
(iriarcnb0n; |3rcss Series 



m^ ISHAKESPEARE 



SELECT FLA YS 



illE TRAGEDY OK 



— ^cv^^^NG RICIIAkI) [I 



^ 



\V. G. CLARK, \\./s. 

COLLEGE, CA.\ruRrOCi:, AN!.' rfli! r_ OkAT' 
ANIJ 

^'V.. ILL! AM 7\LDIS WRIGH'L 

)[iiN. li.C.I.. AND LL.D. 
V -liLLOW AND SLNIOi; KLBSAK OF TBI.Vlry COlX'.CCi;, CaMBKI' 




T]F CL ■ KESS 

MDCCCLXXXIX 

.C _.xieej> JPence 





^^rl'H^tttc^ tn tl)c ¥ibvani 

ilititriT^itl) itfSanimtir. 



BY 



UrUAT- <ij 0^<fcdj 



SjL^.J.f /'ffO 



IhSfti 



Clamton |uss Scries 

ENGLISH CLASSICS 



THE TRAGEDY OF 

KING RICHARD II 

CLARK AND WRIGHT 



HENRY FROWDE 




Oxford University Press Warehouse 
Amen Corner, E.C. 






SHAKESPEARE 

SELECT PLAYS 

THE TRAGEDY OF 

KING RICHARD II 

EDITED BY 

W. G. CLARK, M.A. 

FELLOW OF TKINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, AND PUBLIC ORATOR 
AND 

WILLIAM ALDIS WRIGHT, M.A. 

HON. D.C.L. AND LL.D. 

FELLOW AND SENIOR BURSAR OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE 



AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
MDCCCLXXXIX 

[All Rights reserved^ 




i,^}^- 



-y 



a\(\ 



■(Uo 






PREFACE. 



Shakespeare's Richard II was first published, in quarto, 
in the year 1597. A second edition appeared in the follovvin^^ 
year. In the year 1608 a third edition was published, as the 
title-page informs us, ' With new additions of the Parliament 
Sceane and the deposing of King Richard.' These ' new addi- 
tions' amount to 165 lines, viz. lines 154-318 in the first scene 
of the fourth act, from ' May it please you, lords ' to ' a true 
King's fall.' 

Were these lines in reality newly added to the play, or did 
they form part of it as originally written, and omitted for 
whatever reason ia the two first editions ? We incline to the 
latter alternative, because they agree exactly in style, diction, 
and rhythm with the rest of the play, and because in line 321 
the Abbot says, ' A woeful pageant have we here beheld,' 
nothing having occurred which could be called a pageant, if 
the deposition were omitted. This part of the scene was 
probably omitted in the representation for fear of giving 
offence at Court, because any reference to the deposition oi" 
an English sovereign (even when, as in this case, the sym- 
pathies of the audience are enlisted on behalf of the deposed 
monarch), would be treading on dangerous ground at a time 
when the Pope and other Catholic princes were constantly 
exhorting the subjects of Elizabeth to depose her. 

The fourth quarto, printed from the third, appeared in 
1615. 'The play, as given in the first folio [1623], was no 
doubt printed from a copy of the fourth quarto, corrected 
with some care and prepared for stage representation. Seve- 
ral passages have been left out with a view of shortening the 

b 



IV PREFACE. 

performance. In the 'new additions of the Parliament Sceane ' 
it would appear that the defective text of the quarto had been 
corrected from the author's MS, For this part therefore the 
first folio is our highest authority ; for all the rest of the play 
the first quarto affords the best text.' (Cambridge Shake- 
speare, vol. iv. Preface, p. ix.) 

We have no evidence as to the precise year in which Richard 
II was composed; but its general style conclusively proves that 
it was considerably earlier than the first part of Henry IV, 
which was first printed in 1598. We shall probably not be 
far wrong if with Malone we assign it to the year 1593. From 
internal evidence alone the historical plays may be classed 
under four periods, (i) The three parts of Henry VI; (2) 
Richard III, Richard II, and King John; (3) The two parts 
of Henry IV and Henry V; (4) Henry VIII. In the plays 
of the second period we find much more dramatic skill and 
poetical power than in those of the first, while they are far 
inferior in these respects to the plays of the third period, 
and have little or no trace of the rich comic humour which is 
displayed so abundantly in the latter. In Richard II, as in 
Richard III, and to a minor degree in King John also, we 
may observe certain peculiarities and defects which dis- 
appear from the works composed in the full maturity of 
Shakespeare's powers, as for instance the frequent rhymes, 
the recurrence of elaborate conceits, forced antitheses and 
verbal puns, besides a stilted and unnatural phraseology 
and a kind of stiffness in the diction, sentences and 
clauses being too often coincident with the lines. But 
these minor blemishes do not detract from the great and 
essential merits of the work, which Coleridge pronounced 
to be ' the most admirable of Shakespeare's purely historical 
plays.' It is free from the melodramatic violence and turgid 
language of Richard III, while in the sustained interest of its 
plot it is superior to King John and Henry VIII. 

There were at least two other plays on the same subject 
extant in Shakespeare's time. One, which turned, on the 

t 



PREFACE. V 

deposition of Richard II, was ordered to be played by Sir 
Gilly Merrick, an adherent of Essex, on the afternoon pre- 
ceding his revolt in 1601. It is certain that this was not 
Shakespeare's play. It was, we are told, an old play which 
could not be expected to attract a large audience, so that 
Merrick gave the actors forty shillin;js in order to cover their 
loss. And it would be difficult to conceive any play less likely 
to serve the ends of the conspirators than this of Shakespeare 
even with the deposition-scene, in which the sympathies of 
the audience during the later acts are powerfully attracted 
to the unfortunate King. And besides, the conspirators were 
most anxious to disclaim any attempt upon their sovereign's 
hfe. 

Another play called Richard II was witnessed at the Globe 
Theatre, April 30, 161 1, by Dr. Simon Forman, but this, as we 
learn from his diary, began with Wat Tyler's rebellion, and 
apparently did not include the deposition and death of the 
King. 

Mr. R. G. White has pointed out (Shakespeare's Works, 
vol. vi. p. 139 sqq.) several coincidences between our drama 
and the second edition of Daniel's Civil Wars, published, like 
the first, in 1595, but these are too indecisive to found any 
positive conclusions upon. If one author was indebted to the 
other, Daniel in all likelihood borrowed from Shakespeare. 

Shakespeare's principal, if not sole authority, was Holinshed. 
Indeed, with the exception of the committal of the Bishop of 
Carlisle to the custody of the Abbot of Westminster (iv. i. 
152), which he must have derived from some other source, 
and the little touch we have noticed at the beginning of 
act V. sc. 3, where he may have had recourse to the pages 
of Hall, there is no reason to believe that he consulted any 
other history. That he used the second edition of Holin- 
shed, published in 1586-7, is evident from the fact that the 
withering of the bay-trees (ii. 4. 8) is recorded in that edition 
alone, and not in the first of 1577, from which nevertheless 
we have, with this exception, made our quotations. In the 
course of the notes we have given those passages to which 
b 2 



vi PREFACE. 

Shakespeare was indebted for facts and even expressions. 
Some, however, were too long to be inserted in the Notes, 
and we therefore quote them here at full, with the act and 
scene which they illustrate. 

Act I. Scene I. ' It fell forthe, that in this parliament 
holden at Shrewsbury, Henry duke of Hereford, accused 
Tho. Mowbray, duke of Norfolke, of certaine words which he 
shuld vtter in talke had betwixt them, as they roade togyther 
lately before, betwixte London and Brainforde, sounding 
highely to the kings dishonor. And for further proofe thereof, 
he presented a supplication to the K, wherin he appealed the 
duke of Norfolke in field of battaile, for a traitour, false and 
disloiall to the K. and enimy vnto the realme. This suppli- 
cation was redde becfore bothe the Dukes in presence of 
the Kyng : whiche done, the Duke of Norfolke tooke vppon 
hym to aunswere it, declaring that whatsoeuer the Duke of 
Hereforde hadde sayde agaynste hym other than well, hee 
lyed falsely like an vntrue Knighte, as he was : And when the 
king asked of the duke of Hereforde what he saide to it, he 
taking hys hoode off his heade, said : My soueraigne Lorde, 
euen as the supplication whiche I tooke you importeth, right 
so I say for truthe, that Thomas Moubray duke of Norfolke, 
is a traitour false and disloyall to your roiall Maiestie, your 
crowne, and to all the states of your realme. 

' Then the Duke of Norfolke beeyng asked what he said to 
this, he answered, Right deare Lord, with your fauour that I 
make answere vnto your cousin here, I say (your reuerence 
saued,) that Henry of Lancaster duke of Hereforde, like a 
false and disloyall traitour as he is, dothe lye in that he hath 
or shall say of mee otherwise than well.' 

The dukes were both placed under arrest, and Norfolk was 
actually imprisoned at Windsor, but the Dukes of Lancaster, 
York, Aumerle, and Surrey became sureties for the appear- 
ance of Hereford. 

The play opens with the events described in the following 
paragraph. 

' Nowe after the dissoluing of the Parliament at Shrewsbury, 



PREFACE. Vll 

there was a day appointed about a sixe wcekes after, for the 
K. to come vnto Winsor to hear and to take some order 
betwixte the twoo dukes, which had thus appealed eche other. 
There was a greate skaffold erected within the castell of 
Windsore for the king to sit with the Lordes and Prelates of 
his rcalme : and so at the day apointed, he with the saide lords 
and prelats being come thither and set in their places, the 
duke of Herford appellant, and the duke of Norfolke defen- 
dant, were sent for to come and apeare before the K. sitting 
ther in his seate of Justice. And then began to speak sir 
lo. Bushy for the K. declaring to the lords how they shuld 
vnderstand that where the duke' of Hereford had presented a 
supplication to the K. that was there set to minister iustice 
vnto al men that wold demaund the same, as apperteined to 
his roiall IMaiesty, he therfore wold now heare what the 
parties could say one against an other, and withall the K. 
commaunded the dukes of Aumarle and Surrey, the one 
beyng constable, and the other marshall to go vnto the two 
dukes, appellant and defendant, requiring them on his behalf, 
to grow to some agreement : and for hys parte, hee woulde be 
readye to pardon all that hadde bene sayde or done amisse 
betwixte them, touching any harme or dishonour to him or 
hys realme : but they aunswered bothe assuredly that it was 
not possible to haue any peace or agreement made betwixt 
them. When hee hearde what they hadde aunswered, hee 
commaunded that they shoulde bee broughte forthwith before 
his presence, to heare what they woulde saye. 

' Herewith an Herauld in the Kings name with loude voice 
commaunded the Dukes to come before the King, either of 
them to shewe his reason, or else to make peace togither 
without more delay. 

' When they were come before the King and Lordes, the 
King spake himselfe to them, willing them to agree, and make 
peace togither : for it is (saide he) the best way ye can take. 

' The Duke of Norfolke with due reuerence herevnto aun- 
swered, that it coulde not bee so brought to passe, his honour 
saued. 



VIU • ■ PREFACE. 

' Then the King asked of the Duke of Hereforde, what it 
'•vas that hee demaiinded of the Duke of Norfolke, and M'hat is 
the matter that ye cannot make peace togyther, and beecome 
friendes ? 

' Then stoode forth a Knight that asking and obteining 
licence to speake for the duke of Herford, said, Right dere 
and soueraigne Lorde, here is Henry of Lancaster Duke of 
Hereforde and Erie of Darbie, who saith, and I for hym like- 
wise say, that Thomas IMoubray Duke of Norfolke is a false 
and disloyall traytour to you, and your royall jMaiestie, and 
to your whole realme : and likewise the duke of Hereford 
saith and I for him, that Thomas iNIowbray Duke of Norfolke 
hath receyued .viij. M. nobles to paye the souldiores that keepe 
your Towne of Callais, whiche he hath not done as he oughte : 
and furthermore the saide Duke of Norfolke hath bin the 
occasion of all the treason that hath bin contriued in your 
Realme for the space of these .xviij. yeres, and by his false 
suggestions and malicious counsell, hath caused to dye and to 
be murthered your right dere vncle, the duke of Gloucester, 
Sonne to king Edwarde. 

' Moreouer, the Duke of Hereforde saith and I for hym, that 
he will proue this with his bodye, against the body of the said 
duke of Norfolke within listes. 

* The king herewith waxed angry, and asked the Duke of 
Hereford, if these were his words, who aunswered, Right 
deare Lord, they are my wordes, and hereof I require right, 
and the battell against hym. 

* There was a Knight also that asked licence to speake for 
the Duke of Norfolke, and obteining it, began to aunswere 
thus : Right deare soueraigne Lorde, here is Thomas INIow- 
bray Duke of Norfolke, who aunswercth and saith, and I for 
him, that all that Henry of Lancaster hath sayde and declared 
(sauing the reuerence due to the king and his counsell) is a 
lye, and the saide Henrye of Lancaster hath falsely and 
wickedly lyed as a false and disloyall Knyght, and bothe hath 
bene, and is a traitour againste you, your Crowne, royall 
Maiestye, and Realme. 



PREFACE. IX 

'This will I proue and defende as becommeth a loyall 
Knyghte to doe wyth my body againste his : Right deare 
Lord, I beseeche you therefore, and your counsell, that- it 
maye please you in your royal discretion, to consider and 
marke, what Henry of Lancaster Duke of Hereforde suche 
a one as he is, hath saide. 

' The King then demaunded of the duke of Norfolk, if these 
were his words, and whether he had any more to say. The 
Duke of Norfolk then answered for himself. Right deare sir, 
true it is, that I haue receyued so much golde to pay your 
people of the town of Gallaice, which I haue done, and I do 
auouche that your towne of Callais is aswell kept at your com- 
maundemente as euer it was at any time before, and that 
there neuer hathe bene by any of Callais any complaint made 
vnto you of me. Ryghte deare and my soucraigne Lorde for 
the voiage that I made into Fraunce, aboute your mariage I 
neuer receyued eyther golde or silucr of you, nor yet for the 
voyage that the Duke of Aumarle, and I made into Almaigne, 
where wee spente great treasure : mary true it is, that once I 
laid an ambushe to haue slaine the duke of Lancaster, that there 
sitteth : but neuerthelesse hee hathe pardoned mee thereof, 
and there was good peace made betwixt us, for the whiche I 
yelde hym harty thankes. 

' This is that whiche I haue to aunswere, and am ready to 
defende my selfe against mine aduersarie, I beeseeche you 
therefore of righte and to haue the bataile against him, in 
vpright iudgement. 

' After this, when the King had communed with his counsell 
a little, hee commaunded the two Dukes to stande forth, that 
theiF"answers might bee hearde. The kyng then caused 
them once againe to bee asked if they woulde agree, and make 
peace togither, and they bothe flatly aunswered that they 
woulde not : and wythall the duke of Herford caste downe his 
gage, and the duke of Norfolk tooke it vp. The king per- 
ceyuing this demeanor betwixte them, sware by S. lohn Bap- 
tist, that he wold neuer seeke to make peace betwixt them 
againe. And therwith sir lo. Bushy in name of the K. and 



X PRE FA CE. 

his counsell, declared, that the king and his counsell had com- 
maunded, and ordeined, that they shold haue a day of battel!, 
appoynted them, at Couentrie. Here writers disagree about 
the day that was appointed : for some say, it was vpon a 
Monday in August : other vpon S. Lambertes daye, being the 
.xvij. of September: other on the .xj. of September: But true 
it is, that the K. assigned them not only the day, but also 
apoynted them lists and place for the combate, and there- 
vppon greate preparation was made, as to suche a matter 
apperteined.' (pp. 1098-1100.) 

Holinshed's narrative is here continuous, and supplies the 
material for 

Act I. Scene III. * At the time appointed the King came 
to Couentrye, where the two Dukes were readye, according 
to the order prescribed therin, comming thither in greate 
arraye, accompanied with the Lords and gentlemen of their 
linages. The king had caused a sumptuous scaffolde or 
theatre, and royall listes there to be erected and prepared : 
The Sundaye beefore they shoulde fight, after diner the duke 
of Hereforde came to the Kyng (being lodged like a quarter 
of a mile without the towne in a tower that belonged to sir 
Wil. Bagot) to take his leaue of him. The morrow after, 
being the day apointed for the combat about the spring of 
the day came y^ duke of Norfolke to the Court to take 
leaue likewise of the King. 

' The Duke of Hereforde armed hym in his tent, that was 
set vp nere to the lists, and the duke of Norfolke putte on 
his armour, betwixte the gate and the barrier of the towne^ 
in a beautifull house, hauing a faire perclois of wood towardes 
the gate, that none might see what was done within the house. 

' The duke of Aumerle that daye being highe Constable of 
Englande, and the duke of Surrey Marshall, placed them- 
selucs betwixt them, well armed and apointed, and when they 
sawe their time, they first entred into the listes with a greate 
company of men apparelled in silke sendall, embroudered 
with siluer, both richely, and curiously, euery man hauing a 
tipped staffe to keepe the fielde in order. 



PREFACE. XI 

* Aboiite the houre of Prime came to the barriers of the lists, 
the duke of Hereford, mounted on a white courser, barded 
wyth greene and blewe veluet embroydered sumptuouslye 
wyth Swans and Antelops of gooldsmithes worke, armed at all 
points. The Constable and Marshall came to the barriers, 
demaunding of hym what hee was, hee aunswered I am Henry 
of Lancaster duke of Hereforde, whiche am come hither 
to do my deuoir against Thomas Moubray duke of Norfolke, 
as a traitor vntrue to god, the K. his realme, and me. 
Then incontinently hee sware vpon the holy Euangelistes, 
that his quarrell was true and iuste, and vpon that point hee 
required to enter the lists. 

' Then hee put vp his sworde, which before hee helde 
naked in his hand, and putting down his viser, made a 
crosse on his horse, and with speare in hande, entred into 
the listes, and discended from his horse, and set hym 
downe in a chaire of greene veluet, at the one end of the 
lists, and there reposed hymselfe, abiding the comming of 
his aduersary. Soon after him, entred into the field with 
greate triumph. King Richarde accompanied with all the peares 
of the realme, and in his company was the earle of sainct 
Paule, whiche was come out of Fraunce in post to see this 
chalenge performed. The King had there aboue tenne thou- 
sande men in armour, least some fray or tumult might rise 
amongst his nobles, by quarrelling or partaking. When the 
K. was set in his seate, which was richely hanged and 
adorned : a king at armes made open proclamation, prohibit- 
ing all men in the name of the king, and of the high constable, 
and Marshal, to enterprise or attempte, to approche or 
louche any parte of the listes, vpon paine of death, excepte 
suche as were appointed to order or marshall the fielde. 

* The proclamation ended, an other Herault cried, bcholde 
here Henry of Lancaster Duke of Hereforde appellant, whiche 
is entred into the listes royall to do his deuoir againste Thomas 
Mowbray Duke of Norfolke defendant, vpon paine to be 
founde false and recreant. 

* The duke of Norfolke houered on horseback at the entrie 



Xll PREFACE. 

of the lists, his horse being barded with crimosen veluet, 
embroudered richly with Lions of siluer and Mulbery trees, 
and when he had made his othe before the constable, and 
Marshall that his quarrell was iust and true, he entred the 
fielde manfully, saying aloude : God aide hym that hath the 
righte, and then hee departed from his horse, and sate hym 
downe in his chaire which was crimsen veluet, courtined aboute 
with white and redde damask. The Lord Marshal viewed 
their speares, to see that they were of equall lengthe, and 
deliuered the one speare hymselfe to the Duke of Hereforde, 
and sent the other vnto the Duke of Norfolke by a Knighte. 
Then the Herrault proclaimed that the trauerses, and chaires 
of the champions shoulde bee remoued, commaunding them 
on the kinges behalfe, to mount on horsebacke and addresse 
themselues to the battaile and combate. The duke of 
Herford was quickly horsed, and closed his bauier, and 
caste his speare into the reste, and when the trumpet sounded 
sette forwarde couragiously towards hys enimy sixe or .vij. 
paces. The duke of Norfolke was not fully set forward, 
when the K. caste downe hys warder, and the Heraultes 
cried, ho, ho. Then the K. caused their spears to be 
taken from them and commaundcd them to repaire againe to 
their chaires, where they rcmayncd .ij. long houres, while 
the K. and his counsel! deliberatly consulted what order 
was beste to be had in so weightye a cause. Finally after 
they had deuised, and fully determined what shuld be done 
therin, the Herraultes cried silence, and Syr lohn Bushy the 
kings secretary red the sentence and determination of the 
K. and his counscll, in a long roll, the effect wherof was, 
that Henry duke of Herford should within .xv. dayes depart 
out of the realme, and not to returne before the terme of 
X. yeres were expired, except by the Kyng hee should bee 
repealed again, and this vpon paine of deathe : And that 
Thomas Moubray duke of Norfolke, bycause hee had sowen 
sedition in the realme by his words, should likewise auoid the 
Realme, and neuer to retourne againe into Englande, nor 
approche the borders or confines therof, vpon paine of 



PREFACE. Xlil 

death, and that the K. would stay the profits of his landes, 
till he had leiiied therof suche summes of mony as the duke 
had taken vp of the kings treasurer for the wages of the 
garrison of Calleis, vvhych were still vnpaide. When these 
iudgements were once red, the K. called before him both 
the parties, and made them to sweare that the one shuld 
neuer come in place, where the other was, willingly, nor 
keepe any companye togither in any forrein region, whiche 
othe they bothe receiued humbly, and so wente their waies. 
The Duke of Norfolke departed sorowfully out of the realme 
into Almaine, and at the laste came to Venice, where he 
for thought and melancoly deceased : for he was in hope as 
writers recorde, that he should haue bene borne out in the 
matter by the K. which when it fell out otherwise, it 
greeued hym not a little. The Duke of Hereford tooke 
his leaue of the K. at Eltham, which there released .iiij. 
yeres of hys banishement : So he tooke hys iorney ouer into 
Callais, and from thence went into Fraunce, wher he 
remained.' (pp. iioo, iioi.) 

Act II. Scene I. 'In this meane time, the duke of 
Lancaster departed out of this life at the bishop of Elies place 
in Holborne, and lieth buryed in the cathedrall churche of 
S. Paule in London, on the North side of the highe Aulter, 
by the Lady Blaunche his firste wife. 

' The death of this duke gaue occasion of encreasing more 
hatred in the people of this realm towarde the king, for he 
seased into his handes all the goods that belonged to hym, 
and also receyued all the rents and reuenues of his landes 
whiche ought to haue discended vnto the duke of Hereforde 
by lawfull inheritaunce, in reuoking his letters patents, which 
he had graunted to him before, by vertue wherof, he might 
make his attorneis generall to sue liuery for hym, of any 
maner of inheritaunces or possessions that myghte from 
thenceforthe fall vnto hym, and that hys homage myghte 
bee respited, wyth making reasonable fine : wherby it was 
euident, that the king ment his vtter vndooing. 

'Thys harde dealing was muche myslyked of all the nobilitie. 



XIV PREFACE. 

and cried out against of the meaner sorte : But namely the 
Duke of Yorlce was therewyth sore amoued, who before this 
time, had borne things with so pacient a mind as he could, 
though the same touched him very neare, as the death of 
his brother the Duke of Gloucester, the banishment of hys 
nephewe the said duke of Hereford, and other mo iniuries in 
greate number, which for the slippery youth of the king, hee 
passed ouer for the tyme, and did forget aswell as he might.' 

(p. II02.) 

Act II. Scene rv. ' In the meane time, lie sent the 
Earle of Salisburie ouer into England, to gather a power 
togither, by help of the Kings friends in Wales, and Cheshire, 
with al speede possible, that they myght bee ready to assist 
hym agaynste the Duke, vpon his first arriuall, for hee meante 
hymselfe to followe the Earle, within sixe dayes after. The 
Earle passing ouer into Wales, landed at Conwey, and sente 
foorthe letters to the Kings friends, both in ^^^ales and 
Cheshire, to leauie their people, and to come with all speede 
to assist the King, whose request, with greate desire, and very 
willyng myndes they dyd, hoping to haue found the king 
hymselfe at Conwey, in so muche, that within foure dayes 
space, there were to the number of fortie thousand men 
assembled, ready to march with the King againste his enimies, 
if hee hadde bin there hymselfe in person, but when they 
missed the Kyng, there was a brute spredde among them, 
that the Kyng was surely dead, whyche MTought suche an 
impression, and euill disposition in the myndes of the Welch- 
menne and others, that for any perswasion which the Earle 
of Salisburie mighte vse, they woulde not goe foorth with hym, 
till they sawe the Kyng : onely they were contented to staye 
foureteene dayes, to see if he should come or not, but when 
hee came not within that tearme, they would no longer 
abyde, but scaled and departed away.' (p. 1107.) 

Act III. Scene III. * King Richarde being thus come 
vnto the Castell of Flint, on the IMonday, the eyghtcnth of 
August, and y^ Duke of Hereforde beeyng still aducrtised 
from houre to houre by postes, how the Earle of Northum- 



PREFACE. XV 

berlande spedde, the morrowe following beeyng Tuisday, and 
the nintenth of August, he came thither, and mustrcd hys 
armye before the kings presence, whyche vndoubtedly made a 
passing fayre shewe, beyng very well ordered by the Lorde 
Henry Percye, that was appoynted general!, or rather as wee 
maye call hym, maister of the Campe, vnder the Duke, of 
the whole armye. 

' There were come already to the Castell, before the 
approching of the mayne armie, the Archebyshoppe of 
Caunterburye, the Duke of Aumarle, the Earle of Worcetor, 
and dyuers other. The Archebyshoppe entred fyrste, and 
then followed the other, commyng into the firste warde. 

'The King that was walking aloft on the brayes of the walles, 
to beholde the commyng of the Duke a farre off, myghte see, 
that the Archebyshoppe and the other were come, and as 
hee tooke it to talke with him : wherevpon, hee forthwith came 
down vnto them, and beholding that they did theyr due 
reuerence to hym on theyr knees, hee tooke them vp, and 
drawing y^ Archebyshop aside from the residue, talked with 
hym a good while, and as it was reported, the Archebyshoppe 
willed him to bee of good comforte, for hee should bee 
assured, not to haue any hurte, as touching his person, but 
hee prophesied not as a Prelate, but as a Pilate, as by the 
sequeale it well appeared. 

' After that the Archbyshoppe hadde now heere at 

Flynt communed with the King, hee departed, and taking his 
horse agayne, rode backe to meete the Duke, who began 
at that presente to approche the Castell, and compassed it 
rounde about, euen downe to the Sea, with his people araunged 
in good and seemely order, at the foote of the mountaynes, 
and then the Earle of Northumberlande passing foorth of the 
Castell to the Duke, talked with him a whyle in sighte of the 
King, being againe got vp to the walles, to take better viewe 
of the armie, beeyng nowe aduaunced within two bowe shootes 
of the Castell, to the small reioycing yee maye bee sure of the 
sorowfuU King. 

' The Earle of Northumberlande, returnyng to the Castell, 



XVI PREFACE. 

appoynted to the King to bee sette to dynner, (for hee was 
fasting till then) and after he had dined, the Duke came 
downe to the Castell himselfe, and entred the same all armed, 
hys bassenet onely excepted, and beeing within the firste gate, 
hee stayed there, tyll the Kyng came foorthe of the inner 
parte of the Castell vnto hym. 

' The Kyng accompanyed with the Bishop of Careleill, the 
Earle of Salisburie, and Sir Stephen Scrope Knight, who bare 
the sword before hym, and a fewe other, came foorthe into 
the vtter warde, and sate downe in a place prepared for 
hym : forthwith as the Duke gote sighte of the Kyng, hee 
shewed a reuerente duetie as became him, in bowing his knee, 
and comming foreward, did so likewise the seconde and 
thirde time, till the King tooke him by the hande, and lift him 
vppe, saying, deere Cousin, ye are welcome : the Duke humbly 
thanking him sayde. My soueraigne Lorde and Kyng, the cause 
of my comming at this presente, is (your honour saued,) to 
haue agayne restitution of my person, my landes and heritage, 
through your fauourable licence. 

* The King heerevnto aunswered, deare Cousin, I am ready 
to accomplish your will, so that yee maye enioy all that is 
yours, without exceptioui' (pp. 1109, 11 10.) 

Act IV. Scene I. After describing the contents of the 
bill of accusation brought forward by Bagot, Holinshed con- 
tinues : * There was also contcyned in the sayde Bill, that 
Bagot had heard the Duke of Aumarle say, that he had leaner 
than twentie thousand pounds that the Duke of Hereforde 
were dead, not for any feare hee had of him, but for the 
trouble and myschiefe that hee was like to procure within 
the realme. 

' After that the Byll had beene read and heard, the Duke of 
Aumarle rose vp and sayde, that as touching the poynts 
conteyned in the bill concerning him, they were vtterly false 
& vntrue, which he would proue with his body, in what 
maner soeuer it should be thought requisit 

* This was on a Thursday being the .xv. of October. 

* On the Saterday next ensuing, . . . .the Lord FitzWater here- 



PREFACE. XVll 

with rose vp, and sayd to the king, that where the duke of 
Aumarle excuseth himself of the duke of Gloucesters death, 
I say (quoth he) that he was the very cause of his death, and ' 
so hee appealed him of treason, offring by throwing downe 
his hoode as a gage to proue it with his bodie. There were 
.XX. other Lordes also that threw downe their hoodes, as 
pledges to proue y*^ like matter against the duke of Aumarle. 

' The Duke of Aumarle threwe downe hys hoode to trie it 
agaynst the Lorde FitzWater, as agaynst him that lyed 
falsly, in that hee charged him with, by that his appeale. 
These gages were deliuered to the Conestable and Marshal 
of England, and the parties put vnder arrest. 

' The duke of Surrey stood vp also agaynst the L. Fitz- 
water, auouching that where he had sayd that the appellants 
were cause of ye duke of Gloucesters death, it was false, for 
they were constreyned to sue the same appeale, in like maner 
as the sayd Lorde FitzWater was compelled to gyue iudge- 
ment against the duke of Glocester, and the Earle of Arundell, 
so that the suing of the appeale was done by cohertion, and 
if he sayd contrary he lied: and therwith he threw down 
his hood. 

* The Lorde FitzWater answered herevnto, that he was not 
present in the Parliament house when iudgement was giuen 
against them, and al the Lordes bare witnesse thereof. 

'Morouer, where it was alledged that the duke of Aumarle 
should send two of his seruants vnto Calais, to murther the 
duke of Gloucester, y^ sayd duke of Aumarle said, that if the 
duke of Norffolk affyrme it, he lyed falsly, and that he would 
proue with his bodie, throwing downe an other hoode which 
he had borowed. 

' The same was likewise deliuered to the Conestable and 
Marshall of England, and the king licenced the Duke of 
Norffolke to returne, that hee might arraigne his appeale.' 
(pp. II22, 1123.) 

The speech of the Bishop of Carlisle was delivered on the 
Wednesday next after these events, and under the circum- 
stances mentioned in the note on iv. i. 114. The following 



XVIU PREFACE. 

is Holinshed's version of it : ' Wherevpon the Bishop of 
Carleil, a man both learned, wise, & stoute of stomacke, 
boldly shewed forth his opinion concerning that demaunde, 
affyrming that there was none amongst them worthie or 
meete to giue iudgement vpon so noble a prince as king 
Richard was, whom they had taken for their soueraigne and 
liege Lorde, by the space of .xxij. yeares and more, and I 
assure you (sayd he) there is not so ranke a tray tor, nor so 
errant a theef, nor yet so cruell a murtherer apprehended or 
deteyned in prison for his offence, but hee shall be brought 
before the lustice to heare his iudgement, and ye will pro- 
ceede to the iudgement of an annoynted K. hearing neither 
his answere nor excuse : and I say, that the duke of Lancaster 
whom ye cal king, hath more trespassed to king Ric. and 
his realme, than king Richard hath done either to him, cr 
to vs : for it is manifest and well knowne, that the Duke was 
banished the realme by king Richard and his counsayle, and 
by the iudgement of hys owne father, for the space of tenne 
yeres, for what cause ye know, and yet without licence of 
King Richard, he is returned againe into the Realme, and that 
is worse, hath taken vpon him, the name, tytle, and pre- 
heminence of a King. And therefore I say, that yee hauc 
done manifest wrong, to proceede in anye thing agaynst king 
Richarde, without calling him openly to his aunswere and 
defence, 

'As soone as the Bishop had ended this tale, he was attached 
by the Earle Marshal, &, committed to warde in the Abbey 
of S. Albons,' (p. 1 123.) 

The passages on which the last five scenes of the fifth act 
are founded are quoted in the Notes. 

Our references to other plays of Shakespeare are made to 
the Globe Edition, except in the case of the Notes to the 
Merchant of Venice, separately edited as one of the present 
series. 

W. G. CLARK. 
W. A. WRIGHT. 
Trinity College, Cambridge, 
November, 1868. 



THE TRAGEDY OF 

KING RICHARD II. 



DRAMATIS PERSON/E. 



King Richard the Second. 

John of Gaunt, Duke "j 

of Lancaster, ( uncle"^ to the 

Edmund of Langlev, ( Kin^;. 

Duke of York, J 

HENRV, surnained BOLINGBROKE, Duke 
of Hereford, son to John of Gaunt ; after- 
wards KING HENRY IV. 

Duke of Aumerle, son to the Duke of 
York. 

Thomas Mowhray. Duke of Norfolk. 

Duke of surrey. 

Earl of Salisbury. 

I.ord Berkeley. 

Bushy,) 

BAGOT, > servants to King: Richard. 

Green, ) 

Earl of Northumberland. 

HENRY Percy, surnamed Hotspur, his son. 



Lord Ross. 

Lord willougiibv. 

Lord fitz water. 

Bishop of Carlisle. 

Abbot of Westminster. 

Lord Marshal. 

Sir Stephen Scroop. 

Sir Pierce of Hxion, 

Captain of a band of Welshmen. 

Queen to Kinir Richard. 

DUCHESS of York. 

Duchess of Gloucester. 

Lady attending on the Queen. 

Lords, Heralds, Officers, Soldiers, two 
Gardeners, Keeper, Messenger, Groom. 
and other Attendants. 

Scene : England and H'aUi. 



ACT I. 



Scene I. Windsor Castle. 

Enter KiNG Richard, John of Gaunt, with other Nobles 
and Attendants. 

K. Richard. Old John of Gaunt, time-honour'd Lancaster, 
Hast thou, according to thy oath and band, 
Brought hither Henry Hereford thy bold son, 
Here to make good the boisterous late appeal, 
Which then our leisure would not let us hear, 
Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray ? 

Gaunt. I have, my liege. 

K. Richard. Tell me, moreover, hast thou sounded him, 
If he appeal the duke on ancient malice ; 
Or worthily, as a good subject should, lo 

On some known ground of treachery in him ? 
B 



2 KING RICHARD II. 

Gaunt. As near as I could sift him on that argument, 
On some apparent danger seen in him 
Aim'd at your highness, no inveterate malice. 

K. Richard. Then call them to our presence ; face to face. 
And frowning brow to brow, ourselves will hear 
The accuser and the accused freely speak : 
High-stomach'd are they both and full of ire, 
In rage deaf as the sea, hasty as fire. 

Enter Bolingbroke and MoWBRAY. 

Bol'tngbroke. INIany years of happy days befal 20 

My gracious sovereign, my most loving liege ! 

Moivbray. Each day still better other's happiness ; 
Until the heavens, envying earth's good hap. 
Add an immortal title to your crown ! 

K. Richard. We thank you both : yet one but flatters us, 
As well appeareth by the cause you come ; 
Namely, to appeal each other of high treason. 
Cousin of Hereford, what dost thou object 
Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray ? 

Bolingbroke. First, heaven be the record to my speech ! 
In the devotion of a subject's love, 31 

Tendering the precious safety of my prince, 
And free from other misbegotten hate. 
Come I appellant to this princely presence. 
Now, Thomas Mowbray, do I turn to thee, 
And mark my greeting well ; for what I speak 
My body shall make good upon this earth. 
Or my divine soul answer it in heaven. 
Thou art a traitor and a miscreant. 

Too good to be so and too bad to live, 40 

Since the more fair and crystal is the sky, 
The uglier seem the clouds that in it fly. 
Once more, the more to aggravate the note, 
With a foul traitor's name stuff" I thy throat ; 
And wish, so please my sovereign, ere I move. 
What my tongue speaks my right drawn sword may prove. 



ACT I. SCENE I. 3 

Mowbray. Let not my cold words here accuse my zeal : 
'Tis not the trial of a woman's war, 

The bitter clamour of two eager tongues, ' 

Can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain ; 50 

The blood is hot that must be cool'd for this: 
Yet can I not of such tame patience boast 
As to be hush'd and nought at all to say : 
First, the fair reverence of your highness curbs me 
From giving reins and spurs to my free speech ; 
Which else would post until it had return'd 
These terms of treason doubled down his throat. 
Setting aside his high blood's royalty, 
And let him be no kinsman to my liege, 
I do defy him, and I spit at him ; 60 

Call him a slanderous coward and a villain : 
Which to maintain I would allow him odds, 
And meet him, were I tied to run afoot 
Even to the frozen ridges of the Alps, 
Or any other ground inhabitable. 
Where ever Englishman durst set his foot. 
Mean time let this defend my loyalty. 
By all my hopes, most falsely doth he lie. 

Baling. Pale trembling coward, there I throw my gage. 
Disclaiming here the kindred of the king, 70 

And lay aside my high blood's royalty. 
Which fear, not reverence, makes thee to except. 
If guilty dread have left thee so much strength 
As to take up mine honour's pawn, then stoop : 
By that and all the rites of knighthood else, 
Will I make good against thee, arm to arm. 
What I have spoke, or thou canst worse devise. 

Mowbray. I take it up ; and by that sword I swear. 
Which gently laid my knighthood on my shoulder, 
I'll answer thee in any fair degree, 80 

Or chivalrous design of knightly trial : 
And when I mount, alive may I not light, 
If I be traitor or unjustly fight I 
B 2 



4 KING RICHARD II. 

K. Rich. What doth our cousin lay to IMowbray's charge ? 
It must be great that can inherit us 
So much as of a thought of ill in him. 

Boling. Look, what I speak, my life shall prove it true ; 
That Mowbray hath received eight thousand nobles 
In name of lendings for your highness' soldiers, 
The which he hath detain'd for lewd employments, 90 

Like a false traitor and injurious villain. 
Besides I say and will in battle prove, 
Or here or elsewhere to the furthest verge 
That ever was survey'd by English eye, 
That all the treasons for these eighteen years 
Gomplotted and contrived in this land 
Fetch from false Mowbray their first head and spring. 
Further I say and further will maintain 
Upon his bad life to make all this good, 
That he did plot the Duke of Gloucester's death, 100 

Suggest his soon-believing adversaries, 
And consequently, like a traitor coward, 
Sluiced out his innocent soul through streams of blood : 
Which blood, like sacrificing Abel's, cries. 
Even from the tongueless caverns of the earth, 
To me for justice and rough chastisement ; 
And, by the glorious worth of my descent. 
This arm shall do it, or this life be spent. 

King Richard. How high a pitch his resolution soars ! 

Thomas of Norfolk, what say'st thou to this? iio. 

Mowbray. O, let my sovereign turn away his face 

And bid his ears a little while be deaf, 

Till I have told this slander of his blood, 

How God and good men hate so foul a liar. 

King Richard. Mowbray, impartial are our eyes and ears : 

Were he my brother, nay, my kingdom's heir, 

As he is but my father's brother's son, 

Now, by my sceptre's awe, I make a vow. 

Such neighbour nearness to our sacred blood 

Should nothing privilege him, nor partialize 1 20 



ACT I. SCENE I. 5 

The unstooping firmness of my upright soul : 
He is our subject, Mowbray ; so art thou : 
Free speech and fearless I to thee allow. 

Mo^iubray. Then, Bolingbroke, as low as to thy heart, 
Through the false passage of thy throat, thou liest. 
Three parts of that receipt I had for Calais 
Disbursed I duly to his highness' soldiers ; 
The other part reserved I by consent. 
For that my sovereign liege was in my debt 
Upon remainder of a dear account, 1 30 

Since last I went to France to fetch his queen : 
Now swallow down that lie. For Gloucester's death, 
I slew him not ; but to my own disgrace 
Neglected my sworn duty in that case. 
For you, my noble Lord of Lancaster, 
The honourable father to my foe, 
Once did I lay an ambush for your life, 
A trespass that doth vex my grieved soul ; 
But ere I last received the sacrament 

I did confess it, and exactly begg'd 140 

Your grace's pardon, and I hope I had it. 
This is my fault : as for the rest appeal'd, 
It issues from the rancour of a villain, 
A recreant and most degenerate traitor : 
Which in myself I boldly will defend ; 
And interchangeably hurl down my gage 
Upon this overweening traitor's foot. 
To prove myself a loyal gentleman 
Even in the best blood chamber'd in his bosom. 
In haste whereof, most heartily I pray 150 

Your highness to assign our trial day. 

K. Richard. Wrath-kindled gentlemen, be ruled by me; 
Let 's purge this choler without letting blood : 
This we prescribe, though no physician ; 
Deep malice makes too deep incision ; 
Forget, forgive ; conclude and be agreed ; 
Our doctors say this is no month to bleed. 



6 KING RICHARD II. 

Good uncle, let this end where it begun ; 
We'll calm the Duke of Norfolk, you your son. 

Gaunt. To be a make-peace shall become my age: i6o 
Throw down, my son, the Duke of Norfolk's gage. 

King Richard. And, Norfolk, throw down his. 

Gaunt. When, Harry, when ? 

Obedience bids I should not bid again. 
K. Richard. Norfolk, throw down, we bid ; there is no boot. 

Moivbray. Myself I throw, dread sovereign, at thy foot. 
My life thou shalt command, but not my shame : 
The one my duty owes ; but my fair name, 
Despite of death that lives upon my grave. 
To dark dishonour's use thou shalt not have. 
I am disgraced, impeach'd and baffled here, 170 

Pierced to the soul with slander's venom'd spear. 
The which no balm can cure but his heart-blood 
Which breathed this poison. 

King Richard. Rage must be withstood : 

Give me his gage : lions make leopards tame. 

Monv. Yea, but not change his spots : take but my shame, 
And I resign my gage. My dear dear lord. 
The purest treasure mortal times afford 
Is spotless reputation : that away, 
Men are but gilded loam or painted clay. 
A jewel in a ten-times-barr'd-up chest 180 

Is a bold spirit in a loyal breast. 
Mine honour is my life; both grow in one; 
Take honour from me, and my life is done : 
Then, dear my liege, mine honour let me try ; . 
In that I live and for that will I die. 

King Richard. Cousin, throw up your gage ; do you begin. 

Bolingbroke. O, God defend my soul from such deep sin ! 
Shall I seem crest-fall'n in my father's sight? 
Or with pale beggar-fear impeach my height 
Before this out-dared dastard? Ere my tongue 190 

Shall wound my honour with such feeble wrong, 



ACT I. SCENE II. 7 

Or sound so base a parle, my teeth shall tear 

The slavish motive of recanting fear, 

And spit it bleeding in his high disgrace, 

Where shame doth harbour, even in Mowbray's face. 

[^Exit Gaunt. 
King Richard. We were not born to sue, but to command ; 
Which since we cannot do to make you friends, 
Be ready, as your lives shall answer it. 
At Coventry, upon Saint Lambert's day ; 
There shall your swords and lances arbitrate 200 

The swelling difference of your settled hate : 
Since we can not atone you, we shall see 
Justice design the victor's chivalry. 
Lord marshal, command our officers at arms 
Be ready to direct these home alarms. [Exeunt. 

Scene IL The Duke of Lanxaster's palace. 

Enter John OF Gaunt ivith the Duchess 
OF Gloucester. 

Gau7it. Alas, the part I had in Woodstock's blood 
Doth more solicit me than your exclaims. 
To stir against the butchers of his life ! 
But since correction lieth in those hands 
Which made the fault that we cannot correct, 
Put we our quarrel to the will of heaven ; 
Who, when they see the hours ripe on earth. 
Will rain hot vengeance on offenders' heads. 

Duchess. Finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur ? 
Hath love in thy old blood no living fire ? i o 

Edward's seven sons, whereof thyself art one. 
Were as seven vials of his sacred blood. 
Or seven fair branches springing from one root: 
Some of those seven are dried by nature's course. 
Some of those branches by the Destinies cut ; 
But Thomas, my dear lord, my life, my Gloucester, 
One vial full of Edward's sacred blood. 



8 KING RICHARD II. 

One flourishing branch of his most royal root, 

Is crack'd, and all the precious liquor spilt, 

Is hack'd down, and his summer leaves all faded, 20 

By envy's hand and murder's bloody axe. 

Ah, Gaunt, his blood was thine ! that bed, that womb, 

That metal, that self-mould, that fashion'd thee 

Made him a man ; and though thou livest and breathest. 

Yet art thou slain in him : thou dost consent 

In some large measure to thy father's death, 

In that thou seest thy wretched brother die, 

Who was the model of thy father's life. 

Call it not patience. Gaunt; it is despair: 

In suffering thus thy brother to be slaughter'd, 30 

Thou showest the naked pathway to thy life, 

Teaching stern murder how to butcher thee : 

That which in mean men we intitle patience 

Is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts. 

What shall I say ? to safeguard thine own life, 

The best way is to vcnge my Gloucester's death. 

Gaunt. God's is the quarrel ; for God's substitute, 
His deputy anointed in His sight, 
Hath caused his death : the which if wrongfully. 
Let heaven revenge ; for I may never lift 40 

An angry arm against His minister. 

Duchess. Where then, alas, may I complain myself? 

Gaunt. To God, the widow's champion and defence. 

Duchess. Why, then, I will. Farewell, old (^.annt. 
Thou goest to Coventry, there to behold 
Our cousin Hereford and fell Mowbray fight: 
O, sit my husband's wrongs on Hereford's spear, 
That it may enter butcher Mowbray's breast ! 
Or, if misfortune miss the first career. 

Be Mowbray's sins so heavy in his bosom, 50 

That they may break his foaming courser's back, 
And throw the rider headlong in the lists, 
A caitiff recreant to my cousin Hereford ! 



ACT I. SCENE III. 9 

Farewell, old Gaunt : thy sometimes brother's wife 
With her companion grief must end her life. 

Gaunt. Sister, farewell ; I must to Coventry : 
As much good stay with thee as go with me ! 

Duchess. Yet one word more: grief boundeth where it falls, 
Not with the empty hollowness, but weight ; 
I take my leave before I have begun, 60 

For sorrow ends not when it seemeth done. 
Commend me to thy brother, Edmund York. 
Lo, this is all : — nay, yet depart not so ; 
Though this be all, do not so quickly go; 
I shall remember more. Bid him — ah, what ? — 
With all good speed at Plashy visit me. 
Alack, and wliat shall good old York there see 
But empty lodgings and unfurnish'd walls, 
Unpeopled offices, untrodden stones ? 

And what hear there for welcome but my groans? 70 

Therefore commend me ; let him not come there. 
To seek out sorrow that dwells every where. 
Desolate, desolate, will I hence and die : 
The last leave of thee takes my weeping eye. [^Exeunt. 

Scene III. The lists at Coventry. 
Enter the Lord Marshal and the DuKE OF Aujierle. 
Marsha/. My Lord Aumerle, is Harry Hereford arm'd ? 
Aunierle. Yea, at all points ; and longs to enter in. 
Marshal. The Duke of Norfolk, sprightfully and bold. 
Stays but the summons of the appellant's trumpet. 

Aumerle. Why, then, the champions are prepared, and stay 
For nothing but his majesty's approach. 

The trumpets sound, and the KiNG enters <with his nobles, Gaunt, 
Bushy, BagOT, Green, and others. When they are set, enter 
Mowbray in arms, defendant, with a Herald. 

King Richard. Marshal, demand of yonder champion 
The cause of his arrival here in arms : 



10 KING RICHARD II. 

Ask him his name and orderly proceed 

To swear him in the justice of his cause. lo 

Mar. In God's name and the king's, say who thou art 
And why thou comest thus knightly clad in arms, 
Against what man thou comest, and what thy quarrel: 
Speak truly, on thy knighthood and thy oath; 
As so defend thee heaven and thy valour ! 

Moiu. My name is Thomas INIowbray, Duke of Norfolk ; 
Who hither come engaged by my oath — 
"Which God defend a knight should violate ! — 
Both to defend my loyalty and truth 

To God, my king and my succeeding issue, 20 

Against the Duke of Hereford that appeals me; 
And, by the grace of God and this mine arm, 
To prove him, in defending of myself, 
A traitor to my God, my king, and me: 
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven ! 

The trumpets sound. Enter BOLINGBROKE, appellant, in armour, 
ivitb a Herald. 

King Richard. Marshal, ask yonder knight in arms, 
Both who he is and why he cometh hither 
Thus plated in habiliments of war, 
And formally, according to our law, 
Depose him in the justice of his cause. 3° 

Mar. What is thy name ? and wherefore comest thou hither, 
Before King Richard in his royal lists? 
Against whom comest thou? and what's thy quarrel? 
Speak like a true knight, so defend thee heaven! 

Bolingbroke. Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby 
Am I ; who ready here do stand in arms. 
To prove, by God's grace and my body's valour, 
In lists, on Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, 
That he is a traitor, foul and dangerous, 
To God of heaven. King Richard and to me ; 40 

And as I truly fight, defend me heaven! 



ACT I. SCENE III. II 

Marshal. On pain of death, no person be so bold 
Or daring-hardy as to touch the lists, 
Except the marshal and such officers 
Appointed to direct these fair designs. 

Bolingbroke. Lord marshal, let me kiss my sovereign's hand. 
And bow my knee before his majesty : 
For JVIowbray and myself are like two men 
That vow a long and weary pilgrimage; 
Then let us take a ceremonious leave 50 

And loving farewell of our several friends. 

Marshal. The appellant in all duty greets your highness, 
And craves to kiss your hand and take his leave. 

King Richard. We will descend and fold him in our arms. 
Cousin of Hereford, as thy cause is right, 
So be thy fortune in this royal fight ! 
Farewell, my blood; which if to-day thou shed, 
Lament we may, but not revenge thee dead. 

Bolingbroke. O, let no noble eye profane a tear 
For me, if I be gored with Mowbray's spear: 60 

As confident as is the falcon's flight 
Against a bird, do I with Mowbray fight. 
My loving lord, I take my leave of you; 
Of you, my noble cousin. Lord Aumerle ; 
Not sick, although I have to do with death. 
But lusty, young, and cheerly drawing breath. 
Lo, as at English feasts, so I regreet 
The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet: 
O thou, the earthly author of my blood. 
Whose youthful spirit, in me regenerate, 7° 

Doth with a twofold vigour lift me up 
To reach at victory above my head, 
Add proof unto mine armour with thy prayers ; 
And with thy blessings steel my lance's point. 
That it may enter Mowbray's waxen coat. 
And furbish new the name of John a Gaunt, 
Even in the lusty haviour of his son. 

Gaunt. God in thy good cause make thee prosperous! 



12 KING RICHARD II. 

Be swift like lightning in the execution ; 

And let thy blows, doubly redoubled, 80 

F'all like amazing thunder on the casque 

Of thy adverse pernicious enemy : 

Rouse up thy youthful blood, be valiant and live. 

BoUnghroke. Mine innocency and Saint George to thrive ! 

Moiubray. However God or fortune cast my lot, 
There lives or dies, true to King Richard's throne, 
A loyal, just and upright gentleman : 
Never did captive with a freer heart 
Cast off his chains of bondage and embrace 
His golden uncontroll'd enfranchisement, 90 

More than my dancing soul doth celebrate 
This feast of battle with mine adversary. 
Most mighty liege, and my companion peers, 
Take from my mouth the wish of happy years: 
As gentle and as jocund as to jest 
Go I to fight : truth hath a quiet breast. 

King Richard. Farewell, my lord : securely I espy 
Virtue with valour couched in thine eye. 
Order the trial, marshal, and begin. 

Marshal. Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby, 100 
Receive thy lance ; and God defend the right ! 

Bol'mgbroke. Strong as a tower in hope, I cry amen. 

Mar. Go bear this lance to Thomas, Duke of Norfolk. 

First Herald. Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby, 
Stands here for God, his sovereign and himself. 
On pain to be found false and recreant, 
To prove the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray, 
A traitor to his God, his king and him ; 
And dares him to set forward to the fight. 

Second Herald. Here standeth Thomas Mowbray, Duke 
of Norfolk, no 

On pain to be found false and recreant, 
Both to defend himself and to approve 
Henry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby, 



ACT I. SCENE III. 13 

To God, his sovereign and to him disloyal ; 
Courageously and with a free desire 
Attending but the signal to begin. 

Marshal. Sound, trumpets; and set forward, combatants. 

[A charge sounded. 
Stay, the king hath thrown his warder down. 

K. Rich. Let them lay by their helmets and their spears, 
And both return back to their chairs again: 120 

Withdraw with us : and let the trumpets sound 
While w^e return these dukes what we decree. 
Draw near, [^ ''^"S flourish. 

And list what with our council we have done. 
For that our kingdom's earth should not be soil'd 
With that dear blood which it hath fostered ; 
And for our eyes do hate the dire aspect 
Of civil wounds plough'd up with neighbours' sword ; 
And for we think the eagle-winged pride 
Of sky-aspiring and ambitious thoughts, 130 

With rival-hating envy, set on you 
To wake our peace, which in our country's cradle 
Draws the sweet infant breath of gentle sleep ; 
Which so roused up with boisterous untuned drums, 
With harsh-resounding trumpets' dreadful bray. 
And grating shock of wrathful iron arms. 
Might from our quiet confines fright fair peace 
And make us wade even in our kindred's blood ; 
Therefore, we banish you our territories: 
You, cousin Hereford, upon pain of life, 140 

Till twice five summers have enrich'd our fields 
Shall not regreet our fair dominions. 
But tread the stranger paths of banishment. 

Bolingbroke. Your will be done : this must my comfort be, 
That sun that warms you here shall shine on me ; 
And those his golden beams to you here lent 
Shall point on me and gild my banishment. 

King Richard. Norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom, 
Which I with some unwillingness pronounce : 



14 KING RICHARD II. 

The sly slow hours shall not determinate 150 

The dateless limit of thy dear exile ; 
The hopeless word of ' never to return' 
Breathe I against thee, upon pain of life. 

Moivbray. A heavy sentence, my most sovereign liege, 
And all unlook'd for from your highness' mouth : 
A dearer merit, not so deep a maim 
As to be cast forth in the common air. 
Have I deserved at your highness' hands. 
The language I have learn'd these forty years. 
My native English, now I must forego: 160 

And now my tongue's use is to me no more 
Than an unstringed viol or a harp. 
Or like a cunning instrument cased up. 
Or, being open, put into his hands 
That knows no touch to tune the harmony : 
Within my mouth you have engaol'd my tongue. 
Doubly portcullis'd with my teeth and lips; 
And dull unfeeling barren ignorance 
Is made my gaoler to attend on me. 

I am too old to fawn upon a nurse, 170 

Too far in years to be a pupil now: 
What is thy sentence then but speechless death. 
Which robs my tongue from breathing native breath ? 

King Richard. It boots thee not to be compassionate: 
After our sentence plaining comes too late. 

Moivbray. Then thus I turn me from my country's light, 
To dwell in solemn shades of endless night. 

King Richard. Return again, and take an oath with thee. 
Lay on our royal sword your banish'd hands; 
Swear by the duty that you owe to God — 180 

Our part therein we banish with yourselves — 
To keep the oath that we administer : 
You never shall, so help you truth and God ! 
Embrace each other's love in banishment ; 
Nor never look upon each other's face ; 
Nor never write, regreet, nor reconcile 



ACT I. SCENE III. 15 

This louring tempest of your home-bred hate; 

Nor never by advised purpose meet 

To plot, contrive, or complot any ill 

'Gainst us, our state, our subjects, or our land. 190 

Bolingbroke. I swear. 

Movjbray. And I, to keep all this. 

Bolingbroke. Norfolk, so far as to mine enemy : — 
By this time, had the king permitted us, 
One of our souls had wander'd in the air, 
Banish'd this frail sepulchre of our flesh. 
As now our flesh is banish'd from this land : 
Confess thy treasons ere thou fly the realm ; 
Since thou hast far to go, bear not along 
The clogging burthen of a guilty soul. 200 

Mowbray. No, Bolingbroke : if ever I were traitor, 
My name be blotted from the book of life. 
And I from heaven banish'd as from hence ! 
But what thou art, God, thou, and I do know ; 
And all too soon, I fear, the king shall rue. 
Farewell, my liege. Now no way can I stray ; 
Save back to England, all the world's my way. [Exit. 

King Richard. Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes 
I see thy grieved heart : thy sad aspect 
Hath from the number of his banish'd years 210 

Pluck'd four away. [To Baling.^ Six frozen winters spent. 
Return with welcome home from banishment. 

Bolingbroke. How long a time lies in one little word .' I 
Four lagging winters and four wanton springs ' 

End in a word : such is the breath of kings. 

Gaunt. I thank my liege, that in regard of me 
He shortens four years of my son's exile: 
But little vantage shall I reap thereby ; 
For, ere the six years that he hath to spend 
Can change their moons and bring their times about, 220 
My oil-dried lamp and time-bewasted light 
Shall be extinct with age and endless night ; 



1 6 KING RICHARD II. 

My inch of taper will be burnt and done, 
And blindfold death not let me see my son. 

King Richard. Why, uncle, thou hast many years to live. 

Gaunt. But not a minute, king, that thou canst give : 
Shorten my days thou canst \Aith sullen sorrow, 
And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow ; 
Thou canst help time to furrow me with age. 
But stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage; 250 

Thy word is current with him for my death, 
But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath. 

King Richard. Thy son is banish'd upon good advice, 
Whereto thy tongue a party-verdict gave : 
Why at our justice seem'st thou then to lour? 

Gaunt. Things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour. 
You urged me as a judge ; but I had rather 
You would have bid me argue like a father, 
O, had it been a stranger, not my child. 
To smooth his fault I should have been more mild : 240 
A partial slander sought I to avoid, 
And in the sentence my own life destroy'd. 
Alas, I look'd when some of you should say, 
I was too strict to make mine own away ; 
But you gave leave to my unwilling tongue 
Against my will to do myself this wrong. 

King Richard. Cousin, farewell ; and, uncle, bid him so : 
Six years we banish him, and he shall go. 

[F/ourijh. Exeunt King Richard and train. 

Aumerle. Cousin, farewell : what presence must not know, 
From where you do remain let paper show. 250 

Marshal. My lord, no leave take I ; for 1 will ride, 
As far as land will let me, by your side. 

Gaunt. O, to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words, 
That thou return'st no greeting to thy friends? 

Bolingbroke. I have too few to take my leave of you. 
When the tongue's office should be prodigal 
To breathe the abundant dolour of the heart. 



ACT I. SCENE III. 



17 



Gaunt. Thy grief is but thy absence for a time. 
BoUngbroke. Joy absent, grief is present for that time. 
Gaunt, What is six winters ? they are quickly gone. 260 
Bo/i/ig. To men in joy ; but grief malces one hour ten. 
Gaunt. Call it a travel that thou takest for pleasure. 
BoUngbroke. My heart will sigh when I miscall it so, 
Which finds it an inforced pilgrimage. 

Gaunt. The sullen passage of thy weary steps 
Esteem as foil wherein thou art to set 
The precious jewel of thy home return. 

BoUngbroke. Nay, rather, every tedious stride I make 
Will but remember me what a deal of world 
I wander from the jewels that I love. 270 

Must I not serve a long apprenticehood 
To foreign passages, and in the end, 
Having my freedom, boast of nothing else 
But that I was a journeyman to grief ? 

Gaunt. All places that the eye of heaven visits 
Are to a wise man ports and happy havens. 
Teach thy necessity to reason thus; 
There is no virtue like necessity. 
Think not the king did banish thee. 

But thou the king. Woe doth the heavier sit, 280 

Where it perceives it is but faintly borne. 
Go, say I sent thee forth to purchase honour 
And not the king exiled thee; or suppose 
Devouring pestilence hangs in our air 
And thou art flying to a fresher clime: 
Look, what thy soul holds dear, imagine it 
To lie that way thou go'st, not whence thou comest : 
Suppose the singing birds musicians. 
The grass whereon thou tread'st the presence strew'd. 
The flowers fair ladies, and thy steps no more 290 

Than a delightful measure or a dance; 
For gnarling sorrow hath less power to bite 
The man that mocks at it and sets it light. 

c 



l8 KING RICHARD II. 

BoUngbroke. O, who can hold a fire in his hand 
By thinking on the frosty Caucasus ? 
Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite 
By bare imagination of a feast ? 
Or wallow naked in December snow 
By thinking on fantastic summer's heat ? 
O, no ! the apprehension of the good 300 

Gives but the greater feeling to the worse : 
Fell sorrow's tooth doth never rankle more 
Than when he bites, but lanceth not the sore. 

Gaunt. Come, come, my son, I'll bring thee on thy way : 
Had I thy youth and cause, I would not stay. 

Baling. Then, England's ground, farewell; sweet soil, adieu; 
My mother, and my nurse, that bears me yet ! 
Where'er I wander, boast of this I can. 
Though banish'd, yet a trueborn Englishman. [Exeunt. 



Scene IV. The court. 

Enter the KiNG, nvith BaGOT and Green at one door; a>ul 
the Duke of Aumerle at another. 

King Richard. We did observe. Cousin Aumerle, 
How far brought you high Hereford on his way ? 

Aumerle. I brought high Hereford, if you call him so, 
But to the next highway, and there I left him. 

K. Rich. And say, what store of parting tears were shed ? 

Aum. Faith, none for me ; except the north-east wind, 
Which then blew bitterly against our faces. 
Awaked the sleeping rheum, and so by chance 
Did grace our hollow parting with a tear. 

K. Rich. What said our cousin when you parted with him ? 

Aumerle. * Farewell : ' 11 

And, for my heart disdained that my tongue 
Should so profane the word, that taught me craft 
To counterfeit oppression of such grief 
That words seem'd buried in my sorrow's grave. 



ACT I. SCENE IV. 1 9 

Marry, would the word 'farewell' have lengthen'd hours 
And added years to his short banishment, 
He should have had a volume of farewells; 
But since it would not, he had none of me. 

King Richard. He is our cousin, cousin ; but 'tis doubt, 
When time shall call him home from banishment, ai 

Whether our kinsman come to see his friends. 
Ourself and Bushy, Bagot here and Green 
Observed his courtship to the common people; 
How he did seem to dive into their hearts 
With humble and familiar courtesy. 
What reverence he did throw away on slaves, 
Wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles 
And patient underbearing of his fortune, 
As 'twere to banish their affects with him. 30 

Off goes his bonnet to an oyster-wench ; 
A brace of draymen bid God speed him well 
And had the tribute of his supple knee. 
With 'Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends;' 
As were our England in reversion his. 
And he our subjects' next degree in hope. 

Green. Well, he is gone ; and with him go these thoughts. 
Now for the rebels which stand out in Ireland, 
Expedient manage must be made, my liege, 
Ere further leisure yield them further means 40 

For their advantage and your highness' loss. 

King Richard. We will ourself in person to this war : 
And, for our coffers, with too great a court 
And liberal largess, are grown somewhat light, 
We are inforced to farm our royal realm ; 
The revenue whereof shall furnish us 
For our affairs in hand : if that come short. 
Our substitutes at home shall have blank charters; 
Whereto, when they shall know what men are rich, 
They shall subscribe them for large sums of gold 50 

And send them after to supply our wants; 
For we will make for Ireland presently. 
c 2 



20 KING RICHARD II. 

Enter Bushy. 
Bushy, what news ? 

Bushy. Old John of Gaunt is grievous sick, my lord, 
Suddenly taken ; and hath sent post haste 
To entreat your majesty to visit him. 

King Richard. Where lies he? 

Bushy. At Ely House. 

King Richard. Now put it, God, in the physician's mind 
To help him to his grave immediately ! 60 

The lining of his coffers shall make coats 
To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars. 
Come, gentlemen, let 's all go visit him : 
Pray God we may make haste, and come too late ! 

All. Amen. {Exeunt. 

ACT II. 

Scene I. Ely House. 

Enter JOHN OF GaUNT sick, ivith the DUKE OF YORK, &C. 

Gaunt. Will the king come, that I may breathe my last 
In wholesome counsel to his unstaid youth ? 

York. Vex not yourself, nor strive not with your breath ; 
For all in vain comes counsel to his ear. 

Gaunt. O, but they say the tongues of dying men 
Enforce attention like deep harmony : 
Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain, 
P'or they breathe truth that breathe their words in pain. 
He that no more must say is listcn'd more 

Than they whom youth and ease have taught to glose ; 
More are men's ends mark'd than their lives before : 1 1 

The setting sun, and music at the close, 
As the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last. 
Writ in remembrance more than things long past : 
Though Richard my life's counsel would not hear, 
My death's sad tale may yet undeaf his ear. 



ACT 11. SCENE I. 21 

fork. No ; it is stopp'd with other flattering sounds, 
As praises, of whose taste the wise are fond, 
Lascivious metres, to whose venom sound 
The open ear of youth doth always listen ; 20 

Report of fashions in proud Italy, 
"Whose manners still our tardy apish nation 
Limps after in base imitation. 
Where doth the world thrust forth a vanity — 
So it be new, there 's no respect how vile — 
That is not quickly buzz'd into his ears ? 
Then all too late comes counsel to be heard, 
Where will doth mutiny with wit's regard. 
Direct not him whose way himself will choose : 
'Tis breath thou lack'st, and that breath wilt thou lose. 30 

Gaunt. Methinks I am a prophet new inspired 
And thus expiring do foretell of him: 
His rash fierce blaze of riot cannot last. 
For violent fires soon burn out themselves ; 
Small showers last long, but sudden storms are short ; 
He tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes; 
With eager feeding food doth choke the feeder : 
Light vanity, insatiate cormorant. 
Consuming means, soon preys upon itself. 
This royal throne of kings, this scepter'd isle, 40 

This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars, 
This other Eden, demi-paradise. 
This fortress built by Nature for herself 
Against infection and the hand of war. 
This happy breed of men, this little world. 
This precious stone set in the silver sea. 
Which serves it in the office of a wall 
Or as a moat defensive to a house. 
Against the envy of less happier lands. 
This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England, 50 
This nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings, 
Fear'd by their breed and famous by their birth, 
Renowned for their deeds as far from home. 



2% KING RICHARD II. 

For Christian service and true chivalry, 

As is the sepulchre in stubborn Jewry 

Of the world's ransom, blessed Mary's Son, 

This land of such dear souls, this dear dear land, 

Dear for her reputation through the world, 

Is now leased out, I die pronouncing it, 

Like to a tenement or pelting farm : 60 

England, bound in with the triumphant sea, 

Whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege 

Of watery Neptune, is now bound in with shame, 

With inky blots and rotten parchment bonds : 

That England, that was wont to conquer others, 

Hath made a shameful conquest of itself. 

Ah, would the scandal vanish with my life, 

How happy then were my ensuing death ! 

Enter KiNG RICHARD a7id Queen, Aumerle, Bushy, 
Green, Bagot, Ross, and Willoughby. 

Tork. The king is come : deal mildly with his youth ; 
For young hot colts being raged do rage the more. 70 

Queen. How fares our noble uncle, Lancaster? 

K. Rich. What comfort, man ? how is 't with aged Gaunt ? 

Gaunt. O, how that name befits my composition ! 
Old Gaunt indeed, and gaunt in being old: 
Within me grief hath kept a tedious fast ; 
And who abstains from meat that is not gaunt ? 
For sleeping England long time have I watch'd ; 
Watching breeds leanness, leanness is all gaunt : 
The pleasure that some fathers feed upon. 
Is my strict fast ; I mean, my children's looks ; 80 

And therein fasting, hast thou made me gaunt: 
Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave, 
Whose hollow womb inherits nought but bones. 

K. Rich. Can sick men play so nicely with their names ? 

Gaunt. No, misery makes sport to mock itself: 
Since thou dost seek to kill my name in me, 
I mock my name, great king, to flatter thee. 



ACT II. SCENE I. 23 

K. Rich. Should dying men flatter with those that live? 

Gaunt. No, no, men living flatter those that die. 

K. Rich. Thou, now a-dying, say'st thou flatterest me. 

Gaunt. O, no ! thou diest, though I the sicker be. 9 1 

K. Rich. I am in health, I breathe, and see thee ill. 

Gaunt. Now He that made me knows I see thee ill ; 
111 in myself to see, and in thee seeing ill. 
Thy death-bed is no lesser than thy land 
Wherein thou liest in reputation sick ; 
And thou, too careless patient as thou art, 
Commit'st thy anointed body to the cure 
Of those physicians that first wounded thee : 
A thousand flatterers sit within thy crown, 100 

Whose compass is no bigger than thy head ; 
And yet, incaged in so small a verge, 
The waste is no whit lesser than thy land. 
O, had thy grandsire with a prophet's eye 
Seen how his son's son should destroy his sons, 
From forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame, 
Deposing thee before thou wert possess'd. 
Which art possess'd now to depose thyself. 
Why, cousin, wert thou regent of the world, 
It were a shame to let this land by lease; no 

But for thy world enjoying but this land, 
Is it not more than shame to shame it so ? 
Landlord of England art thou now, not king: 
Thy state of law is bondslave to the law; 
And thou — 

King Richard. A lunatic lean-witted fool, 
Presuming on an ague's privilege, 
Darest with thy frozen admonition 
Make pale our cheek, chasing the royal blood 
W^ith fury from his native residence. ^ 

Now, by my seat's right royal majesty, 120 

Wert thou not brother to great Edward's son, 
This tongue that runs so roundly in thy head 
Should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders. 



24 KING RICHARD II. 

Gaunt. O, spare me not, my brother Edward's son, 
For that I was his father Edward's son ; 
That blood already, like the pelican, 
Hast thou tapp'd out and drunkenly caroused : 
My brother Gloucester, plain well-meaning soul, 
Whom fair befal in heaven 'mongst happy souls ! 
May be a precedent and witness good 130 

That thou respect'st not spilling Edward's blood: 
Join with the present sickness that I have; 
And thy unkindness be like crooked age. 
To crop at once a too long wither'd flower. 
Live in thy shame, but die not shame with thee ! 
These words hereafter thy tormentors be ! 
Convey me to my bed, then to my grave: 
Love they to live that love and honour have. 

[Exit, borne off by his Attendants. 

K. Rich. And let them die that age and sullcns have ; 
For both hast thou, and both become the grave, 140 

Tork. I do beseech your majesty, impute his words 
To wayward sickliness and age in him : 
He loves you, on my life, and holds you dear 
As Harry Duke of Hereford, were he here. 

K. Rich. Right, you say true : as Hereford's love, so his ; 
As theirs, so mine ; and all be as it is. 

Enter NORTHUMBERLAND. 

Northumberland. My liege, old Gaunt commends him to 
your majesty. 

King Richard. What says he ? 

Northumberland. Nay, nothing; all is said: 

His tongue is now a stringless instrument; 
Words, life and all, old Lancaster hath spent. 150 

Tork. Be York the next that must be bankrupt so ! 
Though death be poor, it ends a mortal woe. 

K. Rich. The ripest fruit first falls, and so doth he; 
His time is spent, our pilgrimage must be. 



ACT II. SCENE I. 2 J 

So much for that. Now for our Irish wars : 

We must supplant those rough rug-headed kerns, 

Which Hve like venom where no venom else 

But only they have privilege to live. 

And for these great affairs do ask some charge, 

Towards our assistance we do seize to us i6o 

The plate, coin, revenues and moveables. 

Whereof our uncle Gaunt did stand possess'd. 

Tork. How long shall I be patient ? ah, how long 
Shall tender duty make me suffer wrong? 
Not Gloucester's death, nor Hereford's banishment, 
Not Gaunt's rebukes, nor England's private wrongs, 
Nor the prevention of poor Bolingbroke 
About his marriage, nor my own disgrace, 
Have ever made me sour my patient cheek. 
Or bend one wrinkle on my sovereign's face. 170 

I am the last of noble Edward's sons, 
Of whom thy father, Prince of Wales, was first : 
In war was never lion raged more fierce. 
In peace was never gentle lamb more mild. 
Than was that young and princely gentleman. 
His face thou hast, for even so look'd he, 
Accomplish'd with the number of thy hours; 
But when he frown'd, it was against the French 
And not against his friends ; his noble hand 
Did win what he did spend and spent not that 180 

Which his triumphant father's hand had won ; 
His hands were guilty of no kindred blood, 
But bloody with the enemies of his kin. 
O Richard! York is too far gone with grief, 
Or else he never would compare between. 

King Richard. Why, uncle, what 's the matter ? 

Tork. O my liege, 

Pardon me, if you please ; if not, I, pleased 
Not to be pardon'd, am content withal. 
Seek you to seize and gripe into your hands 
The royalties and rights of banish'd Hereford? 190 



26 KING RICHARD II. 

Is not Gaunt dead, and doth not Hereford live? 

Was not Gaunt just, and is not Harry true? 

Did not the one deserve to have an heir? 

Is not his heir a well-deserving son ? 

Take Hereford's rights away, and take from Time 

His charters and his customary rights ; 

Let not to-morrow then ensue to-day ; 

Be not thyself; for how art thou a king 

But by fair sequence and succession ? 

Now, afore God — God forbid I say true ! — 200 

If you do wrongfully seize Hereford's rights. 

Call in the letters patents that he hath 

By his attorneys-general to sue 

His livery, and deny his offer'd homage, 

You pluck a thousand dangers on your head, 

You lose a thousand well-disposed hearts 

And prick my tender patience to those thoughts 

Which honour and allegiance cannot think. 

K. Rich. Think what you will, we seize into our hands 
His plate, his goods, his money and his lands, 210 

Tork. I'll not be by the while: my liege, farewell: 
What will ensue hereof, there's none can tell ; 
But by bad courses may be understood 
That their events can never fall out good. ^Exit. 

K. Rich. Go, Bushy, to the Earl of Wiltshire straight : 
Bid him repair to us to Ely House 
To see this business. To-morrow next 
We will for Ireland; and 'tis time, I trow: 
And we create, in absence of ourself. 

Our uncle York lord governor of England ; 220 

For he is just and always loved us well. 
Come on, our queen : to-morrow must we part ; 
Be merry, for our time of stay is short. 

[Flourtjh. Exeunt King, Queen, Aumerle, 
Bushy, Green, and Bagot. 

North. Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead. 

Ross. And living too; for now his son is duke. 



ACT II. SCENE I. 27 

IViUoughby. Barely in title, not in revenue. 

Northumberlatid. Richly in both, if justice had her right. 

Ross. My heart is great ; but it must break with silence, 
Ere 't be disburden'd with a liberal tongue. 

North. Nay, speak thy mind ; and let him ne'er speak 
more 230 

That speaks thy words again to do thee harm ! 

Hllloiighby. Tends that thou wouldst speak to the Duke 
of Hereford ? 
If it be so, out with it boldly, man ; 
Quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him. 

Ross. No good at all that I can do for him ; 
Unless you call it good to pity him, 
Bereft and spoiled of his patrimony. 

North. Now, afore God, 'tis shame such wrongs are borne 
In him, a royal prince, and many moe 
Of noble blood in this declining land. 240 

The king is not himself, but basely led 
By flatterers; and what they will inform, 
Merely in hate, 'gainst any of us all. 
That will the king severely prosecute 
'Gainst us, our lives, our children, and our heirs. 

Ross. The commons hath he pill'd with grievous taxes, 
And quite lost their hearts : the nobles hath he fined 
For ancient quarrels, and quite lost their hearts. 

Willoughby . And daily new exactions are devised, 
As blanks, benevolences, and I wot not what: 250 

But what, o' God's name, doth become of this ? 

North. Wars have not wasted it, for warr'd he hath not. 
But basely yielded upon compromise 
That which his noble ancestors achieved with blows : 
More hath he spent in peace than they in wars. 

Ross. The Earl of Wiltshire hath the realm in farm. 

H^illo. The king 's grown bankrupt, like a broken man. 

North. Reproach and dissolution hangeth over him. 

Ross. He hath not money for these Irish wars, 



28 KING RICHARD II. 

His burthenous taxations notwithstanding, 360 

But by the robbing of the banish'd duke. 

North. His noble kinsman : most degenerate king ! 
But, lords, we hear this fearful tempest sing, 
Yet seek no shelter to avoid the storm ; 
We see the wind sit sore upon our sails. 
And yet we strike not, but securely perish. 

Ross. We see the very wreck that we must suffer; 
And unavoided is the danger now. 
For suffering so the causes of our wreck. 

North. Not so; even through the hollow eyes of death 
I spy life peering; but I dare not say 271 

How near the tidings of our comfort is. 

Willo. Nay, let us share thy thoughts, as thou dost ours. 

Ross. Be confident to speak, Northumberland : 
We three are but thyself; and, speaking so. 
Thy words are but as thoughts ; therefore, be bold. 

North. Then thus: I have from Port le Blanc, a bay 
In Brittany, received intelligence 
That Harry Duke of Hereford, Rainold Lord Cobham, 

280 

That late broke from the Duke of Exeter, 

His brother. Archbishop late of Canterbury, 

Sir Thomas Erpingham, Sir John Ramston, 

Sir John Norbery, Sir Robert Waterton and Francis Quoint, 

All these well furnish'd by the Duke of Bretagnc 

With eight tall ships, three thousand men of war, 

Are making hither with all due expedience 

And shortly mean to touch our northern shore: 

Perhaps they had ere this, but that they stay 

The first departing of the king for Ireland. 290 

If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke. 

Imp out our drooping country's broken wing. 

Redeem from broking pawn the blemish'd crown, 

Wipe off the dust that hides our sceptre's gilt 

And make high majesty look like itself. 

Away with me in post to Ravenspurgh ; 



ACT II. SCENE II. 29 

But if you faint, as fearing to do so, 
Stay and be secret, and myself will go. 

Ross. To horse, to horse ! urge doubts to them that fear. 

Willo. Hold out my horse, and I will first be there. 300 

[Exeunt. 

Scene II. Windsor Castle. 
Enter QuEEN, BuSHY, and Bagot. 

Bushy. Madam, your majesty is too much sad: 
You promised, when you parted with the king, 
To lay aside life-harming heaviness 
And entertain a cheerful disposition. 

Queen. To please the king I did ; to please myself 
I cannot do it ; yet I know no cause 
Why I should welcome such a guest as grief. 
Save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest 
As my sweet Richard ; yet again, methinks, 
Some unborn sorrow, ripe in fortune's womb, 10 

Is coming towards me, and my inward soul 
With nothing trembles : at some thing it grieves, 
More than with parting from my lord the king. 

Busby. Each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows, 
Which shows like grief itself, but is not so ; 
For sorrow's eye, glazed with blinding tears, 
Divides one thing entire to many objects; 
Like perspectives, which rightly gazed upon 
Show nothing but confusion, eyed awry 
Distinguish form : so your sweet majesty, 20 

Looking awry upon your lord's departure. 
Find shapes of grief, more than himself, to wail; 
Which, look'd on as it is, is nought but shadows 
Of what it is not. Then, thrice-gracious queen, 
More than your lord's departure weep not : more 's not seen ; 
Or if it be, 'tis with false sorrow's eye, 
Which for things true weeps things imaginary. 

Queen. It may be so ; but yet my inward soul 



30 KING RICHARD II. 

Persuades me it is otherwise : howe'er it be, 

I cannot but be sad ; so heavy sad 30 

As, though on thinking on no thought I think, 

Makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink. 

Bushy. 'Tis nothing but conceit, my gracious lady. 

Queen. 'Tis nothing less : conceit is still derived 
From some forefather grief; mine is not so, 
For nothing hath begot my something grief; 
Or something hath the nothing that I grieve: 
'Tis in reversion that I do possess ; 
But what it is, that is not yet known ; what 
I cannot name ; 'tis nameless woe, I wot. 40 

Enter GreEN. 

Green. God save your majesty ! and well met, gentlemen : 
I hope the king is not yet shipp'd for Ireland. 

Queen. Why hopest thou so ? 'tis better hope he is ; 
For his designs crave haste, his haste good hope : 
Then wherefore dost thou hope he is not shipp'd ? 

Green. That he, our hope, might have retired his power. 
And driven into despair an enemy's hope, 
Who strongly hath set footing in this land: 
The banish'd Bolingbroke repeals himself, 
And with uplifted arms is safe arrived 50 

At Ravenspurgh. 

Queen. Now God in heaven forbid ! 

Green. Ah, madam, 'tis too true : and that is worse, 
The Lord Northumberland, his son young Henry Percy, 
The Lords of Ross, Beaumond, and Willoughby, 
With all their powerful friends, are fled to him. 

Bushy. Why have you not proclaim'd Northumberland 
And all the rest revolted faction traitors ? 

Green. We have : whereupon the Earl of Worcester 
Hath broke his staff, resign'd his stewardship, 
And all the household servants fled with him 60 

To Bolingbroke. 



ACT II. SCENE II. 31 

Queen. So, Green, thou art the midwife to my woe, 
And Bolingbroke my sorrow's dismal heir : 
Now hath my soul brought forth her prodigy, 
And I, a gasping new-deliver'd mother, 
Have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow join'd. 

Bushy. Despair not, madam. 

Queen. Who shall hinder me ? 

I will despair, and be at enmity 
With cozening hope : he is a flatterer, 
A parasite, a keeper back of death, 70 

Who gently would dissolve the bands of life. 
Which false hope lingers in extremity. 

Enter YORK. 

Green. Here comes the Duke of York. 

Queen. With signs of war about his aged neck : 
O, full of careful business are his looks ! 
Uncle, for God's sake, speak comfortable words. 

Tork. Should I do so, I should belie my thoughts : 
Comfort's in heaven ; and we are on the earth. 
Where nothing lives but crosses, cares and grief. 
Your husband, he is gone to save far off, 80 

Whilst others come to make him lose at home : 
Here am I left to underprop his land. 
Who, weak with age, cannot support myself: 
Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made ; 
Now shall he try his friends that flatter'd him. 

Enter a Servant. 

Servant. Tsly lord, your son was gone before I came. 

Tork. He was ? Why, so ! go all which way it will ! 
The nobles they are fled, the commons they are cold, 
And will, I fear, revolt on Hereford's side. 
Sirrah, get thee to Plashy, to my sister Gloucester; 90 

Bid her send me presently a thousand pound : 
Hold, take my ring. 



32 KING RICHARD 11. 

Servant. My lord, I had forgot to tell your lordship, 
To-day, as I came by, I called there ; 
But I shall grieve you to report the rest. 

Tork. What is 't, knave ? 

Servant. An hour before I came, the duchess died. 

Tork. God for his mercy ! what a tide of woes 
Comes rushing on this woeful land at once ! 
I know not what to do : I would to God, i oo 

So my untruth had not provoked him to it. 
The king had cut off my head with my brother's. 
What, are there no posts dispatch'd for Ireland? 
How shall we do for money for these wars? 
Come, sister, — cousin, I would say, — pray, pardon me. 
Go, fellow, get thee home, provide some carts 
And bring away the armour that is there. \_Exit Servant. 
Gentlemen, will you go muster men ? 
If I know how or which way to order these affairs 
Thus thrust disorderly into my hands, no 

Never believe me. Both are my kinsmen : 
The one is my sovereign, whom both my oath 
And duty bids defend ; the other again 
Is my kinsman, whom the king hath wrong'd, 
Whom conscience and my kindred bids to right. 
Well, somewhat we must do. Come, cousin, I'll 
Dispose of you. 

Gentlemen, go, muster up your men. 
And meet me presently at Berkeley. 

I should to Plashy too; i-o 

But time will not permit: all is uneven, 
And every thing is left at six and seven. 

^Exeunt Tork and Queen. 

Bushy. The wind sits fair for news for Ireland, 
But none returns. For us to levy power 
Proportionable to the enemy 
Is all unpossible. 

Green. Besides, our nearness to the king in love 
Is near the hate of those love not the king. 



ACT II. SCENE III. 



33 



Bagot. And that 's the wavering commons : for their love 
Lies in their purses, and whoso empties them 1 30 

By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate. 

Bushy. Wherein the king stands generally condemn'd. 

Bagot. If judgement lie in them, then so do we, 
Because we ever have been near the king. 

Green. Well, I will for refuge straight to Bristol castle : 
The Earl of Wiltshire is already there. 

Busby. Thither will I with you; for little office 
The hateful commons will perform for us, 
Except like curs to tear us all to pieces. 
Will you go along with us? 140 

Bagot. No; I will to Ireland to his majesty. 
Farewell: if heart's presages be not vain. 
We three here part that ne'er shall meet again. 

Bushy. That's as York thrives to beat back Bolingbroke. 

Green. Alas, poor duke ! the task he undertakes 
Is numbering sands and drinking oceans dry: 
Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly. 
Farewell at once, for once, for all, and ever. 

Bushy. Well, we may meet again. 

Bagot. I fear me, never. 

\_Ex-eiint. 

Scene III. Iflhls in Gloucestershire. 
Enter BOLINGBROKE and NORTHUMBERLAND, ^ivith Forces. 

Bolingbroke. How far is it, my lord, to Berkeley now ? 

Northumberland. Believe me, noble lord, 
I am a stranger here in Gloucestershire : 
These high wild hills and rough uneven ways 
Draws out our miles, and makes them wearisome ; 
And yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar, 
Making the hard way sweet and delectable. 
But I bethink me what a weary way 
From Ravenspurgh to Cotswold will be found 

D 



34 KING RICHARD II. 

In Ross and Willoughby, wanting your company, lo 

Which, I protest, hath very much beguiled 

The tediousness and process of my travel : 

But theirs is sweetened with the hope to have 

The present benefit which I possess ; 

And hope to joy is little less in joy 

Than hope enjoy'd : by this the weary lords 

Shall make their way seem short, as mine hath done 

By sight of what I have, your noble company. 

BoUngbroke. Of much less. value is my company 
Than your good words. But who comes here ? 20 

Enter Henry PerCY. 

Northumberland. It is my son, young Harry Percy, 
Sent from my brother Worcester, whencesoever. 
Harry, how fares your uncle ? [yo^* 

Percy. I had thought, my lord, to have learn'd his health of 

Northumberland. Why, is he not with the queen? 

Percy. No, my good lord ; he hath forsook the court. 
Broken his staff of office and dispersed 
The household of the king. 

Northumberland. What was his reason ? 

He was not so resolved when last we spake together. 

Percy. Because your lordship was proclaimed traitor. 30 
But he, my lord, is gone to Ravenspurgh, 
To offer service to the Duke of Hereford, 
And sent me over by Berkeley, to discover 
What power the Duke of York had levied there ; 
Then with directions to repair to Ravenspurgh. 

North. Have you forgot the Duke of Hereford, boy ? 

Percy. No, my good lord, for that is not forgot 
Which ne'er I did remember : to my knowledge, 
I never in my life did look on him. 

North. Then learn to know him now; this is the duke. 

Percy. My gracious lord, I tender you my service, 41 
Such as it is, being tender, raw and young; 



ACT II. SCENE III. 35 

Which elder days shall ripen and confirm 
To more approved service and desert. 

BoUngbroke. I thank thee, gentle Percy ; and be sure 
I count myself in nothing else so happy 
As in a soul remembering my good friends; 
And, as my fortune ripens with thy love. 
It shall be still thy true love's recompense : 
My heart this covenant makes, my hand thus seals it. 50 

North. How far is it to Berkeley ? and what stir 
Keeps good old York there with his men of war ? 

Percy. There stands the castle, by yon tuft of trees, 
Mann'd with three hundred men, as I have heard ; 
And in it are the Lords of York, Berkeley, and Seymour ; 
None else of name and noble estimate. 

Enter RoSS and WiLLOUGHBY. 

North. Here come the Lords of Ross and Willoughby, 
Bloody with spurring, fiery-red with haste. 

BoUngbroke. Welcome, my lords. I wot your love pursues 
A banish'd traitor : all my treasury 60 

Is yet but unfelt thanks, which more enrich'd 
Shall be your love and labour's recompense. 

Ross. Your presence makes us rich, most noble lord. 

Willoughby. And far surmounts our labour to attain it. 

Bol'mg. Evermore thanks, the exchequer of the poor; 
Which, till my infant fortune comes to years. 
Stands for my bounty. But who comes here? 

E7iter Berkeley. 

" Northumberland. It is my Lord of Berkeley, as I guess. 
Berk. My Lord of Hereford, my message is to you. 
BoUngbroke. My lord, my answer is to 'Lancaster;' 70 
And I am come to seek that name in England; 
And I must find that title in your tongue, 
Before I make reply to aught you say. 
D 2 



36 KING RICHARD II. 

Berk. Mistake me not, my lord ; 'tis not my meaning 
To raze one title of your honour out : 
To you, my lord, I come, what lord you will, 
From the most gracious regent of this land, 
The Duke of York, to know what pricks you on 
To take advantage of the absent time 
And fright our native peace with self-born arms. 80 

E}iter York attended. 

Boling. I shall not need transport my words by you ; 
Here comes his grace in person. 

INIy noble uncle ! [^Kmeis. 

York. Show me thy humble heart, and not thy knee, 
Whose duty is deceiveable and false. 

Bolhigbroke. IMy gracious uncle — 

York. Tut, tut! 
Grace me no grace, nor uncle me no uncle : 
I am no traitor's uncle ; and that word ' grace ' 
In an ungracious mouth is but profane. 
Why have those banish'd and forbidden legs 90 

Dared once to touch a dust of England's ground ? 
But then more 'why?' why have they dared to march 
So many miles upon her peaceful bosom. 
Frighting her pale-faced villages with war 
And ostentation of despised arms ? 
Gomest thou because the anointed king is hence ? 
Why, foolish boy, the king is left behind, 
And in my loyal bosom lies his power. 
Were I but now the lord of such hot youth 
As when brave Gaunt, thy father, and myself 100 

Rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men, 
From forth the ranks of many thousand French, 
O, then how quickly should this arm of mine, 
Now prisoner to the palsy, chastise thee 
And minister correction to thy fault ! 

Bolhigbroke. My gracious uncle, let me know my fault : 
On what condition stands it and \\ herein ? 



ACT II. SCENE III. ^y 

Tori. Even in condition of the worst degree, 
In gross rebellion and detested treason : 
Thou art a banish'd man, and here art come no 

Before the expiration of thy time, 
In braving arms against thy sovereign. 

Bo/ing. As I was banish'd, I was banish'd Hereford; 
But as I come, I come for Lancaster. 
And, noble uncle, I beseech your grace 
Look on my wrongs with an indifferent eye : 
You are my father, for methinks in you 
I see old Gaunt alive ; O, then, my father, 
Will you permit that I shall stand condemn'd 
A wandering vagabond; my rights and royalties 120 

Pluck'd from my arms perforce and given away 
To upstart unthrifts ? Wherefore was I born ? 
If that my cousin king be King of England, 
It must be granted I am Duke of Lancaster. 
You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin ; 
Had you first died, and he been thus trod down, 
He should have found his uncle Gaunt a father, 
To rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay. 
I am denied to sue my livery here. 

And yet my letters-patents give me leave: 130 

My father's goods are all distrain'd and sold. 
And these and all are all amiss employ'd. 
What would you have me do? I am a subject. 
And I challenge law: attorneys are denied me; 
And therefore personally I lay my claim 
To my inheritance of free descent. 

North. The noble duke hath been too much abused. 

Ross. It stands your grace upon to do him right. 

JVilloiighby. Base men by his endowments are made great. 

Tork. My lords of England, let me tell you this : 140 
I have had feeling of my cousin's wrongs 
And laboured all I could to do him right ; 
But in this kind to come, in braving arms. 
Be his own carver and cut out his way, 



38 KING RICHARD II. 

To find out right with wrong, it may not be ; 
And you that do abet him in this kind 
Cherish rebeUion and are rebels all. 

North. The noble duke hath sworn his coming is 
But for his own ; and for the right of that 
We all have strongly sworn to give him aid; 150 

And let him ne'er see joy that breaks that oath ! 

Tork. Well, well, I see the issue of these arms : 
I cannot mend it, I must needs confess. 
Because my power is weak and all ill left: 
But if I could, by Him that gave me life, 
I would attach you all and make you stoop 
Unto the sovereign mercy of the king ; 
But since I cannot, be it known to you 
I do remain as neuter. So, fare you well ; 
Unless you please to enter in the castle 160 

And there repose you for this night. 

Bolingbroke. An offer, uncle, that we will accept : 
But we must win your grace to go with us 
To Bristol castle, which they say is held 
By Bushy, Bagot and their complices. 
The caterpillars of the commonwealth, 
Which I have sworn to weed and pluck away. 

York. It may be I will go with you : but yet I '11 pause ; 
For I am loath to break our country's laws. 
Nor friends nor foes, to me welcome you are: 170 

Things past redress are now with me past care. [Exeunt. 

Scene IV. Coaiuay. 
Enter SALISBURY and a Welsh Captain. 
Captain. My Lord of Salisbury, we have stay'd ten days, 
And hardly kept our countrymen together, 
And yet we hear no tidings from the king ; 
Therefore we will disperse ourselves: farewell. 

Salisbury. Stay yet another day, thou trusty Welshman : 
The king reposeth all his confidence in thee. 

Captain. 'Tis thought the king is dead ; we will not stay. 

\ 



ACT III. SCENE 7. 39 

The bay-trees in our country are all wither'd 

And meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven ; 

The pale-faced moon looks bloody on the earth 10 

And lean-look'd prophets whisper fearful change ; 

Rich men look sad and ruffians dance and leap, 

The one in fear to lose what they enjoy, / 

The other to enjoy by rage and war: 

These signs forerun the death or fall of kings. 

Farewell: our countrymen are gone and fled, 

As well assured Richard their king is dead. [Exit. 

Salisbury. Ah, Richard, with the eyes of heavy mind 
I see thy glory like a shooting star 

Fall to the base earth from the firmament. 20 

Thy sun sets weeping in the lowly west, 
Witnessing storms to come, woe and unrest: 
Thy friends are fled to wait upon thy foes, 
And crossly to thy good all fortune goes. [Exit. 

ACT III. 

Scene I. Bristol. Before the castle. 
Enter BoLiNGBROKE, York, Northumberland, Ross, Percy 

WiLLOUGHBY, ivith BuSHY and GrEEN, prisoners. 

Bolingbroke. Bring forth these men. 
Bushy and Green, I will not vex your souls — 
Since presently your souls must part your bodies — 
With too much urging your pernicious lives, 
For 'twere no charity ; yet, to wash your blood 
From off my hands, here in the view of men 
I will unfold some causes of your deaths. 
You have misled a prince, a royal king, 
A happy gentleman in blood and lineaments, 
By you unhappied and disfigured clean : 10 

You have in manner with your sinful hours 
Made a divorce betwixt his queen and him. 
Broke the possession of a royal bed 
And-stain'd the beauty of a fair queen's cheeks 



40 KING RICHARD II. 

With tears drawn from her eyes by your foul wrongs. 

Myself, a prince by fortune of my birth, 

Near to the king in blood, and near in love 

Till you did make him misinterpret me, 

Have stoop'd my neck under your injuries, 

And sigh'd my English breath in foreign clouds, 20 

Eating the bitter bread of banishment; 

Whilst you have fed upon my signories, 

Disp^rk'd my parks and fell'd my forest woods, 

From my own windows torn my household coat, 

Razed out my imprese, leaving me no sign, 

Save men's opinions and my living blood, 

To show the world I am a gentleman. 

This and much more, much more than twice all this, 

Condemns you to the death. See them deliver'd over 

To execution and the hand of death. 30 

Bushy. More welcome is the stroke of death to me 
Than Bolingbroke to England. Lords, farewell. 

Green. My comfort is that heaven will take our souls 
And plague injustice with the pains of hell. 

Baling. My Lord Northumberland, see them dispatch'd. 
[Exeunt Northumberland and others, ivith the prisoners. 
Uncle, you say the queen is at your house ; 
For God's sake, fairly let her be entreated : 
Tell her I send to her my kind commends ; 
Take special care my greetings be deliver'd. 

Tork. A gentleman of mine I have dispatch'd 40 

With letters of your love to her at large. 

Bolingbroke. Thanks, gentle uncle. Come, lords, away, 
To fight with Glendower and his complices: 
Awhile to work, and after holiday. [Exeunt. 

Scene II. The coast of Wales. A castle in vieiv. 

Drums: flourish and colours. Enter KiNG RiCHARD, the BiSHOP 
OF Carlisle, AumerlE, and Soldiers. 

King Richard. Barkloughly castle call they this at hand? 



ACT III. SCENE II. 41 

Aumerle. Yea, my lord. How brooks your grace the air, 
After your late tossing on the breaking seas ? 

King Richard. Needs must I like it well : I weep for joy 
To stand upon my kingdom once again. 
Dear earth, I do salute thee with my hand, 
Though rebels wound thee with their horses' hoofs : 
As a long-parted mother with her child 
Plays fondly with her tears and smiles in meeting. 
So, weeping, smiling,, greet I thee, my earth, 10 

And do thee favours with my royal hands. 
Feed not thy sovereign's foe, my gentle earth, 
Nor with thy sweets comfort his ravenous sense ; 
But let thy spiders, that suck up thy venom. 
And heavy-gaited toads lie in their way. 
Doing annoyance to the treacherous feet 
Which with usurping steps do trample thee : 
Yield stinging nettles to mine enemies ; 
And when they from thy bosom pluck a flower, 
Guard it, I pray thee, with a lurking adder 20 

Whose double tongue may with a mortal touch 
Throw death upon thy sovereign's enemies. 
Mock not my senseless conjuration, lords : 
This earth shall have a feeling and these stones 
Prove armed soldiers, ere her native king 
Shall falter under foul rebellion's arms. 

Car. Fear not, my lord : that Power that made you king 
Hath power to keep you king in spite of all. 
The means that heaven yields must be embraced, 
And not neglected; else, if heaven would, 30 

And we will not, heaven's offer we refuse,. 
The proffer'd means of succour and redress. 

Aumerle. He means, my lord, that we are too remiss ; 
Whilst Bolingbroke, through our security, 
(irows strong and great in substance and in power. 

King Richard. Discomfortable cousin ! know'st thou not 
That when the searching eye of heaven is hid. 
Behind the globe, that lights the lower world, 



43 KING RICHARD II. 

Then thieves and robbers range abroad unseen 

In murders and in outrage, boldly here ; 40 

But when from under this terrestrial ball 

He fires the proud tops of the eastern pines 

And darts his light through every guilty hole, 

Then murders, treasons and detested sins, 

The cloak of night being pluck'd from off their backs, 

Stand bare and naked, trembling at themselves ? 

So when this thief, this traitor, Bolingbroke, 

Who all this while hath revell'd in the night 

Whilst we were wandering with the antipodes, 

Shall see us rising in our throne, the east, 50 

His treasons will sit blushing in his face, 

Not able to endure the sight of day. 

But self-aflfrighted tremble at his sin. 

Not all the water in the rough rude sea 

Can wash the balm off from an anointed king ; 

The breath of worldly men cannot depose 

The deputy elected by the Lord : 

For every man that Bolingbroke hath press'd 

To lift shrewd steel against our golden crown, 

God for his Richard hath in heavenly pay 60 

A glorious angel : then, if angels fight. 

Weak men must fall, for heaven still guards the right. 

Enter SALISBURY. 
Welcome, my lord : how far off lies your power ? 

Salisbury. Nor near nor farther off, my gracious lord, 
Than this weak arm: discomfort guides my tongue 
And bids me speak of nothing but despair. 
One day too late, I fear me, noble lord, 
Hath clouded all thy happy days on earth : 
O, call back yesterday, bid time return. 
And thou shalt have twelve thousand fighting men ! 70 

To-day, to-day, unhappy day, too late, 
O'erthrows thy joys, friends, fortune and thy state : 
For all the Welshmen, hearing thou wert dead, 
Are gone to Bolingbroke, dispersed and fled ; 



ACT III. SCENE II. 43 

Aumerle. Comfort, my liege : why looks your grace so pale ? 

K. Rich. But now the blood of twenty thousand men 
Did triumph in my face, and they are fled ; 
And, till so much blood thither come again, 
Have I not reason to look pale and dead ? 
All souls that will be safe fly from my side, 80 

For time hath set a blot upon my pride. 

Aumerle. Comfort, my liege ; remember who you are. 

King Richard. I had forgot myself: am I not king ? 
Awake, thou coward majesty ! thou sleepest. 
Is not the king's name twenty thousand names ? 
Arm, arm, my name ! a puny subject strikes ■ 

At thy great glory. Look not to the gi-ound, 
Ye favourites of a king : are we not high ? 
High be our thoughts: I know my uncle York 89 

Hath power enough to serve our turn. But who comes here ? 

Enter SCROOP. 

Scroop. More health and happiness betide my liege 
Than can my care-tuned tongue deliver him ! 

K. Rich. Mine ear is open and my heart prepared : 
The worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold. 
Say, is my kingdom lost ? why, 'twas my care ; 
And what loss is it to be rid of care ? 
Strives Bolingbroke to be as great as we ? 
Greater he shall not be ; if he serve God, 
We'll serve Him too and be his fellow so: 
Revolt our subjects? that we cannot mend; 100 

They break their faith to God as well as us: 
Cry woe, destruction, ruin and decay ; 
The worst is death, and death will have his day. 

Scroop. Glad am I that your highness is so arm'd 
To bear the tidings of calamity. 
Like an unseasonable stormy day. 
Which makes the silver rivers drown their shores, 
As if the world were all dissolved to tears, 
So high above his limits swells the rage 



44 KING RICHARD II. 

Of Bolingbroke, covering your fearful land no 

With hard bright steel and hearts harder than steel. 

White-beards have arm'd their thin and hairless scalps 

Against thy majesty; boys, with women's voices, 

Strive to speak big and clap their female joints 

In stiff unwieldy arms against thy crown : 

Thy very beadsmen learn to bend their bows 

Of double-fatal yew against thy state ; 

Yea, distaff-women manage rusty bills 

Against thy seat: both young and old rebel, 

And all goes worse than I have power to tell. 120 

King Richard. Too well, too well thou tell'st a tale so ill. 
Where is the Earl of Wiltshire ? where is Bagot ? 
What is become of Bushy ? where is Green ? 
That they have let the dangerous enemy 
Measure our confines with such peaceful steps.' 
If we prevail, their heads shall pay for it: 
I warrant they have made peace with Bolingbroke. 

Scroop. Peace have they made with him indeed, my lord. 

K. Rich. O villains, vipers, damn'd without redemption ! 
Dogs, easily won to fawn on any man ! 130 

Snakes, in my heart-blood warm'd, that sting my heart ! 
Three Judascs, each one thrice worse than Judas! 
Would they make peace ? terrible hell make war 
Upon their spotted souls for this offence ! 

Scroop. Sweet love, I see, changing his property. 
Turns to the sourest and most deadly hate : 
Again uncurse their souls ; their peace is made 
With heads, and not with hands : those whom you curse 
Have felt the worst of death's destroying wound 
And lie full low, graved in the hollow ground. 140 

Aumerle. Is Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead ? 

Scroop. Ay, all of them at Bristol lost their heads. 

Aumerle. Where is the duke my father with his power ? 

K. Rich. No matter where ; of comfort no man speak :. 
Let's talk of graves, of worms and epitaphs; 
Make dust our paper and with rainy eyes 



ACT III. SCENE II. 45 

Write sorrow on the bosom of the earth, 

Let 's choose executors and talk of wills : 

And yet not so, for what can we bequeath 

Save our deposed bodies to the ground? 150 

Our lands, our lives and ali are Bolingbroke's, 

And nothing can we call our own but death 

And that small model of the barren earth 

Which serves as paste and cover to our bones, 

For God's sake, let us sit upon the ground 

And tell sad stories of the death of kings: 

How some have been deposed ; some slain in war ; 

Some haunted by the ghosts they have deposed ; 

Some poison'd by their wives ; some sleeping kill'd ; 

All murder'd: for within the hollow crown 160 

That rounds the mortal temples of a king 

Keeps Death his court and there the antic sits, 

Scoffing his state and grinning at his pomp. 

Allowing him a breath, a little scene. 

To monarchize, be fear'd and kill with looks, 

Infusing him with self and vain conceit, 

As if this flesh which walls about our life 

Were brass impregnable, and humour'd thus 

Comes at the last and with a little pin 

Bores through his castle wall, and farewell king! 170 

Cover your heads and mock not flesh and blood 

With solemn reverence : throw away respect, 

Tradition, form and ceremonious duty. 

For you have but mistook me all this while : 

I live with bread like you, feel want. 

Taste grief, need friends : subjected thus, 

How can you say to me, I am a king ? 

Carlisle. I\Iy lord, wise men ne'er sit and wail their woes, 
But presently prevent the ways to wail. 
To fear the foe, since fear oppresseth strength, 180 

Gives in your weakness strength unto your foe, 
And so your follies fight against yourself. 
Fear, and be slain ; no worse can come to fight : 



46 KING RICHARD II. 

And fight and die is death destroying death ; 
Where fearing dying pays death servile breath. 

Aumerle. My father hath a power; inquire of him, 
And learn to make a body of a limb. 

K. Rich. Thou chidest me well ; proud Bolingbroke, I come 
To change blows with thee for our day of doom. 
This ague fit of fear is over-blown; 190 

An easy task it is to win our own. 
Say, Scroop, where lies our uncle with his power? 
Speak sweetly, man, although thy looks be sour. 

Scroop. Men judge by the complexion of the sky 
The state and inclination of the day : 
So may you by my dull and heavy eye. 

My tongue hath but a heavier tale to say. 
I play the torturer, by small and small 
To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken : 
Your uncle York is join'd with Bolingbroke, 200 

And all your northern castles yielded up. 
And all your southern gentlemen in arms 
Upon his party. 

King Richard. Thou hast said enough. 
Beshrew thee, cousin, which didst lead me forth \To Aumerle. 
Of that sweet way I was in to despair ! 
What say you now ? what comfort have we now ? 
By heaven, I'll hate him everlastingly 
That bids me be of comfort any more. 
Go to Flint castle: there I'll pine away; 
A king, woe's slave, shall kingly woe obey. 210 

That power I have, discharge ; and let them go 
To ear the land that hath some hope to grow, 
For I have none : let no man speak again 
To alter this, for counsel is but vain. 

Aumerle. My liege, one word. 

King Richard. He does me double wrong 

That wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue. 
Discharge my followers: let them hence away, 
From Richard's night to Bolingbroke's fair day. \Exeunt. 



ACT III. SCENE III. 47 

Scene III. Wales. Before Flint castle. 

Enter, with drum and colours, BOLINGBROKE, YORK, 
Northumberland, Attendants, and Forces. 

BoUngkroke. So that by this intelligence we learn 
The Welshmen are dispersed, and Salisbury 
Is gone to meet the king, who lately landed 
With some few private friends upon this coast. 

North. The news is very fair and good, my lord : 
Richard not far from hence hath hid his head. 

Tork. It would beseem the Lord Northumberland 
To say 'King Richard:' alack the heavy day 
When such a sacred king should hide his head. 

Northumberland. Your grace mistakes; only to be brief. 
Left I his title out. 

Tork. The time hath been, 1 1 

Would you have been so brief with him, he would 
Have been so brief with you, to shorten you. 
For taking so the head, your whole head's length. 

BoUngbroke. Mistake not, uncle, further than you should. 

Tork. Take not, good cousin, further than yoU should, 
Lest you mistake the heavens are o'er our heads. 

BoUngbroke. I know it, uncle, and oppose not myself 
Against their will. But who comes here ? 

Enter PERCY. 
Welcome, Harry : what, will not this castle yield ? 20 

Percy. The castle royally is mann'd, my lord, 
Against thy entrance. 

BoUngbroke. Royally ! 
Why, it contains no king? 

Percy. Yes, my good lord, 

It doth contain a king; King Richard lies 
Within the limits of yon lime and stone : 
And with him are the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury, 
Sir Stephen Scroop, besides a clergyman 
Of holy reverence ; who, I cannot learn. 



48 KING RICHARD II. 

Northumberland. O, belike it is the Bishop of Carlisle. 

Bolingbroke. Noble lords, 3 1 

Go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle ; 
Through brazen trumpet send the breath of parley 
Into his ruin'd ears, and thus deliver: 
Henry Bolingbroke 

On both his knees doth kiss King Richard's hand 
And sends allegiance and true faith of heart 
To his most royal person, hither come 
Even at his feet to lay my arms and power. 
Provided that my banishment repeal'd 40 

And lands restored again be freely granted : 
If not, I'll use the advantage of my power 
And lay the summer's dust with showers of blood 
Rain'd from the wounds of slaughter'd Englishmen : 
The which, how far off from the mind of Bolingbroke 
It is, such crimson tempest should bedrench 
The fresh green lap of fair King Richard's land, 
IMy stooping duty tenderly shall show. 
Go, signify as much, while here we march 
Upon the grassy carpet of this plain. 50 

Let's march without the noise of threatening drum, 
That from this castle's tatter'd battlements 
Our fair appointments may be well perused. 
Methinks King Richard and myself should meet 
With no less terror than the elements 
Of fire and water, when their thundering shock 
At meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven. 
Be he the fire, I '11 be the yielding water : 
The rage be his, whilst on the earth I rain 
My waters; on the earth, and not on him. 60 

INIarch on, and mark King Richard how he looks. 

Parle 'without, and ansiver <within. Then a flourish. Enter 
on the walls, KiNG RiCHARD, the BiSHOP OF CARLISLE, 

AuMERLE, Scroop, and Salisbury. 

See, see, King Richard doth himself appear, 
As doth the blushing discontented sun 



A2T in. SCENE III. 49 

From out the fiery portal of the east, 
When he perceives the envious clouds are bent 
To dim his glory and to stain the track 
Of his bright passage to the Occident. 

Tork. Yet looks he like a king : behold, his eye, 
As bright as is the eagle's, lightens forth 
Controlling majesty: alack, alack, for woe, 70 

That any harm should stain so fair a show ! 

K. Rich. We are amazed ; and thus long have we stood 
To watch the fearful bending of thy knee, \To North. 

Because we thought ourself thy lawful king : 
And if we be, how dare thy joints forget 
To pay their awful duty to our presence ? 
If we be not, show us the hand of God 
That hath dismiss'd us from our stewardship ; 
For well we know, no hand of blood and bone 
Can gripe the sacred handle of our sceptre, 80 

Unless he do profane, steal, or usurp. 
And though you think that all, as you have done, 
Have torn their souls by turning them from us. 
And we are barren and bereft of friends ; 
Yet know, my master, God omnipotent, 
Is mustering in his clouds on our behalf 
Armies of pestilence ; and they shall strike 
Your children yet unborn and unbegot, 
That lift your vassal hands against my head 
And threat the glory of my precious crown. 90 

Tell Bolingbroke — for yond methinks he stands — 
That every stride he makes upon my land 
Is dangerous treason : he is come to open 
The purple testament of bleeding war; 
But ere the crown he looks for live in peace. 
Ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers' sons 
Shall ill become the flower of England's face, 
Change the complexion of her maid-pale peace 
To scarlet indignation and bedew 

Her pastures' grass with faithful English blood. ioa 

E 



^O KING RICHARD TI. 

North. The king of heaven forbid our lord the king 
Should so with civil and uncivil arms 
Be rush'd upon ! Thy thrice noble cousin 
Harry Bolingbroke doth humbly kiss thy hand ; 
And by the honourable tomb he swears, 
That stands upon your royal grandsire's bones, 
And by the royalties of both your bloods, 
Currents that spring from one most gracious head, 
And by the buried hand of warlike Gaunt, 
And by the worth and honour of himself, 1 1 o 

Comprising all that may be sworn or said, 
His coming hither hath no further scope 
Than for his lineal royalties and to beg 
Enfranchisement immediate on his knees: 
Which on thy royal party granted once, 
His glittering arms he will commend to rust, 
His barbed steeds to stables, and his heart 
To faithful service of your majesty. 
This swears he, as he is a prince, is just ; 
And, as I am a gentleman, I credit him. 120 

King Richard. Northumberland, say thus the king returns : 
His noble cousin is right welcome hither; 
And all the number of his fair demands 
Shall be accomplish'd without contradiction : 
With all the gracious utterance thou hast 
Speak to his gentle hearing kind commends. 
We do debase ourselves, cousin, do we not, \To Aumerle. 
To look so poorly and to speak so fair? 
Shall we call back Northumberland, and send 
Defiance to the traitor, and so die ? 1 30 

Aumerle. No, good my lord; let's fight with gentle words 
Till time lend friends and friends their helpful swords. 

A'. Rich. O God, O God ! that e'er this tongue of mine. 
That laid the sentence of dread banishment 
On yon proud man, should take it off again 
With words of sooth ! O that I were as great 



ACT III. SCENE III. 51 

As is my grief, or lesser than my name ! 

Or that I could forget what I have been, 

Or not remember what I must be now ! 

Swell'st thou, proud heart? I'll give thee scope to beat, 

Since foes have scope to beat both thee and me. 14 1 

Aiimerle. Northumberland comes back from Bolingbroke. 

K. Rich. What must the king do now? must he submit? 
The king shall do it : must he be deposed ? 
The king shall be contented : must he lose 
The name of king ? o' God's name, let it go : 
I'll give my jewels for a set of beads, 
My gorgeous palace for a hermitage, 
My gay apparel for an almsman's gown. 
My figured goblets for a dish of wood, 150 

My sceptre for a palmer's walking-staff. 
My subjects for a pair of carved saints 
And my large kingdom for a little grave, 
A little little grave, an obscure grave ; 
Or I '11 be buried in the king's highway, 
Some way of common trade, where subjects' feet 
May hourly trample on their sovereign's head ; 
For on my heart they tread now whilst I live ; 
And buried once, why not upon my head? 
Aumerle, thou weep'st, my tender-hearted cousin! 160 

We '11 make foul weather with despised tears ; 
Our sighs and they shall lodge the summer corn, 
And make a dearth in this revolting land. 
Or shall we play the wantons with our woes, 
And make some pretty match with shedding tears ? 
As thus, to drop them still upon one place, 
Till they have fretted us a pair of graves 
Within the earth ; and, therein laid, — there lies 
Two kinsmen digg'd their graves with weeping eyes. 
Would not this ill do well? Well, well, I see 170 

I talk but idly, and you laugh at me. 
Most mighty prince, my Lord Northumberland, 
What says King Bolingbroke? will his majesty 

E 2 — - • . 



52 KING RICHARD II. 

Give Richard leave to live till Richard die? 
You make a leg, and Bolingbroke says ay. 

North. My lord, in the base court he doth attend 
To speak with you ; may it please you to come down. 

K. Rich. Down, down I come ; like glistering Phaethon, 
Wanting the manage of unruly jades. 
In the base court? Base court, where kings grow base, 
To come at traitors' calls and do them grace. i8i 

In the base court? Come down ? Down, court ! down, king ! 
For night-owls shriek where mounting larks should sing. 

^Exeunt from abo-ve. 

Boling, What says his majesty ? 

Northumberland. Sorrow and grief of heart 

Makes him speak fondly, like a frantic man : 
Yet he is come. 

Enter KiNG RiCHARD and his Attendants belozv. 

Bolingbroke. Stand all apart. 
And show fair duty to his majesty. [Hi? kneels down. 

My gracious lord, — 

K. Rich. Fair cousin, you debase your princely knee 190 
To make the base earth proud with kissing it : 
Me rather had my heart might feel your love 
Than my unpleased eye see your courtesy. 
Up, cousin, up ; your heart is up, I know. 
Thus high at least, although your knee be low. 

Boling. My gracious lord, I come but for mine own. 

K. Rich. Your own is yours, and I am yours, and all. 

Bolingbroke. So far be mine, my most redoubted lord, 
As my true service shall deserve your love. 

K. Rich. Well you deserve : they well deserve to have. 
That know the strong'st and surest way to get. 201 

Uncle, give me your hands : nay, dry your eyes ; 
Tears show their love, but want their remedies. 
Cousin, I am too young to be your father, 
Though you are old enough to be my heir. 



ACT III. SCENE IV, 53 

What you will have, I '11 give, and willing too ; 
For do we must what force will have us do. 
Set on towards London, cousin, is it so? 

Bolmgbroke. Yea, my good lord. 

Khig Richard. Then I must not say no. 

^Flourish. Exeunt. 

Scene IV. Langley. The DUKE OF York's garden. 
Enter the QuEEN and two Ladies. 

Queen. What sport shall we devise here in this garden, 
To drive away the heavy thought of care ? 

Lady. Madam, we'll play at bowls. 

Queen. 'Twill make me think the world is full of rubs. 
And that my fortune runs against the bias. 

Lady. Madam, we'll dance. 

Queen. My legs can keep no measure in delight, 
When my poor heart no measure keeps in grief: 
Therefore, no dancing, girl ; some other sport. 

Lady. Madam, we'll tell tales. 10 

Queen. Of sorrow or of joy ? 

Lady. Of either, madam. 

Queen. Of neither, girl : 
For if of joy, being altogether wanting. 
It doth remember me the more of sorrow; 
Or if of grief, being altogether had. 
It adds more sorrow to my want of joy : 
For what I have I need not to repeat ; 
And what I want it boots not to complain. 

Lady. Madam, I '11 sing. 

Queen. 'Tis well that thou hast cause ; 

But thou shouldst please me better, wouldst thou weep. 20 

Lady. I could weep, madam, would it do you good. 

Queen. And I could sing, would weeping do me good, 
And never borrow any tear of thee. 



54 KING RICHARD II. 

Enter a Gardener, and t-zvo Servants. 
But stay, here come the gardeners : 
Let's step into the shadow of these trees. 
IMy wretchedness unto a row of pins, 
They'll talk of state; for every one doth so 
Against a change ; woe is forerun with woe. 

[Qi/een and Ladies retire. 
Gardener. Go, bind thou up yon dangling apricocks, 
Which, like unruly children, make their sire 30 

Stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight : 
Give some supportance to the bending twigs. 
Go thou, and like an executioner, 
Cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays, 
That look too lofty in our commonwealth : 
All must be even in our government. 
You thus employ'd, I will go root away 
The noisome weeds, which without proiit suck 
The soil's fertility from wholesome flowers. 

Servant. Why should we in the compass of a pale 40 
Keep law and form and due proportion, 
Showing, as in a model, our firm estate, 
When our sea-walled garden, the whole land. 
Is full of weeds, her fairest flowers choked up. 
Her fruit-trees all unpruned, her hedges ruin'd, 
Her knots disorder'd and her wholesome herbs 
Swarming with caterpillars ? 

Gardener. Hold thy peace: 

He that hath suffer'd this disorder'd spring 
Hath now himself met with the fall of leaf: 49 

The weeds which his broad-spreading leaves did shelter, 
That seem'd in eating him to hold him up. 
Are pluck'd up root and all by Bolingbroke, 
I mean the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, Green. 
Serv. What, are they dead? 

Gardener. They are ; and Bolingbroke 

Flath seized the wasteful king. O, what pity is it 
That he had not so trimm'd and dress'd his land 



ACT III. SCENE IV. 55 

As we this garden ! We at time of year 

Do wound the bark, the skin of our fruit-trees, 

Lest, being over-proud in sap and blood. 

With too much riches it confound itself: 60 

Had he done so to great and growing men, 

They might have lived to bear and he to taste 

Their fruits of duty : superfluous branches 

We lop away, that bearing boughs may live : 

Had he done so, himself had borne the crown. 

Which waste of idle hours hath quite thrown down. 

Servant. What, think you then the king shall be deposed ? 

Gardeyier. Depress'd he is already, and deposed 
'Tis doubt he will be : letters came last night 
To a dear friend of the good Duke of York's, 70 

That tell black tidings. 

Queen. O, I am press'd to death through want of speaking ! 

\Com'ing fo)"vard. 
Thou, old Adam's likeness, set to dress this garden, 
How dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this un pleasing news ? 
What Eve, what serpent, hath suggested thee 
To make a second fall of cursed man ? 
Why dost thou say King Richard is deposed ? 
Darest thou, thou little better thing than earth, 
Divine his downfal .' Say, where, when, and how, 
Camest thou by this ill tidings ? speak, thou wretch. 8 o 

Gardener. Pardon me, madam : little joy have I 
To breathe this news ; yet what I say is true. 
King Richard, he is in the mighty hold 
Of Bolingbroke : their fortunes both are weigh'd : 
In your lord's scale is nothing but himself. 
And some few vanities that make him light; 
But in the balance of great Bolingbroke, 
Besides himself, are all the English peers. 
And with that odds he weighs King Richard down. 
Post you to London, and you will find it so; 90 

I speak no more than every one doth know. 

Queen. Nimble mischance, that art so light of foot, 



56 KING RICHARD II. 

Doth not thy embassage belong to me, 

And am I last that knows it ? O, thou think'st 

To serve me last, that I may longest keep 

Thy sorrow in my breast. Come, ladies, go. 

To meet at London London's king in woe. 

What, was I born to this, that my sad look 

Should grace the triumph of great Bolingbroke ? 

(jardener, for telling me these news of woe, loo 

Pray God the plants thou graft'st may never grow. 

^Exeunt Queen and Ladies. 
Card. Poor queen ! so that thy state might be no worse, 
I would my skill were subject to thy curse. 
Here did she fall a tear; here in this place 
I '11 set a bank of rue, sour herb of grace : 
Rue, even for ruth, here shortly shall be seen, 
In the remembrance of a weeping queen. ^Exewit. 

ACT IV. 

Scene I. Westminster Hall. 

Enter, as to the Parliament, BOLINGBROKE, AUMERLE, NORTH- 
UMBERLAND, Percy, Fitzwater, Surrey, the Bishop 
OF Carlisle, the Abbot of Westminster, and another 
Lord, Herald, Officers, and Bagot, 

Bolingbroke. Call forth Bagot. 
Now, Bagot, freely speak thy mind ; 
What thou dost know of noble Gloucester's death, 
Who wrought it with the king, and who perform'd 
The bloody office of his timeless end. 

Bagot. Then set before my face the Lord Aumerle. 

Baling. Cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man. 

Bagot. My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue 
Scorns to unsay what once it hath deliver'd. 
In that dead time when Gloucester's death was plotted, lo 
I heard you say, ' Is not my arm of length. 
That reacheth from the restful English court 
As far as Calais, to mine uncle's head?' 



ACT IV. SCENE I. 57 

Amongst much other talk, that very time, 
I heard you say that you had rather refuse 
The offer of an hundred thousand crowns 
Than BoHngbroke's return to England ; 
Adding withal, how blest this land would be 
In this your cousin's death. 

Aumerle. Princes and noble lords. 

What answer shall I make to this base man ? 20 

Shall I so much dishonour my fair stars, 
On equal terms to give him chastisement ? 
Either I must, or have mine honour soil'd 
With the attainder of his slanderous lips. 
There is my gage, the manual seal of death, 
That marks thee out for hell : I say, thou liest. 
And will maintain what thou hast said is false 
In thy heart-blood, though being all too base 
To stain the temper of my knightly sword. 

Bolingbroke. Bagot, forbear ; thou shalt not take it up. 

Aumerle. Excepting one, I would he were the best 31 
In all this presence that hath moved me so. 

Fit%<voater. If that thy valour stand on sympathy. 
There is my gage, Aumerle, in gage to thine : 
By that fair sun which shows me where thou stand'st, 
I heard thee say, and vauntingly thou spakest it. 
That thou wert cause of noble Gloucester's death. 
If thou deny'st it twenty times, thou liest ; 
And I will turn thy falsehood to thy heart. 
Where it was forged, with my rapier's point. 40 

Aumerle. Thou darest not, coward, live to see that day. 

Fitziuater. Now, by my soul, I would it were this hour. 

Aumerle. Fitzwater, thou art damn'd to hell for this. 

Percy. Aumerle, thou liest ; his honour is as true 
In this appeal as thou art all unjust ; 
And that thou art so, there I throw my gage, 
To prove it on thee to the extremest point 
Of mortal breathing : seize it, if thou darest. 

Aumerle. An if I do not, may my hands rot off 



5^ KING RICHARD II. 

And never brandish more revengeful steel 50 

Over the glittering helmet of my foe ! 

Another Lord. I task the earth to the like, forsworn Aumerle ; 
And spur thee on with full as many lies 
As may be holloa'd in thy treacherous ear 
From sun to sun : there is my honour's pawn ; 
Engage it to the trial, if thou darcst. 

Aimi. Who sets me else ? by heaven, I'll throw at all : 
I have a thousand spirits in one breast, 
To answer twenty thousand such as you. 

Surrey. My Lord Fitzwater, I do remember well 60 
The very time Aumerle and you did talk. 

Fitzwater. 'Tis very true : you were in presence then ; 
And you can witness with me this is true. 

Surrey. As false, by heaven, as heaven itself is true. 

Fitzivater. Surrey, thou licst. 

Surrey. Dishonourable boy ! 

That lie shall lie so heavy on my sword. 
That it shall render vengeance and revenge 
Till thou the lie-giver and that lie do lie 
In earth as quiet as thy father's skull : 
In proof whereof, there is my honour's pawn ; 70 

Engage it to the trial, if thou darest. 

Fitzwater. How fondly dost thou spur a forward horse ! 
If I dare eat, or drink, or breathe, or live, 
I dare meet Surrey in a wilderness. 
And spit upon him, whilst I say he lies, 
And lies, and lies : there is my bond of faith, 
To tie thee to my strong correction. 
As I intend to thrive in this new world, 
Aumerle is guilty of my true appeal : 

Besides, I heard the banish'd Norfolk say 80 

That thou, Aumerle, didst send two of thy men 
To execute the noble duke at Calais. 

Aumerle. Some honest Christian trust me with a gage. 
That Norfolk lies: here do I throw down this, 
If he may be repeal'd, to try his honour. 



ACT IV. SCENE I. 59 

Bolingbroke. These differences shall all rest under gage 
Till Norfolk be repeal'd : repeal'd he shall be, 
And, though mine enemy, restored again 
To all his lands and signories : when he's return'd, 
Against Aumerle we will enforce his trial. 90 

Carlisle. That honourable day shall ne'er be seen. 
Many a time hath banish'd Norfolk fought 
For Jesu Christ in glorious Christian field, 
Streaming the ensign of the Christian cross 
Against black pagans, Turks, and Saracens ; 
And toil'd with works of war, retired himself 
To Italy; and there at Venice gave 
His body to that pleasant country's earth, 
And his pure soul unto his captain Christ, 
Under whose colours he had fought so long. 100 

Bolingbroke. Why, bishop, is Norfolk dead ? 

Carlisle. As surely as I live, my lord. 

Baling. Sweet peace conduct his sweet soul to the bosom 
Of good old Abraham ! Lords appellants. 
Your differences shall all rest under gage 
Till we assign you to your days of trial. 

Enter YoRK, attended. 

Tork. Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to thee 
From plume-pluck'd Richard ; who with willing soul 
Adopts thee heir, and his high sceptre yields 
To the possession of thy royal hand : 110 

Ascend his throne, descending now from him ; 
And long live Henry, fourth of that name ! 

Bolingbroke. In God's name, I'll ascend the regal throne. 

Carlisle. Marry, God forbid! 
Worst in this royal presence may I speak, 
Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth. 
W^ould God that any in this noble presence 
Were enough noble to be upright jud^-e 
Of noble Richard ! then true noblesse would 
Learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong. 120 

What subject can give sentence on his king? 



6o KING RICHARD II. 

And who sits here that is not Richard's subject? 

Thieves are not judged but they are by to hear, 

Although apparent guilt be seen in them ; 

And shall the figure of God's majesty, 

His captain, steward, deputy -elect, 

Anointed, crowned, planted many years, 

Be judged by subject and inferior breath. 

And he himself not present ? O, forfend it, God, 

That in a Christian climate souls refined 130 

Should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed! 

I speak to subjects, and a subject speaks, 

Stirr'd up by God, thus boldly for his king. 

My Lord of Hereford here, whom you call king. 

Is a foul traitor to proud Hereford's king : 

And if you crown him, let me prophesy : 

The blood of English shall manure the ground, 

And future ages groan for this foul act ; 

Peace shall go sleep with Turks and infidels. 

And in this seat of peace tumultuous wars 140 

Shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound ; 

Disorder, horror, fear and mutiny 

Shall here inhabit, and this land be call'd 

The field of Golgotha and dead men's skulls. 

O, if you raise this house against this house, 

It will the woefullest division prove 

That ever fell upon this cursed earth. 

Prevent it, resist it, let it not be so. 

Lest child, child's children, cry against you *woe!' 

North. Well have you argued, sir ; and, for your pains. 
Of capital treason we arrest you here. 151 

My Lord of Westminster, be it your charge 
To keep him safely till his day of trial. 
May it please you, lords, to grant the commons' suit. 

Bolingbroke. Fetch hither Richard, that in common view 
He may surrender ; so we shall proceed 
Without suspicion. 

Tork. I will be his conduct. [Exit. 



ACT IV. SCENE I. 6 1 

Bolingbroke. Lords, you that here are under our arrest, 
Procure your sureties for your days of answer. 
Little are we beholding to your love, i6o 

And little look'd for at your helping hands. 

Re-enter YORK, with RiCHARD, and Officers 
bearing the regalia. 

Kit2g Richard. Alack, why am I sent for to a king, 
Before I have shook off the regal thoughts 
Wherewith I reign'd ? I hardly yet have learn'd 
To insinuate, flatter, bow, and bend my limbs : 
Give sorrow leave awhile to tutor me 
To this submission. Yet I well remember 
The favours of these men : were they not mine ? 
Did they not sometime cry 'all hail!' to me? 
So Judas did to Christ: but he, in twelve, 170 

Found truth in all but one ; I, in twelve thousand, none. 
God save the king ! Will no man say amen ? 
Am I both priest and clerk ? well then, amen. 
God save the king ! although I be not he ; 
And yet, amen, if heaven do think him me. 
To do what service am I sent for hither ? 

York. To do that office of thine own good will 
Which tired majesty did make thee offer, 
The resignation of thy state and crown 
To Henry Bolingbroke. 180 

King Richard. Give me the crown. Here, cousin, seize 
the crown ; 
Here cousin ; 

On this side my hand, and on that side yours. 
Now is this golden crown like a deep well 
That owes two buckets, filling one another. 
The emptier ever dancing in the air, 
The other down, unseen and full of water : 
That bucket down and full of tears am I, 
Drinking my griefs, whilst you mount up on high. 189 

Bolingbroke, I thought you had been willing to resign. 



62 KING RICHARD II. 

K. Rich. My crown I am ; but still my griefs are mine : 
You may my glories and my state depose, 
But not my griefs ; still am I king of those. 

Baling. Part of your cares you give me with your crown. 

K. Rich. Your cares set up do not pluck my cares down. 
My care is loss of care, by old care done ; 
Your care is gain of care, by new care won : 
The cares I give I have, though given away ; 
They tend the crown, yet still with me they stay. 

Baling. Are you contented to resign the crown ? 200 

King Richard. Ay, no ; no, ay ; for I must nothing be ; 
Therefore no no, for I resign to thee. 
Now mark me, how I will undo myself: 
I give this heavy weight from oft" my head 
And this unwieldy sceptre from my hand. 
The pride of kingly sway from out my heart ; 
With mine own tears I wash away my balm, 
With mine own hands I give away my crown, 
With mine own tongue deny my sacred state, 
With mine own breath release all duty's rites : 210 

All pomp and majesty I do forswear; 
iMy manors, rents, revenues I forego; 
My acts, decrees, and statutes I deny : 
God pardon all oaths that are broke to me ! 
God keep all vows unbroke that swear to thee ! 
Make me, that nothing have, with nothing grieved, 
And thou with all pleased, that hast all achieved ! 
Long mayst thou live in Richard's seat to sit. 
And soon lie Richard in an earthy pit ! 
God save King Harry, unking'd Richard says, 220 

And send him many years of sunshine days ! 
What more remains ? 

Northumberland. No more, but that you read 

These accusations and these grievous crimes 
Committed by your person and your followers 
Against the state and profit of this land ; 



ACT IV. SCENE I. 6^ 

That, by confessing them, the souls of men 
i'May deem that you are worthily deposed. 

King Richard. INIust I do so ? and must I ravel out 
My weaved-up folly? Gentle Northumberland, 
If thy offences were upon record, 230 

Would it not shame thee in so fair a troop 
To read a lecture of them ? If thou wouldst. 
There shouldst thou find one heinous article, 
Containing the deposing of a king 
And cracking the strong warrant of an oath, 
IVIark'd with a blot, damn'd in the book of heaven : 
Nay, all of you that stand and look upon, 
Whilst that my wretchedness doth bait myself, 
Though some of you with Pilate wash your hands 
Showing an outward pity; yet you Pilates 240 

Have here deliver'd me to my sour cross. 

And water cannot wash away your sin. 

North. JMy lord, dispatch ; read o'er these articles. 
K. Rich. Rliiie eyes are full of tears, I cannot see : 

And yet salt water blinds them not so much 

But they can see a sort of traitors here. 

Nay, if I turn mine eyes upon myself, 

I find myself a traitor with the rest ; 

For I have given here my soul's consent 

To undeck the pompous body of a king; 250 

Made glory base and sovereignty a slave, 

Proud majesty a subject, state a peasant. 
Northumberland. My lord, — 
K. Rich. No lord of thine, thou haught insulting man. 

Nor no man's lord; I have no name, no title. 

No, not that name was given me at the font. 

But 'tis usurp'd : alack the heavy day, 

That I have worn so many winters out. 

And know not now what name to call myself ! 

O that I were a mockery king of snow, 260 

Standing before the sun of Bolingbroke, 

To melt myself away in water-drops ! 



64 KING RICHARD II. 

Good king, great king, and yet not greatly good, 
An if my word be sterling yet in England, 
Let it command a mirror hither straight. 
That it may show me what a face I have. 
Since it is bankrupt of his majesty. 

Bolingbroke. Go some of you and fetch a looking-glass. 

\Exit 071 attendant. 

North. Read o'er this paper while the glass doth come. 

K. Rich. Fiend, thou torment'st me ere I come to hell ! 

Baling. Urge it no more, my Lord Northumberland. 271 

North. The commons will not then be satisfied. 

King Richard. They shall be satisfied : I'll read enough. 
When I do see the very book indeed 
Where all my sins are writ, and that's myself. 

Re-enter Attendant, ivith a glass. 
Give me the glass, and therein will I read. 
No deeper wrinkles yet ? hath sorrow struck 
So many blows upon this face of mine, 
And made no deeper wounds ? O flattering glass, 
Like to my followers in prosperity, 280 

Thou dost beguile me ! Was this face the face 
That every day under his household roof 
Did keep ten thousand men ? was this the face 
That, like the sun, did make beholders wink ? 
Was this the face that faced so many follies. 
And was at last out-faced by Bolingbroke ? 
A brittle glory shineth in this face : 
As brittle as the glory is the face ; 

[Dashes the glass against the ground. 
For there it is, crack'd in a hundred shivers. 
Mark, silent king, the moral of this sport, 290 

How soon my sorrow hath destroy'd my face. 

Bolhgbroke. The shadow of your sorrow hath destroy'd 
The shadow of your face. 

King Richard. Say that again. 

The shadow of my sorrow! ha! let's see: 



ACT IV. SCENE I. 65 

'Tis very true, my grief lies all within ; 

And these external manners of laments 

Are merely shadows to the unseen grief 

That swells with silence in the tortured soul ; 

There lies the substance : and I thank thee, king, 

For thy great bounty, that not only givest 300 

Me cause to wail but teachest me the way 

How to lament the cause. I'll beg one boon, 

And then be gone arui trouble you no more. 

Shall I obtain it? 

Bolingbroke. Name it, fair cousin. 

King Rjchard. ' Fair cousin' ? I am greater than a king : 
For when I was a king, my flatterers 
Were then but subjects ; being now a subject, 
I have a king here to my flatterer. 
Being so great, I have no need to beg. 

Bolingbroke. Yet ask. 310 

King Richard. And shall I have ? 

Bolingbroke. You shall. 

King Richard. Then give me leave to go. 

Bolingbroke. Whither ? 

K. Rich. Whither you will, so I were from your sights. 

Bolingbroke. Go, some of you convey him to the Tower. 

King Richard. O, good ! convey ? conveyers are you all, 
That rise thus nimbly by a true king's fall. 

[Exeunt King Richard, some Lords, and a Guard. 

BoVrngbroke. On Wednesday next we solemnly set down 

Our coronation: lords, prepare yourselves. 320 

\^Exeunt all except the Bishop of Carlisle, the Abbot 

of IVestminster, and Aumerle. 

Abbot. A woeful pageant have we here beheld. 

Carlisle. The woe's to come ; the children yet unborn 
Shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn. 

Aumerle. You holy clergymen, is there no plot 
To rid the realm of this pernicious blot ? 

F 



56 KING RICHARD II. 

Abbot. My lord, 
Before I freely speak my mind herein, 
You shall not only take the sacrament 
To bury mine intents, but also to effect 
Whatever I shall happen to devise. 330 

I see your brows are full of discontent, 
Your hearts of sorrow and your eyes of tears : 
Come home with me to supper; and I'll lay 
A plot shall show us all a merry day. -^ [Exeunt. 



ACT V. 

Scene I. London. A street leading to the Tower. 

Enter Qt'EEN and Ladies. 

Queen. This way the king will come; this is the way 
To Julius Caesar's ill-erected tower. 
To whose flint bosom my condemned lord 
Is doom'd a prisoner by proud Bolingbroke : 
Here let us rest, if this rebellious earth 
Have any resting for her true king's queen. 

E>2ter Richard and Guard. 

But soft, but see, or rather do not see, 

]\Iy fair rose wither : yet look up, behold. 

That you in pity may dissolve to dew, 

And wash him fresh again with true-love tears. lo 

Ah, thou, the model where old Troy did stand. 

Thou map of honour, thou King Richard's tomb, 

And not King Richard ; thou most beauteous inn, 

Why should hard-favour'd grief be lodged in thee, 

When triumph is become an alehouse guest ? 

K. Rich. Join not with grief, fair Moman, do not so. 
To make my end too sudden : learn, good soul, 
To think our former state a happy dream ; 
From which awaked, the truth of what we are 
Shows us but this: I am sworn brother, sweet, 20 

To grim Necessity, and he and I 



ACT V. SCENE I. 6y 

Will keep a league till death. Hie thee to France 
And cloister thee in some religious house : 
Our holy lives must win a new world's crown, 
Which our profane hours here have stricken down. 

Queen. What, is my Richard both in shape and mind 
Transform'd and weaken'd ? hath Bolingbroke deposed 
Thine intellect ? hath he been in thy heart ? 
The lion dying thrusteth forth his paw, 
And wounds the earth, if nothing else, with rage 30 

To be o'erpower'd ; and wilt thou, pupil-like, 
Take thy correction mildly, kiss the rod, 
And fawn on rage with base humility. 
Which art a Hon and a king of beasts? 

K. Rich. A king of beasts, indeed ; if aught but beasts, 
I had been still a happy king of men. 
Good sometime queen, prepare thee hence for France : 
Think I am dead and that even here thou takest, 
As from my death-bed, thy last living leave. 
In winter's tedious nights sit by the fire 40 

With good old folks and let them tell thee tales 
Of woeful ages long ago betid ; 
And ere thou bid good night, to quit their griefs. 
Tell thou the lamentable tale of me 
And send the hearers weeping to their beds: 
For why, the senseless brands will sympathize 
The heavy accent of thy moving tongue 
And. in compassion weep the fire out; 
And some will mourn in ashes, some coal-black, 
For the deposing of a rightful king. 50 

Enter NORTHUMBERLAND and others. 

North. My lord, the mind of Bolingbroke is changed ; 
You must to Pomfret, not unto the Tower. 
And, madam, there is order ta'en for you ; 
With all swift speed you must away to France. 

King Richard. Northumberland, thou ladder wherewithal 
The mounting Bolingbroke ascends my throne, 



68 KING RICHARD II. 

The time shall not be many hours of age 

More than it is ere foul sin gathering head 

Shall break into corruption : thou shalt think, 

Though he divide the realm and give thee half, 6o 

It is too little, helping him to all ; 

And he shall think that thou, which know'st the way 

To plant unrightful kings, wilt know again. 

Being ne'er so httle urged, another way 

To pluck him headlong from the usurped throne. 

The love of wicked men converts to fear ; 

That fear to hate, and hate turns one or both 

To worthy danger and deserved death. 

North. My guilt be on my head, and there an end. 
Take leave and part ; for you must part forthwith. 70 

King Richard. Doubly divorced ! Bad men, you violate 
A twofold marriage, 'twixt my crown and me, 
And then betwixt me and my married wife. 
Let me unkiss the oath 'twixt thee and me ; 
And yet not so, for with a kiss 'twas made. 
Part us, Northumberland ; I towards the north, 
Where shivering cold and sickness pines the clime ; 
My wife to France : from whence, set forth in pomp. 
She came adorned hither like sweet May, 
Sent back like Hallowmas or short'st of day. 80 

Queen. And must we be divided ? must we part ? 

K. Rich. Ay, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart. 

Queen. Banish us both and send the king with me. 

Northumberland. That were some love but little policy. 

Queen. Then whither he goes, thither let me go. 

King Richard. So two, together weeping, make one woe. 
Weep thou for me in France, I for thee here ; 
Better far off than near be ne'er the near. 
Go, count thy way with sighs ; I mine with groans. 

Queen. So longest way shall have the longest moans. 90 

King Richard. Twice for one step I'll groan, the way 
being short, 



ACT V. SCENE IT. 6g 

And piece the way out with a heavy heart. 
Come, come, in wooing sorrow let's be brief, 
Since, wedding it, there is such length in grief: 
One kiss shall stop our mouths, and dumbly part ; 
Thus give I mine, and thus take I thy heart. 

Queen. Give me mine own again ; 'twere no good part 
To take on me to keep and kill thy heart. 
So, now I have mine own again, be gone, 
That I may strive to kill it with a groan. loo 

K. Rich. We make woe wanton with this fond delay : 
Once more, adieu ; the rest let sorrow say. YExeu)2t. 

Scene II. The Duke of York's palace. 

Enter YORK and his DuCHESS. 

Duchess. My lord, you told me you would tell the rest. 
When weeping made you break the story off. 
Of our two cousins coming into London. 

Tork. Where did I leave ? 

Duchess. At that sad stop, my lord. 

Where rude misgovern'd hands from windows' tops 
Threw dust and rubbish on King Richard's head. 

Tork. Then, as I said, the duke, great Bolingbroke, 
Mounted upon a hot and fiery steed 
Which his aspiring rider seem'd to know. 
With slow but stately pace kept on his course, lo 

Whilst all tongues cried 'God save thee, Bolingbroke!' 
You would have thought the very windows spake, 
So many greedy looks of young and old 
Through casements darted their desiring eyes 
Upon his visage, and that all the walls 
With painted imagery had said at once 
'Jesu preserve thee! welcome, Bolingbroke!' 
Whilst he, from the one side to the other turning, 
Bareheaded, lower than his proud steed's neck, 
Bespake them thus; 'I thank you, countrymen:' 20 

And thus still doing, thus he pass'd along. 



70. KING RICHARD II. 

Duchess. Alack, poor Richard ! where rode he the whilst ? 

York. As in a theatre, the eyes of men, 
After a well-graced actor leaves the stage, 
Are idly bent on him that enters next, 
Thinking his prattle to be tedious ; 
Even so, or with much more contempt, men's eyes 
Did scowl on gentle Richard ; no man cried ' God save him !' 
No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home : 
But dust was thrown upon his sacred head ; 30 

Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off. 
His face still combating with tears and smiles, 
The badges of his grief and patience. 
That had not God, for some strong purpose, steel'd 
The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted 
And barbarism itself have pitied him. 
But heaven hath a hand in these events, 
To whose high will we bound our calm contents. 
To Bolingbroke are we sworn subjects now, 
Whose state and honour I for aye allow. 40 

Duchess. Here comes my son Aumerle. 

Tork. Aumerle that was ; 

But that is lost for being Richard's friend, 
And, madam, you must call him Rutland now : 
I am in parliament pledge for his truth 
And lasting fealty to the new made king. 

Enter AUMERLE. 

Duchess. Welcome, my son : who are the violets no\\' 
That strew the green lap of the new come spring ? 

Aumerle. Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not : 
God knows I had as lief be none as one. 

Tork. Well, bear you well in this new spring of time. 
Lest you be cropp'd before you come to prime. 51 

What news from Oxford ? hold those justs and triumphs .' 

Aumerle. For aught I know, my lord, they do. 

York. You will be there, I know. 

Aumerle. If God prevent not, I purpose so. 



ACT V. SCENE IT. 7 1 

Tori. What seal is that, that hangs without thy bosom ? 
Yea, loolc'st thou pale ? let me see the writing. 
yiuni. My lord, 'tis nothing. 

Tork. No matter, then, who see it : 

I will be satisfied ; let me see the writing. 

Jlumerle. I do beseech your grace to pardon me : 60 
It is a matter of small consequence, 
Which for some reasons I would not have seen. 

York. Which for some reasons, sir, I mean to sec. 
T fear, I fear, — 

Duchess. What should you fear ? 

'Tis nothing but some band, that he is enter'd into 
For gay apparel 'gainst the triumph day. 

York. Bound to himself ! what doth he with a bond 
That he is bound to .' Wife, thou art a fool. 
Boy, let me see the writing. 

Aum. I do beseech you, pardon me ; I may not show it. 

York. I will be satisfied ; let me see it, I say. 7 1 

\He plucks it out of his bosom and reads it. 
Treason ! foul treason ! Villain ! traitor ! slave ! 
Duchess. What is the matter, my lord ? 
York. Ho ! who is within there ? 

Enter a Servant. 

Saddle my horse. 
God for his mercy, what treachery is here ! 

Duchess. Why, what is it, my lord ? 

York. Give me my boots, I say ; saddle my horse. 

\Exit Ser'vant. 
Now, by mine honour, by my life, by my troth, 
I will appeach the villain. 

Duchess. What is the matter ? 

York. Peace, foolish woman. 80 

■ Duchess, I will not peace. What is the matter, Aumerle ? 



73 AViVG RICHARD II. 

Aumerle. Good mother, be content ; it is no more 
Than my poor life must answer. 

Duchess. Thy life answer ! 

York. Bring me my boots : I will unto the king. 

Re-enter Servant luith boots. 

Diich. Strike him, Aumerle. Poor boy, thou art amazed. 
Hence, villain ! never more come in my sight. 

York. Give me my boots, I say. 

Duchess. Why, York, what wilt thou do ? 
Wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own ? 
Have we more sons ? or are we like to have ? 90 

Is not my teeming date drunk up with time ? 
And wilt thou pluck my fair son from mine age, 
And rob me of a happy mother's name ? 
Is he not like thee ? is he not thine own ? 

Tork. Thou fond mad woman. 
Wilt thou conceal this dark conspiracy ? 
A dozen of them here have ta'en the sacrament. 
And interchangeably set down their hands, 
To kill the king at Oxford. 

Duchess. He shall be none ; 

We'll keep him here : then what is that to him ? 100 

Tork. Away, fond woman ! were he twenty times my son, 
I would appeach him. 

Duchess. Hadst thou groan'd for him 

As I have done, thou wouldst be more pitiful. 
But now I know thy mind ; thou dost suspect 
That I have been disloyal to thy bed, 
And that he is a bastard, not thy son : 
Sweet York, sweet husband, be not of that mind : 
He is as like thee as a man may be, 

Not like to me, or any of my kin, 109 

And yet I love him. 

• Tork. Make way, imruly woman ! [Exit. 



ACT V. SCENE III. 73 

Duchess. After, Aumerle ! mount thee upon his horse ; 
Spur, post, and get before him to the king, 
And beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee. 
I '11 not be long behind ; though I be old, 
I doubt not but to ride as fast as York : 
And never will I rise up from the ground 
Till Bolingbroke have pardon'd thee. Away, be gone ! 

^Exeunt. 

Scene III. Windsor Castle. 
Enter BOLINGBROKE, PERCY, and other Lords. 

Bolingbroke. Can no man tell me of my unthrifty son ? 
'Tis full three months since I did see him last : 
If any plague hang over us, 'tis he. 
I would to God, my lords, he might be found : 
Inquire at London, 'mongst the taverns there. 
For there, they say, he daily doth frequent, 
With unrestrained loose companions. 
Even such, they say, as stand in narrow lanes. 
And beat our watch, and rob our passengers ; 
Which he, young wanton and effeminate boy, 10 

Takes on the point of honour to support 
So dissolute a crew. 

Percy. My lord, some two days since I saw the prince. 
And told him of those triumphs held at Oxford. 

Bolingbroke. And what said the gallant ? 

Percy. His answer was, he would unto the stews. 
And from the common'st creature pluck a glove. 
And wear it as a favour ; and with that 
He would imhorse the lustiest challenger. 

Bolingbroke. As dissolute as desperate ; yet through both 
I see some sparks of better hope, which elder years 21 

May happily bring forth. But who comes here ? 

Enter AuMERLE. 
Aumerle. Where is the king ? 



74 KING RICHARD II. 

Boling. What means our cousin, that he stares and looks 
So wildly? 

Aum. God save your grace ! I do beseech your majesty, 
To have some conference with your grace alone. 

Boling. Withdraw yourselves, and leave us here alone. 

\^Exeunt Percy and Lords. 
What is the matter with our cousin now ? 

Aumerle. For ever may my knees grow to the earth, 30 
My tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth, 
Unless a pardon ere I rise or speak. 

Bolingbroke. Intended or committed was this fault.' 
If on the first, how heinous e'er it be, 
To win thy after-love I pardon thee. 

Aumerle. Then give me leave that I may turn the key. 
That no man enter till my tale be done. 

Bolingbroke. Have thy desire. 

York. {Within'] My liege, beware: look to thyself; 
Thou hast a traitor in th.y presence there. 40 

Bolingbroke. Villain, I'll make thee safe. {Drawing. 

Aum. Stay thy revengeful hand ; thou hast no cause to fear. 

York. \Within\ Open the door, secure, fool-hardy king: 
Shall I for love speak treason to thy face ? 
Open the door, or I will break it open. 

[Bolingbroke opens the door, and shuts it again. 

Enter York. 

Bolingbroke. W^hat is the matter, uncle ? speak ; 
Recover breath; tell us how near is danger. 
That we may arm us to encounter it. 

York. Peruse this writing here, and thou shalt know 
The treason that my haste forbids me show. 50 

Aumerle. Remember, as thou read'st, thy promise pass'd : 
I do repent me ; read not my name there ; 
My heart is not confederate with my hand. 

York. It was, villain, ere thy hand did set it down. 
I tore it from the traitor's bosom, king ; 



ACT V. SCENE III. 'J^ 

Fear, and not love, begets his penitence : 

Forget to pity him, lest thy pity prove 

A serpent that will sting thee to the heart. 

Bolhigbroke. O heinous, strong and bold conspiracy ! 

loyal father of a treacherous son ! 60 
Thou sheer, immaculate and silver fountain. 

From whence this stream through muddy passages 
Hath held his current and defiled himself! 
Thy overflow of good converts to bad, 
And thy abundant goodness shall excuse 
This deadly blot in thy digressing son. 

Tork. So shall my virtue be his vice's bawd ; 
And he shall spend mine honour with his shame, 
As thriftless sons their scraping fathers' gold. 
Mine honour lives when his dishonour dies, 70 

Or my shamed life in his dishonour lies : 
Thou kill'st me in his life ; giving him breath, 
The traitor lives, the true man's put to death. 

Duch. [Within] What ho, my liege ! for God's sake, let me in. 

Baling. What shrill-voiced suppliant makes this eager cry? 

Duchess. A woman, and thy aunt, great king ; 'tis I. 
Speak with me, pity me, open the door: 
A beggar begs that never begg'd before. 

Bolingbroke. Our scene is alter'd from a serious thing, 
And now changed to 'The Beggar and the King.' 80 

My dangerous cousin, let your mother in : 

1 know she is come to pray for your foul sin. 

[Aumerle opens the door. 
Tork. If thou do pardon, whosoever pray, 
More sins for this forgiveness prosper may. 
This fester'd joint cut off, the rest rest sound ; 
This let alone will all the rest confound. 

Enter DuCHESS. 

Duchess. O king, believe not this hard-hearted man ! 
Love loving not itself none other can. 



70 KING RICHARD II. 

York. Thou frantic woman, what dost thou make here ? 
Shall thy old dugs once more a traitor rear ? 90 

Duch. Sweet York, be patient. Hear me, gentle liege. 

\K71eels, 
Boling. Rise up, good aunt. 

Duchess. Not yet, I thee beseech : 

For ever will I walk upon my knees, 
And never see day that the happy sees. 
Till thou give joy ; until thou bid me joy, 
By pardoning Rutland, my transgressing boy. 

Aumerle. Unto my mother's prayers I bend my knee. 
York. Against them both my true joints bended be. 
Ill mayst thou thrive, if thou grant any grace! 

Duchess. Pleads he in earnest ? look upon his face ; 100 
His eyes do drop no tears, his prayers are in jest ; 
His words come from his mouth, ours from our breast ; 
He prays but faintly and would be denied ; 
We pray with heart and soul and all beside : 
His weary joints would gladly rise, I know ; 
Our knees shall kneel till to the ground they grow : 
His prayers are full of false hypocrisy; 
Ours of true zeal and deep integrity, 
(^ur prayers do out-pray his ; then let them have 
That mercy which true prayer ought to have. no 

Boling. Good aunt, stand up. 

Duchess. Nay, do not say, ' stand up ;' 

Say 'pardon' first, and afterwards 'stand up.' 
An if I were thy nurse, thy tongue to teach, 
' Pardon ' should be the first word of thy speech. 
I never long'd to hear a word till now ; 
Say * pardon,' king ; let pity teach thee how : 
The word is short, but not so short as sweet ; 
No word like 'pardon' for kings' mouths so meet. 

York. Speak it in French, king; say, 'pardonne moi.' 

Duchess. Dost thou teach pardon pardon to destroy ? 
Ah, my sour husband, my hard-hearted lord, 121 



ACT V. SCENE IV. ']'] 

That set'st the word itself against the word ! 
Speak 'pardon' as 'tis current in our land; 
The chopping French we do not understand. 
Thine eye begins to speak ; set thy tongue there ; 
Or in thy piteous heart plant thou thine ear ; 
That hearing how our plaints and prayers do pierce, 
Pity may move thee ' pardon ' to rehearse. 

Baling. Good aunt, stand up. 

Duchess. I do not sue to stand ; 

Pardon is all the suit 1 have in hand. 130 

Bolmgbroke. I pardon him, as God shall pardon me. 

Duchess. O happy vantage of a kneeling knee ! 
Yet am I sick for fear : speak it again ; 
Twice saying 'pardon' doth not pardon twain, 
But makes one pardon strong. 

Bolmgbroke. A\'ith all my heart 

I pardon him. 

Duchess. A god on earth thou art. 

Baling. But for our trusty brother-in-law and the abbot, 
With all the rest of that consorted crew. 
Destruction straight shall dog them at the heels. 
Good uncle, help to order several powers 140 

To Oxford, or where'er these traitors are : 
They shall not live within this world, I swear, ' 

But I will have them, if I once know where. 
Uncle, farewell : and, cousin too, adieu : 
Your mother well hath pray'd, and prove you true. 

Duchess. Come, my old son : I pray God make thee new. 

\^Exeu>!t. 

Scene IV. The same. 
Enter ExTON and Servant. 

Exton. Didst thou not mark the king, what words he spake, 
'Have I no friend will rid me of this living fear?' 
Was it not so ? 
Ser'vant. These were his very words. 



70 KING RICHARD II. 

Exton. 'Have I no friend ?' quoth he: he spake it twice, 
And urged it twice together, did he not? 

Servant. He did. 

Exton. And speaking it, he wistly look'd on me ; 
As who should say, ' I would thou wert the man 
That would divorce this terror from my heart ; ' 
Meaning the king at Pomfret. Come, let's go: lo 

I am the king's friend, and will rid his foe. [Exeunt. 



Scene V. Pom/ret castle. 
Enter KiNG RiCHARD, 

K. Rich. I have been studying how I may compare 
This prison where I live unto the world : 
And for because the world is populous 
And here is not a creature but myself, 
I cannot do it ; yet I '11 hammer it out. 
My brain I '11 prove the female to my soul, 
My soul the father ; and these two beget 
A generation of still-breeding thoughts. 
And these same thoughts people this little world, 
In humours like the people of this world, 
For no thought is contented. The better sort, 
As thoughts of things divine, are intermix'd 
With scruples and do set the word itself 
Against the word : 

As thus, ' Come, little ones,' and then again, 
'It is as hard to come as for a camel 
To thread the postern of a small needle's eye.' 
Thoughts tending to ambition, they do plot 
Unlikely wonders ; how these vain weak nails 
May tear a passage through the flinty ribs 
Of this hard world, my ragged prison walls, 
And, for they cannot, die in their own pride. 
Thoughts tending to content flatter themselves 
That they are not the first of fortune's slaves, 



ACT V. SCENE V. 79 

Nor shall not be the last ; like silly beggars 

Who sitting in the stocks refuge their shame, 

That many have and others must sit there ; 

And in this thought they find a kind of ease, 

Bearing their own misfortunes on the back 

Of such as have before endured the like. 30 

Thus play I in one person many people, 

And none contented : sometimes am I king ; 

Then treasons make me \vish TnyseiraTbeggar, 

And so I am : then crushing penury 

Persuades me I was better when a king ; 

Then am I king'd again : and by and by 

Think that I am unking'd by Bolingbroke, 

And straight am nothing : but whate'er I be. 

Nor I nor any man that but man is 

With nothing shall be pleased, till he be eased 40 

With being nothing. Music do I hear ? \^Mnsic. 

Ha, ha ! keep time : how sour sweet music is, 

When time is broke and no proportion kept ! 

So is it in the music of men's lives. 

And here have I the daintiness of ear 

To check time broke in a disorder'd string ; 

But for the concord of my state and time 

Had not an ear to hear my true time broke. 

I wasted time, and now doth time waste me ; 

For now hath time made me his numbering clock : 50 

My thoughts are minutes ; and with sighs they jar 

Their watches on unto mine eyes, the outward watch, 

Whereto my finger, like a dial's point. 

Is pointing still, in cleansing them from tears. 

Now sir, the sound that tells what hour it is 

Are clamorous groans, which strike upon my heart, 

Which is the bell : so sighs and tears and groans 

Show minutes, times, and hours : but my time 

Runs posting on in Bolingbroke's proud joy, 

While I stand fooling here, his Jack o' the clock. 60 

This music mads me ; let it sound no more ; 

For though it have holp madmen to their wits. 



8o KING RICHARD II. 

In me it seems it will make wise men mad. 
Yet blessing on his heart that gives it me ! 
For 'tis a sign of love ; and love to Richard 
Is a strange brooch in this all-hating world. 

Enter a Groom of the Stable. 
Groom. Hail, royal prince ! 

King Richard. Thanks, noble peer ; 

The cheapest of us is ten groats too dear. 
What art thou ? and how comest thou hither, 
Where no man never comes but that sad dog 70 

That brings me food to make misfortune live ? 

Groom. I was a poor groom of thy stable, king, 
When thou wert king ; who, travelling towards York, 
With much ado at length have gotten leave 
To look upon my sometimes royal master's face. 
O, how it yearn'd my heart when I beheld 
In London streets, that coronation-day, 
When Bolingbroke rode on roan Barbary, 
That horse that thou so often hast bestrid, 
That horse that I so carefully have dress'd ! 80 

K. Rich. Rode he on Barbary ? Tell me, gentle friend, 
How went he under him ? 

Groom. So proudly as if he disdain'd the ground. 

K. Rich. So proud that Bolingbroke was on his back ! 
That jade hath eat bread from my royal hand ; 
This hand hath made him proud with clapping him. 
Would he not stumble ? would he not fall down, 
Since pride must have a fall, and break the neck 
Of that proud man that did usurp his back ? 
Forgiveness, horse ! why do I rail on thee, 90 

Since thou, created to be awed by man. 
Wast born to bear? I was not made a horse; 
And yet I bear a burthen like an ass, 
Spurr'd, gall'd and tired by jauncing Bolingbroke. 



ACT V. SCENE VI. 8 1 

Enter Keeper, ivith a dish. 

Keeper. Fellow, give place ; here is no longer stay. 

K. Rich. If thou love me, 'tis time thou wert away. 

Groom. What my tongue dares not, that my heart shall 
say. [Exit. 

Keeper. My lord, will't please you to fall to? 

K. Rich. Taste of it first, as thou art wont to do. 

Keeper. I\Iy lord, I dare not: Sir Pierce of Exton, who 
lately came from the king, commands the contrary. loi 

K. Rich. The devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee ! 
Patience is stale, and I am weary of it. [Beats the keeper. 

Keeper. Help, help, help ! 

Enter ExTON and Servants, armed. 

King Richard. How now ! what means death in this rude 
assault .' 
Villain, thy own hand yields thy death's instrument. 

[Snatching an axe from a Servant and killing him. 
Go thou, and fill another room in hell. 

[He kills another. Then Exton strikes him do^ivn. 
That hand shall burn in never-quenching fire 
That staggers thus my person. Exton, thy fierce hand 
Hath with the king's blood stain'd the king's own land. 
Mount, mount, my soul ! thy seat is up on high ; 1 1 1 

Whilst my gross flesh sinks downward, here to die. [Dies. 

Exton. As full of valour as of royal blood : 
Both have I spill'd ; O would the deed were good ! 
For now the devil, that told me I did well, 
Says that this deed is chronicled in hell. 
This dead king to the living king I'll bear : 
Take hence the rest, and give them burial here. [Exetmt. 

G 



82 KING RICHARD II. 

Scene VI. Ulndsor castk. 

Flourish. Enter BOLINGBROKE, YORK, nvith other Lords, 
and Attendants. 

Bol'ingbroke. Kind uncle York, the latest news we hear 
Is that the rebels have consumed with fire 
Our town of Cicester in Gloucestershire ; 
But whether they be ta'en or slain we hear not. 

Enter NORTHUMBERLAND. 

Welcome, my lord : what is the news ? 

North. First, to thy sacred state wish I all happiness. 
The next news is, I have to London sent 
The heads of Oxford, Salisbury, Blunt, and Kent : 
The manner of their taking may appear 
At large discoursed in this paper here. lo 

Bolingbroke. We thank thee, gentle Percy, for thy pains ; 
And to thy worth will add right worthy gains. 

Enter FiTZWATER. 

Fitzivater. My lord, I have from Oxford sent to London 
The heads of Brocas and Sir Bennet Seely, 
Two of the dangerous consorted traitors 
That sought at Oxford thy dire overthrow. 

Bolingbroke. Thy pains, Fitzwater, shall not be forgot ; 
Right noble is thy merit, well I wot. 

Enter PERCY, and the BiSHOP OF CARLISLE. 

Percy. The grand conspirator, Abbot of Westminster, 
With clog of conscience and sour melancholy 20 

Hath yielded up his body to the grave ; 
But here is Carlisle living, to abide 
Thy kingly doom and sentence of his pride. 

Bolingbroke. Carlisle, this is your doom: 
Choose out some secret place, some reverend room, 



ACT V. SCENE VI. 83 

More than thou hast, and with it joy thy life ; 
So as thou hvest in peace, die free from strife : 
For though mine enemy thou hast ever been, 
High sparks of honour in thee have I seen. 

Enter Ex TON, (with persons bearing a coffin. 

Exton. Great king, within this coffin I present 30 

Thy buried fear : herein all breathless lies 
The mightiest of thy greatest enemies, 
Richard of Bordeaux, by me hither brought. 

Baling. Exton, I thank thee not : for thou hast wrouglit 
A deed of slander with thy fatal hand 
Upon my head and all this famous land. 

Exton. From your own mouth, my lord, did I this deed. 

Bolingbroke. They love not poison that do poison need, 
Nor do I thee : though I did wish him dead, 
I hate the murderer, love him murdered. " 40 

The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labour, 
But neither my good word nor princely favour : 
With Cain go wander thorough shades of night, 
And never show thy head by day nor light. 
Lords, I protest, my soul is full of woe, 
That blood should sprfnkle me to make me grow : 
Come, mourn with me for that I do lament, 
And put on sullen black incontinent : 
I'll make a voyage to the Holy Land, 

To wash this blood off from my guilty hand : 50 

March sadly after ; grace my mournings here ; 
In weeping after this untimely bien [Exeunt. 



G 2 



NOTES. 



ACT I. 

Scene I. 

According to Holinshed, Shakespeare's authority tor the historical facts, 
the following scene occurred ' within the castell of Windsore.' Editors place 
it in London. The quartos and folios have no indication of the place of 
each scene. 

1 . John of Gaunt was born at Ghent — whence his surname, corrupted from 
the French 'Gaud' — in 1,^,40, and the play opens in the year 1398. Shake- 
speaie, however, speaks of him throughout as a very old man. 

2. band, used indifferently with ' bond.' See Comedy of Errors, iv. 2. 49 : 

' Tell me, was he arrested on a band ?' 
4. the boisterous late appeal. First made at the parliament held at Shrews- 
bury about six weeks before. The word ' appeal' is here used in the sense of 
' accusation involving a challenge,' as in iv. I. 45. So also the verb ' appeal,' 
i. 1.9, and i. 1. 27. In Holinshed, p. 1C98, col. 2, margin, 'The Duke of 
Hereforde ajipealeth the duke of Norfolk of treason.' ' Appeal,' according to 
Cowel (Law Diet. ed. 17^7), 'is a lawful declaration of another man's crime 
before a competent judge, by one that setteth his name to the declaration, 
and undertakes to prove it upon the penalty that may ensue of the contrary.' 
13. apparen', manifest. See King John, iv. 2. 93 : 
' It is apparent foul play.' 
The adverb ' apparently' is used for ' manifestly,' Numbers xii. 8. 

18. High-slot; lach'd, haughiy. ' Stomach' is used for ' pride' in Henr}' VIII. 
iv. 2.34: 

' He was a man 
Of an unbounded stomach, ever ranking 
Hiniself with pri]ices.' 
It means ' courage in Henry V. iv. 3. 35 : 

' He which hath no stomach to this fight, 
Let him depart.' 
20. The line is incomplete. Pope read ' May many years . . .' 
23. envying, with the accent on the second syllable. Compare Taming of 
the Shrew, ii. 1. 18 : 

' Is it for him you do envy me so.' 
Spenser uses 'envy' with the accent on the last syllable. 

26. the cause you come, the cause you come on, or come for. The 



H6 NOTES. [act I. 

preposition is frequently omitted thus. See Merchant of Venice, iv. i. 389 : 
' That he do record a gift, 
Here in the court, of all he dies possess'd,' 
i. e. possessed of. 

28. The word ' object' is used as a transitive verb, and in a sense stronger 
than the modern one. See i Henry VI. ii. 4. 116 : 

' This blot that thev object against your house.' 
We find in Holinshed, p. 1099, col. 2, margin, ' The obiections against the 
Duke of Norfolke.' 

32. Tendering, cherishing, fondly regarding. See Richard HI. i. I. ^4: 
' His majesty. 
Tendering my person's safety.' 
The two senses of the word are played upon in Hamlet, i. 3. 107 : 
' Tender yourself more dearly, 
Or — not to crack the wind of the poor phrase, 
Running it thus — you '11 tender me a fool.' 
38. my divine soul, my immaterial, immortal soul, my soul that after 
death will be in the hands of God. The word ' divine' seems to have a 
similar sense in All's Well that Ends Well, iii. 6. 31, where 'the divine forfeit 
of his soul' is used in Shakespeare's manner for ' the forfeit of his divine soul.' 
43. as^'rravate the note, intensify or surcharge the mark of disgrace. So 
Merry Wives of Windsor, ii. 2. 296 : 

' Ford 's a knave, and I will aggravate his style.' 
46. right drawn, drawn in a just cause. 
49. eager, sharp, piercing. So Hamlet, i. 4. 2 : 

'It is a nipping and an eager air.' 

56. post, travel with all haste: said either of horse or rider. Compare 
iii. 4. 90, and v. 2. 1 1 2. 

57. doubled, twofold. The folios read 'doubly.* 

63. tied, bound, obliged. So Winter's Tale, v. I. 213: 

' Where you were tied in duty.' 
65. inhabitable, uninhabitable, the ' in' having a negative force, as inhabita- 
bilis in good Latin. So Ben Jonson, Catiline, v. i. ,4 : 

'Let 
Their blood out to be drawn away in clouds. 
And pour'd on some inhabitable place, 

Where the hot sun and slime breeds nought but monsters.' 
So ' inhabited' is used for ' uninhabited' by Beaumont and Fletcher, Thierry 
and Theodoret, iii. I. 
67. this, this protest. 

72. 'Except,' says Staunton, 'is here employed in the old sense of to put 
a bar to, or stay, action.' But with the ordinary meaning of the word the 
passage is easily explained. See lines 58, 59, where Mowbray disclaims any- 
thing that might be offensive to the King. Bolingbroke affirms that this 
disclaimer was due not to real loyalty, but fear. 

74. pawn, pledge, the glove which he throws down. Compare iv. I. 55. 
The word is used in a somewhat similar sense. King Lear, i. I. 157 : 
' My life I never held but as a pawn 
To wage against thine enemies.' 



sc. i] RICHARD II. 87 

77. worse was omitted in the second quarto. Tlie third and fourth com- 
plete the line by reading 'or what thou canst devise;' the folios, 'spoken, cr 
thou csnst devise.' 

80, 81. The general sense of these somewhat obscure lines seems to be: 
' I will meet you on any fair terms, or in any form of combat prescribed by 
the laws of chivalry." 

85. Inherit is here used actively, much in the same way as 'possess' is 
used, Twelfth Night, ii. 3. 149: 'Possess us, possess us; tell us something 
of him.' This is the only passage of Shakespeare in which the verb ' inherit' 
is used in this sense, ' to put in possession.' 

88. eight thojuand iiobles. A noble was 6s. Sc?. This money should have 
gone to pay the garrison of Calais, according to Holinshed. The term 'lend- 
ings' is used because it was paid to Mowbray not for his own use, but to be 
transferred to others. So Lear says, 'Off, off, you lendings !' (iii. 4. 115) 
when he flings his clothes away as superfluities. 

90. lewd, mean, base. See I Henry IV. iii. 2. 13: 

' Such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean attempts,' 
and Acts of the Apostles, xvii. 5 : ' Certain lewd fellows of the baser sort,' 
where the Greek has vovTjpovs. The word comes from the Anglo-Saxon 
leode, connected with the German leute, people. 

91. injurious implies insolence in wrong-doing, and is used in the Ntw 
Testament as the translation of vPpt(TTT]s ; in the Vulgate con/iimeliosus. So 
in Coriolanus, iii. 3. 69: ' Thou injurious tribune!' 

95. eighteen years, i. e. since the great rising of the commons in 1 381. 

96. Complot/ed, ploUed. See 1.3.189. 'Completer. To complot, conspire. 
combine or pack together.' Cotgrave, Fr. Diet. 

100. The Duke of Glcmcester was Thomas of Woodstock, sixth, cr. 
according to some, seventh son of Edward III. See note on i. 2. 11. He 
was charged by the Duke of Norfolk, then Earl of Nottingham and Lord 
Deputy of Calais, with having conspired, along with the Archbishop of 
Canterbury, the Abbot of St. Alban's, and others, agahist the king, and was 
put to death at Calais in 1397. (See Holinshed, pp. 1091, 1092.) 

loi. suggest, prompt secretly. It is used with the accusative of the person. 
All's Well that Ends Well, iv. 5. 47 : ' To suggest thee from thy master.' 

102. consequently, as a result of the prompting. See King John, iv. 2. 240 : 
' Yea, without stop, didst let thy heart consent, 
And consequently thy rude hand to act.' 

104. Genesis iv. 10: 'The voice of thy brother's blood crieth un'.o me 
from the ground.' 

106. To me, i. e. as the nephew of the murdered Duke. 

107. tfo>-//b, nobility, dignity. See Two Gentlemen of Verona, i. 2. 44: 'An 
office of great worth ;' and As You Like It, v. 4. 161 : ' Men of great worth.' 

109. pitch is here used as a cognate accusative. It was a familiar term of 
falcoiiry. See I Henry VI. ii. 4. 11: 

' Between two hawks, which flies the higher pitch,' 
and TitHS Andronicus, ii. I. 14: 'And mount her pitch.' 
113. slander of his blood, reproach to his kindred. 

119. neighbour, used as an adjective in Love's Labour's Lost, v. 2. 94: 
' I stole into a neighbour thicket by.' 



88 NOTES. [act I. 

1 20. parlialize, make partial ; a rare word, not found elsewhere in Shake- 
speare. Cotgrave gives ' to partialize it,' i. e. be partial, as an equivalent fur 
the French parlialiier. 

1 26. receipt, i. e. money received. 

1 30. Upon remainder of a dear account, on the balance of a heavy debt 
still due. Mr. Collier's MS. corrector changed 'dear' to 'clear;' but see 
Romeo and Juliet, i. 5. 120: 

' O dear account ! my life is my foe's debt.' 
An account is called ' dear' when it requires a costly payment. So Much 
Ado About Nothing, iv. I. 337 : 

' Claudio shall render me a dear account.' 

131. He went to France in 1.^95 with the Earl of Rutland (the Aumerle 
of this play) and others, as ambassadors to negotiate a marriage between 
Richard and Isabel, daughter of Charles VI, then eight years old. 

133. Holinshed, in his narrative of the duke's death (jp. 1092, col. 2), says 
that Mowbray ' prolonged t3'me for the executing of the kings commandc- 
ment,' and so incurred the royal displeasure ; but in the speech which he 
attributes to Mowbray no allusion is made to the subject. Indeed Mowbray 
could not excuse himself without accusing the king. 

140. exactly, in precise and distinct terms, without the omission of any 
detail. See Tempest, i. 2. 499 : 

' But then exactly do 
All points of my command.' 

142. appeal'd, charged against me. See note on i. I. 4. 

144. recreant, used both as adjective and substantive, here probably the 
former. It means, originally, ' one who is an apostate to his faith,* or ' one 
who has broken his oath as knight or liegeman;' then, one who has yielded 
through fear ; one who has surrendered or fled ; a coward. 

1 45. in myself, in my own person. 

150. In haste luhereof in order to expedite this proof. 

156. conclude, come to terms, agree together. See I Henry VI. ii. 4. 40: 

' Stay, lords and gentlemen, and pluck no more 
Till you conclude that he upon whose side 
The fewest roses are cropp'd from the tree 
Shall yield the other in the right opinion.' 

157. fno'itb. So the quartos: the folios have ' time.' It was customary 
with our fathers to be bkd periodically, in spring and in autumn. 

162. whenf is an exclamation of impatience, as in Taming of the Shrew, 
iv. I. 146, Petruchio calls to the servants ' Why, when, I say?' The words 
'obedience bids' were by a printer's error repeated in the first quarto. The 
error was followed in the sulssequent editions with variations in the stopping. 

164. There is no boot, there is no use in resisting. See I Henry VI. ir. 
6.52 : 

' Then talk no more of flight, it is no boot.' 
The word, in Anglo-Saxon hot, means profit, advantage, help; whence the 
use of ' to boot.' The verb ' it buots,' ' it boots not,' is of frequent occur- 
rence. 

168. The natural order of the words is: 'That lives upon my grave 
despite ot death.' For the construction, compare iii. 2. 38. 



sc. i] RICHARD IT. 89 

I/O. 'Bnffling,' says Nares, 'was originally a punishment of infamy, in- 
flicted on recreant knights, one part of which was hanging them up by the 
heels.' Here it is used of disgrace to knighthood generally, as in I Henry IV. 
i. 2. 113: 

' An I do not, call me villain and baffle me.' 
The French original is hafoiier. Compare Trench's English Past and Fresent, 
s. V. 

I 73. which, frequently used with a personal antecedent, as e. g. in the 
Lord's Prayer. 

] 74. ■ The Norfolk crest,' says Malone, ' was a golden leopard :' but we find 
no authority for this statement. The present Nortblk crest is a golden lion. 

175. his spots. Pope altered this to ''their spots ;' but Mowbray is quoting 
the te.xt, Jeremiah xiii. 23. 

177. mortal limes, the lifetime of men. 

186. throw up. So the quartos: the folios have 'throw down.' The 
former, meaning ' relinquish,' is more appropriate than the latter, which is 
specially used for the act of defiance. 

187. In the folios ' God' is changed to ' Heaven,' in compliance with an 
Act of Parliament, 3 Jamts I. chap. 21. 'To restrain the abuses of I'layers.* 
The Act is printed in our notes to The Merchant cf Venice, i. 2. 99. 

189. beggar-fear. So the first quarto and the first two folic s. The 
second, third, and fourth quartos read • begger-face ; " the two lust folios, 
' beggar'd fear.' 

lb. The word ' impeach' means, originally, ' to hinder,' frcm the French 
empecher, and thence ' to accuse,' because the first step in an accv.sation is to 
secure the personal attendance of the accused on the day of trial, thus im- 
peding his free action. The word was used by Shakespeare in either sense, 
and here, perhaps, both are blended; 'Let not fear bring n;y high charactir 
in question, and prevent me from holding up my head in his presence.' 

192. parle and 'parley' are identical, meaning ' conference, with a view to 
peaceful settlement of differences.' Here it refers to the particular note of 
the trumpet which conveyed to the enemy an invitation to confer. See the 
stage direction on p. 48, and 3 Henry VI. v. i. 16: 

' Go, trumpet, to the walls, and sound a parle,' 
and Henry V. iii. 2. 149 : 'The town sounds a parley.' 

193. the mo'ive, the moying power, the agent: in this case the fcngiie, 
which gives utterance to the recantation See Troilus and Cressida, iv. 5. i.'j: 

' At every joint and motive of her body.' 

194. It may be doubted whether 'his' refers to the tongue (used for the 
modern 'its') or to Mowbray. Either yields a reasonable sense. 

195. Exit Gaunt. This stage direction, found only in the folios, was 
inserted, because Gaunt has to appear in the next scene, and he could not re- 
main on the stage as the audience were to suppose the place to be changed. 

199. Saint Lambert's day. Sept. 17. Stow says St. Edith's day, Sept. 16. 
202. atone, set at one, reconcile. See Cymbeline, i. 4. 42 : '1 was glad I 
did atone my countrymen and you.' It is used intransitively, As You Like 
It, v. 4. 116: 

' When earthly things made even 
Atorie toeether.' 



90 NOTES. [act I. 

202. we. So the first quarto : the rest read ' you.' 

203. design the victor's chivalry, appoint which of the two combatants 
shall be victorious. 

204. Lord marshal, i. e. deputy Earl Marshal ; on this occasion Thomas 
Holland, Duke of Surrey, was 'for that tourne Marshall of Englande,' as 
HolinsheJ says. p. 1099, col. I. Mowbray himself was made Earl Marshal in 
9 Rich. II. There is a superfluous syllable at the beginning of this line un- 
less v/e read ' Mareshal,' a trisyllable, and consider the line an Alexandrine. 

Scene II. 

The Duke of Lancaster's palace was originally ' The Savoy.' It was 
burnt by the rebels on Corpus Christi day, June 13, I3S1 (Holinshed, 
p 1026), and rebuilt (as a hospital) in Henry the Seventh's time. John 
of Gaunt, at the time of his death in 1399, was at Ely House (i. 4. 58). 

The Duchess of Gloucester, widow of the murdered Duke, was Eleanor 
Bohun, daughter of Humphrey, Earl of Northampton, Hereford, and Essex. 
The other daughter and co-heiress, Mary, was the wife of Henry Plantagenet 
(the Bolingbroke of our play), who was created Duke of Hereford in 1,197. 
Eleanor lies buried in Westminster Abbey, in St. Edmund's chapel, ' under a 
brass representing her in her conventual dress as a nun of Barking.' Stanley's 
Memorials, p. 145. 

1. the part I had in Woodstock's blood, my relationship to Woodstock. 
lb. Woodstock's. So the quartos. In the folios the word is changed to 

• Glousters,' no doubt in order to make the meaning more clear to the 
audience, who could not be expected to know that the Duke of Gloucester 
was also called Thomas of Woodstock. 

2. solicit, prevail by entreaty. See Macbeth, iv. 3. 149. 
lb. exclaims, exclamations. See Richard III. i 2. 52 : 

' Cursing cries and deep exclaims.' 
So 'commends' for 'commendations' in the present play, iii. I. 38; 'la- 
ments' for 'lamentations,' iv. 1. 296; 'accuse' for 'accusation,' 2 Henry VI. 
iii. I. 160. Compare ' depart' for ' departure,' 3 Henry VI. ii. I. no. 

7. they see. Pope read 'it sees,' Steevens ' he sees' Doubtless Shakespeare 
wrote ^ they see,' as he uses 'heaven' elsewhere as a plural. See iii. 3. i7i 
19, and Hamlet, iii. 4. 173 : 

' But heaven hath pleased it so 

That I must be their scourge and minister.' 
And Othello, iv. 2. 47 : 

' Had it pleased heaven 
To try me with affliction ; had they rain'd,' &c. 
And in Rich. III. iv. 4. 71, 72, ' hell ' is used in the same way : 
' Hell's black intelligencer, 
Only reserved their factor.' ■ 
lb. hours. A dissyllable here. 

8. hot vengeance. Perhaps the author was thinking of the destruction of 
the 'cities of the plain,' Genesis xix. 24, 25. 

Ir. Edward's seven sons were: — (l) Edward the Black Prince, 1330- 



sc. 2.] RICHARD II. 91 

1376; (2) William of Hatfield, 1336-1344; (3) Lionel of Antwerp, Duke 
of Clarence, T 338-1 368; (4) John of Gaunt, 1 340-1 399; (5) Edmund of 
Langley, Duke of York, 1341-1402; (6) William of Windsor (died young); 
(7) Thomas of Woodstock, I355-I397- This list differs from the enumera- 
tion in 2 Henry VI. ii. 2. 10-17, '" ^^^ '^^^^ o^" ^^'^ sixth and seventh sons. 
Thomas is there the sixth and William the seventh son. 

14, 15. A natural death, which the destinies had brought to Edward, the 
two Williams, and Lionel, is contrasted with the violent death which bcfel 
Gloucester. 

20. faded. So the quartos: 'vaded' the folios. The words were used indif- 
ferently. So in The Passionate Pilgrim, x. I, 2 : 

' Sweet rose, fair flower, untimely pluck'd, soon vaded, 
Pluck'd in the bud and vaded in the spring.' 

21. envy, malice. See Merchant of Venice, iv. 1. 10: 

' No lawful means can carry me 
Out of his envy's reach.' 
23. metal. Here the quartos have 'nietall' or ' metal,' the fohos ' mettle.' 
Modern usage reserves the former spelling to the original sense, the latter to 
the metaphorical. Compare Richard HE iv. 4. 302 : 

' They are as children but one step below. 
Even of your mettle, of vour very blood.' 
lb. self-moidd, selfsame mould. See Titus Andronicus, iv. 2. 123: 
' Sensibly fed 
Of that self-blood that first gave life to you.' 
25. consent in Shakespeare's time had a stronger meaning than it has 
now, and implied approval as well as acquiescence. See I Henry VL i. 5. 34 : 
' You all consented unto Salisbury's death. 
For none would strike a stroke in his revenge.* 
So also I Henry VL i. I. 5 : 

' The bad revolting stars 
That have consented unto Henry's death.' 
So Holinshed, p. II25: 'This yeare Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norffolke 
dyed in exile at Venice, whose death might haue beene worthily bewayled of 
all the realme, if he had not bene consenting to the death of the Duke of 
Gloucester.' Compare Acts viii. I. 

28. model, copy, as well as pattern, or plan. See iii. 4. 42, v. I. 11. 
Compare Henry VHL iv. 2. 132 : 

' The model of our chaste loves, his young daughter.' 
35. to safeguard. Used as a verb in Henry V. i. 2. 176 : 
' Since we have locks to safeguard necessaries.' 

37. The folios here substitute ' Heaven' for 'God,' as in i. I. 187, and 
for the same reason they do the like in line 43 and elsewhere. 

38. Hh deputy anointed in His sight, Mr. Staunton punctuates thus : 

' His deputy anointed, in His sight 
Hath caused his death.' 
We have adhered to the old stopping because the king was anointed at his 
coronation in the house of God and therefore especially in His sight. This 
part of the ceremony made the greater impression as the king was stripped 
to the waist. 



gZ NOTES. [act t. 

42. may, used for 'can,' as in Merchant of Venice, i. 3. 7 : 'May you 
stead me ? ' 

lb. complain myself. The reflexive pronoun was used frequently in 
Old English with verbs which have now become intransitive. See i.v. I. 96, 
' retired himself;' v. 3. 28, ' withdraw yourselves ;' v. 3. 52, ' I do repent me.' 

46. cousin was used much more vaguely than now. Compare Twelfth 
Night, i. 3. I, 5, where Sir Toby calls Olivia his 'niece,' and Maria speaks 
of her as his ' cousin.' Hereford was, as we have seen, the duchess's brother- 
in-law as well as her husband's nephew. 

lb. fell, fierce, cruel. See i. 3. 302, and Macbeth, iv. 2. 71. 

49. If disaster fails to attend the first course of the tournament. 

53. caitiff htre retains something of its etymological meaning captivus, a 
prisoner at the mercy of the conqueror. In Wiclif's Version, Eph. iv. 8, we 
read 'He ledde caitifte caytif.' 'Recreant' seems here to be used in the 
special sense of one who surrenders in battle. It is so used in Chaucer's 
Parson's Tale (ed. Tyrwhitt) : ' Sothly, he that despeirith him, is like to 
the coward champioun recreant, that fiieth withouten nede.' 

54. sometimes. Used by Shakespeare indifferently for ' sometime.' So 
Ephcsians ii. 13 : 'Ye who sometimes were far oflF.' 

58. She compares her reiterated complaints to the rebounding of a tennis- 
ball. 

66. Flashy, near Dunmow in Essex, where Thomas, Duke of Gloucester, 
had a seat, in virtue of his office as Lord High Constable, which he inherited 
with his wife. Camden derives the name from Plaisir. Plessis seems a 
more probable origin. It \v:is at Phishy that the king in person arrested 
his uncle (Holinshed, p. IC92). The ruins of the Norman keep are still to 
be seen. 

68. lodgings. Compare Pericles, ii. 3. IIO: 

' Pages and lights, to conduct 
These knights unto their several loi^gings.' 

Ih. unfurnished walls. ' In our ancient castles the naked stone walls were 
only covered with tapestry, or arras, hung upon tenter hooks, from which it 
was easily taken down on every removal of the family.' Steevens, from Percy. 

73. will I hence, that is, go hence. Adverbs of place are constantly used 
without the verb of motion. The duchess in fact died the following year, 
Oct. 3, 1399, for grief, not at the death of her husband, but of her son Hum- 
phrey, who ' was taken with the pestilence' on his way back from Ireland. 
Holinshed, p. 1 1 25, col. :. Accirding to the monk of Evesham he was 
drowned. 

Scene III. 

Steevens. following Dugdale, places the scene at Gosford Green, Coventry. 
Enter the Lord Marshal See note on i. I. 204. The Duke of Aumerle 
was acting as Lord High Constable. 

3. sprigh fully and bold, i. e. sprightfully and boldly, the adverbial t-.-rmin- 
ation being understood in the second word. Fo Richard III. iii. 4. 50 : 

' His grace looks cheerfully and smooth to day,' 
and Othello iii. 4- 79 : 

' Why do you speak so startingly and rash ?' 



sc. 3 J R I C H A R D 1 1. 93 

Sometimes the adverbial form is given to the second word, as in Beaumont 
and Fletcher, The Pilgrim, ii. 2 : 

' Now poor and basely 
Thou set'st toils to betray me.' 
7. Enter Mowbray. Shakespeare has here departed from Hoiinshed, 
according to whom Bolingbroke entered first ; then came the king and suite, 
and last of all Mowbray. 

10. swear is used actively in Julius Caesar, ii. i. 129 : 

' Swear priests and cowards and men cautelous.' 
18. defend, i.e. forbid, like the French dijendre. So in Richard III. 
iii. 7. 173: 

' Which God defend that I should wring from him.' 
So in Chaucer's Parson's Tale : ' Certes, al this thing is defended by God 
and holy chirche;' and again, 'such japes defendith seint Poule.' 

20. For my, the reading of the quartos, the folios give his, probably a 
conjectural emendation. Norfolk's succeeding issue would be involved in the 
forfeiture incurred by treason against the king. 

21. Henry Plantagenet, Earl of Derby, was created Duke of Hereford 
Sept. ■zg, 1.^,97. Hoiinshed, p. 1097, col. 2. 

26. The line is defective in metre. 

28. plated, clad in plate armour. So Antony and Cleopatra, i. I. 4 : ' Like 
plated Mars.' Chain-mail, except in parts of the armour, was disused in the reign 
of Edward HI, as not being so well adapted to resist the thrust of a lance. 

30. depose. Very rarely used in the active sense, to take evidence on oath. 

45. designs. See i. I. 81. 

58. /hee dead. The first two quartos have ' /he dead.' 

59. Bolingbroke means, if he were to be slain by Mowbray he would 
shew himself unworthy of being lamented, and it would be profanation to 
weep for him. 

66. lusty, young. Perhaps this should be printed ' lusty-young.' 

67. The custom of ending a great dinner with confectionery of elaborate 
structure was general throughout England in Shakespeare's time, and still 
exists in college-halls. From the emphasis laid upon 'English,' the author 
seems to imply that the custom was peculiar to this country. Compare 
Bacon (Life and Letters, ed. Spedding, vol. iii. p. 215, note) : 'Let not this 
Parliament end, like a Dutch feast, in salt meats ; but like an English feast, 
in sweet meats.' 

lb. regreet, i. e. salute. See i 3. 186. In i. 3. 142, it is doubtful whether 
it means 'salute' or 're-salute.' The verb is not found elsewhere in Shake- 
speare. 'Regreet' as a substantive is found in King John, iii. I. 241, and 
Merchant of Venice, ii. 9. 89, in both cases with the sense of ' salutation.' 

73. proof, resisting power ; a word technically used of armour. See Mac- 
beth, i. 2. 54 : 

' Bellona's bridegroom, lapp'd in proof,' 
i. e. in armour of proof ; and Antony and Cleopatra, iv. 8. 15 : 
' Leap thou, attire and all. 
Through proof of harness to my heart ; ' 
and Romeo and Juliet, i. i. 216: 

* And in strong proof of chastity well arm'd.' 



94 NOTES. [act 1. 

75. That my lance may pierce Mowbray's coat of mail as if it were a 
coat of wax. 

76. John a Gaunt. Capell and later editors read ' John of Gaunt,' Theo- 
bald ' John o' Gaunt.' The ' a ' no doubt is a corruption of ' o.' So we have 
in Hamlet, ii. 2. 595, ' John-a-dreams.' 

77. haviour, carriage, bearing. In Hamlet, i. 2. 81, it means rather 
aspect : 

' Nor the dejected haviour of the visage.' 

80. redoubled is to be pronounced as a quadrisyllable. Pope reads 
awkwardly 'redoubled on.' We have the same reduplication in Macbeth, i. 
2. 38: 

' Doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe.' 

81. amazing, bewildering, confounding. See v. 2. 85, and Hamlet, ii. 
2. 591: 

* Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed 
The very faculties of eyes and ears.' 
See also Richard HI. v. 3. 341, and King John, iv. 1. 137. 
lb. casque, helmet. See Henry V. Prologue 13: 
' The very casques 
That did affright the air at Agincourt.' 

82. adverse. Except in this passage Shakespeare always accentuates 
'adverse' on the first syllable. The folios here read ' amaz'd,' which is 
obviously a printer's error. 

84. to thrive, i. e. help me to succeed. The old copies read 'innocence;' 
Pope read 'innocence, God;' Capell introduced ' innocency,' which is a 
familiar Shakespearian word and restores the rhythm with slight change. 

91. More is here superfluous. 

95. to jest had in Shakespeare's time a wider signification than now, to 
take part in any merrymaking and specially to act in a masque or interlude. 
The substantive ' jest' was also used in the same sense. It is derived from 
the word gesta applied to collections of tales frequentlj' of a comic nature. 
The word was spelt variously ' gest,' 'jeast,' &c. In Chaucer, to jest means 
to relate amusing stories. 

97. securely, surely, certainly. 

112. approve, prove. See Merchant of Venice, iii. 2. 79: 
' What damned error, but some sober brow 
Will bless it and approve it with a text?' 
and 2 Corinthians vii. 11: ' In all things ye have approved yourselves to be 
clear in this matter.' 

115. free, unconstrained. 

116. Attending, awaiting (the original meaning of the word). See 
2 Henry IV. i. 1. 3 : 

* Tell thou the earl 
That the Lord Bardolph doth attend him here.' 
118. warder, the truncheon which he held as president of the combat. In 
2 Henry IV. iv. 1. 125, the same incident is spoken of thus : 
' O, when the king did throw his warder down 
His own life hung upon the staff he threw.' 
At Agincourt, Sir Thomas Erpingham led the English vanguard ' with a 



sc. 3-] RICHARD II. 95 

warder in his hand, and when he cast vp his warder all the army shouted, 
but that was a signe to the archers in the meadow,' &c. HoUnshed, p. 11 80, 
col. 2. 

120. chairs. A chair was provided for each combatant; that of Boling- 
broke was of green velvet, that of Norfolk of crimson velvet curtained 
about with white and red damask. During the king's discussion with his 
council, they were commanded ' to repaire againe to theire chaires, where 
they remayned .ij. long houres.' Holinshed, p. iioi, col. I. 

121. Withdraw luith us. These words are addressed to the members of 
the council standing behind. 

122. While, i. e. in the meantime, till. See iv. i. 269. Compare Macbeth, 
iii. 1. 44: 

' We will keep ourself 
Till supper-time alone : while then, God be with you !' 
' While' can only, we think, be properly used for ' till,' when it follows a 
verb expressing a continuous action, an action which lasts over the interval 
of time designated. 'While' is commonly used for 'till* in the northern 
counties of England, but without the limitation which we have mentioned 
as characterizing the usage of Shakespeare. 

lb. return these dukes, report, or announce, to these dukes the sentence 
which is the answer to their appeal. See iii. 3. 121. 

124. list, listen, hear. Compare Merry Wives, v. 5. 46: 

' Elves, list your names.' 

125. Because our kingdom's earth ought not to be soiled. 'For' in this and 
the following lines is used in the sense of ' because' as in Othello, iii. 3. 263 : 

' Haply, for I am black 
And have not those soft parts of conversation 
That chamberers have, or for I am declined 
Into the vale of years.' 
According to Holinshed the sentence was read by Sir John Bushy, the king's 
secretary. 

129-133. These five lines are omitted in the folios. Probably they had 
been erased in some acting copy, to avoid the tautology ' to wake our 
peace,' . . . ' fright fair peace.' But then the words ' which so roused up,* 
have no proper antecedent. 

131. set on you, urged you on, incited you. 

I40. pain of life. So the quartos: the folios read 'pain of death.' The 
sense is the same. In line 153 the folios as well as quartos read ' pain of life.' 
Holinshed has 'pain oi death' in both cases. 
142. regreet. See note on i. 3. 67. 

150. sly slow. The second folio alone of the earlier editions reads ' flye 
slow,' whence Pope read 'fly-slow.' 'Sly' is an epithet suitable enough to 
the hours that pass with stealthy and noiseless step, and to the exile they 
would be 'slow' also. The first epithet is found in Chapman's Odyssey, ii. 164: 
' But when the fourth year came, and those sly hours 
That still surprise at length dames' craftiest powers.' 
And in Henry More, Philosophicall Poems, p. 97, ed 1647: 

' The Moons sly gate 
Had cross'd the middle line.' 



96 NOTES. [act I. 

150. determbiate. A legal word applied to a bond. Compare Sonnet 
Ixxxvii. 4 : 

' My bonds in thee are all determinate.' 
The expression 'determinate the dateless limit' is pleonastic. 'Dateless' is 
used in a legal sense in Romeo and Juliet, v. 3. 115: 

' A dateless bargain to engrossing death.' 

151. thy dear exile, the exile which will touch thee so nearly, will engross 
all thy thoughts. The original sense of' dear' seems to be 'precious,' 'rare,* 
thence ' carefully treasured,' ' much thought of.' See Timon of Athens, v. 
I. 331 : 

' Let us return, 
And strain what other means is left unto us 
In our dear peril,' 
where 'dear' has the same sense as in our text. King Lear, iv. 7. 53: 

' Some dear cause 
Will in concealment wrap me up awhile.' 
Cymbeline, v. 5. 345 : ' Their dear loss.' 

156. a dearer merit, a more precious reward. The word does not appear 
to have been used by Shakespeare elsewhere in this sense, but conversely he 
uses ' meed' in the sense of merit. Johnson, defining one sense of ' merit' to 
be ' reward deserved,' quotes an instance from Prior, Ode to Queen Anne : 
' Those laurel groves, the merits of thy youth.' 

159. iheie forty years. Shakespeare is not careful about dates. John 
Mowbray, the elder brother of Thomas, Duke of Norfolk, was only born in 
1365, so that Norfolk, like Richard and Bolingbroke, could not be more than 
three-and-thirty at the time of this scene. 

160. forego should, consistently, be spelt ' forgo.' 

162. viol, a six-stringed guitar. This speech is entirely Shakespeare's own 
invention. It is not probable that Norfolk was ignorant of French and 
Latin, as he had been sent on an embassy to France and Germany. 

163. a cunning instrument, cunningly constructed and requiring cunning 
in the player. So Cymbeline, iv. 2. 186: ' My ingenious instrument !' 

1 70. I am too old to begin learning a new language, as a child learns from 
the nurse it fondles. 

1 74. compassionate. There appears to be no other instance of the word 
' compassionate' used in the sense of having pity on oneself. But it rather 
signifies ' loudly lamenting' like the simple ' passionate.' King John, ii. i. 544 : 

' She is sad and passionate at your highness' tent.' 
As * plain' and 'complain,' 'plot' and ' complot,' are used with identical 
meaning, so may 'passionate' and 'compassionate,' the latter being somewhat 
stronger. Theobald's conjecture ' to become passionate,' though sanctioned 
by Mr. R. G White, seems tame. 

i7g. Compare Hamlet, i. 5. 154: 'Swear by my sword.' The guard of 
the sword, being at right angles to the hilt and blade, formed a cross, hence 
those who swore by a sword swore by the cross. 

1 8 1. Richard releases them from their allegiance during their exile. 
Shakespeare had no warrant in Holinshed for thus deciding a moot point in 
the law of nations. 

185. nor never. So the quartos. The double negative is very common 



sc. 3-] RICHARD II. 97 

in our author and his contemporaries. The folios read ' nor ever.' So also 
in lines 186, 188. 

186. write, regreet. Delius reads 'write regreet/ taking ' regreet' as 
a substantive. All the old editions have a comma or semicolon. 

188. advised, deliberate. See Merchant of Venice, i. i. 142 : ' With 
more advised watch.' 

189. plot, contrive, or complot. This almost tautological language is used, 
as in legal documents, to include every form of conspiracy in the oath. 

190. our state, our royal dignity. See Tempest, i. 2. 76: 

' The government I cast upon my brother. 
And to my state grew stranger ;' 
and Merchant of Venice, v. i. 95. 

193. The quartos and first folio read ' so fare ;' the second and third folios, 
* so farre;' the fourth, 'so far.' In all likelihood the 'fare' of the earlier 
editions was a misprint for ' farre,' i. e. ' far.' The meaning of the broken 
sentence seems to be : ' so far as I am allowed to speak to you as my enemy, 
my oath having bound me not to speak to you as a friend.' 

196. sepulchre, usually accentuated by Shakespeare on the first syllable. 

205. rue, rue his knowledge. 

209. aspect, always accented by Shakespeare on the last syllable. In 
'e.xile' the accent is variable. 

211. It was at Eltham, according to Holinshed, that Bolingbroke took 
leave of the king and had four years of his e.xile remitted. 

222. extinct is only used by Shakespeare here and in Hamlet, i. 3. I18 ; in 
both places in its literal sense. 'Extinguished' does not occur in his plays 
at all. 

231. 'Time accepts the mere word of a king as sufficient warrant for a 
man's death.' The metaphor is taken from coinage stamped with the king's 
image. Compare 'sterling,' iv. i. 264. 

233. upon good advice, after due deliberation. 

234. Richard says that Gaunt, as a member of the council, gave his assent 
to his son's banishment. Shakespeare had no authority in Holinshed for this 
statement. 

239-242. These lines are omitted in the folios. 

240. smooth, palliate. See 3 Henry VI. iii. i. 48 : ' Smooths the wrong.' 

241. A partial slander, an imputation of partiality. So in Julius Caesar, 
i. 2. 9, ' sterile curse,' means ' curse of sterility.' 

244. to tJiake, in making. 

257. dolour, grief, from Fr. douleur. See King Lear, ii. 4. 54 : ' Thou 
shalt have as many dolours for thy daughters as thou canst tell in a year.' 

262. a travel, a journey. The word is rarely found in this modern sense 
with the indefinite article. The two senses 'travel' and 'travail' were not 
in Shakespeare's time distinguished by different spelling. 

i(i(). foil, from Yr.feuille, hat. folium, gold or silver leaf put behind a 
looking-glass or transparent precious stone. See I Henry IV, i. 2. 239 ; 
' And like bright metal on a sullen ground, 
My reformation, glittering o'er my fault, 
Shall show more goodly and attract more eyes 
Than that which hath no foil to set it oft'.' 



98 



NO T E S. [act 1. 



268-293. These twenty-six lines are omitted in the folios. 
269. remember, remind. See Winter's Tale, iii. 2. 231 : 

'Til not remember you of my own lord.' 
lb. a deal. So the tirst and second quartos. The third and fourth omit 
the article, helping the metre at the expense of the grammar. 

272. foreign passages, wanderings abroad. Bolingbroke compares himself 
to an apprentice who, after serving his time, is made free of his craft or 
guild. In line 274 ' journeyman,' originally a workman hired by the day, 
seems to be used as if it were an apprentice in his ivanderjahre. 

276. wise 7>ian. In the first two quartos written as one word, ' wiseman.' 
It was pronounced as one word with the accent on the first syllable. See v. 5. 
63. We still use 'madman.' In Shakespeare's time this usage was much more 
extended, as for instance, 'deadman, oldman, richman, sickman, youngman.' 
In all these cases, as Sidney Walker says, 'man' had an enclitic force. 
Crit. Exam. ii. 136. 

2S2, purchase, acquire, win. See Merchant of Venice, ii. 9. 43 : 
' O that estates, degrees and offices 
Were not derived corruptly, and that clear honour 
Were purchased by the merit of the wearer ! ' 
283. exiled. Shakespeare accentuates this word sometimes on the first, 
and sometimes on the second syllable. Compare Macbeth, v. 8. 66 : 

' As calling home our exiled friends abroad.' 
' Exile' in this scene, lines 151, 217, has the accent on the last syllable, while 
i.i Coriolanus v. 3. 45 it is on the first : 

' Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge.' 
• Envy* is used with the same varying accentuation. 
lb. suppose, imagine. 

289. the presence strew'd, the reception-room strewed, as even palace 
floors were, with rushes. See Henry VIII. iii. I. 17 : 

' The two great cardinals 
Wait in the presence.' 
And Romeo and Juliet, v. 3. 86 : 

' This vault a feasting presence full of light.' 
And for the rushes. Taming of the Shrew, iv. i. 48 : ' Is supper ready, the 
house trimmed, rushes strewed, cobwebs swept?' and Romeo and Juliet, i. 

4- 36 •• 

' Let wantons light of heart 
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels.' 

291. measure, a stately dance. See Richard III. i. i. 8 : 

' Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.' 

292. gnarling, snarling, growling. See 2 Henry VI. iii. i. 192 . 

'And wolves are gnarling who shall gnaw thee first.' 

293. sets it light, esteems it lightly. 

294. Jire is here, as often, a dissyllable. 

299. fantastic suvuner's heat, summer's heat which is merely imaginary, 
the creature of fancy. Compare Macbeth, i. 3. 139 : 

' My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical, ' 
and line 53 of the same scene. 



sr. 4-] RICHARD II. 99 

300. apprehension, imagination. See Hamlet, ii. 2. 319 : ' In apprehension 
how like a God !' The sentiment is like that of Dante : 
' Nessun maggior dolore 
Che recordarsi del tempo felice 
Nella niiseria.' Inferno, v. 1 21. 

302. Perhaps Shakespeare had in his mind this sentence in Lyly's Euphues, 
* a sharp sore hath a short cure.' As Malone says, the speech of Gaunt, 275, 
&c, seems to have been suggested by a passage in the same book. Shake- 
speare only uses the word 'rankle' in one other passage, and then also 
of a tooth. Richard III. i. 3. 291 : 

' His venom tooth will rankle to the death.' 
304. bring, accompany. Comp. i. 4. 2 : 

' How far brought you high Hereford on his way ? ' 



Scene IV. 

I. We did observe. These words are addressed by the King to Bagot 
and Green in continuation of a previous discourse on Bolingbroke's behaviour 
to the common people. See line 24. 

lb. Edward, Duke of Aumerle, was the eldest son of Edmund, Duke of 
York, and therefore first cousin to the king. 

6. for me, for my part. 

13. that is here emphatic, resuming the previous clause, ' because my 
heart disdained,' &c. 

16. Marry is frequently reckoned as a monosyllable in the verse. It is a 
corruption of ' Mary' as ' Birlady' is a corruption of ' By our Lady.' 

20. doubt, for 'doubtful,' as 'reason' for ' reasonable.' See iii. 4. 69. 

22. bis friends, his ostensible friends, the king and his other relatives. 

23. Bagot here and Green. These words are omitted in the quartos. 
They were probably supplied in MS. in the acting copy of the fourth quarto, 
from which the folio of 1623 was printed. 

28. There is a play on the word 'craft' in Coriolanus, iv. 6. liS : 

' You and your crafts ! you have crafted fair.' 

29. underbearing, enduring, supporting. See King John, iii. I. 65 : 

' And leave those woes alone which I alone 
Am bound to underbear.' 

30. their affects, the affections of the craftsmen, &c. See Love's Labour's 
Lost, i. I. 152 : 

' For every man with his affects is born.' 

31. bonnet. See Merchant of Venice, i. 2. 81: 

' He bought ... his bonnet in Germany.' 
36. In the expectation of our subjects heir-presumptive to the crown. So 
*■ Spes altera Romge,' Virgil, .ffineid, xii. 168. 

38. stand out, are in open rebellion. Compare Macbeth, iv. 3. 183. 
3g. Expedient manage must be made. Speedy measures must be taken. 
For this sense of ' expedient,' see King John, ii. I. 60 : 

' His marches are expedient to this town.' 
For ' manage,' compare Tempest, i. 2. 70 : ' The manage of my state.' 

H 2 



lOO NOTES. [act I!. 

The word also had the special sense of ' horsemanship.' See i Henry IV. ii. 

3- 52: 

' Speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed.' 

45. ' The common brute ranne, that the kyng had sette to ferme the realme 
of England, vnto Sir William Scrope Earle of Wiltshire, and then treasourer of 
Englande, to sir John Bushy, Syr John Bagot, and sir Henry Greene 
Knights.' Holinshed, p. 1 102, col.- 2. Compare ii. I. 60. 

48. ' Many blanke charters were deuised .... when they were so sealed 
the kings officers wrote in the same what liked them.' Holinshed, p. 1102, 
col. I. 'Moreover they were compelled to put their hands and scales, to 
certaine blankes, ... in the whiche, when it pleased hym hee might write, 
what hee thought good.' Holinshed, p. 1 103, col. I. See ii. I. 250. 

50. s-iibscribe them, put their names down. 

32. presently, immediately, without delay. 

54. grievous, grievously ; the adjective used adverbiallv. Comp. i Henrv 
IV. iv. I. 16: 

' He cannot come, my lord ; he is grievous sick.' 

58. Ely House. The Bishop of Ely's palace in Holborn, the site of which 
is still marked by 'Ely Place.' In Richard III. iii. 4. 33, Richard, addressing 
' my Lord of Ely,' says, 

'When I was last in Holborn, 
I saw good strawberries in your garden there.' 

63. go visit. Compare 'go root away,' iii. 4. 37; 'go sleep,' iv. i 139. 



ACT II. 
Scene I. 

3. nor strive not. For the double negative, see i. 3. 1 85, 186. 
9. is listened more. See Julius Caesar, iv. i. 4I : 
' And now, Octavius, 
Listen great things.' 
!0. gJose, or ' gloze,' make fair, flattering speeches, from the Anglo-Saxon 
glesen, ' adulari.' It is used as equivalent to ' gloss,' ' interpret,' Henry V. i. 
1. 40: 

' Which Salique land the French unjustly gloze 
To be the realm of France.' 
12. close, a cadence in music. The words 'close or cadence' are used as 
synonymous in Bacon's Advancement of Learning, ii. 5. § 3. Compare 
Henry V. i. 2. 183 : 

' Congreeing in a full and natural close 
Like music' 
14. Writ. We have the form of the participle again, iv. I. Z"]^. 
16. undeaf. This word is not found elsewhere in Shakespeare. He uses 
' deaf as a verb in King John, ii. I. I47 : 

' What cracker is this same that deafs our ears?' 
1 8. of whose taste the wise are fond, i. e. even the wise, much more Richard. 



SCI.] RICHARD IT. lOI 

This reading is Mr. Collier's conjecture. The first quarto has ' of whose taste 
the wise are found;' the second, 'of whose state the wise are found ;' the 
third and fourth quartos and the later folios, 'of his state: then there are found.* 
The first folio has, ' of his state : then there are sound.* Delius reads : 
' of his state : then there are fond 
Lascivious metres.' 

19. venom. Used elsewhere as an adjective, as Comedy of Errors, v. I. 69, 
' venom clamours,' and Richard III. i. 3. 291, ' venom tooth.* 

21. Whether Shakespeare had any authority or not for the statement that 
Italian fashions were copied in England under Richard II. as well as in his 
own day, it was probably true, as the Italian courts, particularly that of 
Milan, were far in advance of all northern courts in luxury and splendour. 
For the English habit of adopting foreign fashions, compare Merchant of 
Venice, i. 2. 80. 

23. Pope inserted 'awkward' to complete the line. But it is complete if 
we pronounce 'imitation' as a word of five syllables, not rhyming with 
• nation' in the previous line. 

25. there's no respect, no one considers. See Merchant of Venice, i. I. 74 : 

' You have too much respect upon the world.' 

26. buzzd, whispered. Compare Titus Andronicus, iv. 4. 7 : 

' However these disturbers of our peace 
Buz in the people's ears.' 
28. Where the will rebels against what the understanding sees to be right. 
For 'regard' see Twelfth Night, v. I. 219: 

' You throw a strange regard upon me.' 
33. rash, hasty, violent. I Henry IV. iii. 2. 61 : 

' The skipping king, he ambled up and down 
With shallow jesters and rash bavin wits, 
Soon kindled and soon burnt.' 
40-55. This splendid passage is given in England's Parnassus, a collec- 
tion of poetical extracts from various authors, printed in 1600. It is there 
by mistake attributed to Michael Drayton. 

44. infection. England's Parnassus gives 'intestion:' Farmer suggested 
' infestion.' In Daniel's Civil Wars, published 1595, is a similar thought: 
' Neptune keepe out from thy imbraced He 
This foule contagion of iniquitie.' Bk. iv. st. 90. 

47. in the office. Compare Taming of the Shrew, iv. I. 34 : 

' Being slow in thy hot office.' 

48. ' Moated granges' were very common in England in Shakespeare's 
time. Many examples still remain, as Oxburgh in Norfolk, Helmingham in 
Suffolk. 

49. envy, malice. Used in a much stronger sense than at present. Compare 
Merchant of Venice, iv. i. 126: 'The keenness Of thy sharp envy.' The 
adjective 'envious' occurs below, 1. 62. Compare Merchant of Venice, iii. 
2. 284. 

Ih. less happier. The double comparative with ' more' is common 
enough ; this is the only instance in Shakespeare with ' less.' See Merchant 
of Venice, iv. i. 251 : 

' How much more elder art thou than thj looks ! ' 



J02 NOTES. [act II. 

55. Jewry, Judsea. See St. John vii. i : ' He would not walk in Jewry, 
because the Jews sought to kill him.' 

59. See note on i. 4. 45. 

60. pelting, peddling, paltry. See Midsummer Night's Dream, ii. I. 91 : 

' Have every pelting river made so proud.' 

64. A contemptuous allusion on the part of the dying warrior to the blank 
charters mentioned in i. 4. 48, and to the leases by which the revenue of the 
country was farmed out, i. 4. 45, and ii. I. 59. 

68. ensuing, approaching. See Much Ado About Nothing, ill. 2. 102 : 
' Hath holp to effect your ensuing marriage.' See also Pericles, ii. I. 7. 

lb. The Queen, Isabel of France, was at this time not yet ten years old. 
Shakespeare was either ignorant of, or indifferent to, this fact. Richard's first 
wife, Anne of Bohemia, died at Shene, on Whitsunday, June 7, 1394. He 
married Isabel at Calais, Nov. I, 1396. She was crowned Jan. 7, 1397. 

lb. Bushy. Sir John Bushy, Speaker of the House of Commons in 1394. 

lb. Bagot. Sir William Bagot, Sheriff' of Leicestershire, 6 and 7 Richard 
II : died 1407. 

lb. Green. Sir Henry Green of Drayton, son of Sir Henry Green, Justice 
of the King's Bench in the reign of Edward III. 

lb. Ross. The name is variously spelt ' Ross,' ' Rosse,' ' Roos,' &c. The 
person in question was William de Ros, who succeeded his brother as seventh 
Lord Ross of Hamlake, in 1394. He was made Lord Treasurer under 
Henry IV, and died I414. 

lb. Willoughby. William, fifth Lord Willoughby d'Eresby, made K.G. 
by Richard; married the Duchess of York, and died 1409. 

70. being raged. The text is probably corrupt; admitting that 'rage' 
can be used actively, the sense thus given is poor in itself and not suitable to 
the context. Various conjectures have been made, as e. g. ' being rein'd,' 
' being chafed,' ' being urged,' ' being curb'd.' 

73-93. These lines were put in the margin by Pope as being either spurious 
or unworthy of their author. But such playing upon words in a time of the 
deepest affliction is quite in accordance with truth and nature, and therefore 
really pathetic. Shakespeare avails himself of it abundantly, perhaps too 
much. Ajax, in Sophocles' drama, plays upon his name in a well-known 
passage. Compare the sad jest in Merchant of Venice, iv. I. 281. Falstaff" 
makes a merry jest on ' Gaunt' in 2 Henry IV. iii. 2. 349. 

73. composition, state of body. 

80. John of Gaunt was thrice married, and had several other children 
besides the banished Bolingbroke, but this is of course ignored by the poet. 

83. inherits, possesses, contains. See Cymbeline, iii. 2. 63 : 

' Tell me how Wales was made so happy as 
To inherit such a haven.' 

84. nicely, fancifully. It is given by Cotgrave as one of the equivalents 
to mignotement. Can a sick man trifle thus ? Compare Richard III. iii. 7. 175: 

' But the respects thereof are nice and trivial,' 
and 2 Henry IV. iv. i. 191 : 

' Every idle, nice and wanton reason.' 
86. to Mil my name in me, by banishing my sou, to leave me without au 
inheritor of mv name. 



sc. i] RICHARD IT. IO3 

88. flatter with. The folio omits ' with.' But see Two Gentlemen of 
Verona, iv. 4. 193 : 

' Unless I flatter with myself too much.' 
95, 103. lesser. See iii. 3. 137. This double comparative is frequent. 
See Macbeth, i. 3. 65 : 

' Lesser than Macbeth and greater.' 

102. verge, the compass about the king's court, which extended for twelve 
miles round. 

103. The waste made by the thousand flatterers. Pope read ' Thy waste.' 
'Waste' is a law term for destruction of houses, wood, or other produce of 
land, done by the tenant to the prejudice of the freehold. 

108. which art possessed, seized with a mad impulse. 

114. Your legal status is now subject to law, being now only landlord, 
instead of king ' in all causes supreme.' 

119. his. Used for the neuter as well as masculine possessive pronoun. 
' Its' was coming into use in Shakespeare's time. 

122. roundly, without check, without reserve. ' Round' is applied to unin- 
terrupted movement and unqualified speech. Both meanings combine here. 

1 29. See Taming of the Shrew, v. 2. Ill: 

' Now fair befal thee, good Petruchio.' 

133. The epithet 'crooked' doubtless suggested to the poet the sickle of 
Time. 

138. Love they to live, let them love to live. 

139. sullsns. Used as a substantive by Shakespeare only in this passage. 
Mr. Dyce quotes from Lyly's Sapho and Phao, sig. D 2, ed. 1591; 'Like 
you, Pandion, who being sick of the suUens, will seeke no friend.' 

145. The king chooses to misunderstand York's meaning, by taking 
* Harry Duke of Hereford' as nominative not accusative. 

148. Pope, in order to complete the line, substituted 'old Gaunt' for 
' he' — an unwarrantable change of the text. When a line is divided 
between two speakers the metre is frequently imperfect. A defect which 
the audience would certainly not find out may very well have escaped the 
notice of the author. Shakespeare intended his plays to be heard, not read. 

154. nijist be, i. e. must be spent. Monck Mason erroneously interpreted 
' our pilgrimage is yet to come.' 

156. rug-headed. ' Rug ' was rough coarse frieze, and also a cloak or 
coverlet made of it. Cotgrave interprets velu, ' hairie, shag, nappie,' and 
couvertnre velu'e, ' an Irish rug.' The fact that such rugs were manu- 
factured in Ireland suggested to Shakespeare the comparison here. 'Rug' 
is also applied to a rough-haired water-dog in Macbeth, iii. I. 94: 

' As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs, 
Shoughs, water-rugs and demi-wolves are clept 
All by the name of dogs.' 
Irish kerns are mentioned 2 Henry VI, iii. i. 367 : 

' Full often like a shag-hair'd crafty kern.' 
See also lines 310. 361 of the same scene, and Macbeth, i. 2. 13, when the 
'kerns' of the Western Isles are spoken of. The derivation of the word is 
doubtful, perhaps from cearn, ' man,' in old Gaelic and Irish (Webster). 

lb. Spenser, in his Viev of the State of Ireland, says, ' They have another 



104 ^ '^ T E S. [act II. 

custome from the Scythians, that is the wearing of mantles, and long glibbes, 
which is a thicke curled bush of haire, hanging dovvne over their eyes, and 
monstrously disguising them, which are both very bad and hurtful!.' Todd's 
ed. viii. p. 365. We may add that Spenser, p. 370, uses ' kerne' as plural : 
' The Irish hubub, which their kerne use at their first encounter.' Ware 
(Antiquities of Ireland, p. 31) says that the kerns were light-armed, having 
only darts, daggers, or knives, while the gallowglasses had helmet, coat of 
mail, long sword, and axe. 

158. But only. This somewhat redundant phrase was in frequent use, like 
similar combinations ' an if,' ' or ere,' &c. See Bacon's Advancement of 
Learning, ii. 23. § 21 : 'So that this variety of knowledge tendeth in con- 
clusion but only to this.' 

lb. Capell changed ' have' to 'has,' and was followed by almost all subse- 
quent editors. There is however no doubt that Shakespeare wrote 'have.' 
In such a case the verb almost invariably agrees with the last substantive, 
i. e. where the old text has not been tampered with, not only in Shakespeare 
but all his contemporaries. See Hamlet, i. 2. 38 : 
' More than the scope 

Of these delated articles allow.* 
See also Eicon's Advancement of Learning, ii. 8. § 5 : ' That the entry of 
doubts are as so many suckers or sponges to draw use of knowledge,' and 
Comedy of Errors, v. I. 71 : 

' The venom clamours of a jealous woman 

Poisons more deadlj' than a mad dog's tooth.' 
In this passage of our text the plural might be justified even after ' venom,' 
on the ground that the noun has, like ' vermin,' a plural meaning, ' venomous 
creatures.' The allusion is of course to the absence of snakes, &c. in Ireland, 
which, according to tradition, St. Patrick expelled. 

159. for, because. Compare i. 3. 125, and Othello, iii. 3. 263, 265. 

lb. ask, require. See Bacon's Essays, vi. p. 18: 'For it asketh a strong 
wit, and a strong heart, to know, when to tell truth, and to doe it.' 
lb. charge, expense. Compare All's Well that P^nds Weil, ii. 3. 121 : 
' She had her breeding at my father's charge.' 

160. This is from Holinshed, p. 1 102, col. I : 'The death of this duke 
gaue occasion of encreasing more hatred in the people of this realm towarde 
the king, for he seased into his handes all the goods that belonged to hym, 
and also receyued all the rents and reuenues of his landes.' 

167. Holinshed, p. iioi, col. 2, says, speaking of Bolingbroke, ' At his 
comming into Fraunce K. Charles hearyng the cause of hys banishement 
(whiche he esteemed to bee verye light) receiued hym gently, and him honor- 
ably interteined, in so much that he had by fauor obteyned in mariage the 
only daughter of y^ duke of Berry, vncle to the frenche K. if King Richard 
had not bin a let in that matter, who being thereof certified, sent the earle 
of Salisbury with all speede into France, both to surmise by vntrue suggestion, 
hainous offences against him, and also to require the frenche King that in no 
vi'ise hee woulde sutler his cousin to bee matched in mariage with him that was 
so manifest an offendor.' Bolingbroke had first married IVlary de Bohun, who 
died in I3q4. 

168. The Duke of York 'had borne things with so pacient a mind as he 



SCI.] RICHARD II. 105 

could, though the san>e touched him very neare, as the death of his brother the 
Duke of Gloucester, the banishment of hys nephewe the said duke of Hereford, 
and other mo iniuries in greate number.' Holinshed, p. IJ02, col. 2. 

173. was never lion [which] raged. The relative is thus frequently 
omitted. See iv. 1. 256, and Merchant of Venice, i. I. 175 : 
' I have a mind presages me such thrift.' 

177. Richard was at this time thirty-two years old. His father was 
sixteen when he fought at Crecy (1346) and twenty-six at Poitiers (1356). 
Accomplish' d means ' fully equipped, furnished,' and is appropriately said of 
a person in the prime of life. The use of the word in this passage is perhaps 
suggested by its frequent occurrence with nouns of time. For the former 
sense see Henry V. iv. Chorus 12. 

' The armourers accomplishing the knights.' 

185. co7)ipare between. Hanmer put a dash after 'between,' as if the 
sentence were interrupted. But this is unnecessary, as it is obvious from 
what has been said who are the two persons com.pared. 

187, 18S. Pope put these lines in the margin. He held these verbal 
conceits to be unworthy of Shakespeare 

189. gripe into. So I Henry IV. v. i. 57: 

' To gripe the general sway into your hand.' 

190. 'Royalties' and 'rights' are found together, ii. 3. 120, and in King 
John, ii. I. 176 ; in the first referring to Bolingbroke, in the second to Arthur. 
' Royalties' seems to be used by Shakespeare in the sense of the possessions 
and privileges appertaining to a member of the royal family. 

197. enme is rarely used as a transitive verb. In the text 'Let him seek 
peace and ensue it,' I Peter iii. II, 'ensue' means 'follow rp' (Situ^dTO)). 
Here it means simply ' follow,' ' succeed to.' 

200. In this passage the folio has left the word ' God' unaltered. 

202. See the passage from Holinshed given in the Preface, which Shake- 
speare has copied very closely. 

lb. letters patents. The double plural is found in Holinshed, and is 
natural in a phrase derived from Norman French. Compare ii. 3. 130. 

203. ^Attorney is either general or special. "Attorney general" is he that 
by general authority is appointed to act in all our affairs or suits.' Cowel, 
Law Interpreter. 

204. On the decease of every man holding lands under feudal tenure, the 
lands lapsed to the suzerain, and were restored on the next heir proving in 
open court that he was of full age and entitled to have them delivered up to 
him. This was called ' suing his livery.' 

lb. deny, refuse. See Macbeth, iii. 4. 128. 

207. prich, spur. The word occurs again, ii. 3. 78. 

213. by bad courses, with reference to bad courses. See Merchant of 
Venice, i. 2. 58 : 'How say you by the French lord?' 

215. the Earl of Wiltshire. Sir William Scrope, created Earl of Wiltshire 
September 29, 1397. He was beheaded in 1399 and his honours forfeited. 

217. see this bjisiness. Rowe read ' see this business done,' thus mending, 
as he thought, both sense and metre. But 'sec' is used for 'examine,' 
•look to,' and 'business' must be pronounced as a trisyllable, as in Julius 
CiEsar, iv. I. 22 : 'To groan and sweat under the business.* 



Io6 NOTES. [act II. 

217. To-morrow next, a pleonasm not used elsewhere by Shakespeare. 

218 sqq. 'The king departed towarde Bristow, from thence to passe into 
Irelande, leaning the Queene with hir traine still at Windsor : He appointed 
for hys lieftenaunt generall in hys absence hys vncle the Duke of Yorke.' 
Holinshed, p. II03, col. I. The Duke is called ' gouernour of the realme' 
in p. 1 106, col. I. 

228. great, pregnant. 

239. In him must be construed with 'wrongs,' not with 'borne.' 

lb. moe. Altered to ' more' by Rowe, as frequently in other places. See 
Merchant of Venice, i. I. 108. 

242. what they will inform, whatever informations they may lay. ' In- 
form ' is used transitively, but not, as here, in a legal sense, in Coriolanus, i. 
6. 42, ' He did inform the truth.' 

246. pill'd, i.e. peeled, stripped, plundered. See Timon of Athens, iv. I. 12: 

' Large-handed robbers your grave masters are, 
And pill by law.' 
' Pillage,' originally a substantive, has superseded the simple verb. Cot- 
grave, French Dictionary, has, 'Filler; to pill, rauage, ransacke, rifle, 
rob." 

247. The defective metre of this line, together with the repetition of the 
words ' and quite lost their hearts,' lead us to conclude that there is some 
corruption of the text. Pope omitted ' quite.' Sidney Walker proposed 
to strike out the words ' and quite lost their hearts' from 1. 248, reading the 
rest thus : 

' The commons hath he pill'd 
With grievous taxes, and quite lost their hearts ; 
The nobles hath he fined for ancient quarrels.' 
But this seems a lame ending. Probably the transcriber by mistake put the 
ending of line 248 into the commencement of line 247, in place of some- 
thing quite different in the original MS. The passage of Holinshed, the 
authority which Shakespeare followed, is in p. 1 102, col. 2. There 'the 
nobles, gentlemen, and commons' are spoken of as oppressed by the king's 
exactions. Perhaps, therefore, Shakespeare wrote for line 247 : 
' The gentlemen and nobles hath he fined.' 

248. For ancient quarrels. Holinshed savs : ' That they had aided y" 
duke of Gloucester, the eries of Arundel and Warwick, when thei rose in 
armor against him ;' p. 1102, col. 2. 

250. blanks, blank charters. See note i. 4. 48, especially the second 
passage from Holinshed there quoted. 

lb. benevolences. According to Holinshed, p. 1346, col. i, the word was 
first used in this sense by Edward IV. in the year 1473. 'notwithstanding 
that many with grudge gare great summcs toward that newe found ayde, 
which of them might bee called a Malevolence.' If this be true, Shakespeare 
commits an anachronism in using the word in Richard the Second's time. 
These repeated ' benevolences,' in reality forced loans, were very oppressive 
to Edward the Fourth's subjects, and were abolished by Richard III, but 
resumed by Henry VII, and continued by subsequent sovereigns. This was 
one of the grievances alleged in the Petition of Right in the third year 
of Charles I. 



»c. I.] RICHARD II. 107 

250. Pope, for the sake of the metre, omitted ' and.' Sidney Walker 
supposes, probably rightly, that ' benevolences ' was pronounced ' benevolence,' 
as ' balance ' is used for the plural. 

76. I wot. The word is used in Genesis xxi. 26 : ' I wot not who hath 
done this thing.' Compare Acts iii. 7. 

251. 0' God's name. So the folios. The quartos have 'a God's name.' 
So also in iii. 3. 146. Perhaps ' a ' is a corruption of i' ' for ' in.' The 
corrector of the folio has forgotten to alter ' God ' to ' Heaven,' as he ought 
to have done, in compliance with the Act of Parliament 3 James I. c. 24 : 
' To restrain the abuses of Players.' See note on i. i. 187. 

253. The allusion here is to the treaty which Richard made with 
Charles VI. of France, in the year 1 393, and renewed in 1396 upon the mar- 
riage of Richard and Isabel. 

254. The folios omit ' noble,' doubtless for the sake of the metre. But 
Alexandrines occur too frequentl}' in this play to allow of the supposition 
that they are due to transcribers' or printers' errors. The folios make no 
change in line 258. See also ii. 2. 25, and ii. 2. 29. 

258. For ' hangeth over ' Hanmer reads ' hang o'er.' Of course he would 
pronounce ' dissolution ' as five syllables. The singular verb frequently occurs 
with a double nominative. See ii. 2. 113, 115. The singular verb is also found 
with a plural nominative, or even with several plurals as in ii. 3. 5. 

263. Compare Merry Wives of Windsor, iii. 2. 38 : 'A man may hear 
this shower sing in the wind.' And Tempest, ii. 2. 20: 'Another storm 
brewing; I hear it sing i' the wind.' 

265. sore, heavily. The wind is said to ' sit,' as pressing with steady 
weight. Compare Hamlet, i. 3. 56 : 

' The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail.' 
The expression would not be used of a light or variable wind. 

266. strike. Compare 3 Henry VI. v. i. 52 : 

' Than bear so low a sail, to strike to thee.' 
lb. securely, used in the sense of the Latin secure. See Proverbs iii. 29 : 
' Devise not evil against thy neighbour, seeing he dwelleth securely by thee.* 
' Secure ' is used in this sense v. 3. 43, where see note. 

268. Pope changed ' unavoided is ' to ' unavoidable.' But ' unavoided " is 
here used in the sense of ' unavoidable.' The word occurs three times 
elsewhere in Shakespeare, always in this sense. Compare I Henry VI. 
iv.s.8: 

' A terrible and unavoided danger.' 
See also Richard III. iv. i. 56, and iv. 4. 217. So 'unvalued' for 'in- 
valuable,' Richard III. i.4. 27 : 

' Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels.* 
And ' undistinguished ' for ' undistinguishable,' King Lear, iv. 6. 278 : 

'O undistinguish'd space of woman's will 1' 
Compare also ii. 3. 95 of this play. 

272. tidings. Used like 'news' in the singular. See iii. 4. So. So 
Richard III. iv. 3. 22 : 

' To bring this tidings to the bloody king.' 
Shakespeare generally makes the word plural, as Julius Cgesar, v. 3. 54 : 

' These' tidings will well comfort Cassius." 



1 c8 NOTES. [act II. 

277. Port le Blanc. The first folio has 'Port le B]an,* and the quartos 
' le Port Blan.' Holinshed has ' le Porte Blanc,' p. 1 105, col. I, and he copied 
from ' Les grades croniques de Bretaigne' (Paris, 1514). Le Port Blanc is a 
small port in the department of Cotes du Nord, near Treguier, 

2 78. Brittany. The first quarto has ' Brittaine,' the second and third 
' Brittanie,' the rest 'Brittaine' or 'Britain.' Bacon, in his History of 
Henry VII, calls the French Bretagne ' Britaine,' and in his Advance- 
ment of Learning he calls our island ' Brittanie.' Holinshed, here and 
elsewhere, has ' Britaine ' or ' Britaigne.' In line 285 it is ' Britaine ' in the 
old copies. 

280. It is evident that there is a corruption in the text here, for, according 
to Holinshed, p. 1102, col. 2, it was not Lord Cobham, but Richard, son and 
heir of the late Earl of Arundel, who escaped from the Duke of Exeter's 
house. Malone introduced between brackets this line : 

' The son of Richard Earl of Arundel.' 
It is necessary to make mention of Richard, Earl of Arundel, in order to 
make ' His brother,' in line 282, historically accurate. In Holinshed, Lord 
Cobham is here called ' Reginalde,' of which Rainold is another form. He 
is called also ' Reignolde ' in a previous passage, p. 1098, col. I. 

281. John Holland, son of Thomas, first Earl of Kent, by Joan Plan- 
tagenet, was first created Earl of Huntingdon, and then Duke of Exeter in 
1397. See note on v. 3. 137. 

2S2. Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury, was banished in 1398, and 
Roger Walden made Archbishop in his stead. Holinshed, p. 1095, col. 2. 
He was brother to Richard, Earl of Arundel, who was executed on Tower 
Hill, 1397. The family name was Fitzalan. 

284. Holinshed says, p. II 05, col. I : ' There were also with hym, 
Reginalde Lord Cobham, Sir Thomas Erpinghani, and Sir Thomas Ramston 
knightes, John Norbury, Roberte Waterton, and Frauncis Coint esquiers : few 
else were there : for (as some write) he had not past a .xv. launccs, as they 
tearmed them in those dayes, that is to wit, men of armes, furnished and 
appointed as the vse then was : yet other write, that the duke of Britaigne 
deliuered vnto hym three thousand men of warre, to attende hym, and that 
he had .viii. ships well furnished for the warre. wher Froissart yet speaketh 
but of three.' It will be observed that where Holinshed speaks of Sir Thomas 
Ramston, the text of Shakespeare, line 28;;, has Sir John. The line would 
be improved metrically by reading 'Thomas.' For 'Quoint,' which the 
folios have, the quartos read ' Coines.' 

286. tall is an epithet frequently applied to ships. See Merchant of 
Venice, iii. I. 6, Othello, ii. I. 79, and Massinger, Roman Actor, v. I, 'En- 
dangering tall ships.' 

lb. men of war. This phrase, meaning soldiers of all sorts, is, as wc have 
seen, used by Holinshed. It is found also in St. Luke xxiii. 1 1 : 'Herod 
with his men of war,' where the original is: <5 "HpcuSiys trw roTs arpaTci- 
fiaatv ai/Tov. 

287. expedience, expedition. Compare Henry V. iv. 3. 70: 

' The French are bravely in their battles set. 
And will with all expedience charge on us.' 
We have had ' expedient," in the sense of ' expeditious,' i. 4. 39. 



sc. 2.] RICHARD IT. I09 

■289. stay, wait for, await. So Taming of the Shrew, iv. 3. 59 : 

' The tailor stays thy leisure.' 
392. Imp, from A. S. impmi, to graft, is technically used of supplying new 
feathers in place of broken ones in a falcon's wing. See Massinger, Renegade, 
V. 8: 

' Strive to imp 
New feathers to the broken wings of time.' 
Almost the same words recur in the Roman Actor, v. 2, and Great Duke of 
Florence, i. I. 

293. brokmg pawn, pawn in the hands of brokers. The word 'broker' 
was always used in a bad sense, equivalent to the French fripier and 
niaqiiignon. The verb 'to broke' is rare; the participle 'broking' still 
rarer. The third and fourth quartos by mistake have ' broken.' The first 
article of accusation against Richard was that he ' wastfully spente the 
treasure of the realme.' Holinshed, p. nil, col. I. 

294. gilt, spelt ' guilt' in the quartos. Of course no pun is intended here, 
though Shakespeare has made it frequently elsewhere. The use of the word 
' gilt ' in this place, meaning not superficial but solid costliness, tends to 
justify the old re?ding in Troilus and Cressida, iii. 3. 179 : 

' And give to dust that is a little gilt 
More laud than gilt o'er-dusted,' 
where in the second line a plausible suggestion has been made, 'gold' for 'gilt.' 

296. in post. The third and fourth folios read ' in haste.' Compare 
3 Henry VI. i. 2. 48 : ' Why comest thou in such post ?' 

lb. Ravenspnrgh. ' The Duke of Lancaster . . . landed aboute the bc- 

S'nning of July in Yorkshire, at a place somtime called Rauenspurre, betwixte 
ulle and Bridlington .... Fyrst that came to hym, were the Lords of 
Lincolneshire, and other Countreys adioyning, as the Lordes Willoughby, Ros, 
Darcy, and Beaumont.' Holinshed, p. 1 105, col. 2. Ravenspurgh, otherwise 
Ravenspurn, or Ravenser, near Spurn Head, was, in the time of Edward \, 
the most considerable port on the Humber. In the middle of the fourteenth 
century the sea did it great mischief. Its merchants afterwards removed to 
Hull. It is last mentioned by Leiand in 1538, and Walsingham implies that 
it no longer existed even in his time. 

297. faint, are faint-hearted, want confidence. So St. Luke xviii. I : ' Men 
ought always to pray and not to faint' (/u-^ iKKaKuv). Bacon's Essays, xvi. 
p. 65 : ' Atheists will ever be talking of that their opinion, as if they fainted 
in it, within themselves.' Compare ii. 2. ^2, and 3 Henry VI. i. 4. 48. 

298. he secret. Compare Two Gentlemen of Verona, iii. I. 60 : ' Wherein 
thou must be secret,' and Julius Caesar, ii. i. 125, 'secret Romans.' 

300. Hold out my borse, if my horse hold out. 

Scene II. 
Windsor Castle. The places where the respective «cenes take place are 
never mentioned in the quartos or folios. Pope here gave ' The Court 
of England,' recent editors ' The Palace.' We have given Windsor Castle, as 
it appears from Holinshed that Richard left his Queen at Windsor when he 
went to Ireland. See note, ii. i. 2i8. Windsor was probably chosen for 
greater security. 



no NOTES. [act u. 

^. life-harming. So the two first quartos. The third and fourth have 
' halfe-harming,' the folios ' selfe-harming.' 

4. entertain. See Merchant of Venice, i. i. 90: 
' And do a wilful stillness entertain.' 
lb. disposition, mood : used here of a temporary frame of mind. Com- 
pare Lear, i. 4. 241 : 

' Put away 
These dispositions, that of late transform you 
From what you rightly are.' 
See also Hamlet, i. 5. 172 : 

' To put an antic disposition on.' 
The word is also used by Shakespeare in the modern sense of permanent 
character. 

10. ripe, mature, ready for birth. Compare the use of the word in 
Merchant of Venice, i. 3. 64, ' the ripe wants of my friend.' 

12. The Queen's melancholy, for which there is no sufficient cause appar- 
ent, may be compared with that of Antonio at the beginning of the Mer- 
chant of Venice. In both cases the poet wishes to convey a presentiment 
of approaching disaster. 

15. which ihows, i.e. each of which shows. Pope changed 'shows' and 
' is ' to ' show ' and ' are.' 

18. perspectives. 'At the right Honorable the Lord Gerards at Gerards 
Bromley, there are the pictures of Henry the great of France and his Queen, 
both upon the same indented board, which if beheld directly, you only per- 
ceive a confused piece of work ; but if obliquely, of one side you see the 
king's and on the other the queen's picture.' Plot's Natural History of 
Staffordshire, quoted by Staunton. Compare Twelfth Night, v. I. 224 : 
' One face, one voice, one habit, and two persons, 
A natural perspective, that is and is not !* 
Steevens proposed to change the places of 'rightly' and 'awry' and substitute 
'wryly' and 'aright.* In support of this he quotes the following verses of 
Ben Jonson : 

' Looke here on Breton's work, the master print, 
Where such perfections to the life doe rise : 
If they seeme wry, to such as looke asquint. 
The fault's not in the object, but their eyes. 

For, as one comming with a laterall viewe 
Unto a cunning piece-wrought perspective, 

Wants facultie to make a censure true : 

So with this author's readers will it thrive : 

Which, being eyed directly, I divine 
His proofe their praise will meete, as in this line.' 
But Jonson maintains that Breton's work is not like a perspective, but like a 
true picture ; and the passage illustrates Shakespeare's meaning without 
throwing any doubt on the text. Compare also Henrj' V. v. 2. 447: ' Yes, my 
lord, you see them perspectively, the cities turned into a maid.' The word 
' perspective' is applied to a picture of this kind as being distorted according 
to the rules of perspective. It is elsewhere applied to a glass which might 



sc. 2.] RICHARD II. Ill 

be so shaped as to produce optical illusion. Compare All's Well that Ends 
Well, V. 3. 48 : 

' Contempt his scornful perspective did lend me, 

Which warp'd the line of every other favour.' 

It means ' telescope ' in Beaumont and Fletcher's Lover's Progress, iii. 6 : 

' Lies hide our sins like nets : like perspectives, 

They draw offences nearer still and greater.' 

Bacon, Essay xxvi. p. 104, used 'prospective' in the sense of stereoscope: 

' Prospectives, to make superficies to seeme body, that hath depth and bulke.' 

Henley takes ' perspective,' in the present passage, to mean the glass and not 

the picture, but in that case the poet would hardly have said ' gazed upon.' 

Hobbes, in his letter to Davenant, prefixed to the latter's Gondibert, p. 87. 

cd. 1651, says: 'I beleeve (Sir) you have seen a curious kinde oi perspective, 

where he that looks through a short hollow pipe, upon a picture containing 

divers figures, sees none of those that are there painted, but some one person 

made up of their parts, conveyed to the eie by the artificial cutting of a 

glass." 

20. Distinguish form, exhibit distinct form. 

22. Find. Pope altered this unnecessarily to 'Finds.' 

25. An Alexandrine. See note on ii. I. 254. 

31, 32. This elaborate conceit was so displeasing to Pope that he put the 
lines in the margin. Capell altered ' on thinking' to ' in thinking,' and so 
most editors read. The meaning is the same. We must take ' though .... 
think' as a parenthesis, and construe ' so heavy sad as makes me,' &c. The 
first quarto reads ' As thought,' which cannot be right, unless indeed we 
make a further alteration and read ' As thought, though thinking.' This 
would supply a nominative to ' makes,' though its absence is quite consistent 
with Shakespeare's ordinary grammar. 

33. conceit, fancy. Sometimes the word means 'an idea,' 'a concep- 
tion,' but Shakespeare never uses it in the modern sense. See note on iii. 
2. i66. 

34. 'Tis nothing less, it is anything but fancy. Compare Bacon, Ad- 
vancement of Learning, ii. i. § 3 : 'The use of this work, honoured with 
a precedent in Aristotle, is nothing less than to give contentment to the 
appetite of curious and vain wits.' So rien moins is used in French. 

Ih. still, constantly, as in Merchant of Venice, i. i. 17. 
36-38. The sense of this passage, which is rendered obscure by the 
involved play upon words, appears to be this : my grief is either real and yet 
has no origin, or it is only mine in reversion, being still as it were in the 
possession of something which keeps it from manifesting itself. 
46. retired, withdrawn. Used transitively, as in Lucrece, 303 : 
' Each one by him enforced retires his ward.' 
It not unfrequently occurs as a reflexive verb, as in Tempest, v. I. 310: 
' And thence retire me to my Milan.' 

49. repeals, recals. Compare iv. I. 87: 

' These differences shall all rest under gage 
Till Norfolk be repeal'd.' 

50. vplifted arms, taken up or raised in his defence. There is at Hedon 



112 NOTES. [act II. 

in Yorkshire a cross which is said to have been originally erected at Kilnsea 
near Ravenspurgh, to commemorate Bolingbroke's landing, which took place 
on or about the feast of the Translation of St. Martin, July 4, 1399. So 
Walsingham, Capgrave, Holinshed. 

52. that is worse, that which is worse, or, what is worse. 

53. bis son young Henry Percy. The reading of the first quarto. The 
others have ' his young son Henry Percy.' According to Holinshed, p. 1 105, 
col. 2, the Earl of Northumberland and his son met Bolingbroke at Don- 
caster. 

57. all the rest. The reading of the first quarto. The other old editions 
have ' the rest of the,' or, ' the rest of that.' Two of the quartos read 
' revolting' for ' revolted.' 

58. ' Sir Thomas Percye Earle of Worceter, Lord Steward of the kyngs 
house, either being so commaunded by the King, or else vpon displeasure (as 
some write) for that the King had proclaymed his brother the Earle of North- 
umberlande Traytor, brake his whyte staffe, which is the representing signe 
and token of his office, and without delay wente to Duke Henry. When the 
Kvngs seruauntes of housholde sawe this (for it was done before them all) 
they dispersed themselues, some into one Countrey, and some into an other.' 
Holinshed, p. 1108, col. I. 

59. broke. See note on iii. I. 13. 

60. yied, i.e.' are fled' or ' have fled.' 

62. The Queen continues the train of thought indicated in lines 10 
and 36. 

63. heir, offspring, not the inheritor. So Shakespeare uses the word in 
the dedication of Venus and Adonis: ' But if the first heir of my invention 
prove deformed, I shall be sorry it had so noble a god-father.' 

64. prodigy, a monstrous birth, or a birth heralded by supernatural signs. 
See 3 Henry VI. i. 4. 75 : 

' And where 's that valiant crook-back prodigy?' 
So also 'prodigious,' Richard HI. i. 2. 22. 

71. dissolve, loosen. So Merry Wives of Windsor, v. 5. 237 : 

' The truth is, she and I, long since contracted. 
Are now so sure that nothing can dissolve us.' 

72. lingers, causes to linger. So Midsummer Night's Dream, i. i. 4: 
' She lingers my desires.* 

74. With his mail gorget on. 

75. care/ul, anxious. Compare Richard III. i. 3. S3: 

' By Him that raised me to this careful height.' 
90. See note on i. 2. 66. The death of the Duchess of Gloucester is not 
mentioned by Holinshed till some time after these events. After speaking of 
the death of Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, in 1 399, he says, 'The 
same yeare deceassed the duches of Gloccster, through sorrow as was 
thought, which she conceyued for the losse of hir sonne and hey re the Lorde 
Humfrey, who being sent for forth of Ireland (as before ye haue heard) was 
taken with the pestilence, and died by the way.' (p. 1 125, col. 2.) 

loi. So my untruth, &c. Provided no treason of mine had provoked 
him to it. 



sc. 2.] RICHARD II. 113 

102. 7ny brother's, i. e. Gloucester's. 

103. no is misprinted 'two' in the second, third, and fourth quartos, and 
omitted in the folios. To make the metre smooth we might either omit 
'there,' or place 'what' as an exclamation in a line by itself, as 'Well' and 
'No' in lines 135 and 141, reading ' Ireland' as a trisyllable. 

lOg-iil. The metre of these lines is very irregular, and various attempts 
have been made to correct it. Of these we have adopted Steevens's emend- 
ation 'thrust disorderly' for 'disorderly thrust.' Perhaps the rest of the 
speech, as far as line 1 20 inclusive, might be printed as prose. 

113, 115. bids. See note on ii. I. 258. 

122. At si.x and seven, in confusion. Compare Bacon, Considerations 
touching a War with Spain (Works, v. 279, ed. Montagu): 'Thirdly, in 
88, there sate in the see of Rome a fierce thundering friar, that would set 
all at six and seven ; or at six and five, if you allude to his name' — referring 
to Pope Sixtus the Fifth. 

123. sits. See note on ii. I. ■265. 

lb. for Ireland. So the early quartos. The folios read ' to go to Ireland.' 

126. iinpofsible. So the earlier quartos. The folios have 'impossible.' 
So 'uncapable' is used for 'incapable.' We have also ' unreverent,' ii. I. 
123. See note on Merchant of Venice, iv. i. 5. 

128. those love not, i.e. those who love not. Compare ii. I. 173. 

133. so do we, i. e. stand condemned. 

142. presages, as a noun, only occurs in two other metrical passages in 
Shakespeare, and then with the accent on the first syllable. Compare King 
John, i. I. 28 : 

' And sullen presage of your own decay.' 
And again King John, iii. 4. 158 : 

' Abortives, presages, and tongues of heaven.' 

149. I fear me, used frequently as a reflexive verb. Compare Two 
Gentlemen of Verona, ii. 'J. 67 : 

' I fear me, he will scarce be pleased withal.' 

Scene III. 

5. Drazi's . . . mahes. Rcwe altered these words to 'draw' and 'make,' 
in compliance with modem rules of grammar. Though there can be no 
doubt that many inaccuracies found in the oldest editions of Shakespeare 
are due to the transcriber or printer, yet this particular inaccuracy, if such it 
be, occurs so frequently that it must be attributed to the author himself. It 
is in fact a construction which the Greeks called a axfjijui irpos to arjfiai- 
v6ixivov. These wild hills and rough w.iys blend, as it were, into one idea 
in the speaker's mind, and he proceeds as if he had said ' journeying over 
these hills and ways,' &c. Compare note on ii. I. 258. 

7. delectable. In words ending in 'able' of more than three syllables, the 
principal accent frequently falls upon the last syllable but three. So in King 
John, iii. 4. 29 : 

' And I will kiss thy detestable bones,' 
and Coriolanus, iv. 7. 5 1 : 

' And power unto itself most commendable.' 
I 



] 1 4 NOTES. [act II. 

Compare Hamlet, i. 2. 87. But Shakespeare uses ' ccmmendable' also with 
the principal accent on the antepenultimate as in Merchant of Venice, i. I. 
III. 'Detestable' is always accented as in the passage from King John. 
'Delectable' only occurs in prose passages elsewhere. 

g. Cotiwold, famous for its coursing meetings in Shakespeare's time ; 
Merry Wives of Windsor, i. I. 92. The word is spelt Cotshall in the 
quartos, Cotshold in the folios. 'Will Squele a Cotswold man' is men- 
tioned, 2 Henry IV. iii. 2. 18, where the quartos spell the word ' Cotsole,' 
the folios ' Cotsal.' 

10. According to Holiushed, Ross and Willoughby accompanied Boling- 
broke to Berkeley. 

12. process, long course. Compare Henry VIH. ii. 4. 38 : 
' In the course 
And process of this time.' 
The word seems always to be used as connoting ' tediousness' and ' weari- 
ness,' an idea perhaps suggested by its legal signification, for which see 
Love's Labour's Lost, v. 2. 753- 

' That which long procets could not arbitrate.' 

15. to joy. This verb is again used intransitively, v. 3. 95 ; transitively, 
V. 6. 26. See the note on the latter passage. 

20. This and the following lines are metrically irregular. Shakespeare's 
language often hovers uncertainly between prose and verse. 

27. See ii. 2. 58. ■ 

29. Steevens considered ' together' as an interpolation. But, as we have 
seen, the metrical redundancies and deficiencies of this play are so conmion, 
that we are not justified in altering the text to mend the line. 

30. ' For that the King had proclaymed his brother the Earle of Northum- 
berlande Traytor.' Holinshed, p. 1 108, col. I. 

33. over. Pope read ' o'er,' for the metre. 

42. tender. This word is used carelessly, the author forgetting that he 
had used ' tender' the verb in the previous line. Even Shakespeare could 
scarcely have meant a pun here. There is however in Cymbelinc, iii. 4. 11, 
one of the same kind : 

' Why tcnder'st thou that paper to me with 
A look untender?' 

lb. raw, crude, unmatured. Compare Merchant of Venice, iii. 4- 77- ' ^^ 
thousand raw tricks.' 

Ih. Henry Percy, according to Collins (Peerage), was born in 1364. His 
father was married July 12, 1358. But Shakespeare, both in this passage 
and in i Hen. IV. i. i. 86-90, iii. 1. T03, 112, represents him as much 
younger, and of the same age as Prince Hal who was born about 1388. 

t;^. 'With the Duke of Yorke were the Byshope of Norwiche, the Lord 
Barkeley, the Lord Seymour, and other.' Holinshed, p. 1106, col. 1. 
Thomas, fifth Baron Berkeley, was summoned to parliament for the first 
time on the i6th of July, 1381, for the last on the 3rd of Sept. 1417. 

Ih. Seymour. Richard de St. Maur, fifth Baron of that surname, born 
1355, summoned to parliament from Aug. 26, 1380, to Oct. 3, 1400; 
died 1 40 1. 

61. unfelt, not accompanied by any palpable proofs, expressed only in words. 



sc. 3.] RICHARD II. 1 1 5 

6i. treasttry is the antecedent to ' which.' 

70. ' I only answer to the title of Lancaster.' Malone thinks the meaning 
is 'I answer that your message is not to Hereford but to Lancaster.' This 
seems farfetched. 

75. title. Capell proposed 'tittle.' Probably a play upon the words is 
intended. 

77. The first quarto alone gives the reading of the text ' gratious 
regent.' The second quarto omitted 'regent' and read 'the most ghorious 
of this land.' The later quartos and folios read ' the most glorious of 
this land.' Hanmer patched the verse by introducing ^ all this land' and 
it was not till Capell that any editor restored the true text. 

78. pricks. See li. I. 207. 

79. absent time is a very singular way of expressing the meaning which 
the context requires, ' the king's absence.' Theobald proposed to read 
'absent king,' a facile but not quite satisfactory emendation. He did not 
introduce it into his own text. We have something like a parallel to the 
passage as it stands in Othello, iii. 4. 174: 'Lovers' absent hours,' i.e. the 
liour of lovers' absence. So the 'absent time' is the time of absence, and 
the idea of 'king' is suggested by the preceding 'regent.' 

80. self-born, indigenous, home-sprung. The only other place in which 
Shakespeare uses this compound is Winter's Tale, iv. I. 8. The quartos 
and earlier folios all spell 'borne,' but the distinction between ' born' and 
'borne' is more modern. 'Self-born' (to adopt the present distinction) 
gives, we think, a better sense than ' self-borne;' though some editors, includ- 
ing Delius, prefer the latter. 'Self-born' is a pendant to ' native.' In all 
wars, civil or not, arms are ' self-borne.' 

81. Enter York, attended. According to Holinshed (p. 1 106, col. i) this 
interview took place in the church outside Berkeley Castle, on the Sunday 
after the feast of St. James, which that year fell on a Friday. It was 
therefore on 27th July, 1399. 

84. deceiveable, deceptive, treacherous. So in Twelfth Night, iv. 3. 21 : 
'There's something in't 
That is deceiveable.' 
87. grace me no grace, nor zincle me no uncle. Compare Romeo and 
Juliet, iii. 5. 153: 

' 7 hank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds.' 
The folios omit the words ' no uncle.' 

91. a dust, I. e. a particle of dust. See King John, iv. I. 93 : 

' A grain, a dust, a gnat, a wandering hair.' 

92. But then more '■why 7' But then I have more questions to ask. 
This is the reading of the first quarto. Other readings are 'more than why,' 
' more then why.' 

94. pale-faced villages. The epithet ' pale-faced ' is used proleptically- 
the paleness following upon the fright. 

95. despised arms, arms despicable because paraded in a bad cause and 
among an unresisting people. So below, 1. 109, 'detested' for 'detestable,' 
and ' unavoided ' for ' unavoidable ' in ii. I. 26S. It has been proposed to read 
' despightful,' ' disposed,' ' despited,' ' despoiling,' and ' displayed ;' but ' de- 
spised ' is required as antithetical to ' ostcnMtion.' Cp King John, v. 2. 13. 

I 2 



Il6 NOTES. [act II. 

99, &c. This passage bears considerable resemblance to the speech of 
Nestor in Horn. II. vii. 157, but, as Chapman's translation was not published 
till 1598, it is not probable that Shakespeare had seen it when he wrote 
this play. Hall's translation of Homer was, however, published in 1581. 

100. It does not appear that Shakespeare had any historical authority for 
this statement. No such incident is recorded of the battle of Navarrete, at 
which the Black Prince and John of Gaunt were present in 1367. John of 
Gaunt was not with the Prince at Poitiers in 1356, nor did the Prince 
accompany him in his expedition to France in 1372 ; and there is no mention 
of the Duke of York on any of these occasions. 

lo,'',. should, used where we should now employ ' would.' See Merchant 
of Venice, i. 2. lOO : ' You should refuse to perform your father's will, if you 
should refuse to accept him.' See also line 127 of the present scene, and 
note on iv. i. 232, 233. 

104. chastise, accented on the first syllable, as is always the case in 
Shakespeare, except perhaps in The Tempest, v. i. 263 : 

' I am afraid 
He will chastise me.' 

107. On what condition. Johnson proposed to read ' In what condition ' 
with a view to the next line. Shakespeare frequently uses ' condition ' with 
the preposition ' on ' or ' upon,' as indeed we do still. York, in his reply, 
repeats the word 'condition' in a different sense, the usual modern sense. 
Bolingbroke asks: ' What express compact or natural law have I broken?' 

109. detested, equivalent to 'detestable.' See ii. i. 268. 

112. in braving arms, in arms ostentatiously defiant. The same phrase 
recurs in line 143. Compare All's Well that Ends Well, i. 2. 3 : 'A braving 
war.' 

114. for Lancaster, in the character of Lancaster. Compare the stage- 
directions in Love's Labour's Lost, v. 2. 549, 564: 'Enter Costard, for 
Pompey,' 'Enter Sir Nathaniel, for Alexander.' 

n6. indifferent, impartial. See Henry VIII. ii. 4. 17: 'No judge in- 
different,' and ' indifferently minister justice ' in the Liturgy. 

I 20. rights and royalties. See ii. I. 190. 

122. unthrifts. See Timon of Athens, iv. 3. 31 r, and Merchant of Venice, 
v. I. 16, where the word occurs as an adjective. This is the only passage 
of Shakespeare in which it occurs as a substantive. 

127. should. See line 103. 

128. The metaphor here is from stag-hunting. Cotgrave, s. v. Abbots, 
says : ' A stag is sayd, " Rendre les abbois," when wearie of running he turnes 
vpon the hounds, and holds them at, or puts them to, a bay.' 

129. 130. Compare ii. i. 202-204, ^'^'^ ^^'^ notes. 
136. free, unimpeachable, direct. 

138. it stands your grace vpon, it is incumbent on your grace. See 
Richard III. iv. 2. 59 : 

' It stands me much upon, 
To stop all hopes whose growth may damage me.' 
I43, 146. in this kind, in this manner of proceeding. In Midsummer 
Night's Dream, i. I. 54, it means ' in this manner of looking at the question,' 
' from this point of view.' 



sc. 4-] RICHARD II. II7 

154. /// left, left by the king with an insufficient force. 
156. a!Uich, arrest. See 2 Henry IV. iv. 2. 109: 

' Of capital treason I attach you both.' 

159. Pope, for the metre's sake, read 'So, farewell.' 

160. in, for ' into.' See Richard III. i. 2. 261 : 

' But first I '11 turn yon fellow in his grave.' 

164. Bristol, written, as usual, ' Bristow ' in the old editions and in 
Holinshed. 

165. Bagot is not mentioned by Holinshed as one of those who took 
refuge at Bristol. He had previously gone to Chester, and thence went to 
join the king in Ireland, (p. 1 105, col. 2.) 

lb. co)7iplices, accompiices. See iii. 1.43. 

168. An Alexandrine. See ii. I. 254. 

171. Compare Love's Labour 's Lost, v. 2. 28 : ' Past cure is still past care.' 

Scene IV. 

Enter Salisbury. John Montacute, third Earl of Salisbury of that sur- 
name, son of Sir John de Montacute, one of the heroes of Crecy, succeeded 
his uncle, one of the original Knights of the Garter. He was beheaded by 
the townsmen of Cirencester in 1400. See v. 6. S. His son was restored 
to the forfeited honours of his house, and is the Earl of Salisbury introduced 
in Shakespeare's Henry V. 

I sqq. Holinshed says that 40,000 men assembled at Conway and stayed 
fourteen days, but dispersed on a false rumour of the king's death, 
(p. 1 107, col. I.) 

6. Pope changed ' confidence ' to ' trust,' in order to get rid of the 
Alexandrine. 

8. ' In this yeare in a manner throughout all the realme of England, old 
bale trees withered, and afterwards, contrarie to all mens thinking, grew 
greene againe, a strange sight, and supposed to import some vnknowne 
euent.' Holinshed, p. 496, col. 2, ed. 2. Suetonius mentions the withering of a 
grove of laurel at the imperial villa ' ad Gallinas,' seven miles from Rome, 
just before the death of Nero. 

12. ruffians. Florio translates the Italian roffiano 'a ruffin, a swagrcr, 
a swashbuckler.' 

14. to enjoy, i. e. in hope to enjoy. Capell, in order to complete the 
sense, proposed to read 'rape' for 'leap' in line 12, but this would spoil the 
antithesis to ' look sad.' 

15. signs. Shakespeare frequently mentions such signs as portending 
public calamities, especially the death of princes, or accompanying the birth 
of great men. See Hamlet, i. i. 113 sqq. ; Julius Caesar, i. 3. I sqq. ; King 
Lear, i. 2. 112 sqq. ; i Henry IV. iii. i. 13 sqq. ; and 3 Henry VI. v. 6. 44. 

lb. All the old editions, except the first quarto, omit ' or fall.' Hanmer 
completed the line by reading ' These boding signs.' 

22. Witnessing, giving token of. Compare Much Ado About Nothing, 
iv. 1.39: 

' Comes not that blood as modest evidence 
To witness simple virtue ?' 
24. crossly to thy good, thwarting thy prosperity. 



Il8 NOTES. [act ui. 

ACT IIL 

Scene I. 

' The morow after, the foresayd Dukes with their power, wente towardes 
Bristow, where at their comming, they shewed themselues before the towiie 
and Castell, beeing an huge multitude of people. There were enclosed within 
the Castell, the Lord Wil. Scrope Erie of Wilshire, and Treasorer of 
Englande, sir Henry Greene, and Sir John Busshy knightes, who prepared to 
make resistance, but when it would not preuayle, they were taken, and 
brought forth bound as prisoners into the Campe, before the Duke of 
Lancaster.' Holinshed, p. lio6, col. 2. They were tried and beheaded the 
next day. 

3. part your bodies, quit your bodies. 'Part' is not used elsewhere by 
Shakespeare in this sense as a transitive verb. 

4. vrging, laying stress upon, bringing forward. Compare Richard IIL 
iii. 5. 80 : 

' Moreover, urge his hateful luxury.' 

10. 7inhappied. This participle is not found in any other passage of our 
author. Compare ' undeaf,' ii. I. 16. 

lb. clean, quite, completely. Compare 2 Henry IV. i. 2. 1 10 : ' Though 
not clean past your youth.' 

11. in manner, more commonly ' in a manner.' ' You have made a kind 
of divorce.' The Queen was only nine years old, and the former Qiieen 
had died five years before, so that there is no authority for the cliarge 
which Shakespeare puts into Bolingbroke's mouth. 

13. Broke, broken, interrupted. Used as a participle also ii. 2. 59. 
Similarly we have ' spoke,' ' rode,' ' wrote,' ' took,' ' shook,' used as par- 
ticiples, for • spoken,' ' ridden,' ' written,' ' taken,' ' shaken,' &c. 

20. It has been suggested that we should read ' climes ' for ' clouds ;' but 
there is no need of change. The conceit is more easily understood than 
paraphrased. Compare Romeo and Juliet, i. I. 139 : 

' With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew, 
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs.' 

22. signories. Compare iv. 1. 89. Cowel says :' Seigniory, Dominium, 
is borrowed from the French Seigneurie, .... and signifies with us a Manor 
or Lordship.' Interpreter, s. v. 

23. Dispark'd. Cotgrave translates the French desclorre, 'to disparke, 
vnclose ; disinclose, pull downe hedges, or inclosures.' Cowel (Interpreter, s. v. 
•Park') quotes Manwood's Forest Laws, defining Park to be 'a place for 
privilege for wild beasts of venery, and also for other wild beasts that are 
beasts of the forest, and of the chase.' It ' differs from a chase, or warren, 
in that it must be inclosed, and may not lie open.' 

24. my household coat, the arms of my family blazoned in the painted 
glass. Mr. French informs us that, as Duke of Lancaster, the arms he bore 
were : ' Quarterly, France ancient and England, with a label of five points, 
the three dexter ermine for Britany, and the two sinister charged with 
fleurs-de-lis,' 



sc. 2.] RICHARD II. Mg 

25. imprese, a device with motto. Florio translates impresa, 'an im- 
presse, a word, a mot or enibleme.' Bacon' Advancement of Learning, 
ii. 16. § 3 : ' For as to hieroglyphics .... they are but as continued impreses 
and emblems.' The word is spelt ' impreese ' in the three first quartos, 
' impresse ' or 'impress' in the later editions. Bacon spells it 'imprease;' 
Camden, ' imprese.' Camden says in his ' Remaines,' published i6o«;, 
p. 158: ' An Imprese (as the Italians call it) is a devise in picture with his 
Motte, or Word, borne by noble and learned peisonages, to notitie some par- 
ticular conceit of their owne.' Again, in p. 162, he tells us: 'King Henry 
the fourth (as it is in Maister Garters booke) vsed onely a Fo.x tayle 
dependent, following Lysanders advise, if the Lions skin were too short, 
to peece it out with a Foxes case.' The motto was ' Souveraine.' Sir Samuel 
Meyrick suggested that the initial letter of this word was the origin of the 
symbol repeated on the collar of SS., a decoration first worn in Henry the 
Fourth's time. See Planche's History of British Costume, p. 175. Henry had 
adopted this motto of happy aus;ury while still Earl of Derby. It is 
frequently repeated on his tomb at Canterbury. 

29. the death. Observe the article which, according to modern usage, is 
redundant, though we preserve it in the phrase ' Die the death.' Compare 
Much Ado About Nothing, i. 3. 72: 'To the death, my lord.' So in 
Psalm Ixiii. 4, Prayer Book version, ' the life ' for 'life.' 

lb. Pope omitted ' over.' 

32. Lords, farewell. These words are omitted in the folios. 

38. commends, compliments, commendations, See iii. 3. 1 26. So we 
have ' laments ' for lamentations, iv. i. 296 ; ' depart ' for departure, 3 Henry 
VI. ii. I. no. 

41. Letters fully expressing your kindly feeling towards her. 'At large' 
occurs again, v. 6. 10. 

42. lords. Pope read ' my lords,' for the metre. 

43. Owen Glendower, of Conway, the same who appears in I Henry IV, 
was in attendance upon Richard ' as his beloved squire and minstrel.' He 
escaped from Flint when Richard was taken. The expedition against ' the 
said Owen and his unruly complices ' (words used by Holinshed, p. 1 132) 
was really not undertaken by Henry till the second year of his reign. 
Holinshed speaks of ' the Welshmen and their Captain,' meaning Glendower. 

44. after, aflerwards. 

Scene II. 

The Bishop of Carlisle was Thomas Merks, who had been a Benedictine 
monk of Westminster, consecrated Bishop in 1397. See note on v. 6. 22. 

I. The King landed at Barkloughly (' Barclowlie ' or 'Barclowly' as 
Holinshed spells it) about July 25, and remained in the castle ' awhyle.' 
Holinshed is the only authority for this name. It is undoubtedly an error of 
the copyist or printer for ' Hcrtlowli,' the form in which it appears in 
Hearne's edition of the life of Richard II. by a monk of Evesham. Of the 
two MSB. of this life in the British Museum, one (Cotton. MS. Tib. C. ix) 
reads ' Hertlowli,' the other (Cotton. MS. Claud. B. ix) ' Hertlow,' which 



120 NOTES. [act ni. 

Mr. Williams, the editor of the French Chronicle quoted at the beginning of 
Act iii. Scene 4, identifies with Harlech in North Wales. In another MS, 
quoted by Mr. Williams in his Appendix C, the name of Harlech appears 
in the form ' Hardleigh.' Fabian and Stow say that Richard landed at 
Milford Haven, and according to the French chronicler it was at Pembroke ; 
but, as his object was to join Salisbury at Conway, he would naturally have 
made for a more northern port. 

2. my lord. Pope reads 'my good lord,' and omits 'your' in the next 
line. 

8. a long-parted mother with her child, i. e. a mother long-parted from her 
child. For instances of the participle, or adjective, separated by the noun 
from the preposition which it governs, see All 's Well that Ends Well, 
iii. 4. 30 : 

' To this unworthy husband of his wife ;' 
and Timon of Athens, iv. 2. 13: 

' A dedicated beggar to the air.' 
See also in this play, iii. I. 9, and Sidney Walker's Critical Examination, 
i. p. 160. In this passage it is not necessary to change 'with' to 'from,' 
as Capell proposed. ' To part with ' is a conunon construction. 

13, 15. Notice the change from ' his' to 'their.' 

21. double tongue, forked tongue. See Midsummer Night's Dream, ii. 2. 9: 
' You spotted snakes with double tongue.' 

lb. mortal, deadly. See Romeo and Juliet, v. i. 66 : ' Such mortal drugs 
I have.' 

23. conjuration, as we should say ' adjuration.' Compare Henry V. i. 2. 29 : 
' Under this conjuration speak, my lord.' 

25. native, natural, king by right of birth ; not ' born in the country." 
Shakespeare would remember that Richard was born at Bordeaux. 

29-32. These four lines are omitted in the folios. In line 29 Pope 
tirst changed ' heavens yield ' to 'heaven yields,' probably rightly, as ' heaven ' 
is used twice immediately after. 

34. security, carelessness. See Macbeth, iii. 5. 32 : 

' Security 
Is mortals' chiefest enemy.' 
Compare ii. i. 266 of this play. 

35. power. So the quartos. The folios have ' friends.' 

36. Discomfortable. This word is only used in this one place by 
Shakespeare. 

37. 38. is bid . . . world. Malone proposed, unnecessarily, to reaa : 

' that lights 
The lower world, is hid behind the globe.' 

39. range, walk in search of game, or prey. Julius Ciesar, ii. I. 118 : 

' So let high-sighted tyranny range on.' 

40. boldly. This is Collier's conjecture first introduced into the text by 
Dyce. The first quarto has ' bouldy,' the second ' bloudy,' the rest ' bloodie" 
or ' bloody.' 

55. balm, the consecrated oil. See iv. I. 207, and note. So Henry V. 
iv. 1.277: 

' 'Tis not the balm, the sceptre and the ball.' 



sc. 2.] R I C H A R D 1 1. 121 

58. fress'd, impressed, enlisted. So i Henry IV. iv. 2. 16 : 'I press n»e 
none but good householders.' 

59. shrewd, sharp. See Hamlet, i. 4. I : ' The air bites shrewdly.' 
64. near, in this place an abbreviation for 'nearer.' See v. I. 88 : 

' Better far off than near, be ne'er the near ;' 
and Macbeth ii. 3. 146 : 

' The near in blood 
The nearer bloody.' 
So ' far ' for ' farther,' Winter's Tale, iv. 4. 442 : ' Far than Deucalion off.' 
70. txvelve thou&and. Forty thousand according to Holinshed. 
79. dead. See 2 Henry IV. i. I. 71 : 'So dull, so dead in look.' 

84. coward. So the quartos. The folios have ' sluggard.' 

85. twenty. So the quartos. The folios read ' forty.' The alteration 
was probably made in order to surpass by a rhetorical climax the twenty- 
thousand mentioned before, 1. 76. 

90. Pope, a determined enemy of Alexandrines, cut out ' enough.' 

lb. Enter Scroop. Sir Stephen Scroop, of Masham, son and heir of Henry 
first Baron Scroop, and elder brother of William, Earl of Wiltshire. He 
became famous as a soldier in his father's lifetime, and continued to be called 
Sir Stephen even after he succeeded to his father's barony in 1392. Holins- 
hed calls him at this time 'Sir Stephen Scrope,' p. 1107, col. 2. 

92. deliver. See iii. 3. 34. So Twelfth Night, i. 5. 222 : ' Sure, you have 
some hideous matter to deliver when the courtesy of it is so fearful.' 

94. The worst which thou canst unfold is worldly loss. 

112. white-beards, v^fhite -bearded men. 

lb. thin and hairless scalps, scalps which have thin hair or none. See 
Timon of Athens, iv. 3. 144 : 

' Thatch your poor thin roofs 
With burthens of the dead.' 
and Midsummer Night's Dream, ii. I. 109: 

' Old Hiems' thin and icy crown.' 

114. female joints, joints weak as those of women. 

116. beadsmen, old pensioners, so called because they were bound to pray 
for those by whose alms they were supported. See Two Gentlemen of 
Verona, i. I. 18 : 

' I will be thy beadsman, Valentine.' 

117. double-fatal, i. e. doubly fatal. ' Called so, because the leaves of the 
yew are poison, and the wood is employed for instruments of death.' War- 
burton. The word 'yew' is spelt ' ewe' and ' eugh' in the old editions, and 
misprinted 'woe' in the third and fourth quartos. 

118. manage. See 2 Henry IV. iii. 2. 292: 'Come, manage me your 
caliver.' The word occurs again in the same scene, line 301. 

12 2. Where is Bagot? According to Holinshed, Bagot escaped to Chester 
and thence to Ireland. Others say he fled from Bristol. In consequence of 
this, and because the king shortly after denounces ' three Judases,' not ' four,' 
Theobald read ' Where is he got?' 

128. There is the same play on the word 'peace' in Macbeth, iv. 3. 178, 1 79: 
' Macd. The tyrant has not batter'd at their peace ? 
Rosse. No: they were well at peace when I did leave 'em.' 



122 NOTES. [act hi. 

135. his, used, as frequently, where we should say ' its.' Compare iii. 3. 34. 

lb. property, nature, quality, or natural attribute. So in the Liturgy : 
' O God, whose nature and property is ever to have mercy and to for- 
give.' 

140. graved, buried. The verb 'to grave' is not used by Shakespeare 
elsewhere exactly in this sense. We have however in Timon of Athens, iv. 
3. 166, ' Ditches grave you all !' 

143. power, forces. Ste ii. 2. 46, iii. 2. 212. More usual in the plural, 
as ill King John, v. I. 32 : 

' London hath received. 
Like a kind host, the Dauphin and his powers.' 

153. model. Here used as were niodelle and module in French, for ' mould,' 
' pattern.' Compare Hamlet, v. 2. 50 : 

' I had my father's signet in my purse. 
Which was the model of that Danish seal.' 
And He.ary V. ii. Prologue 16 ; 

' O England I model to thy inward greatness.' 
The image was suggested in this place to the author by the raised earth over 
graves, which appears to mark the length and breadth of the body beneath. 
Compare iii. 4. 42. 

156. Possibly Shakespeare had in his mind Lydgate's Fall of Princes, 
translated from the Italian of Boccaccio. 

158. the ghosts they have deposed, the ghosts of those whom they have 
deposed. As the word ' deposed' occurs in the previous line. Pope altered it 
to ' the ghosts they dispossess'd,' and Sidney Walker proposes ' the ghosts 
they have depriv'd.* Compare As You Like It, ii. 4. 79, 

161. roundf, encircles. See Midsummer Night's Dream, iv. I. 56: 

' For she his hairy temples then had rounded 
With coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers.' 
lb. Douce suggests that this image was suggested to Shakespeare by the 
seventh print in the Imagines Mortis (attributed to Holbein, but without 
authority). There a king is represented sitting on his throne, sword in 
hand, with courtiers round him, while from his crown rises a grinning 
skeleton. 

162. antic. Compare i Henry VI. iv. 7. 18: 

' Thou antic Death, which laugh 'st us here to sconi.' 

163. Scoffing his state. We rarely find 'scoff' used thus, as a transitive 
verb. Todd gives an instance from Glanvil's sermons : ' To scoff religion is 
ridiculously proud and immodest.' 

164. a breath. Compare King John, iii. 4. 134: 'One quiet breath of 
rest ;' and Henry V. ii. 4. 146: 

' A night is but small breath and little pause 
To answer matters of this consequence.' 
166. self is used by Shakespeare as an adjective, as in Twelfth Night, i. 
1 . 39 : ' One self king,' so that he felt no awkwardness in separating it from 
the substantive whose sense it modifies, by a second epithet. ' Conceit' by 
itself, as we have said, ii. 2. 33, is not found in the modern sense. 

168, 169. humour'd thus Comes. Though the commentators are all silent 
on this passage, the construction is by no means clear. Arc we to take the 



sc. 3-] RICHARD II. 1 23 

word 'humour'd' as a case absolute, the subject being ' ihe king/ and the 
sense 'after the king has been thus indulged in his caprices, Death comes,' or 
is Death the subject, and the sense, ' Death, having thus amused his humour, 
comes?' We incline to the former interpretation as being more agree- 
able to the common usage of the verb ' to humour,' though the grammatical 
structure of the sentence is more difficult than it would be according to the 
latter. 

174. mistook, mistaken. See note on iii. i. 13. 

175. with bread. Pope, intolerant of deviations from ordinary usage, 
wrote 'on bread.' 'Live with' is equivalent to 'is fed with.' Compare 
I Henry IV. iii. I. 162 : 

' I had rather live 
With cheese and garlic in a windmill, far. 
Than feed on cates and have him talk to me.' 
175, 176. These lines as they stand, are defective. Something has, 
doubtless, dropped out. Perhaps the best suggestion is that of Sidney 
Walker: 

' I live with bread like you, feel want, taste grief, 
Need friends, /ear enemies; subjected thus,' &c. 

178. ne'er sit and wail their woes. For this, the reading of ihe early 
quartos, the folios have ' ne'er wail their present woes.' 

179. presently, immediately, at once. 

183. to fight, that is, to you if you fight. 

184. Johnson paraphrases this verse: 'To die fighting is to return the 
evil that we suffer, to destroy the destroyers.' 

185. Where, whereas. Compare Love's Labour's Lost, ii. i. 103 : 

' Were my lord so, his ignorance were wise. 
Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance.' 
lb. fearing dying, that is, to die fearing. 

203. party. So the early quartos. The folios read ' faction.' 

204, 205. forth Of, out of, away from. Compare Tempest, v. I. 160 : 

' I am Prospero, and that very duke 
Which was thrust forth of Milan.' 

212. To ear, that is, to plough, till. 'Ear' is from the A.S. erian, which 
is connected with the Lat. arare and the Greek apocu, apovpa, aporpuv. 
Compare Deut. xxi. 4 : 'A rough valley, which is neither eared nor 
sown.' 

lb. that hath. Delius suggests that we should read ' that have,' making 
' them' the antecedent. As the text stands, ' hath' refers to ' land.' Serving 
a master who cannot hope to prosper is like ploughing land which will yield 
no crop. 

Scene III. 

I. As the authority for this scene read Holinshed, p. 1 109, col. 2, quoted 
in the Preface. Shakespeare however represents the castle as being held by 
Richard, while, according to Holinshed, Flint Castle was surrendered to 
Northumberland. 



124 ' NOTES. [act iiu 

lo. mistakes. To remedy the defective metre Rowe read ' mistakes me,' 
Delius ' mistaketh.' 

12. Would you. The third and fourth quartos read 'Should 3'ou.'' 

13. lo shorten y 07/, i. e. as to shorten you. 

14. taking so the head, presuming so much as unceremoniously to deprive 
the king of his title. 

32. ribs. Compare King John, ii. i. 384: 

' The flinty ribs of this contemptuous city.' 

33. parley. The early quartos spell this 'parlee;' the folios read ' parle.' 
Shakespeare uses both ' parley' and 'parle' indifferently. 

34. his, its, as in iii. 2. 135. 

lb. deliver, announce, proclaim. See iii. 2. 92. 

52. tatter d. So the folios. The first and second quartos have 'tottered,' 
the third and fourth ' tattered.' With ' tatter'd' as applied to stone walls, 
compare 2 Henry IV. Ind. 35 : 

' Worm-eaten hold of ragged stone.' 
Bosweil, reading ' totter'd,' supposes it is used in the sense of ' tottering.' In 
King John, v. 5. 7> Malone reads, 

' And wound our tattering colours clearly up,' 
where the folios have ' tott'ring,' and Pope ' tatter'd.' 

53. perused, reviewed, clearly observed. Compare 2 Henry IV. iv. 2. 94 : 

' Let our trains 
March by us, that we may peruse the men 
We should have coped withal.' 
And Hamlet, iv. 7- I37 • 'Will not peruse the foils.' 

56. shock. So the first quarto. The other old copies read 'smoke' with 
variable spelling. 

57. cheeks of heaven. Compare Tempest, i. 2. 4: 

' The sea, mounting to the welkin's cheek.' 

61. The raised platform at the back of the stage is supposed to represent 
Flint Castle. Bolingbroke and his forces march past in front of the stage, 
while Northumberland advances to the foot of the walls. 

62-67. Hanmer and Warburton assign these six lines to York, and Mr. 
Dyce conjectures that thev should be given to Percy. 

81. profane, commit sacrilege. 

83. Have torn their souls by ti/rning them from ns, i. e. have incurred tlie 
guilt of perjury by transferring their allegiance. The word 'torn' would not 
have been used but for the jingle ' torn,' ' turning,' in which the point of the 
phrase, such as it is, consists. 

89. That lift. The antecedent to ' that' is ' you,' implied in ' your' in the 
preceding line. 

90. threat, threaten, menace. So Richard III. v. 3. 205 : 

' And every one did threat 
To-morrow's vengeance on the head of Richard ;' 
and Antony and Cleopatra, iii. 5. IQ : 

'And threats the throat of that his officer 
That murder'd Pompey.' 

91. yond, the reading of the folios. The early quartos have 'yon.' For 



SC.3-] RICHARD II. 12^ 

the sake of uniformity we use 'yond' for the adverb and 'yon' for the ad- 
jective, although this distinction is not always maintained in the old editions. 

94. purple, blood-stained. Compare Julius Csesar, iii. I. 158 : 

' Mow, whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke.' 

Tb. testament, will. The word is always used in this sense by Shakespeare. 
So in Timon of Athens, v. I. 30; 'Performance is a kind of will or testa- 
ment, which argues a great sickness in his judgement that makes it.' 

97. the flower of England's face, the blooming surface of the land. 
Steevens quotes from Sidney's Arcadia, p. 240, ed. 1633: 'The sweet and 
beautiful flower of her face.' The expression is parallel to ' complexion ' in 
the ne.xt line. 

98. maid-pale. Compare I Henry VI. ii. 4. 47 : 

' I pluck this pale and maiden- blossom here.' 
lb. Malone proposed to invert the position of the words ' face ' and 
' peace,' reading ' peace ' in line 97, ' face ' in 98. 

102. civil and uncivil. ' Civil ' is here used in the sense in which we still 
say ' civil war ;' 'uncivil' has a stronger meaning than the modern one. 
Compare Two Gentlemen of Verona, v. 4. 17 • 

' Yet I have much to do 
To keep them from uncivil outrages.' 
105. The tomb of Edward III, of all those in Westminster Abbey, is the 
first mentioned in our literature, namely in this passage. See Stanley, 
Memorials of Westminster Abbey, p. 140. 

109. John of Gaunt was buried in St. Paul's, on the north side of the high 
altar. Holinshed, p. 1102, col. I. 

113. royalties. See ii. I. 190. 

114. Enfranchisement, restoration to his full rights as a free Englishman. 
In this sense Bolingbroke's personal ' enfranchisement ' would include the 
' enfranchisement ' of his property which had been seized by the king ; in 
Holinshed's words, restitution of his person, lands, and heritage. Compare 
note on ii. i. 204. 

115. party, as we should say 'part.' 

116. commend, commit. See King John, v. 2. ^6 : 

' Commend these waters to those baby eyes 
That never saw the giant world enraged,' 

117. barbed, a corruption of ' barded,' i. e. equipped in armour, said only of 
a horse. Cotgrave gives the French harder, ' to barbe, or trap, horses,' and 
bardes, ' barbes, or trappings, for horses of seruice, or of shew.* Compare 
Richard III. i. i. 10 : 

' Instead of mounting barbed steeds ;' 
and for ' barbes ' see Spenser, F. Q^ ii. 2. 11 : 

'He left "his loftie steed with golden sell. 
And goodly gorgeous barbes.* 
121. returns, returns answer. See i. 3. 122. 

126. commends. See iii. I. 38. Here Northumberland comes to the 
front of the stage, and in dumb show reports to Bolingbroke, while Richard 
converses aloud with Aumerle. 

136. sooth is evidently here used by Shakespeare as if it were connected 



126 NOTES. [act hi. 

with the verb ' to soothe,' and meant ' sweetness, flattery.' He has 
' soothers' in the sense of flatterers in 1 Henry IV. iv. I. 7 : 
' I cannot flatter ; I do defy 
The tongues of soothers.' 
In Pericles ' sooth ' is used in the same sense as here, i. 2. 44 : 

' When Signior Sooth here does proclaim a peace, 
He flatters you, makes war upon your life.' 
' Sooth,' in its proper sense, means ' truth,' or ' true,' being used both as a 
substantive and adjective. 

137. leiser. See ii. 1.95. So we have ' worser ' in Tempest, iv. 1. 2": 
' Our worser genius.' 

1 49. My gay apparel. ' Hee was in his tyme exceeding sumptuous in 
apparrell, in so muche, as hee had one coate, whiche he caused to be made 
for him of golde and stone, valued at 30000. markes.' Holinshed, p. 1110, 
col. 2. The extravagance of his courtiers in dress is mentioned p. I II 7, 
col. I. 

156. trade. 'The proper meaning of the word is a trodden way, a 
beaten path or course, and thence metaphorically a way of life. A " trades- 
man " is one who followed a special way of life in opposition to the 
husbandmen who constituted the great bulk of the conimunit)\ The " trade 
winds" are winds which hold a certain trade or course.' Wedgwood, 
Dictionary of English Etymology, s. v. Compare Henry VIII. v. i. 36 : 

• Stands in the gap and trade of moe preferments.' 
Theobald, on Warburton's suggestion, changed 'trade' in our passage to 
'tread,' without authority or necessity. 

162. lodge, lay. Compare Macbeth, iv. i. 55: 
'Though bladed corn be lodged;' 
and 2 Henry VI. iii. 2. 176: 

' Like to the summer's corn by tempest lodged.' 

167. fretted, eaten, worn. Compare King Lear, i. 4. 307 : 

' With cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks.' 

168. there lies. With ' there' the verb is frequently singular, even though 
a plural nominative follows, as il y a in French. 

169. digg'd, i. e. ' who digged.' Compare Pericles, i. 2. 39 : 

' For flattery is the bellows blows up sin.' 
' There lies . . . eyes ' is proposed by Richard as the epitaph over the two 
graves. 

175. ay is printed 'I' in the old editions, and pronounced like 'eye.' 
Some commentators see a joke here between ' leg' and ' eye.' If so, Richard 
has sunk low indeed. Our author does make a similar pun, Romeo and 
Juliet, iii. 2.45 : 

' Say thou but " I," 
And that bare vowel " I " shall poison more 
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.' 
Compare also iv. I. 201 of this play. 

176. the base court. The court which, being inc'osed within the outer 
wall of the castle, was generally on a lower level than the inner or chief 
court. Holinshed says that the King and Duke met in ' the vtter warde ' 
(p. 1 1 10, col. i). ' Base court' is derived from the French basse cour, the 



sc. 4] RICHARD IT. 1 27 

court surrounded by stables, offices, &c. and appropriated to the servants — the 
other being called coi/r d'honneitr. Holland, Pliny, bk. xxxvi. c. 5, translates 
' Propylaeum ' thus : ' The three Charites or Graces, which are to bee seene in 
the Basse court before the Citadell of Athens.' 

178. Phaethon. Ovid's Metam. bk. ii. 

I 79. manage of, control over. See T Henry IV. ii. 3. 52 : 

' Speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed.' 

1S5. makes. Pope, as he conceived, mended at once the grammar of this 
line and the metre of the former by leaving out ' and grief.' For the 
singular verb compare Psalm xiv. 7, Prayer Book version : ' Destruction and 
unhappiness is in their ways.' Compare also ii. I. 258. 

lb. fondly, foolishly. Compare iv. 1.72, and see Comedy of Errors, 
iv. 2. 57: 'How fondly dost thou reason,' i.e. how foolishly dost thou 
talk. 

188. The stage direction, ' He kneels down,' is found in the quartos, where 
stage directions are very rare. Holinshed says he knelt thrice. 

192. Me rather had, for 'I had rather.' The impersonal verb, of which 
' methinks,' ' methought' are now the sole relics in use, was in old English 
much more common, as ' me seems,' ' me list,' ' me wondereth,' &c. (Com- 
pare Miitzner, Englische Grammatik.) In Anglo-Saxon other personal pro- 
nouns besides ' me ' were used with such verbs in the objective case. We 
have ' me seemeth ' in 2 Henry VI. iii. I. 23 : 

' Me seemeth then it is no policy,' 
and Richard III. ii. 2. 120: ' Me seemeth good.' 

195. Thus high. Here the king touches his own head. 

i02. Uncle. He addresses the Duke of York. 

204. Bolingbroke and Richard were both born in the year 1366, and 
were consequently thirty-three years old at this time. 

208. Sel on. See Measure for Measure, iii. i.6l : 'To-morrow you set 
on.' Compare ' set forward ' and our ' set off.' 

lb., towards London. Their stages on the way are thus enumerated by 
Holinshed, p. mo, col. 2: 'Flint, Chester, Nantwich, Newcastle [under 
Lyne], Stafford, Lichfield, Coventry, Daventry, Northampton, Dunstable, 
St. Albans, London.' There is some confusion in his statement. The in- 
terview takes place at Flint Castle, and yet they ride the first night to 
Flint. Froissart gives an entirely different route (c. 115), 

Scene IV. 

It was Capell who first pointed out that the scene should be laid at the 
Duke of York's palace at Langley, which he inferred from line 70, and from 
ii. 2. 116, where York says to the Queen, ' Come, cousin, I '11 dispose of you,' 
which implies that he gave her an asylum in his house, as indeed appears 
afterwards in iii. i. 36. The French Chronicler (Chronicque de la Traison 
et Mort de Richart deux Roy Dengleterre, p. 33, ed. Williams) says that the 
Queen, after Richard's departure, retired to Wallingford. At the time of the 
conspiracy of Rutland, Kent, Huntingdon, &c, early in 1400, the Queen 
was at Sunning, a manor near Reading. Holinshed, p. 1 1 28, col. I. Ac- 
cording to Froissart (c. 1 1 3), at the time when Richard was taken to the 



128 NOTES. [act in. 

Tower the Queen was residing with the Lady de Coucy at Leeds Castle 
in Kent, and afterwards, with an entirely new household, at Havering at 
the Bower (c. 1 18). Her attendants were forbidden to mention King 
Richard's name to her. (lb.) 

4. rubs. In the game of bowls, when a bowl was diverted from its course 
by an impediment, it was said to ' rub.' Cotgrave gives ' Saut : m. A leape, 
sault, bound, skip, iumpe ; also, (at Bowles) a rub :' and ' Saulter. To leape, 
iump, skip, to spring or bound; also, to rub (at Bowks).' 'But as a rubbe 
to an overthrown bowl proves an helpe by hindering it ; so afflictions bring 
the souls of Gods Saints to the mark.' Fuller, Holy State, Book i. chap. II. 
' Shall blow each dust, each straw, each little rub, 
Out of the path.' King John, iii. 4. 128. 
Compare also Troilus and Cressida, iii. 2. 52. What we call the jack was 
then called the ' mistress.' 

II. joy. This is Rowe's correction in his second edition. The quartos 
and folios read ' griefe.' See line 13. 

14. remember, remind. Compare Tempest, i. 2. 243 : 

' Let me remember thee wliat thou hast promised.' 
And i. 3. 269 of the present play. 

15. being altogether had, occupying my whole mind. 

18. to complain, to bewail. Not used now in a transitive sense. Johnson 
quotes from Fairfax's Tasso, iii. 50. 6 : 

' Come, wreak his loss whom bootless }'ou complain.' 

20. shouldsl . . . wouldst. We should now transpose these words. 

22. And I could sing. That is, as we have explained it in the Cambridge 
Shakespeare, ' And I could even sing for joy if my troubles were only such 
as weeping could alleviate, and then I would not ask you to weep for me.' 
Pope substituted ' And I could weep,' and Mr. Staunton conjectures • And 1 
could sing, would singing do me good.' 

25. I will stake my great wretchedness against the merest trifle. 

28. against a change, when a change is impending. See v. 2. 66, and 
compare Hamlet, i. i. 158 : 

' Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes 
Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated,' &c. 
lb. woe is forerun with woe, sadness is the harbinger or precursor of 
disaster. Compare ii. 4. 15 : 

' These signs forerun the death or fall of kings.' 
And 2 Hen. IV. iv. 2. 81 : 

' Against ill chances men are ever merry. 
But heaviness foreruns the good event.' 

29. apricocJis. This is the old spelling. Johnson substitutes the form 
which has been retained in modern times. Cotgrave (Yt. Diet.) gives, 
' Abricot : m. The Abricot, or Apricocke plum.' Minsheu (Span. Diet. 1599) 
has, ' Albarcoque, or Alvarcoque, m. an apricocke.' Compare Midsummer 
Night's Dream, iii. i. 169: 

' Feed him with apricocks and dewberries.' 
32. supportance, support. Compare Twelfth Night, iii. 4. 329 : 

' Therefore draw, for the supportance of his vow.' 
35. looh too lofty, aspire too much, hold up their heads too iiigh. 



sc. 4-] RICHARD II. 1 29 

38. noisome, noxious, injurious, hurtful. So in Ps. xci. 3 : ' Surely he 
fhall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome pes- 
tilence.' And Cymbeline, i. 5. -26: 

' Besides, the seeing these effects will be 
Both noisome and infectious.' 
40. pale, enclosure. Compare i Hen. VI. iv. ■2. 45 : 

' How are we park'd and bounded in a pale.* 
42. Shoiving. . .oiirjirm estate, repreientwg our commonwealth as it was 
when settled. For 'show' compare Merchant of Venice, iv. I. lyo: 
' His sceptre shows the force of temporal power.' 
lb. model, a copy or sketch, generally on a small scale. Compare i. 2. 28 : 
' Who was the model of thy father's life.' 
And V. I. II : 

'Ah thou, the model where old Troy did stand.' 
Bacon, writing to his friend Toby Matthew, says of his memorial of Queen 
Elizabeth, 'Of this, when you were here, I shewed you some ynodel' (Life 
and Letters, ed. Spedding, iv. 133). 

46. knots, fliwer-bcds laid out in fanciful shapes. See Bacon's Essay Of 
Gardens, p. 1S9: 'As for the making of knots, or figures, with divers 
coloured earths, that they may lie under the windowes of the house, on that 
side, which the garden stands, they be but toyes.' Compare also Love's 
Labour's Lost, i. I. 249; 'Thy curious-knotted garden;* and Milton's 
Paradise Lost, iv. 242 : 

' Flowers worthy of Paradise, which not nice art 
In beds and curious knots, but nature boon 
Pour'd forth profuse.' 
■^f'. dre^s'd. Comp. Gen. ii. 15: 'And the Lord God took the man. 
and put him into the garden of Eden, to dress it and to keep it.' See line 
73 of this scene. 

57. We at lime of year. Capell inserted ' We,' which is omitted in all 
the old copies. It is required both by sense and metre. 
60. it, that is, the bark, or, possibly, each fruit-tree. 

lb. confound, destroy. See iv. I. 141, v. 3. 86, and Merchant of Venice, 
iii. 2. 278 : 

' So keen and greedy to confound a man.' 

63. superfluous branches. The second folio, to mend the metre, read 
• All superfluous branches.' Mr. R. Grant White suggests that ' superfluous ' 
may be accented on the penultimate. Elsewhere Shakespeare always accent- 
uates it on the antepenultimate, as we do. 

64. bearing, productive. 

66. waste of idle hours hath. So the quartos. The folios read 'waste 
and idle hours hath ;' Pope ' waste and idle hours have.' 

69. 'Tis doubt, that is, it is to be feared. 'Doubt* frequently occurs in 
the sense of 'fear.' Compare Bacon, Essay xxii. p. 92: 'If a man would 
crosse a businesse, that he doubts some other would handsomely and 
effectually move, let him pretend to wish it well, and move it himselfe, in 
such sort, as may foile it.' 'Doubt' is the reading of the early quartos, 
and ' doubted ' of the folios ; but we have the phrase ' 'Tis doubt,' though 
in another sense, in this play, i. 4. 20. 



1 30 NOTES. [act IV. 

72. presb'd to death. The punishmeat of accused persons who refused 
10 plead. It was known in French as the peine forle ct dure, and consisted 
in laying heavier and heavier weights upon the chest. Compare Much Ado 
About Nothing, iii. i. 76: 'Press me to death with wit.' 

73. See note on line 56. 

74. Pope omitted ' harsh rude,' reducing the line from six feet to five. 

75. suggested, tempted, prompted. Compare i. 1. loi, and Henry VIII. 
i. I. 164: 

' Suggests the king our master 
To this last costly treaty.' 

76. cursed man. Refers to Gen. iii. 17-19. 

79. Divine, prophesy. See Richard III. iii. 2. 18: 

' To shun the danger that his soul divines.' 

80. this ill tidings. Pope reads ^ these ill tidings.' But see ii. I. 272, 
and note. 

82. this neius. So the first quarto. The rest read ' these.' But in line 
74 all have ^ this unpieasing news.' 

83. hold, grasp. Cotgrave gives as one of the meanings of the French 
prise ' a hold in wrastling.' Perhaps there is here a special reference to 
wrestling. 

86. Compare Merchant of Venice, iii. 2. 91 : 

' Making them lightest that wear most of it.' 
89. that odds. ' Odds,' like ' news ' and ' tidings,' is used both as singular 
and plural. Compare Henry V. iv. 3.5:' 'Tis a fearful odds,' and Measure 
for Measure, iii. 1.41: 

' That makes these odds all even.' 
101. For ' Pray God ' the folios substituted ' I would.' 
104. /,://, let tail. See Othello, iv. 1. 258 : 

' Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile.' 
705. rue, sour herb 0/ grace. Compare Hamlet, iv. 5. 181: 'There's 
rue for you ; and here's some for me : we may call it herb-grace o' Sundays.' 
And Wniter's Tale, iv. 4. 74: 

'For you there's rosemary and rue; these keep 
Seeming and savour all the winter long : 
Grace and remembrance be to you both.' 
Some suppose it to have been called ' herb of grace ' on account of the 
many excellent properties it was held to possess, being a specific against 
poison, the bites of venomous creatures, &c ; but probably it was so called 
because ' rue ' means ' repent.' 

106. ruth, pit}', regret. See Coriolanus, i. 1. 201 : 

'Would the nobility lay aside their ruth 
And let me use my sword.' 



ACT IV. 
Scene I. 

Westminster Hall. Richard had just completed the rebuilding of West- 
minster Hall, and the first parliament there held was held for the purpose of 



SCI.] RICHARD II. 131 

recording his deposition. It met 'on Tuesday the last of September ' according 
to Holinshed, and the ' scecule or bill of renouncement ' was dated Sept. ay. 
(pp. 1114-II16.) Shakespeare blends together the proceedings of Sept. 30, 
with those of the parliament which reassembled on the 14th of Oct. Richard 
was not himself present at either. On Sept. 30 the Lords and Commons sat 
in the same Hall. Richard's ' renouncement ' was read by the Archbishop of 
Canterbury. The resignation was accepted by Lords and Commons, and his 

• manifold crimes and defaults' were recorded in writing. Commissioners were 
appointed to pronounce the sentence of deprivation, which was made by the 
Bishop of St. Asaph. Then Henry stood forward, and crossing himself, claimed 
the realm. The Archbishop ' hauing notice of the minds of the Lordes ' 
stood up and asked the Commons whether they accepted him for king, and 
on their shouting 'yea, yea, yea,' the two Archbishops led him to the 
throne. The Archbishop of Canterbury then preached a sermon on the text 

* Vir dominabitur in populo,' i Samuel ix. 16. Then the King rose and 
made a speech, thanking the Lords and Commons, and promising not to 
interfere with any man's rights. The above-mentioned commissioners on the 
following day, Oct. i, conveyed the intelligence to Richard in the Tower, and 
' Justice William Thyrning in name of the other, and for all the states of the 
lande,' renounced the homage and fealty which before had been due to him. 
(Holinshed, pp. 1 1 15, II 16.) 

4. Who wrought it luith the M?ig, who worked upon the king's mind to 
bring it about, who, as Holinshed says (p. 1 102, col. l), ' had set hym in hande 
w^'th all that was done against the sayd duke.' 

5. timeless, untimely. Compare 2 Henry VL iii. 2. 187 : 

'Duke Humphrey's timeless death.' 

6. Aumerle was accused on Thursday, Oct. 16, by a ' bill ' drawn up by 
Bagot and read in Parliament. 

10. dead time, dark and dreary time, as if during Richard's last and worst 
years it had been always midnight in England. Compare Titus Andronicus. 
ii. 3. 99 : ' At dead time of the night ;' and Hamlet, i. I. 65 : ' Jump at this 
dead hour.' 

11. Compare Ovid, Epist. xvi. 166 : ' An nescis longas regibus esse manus ? ' 

12. restful, quiet, reposing; because it had no need to act, but only to 
give orders. 

15. 'There was also conteyned in the sayde Bill, that Bagot had heard the 
Duke of Aumarle say, that he had leauer than twentie thousand pounds that 
the Duke of Hereforde were dead, not for any feare hee had of him, but for 
the trouble and myschiefe that hee was like to procure within the realme.' 
Holinshed, p. 1122, col. 2. 

17, 19. Than .... death. These words are arranged in the way adopted 
by Capell. In the quartos and folios they form only two lines, the first 
ending ' withal.' ' England ' may be pronounced as a trisyllable, as frequently 
in Old Poetry, e. g : 

' God help sir Tristram the knight, 
He fought for Yngelonde.' 
Sidney Walker says (Shakespeare's Versification, p. 7), 'words such as jug- 
gler, tickling, kindhng, England, angry, children, and the like, are frequently 
pronounced by the Elizabethan poets as if a vowel were interposed between 



133 NOTES. [act IV. 

the liquid and the preceding mute.' £0 also wrestler, fiddler, entrance, 
semblance, secret, remembrance, &c. 

•21. my fair stars, the fortune of my birth, whatever a lucky conjunction 
of planets secured to me at my nativity; here especially royal blood. Com- 
pare All's Well that Ends Well, i. i. 197 : 

' We, the poorer born. 
Whose baser stars do shut us up in wishes.' 
Twelfth Night, ii. 5. 156: 

' In my stars I am above thee.' 
And All's Well that Ends Well, ii. 5. 80 : 

' Wherein toward me my homely stars have fail'd 
To equal my great fortune.' 

24. attainder. Aumerle says that if he did not refute the calumny by 
wager of battle, his reputation would suffer a stain such as was inflicted by 
legal process on a man's rank and rights after conviction of felony or treason. 

25. the majiual seal of death, a gage which was his death-warrant. 
Additional force will be given to the epithet ' manual ' if we suppose that 
Aumerle, as was usual, threw down his glove. Holinshed places Aumerle's 
defiance and the subsequent challenges on two different days. On Saturday, 
Oct. 18, Fitzwater challenged Aumerle by throwing down his hood. Twenty 
other lords did the same. Aumerle accepted Fitzwatcr's challenge by throw- 
ing down his own hood, and then, when he wanted to defy the Duke of 
Norfolk, he was obliged to borrow another hood of a bystander. Holinshed, 
pp. 1 1 22, 1 1 23. 

29. To stain the temper. Compare i Henry IV. v. 1. 94 : 
' A sword, whose temper I intend to stain 
With the best blood that I can meet withal.' 
Tiie harder the steel the brighter polish would it take, hence the polish may 
be taken as a measure of the temper. 

33. Walter Fitzwater, or Fitzwaltcr, fifth Baron, was summoned to 
Parliament from Sept. 12, 1390, to Aug. 25, 1404 ; died, 1407. Holinshed 
calls him ' Fitz Water,' p. 1 1 20, col. 2. It was on Thursday, Oct. 16, as we 
have seen, that Bagot made his charge ; it was not till Saturday, Oct. 18, 
that Fitzwater defied Aumerle. The pronunciation 'Water' for 'Walter' is 
illustratcchby 2 Henry VI. iv. I. 31, 35. 

lb. sympathy. So the quartos. The first folio reads erroneously 
'sympathize,' corrected in the later folios to 'sympathies.' 'Sympathy' 
here means not so much feeling as external correspondence, equality. Com- 
pare Othello, ii. I. 232 : 

' Sympathy in years, manners and beauties ;' 
and Merry Wives of Windsor, ii. I. 7 : ' You are not young ; no more am I ; 
go to then, there's sympathy.' 'The meaning is: 'If your valour is so 
punctilious as to insist upon an antagonist of similar rank.' 

40. my rapier's point. The rapier was a long pointed sword. Du Guez, 
in his ' Introductorie for to lerne to speke French trewly,' has ' the spanischc 
sworde, la rapiere.' The weapon was apparently of Spanish origin, and 
nearly fifty years after the time of Du Guez had not become familiar in 
England. In Bulleine's Dialogue between Soarnesse and Chirurgi (1579)' 
quoted by Reed, the ' long foining rapier ' is spoken of as ' a new kynd of 



SCI.] RICHARD II. 133 

instrument. ' To anachronisms of this kind Shakespeare was always in- 
different. He arms Demetrius in Titus Andronicus (ii. I. 54, and iv. 2. 85) 
with a rapier. 

44. Percy is not specially mentioned by Holinshed, who says : ' There 
were .xx. ether Lordes also that threw downe their hoodes, as pledges to proue 
y-" like matter against the duke of Aumarle ' (p. 1 1 22, col. 2). 

49. An if. The quartos and folios write as in other cases ' And if.^ lu 
recent times a distinction has been made in spelling between ' and,' the 
ordinary conjunction, and ' an,' meaning ' if.' The latter spelling is not 
only convenient, but also conformable to etymology if 'an' be derived (as 
Home Tooke suggested) from the Anglo-Saxon vnnnn, 'to grant,' as *if,' 
originally 'gif,'comes from g'fci'i, 'to give.' See Merchant of Venice, ii. 2. 63. 

52-59. / task . . . as you. Omitted in the folios. 

52. I task the earth to the like, I lay on the earth the task of bearing the 
like gage. This, which is the reading of the first quarto, appears to give a 
better sense than the others which have been proposed, The second, third, 
and fourth quartos have ' I take the earth.* Capell reads ' I task thee,' 
omitting 'earth.' Johnson conjectured ' I take thy oath ;' Steevens, ' I task 
thy heart,' and Sidney Walker, ' I take oath.' 

55. From sun to sun. The quartos read ' From sinne to sinne.' The 
emendation is Capell's, and it is one of very many of which the cretlit has 
been taken by Steevens. The phrase ' from sun to sun' probably means, as 
Steevens explained it, ' from one day to another.' Compare Cymbeline, 
iii. 2. 70: 

' One score 'twixt sun and sun. 
lb. pmvn, pledge. Compare i. I. 74- 

56. Engage it, that is, make a gage or pledge of it by giving your own in 
return. See line 71. 

57. llljo sets me else? who else challenges me to a match? who offers to 
lay a wager against me? Compare Troilus and Cressida, ii. I. 94 : 'Will j'ou 
set your wit to a fool's ?' and I Henry IV. i. 2. 119 : ' Now shall we know 
if GadshiU have set a match.' 

58. Compare Richard HI. v. 3. 347 : 

' A thousand hearts are great within my bosom.' 
60. ' The duke of Surrey stood vp also agaynst the L. Fitzwater.' 
Holinshed, p. 1 1 23, col. I. 'Thomas Holland, third Earl of Kent, was created 
Duke of Surrey, 29 Sept. 1397. He was degraded to his former title of 
'Kent' 3 Nov. 1399. ^"''' joining in the plot against Henry IV, was taken 
and beheaded by the inhabitants of Cirencester at the beginning of the 
year I400. 

65. Diihonourahle hoy. Fitzwater succeeded his father at the age of 
eighteen in 1386, and therefore at this time was thirty-one^ and could 
hardly be called ' a boy.' 

67. vengeance and revenge. The combination of these two nearly 
synonymous words expresses the most complete revenge. Such a com- 
bination is not unusual when the words are derived from different roots, and 
many examples will be found in the Liturgy ; for instance, ' dissemble nor 
cloke,' ' humble, lowly,' ' assemble and meet together,' ' erred and strayed,' 
' joy and felicity.' 



134 ^ O TE S. [act IV. 

72. fondly, foolibhly. See iii. 3. 185. 

74. in a tvilderness, where none could part them or help the wounded. 
See i. I. 63-66, and compare Macbeth, iii. 4. 104 : 

' And dare me to the desert with thy sword.* 

76. my bond of failh. Fitzwater probably throws down another hood 
which he borrowed of a bystander, as we are told by Holinshed (p. 1 123, 
col. i) that Aumerle does. 

78. this new world, that is, this new era which is begun under Bolingbroke. 

79. My accusation against Aumerle is true. For ' appeal' in this sense 
see i. 1.4, and line 45 of this scene. 

85. repeal' d, recalled from banishment. See note on ii. 2. 49. 
89. signories. See note on iii. 1.22, and 2 Henry IV. iv. I. III. 

93. Jesu Christ. This form of the name ' Jesus ' is used in the oblique 
cases, or with the optative mood, or in exclamations. The only exception 
in Shakespeare to this usage is in 3 Henry VI. v. 6. 75 : 

' O, Jesus bless us, he is bora with teeth!' 
It constantly occurs in the Prayer Book. 

94. Streaming. Compare, for an instance of ' stream ' used transitively, 
Julius Csesar, iii. I. 201 : 

' Weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood.' 

96. toiTd, wearied. 

Ih. retired himself, withdrew. See notes on i. 2.42 and ii. 2. 46. Com- 
pare also Coriolanus, i. 3- 30 : ' Give me leave to retire myself.' 

97. at Venice. Holinshed (p. IIOI, col. 2) says, speaking of Norfolk's 
banishment : ' The Duke of Norfolke departed sorowfully out of the realme 
into Almaine, and at the laste came to Venice, where he for thought and 
melancoly deceased.' The exact date of his death is a little uncertain. 
Holinshed mentions it again on the same page on which he records the pro- 
ceedings in Parliament on Nov. 3, 1399, when Fitzwaler 'prayed to haue 
day and place to arraigne his appeale agaynst the Erie of Rutland ' (p. II 25, 
col. l), and the king promised to repeal Norfolk from banishment. This 
circumstance probably suggested to Shakespeare the idea of introducing 
Norfolk's death in the present scene. Stow (Annals, p. 525, ed. 1601) adds 
that it took place ' in his returne from Jerusalem.' 

104. See Luke xvi. 22 ; and Richard III. iv. 3. 38: 

' The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham's bosom.' 

112. fourth of that name. So the quartos. The folios, doubtless for the 
metre's sake, read 'of that name the fourth.' But 'fourth' may be pro- 
nounced as a dissyllable. Sidney Walker (Versification, p. 1.^8) quotes an 
mstance from Middleton's Wisdom of Solomon, ed. Dyce, vol. v. p. 3S9 : 

' All four are one, each in all four's place.' 
See also 2 Henry VI. ii. 1. 55 : 

' Henry doth claim the crown from John of Gaunt, 
The fourth son ; York claims it from the third." 
So we find in Shakespeare, chiefly in the earlier plays, such words as ' fear,' 
'dear,' 'fire,' 'heir,' 'hour.' 'sure,' 'your' pronounced as dissyllables. 

113. I71 God's name. Bolingbroke began with the words : ' In the name 
of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,' when he claimed the realm. 



sc. I.] RICHARD II. 135 

but is not recorded as having used any such adjuration when he seated 
himself on the throne. 

114. The speech of the Bishop of Carlisle, here paraphrased and expanded 
by Shakespeare from Holinshed (p. 1 1 23, cols. I, 2) was made, not on the 
occasion of Richard's deposition and Henry's election, but on the 22nd of 
October, when a request was made by the Commons that King Richard 
might have judgment decreed against him, and that the causes of his deposing 
might be published through the realm. The Bishop is said to have been a 
man ' learned, wise, and stoute of stomacke.' 

115. The Bishop speaks as if no other spiritual peer were present. ' Worst' 
is here an adverb, and the speaker apologizes either for his comparatively 
humble rank or his deficiency in rhetorical skill, perhaps both. ' Though I may 
speak the worst, or with the least right to speak of all in this royal presence.' 

116. Yet best beseeming 7ne, i.e. yet I speak, as best befitting me (being a 
spiritual peer) to speak the truth. Johnson proposed 'yet best beseems it me,' 
and Staunton points 'yet best, beseeming me.' The somewhat la.x con- 
struction is quite in Shakespeare's manner, and the sense cannot be mistaken. 

119. noblesse. So the first quarto. The others have ' noblenesse.' The 
word is borrowed from the French, like 'largesse,' 'richesse,' 'duresse,' 'caresse.' 
Spenser uses the word as a trisyllable. Fairy Queen, ii. 8. 18; 

' Prince Arthur, flowre of grace and nobilesse.' 

120. Learn, teach. So Much Ado About Nothing, iv. I. 31 : 

' You learn me noble thankfulness.' 
' Learn ' occurs in this sense in the Prayer Book version of the Psalms. See 
Ps. XXV. 4, 8, cxix. 66, cxxxii. 13. 

123. judged, condemned. So in line 128. Compare Merchant of Venice, 
iv. 1.83: 

'Let me have judgement and the Jew his will.' 
So St. Luke xix. 22 : 'Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee.' See 
also 2 Henry VL ii. 3. 15 : 

' Eleanor, the law, thou see'st, hath judged thee : 
I cannot justify whom the law conden)ns.' 

124. apparent, manifest. See King John, iv. 2. 93: 'It is apparent 
foul play.' 

125. subject. Used as an adjective, like 'servant' in t Henry IV. i. 3. 19 : 

' The moody frontier of a servant brow.' 
12(). for/end. So the quartos. The folios read ' forbid.' See Winter's 
Tale, iv. 4. 541 : ' As heavens forfend !' 

130. climate, region of earth or sky. See Julius Caesar, i. 3. 32 : 

' For I believe they are portentous things 
Unto the climate that they point upon.' 
Compare King John, ii. i. 344 : 

' By this hand I swear, 
That sways the earth this climate overlooks.' 
lb. S07il!; refined, i. e. souls purified by Christian discipline. The sense 
of ' refined ' is modified and explained by the preceding words, ' in a 
Christian climate,' as we should say, in a Christian atmosphere. 

131. obscene, 'foul,' 'loathsome,' in the sense of the Latin original. See 
Virgil, Georgics, iv. 170. 



17,6 



NOTES. [act rv. 



137 sqq. The civil wars between the rival houses of York and Lancaster 
consequent upon Richard's deposition, and the disputed right of succession 
to the crown, may be said to have lasted from I455, in which year the 
Battle of St. Alban's was fought, to 14S5 when Henry conquered on the 
field of Bosworth. 

139. go deep. So Hamlet, ii. 1. loi : 

' I will go seek the king.' 
So also ' come ' in Merchant of Venice, ii. 7. 4.^ : 

'For princes to come view fair Portia.' 
141. Wars in which fellow-countrymen and kinsmen shall be ranged on 
opposite sides, will destroy all the obligations of family afl'ection and of 
humanity. ' Kin ' refers to blocd-relationship, ' kind ' to our conunou 
human nature. Compare Hamlet, i. 2. 65 : 

' A little more than kin, and less than kind.' 

144. Golgotha. See St. Matthew xxvii. 33. 

145. An allusion to St. Matthew xii. 25. 

lb. raise, rouse, stir up. See King Lear, ii. 4. 43: 

' He raised the house with loud and coward cries.' 
The folios erroneously read ' reare.' 

148. Prevent it, resist it. Pope, perhaps rightly, read ' Prevent, 
resist it.' 

150. At the close of the Bishop's speech he was arrested, according to 
Holinshed, by the Earl Marshal, i. e. the Earl of Westmoreland, and com- 
mitted to ward in the Abbey of St. Alban's. Northumberland w.is Lord 
High Constable, and had been Earl Marshal in the reign of Edward III and 
at the coronation of Richard. 

152. According to Holinshed the Bishop of Carlisle was on this occasion 
committed to custody in the Abbey of St. Alban's. It appears however 
from Rymer (Fcedera, vol. viii. p. 150) that on the 23rd of June, 1400, he 
was transferred from the Tower to the custodv of the Abbot of Westminster. 
Shakespeare must in this instance have consulted some other source besides 
his usual authority Holinshed, who does not mention his confinement in the 
Tower, or his transference to Westminster. There is considerable doubt 
among antiquaries as to the name of this Abbot. Dr. Stanley (Memorials 
of Westminster Abbey, p. 355) says that it was William of Colchester, Abbot 
from 1386 to 1420, 'who was sent by Henry IV. with sixty horsemen to 
the Council of Constance, and died twenty years after Shakespeare reports 
him to have been hanged for his treason.' But what Shakespeare says, 
v. 6. 19, is this : 

• The grand conspirator, Abbot of Westminster, 
With clog of cou'^cience and snur melancholy 
Hath yielded up his body to the grave.' 
He derived this statement from Holinshed, p. 1129, col. I : 'Shortly after,' 
(i.e. shortly after the defeat of the conspiracy in the beginning of 1400) 
' the Abbot of Westminster, in whose house the conspiracie was begonne 
(as is sayde) goyng betweene his nionastcric and mansion, for thought fell 
into a suddayiie palscy, and shortly after, without speech, ended thys life.' 
This is copied almost verbatim from Hall (fol. xiv. 1, ed. 1550). The 
truth of tliis statcaicnt is impugned by Widmore and others, but ai> 



!c. I.] RICHARD II. 137 

Shakespeare adopted it with implicit confidence, his editors are not con- 
cerned in its refutation. 

154-318. This part of the scene, beginning 'May it please you 
lords,' down to 'a true king's fall,' 165 lines in all, is not found in the 
quartos of 1 597 and 1598, but appears for the first time in the quarto of 
160S. See our remarks in the Preface. 

157- conduct, guide, escort. See Romeo and Juliet, iii. I. 12Q): 
' And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now.' 

160. beholding. Changed, as usual, by Pope to 'beholden.' See IMerchant 
of Venice, i. 3. 106 : 

'Well, Shylock, shall we be beholding to you?' 

161. This stage direction is CapcU's. The third and fourth quartos have 
merely 'Enter King Richard ;' the folios ' Enter Richard and Yorke.' 

163. shook. See note on iii. i. 13. 

168. favours, countenances. See All's Well that Ends Well, i. I. IC7 : 

' Of every line and trick of his sweet favour.' 

169. sometime, once. See v. i. 37, and Tempest, v. I. 86: 

' As I was sometime Milan.' 
'Sometimes' is also used by Shakespeare in this sense. See note, i. 2. ^4. 

170. See St. Matthew xxvi. 49. 

171. An incurable Alexandrine. 

183. yours. 'So the quartos. The folios have 'thine.' 
185. owes, owns. See Antony and Cleopatra, iv. 8. 31 : 

' Bear our hack'd targets like the men that owe them.' 
'Owe' is also used in the modern sense, i. 1. 167. Both senses aie found 
together in King John, ii. I. 24S : 

' Be pleased then 
To pay that duty which you truly owe 
To him that owes it.' 
196, 197. ' Care' is mental trouble, whether caused by an anxious ofnce 
or by regret for its loss, ' anxiety ' or ' sorrow.' Richard therefore says, 
using the word first in the sense of ' sorrow,' ' My care is loss of care, 
owing to the cessation of my cares of office ; your care is gain of care, 
consequent upon j'our having won the anxious dignity of king.' 

199. tend, attend. Used, like " attend,' with or without ' ou.' See 
Macbeth, i. 5. 42 ; 

' Come, you spirits 
That tend on mortal thoughts;' 
and King John, v. 6. 32 : 

'Who didst thou leave to tend his majesty?' 

201. Ay is printed as usual in the old editions ' I,' and the joke, such a« 
it is, depends upon the identity in sound of ' ay' and 'I.' See note iii. 3. 175. 

202. no no. Since I must be nothing, 'no I' is 'no no.' The second 
'no' must be taken as a substantive. 

207. balm, iii. 2. 55. Holinshed, in his account of Rich.Trd's coronation, 
says (p. 1005, col. 2), 'The Archbishop hauing stripped him, first anointed 
his hands, after his head, brest. shoulders, and the joints of his armes with 
y' sacred oile, saying certain prayers, and in the nieaiie time did the quier 
sing y" antheme, beginning " Uuxeruat regem Salamouem," ' &c. 



138 



NOTES. [act IV. 



210. duty's rites. The third and fourth quarto read 'duties rites,' the 
foHos ' dutious oathes.' In this interpolated portion of the play the text of 
the first folio is generally to be preferred to that of the quarto, as it presents 
several deliberate corrections, some unquestionably right and perhaps taken 
from the original manuscript. But in this passage ' dutious oathes' seems 
like the substitution of a commonplace for a difficult reading. The author 
no doubt originally wrote what we find in the quarto ; whether he or 
another made the correction is doubtful. 'Duty's rites' are the ceremonious 
observances which subjects are bound to render to their sovereign. Collier 
reads 'duties, rites,' and proposes 'duteous riles' or ' duties, rights.' The 
distinction in spelling between 'rite' and 'right' is by no means always 
observed in Shakespeare and his contemporaries. 

212. revenue to be accented on the second syllable, as in Tempest, i. 2. 98: 
' Not only with what my revenue yielded.' 
Compare Hamlet, iii. 2. 63. The word has occurred in this play three times 
before, i. 4. 46, ii. I. 161, 226, always with the accent upon the first syllable. 

215. that sivear, i.e. 'of them that swear,' an ellipsis similar to that 
noticed in iii. 2. 15S. The folio reads: 

' God keep all vows unbroke are made to thee,' 
which looks like an unauthorized correction. 

217. And thou. Strict grammar requires ' and thee.' Compare Merchant 
of Venice, iii. 2. 321 : ' All debts are cleared between you and I.' 

2l8-22i. Long... days] Pope banished these lines to the margin, as 
unworthy of their author and perhaps spurious. 

221. sunshine days. Compare 3 Henry VI. ii. I. 187 : 
' Ne'er may he live to sec a sunshine day.' 

225. state and profit, settled order and mateiial progress, which had been 
damaged by Richard's unconstitutional exactions. The two words 'state' 
and ' profit' are used as Bacon uses 'state' and 'advancement' in the following 
(Advancement of Learning, ii. 21. § 2. p. 195): 'For to preserve in state 
is the less, to preserve with advancement is the greater.' 

228. ravel out, unravel. See flamlet, iii. 4. 1&6: 

' Make you to ravel all this matter out.* 

329. folly. So the third and fourth quartos. The folios have ' follyes ' 
or ' follies.' 

230. record. The word is used with the accent on the second syllable 
also in Hamlet, i. 5. 99: 

'I'll wipe away all trivial fond records,' 
and accented on the first, i. I. 30, of this play. 

232. lecture, reading, 'lesson' in the ecclesiastical sense. 'To read a 
lecture of them' is not a pleonastic phrase, but implies to read aloud for the 
instruction of the public. 

232, 233. If thou wouldst. There shouldst thou. We should say ' If thou 
shouldst, There wouldst thou.' Compare iii. 4. 20. We have ' should' used 
for our 'would* ii. 3. lop, where see note. We have 'would' for 'should' 
in Bacon's Essay xxxiii. p. 141. 'Making of bay salt, if the climate be 
proper for it, would be put in experience.' The modern usage of ' shall' and 
'will,' 'should' and 'would,' now perfectly logical and consistent, has been 
gradually refined and perfected. In the time of Shakespeare and Bacon these 



sc. I.] RICHARD II. 139 

words were employed as arbitrarily and irregularly as they still are in con- 
versation by Scotchmen and Irishmen. The late lamented Sir Edmund Head 
wrote a treatise on the subject which is well worth reading. 

236. Perhaps Shakespeare had in his mind Exodus xxxii. 32, 33. 

237. All. Omitted in the quartos. 

lb. look vpon. So the quartos. The folios have ' look upon me.' We 
find however 'look upon' in Troilus and Cressida, v. 6. 10: 

' He is my prize : I will not look upon.' 
In all probability therefore Shakespeare wrote 'look upon' in this passage. 

238. bait, worry. This is a metaphor from bear-baiting or bull-baiting: 
Wretchedness is the dog. Compare 2 Henry VI. v. I. 148, where bear- 
baiting is mentioned in more detail. 

239. St. Matthew xxvii. 24, 26. 

■241. sour, bitter. So we have had 'sour' applied to ' ru«,' iii. 4. lo.^, 
■where a modern author would certainly have said ' bitter.' So probably 
Romeo and Juliet, iii. 2. 116, ' Sour woe.' The word is however used also 
in the narrower and modern sense, as Coriolanus, v. 4. 18 : 
' The tartness of his face sours ripe grapes.' 
In many cases either sense will suit the context, as the contrary of ' sweet ' 
may be either ' sour ' or ' bitter.' 

246. a sort, a company, or, in modern colloquial phrase, ' a lot.' See 
Richard III. v. 3. 316 : 

' A sort of vagabonds, rascals, and runaways.' 
■350. pompo7ts. Now only applied in a bad sense to personal bearing or to 
style in writing and speaking. Here it denotes external magnificence. Com- 
pare As You Like It, v. 4. 188 : 

' The Duke hath put on a religious life 
And thrown into neglect the pompous court.' 
254. haught, haughty. So 3 Henry VI. ii. i. 169: 'The haught North- 
umberland.' 

lb. insulting, ostentatiously triumphing. Compare i Henry VI. i. 2. 13S : 
' Now am I like that proud insulting ship 
Which Cjesar and his fortune bare at once.' 
25v Nor no man's. This double negative is very frequent. Compare 
Merchant of Venice, iii. 4. 1 1 : • 

' I never did repent for doing good 
Nor shall not now.' 

256. name was, i. e. name which was. See ii. I. 17,^, and note. 

257. But 'tis usurped, i.e. I have no name which is not usurped. In 
giving away my kingdom 1 have given away all that was mine by right of 
birth. I am no longer the same person who was born and baptized. 

260. a mockery king, a mock king. The substantive is made into an 
adjective as is ' sunshine' line 221. 

263. Pope, who had a great contempt for verbal quibbles, put this line in • 
the margin. 

264. An if. See note on iv. i. 49. 

lb. if my word be sterling, i.e. if my word pass current, and command its 
full value. Somewhat in the same sense we have 'current' used, i. 3. 231. 



1 40 NOTES. [act IV. 

The quartos here have ' name' for 'word,' but the latter, which is the reading 
of the folios, is supported by the pass.ige just referred to, i. 3 231. 

267. bis, for 'its.' So Matthew v. 13: 'If the salt have lost his 
savour.' 

269. while the glass do:b come, in the mean time till the glass ton:ei. 
See i. 3. 122, and note. 
275. writ. See ii. I. 14. 
281. beguile, deceive. See King John, iii. 1. 99; 

* You have bcgUiled nie with a counterfeit 
Resembling majesty.' 
vVe have had the word in the sol'tcr and more modern sense, ii. 3. 11. 

2S3. Holinshed, p. 1 116, col. 2, says: 'There resorted dayly to his court 
aboue .x. M.' (i.e. ten thousand) 'persons that had nieate and driiike there 
allowed them.' 

285-290. Was this . . . sport. This passage was also put in the margin 
by Pope. 

292. Bolingbroke's meaning in 'the shadow of your sorrow' is probably 
explained by Richard's comment ; ' the shadow of your face ' is, of course, 
the image of his face in the glass. 

296. lament^.. See note on iii. I. 38. 

299. The quartos omit ' There lies the substance,' also ' for thy great 
bounty ' line 300, and ' Shall I obtain it ? ' line 304. All these are supplied 
by the 4blio. 

304. fair. Hanmer read ' my fair ' for the metre. 

308. I have a king here to my flatterer. The same construction is found 
Judges xvii. 13 : 'Seeing 1 have a Levite to my priest,' and Matthew iii 9: 
* We have Abraham to our father.' 

315. sights. Pope changed this to 'sight.' But the plural is frequently 
used by Shakespeare and writers of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries 
when designating an attribute common to many, in cases where it would 
now be considered a solecism. Compare King Lear, iv. 6. 35 : 
' O you mighty gods ! 
This world I do renounce, and in your sights 
Shake patiently my great affliction ol^".' 
See also Richard I^. iv. I. 25 ; 'Timon of Athens, i. I. 255 ; Pericles, i. I. 74. 
So we have ' loves,' ' consents,' Two Gentlemen of Verona, i. 3. 48, 49 : 
' O that our fathers would applaud our loves, 
To seal our happiness with their consents!' 
We find 'wills,' Henry VIII. iii. 1. 68: 

' My lords, I thank you both for your good wills ; ' 
and in Timon of Athens, i. 2. 123. So again 'contents' in the present 
play, V. 2. 38. 

317. conveyers. A euphemism for 'tliieves.' See Merry Wives of 
Windsor, i. 3. 32 : 

' Nytn. The good humour is to steal at a minute's rest. 
Pistol. '• Convey," the wise it call.' 
319. Wednesday. Henry's coronation was really on Monday, Oct. 13, 
being St. Edward's Day. (Holinshed, p. 11 21, col. i.) 

333. The conspirators entertained by the Abbot of Westminster were, 



«c. I.] RICHARD IT. I4I 

besides Carlisle and Aumerle (now only Earl of Rutland), the Earl of 
Huntingdon, lately deprived of the dukedom of Exeter, the Eail of Kent, late 
Duke of Surrey, the Earl of Salisbury, Hugh Lord Spencer, late PJarl of 
Gloucester, Sir Thomas Blount, and IVIagdalen, one of King Richard's 
chaplains, who strongly resembled his master in appearance. Holinshed, 
p. 1126, col. I. 

334. A plot shall, i.e. which shall. See note on ii. I. 173. 



ACT V. 

Scene I. 

2. Jnlh/s C(Ssar's ill-erected tower. Compare Richard HI. iii. i. 69, &c., 
where Shakespeare says that the building of the Tower by Julius Caesar was 
' upon record,' and not a mere matter of tradition. But the story is rejected 
by Stow as ' of none assured ground.' Gray refers to it in 'The Bard :' 

'Ye towers of Julius! London's lasting shame.' 
Ill-erected, i. e. erected for evil purposes or under evil auspices. 

3. flint bosom. ' Flint ' is probably used as an epithet without any direct 
reference to the material of which the Tower was built. Compare v. 5. 20 : 

' The flinty ribs 
Of this hard world, my ragged prison walls.' 

11. model, the groundplan of the ruined city, to be traced only by the 
foundations of the walls. So Richard is on!y the ruin of his former self. 
Mr. Hunter supposes lines II-15 to be addressed to the Tower, not to 
Richard. But the words in line l^, 'And not Kins; Richard,' are decisive 
against this interpretation. 

12. Thou fnap of honour. The mere outline, which is all that is left. In a 
lomewhat different sense the expression occurs in 2 Henry VI. iii. i. 203 : 

' In thy face I see 
The map of honour,' 
which indicates the honour within. In the same way ' sleep ' is called ' the 
map of death ' in Lucrecc, 402 : 

' Showing life's triumph in the map of death.' 

13. inn, a lodging, distinguished from a dwelling as being temporary, and 
hence a house for the entertainment of travellers. In this sense Shakespeare 
always uses it, except when he speaks of the ' Inns of Court.' Compare 
King Lear, i. 4. 265 : 

' This our court, infected with their manners. 
Shows like a riotous inn.' 
It clearly bears this sense in Beaumont and Fletcher's Lover's Progress, v. 3 : 

' Tis my wonder. 
If such misshapen guests as lust and murder 
At any price should ever find a lodging 
In such a beauteous inn.' 
Tile words 'guests,' 'price,' 'lodging,' sufficiently show the meaning to be 



1 4 i NOTES. [act v. 

attached to ' inn.' In the present passage Bolingbroke is to Richard as a 
common alehouse to a ' beauteous inn.' 

14. bard-favour d. See note on 'favour' in iv. I. 168. 

20. sworn brother. Compare Henry V. ii. 1.13: 'I will bestow a 
breakfast to make you friends, and we'll be all three sworn brothers to 
France.' And Much Ado About Nothing, i. I. 73 : ' He hath every month 
a new sworn brother.' In his note on the former passage, Mr. Whalley says: 
' In the time of adventure, it was usual for two chiefs to bind themselves to 
share in each other's fortune, and divide their acquisitions between them. 
So, in the Conqueror's expedition, Robert de Oily and Roger de Ivery were 
fratres jurati ; and Robert gave one of the honours he received to his swor/i 
brother Roger.' 

23. cloister thee, become a recluse. Like Germ. Master, and Fr. cloitre, 
'cloister' is used for 'convent' without any reference to the architectural 
sense of the word. 

lb. religious house, that is, a convent in which the inhabitants took vows 
of * religion ' in the technical sense. Compare As You Like It, v. 4. 188 : 
' The Duke hath put on a religious life, 
And thrown into neglect the pompous court.' 
That is, he has entered a monastic order. And in line 166 of the same 
scene : ' Where meeting with an old religious man.' 

25. sfricken. The reading of the folios. The early quartos had ' thrown,' 
in which case ' here ' must be pronounced as a dissyllable. See note on 
* fourth,' iv. I. 112. For this form of the participle see Julius Csesar, 
ii. I. 192 : 'The clock hath stricken three.' In the same play (iii. 1. 209) 
we find the form 'strucken ': 

' How like a deer, strucken by many princes, 
Dost thou here lie !' 

27. Transform' d and weahen'd. The former of these refers to ' shape,' 
and the latter to 'mind.' The quartos and folios end the line at 'Boling- 
broke.' Pope arranged as in the text, reading ' weak ' for ' weaken'd.' 

28. hath he been in thy heart? The feebleness of this expression would 
lead us to suspect that the line is corrupt, and that something of this sort 
occupied its place, dividing as in the early editions : 

' Deposed thine intellect, benunib'd thy heart.' 
30, 31. with rage To he overpowered, that is, with rage at being over- 
powered. Compare I Henry IV. i. 3. 50 : 

• I then, still smarting with my wounds being cold, 
To be so pester'd with a popinjay.' 

37. sometime. See iv. 1. 169. 

41, 42. tales .... long ago betid, that is, tales of woe which happened in 
ages long past. Compare Tempest, i. c. 31 : 

' No, not so much perdition as an hair 
Betid to any creature in the vessel.' 
The word 'betid' is derived from the Anglo-Saxon tid, time. 

43. to quit their griefs, to requite or match their sorrowful tales. Com- 
pare King Lear, iii. 7- 87 : 

* Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature, 
To quit this horrid act.' 



SCI.] RICHARD II. 143 

44. tale. So the quartos. The folios have ' fall.' 

46. For ivky, because. Compare Two Gentlemen of Verona, iii. i. 99 : 
' For why, the fools are mad if left alone.' 
And Comedy of Errors, iii. 2. lo^ : ' Swart, like my shoe, but her face 
nothing like so clean kept ; for why, she sweats.' See also Ps. cv. 41, Prayer 
Book version, where it is wrongly printed with a note of interrogation. 

lb. sympathize does not occur elsewhere in Shakespeare as a transitive 
verb. We have, however, the participle passive ' sympathized,' Comedy 
of Errors, v. i. 397 : 

' And all that are assembled in this place. 
That by this sympathized one day's error 
Have suffer'd wrong ;' 
and Love's Labour 's Lost, iii. I. 52 : 'A message well sympathized : a horse 
to be ambassador for an ass.' Cotgrave uses ' sympathize ' as equivalent to 
' have a fellow feeling of.' 

45. Jire. To be pronounced as a dissyllable. See note on iv. i. 112. 
53. order tden. Compare 2 Henry IV. iii. 2. 198 : ' I will take such order 

that thy friends shall ring for thee.' 

61. helping him to all, i.e. seeing that you have helped him to all. The 
participle agrees with ' thou,' the principal subject of the sentence. 

62. And was added by Rowe. 

66. converts. We have ' convert ' as an intransitive verb, v. 3. 64, and 
Macbeth, iv. 3. 229 : ' Let grief Convert to anger.' 

68. worthy, merited. Compare All's Well that Ends Well, iv. 3. 7 '■ 

' He has much worthy blame laid upon him.' 

69. and there an end. A familiar colloquial phrase. See Two Gentlemen 
of Verona, i. 3. 65 : 

' For what I will, I will, and there an end.' 
With the substantive verb it is found in Henry V. ii. 1 . 1 1 : 'It will toast cheese, 
and it will endure cold as another man's sword will : and there's an end.' 

74. imkiss, i. e. here ' unmake by a kiss.' The speaker would hardly have 
used this word unless he had already bethought him that it was made by a 
kiss. So we have ' uncurse,' iii. 2.137; ' unshout,' Coriolanus, v. 5. 4 ; ' un- 
speak,' Macbeth, iv. 3. 123. 

76. I towards the north. We should have expected 'me' rather than '1,' 
but the older writers, like modern talkers, are careless of strict grammar 
when there is no doubt of the meaning. Verbs of motion especially are 
often omitted when an adverb or preposition suffices to determine the sense. 

77. pines. See note ii. I. 25S. "This verb is not used transitive!}' else- 
where in Shakespeare. 

80. Hallowmas. Written ' Hollowmas ' in the quartos and folios. 
Hallowmas, i. e. All Saints' Day, Nov. I, was, in Shakespeare's time, ten day* 
nearer the winter solstice than now. 

88. Better to be far off than to be near, and yet never the nearer. Foi 
' near,' as a comparative, see iii. 2. 64, and Drayton, Eclogue vii. 164 : 

' Much will be said and ne'er a whit the near.' 
Malone quotes The Legend of Shore's Wife, by Thomas Churchyard, in the 
Mirrour for Magistrates, 1578 : 

* Your time is lost and you are never the near.' 



144 NOTES. [act t. 

96. mine, i. e. my heart. 

lOl. To make woe wanton. Compare iii. 3. 164. 

Ih. fond. This word, whenever in Shakespeare it has the sense of 
' affectionate,' implies also something of folly. Frequently it is merely 
* foolish,' as in v. 2. 95, loi, and Merchant of Venice, iii. 3. 9 : 

' I do wonder. 
Thou naughty gaoler, that thou art so fond 
To come abroad with him at his request." 

Scene II. 

Capell supposes this scene to be laid in London. The Earl of Rutland 
(formerly Duke of Aumerle), according to Hcilinshed, p. 1 1 26, col. 2, went 
from Westminster to his father's house, with the ' counterpane of the In- 
denture of the confederacie in his bosome,' which does not imply that he took 
a journey as far as Langley. On the other hand, what the Duchess says, line 
3, would seem to show that she was not in London. The first Duchess of 
York, mother of Aumerlc, was Isabella, daughter of Peter the Cruel, king of 
Castile and Leon. She died in 1394. The present Duchess was Joan Holland, 
third daughter of Thomas, E;irl of Kent, the son of Joan Planlagenet, ' fair 
maid of Kent,' by her first husband, Thomas Holland, first Earl of that surname. 
Joan Plantagenet was daughter of Edmund ofWoodstock,Earl of Kent, younger 
son of Edward I. After the death of Thomas Holland she married the Black 
Prince, and was by him mother of Richard II. Thiis the second Duchess of 
York was niece of Richard II. and sister of the Duke of Surrey, who appears 
in this play. After York's death the Duchess was thrice married; (1) to 
Lord Willoughby ; (2) to Henry, Lord Scrope : and (3) to Henry, Lord de 
Vesci. But Shakespeare evidently knew nothing of this genealogy. He 
considers the Duchess to be mother of Aumerle (line 102), and makes no 
allusion to her relationship to the deposed king. 

4. leave, leave oflT, cease. Compare Two Gentlemen of Verona, ii. 6. 17 : 
*I cannot leave to love.' 

7. The description of Richard's and Bolingbroke's entry into London is 
due to the poet's imagination. According to Holinshed, p. i 1 10, col. 2, 
and IIII, col. I, Richard was first taken to Westminster, while Henry 'was 
receyued with all the ioy and pompe that myghte bee of the Londoners, and 
was lodged in the Byshops Palace by Ponies Churche.' The next day 
Richard ' was had to the Tower and there committed to safe custodie. 
Many euill disposed persons, assembling themselues togither in greate num- 
bers, intended to haue met with him, and to haue taken him from suche as 
had the conueying of him, that they might haue slayne him : but the Maior 
and Aldermen gathered to them the worshipful] Commoners, and graue 
Citizens, by whose policie, and not without much adoe, y>-' other were re- 
uoked from their euill purpose.' According to Stow, p. 522, ed. 1601, 
Richard was taken by water from Westminster to the Tower. 

16. The windows of every storey crowded with spectators remind the 
poet of the painted cloths, or tapestry, which decorated the chambers of 
well-to-do people and on gala days were brought out to adorn the outer 
walls. He does not say (as Delius understands it) that the walls were actn- 



sc. 2.] RICHARD II. 145 

illy on this occasion decked with tapestry : ' You would have thought,' 
line 12. 

17. Jcf-ii. See note on iv. i. 93. 

22. Pope ahered ' the whilst ' to the more usual form ' the while.' 

25. idly, carelessly, indifferently. 

28. The folios, for the sake of the metre, omit ' gentle.' 

32. combating, as expressing the inward struggle of his mind. 

33. fatience, a trisyllable. 

38. Though the meaning of this line is clear enough, the expression is 
remarkable. In modern prose we should rather have said : ' In accordance 
with whose will we limit our desires and regrets.' 

Ih. contents. See note iv. i. 315. 

40. allow, admit, accede to. Compare Coriolanus, iii. 3. 45 : 

' I do demand 

If you submit yru to the people's voices, 

Allow their officers.' 
In this sense the word comes through the French alloiier, from the Latin 
allaiidare. In the more usual sense it is derived, also through the French 
alloiier, from aUocare. 

41. Ajinurle that was, now degraded to be Earl of Rutland. 

44. Holinshed, speaking of York and his son, p. 1 1 26, col. 2, says: 'For 
whom he was become suretie and mainpernour for his good abearing in 
open Parliament.' 

46, 47. Who are the earliest courtiers of the new king? Bolingbroke has 
already been compared to the sun melting winter's snow, iv. i. 261 ; now 
he is ihe sun that calls forth the flowers of spring. 

48. Nor I greatly care not. See iv. I. 255, and note. 

52. Holinshed, p. 1 1 26, col. I, speaking of the conspiracy in the secret 
chamber of the Abbot's house at Westminster, says: ' At length by the aduice 
of the Earle of Huntingdon, it was deuised that they should take vpon them 
a solemne iustes to be enterprysed betweene him and twentie on his part, 
and the erle of Salisburie, and twentie with him at Oxford, to the which 
triumph king Henr;e shoulde be desired, and when hee should bee most busily 
regarding the Martiall pastime, hee sodainl}' shoulde bee slaine and destroj^ed, 
and so by that meanes king Richard, which as yet liucd, might be restored 
to libertie, and to his former estate and dignitie.' 

lb. triumphs, stately shows. See Pericles, ii. 2. I : 

' Are the knights ready to begin the triumph?' 

56. According to Holinshed this discovery was made while they sate at 
dinner, p. 11 26, col. 2. Shakespeare has introduced the seal. 'For this 
Earle of Rutland departing before from Westminster to see hys father the 
duke of Yorke, as he sate at dinner, had his counterpane of the Indenture of 
the confederacie in his bosome. The father espying it, would needes see what 
jt was : and though the sonne humbly denied to shew it, the father beeing 
more earnest to see it, by force tooke it out of his bosome, and perceyuing 
the contents thereof, in a great rage caused his horses to be sadled out of 
hande,' &c. 

65. band, bond. The two forms are used indifferently. ' Bond ' is the 
reading of the folios. The early quartos have 'band.' For 'band' see 



1 46 NOTES. [act v. 

i. I. 2. 'Bond' occurs two lines below, and in Merchant of Venice, i. 

' Yes, Shylock, I will seal unto this bond.' 
And frequently in other passages. 
66. 'gainst. See note iii. 4. 28. 

79. appeach, inform against, accuse. See 1. I02, and compare All's Well 
that Ends Well, i. 3. 197 : 

' Come, come, disclose 
The state of your aftection ; for your passions 
Have to the full appeach'd.' 
Cotgrave translates the word by the French accuser, calenger, emputer. 

81. / will not peace. The Duchess makes a verb for the nonce out of 
York's exclamation. York himself does the same in ii. 3. 87 : 
' Grace me no grace, nor imcle me no uncle.' 

84. I will unto the king. The verb of motion is frequently omitted when 
the preposition or adverb indicating direction is expressed. Compare i. 2. 
73 ; Psalm xii. 6, Pr. Bk., ' I will up, saith the Lord.* And Timon of Athens, 
ii. 2. 14 : 

' So soon as dinner's done, we'll forth again, 
My Alcibiades.' 
So also, Lear, iii. 2. 12 : 

' Good nuncle, in, and ask thy daughters' blessing.' 

85. amazed, confounded, bewildered. Compare i. 3.81, and Cymbeline, 
iv. 3. 28 : 'I am amazed with matter.' 

90. York had at least one more son, Richard, who appears as Earl of 
Cambridge in the play of Henry V. 

lb. like, likely. Compare All's Well that Ends Well, ii. I. 61 : 'Worthy 
fellows ; and like to prove most sinewy sword-men.' 

91. teeming date, the period of child bearing. 

97. A dozen. Holinshed only mentions nine conspirators, of whom si.x 
signed the bond. See note on iv. I. 333. 

98. interchangeably. Compare i. I. 146, and I Henry IV. iii. i. 81 : 

' And our indentures tripartite are drawn ; 
Which being sealed interchangeably.' 
Holinshed (p. 1126, col. 2) says, ' Herevpon was an Indenture sextipartite 
made, sealed with their scales, and signed wyth theyr handes, in the whiche 
eche stoode bounde to other, to do their whole endeuor for the accomplish- 
ing of their purposed exployte.' 

99. He shall be none, that is, he shall not be one of them. 
102. appeach. See 1. 79. 

111. After. Like 'away,' 'on,' and other prepositions used as interjec- 
tions without the verb of motion. 

112. Spur, post. This is the reading of the quartos. The folios have 
'spurre post,' taking 'post' as an adverb. Either is allowable. As an adverb 
the word occurs in Ail's Well that Ends Well, iv. 5. 85 : 

' His highness comes post from Marseilles.' 
And as a verb in the present play, i. I. 56. Compare also Lucrece, I : 
' From the bes'eged Ardea all in post.' 



sc. 3-1 RICHARD II. I47 

Scene III. 

Windsor Castle. Hal! (Henry IV. fol. 13 a) says, 'The duke of Aumerle 
seyng in what case he stode toke his horse and rode another way to Wind- 
sor, riding in post thither (whiche his father being an olde man could not do). 
And when he alighted at the castel gate, he caused the gates to be shut, 
sayinge, that he must nedes delyuer the keies to the kyng. When he came 
before the kynges presence, he kneled doune on his knees, besechyng hym 
of mercy and forgeuenes : The kyng demaunded the cause : then he declared 
to him playnely the whole confederacie and entier coniuracyon in maner and 
forme as you haue hearde : Wei sayde the kynge, yf this be true we pajdon 
you, yf it bee fayned at youre extreme peryll bee it. Whyle the kynge and 
the duke talked together, the duke of Yorke knocked at the castel gate, 
whom the kynge caused to be let in, and there he delyuered the endenture 
which before was taken from hys sonne, into the kynges handes. Whyche 
writinge when he had redde and sene, perceiuynge the signes and seales of 
the confederates, he chaunged his former purpose.' Holinshed follows Hall 
nearly verbatim, but we have preferred to quote the passage as it stands in 
Hall, because it may possibly have suggested to Shakespeare the reference to 
York's age in v. 2. 115. The introduction of the Duchess upon the scene 
is purely the dramatist's invention. We have already called attention to the 
fact that this Duchess of York was not Aumerle's mother. 

I. The 'unthrifty son' was only in his twelfth year at this time. See 
note on ii. 3. 42. Bolingbroke himself was only thirty-three. Henry the 
Fifth's youthful wildness is mentioned by Holinshed, p. 1 165, col. I. 

6. frequent. Not used intransitively elsewhere by Shakespeare. 

7. tinrestrained. Delius explains this as equivalent to ' unrestrainable,' 
comparing the use of ' unavoided ' for ' unavoidable ' in ii. 1. 268. But this 
does not appear to be necessary. 

lb. companions, frequently used by Shakespeare and his contemporaries 
in a depreciatory sense, as ' fellow ' is now. Compare Merry Wives of 
Windsor, iii. I. 123: 'This same scall, scurvy, cogging companion;' and 
2 Henry VI. iv. 10. 33 : 

' Why, rude companion, whatsoe'er thou be, 
I know thee not.' 
Also Coriolanus, v. 2. 65: 'Now, }'ou companion, I'll say an errand icr 
you.' 

9. passengers, passers by. Compare 2 Henry VI. iii. I. 129: 

* Or foul felonious thief that fleeced poor passengers.' 
And in the same scene, 1. 227 : 

' Gloucester's show 
Beguiles him as the mournful crocodile 
With sorrow snares relenting passengers.' 

10. Which. Pope altered this to ' While.' The construction is very 
irregular, but not without parallel in Shakespeare. Staunton thinks that the 
words 'So dissolute a crew' were either intended to be cancelled, or to 
supply the place of ' even such they say ' line 8. By putting a comma after 
' support,' we may get rid of the difficulty, ' So dissolute a crew ' being in 
apposition to ' Which." 

L 2 



14^ 



NOTES. [act r. 



10. wanton. Rowe takes this word as an adjective. It occurs a.s a sub- 
stantive in King John, v. i. 70 : 

' Shall a beardless boy, 
A cocker'd silken wanton, brave our fields?' 
14. triiimphi. See v. 2. 52. 
lb. held, rather ' to be held.' 
16. he would unto. See note on v. 2. 84. 

18. And wear it as a Javotir. Compare King Lear, iii. 4. 88 : 'A serv- 
ing-man, proud in heart and mind; that curkd my hair; wore gloves in 
njy cap;' and Troilus and Cressida, iv. 4. 73: 

' Tra Wear this sleeve. 

Cres. And you this glove.' 

21. sparks. The second, ihird and fourth quartos read 'sparkles.' 
lb. Pope omitted ' better.' 

22. happily. This word is used in Shakespeare both for 'happily' and 
' haply.' As in this passage, it is not always easy to say in which sense it 
must be taken, if indeed both senses are not blended. 

lb. The quartos give as stage-direction here : ' Enter Aumerle amazed.' 

28. Withdraiu, like ' retire,' frequently was used with a reflexive pronoun 
following. See note on i. 2. 42. 

34. If 071 the Jir^t is a very curious phrase. Malone explains 'If your 
fault stand only on intention;' and if the text be right, this must be the 
meaning. Pope suggested 'If hit the first;' Collier, ' If 0/ the first;' 
Another conjecture is, ' If only the first.' 

36. It was not the door of the room, but the gates of the castle, which 
Aumcrle caused to be locked. See Hall, as quoted above. 

43. secure, careless, unguarded, falsely confident. Compare i Henry VI. 
ii. I. 11: 

' This happy night the Frenchmen are secure, 
Having all da.y caroused and banqueted;' 
and Hamlet, i. 5. 61 : 

' Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole.' 
'Security' is used in the sense of careless false confidence in Macbeth, iii. 

5- 32 : 

' Security 
Is mortals' chiefest enemy.' 
The adverb 'securely' is found in the present play, ii. I. 266. 

44. It would be treason to call the king 'foolhardy' behind his back; 
shall I be compelled by my loyalty to speak the treason to your face? 

48. ar7?i 7IS. The simple pronouns ' me,' ' him,' ' us,' &c, were often 
used in Shakespeare's time reflexively, in cases where we should use either 
the simple verb or ' myself,' ' himself,' ' ourselves,' &c. Compare ' repent 
me,' line 52. 

57. Forget to pity hi/n, forget your promise to have mercy upon him. 
For 'pity' compare 3 Henry Vi. ii. 6. 74: 

' Thou pitied'st Rutland ; I will pity thee.' 

58. Compare 2 Henry VI. iii. I. 343 : 

' I fear me )ou but warm the starved snake. 
Who, cherish'd in your breasts, will sting your hearts.' 



sc. 3-] R I C HA R D II. I49 

61. sheer, unmixed, pure. We still have ihe word in the same sense, 
though as a matter of usage we almost always join it to a r.oun signifying a 
bad moral quality, as ' sheer folly,' ' sheer stupidity.' We say, however, 
' a sheer precipice,' ' sheer muslin,' ' sheer steel ;' in the last a false etymology 
preserves the spelling 'shear.' But in Spenser we fiiul it applied exactly as 
Shakespeare applies it in this place. See Fairy Queen, iii. 2. 44: 
' Who having vewed in a fountaine shere 
His face ;' 
and iv. 6. 20 : 

' Pactolus with his waters shere.* 
The only other passage of Shakespeare in which the v/ord occurs is in the 
Induction to the Taming of the Shrew, 2.25:' Fourteen pence on the score 
for sheer ale,' where ' sheer ale ' either means ' ale unmixed with any other 
liquor,' or more probably ' ale merely,' i. e. not reckoning the other items of 
the score. 

64. converts. See note v. I. 66. 

66. digressing, deviating, i. e. from the right path. Compare Romeo and 
Juliet, iii. 3. 127 : 

' Thy noble shape is but a form of wax, 
Digressing from the valour of a man.' 

79, So. Pope thought these lines undignified, and put them in the 
margin. 

80. ' The Beggar and the Kttig.' Compare Love's Labour 's Lost, 
i. 2. 114: 'Is there not a ballad, boy, of the King and the Beggar?' The 
ballad alluded to is th?.t of King Cophetua, printed in Percy's Reliques, 
from Richaid Johnson's Crown Garland of Goulden Roses, 1612, where it is 
entitled ' A Song of a Beggar and a King.' Of course Henry merely jests 
upon the title, r.nd makes no reference to the subject" of the ballad. 

86. confound, destroy. See note iii. 4. 60. 

88. If York does not love his own flesh and blood he cannot love another, 
he cannot love his King. 

89. make, do. Compare Merry Wives of Windsor, iv. 2. 55: 'What 
make you here ?' and ii. I. 244 of the same play : ' She was in his company 
at Page's house ; and what they made there, I know not.' So As You Like 
It, i. I. 31. 

93. walk. So the quartos. The folios have ' kneel.' 

94. the happy, the happy man. The substantive is very rarely omitted in 
the singular. 

9s-joy. See ii. 3. 15. 

97- Unto, in addition to. So we have ' to ' used in Troilus and Cressida. 
i. 1.7, 8: 

'The Greeks are strong and skilful to their strength. 
Fierce to their skill and to their fierceness valiant.' 

90. Ill . . . grace ! This line was omitted, doubtless by accident, in 
the folio. 

lOi. The line as it stands is an Alexandrine, and 'prayers' must be pro- 
nounced as a dissyllable, as 'prayer' in line no. Pope omitted 'do' for 
the sake of the metre, but he thus left a most inharmonious line, in which 



150 NOTES. [act v. 

the ici2is metricits fell on ' no,' ' his,' and ' are.' Capell with much more 
plausiblhty omitted ' in.' 

109, no. Both these lines end in 'have.' Pope for the first sub- 
stituted "crave.' Sidney Walker would retain the first and read 'crave' for 
the second. 

113. An if. See note iv. I. 49. 

119, ' pardonne inoi,' i. e. excuse me ; a polite way of declining to accede 
to a request. As ' moi ' rhymes to ' destroy,' Shakespeare must have 
pronounced it, as ' Roi ' is still traditionally pronounced in the formula ' Le 
Roi le veut.' Staunton quotes Skelton's Elynour Runimyng, line 587 : 
' She made it as koy 
As a lege de moy." 
'Lege de moy' is a dance, a kind of minuet apparently. Skelton was born 
about 1460, and died 1529. He was Poet Laureate to Henry VH and his 
successor. In Henry V. iv. 4. 14, where the French soldier asks for quarter, 
' Ayez pitie de moi,' Pistol replies, ' Moy shall not serve ; I will have forty 
moys.' ' Moy' was a measure of corn, derived probably from ' modius,' 
though not equivalent to it. 

122. Compare v. 5. 13, 14. Possibly, keeping in view the epithet 
' hard-hearted,' there may be an allusion to the obstinacy of heretics who 
justify themselves by quoting one passage of Scripture against another. 
There is, of course, a play upon the double meaning of ' word.' 

124. chopping, changing one meaning for another. ' Chop ' is given by 
Cotgrave as the equivalent of the French changer, troquer. It is no 
doubt connected with the word ' chepe,' ' cheap,' and means ' to barter,' 
' exchange.' Hence ' to chop logic,' to bandy logical arguments. 

127. Observe that 'pierce' is made to rhyme with 'rehearse.' Compare 
Love's Labour's Lost, iv. 2. 85, 86: 'Master Parson, quasi pers-on. An if 
one should be pierced, which is the one?' 

128. rehearse, recite, pronounce aloud. Compare Merchant of Venice, 
iv. I. 362 : 

' The danger formerly by mc rehearsed.' 
So Taming of the Shrew, i. 2. 124 : 

' For those defects I have before rehearsed.' 
132. vantage. A military term originally, applied to superiority of position, 
whether of a castle, an army, or a single combatant. The Duchess here 
implies that kneeling was for the suppliant as much a position of vantage as 
it would be the reverse for a combatant. Compare 2 Henry IV. ii. 3. 53 
(where ' vantage ' is used of an army) : 

' If they get ground and vantage of the king.' 
And Troilus and Cressida, v. 8. 9 (of a single combatant) : 

' I am unarm'd ; forego this vantage, Greek. ' 
And, in a metaphorical sense, Merchant of Venice, iii. 2. 176: 

' Let it presage the ruin of your love. 
And be my vantage to exclaim on you.' 

137. Our trusty brother-in-law. John, Earl of Huntingdon, had married 
Henry's sister Elizabeth. In Henry's first parliament he had been degraded 
from the dukedom of Exeter ; hence his animosity to the new king. 

138. consorted, confederated. See v. 6. 15. 



sc. 4-] RICHARD II. 151 

139. dog them at the heels. Compare Richard III. iv. i. 40: 

' Death and destruction dog thee at the heels.' 

140. order, marshal. See i. 3. 99. 

lb. several powers, separate bodies of troops. For ' several,' see Antony 
and Cleopatra, i. 5. 62 : ' Twenty several messengers.' Compare, for this 
meaning of ' power,' ii. 2. 46. 

144. This line is printed in all the older editions thus (barring difference 
of spelling) : 

' Uncle, farewell, and cousin adieu.' 
Too' was inserted first in a quarto reprinted from the second folio in 16:4, 
doubtless a conjectural emendation. Collier reads ' cousin mine.' Perhaps 
we should read : 

'Uncle, farewell; farewell, aunt; cousin, adieu.' 

145. Aumerle was reserved for a nobler end. He succeeded on the death 
of his father to his titles and honours, and, as Duke of York, led the van- 
guard at Agincourt, Oct. 25th, 1415, where he was slain. (Holiushed, 
p. 1179, col. I, and 1183,001. I.) See Henry V. iv. 3. 130, and iv. 6. 



Scene IV. 

Exton. Sir Piers of Exton is supposed to have been a relative of Sir 
Nicholas Exton, who was one of the Sheriffs of London in 1385, and Lord 
Mayor in 1386 and 1387. 

1. According to Holinshed (p. 1 1 29, col. 2), these words were overheard 
by Sir Piers of Exton while in attendance upon the king at table. 

lb. what. For this usage of the relative compare Merchant of Venice, 
iv. I. 167 : 

' You hear the learn'd Bellario, what he writes.' 

2. friend [who] will. See note on ii. i. 173. 

5. urged, laid stress upon it. See note on iii. I. 4. 

7. u'istly, wistfully, earnestly. The first and second quartos read ' wishtly.' 
' Wistly ' is found besides in three passages of Shakespeare. Compare Venus 
and Adonis, 343 : 

' O, what a sight it was, wistly to view 
How she came stealing to the wayward boy I' 
Lucrece, 1355 : 

' And, blushing with him, wistly on him gazed.' 
And The Passionate Pilgrim, 82 : 

' The sun look'd on the world with glorious eye, 
Yet not so wistly as this queen en him.' 

8. As who should say. Compare Merchant of Venice, i. I. 93: 

' As who should say " I am Sir Oracle." ' 
And again in the same play, i. 2. 50. 

II. rid, remove, take off. Compare 3 Henry VI. v. 5. 67 : 

' As, deathsmen, you have rid this sweet young prince.' 



152 NOTES. [act v. 

Scene V. 

3. /or because, because ; a not uncommon reduplication. Compare ' for 
why' in v. i. 46. 'For' is frequently used for 'because,' as in line 22 just 
below. See Merchant of Venice, i. 3. 43 : 

' I hate him for he is a Christian, 
But more for that in low simplicity 
He lends out money gratis.' 
And Othello, iii. 3. 263 : 

' Haply for I am black.' 
Other examples of the same kind of reduplication are ' an if,' ' or ere.' 

8. still-breeding, tliat is, constantly breeding. See Tempest, iii. 3. 64 : 
'the still-closing waters;' and again in the same play, i. 2. 229: 'the still- 
vex'd Bermoothes.' 

9. this Utile world. See Lear, iii. I. 10: 

' Strives in his little world of man to outscom 
The to-and-fro-conflicting wind and rain.' 
Compare Bacon, Advancement of Learning, ii. 10, § 2: 'The ancient 
opinion that man was ruicrocosnu/s, an abstract or model of the world, hath 
been fantastically strained by Paracelsus and the alchemists, as if there were 
to be found in man's body certain correspondences and parallels, which 
should have respect to all varieties of things, as stars, planets, minerals, 
which are extant in the great world.' See also The Lover's Complaint, 7 : 

' Storming her world with sorrow's wind and rain.' 
In this sense Ivlenenius speaks of his face as 'the map of my microcosm,' 
Coriolanus, ii. I. 6S. 

10. humours, dispositions, tempers. Johnson defines this sense of 
' humour ' as ' The different kind of moisture in man's body, reckoned by 
the old physicians to be phlegm, blood, choler, and melancholy, which, as 
they predominated, were supposed to determine the temper of mind.' In 
consequence of the changes of mind brought about by the changes of these 
humours of the body, 'humorous' came to mean 'capricious,' and 'humours' 
are equivalent to ' caprices, fancies.' See the Merchant of Venice, iii. 5. 67 : 

' Let it be as humours and conceits shall govern.' 
13, 14. do set the word itself Against the word, that is, set one passage of 
Scrip'iure against the other. See v. 3. 122. The folios, perhaps to avoid 
the imputation of profanity, substitute ' faith ' for ' word ' in both in- 
stances. 

15. See St. Matthew xix. 14, apparently combined with St. Matthew 
xi. 28. 

16. See St. Matthew xix. 24. 

lb. the postern of a unall needle's eye. The folios omit ' small ;' but 
' needle ' is here a monosyllable, and is often found in the monosyllabic form 
' neeld.* Compare King John, v. 2. 157: 

' Their needles to lances, and their gcn.le hearts 
To fierce and bloody inclination.' 
And again in Lucrece, 319 : 

'And griping it, the needle his finger pricks.' 
A ' postern ' is the back-gate of a fortress, and generally therefore low and 



sc 5.] RICHARD 11. 153 

narrow. It has been said by some commentators that by the ' needle's eye ' 
in the above-quoted passage from the Gospel, is intended the narrow gate 
of an eastern town so called, which was only wide enough to admit foot 
passengers. This interpretation Shakespeare had prob.ibly heard of, and 
combined it with the more common and obvious one which explains the 
phrase as hyperbolical and expressive of anything which is impossible. 
With the phrase ' thread the postern of a small needle's eye,' compare 
King John, v. 4. 1 1 : 

' Unthread the rude eye of rebellion.' 
18. they, redundant. See King John, v. 7. 60: 

' Where heaven He knows how we shall answer him.' 

21. ragged, rugged, rough. Compare 2 Henry IV. Ind. 35 : 

'And this worm-eaten hold of ragged stone.' 
And Isaiah, ii. 21 : 'To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops 
of the ragged rocks.' 

22. for. See note on line 3 above. 

25. Nor shall not be. For the double negative, see iv. I. 255. 

Ih. silly, simple ; used compassionately and almost contemptuously. 
Compare Two Gentlemen of Verona, iv. 1. 72 : 

' On silly women or poor passengers." 

26. refuge their shame That &c, find refuge lor their shame in the 
thought that, &c. 

27. That many have, that is, that many have sat. Compare Holinshed 
(p. 1099, col. 1): 'I say (your reuerence saued,) that Henry of Lancaster, 
duke of Hereforde, like a false and disloyall traitour as he is, dothe lye in that 
he hath or shall say of mee otherwise than well.' 

31. person. The reading of the first quarto only. The other old copies 
all read ' prison.' 

36. king'd, made a king. The second quarto reads ' king.' The par- 
ticiple occurs again in a dift'erent sense in King John, ii. I. 371 : 'King'd of 
our fears.' 

37. unking' d occurs again in iv. I. 220. 

38. straight, immediately. See Merchant of Venice, ii. 9.1:' Draw 
the curtain straight.' And frequently in this play, as v. 3. 139. 

42. broke. For this form of participle, see note en iii. i. 13. 

lb. proportion. Compare Romeo and Juliet, ii. ^. 22: 'He fights hs 
you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and propor'.ion.' 

46. check, rebuke. See 2 Henry IV. i. 2. 220: 'I have checked him for 
it, and the young lion repents ; marry, not in ashes and sackcloth, but iu 
new silk and old sack.' And Lear, ii. 2. 149: 

' His master 
Will check him for't.' 

50. his numbering clock, the clock by which he counts hours and 
minutes, which he could not do with his hour-glass. ' There are three 
ways in which a clock notices the progress of time ; viz. by the libration 
of the pendulum, the index on the dial, and the striking of the hour. To 
these, the King, in his comparison, severally alludes ; his sighs corresponding 
to the jarring of the pendulum, which, at the same time that it w.itchcs or 
numbers the seconds, marks also their progress ui minutes on the dial or 



154 -^ O T E S. [act V, 

outward-watch, to which the King compares his eyes ; and their want of 
figures is supplied by a succession of tears, or, (to use an expression of 
Milton, II Penseroso, 130), "minute drops:" his finger, by as regularly 
wiping these away, performs the office of the dial's point : — his clamorous 
groans are the sounds that tell the hour.' Henley. 

51. My thoughts are minutes. The overwhelming pressure of calamity 
and the monotony of prison-life would cause the captive's thoughts to recur 
in regular and uniform order. 

lb. jar, tick. The word occurs as a substantive in Winter's Tale, i. 2. 43: 
' I love thee not a jar o' the clock behind 
What lady-she her lord.' 
' They jar their watches on,' as watchmen at stated intervals report the 
time. 

52. The line, having six feet, has been altered in the second folio, which 
reads ' to ' for ' on unto.' Johnson proposed ' Their watches on ; mine 
eyes,' &c. 

55. sound. . .tells, altered by Pope to ' sounds. . .tell.' 

60. Jack o' the clock. Alluding to an iron or bronze figure, which in 
some old clocks, by a mechanical contrivance struck the bell at intervals. 
Two such figures used to be seen at St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street. 
There are still clocks of this kind at Berne, Venice, and other places. 
Compare Richard III. iv. 2. 117: 

"■Rich. Well, but what's o'clock? 

Buck. Upon the stroke of ten. 

Rich. Well, let it strike. 

Buck. Why let it strike? 

Rich. Because that, like a Jack, thou keep'st the stroke 
Betwixt thy begging and my meditation.' 
These automatons were also called Jacks i' the clock-house. So Beaumont 
and Fletcher, The Coxcomb, i. 5 : 

' Is this your Jack i' the clock-house ? 
Will you strike, sir?' 
From a passage in Decker's Gull's Hornbook, published 1 609, quoted by 
Nares, we learn that in old St. Paul's there was a clock of which the 'Jacks' 
struck the quarters, one, two, three, four, and the bell then rang the hour. 
' If Powles Jacks be once up with their elbowes, and quarelling to strike 
eleven, as soon as ever the clock has parted them and ended the fray with 
his hammer, let not the duke's gallery couteyne you any longer.' 

61. mads, maddens. See Twelfth Night, i. 5. 141 : ' One draught above 
heat makes him a fool ; the second mads him, and the third drowns him.' 

62. There is probably especial reference to I Samuel xvi. 23: 'And it 
came to pass, when the evil spirit from God was upon Saul, that David took 
an harp, and played with his hand : so Saul was refreshed, and was well, 
and the evil spirit departed from him.' Burton discusses the etTect of music 
on the spirits. Anatomy of Melancholy, pt. ii, sect. 2, mem. 6, subs. 3. 

lb. help. For this form of the past participle, see Macbeth, i. 6. 23 : 
' And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him 
To his home before us.' 
As a preterite, see Coriolanus, v. 3. 63 : 'I holp to frame thee.* 



sc. 5] RICHARD IT. I55 

63. Judging from the effect it produces in me, its tendency is to make 
sane men mad. ' Wise men ' is written ' wise-men,' with a hyphen, in the 
foHos and was frequently pronounced hke a compound, with the accent on 
the first syllable. This is always the case when ' wise man ' as one of a 
class is contrasted with ' madman ' or ' fool.' Compare Twelfth Night, 
iii. I. 73, 75. We still have 'madman,' 'nobleman,' and the usage v/as 
formerly extended to many other adjectives. Compare ' rude man' in King 
John, i. I. 64: 

' Out on thee, rude man ! thou dost shame thy mother.' 

66. brooch. This word is derived from the French broche, a spit or pin, 
and means here an ornamental buckle. It was worn in the hat. ' Honour's 
a good brooch to wear in a man's hat at all times.' Ben Jonson's Poetaster, 
i. I. The Poetaster was first played in 1601. From a passage in All's 
Well that Ends Well (the date of which is uncertain), it would appear that 
brooches at the time when it was produced had gone out of fashion. Sec 
i. I. 171 : 'Just like the brooch and the tooth-pick, which wear not now.' 
If it were out of fashion also when Richard II was first performed it would 
add point to the simile. So capricious is fashion that what was no longer 
worn in 1593 or 1594 might have been generally resumed in 1601. 

67. Thanks, noble peer I Richard answers as mockingly as, but with 
more bitterness than Portia in Merchant of Venice, ii. 9. 85 : 

' Servant. Where is my lady ? 
Portia. Here : what would my lord ? ' 

Pope relegated the words ' Thanks. . .dear ' to the margin, as beneath the 
dignity of tragedy. 

68. Here Shakespeare borrows a jest of his sovereign. ' Mr. John Blower, 
in a sermon before her majesty, first said : " My royal Queen," and a little 
after : " My noble Queen." Upon which says the Queen : " What am I ten 
groats worse than I was? "' This is given by Toilet from Hearne's Discourse 
of some Antiquities between Windsor and Oxford. Gold nobles were issued 
first in Edward the Third's reign worth 6s. Sd. each. The value of the 
noble increased gradually to los. when Edward IV. issued new coins 
of this value called ' rose nobles,' ' rials,' or ' royals.' In Elizabeth's time the 
' rial ' was current, value los, and also the noble, value 6s. 8c?. The groat 
was fourpence. Hence the difference between the value of the ' royal ' and 
' noble ' was ten groats. Richard says that the cheapest of them, that is, the 
noble, twenty groats, is rated at twice his true value. The same joke is found 
in I Henry IV. ii. 4. 317-321, where the hostess says, 'My lord, there is 
a nobleman of the court at door,' and the Prince replies, ' Give him as 
nmch as will make him a royal man.' Nares says that the 'royal' was 
worth 15s, and Sherwood, in the Index to Cotgrave, gives ' Royall, piece d'or 
valant vingt shelins, ou dix francs.' 

69. Capell completed the line by adding ' man.' 

70. Where no man never. See note, iv. I. 255. 

76. sad, grave, gloomv-looking. See Henry V. iv. I. 318 : ' The sad and 
solemn priests.' 

Ih. dog. Warburton was offended at this term, and proposed ' drudge,' 
which Theobald inserted in his text. 

75- sometimes. See note on i. 2. 54. 



156 



NOTES. [act v. 



76. yearn'd my heart, moved my heart with regret and sorrow. Compare 
Merry Wives of Windsor, iii. 5. 45 : 'Well, she laments, sir, for it, that it 
would yearn your heart to see it.' 

78. Roan Barhary appears to have been an invention of the poet's. 
Froissart however has a story of a favourite greyhound of King Richard's, 
which when the King met the Duke of Lancaster deserted his master and 
leaped to the shoulders of his rival. Froissart's Chronicles, chap, c.xii. 

85. jade, applied to a bad or vicious horse, irrespectively of the sex. See 
iii. 3. 179, and Goldsmith's Good-natured Man, i. 1, 'Philosophy is a good 
horse in the stable, but an arrant jade on a journey.' Cotgrave gives ro&^e 
as one of the French equivalents of 'jade.' He quotes the proverb 'Oncques 
bon cheval ne devient rosse.' He also gives haridelle as another translation, 
which is 'jade' according to the more common modern use of the word. 

Jb. eat, eaten. Compare King John, i. i. 2y\: 

' Sir Robert might have eat his part in me 
Upon Good Friday and ne'er broke his fast.' 

90. rail on. See King John, ii. I. 587: 

'And why rail I on this commodity?' 

94. Spurr'd, gaWd. Spelling apart, this is the reading of the quartos. 
The folios have ' Spur-gall'd.' 

lb. jauncing, fretting the horse to make him prance. Cotgrave (Fr. Diet.) 
gives another form of the word in English while he shows that the French 
form is followed here. ' lancer vn cheval. To ftirre a horse in the stable 
till hee sweat withall ; or (as our) to iaunt ; (an old word).' ' Jaunt ' is found 
in Romeo and Juliet, ii. 5. 26, 'What a jaunt have I had!' and in line 53 
of the same scene ; 

' To catch my death with jaunting up and down.' 

95. here is no longer stay, that is, thou must stay here no longer. 

99. Holinshed, p. 1 1 29, col. 2, is the authority for the remainder of this 
scene. Of Sir Piers of E-Kton he says, ' This Knighte incontinently departed 
from the Courte, with eight strong persons in his company, and came to 
Poumfret, commaunding the Esquier that was accustomed, to sew and take 
the assay before Kyiig Richarde, to doe so no more, saying, let him eatc 
nowe, for hee shall not long eate. K. Richarde sate downe to dinner, and 
was serued without courtesie or assay, wherevppon, muche maruelling at the 
suddaine chaunge, he demanded of the Esquier, why he did not his duetie, 
sir (sayd he) I am otherwise commaunded by Sir Piers of Exton, which is 
newly come from K. Henry : when King Richard heard that worde, he 
tooke the keruing knife in his hand, and strake the Esquier on the head, 
saying, the Deuil take Henry of Lancaster, and thee togither, and with that 
worde, sir Piers entered the chamber, well armed, with eight tall men like- 
wise armed, euery of them hauing a bill in his hand. King Richard pcr- 
ceiuing this, put the table from him, and stepping to the formost man, 
wrong the bill out of his handes, and so valiantlv defended himstlfe, that 
hee slewe foure of those that thus came to assayle liym : Sir Piers beeing 
halfe dismayed herewith, lept into the chayre, where King Richarde was 
wont to sitte, while the other foure persons fought with him, and chased 
him about the chamber : and in conclusion, as King Richard traucrsed his 
ground, from one side of the chamber to an others and co.nming by the 



sc. 6.] RICHARD II. 157 

chayre, where sir Piers stoode, hee was felled with a stroke of a poliax, which 
sir Piers gaiie hym vppon the head, and therewith ridde him out of hfe, 
without giuiiig him respite, once to call to God for mercie, of his passed 
offences.' This account is taken by Holinshcd from Hall, and by Hall from 
Fabyan, but bo;h Hall and Holinshed mention the other rumour that Richard 
was starved to death. This indeed is one of the charges against Henry IV, 
published in the manifesto of the Percies on the day before the battle of 
Shrewsbury. Walsingham relates that Richard died of voluntary starvation 
on St. Valentine's day, 1400. A contemporary French chronicler, Le 
Laboreur, quoted by Malone, gives the date Jan. 6, 1400. 

104. What means death in this rude assault^ Mr. Staunton conjectures 
'What? mean'st death in this rude assault?' 

106. Villain. Pope, for the sake of the metre, altered this to 'Wretch.' 
109. staggers. Used as a transitive verb in Henry VHI. ii. 4. 212: 
' The question did at first so stagger me.' 

Scene VI. 

2. cofisjaned with fire. When the Earl of Kent was besieged in his lodging 
by the bailiff of the town with eighty archers, ' the Earle of Huntingdon, 
being in another Inne with the lord Spencer, set fire on diuerse houses in 
the towne.' Holinshed, p. 1 1 27, col. I. 

3. Cicester, that is, Cirencester in Gloucestershire. The quartos and folios 
have ' Ciceter,' which represents the local pronunciation. Holinshed spells it 
' Circester ' and ' Circiter.' We hive followed Rowe. 

4. Enter Northumberland. After the disclosure of the conspiracy by 
Aumerle, the King ' chaungcd his purpose for his goying to Oxibrde, and 
dispatched Messengers forth to signifie vnto the Earle of Northumberlande 
his highe Conestable, and to the Erie of Westmerland hys high Marshall, and 
to other his assured friends, of al the doubtfull daunger and perillous 
ieopardie.' Holinshed, p. 1127, col. I. 

8. Oxford, Salisbury. This, which is the reading of the first quarto alone, 
is corrected in the folios to 'Salisbury, Spencer,' in accordance with Holin- 
shed's account. As the name of Oxford frequently occurs in Holinshed's 
description of this conspiracy, Shakespeare may inadvertently have taken it 
for the title of one of the conspirators : ' Many other that were priuie to 
this conspiracie, wer? taken, and put to deathe, some at Oxforde, as Sir 
Thomas Blunt, Sir Benet Cilie Knight, and Thomas Wintercell Esquier, but 
sir Leonard Brokis, and sir John Shelley Knights, John Magdalene, and 
William Ferby Chapleynes, were drawen, hanged, and beheaded at London.' 
Holinshed, p. 1129, col. I. 'The Lorde Hugh Spencer, otherwise called 
Earle of Gloucester, as he would have fledde into Wales, was taken and 
carried to Bristowe, where according to the earnest desires of y'^ commons, 
he was beheaded.' Ibid. 

15. consorted. See v. 3. 138. 

19. See note on iv. i. 152. 

22. Carlisle. See note at the beginning of iii. 2. ' The Bishop of 
Careleill was impeached, and condemned of the same conspiracie, but the 
King of his mercifuU clemencie, pardoned hym of that offence, although hee 



158 NOTES. [act v. sc. 6. 

dyed shortly after, more through feare than force of sicknesse, as some haue 
written.' Holinshed, p. 1129, col. I. The bishop did not die till some 
years after the time of this scene. He was committed to the Tower, but was 
liberated on the 23rd of June, 1400, and delivered into the custody of the 
Abbot of Westminster. He was pardoned and allowed to go at large on 
28th Nov. 1400. On 13th Aug. 1404 he was presented by the Abbot of 
Westminster to the rectory of Todenham in Gloucestershire, and probably 
died about the end of the 3'ear 1409, as his successor in the living 'was 
instituted 13th Jan. I409-IO per mortem Thomae Merks.' Le Neve's Fasti, 
ed. Hardy, vol. iii. p. 237. 

25. reverend. In the first and second quartos the reading is 'reuerent,' but 
the words are used indifi'erently in the old editions. ' Some reverend room' is 
some space surrounded by respect. 

26. joy, enjoy. Used transitively, but in a different sense, in Pericles, i. 
2.9: 

' Yet neither pleasure s art can joy my spirits. 
And in the same sense as in the present passage in 2 Henry VI. iv. 9. i : 

'Was ever king that joy'd an earthly throne?' 
It is also used intransitively in this play, ii. 3. 15, and v. 3. 95. 

30. According to Holinshed the body of Richard was brought by succes- 
sive stages to London, and exhibited in the towns where it rested each night. 
On arriving in London it was ' firste broughte to the Tower, and after 
through the citie, to the Calhedrall Churche of Sainte Paule bare faced, 
where it lay three dayes together, that all men might behold it.' Holinshed, 
p. 1 1 30, col. I. He was buried in the church of the Friars Preachers at 
Langley, and was afterwards removed by King Henry V. to Westminster, 
where his body was laid beside that of his first Queen, Anne of Bohemia. 

35. a deed of slaiidcr, that is, a deed which will set slanderous tongues in 
motion. ' Slaunder ' is the reading of the first quarto only ; the rest read 
• slaughter.' 

43. Cain. Sec Gen. iv. 12, 14. 

lb. thorough shades. This is the reading of the first quarto alone. The 
other old editions have ' through the shade.' For ' thorough ' see Mid- 
summer Night's Dream, ii. I. 3 : ' Thorough bush, thorough brier.' 

44. nor, used frequently by Shakespeare where we should say ' or.' So 
Macbeth, ii. 3. 70 : 

' Tongue nor heart 
Cannot conceive nor name thee !' 

47. that, that which. Pope read ' what.' 

48. sullen, gloomy, dark. Compare I Henry IV. i. 2. 236: 

' And like bright metal on a sullen ground.' 
Ih. incontinent, immediately. Compare Othello, iv. 3. i 2 : 
' He says he will return incontinent.' 




Clarcnbon Scbool Classics, 



Clarendon Press, Oa'ford, 1889. 

A Series of Greek and Latin Text-Books, prepared in all 
cases by Teachers of experience and academical distinction, is 
now being published at the Oxford University Press, which in 
accordance with the representation of the Schoolbooks Committee 
of the Head Masters^ Conference^ is marked by the following 
characteristics : — 

(i) The Text and Notes can be had bound separately or 
together. 

(2) Single Plays and small portions of Authors are separately 

issued. 

(3) The text of the best MSS. and editions has been re- 

tained, and a limited Apparatus Criticus, extending 
only to really important variants and the best emen- 
dations, is, when necessary, introduced. 

(4) The Texts are expurgated in accordance with the ex- 

perience of practical teachers. 

(5) Full Introductions and Indices are supplied when 

desirable, and the learner is guided by careful running 
analyses. 

(6) Every expedient has been studied in the choice of paper 

and print to spare all strain upon the eyesight, and to 
convey the clearest possible impression to the learner. 

The books are produced under the general superintendence 
of Mr. Evelyn Abbott, Fellow and Tutor of Balliol College, 
and late a Classical Master at Clifton College. 



Clarcnbon Pvcbb Series, 



LATIN AND GREEK CLASSICS. 





I. LATIN. 








Author. 


Work. Editor. 


Price. 


Caesar . 


. Gallic War .... Moberly . . 


. . 4J. 6d. 


» 


. . „ Books I- 1 I ,, 






. . 2S. 


»> 


Books I/I- F 






. 2s. 6d. 


>» 


Books VI-VIII „ 






[^fmtnediaiely .1 


j> 


. Civil War .... ,, 






. is.6d 


>» 


„ Book I . 






. 2S. 


Catullus 


Car?nina Selecta (text only) Ellis . 






. . 5s.6d 


Cicero . 


. Selections, 3 Parts. . Walford 
. Select letters (text only) Watson 






Each I J. 6d. 
. 4s. 




. De Senectute . . . Huxley . 
. Pro Cluentio . . . Ramsay 
. Select Orations . . . King . 
{ In Q. Caec. Div. and 
• • ( In Verrem I . . .\ " 






. 2S. 

. 3J. 6d. 

. 2^-. 6(/. 

. \s. 6d. 


>> 


. Catilinarian Orations Upcott . 






. 2s. 6d. 


Cornelius 
Nepos 


. lives Browning & Inge 


. 3^. 


Horace . 


. Odes,Carm.Saec.Epodes Wickham 


. 6^. 


„ 


. Selected Odes ... „ . . 


. 2S. 


Juvenal 


. XIII Satires . . . Pearson & Strong 


y . 6.. 


Livy 


. Selections, 3 Parts . . Lee- Warner . 


. Each IS. 6d. 


)< 


. Books V-V II . . . Cluer & Mathesc 


n . 5J-. 


>> 


. Book V 


. . 2s. 6d. 


I* 


. Books XXI-XXIII . Tatham 




. 5J. 


,, 


. . Book XXI .... 




. 2s. 6d. 


)» 


. Book XXII. ... 




. 2s. 6d. 


Ovid . 


. Selections .... Ramsay 




. ss.6d. 


>) 


. Tristia, Book I . . Owen . 




. . 3J. 6d. 


,, 


Book III. . 




. 2J. 


Plautus 


. . Captivi Lindsay 




. 2s. 6d. 


,, 


Trinummus . . . Freeman & Slomr 


in . 35. 


Pliny . 


. . Selected Letters . . Prichard& 


Be 


ma 


rd . y. 



LATIN AND GREEK CLASSICS. 



Author, 
SaUust . 
Tacitus 

Terence 



Tibullus and 

Propertius 

Virgil 



Aeschylus 



Ar 



stophanes 



Cebes 



Demostlienes 



Euripides 



I. LATIN (continued). 

Work. Editor. 

Bellum Cat. ^Jiigurth. Capes . 



Annals I-IV 
Annals I 
Addphi . 
Andria . 
Phonnio . 

Selections 

(Complete) 
Bucolics . 
Gc orgies . 
Ai,neid I 
,. IX 



Furneaux 



Sloman . 
Freeman & Sloman 
Sloman. 



Ramsay 

Papillon 
Jerram . 



Haigh . 



Price. 
4?. dd. 

3-y- 



11. 



Agatneninon . . 
Choephoroi . . . 
Eumenides . 
Prometheus Bound 
Acharnians . 

Birds 

Clouds . . . . 

Frogs 

Knights . . . . 
Tabula . . . . 



GREEK. 

. . Sidmvick 



Prickard 
Merry 



Jerram 



6s. 

JOS. (yd. 

2s. 6d. 

\_In the Press'] 

\s. dd. 



3^- 
3-f- 
3-f- 



[/w the Press] 

■ Zs. 

■ Zs. 

2S. 6d. 



Herodotus 



" Orations against Philip,-^ 

Vol. I, Philippic /A Abbott & Matheson 
' Olynthiacs. I-III . S 
rVol. II, De Pace, Philip-^ 
\ pic II, De Chersonese, \ ,, 

I Philippic III . . 3 

Alcestis Jerram . 

Hecuba Russell. 

Helena Jerram . 

Heracleidae .... ,, 

Iphigenia in Tauris . ,, 

Medea Heberden 

Selections .... Merry . 

Book IX Abbott . 



[/« the 


Press 


] 




2S. 


6d. 






2S. 


6d. 






3-f- 








3^- 








3- 








2S. 








2S. 


6d. 






3^. 







LATIN AND GREEK CLASSICS. 



II. GREEK (continued). 



Author. 


Work. 


Editof 




Price. 


Homer . . 


Iliad I-Xn . . 


Monro 6j. 




„/.... 


,, 




. 2S. 




„ XIII-XXIV 


,, 




. 6s. 


„ . . 


Odyssey I-XII. . 
I . . . 


Merry 




. Bs. 
. IS. 6d. 


» 


„ II . . . 


„ 




. IS. 6d. 


„ 


XIII-XXIV 


„ 




5-f- 


Lucian. . 


I' era Historia . . 


. Jerram 




. \s. 6d. 


Lysias . . 
Plato . . 


Epitaphius . . . 
Apology .... 
Aleno 


Snell 
Stock 




2S. 

2s. 6d. 
. 2s. 6d. 


Sophocles 


(Complete) . . . 


. Campbell & Ahbott 105. dd. 


,. 


Ajax 

. Antigone . . . 


„ . 2S. 

,. .IS. gd. 


)) 


. I'.lcclra .... 


,, . 2S. 


)> 


Oedipus Coloucus . 
. Oedipus Tyramius 
. Philoctetes . . . 


„ . IS. gd. 

,, . 2S. 

„ . 2S. 


• >i 


Trachiniae . . . 


• 25. 


Theocritus 


. Idylls, ^c. . . . 


. Kynaston . . . . 4^-. 6d. 


Xenophon . 


Easy Selections 
Selections . . . . 
Anabasis I . . . 


Phillpotts & Jerr 
rhillpotts . . 
Marshall . . 


am . 3^. 6^/. 
. . y. 6d. 

. 2S. 6d. 


„ 


II. . . 


Jerram . . 


2S. 


)7 


Ill . . 


Marshall . . 


. . 2s. 6d. 




{ Vocabulary to th 

' \ Anafasis 


i „ . . 


. . IS. 6d. 


>> • 


. Cyropaedia I . . . 
. Cyropaedia IV, V 
. Hellenica I-II . . 


Bigg . . . 
. Underbill . . 


. . 2S. 

. . 2s. 6d. 
. . 3-f- 




Memorabilia 


. Marshall . . 


. [/// t/ie Press.] 



Easy Greek Reader . Abbott 



3^- 



Hon a on: HENRY FROWDE, 

Oxford University Press Warehouse, Amen Corner. 

lEtitniiurgl) : 12 Frederick Street. 

©xforti: Clarendon Press Depository, 

116 High Street. 



PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 



PH Shakespeare, William 

2820 The tragedy of King 

A2C4 Richard II 



.^sssjissiisssssi 







.-.•FN Corner, E.C. 



