Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


WBUttftOt  CDUUni 


THE 


COMPLETE  WORKS  OF  NATHANIEL 

HAWTHORNE,  WITH  INTRODUCTORY 
"     NOTES  BY  GEORGE  PARSONS 

LATHROP 


AND  ILLUSTKATKD  WITH 


Etchings  by  Blum,  Church,  Dielman,  Gifford,  Shirlaw, 

and  Turner 


IN  THIRTEEN  VOLUMES 
VOLUME  X. 


t 


r 


MATHAinitL  HAVN 


Wow   AT 

TON  y 


PASSAGES  FROM  THE  FRENCH 
AND  ITALIAN  NOTE- 
BOOKS 


NATHANIEL  HAWTHORNE 


'^P.^ 


Bi  JAllEB  R.  OBQOOD  A  CO. 
Bt  aODQBTOH,  HIFPLIS  A  00. 


Bl  KOBE  HAWTHORNE  LATHROF. 


7398  ;0 


INTBODUCTORT  NOTE. 


THE  FBENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-] 


:••]:♦; 


When  ^  The  Marble  Faun  "  was  first  published,  it 
attracted  American  readers,  at  least,  almost  as  much 
by  its  descriptions  of  Roman  ruins  and  Italian  land- 
scape, by  the  delicate  and  imaginative  touch  with 
which  it  reproduced  or  gave  new  meaning  to  &mou8 
works  of  antique  and  Benaissance  art,  as  by  the  weird 
fascination  of  its  plot  and  psychological  problems^ 
How  the  author  was  enabled  to  impart  this  additional 
charm  to  his  work  is  explained  by  a  perusal  of  his 
^'Fraich  and  Italian  Note-Books.'' '  There  the  duly 
experience  of  his  Italian  sojourn,  and  the  mute  life  of 
painting  and  sculpture  as  it  stood  to  be  reyiewed  by 
his  eye,  are  set  down  precise^  as  they  presented  tfiem- 
selves  to  him  at  the  time. 

Of  France  he  saw  but  little,  and  the  main  portion 
of  these  journals  is  therefore  devoted  to  Italy,  where 
he  remained  from  the  end  of  January,  1858,  until  the 
middle  of  May,  1859.  While  he  was  in  Bome  the 
second  time,  his  elder  daughter,  Una,  then  about  ax- 
teen  years  of  age,  had  a  severe  attack  of  Boman  fever, 
and  his  associations  with  the  place  were  tinged  with 
gloom. 

^I  bitterly  detest  Bome,"  he  wrote  to  Mr.  flekia, 
^and  shall  rejoice  to  bid  it  farewell  forever;  and  I 


6  INTRODaCTORT  NOTE. 

folly  acquiesce  in .  all  the  mischief  and  ruin  that  haa 
happened  to  it,  from  Kero's  conflagration  downward. 
In  fact,  I  wish  the  very  site  had  been  obliterated  be> 
fore  I  saw  it" 

But  his  stay  in  iloreooe  Mid  at  the  Villa  Montauto 
had  been  a  pleasurable  one,  and  in  part  compensated 
him  for  the  punful  impressions  left  upon  his  mind  by 
his  Boman  experience.  It  will  be  noticed  tliat  he 
continued  to  joumaliie  steadily,  however,  through  the 
vidsutudes  of  the  reeidenoe  in  Bome ;  although  doubt- 
less the  eDtries  are  not  so  voluminous  e«  they  would 
have  been  bnt  for  the  interruption  of  illness  in  his 
household,  and  for  the  fact  that  he  had  already  begun 
to  outline  "  The  Marble  Faun."  Notwithstanding  an 
oocasional  dissatisfaction  expressed  in  the  Note-Books 
and  elsewhere,  be  was  very  susceptible  to  the  peculiar 
spell  of  Italy,  and  gave  himself  up  to  the  poetic  in- 
fluences of  its  soenery  and  associations.  Nor  should 
it  be  supposed,  as  it  has  sometimes  been  done,  bfr 
cause  he  made  no  pretenraon  to  the  title  of  connois- 
seur, and  in  one  instanoe  preferred  the  work  of  an 
American  painter  named  Thompson  to  many  of  the 
prodnotione  of  the  old  masters,  that  be  did  not  enter 
with  deep  sympathy  into  the  beauty  of  the  historic  art 
which  surrounded  him.  He  spent  hours  at  a  time, 
musing  and  observing,  amid  its  treasures.  One  who 
was  near  bim  recalls  bow  slowly  uid  thon^tfully  he 
passed,  one  day,  through  the  gallery  of  t^e  Capitol 
where  the  Faun  of  Praxiteles  stands,  his  own  stnmg 
figure  imbued  with  a  grace  and  pensiveness  that 
seemed  to  give  it  a  brotherhood  with  the  ideal  shapes, 
sprung  from  the  perfection  of  Greek  sculpture,  which 
he  was  contemplating. 

So  far  did  Hawtbonw  carry  bis  habit  of  maUag 


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE.  7 

memcnraiida,  that  he  kept  a  pocket -diaiy  while  in 
Borne,  in  which  were  recorded  the  ordinary  transac- 
tions of  each  day.  This  he  may  have  used  for  ref- 
erence when  writing  the  more  elaborate  accounts  of 
what  was  worth  remembering.  These  last  were  en- 
tered in  ordinary  thin  blank-books  with  flexible  cov- 
ers. The  books  are  filled  with  consecutive  entries, 
written  almost  without  the  interruption  of  a  single 
erasure  or  change  of  word;  and,  substantially,  the 
whole  of  the  contents  appear  in  the  printed  volumes. 

The  "^  French  and  Italian  Note-Books  "  were  tran- 
scribed for  publication  by  Mrs.  Hawthorne,  at  London, 
in  the  winter  of  1870-71,  and  appeared  in  the  follow- 
ing autumn,  after  her  death.  They  end  the  series  of 
Hawthorne's  journals ;  since,  on  his  return  to  Amer- 
ica, the  Civil  War  so  absorbed  his  thoughts  that  he 
was  unable  to  continue  memoranda  of  this  kind. 

O.  P.  L. 


PASSAGES 


HAWraOBSBS  » 

ASD  HALT. 


DrFRASCB 


FRANCE. 


«,1858.->Ob 


bags  hmg  aQ  wtmijfmgktd  wmd  hhMnd^  we  begaa 
to  prcpsre  Cor 

h^    Two  edhs  woe  aft  IIm  door  faj  Uf  put 
aiid  aft  aefvcBwe  aetoMt  forUM  LondkA  Bridge 

wluk  it  waa  aim  daxk  aiid  faittacfy  cnU.    Tkero 

people  in  IIm 
iPB  dbove  eity-vaid ;  aad,  in  }i<i 
aadi  a  nnabcr  o£ 
tbift  we  alBMH*  eaaae  to  a  dead  loek  witk  aoaae  eC 
At  IIm  italion  we  faund  aereial  penoos  iriio 
i^paicBtfy  going  in  IIm  same  train  widi  aa^  tMaag 
louBd  IIm  file  eC  IIm  waitb^-room.  Snoe  I  came  to 
Ei^jlaiid  Aeie  kaa  baidfy  been  a  nftomii^  wlien  I 
ihoold  liafe  leaa  willing^  besdned  myadf  befoie  day- 
Egbt;  ao  sharp  and  hidpinwit  was  the  atmospbeie. 
We  started  aft  half  past  eight,  haTing  taken  thitNi^ 
tidoets  to  Paris  bj  way  eC  Folkestone  and  Bookgne. 
k  foot-wanw  (a  k^,  flat  tin  utensil,  foil  of  hot 


10     FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1898. 

Tater)  was  put  into  the  carriags  jnat  before  we 
started ;  but  it  did  not  make  us  more  than  half  com- 
fortable, and  the  froet  soon  began  to  dood  the  win- 
dows, and  shut  out  the  prospect,  so  that  we  oould  only 
glance  at  the  green  fields  —  immortally  green,  what- 
ever winter  can  do  against  them  —  and,  at  here  and 
there,  a  stream  or  pool  with  the  ice  forming  on  its  bor- 
ders. It  was  the  first  oold  weather  of  a  very  mild  se^ 
son.  Ths  snow  b^^  to  fall  in  scattered  and  almost 
invinble  flakes ;  and  it  seemed  as  if  we  had  stayed  our 
English  welcome  out,  and  were  to  find  nothing  genial 
and  hospitable  there  any  more. 

At  Folkestone,  we  were  deposited  at  a  railway  sta- 
tion close  upon  a  shingly  beach,  on  which  the  sea 

broke  in  foam,  and  which  J reported  as  stiewn 

with  shells  and  star-fish ;  behind  was  the  town,  with 
an  (dd  church  in  tlte  midst ;  and,  close  at  hand,  the 
pier,  when  lay  the  steamer  in  which  we  were  to  em- 
bark. But  the  air  was  so  wintry,  that  I  bad  no  heart 
to  explore  the  town,  or  pick  up  shells  with  J-  <m 
the  beach;  so  we  kept  within  doon  during  the  two 
hours  of  our  stay,  now  and  then  looking  out  vS.  the 
windows  at  a  fishing-boat  or  two,  as  they  [atdied  and 
rolled  with  an  ugly  and  irregular  motion,  such  as  the 
British  Channel  generally  oommunioates  to  the  oiaft 
that  navigate  it 

At  about  one  o'clock  we  went  on  bovd,  and  were 
soon  under  steam,  at  a  rate  that  quiiddy  showed  a 
long  line  of  the  white  olifEs  of  Albion  behind  us.  It 
is  a  very  dusky  white,  by  the  by,  aod  the  cliffs  dmrn- 
selvea  do  not  seem,  at  a  distance,  to  be  of  imposing 
height,  and  have  too  even  an  outline  to  be  picturesque. 

As  we  increased  our  distance  from  "Rnglamj,  tha 
EVenoh  ooast  came  nkore  and  mote  disttnctly  in  siglirtY 


186a]  FRANCE.  11 


a  low,  ymvj  outline,  not  verj  well  wmrth  looking 
at,  exoept  because  it  was  the  coast  of  France.  Indeed, 
I  looked  at  it  but  little;  for  the  wind  was  Ueak  and 
boisterous,  and  I  went  down  into  the  cabin,  where  I 
found  the  fire  very  comfortable,  and  several  people 
were  stretched  on  so&s  in  a  state  of  placid  wretched* 
ness.  ...  I  have  never  suffered  from  sea- sickness, 
but  had  been  s<Hne\diat  apprehensive  of  this  rough 
strait  between  England  and  France,  which  seems  to 
have  more  potency  over  people's  stomachs  than  ten 
times  the  extent  of  sea  in  other  quarters.  Our  pas- 
sage was  of  two  hours,  at  the  end  of  which  we  landed 
on  French  soil,  and  found  ourselves  immediately  in 
the  clutches  of  the  custom  house  offiorars,  who,  how- 
ever, merely  made  a  momentary  examination  of  nxy 
passport,  and  allowed  us  to  pass  without  opening  even 
<Hie  of  our  carpet-bags.  The  great  bulk  of  our  lag- 
gage  had  been  registered  through  to  Paris,  for  exami- 
nation after  our  arrival  there. 

We  left  Boulogne  in  about  an  hour  after  our  arri- 
val, when  it  was  already  a  darkening  twilight.  The 
weather  had  grown  colder  than  ever,  since  our  arrival 
in  sunny  France,  and  the  night  was  now  setting  in, 
wickedly  black  and  dreary.  The  frost  hardened  upcm 
the  carriage  windows  in  such  thickness  that  I  could 
scarcely  scratch  a  peep-hole  through  it ;  but,  from 
such  glimpses  as  I  could  catch,  the  aspect  of  the  coun- 
try seemed  pretty  much  to  resemUe  the  December  as- 
pect of  my  dear  native  land,  —  broad,  bare,  brown 
fields,  with  streaks  of  snow  at  the  foot  of  ridges,  and 
along  fences,  or  in  the  furrows  of  ploughed  soil.  There 
was  ice  wherever  there  happened  to  be  water  to  form 
it 

We  had  feet-warmers  in  the  carriage,  but  the  odd 


12    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [I8W. 

crept  in,  nererUieleeB ;  and  I  do  not  remember  hardly 

in  mj  life  a  more  disagreeable  short  journey  than  thia, 
my  first  advance  into  French  territory.  My  impre*- 
sion  of  Franoe  will  always  be  that  it  is  an  aJrodo  re- 
gion. At  any  season  of  the  year,  the  tract  over  which 
we  passed  yesterday  must  be  an  uninteresting  one  as 
regurds  its  natural  featuree ;  and  the  only  adornment, 
as  far  as  I  oould  observe,  which  art  has  given  it  con* 
sists  in  straight  rows  of  very  stiff-looking  and  slender- 
stenuned  trees.  In  the  dusk  they  resembled  poplar- 
trees. 

Weary,  and  frost  -  bitten,  —  morally,  if  not  jdiyuo- 
ally,  —  we  reached  Amiens  in  three  or  four  hoars,  and 
here  I  underwent  much  annoyance  from  the  French 
nulway  officials  and  attendants,  who,  I  believe,  did 
not  mean  to  inoonmiode  me,  but  rather  to  forward  my 
purposes  as  far  as  they  well  oould.  If  they  would 
speak  slowly  and  distinctly  I  might  understand  them 
well  enough,  being  perfectly  familiar  wilii  the  written 
language,  and  knowing  the  principles  of  its  pronun- 
ciation; but,  in  their  customary  rapid  ntteranoe,  it 
sounds  like  a  string  of  mere  gabble.  When  left  to 
myself,  therefore,  I  got  into  great  difficulties.  ...  It 
gives  a  taciturn  personage  like  myself  a  new  concep- 
tion as  to  the  value  of  speech,  even  to  him,  when  he 
finds  himself  unable  either  to  speak  or  nnderetand. 

Finally,  being  advised  on  all  hands  to  go  to  the 
Hdtel  de  Rhin,  we  were  carried  thither  in  an  omnibus, 
rattling  over  a  rough  pavement,  through  an  invisible 
and  frozen  town;  and,  on  our  arrival,  were  nshered 
into  a  handsome  8<Uon,  as  chill  as  a  tomb.  They 
made  a  little  bit  of  a  wood  fire  for  us  in  a  low  and 
deep  chimney  -  hole,  which  let  a  hundred  times  more 
beat  escape  up  the  flue  than  it  sent  into  dw  room. 


ISSa.]  FRANCE.  18 

In  IIm  momiiig  we  sallied  f ortii  to  aee  the  Cathe- 
dnL 

The  aspect  of  die  old  French  town  was  very  differ- 
en&  from  anytiung  English;  whiter,  infinitely  cleaner; 
higgler  and  narrower  houses,  the  entrance  to  most  of 
whidi  seeming  to  be  throogh  a  great  gateway  affording 
admission  into  a  central  courtyard ;  a  pnUic  square, 
widi  a  statue  in  die  middle,  and  another  statue  in  a 
nei^iboring  street.  We  met  prieste  in  three^xxmered 
hats,  long  frodE-ooats,  and  knee-breeches ;  also  soldiers 
and  gmdarmes,  and  peasante  and  children,  datteiing 
OTer  the  pavements  in  wooden  shoes. 

It  makes  a  great  impression  of  outlandishness  to 
see  die  aogns  over  die  shop  doors  in  a  foreign  tongue. 
If  die  cold  had  not  been  such  as  to  dull  my  s^ise  of 
novehy,  and  make  all  my  perceptions  torpid,  I  should 
have  taken  in  a  set  of  new  impressions,  and  enjoyed 
them  very  moch.  As  it  was,  I  cared  little  for  what  I 
saw,  bat  yet  had  life  enoogh  left  to  enjoy  die  Cadie- 
dral  of  AmiAiift^  vdiich  has  many  features  milike  diose 
of  English  cathedrals. 

It  stands  in  the  midst  of  die  cold,  white  town,  and 
has  a  hif^Kshonldered  look  to  a  spectator  accustomed 
to  the  minsters  of  England,  which  cover  a  great  space 
of  groond  in  proportion  to  their  height.  The  impres- 
skrn  die  latter  gives  is  of  magnitude  and  mass ;  this 
French  Cadiedral  strikes  one  as  lofty.  The  exterior  is 
venerable,  thongh  bat  litde  time-worn  by  die  action 
of  die  atmosphere ;  and  statues  still  keep  their  places 
in  numerous  niches,  almost  as  perfect  as  when  first 
placed  there  in  die  thirteenth  century.  The  principal 
doors  are  deep,  elaborately  wrought,  pointed  arches ; 
and  the  interior  seined  to  us,  at  the  moment,  as 
grand  as  any  diat  we  had  seen,  and  to  afford  as  vast 


14    FRENCH  AND  ITALt^' NOTE-BOOKS.    [♦( 

an  idea  of  included  space ;  it  being  of  ench  an 
height,  and  with  do  screen  between  the  chancel 
nave,  as  in  all  the  English  cathedrals.  We  saw 
differences,  too,  betwixt  a  ehuroh  in  which  the  aame 
ftiim  of  worship  for  which  it  was  originally  built  is 
still  kept  ap,  and  those  of  England,  where  it  has  been 
supereudeil  for  (centuries ;  for  here,  in  the  recess  of 
every  arch  of  the  side-aisles,  beneath  each  lofty  win- 
dow, there  was  a  chapel  dedicated  to  some  saint,  and 
adorned  with  great  marble  sculptures  of  the  cmoi- 
fixion,  and  with  pictures,  exeerahly  bad,  in  all  caHes, 
aad  various  kinds  of  gilding  and  omamentatioQ.  Im- 
menst^Iy  tall  wax  candles  stand  upon  the  altars  of  these 
chapels,  and  before  one  sat  a  woman,  with  a  great  sup- 
ply of  tapers,  one  of  which  waa  burning.  I  suppose 
these  were  to  be  lighted  aa  offerings  to  the  saints,  by 
the  true  believers.  Artificial  flowers  were  hung  at 
some  of  the  shrines,  or  placed  under  gWs.  In  every 
chapel,  moreover,  there  was  a  eonfcsnional,  —  a  little 
oaken  structure,  about  as  big  as  a.  sentry-box,  witli 
a  dosed  part  for  the  priest  to  sit  in.  and  an  open 
one  for  the  penitent  to  kneel  at.  and  speak  through 
the  open-work  of  the  priest's  closet.  Monuments,  mu- 
ral and  others,  to  long-departed  worthies,  and  im^es 
of  the  Saviour,  the  Virgin,  and  saints,  were  numer* 
ous  everywhere  about  the  church ;  and  in  the  chancel 
there  was  a  great  deal  of  quaint  and  curious  sculpture, 
fencing  in  the  Holy  of  Holies,  where  the  high  altar 
stands.  There  is  not  much  painted  glaas ;  one  or  two 
very  rich  and  beautiful  rose-windows,  however,  thait 
looked  antique  ;  and  the  great  eastern  window,  whicli, 
I  think,  is  modem.  The  jiavement  has,  probably, 
never  been  renewed,  as  one  piece  of  work,  since  the 
structure  was  erecte<l,  and  is  foot-worn  by  the  succaa* 


ame  ^^i 


1 


tsn.}  FRANCS.  16 

nve  generations,  tbon^h  still  in  exoeOent  Tepair.  1 
saw  <me  of  the  small,  square  stones  in  it,  bearing  the 
date  of  1597,  and  no  doubt  there  are  a  thousand  older 
cMies.  It  was  gratifyii^  to  find  the  Cathedral  in  such 
good  condition,  without  any  traces  of  rec^it  repair; 
and  it  is  perhaps  a  mark  of  difference  between  French 
and  English  character,  that  the  Kerohition  in.  the 
former  country,  though  all  religious  worship  disap 
pears  before  it,  does  not  seem  to  have  caused  such  vio- 
lenoe  to  ecclesiastical  m<muments  as  the  Reformation 
and  the  reign  of  Puritanism  in  the  latter.  I  did  not 
see  a  mutilated  shrine,  or  even  a  broken-nosed  image, 
in  the  whole  CathedraL  But,  probably,  the  very  rage 
of  the  Finglish  fanatics  against  idolatrous  tokens,  and 
their  smashing  blows  at  them,  were  symptoms  ot  sin^ 
oerer  religious  faith  than  the  French  were  ciqiable  of. 
These  last  did  not  care  enough  about  their  Saviour  to 
beat  down  his  crucified  image ;  and  they  preserved 
the  works  of  sacred  art,  for  the  sake  only  of  what 
beauty  there  was  in  them. 

While  we  were  in  the  Cathedral,  we  saw  several 
perscms  kneeling  at  their  devotions  on  the  steps  of  the 
diancel  and  elsewhere.  One  dipped  his  fingers  in  the 
hoij  water  at  the  entrance :  by  the  by,  I  looked  into 
the  stone  basin  that  held  it,  and  saw  it  full  of  ice. 
Could  not  all  that  sanctity  at  least  keep  it  thawed  ?^v  ^^  y^, 
Priests  —  jolly,  fat,  mean -looking  fellows,  in  white 
robes — went  hither  and  thither,  but  did  not  interrupt 
er  accost  us. 

There  were  other  peculiarities,  which  I  suppose  I 
shall  see  more  of  in  my  visits  to  other  churches,  but 
now  we  were  all  glad  to  make  our  stay  as  brief  as 
possible,  the  atmosphere  of  the  Cathedral  being  so 
bieal^  and  its  stone  pavement  so  icy  cold  beneath  oux 


16    FBBNCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTB-BOORS.   [18U, 

feet  We  retomed  to  the  hotel,  and  the  chambeib 
maid  broiight  me  a  book,  m  which  she  aaked  me  to 
inBoribe  my  name,  age,  profession,  ooimtiy,  destinft> 
tion,  and  tiie  authorization  under  which  I  travelled. 
After  the  freedom  of  an  English  hotel,  so  much 
greater  than  even  that  of  an  American  one,  where 
they  make  you  disolose  your  name,  this  is  not  so 
pleasant. 

We  left  AmianB  at  half  past  one ;  and  I  can  tell  as 
little  of  the  country  between  that  place  and  Paris,  aa 
between  Bouh^e  and  Amiens.  The  windows  of  our 
nulway  carriage  were  already  frosted  with  IVench 
breath  when  we  got  into  it,  and  the  ioe  grew  thicker 
and  thicker  continually.  I  tried,  at  various  times,  to 
mb  a  peep-hole  through,  as  before ;  but  the  ice  im- 
mediately shot  its  crystallized  tracery  over  it  again ; 
and,  indeed,  there  was  little  or  notiiing  to  make  it 
worth  while  to  look  oat,  ao  bleak  was  the  scene.  Now 
and  then  a  chfiteau,  too  far  off  for  its  charaoteristios 
to  he  discerned  ;  now  and  then  a  church,  with  a  tall 
gray  tower,  and  a  little  peak  atop ;  here  and  there  a 
vilhige  or  a  town,  which  we  could  not  well  see.  At 
sunset,  there  was  jnat  that  clear,  oold,  wintry  skjr 
which  I  remember  so  well  in  Amerioa,  but  have  never 
seen  in  England. 

At  five  we  reached  Paris,  and  were  suffered  to  take 
a  carriage  to  the  H6tel  de  Louvre,  without  any  ex- 
amination of  the  little  luggage  we  had  with  us.  Ar> 
ririi^,  we  took  a  suite  of  apartments,  and  the  waiter 
immediately  lighted  a  wax  candle  in  each  separate 
room. 

We  might  have  dined  at  the  table  cThAte,  but  pre- 
ferred the  restaurant  oonneoted  with  and  within  the 
hotel.    All  the  dishes  were  very  delicate,  and  a  vast 


185&J  PRANCE.  17 

ehange  from  the  simple  English  system,  with  its 
joints,  shoulders,  beefsteaks,  and  chops ;  but  I  doubt 
whether  English  cookery,  for  the  very  reason  that  it 
is  so  simple,  is  not  better  for  men's  moral  and  spir- 
itual nature  than  French.  In  the  former  case,  you 
know  that  you  are  gratifying  your  animal  needs  and 
propensities,  and  are  duly  ashamed  of  it ;  but,  in  deal' 
ing  with  these  French  delicacies,  you  delude  yourself 
into  the  idea  that  you  are  cultivating  your  taste  while 
satisfying  your  appetite.  This  last,  however,  it  re- 
quires a  good  deal  of  perseverance  to  accomplish. 

In  the  Cathedral  at  Amiens  there  were  printed  lists 
of  acts  of  devotion  posted  on  the  columns,  such  as 
prayers  at  the  shrines  of  certain  saints,  whereby  plen- 
ary indulgences  might  be  gained.  It  is  to  be  ob- 
served, however,  that  all  these  external  forms  were 
necessarily  accompanied  with  true  penitence  and  re- 
ligious devotion. 

Hdtd  de  Louvre^  January  %ih.  —  It  was  so  fear* 
fully  cold  this  morning  that  I  really  felt  little  or  no 
curiosity  to  see  the  city.  .  •  .  Until  after  one  o'clock, 
therefore,  I  knew  nothing  of  Paris  except  the  lights 
which  I  had  seen  beneath  our  window  the  evening 
before,  far,  far  downward,  in  the  narrow  Rue  St. 
Honor^,  and  the  rumble  of  the  wheels,  which  con- 
tinued later  than  I  was  awake  to  hear  it,  and  began 
again  before  dawn.  I  could  see,  too,  tall  houses,  that 
seemed  to  be  occupied  in  every  story,  and  that  had 
windows  on  the  steep  roofs.  One  of  these  houses  is 
six  stories  high.  This  Rue  St.  Honor^  is  one  of  the 
old  streets  in  Paris,  and  is  that  in  which  Henry  IV. 
was  assassinated ;  but  it  has  not,  in  this  part  of  it,  the 
aspect  of  antiquity. 


18    FRESCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [ISM 

Aiter  one  o'clock  we  all  went  out  and  walked  along 
the  Rue  de  Bivoli.  .  .  .  We  are  here,  right  in  tba 
midst  of  Paris,  and  close  to  whatever  is  best  known 
to  those  who  hear  or  read  about  it,  —  the  Louvre  b» 
ing  across  the  street,  the  Palais  Royal  but  a  little  way 
o£F,  the  Tuileriea  joining  to  the  Louvre,  the  Place  da 
la  Concorde  just  beyond,  ver^ng  on  which  is  the 
Champa  Elys^es.  We  looked  about  us  for  a  suitable 
place  to  dine,  and  soon  found  the  Restaurant  dea 
Echelles,  where  we  entered  at  a  venture,  and  were 
courteously  received.  It  has  a  haodsomel*  fsmisbed 
saloon,  much  set  off  with  gilding  ana  mirrora ;  and 
appears  to  be  frequented  by  English  and  Americans ; 
its  carte,  a  bound  volume,  being  printed  in  English  aa 
well  as  French.  ... 

It  was  now  nearly  four  o'dock,  and  too  late  to  visit 
the  galleries  of  the  Louvre,  or  to  do  anything  else  but 
walk  a  little  way  along  the  street  The  splendor  of 
Paris,  BO  far  as  I  have  seen,  takes  me  altc^ther  by 
anrprise :  such  stately  edifices,  prolonging  themselves 
in  unwearying  magnificence  and  beauty,  and,  ever  and 
anon,  a  long  vista  of  a  street,  with  a  column  rising  at 
the  end  of  it,  or  a  triumphal  arch,  wrought  in  memory 
of  some  grand  event.  The  light  stone  or  stucco,  wholly 
nntamished  by  smoke  and  soot,  puts  London  to  the 
blush,  if  a  bluflh  could  be  seen  on  its  dingy  face;  but, 
indeed,  London  is  not  to  be  mentioned  with,  nor  coni' 
pared  even  with  Paris.  I  never  knew  what  a  palace  was 
till  I  had  a  glimpse  of  the  Louvre  and  the  Tuileries ; 
never  had  my  idea  of  a  city  been  gratified  till  I  trod 
those  stately  streets.  The  life  of  the  scene,  too,  is  infi- 
nitely more  picturesque  than  that  of  London,  with  its 
monstrous  throng  of  grave  faces  and  black  coats; 
whereas,  there,  you  see  stddiers  and  priests,  policemen 


1858.1  FRANCE.  19 

in  coded  hals,  Zoumves  with  turlMUiSy  kmg  immtleis 
and  hrcMued,  half  Mooriak  &oe8 ;  and  a  ^reat  many 
peofde  whom  yon  peiceive  to  be  oatside  of  your  expe* 
rienoe,  and  know  them  ngly  to  look  at,  and  fxacy  them 
TiDanons.  Truly,  I  have  no  sympathies  towards  the 
French  peojde;  their  eyes  do  not  win  me,  nor  do  their 
glances  melt  and  mingle  with  mine.  Bat  they  do 
grand  and  beantifal  things  in  the  architectaral  way  ; 
and  I  am  gratefol  for  it.  The  I^aoe  de  la  Concorde 
IS  a  most  splendid  square,  large  enough  for  a  nation  to 
erect  troplues  in  of  all  its  triumphs ;  and  on  one  side 
of  it  is  die  Tuileries,  on  die  opposite  side  die  Champs 
QyB^es,  and,  on  a  third,  die  Seine,  adown  which  we 
Miw  large  cakes  of  ice  floating,  beneath  the  arches  of 
a  bridge.  The  Champs  Elys^es,  so  far  as  I  saw  it,  had 
not  a  grassy  sihI  beneath  its  trees,  but  the  bare  earth, 
niiite  and  dusty.  The  Tery  dust,  if  I  saw  nothing 
else,  would  assure  me  that  I  was  out  of  England. 

We  had  time  only  to  take  this  little  waUc,  when  it 
b^an  to  grow  dusk ;  and,  being  so  pitQessly  cold,  we 
hurried  back  to  our  hoteL  Thus  &r,  I  think,  what 
I  have  seen  of  Paris  is  wholfy  unlike  what  I  expected ; 
but  yeiy  like  an  imaginary  picture  which  I  had  con- 
ceived  of  St.  Petersburg,  —  new,  bright,  magnificent, 
and  desperately  cold. 

A  great  part  of  this  architectural  splendor  is  due 
to  the  present  Emperor,  who  has  wrought  a  great 
change  in  the  aspect  of  the  city  within  a  very  few 
years.  A  traveller,  if  he  loots  at  the  thing  selfishly, 
ought  to  wish  him  a  long  reign  and  arbitrary  power, 
since  he  makes  it  his  policy  to  illustrate  his  capital 
with  palatial  edifices,  which  are,  however,  better  for  a 
itranger  to  IooIl  at,  than  for  his  own  people  to  pay 
br; 


20    FRENCH  AlfD  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [IMS 

We  liave  apent  to^y  chiefly  in  seeing  some  of  tlie 
gallerisB  of  the  Lonvre.  I  must  confess  that  tlie  vast 
and  beautiful  edifioe  struck  me  far  more  tlian  tlaa 
pictures,  sculpture,  and  curiosities  which  it  contains, 
—  the  shell  more  than  the  kernel  inside;  such  noblp 
suites  of  rooms  and  halls  were  those  through  which 
we  first  passed,  contuning  Egyptian,  and,  farther  on- 
ward, Greek  and  Roman  antiquities  ;  the  walls  cased 
in  variegated  marbles ;  the  ceilings  glowing  with  beau* 
tiful  frescos ;  the  whole  extended  into  infinite  vistaa 
by  mirrors  that  seemed  like  vacancy,  and  moltiplied 
everything  forever.  The  picture  -  rooms  are  not  so 
brilliant,  and  the  pictures  themselves  did  not  greaUy 
win  upon  me  in  this  one  day.  Many  artists  were  en^ 
ployed  in  copying  them,  especially  in  the  rooms  bung 
witii  the  productions  of  French  painters.  Not  a  few 
of  these  copyists  were  fem^es ;  most  of  them  were 
young  men,  picturesquely  mustached  and  bearded; 
but  some  were  elderly,  who,  it  was  pitiful  to  think, 
had  passed  through  life  without  so  much  success  as 
now  to  paint  pictures  of  their  own. 

From  the  pictures  we  went  into  a  euit«  of  rooms 
where  are  preserved  many  relics  of  the  ancient  and 
later  kings  of  France ;  more  relics  of  the  elder  ones, 
indeed,  than  I  supposed  had  remained  extant  through 
the  Revolution.  The  French  seem  to  like  to  keep 
memorials  of  whatever  they  do,  and  of  whatever  their 
forefathers  have  done,  even  if  it  be  ever  so  little  to 
their  credit;  and  perhaps  t^y  do  not  take  matters 
sufficiently  to  heart  to  detest  anything  that  has  ever 
happened.  What  surprised  me  most  were  the  golden 
sceptre  and  the  magnificent  sword  and  other  gorgeous 
relics  of  Charlemagne,  — a  person  whom  I  had  always 
associated  with  a  sheepskin  cloak.     There  were  suitai 


1858.]  FRANCE.  21 

of  armor  and  weapons  that  had  been  worn  and  han- 
dled by  a  great  many  of  the  French  kings ;  and  a  re- 
ligious book  that  had  belonged  to  St.  Louis ;  a  dress* 
ing-glass,  most  richly  set  with  precious  stones,  which 
formerly  stood  on  the  toilet-table  of  Catherine  di  Medr 
ici,  and  in  which  I  saw  my  own  face  where  hers  had 
been.  And  there  were  a  thousand  other  treasures, 
just  as  well  worth  mentioning  as  these.  If  each  mon- 
arch could  have  been  summoned  from  Hades  to  claim 
his  own  relics,  we  should  have  had  the  halls  full  of 
the  old  Childerics,  Charleses,  Bourbons  and  Capets, 
Henrys  and  Louises,  snatching  with  ghostly  hands  at 
sceptres,  swords,  armor,  and  mantles ;  and  Napoleon 
would  have  seen,  apparently,  almost  everything  that 
personally  belonged  to  him,  —  his  coat,  his  cocked 
hats,  his  camp -desk,  his  field -bed,  his  knives,  forks, 
and  plates,  and  even  a  lock  of  his  hair.  I  must  let 
it  all  go.  These  things  cannot  be  reproduced  by  pen 
and  ink. 

H6td  de  Louvre^  January  9th. —  •  •  •  Last 
evening  Mr.  Fezandie  called.  He  spoke  very  freely 
respecting  the  Emperor,  and  the  hatred  entertained 
against  him  in  France  ;  but  said  that  he  is  more  pow- 
erful, that  is,  more  firmly  fixed  as  a  ruler,  than  ever 
the  first  Napoleon  was.  We,  who  look  back  upon  the 
first  Napoleon  as  one  of  the  eternal  facts  of  the  past, 
a  great  bowlder  in  history,  cannot  well  estimate  how 
momentary  and  unsubstantial  the  great  Captain  may 
have  appeared  to  those  who  beheld  his  rise  out  of  ob- 
scurity. They  never,  perhaps,  took  the  reality  of  his 
career  fairly  into  their  minds,  before  it  was  over. 
The  present  Emperor,  I  believe,  has  already  been  as 
long  in  possession  of  the  supreme  power  as  his  uncie 


22    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [ISW 

was.  I  Bhould  like  to  see  Mm,  and  may,  perhaps,  do 
so,  an  he  ia  our  neighbor,  across  the  way. 

This  morning  Miss ,  the  celebrated  astronom- 
ical lady,  called.  She  had  brought  »  letter  of  intro- 
duction to  me,  while  consul;  and  her  purpose  now 
was  to  see  if  we  oould  take  her  as  one  of  our  party 
to  Rome,  whither  she  likewise  is  bound.  We  readilj 
consented,  for  she  seems  to  be  s  simple,  strong,  healthy- 
humored  woman,  who  will  not  fling  herself  as  s  bur^ 
den  on  our  shoulders ;  and  my  only  wonder  is  that  a 
person  evidently  bo  able  to  take  care  of  herself  should 
wish  to  have  an  escort. 

We  issued  forth  at  abont  eleven,  and  went  down 
the  Rue  St.  Honor^,  which  is  narrow,  and  has  houses 
of  five  or  six  stories  on  either  side,  between  which  run 
the  streets  like  a  gully  in  a  rock.  One  face  of  our 
hotel  borders  and  looks  on  this  street.  After  going 
a  good  way,  we  came  to  an  intersection  with  another 
street,  the  name  of  which  I  foiget ;  but,  at  this  point, 
Ravaillac  sprang  at  the  carriage  of  Henry  IV.  and 
plunged  bis  daj^r  into  him.  As  we  went  down  the 
Rue  St.  Honor^,  it  grew  more  and  more  thronged,  and 
with  a  meaner  class  of  pet^le.  The  houses  still  were 
high,  and  without  the  shabbiness  o£  exterior  that  dis- 
tinguishes the  old  part  of  London,  being  of  light-col- 
ored stone  ;  but  I  never  saw  anything  that  so  much 
came  up  to  my  idea  of  a  swarming  city  as  this  narrow, 
crowded,  and  rambling  street. 

Thence  we  turned  into  the  Rue  St.  Denis,  which  is 
one  of  the  oldest  streets  in  Paris,  and  is  said  to  have 
been  first  marked  out  by  the  track  of  the  saint's  foot- 
steps, where,  after  Ms  martyrdom,  he  walked  along  it, 
with  his  head  under  hifi  arm,  in  quest  of  a  burial-placa 
This  legend  may  account  for  any  crookedness  of  thf 


1858.]  FRANCE.  28 

street ;  for  it  could  not  reasonably  be  asked  of  a  head* 
less  man  that  he  should  walk  straight. 

Through  some  other  indirections  we  at  last  found 

the  Rue  Bergdre,  down  which  I  went  with  J in 

quest  of  Hottinguer  &  Co.,  the  bankers,  while  the  rest 
of  us  went  along  the  Boulevards,  towards  the  Church 
of  the  Madeleine.  .  .  .  This  business  accomplished, 

J and  I  threaded  our  way  back,  and  oyertook  the 

rest  of  the  party,  still  a  good  distance  from  the  Made- 
leine. I  know  not  why  the  Boulevards  are  called  so. 
They  are  a  succession  of  broad  vralks  through  broad 
streets,  and  were  much  thronged  with  people,  most 
of  whom  appeared  to  be  bent  more  on  pleasure  than 
business.  The  sun,  long  before  this,  had  come  out 
brightly,  and  gave  us  the  first  genial  and  comfortable 
sensations  which  we  have  had  in  Paris. 

Approaching  the  Madeleine,  we  found  it  a  most 
beautiful  church,  that  might  have  been  adapted  from 
Heathenism  to  Catholicism ;  for  on  each  side  there  is 
a  range  of  magnificent  pillars,  imequalled,  except  by 
those  of  the  Parthenon.  A  moummg  coach,  arrayed 
in  black  and  silver,  was  drawn  up  at  the  steps,  and 
the  front  of  the  church  was  hung  with  black  doth, 
which  covered  the  whole  entrance.  However,  seeing 
the  people  going  in,  we  entered  along  with  them. 
Glorious  and  gorgeous  is  the  Madeleine.  The  en- 
trance to  the  nave  is  beneath  a  most  stately  arch ;  and 
three  arches  of  equal  height  open  from  the  nave  to 
the  side  aisles ;  and  at  the  end  of  the  nave  is  an- 
other great  arch,  rising,  with  a  vaulted  half-dome,  over 
the  high  altar.  The  pillars  supporting  these  arches 
are  Corinthian,  with  richly  sculptured  capitals  ;  and 
wherever  gilding  might  adorn  the  church,  it  is  lav- 
ished like  sunshine  ;  and  within  the  sweeps  of  the 


24    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [I8»a 

ardiea  there  are  fresoo  paintings  oi  sacred  subjects, 
and  a  beautiful  picture  covers  the  hollow  of  the  vault 
over  the  altar ;  all  this,  besides  much  sculpture ;  and 
especially  a  group  above  and  around  the  high  altar, 
representing  the  Magdalen  smiling  down  upon  ai^ 
gek  and  archangels,  some  of  whom  are  kneeling, 
and  shadowing  themselves  with  their  heavy  marble 
wings.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  nuking  my  pag« 
glow  with  the  most  distant  idea  of  the  magnificenoe 
of  this  church,  in  its  details  and  in  its  whole.  It  was 
founded  a  hundred  or  two  hnndred  years  ago ;  then 
Bonaparte  contemplated  transforming  it  into  a  Temple 
of  Victory,  or  building  it  anew  as  one.  The  restored 
Bourbon  remade  it  inta  a  church ;  but  it  still  has  a 
heathenish  look,  and  will  never  lose  it 

When  we  entered  we  saw  a  crowd  of  people,  all 
pressing  forward  towards  the  high  altar,  before  which 
burned  a  hundred  wax  lights,  some  of  which  were  six 
or  seven  feet  high ;  and,  altogether,  they  shone  like 
a  galaxy  of  stars.  In  the  middle  of  the  nave,  more* 
over,  there  was  another  galaxy  of  wax  candles  burn- 
ing around  an  immense  pall  of  black  velvet,  embroi- 
dered with  silver,  which  seemed  to  cover,  not  only  a 
ooffin,  but  a  sarcophagus,  or  something  still  more  huge. 
The  organ  was  rumbling  forth  a  deep,  lugubrious  baas, 
Bcoompanied  with  heavy  chanting  of  priests,  out  of 
which  aometimea  rose  the  dear,  young  voices  of  choris* 
ters,  like  light  flashing  out  of  the  gloom.  The  church, 
between  the  arches,  along  the  nave,  and  round  the 
altar,  was  hung  with  broad  expanses  of  black  cloth ; 
and  all  the  priests  had  their  sacred  veatmenta  covered 
with  black.  They  looked  exceedingly  well ;  I  never 
■aw  anything  half  so  well  got  up  on  the  stage.  Some 
of  these  eoelesiastioal  figures  were  very  stately  and 


1858.]  FRANCE.  25 

noble,  and  knelt  and  bowed,  and  bore  aloft  the  crosa, 
and  swung  the  censers  in  a  way  that  1  liked  to  see. 
The  ceremonies  of  the  Catholic  Church  were  a  superb 
work  of  art,  or  perhaps  a  true  growth  of  man's  re- 
ligious nature ;  and  so  long  as  men  felt  their  orig- 
inal meaning,  they  must  have  been  full  of  awe  and 
glory.  Being  of  another  parish,  I  looked  oh  coldly, 
but  not  irreverendy,  and  was  glad  to  see  the  funeral 
service  so  well  performed,  and  very  glad  when  it  was 
over.  What  struck  me  as  singular,  the  person  who 
performed  the  part  usually  performed  by  a  verger, 
keeping  order  among  the  audience,  wore  a  gold -em- 
broidered scarf,  a  cocked  hat,  and,  I  believe,  a  sword, 
and  had  the  air  of  a  military  man. 

Before  the  close  of  the  service  a  contribution-box  — 
or,  rather,  a  bhick  velvet  bag  —  was  handed  about  by 

this  military  verger ;  and  I  gave  J a  franc  to  put 

in,  though  I  did  not  in  the  least  know  for  what. 

Issuing  from  the  church,  we  inquired  of  two  or 
three  persons  who  was  the  distinguished  defunct  at 
whose  obsequies  we  had  been  assisting,  for  we  had 
some  hope  that  it  might  be  Rachel,  who  died  last 
week,  and  is  still  above  groimd.  But  it  proved  to  be 
only  a  Madame  Mentel,  or  some  such  name,  whom 
nobody  had  ever  before  heard  of.  I  forgot  to  say  that 
her  coffin  was  taken  from  beneath  the  illuminated  hall, 
and  carried  out  of  the  church  before  us. 

When  we  left  the  Madeleine  we  took  our  way  to 
the  Place  de  la  Concorde,  and  thence  through  the  Ely- 
sian  Fields  (which,  I  suppose,  are  the  French  idea  of 
heaven)  to  Bonaparte's  trimnphal  arch.  The  Champs 
Elys^es  may  look  pretty  in  summer ;  though  I  suspect 
they  must  be  somewhat  dry  and  artificial  at  whatever 
season, — the  trees  being  alender  and  scraggy,  and  re 


26     FRENCn  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [i8J 

(|ujriiig  to  be  renewed  every  few  years.  The  fioil  \u 
ni>t  ^nial  to  them.  The  stratigext  peculiiirity  of  i\»» 
place,  however,  to  eyes  fresh  from  raoiBt  ami  verdant 
England,  itt,  that  there  ia  not  one  Itlatle  of  grattfl  in  all 
tlie  Elysian  Fields,  nothing  but  hard  ulay,  now  <!ov- 
ered  with  white  dust.  It  gives  the  whole  scene  the 
iLir  of  being  a  eontrivance  of  man.  in  which  Nature 
has  cither  not  been  invited  to  take  any  part,  or  has  de- 
clined to  do  so.  There  were  merry-grounds,  wooden 
horses,  and  other  provision  for  children's  amusements 
among  the  trees ;  and  booths,  aii<l  tables  of  cakes,  and 
candy-women  ;  and  restaurants  on  the  borders  of  the 
wood  ;  but  very  few  people  there  ;  and  doubtless  we 
can  form  no  idea  of  what  the  scene  might  become 
wlien  alive  with  French  gayety  and  vivacity. 

As  we  walked  onward  the  Triumphal  Arch  began 
to  loom  up  in  the  distance,  looking  huge  and  massive, 
though  still  a  long  way  off.  It  was  not,  however,  till 
we  8too<I  almost  beneath  it  that  we  really  felt  the 
grandeur  of  this  great  ari'h,  including  so  large  a  space 
of  tlie  blue  sky  in  its  airy  sweep.  At  a  distance,  it 
impresses  the  spectator  with  its  solidity  ;  nearer,  with 
the  lofty  vacancy  beneath  it  There  Is  a  spiral  stmr> 
case  within  one  of  its  immense  limbs;  and,  climbin|f 
Htea^lily  upward,  lighted  by  a  lantern  which  the  door- 
keeper's wife  gave  us,  we  had  a  bird's-eye  view  at 
Paris,  much  obscured  by  smoke  or  mist.  Several  itt- 
terminable  avenues  shoot  with  painful  directness  right 
towards  it. 

On  our  way  homeward  we  visited  the  Place  Veiw 
ddme,  in  the  centre  of  which  is  a  tall  column,  sculp- 
tured from  top  to  bottom,  all  over  the  pe<1estal,  and 
all  over  the  sbift,  and  with  Napoleon  himself  on  the 
summit.     The  shaft   ia  wreathed  round  and   round 


I 


J 


1858.]  FRANCE.  27 

about  with  representations  of  what,  as  far  as  I  could 
distinguish,  seemed  to  be  the  Emperor's  victories.  It 
has  a  very  rich  effect.  At  the  foot  of  the  column 
we  saw  wreaths  of  artificial  flowers,  suspended  there, 
no  doubt,  by  some  admirer  of  Napoleon,  still  ardent 
enough  to  expend  a  franc  or  two  in  this  way. 

H6td  de  Louvre^  January  10th,  —  We  had  pur- 
posed going  to  the  Cathedral  of  Notre  Dame  to-day, 
but  the  weather  and  walking  were  too  unfavorable  for 
a  distant  expedition;  so  we  merely  went  across  the 
street  to  the  Louvre.  .  .  . 

Our  principal  object  this  morning  was  to  see  the 
pencil  drawings  by  eminent  artists.  Of  these  the 
Louvre  has  a  very  rich  collection,  occupying  many 
apartments,  and  comprising  sketches  by  Annibal  Ca- 
racci,  Claude,  Raphael,  Leonardo  da  Vinci,  Michel 
Angelo,  Rubens,  Rembrandt,  and  almost  all  the  other 
great  masters,  whether  French,  Italian,  Dutch,  or 
whatever  else;  the  earliest  drawings  of  their  great 
pictures,  when  they  had  the  glory  of  their  pristine 
idea  directly  before  their  minds'  eye,  —  that  idea 
which  inevitably  became  overlaid  with  their  own  hand* 
ling  of  it  in  the  finished  painting.  No  doubt,  the 
painters  themselves  had  often  a  happiness  in  these 
rude  off-hand  sketches,  which  they  never  felt  again 
in  the  same  work,  and  which  resulted  in  disappoint- 
ment, after  they  had  done  their  best.  To  an  artist, 
the  collection  must  be  most  deeply  interesting:  to 
myself,  it  was  merely  curious,  and  soon  grew  weari- 
some. 

In  the  same  suite  of  apartments,  there  is  a  collec- 
tion of  miniatures,  some  of  them  very  exquisite,  and 
absolutely  lifelike,  on  their  small  scale.     I  observed 


28    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [1BB8. 

two  of  Franklin,  both  good  and  pictureaqne,  one  of 
tbem  especially  so,  with  its  cloud-like  white  hair.  I 
do  not  think  we  liave  produced  a  man  so  interesting 
to  contemplate,  in  many  points  of  view,  aa  he.  Most 
of  our  great  men  are  of  a  character  that  I  find  it  im- 
possible to  warm  into  life  by  thought,  or  by  laTisfaing 
any  amount  of  sympathy  upon  them.  Not  so  Frank* 
lin,  who  had  a  great  de^  of  common  and  uncommon 
human  nature  in  him. 

Much  of  the  time,  while  my  wife  was  looking  ut  the 
drawings,  I  sat  observing  the  crowd  of  Sunday  visit- 
ors. They  were  generally  of  a  lower  class  than  those 
of  week-days :  private  soldiers  in  a  variety  of  oni- 
forms,  and,  for  the  most  part,  ugly  little  men,  but 
decorous  and  well  behaved.  1  saw  medals  on  many 
of  their  breasts,  denoting  Crimean  service ;  some  were 
Ute  English  medal,  with  Queen  Victoria's  head  upon 
it.  A  blue  coat,  with  red,  baggy  trousers,  was  the 
most  usual  uniform.  Some  had  short-breasted  coate, 
made  in  the  same  style  as  those  of  the  first  Napoleon, 
which  we  had  seen  in  the  preceding  rooma.  The  po- 
licemen, distributed  pretty  abundantly  about  the  rooms, 
themselves  looked  military,  wearing  cocked  hats  and 
swords.  There  were  many  women  of  the  middling 
classes ;  some,  evidently,  of  the  lowest,  but  clean  and 
decent,  in  colored  gowns  and  caps ;  and  laboring  men, 
citizens,  Sunday  gentlemen,  young  artists,  too,  no  doubt 
looking,  with  educated  eyes,  at  these  art^treasures,  and 
I  think,  as  a  general  thing,  each  man  was  mated  with 
a  woman.  The  soldiers,  however,  came  in  pairs  or 
little  squads,  accompanied  by  women.  I  did  not  much 
like  any  of  the  French  faces,  and  yet  I  am  not  sure 
that  there  is  not  more  resemblance  between  them  and 
the  American  physiognomy,  than  between  the  latter 


1858.]  FRANCE.  29 

and  the  English.  The  women  are  not  pretty,  bat  in 
all  ranks  above  the  lowest  they  have  a  trained  expres- 
non  that  supplies  the  place  of  beauty. 

I  was  wearied  to  death  with  the  drawings,  and  began 
to  have  that  dreary  and  desperate  feeling  which  has 
often  come  upon  me  when  the  sights  last  longer  than 
my  capacity  for  receiving  them.  As  our  time  in  Paris, 
however,  is  brief  and  precious,  we  next  inquired  our 
way  to  the  galleries  of  sculpture,  and  these  alone  are  of 
astounding  extent,  reaching,  I  should  think,  all  round 
one  quadrangle  of  the  Louvre,  on  the  basement  floor. 
Hall  after  hall  opened  interminably  before  us,  and  on 
either  side  of  us,  paved  and  incrusted  with  variegated 
and  beautifully  polished  marble,  relieved  against  which 
stand  the  antique  statues  and  groups,  interspersed 
with  great  urns  and  vases,  sarcophagi,  altars,  tablets, 
busts  of  historic  personages,  and  all  manner  of  shapes 
of  marble  which  consummate  art  has  transmuted  into 
precious  stones.  Not  that  I  really  did  feel  much  im- 
pressed by  any  of  this  sculpture  then,  nor  saw  more 
than  two  or  three  things  which  I  thought  very  beauti- 
ful ;  but  whether  it  be  good  or  no,  I  suppose  the  world 
has  nothing  better,  unless  it  be  a  few  world-renowned 
statues  in  Italy.  I  was  even  more  struck  by  the  skill 
and  ingenuity  of  the  French  in  arranging  these  sculp- 
tural remains,  than  by  the  value  of  the  sculptures 
themselves.  The  galleries,  I  should  judge,  have  been 
recently  prepared,  and  on  a  magnificent  system,  —  the 
adornments  being  yet  by  no  means  completed,  —  for 
besides  the  floor  and  wall-casings  of  rich,  polished 
marUe,  the  vaulted  ceilings  of  some  of  the  apartments 
are  painted  in  fresco,  causing  them  to  glow  as  if  the 
sicy  were  opened.  It  must  be  owned,  however,  that 
the  statuary,  often  time-worn  and  darkened  from  its 


80    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [1868. 

original  brilliattoy  by  weatber-gtuns,  does  not  unit  well 
as  furniture  for  such  splendid  rooms.  When  we  see  a 
perfection  of  modem  finish  around  them,  we  recognize 
that  moat  of  these  statues  had  been  thrown  down  from 
their  pedestals,  hundreds  of  years  ago,  and  have  been 
battered  and  externally  degraded;  and  though  what- 
ever Bpiritual  beauty  they  ever  had  may  still  remun, 
yet  this  is  not  made  more  apparent  by  the  contrast  be- 
twixt the  new  gloss  of  modem  upholstery,  and  their 
tarnished,  even  if  immortal  grace.  I  rather  think  the 
English  have  given  really  the  more  hospitable  recep- 
tion to  the  maimed  Theseus,  and  bis  broken  -  nosed, 
broken-le^ed,  headless  companioiA,  because  flouting 
them  with  no  gorgeous  fittings  up. 

By  this  time  poor  J--  — ■  (who,  with  his  taste  for  art 
yet  undeveloped,  is  the  companion  of  all  our  viuts  to 
sculpture  and  picture  galleries)  was  wofully  hungry, 
and  for  bread  we  had  given  him  a  stone,  —  not  one 
stone,  but  a  thousand.  We  returned  to  the  hotel,  and 
it  being  too  damp  and  raw  to  go  to  our  Restaurant 
des  Ecbelles,  we  dined  at  the  hotel.  In  my  opinion 
it  would  require  less  time  to  cultivate  our  gaatronomio 
taste  than  taste  of  any  other  kind ;  and,  on  the  whole, 
I  am  not  sure  that  a  man  would  not  be  wise  to  afford 
himself  a  little  discipline  in  this  line.  It  is  certainly 
throwing  away  the  bounties  of  Providence,  to  treat 
them  as  the  English  do,  producing  from  better  mate- 
rials than  the  French  have  to  work  upon  nothing  but 
sirloins,  joints,  joints,  steaks,  steaks,  steaks,  chops, 
chops,  chops,  chops  t  We  had  a  soup  t(Mlay,  in  which 
twenty  kinds  of  vegetables  were  repiesented,  and  man- 
ifested each  its  own  aroma;  a  fillet  of  stewed  beef, 
and  a  fowl,  in  some  sort  of  delicate  fricassee.  We 
had  a  bottle  of  Chablis,  and  renewed  ouiselves,  at  the 


1858.]  FRANCE.  81 

dose  of  the  banquet,  with  a  plate  of  Chateaubriand 
ice.  It  was  all  very  good,  and  we  respected  ourselves 
far  more  than  if  we  had  eaten  a  quantity  of  red  roast 
beef ;  but  I  am  not  quite  sure  that  we  were  right.  .  .  • 
Among  the  relics  of  kings  and  princes,  I  do  not 
know  that  there  was  anything  more  interesting  than 
a  little  brass  cannon,  two  or  three  inches  long,  which 
had  been  a  toy  of  the  unfortunate  Dauphin,  son  of 
Louis  X VL  There  was  a  map,  —  a  hemisphere  of 
the  world,  — which  his  father  had  drawn  for  this  poor 
boy;  yery  neatly  done,  too.  The  sword  of  Louis 
XVI.,  a  magnificent  rapier,  with  a  beautifully  dam- 
asked blade ;  and  a  jewelled  scabbard,  but  without  a 
hUt,  is  likewise  preserved,  as  is  Ae  hilt  of  Henry  IV.'s 
sword.  But  it  is  useless  to  begin  a  catalogue  of  these 
things.  What  a  collection  it  is,  including  Charle- 
magne's sword  and  sceptre,  and  the  last  Dauphin's 
little  toy  cannon,  and  so  much  between  the  two  I 

n6td  de  Louvre^  January  11th,  —  This  was  an- 
other chill,  raw  day,  characterized  by  a  spitefulness  of 
atmosphere  which  I  do  not  remember  ever  to  have  ex- 
perienced in  my  own  dear  country.     We  meant  to 

have  visited  the  H6tel  des  Invalides,  but  J and  I 

walked  to  the  Rivoli,  the  Place  de  la  Concorde,  the 
Champs  Elys^es,  and  to  the  Place  de  Beaiijon,  and  to 
the  residence  of  the  American  Minister,  where  I  wished 
to  arrange  about  my  passport.  After  speaking  with 
the  Secretary  of  Legation,  we  were  ushered  into  the 
minister's  private   room,  where   he  received  me  with 

great  kindness.     Mr. is  an  old  gentleman  with  a 

white  head,  and  a  large,  florid  face,  which  has  an  ex- 
pression of  amiabiUty,  not  unmingled  with  a  certain 
dignity.    Hedidnotrisefromhisarm^^hairtogreet 


82    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS     [ie» 

me, — a  lack  of  ceremony  which  I  imputed  to  the 
gont,  feeling  it  impossible  that  he  should  have  will- 
ingly failed  in  oourtesy  to  one  of  his  twenty-five  mill- 
ion sovereigns.  In  response  to  some  remark  of  mine 
about  the  shabby  way  in  which  our  government  treats 
its  ofBoials  pecuniarily,  he  gave  a  detailed  account  of 
his  own  troubles  on  that  score ;  then  expressed  a  hope 
that  I  had  made  a  good  thing  out  of  my  consulate, 
and  inquired  whether  I  had  received  a  hint  to  resign ; 
to  which  I  replied  that,  for  vanous  reasons,  I  had  re- 
signed of  my  own  accord,  and  before  Mr.  Buchanan's 
inauguration.  We  agreed,  however,  in  disapproving 
the  system  of  periodical  change  in  our  foreign  ofBcials ; 
and  I  remarked  that  a  consul  or  an  ambassador  ought 
to  be  a  citizen  both  of  his  native  country  and  of  the 
one  in  which  he  resided ;  and  that  his  possibility  of 
beneficent  influence  depended  largely  on  bis  being  so. 

Apropos  to  which  Mr. said   that  he   bad   once 

a^ed  a  diplomatic  friend  of  long  experience  what  was 
the  first  duty  of  a  minister.  "  To  love  his  own  coun- 
try, and  to  watch  over  its  interests,"  answered  the 
diplomatist  '*  And  his  second  duty  ? "  asked  Mr. 
'  '*  To  love  and  to  promote  the  interests  of  the 

country  to  which  he  is  accredited,"  said  his  friend. 
This  is  a  very  Christian  and  sensible  view  of  the  mat- 
ter ;  but  it  can  scarcely  have  happened  once  in  our 
whole  diplomatic  history,  that  a  minister  can  have 
had  time  to  overcome  his  first  rude  and  ignorant  prej- 
udice against  the  country  of  his  mission  ;  and  if  ^ere 
were  any  suspicion  of  his  having  done  so,  it  would  be 
held  abundantly  sufficient  ground  for  his  recalL  I 
like  Mr.  — — ,  a  good-hearted,  sensible  old  man. 

J and  I  returned  along  the  Champs  Elys6es, 

and,  crossing  the  Seine,  kept  on  our  way  by  the  river's 


«■] 


33 


'  brink,  looking  at  the  titles  of  books  on  the  long  line« 
of  stalla  that  extend  betweea  the  bridges.  Novels, 
faiiy-tales,  dream  books,  treatises  of  behavior  and  <.'ti- 
i{uette,  collections  of  boti-mots  and  of  songs,  were  in- 
terspersed with  volumes  iu  the  old  style  of  calf  and 
gilt  binding,  the  works  of  the  classics  of  French  Hteiv 
ature.  A  good  many  persons,  of  the  poor  classes,  and 
of  those  apparently  well  to  do,  stopped  transitorily  to 
look  at  these  books.  On  the  other  side  of  the  street 
vas  a  range  of  tall  edifices  with  shops  beneath,  and 
the  quick  stir  of  French  life  hurrying,  and  babbling, 
and  swarming  along  the  sidewalk.  W^e  passed  two 
or  three  bridges,  occurring  at  short  inter>'als.  anil  at 
laat  we  recrossed  the  Seine  by  a  bridge  which  over- 
Eteps  the  river,  from  a  point  near  the  National  In- 
sdtute,  and  reaches  the  other  side,  not  far  from  the 


Though  the  day  was  so  disagreeable,  we  thongbt  it 
t  not  to  lose  the  remainder  of  it,  and  therefore  bet 

I  out  to  visit  the  Cathexiral  of  Notre  Dame.  We  t<x)k 
,  6acre  in  the  Pla^e  de  Carrousel,  and  drove  to  the 

I  door.  On  entering,  we  found  the  interior  miserably 
shut  off  from  view  by  the  stagings  erected  for  the  pur- 
pose of  repairs.  Penetrating  from  the  nave  towards 
the  chancel,  an  ofBcial  personage  signilied  to  us  that 
we  must  first  purchase  a  ticket  for  each  grown  person, 
at  the  price  of  half  a  franc  each.  This  expenditure 
admitted  us  into  the  sacristy,  where  we  were  taken 
in  charge  by  a  guide,  who  came  down  upon  us  with 
an  avalanche  or  cataract  of  French,  descriptive  of  a 
great  many  treasures  reposited  in  this  ehapel.  I  un- 
der8too<l  haitlly  more  than  one  word  in  ten,  but  gath- 
ered doubtfully  that  a  bullet  which  was  shown  us  was 

_  the  one  that  killed  the  late  Archbishop  of  Paris,  on 


84     FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [IM 

(he  floor  of  tlie  Cathedral.     [But  this  was  a  mistake. 
It  was  the   archbishop  who  was  kUk'd  in  tlie  insui^ 
ruction  of  1848.      Two   joints  of  Jiis  hackbone  wera 
also  lihowii.]    Also,  that  some  gorgeously  emhroiderad 
vestments,  which  he  drew  forth,  had  beeu  used  at 
corouation  of    Napoleou  I.      There    were    two   lai 
full-k-agth  ]>ortraits  hanging  aloft  in  the  sacristy,  and' 
a  gold  or  silver  gilt,  or,  at  all  events,  gilt  image,  of 
the  Virgin,  as  large  as  life,  standing  on  a  pedestaL 
The  guide  bad  much  to  say  about  these,  but,  undeib 
standing  him  so  imperfectly,  1  have  nothing  to 
cord. 

The  guide's  supervision  of  us  seemed  not  to  extend 
beyond  this  sacristy,  on  quitting  which  lie  gave  ua 
permission  to  go  wliere  we  pl(!as<jd,  only  intimating 
a  hope  tliat  we  would  not  forget  liim  ;  so  I  gave  hint 
half  a  franc,  though  thereby  violating  an  iuhibition 
the  printed  ticket  of  entrance. 

We  had  been  much  disappointed  at  first  by  the  ap- 
parently narrow  limits  of  the  interior  of  this  famous 
church ;  but  now,  as  we  made  our  way  round  the 
choir,  gazing  into  chapel  after  chapel,  eaoli  with  ibii 
painted  window,  its  crucifix,  its  pictures,  its  confc 
sional,  and  afterwards  came  back  into  the  nave,  whi 
arch  rises  above  arch  to  the  lofty  roof,  we  came  to 
the  conclusion  that  it  was  very  Rumptuoua.  It  is  the 
greatest  of  pities  that  its  grandeur  and  solemnly 
should  just  now  be  so  infinitely  marred  by  the  work- 
men's boards,  timber,  and  ladders  occupying  the  whole 
centre  of  the  edifice,  and  screening  all  its  best  effects. 
It  seems  to  have  been  alrea«ly  most  richly  oma- 
vented,  its  roof  being  painted,  and  the  capitals  ol 
the  pillars  gilded,  and  their  shafts  illuminated  la 
fiasco;   and   no  doubt   it  will   shine  out  gorgeoualj 


rara  I 

th^H 

■Uld'^ 

of 
taL 

md^ 

ua 

"g  I 

lint^H 

>UB 

the 

!2M 


J 


1858.]  FRANCE.  85 

when  all  the  repairs  and  adomments  shall  be  com- 
pleted. Even  now  it  gave  to  my  actual  sight  what  I 
have  often  tried  to  imagine  in  my  visits  to  the  Eng- 
lish cathedrals,  —  the  pristine  glory  of  those  edifices, 
when  they  stood  glowing  with  gold  and  picture,  fresh 
from  the  architects'  and  adomers'  hands. 

The  interior  loftiness  of  Notre  Dame,  moreoyer, 
^yes  it  a  sublimity  which  would  swallow  up  anything 
that  might  look  gewgawy  in  its  ornamentation,  were 
we  to  consider  it  window  by  window,  or  piUar  by  pU- 
lar.  It  is  an  advantage  of  these  vast  edifices,  rising 
oyer  us  and  spreading  about  us  in  such  a  firmamental 
way,  that  we  cannot  spoil  them  by  any  pettiness  of 
our  own,  but  that  they  receive  (or  absorb)  our  pet- 
tiness into  their  own  immensity.  Every  little  fan- 
tasy finds  its  place  and  propriety  in  them,  like  a 
flower  on  the  earth's  broad  bosom. 

When  we  emerged  from  the  Cathedral,  we  found  it 
b^inning  to  rain  or  snow,  or  both ;  and,  as  we  had 
dismissed  our  fiacre  at  the  door,  and  could  find  no 
other,  we  were  at  a  loss  what  to  do.  We  stood  a  few 
moments  on  the  steps  of  the  Hdtel  Dieu,  looking  up 
at  the  front  of  Notre  Dame,  with  its  twin  towers, 
and  its  three  deep-pointed  arches,  piercing  through  a 
great  thickness  of  stone,  and  throwing  a  cavern-like 
gloom  around  these  entrances.  The  front  is  very 
rich.  Though  so  huge,  and  all  of  gray  stone,  it  is 
carved  and  fretted  with  statues  and  innumerable  de- 
vices, as  cunningly  as  any  ivory  casket  in  which 
relics  are  kept ;  but  its  size  did  not  so  much  impress 
me.  •  •  • 

H6tel  de  Louvre^  January  12tk.  —  This  has  been 
a  bright  day  as  regards  weather;  but  I  have  done 


80    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [18W 

little  or  nothing  worth  recording.  After  breakfast,  I 
set  out  in  quest  of  the  consul,  and  found  him  tip  a 
court,  at  51  Rue  Cammartin,  in  an  office  ratliei 
smaller,  I  Uiink,  than  mine  at  Liverpool ;  but,  to  say 
the  truth,  a  little  better  furnished.  I  was  received  in 
the  outer  apartment  b;  an  elderly,  brisk-looking  man, 
in  whose  air,  respectful  and  subservient,  and  yet  with 
a  kind  of  authority  in  it,  I  recognized  the  vice-consuL 
He  introduced  me  to  Mr.  — -,  who  sat  writing  in  aa 
inner  room  ;  a  very  gentlemanly,  ooorteons,  oool  man 
of  the  world,  whom  I  should  take  to  be  an  excellent 
person  for  oonsul  at  Paris.  He  tells  me  that  he  has 
resided  here  some  years,  although  his  occupancy  of  the 
consulate  dates  only  from  November  last.  Consulting 
him  respecting  my  passport,  he  gave  me  what  appear 
good  reasons  why  I  should  get  all  the  necessary  visSa 
here ;  for  example,  that  the  viaS  of  a  minister  oarriea 
more  weight  than  that  of  a  consul;  and  especially 
that  an  Austrian  consul  will  never  viaS  a  passport  nn- 

less  he  sees  his  minister's  name  upon  it.    Mr. has 

travelled  much  in  Italy,  and  ought  to  be  able  to  give 
me  sound  advice.  His  opinion  was,  that  at  this  sea- 
son of  the  year  I  had  better  go  by  steamer  to  CivitfL 
Vecchia,  instead  of  landing  at  Leghorn,  and  thence 
journeying  to  Rome.  On  this  point  I  shall  decide 
when  the  time  comes.  As  I  left  the  office  the  vice- 
consul  informed  me  that  there  was  a  charge  of  five 
francs  and  some  sous  for  the  consul's  via^,  a  tax 
which  surprised  me,  —  the  whole  business  of  pass- 
ports having  been  taken  from  consuls  before  I  quit- 
ted office,  and  the  consular  fee  having  been  annulled 

even  earlier.      However,  no   doubt   Mr. had   a 

fair  claim  to  my  five  francs  ;  but,  really,  it  is  not  half 
HO  pleasant  to  pay  a  consular  fee  as  it  used  to  be  to 
receive  it. 


1858.]  FRANCE.  87 

Afterwards  I  walked  to  Notre  Dame,  the  rich  front 
of  which  I  viewed  with  more  attention  than  yesterday. 
There  are  whole  histories,  carved  in  stone  figures, 
within  the  vaulted  arches  of  the  three  entrances  in 
this  west  front,  and  twelve  apostles  in  a  row  above, 
and  as  much  other  sculpture  as  would  take  a  month 
to  see.  We  then  walked  quite  round  it,  but  I  had  no 
sense  of  immensity  from  it,  not  even  that  of  great 
height,  as  from  many  of  the  cathedrals  in  England. 
It  stands  very  near  the  Seine ;  indeed,  if  I  mistake 
not,  it  is  on  an  island  formed  by  two  branches  of  the 
river.  Behind  it  is  what  seems  to  be  a  small  public 
ground  (or  garden,  if  a  space  entirely  denuded  of 
grass  or  other  green  thing,  except  a  few  trees  can  be 
called  so),  with  benches,  and  a  monument  in  the 
midst.  This  quarter  of  the  city  looks  old,  and  ap- 
]>ears  to  be  inhabited  by  poor  people,  and  to  be 
busied  about  small  and  petty  affairs  ;  the  most  pictu- 
resque business  that  I  saw  being  that  of  the  old  wo- 
man who  sells  tsrucifixes  of  pearl  and  of  wood  at  the 
cathedral  door.     We  bought  two  of  these  yesterday. 

I  must  again  speak  of  the  horrible  muddiness,  not 
only  of  this  part  of  the  city,  but  of  all  Paris,  so  far  as 
I  have  traversed  it  to-day.  My  ways,  since  I  came  to 
Europe,  have  often  lain  through  nastiness,  but  I  never 
before  saw  a  pavement  so  universally  overspread  with 
mud-padding  as  that  of  Paris.  It  is  difficult  to  im- 
agine where  so  much  filth  can  come  from. 

After  dinner  I  walked  through  the  gardens  of  the 
Tuileries ;  but  as  dusk  was  coming  on,  and  as  I  was 
afraid  of  being  shut  up  within  the  iron  lailing,  I  did 
not  have  time  to  examine  them  particularly.  There 
are  wide,  intersecting  walks,  fountains,  broad  basins, 
snd  many  statues;  but  almost  the  whole  surface  of 


88    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [ISSa. 

the  gardeoB  is  baireii  earth,  instead  of  the  Terdnre 
that  would  beautify  an  English  pleasure  -  ground  of 
this  sort.  In  the  summer  it  has  doubtless  an  agree- 
able  shade ;  but  at  this  season  the  naked  branches 
look  mei^re,  and  sprout  irom  slender  trunks.  Like 
the  trees  in  the  Champs  Elys^es,  those,  I  presume,  in 
the  gardens  of  the  Tuileries  need  renewing  every  few 
years.  The  same  ia  true  of  the  human  race,  —  fami- 
lies  beooming  extinct  after  a  generation  or  two  of  res- 
idence in  Paris.  Nothing  really  thrives  here ;  man 
and  vegetables  have  but  an  artificial  life,  like  flowers 
stuck  in  a  little  mould,  but  never  taking  root.  I  am 
quite  tired  of  Paxis,  and  long  for  a  home  more  than 


HABBEILLES. 

Sitd  d'Angleterre,  January  15(A.  —  On  Tuesday 
morning  (12th)  we  took  our  departure  from  the  Hdtel 
de  Louvre.  It  is  a  most  excellent  and  perfectly  or- 
dered hotel,  and  I  have  not  seen  a  more  magnificent 
hall  in  any  palace  than  the  dining -saloon,  with  its 
profuse  gilding,  and  its  ceiling,  painted  in  compart- 
ments ;  so  that  when  the  chandeliers  are  all  alight,  it 
looks  a  fit  place  for  princes  to  banquet  in,  and  not 
very  fit  for  the  few  Americans  whom  I  saw  scattered 
at  its  long  tables. 

By  the  by,  as  we  drove  to  the  railway,  we  passed 
through  the  public  square  where  the  Bastille  formerly 
stood ;  and  in  the  centre  of  it  now  st&nds  a  column, 
surmounted  by  a  golden  figure  of  Mercury  (I  think), 
which  seems  to  be  just  on  the  point  of  casting  itself 
from  a  gilt  ball  into  the  air.  This  statue  is  so  buoy- 
ant, that  the  spectator  feels  quite  willing  to  trust  it  to 
the  viewless  element,  being  as  sure  that  it  would  b» 
borne  up  as  that  a  bird  would  fly. 


1858.]  FRANCE.  89 

Oar  first  day's  journey  was  wholly  without  interest, 
through  a  country  entirely  flat,  and  looking  wretchedly 
brown  and  barren.  There  were  rows  of  trees,  very  slen« 
der,  very  prim  and  formal;  there  was  ice  wherever 
there  happened  to  be  any  water  to  form  it ;  there  were 
occasional  villages,  compact  little  streets  or  masses  of 
stone  or  plastered  cottages,  very  dirty  and  with  gable 
ands  and  earthen  roofs ;  and  a  succession  of  this  same 
landscape  was  all  that  we  saw,  whenever  we  rqbbed 
away  the  congelation  of  our  breath  from  the  carriage 
windows.  Thus  we  rode  on,  all  day  long,  from  eleveA 
o'clock,  with  hardly  a  five  minutes'  stop,  till  long  after 
dark,  when  we  came  to  Dijon,  where  there  was  a  halt 
of  t^enly-five  minates  for  dinner.  Then  we  set  forih 
again,  and  rumbled  forward,  through  cold  and  dark- 
ness without,  until  we  reached  Lyons  at  about  ten 
o'clock.  We  left  our  luggage  at  ^b  railway-station, 
and  took  an  onmibus  for  the  Hdtel  de  Provence,  which 
we  chose  at  a  venture,  among  a  score  of  other  hotels. 

As  this  hotel  was  a  little  off  the  direct  route  of  the 
omnibus,  the  driver  set  us  down  at  the  comer  of  a 
street,  and  pointed  to  some  lights,  which  he  said  des- 
ignated the  Hdtel  de  Provence ;  and  thither  we  pro- 
ceeded, all  seven  of  us,  taking  along  a  few  carpet-bags 
and  shawls,  our  equipage  for  the  night.  The  porter 
of  the  hotel  met  us  near  its  doorway,  and  ushered  us 
through  an  arch,  into  the  inner  quadrangle,  and  then 
up  some  old  and  worn  steps,  —  very  broad  and  appear* 
ing  to  be  the  principal  staircase.  At  the  first  landing- 
\^lace,  an  old  woman  and  a  waiter  or  two  received  us  : 
and  we  went  up  two  or  three  more  flights  of  the  same 
broad  and  worn  stone  staircases.  What  we  coidd  see 
of  the  house  looked  very  old,  and  had  the  musty  odol 
with  which  I  first  became  acquainted  at  Chester. 


JO    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [1851 

After  ascending  to  tbe  proper  level,  we  were  oon. 
ducted  along  a  corridor,  paved  witb  octagonid  earthen 
tilea  ;  on  one  side  were  windows,  looking  into  the 
courfc-yard ;  on  the  other,  doors  opening  into  the  aleep- 
ing-cbambera.  The  corridor  was  of  immense  length, 
and  seemed  still  to  lengthen  itaelf  before  ua,  as  the 
glimmer  of  onr  conductor's  candle  went  farther  and 
farther  into  the  obscurity.  Our  own  chamber  was  at 
a  vast  distance  along  this  passage ;  those  of  the  rest 
of  the  party  were  on  the  hither  side  ;  but  all  this  im- 
mense suite  of  rooms  appeared  to  communicate  by 
doors  from  one  to  another,  like  the  chambers  through 
which  the  reader  wanders  at  midnight,  in  Mrs.  Rad* 
diffe's  romances.  And  they  were  really  splendid 
rooms,  though  of  an  old  fa^ion,  lofty,  spacious,  with 
floors  of  oak  or  other  wood,  inlaid  in  squares  and 
crosses,  and  waxed  till  they  were  slippery,  but  with- 
out carpets.  Our  own  sleeping-room  had  a  deep  fire- 
place, in  which  we  ordered  a  fire,  and  asked  if  there 
were  not  some  saloon  already  warmed  where  we  could 
get  a  cup  of  tea. 

Hereupon  the  waiter  led  us  back  along  the  endless 
corridor,  and  down  the  old  stone  staircases,  and  out 
into  the  quadrangle,  and  journeyed  with  us  along  an 
exterior  arcade,  and  finally  threw  open  the  door  of  the 
stdle  d  manner,  which  proved  to  be  a  room  of  lofty 
height,  with  a  vaulted  roof,  a  stone  floor,  and  interior 
spaciousness  BufBcient  for  a  baronial  hall,  the  whole 
bearing  the  same  aspect  of  times  gone  by  that  charac- 
terized the  rest  of  the  house.  There  were  two  or  three 
tobies  covered  with  white  cloth,  and  we  sat  down  at 
one  of  them  and  had  our  tea.  Finally  we  wended  back 
to  our  sleeping  -  rooms, —  a  considerable  journey,  aa 
endless  seemed  the  ancient  boteL  I  should  like  t» 
know  its  history. 


i868.] 


FRA  NCE. 


41 


P 


The  fire  made  our  great  chamber  look  comfortaWe, 
■nd  the  fireplace  threw  out  the  heat  better  than  the 
little  square  hole  over  which  we  cowered  id  one  saloon 
ftt  the  Hrttel  dc  Louvre.  .  ,  . 

In  the  morning  we  began  our  preparations  for  start- 
ing at  ten.  Issuing  into  the  corridor,  I  found  a  sol- 
dier of  the  line,  pacing  to  and  fro  there  as  seiitineL 
Another  was  posted  in  another  corridor,  into  which 
I  wandered  by  mistake ;  another  stood  in  the  inner 
court-yard,  and  another  at  the  porte  -  cochcre.  They 
were  not  there  the  night  before,  and  I  know  not 
whenee  nor  why  tbey  eanie,  unless  that  some  officer 
of  rank  may  have  taken  up  hia  quarters  at  the  hotel- 
Miss  M says  she  heard  at  Paris  that  a  consider- 
able number  of  troops  had  recently  been  drawn  to- 
gether at  Lyons,  in  consequence  of  symptoms  of  dis- 
affection that  have  recently  shown  themselves  here. 
'  Before  breakfast  I  went  out  to  catch  a  momentary 
'glimpse  of  the  city.  The  street  in  which  our  hotel 
■tands  is  near  a  large  public  square;  in  the  centre  is 
a  bronze  equestrian  statue  of  Louis  XIV. ;  and  the 
square  itself  is  called  the  Place  de  Louis  le  Grand.  I 
wonder  where  this  statue  hid  itself  while  the  Kcvohi- 
was  raging  in  Lyons,  and  when  the  guillotine, 
perhaps,  stood  on  that  very  spot. 

The  square  was  surrounded  by  stately  buildings,  but 
had  what  seemed  to  be  barracks  for  soldiers,  —  at  any 
rate,  mean  little  huts,  deforming  its  am]>Ie  space ;  and 
a  soldier  was  on  guard  before  the  statue  of  Louis  le 
Grand.  It  was  a  cold,  misty  morning,  and  a  fog  lay 
IJtroughout  the  area,  so  tliat  I  could  scarcely  see  from 
one  side  of  it  to  the  other. 

Beturuing  towards  our  hotel,  I  saw  that  it  had  an 
bnmenae  front,  along  which  ran  in  gigantic  letters,  its 


42    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOORS.   [181 

title,  —  "  Hfltel  de  Provence  et  dea  Ambassadours.' 
The  c:icelleiic«  of  the  hoU;l  lay  rather  in  the  fadedl 
pomp  of  its  Bleeping  -  rooms,  aiid  the  vaBtness  of  itir 
nafln  a  tnanger,  than  in  anything  very  good  to  eat  os' 
drink. 

We  left  it,  after  a  poor  breakfast,  and  went  to 
railway-atation.     Looking  at  the  mountainous  heap 
our  luggage  thn  night  before,  we  had  miHsed  a  great' 

carpet  -  bag ;  and  we  now  found  that  Miss  M *t 

trimk  had  been  substituted  for  it,  and,  there  being 
the  proper  number  of  packages  as  registered,  it  vm 
impossible  to  convince  tiie  officials  that  anything  was 
y  wrong.  We,  of  course,  began  to  generalize  forthwith, 
and  pronotmce  the  incident  to  be  cbaract«riBtic  of 
French  morality.  They  love  a  certain  system  and  ex- 
temal  correctness,  but  do  not  trouble  themselves  to  be 

deeply  in  the  right ;  and  Miss  M suggested  tbak 

there  used  to  be  parallel  eases  in  the  French  Revolit- 
tion.  when,  so  long  as  the  assigned  numbei 
out  of  prison  to  be  guillotined,  the  jailer  did  not  muolli 
care  whether  they  were  the  persons  designated  by 
tribunal  or  not.  At  all  events,  we  could  get  no  satit-j 
faction  about  the  carpet-bag,  and  sliall  very  probably 
be  compelled  to  leave  Marseilles  without  it. 

This  day's  ride  was  through  a  far  more  picturesque 
country  than  that  we  saw  yesterday.  Heights  began 
to  rise  imminent  above  our  way,  with  sometimes  a 
ruine<l  cjistle  wall  upon  them ;  on  our  left,  the  rail-track 
kept  cIuHu  to  the  hills ;  on  the  otlier  side  there  was  the 
level  bottom  of  a  valley,  with  heights  descending  upon 
it  a  mile  or  a  few  miles  away.  Farther  off  we  could 
eee  blue  bills,  shouldering  high  above  the  intermediate 
ones,  and  themselves  worthy  to  be  called  mountains, 
rhese  hiUa  arranged  themselves  in  beautifui  grou] 


I 


1 


1858.]  FRANCE.  48 

affording  openings  between  them,  and  vistas  of  what 
lay  beyond,  and  gorges  which  I  suppose  held  a  great 
deal  of  romantic  scenery.  By  and  by  a  river  made  its 
appearance,  flowing  swiftly  in  the  same  direction  that 
we  were  travelling, — a  beautiful  and  cleanly  river, 
with  white  pebbly  shores,  and  itself  of  a  peculiar  blue., 
It  rushed  along  very  fast,  sometimes  whitening  over^ 
shallow  descents,  and  even  in  its  calmer  intervals  its 
sur&oe  was  all  covered  with  whirls  and  eddies,  indi- 
cating that  it  dashed  onward  in  haste.  I  do  not  now 
know  the  name  of  this  river,  but  have  set  it  down  as 
the  **  Arrowy  Rhone."  It  kept  us  company  a  long 
while,  and  I  think  we  did  not  part  with  it  as  long  as 
daylight  remained.  I  have  seldom  seen  hill-sceneiy 
that  struck  me  more  than  some  that  we  saw  to-day, 
and  the  old  feudal  towers  and  old  villages  at  their 
feet;  and  the  old  churches,  with  spires  shaped  just 
Uke  extinguishers,  gave  it  an.  interest  accumulating 
from  many  centuries  past. 

Still  going  southward,  the  vineyards  began  to  bor- 
der our  track,  together  with  what  I  at  first  took  to  be 
orchards,  but  soon  found  were  plantations  of  olive- 
trees,  which  grow  to  a  much  larger  si2se  than  I  sup- 
posed, and  look  almost  exactly  like  very  crabbed  and 
eccentric  apple-trees.  Neither  they  nor  the  vine- 
yards add  anything  to  the  picturesqueness  of  the  land* 
scape. 

On  the  whole,  I  should  have  been  delighted  with  all 
this  scenery  if  it  had  not  looked  so  bleak,  barren, 
brown,  and  bare ;  so  like  the  wintry  New  England  be-  ^ 
fore  the  snow  has  fallen.  It  was  very  cold,  too ;  ice 
along  the  borders  of  streams,  even  among  the  vine- 
irards  and  olives.  The  houses  are  of  rather  a  differ- 
ent shape  here  than  farther  northward,  their  roofs  be 


t4     FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-DOOK.t.    [i8B»i 

itig  Dut  nearly  so  sloping.  They  are  almost  iavariably 
cnvereii  with  whit«  plaster;  the  farm-houses  have  their 
out-buildings  in  connection  with  the  dwelling, —  the 
whole  surrounding  three  Hiden  of  a  quadrangle. 

We  travelled  far  into  the  night,  HWalloweil  a  cold 
and  hasty  dinner  at  Avignon,  aud  reached  Marseillea 
sorely  wearied,  at  about  eleven  o'clock.     We  took 
cab  to  the  H6tel  d'Augleterre  (two  cabs,  to  be  quits' 
accurate),  and  find  it  a  very  poor  place. 

To  go  back  a  little :  aa  the  stin  went  down, 
looked  out  of  the  window  of  our  rait  way -carriage,  and." 
saw  a  sky  that  reminded  us  of  what  we  used  to 
day  after  day  in  Amenco,  and  what  we  have  not  si'on 
since  ;  and.  after  sunset,  the  horizon  bunied  and 
glowed  with  rich  crimson  and  orange  lustre,  looking 
at  once  warm  and  cold.     After  it  grew  dark,  the  stars 

brightened,  and  Miss  M from  her  window  pointed 

out  some  of  the  planets  f*»  the  cliildren.  she  V>eing 
familiar  with  them  as  a  gardener  with  his  flowers. 
They  were  as  bright  aa  diamonds. 

Wo   had  a  wretche<l  breakfast,  and  J and  X 

then  went  to  the  railway-station  to  se«  about  our  lu^i 
gage.  On  our  wallc  bai-k  we  went  astray,  passing  by' 
a  triumphal  arch,  erected  by  the  Marseill-aise,  in  honoE' 
uf  Louis  Napoleon  ;  but  we  inquired  our  way  of  old 
women  and  soldiers,  who  were  very  kind  and  cour- 
teous, —  especially  the  latter,  —  and  were  directed 
aright.  We  came  to  a  large,  oblong,  public  plac«, 
set  with  trees,  but  devoid  of  grass,  like  all  public 
places  in  France.  In  the  middle  of  it  was  a  bronze 
Btatiie  of  an  ecclesiastical  personage,  stretching  forth 
his  hands  in  the  attitude  of  addressing  the  people  or 
«f  throwing  a  benediction  over  them.  It  was 
archbishop,  who  had  diatioguished  himself  by  hia  ha 


I 


1 


I 


1858.]  FnAtrcE.  46 

manity  and  devotedneas  during  the  plague  of  1720. 
At  the  momeut  of  our  arrival  the  piazzu  was  quite 
thronged  with  people,  who  seemed  to  he  talking 
amongst  themselves  with  cousidurable  earnestness, 
although  without  any  actual  excitement.  They  were 
smoking  cigars  ;  and  we  judged  tlmt  they  were  only 
loitering  here  for  the  sake  of  the  smishine,  having  no 
fires  at  home,  and  nothing  to  do.  Some  looked  like 
gentlemen,  others  like  peasants ;  most  of  them  I 
should  hare  taken  for  the  lazzaroni  of  this  Southern 
city,  —  men  with  cloth  caps,  like  the  classic  liberty- 
cap,  or  with  wide-awake  hats.  There  were  one  or  two 
women  of  the  lower  classes,  without  bonnets,  the  elder 
ones  with  white  caps,  the  younger  bareheaded.  I 
have  hardly  seen  a  lady  in  Marseilles ;  and  1  suspect, 
it  being  a  commercial  city,  aD<l  dirty  to  the  last  de- 
gree, ill-built,  narrow-streeted,  and  sometimes  jwsti- 
lential,  there  are  few  or  no  families  of  gentility  resi- 
dent here. 

Ketuming  to  the  hotel,  we  found  the  rest  of  the 
party  ready  to  go  out  ;  so  we  all  issued  forth  in  a 
body,  and  inquired  our  way  to  the  telegraph-office,  in 
order  to  send  my  message  about  the  carpet-bag.  In 
B  street  through  which  we  had  to  pass  (and  wliicli 
seemed  to  be  the  Exchange,  or  its  precinvts),  tliere 
was  a  crowd  even  denser,  yes,  much  denser,  than  that 
which  we  saw  in  the  square  of  the  archbishop's 
Btatue  ;  and  each  man  was  talking  to  his  neighbor  in 
«  virid,  animated  way,  as  if  business  were  very  brisk 
tiMlay. 

At  the  telegrapli-ofBce,  we  discovered  the  cause  tliat 
lad  brought  out  these  many  i>eople.  There  had  been 
attempts  on  the  Emperor's  life,  —  unsuitwssfid,  as 
they  Beem  fated  to  be,  though  some  misuhief  was  dona 


46     FRENCH  AND    ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [1888,  | 

to  those  near  Mm.  I  rather  think  the  good  pGO[ 
Marseilles  were  glad  of  the  attempt,  as  an  item  ol 
news  aiid  gossip,  and  did  not  very  greatly  care  whethef 
it  were  suocessful  or  no.  It  se<^iiieil  to  have  roused 
their  vivacity  rather  thsji  tlieir  interest.  The  oidy  ao- 
count  I  have  seen  of  it  was  in  the  briuf  public  do- 
Bjiatoh  from  the  Syndic  (or  whatever  he  bo)  of  Pari? 
to  the  chief  authority  of  MarseiUes,  wliicli  was  printed 
and  posted  in  various  conspicuous  places.  The  only 
chance  ot  knowing  tho  trutli  with  any  fulness  of  detail 
would  be  tu  come  across  an  English  [taper.  We  have 
had  a  banner  hoisted  half-mast  in  front  of  our  liotel 
to-day  as  a  token,  tho  head-waiter  tells  mc,  of  sympa^ 
thy  and  sorrow  for  tho  General  and  other  persons  wlio  i 
were  slain  by  this  treasonable  attempt,  | 

J and  I  now  wandered  by  ourselves  along  s 

circidar  line  of  quays,  having,  on  one  side  of  us,  a 
thick  forest  of  masts,  while,  on  tho  other,  was  a  sweep 
of  shops,  hook-stalls,  sailors'  restaurants  and  drinking- 
houses,  fniit-aellers,  candy-women,  and  all  manner  of 
n|teD-air  dealers  and  pedlars;  little  children  plaj-ing, 
and  jumping  the  rope,  and  such  a  babble  and  bustle 
as  I  never  saw  or  heard  before  ;  the  aim  lying  along 
the  whole  sweep,  very  hot,  and  evidently  very  grateful 
to  those  who  basked  in  it.  Whenever  I  ])asse<l  into 
the  shade,  immediately  from  too  warm  I  became  too 
cold.  The  sunshine  was  like  hot  air ;  the  sliade,  like 
the  touch  of  cold  steel,  —  sharp,  hard,  yet  cxhlhiratiug. 
From  the  broad  street  of  the  quays,  narrow,  thread- 
like lanes  pierced  up  between  tlie  edifices,  calling 
themselves  streets,  yet  so  narrow,  tliat  a  person  in  the 
middle  could  almost  touch  the  houses  on  either  hand. 
They  as<'cnded  rttecply,  bordered  on  eauh  side  by  long, 
sontiguous  walls  of  high  bouses,  and  from  the  time  oj 


i858.]  THE  MEDITERRANEAN  SEA.  41 

kheir  first  being  built,  could  never  have  bad  a  gleam 
of  sunshine  in  them,  —  always  in  shadow,  always  un. 
ntterahly  nasty,  and  often  pestiferous.  The  nastiness 
whiob  I  saw  in  Marseilles  exceeds  my  heretofore  expe- 
rience. There  is  dirt  in  the  hotel,  and  everywhere 
else ;  and  it  evidently  troubles  nobody,  —  no  more 
than  if  all  the  people  were  pigs  in  a  pigsty.  •  .  • 

Passing  by  all  this  sweep  of  quays,  J and  T 

ascended  to  an  elevated  walk,  overlooking  the  harbor, 
and  far  beyond  it ;  for  here  we  had  our  first  view  of 
(he  Mediterranean,  blue  as  heaven,  and  bright  with 
sunshine.  It  was  a  bay,  widening  forth  into  the  open 
deep,  and  bordered  with  heights  and  bold,  picturesque 
headlands,  some  of  which  had  either  fortresses  or  con- 
vents on  them.  Several  boats  and  one  brig  were  un- 
der sail,  making  their  way  towards  the  port.  I  have 
never  seen  a  finer  sea-view.  Behind  the  town  there 
seemed  to  be  a  mountainous  landscape,  imperfectly 
visible,  in  consequence  of  the  intervening  edifices. 

TH£  MEDITEBRANEAN  SEA* 

Steamer  Calahrese,  January  llth.  —  If  I  had  re* 
muned  at  Marseilles,  I  might  have  found  many  pecu- 
liarities and  characteristics  of  that  Southern  city  to 
notice ;  but  I  fear  that  these  will  not  be  recorded  if  I 
leave  them  till  I  touch  the  soil  of  Italy.  Indeed,  I 
doubt  whether  there  be  anything  really  worth  record- 
ing in  the  little  distinctions  between  one  nation  and 
inother ;  at  any  rate,  after  the  first  novelty  is  over, 
Hew  things  seem  equally  commonplace  with  the  old. 
There  is  but  one  little  interval  when  the  mind  is  in 
such  a  state  that  it  can  catch  the  fleeting  aroma  of  a 
new  scene.  And  it  is  always  so  much  pleasanter  to 
enjoy  this  delicious  newness  than  to  attempt  arresting 


48    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.     [18M. 

it,  that  it  requires  great  force  of  will  to  insist  with 
one's  self  upon  sitting  down  to  write.  I  can  do  noth 
ing  with  Marseilles,  especially  here  on  the  Mediterrtu 
nean,  long  after  nightfall,  and  when  the  steamer  is 
pitching  in  a  pretty  lively  way. 

(Later.)  —  I   walked    out  with  J yesterday 

morning,  and  reached  the  outskirts  of  the  city,  whence 
we  could  see  the  bold  and  picturesque  heights  that  but* 
round  Maraeilles  as  with  a  semicircular  wall.  They 
rise  into  peaks,  and  the  town,  being  on  their  lower 
slope,  descends  from  them  towards  the  sea  with  a  grad- 
ual  sweep.  Adown  the  streets  that  descend  these  d^ 
clivities  come  little  rivulets,  nmning  along  over  the 
pavement,  close  to  the  sidewalks,  as  over  a  pebbly 
bed;  and  though  they  look  vastly  like  kennels,  I  saw 
women  washing  linen  in  these  streams,  and  others  dip- 
ping up  the  water  for  household  purposes.  The  wo- 
men appear  very  much  in  public  at  Marseilles.  In 
the  squares  and  places  you  see  half  a  dozen  of  them 
together,  sitting  in  a  social  circle  on  the  bottoms  of 
upturned  baskets,  knitting,  talking,  and  enjoying  the 
public  sunshine,  as  if  it  were  their  own  household  Bre. 
Not  one  in  a  thousand  of  them,  probably,  ever  has  a 
household  fire  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  themselves 
warm,  but  only  to  do  their  little  cookery ;  and  when 
there  is  sunshine  they  take  advantage  of  it,  and  in  the 
short  season  of  rain  and  frost  they  shrug  their  shoul- 
ders, put  on  what  warm  garments  they  have,  and  get 
through  the  winter  somewhat  as  grasshoppers  and  but- 
terflies do,  —  being  summer  insects  like  them.  This 
certunly  is  a  very  keen  and  cutting  air,  sharp  as  a 
razor,  and  I  saw  ice  along  the  borders  of  the  little 
rivulets  almost  at  noonday.  To  be  sure,  it  is  mid-win- 
tei,  and  yet  in  the  sunshine  I  found  myself  anooo» 


S] 


THE  MBDITEnRANEAN  SEA. 


4» 


I 


I 


fortably  wann,  but  in  tlie  shade  the  air  was  like  the 
tuuch  of  death  itst^lf.     1  do  nut  like  the  climate. 

There  are  a  g;reat  number  of  public  pW'vs  in  Mar- 
seille!!, several  of  which  are  adorned  with  statues  or 
fountaiiis,  or  triumphal  arches  or  columns.  an<!  set  out 
with  trees,  and  otherwise  furnished  as  a  kind  of  draw- 
iug-rooms,  where  the  popula<;e  may  meet  together  and 
gossip.  I  never  before  heard  from  human  lips  any- 
thing like  this  bustle  and  babble,  this  thousand-fold 
talk  whiofa  you  hear  all  round  about  you  in  the  crowd 
of  a  public  square;  so  entirely  different  b  it  from  the 
dulness  of  a  crowd  in  England,  where,  &&  a  rule,  every- 
body is  silent,  and  hardly  half  a  dozen  monosyllables 
will  come  from  the  lips  of  a  thousand  people.  In 
Marseilles,  on  the  contrary,  a  stream  of  unbroken  talk 
Beema  to  bubble  from  the  lips  of  every  individual.  A 
great  many  interesting  scenes  take  place  in  these 
squares.  From  the  window  of  our  hotel  (which  looked 
into  the  Place  Royal)  I  saw  a  juggler  displaying  his 
art  to  a  crowd,  who  stood  in  a  regular  square  about 
him,  none  pretending  to  press  nearer  than  the  pre- 
scribed limit.  Whde  the  juggler  wrought  his  mirar 
cles  his  wife  supplied  him  with  his  magic  materials 
out  of  a  box;  and  when  the  exhibition  was  over  she 
packed  up  the  white  cloth  with  which  bis  table  was 
covered,  together  with  cups,  cards,  balls,  and  whatever 
else,  and  they  took  their  departure. 

I  have  been  struck  with  the  idle  curiosity,  and,  at 
the  same  time^  the  courtesy  and  kindness,  of  the  popu- 
lace of  Marseilles,  and  I  meant  to  exemplify  it  by  re- 

eonling  how  Miss  S and  I  attracted  their  notice, 

and  became  the  centre  of  a  crowd  of  at  least  fifty  of 
them,  while  doing  no  more  remarkable  thing  thau  set. 
tling  with  a  cab  -  driver.     But  really  tins  pitch  and 


60    FRENCH  AND  ITAUAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [II 

swell  is  getting  too  bod,  and  I  shall  go  to  bed,  as 
best  chajice  of  keeping  mysi<lf  in  an  equable  state. 


37  Palazzo  Larazani,  Via  Porta  Pinciana,  Jam 
ary  24(A.  —  We  left  Marseilles  in  the  Neapoli 
Steamer  Calabrese,  as  noticed  above,  a  week  ago  this 
morning.  There  was  no  fault  to  be  found  with  the 
steamer,  which  was  very  clean  and  comfortable,  con- 
trary to  what  we  had  understood  beforehand :  except 
for  the  ooolnoBS  of  the  air  (and  I  know  not  that  this 
was  greater  tlian  that  of  the  Atlantic  in  July),  our 
voyage  would  have  been  very  pleasant;  but  for  my- 
self, 1  enjoyed  nothing,  having  a  cold  upon  me,  or  a 
low  fever,  or  something  else  that  took  the  light  and 
warmth  out  of  everything. 

I  went  to  bed  immediately  after  my  last  record, 
was  rocked  to  sleep  pleasantly  enough  by  the  hi] 
of  the  Meditorranean ;  and,  coming  on  deck  about 
sunrise  next  morning,  found  the  steamer  approaching 
Genoa.  We  saw  the  city,  lying  at  the  foot  of  a  range 
of  hills,  and  stretohing  a  little  way  up  their  sIojkb, 
the  hills  sweeping  round  it  in  the  segment  of  a  circle, 
and  looking  like  an  island  rising  abruptly  out  of  the 
sea ;  for  no  conuM'tion  with  the  mainland  was  visible 
on  eitticF  side.  There  was  snow  scatteretl  on  their 
Mummits,  and  streaking  their  sides  a  good  way  down. 
They  looked  bold,  and  barren,  and  brown,  except 
where  the  snow  whitene«l  them.  The  city  did  not  im- 
press me  with  much  expeotation  of  size  or  splendor. 
Skortly  after  coming  into  the  port  our  whole  party 
landed,  and  we  foimd  ourselves  at  once  in  the  midst 
of  a  iirowd  of  cab-drivei-s,  hotel -runners,  and  coinmis- 
tionaires,  who  assaulted  us  with  a  volley  of  Freo< 


illcnwIB 


PreoQ])^^_ 


nu.]  rTALT.  n 

ItaEn.  1^  fankn  E-^fid^  «U(k  twt  pitaMeK 
almM  flvflan;  fiorRaBvii  SdOM^  »  if  all  tW<]»^- 
tio—rif  IB  Ae  voU  ^i  hwa  torn  tt>  piMws.  umi 
lilorvB  SKMBd  as  W  a  kKunae.  Sork  a  [wdwr  *  W^ 
took  a  rnwrrTr-—--*  a  wpWaMf  Wifcing  »aa,  in 
a  doak.  vbo  wd  Us  aiM^  va»  SalTalor  R>«a :  and 
he  gngaged  to  Jaia  bs  vbtmr  was  iBtnwMitij;  ia 
Genoa. 

In  tfe  fint  pWir  hp  took  w  tibrouf:!!  aanvtw  strtwt* 
to  an  old  dnnck.  d»  name  of  vlikb  I  haxv  f»j^m««. 
and,  indeed,  itapecaliar  fiMttnrm:  bat  I  know  that  I 
found  it  paeoainenth-  magnJficwit.  —  its  whol»  int»> 
rioi-  htmg  incawd  in  polishn)  marhte.  of  Tariooa  kindii 
and  coktts,  its  eating  paint«L  and  its  ohapeU  aiiomM 
•wHHi  pictnzes.  How«v«r.  this  rhorch  was  daolnl  <.Hit 
of  sight  by  the  Cathedral  of  San  Loreiuo.  to  vhirh 
ire  were  aftenrards  oondocted.  whose  exterior  front  ia 
covered  with  alternate  slabs  of  black  and  white  ma^ 
Ue,  iriiich  were  braogfat,  either  in  whole  or  in  part, 
from  Jemsalem.  Within,  there  was  a  prodigious  rich- 
nen  of  precious  marbles,  and  a  pillar,  if  I  mistake 
not,  from  Solomon's  Temple ;  and  a  piotiire  of  the 
Virgin  by  St.  Lnke ;  and  others  (rather  more  intrin< 
ideally  TaloaUe,  I  imagine),  by  old  masters,  set  in  sn< 
perb  marble  frames,  within  the  art- hos  of  the  ehA)x'ls. 
I  nsed  to  try  to  imagine  bow  the  Knglish  oathtHlmls 
must  have  looked  in  their  primeval  glory,  l)et»n<  the 
B^ormation,  and  before  the  whitewash  of  CrotnwoH's 
time  had  overlaid  their  marble  pillars ;  but  I  nuvpr 
imagined  anything  at  all  approiiohing  what  my  t>yi>H 
now  beheld:  this  sheen  of  polished  anil  variogattxl 
marble  covering  every  inch  of  iti  walls ;  this  glow  of 
brilliant  frescos  all  over  the  roof,  and  up  witliiu  the 
domes ;  these  beaatiful  pictures  by  great  masturiH 


62    FRENCB  AND   ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [185R 

painted  for  t)ie  places  which  they  now  (x^riipied,  and 
making  an  actual  portion  of  th(^>  edifice;  this  weulth 
of  silver,  gohl.  and  gems,  that  axlomfd  the  Bhtiui^H  of 
the  saints,  before  whieh  wax  candles  bunied,  ami  were 
kept  burning,  I  suppose,  from  year's  end  to  year's 
end ;  in  flhort,  there  is  no  imagining  nor  remembering 
a  hundredth  part  of  the  rich  detaik.  And  even  the 
Cathedral  (though  I  give  it  up  as  imleacribablc)  wa^ 
nothing  at  all  in  comparison  with  a  church  to  which 
the  commifisionaire  afterwards  led  us ;  a  church  that 
ha^I  been  built  four  or  five  hundred  years  s^gn,  by  a 
pirate,  in  expiation  of  his  sins,  and  out  of  the  profit  of 
his  rapine.  This  last  edifice,  in  its  interior,  absolutely 
shone  with  burnished  gold,  and  glowed  with  pietiirea ; 
its  walls  were  a  quarry  of  precious  stones,  so  valuable 
were  the  marbles  out  of  which  they  were  wrought ;  its 
columns  and  pillars  were  of  inconceivable  costliness  ; 
its  pavement  was  a  mosaic  of  wonderful  beauty,  and 
there  were  four  twistetl  pillars  made  out  of  stalactites, 
Perhaps  the  best  way  to  form  some  dim  conception  of 
it  is  to  fancy  a  little  casket,  inlaid  inside  with  precious 
stones,  so  that  there  shall  not  a  hairVbrea4lth  be  left 
unprecious-stonetl,  and  then  to  conceive  this  little  bit 
of  a  casket  increased  to  the  magnitude  of  a  great 
church,  without  losing  anything  of  the  excessive  glory 
that  was  compressed  into  its  original  small  compass, 
but  all  its  pretty  lustre  made  sublime  by  the  conwe- 
qiient  immensity.  At  any  rate,  nobody  who  has  not 
seen  a  ehim^h  like  tins  can  imagine  what  a  gorgeous 
religion  it  was  that  reared  it. 

In  the  Cathedral,  and  in  all  the  churches,  we  saw 
priests  and  many  iiersoiis  kneeling  at  their  devotions ; 
and  our  Salvator  Rosa,  whenever  we  pastiod  a  chap*] 
or  shrine,  failed  not  to  touch  the  pavement  with 


1958.]  ITALY.  53 

knee,  crcMBUig  liiiiiself  the  while ;  and  once,  when  a 
priest  was  going  through  some  form  of  devotion,  he 
stopped  a  few  moments  to  share  in  it. 

He  conducted  us,  too,  to  the  Balbi  Pakoe,  the  state- 
liest and  most  sumptuous  residence,  but  not  more  so 
than  another  which  he  afterwards  showed  us,  nor  per- 
haps than  many  others  which  exist  in  Genoa,  The 
Superb.  The  painted  ceilings  in  these  palaces  are 
a  glorious  adornment;  the  walls  of  the  saloons,  in- 
crusted  with  various-colored  marbles,  give  an  idea  of 
splendor  which  I  never  gained  from  anything  else. 
The  floors,  laid  in  mosaic,  seem  too  precious  to  tread 
upon.  In  the  royal  pahice,  many  of  the  floors  were 
of  various  woods,  inlaid  by  an  English  artist,  and  they 
looked  like  a  magnification  of  some  exquisite  piece  of 
Tonbridge  ware ;  but,  in  all  respects,  this  palace  was 
inferior  to  others  which  we  saw.  I  say  nothing  of  the 
immense  pictorial  treasures  which  hung  upon  the  walls 
of  all  the  rooms  through  which  we  passed ;  for  I  soon 
grew  so  weary  of  admirable  things,  that  I  could  neither 
enjoy  nor  understand  them.  Mv  receptive  faculty  is 
yeryKmited,  and  when  the  utmosi  of  its  smaU  capacity 
is  full,  I  become  perfectly  miserable,  and  the  more  so 
the  better  worth  seeing  are  the  things  I  am  forced  to 
reject.  I  do  not  know  a  greater  misery ;  to  see  sights, 
after  such  repletion,  is  to  the  mind  what  it  would  be  to 
the  body  to  have  dainties  forced  down  the  throat  long 
after  the  appetite  was  satiated. 

All  this  while,  whenever  we  emerged  into  the  vault- 
like streets,  we  were  wretchedly  cold.  The  commis- 
sionaire took  us  to  a  sort  of  pleasure-garden,  occupying 
the  ascent  of  a  hill,  and  presenting  seven  different 
views  of  the  city,  from  as  many  stations.  One  of  the 
objects  pointed  out  to  us  was  a  large  yellow  house,  on 


64    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [1BS& 

a  lull-side,  in  the  outskirts  of  Geaoa,  wliidi  was  fot^ 
merly  inhabited  for  six  montlui  by  Charles  Dii-kcns. 
Looking  down  from  the  elevated  part  of  the  pleasure- 
gardens,  we  saw  orange -trees  beneath  ua,  with  the 
golden  fruit  hanging  upon  them,  though  tlieir  trunks 
were  muffled  in  straw;  anil,  still  lower  down,  there 
was  ice  and  snow. 

Gladly  (so  far  as  I  myself  waa  concerned)  we  dis- 
missed the  couunissionaire,  after  he  had  brought  us 
to  the  hotel  of  the  Cross  of  Malta,  where  we  dined  j 
needlessly,  as  it  proved,  for  another  dinner  awaited  os  - 
after  our  return  on  boai-d  the  boat. 

We  set  sail  for  Leghorn  before  dark,  and  I  retire^] 
early,   feeling  still  more   ill  from  my  cold  than  tll*l 
night    l».'fore.      The    next    morning  we  were    in  1 
crowded  port  of  Leghorn.      We  all  went  ashore,  with 
some  idea  of  taking  the  rail  for  Pisa,  which  is  within 
an  hour's  distance,  and  might  have  been  seen  in  time 
for  our  departure  with  the  steamer.     But  a  necessary 
visit  to  a  banker's,  and  afterwards  some  unnecessary 
fonualities  about  our  passports,  kept  us  wandering 
through  the  streets  nearly  all  day ;  anil  wo  saw  noth- 
ing in  the  slightest  degree  interesting,  except  the  tomb 
of  Smollett,  in  the  buriul-plaee  attached  to  the  English 
Chapel.      It  is  surrounded  by  an  iron  railing,  and 
marked  by  a  slender  obelisk  of  white  marble,  the  pat>^ 
tern  of  which  is  many  times  repeated  over  surround-T 
ing  graves. 

We  went  into  a  Jewish  synagogue.  —  the  interior] 
cased  in  marbles,  and  surrounded  with  galieri« 
ing  upon  arches  above  arches.  There  were  lighfalj 
burning  at  the  altar,  and  it  looked  very  like  aChri».J 
tian  church  ;  but  it  was  dirty,  and  had  an  odor  not  of] 
Banctity. 


1858.]  ITALY.  65 

In  li^ilioni,  88  eveiywhere  else,  we  were  chilled  to 
the  heart,  except  when  the  sunshine  fell  directly  upon 
m ;  and  we  returned  to  the  steamer  with  a  feeling  as 
if  we  were  getting  back  to  our  home ;  for  this  life  of 
wandering  makes  a  three  days'  residence  in  one  place 
aeem  like  home. 

We  found  several  new  passengers  on  board,  and 
among  others  a  monk,  in  a  long  brown  frock  of  wool- 
len dbth,  with  an  immense  cape,  and  a  little  black 
ooTering  over  his  tonsure.  He  was  a  tall  figure,  with 
a  gray  beard,  and  might  have  walked,  just  as  he 
stood,  out  of  a  picture  by  one  of  the  old  masters. 
This  holy  person  addressed  me  very  affably  in  Ital- 
ian ;  but  we  found  it  impossible  to  hold  much  conver- 
sation. 

The  evening  was  beautiful,  with  a  bright  young 
moonlight,  not  yet  sufficiently  powerful  to  overwhelm 

the  stars,  and  as  we  walked  the  deck.  Miss  M 

showed  the  children  the  constellations,  and  told  their 

names.    J made  a  slight  mistake  as  to  one  of 

them,  pointing  it  out  to  me  as  ^^  O'Brien's  belt  I  " 

Elba  was  presently  in  view,  and  we  might  have 
seen  many  other  interesting  points,  had  it  not  been 
for  our  steamer's  practice  of  resting  by  day,  and  only 
pursuing  its  voyage  by  night.  The  next  morning  we 
found  ourselves  in  the  harbor  of  Civit^  Veccbia,  and, 
going  ashore  with  our  luggage,  went  through  a  blind 
turmoil  with  custom  house  officers,  inspectors  of  pass- 
ports, soldiers,  and  vetturino  people.  My  wife  and  1 
strayed  a  little  through  Civiti  Vecchia,  and  found  its 
streets  narrow,  like  clefts  in  a  rock  (which  seems  to 
be  the  fashion  of  Italian  towns),  and  smelling  nastily. 
I  had  made  a  bargain  with  a  vetturino  to  send  us  to 
Rome  in  a  carriage,  with  four  horses,  in  eight  hours 


56    FRE^Cff  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [ISOfel 

and  OH  soon  as  the  custom  house  anil  pitSHport  people 
woulil  let  us,  we  started,  lumbering  slowly  along  with 
our  mountain  of  luggage.  We  had  heard  runiorn  of 
robberies  lately  committed  on  tliia  route ;  esiieeially  of 
a  Nova  Hcotia  bishop,  who  was  detained  on  the  road 
an  hour  and  a  half,  and  utterly  pillaged ;  and  certninly 
there  was  not  a  single  mile  of  the  dreary  and  desolate 
country  over  which  we  passed,  where  we  miglit  nol 
bave  been  robbed  and  murdered  with  impunity.  Now 
and  then,  at  long  distances,  we  came  to  a  structure 
that  was  either  a  prison,  a  tavern,  or  a  barn,  l)ut  did 
not  look  very  much  like  either,  being  strongly  built 
of  stone,  with  iron-grat«d  windows,  anti  of  ancient  and 
rusty  aspect.  We  kept  along  by  the  sea-shore  a  great 
part  of  the  way,  and  stopped  to  feed  our  horses  at  a 
village,  the  WTctched  street  of  wliich  stands  close  along 
the  shore  of  the  Mediterranean,  its  loose,  dark  sand 
being  made  nas^  by  the  vicinity.  The  vetturino 
clieated  us,  one  of  the  horses  giving  out,  as  he  must 
have  known  it  would  do,  half-way  on  our  journey  ;  and 
we  staggered  on  through  cold  and  darkness,  and  p^^ril, 
too,  if  the  banditti  were  not  a  myth,  — reacliing  Rome 
not  much  before  midnight.  I  perpetrated  unlieard-of 
briberies  on  the  custom  house  officers  at  the  gates,  and 
was  permitted  to  pass  through  and  establish  myself  at 
Spillman's  Hotel,  the  only  one  where  we  coi 
admittance,  and  where  we  have  been  half  frozen,  i 
have  oontinxied  so  ever  since. 

And  this  is  sunny  Italy,  and  genial  Rome! 

Palazzo  Larazani,  tla  Porta  Pinciana,  FehriiOn 
%d.  —  We  have  been  in  Rome  a  fortnight  to-day,  C 
rather  at  eleven  o'clock  to-night:  and  I  have  seldoi 
vr  never  s{>ent  so  wretciied  a  time  anywhere.     Olfl 


1868.}  ITALY.  6T 

impressions  were  very  unfortunate,  arriving  at  mid* 
night,  half  frozen  in  the  wintry  rain,  and  being  re* 
eeived  into  a  cold  and  cheerless  hotel,  where  we  shiv* 
ered  during  two  or  three  days;  meanwhile  seeking 
lodgings  among  the  sunless,  dreary  alleys  which  are 
called  streets  in  Rome.     One  cold,  bright  day  after 
another  has  pierced  me  to  the  heart,  and  cut  me  in 
twain  as  with  a  sword,  keen  and  sharp,  and  poisoned 
at  point  and  edge.     I  did  not  think  that  cold  weather 
oould  have  made  me  so  very  miserable.      Having 
eaoght  a  feverish  influenza,  I  was  really  glad  of  being 
muffled  up  comfortably  in  the  fever  heat.     The  atmos- 
phere certainly  has  a  peculiar  quality  of  malignity. 
After  a  day  or  two  we  settled  ourselves  in  a  suite  of 
ten  rooms,  comprehending  one  flat,  or  what  is  called 
the  second  piano  of  this  house.     The  rooms,  thus  far, 
have  been  very  imcomfortable,  it  being  impossible  to 
warm  them  by  means  of  the  deep,  old-fashioned,  in- 
artificial fireplaces,  unless  we  had  the  great  logs  of  a 
New  England  forest  to  bum  in  them ;  so  I  have  sat 
in  my  comer  by  the  fireside  with  more  clothes  on 
than  I  ever  wore  before,  and  my  thickest  great-coat 
over  alL     In  the  middle  of  the  day  I  generally  ven- 
ture out  for  an  hour  or  two,  but  have  only  once  been 
warm  enough  even  in  the  simshine,  and  out  of  the 
sun  never  at  any  time.     I  understand  now  the  force 
of  that  story  of  Diogenes  when  he   asked  the  Con- 
queror, as  the  only  favor  he  could  do  him,  to  stand 
out  of  his  sunshine,  there  being  such  a  difference  in 
these  Southern  climes  of  Europe  between  sun  and 
shade.     If  my  wits  had  not  been  too  much  congealed, 
and  my  fingers  too  numb,  I  should  like  to  have  kept  a 
minute  journal  of  my  feelings  and  impresflions  during 
the  past  fortnight.     It  would  have  shown   modem 


B8     FRENCn  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [1868. 

Rome  in  iin  aspect  in  which  it  has  never  yet  been  de- 
picted. But  I  have  now  grown  somewhat  acclimated, 
and  the  firat  freshnesa  nf  my  discomfort  has  worn  off, 
HO  that  I  shall  never  be  able<  to  express  how  1  dislikg 
the  place,  and  how  wretched  I  have  been  in  it ; 
soon,  I  suppose,  warmer  weather  will  come,  and 
haps  reconcile  me  to  Rome  against  my  will.  Col( 
narrow  laiies,  between  toll,  ugly,  mean-looking,  white- 
washed houses,  sour  bread,  pavements  most  uncomfor- 
table to  the  feet,  enormous  prices  for  poor  living ; 
bej^ars,  pickpockets,  ancient  t«tnples  and  broken 
monuments,  and  clothes  hanging  to  dry  about  tliem  ; 
French  soldiers,  monks,  and  priests  of  every  degree ; 
a  shabby  population,  smoking  bad  t-igars,  —  these 
would  have  been  some  of  the  points  uf  my  descrip- 
tion. Of  course  tliere  are  better  and  truer  tilings  to 
1)6  said.  .  .  . 

It  would  I)e  idle  for  me  to  attempt  any  sketehes 
these  famous  sites  and  edifices,  —  St.  Peter' 
ample,  —  which  have   been   described  by  a  thoi 
}>eople,  though  none  of  them  have  ever  given  me 
idea  of  what  sort  of  plai-e  llome  is.  ,  .  , 

The  Coliseum  was  very  much  what  I  had  precoiH 
cfiived  it,  though  I  was  not  prepared  to  find  it  turned 
into  a  sort  of  Christian  church,  with  a  pulpit  on  the 
verge  of  the  open  space.  .  .  .  The  French  sohliers, 
who  keep  guard  within  it,  as  in  other  public  places  in 
Borne,  have  an  excellent  opportimity  to  secure  the  wel- 
fare of  their  souls. 


ags  to  ^^ 

hes  d^^H 
or  so^^^l 
lUsa^^H 
me  H^^l 


Fchrvary  1th.  —  I  cannot  get  fairly  into  the  cun 
of  my  journal  since  we  arrived,  and  alrciwly  I  perceive 
that  the  nice  pucidiarities  of  Konian  life  are  passing 
from  mj  notioe  before  I  have  recorded  them.     It  i 


srceive 
tossing 
It  is  a 


1868.]  ITALY.  69 

yrerj  great  pity.    Daring  the  past  week  I  have  plodded 
daily,  for  an  hour  or  two,  through  the  narrow,  stony 
streets,  that  look  worse  than  the  worst  backside  lanes 
of  any  oUier  city ;  indescribably  ugly  and  disagreeable 
they  are,  .  .  .  without  sidewidks,  but  provided  with 
a  line  of  larger  square  stones,  set  crosswise  to  each 
other,  along  which  there  is  somewhat  less  uneasy  walki 
ing*  •  •  •  Ever  and  anon,  even  in  the  meanest  streets, 
—  tboo^  generally  speaking,  one   can    hardly  be 
caUed  meaner  than  another,  —  we  pass  a  palace,  ex- 
tending  &r  along  the  narrow  way  on  a  line  with  the 
other  houses,  but  distingoished  by  its  architectural 
windows,  iron-barred  on  the  basement  story,  and  by 
its  portal  arch,  through  which  we  have  glimpses,  some- 
times of  a  dirty  court-yard,  or  perhaps  of  a  clean,  or- 
namented one,  with  trees,  a  colonnade,  a  fountain,  and 
a  statue  in  the  vista ;  though,  more  likely,  it  resembles 
tiie  entrance  to  a  stable,  and  may,  perhaps,  really  be 
cue.    The  lower  r^ons  of  palaces  come  to  strange 
uses  in  Rome.  •  •  •  In  the  basement  story  of  the  Bar- 
berini  Palace  a  regiment  of  French  soldiers  (or  sol- 
diers of  some  kind  ^)  seems  to  be  quartered,  while,  no 
doubt,  princes  have  magnificent  domiciles  above.     Be 
it  palace  or  whatever  other  dwelling,  the  inmates  climb 
through  rubbish  often  to  the  comforts,  such  as  they 
may  be,  that  await  them  above.     I  vainly  try  to  get 
down  upon  paper  the  dreariness,  the  ugliness,  sbabbi- 
ness,  un-home-likeness  of  a  Roman  street.     It  is  also 
to  be  said  that  you  cannot  go  far  in  any  direction 
without  coming  to  a  piazza,  which  is  sometimes  little 
more  than  a  widening  and  enlarging  of  the  dingy 
street,  with  the  lofty  facade  of  a  church  or  basilica  on 
0ne  side,  and  a  fountain  in  the  centre,  where  the  water 
^  We  find  them  to  be  retamen  of  the  Barberini  family,  not  Fxench. 


60     FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [ISM 

squirts  out  of  Bome  fantastic  piece  of  sculpture  into  a 
groat  fltone  baain.  These  fountains  are  oftcu  of  im- 
mease  size  antl  moot  elaborate  design.  ,  ,  . 

There  are  a  great  many  of  tlieso  fountain-sbapes, 
constructed  under  the  oniers  of  one  pope  or  another, 
in  all  parts  of  the  city ;  and  only  the  very  sinipleBt, 
such  as  a  jet  springing  from  a  broad  niarble  or  poiw 
phj-ry  vase,  and  falling  back  into  it  again,  art;  reall; 
ornamental.  If  an  antiquary  were  to  accompany  me 
through  the  streets,  no  doubt  he  would  point  out  tea 
thousand  interesting  objects  that  I  now  pa^s  over  un- 
noticed, so  general  is  the  surface  of  plaster  and  white- 
wash ;  hut  often  I  can  see  fragments  of  antiquity  built 
into  the  walls,  or  i>erhaps  a  chun^h  that  wat  a  Roman 
temple,  or  a  basement  of  pondei'ous  stones  tliat  were 
laid  above  twenty  centuries  ago.  It  is  strange  how 
our  ideas  of  what  antiquity  is  become  altered  here  in 
Rome ;  the  sixteenth  century,  in  which  many  of  the 
chunrhes  and  fountains  seem  to  have  been  built  or  re- 
ediiied,  seems  close  at  hand,  even  like  our  own  days ; 
a  thousand  years,  or  the  days  of  the  latter  empire, 
is  but  a  modern  date,  and  scarcely  interests  us ;  and 
nothing  is  really  venerable  of  a  more  recent  epoch 
than  the  reign  of  Constantine.  And  the  Egy]>tian 
obelisks  that  stand  in  several  of  the  piazzas  put  even 
the  Augustan  or  Republican  antiquities  to  shame.  I 
remember  reading  in  a  New  York  newspaper  an  ao- 
coiint  of  one  of  the  public  buildings  of  that  citj',  —  a 
relic  of  "  the  olden  time,"  tlie  writer  called  it ;  for  it 
was  erected  in  1825 !  I  am  glad  I  saw  the  castles 
and  Gothic  chiurehes  and  cathedrals  of  England  before 
visiting  Rome,  or  I  never  could  have  felt  that  <leligiit- 
ful  reverence  for  I'heir  gray  and  ivy-hung  antiquity  af- 
ter seeing  these  bo  jhucH  oHer  remains. 


But,  indee(^ 


1M>J  ITALY.  61 

dd  iUiigs  are  not  so  beautiful  in  this  dry  climate  and 
dear  atmosphere  as  in  moist  England.  .  .  . 

Whatever  beauty  there  may  be  in  a  Roman  ruin  is 
the  leoaaiant  of  what  was  beautiful  originally ;  whereas 
an  English  min  is  more  beautiful  often  in  its  decay 
than  even  it  was  in  its  primal  strength.  If  we  ever 
build  such  noble  structures  as  these  Roman  ones,  we 
can  have  just  as  good  ruins,  after  two  thousand  years, 
in  the  United  States ;  but  we  never  can  have  a  Fmv 
11688  Abbey  or  a  Kenilworth.  The  Corso,  and  perhaps 
some  other  streets,  does  not  deserve  all  the  vitupera- 
tion which  I  have  bestowed  on  the  generality  of  Ro- 
man  vias,  though  the  Corso  is  narrow,  not  averaging 
more  than  nine  paces,  if  so  much,  from  sidewalk  to 
ndewalk.  But  palace  after  palace  stands  along  al- 
meet  its  whole  extent,  —  not,  however,  that  they  make 
such  architectural  show  on  the  street  as  palaces  shoidd. 
The  enclosed  courts  were  perhaps  the  only  parts  of 
these  edifices  which  the  founders  cared  to  enrich  ar- 
chitecturally. I  think  Linlithgow  Palace,  of  which  I 
saw  the  ruins  during  my  last  tour  in  Scotland,  was 
built  by  an  architect  who  bad  studied  these  Roman 
palaces.  There  was  never  any  idea  of  domestic  com- 
fort, or  of  what  we  include  in  the  name  of  home,  at 
all  implicated  in  such  structures,  they  being  generally 
built  by  wifeless  and  childless  churchmen  for  the  dis- 
play of  pictures  and  statuary  in  galleries  and  long 
suites  of  rooms. 

I  have  not  yet  fairly  begun  the  sight -seeing  of 
Rome.  I  have  been  four  or  five  times  to  St.  Peter's, 
and  always  with  pleasure,  because  there  is  such  a  de- 
lightful, siunmer-like  warmth  the  moment  we  pass 
beneath  the  heavy,  padded  leather  curtains  that  pro- 
tect the  entrances.     It  is  almost  impossible  not  to  be 


62    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [ 

Ik'io  that  this  genial  temperature  is  the  rcBult  of  fuifc 
nuoo-heati  but,  really,  it  is  the  warmth  of  last  summer, 
wlii(!h  will  be  inclutleil  within  those  massive  walls, 
and  in  that  vast  immensity  of  spsice,  till,  six  inoni 
hence,  this  winttir's  chill  will  juat  have  made  its 
thither.  It  would  he  an  excellent  plan  for  a  vali 
dinarion  to  lotlgo  during  the  winter  in  St.  Peter^^ 
|)erhaps  establishing  his  household  in  one  of  the  papal 
tombs.  I  become.  I  think,  more  sensible  of  the  size  of 
St.  Peter's,  but  am  as  yet  far  from  being  overwhelmed 
liy  it.  It  is  not,  aa  one  expects,  so  big  as  all  out- 
o'-doors,  nor  is  its  dome  so  immense  as  that  of  the  fir- 
mament. It  looked  (jueer,  however,  the  othvr  day,  to 
see  a  little  r^;geid  boy.  the  very  least  of  human  things, 
going  round  and  kneeling  at  shrine  after  shrine,  and 
a  group  of  children  standing  on  tiptoe  to  reach  tlwn 
vase  of  holy  water.  ...  U 

On  coming  out  of  St.  Peter's  at  my  last  visit,  I  Mfl 
a  great  sheet  of  ice  around  the  fountain  on  the  right^ 
hand,  and  some  little  Romans  awkwardly  sliding  on 
it.  I,  too,  took  a  slide,  just  for  the  sake  of  doing 
what  I  never  thought  to  do  in  Rome.  This  inclem- 
ent weather,  T  shoidd  suppose,  must  make  the  whole 
city  very  miserable;  for  the  native  Romans,  I  am 
told,  never  keep  any  fire,  except  for  culinary  pur-. 
poses,  even  in  the  severest  winter.  They  flee  fi 
their  cheerless  houses  into  the  open  air,  and  bring  thui 
firesides  along  with  them  in  the  shape  of  small  earthen 
vases,  or  pipkins,  with  a  handle  by  which  they  carry 
them  up  and  down  the  streets,  and  so  warm  at  least 
their  hands  with  the  lighted  charcoal.  I  have  had 
glimpses  through  open  doorways  into  interiors,  and 
»aw  them  aa  dismal  as  tombs.  Wherever  I  pass  my 
summers,  let  mo  spend  my  winters  in  a  cold  country. 


tier, 
letl^H 


I 


USB.]  ITAtr  63 

We  vnt  yutuity  to  the  Pantheon.  .  .  . 

When  I  first  tmtat!  to  Rome.  I  felt  embMiiowd  and 
mwiUu^  to  pisB,  with  my  heresy,  between  a  deTi>te« 
aod  his  aunt ;  for  they  often  shoot  ihdr  prayers  at 
a  stmne  almost  qnile  across  the  chutch.  Bat  thei* 
■eems  to  be  no  violation  of  etiquette  in  so  drang.  A 
wonun  begged  of  oa  in  the  Pantheon,  and  accosed 
mr  wife  of  impiety  for  not  giriog  her  an  ahna.  .  .  . 
People  of  verr  decent  appe*ranoe  aro  often  nnexpeci- 
edlj  ooDwrtetl  into  beggars  as  you  apprasioh  tbent; 
bot  in  general  they  take  a  "  No  ^  at  onoe. 

■feirnary  9f A.  —  For  three  or  foor  days  it  has  been 
doody  and  rainy,  which  is  the  greater  pity,  aa  this 
■hould  be  the  gayest  and  merriest  part  of  the  Carni* 
vaL  I  go  out  Init  little, — yesterday  only  as  far  aa 
Ft^enham's  and  Hooker's  bank,  in  the  Piazza  i 
Spagnn,  when  I  read  "  Galignani "  and  the  American 
papen.  At  last,  after  seeing  in  England  more  of  my 
fdliHMxiinpatriotB  than  ever  before,  I  really  am  dift- 
joined  faom  my  ooontry. 

To-day  I  walked  out  along  the  Pinctan  HilL  .  ,  . 
As  the  clouds  still  threatened  rain,  I  denned  it  my 
safest  cnnree  to  go  to  St,  Peter's  for  refuge-  Heavy 
and  dull  as  the  day  was,  the  effect  of  this  great  world 
of  a  chnrch  was  still  brilliant  in  the  tuterior.  as  if  it 
liad  a  sunshine  of  its  own.  as  well  as  its  own  temper- 
ature ;  and.  by  and  by.  the  snnshine  of  the  outward 
world  came  throu^  the  windows,  hundreds  of  feet 
alo^  and  fell  upon  the  beautiful  inlaid  pavement;. . . . 
Against  a  pillar,  on  one  side  of  the  nave.  t»  a  mosaic 
lopy  of  Raphael's  Transfiguration,  fitly  fnuoed  within 
t  great  arch  of  gorgeous  marble ;  and,  no  doubt,  the 
tadertniPtible  mosaic  has  preserved  it  far  more  com 


64    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [IW 

[iletGly  than  the  fiuUng  and  darkening  tints  in  which 
die  artist  painted  it.  At  any  rate,  it  sevmed  Ui  me 
the  one  glorious  picture  that  I  have  ever  seen.  The 
pillar  nearettt  the  great  entrance,  on  the  left  of  t)ie 
nave,  supports  the  monument  to  the  Stuart  family, 
where  two  winged  figures,  with  inverted  torchcB.  stand 
on  either  side  of  a  marble  door,  which  is  closed  for- 
ever.  It  is  an  impi'essive  monuinont,  for  you  feel  IfH 
if  the  last  of  the  raee  ha^l  parsed  through  that  door.    | 

Emerging  from  the  church,  I  saw  a  French  sergeant 
drilling  his  men  in  the  piazza.  These  French  soldiers 
are  prominent  objects  everywhere  about  tlie  city,  and 
make  up  more  of  its  sight  and  sound  than  anything 
else  tliat  lives.  They  stroll  about  individually  ;  they 
pace  as  sentinels  in  all  the  public  iilaces;  and  tliey 
inarch  up  and  down  in  squads,  companies,  and  battal- 
ions, always  with  a  very  great  din  of  drum,  fife,  and 
trumpet ;  ten  times  the  proportion  of  music  that  the 
flame  number  of  men  would  require  elsewhere ;  and  it 
reverberates  with  ten  times  the  noise,  between  the 
high  edifices  of  these  lanes,  that  it  could  make  in 
broader  streets.  Nevertheless,  I  have  no  quarrel  with 
the  French  soldiers;  they  are  fresh,  healthy,  smart, 
honest  -  looking  young  fellows  enough,  in  blue  eoata 
and  red  trousers ;  .  .  .  anil,  at  all  events,  they  serve 
as  an  efficient  police,  making  Rome  as  safe  as  Lon- 
don :  whereas,  without  them,  it  would  very  likely  be 
&  den  of  banditti. 

On  my  way  home  I  saw  a  few  tokens  of  the  Car- 
nival, which  is  now  in  full  progress ;  though,  as  it 
Was  only  about  one  o\:loek.  its  frolics  had  not  com- 
menced for  the  day.  ...  I  question  whether  the 
Romans  themselves  take  any  great  interest  in  the 
CfUnuvaL     The  halooniea  along  the  Corso  v 


■SQ  were  alraoa^^^ 


ta«.]  ITALY.  6S 

entirely  taken   by  EnglisK  and  Americans,  or  other 
foreigners. 

As  I  approached  the  bridge  of  St.  Angelo,  I  itatt 
jerend  persona  engaged,  aa  I  thought,  in  Dflhing  in 
the  Tiber,  with  very  strong  lines;  but,  on  drawing 
nearer,  I  found  that  they  were  trying  to  hook  up  the 
branches  and  twigs,  and  other  drift-wood,  which  the 
recent  runs  might  have  swept  into  the  river.  There 
vsA  a  little  heap  of  wliat  looked  chteily  lilce  willow 
twigs,  the  poor  result  of  their  labor.  The  hook  was 
a  knot  of  wood,  with  the  lopped-off  branches  project- 
ing in  three  or  four  prongs.  The  Tiber  has  always 
the  hue  of  a  mud-puddle ;  but  now,  after  a  heavy  rain 
which  haa  washed  the  clay  into  it,  it  looks  like  pease- 
Boup.  It  is  a  broad  and  rapid  stream,  eddying  along 
as  if  it  were  in  haste  to  disgorge  its  impurities  into 
the  sea.  On  the  left  side,  where  the  city  mostly  ia 
situated,  the  buildings  hang  directly  over  the  stream ; 
on  the  other,  where  stand  the  Castle  of  St.  Angelo 
and  the  Church  of  St  Peter,  the  town  does  not  press 
90  imminent  upon  the  shore.  The  banks  are  clayey, 
and  look  as  if  the  river  bad  been  digging  them  away 
for  ages ;  but  I  believe  its  bed  is  higher  than  of  yore. 

February  IQth.  —  I  wont  out  to-day,  and,  going 
along  the  Via  Felice  and  the  Via  delle  Quattro  Fon- 
taue,  came  unawares  to  the  Basilica  of  Santa  Maria 
Maggiore,  on  the  smnmit  of  the  Esquiline  HilL  I 
entered  it,  without  in  the  least  knowing  what  church 
it  was,  and  found  myself  in  a  broad  and  noble  nave, 
both  very  simple  and  very  grand.     There  was  a  long 

V  of  Ionic  t^>lumnB  of  marble,  twenty  or  thereabouts 
each  side,   supporting   a  flat   roof.     There   were 

olted  flide-aisles,  and,  at  the  farther  end,  a  bronze 


86     FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    \\Vi 

canopy  over  the  high  altar ;  and  all  along  the  ItsngtJl 
of  the  side-amk-s  were  Hhrtnos  with  pictures,  hc'u]i>- 
titre,  aiid  burning  laiiipx ;  the  whole  chuivh,  too,  waa 
lined  with  marble :  the  ruof  was  g!ld«l ;  and  yet  tike 
general  effect  of  severe  and  noble  Hiniplicity  triumphed 
over  all  the  ornament.  I  should  have  taken  it  fur  a 
Roman  temple,  retaining  nearly  its  pmtiiie  aspect; 
but  Murray  tells  us  that  it  waa  founded  A.  D.  342  by 
Pope  Liberius,  on  the  spot  precisely  marked  out  by  a 
miraculous  fall  of  snow,  in  the  mouth  of  August,  and 
it  has  undergone  many  alterations  sinc«  his  time.  But 
it  is  very  fine,  and  gives  the  beholder  the  idea  of  vast- 
ness,  which  seems  harder  to  attain  than  anything  else. 
On  the  right  hand,  approaching  the  high  altar,  there 
is  a  chapel,  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  chui-ch  by 
an  iron  paling ;  and,  being  admitted  into  it  with  an- 
other party,  1  found  it  most  elaborately  magnificent. 
But  one  magnificence  outshone  another,  and  made  it- 
self the  brightest  conceivable  for  the  moment,  flow* 
ever,  this  chapel  wa^  as  rich  as  the  most  precious  mar- 
ble eould  make  it,  in  pillars  and  pilasters,  and  broad, 
poliahed  slabs,  covering  the  whole  walls  (except  where 
there  were  splendid  and  glowing  frescos;  or  where 
Bome  monumental  statuary  or  bas-relief,  or  mosaic  pic- 
ture, filled  up  an  arched  niclie).  Its  amhitecture  was 
a  dome,  resting  on  four  great  arches ;  and  in  siie  it 
wouhl  alone  hav^  been  a  church.  In  the  centre  of  the 
mosaic  pavement  there  was  a  flight  of  steps,  down 
which  we  went,  and  saw  a  group  in  marble,  represent- 
ing the  Natiiity  of  Christ,  which,  judging  by  the  unc- 
tion with  which  our  guide  talked  about  it.  must  have 
been  of  peculiar  sanctity.  I  hate  to  leave  this  chapel 
and  church,  without  being  able  to  say  any  one  thing 
that  may  reflect  a  portion  of  their  beauty,  or  of  tin 


J 


1866.] 


67 


I 


feeling  whii'b  they  excite.  Kneeling  against  many  of 
tbe  pillars  there  were  persons  in  prayer,  and  I  stepped 
softly,  fearing  lest  my  treat!  on  the  marble  pavement 
should  disturb  them,  —  a  needless  precaution,  how- 
e>-er,  for  nobody  seems  to  expect  it,  nor  to  be  dis- 
turbed by  the  lack  of  it. 

The  situation  of  the  church,  I  should  suppose,  is 
the  loftiest  in  Rome :  it  has  a  fountain  at  one  end, 
and  a  column  at  the  other;  but  I  did  not  pay  par- 
ticular attention  to  either,  nor  to  the  exterior  of  tbe 
cbureh  itself. 

On  my  return,  I  turned  aside  from  the  Via  delle 
Quattro  Fontane  into  the  Via  Quirinalis,  and  was  led 
by  it  into  the  Piazza  di  Monte  Cavallo.  The  street 
through  which  1  passed  was  broadcir,  (^lealUie^,  and 
statelier  than  most  streets  in  Hume,  and  bordered  by 
palaces ;  and  the  piazza  had  noble  edifices  aroimd  it, 
and  a  fouutain,  an  obelisk,  anil  two  nude  statues  in 
the  centre.  The  obelisk  was,  us  the  inscription  indi- 
cated, a  reJic  of  Egypt ;  the  baain  of  the  fountain  was 
an  immense  bowl  of  Oriental  granite,  into  which 
{mured  a  copious  flood  of  water,  discolored  by  the 
rain ;  the  statues  were  colossal,  —  two  beautiful  young 
men,  each  holding  a  fiery  steed.  On  the  pedestal  of 
the  inst^ription.  Opus  Phidl«;  on  the  other, 
Opdb  Phaxitelis.  What  a  city  is  this,  when  one 
'may  stumble,  by  mere  chance  —  at  a  street  comer,  as 
it  were  —  on  the  works  of  two  such  scidptors  1  I  do 
not  know  the  authority  on  which  these  statues  (Castor 
and  Pollux,  I  presume)  are  attributed  t«  Phidias  and 
Praxiteles  ;  but  they  impressed  me  as  noble  and  god- 
Hke,  and  I  feel  inclinetl  to  take  tlit'm  for  what  they 
purport  to  be.  On  one  side  of  the  piazza  is  the  Po»- 
il  Palace ;  but,  not  being  aware  of  this  at  t~ 
:,  I  did  not  look  particularly  at  the  edifice. 


68     FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [1869, 

I  oame  home  by  way  of  the  Corso,  which  seemed  a 
little  enlivened  by  Carnival  time ;  though,  ao  it  was 
not  yet  two  oVlook,  the  fun  had  not  bc^un  for  the 
day.  The  rajn  throws  a  dreary  damper  on  Uio  io^ 
tivities. 


February   tZth.  —  Day  before   yesterday  we  took 

J and  R iu  a  rurriage,  and  went  to  see  tlie 

Carnival,  by  driving  up  and  down  the  Corso,  It  was 
aa  ugly  a  day,  as  resjtocts  weather,  as  has  befallen  its 
since  we  came  to  Rome, — cloudy,  with  an  iudecisivu 
wet,  which  finally  settled  into  a  rain ;  and  people  say 
that  such  is  generally  the  weather  in  Carnival  time. 
There  is  very  little  to  be  said  about  the  spectacle. 
Sunshine  would  have  improved  it,  no  doubt;  but  a 
person  must  have  very  broad  sunshine  within  himself 
to  be  joyous  on  such  shallow  provocation.  The  street, 
at  all  events,  would  Imve  looked  rather  brilliant  under 
n  sunny  sky,  the  balconies  I>eing  hung  with  bnght- 
eolored  draperies,  which  were  also  flung  out  of  some 
of  the  windows.  .  .  .  Soon  I  had  my  first  experience 
of  the  Carnival,  in  a  handful  of  confetti,  right  slap 
in  my  face.  .  .  .  Many  of  the  ladies  wore  loose  white 
dominoes,  and  some  of  the  gentlemen  had  on  defensive 
annor  of  blouses ;  and  wire  masks  over  the  face  were 
B  protection  for  both  sexes,  —  not  a  needless  one,  for 
I  received  a  shot  in  my  right  eye  which  cost  me  many 
tears.  It  seems  to  be  a  point  of  courtesy  (though 
often  disregarded  by  Americans  and  English)  not  to 
fling  confetti  at  ladies,  or  at  non-combatants,  or  quiet 
by-standers;  and  the  engagements  with  these  missiles 
were  generally  between  open  carriages,  manned  with 
youths,  who  were  jjroviiled  with  confetti  for  such  en- 
counters, and  with  boutpicts  for  the  Indies.     We  had| 


1858.]  ITALY.  69 

one  real  enemy  on  the  Corso;  for  our  former  friend 

Mrs.  T was  there,  and  as  often  as  we  passed  and 

repassed  her,  she  favored  us  with  a  handful  of  lime. 
Two  or  three  times  somebody  ran  by  the  carriage  and 
puffed  forth  a  shower  of  winged  seeds  through  a  tube 
into  our  faces  and  over  our  clothes ;  and,  in  the  course 
of  the  afternoon,  we  were  hit  with  perhaps  half  ia 
doien  sugar-plums.  Possibly  we  may  not  have  re 
our  &ir  share  of  these  last  salutes,  for  J 


had  on  a  black  mask,  which  made  him  look  like  an 
imp  of  Satan,  and  drew  many  volleys  of  confetti  that 
we  might  otherwise  have  escaped.  A  good  many  bou 
qaets  were  flung  at  our  little  B ,  and  at  us  gener- 
ally. •  •  .  This  was  what  is  called  masking-day,  when 
it  is  the  rule  to  wear  masks  in  the  Corso,  but  the  great 
majority  of  people  appeared  without  them.  .  .  .  Two 
fimtastic  figures,  with  enormous  heads,  set  round  with 
frizdy  hair,  came  and  grinned  into  our  carriage,  and 

J tore  out  a  handful  of  hair  (which  proved  to  be 

sea-weed)  from  one  of  their  heads,  rather  to  the  dis* 
oomposure  of  the  owner,  who  muttered  his  indignation 

in  Italian.  .  .  .  On  comparing  notes  with  J and 

B y  indeed  with  U too,  I  find  that  they  all 

enjoyed  the  Carnival  much  more  than  I  did.  Only 
the  young  ought  to  write  descriptions  of  such  scenes. 
My  cold  criticism  chills  the  life  out  of  it. 

Fdyruary  Wth.  —  Friday,  12th,  was  a  sunny  day, 
the  first  that  we  had  had  for  some  time ;  and  my  wife 
and  I  went  forth  to  see  sights  as  well  as  to  make  some 
calls  that  had  long  been  due.  We  went  first  to  the 
church  of  Santa  Maria  Maggiore,  which  I  have  already 
mentioned,  and,  on  our  return,  we  went  to  the  Piazza 
ii  Monte  Cavallo,  and  saw  those  admirable  ancient 


70     FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [1858. 

statues  of  Castor  and  Pollux,  whict  seem  to  me  sons 
of  tlio  morning,  and  full  of  life  and  strength.  Tim  at- 
nionpliere,  in  bucIi  a  length  of  time,  has  covered  the 
marble  surfa^^e  o£  these  statues  with  a  gray  rust,  tliat 
envelops  both  the  men  and  horses  as  with  a  garment; 
beaiilex  which,  there  are  strange  disc-olorations,  suoh 
as  patches  of  white  moss  on  the  elbows,  and  reddish 
streaks  down  the  sides ;  but  the  glory  of  fonn  over- 
comes all  these  defects  of  color.  It  is  pleasant  fo  ob- 
serve how  familiar  some  little  birds  are  with  these  oo«'j 
lossal  statues,  — -  hopping  about  on  their  heads  i 
over  their  huge  fiats,  and  very  likely  they  have  nest 
in  their  ears  or  among  their  hair. 

We  called  at  the  Barberini  Palace,  where  Williai 
Story  has  established  himself  and  family  for  the  uei 
seven  years,  or  more,  on  the  third  piano,  in  apartnienta 
that  afford  a  very  fine  outlook  over  Rome,  and  have 
the  sun  in  them  through  most  of  the  day.     Mrs. 
invited  us  to  her  fancy  ball,  but  we  declined. 

Ou  the  staircase  ascending  to  their  piano  we  ( 
ancient  Gi'cek  bas-relief  of  a  Hon,  whence  Cai 
supposed  to  have  taken  the  idea  of  his  lions  on  the  ' 
monument  in  St.  Peter's.     Afterwards  we  made  two 
or  three  calls  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  Piazza  di 
Spagna,  finding  only  Mr.  Hamilton  Fish  and  family, 
at  thb  113tel  d'Europe,  at  Lome,  and  next  visited  the 
studio  of  Mr.  C  (r.  Thompson,  whom  I  knew  in  Bos- 
ton.    He  has  very  greatly  improved  since  those  days,  i 
and,  being  always  a  man  of  delicate  mind,  and  ear* 
neetly  desiring  cxcelleuce  for  its  own  sake,  he  has  woi 
himself  the  power  of   doing  beautiful  and  elevatedl 
works.    He  is  now  meditating  a  series  of  pictures  f  romfl 
Shakespeare's  "Tempest,"  the  sketches  of  one  or  tw«a 
of  which  he  showed  us,  likewise  a  copy  of  a  smaSf 


»  OD- 

se  oo*-^H 
I  and^^H 
nesti^H 

iliao^l 
nexU^H 

"ent«  ^^^ 
lave 

a  t»^^| 


1858.]  ITALY.  71 


Madomim,  hj  Saphael,  wronglit  with  a  minute  fiuth- 
fnlness  whidi  it  makes  one  a  better  man  to  obeerve. 
•  •  .  Mr.  Thompson  is  a  true  artist,  and  whatever  his 
pictures  hare  of  beantjr  oomes  from  very  far  beneath 
tiie  snifaoe ;  and  this,  I  suppose,  is  one  weighty  reason 
why  he  has  but  moderate  success.  I  should  like  his 
pictures  for  the  mere  color,  even  if  ihej  represented 
nothing.  His  studio  is  in  the  Via  Sistina ;  and,  at  a 
little  distence  on  the  other  side  of  the  same  street,  is 
William  Story's,  where  we  likewise  went,  and  found 
him  at  work  on  a  sitting  statue  of  Cleopatra. 

William  Story  looks  quite  as  vivid,  in  a  graver  way, 
as  when  I  saw  him  last,  a  very  young  man.  His  per- 
plexing variety  of  talents  and  aocomplishmente —  he 
being  a  x>oet,  a  prose  writer,  a  lawyer,  a  painter,  a  mu- 
sician, and  a  sculptor  —  seems  now  to  be  concentrating 
itself  into  this  latter  vocation,  and  I  cannot  see  why 
he  should  not  achieve  something  very  good.  He  has 
a  beautiful  statue,  already  finished,  of  Groethe's  Mar- 
garet, pulling  a  flower  to  pieces  to  discover  whether 
Faust  loves  her ;  a  very  type  of  virginity  and  simpli- 
city. The  statue  of  Cleopatra,  now  only  fourteen  days 
advanced  in  the  clay,  is  as  wide  a  step  from  the  little 
maidenly  Margaret  as  any  artist  could  take ;  it  is  a 
grand  subject,  and  he  is  conceiving  it  with  depth  and 
power,  and  working  it  out  with  adequate  skill.  He 
certainly  is  sensible  of  something  deeper  in  his  art 
than  merely  to  make  beautiful  nudities  and  baptize 
them  by  classic  names.  By  the  bye,  he  told  us  several 
queer  stories  of  American  visitors  to  his  studio :  one 
of  them,  after  long  inspecting  Cleopatra,  into  which 
he  has  put  all  possible  characteristics  of  her  time  and 
nation,  and  of  her  own  individuality,  asked,  *'  Have 
you  baptized  your  statue  yet  ?  "  as  if  the  sculptor  were 


72    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [1808. 

wtuting  till  bis  statue  were  finished  before  lie  choaa 
the  subject  of  it, — as,  indeeil,  I  should  think  iiuiny 
sculptors  do.  Auuther  remarked  of  a  stutue  of  Hero, 
who  is  Hoeking  Leaiiiler  hy  turrlilight,  and  in  momen- 
tary expeotatiou  of  tindiug  his  drowued  body,  "  Is  not 
the  face  a  little  sad  ?  "  Another  time  a  wliole  party 
of  Americans  filed  into  his  studio,  and  ranged  them- 
selves round  his  father's  statue,  and,  after  much  silent 
examination,  tlie  spokesman  of  the  party  inquired, 
"  Well,  sir,  what  is  this  intended  to  repi-escnt?  "  Wil- 
liam Story,  in  telling  these  littJe  anecdotes,  gave  the 
Yankee  twang  to  perfection,  .  .  . 

The  statue  of  his  father,  his  first  work,  is  very 
noble,  —  as  noble  and  fine  a  portrait^tatue  as  I  ever 
saw.  In  the  outer  room  of  his  studio  a  stone-eutter, 
or  whatever  this  kind  of  artisan  is  called,  was  at  work, 
transferring  the  statue  of  Hero  from  the  planter-cast 
into  marble ;  and  already,  though  still  in  some  respects 
a  block  of  stone,  there  was  a  wonderful  degree  of  ex- 
pression  in  the  face.  It  is  not  t^iiite  pluasant  to  think 
that  tlie  sculptor  does  not  really  do  the  whole  labor  on 
his  statues,  but  that  they  are  all  but  finished  to  his 
han<I  by  merely  nieehanical  people.  It  is  generally 
only  the  finishing  touches  that  are  given  by  his  own 
ohiseL 

Yesterday,  being  another  bright  day,  we  went  to 
the  basilica  of  St.  John  Lateran,  which  is  the  basilica 
next  in  rank  to  St.  Peter's,  and  has  the  precedence  of 
it  as  regards  certain  sacred  privileges.  It  stands  on  a 
most  noble  site,  on  the  outitkirti  of  the  city,  command- 
ing a  view  of  the  Sabine  and  Albau  hill^,  bhie  in  the 
distance,  ami  some  of  them  hoary  with  sunny  snow. 
The  ruins  of  the  Claudian  aqueduct  are  close  at  hautL 
Tbfl  church  is  connected  with  the  Lateran  palace  and 


I8M.]  ITALY.  78 

■unevim,  so  tliat  the  whole  is  one  edifice;  but  lihe 
facade  of  ihe  churcli  distdnguiahes  it,  and  is  veiy  lofty 
and  grand,  — more  so,  it  seems  to  me,  than  that  of  St. 
Peter's.  Under  the  portico  is  an  old  statue  of  Con- 
trtantine,  representing  him  as  a  very  stout  and  sturdy 
personage.  The  inside  of  the  church  disappointed  me, 
though,  no  doubt,  I  should  have  been  wonder-struck 
had  I  seen  it  a  month  ago.  We  went  into  one  of 
the  chapels,  which  was  very  rich  in  colored  marbles ; 
and,  going  down  a  winding  staircase,  found  ourselves 
among  the  tombs  and  sarcophagi  of  the  Corsini  fam- 
ily, and  in  presence  of  a  marble  Pieta,  very  beauti- 
fully sculptured.  On  the  other  side  of  the  church  we 
looked  into  the  Torlonia  Chapel,  very  rich  and  rather 
profusely  gilded,  but,  as  it  seemed  to  me,  not  tawdry, 
though  the  white  newness  of  the  marble  is  not  per- 
fectly agreeable  after  being  accustomed  to  the  milder 
tint  which  time  bestows  on  sculpture.  The  tombs 
and  statues  appeared  like  shapes  and  images  of  new- 
fallen  snow.  The  most  interesting  thing  which  we 
saw  in  this  church  (and,  admitting  its  authenticity, 
there  can  scarcely  be  a  more  interesting  one  any- 
where) was  the  table  at  which  the  Last  Supper  was 
eaten.  It  is  preserved  in  a  corridor,  on  one  side  of 
the  tribune  or  chancel,  and  is  shown  by  torchlight  sus» 
pended  upon  the  wall  beneath  a  covering  of  glass. 
Only  the  top  of  the  table  is  shown,  presenting  a  broad, 
flat  surface  of  wood,  evidently  very  old,  and  showing 
traces  of  dry-rot  in  one  or  two  places.  There  are  nails 
in  it,  and  the  attendant  said  that  it  had  formerly  been 
covered  with  bronze.  As  well  as  I  can  remember,  it 
may  be  five  or  six  feet  square,  and  I  suppose  would 
accommodate  twelve  persons,  though  not  if  they  re- 
eiined  in  the  Roman  fashion,  nor  if  they  sat  as  they 


74    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [ISsa 

do  in  Ijeonardo  da  Vinci's  piPtiire.     It  would  bo  very'' 
delightful  to  heliuvu  in  thin  taljle. 

There  are  several  other  aacred  relics  preserved  m 
the  ehiirch  :  for  iuatanco,  the  staircase  of  Pilat«'>' 
house  up  which  Jesus  went,  and  the  porphyry  slab  on' 
which  tiie  soldiers  cast  lots  for  his  gannenta.  Theflfl^' 
liowever,  we  did  not  see.  There  are  very  glowing 
frescos  on  portions  of  the  walls ;  but,  there  being  much 
whitewash  instead  of  incrust«d  marble,  it  has  not  the 
pleasant  aspect  which  one's  eye  learns  to  demand  is 
Roman  churches.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  statuary 
along  the  columns  of  the  nave,  and  In  the  monuinenla 
of  the  side-aisles. 

In  reference  to  the  interior  splendor  of  Koi 
churches,  I  must  say  that  I  think  it  a  pity 
painted  windows  are  exclusively  a  Gothic  ornament 
for  the  elaborate  ornamentation  of  these  interiors  puts 
the  ordinary  daylight  out  of  countenance,  so  that  a 
window  witli  only  the  white  sunshine  cunting  through 
it,  or  even  with  a  glimpse  of  the  blue  Italian  sky, 
looks  like  a  portion  left  unfinished,  and  therefore  a 
hlotcli  in  the  rich  wall.  It  is  like  the  one  sjwt  in 
Aladdiu's  palace  which  he  left  for  the  king,  Ins  father- 
in -)«w,  to  finish,  after  his  fairy  architects  had  ex- 
hausted their  magnificence  on  the  rest ;  and  the  stm, 
like  the  king,  fails  in  the  effort.  It  has  what  is  called 
a  porta  Kanta,  which  we  saw  walled  up,  in  front  of  the 
church,  one  side  of  the  main  entrance.  I  know  nob 
what  gives  it  its  sanctity,  but  it  appears  to  be  open* 
by  the  pope  on  a  year  of  jubilee,  once  every  quai 
of  a  century. 

After  our  retuni  ...  I  took  R along  the  Pi 

eian  Ilill,  and  finally,  after  witnessing  what  of 
Carnival  could  be  seen  in  the  Piazza  del  Popolo  fi 


I 


thai^l 


IS58.]  ITALY.  76 

dttt  8ii£e  lidglity  we  went  down  into  tlie  Cono,  and 
•ome  litde  distance  along  it.  Except  for  the  sunshine, 
the  scene  was  much  the  same  as  I  have  already  de- 
scribed; perhaps  fewer  confetti  and  more  bouquets. 
Some  Americans  and  English  are  said  to  have  been 
brooght  before  llie  police  anthoritiesy  and  fined  for 
throwing  lime.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  jollity,  such 
as  it  is,  of  the  Carnival,  does  not  extend  an  inch  be- 
yond the  line  of  the  Corso ;  there  it  flows  along  in  a 
nanow  stream,  while  in  the  nearest  street  we  see  notb* 
ing  but  the  ordinary  Roman  gravity. 

FAraary  \hih.  —  Yesterday  was  a  bright  day,  but 
I  did  not  go  out  till  the  afternoon,  when  I  took  an 
hoards  walk  along  the  Pincian,  stopping  a  good  while 
to  look  at  the  old  beggar  who,  for  many  years  past, 
has  occupied  one  of  the  platforms  of  the  flight  of  steps 
leading  from  the  Piazza  di  Spagna  to  the  Trinita  di 
MontL  Hillard  commemorates  him  in  his  book.  He 
is  an  unlovely  object,  moving  about  on  his  hands  and 
knees,  principally  by  aid  of  his  hands,  which  are  for- 
tified with  a  sort  of  wooden  shoes  ;  while  his  poor, 
wasted  lower  shanks  stick  up  in  the  air  behind  him, 
loosely  vibrating  as  he  progresses.  He  is  gray,  old, 
ragged,  a  pitiable  sight,  but  seems  very  active  in  his 
own  fashion,  and  bestirs  himself  on  the  approach  of 
his  visitors  with  the  alacrity  of  a  spider  when  a  fly 
touches  the  remote  circumference  of  his  web.  While 
I  looked  down  at  him  he  received  alms  from  three 
persons,  one  of  whom  was  a  young  woman  of  the 
lower  orders  ;  the  other  two  were  gentlemen,  probably 
either  English  or  American.  I  could  not  quite  make 
out  the  principle  on  which  he  let  some  people  pass 
without  molestation,  while  he  shufiBed  from  one  end 


76     FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [1858. 

of  tho  platform  to  the  other  to  intercept  &n  occasional 
indiviiluai.  He  is  not  persistent  in  his  demands,  nor, 
indeed,  is  tliia  a  usual  fault  among  Italian  beggars, 
A  shake  of  the  head  will  stop  him  when  wriggling 
towards  you  from  a  distance.  I  fancy  ho  rtiaps  a 
pretty  fair  harvest,  and  no  doubt  leads  as  contented 
and  as  interesting  a  life  as  most  people,  sitting  there 
oil  day  on  those  sunny  steps,  looking  at  the  world, 
and  making  his  profit  out  of  it.  It  must  l>e  pret^ 
much  such  an  occupation  as  fishing,  ia  its  effect  upon 
the  hopes  and  apprehensions;  and  probably  he  siiffera 
no  more  from  the  many  refusals  he  meets  with  than 
the  angler  does,  when  he  sees  a  fish  smell  at  his  bait 
and  swim  away.  One  success  pays  for  a  hundred  dis- 
appointments,  aud  the  game  is  all  the  better  for  nut 
being  entirely  in  his  own  favor. 

Walking  onward,  I  found  the  Pincian  thronged 
with  promcnaders,  as  also  with  carriages,  which  drove 
round  the  verge  of  tlie  gardens  in  an  unbroken  ring. 

To-day  has  been  very  rainy.  1  went  out  in  the 
forenoon,  and  took  a  sitting  for  my  bust  in  one  of  a 
suite  of  rooms  formerly  occupied  by  Cannva.  It  was 
large,  high,  and  dreary  from  the  want  of  a  carpet,  fur- 
niture, or  anything  but  clay  and  plaster.  A  sculptor's 
studio  has  not  the  picturesque  charm  of  that  of  a 
painter,  where  there  is  color,  warmth,  and  cheerful- 
ness, and  where  the  artist  continually  turns  towards 
you  the  glow  of  some,  picture,  which  is  resting  against 
the  wall.  ...  I  was  asked  not  to  look  at  the  bust  at 
the  close  of  the  sitting,  and,  of  course,  I  ol>eyed  ; 
though  1  have  a  vague  idea  of  a  Iieavy-browed  phy^k 
ognoiny,  something  like  what  I  have  seen  in  the 
but  lookuig  strangely  in  that  guise  of  clay.  .  .  , 

It   is  a  singular  fascination    that    Kome   exei 


[>hy9^^ 
^roli^l 


WUS.2  ITALY.  77 

upon  artists.  There  is  day  elsewhere,  and  marble 
enough,  and  heads  to  model,  and  ideas  mar  be  made 
aenaUe  objects  at  home  as  well  as  here.  I  think  it  is 
tiie  peculiar  mode  of  life  that  attracts,  and  its  freedom 
from  the  inthralments  of  society,  more  than  the  artistic 
advantages  which  Rome  offers ;  and,  no  doabt,  though 
the  artists  care  little  about  one  another's  woiks,  yet 
thej  keep  each  other  warm  by  the  presence  of  so  manv 
of  them. 

The  Carnival  still  continues,  though  I  hardly  see 
how  it  can  have  withstood  such  a  damper  as  this  rainy 
day.  There  were  several  people  —  three,  I  think  — 
killed  in  the  Corso  on  Saturday :  some  accounts  say 
that  they  were  run  over  by  the  horses  in  the  race  ; 
odiers,  that  they  were  ridden  down  by  the  dragoons  in 
clearing  the  course. 

After  leaving  Canova's  studio,  I  stepped  into  the 
church  of  San  Luigi  de  Franchesi,  in  the  Via  di  Ri- 
petta.  It  was  built,  I  believe,  by  Catherine  di  Med- 
ici, and  is  under  the  protection  of  the  French  govern- 
ment, and  a  most  shamefuUy  dirty  place  of  worship, 
the  beautiful  marble  columns  looking  dingy,  for  the 
want  of  loving  and  pious  care.  There  are  many  tombs 
and  monuments  of  French  people,  both  of  the  past 
and  present,  —  artists,  soldiers,  priests,  and  others, 
who  have  died  in  Some.  It  was  so  dusky  within  the 
church  that  I  could  hardly  distinguish  the  pictures  in 
the  chapels  and  over  the  altar,  nor  did  I  know  that 
there  were  any  worth  looking  for.  Nevertheless,  there 
were  frescos  by  Domenichino,  and  oil-paintings  by 
(juido  and  others.  I  found  it  peculiarly  touching  to 
read  the  records,  in  Latin  or  French,  of  persons  who 
had  died  in  this  foreign  land,  though  they  were  not 
my  own  country -people,  and  though  I  was  even  less 


78    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [1868, 

akin  to  them  tban  they  to  Italy.  Still,  there  was  « 
mrt  of  relationship  in  the  fact  that  neithur  they  nor 
I  belonged  here. 

February  Vlth.  —  Yesterday  morning  wiw  perfectly 
Bunny,  and  we  went  out  betimea  to  see  chunbes;  go 
ing  first  to  the  Capuchins',  close  by  the  Piazza  Bar- 
berini. 

["The  Marble  Fatm  "  takes  up  this  description  of 
the  church  and  of  the  dead  monk,  which  we  really 
saw,  just  a»  recount«<l,  even  to  the  siitlden  stream  of 
blood  which  flowed  from  the  nostrils,  as  we  looked  at 
him.  —  Ed.] 

We  next  went  to  the  Trinita  di  Monti,  which 
stands  at  the  head  of  the  steps,  leading,  in  several 
fliglits,  from  the  Piazza  di  Spagna.  It  is  now  con- 
nected with  a  convent  of  French  nuns,  and  when  wo 
rang  at  a  side  door,  one  of  the  sisterhood  answered 
the  summons,  and  admitted  us  into  the  church.  This, 
like  that  of  tlie  Capuchins',  had  a  vaulted  roof  over 
the  nave,  and  no  side-aisles,  but  rows  of  chapels  in- 
stead. Unlike  the  Capuchins',  which  was  filthy,  and 
really  disgraceful  to  Itehold,  thia  church  waa  most  ex- 
qubitely  neat,  as  women  alone  wotdd  have  thought 
it  wortli  while  to  keep  it.  It  is  not  a  very  splendid 
church,  not  rich  in  gorgeous  marbles,  hut  pleasant  to 
be  in,  if  it  were  only  for  the  sake  of  its  gtMlly  purity. 
There  was  only  one  person  in  the  nave ,-  a  young  girl, 
who  sat  perfectly  still,  with  her  face  towards  the  altar. 
as  long  as  we  stayed.  Between  the  nave  and  tlie  rest 
of  the  church  there  is  a  high  iron  railing,  and  on  the 
other  side  of  it  were  two  kneeling  figures  in  black,  so 
motiouless  that  I  at  tirat  thought  them  statues ;  hut 
they  proved  to  be  two  nuns  at  their  devotions ;  and 


I8M.]  ITALY.  79 

others  of  the  sigterhood  came  by  and  by  and  joined 
them.  Nuns,  at  least  these  nuns,  who  are  French  and 
probably  ladies  of  refinement,  having  the  education 
of  young  girls  in  charge,  are  far  pleasanter  objects  to 
see  and  think  about  than  monks  ;  the  odor  of  sanctity^ 
in  the  latter,  not  being  an  agreeable  fragrance.  But 
these  holy  sisters,  wiUi  their  black  crape  and  white 
muslin,  looked  really  pure  and  unspotted  from  the 
world. 

On  the  iron  railing  above  mentioned  was  the  repre- 
sentation of  a  golden  heart,  pierced  with  arrows ;  for 
these  are  nuns  of  the  Sacred  Heart.  In  the  various 
chapels  there  are  several  paintings  in  fresco,  some  by 
Daniele  da  Volterra ;  and  one  of  them.  The  Descent 
from  the  Cross,  has  been  pronounced  the  third  great- 
est picture  in  the  world.  I  never  should  have  had 
tiie  slightest  suspicion  that  it  was  a  great  picture  at 
all,  so  worn  and  faded  it  looks,  and  so  hard,  so  dif- 
ficult to  be  seen,  and  so  undelightful  when  one  does 
lee  it. 

Fr(»n  the  Trinita  we  went  to  the  Santa  Maria  del 
Popolo,  a  church  built  on  a  spot  where  Nero  is  said  to 
have  been  buried,  and  which  was  afterwards  made 
horrible  by  devilish  phantoms.  It  now  being  past 
twelve,  and  all  the  churches  closing  from  twelve  till 
two,  we  had  not  time  to  pay  much  attention  to  the 
frescos,  oil-pictures,  and  statues,  by  Raphael  and  other 
famous  men,  which  are  to  be  seen  here.  I  remember 
dimly  the  magnificent  chapel  of  the  Chigi  family,  and 
little  else,  for  we  stayed  but  a  short  time  ;  and  went 
next  to  the  sculptor's  studio,  where  I  had  another  sit- 
ting for  my  bust.  After  I  had  been  moulded  for 
about  an  hour,  we  turned  homeward ;  but  my  wife  con- 
cluded to  hire  a  balcony  for  this  last  afternoon  and 


80     FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS,    [18B(L 

evening  of  the  Carnival,  and  she  took  posaesRioD  of 

it,  while  I  went  home  to  aend  to  her  Miss  S and 

the  two  elder  children.     For  my  part,  I  took  R , 

and  walked,  l>y  way  of  the  Pincian,  to  the  Piazza  del 
Popolo,  and  tlience  along  the  Corso,  where,  by  this 
time,  the  warfare  of  bouquets  and  confetti  raged  pretty 
fiercely.  The  aky  being  blue  and  the  sun  bright,  the 
Bcene  looked  much  gayer  and  brisker  than  I  had  be- 
fore found  it ;  and  I  can  conceive  of  its  being  rather 
agreeable  than  otherwise,  up  to  the  age  of  twenty* 

We  got  eeveral  voUeya  of  confetti.     R receivwl  tA 

bouquet  and  a  augar-phun,  and  I  a  resouniling  hit  fros' 
something  that  looked  more  like  a  (yibbage  than  a 
flower.  Little  as  I  have  enjoyed  the  Carnival,  I  think 
I  could  make  quite  a  brilliant  sketch  of  it,  without 
very  widely  departing  from  truth. 

February  19(/i.  —  Day  before  yesterday,  pi 
early,  wo  went  to  St.  Peter's,  expecting  to  see  the 
pope  cast  ashes  on  the  heads  of  the  cardinals,  it  being 
Ash  -Wednesday.  On  arriving,  however,  we  found  no 
more  than  the  usual  number  of  visitants  and  devo- 
tional people  scattered  through  the  broad  interior  of 
St.  Peter's ;  and  thenoe  concluded  that  the  oercmonies 
were  to  be  performed  in  the  Sistine  Chapel.  Accord- 
ingly, we  went  out  of  the  Cathedral,  through  the  door 
in  the  left  transejrt,  and  passed  round  the  exterior, 
and  through  the  vast  courts  of  the  Vatican,  seeking 
for  the  chapel.  We  had  blundered  into  the  ojuriage*) 
entrance  of  the  palace ;  there  is  an  entrajice  fromi 
tome  point  near  the  front  of  the  church,  but  this  wt 
did  not  find.  The  papal  guards,  in  the  strangest  an- 
tique and  antic  costume  that  was  ever  seen,  —  a  party 
tolored  dress,  striped  witli  blue,  red,  and  yellow,  white 


1  th*   '     ) 


4 


1858.]  ITALY.  81 

and  Uaok,  with  a  doublet  and  ruff,  and  tnmk-breeches, 
and  armed  with  halberds,  —  were  on  duty  at  the  gate- 
irajTB,  but  suffered  us  to  pass  without  question.  H* 
nallj,  we  reached  a  large  court,  where  some  cardinals' 
red  equipages  and  other  carriages  were  drawn  up,  but 
were  still  at  a  loss  as  to  the  whereabouts  of  the  chapeL 
At  last  an  attendant  kindly  showed  us  the  proper 
door,  and  led  us  up  flights  of  stairs,  along  passages 
and  galleries,  and  through  halls,  till  at  last  we  came  to 
a  spacious  and  lofty  apartment  adorned  with  frescos ; 
this  was  the  Sala  Begia,  and  the  antechamber  to  the 
Sistine  ChapeL 

The  attendant,  meanwhile,  had  informed  us  that  my 
wife  could  not  be  admitted  to  the  chapel  in  her  bon- 
net, and  that  I  myself  could  not  enter  at  all,  for  lack 
of  a  dress-coat ;  so  my  wife  took  off  her  bonnet,  and, 
ooyering  her  head  with  her  black  lace  veil,  was  readily 
let  in,  while  I  remained  in  the  Sala  Begia,  with  sev« 
eral  other  gentlemen,  who  found  themselves  in  the 
same  predicament  as  I  was.  There  was  a  wonderful 
variety  of  costume  to  be  seen  and  studied  among  the 
persons  around  me,  comprising  garbs  that  have  been 
elsewhere  laid  aside  for  at  least  three  centuries,  —  the 
broad,  plaited,  double  ruff,  and  black  velvet  cloak, 
doublet,  trunk  -  breeches,  and  sword  of  Queen  Eliza- 
beth'8  time, -the  papal  guard,  in  their  striped  and 
party-colored  dress  as  before  described,  looking  not  a 
little  like  harlequins ;  other  soldiers  in  helmets  and 
jackboots ;  French  officers  of  various  imiform ;  monks 
and  priests ;  attendants  in  old-fashioned  and  gorgeous 
livery ;  gentlemen,  some  in  black  dress-coats  and  pan- 
taloons, others  in  wide-awake  hats,  and  tweed  over- 
coats ;  and  a  few  ladies  in  the  prescribed  costume  of 
black  ;  so  that,  in  any  other  country,  the  scene  might 

TOI.X.  6 


82    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE^BOOKS.    [IHW 

have  been  taken  for  a  fancy  ball.  By  and  by,  the  cai^ 
dinaU  began  to  arrive,  and  added  their  splendid  pur- 
ple robes  and  red  hut«  to  make  the  picture  etill  mom 
bnlliant.  They  were  old  men,  one  or  two  verj'  aged 
aiid  infirm,  and  geuemlly  men  of  bulk  and  substance, 
with  heavy  faces,  fleshy  about  the  chin.  Tlieir  red 
hats,  trimmed  with  gold-laoe,  are  a  beautiful  piece  of 
finery,  and  are  identical  in  sha|)e  with  the  black, 
loosely  cocked  beavers  worn  by  the  Catholic  ecclesi- 
astics generally.  Wolsey's  bat,  which  I  ttaw  at  tbo 
Manchester  Exhibition,  might  have  been  made  on  the 
Kome  block,  but  apparently  was  never  cocked,  as  the 
fashion  now  ts.  The  attendants  changed  the  upper 
portions  of  tlicir  masters'  attire,  and  put  a  little  cap 
of  scarlet  cloth  on  each  of  their  heads,  after  which  the 
cardinals,  one  by  one,  or  two  by  two,  as  they  happened 
to  arrive,  went  into  the  chapel,  with  a  page  behind 
each  holding  up  his  purple  train.  In  the  mean  while, 
within  the  chapel,  we  heard  singing  and  chanting; 
and  whenever  the  voluminous  curtaius  that  hung  be- 
fore the  entrance  were  slightly  drawn  apart,  we  out- 
eiders  glanced  through,  but  could  sec  only  a  mass  of 
people,  and  beyond  them  still  another  chapel,  divided 
from  the  hither  one  by  a  screen.  When  almost  every- 
body  had  gone  in,  there  was  a  stir  among  tho  guards 
and  attendants,  and  a  door  opened,  apjmrcntly  commu' 
nicating  with  the  inner  apartments  of  the  Vatican. 
Through  this  door  came,  not  the  pope,  as  I  had  partly 
expected,  but  a  bulky  old  lady  in  black,  with  a  red 
face,  who  bowed  towards  the  spectators  with  an  aspect 
of  dignified  complaisance  as  she  passed  towards  the 
entrance  of  the  cliapel.  I  took  off  my  hat,  unlike  cer- 
tain English  gentlemen  who  stood  nearer,  and  found 
that  I  had  not  done  amiss,  for  it  was  the  Queen  of 
Spiun. 


"  «  ►■ 


18M.]  ITALY.  88 

Theie  was  nodung  else  to  be  seen ;  so  I  went  back 
tfnoii^  the  aatechambers  (which  are  noble  hallsi 
richly  frescoed  on  the  ¥Falls  and  ceilings),  endeavor- 
ing to  get  ont  through  the  same  passages  that  had  let 
me  in.  I  had  already  tried  to  descend  what  I  now 
suppose  to  be  the  Scala  Santa,  but  had  been  turned 
badL  by  a  sentineL  After  wandering  to  and  fro  a 
good  while,  I  at  last  found  myself  in  a  long,  long  gal- 
lery, on  each  side  of  which  were  innumerable  inscrip- 
tions, in  Greek  and  Latin,  on  slabs  of  marUe,  built 
into  the  walls ;  and  classic  altars  and  tablets  were 
ranged  along,  from  end  to  end.  At  the  extremity  was 
a  closed  iron  grating,  from  which  I  was  retreating ; 
but  a  French  gentleman  accosted  me,  with  the  infor- 
mation that  the  custode  would  admit  me,  if  I  chose, 
and  would  accompany  me  through  the  sculpture  de- 
partment of  the  Vatican.  I  acceded,  and  thus  took 
my  first  yiew  of  those  innumerable  art-treasures,  pass- 
ing from  one  object  to  another,  at  an  easy  pace,  paus- 
ing hardly  a  moment  anywhere,  and  dismissing  even 
the  Apollo,  and  the  Laocoon,  and  the  Torso  of  Her- 
cules, in  the  space  of  half  a  dozen  breaths.  I  was 
well  enough  content  to  do  so,  in  order  to  get  a  gen- 
eral idea  of  the  contents  of  the  galleries,  before  set- 
tling down  upon  individual  objects. 

Most  of  the  world-famous  sculptures  presented  them- 
selves to  my  eye  with  a  kind  of  familiarity,  through 
the  copies  and  casts  which  I  had  seen ;  but  I  found 
the  originals  more  different  than  I  anticipated.  The 
Apollo,  for  instance,  has  a  face  which  I  have  never 
seen  in  any  cast  or  copy.  I  must  confess,  however, 
taking  such  transient  glimpses  as  I  did,  I  was  more 
impressed  with  the  extent  of  the  Vatican,  and  the 
beautiful  order  in  which  it  is  kept,  and  its  great  sunny, 


84    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [IHS^I 

open  courts,  with  fountains,  grass,  anil  sliruba,  and 
the  views  of  Home  anil  the  Campagna  from  its  win- 
dows, —  more  imprettaed  with  tiiuse,  and  with  certain 
vastly  capai^'ioiia  vases,  and  two  great  san-ophagi,  — 
tlian  with  the  statuary.  Thus  1  went  round  the 
whole,  and  waa  dismissed  through  tbts  grat«d  barrier 
into  the  gallery  of  inscriptions  again ;  and  after  a  lib* 
tie  more  wandering,  I  made  my  way  out  of 
palace.  .  .  . 

Yesterday  I  went  out  betimes,  and  strayed  tlirough 
some  portion  of  ancient  Rome,  to  tlie  Column  of  Tra- 
jan, to  the  Fonim,  thence  along  the  Appian  Way ; 
after  which  I  lost  myself  among  the  intriencies  of  the 
streets,  and  finally  came  out  at  the  bridge  of  St.  An- 
gelo.  Tlie  first  observation  which  a  atranger  is  led 
to  make,  in  the  neiglilKirhooil  of  lioman  rutua,  is  that 
the  inhabitants  seem  to  be  strangely  aildicted  to  thttJ 
washing  of  clotlies ;  for  all  the  precincts  of  Trajaa't.i 
Forum,  and  of  the  Konian  Forum,  and  wherever  else 
an  iron  railing  affords  opportimity  to  hang  them,  were 
whitened  with  sheets,  and  other  linen  and  cotton,  dry- 
ing in  the  sun.  It  must  be  that  waAherwomen  bur- 
row among  the  o]<I  t«inples.  The  second  observation 
is  not  quite  so  favorable  to  the  cleanly  character  of 
the  modem  Romans;  indeed,  it  is  so  very  unfavora- 
ble, that  I  hardly  know  how  to  express  it.  But  the^ 
fact  is,  that,  through  the  Fonuu,  .  .  .  and  anywheM-. 
nut  of  the  commonest  foot -track  and  road-way,  yoa 
must  look  well  to  your  steps,  ...  If  yoii  tread  l)e- 
iieath  the  triumphal  arch  of  Titus  or  Constanttne,  you 
had  better  look  downward  than  upward,  whatever  ba 
the  merit  of  the  sculptures  aloft.  .  .  . 

After  a  while  the  visitant  finds  himself  getting 
Customed  to  this  horrible  state  of  things  ;  and 


ITALr.  88 

IDS  of  moral  sublimity  and  beauty  seem  to 
k  veil  over  tlie  phyuical  meiinnesseB  to  which  I 
alluile.  Ferliaps  tliere  is  something  in  the  mind  of 
die  people  of  these  countries  that  enables  them  C|uite 
to  dissever  small  ugliness  from  great  subbmity  and 
beauty.  They  spit  upon  the  glorious  pavement  of  St. 
Put«r's,  and  wherever  else  they  like ;  they  piace  pal- 

^tIT-looking  wooileu  confessionals  beneath  its  sublime 
arches,  and  ornament  them  with  cheap  little  colored 
prints  of  the  crucifixion ;   they  hang  tin  hearts  and 
other  tinsel  and  trumpery  at  the  gorgeous  shrines  of 
the  s^nts,  in  chapels  tluit  are  incnisted  with  gems,  or 
marbles  almost  as  precious ;  they  put  pasteboard  stat- 
ues of  saints  beneath  the  dome  of  the  Pantheon ;  in 
i  Rhort,  they  let  the  sublime  and  the  ridiculous  come 
I  close  together,  and  are  not   in  the  least  troubled  by 
r  the  proximity.     It  must  be  that  their  sense  of  the 
beautiful  is  stronger  than  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  mind, 
and  that  it  observes  only  what  is  fit  to  gratify  it. 

To-day,  which  was  bright  and  cool,  my  wife  and  I 
Bet  forth  immediately  after  breakfast,  in  search  of  tlie 
Baths  of  Diocletian,  and  the  church  of  Santa  Maria 
degl'  Augeli,    We  went  too  far  along  the  Via  di  Porta 
Pia,  and  after  passing  by  two  or  three  convents,  and 
their  high  garden  walls,  and  the  villa  Bonaparte  on 
one  side,  and  the  villa  Torlonia  on  the  other,  at  last 
L  issued  through  the  city  gate.      Before  us,  far  away, 
E  were  the  Alban  hills,  the  loftiest  of  which  was  abso< 
r  lut«ly  silvered  with  snow  and  sunshine,  and  set  in  the 
bluest  and  brightest  of  skies.     We  now  retraced  our 
st«ps  to  the  Fountain  of  the  Termini,  where  is  a  pon- 
derous heap  of  stone,  representing  Muses  striking  the 
■  rock;  a  colossal  figure,  not  without  a  certain  euoi^ 
I  kiouB  might  and  dignity,  though  rather  too  evidently 


86     rnENCH  and  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [18S«    ' 

|[)oking  his  awfullettt.  This  Htntne  was  tlie  death  o( 
its  sculprtnr,  whose  heart  wa«  brokon  on  actwunt  of  tha 
ridicule  it  excited.  There  are  many  more  abRiird 
aqiiatie  devicea  in  Rome,  however,  and  few  better. 

We  tiirued  into  the  Piazza  di  Termini,  the  entranos 
of  whit'h  is  at  this  fountain  ;  and  after  some  inquiry  of 
tlie  French  soldiers,  a  numerous  detachment  of  whom 
appear  to  be  quartered  in  the  vicinity,  we  found  onr 
way  to  the  portal  of  Santa  Maria  degl'  Angeli.  The 
exterior  of  this  church  ha«  no  pretensions  to  beauty  or 
majesty,  or,  indeed,  to  architectural  merit  of  any  kind,- 
or  to  any  architecture  whatever ;  for  it  looks  like  ti 
confused  pile  of  ruined  brickwork,  with  a  facade  re- 
sembling half  the  inner  cnrve  of  a  lat^  oven.  No 
one  would  imagine  that  there  was  a  church  imder  that 
enormous  heap  of  ancient  rubbish.  But  the  door  ad- 
mits you  into  a  circular  vestibule,  once  an  apartment 
of  Diocletian's  Baths,  but  now  a  portion  of  the  nave 
of  the  churcli,  and  surrounded  with  monumental  busts; 
and  thence  you  pass  into  what  was  the  central  hall ; 
now,  with  little  change,  except  of  detail  and  ornament, 
transformed  into  the  body  of  the  church.  This  space 
is  BO  lofty,  broad,  and  airy,  that  the  soul  forthwith 
swells  out  and  magnifies  itself,  for  the  sake  of  filling 
it.  It  was  Michel  Angelo  who  contrived  this  niirB' 
cle ;  and  I  feel  even  more  grateful  to  him  for  rescuing 
such  a  noble  interior  from  destruction,  than  if  he  had 
originally  built  it  himself.  In  the  ceiling  above,  you 
see  the  metal  fixtures  whereon  the  old  Romans 
their  lamps ;  and  there  are  eight  gigantic  pillars 
Egyptian  granite,  standing  as  tliey  stood  of  yorft 
There  is  a  grand  simplicity  about  tlie  church,  more 
satisfaetory  than  elaborate  ornament ;  but  the  present 
pope  has  paved  and  adorned  one  of  the  large  chapela 


4 

^ 


ITS   <j^H 

yoret^^ 
more 
esent 
apela        . 


TTALT.  W 

1  pHt  H  EkewisF  laid  n  lie^  «■■>■ 

«UA«as  xtSed,  at  tthitntd  fieam^  bn^uaalr  ai» 
m  c^hvAml  a  fcnon.  ^o  wetmei  w  be  as  k»^ 
^vtioBe.  nUiw  tfe  nsl  fior«i.Mid  «t  nnr  a  Slai>> 

II 

Itai^m 

i*  £«.  IVtar's  M  i^filKd  br  a  Boaaie  eapw.  I  w  a 
good  deal  aaffJ  fardaspacCare. — At&nm^wmt, 
mmiliitmmTamtd  tfcow  vlio  loml  Im.  aad  tfae  fnr 
at  im  '■'^'^  ^■"^■■g  apoavd.  vkji  a  h^jmiij  of 
^igda,  lad  Jcsas  vriik  l^i  iii  ai«  waaaap  to  adnaat 
tiHaBd  cra«a  hni:  aad  I  fth  vhat  am  iaflncswpBp 
tam  wu^t  kaiv  ^kh  de  denakaal  pan  rf  oar  aa- 
tare.  Tk  Bul-amks  ia  tfe  kaak  aad  £mc  td  Jaaa. 
iurfatjaalih..  em  after  he  kad  paaed  into  blia  ami 
^OKT.  toaAed  an*  heart  with  a  aease  of  kk  knr  for 
^  I  tloBk  thU  realh-  a  ^nat  pictare.  We  walked 
■vaad  the  <  Imh  li,  IjhAjm  u  oilier  paintiiH|s  aad  fras- 
tna.  b^  mm  no  othtn  tint  ?na%  intended  ns.  Ia 
tk  Tialfl>Qte  Aare  an  BKnnnkinB  to  Caxlo  'HanXU 
aad  Sahator  Bon.  aad  tfao*  is  a  rtatnt  «<  Sc  Brano, 
hj  H«»>Lii  vUe^  is  pnaioimKd  to  be  vrt  fine.  I 
dKN^it  it  ^ood.  bat  scazvelT  wTorthv  of  vast  admita- 
tioa.  Hoodon  vas  the  srnlpcor  at  the  first  aatoe  of 
Wafihington.  and  <rf  the  bofC  vfaencc,  I  mppiwie.  aU 
■ofaseqaem   staxoes   have    been,   and   vill  be.   aaiiily 


After  ouei^lu?  frotn  the  efanrrh.  I  kiokeid  back 
aidi  wonder  ai  the  stack  of  shapeless  old  hrickaviric 
that  hid  the  i|4mdkl  inteiior.  I  mnfS  go  tha«  agai^ 
Vad  faraatfe  fndr  in  that  aoUs  q»ee. 


88    FRBNCff  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS,    [1888. 

Ffbntary  20^%.  —  Thia  morning,  after  breakfast,  1 
walktKl  aoross  tlio  pity,  making  a  pretty  etraiglit  cc)iira« 
to  the  Pantheon,  and  thenee  to  the  bridge  of  St.  An- 
gelo,  and  to  St.  Petfir's.     It  had  been  my  puqjose  to 
go  to  the  Fontaiia  Paolina ;  but,  finding  that  the  dis- 
tance was  too  great,  and  being  weighed  down  with  a 
Koman    lassitude,  I  concluded  to  go  into  St.  Pet«r's, 
Here  I  looked  at  Michel  Angelo's  Pieto,  a  representar 
tion  of  the  dead  Christ,  in  his  mother's  lap.     Then  I 
strolled  round  the  great  church,  and  find  that  it  con-, 
tinues  to  grow  upon  ine  both  in  magnitude  and  beaul 
by  comparison  with  tlie  many  interiors  of  sacred 
Sees  which  I  have   lately  seen.     At  times,  a  singla^ 
casual,  momentary  glimpse  of  its  magniticence  gleams 
upon  my  soul,  as  it  were,  when  I  happen  to  glance  at 
arch  opening  beyond  arch,  and  I  am  surprised  into  ad- 
miration.    I  have  experienced  that  a  landscape 
the  sky  unfold  the  deepest  beauty  in  a  similar  way 
not  when  they  are  gazed  at  of  set  purpose,  but  wl 
the  spectator  looks  suddenly  through  a  vista,  among 
crowd   of  other  thoughts.      Passing  near  the  oonft 
sionals  for  foreigners  to-day,  I  saw  a  Spaniard,  w] 
had  just  come  out  of  the  one  devote<l  to  liis  uatii 
tongue,  taking  leave  of  his  confessor,  with  an  afft 
tionate  reverence,  which  —  as  well  as  the  benign  dt| 
nitj-  of  the  good  father  —  it  was  good  to  behold.  . 

I  returned  home  early,  in  order  to  go  with  my 
to  the  Barberini  Palace  at  two  o'clock.  We  entei 
through  the  gateway,  through  the  Via  delle  Quattro 
Fontane,  passing  one  or  two  sentiuels ;  for  there  is 
apparently  a  regiment  of  dragoons  quai-tered  on  tha 
grouud  Boor  of  the  palace  ;  and  I  stumbled  upon  a 
room  containing  their  saddles,  the  other  day,  wheo 
•eeking  for  Mr.  Story's  staircase.     Tha  entranoe  tf. 


I 


]85a.]  TTAIT.  89 

the  pietore  gaUerr  i>  br  a  door  oa  Uw  rigbt  band, 
affording  as  &  nglit  of  a  bouitifiil  s^atl  staircue, 
which  goes  cirefii^  iqnrmid  fram  the  vei^r  faaMsnent  to 
the  rer;  stimmtt  of  the  i«l>re,  with  a  perfectlr  ean^ 
ascent,  yet  confining  its  sweep  within  a  modoate  ram- 
pass.  We  loohMi  np  through  the  Intel  iur  of  the 
spiral,  as  thnx^  a  tube,  from  the  botton  to  the  top. 
The  pictures  are  contained  in  three  eontigaoas  nxms 
of  the  low^  piano,  and  are  few  in  number,  compria- 
ing  tarel;  half  a  dozen  which  I  ■boold  care  to  see 
again,  though  doobtless  all  bsTn  vmbK  in  their  way. 
One  that  attracted  oar  atlMition  was  a  picture  of 
Christ  Di^mting  with  tint  Doetots,  by  Albert  Diinrr, 
in  which  was  represented  the  aglicat,  Bkoet  entaunded. 
■tnbboni,  pragmatical,  and  eoolentiom  old  Jew  that 
evKT  liTed  under  die  law  of  Moses;  and  be  and  the 
child  Jesus  were  aignii^,  not  only  with  their  tongiiea, 
bat  making  hiero^hfphies,  as  it  were,  by  the  motioD 
of  their  hands  and  fingetSL  It  is  a  reiy  queer,  as  well 
as  a  my  remaihaUe  pactnre.  But  we  pasaed  has- 
tily by  this,  and  almost  all  others,  bcii^  aager  to  see 
the  two  iriuch  ohieSy  make  the  collection  fanwos,  — 
Bajihaers  Fomarina,  and  Guido's  portrait  of  Beatrice 
CncL  These  were  fonnd  in  the  last  of  the  three 
tOOaiM,  and,  as  regards  Beatrix  CencL,  I  might  as  well 
not  try  to  aay  anything ;  for  its  q^ell  b  indefinable, 
and  the  painter  has  wrooght  it  in  a  way  more  like 
inagic  than  anything  eUe.   .  .  . 

It  is  the  most  profoundly  wron|^t  pictore  in  the 
worid ;  no  artist  did  it.  nor  coold  do  it  again.  Gnido 
may  have  held  the  brush,  bot  he  painted  better  than 
he  knew.  I  wish,  howerer,  it  were  possible  for  some 
q>ectator,  of  deep  Mnsibility,  to  xee  the  picture  with- 
\  anything  of  its  anbject  or  history ;  foe 


4 


90     FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS-  [IBSa 

no  doubt,  we  bring  all  our  knowledge  of  the  Cen<^ 
trag^eilj  to  the  intorpretation  of  it. 

CloHe  beeide  the  Beatrice  Cenci  hiings  the  Foi 
rinu.  .  .  . 

While  we  were  looking  at  these  works  Miss  M- 
unexpeeledly  joined  us,  and  we  went,  all  three 
gether,  to  the  KoBpigliosi  Palace,  in  the  Piazza 
Monte  Oavallo.  A  port«r,  in  cocked  hat,  and  with  a 
statf  of  ofhce,  admitted  us  into  a  spauioua  court  be- 
fore the  ]>alace,  and  directed  us  to  a  garden  on  one 
side,  raised  as  much  as  twenty  feet  above  the  level  on 
which  we  stood.  The  gardener  opened  the  gate  fw 
us,  and  we  aseended  a  beautiful  stone  staircase,  with 
a  carved  balustrade,  bearing  many  marks  of  time  and 
weather.  Keachlng  the  garden-level,  we  found  it  laid 
out  in  walks,  boi-dered  with  box  and  ornamental  shrub- 
bery, amid  which  were  lemon-trees,  and  one  large  old 
exotic  from  some  distant  vlime.  In  the  centre  of  the 
garden,  surroundeil  by  a  stone  balustrade,  like  tliat 
of  the  staircase,  was  a  lish-pimd,  into  which  several 
jets  of  water  were  continually  spouting ;  and  on  pe<l- 
estals,  that  made  j>art  of  the  balusters,  stood  eight 
marble  statues  of  Apollo,  Cupid,  nymphs,  and  other 
such  sunny  and  beautiful  people  of  classic  mythology. 
There  had  been  many  more  of  these  statues,  hut  the 
rest  had  disappeared,  and  those  which  remained 
suffered  grievous  damage,  here  to  a  nose,  there  to 
hand  or  foot,  and  often  a  fracture  of  the  body,  vei 
imperfectly  mended.  There  was  a  pleasant  sunshil 
in  the  ganlen,  and  a  spring-like,  or  rather  a  geni 
autumnal  atmosphere,  though  eUewliero  it  was  a 
of  poisonous  Roman  chill. 

At  the  end   of  the  garden,  which  was  of  no  great 
extent,  was  an  edifice,  bordering  on  the  piazza,  called 


the 

biii^H 
.iiH 

real 
lied 

1 


<858.J  ITALY.  91 

the  Casino,  which,  I  pTesume,  means  a  garden-house. 
The  front  is  richly  ornamented  with  bas-reliefs,  and 
statues  in  niches;  as  if  it  were  a  place  for  pleasure 
and  enjoyment,  and  therefore  ought  to  be  beautiful 
As  we  approached  it,  the  door  swung  open,  and  we 
went  into  a  large  room  on  the  ground  floor,  and,  look- 
ing up  to  the  ceiling,  beheld  Ghiido's  Aurora.  The 
picture  is  as  fresh  and  brilliant  as  if  he  had  painted 
it  with  the  morning  sunshine  which  it  represents.  It 
oould  not  be  more  lustrous  in  its  hues,  if  he  had  given 
it  the  last  touch  an  hour  ago.  Three  or  four  artists 
were  copying  it  at  that  instant,  and  positively  their 
colors  did  not  look  brighter,  though  a  great  deal 
newer  than  his.  The  alacrity  and  movement,  brisk- 
ness and  morning  stir  and  glow  of  the  picture  are 
wonderfuL  It  seems  impossible  to  catch  its  glory  in 
a  copy.  Several  artists,  as  I  said,  were  making  the 
attempt,  and  we  saw  two  other  attempted  copies  lean- 
inip  against  the  wall,  but  it  was  easy  to  detect  failure 
bjuTeLntial  points.    My  memJry,  I  believe,  wiU 

be  Lmewhat  enU^ned  by  4.F<^  ^^'^'^'^  »»« 
that  I  remember  it  very  distinctiy  even  now;  but 
bright  things  leave  a  sheen  and  glimmer  in  tiie  mind, 
like  Christian's  tremulous  glimpse  of  the  Celestial 
City. 

In  two  other  rooms  of  the  Casino  we  saw  pictures 
by  Domenichino,  Rubens,  and  otiier  famous  painters, 
which  I  do  not  mean  to  speak  of,  because  I  cared 
really  little  or  nothiug  about  them.  Eetuming  into 
the  garden,  the  sunny  warmth  of  which  was  most 
grateful  after  the  chill  air  and  cold  pavement  of  the 
Casino,  we  walked  round  the  laguna,  examining  the 
statues,  and  looking  down  at  some  littie  fishes  that 
swarmed  at  the  stone  margin  of  the  pooL      There 


92    FRENCH  AND   ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [ISJ 

vere  two  infante  of  the  Rospiglioai  ftiinilj;  one,  \ 
young  child  playing  with  a  maid  and  head-»ervanfe| 
another,  the  very  chubbiest  and  rosieit  boy  in  t 
world,  sleeping  on  tta  nurue'H  bo^um.  The  nurae  was 
a  comely  woman  enough,  dreused  in  bright  eolors, 
which  titly  set  ofF  the  deep  hues  of  her  Italian  fae^. 
An  old  painter  very  likely  would  have  beautified  and 
refined  the  pair  into  a  Madonna,  vi-ith  the  child  Jettus ; 
for  an  artist  need  not  go  far  in  Italy  to  find  a  picture 
ready  composed  and  tinted,  needing  little  more  than 
to  be  literally  copied. 

Miss  M had  gone  away  before  ua  ;  but  my  wife 

and  I,  after  leaving  the  Palazzo  Rospig:lii)ai,  and  on 
our  way  home,  went  into  the  Church  of  St.  Andrea, 
which  belongs  to  a  convent  of  Jesuits.  I  have  long 
ago  exhausted  all  my  capacity  of  admiration  for  splen- 
did interiors  of  churches,  but  methinks  this  little,  little 
temple  (it  is  not  niore  than  fifty  or  sixty  feet  across) 
has  a  more  perfect  and  gem -like  beauty  than  any 
other.  Its  shape  is  oval,  with  an  oval  dome,  au<l, 
above  that,  another  little  dome,  both  of  which  are 
magnificently  frescoed.  Around  the  base  of  the  larger 
dome  is  wreathed  a  flight  of  angels,  and  the  smaller 
and  upper  one  is  encircled  by  a  garland  of  cherubs,  — 
cherub  and  angel  all  of  pure  white  marble.  The  oval 
centre  of  the  church  is  walled  round  with  precious 
and  lustrous  marble,  of  a  red- veined  variety  int«r- 
Bper9e<l  with  columns  and  pilasters  of  white ;  and 
there  are  arches  opening  through  this  rich  wall,  form- 
ing chapels,  which  the  anihiteot  seems  to  have  striven 
hard  to  make  even  more  gorgeous  than  the  mam  body 
of  the  churi'h.  They  contain  beautiful  ])ictuiva,  not 
dark  ami  faded,  lint  glowing,  as  if  just  from  the  )>aint 
er*B  hands;  and  the  shrines  are  adorned  with  what 


A 


1856.]  ITALY.  98 

0ver  18  most  rare,  mud  in  one  of  dian  wms  llie  great 
raibande ;  at  any  rate,  a  bright^  fiery  gem  as  b^  as 
m  UsAeifs  egg.  The  pavement  of  the  choich  was  one 
star  iA  Tsrkni»<x>lored  marble,  and  in  the  centre  was  a 
mosaic,  coTering,  I  believe,  the  tomb  of  the  founder. 
I  have  not  seen,  nor  expect  to  see,  anything  eke  so  en- 
tirely and  satisfactorily  finished  as  this  small  oval 
chnrch ;  and  I  only  vdsh  I  could  pack  it  in  a  laige 
box,  and  send  it  home. 

I  must  not  forget  that,  on  our  way  from  the  Bar- 
beiini  Palace,  we  stopped  an  instant  to  look  at  the 
house,  at  the  comer  of  the  street  of  the  four  fountains, 
where  Milton  was  a  guest  while  in  Rome.  He  seems 
quite  a  man  of  our  own  day,  seen  so  nearly  at  the 
hither  extremity  of  the  vista  through  which  we  look 
back,  from  the  epoch  of  railways  to  that  of  the  oldest 
Egyptian  obelisk.  The  house  (it  was  then  occupied 
by  the  Cardinal  Barberini)  looks  as  if  it  might  have 
been  built  within  the  present  century ;  for  mediseval 
houses  in  Borne  do  not  assume  the  aspect  of  antiq« 
nity;  perhaps  because  the  Italian  style  of  architec- 
ture, or  something  similar,  is  the  one  more  generally 
in  vogue  in  most  cities. 

Fehruary  21«f.  —  This  morning  I  took  my  way 
through  the  Porta  del  Popolo,  intending  to  spend  the 
forenoon  in  the  Campagna ;  but,  getting  weary  of  the 
straight,  uninteresting  sti*eet  that  runs  out  of  the  gate, 
I  turned  aside  from  it,  and  soon  found  myself  on  the 
shores  of  the  Tiber.  It  looked,  as  usual,  like  a  sat- 
urated solution  of  yellow  mud,  and  eddied  hastily 
along  between  deep  banks  of  clay,  and  over  a  clay 
bed,  in  which  doubtless  are  hidden  many  a  richer 
treasure  than  we  now  possess.     The  French  once  pro- 


•4     FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [II 

posed  to  draw  off  the  river,  for  the  purjHwe  of  recover- 
ing  hU  the  sunken  statues  and  relics ;  but  the  Gotniuis 
made  strenuous  objection,  on  lusoouut  of  tlie  increafitnl 
Tirulence  of  malaria  which  would  probably  ri^iilt.  I 
saw  a  man  on  the  immediate  shore  of  the  river,  fifty 
feet  or  so  beneath  Ihe  hank  on  which  I  stood,  sitting 
patiently,  with  an  angling  rod ;  and  1  waited  to  see 
what  he  might  <.'at4.-h.  Two  other  persons  likewise  8».t 
down  to  wat^h  him ;  hut  ho  caught  nothing  so  long 
as  I  stayed,  and  at  last  seemed  to  give  it  up.  Tlie 
banks  and  vicinity  of  the  river  are  very  bare  and  un- 
inviting,  as  I  then  saw  them ;  no  shade,  no  veixlure, 
—  a  rough,  neglected  aspect,  and  a  pecidiar  shabbi- 
ness  about  the  few  houses  that  were  visible.  Farther 
down  the  stream  the  dome  of  St.  Petur's  showed  itself 
on  the  other  side,  seeming  to  stand  on  the  outskirts  of 
the  city.  I  walked  along  the  banks,  with  some  ex- 
pectation of  finding  a  ferry,  by  which  I  might  cross 
tlie  river ;  but  my  course  was  soon  interrupted  by  the 
wall,  and  I  turned  up  a  lane  that  led  me  straight  back 
again  to  the  Porta  del  Popolo.  I  stopped  a  moment, 
however,  to  see  some  young  men  pitching  quoits,  which 
they  appeared  to  do  with  a  good  deal  of  skill. 

I  went  along  the  Via  di  Ripetta.  and  through  other 
atreeta,  stepping  into  two  or  three  cJiurches,  one  of 
which  was  the  Pantheon.  .  .  . 

There  are,  I  think,  seven  deep,  pillared  recesses 
around  the  circumference  of  it,  each  of  which  becomes 
a  sufficiently  capacious  chapel ;  and  alternately  with 
these  chapels  there  is  a  marble  structure,  like  the 
architecture  of  a  doorway,  beneath  wliich  is  the  shrino 
of  a  saint ;  so  tLat  the  whole  circle  of  the  Pantheon  la 
filled  up  with  the  seven  chapels  and  seven  shrines.  A 
number  of  persons  were  sitting  or  kneeling  arouiul, 


IBH^I 


I 


TTALr. 

lers  came  in  while  T  was  there,  dipping  Uieir  fingers 
the  holy  water,  and  bending  the  knee,  as  they 
passed  the  shrines  aucl  cliapels.  until  they  reached  the 
one  which,  apparently,  they  had  selected  as  the  partic- 
ular altar  for  their  devotions.  Everybody  seemed  so 
devout,  and  in  a  frame  of  mind  eo  suited  to  the  day 
and  place,  that  it  really  made  me  feel  a  little  awkward 
not  to  be  able  to  kneel  down  along  with  tliem.  Un- 
like the  worshippers  in  our  own  ehurches,  each  indi- 
vidual here  seems  to  do  his  own  individual  nets  of  de- 
votion, and  I  cannot  but  think  it  better  so  than  to 
make  an  effort  for  united  prayer  as  we  do.  It  is  my 
opinion  that  a  great  deal  of  devout  and  reverential 
feeling  is  kept  alive  in  people's  hearts  by  the  Catholic 
mode  of  worship. 

Soon  leaving  the  Pantheon,  a  few  minutes'  walk 
towards  the  Corso  brought  me  to  the  Church  of  St. 
Igna^io,  which  belongs  to  the  College  of  the  Jesuits. 
It  is  spacious  and  of  beautiful  architecture,  but  not 
strikingly  distinguisbed,  in  the  latter  particular,  from 
many  others ;  a  wide  and  lofty  nave,  supported  upon 
marble  columns,  between  which  arches  open  into  the 
Bide-^sles,  and  at  the  junction  of  the  nave  and  tran- 
sept a  dome,  resting  on  four  great  arches.  The 
church  seemed  t^  be  purposely  somewhat  darkened, 
BO  that  I  could  not  well  see  the  details  of  the  oma- 
tnentation,  except  the  frescos  on  the  ceiling  of  the 
Dare,  which  were  very  brilliant,  and  done  in  so  effec- 
tual a  stj'le,  that  I  really  could  not  satisfy  myself  that 
■ome  of  the  figures  did  not  actually  protrude  from  the 
ceiling,  —  in  short,  that  they  were  not  colored  bas-re- 
liefs, instead  of  frescos.  No  words  can  express  the 
beautiful  effect,  in  an  upholstery  point  of  view,  of  this 
kuid  of  decoration.     Here,  as  at  the  Pantheon,  tliere 


Jt6     FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS,    [lUft; 

wore  many  persons  sitting  silent,  kneeling,  or  paasi: 
from  stirine  to  shrine 

I  reached  homo  at  about  twelve,  and,  at  ono,  set  o 
^^n,  with  my  wife,  towards  St.  Peter's,  where  ' 
meant  to  stay  till  after  Vespers.     Wo  walked  aoroaS'l 
the  city,  and  through  the  Piazza  de  Navona,  where  WO'M 
stoppe<)  to  look  at  one  of  Bernini's  absurd  fountain! 
of  which  the  water  makes  but  the  smalletit  part,  —  ij 
little   squirt  or  two  amid  a  prodigious  fuss  of  ] 
and  monsters.      Thence  we  passed  by  the  poor,  bafe-' 
t«red-dowu  torso  of  Pasquin,  and  came,  by  devious 
ways,  to  the  bridge  of  St.  Angelo  ;  the  streets  bearing 
pretty  much  their  week-day  aspect,  many  of  the  shops- 
open,  the  market-stalls  doing  their  usual  business,  i 
the  people  brisk  and  gay,  though  not  indecorously  si 
I  suppoHO  there  was  hanlly  a  man  or  woman  who  ha^'' 
not  heard  mass,  confessed,  and  said  their  prayers ;  a 
thing  which  —  the  prayers,  I  mean  —  it  would  be  ab- 
surd to  predicate  of  Loudon,  New  York,  or  any  Prot- 
estant city.    In  however  adulterated  a  guise,  the  Cath- 
olics do  get  a  draught  of  devotion  to  slake  tlie  thirst 
of  their  souls,  and  methinks  it  must  needs  do  thetu 
good,  even  if  not  quit*  so  pure  b»  if  it  came  from  b 
ter  oistems,  or  from  the  original  foimtain  he^. 

Arriving  at  St.  Peter's  shortly  after  two.  we  walked 
round  the  whole  church,  looking  at  all  the  pictures 
and  most  of  thu  monuments,  .  .  .  and  paused  longest 
before  Guido's  Archangel  Michael  overcoming  Luci-. 
for.  This  is  surely  one  of  the  most  beautiful  thioj 
in  the  world,  one  of  the  human  conceptions  that  i 
indiued  most  deeply  witJi  the  celestial.  .  . 

We  thon  sat  down  in  one  of  the  aisles  and  awaits 
the  be^nuing  of  Vespers,  which  we  supposed  won] 
take  place  at  half  past  three.      Four  o'clock  i 


however,  and  do  Vespers  ;  and  as  our  diimer  hour  is 
.  .  we  at  last  came  away  without  hearing  the 

February  2Zd.  —  Yesterday,  at  noon,  we  set  out  for 
the  Capital,  aod  after  going  up  the  acclivity  (not 
from  tho  Forum,  but  from  the  opposite  direction), 
stopped  to  look  at  the  statues  of  Castor  and  PuUux, 
nhieh,  with  other  sculptures,  look  down  the  ascent. 
Castor  and  his  broUier  seem  to  me  to  have  heads  dis- 
proportionately large,  and  are  not  ao  striking,  in  any 
respect,  as  such  great  imager  ought  to  be.  But  we 
heartily  admired  tho  eijuestrian  statue  of  Marcus  Au- 
reliua  Antoninus,  .  .  .  and  looked  at  a  fountain,  prin- 
cipally composed,  I  think,  of  figures  representing  the 
^ile  and  the  Tiber,  who  loll  upon  their  elbows  and 
preside  over  the  gushing  water ;  and  between  them, 
against  the  facade  of  the  Senator's  Palace,  there  is  a 
statue  of  Minerva,  with  a  petticoat  of  red  porphyry. 
Having  taken  note  of  these  objects,  we  went  to  the 
Museum,  in  an  edifice  on  our  left,  ent«ring  the  piazza, 
and  here,  in  the  vestibule,  we  found  various  old  statues 
and  relics.  Ascending  the  stairs,  we  passed  tlirough 
a  long  gallery,  and,  turning  to  our  left,  examined 
somewhat  more  carefidly  a  suite  of  rooms  running 
parallel  with  it.  The  first  of  these  contained  busts  of 
tiie  CiBsars  and  their  kindred,  from  the  epoch  of  the 
lightiest  Julius  downward ;  eighty-three,  I  believe,  in 
I  had  seen  a  bust  of  Julius  CsBsar  in  the  British 
'useum,  and  was  surprised  at  its  thin  and  withered 
ipect ;  but  this  head  is  of  a  very  ugly  old  man  In- 
deed, —  wrinkled,  puckered,  shrunken,  hwkiiig  breadth 
>nd  Bubatanee  ;  careworn,  grim,  as  if  he  had  fought 
uid  had  suffered  in  the  conflict ;  a  waan 


98     FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [11 

of  schemes,  an<l  of  eager  effort  to  bring  his  flclicmea 
to  i«B9,  Hia  protUe  is  hy  no  means  good,  a<lvaneing 
from  the  toji  of  his  foreheail  to  the  tip  of  his  nose,  and 
retreating,  at  a.bout  the  same  angle,  from  the  latter 
point  to  the  bottom  of  hla  chin,  whieh  seems  to  he 
thrust  forcibly  down  into  his  meagre  neck,  —  not  that 
be  pokes  his  head  forward,  however,  for  it  is  purtict^ 
larly  erect 

The  head  of  Augustus  is  very  beaiitifid,  and  iip)>ear8 
V)  be  that  of  a  meditative,  philosophic  man,  saddened 
with  the  sense  that  it  is  not  very  much  worth  while  to 
be  at  the  siunmit  of  hmnon  greatness  aft^r  all.  It  is 
a  sorrowfid  tiling  to  trace  the  decay  of  civilization 
through  this  series  of  busts,  and  to  observe  how  the 
artistic  skill,  so  requisite  at  first,  went  on  declining 
through  the  dreary  <lynasty  of  the  Cresars,  till  at 
length  the  master  of  the  world  could  not  get  bj»  head 
carved  in  better  style  than  the  figure-head  of  a  ship. 

In  tbe  next  room  there  were  better  statues  tha^  we 
had  yet  seen ;  but  in  the  last  room  of  the  range  we 
found  The  Dying  Gladiator,  of  which  I  had  already 
caught  a  glimpse  in  passing  by  the  open  door.  It  bad 
made  all  the  other  treasures  of  the  gallery  t^^dious  in 
my  eagerness  to  come  to  that.  I  do  not  believe  that 
so  much  pathos  is  wroxight  into  any  other  block  of 
stone.  Like  all  works  of  the  highest  excellence,  how- 
ever, it  makes  great  demands  upon  the  spectator.  He 
must  make  a  generous  gift  of  bis  sympathies  to  the 
Bcidptor,  and  help  out  his  skill  with  all  his  heart,  or 
else  he  will  see  little  more  than  a  skilfully  wrought 
surface.  It  suggests  Ear  more  than  it  shows.  I  looked 
long  at  this  statue,  and  little  at  anything  else,  thonght 
unong  other  famous  works,  a  statue  of  Antiuotis  wa( 
in  the  lumie  room. 


1868.] 


ITALY. 


^ 
I 


1  waa  glatl  when  we  left  the  Museum,  whicli,  Iiy  the 
by,  was  piercingly  chill,  a»  if  the  multitude  of  statues 
radiated  cold  out  of  their  marble  siibstance.  We 
might  have  gone  to  see  the  pictures  iu  the  Palace  ot 
the  Conservatori,  and  S ,  whose  receptivity  is  un- 
limited and  forever  fresh,  would  willingly  have  done 
Bo ;  but  I  objected,  and  we  went  towards  the  Forum. 
I  had  noticed,  two  or  three  times,  an  inscription  over 
a  mean-looking  door  in  this  ne!ghborhoo<I,  stating  that 
here  was  the  entrjince  to  the  prison  of  the  holy  Apos- 
tles Peter  and  Paul ;  and  we  soon  found  the  spot,  not 
far  from  the  Forum,  with  two  wretched  frescos  of  the 
apostles  above  the  inscription.  We  knocked  at  the 
door  without  effect ;  but  a  lame  be^ar,  who  sat  at 
another  door  of  the  same  house  (which  looked  exceed- 
ingly  like  a  liquor  shop),  desired  us  to  follow  him, 
and  began  to  ascend  to  the  Capitol,  by  the  causeway 
leading  from  the  Forum.  A  little  way  upward  we 
met  a  woman,  to  whom  the  beggar  delivered  us  over, 
and  she  led  us  into  a  church  or  chapel  door,  and 
pointed  to  a  long  flight  of  steps,  which  descended 
through  twilight  into  utter  darkness.  She  called  to 
somebody  in  the  lower  regions,  and  then  went  away, 
leaving  us  to  get  down  this  mysterious  staircase  by 
ourselves.  Down  we  went,  farther  and  farther  from 
the  daylight,  and  found  ourselves,  anon,  in  a  dark 
chamber  or  cell,  the  shape  or  boundaries  of  which  we 
oould  not  make  but,  though  it  seemed  to  be  of  stone, 
and  black  and  dungeon-like.  Indistinctly,  and  from 
a  still  farther  depth  in  the  earth,  we  heaj^  voices,  — • 
one  voice,  at  least,  —  apparently  not  addressing  our. 
selves,  but  some  other  persons ;  and  soon,  directly  be- 
neath our  feet,  we  saw  a  glimmering  of  light  througo 
a  rotmd)  iron-grated  hole  in  the  bottom  of  the  dun 


100  FRENCB  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [II 

geon.  In  a  few  moments  the  glimmer  an<)  the 
caiiie  up  through  this  hole,  and  the  light  ilLiappeii: 
and  it  and  the  voice  fame  gliiiunering  uiid  balibJ 
u[>  a  flight  of  atone  Btairs,  of  which  we  had  not  hith* 
erto  lieeu  aware.  It  was  the  ctistoile,  with  a.  party  o{ 
visitors,  to  whom  he  had  been  showing  St.  Peb^r's 
liungcoQ.  Ea<'h  visitor  was  provided  with  a  wax  ta- 
per, and  the  eustode  gave  one  to  each  of  us,  bidding 
ua  wait  a  moment  while  he  conducted  the  other  party 
to  the  upper  fur.  During  his  absence  we  examined 
the  cell,  as  well  as  our  dim  lighte  would  permit,  and 
aoon  found  an  indentation  in  the  wall,  with  an  iron 
grate  put  over  it  for  protection,  and  an  inscription 
above  informing  ub  that  the  Apostle  Peter  had  hero 
left  the  imprint  of  his  visage ;  and,  in  truth,  tlieri 
a  profile  there,  —  foreheu<l,  nose,  uiuuth.  and  ehiji,  — ■ 
plainly  to  be  seen,  an  intaglio  Ln  the  solid  rock, 
touched  it  with  the  tips  of  our  fingers,  as  well  s 
it  with  our  eyes. 

The  custode  soon  returned,  and  led  us  down  the 
darksome  steps,  chattering  in  Italian  all  the  time.  It 
i.t  not  a  very  long  descent  to  the  lower  cell,  the  roof, 
of  which  is  so  low  that  I  believe  I  could  liave  reacl 
it  with  my  hand.  We  were  now  in  the  deepest 
ugliest  part  of  the  old  Mamertine  Prison,  one  of  th»^ 
few  remains  of  the  kingly  period  of  Rome,  and  which 
served  the  Romans  a&  a  state  prison  for  hundreds  of 
years  before  the  Christian  era.  A  multitude  of  crim- 
inals or  innocent  persons,  no  doubt,  have  languished 
here  in  misery,  and  perished  in  darkness.  Here  Ju- 
gurtha  starved ;  here  Catiline's  a^lhercnb*  were  strao- 
gied  ;  and,  methinks,  there  cannot  be  in  the  world  au 
other  sueh  an  evil  den,  so  haunted  with  black  memo 
riea  and  indistinct  aurmisea  of  j;uilt  and  suffering.    la 


'bli»3H 
hith-^" 


the 
It 
roaf.^^_ 

'MM 


J 


18M.]  ITALY.  101 

old  Rome,  I  suppose,  the  citizens  never  spoke  of  this 
dnngeon  above  their  breath.  It  looks  just  as  bad  as 
it  is ;  round,  only  seven  paces  across,  yet  so  obscure 
tiiat  our  tapers  could  not  illuminate  it  from  side  to 
side,  —  the  stones  of  which  it  is  constructed  being  as 
Uack  as  midnight.  The  custode  showed  us  a  stone 
post,  at  the  side  of  the  cell,  with  the  hole  in  the  top  of 
it,  into  which,  he  said,  St.  Peter's  chain  had  been  fas- 
tened ;  and  he  uncovered  a  spring  of  water,  in  the 
middle  of  the  stone  floor,  which  he  told  us  had  mirac- 
ulously gushed  up  to  enable  the  saint  to  baptize  his 
jailer.  The  miracle  was  perhaps  the  more  easily 
wrought,  inasmuch  as  Jugurtha  had  found  the  floor  of 
the  dungeon  oozy  with  wet.  However,  it  is  best  to  be 
as  simple  and  childlike  as  we  can  in  these  matters ; 
and  whether  St.  Peter  stamped  his  visage  into  the 
stone,  and  wrought  this  other  miracle  or  no,  and 
whether  or  no  he  ever  was  in  the  prison  at  all,  still 
the  belief  of  a  thousand  years  and  more  gives  a  sort 
of  reality  and  substance  to  such  traditions.  The  cus- 
tode dipped  an  iron  ladle  into  the  miraculous  water, 
and  we  each  of  us  drank  a  sip ;  and,  what  is  very  re- 
markable, to  me  it  seemed  hard  water  and  almost 
brackish,  while  many  persons  think  it  the  sweetest  in 
Home.  I  suspect  that  St.  Peter  still  dabbles  in  this 
water,  and  tempers  its  qualities  according  to  the  faith 
of  those  who  drink  it. 

The  staircase  descending  into  the  lower  dungeon  is 
comparatively  modem,  there  having  been  no  entranco 
of  old,  except  through  the  small  circular  opening  in 
the  roof.  In  the  upper  cell  the  custode  showed  us  an 
ancient  flight  of  stairs,  now  built  into  the  wall,  which 
used  to  lead  from  the  Capitol.  The  whole  precincts 
ire  now  oonsecratedf  and  I  believe  the  upper  por 


102   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [181 

tion,  perhajts  both  upper  aiid  lower,  are  a  slirine  or 
chapel. 

I  now  left  S  in  the  Fonim,  aud  went  to  will 

Mr,  J.  P.  K at  the  H3tel  d'Eiirope,    I  found  him' 

juHt  returned  from  a  drive,  —  a  gentleman  of  about 
sixty,  or  more,  with  gray  hair,  a  pleaflant,  intellectual 
face,  and  penetrating,  but  not  unkindly  eyes.  He 
moved  infinniy,  being  on  the  recovery  from  an  illness, 
Wo  went  up  to  his  saloon  together,  and  had  a  talk,  — • 
or,  rather,  he  had  it  nearly  all  to  himself,  —  and  pa& 
ticularly  sensible  talk,  too,  and  full  of  the  results  tA 
learning  and  expenence.  In  the  first  place,  he  set' 
tied  the  whole  Kansas  difficiUty  ;  then  he  made  havoo 
of  St.  Peter,  who  came  very  shabbily  out  of  his  hands, 
as  regardi-d  his  early  character  in  the  Church,  aud  Ida 

claims  to  the  position  he  now  holds  in  it.     Mr.  K • 

also  gave  a  curious  illustratiou,  from  something  that 
happened  to  himself,  of  the  little  dependence  tliat  can 
be  placed  on  tradition  purporting  to  be  ancient,  aud  I 
capped  his  st«ry  by  telling  him  how  the  site  of  my 
town  pump,  so  plainly  indicated  in  the  sketch  itself, 
has  already  been  mistaken  in  tlie  city  cuiuicil  and  la 
the  public  prints. 

Februnry  24M.  —  Yestenlay  I  crossed  the  Poni 
Histo,  and  took  a  short  ramble  on  tlie  other  side  of  tl 
river ;  and  it  rather  surprised  me  to  discover,  \\ 
nearly  opposite  the  Capitoline  Hill,  a  quay,  at  wluch 
several  schooners  and  barks,  of  two  or  tliree  hundred 
tons'  burden,  were  moored.     There  was  also  a  steamer, 
«mied  with  a  large  gun  and  two  brass  swivels  on  her 
forecastle,  and   I  know   not   wliat  artillery   l>esi»li 
Probably  she  may  have  been  a  revcuue-cutti'r. 

fieturoing  1  crossed  the  river  by  way  of  tlia 


1 


,ch^^ 

ed 

er, 
ju  aer.^^_ 
esideSi^^^l 


■Ml.] 


108 


I 


of  St.  Bartholomew  over  two  briflg;es.  The  island  ia 
densely  covered  with  ImiliUngs,  anil  ia  a  separate  small 
fragment  of  the  eity.  It  was  a  tradition  of  the  ani'ient 
Romans  that  it  was  formed  by  the  aggregation  of  soil 
and  rubbish  brought  down  by  the  river,  and  at-cmnu- 
Iftting  round  the  nucleus  of  some  Buuken  baskets. 

Od  reaehiug  the  hitlier  side  of  the  river,  I  soon 
Btmek  upon  the  ruins  of  the  theatre  of  Marcellus, 
which  are  very  picturesque,  and  the  more  bo  from 
being  closely  linked  in,  indeed,  identified  with  the 
shops,  habitations,  and  swarming  life  of  modern  Rome. 
The  most  striking  portion  was  a  circular  ediUce,  wliich 
seemed  to  have  been  composed  of  a  row  of  Ionic  col- 
umns, standing  upon  a  lower  row  of  Doric,  many  of 
the  antique  pillara  being  yet  perfect;  but  the  inter- 
Teoing  arches  built  up  with  brickwork,  and  the  whole 
once  magnificent  structure  now  tenanted  by  poor  and 
squalid  people,  as  thick  as  mites  within  the  round  of 
aa  old  oheese.  From  this  point  I  cannot  very  clearly 
trace  out  my  course ;  but  I  passed,  1  tliink,  betwef  n 
the  Circus  Maximus  and  the  Palace  of  the  Caesars,  and 
Dear  the  Baths  of  Caracalla,  and  went  into  the  clois- 
ters of  the  Church  of  San  Gregorio.  All  along  I  saw 
massive  ruins,  not  particularly  picturesque  or  beauti- 
ful, but  huge,  mountainous  piles,  chiefly  of  brickwork, 
somewhat  weed-^rown  here  and  there,  but  of tener  bare 
and  dreary.  .  .  .  All  the  successive  ages  since  Kome 
begui  to  decay  have  done  their  best  to  ruin  the  very 
mins  by  tailing  away  the  marble  and  the  hewn  stjine 
for  their  own  structures,  and  leaving  only  the  inner 
filling  up  of  brickwork,  which  the  ancient  architects 
never  designed  to  be  seen.  The  consequence  of  all 
tins  is,  that,  except  for  the  lofty  and  poetical  associa- 
Mana  connected  with  it,  and  except,  too,  for  the  im> 


104    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [181 

menae  differeace  in  m^nitude,  a  Roman  min  may 
in  itself  not  more  picturesque  than  I  have  sei^n  an  old 
cellar,  with  a  shattered  brick  chimney  half  crumbling 
down  into  it.  in  New  England. 

By  thlit  time  I  knew  not  whither  I  was  going,  and^ 
turned  aside  from  a  broad,  paved  roiul  (it  was  thft> 
Appian  Way)  into  the  Via  Latina,  which  I  oupjwsed 
would  lead  to  one  of  the  city  gates.  It  wa«  a  lonely 
path:  on  my  right  hand  extensive  piles  of  ruin,  in 
strange  tthajieB  or  shapelessness,  built  of  the  broad  ao^ 
thin  old  Roman  bricks.  Much  as  may  be  traced  c 
where,  when  the  stucco  has  fallen  away  from  a 
em  Roman  house  ;  for  I  iinagino  there  has  not  l>een  % 
new  brielc  made  here  for  a  thousand  years.  On  my 
loft,  I  think,  was  a  liigh  wall,  and  before  me,  grazing  in 
the  ruatl  .  .  .  [the  buffalo  calf  of  the  "  Marble  Faun." 
—  Ed.].  The  road  went  boldly  on,  with  a  well-wom 
track  up  to  the  very  walls  of  the  city ;  but  there  it 
abruptly  terminated  at  an  ancient,  closed-up  gateway, 
From  a  notiee  posted  against  a  door,  which  appei 
to  be  the  entrance  to  the  ruins  on  my  left,  I  found 
that  these  were  the  remains  of  Columbaria,  where  tln' 
dead  used  t^  be  put  away  in  pigeon-holes.  Reachii^J 
the  paved  road  again,  I  kept  on  my  course,  passing, 
the  tomb  of  the  Scipios,  and  soon  came  to  the  gate  c^ 
San  Sebastiano,  through  which  I  entered  the  Com- 
pagna.  Indeed,  the  scene  around  was  so  rural,  thiit  I 
had  fancied  myself  already  beyond  the  walls.  As  tha 
afternoon  was  getting  advanced,  I  did  not  proceeil 
farther  towards  the  blue  hills  whieh  I  saw  in  the 
tanee,  but  turned  to  my  left,  following  a  road  that 
runs  round  the  exterior  of  the  city  wall.  It  was  very 
dreary  and  solitary,  —  not  a  house  on  the  whole  traek, 
with  the  broad  and  shaggy  Ciimpagna  on  one  side,  and 


anit^^B 
en  B^^^ 


lainB 
I  dic^H 

thak^H 

very 
raek, 
,and^^ 


I8B8.]  ITJL7.  105 

the  high,  bare  wall,  looking  down  over  my  head,  on 
the  other.  It  is  not,  any  niore  than  the  other  objects 
of  the  scene,  a  very  picturesque  wall,  but  is  little  mora 
than  a  brick  garden-fence  seen  through  a  magnifying- 
glass,  with  now  and  then  a  tower,  however,  and  fre- 
C|uent  buttresses,  to  keep  its  height  of  fifty  feet  from 
toppling  over.  The  top  was  ragged,  and  fringed  with 
a  few  weeds ;  there  had  been  embrasures  for  guns  and 
eyelet  holes  for  musketry,  but  these  were  plastered  up 
with  brick  or  stone.  I  passed  one  or  two  walled-up 
gateways  (by  the  by,  the  Porta  Latina  was  the  gatti 
through  which  Belisarius  first  entered  Rome),  and  one 
of  these  had  two  high,  round  towers,  and  looked  mora 
GotMc  and  venerable  with  antique  strength  than  any 
other  portion  of  the  wall.  Immediately  after  this  I 
came  to  the  gate  of  San  Giovanni,  just  within  which 
is  the  Basilica  of  St.  John  Lateran,  and  there  I  was 
glad  to  rest  myself  upon  a  bench  before  proceeding 
homeward. 

There  was  a  French  sentinel  at  this  gateway,  as  at 
nil  the  others ;  for  the  Gauls  have  always  been  a  pest 
to  Rome,  and  now  gall  her  worse  than  ever.  I  ob- 
served, too,  that  an  official,  in  citizen's  dress,  stood 
there  also,  and  api»eared  to  exercise  a  supervision  over 
some  carts  with  country  produce,  that  were  entering 
just  then. 

February  25tk.  —  We  went  this  forenoon  to  the 
Palazzo  Borghese,  which  is  situated  on  a  street  that 
runs  at  right  angles  with  the  Corso,  and  very  near  the 
latter.  Most  of  the  palaces  in  Rome,  and  the  Borghese 
among  them,  were  built  somewhere  alwut  the  sixteenth 
century ;  this  in  1590,  I  believe.  It  is  an  immense 
edifice  standing  round  the  four  sides  of  a  quadrangle ; 


106    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [I8«  ■ 

ttnil  though  the  suite  of  rooms  comprising  Uie  picture* 
gallery  foniw  an  almost  intenuinable  viata,  they  oo- 
I'upy  ouly  a  part  of  th(!  ground  floor  of  one  side,  Wa 
enter  from  the  street  into  a  large  court,  surrounded 
with  a  corridor,  the  arches  of  which  support  a  second 
scries  of  arches  above.  The  picture-rooms  open  from 
one  into  another,  and  have  many  points  of  magniti- 
cciice,  being  large  and  lofty,  with  vaulted  ceilings  and 
beautiful  frescos,  generally  of  mythological  subjects, 
in  the  flat  central  part  of  the  vault  The  cornices  are 
gilded  ;  the  deep  embrasures  of  the  windows  are  pan- 
eUed  with  wood-work ;  the  doorways  are  of  polished 
and  variegated  marble,  or  covered  with  a  composition 
as  hard,  and  seemingly  as  durable.  The  whole  has  a 
kind  of  splendid  shabbiness  thrown  over  it,  like  a  slight 
coating  of  rust ;  the  furniture,  at  least  the  damask 
chairs,  being  a  good  deal  worn,  though  there  are  marbld 
and  mos^c  tables,  which  may  serve  to  ailom  anothi 
palace  when  this  one  crumbles  away  with  age.  One^ 
Iieautiful  hall,  with  a  cciliug  more  richly  gilded  than 
the  rest,  is  panelled  all  round  with  large  looking- 
glasses,  on  which  are  painted  pictures,  both  landscapes 
and  human  iigure^,  in  oils  ;  so  that  the  effect  is  some- 
what as  if  you  saw  these  objects  represented  in  the 
mirrors.  These  glasses  must  be  of  old  date,  perhaps 
coeval  with  the  first  building  of  the  palace ;  for  they 
are  so  much  dimmed,  that  oue's  own  figure  appears  in< 
distinct  in  them,  and  more  difficult  to  be  traced  tlian 
the  pictures  which  cover  them  half  over.  It  was  very 
comfortless,  —  indeed,  1  suppose  nobody  ever  thought 
of  being  comfortable  there,  since  the  house  was  built, 
—  but  especially  uncomfortable  on  a  chill,  damp  day 
like  this.  My  fingers  were  quite  numb  before  I  got 
half-way  through  the  suite  of  apartments,  in  spite  of  ■ 


J 


tSiS.]  ITALr.  lOf 

bnuder  of  ohsrooal  which  was  amonldering  into  ashes 
in  two  or  three  of  the  rooms.  There  was  not,  so  far 
as  I  ranember,  a  single  fireplace  in  the  suite.  A  con- 
■idemble  nnmber  of  visitors  —  not  many,  however  — 
were  there ;  and  a  good  many  artists ;  and  three  or 
fonr  ladies  among  them  were  making  copies  of  the 
more  celebrated  pictures,  and  in  all  or  in  most  cases 
miswing  the  especial  points  that  made  their  celebrity 
and  value.  Hie  Prince  Borghese  certainly  demeans 
liimHftlf  like  a  kind  and  liberal  gentleman,  in  throwing 
open  this  invaluable  collection  to  the  public  to  see, 
and  for  artists  to  carry  away  with  them,  and  diffuse 
all  over  the  world,  so  far  as  tiieir  own  power  and  skill 
will  permit.  It  is  open  every  day  of  the  week,  except 
Saturday  and  Sunday,  without  any  irksome  restriction 
or  supervision;  and  the  fee,  which  custom  requires 
the  visitor  to  pay  to  the  custode,  has  the  good  effect 
of  making  us  feel  that  we  are  not  intruders,  nor  re- 
ceived in  an  exactly  eleemosynary  way.  The  thing 
oould  not  be  better  managed. 

The  collection  is  one  of  the  most  celebrated  in  the 
world,  and  contains  between  eight  and  nine  hundred 
pictures,  many  of  which  are  esteemed  masterpieces.  I 
think  I  was  not  in  a  frame  for  admiration  to^y,  nor 
could  achieve  that  free  and  generous  surrender  of 
myself  which  I  have  already  said  is  essential  to  the 
proper  estimate  of  anything  excellent.  Besides,  how 
is  it  possible  to  give  one's  soul,  or  any  considerable 
part  of  it,  to  a  single  picture,  seen  for  the  first  time, 
among  a  thousand  others,  all  of  which  set  forth  their 
own  claims  in  an  equally  good  light  ?  Furthermore, 
there  is  an  external  weariness,  and  sense  of  a  thou- 
sand-fold sameness  to  be  overcome,  before  we  can  boi 
gin  to  enjoy  a  gallery  of  the  old  Italian  mastera  .  •  • 


108    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOORS.  [18B8. 

I  remember  but  one  painter,  Fmncia,  who  seems  re- 
tily  to  have  a]>proa«heii  this  awful  chuts  of  subjecta 
(Christa  aud  Madonnas)  in  a  fitting  spirit ;  his  pi(V 
turea  are  very  singular  and  awkward,  if  yon  look  at 
them  with  merely  an  external  eye,  but  they  are  full 
of  the  beauty  of  holiness,  and  evidently  wrought  out 
as  acts  of  devotion,  with  the  deepest  sincerity ;  and 
are  veritable  prayers  upon  canvas.  .  .  . 

I  waa  glad,  in  the  very  last  of  the  twelve  rooms,  to 
come  upon  some  Dutch  and  Flemish  pictures,  very 
few,  but  very  welcome  ;  Rul>ena,  Rembrandt,  Van- 
dyke, Paul  Potter,  Tenicrs,  and  others,  — men  of  flesh 
and  blood  and  warm  fists,  and  human  hearts.  As 
compared  with  them,  these  mighty  Italian  masters 
seem  men  of  ]>oliahed  steel ',  not  human,  nor  address- 
ing themselves  so  much  to  human  sympathies  as  to  a 
formed,  Intellectual  taste. 

March  Ist. — Tonlay  began  very  imfavorably ;  but 
we  ventured  out  at  about  eleven  o'clock,  intending  to 
visit  the  gallery  of  the  Colonna  Palace.  Finding  it 
dosed,  however,  on  account  of  the  illness  of  the  eus- 
tode,  we  determined  to  go  to  the  picture-gallery  of  the 
Capitol ;  and,  on  onr  way  thither,  we  stepped  into  St. 
Gesil,  the  grand  and  rich  church  of  the  Jesuits,  where 
we  found  a  priest  in  white,  preaching  a  sermon,  with 
vast  earnestness  of  action  and  variety  of  tones,  inso- 
much that  I  fancied  sometimes  that  two  priests  were 
in  the  agony  of  sermonizing  at  once.  He  had  a  pretty 
large  and  seemingly  attentive  audience  clustered  round 
him  from  the  entrance  of  the  church,  half-way  down 
the  nave ;  while  in  the  chapels  of  the  transepts  and 
in  the  remoter  distances  were  persona  occupied  with 
their  own   individual  devotion.     We   sat  down  ueai 


tlM  t3mfA  ti  St.  i^oMBo,  whidi  i 
pietoz*  orcr  Ae  altar,  and  wiA  : 
if  ^  l^nitr  akft,  ami  at  a^ab  ftottenag  at  I 
■do.  Wbak  I  pvtKolnlf  aotad  (Eor  ^  m«^ 
vem  aot  Tef?-  real  peranaagea,  betng  netdMf  carlUj' 
nor  calijtial)  was  tbe  gicM  baU  of  b^iia  hnli,  tba 
iaggat  in  tbe  vxkU,  at  the  tmt  of  die  Fast  Psraoa 
ia  tbe  TrimtT.  TW  I'httfrli  ta  ft  ih4m>iM  <mw\  lined 
with  a  great  nmetj-  of  p»aeioa»  BuarfalaB,  .  .  .  bat 
parthr,  perhaps,  owh^  to  the  Aaakj  B^it,  as  well  aa 
to  tile  want  of  dcBaHneaa,  tlwce  was  a  dingy  «ff«rt 
t^OD  tim  whole.  We  made  but  a  voy  afaoK  star,  ow 
]}«« "F"g*»™l  breeding  aMaing  ns  to  feel  sbj  of  nwT* 
btg  fl^ftf  the  cfaoich  in  eermoo  tiiaa. 

It  mined  when  we  reached  the  CaptoL,  and,  as  tbe 
mnseom  was  not  T«t  open,  we  went  tutu  tbt*  PkUve 
of  tbe  Conaervators,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  piam. 
Aronnd  the  inner  eourt  of  the  gnHind  floor,  parti/ 
wider  two  opposite  arcades,  and  partly  under  the 
sky,  aie  sereral  statues  and  other  anoient  sonlptarea; 
among  them  a  statue  of  Julius  C»sar,  s^d  to  be  tbe 
only  aatbentio  one,  aud  certainly  giving  an  impre^ 
^on  of  him  more  in  accordance  with  Ida  chanu'ter 
than  the  withered  old  face  in  the  museum ;  also,  a 
statue  of  Augustus  in  middle  age,  still  retaining  a  re- 
Bemblance  to  the  bust  of  him  in  youth  ;  some  gigantic 
heads  and  hands  and  feet  in  marble  and  bronze ;  a 
stone  lion  and  horse,  which  lay  long  at  the  bottom  of 
a  river,  broken  and  corroded,  and  were  repaired  by 
Michel  Augelo ;  and  other  things  which  it  \ 
nsome  to  set  don-n.  M'e  inquired  of  two  or  three 
French  soldiers  the  way  into  the  piotii re-gallery  ;  but 
I  it  ia  our  experieuL^  that  Freni-h  soldiers  in  Rome 
[sever  know  anything   of  what  is   around  them,  not 


^ 


110   FRBXCII  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [IM 

Bven  the  name  of  the  palace  or  piihlic  pla<>c 
whiph  they  ntauJ  guanl ;  ami  tlioiigh  invariably  oiviU 
you  might  &s  well  put  a  ijuestion  to  a  statue  of 
(ilil  Roman  a^  to  one  of  them.  While 
der  the  loggia,  however,  looking  at  the  rain  plashing 
into  tlie  court,  a  solilier  of  the  Paftal  Quard  kindly 
directed  us  up  the  stairease,  and  even  took  pains  to 
go  with  n«  to  the  very  entrance  of  the  pieture-rooma. 
Thank  Heaven,  there  are  but  two  of  them,  and  not 
many  piotures  which  ono  cares  to  look  at  veiy  long. 

Italian  galleries  are  at  a  disadvauta^  as  compared 
with  English  ones,  inasmuch  as  the  pictures  are  not 
nearly  such  splendid  articles  of  upholstery ;  thou^i, 
very  likely,  liaving  undergone  less  cleaning  and 
nishing,  they  may  retain  more  perfectly  the  fini 
touches  of  the  masters.  Nevertheless,  I  miss  tho  mel- 
low glow,  the  rich  and  mild  external  lustre,  and  even 
the  brilliant  frames  of  tlic  pictures  I  have  seen  in 
England.  You  feel  that  they  have  had  loving  caro 
taken  of  them ;  even  if  spoiled,  it  is  because  they 
have  been  valued  so  much.  But  these  pictures  in 
Italian  galleries  look  rusty  and  lustreless,  as  far  aa 
the  exterior  is  concerned ;  and,  really,  the  splendor 
of  the  painting,  as  a  production  of  intellect  and  feel- 
ing, has  a  good  deal  of  difKculty  in  shining  throi 
Buch  clouds. 

There  Ls  a  picture  at  the  Capitol,  The  Kapo  of 
ropa,  by  Paul  Veronese,  that  would  glow  with  woi 
derful  brilliancy  if  it  were  set  in  a  magnificent  frame, 
and  covered  with  a  sunshine  of  varnish ;  and  it  is  a 
kind  of  picture  that  would  not  be  desccrate<l,  as  some 
ileeper  and  holier  ones  might  Iw,  by  any  sjilendor  of 
fxtemal  a<lomment  that  could  l>e  bestowed  on  it.  It 
is  deplorable  and  disheartening  to  see  it  in  faded  and 


mnl.  I 


teel- 


1 


1S«80  ITALY.  Ill 

shabby  pligbt*  — this  joyous,  exuberant,  warm,  volupt- 
uous work.  There  is  the  head  of  a  cow,  thrust  into 
the  picture,  and  staring  with  wild,  ludicrous  wonder 
at  the  godlike  bull,  so  as  to  introduce  quite  a  new 
sentiment. 

Here,  and  at  the  Borghese  Palace,  there  were  some 
pictures  by  Grarofalo,  an  artist  of  whom  I  never  heard 
before,  but  who  seemed  to  have  been  a  man  of  power. 
A  picture  by  Marie  Sublegras  —  a  miniature  copy 
from  one  by  her  husband,  of  the  woman  anointing 
the  feet  of  Christ  —  is  most  delicately  and  beautifully 
finished,  and  would  be  an  ornament  to  a  drawing- 
room  ;  a  thing  that  could  not  truly  be  said  of  one  in 
a  hundred  of  these  grim  masterpieces.  When  they 
were  painted  life  was  not  what  it  is  now,  and  the  ar- 
tists had  not  the  same  ends  in  view.  ...  It  depresses 
the  spirits  to  go  from  picture  to  picture,  leaving  a  por- 
tion of  your  vital  sympathy  at  every  one,  so  that  yon 
come,  with  a  kind  of  half-torpid  desperation,  to  the 
end.  On  our  way  down  the  staircase  we  saw  several 
noteworthy  bas-reliefs,  and  among  them  a  veiy  ancient 
one  of  Curtius  plunging  on  horseback  into  the  chasm 
in  the  Forum.  It  seems  to  me,  however,  that  old 
sculpture  affects  the  spirits  even  more  dolefully  than 
old  painting ;  it  strikes  colder  to  the  heart,  and  lies 
heavier  upon  it,  being  marble,  than  if  it  were  merely 
canvas. 

My  wife  went  to  revisit  the  museum,  which  we  had 
already  seen,  on  the  other  side  of  the  piazza ;  but, 
being  cold,  I  left  her  there,  and  went  out  to  ramble 
in  the  sun ;  for  it  was  now  brightly,  though  fitfully, 
shining  again.  I  walked  through  the  Forum  (where 
a  thorn  thrust  itself  out  and  tore  the  sleeve  of  my 
talma),  and  under  the  Arch  of  Titus,  towards  the 


112    FRENCff  AND  ITAUAlf  NOTE-BOOKS.   [IM 

Coliseum.  About  a.  floore  of  French  drummers  wer«< 
beatiug  a  loug,  loud  roll-call,  at  the  base  of  the  Coli- 
eeum  and  under  its  arches  ;  and  a  score  of  trumpeters 
respouded  to  these,  from  the  rising  grouad  opjiosite 
the  Arch  of  Constantinu ;  and  the  echoes  of  the  old 
Roman  ruins,  espeeially  those  of  the  Palnee  of  the 
Cwsara,  responded  to  thU  martial  uproar  of  the  barba- 
rians. There  seemed  to  be  no  cause  for  it ;  but  the 
drummers  beat,  and  the  trumpeters  blew,  as  long  as  I 
was  witliin  hearing. 

I  walked  along  the  Appian  Way  as  far  as  the 
Baths  of  Caracalla.  The  Palace  of  the  Cssars,  which 
I  have  never  yet  explored,  appears  to  bo  vrowned  by 
the  walls  of  a  convent,  built,  no  doubt,  out  of  some 
the  fragments  that  would  suffice  to  build  a  city 
I  think  there  is  another  convent  among  the  baths.' 
The  Catholies  have  taken  a  peculiar  pleasure  in  plant- 
ing themselves  in  the  very  citadels  of  paganism, 
whether  temples  or  palaces.  There  has  been  a  good 
deal  of  enjoyment  in  the  destruction  of  old  Rome.  I 
often  think  so  when  I  see  the  elaborate  pains  that 
have  been  taken  to  smatth  and  demolish  some  beauti- 
ful column,  for  no  purpose  whatever,  except  the  mere 
delight  of  annihilating  a  noble  piece  of  work.  There 
is  something  in  the  impulse  with  which  one  symp^- 
Uuzes ;  though  I  am  afraid  the  destroyers  were  not 
sufficiently  aware  of  the  mischief  they  did  to  enjoy 
it  fully.  Probably,  too,  the  early  Christians  were  im- 
pelled by  religious  zeal  to  destroy  the  pagan  temples, 
before  the  happy  thought  occurred  of  convei-ting  them 
mto  churches. 


"ail 


March  3(/.  —  This  morning  was  U 's  birthdaj^ 

Bod  we  celebrated  it  by  taking  a  barouche,  and  drii 


1 


fo**' 


h>  «ff  Ocffia  Miwfc      IW  ife  ^  I 


Oe  moKf  of  iW  nstfe  rauHttd  «ilk  iL  TV  bN^ 
«a-.  tko^  mil  k%^  ^  rtalmvIL  shvnd  lev  cc  ■» 
iJiawtwal  fintu»«f  brtBHt.  bei^  ImOIL  I  tUiik. 
prnKqaDr  (rf  liij^i  bricks^  ^mJ  not  to  t«  c«^«n<l  to 
Ea^ik  inw  w  a  beatfifid  or  TCMnihfe  obJKt. 

A  fittk  nj  be^wd  C«aln  MebJk's  tmb.  Oe 
nad  sdD  sfacws  &  *yiof  of  dt»  ■fkal  Rovna 
y»M<jU.  conpoecd  «rf  brmaL  Sat  fl^slMtes^a  j^oad 
deal  cracfad  and  worn,  ban  suNrnd  omni;^  piwliaUT, 
toootlaR  the  little  mbes  wioeb  make  Ae  otberpua^ 
tions  ^  ibe  road  so  imcoiBfbnabfe.  We  tamed  back 
htMB  tfan  point,  and  soob  recatend  tbe  gato  of  St. 
PrhanlTiii  «bicb  is  flanked  br  two  saall  towrss,  and 
jost  viibin  vUck  is  tbe  oid  trianpbal  arck  of  Dnevs, 
— a  stardj  ranstraction.  mndi  dila{adated  as  regards 
its  architBrtiiral  bcaoty.  bat  mtdewd  br  morv  fit- 
toresqae  than  it  eoold  haT«  been  in  its  best  dav^  hr  a 
Bown  of  TCrdnreon  ita  head.     Ptobabfyso  muAof 


114    FRENCH  AND  J  TALI  AN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [ 

the  (lust  of  the  highway  has  risen  in  douda  and  sett 
there,  that  Bufficient  soil  fur  shrubbery  bi  root  ItMslf 
has  thus  been  collected,  by  email  annual  ootitributions, 
in  the  course  of  two  thouaand  years,  A  little  fartlier 
towards  the  city  we  turned  aaiile  from  the  Ajipian 
Way,  and  pame  to  tlie  site  of  some  ancient  Coluiu- 
haria,  dose  by  what  seemed  t^i  )iartake  of  the  charac- 
ter of  a  villa  and  a  fami-boiue.  A  man  CJime  out  of 
the  house  and  unlocked  a  door  in  a  low  building  ap- 
parently quite  luodem ;  but  on  entering  wo  found  our- 
selves looking  into  a  large,  square  chamber,  sunk  en- 
tirely beneath  the  surface  of  the  grouuil.  A  very 
narrow  and  steep  staircase  of  stone,  and  evidently  an* 
cient,  descended  into  this  chamber ;  and,  going  down, 
we  found  the  walls  hollowed  on  all  sides  into  little 
aemicircular  niehes,  of  which,  I  believe,  there  were 
nine  rows,  one  above  another,  and  nine  niches  in  each 
row.  Thus  they  looked  somewhat  like  the  Utth 
trances  to  a  pigeon-lumae,  ami  hence  the  name  of  Co* 
lumbarium.  Each  seiniciriHilar  niche  was  about 
foot  in  its  semidiameter.  In  the  centre  of  this  sub) 
ranean  chamber  was  a  solid  square  column,  or  pier, 
rising  to  the  roof,  and  containing  other  niches  of  tho 
same  pattern,  besides  one  that  wa«  iiigh  and  deep,  ris- 
ing to  tlie  height  of  a  man  from  the  floor  on  each  of 
the  four  sides.  In  every  one  of  tlie  semicin-idar  niches 
were  two  round  holes  eovere<l  with  an  earthen  plate, 
and  in  each  hole  were  ashes  and  little  fragments  of 
bones,  —  the  ashes  and  bonea  of  the  dead,  whose  names 
were  inscribed  in  Koman  capitals  on  marble  slabs  in- 
laid into  the  wall  over  each  individual  niche.  Very 
likely  the  great  ones  in  the  central  pier  had  conbuned 
fltatues,  or  busts,  or  large  urns ;  indeed,  I  remember 
that  some  such  things  were  there,  as  well  as  bas-reliefi 


iiiuaa    ,     I 


I 
I 


)858.] 


no 


in  the  walls  ;  but  hardly  more  than  the  general  aspect 
of  tlita  strange  ylacv  renmiuH  In  my  mind.  It  was  the 
Columbarium  of  the  eoonectiona  or  dependants  of  the 
Ciesars ;  and  the  impression  left  on  me  was,  that  this 
mode  of  disposing  of  the  deml  was  infinitely  prefer- 
able to  any  which  has  been  adopted  since  that  day. 
The  handful  or  two  of  dry  dust  and  bits  of  dry  bones 
in  each  of  the  small  round  holes  had  nothing  disgust- 
ing in  them,  and  they  are  no  drier  now  than  they  were 
when  first  deposited  there.  I  would  rather  have  my 
ashes  scattered  over  the  soil  to  help  the  growth  of  the 
grass  and  daisies  ;  but  still  I  should  not  murmur  much 
at  having  them  decently  pigeon  -  holed  ju  a  Koman 
tomb. 

After  ascending  out  of  this  chamber  of  the  dead,  wo 
looked  down  into  another  similar  one,  containing  the 
ashes  of  Pompey's  household,  which  was  discovered 
only  a  verj-  few  years  ago.  Its  arrangement  was  the 
same  as  that  first  described,  except  that  it  had  no  cen- 
tral pier  with  a  passage  round  it,  as  the  former  had. 

While  we  were  down  in  the  first  chamber  the  pro- 
prietor  of  the  spot — a  half-gentlemanly  and  veiy  afiEa- 
ble  kind  of  person  —  came  to  us,  and  explained  die 
arrangements  of  the  Columbarium,  though,  indeed  we 
understood  them  better  by  their  own  aspect  than  by 
his  explanation.  The  whole  soil  around  his  dwelling 
is  elevated  niuch  above  the  level  of  the  road,  and  it  is 
probable  that,  if  he  chose  to  excavate,  he  might  bring 
to  light  many  more  sepulchral  chambers,  and  find  his 
profits  in  them  too.  by  disposing  of  the  urns  and  busts. 
What  struck  me  as  much  as  anvthing  was  the  neat- 
ness of  these  subterranean  apartments,  wliich  were 
quite  as  fit  to  sleep  in  as  most  of  those  occupied  by 
living  Romans ;  and,  having  undergone  no  wear  and 


IIG    F/lENCJl  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [181 

tear,  they  were  in  aa  good  condition  as  on  the  day  th^ 
were  built. 

In  tins  Col um barium,  measuring  about  twenty  f( 
Hqiiare,  I  roughly  estimate  that  there  have  been  ilepott- 
it«(l  together  the  remains  of  at  least  seven  or  eight 
hundred  persons,  reekoning  two  little  heaps  of  bones 
and  aahes  in  each  ]>igeon-bole,  nine  pigeon-holes  ia 
each  row,  and  nine  rows  on  each  side,  besides  thosi 
the  middle  pier.     All  difficulty  ui  finding  spuue 
the  dead  would  be  obviated  by  returning  to  the  ancient 
fashion  of  reducing  tJiem  to  ashes,  —  the  only  objec- 
tion, though  a  very  serious  one,  being  the  quantity  of 
fuel  that  it  would  retiiure.     But  perliaps  future  chem- 
ists may  discover  some  better  means  of  consuming  at' 
dissolving  this  troublesome  mortality  of  oi 

We  got  into  tlie  carriage  again,  and,  driving  farther 
towards  the  city,  came  to  the  tomb  of  the  Scipios,  of 
the  exterior  of  whicli  I  retain  no  very  definite  idea. 
It  was  close  upon  the  Appiau  Way,  however,  though 
separated  from  it  by  a  high  fence,  and  accessible 
through  a  gateway,  leading  into  a  court.  1  think  the 
tomb  is  wholly  subterranean,  and  that  the  ground 
above  it  is  covered  with  the  buildings  of  a  farm-house ; 
but  of  this  I  cannot  be  certain,  as  we  were  led  imme- 
diately into  a  dark,  underground  passage,  by  an  elderly 
peasant,  of  a  cheerful  and  affable  demeanor, 
as  he  had  brought  us  into  the  twilight  of  the  tomi 
lie  lighted  a  long  wax  tajKsr  for  eJich  of  us,  and  led' 
us  groping  into  blacker  and  blacker  darkness.     Even 

little  R followed  courageously  in  tJie  procession, 

which  looked  very  picturesque,  as  we  glanced  bact 
ward  or  forward,  and  beheld  a  twinkling  line  of 
fights,  glimmering  faintly  on  our  faces,  and  showii 
votliing  beyond.    The  passages  and  niches  of  the  toi 


m 


I  1«I'^^ 


IS».] 


fTAir. 


m 


I 


I 


aeem  to  have  been  bewn  and  hollov-pd  ont  of  the  rock, 
not  bnilt  by  any  art  of  luaiionrY  ;  but  the  walls  wero 
very  dark,  almost  blat.>k,  sod  our  tapers  so  dim  tliat  I 
coald  not  gain  a  sufficient  breadth  of  view  to  asoertain 
what  kind  of  plaoe  it  was.  It  was  ven-  dark,  indeed ; 
the  Mammoth  Cave  of  Kentucky  could  not  be  darker. 
The  rou^-hewn  roof  was  within  touch,  and  sometimes 
we  had  to  stoop,  to  avoid  hitting  our  heads ;  it  wu 
eorered  wiUi  damps,  which  collected  and  fell  upon  os 
in  occa^onal  drops.  The  passages,  besides  being  nar- 
row, were  so  irregular  and  crooked,  that,  after  going 
a  little  way,  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  return 
Dpon  oar  steps  without  the  help  of  the  guide  :  and  we 
«|^>eared  to  be  taking  quite  an  extensive  ramble  un- 
derground, though  in  reality  I  suppose  the  tomb  in< 
clndes  no  great  space.  At  several  turns  of  our  dismal 
way,  the  guide  pointed  to  inscriptions  in  Roman  capi- 
tak,  commemorating  various  members  of  the  Seipto 
faunily  who  were  buried  here  ;  among  them,  a  son  of 
Scipio  Afrioanus,  who  himself  bad  his  death  and  bur- 
ial in  a  foreign  land.  All  these  inscriptions,  however, 
are  copies,  —  the  originals,  which  were  really  found 
here,  having  been  removed  to  the  Vatican.  Whether 
any  bones  and  ashes  have  been  left,  or  whether  any 
wer«  found,  I  do  not  know.  It  is  not,  at  all  events, 
a  particolarly  interesting  spot,  being  such  shapeless 
blackness,  and  a  mere  dark  hole,  requiring  a  stronger 
illumiDation  than  that  of  our  tapers  to  distinguish  it 
from  any  other  cellar.  I  did,  at  one  place,  see  a  sort 
of  fneze,  rather  roughly  sculptured  ;  and,  as  we  re- 
tamed  towaiits  the  twilight  of  tlie  entrance-pass^e,  I 
discerned  a  large  spider,  who  fled  hastily  away  from 
ear  tapers — the  solitary  living  inhabitant  of  the  tomb 
•I  theScipios. 


118  FRENCH  AND   iTM.IAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [igfiS^ 

One  visit  that  we  ina<le,  and  I  think  it  was  befot 
entering  the  city  gates,  I  forgot  to  mt^ntiuu.  U 
to  an  old  edifice,  formerly  called  tlie  Temple  of  1 
chua,  but  now  supposed  to  have  been  the  Teniplo  ol 
Virtue  and  Honor,  The  interior  consists  of  a  vaulted 
hall,  which  was  converted  from  it«  pagan  consecration 
into  a  church  or  chapel,  by  the  early  Christians ;  t 
tlie  ancient  marble  pillars  of  the  teniplo  may  still 
seen,  built  in  with  the  brick  and  stucco  of  the  lal 
oci^ui>anta.  There  is  an  altar,  and  other  tokens  of 
Cathoho  church,  and,  high  towards  the  ceiling,  thei 
are  some  fresoos  of  saints  or  angels,  very  curioi 
specimens  of  niedia;yal,  and  earlier  than  mediffival  art. 
Nevertheless,  tlie  place  impressed  me  as  still  nither 
pagan  than  Christian,  What  is  moat  remarkable 
about  this  spot  or  this  vicinity  lies  in  the  fact  that 
the  Fountain  of  Kgeria  was  formerly  supposed  to  be 
clone  at  hand  ;  indeed,  the  cuntode  of  the  chai>el  still 
claims  the  spot  as  the  identical  one  consecrated  by  the 
legend.  There  is  a  dark  grove  of  trees,  not  far  from 
the  door  of  the  temple ;  but  Murray,  a  highly  essen- 
tial nuisance  on  such  excursions  as  this,  throws  sudi 
overwhelming  doubt,  or  rather  incredulity,  upon 
site,  that  I  aeized  upon  it  as  a  pretext  for  not 
thither.  In  fact,  my  small  capacity  for  sight-seeii 
was  already  more  than  satisfied. 

On  account  of I  am  sorry  that  we  did  not 

the  grotto,  for  her  enthusiasm  is  as  fresh  as  the  watei 
of  Egeria'a  well  can  be.  and  she  has  poetical  fail 
enough  to  light  her  cheerfully  through  all  these  mil 
of  incredulity. 

Our  visits  to  sepulchral  places  ended  with  Seipif 
tomb,  whence  we  returned  to  our  dwelling,  and  M' 
M— —  came  to  dine  with  us. 


ted 

ion  I 

i 


Mmrtk  lOO.— Ob  Saterdsf  Int.  a  vety  nisT  day, 

«e  «eM  to  Ae  Saam  Pkhee.  and  took  U ^  whh 

aa.  h  ■•  OB  the  Cotats  bcbiI;  oppaata  to  &r  Ptaaa 
ColgBBB.  It  bas  I^Haavsa  be  pv^aed! )  bat  four  rootBS 
of  piatuiea,  aaMOg  1rinel^  hoarefet.  ara  scTetml  tmt 
geMaalul  aam.  Oalj  a  lew  vt  dwae  remaia  in  my 
iBtiawT,  —  R^tkael's  Vkdta  Player,  vrhich  I  ana  will- 
ing  to  aoeept  as  a  ^ooA  picture;  and  L(«oaanlo  da 
TuKs's  Vaahj  and  Modesty,  wUch  also  I  cao  bnag 
vp  beCtne  mj  mind's  eye,  and  find  it  very  beantifuli, 
aldmogfa  oae  o(  the  boss  haa  an  affaoted  aidle,  iriuolt 
I  have  since  seen  en  another  pietiin  by  the  aatne  ar- 
tul,  Joanna  of  Anagon.  The  most  striking  pietura 
in  the  collection.  I  thlnlc.  is  Titian's  Bella  Dmina,— 
tbe  ouly  one  of  Titian's  works  that  I  baTe  yet  smb 
whieb  makes  an  impression  on  ni«  cnrresponding  with 
Iiis  fame.  It  is  a  very  splendid  anil  very  scomfnl 
lady,  as  beautiftd  and  as  scornful  as  Gainstmnmgfa's 
Lady  Lyndoch.  though  of  an  entirely  different  type. 
There  were  two  Madonnas  liy  Guido,  of  whieb  I  liked 
the  least  celebrated  one  l>i«t :  and  several  pictures  by 
Gantfalo,  who  always  produces  sonietliin|;  noteworthy. 
All  tbe  pictures  lacked  the  charm  (no  doubt  I  am  a 
barbarian  to  think  it  one)  of  being  in  brilliant  frames, 
and  looked  as  if  it  were  a  long,  long  while  since  tbey 
were  cleaned  or  varnished.  The  light  was  so  scanty, 
too.  on  that  heavily  clouded  day,  and  in  those  gloomy 
old  rooms  of  the  palace,  that  scarcely  anything  could 
be  fairly  made  out. 

P  cannot  refrain  from  observing  here,  that  Mr, 
Hawtliome's  inexorable  demand  for  perfet'tion  in  all 
things  lends  him  to  compl:iin  of  grimy  pictures  and 
tarnished  frames  aud  fade<l  frescos,  distressing  beyond 
measure  to  eyes  that  never  failed  to  see  everything 


120  FRENCH  AND  tTAUAH  SOTE-BOOKS.    [186& 

before  him  with  the  keenest  apprehension.  The  usual 
careless  obaerration  of  people  both  of  the  good  and 
the  imperfect  is  much  more  comfortable  in  this  impeiv 
feet  world.  But  the  insight  which  Mr.  Hawthorne 
posaesaed  waa  only  equalled  by  his  outsig^t,  and  be 
■offered,  in  a  way  not  to  be  readily  conceived,  from 
any  failnre  in  beauty,  physical,  moral,  or  intellectual. 
It  is  not,  therefore,  mere  love  of  upholstery  tJiat  im- 
pels him  to  ask  for  perfect  settings  to  priceless  gems 
of  art ;  but  a  native  idiosyncrasy,  which  always  made 
me  feel  that  "the  New  Jerusalem,"  "even  like  a  jas- 
per stone,  clear  as  crystal,"  "  where  shall  in  no  wise 
enter  anything  that  deflleth,  neither  what  worketh 
abomination  nor  maketh  a  lie,"  would  alone  satisfy 
him,  or  rather  alone  not  give  him  actual  pain.  It 
may  give  an  idea  of  this  exquisite  nicety  of  feeling  to 
mention,  that  one  day  he  took  in  bu  fingers  a  half- 
bloomed  rose,  without  blemish,  and,  smiling  with  an 
infinite  joy,  remarked,  "  This  is  perfect.  On  earth  a 
flower  only  can  be  perfect."  —  Ed.] 

The  palaoe  is  about  two  hundred  and  fifty  years 
old,  and  looks  as  if  it  had  never  been  a  very  cheerful 
place ;  most  shabbily  and  scantily  furnished,  moreover, 
and  as  chill  as  any  cellar.  There  is  a  small  balcony, 
looking  down  on  die  Corso,  which  probably  has  often 
been  filled  with  a  merry  little  family  puly,  in  the 
carnivals  of  days  long  past  It  has  faded  frescos,  and 
tarnished  gilding,  and  green  blinds,  and  a  few  damask 
chairs  still  remain  in  it. 

On  Monday  we  all  went  to  the  sculpture^^ery  of 
the  Vatican,  and  saw  as  much  of  the  sculpture  as  we 
could  in  the  three  hours  during  which  the  public  are 
admissible.  There  were  a  few  things  which  I  really 
enjoyed,  and  a  few  momenta  during  which  I  reallj 


IT  ALT. 


121 


! 


seemed  to  see  them ;  but  it  ia  in  vain  to  attempt  giv^ 
ing  the  impression  produced  by  mast«rpiei-«H  of  ait, 
and  moat  in  vain  when  we  see  them  best.  They  are 
a  language  in  themselveB,  and  if  they  could  be  ex- 
pressed as  well  any  way  except  by  themselves,  there 
would  have  been  no  need  of  expressing  those  partio- 
olar  ideas  and  sentiments  by  sculpture.  I  saw  the 
Apollo  Belvidere  as  something  ethereal  and  godlike ; 
only  for  a  flitting  moment,  however,  and  as  if  be  had 
alighted  from  heaven,  or  shone  suddenly  out  of  the 
sunlight,  and  then  had  withdrawn  himself  again.  I 
felt  the  Laoeoon  very  powerfully,  though  very  quietly; 
an  immortal  agony,  with  a  strange  calmness  diHused 
through  it,  so  that  it  resembles  the  vast  rage  of  the 
sea,  calm  on  account  of  its  immensity ;  or  the  tumult 
of  Niagara,  which  does  not  seem  to  be  tumult,  because 
it  keeps  pouring  on  forever  and  ever.  I  have  not  had 
so  good  a  day  as  this  (among  works  of  art)  since  we 
came  to  Rome;  and  I  impute  it  partly  to  the  magnif- 
icence of  the  arrangements  of  the  Vatican,  —  its  long 
vistas  and  beautiful  courts,  and  the  aspect  of  immor- 
tality which  marble  statuea  acquire  by  being  kept  free 
from  dust.  A  very  hungry  boy,  seeing  in  one  of  the 
cabinets  a  vast  porphyry  vase,  forty  -  four  feet  in  cir- 
cumference, wished  that  he  had  it  full  of  soup. 

Yesterday,  we  went  to  the  Pamfili  Doria  Palace, 
vhicb,  I  believe,  is  the  most  splendid  in  Rome.  The 
entrance  is  from  the  Corso  into  a  court,  siuroonded 
by  a  colonnade,  and  having  a  space  of  luxuriant  ver- 
dure and  ornamental  shrubbery  in  the  centre.  The 
apartments  containing  pictures  and  sculptures  are  fit- 
teen  in  number,  and  run  quite  round  the  court  in  the 
first  piano.  —  all  the  rooms,  halls,  and  galleries  of 
beautiful  proportion,  with  vaulted  roofs,  some  of  which 


122  FRESCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185a 

glow  with  frescos ;  and  all  are  colder  and  more  coro- 
fortlesB  than  can  possibly  be  imagined  without  having 
been  in  them.  The  pictures,  most  of  them,  interested 
me  very  little.  I  am  of  opinion  that  good  pictures 
are  quite  as  rare  aa  good  poets  ;  and  I  do  not  see  why 
we  should  pique  ourselves  on  admiring  any  but  the 
very  best.  One  in  a  thousand,  perhaps,  ought  to  live 
in  the  applause  of  men,  from  generation  to  generation, 
till  its  colors  fade  or  blacken  out  of  sight,  and  its  can* 
VBS  rots  away ;  the  rest  should  be  put  in  ganets,  or 
painted  over  by  newer  artists,  just  as  tolerable  poets 
are  shelved  when  their  little  day  is  over.  Neverthe- 
less, there  was  one  long  gallery  contiuning  many  pic- 
tures that  I  should  be  glad  to  see  again  under  more 
favorable  circumstances,  that  is,  separately,  and  where 
I  might  contemplate  them  quite  undisturbed,  reclin- 
ing in  an  easy-chair.  At  one  end  of  the  long  vista  of 
this  gallery  is  a  bust  of  the  present  Prince  Doria,  a 
smooth,  sharp-uosed,  rather  handsome  young  man,  and 
at  the  other  end  his  princess,  an  English  lady  of  the 
Talbot  family,  apparently  a  blonde,  with  a  simple  and 
sweet  expression.  There  is  a  noble  and  striking  por- 
tiut  of  the  old  Venetian  admiral,  Andrea  Doria,  by 
Sebastian  del  Piombo,  and  some  other  portnuts  and 
busts  of  the  family.  ' 

In  the  whole  immense  range  of  rooms  I  saw  but  a 
single  fireplace,  and  that  so  deep  in  the  wall  that  no 
amount  of  blaze  would  raise  the  atmosphere  of  the 
room  ten  degrees.  If  the  builder  of  the  palace,  or 
any  of  bis  successors,  have  committed  crimes  worthy 
of  Tophet,  it  would  be  a  still  worse  punishment  for 
him  to  wander  perpetually  through  this  suite  of  rooms 
on  the  cold  floors  of  polished  brick  tiles  or  marble 
vr  nuwaio,  growing  a  little  chiller  and  chiller  through 


18S8.]  ITALY.  12S 

eiciy  moment  of  etenutj^ — at^  atleast,  till  tiie  piJam 
enmibles  down  upon  him. 

Nehlier  wmild  it  mssnage  his  torment  in  the  least  to 
be  eompelled  to  gaae  np  at  the  dark  old  pictures^ «—» 
the  ogly  ghosts  of  what  may  once  have  be«i  beautifuL 
I  am  not  going  to  tiy  any  more  to  receive  pleasure 
from  a  faded,  tarnished,  lustreless  picture,  especially 
if  it  be  a  landscape.  There  were  two  or  three  land* 
scapes  of  Claude  in  this  palace,  whidi  I  doubt  not 
would  have  been  exquisite  if  they  were  in  the  condi* 
tion  of  those  in  the  British  National  Ghdlery ;  but 
here  they  looked  most  forlorn,  and  even  their  sunshine 
was  sunless.  The  merits  of  historical  painting  may  be 
quite  independent  of  the  attributes  that  give  pleasure, 
and  a  superficial  ugliness  may  even  heighten  the  ef* 
feet ;  but  not  so  of  landscapes. 

Via  Porta^  Palazzo  Larazard^  March  llfA.  —  To- 
day we  called  at  Mr.  Thompson's  studio,  and  ...  he 
had  on  the  easel  a  little  picture  of  St  Peter  released 
from  prison  by  the  angel,  which  I  saw  once  bef ore. 
It  is  very  beautiful  indeed,  and  deeply  and  spiritually 
conceived,  and  I  wish  I  could  afford  to  have  it  finished 
for  myself.  I  looked  again,  too,  at  his  Georgian  Slave, 
and  admired  it  as  much  as  at  first  view ;  so  very  warm 
and  rich  it  is,  so  sensuously  beautiful,  and  with  an  ex- 
pression of  higher  life  and  feeling  within.  I  do  not 
think  there  is  a  better  painter  than  Mr.  Thompson  liv- 
ing, —  among  Americans  at  least ;  not  one  so  earnest, 
faithful,  and  religious  in  his  worship  of  art.  I  had 
rather  look  at  his  pictures  than  at  any  except  the  very 
finest  of  the  old  masters,  and,  taking  into  considera- 
tion only  the  comparative  pleasure  to  be  derived,  I 
would  not  except  more  than  one  or  two  of  those.     In 


124  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [IW 

painting,  as  in  litomturo,  I  suspect  there  is  sometliin| 
in  the  produetiona  of  the  day  that  takes  the  fancy 
more  than  the  works  of  auy  past  a^,  —  not  greater 
merit,  nor  nearly  so  great,  hut  better  suited  to  tbu 
very  present  time.  .  .  . 

After  leaving  him,  we  went  to  the  I'iazza  di  T< 
mini,  near  the  Baths  of  Diocletian,  and  found  our  way 
with  aome  difficulty  to  Crawford's  studio.  It  occupies 
several  great  rooms,  connected  with  the  ofBcea  of  the 
Villa  Negroni ;  and  all  theae  rooms  were  full  of  plas- 
ter casts  and  a  few  works  in  marble,  —  principally 
portions  of  Ilia  huge  Washington  Monument,  whieh  ho 
left  unfinished  at  his  death.  Close  by  the  door  lit 
which  we  entered  stood  a  gigantic  figure  of  Mason,  in 
bag-wig,  and  the  coat,  waistcoat,  breeches,  and  knee 
and  shoe  buckles  of  the  last  century, — the  enlarge- 
ment of  these  unheroic  matters  to  far  more  than  heroic 
flize  having  a  very  odd  effect.  There  was  a  figure 
of  Jefferson  on  the  same  scale;  another  of  Patrick 
Henry,  besides  a  horse's  heail,  and  other  portions  of 
the  equestrian  group  which  is  to  cover  the  summit  of 
the  monument.  In  one  of  the  rooms  was  a  model  o£ 
the  monument  itself,  on  a  scale,  I  should  think,  oA 
al)out  an  inch  to  a  foot.  It  did  not  impress  me  tt| 
having  grown  out  of  any  groat  and  genuine  idea  ilii 
the  artist'fl  mind,  but  as  l>eing  merely  an  ingenious 
contrivance  enough.  Tliere  were  alno  easts  of  stat- 
ues that  seemed  to  be  intended  for  some  otlier  monu- 
ment referring  to  Revolutionary  times  and  personages  ; 
and  with  these  were  intermixed  »ome  ideal  statues  or 
groups,  —  a  naked  boy  playing  marbles,  very  beauti- 
ful ;  a  girl  witli  flowers ;  the  east  of  his  Orpheus,  oi 
which  1  long  ago  saw  the  marble  statue ;  Adam  and 
Gve ;  Flora,  —  all  with  a  good  deal  of  merit,  no  doabt. 


I 


1858.]  ITALY.  125 

but  not  a  single  one  that  justifies  Crawford's  reputa- 
tion, or  that  satisfies  me  of  his  genius.  ^They  are  but 
commonplaces  in  marble  and  plaster,  such  as  we 
should  not  tolerate  on  a  printed  page.  He  seems  to 
have  been  a  respectable  man,  highly  respectable,  but 
no  more,  although  those  who  knew  him  seem  to  have 
rated  him  much  higher.  It  is  said  that  he  exclaimed, 
not  very  long  before  his  •death,  that  he  had  fifteen 
years  of  good  work  still  in  him ;  and  he  appears  to 
have  considered  all  his  life  and  labor,  heretofore,  as 
only  preparatory  to  the  great  things  that  he  was  to 
achieve  hereafter.  I  should  say,  on  the  contrary,  that 
he  was  a  man  who  had  done  his  best,  and  had  done  it 
early ;  for  his  Orpheus  is  quite  as  good  as  anything 
else  we  saw  in  his  studio. 

People  were  at  work  chiselling  several  statues  in 
marble  from  the  plaster  models,  —  a  very  interesting 
process,  and  what  I  should  think  a  doubtful  and  haz- 
ardous one ;  but  the  artists  say  that  there  is  no  risk  of 
mischief,  and  that  the  model  is  sure  to  be  accurately 
repeated  in  the  marble.  These  persons,  who  do  what 
is  considered  the  mechanical  part  of  the  business,  are 
often  themselves  sculptors,  and  of  higher  reputation 
than  those  who  employ  them. 

It  is  rather  sad  to  think  that  Crawford  died  before 
he  could  see  his  ideas  in  the  marble,  where  they  gleam 
with  so  pure  and  celestial  a  light  as  compared  with  the 
plaster.  There  is  almost  as  much  difference  as  be- 
tween flesh  and  spirit 

The  floor  of  one  of  the  rooms  was  burdened  with 
immense  packages,  containing  parts  of  the  Washing- 
ton Momutient,  ready  to  be  forwarded  to  its  destina- 
tion. When  finished,  and  set  up,  it  will  probably 
viake  a  very  splendid  appearance,  by  its  height,  its 


126    FRENCH  AND  ITaUAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  ^IBt 

maHS,  its  ekilful  vxocution  ;  and  will  produce  a  mot 
effect  thi-ouglj  itd  images  of  illiiHtrioiis  men,  and  the 
aBHOtriatJuns  that  connect  it  witli  our  Revolutionary 
history ;  but  I  do  not  think  it  nill  owe  much  to  ar- 
tiBtio  force  of  thought  or  depth  of  feeling.  It  is  cer- 
tainty, in  one  sejise,  a  very  foolish  and  illogical  piei-« 
of  worh, —  Washington,  mounted  on  an  uneasy  Bt«ed, 
on  a  very  narrow  space,  aloft  in  the  air,  whence  a  sin- 
gle step  of  the  horHO  backward,  forward,  or  on  either 
side,  must  precipitate  him  ;  and  several  of  his  contem- 
porariea  standing  beneath  him,  not  looking  up  to  won- 
der at  his  predicament,  but  each  intent  on  manifest- 
ing his  own  personality  to  the  world  aroun<l.  They 
have  nothing  to  do  with  one  another,  nor  with  Wai' 
ington,  nor  nntli  any  great  {iur]Kise  which  all  are  i 
work  out  together. 

March,  14<A.  —  On  Friday  evening  1  dined  at  Mv>j 
T,  B.  Read's,   the  poet  and  artist,  with  a  party  c 
posed  of  punters  and  acTilptors,  —  the  only  exceptioMt.a 
being  the  American  banker  and  an  American  tourist] 
who  has  given  Mr.  Hea<l  a  commission.     Next  to  me  . 
at  tabic  sat  Mr.  Gibson,  the  English  soulptor.  who,  I 
HU]>]>ose,  stands  foremost  in  his  profession  at  thia  day. 
He  irmst  be  quite  an  old  man  now,  for  it  was  whis- 
pered about  the  table  that  he  is  known  to  have  been 
in  Konie  forty-two  years  ago,  and  he  himself  spoke  to 
me  of  spending  thirty-seven  years  here,  before  he  onoe 
returned  home.     I  should  hanlly  take  him  to  be  aix^,.-- 
however,  his  hair  being  more  dark  than  gray,  Iiia  fore*! 
head  unwrinkled,  his  features  unwithered,  his  eye  u 
dimmed,  though  his  beard  is  somewhat  veneriible.  . 

lie  has  a  quiet,  self-contained  as{)ect.  and,  bcinj 
bachelor,  baa  doubtless  spent  a  vahn  life  among  I 


1869.] 


12T 


day  and  marble,  meddling  little  wltii  the  world,  and 
entangling  himself  with  no  cares  beyond  his  studio. 
He  did  not  talk  a  great  deal ;  but  enough  to  show 
that  he  is  still  an  Englishman  ui  many  sturdy  traits, 
though  his  accent  has  something  foreign  about  it.  His 
conversation  was  chiefly  about  India,  and  other  topics 
of  the  day,  together  with  a  few  reminiscences  of  peo- 
ple in  Liverpool,  where  he  once  resided.  There  was  a 
kind  of  simplicity  both  in  his  manner  and  matter,  and 
nothing  very  remarkable  in  the  latter.  .  .  . 

The  gist  of  what  he  said  (upon  art)  was  condemna- 
tory of  the  Pre-Raphaelite  modern  school  of  peters, 
of  whom  he  seemed  to  spare  none,  and  of  tlieir  works 
nothing ;  though  he  allowed  that  the  old  Pre-Kaphael- 
ites  had  some  exquisite  merits  which  the  moderns  en- 
tirely omit  in  their  imitations.  In  his  own  art,  he 
said  the  aim  should  be  to  find  out  the  principles  on 
which  the  Greek  sculptors  wrought,  and  to  do  the  work 
of  this  day  on  tliose  principles  and  in  their  spirit ;  a 
fair  doctrine  enough,  I  should  think,  liut  which  Mr. 
Gibson  can  scarcely  be  said  to  practise.  •  .  .  The  dif 
ference  between  the  Pre  -  Rsphaelites  and  himself  is 
<leep  and  genuine,  thoy  being  literalists  and  realists, 
in  a  certain  sense,  and  he  a  pagan  idealist.  Methinks 
they  have  hold  of  the  best  end  of  the  matter. 

March  18(J,  —  To-day,  it  being  very  bright  and 
mild,  we  set  out,  at  noon,  for  an  expedition  to  the 
Temple  of  Vesta,  though  I  did  not  feel  much  inclined 
for  walking,  having  been  ill  and  feverish  for  two  or 
three  days  past  with  a  cold,  which  keeps  renewing  it- 
self faster  tlian  I  can  get  rid  of  it.  We  kept  aloug  on 
this  side  of  tlie  Corso.  and  crossed  the  Forum,  skirts 
log  along  the  CapitoUne  Hill,  and  Uienc«  towards  the 


128    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [l« 

Circus  Maximus.  On  our  way,  looking  <)own  a  c 
street,  we  saw  a  heavy  arch,  and,  on  examination, 
made  it  out  to  lie  the  Arch  of  Janus  Quadrifrons, 
standing  in  the  Fonim  Boarium.  Its  base  is  now  con- 
niderably  below  the  level  of  the  surrounding  soil,  and 
there  is  a  church  or  basilica  close  by,  and  some  mean 
edifices  looking  down  upon  it.  There  is  something 
satisfactory  in  this  arch,  from  the  immense  solidity  of 
its  structure.  It  gives  the  idea,  in  the  first  place,  of  a 
solid  mass  constructed  of  huge  blocks  of  marble,  which 
time  can  never  wear  away,  nor  earthquakes  shake 
down ;  and  then  tliis  solid  mats  is  penutratnl  by  two 
arched  passages,  meeting  in  the  centre.  There  are 
empty  niches,  three  in  a  row,  and,  I  tiiink,  two  rowv 
on  each  face  ;  but  there  aeems  to  have  lieen  very  little< 
effort  to  make  it  a  beautiful  object.  On  the  top  ifj 
some  brickwork,  the  remains  of  a  medieval  forti 
built  by  the  Frangipanis,  loolting  very  frail  and 
porary  being  brought  thus  in  contact  with  the  antiqi 
strength  of  the  arcli. 

A  few  yards  off  across  the  street,  and  close  beside 
the  basilica,  is  what  appears  to  be  an  ancient  portal, 
with  carved  bas-reliefs,  and  an  inscription  which  I 
could  not  make  out.  Some  Romans  were  lying  dor- 
mant in  the  sun,  on  the  steps  of  the  basilica ;  indued, 
now  that  the  sun  is  getting  warmer,  they 
advantage  of  every  quiet  uook  to  liask  in,  and  perl 
to  go  to  sleep. 

We  had  gone  but  a  little  way  from  the  arch,  and 
across  the  Circus  Maximus,  when  we  saw  the  Temple 
of  Vesta  before  us,  on  the  bank  of  the  Tilier,  which, 
however,  we  could  not  see  behind  it.  It  is  a  most 
perfectly  ])reserved  Romsui  ruin,  and  very  beautifid, 
though  HO  small  that,  in  a  suitable  locality,  one  would 


loed,  ^^ 
hapt^^H 


A 


ITALY. 

tfthe  it  rather  for  a  garden-liouse  than  an  ancient  tern* 
pie.  A  circle  of  white  marble  pillars,  much  time-wom 
and  a  little  battered,  though  but  one  of  thctn  broken, 
Burroand  the  HoUd  structure  of  the  temple,  leaving  a 
circular  walk  between  it  and  the  pillars,  the  whole 
covered  by  a  modem  roof  which  looks  like  wood,  and 
disgraces  and  deforms  the  elegant  little  building.  This 
roof  resembles,  as  much  as  anything  else,  the  rotmd 
wicker  cover  of  a  basket,  and  gives  a  very  sqaat  aspect 
to  the  temple.  The  pillars  are  of  the  Corinthian  or- 
der, and  when  they  were  new,  and  the  marble  snow- 
white  and  sharply  carved  and  cut,  there  could  not  have 
been  a  prettier  object  in  all  Rome ;  but  so  small  an 
edifice  does  not  appear  well  as  a  ruin. 

Within  view  of  it,  and,  indeed,  a  very  little  way  o£f, 
is  the  Temple  of  Fortuna  Virilis,  which  likewise  re- 
tains its  antique  form  in  better  preservation  than  we 
generally  find  a  Roman  ruin,  although  the  Ionic  pil- 
lars are  now  built  up  with  blocks  of  stone  and  patches 
of  brickwork,  the  whole  constituting  a  church  which 
is  fixed  against  the  side  of  a  tall  edifice,  the  nature  of 
which  I  do  not  know. 

I  forgot  to  say  that  we  gained  admittance  into  the 
Temple  of  Vesta,  and  found  the  interior  a  plain  cylin- 
der of  marble,  about  ten  paces  across,  and  fitted  up  as 
ft  chapel,  where  the  Virgin  takes  the  place  of  Vesta. 

In  very  close  vicinity  we  came  upon  tlie  Ponte 
Rotto,  tlie  old  Pons  Emilius,  which  was  broken  down 
long  ago,  and  has  recently  been  pieced  out  by  con- 
necting a  suspension  bridge  with  the  old  piers.  We 
crossed  by  this  bridge,  paying  a  toll  of  a  baioccho 
each,  and  stop|)ed  in  the  midst  of  the  river  to  look  at 
the  Temple  of  Vesta,  which  shows  well,  right  on  the 
brink  of  the  Tiber.     We  fancied,  too,  that  we  could 


aj^l 


ngai 
•eopkr^H 


180    FBEIfCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [II 

discern,  a  little  farther  down  the  river,  the  ruined 
almost  submerged  piera  of  the  Sublician  bridge,  which 
HoratiuH  Coeles  defended.  The  Til«sr  here  whirls 
rapidly  along,  and  Horatiufi  must  have  had  a  perilous 
swim  for  his  bfe,  and  the  enemy  a  fair  mark  at  his 
head  with  their  arrows.  I  think  this  is  the  moat 
pioturesque  part  of  the  Tiber  in  its  passage  through 
Home. 

After  crossing  the  bridge,  we  kept  along  the  right 
honk  of  the  river,  through  tlie  dirty  and  hanl-hearted 
streets  of  Traatevere  (which  have  in  no  respect 
advantage  over  those  of  hither  Rome),  till  we  roat;! 
St.   Peter's.     We  saw  a  family  sitting  before 
door  on  the  pavement  in  the  narniw  and  sumiy  t 
engaged  in  their  domestic  avocations,  —  the  old 
man  spinning  with  a  wheel.     I  suppose  the  peoplft 
now  begin  to  live  out  of  doors.     We  entered  Iwueath 
the  colonnade  of  St.  Peter's,  and  immediately  became 
sensible  of  an  evil  odor,  —  the  bad  odor  of  our  fallen 
nature,  which  there  is  no  escaping  in  any  nook  qU 
Rome.  ...  fl 

Between  the  pillars  of  the  colonnade,  however,  mi 
had  the  pleasant  spoetacle  of  the  two  fountains,  send- 
ing  up  their  lily-shaped  gush,  with  rainbows  shining 
in  tlieir  falling  spray.  Parties  of  French  soldiers, 
as  usual,  were  undergoing  their  drill  in  the  piazza. 
When  we  entered  the  church,  the  long,  du»ty  sun- 
beams were  falling  aslantwise  through  the  dome  and 
through  the  chancel  behind  it  .  .  .  . 

March  23</.  —  On  the  21st  we  all  went  to  the  Coli- 
seum, and  enjoyed  ourselves  there  in  the  bright,  warm 
sun,  —  BO  bright  and  warm  that  we  were  glad  to  ge* 
Into  the  shadow  of  the  walls  and  under  the  archeai 


A 


I 


ISSB.] 


181 


though,  after  all,  there  was  the  freshness  of  March  in 

the  breeze  that  stirred  now  and  then.  J and  baby 

found  some  beautiful  flowers  growing  round  alxiut  the 
Coliseum ;  and  far  up  towards  the  top  of  the  walls 
we  saw  tufts  of  yellow  wall-flowers  and  a  great  deal 
of  green  grass  growing  along  the  ridges  betw(?en  the 
arches.  The  general  aspect  of  the  place,  however,  is 
somewhat  bare,  and  does  not  compare  favorably  with 
an  English  ruin,  both  on  account  of  the  lack  of  ivy  and 
because  the  material  is  chiefly  hriek,  the  stone  and 
marble  having  been  stolen  away  by  popes  and  cardi- 
nals to  build  their  pahutes.  While  we  sat  within  the 
circle,  many  people,  of  both  sexes,  passed  through, 
kissing  the  iron  cross  which  stands  in  the  centre, 
thereby  gaining  an  indulgence  of  seven  years,  I  be- 
lieve. In  front  of  several  churches  I  have  seen  an  in- 
Bcriptiou  in  Latin,  "  Indulgentia  flenakia  et  per- 
PBTUA  PRO  CUNCTI8  MORTUIS  ET  VIVI8  " ;  than  whicli, 
it  seems  to  me.  nothing  more  could  be  asked  or  de- 
sired. The  terms  of  this  great  boon  are  not  men- 
tioned. 

Leaving  the  Coliseum,  we  went  and  sat  down  iu  the 

vicdnity  of  the  Arch  of  Constantiue,  and  J and 

E went  in  quest  of  lizards.     J soon  caught  a 

large  one  with  two  tails ;  one,  a  sort  of  afterthought, 
or  appendix,  or  corollary,  to  the  original  tail,  and 
growing  out  from  it  instead  of  from  the  body  of  the 

lizard.     These  reptiles  are  very  abundant,  and  J 

has  already  brought  Iioiue  several,  which  make  their 
escape  and  appear  occasionally  darting  to  and  fro  ou 

the  carpet.    Since  we  have  been  iiere,  J has  taken 

np  various  pursuits  in  turn.  First  he  devoted  himself 
to  gathering  snail-shells,  of  which  there  are  many 
sorts ;  afterwards  he  had  a  fever  for  marbles,  pieces 


182  FltENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [!« 

f>(  which  he  found  on  the  banks  of  the  Tiber,  just  < 
the  ed^  of  its  muddy  waters,  and  in  the  Palace  of  the 
Civsftra,  the  Batha  of  CaruciiUa,  and  indeed  wliei-ever 
elae  his  fancy  lud  him ;  verde  aotiqite,  rosso  antico, 
porphyry,  giallo  antico,  serpentine,  sometimes  fra^ 
menta  of  bas-reliefs  and  mouldinffs,  bits  of  mosaio, 
still  firmly  stuek  together,  on  which  the  foot  of  a  t."i» 
Bar  had  perhaps  once  trodden ;  pieces  of  Roman  glass, 
with  the  iridescence  glowing  on  them ;  and  all  such 
things,  of  which  the  soil  of  Rome  is  full.  It  would 
not  be  difficult,  from  the  spoil  of  his  boyish  rambles, 
to  furnish  what  would  be  looked  upon  as  a  curious 
and  valuable  museiun  in  America. 

Yesterday  we  went  to  the  sculpture-galleries  of  the 
Vatican.  I  think  I  enjoy  these  noble  galleries  and 
their  contents  and  beautiful  arrangement  better  tbaa 
anything  else  in  the  way  of  art,  and  often  I  seem  to 
have  a  deep  feeling  of  something  wonderful  iu  what  If 
look  at.  The  Laocoon  on  this  visit  impressed  me  not 
less  than  before ;  it  is  such  a  type  of  human  beings, 
struggling  with  an  inextricable  ti-ouble,  and  entangled 
in  a  complication  which  they  cannot  free  thomselveB 
from  by  their  own  efforts,  and  out  of  which  Heaven 
alone  can  help  them.  It  was  a  most  powerful  mind, 
and  one  capable  of  reducing  a  comjilex  idea  to  unity, 
that  imagined  this  group.  I  looked  at  Canova's  Pel 
Btus,  anil  tliought  it  exceedingly  beautiful,  but  foua 
myself  less  and  less  contented  after  a  moment  or  two^l 
though  I  could  not  tell  why,  Aftci'wartls,  looking  at 
the  Apollo,  the  recollection  of  the  Perseus  disguste<l 
me,  and  yet  really  I  cannot  explain  how  one  is  better 
than  the  other. 

I  was   interested   in   looking  at  the  busts   i 
Triumvirs,  Antony,  Augustus,  and    Lepidui 


i'tists   of  tb^^l 
pidus.     Tm^H 


18».]  ITALY.  138 

first  two  are  men  of  iatellect,  evidently,  thougli  they 
do  not  recommead  themselvea  to  one's  affectiona  by 
their  physiognomy  ;  but  Lepidus  has  the  strangest, 
most  commonplace  countenance  that  can  be  imagined, 
—  small-featured,  weak,  such  a  face  as  you  meet  any- 
where in  a  man  of  no  mark,  but  are  amazed  to  find  in 
one  of  the  three  foremost  men  of  the  world.  I  sup- 
poso  that  it  is  these  weak  and  shallow  men,  when 
chance  raises  them  above  their  proper  sphere,  who 
commit  enoimous  crimes  without  any  such  restraint 
aa  stronger  men  would  feel,  and  without  any  retribu- 
tion in  the  depth  of  their  conscience.  These  old  Bo- 
man  busts,  of  which  there  are  ho  many  in  the  Vatican, 
have  often  a  most  life-like  aspect,  a  striking  individu- 
ality. One  recognt2ca  them  as  faithful  portraits,  just 
as  certainly  o&  if  the  living  origiDals  were  standing 
beside  them.  The  arrangement  of  the  hair  and  beard 
too,  in  many  cases,  is  just  what  we  see  now,  the  fash- 
ions of  two  thousand  years  ago  having  come  round 
again. 

March  25th.  —  On  Tuesday  we  went  to  breakfast 
at  William  Story's  in  the  Palazzo  BarberinL  We  had 
a  very  pleasant  time.  He  is  one  of  the  most  agree- 
able men  I  know  in  society.  He  showed  us  a  note 
from  Thackeray,  an  invitation  to  dinner,  written  in 
hieroglyphics,  with  great  fun  and  pictorial  merit.  He 
spoke  of  an  expansion  of  the  story  of  "  Blue  Beard," 
which  he  himself  had  either  written  or  thought  of 
writing,  in  which  the  contents  of  the  several  chambers 
which  Fatima  opened,  before  arriving  at  the  fatal  one, 
A'ere  to  be  described.  This  idea  lias  haunted  my 
Diind  ever  since,  and  if  it  had  but  been  my  own  I  am 
pretty  sore  that  it  would  develop  itself  into  something 


184   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [IW 

very  rich.  I  mean  to  press  William  Story  to  work  it 
out.  The  pliamber  of  Blue  Beard,  too  (and  tliia  was 
a  part  of  his  auggestion),  might  be  so  handled  as  to 
become  powerfully  interesting.  Were  I  to  take  up 
tlie  Btory,  T  would  create  an  int^'reet  by  suggesting  a 
Beoret  in  the  tirnt  oharober,  which  would  develop  itself 
more  and  more  in  every  suceessive  hall  of  the 
palace,  and  lead  the  wife  irresistibly  to  the  chaml 
of  horrors. 

After  breakfast,  we  went  to  the  Barherini  Library, 
passing  thi-ough  the  vast  hall,  whieh  occupies  the  cen- 
tral part  of  the  palace.  It  is  the  most  splendid  do* 
mestic  hall  I  have  seen,  eighty  feet  in  length  at  least, 
and  of  proportionate  breadth  and  height ;  and  the 
vaiJted  ceiling  ia  entirely  covere<l,  to  its  utmost  edge 
and  remotest  comers,  with  a  brilliant  painting  in 
fresco,  looking  like  a  whole  heaven  of  angelic  people 
descending  towards  the  floor.  The  effect  ia  indeaorib- 
ably  gorgeous.  On  one  side  stands  a  Baldacehino.  o^ 
canopy  of  state,  draped  with  scarlet  cloth,  and  friii] 
with  gold  embroidery ;  the  scarlet  indicating  that 
palace  is  inhabited  by  a  canlinal.  Green  would  be 
appropriate  to  a  prince.  In  point  of  fact,  tlie  Palazzo 
Barherini  is  inhabited  by  a  cardinal,  a  prince,  and  a 
duke,  all  belonging  to  the  Barherini  family,  and  eaeh 
having  his  separate  portion  of  the  palai-e,  while  their 
servants  have  a  common  territory  and  meeting-ground 
iu  this  nolile  hall. 

After  admiring  it  for  a  few  minutes,  we  made 
exit  by  a  door  on  the  opposite  side,  and  went  up 
Bpiral  staircase  of  marble  to  the  library,  where  we 
were  received  by  an  ecclesiaatie,  who  belongs  to  the 
Barberiui  household,  and  I  believe  was  bom  in  iL 
He  IB  a  gentle,  refuted,  qmetr-looking  mau,  as  wbll  ha 


greafr^H 


th^l 


>  th^^l 
~  w« 
the 

I  it 

1  h0^H 


i8se.] 


ITALT. 


may  be,  having  spent  all  his  life  among  these  books, 
where  few  people  intrude,  and  few  cares  can  come. 
He  showed  us  a  very  old  Bible  in  parchment,  a  speei- 
mea  of  the  earliest  printing,  beautifully  ornamented 
with  pictures,  and  some  monkish  illuminations  of  in- 
describable delicacy  and  elaboration.  No  artist  coiUd 
aSord  to  produce  such  work,  if  the  life  that  he  thus 
lavished  on  one  sheet  of  parchment  had  any  value  to 
him,  either  for  what  could  be  done  or  enjoyed  in  it. 
There  are  about  eight  thousand  volumes  in  this 
library,  and,  judging  by  their  outward  aspect,  the  eol- 
lectioQ  must  be  curious  and  valuable  ,-  but  having 
another  engagement,  we  oould  spend  only  a  little  time 
here.  We  had  a  hasty  glance,  however,  of  some 
poems  of  Tasso,  in  his  own  autograph. 

We  then  went  to  the  Palazzo  Galitzin,  where  dwell 
the  Misses  Weston,  with  whom  we  lunched,  and  where 
we  met  a  French  abbd,  an  agreeable  man,  and  an  an- 
tiquarian, under  whose  auspices  two  of  the  ladies  and 
ourselves  took  carnage  for  the  Castle  of  St.  Angelo. 
Being  admitted  within  the  external  gateway,  we 
found  ourselves  in  the  court  of  guard,  as  I  presume  it 
is  called,  where  the  French  soldiers  were  playing  with 
very  dirty  cards,  or  lounging  about,  in  military  idle- 
ness. They  were  well  behaved  and  courteous,  and 
when  we  had  intimated  our  wish  to  see  the  interior 
of  the  castle,  a  soldier  soon  appeared,  with  a  large 
anlighted  torch  in  his  hand,  ready  to  guide  us.  There 
is  an  outer  wall,  surrounding  the  solid  structure  of 
Hadrian's  tomb ;  to  which  there  is  access  by  one  or 
two  drawbridges  ;  the  entrance  to  the  tomb,  or  castle, 
DOt  being  at  the  base,  but  near  its  central  height. 
The  ancient  entrance,  by  which  Hadrian's  aslies,  and 
diose  of  other   imperial  person^es,   were   probabl; 


186    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [18S&I 

brought  into  tlus  tomb,  has  been  walled  up,  —  perbapt  I 
ever  since  the  last  emperor  was  buried    here.       We  J 
were  now  in  a  vaulted  passage,  both  lofty  and  broad,  I 
which  circles  round  the  whole  interior  of   the  tomb, 
from  the  base  to  the  summit.     During  moiiy  hundred 
yuars,  the  passage  was  filled  with  earth  and  rubbish, 
and  forgotten,  and  it  is   but  partly  excavated,  even 
now ;  although  we  found  it  a  long)  long,  and  gloomy  J 
descent  by  ti>rclilight  to  the  base  of  the  vast  mLauao*  1 
leum.     The  passage  was  onee  linecl  and  vaulted  with  I 
precious  marbles  (which  are  now  entirely  gone),  and  I 
paved  with  tine  mosaics,  portions  of  which  still  re>  I 
main  ;  and  our  guide  lowered  his  flaming  torch  to  \ 
show  them  to  us,  here  and  there,   amid   the   oarthy 
dampness  over  which  we  ti-od.     It  is  strange  to  think 
what  splendor  and  costly  adornment  were  here  wasted 
on  the  dead. 

After  we  had  descended  to  the  bottom  of  this  pa«>  I 
wige,  and  again  nttraeed  our  steps  to  the  highest  part*  J 
the  guide  took  a  large  cannon-ball,  and  sent  it,  with  | 
Ids  whole  force,  rolling  down  the  hollow,  arched  way,  i 
rumbling,  and  reverberating,  and  bellowing  forth  long  J 
tliuuderous  echoes,  and  winding  up  with  a  loud,  dift>  1 
tant  crash,  that  seemed  to  come  from  the  very  bowels  J 
of  the  earth. 

We  saw  the  place,  near  the  centre  of  the  mauso- 
leum, and  lighted  from  above,  through  an  immense 
thickness  of  stone  and  brick,  where  the  ashes  of  the 
emperor  and  his  fellow-slumberers  were  found.  It  is 
ta  much  as  twelve  centuries,  very  likely,  since  they 
were  scattered  to  the  winds,  for  the  tomb  has  been 
aearly  or  quite  that  spac«  of  time  a  fortress,  Tlio 
tomb  itself  is  merely  tlie  base  and  foimdation  of  Uie 
lastle,  and,  being  so  maasively  built,  it  serves  just  M 


ITALY. 


1ST 


I 
I 


well  for  the  purpose  aa  if  it  were  a  aoltd  granite  rock. 
The  medieval  fortress,  'A'ith  itt  antiquity  of  more  than 
&  thousand  years,  and  having  dark  and  deep  dungeons 
of  its  own,  iR  but  a  modem  excrescence  on  the  top  of 
Hadrian's  tomb. 

We  now  ascended  towards  the  upper  region,  and 
were  led  into  the  vaults  which  used  to  serve  as  a 
prison,  but  whieh,  if  I  mistake  not,  are  situated  above 
the  ancient  structure,  although  they  seem  as  damp  and 
subterranean  as  if  they  were  fifty  feet  under  the  earth. 
We  crept  down  to  them  through  najTOw  and  ugly  pas- 
sages, which  the  torchlight  would  not  illuminate,  and, 
stooping  under  a  low,  square  entrance,  we  followed  the 
guide  into  a  small  vaulted  room,  —  not  a  room,  but 
an  artificial  cavern,  remote  from  light  or  air,  where 
Beatrice  Cenci  wa^  confined  before  her  execution.  Ac- 
cording to  the  abb^,  she  spent  a  whole  year  in  this 
dreadful  pit,  her  trial  having  dragged  on  thi'ough  that 
length  of  time.  How  ghost-Iilte  she  must  have  looked 
when  she  came  forth !  Guido  never  painted  that  beau- 
tiful picture  from  her  blanched  face,  as  it  appeared 
after  this  confinement.  And  how  rejoiced  she  must 
hare  been  to  die  at  last,  having  already  been  in  a  sep- 
ulchre so  long ! 

Adjaeent  to  Beatrice's  prison,  but  not  communicat- 
ing with  it.  was  that  of  her  step-mother  ;  and  next  to 
the  latter  was  one  that  interested  me  almost  as  much 
as  Beatrice's,  —  that  of  Benvenuto  Cellini,  who  was 
confined  here,  I  believe,  for  an  assassination.  All 
these  prison  vaults  are  more  homble  than  can  be  Im- 
sgine<l  without  seeing  them ;  but  there  are  worse 
places  here,  for  the  guide  lifted  a  trap-door  in  one  of 
the  passages,  and  held  Ms  torch  down  into  an  inscnv 
table  pit  beneatli  our  feet.    It  was  au  oubliette,  a  dun- 


188   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [II 

(^eon  where  tlio  prisoner  might  l>e  buried  olire,  and' 
nover  come  forth  again,  alive  or  dead.  Groping  about 
among  these  aad  precincts,  we  saw  various  other  things 
that  looked  very  dismal ;  but  at  last  emerged  into  the 
sunshine,  aad  ascended  from  one  platform  and  battle- 
ment to  another,  till  we  found  ourselves  right  at  the 
feet  of  the  Archangel  Michael.  He  has  stood  there 
in  bronze  for  I  know  not  how  many  hundred  years,  in 
the  act  of  sheathing  a  (now)  rusty  sword,  such  being 
the  attitude  in  which  he  appeared  to  one  of  the  popeA' 
in  a  vision,  in  token  that  a  pestilence  which  was  thofl 
desolating  Rome  was  to  be  stayed.  ■ 

There  is  a  tine  view  from  the  lofty  station  over' 
Rome  and  the  whole  adjacent  country,  and  the  abb^ 
pointed  out  the  site  of  Ardea,  of  Corioli,  of  Veii,  and 
other  places  renowned  in  story.  We  were  ushered, 
too,  into  tlie  French  commandant's  quarters  ui  the 
castle.  There  is  a  large  hall,  ornamented  with  fres- 
cos, and  accessible  from  this  a  drawing-room, 
fortably  fitted  up,  and  where  we  saw  modern  fui 
ture,  and  a  chess-board,  and  a  fire  burning  clear, 
other  symptoms  that  the  place  had  perhaps  just  been 
Tacat«d  by  civilized  and  kindly  people.  But  in  one 
corner  of  the  ceiling  the  ahb^  pointed  out  a  ring,  by 
which,  in  the  times  of  mediffival  anarchy,  when  po]>e8, 
eardinals,  and  barons  were  all  by  the  ears  together,  a 
cardinal  was  hanged.  It  was  not  an  assassination, 
but  a  legal  punishment,  and  lie  was  executed  in  th» 
best  apartment  of  the  castle  as  an  act  of  grace. 

The   fortress  is  a  straight -lined  structure  on 
summit  of  the  immense   round   tower  of   Hadi 
tomb  ;  and  to  make  out  tlie  idea  of  it  we  must  throw 
in  drawbridges,  esplanades,  piles  of  ancient  marbia 
lialls  for  cannon ;  battlements  and  embrasures,  lying 


im^^^l 


Ul»'^H 

irbia 


I 
I 

I 


IT  ALT. 

the  1>reeze  and  sanshiiie,  and  opening  viewa 
round  the  whole  horizon  ;  accommodation  for  the  sot 
diers  ;  and  many  small  beds  in  a  large  room. 

How  mueh  mistaken  was  the  emperor  in  his  expeo 
tation  of  a  stately,  solenm  repose  for  his  ashes  through 
all  the  coming  centuries,  as  long  as  the  world  should 
endure  I  Perhaps  his  ghost  glides  up  and  down  di» 
cousolate,  in  that  spiral  passage  which  goes  from  top 
to  bottom  of  the  tomb,  while  the  barbarous  Gaula 
plant  themselves  in  bis  very  mausoleum  to  keep  the 
imperial  city  in  awe. 

Leaving  the  Castle  of  St.  ^Vngelo,  we  drove,  still  on 
the  same  side  of  the  Tiber,  to  the  Villa  Pamfili, 
which  lies  a  short  distance  beyond  the  walls.  As  wa 
passed  through  one  of  the  gates  (I  think  it  was  that 
of  San  Pancrazio)  the  abb<^  pointed  out  the  spot  whera 
the  Constable  de  Bourbon  was  killed  while  attempting 
to  scale  the  walLi,  If  we  are  to  believe  Benvenuto 
Cellini,  it  was  be  who  shot  the  constable.  The  roaJ 
to  the  villa  is  not  very  interesting,  lying  (as  the  roads 
«n  the  vicinity  of  Rome  often  do)  between  veiy  high 
walls,  admitting  not  a  glimpse  of  the  surrounding 
country  ;  the  road  itself  white  and  dusty,  with  no 
verdant  marg^  of  grass  or  border  of  shrubliery.  At 
the  portal  of  the  villa  we  found  many  carriages  in 
waiting,  for  the  Prince  Doria  throws  open  the  grounds 
to  -ill  comers,  and  on  a  pleasant  day  like  this  they  are 
probably  sure  to  be  thronged.  AVe  left  our  carriage 
just  within  the  entrants,  and  rambled  among  these 
1>eautiful  groves,  admiring  the  live-oak  trees,  and  the 
stone  pines,  which  latter  are  truly  a  majestic  troe, 
with  tall  columnar  stems,  supporting  a  cloud-like  den- 
Uty  of  boughs  far  aloft,  and  not  a  str^gling  branch 
between  them  and  the  ground.   They  stand  iu  straight 


140   FREIfCn  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185a| 

rows,  but  are  now  so  anciont  and  venerable  as  to  liave 
lost  the  formal  look  of  a  plantation,  anil  netin  like  a 
wood  that  might  have  arranged  itnelf  almost  of 
own  will.  Beneath  them  is  a  fluwer-strewn  turf,  quite 
free  of  underbrush.  We  found  open  fields  and  lawi 
moreover,  all  abloom  with  anemones,  white  and  rose»^ 
cwloreil  and  purple  and  golden,  and  far  larger  than 
could  be  found  out  of  Italy,  except  in  hot -houses. 
Violets,  too,  wore  abundant  and  exceedingly  fragrant. 
When  we  consider  tliat  all  this  floral  exuberanee  oc- 
curs in  the  midst  of  March,  there  does  not  appeaij 
much  ground  for  complaining  of  the  Roman  clinuite  ; 
and  so  long  ago  as  the  first  week  of  Febntary  I  fouud;] 
daisies  among  the  grass,  on  the  sunny  side  of  th«rj 
BasilioA  of  St.  John  Lateran.  At  this  very  momci 
I  suppose  the  country  within  twenty  miles  of  Bostofti] 
may  be  two  feet  deep  with  snow,  and  the  streams  soli^'j 
with  ice. 

We  wandered  about  the  grounds,  and  found  them 
very  beautiful  indeed  ;  nature  liaving  done  much  for 
them  by  nn  undulating  variety  of  surface,  and  art 
having  added  a  good  many  charms,  which  have  all 
the  better  effect  now  that  decay  and  neglect  have 
thrown  a  natural  grace  over  them  likewise.  There  ia 
an  artificial  ruin,  so  picturesque  that  tt  betrays  itaelf ; 
weather-beat«n  statues,  and  pieces  of  sculpti 
tered  here  and  there ;  an  artificial  lake,  with  upgusl 
ing  fountains;  cascades,  and  broa>l-bo8omed  coves,  and 
long,  canal-like  reaches,  with  swans  taking  their  de- 
light u]>on  them,  I  never  saw  such  a  glorious  and  re. 
splendent  lustre  of  white  aa  shone  between  the  wings 
of  two  of  these  swans.  It  was  really  a  sight  to  see^; 
and  nut  to  be  imagined  beforehand.  Angels,  of 
doubt,  Iiave  just  such  lustrous  wings  as  those.     Eng 


i" I 


1858.]  ITALY.  141 

lish  swans  partake  of  the  dinginess  of  the  atmosphere, 
and  their  plumage  has  nothing  at  all  to  be  compared 
to  this  ;  in  fact,  there  is  nothing  like  it  in  the  world, 
tmless  it  be  the  illmninated  portion  of  a  fleecy,  sum« 
mer  cloud. 

While  we  were  sauntering  along  beside  this  piece 

of  water,  we  were  surprised  to  see  U on  the  other 

side.     She  had  come  hither  with  E S—  and 

her  two  little  brothers,  and  with  our  R ,  the  whole 

under    the    charge   of    Mrs.   Story's    nursery-maids. 

U and  E crossed,  not  over,  but  beneath  the 

water,  through  a  grotto,  and  exchanged  greetings  with 
us.  Then,  as  it  was  getting  towards  sunset  and  cool, 
we  took  our  departure ;  tlie  abb^,  as  we  left  the 
grounds,  taking  me  aside  to  give  me  a  glimpse  of  a 
Columbarium,  which  descends  into  the  earth  to  about 
the  depth  to  which  an  ordinary  house  might  rise  above 
it.  These  grounds,  it  is  said,  formed  the  country  res- 
idence  of  the  Emperor  Oalba,  and  he  was  buried  here 
after  his  assassination.  It  is  a  sad  thought  that  so 
much  natural  beauty  and  long  refinement  of  pictu« 
resque  culture  is  thrown  away,  the  villa  being  unin- 
habitable during  all  the  most  delightful  season  of  the 
year  on  account  of  malaria.  There  is  truly  a  curse 
on  Rome  and  all  its  neighborhood. 

On  our  way  home  we  passed  by  the  great  Paolina 
fountain,  and  were  assailed  by  many  beggars  during 
the  short  time  we  stopped  to  look  at  it.  It  is  a  very 
copious  fountain,  but  not  so  beautiful  as  the  Trevi,  tak« 
ing  into  view  merely  the  water-gush  of  the  latter. 

March  2&th.  —  Yesterday,  between  twelve  and  one, 
our  whole  family  went  to  the  Villa  Ludovisi,  the  enr 
trance  to  which  is  at  the  termination  of  a  street  which 


ion. 

ino,^] 

uokM 


U2    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTB-BOOKS.  [16S%J 

passes  out  of  the  Piazza  Barberbi,  and  it  is  no  ray  ■ 
freat  distance  from  our  nwn  street.  Via  Porta  Pioci- 
ana.  The  grounds,  though  very  extensive,  are  wholly 
within  the  walla  of  the  city,  which  ekirt  them,  and 
comprise  a  part  of  what  were  formerly  the  gardens 
of  Sallust.  The  villa  18  now  the  property  of  Prince 
Piombini,  a  ticket  from  whom  procured  us  admission. 
A  little  within  the  gateway,  to  the  right,  is  a  casino^ 
containing  two  large  rooms  filled  with  sculpture,  mu< 
of  which  is  very  valuable.  A  colossal  head  of  JunO|i 
I  believe,  is  considered  the  greatest  treasure  of 
collection,  but  I  did  not  myself  feel  it  to  be  so, 
indeed  did  I  receive  any  strong  impression  of  its 
oellence.  I  admired  nothing  so  much,  I  think,  aa 
the  face  of  Penelope  (if  it  lie  her  face)  in  the  group 
supposed  also  to  represent  Electra  and  Orestes.  The 
sitting  statue  of  Mar«  is  very  flue ;  so  is  the  Aria  and 
Piptus ;  so  are  many  other  busts  and  figures. 

By  and  by  we  left  the  casino  and  wandered  among 
the  grounds,  threading  interminable  alleys  of  cypress, 
through  the  long  vistas  of  which  we  could  see  here 
and  there  a  statue,  an  um,  a  pillar,  a  temple,  or  gar- 
den-house, or  a  bas-relief  against  the  wall.  It  seems 
as  if  there  must  have  been  a  time,  —  and  not  so  very 
long  ago,  — when  it  was  wortli  while  to  spend  money 
and  thought  upon  the  ornamentation  of  grounds  in  the 
neighborhood  of  Rome.  That  time  is  past,  however, 
and  the  result  is  very  melancholy ;  for  great  beauty 
has  been  produced,  but  it  can  W  enjoyed  in  its  per- 
fection only  at  the  peril  of  one's  life.  .  .  .  For  my 
part,  and  judging  from  my  own  experience,  I  suspect . 
that  the  Roman  atraoaphcre,  never  wholesome, 
Ways  more  or  less  poisonous. 

We  came  to  another  and  larger  casino  remote  fi 


«.] 


ITALY. 


143 


I 


the  gateway,  in  which  the  Prince  resides  during  two 
months  of  the  year.  It  was  now  under  repair,  but  we 
gained  admission,  se  did  several  other  visitors,  and 
saw  in  the  entrance -hall  the  Aurora  of  Guercino, 
painted  in  fresco  on  the  ceiling.  There  is  beauty  in 
the  design  ;  but  tlie  paint^^r  certainly  was  most  un- 
happy in  his  black  shadows,  and  in  the  work  before 
us  they  give  the  impression  of  a  cloudy  and  lowering 
morning,  which  is  likely  enough  to  turn  t«  rain  by  and 
by.  After  viewing  the  fresco  we  mounted  by  a  spiral 
staircase  to  a  lofty  terrace,  and  found  liome  at  our 
feet,  and,  far  off,  the  Sabine  and  Alban  mountaius, 
some  of  them  etill  OApped  with  snow.  In  another  di- 
rection there  was  a  vast  plain,  on  the  horizon  of  which, 
could  our  eyes  have  reached  to  its  verge,  we  might 
perhaps  have  seen  the  Mediterranean  Sea.  After  en- 
joying the  view  and  the  warm  sunshine  we  descended, 
and  went  in  quest  of  the  gardens  of  Sallust,  but  found 
no  satisfactory  remains  of  them. 

One  of  the  most  striking  objects  in  the  first  casino 
was  a  group  by  Bernini,  —  Pluto,  an  outrageously 
masculine  and  strenuous  figure,  heavily  bearded,  rav- 
ishing away  a  little,  tender  Proserpine,  whom  be  holds 
aloft,  while  his  forcible  gripe  impresses  itself  into  her 
soft  virgin  flesh.  It  is  very  disagreeable,  but  it  makes 
one  feel  that  Bernini  was  a  man  of  great  ability. 
There  are  some  works  in  literature  that  bear  an  anal- 
ogy to  his  works  in  sculpture,  where  groat  power  is 
lavished  a  little  outside  of  nature,  and  therefore  proves 
to  be  only  a  fashion,  and  not  permanently  adapts  to 
the  tastes  of  mankind. 


Marvk  27M.— Yesterday  forenoon  my  wife  and  I 
went  to  St  Peter's  to  see  the  pope  pray  at  the  chape) 


144   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [IS5( 

of  the  Holy  SaorameDt.  We  found  a  good  many  p 
pie  in  the  church,  but  not  an  inconvenient  niiuiber; 
indeed,  not  ho  many  as  to  make  any  rt'maFkal)lc  show 
in  the  great  nave,  nor  even  in  front  of  the  ehapel.  A 
detachment  of  the  Swiss  Guard,  in  their  strange,  pict- 
uresque, ha"lequin  -  like  costume,  were  on  duty  before 
the  chapel,  in  which  the  wax  tapers  were  all  lighted, 
and  a  prie-dieu  waA  arranged  near  the  shrine,  and 
covered  with  scarlet  velvet.  On  each  side,  along  the 
breadth  of  tlie  side-aisle,  were  placed  seats,  covered 
with  rich  tapestry  or  caq>eting ;  and  some  gentlemen 
and  ladies  —  English,  probably,  or  American  —  had 
comfortably  deposited  themselves  here,  but  were  com- 
pelled to  move  by  tlie  guanls  before  the  pope's  en- 
trance. His  holiness  should  have  appeared  precisely 
at  twelve,  but  we  waited  nearly  half  an  hour  beyond 
that  time ;  and  it  seemed  to  me  particularly  ill-man- 
nered in  the  pope,  who  owes  the  courtesy  of  being 
punctual  to  the  people,  if  not  to  St.  Peter.  By  and 
by,  however,  there  was  a  stir ;  the  guard  motioned  to 
us  to  stand  away  from  the  benches,  against  tlie  backs 
of  which  we  had  been  leaning ;  tlie  spectators  in  the 
nave  looked  towards  the  door,  as  if  they  l>eheld  som&- 
t^ing  approaching ;  and  first,  there  appeared  some 
cardinals,  in  scarlet  sktdl-caps  and  purple  robes,  inter- 
mixed with  some  of  the  Noble  fluard  and  other  at- 
tendants. It  was  not  a  very  formal  and  stately  pro- 
cession, but  rather  straggled  onward,  with  ragged 
edges,  the  6pe:^tors  standing  aside  to  let  it  pass,  and 
merely  bowing,  or  perhaps  slightly  bending  the  knee, 
OB  good  Catholics  are  accustome<l  to  do  when  passing 
before  the  shrines  of  saints.  Then,  iu  the  mid.tt  of 
the  purple  cardinals,  all  of  whom  were  gray-haired 
men,  appeared  a  stout  old  man,  with  a  white  skuU-oap, 


d 


ITALY. 


146 


I 


ft  scarlet,  gold-embroidered  cape  falling  over  liis  slioul- 
dera,  aod  a  white  silk  robe,  the  train  of  wluch  wa* 
borne  up  by  an  attendant.  He  walked  slowly,  with  a 
sort  of  dignified  movement,  stepping  out  broadly,  and 
planting  his  feet  (on  which  were  red  shoes)  flat  upon 
the  pavement,  as  if  he  were  not  much  accustomed  bo 
locomotion,  and  perhaps  had  known  a  twinge  of  the 
gout.  His  face  was  kindly  and  venerable,  but  not 
particularly  impressive.  Arriving  at  the  scarletroov- 
ered  prie-dieu,  he  kneeled  down  and  took  off  his  white 
skull-cap ;  the  cardinals  also  kneeled  behind  and  on 
either  side  of  him,  taking  ofF  their  sisarlet  skull-caps ; 
while  the  Noble  Guard  remained  standing,  six  on  one 
side  of  his  holineas  and  six  on  the  other.  The  pope 
bent  bis  head  upon  the  prie-dieu,  and  seemed  to  spend 
three  or  four  minutes  in  prayer;  then  rose,  and  all 
the  purple  cardinals,  and  bishops,  and  priests,  of  what- 
ever degree,  rose  behind  and  beside  him.  Next,  lie 
went  to  kiss  St.  Peter's  toe ;  at  least  I  believe  he 
kissed  it,  but  I  was  not  near  enough  to  be  certain ; 
and  Lastly,  he  knelt  down,  and  directed  his  devotions 
towards  the  high  altar.  This  complcte<l  the  ceremo- 
niea,  and  bis  holiness  left  the  church  by  a  side  door, 
making  a  short  passage  into  the  Vatican. 

I  am  very  glad  I  have  seen  the  pope,  because  now 
he  may  be  crossed  out  of  the  list  of  sights  to  he  seen. 
His  proximity  inipreased  me  kindly  and  favorably  to- 
wards him,  and  1  did  not  see  one  face  among  all  his 
cardinals  (in  whose  number,  doubtless,  is  hie  suc- 
cessor) which  I  would  so  soon  trust  as  that  of  Pio 
Nono. 

This  morning  I  walked  as  far  as  the  gate  of  San 
Paolo,  and,  on  approaching  it,  I  saw  the  gray  sharp 
pyramid  of  Cains  Cestius  pointing  upward  close  to  tW 


146    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS,   [i; 
of 


two  dark -brown,  battlemented  Gothiu  towers 
gateway,  each  of  these  very  different  piecwa  ol 
tecture  looking  the  more  picturesiiue  for  the  conti 
of  the  other.  Before  approaching  the  gateway  and' 
pyramid,  I  walked  onward,  and  soon  taiue  in  night  of 
Monte  Testaocio,  the  artifleiaJ  hill  made  of  potshenU. 
There  is  a  gate  admitting  into  tlie  grounds  around  the 
hill,  and  a  road  encircling  its  base.  At  a  distance, 
the  hill  looks  greener  than  any  other  part  of  the  land- 
scape, and  haa  all  the  curved  outlines  of  a  natural  hill, 
resembling  in  shape  a  beadles^  sphinx,  or  Saddlcbiwk 
Mountain,  as  I  used  to  see  it  from  Lenox.  It  in  of 
very  cuneiideralile  height,  —  two  or  three  hundred  feet, 
at  least,  I  should  say,  —  and  well  entitled,  both  by 
its  elevation  and  the  space  it  covers,  to  be  reckoned 
among  the  hills  of  Itome.  Its  base  is  iilmost  entirely 
surrounded  with  small  structures,  which  seem  to 
used  as  fann-buildings.  On  the  summit  is  a  Iarg»: 
iron  cross,  the  Church  liaving  thought  it  expedient 
redeem  these  shattered  pipkins  from  the  power  of  pa>! 
ganism,  as  !t  has  so  many  other  Uoman  ruins.  l'lie»' 
was  a  pathway  up  the  hill,  but  I  did  not  olioose  tu 
cend  it  under  the  hot  sun,  so  steeply  did  it  clamber 
up.  There  appears  to  be  a  good  depth  of  soil  on  most 
parts  of  Monte  Testacoio,  but  on  some  of  tlie  aides 
you  observe  precipices,  bristling  witb  fragments  of 
red  or  brown  earthenware,  or  pieces  of  vases  of  white 
unglazed  clay ;  and  it  is  evident  that  this  immense 
pile  is  entirely  composed  of  broken  crockery,  which  I 
should  hardly  have  thought  woiUd  have  aggregated 
to  such  a  heap  hatl  it  all  been  thrown  here,  —  urns, 
teacups,  porcelain,  or  earthen,  —  since  the  beginning 
of  the  world. 

I  walked  quite  round  the  hill,  and  saw,  at  no  great 


i 


letl 

I 


e«  ^H 


isse.] 


ITALY. 


14T 


diBtauoe  from  it,  tJie  enclosure  of  the  Protestaut  bar- 
ial-groimd,  which  lies  so  close  to  the  pyraimd  of  Ca- 
ias  Cestius  that  the  latter  may  aerve  as  a  general  moo- 
oment  to  the  dead.  Deferring,  for  the  present,  a 
visit  to  tlie  cemetery,  or  to  the  interior  of  the  pyrsunid, 
I  returned  to  the  gateway  of  San  Paolo,  and,  juissing 
through  it,  took  a  view  of  it  from  the  outside  of  the 
city  wall.  It  is  itself  a  portion  of  the  wall,  having 
been  built  into  it  by  the  Emperor  Aurelian,  so  that 
about  half  of  it  lies  within  and  half  without.  The 
brick  or  red  stone  material  of  the  wall  being  so  unlike 
the  marble  of  the  pyramid,  the  latter  is  as  distinct, 
and  seems  as  insulated,  as  if  it  stood  alone  in  the  cen- 
tre of  a  plain ;  and  really  I  do  not  think  there  la  a 
more  striking  architectural  object  in  Gome.  It  is  in 
perfect  condition,  just  as  little  ruined  or  decayed  as 
on  the  day  when  the  builder  put  the  last  peak  on  the 
summit ;  and  it  ascends  steeply  from  its  base,  with  a 
point  so  sharp  that  it  looks  as  if  it  would  hardly  af- 
ford foothold  to  a  bird.  The  marble  was  onoe  white, 
but  ia  now  covered  with  a  gray  coating  like  that  which 
has  gathered  upon  the  statues  of  Castor  and  Pollux 
on  Monte  Cavallo.  Not  one  of  the  great  blocks  is 
displaced,  nor  seems  likely  to  be  through  all  time  to 
come.  They  rest  one  upon  another,  in  straight  and 
even  lines,  and  present  a  vast  smooth  triangle,  aacend- 
ing  from  a  base  of  a  hundred  feet,  and  narrowing  to 
an  apex  at  the  height  of  a  hundred  and  twenty-five, 
the  junctures  of  the  marble  slabs  being  so  close  that, 
in  all  these  twenty  centuries,  only  a  few  little  tufta  of 
grass,  and  a  trailing  plant  or  two.  have  succeeded  in 
tooting  tliemselves  ioto  the  interstices. 

It  is  good  and  satisfactory  to  see  anything  which, 
being  built  for  an  enduring  monument,  has  endured 


4 


148    FRENCn  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE^BOOKS.   [18M 

80  faithfully,  and  has  a  prospect  of  Huuh  sin   Lutei>l 
miiiable  futurity  before  It.     Ont^e,  indeed,  il  seemed  I 
likely  to  be  buried ;  for  three  hundred  years  ago  ifcj 
had  become  covered  to  the  depth  of  sixteen  feet,  1 
the  soil  has  sino«  been  dug  away  from  its  base,  ' 
is   now   lower   than  that  of  the   road   which   paa 
through  the  neighboring  gate  of  San  Paolo.     Midway 
up  the  pyramid,  cut  in  the  marble,  is  an  inscriptioD 
ill  large  Roman  letters,  still  almost  as  legible  as  when 
first  wrought.  I 

J  did  not  return  through  the  Paolo  gateway,  bin 
kept  onward,  round  the  exterior  of  the  wall,  till  £^ 
came  to  the  gate  of  San  Sebastiano.  It  wha  a  hot 
and  not  a  very  interesting  walk,  with  only  a  liigh  bare 
wall  of  brick,  broken  by  frequent  square  towers,  on 
one  side  of  the  roa^l,  and  a  bank  and  hedge  or  a  gar- 
den wall  on  the  other.  Roman  roada  are  most  inhos- 
pitable, offering  no  shade,  and  no  seat,  and  no  pleas- 
ant views  of  rustic  domiciles ;  nothing  but  the  wheel 
traek  of  white  duat,  without  a  footpath  running  by  ita 
side,  and  seldom  any  grassy  margin  to  refresh  the  way- 
farer's feet  1 


April  id.  —  A  few  days  ago  we  visitetl  the  studiif 

of  Mr. ,  an  American,  who  seems  to  have  a  goofl 

deal  of  vogue  as  a  sculptor.  We  found  a  figure  of 
Pocahontas,  which  he  has  repeated  several  times ;  an- 
other, which  he  calls  The  Wept  of  the  Wish-tfln-Wish, 
a  figure  of  a  smiling  girl  playing  with  a  cat  and  dog, 
and  a  school -boy  mending  a  pen.  These  two  last 
were  the  only  ones  that  gave  me  any  pleasure,  or  that 
really  had  any  merit ;  for  his  cleverness  and  ingenu- 
ity appear  in  homely  subjects,  but  are  quite  lost  in 
attempts  at  a  higher  ideality.     Nevertbeleas,  he  hM 


1 


S8.] 


149 


a  group  of  the  Prodigal  Son,  possessing  more  morit 

than  I  should  have  expected  from  Mr- ,  the  son 

reclining  hia  bead  uu  his  father's  breast,  with  an  ex< 
pression  of  utter  weariness,  at  length  finding  perfect 
rest,  while  the  father  bends  his  benign  comitenanoe 
over  him,  and  seems  to  i-eeeive  him  calmly  into  him- 
Belf.  This  group  (tlie  plaster-cast  standing  beside  it} 
is  DOW  taking  shape  out  of  an  immense  block  of  mar^ 
ble,  and  will  be  as  indestructible  as  the  Laocoon ;  an 
idea  at  once  awful  and  ludicrous,  when  we  consider 
that  it  is  at  best  but  a  respectable  production.     I  have 

since  been  told  that  Mr. had  stolen,  adopted,  we 

will  rather  say,  the  attitude  and  idea  of  the  group 
from  one  executed  by  a  student  of  the  French  Acad- 
emy, and  to  be  seen  there  in  plaster.' 

Mr. has  now  been  ten  years  in  Italy,  and,  after 

all  this  time,  he  is  still  entirely  American  in  every- 
thing but  the  most  external  surface  of  his  manners  ; 
scarcely  Europeanized,  or  much  modified  even  in  that. 

He  is  a  native  of ,  but  had  his  early  breeding  in 

New  Tork,  and  might,  for  any  polish  or  refinement 
that  I  can  discern  in  him,  still  be  a  country  shop* 
keeper  in  the  interior  of  New  York  State  or  New  Eng- 
.and.  How  strange  !  For  one  expects  to  find  the  pol- 
ish, the  close  grain  and  white  puri^  of  marble,  in  the 
artist  who  works  in  that  noble  material ;  but,  after  all, 
ho  handles  clay,  and,  judging  by  the  specimens  I  have 
seen  here,  is  apt  to  be  clay,  not  of  the  finest,  himself. 
Mr, is  sensible,  shrewd,  keen,  clever ;  an  ingen- 
ious workman,  no  doubt;  with  tact  enough,  and  not 
destitute  of  taste;  very  agreeable  and  lively  in  his 
conversation,  talking  as  fast  and  as  naturally  as  a 
brook  Tons,  without  the  slightest  affectation.  His 
*  W«  aitetnuils  mw  ii  la  [he  Medici  Cuioo, 


150    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1888,1 

naturalness  is,  in  fact,  a  rath«r  stn'king  characteris- 
tic, in  view  of  his  lack  of  culture,  while  yet  his  life 
has  been  concerned  with  i<l?alities  and  a  beautiful  art. 
What  degree  of  taste  he  pretends  to,  he  seems  really 
to  possess,  nor  did  I  hear  a  single  idea  from  him  that 
struck  me  an  otherwise  than  sensible. 

He  Cidlcd  to  see  us  last  evening,  and  talked  for 
about  two  ho\irs  in  a  very  amusing  and  interesting 
style,  his  topics  being  taken  from  his  own  personal  ex- 
penence,  and  shrewdly  treated.  He  spoke  much  of 
Greenough,  whom  he  described  as  an  excellent  critia 
of  art,  but  possessed  of  not  the  slightest  inventive 
genius.  His  statue  of  Washington,  at  the  Capitol,  is 
taken  precisely  from  the  Pbidian  Jupiter;  his  Chant- 
ing Cherubs  are  copied  in  marble  from  two  figures  in 
a  picture  by  Raphael.  He  did  notliing  that  was  orig- 
inal with  himself.  .  .  .  To-day  we  ttwk  R .  aai 

went  to  see  Miss ,  and  as  her  studio  seems  to  b* 

mixed  up  with  Gibson's,  we  had  an  opportunity  ofi 
glancing  at  some  of  his  beautiful  works.  We  saw  » 
Venus  and  a  Cupiil,  both  of  them  tinte<l ;  and,  side 
by  side  with  them,  other  statues  identical  with  these 
except  that  the  marble  was  left  in  its  pure  whiteness. 

We  found  Miss in  a  little  upper  room.     She 

has  a  small,  brisk,  wide-awake  figure,  uot  ungraceful ; 
frank,  simple,  straightforward,  and  downright.  She 
had  on  a  rolie.  I  think,  but  I  did  not  look  so  low,  my 
attention  being  chiefly  drawn  to  a  sort  of  man's  sack 
of  purple  or  plum  -  colored  broadcloth,  into  the  side- 
pockets  of  which  her  hands  were  thrust  as  she  came 
forward  to  greet  us.  She  withdrew  one  hand,  how- 
ever, and  presented  it  conlially  to  my  wife  (whom  she 
already  knew)  and  to  myself,  without  waiting  for  an 
introduction.     She  had  on  a  shirt-front,  collar,  and 


I 

1 


1858.]  ITALY.  161 

cravat  like  a  mnn'g,  with  a  brooch  of  Etruscan  gold, 
and  on  her  curly  head  wa3  a  picturesque  little  cap  of 
black  velvet,  and  her  face  was  ae  bright  and  men-;, 
and  as  small  of  feature,  as  a  child's.  It  looked  in  ono 
aspect  youthful,  and  yet  there  waa  something  worn  in 
it  too.  There  never  was  anything  so  jaunty  as  her 
movement  and  action  ;  she  was  very  peculiar,  but  she 
seemed  to  be  her  actual  self,  and  nothing  affected  or 
made  up ;  so  that,  for  my  part,  I  gave  her  full  leave 
to  wear  what  may  suit  her  best,  and  to  bebave  as  her 
inner  woman  prompts.  I  don't  quite  see,  however, 
what  she  is  to  do  wheu  she  grows  older,  for  the  de<M>< 
rum  of  age  will  not  be  consistent  with  a  costiune  that 
looks  pretty  and  excusable  enough  in  a  young  woman. 

Miss led  us  into  a  part  of  the  extensive  studio, 

or  collection  of  studios,  where  some  of  her  own  works 
were  to  be  seen :  Beatrice  Cenci,  which  did  not  very 
greatly  impress  me  ;  and  a  monumental  design,  a  fe- 
male figure,  —  wholly  draped  even  to  the  stockings 
and  shoes,  —  in  a  quiet  sleep.  I  liked  this  last.  There 
was  also  a  Puck,  doubtless  full   of  fun ;  but  I  had 

hardly  time  to  glance  at  it.     Miss evidently  has 

good  gifts  in  her  profession,  and  doubtless  she  derives 
great  advantage  from  her  close  association  with  a  con- 
summate artist  like  Gibson ;  nor  yet  does  his  influ- 
ence seem  to  interfere  with  the  originality  of  her  own 
conceptions.  In  one  way,  at  least,  she  can  hardly  fail 
to  profit,  —  that  is,  by  the  opportunity  of  showing  her 
works  to  the  throngs  of  people  who  go  to  see  Gibson's  * 
own  ;  and  these  are  just  such  people  as  an  artist  would 
most  desire  to  meet,  and  might  never  see  in  a  lifetime, 
if  left  to  himself.  I  shook  hands  with  this  frauk  and 
pleasant  little  person,  and  took  leave,  not  without  puv 
pose  of  seeing  her  again. 


152   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [1859. 

Within  a  few  days,  there  have  been  many  pilgrima; 
in  Rome,  who  oonie  hither  to  attend  the  ceremonies 
of  Holy  Week,  and  to  perform  thtir  vows,  and  undergo" 
their  penances.  I  saw  two  of  them  near  the  Forum 
yesterday,  with  their  pilgrim  staves,  in  the  fashion  of 
a  thousand  years  ago.  ...  I  sat  down  on  a  Itench 
near  one  of  the  chapels,  and  a  woman  immediately 
came  up  to  me  to  l>eg.  I  at  first  refused ;  but  she 
knelt  down  by  my  side,  instead  of  praying  to  the  saint 
prayed  to  me  ;  and,  being  thus  treated  as  a  canonized 
personage,  I  thought  it  incumbent  on  me  to  be  gra- 
cious to  the  extent  of  half  a  paul.  My  wife,  some 
time  ago,  came  in  contact  with  a  pickpocket  at  the 
entrance  of  a  church ;  and,  failing  in  his  enterprise 
upon  her  purse,  he  passed  in,  dipped  his  thieving  fin- 
gers in  the  holy  water,  and  paid  his  devotions  at  a 
shrine.  Missing  the  purse,  he  said  his  prayers,  in  the 
hope,  |)erhaps,  that  the  saint  would  send  him  better 
luck  another  time. 

April  10th.  — I  have  made  no  eaitries  in  my  journal 
recently,  being  exceedingly  lazy,  partly  from  indispo 
sition,  as  well  as  from  an  atmosphere  that  takes  the 
vivacity  out  of  everybody.  Not  much  has  happened 
or  been  effected.     Last  Sunday,  which  was  Easter 

Sunday,  I  went  with  J to  St.  Peter's,  where  WB 

arrived  at  about  nine  o'clock,  and  found  a  multitude 
of  people  already  assembled  in  the  church.  The  in- 
•  terior  was  arrayed  in  festal  guise,  there  being  a  cover- 
ing of  scarlet  damask  over  the  pilasters  of  the  nave, 
from  base  to  capital,  giving  an  effect  of  splendor,  yet 
with  a  loss  as  to  the  apparent  dimensions  of  the  in- 
terior. A  guani  of  soldiers  occupieti  the  nave,  keep- 
ing open  a  wide  space  for  the  passage  of  a  pruocssios 


I 


1 


ITALY. 


l&S 


that  was  momently  expected,  and  soon  arrived.  The 
crowd  was  too  great  to  allow  of  my  seeing  it  in  detail; 
but  I  could  perceive  that  there  were  priests,  cardioalB, 
Swiss  guards,  some  of  them  with  corselets  on,  and  by 
and  by  the  pope  himself  was  borne  up  the  nave,  liigh 
over  the  heads  of  all,  sitting  under  a  canopy  crowued 
with  his  tiara.  He  floated  slowly  aloug,  and  was  set 
down  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  high  altar ;  and  the 
pi-ocession  being  broken  up,  some  of  its  scattered  mem- 
bers might  be  seen  here  and  there,  about  the  chui-ch, — 
ofBcials,  in  antique  Spanish  dresses  ;  Swiss  guards,  in 
polished  steel  breastplates;  serving  men,  in  richly  em- 
broidered liveries ;  officers,  in  scarlet  coats  and  militaiy 
boots ;  priests,  and  divers  other  shapes  of  men ;  for  the 
papal  ceremonies  seem  to  forego  little  or  nothing  that 
belongs  to  times  past,  while  it  includes  everything  ap- 
pertaining to  the  present.  I  ought  to  have  waited  to 
witness  the  papal  benediction  from  the  balcony  in  front 
of  the  church ;  or,  at  least,  to  hear  the  famous  silver 

trumpets,  sounding  from  the  dome ;  but  J grew 

weary  (to  say  the  truth,  so  did  I),  and  we  went  on  a 
long  walk,  out  of  the  nearest  city  gate,  and  back 
through  the  Janiculum,  and,  finally,  homeward  over 
the  Ponte  Kotto.  Standing  on  the  bridge,  I  saw  the 
awh  of  the  Cloaca  Maxima,  close  by  the  Temple  of 
Vesta,  with  the  water  rising  within  two  or  three  feet 
of  its  keystone. 

The  same  evening  we  went  to  Monte  Cavallo,  where, 
from  the  gateway  of  the  Pontifical  Palace,  we  saw  the 
illumination  of  St.  Peter's.  Mr.  Akers,  the  sculptor, 
had  recommended  this  position  to  us,  and  accompa^ 
nied  us  thither,  as  the  best  point  from  which  the  iUu- 
minatinn  could  be  witnessed  at  a  distance,  without  tha 
incommodity  of  such  a  crowd  as  would  be  assembled 


154  FRESCB  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [18K  | 

at  the  Pincian.  The  first  UIuminatioD,  the  silver  one, 
as  it  is  calle<l,  was  very  grand  au<l  delicate,  describiog 
the  outline  of  the  great  editice  and  erowning  dome  in 
light ;  while  the  day  was  not  yot  wholly  departed.  As 
■  finally  remarked,  it   seemed  like  the  glorified 

spirit  of  the  Church,  made  visible,  or,  aa  I  will  add,  it 
looked  as  this  famous  and  Devcr-to-lie-fui-gottt.'n  struc- 
ture will  look  to  the  imaginations  of  men,  through  the 
waste  and  gloom  of  future  ages,  after  it  shall  have 
gone  quite  to  decay  and  ruin :  the  brilliant,  though 
scarcely  distinct  gleam  of  a  statelier  dome  than  eve»- 
was  seen,  shining  on  the  background  of  the  night  ofi 
Time.  This  simile  looked  prettier  in  my  fancy  than  II 
have  made  it  look  on  paper. 

After  we  had  enjoyed  the  silver  illumination  a  good 
while,  and  when  all  the  daylight  had  given  plaec  to 
the  con.itellated  night,  the  distant  outline  of  St.  Peter's 
burst  forth,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  into  a  starrj 
blaze,  being  quite  the  finest  effect  that  I  ever  wit> 
nessed.  I  staye<l  to  see  it,  however,  only  a  few  min- 
utes ;  for  I  was  quite  ill  and  feverish  with  a  cold,  — 
which,  indeed,  I  have  seldom  been  free  from,  sinoe 
my  first  breathing  of  the  genial  atmosphere  of  Rome. 
This  j>estilenee  kept  me  within  doors  all  the  next  day, 
and  prevented  roe  from  seeing  the  beautiful  fireworks 
that  were  exhibited  in  the  evening  from  the  platform 
on  the  Pincian,  above  the  Piazza  del  Po|iolo 

On  Thumday.  I  paid  another  visit  to  the  sctdptur^ 
gallery  of  the  Capitol,  where  I  was  particularly  struok 
with  a  bust  of  Cato  the  Censor,  who  must  have  been 
the  most  disagreeable,  stubborn,  iigly-tempered,  pig^ 
headed,  narrow-minded,  strong-willed  old  Roman  that 
ever  lived.  The  collection  of  busts  here  and  at  the 
VatJcan  are  most  interesting,  many  of  the  individual 


I 
I 


nH.] 


ISO 


I 
I 


beads  being  full  of  character,  and  commenfling  theni' 
selves  by  mtrinsic  evidence  as  faithful  portraito  of  the 
originals.  These  atone  people  have  stood  face  to  face 
with  CsBsar,  and  all  the  other  emperors,  and  with 
Btatesmen,  soldiers,  philosophers,  and  poete  of  the  an- 
tique  world,  and  have  been  to  them  like  their  refleo 
tions  in  a  mirror.  It  is  the  next  thing  to  seeing  the 
men  themselves. 

We  went  afterwards  into  the  Palace  of  the  Conser- 
vator!, and  saw,  among  various  other  interesting  things, 
the  bronze  wolf  suckling  Romulus  and  Kemus,  who 
sit  beneath  her  dugs,  with  open  mouths  to  receive  the 
milk. 

On  Friday,  we  all  went  to  see  the  Pope's  Palace  on 
the  Quirinal.  There  was  a  vast  hall,  and  an  inter- 
minable suite  of  rooms,  eased  with  marble,  floored 
with  marble  or  mosaics  or  inlaid  wood,  adorned  with 
frescos  on  the  vaulted  ceilings,  and  many  of  them 
lined  with  Gobelin  tapestry;  not  wofully  faded,  like 
ahnost  all  that  I  have  hitherto  seen,  but  brilliant  as 
pictures.  Indeed,  some  of  them  so  closely  resembled 
paintings,  that  I  could  hardly  believe  they  were  not 
BO ;  and  the  effect  was  even  richer  than  that  of  oil- 
paintings.  In  every  room  there  was  a  crucifix ;  but  I 
did  not  see  a  single  nook  or  comer  where  anybody 
could  have  dreamed  of  being  comfortable.  Neverthe- 
less, as  a  stately  and  solemn  residence  for  his  holiness, 
it  is  quite  a  satisfactory  affair.  Afterwards,  we  went 
into  the  Pontifical  Gardens,  connected  with  the  pal- 
ace. They  are  very  extensive,  and  laid  out  in  straight 
avenues,  bordered  with  walls  of  box,  as  impervious  as 
If  of  atone,  —  not  less  than  twenty-  feet  high,  and 
pierued  with  lofty  archways,  cut  in  the  living  wall. 
Borne  of  the  avenues  were  overshadowed  with  trees. 


166    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [1868 

the  tops  of  which  bent  over  and  joined  one  anothex* 
from  either  side,  so  a^  to  resemble  a  side -aisle  of  a 
Gothit!  catliedral.  Marble  sculptures,  much  weather- 
utained,  and  generally  broken-nosed,  stood  along  theM 
Dtately  walks ;  there  were  many  fountains  gushing  up 
into  the  sunshine ;  we  likewise  found  a  rich  floweiv 
garden,  containing  rare  specimens  of  exotic  flowers, 
and  gigantic  cactuaes,  and  also  an  aviary,  with  vul- 
tures, doves,  and  singing  birds.  We  did  not  see  half 
the  garden,  but,  stiff  and  formal  as  its  general  ai> 
s-angement  is,  it  is  a  beautiful  place, —  a  delightful, 
sunny,  and  serene  seclusion.  Whatever  it  may  be  to 
the  pope,  two  young  lovers  might  And  the  Garden  of 
Eden  here,  and  never  desire  to  stray  out  of  its  pre-  ■ 
cincts.  They  might  fancy  angels  stauding  in  the  long,  ^ 
glimmering  vistas  of  the  avenues. 

It  would  suit  me  well  enough  to  have  my  daily  walk 
along  such  straight  paths,  for  I  think  them  favorable 
to  tliought,  which  is  apt  to  be  disturbed  by  variety  and 
unexpectedness.  J 

April  12th.  —  We  all,  except  R ,  went  to-day  1 

to  the  Vatican,  where  we  found  our  way  to  the  Stanze 
of  Raphael,  these  being  four  rooms,  or  halls,  paint«d 
with  frescos.  No  doubt  they  were  once  very  brilliant 
and  beautiful ;  but  they  have  encountered  bard  treat- 
ment since  Raphael's  time,  especially  when  the  soldiers 
of  the  Constable  de  Bourbon  occupied  these  apart- 
ments, and  made  fires  on  the  mosaic  floors.  The  en- 
tire  walls  and  ceilings  are  covered  with  pictures ;  but 
the  handiwork  or  designs  of  Raphael  consist  of  paint- 
ings on  the  four  sides  of  each  room,  and  include  sev- 
eral works  of  art.  The  School  of  Athens  is  perhapi 
the  most  celebrated ;  and  tho  longest  side  of  the  laxx 


io  of  the  la*.  ^^1 


iTAlT. 


1S7 


I 


It  hall  is  occupied  by  a  battle-piece,  of  whicb  the 
Kmperor  Coastantane  ia  the  hero,  and  which  covers 
almost  space  enough  for  a  real  battle-field.  There  was 
a  wonderful  light  in  one  of  the  pictures,  —  that  of  St. 
Feter  awakened  in  his  prison,  by  the  angel ;  it  really 
peemed  to  throw  a  radiance  into  the  hall  below.  I 
'6sU  not  pretend,  however,  to  have  been  sensible  of 
toy  particular  rapture  at  the  sight  of  these  frescws ;  so 
hded  as  they  are,  so  battered  by  the  mischances  of 
fears,  insomuch  that,  through  all  the  power  and  glory 
of  Raphael's  designs,  the  spectator  cannot  but  be  con- 
tinoally  sensible  that  the  groundwork  of  them  is  an 
old  plaster  wall.     They  have  been  scrubbed,  I  suppose, 

—  brushed,  at  least,  —  a  thousand  times  over,  till  the 
Burfaee,  brilliant  or  soft,  as  Raphael  left  it,  must  have 
been  quite  rubbed  off,  and  with  it  all  the  c^insummate 
finish,  and  everything  that  made  them  originally  de- 
lightful. The  sterner  features  remain,  the  skeleton  of 
thought,  but  not  the  beauty  that  once  clothed  it.  In 
truth,  the  frescos,  excepting  a  few  figures,  never  bad 
the  real  touch  of  Raphael's  own  hand  upon  them,  hav- 
ing been  merely  designed  by  him,  and  finished  by  his 
scholars,  or  by  other  artists. 

The  halls  themselves  are  specimens  of  antique  m^- 
nificence,  paved  with  elaborate  mosaics;  and  wher- 
ever there  is  any  woodwork,  it  is  richly  carved  with 
foliage  and  figures.  In  their  newness,  and  probably 
for  a  hundred  years  afterwards,  tliere  could  not  have 
been  so  brilliant  a  suite  of  rooms  in  the  world. 

Connected  with  them  —  at  any  rate,  not  far  distant 

-  -  is  the  little  Chapel  of  San  Lorenzo,  the  very  site  of 
which,  among  the  thousands  of  apai-tinents  of  the  Vat- 
ican, waa  long  forgotten,  and  its  existence  only  known 
by  tradition.     Aft«r  it  bad  been  walled  up,  however. 


168   FRBNCn  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [ISn,! 


V  of  I 


I,  there  < 


HtUl    1 


beyond  the  memory 
\>i  Home  beautiful  frescos  by  Fra  Angelico,  in  an  old 
ulwjiel  of  Pope  Nicholas  V.,  that  liad  strangely  disap- 
I>oajiid  out  of  the  palace,  and,  search  at  length  being 
ma<lc,  it  was  discovered,  and  entered  through  a  win- 
dow. It  is  a  small,  lofty  room,  quite  covered  over 
with  frescos  of  sacred  subjects,  both  on  the  walls  and 
ceiling,  a  good  deal  faded,  yet  pretty  distinctly  pi 
served.  It  would  have  been  no  misfortune  to 
the  little  old  chapel  bad  remained  still  hidden. 

We  next  issued  into  the  Loggie,  which  consist  of 
a  long  gallery,  or  arcade  or  colonnade,  the  whole  ex- 
tent of  which  was  once  beautifully  adorned  by  Ra- 
phael. Tlieae  pictures  are  almost  worn  away,  and  so 
defaced  as  to  be  untraceable  and  unintelligible,  along 
the  side  wall  of  the  gallery ;  although  traceries  of  Ara- 
besque, and  compartments  where  there  seem  to  have 
been  rich  paintings,  but  now  only  an  indistinguisha- 
ble waste  of  dull  color,  are  still  to  be  seen.  In  the 
coved  ceiling,  however,  there  are  still  some  bright  fres- 
cos, in  better  preservation  than  any  others ;  not  par- 
ticularly beautiful,  nevertheless.  I  remember  to  have 
seen  (indeed,  we  ourselves  possess  tliem)  a  series 
very  spirited  and  energetic  engravings,  old  and 
of  these  frescos,  the  subject  being  the  Creation, 
the  early  Scripture  history ;  and  I  really  think  that 
their  tnuialation  of  the  pictures  is  lietter  than  the  orig- 
inal. On  reference  to  Murray,  I  find  that  little  more 
tlian  the  designs  is  attributed  to  Raphael,  the  execn-, 
tion  being  by  Giulio  Romano  and  other  artists. 

Escaping  from  these  forlorn  splendors,  we  went 
into  the  sculpture-gallery,  where  I  was  able  to  enjoy, 
in  some  Hiiiall  degree,  two  or  three  wonderful  works 
of  art }  and  had  a  perception  that  there  were  a  thoif 


4 


series  ol^^^| 
[1  ooarafli^^H 
don,  and^^l 

»t 

?■ 

•e 

lS 

ere  a  thoo'  ^^1 


18H.] 


ITALY. 


Eaad  other  wonders  around  me.  It  is  as  tf  the  statues 
kept,  for  the  most  part,  a  vmI  about  theni,  which  tbey 
sometimes  withdraw,  and  hit  their  beauty  gleam  upon 
my  sight ;  only  a  glimpse,  or  two  or  three  glimpses,  or 
a  little  spaee  of  tralni  enjoyment,  and  then  I  sec  noth- 
ing but  a  diseolored  marble  image  agaiu.  The  Mi- 
nerva Metlica  revealed  herself  to-day.  I  wonder 
whether  other  people  are  more  fortunate  than  myself, 
and  can  invariably  find  their  way  to  the  inner  soul  of 
a  work  of  art.  I  doubt  it ;  they  look  at  these  things 
for  just  a  minute,  and  pass  on,  without  any  pang  of 
remorse,  such  as  I  feel,  for  quitting  them  so  soon  and 
so  willingly.  I  ara  partly  sensible  that  some  unwrit- 
ten rules  of  taste  are  making  their  way  into  my  mind ; 
that  all  tills  Greek  beauty  has  done  something  towards 
refining  me,  though  I  am  still,  however,  a  very  sturdy 
Goth.  .  .  . 


April  \Sth.  —  Yesterday  I  went  with  J to  the 

Forum,  and  descended  into  the  excavations  at  the 
base  of  the  Capitol,  and  on  the  site  of  the  Basilica  of 
Julia.  The  essential  elements  of  ohi  Rome  are  there : 
columns,  single,  or  in  groups  of  two  or  tbree,  still 
erect,  but  battered  and  bruised  at  some  forgotten  time 
with  infinite  pains  and  labor  ;  fragments  of  other  col- 
umns lying  prostrate,  together  with  rich  capitals  and 
friezes  :  the  bust  of  a  Goloasal  female  statue,  showing 
the  bosom  and  upper  part  of  the  arms,  but  headless  ; 
a  long,  winding  space  of  pavement,  forming  part  of 
the  ancient  ascent  to  the  Capitol,  still  as  firm  and 
solid  as  ever;  the  foundation  of  the  Capitol  itself 
Wonderfully  massive,  built  of  immense  square  blocks 
of  stone,  doubtless  three  thousand  years  old,  and  dur- 
tble  for  whatever  may  be  the  lifetune  of  the  world , 


160   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-IIOOKS.  [1868 

the  Anrh  of   SeptimiuB  Severua,  with  bas-reliefs 
Eastern  wars ;  tho  Column  of  Phoca«,  with  the  rude 
series  of  steps  ascending  on  four  sides  to  its  pedestal 
the  floor  of  heautifiU  and   precious   marbles  in  thfl 
Basilica    of    Julia,    the    slabs    craek^    across,  —  the^ 
greater  part  of  them  torn  up  and  I'emoveil,  thi 
and  weeds  growing  up  through  the  ehinks  of  what  re- 
main ;  heaps  of  bricks,  shapeless  bits  of  granite,  and 
other  ancient  rubbish,  among  which  old  men  ore  lazily 
rummaging  for  specimens  that  a  stranger  may 
duued  to  buy,  —  this  bemg  an  employment  that  suits 
the  indolence  of  a  modem  Koman.     The  level  of  these 
excavations  is  about  fifteen  feet,  I  should  judge,  be-' 
low  the  present  street  which  passes  through  the  F( 
rum,  and  only  a  very  small  part  of  this  alien  surfaoor' 
has  been  removed,  though  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
it  hides  numerous  treasures  of  art  and  monmnents  of 
history.     Yet  these  remains  do  not  make  that  impres- 
sion of   antiquity  upon  me,  which  Gothio  ruins  do. 
Perhaps  it  is  so  because  they  belong  to  quite  another 
system  of  society  and  epoch  of  time,  and  in  view  of 
theiu,  we  foi'get  all  that  has  intervened  betwixt  them 
and  us ;  being  morally  mdike  and  disconnected  with 
them,  and  not  belonging  to  the  same  train  of  thought 
BO  that  we  look  across  a  gulf  to  the  Roman  ages,  and 
do  not  realize  bow  wide  the  gulf  is.     Yet  in  that  in> 
tervening  valley  lie  Christianity,  the  Dark  Ages,  th* 
feudal  system,  chivalry  and  romance,  and  a  deeper  life 
of  the  human  rac«  than  Home  brought  to  the  verge  of 
the  gulf. 

To-day  we  went  to  the  Colonna  Palace,  where  we 
saw  some  fine  pictures,  but,  I  tliink,  no  masterpieces. 
They  did  not  depress  and  dishearten  me  so  umch  aa 
the  pictures  in  Roman  palaces  usually  do;  for  thej 


in-    H 

Its  ^M 

lee  ^^^ 

I 


ITALY. 


16) 


were  in  remarkably  good  order  as,  regards  frames  and 
aish ;  indeed,  I  rather  Buspect  some  of  them  had 
been  injured  by  the  means  adopted  to  preserve  their 
beauty.  The  palace  is  now  occupied  by  the  French 
Ambassador,  who  probably  looks  upon  the  pictures  as 
articles  of  furniture  and  household  adornment,  and 
does  not  choose  to  have  aquares  of  black  and  forlorn 
canvas  upon  his  walls.  There  were  a  few  noble  por- 
traits by  Vandyke ;  a  very  striking  one  by  Holbein, 
one  or  two  by  Titian,  also  by  Guercino,  and  some  pic- 
tures by  Rubens,  and  other _/brc8(im  painters,  which 
refreshed  my  weary  eyes.  But  what  chiefly  interested 
me  was  the  magnificent  and  stately  hall  of  the  palace ; 
fifty-five  of  my  paces  in  length,  besides  a  lai^  apart- 
ment at  either  end,  opening  into  it  through  a  pillarei) 
space,  as  wide  as  the  gateway  of  a  city.  The  pillars 
are  of  giallo  antico,  and  there  are  pilasters  of  the  same 
iJl  the  way  up  and  down  the  walls,  forming  a  perspec- 
tive of  the  richest  aspect,  especially  as  the  broad  cor. 
uice  flames  with  gilding,  and  the  spaces  between  the 
pilasters  are  emblazoned  with  heraldic  achievements 
and  emblems  in  gold,  and  there  are  Venetian  looking- 
glasses,  richly  decorated  over  the  surface  with  beauti- 
ful pictures  of  flowers  and  Cupids,  through  which  you 
catch  the  gleam  of  the  mirror ;  and  two  rows  of  splen- 
did chandeliers  extend  from  end  to  end  of  the  hall, 
which,  when  lighted  up,  if  ever  it  be  lighted  up,  now- 
a-nights,  must  be  the  most  brilliant  interior  that  ever 
mortal  eye  beheld.  The  ceiling  glows  with  pictures  in 
fresco,  representing  scenes  connected  with  the  history 
of  the  Colonna  family;  and  the  floor  is  paved  with 
beautiful  marbles,  [tolistied  and  arranged  in  square 
and  circular  coinpartnients ;  and  each  of  the  many 
windows  is  set  in  a  great  architectural  frame  of  pre- 

VOL.  I.  U 


162   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [18( 

eious  marble,  as  large  aa  tbe  portal  of  a 
apartment  at  the  farther  end  of  tbe  hall  is  elevated 
above  it,  ami  is  attained  by  several  marble  steps, 
whence  it  must  have  been  glorious  in  former  days  to 
have  looked  down  upon  a  gorgeous  throng  of  princes, 
oardinaU,  warriors,  and  ladies,  in  siu'h  rich  attire 
might  be  worn  when  the  palace  was  built.  It  is  sin^ 
gular  how  much  freshness  and  brightness  it  still  re- 
tains; and  the  only  objects  to  mar  the  effect 
some  ancient  statues  and  busts,  not  very  good  in 
themselves,  and  now  made  dreary  of  aspect  by  theu 
corroded  surfaces,  —  tbe  result  of  long  burial 
ground. 

In  tbe  room  at  tlio  entrance  of  the  ball  are  t^ 
cabiuetH,  each  a  wonder  in  its  way,  —  one  bein^.i 
adorned  with  precious  stones;  the  other  with  ivoi 
carvings  of  Michel  Angelo's  Last  Judgment,  and  of 
the  frescos  of  Kapbacl's  Loggio.  Tbe  world  has 
ceased  to  be  so  magnificent  as  it  once  was.  Men 
make  no  such  marvels  nowa^lays,  Tbe  only  defect 
that  I  remember  in  this  hall  was  in  the  marble  steps 
that  ascend  to  the  elevated  apartment  at  the  end  of  it ; 
a  large  piece  bad  been  broken  out  of  one  of  them, 
leaving  a  rough  im-gulur  gap  in  tbe  polished  marble 
Btair.  It  is  not  easy  to  conceive  what  violence  can 
have  done  this,  without  also  doing  mischief  to  all  tba 
other  splendor  around  it. 


April  IGth.  —  We  went  this  morning  to  the  A(^- 
emy  of  St,  Luke  (the  Fine  Arts  Acailemy  at  Rome)  in 
the  Via  Bonella,  close  by  the  Forum.  We  rang  the 
bell  at  the  house  door  ;  and  after  a  few  moments  it 
was  unlocked  or  unbolted  by  some  unseen  agency  froift  I 
above,  no   one  making  his  appearance  to  admit  tUbJ^ 


[  in 
he^^H 

twfH 
>it>SH 


M.] 


iTAir. 


We  asoended  two  or  three  flightB  of  stairs,  and  en- 
terod  a  hall,  where  was  a  young  man,  the  custode, 
and  two  or  three  artists  engaged  in  copying  some  of 
the  pictures.  The  collection  not  being  vastly  large, 
and  the  pictures  being  in  more  presentable  condition 
than  usual,  I  enjoyed  them  more  than  I  generally  do ; 
particularly  a  Virgin  and  Child  by  Vandyke,  where 
two  angels  are  singing  and  playing,  one  on  a  bite 
and  the  other  on  a  violin,  to  remind  the  holy  infant  of 
the  strains  he  used  to  hear  in  heaven.  It  is  one  of 
the  few  pictures  that  there  is  really  any  pleasure  in 
looking  at.  There  were  several  paintings  by  Titian, 
mostly  of  a  voluptuous  character,  but  not  very  cliami- 
ing ;  also  two  or  more  by  Guido.  one  of  which,  repre- 
senting Fortune,  is  celebrated.  They  did  not  impress 
me  much,  nor  do  I  find  myself  strongly  drawn  to- 
wards Guido,  though  there  is  no  other  painter  who 
seems  to  achieve  things  so  magically  and  inscrutably 
as  he  sometimes  does.  Perhaps  it  requires  a  finer 
taste  than  mine  to  appreciate  him ;  and  yet  I  do  ap- 
preciate him  so  far  as  to  see  that  his  Michael,  for 
instance,  is  perfectly  beautiful.  ...  In  the  gallery 
there  are  whole  rows  of  portraits  of  members  of  the 
Academy  of  St.  Luke,  most  of  whom,  judging  by  their 
physiognomies,  were  very  commonplace  people;  a  fact 
which  makes  itself  visible  in  a  portrait,  however  mucli 
the  painter  may  try  to  flatter  his  sitter.  Several  of 
the  pictures  by  Titian.  Paul  Veronese,  aud  other  ar- 
tists,  now  exhibited  in  the  gallery,  were  formerly  kept 
in  a  secret  cabinet  in  the  Capitol,  being  considered  of 
a  too  voluptuous  character  for  the  public  eye,  I  did 
Hot  tliink  them  noticeably  iudeoorous,  as  compared 
with  a  hundrexl  other  pictures  that  are  shown  and 
looked  at  without  scruple,  —  Calypso  and  her  Nympha, 


164    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1 

a  knot  of  Dude  women  by  Titian,  in  perhaps  as  objety 
tionable  as  any.  But  even  Titian's  flesh  tints  cannot 
keep,  and  have  not  kept,  their  warmth  through  all 
these  centuries.  The  illusion  and  Hfelikeness  effer- 
vcsccH  and  exhales  out  of  a  picture  an  it  grows 
and  we  go  on  talking  of  a  charm  that  has  forever  vaa< 
ished. 

From  St.  Lidie's  we  went  to  San  Pietro  in  VincoK,] 
occupying  a  fine  position  on  or  near  the  summit  of 
Escjuiline  mount.  A  little  abortion  of  a  man  (and, 
by  the  by,  tliere  are  more  diminutive  and  ill-«hapoi 
men  and  women  in  Rome  than  I  ever  saw  elsewhere, 
a  phenomenon  to  be  accounted  for,  perhaps,  by  their 
custom  of  wrapping  tlie  new-bom  infant  in  swaddling- 
clothes),  this  two-foot  abortion  hastenetl  before  ns,  aa 
we  drew  nigh,  to  summon  f-e  sacristan  to  ojten  the 
church  door.  It  was  a  needless  service,  for  which  we 
reworded  him  with  two  baiocchi.  San  Pietro  is  a  sim- 
ple and  noble  church,  consisting  of  a  nave  divided 
from  the  side-^sles  by  rows  of  columns,  that  once; 
adorned  some  ancient  temple  ;  and  its  wide, 
bered  interior  affords  better  breathing  space  than  most 
cliurches  in  Rome.  The  statue  of  Muses  occupiei 
niche  in  one  of  the  side-aisles  on  the  right,  not  far] 
from  the  high  altar.  I  found  it  grand  and  sublime, 
with  a  beard  flowing  down  like  a  cataract ;  a  tndy 
majestic  flgure,  but  not  so  benign  as  it  were  desirable 
that  such  strength  should  be.  The  horns,  about  which 
BO  much  has  been  said,  are  not  a  very  prominent  fea- 
ture  of  the  statue,  being  merely  two  diminutive  tips 
rising  straight  up  over  hia  forehead,  neither  adding  to 
the  grandeur  of  the  head,  nor  detrwting  sensibly  from 
it.  The  whole  force  of  this  statue  is  not  to  be  felt  in 
one  brief  visit,  but  I  agree  with  an  English  gentlemu 


ibjefr  ^^^ 
nnot 
li  aU 
;fFer-  ^^_ 

oidiM 

vaa<^^l 
icoU^^^H 


lb  gentlemu  ^1 


JB68.] 


ITALY. 


165 


I 


who,  with  a  large  party,  SDterecl  the  church  while  we 
were  there,  in  tlimkiog  that  Moses  has  "  very  fine  fea- 
ture^" —  a  complimeDt  for  which  the  coloHsal  Hebrew 
ought  to  have  made  the  Engli»hinan  a  l>ow. 

Besides  the  Moses,  the  church  oontaiuH  some  attrae- 
tioiu)  of  a  pictorial  kind,  which  are  TeiH)sited  id  the 
sacristy,  into  which  we  passed  through  a  s^e  door. 
The  moBt  remarkable  of  these  pictures  is  a  face  and 
bust  of  Hope,  by  Guido,  with  beautiful  eyes  lifted  up- 
wards ;  it  has  a  graec  which  artists  are  continually 
trying  to  get  into  their  inoumerable  copies,  but  always 
without  success ;  for,  indeed,  though  nothing  is  more 
true  than  the  existence  of  this  charm  in  the  picture, 
yet  if  you  try  to  analyze  it,  or  even  look  too  intently 
at  it,  it  vanishes,  till  you  look  again  with  more  trust- 
ing simplicity. 

Leaving  the  church,  we  wandered  to  the  Coliseum, 
and  to  the  public  grounds  contiguous  to  them,  where 
a  score  and  more  of  French  drummers  were  beating 
each  man  his  drum,  without  reference  to  auy  rub-a- 
dub  but  his  own.  This  seems  to  be  a  daily  or  peri- 
odical practice  and  point  of  duty  with  them.  After 
resting  ourselves  on  one  of  the  marble  benches,  we 
came  slowly  home,  through  the  Basilica  of  Constan- 
tine,  and  along  the  shady  sides  of  the  streets  and 
piazzas,  sometimes,  perforce,  striking  boldly  through 
the  white  sunshine,  which,  however,  was  not  bo  hot  aa 
to  shrivel  ua  up  bodily.  It  has  been  a  most  beautifid 
and  perfect  day  as  regards  weather,  clear  and  bright, 
very  warm  in  tlie  stmshine,  yet  freshened  throughout 
by  a  quiet  stir  In  the  air.  Still  there  is  sometliing 
in  this  air  malevolect,  or,  at  lea^t,  not  friendly.  Tho 
Romans  lie  down  and  fall  asleep  in  it,  in  any  vacant 
part  of  the  street's  and  wherever  they  can  find  any 


166    FRENCU  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOK^.    [lib»,'\ 
B]>ot  BufRciently  clean,  and  among  the  ruina  of  tomplei 


I  would  not  nluep  in  Uie 


e  ojwn 


r  for  whatevi; 


my 


vm 


may  be  worth. 

On  our  way  home,  sitting  in  one  of  the  narroif 
streets,  we  saw  an  old  woman  spinning  with  a  distaff ; 
a  far  more  anuient  inijilenieut  than  the  spinning-wheel, 
which  the  housewives  of  other  nations  have  long  since 
laid  aside. 

April  18(A.  —  Yesterday,  at  noon,  the  whole  family 
of  us  set  out  on  a  visit  to  the  Villa  Borghcsc  and  its 
grounds,  the  entiunce  to  whu^b  is  just  outside  of  the 
Porta  del  Popolo.  After  getting  witliin  the  gronnds, 
however,  there  is  a  long  walk  before  reaching  the 
casino,  and  we  found  the  sun  rather  nnconifortably 
hot,  and  the  road  dusty  and  white  in  the  sunshine ; 
nevertheless,  a  footpath  ran  alongside  of  it  moat  of 
the  way  through  the  grass  and  among  the  young  ti-ees. 
It  seems  to  me  tliat  the  trees  do  not  put  forth  their 
leaves  with  nearly  the  same  magical  rapidity  in  this 
southern  land  at  the  approach  of  summer,  an  they  do 
in  more  northerly  countries.  In  these  latter,  having 
a  much  shorter  time  to  develop  themselves,  they  feel 
the  necessity  of  making  the  most  of  it.  But  the  grass, 
in  the  lawns  and  enclosures  along  which  we  passed, 
looked  already  fit  to  be  mowed,  and  it  was  interspersed 
with  many  fiowers. 

Saturday  being,  I  believe,  the  only  day  of  the  week 
on  which  visitors  are  admitted  to  the  casino,  there 
were  many  parties  in  carriages,  artists  ou  foot,  gentle- 
men on  horseback,  and  miscellaneous  people,  to  whom 
the  door  was  opened  by  a  custode  on  ringing  a  belt 
The  whole  of  the  basement  floor  of  the  uvsino,  cniO' 
prising  a  suite  of  beautiful  rooms,  is  filled  with  staft 


4 


4 


fWS.]  ITALY.  167 

nary.  The  entrance  hall  is  a  very  splendid  apartment, 
brightly  frescoed,  and  paved  with  ancient  mosaics,  rep- 
resenting the  combats  with  beasts  and  gladiators  in 
the  Coliseum,  curious,  though  very  rudely  and  awk- 
wardly designed,  apparently  after  tiie  arts  had  begun 
to  decline.  Many  of  the  specimens  of  sculpture  dis- 
played in  these  rooms  are  fine,  but  none  of  them,  I 
think,  possess  the  highest  merit.  An  Apollo  is  beau- 
tiful ;  a  group  of  a  fighting  Amazon,  and  her  enemies 
trampled  under  her  horse's  feet,  is  very  impressive ;  a 
Faun,  copied  from  that  of  Praxiteles,  and  another  who 
seems  to  be  dancing,  were  exceedingly  pleasant  to 
look  at.  I  like  these  strange,  sweet,  playful,  rustic 
creatures,  .  .  .  linked  bo  prettily,  without  monstroB- 
ity,  to  the  lower  tribes.  •  •  •  Their  character  has  never, 
that  I  know  of,  been  wrought  out  in  literature ;  and 
something  quite  good,  funny,  and  philosophical,  as 
weU  as  poetic,  might  very  likely  be  educed  from  them. 
•  •  .  The  faun  is  a  natural  and  delightful  link  betwixt 
human  and  brute  life,  with  something  of  a  divine  char- 
acter intermingled. 

The  gallery,  as  it  is  called,  on  the  basement  floor  of 
the  casino,  is  sixty  feet  in  length,  by  perhaps  a  third 
as  much  in  breadth,  and  is  (after  all  I  have  seen  at 
the  Colonna  Palace  and  elsewhere)  a  more  magnificent 
hall  than  I  imagined  to  be  in  existence.  It  is  floored 
with  rich  marble  in  beautifully  arranged  compart- 
ments, and  the  walls  are  almost  entirely  cased  with 
marble  of  various  sorts,  the  prevailing  kind  being 
giallo  antico,  intermixed  with  verde  antique,  and  I 
know  not  what  else ;  but  the  splendor  of  the  giallo 
antico  gives  the  character  to  the  room,  and  the  large 
and  deep  niches  along  the  walls  appear  to  be  lined 
with  the  same  material.     Without  coming  to  Italy» 


168   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [ISM 

one  can  have  nu  idea  of  what  beauty  and  magiiifioencA 
are  produt-eii  liy  these  fittings  up  of  polUhcil  marble. 
Marble  to  an  American  lueaua  nothing  but  white  tiui&- 
Btone. 

Thi§   hall,   moi-eover,    in   adorned   with   pillars 
Oriental  alabaster,  and  wherever  is  a  space  vaeant 
precious  and  richly  colored  marble  it  is  frescoed  wil 
arabesque  ornaments ;  and  over  the  whole  ia  a  covi 
and   vaulted   ceiling,   glowing   with   picture.      The] 
never  can  be  anything  richer  than  the  whole  eEFt 
As  to  the  sculpture  here  it  was  not  \  ery  fine,  so  fi 
as  I  can  remember,  consisting  chicHy  of  b 
emperors  in  porphyry ;  but  they  served  a  good  pi 
pose  in  the  upholstery  way.     There  were  also  magnij 
cent  tables,  each  (lomposed  of  one  great  slab  of  p 
phyry ;  and  also  vases  of  ncro  autico,  and  other  rai 
substance.     It  remains  to  be  mentioned  that,  on 
almost  summer  day,  I  waa  quite  diilled  in  passi 
through  these  glorious  halls ;  no  fireplace  anywhere 
no  possibility  of  comfort ;  and  in  the  hot  season,  when 
their  coolness  might  be  agreeable,  it  would  be  death 
to  inhabit  them. 

Ascending  a  long  winding  staircase,  we  arrived  al 
another  suite  of  rooms,  containing  a  good  many  not 
very  remarkable  pictures,  and  a  few  more  pieces  of 
statuary.  Among  the  latter  is  Canova's  statue  of 
Pauline,  the  sister  of  Bonajmrte,  who  is  represented 
with  but  little  drapery,  and  in  the  character  of  Venus 
holding  the  apple  in  her  hand.  It  is  admirably  done, 
and,  I  have  no  doubt,  a  perfect  likeness ;  very  beauti- 
ful too ;  but  it  is  wonderful  to  see  how  the  artificial 
elegance  of  the  woman  of  this  world  makes  itself  per- 
ceptible in  spite  of  whatever  simplicity  she  could  find 
iu  almost  utter  nakedness.  The  statue  does  not  afford 
pleoDore  in  the  oontemplatiou. 


J 


1888.]  ITACY. 

In  one  of  these  upper  rooms  are  some  works  of  Ber- 
;  two  of  them,  JEnens  and  Anohises,  and  David 
on  the  point  of  slinging  a  stone  at  Goliath,  have  great 
merit,  and  do  not  tear  and  rend  themselves  quite  out 
of  the  laws  and  limits  of  marble,  like  his  later  sculp- 
ture. Here  is  also  his  Apollo  overtaking  Daphne, 
whose  feet  take  root,  whose  finger-tips  sprout  into 
twigs,  and  whose  tender  body  roughens  round  about 
with  bark,  as  he  embraces  her.  It  did  not  seem  very 
wonderful  to  me ;  not  so  good  as  Hillard's  description 
of  it  made  me  expect ;  and  one  does  not  enjoy  these 
freaks  in  marble. 

We  were  glad  to  emerge  from  the  casino  into  the 
warm  sunshine ;  and,  for  my  part,  I  made  the  best  of 
my  way  to  a  large  foimtain,  surrounded  by  a  circular 
stone  seat  of  wide  sweep,  and  sat  down  in  a  sunny 
segment  of  the  circle.  Around  grew  a  solemn  com- 
pany of  old  trees,  —  ilexes,  I  believe,  —  with  huge, 
contorted  trunks  and  evergreen  branches,  .  .  .  deep 
groves,  sunny  openings,  the  airy  gush  of  fountains, 
marble  statues,  dimly  visible  in  recesses  of  foliage, 
great  urns  and  vases,  tei-minal  ligures,  temples,  — -  all 
these  works  of  art  looking  as  if  they  had  stood  there 
long  enough  to  feel  at  home,  and  to  be  on  friendly 
and  familiar  terms  with  the  grass  and  trees.  It  is  a 
most  beautiful  place,  .  .  .  and  the  Malaria  is  its  true 
master  and  inhabitant ! 


April  22(/.  —  We  have  been  recently  to  the  studio 
of  Mr.  Brown,'  the  American  landscape-painter,  and 
were  altogether  surprised  and  delighted  with  his  pio- 
tores.  He  is  a  plain,  homely  Yankee,  quite  unpolished 
by  his  many  years'  residence  in  Italy;  he  talks  ud- 
'  Mow  dead. 


no   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [ISM 

fjp^mmatically,  and  in  Yankee  idioms ;  walka  with  ^\ 
strange,  awkward  gait  and  ntooping  fllioiildera  ;  is  alt 
fjether  un picturesque,  but  wins  one's  confidence  by  hi»i 
very  Uck  of  grace.  It  is  not  often  that  we  see  aa 
artist  BO  entirely  free  from  affectation  in  his  aspect 
and  deportment.  His  pictures  were  views  of  Swiw 
and  Italian  scenery,  and  were  most  beautiful  and  tru0i 
One  of  them,  a  moonlight  picture,  was  really  mngical* 
—  the  moon  shining  so  brightly  that  it  seemed  to' 
throw  a  light  even  beyond  the  limits  of  the  picture,  — 
and  yet  his  sunrises  and  siinsota.  and  noontides  too, 
were  nowise  inferior  to  this,  although  their  excellence 
required  somewhat  longer  study,  to  be  fully  appre- 
ciated. I  seemed  to  receive  more  pleasure  from  Mr. 
Brown's  pictures  than  from  any  of  the  lundscapes  by 
the  old  masters ;  and  the  fact  serves  to  strengthen  me 
in  the  belief  that  the  most  delicate  if  not  the  highest 
charm  of  a  picture  is  evanescent,  and  that  we  continue 
to  admire  pictures  prescriptively  and  by  triulition,  af- 
ter the  qualities  tlmt  first  won  them  their  fame  liav*. 
vanished.  I  suppose  Claude  was  a  greater  landscup** 
painter  than  Brown ;  but  for  my  own  pleasure  I  would 
prefer  one  of  the  latter  artist's  pictures,  —  those  of  the 
former  being  quite  changed  from  what  he  intended 
them  to  be  by  the  effect  of  time  on  his  pigments.  Mr. 
Brown  showed  ns  some  drawings  from  nature,  done 
with  incredible  eare  and  minuteness  of  detail,  as  stud- 
ies for  his  paintings.  We  complimented  him  on  hia 
patience ;  but  he  said,  "  Oh,  it 's  not  patience,  —  it 's 
love  1 "  In  facti  it  was  a  patient  and  most  successful 
wooing  of  a  beloved  object,  which  at  last  rewarded 
him  by  yielding  itself  wholly. 

We   have   likewise   been   to  Mr.  B        'a  '  studioj 


4 
I 


1858.]  ITALY.  171 

where  we  saw  several  pretty  statues  and  busts,  and 
among  them  an  Eve,  with  her  wreath  of  fig-leaves 
\png  across  her  poor  nudity ;  comely  in  some  points, 
but  with  a  frightful  volume  of  thighs  and  calves.  I 
do  not  altogether  see  the  necessity  of  ever  sculpturing 
another  nakedness.  Man  is  no  longer  a  naked  animal ; 
his  clothes  are  as  natural  to  him  as  his  skin,  and  sculp- 
tors have  no  more  right  to  undress  him  than  to  flay 
him. 

Also,  we  have  seen  again  William  Story's  Cleopa- 
tra, —  a  work  of  genuine  thought  and  energy,  repre- 
senting a  terribly  dangerous  woman ;  quiet  enough  for 
the  moment,  but  very  likely  to  spring  upon  you  like  a 
tigress.  It  is  delightful  to  escape  to  his  creations  from 
this  universal  prettiness,  which  seems  to  be  the  high- 
est conception  of  the  crowd  of  modem  sculptors,  and 
which  they  almost  invariably  attain. 

Miss  Bremer  called  on  us  the  other  day.  We  find 
her  very  little  changed  from  what  she  was  when  she 
came  to  take  tea  and  spend  an  evening  at  our  little 
red  cottage,  among  the  Berkshire  hills,  and  went  away 
so  dissatisfied  widi  my  conversational  performances, 
and  so  laudatory  of  my  brow  and  eyes,  while  so  se- 
verely criticising  my  poor  mouth  and  chin.  She  is  the 
funniest  little  old  fairy  in  person  whom  one  caQ  imagw 
ine,  with  a  huge  nose,  to  which  all  the  rest  of  her  is 
but  an  insufficient  appendage;  but  you  feel  at  once 
that  she  is  most  gentle,  kind,  womanly,  sympathetic, 
and  true.  She  talks  English  fluently,  in  a  low  quiet 
voice,  but  with  such  an  accent  that  it  is  impossible  to 
understand  her  without  the  closest  attention.  This 
was  the  real  cause  of  the  failure  of  our  Berkshire  in- 
terview ;  for  I  could  not  guess,  half  the  time,  what  she 
uras  saying,  and,  of  course,  had  to  take  an  uncertain 


172    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS,   [las* 

aim  with  my  responses.  A  more  intrepid  talker  than 
myself  would  liave  shouted  hi»  idena  auross  the  gulf; 
but,  for  me.  tliere  must  tirst  be  a  dose  aud  unembar- 
rassed contiguity  with  my  companion,  or  I  cannot  say 
one  real  word.  I  doubt  whether  I  have  ever  really 
talked  with  half  a  dozen  peimms  in  my  life,  either 
or  women. 

To-day  ray  wife  and  I  have  been  at  the  picture 
Boulpture  galleries  of  the  Capitol.  I  rather  enjoy< 
looking  at  several  of  tlie  pictures,  though  at  this  mo- 
ment I  particularly  remember  only  a  beautiful  face  o£ 
a  man,  one  of  two  heads  on  the  same  canvas,  by  Van- 
dyke. Yes  ;  I  did  look  with  ii«w  admiration  at  Paul 
Veronese's  Rape  of  Europa.  It  must  liave  been,  in  it* 
day,  the  most  brilliant  and  rejoicing  picture,  the  most 
voluptuous,  the  most  exuberant,  that  ever  put  the  sun- 
shine to  shame.  The  bull  has  all  Jupiter  in  him,  so 
tender  and  gentle,  yet  so  passionate,  tliat  you  feel  it 
indecorous  to  look  at  him ;  aud  Eurupa,  under  her 
thick,  rich  stuffs  and  embroideries,  is  all  a  woman. 
What  a  pity  that  such  a  picture  should  fade,  and  |>er- 
plex  the  beholder  with  such  splendor,  shining  through 
such  forlomness  I 

We  afterwards  went  into  the  sculpture-gallery,  when 
I  looked  at  the  Faun  of  Praxiteles,  and  was  sensible  of 
a  peculiar  charm  in  it ;  a  sylvan  beauty  and  homeliness, 
friendly  and  wild  at  once.  The  lengthened,  but  not 
preposterous  cars,  and  the  little  tail,  which  we  infer, 
have  an  exquisite  effect,  and  make  the  spectator  smile 
in  his  very  heart.  This  race  of  fauna  was  the  most 
delightful  of  all  that  antiquity  imagined.  It 
to  me  that  a  story,  with  all  sorts  of  fun  and  pathos 
it,  might  l>c  ctmtrlved  on  the  idea  uf  their  species  haw 
ing  become  bitermingled  witli  the  human  race ;  a  fack 


I 


3mB    ^^ 

I  in  ^H 

law  ^H 
ack  ^H 


1858.]  ITALY.  178 

ily  with  the  faun  blood  in  them  having  prolonged  it- 
self from  the  classic  era  till  our  own  days.  The  tail 
might  have  disappeared,  by  dint  of  constant  intermar- 
riages with  ordinary  mortals ;  but  the  pretty  hairy 
ears  should  occasionally  rea{^>ear  in  members  of  the 
family ;  and  the  moral  instincts  and  intellectual  char- 
acteristics of  the  faun  might  be  most  picturesquely 
brought  out,  without  detriment  to  the  human  interest 
of  the  story.  Fancy  this  combination  in  the  person  of 
a  young  lady ! 

I  have  spoken  of  Mr.  GKbson^s  colored  statues.  It 
seems  (at  least  Mr.  Nichols  tells  me)  that  he  stains 
them  with  tobacco  juice.  .  .  .  Were  he  to  send  a 
Cupid  to  America,  he  need  not  trouble  himself  to 
stain  it  beforehand. 

AprU  2bth.  —  Night  before  hist,  my  wife  and  I 
took  a  moonlight  ramble  through  Rome,  it  being  a 
very  beautiful  night,  warm  enough  for  comfort,  and 
with  no  perceptible  dew  or  dampness.  We  set  out  at 
about  nine  o'clock,  and,  our  general  direction  being 
towards  the  Coliseum,  we  soon  came  to  the  Fountain 
ot  Trevi,  full  on  the  front  of  which  the  moonlight  fell, 
making  Bernini's  sculptures  look  stately  and  beautiful, 
though  the  semicircular  gush  and  fall  of  the  cascade, 
and  the  many  jets  of  the  water,  pouring  and  bubbling 
into  the  great  marble  basin,  are  of  far  more  account 
than  Neptune  and  his  steeds,  and  the  rest  of  the 
figures.  .  .  . 

We  ascended  the  Capitoline  Hill,  and  I  felt  a  satis- 
faction in  placing  my  hand  on  those  immense  blocks 
of  stone,  the  remains  of  the  ancient  Capitol,  which 
form  the  foundation  of  the  present  edifice,  and  will 
make  a  sure  basis  for  as  many  edifices  as  posterity 


174   FRENCH  AND   ITALIAN  NOTB-BOOKS.  [lSS8rf 

nmy  choose  to  rear  upon  it,  till  t 
It  is  wooderful,  the  uolidity  with  which  those  old  Ro- 
mans built ;  one  would  suppoae  they  contomplat^d  tha 
whole  course  of  Time  an  the  only  limit  of  their  indi- 
vidual life.  Thia  is  nut  so  strange  in  tlie  days  of  the 
B«publio,  when,  probably,  they  believed  in  the  per. 
mancnce  of  their  institutions  ;  but  they  still  soL'ined  to 
build  for  eternity  in  the  reigns  of  the  eniperora,  whi 
neitlier  rulers  nor  people  had  any  faith  or  moral  si 
stance,  or  laid  any  earnest  grasp  on  life. 

Reaching  the  top  of  the  Capitolino  Hill,  we 
eeniied  the  steps  of  the  portal  of  the  Palace  of  thft^ 
Senator,  and  looked  down  into  the  piazzai,  with  tfas' 
equestrian  statue  of  Marfua  Aurolius  in  the  wntre  ot^ 
it.  The  architecture  tliiit  surrounds  the  piazza  is  ver]^, 
ineffective  ;  and  so,  in  my  opinion,  are  all  the  other 
architectural  works  of  Michel  Angelo,  including  SL 
Peter's  itself,  of  which  he  has  made  as  little  as  cotdd 
possibly  be  made  of  such  a  vast  pile  of  material,  lie 
balances  everj'jhing  in  such  a  way  that  it  seems  but 
half  of  itself. 

We  soon  descended  into  the  piazza,  and  walked 
romid  and  round  the  statue  of  Marcuu  Aureliiis.  (%n- 
templating  it  from  every  point  and  admiring  it  in  all. 
.  .  .  On  these  beautiftd  moonlight  nights,  Rome  ap- 
pears to  keep  awake  and  stirring,  tliough  in  a  quiet 
imd  decorous  .way.  It  is,  in  fact,  the  pleasautest  time 
for  promenades,  and  we  both  felt  less  wearied  than  by 
any  promenade  in  the  daytime,  of  aimilar  extent,  since 
our  residence  in  Rome.  In  future,  I  mean  to  walk 
often  after  nightfall. 

Yestenlay,  we  set  out  betimes,  and  ascended  the 
dome  of  St.  Peter's.  The  best  Wew  of  the  interior  of 
the  church,  1  think,'  is  from  ttie  first  gallery  beneath  the 


i 


A 


I 

I 


1U8.] 


ITALY. 


dome.  The  whole  inside  of  the  dome  is  set  with  mo- 
Baic-work,  the  separate  pieces  being,  so  far  as  I  could 
see,  about  half  aa  inch  square.  Emerging  on  the  roof 
we  had  a  fine  view  of  all  the  surroimding  Rome,  in- 
cluding the  Metliterranean  Sea  in  the  remote  distance. 
Above  us  still  rose  tliu  whole  mountain  of  the  great 
<lome,  and  it  made  an  impression  on  me  of  greater 
height  and  size  than  I  had  yet  been  able  to  receive. 
The  copper  ball  at  the  summit  looked  hardly  bigger 
than  a  man  could  lift ;  and  yet,  a  little  while  after- 
wards, U ,  J ,  and  I  stood  all  together  in  that 

ball,  which  could  have  contained  a  dozen  more  along 
with  us.  The  esplana^le  of  the  roof  is,  of  course,  very 
extensive ;  and  along  the  front  of  it  are  ranged  the 
statues  which  we  see  from  below,  and  which,  on  nearer 
examination,  prove  to  be  roughly  hewn  giants.  There 
is  a  small  house  on  the  roof,  where,  probably,  the  eus- 
todes  of  this  part  of  the  edifice  reside ;  and  there  is  a 
fountain  gushing  abundantly  into  a  stone  trough,  that 
looked  like  an  old  sarcophagus.  It  is  strange  where 
the  water  comes  from  at  such  a  height.  The  children 
tasted  it,  and  pronounced  it  very  warm  and  disagree- 
able. After  taking  in  the  prospect  on  all  sides  we 
rang  a  bell,  which  summoned  a  man,  who  direi.'ted  us 
towards  a  door  in  the  side  of  the  dome,  where  a  cus- 
tode  wa«  waiting  to  admit  us.  Hitherto  the  ascent 
had  been  easy,  along  a  slojre  without  stairs,  up  whicln 
I  believe,  people  sometimes  ride  on  donkeys.  The 
rest  of  the  way  we  mounted  steep  and  narrow  stair- 
cases, winding  round  witldn  the  wall,  or  between  the 
two  walls  of  the  dome,  and  growing  narrower  and 
steeper,  till,  finally,  there  is  but  a  i)erpendicidHr  iron 
ladder,  by  means  of  which  to  climb  into  the  copper 
ball.     Except  through  smull  windows  and  peep-boles. 


178    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS,  [li 

there  is  no  exteroal  prospect  of  &  higher  point 
the  roof  of  the  church.  Just  beneath  the  hall  there  ia 
a  circular  room  capable  of  coutaining  a  large  company, 
and  a  door  which  ought  to  give  access  to  a  gallei^  on 
the  outside ;  but  the  ciiatode  informed  us  that  tliia 

door  ia  never  opened.     As  I  have  said.  U ,  J , 

atid  I  clambered  into  the  copper  ball,  which  we  fotmd 
as  hot  as  an  oven ;  and,  after  putting  our  hands  on 
top,  and  on  the  summit  of  St.  Peter's,  were  glad 
clamber  down  again.     1  have   made   some   niistaki 
after  all,  in  my  narration.     There  certainly  is  a 
cular  balcony  at  the  top  of  the  dome,  for  I  rememi 
walking  round  it,  and  looking,   not  only 
country,  but  downwards  along  the  ribs  of  the  domej 
to  which  are  attached  the  iron  contrivances  for  illl 
minating  it  on  Easter  Sunday.  .  .  . 

Before  leaving  the  church  we  went  to  look  at  the 
mosaic  copy  of  The  Transfiguration,  because  we  were 
going  to  see  the  original  in  the  Vatican,  and  wished 
to  compare  the  two.  Going  round  to  the  entrano^i 
of  the  Vatican,  we  went  first  to  the  manufactory  ot] 
mosaics,  to  which  we  had  a  ticket  of  admission.  Ws 
found  it  a  long  series  of  rooms,  in  which  the  mosaic 
artists  were  at  work,  chiefly  in  making  some  medal- 
lions of  the  heads  of  saints  for  tJie  new  church  of  St. 
Paul's.  It  was  rather  coarse  work,  and  it  seemed  to 
ine  that  the  mosaic  copy  was  somewhat  stiffer  and 
more  wooden  than  the  original,  the  bits  of  stone  not 
flowing  into  color  quite  so  freely  as  paint  from  a 
brush.  There  was  no  large  picture  now  in  process 
of  being  copied ;  but  two  or  three  artists  were  em- 
ploye>i  on  small  and  delicate  subjects.  One  had  ft 
Holy  Family  of  Raphael  in  hand ;  and  the  Sibyls  of 
Guercino  and  Domenichino  were  hanging  on  the  wall, 


:itt^H 


n 


t85S.] 


177 


apparently  rea*ly  to  be  put  into  mosaic.  Wherever 
great  skill  and  delicnoy,  on  the  artists'  part,  were  nec- 
essary, they  seemed  quite  adequate  to  the  occasion ; 
hut,  after  all,  a  mosaic  of  any  celebrated  picture  is 
but  a  copy  of  a  copy.  The  substance  employed  is  a 
fltone-paste,  of  innumerable  different  hues,  and  in 
bits  of  various  sizes,  quantities  of  which  were  seen  in 
cases  along  the  whole  series  of  rooms. 

We  next  ascended  an  amazing  "height  of  staircHscs, 
and  walked  along  I  know  not  what  extent  of  paa- 
sa^s,  .  .  .  till  we  rea<^hed  the  picture-gallery  of  the 
Vatican,  into  which  I  had  never  been  before.  There 
are  but  three  rooms,  all  lined  with  red  velvet,  on 
which  hung  about  fifty  pictures,  each  one  of  them,  no 
doubt,  worthy  to  be  considered  a  masterpiece.  In  the 
first  room  were  tlu-ee  Murillos,  all  so  beautiful  that  I 
could  have  spent  the  day  happily  in  looking  at  either 
of  them  ;  for,  methinks,  of  all  painters  he  is  the  ten- 
derest  and  truest.  I  rx>uld  not  enjoy  these  pictures 
now.  however,  because  in  the  next  room,  and  visi- 
ble through  the  open  door,  hung  The  Transfiguration. 
Approaching  it,  I  felt  that  the  picture  was  worthy  of 
its  fame,  and  was  far  better  than  I  could  at  once  ap- 
preciate ;  admirably  preserved,  too,  though  I  fully  be- 
lieve it  must  have  possessed  a  charm  when  it  left 
Kaphael's  hand  that  has  now  vanished  forever.  As 
church  furniture  and  an  external  adomneut,  the  mo- 
saic copy  is  preferable  to  the  original,  but  no  copy 
could  ever  reproduce  all  the  life  and  expression  whioh 
we  see  here.  Opposite  to  it  hangs  The  Communion 
of  St.  Jerome,  the  aged,  dying  saint,  half  torpid  with 
lieath  already,  partaking  of  the  sacrament,  and  a 
lunny  garland  of  cherubs  in  the  upper  part  of  the 
picture,  looking  down  upou  him,  and  quite  comforting 


178   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [IM 

tlie  spectator  with  the  idea  that  the  old  n 
only  to  he  quit«  dead  in  order  to  flit  away  witli  the 
Aa  for  the  other  pictures  I  did  but  giant 
have  forgotten  them. 

The  Transfiguration  is  finished  with  great  minutA- 
ness  and  detail,  tlie  weutts  and  Mndeo  of  grass  in  the 
foreground  being  as  distinct  as  if  they  were  growing 
in  a  natural  soiL  A  partly  decaye<l  stick  of  wood 
with  the  bark  is  likewise  given  in  close  imitation  of 
nature.  The  reflection  of  a  foot  of  one  of  tlie  apostles 
is  seen  in  a  pool  of  water  at  the  verge  of  the  picture. 
One  or  two  heads  and  amis  seem  almost  to  project 
from  the  canvas.  Tliere  is  great  lifelikeness  and  re- 
ality, as  well  as  higher  qualities.  The  face  of  Jesus, 
being  so  higli  aloft  and  so  small  in  tlie  distance,  I 
could  not  well  see  ;  hut  I  am  iiuprcssetl  with  the  idea 
tliat  it  looka  too  much  like  human  flesh  and  blood  to  he 
in  keeping  with  the  celestial  aspect  of  the  figure,  or 
with  the  jirobabilities  of  the  scene,  when  the  divinity 
and  inmiortality  of  the  Saviour  beamed  from  with- 
in him  through  the  earthly  features  that  ordinarily 
shaded  bim.  As  regards  the  composition  of  the  pic- 
ture, I  am  not  convinced  of  the  propriety  of  its  being 
in  two  80  distinctly  separate  parts,  —  the  upper  poi^ 
tion  not  thinking  of  the  lower,  and  the  lower  portion 
not  being  aware  of  the  higher.  It  symbolizes,  how- 
ever, the  spiritual  shortsightedness  of  mankind  that, 
amid  the  trouble  and  grief  of  the  lower  picture,  not 
n  single  individual,  either  of  those  who  seek  help  or 
tliose  who  would  willingly  afford  it,  lifts  liis  eyes  to 
that  region,  one  glimpse  of  which  would  set  eveiytbing 
right.  One  or  two  of  tlio  disfi|des  point  upward,  but 
without  really  knowing  what  abundance  of  help  is  ta 
.  bo  had  there. 


1 


«.] 


179 


I 
■ 


April  27th.  —  To-day  we  have  all  been  with  Mr. 
Akers  to  aome  studios  of  painters  ;  first  to  that  of  Mr- 
Wilde,  an  artist  originally  from  Boston.  Ilis  pictures 
are  principally  of  scenes  from  Venice,  and  ara  mira- 
cles of  color,  being  as  bright  as  if  the  light  were  tnui9- 
itiitted  throngh  rubies  and  sapphires.  And  yet,  after 
contemplating  them  awhile,  we  became  convinced  that 
the  painter  had  not  gone  in  the  least  beyond  nature, 
but,  on  the  c<tntrary,  bad  fallen  short  of  brilliancies 
which  no  palette,  or  skill,  or  boldness  in  using  color, 
could  attain.  I  do  not  quite  know  whether  it  is  best 
to  attempt  these  things.  They  may  be  found  in  na- 
ture, no  doubt,  but  always  so  tempered  by  what  aur- 
luunds  them,  so  put  out  of  sight  even  while  they  seem 
full  before  oiu-  eyes,  that  we  question  the  ooouracy  of 
a  faithful  reproduction  of  them  on  cativaii.  There  was 
a  picture  of  sunset,  the  wliole  sky  of  wliich  woidd  have 
outshone  any  gilded  frame  that  could  have  been  put 
around  it.  There  was  a  moat  gorgeous  sketch  of  a 
handful  of  weeds  and  leaves,  such  as  may  be  seen 
strewing  acres  of  forest-ground  in  an  American  au- 
tumn. I  doubt  whether  any  other  man  has  ever  ven- 
tured to  paint  a  picture  like  either  of  these  two,  the 
Italian  sunset  or  the  Ajiierican  autumnal  foliage.  Mr. 
Wilde,  who  is  still  young,  talkt-d  with  genuine  feeling 
and  enthusiasm  of  his  art,  and  is  certainly  a  man  of 
gem  us. 

We  next  went  to  tJie  studio  of  an  elderly  Swiss  ar- 
tist, named  Miiller,  I  believe,  where  we  looked  at  a 
great  many  water-color  and  crayon  drawings  of  scenes 
in  Italy,  Greece,  and  Switzerland.  The  artist  was  a 
quiet,  resjxsotablc,  Bi>mewbat  heavy-looking  old  gentle- 
man, from  whose  aspect  one  would  expect  a  plodding 
pertinacity  of  character  rather  than  quickness  of  sen- 


180   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [H 

Bibility.  He  must  have  united  both  these  qoalitieiv 
howvwer,  to  produce  such  pit-turea  as  these,  such  faith- 
ful transcripts  of  whatever  Natiu%  ^as  must  boautiful 
to  show,  and  whicli  she  shows  only  to  those  who  love 
her  deeply  and  patiently.  They  are  wonderful  pic- 
tures, compreaaing  i>lains,  seas,  and  mountains,  with 
miles  and  miles  of  distance,  into  the  space  of  a  foot  uc 
two  without  crowding  aiiythiug  or  leaving  out  a  fe»>i 
tnre,  aii<!  diffusing  the  free,  blue  atmosphere  througlw< 
out.  The  works  of  tite  English  watertolor  artists 
which  I  saw  at  the  Manchester  Exhibition  seemed  to 
me  nowise  equal  to  these.  Now,  here  are  three  ar^ 
lists,  Mr,  Brown,  Mr.  Wilde,  and  Mr.  MiUIer.  who 
have  smitten  me  with  vast  admiration  within  these 
few  days  past,  while  I  am  continually  turning  awiiy 
disappointed  from  the  landscapes  of  the  most  famous 
among  the  old  masters,  unable  to  find  any  charm  or  U< 
lusion  in  them.  Yet  1  suppose  Claude,  Poussin,  and 
Salvator  Rosa  must  have  won  their  renown  by  real 
achievements.  But  the  glory  of  a  picture  fades 
that  of  a  flower. 

Contiguous  to  Mr.  Miiller's  studio  was  that  of 
yoimg  German  artist,  not  long  resident  in  Rome, 
Mr.  Akers  proposed  that  we  should  go  in  there,  as 
matter  of  kindness  to  the  young  man,  wlio  is  acaively 
known  at  all,  and  seldom  has  a  visitor  to  look  at  his 
pictures.  His  studio  comprised  his  whole  establisln 
ment ;  for  there  was  his  little  bed,  with  its  white 
drapery,  in  a  comer  of  the  small  room,  and  his  dress* 
ing-table,  with  its  brushes  and  combs,  while  the  easel 
and  the  few  sketches  of  Italian  scenes  and  Bgnrea 
ucoupied  the  foregniund.  1  did  not  like  his  picture! 
very  well,  but  would  gladly  have  twaght  them  all  if  ~ 
VDuld  have  afforded  it,  the  artist  looked  so  cheerfol 


and 
real^^ 

and'^H 
asft'^H 
■celv    ^B 


iref|^| 

mm 


ITALY. 


181 


I 


patient,  and  quiet,  doubtless  amidst  huge  discourage 
tuent.  He  is  probably  stubborn  of  purpose,  and  is 
the  sort  of  man  who  will  improve  with  every  year  of 
his  life.  We  could  not  speak  hia  language,  and  were 
therefore  spared  the  difticulty  of  paying  him  any  com- 
pliments ;  but  Miss  Shepard  said  a  few  kind  words  to 
him  in  German,  and  seemed  quite  to  win  his  heart, 
insomuch  that  be  followed  her  with  bows  and  smiles  ft 
long  way  down  the  staii'case.  It  is  a  terrible  business, 
this  looking  at  pictures,  whether  good  or  bad,  in  the 
presence  of  the  artists  who  paint  them  ;  it  is  as  great 
a  bore  as  to  hear  a  poet  read  his  own  verses.  It  takes 
away  all  my  pleasure  in  seeing  the  pictures,  and  even 
makes  me  question  the  genuineness  of  the  impressions 
which  I  receive  from  them. 

After  this  latter  visit  Mr.  Akers  conducted  us  to 
the  shop  of  the  jeweller  Castellani,  who  is  a  great  re- 
producer of  ornaments  in  the  old  Boman  and  Etrua- 
can  fashion.  These  antique  styles  are  very  fashiona- 
ble just  now,  and  some  of  the  specimens  he  showed  us 
were  certainly  very  beautiful,  though  I  doubt  whether 
their  quaintness  and  old-time  curiousness,  as  ])attems 
of  gewgaws  dug  out  of  immemorial  tombs,  be  not  their 
greatest  charm.  We  saw  the  toilet-case  of  an  Etrus- 
can lady,  —  that  is  to  say,  a  modem  imitation  of  it, 
- — with  her  rings  for  summer  and  winter,  and  for 
every  day  of  the  week,  and  for  thumb  and  fingers ; 
her  ivory  comb ;  her  bracelets  ;  and  more  knick-knacks 
than  I  can  half  remember.  Splendid  things  of  our 
own  time  were  likewise  shown  us  ;  a  necklace  of  dia- 
monds worth  eighteen  thousand  scudi,  together  with 
emeralds  and  opals  and  great  pearls.  Finally  we 
came  away,  and  my  wife  and  Miss  Shepard  were 
taken  up  by  the  Misses  Weston,  who  drove  with  them 


182   FIlBNCn  ASD  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [18i 

tfl  visit  the  Villa  Albani.  IKirinj;  their  drive  my 
hR{)p«ni!(l  to  raise  her  arm,  niiil  Miha  Shojianl  espie^ 
a  little  Greek  cross  of  gold  which  had  attiu^hed  itsel" 
t«  the  la«e  of  her  sleeve.  .  .  .  Pray  Heaven  tho  jew( 
JiT  may  not  discover  his  loss  before  we  have  time 
restore  the  spoil  I  lie  is  apparently  so  free  and 
less  in  displayin)r  his  pret^toits  warea,  —  putting  inesH- 
mable  gems  and  brooches  great  ami  small  into  the 
hands  of  strangers  like  ourselves,  and  leaving  scores 
of  them  strewn  on  the  top  of  his  counter,  —  that  it 
would  seem  easy  enough  to  take  a  diamond  or  two 
but  I  su8])ect  there  must  needs  be  a  sharp  eye 
where.  Before  we  left  the  shop  he  i-e<iue8te<l  ma  to 
honor  him  with  my  autograph  in  a  large  book  that 
was  full  of  tlie  namai  of  his  visitors.  This  ia  probably 
a  measure  of  precaution. 


April  &(iih,  —  I  went  yesterday  to  (he  Bculptur»»l 
gallery  of  the  Capitol,  and  lookwi  pretty  thoroughly 
through  the  busts  of  the  illuBtrious  men,  and  less  par- 
ticularly  at  those  of  the  emperors  and  their  relatives, 
I  likewise  took  particular  note  of  the  Faun  of  Praxi- 
teles, because  the  idea  keeps  reclining  to  me  of  writ- 
ing a  little  romance  about  it,  and  for  that  reason  I 
shall  endeavor  bo  set  down  a  somewhat  minutely  item- 
ized detail  of  the  statue  and  its  surroundings.  .  .  , 

We  have  had  beautiful  weather  for  two  or  three 
days,  very  warm  in  the  sun,  yet  always  freshened  hj 
the  gentle  life  of  a  breeze,  and  quite  caoI  enough  tlw 
moment  you  pass  within  the  limit  of  the  shade.  .  .  . 

In  the  morning  there  are  few  people  there  (on  the 
Pincian)  except  the  gnrdeners,  lazily  trimming  tlw 
borders,  or  filling  their  watering-pots  out  of  the  mam 
ble-brimmed  basin  of  the  fountain ;  French  soldiery 


m 
4 


1858.7 


TTALF. 


I 


in  their  long  mtxed-bliie  surtouta,  and  wide  scarlet 
pantaloous,  chatting  with  here  and  there  a,  nursery- 
maid,  and  playiug  with  the  child  in  her  care ;  and 
perhaps  a  few  smokers,  .  .  .  ohoosing  estib  a  marbla 
scat  or  wooden  bench  in  sunshine  or  shade  as  best 
suits  him.  In  the  afternoon,  es])ectally  within  an  hour 
or  two  of  sunset,  the  gardens  are  much  more  popnr 
Inus,  and  the  seats,  exeept  when  the  sun  falls  full 
upon  them,  are  hard  to  come  by.  Ladies  arrive  in 
carriages,  splendidly  dressed ;  children  are  abundant, 
much  impeded  in  their  frolics,  and  rendered  stifi  aad 
stately  by  the  finery  which  they  wear ;  English  gen- 
tlemen, and  Americans  with  their  wives  and  families ; 
the  flower  of  the  Roman  population,  too,  both  male 
and  female,  mostly  dressed  with  great  nicety ;  but  a 
large  intermixture  of  artists,  shabbily  picturesque ; 
and  other  persons,  not  of  the  first  stamp.  A  French 
band,  comprisiug  a  great  many  brass  instrument^  by 
and  by  begins  to  play ;  and  what  with  music,  sun- 
shine, a  delightful  atmosphere,  flowers,  grass,  well-kept 
pathways,  bordered  with  box-hedges,  pines,  cypresses, 
horse-chestnuts,  flowering  shrubs,  and  all  manner  of 
cultivated  beauty,  the  scene  is  a  very  lively  and  agree- 
able one.  The  fine  equipages  tliat  drive  round  and 
ronnd  through  the  carriage-paths  are  another  notice- 
able item.  The  Roman  aristocracy  are  magnificent 
in  their  aspect,  driving  abroad  with  beautiful  horses, 
and  footmen  in  rich  liveries,  sometimes  as  many  as 
three  bt-hind  and  one  sitting  by  the  coachman. 

May  let.  —  This  morning,  I  wandered  for  the  thou- 
sandth time  through  some  of  the  narrow  intricacies 
of  Rome,  stepping  here  and  there  into  a  church.  I 
io  Dot  know  the  name  of  the  first  one.  nor  had   it 


184  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [1858 

anything  that  in  Rome  coiild  be  called  remarkable,  I 
though,  till  I  eanie  here,  1  yias  not  awai'e  that  any 
Bueh  churches  existed,  —  a  marble  pavemeut  in  varie- 
gated compartments,  a  series  of  shrines  and  chapela 
round  the  whole  floor,  each  with  its  own  udomment  of 
sculpture  and  pictures,  its  own  altar  with  tall  wax  t(U 
]>(>rs  before  it,  some  of  which  were  burning ;  a  great 
picture  over  the  high  altar,  tlie  whole  interior  of  the 
chiu\:h  ranged  round  with  pillars  and  pilasters,  and 
lined,  every  inch  of  it,  with  rich  yellow  marble.  Fi- 
nally,  a  frescoed  I'eiling  over  tlie  nave  and  transepts, 
and  a  dome  rising  high  above  tbe  central  part,  and 
filled  with  frescos  brought  to  auch  perspective  illusion 
that  the  edges  seem  to  project  into  the  air.  Two  or 
three  peraoua  are  kneeling  at  separate  shrines ;  there 
are  several  wooden  confessionals  placed  agaiuitt  the 
walls,  at  one  of  which  kneels  a  lady,  confessing  to  a  J 
priest  who  sits  within ;  the  tapers  are  light^Kl  at  tbs  I 
high  altar  and  at  one  of  the  slirines ;  an  atti>ndant  !■  I 
scrubbing  tbe  marble  pavement  with  a  broom  and 
water,  —  a  process,  I  should  think,  seldom  practised 
in  Roman  churches.  By  and  by  the  lady  finishes  her 
confession,  kisses  the  priest's  hand,  and  sits  down  L 
one  of  the  chairs  which  are  placed  about  the  floory-^ 
while  the  priest,  in  a  b!a(^'k  robe,  with  a  short,  white,  1 
loose  jacket  over  his  shoulders,  disappears  hy  a  side 
door  out  of  the  church.  I,  likewise,  finding  nothing 
attractive  in  the  pictures,  take  my  departure.  Prot-  , 
estantism  needs  a  new  apostle  Xo  convert  it  into  som 
thing  positive.  .  .  . 

I  now  found  my  way  to  the  Piazza  Navona. 
to  me  the  most  interesting  piazza  in  Rome ;  a  larga  ' 
oblong  apace,  surrounded  with   tall,   shalby   honse% 
among  which  there  are  none  that  seem  to  he  palaceft 


e 


ITALY. 


18S 


The  sun  falls  broadly  nver  the  area  of  the  piazza,  and 
the  fountainit  in  it :  one,  a  large  basin  with 
great  sea-monster.t,  probably  of  Bernini's  invendous, 
sqiiirting  very  small  streams  of  water  into  it ;  another 
of  the  fountains  I  do  not  at  all  remember;  but  the  een 
tral  one  is  an  immense  basin,  over  which  is  reared  an 
old  Egyptian  obelisk,  elevated  on  a  rock,  which  is 
cleft  into  four  arches.  Monstrous  devices  in  marble, 
I  know  not  of  what  purport,  are  clambering  about  the 
cloven  rock  or  burrowing  beneath  it ;  one  and  all  of 
them  are  superfluous  and  impertinent,  the  only  essen- 
tial thing  being  the  abundant  supply  of  water  in  the 
fountain.  This  whole  Piazza  Navoua  is  usually  the 
scene  of  more  business  thiin  seems  to  be  transacted 
anywhere  else  in  Kome ;  in  some  parts  of  it  rusty  iron 
is  offered  for  sale,  locks  and  keys,  old  tools,  and  all 
such  rubbish ;  in  other  parts  vegetables,  comprising, 
at  this  season,  green  peas,  onions,  cauliflowers,  rad- 
ishes, artichokes,  and  others  with  which  I  have  never 
made  acquaintance ;  also,  stalls  or  wheelbarrows  con- 
taining apples,  chestnuts  (the  meats  dried  and  taken 
out  of  the  shells),  green  almonds  in  their  husks,  and 
squash  seeds,  —  salted  and  dried  in  an  oven,  —  ap- 
pai'ently  a  favorite  delicacy  of  the  Romans.  There 
are  also  lemons  and  oranges ;  stalls  of  fish,  mostly 
about  the  size  of  smelts,  taken  from  the  Tiber ;  cigars 
of  various  qualities,  the  best  at  a  baioccho  and  a  half 
apiece ;  bread  in  loaves  or  in  small  rings,  a  great 
many  of  which  are  strung  together  on  a  long  stick, 
and  thus  carried  round  for  sale.  Women  antl  men 
sit  with  these  things  for  sale,  or  carry  them  about  in 
trays,  or  on  boards  on  their  heads,  cr3^g  them  with 
Bhrill  and  hard  voices.  There  is  a  shabby  crowd  and 
much  babble ;  very  little  picturesqueness  of  costuma 


186   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [18Bt(l 

or  figure,  however,  the  chief  exceptions  being,  hertf 
and  tJiere,  an  oli)  white-beardi^d  Vicggiir.  A  few  of  tha 
men  have  the  peasant  custunie,  —  a  short  juvket  and 
breeches  of  light  blue  elotli  ant!  white  stockinga,  — 
the  ogliest  dress  I  ever  saw.  Tlie  women  go  bare, 
headed,  and  seem  fond  of  scarlet  and  otlier  bright 
fiolors,  but  are  houiety  and  clumsy  in  form.  The 
piazza  is  dingy  in  its  general  aspect,  and  very  dirty, 
t>eing  strewn  with  straw,  vegetable  t«))is,  and  the  rub- 
bish of  a  week's  marketing ;  but  there  is  more  life  in  _ 
it  than  one  sees  elsewhere  iu  Rome.  J 

On  one  side  of  the   piazza  is  the  Church  of  8tM 
Agnes,  traditionaJly  said  to  stand  on  tlie  site  of  thel 
house  where  that  holy  maiden  was  exjwsed  to  infamy 
by  the  Itoman  soldiers,  and  where  her  mwlesty  and 
innocence  were  saved  by  miracle.     I  went  into  the 
church,  and  found  it  very  splendid,  with  rich  marble 
columns,  all  as  brilliant  as  if  just  built ;  a  frest^oeil 
dome  above;  beneath,  a  range  of  chapels  all  round 
the  church,  ornamented   not  with  pictures  but  bas- 
reliefs,  the  figures  of  which  almost  step  and  struggle 
out  of  the  marble.    They  did  not  seem  very  admirable 
as  works  of  art,  none  of  tliem  exjdaining  themselves 
or  attracting  me  long  enough  to  study  out  their  mean- 
ing ;  but,  as  part  of  the  architecture  of  the  church, 
they  had  a  good  effect.     Out  of  the  busy  square  two  « 
or  three   persons  had   step)M;d   into  this  bright  and] 
calm  seeluHion   to  pray  and   be   devout  for  a  little 
while ;  and,  Iwtween  simrise  and  sunset  of  the  bust- 
ling marketduy,  many  doubtless  snatch  a  moment  to 
refresh  their  soids. 

In  the  Pantlieon  (to-day)  it  was  pleasant  looking 
vp  to  the  circular  opening,  to  see  the  clouds  flitting 
ftcroBB  it,  sometimes  covering  it  quite  over,  then  J>eifc 


>•] 


187 


I 


I 


Hutting  s  glimpse  of  sky,  then  showing  all  the  circle 
nt  aonny  blue.  Then  would  (»me  the  ragged  edge  uf 
a  cloud,  brightened  throughout  with  sunshine,  passing 
and  ehanging  quickly,  —  not  that  the  divine  smile 
was  not  always  tlie  »ianie,  but  continually  variable 
through  the  medium  of  earthly  influences.  The  great 
shinting  beam  of  sunshine  was  visible  all  the  way 
down  to  the  pavement,  falling  upon  motes  of  dust  or 
a  thin  smoke  of  incense  imperceptible  in  the  shadow. 
Insects  were  playing  to  and  fro  in  the  beam,  high  up 
toward  the  opening.  There  is  a  wonderful  charm  in 
the  naturalness  of  all  this;  and  one  might  fancy  a 
swarm  of  cherubs  coming  down  through  the  opening 
and  sporting  in  the  broad  ray,  to  gladden  the  f^th  of 
worshippers  on  the  pavement  beneath ;  or  angels  bear- 
ing prayers  upward,  or  bringing  down  responses  to 
them,  visible  with  dim  brightness  aa  they  pass  through 
the  pathway  of  heaven's  radiance,  even  the  many  hues 
of  their  wings  discernible  by  a  trusting  eye ;  though, 
as  they  pass  into  the  shadow,  they  vanish  like  the 
motes.  So  the  sunbeam  would  represent  those  rays 
of  divine  intelligence  which  enable  ns  to  see  wonders 
and  to  know  that  they  are  natural  things. 

Consider  the  effect  of  light  and  shade  in  a  chureh 
irfiere  the  windows  are  open  and  darkened  with  cur- 
tains that  are  occasionally  lifted  by  a  breeze,  letting 
in  the  sunshine,  wluuh  whitens  a  carved  tombstone  on 
the  pavement  of  the  chiirch,  disclosing,  perhaps,  the 
letters  of  the  name  and  inscription,  a  deathVhead,  a 
crosier,  or  other  emblem;  then  the  curtain  falla  and 
the  bright  spot  vanishes. 

May  Sch.  —  This  morning  my  wife  and  I  went  to 
breakfast  with  Mrs.  William  Story  at  the  Barberiui 


188  FRENCH  AND   tTAUAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [IM 

Palace,  expecting  to  meet  Mrs.  Jameson,  wiu 
been  iu  Rome  (or  a  month  or  two.  We  had  a 
[ileasant  breakfast,  but  Mrs.  Jaiuet<on  wan  nut  [ii 
til)  iiccoiuit  of  ind  imposition,  and  the  only  other  guests 

were   Mrs,    A and    Mrs.    H ,  two    sensible 

American  ladies.  Mrs.  Story,  however,  received  a 
note  from  Mrs.  Jameson,  asking  her  to  bring  us  to  see 
her  at  her  lodgings ;  so  in  the  course  of  the  afternoon 
she  called  for  us,  and  took  us  thither  in  her  carriage. 
Mrs.  Jameson  lives  on  tlie  first  piano  of  an  old  palazzo 
on  the  Via  di  Kijietta,  nearly  opfxisile  the  ferry-way 
across  the  Tiber,  and  affording  a  plciiHnnt  view  of  the 
yellow  river  and  the  green  bank  anil  fields  on  the 
other  aide.  I  had  ex]iei?t«d  to  see  an  elderly  lady, 
but  not  quite  so  venerable  a  one  as  MrM.  Jameson 
proved  to  be  ;  a  rather  short,  round,  and  massive  per- 
sonage, of  benign  and  ^^-eeable  aspect,  with  a  sort  ot 
black  skullcap  on  her  head,  beneath  which  api^eared 
her  hair,  which  seemed  once  to  have  been  fair,  and 
was  now  almost  white.  I  should  take  her  to  be  about 
seventy  years  old.  She  began  to  talk  to  us  with  af- 
fectionate familiarity,  and  was  particularly  kind  in 
her  mtinifestations  towards  myself,  who,  on  my  part, 
was  equally  gracious  towards  her.  In  truth,  I  have 
found  great  pleasure  and  profit  in  her  works,  and  was 
glad  to  hear  her  say  that  she  liked  mine  We  talked 
about  art,  and  she  showed  us  a  picture  leaning  up 
against  the  wall  of  the  room ;  a  quaint  old  Byzantine 
painting,  with  a  gilded  background,  and  two  stiff 
figures  ^"our  Saviour  and  St.  Catherine)  standing 
shyly  at  a  sacred  distance  from  one  another,  and  going 
through  the  marriage  ceremony.  There  was  a  great 
deal  of  expression  in  their  faces  and  figures  ;  and  tha 
tpectator  feels,  moreover,  that  the  artist  must  have 


ve    ^J 


1BS8.] 


been  a  devout  man,  —  an  impression  which  we  aeldom 
receive  from  modem  pictures,  however  awfully  holy 
the  subject,  or  however  cunsecratod  the  place  they 
hang  in.  Mm.  Jameson  seemn  to  be  familiar  with 
Italy,  its  people  and  life,  as  well  aa  with  its  picture- 
galleries.  She  is  siud  to  be  rather  irascible  in  her 
tamper ;  hut  nothing  could  be  sweeter  than  her  voice, 
her  look,  and  all  her  manifestations  to-day.  When 
we  were  coming  away  she  clasped  ray  band  in  both 
of  hers,  and  again  expressed  the  pleasure  of  having 
seen  me,  and  her  gratitude  to  me  for  calling  on  het ; 
nor  did  I  refrain  from  responding  Amen  to  these  effu- 
sions. .  .  . 

Taking  leave  of  Mrs.  Janieson,  we  drove  through 
the  eity,  and  out  of  the  Lateraii  Gate  ;  first,  however, 
waitiug  a  long  while  at  Monaldini's  bookstore  in  the 
Piazza  di  Spagna  for  Mr.  Story,  whom  we  finally  took 
up  in  the  street,  after  losing  nearly  an  hour. 

Just  two  miles  beyond  the  gate  is  a  space  on  the 
green  Camp^na  where,  for  some  time  past,  excava- 
tions have  been  in  progress,  which  thus  far  have  re- 
sulted in  the  discovery  of  several  tombs,  and  the  old, 
buried,  and  almost  forgotten,  church  or  basilica  of 
San  Stefano.  It  is  a  beautiful  spot,  that  of  the  ex- 
cavations, with  the  Alban  hills  in  the  distance,  and 
some  heavy,  sunlighted  clouds  hanging  above,  or  re- 
cumbent at  length  upon  them,  and, behiud,the  city  and 
its  mighty  dome.  The  excavations  are  an  object  of 
great  interest  both  to  the  Romans  and  to  strangers, 
and  there  were  many  carriages  and  a  great  many 
visitors  viewing  the  progress  of  the  works,  which 
are  carried  forward  with  greater  energy  than  any- 
thing else  I  have  seen  attempted  at  Rome.  A  short 
time  ago   the   ground   in  the   vicinity   was  a  green 


190   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [H 

Borface,  level,  except  here  and  there  a  little  hillock^ 
i>r  scarcely  perceptible  dwell ;  the  tomb  of  Cecilia 
Metella  showmg  itself  a  mile  or  two  distant,  and 
otiier  rugged  ruinB  of  great  tombs  rising  on  the  plain. 
Now  the  whole  site  uf  the  basilica  is  imuovered,  and 
thej-  have  dug  into  the  depths  of  several  tombs,  bring- 
ing to  light  precious  marbles,  pillars,  a  statue,  and 
elaborately  wrought  earcophagi;  and  if  they  were  to 
dig  into  almost  every  otiier  inequality  that  frets  the 
surface  of  the  Campagna,  1  Bu])pose  the  result  might 
be  the  same.  You  cannot  dig  six  feet  downward  any* 
where  into  the  soil,  deep  enough  to  hollow  out  a  grave, 
without  lindiiig  sonic  precious  relic  of  the  past ;  only 
they  lose  somewhat  of  their  value  wlien  you  think 
that  you  can  almost  spurn  them  out  of  the  groimd 
with  your  foot.  It  is  a  very  wonderful  arrange- 
ment of  Providence  that  these  things  should  liavo 
been  preserved  for  a  long  series  of  coming  generations 
by  that  accumulation  of  dust  and  soil  and  grass  and 
trees  and  houses  over  them,  which  will  keep  them 
safe,  and  cause  their  reappearance  above  ground  to  be 
gradual,  so  that  the  rest  of  the  world's  lifetime  may 
have  for  one  of  its  enjoyments  the  uncovering  of  old 

The  tombs  were  accessible  by  long  flights  of  steps, 
going  steeply  downward,  and  they  were  thronge<i  with 
so  many  visitors  that  we  had  to  wait  some  little  time 
for  our  own  turn.  In  the  first  into  which  we  de- 
scended we  found  two  tombs  side  by  side,  with  only  a 
partition  wall  between  •,  the  outer  tomb  l*eing,  n»  is 
supposed,  a  burial  -  place  constructed  by  tlie  early 
Christians,  while  tlie  adjoined  and  minor  one 
work  of  jiagan  Rome  al)out  the  second  century  after 
Christ.     The  former  was  much  less  interesting  thin 


fta  ■ 
baa  ■ 


8.] 


TTALT. 


IW^ 


the  latter.  It  contained  some  lar^  saroophagi,  wi^ 
tx-ulpture  upon  tbem  of  rather  heathenish  aspeet ;  and 
in  the  centre  of  the  front  of  each  sarcojihagua  waa  a 
bust  in  bas-relief,  the  features  of  which  had  oeTerbeeo 
wrought,  but  were  left  almost  blank,  with  only  the 
faintest  indications  of  a  nose,  for  instance.  It  iii  sup- 
posed that  sarcophagi  were  kept  on  hand  by  the  Bculp- 
t'>rB,  and  were  bought  ready  made,  and  that  it  waa 
custoDiary  to  work  out  the  portnut  of  the  deceased 
ii]M)n  the  blank  face  in  the  centre  ;  but  when  there 
was  a  neoessity  for  sudden  burial,  as  may  have  been 
the  case  in  the  present  instance,  this  was  dispensed 
with. 

The  inner  tomb  was  found  without  any  earth  in  it, 
Just  oa  it  had  been  left  when  the  last  old  Roman  was 
buried  there ;  and  it  being  only  a  week  or  two  since 
it  waa  opened,  there  was  very  little  intervention  of 
persons,  though  much  of  time,  between  the  departure 
of  the  friends  of  the  dead  and  our  own  visit.  It  is  a 
square  room,  with  a  mos^c  pavement,  and  is  ux  or 
seven  paces  in  length  and  breadth,  and  as  much  in 
height  to  the  vaulted  roof.  Tlie  roof  and  upper  walls 
arc  beautifidly  ornamented  with  frescos,  which  were 
very  bright  when  first  discovered,  hut  have  rapidly 
faded  since  the  admission  of  the  air.  though  the  grace- 
ful and  joyous  designs,  flowers,  and  fruits  and  ti«efl, 
are  still  perfectly  discernible.  The  room  must  have 
been  anj'thing  but  sa<^l  and  funereal ;  on  the  contrary, 
aa  cheerful  a  saloon,  and  as  brilliant,  if  lighted  up,  as 
one  could  desire  to  feast  in.  It  contained  several  mar- 
ble sarcophagi,  covering  indeed  almost  the  whole  floor, 
luid  each  of  them  as  much  as  three  or  four  feet  in 
«ngth,  and  two  much  longer.  The  longer  ones  I  did 
pot  partictdarly  examine,  and  they  seemed  compara- 


192    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [laal 

rively  plainer ;  but  the  smaller  sarctopbagi  were  oo^"' 
ered  with  the  most  delieately  wrought  and  beautiful 
l>afl-reliefs  that  I  ever  beheld  ;  a  throng  of  glad  tan] 
lovely  shapes  in  marble  elustermg  thickly  and  chasing 
one  another  round  the  sides  of  these  old  stone  eoAinx. 
The  work  was  as  perfect  as  when  the  sculptor  gave  it 
his  laat  toueli ;  and  it  he  had  wrought  it  to  be  placed' 
in  a  fre<iuentetl  hall,  to  be  seeu  and  at^bnired  by  contio* 
uaJ  crowds  as  long  as  the  marble  should  endure,  bs 
conid  not  have  chiselled  with  better  skill  and  care, 
though  his  work  was  to  be  shut  up  in  the  depths  of  a 
tomb  forever.  This  seems  to  me  the  strangest  thing 
in  the  world,  the  most  alien  from  mo<lem  sympatliies. 
If  they  had  built  their  tombs  above  ground,  one  coidd 
understand  tlie  arrangement  betWr ;  but  no  sooner 
had  they  adorned  them  so  richly,  and  furnished  them 
with  such  exquisite  productions  of  art,  than  they 
nihilated  them  with  darkness.  It  vtaa  an  attompt,  no 
doubt,  to  render  the  physical  aspect  of  death  cheerful, 
but  there  was  no  good  sense  in  it. 

We  went  down  also  into  another  tomb  close  by, 
the  walls  of  which  were  oniament«Ml  with  medallions 
in  stucco.  These  works  piv^ented  a  numerous  series 
of  graoeful  designs,  wrought  by  the  hand  iu  the  short 
space  (Mr.  .Story  said  it  could  not  have  been  mora 
than  five  or  ten  minutes)  while  the  wet  plaster  re- 
mained capable  of  being  moulded  ;  and  it  was  marvel- 
lous to  think  of  the  fertility  of  the  artist's  fancy,  and 
the  rapidity  and  accuracy  with  which  ho  unist  have 
given  substantial  existence  to  his  ideas.  These  too  — • 
all  of  tliem  such  adornments  as  would  have  suited  a 
festal  hall  —  were  maile  to  he  buried  forthwith  in 
eternal  darkness.  I  saw  and  bandied  in  this  tomb  a 
great  thigh-boue,  and  measured  it  with  my 


I 


1 


ITALY. 


195 


was  one  of  maay  such  lelics  of  the  guests  who  were 
laid  to  sleep  in  these  rich  chambers.  The  sarcophagi 
that  served  them  for  cofBns  could  not  now  be  put  to 
a  more  appropriate  use  than  as  wtn^-coolers  la  a  mod- 
em  dining-room  ;  and  it  would  heighten  the  enjoyment 
of  a  festival  to  look  at  them. 

We  would  gladly  have  stayed  much  longer ;  but  it 
was  drawing  towards  sunset,  and  the  evening,  though 
bright,  was  unusually  cool,  so  we  drove  home  ;  and  OQ 
the  way,  Mr.  Story  told  as  of  the  horrible  pra>!tices 
of  the  modem  Romans  with  their  dead,  —  how  they 
place  them  in  the  church,  where,  at  midnight,  they  are 
stripped  of  their  last  rag  of  funeral  attire,  put  into  the 
rudest  wooden  cofBns,  and  thrown  into  a  trench,  —  a 
half-mile,  for  instance,  of  promiscuous  corpses.  This 
is  the  fate  of  all,  except  those  whose  frieuds  choose  to 
pay  an  ezorbitaat  sum  to  have  them  buried  under  the 
pavement  of  a  church.  The  Italians  have  an  exoea- 
nve  dread  of  corpses,  and  never  mecldle  with  those  of 
their  nearest  and  dearest  relatives.  They  have  a  hor- 
ror of  death,  too,  especially  of  sudden  death,  and  most 
particularly  of  apoplexy  ;  and  no  wonder,  as  it  gives 
no  time  for  the  last  rites  of  the  Church,  and  so  ex- 
poses tbem  to  a  fearful  risk  of  perdition  forever.  On 
the  whole,  the  ancient  practice  was,  perhaps,  the  pref- 
erable one ;  but  Nature  has  made  it  very  dtfdcnlt  for 
OS  to  do  anything  pleasant  and  satisfactory  with  a 
dead  body.  God  knows  best;  but  I  wish  He  had  so 
ordered  it  that  our  ntortal  bodies,  when  we  have  done 
with  tbem,  might  vanish  out  of  sight  and  sense,  like 
bubbles.  A  person  of  delicacy  hates  to  think  of  leav- 
ing such  a  burden  as  his  decaying  mortality  to  the  dis- 
posal of  his  friends  i  but,  I  say  again,  how  delightful 
H  would  be,  and  how  helpful  towards  our  faith  in  a 


194   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [181 

blessed  futurity,  if  the  dying  eould  disappear  like 
ishing  bubbles.  lt>aviug,  perhapn.  a  sweet  fragrauC6 
dlEFused  for  a.  minute  or  two  tbruughout  the  deatb- 
chamber.  Thid  would  be  the  odor  of  sanctity  I  And 
if  sometimes  the  evaporation  of  a  sinful  soid  should 
leave  au  odor  not  so  dt;lightful,  a  breeze  through  tho 
open  windows  would  soon  waft  it  quite  away. 

Apropos  of  the  various  uietho<ls  of  diajiosing  of 
dead  bodies,  William  Story  recalled  a  newspaper 
paragraph  respecting  a  ring,  with  a  stone  of  a  tiev 
species  in  it,  which  a  widower  was  observed  to  wear 
upon  his  finger.  Being  questioned  as  to  what  th^ 
gem  was,  he  answered,  '*  It  is  my  wife."  He 
procured  her  body  to  be  chemically  resolved  into 
stone.  I  think  I  could  mako  a  stoiy  on  this  ideai 
the  ring  should  be  one  of  the  widower's  bridal  gifts 
to  a  second  wife  ;  and,  of  noureHj,  it  should  have 
wondrous  and  terrible  qualities,  symbolixiiig  all  that 
disturbs  the  quiet  of  a  second  marriage,  —  on  tba 
busband'a  part,  remorse  for  his  inconstancy,  and  the 
constant  comparison  between  the  dead  wife  of  hia 
youth,  now  idealized,  and  the  grosser  reality  whlok 
he  hail  now  ailopted  into  her  place ;  while  on  the 
wife's  finger  it  should  give  pressures,  shooting  pangs 
into  her  heart,  jealousies  of  the  past,  and  all  such  mis- 
erable emotions. 

By  the  by,  the  tombs  which  we  looked  at  and  e& 
tered  may  have  been  originally  above  ground,  lika 
that  of  Cecilia  Metella,  and  a  hundred  others  along 
the  Appian  Way  ;  though,  even  in  this  case,  the  beau- 
tiful chambers  must  havo  been  shut  up  in  darkneiWi 
Had  tliero  btien  windows,  letting  in  Uio  light  upon  the 
rich  freHci:>e  and  exquisite  sculptures,  there  would  havs 
been  a  satisfaction  iji  thinking  of  the  existence  of  BC 


-4 

an-  I 


th< 


1868.]  ITALY.  195 

mnch  yisoal  beauty,  though  no  eye  had  the  privilege 
to  see  it.  But  darkness,  to  objects  of  sight,  is  anni- 
hilation, as  long  as  the  darkness  lasts. 

May  Wi.  —  Mrs.  Jameson  ealled  this  forenoon  to 
ask  us  to  go  and  see  her  this  evening ;  •  •  .  so  that  I 
had  to  receive  her  alone,  devolving  part  of  Uie  bur* 
den  on  Miss  Shepard  and  the  three  children,  all  of 
whom  I  introduced  to  her  notice.  Finding  that  I  had 
not  been  farther  beyond  the  walls  of  Bome  than  the 
tomb  of  Cecilia  Metella,  she  invited  me  to  take  a  drive 
of  a  few  miles  with  her  this  afternoon.  •  •  •  The  poor 
lady  seems  to  be  very  lame;  and  I  am  sure  I  was 
grateful  to  her  for  having  taken  the  trouble  to  climb 
up  Uie  seventy  steps  of  our  staircase,  and  felt  pain  at 
seeing  her  go  down  them  again.  It  looks  fearfully 
like  the  gout,  the  affection  being  apparentiy  in  one 
foot.  The  hands,  by  the  way,  are  white,  and  must 
once  have  been,  periiaps  now  are,  beautif  uL  She  must 
have  been  a  perfectly  pretty  woman  in  her  day,  —  a 
blue  or  gray  eyed,  &ir-haired  beauty.  I  think  that 
her  hair  is  not  white,  but  only  flaxen  in  the  extreme. 

At  half  past  four,  according  to  appointment,  I  ar- 
rived at  her  lodgings,  and  had  not  long  to  wait  before 
her  little  one-horse  carriage  drove  up  to  the  door,  and 
we  set  out,  rumbling  along  the  Via  Scrofa,  and  through 
the  densest  part  of  the  city,  past  the  theatre  of  Mar- 
cellus,  and  thence  along  beneath  the  Palatine  Hill, 
and  by  the  Baths  of  Caracalla,  through  the  gate  of 
San  Sebastiano.  After  emerging  from  tlie  gate,  we 
soon  came  to  the  little  Church  of  ^  Domind,  quo  va- 
dis?"  Standing  on  the  spot  where  St.  Peter  is  said 
to  have  seen  a  vision  of  our  Saviour  bearing  his  cross, 
Mrs.  Jameson  proposed  to  alight ;  and,  going  in,  we 


196   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1858  ] 

Raw  a  cast  from  Michel  Angelo's  statue  of  the  Sav< 
iour ;  and  not  far  from  tlie  threshold  of  the  church, 
yet  perhaps  in  the  centre  of  the  CiliEce,  which  is  ex- 
trembly  small,  a  circular  atone  is  placed,  a  little  raised 
above  the  pavement,  and  surrounded  by  a  low  wooden 
railing.  Pointing  to  this  stone,  Mrs.  Jameson  showed 
me  tlie  prints  of  two  feet  side  by  side,  inipresswl  into 
its  surface,  as  if  a  person  had  stopped  short  while  ])ur- 
Buing  his  way  to  Home.  These,  she  informed  me, 
were  supposed  to  be  the  miraculous  prints  of  the  Sav- 
iour's feet ;  but  on  looking  into  Murray,  I  am  morti- 
fied to  End  that  they  are  merely  faesimiles  of  the  orig- 
inal impressions,  which  are  treasured  up  among  the 
relics  of  the  neighboring  Basilica  of  San  Sebastiano. 
The  marks  of  sculjitiire  seempd  to  me,  ind««I,  very 
eviilent  in  these  prints,  nor  did  tliey  indicate  sudt 
Iteautiful  feet  as  should  have  belonged  to  the  bearer 
the  best  of  glad  tidings. 

Hence  we  drove  on  a  little  way  farther,  and  came  to 
the  Basilica  of  San  Scbastiano,  where  also  we  alighted, 
and,  leaning  on  my  arm,  Mrs.  Jameson  went  in.  It 
is  a  stately  and  noble  interior,  with  a  spacious  unen- 
cimibered  nave,  anil  a  flat  ceiling  frescoeii  and  gilded., 
In  a  chapel  at  the  left  of  tlie  entrance  is  the  tomb 
St.  Sebastian,  —  a  sarcophagus  containing  his  remains, 
raised  on  high  before  the  altar,  and  beneath  it  a  re- 
cumbent  statue  of  the  saint  pierced  with  gilded  ar- 
rows. The  sculpture  is  of  the  school  of  Bernini,  — 
done  after  the  design  of  Bernini  himself,  Mrs.  Jame- 
son said,  and  is  more  agreeable  and  in  better  taato 
than  most  of  his  works.  We  walked  roim<I  the  basi< 
lica,  glancing  at  the  pictures  in  the  various  chapels, 
none  of  which  seemed  to  be  of  remarkable  merit,  al- 
though Mrs.  Jameson  pronounced  rather  a  favorablt 


It 

4 

ns.  -^^ 


i 


I 


ITALY. 

verdict  on  one  of  St.  Francis.  Ske  saya  that  she  can 
read  a  picture  like  tbe  page  of  a  book ;  in  fact,  with- 
out perhaps  assuming  more  tajtte  aud  judgment  than 
really  belong  to  her,  it  was  impoaaible  not  to  perceive 
that  she  gave  her  companion  no  credit  for  knowing 
one  single  simplest  thing  about  art.  Nor,  on  tbe 
whole,  do  I  think  she  underrated  me;  the  only  mys- 
tery is,  how  she  came  to  be  so  well  aware  of  my  igno 
ranoe  on  aitistical  jwints. 

In  the  basilica  the  Franciscan  monks  wore  arrang- 
ing benches  on  the  floor  of  the  nave,  and  some  peasant 
children  and  grown  people  besides  were  assembling, 
probably  to  undei^o  an  examination  in  the  catechism, 
and  we  hastened  to  depart,  lest  our  presence  should 
interfere  with  their  arrangementa.  At  tbe  door  a, 
monk  met  us,  and  asked  for  a  contribution  in  aid  of 
his  church,  or  some  other  religious  purpose.  Boys, 
as  we  drove  on,  ran  stoutly  along  by  the  side  of  the 
chaise,  begging  as  often  as  they  could  find  breath,  but 
were  constrained  finally  to  give  up  the  pursuit.  The 
great  ragged  bulks  of  the  tombs  along  the  Appian 
Way  now  hove  in  sight,  one  with  a  farm-house  on  its 
summit,  and  all  of  them  preposterously  huge  and  mas- 
sive. At  a  distance,  across  the  green  Campagna  on 
our  left,  the  Claudian  aqueduct  strode  away  over  miles 
of  space,  and  doubtless  reached  even  to  that  circum- 
ference of  blue  hills  which  stand  afar  o£F,  girdling 
Borne  about.  The  tomb  of  Cecilia  MeteJla  camo  in 
sight  a  long  while  before  we  reached  it,  with  the  warm 
buff  hue  of  its  travertine,  and  the  gray  battlemented 
wall  which  the  Gaeteni  erected  on  the  top  of  its  cir- 
cular  summit  six  hundred  years  ago.  After  passing 
it,  we  saw  an  interminable  luie  of  tombs  on  both  sides 
if  the  way,  each  of  which  might,  for  aught  I  know, 


198   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [11 

Iiave  been  as  mausive  as  that  of  Cecilia  Metelliu 
some  perhaps  BfcUl  more  moniitroualy  gigantic,  tho«] 
now  dilapidated  and  miieh  reduced  in  size.  Mi 
Jameson  had  an  engagement  to  dinner  at  half  part 
six,  so  that  we  coidil  go  but  a  little  farther  along  this 
most  interesting  road,  the  Iwnlers  of  which  are  strewn 
with  broken  marbles,  fragments  of  eapitals,  and  naliio 
leas  rubbish  that  once  was  beautiful.  Mcthiuks  the 
Appian  Way  should  t>e  the  only  entrance  to  Rome, 
through  an  avenue  of  tombs. 

The  day  had  been  cloudy,  chill,  and  windy,  but  i 
now  grown  calmer  and  more  genial,  and  brighteno^'J 
by  a  very  pleasant  sunshine,  though  great  dark  clouds 
were  still  lumbering  up  the  sky.  We  drove  home- 
ward, looking  at  the  distant  dome  of  St.  Peter's,  and 
talking  of  many  things,  —  painting,  sculpture,  Amer- 
ica, England,  spiritualism,  and  whatever  else  came  up.' 
She  is  a  very  sensible  old  lady,  and  sees  a  great  AeaX 
of  truth  ;  a  good  woman,  too,  taking  elevated  views  of^ 
matters  ;  but  1  doubt  whetlier  she  has  the  highest  and' 
iinest  perceptions  in  the  world.  At  any  rate,  she  prot^ 
nounced  a  good  judgment  on  the  American  sculptors 
now  in  Rome,  condemning  them  in  the  mans  n»  men 
with  no  high  aims,  no  worthy  conception  of  the  pur- 
poses of  their  art,  and  desecrating  marble  by  the 
things  they  wrought  in  it.  William  Story,  I  pr©* 
eume,  is  not  to  be  included  in  this  censure,  as  she  had 
spoken  highly  of  his  sculpturesque  faculty  in  our  pr». 
vious  conversation.  On  my  part,  I  su^^sted  that  the 
English  sculptors  were  little  or  nothing  t>etter  than 
our  own.  to  which  she  acceded  generally,  but  said  that 
Gibflon  had  produced  works  equal  to  the  antique. — ■ 
which  I  did  not  dispute,  but  still  questioned  whether 
kh*  world  needed  Gibson,  or  was  any  the  better  foi 


I 

i 


J 


ITALY. 


199 


I 


Um.  We  had  a  great  dispute  abont  the  propriety  of 
adopting  the  costume  of  the  day  in  modem  sculpture, 
and  I  contended  that  either  the  art  ought  to  be  given 
op  (which  possibly  would  be  the  best  course),  or  elac 
should  be  used  for  idealizing  the  man  of  the  day  to 
Hmself ;  and  that,  as  Nature  makes  us  sensibla  of  the 
fact  when  men  and  women  are  graceful,  beautiful,  and 
noble,  through  whatever  costume  they  wear,  so  it 
ougbt  to  be  the  teat  of  the  sculptor's  genius  that  he 
should  do  the  same.  Mrfi.  Jameson  decidedly  olv 
jected  to  buttons,  breeches,  and  all  other  items  of 
modem  costume  ;  and,  indeed,  they  do  degrade  the 
marble,  and  make  high  sculpture  utterly  impossible. 
Then  let  the  art  perish  as  one  tlutt  the  world  has  done 
with,  as  it  has  done  with  many  other  beautiful  things 
that  belonged  to  an  earlier  time. 

It  was  long  past  the  hour  of  Mrs.  Jameson's  dinner 
engagement  when  we  drove  up  to  her  door  in  the  Via 
Ripetta.  I  bade  her  farewell  with  much  good  feeling 
on  my  own  side,  and,  I  hope,  on  bers,  excusing  myself, 
however,  from  keeping  the  previous  engagement  to 
spend  the  evening  with  her,  for,  in  point  of  fact,  we 
had  mutually  had  enough  of  one  another  for  the  time 
being.  I  am  glad  to  record  that  she  expressed  a  very 
favorable  opinion  of  our  friend  Mr.  Thompson's  pic- 
tures. 

May  12M.  —  To-day  we  have  been  to  the  Villa 
Albani,  to  which  we  had  a  ticket  of  admission  throu^ 
the  agency  of  Mr.  Cass  (the  American  Minister). 
We  set  out  between  ten  and  eleven  o'clock,  and 
walked  through  the  Via  Felice,  the  Piazza  Barl>erini. 
and  a  long,  heavy,  dusty  range  of  streets  beyond,  to 
the  Porta  Salara,  whence  the  road  extends,  white  and 


4 


200   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [11 

Bunny,  between  two  higli  blank  walls  to  the  gate 
the  villa,  whicb  is  at  no  great  distance.  Wi 
admitted  by  a  girl,  and  went  VttKi  to  the  casino,  aloi 
an  aifllo  of  overshadowing  trees,  the  bramihtis  of 
met  above  our  iieads.  In  the  portico  of  the  casino, 
which  extends  along:  its  whole  front,  there  are  many 
busts  and  statues,  and,  among  them,  one  of  Julius 
Ciesar,  representing  him  at  au  earlier  period  of  life 
than  others  which  I  have  seen.  His  aspect  is  not  par- 
ticularly impressive ;  there  is  a  lack  of  cliin,  though 
not  so  much  as  in  the  older  statues  and  busts.  Withia 
the  edifice  there  is  a  large  hall,  not  so  brilliant,  pep- 
hajis,  with  frcMios  and  gilding  as  those  at  the  Villa 
Borghuse,  but  lined  with  tho  most  beautiful  variety  of 
marbles.  But,  in  fact,  eaoh  new  splendor  of  this  sort 
outsliiues  the  Last,  and  unless  wc  could  pass  from  one 
to  another  all  in  the  same  suite,  we  cannot  remeniber 
them  well  enough  to  compare  the  Borgheso  with  the 
Albani,  the  effect  being  more  on  the  fancy  than  on 
the  intellect.  I  do  not  recall  any  of  the  sculpture^ 
except  a  colossal  bas-relief  of  Antiuoiis,  crowneil  with 
flowers,  and  holding  flowers' in  his  hand,  whiuh 
found  in  the  ruins  of  Hadrian's  Villa.  This  is  said 
to  be  the  tinest  relic  of  antiquity  next  to  the  Apollo 
and  the  Laocoiin ;  but  I  could  not  feel  it  to  be  so, 
partly,  I  supimse,  Ivecause  the  features  of  Antinous  do 
not  seem  to  me  beautiful  in  themselves ;  and  that 
heavy,  downward  look  ia  repeated  till  I  am  more 
weary  of  it  than  of  anything  else  in  sculpture.  Wo 
went  up  stairs  and  down  stairs,  and  saw  a  good  many 
beautiful  things,  but  none,  perhaps,  of  the  very  best 
and  beautifnllest -,  and  second-rate  statues,  with  tlie 
corroded  surface  of  old  marble  that  has  been  dozena 
of  centuries  under  the  ground,  depress  the  spirits  i>£ 


ong^^H 
licb^^V 


I 


J 


I 


1859.]  ITALY.  201 

the  beholder.  The  bas-relief  of  Antmods  has  at  least 
the  merit  of  being  almost  a^  white  and  fresh,  and  quite 
as  smooth,  as  if  it  had  never  been  buried  and  dug  up 
a^^in.  The  real  treasures  of  this  villa,  to  the  number 
of  nearly  three  hundred,  were  removed  to  Paris  by 
Napoleon,  and,  except  the  Antinoils,  not  one  of  them 
ever  came  baok. 

There  are  some  pictures  in  one  or  two  of  the  rooms, 
and  among  them  I  recollect  one  by  Pemgino,  in  which 
is  a  St.  Michael,  very  devout  and  very  beautiful ;  in- 
deed, the  whole  picture  (which  is  in  compartments, 
representing  the  three  principal  points  of  the  Saviour's 
history)  impresses  the  beholder  as  being  painted  de- 
voutly and  earnestly  by  a  religious  man.  In  one  of 
the  rooms  there  is  a  small  bronze  Apollo,  supposed 
by  Winckelraanu  to  be  au  original  of  Praxiteles  ;  but 
I  could  not  make  myself  in  the  least  sensiblo  of  its 
merit 

The  rest  of  the  things  in  the  casino  I  shall  paaa 
over,  as  also  those  in  the  coffee-house, — an  edifice 
which  stands  a  hundred  yards  or  more  from  the  casino, 
with  an  ornamental  garden,  laid  out  in  walks  and 
flower-plats  between.  The  coffee-house  has  a  semi- 
circular sweep  of  porch  with  a  good  many  statues  and 
busts  beneath  it,  chiefly  of  distinguished  Romans.  In 
this  building,  as  in  the  casino,  there  are  curious  mo- 
saics, lai^  vases  of  rare  marble,  and  many  other 
things  worth  long  pauses  of  admiration ;  but  I  think 
that  we  were  all  happier  when  we  had  done  with  the 
works  of  art,  and  were  at  leisure  to  ramble  about  the 
groun<b.  The  Villa  Albani  itself  is  an  edifice  sepa- 
rate from  both  the  coffee-house  and  casino,  and  is  not 
opened  to  strangers.  It  rises,  palace-like,  in  the  midst 
of  the  garden,  and,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  has  some  possibil- 


202   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [181 

ity  of  comfort  amidst  its  aplenilorfl.  Comfort,  however, 
would  be  tlirown  away  upon  it ;  for,  Iiesides  that  the 
site  shaiVB  the  curne  that  has  fallen  upon  every  pleaa- 
aut  place  in  the  vicinity  of  Kume,  ...  it  really  has 
no  occupant  except  the  servantti  who  take  care  of  U 
The  count  of  Castelbareo,  its  present  proprietor, 
Bides  at  Milan.  The  grounds  are  laid  out  in  the  ol 
faBhioD  of  straight  paths,  with  borders  of  box,  which' 
form  hedges  of  great  height  and  density,  and  as  even 
as  a  brick-wall  at  the  top  and  sides.  There  are  also 
alleys  forming  long  vistas  between  the  trunks  and  be- 
neath the  Imugbs  of  oakfi,  ilexes,  and  olives  ;  and  there 
are  shrubberies  and  tangled  wildernesses  of  palm, 
cactus,  rhododendron,  and  I  know  not  what ;  and  a 
profusion  of  roses  that  bloom  and  wither  with  nolxxly 
to  pluck  and  few  to  look  at  them.  They  climb  about 
the  sculpture  of  fountains,  rear  themselves  against 
pillars  and  ]>orticDS,  run  brimming  over  the  walls,  and 
strew  the  paths  with  their  falling  leaves.  We  stole  a 
few,  and  feel  that  we  have  wronged  our  consciences  in 
not  stealing  more.  In  one  part  of  the  grounds  we 
saw  a  field  actually  ablaze  with  scarlet  poppies.  There 
are  great  lagunas ;  fountains  presided  over  by  naiads, 
who  squirt  their  little  jets  into  basins ;  sunny  lawns; 
a  temple,  ho  artificially  ruined  that  we  half  believed 
it  a  veritable  antique ;  and  at  its  base  a  reservoir  of 
water,  in  which  stone  swans  seemed  positively  to  float; 
groves  of  cypress  ;  balustra^les  and  broad  flights  of 
stone  stairs,  descending  to  lower  levels  of  the  garden ; 
beauty,  peace,  simshine,  and  antique  repose  on  every 
side  ;  and  far  in  the  distance  the  blue  hills  that  encii^ 
cle  the  Cani[>agna  of  Rome.  The  day  was  very  fine 
for  our  purjMse ;  cheerful,  but  nut  too  bright,  and 
tempered  by  a  breeze  that  seemed  even  a  little  too 


M 

aa- 

jaa  ^^^ 

iob^H 
rea  ^H 
Iso  V 


I 

tOQ  I 


8.] 


IT  AIT. 


cool  wheB  we  rat  long  in  the  rfiade.  We  enjoyed  it 
till  tliree  o'clock.  .  .  . 

At  the  Capitol  there  is  a  sarcophagus  with  a  most 
beautiful  bas-relief  of  the  discovery  of  Achilles  by 
Ulysses,  in  which  there  is  even  an  expression  of  imrth 
on  the  faces  of  many  of  the  apeetators.  And  to-day 
at  the  Albani  a  sarcophagus  was  ornamented  with  the 
nuptials  of  Peleua  and  Thetis. 

Death  strides  behind  every  man,  to  be  sure,  at  more 
or  less  distance,  and,  sooner  or  later,  enters  upon  any 
event  of  his  life  ;  so  that,  in  this  point  of  view,  they 
might  each  and  all  serve  for  bas-reliefs  on  a  garoopha- 
gils ;  but  the  Romans  seem  to  have  treated  Death  as 
lightly  and  plaj-fuUy  as  they  could,  and  tried  to  cover 
hia  dart  with  flowers,  because  they  hated  it  so  much. 

May  \hih..  —  My  wife  and  I  went  yesterday  to  the 
Sistine  Chapel,  it  being  my  tirst  visit.  It  is  a  room 
of  noble  proportions,  lofty  and  long,  though  divided 
in  the  midst  by  a  Hcreen  or  partition  of  white  marble, 
which  rises  high  enough  to  break  the  effect  of  spaoioos 
nnity.  There  are  six  arched  windows  on  eaoh  aide  of 
the  chapel,  throwing  down  their  light  from  the  height 
of  the  walls,  with  as  much  as  twenty  feet  of  space 
(more  I  should  think)  between  them  and  the  floor. 
The  entire  walls  and  ceiling  of  this  stately  chapel  are 
covered  with  paintings  in  fresco,  except  the  space 
about  t«D  feet  in  height  from  the  floor,  and  that  por- 
tion was  intended  to  be  adorned  by  tapestries  from 
pictures  by  Raphael,  but,  the  design  being  prevented 
by  his  immature  death,  the  projected  tapestries  have 
no  better  substitute  than  paper-hangings.  The  roof, 
which  is  flat  at  top,  and  coved  or  vaulted  at  the  sides, 
k  painted  in  compartments  by  Michel  Angelo,  with 


204    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [ISBtJ 

freocos  representing  the  whole  progpress  of  the  wofI 
and  of  mankiud,  from  its  first  formation  by  the  Al- 
mighty ...  till  after  the  flood.  On  one  of  the  sides 
of  the  chapel  are  pictures  by  Penigino,  and  other 
old  masters,  of  subsequent  events  in  sacred  history; 
and  the  entire  wall  behind  the  altar,  a  vast  expanse 
from  the  ceiling  to  the  floor,  is  taken  up  with  Michel 
Angelo's  summing  up  of  the  world's  history  and  de»» 
tinies  in  his  Last  Judgment. 

There  can  bo  no  doubt  that  while  these 
continued  in  tlieir  perfection,  tliere  was  nothing  elM 
to  be  compared  with  the  magniticent  and  solemn 
beauty  of  this  chapeL  Enough  of  ruined  spleudw 
still  remains  to  convince  the  spectator  of  all  that  has 
departed ;  but  methinks  I  have  seen  hardly  anything 
else  BO  forlorn  and  depressing  a^  it  is  now,  all  dusky 
and  dim,  even  the  very  lights  having  panned  into  shad- 
ows, and  the  shadows  into  utter  blackness ;  so  that  it 
needs  a  sunshiny  day,  under  the  bright  Italian  heav- 
ens, to  make  tlie  designs  perceptible  at  aU.  As  we 
sat  in  the  chapel  there  were  clouds  Eitting  across  ths 
sky ;  when  the  clouds  came,  the  pictures  vanished  % 
when  the  sunshine  broke  forth,  the  figures  satUy  glim- 
mered into  something  like  visibility,  —  the  ALuighty 
moving  in  chaos,  —  the  noble  shape  of  Adam,  the 
beautiful  Eve ;  and,  beneath  where  the  roof  curves, 
the  mighty  figures  of  sibyls  and  prophets,  looking 
as  if  they  were  necessarily  so  gigantic  bec&use  the 
tliought  within  them  was  so  massive.  In  The  Xiast 
Judgment  the  scene  of  the  greater  part  of  the  pic- 
ture lies  in  the  upper  sky,  the  blue  of  which  glows 
through  betwixt  the  g^^ups  of  naked  figures  \  and 
above  sits  Jesus,  not  looking  in  tlie  least  like  the  Sav- 
iour of  the  world,  but,  with  uplifted  arm,  denouncing 


I 


J 


I8SS.] 


205 


eternal  nuMryan  those  whom  He  came  to  save.  I  fear 
I  am  mysL-lf  among  the  wicked,  for  I  found  myeielf  in- 
evitably taking  their  part,  and  asking  for  at  least  a 
little  pity,  some  few  regrets,  and  not  such  a  stem  d&- 
Dunciatory  spirit  on  the  part  of  Hiui  who  had  thought 
us  worth  dying  for.  Around  him  stand  grim  saints, 
and,  far  beneath,  people  are  getting  up  sleepily  out 
of  their  graves,  not  well  knowing  what  is  about  to 
happen;  many  of  them,  however,  finding  themselves 
clutched  by  demons  before  they  are  half  awake.  It 
would  be  a  very  terrible  picture  to  one  who  should 
really  see  Jesus,  the  Saviour,  in  that  inexorable  ju(%e ; 
but  it  seems  to  me  very  undesirable  that  He  should 
ever  be  represented  in  that  aspeet,  when  it  is  so  essen- 
tial to  our  religion  to  believe  Him  infinitely  kinder  and 
better  towai-ds  us  than  we  deserve.  At  the  last  day 
—  I  presume,  that  is,  in  all  future  days,  when  we  see 
ourselves  as  we  are  —  man's  only  inexorable  judge 
will  be  himself,  and  the  punishment  of  his  aim  will  be 
the  perception  of  them. 

In  the  lower  comer  of  this  great  picture,  at  the  right 
haad  of  the  spectator,  is  a  hideous  figure  of  a  damned 
person,  girdled  about  with  a  serpent,  the  folds  of  which 
are  carefully  knotted  between  his  thighs,  so  as,  at  all 
events,  to  give  no  offence  to  decency.  This  figure  rep- 
resents a  man  who  suggested  to  Pope  Paul  III.  that 
the  nudities  of  The  Last  Judgment  ought  to  be  draped, 
for  which  offence  Michel  Angelo  at  once  consigned 
him  to  hell.  It  shows  what  a  debtor's  prison  and  dun- 
geon of  private  torment  men  would  make  of  hell  if 
they  had  the  control  of  it.  As  to  the  nudities,  if  they 
were  ever  more  nude  than  now.  I  should  suppose,  in 
their  fresh  brilliancy,  they  might  well  have  startled  a 
BOt  very  squeamish  eye.     The  effect,  such  as  it  is,  of 


£08    FRESCn  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [II 

this  pioture,  is  much  injured  by  the  high  altar  and 
canopy,  which  atande  close  against  the  wall,  and  inter- 
cepts a  conuiderable  portion  of  the  sprawl  of  naked- 
ness with  wiiicli  Michel  Angelo  has  filled  hid  sky. 
Uowover,  I  am  not  unwilling  to  believe,  with  faith  be> 
yond  what  1  can  actually  see,  that  the  greatest  pictorial 
miravles  ever  yet  a«.ibioved  have  been  wrought  upon 
the  walla  and  ceiling  of  tlie  Sistiiie  Chapel. 

In  the  afternoon  I  went  with  Mr.  Thompson  to  see 
what  bargain  could  be  made  with  vetturinai  for  tak< 
ing  myself  and  family  to  Florence.  We  talked  with 
three  or  four,  and  found  them  asking  prices  of  various 
enormity,  from  a  hundred  and  fifty  scudi  down  to  lit- 
tle more  than  ninety ;  but  Mr.  Thompson  aaya  that 
they  always  begiti  in  this  way  ;  aud  will  proliably  come 
down  to  somewhere  about  seveuty-tive.  Mr,  Thomp- 
son took  me  into  the  Via  Portogheae,  and  showed  me 
an  old  palace,  above  which  rose  —  not  a  very  custom- 
ary feature  of  the  architecture  of  Rome  —  a  tall,  bat- 
demented  tower.  At  one  angle  of  the  tower  we  saw  ■ 
shrine  of  the  Virgin,  with  a  lamp,  and  all  the  append- 
ages of  those  numerous  shrines  which  we  see  at  ths 
street  comers,  and  in  hundreds  of  places  about  the 
city.  Three  or  four  centuries  ago  this  palace  was  i 
habited  by  a  nobleman  who  had  an  only  son,  and 
large,  pet  monkey,  and  one  day  the  monkey  caught  the 
infant  up  and  clambered  to  this  lofty  turret,  and  sat 
there  with  him  in  his  arms  grinning  and  chattering  like 
the  Devil  himself.  The  father  was  in  despair,  but  was 
afraid  to  pursue  the  monkey  lest  he  should  fling  down 
tlie  child  from  the  height  of  the  tower  and  make  his 
escape.  At  la^t  he  vowed  that  if  the  boy  were  safely 
restored  to  him  he  would  build  a  shrine  at  the  summit 
of  the  tower,  aud  cause  it  to  be  kept  as  a  sacred  plao6 


■* 


I 


I 


tsn.] 


TTALT, 


SOT 


forever.  By  and  by  the  monkey  came  down  and  de- 
posited the  child  on  the  grouad ;  the  father  fulfilled 
his  vow,  built  the  sbi'ine,  and  made  it  obligatory  on 
all  future  possessors  of  the  palaee  U>  keep  tlii;  lamp 
burning  before  it.  Centuries  have  passed,  the  prop- 
erty luu)  chang;ed  hands  ;  but  still  tliere  is  the  shrine 
on  the  giddy  top  of  the  tower,  far  aloft  over  the  street, 
:>n  the  very  spot  where  the  monkey  sat,  and  there 
bums  the  lamp,  in  memory  of  the  father's  vow.  This 
being  the  tenure  by  whiL^h  the  estate  is  held,  the  extin- 
guishment of  that  flame  might  yet  turn  the  present 
owner  out  of  the  pahu^e. 

May  21«/. — Mamma  and  I  went,  yesterday  fore- 
noon, to  the  Sjwda  Palace,  which  we  found  among 
the  intrieacies  of  Central  Rome  ;  a  dark  and  massive 
old  edifice,  built  around  a  court,  the  fronts  giving  on 
which  are  adorned  with  statues  in  niches,  and  sculp- 
tured ornaments.  A  woman  led  us  up  a  staircase, 
and  ushered  us  into  a  great,  gloomy  hall,  square  and 
lofty,  and  wearing  a  very  gray  and  ancient  aspect,  its 
walls  being  painted  in  chiaro  -  oscuro,  apparently  a 
great  many  years  ago.  The  hall  was  lighted  by  small 
windows,  high  upward  from  the  floors,  and  admitting 
only  a  dusky  light.  The  only  furniture  or  ornament, 
eo  far  as  I  recollect,  was  the  mlossal  statue  of  Pom- 
pey,  which  standa  on  its  pedestal  at  one  side,  certainly 
Ihe  sternest  and  severest  of  figures,  and  producing  the 
most  awful  impression  on  the  spectator.  Much  of  the 
effect,  no  doubt,  is  due  to  the  sombre  obsciunty  of  the 
hall,  and  to  the  loneliness  in  which  the  great  nakeil 
statue  stands.  It  is  entirely  nude,  except  for  a  cloak 
that  hangs  down  from  the  left  shoulder ;  in  the  left 
hand,  it  holds  a  globe ;   the  right  arm  ia  ixtended. 


208   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [IM 

The  whole  expresBion  is  such  as  the  statue  might  have 
assumed,  if,  during  the  tumult  of  Cicttar'n  murder,  it 
had  stretelied  forth  its  marble  hand,  and  motioned  the 
conspirators  to  give  over  the  attach,  or  to  be  quiet, 
now  that  their  victim  had  fallen  at  it«  feet.  On  the 
left  leg,  about  midway  above  the  ankle,  there  it  a  dull, 
red  stain,  said  to  be  Ciesar's  blood  ;  but,  of  course,  it 
ia  just  such  a  red  stain  in  the  marble  as  may  be  seen 
on  the  statue  of  Antinoiis  at  the  CapitoL  I  could  not 
see  any  resemblance  in  the  face  of  the  statue  to  that 
of  the  bust  of  Pompey,  shown  a»  such  at  the  Capitol, 
in  which  there  in  not  the  slightest  moral  dignity,  or 
sign  of  intellectual  eminence,  I  am  glad  to  have  seen 
this  statue,  and  glad  to  remember  it  in  that  gray,  dim, 
lofty  hall :  glad  that  there  were  no  bright  frescos  on 
the  walla,  and  tliat  the  ceiling  was  wrought  with  mas- 
sive beams,  and  the  floor  paved  with  ancient  brick. 

From  this  anteroom  we  passed  through  several  eOr 
loons  containing  pictures,  some  of  which  were  by  emi* 
nent  artists ;  the  Judith  of  Guido,  a  copy  of  wliioll  1 
used  to  weary  mc  to  death,  year  after  year,  in  the  ■ 
Boston  Athenteum ;  and  many  portraits  of  Cardinals 
in  the  Spada  family,  and  other  pictures  by  Chiido. 
There  were  some  portraits,  also  of  the  family,  by  Ti. 
tian,   some   good  pictures   by  Guercino ;   and   many 
which  I  should  have  been  glad  to  examine  more  at 
leisure  ;  but,  by  and  by,  the  custode  made  bis  appear- 
ance, and  began  to  close  the  shutters,  under  pretence 
that  the  sunsl  ine  would  injure  the  paintings,  —  an  et  I 
feet,  I  ]>resume,  not  very  likely  to  follow  after  two  at  1 
three  centuries'  exposure  t^i  light,  air,  and  whatever  ] 
else  might  hurt  them.     However,  the  pictui-es  seemed  J 
to  he  in  much  better  condition,  and  more  enjoyable,  i 
far  as  they  had  merit,  than  those  in  most  Homan  pio  I 


i 

I 


18.] 


ITALY. 


tare-galleries ;  although  the  Spada  Palace  itself  has  a 
decayed  and  impoveriahed  aspect,  as  if  the  family  had 
dwindled  fivm  its  former  state  and  grandeur,  and  now, 
perhaps,  smuggled  itself  iuto  some  out-of-the-way  oor- 
ner  of  the  old  edifice.  If  such  be  tlie  case,  there  is 
something  touching  in  their  still  keeping  possession  of 
Pompey's  statue,  which  makes  their  house  famous,  anil 
the  sale  of  which  might  give  them  the  means  of  buUd- 
ing  it  up  anew ;  for  surely  it  is  worth  the  whole  sculp- 
ture-gallery of  the  Vatican. 

In  the  aftemuon  Mr.  Thompson  and  I  went,  for 
the  third  or  fourth  tin>e,  to  negotiate  with  vetturinos. 
...  So  far  as  I  know  them  they  are  a  very  tricky  set 
of  people,  bent  on  getting  as  much  as  they  can,  by 
hook  or  by  crook,  out  of  the  unfortunate  individual 
who  falls  into  their  hands.  They  be^n,  as  I  have 
^d.  by  asking  almut  twice  as  much  as  they  ought  to 
receive ;  and  anything  between  this  exorbitant  amount 
and  the  just  price  is  what  they  thank  Heaven  for,  as 
BO  much  clear  gain.  Nevertheless,  I  am  not  quite  sure 
that  the  Italians  are  worse  than  other  people  even  in 
this  matter.  In  other  countries  it  is  the  custom  of  per- 
sons in  trade  to  take  as  much  as  they  can  get  from  the 
public,  fleecing  one  man  to  exactly  tlie  same  eitent  as 
another ;  here  they  take  what  they  can  obtain  from 
the  individual  customer.  In  fact,  Roman  tradesmen 
do  not  pretend  to  deny  that  they  ask  and  receive  dif- 
ferent prices  from  different  people,  taxing  them  ac- 
cording to  their  supposed  means  of  payment ;  the  ar- 
ticle supplied  being  the  same  in  one  case  as  in  another. 
A  shopkeeper  looked  into  his  boohs  to  see  if  we  were 
of  the  class  who  paid  two  pauls,  or  only  a  paul  and  a 
balf,  for  eandles ;  a  chanwal-dealer  said  that  seventy 
baiotK^hi  was  a  very  reasonable  sum  for  us  to  pay  for 


210   FREKCff  AND  ITAlUtl  NOTE-BOOKS.  [H 

charooal,  and  that  Bome  persons  pud  eighty ;  and  Mr. 
Thompson,  reco^zing  the  nile,  toUl  tlie  old  vetturino 
that  "  a  hundred  and  fifty  ecudi  was  a,  very  pro|>er 
cliat^o  for  carrying  a  prince  to  Jloreiwre,  but  not  fur 
carrying  me.  who  was  merely  a  very  good  artist."  Tbo 
result  iH  well  enough  ;  the  rich  man  lives  expensively, 
an<l  pays  a  larger  share  of  the  profits  which  people  of 
a  different  system  of  trade  ■morality  would  take  equally 
from  tlie  poor  man.  The  effect  on  the  conscience  of 
the  vetturino.  however,  and  of  tradesmen  of  all  kinds, 
cannot  l>e  good ;  their  only  intent  Ijeing,  not  to  do  jus- 
tice between  man  and  man,  but  to  go  aa  deep  as  they 
can  into  all  pockets,  and  to  the  very  bottom  of  some. 

We  had  nearly  oouelude<i  a  bai^in,  a  day  or  two 
ago,  with  a  vetturino  to  take  or  send  us  ti^  FlorenoBr 
via  Perugia,  in  eight  days,  for  a  hundred  scudi ;  bufe 
he  now  drew  back,  under  pretence  of  having  misun- 
derstood the  terms,  though,  in  reality,  no  doubt,  ha' 
was  in  hopes  of  getting  a  better  bargain  from  some- 
body else.  We  made  an  agreement  with  another  man, 
whom  Mr.  Thompson  knows  and  highly  recommends, 
and  immediately  made  it  sure  and  legally  binding,  by 
exchanging  a  formal  written  contnu.'t,  in  which  every- 
thing is  Bet  down,  even  to  milk,  butter,  bread,  eggs, 
and  coffee,  which  we  are  to  have  for  breakfast ;  the 
vetturino  being  to  j>ay  every  expense  for  himself,  his 
horses,  and  his  passengers,  and  include  it  within  nine- 
ty-five scudi,  and  five  crowns  in  addition  for  buoa- 
mano. .  .  . 

Mny  22ii.  —  Yesterday,  while  we  were  at  dinnea 

Mr. called.     I  never  saw  Iiiin  but  once  before,  J 

and  that  was  at  the  door  of  our  little  red  cottage  i 
Ijenoz ;  he  sitting  in  a  wagon  with  one  or  two  of  t 


-4 


I 


1858.] 


ITALY. 


211 


Swlgwicks,  merely  exchanging  a  greeting  with  me 
from  under  the  brim  of  his  straw  hat,  and  driving  on. 
He  presented  himself  now  with  a  long  white  beard, 
such  as  a  palmer  might  have  worn  as  the  growth  of 
his  long  pilgrimages,  a  brow  almost  entirely  bald,  and 
what  hair  he  has  quite  hoary  ;  a  forehea<l  impending, 
yet  not  massive ;  dark,  bushy  eyebrows  and  keen  eyes, 
without  mueh  softness  in  them ;  a  dark  and  sallow 
complexion ;  a  slender  figure,  bent  a  little  with  age ; 
but  at  once  alert  and  intirm.  It  surprised  me  to  see 
him  so  venerable  ;  for,  as  poets  are  Apollo's  kinsmen, 
we  are  inclined  to  attribute  to  them  his  enviable  qual- 
ity of  never  growing  old.  There  wa«  a  weary  look  in 
hia  face,  as  if  he  were  tired  of  seeing  things  and  doing 
things,  though  with  certainly  enough  still  to  see  and 
do,  if  ueed  were.  My  family  gathered  about  him, 
and  he  conversed  with  great  readiness  and  simplieity 
about  his  travels,  and  whatever  other  subject  cauie 
up ;  telling  us  that  he  had  been  abroad  five  times, 
and  was  now  getting  a  little  homesick,  and  had  no 
more  eagerness  for  sights,  though  his  "  gals  "  (as  he 
called  his  daughter  and  another  young  lady)  dra^^d 
him  out  to  see  the  wonders  of  Rome  again.  His  man- 
ners and  whole  aspect  are  very  particularly  plain, 
though  not  affectedly  so ;  but  it  seems  as  if  in  the  de- 
cline of  life,  and  the  security  of  his  position,  he  had 
pnt  off  whatever  artificial  polish  ho  may  have  hereto- 
fore had,  and  resumed  the  simpler  liabits  and  deport- 
ment of  his  early  New  England  breeding.  Not  but 
what  you  discover,  nevertheless,  that  he  is  a  man  of 
refinement,  who  has  seen  the  world,  and  is  well  aware 
of  his  own  place  in  it.  He  spoke  with  great  pleasure 
of  his  recent  visit  to  Spain.  I  introduced  the  subject 
of  Kansas,  and  methought  his  face  fortJiwith  ussiuned 


212   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [181 

Bometliing  of  the  bitter  keeaneas  of  the  editor  of  a 
litical  newspaper,  while  spealuQg  of  the  triumpli 
the  admiaiBtration  over  the  freo-soU  oppositioa.     I 

quired  whether  he   ba*l  seen   S ,  and  he  gave 

very  sad  account  of  him  as  he  appeai-ed  at  their  last 

meeting,  which  was  in  Paris,     S ,  he  thought,  had 

suffered  terribly,  and  would  never  again  be  the  man 
ho  was  ;  he  was  getting  fat ;  he  talked  continually  c^\ 
himself,  and  of  triHus  eonuerning  himself,  and  seemed' 
to  have  no  interest  for  other  matters ;  and  Mi 
feared  that  the  shoi-k  u[>un  his  nerves  liad  extended 
to  bis  intellect,  aud  was  irremediable.  He  said  that 
S  ought   to  retire  from  public   life,  but  bad  no 

friend  true  enough  to  tell  liim  so.     This  is  about  a>l 

ead  as  anything  can  l>e.    I  hate  to  have  S undergo) 

the  fate  of  a  martyr,  because  he  was  not  naturally  <A\ 
the  stuff  that  martyrs  are  made  of,  and  it  is  altogethev' 
by  mistake  that  he  has  ttirust  himself  into  the  poi 
tion  of  one.     He  was  merely,  though  with  excellei 
abilities,  one  of  the  beat  of  fellows,  and  ought  to  hava 
lived  and  died  in  good  fellowship  with  all  the  world. 

Mr. was  not  in  the  least  degree  excited  about 

this  or  any  other  subject.  He  uttered  neither  passion 
nor  poetry,  but  excellent  good  sense,  and  luicurate  in- 
formation on  whatever  subject  transpired ;  a  vety 
pleasant  man  to  associate  with,  but  rather  cold,  I 
should  imagine,  if  one  should  seek  to  touch  his  heart 
'  with  one's  own.  He  shook  hands  kindly  all  round, 
but  not  with  any  warmth  of  gripe  ;  although  the  easQ 
of  his  deportment  had  put  us  all  on  sociable  teirnu 
with  him. 

At  seven  o'clock,  we  went  by  invitation  te  take  tea 
with  Miss  Bremer.  After  much  search,  and  bmiben 
ing  painfully  up  two  or  three  staircases  in  vain,  &ai 


i 

4 


tsss.] 


ITALT. 


213 


at  last  going  about  in  a  strange  circuity,  wo  found 
her  in  a  small  chamber  of  a  large  old  building,  situ- 
ated a  little  way  from  the  brow  of  the  Tarpeiau  Rock. 
It  was  the  tiniest  and  humblest  domicile  tliat  I  have 
seen  in  Rome,  just  large  enough  to  hold  her  narrow 
bed,  her  tea-table,  and  a  table  covered  with  books,  — 
photographs  of  Roman  ruins,  and  some  pages  writt«a 
by  heraelf.  I  wonder  whetlier  she  be  poor.  Probably 
80 ;  for  she  told  na  that  her  expense  of  living  here  is 
only  five  pauls  a  day.  She  welcomed  us,  however, 
with  the  greatest  cordiality  and  ladylike  simplicity, 
making  no  allusion  to  the  humblenesa  of  her  environ- 
ment (and  making  us  also  lose  sight  of  it,  by  the  ab- 
sence of  all  apology)  any  more  than  if  she  were  re- 
ceiving us  in  a  palace.  There  ia  not  a  better  bred.X 
woman  ;  and  yet  one  does  not  think  whether  she  has 
any  breeding  or  no.  Her  bttle  bit  of  a  round  table 
was  already  spread  for  us  with  her  blue  earthenware 
teacups ;  and  after  she  had  got  through  an  interview 
with  the  Swedish  Minister,  and  dismissed  him  with  a 
bear^  pressure  of  his  hand  between  both  her  own, 
she  gave  us  our  tea,  and  some  bread,  and  a  mouthful 
of  cake.  Meanwhile,  as  the  day  declined,  there  had 
been  the  most  beautiful  view  over  the  Campagna,  out 
of  one  of  her  windows  ;  and,  from  the  other,  looking 
towards  St.  Peter'a,  the  broad  gleam  of  a  mildly  glori- 
ous sunset ;  not  so  pompous  and  magnificent  as  many 
that  1  have  seen  in  America,  but  softer  and  sweeter  in 
all  its  changes.  As  its  lovely  hues  died  slowly  away, 
the  half-moon  shone  out  brighter  and  brighter;  for 
there  was  not  a  cloud  in  the  sky,  and  it  seemed  like 
the  moonlight  of  my  younger  days.  In  the  garden, 
beneath  her  window,  vei^ng  upon  the  Tarpeian  Rock, 
there  was  shrubbery  and  one  large  tree,  softening  tha 


214    FRENCn  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [lS5g.| 

Itrow  of  the  fiuDoiu  pre^ipipe.  lulown  whicli  the  oU' 
Romaaa  used  to  fling  their  traitors,  or  sometimes,  iiw^ 
deed,  their  putriots. 

Miss  Bremer  talked  plentifully  in  her  strange  maa>< 
ner,  —  good  English  enough  for  a  foreigner,  but  M 
o<ldly  intonated  and  aeeent4;d,  that  it  is  impossible  to 
be  snre  of  more  than  one  word  in  ten.  Being  so  little 
oomprehensiblo,  it  is  very  siagular  how  abe  contrives 
to  make  her  auditors  so  perfectly  certain,  as  they  are, 
that  she  is  talking  the  beat  sense,  and  in  the  kindliest 
spirit.  There  is  no  better  heart  than  hers,  and  not 
many  sounder  heada  ;  and  a  little  touch  of  sentiment 
oouies  delightfully  in,  mixed  up  with  a  quick  and  del- 
icate humor  and  the  most  perfect  simplicity.  There  is 
also  a  very  pleasant  atmosphere  of  maidenhood  about 
her ;  we  are  sensible  of  a  freshness  and  odor  of  the 
morning  still  in  this  little  withered  rose,  —  its  recom- 
pense for  never  having  been  gathered  and  worn,  but 
only  diffusing  fragrance  on  its  stem.  I  forget  mainly 
what  we  talked  about,  —  a  good  deal  about  art,  of 
course,  although  that  is  a  subject  of  which  Miss  Bre- 
mer evidently  knows  notliing.  Once  we  tipoke  cS. 
fleaa,  —  insects  that,  in  Rome,  come  home  to  every- 
body's business  and  bosom,  and  are  so  common  and 
inevitable,  that  no  delicacy  is  felt  about  alluding  ta 
the  sufferings  they  inflict.  Poor  little  Misa  Bremer 
was  tormented  with  one  while  turning  out  our  tea. 
.  .  .  She  talked,  among  other  things,  of  the  winters 
\a  Sweden,  and  said  that  she  liked  them,  long  and 
severe  as  they  are  ;  and  this  made  me  feel  ashamed  of 
dreading  the  winters  of  New  England,  as  I  did 
Coming  from  home,  and  do  now  still  more,  after 
or  six  mild  English  Decembers. 

By  and  by,   two  young  hulica  came   in,  • — 


before     ^^d 
ter  fivtt    ^H 

J 


ITALY. 


215 


Bremer's  neighbors,  it  seemed,  —  fresh  from  &  long 
walk  on  the  Campagna,  fresh  and  weary  at  the  same 
time.  One  apparently  was  German,  and  the  other 
French,  and  they  brought  her  an  offering  of  flowers, 
and  chattered  to  her  with  affectionate  vivacity  ;  and, 
as  we  were  about  taking  leave,  Miss  Bremer  asked 
tliem  to  aecompany  her  and  us  on  a  visit  to  the  edge 
of  the  Tarpeian  Rock.  Before  we  left  the  room,  she 
took  a  bunch  of  roses  that  were  in  a  vase,  and  gave 
them  to  Miss  Shepard,  who  told  her  that  she  should 
make  her  six  sisters  happy  by  giving  one  to  each. 
Then  we  went  down  the  intriuat«  stairs,  and,  emei^- 
ing  into  the  garden,  walked  round  the  brow  of  the 
hill,  which  plunges  headlong  with  exceeding  abrupt- 
ness :  but,  so  far  as  I  could  see  in  the  moonlight,  is 
no  longer  quite  a  precipice.  Then  we  reentered  the 
house,  and  went  up  stairs  and  down  again,  through 
intricate  passages,  till  we  got  into  the  street,  which 
was  still  peopled  with  the  ragamuffius  who  infest  and 
burrow  in  that  part  of  Rome.  Wo  returned  through 
an  archway,  and  descended  the  broad  flight  of  steps 
into  the  piazza  of  the  Capitol  i  and  from  the  extrem- 
ity of  it,  just  at  the  head  of  the  long  graded  way, 
where  Castor  and  Pollux  and  the  old  milestones  stand, 
we  turned  to  the  left,  and  followed  a  somewhat  wind- 
ing path,  till  we  came  into  the  court  of  a  palace.  This 
court  is  bordered  by  a  parapet,  leaning  over  which  we 
saw  the  sheer  precipice  of  the  Tarpeian  Rock,  about 
the  height  of  a  four-story  house.  .  .  . 

On  the  edge  of  this,  before  we  left  the  court,  Miss 
Bremer  bade  us  farewell,  kissing  my  wife  most  affec- 
tionately on  each  cheek,  .  .  .  and  then  turning  to- 
wards myself.  .  .  .  she  pressed  my  hand,  and  we 
parted,  probably  never  to  meet  again.     God  bless  her 


216    FRENCH  AfiD  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [IW 

good  heart  I  .  .  .  Sbo  is  &  most  ftmisble  little  woruib( 
worthy  to  be  the  maiden  aunt  of  th«  whole  human 
race.  I  suspect,  l»y  the  by,  that  she  doea  not  like  me 
half  so  well  as  1  do  her ;  it  is  my  impression  that  she 
thinks  me  unamiable,  or  tliat  thtre  is  something  or 
other  not  quite  right  about  mo.  I  am  sorry  if  it  be 
so,  because  suoh  a  good,  Idndly,  clear-sighted,  anti  del- 
icate person  is  very  apt  to  have  reason  at  tlie  Ixittom 
of  her  harsh  thoughfai,  when,  in  rare  cases,  she  allowa 
them  to  harbor  with  her. 

To-day,  and  for  some  days  past,  we  hav( 
quest  of  lodgings  for  next  winter  ;  a  weary  search,  ap' 
interminable  staircases,  which  seduce  us  upward  to  utf] 
successful  i-eHuIt.     It  is  very  disheartening  not  to  bs] 
able  to  place  the  slightest  reliance  on  the  integrity  o{ 
the  people  we  are  to  tleal  with  :  not  to  believe  in  any 
vounection  between  their  words  and  their  purjiOBes 
to  know  that  they  are  certainly  telling  you  falsehi 
while  you  are  not  in  a  position  to  catch  hold  of  the  lie, 
and  hold  it  up  in  their  faces. 

This  afternoon  wo  called  on  Mr.  and  Mrs. 

the  Hotel  de  TEuropo,  but  fotmd  only  the  former 
home.  We  had  a  pleasant  visit,  bnt  I  made  no  obseN 
vations  of  his  character  save  such  as  I  have  already 
BufBeiently  recorded ;  and  when  we  had  been  with  him 
a  little  while,  Mra.  Chapman,  the  artist's  wife,  Mr. 
Terry,  and  my  friend,  Mr.  Thompson,  cjime  in,  ■ 

received  them  all  with  the  same  good  degree  of  cor- 
diality tliat  he  did  ourselves,  not  cold,  not  very  warm, 
not  annoyed,  not  ecstatically  delighted ;  a  man,  I 
sliould  suppose,  not  likely  to  have  anient  individual 
preferences,  though  perhaps  capable  of  stern  individual 
dislikes.  But  I  take  him,  at  all  events,  to  be  a  vei^ 
npright  man,  and  pursuing  a  narrow  track  of  inte^p 


i 

la, 

4 


I 


1858.]  ITALY.  217 

rity ;  he  is  a  man  whom  I  would  never  forgive  (as  I 
would  a  thousand  other  men)  for  the  slightest  moral 
delinquency.  I  would  not  be  bound  to  say,  however, 
that  he  has  not  the  little  sin  of  a  fretful  and  peevish 
habit ;  and  yet  perhaps  I  am  a  sinner  myself  for  think- 
ing so. 

May  2Zd.  — This  morning  I  breakfasted  at  William 

Story's,  and  met  there  Mr.  Bryant,  Mr.  T (an 

English  gentleman),  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Apthorp,  Miss 
Hosmer,  and  one  or  two  other  ladies.  Bryant  was 
very  quiet,  and  made  no  conversation  audible  to  the 

general  table.     Mr.  T talked  of  English  politics 

and  public  men  ;  the  ^^  Times  "  and  other  newspapers, 
English  clubs  and  social  habits  generally;  topics  in 
which  I  could  well  enough  bear  my  part  of  the  discus- 
sion. After  breakfast,  and  aside  from  the  ladies,  he 
mentioned  an  illustration  of  Lord  Ellenborough's  lack 
of  administrative  ability,  —  a  proposal  seriously  made 
by  his  lordship  in  reference  to  the  refractory  Se- 
poys. ... 

We  had  a  very  pleasant  breakfast,  and  certainly  a 
breakfast  is  much  preferable  to  a  dinner,  not  merely 
in  the  enjoyment  while  it  is  passing,  but  afterwards. 
I  made  a  good  suggestion  to  Miss  Hosmer  for  the 
design  of  a  fountain,  —  a  lady  bursting  into  tears, 
water  gushing  from  a  thousand  pores,  in  literal  trans- 
lation of  the  phrase  ;  and  to  call  the  statue  Niobe, 
all  Tears.  I  doubt  whether  she  adopts  the  idea ;  but 
Bernini  would  have  been  delighted  with  it.  I  should 
think  the  gush  of  water  might  be  so  arranged  as  to 
form  a  beautiful  drapery  about  the  figure,  swaying 
and  fluttering  with  every  breath  of  wind,  and  re-ar- 
ranging itself  in  the  calm;  in  which  case,  the  lady 


218   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [181 

might  be  sud  to  have  '^a  habit  of  weeping. 
Apart,  with  William  Story,  he  and  I  talked  of  the 
unluckiness  of  Friday,  etc.     I   like  him  particularly 
well.  .  -  . 

We  have  been  plagued  today  with  our  prepai-atioiut 
for  leaving  Kome  to-morrow,  and  esiiecially  with  veri- 
fying the  inventory  of  furniture,  before  giving  up  the 
house  to  our  landlord.  He  and  his  daughter  have 
been  examining  every  separate  article,  down  even  to 
the  kitchen  skewers,  I  believe,  and  charging  us  to  the 
amount  of  several  scudi  for  cracks  and  breakages, 
which  veiy  probably  existed  when  we  c^me  into  po^ 
session.  It  is  very  uncomfortable  to  liave  dealings 
with  such  a  mean  people  (though  our  landlord  is 
German),  —  mean  in  their  business  transactions;  mean 
even  in  their  beggary ;  for  the  be^ars  seldom  ask  for 
more  than  a  mezzo  baioccho,  though  they  sometimes 
grumble  when  you  suit  your  gratuity  exactly  to  their 
petition.  It  is  pleasant  to  record  that  the  Italiaua 
have  great  faith  in  the  honor  of  the  English  and  Amer- 
icans, and  never  hesitate  to  tnist  entire  ati-angers,  to 
any  reasonable  extent,  on  the  strength  of  their  being 
of  the  honest  Anglo-Saxon  race. 

This  evening,  U and  I  took  a  farewell  walk  iu 

the  Pincian  Gardens  to  see  the  sunset;  and  found 
them  crowded  with  people,  promena<ling  aud  listening 
to  the  music  of  the  French  band.  It  was  the  feast  of 
Whitsunday,  which  probably  brought  a  greater  throng 
than  usual  abroad. 

When  the  sun  went  down,  we  descended  into  the 
TiazKa  del  Popolo,  and  thence  into  the  Via  Ripetta, 
and  emerged  through  a  gate  to  the  shore  of  the  Tiber, 
along  which  there  is  a  plea-sant  walk  beneath  a  grov« 
pf  trees.     We  traversed  it  gnee  and  back  again, 


fl 


i 


J 


1 


ITALY.  21* 

Ing  at  the  rapid  river,  wliioh  still  kept  ItB  mud-puddly 
aspect  even  iu  the  clear  twilight,  and  beneath  the 
brighteniDg  moon.  The  great  bell  of  St.  Peter's  tolled 
with  a  deep  boom,  a  grand  and  Holemn  sound ;  the 
moon  gleamed  through  Uie  branehes  of  the  trees  above 

us ;  and  U spoke  with  somewliat  alarming  fervor 

of  her  love  for  Rome,  and  regret  at  leaving  it.  We 
shall  have  done  the  child  no  good  office,  in  bringing 
her  here,  if  the  rest  of  her  life  is  to  be  a  dream  of  this 
"  city  of  the  soul,"  and  an  unsatisfied  yearning  to  come 
back  to  it.  On  the  other  hand,  nothing  elevating  and 
refining  can  be  really  injurious,  and  so  I  hope  she  will 
always  be  the  better  for  Home,  even  if  her  life  should 
be  spent  where  there  are  no  pictures,  no  statues,  noth- 
ing but  the  dryness  and  meagreness  of  a  New  England  / 
viUage. 

JOURNEY   TO    FLORENCE. 

Civitd  Castellana,  May  24M.  —  We  left  Rome  this 
morning,  after  troubles  of  various  kinda,  and  a  dispute 
in  the  first  pla(>e  with  Lalla,  our  female  servant,  and 
her  mother.  .  .  .  Mother  and  daughter  exploded  into 
s  livid  rage,  and  cursed  us  plentifully.  —  wishing  that 
we  might  never  come  to  our  journey's  end,  and  that 
we  might  all  break  our  necks  or  die  of  apoplexy,  — 
the  most  awful  curse  that  an  Italian  knows  how  to 
invoke  upon  his  enemies,  because  it  precludes  the  poa- 
eihility  of  extreme  unction.  However,  as  we  are  heiv 
etics,  and  cert^  of  damnation  therefore,  anyhow,  it 
does  not  much  matter  to  us ;  and  also  the  anathema* 
may  have  been  blown  back  upon  those  who  invoked 
them,  like  the  curses  that  were  flung  out  from  the  bal- 
cony of  St.  Peter's  during  Holy  Week  and  wafted  by 
heaven's  breezes  right  into  the  faces  of  some  priests 
vho  stood  near  the  pope.     Next  we  had  a  disagree- 


220    FRENCH  AND  TTALTAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1M»  1 

ment  with  two  men  who  brought  dowo  oar  luggage  1 
&nd  put  it  on  tho  vetturo ;  .  .  .  iuid,  lastly,  v 
infested  with  beggars,  who  hung  round  the  carriagef  J 
with  doleful  petitions,  till  we  began  to  move  uway; 
bnt  the  previous  warfare  had  put  me  into  too  atero  a 
mood  for  almsgiving,  so  that  they  also  were  doubtless 
inclined  to  curae  more  than  to  bless,  and  I  am  per> 
Buaded  that  we  drove  off  under  a  perfect  shower  ol  1 
anathemas.  | 

We  passed  through  the  Porta  del  Popolo  at  about 
eight  o'clock ;  and  after  a  moment's  delay,  while  the 
passport  was  examined,  began  our  journey  along  the 
Flaminian  Way,  between  two  such  high  and  inhospi- 
table walls  of  brick  or  stone,  as  seem  to  shut  in  all  the 
avenues  to  Rome.  We  had  not  goue  far  before  we 
heard  military  music  in  advance  of  us,  and  saw  the 
road  blocked  up  with  people,  and  tlien  the  glitter  of 
muskets,  and  soon  appeared  the  drummers,  fifers,  and 
trumpeters,  and  then  the  first  battalion  of  a  French 
regiment,  marching  into  the  city,  with  two  mounted 
officers  at  their  head ;  then  appeared  a  second  and 
then  a  third  battalion,  the  whole  seeming  to  make  al- 
most  an  army,  though  the  number  on  their  caps  showed 
them  all  to  belong  to  one  regiment^  —  the  1st ;  tlien 
came  a  battery  of  artillery,  then  a  detachment  of  horse, 
^  these  last,  by  the  crossed  keys  on  their  helmets,  b» 
ing  apparently  papal  troops.  All  were  yoimg,  fresh, 
good-looking'  men,  in  excellent  trim  as  to  uniform  and 
equipments,  and  marched  rather  as  if  thoy  were  set- 
ting out  on  a  campaign  than  returning  from  it;  the 
fact  being,  I  believe,  that  they  liave  been  encamped  or 
in  barHK'kfl  within  a  few  miles  of  the  city.  Neverth*. 
less,  it  reminded  me  of  the  military  pro<wssion8  of  v 
rioiu  kinds  which  so  often,  two  thousand  ; 


1  years  aei.^J 


1858.J  ITALY.  2SX 

and  more,  have  entered  Borne  over  the  Flaminian 
Way,  and  over  all  the  roads  that  led  to  the  famous 
eity,  —  triumphs  oftenest,  but  sometimes  the  downcast 
train  of  a  defeated  army,  like  those  who  retreated  be- 
fore HannibaL  On  the  whole,  I  was  not  sorry  to  see 
the  Gauls  still  pouring  into  Rome ;  but  yet  I  begin  to 
find  that  I  have  a  strange  affection  for  it,  and  so  did 
we  all,  —  the  rest  of  the  family  in  a  greater  degree 
than  myself  even.  It  is  very  singular,  the  sad  em- 
brace with  which  Rome  takes  possession  of  the  soul. 
Though  we  intend  to  return  in  a  few  months,  and  for 
a  longer  residence  than  this  has  been,  yet  we  felt  the 
city  pulling  at  our  heartstrings  far  more  than  London 
did,  where  we  shall  probably  never  spend  much  time 
again.  It  may  be  because  the  intellect  finds  a  home 
there  more  than  in  any  other  spot  in  the  world,  and 
wins  the  heart  to  stay  with  it,  in  spite  of  a  good  many 
things  strewn  all  about  to  disgust  us. 

The  road  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  way  was  not 
particularly  picturesque,  —  the  country  undulated,  but 
scarcely  rose  into  hills,  and  was  destitute  of  trees; 
there  were  a  few  shapeless  ruins,  too  indistinct  for  us 
to  make  out  whether  they  were  Roman  or  medisBvaL 
Nothing  struck  me  so  much,  in  the  forenoon,  as  the 
spectacle  of  a  peasant  woman  riding  on  horseback  as 
if  she  were  a  man.  The  houses  were  few,  and  those 
of  a  dreary  aspect,  built  of  gray  stone,  and  looking 
bare  and  desolate,  with  not  the  slightest  promise  of 
comfort  within  doors.  We  passed  two  or  three  locan- 
das  or  inns,  and  finally  came  to  the  village  (if  village 
it  were,  for  I  remember  no  houses  except  our  osteria) 
of  Castel  Nuovo  di  Porta,  where  we  were  to  take  a 
dSjeuner  d  la  fourchette^  which  was  put  upon  the  ta* 
ble  between  twelve  and  one.     On  this  journey,  accord 


222   FRENCH  AND   ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [iSMtj 

ing  to  the  custom  of  travellers  in  Italy,  we  pay  tfati 
vettuiino  a  certain  Biiin,  and  live  at  his  expense ;  anAI 
this  meal  wiui  the  first  specimen  of  his  caterini;  on  otu 
behalf.  It  consisted  of  a  beefsteak,  rather  dry  and 
hard,  but  not  unpalatable,  and  a  large  omelette ;  and 
for  beverage,  two  quart  bottles  of  red  wiue,  whieb,  bfr 
ing  tasted,  had  an  ^reeable  a«id  flavor.  .  .  ,  The  lo- 
canda  was  built  of  stone,  and  had  whiit  looked  like 
old  Roman  altar  in  the  basement-hall,  and  a  ahrins, 
with  a  lamp  before  it,  on  the  staircase  ;  and  tlie  lai^ 
public  saloon  in  which  we  ate  had  a  brick  floor,  a  (wil- 
ing with  cross-beams,  meagrely  painted  in  fresco,  and 
a  scanty  supply  of  cburs  and  settees. 

After  lunch,  we  wandered  out  iato  a  valley  or 
vine  near  the  house,  where  we  gathered  some  Sowei 

and  J found  a  nest  with  the  young  birds  in 

which,  however,  he  put  back  into  the  bush  whence 
took  it. 

Our  afternoon  drive  was  more  picturesque  nud  notfr 
worthy.  8oracto  rose  before  us,  bulging  up  quite  ab- 
ruptly out  of  the  plain,  and  keeping  itself  entirely 
distinct  from  a  whole  horizon  of  hills.  Byron  well 
compares  it  to  a  wave  just  on  the  bend,  and  about  to 
break  over  towanls  the  spectator.  As  we  appmached 
it  nearer  and  nearer,  it  looked  like  tlie  barrenest  great 
rock  that  ever  protruded  out  of  the  substance  of  the 
earth,  with  scarcely  a  strip  or  a  spot  of  verdure  upon 
its  steep  and  gray  declivities.  The  road  ke]tt  trend- 
ing towards  the  mountain,  following  the  line  of  the  old 
Flamiuian  Way.  which  we  could  see,  at  fi-equent  inter- 
vals, close  beside  the  modem  track.  It  is  paved  with 
large  flag-stones,  laid  so  accurately  together,  that  it  ia 
vtill,  in  some  places,  as  smooth  and  even  as  the  floor 
of  a  church  ;  and  everywhere  tlie  tufts  of  giuss  find  H 


I 

IS" 

oil- 
uul 


dit^B 


tTALY.  228 

P  difficult  to  root  themselves  iuto  the  mterstioefl.     Itg 
Btraighter  than  that  of  the  road  of  t<Klay, 
which  often  turns  aside  to  avoid  obstacles  whieh  the 
ancient  one  surmounted.    Much  of  it,  probably,  is  cav- 
<  ereJi  with  the  soil  and  ovei^rowth  dt^posited  in  later 
k  jeara ;  and,  now  and  then,  we  could  see  its  flag-Htonea 
I  partly  protruding  from  the  bank  through  which  our 
I  road  has  been  cut,  and  thus  showing  tliat  the  thick- 
i  of  this  massive  pavement  was  more  thiui  a  foot 
I  of  solid  stone.     We  lost  it  over  and  over  again ;  but 
I  Btill  it  reappeai-ed,  now  on  one  side  of  us,  now  on  the 
r  other;  perhaps  from  beneath  the  roots  of  old  trees,  or 
the  pasture-land  of  a  thousand  years  old,  and  leading 
I  on  towards  the  base  of  Soravte.     I  forget  where  wo 
I  finally  lost  it.     Passing  through  a  town  called  Kig- 
I  nano,  we  found  it  dressed  out  in  festivity,  with  fes- 
toons of  foliage  along  botli  sides  of  the  street,  which 
ran  beneath  a  triumphal  arch,  bearing  an  inscription 
in  honor  of  a  ducal  personage  of  the  Massinii  family. 
I  know  no  occasion  for  the  feast,  except  that  it  is 
Whitsnntide.     The  town  was  thronged  with  peasants, 
in  their  best  attire,  and  we  met  others  on  their  way 
thither,  particularly  women  and  girls,  with  heads  bare 
in  the  sunshine ;  but  there  was  no  tiptoe  jollity,  nor, 
indeed,  any  mare  show  of  festivity  than  I  have  seen 
in    my   own   country   at   a  cattle  -  show   or  muster. 
Really,  I  think,  not  half  so  much. 

The  road  still  grew  more  and  more  picturesque,  and 
now  lay  along  ridges,  at  the  bases  of  which  were  deep 
I  ravines  and  hollow  valleys.  Woo<ls  were  not  want- 
[  ing;  wilder  forest  than  I  have  seen  since  leaving  Amer- 
ica, of  oak-trees  chiefly ;  and,  among  the  green  foliage, 
grew  golden  tufts  of  broom,  making  a  gay  and  lovely 
cambiuation  of  hues.     I  must  not  forget  to  mention 


224   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [181 

the  poppies,  whicL  burned  like  live  coals  along  t 
wayside,  and  lit  up  the  landscape,  even  a  single  one  of 
them,  with  wonderfid  effect.  At  other  pointn,  we  saw 
olive-trees,  biding  their  eceentrii-ity  of  boughs  under 
thick  masses  of  foliage  of  a  livid  tint,  which  is  caused, 
1  believe,  by  their  turning  their  reverse  sides  to  the 
light  and  to  the  spectator.  Vines  were  abmidnnt,  but 
were  of  little  account  in  the  scene.  By  and  by  we 
jame  in  siglit  of  the  high,  flat  table-land,  on  which 
stands  Civitil  Castellana,  and  beheld,  straight  down- 
ward, between  us  and  the  town,  a  deep  level  valley, 
with  a  river  winding  through  it ;  it  was  tlie  valley  of 
tlie  Treja.  A  precipice,  hundreds  of  feet  in  height, 
falls  perpendicularly  upon  the  valley,  from  the  site  of 
Civiti  Cnstellona  ;  there  is  an  ennidly  abrupt  one, 
probably,  on  the  side  from  which  we  saw  it ;  and  a 
modem  road,  skilfully  constructed,  goes  winding  down 
to  the  stream,  crosses  it  by  a  narrow  stone  bridge, 
and  winds  upwai-d  into  the  town.     After  pacing  over 

the  bridge.  I  alighted,  with  J and  R ,  .  ,  . 

and  made  tlie  ascent  on  foot,  along  walls  of  natural 
rock,  in  which  old  Etruscan  tombs  were  hollowed 
out.  There  are  likewise  antique  remains  of  masonry, 
whether  Roman,  or  of  what  earlier  period,  I  cannot 
tell.  At  the  summit  of  the  acclivily,  which  bnjught 
us  close  to  the  town,  our  vettiirino  took  us  into  the 
carriage  again,  and  quickly  brought  iis  to  what  ap|)ear9 
to  be  really  a  good  hotel,  where  all  of  us  are  accommo- 
dated with  sleeping-chambers  in  a  range,  beneatli  ua 
arcade,  entirely  secluded  from  the  rest  of  the  populiu 
tion  of  the  hotel.  After  a  splendid  dinner  (that  ia, 
splendid,  considering  that  it  was  ordered  by  our  hos- 
pitable vetturino),  U ,  Miss  Shepard,  J ,  and 

I  walked  out  of  the  little  town,  in  the  opposite  direo- 


A 


1858.]  ITALY.  225 

tion  from  our  entrance,  and  crossed  a  bridge  at  the 
height  of  the  table-land,  instead  of  at  its  base.  On 
either  side,  we  had  a  view  down  into  a  profound  gulf, 
with  sides  of  precipitous  rock,  and  heaps  of  foliage  in 
its  lap,  through  which  ran  the  snowy  track  of  a 
stream  ^  here  snowy,  there  dark ;  here  hidden  among 
the  foliage,  there  quite  revealed  in  the  broad  depths 
of  the  gulf.  This  was  wonderfully  fine.  Walking  on 
a  little  farther,  Soracte  came  fully  into  view,  starting 
with  bold  abruptness  out  of  the  middle  of  the  coun- 
try; and  before  we  got  back,  the  bright  Italian  moon 
was  throwing  a  shower  of  silver  over  the  scene,  and 
making  it  so  beautiful  that  it  seemed  miserable  not 
to  know  how  to  put  it  into  woi^ ;  a  foolish  thought, 
however,  for  such  scenes  are  an  expression  in  them- 
selves, and  need  not  be  translated  into  any  feebler 
language.  On  our  walk,  we  met  parties  of  laborers, 
both  men  and  women,  returning  from  the  fields, 
with  rakes  and  wooden  forks  over  their  shoulders, 
singing  in  chorus.  It  is  very  customary  for  women 
to  be  laboring  in  the  fields. 

TO  TERNI.  —  BOB6HETTO. 

May  25th.  —  We  were  aroused  at  four  o'clock  this 
momine ;  had  some  ec^fifs  and  coffee,  and  were  ready 
to  start  between  five  S  six ;  being  thus  matutinary, 
in  order  to  get  to  Temi  in  time  to  see  the  falls.  The 
road  was  very  striking  and  picturesque  ;  but  I  remem- 
ber nothing  particularly  till  we  came  to  Borghetto, 
which  stands  on  a  bluff,  with  a  broad  valley  sweeping 
round  it,  through  the  midst  of  which  flows  the  Tiber. 
There  is  an  old  castle  on  a  projecting  point ;  and  we 
saw  other  battlemented  fortresses,  of  mediaeval  date, 
along  our  way,  forming  more  beautiful  ruins  than  an^ 

^K>L.  X.  15 


226   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [IW 

of  the  Roman  remains  to  whiuh  we  have  become  ao< 
I'liatomed.  This  ia  partly,  I  Huppose,  owing  to  tlia 
fact  that  they  have  been  neglected,  and  allowed  to 
mantle  th^ir  decay  with  ivy,  instead  of  being  cleaned, 
propped  up,  and  restored.  The  antiquarian  ia  apt  tft  I 
spoil  the  objects  that  int«reHt  him. 

Sometimes  we  passed  through  wildcmesBes  of  vati* 
OU8  trees,  each  contributing  a  different  hue  of  verdun^ 
(o  the  scene ;  the  vine,  also,  marrying  ittwlf  to  the  fi^> 
tree,  so  that  a  man  might  sit  in  the  shadow  of  both 
once,  and  t^^mper  the  luscious  sweetness  of  the 
fruit  with  the  fresh  flavor  of  the  other.  The  waysid* 
incidents  were  such  oa  meeting  a  man  and  womaif! 
borne  along  aa  priaoners,  handcuffed,  and  in  a  cartj 
two  men  reclining  across  one  another,  asleep, 
lazily  lifting  their  heads  to  gaze  at  us  as  we  passed 
by ;  a  woman  spinning  witli  a  distaff  aa  she  walked 
along  the  road.  An  old  tomb  or  tower  atflod  in  a 
lonely  field,  and  several  caves  were  hollowed  in  the 
rocka,  which  might  have  been  either  sepulchres  or 
habitations.  Soracte  kept  us  company,  sometimes  a 
little  on  one  side,  sometimes  Iwhind,  looming  up  again 
and  again,  when  we  thought  that  we  had  done  with  it, 
and  so  l>ecoming  rather  tedious  at  laat,  like  a  person 
who  presents  himself  for  another  and  another  leave* 
taking  after  the  one  which  ought  to  have  been  6naL. 
Honeysuckles  sweetened  the  hedges  along  the  road. 

After  leaving  Borghetto,  we  crossed  the  broad  val< 
ley  of  the  Tiber,  and  skirted  along  one  of  the  ridges 
that  bonier  it,  looking  back  upon  the  road  that  we  had 
passed,  lying  white  behind  us.  We  saw  a  field  covered 
with  buttercups,  or  some  other  yellow  flower,  and  pop 
pies  burned  along  the  roadside,  as  they  did  yeaterday, 
and  there  were  flowers  of  a  delicious  blue,  aa  if  t^ 


J 


ITALr. 


227 


I 


blue  Italian  sky  had  been  broken  into  little  bits,  and 
scattered  down  upon  the  green  earth.  Otricoli  by  and 
by  appeared,  situated  on  a  bold  promontory  above  the 
valley,  a  village  of  a  few  gray  houses  and  huts,  with 
one  edifice  gaudily  painted  in  white  and  pink.  It 
looked  more  important  at  a  distance  than  we  foimd  it 
-  nearer  approatrh.  As  the  road  kept  ascending, 
and  as  the  hills  grew  to  be  mountains,  we  had  taken 
two  additional  horses,  making  six  in  all,  with  a  man 
and  boy  rimning  beside  them,  to  keep  them  in  motion. 
The  boy  had  two  club  feet,  so  inconveniently  disposed 
that  it  seemed  almost  inevitable  for  him  to  stmnbhi 
over  them  at  every  step ;  besides  which,  he  seemed  to 
tread  upon  his  ankles,  and  moved  with  a  disjointed 
gait,  as  if  each  of  his  legs  and  thighs  had  been  twisted 
roimd  together  with  his  feet.  Nevertheless,  be  had  a 
bright,  cheerful,  intelligent  face,  and  was  exceedingly 
active,  keeping  up  with  the  horses  at  their  trot,  and 
inciting  them  to  better  speed  when  they  la^ed.  1 
conceived  a  great  respect  for  this  poor  boy,  who  had 
what  moat  Italian  peasants  woidd  consider  an  envia- 
ble birthright  in  those  two  club  feet,  as  giving  him  a 
sufBcient  excuse  to  live  on  charity,  but  yet  took  no  ad- 
vantage of  them ;  on  the  contrary,  putting  his  ix>or 
misshapen  hoofs  to  such  good  use,  as  might  have 
shamed  many  a  better  provided  biped.  When  he 
quitted  us.  he  asked  no  alms  of  the  travellers,  bat 
merely  applied  to  Gactano  for  some  slight  recompense 
for  his  well-performed  service.  This  behavior  con- 
trasted most  favorably  with  that  of  some  other  boys 
and  girls,  who  ran  begging  beside  the  carriage  door, 
keeping  np  a  low,  miserable  murmur,  like  tliat  of  a 
kennel-stream,  for  a  long,  long  way.  Beggars,  indeed, 
■tarted  up  at  every  point,  when  we  stopped  for  a  mo 


228  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [186ft.l 

ment,  and  whenever  a  lull  imposed  a  slower  pace  upon  < 
us;  each  village  had  its  dbforinity  nr  ite  infinnity, 
offering  his  wretched  petition  at  the  Bt4^'p  of  the  car- 
riage ;  and  even  a  venerable,  white-headed  patriarch, 
tlie  grandfatlier  of  all  the  beggars,  eeeraed  to  grow  up 
by  the  roadside,  but  waa  left  behind  from  inability 
to  join  in  the  race  with  hia  liglit-footod  juiiiunt.  No 
ahame  is  attached  to  begging  in  Italy.  In  fact,  I 
rather  imagine  it  to  be  held  an  honorable  profession, 
iolieriting  some  of  the  odor  of  sanctity  that  used  to  be 
attached  to  a  mendicant  and  idla  life  in  the  days  of 
early  Christianity,  when  every  saint  lived  upon  Pi-ovi- 
dence,  and  deemed  it  meritorious  to  do  nothing  for  hit 
support. 

Murray's  guide-book  is  exceedingly  vague  and  mi 
satisfactory  along  this  route ;  and  whenever  we  asked 
Gaetano  the  name  of  a  village  or  a  castle,  he  gaT9  J 
Bome  one  which  we  had  never  heard  before,  and  oouUl 
find  nothing  of  in  the  book.  We  niatle  out  the  river^ 
Nar,  however,  or  what  I  supposeil  to  he  such,  though 
he  called  it  Nera.  It  flows  through  a  most  stupen- 
dous mountain-gorge ;  winding  its  narrow  passage  be- 
tween high  hills,  the  broad  sides  of  which  desc«nd 
eteejily  upon  it,  covered  with  tiees  and  siirubbery  that 
mantle  a  host  of  rocky  roughnesses,  and  make  all  look 
smooth.  Here  and  there  a  pretiipiee  juts  sternly 
forth.  We  saw  an  old  castle  on  a  hill-side,  frowning 
down  into  the  gorge  ;  and  farther  on.  the  gray  tower 
of  Narni  stands  upon  a  height,  imniinent  over  the 
depths  below,  and  with  its  battleraented  castle  above, 
now  converted  into  a  prison,  and  therefore  kept  in  ex- 
cellent repair.  A  long  winding  street  passes  through 
Mami,  broadening  at  one  point  into  a  market-place, 
(diere  an  old  cathedml  showed  its  venerable  frontf 


J 


1858.]  ITALY.  229 

and  tlie  great  dial  of  its  clock,  the  figures  on  which 
were  numbered  in  two  Bemicircles  of  twelve  pointD 
each  ;  one,  I  suppose,  for  noon,  and  the  other  for  mid- 
night. The  town  has,  bo  far  as  its  principal  street 
is  concerned,  a  city -like  aspect,  with  large,  fair  edi< 
fices,  and  shops  as  good  as  most  of  those  at  Rome,  the 
smartneas  of  which  contrasts  strikingly  with  the  rude 
and  lonely  scenery  of  mountain  and  stream,  through 
which  we  had  come  to  roafh  it.  Wo  drove  through 
Xami  without  stopping,  and  came  out  from  it  on  the 
other  side,  where  a  broad,  level  valley  opened  before 
us,  most  unlike  the  wild,  precipitous  gorge  which  had 
brought  ua  to  the  town.  The  road  went  winding 
down  into  the  peaceful  vale,  through  the  midst  of 
which  flowed  the  same  stroam  that  cuts  ite  way  be- 
tween the  impending  hills,  as  already  described.  Wo 
passed  a  monk  and  a  soldier,  —  the  two  ourses  of\ 
Italy,  each  in  his  way,  —  walking  sociably  side  by 
aide ;  and  from  Narni  to  Terni  I  remember  nothing 
that  need  be  recorded. 

Temi,  like  so  many  other  towns  in  the  neighbor- 
hood, stands  in  a  high  and  commanding  position, 
chosen,  doubtless,  for  its  facilities  of  defence,  in  days 
long  before  the  medisval  warfares  of  Italy  ma<le  such 
sites  desirable.  I  suppose  that,  like  Nam!  and  Otri- 
colj,  it  was  a  city  of  the  Umbrians.  We  reached  it 
between  eleven  and  twelve  o'clock,  intending  to  em- 
ploy the  afternoon  on  a  visit  to  the  famous  falls  of 
Temi ;  but.  after  lowering  all  day.  it  has  begun  to 
rain,  and  we  shall  probably  have  to  give  them  up. 

Malf  past  eight  o'clock.  —  It  has   rained  in  tor- 
rents during  the  afternoon,  and  we  have  not  seen  the 
i  of  Temi;   considerably  to  my  regret,  for  I 


280   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-DOOKS.  [1851 

think  I  felt  the  more  iDterext  in  8eeing  it,  on  accoui 
of  ita  being  artilifial.  Methinks  nothing  waa  nn 
ohara^^teristic  uf  the  energy  and  determination  of 
old  Koinana,  than  thus  to  take  a  river,  which  theji 
winlied  to  be  rid  of,  and  fling  it  over  a  giddy  preci- 
pice, breuking  it  into  ten  million  pieces  hy  the  falL 
.  .  .  We  are  in  the  Hotel  delle  tre  Colonne,  and  find 
it  reasonably  good,  though  not,  so  far  as  we  are  con* 
cemed,  justifying  the  rapturous  commendations  of  pre- 
vious tourists,  who  probably  travelled  at  their  01 
charges.  However,  there  is  Dothing  really  to  be 
plained  of,  either  in  our  aeoonunodations  or  table,  ani 
the  only  wonder  is  how  (laetano  coutnves  to  get  any 
profit  out  of  our  contract,  since  the  hotel  bills  would 
alone  cost  us  more  than  we  pay  him  for  the  jour- 
ney and  all.  It  is  worth  white  to  record  as  history  of 
vetturino  commissary  customs,  that  for  breakfast  tliis 
morning  we  had  coffee,  eggs,  and  bread  and  butter  j 
for  lunch  an  omelette,  some  stewed  veal,  and  a  dessert 
of  figs  and  grapes,  besides  two  decautt^rs  of  a  light* 
colored  acid  wine,  tasting  very  like  indifferent  cider ; 
for  dinner,  an  excellent  vermicelli  soup,  two  young 
fowls,  fricasseed,  and  a  hind  quarter  of  roatit  lamb, 
with  fritters,  oranges  and  figs,  and  two  more  decanters 
of  the  wine  aforesaid. 

This  hotel  is  an  edifice  with  n  gloomy  front  upon  M) 
narrow  street,  and  enterable  through  an  arch,  which 
admits  you  into  an  enclosed  c«urt ;  arouiul  the  court, 
on  each  story,  run  the  galleries,  with  which  the  par- 
lors and  sleeping  -  apartments  communicate.  The 
whole  house  is  dingy,  probably  old,  and  seems  not 
very  clean ;  but  yet  bears  traces  of  former  magnlfi- 
eence;  for  instance,  in  our  bedroom,  the  door  oi 
irbioh  is  ornamented  with  gilding,  and  the  comioea 


I 
I 


M.] 


ITALY. 


•nth  frescos,  some  of  wtieh  appear  to  represent  the 
cascade  of  Terni,  tlie  roof  is  crossed  with  carved 
beajus.  and  is  piunted  in  tlie  interstices  ;  the  floor  has 
a  carpet,  l>ut  rough  tiles  underneath  it.  which  show 
themselves  at  the  margin.  The  windows  admit  the 
wind ;  the  door  shuts  so  loosely  as  to  leave  great 
cracks ;  and,  during  the  rain  to-day,  there  was  a 
heavy  shower  through  our  ceiling,  which  ma^Ie  a  flood 
upon  the  carpet.  We  see  no  chambermaids ;  noth- 
ing of  the  comfort  and  neatness  of  an  English  hotel, 
nor  of  the  smart  splendors  of  an  American  one  ;  but 
still  this  dilapidated  palace  affords  us  a  better  shelter 
than  I  expected  to  And  in  the  deca}~ed  country  towns 
of  Italy.  In  the  albiuii  of  the  hotel,  I  find  the  names 
of  more  English  travellers  than  of  any  other  nation 
except  the  Americans,  who,  I  think,  even  exceed  the 
former ;  and,  the  route  being  the  favorite  one  for 
tourists  between  Rome  and  Florence,  whatever  merit 
the  inns  have  is  probably  owing  to  the  demands  of 
the  Anglo -Saxons.  I  doubt  not,  if  we  chose  to  pay 
for  it,  this  hotel  would  supply  us  with  any  luxury  we 
might  ask  for ;  and  perhaps  even  a  gorgeous  saloon 
and  state  bedchamber. 

After  dinner,  J and  I  walked  out  in  the  dusk 

to  see  what  we  could  of  Teml.  We  foimd  it  compact 
and  gloomy  (but  the  latter  characteristic  might  well 
enough  be  attributed  to  the  dismal  sky),  with  narrow 
streets,  paved  from  wall  to  wall  of  the  houses,  like 
those  of  all  the  towns  in  Italy  ;  the  blocks  of  paving- 
stone  larger  than  the  little  square  torments  of  Kome. 
The  houses  are  covered  with  tlinjry  stucco,  and  mostly 
tow,  Gompare<l  witli  those  of  Kome,  and  inhospitable 
Bs  regards  their  dismal  aspects  and  uninviting  door* 
ways.     The  streets  are  intricate  as  well  as  narrow 


232  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [ISsa  J 

insomucli  that  we  quickly  lost  our  way,  and  could  not 
fuid  it  again,  tliough  the  U>wn  is  of  ao  small  dimen- 
Biona  that  we  passed  throu};li  it  in  two  directions,  ia 
the  course  of  our  brief  wanderings.  There  are  no 
lamp-posts  in  Terni ;  and  as  it  was  gi-owing  daik  and 
Wginning  to  rain  again,  we  at  last  inquired  of  a  peN 
son  in  the  principal  piazza,  and  found  our  bot«l,  i 
I  exjiected,  within  two  minutes'  walk  of  where  W0  J 
stood. 

FOLIGNO. 

May  2Gth.  —  At  six  o'clock  this  morning  wo  packed  .1 
ourselves  into  our  vettura,  my  wife  and  I  occupjing  J 
the  coup€,  and  <lrove  out  of  the  city  gate  of  TemLj 
There  are  some  old  towers  near  it,  ruins  of  I  know  notfl 
what,  and  care  as  little,  in  the  plethoni  of  antiquitiwi 
aad  other  interesting  objects.     Tlirough   the  arehedf 
gateway,  as  we  approached,  we  had  a  view  of  one  of  J 
the  great  hills  that  surround  the  town,  looking  partly  1 
bright  in  the  early  Euii^hine,  and  partly  catching  thv  J 
shadows  of  the  clouds  that  floated  about  the  sky.     Our  J 
way  was  now  through  the  Vale  of  Terni,  as  1  lielievafl 
it  is  calle<I,  where  we  saw  somewhat  of  the  fertility  of  ' 
Italy :  vines  trained  on  poles,  or  twining  round  mul- 
berry and  other  trees,  ranged  regularly  like  orchards; 
groves  of  olives  and  fields  of  grain.     There  are  inter- 
minable shrines  in  all  sorts  of  situations ;  some  under 
arched  niches,  or  little  pent-houses,  with  a  brick-tiled 
roof,  just  large  enough  to  cover  them ;  or  perha]>s  in 
some  bit  of  old  Roman  masonry,  on  the  wall  of  a  way- 
side inn,  or  in  a  shallow  cavity  of  the  natural  rock,  or 
high  upward  in  the  deep  cuts  of  the  road ;  everywhere, 
in  short,  so  that  nobody  need  be  at  a  loss  when  hs 
feels  the  religions  sentiment  stir  witliin  hint.     Our  vtaj 
■ooQ  began  to  wikd  among  the  bills,  which  rose  steof 


18SB.1 


ITALY. 


'  ftnd  lofty  from  the  scanty,  level  space  that  lay  be- 
tween ;  they  continually  thrust  themselves  across  the 
passage,  and  appeared  as  if  determined  to  shut  ua 
completely  in.  A  great  hill  would  put  its  foot  right 
before  ub  ;  but,  at  the  last  moment,  would  grudgingly 
withdraw  it,  and  allow  us  just  room  enough  to  creep 
by,  Adown  their  sides  we  discerned  the  dry  l>e<ls  of 
mountain  torrents,  which  had  lived  too  fierce  a  life  to 
let  it  bo  a  long  one.  On  here  and  there  a  hill-side  or 
promontory,  we  saw  a  mined  castle  or  a  convent,  look- 
ing from  its  commanding  height  upon  the  road,  which 
very  likely  some  robber-knight  had  formerly  infested 
with  his  banditti,  retreating  with  his  booty  to  the  se- 
curity of  such  strongholds.  We  came,  once  in  a  while, 
to  wretched  villages,  where  there  was  no  token  of 
prosperity  or  comfort;  but  perhapB  there  may  have 
been  more  than  we  could  appreciate,  for  the  Italians 
do  not  seem  to  have  any  of  that  sort  of  pride  which  we 
find  in  New  England  villages,  where  every  man,  ac- 
cording to  his  taste  and  means,  endeavors  to  make 
his  homestead  an  ornament  to  the  plat«.  We  misa 
nothing  in  Italy  more  than  the  neat  doorsteps  and 
pleasant  porches  and  thresholds  and  delightful  lawns 
or  grass-plots,  which  hospitably  invite  the  imagination 
into  a  sweet  domestic  interior.  Everything,  however 
sunny  and  luxuriant  may  be  the  scene  around,  is  es- 
pecially dreary  and  disheartening  in  the  immediate 
vicinity  of  an  Italian  home. 

At  Strettura  (which,  a^  the  name  indicates,  is  a 
-  very  narrow  part  of  the  valley)  we  added  two  oxen  to 
our  horses,  and  began  to  ascend  the  !Kfonte  Somma, 
which,  according  to  Murray,  is  nearly  four  thousand 
feet  high,  where  we  crossed  it.  When  we  came  to 
ttie  steepest  part  of  the  ascent,  Gaetano,  who  exercises 


234   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [IBI* 

a  pretty  decided  control  over  Ixis  passengers,  allowed 
08  to  walk ;  and  we  all,  with  one  exception,  alighted, 
and  l^egan  to  climb  the  mouatain  on  foot.  I  walked 
on  briskly,  and  soon  left  the  rest  of  the  party  behind, 
reu<-hing  the  top  of  tlie  ]>ass  in  Bueh  a  short  time  tliat 
1  could  not  helievo  it,  and  kept  onward,  expecting  still 
another  height  to  clinib.  But  the  road  began  to  di 
acend,  winding  among  the  depths  of  the  hills  t 
tofore  ;  now  beside  the  dry,  gravelly  bed  of  a  di 
stream,  now  crossing  it  by  a  bridge,  and  perhaps  pi 
ing  through  some  other  gorge,  that  yet  gave  no  d^l 
cided  promise  of  an  outlet  into  the  world  beyond.  A' 
glimpse  might  occasionally  be  caught,  through  a  gap 
between  the  hill-tops,  of  a  company  of  diatiuit  moun- 
tain peaks,  pyramidal,  as  these  hills  are  apt  to  be,  and 
resembling  the  camp  of  an  army  of  giants.  The  land- 
scape was  not  altogether  sav^e :  sometimes  a  hill-side 
was  covered  with  a  rich  field  of  grain,  or  an  orchard 
of  olive-trees,  looking  not  unlike  puffu  of  smoke,  from 
the  peculiar  hue  of  their  foliage :  but  oftener  there 
was  a  vast  mantle  of  trees  and  shi-ubhory  from  top 
to  bottom,  the  golden  tufts  of  the  broom  shining  out 
amid  the  verdure,  and  gladdening  the  whole.  Nothing 
was  dismal  except  the  houses ;  those  were  always  so, 
whether  the  compact,  gray  lines  of  village  hovels,  with 
a  narrow  street  between,  or  the  lonely  farm-house, 
standing  far  apart  from  tlie  road,  built  of  stone,  with 
window-gaps  high  in  the  wall,  empty  of  glass ;  or  the 
half-castle,  half -dwelling,  of  which  I  saw  a  specimen 
or  two,  with  what  looked  like  a  defensive  rampart, 
drawn  around  its  court.  I  saw  no  look  of  comfort 
anywhere ;  and  continually,  in  this  wild  and  soUtiry 
region,  1  met  beggars,  just  as  if  I  were  still  in  tbs 
streets  of  Rome.     Boys  and  girls  kept  beside  me,  till 


i 


« 


iTAir.  235 

they  delivered  me  into  the  hands  of  others  like  them- 
selves ;  hoary  grandsires  and  grandmothers  caught  a 
glimpse  of  my  approai'h,  and  tottered  as  fast  as  they 
uDuld  to  intercept  me ;  women  came  out  of  the  cot- 
tages with  rotten  cherries  on  a  plate,  entreating  me  to 
bay  them  for  a  meszo  baioccfao ;  a  man  at  work  on 
the  road,  left  his  toil  to  beg,  and  was  grateful  for  the 
value  of  a  cent ;  in  short,  I  was  never  safe  from 
importunity,  as  long  as  there  was  a  house  or  a  human 
being  in  sight. 

We  arrived  at  Spoleto  before  noon,  and  while  our 
dejeuner  was  being  prepared,  looked  down  from  the 
window  of  the  inn  into  the  narrow  street  beneath, 
which,  from  the  throng  of  people  in  it,  I  judged  to 
be  the  principal  one:  priests,  papal  soldiers,  women 
with  no  bonnets  on  their  heads  ;  peasants  in  breeches 
and  mushroom  hats;  maids  and  matrons,  drawing 
water  at  a  fountain ;  idlers,  smoking  on  a  bench 
under  the  window ;  a  talk,  a  bustle,  but  no  genuine 
activity.  After  lunch  we  walked  out  to  see  the  lions 
of  Spoleto,  and  found  our  way  up  a  steep  and  narrow 
street  that  led  us  to  the  city  gate,  at  which,  it  is  tradi- 
tionally said,  Hannibal  sought  to  force  an  entrance, 
after  the  battle  of  Thrasymene,  and  was  repulsed. 
The  gateway  has  a  double  arch,  on  the  inner  one  of 
which  is  a  tablet,  recording  tlie  above  tradition  as  an 
unquestioned  historical  faot.  From  the  gateway  we 
went  in  search  of  the  Duomo  or  Cathedral,  and  were 
kindly  directed  thither  by  an  officer,  who  was  descend- 
ing into  the  town  from  the  citadel,  which  is  an  old 
castle,  now  converted  into  a  prison.  The  Cathedral 
seemed  small,  and  did  not  much  interest  us,  either  by 
the  Gothic  front  or  its  modernized  interior.  We  saw 
nothing  else  in  Spoleto,  but  went  back  to  the  inn  and 


236    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [Iftfia  I 

resinned  our  journey,  emerging  from  the  citj  mtn  th»l 
elaaaic  valley  of  the  Clitumnu»,  which  we  did  not  victr 
under  the  bent  of  auspices,  because  it  was  overcast,  aiij 
the  wind  as  chill  as  if  it  had  the  east  in  it.  The  valley, 
though  fertile,  and  smilingly  picturesque,  perhaps,  la 
not  such  as  I  shotdd  wish  to  celebrate,  cither  in  prose 
or  poetry.  It  is  of  such  breadth  and  extent,  that  iti 
frame  of  mountains  and  ridgy  hills  hardly  serve  to 
shut  it  in  aufBciently,  and  the  spectator  tliiiiks  of  % 
boundless  plain,  rather  thau  of  a  8eclu<led  vale.  Af- 
ter passing  Le  Vene,  we  came  to  the  little  temple 
which  Byron  describes,  and  which  has  betm  »upposed 
to  be  the  one  immortalized  by  Pliny.  It  is  very 
small,  and  stands  on  a  declivity  that  fulls  immediately 
from  the  road,  right  upon  which  rises  the  pediment 
of  the  temple,  while  the  columns  of  the  other  front 
find  sufficient  height  to  develop  themselves  in  the 
lower  ground.  A  little  farther  down  than  the  base  of 
the  edifice  we  saw  the  Clitiunnus,  so  recently  from  ito 
source  in  the  marble  rock,  that  it  was  still  as  pure  aa 
a  child's  heart,  and  as  transparent  as  truth  itself.  It 
looked  airier  than  nothing,  because  it  had  not  Bub- 
stiince  enough  to  brighten,  and  it  was  clearer  than  the 
atmosphere.  I  remember  nothing  else  of  the  volley 
of  Clitumnus,  except  that  the  beggars  in  this  region 
of  proverbial  fertility  are  wellnigh  profane  in  the  ur- 
gency of  their  petitions  ;  they  absolutely  fall  down  on 
their  knees  aa  you  approach,  in  the  same  attitude  as  if 
they  were  praying  to  their  Maker,  and  beseech  you  for 
alms  with  a  fervency  which  I  am  afraid  they  seldom 
use  before  an  altar  or  shrine.  Iteing  denied,  they  rao 
hastily  beside  the  carriage,  but  got  nothing,  and  finally 
gave  over. 

I  am  so  very  tired  and  sleepy  that  I  mean  to  men 


I 


1658.1  ITALY.  287 

tion  nothing  else  to-night,  except  the  city  of  Trevi, 
vrhieh,  on  the  approach  from  S]K>l(?to,  seems  completely 
to  cover  a  high,  peaked  hill,  from  its  pyrainidiil  tip 
to  its  base.  It  was  the  stran^st  situation  in  which 
to  build  a  town,  where,  I  should  suppose,  no  horse  cun 
climb,  and  whence  no  inhabitant  would  think  of  de- 
scending into  the  world,  after  the  approach  of  age 
should  begin  to  stiffen  Ms  joints.  On  looking  back  on 
this  most  picturesque  of  towns  (which  the  road,  o£ 
course,  did  not  enter,  as  evidently  no  road  could),  I 
saw  that  the  highest  part  of  the  hill  waa  quite  covered 
with  a  crown  of  edifices,  terminating  in  a  church  tower  ; 
while  a  part  of  the  northera  side  was  apparently  too 
steep  for  building ;  and  a  cataract  of  houses  Bowed 
down  the  western  and  southern  slopes.  There  st!«med 
to  be  palaces,  churches,  everything  that  a  city  should 
have ;  but  my  eyes  are  heavy,  and  I  can  write  no  more 
about  them,  only  that  I  suppose  the  summit  of  the  hill 
was  artificially  tenured,  so  as  to  prevent  its  crumbling 
down,  and  enable  it  to  support  the  platform  of  edifices 
which  crowns  it. 


Mat/  27th.  —  We  reached  Foligno  in  good  season 
yesterday  afternoon.  Our  inn  seemed  ancient  j  and, 
under  the  same  roof,  on  one  side  of  the  entrance,  was 
the  stable,  and  on  the  other  the  coach-house.  The 
house  is  built  round  a  narrow  court,  with  a  well  of 
water  at  bottom,  and  an  opening  in  the  roof  at  top, 
whence  the  st;urcases  are  lighted  that  wind  round  the 
sides  of  the  court,  up  to  the  highest  story.  Our  din- 
ing-room and  bedrooms  were  in  the  latter  region,  and 
were  all  paved  with  brick,  and  without  carpets ;  and 
the  characteristic  of  the  whole  was  exceeding  plain- 
ness and  antique  clumsiness  of  fitting  up.     We  found 


238   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [181 

ourselves  sufHuiently  comfortable,  however ;  and, 
baa  been  the  case  throughout  our  journey.  Had  a  very 
fair  and  woll-cooked  dinner.  It  shows,  a«  perhaps  I 
bave  alrea^ly  remarked,  that  it  is  still  possible  to  live 
well  in  Italy,  at  no  great  expense,  and  that  the  big] 
prices  charged  to  the  forestieri  at  Rome  and  clsewhei 
are  artificial,  and  ought  to  bo  abated.  .  .  . 

The  day  bad  darkened  since  morning,  ajid  was  now 
nminouD  of  rain  ;  but  as  soon  as  we  were  e.ttabbshed, 
we  sullied  out  to  see  whatever  was  worth  looking  at. 
A  beggar  boy,  with  one  leg.  followed  lis,  without  asl 
ing  for  anything,  apparently  only  for  the  pleasure 
our   company,   though  he   kept  at   too   great  a  dii 
tance  for  conversation,  and  indeed  did  not  attempt 
speak. 

We  went  first  to  the  Cathedral,  which  has  a  Gothie 
front,  and  a  modernized  interior,  stuccoed  and  white- 
washed, looking  as  neat  as  a  New  England  meeting- 
house, and  very  mean,  after  our  familiarity  with  the 
gorgeous  churches  in  other  cities.  There  were  some 
pictures  in  the  chapels,  but,  I  believe,  all  modem,  and 
I  do  not  remember  a  single  one  of  them.  Next  we 
went,  without  any  guide,  to  a  church  attat^bed  to  a 
convent  of  Dominican  monks,  with  a  Gothic  exterior 
and  two  hideous  picture.^  of  Death, — the  skeleton  lean- 
ing on  his  scythe,  one  on  eatih  side  of  the  door.  ThU 
church,  likewise,  was  whitewashed,  but  we  understood 
that  it  had  been  originally  frescoed  all  over,  and  by 
famous  hands  ;  but  these  pictures,  having  become  much 
injured,  they  were  all  obliterated,  as  we  saw,  —  all. 
that  is  to  say,  except  a  few  specimens  of  the  beat  pre- 
served, which  were  spared  to  show  the  world  what  the 
whole  liad  been.  I  thanked  my  stars  that  the  ubliter> 
fttion  of  the  rest  had  taken  place  before  our  visit ;  fot 


4 

■py 
I 

>w  ' 

;d, 

I 

te-  ' 


1 


1868.]  ITALY.  289 

if  anything  is  dreary  and  calculated  to  make  the  be- 
holdefu A  "^ble,  it  i,  a  faded  fresco,  with  spots 
of  the  white  plaster  dotted  over  it. 

Our  one-legged  boy  had  followed  us  into  the  church, 
and  stood  near  the  door  till  he  saw  us  ready  to  come 
out,  when  he  hurried  on  before  us,  and  waited  a  little 
way  off  to  see  whither  we  should  go.  We  still  went 
on  at  random,  taking  the  first  turn  that  offered  itself, 
and  soon  came  to  another  old  church,  —  that  of  St. 
Mary  within  the  Walls,  —  into  which  we  entered,  and 
found  it  whitewashed,  like  the  other  two.  This  was 
especially  fortunate,  for  the  door-keeper  informed  us 
that,  two  years  ago,  the  whole  church  (except,  I  sup- 
pose, the  roof,  which  is  of  timber)  had  been  covered 
with  frescos  by  Pinturicchio,  all  of  which  had  been 
ruthlessly  obliterated,  except  a  very  few  fragments. 
These  he  proceeded  to  show  us ;  poor,  dim  ghosts  of 
what  may  once  have  been  beautiful, —  now  so  far  gone 
towards  nothingness  that  I  was  hardly  sure  whether 
I  saw  a  glimmering  of  the  design  or  not.  By  the  by, 
it  was  not  Pinturicchio,  as  I  have  written  above,  but 
Giotto,  assisted,  I  believe,  by  Cimabue,  who  painted 
these  frescos.  Our  one-legged  attendant  had  fol- 
lowed us  also  into  this  church,  and  again  hastened  out 
of  it  before  us ;  and  still  we  heard  the  dot  of  his 
crutch  upon  the  pavement,  as  we  passed  from  street 
to  street.  By  and  by  a  sickly-looking  man  met  us. 
and  begged  for  ^^  qualche  cosa '' ;  but  the  boy  shouted 
to  him  ^^  Niente  !  "  whether  intimating  that  we  would 
give  him  nothing,  or  that  he  himself  had  a  prior  claim 
to  all  our  charity,  I  cannot  tell.  However,  the  beggar- 
man  turned  round,  and  likewise  followed  our  devious 
course.  Once  or  twice  we  missed  him ;  but  it  was 
»nly  because  he  could  not  walk  so  fast  as  we  ;  for  he 


240   FHBNCH   AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [lg«t,^ 

appeared  again  as  we  emet^ed  from  the  door  of 
other  church.  Our  one-loggeil  friend  we  never  mii 
for  a  moment ;  he  kept  pretty  near  us,  —  near  eno 
to  be  amiiaed  by  our  indecision  whither  to  go  ;  and  he 
aeenied  much  delighted  wheu  it  began  to  rain,  and  he 
saw  us  at  a  loss  how  to  find  our  way  back  to  the  hoteL 
Nevertheless,  he  did  not  offer  to  guide  us ;  but  stiim]>ed 
on  behuid  with  a  faster  or  slower  dot  of  his  crutt^'h, 
according  to  our  pace.  I  began  to  think  that  he  munt 
have  been  engaged  as  a  spy  upon  our  moveiiients  by 
the  police,  who  had  taken  away  my  pass|>ort  at  tho 
city  gate.  In  this  way  he  attended  \a  to  the  door  of 
the  hotel  where  the  beggar  had  already  arrived.  Tb«' 
latter  again  put  in  bia  doleful  petition  ;  the  one~leg^e4| 
boy  said  not  a  word,  nor  seemed  to  expect  anything, 
and  both  had  to  go  away  without  so  much  ax  a  mcaO^ 
baioocho  out  of  our  pockets.  The  multitude  of  b^i 
gars  in  Italy  makes  the  heart  aa  obdurate  as  a  pavingwj 
stone. 

We  left  FoJigno  this  morning,  and,  all  ready  for  ua 
at  the  door  of  tlie  liotcl,  aa  we  got  into  the  carriage, 
were  our  friends,  the  beggar-man  and  the  one-legged 
boy ;  the  latter  holding  out  his  ragged  hat,  and  smil- 
ing with  as  confident  an  air  a»  if  he  bad  done  us  some 
very  particular  service,  and  were  certaui  of  being  paid 
for  it,  as  from  contract.     It  was  so  very  funny,  so  im- 
])udent.  so  utterly  absurd,  that  I  could  not  help  giving 
him  a  trifle;  but  the  man  got  nothing,  —  a  iact  that 
gives  me  a  twinge  or  two,  for  ho  looked  sickly  aod 
miserable.     But  where  everybody  begs,  everybody, 
a  general  rule,  roust  be  denied ;  and,  besides,  they 
their  misery  so  well  that  you  are  never  sure  of 
genuine  article. 


c 

L 
;1 

t 


PERUGIA. 
-  Ab  I  said  last  night,  we  loft  Foligno 
,  which  waji  bleak,  chill,  and 
very  threatening,  there  being  very  little  blue  sky  any- 
where, and  the  clouds  lying  heavily  on  some  of  the 
monnt^n  -  ridges.    The  wind   blew  sharply,  right   in 

U 'b  fa«e  and  mine,  as  we  occupied  the  coup^,  so 

that  there  must  have  been  a  great  deal  of  the  north 
in  it.  We  drove  through  a  wide  plain  —  the  Umbrian 
valley,  I  suppose  —  and  soon  passed  the  old  town  of 
Spello,  just  toueliiDg  it«  skirts,  and  wondering  how 
people,  who  had  this  rich  and  convenient  plain  from 
which  to  choose  a  site,  could  think  of  covering  a  huge 
island  of  rock  with  their  dwellings.  —  for  Spello  tum- 
bled its  crooked  and  narrow  streets  down  a  steep  de- 
scent, and  cannot  well  have  a  yard  of  even  space 
within  its  walls.  It  is  said  to  contain  some  rare  treas- 
ores  of  ancient  pictorial  art. 

I  do  not  remember  much  that  we  saw  on  our  route. 
The  plains  and  the  lower  hill-sides  seemed  fruitful  of 
everything  that  belongs  to  Italy,  especially  the  olive 
and  the  vine.  As  usual,  there  were  a  great  many 
shrines,  and  frequently  a  cross,  by  the  wayside.  Hith- 
erto it  had  been  merely  a  plain  wooden  cross ;  but 
now  almost  every  cross  was  hung  with  various  instru- 
ments, represented  in  wood,  apparently  symbols  of  the 
crucifixion  of  our  Saviour,  —  the  spear,  the  sponge, 
the  crown  of  thorns,  the  hammer,  a  pair  of  pincers, 
and  always  St.  Peter's  cock,  made  a  prominent  figure, 
generally  perched  on  the  summit  of  the  cross. 

Prom  our  first  start  this  morning  we  had  seen  mists 
in  various  quarters,  betokening  that  there  was  rain  in 
those  spots,  and  now  it  began  to  spatter  in  our  own 


242   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [II 

faces,  although  within  the  wide  extent  of  our  pros] 
we  could  see  the  Bunahuie  falling  on  portionH  of  the 
valley.     A  rainbow,  too,  shone  out,  and  renmined  so 
long  visible  that  it  appeared  to  have  made  a  pernu- 
nent  stain  in  the  sky. 

By  and  by  we  reached  Assisi,  which 
cently  situated  for  pictorial  purposes,  with  a  gray  oao- 
tlo  above  it,  and  a  gray  wall  around  it,  itself  on  a 
mountain,  and  looking  over  the  great  plain  which  we 
had  been  traversing,  and  through  which  lay  our  on- 
ward way.  We  drove  through  tlie  Piazza  Grande  to 
an  ancient  house  a  littlu  buyond,  where  a  hospitable 
old  lady  receives  travellers  for  a  {consideration,  wil 
out  exactly  keeping  an  inn. 

In  the  piazza  we  saw  the  beautiful  front  of  a  tern] 
of  Minerva,  consisting  of  several  marble  jilllars,  flui 
and  with  rich  capitals  supporting  a  pediment.     It 
as  fine  as  anything  I  had  seen  at  Rome,  and  is  ii0W( 
of  course,  converted  into  a  Catholic  church. 

I  ought  to  have  said  that,  instead  of  driving  straight 
to  the  old  lady's,  we  alighted  at  the  door  of  a  church 
near  the  city  gate,  and  went  in  to  inspect  some  mel- 
ancholy frescos,  and  thence  clambered  up  a  narrow 
street  to  the  Cathedral,  which  has  a  Gothic  front,  old 
enough,  but  not  very  impressive.  I  really  remember 
not  a  single  object  that  we  saw  within,  but  am  pretty 
certain  that  the  interior  had  been  stuccoed  and  whit&- 
washed.  The  ecclesiastics  of  old  time  did  an  excel- 
lent thing  in  covering  the  interiors  of  their  churches 
with  brilliant  frescos,  thus  filling  the  holy  places  with 
saints  and  angels,  and  almost  with  the  presence  of  the 
Divinity,  Tli«  modem  ecclesiastics  do  the  next  best 
thing  in  obliterating  the  wretched  remnaiitt  of  wliat 
has  had  its  day  and  done   its  office.     These  freacM 


the 
d  so 

Lgni4^H 

tn  a 
3  we 
on- 
e  to 
able 

1 


I 


I 


1858.]  ITALY. 

might  be  looked  upon  aa  the  symbol  of  the  living 
spirit  that  ma^e  Catholicism  a  true  religion,  and  glo- 
rified it  as  long  as  it  did  liye ;  now  the  glory  and 
beauty  have  departed  from  one  and  tlie  other. 

My  wife,  U ,  and   Miss  Shepard  now  set   out 

with  a  cicerone  to  visit  the  great  Franciscan  convent, 
in  the  church  of  which  are  preserved  some  miraooloua 
specimens,  in  fresco  and  in  oils,  of  early  Italian  art ; 
hut  as  I  had  no  mind  to  suffer  any  further  in  this 

way,  I  stayed   behind  with  J and   E ,  who 

were  equally  weary  of  these  things. 

After  they  were  gone  we  took  a  ramble  through  the 
city,  but  were  almost  swept  away  by  the  violence  of 
the  wind,  which  struggled  with  me  for  my  hat,  and 

whirled  R before  it  like  a  feather.     The  people 

in  the  public  square  seemed  much  diverted  at  our  pre- 
dicament, being,  I  suppose,  accustomed  to  these  rude 
blasts  in  their  mountain  •  home.  However,  the  wind 
blew  in  momentary  gusts,  and  then  became  more  pla- 
cable till  another  tit  of  fury  came,  and  parsed  as  sud- 
denly as  before.  We  walked  out  of  the  same  gate 
through  which  we  had  entered, —  an  ancient  gate,  but 
recently  stuccoed  and  whitewashed,  in  wretched  con- 
trast to  the  gray,  venerable  wall  through  which  it  af- 
fonls  ingress,  —  and  I  stood  gazing  at  the  magnificent 
prospect  of  the  wide  valley  beneath.  It  was  so  vast 
tliat  there  appeared  to  be  all  varieties  of  weather  in 
it  at  the  same  instant ;  Helds  of  sunshine,  tracts  of 
storm,  —  here  the  coming  tempest,  there  the  departing 
one.  It  was  a  picture  of  the  world  on  a  vast  canvas, 
for  there  wa.s  rural  life  and  city  life  within  the  great 
expanse,  and  tlie  whole  set  in  a  frame  of  mountainst 
—  the  nearest  bold  and  distinct,  with  the  rocky  ledges 
showing  through  their  aides,  the  distant  ones  blue  and 
dim,  —  so  far  stretched  this  broad  valley. 


244  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [I8M 

When  I  had  looked  long  enough.  —  no.  not  long' 
enough,  for  it  would  take  a  great  while  to  read  that 
page,  —  we  retiirnod  wlthJD  the  gate,  and  we  i-Iam* 
bered  up,  pa^t  the  Cathedral,  and  into  the  narrow 
atreete  above  it.  The  aspect  of  everytliing  was  im- 
lueusurably  oli)  ,■  a  thousand  years  would  be  but  a 
middle  age  for  one  of  those  houses,  built  so  massively 
with  huge  stones  and  solid  arches,  that  I  do  not  see 
how  they  are  ever  to  tumble  down,  or  to  be  less  fit 
for  human  hahit&tion  than  they  are  now.  The  streets 
crept  between  them,  and  beneath  arched  passages,  and 
:p  and  down  steps  of  stone  or  aneient  brick,  for  it 
would  be  altogether  imjKissible  for  a  carriage  to  as- 
cend above  tlie  Grand  Piazza,  though  possibly  a  don 
key  or  a  chairman's  mule  might  find  foothold.  The 
city  seems  like  a  stony  growth  out  of  the  hill-side,  or 
a  fossilized  city,  —  so  old  and  singular  it  is,  without 
enough  life  and  juiciness  in  it  to  be  susceptible  of  de- 
cay. An  earthquake  is  the  only  chance  of  its  evta?, 
being  ruined,  beyond  its  present  ruin.  Nothing  l| 
more  strange  thaji  to  think  that  this  now  dead  oi^ 
—  dead,  as  regards  the  purposes  for  whtdt  men  live' 
nowadays — was,  centuries  ago,  the  scat  and  birth- 
place almost  of  art,  the  only  art  in  which  the  beau- 
tiful part  of  the  human  mind  then  developed  itself. 
How  came  that  flower  to  grow  among  these  wild  moun- 
tains? I  do  not  conceive,  however,  that  the  people  of 
Assisi  were  ever  much  more  enlightened  or  cultivated 
en  the  aide  of  art  than  they  are  at  present.  The  e«- 
clesiastics  were  then  the  only  patrons ;  and  the  flower 
grew  here  because  there  was  a  gi-eat  ccclesiaatical 
garden  in  which  it  was  Hlicltered  and  fostered.  Bat. 
it  is  very  curious  to  think  of  Assist,  a  school  of 
within,  and  mountain  and  wilderness  without. 


But.JH 

i 


FWM.] 


ITALY, 


845 


I 


Siy  wife  and  the  rest  of  the  party  returned  from 
convent  before  noon,  delighted  with  what  they  had 
Been,  a«  I  was  delighted  not  to  have  seen  it.  We  ate 
our  dejeuner,  and  reaumed  our  journey,  passing  be- 
neath the  great  consent,  aft«r  enierg;ing  from  the  gate 
Opposite  to  that  of  our  entrance.  The  edifice  made  a 
very  good  spectacle,  being  of  great  extent,  and  stand* 
ing  on  a  double  row  of  high  and  narrow  arches,  on 
which  it  ia  built  up  from  the  declivity  of  tlie  hill. 

We  soon  reached  the  Church  of  St.  Mary  of  the 
Angels,  which  is  a  modern  stnicturo.  and  very  spa- 
cious, built  in  place  of  one  destroyed  by  an  earth- 
quake. It  is  a  fine  church,  opening  out  a  magnificent 
space  in  its  nave  and  aisles ;  and  beneath  the  great 
dome  stands  the  small  old  chapel,  with  its  rude  stone 
walls,  in  which  St.  Francis  founded  his  order.  This 
chapel  and  the  dome  appear  to  have  been  the  only 
portions  of  the  ancient  church  that  were  not  destroyed 
by  the  earthquake.  The  dwelling  of  St.  Francis  is  said 
to  be  also  preserved  within  the  church ;  but  we  did  not 
see  it,  unless  it  were  a  little  dark  closet  into  which  we 
squeezed  to  see  some  frescos  by  La  Sp^na.  It  had 
an  old  wooden  door,  of  which  U picked  off  a  lit- 
tle bit  of  a  chip,  to  serve  as  a  relic.  There  is  a  fresco 
in  the  church,  on  the  pediment  of  the  chapel,  by  Over- 
beck,  representing  the  Assumption  of  the  Virgin.  It 
did  not  strike  me  as  wonderfully  fine.  The  other  pic- 
tures, of  which  there  were  many,  were  modem,  and  of 
DO  great  merit. 

We  pursued  our  way,  and  came,  by  and  by,  to  the 
foot  of  the  higJi  hill  on  which  stands  Perugia,  and 
which  is  so  long  and  steep  that  Gaetano  took  a  yoke 
of  oxen  to  aid  his  horses  in  the  ascent.  We  all,  ex- 
eept  my  wife,  walked  a  part  of  the  way  up,  and  J 


246    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [I9SS 

myself,  with  J for  my  companion,  kept  on 

to  the  eity  gate,  —  a  diatanoe,  I  should  think,  of  two 
three  miles  at  least.  The  lower  part  of  the  road 
on  the  etlge  of  the  hill,  with  a  narrow  valley  on 
left ;  anil  as  the  smi  hail  now  broken  out,  its  verdure 
and  fertility,  its  foliage  and  cultivation,  shone  forth  in 
mimeuloua  beauty,  as  green  as  Enghind,  as  bright  as 
only  Italy.  Perugia  appeared  above  us,  crowning  a 
mighty  hill,  the  most  picturesque  of  cities ;  and  tha 
higher  we  ascended,  the  more  the  view  opened  before 
us,  as  we  looked  back  on  the  course  that  we  had  trav- 
ersed, and  saw  the  wide  valley,  sweeping  down  and 
spreading  out,  boimded  afar  by  mountains,  and  sleep* 
tng  in  sun  and  shadow.  No  language  nor  any  art  of 
the  pencil  can  give  an  idea  of  the  scene.  When  God 
expressed  himself  in  the  landscape  to  maukiud,  He 
did  not  intend  that  it  should  be  translated  into  any 
tongue  save  his  own  immediate  one.  J mean- 
while, whose  heart  is  now  wholly  in  snail-shells,  was 
rummaging  for  them  among  the  stones  and  hedgea 
by  the  roadside ;  yet,  doubtless,  enjoyed  the  proapecl 
more  than  he  knew.  The  coach  lagged  far  behind 
us,  and  when  it  came  up,  we  entered  the  gate,  when 
a  soldier  appeared,  and  demanded  my  passport.  W« 
drove  to  tlie  Grand  Hdtel  do  France,  which  is  neai 
the  gate,  and  two  fine  little  boys  ran  beside  the  cai^ 
riage,  well  dressed  and  well  looking  enough  to  have 
been  a  gentleman's  sons,  but  churning  Ga^tonu  for 
their  father.  He  is  an  inhabitant  of  Perugia,  and  has 
therefore  reached  his  own  home,  though  we  are  still 
little  more  than  midway  to  our  journey's  end. 

Oiu*  hotel  proves,  thus  far.  to  be  the  best  that  we 
have  yet  met  with.  We  are  only  in  the  outskirts  of 
Perugia  ;  the  bidk  of  the  city,  where  the  most  inter 


I 


ITALY. 

esting  chuMihcB  and  the  public  edifices  are  situated, 

being  far  above  us  on  the  hill.   My  wife,  U ,  Miss 

Shepard,  and  R streamed  forth  immediately,  and 

saw  a  churoh ;  but  J ,  who  bates  them,  and  I,  re- 
mained behind  ;  and,  for  my  part,  I  added  several 
pages  to  this  volume  of  scribble. 

This  morning  was  as  bright  as  morning  could  be, 
even  in  Italy,  and  in  this  transparent  mountain  ab- 
mosphere.  We  at  first  declined  the  services  of  a  cio* 
rone,  and  went  out  in  the  hopes  of  finding  our  way 
to  whatever  we  vrisbed  to  see,  by  our  own  inatinots. 
This  proved  to  be  a  mistaken  hope,  however  ;  and  wo 
wandered  about  the  upper  city,  much  persecuted  by  a 
shabby  old  man  who  wished  to  guide  us ;  so,  at  last. 
Miss  Shepard  went  back  in  quest  of  the  cicerone  at 
the  hotel,  and,  meanwhile,  we  climbed  to  the  summit 
of  the  hill  of  Perugia,  and,  leaning  over  a  wall,  looked 
forth  npon  a  most  magnificent  view  of  monntiun  and 
valley,  terminating  in  some  peaks,  lofty  and  dim, 
which  surely  must  be  the  Apennines.  There  again  a 
young  man  aceoste<l  us,  offering  to  guide  us  to  the 
Cambio,  or  Exchange ;  and  as  this  was  one  of  the 
places  which  we  especially  wished  to  see,  we  accepted 
hia  services.  By  the  by,  I  ought  to  have  mentioned 
that  we  had  already  entered  a  church  (San  Luigi,  I 
believe),  the  interior  of  which  we  found  very  imprea- 
sive,  dim  with  the  light  of  stained  and  painted  win* 
dows,  insomuch  that  it  at  first  seemed  almost  dark, 
and  we  coiUd  only  see  the  bright  twinkling  of  the 
tapers  at  the  shrines ;  but,  after  a  few  minutes,  we 
discemeil  the  tall  Oi'tagonaJ  pillars  of  the  nave,  mar- 
ble, and  8ui>iH)rting  a  beautiful  roof  of  crossed  arches. 
The  church  was  neither  Gothic  nor  classic,  but  a  mix- 
ture of  both,  and  most  likely  barbarous ;  yet  it  had  ■ 


248    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  f|i 

grand  effect  in  its  tinted  twilight,  and  convinced 
more  than  ever  how  desirable  it  is  that  rcligi* 
lilies  should  have  painteil  windows. 

The  door  of  tlit;  Caiiibio  proved  to  be  one  that 
had  paJtsed  several  times,  while  seeking  for  it,  and  was 
very  near  the  cJiurch  just  mentioned,  whii-li  fronts  on 
one  Hide  of  the  same  piazza.  We  were  received  by 
an  old  gentleman,  who  appeared  to  be  a  public  offi- 
cer, and  foimd  ourselves  in  a  small  room,  waimKotud 
with  beautifully  carved  oak,  nwfed  with  a  coved  ceil- 
ing, painted  with  symbols  of  the  planets,  and  ara- 
besqued  in  rich  designs  by  Raphael,  and  lined  with 
splendid  frescos  of  subjects,  scriptural  and  hUtorical, 
by  Perugino,  When  the  room  was  in  its  first  gloi 
I  can  conceive  tliat  tlie  world  had  not  elsewhere 
flliow,  within  so  small  a  space,  such  magniticenc 
beauty  as  were  then  displayed  here.  Even  now,  I  en- 
joyed (to  the  best  of  my  belief,  for  wo  can  never  feel 
sure  that  we  arc  not  bamboozling  ourselves  in  such 
matters)  some  real  pleasure  in  what  I  saw ;  and  espe- 
cially seemed  to  fi'«l,  after  all  these  ages,  the  old  paiofr- 
er's  devout  sentiment  still  breathing  forth  from  tJio 
religious  pictures,  the  work  of  a  hand  that  had  so  loi 
been  dust. 

When  we  had  looked  long  at  these,  the  old  gentla<' 
man  led  ub  into  a  chapel,  of  the  same  size  as  the 
former  room,  and  built  in  the  same  fashion,  wain- 
scoted likewise  with  old  oak.  The  walla  were  also 
frescoed,  entirely  frescoed,,  and  retained  more  of  their 
original  brightness  than  those  we  had  already  seen, 
although  the  pictures  were  the  production  of  a  some- 
what  inferior  hand,  a  pupil  of  Penigiiio.  They  seemed 
to  be  very  striking,  however,  not  the  less  so,  that  onC 
of  them  provoked  an  uuseaitoaable  smile.     It  was  tli« 


ical,^^ 


1858.]  ITALY.  249 

Decapitation  of  John  the  Baptist ;  and  this  holy  per- 
sonage was  represented  as  still  on  his  knees,  with  his 
hands  clasped  in  prayer,  although  the  executioner  was 
already  depositing  the  head  in  a  charger,  and  the 
blood  was  spouting  from  the  headless  trunk,  directly, 
as  it  were,  into  the  face  of  the  spectator. 

While  we  were  in  the  outer  room,  the  cicerone  who 
first  offered  his  services  at  the  hotel  had  come  in ;  so 
we  paid  our  chance  g^de,  and  expected  him  to  take 
his  leave.  It  is  characteristic  of  this  idle  country, 
however,  that  if  you  once  speak  to  a  person,  or  ocm- 
nect  yourself  with  him  by  the  slightest  possible  tie, 
you  wiU  hardly  get  rid  of  him  by  anything  short  of 
main  force.  He  still  lingered  in  the  room,  and  was 
still  there  when  I  came  away;  for,  having  had  as 
many  pictures  as  I  could  digest,  I  left  my  wife  and 

U with  the  cicerone,  and  set  out  on  a  ramble 

with  J .     We  plunged  from  the  upper  city  down 

through  some  of  the  strangest  passages  that  ever  were 
called  streets ;  some  of  them,  indeed,  being  arched  all 
over,  and,  going  down  into  the  unknown  darkness, 
looked  like  caverns;  and  we  followed  one  of  them 
doubtfully,  till  it  opened  out  upon  the  light.  The 
houses  on  each  side  were  divided  only  by  a  pace  or 
two,  and  communicated  with  one  another,  here  and 
there,  by  arched  passages.  They  looked  very  ancient, 
and  may  have  been  inhabited  by  Etruscan  princes, 
judging  from  the  massiveness  of  some  of  the  founda* 
tion  stones.  The  present  inhabitants,  nevertheless,  are 
by  no  means  princely,  —  shabby  men,  and  the  car^ 
worn  wives  and  mothers  of  the  people,  —  one  of  whom 
was  guiding  a  child  in  leading  -  strings  through  these 
antique  alleys,  where  hundreds  of  generations  have 
trod  before  those  little  feet.     Finally^  we  came  out 


FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1888, 


the  t 


'-  gateway  at  which  we 


through  a  gateway, 
entered  la^t  night. 

I  ought  to  have  mentioned,  in  the  narrative  of  yes*] 
teixlay.  that  we  croBsed  the  Tiber  shortly  before  reacb* 
ing  Perugia,  already  a  broad  and  rapid  stream,  and 
abeady  distinguished  by  the  Banie  turbid  and  mud- 
puddly  quality  of  water  that  we  see  in  it  at  Kome.  I 
think  it  will  never  be  so  disagreeable  to  me  hereafter, 
now  that  I  find  this  turbidnesa  to  be  its  native  coloi^^ 
and  not  (like  that  of  the  Thames)  accruing  from  city 
sewers  or  any  impurities  of  the  lowlands. 

As  I  now  remember,  the  small  Chapel  of  Santa  Ma» 
ria  degli  Angeli  seema  to  have  been  originally  the 
house  of  St.  Francis. 

May  29fA. —  This  morning  we  visited  the  Churdi 
of  the  Dominicans,  where  we  saw  some  quaint  pictures 
by  Fra  Angelico,  with  a  good  deal  of  religious  sincer- 
ity in  them;  also  a  picture  of  St.  Columbo,  by  Peru- 
gino,  which  unquestionably  !a  very  good.  To  confess 
the  truth,  I  took  more  interest  in  a  fair  Gothic  monu- 
ment, in  white  marble,  of  Pope  Benedict  XII.,  repre- 
senting him  reclining  under  a  canopy,  while  two  angela 
draw  aside  the  curtain,  the  canopy  being  supported  by 
twisted  columns,  richly  ornamented.  I  like  this  over- 
flow and  gratuity  of  device,  with  which  Gothic  sculp-: 
ture  works  out  its  designs,  after  seeing  so  mucli  of  tl 
simplicity  of  classic  art  in  marble. 

We  then  tried  to  find  the  Church  of  San  Pietro  in 
Martire,  but  without  success,  although  every  person 
of  whom  wo  inquired  immediately  attached  himself  or 
herself  to  U9,  and  could  hardly  be  got  rid  of  by  any 
efforts  on  our  ])art.  Nobody  st^emed  to  know  tha 
church  we  wished  for,  but  all  directed  us  to  anotfau 


4 

by 

er. I 

in  I 


m I 


18580  ITALY.  261 

Church  of  San  PietrOy  which  contains  nothing  of  in* 
terest;  whereas  the  right  church  is  supposed  to  con- 
tain a  celebrated  picture  by  Perugino. 

Finally,  we  ascended  the  hill  and  the  city  proper  of 
Perugia  (for  our  hotel  is  in  one  of  the  suburbs),  and 

J and  I  set  out  on  a  ramble  about  the  city.    It 

was  market-day,  and  the  principal  piazza,  with  the 
neighboring  streets,  was  crowded  with  people.  .  •  • 

The  best  part  of  Perugia,  that  in  which  the  grand 
piazzas  and  the  principal  public  edifices  stand,  seems 
to  be  a  nearly  level  plateau  on  the  summit  of  the  hiU ; 
but  it  is  of  no  very  great  extent,  and  the  streets  rap- 
idly run  downward  on  either  side.  J and  I  fol- 
lowed one  of  these  descending  streets,  and  were  led  a 
long  way  by  it,  till  we  at  last  emerged  from  one  of  the 
gates  of  the  city,  and  had  another  view  of  the  moun- 
tains and  valleys,  the  fertile  and  sunny  wilderness  in 
which  this  ancient  civilization  stands. 

On  the  right  of  the  gate  there  was  a  rude  coun- 
try-path,  partly  overgrown  with  grass,  bordered  by  a 
hedge  on  one  side,  and  on  the  other  by  the  gray  city 
wall,  at  the  base  of  which  the  track  kept  onward.  We 
followed  it,  hoping  that  it  would  lead  us  to  some  other 
gate  by  which  we  might  reenter  the  city ;  but  it  soon 
grew  so  indistinct  and  broken,  that  it  was  evidently 
on  the  point  of  melting  into  somebody's  olive-orchard 
or  wheat-fields  or  vineyards,  all  of  which  lay  on  the 
other  side  of  the  hedge;  and  a  kindly  old  woman 
of  whom  I  inquired  told  me  (if  I  righdy  imderstood 
her  Italian)  that  I  should  find  no  further  passage  in 
that  direction.  So  we  turned  back,  much  broiled  in 
the  hot  sun,  and  only  now  and  then  relieved  by  the 
shadow  of  an  angle  or  a  tower. 

A  lame  beggar -man  sat  by  the  gate,  and  as  we 


252   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [1858. 

passed  him  J gave  him  two  b^ooohi  (which  hft 

hiuiaelf  had  begged  of  me  to  buy  an  orange  with), 
and  was  loaded  with  the  pauper's  prayers  and  ben^ 
dictious  as  we  enttircHl  the  (;ity.  A  great  many  bless- 
ings can  be  bought  for  vory  little  money  anywhere  ia 
Italy ;  and  whether  tliey  avail  anything  or  no,  it  is 
pleasant  to  see  that  the  be^ara  have  gratitude  enough 
to  bestow  them  in  such  abundance. 

Of  all  beggars  I  think  a  little  fellow,  who  rode 
beside  our  carriage  on  a  stick,  fais  bare  feet  scamper> 
ing  merrily,  while  he  managed  his  8te«d  with  one 
hand,  and  held  out  the  other  for  charity,  howling  piVj 
eoualy  the  while,  amused  me  most. 

PABSIQKANO. 

May  29(A.  — We  left  Perugia  at  about  three  o'elodc 
to^lay,  and  went  down  a  pretty  steep  descent :  but  I 
have  no  particular  recollection  of  the  road  till  it  i^iua 
began  to  descend,  before  reaching  the  village  of  Mu- 
gione.  We  all.  except  my  wife,  walked  up  the  long 
hill,  while  the  vettura  was  dragged  after  us  with  tha 
aid  of  a  yoke  of  oxen.  Arriving  first  at  the  village, 
I  leaned  over  the  wall  to  admire  the  beautiful  paets 
("le  bel  piano,"  as  a  peasant  called  it,  who  made  ao 
quaintance  with  me)  that  lay  at  the  foot  of  the  hill, 
so  level,  so  bounded  within  moderate  limits  by  a  framei 
of  hills  and  ridges,  that  it  looked  like  a  green  lake. 
In  fact,  I  think  it  was  once  a  real  lake,  which  made 
its  escape  from  its  bed,  as  I  have  known  some  lakfift 
to  have  done  in  America. 

Passing  through  and  beyond  the  village,  I  saw, 
a  height  above  the  road,  a  half-ruinous  tower,  with 
great  cracks  running  down  its  walls,  half-way  from 
top  to  bottom.    Some  little  cbildren  had  moauted  the 


I 


loauted  ttte         ■ 


1858.] 


ITALY. 


253     ^^ 


hill  with  as,  beg^^g  all  the  way ;  they  were  recruited 
with  additional  numtiers  in  the  village ;  and  here, 
beneath  the  ruinous  tower,  a  madman,  as  it  seemed, 
assaulted  us,  and  ran  ahnost  under  the  carriage-wheels, 
in  bis  earnestness  to  get  a  baioccho.  Kidding  our- 
selves of  these  aimoyances,  we  drove  on,  and,  between 
five  and  six  o'clock,  came  in  sight  of  the  Lake  of 
Thra^ymene,  obtaining  our  first  view  of  it,  I  think,  in 
its  longest  extent.  There  were  high  bills,  and  one 
mountain  with  its  head  in  the  clouds,  visible  on  the 
farther  shore,  and  on  the  horizon  beyond  it ;  but  the 
nearer  banks  were  long  ridges,  and  hills  of  only  mod- 
erate height.  The  declining  sun  threw  a  broad  sheen 
of  brightness  over  the  surface  of  the  lake,  so  that  we 
could  not  well  see  it  for  excess  of  light ;  but  had  a 
vision  of  headlands  and  islands  floating  about  in  a 
flood  of  gold,  and  blue,  airy  heights  bounding  it  afar. 
When  we  first  drew  near  the  lake,  there  was  but  a 
narrow  tract,  covered  with  vines  and  olives,  between 
it  and  the  hill  that  rose  on  the  other  side.  As  we 
advanced,  the  tract  grew  wider,  and  was  very  fertile, 
as  was  the  hill-side,  with  wheat-field.s,  and  vines,  and 
olives,  especially  the  latter,  which,  sJ^nbol  of  peace  as 
it  is,  seemed  to  find  something  congenial  to  it  in  the 
soil  stained  long  o/go  with  blood.  Farther  onward, 
the  space  between  the  lake  and  hill  grew  still  narrow- 
er, the  road  skirting  along  almost  close  to  the  water- 
side ;  and  when  we  reached  the  town  of  Passignano 
there  was  but  room  enough  for  its  dirty  and  ugly 
street  to  stretch  along  the  shore.  I  have  seldom  be- 
held a  lovelier  scene  than  that  of  the  lake  and  the 
landscape  around  it ;  never  an  uglier  one  than  that 
of  this  idle  and  decaying  village,  where  we  were  im- 
mediately surrounded  by  beggars  of  all  ages,  and  b; 


254   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [ies« 

men  vociterouBly  propouiiig  to  row  ub  out  upon  tba' 
lake.  We  declined  their  offers  of  a  boat,  for  tKe 
evening  was  very  fresh  and  w>oI,  inxotnucli  that  I 
should  have  liked  an  outside  garment,  —  a,  temper^' 
ture  that  I  had  not  antit-ipated,  so  near  the  l>ej^nn!ng 
of  June,  in  sunny  Italy.  IuHt«a<l  of  a  row,  we  toolt  a 
walk  through  the  villago,  hoping  to  come  upon  the 
shore  of  the  laJte  in  some  secluded  epot;  hut  an  incred- 
ible numl)er  of  beggar-children,  both  boys  and  girlfi, 
but  more  of  the  latter,  rushed  out  of  every  door,  and 
went  along  with  us,  all  howling  their  miserable  peld- 
tions  at  the  same  moment.  The  village  street  is  long, 
and  our  escort  waxed  more  nmnerous  at  every 
till  Miss  Shepard  actually  counted  forty  of  ttieso  littlfti 
reprobates,  and  more  were  doubtless  added  afterwards. 
At  ftrst,  no  doubt,  they  begged  in  earnest  hope  of  get> 
ting  some  baiocchi ;  biit,  by  and  by,  perceiving  tliat 
we  had  determined  not  to  ^ve  them  anything,  tliey 
made  a  joke  of  the  matter,  and  began  to  laugh  and 
to  babble,  and  turn  heels  over  head,  still  keeping  about 
us,  like  a  swai-m  of  flies,  and  now  and  then  be^ng 
^ain  vnth  all  their  might.  There  were  as  few  pretty 
faces  as  I  ever  saw  among  the  same  number  of  chil- 
dren ;  and  they  were  as  ragged  and  dirty  little  imps 
as  any  in  the  world,  ajid,  moreover,  tainted  the  air 
with  a  very  disagreeable  odor  from  their  rags  and  dirt ; 
nigged  and  healthy  enough,  nevertheless,  and  suffi- 
ciently intelligent :  certainly  bold  and  persevering  too; 
BO  that  it  is  hard  to  say  what  they  needed  to  fit  them 
for  success  in  life.  Tet  they  l)egiu  as  beggars,  and  no 
doubt  will  end  so,  as  all  their  parents  and  grandparents 
do ;  for,  in  our  walk  through  the  village,  eveiy  old 
woman  and  many  younger  ones  held  out  their  handa 
fur  alma,  aa  if  they  had  all  been  famished.     Yet 


4 


Jieae^^l 


1958.}  ITALY.  266 

people  kept  their  houses  over  their  heads;  had  fire- 
sides in  winter,  I  suppose,  and  food  out  of  their  little 
gardens  every  day ;  pigs  to  kill,  chickens,  olives,  wine, 
and  a  great  many  tlungs  to  make  life  comfortable. 
The  children,  desperately  as  they  begged,  looked  in 
good  bodily  case,  and  happy  enough ;  but,  certainly, 
there  was  a  look  of  earnest  miseiy  in  the  faces  of  some 
of  the  old  women,  either  genuine  or  exceedingly  well 
acted. 

I  could  not  bear  the  persecution,  and  went  into  our 
hotel,  determining  not  to  venture  out  again  till  our 
departure ;  at  lea^tt  not  in  the  daylight.  My  wife,  and 
the  rest  of  the  family,  however,  continued  their  walk, 
and  at  length  were  relieved  from  their  little  pests  by 
three  policemen  (the  very  images  of  those  in  itome, 
in  their  blue,  long-skirted  coats,  cocked  chapeauz-bras, 
white  shoulder-belts,  and  swords),  who  boxed  their 
ears,  and  dispersed  them.  Meanwhile,  they  had  quite 
driven  away  all  sentimental  effusion  (of  which  I  felt 
more,  really,  than  I  expected)  about  the  Lake  of 
Thrasymene. 

The  inn  of  Passignano  promised  little  from  its  out- 
ward appearance ;  a  tall,  dark  old  house,  with  a  stone 
staircase  leading  us  up  from  one  sombre  story  to  an- 
other, into  a  brick-paved  dining-room,  with  our  sleep- 
ing-chambers on  each  side.  There  was  a  fireplace  of 
tremendous  depth  and  height,  fit  to  receive  big  f o^- 
est-logs,  and  with  a  queer,  double  pair  of  ancient  and- 
irons, capable  of  sustaining  them ;  and  in  a  handful  of 
ashes  lay  a  small  stick  of  olive-wood,  —  a  specimen,  I 
suppose,  of  the  sort  of  fuel  which  had  made  the  chim- 
ney black  in  the  course  of  a  good  many  years.  There 
must  have  been  much  shivering  and  misery  of  cold 
around  this  fireplace.      However,  we  needed  no  fire 


26fl   FRBNCn  AND  JTALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [IMS 

now,  and  there  waa  promiae  of  good  cheer  In  the  apeo 
tacle  of  a  man  cleaning  nome  lake-fish  for  our  dii 
while  the  poor  things  fiounced  and  wriggle^l  under 
knife. 

The  dinner  made  its  appearance,  after  a  long  whila^ 
and  was  most  plentiful,  ...  so  that,  having  measured 
our  apijutite  in  uiitii'iputinR  nf  a  paucity  of  food, 
had  to  make  more   room  for  Bueh  overflowing  abi 
danee. 

When  dinner  was  over,  it  was  already  dunk,  and  be^ 
fore  retiring  I  o]>ened  the  window,  and  looked  out  on 
Liake  Thrasyraene,  the  margin  of  which  lies  just  on 
the  other  side  of  the  narrow  village  street.  The  moon 
was  a  day  or  two  past  the  fidl,  just  a  litt.le  clipped  on 
the  edge,  but  gave  light  enough  to  show  the  lake  and 
ita  nearer  ahoros  ahnost  aa  diHtinetly  nn  by  day  ;  and,, 
there  being  a  ripple  on  the  xurface  of  the  water, 
made  a  slieen  of  silver  over  a  wide  space. 

AREZZO. 
Mny  SOfA.  —  We  startwl  at  six  o'clock,  and  left  the 
one  ugly  street  of  Passignano  before  many  of  the  beg- 
gars  were  awake.     Immediately  in  the  vieinity  of  the  J 
vill^e,  there  is  vury  little  spaee  between  the  lake  in  J 
front  and  the  ridge  of  hills  in  the  rear ;  but  the  plu 
widened  as  we  drove  onward,  so  that  the  lake  was 
Bcai-cely  to  be  seen,  or  often  quite  hidden  among  the 
intervening  trees,  although  we  could  still  discern  the 
Bummits  of  the  mountains  that  rise  far  beyond  it>  . 
shores.     The  country  was  fertile,  presenting,  on  eaoh  i 
side  of  the  road,  vines  trained   on  fig-trees;  wheat* 
fields  and  olives,  in  greater  abundance  than  any  other 
[>ro(luct.     (>n  our  right,  with  a  considerable  width  of 
plain  between,  was  the  bending  ridge  of  hills  that  shot 


a 

f 

thatshal^l 


I 


iTALi:  257 

in  the  Ronmn  army,  by  its  close  approach  to  the  lake 
St  Passignano.  In  perhaps  half  an  hour's  drive,  we 
reached  the  little  bridge  that  throws  its  arch  over  the 
SaDguinetto,  and  alighted  there.  The  streain  has  but 
about  a  yard's  width  of  water ;  and  itg  whole  course, 
between  the  hilla  and  the  lake,  might  well  have  been 
reddened  and  swollen  with  the  blood  of  the  multitude 
of  slain  Romans.  Its  name  put  me  in  mind  of  the 
Bloody  Brook  at  Deerfield,  where  a  company  of  Mas- 
sachusetts men  were  massacred  by  the  Indians. 

The  Sanguinetto  flows  over  a  bed  of  pebbles ;  and 

J crept  under  the  bridge,  and  got  one  of  them  for 

a  memorial ;  while  U ,  Miss  Shepard,  and  R 

plucked  some  olive  twigs  and  oak  leaves,  and  made 
them  into  wreaths  together,  —  symbols  of  victory  and 
peace.  Tlie  tower,  which  is  traditionally  named  after 
Hannibal,  is  seen  on  a  height  that  makes  part  of  the 
line  of  enclosing  hills.  It  is  a  large,  old  castle,  appar- 
ently of  the  Middle  Ages,  with  a  square  front,  and  a 
battlemented  sweep  of  wall.  The  town  of  Torres  (its 
name,  I  think),  where  Hannibal's  main  array  is  sup- 
posed to  have  lain  while  the  Romans  came  through 
the  pass,  was  in  full  view ;  and  I  could  understand 
the  plan  of  the  battle  better  than  any  system  of  mili- 
tary operations  which  I  have  hitherto  tried  to  fathom. 
Both  last  night  and  to-day,  I  found  myself  stirred 
more  sensibly  than  I  expected  by  the  influences  of  this 
scene.  The  old  battle-field  is  still  fertile  in  thoughtB 
and  emotions,  though  it  is  so  many  a,gea  since  the 
blood  spilt  there  has  ceased  to  make  the  grass  and 
flowers  grow  more  luxuriantly.  I  doubt  whether  I 
should  feel  so  much  on  the  field  of  Saratoga  or  Mon- 
mouth !  but  these  old  classic  battle-fields  belong  to  the 
whole  world,  ami  each  man  feels  as  if  his  own  for» 


S58    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS,   [tsfl 

fathers  fought  them.  Mine,  by  the  by,  U  they  foii^bt 
them  at  all,  must  have  been  on  the  side  of  Hannibal ; 
tor,  certainly,  I  flynipathized  with  him,  auH  exulte*!  in 
the  defeat  of  the  Romans  on  their  own  soil.  They  ex- 
t^te  much  the  same  emotion  of  general  hostility  that 
the  English  do.  Byron  ha«  written  some  very  fine 
stanzas  on  the  battle  •  6eld,  —  not  so  good  an  others 
that  he  ha«  written  on  classical  scenes  and  subjects, 
yet  wonderfully  impressing  his  own  perception  of  the 
subject  on  the  reader.  Whenever  he  has  to  deal  witli 
a  statue,  a  ruin,  a  battle-Beld,  he  pounces  upon  the 
tojiie  tike  a  vidture,  and  tears  out  its  heart  in  a  twink- 
ling, BO  that  there  is  nothing  more  to  be  said. 

If  I  mistake  not,  our  passport  was  examined  by  the 
papal  officers  at  the  Wt  custom  house  in  the  pontif- 
ical territory,  before  we  traversed  the  path  through 
which  the  Koniau  army  marched  to  its  destruction, 
liake  Thrasymene,  of  which  we  took  our  last  view, 
ia  not  deep  set  among  the  hills,  but  is  bordered  by 
long  ridges,  with  loftier  mountains  receding  into  the 
distance.  It  ia  not  to  be  compared  to  Windermere  or 
Loch  Lomond  for  beauty,  nor  with  Lake  Champlain 
and  many  a  smaller  lake  in  my  own  country,  none  of 
which,  I  hope,  will  ever  become  so  hist4>rically  inter- 
esting as  this  famous  spot.  A  few  miles  onward  our 
passport  was  countersigned  at  the  Tuscan  custom 
bouse,  and  our  luggage  permitted  to  puss  without  ex- 
amination on  payment  of  a  fee  of  nine  or  ten  paula, 
besides  two  pauld  to  the  porters.  There  appears  to  be 
no  concealment  on  the  part  of  the  officials  in  thna 
waiving  the  exercise  of  their  duty,  and  I  rather  im- 
agine that  the  thing  is  recognized  and  permitted  by 
their  superiors.  At  all  events,  it  is  very  convenient 
for  the  traveller. 


i 


ITALY. 


259 


We  saw  Cortona,  sitting,  like  so  miuiy  other  cities 
in  this  region,  on  its  hill,  and  arrived  about  noon  at 
Arezzo,  which  also  stretches  up  a  high  bill-side,  and 
is  surrouDded,  as  they  all  are,  by  its  walLs  or  the  re* 
mains  of  one,  with  a  fortiiied  gate  across  eveiy  en* 
trance. 

I  reraember  one  little  village,  somewhere  in  the 
neighborhood  of  the  Clittmmus,  which  we  entered  by 
one  gateway,  and,  m  the  course  o£  two  minutes  at  the 
utmost,  left  by  the  opposite  one,  so  diminutive  was 
this  walled  town.  Everything  hereabouts  bears  traces 
of  times  when  war  was  the  prevalent  condition,  and 
peace  only  a  rare  gleam  of  sunshine. 

At  Arezzo  we  have  put  up  at  the  H3tel  Royal, 
which  has  the  appearance  of  a  grand  old  house,  and 
proves  to  be  a  tolerable  inn  enough.  After  lunch,  we 
wandered  forth  to  see  the  town,  which  did  not  greatly 
interest  me  after  Perugia,  being  much  more  modern 
and  less  picturesque  in  its  aspect.  We  went  to  the 
Cathedral,  —  a  Gothic  edifice,  but  not  of  striking  ex- 
terior. As  the  doors  were  closed,  and  not  to  be  opened 
till  three  o'clock,  we  seated  ourselves  under  the  trees, 
on  a  high,  grassy  space,  surrounded  and  intersected 
with  gravel  -  walks,  —  a  public  promenade,  in  short, 
near  the  Cathedral ;  and  after  resting  ourselves  here 
we  went  in  search  of  Petrarch's  house,  which  Murray 
mentions  as  being  in  this  neighborhood.  We  inquired 
of  several  people,  who  knew  nothing  about  the  matter ; 
one  woman  misdirected  us,  out  of  mere  fun,  I  believe, 
for  she  afterwards  met  us  and  asked  how  we   had  suo- 

^seeded.     But  finally,  through  's  enterprise  and 

perseverance,  we  found  the  spot,  not  a  stone's-tlirow 
from  where  we  had  been  sitting. 

Petrarch's  house  stands  below  the  promenade  which 


260   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [ISSfl 

I  havo  ju8t  mentioned,  and  within  hearing  of  tha 
reverberations  between  the  strokes  of  the  Cathedral 
bell.  It  ia  two  stories  liigh,  covered  with  a  light* 
colored  stucco,  and  has  not  the  slightest  appearance 
of  antiquity,  no  more  than  many  a  modem  and  modest 
dwelling-house  in  an  American  city.  Its  only  remark- 
able feature  is  a  pointed  arch  of  stone,  let  into  the 
plastered  wall,  and  forming  a  framework  for  the  door- 
way.    I  set  my  foot  on  the  doorsteps,  ascended  them, 

and  Miss  Shepard  and  J gathered  some  weeds 

blades  of  grass  that  grew  in  the  chinks  between 
steps.     There  is  a  long  inscription  on  a  slab  of 
ble  set  in  the  front  of  the  house,  as  is  the  fashit 
Arezzo  when  a  house  has  been   the  birthplace  or  rei 
dence  of  a  distinguished  man. 

Kight  opposite  Petrarch's  birth-house — and  it  mi 
have  been  the  well  whence  the  water  was  drawn 
first  bathed  hira  —  is  a  well  which  Boccaccio  has 
troduced  into  one  of  his  stories.  It  is  suiroundecl 
with  a  stone  curb,  octagonal  in  shape,  and  evidently 
a-s  ancient  as  Boccaccio's  time.  It  has  a  wooden  cover, 
through  which  is  a  square  opening,  and  looking  down 
I  saw  my  own  faee  in  the  water  far  beneath. 

There  is  no  familiar  object  connected  with  duly 
life  so  interesting  as  a  well;  and  this  well  of  old 
Arezzo,  whence  Petrarch  had  drank,  around  which 
he  hat)  played  in  his  boyhood,  and  which  Boccaccio 
has  made  famous,  really  interested  me  more  than  the 
Cathe<IraI.  It  bes  right  under  the  pavement  of  tha 
street,  under  the  sunshine,  without  any  shade  of  trees 
about  it,  or  any  grass,  except  a  little  that  grows  is 
the  crevices  of  its  stones ;  but  the  shape  of  its  aton»- 
work  would  make  it  a  pretty  object  in  an  engraving 
Aa  I  lingered  round  it,  I  thought  of  my  own  towa 


t 


1858.]  ITALY.  261 

pnmp  in  old  Salem,  and  wondered  whether  my  towns* 
people  would  ever  point  it  out  to  strangers,  and 
whether  the  stranger  would  gaze  at  it  with  any  de- 
gree of  sach  interest  as  I  felt  in  Boccaccio's  well.  Oh, 
certainly  not;  but  yet  I  made  that  humble  town-pump 
the  most  celebrated  structure  in  the  good  town.  A 
thousand  and  a  thousand  people  had  pumped  there, 
merely  to  water  oxen  or  fill  their  teakettles ;  but  when 
once  I  grasped  the  handle,  a  rill  gushed  forth  that 
meandered  as  far  as  England,  as  far  as  India,  besides 
tasting  pleasantly  in  every  town  and  village  of  our  own 
country.  I  like  to  think  of  this,  so  long  after  I  did 
it,  and  so  far  from  home,  and  am  not  without  hope 
of  some  kindly  local  remembrance  on  this  score. 

Petrarch's  house  is  not  a  separate  and  insulated 
building,  but  stands  in  contiguity  and  connection  with 
other  houses  on  each  side ;  and  all,  when  I  saw  them, 
as  well  as  the  whole  street,  extending  down  the  slope 
of  the  hill,  had  the  bright  and  sunny  aspect  of  a  mod- 
em town. 

As  the  Cathedral  was  not  yet  open,  and  as  J 

and  I  had  not  so  much  patience  as  my  wife,  we  left 
her  and  Miss  Shepard,  and  set  out  to  return  to  the 
hotel.  We  lost  our  way,  however,  and  finally  had  to 
return  to  the  Cathedral,  to  take  a  fresh  start ;  and  as 
the  door  was  now  open  we  went  in.  We  found  the 
Cathedral  very  stately  ¥dth  its  great  arches,  and 
darkly  magnificent  with  the  dim  rich  light  coming 
through  its  painted  windows,  some  of  which  are  reck- 
oned the  most  beautiful  that  the  whole  world  has  to 
show.  The  hues  are  far  more  brilliant  than  those  of 
any  painted  glass  I  saw  in  England,  and  a  great  wheel 
window  looks  like  a  constellation  of  many -colored 
gems.     The  old  English  glass  gets  so  smoky  and  dull 


262   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [11 

with  dtiBt.  that  its  pristine  beauty  cannot  any  lonf^ 
be  evpn  imagined  ;  nor  did  I  imagine  it  till  I  saw 
thesu  Italian  vrindows.  We  saw  nothing  of  my  n-ife 
and  MiHB  Shepard ;  but  found  aftenvarda  that  they 
had  been  miieh  annoyed  by  tlie  attentions  of  a  priest 
who  wiahed  to  show  them  Uie  Cathedral,  till  they 
finally  told  him  that  they  had  no  money  with  them, 
when  he  left  them  without  another  word.  The  at- 
tendants in  churches  seem  tA  be  quite  aa  venal  as  most 
other  Italians,  and,  for  the  sake  of  their  little  profit, 
tliey  do  not  hesitate  to  interfere  with  the  great  pur- 
poses for  which  their  churches  were  built  and  dec- 
orated; hanging  curtains,  for  instance,  before  all  the 
celebrated  pictures,  or  hiding  them  away  in  the 
risty,  so  that  they  cannot  be  seen  witliout  a  fee- 
Returning  to  the  hot«l,  we  looked  out  of  the  win- 
dow, and,  in  the  street  beneath,  there  was  a  very  busy 
scene,  it  being  Sunday,  and  the  wliole  i)opulation.  ap- 
parently, lieing  astir,  —  promenailing  up  and  down, 
the  smooth  flag-atonea,  wHch  made  the  breadth  of 
street  one  ttidewalk,  or  at  their  windows,  or  sitting  botj 
fore  their  doors. 

The  vivacity  of  the  population  in  these  parts  is  very] 
striking,  after  the  gravity  and  lassitude  of  Rome;  and' 
the  air  was  made  cheerful  with  tlie  talk  and  laughter 
of  hundreds  of  voices.  I  think  the  women  are  pret- 
tier than  the  Roman  malda  and  matrons,  who,  as  I 
think  I  have  8ai<l  before,  have  chosen  to  be  very  un- 
comely since  the  rape  of  their  ancestresses,  by  way  o( 
wreaking  a  terrible  spite  and  revenge. 

I  have  nothing  more  to  say  of  Arczzo,  except  that, 
finding  the  ordinary  wine  very  bad,  as  bla<^k  as  jnk| 
and  tasting  as  if  it  had  tar  and  vinegar  in  it,  wfl 
called  for  a  bottle  of  Monte  Pulciano,  and  were  e» 
wedingly  gladdened  and  mollified  thereby. 


ige^^ 


1868.]  ITALY.  268 

IXCI8A. 

We  left  Arezzo  early  on  Monday  morning,  the  sun 
throwing  the  long  shadows  of  the  trees  across  the 
road,  which  at  first,  after  we  had  descended  the  lull, 
lay  over  a  plain.  As  the  morning  advanced,  or  as 
we  advanced,  the  country  grew  more  hilly.  We  saw 
many  bits  of  rustic  life,  —  such  as  old  women  tending 
pigs  or  sheep  by  the  roadside,  and  spinning  with  a 
distaff ;  women  sewing  under  trees,  or  at  their  own 
doors;  children  leading  goats,  tied  by  the  horns,  while 
they  browse ;  sturdy,  sunburnt  creature  in  petticoats, 
but  otherwise  manlike,  at  work  side  by  side  with  male 
laborers  in  the  fields.  The  broad -brinmied,  high- 
crowned  hat  of  Tuscan  straw  is  the  customary  female 
head-dress,  and  is  as  unbecoming  as  can  possibly  be 
imagined,  and  of  little  use,  one  would  suppose,  as  a 
shelter  from  the  sun,  the  brim  continually  blowing  up- 
ward from  the  face.  Some  of  the  elder  women  wore 
black  felt  hats,  likewise  broad-brimmed ;  and  the  men 
wore  felt  hats  also,  shaped  a  good  deal  like  a  mush- 
room, with  hardly  any  brim  at  alL  The  scenes  in  the 
villages  through  which  we  passed  were  very  lively  and 
characteristic,  all  the  population  seeming  to  be  out  of 
doors :  some  at  the  butcher's  shop,  others  at  the  well ; 
a  tailor  sewing  in  the  open  air,  with  a  young  priest 
sitting  sociably  beside  him ;  children  at  play ;  women 
mending  clothes,  embroidering,  spinning  with  the  dis- 
taff at  their  own  door-steps ;  many  idlers,  letting  the 
pleasant  morning  pass  in  the  sweet-do-nothing ;  aU  as- 
sembling  in  the  street,  as  in  the  common  room  of  one 
Urge  household,  and  thus  brought  close  together,  and 
made  familiar  with  one  another,  as  they  can  never  be 
in  a  different  system  of  society.     As  usual,  along  the 


264   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [18J 

road,  we  passed  multitudes  of  shrines,  where  the  Virgin 
was  painted  in  fresco,  or  sometimes  representetl  in  baa* 
reliefs,  within  niches,  or  under  more  spacious  arehea. 
It  would  be  a  good  idea  to  place  a  comfortable  and 
shady  seat  beneath  all  these  wayside  shrines,  where 
the  wayfarer  might  rest  himself,  and  thank  the  Vif- 
gin  for  her  hospitality;  nor  can  I  believe  that  it  woul£ 
offend  her,  any  more  than  other  incense,  if  he  were  to 
regale  himself,  even  in  such  consecrated  spots,  with  the 
fragrance  of  a  pipe  or  cigar. 

In  the  wire-work  screen,  before  many  of  the  sbrini 
hung  offerings  of  rosins  and  other  flowers,  some  wUl 
anil  withered,  some  fresh  with  that  morning's  duVi 
some  that  never  bloomed  and  never  faded.  —  being 
artiftcial.  I  wonder  that  they  do  not  plant  rose-treett 
and  all  kinds  of  fragrant  and  flowering  shrubs  under 
the  shrines,  and  twine  and  wreathe  them  all  around, 
so  that  the  Virgin  may  dwell  within  a  bower  of  per* 
petual  freshness ;  at  least  put  flower-pots,  with  living 
plants,  into  the  niche.  There  are  many  things  in  the 
customs  of  these  people  that  might  be  made  very  beau- 
tiful,  if  the  sense  of  beauty  were  as  nmch  alive  now  afl 
it  must  liave  I>een  when  these  customs  were  first  imag^ 
ined  and  adopted. 

I  must  not  forget,  among  these  little  descriptjrft 
items,  the  spectacle  of  women  and  girls  bearing  huge 
bundles  of  twigs  and  shrubs,  or  grass,  with  scarlet  pojv 
pies  and  blue  flowers  intcnnixed :  the  bundles  some- 
times so  huge  as  almost  to  hide  the  woman's  figure 
from  head  to  heel,  so  that  she  looked  like  a  locomo 
tive  mass  of  verdure  and  flowers ;  sometimes  reaching 
only  half-way  down  her  back,  so  aa  to  show  the  crooked 
knife  slung  behind,  with  which  she  had  been  reaping 
this  strange  harvest-sheaf.     A  Pre-Baphaelito  paiutei 


the 

I 


I 


J858.]  ITALY.  266 

—  the  one,  for  instance,  who  painted  the  heap  of  an- 
tomnal  leaves,  which  we  saw  at  the  Manchester  Exhi- 
bition—  would  find  an  admirable  subject  in  one  of 
these  girls,  stepping  with  a  free,  erect,  and  graceful 
carriage,  her  burden  on  her  head ;  and  the  miscellane- 
ous herbage  and  flowers  would  give  him  all  the  scope 
he  could  desire  for  minute  and  various  delineation  of 
nature. 

The  country  houses  which  we  passed  had  sometimes 
open  galleries,  or  arcades,  on  the  second  story  and 
above,  where  the  inhabitants  might  perform  their  do- 
mestic labor  in  the  shade  and  in  the  air.  The  houses 
were  often  ancient,  and  most  picturesquely  time- 
stained,  the  plaster  dropping  in  spots  from  the  old 
brickwork ;  others  were  tinted  of  pleasant  and  cheer- 
ful hues ;  some  were  frescoed  with  designs  in  ara- 
besques, or  with  imaginary  windows;  some  had  es- 
cutcheons of  arms  painted  on  the  front.  Wherever 
there  was  a  pigeon-house,  a  flight  of  doves  were  rep- 
resented as  flying  into  the  holes,  doubtless  for  the 
invitation  and  encouragement  of  the  real  birds. 

Once  or  twice  I  saw  a  bush  stuck  up  before  the 
door  of  what  seemed  to  be  a  wine-shop.  If  so,  it  is 
the  ancient  custom,  so  long  disused  in  England,  and 
alluded  to  in  the  proverb,  **6ood  wine  needs  no 
busL"  Several  times  we  saw  grass  spread  to  dry  on 
the  road,  covering  half  the  track,  and  concluded  it  to 
have  been  cut  by  the  roadside  for  the  winter  forage  of 
his  ass  by  some  poor  peasant,  or  peasant's  wife,  who 
had  no  grass  land,  except  the  margin  of  the  public 
way. 

A  beautiful  feature  of  the  scene  to-day,  as  the  pre- 
ceding day,  were  the  vines  growing  on  fig-trees  (7),^ 

^  This  interrogation-mark  miut  mean  that  Bir.  Hawthorne  was  nol 
lora  they  were  fig-treee. —  Ed. 


266   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [18i 

and  often  wreathed  io  rich  festoons  from  one  tree 
another,  by  and  by  to  be  liuiig  witli  clusters  of  purple 
grapes.  I  auspoct  the  vine  is  a  pleaaanter  object  of 
sight  under  thia  mode  of  eidtnre  than  it  can  be  in 
countries  where  it  produces  a  more  precious  wine,  and 
therefore  is  trained  more  artiticially.  Notluug  can  Iw 
more  picturesque  than  the  spectacle  of  an  old  grape- 
vine, with  almost  a  trunk  of  its  own,  clinging  round 
its  tree,  imprisoning  within  its  strong  embrace  tlie 
friend  that  supported  its  tender  infancy,  converting 
the  tree  wholly  to  its  own  selfish  ends,  as  seemingly 
flexible  natures  are  apt  to  do,  stretching  out  its  in- 
numerable arms  on  every  bough,  and  allowing  hardly 
a  leaf  to  sprout  except  its  own.  I  must  not  yet  quit 
this  hasty  sketch,  without  throwing  in,  both  in  tlie 
early  morning,  and  later  in  the  forenoon,  the  mist 
tliat  dreamed  among  the  hills,  and  which,  now  that 
I  have  called  it  mist,  I  feel  almust  mon:  inclined  to 
call  light,  being  so  quietly  cheerful  with  the  sunshine 
through  it.  Put  in,  now  and  then,  a  castle  on  a  hill- 
top ;  a  rough  ravine,  a  smiling  valley ;  a  mountain 
stream,  with  a  far  wider  bed  than  it  at  present  needs, 
and  a  stone  bridge  across  it,  with  ancient  and  massive 
arches,  —  and  I  shall  say  no  more,  except  that  all 
these  particulars,  and  many  better  ones  which  escape 
me,  made  up  a  very  pleasant  whole. 

At  about  noon  we  drove  into  the  village  of  Inciaai 
and  alighted  at  tlie  albergo  where  we  were  to  lunch. 
It  was  a  gloomy  old  house,  as  much  like  my  idea  of 
an  Etruscan  tomb  as  anj'thing  else  that  I  can  compare 
it  to.  We  pasHcd  bito  a  wide  and  lofty  entrance-hall, 
paved  witli  st*>ne,  and  vaulted  with  a  roof  of  intersect- 
ing arches,  supported  by  heavy  cohunns  of  stuccoed- 
brick,  the  whole  as  sombre  and  dingy  as  can  well  be> 


i 


can  well  be>  | 


1858.]  ITALY.  267 

This  entranoe-liall  is  not  merely  the  passageway  into 
the  inn,  but  is  likewise  the  carriage-house,  into  which 
our  yettura  is  wheeled  ;  and  it  has,  on  one  side,  the 
stable,  odorous  with  the  litter  of  horses  and  cattle, 
and  on  the  other  the  kitchen,  and  a  common  sitting- 
room.  A  narrow  stone  staircase  leads  from  it  to  the 
dining-room,  and  chambers  above,  which  are  paved 
with  brick,  and  adorned  with  rude  frescos  instead  of 
paper-hang^gs.  We  look  out  of  the  windows,  and 
step  into  a  little  iron-railed  balcony,  before  the  prin- 
cipal window,  and  observe  the  scene  in  the  village 
street.  The  street  is  narrow,  and  nothing  can  exceed 
the  tall,  grim  ugliness  of  the  village  houses,  many  of 
them  four  stories  high,  contiguous  all  along,  and  paved 
quite  across ;  so  that  nature  is  as  completely  shut  out 
Lm  the  precincts  of  this  little  town  as  from  the  heart 
of  the  widest  city.  The  walls  of  the  houses  are  plas- 
tered, gray,  dilapidated ;  the  windows  small,  some  of 
them  drearily-closed  with  wooden  shutters,  others  flung 
wide  open,  and  with  women's  heads  protruding;  others 
merely  frescoed,  for  a  show  of  light  and  air.  It  would 
be  a  hideous  street  to  look  at  in  a  rainy  day,  or  when 
no  human  life  pervaded  it.  Now  it  has  vivacity 
enough  to  keep  it  cheerful.  People  lounge  round  the 
door  of  the  albergo,  and  watch  the  horses  as  they 
drink  from  a  stone  trough,  which  is  built  against  the 
wall  of  the  house,  and  filled  with  the  unseen  gush  of 
a  spring. 

At  first  there  is  a  shade  entirely  across  the  street, 
and  all  the  within-doors  of  the  village  empties  itself 
there,  and  keeps  up  a  babblement  that  seems  quite 
iisproportioned  even  to  the  multitude  of  tongues  that 
make  it.  So  many  words  are  not  spoken  in  a  New 
England  village  in  a  whole  year  as  here  in  this  single 


268   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOORS.  [181 

day.  People  talk  about  nothing  as  if  they  were  tei 
lily  in  earnest,  and  laugh  at  nothing  as  if  it  were 
excellent  joke. 

An  the  hot  noon  sunshine  encroachea  on  our  side 
the  street,  it  grows  a  little  more  quiet.  The  lonngera 
now  confine  themselves  to  the  shady  murgin  (growing 
narrower  and  narrower)  of  the  other  side,  where,  di- 
rectly opposite  the  albergo,  there  are  two  caf^s  and  a 
wine-shop,  "  vendeta  di  pane,  vino,  ed  altri  generi," 
all  in  a  row  with  benches  before  them.  Tlie  bencherti 
joke  with  the  women  passing  by,  and  are  joked  with 
back  again.  The  sun  still  eats  away  the  shadow  inch 
by  inch,  beating  down  with  such  Intensity  that  finally 
everybody  disappears  except  a  few  passers  by. 

Doubtless  the  village  snatches  this  half-hour  for  its 
siesta.  There  is  a  song,  however,  inside  one  of  the 
CAfi?B,  with  a  burden  in  which  several  voices  join,  A 
gjrl  goes  through  the  street,  sheltered  under  her  great 
bundle  of  freshly  cut  grass.  By  and  by  the  song 
ceases,  and  two  young  peasants  come  out  of  the  caf< 
a  little  affected  by  liquor,  in  their  shirtr-slecves  andl 
bare  feet,  with  their  trousers  tucked  up.  They  resume 
their  song  in  the  street,  and  danoe  along, 
around  his  fellow's  neck,  his  own  waist  grasped  by  the 
other's  arm.  They  whirl  one  another  quite  roi 
about,  and  come  down  upon  their  feet.  Meeting 
village  maid  coming  quietly  along,  they  dance  up 
intercept  her  for  a  moment,  but  give  way  to  her 
briety  of  aspect.  They  pass  on,  and  the  shadow  soon 
begins  to  spread  from  one  side  of  the  street,  which 
presently  fills  again,  and  becomes  once  more,  for  iti 
size,  the  noisiest  place  I  ever  knew. 

We  had  quite  a  tolerable  dinner  at  this  ugly  ini^ 
■rhere  many  preceding  travellers  had  written  their 


'eat 

ime  ^^^ 
Lrm 
J  the 


1858.]  ITALY.  269 

oondemnatory  judgments,  as  well  as  a  few  their  favor- 
able ones,  in  pencil,  on  the  walls  of  the  dining-room. 

TO  FLORENCE. 

At  setting  off  [from  Incisa],  we  were  surrounded 
by  beggars  as  usual,  the  most  interesting  of  whom 
were  a  little  blind  boy  and  his  mother,  who  had  be- 
sieged us  with  gentle  pertinacity  during  our  whole 
stay  there.  There  was  likewise  a  man  with  a  maimed 
hand,  and  other  hurts  or  deformities ;  also,  an  old  wo- 
man who,  I  suspect,  only  pretended  to  be  blind,  keep- 
ing  her  eyes  ti^y  BqueLd  together,  but  di^cti.^ 
her  hand  very  accurately  where  the  copper  shower 
was  expected  to  f alL  Besides  these,  there  were  a 
good  many  sturdy  little  rascals,  vociferating  in  pro- 
portion as  they  needed  nothing.  It  was  touching, 
however,  to  see  several  persons  —  themselves  beggars 
for  aught  I  know  —  assisting  to  hold  up  the  little 
blind  boy's  tremulous  hand,  so  that  he,  at  all  events, 
might  not  lack  the  pittance  which  we  had  to  give. 
Our  dole  was  but  a  poor  one,  after  all,  consisting  of 
what  Roman  coppers  we  had  brought  into  Tuscany 
with  us ;  and  as  we  drove  off,  some  of  the  boys  ran 
shouting  and  whining  after  us  in  the  hot  sunshine,  nor 
stopped  till  we  reached  the  siunmit  of  the  hill,  which 
rises  immediately  from  the  village  street.  We  heard 
Graetano  once  say  a  good  thing  to  a  swarm  of  beggar^ 
children,  who  were  infesting  us,  ^^  Are  your  fathers  all 
dead?"  —  a  proverbial  expression,  I  suppose.  The 
pertinacity  of  beggars  does  not,  I  think,  excite  the  in- 
dignation of  an  Italian,  as  it  is  apt  to  do  that  of  Eng- 
lishmen or  Americans.  The  Italians  probably  sym- 
pathize more,  though  they  give  less.  Graetano  is  very 
gentle  in  his  modes  of  repelling  them,  and,  indeedi 


270   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [I8Sa.| 

never  interferes  at  all,  as  long  as  there  is  a  pros] 
of  their  getting  anything. 

Immediately  after  leaving  Inciaa,  we  saw  the  A 
already  a  considerable  river,  rushing  between  di 
banks,  with  the  greenish  hue  of  a  duck-pond  di'  ' 
through  its  water.  Nevertheless,  tliough  the  first  ii 
pression  was  not  altogether  agreeable,  we  soon  became 
reconciled  to  this  hue,  and  ceased  to  think  it  an  in- 
dication of  impurity ;  for,  in  spite  of  it,  the  river  is 
still,  to  a  certain  degree,  transparent,  and  is,  at  any 
rate,  a  mountain  -  stream,  and  cumea  uncontaminated 
from  its  source.  The  pure,  transparent  brown  of  the 
New  England  rivers  is  the  most  beautiful  color ;  but 
I  am  content  tliat  it  should  be  peculiar  to  them. 

Our  afternoon's  drive  was  through  scenery  less  strik- 
ing than  some  which  we  had  traversed,  but  still  pict- 
uresque and  beautiful.  We  saw  deep  valleys  and 
ravines,  with  streams  at  the  bottom ;  long.  woo«lcd 
hill-sides,  rising  far  and  high,  and  dotted  with  white 
dwellings,  well  towards  the  summits.  By  and  by,  we 
had  a  distant  glimpse  of  Florence,  showing  its  great 
dome  and  some  of  its  towers  out  of  a  sidelong  valley, 
as  if  we  were  between  two  great  waves  of  the  tumul- 
tuous sea  of  hills ;  while,  far  beyond,  rose  in  the  dis- 
tance the  blue  peaks  of  three  or  four  of  the  ApeD- 
nines,  just  on  the  remote  horizon.  There  lieing 
haziness  in  the  atmosphere,  however.  Florence  was  lifr 
tie  more  distinct  to  us  than  the  Celestial  City  waa  to| 
Christian  and  Hopeful,  when  they  spied  at  it  from  thfl, 
Delectable  Mountains. 

Keeping  steadfastly  onward,  we  ascended  a  winding 
roaJ,  and  passed  a  grand  villa,  standing  very  high, 
and  surrounded  with  extensive  grounds.  It  must  be 
the  residence  of   some  great  noble ;   and  it  has  aa 


s- 
>e 


1858.]  ITALY.  271 

avenue  of  poplars  or  aspens,  very  light  and  gay,  and 
fit  for  the  passage  of  the  bridal  procession,  when  the 
proprietor  or  his  heir  brings  home  his  bride ;  while,  in 
another  direction  from  the  same  front  of  the  palace, 
stretches  an  avenue  or  grove  of  cypresses,  very  long^ 
and  exceedingly  black  and  dismal,  like  a  train  of  gi 
gantic  mourners.  I  have  seen  few  things  more  strik- 
ing, in  the  way  of  trees,  than  this  grove  of  cypresses. 

From  this  point  we  descended,  and  drove  along  an 
ugly,  dusty  avenue,  with  a  high  brick -wall  on  one 
side  or  both,  till  we  reached  the  gate  of  Florence,  into 
which  we  were  admitted  with  as  little  trouble  as  cus- 
tom house  officers,  soldiers,  and  policemen  can  possi- 
bly give.  They  did  not  examine  our  luggage,  and 
even  declined  a  fee,  as  we  had  already  paid  one  at  the 
frontier  custom  house.  Thank  Heaven,  and  the  Grrand 
Duke! 

As  we  hoped  that  the  Casa  del  Bello  had  been 
taken  for  us,  we  drove  thither  in  the  first  place,  but 
found  that  the  bargain  had  not  been  concluded.  As 
the  house  and  studio  of  Mr.  Powers  were  just  on  the 
opposite  side  of  the  street,  I  went  to  it,  but  found  him 
too  much  engrossed  to  see  me  at  the  moment ;  so  I  re- 
turned to  the  vettura,  and  we  told  Gaetano  to  carry 
us  to  a  hotel.  He  established  us  at  the  Albergo  della 
Fontana,  a  good  and  comfortable  house.  .  .  .  Mr. 
Powers  called  in  the  evening,  —  a  plain  personage, 
characterized  by  strong  simpUcity  and  warm  kindli- 
ness, with  an  impending  brow,  and  large  eyes,  which 
kindle  as  he  speaks.  He  is  gray,  and  slightly  bald, 
but  does  not  seem  elderly,  nor  past  his  prime.  I  ac- 
cept him  at  once  as  an  honest  and  trustworthy  man^ 
and  shall  not  vary  from  this  judgment.  Through  his 
good  offices,  the  next  day,  we  engaged  the  Casa  del 


2|2   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS,   [181 

Bello,  at  a  rent  of  fifty  dollars  a  moDth,  and  I  shall' 
take  another  opportunity  (my  fingers  and  head  being 
tired  now)  to  write  about  tlie  house,  and  Mr.  Powitb, 
and  what  ap{K:rtains  to  him,  and  about  the  beautiful 
city  of  FlorencD.  At  present,  I  shall  only  say  furtlier, 
that  this  jountpy  from  Rome  has  been  ooe  of  the 
hi-igiiteHt  and  most  uncareful  interludes  of  my  life  i 
we  have  all  enjoyed  it  extMsedingly,  and  I  oui  liapfiy  i 
that  our  children  have  it  to  look  back  uiKin.  ] 

June  ith.  —  At  our  visit  to  Powers's  studio  on  Tues- 
day, we  saw  a  marblo  copy  of  tlie  fisher-boy  holding 
a  shell  to  his  cat,  and  the  bust  of  Proserpine,  and  two 
or  three  other  ideal  busts ;  various  casts  of  most  of  the 
ideal  statues  and  portrait  busts  whieb  he  has  executed. 
He  talks  very  freely  about  his  works,  and  is  no  excep- 
tion to  the  role  that  an  artist  is  not  apt  to  speak  in  a 
very  laudatory  style  of  a  brother  artist.  He  showed 
us  a  bust  of  Mr.  Sparks,  by  Persico,  —  a  lifeless  and 
thoughtless  thing  enough,  to  be  sure,  —  and  compared 
it  with  a  very  good  one  of  the  same  gentleman  by 
himself ;  but  his  chiefest  scorn  was  bestowed  on  a 
wretched  and  ridicidous  image  of  Mr.  King,  of  Ala- 
bama, by  Clarke  Mills,  of  which  he  said  he  had  been 
employe<l  to  make  several  copies  for  Southern  gentle- 
men. The  consciousness  of  power  is  plainly  to  bo  < 
seen,  and  the  aflsertion  of  it  by  no  means  withheld,  in  ' 
his  simple  and  natural  character ;  nor  does  it  give  me 
an  idea  of  vanity  on  bis  part  to  see  and  hear  it.  He 
appears  to  consider  himself  neglected  by  his  country, 
—  by  the  government  of  it,  at  least,  —  and  talks  with 
indignation  of  the  byways  and  political  intrigue  which, 
he  thinks,  win  tlie  rewards  tluit  ought  to  be  bestowed 
exclusively  on  merit.    An  appropriation  of  twenty-fivs 


J 


1868.]  ITALY.  278 

tfaonsand  dollars  was  made,  some  years  ago,  for  a  work 
of  sculpture  by  him,  to  be  placed  in  the  Capitol ;  but 
the  intermediate  measures  necessary  to  render  it  ef- 
fective have  been  delayed  ;  while  the  above-mentioned 
Clarke  Mills — certainly  the  greatest  bungler  that  ever 
botched  a  block  of  marble  —  has  received  an  order  for 
an  equestrian  statue  of  Washington.  Not  that  Mr, 
Powers  is  made  bitter  or  sour  by  these  wrongs,  as  he 
considers  them  ;  he  talks  of  them  with  the  frankness 
of  his  disposition  when  the  topic  comes  in  his  way, 
and  is  pleasant,  kindly,  and  sunny  when  he  has  done 
with  it. 

EKs  long  absence  from  our  coimtry  has  made  him 
think  worse  of  us  than  we  deserve ;  and  it  is  an  effect 
of  what  I  myself  am  sensible,  in  my  shorter  exile:  the 
most  piercing  shriek,  the  wildest  yell,  and  all  the  ugly 
soimds  of  popular  turmoil,  inseparable  from  the  life  of 
a  republic,  being  a  million  times  more  audible  than 
the  peaceful  hum  of  prosperity  and  content  which  is 
going  on  all  the  while. 

He  talks  of  going  home,  but  says  that  he  has  been 
talking  of  it  every  year  since  he  first  came  to  Italy ; 
and  between  his  pleasant  life  of  congenial  labor,  and 
his  idea  of  moral  deterioration  in  America,  I  think  it 
doubtful  whether  he  ever  crosses  the  sea  again.  Like 
most  exiles  of  twenty  years,  he  has  lost  his  native 
country  without  finding  another;  but  then  it  is  as 
well  to  recognize  the  truth,  —  that  an  individual  coun- 
try is  by  no  means  essential  to  one's  comfort. 

Powers  took  us  into  tne  farthest  room,  I  believe,  of 
his  very  extensive  studio,  and  showed  us  a  statue  of 
Washington  that  has  much  dignity  and  stateliness. 
He  expressed,  however,  great  contempt  for  the  coat 
and  breeches,  and  masonic  emblems,  in  which  he  had 

VOL.  X.  is 


274   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [IM 

been  required  to  drape  the  figTire.  What  would  he  ' 
do  with  Washington,  the  most  decorous  and  renpecta^ 
tie  personage  that  ever  went  ceremoniously  throiigh 
the  realities  of  life  ?  Did  anybody  ever  see  Waj*l»iiig- 
ton  nude?  It  is  im^onceivalile.  He  had  no  nukeilness, 
hut  I  imagine  he  wajt  born  with  his  clothes  on,  and  his 
liair  powdered,  and  made  a  stately  bow  on  his  fu^t  ap* 
pearance  in  the  world.  His  costume,  at  all  event 
was  a  part  of  his  character,  and  must  be  dealt  with 
whatever  sculptor  undertakes  lo  represent  him.  I  won- 
der that  so  very  sensible  a  man  aa  Powers  should  not 
see  the  necessity  of  a'lcepting  drapery,  and  the  very 
drapery  of  the  day,  if  he  will  keep  his  art  alive.  It  U 
his  business  to  idealize  the  tailor's  actual  work.  Bat- 
he seems  to  be  especially  fond  of  nudi^,  none  of  toS'i 
ideal  statues,  so  far  as  I  know  them,  having  so  much 
as  a  rag  of  clothes.  His  statue  of  California,  lately 
finished,  and  as  naked  as  Venus,  seemed  to  me  a  very 
good  work ;  not  an  actual  woman,  capable  of  exciting 
passion,  but  evidently  a  little  out  of  the  category  of 
human  nature.  In  one  hand  she  holds  a  divining 
rod.  "  She  says  to  the  emigrants,"  oViscrved  Powers, 
"'Here  is  the  gold,  if  you  choose  to  take  it.'"  But  i] 
her  face,  and  in  her  eyes,  veiy  finely  expressed,  then 
is  a  look  of  latent  mbchief,  rather  grave  than  playful, 
yet  somewhat  impish  or  sprite-like ;  and,  in  the  other 
hand,  behind  her  back,  she  holds  a  bunch  of  thorns. 
Powers  calls  her  eyes  Indian.  The  statue  is  tnie  to 
the  present  fact  anil  history  of  California,  and  ia> 
eludes  the  age-long  truth  as  respects  the  "  auri  saon 
fames."  .  .   , 

When  we  had  looked  sufficiently  at  the  sculpture, 
Powers  proposed  that  we  should  now  go  acro.ss  the 
Itreet  and  see  the  Casa  del  BcJlo.    We  did  so  in  a 


ii 
I 

i 
I 


ia68.]  ITALY.  275 

body,  Powers  in  his  dressing-gown  and  slippers,  and 
his  wife  and  daughters  without  assuming  any  street 
costume. 

The  Casa  del  Bello  is  a  palace  of  three  pianos,  the 
topmost  of  which  is  occupied  by  the  Coimtess  of  St. 
George,  an  English  lady,  and  two  lower  pianos  are  to 
be  let,  and  we  looked  at  both.  The  upper  one  would 
have  suited  me  well  enough ;  but  the  lower  has  a  ter- 
race, with  a  rustic  summer-house  over  it,  and  is  con- 
nected with  a  garden,  where  there  are  arbors  and  a 
willow-tree,  and  a  little  wilderness  of  shrubbery  and 
roses,  with  a  fountain  in  the  midst.  It  has  likevdse 
an  immense  suite  of  rooms,  round  the  four  sides  of  a 
small  court,  spacious,  lofty,  with  frescoed  ceilings  and 
rich  hangings,  and  abundantly  furnished  with  arm- 
chairs, sofas,  marble  tables,  and  great  looking-glasses. 
Not  that  these  last  are  a  great  temptation,  but  in  our 
wandering  life  I  wished  to  be  perfectly  comfortable 
myself,  and  to  make  my  family  so,  for  just  this  sum- 
mer, and  so  I  have  taken  the  lower  piano,  the  price 
being  only  fifty  dollars  per  month  (entirely  furnished, 
even  to  silver  and  linen).  Certainly  this  is  some- 
thing like  the  paradise  of  cheapness  we  were  told  of, 
and  which  we  vainly  sought  in  Rome.  .  .  . 

To  me  has  been  assigned  the  pleasantest  room  for 
my  study ;  and  when  I  like  I  can  overflow  into  the 
summer-house  or  an  arbor,  and  sit  there  dreaming  of 
a  story.  The  weather  is  delightful,  too  warm  to  walk, 
but  perfectly  fit  to  do  nothing  in,  in  the  coolness  of 
these  great  rooms.  Every  day  I  shall  write  a  little, 
perhaps,  —  and  probably  take  a  brief  nap  somewhere 
between  breakfast  and  tea,  —  but  go  to  see  pictures 
and  statues  occasionally,  and  so  assuage  and  mollify 
myself  a  little  after  that  uncongenial  life  of  the  con- 


276    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [11 

Hulate,  and  before  going  back  to  my  own  hard  ani 
dusty  New  England. 

Ait«r  concluding  tlra  arrangement  for  the  Casa  del 
Bello,  we  stood  talking  a  little  while  with  Powiirs  and 
his  wife  and  daughter  before  the  <loor  of  the  house, 
for  they  seem  so  far  to  have  adopted  the  habits  of 
the  dorentines  as  tu  feol  themselves  at  home  on  the 
shady  side  of  the  street.  The  out-of-door  life  and  free 
oommuni cation  with  the  pavement,  habitual  apparently 
among  the  middle  classes,  reminds  me  of  the  plays  of 
Molidre  and  other  old  dramatists,  in  which  the  street; 
or  the  square  becomes  a  sort  of  common  parlor,  when 
most  of  the  talk  and  scenic  business  of  the  people 
carried  on, 

June  Htk.  ~~  For  two  or  three  mornings  after  bre 
fast  I  have  rambled  a  little  altout  the  city  till  thttfl 
sha«le  grew  narrow  Wntfath  tlte  walls  of  tbo  bouui,I 
and  the  heat  ma<le  it  unoomfortahle  to  be  in  motioD. 
To-day  I  went  over  the  Ponte  Carraja,  and  thence 
into  and  through  the  heart  of  the  city,  looking  into 
several  churches,  in  all  of  which  I  found  people  tak* 
ing  advantage  of  the  cool  breadth  of  these  sacred  ia»^ 
tenors  to  refresh  themselves  and  say  their  prayerSifl 
Florence  at  first  struck  me  as  having  the  aspect  of  I 
a  very  new  city  in  comparison  with  Rome;   but,  on 
closer  aequaintance,  I  iind  that  many  of  the  buildings 
are  antique  and  massive,  though  still  the  clear  atmos- 
phere, the  bright  sunshine,  the  light,  cheerful  hues  of 
the  stucco,  and  —  as  much  as  anything  else,  perhaps 
— 'the   vivacious  character  of  the  human  life   in  the 
streets,  take  away  the  sense  of  its  being  au  ancient 
city.     The  streets  are  delightful  to  walk  in  after  so 
many  penitential   pilgrimages  as   I  have  raa4e  over  , 


J 


1868.]  ITALY.  277 

those  little  square,  uneTen  blocks  of  the  Roman  pave- 
ment, which  wear  out  the  boots  and  torment  the  souL 
I  absolutely  walk  on  the  smooth  flags  of  Florence  for 
the  mere  pleasure  of  walking,  and  live  in  its  atmos- 
phere for  die  mere  pleasure  of  living ;  and,  warm  as 
the  weather  is  getting  to  be,  I  never  feel  that  inolina* 
tion  to  sink  down  in  a  heap  and  never  stir  again, 
which  was  my  dull  torment  and  misery  as  long  as  I 
stayed  in  Rome.  I  hardly  think  there  can  be  a  place 
in  the  world  where  life  is  more  deUdous  for  its  own 
simple  sake  than  here. 

I  went  to^y  into  the  Baptistery,  which  stands  near 
the  Duomo,  and,  like  that,  is  covered  externally  with 
slabs  of  black  and  white  marble,  now  grown  brown 
and  yellow  with  age.  The  edifice  is  octagonal,  and  on 
entering,  one  immediately  thinks  of  the  Pantheon,  — 
the  whole  space  within  being  free  from  side  to  side, 
with  a  dome  above ;  but  it  differs  from  the  severe  sim- 
plicity of  the  former  edifice,  being  elaborately  orna- 
mented with  marble  and  frescos,  and  lacking  that 
great  eye  in  the  roof  that  looks  so  nobly  and  rever- 
ently heavenward  from  the  Pantheon.  I  did  little 
more  than  pass  through  the  Baptistery,  glancing  at  the 
famous  bronze  doors,  some  perfect  and  admirable  casts 
of  which  I  had  already  seen  at  the  Crystal  Palace. 

The  entrance  of  the  Duomo  being  just  across  the 
piazza,  I  went  in  there  after  leaving  the  Baptistery, 
and  was  struck  anew — for  this  is  the  third  or  fourth 
visit  —  with  the  dim  grandeur  of  the  interior,  lighted 
as  it  is  ahnost  exclusively  by  painted  windows,  which 
seem  to  me  worth  all  the  vari^ated  marbles  and  rich 
cabinet  -  work  of  St.  Peter's.  The  Florentine  Cathe- 
dral has  a  spacious  and  lofty  nave,  and  side-aisles 
divided  from  it  by  pillars;  but  there  are  no  chapels 


278  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTK-TIOOKS.   [181 

idong  the  mles,  so  tliat  there  U  far  more  breadtli 
fret><loin  of  Interior,  in  proportion  ki  thL>  aotual  space, 
than  is  usual  in  churchta.  It  in  woful  to  think  how 
the  vast  capaciousness  within  St.  Peter's  is  thrown 
away,  ami  made  to  seem  smaller  than  it  ia  by  every 
possible  ilevice,  as  if  on  purpose.  The  pillars  and 
walls  of  this  Duonio  are  of  a  uniform  brownish,  neu- 
tral tint ;  tlie  pavement,  a  mosaic  work  of  marble ; 
the  ceiling  of  the  dome  itself  is  covered  with  frescos, 
which,  being  very  imperfectly  lighted,  it  is  impossible 
to  trace  out.  Indeed,  it  is  but  a  twilight  region  that 
is  enclosed  within  the  firmament  of  this  great  dome, 
which  is  actually  larger  than  that  of  St.  Peter's,  tliough 
not  Lifted  so  high  from  the  pavement.  But  looking  at 
the  pauited  windows,  I  little  cared  wliat  dimness  there 
might  be  elsewhere ;  for  L^ertainly  the  art  of  man  has 
never  contrived  any  other  beauty  and  glory  at  all  to 
be  compared  to  this. 

The  dome  sits,  as  it  were,  upon  three  smaller  domee, 
—  smaller,  but  still  great,  —  beneath  which  are  three 
vast  niches,  forming  the  transepts  of  the  Cathedral 
and  the  tribune  behind  the  high  altar.  All  round 
these  hoUow,  dome-covered  arnhes  or  niches,  are  high 
and  nan-ow  windows  crowded  with  saints,  angels,  and 
all  manner  of  blessed  shapes,  that  turn  the  oommon 
daylight  into  a  miracle  of  richness  and  splendor  as  it 
passes  tlirough  their  heavenly  substance.  And  just 
beneath  the  swell  of  the  great  central  dome  is  a  wreath 
of  circular  windows  quit«  round  it,  as  brilliant  an  the 
tall  and  narrow  ones  below.  It  is  a  pity  anybody 
should  die  without  se«ing  an  antique  painted  window, 
with  the  bright  Italian  sunshine  glowing  through  it. 
This  is  "  the  dim,  religious  light "  that  Milton  speake 
if  i  but  I  doubt  whether  ho  saw  these  windows  when 


::* 


1858.]  ITALY.  279 

he  was  in  Italy,  or  any  but  those  faded  or  dusiy  and 
dingy  ones  of  the  English  cathedrals,  else  he  would 
have  illuminated  that  word  ^^dim"  with  some  epithet 
that  should  not  chase  away  the  dimness,  yet  should 
make  it  shine  like  a  million  of  rubies,  sapphires,  emer- 
alds, and  topazes, — bright  in  themselves,  but  dim  with 
tenderness  and  reverence,  because  Grod  himself  was 
shining  through  them.     I  hate  what  I  have  said. 

All  the  time  that  I  was  in  the  Cathedral  the  space 
around  the  high  altar,  which  stands  exactly  under  the 
dome,  was  occupied  by  priests  or  acolytes  in  white  gar- 
ments,  chanting  a  religious  service. 

After  coming  out,  I  took  a  view  of  the  edifice  from 
a  comer  of  the  street  nearest  to  the  dome,  where  it 
and  the  smaller  domes  can  be  seen  at  once.  It  is 
greatly  more  satisfactory  than  St.  Peter's  in  any  view 
I  ever  had  of  it,  —  striking  in  its  outline,  with  a  mys- 
tery,  yet  not  a  bewUderment,  in  its  niasses  and  curves 
and  angles,  and  wrought  out  with  a  richness  of  detail 
that  gives  the  eyes  new  arches,  new  galleries,  new 
niches,  new  pinnacles,  new  beauties,  great  and  small, 
to  play  with  when  wearied  with  the  vast  whole.  The 
hue,  black  and  white  marbles,  like  the  Baptistery, 
turned  also  yellow  and  brown,  is  greatly  preferable  to 
the  bujff  travertine  of  St.  Peter's. 

From  the  Duomo  it  is  but  a  moderate  street's 
length  to  the  Piazza  del  Gran  Duca,  the  principal 
square  of  Florence.  It  is  a  very  interesting  pla^, 
and  has  on  one  side  the  old  Governmental  Palace,  — 
the  Palazzo  Vecchio,  —  where  many  scenes  of  historic 
interest  have  been  enacted  ;  for  example,  conspirators 
have  been  hanged  from  its  windows,  or  precipitated 
from  them  upon  the  pavement  of  the  square  below. 

It  is  a  pity  that  we  cannot  take  as  much  interest 


280   FRENCH  AND   ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS,  []SS| 

in  the  history  of  tliese  Italian  Repnbtics 
England,  for  the  former  is  much  the  more  picturesqua 
and  fuller  of  curious  incident.  The  sobriety  of  tlie 
Anglo  -  Saxon  race  —  in  connection,  too,  with  their 
moral  sense  —  keeps  them  from  doing  a  great  many  • 
things  that  would  enliven  the  page  of  history ;  and  i 
their  events  seem  to  eome  in  great  masses,  shox-ed 
along  by  the  agency  of  many  persons,  rather  than  to 
result  from  individual  will  and  charaeter.  A  hundred 
plots  for  a  tragedy  might  be  found  in  Florentine  his- 
tory for  one  in  English. 

At  one  corner  uf  the  Palazzo  Vecchio  is  a  bronze 
equestrian  statue  of  Cosmo  di  Medici,  the  first  Grand 
Duke,  very  stately  and  majestic ;  there  are  other  maN 
ble  statues  —  one  of  David,  by  Michel  Augelo  —  at 
each  side  of  the  palace  door  ;  and  entering  the  court 
I  foimd  a  rich  antique  arcade  within,  surrounded  by 
marble  pillars,  moat  eIal>onit«ly  carved,  supporting 
arches  that  were  covered  with  faded  frescos.  I  went 
no  farther,  but  steppetl  across  a  little  space  of  the 
st^uare  to  the  Loggia  di  Lanzi,  which  is  broad  and 
noble,  of  three  vast  arches,  at  the  end  of  which,  1  take 
it,  is  a  part  of  the  Palazzo  USizi  fronting  on  the 
])iazza.  I  should  call  it  a  portico  if  it  stood  before 
tile  palace  do<ir:  but  it  seems  to  have  been  constructed 
merely  for  itself,  and  as  a  shelter  for  the  people  from 
BUD  and  rain,  and  to  contain  some  fine  specimens  of 
sculpture,  as  well  antique  as  of  more  modem  times, 
Benvenuto  Cellini's  Perseus  stands  here ;  but  it  dlc^' 
not  strike  me  so  much  as  the  cast  of  it  in  the  Ciysti 
Palace. 

A  goo<l  many  people  were  under  these  great  archep; 
some  of  whom  were  re/^lining,  half  or  quite  asleep,  on 
tlie  marble  seats  that  are  built  against  the  back  of  the 


mes. I 

di<^H 
,st^ 

OD 

the  I 


1858.J  ITALY.  281 

loggia.  A  group  was  reading  an  edict  of  the  Grand 
Duke,  which  appeared  to  have  been  just  posted  on  a 
board,  at  the  farther  end  of  it ;  and  I  was  surprised 
at  the  interest  which  they  ventured  to  manifest,  and 
the  freedom  with  which  they  seemed  to  discuss  it.  A 
soldier  was  on  guard,  and  doubtless  there  were  spies 
enough  to  carry  every  word  that  was  said  to  the  ear  of 
absolute  authority.  Glancing  myself  at  the  edict,  how- 
ever, I  found  it  referred  only  to  the  furtherance  of  a 
project,  got  up  among  the  citizens  themselves,  for  bring- 
ing  water  into  the  city ;  and  on  such  topics,  I  suppose, 
there  is  freedom  of  discussion. 

June  1th.  —  Saturday  evening  we  walked,  with 
U and  J ,  into  the  city,  and  looked  at  the  ex- 
terior of  the  Duomo  with  new  admiration.  Since  my 
former  view  of  it,  I  have  noticed  —  which,  strangely 
enough,  did  not  strike  me  before  —  that  the  f a9ade  is 
but  a  great,  bare,  ugly  space,  roughly  plastered  over, 
with  the  brickwork  peeping  through  it  in  spots,  and  a 
faint,  almost  invisible  fresco  of  colors  upon  it.  This 
front  was  once  nearly  finished  with  an  incrustation  of 
black  and  white  marble,  like  the  rest  of  the  edifice ; 
but  one  of  the  city  magistrates,  Benedetto  Uguacione, 
demolished  it  three  hundred  years  ago,  with  the  idea 
of  building  it  again  in  better  style.  He  failed  to  do 
so,  and  ever  since  the  magnificence  of  the  great  church 
has  been  marred  by  this  unsightly  roughness  of  what 
should  have  been  its  richest  part ;  nor  is  there,  I  sup- 
^^ose,  any  hope  that  it  will  ever  be  finished  now. 

The  campanile,  or  beU- tower,  stands  within  a  few 
paces  of  the  Cathedral,  but  entirely  disconnected  from 
it,  rising  to  a  height  of  nearly  three  hundred  feet,  a 
tquare  tower  of  light  marbles,  now  discolored  by  tima 


282  FRENCIT  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [II 

It  IB  impossible  to  give  an  idea  of  tlie  ricbneiM  of  efff 
produced  by  its  elalKirute  fiuisli ;  the  whule  siirfuee  of 
the  four  sides,  from  top  to  bottom,  being  diKK>rat«d  with 
all  manner  of  statui'sque  and  architectural  sculpture. 
It  is  like  a  toy  of  ivory,  which  some  ingenious  and 
pinus  monk  might  have  spent  his  lifetime  in  adorning 
vrith  scriptural  designs  and  figures  of  saints;  and  when 
it  was  finished,  seeing  it  bo  boautifiil,  he  prayed  that  it 
might  be  miraculously  magnified  from  the  sise  of  one 
foot  to  that  of  three  hundred.  This  idea  somewhat 
satisfiea  me,  aa  conveying  an  impressioQ  how  gigao- 
tesque  the  oampanile  is  in  its  mass  and  height,  and 
how  minute  and  varied  in  its  detail.  Surely  these 
niediteval  workB  have  an  advantt^  over  the  claasio. 
Tliey  combine  the  tilescope  and  the  microsoope. 

The  city  was  all  alive  in  the  summer  evening,  and 
the  streets  humming  with  voices.  Before  the  doora 
of  tJie  oaf^s  were  tables,  at  which  people  were  taking 
refreshment,  and  it  went  to  my  heart  to  see  a  bottle 
of  English  ale,  some  of  which  was  poure^i  foaming 
into  a  glass ;  at  least  it  had  exactly  the  amber  hue 
and  the  foam  of  English  bitter  ale ;  but  perhaps  it 
may  have  been  merely  a  Florentine  imitation. 

As  we  returned  home  over  the  Amo,  crossing  the 
Ponte  di  Santa  Trinita,  we  were  struck  by  the  beau- 
tiful scene  of  the  broad,  calm  river,  with  the  palaces 
along  ita  shores  repeated  in  it,  on  citlier  side,  and  the 
neighboring  bridges,  too,  jiLtt  ns  perfect  in  tlie  tide 
beneath  as  in  the  air  above,  —  a  city  of  dream  and 
shallow  so  close  to  the  actual  one.  God  has  a  meai^ 
ing,  no  doubt,  in  putting  this  spiritual  symbol  eontin> 
ually  beside  us. 

Along  the  river,  on  both  sides,  as  far  as  we  could 
Bee,  there  was  a  row  of  brilliant  lamps,  which,  in  tht 


1858.]  ITALY.  283 

far  distance,  looked  like  a  cornice  of  golden  light; 
and  this  also  shone  as  brightly  in  the  river's  depths. 
The  hues  of  the  evening,  in  the  quarter  where  the  sun 
had  gone  down,  were  very  soft  and  beautiful,  though 
not  so  gorgeous  as  thousands  that  I  have  seen  in 
America.  But  I  believe  I  must  fairly  confess  that 
the  Italian  sky,  in  the  daytime,  is  bluer  and  brighter 
than  our  own,  and  that  the  atmosphere  has  a  quality 
of  showing  objects  to. better  advantage.  It  is  more 
than  mere  daylight;  the  magic  of  moonlight  is  some- 
how mixed  up  with  it,  although  it  is  so  trans{)arent  a 
medium  of  light. 

Last  evening,  Mr.  Powers  called  to  see  us,  and  sat 
down  to  talk  in  a  friendly  and  familiar  way.  I  do 
not  know  a  man  of  more  facile  intercourse,  nor  with 
whom  one  so  easily  gets  rid  of  ceremony.  His  con- 
versation, too,  is  interesting.  He  talked,  to  begin  with, 
about  Italian  food,  as  poultry,  mutton,  beef,  and  their 
lack  of  savoriness  as  compared  with  our  own ;  and 
mentioned  an  exquisite  dish  of  vegetables  which  they 
prepare  from  squash  or  pumpkin  blossoms ;  likewise 
another  dish,  which  it  will  be  well  for  us  to  remember 
when  we  get  back  to  the  Wayside,  where  we  are  over- 
run with  acacias.  It  consists  of  the  acacia-blossoms 
in  a  certain  stage  of  their  development  fried  in  olive- 
oiL  I  shall  get  the  receipt  from  Mrs.  Powers,  and 
mean  to  deserve  well  of  my  country  by  first  trying  it, 
and  then  making  it  known;  only  I  doubt  whether 
American  lard,  or  even  butter,  will  produce  the  dish 
quite  so  delicately  as  fresh  Florence  oil. 

Meanwhile,  I  like  Powers  all  the  better,  because  he 
does  not  put  his  life  wholly  into  marble.  We  had 
much  talk,  nevertheless,  on  matters  of  sculpture,  for 
be  drank  a  cup  of  tea  with  us,  and  stayed  a  good 
while. 


284    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185( 

He  passed  a  condemnatory  sentence  on  classic  bustr 
in  general,  saying  that  they  were  conventional,  and 
not  ti)  be  depended  upon  as  true  representatiuns  of  the 
persons.  He  particularly  excepted  none  but  tlie  bust 
of  Canu^aUa;  and,  indeed,  everybody  that  has 
this  bust  must  feel  the  justice  of  the  exception,  and^ 
so  be  the  more  inclined  to  accept  his  opinion  about 
tlie  rest.  There  are  not  more  than  half  a  dozen  — 
that  of  Cato  the  Censor  among  the  others  —  in  r^ard 
to  wliieh  I  should  like  to  aak  his  judgment  iodividu- 
ally.  He  seems  to  think  the  faculty  of  making  a  buat 
an  extremely  rare  one.  Canova  put  his  ou'n  likeness 
into  all  the  busts  he  made.  Grcenough  cxjuld  not 
make  a  good  one  ;  nor  Crawford,  nor  Gibson.  Mtt 
Hart,  he  observed, — an  American  sculptor,  now 
resident  in  Florence,  —  is  the  best  man  of  the  day  f< 
making  busts.  Of  course,  it  is  to  be  presmned  that 
he  excepts  himself;  but  I  would  not  do  Powers  thftl 
great  injustice  to  imply  that  there  is  tlie  slightest  pi 
fessional  jealousy  in  his  estimate  of  wlmt  others  havfi 
done,  or  are  now  doing,  in  his  own  art.  If  he  saw  a' 
better  man  than  himself,  he  would  recognize  him  at 
onc«,  and  tell  the  world  of  him ;  but  he  knows  well 
enough  that,  in  this  line,  there  is  no  better,  and  prob- 
ably none  so  good.  It  would  not  accord  with  the  sim- 
plici^  of  hia  dmracter  to  blink  a  fact  that  stands  aa' 
broadly  before  him.  ' 

We  asked  him  what  he  thought  of  Mr.  Gibson'* 
practice  of  coloring  hia  statues,  and  he  quietly  and 
filyly  said  that  he  himself  had  made  wax  figures  in 
his  earlier  days,  but  had  left  off  making  them  now. 
In  short,  he  objected  to  the  practice  wholly,  and  said 
that  a  letter  of  hia  on  the  subject  had  I>een  published 
in  the  London  "  Athenieum,"  and  had  gi^*en  great 


-4 


eat  ^^ 


1858.]  ITALY.  285 

offence  to  some  of  Mr.  Gibson's  friends.  It  appeared 
to  me,  however,  that  his  arguments  did  not  apply 
quite  fairly  to  the  case,  for  he  seems  to  think  Gibson 
aims  at  producing  an  illusion  of  life  in  the  statue, 
whereas  I  think  his  object  is  merely  to  give  warmth 
and  softness  to  the  snowy  marble,  and  so  bring  it 
a  little  nearer  to  our  hearts  and  sympathies.  Even 
so  far,  nevertheless,  I  doubt  whether  the  practice  is 
defensible,  and  I  was  glad  to  see  that  Powers  scorned, 
at  all  events,  the  argument  drawn  from  the  use  of 
color  by  the  antique  sculptors,  on  which  Gibson  relies 
so  much.  It  might  almost  be  implied,  from  the  con- 
temptuous way  in  which  Powers  spoke  of  color,  that 
he  considers  it  an  impertinence  on  the  face  of  visible 
nature,  and  would  rather  the  world  had  been  made 
without  it ;  for  he  said  that  everything  in  intellect  or 
feeling  can  be  expressed  as  perfectly,  or  more  so,  by 
the  sculptor  in  colorless  marble,  as  by  the  painter  with 
all  the  resources  of  his  palette.  I  asked  him  whether 
he  could  model  the  face  of  Beatrice  Cenci  from  Gui* 
do's  picture  so  as  to  retain  the  subtle  expression,  and 
he  said  he  could,  for  that  the  expression  depended 
entirely  on  the  drawing,  ^^  the  picture  being  a  badly 
colored  thing."  I  inquired  whether  he  could  model 
a  blush,  and  he  said  ^^Yes** ;  and  that  he  had  once 
proposed  to  an  artist  to  express  a  blush  in  marble,  if 
he  would  express  it  in  picture.  On  consideration,  I 
believe  one  to  be  as  impossible  as  the  other ;  the  life 
and  reality  of  the  blush  being  in  its  tremulousness, 
coming  and  going.  It  is  lost  in  a  settled  red  just  as 
much  as  in  a  settled  paleness,  and  neither  the  sculptor 
Qor  painter  can  do  more  than  represent  the  circum* 
stances  of  attitude  and  expression  that  accompany  the 
Wush.     There  was  a  great  deal  of  truth  in  what 


288    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  \\iM. 

Powers  siud  about  this  matter  of  color,  and  va  one  of 
our  interminable  New  England  winters   it   ought  to  i 
(comfort  us  to  think  how  little  necessity  there  is  for  | 
any  hue  but  that  of  the  snow. 

Mr.  Powera,  nevertheless,  had  hmtight  us  a  bunch 
of  beautiful  roses,  and  seemed  as  capable  of  appre- 
ciating their  delicate  blush  as  we  were.  The  best 
thing  he  said  against  the  use  of  color  in  marble  waa 
to  the  effect  that  the  whiteness  removed  the  object 
represented  into  a  sort  of  spiritual  region,  and  so  gave 
chaste  permission  to  those  nudities  whioh  would  other- 
wise Huggest  immodesty.  I  have  myself  felt  the  truth 
of  tliis  iu  a  certain  sense  of  shame  as  I  looked  at  Gib- 
son's tinted  Venus. 

He  took  his  leave  at  about  eight  oVlock,  being  to 
make  a  call  on  the  Bryants,  who  arc  at  the  H6tel  da 
Mew  York,  and  also  on  Mrs.  Browning  at  Casa  GuidbJ 

June  %th.  —  I  went  this  morning  to  the  Uffizi 
lery.  The  entrance  b  from  the  great  court  of  the 
ace,  which  communicates  with  Lung'  Amo  at  one  end| 
and  with  the  Grand  Ducal  Piazza  at  the  other. 
gallery  is  in  the  upper  story  of  the  palace,  and  in 
vestibule  arb  some  busts  of  the  princes  and  card! 
of  the  Medici  family,  —  none  of  them  beautiful,  one 
or  two  so  ugly  as  to  be  ludicrous,  especially  one  who 
is  all  but  buried  in  his  own  wig.  I  at  first  travelled 
elowly  through  the  whole  extent  of  this  long,  long  gal- 
lery, which  occupies  the  entire  length  of  the  palace  on 
both  sides  of  the  court,  and  is  full  of  sculpture  and 
pictures.  The  Iatt«r,  being  opposite  to  the  light,  ar« 
not  seen  to  the  liest  atlvontage  ;  but  it  is  the  most  per- 
fect collection,  in  a  chronological  series,  that  I  have 
seen, — comprehending  epecunens  of  all  the  masten 


masten I 


.858.]  ITALY.  287 

since  pamtdng  b^an  to  be  an  art  Here  are  GKotto, 
and  Cimabue,  and  Botticelli,  and  Fra  Angelico,  and 
FiUppo  Lippi)  and  a  hundred  others,  who  have  haunted 
me  in  churches  and  galleries  ever  since  I  have  been  in 
Italy,  and  who  ought  to  interest  me  a  great  deal  more 
than  they  do.  Occasionally  to^y  I  was  sensible  of  a 
certain  degree  of  emotion  in  looking  at  an  old  pic- 
ture ;  as,  for  example,  by  a  large,  dark,  ugly  picture 
of  Christ  bearing  the  cross  and  sinking  beneath  it, 
when,  somehow  or  other,  a  sense  of  his  agony  and  the 
fearful  wrong  that  mankind  did  (and  does)  its  Re- 
deemer, and  the  scorn  of  his  enemies,  and  the  sorrow 
of  those  who  loved  him,  came  knocking  at  my  heart 
and  got  entrance  there.  Once  more  I  deem  it  a  pity 
that  Protestantism  should  have  entirely  laid  aside  this 
mode  of  appealing  to  the  religious  sentiment. 

I  chiefly  paid  attention  to  the  sculpture,  and  was 
interested  in  a  long  series  of  busts  of  the  emperors 
and  the  members  of  their  families,  and  some  of  the 
great  men  of  Some.  There  is  a  bust  of  Pompey  the 
Great,  bearing  not  the  slightest  resemblance  to  that 
vulgar  and  imintellectual  one  in  the  gallery  of  the 
Capitol,  altogether  a  different  cast  of  countenance.  I 
could  not  judge  whether  it  resembled  the  face  of  the 
statue,  having  seen  the  latter  so  imperfectly  in  the 
duskiness  of  the  hall  of  the  Spada  Palace.  These,  I 
presume,  are  the  busts  which  Mr.  Powers  condemns, 
from  internal  evidence,  as  unreliable  and  conventional. 
He  may  be  right,  —  and  is  far  more  likely,  of  course, 
to  be  right  than  I  am,  —  yet  there  certainly  seems  to 
be  character  in  these  marble  faces,  and  they  differ  as 
much  among  themselves  as  the  same  number  of  living 
faces  might.  The  bust  of  Caracalla,  however,  which 
Powers  excepted  from  his  censure,  certainly  does  give 


f88   FtlENCU  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [ISB^ 

Btronger  asBaranee  of  its  being  ao  individual  and  fail 
f  ul  portrait  than  any  other  in  the  series.  All  the  busts 
of  Caracalla  —  of  which  I  have  eeen  many  —  give  the 
•ame  evidence  of  their  truth;  and  I  should  like  to 
know  what  it  was  in  this  abominable  emperor  that 
made  him  insist  upon  having  liia  actual  likeness  per 
petuatod,  with  all  the  ugliness  of  its  animal  and  moral 
chara<:ter.  I  rather  respect  him  for  it,  and  still  more 
the  sculptor,  whose  Itand.  methinks,  must  have  trem- 
bled as  be  wrought  the  bust.  Generally  these  wicked 
old  fellows,  and  their  wicked  wives  and  daughters,  are 
not  BO  hideous  as  we  might  expect.  Messalina,  for 
instaniK,  has  Binall  and  pretty  features,  though  with 
rather  a  sensual  development  of  the  lower  part  of  the 
face.  The  busts,  it  seemed  to  me,  are  usually  superior 
as  works  of  art  to  those  in  the  Capitol,  and  either  bet- 
ter preserved  or  more  thoroughly  restored.  The  bust 
of  Nero  might  almost  be  called  handsome  here,  though 
bearing  his  likeness  unmistakably. 

I  wish  some  competent  person  would  unilertake  to 
analyze  and  develop  his  character,  and  hnw  iuid  by 
what  necessity  —  with  all  his  elegant  tastes,  his  love  of 
the  beautifid,  hia  artist  nature  —  he  grew  to  be  such 
a  monster.  Nero  has  never  yet  had  justice  done  hinv. 
nor  have  any  of  the  wicked  emperors  ;  not  that  I  9Uf>> 
pose  them  to  have  been  any  less  mouBtrous  than  hia> 
tory  represents  them ;  but  there  must  surely  have  been 
something  in  their  position  and  circumstances  to  ren- 
der the  terrible  moral  disease  which  seized  upon  them 
BO  generally  almost  inevitable.  A  vrise  and  profound 
nmn,  tender  and  reverent  of  the  human  soid,  and  o^ 
]}able  of  appreciating  it  in  its  height  and  depth,  has 
great  field  here  for  the  exercise  of  his  powers.  It  hai 
struck  me,  in  reading  the  history  of  the  Italian  repu^ 


I 
I 


IBSS.] 


ITALY. 


Uc«,  that  many  of  the  tyrants,  who  spnmg  up  aftef 
the  destruotioD  of  their  liberties,  resembled  the  worst 
of  the  Koman  emperors.  The  subject  of  Nero  and  his 
brethren  has  often  perplexed  me  with  vain  desires  to 
come  at  the  truth. 

There  were  many  beautiful  specimens  of  antique, 
ideal  sculpture  all  along  the  gallery,  —  Apolloe,  Bao- 
chuses,  Venuses,  Mereurys.  Fauiis,  —  with  tlie  gen- 
eral character  of  all  of  which  I  was  familiar  enough  to 
recognize  them  at  a  glance.  The  mystery  and  wonder 
of  the  gallery,  however,  the  Venus  di  Medici,  I  could 
nowhere  aee,  and  indeed  was  almost  afraid  to  see  it ; 
for  I  somewhat  apprehended  the  extinction  of  another 
of  those  lights  that  shine  along  a  man's  pathway,  and 
go  out  in  a  snuff  the  instant  he  comes  within  eyeshot 
of  the  fulfilment  of  his  hopes.  My  European  expe- 
rience has  extinguished  many  such.  I  was  pretty  well 
contented,  therefore,  not  to  find  the  famous  statue  in 
the  whole  of  my  long  journey  from  end  to  end  of  the 
gallery,  which  terminates  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
court  from  that  where  it  commences.  The  ceiling,  by 
the  by,  throt^h  the  entire  length,  is  covered  with  fres- 
cos, and  the  floor  paved  with  a  composition  of  stone 
smooth  and  polished  like  marble.  The  final  pleoe  of 
sculpture,  at  the  end  of  the  gallery,  is  a  copy  of  the 
Laocoon,  considered  very  fine.  I  know  not  why,  but 
it  did  not  impress  me  with  the  sense  of  mighty  and 
terrible  repose  —  a  repose  growing  out  of  the  infinitude 
of  trouble  —  that  I  had  felt  in  the  original. 

Parallel  with  the  gallery,  on  both  sides  of  the 
palace-court,  there  runs  a  series  of  rooms  devoted 
chiefly  to  pictures,  although  statues  and  bas-reliefs  are 
Hkewise  contained  in  some  of  them.  I  remember  an 
infinished  bas-relief  by  Michel  Angelo  of  a  Holy 


290   FREHCB  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [H 

Family,  which  I  touched  with  my  flnger,  because  if 
Beviiiud  as  if  he  might  have  been  at  work  upon  it  only 
an  hour  ago.  The  pictures  1  tliil  little  more  than 
glance  at.  till  I  had  almost  completed  again  the 
cuit  of  the  giillury,  through  this  aeriett  of  paralleli 
rooms,  and  then  I  came  upon  a  collection  of  Frcnohj 
and  Dutch  and  Flemish  masters,  all  of  which  iut«iw 
ested  me  more  than  the  Italian  generally.  There  was 
a  beautiful  picture  by  Claude,  almost  as  good  as  those 
in  the  British  National  Gallery,  and  very  like  in  sub- 
ject ;  the  Sim  near  the  horizon,  of  course,  and  throw- 
ing its  line  of  light  over  the  ripple  of  water,  witli  ships 
at  the  strand,  and  one  or  two  pahtces  of  stately  archi- 
tecture on  the  shore.  Landscapes  by  Rembrandt  |:; 
fat  (irat'es  and  other  ]>liunp  nudities  by  Uubena}; 
brass  pans  and  earthen  pots  and  herrings  by  Tentenj 
and  other  Dutelunen ;  none  by  Gerard  Dow,  I  thinks] 
but  several  by  Mieris ;  all  of  which  were  like  breii^ 
and  beef  and  ale,  after  having  been  feil  too  long 
made  dishes.  This  is  really  a  wonderful  coUectioo  of 
pictures  ;  and  from  first  to  last  —  from  Giotto  to  the 
men  of  yesterday  —  they  are  in  admirable  condition, 
and  may  be  appreciated  for  all  the  merit  that 
ever  possessed. 

I  could  not  quite  believe  that  I  was  not  to  find 
Venus  di  Medici ;  and  still,  as  I  paaaed  from  one  room 
to  another,  my  bri^ath  rose  and  fell  a  little,  with  the 
half-hope,  half-fear,  that  she  might  stand  before  roe. 
Really,  I  did  not  know  that  I  cared  so  much  ab( 
Venus,  or  any  possible  woman  of  marble.  At  1 
when  I  hud  come  from  among  the  Dutchmen,  I 
lievt'.  and  was  lookiufr  at  some  works  of  Italian  artists, 
ehiefly  Hort-ntincs,  I  cauglit  a  glimpse  of  her  through 
the  door  of  the  next  room.     It  is  the  best  room  of  th( 


i 

I 

tiwn, 
tbgr^ 

Itha^l 
mm 
the 
roe. 

51 


J 


«■) 


iTAtr. 


291 


I 
I 


series,  octagonal  in  shape,  and  hiing  with  red  damask, 
and  the  light  comes  down  from  a  row  of  windows, 
passing  qoite  round,  lieneath  an  ootagonal  dome.  Tha 
Venus  stands  somewhat  aside  from  the  centre  of  the 
room,  and  is  surrounded  bj  an  iron  railing,  a  pace  or 
two  from  her  pedestal  in  front,  and  less  behind.  I 
think  she  might  safely  be  left  to  the  reverence  her 
womanhood  would  win,  without  any  other  protection. 
She  is  very  beautiful,  very  satisfactory ;  and  has  a 
fresh  and  new  charm  about  her  imi-eached  by  any  east 
or  copy.  The  hue  of  the  marble  is  just  so  much  mel- 
lowed by  time,  aa  to  do  for  her  all  that  Gibson  tries, 
or  ought  to  try  to  do  for  his  statues  by  color,  soften- 
ing her,  warming  her  almost  imperceptibly,  making 
her  an  inmate  of  the  heart,  as  well  as  a  spiritual  ex- 
istence. I  felt  a  kind  of  tenderness  for  her ;  an  affeo- 
tiou,  not  as  if  she  were  one  woman,  but  all  woman- 
hood in  one.  Her  modest  attitude,  which,  before  I 
saw  her,  I  had  not  liked,  deeming  that  it  might  be  an 
artificial  shame,  is  partly  what  unmakes  her  as  the 
heathen  goddess,  and  softens  her  into  woman.  There 
is  a  slight  degree  of  alarm,  too,  in  her  face ;  not  that 
8he  really  thinks  anybody  is  looking  at  her,  yet  the 
idea  has  flitted  through  her  mind,  and  startled  her  a 
little.  Pier  face  is  so  beautiful  and  iotellectual.  that 
it  is  not  dazzleil  out  of  sight  by  her  form.  Methinks 
this  was  a  triumph  for  the  sculptor  to  at^hieve.  I  may 
as  well  stop  here.  It  is  of  no  use  to  throw  heaps  of 
words  upon  her ;  for  they  all  fall  away,  and  leave  her 
standing  in  chaste  and  naked  grace,  as  untouched  aa 
when  I  began. 

She  has  suffered  terribly  by  the  mishaps  of  her  long 
existence  in  the  marble.  Each  of  her  legs  has  been 
broken  into  two  or  three  fragmentdi  her  arma  hava 


292    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [18M 

been  severed,  her  body  haa  been  broken  quite  &ci 
at  the  waist,  her  head  has  been  snapped  off  at  tl 
neck.     Furthermore,  there  have  been  grievous  woiii 
and  losses  of  substance  in  various  t«nder  parts  of 
[lerson.     But  on  account  of  the  skill  with  whiph 
st.atue  has  been  reatflretl,  and  also  becaiiM!  the  idea 
perfect  and  iiideHtruetible,  all  these  injuries  do  not  la 
the  leaat  impair  the  effect,  even  when  you  see  where 
the  dissevered  fragments  have  been  reunited.     She  ia 
juat  as  wholfi  as  when  she  left  the  hands  of  the  sculp- 
tor.    I  am  glad  to  have  seen  this  Venus,  and  to  have 
found  her  so  tender  and  so  eha<4t«.     On  the  wall  of 
the  room,  and  to  be  taken  in  at  the  same  glance,  is  ft 
painted  Venus  by  Titian,  ret-lining  on  a  couch, 
and  lustful. 

The  room  of  the  Venus  siiems  to  be  the  treasure* 
place  of  the  whole  Uffizzi  Palace,  containing  more 
pictures  by  famoiu  roasters  than  are  to  be  found  in 
all  the  rest  of  the  gallery.  There  were  several  by 
Raphael,  and  the  room  was  crowded  with  the  easels 
of  artists.  I  did  not  look  half  enough  at  anything, 
but  merely  took  a  preliminary  tattte,  as  a  prophecy  of 
enjoymeat  to  come. 

Afl  we  were  at  dinner  to-Jay,  at  half  past  thi 
there  was  a  ring  at  the  door,  and  a  minute  after  nnf 
servant  brought  a  card.  It  was  Mr.  Robert  Brown- 
ing's, and  on  it  was  written  in  pencil  an  invitation 
for  us  to  go  to  see  them  this  evening.  He  had  left 
the  card  and  gone  away ;  but  very  soon  the  l>ell  rang 
again,  and  he  had  come  back,  having  forgotteu  to  give 
his  address.  This  time  lie  came  in ;  and  he  shook 
hands  with  all  of  us,  children  and  grown  people,  and 
was  very  vivacious  and  agreeable.  He  looked  youngei 
tnd  even  handsmner  than  when  I  saw  him  in  Londoi^ 


'ali  of 

is  ^^^H 

>a8ure<  I 


1858.]  ITALY.  298 

two  years  ago,  and  His  gray  hairs  seemed  fewer  than 
those  that  had  then  strayed  into  his  youthful  head. 
He  talked  a  wonderful  quantity  in  a  litde  time,  and 
told  us — among  other  things  that  we  should  never 
have  dreamed  of  —  that  Italian  people  will  not  cheat 
you,  if  you  construe  them  generously,  and  put  them 
upon  their  honor. 

Mr.  Browning  was  very  kind  and  warm  in  his  ex- 
pressions of  pleasure  at  seeing  us ;  and,  on  our  part, 
we  were  all  very  glad  to  meet  him.  He  must  be  an 
exceedingly  likeable  man.  .  .  .  They  are  to  leave 
Florence  very  soon,  and  are  going  to  Normandy,  I 
think  he  said,  for  the  rest  of  the  summer. 

The  Venus  di  Medici  has  a  dimple  in  her  chin. 

June  %th.  — We  went  last  evening,  at  eight  o'clock, 
to  see  the  Brownings;  and,  after  some  search  and  in« 
quiry,  we  found  the  Casa  Gtddi,  which  is  a  palace  in 
a  street  not  very  far  from  pur  own.  It  being  dusk, 
I  could  not  see  the  exterior,  which,  if  I  remember. 
Browning  has  celebrated  in  song ;  at  all  events,  Mrs. 
Browning  has  called  one  of  her  poems  ^^  Casa  Ghiidi 
Windows." 

The  street  is  a  narrow  one ;  but  on  entering  the  pal- 
ace, we  found  a  spacious  staircase  and  ample  accom- 
modations of  vestibule  and  hall,  the  latter  opening  on 
a  balcony,  where  we  could  hear  the  chanting  of  priests 
in  a  church  close  by.  Browning  told  us  that  this 
was  the  first  church  where  an  oratorio  had  ever  been 
performed.  He  came  into  the  anteroom  to  greet  us, 
as  did  his  little  boy,  Robert,  whom  they  call  Pennini 
{or  fondness.  The  latter  cognomen  is  a  diminutive  of 
Apennino,  which  was  bestowed  upon  him  at  his  first 
advent  into  the  nrorld  because  he  was  so  very  small, 


2M   FREirCB  AJfD  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185* 

there  being  a  statae  in  Florence  of  oolomal  uze  called 
Apennino.  I  never  saw  such  a  boy  as  this  before ;  u 
Blender,  fragile,  and  spirit-like,  —  not  as  if  lie  were 
aotnally  in  ill  health,  but  aa  if  he  had  little  or  nothing 
to  do  with  human  flesh  and  blood.  His  face  is  very 
pret^  and  most  intelligent,  and  exceedingly  like  his 
mother's.  He  is  nine  years  old,  and  seems  at  once 
less  childlike  and  lees  manly  than  would  befit  that 
age.  I  should  not  quite  like  to  be  the  father  of  such  a 
boy,  and  should  fear  to  stake  so  much  interest  and  af- 
fection on  him  as  he  cannot  fail  to  inspire.  I  wonder 
what  is  to  become  of  him,  • — whether  he  will  ever  grow 
to  be  a  man,  —  whether  it  Is  desirable  that  he  should. 
His  parents  ought  to  turn  their  whole  attention  to 
making  him  robust  and  earthly,  and  to  giving  Mm  a 
thicker  scabbard  to  sheathe  his  spirit  in.  He  was 
bom  in  Florence,  and  prides  himself  on  being  a  Flor- 
entine, and  is  indeed  as  un-English  a  production  as  if 
he  were  native  of  another  planet. 

Mrs.  Browning  met  ns  at  the  door  of  the  drawings 
room,  and  greeted  us  most  kindly,  —  a  pale,  small 
person,  scarcely  embodied  at  all ;  at  any  rate,  only 
substantial  enough  to  put  forth  her  slender  fingers  to 
be  grasped,  and  to  speak  witJi  a  shrill,  yet  sweet,  te- 
nuity of  voice.  BeaUy,  I  do  not  see  how  Mr.  Brown- 
ing  can  suppose  that  he  has  an  earthly  wife  any  more 
than  an  earthly  child ;  both  are  of  the  elfin  race,  and 
will  flit  away  from  him  some  day  when  he  least  thinks 
of  it  She  is  a  good  and  kind  fairy,  however,  and 
sweetly  disposed  towards  the  human  race,  altliough 
only  remotely  akin  to  it.  It  is  wonderful  to  see  how 
small  she  is,  how  pale  her  cheek,  how  bright  and  dark 
her  eyes.  There  is  not  such  another  figure  in  the 
world ;  and  her  black  ringlets  duster  down  into  bet 


1858.]  ITALY.  295 

neok,  and  make  her  face  look  the  whiter  by  their  sable 
profusion.  I  oould  not  form  any  judgment  about  her 
age ;  it  may  range  anywhere  within  the  limits  of  hu- 
man life  or  elfin  life.  When  I  met  her  in  London  at 
Lord  Houghton's  breakfast-table,  she  did  not  impress 
me  80  singularly ;  for  the  morning  light  is  more  pro- 
saic  than  the  dim  illumination  of  their  great  tapes- 
tried dra¥dng-room ;  and,  besides,  sitting  next  to  her^ 
she  did  not  have  oocasion  to  raise  her  voice  in  speak- 
ing, and  I  was  not  sensible  what  a  slender  voice  she 
has.  It  is  marvellous  to  me  how  so  extraordinary,  so 
acute,  so  sensitive  a  creature  can  impress  us,  as  she 
does,  with  the  certainty  of  her  benevolence.  It  seems 
to  me  there  were  a  million  chances  to  one  that  she 
would  have  been  a  miracle  of  acidity  and  bitterness. 
We  were  not  the  only  guests.      Mr.  and  Mrs. 

E ,  Americans,  recendy  from  the  East,  and  on 

intimate  terms  with  the  Brownings,  arrived  after  us ; 

also  Miss  F.  H ,  an  English  literary  lady,  whom  I 

have  met  several  times  in  Liverpool ;  and  lastly  came 
the  white  head  and  pahner-like  beard  of  Mr.  — - 
with  his  daughter.  Mr.  Browning  was  very  effi- 
cient in  keeping  up  conversation  with  everybody,  and 
seemed  to  be  in  all  parts  of  the  room  and  in  every 
group  at  the  same  mo^t;  a  mostviyid  and  qui<?. 
thoughted  person,  logical  and  common-sensible,  as,  I 
presume,  poets  generally  are  in  their  daily  talk.    Mr. 

^  as  usual,  was  homely  and  plain  of  manner,  with 

an  old-fashioned  dignity,  nevertheless,  and  a  remark- 
able deference  and  gentleness  of  tone  in  addressing 
Mrs.  Browning.  I  doubt,  however,  whether  he  has 
any  high  appreciation  either  of  her  poetry  or  her  hus- 
band's, and  it  is  my  impression  that  they  care  as  lift 
tie  about  his. 


S96    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS. 

We  hiul  some  tea  and  some  Btrawbemca,  and 
B  pleasant  evening.     There  was  no  very  notewoi 
ponvorsation ;   thw  most  interesting  topic   being 
disagreeable  and  now  wearisome  one  of  spiritual 
muiiieationR,  as  regards  which  Mrs.  BrowniDj^ 

Uf  ver,  and  her  hushand  an  infidel.    Mr. apjK'ared 

not  to  have  mode  up  his  mind  on  the  matter,  but  told 
a  story  of  a  successful  communication  Iwtween  Cooper 
the  novelist  and  his  sister,  who  ha<l  l)een  dead  fifty 
years.  Browning  and  his  wife  had  both  iKjen  present 
at  a  spiritual  session  held  by  Mr.  Home,  and  had  aeea 
and  felt  the  unearthly  hands,  one  of  which  hud  placed 
a  laurel  wreath  on  Mrs,  Browning's  head.  Browning, 
however,  avowed  hist  belief  that  these  hiinds  were  af- 
fixed to  the  feet  of  Mr.  Home,  who  lay  extemlecl  in 
his  chair,  with  his  legs  stretched  far  under  the  table. 
The  niarvellousness  of  the  fact,  as  I  have  rea*l  of 
and  heard  it  from  other  eye-witnesses,  melted  strange]]^ 
away  in  his  hearty  gripe,  and  at  the  sharp  touch 
his  logic;  while  his  wife,  ever  and  anon,  put  in  a  litl 
gentle  word  of  expostulation. 

I  am  rather  surprised  that  Browning's  eonversatioa 
ahoidd  be  so  clear,  and  so  much  to  the  purpose  at  the 
moment,  since  his  poetry  can  seldom  proceed  far  with- 
out running  into  tlie  high  grass  of  latent  meanings 
and  obscure  allusions, 

Mrs.  Browning's  health  does  not  permit  late  houi 
so  we  began  to  take  leave  at  about  ten  o'clock. 

heard  her  ask  Mr, if  he  did  not  mean  to  revisit 

Europe,  and  heard  him  answer,  not  uncheerfully,  tak- 
ing hold  of  his  white  hair,  "  It  is  getting  rather  too 
late  in  the  evening  now."  If  any  old  ago  can  be 
cheerfnl,  I  should  think  his  might  be ;  so  good  a  man, 
10  cool,  so  calm,  so  bright,  too,  we  may  say.     His  li£i 


[isi^H 

wortl^^^H 
il  com*'^^^ 


in 

the 
tb- 


1858.]  ITALY.  ifcT 

has  been  like  the  days  that  end  in  pleasant  sunseta 
He  has  a  great  loss,  however,  or  what  ought  to  be  a 
great  loss,  —  soon  to  be  encountered  in  the  death  of 
his  wife,  who,  I  think,  can  hardly  live  to  reach  Amer- 
ica. He  is  not  eminently  an  affectionate  man.  I 
take  him  to  be  one  who  cannot  get  closely  home  to 
his  sorrow,  nor  feel  it  so  sensibly  as  he  gladly  would ; 
and,  in  consequence  of  that  deficiency,  the  world  lacks 
substance  to  him.  It  is  partly  the  result,  perhaps,  of 
his  not  having  sufficiently  cultivated  his  emotional  na- 
ture. His  poetry  shows  it,  and  his  personal  inter- 
course, though  kindly,  does  not  stir  one's  blood  in  the 
least. 

Little  Pennini,  during  the  evening,  sometimes 
helped  the  guests  to  cake  and  strawberries ;  joined  in 
the  conversation,  when  he  had  anything  to  say,  or  sat 
down  upon  a  couch  to  enjoy  his  own  meditations.  He 
has  long  curling  hair,  and  has  not  yet  emerged  from 
his  frock  and  short  hose.  It  is  funny  to  think  of  putr 
ting  him  into  trousers.  His  likeness  to  his  mother  is 
strange  to  behold. 

June  10th,  —  My  wife  and  I  went  to  the  Pitti 
Palace  to-day;  and  first  entered  a  court  where,  yes- 
terday, she  had  seen  a  carpet  of  flowers,  arranged  for 
some  great  ceremony.  It  must  have  been  a  most  beau- 
tiful sight,  the  pavement  of  the  court  being  entirely 
covered  by  them,  in  a  regular  pattern  of  brilliant 
hues,  80  as  reaJly  to  be  a  Uving  mosaic.  This  morn- 
ing,  however,  the  court  had  nothing  but  its  usual 
stones,  and  the  show  of  yesterday  seemed  so  much 
the  more  inestimable  as  having  been  so  evanescent. 
Around  the  walls  of  the  court  there  were  still  some 
pieces  of  splendid  tapestry  which  had  made  part  of 


298   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [18S( 

yestenlay's  magiiifiBence,  We  went  up  the  ataircaAe^i 
uf  regally  liniud  and  eaay  aacent,  and  iiuule  applli.^ 
tioii  tu  be  iwlmitted  to  see  tbe  grand  ducaJ  apar^^ 
ments.  An  attendant  accordingly  took  the  keys,  and 
uflhered  us  first  ioto  a  great  hidl  with  a  vaulted  ceil- 
ing,  and  then  through  a  series  of  noble  rooms,  with 
riub  frescos  above  the  mosaic  floors,  bung  with  diuop 
ask,  adorned  with  gilded  chandeliers,  and  glowing,  in 
short,  with  more  goi^ousnesa  tlian  I  eould  have  im- 
agined beforehand,  or  can  now  remember.  In  many 
of  the  rooms  were  those  superb  antique  cabinets  wHoh 
I  a<lmire  more  than  any  other  furniture  ever  invented; 
only  these  were  of  unexampled  art  and  glory,  inlaid 
with  precious  stones,  and  with  beautiful  Florentine 
mosaics,  lioth  of  flowers  and  landscajM-s,  —  each  cab- 
inet worth  a  lifetime's  toil  to  make  it,  and  the  cost  a 
whole  palace  to  pay  for  it.  Many  of  the  rooms  were 
coveretl  with  arras,  of  landscapes,  hunting  -  soenea, 
mythological  subjects,  or  historical  scenes,  equal  to 
pictures  in  truth  of  representation,  and  possessing  an 
indesoribable  riehnens  that  makes  them  preferable  as 
a  mere  adornment  of  prineely  halls  and  chambers. 
Some  of  the  rooms,  aa  I  ]irw  said,  were  laid  in  mosaic 
of  stone  and  marble,  otherwise  in  lovely  patterns  of 
various  woods ;  others  were  trnvered  with  carpets,  de- 
lightful to  tread  upon,  and  glowing  like  tlie  living 
floor  of  flowers  which  my  wife  saw  yesterday.  There 
were  tables,  too,  of  Florentine  mosaic,  the  mere  ma- 
terials of  which  —  lapis  lazuli,  malachite,  pearl,  and, 
a  himdred  other  precious  things  —  were  worth  a  foi^j 
tune,  and  made  a  thousand  times  more  valuable  by  the 
artistic  sltill  of  the  manufacturer.  I  toss  together  brilt 
iaut  words  by  the  handful,  and  make  a  rude  sort  of 
patchwork,  but  can  record  no  adequate  idea  of  what 


a.       I 


a 
I 


18J18.J 


299 


I 
I 


I  B&w  in  this  smt«  of  rooms ;  and  the  taste,  the  sub- 
dued splendor,  so  that  it  did  not  shine  too  high,  hut 
was  all  tempered  into  an  effect  at  once  grand  and 
soft,  —  this  was  quit*  as  remarkable  as  the  gorgeoua 
material.  I  have  seen  a  very  dazzling  effect  produced 
in  the  principal  cabin  of  an  American  dipper -ship 
quite  opposed  to  this  in  tast«. 

After  making  the  circiut  of  the  grand  ducal  apart- 
ments, we  went  into  a  door  in  the  left  wing  of  the 
palace,  and  ascended  a  narrow  flight  of  stairs,  —  sev- 
eral tortuous  flights  indeed,  —  to  the  picture-gallery. 
It  Alls  a  great  many  stately  halls,  which  themselves 
are  well  worth  a  visit  for  the  architecture  and  frescos  t 
only  these  matters  become  commonpla^'e  after  travel- 
ling through  a  mile  or  two  of  them.  The  collection  of 
pictures  —  as  well  for  their  number  as  for  the  celeb- 
rity and  excellence  of  many  of  them  —  is  the  most 
interesting  that  I  have  seen,  and  I  do  not  yet  feel  in  a 
condition,  nor  perhaps  ever  shall,  to  speak  of  a  single 
one.  It  gladdened  my  very  heart  to  find  that  they 
were  not  darkened  out  of  sight,  nor  apparently  at  all 
injured  by  time,  but  were  well  kept  and  varnished, 
brilliantly  framed,  and,  no  doubt,  restored  by  skilful 
touches  if  any  of  them  needed  it.  The  artists  and 
amateurs  may  say  what  they  like;  for  my  part,  I 
know  no  drearier  feeling  than  that  inspirud  by  a 
ruined  picture,  —  rained,  that  is  by  time,  damp,  or 
rough  treatment,  —  and  I  would  a  thousand  times 
rather  an  artist  should  do  his  best  towards  reviving 
it,  than  have  it  left  iu  such  a  condition.  I  do  not  be- 
lieve, however,  that  these  pictures  have  been  sacrile- 
giously interfered  with ;  at  all  events,  I  saw  in  the 
masterpieces  no  touch  but  what  seemed  worthy  of  the 
tuaster-hand. 


MO   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [ISSB, 

"nte  most  bttntifDl  pictaic  ib  dte  mnU,  I  am  eon- 
vinced,  U  Rapluel's  MaAwim  deHa  S^giol^  I  waa 
^""tliar  with  it  in  a  bandred  engraYings  and  cranes, 
and  therefore  it  shone  apon  me  as  with  a  &mili«r 
beauty,  thoi^  infinitely  more  dinne  than  I  bad  ever 
seen  it  before.  As  artist  was  copying  it,  and  pro- 
ducing certainly  something  veiy  like  a  fafrsimile,  je( 
tearing  cot,  as  a  matter  of  coarse,  that  mysterious 
aomething  that  renders  the  picture  a  minuile.  It  is 
ny  present  opinion  that  the  pictorial  art  is  capable 
of  something  more  Ulce  magic,  more  wonderful  and 
inacmtabte  in  its  methods  than  poetry,  or  any  other 
mode  of  dereloping  the  beantifaL  Bat  bow  does  this 
aooord  with  what  I  have  been  saying  only  a  minnte 
ago  ?  How  then  can  the  decayed  pictore  of  a  great 
master  ever  be  restored  by  the  toncbes  of  an  inferior 
hand  ?  Doobtleas  it  never  can  be  restored ;  but  let 
some  devoted  worshipper  do  his  utmost,  and  the  whole 
inherent  spirit  of  the  divine  picture  may  pervade  his 
restorations  likewise. 

I  saw  the  Three  Fates  of  Michel  Angelo,  which 
were  also  being  copied,  as  were  many  other  of  the 
best  pictnres.  Miss  Fanny  Howorth,  whom  I  met  in 
the  gallery,  told  me  that,  to  copy  the  Madonna  della 
S^giola,  application  must  be  made  five  years  before- 
hand, so  many  are  the  artists  irito  aspire  to  copy  it. 
Michel  Angelo'a  Fates  are  three  very  grim  and  piti- 
less old  women,  who  respectively  spin,  hold,  and  cut 
the  thread  of  human  destiny,  all  in  a  mood  of  sombre 
^oom,  bnt  with  no  more  sympathy  than  if  they  had 
nothing  to  do  with  us.  I  remember  seeing  an  etching 
of  this  when  I  was  a  child,  and  being  struck,  even 
then,  with  the  terrible,  stem,  passionless  severity, 
neither  loving  ns  nor  hating  as,  that  chazBcterizea 


«.] 


iTAiy. 


SOI 


these  ugly  oH  women.  If  they  were  migry.  «r  liad 
the  least  spite  against  humao  kind,  it  wuultl  render 
them  the  more  tolerable.  They  aro  a  great  work,  con- 
taining and  representing  the  very  idea  tliat  makoB  » 
belief  in  fate  such  a  (.-old  torture  to  tlie  human  sold. 
God  give  me  the  sure  belief  in  his  Providenro! 

In  a  year's  time,  with  the  advantage  "f 
this  magnificent  gall.        -----     ■  ■ 


to  liavo 
IstiU 


™.o  uiagiiiiK-i':ui  gallery,  I  tliink  I  might  (»'i"v  •- 
some  little  knowledge  of  pictures.  At  pr^^sent  _ 
know  nothing ;  but  am  glad  to  find  myself  caiable,  at 
least,  of  loving  one  picture  better  than  another.  I 
cannot  always  "keep  the  heights  I  gain."  however i 
and  after  admiring  and  being  moved  by  a  I'i^ture  one 
day,  it  is  within  my  experience  to  look  at  it  the  next 
as  little  moved  as  if  it  wore  a  tav«m  -  siK"-  ^^  " 
pretty  much  the  same  with  statuary ;  the  saine,  too, 
with  those  pictured  windows  of  the  Duomo,  which  I 
described  so  rapturously  a  few  days  ago.  I  l»»kfd  at 
them  again  the  next  morning,  and  tliought  they  would 
tave  been  hardly  worthy  -^f  "-«  milomum,  ev«n  ha 
aU  the  separate  windowi 
their 


oi  my  L'ui"gi""H  — 
—  ^^^  acjjaraie  winaowa   of  tlie  Cathedral  combinwl 
their  narrow  lights  into  one  grand,  resplendent,  mivny- 
eolored  arch  at  the  caHt«m  end.     It  is  a  pity  they  are 


"'.uieu  arcn  at  tne  caHt«m  end.     it  is  a  pi*j  <'"^j 

I    BO  narrow.     England   ha«   many  a  great  chanccl-win-   , 
I    dow  that,  though  dimmer  in  iu  hues,  duiity.  and  pwr* 
m  —.-J-    _i   t__^  r ^ta    AcliuHea 


11 — ,  iLuau,  Miuugii  mmmer  in   its  nuest  ""'•••j' .•  i 

liaps  made   up  of   heterogeneous   fragmenta,  eclip»e»  I 
'  these  by  its  spacioua  breadth,  1 

From  the  gallery,  I  went  into  the  BoboU  Gard«i»,4 
which  are  contiguouB  to  the  pa]a«« ;  but  found  ilutm  1 
too  sunny  for  enjoyment.  They  seem  to  conairt  ^mrtl^l 
of  a  wilderness  ;  but  the  portion  into  which  1  dtrayftd  " 
waa  laid  out  with  straigbt  walk*.  Iinwl  with  1«kV\  \»ox- 
^ges,  along  which  tliere  was  only  a  narrow  marten 
I  sf  shade.     I  saw  a.a    amphitheatre,  with  a.  vid«  KW«tf^ 


802  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [II 

of  marble  seat  around  it,  pncloung  &  grassy  space,' 
where,  doubtless,  tlie  Medici  may  liave  witnessed 
splendid  spectacles. 

June  llth.  —  1  paid  another  visit  to  the  Uffizi  gal- 
lery this  morning,  and  found  that  the  Venus  h  one  of 
the  things  the  charm  of  which  does  nut  diminish  on 
better  acquaintance.  The  world  has  not  grown  weary 
(if  her  in  all  these  ages ;  and  mortal  man  may  look 
on  her  with  new  delight  from  infancy  to  old  age,  and 
keep  the  memory  of  her,  I  should  imagine,  as  one  of 
the  treasures  of  spiritual  existence  hereafter.  Surely, 
it  makes  me  more  ready  to  believe  in  the  high  desti- 
nies of  tile  hiunan  race,  to  think  that  this  beautiful 
form  is  hut  nature's  phin  for  all  womankind,  and  that 
the  nearer  the  actual  woman  approaches  it,  tlie  more 
natural  she  is.  I  do  not,  and  cAnnot,  think  of  her  as  » 
senseless  image,  but  as  a  being  that  lives  to  gladden 
the  world,  incapable  of  decay  and  death ;  as  youn^ 
and  fair  b>day  as  she  was  three  thousand  years  ago, 
and  still  to  be  young  and  fair  as  long  as  a  beautifttl 
thought  shaU  require  physical  embodiment.  I  wonder 
bow  any  sculptor  has  had  the  impertinence  to  aim  at 
any  other  presentation  of  female  beauty.  I  mean  no 
disrespect  to  Gibson  or  Powers,  or  a  hundred  otiier 
men  who  people  the  world  with  nudities,  all  of  whioh 
are  abortions  as  compared  with  her ;  but  I  think  the 
world  would  be  all  the  richer  if  their  Veuuses,  their 
Greek  Slaves,  their  Eves,  were  burnt  into  quiohlim(>, 
leaving  us  only  this  statue  as  our  image  of  tie  beand* 
ful.  I  observed  to-day  that  the  eyes  of  the  statue  a 
slightly  iiollowea  out,  iu  a  peculiar  way,  so  as  to  g 
them  a  look  of  depth  aud  intelligence.  She  is  a  ii 
acle.     The   sculptor  must   have  wrought  I'eligioualjv  j 


pace,^^ 


1858.]  ITALY.  803 

and  have  felt  that  something  far  beyond  his  own  skill 
was  working  through  his  hands.  I  mean  to  leave  off 
speaking  of  the  Venus  hereafter,  in  utter  despair  of 
saying  what  I  wish;  especially  as  the  contemplation 
of  the  statue  will  refine  and  elevate  my  taste,  and  make 
it  continually  more  difficult  to  express  my  sense  of  its 
excellence,  as  the  perception  of  it  grows  upon  me.  If 
at  any  time  I  become  less  sensible  of  it,  it  will  be  my 
deterioration,  not  any  defect  in  the  statue. 

I  looked  at  many  of  the  pictures,  and  found  myself 
in  a  favorable  mood  for  enjoying  them.  It  seems  to 
me  that  a  work  of  art  is  entitled  to  credit  for  all  that 
it  makes  us  feel  in  our  best  moments ;  and  we  must 
judge  of  its  merits  by  the  impression  it  then  makes, 
and  not  by  the  coldness  and  insensibility  of  our  less 
genial  moods. 

After  leaving  the  Uffizi  Palace,  ...  I  went  into 
the  Museum  of  Natural  History,  near  the  Pitti  Palace. 
It  is  a  very  good  collection  of  almost  everything  that 
Nature  has  made,  —  or  exquisite  copies  of  what  she 
has  made,  —  stones,  shells,  vegetables,  insects,  fishes, 
animals,  man ;  the  greatest  wonders  of  the  museimi 
being  some  models  in  wax  of  all  parts  of  the  human 
frame.  It  is  good  to  have  the  wholeness  and  summed- 
up  beauty  of  woman  in  the  memory,  when  looking  at 
the  details  of  her  system  as  here  displayed ;  for  these 
last,  to  the  natural  eye,  are  by  no  means  beautifuL 
But  they  are  what  belong  only  to  our  mortality.  The 
beauty  that  makes  them  invisible  is  our  immortal  type, 
which  we  shall  take  away  with  us.  Under  glass  cases, 
there  were  some  singular  and  horribly  truthful  repre- 
sentations, in  small  wax  figures,  of  a  time  of  pesti- 
lence; the  hasty  burial,  or  tossing  into  one  common 
Bepulchre,  of  discolored  oorpses,  —  a  very  ugly  piece 


304   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [Ifll 

of  work,  indeed.  I  tliink  Murray  gays  that  thei 
tiling  were  made  for  the  Grand  Duke  Cdbiuo  ;  and 
if  so,  they  do  him  no  credit,  indicating  something  dark 
and  morbid  in  his  character. 


June  13(A.  —  We  called  at  the  Power8*B  yet 

morning  to  leave  It there  for  an  hour  or  two 

play  with  the  children  ;  and  it  being  not  yet  <]uil 
time  for  the  Pitti  Palace,  we  stepped  into  the  studit 
Soon  Mr.  Powers  mside  his  appearance,  in  his  dress'- 
ing-gown  and  slipiicrB  and  sculptor's  cap,  smoking  a 
cigar.  .  .  .  He  was  very  cordial  and  pleajunt,  as  I 
have  always  found  him,  and  began  immediately  to  be 
communicative  about  his  own  works,  or  any  other  sub- 
ject that  came  up.  There  were  two  oasts  of  the  VenilB 
di  Medici  in  the  rooms,  which  he  said  were  valuable 
in  a  commercial  point  of  view,  being  genuine  casta 
from  the  mould  taken  from  the  statue.  He  then  gave 
us  a  quite  unexpected  but  most  interesting  lecture  on 
the  Venus,  demonstrating  it,  as  he  proceeded,  by  ref- 
erence to  the  points  which  he  criticised.  The  figure, 
he  seemed  to  allow,  was  admirable,  though  I  think  ha 
hardly  classes  it  so  high  as  his  own  Greek  Slave  or 
Eve  ;  but  the  face,  he  began  with  saying,  was  that  of 
an  idiot.  Then,  leiining  on  the  pedestal  of  the  caet^ 
he  continued,  "  It  is  rather  a  bold  thing  to  say,  ia 
it,  that  the  sculptor  of  the  Venus  di  Medici  did 
know  what  he  was  about  ?  " 

Truly,  it  appeared  to  mo  so ;  but  Powers  went  on 
remorselessly,  and  showed,  in  the  first  place,  that  the 
eye  was  not  like  any  eye  tluit  Nature  ever  miule  | 
indeed,  being  examined  closely,  and  abstracted 
the  rest  of  the  fats*,  it  has  a  very  queer  look,  - 
like  a  human  eye  than  a  half-wom  buttonhole  I 


tof 


I 

I 


1868.]  ITALY.  305 

be  attacked  tlio  ear,  which,  he  affirmed  and  deinoo- 
Btrated,  was  placed  a  good  deal  too  low  ou  the  head, 
thereby  giving  an  artiiicial  and  monHtrous  height  to 
the  portion  of  the  bead  above  it.  The  forehead  met 
with  no  better  treatment  in  his  bands,  and  as  bo  the 
mouth,  it  waa  altogether  wrong,  as  well  in  its  general 
make  aa  in  such  niceties  as  the  junction  of  the  skin  of 
the  lips  to  the  common  skin  around  them.  In  a  word, 
the  poor  face  was  battered  all  to  pieces  and  utterly 
demolished ;  nor  was  it  possible  to  doubt  or  question 
that  it  fell  by  its  own  demerits.  All  that  could  be 
urged  in  its  defence  —  and  even  that  I  did  not  urge — 
being  that  this  vei-y  f  aoe  had  affected  me,  only  the  day 
before,  with  a  sense  of  higher  beauty  and  intelligence 
than  1  had  ever  then  received  from  sculpture,  and  that 
its  expression  seemed  to  accord  with  that  of  the  whole 
figiu«,  aa  if  it  were  the  sweetest  not«  of  the  same  mu- 
sic. There  must  be  something  in  this ;  the  sculptor 
disregarded  technicalities,  and  the  imitation  of  actual 
nature,  the  better  to  produce  the  effect  which  he  really 
does  produce,  in  somewhat  the  same  way  as  a  painter 
works  his  magical  illusions  by  touches  that  have  no 
relation  to  the  truth  if  looked  at  from  the  wrong  point 
of  view.  But  Powers  considers  it  certain  that  the  an- 
tique sculptor  had  bestowed  all  his  care  on  the  study 
of  the  human  figure,  and  really  did  not  know  how  to 
make  a  face.  I  myself  used  to  think  that  the  face 
was  a  much  leas  important  thing  with  the  Greeks, 
among  whom  the  entire  beauty  of  the  form  was  famil- 
iarly seen,  tlian  with  ourselves,  who  allow  no  other 
nudity. 

After  annihilating  the  poor  visage.  Powers  showed 
us  his  two  busts  of  Proserpine  and  Psyche,  and  con* 
tinuetl  his  lecture  by  showing  the  truth  to  nature  with 


806   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [IM 

which  these  are  mod^lleid.  I  freely  tutknowledge  tlia 
fact ;  there  is  no  surt  of  comjiariHuit  to  be  made  be- 
tween the  beauty,  intelligenee,  feeling,  and  aceura^y 
of  representation  in  these  two  faces  and  in  that  of  th« 
Venus  di  Medici.  A  light  —  tlie  light  of  a  soul  proper 
to  each  individual  character  —  seems  to  shine  from 
the  interior  of  the  marble,  and  beam  forth  from  the 
features,  chiefly  from  the  eyes.  Still  insisting  u|>oq 
the  eye,  and  hitting  the  poor  Yeuus  another  and  an- 
other and  still  another  blow  on  that  nnlmppy  feature, 
Mr.  Powers  turned  up  and  turned  inward  and  turned 
outward  his  own  Titanic  orb,  —  tlio  biggest,  by  far, 
that  ever  I  saw  in  mortal  hciul,  —  and  made  us  see 
and  confess  that  tliere  was  nothing  right  in  the  Venus 
and  everjihing  right  in  I'syche  and  Proserpine.  To 
say  the  truth,  their  marble  eyes  have  life,  and,  placing 
yourself  in  the  proper  position  towards  them,  you  can 
meet  their  glances,  and  feel  them  mingle  with  your 
own.  Powers  is  a  great  man,  and  also  a  tender  and 
delicate  one,  massive  ami  rude  of  surfa4.«  as  he  looks ; 
and  it  is  rather  absurd  to  feel  how  he  impressed  his 
auditor,  for  the  time  being,  with  his  own  evident  idea 
that    nobody  else   is  worthy  to    touch    marble.     Mr. 

B told  nie  tliat  Powers  has  had  many  difficulties 

on  professional  grounds,  as  I  understood  him,  and  with 
his  brotlier  artists.  No  wonder  I  He  has  said  enough 
in  my  hearing  to  put  hira  at  swonls'  points  witli  sculp- 
tors of  every  epoch  and  every  degree  between  the  two 
inclusive  extremes  of  Phidias  and  Clarke  Mills. 

lie  has  a  bust  of  the  reigning  Grand  Duoht 
Tuscany,  who  sat  to  him  fur  it.  The  bust  is  that  of  ft 
noble-looking  lady;  and  Powers  remarked  that  royal 
personages  have  a  certain  look  that  distinguishes  them 
from  other  people,  and  is  seen  in  individuals  of 


1 


)I    IM'^H 


iBsa.] 


ITALY. 


lower  rank.  They  all  have  it ;  the  Queen  of  EBgland 
and  Prince  Albert  have  it ;  and  so  likewise  has  every 
other  Royalty,  although  the  possession  of  this  kingly 
look  implies  nothing  whatever  as  respects  kingly  and 
commanding  qualities.  He  said  that  none  of  our  pub- 
lic men,  whatever  authority  they  may  have  held,  or 
for  whatever  length  of  time,  possess  this  look,  hut  he 
added  afterwards  that  Washington  had  it.  Coni- 
manders  of  armies  sometimen  have  it,  but  not  in  the 
degree  that  royal  personages  do.  It  is,  as  well  as  I 
could  make  out  Powers's  idea,  a  certain  coldness  of 
demeanor,  and  especially  of  eye,  that  surrounds  them 
with  an  atmosphere  through  which  the  electricity  of 
human  brotherhood  cannot  pass.  From  their  youth 
upward  they  are  taught  to  feel  themselves  apart  from 
the  rest  of  mankind,  and  this  manner  becomes  a  sec- 
ond nature  to  them  in  consequence,  and  as  a  safeguard 
to  their  conventional  dignity.  They  put  themselves 
nnder  glass,  as  it  were  (the  illustration  is  my  own), 
BO  that,  though  you  see  them,  and  see  them  looking 
no  more  noble  and  dignified  than  other  mortals,  nor 
so  much  so  as  many,  still  they  keep  themselves  within 
a  sort  of  sanctity,  and  repel  you  by  an  invisible  bar- 
rier. Even  if  they  invite  you  with  a  show  of  warmth 
and  hospitality,  you  cannot  get  through.  I,  too,  rec< 
ognize  this  look  in  the  ]K>rtraita  of  Washington  ;  in 
him,  a  milil,  benevolent  coldness  and  apartness,  but 
indicating  that  formality  which  seems  to  have  been 
deeper  in  him  than  in  any  other  mortal,  and  which 
built  np  an  actual  fortification  between  himself  and 
buman  sympathy.  I  wish,  for  once,  Washington  could 
come  out  of  his  envelopment  and  show  us  what  bia 
teal  dimensions  were. 

Among  other  models  of  statues   heretofore  mada 


808    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [1888. 

Powers  showed  ns  one  of  Mel&ncholy,  or  rather  of 
Contemplation,  from  Milton's  "  PenseroBo  " ;  a  female 
figure  with  uj]lift«d  face  and  rapt  look,  "oommuning 
with  the  skiea."  It  is  very  fine,  and  goes  deeply  into 
Milton's  tliought;  but,  ba  far  as  the  outward  form 
and  action  are  contt^med,  I  remember  seeing  a  mde 
engraving  in  my  childhood  that  probably  suggested 
the  idea.  It  was  prefixed  to  a  cheap  Aiueriean  edi- 
tion of  Milton's  poems,  and  was  probably  as  familiar 
to  Powers  aa  to  myself.  It  is  very  remarkable  how 
difficult  it  seems  to  bo  to  striku  out  a  new  attitude 
sculpture  ;  a  new  group,  or  a  new  single  figui 

One  piece  of  si-uljiture  Powers  exhibited,  bowo' 
which  vaa  very  exquisite,  and  such  as  1  never  saw  be- 
fore. Oi>ening  a  desk,  he  took  out  something  care- 
fully enclosed  between  two  layers  of  eotton  wool,  on 
removing  which  there  appeared  a  little  baby's  hand 
most  delicately  represented  in  the  whitest  marble ;  all 
the  dimples  where  the  knuckles  were  to  be,  all  the 
ereases  in  the  pliunp  flesh,  every  infantile  wrinkle  of 
the  soft  skin,  being  lovingly  recorded.  "  The  oritioa 
condemn  minute  representation,"  said  Powers  ;  "  but 
you  may  look  at  this  through  a  microscope  and  see  if 
it  injures  the  general  effect."  Nature  herself  never 
made  a  prettier  or  truer  little  hand.  It  was  the  hand 
of  his  daughter,  —  "  Luly's  hand,"  Powers  called  it,  — 
the  same  that  gave  my  own  such  a  frank  and  friendly 
grasp  when  I  first  met  "  Luly."  The  sculptor  made 
it  only  for  himself  and  his  wife ;  but  so  many  people, 
he  said,  had  insisted  on  having  a  copy,  that  there  are 
now  forty  scattered  about  the  world.  At  sixty  years, 
Luly  ought  to  have  her  liand  sculptured  again,  and 
give  it  to  her  grandihildren  with  the  baby's  hand  ot 
five  muathe  old.     The  baby-hand  that  had  done  notb 


I 


ITALY.  309 

ing,  and  felt  only  its  mother's  kiss;  the  old  lady*! 
hand  that  had  exchanged  the  love-pressure,  worn  the 
marriage-ring,  closed  dead  eyes,  —  done  a  lifetime's 
work,  in  short.  The  sentiment  ia  rather  obvious,  but 
true  nevertheless. 

Before  we  went  away.  Powers  took  iia  into  a  room 
Apart  —  apparently  the  secretest  room  he  had  —  and 
showed  us  some  tools  and  ma4?hinery,  all  of  his  own 
contrivance  and  invention.     "  You  see  I  am  a  bit  of  a 

■  Yankee,"  he  observed. 
This  niachineiy  is  chiefly  to  facilitate  the  process  of 
modelling  his  works,  for  —  except  in  portrait-busts  — 
he  makes  no  clay  model  as  other  sculptors  do,  but 
models  directly  in  the  plaster ;  so  that  instead  of  be- 
ing crumbled,  like  clay,  the  original  mo<lcl  remains  a 
permanent  possession.  He  has  also  invented  a  certain 
open  file,  which  is  of  great  use  in  finishing  the  surface 
of  the  marble*,  and  likewise  a  machine  for  making 
these  files  and  for  punching  holes  through  iron,  and 
he  demonstrated  its  efficiency  by  punching  a  hole 
through  an  iron  bar,  with  a  force  equivalent  to  ten 

■  thousand  pounds,  by  the  mere  application  of  a  part 
of  bis  own  weight.  These  inventions,  he  says,  are  his 
amusement,  and  the  bent  of  his  nature  towards  sculp- 
ture must  indeed  have  been  strong,  to  coimteract,  in 
an  American,  such  a  capacity  for  the  contrivance  of 
steam-engines.  .  .  . 

I  had  no  idea  of  filling  so  many  pages  of  this  jour- 
nal with  the  sayings  and  characteristics  of  Mr.  Pow- 
ers ;  but  the  man  and  his  talk  are  fi-esh.  original,  and 
I  full  of  bone  and  muscle,  and  I  enjoy  him  much. 
We  now  proceeded  to  the  Pitti  Palace,  and  spent 
several  hours  pleasantly  in  its  saloons  of  pictures,  I 
never  enjoyed  pictures  anywhere  else  as  I  do  in  Flor 


810    FRBNCIT  AND  !TAUA!f  NOTE-BOOKS.  [U 

ence.  There  in  an  admirable  Judith  in  this  gallery 
liy  AUori ;  a  iace  of  great  beauty  BJid  depth,  and  bur 
hand  clutebes  the  bead  of  lIolofi^meD  by  the  hair  in  a 
way  tliut  startles  the  sjt^tator.  There  are  two  jteajb 
ant  MadunDas  by  MurtUo ;  simple  women,  yet  with  a 
thoughtful  eeuse  of  Home  high  mystery  connected  with 
the  baby  in  their  arms. 

Raphael  grows  upon  me  ;  several  other  &moun 
painters  —  Giiido,  ftir  instanee  —  are  fading  out  of 
my  mind.  Salvator  Rosa  baa  two  really  wonderful 
lanileeapes,  looking  from  the  shore  seaward;  and  Ru- 
l>eus  too,  likewise  on  a  large  scale,  of  mountain  and 
plain.  It  is  very  idle  and  fooliwh  to  talk  of  pictures ; 
yet,  after  poring  over  tbem  and  into  them,  it  set'iiis  a 
pity  to  let  all  the  thought  excited  by  them  pass  into 
nothingness. 

The  copyists  of  pictures  are  very  numerous,  both  in 
the  Fitti  and  UEBzi  galleries ;  and,  unlike  sculptors, 
they  appear  to  be  on  tlie  best  of  terms  with  one  an- 
other, chatting  sociably,  exchanging  friendly  criticism, 
and  giving  their  opinions  as  to  the  best  mode  of  at- 
taining the  desireil  effects.  Perhaps,  as  mere  cojtyists, 
they  escape  the  jealousy  that  might  spring  up  between 
rival  painters  attempting  to  develop  original  ideas. 
Miss  Howorth  says  that  the  business  of  copying  pic- 
tures, especially  those  of  Raphael,  is  a  regtdar  profes- 
sion, and  she  thinks  it  exceedingly  obstructive  to  the 
progress  or  existence  of  a  modem  school  of  painting, 
there  being  a  regular  demand  and  sure  sale  for  aH 
copies  of  the  old  masters,  at  prices  proportioned  to 
their  merit ;  whereas  the  eEFort  to  be  original  insures 
Dotbing,  except  long  neglect,  at  the  beginning  of  a 
career,  and  probably  ultimate  failure,  and  the  n< 
sity  of  becoming  a  copyist  at  last.     Some  artists 


ein>«^l 


1868.]  ITALY.  811 

ploy  themselves  from  joxxSi  to  age  in  nothing  else  but 
the  copying  of  one  single  and  self-same  picture  by 
Raphael,  and  grow  at  last  to  be  perfectly  mechanical, 
making,  I  suppose,  the  same  identical  stroke  of  the 
brush  in  fifty  successive  pictures. 

The  weather  is  very  hot  now,  — hotter  in  the  sun*' 
shine,  I  think,  than  a  midsummer  day  usually  is  in 
America,  but  with  rather  a  greater  possibility  of  being 
comfortable  in  the  shade.  The  nights,  too,  are  warm, 
and  the  bats  fly  forth  at  dusk,  and  the  fireflies  quite 
light  up  the  green  depths  of  our  little  garden.  The 
atmosphere,  or  something  else,  causes  a  sort  of  alacrity 
in  my  mind  and  an  affluence  of  ideas,  such  as  they 
are ;  but  it  does  not  thereby  make  me  the  happier.  I 
feel  an  impulse  to  be  at  work,  but  am  kept  idle  by 
the  sense  of  being  unsettled  with  removals  to  be  gone 
through,  over  and  over  again,  before  I  can  shut  my- 
self into  a  quiet  room  of  my  own,  and  turn  the  key.  I 
need  monotony,  too,  an  eventless  exterior  life,  before 
I  can  live  in  the  world  within. 

June  Ibili. — Yesterday  we  went  to  the  Uffizi  gal- 
lery, and,  of  course,  I  took  the  opportunity  to  look 
again  at  the  Venus  di  Medici  after  Powers's  attack 
upon  her  face.  Some  of  the  defects  he  attributed  to 
her  I  could  not  see  in  the  statue ;  for  instance,  the  ear 
appeared  to  be  in  accordance  with  his  own  role,  the 
lowest  part  of  it  being  about  in  a  straight  line  with 
the  upper  lip.  The  eyes  must  be  given  up,  as  not, 
when  closely  viewed,  having  the  shape,  the  curve  out- 
wards, the  formation  of  the  lids,  that  eyes  ought  to 
have ;  but  still,  at  a  proper  distance,  they  seemed  to 
have  intelligence  in  them  beneath  the  shadow  cast  by 
the  brow.    I  cannot  help  thinking  that  the  sculptor 


S12  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [ISH 

intentionally  made  every  feature  what  it  in,  ami  ual* 
oulated  them  all  with  a,  view  to  the  desired  effect. 
Whatever  rules  may  be  transgressed,  it  is  a  noble 
and  beautiful  face,  —  more  so,  ]>ei-hap8,  than  if  all 
ruleB  had  been  obeyed.  T  wish  Powers  wouJd  do  his 
l)eat  to  fit  the  Venna'a  figure  (which  he  does  not  deny 
to  be  a^Imirable)  with  a  faee  which  he  would  deem 
equally  admirable  and  in  aooordance  with  the  senti- 
ment of  the  form. 

"We  looked  pretty  thoroughly  through  the  gallery, 
and  I  saw  many  ])iotureB  that  impreaeod  me ;  but 
among  such  a  multitude,  with  only  one  poor  mind  to 
take  note  of  them,  the  stamp  of  each  new  impreiwioa 
helps  to  obliterate  a  former  one.  I  am  sensible,  ho«* 
ever,  that  a  process  la  going  on.  and  has  been  everi 
since  I  came  to  Italy,  that  puts  me  in  a  state  to  ses 
pictures  with  less  toil,  and  more  pleasure,  and  makes 
me  more  fastidious,  yet  more  sensible  of  beauty  where 
I  saw  none  before.  It  is  the  sign,  I  presume,  of  a 
taste  still  very  defective,  that  I  take  singidar  pleasure 
in  the  elaborate  imitations  of  Van  Mieris,  Geranl 
Dow,  and  other  old  Ehitch  wizards,  who  painted  sucli 
brass  pots  that  you  fan  see  your  face  in  tltem,  and 
such  earthen  pots  that  they  will  surely  hold  water  ; 
and  who  spent  weeks  and  months  in  turning  a  foot 
or  two  of  canvas  into  a  perfect  inicrosoopic  illuaioa 
of  some  homely  scene.  For  my  part,  I  wish  Raphael 
had  painted  The  Transfiguration  in  this  stjle,  at  the 
same  time  preserving  his  breadth  and  grandeur  of 
sign ;  nor  do  I  believe  that  there  is  any  real  im] 
iment  to  the  combination  of  the  two  styles,  exoej 
that  uo  possible  npace  of  human  life  could  8ufFi<^e  to 
cover  a  quarter  part  of  tlie  canvas  of  The  Transfigu* 
ration  with  such  touches  as  Gerard  Dow'b.     But  otM 


4 


ihaal 

the  I 

fde.^H 
.ped.^H 
oept^H 
e  to  ' 

1 


I 


185S.3 


iTAir. 


813 


feels  the  vast  scope  of  this  wonderful  art,  when  we 
think  of  two  excellences  so  far  apart  as  that  of  tlui 
last  painter  and  Raphael.  I  pause  a  good  while, 
too,  before  the  Dutch  paintings  of  fruit  and  flowers, 
where  tulips  and  roses  ajcquire  an  immortal  bloom, 
and  grapes  have  kept  the  freshest  juice  in  them  for 
two  or  three  hundred  years.  Often,  in  these  pictures, 
there  is  a  bird's -nest,  every  straw  perfectly  repre- 
sented, and  the  stray  feather,  or  the  down  that  the 
mother-bird  plucked  from  her  bosom,  with  the  three 
or  four  small  speckled  eggs,  that  seem  as  if  they 
might  be  yet  warm.  These  pretty  miracles  have  their 
use  in  assuring  us  that  paint^trs  really  can  do  some- 
thing that  takes  hold  of  us  iu  our  most  matter-of-fact 
moods ;  whereas,  the  merits  of  the  grander  style  of 
art  may  be  beyond  our  ordinary  appreciation,  and 
leave  us  in  doubt  whether  we  have  nut  befooled  our- 
selves with  a  false  admiration. 

Until  we  learn  to  appreciate  the  cherubs  and  angela 
that  Raphael  scatters  through  the  blessed  air,  in  a 
picture  of  The  Nativity,  it  is  not  amiss  to  look  at  a 
Dutch  fly  settling  on  a  peach,  or  a  hiunblebee  burying 
himself  in  a  flower. 

It  is  another  token  of  imperfect  taste,  no  doubt, 
that  queer  pictures  and  absurd  pictures  remain  in  my 
memory,  when  better  ones  pass  away  by  the  score. 
There  is  a  picture  of  Venus,  combing  her  son  Cupid's 
head  with  a  amail-tooth  comb,  and  looking  with  ma- 
ternal care  among  his  curls ;  this  I  shall  not  forget 
Likewise,  a  picture  of  a  broad,  rubicund  Judith,  by 
Bardoue,  —  a  widow  of  fifty,  of  an  easy,  lymphatic, 
cheerful  temperament,  who  has  ju.it  killed  Holofemea, 
Vid  is  as  self -complaisant  as  if  she  had  been  carving  a 
goose.     What  oould  possibly  have  stirred  up  this  putt 


814   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [18S8 

ding  of  a  woman  (unless  it  were  a  pudding-etick) 
Ao  such  a  (Iced  I  I  looked  witb  mucli  pleasure  at 
ugly,  old,  fat,  jolly  Bacchus,  astiide  on  a  barrel, 
Kubens;  the  most  natural  and  life-like  repreaentati< 
of  a  tipsy  rotundity  of  flesli  that  it  is  poBstble  to 
agine.  And  sometimes,  amid  these  sensual  images, 
caught  the  divine  pensiveness  of  a  Madonna's  face, 
Raphael,  or  the  glory  and  majesty  of  the  babe  Jei 
in  her  arms,  with  hifl  Father  shining  through  hi 
This  is  a  sort  of  revelation,  whenever  it  comes. 

This  morning,  immediately  after  breakfast,  I  vralki 
into   the   city,  meaning  to   make   myself  better 
quainted  with  its  appearaiiee,  and  to  go  into  its  vai 
ous  churches ;  but  it  soon  grew  so  hot,  that  I  tunn 
homeward  again.     The  int«;rior  of  the  Duomu  was  di 
liciously  cool,  to  be   sure,  —  cool  and  dim,  after  the 
white-hot  sunshine ;  but  an  old  woman  began  to  per- 
secute me,  so  that   I  came  away.      A  male   beggar 
drove  me  out  of  another  church  ;  and  I  took  refuge 
the  street,  where  the  beggar  and  I  would  have 
two  cinders  together,  if  we  had  stood  long  enough 
the   sunny  sidewalk.     After  my  five  summers'  exp^ 
rience  of  England,  I  may  have   forgotten  what  hot 
weather  is ;  but  it  does  appear  to  me  that  an  Amer- 
ican summer  is  not  so  fervent  as  this.     Besides  the 
direot  rays,  the  white  pavement  throws  a  furnace-heat 
up  into  one's  face  ;  the  shady  margin  of  the  street  is 
barely  tolerable ;  but  it  is  like  going  through  the  or- 
deal of  fire  to  cross  the  broad  bright  glare  of  an 
piazza.     The  narrow  streets  prove  themselves  a  bli 
ing  at  this  season,  except  when  the  sun  looks  direct 
into  them  ;  the  broad  eaves  of  the  houses,  too,  make  a 
BL'lvage  of  shade,  almost  always.     I  do  not  know  what 
becomes  of  the  street  -  merehants  at  the  noontide 


'ggar 

gein^^ 
beetf^H 
^henH 

BXpO-^^^ 


ope^^l 
blea^^^H 
meetly  ^^^ 
~ke  a 

what 

e  »l^y 


1858.]  ITALY.  816 

these  hot  days.  They  form  a  numerous  class  in  Flor* 
enoe,  displaying  their  wares  —  linen  or  cotton  doth, 
threads,  combs,  and  all  manner  of  haberdashery  —  on 
movable  counters  that  are  borne  about  on  wheels.  In 
the  shady  morning,  you  see  a  whole  side  of  a  street  in 
a  piazza  occupied  by  them,  all  offering  their  merohan* 
disc  at  full  cry.  They  dodge  as  they  can  from  shade 
to  shade ;  but  at  last  the  sunshine  floods  the  whole 
space,  and  they  seem  to  have  melted  away,  leaving 
not  a  rag  of  themselves  or  what  they  dealt  in. 

Cherries  are  very  abimdant  now,  and  have  been  so 
ever  since  we  came  here,  in  the  markets  and  all  about 
the  streets.  They  are  of  various  kinds,  some  exceed- 
ingly  large,  insomuch  that  it  is  almost  necessary  to 
disregard  the  old  proverb  about  making  two  bites  of 
a  cherry.  Fresh  figs  are  already  spoken  of,  though  I 
have  seen  none ;  but  I  saw  some  peaches  this  morning, 
looking  as  if  they  might  be  ripe. 

JuTie  16^A.  —  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Powers  called  to  see  us 
last  evening.  Mr.  Powers,  as  usual,  was  full  of  talk, 
and  gave  utterance  to  a  good  many  instructive  and  en- 
tertaining ideas. 

As  one  instance  of  the  little  influence  the  religian 
of  the  Italians  has  upon  their  morals,  he  told  a  story 
of  one  of  his  servants,  who  desired  leave  to  set  up  a 
small  shrine  of  the  Virgin  in  their  room  — a  cheap 
print,  or  bas-relief,  or  image,  such  as  are  sold  every- 
where at  the  shops  —  and  to  bum  a  lamp  before  it; 
she  engaging,  of  course,  to  supply  the  oil  at  her  own 
expense.  By  and  by,  her  oil-flask  appeared  to  possess 
a  miraculous  property  of  replenishing  itself,  and  Mr. 
Powers  took  measures  to  ascertain  where  the  oil  came 
from.     It  turned  out  that  the  servant  had  all  the  time 


816   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [1861  J 

been  Htealing  the  oU  from  them,  and  keeping  up  her 
daily  saerifice  and  womhip  to  the  Virgin  by  ttiia  oo» 
stant  theft. 

His  talk  Boon  turned  upon  sculpture,  and  he  spoke 
once  more  of  the  difficulty  imposed  upmi  an  artist  by 
the  necessity  of  clothing  portrait  statues  in  the  mod- 
em costume.  I  find  that  he  does  uut  approve  either 
of  nudity  or  of  the  Roman  toga  for  a  mo<lem  statue) 
neither  does  he  think  it  right  to  shirk  the  diffitndty  — 
as  Ohantrey  did  in  the  case  of  Washington  —  by  en- 
veloping him  in  a  cloak;  but  acknowledges  the  pro- 
priety of  taking  the  actual  costume  of  the  age  and 
doing  his  best  with  it.  He  himself  did  so  with  his 
own  Washington,  and  also  with  a  statue  that  he  made 
of  Daniel  Webster.  I  suggested  thnt  though  this  co»- 
tume  might  not  appear  ridiculous  to  us  now,  yet,  two 
or  three  centuries  hence,  it  would  create,  to  the  people 
of  that  day,  an  impossibility  of  seeing  the  real  man 
through  the  absurdity  of  his  envelopment,  after  it  shall 
have  entirely  grown  out  of  fashion  and  remembrance ; 
and  Webster  would  seem  aa  absurd  to  them  then  as  he 
would  to  us  now  in  the  masquenwie  of  some  by-gona 
day.  It  might  be  well,  therefore,  to  adopt  some  con- 
ventional costume,  never  actual,  but  always  graceful 
and  noble.  Besides,  Webster,  for  example,  hod  other 
costumes  than  that  which  he  wore  in  public,  and  per> 
haps  it  was  in  those  that  he  lived  his  most  real  life  | 
his  dressing-^own,  his  drapery  of  the  night,  the  dreas 
that  he  wore  on  his  fishing  excursions  ;  in  these  other 
costumes  he  spent  three  fourths  of  his  time,  and  most 
probably  was  thus  arrayed  when  be  conceived  the  great 
thoughts  tliat  afterwards,  in  some  formal  and  outside 
mood,  he  gave  forth  to  the  public.  I  scarcely  think  I 
was  right,  but  am  not  sure  of  the  contrary.     At  anj 


4 


4 


J 


r 

I 


1868.]  ITALY. 

rate,  I  know  that  T  shnulil  hare  felt  much  more  sore 
that  I  knew  the  real  Webster,  if  I  had  seen  htm  in 
any  of  the  above-meuttooed  dresses,  than  either  in  hia 
Bwallow-tailed  coat  or  frock. 

Talking  of  a  taate  for  painting  and  sculpture. 
Powers  observed  that  it  was  something  very  different 
and  quite  apart  from  the  moral  sense,  and  that  it  was 
often,  perhaps  generally,  possessed  by  unprincipled 
men  of  ability  and  cultivation.  I  have  had  tliis  per- 
oeptioD  myself.  A  genuine  love  of  painting  and 
sculpture,  and  perhaps  of  music,  seems  often  to  have 
distinguished  men  capable  of  every  social  crime,  and 
to  have  formed  a  line  and  hard  enarael  over  their 
characters.  Perhaps  it  is  because  such  tastes  are  ar- 
tificial, the  product  of  cultivation,  and,  when  Iiighly 
developed,  imply  a  great  remove  from  natural  sim- 
plicity. 

This  morning  I  went  with  U to  the  Uffizi  gal- 

leiy,  and  ^ain  looked  witli  more  or  less  attention  at 
almost  every  picture  and  statue.  I  saw  a  little  pic- 
ture of  the  golden  age,  by  Zucchero,  in  which  the 
charms  of  youths  and  virgins  are  depicted  with  a  free- 
dom that  this  iron  age  can  hardly  bear  to  look  at. 
The  cabinet  of  gems  happened  to  be  open  for  the  ad- 
mission of  a  privileged  party,  and  we  likewise  went 
in  and  saw  a  brilliant  collection  of  goldsmiths'  work, 
among  which,  no  doubt,  were  specimens  from  such 
bands  as  Benvenu to  Cellini's.  Little  busts  with  dia^ 
■nond  eyes  ;  boxes  of  gems ;  cups  carved  out  of  pre- 
cious material ;  crystal  vases,  beautifully  chased  and 
engraved,  and  sparkling  with  jewels;  great  pearls,  in 
the  midst  of  rubies;  opals,  rich  with  all  manner  of 
lovely  lights.  I  remember  Benvenuto  Cellini,  in  hia 
memoirs,  speaks  of  manufacturing  such  playthings  as 
theue. 


B18    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [186i 

I  observed  another  nharacteristio  of  the  sammer 
itreets  of  Florence  to-day ;  tables,  movable  to  an<3 
fro,  on  wheeU,  and  set  out  with  cuol  iced  drinks  aod  J 
cordials. 


June  nth.  —  My  wife  and  I  went,  this  morning,  | 
the  Academy  of  Fine  Arts,  and,  on  our  way  thithei^ 
went  into  the  Duoino,  where  we  found  a  delicioualy 
cool  twilight,  through  which  shone  the  mild  gleam  of 
the  painted  windows.     1  cannot  hut  tliink  it  a  pity 
that  St.  Peter's  is  nut  lighted  by  such  windows  ail 
those,  although  I  by  no  means  saw  tlie  glory  in  tbei 
now  that  I  have  spoken  of  in  a  roconl  of  my  formeg 
visit.     We   found   out   the   monument  of   Giotto,  i 
tahlet,  and  portrait  in  bas-relief,  on  the  walk  near  tb 
entrance  of  the  Cathedral,  on  the  right  hand ;  also,  fl 
representation,  in  fresco,  of   a  knight  on  horseback,^ 
the  memorial  of  one  John  Ilawkwood.  close  by  the  ] 
door,  to  the  left.     The  priests  were  chanting  a  service  ] 
of  some  kind  or  otlier  in  the  choir,  terribly  inharmo*  1 
nious,  and  out  of  tune.  .  .  . 

On  reaching  the  Academy,  the  soldier  or  policeman 
at  the  entrance  directed   us  into  the  large  halL,  tfaa 
walls  of  which  were  covered  on  both  sides  with  pic- 
tures, arranged  as  nearly  as  poiufible  in  a  progressive 
series,  with  referenuo  to  the  date  of  the  painters ;  so 
that  here  the  origin  and  procession  of  the  art  may  be  I 
traced  through  the  course  of,  at  least,  two  hundred  ' 
years.      Giotto,  Cimabue,  and   others   of  unfamiliar 
names  to  me,  are  among  the  earliest ;  and,  except  aa 
ourioaities,  I  should  never  desire  to  look  once  at  tliem, 
aor  think  of  looking  tvrice.     They  seem  to  have  be«n 
executed  with  great  care  and  conscientiousness,  and  { 
the  heads  are  often  wrought  out  with  minuteness  awl  J 


1858.J  ITALl.  819 

fidelity,  and  have  so  much  expression  that  they  tell 
their  own  stoiy  clearly  enough ;  but  it  seems  not  to 
have  been  the  painter's  aim  to  effect  a  lifelike  illu- 
sion, the  backgpx>und  and  accessories  being  conven- 
tional.  The  trees  are  no  more  like  real  trees  than  the 
feather  of  a  pen,  and  there  is  no  perspective,  the  figure 
of  the  picture  being  shadowed  forth  on  a  surface  of 
burnished  gold.  The  effect,  when  these  pictures,  some 
of  them  very  large,  were  new  and  freshly  gilded,  must 
have  been  exceedingly  brilliant,  and  iauch  resembling, 
on  an  immensely  larger  scale,  the  rich  illuminations  in 
an  old  monkish  missal.  In  fact,  we  have  not  now,  in 
pictorial  ornament,  anything  at  all  comparable  to  what 
their  splendor  must  have  been.  I  was  most  struck 
with  a  picture,  by  Fabriana  Gentile,  of  the  Adoration 
of  the  Magi,  where  the  faces  and  figures  have  a  great 
deal  of '  life  and  action,  and  even  grace,  and  where  the 
jewelled  crowns,  the  rich  embroidered  robes,  and  cloth 
of  gold,  and  all  the  magnificence  of  the  three  kings, 
are  represented  with  the  vividness  of  the  real  thing : 
a  gold  sword-hilt,  for  instance,  or  a  pair  of  gold  spurs, 
being  actually  embossed  on  the  picture.  The  effect  is 
very  powerful,  and  though  produced  in  what  modem 
painters  would  pronounce  an  imjustifiable  way,  there 
is  yet  pictorial  art  enough  to  reconcile  it  to  the  spec- 
tator's mind.  Certainly,  the  people  of  the  Middle  Ages 
knew  better  than  ourselves  what  is  magnificence,  and 
how  to  produce  it;  and  what  a  glorious  work  must 
that  have  been,  both  in  its  mere  sheen  of  burnished 
gold,  and  in  its  illuminating  art,  which  shines  thus 
through  the  gloom  of  perhaps  four  centuries. 

Fra  Angelico  is  a  man  much  admired  by  those  who 
have  a  taste  for  Pre-Raphaelite  painters ;  and,  though 
I  take  little  or  no  pleasure  in  his  works,  I  can  see  thai 


820   FRENCH  AND  ITAll.lN  NOTF.-BOOKS.    [18S8. 

there  is  great  delicacy  of  execution  in  his  heads,  and 
thftt  generally  he  prudiices  sach  u  Christ,  and  such 
a  Virgin,  and  such  saints,  as  he  eould  not  have  fore- 
seen, except  in  a  pure  and  holy  imagination,  nor  have 
wrought  out  without  saying  a  prayer  between  ©very 
two  touches  of  his  brush.  I  might  come  to  like  him, 
in  time,  if  I  thought  it  worth  while  ;  but  it  is  enough 
to  have  an  outuido  pert^eption  of  his  kind  and  di 
of  merit,  and  so  to  let  him  pass  into  the  garret  of 
livion,  where  many  things  as  good,  or  better,  are  pLI< 
away,  that  our  own  age  may  not  stumble  over  them. 
Perugino  is  the  first  painter  whose  works  seem  re- 
ally worth  preserving  for  tlie  getiuiue  merit  that  is 
in  them,  apart  from  any  quaintness  and  curiosity  of 
an  ancient  and  new-bom  art.  Probably  his  religion' 
was  more  genuine  than  Raphael's,  and  therefore  the 
Virgin  often  revealed  herself  to  him  in  a  loftier  and 
sweeter  face  of  divine  womanhood  than  all  the  genius 
of  Kaphiiel  oouhl  produce.  There  is  a  Crucifixion 
by  him  in  this  gallery,  which  matle  me  partly  feel 
as  if  I  were  a  far-off  spectator,  —  no,  I  did  not  mean 
a  Crucifixioii,  but  a  picture  of  ChriHt  dead,  lying, 
with  a  calm,  sweet  face,  on  his  motlier'a  knees  [*'ft 
Pieta"]. 

The  most  inadequate  and  utterly  absurd  pictura 
here,  or  in  any  otlier  gallery,  is  a  head  of  the  Eternal 
Father,  by  Carlo  Dolce  ;  it  looks  like  a  feeble  saint, 
on  the  eve  of  martyrdom,  and  very  doubtful  bow  he 
shall  be  able  to  bear  it ;  very  finely  and  prettily 
painted,  nevertheless. 

After  getting  through  the  principal  gallery  we  went 
Ento  a  smaller  room,  in  which  are  contained  a  great 
many  small  upecimens  of  the  old  Tuscan  artists,  among 
whom  Fia  Angelico  makes  the  principal  figure.    TheM 


""gh  I 


I 


IS»B.] 


TTAir. 


82t 


pictures  ar«  all  on  woo<l,  and  H^em  to  Iiave  been  taken 
from  the  stirineB  and  altars  of  ancient  (jhun^lies ;  they 
are  predellas  and  triptyclie,  or  pictures  on  three  fold- 
ing tablets,  shaped  quaintly,  in  Gothic  peaks  or  arches, 
and  still  gleaming  with  backgrounds  of  antique  gold. 
The  wood  is  much  worm-eaten,  and  the  colors  have 
often  faded,  or  changed,  from  what  the  old  artista 
meant  them  to  be ;  a  bright  angel  darkening  into  what 
looks  quite  as  much  like  the  Devil.  In  one  of  Fra 
Angelico's  pictures,  —  a  representation  of  the  Last 
Judgment,  —  he  has  tried  bis  saintly  band  at  making 
devils  indeed,  and  showing  them  busily  at  work,  tor- 
menting the  poor,  damned  souls  in  fifty  ghastly  ways. 
Above  sits  Jesus,  with  the  throng  of  blessed  saints 
around  him,  and  a  flow  of  tender  and  powerful  love  in 
bis  own  face,  that  ought  to  sufSce  to  redeem  all  the 
damned,  and  convert  the  very  fleuds,  and  quench  the 
fires  of  hell.  At  any  rate,  Fra  Angelico  bad  a  higher 
conceptioQ  of  his  Saviour  than  Michel  Angelo, 

June  19(A. — This  forenoon  we  have  been  to  the 
Church  of  St.  Lorenzo,  which  stands  on  the  site  of  an 
ancient  basilica,  and  was  itself  built  mure  than  four 
centuries  ago.  The  fa9ade  is  still  an  ugly  height  of 
rough  brickwork,  as  is  the  case  with  tlie  Duomo,  and, 
I  think,  some  other  churches  in  Florence ;  the  design 
of  giving  them  an  ehiborate  and  beautiful  finish  hav- 
ing been  delayed  from  cycle  to  cycle,  till  at  length 
the  day  for  spending  mines  of  wealth  on  churches  is 
gone  by.  The  interior  bad  a  nave  with  a  flat  roof, 
divided  from  the  side-^sles  by  Corinthian  pillars,  auii, 
at  the  farther  end,  a  raised  space  around  the  high  al- 
tar. The  pavement  is  a  mos^c  of  squares  of  black 
and  white  marble,  the  squares  meeting  one  another 


822   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [I8J 


;  the  pillarH,  pilasters,  and  other  arehil 
tural  material,  is  dark  brown  or  grayish  Htone ;  and 
the  general  effect  is  very  sombre,  eH|)ecially  a»  the 
ehurch  ia  somewhat  diuily  lighted,  and  as  the  slirines 
along  the  aisles,  and  the  statues,  and  the  monuments 
of  whatever  kind,  look  dingy  with  time  and  neglect. 
The  nave  is  thickly  set  with  wooden  seats,  brown  and 
worn.  What  pictures  there  are,  in  the  shrines  and 
cli&|>elB,  are  dark  and  faded.  On  the  whole,  the  edi- 
fice lias  a  sluibby  aspect.  On' each  side  of  the  higl 
altar,  elevatti^l  on  four  pillars  of  beautifid  marble,  k 
what  looks  like  a  great  sarcophagus  of  bronze, 
are,  in  fact,  pulpits,  aud  are  ornamented  with 
val  bss-reliefa,  representing  scenes  in  the  life  of  our 
Saviour.  Murray  says  that  the  resting-place  of  the 
first  Cosmo  di  Medici,  the  old  banker,  who  so  manned 
his  wealth  as  to  get  the  ]>osthumous  title  of  "  father  of 
his  country,"  and  to  make  his  posterity  its  reigning 
princes,  b  in  front  of  the  high  altar,  marked  by  red 
and  green  porphyry  and  marble,  inlaid  into  the  pave-, 
ment.     We  looked,  but  could  not  see  it  thexe. 

There  were  worshippers  at  some  of  the  slirines,  and 
persons  sitting  here  and  there  along  the  nave,  and  in 
the  aisles,  wrapt  in  devotional  thought,  doubtless,  and 
sheltering  themselves  here  from  the  white  sunshine  of 
the  piazzas.  Id  the  vicinity  of  the  choir  and  the  high 
altar,  workmen  were  busy  repairing  the  church,  or  per- 
haps only  making  arrangements  for  celebrating  the 
great  festival  of  St.  John. 

On  the  left  hand  of  the  choir  is  what  is  called 
old  sacristy,  with  the  peculiarities  or  notabilities 
which  I  am  not  ae<]uainted.     On  the  right  hand  is  the 
new  sacristy,  otherwise  called  the  Oapella  del  Deposit^, 
»  Chapel  of  the  Burled,  built  by  Michel  Angelo,  to 


1  tha^l 

>soe^ 

s  the 
lo,  to 

i 


18S8.] 


ITAir. 


823 


I 


eontain  two  moiiumeDts  of  the  Me<lici  family.  The 
interior  b  of  somewhat  severe  and  classic  architeo- 
ture,  tlie  Walls  and  pilasters  being  of  dark  stone,  and 
Burraounted  by  a  dome,  beaeatb  whicli  is  a  row  of 
windows,  quite  round  the  building,  throwing  their 
light  down  far  beneath,  upon  niches  of  white  marble. 
These  niches  are  ranged  entirely  around  the  chapel, 
and  might  have  sufficed  to  contain  more  than  all  the 
Medici  monuments  that  the  world  would  ever  care  to 
have.  Only  two  of  these  niches  are  filled,  however. 
In  one  of  them  sits  Giuliano  di  Medici,  sculptured  by 
Michel  Angelo,  —  a  figure  of  dignity,  which  would, 
perhaps,  be  very  striking  in  any  other  presence  than 
that  of  the  statue  which  occupies  the  corresponding 
niche.  At  the  feet  of  Giuliano  recline  two  allegorical 
statues,  Day  and  Night,  whose  meaning  there  I  do  not 
know,  and  perhaps  Michel  Angelo  knew  as  little.  As 
the  great  sculptor's  statues  are  apt  to  do,  they  fling 
their  limbs  abroad  with  adventurous  freedom.  Below 
the  corresponding  niche,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
chapel,  recline  two  similar  statues,  representing  Morn- 
ing and  Evening,  sufficiently  like  Day  and  Night  to 
be  their  brother  and  sister ;  all,  in  truth,  having  sprung 
from  the  same  father.  .  .  . 

But  the  statue  that  sits  above  these  two  latter  alle- 
gories, Morning  and  Evening,  is  like  no  other  that 
ever  came  from  a  sculptor's  hand.  It  is  the  one  work 
worthy  of  Michel  Angelo's  reputation,  and  grand 
enough  to  vindicate  for  him  all  the  genius  that  the 
world  gave  him  cretlit  for.  And  yet  it  aeems  a  simple 
thing  enough  to  think  of  or  to  execute ;  merely  a  sit- 
ting figure,  the  face  partly  overshadowed  by  a  helmet, 
one  hand  supporting  the  chin,  the  other  resting  ou  the 
thigh.     But  ^t«r  looking  at  it  a  litUe  while,  tiie  spec 


824    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  U\ 

tatnr  ccasea  to  Uiintc  of  it  iis  a  marble  stattie ;  it 
to  life,  and  you  »ee  tliat  the  princely  figure  \»  brood- 
ing over  some  great  detiign,  which,  when  he  has  ar- 
ranged in  his  own  mind,  the  world  will  be  isin  to  ex- 
ecute for  him.  No  such  grandeur  and  majesty  haa 
elsewhere  been  put  into  human  shape.  It  is  all  a  miiw 
aele ;  the  deep  repose,  and  the  deep  life  within  it.  It 
is  &n  mucli  a  miracle  to  have  achieved  this  as  to  make 
a  statue  that  would  rise  up  and  walk.  The  face,  when 
one  gazes  earnestly  into  it,  beneath  the  shadow  of  its 
helmet,  is  seen  to  be  calmly  sombre ;  a  mood  which,  I 
think,  is  generally  that  of  the  rulers  of  mankind,  ex- 
cept in  momenta  of  vivid  action.  This  statue  is  one 
of  the  things  which  I  look  at  with  highest  enjoyment, 
but  also  with  grief  and  impatience,  because  I  feel  that 
I  do  not  come  at  all  which  it  involves,  and  that  by 
and  by  I  must  go  away  and  leave  it  forever.  IIow 
wonderful  \  To  take  a  block  of  niurble,  and  convert 
it  wholly  into  thought,  and  to  do  it  through  all  the 
obstructions  and  iuii>e(Iimeiit8  of  drapery ;  for  there  is 
nothing  nude  in  this  statue  but  the  face  and  hands. 
The  vest  is  the  costume  of  Micltel  Angelo's  century. 
This  is  what  I  always  tlioiiglit  a  scidptor  of  true  gen- 
ius should  be  able  to  do,  —  to  show  the  man,  of  what- 
ever epoch,  nobly  and  heroically,  through  the  costume 
which  he  might  actually  have  worn. 

The  statue  sits  within  a  square  niche  of  white  muna! 
ble,  and  completely  htls  it.  It  seems  to  me  a  pitf 
that  it  should  be  thus  confined.  At  tlie  Crystal  Pal- 
ace, if  I  remember,  the  effect  is  improved  by  a  free 
surrounding  space.  Its  naturalness  is  ba  if  it  came 
out  of  the  marble  of  its  own  accord,  with  all  its  grai^ 
deur  banging  heavily  about  it,  and  sat  down  tliere  be* 
Death  its  weight.     I  cannot  describe  it.     It  is  like  ti^ 


A 


1858.] 


325 


I 


ing  to  stop  the  ghost  of  Hamlet's  father  by  crossing 
spears  before  it. 

Com  munica ting  with  the  sacristy  ia  the  Medicean 
Chapel,  which  was  built  more  thaa  two  centuries  ago, 
for  the  reception  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre ;  arrangements 
having  been  made  about  that  time  to  steal  this  most 
sacred  relic  from  the  Turks.  The  design  failing,  the 
chapel  was  converted  by  C-osmo  IT.  into  a  place  of 
sepulture  for  the  princes  of  his  family.  It  is  a  very 
grand  and  solemn  edifice,  octagonal  in  shape,  with  a 
lofty  dome,  vritlun  which  is  a  series  of  brilliant  fres- 
cos, painted  not  more  than  thirty  years  ago.  These 
pictures  are  the  only  portion  of  the  adornment  of  the 
chapel  which  interferes  with  the  sombre  beauty  of  the 
general  effect ;  for  though  the  walls  are  incrusted, 
from  pavement  to  dome,  with  marbles  of  inestimable 
cost,  and  it  la  a  Florentine  mosaic  on  a  grander  scale 
than  was  ever  executed  elsewhere,  the  result  is  not 
gaudy,  as  in  many  of  the  Roman  chapels,  but  a  dark 
and  melancholy  richness.  The  architecture  strikes 
me  as  extremely  fine ;  each  alternate  side  of  the  octa- 
gon being  an  arch,  rising  as  high  as  tlie  cornice  of  the 
lofty  dome,  and  forming  the  frame  of  a  vast  niche. 
All  the  dead  princes,  no  doubt,  according  to  the  gen- 
eral design,  were  to  have  been  honored  with  statues 
within  this  stately  mausoleum  ;  but  only  two  —  those 
of  Ferdinand  I.  and  Cosmo  H.  —  seem  to  have  been 
placed  here.  They  were  a  bad  breed,  and  few  of 
them  deserved  any  better  monument  than  a  dung-hill ; 
and  yet  they  have  this  grand  chapel  for  the  family  at 
large,  and  yonder  grand  statue  for  one  of  its  most 
worthless  members.  I  am  glad  of  it ;  and  as  for  the 
statue,  Michel  Angelo  wrought  it  through  the  efficacy 
of  a  kingly  idea,  which  had  no  reference  to  the  indi- 
*idual  whose  name  it  bears. 


826   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [IM 

In  the  piiizza,  ailjoiiitng  tbe  cburoh,  is  a  Rtatue  < 
the  Smt  CoHDio,  the  old  banker,  in  Roman  coatum 
seated,  and  looking  like  a  man  fit  to  bold  autharitgi 
No,  I  mistake ;  tbe  statue  is  of  John  di  Medici,  t 
father  of  Cogmo,  and  hiniaelf  no  banker,  bat  a  sold 

June  21st.  —  Yestenlay,  after  dinner,  we  went  wil 
the  two  eldest  children  to  the  Ikiholi  Gardens. 
We  entered  by  a  gate,  nearer  to  our  house  than  that 
liy  the  Pitti  Palace,  and  found  ourselves  almost  ii 
diately  among  emltowered  walks  of  box  and  sbrubbei^, 
and  little  wildernesses  of  trees,  with  here  and  there 
seat  under  an  arbor,  and  a  marble  statue,  gray  with 
ancient  weather-stains.  The  site  of  the  garden  is  a 
very  uneven  8urfat.'e,  and  the  paths  go  upward  and 
downward,  and  ascend,  at  their  ultimate  point,  to  a 
base  of  what  appears  to  be  a  fortress,  coramau<ling  tlie 
city.  A  gootl  many  of  the  Florentines  were  raiiibling 
about  the  gardens,  like  ourselves :  little  parties  of 
school-boys,  fathers  and  mothers,  with  their  youthful 
progeny  ;  young  men  in  couples,  looking  closely  into 
every  female  face ;  lovers,  with  a  maid  or  two  attend- 
ant on  the  young  lady.  All  appeared  to  enjoy  them- 
selves, especially  the  children,  dancing  on  the  espla- 
nades, or  rolling  down  the  slopes  of  the  hills ;  and  the 
loving  pairs,  whom  it  was  rather  embarrassing  to  come 
upon  unexpectedly,  Hitting  together  on  the  stone  seat 
of  an  arbor,  with  clasped  hands,  a  passionate  soleub' 
iiity  in  tlie  young  man's  face,  and  a  downcast  pit 
ure  in  the  lady's.  Policemen,  in  cocked  hats  and  ep» 
nulets,  cross -belts,  and  swords,  were  scattered  about 
the  grounds,  but  interfered  with  nobody,  though  they 
seemed  to  keep  an  eye  on  all.  A  sentinel  stood  in 
the  hot  sunshine,  looking  down  over  the  garden  froD*^ 
the  ramparts  of  the  fortress. 


I 
1 


1868.] 


ITALY. 


32T 


f  part,  in  this  foreign  conntry,  I  have  no  oI> 


I 
I 


I  conntr 
jection  to  policemen  or  any  other  minister  of  author- 
ity; tliough  I  remember,  in  America,  I  had  an  innate 
antipathy  to  constables,  and  always  sided  with  the 
mob  against  law.  This  was  very  wrong  and  foolish, 
considering  that  I  was  one  of  the  sovereigns;  bat  a 
sovereign,  or  any  number  of  sovereigns,  or  t!ie  twenty- 
millionth  part  of  a  sovereign,  does  not  love  to  find 
himself,  as  an  American  must,  included  within  the 
delegated  authority  of  his  own  servants. 

There  is  a  sheet  of  water  somewhere  in  the  Boboli 
Gardens,  inhabited  by  swans;  but  this  we  did  not  see. 
We  found  a  smaller  pond,  however,  set  in  marble,  and 
surrounded  by  a  parapet,  and  alive  with  a  multitude 
of  fish.     There  were  minnows  by  the  thousand,  and  a 

good  many  gold-fish ;  and  J ,  who  had  brought 

some  bread  to  feed  the  swans,  threw  in  handfuls  of 
crumbs  for  the  benefit  of  these  finny  people.  They 
seemed  to  be  aecustonied  to  such  courtesies  on  the 
part  of  visitors ;  and  immediately  the  surface  of  the 
water  was  blackened,  at  the  spot  where  each  crumb 
fell,  with  shoals  of  minnows,  thrusting  one  another 
even  above  the  surface  in  their  eagerness  to  snatch  it. 
"Witliin  the  depths  of  the  pond,  the  yellowish-green 
water  —  its  hue  being  precisely  that  of  the  Amo  — 
would  be  reddened  duskily  with  the  larger  bulk  of 
two  or  three  gold-fishes,  who  finally  poked  their  great 
snouts  up  among  the  minnows,  but  generally  missed 
the  crumb.  Beneath  the  circular  margin  of  the  pond 
there  are  little  arches,  into  the  shelter  of  which  the 
iisli  retii-e,  when  the  noonday  sun  burns  straight  down 
into  their  dark  waters.  We  went  on  through  the  gai*- 
den-paths,  shadowed  quite  across  by  the  liigh  walls  of 
box,  and  reached  an  esplanade,  whence  we  had  a  good 


828  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [It 

view  of  Florence,  with  the  bare  brown  ridges  on  tha 
norUioru  side  of  the  Anio,  and  glimiwwsa  of  the  river 
Itself,  flowing  like  a  street,  between  two  rows  of  pal- 
aces. A  great  way  o£F,  too,  wo  saw  some  of  the  cloud- 
like peaks  of  the  Apennines,  iind,  above  them,  tha 
douds  into  which  the  sun  was  descending,  looking 
quite  as  substantial  as  the  distant  mountains.  The 
city  did  not  present  a  particularly  splendid  aspect, 
though  its  great  Duomo  was  seen  in  the  middle  dis 
tance,  sitting  in  its  circle  of  little  dome«,  with  the  tall 
campanile  close  by,  and  within  one  or  two  hundred 
yar<la  of  it,  the  high,  ciunbrous  bulk  of  the  Palazzo 
Vecchio,  with  its  lofty,  inacliit^olated,  and  battlemented 
tower,  very  picturesque,  yet  looking  exceedingly  like 
a  martin-box,  on  a  pole.  There  were  other  domes 
and  towers  and  spires,  and  here  and  there  the  distinct 
shape  of  an  edifice  ;  but  the  general  piilure  was  of  a 
contiguity  of  red,  earthen  roofs,  filling  a  not  very 
broa4  or  extensive  valley,  among  dry  and  ridgy  hills, 
with  a  river-gleam  lightening  up  the  landsea^ie  a  lit- 
tle.   U took  out  her  pencil  and  tablets,  and  l>egiui 

to  sketch  the  tower  of  the  Palazzo  Veochio  ;  in  doing 
whiuh,  she  immediately  l>eeftme  an  object  of  curiosity 
to  some  little  boys  and  larger  people,  who  failed  not, 
under  suuh  pretences  aa  taking  a  grasshopper  off  her 
dress,  or  no  pretence  at  all,  to  come  and  look 
shoulder.  There  is  a  kind  of  familiarity  among 
Florentines,  which  is  not  meant  to  bo  discoi 
End  ought  to  be  taken  in  good  part. 

We  continued  to   ramble   through  the  gardens, 
quest  of  a  good  spot  from  which  to  see  the  svmset,  and 
at  length  found  a  stone  Iwnch,  on  the  slope  of  a  hill« 
whence  the  entire  cloud  and  sim  scenery  was  fullj 
presented  to  us.     At  the  foot  of  the  bill  were  statue^ 


liled  not, 

iT  off  her  1^ 

ongtliMl^H 
»iurteoiH|^H 

irdens,  W^H 
inset,  and  ^^ 

a  hill, 

i  full} 

tattle^  -^ 


1838.] 


829 


and   among  tliem  a  Pegasus,  wtUi  wings  outspread; 
and,  a  little  beyond,  the  gardeD-front  of  tlie  Pitti  Pal- 


I,  which  looks  a  little  less  like  ; 


I  here 


I 


state  ]irison  1 
than  as  it  fronts  the  street,  (iirls  and  children,  and 
young  men  and  old,  were  taking  their  pleasure  in  our 
neighborhood  ;  and,  just  before  us,  a  lady  stood  talk- 
ing with  her  maid.  By  and  by,  we  discovered  her  to 
be  Mifl3  Howorth.  There  was  a  misty  light,  stream- 
ing down  on  the  hither  aide  of  the  ridge  of  hills,  that 
was  rather  peculiar ;  but  the  most  remarkable  thing 
was  the  shape  into  which  the  clouds  gathered  them- 
selves, after  the  disappearance  of  the  sun.  It  was  like 
a  tree,  with  a  broad  and  heavy  mass  of  foliage,  spread- 
ing high  upward  on  the  aky,  and  a  dark  and  well-de- 
fined trunk,  which  rooted  itself  on  the  vei^  of  the 
horizon. 

This  morning  we  went  to  the  Pitt!  Palttee.  The 
air  was  very  sultry,  and  the  pavements,  already  heated 
with  the  sun,  made  the  space  between  the  buildings 
seem  like  a  tilose  room.  The  earth,  I  tlnnk,  is  too 
much  stoned  out  of  the  streets  of  an  Italinn  city,  — 
paved,  like  those  of  Florence,  quite  across,  with  broad 
Bag-stAnes,  to  the  line  where  the  stones  of  tlie  houses 
on  each  side  are  piled  up.  Thtmder  rumbleil  over  our 
heads,  however,  and  the  clouds  were  so  dark  that  we 
scarcely  hoped  to  reach  the  palac*  without  feeling  the 
first  drops  of  the  shower.  The  air  still  darkened  and 
darkened,  so  that  by  the  time  we  arrived  at  the  suite 
of  picture-rooms  the  pictures  seemed  all  to  be  changed 
to  Kembrandts ;  the  shadows  as  black  as  midnight, 
with  only  some  highly  illuminated  portions  gleaming 
out.  The  obscurity  of  the  atmosphere  made  us  sen- 
sible how  splendid  is  the  adornment  of  tiiese  saloons; 
For  the  gilded  cormces  shone  out,  as  did  the  Riding 


830    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-DOORS.    [iBSa,  ] 

uf  tbo  arches  iintl  wreathed  circles  that  divide  the  ceit 
uig  into  crompartQieiits,  witliin  wliich  the  freseos  are 
patated,  and  whence  the  figures  looked  dimly  down, 
like  gods  out  of  a  inyBterious  sky.  The  white  marble 
stiulptures  also  gleamed  from  their  height,  where 
winged  eupids  or  cherubs  gambolled  aloft  in  bas-re- 
liefs ;  or  allegoric  shapes  reclined  along  the  cornices, 
hardly  noticed,  when  the  daylight  comes  brightly  into 
the  window.  On  the  walls,  all  the  rich  picture-frame* 
glimmered  in  gold,  as  did  the  framework  of  the  chairs, 
and  the  heavy  gilded  pedestals  of  the  marble,  alabas- 
ter, and  mosaic  tables.  These  are  very  magnificent 
saloons ;  and  since  I  have  begun  to  speak  of  their 
splendor,  I  may  as  well  add  tliat  the  doors  are  framed 
in  polished,  richly  veined  marble,  and  the  walls  hung 
with  scarlet  damask. 

It  was  useless  to  try  to  see  the  pictures.  All 
artists  engaged  in  copying  laJd  aside  their  brnahai. 
and  we  looked  out  into  the  square  before  the  palace, 
where  a  mighty  wind  sprang  up,  and  quickly  raised 
a  prodigious  cloud  of  dust.  Jt  hid  the  opposite  side 
of  the  street,  and  was  carried,  in  a  great  dusky  whirl, 
higher  than  the  roofs  of  the  houses,  higher  than  the 
top  of  the  Pitti  Palace  itself.  The  thunder  muttered 
and  grumbled,  the  lightning  now  and  then  flashed, 
and  a  few  rain-drops  pattered  against  the  windows; 
but,  for  a  long  time,  the  shower  held  off.  At  last  it 
came  down  in  a  stream,  and  lightened  the  air  to  suoh 
s  degree  that  we  could  see  some  of  the  pictures,  espfr 
eially  those  of  Rubens,  and  the  illuminated  parts  a£ 
Halvator  Rosa's,  and,  best  of  aU.  Titian's  Magdalen, 
the  one  with  golden  h^r  clustering  round  her  naked 
body.  The  golden  hair  indeed,  seemed  to  throw  out 
a  glory  of  its  own.     This  Magdalen  is  very  coarse  aw) 


>ei|I^H 
Mje,^^ 

« 
I 


ITALY. 


831 


§enaual,  with  only  an  impudent  aaaumptioD  of  peni- 
tence and  religious  aentiuieat,  scarcely  ao  de«p  as  the 
eyelids ;  but  it  is  a  splendid  picture,  nevertheless,  with 
those  naked,  lifelike  arms,  and  the  hands  that  press 
the  rich  locks  about  her,  and  so  carefully  permit  those 
voluptuous  breasts  to  be  seen.  She  a  penitent !  She 
would  shake  off  all  pretence  to  it  as  easily  as  she 
would  shake  aside  that  clustering  hair.  .  .  .  Titian 
must  have  been  a  very  good-for-nothing  old  man. 

I  looked  again  at  Michel  Angelo's  Fates  to-day; 
but  cannot  satisfactorily  make  out  what  he  meant  by 
them.  One  of  them — she  who  holds  the  distaff  — 
has  her  mouth  oj>en,  as  if  uttering  a  cry,  and  might 
be  fancied  to  look  somewhat  irate.  The  second,  who 
holds  the  thread,  has  a  pensive  air,  but  is  still,  I 
think,  pitiless  at  heart.  The  third  sister  looks  closely 
and  coldly  into  the  eyes  of  the  second,  meanwhile  cut- 
ting the  thread  with  a  pair  of  ahe-ars.  Michel  An- 
gelo,  if  I  may  presume  to  say  so,  wished  to  vary  the 
expression  of  these  three  sisters,  and  give  each  a  dif- 
ferent one,  but  did  not  see  precisely  how,  inasmuch  as 
all  the  fatal  Three  are  united,  heart  and  soiU,  in  one 
purpose.  It  is  a  very  impressive  group.  But,  a&  re- 
gards the  interpretation  of  this,  or  of  any  other  pro- 
found picture,  there  are  likely  to  be  as  many  interpre- 
tations as  there  are  spectators.  It  is  very  curious  to 
read  criticisms  upon  pictures,  and  upon  the  same  face 
in  a  picture,  and  by  men  of  taste  and  feeling,  and  to 
find  what  different  conclusions  they  arrive  at.  Each 
man  interprets  the  hieroglyphic  in  his  own  way  ;  and 
the  painter,  perhaps,  had  a  meaning  which  none  of 
them  have  reached :  or  possibly  he  put  forth  a  riddle 
without  himself  knowing  the  solution.  There  is  such 
a  necessity,  at  all  events,  of  helping  the  painter  out 


832   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185* 

with  the  spectator's  own  resources  of  feeling  and  im- 
itjpiiation,  that  you  tuin  never  be  sure  how  much  of  tbo 
picture  you  have  yourself  tna«le.  There  is  no  doubt 
that  tlie  public  is,  ta  a  certain  extent,  ri^ht  aud  sure 
of  its  ground,  when  it  du<.-lare8,  through  a  series  of 
ages,  that  a  certain  picture  is  a  great  work.  It  is  so  ; 
a  great  symbol,  pnn^eeding  out  of  a  great  mind  ;  but 
if  it  means  one  thing,  it  seems  to  mean  a  thousand, 
and,  often,  opposite  things. 

June  21th.  —  I  have  had  a  heavy  cold  and  tevet 
almost  throughout  the  past  week,  and  have  thereby 
lost  the  great  Florentine  festivity,  tlie  Feast  of  St 
John,  which  took  place  on  Thursduy  last,  with  the 
fire-works  and  illuminations  the  evening  before,  and 
the  races  and  court  ceremonies  on  the  day  itself. 
However,  unless  it  were  more  characteristic  and  pe- 
culiar than  the  Carnival,  I  have  not  missed  anytliii^ 
very  valuable. 

Mr.  Powers  called  to  see  me  one  evening,  and 
poured  out,  as  usual,  a  stream  of  talk,  both  nu^y  and 
oracular  in  its  character.  Speaking  of  human  eyes, 
he  observed  tliat  they  did  not  depend  for  their  exjires- 
sion  upon  color,  nor  upon  any  light  of  the  soul  beam- 
ing through  them,  nor  any  glow  of  the  eyeball,  nor 
upon  anything  but  the  form  and  action  of  the  sur- 
rounding muscles.  He  illustrates  it  by  sajHng,  that  if 
the  eye  of  a  wolf,  or  of  whatever  fiercest  animal,  could 
Ire  placed  in  another  setting,  it  would  be  found  capable 
of  the  utmost  gentleness  of  expression.  "  Vou  your- 
self," said  he,  "  have  a  very  bright  and  sharp  look 
Bometimes  ;  but  it  is  not  in  the  eye  itself."  His  own 
eye^,  as  I  couhl  have  awom,  were  glowing  all  the  time 
he  apoke ;  aud,  i-emembering  how  many  times  I  havtf 


I 


ma  1 

i 


IBH.] 


ITALY. 


Beemed  to  see  eyes  glow,  aixl  blaze,  and  flash,  and 
sparkle,  and  melt,  and  soften ;  and  how  all  poetry  is 
iliuininated  with  the  light  of  ladies'  i-yett ;  and  how 
many  people  liave  been  smitten  by  the  lightning  of  an 
eye,  whether  in  love  or  anger,  it  waa  difiicult  to  allow 
that  all  this  subtlest  and  keenest  fire  is  illusive,  not 
even  phosphorescent,  and  that  any  other  jelly  in  the 
same  socket  would  serve  as  well  as  the  brightest  eye. 
Kevertheless,  he  must  be  right ;  of  course  he  must,  and 
I  am  rather  ashamed  ever  to  have  thought  otherwise. 
Where  should  the  light  come  from?  Has  a  man  a 
flame  inside  of  his  head  ?  Does  his  spirit  manifest  it- 
self in  the  semblance  of  flame?  Tlie  moment  we  tliink 
of  it,  the  absurdity  becomes  e™ient.  I  am  not  quite 
sure,  however,  that  the  outer  surfaee  of  the  eye  may 
not  reflect  more  light  in  some  states  of  feeling  than 
in  others  ;  the  state  of  the  healtli,  certainly,  has  an  in< 
fluence  of  this  kind. 

I  asked  Powers  what  he  thought  of  Michel  Angelo'a 
statue  of  Lorenzo  di  Medici.  He  allowed  that  ite  ef- 
fect was  very  grand  and  mysterious  ;  but  added  that 
it  owed  this  to  a,  trick,  —  tlie  effect  being  produced  by 
the  arrangement  of  the  hood,  as  he  called  it,  or  hehnet, 
which  throws  the  upper  part  of  the  face  into  shadow. 
The  niche  in  which  it  sits  lias,  I  suppose,  its  part  to 
perform  in  tlirowing  a  still  deeper  shadow.  It  is 
very  possible  that  Michel  Augelo  may  have  calculated 
upon  this  effect  of  sombre  shadow,  and  legitimately,  I 
think ;  but  it  really  is  not  worthy  o£  Mr,  Powers  to 
say  that  the  whole  effect  of  this  mighty  statue  depends, 
not  on  tlie  positive  efforts  of  Michel  Angelo's  chisel, 
but  on  the  absence  of  light  in  a  space  of  a  few  indies. 
He  wrought  the  whole  statue  in  harmony  with  that 
(mall  part  of  it  which  he  leaves  to  the  spectator's  im- 


334    FliENCff  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [ISSBL 

agination,  and  if  he  had  erred  at  any  point,  the  mir- 
acle would  have  been  a  failure ;  bo  Uiat,  working  ia 
marble,  he  has  positively  ruached  a  degree  of  eiccel- 
lenoo  above  the  capability  of  marble,  ttculptnnng  bia 
highest  touches  u))»n  air  an<I  diiHlciucss. 

Mr.  Powers  gave  some  amusing  anecdotes  of  bStm 
early  life,  when  he  was  a  clerk  in  a  store  in  Cincinnati. 
There  was  a  muficutn  oppoHite,  the  proprietor  of  whioh 
ha<l  a  jK-ciiliar  physiognomy  that  struck  Powers,  inso- 
much that  he  felt  impelled  to  make  continual  cario-a- 
tures  of  it.  He  used  to  ilraw  them  upon  the  door  of 
the  museum,  and  became  ao  familiar  with  the  face 
that  he  could  draw  them  in  the  dark  ;  so  that,  every 
morning,  here  was  this  absunl  profile  of  himself  greet- 
ing the  museum-man  when  he  came  to  open  his  estab- 
liahmeot.  Often,  too,  it  would  reappear  within  an 
hour  after  it  was  nibl>ed  out.  The  man  was  infinitely 
annoyed,  and  made  all  possible  efforts  to  discover  the 
wiknown  artist,  but  in  vain  ;  and  fmally  concluded,  I 
suppose,  that  the  likeness  broke  out  upon  the  door  of 
its  own  a(!Cord,  like  the  nettle-rash.  Some  years  aftA^ 
wards,  the  proprietor  of  the  museum  engaged  Powen 
himself  as  an  assistant ;  and  one  day  Powers  asked 
him  if  he  remembered  this  mysterious  profile.  *'  Yes," 
said  he,  "  did  you  know  who  drew  them  ?  "  Powers 
took  a  piece  of  chalk,  and  touched  off  tiie  very  profile 
again,  before  the  man's  eyes.  "  Ah,"  said  he,  "  if  I 
had  known  it  at  the  time,  I  would  have  broken  every 
bone  in  your  body  I  " 

Before  he  began  to  work  in  marble.  Powers  had 
greater  practice  and  success  in  making  wax  Sgurei^ 
and  he  produced  a  work  of  this  kind  called  The  I» 
fcmal  llegions,  which  he  seemed  to  imply  ha^l  l)eea 
«ery  famous,     lie  said  he  once  wrought  a  faoe  in  wax 


I 


J 


ISSB.] 


ITALY. 


which  was  life  itself,  having  niade  the  eyes  on  purpoBe 
tor  it,  and  put  in  every  hair  in  the  eyebrows  individu- 
ally, and  finished  the  whole  with  similar  minuteuess ; 
80  that,  nithin  the  <Iistanee  of  a  foot  or  two,  it  was 
impossible  to  tell  that  the  face  did  not  live. 

I  have  hartUy  ever  before  felt  an  impulse  to  write 
down  a  man's  conversation  as  1  do  that  of  Mr.  Powers. 
The  chief  reason  is.  probably,  that  it  is  so  possible  to 
do  it.  his  ideas  being  square,  sohd,  and  tangible,  and 
therefore  readily  graaped  and  retained.  He  is  a  very 
instructive  man,  and  sweeps  one's  empty  and  dead  no> 
tions  out  of  the  way  with  exceeding  vigor ;  but  when 
you  have  his  ultimate  thought  and  perception,  you 
feel  inclined  to  think  and  see  a  little  further  for  your- 
self. He  sees  too  clearly  what  is  within  his  range  to 
be  aware  of  any  region  of  mystery  beyond.  Probably, 
however,  this  latter  remark  does  him  injustice.  I  like 
the  man,  and  am  always  glad  to  encounter  the  milt* 
stream  of  his  talk.  .  .  .  Yesterday  he  met  me  in  the 
itreet  (dressed  in  his  linen  blouse  and  slippers,  with 
1.  little  bit  of  a  scidptor's  cap  on  the  side  of  his  bead), 
an<l  gave  utterance  U>  a  theory  of  colds,  and  a  disser- 
tation on  the  bad  effects  of  draughts,  whether  of  cold 
air  or  hot,  and  the  dangers  of  transfusing  blood  from 
the  veins  of  one  living  subject  to  those  of  another. 
On  the  last  topic,  he  remarked  that  if  a  single  particle 
of  air  found  ite  way  into  the  veins,  along  with  the 
transfused  blood,  it  caused  convulsions  and  inevita- 
ble death ;  otherwise  the  process  might  he  of  excellent 
effect. 

Last  evening,  we  went  to  pass  the  evening  with 
Miss  Blagdcn,  who  inhabits  a  villa  at  Bellosguardo, 
about  a  mile  outside  of  the  walls.  The  situation  is 
very  lofty,  and  there  are  good  views  from  every  wim- 


886   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS. 

ilow  of  the  bouse,  and  an  especially  fine  one  of 
CQce  and  the  bills  beyond,  from  the  balcony  of  Uiv1 
druwing-room.  By  and  by  canie  Mr.  Browning,  Mr. 
Trollope,  Mr.  Boott  and  bis  yoimg  daughter,  and  two 
or  three  other  gentlemen.  .  .  . 

Browning  was  very  genial  and  full  of  life,  as  usualf 
but  hia  conversation  haj9  the  effervescent  aroma  whioli 
you  cannot  oatch,  even  if  you  get  the  very  words  that 
seem  to  be  imbued  with  it.  I^Ie  spoke  most  raptun 
oufdy  of  a  portrait  of  Mrs,  Browning,  wbit;h  an  Ital- 
ian artist  is  painting  for  the  wife  of  an  American  gen^ 
tleman,  as  a  present  from  ber  husband.  The  succesf  i 
was  alreaily  perfect,  although  there  had  bet-n  only  two 
sittings  aa  yet,  and  both  on  tlie  same  day ;  and  in 

this  relation,  Mr.  Browning  rcmarkL-d  that  P ,  tha 

American  artist,  hud  liad  no  lt;3»  than  seventy-three 
sittings  of  him  for  a  portrait.  In  the  result,  eveiy 
hair  and  speck  of  htm  was  represented ;  yet,  as  I 
ferred  from  what  he  did  not  say,  this  accumulation  o{ 
ndnut«  truths  did  not,  after  all,  amount  to  the  tnWJ 
whole. 

I  do  not  remember  much  else  that  Browning  said, 
except  a  playful  abuse  of  &  little  King  Charles  ftpaniel* 
named  Frolic,  Miss  Blagdeu's  lap-dog,  whose  venei*- 
able  age  (he  is  eleven  years  old)  ought  to  have  pleaded 
in  his  behaJf.  Browning's  nonsense  is  of  very  genU' 
ine  and  excellent  quality,  the  true  babble  and  efferveft- 
cence  of  a  bright  and  jxtwerful  mind :  and  he  lets  it 
play  among  his  friends  with  the  faith  and  simplloi^ 
of  a  child.  He  must  be  an  amiable  man.  I  should 
like  bim  much,  and  should  make  him  like  me,  if  o[k 
portunities  were  favorable. 

I  conversed  principally  with  Mr.  Trollojw,  the 
I  believe,  of  the  Mrs.  Trollope  to  whom  America  owol 


I 


I  )8S8.] 


ITALY. 


8S7 


I 


more  for  her  shrewd  cnticiams  than  we  ar«  ever  likelv 
to  repay.  Mr.  TroUope  is  a  very  sensible  and  culti- 
Tated  man,  and.  I  suspect,  an  author :  at  least,  there 
is  a  literary  man  of  repute  of  this  name,  though  I 
have  never  read  his  works.  He  has  resided  in  Italy 
eighteen  years.  It  seems  a  pify  to  do  this.  It  needa 
the  native  air  to  give  life  a  reality ;  a  truth  which  I 
do  not  fail  to  take  home  regretfully  to  myself,  though 
without  feeding  much  inclination  to  go  back  to  the  re- 
alities of  my  own. 

We  had  a  pleasant  cup  of  tea,  and  took  a  moonlight 
view  of  Florence  from  the  balcony.  .  .  . 

June  2,%th.  —  Yesterday   afternoon,  J and   1 

went  to  a  horse-race,  which  took  place  in  the  Corso 
and  contiguous  line  of  streets,  in  further  celebration 
of  the  Feast  of  St.  John.  A  crowd  of  people  waa  al- 
ready collected,  all  along  the  line  of  the  proposed  race, 
as  early  as  six  o'clock ;  and  there  were  a  great  many 
carriages  driving  amid  the  throng,  open  barouches 
mostly,  in  which  the  beauty  and  gentility  of  Florence 
were  freely  displayed.  It  was  a  repetition  of  the 
scene  in  the  Corso  at  Rome,  at  Carnival  time,  with- 
out the  masks,  the  fun,  and  the  confetti.  The  Grand 
X)uke  and  Duchess  and  the  Court  likewise  made  their 
appearance  in  as  many  as  seven  or  eight  coaches^and- 
six,  each  with  a  coachman,  three  footmen,  and  a  pos- 
tilion in  the  royal  livery,  and  attended  by  a  troop  of 
horsemen  in  scarlet  coats  and  cocked  hats.  I  did  not 
particularly  notice  the  Grand  Duke  himself ;  but,  in 
the  carriage  behind  him,  there  eat  only  a  lady,  who 
fevored  the  people  along  the  street  with  a  constant 
■accession  of  bows,  repeated  at  such  short  intervals, 
And  so  quickly,  as  to  he  little  more  than  noda;  thei» 


ass  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [II 

fore  not  particularly  graceful  or  majestic.  Havii 
the  good  fortune  to  be  favorud  with  one  of  these  no<l3, 
I  lifted  my  hat  in  response,  and  may  therefore  i4aim 
a  bowing  aequaintance  with  the  Grand  Duchess.  She 
is  a  Bourbon  of  the  Naples  faiaily,  and  was  a  pale, 
handsome  woman,  of  princely  aspect  enougli.  The 
crowd  evinced  no  entliu.siasm,  nor  the  slightest  feeling 
of  any  kind,  iu  acknowledgment  of  the  presence  of 
tlieir  rulers ;  and,  Indeed,  I  tliink  I  never  saw  a  crowd 
BO  well  behaved ;  that  is,  with  eo  few  salient  points, 
so  little  ebullition,  so  absolutely  tame,  as  the  Floren- 
tine one.  After  all,  and  uiueh  oontrar}'  to  my  exp^tc- 
tations,  an  American  crowd  ha«  incomparably  more 
life  than  any  otlier ;  and,  meeting  on  any  casual  occa- 
sion, it  will  talk,  laugh,  roar,  and  be  diversified  with 
a  tliuuaand  characteristic  incidents  and  gleams  and 
abadowB,  that  you  ace  nothing  of  here.  The  peoplf 
seems  to  have  no  part  even  in  its  own  gatherings.  It 
oomes  together  merely  as  a  mass  of  spectators,  and 
must  not  HO  much  aa  amuse  itself  by  any  activity  of 
mind. 

The  race,  which  was  the  attractioD  that  drew  us  all 
tc^ether,  turned  out  a  very  pitiful  affair.  When  we 
had  waited  till  nearly  dusk,  the  street  being  thronged 
quite  across,  insomuch  that  it  seemed  impossible  that 
it  should  be  cleared  as  a  race-course,  there  came  aud- 
denly  from  every  throat  a  quick,  sharp  exclamation, 
oombining  into  a  general  shout.  Immediately  the 
crowd  pressed  back  on. each  side  of  the  street;  a  mo- 
ment  afterwaitls,  there  was  a  rapid  pattering  of  hoofs 
over  the  earth  with  which  the  pavement  was  strewn, 
and  I  saw  the  head  and  back  of  a  horse  rushing  past 
A  few  seconds  more,  and  another  horse  followed  ;  and 
at  another  little  interval,  a  third.     This  was  all 


.ving^ 


1R68.] 


fTAir. 


I  ^e  hm\  waited  for ;  all  that  I  saw,  or  anybody  eUe, 
I  except  those  wlio  stood  ou  the  utmost  verge  of  the 
I  course,  at  the  risk  of  being  trampled  down  and  killed. 
I  Two  men  were  killed  in  this  way  on  Thm-sday,  and 
I  certainly  hiunan  life  was  never  spent  for  a  poorer  ob- 
I  ject.     The  spectators  at  the  windows,  to  be  sure,  hav- 
ing tlie  horses  in  sight  for  a  longer  time,  might  get  » 
little  more  enjoyment  out  of  the  affair.     By  the  by, 
the  most  picturesque  aspect  of  the  scene  was  the  life 
given  to  it  by  the  many  faces,  some  of  them  fair  ones, 
that  looked  out  from  window  and  balcony,  all  along 
the  curving  line  of  lofty  palaces  and  edifices,  between 
which  the  race-coorse  lay ;  and  from  nearly  every  win- 
dow, and  over  every  balcony,  was  flung  a  silken  tex- 
ture, or  cloth  of  brilliant  hue,  or  piece  of  tapestry  o( 
carpet,  or  whatever  adornment  of  the  kind  could  be 
had,  so  as  to  dress  up  the  street  in  gala  attire.     But 
the  Feast  of  St.  John,  like  the  Carnival,  is  but  a  mea- 
gre semblance  of  festivity,  kept  alive  factitiously,  and 
dying  a  lingering  death  of  centuries.     It  takes  tlie  ex- 
uberant mind  and  heart  of  a  people  to  keep  its  holi- 
days alive. 

I  do  not  know  whether  there  be  any  populace  in 
Florence,  but  I  saw  none  that  I  recognized  as  such, 
on  this  occasion.  All  the  people  were  respectably 
dressed  and  perfectly  well  behaved ;  and  soldiers  and 
priests  were  scattered  abundantly  among  the  throng. 
On  my  way  home,  I  saw  the  Teatro  Goldoni,  which  is 
in  our  on'n  street,  lightest  up  for  a  representation  this 
Sunday  evening.  It  shocked  my  New  England  preju- 
dices a  little. 

Thb  forenoon,  my  wife  and  I  went  to  the  Churcli  o( 
Santa  Croee,  the  great  monumental  deposit  of  Flor. 
•ntiiie  worthies.     The  piazza  before  it  is  a  wide,  grav 


840   FRENCn  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS. 

elled  square,  whete  the  liberty  of  Florence,  if  it 
ever  had  any  genuine  liberty,  came  into  existeuce 
handreds  of  years  i^,  by  tJic  poople'i)  taking  its 
rights  into  it«  hands,  and  putting  its  own  immedinte 
will  in  execution.  The  piazza  has  not  much  appear- 
ance of  antiquity,  except  that  the  facade  of  one  of  the 
hoasea  is  quitti  covei-ed  with  ancient  frescos,  a  goo<I 
deal  faded  and  obliterated,  yet  with  traees  enough  of 
old  glory  to  show  that  ^e  colors  must  have  been  well 
lud  on. 

The  front  of  the  church,  the  foundation  of  which 
was  laid  six  centuries  ago,  is  still  waiting  for  its  cas- 
ing of  marbles,  and  I  suppose  will  wwt  forever,  tliough 
a  carpenter's  staging  is  now  erected  before  it,  as  If 
with  the  piu-poae  of  doing  something. 

The  interior  is  spacious,  the  length  of  the  church 
being  between  four  and  five  hundred  feet.  There  is 
a  nave,  roofed  with  wooden  d'oss-beams,  lighted  by  a 
clere-story  and  supported  on  each  aide  by  seven  great 
pointed  arches,  which  rest  upon  octagonal  pillars. 
The  octagon  seems  to  Im;  a  favorite  shape  in  Florence. 
These  pillars  were  clad  in  yellow  and  scarlet  dnniash, 
in  honor  of  the  Feast  of  St.  John.  The  lusles,  on 
each  side  of  the  nave,  are  lighted  with  high  and  some- 
what narrow  windows  of  ]>ainted  glass,  the  effect  at 
which,  however,  is  much  diminished  by  the  flood 
common  daylight  that  comes  in  through  the  windoi 
of  the  elere-story.  It  is  like  admitting  too  much  of 
the  light  of  reason  and  worldly  intelligence  into  the 
mind,  instead  of  illuminating  it  wholly  through  a  relig. 
ions  medium.  The  many-hued  saints  and  angels  lost* 
their  mysterious  effulgence,  when  wo  get  white  liglit 
enough,  and  find  we  see  all  the  better  without  their 
belp. 


J 


rjM8.] 


ITALY. 


841 


The  main  pavement  of  the  church  is  brickwork; 
but  it  is  inlaid  with  many  sepulchral  slabs  of  marble, 
on  some  of  which  knightly  or  priestly  figures  are  sculp- 
tured in  baa-relief.  In  both  of  the  side-aiales  there 
,  are  saintly  shrines,  alternating  with  mural  monuments, 
I  some  of  which  record  names  as  illuatnous  as  any  in 
the  world.  Aa  you  enter,  the  first  monument  on  your 
right  is  that  of  Michel  Ang«lo,  occupying  the  ancient 
burial  site  of  his  family.  The  general  design  is  a 
heavy  sarcophagus  of  colored  marble,  with  tlie  figures 
of  Sculpture,  Painting,  and  Architecture  as  moumera, 
and  Michel  Angelo's  bust  above,  the  whole  assum- 
ing a  pyramidal  form.  You  pass  a  shrine,  within  its 
framework  of  marble  pillars  and  a  pediment,  and  come 
next  to  Dante's  monument,  a  modem  work,  with  like- 
wise its  sarcophagus,  and  some  huge,  cold  images 
weeping  and  sprawling  over  it,  and  an  unimpressive 
statue  of  Dante  sitting  above. 

Another  shrine  intervenes,  and  next  you  see  the 
tomb  of  Alfieri,  erected  to  his  memory  by  the  Coun- 
tess of  Albany,  who  pays,  out  of  a  woman's  love,  the 
honor  which  his  country  owed  him.  Her  own  mouu* 
ment  is  in  one  of  the  chapels  of  the  transept. 

Passing  the  next  shrine  you  see  the  tomb  of  Mao- 
chiavelli,  which,  I  think,  was  constructed  not  many 
years  after  his  death.  The  rest  of  the  monuments,  on 
this  side  of  the  church,  commemorate  people  of  less 
than  world-wide  fame ;  and  though  the  opposite  side 
has  likewise  a  moniunent  alternating  with  each  shrine, 
I  remember  only  the  names  of  Raphael  Morghen  and 
of  Galileo.  The  tomb  of  the  latter  is  over  against 
that  of  Michel  Angelo,  being  the  fii-st  large  tomb  on 
the  left-hand  wall  as  you  enter  the  church.  It  has 
Ibe  usual  heavy  sarcophagus,  surmounted  by  a  buat 


842   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [I« 

of  Galileo,  in  the  bahit  of  his  time,  and  ifi,  of  conrae^ 
duly  providetl  with  mourners  in  the  sliape  of  Scienca 
or  Astronomy,  or  some  aiich  cold-hearted  people.  I 
wish  every  sculptor  might  be  at  on^e  impriiwued  for 
life  who  shall  hereafter  chisel  au  allegoric  ligure ;  and 
as  for  thoHe  who  have  sculptured  them  heretofore,  let 
them  be  kept  in  purgatory  till  the  marble  shall  have 
crumbled  away.  It  is  especially  absiu-d  to  aasigD  to 
this  frozen  sisterhood  of  tbe  allegoric  family  the  office 
of  weeping  for  the  dead,  inasmuch  as  they  have  inoom' 
parably  less  feeling  than  a  lump  of  ice,  which  might 
contrive  to  shed  a  tear  if  the  sun  shone  on  it.  But 
they  seem  to  let  themselves  out,  like  the  hired  mourn- 
era  of  an  English  ftmeral,  for  the  very  reason  that, 
having  no  interest  in  the  deai:!  person,  nor  any  aff>H> 
tions  or  emotions  whatever,  it  costs  them  no  wear  and 
tear  of  heart. 

All  round  both  transepts  of  the  church  there 
series  of  chapels,  into  most  of  which  we  went, 
generally  found  an  inscrutably  dark  picture  ovei 
altar,  and  often  a  marble  bust  or  two,  or  perhaps 
medieval  statue  of  a  saint,  or  a  modem  monumental 
bas-relief  in  marble,  as  white  as  new-  fallen  snow.  A 
chapel  of  the  Bonapartes  is  here,  containing  memori- 
als  of  two  female  members  of  the  family.  In  several 
chapels,  moreover,  there  were  some  of  those  distressing 
frescos  by  Giotto,  Cimabue,  or  their  compeers,  whicli, 
whenever  I  see  them.  —  poor,  faded  relics,  looking  aa 
if  the  Devil  had  been  nibbing  and  scrubbing  them  for 
centuries,  in  spite  against  the  saints,  —  my  heart  sinks 
and  my  stomach  sickens.  There  is  no  other  despon- 
dency like  this  ;  it  is  a  new  shade  of  human  misery, 
akin  to  the  physical  disease  that  comes  from  dry-rot  in 
8  wall.   These  frescos  are  to  a  church  what  dreary,  old 


1 

pa4^V 


',  (Md^^ 


IB58.] 


TTALY. 


843 


I 


remembrances  are  to  a  mind ;  tlie  drearier  because 
they  were  once  bright:  Hope  fading  into  Disappoint- 
ment, Joy  into  Grief,  and  festal  splendor  passing  into 
funereal  duskiness,  and  saddening  you  all  the  more  by 
the  grim  identity  that  you  find  to  exist  between  gay 
things  and  sorrowful  ones.  Only  wait  long  enough. 
And  they  turn  out  to  be  the  very  same. 

All  the  time  we  were  in  the  church  some  great 
religious  ceremony  had  been  going  forward ;  the  or* 
gan  playing  and  the  white-robed  priests  bowing,  geetio- 
nlating,  and  making  Latin  prayers  at  the  high  altar* 
where  at  least  a  hundred  wax  tapers  were  burning  in 
constellations.  Everybody  knelt  except  ourselves,  yet 
seemed  not  to  be  troubled  by  the  echoes  of  our  paafl- 
ing  footsteps,  nor  to  require  that  we  should  pray  iJong 
with  them.  They  consider  ua  already  lost  irrevoca- 
bly, no  doubt,  and  therefore  right  enough  in  taking  no 
heed  of  their  devotions ;  not  but  what  we  take  so  much 
heed,  however,  as  to  give  the  smallest  possible  disturb- 
ance. By  and  by  we  sat  down  in  the  nave  of  the 
church,  till  the  ceremony  should  be  concluded ;  ajid 
then  my  wife  left  me  to  go  in  quest  of  yet  another 
chapel,  where  either  Cimabue  or  Giotto,  or  both,  have 
left  some  of  their  now  ghastly  dexiorations.  'While 
she  was  gone  I  threw  my  eyes  about  the  church,  and 
came  to  the  conclusion  that,  in  spite  of  its  antiquity, 
its  size,  its  architecture,  its  painted  windows,  its  tombs 
of  great  men,  and  all  the  reverence  and  interest  that 
broods  over  them,  it  is  not  an  impressive  edifice.  Any 
little  Norman  church  in  England  would  impress  me 
as  much,  and  more.  There  is  something,  I  do  not 
know  what,  but  it  is  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  rather 
than  in  the  intellect,  that  Italian  architecture,  of  whab 
ever  age  or  s^le,  never  seems  to  reach. 


ily  ad. 

>  prill- 
-atiqae. 


844    FRENCU  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [IM 

Leaving  the  Santa  Croce,  we  went  next  in  quest  «tl 
the  Kiceardi  Palaoe.  On  our  way,  in  the  rear  of  tlw 
Grand  Ducal  Piazza,  we  paiwed  by  the  Bargello,  for> 
merly  the  palace  of  the  Po<lest&  of  Florence,  and  ntnt 
oonverted  into  a  priitou.  It  ia  an  inuuense  square  e 
6ce  of  dark  stoue,  with  a  tall,  lank  tower  rising  I 
above  it  at  one  comer.  Two  stone  lions,  syniboU  i 
the  city,  lash  their  tails  and  glare  at  the  possera-by^ 
and  all  over  the  front  of  the  building  windows  are  a 
tered  irregularly,  and  grated  with  rusty  iron  barsil 
also  thore  are  many  square  holes,  which  probably  ad> 
mit  a  little  light  and  a  breath  or  two  of  air  into  pria* 
oners'  cells.  It  is  a  very  ugly  edifice,  but  looks  antique, 
and  aa  if  a  vast  deal  of  history  might  have  been  t 
a<!ted  within  it,  or  have  beaten,  like  tierc« 
against  ifai  dark,  massive  walls,  since  the  thirteeaA 
century.  When  I  first  saw  the  city  it  struck  me  that 
there  were  few  marks  of  antiquity  in  FJomnce ;  but  I 
am  now  inclined  to  think  otherwise,  although  the  bright 
Italian  atmosphere,  and  the  general  squareneAS  and 
monotony  of  the  Italian  architecture,  have  their  effect 
in  apparently  modernizing  evorj-tbing.  But  everywhere 
v-e  see  the  ponderous  TuM-an  basements  that  never  can 
decay,  and  which  will  look,  five  hiuidred  years  liencc, 
as  they  look  now ;  and  one  often  passes  beneath  an 
abbreviated  remnant  of  wJiat  was  once  a  lofty  tower*^ 
perhaps  three  hundred  feet  high,  such  as  used  to  fa0il 
numerous  in  Florence  when  each  noble  of  the  aty  had 
bis  own  warfare  to  wage;  and  there  are  patches  of 
sculpture  that  look  old  on  houses,  the  modern  stucco 
of  which  causes  them  to  look  almost  new.  Here  and 
there  an  unmistakable  antiquity  atjinds  in  its  own  im- 
pressive sliadow ;  tlie  Chuit'h  of  Or  San  Michele,  for 
instance,  once  a  market,  but  which  grew  to  be  a  obniob 


I 


I8fi8.] 


ITALY. 


84fi 


by  some  inliereiit  fitneHS  au<l  inevitable  consecratioiL, 
It  has  not  the  least  the  aapect  of  a  church,  being  high 
and  square,  like  a  mediaeval  palace  ;  but  deep  and 
high  niches  are  let  into  itn  walLt,  within  which  stand 
great  statues  of  saints,  ma8ter]>it<c4.>s  of  Donatcllo,  and 
other  soidptora  of  that  age,  before  sculptun;  began  to 
be  congealed  by  the  influence  of  Greek  art. 

The  Riccardi  Palace  ia  at  the  corner  of  the  Via 
Lai^.  It  was  built  by  the  first  Cosmo  di  Medici,  tho 
old  banker,  more  than  four  centuries  ago,  and  was 
long  the  home  of  the  ignoble  race  of  princes  which  he 
left  behind  him.  It  looks  fit  to  be  still  the  home  of  a 
princely  race,  being  nowise  dilapidated  nor  decayed  ex- 
ternally, nor  likely  to  he  so,  its  high  Tuscan  basement 
being  as  solid  as  a  ledge  of  rock,  and  its  upper  portion 
not  much  less  so,  though  smoothed  into  another  order 
of  stately  architecture.  Entering  its  court  from  the 
Via  Larga,  we  found  ourselves  beneath  a  pillared  ar- 
cade, pastiing  round  the  court  like  a  cloister ;  and  on 
the  walls  of  the  palace,  under  this  succession  of  arches, 
were  statues,  bas-reliefs,  and  sarcophagi,  in  which, 
first,  dead  Pagans  had  slept,  and  then  dead  Christians, 
before  the  sculptured  coffins  were  brought  hither  to 
adorn  the  palace  of  the  Medici.  In  the  most  promi- 
nent place  was  a  Latin  inscription  of  great  length  and 
breadth,  clueBy  in  praise  of  old  Cosmo  and  bis  deeds 
and  wisdom.  This  mansion  gives  the  visitor  a  stately 
notion  of  the  life  of  a  commercial  man  in  the  days 
when  merchants  were  princes ;  not  that  it  seems  to  be 
•0  wonderfully  extensive,  nor  so  very  grand,  for  I  sup- 
pose there  are  a  dozen  Roman  palaces  that  excel  it  in 
both  these  particulars  Still,  we  cannot  but  be  con- 
tciouB  that  it  must  have  been,  in  some  sense,  a  great 
1  who  thought  of  founding  a  homestead  like  this, 


i46    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS. 

BJid  was  capable  of  filling  it  witli  his  personality,  i 
the  hand  filla  a  glove.  It  has  l>een  found  gpat'ious 
enough,  since  Cosnio's  time,  for  an  emperor  and  a 
pope  and  a  king,  all  of  whom  have  been  guests  in  this 
house.  Aft«r  being  the  family  mansion  of  the  Medici 
for  nearly  two  centuries,  it  was  sold  to  the  Uiccardia, 
V)ut  it  was  subsequently  Iwught  of  thvm  by  the  gov- 
ernment and  it  ia  now  occupied  by  public  ofiiceti  and 
societies. 

After  sufBcientl;  examining  the  court  and  its  antiq- 
uities,  we  ascended  a  noble  staircase  that  passes,  by 
broad  flights  and  square  turus,  to  the  region  above  the 
basement.  Here  tlie  palace  is  cut  up  and  portioned 
off  into  little  rooms  and  passages,  and  everywhere 
there  were  desks,  inkstands,  and  men,  with  pens  in 
their  fingers  or  behind  their  ears.  Wc  were  shown 
into  a  little  antique  chapel,  quite  covered  with  fresooa 
in  the  Giotto  style,  but  painted  by  a  certain  Oonzoli. 
They  were  in  pretty  goo<l  preservation,  and,  in  fact,  I 
am  wrong  in  comparing  tliem  to  Giotto's  works,  in- 
asmuch as  there  must  have  been  nearly  two  hundred 
years  between  the  two  artists.  The  chapel  waa  fur- 
nished with  curiously  carved  old  chairs,  and  looked— 
surprisingly  vi;neral)le  within  its  little  precinct. 

We  were  next  guided  into  the  grand  gallery,  a  halln 
of  respectable  size,  with  a  frescoed  ceiling,  on  which  ia 
represented  the  blue  sky,  and  various  meml>ers  of  the 
Medici  family  ascending  through  it  by  the  help  of 
angelic  personages,  who  seem  only  to  have  waited  f 
their  society  to  be  ]>erfectly  happy.    At  least,  this  n 
the  meaning,  so  far  as  I  could  make  it  out.     Aloi 
one  side  of  the  gallery  were  oil-pictures  on  looking* 
glasses,  rather  good  than  otherwise ;  but  Rome,  with 
her  palaces  and  villas,  takes  the  splendor  out  of  all 
this  sort  of  thing  elsewhere. 


ia 

le 

[)f 

d  for^H 

Uong^l 
king, 
with 
>f  aU 

J 


-IB68.] 


ITALY. 


»fl 


On  our  way  bome,  and  on  onr  own  Bide  of  the  Fonte 
Vecchio,  we  passed  the  P^azzo  Guicciardini,  the  an- 
cient residence  of  the  historian  of  Italy,  who  was  a 
politic  statesman  of  his  day,  and  probably  as  cruel  and 
unprincipled  as  any  of  those  whose  deeds  he  has  re- 
corded. Opposite,  across  the  narrow  way,  stands  the 
house  of  Macchiavelli,  who  was  his  friend,  and,  I 
should  judge,  an  honester  man  than  he.  The  house 
is  distinguished  by  a  marble  tablet,  let  into  the  wall, 
commemorative  of  Macchiavelli,  but  has  nothing  an' 
tique  or  picturesque  about  it,  being  in  a  contiguous 
line  with  other  smooth-faced  and  stuccoed  edifices. 


June  ZQth.  —  Yesterday,  at  three  o'clock  p.  M.,  I 
went  to  see  the  final  horse-race  of  the  Feast  of  St. 
John,  or  rather  to  see  the  concourse  of  people  and 
grandees  whom  it  brought  together.  I  t*X)k  my  stand 
in  the  vicinity  of  the  spot  whence  the  Grand  Duke 
and  his  courtiers  view  the  race,  and  from  this  point 
the  scene  was  rather  better  worth  looking  at  than 
from  the  street^omers  whence  I  saw  it  before.  The 
vista  of  the  street,  stretching  far  adowu  between  two 
rows  of  lofty  edifices,  was  really  gay  and  gorgeous  with 
the  silks,  damasks,  and  tapestries  of  all  bright  hues, 
that  flaunted  from  windows  and  balconies,  whence  la- 
dies looked  forth  And  looked  down,  themselves  making 
•  the  liveliest  part  of  the  show.  The  whole  capacity  of 
the  street  swarmed  with  moving  heads,  leaving  scarce 
room  enough  for  the  carriages,  which,  as  on  Sunday, 
passed  up  and  down,  imtil  the  signal  for  the  race  was 
pven.  Equipages,  too,  were  constantly  arriving  at  the 
door  of  the  building  which  coramimicates  with  the 
*pen  loggia,  where  the  Grand  Ducal  party  sit  to  see 
and  to  be  seen.     Two  sentinels  were  standing  at  Uie 


848  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE^BOOKS.  [18ia 

door,  and  presented  arms  as  each  courtier  or  ambassa* 
dor,  or  whatever  dignity  it  mig^t  be,  alighted*  Most 
of  them  had  on  gold-embroidered  court-dresses ;  soma 
of  them  had  military  uniforms,  and  medals  in  abun- 
dance at  the  breast ;  and  ladies  also  came,  looking  like 
heaps  of  lace  and  gauze  in  the  carriages,  but  lightly 
shaking  themselves  into  shape  as  they  went  up  the 
steps.  By  and  by  a  trumpet  sounded,  a  drum  beal^ 
and  again  appealed  a  succession  of  half  a  dosen  royal 
equipages,  each  with  its  six  horses,  its  postilion,  coach- 
man, and  three  footmen,  grand  with  cocked  hats  and 
embroidery;  and  the  gray -headed,  bowing  Grand 
Duke  and  his  nodding  Grand  Duchess  as  before. 
The  Noble  Guard  ranged  themselves  on  horseback 
opposite  the  loggia ;  but  there  was  no  irksome  and 
impertinent  show  of  ceremony  and  restraint  upon  the 
people.  The  play-guard  of  volunteer  soldiers,  who  es- 
cort the  President  of  the  United  States  in  his  North- 
em  progresses,  keep  back  their  fellow -citizens  much 
more  sternly  and  immitigably  than  the'  Florentine 
guard  kept  back  the  populace  from  its  despotic  sov- 
ereign. 

This  morning  J and  I  have  been  to  the  Uflizi 

gallery.  It  was  his  first  visit  there,  and  he  passed  a 
sweeping  condemnation  upon  everything  he  saw,  ex- 
cept a  fly,  a  snail-sheU,  a  caterpillar,  a  lemon,  a  piece 
of  bread,  and  a  wineglass,  in  some  of  the  Dutch  pic- 
tures. The  Venus  di  Medici  met  with  no  sort  of 
favor.  His  feeling  of  utter  distaste  reacted  upon  me^ 
and  I  was  sensible  of  the  same  weary  lack  of  appre- 
ciation that  used  to  chill  me  through,  in  my  earlier 
visits  to  picture-galleries ;  the  same  doubt,  moreover, 
whether  we  do  not  bamboozle  ourselves  in  the  greater 
part  of  the  admiration  which  we  learn  to  bestow.     I 


Fl8fl8.]  ITAir.  M9 

'  looked  with  some  pleasure  at  one  of  Correg^o's  M» 
donnas  in  the  Tribune,  —  no  divine  and  deep-thought- 
ed  mother  of  the  Saviour,  but  a  young  woman  play- 
ing with  her  first  child,  as  gay  and  thoughtless  as 
itself.  I  looked  at  Michel  Ajigelo's  Madonna,  in  which 
William  Ware  saw  such  prophetic  depth  of  feelingj 
but  I  suapect  it  was  oae  of  the  many  instances  in 
which  the  spectator  sees  more  than  the  painter  ever 
dreamed  of. 

Straying  through  the  city,  after  leaving  the  gallery, 
we  went  into  the  Church  of  Or  San  Miohele,  and  saw 
in  its  architecture  the  traces  of  its  transformation 
from  a  mai-ket  into  a  church.  In  its  pristine  state  it 
consisted  of  a  double  row  of  three  great  open  arches, 
with  the  wind  blowing  through  them,  and  the  sun* 
ahine  falling  aslantwise  into  them,  while  the  bustle  of 
the  market,  the  sale  of  fish,  flesh,  or  fruit  went  on 
within,  or  brimmed  over  into  the  streets  that  enclosed 
them  on  every  side.  But,  four  or  five  hundred  years 
ago,  the  broad  arches  were  built  up  with  stone-work ; 
windows  were  pierced  thi-oiigh  and  filled  with  painted 
glass ;  a  high  altar,  in  a  rich  style  of  pointed  Gothic, 
was  raised ;  shrines  and  confessionals  were  set  up ; 
and  here  it  is,  a  solemn  and  antique  church,  where  a 
man  may  buy  his  salvation  instead  of  his  dinner.  At 
any  rate,  the  Catholic  priests  will  insure  it  to  him, 

■  and  take  the  price.  The  sculpture  within  the  beau- 
tifully decorated  niches,  on  the  outside  of  the  church, 
is  very  curious  and  interesting.  The  statues  of  those 
old  saints  seem  to  have  that  charm  of  earnestness 
which  so  attracts  the  admirers  of  the  Pre-Raphaelite 
paiuters. 

It  appears  that  a  picture  of  the  Virgin  used  to  hang 
Rgainst  one  of  the  pillars  of  the  market-place  while  it 


860   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [ISI^I 

wns  still  a  market,  and  in  the  year  1291  several  mit* 
acles  were  wrought  by  it,  insomuch  that  a  chapel  was 
consecrated  for  it.  So  niany  worsbippera  came  to  the 
ahrine  that  the  business  of  the  market  was  impeded, 
and  ultimately  the  Virgin  and  St.  Michael  won  the 
whole  spaec  for  tbomaelvcs.  The  upper  part  of  the 
edifice  was  at  that  time  a  granary,  and  is  still  uscil 
for  other  than  religious  purposes.  This  church  was 
one  spot  to  which  the  inliabitants  betook  themselves 
much  for  refuge  and  divine  assiataDce  during  the 
pla^e  described  by  Boccaccio. 

i/uly  2d.  —  We  set  out  yesterday  morning  to 
the  FaJazzu  Buonarottt,  Michel  Angelo's  ancestral 
home.  .  ..  It  is  in  the  Via  Ghibellina,  an  ordinary- 
looking,  three-story  house,  with  broad-brimmed  eaves, 
a  stuccoed  front,  and  two  or  three  windows  painted  in 
fresco,  besides  the  real  ones.  Adown  the  street,  there 
is  a  glimpse  of  the  hills  outside  of  Florence.  The  sun 
shining  heavily  directly  upon  the  front,  we  rang  the 
door-bell,  and  then  drew  back  into  the  shadow  that 
fell  from  the  opposite  side  of  the  street.  After  we 
bad  waited  some  time  a  man  looked  out  from  an  upper 
window,  and  a  woman  from  a  lower  one,  and  informed 
us  that  we  cuuld  nut  be  admitted  now,  nor  fur  two  or 
three  months  to  come,  the  house  being  under  repairs. 
It  is  a  pity,  for  I  wished  to  see  Michel  Angelo's  sword 
and  walking-stiek  and  old  slippers,  and  whatever  other 
of  his  closest  personalities  are  to  be  shown.  .  .  . 

We  passed  into  the  Piaaza  of  tlie  Grand  Duke,  and 
looked  into  the  court  of  the  Palazzo  Veochio,  with  its 
l>eautifully  embossed  pillaru  ;  and,  seeing  just  beyond 
tlie  conrt  a  staircase  of  broad  and  easy  steps,  we  ac^ 
oeuded  it  at  a  venture.    Upward  and  upward  we  wenti 


J 


«888.] 


ITALY. 


851 


I 


flight  after  flight  of  stairs,  and  through  paass^s,  till 
at  last  we  found  an  ofBcial  who  tinhered  us  into  a  large 
saloon.  It  was  the  Hall  of  Audience.  Its  heavily 
embossed  ceiling,  rich  with  tarnished  gold,  waa  a  fea- 
ture of  antique  tnagniflcence,  and  the  only  one  that  it 
retained,  the  floor  being  paved  with  tiles  and  the  for* 
niture  scanty  or  none.  There  were,  however,  three 
cabinets  standing  against  the  walls,  two  of  which  con- 
tained very  curious  and  exquisite  carvings  and  cut- 
tings in  ivory ;  some  of  them  in  the  Chinese  style  of 
hollow,  concentric  balls ;  others,  really  beautiful  works 
of  art:  little  crucifixes,  statues,  saintly  and  knightly, 
and  cups  enriched  with  delicate  bas-reliefs.  The  cua- 
tode  pointed  to  a  small  figure  of  St.  Sebastian,  and 
also  to  a  vase  around  which  the  reliefs  seemed  to  as- 
sume life.  Botli  these  specimens,  he  said,  were  by 
Benvenuto  Cellini,  and  there  were  many  others  that 
might  well  have  been  wrought  by  his  famous  band. 
The  third  cabinet  contained  a  great  number  and  vari- 
ety of  crucifixes,  chalices,  and  whatever  other  vessels 
are  needed  in  altar  service,  exquisitely  carved  out  of 
amber.  They  belong  to  the  chapel  of  the  palace,  and 
into  this  holy  closet  we  were  now  conducted.  It  is 
large  enough  to  accommodate  comfortably  perhaps 
thirty  worshippers,  and  is  quite  covered  with  frescoB 
by  Ghirlandaio  in  good  preservation,  and  with  rem- 
nants enough  of  gilding  and  bright  color  to  show  bow 
splendid  the  chapel  must  have  l>een  when  the  Medi 
cean  Grand  Dukes  used  to  pray  here.  The  altar  ia 
etill  ready  for  service,  and  I  am  not  sure  that  some  of 
the  wax  tapers  were  not  burning:  but  Lorenzo  the 
Magnificent  was  nowhere  to  be  seen. 

The  custode  now  led  us  back  through  the  Hall  of 
Audience  into  a  smaller  room,  hong  with  pictures, 


852   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [181 

Dhiofly  of  the  Medici  and  their  oounectiona,  amoi 
whom  waa  one  Carolina,  an  intelligeut  anil  pri 
child,  and  Bianca  Capella. 

There  was  nothing  eke  to  show  us  except  a  very 
ble  and  moBt  eparioua  saloon,  lighted  by  two  large 
windows  at  each  end,  coming  down  level  with  the  iloot^ 
aud  by  a  row  of  windows  on  oni^i  xide  just  beneath  the 
eomice.  A  gilded  framework  divides  the  ceiling  into 
squaren,  circles,  and  octagons,  the  compartments  of 
which  are  filled  with  pictures  in  oil ;  and  the  walla 
are  covered  with  immense  frescos,  representing  various 
battles  and  trimnphs  of  the  Florentines.  Statues  by 
Michel  Angclo,  John  of  Bologna,  and  Baiidinelli,  as 
well  historic  as  ideal,  stand  round  the  hull,  &nd  it  is 
really  a  fit  theatre  fur  the  liitttorio  scenes  of  a  country 
to  be  ficted  in.  It  was  built,  moreover,  with  the  idea 
of  its  being  the  council-hall  of  a  free  people ;  but  our 
own  tittle  Faneuil,  which  was  meant,  in  all  simplicity, 
to  be  merely  a  spot  where  the  towna-people  should 
meet  to  choose  their  selectmen,  has  served  the  world 
better  in  that  respect.  I  wish  I  had  more  room  to 
speak  of  this  vast,  dusky,  historic  hall.  [Tliis  voluma 
of  journal  closes  here.] 

Ju}y  4th,  1858.  —  Yesterday  forenoon  we  went  to 
see  the  Church  of  Santa  Maria  Novella.  Wo  found 
the  piazza,  on  one  side  of  which  the  church  stands,  en* 
cumbered  with  the  amphitbeatricAl  ranges  of  wooden 
seats  that  had  been  erected  to  accommodate  the  speo- 
tators  of  the  chaiiot-races,  at  the  recent  Feast  of  St. 
John.  The  front  of  the  church  is  composed  of  black 
and  white  marble,  which,  in  the  course  of  the  five  cen- 
turies that  it  has  been  built,  has  turned  brown  and 
fdlow.     On  the  right  hand,  as  you  approach,  is  a  long 


ji 

'  no>.^^H 


I 


tTALT. 


353 


eolomiade  of  arches,  extending  on  a  line  witli  the  iar 
^ade,  and  having  a  tomb  beneath  every  arch.  This 
colonnade  forma  one  of  the  enclosing  walla  of  a  clois- 
ter. We  found  none  of  the  front  entrances  open,  but 
on  our  left,  in  a  wall  at  right  angles  with  the  church, 
there  was  an  open  gateway,  approaeliing  which,  we 
saw,  within  the  four-sided  colonnade,  an  enclosed  green 
space  of  a  cloister.  This  ia  what  is  called  the  Ctiios- 
I  tJro  Verde,  so  named  from  the  prevailing  color  of  the 
irescoa  with  which  the  walls  beneath  the  arches  are 
adorned. 

This  cloister  is  the  oeality  of  what  I  used  to  imag- 
ine when  I  saw  the  half-ruinous  colonnades  oonnect^d 
with  English  cathedrals,  or  endeavored  to  trace  out 
the  lines  along  the  broken  wall  of  some  old  abbey. 
Not  that  this  extant  cloister,  still  perfect  and  in  daily 
use  for  its  original  purposes,  is  nearly  so  beautiful  as 
the  crumbling  ruin  which  has  ceased  to  be  trodden 
by  monkish  feet  for  more  than  three  centuries.  The 
cloister  of  Santa  Maria  has  not  the  seclusion  that  is 
desirable,  being  open,  by  its  gateway,  to  the  public 
square ;  and  several  of  the  neighbors,  women  as  well 
as  men.  were  loitering  within  its  precincts.  The  con- 
vent, however,  has  another  and  larger  cloister,  which 
I  suppose  is  kept  fre«  from  interlopers.  The  Chiostro 
Verde  is  a  walk  round  the  four  sides  of  a  square,  be- 
neath an  arched  and  groined  roof.  One  side  of  the 
walk  looks  upon  an  enclosed  green  space  with  a  foun- 
tain or  a  tomb  (I  forget  which)  in  the  centre ;  the 
other  side  is  ornamented  all  along  with  a  succession  of 
ancient  frescos,  representing  subjects  of  Scripture  his- 
tory. In  the  days  when  the  designs  were  more  dis- 
tinct than  now,  it  must  have  been  a  very  effective  way 
for  a  monk  to  read  Bible  history,  to  see  its  personages 


Ki  FBBIfCB  AlTD  ITAUAN  HOTS-BOOKS.  fliM 

■od  eraiti  tbiu  paaung  vufbly  beaide  htm  in  Us  monf 
"~  ;  and  «veiuiig  walks.  Beneath  the  frefloos  on  one 
I  o£  the  cknrtered  walk,  and  aloc^  the  low  ■tone 
L  parapet  Uwt  wiMnteit  it  from  the  grmai^lat  on  the 
it,  an  inscriptioas  to  the  mpiooTy  of  the  dead  who 
'  are  buried  underneath  the  [KiveinetiL  The  most  of 
theae  were  modemi,  anil  nwonIp<l  the  namen  of  penons 
of  no  particular  note.  Other  niuDHiaeatal  slabs  were 
inlaid  with  the  pavement  itself.  Two  or  three  Domio- 
ican  raonlu,  belonging  to  the  convent,  pamed  in  and 
oat,  while  we  were  there,  in  their  white  habits. 

After  going  round  three  sides,  we  came  to  the 
fourth,  formed  by  the  wall  of  the  church,  and  hoard 
tiie  voic«  of  a  prient  behind  a  curtain  that  ftll  down 
before  a  door.  Lifting  it  aside,  we  went  in,  and  found 
owrwlvi?)!  in  the  ancient  cha|rtor-hou8e,  a  large  interior 
formed  by  two  great  pointed  arches  croBung  one  an- 
other in  a  groined  roof.  The  broajl  spaces  of  the  walls 
were  entirely  covered  with  frescos  that  are  rich  even 
now,  and  must  Iiave  g;lnwed  with  an  inexpressible 
Rpk-nilor,  when  fresh  from  the  artists'  hands,  6ve  hun- 
dred years  ago.  There  is  a  long  ]>eriod,  during  which 
freHCos  ilhimiuate  a  church  or  a  hall  in  a  way  that  no 
other  adornment  can  ;  when  this  epoch  of  brightness 
is  past,  they  become  the  dreariest  ghosts  of  perished 
mugni licence.  .  ■  .  Thi»  chapter-house  is  the  only  part 
of  the  church  that  is  now  used  for  the  purposes  of 
public  worship.  There  are  several  confessionals,  a 
two  chapels  or  shrines,  each  witli  its  lighted  tapers, 
priest  performed  mass  while  we  were  there,  and  i 
cral  (K^rsons,  as  usual,  Btei>]>ed  in  to  do  a  little  den>. 
tion,  either  praying  on  their  own  account,  or  uniting 
with  the  ccrciiiony  that  was  going  forward.  One  man 
Was  followed  by  two  little  dogs,  and  in  the  midst  fl{   i 


1  w^H 

devi>.^™ 
liting 
^  man 
LUlst  ti  ^m 


I 


ITALY.  855 

bis  prayers,  aa  one  of  the  dogs  was  inclined  to  stray 
about  the  church,  he  kept  snapping  his  fingers  to  call 
him  back.  The  cool,  dusk;  refreshment  of  these  lioly 
places,  affording  such  a  refuge  from  the  hot  noon  of 
the  streets  and  piazzas,  probably  suggests  devotional 
ideas  to  the  people,  and  it  may  be,  when  they  arej 
praying,  they  feel  a  breath  of  Paradise  fanning  them. 
If  we  could  only  see  any  good  effects  in  their  daily 
life,  we  might  deem  it  an  excellent  thing  to  be  able  to 
find  incense  and  a  prayer  always  ascending,  to  which 
every  individual  may  join  his  own.  I  really  wonder 
that  the  Catholics  are  not  better  men  and  women. 

When  we  had  looked  at  the  old  frescos,  ...  we 
.  emei^ed  into  the  cloister  again,  and  thence  ventured 
into  a  passage  which  would  have  led  us  to  the  Chiotttro 
Grande,  where  strangers,  and  especially  ladies,  have 
no  right  to  go.  It  was  a  secluded  corridor,  very  neatly 
kept,  bordered  with  sepulchral  monuments,  and  at  the 
end  appeared  a  vista  of  cypress-trees,  which,  indeed, 
were  but  an  illusory  perspective,  being  painted  in 
fresco.  While  we  loitered  along  .  .  .  the  sacristan 
appeared  and  offered  to  show  us  the  church,  and  led 
OS  into  the  transept  on  the  right  of  the  high  altar,  and 
ushered  us  into  the  sacristy,  where  we  found  two  ar- 
tists copying  some  of  Fra  Angelico's  pictures.  Theso 
were  painted  on  the  three  wooden  leaves  of  a  triptych, 
and,  as  usual,  were  glonfied  with  a  great  deal  of  gild* 
ing,  so  that  they  seemed  to  float  in  the  brightness  of  a 
heavenly  element.  Solomon  speaks  of  "  apples  of  gold 
in  pictures  of  silver."  The  pictures  of  Fra  Angelico, 
and  other  artists  of  that  age,  are  really  pictures  of 
gold  ;  and  it  is  wonderful  to  see  how  rich  the  effect, 
tad  how  much  delicate  i>eauty  is  attained  (by  Fra 
&ngelico  at  least)  along  with  it.    liia  miniature-heada 


rnmo    ^h 


866   FRENCH  ASD  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [18M. 

appear  to  me  mucli  more  siicceBsfiil  than  his  larger 
ones.  In  a  monkish  point  of  view,  however,  tlie  vhief 
value  of  the  triptych  of  which  1  am  speaking  does  not 
lie  in  the  pictures,  for  they  merely  serve  as  the  framo 
work  of  aome  relics,  which  are  set  all  round  the 
of  the  three  leaves.  They  consist  of  little  bits 
fragments  of  twnes,  and  of  packages  carefully  tied  it}T 
in  silk,  the  contents  of  which  are  signified  in  Uothio 
letters  apj>en(ted  to  each  parceL  The  sacred  vessels 
of  the  church  are  likewise  kept  in  the  sacristy.  .  .  . 

Reentering  tlie  transept,  our  guide  showed  us  tho 
(ihajiel  of  the  Strozzi  family,  which  is  accessible  by  a 
flight  of  steps  from  the  floor  of  tlie  cliurch.  The  walla 
of  tliis  cha])el  are  covere<l  with  frescos  by  Oicagna, 
representing  around  the  altar  The  Last  Jtulginent,  and 
on  one  of  the  walls  heaven  and  the  assembly  of  the 
blesse<l,  and  on  the  other,  of  course,  bell.  I  cannot 
speak  as  to  the  truth  of  the  representation  ;  but,  at  all 
events,  it  was  purgatory  to  look  at  it.  .  .  . 

We  next  passed  into  the  choir,  which  occupies  the 
extreme  end  of  the  church  Itehind  the  great  sijitare 
mass  of  the  high  altar,  and  is  surroundod  with  a 
double  row  of  ancient  oaken  seats  of  venerable  shajte 
and  carving.  The  choir  is  illuminated  by  u  tlu'cefold 
Gothic  window,  full  of  richly  painted  glass,  worth  all 
the  frescos  that  ever  stained  a  wall  or  ceiling ;  but 
these  walls,  nevertheless,  are  adorned  with  frescos  by 
Ghirlandaio,  and  it  is  easy  to  see  must  once  have  made 
tt  magnificent  appearance.  I  really  was  sensible  of  a 
Bad  and  ghostly  beauty  in  many  of  the  figures ;  but 
■11  the  bloom,  the  magic  of  the  painter's  touch,  his  top- 
most art,  have  long  ago  been  rubbed  off,  tlie  white 
plaster  showing  through  the  colors  in  spott,  and  even 
la  large  spaces.     Anjr  other  sort  of  ruin  ao^uirea  > 


i 


r  less.] 


ITALY. 


85T 


[  beauty  proper  tn  its  decay,  and  often  Biiperior  to  that 
I  of  its  pristine  state ;  but  the  ruin  of  a  picture,  espe- 
I  cially  of  a  fresco,  is  wholly  unredeemed  ;  and,  more- 
I  over,  it  diea  so  slowly  that  many  generations  are  likely 
I  to  be  saddened  by  it. 

We  next  saw  the  famous  picture  of  the  Virgin  by 
I  Cimabue,  which  was  deemed  a  miracle  in  ita  day, 
,  .  .  and  still  brightens  the  sombre  walls  with  the 
lustre  of  its  gold  ground.  As  to  its  artistic  merits,  it 
seems  to  me  that  the  babe  Jesus  has  a  certain  air  of 
state  and  dignity  ;  but  I  could  see  no  ebarin  whatever 
in  the  broad-faced  Virgin,  and  it  would  relieve  my 
mind  and  rejoice  my  spirit  if  the  picture  were  borne 
out  of  the  church  in  another  triumphal  procession 
I  (like  the  one  which  brought  it  there),  and  reverently 
burnt.  This  should  be  the  final  honor  piud  to  all 
human  works  that  have  served  a  good  of&ce  in  their 
day,  for  when  their  day  is  over,  if  still  galvanized  into 
false  life,  tJiey  do  harm  instead  of  good.  .  .  .  The  in- 
terior of  Santa  Maria  Novella  is  spacious  and  in  the 
Gothic  style,  though  differing  from  English  churches 
of  that  order  of  architecture.  It  is  not  now  kept  open 
to  the  public,  nor  were  any  of  the  shrines  and  chapels, 
nor  even  the  high  altar  itself,  adorned  and  lighten!  for 
worship.  The  pictures  that  decorated  the  shrines 
along  the  side-aisles  have  been  removed,  leaving  bare, 
blank  spaces  of  brickwork,  very  dreary  and  desolate 
to  behold.  This  is  almost  worse  than  a  black  oil-paint- 
ing or  a  faded  fresco.  The  church  was  much  injured 
by  the  French,  and  afterwards  by  the  Anstrians,  both 
powers  having  quartered  their  troops  within  the  holy 
precrincts.  Its  old  walls,  however,  are  yet  stalwart 
enough  to  outlast  another  set  of  frescos,  and  to  see  the 
beginning  and  the  end  of  a  new  school  of  painting  af 


858  FRENCH  AND  ITAUAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [ISU 

long-lived  as  Cimsbne's.  I  sliould  be  sorry  to  Lave 
the  churob  go  to  decay,  becatue  it  was  here  that  Boo* 
oaodo's  dames  and  caTaliera  encountered  one  another, 
and  formed  their  plan  of  retreating  into  the  country 
daring  the  plague.  .  .  . 

At  the  door  we  bought  a  string  of  beads,  with  a 
small  crucifix  appended,  in  memory  of  the  place.  The 
beads  seem  to  be  of  s  grayish,  pear-shaped  seed,  and 
the  seller  assured  ns  that  they  were  the  tears  of  St. 
Job.  They  were  cheap,  probably  becaose  Job  shed  so 
onany  tears  in  his  lifetime. 

It  being  still  early  in  the  day,  we  went  to  the  Uffizi 
gallery,  and  after  loitering  a  good  while  among  the 
pictures,  were  so  fortunate  as  to  find  the  room  of  the 
bronzes  open.  The  first  object  that  attracted  us  was 
John  of  Bologna's  Mercury,  poising  himself  on  tiptoe, 
and  looking  not  merely  buoyant  enough  to  float,  but 
as  if  he  possessed  more  than  the  eagle's  power  of  lofty 
flight  It  seems  a  wonder  that  he  did  not  absolutely 
fling  himself  into  the  air  when  the  artist  gave  bim  the 
last  touch.  No  bolder  work  was  ever  achieved ;  noth- 
ing  so  full  of  life  has  been  done  since.  I  was  much 
interested,  too,  in  the  original  little  wax  model,  two 
feet  high,  of  Benvenuto  Cellini's  Perseus.  The  wax 
seems  to  be  laid  over  a  wooden  framework,  and  is  but 
roughly  finished  off.  .  .  . 

In  an  adjoining  room  are  innumerable  specimens 
of  Roman  and  Etruscan  bronzes,  great  and  small.  A 
bronze  Chimera  did  not  strike  me  as  very  ingeniously 
conceived,  the  goat's  head  being  merely  an  adjunct, 
growing  out  of  the  back  of  the  monster,  without  pos- 
sessing any  original  and  substantive  share  in  its  na- 
ture. The  snake's  head  is  at  the  end  of  the  tail.  The 
object  most  really  interesting  was  a  Roman  eagle,  the 


1858.]  ITALY.  859 

standard  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Legion,  about  the  size 
of  a  blackbird. 

July  %ih,  —  On  the  6th  we  went  to  the  Church  of 
the  Annunasiata,  which  stands  in  the  piazza  of  the 
same  name.  On  the  comer  of  the  Via  dei  Servi  is 
the  palace  which  I  suppose  to  be  the  one  that  Brown* 
ing  makes  the  scene  of  his  poem,  ^^The  Statue  and  the 
Bust,''  and  the  statue  of  Duke  Ferdinand  sits  stately 
on  horseback,  with  his  face  turned  towards  the  win- 
dow, where  the  lady  ought  to  appear.  Neither  she 
nor  the  bust,  however,  was  visible,  at  least  not  to  my 
eyes.  The  church  occupies  one  side  of  the  piazza,  and 
in  front  of  it,  as  likewise  on  the  two  adjoining  sides  of 
the  square,  there  are  pillared  arcades,  constructed  by 
Brunelleschi  or  his  scholars.  After  passing  through 
these  arches,  and  still  before  entering  the  church  it- 
self, you  come  to  an  ancient  cloister,  which  is  now 
quite  enclosed  in  glass  as  a  means  of  preserving  some 
frescos  of  Andrea  del  Sarto  and  others,  which  are  con- 
sidered valuable. 

Passing  the  threshold  of  the  church,  we  were  quite 
dazzled  by  the  splendor  that  shone  upon  us  from  the 
ceiling  of  the  nave,  the  great  parallelograms  of  which, 
viewed  from  one  end,  look  as  if  richly  embossed  all 
oyer  ^th  gold.  The  whole  interior,  indeed,  has  an 
effect  of  brightness  and  magnificence,  the  walls  being 
covered  mostly  with  lightKX)lored  marble,  into  which 
are  inlaid  compartments  of  rarer  and  richer  mar- 
bles. The  pillars  and  pilasters,  too,  are  of  variegated 
marbles,  with  Corinthian  capitals,  that  shine  just  as 
brightly  as  if  they  were  of  solid  gold,  so  faithfully 
have  they  been  gilded  and  burnished.  The  pavement 
is  formed  of  squares  of  black  and  white  marble.  There 


860  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  flSM 

axe  no  side-iuiites,  bnt  ranges  of  chapels,  with  oommn* 
nioadon  from  one  to  another,  stand  round  the  vboh 
extent  of  the  nave  and  choir ;  all  of  marble,  all  deo> 
orated  with  piotarea,  statues,  busts,  and  mural  mono- 
menta ;  all  worth,  separatelj,  a  day's  inspection.  The 
high  altar  is  of  great  beauty  and  richness,  .  ,  .  and 
also  the  tomb  of  John  of  Bologna  in  a  chapel  at  the 
remotest  extremity  of  the  church.  In  this  ohapd 
'  there  are  some  bas-reliefa  by  him,  and  also  a  luj^ 
cmoiflx,  with  a  marble  Christ  upon  it.  I  think  there 
has  been  no  better  Boolptor  since  the  days  of  Phi- 
dias. .  .  . 

The  church  was  founded  by  seven  gentlemen  of 
Florence,  who  formed  themselves  into  a  religions  order 
called  "  Servants  of  Mary."  Many  miraculous  cures 
were  wrou^t  here ;  and  the  church,  in  consequence, 
was  so  thickly  hung  with  votive  offerings  of  legs, 
arms,  and  other  things  in  wax,  that  they  used  to 
tumble  upon  people's  beads,  so  that  finally  they  were 
all  cleared  out  as  rubbish.  The  church  is  still,  I  should 
imagine,  looked  upon  as  a'place  of  peculiar  sanctity ; 
for  while  we  were  there  it  had  an  unusual  number  of 
kneeling  worshippers,  and  persons  wero  passing  from 
shrine  to  ehrine  all  round  the  navo  and  choir,  praying 
awhile  at  each,  and  thus  performing  a  pilgrimage  at 
little  cost  of  time  and  labor.  One  old  gentleman,  X 
observed,  carried  a  cushion  or  pad,  just  big  enough  for 
one  knee,  on  which  he  carefully  adjusted  his  geuu' 
flections  before  each  altar.  An  old  woman  in  the  choir 
prayed  alternately  to  us  and  to  the  saints,  with  most 
success,  I  hope,  in  her  petitions  to  the  latt«r,  though 
certainly  her  prayers  to  ourselves  seemed  the  mora 
fervent  of  the  two. 

When  we  had  gone  entirely  round  the  oborob*  wi 


1858.]  ITALY.  861 

• 

same  at  last  to  the  ehapel  of  the  Anntuiziata,  which 
stands  on  the  floor  of  the  nave,  on  the  left  hand  as 
we  enter.  It  is  a  very  beautiful  piece  of  architecture, 
—-a  sort  of  canopy  of  marble,  supported  upon  pillars ; 
and  its  magnificence  within,  in  marble  and  silver,  and 
all  manner  of  holy  decoration,  is  quite  indescribable. 
It  was  built  four  hundred  years  ago,  by  Pietro  di 
Medici,  and  has  probably  been  growing  richer  ever 
since.  The  altar  is  entirely  of  silver,  richly  embossed* 
As  many  people  were  kneeling  on  the  steps  before  it 
as  could  find  room,  and  most  of  them  when  they  fin- 
ished their  prayers,  ascended  the  steps,  kissed  over 
and  over  again  the  margin  of  the  silver  altar,  laid 
their  foreheads  upon  it,  and  then  deposited  an  offer- 
ing in  a  box  placed  upon  the  altar's  top.  From  the 
didness  of  the  chink  in  the  only  case  when  I  heard  it, 
I  judged  it  to  be  a  small  copper  coin. 

In  the  inner  part  of  this  chapel  is  preserved  a 
miraculous  picture  of  the  Santissima  Annunziata, 
painted  by  angels,  and  held  in  such  holy  repute  that 
forty  thousand  dollars  have  lately  been  expended  in 
providing  a  new  crown  for  the  sacred  personage  rep* 
resented.  The  picture  is  now  veiled  behind  a  cur- 
tain ;  and  as  it  is  a  fresco,  and  is  not  considered  to 
do  much  credit  to  the  angelic  artists,  I  was  well  con- 
tented not  to  see  it. 

We  foimd  a  side  door  of  the  church  admitting  us 
into  the  great  cloister,  which  has  a  walk  of  interseclr 
ing  arches  round  its  four  sides,  paved  with  flat  tomb- 
stones, and  broad  enough  for  six  people  to  walk  abreast. 
On  the  walls,  in  the  semicircles  of  each  successive  arch, 
are  frescos  representing  incidents  in  the  lives  of  the 
seven  f oimders  of  the  church,  and  all  the  lower  part 
of  the  wall  is  incrusted  with  marble  inscriptions  to 


862   FllENCn  AND  nALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [18S8. 

the  memory  of  the  dea^,  and  mostly  of  persons  who 
have  died  not  very  long  ago.  The  space  enclosed  bjr,. 
the  {;loist«red  walk,  usually  made  cheerful  by  greeqj 
grass,  has  a  pavement  of  tombstones  laid  in  regular 
ranges.  In  the  centre  is  a  stune  octagonal  structure, 
which  at  first  I  supposed  to  be  the  tomb  of  some  de- 
ceased raediroval  personage;  but,  on  approachii^,  I 
found  it  a  well,  with  its  bucket  hanging  within  the 
curb,  and  looking  as  if  it  were  in  constant  use.  The 
Burfaoe  of  the  water  lay  deep  beneath  the  deepest  dust 
of  the  dead  people,  and  thence  threw  up  its  picture 
of  the  sky ;  but  I  think  it  would  not  be  a  moderate 
thirst  that  would  induce  me  to  drink  of  that  well. 

On  leaving  the  church  we  bought  a  little  gilt 
ciiix.  .  .  . 

On  Sunday  evening  I  paid  a  short  visit  to 
Powers,  and,  as  usual,  was  entertained  and  instructed 
with  his  conversation.  It  did  not  indeed,  turn  upon 
artistical  subjects ;  but  the  artistic  is  only  one  side  of 
Ids  character,  and,  I  think,  not  the  principal  side.  He 
might  have  achieved  valuable  success  as  an  engineer 
and  mechanician.  He  gave  a  dissertation  on  fiying- 
machines,  evidently  from  his  own  experience,  and  came 
to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  impossible  to  fly  by  means 
of  steam  or  any  other  motive  power  now  known  to 
man.  No  force  hitherto  attained  would  sufBce  to  lift 
the  engine  which  generated  it.  He  appeared  to  antic- 
ipate that  flying  will  be  a  future  mode  of  locomotion, 
but  not  till  the  moral  coniUtion  of  mankind  is  so  im- 
proved as  to  obviate  the  bad  uses  to  which  the  power 
might  l>e  applied.  Another  topic  discussed  wa^  a  cure 
for  complaints  of  the  chest  by  tlte  inhalation  of  nitric 
acid ;  and  lie  produced  his  own  apparatus  for  that 
purpose,  being  merely  a  tube  inserted  into  a  bottlf 


race 


ITALY. 


^^F  eontaining  a  amall  quantity  of  the  Kcid,  juHt  enongh  to 
produce  the  gas  for  inhalation.  He  told  me,  too,  a 
remedy  for  biu^s  accidentally  discovered  by  himself ; 
viz.,  to  wear  wash-leather,  or  something  equivalent, 
over  the  hum,  and  keep  it  constantly  wet.  It  pr^ 
vents  all  pain,  and  cures  by  the  exclusion  of  the  ur. 
He  evidently  has  a  great  tendency  to  empirical  reme- 
dies, and  would  have  made  a  natural  doctor  of  mighty 
potency,  possessing  the  shrewd  sense,  inventive  faeulty, 
and  self-reliance  that  such  persons  require.  It  is  very 
singular  that  there  should  be  an  ideal  vein  in  a  man 
of  this  character. 

This  morning  he  called  to  see  me,  with  intelligence 
of  the  failure  of  the  new  attempt  to  lay  the  electrio 
cable  between  England  and  America ;  and  here,  too, 
it  appears  the  misfortune  might  have  been  avoided 
if  a  plan  of  his  own  for  laying  the  cable  had  been 
adopted.  He  explained  hie  process,  and  made  it  seem 
as  practicable  as  to  put  up  a  bell-wire,  I  do  not  re- 
member how  or  why  (but  appositely)  he  repeated  some 
verses,  from  a  pretty  little  ballad  about  fairies,  tliat 
had  struck  his  fancy,  and  he  wound  up  his  talk  with 
some  acute  observations  on  the  characters  of  General 
Jackson  and  other  public  men.  He  told  an  anecdote, 
illustrating  the  old  general's  small  acquaintance  with 
astronomical  science,  and  hia  force  of  will  in  compel- 
ling a  whole  dinner-party  of  better  instructed  people 
than  himself  to  succumb  to  him  in  an  argument  about 
eclipses  and  the  planetary  system  generally.  Powers 
witnessed  the  scene  himself.  He  thinks  that  General 
Jackson  was  a  man  of  the  keenest  and  surest  intui- 
tions, in  respect  to  men  and  measures,  but  with  no 
power  of  reasoning  out  his  own  conclusions,  or  of  im< 
parting   them   intellectually  to  other   persons.     Men 


364  FSENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [IBM. 

wbo  Ii«T«  known  Jaukson  iatiinately,  ftnd  in  great  af- 
bin,  would  not  agree  as  to  this  intellectnal  and  &p- 
gnmentalive  deficient^,  though  Qtej  wonld  fully  allow 
the  intnitire  facnl^.  I  hare  heard  General  Herce 
tell  a  striking  instance  of  Jackson's  power  of  present* 
ing  his  own  view  of  a  sabject  with  irresistible  foroa 
to  the  mind  of  the  aoditor.  President  Boehanan  haa 
likewise  expressed  to  me  as  hi^  admiimtion  of  Jack- 
son aa  I  erer  beard  one  man  award  to  another.  Snrel  j 
he  was  a  great  man,  and  his  native  strength,  as  well 
of  intellect  as  oharacter,  compelled  every  man  to  be 
his  tool  that  came  within  bis  reach ;  and  the  more  con- 
ning tlie  individoal  might  be,  it  served  only  to  make 
h'T"  die  sharper  tooL 

Speaking  of  Jackson,  and  remembering  Raphael's 
{nctnre  of  Pope  Jnlins  II.,  the  best  portrait  in  the 
whole  world,  and  excellent  in  all  its  repetitionB,  I  wisb 
it  had  been  possible  for  Raphael  to  paint  General 
Jackson  I 

Referring  again  to  General  Jackson's  intuitions, 
and  to  Powers's  idea  that  he  was  unable  to  render  a 
reason  to  himself  or  others  for  what  he  chose  to  do,  I 
abould  have  thought  that  this  very  probably  might 
have  been  the  case,  were  there  not  such  strong  evi- 
dence to  the  contrary.  The  highest,  or  perh^ts  any 
high  adminiBtrative  ability  ia  intuitive,  and  precedes 
a^^mnent,  and  rises  above  it.  It  is  a  revelation  of 
the  very  thing  to  be  done,  and  its  propriety  and  ne- 
cessity are  felt  so  strongly  that  very  likely  it  cannot 
be  talked  about ;  if  the  doer  can  likewise  talk,  it  is 
an  additional  and  gratuitous  faculty,  as  little  to  be 
expected  as  that  a  poet  should  be  able  to  write  an 
explanatory  criticism  on  bis  own  poem.  The  English 
averlook  this  in  their  scheme  of  government,  which 


ITALY.  865 

ptequires  that  the  memberH  of  the  national  executive 
should  be  orators,  and  the  readiest  and  most  fluent 
orators  that  can  be  found.  The  very  fact  (on  which 
they  are  selected)  that  tliey  are  men  of  wonls  makes 
it  improbable  that  they  are  likewise  men  of  deeds. 
And  it  is  only  tradition  and  old  custom,  founded  on 
mi  obsolete  state  of  tlungs,  that  assigns  any  value  to 
parliamentary  oratoiy.  The  world  lias  done  with  it, 
except  as  an  intellectual  pastime.  The  speeches  have 
no  effect  till  they  are  converted  into  newspaper  para- 
graphs ;  and  they  had  better  be  composed  aa  suck,  in 
the  first  place,  and  oratory  reserved  for  churches,  courts 
of  law,  and  public  dinner-tables. 

July  10(A.  —  My  wife  and  I  went  yesterday  fore- 
noon to  see  the  Church  of  San  Marco,  with  which  is 
k  connected  a  convent  of  Dominicans.  .  .  .  The  interior 
b  is  not  less  than  three  or  four  hundred  years  old,  and 
I  is  in  the  classic  stj'le,  with  a  flat  ceiling,  gilded,  and  a 
'  lofty  arch,  supported  by  pillars,  between  the  nave  and 
choir.     There  are  no  side-aisles,  but  ranges  of  shrines 
on  both  sides  of  the  nave,  each  beneath  its  own  pair 
of  pillars  and  pediments.     The  pavement  is  of  brick, 
■with  here  and  there  a  marble  tombstone  inlaid.     It  is 
not  a  magnificent  church ;  but  looks  dingy  with  time 
and  apparent  neglect,  though  rendered  suf&cieutly  in- 
teresting by  statues  of  mediffival  date  by  John  of  Bo- 
logna and   otlier  old   sculptors,  and   by  monumental 
,  busts  and  bas-reliefs :  also,  there  ia  a  wooden  crucifix 
■  1^  Giotto,  with  ancient  gilding  on  it ;  and  a  painting 
Ktrf  Chrbt,  which  was  considered  a  wonderful  work  in 
*  its  day.     Each  shrine,  or  most  of  them,  at  any  rate, 
bad  its  dark  old  picture,  aud  there  is  a  very  old  and 
bideouB  mosaic  of  the  Vii^n  and  two  saints,  which  I 


866  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS,   [iwa 

looked  at  very  slightly,  with  the  purpose  of  immedi> 
ately  forgetting  it.  Savonarola,  the  reforming  monk, 
was  a  brother  of  this  convent,  and  was  torn  from  its 
shelter,  to  be  subsequently  hanged  and  burnt  in  the 
Grand  Ducal  Piazza.  A  large  chapel  in  the  left  tran- 
sept is  of  the  Salviati  family,  dedicated  to  St  An- 
thony, and  decorated  with  several  statues  of  saints, 
and  with  some  old  frescos.  When  we  had  more 
than  sufficiently  examined  these,  the  custode  proposed 
to  show  us  some  frescos  of  Fra  Angelico,  and  con- 
ducted us  into  a  large  cloister,  under  the  arches  of 
which,  and  beneath  a  covering  of  glass,  he  pointed  to 
a  picture  of  St.  Dominic  kneeling  at  the  Cross. 
There  are  two  or  three  others  by  the  angelic  friar  in 
different  parts  of  the  cloister,  and  a  regular  series,  fill- 
ing up  all  the  arches,  by  various  artists.  Its  four- 
sided,  cloistered  walk  surrounds  a  square,  open  to  the 
sky  as  usual,  and  paved  with  gray  stones  that  have 
no  inscriptions,  but  probably  are  laid  over  graves.  Its 
walls,  however,  are  incrusted,  and  the  walk  itself  is 
paved,  with  monumental  inscriptions  on  marble,  none 
of  which,  so  far  as  I  observed,  were  of  ancient  date. 
Either  the  fashion  of  thus  commemorating  the  dead 
is  not  ancient  in  Florence,  or  the  old  tombstones  have 
been  removed  to  make  room  for  new  ones.  I  do  not 
know  where  the  monks  themselves  have  their  burial- 
place  ;  perhaps  in  an  inner  cloister  which  we  did  not 
see.  All  the  inscriptions  here,  I  believe,  were  in  mem- 
ory of  persons  not  connected  with  the  convent. 

A  door  in  the  wall  of  the  cloister  admitted  us  into 
the  chapter  -  house,  its  interior  moderately  spacious, 
with  a  roof  formed  by  intersecting  arches.  Three 
sides  of  the  walls  were  covered  with  blessed  white- 
wash; but  on  the  fourth  side,  opposite  to  the  entrance. 


18M.]  ITALY.  867 

was  a  great  fresco  of  the  Crucifixion,  by  Fra  Angel* 
ioo,  surrounded  with  a  border  or  pictured  framework, 
in  which  are  represented  the  heads  of  saints,  prophets, 
and  sibyls,  as  large  as  life.  The  cross  of  the  Saviour 
and  those  of  the  thieves  were  painted  against  a  dark 
red  sky ;  the  figures  upon  them  were  lean  and  atten< 
nated,  evidently  the  vague  conceptions  of  a  man  who 
had  never  seen  a  naked  figure.  Beneath,  was  a  mul- 
titude of  people,  most  of  whom  were  saints  who  had 
lived  and  been  martyred  long  after  the  Crucifixion ; 
and  some  of  these  had  wounds  from  which  gilded  rays 
shone  forth,  as  if  the  inner  glory  and  blessedness  of 
the  holy  men  blazed  through  them.  It  is  a  very  ugly 
picture,  and  its  ugliness  is  not  that  of  strength  and 
vigor,  but  of  weakness  and  incompetency.  Fra  An- 
gelico  should  have  confined  himself  to  miniature  heads, 
in  which  his  delicacy  of  touch  and  minute  labor  often 
produce  an  excellent  effect.  The  custode  informed  us 
that  there  were  more  frescos  of  this  pious  artist  in 
the  interior  of  the  convent,  into  which  I  might  be  al- 
lowed admittance,  but  not  my  wife.  I  declined  see- 
ing them,  and  heartily  thanked  Heaven  for  my  escape. 
Eetuming  through  the  church,  we  stopped  to  look 
at  a  shrine  on  the  right  of  the  entrance,  where  several 
wax  candles  were  lighted,  and  the  steps  of  which  wer? 
crowded  with  worshippers.  It  was  evidently  a  spot 
of  special  sanctity,  and,  approaching  the  steps,  we  saw, 
behind  a  gilded  framework  of  stars  and  protected  by 
glass,  a  wooden  image  of  the  Saviour,  naked,  covered 
with  spots  of  blood,  crowned  with  thorns,  and  express- 
ing all  the  human  wretchedness  that  the  carver's  skill 
could  represent.  The  whole  shrine,  within  the  glass, 
was  hung  with  offerings,  as  well  of  silver  and  gold  as 
of  tinsel  and  trumpery,  and  the  body  of  Christ  glia* 


868   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [IBU. 

tened  with  gold  duuna  and  ontaments,  and  with 
watches  of  lilver  and  gold,  some  of  which  appeared  ta 
be  of  very  old  maDofacture,  and  others  might  be  new. 
Amid  all  this  glitter  the  face  of  pain  and  grief  looked 
forth,  not  a  wbit  comforted.  While  we  stood  there, 
a  woman,  who  had  been  praying,  arose  from  her  kneea 
and  laid  an  offering  of  a  single  flower  upon  the  shrine. 
The  oorresponding  arch,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
entrance,  contained  a  wax  -  work  within  a  large  glass 
case,  representing  the  Nativity.  I  do  not  remember 
bow  the  Blessed  Infant  looked,  but  the  Yii^in  was 
gorgeooaly  dressed  in  silks,  satins,  and  gauzes,  with 
spangles  and  ornaments  of  all  kinds,  and  I  believe 
brooches  of  real  diamonds  on  her  bosom.  Her  at- 
tire, judging  from  its  freshness  and  newness  of  glitter, 
might  have  been  put  on  that  very  morning. 

Jviy  IZih. — We  went  for  the  second  time,  this 
morning,  to  the  Academy  of  Fine  Arts,  and  I  looked 
pretty  thoroughly  at  the  Pre-Raphaelite  pictures,  few 
of  which  are  really  worth  looking  at  nowadays.  Cima- 
hue  and  Giotto  might  certainly  be  dismissed,  hence- 
forth and  forever,  without  any  detriment  to  the  cause 
of  good  art  There  is  what  seems  to  me  a  better  pic- 
ture than  either  of  these  has  produced,  by  Bonamico 
Buffalmacco,  an  artbt  of  about  their  date  or  not  long 
after.  The  first  real  picture  in  the  series  is  The  Ado- 
ration of  the  Magi,  by  Gentile  da  Fabriano,  a  really 
splendid  work  in  all  senses,  with  noble  and  beautiful 
6gures  in  it,  and  a  crowd  of  personages,  managed  with 
great  skill.  Three  pictures  by  Perugino  are  the  only 
other  ones  I  cared  to  look  at.  In  one  of  these,  the 
face  of  the  Virgin,  who  holds  the  dead  Christ  on  her 
knees,  has  a  deeper  expression  of  woe  than  can  ever 


ilSfiS.] 


ITALY. 


I 


liave  been  paintetl  since.  After  Pemgino  the  pieturea 
cea,3e  to  be  interesting ;  the  art  came  forward  with 
rapid  strides,  but  the  painters  and  their  productions 
do  not  take  nearly  so  mneh  hold  of  the  spectator  as 
before.  Thej  all  paint  better  than  Giotto  and  Ctma- 
biie,  —  in  some  respects  better  than  Perugino  ;  but 
they  paint  in  vain,  probably  because  they  were  not 
nearly  so  much  in  earnest,  and  meant  far  less,  though 
possessing  the  dexterity  to  express  far  more.  Andrea 
del  Sarto  appears  to  have  been  a  good  painter,  yet  I 
always  turn  away  readily  from  his  pictures.  I  looked 
again,  and  for  a  good  while,  at  Carlo  Dolce's  portrait 
of  the  Eternal  Father,  for  it  is  a  miracle  and  master- 
piece of  absurdity,  and  almost  equally  a  miracle  of 
pictorial  art.  It  is  the  All-powerless,  a  fair-haired, 
soft,  consumptive  deity,  with  &  mouth  that  has  fallen 
open  through  very  weakness.  He  holds  one  hand  on 
hia  stomach,  as  if  the  wickedness  and  wTctehedness  of 
mankind  made  him  qualmish ;  and  he  is  looking  down 
out  of  heaven  with  an  expression  of  pitiable  appeal, 
or  as  if  seeking  somewhere  for  assistance  in  his  heavy 
task  of  ruling  the  universe.  You  might  fancy  such  a 
being  falling  on  his  knees  before  a  strong-willed  man, 
and  beseeching  him  to  take  the  reins  of  omnijiotenee 
out  of  his  hands.  No  wonder  that  wrong  gets  the  bet- 
ter of  right,  and  that  good  and  ill  are  confounded,  if 
the  Supreme  Head  were  as  here  depicted  ;  for  1  never 
saw,  and  nobotly  else  ever  saw,  so  perfect  a  representa- 
tion of  a  person  burdened  with  a  task  infinitely  above 
Ins  strength.  If  Carlo  Dolce  had  been  wicked  enough 
to  know  what  he  was  doing,  the  picture  would  have 
been  most  blasphemous,  —  a  satire,  in  the  very  person 
of  the  Almighty,  against  all  incompetent  rulers,  and 
j^inst  the  rickety  machine  and  crazy  action  of  thtj 


870   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [1868. 

imivetM.  Heaven  for^ve  me  for  Buch  thoughts  aa 
QiU  pictore  hsfl  suggested  \  It  must  be  added  that 
the  great  origmal  defect  in  the  obaracter  as  here  rep* 
teeented  is  an  easy  good-nature.  I  wonder  what  Mi- 
chel Angelo  wonM  have  said  to  this  painting. 

In  the  large,  enclosed  court  connected  with  the  Acad- 
emy there  are  a  number  of  statues,  bas-reliefs,  and 
caste,  and,  what  was  especially  interestiiig,  the  vague 
and  rude  commencement  of  a  statue  of  St.  Matthew 
by  Michel  Angelo.  The  conceptions  of  this  great 
sculptor  were  eo  godlike  that  he  seems  to  have  been 
discontented  at  not  tihewiae  possessing  the  godlike  at- 
tribute of  creating  and  embodying  them  with  an  in- 
stantaneous thought,  and  therefore  we  often  find 
sculptures  from  his  hand  left  at  the  critical  point  of 
their  struggle  to  get  out  of  the  marble.  The  atatue 
of  St  Matthew  looks  like  the  antediluvian  fossil  of  a 
human  being  of  an  epoch  when  humanity  was  mightier 
and  more  majestic  than  now,  long  ago  imprisoned  in 
stone,  and  half  uncovered  again. 

Jvly  \.Qth.  —  We  went  yesterday  forenoon  to  see 
the  Bai^llo.  I  do  not  know  anything  more  pictur- 
esque in  Florence  than  the  great  interior  court  of  this 
ancient  PaUce  of  the  Fodest&,  with  the  lofty  height  of 
the  edifice  looking  down  into  the  encloaed  space,  daik 
and  stem,  and  the  armorial  beanngs  of  a  long  succes- 
sion of  magistrates  carved  in  stone  upon  the  walls,  a 
garland,  as  it  were,  of  these  Gothic  devices  extending 
quite  round  the  court.  The  best  feature  of  the  whok 
is  the  broad  stone  staircase,  with  its  heavy  balustrade, 
ascending  externally  from  the  court  to  the  iron-grated 
door  in  the  second  story.  We  passed  the  sentinels 
Onder  the  lofty  archway  that  communicates  with  the 


I 


1888.]  ITALY.  atr 

street,  and  went  u]>  the  Htairs  without  being  questioned 
or  impeded.  At  the  iron -grated  door,  however,  wo 
were  met  by  two  ofReials  in  uniform,  who  courteoualv 
informed  us  that  there  was  nothing  to  be  exhibited 
in  the  Bargello  except  an  old  ehapel  containing  soma 
frescos  byGiotto,  and  that  these  could  only  be  seen 
by  making  a  previous  appointment  with  the  ciistode, 
he  not  being  constantly  on  hand.  I  was  not  sorry  to 
escape  the  frescos,  though  one  of  them  is  a  portrait  of 
Dante. 

We  nest  went  to  the  Cliurch  of  the  Badia,  which  is 
built  in  the  form  of  a  Greek  cross,  with  a  6at  roof 
embossed  and  once  8]>]endid  with  now  tarnished  gold. 
The  pavement  is  of  brick,  and  the  walla  of  dark  stone, 
oniilar  to  that  of  the  interior  of  the  Cathedral  (pietra 
Serena),  and  there  being,  according  to  Florentine  cus- 
tom, but  little  light,  the  effect  was  sombre,  though  the 
oool  gloomy  dusk  was  refreshing  after  the  hot  turmoil 
and  dazzle  of  the  adjacent  street.  Here  we  found 
three  or  four  Gothic  tombs,  with  figures  of  the  de- 
feased persons  stretched  in  marble  slumber  upon  them. 
There  were  likewise  a  picture  or  two,  which  it  was  im- 
possible to  see  ;  indeed,  I  have  hardly  ever  met  with  a 
picture  in  a  church  that  was  not  utterly  wasted  and 
thrown  away  in  the  <Ie«p  shadows  of  the  chapel  it  was 
meant  to  adorn.  If  there  is  the  remotest  chance  of  its 
being  seen,  the  sacristan  hangs  a  curtain  before  it  for 
the  sake  of  his  fee  for  withdrawing  it.  In  the  chapel 
of  the  Bianco  family  we  saw  (if  it  could  be  called  see- 
ing) what  is  considered  the  finest  oil-painting  of  Fra 
Filippo  Lippi,  It  was  eWdently  hung  with  reference 
to  a  lofty  window  on  the  other  aide  of  tlie  ihurch, 
whence  sufRcient  liglit  might  fall  upon  it  to  show  a 
picture  so  vividly  painted  aa  this  is,  and  as  most  of 


B72   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS. 

5Va  Filippo  Lippi's  are.     The  window  was  uurtaii 
however,  and  the  (Jiapel  so  dunky  that  I  could 
out  nothing. 

Several  persons  came  in  to  say  their  prayers  &\ 
the  little  time  that  we  remained  in  the  church,  and 
wo  came  out  we  passed  a  good  woman  who  sat  knit- 
ting in  the  coolness  of  the  vestibule,  which  was  lined 
with  mural  t^inibatones.     Probably  she  spends  the 
thus,  keeping  up  the  little  industry  of  her  fingera, 
piug  into  the  church  to  pmy  whenever  a  devotiotutl 
impulse  swells  into  her  heart,  and  asking  an  alms  as 
often  as  she  sees  a  person  of  charitable  aspect. 

From  the  church  we  went  to  tho  Uflizi  gallery,  and 
reinspected  the  greater  part  of  it  pretty  faithfully. 
Wo  had  the  good  fortune,  too,  again  to  get  admit- 
tanee  into  tlie  cabinet  of  bronzes,  where  we  admired 
anew  the  wonderf  id  ^riness  of  John  of  Bologna's 
cury,  which,  as  I  now  obser^-eil,  rt^sts  on  nothing 
Stantial,  but  on  the  breath  of  a  »!phyr  beneath  him. 
"We  abo  saw  a  bronze  bust  of  one  of  the  Medici  by 
Benvenuto  Cellini,  and  a  thousand  other  things  the 
curiosity  of  which  is  overlaid  by  their  multitude.    TUg 
Roman  eagle,  which  I  have  recorded  to  be  about 
Bize  of  a  blackbird,  I  now  saw  to  bo  as  large  i 
pigeon. 

On  our  way  towards  the  door  of  the  gallery,  at  our 
departure,  we  saw  the  cabinet  of  gems  open,  and  again 
feast«d  our  eyes  with  its  concentratfid  brilliancies  and 
magnificences.  Among  them  were  two  crystal  cu]>s, 
with  engraved  devices,  and  covers  of  enamelled  gold, 
wrought  by  Benvenuto  Cellini,  and  wonderfully  l)eau* 
tiful.  But  it  is  idle  to  mention  one  or  two  tbii 
when  all  are  so  beautifiU  and  cnrioufl ;  idle,  too, 
cause  language  is  uot  burnished  gold,  with  here 


lurfi^^ 
ad  as 
knit- 
lined  ^H 

ionnl  •^ 

iS  as 

,  and 
Fully. 
lmit< 
nired^^K 

him.  ^^ 
the 

t4 


18W.]  ITALY.  878 

diere  a  brighter  word  flaahing  like  a  diamond;  and 
therefore  no  amount  of  talk  will  give  the  slightest  idea 
of  one  oi  these  elaborate  handiworks. 

JuLy  21th.  —  I  seldom  go  out  nowadays,  having  al- 
ready seen  Florenee  tolerably  well,  and  the  streets  be- 
ing  very  hot,  and  myself  having  been  engaged  in 
sketching  out  a  romance,^  which,  whether  it  will  ever 
oome  to  anything,  is  a  point  yet  to  be  decided.  At 
any  rate,  it  leaves  me  little  heart  for  journalizing  and 
describing  new  things;  and  six  months  of  uninter- 
rupted monotony  would  be  more  valuable  to  me  just 
now,  than  the  most  brilliant  succession  of  novelties. 

Yesterday  I  spent  a  good  deal  of  time  in  watch- 
ing  the  setting  out  of  a  wedding  party  from  our  door; 
the  bride  being  the  daughter  of  an  English  lady,  the 

Countess  of .    After  all,  there  was  nothing  very 

characteristic.     The  bridegroom  is  a  young  man  of 

English  birth,  son  of  the  Countess  of  St  O y  who 

inhabits  the  third  piano  of  this  Casa  del  Bello.  The 
very  curious  part  of  the  spectacle  was  the  swarm  of 
be&^enrs  who  haunted  the  street  all  day;  the  most 
3hed  mob  conceivable,  chieHy  wome^  with  a  few 
blind  people,  and  some  old  men  and  boys.  Among 
these  the  bridal  party  distributed  their  beneficence  in 
the  shape  of  some  handfuls«of  copper,  with  here  and 
there  a  half-paul  intermixed;  whereupon  the  whole 
wretched  mob  flung  themselves  in  a  heap  upon  the 
pavement,  struggling,  fighting,  tumbling  one  over  an- 
other, and  then  looking  up  to  the  windows  with  peti- 
tionary gestures  for  more  and  more,  and  still  for  more. 
Doubtless,  they  had  need  enough,  for  they  looked  thin, 
uckly,  ill-fed,  and  the  women  ugly  to  the  last  degrea 

1  The  MarhU  Faun,  _  Ed. 


874    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1 

The  wedding  party  had  a  hreakfaat  above  Htaira,  wl 
histed  till  fuur  o'clock,  nnd  then  tlie  l)ridegri)otu 
Ilia  bride  in  a  barouche  and  pair,  which  was  already 
crammed  with  hia  own  luggage  and  hers.  .  .  .  [lo 
was  a  well-Iouking  young  inau  enough,  in  a  uniform  of 
Krench  gray  with  silver  epaulets ;  more  agreeable  in 
aspect  than  his  briile,  who,  I  think,  will  liave  the  up- 
per hand  in  their  domestic  life.  I  observed  that,  on 
getting  into  the  barouche,  he  sat  down  on  her  dress, 
as  he  could  not  well  help  doing,  and  received  a  slight 
reprimand  in  consequence.  After  their  departure,  the 
wedding  guests  took  their  leave ;  the  most  noteworthy 
jierson  being  the  Pope's  Nuncio  (the  young  man  being 
Win  of  the  Foil's  C'haml>erlain,  and  one  of  the  Grand 
Duke'a  Noble  Guard),  an  ecclesiastical  personage  in 
jiurple  stot-kinga,  attended  by  two  priests,  all  of  wlx 
got  into  a  coiu^h,  the  driver  and  footmen  of  which  woi 
gold-laced  cocked  hats  and  other  splendors. 

To-day  I  paid  a  short  visit  to  the  gallery  of 
Pitti  Palace.  I  looked  long  at  a  Madonna  of  Rftio 
phael's,  the  one  which  is  usually  kept  in  tlie  Grand 
I>uke's  private  apartments,  only  brought  into  the  pub- 
lie  gallery  for  the  pur|>ose  of  being  copied.  It  is  ttie 
holiest  of  all  Raphael's  Madonnas,  with  a  great  re- 
serve in  the  expression,  a  sense-  of  being  apart,  and 
with  the  utmost  tenderness  and  sweetness ;  althou^l 
she  drops  her  eyelids  liefoi'e  her  like  a  veil,  as  it  were, 
and  has  a  priinuess  of  eternal  virginity  about  the 
moutli.  It  is  one  of  Raphael's  earlier  works,  when 
he  mixed  more  religious  sentiment  with  his  paint  than 
aft<?rwards.  Perugino's  pictures  give  the  impression 
of  greater  sincerity  and  earnestness  than  Raphael's, 
though  the  genius  of  Raphael  often  gave  him 
ions  vision. 


to^H 

eadjr  1^1 


J®  in    ^^ 
wonv^H 

thiA 

rand^^l 
pub- 
B  ttie 
t  re- 


J 


ITALY. 


875 


July  28M.  —  Laflt  evening  we  went  to  the  Powers's, 
I  and  sat  with  them  on  the  terrace,  at  the  top  of  the 
f  bouse,  till  nearly  ten  o'clock.  It  was  a  delightful, 
calm,  summer  evening,  and  we  were  elevated  far  above 
all  the  adjacent  roofs,  and  had  a  pros]>ect  of  the  greater 
part  of  Florence  and  its  towers,  and  the  surrounding 
hills,  while  directly  beneath  us  rose  the  trees  of  a  gar- 
den, and  they  hardly  sent  their  summita  higher  than 
we  sat.  At  a  little  distance,  with  only  a  house  or  two 
between,  was  a  tlieatre  in  full  action,  the  Teatro  Gol- 
doni,  which  is  an  open  amphitheatre,  in  the  ancient 
fashion,  without  any  roof.  We  could  see  the  upper 
part  of  the  proscenium,  and,  had  we  been  a  little 
nearer,  might  have  seen  the  wliole  performance,  as  did 
several  boys  who  crept  along  the  tops  of  the  surronnd- 
iag  houses.  As  it  was,  we  heard  the  music  and  the 
applause,   and   now  and   then   an   actor's   stentorian 

tones,  when  we  chose  to  listen,     Mrs,  P and  my 

wife,  U and  Master  Bob,  sat  in  a  group  together, 

and  chatted  in  one  corner  of  our  aerial  drawing-room, 
while  Mr.  Powers  and  myself  leaned  against  the  par- 
apet, and  talked  of  innumerable  things.  When  the 
docks  struck  the  hour,  or  the  bells  rung  from  the 
steeples,  as  they  are  continually  doing,  I  spoke  of  the 
sweetness  of  the  Florence  bells,  the  tones  of  some  of 
them  being  as  if  the  l»ell  were  full  of  liquid  melody, 
and  shed  it  through  the  air  on  being  upturned,  I  had 
supposed,  in  my  lack  of  musical  ear,  that  the  bells  of 
the  Campanile  were  the  sweetest ;  but  Mr.  Powers 
says  that  there  is  a  defect  in  their  tone,  and  that  the 
bell  of  tlie  Palazzo  Vecehio  ia  the  most  melodious  he 
ever  heard.  Then  he  spoke  of  his  having  Ik-bu  a 
manufacturer  of  organs,  or,  at  least,  of  reeds  for  or- 
gans, at  one  period  of  his  life.     I  wonder  what  be  has 


k 


•76  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS,  {l 

not  been!  H«  told  me  of  an  immtiooof  Us  in  IIm 
nnmal  line,  a  jew'sJuup  widi  two  toi^;iie8 ;  and  hj 
and  hj  he  prodnoed  it  for  my  inspectioii.  It  waa  eai^ 
fully  kept  in  a  little  wooden  ease,  and  waa  werj  neatly 
and  elaborately  eonstmcted,  with  serews  to  tiglitm  it^ 
and  a  aflrer  oentre-pieee  between  the  two  toi^nea. 
Eridently  a  great  deal  of  tboi^^lit  had  been  bestowed 
on  this  little  harp ;  bat  Mr.  Powers  told  me  that  it 
was  an  otter  faOnre,  beeaose  the  tongnes  were  apt  to 
interfere  and  jar  with  one  another,  although  the  strain 
of  mnsic  was  rery  sweet  and  melodioos — as  he  prored, 
by  playing  on  it  a  little — when  everything  went  right. 
It  was  a  yoadif  ol  production,  and  he  said  that  its  fiul- 
nre  had  been  a  great  disappointment  to  him  at  the 
time ;  whereupon  I  oongratolated  him  that  his  failures 
had  been  in  small  matters,  and  his'suoeesses  in  great 
ones. 

We  talked,  furthermore,  about  instinct  and  reason, 
and  whether  the  brute  creation  have  souls,  and,  if  they 
have  none,  how  justice  is  to  be  done  them  for  their 
sufferings  here ;  and  Mr.  Powers  came  finally  to  the 
conclusion  that  brutes  suffer  only  in  appearance,  and 
that  Ood  enjoys  for  them  all  that  they  seem  to  enjoy, 
and  that  man  is  the  only  intelligent  and  sentient  be- 
ing. We  reasoned  high  about  other  states  of  being ; 
and  I  suggested  the  possibility  that  there  might  be 
beings  inhabiting  this  earth,  contemporaneously  with 
us,  and  close  beside  us,  but  of  whose  existence  and 
whereabout  we  could  have  no  perception,  nor  they  of 
ours,  because  we  are  endowed  with  different  sets  of 
senses  ;  for  certainly  it  was  in  God's  power  to  create 
beings  who  should  communicate  with  nature  by  in* 
numerable  other  senses  than  those  few  which  we  pos- 
sess.   Mr.  Powers  gave  hospitable  reception  to  this 


1858.]  ITALY.  877 

idea,  and  said  that  it  had  occurred  to  himself ;  and  he 
has  evidently  thought  much  and  earnestly  about  such 
matters ;  but  is  apt  to  let  his  idea  crystallize  into  a 
theory,  before  he  can  have  sufficient  data  for  it.  He 
is  a  Swedenborgian  in  faith. 

The  moon  had  risen  behind  the  trees  while  we  were 
talking,  and  Powers  intimated  his  idea  that  beinirs 
^ud^os  to  men  -  men  in  eyeiything  except  Z> 
modification  necessary  to  adapt  them  to  their  phys- 
ical circumstances  —  inhabited  the  planets,  and  peo- 
pled them  with  beautiful  shapes.  Each  planet,  how- 
ever, must  have  its  own  standard  of  the  beautiful,  I 
suppose;  and  probably  his  sculptor's  eye  would  not 
see  much  to  admire  in  the  proportions  of  an  inhabi. 
tant  of  Saturn. 

The  atmosphere  of  Florence,  at  least  when  we  as- 
cend a  little  way  into  it,  suggests  planetary  specula- 
tions. Galileo  found  it  so,  and  Mr.  Powers  and  I  per- 
vaded the  whole  imiverse ;  but  finally  crept  down  his 
garret-stairs,  and  parted,  with  a  friendly  pressure  of 
the  hand. 

VILLA  MONTAirrO. 
MONTE  B£NI. 

August  2d.  —  We  had  grown  weary  of  the  heat  of 
Florence  within  the  walls,  .  .  .  there  being  little  op- 
portunity for  air  and  exercise  except  within  the  pre- 
cincts of  our  little  garden,  which,  also,  we  feared  might 
breed  malaria,  or  something  akin  to  it.  We  have 
therefore  taken  this  suburban  villa  for  the  two  next 
months,  and,   yesterday  morning,  we   all  came   out 

hither.     J had  preceded  us  with  B.  P .    The 

villa  is  on  a  hill  called  Bellosguardo,  about  a  mile  be^ 


a  liad 

y  of 
was 


878   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [181 

yond  the  Porta  Romana.  Less  than  half  an  Tioai 
walk  brought  us,  who  were  on  foot,  to  the  iron  gate 
of  our  villa,  which  we  found  sliut  and  lockotl.  We 
shouted  to  be  let  in,  and,  while  waiting  for  somebody 
to  appear,  there  was  a  gooil  opjwrtunity  to  contem- 
]>late  the  external  aspect  of  the  villa.     After  we  had 

waited  a  few  minutes,  J came  rating  down  to  t 

gate,  laughing  heartily,  and  said  that  Bub  and  t 
been  in  the  house,  but  had  come  out,  shutting  the  dot 
beliind  them ;  and  as  the  door  closed  with  a  springk 
lock,  they  could  not  get  in  again.     Now  as  the  key  of 
the  outer  gate  as  well  as  that  of  the  bouse  itself  was 

in  the  pocket  of  J 'a  coat,  left  inside,  we  were  sbui 

out  of  our  own  castle,  and  compelled  to  carry  c 
siege  against  it,  without  much  likelihood  of  taking  i^ 
altliough  the  garrison  was  willing  to  surrender.     Bri 

B.  P called  in  the  assistance  of  the  contadini  who 

cultivate  the  ground,  and  live  in  the  fartn-house  close 
by ;  and  one  of  tliem  gut  into  a  window  by  means  of 
a  ladder,  so  that  the  keys  were  got,  the  gates  opened, 
and  we  finally  ailniitted.  Before  examining  any  other 
part  of  the  house,  we  climbed  tn  the  top  of  the  tower, 
which,  indeed,  is  not  very  high,  in  proportion  to  its 
massive  square.  Very  probably,  \tn  original  height 
was  abbreviated,  in  compliance  with  the  law  that  low- 
ered so  many  of  the  fortified  towers  of  noblemen 
within  the  walls  of  Florence.  .  .  .  The  stairs  were  not 
of  stone,  built  in  with  the  original  mass  of  the  towei 
as  in  English  castles,  hut  of  now  decayed  wood,  whi« 
shook  beneath  us,  and  grew  more  and  more  crazy  ^ 
we  ascended.  It  will  not  be  many  years  before  I 
height  of  the  tower  becomes  unattainable.  .  .  .  NaJ 
at  hand,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  city,  we  saw  the  couvei 
of  Monte  Olivetto,  and  other  Btructures  that  1 


^^  aai 

m  ■ 


ITALY.  379 

like  convente,  being  tuilt  round  an  enclosed  square; 
also  Dumeroiis  white  villas,  many  of  which  had  towers, 
like  that  we  were  standing  upon,  square  and  massive, 
some  of  them  battlemented  on  the  summit,  and  others 
apparently  modernized  for  domestic  purjwses.    Among 

them  U pointed  out  Galileo's  tower,  whither  she 

made  an  excursion  the  other  day.  It  looked  lower 
than  our  own,  but  seemed  to  stand  on  a  higher  eleva- 
tion. We  also  saw  the  duke's  villa,  the  Poggio,  with 
a  long  avenue  of  cypresses  leading  from  it,  as  if  a 
funeral  were  going  forth.  And  having  wasted  thus 
much  of  description  ou  tbe  landscape,  I  will  finish 
with  saying  that  it  lacked  only  water  to  be  a  very  fine 
one.  It  is  strange  what  a  difference  the  gleam  of 
water  makes,  and  how  a  scene  awakens  and  comes  to 
life  wherever  it  is  visible.  The  landscajw,  moreover, 
^ves  the  beholder  (at  least,  this  beholder)  a  sense  of 
oppressive  sunshine  and  scanty  shade,  and  does  not 
incite  a  longing  to  wander  through  it  on  foot,  as  a 
really  delightful  landscape  should.  The  vine,  too,  be- 
ing cultivated  in  so  trim  a  manner,  does  not  suggest 
that  idea  of  luxiu^nt  fertility,  which  is  the  poetical 
notion  of  a  vineyard.  The  olive  orchards  have  a  pale 
and  unlovely  hue.  An  English  view  would  have  been 
incomparably  richer  in  its  never-fading  green  ;  and  in 
my  own  country,  the  wooded  hills  would  have  been 
more  delightful  than  these  peaks  and  ridges  of  dreary 
and  barren  sunshine  ;  and  there  would  have  been  the 
■bright  eyes  of  half  a  dozen  little  lakes,  looking  heav- 

iward  within  an  extent  like  that  of  the  Val  <l*Amo. 

By  and  by  mamma's  carriage  came  along  tlie  dusty 
roa^l,  and  passed  through  the  iron  gateway,  which  we 
had  left  open  for  her  reception.  We  shoutt^d  down  to 
heit  and  B ,  and  they  waved  their  handkerchief* 


880    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1^ 

upward  to  us ;  and,  on  my  way  down,  I  met  R- 
and  the  servant  coming  up  tlirotigli  the  ghuxtly  rooms. 
The  rest  of  the  day  we  s))ent  mo»tly  in  exploring 
the  premises.  The  house  itself  is  of  almost  bewildering 
extent,  inaomueh  that  we  miglit  each  of  us  have  a  suita 
of  rooms  individually.  I  have  established  myself  on 
the  ground-floor,  where  I  have  a  droasing-room,  a  larf^e 
vaulted  saloon,  hung  with  yellow  damask,  and  a  B<]uare 
writing-stiuly,  the  walls  and  ceilings  of  the  two  latter 
apartments  being  ornamented  with  angels  and  cher- 
ubs aloft  in  fresco,  and  with  temples,  statues,  vams, 
broken  columns,  |>enco(^ks,  parrots,  vines,  and  sunflow. 
ers  below.  I  know  not  how  many  more  salooii%. 
anterooms,  and  sleep ii)g-4.-harobers  there  are  on 
iaroe  basement  story,  besides  an  equal  number 
them,  and  a  great  subterranean  establishment.  I  »av 
Bome  immense  jars  there,  which  1  stipiHwe  were  in- 
tended to  hold  oil ;  and  iron  kettles,  for  what  purpose 
I  cannot  tell.  There  is  also  a  chapel  in  the  house,  but 
it  is  locked  up,  and  we  cjinnot  yet  with  certainty  find 
the  door  of  it,  nor,  even  in  this  great  wildemeax  of  a 
house,  decide  absoiut4>ly  what  spai-e  the  holy  precincts 

occupy.     Adjoining  U 's  chamber,  which  is  in  the 

tower,  there  is  a  little  oratory,  hung  round  witli  aaored 
prints  of  very  ancient  date,  and  with  crucifixes,  holy- 
water  vases,  and  other  consecrated  things ;  and  here, 
within  a  glass  case,  there  is  the  representiLtion  of  an 
nndraped  little  boy  in  wax,  very  prettily  modelled, 
and  holding  up  a  heart  that  looks  like  a  bit  of  red 
sealing-wax.  If  I  had  found  him  anywhere  else,  I 
ahoidd  have  taken  him  for  Cupid ;  but,  being  in  an 
oratory,  I  presiune  him  to  have  some  religious  signi- 
fication. In  the  servants'  room  a  crucifix  hung  on 
one  side  of  the  bed,  and  a  little  vase  for  holy  wat«ff 


^ 


wat«r,  ^H 


168.3 


ITALY. 


vow  overgrown  with  a  cobweb,  on  the  other ;  and,  no 
'  idoubt,  all  the  other  sleeping  apartmente  would  have 
been  equally  well  provided,  only  that  their  occupanta 
were  to  be  heretics. 

The  lower  floor  of  the  house  ia  tolerably  furnished. 
Land  looks  cheerful  with  its  frescos,  although  the  bare 
■Jtarements  in  every  room  give  an  impreSBiou  of  dift- 
I  comfort.  But  carpets  are  iiniveraally  taken  up  in  Italy 
during  sntnmer-tiine.  It  must  have  been  an  immense 
family  that  could  have  ever  filled  such  a  house  with 
life.  We  go  on  voyages  of  discovery,  and  when  in 
quest  of  any  particular  point,  are  likely  enough  to 
fetch  up  at  some  other.  This  morning  I  had  difKcitltj 
in  finding  my  way  ag^n  to  the  top  of  the  tower.  One 
of  the  most  peculiar  rooms  is  constructed  close  to  the 
tower,  under  the  roof  of  the  main  building,  but  with 
no  external  walls  on  two  sides !  It  ia  thus  left  open  to 
the  air,  I  presume  for  the  sake  of  coolness.  A  parapet 
runs  round  the  exposed  sides  for  the  sake  of  security. 
Some  of  the  palaces  in  Florence  have  such  open  log- 
gias in  their  upper  stories,  and  I  saw  others  on  our 
journey  hither,  after  arriving  in  Tuscany. 

The  grounds  immediately  around  the  house  are  laid 
out  in  gravel-walks,  and  oruament«d  with  shrubbery, 
and  with  what  ought  to  be  a  grassy  lawn ;  but  the  Ital- 
ian sun  is  quite  as  little  favorable  to  beauty  of  that 
kind  as  our  own,  I  have  enjoyed  the  Inxury.  how- 
ever, almost  for  the  first  time  since  I  left  my  hill-top 
at  the  Wayside,  of  flinging  myself  at  full  length  on  the 
ground  without  any  fear  of  catching  cold.  Moist  Eng- 
land would  punish  a  man  soundly  for  taking  such  lib- 
erties with  her  greensward.  A  podere,  or  cultivated 
Ltract,  comprising  several  acres,  belongs  to  the  villa, 
lod  seems  to  be  fertile,  like  all  the  surrounding  counr 


882   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [1858; 

try.  The  pOBSeBBions  of  different  proprietors  are  not 
separated  by  fences,  but  only  marked  out  by  ditolies ; 
end  it  Beems  poasible  to  walk  miles  and  miles,  along 
the  intersecting  paths,  without  obstruction.  The  rural 
laborers,  so  far  as  I  have  obeerved,  go  about  in  i 
shtrt-aleeveB,  and  look  very  much  like  tanned  and 
burnt  Yankees- 
Last  night  it  was  really  a  work  of  time  and  toil  to 
go  aI>out  making  our  defensive  preparations  for  the 
night;  tirst  ulosing  the  iron  gate,  then  the  pondwous 
and  complicated  fastenings  of  tlie  house-door,  then  the 
separate  barrieadoos  of  each  iron-bornHl  window  oa  the 
lower  floor,  with  a  somewhat  slighter  arrangement 
above.  There  are  bolts  and  shutters,  however,  for 
every  window  in  the  house,  and  I  suppose  it  would 
not  be  amiss  to  put  them  all  in  use.  Our  garrison  ia 
so  small  that  we  must  depend  more  upon  the  strength 
of  our  fortifications  than  upon  our  own  active  efforts 
in  case  of  an  attack.  In  England,  in  an  insulated 
country  house,  we  should  need  all  these  bolts 
bars,  and  Italy  b  not  thought  to  be  the  safer  coi 
of  the  two. 

It  deserves  to  be  recorded  that  the  Count  Montaul 
a  nobleman,  and  seemingly  a  man  of  property,  should 
deem  it  worth  while  to  let  las  country  seat,  and  re- 
side during  the  hot  months  in  his  palaue  in  the  city, 
for  the  consideration  of  a  comparatively  small  sum  a 
month.  He  seems  to  contemplate  returning  hither  for 
the  autumn  and  winter,  when  the  situation  must  bo 
very  windy  and  bleak,  and  the  cold  deathlike  in  these 
great  halls;  and  then,  it  is  to  be  supposed,  he  will  let 
his  palace  in  town.  The  Count,  through  the  agency  of 
his  son,  bargained  very  stiffly  for,  and  finally  obtained, 
three  dollars  in  addition  to  the  sum  which  we  at  first 


ilated 
tauM^^ 


J 


1858.]  ITALY.  888 

offered  liim.  This  indicates  that  even  a  little  money 
is  still  a  matter  of  great  moment  in  Italy.  Signor 
del  Bello,  who,  I  believe,  is  also  a  nobleman,  haggled 
with  us  about  some  cracked  crockery  at  our  late  resi- 
dence, and  finally  demanded  and  received  fifty  cents 
in  compensation.  But  this  poor  gentleman  has  been  « 
spendthrift,  and  now  acts  as  the  agent  of  another. 

August  8rf. — Yesterday  afternoon  William  Story 
called  on  me,  he  being  on  a  day  or  two's  excursion 
from  Siena,  where  he  is  spending  the  summer  with  his 
family.  He  was  very  entertaining  and  conversative, 
as  usual,  and  said,  in  reply  to  my  question  whether  he 
were  not  anxious  to  return  to  Cleopatra,  that  he  had 
already  sketched  out  another  subject  for  sculpture, 
which  would  employ  him  during  next  winter.  He  told 
me,  what  I  was  glad  to  hear,  that  his  sketches  of  Ital- 
ian life,  intended  for  the  *^  Atlantic  Monthly,"  and 
supposed  to  be  lost,  have  been  recovered.  Speaking 
of  the  superstitiousness  of  the  Italians,  he  said  that 
they  universally  believe  in  the  influence  of  the  evil 
eye.  The  evil  influence  is  supposed  not  to  be  depend- 
ent on  the  will  of  the  possessor  of  the  evil  eye ;  on  the 
contrary,  the  persons  to  whom  he  wishes  well  are  the 
very  ones  to  suffer  by  it.  It  is  oftener  found  in  monks 
than  in  any  other  class  of  people ;  and  on  meeting  a 
monk,  and  encountering  his  eye,  an  Italian  usually 
makes  a  defensive  sign  by  putting  both  hands  behind 
him,  with  the  forefingers  and  little  fingers  extended, 
although  it  is  a  controverted  point  whether  it  be  not 
more  efficacious  to  extend  the  hand  with  its  outspread 
fingers  towards  the  suspected  person.  It  is  considered 
an  evil  omen  to  meet  a  monk  on  first  going  out  for 
the  day.     The  evil  eye  may  be  classified  with  the  phe- 


884    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [:8aR. 

nomena  of  niesmeruun.  The  Italians,  especially  (ha 
Neapolitans,  very  generally  wear  amulets.  Fio  Xono, 
perhaps  as  being  the  chief  of  all  monks  and  other  re- 
ligious people,  is  supposed  to  have  an  evil  eye  of  ton- 
fold  malignancy ;  and  its  effect  has  been  seen  in  the 
ruin  of  all  schemes  for  the  public  good  so  soon  an  they 
are  favored  by  him.  When  the  pillar  in  the  Piazza  di 
Spagna,  commemorative  of  his  dogma  of  the  Inimacn- 
late  Conception,  was  to  l>e  erected,  the  people  of  Home 
refused  to  bo  present,  or  to  have  anything  to  do  with 
it,  unless  tlie  pope  promised  to  abstain  from  interfer- 
ence. His  holiness  did  promise,  but  so  far  broke  his 
word  as  to  be  present  one  day  while  it  was  being 
erected,  and  on  that  day  a  man  was  killed.  A  little 
while  ago  there  ^tas  a  Lord  Clifford,  an  English  Cath- 
olic nobleman,  residing  in  ItJily,  and,  happening  to 
oome  to  Rome,  he  sent  Iiis  coni])limenta  to  Pio  Nono, 
and  requested  the  favor  of  an  intiirview.  The  pope,  as 
it  happened,  was  indisposed,  or  for  some  reason  could 
sot  see  his  lordship,  but  very  kindly  sent  him  his 
blessing.  Those  who  knew  of  it  shook  their  heads, 
and  intimated  that  it  would  go  ill  with  his  lonlnhlp 
now  that  he  had  been  blessed  by  Pio  Nono.  ajid  th^ 
Tery  next  day  poor  Lord  Clifford  was  dea<l  I  His  ho- 
liness hail  better  construe  the  scriptural  injunction  lit- 
erally, and  take  to  blessing  his  enemies. 

I  walked  into  town  with  J this  morning, 

meeting  a  monk  in  the  Via  Fomaee,  1  thought  it 
more  than  reasonable,  as  the  gooil  father  fixed  hi 
nn  me,  to  provide  against  the  worst  by  putting  botll 
banda  behind  me,  with  tlie  forefingers  and  little  fingers 
stuck  out. 

In  speaking  of   the  little  oratory  cuimected 
U 's  obamber,  I  forgot  to  mention  the  most 


t  nO^f 


.1^ 


ITALY. 


S86 


tnarkable  object  in  it.  It  is  a  ekoll.  the  size  of  life 
(or  death).  .  .  .  This  part  of  the  house  must  be  very 
old,  probably  coeval  with  the  tower.     The  t'eiling  of 

U 's  apartment  is  vaulted  with  intersecting  arches; 

and  adjoining  it  is  a  very  lai^  saloon,  likewise  with 
a  vaulted  and  groined  ceiling,  and  having  a  cushioned 
divan  running  all  round  the  walls.  The  windows  of 
these  tooms  look  out  on  the  Val  d'Amo. 

The  apartment  above  this  saloon  is  of  the  same  size, 
and  hung  with  engraved  portraits,  printed  on  lai^ 
sheets  by  the  Bcore  and  hundred  together,  and  enclosed 
in  wooden  frames.  They  comprise  the  whole  series  of 
Soman  emperors,  the  succession  of  popes,  the  kings  of 
Europe,  the  doges  of  Venice,  and  the  sultans  of  Tnr- 
key.  The  engravings  bear  different  dates  between 
1685  and  thirty  years  later,  and  were  executed  at 
■  £ome. 


I  August  4th.  —  We  ascended  our  tower  yesterday 
'  afternoon  to  see  the  sunset.  In  my  first  sketch  of  the 
Val  d'Arno  I  said  that  the  Amo  seemed  to  hold  its 
course  near  the  bases  of  the  hilts.  I  now  observe  that 
the  line  of  trees  which  marks  its  current  divides  the 
valley  into  two  pretty  equal  parts,  and  the  river  runs 
nearly  east  and  west.  ...  At  last,  when  it  was  grow- 
ing dark,  we  went  down,  groping  onr  way  over  the 
shaky  staircases,  and  peeping  into  each  dark  chamber 

as  we  paased.     I  gratified  J exceedingly  by  hiU 

ting  my  nose  against  the  wall,  fieaching  the  bottom, 
I  went  into  the  great  saloon,  and  stood  at  a  window 
watching  the  lights  twinkle  forth,  near  and  far,  in  the 
▼alley,  and  listening  to  the  convent  bells  that  soundeil 
from  Monte  Olivetto,  and  more  remotely  still.  The 
rtars  came  out.  and  the  constellation  of  the  Dipper 


886    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [18581 

hung  exactly  over  the  Val  d'Arno,  pointing  to  tb* 
North  Star  above  the  hilla  on  my  right. 


^P 


Aiiffust  12(A.  —  We  drove  into  town  yesterday 
ternoon,  with  Miss  Blagden,  to  call  on  Mr.  Kirkup,  an 
old  Englishman  wlio  has  resided  a  great  many  years 
in  Florence.  He  is  noted  as  an  antiquarian,  and  haA 
the  reputation  of  Iwing  a  necromancer,  not  undeser- 
vedly, as  he  is  deeply  interested  in  spirit-rappings,  and 
holds  converse,  through  a  medium,  with  dead  poets 
and  emperors.  He  lives  in  an  old  house,  formerly 
a  residence  of  the  Knights  Templars,  hanging  over 
the  Amo,  just  as  you  come  upon  the  Ponte  Veochio: 
and,  going  up  a  dark  staircase  and  knocking  at  a  door 
on  one  side  of  tlie  landing-place,  we  were  received 
by  Mr.  Kirkup.  He  had  had  notice  of  our  visit, 
and  was  prepai-ed  for  it,  being  dressed  in  a  blue  frock- 
coat  of  rather  an  old  fashion,  with  a  velvet  collar,  and 
in  a  thin  waistcoat  and  pantaloons  fresh  from  the 
drawer ;  looking  very  .spiuueJy,  iu  short,  and  unlike  his 
customary  guise,  for  Miss  Blagden  hinted  tu  us  that 
the  poor  gentionian  is  generally  so  untidy  that  it  is 
not  quite  pleasant  to  take  him  by  the  liand.  He  is 
rather  low  of  stature,  with  a  pale,  shrivelled  face,  and 
hair  and  beard  perfectly  white,  and  tlie  hair  of  a  par- 
tioularly  soft  and  silken  texture.  He  has  a  high,  thin 
nose,  of  the  English  aristocratic  type  ;  bis  eyes  have  a 
queer,  rather  wild  look,  and  the  eyebrows  are  arched 
above  them  so  that  he  seems  all  the  time  to  be  seeing 
something  that  strikes  him  with  surprise.  I  judged 
him  to  be  a  little  craek-brained,  chiefly  on  the  strengtli 
of  this  expression.  His  whole  make  is  delicate,  his 
bands  white  and  small,  and  his  appi-arance  and  man- 
ners those  of  a  gentleman,  with  rather  more  embroitt 


-I 


S87 


BJ  ITALY, 

tt  courtesy  than  belongs  to  ao  Englishman.  He 
appeared  to  be  very  nervous,  tremulous,  indeed,  to  bis 
fingers'  ends,  without  being  in  any  degree  disturbed  or 
embarrassed  by  our  presence.  Finally,  he  is  very  deaf ; 
an  infirmity  that  quite  took  away  my  pleasure  in  the 
interview,  beL'a,use  it  is  impossible  to  say  anything 
worth  while  when  one  is  compelled  to  raise  one's  voice 
above  its  ordinary  level. 

He  ushered  us  through  two  or  three  large  rooms, 
dark,  dusty,  hung  with  antique-looldng  pictures,  and 
lined  with  bookcases  containing,  I  doubt  not,  a  very 
curious  library.  Indeed,  he  directed  niy  attention  to 
one  case,  and  said  that  he  had  collected  those  works, 
in  former  days,  merely  for  the  sake  of  laughing  at 
them.  They  were  books  of  magic  and  occult  sciences. 
What  he  seemed  really  to  value,  however,  were  some 
manuscript  copies  of  Dante,  of  which  he  showed  us 
two :  one.  a  folio  on  parchment,  beantifiJly  written  in 
German  text,  the  letters  as  clear  and  accurately  cut 

•as  printed  type ;  the  other  a  small  volmne,  fit,  as  Mr. 
Eirkup  said,  to  be  carried  in  a  capacious  mediaeval 
alee^'e.  This  also  was  on  vellum,  and  as  elegantly  ex- 
ecuted aa  the  lai^r  one;  but  the  larger  had  beau- 
tiful Illuminations,  the  vermilion  and  gold  of  which 
looked  as  brilliant  now  as  they  did  five  centuries  ^o. 

»Both  of  these  books  were  written  early  in  the  four- 
teenth century.  Mr.  Eirkup  has  also  a  plaster  cast 
of  Dante's  face,  which  he  believes  to  be  the  original 
one  taken  from  his  face  after  death  ;  and  he  has  like- 
wise his  own  accurate  tracing  from  Giotto's  fresco  of 
Dante  in  the  chapel  of  the  Bargcllo.  This  fresco  wa^ 
discovered  through  Mr,  Kirkup's  means,  and  the  trac- 
ing is  particularly  valuable,  because  the  original  has 
oeen  almost  destroyed  by  rough  usage  in  drawing  out 


888   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [186& 

a  aaH  that  had  been  driven  into  the  eye.  It  rept» 
sents  the  profile  of  a  youthful  but  melancholy  taoe, 
and  has  tiie  general  ontUne  of  Dante's  features  in 
other  portrutB. 

Dante  has  held  frequent  oommunications  with  Mr. 
Kirkup  through  a  medium,  the  poet  being  described 
by  the  medium  ae  wearing  the  same  dress  seen  in  the 
youthful  portrait,  but  as  bearing  more  resemblance  to 
the  oast  taken  from  his  dead  face  than  to  the  picture 
from  his  youthful  one. 

There  was  a  veiy  good  picture  of  Savonarola  in  one 
of  the  rooms,  and  mauy  other  portraits,  paintings,  and 
drawings,  some  of  them  ancient,  and  others  the  work 
of  Mr.  Kirkup  himself.  He  has  the  torn  fragment  of 
an  exquisite  drawing  of  a  nude  figure  by  Rubens,  and 
a  portfolio  of  other  curious  drawings.  And  besides 
books  and  works  of  art,  he  has  no  end  of  antique 
knick-knackeries,  none  of  which  we  bad  any  time  to 
look  at ;  among  others  some  instruments  with  which 
nuns  used  to  torture  themselves  in  their  convents  by 
way  of  penance.  But  the  greatest  curiosity  of  all, 
and  no  antiquity,  was  a  pale,  large-eyed  little  girl, 
about  four  years  old,  who  followed  the  conjurer's  foot- 
steps wherever  he  went.  She  was  the  brightest  and 
merriest  little  thing  in  the  world,  and  frisked  through 
those  shadowy  old  chambers,  among  the  dead  people's 
trumpery,  as  gayly  as  a  butterfly  flits  among  flowers 
and  BunshiDe. 

The  child's  mother  was  a  beautiml  girl  named 
Beg^a,  whose  portrait  Mr.  Kirkup  showed  us  on  the 
wall.  I  never  saw  a  more  beautiful  and  striking  face 
claiming  to  be  a  real  one.  She  was  a  Florentine,  of 
low  birth,  and  she  lived  with  the  old  necromancer  as 
hia  spiritual  mediant.    He  showed  us  a  journal,  ke|4 


iTAf-r. 


889 


'  during  lier  lifetime,  and  read  from  it  liis  notes  of  an 

interview  with  th«  Czar  Alexander,  when  that  pott^D- 

tate  communicated  to  Mr.  Kirkup  that  he  had  been 

P    poisoned.     The  necromancer  set  a  great  value   upon 

I  Bcgina,  .  .  .  and  when  she  died  he  received  her  poor 

I  baby  into  his  heart,  and  now  considers  it  absolutely 

I   bis  own.     At  any  rate,  it  is  a  happy  belief  for  him, 

Bince  he  has  nothing  else  in  the  world  to  love,  and 

lovea  the  child  entirely,  and  enjoya  all  the  bliss  of 

fatherhood,  though  he  must  have  lived  as  much  as 

seventy  years  before  he  began  to  taste  it. 

The  child  inherits  her  mothers  gift  of  communica- 
tion with  the  spiritual  world,  so  that  the  conjurer  can 
still  talk  with  Kegina  through  the  baby  which  she 
left,  and  not  only  with  her,  but  with  Dante,  and  any 
other  great  spirit  that  may  choose  to  visit  him.  It  is 
a  very  strange  story,  and  this  child  might  be  put  at 
once  into  a  romance,  with  all  her  history  and  environ- 
ment: the  ancient  Knight  Templar  palace,  with  the 
Amo  flowing  under  the  iron-barred  windows,  and  the 
Ponte  Vecchio,  covered  with  its  jewellers'  shops,  close 
at  hand  ;  the  dark,  lofty  chambers  with  faded  freseoa 
on  the  ceilings,  black  pictures  han^ng  on  the  walls, 
old  books  on  the  shelves,  and  hundreds  of  musty  an- 
tiquities, emitting  an  odor  of  past  centuries ;  the  shriv- 
elled, white-bearded  old  man,  thinking  all  the  time  of 
ghosts,  and  looking  into  the  child's  eyes  to  seek  them ; 
and  the  child  herself  springing  so  freshly  out  of  the 
eoil,  so  pretty,  so  intelligent,  so  playfiU,  with  never  a 
playmate  save  the  conjurer  and  a  kitten.  It  is  a  Per- 
sian kitten,  and  lay  asleep  in  a  window ;  but  when  I 
touched  it,  it  started  up  at  once  in  as  gamesome  a 
mood  as  the  cliild  herself. 

The  child  looks  pale,  and  no  wonder,  seldom  or 


890   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [IM 

never  Btirring  out  of  that  old  palace,  or  away  f 
river  atmosphi-re.  Miss  Blagden  advised  Mr.  Kirkup 
to  ^  with  her  to  the  sea-side  or  into  the  euuntry,  and 
he  did  not  deny  that  it  might  do  her  good,  but  seemed 
to  be  hampered  hy  an  old  man's  shiggishiieHS  an<l  dis- 
like of  change.  I  think  he  will  not  live  a  great  while, 
for  he  seems  very  frail.  When  ho  dies,  the  little  girl 
will  inherit  what  propei-ty  he  may  leave.  A  lady, 
Catharino  Fleming,  an  Englishwoman,  and  a  friend  of 
Mr.  Kirkup,  has  engaged  to  take  her  in  charge.  She 
followed  us  merrily  to  the  door,  and  so  did  the  Persian 
kitten,  and  Mr.  Kirkup  shook  hands  with  us,  over  and 
over  again,  with  vivacious  oourtexy,  his  manner  hav- 
ing been  characterized  by  a  great  deal  of  brisknesa 
throughout  Uio  interview.  He  expressed  himself  de- 
lighted to  have  met  me  (whose  books  he  luul  road}^ 
and  said  that  the  day  would  be  a  memorable  ona  M 
him,  —  which  I  did  not  in  the  least  believe.  | 

Mr.  Kirkup  is  an  intimate  friend  of  Trelawne^^' 
author  of  "  Adventures  of  a  Younger  Son,"  and,  long 
ago,  the  latter  promised  him  that,  if  ho  ever  came  into 
possession  of  the  family  estate,  he  would  diviile  it  with 
him.  Trelawuey  did  really  succeed  to  tlie  estate, 
lost  no  time  in  forwarding  to  his  friend  the  legal  d< 
ments,  entitling  him  to  half  of  the  property.  But  Mr.' 
Kirkup  declined  the  gift,  as  he  himself  was  c 
tute,  and  Trelawney  had  a  brother.  There  were  two 
pictures  of  Trelawney  in  tlie  saloons,  one  a  alight  sketch 
on  the  wall,  the  other  a  half-lengtli  portrait  in  a  TupI 
Uh  dress ;  both  handsome,  but  indicating  no  very 
able  character.  It  is  not  eaay  to  forgive  Trelawney 
uncovering  dead  BjTon's  Uniba,  and  telling  that 
rible  story  alxtut  them,  —  equally  disgraueful  to 
■elf,  be  it  truth  or  a  lie. 


HM.] 


ITALY. 


891 


I 


It  seemg  tliat  Regina  had  a  lover,  and  a  sister  who 
was  very  disreputable.  ...  It  rather  adds  than  oth- 
erwise to  the  romance  of  the  afFair,  —  the  idea  that 
this  pretty  little  elf  has  no  right  whatever  to  the  asy- 
liim  which  she  ha*  found.     Her  name  is  Imogen. 

The  small  manuscript  copy  of  Dante  whieh  he 
showed  me  was  written  by  a  Florentine  gentleman  of 
the  fourteenth  century,  one  of  whose  ancestors  the  poet 
iiad  met  and  talked  with  in  Paradise. 

August  19(A.  —  Here  is  a  good  Italian  incident, 
which  I  find  in  Valery.  Andrea  del  Castagno  was  a 
painter  in  Florence  in  the  fifteenth  century ;  and  he 
had  a  friend,  likewise  a  painter,  Doinenieo  of  Venice. 
The  latter  had  the  secret  of  painting  in  oils,  and 
yielded  to  Castagno's  entreaties  to  impart  it  to  him. 
Desirous  of  being  the   sole  possessor  of   this   great 

[  aeoret,  Castogna  waited  only  the  night  to  assassinate 

'  Domenico,  who  so  little  suspected  hia  treachery,  that 
he  besought  those  who  found  him  bleeding  and  dying 
to  take  him  to  his  friend  Caatagno,  that  he  might  die 
in  his  arms.  The  murderer  lived  to  be  seventy-four 
years  old,  and  his  crime  was  never  suspected  till  he 
himself  revealed  it  on  his  death-bed.  Domenico  did 
Actually  die  in  Castagno's  arms.     The  death  st^ene 

.  would  have  been  a  good  one  for  the  latter  to  paint  in 

Loils. 

September   Ist.  —  Few  things   joumalizable   have 
happened  during  the  last  month,  because  Florence  and 
the  neighborhood  have  lost  their  novelty ;  and  further- 
more, I  usually  spend  the  whole  day  at  home,  having 
kibeen  engaged  in   planning  and  sketching  out  a  ro> 
n  ,|iiance.    I  have  now  done  with  this  for  the  present, 


892   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [18S8u 

and  mean  to  employ  the  rest  of  the  time  we  stay  ber* 
chiefly  in  revisItiDg  the  galleries,  and  seeing  whatdfl 
mains  to  be  Been  in  Florence.  ^H 
LaMt  Saturday,  August  28th,  we  went  to  take  tea  H 
Misfl  Blagden's,  who  has  a  weekly  reception  on  that 
evening.   We  found  Mr.  Powers  there,  and  by  and  by- 
Mr.  Boott  and  Mr.  Trollope  came  in.     Mias has 

lately  been  exercising  her  faculties  aa  a  H]>iritual  writ- 
ing-medium; and,  the  conversation  turning  on  that 
subject,  Mr.  Powers  related  Home  things  that  he  had 
witnessed  through  the  agency  of  Mr.  Home,  who  li 
held  a  session  or  two  at  bis  house.  He  descrilml  i 
apparition  of  two  mysterious  hands  from  beneath^ 
table  round  which  the  party  were  seated.  These  hands 
purported  to  Ijelong  to  the  aunt  of  the  Countess  Oot- 
tereJ,  who  was  present,  and  were  a  pair  of  thin,  del- 
icate, aged,  ladylike  hands  and  arms,  appearing  at 
the  edge  of  the  table,  and  terminating  at  the  elbow  in 
a  sort  of  white  mist.  One  of  the  bands  took  up  a  fan 
and  began  to  use  it.  The  countess  then  said,  "  Fan 
yoiu-self  as  you  nse<l  to  do,  dear  aunt "  ;  and  forthwith 
the  hands  waved  the  fan  back  and  forth  in  a  peculiitr 
manner,  which  the  countess  recognized  as  the  man- 
ner of  her  dead  aunt.  The  spirit  was  then  re<iu««ted 
to  fan  each  member  of  the  party ;  and  aci'ordingly, 
each  separate  individual  round  the  table  was  fanned 
in  turn,  and  felt  the  breeze  sensibly  upon  his  face. 
Finally,  the  hands  sank  beneath  the  table,  I  believe 
Mr.  Powers  said ;  but  1  am  not  quite  sure  that  tliey 
did  not  melt  into  the  air.  During  this  apparition, 
Mr.  Home  sat  at  the  tal)le,  but  not  in  such  a  position 
or  within  such  distance  that  Iio  could  have  put  out  or 
managed  tlie  spe<'tral  hands ;  and  of  tliis  Mr.  Powers 
•atisfied  himself  by  taking  precisely  the  same  po«^ 


J 


1 1858.] 


ITALY. 


a  after  tl 


I 
I 


liftd  retired.  Mr.  Powers  did  not 
feel  the  hands  at  this  time,  but  he  afterwards  felt  the 
tout^h  of  infant  bandit,  which  were  at  the  time  invis- 
ible. He  t*>ld  of  many  of  the  wonders,  which  seem  to 
have  as  much  n^ht  to  be  set  down  as  facta  as  anything 
else  that  depends  on  human  testimony.     For  example, 

Mr.  K ,  one  of  the  party,  gave  a  sudden  start  and 

exclamation.  He  bad  felt  on  his  knee  a  certain  token, 
which  could  have  been  given  bim  only  by  a  friend, 
long  ago  in  hia  grave.  Mr.  Powers  inquired  what  was 
the  lajtt  thing  that  had  been  given  as  a  present  to  a 
deceased  child,  and  suddenly  both  he  and  bis  wife  felt 
a  prick,  as  of  souie  sharp  instrument,  on  their  knees. 
The  present  had  beeu  a  penknife.  I  have  forgotten 
other  incidents  quite  as  striking  as  these ;  but,  with 
the  exception  of  the  spirit-hands,  tliey  seemed  to  be 
akin  to  those  that  have  been  produced  by  mesmerism, 
returning  the  inquirer's  thoughts  and  veiled  recoUec- 
fdons  to  himself,  as  answers  to  his  queries.  The  hands 
are  certainly  an  inexplicable  phenomenon.  Of  course, 
they  are  not  portions  of  a  dead  body,  nor  any  other 
kind  of  substance ;  they  are  impressions  on  the  two 
senses,  sight  and  touch,  hut  how  produced  I  cannot 
telL  Even  admitting  their  appearance.  —  and  certainly 
I  do  admit  it  as  freely  and  fully  as  if  I  liad  seen  them 
myself,  —  there  is  no  need  of  supposing  them  to  come 
from  the  world  of  departed  spirits. 

Powers  seems  to  put  entire  faith  in  the  verity  of 
spiritual  communications,  while  acknowleilging  the  dif- 
ficxUty  of  identifying  spirits  as  being  what  they  pre- 
tend to  be.  He  is  a  Sweden borgiau,  and  so  far  pre- 
pared to  put  f^tb  in  many  of  these  phenomena.  As 
for  Home,  Powers  gives  a  decided  opinion  tliat  he  is 
a  knave,  but  thinks  him  so  organized,  nevertheless,  aa 


894    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [181 

to  be  a  partinularly  good  meiliuiu  for  spiritual  comi 
nications.  Spirits,  I  Buppiisc,  like  earthly  people,  lire 
obliged  to  use  eucli  iostruments  as  will  auswer  their 
purposes ;  but  rather  tliau  receive  a  message  from  a 
dead  friend  through  the  urgiiniHtn  of  a  rogue  or 
latan,  methinks  I  would  ehoose  to  wait  till  we 
But  what  most  astonishva  uie  is  the  indiffercDce 
which  I  listeu  to  these  inarvelx.  They  throw  old  glios^ 
stories  quite  into  the  shade ;  they  bring  the  whole  world 
of  spirits  down  amongst  us,  visibly  and  audibly  ;  they 
are  absolutely  proved  to  be  sober  fai^ta  by  evidence 
that  woidd  satisfy  us  of  any  other  alleged  realities ; 
and  yot  I  eanuot  fortte  my  mind  to  interest  myaelf  in 
them.  They  are  facts  to  my  understanding,  which, 
might  have  been  anticipated,  would  have  been  the 
to  acknowledge  them ;  but  they  seem  not  to  be  facts 
my  intuitions  and  deeper  perceptions.  My  inner 
does  not  in  the  least  admit  them  ;  there  is  a  mistake 
somewhere.  So  idle  and  empty  do  I  feel  these  stories 
to  be,  that  I  hesitated  long  whether  or  DO  to  give  ( 
few  pages  of  this  not  very  important  journal  to 
record  of  them. 

We  have  had  written  communications  through 

with  several  spirits ;  my  wife's  father,  mt 

two  brothers,  and  a  sister,  who  died  long  ago,  i 
fancy  ;  a  certain  Mary  Hall,  who  announces  herself 

the  guardian  spirit  of  Miss ;  and,  queerest  of 

a  Mary  Runnel,  who  seems  to  be  a  wandering  fipiri^i 
having  relations  with  nobody,  but  thrusts  her  flnj 
into  everylMxly's  affairs.      My  wife's  mother  is 
j>riucipal    communicant ;    she   exi)resses  strong  a 
tion,  and  rejoices  at  the  opportunity  of  conversing  wil 
her  dauglit«r.     She  often  says  very  pretty  tilings 
instance,  in  a  disaei-tation  upon  heavenly  music;  bi 


om  a 


1BB8.]  ITALY.  895 

there  is  a  lack  of  sabstance  in  her  talk,  a  want  of 
gripe,  a  delusive  show,  a  sentimental  Hurface,  with  uo 
bottom  beneath  it.  The  same  sort  of  thing  has  stnit'k 
me  in  all  the  poetry  and  prose  that  I  have  read  from 
spiritual  sourceB.  I  should  judge  that  these  effusions 
emanated  from  earthly  minds,  but  had  undergone' 
some  process  that  had  deprived  them  of  solidity  and 
varmth.  In  the  communications  between  my  wife 
and  her  mother,  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  (Miss 

being  unconsciously  in  a  meamerio  state}  all  the 

responses  are  conveyed  to  her  fingers  from  my  wife's 
mind.  .  .  . 

We  have  tried  the  spirits  by  various  test  questions, 
on  every  one  of  which  they  have  failed  egregiously. 
Here,  however,  the  aforesaid  Mary  Runnel  comes  into 
play.  The  other  spirits  have  told  us  that  the  veracity 
of  this  spirit  is  not  to  be  depended  upon  ;  and  so, 
whenever  it  is  possible,  poor  Mary  Runnel  is  thrust 
forward  to  bear  the  odium  of  every  mistake  or  false- 
hood. They  have  avowed  themselves  responsible  for 
all  statements  signed  by  themselves,  and  have  thereby 
brought  themselves  into  more  than  one  inextricable 
dilemma  ;  but  it  is  very  funny,  where  a  response  or  a 
matter  of  fact  has  not  been  thus  certified,  how  invavi- 

,  «bly  Mary  Runnel  is  ma«!e  to  assume  the  discredit  of 
it,  on  its  turning  out  to  be  false.  It  is  the  most  in- 
genious arrangement  that  could  possibly  have  been 
contrived ;  and  somehow  or  other,  the  pranks  of  this 

rlying  spirit  give  a  reality  to  the  conversations  which 

1  the  more  respectable  ghosts  qmte  fail  in  imparting. 
The  whole  matter  seems  to  me  a  sort  of  dreaming 

pitwake.     It  resembles  a  dream,  in  that  the  whole  ma- 
I,  from  the  first,  in  the  dreamer's  mind,  though 

bconcealed  at  various  depths  below  t^  surface ;  the 


896    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKa.  [1«» 

dead  appear  alive,  as  they  always  do  in  dreams 
expected  combinatioQB  occur,  as  uontinually  in  dreaiat]^ 
tho  mind  speaks  through  the  various  persons  of 
drama,  and  sometimes  astonishes  itself  with  its 
wit,  wisdom,  and  eloquence,  as  often  in  dreams ;  but, 
in  both  cases,  the  intellectual  manifestations  are  really 
of  a  very  flimsy  texture.  Mary  Kunnel  is  the  only 
personage  who  does  not  come  evidently  from  dream- 
land ;  and  she,  I  think,  rcprusenl-s  that  lurking  8oej>< 
ticism,  that  sense  of  unreality,  of  whicli  we  are  often 
conscious,  amid  the  most  vivid  phantasmagoria  of  a 
dream.  I  should  be  glad  to  believe  in  the  genuine- 
ness of  these  spirits,  if  I  oould ;  but  the  above  is  the 
conclusion  to  which  my  soberest  thoughts  t«?nd.  There 
remains,  of  course,  a  great  deal  for  which  I  cannot  wc- 
count,  and  I  caimot  sufiiciently  wonder  at  tlie  pighead- 
edness  both  of  metaphysicians  and  physiologists,  tn  not 
accepting  the  phenomena,  so  far  as  to  make  tliem  the 
subject  of  investigation. 

In  writing  the  communications.  Miss holds  the 

pencil  ratlier  loosely  between  her  Gngers ;  it  moves 
rapidly,  and  with  equal  facility  whether  she  fixes  her 
eyes  on  the  paper  or  not.  The  handwriting  has  far 
more  freedom  than  her  own.  At  the  conclusion  of  a 
sentence,  the  pencil  lays  itself  down.  She  sometimes 
has  a  perception  of  each  word  before  it  is  written ;  at 
other  times,  she  is  quite  unconscious  what  is  to  come 
next.  Her  int^rity  is  absolutely  indubitable,  and  she 
herself  totally  disbelieves  in  the  spiritual  authentioitjjr  ■ 
of  what  is  communicated  through  her  medium.  fl 

September  3il.  —  We  walked  into  Florence  yeBtflP- ' 
day,  betimes  after  breakfast,  it  being  comfortably  cool, 
and  a  gray,  English  sky ;  though,  indeed,  the  cloud« 


1858.]  ITALY.  897 

had  a  tendency  to  mass  themselves  more  than  they 
do  on  an  overcast  English  day.  We  found  it  warmer 
in  Florence,  but  not  inconveniently  so,  even  in  the 
simniest  streets  and  squares. 

We  went  to  the  Uffizi  gallery,  the  whole  of  which, 
with  its  contents,  is  now  familiar  to  us,  except  the 
room  containing  drawings ;  and  our  to-day's  visit  was 
especiaUy  to  them.  The  door  giving  admittance  to 
them  is  the  very  last  in  the  gallery ;  and  the  rooms, 
three  in  number,  are,  I  should  judge,  over  the  Loggia 
de  Lanzi,  looking  on  the  Grand  Ducal  Piazza.  The 
drawings  hang  on  the  walls,  framed  and  glazed ;  and 
nxmiber,  perhaps,  from  one  to  two  hundred  in  each 
room ;  but  this  is  only  a  small  portion  of  the  coUec- 
tion,  which  amounts,  it  is  said,  to  twenty  thousand, 
and  is  reposited  in  portfolios.  The  sketches  on  the 
walls  are  changed,  from  time  to  time,  so  as  to  exhibit 
all  the  most  interesting  ones  in  turn.  Their  whole 
charm  is  artistic,  imaginative,  and  intellectual,  and  in 
no  degree  of  the  upholstery  kind ;  their  outward  pre- 
sentment  being,  in  general,  a  design  hastUy  shadowed 
out,  by  means  of  colored  crayons,  on  tinted  paper,  or 
perhaps  scratched  rudely  in  pen  and  ink ;  or  drawn  in 
pencil  or  charcoal,  and  half  rubbed  out ;  very  rough 
things,  indeed,  in  many  instances,  and  the  more  inter- 
esting on  that  account,  because  it  seems  as  if  the  art- 
ist had  bestirred  himself  to  catch  the  first  glimpse  of 
an  image  that  did  but  reveal  itself  and  vanish.  The 
«heets,  or  sometimes  scraps  of  paper,  on  which  they 
are  drawn,  are  discolored  with  age,  creased,  soiled  ; 
but  yet  yov  are  magnetized  by  the  hand  of  Raphael, 
Michel  Angelo,  Leonardo,  or  whoever  may  have  jotted 
down  those  rough-looking  master-touches.  They  cer 
tainly  possess  a  charm  that  is  lost  in  the  finished  pic 


898    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1858. 

hire ;  and  I  was  more  sensible  of  forei'iwtinj;  tlionf^lit, 
skill,  and  prophetic  design,  in  these  sketckcs  than  in 
the  moat  consummate  works  that  have  been  elaborated 
from  them.  Tliero  is  something  more  divine  in  these ; 
for  I  siipjtosti  till!  tirst  idea  of  a  picture  is  reiil  tnspinu 
tion,  and  oil  the  subsequent  elaboration  of  the  master 
servos  but  to  cover  up  the  celestial  germ  with  some- 
thing that  belongs  to  himself.  At  any  rate,  the  first 
sketch  is  the  more  suggestive,  and  sets  the  spectator's 
ima^ation  at  work ;  whereas  the  picture,  if  a  good 
one,  leaves  him  nothing  1«  do ;  if  bad,  it  confuses, 
stupefies,  disenchants,  and  disheartens  him.  First 
thoughts  have  an  aroma  and  fragrance  in  them,  that 
they  do  not  lose  in  three  hundre<l  years;  for  so 
and  a  good  deal  more,  are  some  of  these  skettihoa. 

None  interested  mo  more  than  some  drawings, 
separate  pieces  of  paper,  by  Pemgino,  for  his  picture 
of  the  mother  and  friends  of  Jesus  round  his  dead 
body,  now  at  the  Pitti  Palace.  The  attendant  figures 
arc  distinctly  made  out,  aa  if  the  Virgin,  and  Jolin, 
and  Mary  Magdalen  had  eaeh  favored  the  paint«r  with 
a  sitting ;  but  the  body  of  Jesus  lies  in  the  midst, 
dimly  hinted  with  a  few  |)encil  marks. 

There  were  neveral  designs  by  Michel  Angelo,  ni 
of  which  made  much  impression  on  me ;  the  ■nodt' 
striking  was  a  very  ugly  demon,  afterwards  paiuted 
in  the  Sistine  Chapel.  Kaphael  shows  several  skettrhes 
of  Madonnas,  —  one  of  which  lias  flowered  into  the 
Grand  Duke's  especial  Madoima  at  the  Pitti  Palace, 
but  with  a  different  face.  His  sketches  were  mostly 
very  rough  in  execution  ;  but  there  were  two  or  three 
designs  for  frescos,  I  think,  in  the  Vatican,  very 
fully  executed  ;  perhaps  because  these  works 
Buunly  to  be  done  by  other  hands  than  his  own. 


that 


dst, 


I 


ITALY.  899 

Beems  to  me  tliat  tlie  Pre-Raplmelite  artists  made  mora 
careful  drawiags  than  the  later  ones ;  an<l  it  rathor 
surprised  me  to  see  how  much  science  they  possessed. 

We  looked  at  few  other  things  in  the  gallery  ;  and, 
indeed,  it  was  not  one  of  the  days  when  works  of  art 
find  me  impressible.  We  stopped  a  little  while  tn  the 
Tribune,  but  the  Venus  di  Medici  seemed  to  me  to- 
day little  more  than  any  other  pieee  of  yellowish  white 
marble.  How  strange  that  a  goddess  should  stand  be- 
fore U8  absolutely  unrecognized,  even  when  we  know, 
by  previous  revelations,  that  she  is  nothing  short  of 
divine  I  It  is  also  strange  that,  unless  when  one  feels 
the  ideal  charm  of  a  statue,  it  becomes  one  of  the 
most  tedious  and  irksome  things  in  the  world.  Either 
it  must  be  a  celestial  thing  or  an  old  lump  of  stone, 
dusty  and  time -soiled,  and  tiring  out  your  patience 
with  eternally  looking  just  the  same.  Once  in  a  while 
you  penetrate  through  the  crust  of  the  old  sameness, 
and  see  the  statue  forever  new  and  immortally  young. 

Leaving  the  gallery  we  walked  towards  the  Duomo, 
and  on  our  way  stopped  to  look  at  the  beautiful  Gothic 
niches  hollowed  into  the  exterior  walls  of  the  Church 
of  San  Michele.  They  are  now  in  tlie  process  of  be- 
ing cleaned,  and  each  niche  is  elaliorately  inlaid  with 
precious  marbles  and  some  of  them  magnificently 
gilded ;  and  they  are  all  surmounted  with  marble 
canopies  as  light  and  graceful  as  frost-work.  Within 
stand  statues,  St.  Geoi^,  and  many  other  saints,  by 
Donatello  and  others,  and  all  taking  a  hold  upon  one's 
sympathies,  even  if  they  be  not  beautiful.  Classic 
statues  escape  you  with  their  slippery  beauty,  as  if 
they  were  made  of  ice.  Rough  and  ugly  things  can 
be  clutched.  Thb  is  nonsense,  and  yet  it  means  some- 
I  thing.  .  ■  .  The  streets  were  thronged  and  vociferativfl 


400   FHENCn  AND  ITAUAK  NOTE-BOOKS.   [IPSl 

With  more  life  and  outcry  than  asaal.  It  muBt  hiiva 
been  market-day  in  Florence,  for  the  commerce  of  the 
streets  was  in  great  vigor,  narrow  tables  being  set  out 
in  them,  and  in  the  squarea,  burdened  with  all  tdnda 
of  smnll  nierchandiae,  such  as  cheap  jewelry,  glisten- 
ing as  brightly  a^  what  we  had  just  see-n  in  the  gem 
room  of  the  Uflizi ;  crot-keiy  ware  ;  toys,  books, 
Italian  and  French ;  atlks ;  slippers ;  old  iron  ;  all 
advertiaed  by  the  dealers  with  terrilily  loud  and  high 
Toices,  that  reverberated  harshly  from  uide  to  side  of 
the  narrow  streets.  Italian  street-cries  go  through  the 
head,  not  that  they  are  so  very  sharp,  but  exceedingly 
hard,  like  a  blunt  iron  bar. 

We  stood  at  the  base  of  the  Campanile,  and  looked 
at  the  bas-reliufs  which  wreathe  it  round  ;  and,  above 
them,  a  row  of  statues ;  and  from  bottom  to  top  a 
marvellous  minuteness  of  inl^d  marblesi,  filling  up 
the  vast  and  beautiful  design  of  this  heaven-aspiring 
tower.  Looking  upward  to  its  lofty  summit,  —  whoro 
angels  might  alight,  lapsing  downward  from  heaven, 
and  gaze  curiously  at  tlie  bustle  of  men  Iwlow,  —  I 
could  not  but  feel  that  tliere  is  a  moral  charm  in  this 
faithful  minuteness  of  Gotliic  architecture,  filling  up 
its  outline  with  a  million  of  beauties  that  perhaps  may 
never  be  studied  out  by  a  single  spectator.  It  is  the 
very  process  of  nature,  and  no  doubt  produces  an  ef- 
fect that  we  know  not  of.  Classio  architecture  is  noth- 
ing but  an  outline,  and  affords  no  little  points,  no 
interstices  where  human  feeUnga  may  cling  and  over- 
grow it  like  ivy.  The  charm,  as  I  said,  seems  to  be 
moral  rather  than  intellectual;  for  in  the  gem-room 
of  the  Uffizi  you  may  see  fifty  designs,  elaborated  on 
a  small  si'iile,  tliut  have  just  as  much  merit  as  the  d& 
■ign  of  the  Campanile.    If  it  were  only  five  indwr 


J 


ITALY. 


401 


Kkei 


I 


loDg,  it  might  be  a  case  for  some  article  of  toilet ;  be- 
ing two  hundred  feet  high,  its  prettiness  develops  into 
grandeur  as  well  as  beauty,  and  it  becomes  really  one 
of  the  wonders  of  the  world.  The  design  of  the  Pan- 
theon, on  the  contrary,  would  retain  its  sublimity  on 
whatever  scale  it  might  be  represented. 

Returning  homewards,  we  crossed  the  Ponte  Veo- 
chio,  and  went  to  the  Museum  of  Natural  History, 
where  we  gained  admittance  into  the  rooms  dedicated 
to  Gralileo.  They  consist  of  a  vestibule,  a  saloon,  and 
a  semicircular  tribune,  covered  with  a  frescoed  dome, 
beneath  which  stands  a  colossal  statue  of  Galileo, 
long-bearded,  and  clad  in  a  student's  gown,  or  some 
voluminous  garb  of  that  kind.  Around  the  tribune, 
beside  and  behind  the  statue,  are  six  niches,  —  in  one 
of  which  is  preserved  a  forefinger  of  Galileo,  fixed  on 
a  little  gilt  pedestal,  and  pointing  upward,  under  a 
glass  cover.  It  is  very  much  shrivelled  and  mummy' 
like,  of  the  color  of  parchment,  and  is  little  more  than 
|.ft  finger-bone,  with  the  dry  stdn  or  flesh  flaking  away 
rfrom  it ;  on  the  whole,  not  a  very  delightful  relic  ;  but 
Galileo  used  to  point  heavenward  with  this  finger,  and 
I  hope  has  gone  whither  he  point«d. 

Another  niche  contains  two  telescopes,  wherewith  he 
made  some  of  his  discoveries ;  they  are  perhaps  a  yard 
long,  and  of  very  small  calibre.  Other  astronomical 
instruments  are  displayed  in  the  glass  cases  that  line 
the  rooms ;  but  I  did  not  understand  their  use  any 
better  than  the  monks,  who  wished  to  bum  Galileo 
ir  his  heterodoxy  about  the  planetary  system.  .  .  . 
After  dinner  I  climbed  the  tower.  .  .  .  Florence 
iy  in  the  sunshine,  level,  compact,  and  small  of  com- 
pass. Above  the  tiled  roofs  rose  the  tower  of  Palazzo 
Vecchio,  the  loftiest  and  the  most  picturesque,  though 


402  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [ISfti 

built,  I  suppose,  with  no  idea  of  miikiug  it  bo.  But  it 
attains,  in  a  singular  degree,  tho  end  of  eausing  the 
iinagiuatioQ  to  fly  upward  and  alight  on  its  airy  battle- 
ments. Near  it  I  btjheld  the  square  mass  of  Or  San 
MichoU,  and  farther  to  the  U'ft  the  bulky  Ouomo,  and 
the  Campanile  close  bo.iide  it,  like  a  slender  brtdo  or 
daughter  ;  the  dome  of  San  Lorenzo  too.  The  Amo  ia 
nowhere  risible.  Beyond,  and  on  all  sides  of  tbe  city, 
the  hills  pile  themselves  lazily  upward  in  ridges,  hero 
and  there  developing  into  a  peak ;  towards  their  bases 
white  villas  were  strewn  numerously,  but  the  upper 
region  was  lonely  and  bare. 

As  we  passed  under  the  arch  of  the  Porta  Roniana 
this  morning,  on  our  way  into  the  city,  we  saw  a  queer 
object.  It  was  what  we  at  iirst  took  for  a  living  man, 
in  a  garb  of  light  reddish  or  yellowish  red  color,  of 
antique  ot  priestly  fashion,  and  with  a  cowl  falling  be- 
hind. Ilia  face  was  of  the  same  hue,  and  seemed  to 
have  been  powdered,  as  the  faces  of  maskers  some- 
times are.  He  sat  in  a  cart,  which  he  seemed  to  be 
driving  into  the  city  with  a  load  of  earthen  jars  and 
pipkins,  the  color  of  which  was  precisely  like  his  own. 
On  closer  inspection,  this  priestly  figure  pnived  to  be 
likewise  an  image  of  earthenware,  but  his  lifalikeness 
luul  a  very  stntnge  and  rather  ghastly  effect.  AdaiO] 
perhaps,  was  maile  of  just  such  rtxi  earth,  and  hiut 
ouniplexion  of  this  figure. 

September  1th.  —  I  walked  into  t«wn  yesterday 
morning,  by  way  of  the  Pcrla  San  Frodiano.  The 
l^te  of  a  city  might  be  a  good  locality  for  a  chapter 
in  a  novel,  or  for  a  little  sketch  by  itself,  whether  by 
painter  or  writer.  The  great  arch  of  the  gateway, 
piercing  through  the  depth  and  height  of  the  i 


1 


J 


I 

i 

i 


ITALY.  408 

masonry  beneath  the  batUemeDted  siunmit ;  the  ehadow 
brmxlmg  below  in  the  inuuense  thickness  of  the  nail, 
and  beyond  it  the  ^*ista  of  the  street,  Bimny  and 
fiwanning  with  life ;  outside  of  the  gate,  a  throDg  of 
carts,  laden  with  fruits,  vegetables,  small  flat  barrels 
of  wine,  waiting  to  be  examined  by  the  custom  house 
officers ;  carriages  too,  and  foot-passengers  entering, 
and  others  swarming  ontward.  Under  the  shadowy 
arch  are  the  offices  of  the  police  and  customs,  and 
probably  the  guard-room  of  the  soldiers,  all  hollowed 
out  in  the  mass  of  the  gateway.  Civil  officers  loll  on 
chairs  in  the  shade,  perhaps  with  an  awning  over  their 
heads.  Where  the  sun  falls  a^lantwise  under  the  arch 
a  sentinel,  with  musket  and  bayonet,  paces  to  and  fi-o 
in  tlie  entrance,  and  other  soldiers  lounge  close  by. 
The  life  of  the  city  seems  to  be  compressed  and  matlo 
more  intense  by  this  barrier ;  and  on  passing  within  it 
you  do  not  breathe  quite  so  freely,  yet  are  sensible  of 
an  enjoyment  in  the  close  elbowing  throng,  the  clamor 
of  high  voices  from  side  to  side  of  the  street,  and  the 
million  of  pretty  sights,  actions,  trafScs,  and  personal- 
ities, all  ao  squeezed  together  as  to  become  a  great 
whole. 

The  street  by  which  I  entered  led  me  to  the  Carraja 
Bridge ;  crossing  which,  I  kept  straight  onward  till  I 
came  to  the  Church  of  Santa  Maria  Novella.  Doubt- 
less, it  looks  just  the  same  as  when  Boccaccio's  party 
Stood  in  a  cluster  on  its  broad  steps  arranging  their 
excursion  to  the  villa.  Thenc«  I  went  to  the  Church 
of  St.  Lorenzo,  which  I  entered  by  the  side  door,  and 
found  the  organ  soimding  and  a  religious  ceremony 
going  forward.  It  is  a  church  of  sombre  aspect,  with 
its  gray  walls  and  pillars,  but  was  decked  out  for  some 
festivity  with  hangings  of  scarlet  damask  and  gold.     I 


404  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [iH 

Bat  awhile  to  rest  myself,  and  then  pursued  my  w»yw 
the  Diiomo.  I  entered,  and  looked  at  Sir  John  Hawk- 
vootl's  painted  efRgy,  and  at  ueverul  buste  and  stutuea, 
and  at  tho  windows  of  the  chapel  surrounding  the 
dome,  through  which  the  sunshine  glowed,  white  iu 
the  outer  air,  but  a  hundred-hued  splendor  within.  I 
tried  to  bring  up  the  scene  of  Lorenzo  di  Medici's  at- 
tempted assassination,  but  with  no  great  success ;  and 
after  listening  a  little  while  to  the  chanting  of  the 
priests  and  acolytes,  I  went  to  the  Bank.  It  is  in.  < 
palac-e  of  which  Raphael  was  the  architect,  in 
Piazza  Gran  Duca. 

I  next  went,  as  a  matter  of  course,  to  the  Uffizi 
lery,  and,  in  the  first  place,  to  the  Tribune,  where  the 
Venus  di  Metlici  deigned  to  reveal  herself  rather 
satisfactorily  than  at  my  last  visit.  ...  I  looked 
all  the  rooms,  bronzes,  drawings,  and  gem 
volume  might  easily  be  written  upon  either  subji 
Hie  contents  of  tlie  gem-room  especially  require  to 
looked  at  separately  in  onler  to  couvioce  one's  self  of 
their  minute  magniilcences  ;  for,  among  so  many,  the 
eye  slips  from  one  to  anotlier  with  only  a  vague  out- 
ward sense  that  here  are  whole  shelves  full  of  Uttle 
miracles,  both  of  nature's  material  and  man's  work- 
manship. Greater  [larger]  things  can  be  reasonably 
well  appreciated  with  a  less  scrupulous  though  broader 
attention  ;  but  in  order  to  estimate  the  brilliancy  of 
the  diamond  eyes  of  a  little  agate  bust,  for  inatanco, 
you  have  to  screw  your  mind  down  to  them  and  noth- 
ing  else.  You  must  sharpen  your  faculties  of  obser- 
vation to  a  point,  and  touch  tlie  object  exactly  on  the 
right  spot,  or  you  <lo  not  appreciate  it  at  all.  It  is  a 
troublesome  process  when  there  are  a  thousand  suoh 
objects  to  be  seen. 


ig^^ 

•e  the 

1  iiV^^H 


I 


»J868.] 
lato 
dor,  an 
tiie  ran 


ITALY. 


405 


I  stood  at  an  open  window  in  the  transverse  coitI' 
dor,  and  looked  down  upon  the  Arno,  and  aoross  at 
the  range  of  edifices  that  impend  over  it  on  the  oppo- 
site side.  The  river,  I  should  judge,  may  be  a  hun- 
dred or  a  hundred  and  fifty  yards  wide  in  its  course 
between  the  Ponte  alle  Grazie  and  the  Ponte  Vecchio ; 
that  is,  the  width  between  strand  and  strand  is  at  least 
BO  much.  The  river,  however,  leaves  a  broad  marg^ 
of  mud  and  gravel  on  its  right  bank,  on  which  water- 
weeds  grow  pretty  abundantly,  and  creep  even  into  the 
stream.  On  my  first  arrival  in  Florence  I  thought 
the  goose -pond  green  of  the  water  rather  agreeable 
than  otherwise  ;  but  its  hue  is  now  that  of  unadulter- 
ated mud,  as  yellow  as  the  Tiber  itseJf,  yet  not  im- 
pressing me  as  being  enriched  with  city  sewerj^  like 
that  other  famous  river.  From  the  Ponte  alle  Grazie 
downward,  half-way  towards  the  Ponte  Vecchio,  there 
is  an  island  of  gravel,  and  the  channel  on  each  side  is 
so  shallow  as  to  allow  the  passage  of  men  and  horses, 
wading  not  overleg.  I  have  seen  fishermen  wading 
the  main  channel  from  side  to  side,  their  feet  sinking 
into  the  dark  mud,  and  thus  discoloring  the  yellow 
water  with  a  black  track  visible,  step  by  step,  through 
its  shallowness.  But  still  the  Arno  is  a  mountain 
stream,  and  liable  to  be  tetchy  and  turbulent  like  all 
its  kindred,  and  no  doubt  it  often  fijids  its  borders  of 
hewn  stone  not  too  far  apart:  for  its  convenience. 

Along  the  right  shore,  beneath  the  Uffizi  and  the 
atljacent  biuldings,  there  is  a  broad  paved  way,  with  a 
parapet ;  on  the  opposit«  shore  the  edifices  are  built 
directly  upon  the  river's  edge,  and  impend  over  the 
water,  supported  upon  arches  and  machicolations,  as  I 
think  that  peculiar  arrangement  of  buttressing  arcades 
is  called.     The  houses  are  picturesquely  various  in 


408   FliENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS,    [iflj 

height,  from  two  or  three  atoriea  to  seven ;  pieturei 
in  hue  likewise, — ]>ea-green,  yellow,  white,  fijid  of 
age<l  discoloration,  —  but  all  with  green  blinds ;  pict- 
uresque also  in  the  eourt«  and  galleries  that  look  upon 
tlie  river,  anti  in  the  wide  at'chea  that  open  beneatli, 
intended  perliaps  to  afford  a  haven  for  tlic  household 
boat.  Nets  were  suspended  before  one  or  two  of  the 
houses,  as  if  the  inhabitants  were  in  the  habit  of  tlsb- 
ing  out  of  window.  As  a  general  effect,  tlie  houses, 
though  often  palatial  in  size  and  height,  liave  a  shabby, 
neglected  aspect,  and  are  jumbled  too  closely  togetl 
Behind  their  range  the  city  swells  upward  in 
side,  which  rises  to  a  great  height  above,  fonniiig, 
believe,  a  part  of  the  Boboli  Ganlena. 

I  returned  homewards  over  the  Ponte  Vecchio, 
which  is  a  continuous  street  of  ancient  houses,  except 
over  the  central  arch,  so  that  a  stran^r  might  easily 
cross  tlie  river  without  knowing  it.  In  these  small, 
old  houses  there  is  a  community  of  goldsmiths,  who 
set  out  their  glass  eases,  and  hang  their  windows  with 
rings,  bracelets,  necklaces,  strings  of  pearl,  ornaments 
of  malachite  and  coral,  and  esjteeially  with  Florentii 
mosaics  ;  watches,  too,  and  snuff-boxes  of  old  fasl ' 
or  new ;  offerings  for  shrines  niiM),  such  aa  ailver  hej 
pierced  with  swonis ;  an  infinity  of  pretty  things, 
manufacture  of  which  ia  continually  going  on  in  the 
little  back  -  room  of  each  little  shop.  This  gewgaw 
business  has  been  established  on  the  Ponte  Vecchio 
for  centuries,  although,  long  since,  it  was  an  art  of  far 
higher  pretensions  than  now.  Benvenuto  Cellini  had 
his  workshop  here,  probably  in  one  of  tliese  self-same 
little  nooks.  It  would  have  been  a  ticklish  affair  to 
be  Benvenuto's  fellow  -  workman  within  such  narrow 
^  fimita. 


bbjr^ 


:4 


J 


I 


I 


'  1B5S.]  ITALY.  407 

Going  out  of  the  Porta  Romana,  I  walked  for  aome 
distauce  along  the  city  wall,  and  then,  turning  to  tlie 
left,  toiled  up  the  hill  of  Bellosguardo,  through  nar- 
row zigzag  lanes  between  high  walls  of  stoue  or  plas- 
tered briuk,  where  the  siin  had  the  fairest  chance  to 
frizzle  me.  There  were  scattered  villas  and  houses, 
here  and  there  concentrating  into  a  little  bit  of  a 
street,  paved  with  flag-atones  from  side  to  side,  aa  In 
the  ci^,  and  shadowed  quite  across  ita  narrowness  by 
the  height  of  the  houses.  Mostly,  however,  the  way 
was  inhospitably  sunny,  and  shut  out  by  the  high  wall 
from  every  glimpse  of  a  view,  except  in  one  spot, 
where  Florence  spread  itself  before  my  eyes,  with 
every  tower,  dome,  and  spire  which  it  contains.  A 
little  way  farther  on  my  own  gray  tower  rose  before 
me,  the  most  welcome  object  that  I  had  seen  in  the 
course  of  the  day. 


September  IO(A.  —  I  went  into  town  again  yester- 
day, by  way  of  the  Porta  San  Frediano,  and  obsei-ved 
that  this  gate  (like  the  other  gates  of  Florence  as  far 
aa  I  have  observed)  is  a  tall,  square  structure  of  stone 
or  brick,  or  both,  rising  high  above  the  adjacent  wall, 
and  having  a  range  of  open  lo^e  in  the  upper  story. 

I  The  arch  externally  is  about  half  the  height  of  the 
structure.  Inside,  towards  the  town,  it  rises  nearly 
to  the  roof.  Ou  each  side  of  the  arch  there  is  niucli 
TDom  for  offices,  apartments,  storehouses,  or  whatever 
else.  On  the  outside  of  the  gate,  along  the  base,  are 
those  iron  rings  and  sockets  for  torches,  which  are  said 
to  be  the  distinguishing  symbol  of  illustrious  houses. 
Aa  contrasted  with  the  vista  of  the  narrow,  swarming 
street  through  the  arch  from  without,  the  view  from 
the  inside  might  he  presented  with  a  glimpse  of  the 
free  blue  sky. 


408   FRENCB  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  £18M 

I  Btrdled  a  little  about  Florenoe,  and  went  into  two 
or  three  ohurohea ;  into  that  of  the  Anmmziata  for 
one.  I  have  already  described  this  church,  with  its 
general  magnificence,  and  it  was  more  magnificent 
than  ever  to-day,  being  hung  with  scarlet  silk  and 
gold-embroidery.  A  great  many  people  were  at  their 
devotions,  thronging  principally  around  the  Virgin's 
shrine.  I  was  struck  now  witb  the  many  bas-reliefs 
and  busts  in  the  costume  of  their  respective  ages,  and 
seemingly  with  great  aocnracy  of  portraiture,  in  tlie 
passage  leading  from  the  front  of  the  church  into  the 
cloisters.  Hie  marble  was  not  at  all  abashed  nor  d»- 
graded  by  being  made  to  assume  the  guise  of  the  med- 
iieval  furred  robe,  or  the  close-fitting  tunic  with  elab- 
orate ruS,  or  the  breastplate  and  gorget,  or  the  flowing 
wig,  or  whatever  the  actual  costume  might  be ;  and 
one  is  sensible  of  a  rectitude  and  reality  in  the  affair, 
and  respects  the  dead  people  for  not  putting  them- 
selves into  an  eternal  masquerade.  The  dress  of  the 
present  day  will  look  eqoaUy  respectable  in  one  or  two 
hundred  years. 

The  Fair  is  stdll  going  on,  and  one  of  its  principal 
centres  is  before  this  church,  in  the  Piazza  of  the  An- 
minziata.  Cloth  is  the  chief  commodity  offered  for 
sale,  and  none  of  the  finest ;  coarse,  unbleached  linen 
and  cotton  prints  for  country-people's  wear,  together 
with  yam,  stockings,  and  here  and  there  an  assortment 
of  bright«olored  ribbons.  Playthings,  of  a  very  rude 
fashion,  were  also  displayed ;  likewise  books  in  Italian 
and  French;  and  a  great  deal  of  iron -work.  Both 
here  and  in  Home  they  have  this  odd  custom  of  offen 
ing  rusty  iron  implements  for  sale,  spread  out  on  the 
pavements.  There  was  a  good  deal  of  tinware,  took 
glittering  in  the  Buoshine,  especially  around  the  pede» 


ITALT. 


409 


'  tal  ot  tbe  bronze  statue  of  Duke  Fordinand.  who  curbs 
his  horse  and  looks  down  upon  the  bustling  piazza  in 
a  very  stately  way.  .  .  .  The  people  attending  the  fair 
had  mostly  a  rustic  appearance ;  auubumt  faces,  thin 
frames  ;  no  beauty,  no  bloom,  no  joyouaness  of  young 
or  old ;  an  anxious  aspect,  as  if  life  were  no  easy  or 
holiday  matter  with  them  ;  hut  I  should  take  them  to 
he  of  a  kindly  nature,  and  reasonably  honest.  Except 
the  broad-brimmed  Tuscan  hats  of  the  women,  there 
vms  no  peculiarity  of  costume.  At  a  careless  glance 
I  could  very  well  have  mistaken  most  of  the  men  for 
Yankees  ;  as  for  the  women,  there  is  very  little  resem- 
blance between  them  and  ours,  —  the  old  being  abso- 
lutely hideous,  and  tbe  young  ones  very  seldom  pretty. 
It  was  a  very  dull  crowd.  They  do  not  generate  any 
warmth  among  themselves  by  contiguity;  they  liave 
no  pervading  sentiment,  such  as  is  continually  break- 
ing out  in  rough  merriment  from  an  American  crowd  ; 
they  have  nothing  to  do  with  one  another ;  they  are 
not  a  crowd,  considered  as  one  mass,  but  a  collection 
of  individuals.  A  despotic  government  has  perhaps 
destroyed  their  principle  of  cohesion,  and  crumbled 
them  to  atoms.  Italiau  crowds  are  not^  for  their  ci- 
vility ;  possibly  they  deserve  credit  for  native  courtesy 
and  gentleness ;  possibly,  on  tbe  other  hand,  the  crowd 
has  not  spirit  and  self -consciousness  enough  to  be  ram- 
pant. I  wonder  whether  they  will  ever  hold  another 
parliament  in  the  Piazza  of  Santa  Croee  I 

L      I  paid  a  visit  to  tbe  gallery  of  the  Pitti  Palace. 

I  There  is  too  large  an  intermixture  of  Andrea  del  Son 

'  to's  pictures  in  this  gallery ;  everywhere  you  see  them, 
cold,  proper,  and  uncriticisable,  looking  so  much  like 
first-rate  excellence,  that  you  inevitably  quarrel  with 
your  own  taste  for  not  admiring  them.  .  .  . 


nng 

1 


110  FKENCIT  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [;i8S8, 

It  was  one  of  the  days  when  my  mind  misgives  me 
whether  the  pictoriiU  art  be  not  a  humbug,  and  wbr-n 
the  minute  a^cumcy  of  a  fly  in  a  Dutch  picture  of 
fniit  and  fiowcrs  seems  to  me  something  moro  rplial>l>! 
than  the  master- touches  of  Ka]>hael.  The  gallery  waa 
conaideralily  througed,  and  many  of  the  visitors  ap- 
peared to  be  from  the  comitry.  and  of  a  class  inter- 
mediate between  gentility  and  labor.  Is  there  sach 
a  rural  class  in  Italy  ?  I  saw  a  respectable  -  looking 
man  feeling  awkward  and  uncomfortable  in  a  new 
glossy  pair  of  pantaloons  not  yet  bent  and  creased 
bis  natural  movement. 

Nothing  pleased  me  better  to^lay  than  some  ami 
cups,  in  one  of  the  cabinets  of  curiosities.  They  are 
riolily  wrought,  and  the  material  is  aj*  if  the  artist  had 
compressed  a  great  deal  of  sunshine  together,  and, 
when  sufficiently  solidified,  liad  moulded  these  oupB 
out  of  it  and  let  them  harden.  This  simile  wa«  su^ 
gCHted  by . 

Leaving  the  palace,  I  entered  the  Boboli  Gardens, 
and  wandered  up  and  down  a  good  deal  of  its  uneven 
surface,  titrough  broad,  well-kept  edges  of  box,  sprout- 
ing loftily,  trimmed  smoothly,  and  strewn  l)etweon 
with  cleanly  gravel  ;  skirting  along  plantations  of 
^ed  trees,  throwing  a  deep  shadow  within  their  pre- 
cincts ;  passing  many  statues,  not  of  the  finest  art,  yet 
approaching  so  near  it  as  to  serve  just  as  good  a  pur- 
pose for  garden  ornament ;  coming  now  and  then  to 
the  borders  of  a  fisb-pool,  or  a  pond,  where  stately 
swans  circumnavigated  an  island  of  flowers,  —  all  very 
fine  and  very  wearisome.  I  have  never  enjoyed  tbifl 
garden ;  perhaps  because  it  suggests  dreaa-coats, 
such  elegant  formaiildes. 


TTALT. 


411 


iSeptetnhfr  11th.  —  We  have  hear<J  a  good  deal  of 
ipirit  matters  nf  late,  espeeialiy  of  wonderful  incidents 
that  attended  Mr.  Home's  visit  to  Florence,  two  or 
three  years  ago.  Mrs.  Powers  told  a  very  marvellous 
thing ;  how  that  when  Mr.  Home  was  holding  a  seanee 
in  her  house,  and  several  persons  present,  a  great 
scratching  waa  heard  in  a  neighboring  closet.  She 
addressed  the  spirit,  and  requested  it  not  to  disturb 
the  company  then,  aa  they  were  busy  with  other  af- 
fairs, promising  to  converse  with  it  on  a  future  occa* 
sion.  On  a  subsequent  night,  accordingly,  the  scratch- 
ing  was  renewed,  with  the  utmost  violence  ;  and  in  re- 
ply to  Mrs,  Powers's  questions,  the  spirit  assui-ed  her 
that  it  was  not  one,  but  legion,  being  the  ghosts  of 
twenty-seven  monks,  who  were  miserable  and  without 
I  hope !  The  house  now  occupied  by  Powers  was  for- 
I  nierly  a  convent,  and  I  suppose  these  were  the  spirits 
B of  all  the  wicked  monks  that  had  ever  inhabited  it; 
at  least,  I  hope  that  there  were  not  such  a  number  of 
damnable  sinners  extant  at  any  one  time.  These 
ghostly  fathers  must  have  been  very  improper  persons 
in  their  lifetime,  judging  by  the  indecorousness  of 
their  behavior  even  after  death,  and  in  such  dreadful 
circumstances  ;  for  they  pulled  Mrs.  Powers's  skirts 
BO  hard  as  to  break  the  gathers.  ...  It  was  not  as- 
certained that  they  desired  to  have  anything  done  for 
their  eternal  welfare,  or  that  their  situation  was  ca- 
pable of  amendment  anyhow ;  but,  being  eithorted  to 
refrain  from  further  disturbance,  they  took  their  de- 
parture, after  making  the  sign  of  the  cross  on  the 
breast  of  each  person  present.  This  wan  very  singu- 
lar in  such  reprobates,  who,  by  their  own  confession, 
bad  forfeited  all  claim  to  be  benefited  by  that  holy 
tfoibol :  it  curiously  suggests  that  the  forms  of  relig- 


112   FRENCH  AND  XTAtJAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [1888. 

fen  may  Btall  be  kept  up  in  purgatory  and  hell  itsel£ 
The  sign  was  made  in  a  way  that  ooDveyed  the  wnu 
of  flomething  devilish  and  spiteful ;  the  perpendicular 
line  of  the  cross  being  drawn  gently  enough,  but  the 
transverse  one  sharply  and  violently,  so  as  to  leave  a 
painful  impression.  Perhaps  the  monks  meant  this 
to  express  their  contempt  and  hatred  for  heretics; 
and  how  queer,  that  this  antipathy  shonld  survive 
their  own  damnation  I  But  I  cannot  help  hoping 
that  the  case  of  these  poor  devils  may  not  be  so  des- 
perate aa  they  think.  They  cannot  be  wholly  lost,  be- 
cause th«r  desire  for  communication  with  mortals 
shows  that  they  need  sympathy,  therefore  are  not  al- 
together hardened,  therefore,  with  loving  treatment, 
may  be  restored. 

A  great  many  other  wonders  took  place  within  the 

knowledge  and  experience  of  Mrs.  P .    She  saw, 

not  one  pur  of  hands  only,  hut  many.  The  head  of 
one  of  her  dead  children,  a  little  boy,  was  laid  in  her 
lap,  not  in  ghastly  fashion,  as  a  head  out  of  the  coffin 
and  Uie  grave,  but  just  as  the  living  child  might  have 
lud  it  on  his  mother's  knees.  It  was  invisible,  by 
the  hy,  and  she  recognized  it  by  the  features  and  the 
character  of  the  hmr,  through  the  sense  of  touch. 
Iiittle  hands  grasped  hers.  In  short,  these  soberly  at- 
tested incredibilities  are  so  numerous  that  I  forget 
nine  tenths  of  them,  and  judge  the  others  too  cheap  to 
he  written  down.  Christ  spoke  the  truth,  surely,  in 
saying  that  men  would  not  believe,  "  though  one  rose 
from  the  dead."  In  my  own  case,  the  fact  makes  ab- 
solutely no  impression.  I  regret  such  confirmation  of 
truth  as  this. 

Within  a  mile  of  our  villa  stands  the  Villa  Colunt* 
baria,  a  large  house,  built  round  a  square  court    Ldkt 


I 
I 


1888.]  ITALr.  418 

Mr.  Powers'a  residence,  it  was  formerly  a  oonveiit.  It 
Is  inhabited  by  Major  Gregwrie,  an  old  soldier  of  Wa- 
terloo and  various  other  fights,  and  his  family  consists 

of  Mrs. ,  the  widow  of  one  of  the  major's  friends 

and  her  two  daughters.     We  have  become  acquainted 

with  the  family,  and  Mrs. ,  the  married  daughter, 

has  lent  us  a  written  statement  of  her  experiences  with 
B  ghost,  who  has  haunted  the  Villa  Colimibaria  for 

many  years  back.     He  had  made  Mrs. aware  of 

his  presence  in  her  room  by  a  sensation  of  extreme 
cold,  as  if  a  wintry  breeze  were  blowing  over  her ;  also 
by  a  rustling  of  the  bed-«urtaina  ;  and,  at  such  times, 
ehe  had  a  certain  consciousness,  as  she  says,  that  she 
was  not  ALOME.  Through  Mr.  Home's  ^ency  the 
ghost  was  enabled  to  explain  himself,  and  declared 
that  he  was  a  monk,  named  Giannana,  who  died  a  very 

long  time  ago  in  Mrs.  's  present  bed-chamber. 

He  was  a  murderer,  and  had  been  in  a  restless  and 
miserable  state  ever  since  his  death,  wandering  up  and 
down  the  house,  but  especially  haunting  his  own  death- 
ohamber  and  a  staircase  that  communicated  with  the 
chapel  of  the  villa.  All  the  interviews  with  this  lost 
spirit  were  attended  with  a  sensation  of  severe  cold, 
which  was  felt  by  every  one  present.  He  made  his 
communications  by  means  of  table-rapping,  and  by  the 
movements  of  chairs  and  otlier  articles,  which  often 
assimied  an  angry  character.  The  poor  old  fellow 
does  not  seem  to  have  known  exactly  what  he  wanted 

with  Mrs. ,  but  promised  to  refrain  from  disturl*- 

ing  her  any  more,  on  condition  that  she  would  pray 
that  he  might  find  some  repose.  He  had  previously 
declined  having  any  masses  said  for  his  soul.  Best, 
rest,  rest,  appears  to  be  the  continual  craving  of  ud< 
happy  spirits ;  diey  do  not  venture  to  ask  for  pon 


414  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTS-BOOKS-   [WM. 

tive  bliu :  perhaps,  in  their  ntter  weariness,  would 
nthet  forego  the  trouble  of  active  enjoyment,  but 
pray  only  for  rest.  The  oold  atmoBphere  around  thia 
monk  suggests  new  ideas  as  to  the  olimate  of  Hades. 
If  all  the  afoiementioned  twenty-fleven  monks  had  a 
similar  one,  the  combined  temperature  must  have  been 
that  of  a  polar  winter. 

Mrs. saw,  at  one  time,  the  fingers  of  her  monk, 

long,  yellow,  and  skinny;  these  fingers  grasped  the 
bands  of  individuals  of  the  party,  with  a  oold,  clammy, 
and  horrible  touch. 

After  the  departure  of  this  ghost  other  seanoes  were 
held  in  her  bedchamber,  at  which  good  and  holy  spir- 
its manifested  themselves,  and  behaved  in  a  very  com' 
fortable  and  encouraging  way.  It  was  their  benev. 
olent  purpose,  apparently,  to  purify  her  apartments 
from  all  traces  of  the  evil  spirit,  and  to  reconcile  her 
to  what  had  been  so  long  the  haunt  of  this  miserable 
monk,  by  filling  it  with  happy  and  sacred  associations, 
in  which,  as  Mrs. intimates,  they  endrely  suc- 
ceeded. 

These  stories  remind  me  of  an  incident  that  took 
place  at  the  Old  Manse,  in  the  first  summer  of  our 
marriage.  .  .  . 

September  llth.  —  We  walked  yesterday  to  Flor- 
ence, and  visited  the  Church  of  St.  Lorenzo,  where  we 
saw,  for  the  second  time,  the  famous  Medici  statues  of 
Michel  Angelo.  I  found  myself  not  in  a  very  appre- 
ciative state,  and,  being  a  stone  myself,  the  statue  of 
Lorenzo  was  at  first  little  more  to  me  than  another 
stone ;  but  it  was  beginning  to  assume  life,  and  would 
have  impressed  me  as  it  did  before  if  I  had  gazed  long 
anough.    There  was  a  better  light  upon  the  face,  nn* 


ITALY. 


41S 


I 


der  the  belmet,  than  at  my  former  viait,  although  still 
the  features  were  enough  overshadowed  to  produce 
that  mystery  ou  which,  according  to  Mr.  Powers,  thu 
effect  of  the  statue  depends.  1  observe  that  the  cos- 
tume of  the  figiire,  instead  of  being  mediieval  as  I  be- 
lieve I  have  stated,  is  Roman  ;  but,  be  it  what  it  may, 
the  grand  and  simple  character  of  the  figure  imbues 
the  robes  with  its  individual  propriety,  I  still  think 
it  the  greatest  miracle  ever  wrought  in  marble. 

We  crossed  the  church  and  entered  a  cloister  on 
the  opposite  side,  in  quest  of  the  Laurentian  Library. 
Ascending  a  staircase  we  found  an  old  mau  blowing 
the  bellows  of  the  organ,  which  was  in  full  blast  in 
the  church ;  nevertheless  he  found  time  to  direct  us 
to  the  library  door.  We  entered  a  lof^  vestibule,  of 
ancient  aspect  and  stately  architecture,  and  thenco 
were  admitted  into  the  library  itself ;  a  long  and  wide 
gallery  or  hall,  lighted  by  a  row  of  windows  od  which 
wore  painted  the  arms  of  the  Medici.  The  ceiling 
was  inlaid  with  dark  wood,  in  an  elaborate  pattern, 
which  was  ejcaotly  repeated  in  t«rra-fotta  ou  the  pave- 
ment beneath  our  feet.  Long  desks,  much  like  tho 
old-fashioned  ones  in  schools,  were  ranged  on  each 
Bide  of  the  mid  aisle,  in  a  series  from  end  to  end,  with 
seats  for  the  convenience  of  students ;  and  on  these 
desks  were  rare  manuscripts,  carefully  preserved  under 
glass;  and  books,  fastened  to  the  desks  by  iron  chains, 
as  the  custom  of  studious  antiquity  used  to  be.  Along 
the  centre  of  the  hall,  between  the  two  ranges  of  desks, 
were  tables  and  chairs,  at  which  two  or  three  scholarly 
persons  were  seated,  diligently  considting  volumes  In 
manuscript  or  old  type.  It  was  a  very  quiet  place,  im- 
bued with  a  cloistered  sanctity,  and  remote  from  all 
Btreet-crieB  and  rumble  of  the  oily,  —  odorous  of  old 


416   f-KENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NCTE-BOOKS.   [;i^ 

literature,  —  a  spot  where  tbe  oommonest  ideas  oi 
not  to  be  expressed  in  less  than  Latin. 

The  librariuji  —  or  custody  he  ought  rather  to 
terme<l,  for  he  wa.s  a  man  not  above  the  fee  of  a  _ 
■ —  now  presented  himself,  and  showed  ua  some  of  the 
literary  curiosities  ;  a  vellum  maniisfript  of  the  Bible, 
with  a  splendid  illumination  by  Ghirlandaio,  craverinj 
two  folio  pages,  and  JH»t  as  brilliant  in  its  color 
fmished  yesterday.  Other  illuminated  manuscript* 
or  at  least  separate  i>uges  of  tliem,  for  tbe  voli 
were  kept  under  glass,  and  not  to  be  turned  over 
were  shown  ua,  very  magnifiirent,  but  not  to  be 
pared  with  this  of  Ghirlandaio.  Looking  at 
treasures  I  could  almost  say  that  we  have  loft  l)chind 
us  more  splendor  than  wo  havo  kept  alive  to  our  own 
age.  We  publish  l)eautiful  editions  of  books,  to  be 
sure,  and  thousands  of  people  enjoy  them  ;  but  in  an- 
cient times  the  ex|)ense  that  we  spread  thinly  over  a 
thousand  voliunes  was  all  compressed  itite  one.  and  it 
became  a  great  jewel  of  a  book,  a  heavy  folio, 
its  weight  in  gold.  Then,  what  a  spiritual  iliarm 
gives  to  a  book  to  feel  that  every  letter  has  been 
dividually  wrought,  and  the  pictures  glow  for  that  in- 
dividual page  alone  I  Certainly  the  ancient  reader 
ha>l  a  luxury  which  the  modem  one  lacks.  I  was  nir- 
prised.  moreover,  to  see  the  clearness  and  accuracy 
the  chirography.  Print  does  not  surpass  it  in 
respects. 

The  custode  showed  us  an  ancient  manuscript 
the  Decameron ;  likewise,  a  volume  contmning  the 
portraits  of  Petrarch  and  of  Laura,  each  covering  the 
whole  of  a  vellimi  Jiage,  anil  very  finely  done.  They 
are  authentic  portraits,  no  doubt,  and  Laura  is  de- 
[acted  aa  a  fair-haired  beau^,  with  a  very  aatiiifactoi; 


B  Bur- 
tcy^H 

ipt  of 


I 


H    J*"' 


IBM.]  ITALY.  41T 

amount  of  loveliness.  We  aaw  some  choice  old  edi- 
tions of  books  in  a  small  separate  room ;  but  as  these 
were  all  ranged  in  shut  bookcases,  and  as  each  volume, 
moreover,  was  in  a  separate  cover  or  modem  binding, 
this  exhibition  did  us  very  little  good.  By  the  by, 
there  is  a  conceit  stniggling  blindly  in  my  mind  about 
Petrarch  and  Laura,  suggested  by  those  two  lifelike 
portraits,  which  have  been  sleeping  cheek  to  cheek 
through  all  these  centuries.  But  I  cannot  lay  hold 
i«f  it. 

September  21s(.  —  Yesterday  morning  the  Val 
d'Amo  was  entirely  filled  with  a  thick  fog,  which  ex- 
tended even  up  to  our  windows,  and  concealed  objects 
within  a  very  short  distance.  It  began  to  dissipate 
itself  betimes,  however,  and  was  the  forerunner  of  an 
unusually  bright  and  warm  day.  We  set  out  after 
breakfast  and  walked  into  town,  where  we  looked  at 
mosaic  brooches.  These  are  very  pretty  little  bits  of 
manufacture  ;  but  there  seems  to  have  been  no  infu- 
sion of  fresh  fancy  into  the  work,  and  the  specimens 
present  little  variety.  It  is  the  charactoristic  com- 
modity of  the  place;  tbe  central  mart  and  manu- 
facturing locality  being  on  the  Ponte  Vecchio,  from 
end  to  end  of  which  they  are  displayed  in  crises ;  bnt 
there  are  other  mosaic  shops  scattered  alwut  the  town. 
The  principal  devices  are  roses,  —  pink,  yellow,  or 
white,  —  jasmines,  lilies  of  the  valley,  forget-me-nota, 
orange  blossoms,  and  others,  single  or  tn  sjtrigs,  or 
twined  into  wreaths ;  parrots,  too,  and  other  birds  of 
gay  plumage,  —  often  exquisitely  done,  and  sometimes 
with  precious  materials,  such  as  lapis  lazuli,  malachite, 
and  still  rarer  gems.  Bracelets,  with  several  different, 
jret  relative  designs,  are  often  very  beautlfuL  We  find, 


418  FREffCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [H 

at  different   shops,  a  great  inequality  of   prices  i 
moHait'S  that  seemed  to  be  of  much  the  same  quality. 

We  vent  to  the  UfUzi  {gallery,  and  found  it  much 
thronged  with  the  middle  and  lower  classes  of  Ital- 
ians ;  and  the  Englisli,  too,  seemed  more  numerous 
than  I  have  lately  seen  them.  Perhaps  the  tourists 
have  just  arrived  here,  starting  at  the  close  of  the  Lon- 
don season.  We  were  amused  with  a  pair  of  English- 
men who  wenf  througli  the  gallery  :  one  of  them  crit- 
icising the  pictures  and  statues  audibly,  for  the  l)enefit 
of  his  companion.  Tlie  critic  I  should  take  to  l>e  a 
countiy  squire,  and  wholly  uutravelletl ;  a  tall,  well- 
built,  rather  rough,  but  gentlemanly  man  enough ;  his 
friend,  a  small  personage,  exquisitely  neat  in  dreM, 
and  of  artificial  deportment,  every  attitude  and  ges- 
ture appearing  to  have  been  practised  before  a  glass. 
Being  but  a  small  pattern  of  a  man,  physically  and 
intellectually,  he  had  thought  it  worth  while  to  finish 
himself  off  with  the  elalMrateness  of  a  Florentine  mo. 
saic ;  and  the  renult  was  something  like  a  dancing- 
master,  though  without  the  exuberant  embroidery  of 
such  persons.  Indee<l,  ho  was  a  very  quiet  little  man, 
and,  though  so  thoroughly  made  up.  there  was  some- 
thing particularly  green,  fresh,  and  simple  in  him. 
Both  these  Englishmen  were  elderly,  and  the  smaller 
one  had  perfectly  white  hair,  glossy  and  silken.  It 
did  not  make  him  in  the  least  venerable,  however,  but 
took  his  own  charnetcr  of  neatness  and  prettiness.  He 
carried  his  well-brushed  and  glossy  hat  in  his  hand  in 
such  a  way  as  not  to  rufBe  its  surface ;  and  I  wish  I 
could  put  into  one  word  or  one  sentence  the  pettiness, 
the  minikin-finieal  effect  of  this  little  nmn  ;  his  self- 
consciousness  so  lifelong,  that,  in  some  sort,  he  for^ 
bimBali  even  in  the  midst  of  it ;  his  propria^,  bj|_ 


A 


isse.] 


419 


I 

I 


deanlinesa  and  nmuSedneas ;  Mb  prettmess  and  nicety 
of  maaifestatioii,  like  a  bird  hopping  daintily  about. 

His  companion,  as  I  said,  was  of  a  completely  dif- 
ferent type ;  a  tall,  gray-haired  man,  with  the  rough 
English  face,  a  little  tinted  with  port  wine  j  careless, 
natural  manner,  betokening  a  man  of  position  in  his 
own  neighborhood ;  a  loud  voice,  not  vulgar,  nor  out- 
raging the  rules  of  society,  but  betraying  a  charac- 
ter incapable  of  much  refinement.  He  talked  continu- 
ally in  his  progress  tliroiigh  the  gallery,  and  audibly 
enough  for  us  to  catch  almost  everything  he  said,  at 
many  yards"  distance.  His  remarks  and  criticisms, 
addressed  to  his  small  friend,  were  so  entertaining, 
that  we  strolled  behind  him  for  the  sake  of  being 
benefited  by  them ;  and  I  think  he  soon  became  aware 
of  this,  and  addressed  himself  to  us  as  well  as  to  his 
more  immediate  friend.  Nobody  but  an  Englishman, 
it  seems  to  me,  has  just  this  kind  of  vanity,  —  a  feel- 
ing mixed  up  with  scorn  and  good-nature;  self-com- 
placency on  his  own  merits,  and  as  an  Englishman ; 
pride  at  being  in  foreign  parte ;  contempt  for  every- 
body around  him  ;  a  rough  kindliness  towards  people 
in  general.  I  liked  the  man,  and  should  be  glad  to 
know  him  better.  As  for  his  criticism,  I  am  sorry  to 
remember  only  one.  It  was  upon  the  picture  of  the 
Nativity,  by  Correggio,  in  the  Tribune,  where  the 
mother  ia  kneeling  before  the  Child,  and  adoring  it  in 
an  awful  rapture,  because  she  sees  the  eternal  God  in 
its  baby  face  and  figure.  The  Englishman  was  highly 
delighted  with  this  picture,  and  began  to  gesticulate, 
as  if  dandling  a  baby,  and  to  make  a  chirruping 
sound.  It  was  to  him  merely  a  representation  of  a 
mother  fondling  her  infant.  He  then  said,  "  If  I 
Dould  have  my  choice  of  the  pictures  and  statues  in 


420   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  flMBl 

the  Tribune,  I  would  take  tliia  picture,  and  that  on« 
yonder  "  (it  was  a  good  enough  Enthronement  of  the 
Virgin,  by  Andrea  del  Sarto')  "  and  the  Dancing  Faun, 
and  let  the  rest  go,"  A  delightful  man  ;  I  love  that 
wholesome  coarseneas  of  mind  and  heart,  wliirii  ua 
education  nor  opportunity  can  polish  out  of  th«  geib 
nine  Englishman.  —  a  coarsenosa  without  vulgarity. 
When  a  Yankee  !b  coarse  he  is  jn-etty  sure  to  be  vul- 
gar  too. 

The  two  critics  seemed  to  be  considering  whetlier  it 
were  practicable  to  go  from  the  UfRzi  to  the  Pitti 
gallery ;  but  "  it  confuses  one,"  remarket!  the  little 
man,  "  to  see  more  than  one  gallery  in  a  day."  (I 
should  think  BO,  —  the  Pitti  Palace  tumbling  into  bis 
■mall  receptacle  on  the  top  of  the  Ufiizi.)  "  It  doej 
BO,"  responded  the  big  man,  with  heavy  emphasis. 

September  23(?. — The  vintage  has  I>een  going  on  in 
our  podere  for  about  a  week,  and  I  saw  a  part  of  the 
pnx^ss  of  making  wine,  under  one  of  our  back  win- 
dows. It  was  on  a  very  small  scale,  the  gra]>eB  being 
thrown  into  a  barrel,  and  crushed  with  a  sort  of  pea- 
tie  :  and  as  each  estate  seems  to  make  its  own  wine, 
there  are  probably  no  very  extensive  and  ehiborate 
appliances  in  general  use  for  the  manufacture.  The 
cider-making  of  New  England  is  far  more  picturesque ; 
the  great  heap  of  golden  or  rosy  apples  under  the 
trees,  and  the  cider-mill  worked  by  a  circumgyratory 
horse,  and  all  agush  with  sweet  juice.  Indeed,  noth- 
ing connected  with  the  grape-culture  and  the  vintage 
here  has  been  picturesque,  except  the  large  invertu«l 
pyramids  in  which  the  clusters  bang ;  those  great 
bunches,  white  or  purple,  really  satisfy  my  idea  both 
U  to  afipect  and  taste.     We  can  buy  a  large  basketfld 


VIBM.] 


ITALY. 


421 


I 


for  leas  tiian  a  panl ;  and  they  are  the  only  things  tliat 
one  can  never  devotir  too  much  of  —  and  there  is  no 
enough  short  of  a  little  too  muoh  -  without  subse- 
quent repentaoL-e.  It  is  a  shame  to  turn  such  deli- 
cious juice  into  such  sour  wine  as  they  make  in  Tus- 
cany. I  tasted  a  sip  or  two  of  a  flask  which  the  cont*- 
dini  sent  us  for  trial,  —  the  rich  result  of  the  process 
I  had  witnessed  in  the  barrel.  It  took  me  altogether 
by  surprise ;  for  I  remembered  the  nectareousnesa  of 
the  new  cider,  which  I  used  to  sip  through  a  straw  in 
my  boyhood,  and  I  never  doubted  that  this  would  be 
as  dulcet,  but  finer  and  more  ethereal  ;  as  much  more 
delectable,  in  short,  as  these  grapes  are  better  than 
puckery  cider  apples.  Positively,  I  never  tasted  any- 
thing so  detestable,  such  a  som*  and  bitter  juice,  still 
lukewarm  with  fermentation :  it  was  a  wail  of  woe, 
squeezed  out  of  the  wine-press  of  tribulation,  and  the 
more  a  man  drinks  of  such,  the  somer  he  will  be. 

Besides  grapes,  we  have  had  figs,  and  I  have  now 
learned  to  be  very  fond  of  them.  When  they  first  be- 
gan to  appear,  two  months  ago,  they  had  scarcely  any 
sweetness,  and  tasted  very  like  a  decaying  squash : 
this  was  an  early  variety,  with  purple  skias.  There 
are  many  kinds  of  figs,  the  best  being  green-skinned, 
growing  yellower  as  they  ripen ;  and  the  riper  they 
are,  the  more  the  sweetness  within  them  intensifies, 
till  they  resemble  dried  ligs  in  everything,  except  that 
they  retain  the  fresh  fruit-flavor;  rich,  luscious,  yet 
not  palling.  We  have  bad  pears,  too,  some  of  them 
very  tolerable ;  and  peaches,  which  look  magnificently, 
as  regards  size  and  downy  blush,  but  have  seldom 
much  more  taste  than  a  cucumber.  A  succession  of 
fruits  has  followed  us,  ever  since  our  arrival  in  Dor- 
Bnce :  first,  and  for  a  long  time,  abundance  of  cher 


422   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [l| 

riea ;  then  apricote,  wliit^h  lasted  many  weeks,  till 
were  weary  of  tliem  ;  then  |iliun»,  pears,  and  finally 
figs,  peat^hea,  and  grapea.  Except  the  6ga  and  grapeo, 
a  New  England  summer  and  autumn  would  give  lu 
better  fruit  than  any  we  have  found  in  ItaJy. 

Italy  beats  ua,  I  think,  in  uin»quitoeit ;  they  are  hor- 
rihly  pungent  little  Hatauto  particlps.  They  posseM 
strange  intelligence,  and  exquisite  aouteness  of  eight 
and  smell,  —  prodigiouit  audacity  and  courage 
match  it,  insomuch  that  they  venture  on  the  most 
ardous  attacks,  and  get  safe  oS.  One  of  them 
into  my  mouth,  the  other  night,  and  stung  tni 
down  in  my  throat ;  but  luckily  I  ooughed  him  up 
halves.  They  are  bi^er  than  American  mosquitoes ; 
and  if  yon  crush  them,  after  one  of  their  feaste,  it 
makes  a  terrific  btood-spot.  It  is  a  sort  of  suicide  — 
at  least,  a  shedding  of  one's  own  blood  —  to  kill  them ; 
but  it  gratifies  the  old  Adam  to  do  it.  It  shocks  me 
to  feel  how  revengefid  I  am ;  but  it  is  impossible  not 
to  impute  a  certain  malice  and  intellectinU  venom  to 
tliBse  diabolical  insects.  I  wonder  whetlier  our  health, 
at  this  season  of  the  year,  requires  that  we  should 
be  kept  in  a  state  of  irritation,  and  so  the  mosquitoes 
are  Nature's  prophyla«tio  remedy  for  some  disease 
whether  we  are  made  for  the  mosquitoes,  not  thej 
{or  us.  It  is  ]>oesible,  just  ]>ossilile,  that  the  infiuit 
mal  doses  of  poison  which  they  infuse  into  us 
bom<Ba[>athic  safeguard  against  pestilence  ;  but 
cine  never  was  administered  in  a  more  disagrveabls 
way. 

The  moist  atmosphere  anient  the  Amo,  I  Buppoae. 
produces  these  insects,  and  fills  the  broad,  tcn-i  ~" 
valley  with  them ;  and  as  we  are  just  on  the  brim 
the  bafdn,  they  overflow  into  out  windows. 


I     to 

1 


thej^^ 


ttm-mfl^^l 
brim  ^^H 


ITALY. 


423 


'  252A.  —  U and  I  walked  to  town 

yesterday  moming,  and  went  to  the  UffizI  gallery. 
It  is  not  a  pleasant  thought  that  we  are  so  soon  to  give 
up  this  gallery,  with  little  prospect  (none  or  hardly 
any,  on  my  part)  of  ever  seeing  it  again.  It  interests 
me  and  all  of  us  far  more  than  the  gallery  of  the  Pitti 
Pala^w,  wherefore  I  know  not,  for  the  latter  is  the 
richer  of  the  two  in  admirable  pictures.  Perhaps  it 
is  the  picturesque  variety  of  the  Uffizi  —  the  combi- 
nation of  painting,  sculpture,  gems,  and  bronzes  —  that 
makes  the  charm.  The  Tribune,  too,  is  the  richest 
room  in  all  the  world ;  a  heart  that  draws  all  hearts 
to  it.  The  Dutch  pictures,  moreover,  give  a  homely, 
human  interest  to  the  Ufiizi ;  and  I  really  think  that 
the  frequency  of  Andrea  del  Sarto'a  productions  at  the 
Pitti  Palace  —  looking  so  very  like  masterpieces,  yet 
lacking  the  soul  of  art  and  nature  —  have  much  to  do 
with  the  wearineas  that  comes  from  bett«r  acquaint- 
ance with  the  latter  gallery.  The  splendor  of  the 
gilded  and  frescoed  saloons  is  perhaps  another  bore ; 
hut,  aft«r  all,  my  memory  will  often  tread  there  as 
long  as  I  live.     What  sh^  we  do  in  America? 

Speaking  of  Dutch  pictures,  I  was  much  struck  yes- 
terday, as  frequently  before,  with  a  small  picture  by 
Teniers  the  elder.  It  seems  to  be  a  pawnbroker  in 
the  midst  of  his  ple<lges ;  old  earthen  jugs,  flasks,  a 
brass  kettle,  old  books,  and  a  huge  pile  of  worn-out 
and  broken  rubbish,  which  he  is  examining.  These 
things  are  represented  with  vast  fidelity,  yet  with  bold 
and  free  touches,  unlike  the  minut«,  microscopic  work 
of  other  Dutch  masters ;  and  a  wonderful  picturesque- 
oess  is  wrought  out  of  these  humble  materials,  and 
even  the  figure  and  head  of  the  pawnbroker  have  a 
strange  grandeur. 


A-U 


*M  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOK.'!.  [iSSa. 

We  spent  no  very  long  time  at  the  Uffizi,  and  af- 
terwards crossed  the  Poiite  alle  Grazie,  and  went  to 
the  convent  of  San  Miniuto,  which  stands  on  a  Iiill 
outside  of  the  Porta  San  Gallo.  A  paved  pathway, 
alon^r  which  stand  crosses  marking  stations  at  which 
pilgrims  are  to  kneel  and  pray,  goes  steeply  to  th» 
hill-top.  where,  in  the  first  place,  ia  a  smaller  church 
and  convent  than  those  of  San  Miaiato.  The  latter 
are  seen  at  a  short  distance  to  the  right,  the  convent 
being  a  large,  square  battlcmented  mass,  adjoiiiio); 
which  is  the  church,  showing  a  front  of  aged  white 
marble,  streaked  with  blaek,  and  having  an  old  atone 
tower  behind.  I  have  seen  no  other  convent  or  mon- 
Utery  that  so  well  corresponds  with  my  idea  of  what 
■uch  structures  were.  The  sacred  precincts  are  en- 
closed by  a  high  wall,  gray,  ancient,  and  luxuriously 
ivy-grown,  and  lofty  and  strong  enough  for  the  ram- 
part of  a  fortress.  We  went  through  the  gateway 
and  entered  the  church,  which  we  found  in  much  dis- 
array, and  masons  at  work  upon  the  pavement.  The 
trihime  is  elevatetl  considerably  above  the  nave,  and 
accessible  by  marble  staircases ;  there  are  great  arches 
and  a  chapel,  with  curious  monuments  in  the  Gothic 
ityle,  and  ancient  carvings  and  mosaic  works,  and,  in 
abort,  a  dim,  dusty,  and  venerable  interior,  well  worth 
studying  in  detail.  .  .  .  The  ^w  of  Florence  from 
the  church  door  is  very  fine,  and  seems  to  include 
every  tower,  dome,  or  whatever  object  emerges  out 
of  the  general  mass. 

September  28th.  — 1  went  to  the  Pitti  Pahwo  y 
terday,  and  the  Uffizi  to-day,  paying  tbcm  probably 
my  last  visit,  yet  cherishing  an  imrea^onable  doubt 
Whether  I  may  not  sea  them  again.    At  all  eventut  I 


J 


1858.J 


ITALr. 


425 


liave  seen  them  enough  for  the  present,  even  what  is 
beat  of  them  ;  an<l,  at  the  same  time,  with  a  sad  reluc- 
tanL'e  to  bid  them  farewell  forever,  I  experience  an 
Utter  weariness  of  Raphael's  old  canvas,  antl  of  the 
time-yellowed  marble  of  the  Venus  di  Medici.  When 
the  material  embodiment  presents  itself  outermost,  and 
we  perceive  them  only  by  the  grosser  sense,  missing 
their  ethereal  spirit,  there  is  nothing  so  heavily  bur- 
densome as  masterpieces  of  painting  and  sculpture.  I 
threw  my  farewell  glance  at  the  Venus  di  Medici  to- 
day with  strange  insensibility. 

The  nights  are  wonderfidly  beautiful  now.  When 
the  moon  was  at  the  full,  a  few  nights  ago,  its  light 
was  an  absolute  glory,  such  as  I  seem  only  to  have 
dreamed  of  heretofore,  and  that  only  in  my  younger 
days.  At  its  rising  I  have  fancied  that  the  orb  of  the 
moon  has  a  kind  of  purple  brightness,  and  that  this 
tinge  is  communicated  to  its  radiance  until  it  has 
climbed  high  aloft  and  sheds  a  flood  of  white  over  hill 
and  valley.  Now  that  the  moon  is  on  the  wane,  tliere 
is  a  gentler  lustre,  but  still  bright ;  and  it  makes  the 
Val  d'Amo  with  its  siitronnding  hills,  and  its  soft 
mist  in  the  distance,  as  beautiful  a  scene  as  exists  any- 
where out  of  heaven.  And  the  morning  is  quite  as 
beautiful  in  its  own  way.  This  mist,  of  which  I  have 
BO  often  spoken,  sets  it  beyond  the  limits  of  actual 
sense  and  makes  it  ideal ;  it  is  as  if  you  were  dream- 
ing about  the  valley,  —  as  if  the  valley  itself  were 
dreaming,  and  met  you  half-way  in  your  own  dream. 
If  the  mist  were  to  be  withdrawn,  I  believe  the  whole 
beau^  of  the  valley  would  go  with  it. 

Until  pretty  late  in  the  morning  we  have  the  comet 
■treaming  through  the  sky,  and  dragging  its  intermi- 
uable  tail  among  the  stars.    It  keeps  brigbtouing  from 


*26    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [!« 

night  to  night,  and  I  should  think  must  blaxe  fierc 
enough  to  cast  a  shaduw  by  ami  by.     I   know  i 
whether  it  be  in  the  vicinity  of  Galileo's  tower,  j 
in  the  influence  of  his  spirit,  but  I  liave  hardly  evi 
watched  the  stars  with  Hueb  interest  as  now. 


September  29M.  —  Last  evening  I  met  Mr.  Powai 
at  Miss  Bladen's  and  be  talked  about  his  treatment 
by  our  government  in  reference  to  an  appropriation 
of  twenty-five  thousand  dollars  made  by  CongresH  for 
a  statue  by  him.  Its  payment  and  the  purcJiase  of 
the  statue  were  left  at  the  option  of  the  President,  and 
he  conceiveti  himself  wronged  l>epau8e  the  affair  was 
never  concluded.  .  ,  ■  As  for  the  President,  be  knows 
nothing  of  art,  and  probably  acted  in  the  matter  by 
the  advice  of  the  ilirector  of  publio  works.  Mo  doubt 
a  sculptor  gets  commissions  as  everybody  gets  publio 
employment  and  emolument  of  whatever  kind  from 
our  government,  not  by  merit  or  fitness,  but  by  polit- 
ical influence  skilfully  applied.  As  Powers  himself 
observed,  the  ruins  of  our  Capitol  nre  not  likely  to  af' 
ford  sculptures  equal  to  those  which  Lord  Elgin  took 
from  the  Parthenon,  if  this  be  the  system  under  which 
they  are  produced.  ...  I  wish  our  great  Republic 
had  the  spirit  to  do  as  much,  according  to  its  vast 
means,  as  Florence  did  for  scidpture  and  architecture 
when  it  was  a  republic ;  but  we  have  the  meanest  gov- 
ernment and  the  sbEibbiest,  and  —  if  truly  represented 
by  it  —  we  are  the  meanest  and  shabbiest  people 
known  in  history.  And  yet  the  less  we  attempt  to 
do  for  art  the  better,  if  our  future  attempts  are  to 
have  no  better  residt  tlian  such  branen  troopers  as  the 
equestrian  statue  of  General  Jackson,  or  even  such 
•aked  respectabilities   as   Greenough's   Washiugtoni 


IMS.] 


ITALY. 


421 


There  ia  Mimetlung  false  and  affected  in  our  highest 
ta^te  for  art ;  and  I  suppose,  furthermore,  we  are  the 
only  people  who  seek  to  decorate  their  public  institu- 
tinna,  not  by  the  highest  taste  among  them,  but  by  ths 
average  at  best. 

There  was  also  at  Miss  Blagden'a,  among  other 
company,  Mr. ,  an  artist  in  Florence,  and  a  sen- 
sible man.  I  talked  with  him  about  Home,  the  me- 
dium, whom  he  had  many  opportunities  of  observing 

when  the  latter  was  in  these  parts.     Mr.  says 

that  Home  is  unquestionably  a  knave,  hut  that  he  him- 
self is  as  much  perplexed  at  his  own  preternatural 
performances  as  any  other  person  ;  he  is  startled  and 
afFrighted  at  the  phenomena  which  he  produces.    Nev- 
ertheless, when  his  spiritual  powers  fall  short,  he  does 
his  best  to  eke  them  out  with  imposture.     This  moral 
infirmity  is  a  part  of  his  nature,  and  I  suggested  that 
perhaps  if  he  were  of  a  firmer  and  healthier  moral 
I   make,  if  his  character  were   suBiciently  sound   and 
I  dense  to  be  capable  of  steadfast  principle,  he  would 
I  not  have  possessed  the  impressibility  that  fits  him  for 

'   the  so-called  spiritual  influences.     Mr. says  t)iat 

Louis  Napoleon  is  literally  one  of  the  most  skilful  jug- 
glers in  the  world,  and  that  probably  the  interest  he 
has  taken  in  Mr.  Home  was  caused  partly  by  a  wish 
to  acquire  his  art. 

This  morning  Mr,  Powers  invited  me  to  go  with 
him  to  the  Grand  Duke's  new  foundry,  to  see  the 
Ironze  statue  of  Webster,  which  has  just  been  cast 
from  hia  model.  It  is  the  second  cast  of  the  statue, 
the  first  having  lieen  shipped  some  months  ago  on 
board  of  a  vessel  which  was  lost ;  and,  as  Poweis  ob- 
served, the  statue  now  lies  at  the  bottom  of  the  Atlan. 
tic  Ocean  somewhere  in  the  vicinity  of  the  telegraphio 
I  uble. 


m 


438  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   ClSCfc 

We  were  received  with  much  cnurteay  ancl  ^mphi 
by  the  director  of  the  foimdry,  and  conducted  in 
large  room  walled  with  bare,  new  brick,  when." 
Statue  was  standing  in  front  of  the  eictinct  furnace 
majestiti  Webster  indeed,  eight  fi>et  hi)rh.  and  looking 
even  mora  colossal  than  that.  The  likcnesB  seemed 
to  me  perfect,  and,  like  a  sensible  man,  Powera  has 
dreiued  him  in  his  natural  eostiune,  such  as  I  have 
Bcen  Webster  have  on  while  making  a  speech  in  the 
open  air  at  a  mass  meeting  in  Concord,  —  drcMS-coat 
buttoued  pretty  closely  across  the  breast,  pantaloons 
and  boots,  —  everything  finished  even  to  a  seam  and 
a  stitch.  Not  an  inch  of  the  statue  but  is  Webster ; 
even  his  coat-tails  are  imbued  with  the  man,  and  tliis 
true  artist  has  auc«ee<ied  in  showing  hiw  through  the 
broadcloth  as  nature  showed  him.  He  has  felt  that 
a  man's  actual  clothes  are  as  much  a  part  of  him  as 
his  flesh,  and  I  respect  him  for  disdaining  to  shirk 
the  difficulty  by  throwing  the  meanness  of  a 
over  it,  and  for  recognizing  the  folly  of  masquei 
our  Yankee  statesman  in  a  Roman  toga,  and  the 
decorousness  of  presenting  him  as  a  brassy  nudi 
It  would  have  been  quite  as  unjustifiable  to  strip  him 
to  his  skeleton  as  to  his  flesh.  Webster  is  represeuted 
as  holding  in  his  right  hand  the  written  roll  of  the 
Constitution,  with  which  he  points  to  a  bundle  of 
fasces,  which  be  keeps  from  falling  by  the  grasp  of 
his  left,  thus  symbolizing  him  as  the  preserver  of  the 
Union.  There  is  an  expression  of  quiet,  solid,  mas- 
sive strength  in  the  whole  figure ;  a  deep  pervading 
energy,  in  wliich  any  exaggeration  of  gesture  would 
lessen  and  lower  the  effect.  He  looks  i-eatly  like  4 
pillar  of  the  stat(\  Tlie  face  is  very  grand,  very  Web- 
vter ;  8t«m  and  awful,  because  he  is  in  the  act  of 


ot  of  meel^^ 

J 


1808.] 


ITALY. 


1 

I 


lug  a  great  criais,  and  yet  with  the  wanntli  of  a  great 
heai-t  glowing  through  it.  Happy  ia  Webster  to  have 
been  so  truly  and  adequately  sculptured  ;  happy  the 
sculptor  in  such  a  subject,  which  no  idealizatioa  of  a 
demigod  could  have  supplied  him  with.  Perhaps  the 
statue  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea  will  be  cast  up  in 
8ome  future  age,  when  the  present  race  of  man  ia  foiu 
gotten,  and  if  so,  that  far  posterity  will  look  up  to  us 
as  a  grander  race  than  we  find  ourselves  to  be.  Nei- 
ther was  Webster  altogether  the  man  he  looked.  Mis 
physique  helped  him  out,  even  when  he  fell  somewhat 
short  of  its  promise ;  and  if  his  eyes  had  not  been  in 
such  deep  cavems  their  fire  would  not  have  looked  so 
bright. 

Powers  made  me  observe  how  the  surface  of  the 
statue  was  wrought  to  a  sort  of  roughness  instead  of 
being  smoothed,  as  is  the  practice  of  other  artists.  He 
said  that  this  luul  cost  hini  great  pains,  and  certainly 
it  has  an  excellent  effect.  The  statue  is  to  go  to  Bos- 
Ion,  and  I  hope  will  be  placed  in  the  open  ur,  for  it  ia 
too  mighty  to  be  kept  under  any  roof  that  now  exists 
in  America.  .  .  . 

After  seeing  this,  the  director  showed  us  some  very 
curious  and  exquisite  specimens  of  castings,  such  as 
baskets  of  flowers,  in  which  the  most  delicate  and 
.fragile  blossoms,  the  cur!  of  a  petal,  the  finest  veins 
in  a  leaf,  the  lightest  flower-spray  that  ever  quivered 
•{□  a  breeze,  were  perfectly  preserved  ;  and  the  basket 
rfiontained  an  abundant  heap  of  such  sprays.  There 
were  likewise  a  pair  of  hands,  taken  actually  from  life, 
clasped  together  as  they  were,  and  they  looked  like 
parts  of  a  man  who  had  been  clianged  suddenly  from 
flesh  to  brass.  They  were  worn  and  rough  and  un- 
bandsome  hands,  and  so  very  real,  with  all  their  veina 


480   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [1858. 

and  the  pores  of  the  aldn,  that  it  waa  §hocking  to  look 
at  them.  A  bronze  leaf,  coet  abo  from  the  life,  wajt 
sa  L-urioua  and  more  beautiful. 

Taking  leave  of  Powers,  I  went  hither  and  thither 
about  Florence,  seeing  for  the  last  time  things  that  I 
have  Boen  many  timen  before :  the  market,  for  in- 
stants, blotiking  up  a  line  of  narrow  streets  with  fmit- 
stallx,  and  obstreperous  dealers  crying  their  peaches, 
tlieir  green  lemons,  their  figs,  tlieir  <lelicious  (frapes, 
tlieir  mushrooms,  their  poinpgriuiates,  their  rHtliffhes, 
their  lettuees.  They  use  one  vegetable  here  whieh  I 
have  not  known  so  used  elsewhere  :  that  is,  very  young 
pumpkins  or  squashes,  of  the  size  of  apples,  and  to  be 
cooked  by  boiling.  They  are  not  to  my  taste,  but  the 
people  here  like  unripe  things,  —  unripe  fruit,  unripe 
chickens,  unripe  lamb.  This  market  is  the  noisiest  and 
ewarmiest  centre  of  noisy  and  swarming  Florence,  and 
I  always  like  to  pass  through  it  on  that  account. 

I  went  also  to  Santa  Croce,  and  it  seemed  to  me  to 
present  a  longer  vista  and  broader  apace  than  almost 
any  other  church,  perhaps  because  the  pillars  between 
the  nave  and  aisles  are  not  so  massive  as  to  obstruct  the 
view.  I  looked  into  the  Dnomo,  too,  and  was  pretty 
well  content  to  leave  it.  Then  I  came  homeward,  and 
lost  my  way,  and  wandered  far  oif  through  the  white 
sunshine,  and  the  scanty  shade  of  the  vineyard  walls, 
and  the  olive-trees  that  here  and  there  branched  over 
them.  At  laat  I  saw  our  own  gray  battlements  at  a 
distance,  on  one  side,  quite  out  of  the  direction  in 
which  I  was  travelling,  ao  was  comjieUed  to  the 
grievous  mortification  of  retracing  a  great  many  of  my 
weary  footstepa.  It  was  a  very  hot  day.  Thia  even- 
ing I  have  been  on  tlie  tower-top  star-grazing,  and 
looking  at  the  comet,  which  waves  along  the  sky  Uk« 


J 


431 


^M     1859.] 

^™  bh  Immense  feather  of  fliune.  Over  Florence  there 
was  an  illuminated  atmosphere,  caused  bj  the  lights 
of  the  city  gleaming  upward  into  the  mists  which  sleep 
and  dream  above  that  portion  of  the  valley,  as  well  as 
the  rest  of  it.  I  saw  dimly,  or  fancied  I  saw,  the  hill 
of  Fiesole  on  the  other  side  of  Florence,  and   remem- 

Ibered  how  ghostly  lights  were  seen  passing  thence  to 
the  Duomo  on  the  night  when  Lorenzo  the  Munifi- 
cent died.  From  time  to  time  the  sweet  bells  of  Flor- 
ence rang  out,  and  I  was  loath  to  come  down  into  the 
lower  world,  knowing  that  I  shall  never  again  look 
beavenward  &om  an  old  tower-top  in  such  a  soft  calm 
evening  as  this.  Yet  I  am  not  loath  to  go  away  ;  im- 
patdent  rather  ;  for,  taking  no  root,  I  soon  weary  of 
any  soil  in  whit-h  I  may  be  temporarily  deposited. 
The  same  impatience  I  sometimes  feel  or  conc«ive  of 
aa  regards  thia  earthly  life.  .  .  . 
I  forgot  to  mention  that  Powers  showed  me,  in  his 
studio,  the  model  of  the  statue  of  America,  which  ho 
wished  the  government  to  buy.  It  has  great  merit, 
and  embodies  the  ideal  of  youth,  freedom,  progress, 

tand  whatever  we  consider  as  distinctive  of  our  coun- 
try's eharaoter  and  destiny.  It  is  a  female  figure, 
vigorous,  beautiful,  planting  its  foot  lightly  on  a 
broken  chain,  and  pointing  upward.  The  face  has  a 
high  look  of  intelligence  and  lofty  feeling  ;  the  form, 
nude  to  the  middle,  has  all  the  charms  of  womanhood, 
and  is  thus  warmed  and  redeemed  out  of  the  cold  al- 
legoric sisterhood  who  have  generally  no  merit  in  chas- 
tity, being  really  without  ses.  I  somewhat  question 
whether  it  is  quite  the  thing,  however,  to  make  a  gen- 
nine  woman  out  of  an  allegory:  we  ask,  \^n]o  is  to 
wed  this  lovely  virgin  ?  and  we  are  not  satisfied  to 
banish  her  into  the  realm  of  chilly  thought.     But  T 


432   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1^ 
liked  the  atatue,  and  a 


e  better  for  what  I  critii 
liiige  package  i 
finished  marble  lies  bundled  u 


and  was  sorry  to  see  t 


I'  to  be  seukl 


country,  - 


which  doea  not  call  for  it. 


Mr.  Powers  and  his  two  daughters  called  to  take 
leave  of  us,  and  at  parting  1  expressed  a  hojie  of  see- 
ing him  in  Amoriea.  Pie  said  that  it  would  make  him 
very  unhappy  to  believe  that  he  should  never  return 
thither ;  but  it  seems  to  me  that  he  has  no  such  de&- 
nite  purpose  of  return  as  would  be  certain  to  bring  it- 
self to  pass.  It  makes  a  very  unsatisfactory  life,  thus 
to  spend  the  greater  part  of  it  in  exile.  In  such  a 
case  we  are  idways  deferring  the  reality  of  life  till  a 
future  moment,  and,  by  and  by.  we  have  deferred  it 
till  there  are  no  future  moments ;  or,  if  we  do  go  back, 
we  find  that  life  has  shifted  whatever  of  reality  it  had 
to  tlio  country  where  we  deemed  ourselves  only  living 
temporarily ;  and  so  between  two  stools  we  cume  to 
the  ground,  and  make  ourselves  a  part  of  one  or  tha 
other  country  only  by  laying  our  bones  in  its  soil.  It 
is  particidarly  a  pity  in  Powers's  case.,  because  he  ia  so 
very  American  in  character,  an<l  the  only  convenience 
{of  him  of  his  Italian  residence  is,  that  here  he 
supply  himself  with  marble,  and  with  workmen' 
chisel  it  according  U>  his  designs. 


October  2ef.  —  Yesterday  morning,  at 
we  left  our  ancient  tower,  and  threw  a  parting  gl 
—  and  a  rather  sad  one  —  over  the  misty  Val  d' 
This  summer  will  look  like  a  hai>py  one  in  oar 
dren's  retrospect,  and  also,  no  doubt,  in  the  years  that 
remain  to  ourselves  ;  and,  in  truth,  I  have  found  it  a 
jieaceful  and  not  uncheerful  one. 


le  ^^H 
len^^^l 


J 


It  was  not  a  pleasant  moming,  and  Mont«  Morello, 
looking  down  od  Plorence,  had  on  its  cap,  betokening 
foul  weather,  according  to  the  proverb.  Crossing  the 
Buspension-bridge,  we  reached  the  Leopoldo  railway 
without  entering  the  city.  By  some  mistake,  —  or 
perhaps  because  nobody  ever  travels  by  first-olass  car- 
riages in  Tuscany,  —  we  found  we  had  received  sec- 
ond-olass  ti(.'kets,  and  were  put  into  a  long,  crowded 
carrif^,  full  of  priests,  military  men,  commercial  trav* 
ellers,  and  other  respectable  people,  facing  one  another 
lengthwise  along  the  carri^e,  and  many  of  tliein 
smoking  cigars.  They  were  all  perfectly  civil,  and  I 
think  I  must  own  that  the  manners  of  this  second- 
class  would  compare  favorably  with  those  of  an  Amer- 
ican first-olass  one. 

At  Empoli,  about  an  hour  after  we  started,  we  had 
to  change  carriages,  the  main  train  proceeding  to  Leg- 
horn. .  .  .  My  observations  along  the  road  were  very 
scanty :  a  tully  country,  with  several  old  towns  seated 
on  the  most  elevated  hill-tops,  as  is  common  through- 
out Tuscany,  or  sometimes  a  fortress  with  a  town  on 
the  plain  at  its  base  ;  or,  once  or  twice,  the  towers  and 
battlements  of  a  mediieval  castle,  commanding  the  pass 
below  it.  Near  Florence  the  country  was  fertile  in  the 
vine  and  olive,  and  looked  as  unpicturesque  as  that 
sort  of  fertility  usually  makes  it ;  not  but  what  I  have 
come  to  think  better  of  the  tint  of  the  olive-leaf  than 
when  I  first  saw  it.  In  the  latter  part  of  our  journey  I 
remember  a  wild  stream,  of  a  greenish  hue,  but  trans- 
parent, rushing  along  over  a  rough  bed,  and  before 
reaching  Siena  we  nimbled  into  a  long  tunnel,  and 
^merged  from  it  near  the  city.  .  .  . 

We  drove  up  hill  and  down  (for  the  surface  of  Si 
ena  seems  to  be  nothing  but  an  irregularity)  through 


484   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [1868. 

narrow  old  streets,  and  were  sot  down  at  the  A^uib 
Neva,  a  j^rim-looklng  albergo  near  the  ceutre  of  tha 

town.     Mrs.  a had  already  taken  rooms  for  ua 

there,  and  tu  these  we  were  now  uttbered  up  the  lii{;h* 
way  of  a  dingy  stone  Btaircase,  and  into  a  aniall.  brick- 
paved  parlor.  The  house  seemed  endlessly  old,  and 
all  the  glimpses  that  we  caught  of  Siena  out  of  window 
seemed  more  ancient  still.  Almost  within  arm's  reach, 
across  a  narrow  Htreet,  a  tall  palaee  of  g;ray,  time-worn 
stone  clambered  skyward,  witli  arched  winilows,  and 
square  windows,  and  large  windows  and  small,  scat- 
tered up  and  down  its  side.  It  is  the  Pulnxzo  Tolo- 
mei,  and  looks  immensely  venerable.  From  the  win- 
dows  of  onr  bedrooms  we  looki-d  into  a  hroa»ler  street, 
though  still  not  very  wide,  and  into  a  small  piazza,  the 
most  conspicuous  object  in  which  was  a  column,  bear- 
ing on  iti  top  a  bronze  wolf  suckling  Romulus  and  Be- 
mus.  This  symbol  in  repeated  in  other  parts  of  the 
city,  and  seems  to  indicate  that  the  Sienese  people 
pride  themselves  in  a  Roman  origin.  In  another  di- 
rection, over  the  tops  of  the  houses,  we  saw  a  very 
high  tower,  with  battlements  projecting  around  its 
summit,  so  that  it  was  a  fortress  in  the  air-,  and  tliis 
I  have  since  found  to  be  the  Palazzo  Publico.  It  was 
pleasant,  looking  downwanl  into  the  little  old  piazza 
and  narrow  streets,  to  see  the  swarm  of  life  on  the 
pavement,  the  life  of  to-day,  just  as  new  as  if  it  had 
never  been  lived  before ;  the  citizens,  the  priests,  the 
soldiers,  the  mules  and  asses  witli  tlieir  paimiers,  the 
diligence  lumbering  along,  with  a  postilion  in  a  fadod 
crimson  coat  bobbing  up  and  down  on  the  off-horse. 
Buch  a  bustling  scene,  vociferous,  too,  witli  various 
itreet-cries,  is  wonderfully  set  off  by  tlie  gray  antiq- 
uity of  the  town,  aiul  makes  the  town  look  older  tT 
if  it  were  a  eolitude. 


x>k  older  tt]^^_ 


I  IB68.]  ITALY.  485 

Soon  Mr.  anil  Mrs.  Story  came,  and  accompanied 
I  m  to  look  for  lodgings.     They  also  drove  iia  about 
I  the  city  in  their  carriage,  and  showed  us  tlie  outside 
I  of   the  Palazzo  Fublieu,  and  of  tlie  Cathedral,  and 
I  other  remarkable  edifices.     The  aspect  of  Siena  is  far 
L  more  picturesque  than  that  of  any  other  town  in  Italy, 
I  to  far  a^  I  know  Italian  towns ;  and  yet,  now  tliat  I 
I  tave  written  it,  I  remember  Perugia,  and  feel  that  the 
I  Vjservation  is  a  mistake.     But  at  auy  rate  Siena  is 
[  remarkably  picturesque,  standing  on  such  a  site,  on 
[  tiie  vei^  and  within  the  crater  of  an  extinct  volcano, 
r  and  therefore  being  as  uneven  as  the  sea  in  a  tempest; 
the  streets  so  narrow,  ascending  between  tall,  ancient 
palaces,  while  the  side  streets  rush  headlong  down, 
only  to  be  threaded  by  sure-footed  mules,  such  as 
climb  Alpine  heights;  old  stone  balconies  on  the  paJ- 
I  ace  fronts :  old  arched  doorways,  and  windows  set  in 
I  frames  of  Gothic  architecture ;   arcades,   resembling 
I  canopies  of  stone,  with  quaintly  sculptured  statues  in 
the  richly  wrought  Gothic   niches  of  each  pillar,  — 
everything  massive  and  lofty,  yet  minutely  interesting 
when  you  look  at  it  stone  by  stone.     The  Florentines, 
and  the  Romans  too,  have  obliterated,  as  far  as  they 
Goidd.  all  the  interest  of  their  mediseval  structures  by 
covering  them  with  stucco,  so  that  they  have  quite  lost 
their  character,  and  affect  the  spectator  with  no  rever- 
ential idea  of  age.     Here  the  city  is  all  overwritten 
with  black-letter,  and  the  glad  Italian  sun  makes  the 
effect  BO  much  the  stronger. 

We  took  a  lodging,  and  afterwards  J and  I 

rambled  about,  and  went  into  the  Cathedral  for  a  mo- 
ment, and  strayed  also  into  the  Piazza  del  Campo, 
the  great  public  square  of  Siena.  I  am  not  in  the 
mood  for  further  description  of  public  places  now,  so 


486   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [18*8. 

fllmll  say  a  word  or  two  about  the  old  palace  in  wliicb 
we  have  established  ourselves.  We  have  the  sevund 
piano,  and  dwell  amid  failed  grandeur,  having  for  our 
Baloon  what  seems  to  have  been  a  hull-rooiii.  It  is 
ornamented  with  a  great  fresco  in  the  centre  of  the 
vaulted  ceiling,  and  others  covering  tlie  sides  of  tliu 
apartment,  and  surrounded  with  arabesque  frame- 
works, where  Cupids  gambol  and  chase  one  another. 
The  subjects  of  the  frescos  I  cannot  make  out,  not 
that  they  are  faded  like  Giotto's,  for  they  are  as  fresh 
as  rosea,  and  are  done  in  an  exceedingly  workman- 
like style  ;  hut  they  are  allegories  of  Fame  and  Plenty 
and  other  matters,  such  as  I  eoidd  never  understand. 
Our  whole  acconunodation  is  in  similar  style,  —  spa- 
cious, magnificent,  and  mouldy. 

In  the  evening  Mi.sa  S and  I  drove  to  the  rail- 
way, and  on  the  arrival  of  the  train  from  Florence  we 
watched  with  much  eagerness  the  unlading  of  the  lug* 
gage-van.  At  lust  the  whole  of  our  ten  trunks  and 
tin  bandbox  were  produced,  and  finally  my  leather 
hag,  in  which  was  my  journal  and  a  manuscript  l>ook 
centring  my  sketch  of  a  romance.  It  gladdened  my 
very  heart  to  see  it,  and  I  shall  think  the  Wtter  of 
Tuscan  promptitude  and  accuracy  for  so  quickly  bring- 
ing it  back  to  mo.  (It  was  left  behind,  under  one  of 
the  rail  carriage  seats.)  We  find  all  the  public  offi- 
cials, whether  of  railway,  police,  or  custom  house,  ex- 
tremely courteous  and  pleasant  to  encounter ;  they 
seem  willing  to  take  trouble  and  reluctant  to  give  it, 
and  it  is  really  a  gratification  to  find  that  snclt  ci^Hl 
people  will  sometimes  oblige  you  by  taking  a  paul  ^r 
two  aside. 


October  Sd.  —  I  took  several  Btrolls  Bbont 


1 


I 


iTAir. 

yesterday,  and  find  it  scarcely  extensive  enough  to 
get  lost  in ;  and  if  we  go  far  from  the  centre  we  aoon 
come  to  Btlent  streets,  with  only  here  and  there  an  in- 
dividual; and  the  inhabitants  stare  from  their  doors 
and  windows  at  the  stranger,  and  turn  round  to  look 
at  him  after  he  has  passed.  The  interest  of  the  old 
town  would  soon  he  exhausted  for  the  traveller,  but  I 
can  conceive  that  a  thoughtful  and  shy  man  miglit 
BettJe  down  here  with  the  view  of  making  the  place  a 
home,  aud  spend  many  years  in  a  sombre  kind  of  hap- 
piness. I  should  prefer  it  to  Florence  as  a  residence, 
but  it  would  be  terrible  without  an  independent  life 
in  one's  own  mind. 

U and  I  walked  out  in  the  afternoon,  and  went 

into  the  Piazza  del  Campo,  the  principal  place  of  the 
city,  and  a  very  noble  and  peculiar  one.  It  is  much 
in  the  form  of  an  amphitheatre,  and  the  surface  of  the 
ground  seems  to  be  slightly  scooped  out,  so  that  it 
resembles  the  shallow  basin  of  a  shell.  It  is  thus  a 
much  better  site  for  an  assemblage  of  the  populace 
than  if  it  were  a  perfect  level.  A  semicircle  or  trun- 
cated ellipse  of  stately  and  ancient  edifices  surromid 
the  piazza,  with  arches  opening  beneatli  them  through 
which  streets  converge  hitherward.  One  side  of  the 
piazza  is  a  straight  line,  and  is  occupied  by  the  Palazzo 
Publico,  which  is  a  most  noble  and  impressive  Gothic 
structure.  It  has  not  the  mass  of  the  Palazzo  Vecchio 
at  Florence,  but  b  more  striking.  It  has  a  long  bat- 
tlemented  front,  the  central  part  of  which  rises  emi- 
nent above  the  rest,  in  a  groat  square  bulk,  which 
b  likewise  crowned  with  battlements.  This  is  much 
more  picturesque  than  the  one  great  block  of  stone 
into  which  the  Palajfzo  Vecchio  is  consolidated.  At 
one  extremi^  of  this  long  front  of  the  Palazzo  Pub 


*88   FRENCB  AND  ITAIJAK  NOTE-BOOKS.    fl85S. 

lioo  riaea  a  towor,  shooting  up  its  shaft  high,  high  into 
the  air,  atiil  bulging  out  there  into  a  battlemented  for- 
tresH,  within  which  the  tower,  slenJerer  than  before, 
climbs  to  a  still  higher  region.  I  do  not  know  whether 
the  summit  of  the  tower  is  higher  or  so  high  as  that 
of  tlio  Palazzo  Vecchio ;  but  the  length  of  the  shaf^ 
fre«  of  thp  edifice,  is  much  greater,  and  bo  prwliu^es 
the  more  elevating  effect.  The  whole  fi-ont  of  tlje 
Palazzo  Publico  is  exceedingly  venerable,  with  an^bed 
windows,  Gothic  carvings,  and  all  the  old-time  orna- 
ments tliat  betoken  it  to  have  stood  a  great  while,  and 
the  gray  strength  that  will  hold  it  up  at  least  as  much 
longer.  At  one  end  of  the  fa^aile,  beneath  the  shadow 
of  the  tower,  is  a  grand  and  beautiful  porch,  supported 
on  square  pillars,  within  each  of  which  is  a  niche  con- 
taining a  statue  of  niedimviU  sculpture. 

The  great  Piazza  del  Cainpo  is  the  market-place  of 
Siena.  In  the  morning  it  was  thronged  with  l>ootha 
and  stalls,  especially  of  fruit  and  vegetable  dealers; 
but  as  in  Florence,  they  melted  away  in  the  sunshine, 
gradually  withdrawing  themselves  into  the  shadow- 
thrown  from  the  Palazzo  Publica 

On  the  side  opposite  the  palace  is  an  antique  foun- 
tain of  marble,  ornamented  with  two  statues  and  a 
series  of  bas-reliefs;  and  it  was  so  much  a<)inire<i  in 
its  day  that  it«  sculptor  recei\-e<l  the  name  "  Del  Fonte." 
1  am  loath  to  leave  the  piazza  and  palace  witliout  find- 
ing some  word  or  two  to  suggest  their  antique  majesty, 
in  the  sunshine  and  the  shadow ;  and  how  fit  it  seemed, 
notwithstanding  their  venerableness,  that  there  should 
be  a  busy  crowd  filling  up  the  great,  hollow  amphithe- 
atre, and  crying  their  fruit  and  little  merchandises,  so 
that  all  the  curved  line  of  stately  old  edifices  helped 
tu  reverberate  the  noise.  The  life  of  to-day,  within 
the  shell  of  a  time  past,  is  wonderfully  fascinating. 


1 


ITALY. 


489 


ADother  point  to  which  a  stranger's  footsteps  are 
drawn  by  a  kind  of  magnetism,  so  that  he  will  be  apt 
to  find  himself  there  as  often  as  he  strolls  out  of  his 
hotel,  is  the  Cathedral.  It  stands  in  the  highest  part 
of  the  city,  and  almost  every  street  runs  into  some 
other  street  which  meanders  hitherward.     On  our  way 

thither,  U aD<i  I  came  to  a  beautiful  front  of  black 

and  whito  marble,  m  somewhat  the  same  style  as  the 
Cathedral ;  in  fact,  it  was  the  baptistery,  and  should 
have  made  a  part  of  it,  according  to  the  original  de- 
sign, which  contemplated  a  structure  of  vastly  greater 
extent  than  this  actual  one.  We  entered  the  bap- 
tistery, and  found  the  interior  small,  but  very  ricli  in 
its  clustered  columns  and  intersecting  arches,  and  its 
frescos,  pictures,  statues,  and  ornaments.  Moreover, 
a  father  and  mother  had  brought  their  baby  to  be 
baptized,  and  the  poor  little  thing,  in  its  gay  awad- 
dling-clothes,  looked  just  like  what  1  have  seen  in  old 
pictures,  and  a  good  deal  like  an  Indian  pappoose.  It 
gave  one  little  slender  squeak  when  the  priest  put  the 
water  on  its  forehead,  and  then  was  quiet  agaJn. 

We  now  went  round  to  the  facade  of  the  Cathedral. 
.  ..  It  is  of  black  and  white  marble,  with,  I  believe, 
an  intermixture  of  red  and  other  colors ;  hut  time  has 
toned  them  down,  so  that  white,  black,  and  red  do  not 
contrast  so  strongly  with  one  another  as  they  may 
have  done  five  hundred  years  ago.  The  architecture 
is  generally  of  the  pointed  Gothic  style,  but  there  are 
likewise  carved  arches  over  the  doors  and  windows, 
and  a  variety  which  does  not  pnxluce  the  effect  of 
confusion,  —  a  magnificent  eccentricity,  an  exuberant 
ima^nation  flowering  out  in  stone.  On  high,  iu  the 
great  peak  of  the  front,  and  throwing  its  colored  ra- 
diance into  the  nave  within,  there  is  a  round  window 


440   FUESCU  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [1884 

of  immense  eircumfereiice,  the  painted  figures  in  which 
we  can  see  dimly  from  the  outside.  But  what  I  wish 
to  express,  and  never  can,  is  the  multitiidinoiiB  rich- 
ness of  the  ornamentation  of  the  front;  the  arches 
within  arches,  sculptured  inch  by  inch,  of  the  dee|) 
doorways ;  the  statues  of  saints,  some  making  a  het^ 
mitage  of  a  niche,  others  standing  forth ;  the  scores  of 
busts,  that  look  like  faces  of  ancient  people  gazing 
down  out  of  the  Cathedral ;  the  projecting  shapes  of 
stone  lions,  —  the  thousand  fonns  of  Crothic  fan<-y, 
which  seemed  to  soften  the  marble  and  express  what 
ever  it  liked,  and  allow  it  to  harden  again  to  last  for 
ever.  But  my  diwription  seems  like  knocking  off  tlj» 
noses  of  some  of  the  busts,  the  fingers  and  toes  of  ttie 
statues,  the  projecting  poiuts  of  the  architecture,  jiim- 
hling  them  all  up  together,  and  flinging  them  down 
upon  the  page.  Tbis  gives  no  idea  of  the  trutli,  dot, 
least  of  all,  can  it  shadow  forth  that  solemn  whole, 
mightily  combined  out  of  all  these  miouUt  particulars, 
and  sanctifying  the  entire  space  of  ground  over  which 
this  cathedral  front  flings  its  shadow,  or  on  which  it 
reflects  the  sun.  A  majesty  and  a  minuteness,  neitlier 
interfering  with  the  other,  each  assisting  the  other; 
this  is  what  I  love  in  (lothic  architecture.  We  went 
in  and  walked  about :  but  I  mean  to  go  again  before 
sketehing  the  interior  in  my  poor  water-colors. 

October  4ch.  —  On  looking  again  at  the  Palazso 
Publico,  I  see  that  the  pillared  portal,  wliich  1  have 
tpoken  of,  does  not  cover  an  entrance  to  the  palace, 
but  is  a  cha])el,  with  an  altar,  and  frescos  above  it, 
Ilou(^uets  of  fresh  flowers  are  on  the  altar,  and  a  lump 
bums,  in  all  the  daylight,  before  the  cruciflx.  The 
thapel  is  quite  unenclosed,  except  by  an  openwork 


J 


1868.] 


ITALY. 


441 


balustrade  of  marble,  on  which  the  carving  loohn  very 
ancient.  Nothing  could  be  more  convenient  for  the 
devotions  of  the  crowd  in  the  piazza,  and  no  doubt  the 
ilaily  prayers  offered  at  the  ahrine  might  be  nimibered 
by  the  thousand,  —  brief,  but  I  hope  earnest,  —  like 
tho»e  glimpses  I  used  io  catch  at  the  blue  sky,  reveal- 
ing so  much  in  an  instant,  while  I  was  toiling  at  Bi-ook 
Farm.  Another  picturesque  thing  about  the  Palazzo 
Publico  is  a  great  stone  balcony,  quaintly  wrought, 
about  midway  in  the  front  and  high  aloft,  with  two 
arched  windows  opening  into  it. 

After  another  glimpse  at  the  Cathedral,  too,  I  real- 
ize how  utterly  I  have  failed  in  conveying  the  idea  of 
its  elaborate  ornament,  its  twisted  and  clustered  pil- 
lars, and  numberless  devices  of  sculpture ;  nor  did  I 
mention  the  venerable  statues  that  stand  all  roimd  the 
Biunmit  of  the  edifice,  relieved  against  the  sky,  —  tbe 
highest  of  all  being  one  of  the  Saviour,  on  the  top- 
most peak  of  the  front ;  nor  the  tall  tower  that  as- 
cends from  one  side  of  the  building,  and  is  built  of 
I  layers  of  black  and  white  marble  piled  one  upon  an- 
other in  regular  succession  ;  nor  the  dome  that  swells 
upward  close  beside  this  tower. 

Had  the  Cathedral  been  construct^  on  the  plan  and 
dimensions  at  first  contemplated,  it  would  have  been 
incomparably  majestic  ;  the  finished  portion,  grand  aa 
,  it  is,  being  only  what  was  intended  for  a  transept. 
One  of  the  walls  of  what  was  to  have  been  the  nave 
IS  still  standing,  and  looks  like  a  ruin,  though.  I  be- 
lieve, it  has  been  turned  to  account  as  the  wall  of  a 
palace,  the  space  of  the  never- completed  nave  being 
now  a  court  or  street. 

The  whole  family  of  us  were  kindly  taken  out  yes- 
terday, to  dine  and  spend  the  day  at  the  Villa  Bolvi- 


-III 


442   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  £18SR 

dere  with  our  friends  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Story.  The 
vioinity  of  Siena  is  much  mora  agreeable  thaii  thut 
of  Florence,  lielng  cooler,  hreerier,  with  more  foliage 
and  Bhrubbery  both  near  at  hand  and  in  the  distance ; 
and  tlie  prospect,  Mr.  Story  toid  ue,  embraces  a  diam- 
eter of  about  a  hundred  miles  between  hills  north  and 
aouth.  The  Villa  Belvidere  was  built  and  owned  by 
an  Englishman  now  deceased,  who  has  leit  it  to  his 
butler,  and  its  lawns  and  shrubbery  have  something 
English  in  their  character,  and  thera  waa  almost  a 
dampness  in  the  grass,  which  really  pleased  me  in  this 
parched  Italy.  Within  the  house  the  walls  are  hung 
with  fine  old-fashioned  engravings  from  the  pictunts 
of  Oainsborough,  West,  and  other  English  painters. 
The  Englishman,  though  he  had  chosen  to  live  and 
die  in  Italy,  had  evidently  brought  hie  native  t 
and  peculiarities  along  with  hun.  Mr.  Story  thin] 
of  buying  this  villa:  I  do  not  know  but  I  might  ^ 
tempted  to  buy  it  myself  if  Siena  were  a  practici~ 
residence  for  the  entire  year ;  but  the  winter  I 
with  the  bleak  mountain-winds  of  a  hundred  miles 
Totmd  about  blustering  against  it,  must  be  terribly  di^ 
a^^reeable. 

We  spent  a  very  pleasant  day,  turning  over  b 
or  talking  on  the  lawn,  whence  we  coidd  behold  s 
picturesque  afar,  and  rich  vineyard  glinipsea  near  ^ 
hand.  Mr.  Story  is  the  most  variounly  accomplished 
and  brilliant  person,  tlie  fidlest  of  social  life  and  Are, 
whom  I  have  ever  met ;  and  without  seeming  to  make 
an  effort,  he  kept  us  amused  and  entertained  the 
whole  day  long ;  not  wearisomely  entertained  neither, 
as  we  shoidd  have  l»een  if  he  hml  not  let  his  fountain 
play  naturally.  Still,  though  he  bnblileil  and  lirimmtH] 
over  with  fun,  he  left  the  impression  on  me  that  .  .  - 


tastes 
thin^^H 
ght^H 
ticUi^^l 
r  hei^^^ 
1  miles 
Illy  dis- 

1  sced^^l 
near  ^^^ 


IS58.]  ITALY.  44S 

there  is  a  pain  aiwi  care,  bretl,  it  may  be,  out  of  tho 
very  richneBs  of  his  gifts  and  abundance  of  his  out- 
ward prosperity.  Bich,  in  the  prime  of  life,  .  .  .  and 
children  budding  and  blossoming  around  hiin  as  fairly 
as  his  heart  could  wish,  with  sparkling  talents,  —  so 
many,  that  if  he  choose  to  neglect  or  fling  away  one,  or 
two,  or  three,  he  would  still  have  enough  left  to  shine 
with,  —  who  should  be  happy  if  not  he  ?  .  .  , 

Towards  sunset  we  all  walked  out  into  the  podere, 
pausing  a  little  while  to  look  down  into  a  well  that 
stands  on  the  verge  of  the  lawn.  Within  the  spacious 
circle  of  its  stone  curb  was  an  abundant  growth  of 
maidenhair,  forming  a  perfect  wreath  of  thickly  clus- 
tering leaves  quite  round,  and  trailing  its  t«ndriU 
downward  to  tbe  water,  which  gleamed  beneath.  It 
was  a  very  pretty  sight.     Mr.  Story  bent  over  the 

tvell  and  uttered  deep,  musical  tones,  which  were  re- 
nrerberated  from  the  hollow  depths  with  wonderful  ef- 
liect,  as  if  a  spirit  dwelt  within  there,  and  (unlike  the 
ipirits  that  speak  through  mediums)  sent  bim  back 
Tesponses  even  profounder  and  more  melodious  than 
.  tlte  tones  that  awakened  thera.  Such  a  responsive 
well  as  this  might  have  been  taken  for  an  oracle  in 
old  days. 

We  went  along  paths  that  led  from  one  vineyard 
to  another,  and  which  might  have  led  us  for  miles 
across  the  country.  The  grapes  had  been  partly 
gathered,  but  still  there  were  many  purple  or  white 
clusters  hanging  heavily  on  the  vines.  We  passed 
cottage-doors,  and  saw  groups  of  contadini  and  con- 
tadine  in  their  festal  attire,  and  they  saluted  us  gra- 
lously ;  but  it  was  ubacrvable  that  one  of  the  men 
lingered  on  our  track  to  see  that  no  grapes 
stolea,  for  there  were  a  great  many  young  people 


444   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [180* 

uid  children  in  our  train,  not  only  our  owa,  but  soma 
from  a  neighboring  villa.     These  Italiun  peasauta  J 
a  kiuiUy  race,  but,  I  doubt,  not  very  Iiospitabi 
grape  or  fig. 

There  was  a  beautiful  sunset,  and  by  the  time  TC 
reached  the  house  again  the  comet  was  already  visible 
amid  the  unextinguished  glow  of  daylight.     A  Mr. 

and  Mrs.  B ,  Scoteh  people  from  the  next  villa, 

had  come  to  see  the  Storys,  and  we  sat  till  tea-time 
reading,  talking,  WUliani  Story  drawing  caricature! 
for  his  children's  amusement  and  ours,  and  all  of  us 
sometimes  getting  up  to  look  at  the  comet,  which 
blazed  brighter  and  brighter  till  it  wont  down -into  the 
mists  of  the  horizon.  Among  the  caricaturcit  was  one 
of  a  Presidential  candidate,  evidently  a  man  of  very 
malleable  principles,  aud  likely  to  succeed. 

Late  in  the  evening  (too  late  for  littlo  Rosebud) 
we  drove  homeward.  The  streets  of  old  Sioiia  looked 
very  grim  at  night,  and  it  seemed  like  gazing  into  cav- 
erns to  glimpse  down  some  of  the  side  streets  as  we 
passed,  with  a  light  burning  dimly  at  the  end  of  them. 
It  was  aft4;r  ten  when  we  reached  home,  and  climbed 
up  our  gloomy  staircase,  lighted  by  the  glimmOl 
some  wax  moccoli  which  I  had  in  my  pocket. 

Octobtr  5th.  • —  I  have  been  two  or  three  times  into 
the  Cathedral ;  .  •  .  the  whole  interior  is  of  marble, 
in  alternate  lines  of  black  and  white,  each  layer  being 
about  eight  inches  in  width  and  extending  horizon, 
tally.  It  looks  very  curiously,  and  might  remind  the 
spectator  of  a  stuff  with  iiorizontal  stripes.  Never. 
tliclcss,  the  effect  ia  exceedingly  rich,  these  altcmat« 
lines  stretching  away  along  the  walln  aud  round  tha 
elustered  pillars,  seen  aloft,  and  through  the  amlusi 


ITALY.  44R 

■verywhere,  this  inlay  of   blacb   and  white.     Every 
Bort  of  ornament  that  could  be  thought  of  seems  to 
have  been  crammed  into  the  Cathedral  in  one  place 
or  another :  gilding,  frescos,  pictures ;  a  roof  of  blue, 
Bpangled  with  golden  stars  ;  a  magnificent  wheel  win- 
dow of  old  painted  glass  over  the  entrance,  and  an- 
other at  the  op]K>3ite  end  of  the  Cathedral  ;  statues, 
L'some  of  marble,  others  of  gilded   bronze;  pulpits  of 
T  carved  marble ;  a  gilded  organ ;  a  cornice  of  marble 
■  Imsts  of  the  popes,  extending  round  the  entire  church ; 
i  pavement,  covered  all  over  with  a  strange  kind  of 
I  mosaic-work  in  various  marbles,  wrought  into  marble 
Vpictures  of  sacred  subjects ;  immense  clustered  pillars 
^'supporting  the  round  arches  that  divide  the  nave  from 
e  side-aisles ;  a  elere-story  of  windows  within  pointed 
arches,  —  it  seemed  as  if  the  spectator  were  reading 
an  antique  volume  written  in  black-letter  of  a  small 
character,  but  conveying  a  high  and  solemn  meaning. 
I  can  find  no  way  of  expressing  its  effect  on  rae,  so 
quaint  and  venerable  as  I  feel  this  cathedral  to  be 
in  its  immensity  of  striped  waistcoat,  now  dingy  with 
five  centuries  of  wear,     I  ought  not  to  say  anything 
that  might  detract  from  the  grandeur  and  sanctity  of 
the  blessed  edifice,  for  these  attributes  are  really  unin- 
jured by  any  of  the  Gothic  oddities  which  I  have 
hinted  at. 

We  went  this  morning  to  the  Institute  of  the  Fine 
Arts,  which  is  interesting  as  containing  a  series  of  the 
works  of  the  Sienese  painters  from  a  date  earlier  than 
that  of  Cimabue.  There  is  a  dispute,  I  believe,  be- 
tween Florence  and  Siena  as  to  whieh  city  may  claim 
the  credit  of  having  originated  tlie  modem  art  of 
painting.  The  Florentines  put  forward  Cimabue  as 
.  *  die  first  artist,  but  as  the  Sienese  produce  a  picture, 


146    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS. 

by  Giiiilo  Ja  Siena,  dated  before  the  birth  of  ( 
bue,  the  victory  is  decidedly  with  them.  As  to  picto- 
rial merit,  to  my  taste  there  ia  iinnc  in  eitlier  of  these 
old  paiutcrs,  nor  in  any  of  their  Huo^esaoni  for  a  long 
time  afterwards.  At  the  Institute  there  are  several 
rooms  hung  with  early  productions  of  the  Sienese 
school,  painted  before  the  invention  of  oil-t'olors,  on 
wood  shaped  into  Gothic  oltar-piecea.  The  back- 
grounds still  retain  a  bedinuned  splendor  of  gilding. 
There  ia  a  plentiful  use  of  red,  and  I  can  conceive 
that  the  pictures  must  have  sb^  an  illuminatioQ 
through  the  churches  where  Uiey  were  <lisphiyed. 
There  is  often,  too,  a  minute  care  bestowed  on  the 
faces  in  the  pictures,  and  sometimes  a  very  strong  ex- 
pression, stronger  than  modem  artiste  got,  and  it  is 
very  strange  how  they  attained  this  merit  while  they 
were  BO  inconceivably  rude  in  other  respects.  It  ia 
remarkable  that  all  the  early  faces  of  the  Madoima 
are  especially  stupid,  and  all  of  the  same  type,  a  sort 
of  face  such  as  one  might  carve  on  a  pumpkin,  repre- 
senting a  heavy.  Bulkj,  phlegmatic  woman,  with  a  long 
and  low  arch  of  the  nose.  This  same  dull  face  con- 
tinues to  be  assigned  to  the  Madonna,  even  when  the 
countenances  of  the  surrounding  saints  and  angels  are 
characterized  with  power  and  beauty,  so  that  I  think 
there  must  have  been  some  portrait  of  this  sacred  J| 
Bonage  reckoned  authentic,  which  the  early  \ 
followeil  and  religiously  repeated. 

At  last  we  camo  to  a  picture  by  Sodoma,  the  moai 
illustrious  representative  of  the  Sienese  schooL  It 
was  a  fresco;  Christ  Wund  to  the  jiillar,  after  having 
been  scourged.  I  do  believe  ttiat  painting  has  never 
done  any  tiling  better,  so  far  as  expression  is  concerned, 
than  this  figure.     In  all  these  generations  since  it  v 


It  I  thm^^ 
Msredj^^l 
'  pain^H 


J 


1868,]  JTALr. 

painted  it  must  have  softened  tbouaands  of  hearty 
drawn  down  rivers  of  tears,  been  more  effectual  than 
a  million  of  sermons.  Really,  it  is  a  thing  to  stand 
and  weep  at.  No  other  paint«r  has  done  anything 
tliat  uin  deserve  to  be  compared  to  this. 

There  are  some  other  pictures  by  Sodoma,  among 
them  a  Judith,  very  noble  and  admirable,  and  full  of 
a  profound  sorrow  for  the  deed  which  she  has  felt  it 
her  mission  to  do. 

Aquila  Nera.  October  1th.  —  Our  lodgings  in  Si- 
ena had  been  taken  only  for  five  days,  as  they  were 
alreaily  engaged  after  that  period ;  so  yesterday  we 
returned  to  our  old  quarters  at  the  Black  Eagle. 

In  the  forenoon  J and  I  went  out  of  one  of  the 

gates  (the  road  from  it  leads  to  Florence}  and  had  a 
pleasant  country  walk.  Our  way  wound  downward, 
round  the  hill  on  which  Siena  stands,  and  gave  us 
views  of  the  Duomo  and  its  campanile,  seemingly 
pretty  near,  after  we  had  walked  long  enough  to  be 
quite  remote  from  them.  Sitting  awhile  on  the  para- 
pet of  a  bridge,  I  saw  a  laborer  chopping  the  branches 
off  a  poplar-tree  which  he  bad  felled ;  and,  when  it 
was  trijnmed,  he  took  up  the  large  trunk  on  one  of  his 
shoulders  and  carried  it  off,  seemingly  with  ease.  He 
did  not  look  like  a  particularly  robust  man ;  but  I 
have  never  seen  such  an  herculean  feat  attempted  by 
an  Englishman  or  American.  It  lias  frequently  struck 
me  that  the  Italians  are  able  to  put  forth  a  great  deal 
of  strength  in  such  insulated  efforts  as  this  ;  but  I 
bare  been  told  that  they  are  less  capable  of  continued 
I  endurance  and  hardship  than  our  own  race.  I  do  not 
[  know  why  it  shoidd  be  so,  except  that  I  presume  their 
pfood  is  less  strong  than  ours,     There  was  no  other 


448    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOK!^.  [iftJ* 

remarkable  incident  in  our  walk,  which  lay  chiefly 
through  gorges  of  the  hills,  winding  beneath  high 
cliffs  uf  the  brown  Siena  earth,  with  many  pretty 
Bcenes  of  rural  landscape ;  vineyards  everywhere,  and 
olive-trees  ;  a  mill  on  its  little  stream,  over  which  there 
was  an  old  stone  bridge,  with  a  graceful  an-h ;  farn>- 
houses  ;  a  villa  or  two  ;  subterranean  passageu,  paosing 
from  tlie  roadside  through  the  high  banks  into  t)ie 
vineyards.  At  last  we  turned  aside  into  a  road  which 
led  ua  pretty  directly  to  another  gate  of  the  city,  and 
climbed  steeply  upward  among  tanneries,  where  tlie 
young  men  went  about  with  their  well-shaped  legs 
bare,  their  trousers  being  tucked  up  till  they  were 
strietly  breeches  and  nothing  else.  The  campanile 
stood  high  above  us ;  and  by  and  by,  and  very  soon, 
indeed,  the  steep  ascent  of  the  street  brought  us  into 
the  neigblmrhood  of  the  Piazza  del  Campo,  and  of  our 
own  hotel.  .  .  .  From  about  twelve  o'clock  tiU  one,  I 
sat  at  my  chamber  window  watching  the  specimens  of 
human  life  as  dis])layed  in  the  Piazza  Tolomei. 
[Here  follow  several  pi^s  of  moving  objects.]  .  .  . 
Of  course,  a  multitude  of  other  people  passed  by,  but 
the  curiousnesa  of  the  catalogue  is  the  prevalence  of 
the  martial  and  religious  elements.  The  general  cos- 
tume of  the  inhabitants  is  frocks  or  sacks,  loosely 
made,  and  rather  shabby ;  often,  shirt-sleeves  ;  or  the 
coat  hung  over  one  shoulder.  They  wear  felt  hats 
and  straw.  People  of  respectability  seem  to  prefer 
cylinder  hats,  either  black  or  drab,  and  broadcloth 
frock-coats  in  the  French  fashion ;  but,  like  the  rest, 
they  look  a  little  shabby.  Almost  all  the  women  wear 
shawls.  Ladies  in  swelling  petticoats,  and  with  fans, 
some  of  which  are  highly  gilded,  ai>pear.  The  people 
generally  are  not  tail,  but  have  a  sufficient  breadth  o( 


J 


ITALY. 


449 


I 


elioulder ;  in  complexion,  similar  to  Americana ;  beard- 
ed, universally.  The  vehicle  used  for  driving  is  a  lit- 
tle gig  without  a  top ;  but  theae  are  seldom  seen,  and 
still  less  frequently  a  cab  or  other  carriages.  The 
gait  of  the  people  has  not  the  energy  of  business  or 
decided  purpose.  Everybody  appears  to  lounge,  atid 
to  have  time  for  a  moment's  chat,  and  a  disposition  to 
rest,  reason  or  none. 

After  dinner  I  walked  out  of  another  gate  of  the 
city,  and  wandered  among  some  pleasant  country 
lanes,  bordered  with  hedges,  and  wearing  an  English 
aspect ;  at  least,  I  could  fancy  so.  The  vicinity  of 
Siena  is  delightful  to  walk  about  in ;  there  being  a 
verdant  outlook,  a  wide  prospect  of  purple  mountains, 
though  no  such  level  valley  as  the  Val  d'Amo ;  and 
the  eity  stands  so  high  that  its  towers  and  domes  are 
Sbcn  more  picturesquely  from  many  points  than  those 
of  Florence  can  be.  Nwther  is  the  pedestrian  so 
cruelly  shut  into  narrow  lanes,  between  high  stone 
walls,  over  which  he  cannot  get  a  glimpse  of  land- 
scape. As  I  walked  by  the  hedges  yesterday  I  could 
have  fancied  that  the  olive-trunks  were  those  of  apple- 
trees,  and  that  I  were  in  one  or  other  of  the  two  lands 
that  I  love  better  that  Italy.  But  the  great  whit« 
villas  and  the  farm-houses  were  unlike  anything  I 
have  seen  elsewhere,  or  that  I  should  wish  to  see  again, 
though  proper  enough  to  Italy. 

October  9tk.  —  Thursday  forenoon,  8th,  we  went  to 
see  the  Palazzo  Publico.  There  are  some  fine  old  halls 
and  chapels,  adorned  with  ancient  frescos  and  pic- 
tures, of  which  I  remember  a  picture  of  the  Virgin  by 
Sodonia,  very  beautiful,  and  other  fine  pictures  by  the 
Siune  master.     The  architecture  of  these  old  rooms  is 


460  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [I8W. 

grand,  the  roofs  being  supported  by  ponderous  arches, 
which  are  covered  witti  freitcos,  still  magnificent, 
though  faded,  darkened,  and  defaeed.  We  likewise 
saw  an  antique  casket  of  wood,  enriched  with  gilding, 
wliich  had  once  contained  an  arm  of  John  the  Baptist, 
—  HO  the  cufltode  told  us.  One  of  the  halls  was  hung 
with  the  portraits  of  eight  popes  and  nearly  forty 
cardinals,  who  were  natives  of  Siena.  I  have  done 
hardly  any  other  sight-seeing  except  a  daily  visit  to 
the  Cathedral,  which  I  a*imire  and  love  the  more  the 
ottener  I  go  thither.  Its  striped  pecidianty  ceases 
entirely  to  interfere  with  the  grandeur  and  venerable 
beauty  of  its  impression ;  and  I  ain  never  weary  of 
gazing  through  tlie  vista  of  its  arches,  and  noting  con- 
tinuidly  something  that  I  bad  not  seen  befoT«  in  its 
exulierant  R<lomnient.  The  pavement  alone  is  inex- 
haustible, being  covered  ail  over  with  figures  of  lifo 
size  or  larger,  which  look  like  imiuense  engravings  of 
Gothic  or  Scriptural  scenes.  There  is  Absalom  bang- 
ing by  his  hair,  and  Joab  slaying  him  with  a  spear. 
There  ia  Samson  belaboring  the  Philistines  with  the 
jawbone  of  an  ass.  There  are  armed  kntghts  in  the 
tumult  of  battle,  all  wrought  with  wonderful  expres- 
sion. The  figures  are  in  white  marble,  inlaid  with 
darker  stone,  and  the  shading  is  effected  by  means  of 
engraved  lines  in  the  marble,  filled  in  with  black.  It 
would  l>e  jmssible.  perhaps,  to  print  impressions  from 
some  of  these  vast  plates,  for  the  process  of  cutting 
the  lines  was  an  exact  anticipation  of  the  modem  art 
of  engraving.  However,  the  same  thing  was  done  — 
and  I  suppose  at  about  the  same  period  —  on  mcmn- 
mental  brasses,  and  I  have  seen  impressions  or  rub- 
bings from  those  for  sale  in  the  old  English  churches. 
Yestertlay  morning,  in  the  Cathedral,  I  watc 


] 


A] 


451 


woman  at  confession,  being  curious  to  see  how  long 
it  would  take  her  to  tell  her  sins,  the  growth  of  a 
week  perhaps.  I  know  not  how  long  she  had  been 
confessing  when  I  first  observed  her,  but  nearly  an 
hour  passed  before  the  priest  came  suddeuly  from  the 
confessional,  looking  weary  and  moist  with  perspira- 
tion, and  took  his  way  out  of  the  Cathedral.  The 
woman  was  left  on  her  knees.  This  morning  I  watched 
another  woman,  and  she  too  was  very  long  about  it, 
and  I  could  see  the  face  of  the  priest  behind  the  cur- 
tain of  the  confessional,  scarcely  inclining  his  ear  to 
the  perforated  tin  through  which  the  penitent  com- 
municated her  out]>ouring8.  It  must  be  very  tedious 
to  listen,  day  after  day,  to  the  minute  and  common- 
place iniquities  of  the  multitude  of  penitents,  and  it 
cannot  be  often  that  these  are  redeemed  by  tlie  treas- 
ure-trove of  a  great  sin.  When  her  confession  was 
over  the  woman  came  and  sat  down  on  the  same  bench 
with  me,  where  her  broad-brimmed  straw  hat  was  lying. 
She  seemed  to  be  a  country  woman,  with  a  simple, 
matronly  face,  which  was  solemnized  and  softened 
with  the  comfort  that  she  had  obtained  by  disburden- 
ing herself  of  the  soil  of  worldly  frailties  and  receiv- 
ing absolution.  An  old  woman,  who  haunts  the  Ca- 
thedral, whispered  to  her,  and  she  went  and  knelt 
down  where  a  procession  of  priests  were  to  pass,  and 
then  the  old  lady  begged  a  craria  of  me,  and  got  a 
half-paul.  It  almost  invariably  happens,  in  church 
or  cathedral,  that  beggars  address  their  prayers  to  the 
heretic  visitor,  and  probably  with  more  unction  than 
to  the  Virgin  or  saints.  However,  I  have  nothing  to 
say  against  the  sincerity  of  this  people's  devotion. 
They  give  all  the  proof  of  it  that  a  mere  spectator 
r  can  estimate. 


462  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS. 

Liist  eTening  we  all  went  out  to  see  the  ( 
which  then  reai'hed  its  climax  of  lustre.  It  was  liko 
a  lofty  pluine  of  fire,  and  grew  very  LriUiant  aa  tlie 
night  darkened. 

October  lOth.  —  This  morning  too  we  went  to  the 
Cathedral,  and  8at  long  listening  to  the  music  of  the 
organ  and  voices,  and  witnessing  rites  and  reremoniea 
which  are  far  older  than  even  the  ancient  edifice  where 
they  were  exhibited.  A  good  many  people  wer«  pnis- 
ent,  sitting,  kneeling,  or  walking  about,  —  a  freedom 
that  contrasts  very  agreenbly  with  the  grim  formali- 
ties of  English  churches  and  our  own  meeting-houses. 
Many  persons  were  in  their  best  attire ;  but  othent 
came  in,  with  unabashed  simplicity,  in  their  ohi  giir- 
raents  of  labor,  sunburnt  women  from  their  toil  among 
the  vines  and  olives.  One  old  peasant  I  noticed  with 
his  withered  shanks  in  breeches  and  blue  yam  stock- 
ings. The  people  of  whatever  class  are  wonderfully 
tolerant  of  heretics,  never  manifesting  any  rlisjtleaeure 
or  annoyance,  though  they  must  see  tltat  we  are  dran-n 
thither  by  eurioaity  alone,  and  merely  pry  while  they 
pray.  I  heartily  wish  the  priests  were  better  men, 
and  that  hmnan  nature,  divinely  influenced,  could  be 
depended  upon  for  a  constant  supply  and  succession 
of  good  and  pure  ministers,  their  religion  has  so  many 
admintble  points.  And  tlien  it  is  a  sad  pity  that  this 
noble  and  beautiful  cathedral  should  be  a  mere  fossil 
ahcll,  out  of  which  the  life  has  died  long  ago.  But 
for  many  a  year  yet  to  eoine  the  tapers  will  bum  be- 
fore the  high  altar,  the  Host  will  be  elevated,  the  in- 
cense diffuse  its  fragrance,  the  confession  ids  he  o|H-n 
to  reeoive  the  penitent*.  I  saw  a  father  entering  with 
two  little  bits  of  boys,  just  big  enough  to  toddle  a 


e  al<»^^_ 


Il8S8.] 


453 


I 


bolding  bia  hand  on  either  side.  The  father  dipped 
his  fingers  into  the  marble  font  of  holy  water,  —  which, 
on  its  pedestals,  was  two  or  three  times  as  high  aa 
those  small  Chrigtians, — and  wetted  a  hand  of  each, 
■nd  taught  them  how  to  erosa  themselves.  When  they 
come  to  be  men  it  will  be  iroposstblo  to  convince  those 
children  that  there  is  no  efficacy  in  holy  water,  with- 
out plucking  up  all  religious  faith  and  sentiment  by 
the  roots.  Generally,  I  suspect,  when  people  throw 
off  the  fwth  they  were  horn  in,  the  best  soil  of  their 
kearts  is  apt  to  cJing  to  its  roots. 

Raised  several  feet  above  the  pavement,  against 
every  clustered  pillar  along  the  nave  of  the  Cathedral, 

placed  a  statue  of  Gothic  sculpture.  In  various 
places  are  sitting  statues  of  popes  of  Sienese  nativity, 
all  of  whom,  I  believe,  have  a  hand  raised  iu  the  act 
of  blessing.  Shrines  and  chapels,  set  in  grand,  heavy 
frames  of  pillared  architecture,  stand  all  along  the 
aisles  aud  transepts,  and  these  seem  in  many  insttnces 
to  have  been  built  and  enriched  by  noble  families, 
whose  arms  arc  sculptured  on  the  pedestals  of  the  pil- 
lars, sometimes  with  a  cardinal's  hat  above  to  denote 
the  rank  of  one  of  its  members.  How  much  pride, 
love,  and  reverenc«  in  the  lapse  of  ages  must  have 
dung  to  the  sharp  points  of  all  this  sculpture  and 
architecture  1  The  Cathedral  is  a  religion  in  itself,  — 
something  worth  dying  for  to  those  who  have  an  he- 
reditary interest  in  it.  In  the  pavement,  j'esterday,  I 
noticed  the  gravestone  of  a  person  who  fell  six  cen- 
turies ago  in  the  battle  of  Monte  Aperto,  and  was 
buried  here  by  public  decree  as  a  meed  of  valor. 

This  afternoon  I  took  a  walk  out  of  one  of  the  city 
gates,  and  found  the  country  about  Siena  as  beautiful 
it)  this  direction  as  in  all  others.     I  came  to  a  little 


464   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    ptW. 

etreBm  flowing  over  into  a  pebbly  bed,  and  oolleoting 
itself  into  pools,  with  a  suanty  rirnlet  between.  Its 
jflen  was  deep,  and  was  crossed  by  a  bridge  of  serenl 
lofty  and  narrow  archea  like  those  of  a  Ronuw  aque- 
duct It  is  a  modem  structnre,  however.  Farther 
on,  as  I  wonnd  ronnd  along  the  base  of  a  hill  which 
fell  down  upon  the  road  by  piecipitons  cliffs  of  brown 
earth,  I  saw  a  gray,  ruined  wall  on  the  summit,  sni^ 
rounded  with  cypress-trees.  This  tree  is  very  frequent 
about  Siena,  and  the  soenery  is  made  soft  and  beauti- 
fnl  by  a  variety  of  other  trees  and  Bhrubbery,  without 
which  these  hills  and  gorges  would  have  soaroely  a 
charm.  The  load  was  thronged  with  country  people, 
mostly  women  and  children,  who  had  been  spending 
the  feaat-^y  in  Siena ;  and  parties  of  boys  were  chas- 
ing one  another  through  the  fields,  pretty  much  as 
boys  do  in  New  England  of  a  Sunday,  but  the  Sienese 
lads  had  not  the  sense  of  Sabbath-breaking  like  onr 
boys.  Sunday  with  thene  people  is  like  any  other 
feast-day,  and  consecrated  to  cheerful  enjoyment.  So 
much  religions  observance,  as  regards  outward  forms, 
is  diffused  through  the  whole  week  that  they  hare  no 
need  to  intensify  the  Sabbath  except  by  making  it 
gladden  the  other  days. 

Returning  throi^h  the  same  gate  by  whioh  I  had 
come  out,  I  ascended  into  the  city  by  a  long  and  steep 
street,  which  was  paved  with  bricks  set  edgewise.  This 
pavement  is  common  in  many  of  the  streets,  which, 
being  too  steep  for  horses  and  carriages,  are  meant 
only  to  sustain  the  lighter  tread  of  mules  and  asses. 
The  more  level  streets  are  paved  with  broad,  smooth 
flag-stonea,  like  those  of  Florence,  —  a  fashion  which 
I  heartily  regret  to  change  for  the  little  penitential 
blocks  of  Rwue.    The  walls  of  Siena  in  their  present 


I8S8.] 


ITALY. 


455 


P 


state,  and  so  far  as  I  Iiave  seen  them,  are  chiefly  brick , 
but  there  are  iDtermingled  fragments  of  ancient  stone- 
work, and  I  wonder  why  the  latter  does  not  prevail 
more  largely.  The  Romans,  howuver,  —  and  Siena 
had  Koman  characteristics,  —  always  liked  to  build  of 
brick,  a  taste  that  has  made  their  ruins  (now  that  the 
marble  slabs  are  torn  off)  much  less  grand  than  they 
ought  to  have  been.  I  am  grateful  to  the  old  Sienese 
for  having  used  stone  so  largely  in  their  domestic 
architecture,  aud  thereby  rendered  their  city  so  grimly 
picturesque,  with  its  black  palaces  frowning  upon  ona 
another  from  arched  windows,  across  narrow  streets, 
to  the  height  of  six  stories,  like  opposite  ranks  of  tail 
men  looking  sternly  into  one  another's  eyes. 

October  llth.  —  Again  I  went  to  the  Cathedral  this 
morning,  and  spent  an  hour  listening  to  the  music  and 
looking  through  the  orderly  intricaeies  of  the  arches, 
where  many  vistas  open  away  among  the  columns  of 
the  choir.  There  are  five  clustered  colunma  on  each 
side  of  the  nave  ;  then  under  the  dome  there  are  two 
more  arches,  not  in  a  straight  line,  but  fomiing  the 
segment  of  a  circle  ;  and  beyond  the  circle  of  the 
dome  there  are  four  more  arches,  extending  to  the  ex- 
tremity of  the  chancel.  T  should  have  said,  instead 
of  "clustered  columns,"  as  above,  that  there  are  five 
arches  along  the  nave  supported  by  columns.  This 
Cathedral  has  certainly  bewitched  me,  to  write  about 
it  so  much,  effecting  nothing  with  my  pains.  I  should 
judge  the  width  of  each  arch  to  be  about  twenty  feet, 
and  the  thickness  of  each  clustered  pillar  is  eight  or 
ten  more,  and  the  length  of  tlie  entire  building  may 
be  between  two  and  three  hundred  feet  ;  not  very 
large,  certainly,  but  it  makes  an  impression  of  gran- 
deur independent  of  siie.  .  .  . 


456   FRENCH  AND  ITAUAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1808. 

I  never  ahall  snooeed  even  in  reminding  mywlf  vS. 
the  venerable  magnificence  of  this  minster,  with  its 
arches,  its  columns,  its  cornice  of  popes'  heads,  its 
great  wheel-windows,  its  manifold  ornament,  all  com- 
bining in  one  vast  effect,  though  many  men  have  lar 
bored  individaally,  and  through  a  long  courae  of  time, 
to  produce  this  multifarious  handiwork  and  headwork, 

I  now  took  a  walk  out  of  the  city.  A  road  turned 
immediately  to  the  left  as  I  emerged  from  the  oi^, 
and  soon  proved  to  be  a  rustic  lane  leading  past  sev- 
eral villas  and  farm-houses.  It  was  a  very  pleasant 
walk,  with  vineyards  and  olive^jrchards  on  each  side, 
and  now  and  then  glimpses  of  the  towers  and  sombre 
heaped-up  palaces  of  Siena,  and  now  a  rural  Beclusion 
again ;  for  the  hills  rise  and  the  valleyB  fall  like  the 
swell  and  subsidence  of  the  sea  after  a  gale,  so  that 
Siena  may  be  quite  hidden  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile 
of  its  wall,  or  may  be  visible,  I  doubt  not,  twenty 
miles  away.  It  is  a  fine  old  town,  with  every  promise 
of  health  and  vigor  in  its  atmosphere ;  and  really,  if  I 
oould  take  root  anywhere,  I  know  not  but  it  could  as 
well  be  here  as  in  another  place.  It  would  only  be  a 
kind  of  despair,  however,  that  would  ever  make  me 
dream  of  finding  a  home  in  Italy ;  a  sense  that  I  had 
loBt  my  country  through  absence  or  incongruity,  and 
that  earth  is  not  an  abiding.place.  I  wonder  that  we 
Americans  love  our  country  at  all,  it  having  no  limits 
and  no  oneness ;  and  when  you  try  to  make  it  a  mat^ 
ter  of  the  heart,  everything  faUs  away  except  one's 
native  State ;  neither  can  you  seize  hold  of  that  un- 
leBB  you  tear  it  out  of  the  Union,  bleeding  and  quiver- 
ing.  Yet,  unquestionably,  we  do  stand  by  our  national 
fiag  as  stoutly  as  any  people  in  the  world,  and  I  my- 
self have  felt  the  heart  throb  at  sight  of  it  as  sensibly 


I8&e.] 


457 


B  other  men.     I  think  the  singularity  of  our  form  of 

I  government  contributes  to  give  us  a  kind  of  patriot- 

a,  by  separating   us   from  other  nations  more  en- 

I  tirely.     If  other  nations  ha<l  similar  institutions,  —  if 

England,  especially,  were  a  democracy,  —  we  should 

9  readily  make  ourselves  at  home  ui  another  country 

■a  now  in  a  new  State. 


v 


October  12th,  —  And  again  we  went  to  the  Cathe- 
dral this  forenoon,  and  the  whole  family,  except  my- 
Klf,  sketched  portions  of  it.  Even  Rosebud  stood 
gravely  sketching  some  of  the  inlaid  figures  of  the 
pavement.  As  for  me,  I  fan  but  try  to  preserve  some 
memorial  of  this  beautiful  edifice  in  ill-fittiug  words 
that  never  hit  the  mark.  This  morning  visit  was  not 
my  final  one,  for  I  went  again  after  dinner  and  walked 
quite  round  the  whole  interior.  I  think  I  have  not 
yet  mentioned  the  rich  carvings  of  the  old  oaken  seats 
round  the  choir,  and  the  curious  mosaic  of  lightor  and 
darker  woods,  by  which  figures  and  landscapes  are 
skilfully  represented  on  the  backs  of  some  of  the 
stalls.  The  process  seems  to  be  the  same  as  the  in- 
laying and  engraving  of  the  pavement,  the  material  in 
one  ease  being  marble,  in  the  other  wood.  The  only 
other  thing  that  I  particularly  noticed  was,  tliat  in 
the  fonts  of  holy  water  at  the  front  entrance,  marble 
fish  are  sculptured  in  the  depths  of  the  basin,  and  eels 
and  shell-fish  crawling  round  the  brim.  Have  I  spoken 
fif  the  sumptuous  carving  of  the  capitals  of  the  col- 
umns ?  At  any  rate  I  have  left  a  thousand  beauties 
without  a  word.  Here  I  drop  the  subject.  As  I  took 
my  parting  glance,  the  Cathedral  had  a  gleam  of 
golden  sunshine  in  its  far  depths,  and  it  seemed  to 
widen  and  deepen  itself,  as  if  to  convince  me  of  my 


458   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [11 

error  in  saying,  yesterday,  that  it  b  not  very  large, 
wonder  how  I  could  itay  it. 

After  taking  leave  of  the  Cathedral,  I  foimd 
way  out  of  another  of  the  city  gatesi,  and  Boon  turai 
aside  into  a  greeu  lane.  .  .  .  Soon  tho  lane  passed 
through  a  hamlet  consisting  of  a  few  farm-houses,  the 
Bhabbiest  and  dreariest  that  can  be  conceived,  ancient, 
and  ugly,  and  dilapidated,  with  iron-grate<l  windows 
below,  and  heavy  wooden  shutters  on  the  windows 
above,  —  high,  ruinous  walls  shutting  in  the  courts, 
and  ponderous  gates,  one  of  wliich  was  off  its  hinges. 
The  farm-yards  were  perfect  pictures  of  disarray  and 
slovenly  administration  of  home  affairs.  Only  one  of 
these  houses  had  a  door  opening  on  the  road,  and  that 
was  the  meanest  in  the  hamlet.  A  flight  of  narrow 
stone  stairs  ascended  from  the  threshold  to  the  second 
story.  AH  these  houses  were  speuimens  of  a  rude  an- 
tiquity, built  of  brick  and  stone,  with  the  marks  of 
arched  doors  and  windows  wliere  a  subsequent  genera- 
tion had  shut  up  the  lights,  or  the  a^^cesses  which  the 
original  builders  had  opened.  Humble  as  these  dwell- 
iugs  ai-e,  —  though  large  and  high  compared  with  ru- 
ral residences  in  other  couutries,  —  they  may  very 
probably  date  back  to  tlie  times  when  Siena  was  a  war- 
like republic,  and  when  every  house  in  its  neighbor- 
hood had  need  to  be  a  fortress.  I  suppose,  howe' 
prowling  banditti  were  the  only  enemies  against  wl 
a  defence  would  be  attempted.  What  lives  must  now 
Im  lived  there,  —  in  beastly  ignorance,  mental  slug- 
gishness, hard  toil  for  little  profit,  filth,  and  a  horrible 
discomfort  of  Heas  ;  for  if  the  palaces  of  Italy  ara 
cven-un  with  tlicse  pests,  what  must  the  country  hoi 
be!  .  .  . 

yfe  ore  now  all  ready  for  a  start  to-morrow. 


f 


ibor>  ^_ 


1 


I 


BADICOFANI, 

October  \Zth.  —  We  arranged  to  beg;ui  our  jonmey 
!it  six.  .  .  It  was  a  chill,  lowering  morning,  and  the 
rain  blew  a  little  in  our  faces  before  we  had  gone  far, 
but  did  not  continue  long.  The  country  soon  lost  the 
'  pleasant  aspect  which  it  wears  immediately  about 
Siena,  and  grew  very  barren  and  dreary.  Then  it 
.  changed  again  for  the  better,  the  road  leading  us 
through  a  fertility  of  vines  and  olives,  after  which  tlie 
dreary  and  barren  hilla  came  back  a.gaiD,  and  formed 
our  prospect  throughout  most  of  the  day.  We  stopped 
for  our  d^jevner  d  la/ourchette  at  a  little  old  town 
called  San  Querico,  which  we  entered  through  a  ruined 
gateway,  the  town  being  entirely  surrounded  by  its 
ancient  wall.  This  wall  is  far  more  picturesque  than 
that  of  Siena,  being  lofty  and  built  of  stone,  with  a 
machicolation  of  arches  running  quite  round  its  top, 
like  a  cornice.  It  has  little  more  than  a  single  street, 
perhaps  a  quarter  of  a  niile  long,  narrow,  paved  with 
flag-stonea  in  the  Florentine  fashion,  and  lined  with 
two  rows  of  tall,  rusty,  stone  houses,  without  a  gap  be- 
tween them  from  end  to  end.  The  caf^s  were  numer- 
ous in  relation  to  the  size  of  the  t^wn,  and  there  were 
two  taverns,  —  our  own,  the  Eagle,  being  doubtless 
the  best,  and  having  three  arched  entrances  in  its 
front.  Of  these,  the  middle  one  led  to  the  guests' 
apartments,  the  one  on  the  right  to  the  bam.  and  that 
I  OD  the  left  to  the  stable,  so  that,  as  is  usual  in  Italian 
[  inns,  the  whole  establishment  was  under  one  roof.  We 
'  were  shown  into  a  brick-paved  room  on  the  first  floor, 
adorned  with  a  funny  fresco  of  Aurora  on  the  ceiling, 
and  with  some  colored  prints,  both  religious  and  pro 
f&ne.  .  .  . 


HO   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [ISflft 

Ab  we  drove  into  the  town  we  noticed  a  Gothio 
ehurcli  with  two  doors  of  peculiar  architecture,  and 
while  our  dejeuner  was  beiug  prepared  we  went  to  see 
it.  The  interior  hud  little  tlmt  was  remarkable,  for  it 
had  been  repaired  early  in  tlie  last  centuiy.  and  i<i>uilt 
of  course ;  but  an  old  triptych  is  still  hanging  in  a 
chapel  beside  the  high  altar.  It  is  painted  on  wood, 
and  dates  back  beyond  the  invention  of  oil-painting, 
and  represents  the  Virgin  and  some  saints  and  angels 
Neither  is  the  exterior  of  the  church  particularly  in- 
teresting, with  the  exception  of  the  carving  and  orna- 
ments of  two  of  the  doors.  Both  of  them  have  round 
arches,  deep  and  curiously  wrought,  and  the  pillars  of 
one  of  the  two  are  formed  of  a  peculiar  knot  or  twine 
in  stone-work,  such  as  I  cannot  well  describe,  bui  it 
is  both  ingenious  and  simple.  These  pillars  rest  on 
two  nondescript  animals,  which  look  as  much  like 
walruses  as  anything  else.  The  pillars  of  the  other 
door  consist  of  two  figures  supporting  the  capitals,  an; 
themselves  standing  on  two  handsomely  car\'ed  lit 
The  work  is  curious,  and  evidently  very  ancient, 
the  natenal  a  red  freestone. 

After  lunch,  J and  I  took  a  walk  out  of  the 

gate  of  the  town  opposite  to  that  of  our  entrance. 
There  were  no  soldiers  on  guard,  as  at  city  gates  of 
more  importance  ;  nor  do  I  think  that  there  is  really 
any  gate  to  shut,  but  the  massive  stone  piteway  still 
stands  entire  over  tlie  empty  arcli.  Looking  back 
after  we  had  passed  through,  I  observed  that  tlie  lofty 
upper  story  is  converted  into  a  dov&«ot,  and  that 
pumpkins  were  put  to  ripen  in  some  open  chambers 
at  one  side.  We  passed  near  the  base  of  a  toll,  sqi 
tower,  which  is  said  to  be  of  Roman  origin.  The 
Qe  town  is  in  the  midst  of  a  barren  region,  but  its  ii 


ther 


I 


I 


ITALY.  461 

Bighborhoofl  is  fertile,  luid  aD  olive-orchard, 
venerable  of  aspect,  lay  on  the  other  side  of  the  pleas- 
ant lane  with  its  English  hedges,  and  olive-trees  grew 
likewise  along  the  base  of  the  city  walL  The  arched 
machicolatiotis,  wliii'h  I  have  before  mentioned,  were 
here  and  there  interrupted  by  a  house  which  was  built 
upon  the  old  wall  or  incorjiorated  into  it ;  and  from 
the  windows  of  one  of  them  I  saw  ears  of  Indian  com 
hung  out  to  ripen  in  the  sun,  and  somebody  was  win- 
nowing grain  at  a  little  door  that  opened  through  the 
wall.  It  was  very  pleasant  to  see  the  ancient  warlike 
rampart  thus  overcome  with  rustic  peace.  The  ruined 
gateway  is  partly  ovei^rown  with  ivy- 
Returning  to  our  inn,  along  the  street,  we  saw 

sketching  one  of  the  doors  of  the  Gothic  church,  in  the 
midst  of  a  crowd  of  the  good  people  of  San  Querico, 
who  made  no  scruple  to  look  over  her  shoulder,  press- 
ing BO  closely  as  hardly  to  allow  her  elbow-room.  1 
must  own  that  I  was  too  cowardly  to  come  forward 
and  take  my  share  of  this  publie  notice,  so  I  turned 
away  to  the  inn  and  there  awaited  her  coming.  In> 
deed,  she  has  seldom  attempted  to  sketch  without  find- 
ing herself  the  nucleus  of  a  throng. 

VITEKBO. 
The  Black  Eagle,  October  14(A.  —  Perhaps  I  had 
Boraething  more  to  say  of  San  Querico,  but  I  shall 
merely  add  that  there  ia  a  stately  old  palace  of  the 
Piccoiomini  close  to  the  church  abot'e  described.  It 
is  built  in  tlie  style  of  the  Roman  palaces,  and  looked 
almost  large  enough  to  be  one  of  them.  Nevertheless, 
the  basement  story,  or  part  of  it,  seems  to  he  used  as 
a  bam  and  stable,  for  I  saw  a  yoke  of  oxen  in  the  en- 
I  cannot  but  mention  a  most  wretched  team 


462  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [IS68L 

of  vettura-horaes  which  stopped  at  the  door  of  our  at 
bei^ :  poor,  lean,  downcast  creature.t,  with  deep  fur- 
rowB  between  their  ribs  ;  nothing  but  skiu  and  Ikiuii 
in  short,  and  not  even  so  much  ekin  oa  th(>y  should 
have  had,  for  it  was  partially  worn  off  fn>m  their 
baokn.  The  harness  was  fastened  with  ropes,  the 
traees  and  reins  were  ropes;  the  earriage  was  old 
and  shabby,  and  out  of  this  miserable  equip^e  then; 
alighted  an  aneient  gentleman  and  la<ly,  whom  our 
waiter  affirmed  to  be  tlie  Prefetit  of  Floreuet-  and  bia 
wife. 

We  left  San  Querioo  at  two  o'clock,  and  followed 
ascending  road  till  we  got  into  the  region  almvi 
clouds ;  the  landsi-ape  was  very  wiile,  but  very  dreary 
and  barren,  and  grow  more  and  more  so  till  we  begnu 
to  climb  the  mountain  of  Radieofani,  the  peak  of  which 
had  been  blackening  itself  on  the  horizon  almost  the 
whole  day.  When  we  had  coroe  into  a  pretty  high  re- 
gion we  were  assailed  by  a  real  mountain  tempest  of 
wind,  rain,  and  hail,  which  pelte«l  down  upon  us  in 
good  earnest,  and  cooled  the  air  a  little  below  comfort. 
As  we  toiled  up  the  mountain  its  upper  region  pre- 
sented a  very  striking  aspeet,  looking  aa  if  a  precipice 
had  been  smoothed  and  squareil  for  the  jturpose  of 
rendering  the  old  castle  on  its  summit  more  inacces- 
sible than  it  was  by  nature.  This  is  the  caatle  of  tlio 
robber-knight,  Ghino  di  Tacco,  whom  Boccaccio  in- 
troduces into  the  Decameron.  A  freelM>ot«r  of  those 
days  must  have  set  a  higher  value  on  such  a  rock  as 
this  than  if  it  had  been  one  maM  of  diamond,  for  no 
art  of  mediteval  warfare  could  endanger  him  in  such  a 
fortress.  Drawing  yet  nearer,  we  found  the  hill-sido 
immediately  above  us,  strewn  with  thousands  upon 
thousands  of  great  fragments  of  stone.     It  looked 


I 


I 


IB08.]  ITALY.  463 

if  some  great  niio  had  taken  place  tlicre,  only  it  was 
too  vast  a  ruin  to  have  been  the  disiueinbennent  and 
dissolution  of  anytbisg  made  by  man. 

We  could  now  see  the  castle  on  the  height  pretty 
distinctly.  It  seemed  to  impend  over  the  precipice ; 
and  close  to  the  base  of  the  latter  we  saw  the  street  of 
a  town  on  aa  strange  and  inconvenient  a  foundation  as 
ever  one  was  built  upon.  I  suppose  the  inhabitants  of 
the  vill^e  were  dependants  of  the  old  knight  of  the 
castle ;  his  brotherhood  of  robbers,  as  they  married 
and  had  families,  settled  there  under  the  shelter  of 
the  e^le's  neat.  But  the  singularity  is,  how  a  com- 
munity of  people  have  contrived  to  live  and  perpetu- 
ate themselves  so  far  out  of  the  reach  of  the  world's 
Lelp,  and  seemingly  with  no  means  of  assisting  in  the 
world's  labor.  I  cannot  imagine  how  they  employ 
themselves  except  in  begging,  and  even  that  branch  of 
industry  appears  to  be  left  to  the  old  women  and  the 
children.  No  house  was  ever  built  in  this  imme<liate 
neighborhood  for  any  such  natural  purpose  as  induces 
people  to  build  tbein  on  other  sites.  Even  our  hotel, 
at  which  we  now  arrived,  could  not  be  said  to  be  a 
natural  growth  of  the  soil ;  it  had  originally  been  a 
whim  of  one  of  the  Grand  Dukes  of  Tuscany,  —  a 
hunting  -  palace,  —  intended  for  habitation  only  dur- 
ing a  few  weeks  of  the  year.  Of  all  dreary  hotels  I 
ever  alighted  at,  methinks  this  is  the  most  so  ;  but  on 
first  arriving  I  merely  followed  the  waiter  to  look  at 
our  rooms,  across  stone-paved  basement-halls  dismal 
as  Etruscan  tombs;  up  dim  staircases,  and  along  shiv- 
ering corridors,  all  of  stone,  stone,  stone,  nothing  but 
cold  stone.     After  glancing  at  these  pleasant  acconi- 

ntodations,  my  wife  and   I,  with  J ,  set   out    to 

•soend  the  hill  and  visit  the  town  of  Radicofaoi. 


(64  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [11 

It  is  not  more  tlian  a  quarter  nf  a  mile  above 
hotel,  an<]  is  accessible  by  a  good  piece  of  road, 
though  very  steep.  As  we  approaches)  the  town  we 
were  assailed  by  some  little  bejrgars  \  but  this  is  the 
case  all  throuj^h  Italy,  in  city  or  solitude,  and  I  think 
the  mendicants  of  Kadicofani  are  fewor  than  its  pro- 
]Hirtion.  We  had  not  got  far  towards  tlie  village 
when,  looking  bach  over  the  scene  of  many  miles  tliat 
lay  stretched  beneath  us,  we  saw  a  heavy  shower  ap- 
jiarently  travelling  straight  towards  us  over  hill  an<~ 
dale.  It  seemed  inevitable  that  it  should  soon  be 
us,  HO  I  persuaded  my  wife  to  return  to  the  hotel 

J and  I  kept  onward,   being  detennined  to 

Radioofani  with  or  without  a  drenching.  We 
entered  the  street ;  the  blackest,  ugliest,  nulest 
street,  1  do  believe,  that  ever  human  life  incrusted  il 
self  witli.  The  first  portion  of  it  is  the  over-brimming 
of  the  town  in  generations  subsequent  to  that  in  which 
it  was  Burrounded  by  a  wall ;  but  after  going  a  little 
way  we  came  to  a  higli,  xquare  tower  planted  right 
across  the  way,  with  an  arched  gateway  in  its  base- 
ment story,  so  that  it  looked  like  a  great  shurt-legged 
giant  striding  over  the  street  of  Radicofani.  Within 
the  gateway  is  the  proper  and  original  town,  though 
indeed  the  portion  outside  of  the  gate  is  as  densely 
populated,  as  ugly,  and  us  ancient,  as  that  within. 

The  street  was  very  narrow,  and  paved  with  flag- 
stones not  quite  so  smooth  a»  those  of  Florence  ;  the 
houses  are  tall  enough  to  be  Htately,  if  they  w«re 
BO  inconceivably  dingy  and  shabby;   but,  with 
hulf-dozen  stories,  they  make  only  the  impreasion 
hovel  piled  upon   hovel,  —  squalor  inimortaliKed 
undecaying  stone.     It  was  now  getting  far  into  the 
kwilight,  and  I  could  not  distinguish  the  particulaiidM 


;  tne  

thd^H 


R8S8.] 


465 


^^Kof  the  little  town,  except  tba,t  there  were  shops,  a  cuf^ 
^Bor  two,  and  as  many  chuichea,  all  dusky  with  ago, 
^H  crowded  closely  together,  inconvenient,  stifled,  t^>o,  in 
^H'  Bpite  of  the  breadth  and  freedom  of  the  mountaui  at- 
^H  mosphere  outside  the  scanty  precinc-ts  of  the  street.    It 
^H'  vas  a  death-inlife  little  place,  a  fossilized  pla4:e,  and 
^B  jet  the  street  was  thronged,  and  had  all  the  bustle  o£ 
^Hb  city;  even  more  noise  than  a,  city's  street,  because 
^B  everybody  in  Radicofani  knows  everybody,  and  prob- 
ably gossips  with  everybody,  being  everybody's  blood 
relation,  aa  they  cannot  fail  to  have  Iwcome  after  they 
and   tlieir   forefathers   have   been   shut   up   together 
within    the   narrow  walls    for    many    hundred    years. 

They  looked  round  briskly  at  J and  me,  but  were 

courteous,  as  Italians  always  are,  and  made  way  for  us 
to  pass  through  the  throng  as  we  kept  ou  still  ascend- 
;  the  steep  street.     It  took  ns  but  a  few  minutes 
I  to  reach  the  still  steeper  and  winding  pathway  which 
(fllimbs  towards  the  old  castle. 

After  ascending  above  the  vill^je,  the  path,  though 
bctall  paved,  becomes  very  rough,  aa  if  the  hoofs  of  Ghi- 
pno  di  Tacco's  robber  cavalry  had  displaced  the  stones 
tnd  they  had  never  been  readjusted.     On  every  side, 
pioo,  except  where  the  path  just  flnda  space   enough, 
tiiere  is  an  enormous  rubbish  of  huge  stones,  which 
seems  to  have  fallen  from  the  precipice  above,  or  else 
to  have  rained  down  out  of  the  sky.    We  kept  on,  and 
by  and  by  reached  what  seemed  to  have  been  a  lower 
outwork  of  the  castle  on  the  top ;  there  was  the  mas- 
sive old  arch  of  a  gateway,  and  a  great  deal  of  ruin 
of  man's  work,  beside  the  large  stones  that  here,  as 
elsewhere,  were  scattered  so  abundantly.    Within  the 
wall  and  gateway  jnst  mentioned,  however,  there  was 
I  »  kind  of  farm-house,  adapted,  I  suppose,  out  of  the 


i 


466   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [IMi 

old  nun,  and  I  noticed  some  ears  of  Indian  wni  hang- 
ing out  of  a  window.  There  were  also  a  few  itaok»  of 
hay,  but  no  gignit  of  biuuati  or  animal  life ;  and  it  ia 
utterly  inexplicable  to  ine  where  these  products  of  the 
soil  could  have  come  from,  for  certainly  they  never 
grew  amid  that  barrenneBs. 

We  had  not  yet  reached  Ghino'a  caatle,  and,  being 
now  beneath  it,  we  had  to  bend  our  heads  far  back- 
ward to  see  it  risiug  up  against  the  clear  sky  while  we 
were  now  in  twilight.  The  path  ui)ward  Iooko<l  ter- 
ribly eteep  and  rough,  and  if  we  had  climbed  it  we 
should  probably  have  broken  our  necks  in  descending 
again  into  the  lower  obscurity.    We  therefore  stopped 

here,  much  against  J 's  will,  and  went  back  as  we 

came,  still  wondering  at  the  strange  situation  of  Radi- 
tx}fani ;  for  iU  aspect  is  as  if  it  had  stepped  off  the 
top  of  the  cliff  and  lodged  at  ita  base,  though  still  in 
danger  of  sliding  farther  down  the  hill-eide.  Emerg- 
ing from  the  compact,  grimy  life  of  its  street,  wo  saw 
that  the  shower  had  swept  by.  or  probably  had  ex- 
pended itself  ui  a  region  beneath  us,  for  we  were  above 
the  scope  of  many  of  the  showery  clouds  that  haunt  a 
hill-country.  There  was  a  very  bright  star  visible,  I 
remember,  and  we  saw  the  new  moon,  now  a  third  to. 
wards  the  full,  for  the  first  time  this  eveniug.  The 
air  was  cold  and  braeing. 

But  I  am  excessively  sleepy,  so  will  not  describe  our 
great  dreary  hotel,  where  a  blast  howled  in  an  inter- 
minable corridor  all  night.  It  did  not  seem  to  have 
anything  to  do  with  the  wind  out  of  doors,  but  to  be  a 
blast  that  had  been  casually  shut  in  wheu  tlie  doors 
were  closed  behind  the  last  Grand  Duke  who  came 
hither  and  departed,  and  ever  since  it  has  been  kepf 
prisoner,  and  makes  a  melancholy  wail  along  the 


1858.]  ITALY.  467 

ridor.    Tlie  dreamy  stupidity  of  the  conceit  proves  botr 
aleepy  I  am. 

6ETTE   VENE. 

Ortober  \bOi.  —  We  left  Radicofani  long  before 
Biuirise,  and  I  saw  that  ceremony  take  pla«e  from  the 
eoiip^  of  the  vcttura  for  the  first  time  in  a  long  while. 
A  sunset  is  the  better  sight  of  the  two.  I  have  always 
suspected  it,  and  have  been  strengthened  in  the  idea 
whenever  I  have  had  an  opportunity  of  compariaon. 
Our  departure  from  Radicofani  was  most  dreary,  ex- 
cept that  we  were  very  glad  to  get  away ;  but  the  eold 
discomfort  of  dressing  in  a  chill  bedroom  by  candle- 

■  light,  and  our  uncertain  wandering  through  the  im- 
\  vense  hotel  with  a  dim  taper  in  search  of  the  break- 

■  fast -room,  and  our  poor  breakfast  of  e^«,  Italian 
bread,  and  coffee.  —  all  these  things  made  me  wish 
that  people  were  created  with  roots  like  trees,  so  that 
they  could  oot  befool  themselves  with  wandering  about. 
However,  we  had  not  long  been  on  our  way  before  the 
morning  w  blew  away  all  our  troubles,  and  we  rum- 
bled cheerfidly  onward,  ready  to  encounter  even  the 
papal  custom  house  officers  at  Poiite  Centiuo.  Our 
road  thither  was  a  pretty  steep  desci:nt.  I  remember 
the  barren  landscape  of  hills,  with  here  and  there  a 
lonely  farm-house,  which  there  seemed  to  be  no  occa- 
Bion  for,  where  nothing  grew. 

At  Ponte  Centino  my  passport  was  examined,  and 
1  waA  invited  into  an  ofBce  where  sat  the  papal  cus- 
tom house  officer,  a  thin,  subtle  -  looking,  keen -eyed, 
sallow  personage,  of  aspect  very  suitable  to  be  the 
agent  of  a  government  of  priests,  I  communicated  to 
him  my  wish  to  pass  the  custom  house  without  giving 
the  officers  the  trouble  of  examining  my  lu^age.    He 


4C8   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [ISBfc 

inquired  whether  I  bad  any  dutiable  articles,  and 
wrote  for  my  sij^nature  a  declaration  in  tba  negative; 
and  tben  be  lifted  a  simd-bux,  beneatb  whicb  was  a 
little  beap  of  silver  coiuA.  On  this  delicate  bint  I 
anked  what  was  the  usual  fee,  aud  was  told  that  fifteen 
pauls  was  the  proper  snm.  I  presume  it  was  entirely 
an  illegal  charge,  and  that  he  had  no  right  to  pass  any 
luggage  without  examination ;  but  the  thing  is  winked 
at  by  the  authorities,  and  no  money  is  better  spent  for 
the  traveller's  convenieQce  than  these  fifteen  pauls. 
I'here  was  a  papal  military  oflicer  in  the  room,  anrl 
he,  I  beUeve,  cheated  me  in  the  change  of  a  Napoleon, 
as  hia  share  of  the  8i>oIl.  At  the  door  a  soldier  met 
me  witli  ray  passport,  and  looked  as  if  he  expected 
a  fee  for  handing  it  to  me,  but  in  this  he  was  disap- 
pointed. After  I  had  resumed  my  seat  in  the  f^oupi^, 
the  porter  of  the  custom  house  —  a  poor,  sickly  look- 
ing creature,  half  dead  with  the  malaria  of  the  place 
—  appeared,  and  demanded  a  fee  for  doing  nothing  to 
my  luggage.  He  got  tliree  panls,  and  looked  but  half 
contented.  This  whole  set  of  men  seem  t'O  be  as  cor- 
rupt as  official  people  can  possibly  be ;  and  yet  I 
hardly  know  whether  to  stigmatize  them  as  oomipt, 
beeauae  it  is  not  their  individual  delinquency,  but  the 
Operation  of  a  regular  system.  Their  superiors  know 
what  men  they  are,  and  calcidate  upon  their  getting  a 
living  by  just  these  means.  Aud,  indeed,  the  custom 
house  and  passport  regulations,  as  they  exist  in  Italy, 
would  be  intolerable  if  there  were  not  this  facility  of 
evading  them  at  little  coat.  Such  laws  are  good  fot 
nothing  but  to  be  broken. 

We  now  began  to  ascend  again,  and  the  country 
grew  fertile  and  picturesque.  We  passed  many  mule.' 
and  donkeys,  laden  with  a  sort  of  deep  Srkin  on  e 


if  deep  Srkin  on  euj^— 


^vaact 


I8S8.]  ITALY.  469 

side  of  tie  saddle,  and  tteae  were  heaped  up  with 
grapes,  both  purple  and  whit*.  We  bought  some,  and 
got  what  we  uhuuld  have  thought  an  abimdauee  at 
small  price,  only  we  used  to  get  twice  as  many  at 
MoDtauto  for  the  same  money.  However,  a  Roman 
paul  bought  us  three  or  four  pounds  even  here.  We 
still  ascended,  and  came  soon  to  the  gateway  of  the 
town  of  Acquapendente^  which  stands  on  a  height  that 
seems  to  descend  by  natural  terraces  to  the  valley  be- 
low, .  .  . 

French  soldiers,  in  their  bluish-gray  coats  and  scar- 
let trousers,  were  on  duty  at  the  gate,  and  one  of  them 
took  my  passport  and  the  vetturino's,  and  we  then 
drove  into  the  town  to  wait  till  they  should  be  vist!d. 
We  saw  but  one  street,  narrow,  with  tall,  rusty,  aged 
bouses,  built  of  stone,  evil  smelling ;  in  short,  a  kind 
of  place  that  would  be  intolerably  dismal  in  cloudy 
England,  and  cannot  be  called  clieerful  even  under 
the  sun  of  Italy.  .  .  .  Priests  passed  and  burly  fnars, 
one  of  whom  was  carrying  a  wine-barrel  on  his  head. 
Little  carts,  laden  with  firkins  of  grapes,  and  donkeys 
with  the  same  genial  burden,  brushed  past  our  vettura, 
finding  scarce  room  enough  in  thfi  narrow  street.  All 
the  idlers  of  Acquapendente  —  and  tlieywere  many  — 
assembled  to  gaze  at  us,  but  not  discourteously.  In- 
deed, I  never  saw  an  idle  curiosity  exercised  in  such 
a  pleasant  way  as  by  the  country-people  of  Italy.  It 
almost  deserves  to  be  called  a  kindly  interest  and  8ym< 
pathy,  instead  of  a  hard  and  cold  curiosity,  like  that 
of  our  own  people,  and  it  is  displayed  with  such  sim- 
plicity that  it  hi  evident  no  offence  is  intended. 

By  and  by  tlie  vetturino  brought  his  passport  and  my 
own,  with  the  official  visiS  and  we  kept  on  our  way,  still 
ascending,  passing  through  vineyards  and  olives,  and 


470   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [1838. 

meeting  grape-laden  donkeys,  till  we  came  to  the  town 
of  San  Lorenzo  Nuovo,  a  place  built  by  Pius  VI.  aa 
the  refuge  for  the  people  of  a  lower  town  which  had 
been  made  uninhabitable  by  malaria.  The  new  town, 
which  I  suppose  is  hundreds  of  years  old,  with  all  its 
novelty  shows  strikingly  the  difference  between  plae«a 
that  grow  up  and  shape  out  their  streets  of  their  own 
accord,  as  it  were,  and  one  that  is  built  on  a  settled 
plan  of  malice  aforethought.  This  little  rural  village 
has  gates  of  classic  arcluteeture,  a  spacious  piazza,  and 
a  great  breadth  of  straight  and  rectangidar  streets, 
with  houses  of  uniform  style,  airy  and  wholesome  look* 
ing  to  a  degree  seldom  seen  on  the  Continent.  Never- 
theless, I  must  say  that  the  town  looked  hatefully  dull 
and  ridiculously  prim,  and  of  the  tw^  I  had  ratlier 
spend  my  life  in  Radieofani.  We  drove  through  it, 
from  gato  to  gate,  without  stopping,  and  soon  eame  to 
the  brow  of  a  hill,  whence  wc  beheld,  right  beneath  us, 
the  beautiful  lake  of  Bolaena ;  not  exactly  at  our  feet, 
however,  for  a  portion  of  level  ground  lay  between, 
haunted  by  the  pestilence  which  has  depopulatod  all 
these  shores,  and  made  the  lake  and  its  neighborhood 
a  solitude.  It  looked  very  beautiful,  nevertheless, 
with  a  sheen  of  a  silver  and  a  gray  like  that  of  steel  as 
the  wind  blew  and  the  sun  shone  over  it ;  and,  judging 
by  my  own  feelings,  I  shoultl  really  have  thought  that 
the  breeze  from  its  surface  was  bracing  and  healthy. 

Descending  the  hill,  we  passed  tlie  ruins  of  the  old 
town  of  San  Lorenzo,  of  which  the  prim  village  on 
the  hill-top  may  be  considered  the  daughter.  There 
is  certainly  no  resemblance  between  parent  and  child, 
the  former  being  situated  on  a  sort  of  precipitous 
bluff,  where  there  coidd  have  been  no  room  for  piazzaa 
and  spacious  streets,  nor  accessibility  except  by  molei. 


ly  mmM,     ^ 


3 


ITALY. 


471 


[■  doukeys,  goats,  aiid  people  of  Alpine  habita.  There 
I  was  aa  ivy-covered  tower  on  the  top  of  the  bluS,  and 
I  some  arched  cavern  moutlis  that  looked  as  if  they 
opened  into  the  great  darkness.  These  were  the  en- 
trances to  Etniscan  tombs,  for  the  town  on  top  had 
been  originally  Etruscan,  and  the  inhabitants  had 
buried  themselves  in  the  heart  of  the  precipitous  blufEg 
after  spending  their  lives  on  its  summit 

Reaching  the  plain,  we  drove  several  miles  along 
the  shore  of  the  lake,  and  found  the  soil  fertile  and 
generally  well  cultivated,  especially  with  the  vine, 
though  there  were  tracts  apparently  too  marshy  to  be 
put  to  any  agricultural  purpose.  We  met  now  and 
then  a  flock  of  sheep,  watched  by  sallow-looking  and 
spiritless  men  and  boys,  who,  we  took  it  for  granted, 
would  soon  perish  of  malaria,  though,  I  presume,  they 
never  spend  their  nights  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of 
the  lake.  I  should  like  to  inquire  whether  animals 
Buffer  from  the  bad  qualities  of  the  air.  The  lake  is 
not  nearly  so  beautiful  on  a  nearer  view  as  it  is  from 
the  hill  above,  tliere  being  no  rocky  margin,  nor 
bright,  sandy  beach,  but  everywhere  this  interval  of 
level  ground,  and  often  swampy  marsh,  betwixt  the 
water  and  the  hill.  At  a  considerable  distance  from 
the  shore  we  saw  two  islands,  one  of  which  is  memora- 
ble as  having  been  the  scene  of  an  empress's  murder, 
but  I  cannot  stop  to  fill  my  journal  with  historical 
reminiscences. 

We  kept  onward  to  the  town  of  Bolsena,  which 
stands  nearly  a  mile  from  the  lake,  and  on  a  site 
higher  than  the  level  margin,  yet  not  so  much  so,  t 
should  apprehend,  an  to  free  It  from  danger  of  malaria. 
We  stopped  at  an  albergo  outside  of  the  wall  of  ths 
town,  and  before  dinner  had  time  to  see  a  good  deal 


472  FliENCH  AND   ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [IS 

of  the  neighborhood.  The  first  aspect  of  the  tow 
was  very  striking,  with  a  vista  into  its  street  through 
the  open  gateway,  and  high  above  it  an  old,  gray, 
B(]uBre-buiIt  castle,  with  three  towers  visible  at  the 
angles,  one  of  them  battleniented,  one  taller  tluui 
rest,  aiid  one  partiuUy  ruined.  Outside  of  the  to 
gate  there  were  some  fraguienbi  of  Eti-uscan  nin  _ 
capitals  of  pillars  and  altars  with  inscriptions  ;  these 
we  glanced  at,  and  then  made  our  entrance  through 
the  gate. 

There  it  was  again,  — the  same  narrow,  dirty,  time- 
darkened  street  of  piled-up  houses  which  we  have  so 
often  seen ;  the  same  swarm  of  ill-to-do  people,  gmpe- 
lailen  donkeys,  little  stands  or  shops  of  roasted  chest- 
nuts, peaches,  tomatoes,  white  and  purple  figs ;  the 
same  evidence  of  a  fertile  land,  and  grimy  poverty  in 
the  midst  of  abundance  which  nature  tries  to  heap 
their  hands.  It  seems  strange  that  they  can  n 
graap  it. 

Wc  had  gone  but  a  little  way  along  this  street  w] 
we  saw  a  narrow  lane  that  turned  asi<to  from  it 
went  steeply  upward.     Its  name  was  on  the  coi 
—  the  Via  di  Castello, — and  as  the  castle  pi-oi 
to  be  more  interesting  than  anything  else,  we  \\aan 
ately  began  to  ascend.     The  street  —  a  strange  m 
for  such  an  avenue  —  clambered  upward  in  the  oddest 
fashion,  passing  under  arches,  scrambling  up  steps,  so 
that  it  was  more   like  a  long  in-egular  pair  of  stairs 
than  anything  that  Christians  cull  a  street ;  and 
large  a  part  of  it  was  under  arches  that  we  scarcel] 

seemed  to  be  out  of  doors.     At  last  U ,  who  wi 

in  advance,  emerged  into  the  upper  air,  and  cried  out 
that  we  had  ascended  to  an  upper  town,  and  a  larger 
gue  than  that  beneath. 


'^^1 


TTALV.  473 

It  really  seemed  like  coming  up  out  of  the  earth 
I  into  the  midst  of  the  towii.  when  we  found  ourselves 
I  BO  unexpectedly  in  upper  Bolsena.     We  were  in  a  lit- 
tle nook,  surrounded  by  old  ediBces,  and  called  the 
Piazza  del  Orolo^o,  on  account  of  a  clock  that  waa 
apparent  somewhere.      The  castle  waa  close  by,  and 
from  its  platform  there  was  a  splendid  view  of  the 
lake  and  all  the  near  hill-country.     The  castle  itseJf  is 
still  in  good  condition,  and  apparently  as  strong  aa 
,   ever  it  was  as  respects  the  exterior  walls ;  but  within 
I  there  seemed  to  be  neither  floor  nor  chamber,  nothing 
I  bnt  the  empty  shell  of  the  dateless  old  fortress.     The 
I   stones  at  the  base  and  lower  part  of  the  building  wer6 
so  massive  that  I   should  think  the  Etrurians  must 
have  laid  them ;  and  then  perhaps  the  Romans  built  a 
,  little  higher,  and  the  mediaeval  people  raiseil  the  bat- 
b  tlementa  and  towers.     But  we  did  not  look  long  at  the 
I  castle,  our  attention  being  drawn  to  the  suigular  as- 
r  pect  of  the  town  itself,  which  —  to  speak  first  of  its 
most  prominent  characteristic  —  is  the   very  filthiest 
place,  I  do  believe,  that  was  ever  inhabited  by  man. 
Defilement  was  everywhere ;  in  the  piazza,  in  nooks 
and  comers,  strewing  the  miserable  lanes  fi-om  side  to 
side,  the  refuse  of  every  day,  and  of  accumulated  ages. 
I  wonder  whether  the  ancient  Romans  were  as  dirty 
a  people  aa  we  everywhere  find  those  who  have  auc- 
ceeded  them  ;  for  there  seems  t«  have  been  something 
in  the  places  that  have  been  inhabited  by  Romans,  or 
ma«^le  famous  in  their  history,  and  in  the  monuments 
of  every  kind  that  they  have  raised,  that  puts  peojild 
in  mind  of  their  very    eartbiness,  and  incites  them  to 
defile  therewith  whatever  temple,  column,  ruined  pal- 
ace, or  triumphal  arch  may  fall  in  their  way.     I  think 
it  must  be  an  hereditary  trait,  probably  weakened  and 


474   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [IMS. 

robbtid  of  a  little  of  its  horror  by  the  influence  of 
tnililer  ages ;  Riid  I  ajn  much  af mi<l  that  Cesar  trcx] 
narrower  and  fouler  ways  in  his  path  to  power  thaa 
those  of  nitxlem  Kome,  or  even  of  this  disgusticg 
town  of  Bnlseua.  I  cannot  imagine  anything  worse 
than  theae,  however.  Rotten  vegetables  thrown  every- 
where  about,  musty  straw,  standing  puddles,  running 
rivulets  of  dissolved  nastiness,  —  these  matters  were  a 
relief  amid  viler  objects.  The  town  was  full  of  great 
black  bogs  wallowing  before  every  door,  and  they 
grunted  at  us  with  a  kind  of  courtesy  and  affability  us 
if  the  town  were  theirs,  and  it  was  their  part  to  be 
hospitable  to  strangers.  Many  donkeys  likewise  ac- 
costed us  with  braying;  cliildren,  growing  more  un- 
cleanly every  day  they  lived,  pestered  us  with  begging; 
men  HtartKl  askance  at  us  as  they  loimged  in  comers, 
and  women  endangered  us  with  slops  which  they  were 
flinging  from  doorways  into  the  street.  No  decent 
words  can  describe,  no  admissible  image  can  give  an 
idea  of  this  noisome  place.  And  yet,  I  remember,  the 
donkeys  came  up  the  height  loaded  with  fmit,  and  with 
little  flat-sided  barrels  of  wine;  the  people  bad  a  good 
atmosphere  —  except  as  they  polluted  it  themselves  — 
on  their  high  site,  and  there  seemed  to  be  no  reuoo 
why  they  should  uot  live  a  beautiful  and  jolly  life. 

I  did  not  mean  to  write  such  an  ugly  description 
as  the  above,  but  it  is  well,  once  for  all,  to  have  at- 
tempted conveying  an  idea  of  what  disgusts  the  trav- 
eller, more  or  less,  in  all  these  Italian  towns.  Setting 
aside  this  grand  eharacteristio,  the  upper  town  of  Bot- 
Bena  is  a  most  curious  and  interesting  place.  It  was 
originally  an  Etruscan  city,  the  ancient  Volsinii,  and 
when  taken  and  destroyed  by  the  Romans  was  said  to 
ocmtain  two  thousand   statues.     Afterwards  the  S^ 


i 


«■] 


471 


I 

i 


mans  built  a  town  upon  the  site,  including,  I  suppose, 
the  space  occupied  by  the  lower  city,  which  looks  as  if 
it  Im^l  brimmed  over  like  Radicofaoi,  and  fallen  from 
the  precipitous  height  occupied  by  the  upper.  The 
latter  is  a  strange  confusion  of  black  and  ugly  housea, 
piled  massively  out  of  the  ruins  of  former  ages,  bnilt 
rudely  and  without  plan,  as  a  pauper  would  build  bis 
hovel,  and  yet  with  here  and  there  an  arched  gateway, 
a  cornice,  a  pillar,  that  might  have  adorned  a  palace. 
,  .  .  The  streets  are  the  narrowest  I  have  seen  any- 
where, —  of  no  more  width,  indeed,  than  may  suffice 
for  the  passage  of  a  donkey  with  his  panniers.  They 
wind  in  and  out  in  strange  confusion,  and  hardly  look 
like  streets  at  all,  but,  nevertheless,  have  names 
printed  on  the  comers,  just  as  if  they  were  stately 
avenues.  After  looking  about  us  awhile  and  drawing 
half-breaths  so  as  to  take  in  the  less  quanti^  of  gas- 
eous pollution,  we  went  back  to  the  castle,  and  de- 
scended by  a  path  winding  downward  from  it  into  the 
plain  outside  of  the  town-gate. 

It  was  now  dinner-time,  .  .  .  and  we  had,  in  the 
first  place,  some  fish  from  the  pestiferous  lake ;  not, 
I  am  sorry  to  say,  the  famous  stewed  eela  which, 
Dante  says,  killed  Pope  Martin,  but  some  trout.  .  .  . 
By  the  by,  the  meal  was  not  dinner,  but  our  midday 
colazione.  After  despatching  it,  we  again  wandered 
forth  and  strolled  round  the  outside  of  the  lower  town, 
which,  with  the  upper  one,  made  as  picturesque  a  com- 
bination as  could  be  desired.  The  old  wall  that  sur- 
rounds the  lower  town  has  been  appropriated,  long 
since,  as  the  back-wall  of  a  range  of  houses  ;  windows 
have  been  pierced  through  it  ;  upper  chamliers,  and 
loggie  have  been  built  upon  it ;  so  that  it  looks  som*- 
thing  like  a  long  row  of  rural  dwellings  with  one  oo» 


478   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [1858. 


tinuous  front  or  La<rk,  constructed  in  a  strange  styla 
of  massivo  strength,  contrasting  with  the  vines  that 
here  and  there  are  trained  over  it,  and  witli  the 
wreatliB  of  yellow  corn  that  Imng  from  the  windows. 
But  poi-tions  of  the  oM  battlements  are  interspersed 
with  the  line  of  homely  chambers  and  tiled  bouso-tojis. 
Within  the  wall  the  town  is  very  comjiact,  and  above 
its  roofs  rises  a  rock,  the  sheer,  precipitous  bluff  on 
which  stands  the  upper  town,  whose  foundations  im- 
pend over  the  highest  roof  in  the  lower.  At  one  end 
is  the  old  castle,  with  its  towers  rising  above  the 
square  battlemented  mass  of  the  main  fortress,  and  if 
we  had  not  seen  the  dirt  and  squalor  that  dwells  with- 
in this  venerable  outside,  we  should  have  carried 
away  a  picture  of  gray,  grim  dignity,  presented  by  a, 
long  pitst  age  to  the  present  one,  to  put  its  mean  ways 

and  niodcA  to  abatne.     sat  diligently  sketching, 

and  children  came  about  her,  exceedirgly  unfragriuit, 
but  very  courteous  and  gentle,  looking  over  her  shoul* 
ders,  and  expressing  delight  as  they  saw  each  fauiiliu 
etlifice  take  its  place  in  the  sketch.  They  are  a  ior 
able  people,  these  Italians,  as  I  tind  from  almost  all 
with  whom  we  come  in  contact ;  tbey  have  great  and 
little  faults,  and  no  great  virtues  that  I  know  of;  but 
still  are  sweet,  amiable,  pleasant  to  encounter,  save 
when  they  beg,  or  when  you  have  to  bargain  1  '  ~ 
them. 

We  left  Bolsena  and  drove  to  Viterbo,  passing  t 
gate  of  the  picturesque  town  of  Monte flasc^ne,  ovc 
the  wall  of  which  I  saw  spires  and  towers,  and  tb#l 
dome  of  a  cathedral.     1  was  sorry  not  to  taste,  in  ii 
own    town,  the   celebrated   est,  which  was  tlie  death- 
draught  of   the  jolly  pi-elate.     At  Viterbo,  however, 
I  called  for  some  wine  of  Montefiascone,  and  had  V 


t8S8.] 

little  straw-oovered  flask, ' 
was  the  genuiui!  est-wiiie. 


471 


which  the  waiter  assured  aa 
It  was  of  golden  color,  and 
very  delicate,  somewhat  resembling  still  champagne, 
but  finer,  and  requiring  a  calmer  pause  to  appreciate 
its  subtle  delight  Its  good  qualities,  however,  are  so 
evanescent,  that  the  finer  flavor  became  almost  impen- 
ceptihie  before  we  finished  the  flask. 

Viterbo  ia  a  large,  disagreeable  town,  built  at  tlie 
foot  of  a  mountain,  the  peak  of  wluch  is  seen  through 
the  vista  of  some  of  the  narrow  streets.  .  .  . 

There  are  moi-e  fountains  in  Viterbo  than  I  have 
seen  in  any  other  city  of  its  size,  and  many  of  them 
of  very  good  design.  Around  most  of  them  there  were 
wine-hogsheads,  waiting  their  turn  to  be  cleansetl  and 
rinsed,  before  receiving  the  wine  of  the  present  vin- 
tage. Passing  a  doorway,  J saw  some  men  tread- 
ing out  the  grapes  in  a  great  vat  with  their  naked 
feet.  .  .  . 

Among  the  beggars  here,  the  loudest  and  most  vo- 
ciferous was  a  crippled  postilion,  wearing  his  uniform 
jacket,  green,  faced  with  red  ;  and  he  seemed  to  con- 
eider  himself  entitled  still  to  get  liia  living  from  trav- 
ellers, as  having  been  disabled  in  the  way  of  his  pro* 
fession.  I  recognizeil  his  claim,  and  was  rewarded 
with  a  courteous  and  grateful  bow  at  our  depiirture. 
...  To  beggars  —  after  my  much  experience  both 
in  England  and  Italy  —  I  give  very  little,  though  1 
am  not  certain  that  it  would  not  oft«n  be  real  benef- 
icence in  the  latter  country.  There  being  little  or  no 
provision  for  poverty  and  age,  the  poor  must  often 
KufEer.  Nothing  can  be  more  earnest  than  their  en- 
treaties  for  aid ;  nothing  seemingly  more  genuine  than 
flieir  gratitude  when  they  receive  it.  They  return  yoo 
the  value  of  their  alma  in  prayers,  and  say,  *'  God  will 


eloatk 


*78   FRENCH  AND   ITALIAN  NOTE-BUORS.   [ISftS. 

Mcompany  you."  Many  of  tltem  have  a  professional 
whine,  and  a  certain  doleful  twist  of  the  net^k  and 
turn  of  the  hea^l,  which  liardeua  my  heart  against 
them  at  once.  A  painter  might  find  numerous  niudels 
among  them,  if  canvas  had  not  already  been  mora 
than  sufBciently  covered  with  their  style  of  the  pict- 
uresque. There  is  a  certain  brick-dust  colored  eloatk 
worn  in  Viterbo,  not  exclusively  by  beggars, 
when  ragged  enough,  is  exceedingly  artistic. 

ROME. 

68  Piazza  PoU,  October  \1tk.  —  We  left  Viterbo 
on  the  15tb,  and  proceeded,  through  Monterosi,  to 
Sette  Vene.  There  was  nothing  interesting  at  Sette 
Vene,  except  an  old  Roman  bridge,  of  a  single  arch, 
which  had  kept  its  sweep,  composed  of  one  row  of 
stones,  unbroken  for  two  or  more  thousand  years,  and 
looked  just  as  strong  as  ever,  though  gray  with  age, 
and  fringed  with  plants  tliat  found  it  hard  to  fix  thein> 
selves  in  its  close  crevices. 

The  next  day  we  drove  along  the  Caasiau  Way  to- 
wards Rome.  It  was  a  most  delightful  morning,  a 
genial  atmosphere;  the  more  so,  I  suppose,  because 
this  was  the  Campagna,  the  region  of  pestilence  and 
death.  I  had  a  quiet,  gentle,  comfortable  pleasure, 
as  if,  after  many  wanderings,  I  was  drawing  near 
Rome,  for,  now  that  I  have  known  it  once,  Rome  cer- 
tainly does  draw  into  itself  my  heart,  as  I  think  even 
London,  or  even  little  Concord  itself,  or  old  sleepy 
Salem,  never  did  and  never  will.  Besides,  we  are  to 
atay  here  six  months,  and  we  had  now  a  house  all  pre. 
pared  to  receive  us  ;  so  that  this  present  approach,  in 
the  noontide  of  a  genial  day,  was  most  unlike  our  first 
Due,  when  we  crept  towards  Rome  through  the  wintiy 


I 


ITALY. 


479 


midnight,  beniinibed  with  cold,  ill,  weary,  and  not 

knowing  whither  to  betake  oureelvea,     Ah !  tliat  was 

a  dismal  time  !     One  thing,  however,  tliat  diciturbtiil 

even  my  present  equniiimity  a  little  was  the  necessity 

of  meeting  the  custom  house  at  the  Porta  del  Popolo ; 

but  my  past  experience  warranted  me  in  believing  that 

I    even  these  ogres  might  be  mollified  by  the  ma^c  touch 

ft  of  a  Bcudo ;  and  so  it  proved.     We  should  have  es- 

t  caped  any  examination  at  all.  the  ofiicer  whispered 

I    me,  if  his  superior  had  not  happened  to  be  present ; 

but.  as  the  case  stood,  tliey  took  down  only  one  trunk 

from  the  top  of  the  vettura,  just  lift«d  the  lid,  closed 

it  again,  and  gave  us  permission  to  proceed.     So  we 

came  to  68  Piazza  Poli,  and  found  ourselves  at  once  at 

home,  in  such  a  comfortable,  cosey  little  house,  as  I 

did  not  think  existed  in  Rome. 

I  ought  to  say  a  word  about  our  vetturino,  Constan- 
tino Bacci,  an  excellent  and  most  favorable  specimen 
of  his  class;  for  his  magnificent  conduct,  his  liberality, 
L  and  all  the  good  qualities  that  ought  to  be  imperial, 

\  S called  him  the  Emperor.     He  took  us  to  good 

.  hotels,  and  feasted  us  with  the  best ;  he  was  kind  to 
ns  all,  and  especially  to  little  Rosebud,  who  used  to 
run  by  his  side,  with  her  small  white  hand  in  his  great 
brown  one ;  he  was  cheerful  in  his  deportment,  and 
expressed  his  good  spirits  by  the  smack  of  his  whip, 
which  is  the  barometer  of  a  vetturino*s  inward  weather; 
lie  drove  admirably,  and  woiUd  rumble  up  to  the  door 
of  an  albergo,  and  stop  to  a  hairVbreadth,  just  where 
it  was  most  convenient  for  ua  to  alight ;  he  would  hire 
postilions  and  horses,  where  otiier  vetturini  would  taku 
nothing  better  than  sluggish  oxen,  to  help  us  up  the 
billy  roads,  so  that  sometimes  we  had  a  team  of  seven ; 
ke  did  all  that  we  could  possibly  require  of  him,  and 


480  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-^BOOKS.  [ISMl 

was  content,  and  more,  with  a  btum  mano  of  five  sondi, 
in  addition  to  the  stipulated  price.  Finally,  I  think 
the  tears  had  risen  almost  to  his  eyelids  when  we 
parted  with  him. 

Our  friends,  the  Thompsons,  through  whose  kind* 
ness  we  procured  this  house,  called  to  see  us  soon  after 
our  arrival.  In  the  afternoon,  I  walked  with  Rosebud 
to  the  Medici  Gardens,  and,  on  our  way  thither,  we 
espied  our  former  servant,  Lalla,  who  flung  so  many 
and  such  bitter  curses  after  us,  on  our  departure  from 
Rome,  sitting  at  her  father's  f ruitstall.  Thank  God, 
they  have  not  taken  effect.  After  going  to  the  Medici, 
we  went  to  the  Pincian  Gardens,  and  looked  over  into 
the  Borghese  grounds,  which,  methought,  were  more 
beautiful  than  ever.  The  same  was  true  of  the  sky, 
and  of  every  object  beneath  it ;  and  as  we  came  home- 
ward along  the  Corso,  I  wondered  at  the  stateliness 
and  palatial  magnificence  of  that  noble  street  Once, 
I  remember,  I  thought  it  narrow,  and  far  unworthy  of 
its  fame. 

In  the  way  of  costume,  the  men  in  goatskin  breeches, 
whom  we  met  on  the  Campagna,  were  very  striking, 
and  looked  like  Satyrs. 

October  2l8t  — .  .  .  I  have  been  twice  to  St. 
Peter's  and  was  impressed  more  than  at  any  former 
visit  by  a  sense  of  breadth  and  loftiness,  and,  as  it 
were,  a  visionary  splendor  and  magnificence.  I  also 
went  to  the  Museum  of  the  Capitol ;  and  the  statues 
seemed  to  me  more  beautiful  than  formerly,  and  I 
was  not  sensible  of  the  cold  despondency  with  which 
I  have  so  often  viewed  them.  Yesterday  we  went  to 
the  Corsini  Palace,  which  we  had  not  visited  before. 
It  stands  in  the  Trastevere,  in  the  Longara,  and  is  a 


«.] 


ITALY. 


481 


Btately  palace,  with  n  grand  staircase,  leading  to  the 
first  floor,  where  is  situated  tlie  range  of  picture- 
rooms.  There  were  a  good  niauy  fine  pictures,  but 
none  of  them  have  made  a  memorable  impression  on 
my  mind,  except  a  portriut  by  Vandyke,  of  a  man  in 
point-lace,  very  grand  and  very  real.  The  room  in 
which  this  picture  hung  had  many  other  portraits 
by  Holbein,  Titian,  Rembrandt,  Rubens,  and  other 
famous  painters,  and  was  wonderfully  rich  in  this  d^ 
paitraent.  In  another,  there  was  a  portrait  of  Pope 
Julius  II.,  by  Raphael,  somewhat  differing  from  those 
at  the  Pitti  and  the  Uffizzi  galleries  in  Florence,  and 
those  I  have  seen  in  England  and  Paris ;  thinner, 
paler,  perhaps  older,  more  severely  intellectual,  but  at 
least  as  high  a  work  of  art  as  those. 

The  palace  has  some  handsome  old  furniture,  and 
^ded  chairs,  covered  with  leather  cases,  possibly 
relics  of  Queen  Christina's  time,  who  died  here.  I 
know  not  but  the  most  curious  object  was  a  curule'* 
chair  of  marble,  sculptured  all  out  of  one  piece,  and 
adorned  with  bas-reliefs.  It  is  supposed  to  be  Etrus- 
can. It  has  a  circular  back,  sweeping  roimd,  so  as 
to  afford  sufRcient  rests  for  the  elbows  ;  and,  sitting 
down  in  it,  I  discovered  that  modern  ingenuity  has 
not  made  much  real  improvement  or  this  chair  of 
three  or  four  thousand  years  ago.  But  some  chairs 
Are  easier  for  the  moment,  yet  soon  betray  you,  and 
grow  the  more  irksome. 

We  strolled  along  Longara,  and  found  tlie  piazza  of 
St.  Peter's  full  of  French  soldiers  at  their  drilL  ,  .  . 
We  went  quite  roimd  the  interior  of  the  church,  and 
perceiving  the  pavement  loose  and  broken  near  the 
altar  where  Guido's  Archangel  is  placed,  we  picked  up 


482   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [IBS?. 

some  bits  of  rosso  antico  and  gray  marble  to  be  set  in 
broochea,  as  relics. 

We  have  the  snuggest  little  set  of  apartments  iu 
Rome,  seven  rot>mH,  imploding  an  antechamber ;  and 
though  the  sUiira  are  exceedingly  narrow,  there  is  r^ 
ally  a  carpet  on  them,— a  civilized  comfort  of  which 
the  proudest  palaces  in  the  Et«.'maJ  City  eannot  IxHtnt. 
The  stairs  are  very  steep,  however,  and  I  should  not 
wonder  if  some  of  us  broke  our  noses  down  them. 
Narrowness  of  spaee  within  doors  strikes  us  all  rather 
ludicrously,  yet  not  unpleasantly,  after  being  accti*- 
toraed  to  the  wastes  and  deserts  of  the  Montauto  Villa. 
It  is  well  thus  to  be  put  in  training  for  the  over^snug- 
nesB  of  our  iH>ttuge  in  Conw>rd.  Our  windows  h«re 
look  out  on  a  small  and  rather  quiet  pifuua,  vrith  an 
immense  palaee  on  the  left  hand,  and  a  sttiidler  yet 
statelier  one  on  the  right ;  and  just  round  the  comer 
of  the  street,  leading  out  of  our  piazza,  is  the  Fountain 
'  of  Trevi,  of  which  I  can  hear  the  plash  in  the  evening, 
when  other  soun<ls  are  hushed. 

Looking  over  what  I  have  sud  of  Sodoma's  Christ 
Bound,  at  Siena,  I  see  that  I  have  omitted  to  imttue 
what  seems  to  me  one  of  its  most  striking  character- 
istics, —  its  loneliness.  You  feel  as  if  the  Saviour  wers 
deserted,  botli  in  heaven  and  earth  ;  the  desjiair  is  in 
him  which  made  him  say,  "  My  God,  why  hast  thou 
forsaken  me  ?  "  Kven  in  this  extremity,  however,  he 
is  still  Divine,  and  Sodoma  almost  seems  to  have 
reoonciled  the  impossibilities  of  combining  an  omni- 
present divinity  with  a  suffering  and  outraged  huniao- 
ity.  But  this  is  one  of  the  cases  in  which  the  ape 
tor's  imagination  completes  what  the  artist  i 
bints  at 

Mr. ,  the  sculptor,  called  to  see  us,  the  ( 


I 


ITALY.  483 

eveuing,  asd  quite  paid  Powers  off  for  all  Mb  tron- 
chant  criticisinH  on  his  brother  artiats.  He  will  not 
allow  Powers  to  be  an  artist  at  all,  or  to  know  any- 
thing of  the  laws  of  art,  altliough  acknowledging  hitn 
to  be  a  great  bust  -  maker,  and  to  have  put  together 
the  Greek  Slave  and  the  Fisher-Boy  very  ingeniously. 
The  latter,  however  (he  eays),  is  copied  from  the 
Ajmlliuo  in  the  Tribune  of  the  Uffizi ;  and  the  former 
is  made  up  of  beauties  tliat  had  no  reference  to  one 
mnother ;  and  he  afGrms  that  Powers  is  ready  to  sell, 
and  has  actually  sold,  the  Greek  Slave,  limb  by  limb, 
dismembering  it  by  reversing  the  process  of  putting  it 
together,  —  a  head  to  one  purchaser,  an  arm  or  a  foot 
to  another,  a  hand  to  a  third.  Powers  knows  nothing 
scientifically  of  the  human  frame,  and  only  succeeds 
in  representing  it,  as  a  natural  bone-doctor  succeeds  in 
setting  a  dislocated  limb,  by  a  happy  accident  or  spe- 
cial providence.     (The  illustration  was  my  own,  and 

adopted  by  Mr. .)     Yet  Mr.   seems  to  ae- 

kuowledge  that  he  did  succeed.  I  repeat  these  things 
only  as  another  instance  how  invariably  every  sculptor 
uses  his  chisel  and  mallet  to  smash  and  deface  the 
marble-work  of  every  other.     I  never  heard  Powers 

speak  of  Mr. ,  but  can  partly  imagine  what  he 

would  have  said. 

Mr.  spoke  of  Powers's  disappointment  about 

the  twenty-five-thousand-dollar  appropriation  from 
Congress,  and  said  that  he  was  altogether  to  blame,  in- 
asmncli  as  he  attempted  to  sell  to  the  nation  for  that 

sum  a  statue  which,  to  Mr. "s  certain  knowledge, 

he  had  already  offered  to  private  persons  for  a  fifth 

part  of  it.     I  have  not  implicit  faith  in  Mr. 's 

veracity,  and  doubt  not  Powers  acted  fairly  in  hia  own 
«yea. 


484    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [184& 

October  2id.  —  I  am  ainiiil  I  havo  caught  one  of 
the  colds  which  tlie  Roinau  air  continually  affected  me 
with  last  winter ;  at  any  rate,  a  sirocco  has  tak(>n  the 
life  out  of  me,  and  I  have  no  spirit  to  do  anything, 
Thi»  morning  I  took  a  walk,  however,  out  of  the  Porta 
Maggiore,  and  looked  at  tlie  tomb  of  the  baker  Eurj- 
Bacea,  just  outside  of  the  gate,  —  a  very  singular  ruin, 
covered  with  symbols  of  the  man's  trade  in  stonework, 
and  with  bas-reliefs  along  the  cornice,  representing 
people  at  work  making  bread.  An  inscription  states 
that  the  ashea  of  his  wife  are  likewise  repoeited  there, 
in  a  bread-bafiket.  The  mausoleum  is  perhaps  twenty- 
feet  long,  in  its  largest  extent,  and  of  equal  height ; 
and  if  goo<l  bakers  were  as  scarce  in  ancient  Rome  as 
in  the  modem  city,  I  do  not  wonder  that  they  were 
thouglit  worthy  of  stately  monuments.  None  of  the 
modern  ones  deserve  any  better  tomb  than  a  pile  of 
tlieir  own  sour  loaves. 

I  walked  onward  a  good  distance  beyond  the  gate 
alongside  of  the  arches  of  the  Claudian  aqueduct, 
which,  in  this  portion  of  it,  seems  to  have  had  little 
repair,  and  to  have  needed  little,  since  it  was  built. 
It  looks  like  a  long  procession,  striding  across  the 
Campagna  towards  the  city,  and  entering  the  gat« 
over  one  of  its  arches ;  within  the  gate,  I  saw  two  or 
three  slender  jets  of  water  spurting  from  the  crevices ; 
this  aqueduct  being  still  iu  use  to  bring  the  Ae<|un 
Felice  into  Rome. 

Returning  within  the  walls,  I  walked  along  their 
Inner  base  to  the  Church  of  St.  John  Lateran,  into 
which  I  went,  and  sat  down  to  rest  myself,  being  Ian. 
guid  and  weary,  and  hot  with  the  sun,  though  afraid 
to  trust  tho  coolness  of  the  shade.  I  hate  the  Roman 
atmosphere ;  indeed,  all  my  pleasure  in  getting 


Lre  in  getting  ha^^^ 


ITALY.  486 

L  • —  all  my  liome-feeling  —  hsa  already  evaporated,  and 
Iwhat  now  impresses  me,  as  before,  is  the   lauguor  of 
I  Borne,  —  its  weary  pavements,  its  little  life,  pressed 
down  by  a  weight  of  death. 

Quitting  St.  Jolm  Lateran.  I  went  astray,  as  I  do 
nine  times  out  of  ten  in  these  Roman  intricacies,  and 
at  last,  seeing  the  Coliseum  in  the  vista  of  a  street,  I 
betook  myself  thither  to  get  a  fresh  start.  Its  round 
of  stones  looked  vast  and  dreary,  but  not  particularly 
impressive.  The  interior  was  quite  deserted  ;  except 
that  a  Roman,  of  respectable  appearance,  was  mak- 
ing a  pilgrimage  at  the  altars,  kneeling  and  saying  a 
prayer  at  each  one. 

Outside  of  the  Coliseimi.  a  neat-looking  little  boy 
came  and  begged  of  me ;  and  I  gave  him  a  baioccho, 
rather  because  he  seemed  to  need  it  so  little  than  for 
any  other  reason.  I  observed  that  he  immediately  af- 
terwards went  and  spoke  to  a  well-dressed  man,  and 
Bupposed  that  the  child  was  likewise  begging  of  him. 
I  watched  the  little  boy,  however,  and  saw  that,  in 
two  or  three  other  instances,  aft«r  begging  of  other 
individuals,  he  still  returned  to  this  well-dressed  man  ; 
the  fact  being,  no  doubt,  that  the  latter  was  fishing 
for  baiocchi  through  the  medium  of  his  child,  — 
throwing  the  poor  little  fellow  out  as  a  bait,  while  he 
himself  retained  his  independent  respectability.  He 
had  probably  come  out  for  a  whole  day's  sport ;  for, 
by  and  by,  he  went  between  the  arches  of  the  Coli- 
seum, followed  by  the  child,  and  taking  with  him  what 
looked  like  a  bottle  of  wine,  wrapped  in  a  handker- 
^_   Bhief. 

^H      November  2d.  —  The  weather   lately  would   have 
^B'  ioited  one's  ideal  of  an  English  November,  except  that 


486  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [II 

there  have  been  no  fogs  ;  but  of  ugly,  hopeleaa  cloni 
chill,  sluvering  winilit,  drizzle,  anrl  now  auil  then  jmiii 
ing  rain,  much  more  Uian  enough.  An  Engliah  coal 
fire,  if  we  could  see  its  honest  face  within  dooni,  would 
compensate  for  all  the  un&miableness  of  the  outside 
atmosphere  ;  but  we  might  ask  for  the  Huusbine  of  the 
Now  Jerusalem,  with  as  much  hope  of  getting  it  It 
is  extremely  spirit  -  cruidiing,  this  remorseleBs  gray, 
with  its  icy  heart ;  and  the  more  to  depress  the  whole 

family,  U has  taken  what  seems  to  be  the  Roman 

fever,  by  sitting  down  in  the  Palace  of  the  Ceaars, 

while  Mrs,  S sketched  the  rains.  .  .  . 

[During  four  months  of  the  illness  of  his  daughl 
Mr.  Hawthorne  wrote  no  word  of  Journal.  —  Ed.J 


FEhntary  27(A,  1859,  —  For  many  days  past,  thi 
have  been  tokens  of  the  coming  Carnival  in  the  Corso 
and  the  adjacent  streets ;  for  example,  in  the  shops, 
by  the  display  of  masks  of  wire,  pasteboard,  silk,  or 
aloth,  some  of  beautiful  features,  others  hideous,  fan- 
tastic,  currish,  asinine,  huge-nosed,  or  otherwise  mon- 
strous ;  some  intended  to  i^over  the  whole  face,  others 
concealing  only  the  upjier  part,  also  white  ih>minoi*, 
or  robes  bedizened  with  gold-laee  and  theatric  splen* 
dors,  displayed  at  the  windows  of  mercers  or  flaunt- 
ing before  the  doors.     Yesterday,  U and  I  CAnie 

along  the  Corso,  between  one  and  two  o'clock,  after 
a  walk,  and  found  all  these  syni])tom8  of  imjiending 
merriment  multiplied  and  intensified  ;  .  .  .  rows  of 
chairs,  set  out  along  the  sidewalks,  elevated  a  foot  or 
two  by  means  of  planks ;  great  basketa,  full  of  nase- 
fetti,  for  sale  in  the  nooks  and  reeesses  of  tht 
bosquets  of  all  qualities  and  prices.  The  Corao 
becoming  pretty  well  thronged  with  people ;  but. 


ler^^^ 


e  streetin^H 
>>rao  wi^^H 
hut,aal|^H 


ITALY. 


487 


I 


two  o'clock,  nobody  dared  to  Hing  as  much  as  a  rose- 
bud or  a  handfiU  of  Biigar-plums,  There  was  a  sort 
of  holiday  expreaaion,  however,  on  almost  everybody's 
faee.  such  as  I  have  Dot  hitherto  seen  in  Rome,  or  in 
any  part  of  Italy  ;  a  smile  gleaming  out,  an  aurora  of 
mirth,  which  probably  will  not  be  very  exu1>eraQt  in 
its  noontide.  The  day  was  so  snnny  and  bright  that 
it  made  this  opening  scene  far  more  cheerful  tfian  any 
day  of  the  last  year's  Carnival.     As  we  threaded  our 

way  through  the  Corso,  U kept  wishing  she  could 

plunge  into  the  fuo  and  uproar  aa  J would ;  and 

for  my  own  part,  though  I  pretended  to  take  do  in- 
terest in  the  matter,  I  could  have  bandied  confetti  and 
nosegays  as  readily  and  aa  riotously  as  any  nrchin 
there.  But  my  black  hat  and  grave  talma  would  have 
been  too  good  a  mark  for  the  combatants,  ...  so  we 
vent  home  before  a  shot  was  fired.  .  .  ■ 


I 


I 


March  1th.  —  I,  aa  well  as  the  rest  of  the  family, 
have  followed  up  the  Carnival  pretty  faithfully,  and 
enjoyed  it  as  well,  or  rather  better,  than  could  have 
been  exi>ected ;  principally  in  the  street,  as  a  mere 
looker-on,  — which  does  not  let  one  into  the  mystery 
of  the  fun,  —  and  twice  from  a  balcony,  where  I  threw 
confetti,  and  partly  understood  why  the  young  people 
like  it  so  much.  Certainly,  there  cannot  well  be  a 
more  picturesque  spectacle  in  himian  life,  than  that 
stately,  palatial  avenue  of  the  Corso,  the  more  pict- 
uresque because  so  narrow,  all  hung  with  carpets  and 
Gobelin  tapestry,  and  the  whole  palace-heights  abve 
with  faces ;  and  all  the  capacity  of  the  street  thronged 
with  the  most  fantastic  figiuvs  that  either  the  fancies 
of  folks  alive  at  thia  day  are  able  to  contrive,  or  that 
Cve  traditionally  from  year  to  year.  .  .  .  The  Prince 


■nival  ^^ 


«88  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [1859. 

o£  Wales  hax  fought  manfully  tliroiigh  the  Carnival 

with  confetti  and  bouquets,  and  U reweivetl 

eral  bouquets  from  him,  on  Saturday,  ae  her  carl 
moved  along. 


March  8M.  —  I  went  with  U to  Mr.  MoU^y'a 

balcony,  in  the  Corso,  and  saw  the  Carnival  from  it 
yesterday  afternoon ;  but  the  sj>ecta4;le  is  straiigi^ly 
like  a  dream,  in  respect  to  the  difficulty  of  rrtaiuing 
it  in  the  mind  and  solidifying  it  into  a  description.  I 
enjoyed  it  a  good  deal,  and  assisted  in  so  far  ua 
pelt  all  the  people  in  cylinder  hats  with  handsfiil 
confetti.  The  scene  opens  with  a  lon^  array  of  OM^ 
airy,  who  ride  through  the  Corao,  preceded  by  a  large 
band,  playing  loudly  on  their  brazen  instruments.  . . . 
There  were  some  splendid  dresses,  particularly  cont&- 
dina  costumes  of  scarlet  and  gold,  which  seem  to  be 
actually  the  fcatal  attire  of  that  class  of  people,  and 
must  neeils  be  so  expensive  that  one  must  serve  for 
lifetime,  if  indeed  it  be  nut  an  inheritance. 


9 


March  9lh.  —  I  was,  yesterday,  an  hour  or  so  aim 
the  people  on  the  sidewalks  of  the  Corso,  just  on  the 
edges  of  the  fuu.     Thfy  appeared  to  be  in  a  decoroua, 
good-natured  mood,  neither  entering  into  the  i 
ment,  nor  harshly  repelling ;  and  when  groups  of 
era  overflowed  among  them,  they  received  their 
in  gooil  part.     Many  women  of  the  lower  class 
the  crowd  of  by-standers ;  generally  broad  and  a 
figures,  clad  CNndently  in  their  best  attire,  and 
tng  a  giKMl  many  ornaments;  such  as  gold  or 
beads  and  necklaces,  combs  of  silver  or  gold,  I 
ear-rings,  curiously  wrought  brooches,  jjerhaps 
or  mosaics,  though  I  think  they  prefer  purely 


1 


'   1859.] 


ITALY. 


489 


I 


work  to  tbese.  One  ornament  very  common  among 
them  is  a  large  Ixxlkin,  which  they  stick  through  their 
hair.  It  is  usually  of  silver,  but  sometimes  it  looks 
•  like  steel,  and  is  made  in  the  shape  of  a  sword,  —  a 
long  Spanish  thrustiug-sword,  for  example.  Dr.  Franco 
told  us  a  story  of  a  woman  of  Trastevere,  who  was 
addressed  rudely  at  the  Carnival  by  a  gentleman ;  she 
warned  him  to  desist,  but,  as  he  still  persisted,  elie 
drew  the  bodkin  from  her  h^r,  and  stabbed  him  to 
the  heart. 

By  and  by  I  went  to  Mr.  Motley's  balcony,  and 
looked  down  on  the  closing  scenes  of  the  Carnival, 
Methought  the  merry-makers  labored  harder  to  lie 
mirthful,  and  yet  were  somewhat  tired  of  their  eight 
play-days;  and  their  dresses  looked  a  little  shabby, 
rumpled,  and  draggled ;  but  the  lack  of  sunshine  — 
which  we  have  had  on  all  the  preceding  days  —  may 
have  produced  this  effect.  The  wheels  of  some  of  the 
carriages  were  wreathed  round  and  spoked  with  green 
foliage,  making  a  very  pretty  and  fanciful  appearance, 
as  did  likewise  the  harnesses  of  the  horses,  which  were 
trimmed  with  roses.  The  pervading  noise  and  uproar 
of  human  voices  is  one  of  the  most  effective  points  of 
the  matter  ;  but  the  ncene  is  quite  indescribable,  and 
its  e£Eect  not  to  be  conceived  without  both  witnessing 
and  taking  part  in  it.  If  you  merely  look  at  it,  it  dft. 
presses  you ;  if  you  take  even  the  sbghtest  share  in  it, 
you  become  aware  that  it  has  a  fascination,  and  you 
no  longer  wonder  that  the  young  people,  at  least,  tako 
Buch  delight  in  plunging  into  this  mail  river  of  fuu 
that  goes  roaring  between  the  narrow  limits  of  the 
Corso. 

As  twilight  came  on,  the  moccoli  commenced,  and, 
IS  it  grew  darker,  the  whole  street  twinkled  with  lights 


490   FREyCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [IMS. 

which  would  have  been  iimuiDerable  if  every  torolv 
bearer  had  not  been  surrounded  by  &  host  of  enejnieft, 
who  tried  to  extinguish  his  poor  little  twinkle.  It  was 
a  pity  to  lose  bo  ranch  splendor  as  there  might  have 
been ;  but  yet  there  was  a  kind  of  eymboliHiu  in  the 
thought  that  every  one  of  those  thousands  of  twink- 
ling lighttt  was  in  charge  of  somebody,  who  was  striv- 
ing with  all  bis  might  to  keep  it  alive.  Not  merely 
the  street-way,  but  all  the  balconies  and  hundreds  of 
windows  were  lit  up  with  these  little  turehes ;  so  that 
it  seemed  as  if  the  stars  luul  crumbled  into  glittering 
fragments,  and  raineil  down  upon  the  Corso,  some  of 
them  lodging  upon  the  palace  fronts,  »ome  falling  on 
the  ground.  Besides  this,  there  were  gas-lights  burn- 
ing witli  a  white  flame  ;  but  this  illumination  was  nut 
half  80  interesting  as  that  of  the  torches,  wliich  indi- 
cated human  atniggle.  All  this  time  there  were  myr- 
iad  voices  shouting,  "  Senza  uoccolo  I "  and  nung' 
Ung  into  one  long  roar.  We,  in  our  balcony,  carried 
on  a  civil  war  against  one  another's  torches,  as  is  the 
custom  of  human  beings,  within  even  the  uarroweat 
precincts  ;  but  afttT  a  while  we  grew  tired,  and  so  did 
the  crowd,  a])pai-ently ;  for  the  lights  vanished,  one 
after  another,  till  the  gas-lights  —  which  at  first  were 
an  unimportant  part  of  the  illumination  —  shone  quietly 
out,  overpowering  the  scattered  twinkles  of  the  moo 
coli.  They  were  what  the  fixed  stars  are  to  the  tran- 
sitory splendors  of  hiunan  life. 

Mr.  Motley  tells  me  that  it  was  formerly  the  cos- 
tom  to  have  a  mock  funeral  of  Harlequin,  who  was 
eupiHised  to  die  at  the  close  of  the  Carnival,  during 
which  he  had  reigned  supreme,  and  all  the  people,  ot 
as  many  as  chose,  bore  torches  at  his  burial.  But 
this  being  considered  an  indecorous  mockery  of  pc^uak 


I18S9.] 


ITALV. 


491 


I 


'  fimereal  customs,  the  present  frolio  of  the  mocooli  waa 
instituted,  —  in  some  sort,  growing  out  of  it. 

All  last  night,  oi  as  much  of  it  as  T  was  awake, 

[  tiiere  was  a  noise  of  song  and  l&t«  revellers  in  the 

I  streets ;  but  to-day  we  h&ve  waked  np  in  the  sad  and 

I  sober  season  of  Lent. 

'  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  all  the  jollity  of  the 
Carnival  is  a  genuine  ebullition  of  spirit,  without  the 
aid  of  wine  or  strong  drink. 

March  llth.  —  Yesterday  we  went  to  the  Catacomb 
of  St.  Calixtus,  the  entrance  to  which  is  alongside  of 
the  Appian  Way.  within  sight  of  the  tomb  of  Cecilia 
Metella.  We  descended  not  a  very  great  way  under 
ground,  by  a  broad  flight  of  stone  steps,  and,  lighting 
some  wax  tapers,  with  which  we  had  provided  ourselves, 
we  foDowed  the  guide  through  a  great  many  intricate 
pass^BS,  which  mostly  were  just  wide  enough  for  me 
to  touch  the  wall  on  each  side,  while  keeping  my  el- 
bows close  to  my  body ;  and  as  to  height,  they  were 
from  seven  to  ten  feet,  and  sometimes  a  good  deal 
higher.  ...  It  was  rather  picture(«]ue,  when  we  saw 
the  long  line  of  our  tapers,  for  another  large  party 
had  joined  us,  twinkling  along  the  dark  passage,  and 
it  was  interesting  to  think  of  the  former  inhabitants 
of  these  caverns.  ...  In  one  or  two  places  there  was 
'  the  round  mark  in  the  stone  or  plaster  where  a  bottle 
had  been  deposited.  This  was  said  to  have  been  the 
token  of  a.  martyr's  burial-place,  and  to  have  contained 
his  blood.  After  leaving  the  Catacomb,  we  drove  on- 
ward to  Cecilia  Metella's  tomb,  which  we  entered  and 
inspectod.  Within  the  immensely  massive  circular 
lubstanue  of  the  tomb  was  a  round,  vacant  space,  and 
tilis  interior  vacancy  was  open  at  the  top,  and  had 


492    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [IMS 

notliing  but  some  fallen  atoQen  &nd  a  heap  of  earth  at 
tiiu  bottom. 

On  our  way  home  we  entered  the  Church  of  "  Dom. 
ine,  quo  ViwIib,'"  and  looked  at  tlie  old  fragment  of 
the  Apjtian  Way  where  our  Saviour  met  St.  Peter, 
and  left  the  impreatiion  of  his  ft;et  iu  one  of  tlie  Ro- 
man  pa ving-s tones.  The  stone  has  been  removed,  and 
there  is  now  only  a  fac-simile  engraved  in  a  block  of 
marble,  occupj-iug  the  place  where  Jesus  sUhhI.  It  i» 
a  great  pity  they  had  not  left  the  original  stone  :  for 
then  all  its  brother-stones  in  the  pavement  would  have 
Buemed  to  confirm  the  truth  of  the  legend. 

While  we  were  at  tUitner,  a  gentleman  called  and 
was  shown  into  the  parlor.  We  supfKised  it  to  be 
Mr.  May ;  but  soon  his  voice  grew  familiar,  and  my 
wife  was  sure  it  wa«  General  Pierce,  ho  I  left  the 
table,  and  found  it  to  be  really  lie.  I  was  rejoiced  to 
see  him,  though  a  little  saddened  to  see  the  marks  of 
csi-e  and  coming  age,  in  many  a  whitening  hair,  and 
many  a  furrow,  and,  still  mure,  in  something  that 
seemed  to  have  passed  away  out  of  him,  without  leav- 
ing any  trace.  His  voice,  sometunes,  sounded  strange 
and  old,  though  generally  it  was  what  it  used  to  be. 
He  was  evidently  glad  to  see  me,  glad  to  see  my  wife, 
glad  to  see  the  children,  though  there  was  something 
melancholy  in  his  tone,  wlien   he  remarked   what  a 

stout  boy  J had   grown.     Poor  fellow  \  he  ha« 

neither  son  nor  daughter  to  keep  his  heart  warm. 
This  morning  I  have  been  with  him  to  St.  Peter's,  and 
elsewhere  about  tlie  city,  and  fiud  him  less  clianged 
tlian  he  seemed  to  be  last  night;  not  at  all  changed 
in  heart  aud  affections.  We  talked  freely  atmut  all 
matters  that  came  up  ;  among  the  rest,  about  the  pro 
iect— recognizable    by   many  tokens — for  bringing 


I 
I 


I8B».]  ITALr.  493 

fcim  again  fonrard  as  a  candidate  for  the  presidency 
next  year.  He  appears  to  be  fimily  resolved  not  again 
to  present  hunself  to  the  country,  and  is  content  to  let 
his  one  adraiiuBti-ation  stand,  and  to  be  judged  by  the 
public  and  posterity  on  the  merits  of  that.  No  doubt, 
he  is  perfectly  sincere  ;  no  doubt,  too,  be  would  again 
be  a  candidate,  if  a  pretty  unanimous  voice  of  the 
party  should  demand  it.  I  retain  all  my  faith  in  his 
administrative  faculty,  and  should  be  glad,  for  his 
sake,  to  have  it  fully  recognized;  but  the  probabili- 
ties, as  far  as  I  can  see,  do  not  indicate  for  him  an< 
other  presidential  term. 

March  15tk.  — This  morning  I  went  with  my  wife 
and  Miss  Hoar  to  Miss  Hosmer's  studio,  to  see  her 
statue  of  Zenobia.  We  found  her  in  her  premises, 
Bpringing  about  with  a  bird-like  action.  She  has  a 
lofty  room,  with  a  skylight  window  ;  it  was  pretty 
well  warmed  with  a  stove,  and  there  was  a  small 
orange-tree  in  a  pot,  with  the  oranges  growing  on  it, 
and  two  or  three  flower-shrubs  in  bloom.  She  her- 
self looked  prettily,  with  her  jaunty  little  velvet  cap 
on  the  side  of  her  head,  whence  came  clustering  out 
her  short  brown  curls ;  her  face  full  of  pleasant  life 
and  quick  expression ;  and  though  somewhat  worn 
with  thought  and  struggle,  handsome  and  spirited. 
She  told  us  that  "  her  wig  was  growing  as  gray  as  a 
rat." 

There  were  but  very  few  things  in  the  room;  two 
or  three  plaster-busts,  a  headless  cast  of  a  plaster 
statue,  aud  a  cast  of  the  Minerva  Mcdicii,  whicli  per- 
haps she  ha<l  been  studying  as  a  help  towards  the 
design  of  her  Zenobia;  for,  at  any  rate,  1  seemed  to 
discern  a  resemblance  or  analogy  between  the  two 


494    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS. 

Zenobia  stood  in  the  centre  of  tbo  room,  as  yet  1 
finished  in  the  clay,  but  a  very  noble  and  remarlcabh 
statue  indeed,  full  of  dignity  and  beauty.  It  is  won* 
dei'fid  that  so  brisk  a  woman  could  have  achieved  a 
work  80  quietly  impressive ;  and  there  is  Horaethiug  in 
Zenobia's  air  that  conveys  the  idea  of  music,  uproar, 
and  a  great  throng  all  about  her ;  whilst  she  walks 
in  the  midst  of  it,  self -sustained,  and  kept  in  a  sort  of 
aaiictity  b)  her  native  pride.  The  idea  of  motion  m 
attained  with  great  success;  you  not  oidy  perceive 
that  she  is  walking,  but  know  at  just  what  tranquil 
pace  she  steps,  amid  the  music  of  the  triumph.  The 
drapeiy  is  very  fine  and  full ;  she  is  decked  with  or- 
naments; but  the  chains  of  her  captivity  hang  from 
wrist  to  wrist ;  and  her  deportment  —  indicating  a 
soul  so  much  above  her  misfortune,  yet  not  insensi- 
ble to  the  wetglit  of  it  —  makes  these  chains  a  riclier 
decoration  tlian  all  her  otlier  jewels.  I  know  not 
whether  there  be  some  magic  in  the  present  im]>er- 
fect  finish  of  the  statue,  or  in  the  material  of  cJay.  as 
being  a  better  medium  of  expression  than  even  mat^ 
ble  ;  but  certainly  I  have  seldom  lieen  more  impressed 
by  a  piece  of  modem  sculpture.  Miss  Hosmer  showed 
us  photography  of  her  Puck  —  which  I  have  seen  in 
the  marble  —  and  likewise  of  the  VVill-o'-the-Wiap, 
both  very  pretty  and  fancifnl.  It  indicates  much 
variety  of  power  tliat  Zenobia  should  he  the  sister  of 
tliese,  wliich  would  seem  the  more  natural  offspring 
of  her  quick  and  vivid  character.  But  Zenobia  j 
liigh,  heroic  ode. 

...  On  my  way  up  the  Via  Babuino,  I  met  (  

eral  Pierce,  We  have  taken  two  or  three  walks  Ur 
gether,  and  stray  among  the  Roman  ruins,  and  olil 
tcenes  of  history,  talking  of  matters  in  which  ba  it 


snruwf 


1850.]  ITALY.  495 

personally  concerned,  yet  which  are  as  histono  as  any- 
thing around  us.  He  is  singularly  little  changed;  the 
more  I  see  him,  the  more  I  get  him  hack,  just  such  aa 
he  was  in  our  youth.  This  morning,  his  face,  air,  and 
fluiile  were  so  wonderfully  like  himself  of  old,  that  at 
hast  thirty  years  are  annihihitcd. 

Zenobia's  manacles  serve  as  bracelets  ;  a  very  ingen- 
ious and  suggestive  idea. 

March  ISth.  —  I  went  to  the  sculpture-gallery  of  the 
Capitol  yesterday,  and  saw,  among  other  things,  t)ie 
Venus  in  her  secret  cabinet.  This  was  my  second  view 
of  her :  the  first  time,  I  greatly  admired  her ;  now, 
she  made  no  very  favorable  impression.  There  ant 
twenty  Venuses  whom  I  like  as  well,  or  better.  On 
the  whole,  she  is  a  heavy,  clumsy,  unintellectual,  and 
commonplace  figure ;  at  all  events,  not  in  good  looks 
to-day.  Marble  beauties  seem  to  suffer  the  same  oc- 
casional eclipses  as  those  of  flesh  and  blood.  Wa 
looked  at  the  Faim,  the  Dying  Gladiator,  and  other 
famous  sculptures  ;  but  nothing  had  a  glory  round  it, 
perhaps  because  the  sirocco  was  blowing.  These  halls 
of  the  Capitol  have  always  had  a  dreary  and  depress* 
ing  effect  upon  ine,  veiy  different  from  those  of  the 
Vatican.  I  know  not  why,  except  that  the  rooms  of 
the  Capitol  have  a  dingy,  shabby,  and  neglected  look, 
and  that  the  statues  are  dusty,  and  all  tlie  arrange- 
ments less  mi^ificent  than  at  the  Vatican.  The  cor- 
roded and  discolored  surfaces  of  the  statues  take  a«'»y 
from  the  impression  of  immortal  youth,  and  tnm 
Apollo '  himself  into  an  old  stone  ;  unless  at  rare  i» 
tervals,  when  he  ai)pear8  transfigured  by  a  light  ^eas- 
ing from  within. 

>  The  Lf  dan  AfoUa. 


i 


496  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS,   [isj 

March  28r2.  —  I  am  we&ring  away  liatlesfily  1 
last  precious  clays  of  my  al>ixle  in  Home.     U— 

illness  is  disheartening,  and  by  eoniinitig ,  it  b 

away  the  energy  and  enterprise  that  were  the 
of  all  our  movements.  1  am  weary  of  Rome,  without 
having  seen  and  known  it  as  I  ought,  and  I  shall  be 
gliui  to  get  away  froiu  it,  though  no  doubt  there  will 
be  many  yearnings  to  return  hereafter,  and  many  rfr- 
greta  that  I  did  not  make  better  use  of  the  opportuui- 
tiea  within  my  grasp.  Still,  I  have  been  in  Rome 
long  enough  to  be  imbued  with  its  atmosphoru,  and 
this  is  the  essential  condition  of  knowing  a  place  ;  for 
such  knowledge  does  not  consist  in  haviog  seen  every 
juirticular  object  it  contains.  In  the  stat«  of  mind  in 
which  I  now  stand  towards  Rome,  there  is  very  little 
advantage  to  bo  gained  by  staying  here  longer. 

And  yet  I  had  a  pleasant  stroll  enough  yesterdjiy 
afternoon,  all  by  myself,  from  the  Corso  down  past 
the  Church  of  St.  Andrea  della  Valle,  —  tlie  i 
where  Ctesar  was  murdered,  —  and  thence  to  the  I 
nese  Palac«.  the  noble  court  of  which  I  enters 
tbence  to  the  Piazza  Cenci.  where  I  looked  at  one  i 
two  ugly  old  palaces,  and  fixed  on  one  of  tltem  as  tho 
residence  of  Beatrice's  father ;  then  past  the  Temple 
of  Vesta,  and  skirting  along  the  Tiber,  and  benei 
the  Aventiue,  till  I  somewhat  imexpectcdly  came  ] 
sight  of  the  gray  pyramid  of  Caiua  Ccstius.  I  v 
out  of  the  city  gate,  ajid  leaned  on  tlie  parapet  t 
encloses  the  pyramid,  advancing  its  high,  unbroken 
slope  and  peak,  where  the  great  blocks  of  marble  still 
fit  almost  as  closely  to  one  another  as  when  they  were 
first  laid :  though,  indeed,  there  nvti  crevices  just  large 
enough  fur  plants  to  root  themselves,  and  flaunt  and 
trail  over  the  face  of  this  great  tomb;  onl;  i   "   ' 


le  ait^^^ 

tere^^H 
ine  n^^M 
as  tho 
emple 

eneat^^^— 
ma  i^^l 

:t  th^^H 


inlj  a  lit^^^J 


i 


ITALY.  497 

verdure,  however,  over  a  vast  fipace  of  marble,  still 
white  in  spote,  but  pervadiiigly  turned  gray,  by  two 
thousand  years'  action  of  the  atmosphere.  Thence  I 
came  home  by  the  Coeliau,  and  sat  dowii  on  an  ancient 
flight  of  steps  umler  one  of  the  arches  of  the  Coliseum, 
into  which  the  sunshine  fell  sidelong.  It  was  a  de- 
lightful afternoon,  not  precisely  like  any  weather  that 
I  have  known  elsewhere  ;  certainly  never  in  America, 
where  it  is  always  too  oold  or  too  hot.  It  t'esemblcs 
Bummer  more  than  anything  which  we  New-England- 
ers  recoguize  in  our  idea  of  spring,  hut  there  was  an 
indescribable  something,  sweet,  fresh,  gentle,  that  does 
not  belong  to  summer,  and  that  thrilled  and  tickled 
my  heart  with  a  feeling  partly  sensuous,  partly  spir- 
itual. 

I  go  to  the  bank  and  read  "  Galignani "  and  the 
American  newspapers  ;  thence  I  stroll  to  the  Pincian 
or  to  the  Medici  Gardens ;  I  see  a  good  deal  of  Gen- 
eral Pierce,  and  we  talk  over  his  presidential  life, 
vhich,  I  now  really  think,  he  has  no  latent  desire  nor 
purpose  to  renew.  Yet  he  seems  to  have  enjoyed  it 
while  it  lasted,  and  certainly  he  was  in  his  element  as 
an  administrative  man ;  not  far-seeing,  not  possessed 
of  vast  stores  of  political  wisdom  in  advance  of  his 
occasions,  but  endowed  n-ith  a  miraculous  Intuition  of 
what  ought  to  be  done  just  at  the  time  for  action,  ilis 
judgment  of  things  about  him  is  wonderful,  and  his 
Cabinet  recognized  it  as  such ;  for  though  they  were 
men  of  great  ability,  he  was  evidently  the  master-mind 
among  them.  None  of  them  were  particularly  his  per- 
Bonal  friends  when  he  selected  them ;  they  all  loved 
bim  when  they  parted;  and  he  showed  me  a  letter, 
ngned  by  all,  in  which  they  expressed  their  feelings 
of  respect  and  attachment  at  the  close  of  hia  admluis- 


498    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [H 


th^ 


tration.  There  was  a  nohle  frankneaa  on  hia  part 
kept  the  atmosphere  always  clear  among  thetu,  and  in 
reference  to  this  chiiraoteristic,  Governor  Marcy  told 
him  that  the  yearn  daring  which  he  had  been  con- 
necte<l  with  his  Cabinet  had  been  the  haj»pi«it  of  his 
life.  Speaking  of  Caleb  Cuahing,  he  told  me  that  the 
unreliability,  the  flckleuess,  whii'h  is  usually  attributed 
to  him  18  an  actual  characteristic,  but  that  it  ia  intel- 
lectual, not  moral.  He  has  such  comprehenaivanesa, 
snch  mental  variety  and  activity,  that,  if  loft  to  hin^ 
Belf,  he  cannot  keep  fast  hold  of  one  view  of  things, 
and  ao  cannot,  without  external  help,  be  a  conaist«nt 
man.  He  needs  the  influence  of  a  more  single  And 
stable  jnd^neiit  to  keep  him  from  divergency,  and,  oa 
thia  condition,  ho  ia  a  moat  inestimable  coadjutur.  As 
regards  learning  and  ability,  he  has  no  superior. 

Pierce  spoke  the  other  day  of  the  idcA  among  some 
of  his  friends  that  his  life  had  been  planned,  from  a 
very  early  period,  with  a  view  to  the  station  which  he 
nltimately  reached.  He  smiled  at  the  notion,  said 
tliat  it  waa  inconaiatcnt  with  hia  natural  charwoter, 
and  that  it  implietl  foresight  and  dexterity  beyond 
what  any  mortal  is  endowed  with.  I  think  so  too; 
but  nevortheleas,  I  was  long  and  long  ^o  aware  that 
he  cherished  a  very  high  ambition,  and  that,  though 
he  might  not  anticipate)  the  highest  things,  he  (tared 
very  little  about  inferior  objects.  Then  as  to  plana,  I 
do  not  think  that  he  had  any  doflnite  ones  ;  lint  there 
was  in  him  a  subtle  faculty,  a  real  instinct,  that  taught 
him  what  was  good  for  him,  —  that  ia  to  say,  promo- 
tive of  his  political  success,  — and  made  him  iuevita^ 
bly  do  it.  He  had  a  magic  touch,  that  arranged  mat^ 
tera  with  a  <lclical«  potency,  which  he  himself  hardly 
recognized ;  and  ho  wrought  through  other  minds 


7  minds  f^^H 


I 


IStat  neitlier  he  oor  they  always  knew  when  and  bow 
far  they  were  under  his  influeuce.  Before  his  nonii- 
natioa  for  the  presidency  I  had  a  sense  that  it  was 
ooming,  and  it  iiever  seemed  to  me  an  a£4!ideiit.  He 
in  a  moat  singular  character ;  so  frank,  so  true,  so  im- 
mediate, so  subtle,  so  simple,  so  complicated. 

I  passed  by  the  tower  in  the  Via  Portoghese  to- 
day, and  observed  that  the  nearest  shop  appears  to 
Ik  for  the  sale  of  ootton  or  linen  cloth.  .  .  .  The 
upper  window  of  the  tower  was  half  open  ;  of  course, 
like  all,  or  almost  all,  other  Roman  windows,  it  is 
divided  vertically,  and  each  half  swings  back  on 
liinge^.  .  .  . 

Last  week  a  fritter  e-stabliehment  was  opened  in  mir 
piazza.  It  was  a  wooden  booth  erected  in  the  open 
Bquare,  and  covered  with  canvas  painted  red,  which 
looked  as  if  it  had  withstood  much  rain  and  sunsbuie. 
In  front  were  three  great  boughs  of  laurel,  not  so 
much  for  shade,  I  think,  as  ornament.  There  were 
two  men,  and  their  apparatus  for  busineas  was  a  sort 
of  stove,  or  charcoal  furnace,  and  a  frying-pan  to 
place  over  it ;  they  had  an  armfid  or  two  of  dry  sticks, 
eome  flour,  and  I  suppose  oil,  and  this  seemed  to  be 
all.  It  was  Friday,  and  Leut  besides,  and  possibly 
there  was  some  other  peculiar  propriety  in  the  con- 
gnmption  of  fritters  just  then.  At  all  events,  their 
fire  burned  merrily  from  morning  till  night,  and  pretty 
late  into  the  evening,  and  they  had  a  fine  run  of  cus- 
tom ;  the  commodity  being  simply  dough,  cut  into 
squares  or  rhomboids,  and  thrown  into  the  boiling  oil, 
which  quickly  turned  them  to  a  light  brown  color.     I 

flent  J to  buy  some,  and,  tasting  one,  it  resembled 

an  unspeakably  b»d  doughnut,  without  any  sweeten- 
ing.    In  fact,  it  was  sour,  for  the  Romans  like  tfaeii 


EOO    FRENCH  AND  ITALTAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [H 

bread,  and  all  their  preparations  of  flour,  in  a  atato^fl 
acetoiu  fermentation,  which  serves  them  instead  | 
salt  or  other  i^oniliment.  This  frittor-ahop  had  ) 
up  in  a  night,  like  Aladdin'ti  palace,  and  vanished  t 
suddenly;  for  aft«r  standing  through  Friday.  Satur 
day,  and  Sunday,  it  was  gone  on  Monday  niorniug; 
and  a  cliarcnul-strewu  pLu^e,  on  the  pavement  wbl 
the  furnace  had  btten,  was  the  only  memorial  of  it. 
wiis  curious  to  observe  how  immediat^sly  it  1 
lounging-pla«e  fur  idle  people,  who  stood  and  1 
all  day  with  the  fritter-friers,  just  as  they  might  at 
any  old  shop  in  the  basement  of  a  palace,  or  between 
the  half-lmried  pillars  of  the  Temple  of  Minerva, 
which  had  been  familiar  to  them  and  their  remote 
grandfathers. 

April  14th.  —  Yesterday  afternoon  I  drove  with 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Story  and  Mr.  Wilde  to  see  a  sttitue  of 
Venus,  which  has  just  been  discovered,  outside  of  the 
Porta  Portese,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Til>cr.  A 
tittle  distance  beyond  the  gat«  we  came  to  the  en- 
trance of  a  vineyard,  with  a  wheel-track  through  the 
midst  of  it ;  and,  following  this,  we  soon  ciuue  to  a 
hill-side,  in  which  an  excavation  had  been  made  with 
the  purpose  of  building  a  grotto  for  keeping  and  stor- 
ing wine.  They  had  dug  down  into  what  seemed  to 
be  an  ancient  batli-room,  or  some  structure  of  that 
kind,  the  excavation  being  square  and  cellar-like,  and 
bnilt  round  with  old  subterranean  walls  of  briek  and 
stone.  Within  this  hollow  space  the  statue  hmi  been 
found,  and  it  was  now  standing  against  one  of  the 
walls,  oovered  with  a  coarse  cloth,  or  a  canvas  bag. 
This  being  removed,  there  appeared  a  headless  marble 
figure,  earth  -  stained,  of  course,  and  with  a  sligl 


iidigi^— 


ITALY.  601 

vCoTToded  sorface,  but  wonderfully  delicate  and  beau- 
■  laful,  the  flhape,  size,  and  attitude,  apparently,  of  the 
F  Venus  di  Medici,  but,  as  we  all  thought,  more  beauti- 
ful than  that.  It  is  supposed  to  be  the  original  from 
which  the  Venus  di  Medici  was  copied.  Both  arms 
were  broken  off,  but  the  greater  part  of  both,  and 
nearly  the  whole  of  one  hand,  had  been  found,  and 
these  being  adjusted  h>  the  figure,  they  took  the  well- 
known  position  before  the  bosom  and  the  middle,  as 
if  the  f ragmentarj-  woman  retained  her  instinct  of  mod- 
esty to  the  last.  There  were  the  marks  on  the  bosom 
and  thigh  where  the  fingers  had  touched  ;  whereas  in 
the  Venus  di  Medici,  if  I  remember  rightly,  the 
fingers  are  sculptured  quite  free  of  the  person.  The 
man  who  showed  the  statue  now  lifted  from  a  comer 
a  round  block  of  marble,  which  had  been  lying  there 
among  other  fragments,  and  this  he  placed  upon  the 
shattered  neck  of  the  Venus  j  and  behold,  it  was  her 
head  and  face,  perfect,  all  but  the  nose  \  £ven  in 
spite  of  this  mutilation,  it  seemed  immediately  to 
light  up  and  vivify  the  entire  figure ;  and,  whatever  I 
may  heretofore  have  written  about  the  countenance  of 
the  Venu3  di  Medici,  I  here  record  my  belief  that  that 
head  has  been  wrongfxilly  foisted  upon  the  statue ;  at 
all  events,  it  is  unspeakably  inferior  to  this  newly  dis- 
covered one.  This  face  has  a  breadth  and  front  which 
are  strangely  deficient  in  the  other.  The  eyes  are  well 
opened,  most  unlike  the  buttonhole  lids  of  the  Venus 
di  Medici ;  the  whole  head  is  so  much  larger  aa  to  en- 
tirely obviate  the  criticism  that  has  always  been  made 
on  the  diminutive  head  of  the  Di  Medici  statue.  If 
it  had  but  a  nose !  They  ought  to  sift  every  handfid 
of  earth  that  has  been  thrown  out  of  the  excavation, 
I  {or  the  nose  and  the  missing  hand  and  fingers  must 


602  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [IBSSt 

needs  be  there;  and,  if  they  were  found,  thd  effect 
would  l>e  like  tliu  n-apiH-'aranoe  of  a  divinity  upon 
eai-th.  Mutilated  iis  we  saw  her,  it  was  Htraii};ely  iw 
teresting  to  be  present  at  the  moment,  a»  it  were, 
when  eho  Iiiwl  jast  rJHen  from  her  long  burial,  and 
was  Hheitding  the  untitienchable  lustre  around  ber 
which  no  eye  hotl  seen  for  twenty  or  more  oenturie«. 
The  earth  still  clung  about  her ;  her  beautiful  lips 
were  full  of  it,  till  Mr.  Story  took  a  thin  chip  of  wood 
and  cleared  it  away  from  l>ctween  them. 

The  [iroprietor  of  the  vineyard  stood  by; 
with  the  most  purple  fa«e  aiul  hugest  and  rvddi 
noae  that  I  ever  beheld  in  my  life.  It  must  hare  taken 
innumerable  hognheailsof  his  thin  vintage  to  enipurple 
bis  face  in  this  manner.  He  ohuekle<l  much  ovi^r  tbu 
statue,  and,  I  suppose,  counts  ui>on  making  his  fortune 
by  it.  He  is  now  awaiting  a  bid  from  the  pajuil  gov- 
ernment, which,  I  believe,  has  tlie  right  of  preemption 
whenever  any  relics  of  ancient  art  are  di8<'overo<l.  If 
the  statue  could  but  be  smuggled  out  of  Italy,  it  might 
command  almost  any  price.  There  is  not,  I  think,  any 
name  of  a  sculptor  on  tlie  pedestal,  a«  on  that  of  the 
Venus  di  Me<lici.  A  dnlphiu  is  sculptured  on  the 
pillar  against  which  she  leans.  The  statue  is  of  Greek 
marble.  It  was  first  found  about  eiglit  days  ago,  but 
has  been  offered  for  iusjiection  only  a  day  or  two,  and 
already  the  visitors  come  in  throngs,  and  the  beggars 
gather  about  the  entrance  of  the  vineyard.  A  wine- 
shop, too,  seems  to  have  been  opened  on  the  premise! 
for  the  accommodation  of  this  great  concourse;  and  we 
saw  a  row  of  German  artists  sitting  at  a  long  table  in 
the  open  air,  each  with  a  gloss  of  thin  wine  and  some* 
thing  to  eat  before  him  ;  for  the  Germans  refresh  Dfr 
tore  ten  times  to  other  persons  once. 


I 


ilow  the  whole  world  might  be  peopled  with  ao' 
tiqpa  beauty  if  the  Komaos  would  ooly  dig ! 

April  19(A.  —  General  Pierce  leaves  Rome  thia 
tnorniug  for  Venice,  by  way  of  Aucona,  and  takiiig 
the  steamer  thence  to  Trieste.  I  Iiad  hoped  to  make 
the  journey  along  with  him  ;  but  U 'b  terrible  ill- 
ness haa  made  it  necessary  for  us  to  continue  here  an^ 
other  month,  and  we  are  thankful  that  this  seems  now 
to  be  the  extent  of  our  misfortune.  Never  having  had 
any  trouble  before  that  j)ierced  into  my  very  vitals,  I 
did  not  know  what  comfort  there  might  be  in  the 
manly  sympathy  of  a  friend  ;  but  Pierce  has  under- 
gone BO  great  a  sorrow  of  his  own,  and  has  so  large 
and  kindly  a  heart,  and  is  so  tender  and  so  strong,  that 
he  really  did  me  good,  and  I  shall  always  love  him  the 
better  for  the  recollection  of  his  ministrations  in  tltese 
dark  days.  Thank  God,  the  thing  we  dreaded  did  not 
come  to  paAB. 

Pierce  is  wonderfully  little  changed.  Indeed,  now 
that  he  hai)  won  and  enjoyed  —  if  there  were  any  en- 
jo)-ment  in  it  —  the  highest  success  that  public  life 
could  give  him,  he  seems  more  like  what  he  was  in 
his  early  youth  than  at  any  subsequent  period.  He 
is  evidently  happier  than  I  have  ever  known  him  since 
our  college  days ;  satisfied  with  what  he  has  been,  and 
with  the  position  in  the  country  that  remains  to  him, 
after  filling  such  an  ofBce.  Amid  all  his  former  suc- 
cesses, —  early  as  they  came,  and  great  as  they  were, 
—  I  always  perceived  that  something  gnawed  with- 
in him.  and  kept  him  forever  restless  and  miserable. 
Nothing  he  won  was  worth  the  winning,  except  as  a 
step  gained  toward  the  summit.  I  cannot  tell  how 
early  he  began  to  look  towards  the  presidency ;  but  I 


604    FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.    [1B« 

believe  be  would  have  died  an  imbappy  man  witbonl 
it.  And  yet  what  infinite  chances  tliere  aeemed  to  be 
against  bis  attaining  it !  When  I  look  at  it  in  one 
way,  it  strikes  me  as  absolutely  miraculons ;  in  an- 
other, it  came  like  an  event  that  I  bad  all  alcmg  ex* 
pected.  It  was  due  to  bis  wonderful  tact,  which  is  of 
BO  subtle  a  character  tbat  he  himself  is  but  partially 
sensible  of  it 

I  have  found  in  bim,  here  in  Borne,  the  whole  of 
my  early  friend,  and  even  better  than  I  used  to  know 
lum ;  a  heart  aa  true  and  affectionate,  a  mind  much 
widened  and  deepened  by  his  experience  of  life.  We 
hold  just  the  same  relation  to  each  other  as  of  yore, 
and  we  have  passed  all  the  turning -off  places,  and 
may  hope  to  go  on  together  still  the  same  dear  friends 
as  long  as  we  live.  I  do  not  love  him  one  whit  the 
less  for  having  been  President,  nor  for  having  done 
me  the  greatest  good  in  his  power ;  a  fact  that  speaks 
eloquently  in  his  favor,  and  perhaps  says  a  little  for 
myself.  If  be  had  been  merely  a  benefactor,  perhaps 
I  might  not  have  borne  it  so  well ;  but  each  did  his 
best  for  tbe  other  as  friend  for  friend. 

May  ibth.  —  Yesterday  afternoon  we  went  to  tbe 
Barberini  picture-gallery  to  take  a  farewell  look  at 
the  Beatrice  Cenci,  which  I  have  twice  visited  before 
since  our  return  from  Florence.  I  attempted  a  de- 
scription of  it  at  my  first  visit,  more  than  a  year  ago, 
but  the  picture  is  quite  indescribable  and  unaccount- 
able in  its  effect,  for  if  you  attempt  to  analyze  it  you 
can  never  succeed  in  getting  at  the  secret  of  its  fasci- 
nation. Its  peculiar  expression  eludes  a  straightfor- 
ward glance,  and  can  only  be  caught  by  side  glimpses, 
or  when  ita  eye  falls  upon  it  casually  aa  it  were,  and 


'   18BB.] 


ITALY. 


505 


I 


L 


without  thinking  to  discover  anytlung,  as  if  the  pio- 
tiire  had  a  life  and  consciousness  of  its  own,  and  were 
resolved  not  to  betray  its  secret  of  grief  or  guilt, 
though  it  wears  the  full  expression  of  it  when  it  im- 
a^pnes  itself  unseen.  I  think  no  other  such  niit^cal 
efifect  can  ever  have  been  wrought  by  pencil.  1  lookeil 
close  into  its  eyes,  with  a  determination  to  see  all  that 
there  was  in  them,  and  could  see  nothing  tliat  might 
not  have  been  in  any  young  girl's  eyes ;  and  yet,  a 
moment  afterwards,  there  was  the  expression  —  seen 
aside,  and  vanishing  in  a  moment  —  of  a  being  un- 
humanized  by  some  terrible  fate,  and  gazing  at  me  out 
of  a  remote  and  inaccessible  region,  where  she  was 
frightened  to  be  alone,  but  where  no  sympathy  could 
reach  her.  The  moiith  is  beyond  measure  touching ; 
the  lips  apart,  looking  as  innocent  as  a  baby's  after  it 
has  been  crj-ing.  The  plctm*  never  can  be  copied. 
Gnido  himself  could  not  have  done  it  over  again.  The 
copyists  get  all  sorts  of  expression,  gay  as  well  as  griev- 
ous ;  some  copies  have  a  coquettish  air,  a  half -back- 
ward glance,  thrown  alluring  at  the  spectator,  but 
nobody  ever  did  catch,  or  ever  will,  the  vanishing 
charm  of  that  sorrow.  I  hated  to  leave  the  picture, 
and  yet  was  glad  when  I  bad  taken  my  last  glimpse, 
because  it  so  perplexe<I  and  troubled  me  not  to  be  able 
to  get  hold  of  its  secret. 

Thence  we  went  to  the  Church  of  the  Capuchins, 
and  saw  Guido's  Archangel.  I  have  been  several 
times  to  this  church,  but  never  saw  the  picture  before, 
though  I  am  familiar  with  the  mosaic  copy  at  St. 
Peter's,  and  had  supposed  the  latter  to  be  an  equiva- 
lent representation  of  the  original.  It  is  nearly  or 
quite  so  as  respects  the  general  effect ;  but  there  is  a 
beauty  in  the  Archangel's  face  that  immeasurably  sur- 


606    FRESCB  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [IWa 

paaaea  tlie  oopy,  —  the  ezpreasion  of  heavenly  Mvet^ 
ity,  and  a  degree  of  pun,  trouble,  or  diBgust,  at  being 
broi^ht  in  contact  with  sin,  even  for  the  purpooe  of 
quelling  and  pnniAing  it.  Thete  is  something  finw^l 
in  the  oopy,  which  I  do  not  find  in  the  originaL  The 
sandalled  feet  are  here  those  of  an  angel;  in  the 
mosaic  they  are  those  of  a  celestial  coxctonb,  treading 
daintOy,  as  if  he  were  afraid  they  would  be  aoiled  by 
the  touch  of  Lucifer. 

After  looking  at  the  Archangel  we  went  down  un- 
der the  church,  guided  by  a  fleshy  monk,  and  saw  the 
famous  cemetery,  where  the  dead  monks  of  many  oeo- 
tnries  back  have  been  laid  to  sleep  in  sacred  earth 
from  Jemsalem.  .  .  . 


Ji/ttel  dea  Colonies,  MarteUiea,  May  29th,  Satw- 
day.  —  Wednesday  was  the  day  fixed  for  our  depar- 
ture from  Rome,  and  after  breakfast  I  walked  to  tbe 
Fincian,  and  saw  the  garden  and  the  (uty,  and  the 
Boi^hese  grounds,  and  St.  Peter's  in  an  earlier  sun- 
light than  ever  before.  Methought  they  never  looked 
so  beautiful,  nor  the  sky  so  bright  and  blue.  I  aaw 
Soracte  on  the  horizon,  and  I  looked  at  everything  a» 
if  for  the  last  time;  nor  do  I  wish  ever  to  see  any 
of  these  objects  again,  though  no  place  ever  took  ao 
strong  a  hold  of  my  being  as  Bome,  nor  ever  seemed 
BO  close  to  me  and  so  strangely  familiar,  I  seem  to 
know  it  better  than  my  birthplace,  and  to  have  known 
it  longer  ;  and  though  I  have  been  very  miserable 
there,  and  lanpiid  with  the  effects  of  the  atmosphere, 
and  disgust^  with  a  thousand  things  in  its  duly  life^ 
still  I  cannot  say  I  hate  it,  perhaps  might  fairly  own 
a  love  for  it    But  life  being  too  short  for  such  qoer 


KB9.} 


FRATfCB. 


607 


I 

I 


I 


tionable  and  troublesome  enjoymeate,  I  desire  never 
to  aet  eyes  on  it  again.  .  .  . 

.  .  .  We  traversed  again  that  same  wciiry  and 
dreary  tract  of  oountry  whifh  we  passed  over  in  a  win- 
ter afternoon  and  night  on  oar  first  arrival  in  Koiiiii. 
It  is  as  desolate  a  oountry  as  oan  well  be  imagined, 
but  about  ini<lway  of  ouv  journey  we  came  to  tlie  tte*- 
Bhore.  and  kept  very  near  it  during  the  rest  of  tha 
y&y.     The  sight  and  fragranee  of  it  were  exceedingly 

refreshing  after  so  long  an  interval,  and  U revived 

visibly  as  we  rushed  along,  while  J chuckled  and 

contorted  himself  with  inefTable  delight. 

We  reached  Civiti  Vecchia  in  tliree  or  four  hours, 
&nd  were   there   subjected   to  various   troubles.  .  ,  . 

All  the  while  Mies  S and  I  were  bothering  about 

the  passport,  the  rest  of  the  family  sat  in  the  sun  on 
the  quay,  with  all  kinds  of  bustle  and  oonfusion 
aroimd  them ;  a  very  trying  experience  to  U af- 
ter the  long  seclusion  and  quiet  of  her  sick-chamber. 
But  she  did  not  seem  to  suffer  from  it,  and  we  finally 
Teached  the  steamer  in  gootl  condition  and  spiritx.  .  . . 

I  slept  wretchedly  in  my  short  and  narrow  berth, 
more  especially  as  there  was  an  old  gentleman  who 
snored  as  if  he  were  sounding  a  charge ;  it  was  tern- 
bly  hot  too,  and  I  rose  before  four  o'cloc^k,  and  wa«  on 
deck  amply  in  time  to  watch  the  distant  approach  nf 
sunrise.  We  arrived  at  Leghorn  pretty  early,  and 
might  have  gone  ashore  and  spent  tJie  day.  Indeed, 
we  had  been  recommentled  by  Dr.  Franco,  and  hail 
fully  purposed  to  spend  a  week  or  ten  days  thm«,  !a 

expectation  of  benefit  to  U 's  health  from  tlie  sea 

air  and  sea  bathing,  becau!«e  he  thought  her  still  too 
feeble  to  make  the  whole  voyage  to  MaTneilles  at  a 
Itretch.     But  she  showed  herself  so  strong  thitt  Wfl 


608  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NQTE^BOOKS.  [185t 

thonght  she  would  get  as  much  good  from  our  three 
days'  voyage  as  from  the  days  by  the  sea-shora 
Moreover,  ...  we  all  of  us  still  felt  the  languor  of 
the  Roman  atmosphere,  and  dreaded  the  hubbub  and 
crazy  confusion  of  landing  at  an  Italian  port  •  •  •  So 
we  lay  in  the  harbor  all  day  without  stirring  from  the 
steamer.  ...  It  would  have  been  pleasant,  however, 
to  have  gone  to  Pisa,  fifteen  miles  off,  and  seen  the 
leaning  tower;  but,  for  my  part,  I  have  arrived  at 
that  point  where  it  is  somewhat  pleasanter  to  sit 
quietiy  in  any  spot  whatever  than  to  see  whatever 
grandest  or  most  beautiful  thing.  At  least  this  was 
my  mood  in  the  harbor  of  Leghorn.  From  the  deck 
of  the  steamer  there  were  many  thinsn  visible  that 
might  have  been  interesting  to  describe  :  the  boats 
of  peculiar  rig,  and  covered  witii  awning ;  the  crowded 
shipping  ;  the  disembarkation  of  horses  from  the 
French  cavalry,  which  were  lowered  from  steamers 
into  gondolas  or  lighters,  and  hung  motionless,  like 
the  sign  of  the  Golden  Fleece,  during  the  transit,  only 
kicking  a  little  when  their  feet  happened  to  graze  the 
vessel's  side.  One  horse  plunged  overboard,  and  nar- 
rowly escaped  drownins:.  There  was  likewise  a  disem- 
barlition  TFrenX^diers  in  a  train  of  boate,  which 
rowed  shoreward  with  sound  of  trumpet.  The  French 
are  concentrating  a  considerable  number  of  troops  at 
this  point. 

Our  steamer  was  detained  by  order  of  the  French 
government  to  take  on  board  despatches ;  so  that,  in- 
stead of  sailing  at  dusk,  as  is  customary,  we  lay  in  the 
harbor  till  seven  of  the  next  morning.  A  number  of 
young  Sardinian  officers,  in  green  uniform,  came  on 
board,  and  a  pale  and  picturesque-looking  Italian,  and 
^ther  worthies  of  less  note,  —  English,  American,  and 


58.] 


509 


of  all  races,  —  among  tliem  a  Turk  witli  a  little  boy 
in  Chnataan  dress ;  also  a  Greek  gentleman  with  hia 
youag  bride. 

At  the  appointed  time  we  weighed  anchor  for 
Genoa,  and  had  a  beautiful  day  on  the  Mediterranean, 
and  for  the  first  time  in  my  life  I  saw  the  real  dark 
blue  of  the  sea.  I  do  not  remember  notiuing  it  on  my 
outward  voyage  to  Italy.  It  is  the  most  beautiful  hue 
that  can  be  imagined,  like  a  liquid  sky ;  and  it  retains 
Hs  lustrous  blue  directly  under  tlie  side  of  the  ship, 
where  the  water  of  the  mid-Atlantic  looks  greenish. 
.  .  .  We  reaehed  Genoa  at  seven  in  the  afternoon. 
.  .  .  Genoa  looks  moat  picturesquely  from  the  sea,  at 
the  foot  of  a  sheltering  semicirt^Ie  of  lofty  hills  ;  and 
as  we  lay  in  the  harbor  we  saw,  among  other  interest- 
ing objects,  the  great  Doria  Palace,  with  its  gardens, 
and  tlie  Cathedral,  and  a  heap  and  sweep  of  stately 
edifices,  with  the  mountains  looking  down  upon  tho 
city,  and  crowned  with  fortresses.  The  variety  of  hue 
in  the  houses,  white,  green,  pink,  and  orange,  was 
very  remarkable.  It  would  hawe  been  well  to  go 
ashore  here  for  an  hour  or  two  and  see  the  streets.  — 
having  already  seen  the  palaces,  churches,  and  public 
buildings  at  our  former  visit,  — and  buy  a  few  speci- 
mens of  Genoa  goldsmiths'  work ;  but  I  preferred  the 
Bteamer's  dock,  so  the  evening  passed  pleasantly  away ; 
the  two  light-houses  at  the  entrance  of  the  port  kindled 
up  their  fires,  and  at  nine  o'clock  the  evening  gim 
thundered  from  the  fortress,  and  was  reverberated 
from  the  heights.  We  sailed  away  at  eleven,  and  I 
was  roused  from  ray  first  sleep  by  the  snortings  and 
hissings  of  the  vessel  as  she  got  under  way. 

At  Genoa  we  took  on  board  some  more  pafisengerSi 
an  English  nobleman  with  his  lady  being  of  the  nam 


610  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE^BOOKS.  [l«aa 

ber.    These  were  Lord  and  Lady  J ^  and  before 

the  end  of  our  voyage  his  lordship  talked  to  me  of  a 
translation  of  Tasso  in  which  he  is  engaged,  and  a 
stanza  or  two  of  which  he  repeated  to  me.  I  really 
liked  the  lines,  and  liked  too  the  simplicity  and  frank- 
ness with  which  he  spoke  of  it  to  me,  a  stranger,  and 
the  way  he  seemed  to  separate  his  egotism  from  the 
idea  which  he  evidently  had  that  he  is  going  to  make 
an  excellent  translation.  I  sincerely  hope  it  may  be 
80.  He  began  it  without  any  idea  of  publishing  it,  or 
of  ever  bringing  it  to  a  conclusion,  but  merely  as  a 
solace  and  occupation  while  in  great  trouble  during  an 
illness  of  his  wife,  but  he  is  gradually  come  to  find  it 
the  most  absorbing  occupation  he  ever  undertook ;  and 
as  Mr.  Gladstone  and  other  high  authorities  give  him 
warm  encouragement,  he  now  means  to  translate  the 
entire  poem,  and  to  publish  it,  with  beautiful  illus- 
trations, and  two  years  hence  the  world  may  expect 
to  see  it.  I  do  not  quite  perceive  how  such  a  man 
as  this  —  a  man  of  frank,  warm,  simple,  kindly  nature, 
but  surely  not  of  a  poetical  temperament,  or  very  re- 
fined, or  highly  cultivated  —  should  make  a  good  ver- 
sion of  Tasso's  poems ;  but  perhaps  the  dead  poefs 
soul  may  take  possession  of  this  healthy  organization, 
and  wholly  turn  him  to  its  own  purposes. 

The  latter  part  of  our  voyage  to-day  lay  close  along 
the  coast  of  France,  which  was  hilly  and  picturesque, 
and  as  we  approached  Marseilles  was  very  bold  and 
striking.  We  steered  among  the  rocky  islands,  rising 
abruptly  out  of  the  sea,  mere  naked  crags,  without  a 
trace  of  verdure  upon  them,  and  with  the  surf  break* 
mg  at  their  feet.  They  were  unusual  specimens  lif 
what  hills  would  look  like  without  the  soil,  that  is  to 
them  what  flesh  is  to  a  skeleton.    Their  shapes  wera 


^' 


I  As».1 


FRANCE. 


511 


I 
I 


often  wonderfully  fine,  and  the  great  headlands  thrust 
themselves  out,  and  took  such  hues  of  light  and  shade 
that  it  seemed  like  sailing  tlirough  a  picture.  In  the 
course  of  the  afternoon  a  squall  eame  up  and  black- 
ened the  sky  all  over  in  a  twinkling ;  oiu-  vessel  pitched 
and  tossed,  and  a  brig  a  little  way  from  us  had  her 
sails  blown  about  in  wild  fashion.  The  blue  of  the 
sea  turned  as  black  as  night,  and  soon  the  rain  began 
to  spatter  down  upon  ns,  and  continued  to  sprinkle 
and  drizzle  a  considerable  time  after  the  wind  had  suk- 
eided.  It  was  quite  calm  and  pleasant  when  we  en- 
tered  the  harbor  of  Marseilles,  which  lies  at  the  foot  of 
very  fair  hiUs,  and  is  »et  among  great  cliffs  of  atone. 
I  did  not  attend  much  Ut  this,  however,  being  in  dread 
of  the  difficulty  of  landing  and  passing  through  the 
custom  house,  with  our  twelve  or  fonrtten  trunks  and 
numberless  carpet-bags.  The  trouble  vanishe<l  into 
thin  air,  nevertheless,  aa  we  approached  it,  for  not  a 
single  trunk  or  bag  was  opened,  and,  moreover,  our 
lu^iage  and  ourselves  were  not  only  landed,  but  the 
greater  part  of  it  conveye<l  to  the  railway  without  any 
expense.  Long  live  Louis  Napoleon,  say  I.  We  es- 
tablished ourselves  at  the  Hotel  des  Colonies,  and  then 

Miss  S         ,  J ,  and  I  drove  hither  and  thither 

about  Marseilles,  making  arrangements  for  our  journey 
to  Avignon,  where  we  mean  to  go  to-day.  We  might 
Iiave  avoide<l  a  good  deal  of  this  annoyance  :  but  trav- 
ellers, like  other  people,  are  continually  getting  their 
experience  just  a  little  too  late.  It  was  after  nine 
*iefore  we  got  baek  to  the  hotel  and  took  our  tea  in 


612  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [18M 

AYIONOK. 

ffStd  de  T Europe^  June  IsU — I  remember  nothii^ 
very  special  to  record  about  Marseilles ;  though  it  waa 
really  like  passing  from  death  into  life,  to  find  our* 
selves  in  busy,  cheerful,  effervescing  France,  after  liv- 
ing so  long  between  asleep  and  awake  in  sluggish 
Italy.  Marseilles  is  a  very  interesting  and  entertain 
ing  town,  with  its  bold  surrounding  heights,  ite  wide 
streets,  —  so  they  seemed  to  us  after  the  Roman  alleys, 
»—  its  squares,  shady  with  trees,  its  diversified  popula- 
tion of  sailors,  citizens.  Orientals,  and  what  not ;  but 
I  have  no  spirit  for  description  any  longer;  being 
tired  of  seemg  thmgs,  and  still  more  of  telling  myself 
about  them.  Only  a  young  traveller  can  have  patience 
to  write  his  travels.  The  newest  things,  nowadays, 
have  a  familiarity  to  my  eyes ;  whereas  in  their  lost 
sense  of  novelty  lies  the  charm  and  power  of  descrip- 
tion. 

On  Monday  (80th  May),  though  it  began  with 
heavy  rain,  we  set  early  about  our  preparations  for  de- 
parture, .  .  •  and,  at  about  three,  we  left  the  Hdtel 
des  Colonies.  It  is  a  very  comfortable  hotel,  though 
expensive.  The  Restaurant  connected  with  it  occupies 
the  enclosed  court-yard  and  the  arcades  around  it ; 
and  it  was  a  good  amusement  to  look  down  from  th« 
surrounding  gallery,  communicating  with  oiir  apart 
ments,  and  see  the  fashion  and  manner  of  French  eat 
ing,  all  the  time  going  forward.  In  sunny  weather  k 
great  awning  is  spread  over  the  whole  court,  acrost 
from  the  upper  stories  of  the  house.  There  is  a  grasi 
plat  in  the  middle,  and  a  very  spacious  and  airy  din- 
{ng-saloon  is  thus  formed. 

Our  railroad  carriage  was  comfortable,  and  wo  found 


klM9.] 


FHANCB. 


513 


L 


it,  besides  two  other  Frenchwomen,  two  nnns.  They 
were  very  devout,  and  sedulously  read  their  little 
1)ooka  of  devotiou,  repeated  prayers  under  their  breatli, 
kissed  the  crucifixes  which  hung  at  their  girdles,  and 
told  a  string  of  beads,  which  they  passed  from  one 
to  the  otlier.  So  much  were  they  occupied  with  these 
duties,  that  they  scarcely  looked  at  the  scenery  along 
the  road,  though,  probably,  it  is  very  rare  for  them 
to  see  anything  outside  of  their  convent-walls.  They 
never  failed  to  mutter  a  prayer  and  kiss  tlie  crucifix 
whenever  we  plunged  into  a  tunnel.  If  they  glanced  at 
their  fellow-passengers,  it  was  shyly  and  askance,  with 
their  lips  in  motion  all  the  time,  like  children  afraid  to 
let  their  eyes  wander  from  their  lesson-booh.     One  of 

them,  however,  took  occasion  to  puU  down  R 'a 

dress,  which,  in  her  frisky  movements  about  the  car- 

ige,  bad  got  out  of  place,  too  high  for  tlie  nun's 
Eorum.  Neither  of  them  was  at  all  pretty, 
nor  was  the  black  stuff  dress  and  white  muslin  cap  Ul 
the  least  becoming ;  neither  were  their  features  of  an 
intelligent  or  high -bred  stamp.  Their  manners,  how- 
ever,  or  such  little  glimpses  as  I  could  get  of  them, 

ire  unexceptionable ;  and  when  I  drew  a  curtain  to 

itect  one  of  them  from  the  sun,  slie   made  me  a 

iry  courteous  gesture  of  thanks. 

We  had  some  very  good  views  both  of  sea  and  hills ; 

id  a  part  of  our  way  lay  along  the  bauks  of  the 
Khonc.  .  .  .  By  the  by,  at  the  station  at  Marseilles, 
I  bought  the  two  volumes  of  the  "  Livre  des  Mer- 
veilles,"  by  a  certain  author  of  my  acquaintance,  trans- 
lated into  French,  and  printed  and  illustrated  in  very 

pretty  style.     Miss  S also  liought  them,  and,  in 

answer  to  her  inquiry  for  other  works  by  the  same  au- 
thor, the  bookseller  observed  that  "  she  did  not  think 


B14   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [I8»t, 

MoDsieur  Nathaniel  had  publifthed  anytliing  else." 
The  Chriatian  iiame  BeuiuB  tu  be  the  most  important 
one  in  Fninee,  and  still  more  especially  in  Italy. 

We  arrived  at  Avignon,  HOtel  de  I'Europe,  in  the 
dusk  of  the  evening.  .  .  .  The  lassitude  of  llome  still 
clings  to  us,  and  I,  at  least,  feel  no  spring  of  lif«  or 
a^^vity,  whether  at  morn  or  eve.  In  the  moniing 
we  found  ourseivea  very  jileasantly  situat^l  as  regards 
lodgingB.  The  gallery  of  our  suite  of  rotiins  looks 
down  as  usual  into  an  enclosed  court,  three  sides  o' 
whieh  arc  formed  liy  the  stone  house  and  it^  Si»o 
■wings,  and  the  third  by  a  high  wall,  with  a  gateway  of 
iron  between  two  lofty  stone  pillars,  which,  for  their 
capitals,  have  great  atone  vases,  with  grass  growing  in 
them,  and  hanging  over  tlie  brim.  There  is  a  large 
plane-tree  in  one  comer  of  the  court,  and  creeping 
plants  clamljer  up  trellis*(s;  and  there  are  pots  of  flow- 
ers and  bird-cages,  all  of  which  give  a  very  fresh  and 
cheerful  aspect  to  the  enclosure.  The  court  is  paved 
with  small  roimd  stones ;  the  omnibus  belonging  to  the 
hotel,  and  all  the  carriages  of  guests,  drive  into  it ; 
and  the  wide  arch  of  the  stable  door  opens  under  the 
central  part  of  the  house.  Nevertheless,  the  scene  is 
not  in  all  respects  that  of  a  stable-yard  ;  for  gentlemen 
«jid  ladies  come  from  the  salle  d  manger  and  other 
rooms,  and  stand  talking  in  the  court,  or  occupy  chairs 
and  scats  there ;  children  play  about ;  the  hostess  or 
her  daughter  often  appears  and  t.alks  with  her  gneste 
or  servants;  dogs  lounge,  and,  in  short,  the  court  might 
well  enough  be  taken  for  the  one  scene  of  a  classic 
play.  The  hotel  seems  to  be  of  the  first  class,  though 
such  would  not  be  indiL-ated,  citlier  in  England  or 
America,  by  thus  mixing  up  the  stable  with  the  lu«Ig- 
{ngs.     I  have  taken  two  oi  three  rambles  about  |~ 


ablea  about  th^^ 


FRANCE.  515 

I  town,  and  have  climbed  a  liigh  rock  which  donunates 
I  over  it,  and  gives  a  most  extensive  view  from  the  broad 
I  table-!and  of  it«  sumnut.  The  old  church  of  Avignon 
■ —  as  old  as  the  times  of  its  popes,  and  older  —  stands 
close  beside  this  mighty  and  massive  crag.  We  went 
into  it,  and  found  it  a  dark  old  place,  with  broad,  in- 
terior archtis,  and  a  singularly  shaped  dome  ;  a  vener- 
able Gotliio  and  Grecian  porch,  with  ancient  frescos 
in  its  arclied  spaces ;  some  dusky  pictures  within ;  an 
ancient  chair  of  stone,  formerly  occupied  by  the  popes, 
and  much  else  that  would  have  been  exceedingly  inter- 
esting before  I  went  to  Borne.  But  Rome  takes  the 
charm  out  of  all  inferior  antiquity,  a^  well  as  the  life 
out  of  human  beings, 

This  forenoon,  J and  I  have  crossed  the  Klione 

by  a  bridge,  just  the  other  side  of  one  of  the  city  gates, 
which  is  near  our  hoteL  We  walked  along  the  river- 
eide,  and  saw  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  bi-idge,  wliich 
ends  abi-uptly  in  the  midst  of  the  stream ;  two  or  three 
arches  still  making  tremendous  strides  across,  while 
the  others  have  long  ago  been  crumbled  away  by  the 
niflh  of  the  rapid  river.  The  bridge  was  originally 
i  founded  by  St,  Benedict,  who  received  a  Divine  order 
I  to  undertake  the  work,  while  yet  a  shepherd-boy,  with 
only  three  sous  in  his  pocket ;  and  he  proved  the  a»i- 
thenticity  of  the  mission  by  taking  an  immense  stone 
on  his  shoulder,  and  laying  it  for  the  foundation. 
There  is  still  an  ancient  chapel  midway  on  the  bridge, 
and  I  believe  St,  Benedict  lies  buried  there,  in  the 
midst  of  his  dilapidated  work.  The  bridge  now  used 
is  considerably  lower  down  the  stream.  It  is  a  wooden 
suspension-bridge,  broader  than  the  ancient  one,  and 
doubtless  more  tlian  supplies  its  place ;  else,  uni)iie» 
tionably,  St,  Benedict  would  think  it  necessary  to  re- 


616  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  ^H 

pair  hia  own.  The  view  from  the  inner  aide  o(  W^ 
mined  etructure,  grass-grown  and  wee<Iy,  ami  leading 
to  such  a  precipitous  plunge  into  tbo  ewift  river,  is 
very  picturesque,  in  connt^itiou  with  the  gray  town 
and  above  it,  the  gi'eat,  massive  bulk  of  the  cliff,  the 
towers  of  the  church,  and  of  a  vast  old  edifice,  shnjm- 
less,  ugly,  and  venerable,  which  the  popes  biult  -1 
occupied  as  their  palace,  many  centuries  ago. 

After  dinner,  we  all  set  out  on  a  walk,  iu  the  o 
of  which  we   called  at  a  bookseller's  shop,  to  i 

U an  enonnouB  cat,  which  I  hail  already  aeen. 

It  is  of  the  Angora  breed,  of  a  mottled  yelhjw  color, 
and  is  really  a  wonder ;  aa  big  and  broad  as  a  toler- 
ably sized  dog,  very  soft  and  silken,  and  appiLretitly 
of  the  gentlest  disposition.  I  never  imagined  the  like, 
nor  felt  anything  imi  deeply  soft  as  this  great  beast. 
Its  master  seems  very  fond  and  proud  of  it ;  and  great 
a  favorite  s&  the  cat  is,  she  does  not  take  airs  upon 
herself,  but  is  gently  shy  and  timid  in  her  demoni 
tions. 

We  ascended  the  great  Rocher  above  the  pala 
the  popes,  and  on  our  way  I(x»ke<l  into  the  old  chm 
which  was  so  dim  in  the  decline  nf  <iay  that  we  conM 
not  see  within  the  dusky  arches,  through  which  the 
chapels  eominunicated  with  the  nave.  Thence  we 
pursued  our  way  up  the  farther  ascent,  and,  standing 
on  tlie  edge  of  the  precipice,  — ■  protected  by  a  parapet 
of  stone,  and  lu  other  places  by  an  iron  railiiig,  —  we 
could  look  down  upon  tlie  road  that  winds  its  dusky 
trai^k  far  below,  and  at  the  river  ithone,  which  eddies 
dose  beside  it.  This  is  indeed  a  massive  and  lofty 
cliff,  and  it  tumbles  down  so  precipitously  that  I  could 
readily  have  flung  myself  from  the  bank,  and  alighted 
•m  my  head  in  the  middle  of  the  river.     The  J 


,  shajm- 
lilt  M^— 

eoo^^l 
to  iMV 


irs  uiK>n 
lalaal^^l 


■  Hbm^_ 


iSaa.J  FRANCE. 

passes  so  near  its  base  that  I  threw  stones  a  good  way 
into  its  current.  We  talked  with  a  man  of  Avignon, 
who  leanutl  over  the  parapet  near  by,  and  he  was 
Tery  kind  in  explaining  the  points  of  view,  and  told 
us  that  the  river,  which  winds  and  doubles  upon  itself 
BO  as  to  look  like  at  least  two  rivers,  is  really  ths 
Rhone  alone.  The  Durano«  joins  with  it  within  a  few 
miles  below  Avignon,  but  is  here  invisible. 

IlSlel  de  r Europe,  June  2d.  —  This  morning  w© 
went  ^ain  to  the  Duomo  of  the  popes  ;  and  this  time 
we  allowed  the  custode,  or  sacristan,  to  show  us  the 
curiosities  of  it.  He  led  us  into  a  chapei  apart,  and 
showed  ua  the  old  Gothic  tomb  of  Pope  Jolin  XXII., 
where  the  recumbent  statue  of  the  pope  lies  beoeath 
one  of  those  Iieautiful  and  venerable  canopies  of  stone 
which  look  at  once  so  light  and  so  solemn.  I  know 
sot  how  many  hundred  years  old  it  is,  but  everything 

^^)f  Gothic  origin  has  a  faculty  of  conveying  the  idea 
of  age ;  whereas  classic  forms  seem  to  have  nothing 
io  do  with  time,  and  so  lose  the  kind  of  impressive- 
nesa  tliat  arises  from  suggestions  of  decay  and  the 
past. 

In  the  sacristy  the  guide  opened  a  cupboard  that  con- 
tained the  jewels  and  sacred  treasures  of  the  church, 
and  showed  a  most  exquisite  figure  of  Clirist  in  ivory, 
represented  as  on  a  cross  of  elwny ;  and  it  was  ex- 
ecuted with  wonderful  truth  and  force  of  expression, 
and  with  gi-eat  beauty  likewise.  I  do  not  see  what  a 
full-length  marble  statue  could  have  had  that  was  lack- 
ing in  this  little  ivory  figure  of  hardly  more  than  a 
foot  high.  It  is  about  two  centuries  old,  by  an  un- 
known artist.  There  is  another  famous  ivory  stat* 
raette  in  Avignon  which  seems  to  be  more  celebrated 


618   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTK-BOOKS.    []SB» 

than  this,  but  oaa  hardly  be  roperior.  I  shall  gladly 
look  at  it  if  it  oomes  in  my  way. 

Kext  to  this,  the  prettiest  thing  the  nun  showed  ni 
was  a  circle  of  emeralds,  in  ^ne  of  the  holy  imple- 
ments ;  and  then  he  exhibited  a  little  bit  of  a  pope's 
shall ;  also  a  great  old  oroaier,  that  looked  as  if  nude 
chiefly  of  silver,  and  partly  gilt ;  but  I  saw  where  the 
plating  of  silver  was  worn  away,  and  betrayed  tbe 
copper  of  its  actual  substance.  There  were  two  or 
three  pictures  m  the  sacrisfy,  by  ancient  and  modem 
French  artists,  veiy  unlike  tiie  productions  oi  the 
Italian  masters,  but  not  without  a  bean^  of  their 
own. 

Leaving  the  sacristy,  we  returned  into  the  church, 

where  U and  J began  to  draw  the  pope's  old 

stone  cbwr.  There  is  a  beast,  or  perhaps  more  than 
one,  grotesquely  sculptured  upon  it  -,  the  seat  is  high 
and  square,  the  back  low  and  pointed,  and  it  offera  no 
enticing  promise  to  a  weary  man. 

The  interior  of  tbe  church  is  massively  picturesque, 
with  its  vaulted  roof,  and  a  stone  gallery,  heavily  or- 
namented, running  along  each  side  of  the  nave.  Each 
arch  of  the  nave  g^ves  admittance  to  a  chapel,  in  aH 
of  which  there  are  pictures,  and  sculptures  in  most  of 
them.  One  of  these  chapels  is  of  tbe  time  of  Charle- 
magne, and  has  a  vaulted  roof  of  admirable  arohiteo- 
ture,  covered  with  frescos  of  modem  date  and  tittle 
merit  In  an  adjacent  chapel  is  the  stone  monument 
of  Pope  Benedict,  whose  statue  reposes  on  it,  like 
many  which  I  have  seen  in  the  Cathedral  of  York  and 
other  old  English  churches.  In  another  part  we  saw 
a  monument,  consisting  of  a  plain  slab  supported  on 
pillars ;  it  is  said  to  be  of  a  Boman  or  very  early 
Christian  epoch.    In  another  chapel  was  a  figure  c^ 


FBANCE. 

Chrirt  in  wax,  I  believe,  and  clothed  in  real  drapery ; 
a  very  ugly  object.  Also,  a  figure  reposing  under  a 
slab,  which  strikes  the  spectator  with  the  idea  that  it 
IB  really  a  dead  person  enveloped  in  a  shroud.  There 
are  windows  of  piunted  glaits  in  some  of  the  chapels ; 
and  the  gloom  of  the  dimly  lighted  interior,  especially 
beneath  the  broad,  low  arches,  is  very  impressive. 

While  we  were  there  some  women  assembled  at  one 
of  the  altars,  and  went  through  their  acts  of  devotion 
without  the  help  of  a  priest ;  one  and  another  of  them 
altenmt«ly  repeating  prayers,  to  which  the  rest  re- 
sponded. The  murmur  of  their  voices  took  a  musical 
tone,  which  was  reverberated  by  the  vaulted  arches. 

U and  I  DOW  came  out ;  and,  under  the  porch, 

we  found  an  old  woman  selling  rosaries,  little  relig- 
ious books,  and  other  holy  things.  We  bought  two 
little  medals  of  the  Immaculate  Virgin,  one  purport- 
ing to  be  of  silver,  the  other  of  gold  ;  but  as  Iwtb  to- 
gether cost  only  two  or  three  sous,  the  genuineness  of 
the  material  may  well  be  doubted.  We  sat  down  on 
the  steps  of  a  crucifix  which  ia  placed  in  front  of  the 
church,  and  the  children  began  to  draw  the  porch,  of 
which  I  hardly  know  whether  to  call  the  architecture 
classic  or  Gothic  (as  I  said  before)  ;  at  all  events  it 
has  a  venerable  aspect,  and  there  are  frescos  within  its 
arches  by  Simone  Memmi.  .  .  .  The  popes'  palace  ia 
contiguous  to  the  church,  and  just  below  it,  on  the 
hill-side.  It  is  now  occupied  as  barracks  by  some  reg- 
iments of  soldiers,  a  number  of  whom  were  lounging 
before  the  entrance ;  but  we  passed  the  sentinel  with- 
out being  challenged,  and  addressed  ourselves  to  the 
concierge,  who  readily  assented  to  our  request  to  be 
shown  through  the  edifice.  A  French  gentleman  and 
bdy,  likewise,  came  with  similar  purpose,  and  weot 


620   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [I860. 

the  rounds  along  with  us.  The  palace  is  such  a  con- 
fused heap  and  conglomeration  of  buildings,  that  it  is 
impossible  to  get  within  any  sort  of  a  regular  descrip- 
tion. It  is  a  huge,  shapeless  mass  of  architecture ; 
and  if  it  ever  had  any  pretence  to  a  plan,  it  has  lost  it 
in  the  modem  alterations.  For  instance,  an  immense 
and  lofty  chapel,  or  rather  church,  has  had  two  floors, 
one  above  the  other,  laid  at  different  stages  of  its 
height ;  and  the  upper  one  of  these  floors,  which  ex- 
tends just  where  the  arches  of  the  vaulted  roof  begin 
to  spring  from  the  pillars,  is  ranged  round  with  the 
beds  of  one  of  the  regiments  of  soldiers.  They  ar^ 
small  iron  bedsteads,  each  with  its  narrow  mattress, 
and  covered  with  a  dark  blanket.  On  some  of  them 
lay  or  lounged  a  soldier ;  other  soldiers  were  cleaning 
their  accoutrements ;  elsewhere  we  saw  parties  of  them 
pkying  cards.  So  it  was  wherever  we  went  among 
those  large,  dingy,  gloomy  halls  and  chambers,  which, 
no  doubt,  were  once  stately  and  sumptuous,  with  pic- 
tures, with  tapestry,  and  all  sorts  of  adornment  that 
the  Middle  Ages  knew  how  to  use.  The  windows 
threw  a  sombre  light  through  embrasures  at  least 
two  feet  thick.  There  were  staircases  of  magnificent 
breadth.  We  were  shown  into  two  small  chapels,  in 
different  parts  of  the  building;  both  containing  the  re- 
mains of  old  frescos  wofully  defaced.  In  one  of  them 
was  a  light,  spiral  staircase  of  iron,  built  in  the  centre 
of  the  room  as  a  means  of  contemplating  the  frescos, 
which  were  said  to  be  the  work  of  our  old  friend 
Giotto.  .  .  .  Finally,  we  climbed  a  long,  long,  narrow 
stair,  built  in  the  thickness  of  the  wall,  and  thus 
gained  access  to  the  top  of  one  of  the  towers,  whence 
we  saw  the  noblest  landscapes,  mountains,  plains,  and 
the  Shone,  broad  and  bright,  winding  hither  and 
thither,  as  if  it  had  lost  its  way. 


I 


FRANCE.  5^1 

Beneath  our  feet  was  the  gray,  ugly  old  palace,  and 
its  many  courts,  jitst  as  voiii  of  system  and  as  incon- 
ceivable as  when  we  were  burrowing  through  its  be- 
wildering passages.  No  end  of  historical  romances 
might  be  made  out  of  this  castle  of  the  popes;  and 
there  ought  to  be  a  ghost  in  every  room,  and  droves 
of  them  in  some  of  the  rooms;  for  there  have  been 
murders  here  in  the  gross  and  in  detail,  as  well  hun- 
dreds of  years  ago.  as  no  longer  back  than  the  French 
Revolution,  when  there  was  a  great  massacre  in  one 
of  the  courts.  Traces  of  this  bloody  business  were 
visible  in  actual  stains  on  the  wall  only  a  few  years 
ago. 

Returning  to  the  room  of  the  concierge,  who,  being 
a  little  stiff  with  age,  had  sent  an  attendant  round 
with  us,  instead  of  accompanying  us  in  pei'son,  ha 
Bhowed  us  a  picture  of  Rienzi,  the  last  of  the  Roman 
tribimes,  who  was  once  a  prisoner  here.  On  a  table, 
beneath  the  picture,  stood  a  little  vase  of  earthenware 
containing  some  silver  coin.  We  took  it  as  a  hint, 
in  the  customary  style  of  French  elegance,  that  a  fee 
should  be  deposited  here,  instead  of  being  put  into  the 
hand  of  the  concierge ;  so  the  French  gentleman  de- 
}>osited  half  a  frano,  and  I,  in  my  magnificence,  twice 
as  much. 

S6tel  de  r Europe^  June  Gth,  —  We  are  still  here. 
...  I  have  been  daily  to  the  Rocher  des  Doms,  and 
have  grown  familiar  with  the  old  church  on  its  decliv- 
ity. I  think  I  might  become  attached  to  it  by  seeing 
it  often.  A  sombi-e  old  interior,  with  its  heavy  arches, 
and  its  roof  vaulted  like  the  top  of  a  trunk ;  ita  stone 
gallery,  with  ponderous  adornments,  running  round 
three  sides.     I  observe  that  It  is  a  daily  custom  of  the 


622  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [ISW 

old  women  to  My  tbetr  prayers  in  concert,  Bometunet 
making  a  pilgrimage,  as  it  were,  from  chapel  to  chapeL 
The  voice  of  one  of  tliem  is  heard  ronning  through  the 
■eries  of  petitions,  and  at  intervals  the  voices  of  the 
others  join  and  swell  into  a  chorus,  so  that  it  is  like  a 
river  connecting  a  aeries  of  lakes;  or,  not  to  nae  so 
gigantic  a  simile,  the  one  voice  is  like  a  thread,  oq 
which  the  beads  of  a  rosary  are  strung. 

One  day  two  priests  oame  and  sat  down  beside  thoso 
prayerful  women,  and  joined  in  their  petitiona.  I  am 
inclined  to  hope  that  there  is  something  genuine  in  the 
devotion  of  these  old  women. 

The  view  from  the  top  of  the  Bocher  des  Doms  (a 
oontraotion  of  Domin^s)  grows  upon  me,  and  ia  truly 
magnificent;  a  vast  mountain  -  girdled  plun,  iUumU 
nated  by  the  far  windings  and  reaches  of  the  Hhone. 
The  river  is  here  almost  as  turbid  as  the  Tiber  itself ; 
but,  I  remember,  in  the  upper  part  of  its  course  the 
waters  ate  beautifully  transparent.  A  powerful  rush 
is  indicated  by  the  swirls  and  eddies  of  its  broad 
surface. 

Yesterday  was  a  race  day  at  Avignon,  and  i^par- 
ently  almost  the  whole  population  and  a  great  many 
struigers  streamed  out  of  the  city  gate  nearest  our 
hotel,  on  their  way  to  the  raoe-oourse.  There  were 
many  noticeable  figures  that  might  come  well  into  a 
French  picture  or  description ;  but  oatj  one  remains 
in  my  memory,  —  a  young  man  with  a  wooden  \eg, 
setting  off  for  the  course  —  a  walk  of  several  miles,  I 
believe — with  prodigious  courage  and  alacrity,  flour> 
iahiug  his  wooden  leg  with  an  air  and  grace  that  seemed 
to  render  it  positively  flexible.  The  crowd  returned 
towards  sunset,  and  almost  all  night  long  the  streets 
and  the  whda  air  of  tlie  old  town  were  full  of  siHig  and 


S9.] 


FRANCE. 


523 


merriment.  There  was  a  ball  in  a  temporary  striuv 
ture,  covered  with  an  awning,  in  the  Place  d'Horloge, 
and  a  showman  has  erected  his  teut  and  spread  forth 
his  great  painted  canvases,  auuouuciog  an  anaconda 

and  a  sea-tiger  to  be  seen.     J paid  four  sous  for 

admittance,  and  found  that  the  sea-'tiger  was  nothing 
but  a  large  seal,  and  the  anaconda  altogether  a  myth. 
I  have  rambled  a  good  deal  about  the  town.  Ita 
streets  are  crooked  and  perplexing,  and  paved  with 
round  pebbles  for  the  most  part,  which  aifonl  more 
uncomfortable  pedestrianism  than  the  pavement  of 
Kome  itself.  It  is  an  ancient-looking  place,  with  some 
large  old  mansions,  but  few  that  are  individually  im- 
pressive ;  though  here  and  there  one  sees  an  antique 
entrance,  a  comer  tower,  or  other  bit  of  anti(|uity, 
that  throws  a  venerable  effect  over  the  gray  common- 
place of  past  centuries.  The  tewn  is  not  overcleaa, 
and  often  there  is  a  kennel  of  unhappy  odor.  There 
appear  to  have  been  many  more  churches  and  devo- 
tional establishments  under  the  ancient  dominion  of 
the  popes  than  have  been  kept  intact  in  subsequent 
ages ;  the  tower  and  facade  of  a  church,  for  instance, 
form  the  front  of  a  carpenter's  shop,  or  some  such  ple- 
beian place.  The  church  where  Laura  lay  has  quite 
disappeared,  and  her  tomb  along  with  it.  The  town 
reminds  me  of  Chester,  though  it  does  not  in  the  least 
resemble  it,  and  is  not  nearly  so  picturesque.  Like 
Chester,  it  is  entirely  surrounded  by  a  wall ;  and  that 
of  Avignon  —  though  it  has  no  delightful  promenade 
on  its  top,  as  the  wall  of  Chester  has  —  is  the  more 
perfectly  preserved   in   its  mediaeval   form,  and   the 

more  picturesque  of  the  two,     J and  I  have  once 

or  twice  walked  nearly  round  it,  commencing  from  the 

^m _i L 


624  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [18691 

this  point  it  stretches  for  a  considerable  distance  along 
by  the  river,  and  here  there  is  a  broad  promenade, 
with  trees,  and  blocks  of  stone  for  seats ;  on  one  side 
*Hhe  arrowy  Shone,''  generally  carrying  a  cooling 
breeze  along  with  it ;  on  the  other,  the  gray  wall,  with 
its  battlements  and  machicolations,  impending  over 
what  was  once  the  moat,  but  which  is  now  full  of  care- 
less and  untrained  shrubbery.  At  intervals  there  are 
round  towers  swelling  out  from  the  wall,  and  rising 
a  little  above  it.  After  about  half  a  mile  along  the 
river-side  the  wall  turns  at  nearly  right  angles,  and 
still  there  is  a  wide  road,  a  shaded  walk,  a  boulevard ; 
and  at  short  distances  are  cafds,  with  their  little  round 
tables  before  the  door,  or  small  shady  nooks  of  shrub- 
bery. So  numerous  are  these  retreats  and  pleasaunces 
that  I  do  not  see  how  the  little  old  town  can  sup- 
port them  all,  especially  as  there  are  a  great  many 
caf  ^s  within  the  walls.  I  do  not  remember  seeing  any 
soldiers  on  guard  at  the  numerous  city  gates,  but  there 
is  an  office  in  the  side  of  each  gate  for  levying  the 
octroi^  and  old  women  are  sometimes  on  guard  there. 

This  morning,  after  breakfast,  J and  I  crossed 

the  suspension-bridge  close  by  the  gate  nearest  our 
hotel,  and  walked  to  the  ancient  town  of  Villeneuve, 
on  the  other  side  of  the  Shone.  The  first  bridge 
leads  to  an  island,  from  the  farther  side  of  which  an- 
other very  long  one,  with  a  timber  foundation,  accom- 
plishes the  passage  of  the  other  branch  of  the  Shone. 
There  was  a  good  breeze  on  the  river,  but  after  cross- 
ing it  we  found  the  rest  of  the  walk  excessively  hot 
This  town  of  Villeneuve  is  of  very  ancient  origin,  and 
owes  its  existence,  it  is  said,  to  the  famous  holiness  of 
a  female  saint,  which  gathered  round  her  abode  and 
burial-place  a  great  many  habitations  of  people  who 


^ 


90 


PRANCE. 


525 


I 

I 
I 


reverenced  her.  She  was  the  daughter  of  the  King 
of  Saragossa,  and  I  presume  she  chose  this  site  be- 
cause it  was  so  rocky  and  desolate.  AFterwaiils  it  ha«l 
a  long  tnediEeval  history;  and  in  the  time  of  the  Avig- 
non popes,  the  cardinals,  regretful  of  their  abandoned 
Koman  villas,  built  pleasure  houses  here,  so  that  the 
town  was  called  Villa  Nuova.  After  they  had  done 
their  best,  it  must  liave  seemed  to  these  poor  cardinals 
but  a  rude  and  sad  exchange  for  the  Borghese,  the 
Albant,  the  Pamfili  Doria,  and  those  other  perfeetest 
results  of  man's  luxurious  art.  And  probably  the 
tradition  of  the  Roman  villas  had  really  l)een  kept 
alive,  and  extant  examples  of  them  all  the  way  down- 
ward from  the  times  of  the  empire.  But  this  Ville- 
neuve  is  the  stoniest,  roughest  town  that  can  be  im- 
^ned.  There  are  a  few  large  old  houses,  to  be  sure, 
but  built  on  a  line  with  shabby  villf^  <iwellings  and 
bams,  and  so  presenting  little  but  samples  of  magnif- 
icent sliabbiness.  Perhaps  I  might  have  found  traces 
of  old  splendor  if  I  had  sought  for  them ;  but,  not 
having  the  history  of  the  place  in  my  mind,  I  passed 
through  its  scrambling  streets  without  imagining  that 
Princes  of  the  Church  had  once  made  their  abode 
here.  The  inhabitants  now  are  peasants,  or  chiefly 
such ;  though,  for  aught  1  know,  some  of  the  French 
noblesse  may  burrow  in  these  palaces  that  look  so  like 

A  large  church,  with  a  massive  tower,  stands  near 
the  centre  of  the  town ;  and,  of  course,  I  did  not  fail 
to  enter  its  arched  door,  —  a  pointed  ari'h.  with  many 
frames  and  mouldings,  one  within  anotlier.  An  old 
woman  was  at  her  devotions,  and  several  others  came 
m  and  knelt  during  my  stay  there.  It  was  quite  an 
IDCeresting  interior ;    a  long  nave,   with  six    pointed 


626  FRSyCB  ANV  tTALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  flSW 

uohes  on  each  side,  beneath  which  were  as  many 
chapels.  The  walls  were  rich  with  pictures,  not  only 
in  the  chapels,  but  up  and  down  the  nave,  above  the 
arches.  There  were  gilded  virgins,  too,  and  much 
other  qnaint  device  that  produced  an  effect  that  I 
rather  liked  than  otherwise.  At  the  end  of  the  church, 
&rthest  from  the  high  altar,  there  were  four  columns 
of  exceedingly  rich  marble,  and  a  good  deal  more  tA 
such  precious  material  was  wrought  into  the  chapels 
and  altars.  There  was  an  old  stone  seat,  also,  of  Botne 
former  pope  or  prelate.  The  church  was  dim  enough 
to  cause  the  lamps  in  the  shrines  to  beoome  points  of 
vivid  light,  and,  looking  from  end  to  end,  it  was  a 
long,  venerable,  tarnished.  Old- World  vista,  not  at  all 
tampered  with  by  modem  taste. 

We  now  went  on  our  way  through  the  village,  and, 
emerging  from  a  gate,  went  clambering  towards  the 
castle  of  St.  Andr^,  which  stands,  perhaps,  a  quarter 
of  a  mile  beyond  it.  This  castle  was  built  by  Philip 
le  Bel,  as  a  restraint  to  the  people  of  Avignon  in  ex- 
tending their  power  on  this  ude  of  the  Rhone.  We 
happened  not  to  take  the  most  direct  way,  and  so  ap- 
proached the  castle  ou  the  farther  side,  and  were 
obliged  to  go  nearly  round  the  hill  on  which  it  stands, 
before  striking  into  the  path  which  leads  to  its  gate. 
It  crowns  a  very  bold  and  difficult  hill,  directly  abovo 
the  Khone,  opposite  to  Avignon,  —  which  is  so  far  off 
that  objects  are  not  minutely  distinguishable,  —  and 
looking  down  upon  the  long,  str^gling  town  of  Ville. 
neuve.  It  must  have  been  a  place  of  migh^  strength 
in  its  day.  Its  ramparts  seem  still  almost  entire,  as 
looked  upon  from  without,  and  when,  at  length,  we 
climbed  the  rough,  rocky  pathway  to  the  entrance,  we 
found  the  two  vast  round  towers,  with  their  battle- 


less.] 


FRANCE. 


627 


I 


mented  summits  and  archcKl  gateway  between  them, 
just  as  perfect  as  they  could  have  been  five  hundred 
or  more  years  ago.  Some  external  defencea  are  now, 
however,  in  a  state  of  ruin ;  and  there  are  only  the 
remaiuB  of  a  tower,  that  once  arose  between  the  two 
round  towers,  and  was  apparently  much  more  elevated, 
than  they.  A  little  in  front  of  the  gate  was  a  ntonu-' 
mental  cross  of  stone;  and  in  the  arch,  between  the 
two  round  towers,  were  two  little  boys  at  play ;  and 
an  old  woman  soon  showed  herself,  but  took  no  notice 
of  us.  Casting  oiu*  eyes  within  the  gateway,  we  saw 
what  looked  a  rough  village  street,  betwixt  old  houses 
built  ponderously  of  stone,  but  having  far  more  the 
aspeot  of  huts  than  of  castle-halls.  They  were  evi- 
dently the  dwellings  of  peasantry,  and  people  engaged 
in  rustic  labor ;  and  no  doubt  they  have  burrowed  into 
the  primitive  structures  of  the  castle,  and,  as  they 
found  convenient,  have  taken  their  crumbling  mate- 
rials to  build  barns  and  farm-houses.  There  was  space 
and  accommodation  for  a  very  considerable  popula- 
tion; but  the  men  were  probably  at  work  in  the  fields, 
and  the  only  persona  visible  were  the  children  afore- 
said, and  one  or  two  old  women  bearing  bundles  of 
twigs  on  their  backs.  They  showed  no  curioaity  re- 
specting us.  and  though  the  wide  space  included  with- 
in the  castle-rampart  seemed  almost  full  of  habitations 
ruinous  or  otherwise.  I  never  found  such  a  solitude  in 
any  ruin  before.  It  contrasts  very  favorably  in  this 
particular  with  English  castles,  where,  though  you  do 
not  find  rustic  villages  within  the  warlike  enclosure, 
there  is  always  a  padlocked  gate,  always  a  guide,  and 
generally  half  a  dozen  idle  tourists.  But  here  was 
only  antiquity,  with  merely  the  natural  growth  o£ 
fungous  human  life  upon  it 


628   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  £185* 

We  went  to  the  end  of  the  castle  court  and  sal 
down,  for  lack  of  other  shade,  among  some  inhospita- 
ble nettles  that  grew  close  to  the  walL  Close  by  ns 
was  a  great  gap  in  the  ramparts,  —  it  may  have  been 
a  breach  which  was  once  stormed  through  ;  and  it  now 
afforded  us  an  airy  and  sunny  glimpse  of  distant  hills. 

.  •  •  J sketched  part  of  the  broken  wall,  which, 

by  the  by,  did  not  seem  to  me  nearly  so  thick  as  the 
walls  of  English  castles.  Then  we  returned  through 
the  gate,  and  I  stopped,  rather  impatiently,  under  the 

hot  sun,  while  J drew  the  outline  of  the  two  round 

towers.  This  done,  we  resumed  our  way  homeward, 
after  drinking  from  a  very  deep  well  close  by  the 
square  tower  of  Philip  le  Bel.  Thence  we  went  melt- 
ing through  the  sunshine,  which  beat  upward  as  piti- 
lessly from  the  white  road  as  it  blazed  downwards 
W  ia.e  sky.  .  .  . 

GEXEYA. 

H6td  cTAngleterre^  June  11th.  — We  left  Avignon 
on  Tuesday,  7th,  and  took  the  rail  to  Valence,  where 
we  arrived  between  four  and  five,  and  put  up  at  the 
Hdtel  de  la  Poste,  an  ancient  house,  with  dirty  floors 
and  dirt  generally,  but  otheiwise  comfortable  enough. 
.  .  .  Valence  is  a  stately  old  town,  full  of  tall  houses 
and  irregular  streets.  We  found  a  Cathedral  there, 
not  very  large,  but  with  a  high  and  venerable  interior, 
a  nave  supported  by  tall  pillars,  from  the  height  of 
which  spring  arches.  This  loftiness  is  characteristic  of 
French  churches,  as  distinguished  from  those  of  Italy. 
•  .  •  We  likewise  saw,  close  by  the  Cathedral,  a  large 
monument  with  four  arched  entrances  meeting  benes^ 
a  vaulted  roof ;  but,  on  inquiry  of  an  old  priest  and 
other  persons,  we  could  get  no  account  of  it,  except 


ISSSJ 


SWITZERLAND. 


529 


that  it  was  a  tomb,  and  of  unknown  antiquity.  The 
architecture  seemed  classic,  and  jet  it  had  some  Gotbic 
peculiarities,  and  it  was  a  revereud  and  beautiful  ob- 
ject. Had  I  written  up  my  Journal  while  the  town 
was  fresh  in  my  remembrance,  I  might  have  found 
much  to  describe ;  but  a  successiou  of  other  objects 
have  obliterated  most  of  the  impressions  1  have  re- 
ceived here.  Our  railway  ride  to  Valence  was  intol- 
erably hot.  I  have  felt  nothing  like  it  since  leaving 
America,  and  that  is  so  long  ago  that  the  terrible  dis- 
comfort was  just  as  good  as  new.  .  .  . 

We  left  Valence  at  four,  and  came  tliat  afternoon 
to  Lyons,  still  along  the  Rhone.  Either  the  waters  of 
this  river  assume  a  transparency  in  winter  wliicb  they 
lose  in  summer,  or  I  was  mistaken  in  thinking  them 
transparent  on  our  former  journey.  They  are  now 
turbid  ;  but  the  hue  does  not  surest  the  idea  of  a  run- 
ning mud-puddle,  as  the  water  of  the  Tiber  does.  Mo 
uns,  however,  are  so  beautiful  in  the  quality  of 
their  waters  as  the  clear,  brown  rivers  of  New  Eng- 
land. The  scenery  along  this  part  of  the  Rhone,  aa 
we  have  found  all  the  way  from  Marseilles,  ia  very 
fine  and  impressive;  old  villages,  rocky  cliffs,  castel- 
lated steeps,  quaint  chateaux,  and  a  thousand  other 
interesting  objects. 

We  arrived  at  Lyons  at  five  o'clock,  and  went  to 
flie  Hotel  de  I'Universe,  to  which  we  had  been  recom- 
mended by  our  good  hostess  at  Avignon.  The  day 
had  become  showery,  but  J and  I  strolled  about 

little  before  nightfall,  and  saw  the  general  charac- 
teristics of  the  place,  Lyons  is  a  city  of  very  stately 
ftSpect,  hardly  inferior  to  Paris ;  for  it  has  regular 
itreets  of  lofty  houses,  and  inunense  squares  planted 
vith  trees,  and  adorned  with  statues  and  foantain& 


680  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTEBOOKS.  [ISSl 

New  edifices  of  great  splendor  are  in  process  of  ereo* 
tdon;  and  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Rhone,  whers 
the  site  rises  steep  and  high,  there  are  structures  of 
older  date,  that  have  an  exceedingly  picturesque  ef- 
fect, looking  down  upon  the  narrow  town. 

The  next  morning  I  went  out  with  J in  quest 

of  my  bankers,  and  of  the  American  Consul ;  and  as  I 
had  forgotten  the  directions  of  the  waiter  of  tlie  hotel, 
I  of  course  went  astray,  and  saw  a  good  deal  more  of 
Lyons  than  I  intended.  In  my  wanderings  I  crossed 
the  Rhone,  and  found  myself  in  a  portion  of  the  city 
evidently  much  older  than  that  with  whioh  I  had  pre- 
viously made  acquaintance ;  narrow,  crooked,  irr^o- 
lar,  and  rudely  paved  streets,  full  of  dingy  business 
and  bustle,  —  the  city,  in  short,  as  it  existed  a  century 
ago,  and  how  much  earlier  I  know  not.  Above  rises 
that  lofty  elevation  of  ground  which  I  before  noticed ; 
and  the  glimpses  of  its  stately  old  buildings  tibrongk 
the  openings  of  the  street  were  very  picturesque.  Un- 
less it  be  Edinburgh,  I  have  not  seen  any  oilier  citj 
that  has  such  striking  features.  Altogether  unawares, 
immediately  after  crossing  the  bridge,  we  came  upon 
the  Cathedral ;  and  the  grand,  time-blackened  Gothic 
front,  with  its  deeply  arched  entrances,  seemed  to  me 
as  good  as  anything  I  ever  saw,  —  unexpectedly  more 
impressive  than  all  the  ruins  of  Some.  I  could  but 
merely  glance  at  its  interior  ;  so  that  its  noble  height 
and  venerable  space,  filled  with  the  dim,  consecrated 
light  of  pictured  windows,  recur  to  me  as  a  vision. 
And  it  did  me  good  to  enjoy  the  awfulness  and  sanc- 
tity of  Gothic  architecture  again,  after  so  long  shiver* 
ing  in  classic  porticos.  .  .  . 

We  now  recrossed  the  river.  .  .  .  The  Frank  metb 
ods  and  arrangements  in  matters  of  business  seem  tl 


|r!K».] 


SWITZERLAND. 


631 


lie  excellent,  so  far  as  effecting  the  proposed  object  is 
ooDcemed  ;  but  tiiem  is  suub  an  inexomblc  succession 
of  steel-wrought  forms,  that  life  ie  not  loug  enough  for 
BO  much  accuraey.  The  stranger,  too,  goes  biindfolit 
through  all  these  processes,  not  knowing  what  is  to 
turn  up  next,  till,  when  quite  in  despair,  he  suddenly 
finds  his  business  mysteriously  accomplished.  .  .  . 

We  left  Lyons  at  four  o'clock,  taking  the  railway 
for  Geneva.  The  scenery  was  very  striking  through 
out  the  journey  ;  but  I  allowed  tlie  hills,  deep  valleys, 
high  impending  cliffs,  and  whatever  else  I  saw  along 
the  road,  to  pass  from  me  without  an  ink-blot.  We 
reached  Geneva  at  nearly  ten  o'clock.  ...  It  is  situ- 
ated partly  on  low,  flat  ground,  bordering  the  lake, 
and  behind  thb  level  space  it  rises  by  steep,  p^nfully 
paved  streets,  some  of  which  can  hardly  be  accessible 
by  wheeled  carriages.  The  prosperity  of  the  town  is 
indicated  by  a  good  many  new  and  splendid  edifiees, 
for  commercial  and  other  purposes,  in  the  vicinity  of 
the  lake ;  but  intermixed  with  these  there  are  many 
4]aaint  buildings  of  a  stem  gray  color,  and  in  a  style 
of  architecture  that  I  prefer  a  thousand  times  to  tlio 
monotony  of  Italian  streets.  Inunensely  high,  red 
roofs,  with  windows  in  them,  produce  an  effect  that 
delights  me.  They  are  as  ugly,  perhaps,  as  can  well 
be  conceived,  but  very  striking  and  individual.  At 
each  comer  of  these  ancient  bouses  frequently  is  a 
tower,  the  roof  of  which  rises  in  a  square  pyramidal 
form,  or,  if  the  tower  be  roun<l,  in  a  roimd  pyramidal 
form.  Ai'ched  pass^es,  gloomy  and  grimy,  pass  from 
one  street  to  another.  The  lower  town  creeps  with 
busy  life,  and  swanns  like  an  ant-hill;  but  if  you 
climb  the  half -precipitous  streets,  you  find  yourself 
I.  among  ancient  and  stately  mansions,  high  roofed,  with 


682  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [18». 

a  strange  aspect  of  grandeor  about  them,  looking  ai 
if  tbef  nught  still  be  tenanted  by  sucb  old  magnates 
as  dwelt  in  them  centuries  ago.  There  is  also  a  Ca- 
thedral,  the  older  portion  exceedingly  fine ;  but  it  has 
been  adorned  at  some  modem  epoch  with  a  Grecian 
portico,  — good  in  itself,  but  absurdly  out  of  keeping 
with  the  edifice  wbieh  it  prefaoes.  liis  being  a  Prot^ 
estant  country,  Ae  doors  were  all  shut,  —  an  inhoe- 
pitali^  that  made  me  half  a  Catholic.  It  is  fancy 
enough  that  a  stranger  generally  profits  by  all  that  is 
worst  for  the  inhabitants  of  the  oountry  where  he  him- 
self is  merely  a  visitor.  Despotism  makes  things  all 
the  pleasanter  for  the  stranger.  Catholicism  lends  it- 
self admirably  to  his  purposes. 

There  are  public  gardens  (one,  at  least)  in  Geneva. 
.  .  .  Nothing  struck  me  so  much,  I  think,  as  the  color 
of  the  Rhone,  as  it  flows  under  the  bridges  in  the  lower 
town.  It  is  absolutely  miraculous,  and,  beautiful  as  it 
is,  suggests  the  idea  that  the  tubs  of  a  thousand  dyers 
have  emptied  their  liquid  indigo  into  the  stream. 
When  once  you  have  conquered  and  thrust  out  this 
idea,  it  is  an  inexpressible  delight  to  look  down  into 
tliis  intense,  brightly  transparent  blue,  that  hurries  be> 
neath  you  with  the  speed  of  a  race-horse. 

The  shops  of  Geneva  are  very  tempting  to  a  trav- 
eller, being  full  of  such  little  kniok-knaoks  as  he  would 
be  glad  to  carry  away  in  memory  of  the  place ;  won- 
derful carvings  in  wood  and  ivory,  done  with  exquisite 
taste  and  skill ;  jewelry  that  seems  very  cheap,  but  is 
doubtless  dear  enough,  if  you  estimate  it  by  the  solid 
gold  that  goes  into  ite  manufacture ;  watehes,  above 
all  things  else,  for  a  third  or  a  quarter  of  the  price 
that  one  pays  in  England,  looking  jnst  as  well,  too, 
and  probably  perfonoing  the  wh<ds  of  a  wateh'a  duty 


1859.] 


SWITZERLAND. 


533 


I 


t 


as  imeriticisaWj.  The  Swiss  people  are  frugal  and  in- 
expensive in  their  own  hsbiu,  I  believe,  plaiii  and  sini< 
pie,  and  careless  of  ornament ;  hut  they  seem  to  reckon 
on  other  people's  spending  a  great  deal  of  money  for 
gewgawB,     We  bought  Borae  of  their  wooden  trumpery, 

and  likewise  a  watch  for  U .  .  .  .  Next  to  watches, 

jewelry,  and  wood-carving,  I  ahould  say  that  cigars 
were  one  of  the  principal  articles  of  commerce  in  Ge- 
neva. Cigar-shops  present  themselves  at  every  step 
or  two,  and  at  a  reasonable  rate,  there  being  no  dutiijs, 
I  believe,  on  imported  goods.  There  was  no  exami- 
nation of  our  trunhs  on  arrival,  nor  any  questions 
asked  on  that  score. 

TILLENEUVE. 

Hdtel  de  Byron,  June  12th.  —  Yesterday  Bftemoon 
we  left  Geneva  by  a  steamer,  starting  from  the  quay 
at  only  a  short  distance  from  our  hotel.  The  forenoon 
had  been  showery ;  but  the  sun  now  c-anie  out  very 
pleasantly,  although  there  were  still  clouds  and  mist 
enough  to  give  infinite  variety  to  the  mountain  scen- 
ery. At  the  commencement  of  our  voyage  the  scenery 
of  the  lake  was  not  incomparably  superior  to  that  of 
other  lakes  on  which  I  have  smled,  as  Lake  Winder- 
mere, for  instance,  or  Loch  Lomond,  or  our  own  Lake 
Champlain.  It  certainly  grew  more  grand  and  beau- 
tifid,  however,  till  at  length  I  felt  that  I  had  never 
aeen  anything  worthy  to  be  put  beside  it.  The  south- 
ern shore  has  the  grandest  scenery ;  the  great  hills  on 
that  side  appearing  close  to  the  water's  edge,  and  after 
descending,  with  headlong  slope,  directly  from  their 
rocky  and  snow.streaked  summits  down  into  the  blue 
water.  Our  course  lay  nearer  to  the  northern  shoi-e, 
aod  all  our  stopping-places  were  on  that  side.     The 


684   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [l^H 

first  was  Coppet,  where  Mailanie  ile  8tacl  or  lef 
father,  or  botii,  were  either  bom  or  resitlvd  or  died, 
I  know  not  which,  and  care  very  little.  It  U  a  pict- 
uresque villag;e,  with  an  old  churiih,  auti  old,  hi^b- 
roofed,  red-tiled  houses,  the  whole  looking  as  if  noth- 
infT  in  it  had  been  changed  for  many,  many  yeani. 
All  these  villages,  at  several  of  which  we  stojiped  nitt- 
montarily,  look  delightfully  unmodilied  by  recent  fash- 
ions. There  is  the  church,  with  its  tower  crowned  by 
a  pyramidal  roof,  like  an  extinguisher ;  then  thf>  cha- 
teau of  tlie  fonner  Innl,  half  castle  and  lialf  dwelling- 
hoiute,  with  a  round  tower  at  each  comer,  pyramid 
topped;  then,  perhaps,  the  ancient  town -house  or 
Hdtel  de  Ville,  in  an  opi>n  paved  square ;  and  per- 
haps the  largest  mansion  in  the  whole  village  will 
have  been  turned  into  a  modern  inn,  but  retaining 
all  its  venerable  rharacteristics  of  high,  steep  sloping 
roof,  and  antiquated  windows.  Scatter  a  delightful 
shade  of  tr«es  among  the  houses,  throw  in  a  tim^wom 
monument  of  one  kind  or  another,  swell  out  the  d^ 
licious  blue  of  the  lake  in  front,  and  the  delicious 
green  of  the  simny  hill-side  sloping  up  and  around 
this  closely  congregated  neighborhood  of  old,  comfort- 
able houses,  and  1  do  not  know  what  more  I  can  add 
to  this  sketch.  Often  there  was  an  insulated  house 
or  cottage,  embowered  in  shade,  and  each  seeming 
like  the  one  only  spot  in  the  wide  world  where  two 
people  that  had  good  consciences  and  loved  eaflh  other 
could  spend  a  happy  life.  Half-ruined  towers,  old  his- 
toric oatitlea,  these,  too,  we  saw.  And  all  the  while,  on 
the  otber  side  of  the  lake,  were  the  high  hills,  s 
times  dim,  sometimes  bla<'k,  sometimes  green,  i 
gray  precipices  of  stone,  and  often  snow-patches,  i 
above  the  warm  sunny  lake  whereon  we  were  m 


SWITZERLAND. 


685 


We  passed  Lausanne,  which  stands  upward,  on  tha 
dope  of  the  bill,  the  tower  of  its  Cathedral  forming  a 
conspicuous  object.  We  mean  to  visit  this  to-morrow ; 
BO  I  may  pretermit  further  mention  of  it  here.  We 
passed  Vevay,  and  Clarens,  which,  methought,  was 
particidarly  picturesque ;  for  now  the  hills  had  ap- 
proached close  to  the  water  on  the  northeni  side  also, 
and  steep  heights  rose  directly  above  the  little  gray 
church  and  village ;  and  especially  I  remember  a  rocky 
cliff  which  ascends  into  a  rounded  pyramid,  insulated 
from  all  other  peaks  and  ridges.  But  if  I  could  per- 
form the  absolute  impossibili^  of  getting  one  single 
outline  of  the  scene  into  words,  there  would  be  all  the 
color  wanting,  the  light,  the  haze,  which  spiritualizes 
it,  and  moreover  makes  a  thousand  and  a  thousand 
scenes  out  of  tliat  single  one.  Clarens,  however,  has 
still  another  interest  for  me ;  for  I  found  myself  more 
affected  by  it,  as  the  scene  of  the  love  of  St.  Pi-eux 
and  Julia,  than  I  have  often  been  by  scenes  of  poetry 
and  romance.  I  read  Rousseau's  romance  with  great 
sympathy,  when  I  was  hardly  more  than  a  boy ;  ten 
years  ago,  or  thereabouts,  I  tried  to  read  it  again  with- 
out success ;  but  I  think,  from  my  feeling  of  yestei^ 
day,  that  it  still  retains  its  hold  upon  my  imagination. 

Farther  onward,  we  saw  a  white,  ancient-looking 
group  of  towers,  beneath  a  mountain,  which  was  so 
high,  and  rushed  so  precipitately  down  upon  this  pile 
of  bnil<Ung  as  quite  to  dwarf  it ;  besides  which,  its 
dingy  whiteness  had  not  a  very  picturesque  effect. 
Vevertheless,  this  was  the  Castle  of  Chillon.  It  ap- 
pears to  sit  right  upou  the  water,  and  does  not  rise 
very  loftily  above  it  I  was  disappointed  in  its  as- 
pect, having  imagined  this  famous  castle  as  situated 
^1    Bpon  a  rock,  a  hundred,  or,  for  aught  I  know,  a  thou 


686  FRENCH  AND  ITAtlATf  NOTE-BOOKS.  C^^H 

B&nd  feet  above  tho  surface  of  the  lake  ;  t>iit  it  is  qint* 
as  impreHsivB  a  fact  —  supposing  it  to  be  true  —  that 
the  water  is  eight  hundred  feet  deep  at  itti  base.  Ily 
this  time,  the  mountaiiiH  had  taken  the  beautiful  lako 
into  their  deepest  heart ;  they  girdled  it  quite  romid 
with  their  grandeur  and  beauty,  and.  Wing  able  to  do 
no  more  for  it,  they  here  witliheld  it  from  extending 
any  farther;  and  liere  our  voyage  came  to  an  euiL 
I  have  never  beheld  any  se«ne  so  extjuisite ;  nor  do  I 
ask  of  Heaven  to  show  me  any  lovelier  or  nobler  one, 
but  only  to  give  me  such  depth  and  breadth  of  sympoi- 
thy  with  nature,  that  I  may  worthily  enjoy  this.  It 
is  beauty  more  than  enough  for  poor,  perishable  BM^H 
tuls.     If  this  be  earth,  what  must  heaven  be  I  ^^| 

It  was  nearly  eight  o'clock  when  we  arrived  ;  ^^| 
then  we  had  a  walk  of  at  least  a  mile  to  the  Ildte]  By* 
ron.  ...  I  forgot  to  mention  that  in  the  latter  ftart 
of  our  voy(^  there  was  a  shower  in  some  part  of  the 
sky,  and  though  none  of  it  fell  upon  us,  we  tiail  the 
benefit  of  those  gentle  tears  in  a  rainl>ow,  which 
arched  itself  across  the  lake  from  mountain  to  roonn. 
tain,  so  that  our  track  lay  directly  under  this  triu 
phal  arch.  We  took  it  as  a  goo<l  omen,  nor  wen 
discouraged,  though,  after  the  rainbow  had  \ 
a  few  sprinkles  of  the  shower  came  down. 

We  found  the  H6tel  Byron  very  grand  indeed,  | 
a  good  one  too.  There  was  a  beautiful  moonligbfil 
the  lake  and  hills,  but  we  contented  ourselves  witE 
looking  out  of  our  lofty  window,  whence,  likewise,  we 
bad  a  sidelong  glance  at  the  white  battlements  of 
Chillon,  not  more  than  a  mile  off,  on  the  water's  edge. 
The  castle  is  wofuUy  in  need  of  a  pedestal.  If  its  sita 
Were  elevated  to  a  height  equal  to  its  own,  it  would 
Biake  a  far  better  apitearauee.     As  it  now  ia,  it  li 


itloc^H 


I 


I8S9.]  SWITZERLA  ND. 

to  apeak  profanely  of  what  poetry  has  consecrate*!, 
when  Been  from  the  water,  or  along  the  shore  of  tha 
lake,  very  like  an  old  whitewashed  factory  or  mill. 

This  morning   I  walked   to  the   Castle  of   Chillon 

with  J ,  who  sketches  everything  he  sees,  from  a. 

wild  flower  or  a  carved  chair  to  a  castle  or  a  range  of 
monutaios.  The  morning  had  sunshine  thinly  ac-at^ 
tered  through  it ;  but,  nevertheless,  there  was  a  con- 
tinual sprinkle,  sometimes  scarcely  perceptible,  and 
then  again  amounting  to  a  decided  drizzle.  The  road, 
which  is  built  along  on  a  little  elevation  above  the 
lake  shore,  led  us  past  the  Castle  of  Chillon  ;  and  we 
took  a  side-path,  which  passes  still  nearer  the  castle 
gate.  The  castle  stands  on  an  isthmus  of  giavel,  i>er- 
manently  connecting  it  with  the  mainland.  A  wooden 
bridge,  covered  with  a  roof,  passes  from  the  shore  to 
the  arched  entrance ;  and  beneath  this  shelter,  which 
has  wooden  walls  as  well  as  roof  and  floor,  we  saw  a 
soldier  or  gendarme  who  seemed  to  act  as  warder.  As 
it  sprinkled  rather  more  freely  than  at  first,  I  thought 
of  appealing  to  his  hospitality  for  shelter  from  the 
rain,  but  concluded  to  pass  on. 

The  castle  makes  a  far  better  appearance  on  & 
nearer  view,  and  from  the  land,  than  when  seen  at  a 
distance,  and  from  the  water.  It  is  built  of  stone, 
and  seems  to  have  been  anciently  covered  with  plast«r, 
which  imparts  the  whiteness  to  which  Byron  does 
much  more  than  justice,  when  he  speaks  of  "  Chillon's 
snow-white  battlements."  There  is  a  lofty  external 
Tall,  with  a  cluster  of  round  towers  about  it,  each 
crowned  with  its  pyramidal  roof  of  tiles,  and  from 
the  central  portion  of  tlie  castle  rises  a  square  tower, 
also  crowned  with  its  own  pyramid  to  a  considerably 
greater  height  than  the  circumjacent  ones.     The  whola 


688  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [18M 

are  in  a  dose  duster,  and  make  a  fine  picture  of  aiii 
oient  strength  when  seen  at  a  proper  proximity ;  for  I 
do  not  think  that  distance  adds  anything  to  the  effect 
There  are  hardly  any  windows,  or  few,  and  very  small 
ones,  except  the  loopholes  for  arrows  and  for  the  gar- 
rison of  the  castle  to  peep  from  on  the  sides  towards 
the  water ;  indeed,  there  are  larger  windows,  at  least 
in  the  upper  apartments ;  but  in  that  direction,  no 
doubt,  the  castle  was  considered  impregnable.  Trees 
here  and  there  on  the  land  side  grow  up  against  the 
oastle  wall,  on  one  part  of  which,  moreover,  there  was 
a  green  curtain  of  ivy  spreading  from  base  to  battle- 
ment. The  walls  retain  their  machicolations,  and  I 
should  judge  that  nothing  had  been  [altered],  nor  any 
more  work  been  done  upon  the  old  fortress  than  to 
keep  it  in  singukrly  good  repair.  It  was  formerly  a 
castle  of  the  Duke  of  Savoy,  and  since  his  sway  over 
the  country  ceased  ^three  hundred  years  at  least), 
it  has  been  in  the  hands  of  the  Swiss  government, 
who  still  keep  some  arms  and  ammunition  there. 

We  passed  on,  and  found  the  view  of  it  better,  as 
we  thought,  from  a  farther  point  along  the  road.  The 
rain-drops  began  to  spatter  down  faster,  and  we  took 
shelter  under  an  impending  precipice,  where  the  ledge 
of  rock  had  been  blasted  and  hewn  away  to  form  the 
road.  Our  refuge  was  not  a  very  convenient  and  com- 
fortable one,  so  we  took  advantage  of  the  partial  cessa- 
tion of  the  shower  to  turn  homeward,  but  had  not  gone 
far  when  we  met  mamma  and  all  her  train.  As  we 
were  close  by  the  castle  entrance,  we  thought  it  advis- 
able to  seek  admission,  though  rather  doubtful  whether 
the  Swiss  gendarme  might  not  deem  it  a  sin  to  let  us 
into  the  castle  on  Sunday.  But  he  very  readily  ad* 
mitted  us  under  his  covered  drawbridge,  and  called 


ISfiS.] 


SWITZERLAND. 


539 


I 


I 


old  man  from  within  the  fortress  to  show  us  whatever 
was  to  be  seen.  This  latter  pereoDage  waa  a  staid, 
rather  grim,  and  Calvinistio-looking  old  worthy ;  but  he 
received  us  without  scruple,  and  forthwith  proceeded 
to  usher  us  into  a  range  of  most  dismal  dungeons,  ex- 
tending along  the  basement  of  the  castle,  on  a  level 
with  the  surface  of  the  lake.  First,  if  I  rememl>er 
aright,  we  came  to  what  he  said  had  been  a  chapel, 
and  which,  at  all  events,  looked  like  an  usle  of  one,  or 
rather  such  a  crypt  as  I  have  seen  beneath  a  cathe- 
dral, being  a  succession  of  massive  pillars  supiwrting 
groined  arches,  —  a  very  admirable  piece  of  gloomy 
Gothic  architecture.  Next,  we  came  to  a  very  dark 
compartment  of  the  same  dungeon  range,  where  he 
pointed  to  a  sort  of  bed,  or  what  might  serve  for  a 
bed,  hewn  in  the  solid  rock,  and  this,  our  guide  said, 
bad  been  the  last  slei'ping-place  of  condemnud  pris- 
oners on  the  night  before  their  execution.  The  next 
compartment  was  still  duskier  and  diamaller  than  the 
last,  and  he  bade  us  cast  our  eyes  up  into  the  obscurity 
and  see  a  beam,  where  the  condemned  ones  used  to  be 
hanged.  I  looked  and  looked,  and  closed  my  eyes  so 
fts  to  see  the  clearer  in  this  horrible  duskiness  on 
opening  them  again.  Finally,  I  thought  I  discerned 
lie  accursed  beam,  and  the  rest  of  the  party  were  cer- 
tain that  they  saw  it.  Next  beyond  thu,  I  think,  was 
a  stone  staircase,  steep,  rudely  cut,  and  narrow,  down 
which  the  condemned  were  brought  to  death ;  and  be- 
yond this,  still  on  the  same  basement  range  of  the 
castle,  a  low  and  narrow  [corridor]  through  which  we 
passed,  and  saw  a  row  of  seven  massive  pillars,  sup- 
porting two  parallel  aeries  of  groined  arches,  like  those 
in  the  chapel  which  we  first  entered.  This  was  Bonni- 
Yard's  prison,  and  the  scene  of  Byron's  poem. 


540   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE^BOOKS.  [185t 

The  arches  are  dimly  lighted  by  narrow  loophole^ 
pierced  through  the  immensely  thick  wall,  but  at  such 
a  height  above  the  floor  that  we  could  catch  no  glimpse 
of  land  or  water,  or  scarcely  of  the  sky.  The  prisoner 
of  Chillon  could  not  possibly  have  seen  the  island  to 
which  Byron  alludes,  and  which  is  a  little  way  from 
the  shore,  exactly  opposite  the  town  of  Villeneuva 
There  was  light  enough  in  this  long,  gray,  vaulted 
room,  to  show  us  that  all  the  pillars  were  inscribed 
with  the  names  of  visitors,  among  which  I  saw  no  in- 
teresting one,  except  that  of  Byron  himself,  which  is 
cut,  in  letters  an  inch  long  or  more,  into  one  of  the 
pillars  next  to  that  to  which  Bonnivard  was  chained. 
The  letters  are  deep  enough  to  remain  in  the  pillar  as 
long  as  the  castle  stands.  Byron  seems  to  have  had  a 
fancy  for  recording  his  name  in  this  and  similar  ways; 
as  witness  the  record  which  I  saw  on  a  tree  of  New- 
stead  Abbey.  In  Bonnivard's  pillar  there  still  remains 
an  iron  ring,  at  the  height  of  perhaps  three  feet  from 
the  ground.  His  chain  was  fastened  to  this  ring,  and 
his  only  freedom  was  to  walk  round  this  pillar,  about 
which  he  is  said  to  have  worn  a  path  in  the  stone  pave* 
ment  of  the  dungeon ;  but  as  the  floor  is  now  covered 
with  earth  or  gravel,  I  could  not  satisfy  myself  whether 
this  be  true.  Certainly  six  years,  with  nothing  else  to 
do  in  them  save  to  walk  round  the  pillar,  might  well 
suffice  to  wear  away  the  rock,  even  with  naked  feet. 
This  column,  and  all  the  columns,  were  cut  and  hewn 
in  a  good  style  of  architecture,  and  the  dungeon  arches 
are  not  without  a  certain  gloomy  beauty.  On  Bonni- 
vard's pillar,  as  well  as  on  all  the  rest,  were  many 
names  inscribed ;  but  I  thought  better  of  Byron^s 
delicacy  and  sensitiveness  for  not  cutting  his  name 
into  that  very  pillar.     Perhaps,  knowing  nothing  of 


■86>.] 


SWITZERLAND. 


64] 


I 


I 


Bonnivard's  atoiy,  he  did  not  know  to  which  coliuna 
h&  was  chained. 

Emei^ing  from  the  dungeon- vaults,  our  guide  led 
Tu  through  other  parts  of  the  castle,  showing  us  the 
Duke  of  Savoy's  kitchen,  with  a  fireplace  at  least 
twelve  feet  long ;  also  the  judgment-hall,  or  some  sni-h 
place,  hung  round  with  the  coats  of  ai'ms  of  some  of- 
ficers or  other,  and  ha^nng  at  one  end  a  wooden  post, 
reaching  from  floor  to  ceiling,  and  having  upon  it  the 
marks  of  fire.  By  means  of  this  post,  contumacious 
prisoners  were  put  to  a  dreadful  torture,  being  drawn 
np  by  cords  and  pulleys,  while  their  limbs  were 
scorched  by  a  fire  underneath.  We  also  saw  a  chapel 
or  two,  one  of  which  ia  still  in  good  and  sanctified 
condition,  and  was  to  be  used  this  very  day,  our  guide 
told  ua,  for  religious  purposes.  We  saw,  moreover,  the 
duke's  private  chamber,  with  a  part  of  the  bedst«ad 
on  which  he  used  to  sleep,  and  be  haunted  with  hor- 
rible dreams,  no  doubt,  and  the  ghosts  of  wretches 
whom  he  had  tortured  and  hanged  ;  likewise  the  bed- 
chamber of  his  duchess,  that  had  in  its  window  two 
stone  seats,  where,  directly  over  the  head  of  Bonnivard, 
the  ducal  pair  might  look  out  on  the  beautiful  scene 
of  lake  and  mount^s,  and  feel  the  warmth  of  the 
blessed  sun.  Under  this  window,  the  guide  said,  the 
water  of  the  lake  is  eight  hundred  feet  in  depth ;  ao 
immense  profundity,  indeed,  for  an  inland  lake,  but 
it  ia  not  very  difficult  to  believe  that  the  mountain  at 
the  foot  of  which  Chillou  stands  may  descend  so  far 
beneath  the  water.  In  other  parts  of  the  lake  and 
not  distant,  more  than  nine  hundred  feet  have  been 
Bounded.  I  looked  out  of  the  duchess's  window,  and 
could  certainly  see  no  appearance  of  a  bottom  in  the 
light  blue  water. 


f 


B42  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [UU, 

The  hat  thing  that  the  gnule  showed  na  wa«  a  traj^ 
door,  or  opening,  beneath  a  ctazy  old  floor.  Looking 
down  into  this  torture  we  saw  three  stone  steps, 
which  we  should  have  taken  to  be  the  beginning  of  a 
flight  of  stairs  that  descended  into  a  dungeon,  or  series 
of  dungeons,  such  as  we  had  already  seen.  But  in- 
specting them  more  closely,  we  saw  that  the  third  step 
terminated  the  flight,  and  beyond  was  a  dark  vaaaocy. 
Three  steps  a  person  would  grope  down,  planting  1;^ 
unoertain  foot  on  a  dimly  seen  stone ;  the  fourth  step 
would  be  in  the  empty  air.  The  guide  bdd  as  that  it 
used  to  be  the  praotioe  to  bring  prisoners  hither,  un- 
der pretenoe  of  oommittang  them  to  a  dungeon,  and 
make  them  go  down  the  three  steps,  and  that  fourth 
fatal  one,  and  they  would  nevermore  be  heard  <^  ;  but 
at  the  bottom  of  the  pit  there  would  be  a  dead  body, 
and  in  due  time  a  mouldy  skeleton,  which  would  rat- 
tle beneath  the  body  ctf  the  next  prisoner  that  fell.  I 
do  not  believe  that  it  was  anything  more  than  a  secret 
dungeon  for  state  prisoners  whom  it  was  out  of  the 
question  either  to  set  at  liber^  or  bring  to  publio 
triaL  The  depth  of  the  pit  was  about  forty-Sre  feeb 
Gazing  intently  down,  I  saw  a  funt  gleam  of  li^t  at 
the  bottom,  apparently  coming  from  some  other  apei^ 
ture  than  the  tnq>-door  over  which  we  were  bending, 
so  that  it  must  have  been  contemplated  to  supply  it 
with  light  and  air  in  such  d^ree  as  to  support  human 
life.  U deolared  she  saw  a  skdetou  at  the  bot- 
tom ;  Miss  S-. thought  she  saw  a  hand;  but  I  saw 

only  the  dim  gleam  of  light. 

There  aie  two  or  three  courts  in  the  castle,  but  ol 
no  great  size.  We  were  now  led  across  one  of  them, 
and  dismissed  out  of  the  arched  entranoe  by  which 
we  had  oome  in.    We  found  the  gendarme  still  keep* 


i 


(M9.]  SWITZERLAND.  548 

tng  wateh  on  his  roofed  drawbridge,  and  as  diere  was 
the  same  gentle  shower  that  had  been  effusing  itsel£ 
all  the  momiiig,  we  availed  oiirselves  of  the  shelter, 
more  especially  as  there  were  acme  curiosities  to  ex- 
amine. Tbeae  coneisted  chiefly  of  wood  carvings,  — 
such  as  little  figures  in  the  national  costume,  boxes 
with  wreaths  of  foliage  upon  them,  paper  knives,  the 
chamois  goat  admirably  well  represented.  We  at  first 
hesitated  to  make  any  advanc«B  towards  trade  with 
the  gendarme  because  it  was  Sunday,  and  we  fancied 
there  might  be  a  Calviuistic  scruple  on  his  part  about 
turning  a  penny  on  the  Sabbath ;  but  from  the  little 
I  know  of  the  Swiss  character,  I  suppose  they  would 
be  as  ready  as  any  other  men  to  sell  not  only  Buch 
matters,  but  even  their  own  souls,  or  any  smaller  —  or 
shall  we  say  greater  —  thing  on  Sunday,  or  at  any 
other  time.  So  we  began  to  ask  the  prices  of  the 
articles,  and  met  with  no  difficulty  in  purchasing  a 
salad  spoon  and  fork,  with  pretty  bas-reliefs  carved  on 
the  handles,  and  a  napkin-ring.  For  Rosebud's  and 
our  amusement,  the  gendarme  now  set  a  musical-box 
agoing ;  and  as  it  played  a  pasteboard  figure  of  a  den- 
tist began  to  puli  the  tooth  of  a  pasteboard  patient, 
lifting  the  wretched  simulacrum  entirely  from  the 
ground,  and  keeping  him  in  this  horrible  torture  for 
half  an   hour.     Meanwhile,  mamma.  Miss   Shepard, 

U .  and  J sat  down  all  in  a  row  on  a  bench 

and  sketched  the  mountains ;  and  as  the  shower  did 
not  cease,  though  the  sun  most  of  the  time  shone 
brightly,  we  were  kept  actual  prisoners  of  Chillon 
much  longer  than  we  wished  to  stay. 

We  took  advantage  of  the  first  cessation,  —  though 
still  the  drops  came  dimpling  into  the  water  that 
rippled  against  the  pebbles  beneath  the  bridge,  — of 


i 


.544  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE^BOOKS.  £l85a 

the  first  partial  cessation  of  the  shower,  to  escape,  and 
returned  towards  the  hotel,  with  this  kindliest  of  sum- 
mer rains  falling  upon  us  most  of  the  way.  ...  In 
the  afternoon  the  rain  entirely  ceased,  and  the  weather 
grew  delightfully  radiant,  and  warmer  than  could  well 

be  borne  in  the  sunshine.    U and  I  walked  to  the 

village  of  V illeneuve,  —  a  mile  from  the  hotel,  —  and 
found  a  very  commonplace  little  old  town  of  one  or 
two  streets,  standing  on  a  level,  and  as  uninteresting 
as  if  there  were  not  a  hill  within  a  hundred  miles.  It 
is  strange  what  prosaic  lines  men  thrust  in  amid  the 
poetry  of  nature.  •  •  • 

Hdtel  de  rAngleterrej  Geneva^  June  14th.  —  Yes- 
terday morning  was  veiy  fine,  and  we  had  a  pretty 
early  breakfast  at  Hdtel  Byron,  preparatory  to  leav> 
ing  it.  This  hotel  is  on  a  magnificent  scale  of  height 
and  breadth,  its  staircases  and  corridors  being  the 
most  spacious  I  have  seen;  but  there  is  a  kind  of 
meagreness  in  the  life  there,  and  a  certain  lack  of 
heartiness,  that  prevented  us  from  feeling  at  home. 
We  were  glad  to  get  away,  and  took  the  steamer,  on 
our  return  voyage,  in  excellent  spirits.  Apparently 
it  had  been  a  cold  night  in  the  upper  regions,  for 
a  great  deal  more  snow  was  visible  on  some  of  the 
mountains  than  we  had  before  observed  ;  especially  a 
mountain  called  ^^  Diableries  "  presented  a  silver  sum- 
mit, and  broad  sheets  and  fields  of  snow.  Nothing 
ever  can  have  been  more  beautiful  than  those  groups 
of  mighty  hills  as  we  saw  them  then,  with  the  gray 
i*ocks,  the  green  slopes,  the  white  snow-patches  and 
crests,  all  to  be  seen  at  one  glance,  and  the  mists  and 
fleecy  clouds  tumbling,  rolling,  hovering  about  their 
summits,  filling  their  lofty  valleys,  and  ocnning  down 


•  n«9.] 


SWITZERLAND. 


545 


far  towards  the  lower  world,  making  the  ekyej  as- 
pects so  intimate  with  the  earthly  ones,  that  we  hardly 
knew  whether  we  were  sojourning  in  the  material  or 
spiritual  world.  It  was  like  sailing  through  the 'sky, 
moreover,  to  be  borne  along  on  such  water  aa  that  of 
Lake  Leman,  — the  bluest,  brightest,  and  profoundest 
element,  the  most  radiant  eye  that  the  dull  earth  evci 
opened  to  see  heaven  withal.  I  am  writing  nansense, 
but  it  is  because  no  sense  within  my  mind  will  answer 
the  purpose. 

Some  of  these  mountainx,  that  looked  at  no  such 
mighty  distance,  were  at  least  forty  or  fifty  miles  off, 
and  appeared  as  if  they  were  near  neighbors  and 
friends  of  other  mountains,  from  which  they  were 
really  still  farther  removed.  The  relations  into  which 
distant  points  are  brought,  in  a  view  of  mountain 
scenery,  symbolize  the  truth,  which  we  can  never 
judge  within  our  partial  scope  of  vision,  of  the  reW 
tions  which  we  bear  to  our  fellow-creatures  and  hu- 
man ciroum stances.  These  mighty  mountains  think 
that  tfaey  have  nothing  to  do  with  one  another,  each 
seems  itself  its  own  centre,  and  existing  for  itself 
alone ;  and  yet,  to  an  eye  that  can  take  them  all  in, 
they  are  evidently  portions  of  one  grand  and  beautiful 
idea,  which  could  not  be  consununated  without  the 
lowest  and  the  loftiest  of  them.  I  do  not  express  this 
satisfactorily,  but  have  a  genuine  meaning  in  it  never- 
theless. 

We  passed  again  by  Chillon,  and  gazed  at  it  as 
king  as  it  was  distinctly  visible,  though  the  water  view 
does  no  justice  to  its  real  pictiiresqueness.  there  being 
no  towers  uor  projections  on  the  side  towards  the  lake, 
nothing  but  a  wall  of  dingy  white,  with  an  indentatio& 
that  looks  something  like  a  gateway.     About  an  hour 


646   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.   [18M 

and  a  half  brought  ns  to  Ouchy,  the  pomt  wbere  p«»- 
sengere  land  to  tako  the  omnibuB  to  Tianaanne.  The 
aaoent  from  Ouoby  to  Lausanne  U  a  mile  and  a  faali^ 
vhich  it  took  the  omnibus  nearly  half  an  honr  to  a» 
oomplish.  We  left  our  shawls  and  oarpet-baga  in  the 
talU  d  manger  of  the  HOtel  Fauoon,  and  set  forth 
to  find  the  Cathedral,  the  pinnacled  tower  of  which 
is  risible  for  a  lon^  distanoe  up  and  down  the  lake. 
Pronunent  as  it  is,  however,  it  is  by  no  means  very 
easy  to  ilnd  it  while  rambling  through  the  intricate 
streets  and  declivities  of  the  town  iteelf,  for  lAnsanne 
is  the  town,  I  should  fancy,  in  all  the  world  the  most 
difiioult  to  go  directly  from  one  point  to  another.  It 
is  built  on  the  declivity  of  a  hill,  adown  which  run 
several  valleys  or  ravines,  and  over  these  the  contigtf 
i^  of  houses  extends,  so  that  the  communication  is 
kept  up  by  means  of  steep  streets  and  sometimes  long 
weary  stain,  which  must  be  surmounted  and  descended 
again  in  acoomplisMng  a  very  moderate  distance.  In 
some  inscrutable  way  we  at  last  arrived  at  the  Cathe> 
dral,  which  stands  on  a  higher  site  than  any  other  in 
Lausanne.  It  has  a  very  venerable  exterior,  with  all 
the  Qothic  grandeur  which  arched  mullioned  windows, 
deep  portals,  buttresses,  towers,  and  pinnacles,  gray 
with  a  thousand  years,  can  give  to  architecture.  Af- 
ter waiting  awhile  we  obtained  entrance  by  means  (rf 
an  old  woman,  who  acted  the  part  of  sacristan,  and  was 
then  showing  the  church  to  some  other  visitora. 

The  interior  disappointed  us ;  not  bat  what  it  was 
very  beautiful,  but  I  think  the  excellent  repair  that  it 
was  in,  and  the  puritanic  neatness  with  which  it  is 
kept,  does  mu<;h  towards  effacing  the  majesty  and 
mystery  that  belong  to  an  old  church.  Every  inch  of 
wall  and  column,  oud  all  the  mouldings  and  tracery, 


SWITZERLAND.  547 

and  every  scrap  of  grotesque  carving,  bad  been 
vasbed  with  a  drab  mixture.  There  were  likewise 
eeata  all  up  and  down  the  nave,  made  of  pine  wood, 
and  looking  very  new  and  neut,  just  such  seats  as  I 
shall  see  in  a  hundred  meeting-houses  (if  ever  I  go 
into  so  many)  in  America.  Whatever  might  be  the 
reason,  the  stately  nave,  with  its  high-groined  roof, 
the  clustered  columns  and  lofty  pillars,  the  intersectr- 
ing  arches  of  the  side-aisles,  the  choir,  the  armorial 
and  knightly  tombs  that  surround  what  was  once  the 
high  altar,  all  produced  far  less  effect  than  I  could 
have  thought  beforehand. 

As  it  happened,  we  had  more  ample  time  and  free- 
dom to  inspect  this  Cathedral  than  any  other  that  we 
have  visited,  for  the  old  woman  consented  to  go  away 
and  leave  us  there,  locking  the  door  behind  her.  The 
others,  except  Rosebud,  sat  down  to  sketch  such  por- 
tions as  struck  their  fancy  ;  and  for  myself,  I  looked 
at  the  monuments,  of  which  some,  being  those  of  old 
knights,  ladies,  bishops,  and  a  king,  were  curious  from 
their  antiquity ;  and  others  are  interesting  as  bearing 
memorials  of  English  people,  who  have  died  at  Lau- 
sanne in  comparatively  recent  years.  Then  I  went  up 
into  the  pulpit,  and  tried,  without  success,  to  get  into 
the  stone  gallery  that  runs  all  round  the  nave ;  and  I 
explored  my  way  into  various  side  apartments  of  the 
Cathedral,  which  I  found  fitted  up  with  seats  for  Sab- 
bath schools,  perhaps,  or  possibly  for  meetings  of  el- 
ders of  the  Church.  I  opened  the  great  Bible  of  the 
church,  and  found  it  to  be  a  French  version,  printed 
at  Lille  some  fifty  years  aga  There  was  also  a  lit- 
tirgy,  adapted,  probably,  to  the  Lutheran  form  of  wor- 
ship. In  one  of  the  side  apartments  I  found  a  strong 
box,  heavily  clamped  with  iron,  and  having  a  contriv- 


L 


548  FRENCH  AND  ITAUAN  NOTEBOOKS.   [185a 

•noe,  like  the  hopper  of  a  mill,  by  which  money  oouU 
be  turned  into  the  top,  while  a  doable  look  prevented 
its  being  abstraoted  again.  This  was  to  reoeiye  the 
avails  of  oontributions  made  in  the  ohorch ;  and  there 
were  likewise  boxes,  stuck  on  the  ends  of  long  poles, 
wherewith  the  deacons  could  go  round  among  the  wor* 
shippers,  conveniently  extending  the  begging -box  tc 
the  remotest  curmudgeon  among  them  alL  From  the 
arrangement  of  the  seats  in  the  nave,  and  the  labek 
pasted  or  painted  on  them,  I  judged  that  the  women 
sat  on  one  side  and  the  men  on  the  other,  and  the 
seats  for  various  orders  of  magistrates,  and  for  eccle- 
siastical and  collegiate  people,  were  likewise  marked 
out. 

I  soon  grew  weary  of  these  investigations,  and  so 
did  Rosebud  and  J ,  who  essayed  to  amuse  them- 
selves with  running  races  together  over  the  horizontal 
tombstones  in  the  pavement  of  the  choir,  treading  re- 
morselessly over  the  noseless  effigies  of  old  dignitaries, 
who  never  expected  to  be  so  irreverently  treated.  I 
put  a  stop  to  their  sport,  and  banished  them  to  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  Cathedral ;  and,  by  and  by,  the 
old  woman  appeared  again,  and  released  us  from  du- 
rance. .  .  • 

While  waiting  for  our  dSjeuner^  we  saw  the  people 
dining  at  the  regular  table  cThSte  of  the  hotel,  and  the 
idea  was  strongly  borne  in  upon  me,  that  the  profes- 
sional mystery  of  a  male  waiter  is  a  very  unmanly  one. 
It  is  so  absurd  to  see  the  solemn  attentiveness  with 
which  they  stand  behind  the  chairs,  the  earnestness  of 
their  watch  for  any  crisis  that  may  demand  their  in- 
terposition, the  gravity  of  their  manner  in  performing 
some  little  office  that  the  guest  might  better  do  for 
himself,  their  decorous  and  soft  steps ;  in  short,  as  I 


*■] 


SWITZERLAND. 


549 


•at  aiid  gazed  at  them,  they  seemed  to  me  not  real 
men,  but  creatures  with  a  plerical  aspect,  engendered 
out  of  a  very  artificial  state  of  society.  When  they 
are  waiting  on  myself,  they  do  not  appear  so  absurd  ; 
it  13  neceesaiy  to  stand  apart  in  order  to  see  them 
properly. 

We  left  Lausanne  —  which  was  to  us  a  tedious  and 
weary  place  —  before  four  o'clock.  I  should  have 
liked  well  enough  to  see  the  house  of  Gibbon,  and  the 
gardon  in  which  he  walked,  after  finishing  "  The  De- 
cline and  Fall "  ;  but  it  could  not  be  done  without 
some  trouble  and  inquiry,  and  as  the  house  did  not 
come  to  see  me,  I  determined  not  to  go  and  see  the 
house.  There  was,  indeed,  a  mansion  of  somewhat 
antique  respectability,  near  our  hotel,  having  a  gar- 
den and  a  shaded  terrace  behind  it,  which  would  have 
answered  accurately  enough  to  the  idea  of  Gibbon's 
residence.     Perhaps  it  was  so ;  far  more  probably  not. 

Our  former  voyages  had  been  taken  in  the  Hiron- 
delle ;  we  now,  after  broiling  for  some  time  in  the  sun- 
shine by  the  lake-side,  got  on  board  of  the  Aigle,  No. 
2.  There  were  a  good  many  passengers,  the  larger 
proportion  of  whom  seemed  to  be  English  and  Amer- 
loan,  and  among  the  latter  a  large  party  of  talkative 
ladies,  old  and  young.  The  voya^  was  pleasant  while 
we  were  protected  from  the  sun  by  the  awning  over- 
head, but  became  scarcely  agreeable  when  the  sun  had 
descended  so  low  as  to  shine  in  our  faces  or  on  our 
backs.  We  looked  earnestly  for  Mont  Blanc,  which 
ought  to  have  been  visible  during  a  large  part  of  our 
course ;  but  the  clouds  gathered  themselves  hopelessly 
over  the  portion  of  the  sky  where  the  great  mountain 
lifted  his  white  peak ;  and  we  did  not  see  it,  and  prob- 
ably never  shall.     As  to  the  meaner  mountains,  there 


660  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-'BOOKS.  fl^M. 

were  enoogli  of  them,  and  beautiful  enangh ;  but  ire 
were  a  little  weary,  and  f eyerish  with  the  heat.  •  •  •  I 
think  I  had  a  headache,  though  it  is  so  unusual  a  oom- 
plaint  with  me  that  I  hardly  know  it  when  it  eomm. 
We  were  none  of  us  sorry,  therefore,  when  the  Eagle 
brought  us  to  the  quay  of  Geneva,  only  a  short  di»- 
teaoe  from  our  hoteL  .  •  • 

To-day  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Wilding,  requesting  him  to 
eeeure  passages  for  us  from  Liverpool  on  the  15th  of 
next  month,  or  1st  of  August.  It  makes  my  heart 
thrill,  half  pleasantly,  half  otherwise ;  so  much  nearer 
does  this  step  seem  to  faring  that  home  whenoe  I  have 
now  been  absent  six  years,  and  which,  when  I  see  it 
again,  may  turn  out  to  be  not  my  home  any  Icmger. 
I  likewise  wrote  to  Bennoch,  though  I  know  not  his 
present  address ;  but  I  should  deeply  grieve  to  leave 
England  without  seeing  him.  He  and  Henry  Bright 
are  the  only  two  men  in  England  to  whom  I  shall  be 
much  grieved  to  bid  farewell ;  but  to  the  island  itself 
I  cannot  bear  to  say  that  word,  as  a  finality.  I  shall 
dreamily  hope  to  come  back  again  at  some  indefinite 
time ;  rather  foolishly,  periiaps,  for  it  will  tend  to  take 
the  substance  out  of  my  life  in  my  own  land.  But  this, 
I  suspect,  is  apt  to  be  the  penalty  of  those  who  stay 
abroad,  and  stay  too  long. 

HATBE. 

Sdtd  Wheeler,  June  22d.—We  arrived  at  this 
hotel  last  evening  from  Paris,  and  find  ourselves  on 
the  borders  of  the  Petit  Quay  Notre  Dame,  with 
steamers  and  boats  right  under  our  windows,  and  all 
sorts  of  dock -business  going  on  briskly.  There  are 
barrels,  bales,  and  orates  of  goods ;  there  are  old  ircm 
oannon  for  posts;  in  short,  all  that  belongs  to  tha 


■■_^ 


11899.] 


FRANCE. 


661 


I 


Wapping  of  a  great  seaport  .  .  .  The  American  |»ap- 
tialities  of  the  giiesta  [of  this  hotel]  are  consulted  by 
the  decoratious  of  the  parlor,  in  which  hang  two  litlt- 
Ographs  and  colored  views  of  New  York,  from  Brook- 
lyn  and  from  Weehawlcen.  The  fashion  of  the  honse 
pis  a  sort  of  nondescript  mixture  of  Frank,  English, 
■od  American,  and  is  not  disagreeable  to  us  after  our 
weary  experience  of  Continental  life.  The  abundance 
of  the  food  is  very  acceptable,  in  comparison  with  the 
meagreness  of  Fi-ench  and  Italian  meals ;  and  last 
evening  we  supped  nobly  on  cold  roast  beef  and  ham, 
Kt  generously  before  us,  in  the  mass,  insteaci  of  being 
doled  out  in  slices  few  and  thin.  The  waiter  has  a 
kindly  sort  of  manner,  and  resembles  the  stewai-d  of  a 
veesel  rather  than  a  landsman  ;  and,  in  short,  every- 
thing here  h^  undergone  a  change,  which  might  ad- 
mit  of  very  effective  description.  I  may  now  as  well 
give  up  all  attempts  at  journalising.  So  I  shall  say 
nothing  of  our  journey  across  France  from  Geneva. 
.  .  .  To-night  we  shall  t^e  our  departure  in  a  steamer 
for  SoutlmmptoD,  whence  we  shall  go  to  London  ; 
thence,  in  a  week  or  two,  to  Liverpool ;  thence  to 
Boston  and  Concord,  there  to  enjoy  —  if  enjoyment 
it  prove  —  a  little  rest  and  a  sense  that  we  are  at 
home, 

[More  than  four  months  were  now  taken  up  in  writ- 
ing "  The  Marble  Faun,"  in  great  part  at  the  sea-side 
town  of  Bedcar,  Yorkshire,  Mr.  Hawthorne  having 
conclude  to  remain  another  year  in  England,  chiefly 
to  accomplish  that  romance.  In  Redcar,  where  he 
remained  till  Septemlier  or  October,  he  wrote  no  jour- 
nal, but  only  the  i)ook.  He  then  went  to  Leamington, 
where  he  finished  "  The  Marble  Faun  "  in  March,  and 
there  is  a  little  journalizing  soon  after  leaving  Bed- 
—  Ed.] 


B52  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [ISM. 

ENGLAKIX 

Leamington  November  l^th^  1859.  —J  aod  I 
walked  to  Lillington  the  other  day.  Its  litde  ohiiroli 
ynm  undergoing  renovation  when  we  were  here  two 
years  ago,  and  now  seems  to  be  quite  renewed,  with 
the  exception  of  its  square,  gray  battlemented  tower, 
which  has  still  the  aspect  of  unadulterated  antiquity. 
On  Saturday  J  and  I  walked  to  Warwick  by  the 
old  road,  passing  over  the  bridge  of  the  Avon,  within 
view  of  the  dasile.  It  is  as  fine  a  piece  of  English 
•oeneiy  m  exirtB  wywhere,  -  the  qoiet  Utd«  river 
shadowedwil^  drooping  trees,  and,  in  its  vista,  the 
gray  towers  and  long  line  of  windows  of  the  lordly 
castle,  with  a  picturesquely  varied  outline;  ancient 
strength,  a  little  softened  by  decay.  •  •  • 

The  town  of  Warwick,  I  think,  has  been  consider- 
ably modernized  since  I  first  saw  it.  The  whole  of 
the  central  portion  of  the  principal  street  now  looks 
modem,  with  its  stuccoed  or  brick  fronts  of  houses, 
and,  in  many  cases,  handsome  shop  windows.  Leices* 
ter  Hospital  and  its  adjoining  chapel  still  look  ven« 
erably  antique ;  and  so  does  a  gateway  that  half  be* 
strides  the  street.  Beyond  these  two  points  on  either 
side  it  has  a  much  older  aspect.  The  modem  signs 
heighten  the  antique  impression. 

February  5thj  1860.  —Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bennoch  are 
staying  for  a  little  whUe  at  Mr.  B  *s,  at  Coventry, 
and  Mr.  B  called  upon  us  the  other  day,  with 

Mr.  Bennoch,  and  invited  us  to  go  and  see  the  lions 

of  Coventry ;  so  yesterday  U and  I  went.    It  was 

not  my  first  visit,  therefore  I  have  little  or  nothing  to 
record,  unless  it  were  to  describe  a  ribbon-&ctory  inte 


I 


i 


ENGLAND.  558 

whicli  Mr.  B took  us.     But  I  have  no  compre* 

benBion  of  machmery,  and  have  only  a  confused  recol- 
lection of  an  edifice  of  four  or  five  stories,  on  ea^ih 
floor  of  witich  were  rows  of  huge  maclimea,  all  busy 
vith  their  iron  hands  and  joints  in  turning  out  deli> 
cate  ribbons.  It  was  very  curious  and  unintelligible 
to  me  to  observe  bow  they  caused  different  colored 
patterns  to  appear,  and  even  flowers  to  blossom,  on 
the  plain  surface  of  a  ribbon.  Some  of  the  designs 
were  pretty,  and  I  was  told  that  one  manufacturer 
pays  X500  annually  to  French  artiste  (or  artisans,  for 
I  do  not  know  whether  they  have  a  connection  with 
higher  art)  merely  for  new  patterns  of  ribbons.  The 
English  find  it  impossible  to  supply  themselves  with 
tasteful  productions  of  this  sort,  merely  from  the  re- 
sources of  English  fancy.  If  an  Englishman  pos- 
sessed the  artistic  faculty  to  the  degree  requisite  to 
produce  such  things,  he  would  doubtless  think  himself 
a  great  artist,  and  scorn  to  devote  himself  to  these 
humble  purposes.  Every  Frenchman  is  probably  more 
of  an  artist  than  one  Englishman  in  a  thousand. 

We  ascended  to  the  very  roof  of  the  factory,  and 
gazed  thence  over  smoky  Coventry,  which  is  now  a 
town  of  very  considerable  size,  and  rapidly  on  the  In- 
crease. The  three  famous  spires  rise  out  of  the  midst, 
that  of  St.  Michael  being  the  tallest,  and  very  beauti- 
ful. Had  the  day  been  clear,  we  should  have  had  a 
wide  view  on  all  aides ;  for  Warwickshire  is  well  laid 
out  for  distant  prospects,  if  you  can  only  gain  a  little 
elevation  from  which  to  see  them. 

Descending  from  the  roof,  we  next  went  to  see  Trin- 
ity Church,  which  has  just  come  through  an  entire 
process  of  renovation,  whereby  much  of  its  pristina 
beauty  has  doubtless  been  restored  j  but  its  venerable 


564   FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE^BOOKS.  ptaa, 

awfulnees  is  greatly  impaired.  We  weai  into  three 
Ghurches,  and  found  that  they  had  all  been  subjected 
to  the  same  process.  It  would  be  nonsense  to  n^ret 
it,  because  the  very  existence  of  these  old  edifices  is 
involved  in  their  being  renewed ;  but  it  certainly  does 
deprive  them  of  a  great  part  of  their  charm,  and  puts 
(me  in  mind  of  wigs,  padding,  and  all  sueh  devices  for 
giving  decrepitude  the  aspect  of  youth.  In  the  pave- 
ment of  the  nave  and  aisles  there  are  worn  tombstones, 
with  defaced  inscriptions,  and  discolored  marbles  af- 
fixed against  the  ¥rall ;  monuments,  too,  where  a  me- 
difldval  man  and  wife  sleep  side  by  side  on  a  marble 
slab ;  and  other  tombs  so  old  that  the  inscriptions  are 
quite  gone.  Over  an  arch,  in  one  of  the  churches, 
there  was  a  fresco,  so  old,  dark,  faded,  and  blackoied, 
that  I  found  it  impossible  to  make  out  a  single  figure 
or  the  slightest  hint  of  the  design.  On  the  whole, 
after  seeing  the  churches  of  Italy,  I  was  not  greatly 
impressed  with  these  attempts  to  renew  the  andeni 
beauty  of  old  English  minsters ;  it  would  be  better  to 
preserve  as  sedulously  as  possible  their  aspect  of  de- 
cay, in  which  consists  the  principal  charm.  .  .  . 

On  our  way  to  Mr.  B *s  house,  we  looked  into 

the  quadrangle  of  a  charity-school  and  old  men's  hoe* 
pital,  and  afterwards  stepped  into  a  lai^  Bomaa 
Catholic  church,  erected  within  these  few  years  past, 
and  closely  imitating  the  medisBval  architecture  and 
arrangements.  It  is  strange  what  a  plaything,  a  trifle^ 
an  unserious  affair,  this  imitative  spirit  makes  of  a 
huge,  ponderous  edifice,  which  if  it  had  really  been 
built  five  hundred  years  ago  would  have  been  worthy 
»f  all  respect.  I  think  the  time  must  soon  come  whea 
this  sort  of  thing  will  be  held  in  utmost  scorn,  imtil 
the  lapse  ol  time  shall  give  it  a  claim  to  respect    But, 


ijB«0.] 


ENGLAND. 


655 


I 


imetluiiks,  we  tad  better  Btrike  out  any  kind  o£  KrchU 
lecture,  so  it  be  our  own,  however  wret4:hed,  than  thus 
tread  back  upon  the  past. 

Mr.  B now  conducted  us  to  his  residence,  which 

stands  a  little  beyond  the  outskirts  of  the  city,  on  the 
declivity  of  a  hill,  and  in  bo  windy  a  spot  that,  a&  he 
assured  me,  the  very  plants  are  blown  out  of  the 
ground.  He  pointed  to  two  maimed  trees  whose  tops 
vera  blown  off  by  a  gale  two  or  three  years  since; 
but  tlie  foliage  still  covers  their  shortened  summits  in 
summer,  so  that  he  does  not  think  it  desirable  to  cut 
them  down. 

In  America,  a  man  of  Mr.  B  's  property  would 

take  upon  himself  the  state  and  dignity  of  a  million- 
aire. It  is  a  blessed  thing  in  England,  that  money 
gives  a  man  no  pretensions  to  rank,  and  does  not 
bring  the  responsibilities  of  a  great  position. 

We  found  three  or  four  gentlemen  to  meet  us  at 

dinner,  —  a  Mr.  D and  a  Mr,  B ,  an  author, 

having  written  a  book  called  "  The  Philosophy  of  Ne- 
cessity," and  is  acquainted  with  Emerson,  who  spent 
two  or  three  days  at  his  house  when  last  in  England. 
He  was  very  kindly  appreciative  of  my  own  produt^ 
tiona,  as  was  also  his  wife,  next  to  whom  I  sat  at  din- 
ner. 8he  talked  to  me  about  the  author  of  "  Adani 
Bede,"  whom  she  has  known  intimately  all  her  life. 
.  .  .  Miss  Evans  (who  wrote  "  Adam  Bede  ")  was  the 
daughter  of  a  steward,  and  gained  her  exact  knowl- 
edge of  English  rural  life  by  the  connection  with  which 
this  origin  brought  her  with  the  farmers.  She  was 
entirely  self -educated,  and  has  made  herself  an  admi- 
rable scholar  in  classical  as  well  as  in  modem  lan- 
guages. Those  who  knew  her  had  always  recognized 
her  wonderful  endowments,  and  only  watched  to  bm 


666  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [IMa 

in  wliat  waj  they  would  deyelop  themtelYes*  She  is  a 
person  of  the  simplest  manners  and  character,  ainiahle 
and  unpretending,  and  Mrs.  B  spoke  of  her  with 

great  affection  and  respect  .  •  .  Mr.  B— ,  our  host, 
is  an  extremely  sensible  man ;  and  it  is  remarkable 
how  many  sensible  men  there  are  in  England,  — men 
who  have  read  and  thought,  and  can  develop  very  good 
ideas,  not  exactly  original,  yet  so  much  the  product  of 
their  own  minds  that  they  can  fairly  call  them  their 
oinXm  •  •  • 

February  l%ih.'^-*.  .  •  This  present  month  has  been 
somewhat  less  dismal  than  the  preceding  ones ;  there 
have  been  some  sunny  and  breezy  days  when  there 
was  life  in  the  air,  affording  something  like  enjoyment 
in  a  walk,  especially  when  the  ground  was  frozen.  It 
is  agreeable  to  see  the  fields  still  green  through  a  par- 
tial covering  of  snow ;  the  trunks  and  branches  of  the 
leafless  trees,  moreover,  have  a  verdant  aspect,  very 
unlike  that  of  American  trees  ut  winter,  for  they  are 
covered  with  a  delicate  green  moss,  which  is  not  so 
observable  in  summer.  Often,  too,  there  is  a  twine  of 
green  ivy  up  and  down  the  trunk.     The  other  day,  as 

J and  I  were  walking  to  Whitnash,  an  elm  was 

felled  right  across  our  path,  and  I  was  much  struck  by 
this  verdant  coating  of  moss  over  all  its  surface, — the 
moss  plants  too  minute  to  be  seen  individually,  but 
making  the  whole  tree  green.  It  has  a  pleasant  effect 
here,  where  it  is  the  natural  aspect  of  trees  in  general; 
but  in  America  a  mossy  tree4Tunk  is  not  a  pleasant 
object,  because  it  is  associated  with  damp,  low,  uUf 
wholesome  situations.  The  lack  of  foliage  gives  many 
new  peeps  and  vistas,  hereabouts,  which  I  never  saw 
in  summer. 


I  i860.] 


ENGLAND. 


567 


March  Vlth.  —  J and  I  walked  to  Warwick 

yesterday  forenoon,  and  went  into  St.  Mary's  Church, 
to  aee  the  Beauchanip  chapel.  .  .  .  On  one  side  of  it 
were  some  worn  steps  ascending  to  a  confessional, 
where  the  priest  used  to  sit,  while  the  penitent,  in  the 
body  of  the  church,  poured  his  sins  through  a  perfo- 
rated auricle  into  this  unseen  receptacle.  The  sexton 
showed  us.  too,  a  very  old  chest  which  haA  been  found 
in  the  burial  vault,  with  some  ancient  armor  stored 
away  in  it.  Three  or  four  hehneta  of  rusty  iron,  one 
of  them  barred,  the  last  with  visors,  and  all  intolera- 
bly weighty,  were  ranged  in  a  row.  What  heads  those 
must  have  been  that  could  bear  such  massiveness  I  On 
one  of  the  helmets  was  a  wooden  crest  —  some  bird 
or  other  —  that  of  itself  weighed  several  pounds.  .  .  . 


%    April  23(?.  ■ — We  have  been  here  several  weeks. 

r.  .  .  Had  I  seen  Bath  earlier  in  my  English  life,  I 
might  have  written  many  pages  about  it,  for  it  is  really 
a  picturesque  and  interesting  city.  It  is  completely 
sheltered  in  the  lap  of  hills,  the  sides  of  the  valley 
rising  steep  and  high  from  the  level  spot  on  which  it 
stands,  and  through  which  runs  the  muddy  little  stream 
of  the  Avon.  The  older  part  of  the  town  is  on  the 
level,  and  the  more  modern  growth  —  the  growth  of 
more  than  a  hundred  years  —  climbs  higher  and  higher 
up  the  hill-side,  till  the  upper  streets  are  very  airy  and 
lofty.  The  houses  are  built  almost  entirely  of  Bath 
stone,  which  in  time  loses  its  original  huff  color,  and 
is  darkened  by  age  and  coal-smoke  into  a  dusky  gray ; 
but  still  the  city  looks  clean  and  pure  as  compared 
with  most  other  English  towns.  In  its  arehitecture  it 
has  somewhat  of  a  Parisian  aspect,  the  houses  havii^ 


668  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE-BOOKS.  [iMa 

roofs  rising  steep  from  their  high  fronts,  which  are 
often  adorned  with  pillars,  pilasters,  and  other  good 
devices  so  that  you  see  it  to  be  a  town  built  with  some 
general  idea  of  beauty,  and  not  for  business.  There 
are  Circuses,  Crescents,  Terraces,  Parades,  and  all 
such  fine  names  as  we  have  become  familiar  with  at 
Leamington,  and  other  watering-places.  The  decliv- 
ity of  most  of  the  streets  keeps  them  remarkably  clean, 
and  they  are  paved  in  a  very  comfortable  way,  with 
large  blocks  of  stone,  so  that  the  middle  of  the  street 
is  generally  practicable  to  walk  upon,  although  the 
sidewalks  leave  no  temptation  so  to  do,  being  of  gen- 
erous width.  In  many  alleys,  and  round  about  the 
Abbey  and  other  edifices,  the  pavement  is  oi  square 
flags,  like  those  of  Florence,  and  as  smooth  as  a  palace 
floor.  On  the  whole,  I  suppose  there  is  no  place  in 
England  where  a  retired  man,  with  a  moderate  income, 
could  live  so  tolerably  as  at  Bath ;  it  being  almost  a 
city  in  sise  and  social  advantages ;  quite  so,  indeed,  if 
eighty  thousand  people  make  a  city,  —  and  yet  havmg 
no  amioyance  of  business  nor  spirit  of  worldly  strug- 
gle.  All  modes  of  enjoyment  that  English  people  like 
may  be  had  here ;  and  even  the  climate  is  said  to  be 
milder  than  elsewhere  in  England.  How  iliis  may  be, 
I  know  not;  but  we  have  rain  or  passing  showers 
almost  every  day  since  we  arrived,  and  I  suspect  the 
surrounding  hills  are  just  about  of  that  inconvenient 
height,  that  keeps  catching  clouds,  and  compelling 
them  to  squeeze  out  their  moisture  upon  the  included 
valley.  The  air,  however,  certainly  is  preferable  to 
that  of  Leamington.  •  •  . 

There  are  no  antiquities  except  the  Abbey,  which 
has  not  the  interest  of  many  other  English  churches 
and  cathedrals.     In  the  midst  of  the  old  part  of  the 


ENGLAKO, 


659 


town  stands  the  house  whldi  was  funnerly  Bean  Nnsh's 
residenoe.  but  which  is  now  part  of  tht*  establiahm^nt 
of  an  ale-merchant.  The  edifice  is  a  tall,  hut  rathi^r 
mean-looking,  atone  building,  with  th«  utitriuuw  from 
a  little  aide  court,  which  is  so  cumbered  with  einjjty 
beer  barrels  as  hardly  to  alTord  a  paasagc.  The  door- 
way has  some  architectural  pi-etensions,  being  pillared 
and  with  some  sculptured  devices  —  whether  lioni*  or 
winged  heraldic  monstrosities  I  forget  —  ou  thv  pedi- 
ment. Within  there  is  a  small  entry,  not  large  enough 
to  l>e  tenned  a  hall,  and  a  staircase,  with  carviid  biUiiii* 
trade,  ascending  by  angular  turns  and  square  landing- 
places.  For  a  long  course  o£  years,  ending  a  litlie 
more  than  a.  century  ago,  princes,  nobles,  luid  all  tlio 
great  and  beautiful  people  of  old  times,  used  to  go  up 
that  staircase,  to  pay  their  respects  to  the  King  of  Itutli. 
On  the  side  of  the  bouse  there  is  a  marble  slab  in- 
serted, recording  that  here  he  resided,  and  that  here 
be  died  in  1767,  between  eighty  and  ninety  yean  of 
LjBge.  My  first  acquaintaai^e  with  him  was  in  Smol- 
■lett's  "  Roderick  Random,"  and  I  have  met  him  in  a 
P  Inmdred  other  novels. 

His  marble  statue  b  in  a  niche  at  one  end  of  the 
great  pump-room,  in  wig,  B(]uare.«kirt«id  coat,  flapped 
waistcoat,  and  all  the  queer  costume  of  tlie  period, 
still  looking  ghost-like  upon  the  scene  where  be  used 
to  be  an  autocraL  Marble  is  not  a  good  material  for 
Beau  Xash,  however  ;  or,  if  so,  it  requires  color  to  set 
htm  off  adequately.  .  .  . 

It  is  usual  in  Bath  to  see  the  old  sign  of  the  checker- 
board on  the  door-^xists  of  taverns.  It  was  originally 
a  token  that  the  game  might  be  played  there,  and  ii 
•uw  merely  a  tuvem-aga. 


660  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE^BOOKS.  [IMa 

LONDON. 

81  Hertford  Street,  Mayfair^  May  16eA,  1860.  -« 
I  came  hither  from  Bath  on  the  14di,  and  am  stay* 
ing  with  my  friends,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Motley.  I  would 
gladly  journalise  some  of  my  proceedings,  and  de- 
scribe things  and  people ;  but  I  find  the  same  cold* 
ness  and  stiffness  in  my  pen  as  always  since  our  re- 
turn to  England.  I  dined  with  the  Motleys  at  Lord 
Dufferin's,  on  Monday  evening,  and  there  met,  among 
a  few  other  notable  people,  the  Honorable  Mrs.  Nor- 
ton, a  dark,  comely  woman,  who  doubtless  was  once 
most  charming,  and  still  has  charms,  at  above  fifty 
years  of  age.  In  fact,  I  should  not  have  taken  her  to 
be  greatly  above  thirty,  though  she  seems  to  use  no 
art  to  make  herself  look  younger,  and  talks  about  her 
time  of  life  without  any  squeamishness.  Her  voice 
is  very  agreeable,  having  a  sort  of  muffled  quality, 
which  is  excellent  in  woman.  She  is  of  a  very  cheer- 
ful temperament,  and  so  has  borne  a  great  many 
troubles  without  being  destroyed  by  them.  But  I 
can  get  no  color  into  my  sketch,  so  shall  leave  it  here. 

London^  May  Vlth.  [From  a  letter.]  —  Affairs 
succeed  each  other  so  fast,  that  I  have  really  forgotten 
what  I  did  yesterday.  I  remember  seeing  my  dear 
friend,  Henry  Bright,  and  listening  to  him,  as  we 
strolled  in  the  Park,  and  along  the  Strand.  To-day 
I  met  at  breakfast  Mr.  Field  Talfourd,  who  promises 
to  send  you  the  photograph  of  his  portrait  of  Mr. 
Browning.  He  was  very  agreeable,  and  seemed  de- 
lighted to  see  me  again.  At  lunch,  we  had  Lord 
Dufferin,  the  Honorable  Mrs.  Norton,  and  Mr.  Steiw 
ling  (author  of  the  ''  Cloister  Life  of  Charles  Y."), 
with  whom  we  are  to  dine  on  Sunday. 


AMERICA. 


S61 


You  would  be  stricken  dumb,  to  see  how  quietly  I 
•ocept  a  whole  string  of  invitations,  aad  what  Is  more, 
perform  my  engagements  without  a  murmur. 

A  German  artist  has  come  to  me  with  a  letter  of 
introduction,  and  a  request  that  I  will  sit  to  him  for  a 
portrait  in  bas-relief.  To  this,  likewise,  I  have  as- 
sented !  subject  to  the  condition  that  1  shall  have  my 
leisure. 

The  stir  of  this  London  life,  somehow  or  other,  has 
done  me  a  wonderful  deal  of  good,  and  1  feel  better 
than  for  months  past.  This  is  strange,  for  if  I  had 
my  choice,  I  should  leave  undone  almost  all  the  things 
I  do. 

I  have  had  time  to  see  Beunoch  only  once. 

[This  closes  the  European  Journal.  After  Mr. 
Hawthorne's  return  to  America,  he  published  ''Our 
Old  Home,"  and  began  a  new  romance,  of  which  two 
chapters  appeared  in  the  "Atlantic  Monthly."  But 
the  breaking  out  of  the  war  stopped  all  imaginative 
work  with  him,  aod  all  journalizing,  until  1862,  when 
he  went  to  Maine  for  a  little  excursion,  and  began  an- 
other  journal,  from  which  I  take  one  paragraph,  giv- 
ing a  slight  note  of  his  state  of  mind  at  an  interesting 
period  of  his  country's  history.  — Ed.] 

West  G<mldsboroiigk,  August  15(A,  1862. — It  is 

a  week  ago,  Saturday,  since  J and  I  reached  this 

place,  .  .  .  Mr.  Barney  S.  Hill's. 

At  Hallowell,  and  subsequently  all  along  the  route, 
the  country  was  astir  with  volunteers,  and  the  war  is 
all  that  seems  to  be  alive,  and  even  that  doubtfully 
80.  Nevertheless,  the  country  certainly  shows  a  good 
spirit,  the  towns  offering  everywhere  most  liberal 
bounties,  and  every  able-bodied  man  feeb  an  immense 


L 


X.  3a 


662  FRENCH  AND  ITALIAN  NOTE^BOOKS.  [IMl 

pull  and  pressure  upon  him  to  go  to  tlia  war.  I  doubt 
whether  any  people  was  ever  actuated  bj  a  more  geo- 
ume  and  disinterested  public  spirit ;  though,  of  oonrsei 
it  is  not  unalloyed  with  baser  motiyee  and  tendencies. 
We  met  a  train  of  cars  with  a  regiment  or  two  just 
starting  for  the  South,  and  apparently  in  high  spirits. 
Everywhere  some  insignia  of  soldiership  were  to  be 
seen,  —  bright  buttons,  a  red  stripe  down  the  trousers, 
a  military  cap,  and  sometimes  a  round-shouldered 
bumpkin  in  the  entire  uniform.  They  require  a  great 
deal  to  give  them  the  aspect  of  soldiers ;  indeed,  it 
seems  as  if  they  needed  to  have  a  good  deal  taken 
away  and  added,  like  the  rough  day  of  a  sculptor  as 
it  grows  to  be  a  modeL  The  whole  talk  of  the  bar* 
rooms  and  every  other  jdace  of  intercourse  was  about 
enlisting  and  the  war,  this  being  the  very  erisb  of 
trial,  when  the  voluntaiy  system  is  drawing  to  an  endf 
and  the  draft  almost  immediately  to  commence* 


m_w 


INDEX. 


AdoUd  BfllrAdSFB.  83,  12] ,  IS. 

Appiu  W(V,  M,  IM,  \li.  III,  lie,  IM, 

in,  481,  tes. 

ApUivrp,  Hr.,  31 T. 
Aptboip,  Mn..  ni. 

AnbutrtaTM,  IM  iO,  Ul,  EOS. 

AnhUiiliop  ol  9nlt,  tB,  M. 

*—"— Mm,  Pute,  IS  I  (ihiinh,  m, «» 1 
MO. BIT;  ImttaUre.SM.  St 
DMiwu,  C*ftt°*i  CuUu.  CUbednta, 
Ohuoli,  Cborobaa,  OolUapni.  DuHnu, 
OotUo  mils,  BiHiaH,  HonumHiU, 
FiliieH,  PuOiaoB,  Bcnlptir—  "— 
ptH,  TVabm,  Toma,  VlUu. 

ATdnisa. 

Anna,  1S6,  ISa- 

CaUudnlol.Ste,  3«1. 

Arao,  Um  Btnt,  XO.  782, 3A,  3SB.  «X. 


10,  im,  103.  M7.     &»  J 

-..-.n  HomiH,  Plotuna.  and  BeuLpCujs. 

Altirti,  W,  27.  IS,  T7,  l««.  IN).  170,  180, 


664 


INDEX. 


BMidittf,6«. 

Baptim,  A,  480. 

BftptittenTf  the.  aT7. 

Barberlni,  Oftrdiiua,  98. 

Barberini  fMnOy,  6^,  184. 

Barberini  0*11«7,  604. 

Barberini  Ubnry,  134. 

Bwberlni  PBlAoe^fie.  70, 88, 138, 134, 187. 

Barberinl.  ^Uua,  78. 

Bardona  (painter),  813. 

Bargello,  the,  844,  870,  887. 

Warilima     See  BuUioM  of  OoneUnthie, 

Jallft,  St.   John   Latenm,   St  MerU 

Megffiore,  St  SebMtiano,  St.  Stefano. 

iSee  Arohitectore,  CathedraU,  Chapala, 

Ghurohea,  Doomo,  and  Tempiee. 
BaetiUe,  the,  88. 
BathTsST. 

Baths  of  CaraoaUa,  108, 113. 
Battle-flelda,  257. 

BeatrioeCend,  88. 187, 151,  408, 004. 
Beauohamp  Chapel,  857. 
Beantj,  2M.  303. 

Beggan.  6l  76,  90, 108,  197,  218,  290, 
^S7,  ^  288,  238,  280,  951,  208,  264, 

260,  814,  360,  872,  878,  461,  4M,  4n, 

486.    See  Wonhip. 
BeliMriua,  106. 
Bella  Donna  (Tltian*e),  110. 
Bello,  Signor  deL  388. 
Belloeguardo,  336,  377,  407. 
Bella,376. 

Belredere  riUa,  441. 
Benedict,  Popel  200,  618. 
Beni,  Monte,  877. 
Bennoch,  Franda,  000,  002,  061. 
Bennooh,  Mra.,  OKS. 
BenTennto  Cellini,  187, 180, 280,817,  801, 

368,872.406. 
Bernini,  John  Lawrence,  06,  148,  160, 

173,196. 
BergAre.  Roe,  23. 
Bianco  family,  the,  371. 
Biblet,  136,  416. 
Black  Eafrle  Hot«1,  447,  461. 
Blafirden,  MIm,  335, 366, 802,  426,  427. 
Blanc,  Mont,  640. 
Bleadnn,384. 
Bloody  Brook,287. 
Bine  Beard,  138. 
Bluahea,  286. 

BoboUOardena,  301,  326,  410. 
Boccaccio,  John,  260,  300,  368,  408,  462. 
BolMna,471. 

BolMna,  Caatle  of,  472,  476. 
Boleena,  Lake  of,  470. 
Bonaparte.    See  Napoleon. 
Bonaparte,  Pauline,  168. 
Bonaparte,  Villa,  86. 
Bonapartes,  Chapel  of  the,  342. 
BoneUa,  Via,  162. 
Bonnivard,  Krancit  de,  639,  640. 
Booka,  33.    Ste  BIblee,  and  Librariea. 
Boott,  Mr.,  336,  392. 
BoTRheae,  Palatso,  106,  111. 
Borgheae,  Prince,  107. 
Borghew),  Villa,  166,  480. 


Hill  ■ii^iiii  eiM 
oonneiBO{  xed. 

Boston  AtbeiMMna,  90 

BotticeUi,  Ahnonaar,  287. 

Boologna,  11. 

Bourbon,  GomteUe  de,  180, 158L 

Bourbona,  888.      See  under  ■■ 

kings. 

Bramar,MlBB,  171, 212. 

Bright,  Henry,  000, 000. 

British  Channel.  10. 

Bronsea,  808, 872. 

Brown  (Amarican  Plilntnr),  160. 

Brown^,  KUwOwith  Bnnreitt,  MS,  208^ 

Browning,  Robert,  208,  386,  SM,  207. 
886,800,060. 

Browning,  Robert  (son),  388. 

Bnmellesohi.  Philin,  860. 

Bryant,  WlUiaia  CuUea,  217. 

Bryants,  the,  288. 

Buchanan,  Jamea,  82. 864. 

Bnffalmaooo,  Bonamloo,  368i 

Bnonarottl,  PUasso,  860. 

Burial,  193. 

Burial-plaoes,  at  Lsghora,  04 ;  aft  Boom, 
77,  186;  Koteetantl  147i  198.  See 
Basilicas,  Cataeomba,  fWhedmh, 
Chapels,  Chnrchea,  MoBomsal^ 
Tomba. 

Buried,  Chapel  of  the,  822. 

Byron,  HOtol  de,  038.  686. 644. 

Byron,  Lord,  222,  286,  266,  800,  087,  030, 
040. 

Byiantina  ploture,  180. 

CMara,  the,  97;  palaee  e^  108,  112, 
486  ;  Columb^um  of,  llA.    See  Aa- 


gustna  Cftsar,  Julius 
Cal4s,268.    ^Em  Restau 
Caius  Ceetlus,  146,  496. 
Calabreee,  Steamer,  47,  00. 
California,- 274. 
Calypao  and  her  Nympha,  168. 
Cambio,  the,  248. 
Campagna,  93, 104, 189,  478,  484. 
Campanile,  the,  281,  400.  402. 
Campo,  Ptassa  del,  437,  438. 
Canova,  Anthony.  70,  76, 182, 168,  284. 
CapeUa,  Bianca,  362. 
Capitol,  the,  97, 101, 106, 100,  104,  101^ 

172, 173,  182,  208,  216.  480,  486. 
Capltoline  Hill,  102, 171 
Capuohhia,  Church  of  the,  78,  006. 
CaraoUla,  284,  287. 
CaraoaUa,  Baths  of,  108, 112: 
Caracd,  Annlbal,  27. 
Cardinals,  81,  82, 138, 144,  206. 
CamiTal,  63,  64,  68,  74,  70,  77,  70,  8(( 

486,487,488. 
Carraja,  Ponte,  276. 
Carrousel,  Place  de,  33. 
Csstagno,  Andrea  del,  391. 
Casadel  BeUo,  271, 273,  274. 
Casa  Ouidi,  286,  293. 
Casa  Ouidi  Windows,  293. 
Csainos,  91, 142, 149, 166,  200. 
Cass,  Lewis,  190. 


nlbUolIiDCHIDtoliSaJ. 


INDEX, 


OmUk,  113,  us,  3K,  9R.  a«  OuUh 
(d  BdIhu,  CbinaiL  BvUcafuI.  St. 

lun  udTowan. 
C«lor,  67  71^  ST. 

OMDMBb*.  Ml.    AstAnhiWctiin. 

CMtwdnlK  A«(Mli*dnli  at  Amlmi^ 
Aa^  Anno,  Fkrilgno,  Oeoim.  t^u- 
■uuH,  Lyoiu,  If  Mr*  Dun*,  Nuvl,  81- 
Lomuo,  Sku,  BsoMo,  Vilaaca.  5« 
AnUtaetiin,      BtdlMi,      Clu|»li>. 

CUboUc  Olionli,  1&,  BG,  OS,  113,  M3, 
033.  Ste  CardliBU,  HoakL  Smu. 
Priaita,  ud  Wotdilp.  «h  g~HH-iir. 
CaUwdms,  Cli^iali,  CtaonhB*,  CiB- 
noU,  SbriDH.  ud  Wonhlp. 


I 


OH^lalbta 


IS8.37J.  40& 


I 


Obuabolaibi,  Fupa'*,  STL 
ObuoM  ^!jP*Ms,  I&  IB,  ». 

OhuInT,  all  FVsihU,  S16. 

OhuBli,  US,  343,  MO.  Sa  BauahuBp, 
of  lb*  Bmuputo,  ot  (he  BuiM, 
MtdliiHB,  Bt.  Aatluny'a,  Bt.  bnulo'i. 
Bt  LomuoX  BlKine,  Stroitf  Fimdlj, 
ud  TDrioiila  Cb^vlL  Au  AroUMi!- 
toTF,  BhIUiiu,  Cithfdnli,  ChurcbH, 
l>uonia,  bid  Templisii. 

dupmiio,  Mn,,  216. 

ChuLubAnH,  an.  31,  £15. 

OhMMabAud  log,  31. 

ChM  tu&r     ~ 

C^dna, , 

idnt,  89 ;  tUUu,  » ;  fam 
SSg,  SSI,  tea.  SHBennn. 
UOco,  OuUb  at,  safi,  £k,  113 


>t  Bt-FMeiXeii  nC  tbeCi 


< 


SSI.tM. 

OhrM  Diipottnc  nUk  tin  Dooton,  88. 

Chrilt,  Innr  Dciin  at,  GIT. 

"^irUI.  pIcrtarH  ol.  SI,  89,  !(«,  111.  KM, 

zar,  ti4,  320,  321.  »,  aoT,  sm,  ssb, 

419,  440.  4S1 ;  iCUw  ol.  196. 
Chriit,  nU«  at,  T4, 190, 4SI. 

ClirUtlu.  H.  ZIIL 

ChrirtiaK,  QUBfln,  481. 

Cbiircliu,C,  183.317.    S(v  Chunbat  of 


nii^  DomlidcwM,  FniignB.  Ilmiliitolnii. 
Or  8u  Michde.  Penuii.  St.  Ama,  St. 
Andns,  St.  Asdna  dallB  VbDc,  St. 
Croc*.  Bt.  Oub,  Bt.  OnnrfiL  St.  If- 
Bula,  Bt.  John  Idank,  H.  uhbib, 
■t.  Lokl.  Bt.  ItHoo.  St.  Hula  d^' 


■t.  Loicl,  Bt.  ItHoo,  St.  Hula  d^' 


(oTelU.  St.  tUrta 
■niKila,  Bt.  Muy,  Bt.  Ihrv  of  tbo 
AoMli,  Bt.  UuT  wtttaln  the  Willi, 
Bt. Viducl.  St.  HinlUo,  at,  PatiiT.  3L 
PlBtn  to  Haittn,  Bt.  PlBtTD  In  Vm- 


LnlUand  VlUn 

I.   Badiaat,   C 

unoiaiK,  ^.papaU.  DooniD, 

C^malKie.  JdIid.  339.  !ST.  3U 


Clvlta  TaCEhla.  U. 

Claima,  B3S. 

Claud*  Lo^ne,  31.  I3X.  170.  ISO,  290. 

Cliodiau  AdiMdDdl,  ?!  in,  484. 

Clfopatim,ri.  in. 

CUOnil.  Lord.  384. 

CUtumniu.  Um  Blier,  »e. 

Cloaca  Maidiua,  IS3, 

CtoWir  I4ff  of  Charta  V.,  MO. 

Cloiatara,  3S3,  SAfi. 

Cold.  07,™'  *■ 

CoUhubi,  B8,  lia,  130. 16t.  101, 4U.  401. 

Cokolea,  HBUl  du.  Ml,  M3. 

Colanna  nuBllr.  161. 

Colooaa  Falan,  ICIB,  1«0, 

Colonna,  Plana,  119. 

ColomH,  HAtd  dalla  tn,  330, 

Color,  ais. 


Onfa^lB- 

OoRU^  AiMb1«  AIIhiI  dl,  MO,  iia 

OonlnrbiallT,  T3. 

Conbii  FUaa*,4M. 

Cono,  tba,  Gl.  S4,  08,  T8,  TT,  80,  10& 

110,131, 480, 4ae,tfi,  lis. 

co[t«u,iiGe. 

CoUcnl.  CouDlBa,Kn. 

OoTBntry,  362. 

Cnwtoidi  Ihooiaa.  134. 38L 


666 


INDEX. 


tl9. 
Cntiaii  111. 

OiHlaa  IMMM,  11, 08, 918,  tfr,  «7A, 


^ ,  Mr.,  068. 

Dante  da^  Ali^iiMri,  OH,  871, 887, 801, 

47ft. 
Dwahiia,  108. 

Dvridiafatnm  of  X 108, 980. 
Daj.  828. 

Daath,  188, 908:  piotorM of, 988. 
Doounaroii,  410^  402. 
DMultetioB  of  Jolm  tbo  BaytkOi  910L 
lMSieamdFaU,Tht,om^ 
DMrflold.907. 
PMOMit  ftom  tho  Owi^  18L 
DonotiflBf  688* 
Drat,  881. 
DiAbl«rtos044. 
DickoM.  Ohirtoi,  Oii 
DUon,  8v. 

DtooletiuLBathi  of,  80, 08^  190. 
XMoffenoa,  (17. 
Dirt,  84,  478. 
DifltaflM08,220,908. 
DogM,  880. 
Don,  836. 

Dolce,  Carlo,  890,  88Bi 
Domniiohiiio,  77,  87,  tt.  178. 
Domanloo  of  Venioa,  SBi. 
Domini,  quo  Tadia,  Choroh  of,  190,  482. 
Dominloaaa,  Choroh  of,  900. 
Doma,  Rooher  daa,  081. 
DonatoUo,  340,  m 
Doria,  Andrea,  122. 
Dorla  PalaoeTooO. 
DorIa,  Prlnoe,  122, 188. 
Doria,  PrIiioeoVl92. 
Dow,a«rardr»(L819. 
Drawtnga  at  the  LooTre,  97. 
Draama,  880. 
Draaa,  to,81,  m,  190,  278,  406,  498, 

448. 
Dmam,  aroh  of,  1181 
Dulferiii,  Lord,  060. 
Draoeona,   St.   Feter*a,  90,  137.      8t€ 

Doomo,  977,  281.  801,  814, 818,  828,  409, 

404,  430.  447,  617,  081. 
Durance,  the  River,  617. 
DUrer,  Albert,  80. 
Dutch  paintera,  106,  812, 818, 498L 
Dwarfs,  164. 
Dying  Gladiator,  The,  98,  490. 

E ,  Mr.,  296. 

E ,  Mra.,  296. 

Eagle,  Roman,  366,  372. 
Kaffle  toYem,  468. 
Easter  Sunday,  162. 
Eating,  230,  2SA,  430.    See  Cookery. 
EoheUea,  Reetaurant  dea,  1& 
Egeria,  Fountain  of,  118. 
Egyptian  antiquitlea,  20. 
Emtiaa  obeli^  06, 67, 180. 


Balnh  Waldo, 
r,*'^«79. 


BnipolL488. 
Kn^iMl,661-681 


BOIMIT, 
Mil.41& 


81,008. 


of  theVliitaL 
KaqnlUiie  Hm,  00,  104. 
Stenal  IMher,  tha,  890, 8881 
MUwoMMi  471, 479, 47i. 
lorape,  tiOteldeP,  10^  SU^Oli, 
MnrvMa^  484k 
STaiia,MariML00O. 
SvM94, 1717904, 804. 
■vonfaiff,  898. 
XTttlCyf.the.888. 

i;yea,888. 


Vkbfiano,  Gentile  da,  S19L 

IUr,the,408. 

FaneoO  Hall,  888. 

Fameae  PtOaoe,  460. 

Flaooon,  H6tel,646. 

Ftuma,  107, 172, 182, 490, 

Faaat,71. 

Faea,  36,  902, 2n,  468, 08L 

FlBaandie,  Mr.,  21. 

11eaole,481. 

Flfa,421. 

Wne  Arte,  Academy  of,  818, 

Fbie  Aria,  LMtftote  of  the,  440w 

Flreworiu.    See 

Fiah,  Hamilton,  70. 

FlaheMwy,  272, 483k 

Flahing.6M6,M. 

Flamlnlan  way,  220l  298. 

neMu214,4H. 

nemUMr,  Catharine.  880. 

n^yt1f>^ff^  nliitiiiiea^  lOS. 

nonhl94. 

Florence,  900.  210,  919,  908,  970-488} 

climate,  277,  811, 814. 
Florence,  Grand  Docheaa of,  SST^MS. 
Florence,  Grand  Dokea  of,  971,  980l  981 

337,348. 
Florence,  Prefect  of,  462. 
Flowers,  131, 140,  202,  224,  226^ 
FoUgno,  237  ;  churchee  of,  288b 
Foligno,  Cathedral  of,  238. 
Folkestone,  10. 
Fontana,  Albergo  della,  271. 
"Fonte,Del,**4in. 
Forests,  22^220. 
Fbmarina,  SB. 

Fortune  Vlrflii,  Tanple  of,  19& 
Fortone,  168. 
Forum,  84,  99,  lHjJOOL 
Forum  Boarinm,  U8b 


Fiu«,"i)^Mi;&w-^. 

fiMwa.  Oi—d  HJUI  da.  MB. 


ObUoo, 3ZT, 33R, 390,  »^ MO-MO, 
aaliiab<i«M(b,  IkMU^  lis,  Ml. 
O^tw,  Ennnn,  lU. 

aim«,S41.^.  719,  401. 

<l«Uuls.  P^uio,  13S. 

QalkrtH,  lulUn  sompHvl  with  ■IwlU^ 

0u4«u,  th«  TuUflrlfl*,  37 ;  M  Qtatm^  fis ; 

dorU;  142';  P^ntllifld,lUi'lGSi'ptB- 
oiu.  tin;  Albul,  Ul;  BoboU,  301, 

Omitlo,  ill,  m. 

Otlm,  403.    S«  FdtU  UtliK,  d«l  Pd- 

polo,  St  Fndiwo,  Bt,  GUnuinl.  SI. 

Fancimilil,  BC.  Puis.  at.  BaliHtiuw. 
Onu,  93,  IDS   3i;,  ST!,  404,  400.    Sh 


Own,  Idilu  of ,  933,  MS. 
OnaL»-M,B(»:  t^imh  at,  El, 0. 
OHRgtaa  Slan,  IIO. 
Oamui  ailfait.  L  UO. 
OUIoUiu,  Vk,  »). 
aUrtudilo,  3«,  366,  410. 
GliuMU,  413     Jto  Hiuidi,  HmiH.  ■  Hi 
....      ..  8pirito»U«B,  u 


.413. 

Olbbon,  EdwuiL  MS. 

GCbm^dhn,  I2S.  ISO,  ISl.  173,  IM, 

oidttD,  33B,  wi.  318.  ses.  3W.  an. 

nudnou,  Huilui  Bnrt.  SIO. 
Q1h>,  putiilad,  »t,  177,  Vli,  301,  M& 


OobsllD  tapeMTT,  ISB. 

i.  Te.lro,°3:Sf37a. 
uouoh,  W«M,£6L 

Duck  Plam~dal,'27iL  4M. 
^._d  Dnul  Ftuvk  m 
OnBBL  420,  443,  480,  41 


in,  304, 483. 

mRonUo,  Ua,3S4,«e. 
UtVfDIU,  MM«,  413. 
Ooerdno diCnto,  143, 141,  170,  3U 


QBintenllal,  PaLuu.  M7. 

OuMo  Hail,  77,  W,  Rl.  ee.  lit,  137,  103. 

1G6,  2aOlO,4EI,  KA,  UH 
Onida  dt  Slkii/i,  440. 

H — ,  wm  ¥.,  -tan. 

H ,  Un..  108. 

Hwlriwi'i  tiiiuh.  tie,  130  ,  TtUa,  300. 

HaU,Mur.3^ 

Huda,  3M,  Xa.  303,  411,  U4, 43t. 

Humltal,  23G,  iSI. 

amilamJa.  400. 

Eut,  Jog]  T.,  384. 

H>Tn,eSO. 

Uiokwvid,  Jokn,  310,  404. 

Hantaoroe,  JuUaii,  U,  ao,  III,  OB,  MO, 

247,  •ae,  m,  340.  aio,  got,  on. 

BawthonH,  MallHDlnl,  bnt,  TO.  79i  4*- 
-■--  -—  ttrhctkm,  110  i  psrtnlc.  SU. 
a,  Db^  IlO,  Sai,  Ih,  «>},  481, 


Henry  IV.,  17,  il.31. 

Hsurr,  PaMck,  124. 


SoIb^D,  ISl,  4st. 
Boll  FamUv.  170, 200. 

°-'-*' — '-•■™,m 


auial  Dnataa.  na^  ML  MS,  41 
!7.     a«  IlanfrkBi,  BpMCiu 


lorUlDi  Coelah  130, 
lomw,  m^Sn,  4M. 
loMU.    S«  B6ula  de*  '  -•■Tm^T-r-, 
d'AnrieUm,  Bluk  Bula,  da  Bjmn, 

T»  Colonu,  Ciw^ol  Italia,  da  I'Ba- 


668 


IfTDEX. 


RojAl,  BpOfaaaa%  Hid  WhMtor.    8m 
▲Ibergot,  BmU  1«v«ni,  and  Ibm. 

RottlDKu«r  A  Co.,  28. 

Hoodoo,  Jolm  Ai^lioay«  87. 

Hooffhton,  Lord,  29S. 

HooMS,  Italian,  238,  234,  944.  MO,  260, 
2677405,468;  Now  Bn^aod,  28Sw 

Hoirortli,  Mlia  Flaiiiqr,  800, 810, 828. 

IdleooML  248. 

IUnmiiiationa.168, 1M,480:  books,  418. 

Tmmamlafo  Oonoopttoa,  884. 

Imogon,  888, 801. 

Inolaa,  268, 206. 

Inooofruity,  8S. 

IndttlgiBoea,  181. 

Infernal  Reftooa,  tbo,884. 

Inna,  at  FbUgno,  287.     8e9  Albaqioa, 

Eafls  Tavern,  and  Hofeala. 
Inatttato  of  Una  Aria,  448. 
Italian  Rapablioa,  280,  287. 
ItaUana,    ebaraotor,    283,    816,     476; 

atranfth,  447 :  oorioattv,  468. 
ItalyToO^eOO  ;  boiiaea,288, 284, 244, 288, 

2lS6^287.406.4a8:rulna,226;  aoanoTj, 

188,  1^,  288-237,  248,  216,  286,  270, 

879,447,463;  aky,  288. 

1 ,  LadT,  6ia 

J ,  Lora,  510. 

Jaokaon,  Oonaral,  868, 426. 

Jamaaon,  Mra.,  188, 105. 

Janoa  Qoadrifrona,  aroh  of,  128. 

Jaffaraon,  Thomaa,  124. 

Jomaalani,  61. 

Janiita,  OoUmo  of,  86 ;  ehoreh  of,  108. 

Joaua.    See  Chriat 

Jowalry,  632.  See  Qam^iad  Ornamonta 

Jewiah  qmagogoa,  64. 

Jews,  88. 

Jow».harp,  a,  878. 

Joab,460: 

Joanna  of  Arragon,  119. 

John  tha  BapUat,  460. 

John  of  Bologna,  362. 866, 860, 868, 872. 

John  XXIL,Popa,6l7. 

Judith,  206,  810,  818,  447. 

Jogj^ra,  49. 

Joffiutiia,  100,  101. 

Jniia,68o. 

JoUa  BaaiUoa  of,  169, 160. 

JoUoa  Csaar,  97, 109, 200, 206, 408.  See 

Cmmn. 
Jnliui  n.,  Popa,  864, 481. 
Juno,  142. 
Jupiter,  16a 

K ,  Mr.,  398. 

.,  Mr.,  J.  P.,  102. 

u,  102,  211. 
King,  Mr.  (of  Alabama),  272. 
Kings,  385. 
Kirkup,  Mr.,  886. 


Lalla,  219,  480. 
Lame  boy,  a,  227 
8m 


Lanit,  Loggia  dL  8801 
I«ooo6^88,  m,  188, 8881 
LaraaanL  Palacao,  66* 
Larga,  Via,  845. 
Laat  JndgmM^  182,  204, 821, 
Supper,  78. 
iPalaoe,' 


itia«  Pope,  86. 
'VLSm 


72. 
Porta,  105. 
Latina;  Via,  104. 
Ijuua,  416,  688. 

LniftHT,416. 

.^iedralof,8aS,0i8l 
Lsamingtoii,  6tt,  568. 
Laander,  72. 
LM|ho^^M,607. 
liHiOMnr  jaonmie  oooiv 
Lamaa,Uke,&iM4B. 
Lenox,  210. 
Lepidna,188. 
Uberitia, 
librarlea, 

rentian  libtariaa. 
Lillington,  660. 
linlltLNrir  PalMO,  6L 

Livrtde»Mer»eaUe,Sl» 

Llaarda,131. 

Looanda,  a,  221. 

Lodglnga,  216. 

Legale,  168. 182, 88L 

LonQon,566. 

Longan,  480, 481. 

Loula  IX.,  Saint,  21. 

Loola  XIY.,  atatne,  4L 

Loola  XVI.,  81. 

Looia  XVII.,  81. 

Loola  le  Grand,  Plaoedo,41« 

Loorre,  the,  18. 20.  27. 

Loorre,  Hdtel  do,  9, 16, 88L 

Lorera,  826. 

Locifer,96. 

LodoTlal,  Vnia,  141. 

Luly'a  bandTaOS. 

Lona*  Amo,  288. 

Lorodooh.  Ladj2ll9. 

I^yona,  86,  41,  628. 

Lvona.  Cathedral  of.  530. 

M ,  Mlaa,  90, 118. 

MaooblaTem,  Ifieholaa,  841 ,847. 
Madeleine,  Church  of  the,  28. 
Madonnaa,106,119:  della  Seawlola, 

810,  814,  849,  866,  868,  874,886, 

446,448,460. 
Mahuria,  160,  470,  471. 
Mamertine  Priaon,  100. 
Manoheater  Ezhibitloa,  88. 
Manae,the01d.414. 
Manuaoripta,  416. 
Maratti,  Gulo,  87. 
Marble,  182, 167, 860. 
MarbleFimn,  JAe,  78, 104,  878, 6BL 
MaroeUna,  theatre  of,  108. 
Mazoua  Aurelioa  Antcwimia,  OT,  UC 
MBNy,  OoranMr,  406. 


INDEX. 


669 


KMnnt  (GoetlM'a),  n. 
]Cmb,143. 

]itfMniflt,8s-«8,sio,  mi,  SIX 

Martin,  Pope,  475. 

Umtj  Magdaton,  330,  88& 

MaakaT^ 

MaaoD,  atatoa  of,  124. 

ICaaatnU  family,  223. 

Xadiooan  Cbapel,  325. 

Medici,  OaroliiM  di,  302. 

Medioi,  Caaino,  14a 

Madid,  Catherine  dl,  21, 77. 

Medid,  Goamo  di,  »0,  822,  S28,  S45. 

Mediel,  Goamo  n.  325. 

Medid  temily,  288.  OS.  925.  M6.  852. 

Madid,  Tmdimad  di,  1, 325, 800, 400. 
Medid  Oardena,  480. 
Medid,  Oinliano  di.  328. 
Medid,  John  di,  326. 


di.a2S, 888,  404,414,481. 
Medid,  Fletro  diTOSL 
Mediterranau-^a,  «7-«>,  000, 6ia 
Medinm,  a,  301 
MelandMdT,  806. 
Mrnnmi,  fljhnone,  5101 
Mentel,  Madame,  26. 
Meroory,  88,  368,  872. 
Meameriam,  388,  384, 808w    iba  Ghoata, 

MetelhL  Cedlia,  118, 180, 107, 401. 
Mkdiad,  Arohangel,  Gukb'a,  06, 188, 168, 

605,681. 
Mkshel  Angelo,  27.  86,.  88,  100,  168,  174, 

106,  20M)6,  280.  280,  800,  821,  888, 

825,  881,  888,  SS,  810,  »$,  aO^ilS 

886,  414. 
Mieria,  200,  812. 
MUla,  Clarke,  272,  278,  806. 
MUton,  John,  86,  278,  806. 
07. 


Minerra  Mediea,  100, 488. 
Minmra,  temple  of,  242. 
Mlniatarea,  27. 
Minora,  106. 
Miata,  206, 426. 
ModeUi^.    i8^  Senlptara. 
Modem  art,  170, 180. 
Modeaty  and  Tanity,  110. 
MoUtoe.  John  Bap&ate  Foqaattn  da,  876. 
[onaldfaii*abookatoie.l80. 


M< 

Mookay,  a,  206w 

Monka,66,70,220,  888,411,00flL'    8m 

ConTflBfea. 
Moootony,  811. 
Montauto,  Count,  882. 
Montaoto,  VOla,  377. 
Monte  Cavallo,  163. 
Monte  Cavallo,  Plaaiadi,  67,  60,  00. 


Monteflaaoone,  476. 
Monumenta,  124, 
866,  618,  K4.     See  Baailicaa.  Burial 


146, 147,  260,  841,  361, 


plaoea,  Cataoomba,  Cathedrala^  duq^ 

ela,  Chnrohaa,  andToaba. 
MoooUgfat,  426. 
ltoaliHaaaaa.286. 


MomDo,  Monto,  488. 

Morning,  828. 

Moaaloa,  176,  286,  325,  407. 

Moaea,  85, 164. 

Moaqoitoea,  ^22. 

Motley,  Mr.,  486,  480,  400,  660. 

Motley,  Mra.,  660. 

Mounfeaina.  ^  624. 

Mngione,262. 

MOOer  (avtlat),  170. 

Mnrino,  Barthoknaew  fltophan,177,  SUl 

Mmro^a  Htmd-booke,  66, 118, 106, 228. 

Mnaamna.  07;  of  the  GapitoL  480;  oA 

NatmiaHlafeoiy,808,  4m. 
Maalc,2i. 

Napoleon  L,  21,  24, 26, 27,  28,  84, 20L 
Napoleon,  Looia,  10,  21,  44;  atteaapt  to 

aaaaarfnate,46t  427, 611. 
Nar,  the  Urar,  228. 
Nami,228. 

Nami,  Cathedxal  of.  828. 
Nam!,  Tk>wer  of,  226. 
Naah,  Bean,  660. 
NathanieLMonaiear.  614. 
NattTityTTbe,  813, 868, 410. 
Natmral  HiatMy,  Mnaeom  of,  808|  401 
Navooa,  Ptaaaa,  86, 184. 
Negroni,  TDla,  124. 
Nera,  the  BiTor,  228. 
Nero,  70,  288. 
New  Ebgland  TiUagea,  288. 


Niagara,  121. 
NkAolaa  v.,  Pk>pe, 
NiefaolajMr.,  1^7 
Night,  823. 
Niobe,217. 


16& 


Norton.  Honorable  Mra.,  660. 

Notre  Dame,  Cathedral  of,  27, 88, 87. 

NoTa8ootiablahop,66. 

Norelty,  47. 

Nudity,  171, 180,  205,  274,  286,  308,  806, 

31&824,4^ 
Nunolo,  Fope'a,  874. 
Nona,  78,  70^  U& 

Obeliaka,  l^mptian,  60,  67. 

O'Brlen'a  Beit,  65. 

01iTa4reee,  43, 224,  234,  208. 

OttrettoTllonte,  878. 

Or  Ban  MIohele,  Chnroh  of,  844,  810, 

800,402. 
Oratory,  865. 
Oreatea,142. 
Orgagna,  Andrew,  386. 
Omamenta,181.  8eeQemM,mAJemtirj, 
Orphena,  124, 125. 
227,220. 


Ouohy.  & 

Our  Old  Home,  661. 

Orerbeck,  Triedrieh,  246. 


Pwtna.142. 
Pakenhi 


am*abank,63. 
Palaoaa.     See    BalU,  Barberini,   Bor* 
gheaa,  Buonarotti,  C»aar*a,  Colwma, 
Ooaaarvatori,  Coaalni,  Doria, 


n«,PwiUI  IMrta. 

Fb4hU,  FaUUlinl,  PnbUw,  a , 

Uocudi.  ttcmglgTial,  ttonta,  adun, 
■it  ail,  Sp%  TuUiriH,  TobmKl, 
UOul,  VaUeu,  ud  VhsUo  PiIhm. 
Ai  ATBUtooRin. 

hMi  BotW,  Uw.  18. 

mdU  Sorii  Falvo,  Ul. 

MbUL  VBl^  IX. 

Barfcas.M'"'"'- 

TtaHl  Ovrdi,  SO,  110. 
TiIm,  IS-M;  tnUtMMn,  Ut  UtM- 
•*•  Tito,  it ;  Bod,  IT. 


P«»i»,  aoi.  m,  w,  Wk  no.  Ml, 

P««',  ApoMfc  M,  101. 
PMnnh,  I'niicU,  au,  4U. 
PUdlMr«r,  U>X  SM. 
PUUp  la  Bal,  BtfS,  Saa. 
iWli>MpJt)r  tft/KttHIW,  n*.  BB. 

•hOM^  OotOBB  of,  in. 

■boM.  Sm  BukBtal,  dH  Oiuo, 
ObbI,  Ona  I>a«)i,  Mo<*>  OhiUo,  Sa. 
mu,  dal  hipolo,  lU  Bpafut,  wmi- 


TMuni,  ii  37,  Bi.  TO,  in.  m,  ei,  ion, 
lOB-iici,  ne,  iji,  iia.  i»4,  iss,  iwi. 
us,  les,  IT*),  iia,  ITT,  ii«.  in.  i«. 

1M,  301,  na,  wt.  MS,  338,  9B,  BK, 
MB.  MS,  384,  3M.  n>,  SOI,  311,  IIT. 

SIS,  320,  330;  nrbwtdna,  834:  pnr. 
tnlU,  S3S I  Mi  MS,  S«8,  Ma,  SO,  m. 

tsT,  an,  380,  387,  m,  n*;  «i*t>t- 

Inn,  S» ,  SRT,  443  ;  dnwbiRi,  MT 1  «W. 

ua,  419,  430.  436  i  iwrlntuni,  4M: 

«41.  4J»,  481.  Kt. 
Pitnw,  Fnnklla,  36«,  403,  4H,  4?7,  GOD. 
FlaU,i,3X>. 
PUU*,f4. 

PlDdw  Oirdnu,  1B2,  318,  480. 
Plsolui  Hill,  83,  74.  TS,  78,  eo. 
FlBturioehki,  Bmuidla,  W. 
Bo  NODO,  14S,  ISS,  SM. 


na(o,l«S. 

PDoahiiBtaL  14& 

PodMM,  FtbM  o(  Ih*,  M4,  ntl 


nBtaBIMa,lia. 
FUBtUial  (lud«M.  lA 

FM*  FUMia,  UB,  SU. 
Fopol>,IkMM,H«li 

F«SfK  Via dl, ». 
PBWiith«w,  Tla,9Ki 
POiU,  HMal  fla,  Oia. 
Fottar,  Paul,  lOt. 


MmnTMra.  RbMB,  KS,SUt  SIS,  S 
411,410,490. 

PrZdtaLa^n'flT,  111,  IM,  KH. 

nwiiMiia.  IIW 

Pr»JlaBb>«UMi,  tn. 

PlIOM,^  ITS,  IN. 

Priaata,  IB.  31,  in.  >».    —  — — - 


PNanlBa,  148,  ifl  SOB. 

PnnDaa,  HOM  da,  3>,  U. 

PCTeha,a». 

PdiUoo,  naai^  «t,  W,  4l»,4«b 

Paak.Ul,4»4. 

t>aliilaiia,lfoaU,MI. 

Qoittro  Pcalana,  Tb  daOL  Mi  (ft 
Qnlridal,  tba,  I«. 

qulTUalU,  via,  «T. 

Itaoaa.  SST,  947.  BO. 

RacrhaLSB. 

RadcUffe,  Hn..  40. 

RadlaofaDl,  400, 410 1  hoM  (t,  4M,  4SS. 

RadlwEasl.  Caitla  at,  48S. 

HidlcnhiU.  UooBtalB  <>(,«. 

Bapa  of  Earopa,  110.  ITS. 

Buhaai.  n,  S.  Ti,  n, «,  lu,  uo,  loa; 
ia.  101,  ITS,  m,  »,  MS,  Ml,  am 

810.  sis;  890^  SM,  r4,  MB,  4D^  4^ 


tUpbMl  Marshal,  3U. 

BinUlK.Sl. 

B«d,  T.  B..  tag. 

Kedou-.m. 

Rnrtm,  3Sfl,  391. 

BcUu.  u  l)H  tdum.  v.  n  ;  of  Nivv- 
kwo,  34  ;  ^  tfaa  BulUDt  at  BL  John 
Utuu.  n.    IflO.  lift,  3H.  tOl,  U7, 

1^. «,  Kie,  wo,  «L 

da     LooTTV,     U;     dai 
-.    an  CiM*. 

■uwHi.  UH  Rlnr.EIB,  0X1,  SM,  KH,  oai. 
RlM»ii>IioC<iiT,  »:. 


RtpMu.  ri*  di.  rr,  M,  iM. 

Bomui  ulCiqalUM,  30. 


■u.fiO,  BB,Sa-I10,  iTS-SOl:  eUsau, 

rr,  sj.  08.  IIS,  140.  i«i.  les,  wt. 

ltd,  im,  IW  ^  bj  uocnlichl.  ITS ;  tIs- 
i(,  I7E ;   BUoenn,   183  ;  talialMwd. 


I 

P 


wm,  na  :  l^Tinc,  ZIB;  lor«  lot,  Ml. 
OH;  lunar,  «M;  nwiaw  (>I,<H. 


RoipllUgid  bimllr,  n. 

itomii^iad  Ouda^  m,  as. 

RoUh,  Fatn  PhI.  EI,  Bl,  DM.  IR,  ISO, 

no,  n4, 3»,  Ml. 

Bnuwl.  iJMy.  Wt  Wfl. 

B (poKI,  210. 

Scblw  mill.  13,1 
Sutnd  Hnut.  Tt. 


uhSll. 

a,i*s. 


8t  Aiidr«,  OhUc  of,  S3B. 

BL  AndtM,  Ctamti  oC  ffiL 

et  AndtskddU  Till^  Chunk  of.  ttt. 

St.  Ang^,  Bridtn  si.  at,  M,  W,  ML 

St.  Ai^lo,  Cutis  af,  «B.  lae. 
BV  Anthm;.  Chipet  at.  SOS. 
Bt,  ButholoDiew,  ImliBd  of,  tCO. 


Bt.  CiUitot.  CMHOmb  <4,  WL 

Bt.  Colanba.  -XO. 

St.  CitKia,  Chunh  ol,  330,  KO. 


Bt.  Fnucl*,  191, 9U,  310. 

St.  I^nlluia.  Pofta,  «n. 

Bt.0»r(*,3M. 

St.  Osarra,  Coanla*  oL  319,  nH 

at.Q«irii,<Jburehal,  lU; 

St.  OkmnDl,  0*u  of,  IIH. 

BI.  OngarloJChnnb of.  101. 

St.  HaBDH,  Bo*,  17,  n. 

HL  IgQulo.  Cbapd  ol,  lUa. 

Bt,  Inula.  Chanh  of,  99. 

Bt.  J«m^  177' 

Bt,  loba,  Tfia  ot.  03.  Xn.  MT, 
Be.  Joha  lAtano.  BariUix  of,  73,  Il)& 
140. 


L  Loraixa,  CUhsdnl ol^M. 


B,  AndMir  ol.  182, 1G&, 


at.  KuT  of  lh>  AdiiU,  Chmch  ol,  34B, 

Bt.  ktrj  wtthin  tba  Willi,  Chundi  at, 

ft.  Ibtths*,  S70. 
Bt.  WskHl,  SM. 

at.  HlaUta,  Own*  ol,  4M. 
Bt.  ItlBkta,  CoBTHt  ei,  4M. 
BL  Puenahi,  QH«  OC  UB. 
Bb  Pulo,  0^  of,  lU,  117. 

St.  PMw,  w,  Its,  un,  IBB,  tie. 

St.  PeUr'i  Chnnh.  H.  61. 0,  «,  T3,  M, 

WAtas  '"■  "■'  "* 

at.  t^tantmrE,  19, 

St  PIsini  lo  fbnin,  Obuch  of.JGO. 

^.  Fifltra  In  VlnooU,  Church  ol,  lAL 


672 

BatTsloT  Bom.  St 

telTllU  lUBJljI.  U 


-ma,  f ■<■  Of,  ^41. 

Bh«,  Diik(Be.tlJ«,UI. 
° "■>  8bH,83. 

HIT.     St  Albu  BlU 


■n,BiiiUH 
BUU,  HM  MUH.  ■  twarm.  BDnint.  Bon- 
■klBe,  Ttml,  L4k«  of  ThruymtDft, 
«H  I1b*r,  TnnUlw.  Tm^Uu  TnK 
Tfam,  TlHnrdi,  Vlntwi.  WInur. 
Sakool  of  AUUu,  IG6. 


•,Ibata,«L 


S(iS£diu«( m, m, m MS,  411. 

417.    Ah  OboMa,  Rn^  hJ  Ut^m- 
BBi)lato.O*UialHl  ottae. 

§I«Uh,  Mr.,  «a. 

Btiiim,_i,  ■»,  no. 

Bton,  WUUun,  70,  Tl,  8>,  U>,  ITl,  ML 

in,  iM,  iM,  iiT,  ns,  tn,  4S,  44 


SleM,  3S3,  tS2,  43S,  tM. 

BUu,  CUlMdnl  of ,  435,  4aB,  44J,  4U, 

UO,  462, 4«,  tn. 
Uhu,  OuUc  da,  440. 


SmtdlMt,  ToUh,  04,  ue. 


iCuK^mild,  s«a 

Two,  13B,  SIO. 

lU^nph,  AUuUo,  m. 

IVii^u',  na>TO. 

TaupUn,  Kolihtt,  3M. 

Tupla*.  flwTmnJMof  B*M 
tou  VliUU,  Honor,  Wnam 
on,  Putbwa.  Bolooos'*,  T> 
Mrr.Viita*.    $«AfcUtKitB 

Tndiin,  DaiU,  108,  »0,  433. 

Tarmbii,  fomitdn  of  IM,  K. 

Tarmlnj,  Plaiaa  dl,  ML  IH. 

■rrnii,ta,2a. 


ttaMdo,  Mmte,  1M. 
niKkunr.  W.  IL,  US. 

TlH>tU,303. 

TbninpHD,  C.  a.,  70,  71.  123,  tl 

an,  210, 2i(v,  teo. 

ThruTinflfLA,  bAtUft  of,  !23fi. 
ThnuynuuM,  IaIh  of,  2&,1,  356,  HE 
ThniE  Fauu,  ClM.  3U0,  331. 
Tnm,  Um  Hm,  GS,  SO,  138,  U 

ns.  mo,  we, 
jv»«,  r*e,  W7, 
■ntun,  119,  lei,  IBS,  IM,  ax,  a 

ntu,  Ardi  ot,  H,  IIL 

TdIdiuI,  Pitiula,  4M. 
TdIdhuI.  PIwB,  4U. 
Tomba,  113-118 :   HadriHi'*,  13 
189,  IK),  194,  lOT.  XH,2M.  *: 

Buriid-plu*, 

Torloni*  Ctunl,  T3 
Torloni.,  Vllfii,  85. 

Turm,  an. 


TnMenn,  ISO,  480, 489. 


rwiuu,  V,  IQ,  d3, 

1;  SJO^  433,  '. 
•vt. 


16,39,  42;  In  ■a.Sn 


Trlnmphia  Arch.  SB.  38. 
Trlunxin.  132. 
TmllD|R,  Mr.,  33A.  XO. 
TroMmw,  Mr*..  3;iG. 

TuUerln,  flnrdeu  ol,  37, 
TnHuiy,  2S8. 

ruKHij,  Gnukd  Doohefl  of.  3 
tilMU]',  OtMid  Duka*  oC,  4ra 


roii,  ntiuio. 

t^qmicloao,  '^ 


VitlroH,  CUbadnl  of,  G2S. 
Vilorr.  301. 

Vuidrko,   Sir  Antbdu,  lOS,  IBl,  163, 
112,481. 

It^tjt  lud  ModMtr,  lis. 


VmdSuie,  ntDi,  -X. 
Vww,  Lo,  2M. 

vcmiu^  lio,  ae,  ran.  sia.  sm,  4h,  49S, 

V«u^  dl  tStiiai.  289, 280,  293,  302,  301. 

30^  311, »«.  426,^1, 
YomiMH,  PhiI,  110. 
VsMt,  TsmplB  of,  127, 128, 1S3. 
TMnriiiH,  -M,  aoe,  223.  224.  330,  fltt 

Am  UobUuX 
Vovmy,  S35. 
Vlctot^  (taten,  28,  307. 

VQlH.  fiUAlbMi,  Baliodcn,  Baupirto, 
Bnr.li—,  Colnmlnria,  Hadriu'i,  Liul 
oriil  MonlHilo,  Kenonl.  PubSU, 
FoCTio,  ud  Tcrrlinl*  vIiUl 

VUlKntB,  KM,  S33,  544  ;  Chuish  o4 


Vioejmrdj,  43. 
VIoMgo,  tin.  420,  41 
Tialta  PUjor,  11*. 
Vlmln  and  Child.  18 
Vir^Uu.    Set  Miuloi 


WtUi,  Priuea  ol,  4B«. 
Wvs,  waUni,  340. 

WKwick,  sea,  m.  

WubbwHw,  Gnurge.  8T.  ISO,  37S,  SOT, 

WubiniMn  Honumnit,  124. 133. 

Wu  BinrH.  334,  3S0. 

Wayiddc,  The,  in. 

WeutHH,  of  ttetatKoliw.  9,  B3,  101 

111,  118.232,  249,  42Mh. 
WobHw,  Di^  06,01. 

WeU^IW,  3(0,  443L 

Wept  ol  till.  mub-bm-WUh,  Iha,  Itt. 

Wot,  B«IhbId.  442.  __ 


Vluder,  Hotel.  tM. 


Vludei. 
WIlillOE.  Ml 


B.  201,  420,  476. 


674 


INDEX. 


WomtB,  aft  tiM  Lootvt.  Sit  Si!  Mh^ 
mUIm, 46 {  aft  BflM,m,  ISO,  Itl,  IM, 
tU,  960 :  IltfiMi,  2SB,  aai,  968,  SO, 
SB4, 873, 40O{  ttl  I  IlriiH^MlTM  MO- 
fMiloB,  4fil ;  aft  tiM    OMiilna,  411; 


VkWMh,  S19,  0B.    <Sm  BcffMt, 


ronhip,  BB,  O,  If  • 
18018,  MS,  SM, 
408,819,583.    Sm 

CmmMa,  408, 4ffb 
10. 


Kit  ttbttfttc  i^BiV 

MBRIDOX  .  HAUACUUaBTTI 


J 


I  :>  i 


1 


STANFORD  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARIES 

CECIL   H.   GREEN   LIBRARY 

STANFORD,   CALIFORNIA  94305-600-1 

1415)   723-1493 

All  books  moy  be  recalled  aFier  7  days 

DATE   DUE 


