Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



WORKS PUBLISHED BY CHAPMAN AND HALL. 



TRAVELS. 

TWO YEARS' RESIDENCE IN A LEVANTINE 

• 

FAMILY. By Bayle St. John, Author of ** Adventures in the 
Libyan Desert," &c. Post 8vo, 9s. 

RAMBLES AND OBSERVATIONS IN NEW SOUTH 

WALES, with Sketches of Men and Manners, Notices of the Abo- 
rigines, Glimpses of Scenery, and some Hints to Emigrants. By 
Joseph Puipps Townsend. Post 8yo, Bs, 

WAYFARING SKETCHES AMONG THE GREEKS 

AND TURKS, AND ON THE SHORES OF THE DANUBE. 
By A Seven Years' Resident in Greece. Post 8vo, 9s. 

EXCURSION TO' CALIFORNIA, over the Prairie, Rocky 

Mountains, and Great Sierra Nevada ; with a Stroll through the 
Diggings and Ranches of that Country. By William Kelly, J.P. 
2 vols. 8vo, 21s. 

THE SHOE AND CANOE ; or, Pictures of Travel in the 

Canadas. With twenty Illustrations on Steel, and four Maps. By 
J. J. BiosBY, M.D. 2 vols, post 8vo, 24s. 

SIR JAMES BROOKE'S JOURNALS OF EVENTS IN 

BORNEO. And the EXPEDITION OF H.M.S. « DIDO," FOR 
THE SUPPRESSION OF PIRACY. By Captain the Hon. Henry 
Keppel, R.N. Continued to the Occupation of Labuan, by Walter 
K. Kelly. Third Edition. With Maps and Views. 2 vols. 8vo, 32s. 

NOTES OF A JOURNEY FROM CORNHILL TO 

GRAND CAIRO. By Michael Angelo Titmarsh. With a 
Coloured Frontispiece. Second Edition. Small 8vo, 6s. 

THE IRISH SKETCH-BOOK. By Mr. M. A. Titmarsh. 

With numerous Engravings on Wood, from the Author's Designs. 
Second Edition. 2 vols, post 8vo, 14s. 

IRELAND, SCOTLAND, AND ENGLAND. Bj J. G. 

Kohl. One vol. 8vo, lis. 

AUSTRIA. By J. G. KonL, One voL 8vo, 1 1*. 

RUSSIA. By J. G. Kohl. With a Map. ll^. 

THE TARANTAS ; Travelling Impressions of Young Russia. 

By Count Sollogub. With Eight Illustrations. Fcap., cloth, 58. 

A DESCRIPTIVE TOUR IN SCOTLAND. By the Rev. 

Chauncy Hare Townsubno. With Twelve Illustrations. 8vo, 



/ 



WORKS PUBLISHED BY CHAPMAN AND HALL. 

TRAVELS IN THE STEPPES OF THE CASPIAN 

SEA, THE CRLMEA, THE CAUCASUS, &c. By Xavier 
HoMMAiRE DE U.Eht, Civil Engineer, Member of the Societe Geo- 
logiquc of France/ &c. 8vo, 11a. 

LIFE IN MEXICO, during a Residence of Two Years in 

that Country. By Madame Caldehon dr la Barca. 8vo, Ms. 

THE KING OF SAXONY'S JOURNEY THROUGH 

ENGLAND AND SCOTLAND, in the year 1844. By Dr. C. G. 
Carus, Physician to His Majesty. Translated by S. C. Davison, B. A. 
8vo, 1 1 s. 

A TOUR THROUGH THE VALLEY OF THE MEUSE, 

with the Legends of the "Walloon Country and the Ardennes. By 
Dudley Costello. Numerous Woodcuts. Second Edition. Post 
8vo, 145. 

HIGHLANDS AND ISLANDS OF THE ADRIATIC, 

including Dalmatia, Croatia, and the Southern Provinces of Austria. 
By A. A. Paton, Esq. With Maps and Illustrations. 2 vols. 8vo, 32s. 

SYRIA AND THE HOLY LAND, popularly described. 

By Walter K. Kelly. 180 Illustrations. 8vo, 85. 6d. 

EGYPT AND NUBIA, popularly described. By J. A. St. 

John. 125 Engravings. 8vo, 98. 



NOVELS. 



REUBEN MEDLICOTT ; or. The Coming Man. By M. 

W. Savage, Author of ** The Bachelor of the Albany," &c. 3 vols, 
post 8vo. [Nearly ready. 

MY UNCLE THE CURATE. By the Author of «* The 

Bachelor of the Albany," &c. 3 vols, post 8vo. 

THE HEAD OF THE FAMILY, By the Author of 

« Olive." 3 vols, post 8vo. 

OLIVE. By the Author of »' The Ogilvies." 3 vols, post 8vo. 
THE OGILVIES. By the Author of " Olive," ** The Head 

of the Family," &c 3 vols, post 8vo. 



Bradbury & Evans, PrintetB, \V\i\t&«ifVa^^» 




600021 526M 



THK 



BLITHEDALE ROMANCE. 



BT 



NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE, 

AUTHOR OF " THE SCABLET LETTEBf" " THE HOUSE OF THE 8EVEN 

GABLES," &C. 



IN TWO VOLUMES. 
YOL. II. 



LONDON : 
CHAPMAN AND HALL, 193, PICCADILLY. 

1852. 



^^^. ^ sy/. 



\* The English Copyright of this Romance is the property of 
Mesbbs. Chapman and Hall.. 




CONTENTS. 
VOL. n. 



I* VAQB 

Euot's Pulpit 1 

A Crisis 26 

m. 

Leave-takings 45 

IV. 
The Hotel 63 

V. 
The Boaboing-uouse 81 

VI. 
Zenobia's Drawing-room 96 

vn. 

Tbet Vanish 115 

VIII. 
An Old Acquaintance 127 



# 



IV CONTENTS. 



IX. PAGB 

Fauntlkrot 144 

X. ,^> 

A ViLLAOB-HALL 170 

XI. 

ThK MA8QDKRADKK8 192 

xn. 

Thb Tursk Toobtuer 212 

xm. 

Zbnobia and Coybrdalb 231 

XIV. 
Midnight 246 

XV. 

BUTHBDALB PaSTDRB 266 

XVI. 

Miles Coybrdalb's Confession 281 



THE BLITHEDALE ROMANCE. 



L 



eliot's pulpit. 



OuB Sundays, at Blythedale, were not 
ordinarily kept with such rigid observance 
as might have befitted the descendants of 
the Pilgrims, whose high enterprise, as we 
sometimes flattered ourselves, we had taken 
up, and were carrying it onward and aloft, 
to a point which they never dreamed of 
attaining. 

On that hallowed day, it is true, we rested 

VOL, n. B 



2 THE BLITHEDALB EOMANCB. 

jfrom our labours. Our oxen, relieved from 
their week-day yoke, roamed at large 
through the pasture; each yoke-fellow, 
however, keeping close beside his mate, and 
continuing to acknowledge, from the force 
of habit and sluggish sympathy, the union 
which the taskmaster had imposed for his 
own hard ends. As for us human yoke- 
fellows, chosen companions of toil, whose 
hoes had clinked together throughout the 
week, we wandered off, in various directions, 
to enjoy our interval of repose. Some, I 
believe, went devoutly to the village church. 
Others, it may be, ascended a city or a 
country pulpit, wearing the clerical robe 
with so much dignity that you would 
scarcely have suspected the yeoman's frock 
to have been flung off only since milking- 
time. Others took long rambles among the 
rustic lanes and by-paths, pausing to look at 
black old farm-houses, with their sloping 



bliot's pulpit. 



roo& ; and at tlie modern cottage, so like a 
plaything that it seemed as if real joy or 
sorrow could have no scope within ; and at 
the more pretending villa, with its range of 
wooden columns, supporting the needless 
insolence of a great portico. Some betook 
themselves into the wide dusky barn, and 
lay there for hours together on the odorous 
hay ; while the sunstreaks and the shadows 
strove together — these to make the barn 
solemn, those to make it cheerful — and both 
were conquerors; and the swallows twit- 
tered a cheery anthem, flashing into sight, or 
vanishing, as they darted to and fro among 
the golden rules of sunshine. And others 
went a little way into the woods, aaid threw 
themselves on mother earth, pillowing their 
heads on a heap of moss, the green decay of 
an old log ; and, dropping asleep, the hum- 
ble-bees and mosquitoes sung and buzzed 

b2 



4 THB BLITHEDALE &OMASCE. 

about their ears, canang the slumbereis to 
twitch and start without awakening. 

With HoDingsworth, Zenobia, Priscilla, 
and m jsel^ it grew to be a custom to spend 
the Sabbath afternoon at a certain rock. It 
was known to us under the name of Eliot's 
Polpit, from a tradition that the venerable 
Apostle Eliot had preached there, two cen- 
turies gone by, to an Indian auditory. The 
old pine forest, through which the apostle's 
voice was wont to sound, had fallen, an im- 
memorial time ago. But the soil, being of 
the rudest and most broken surface, had ap- 
parently never been brought under tillage ; 
other growths, maple, and beech, and birch, 
had succeeded to the primeval trees; so that 
it was still as wild a tract of woodland as 
the great-great-great-great-grandson of one 
of Eliot's Indians (had any such posterity- 
been in existence) could have desired, for 



bliot's pulpit. 



the site and shelter of his wigwam. These 
aftergrowths, indeed, lose the stately so- 
lemnity of the original forest. If left in due 
neglect, however, they run into an entangle- 
ment of softer wildness, among the rustling 
leaves of which the sun can scatter cheer- 
fullness as it never could among the dark- 
browed pines. 

The rock itself rose some twenty or thirty 
feet, a shattered granite boulder, or heap of 
boulders, with an irregular outline and many 
fissures, out of which sprang shrubs, bushes, 
and even trees ; as if the scanty soil within 
those crevices were sweeter to their roots 
than any other earth. At the base of the 
pulpit, the broken boulders inclined towards 
each other, so as to form a shallow cave, 
within which our little party had sometimes 
found protection from a summer shower. 
On the threshold, or just across it, grew a 
tuft of pale columbines, in their season, and 



6 THE BIOTHEDALE BOMANCE. 

violets, sad [and shadowy recluses, such as 
Priscilla was when we first knew her ; chil- 
dren of the sun, who had never seen their 
father, but dwelt among damp mosses, 
though not akin to them. At the summit 
the rock was overshadowed by the canopy 
of a birch-tree, which served as a sounding- 
board for the pulpit. Beneath this shade 
(with my eyes of sense half shut, and those 
of the imagination widely opened) I used to 
see the holy apostle of the Indians, with the 
sunlight flickering down upon him throngh 
the leaves, and glorifying his figure as with 
the ^half-perceptible glow of a transfigura- 
tion. 

I the more minutely describe the rock, 
and this httle Sabbath solitude, because 
Hollingsworth, at our solicitation, often 
ascended Eliot's pulpit, and not exactly 
preached, but talked to us, his few disciples, 
in a strain that rose and fell as naturally as 



the silt au-.L siieia .. r:- ■»::: 






afterzro-vn::.. . luut... - ... 


^ 


lemiiiT- .: lijf '.'ri:uiu- 1.. 




negiec. liowtv.i. n- 


- — 


men:':, s-ji:-.':- v.uu;,-,;. ^ 


f 


leave: -.: t.j:;... ... „. . 


-.. y 


fulinfct: Hi - Iie-v i:._. . 


e. 


browtd Piii-- 


en 


Tiiv i^j- i.--^ iv- :^^. 


the 


feei. a iliaaeicu^ai..,.. ^.^_ 


ulti- 


boulder;, wil^ lih ;..:-___ ^ 


e, as 


fissures, oui u: y^n. ,_,_ 


m his 


andeveaufce , i. ,..^_-_ 


self at 


thoK orauK ^bn.—: 




nward. 


^^^^^^^^^^^H 


■ 


on Buch 


^^^^^^^BiH 


■ 


;ourBe. 


Kjl 


1 


Wcstervelt, 
5 of temper 
re friends to 
£r that ind' 
1 clambered 



8 THE BLITHEDALE BOMAKCE. 

down from Eliot's pulpit, she declaimed 
with great earnestness and passion, nothing 
short of anger, on the injustice which the 
world did to women, and equally to itself, 
by not allowing them, in freedom and 
honour, and with the fullest welcome, their 
natural utterance in public. 

" It shall not always be so !" cried she, 
*' If 1 live another year, I will lift up my 
own voice in behalf of woman's wider 
liberty!" 

She, perhaps, saw me smile. 

" What matter of ridicule do you find in 
this. Miles Coverdale ?" exclaimed Zenobia, 
with a flash of anger in her eyes. " That 
smile, permit me to say, makes me suspicious 
of a low tone of feeling and shallow thought. 
It is my belief— yes, and my prophecy, 
should I die before it happens — that, when 
my sex shall achieve its rights, there will be 
ten eloquent women where there is now one 



eliot's pulpit. 



eloquent man. Thus far, no woman in the 
world has ever once spoken out her whole 
heart and her whole mind. The mistrust 
and disapproval of the vast bulk of society 
throttles us, as with two gigantic hands at 
our throats ! We mumble a few weak words, 
and leave a thousand better ones irnsaid* 
You let us write a little, it is true, on a 
limited range of subjects. But the pen is 
not for woman. Her power is too natural 
and immediate. It is with the living voice 
alone that she can compel the world to 
recognise the light of her intellect and the 
depth of her heart !" 

Now — though I could not well say so to 
Zenobia — ^I had not smiled from any unwor- 
thy estimate of woman, or in denial of the 
claims which she is beginning to put forth. 
What amused and puzzled me was the fact, 
that women, however intellectually superior, 
so seldom disquiet themselves about the 



10 THE BLTKEDALE EOMANCE. 

rights or wrongs of their sex, unless their 
own individual affections chance to lie in 
idleness, or to be ill at ease. They are not 
natural reformers, but become such by the 
pressure of exceptional misfortune. I could 
measure Zenobia's inward trouble by the 
animosity with which she now took up the 
general quarrel of woman against man. 

" I will give you leave, Zenobia," rephed 
I, " to fling your utmost scorn upon me, if 
you ever hear me utter a sentiment imfa- 
vourable to the widest liberty which woman 
has yet dreamed of I would give her aU 
she asks, and add a great deal more, which 
she will not be the party to demand, but 
which men, if they were generous and wise, 
would grant of their own free motion. For 
instance, I should love dearly — for the next 
thousand years, at least — to have all govern- 
ment devolve into the hands of women. I 
hate to be ruled by my own sex ; it excites 



jsuot'b fuleh. 11 

my jealousy, and woundB my pride. It is 
the iron sway of bodily force which abases 
us, in our compelled submission. But how 
sweet the free, generous courtesy, with 
which I would kneel before a woman- 
ruler !" 

" Yes, if she were young and beautiful," 
said Zenobia, laugMrig. " But how if she 
were sixty, and a fright ?" 

" Ah 1 it is you that rate womanhood 
low," said I. " But let me go on. I have 
never found it possible to suffer a bearded 
priest so near my heart and conscience as to 
do me any spiritual good. I blush at the 
very thought! O, in the better order oi 
things, Heaven grant that the ministry of 
souls may be left in charge of women ! The 
gates of the Blessed City will be thronged 
with the multitude that enter in, when that 
day comes! The task belongs to woman. 
God meant it for her. He has endowed 



12 THE BUTHEDALE BOMANCE. 

her with the religious sentiment in its utmost 
depth and purity, refined from that gross, 
intellectual alloy with which every mascu- 
line theologist — save only One, who merely 
veiled himself in mortal and masculine 
shape, but was, in truth, divine — has been 
prone to mingle it. I have always envied 
the Catholics their faith in that sweet, sacred 
Virgin Mother, who stands between them 
and the Deity, intercepting somewhat of his 
awful splendour, but permitting his love to 
stream upon the worshipper more intelligibly 
to human comprehension through the me» 
dium of a woman's tenderness. Have I not 
said enough, Zenobia ?" 

" I cannot think that this is true," ob- 
served Priscilla, who had been gazing at me 
with great, disapproving eyes. " And I am 
sure I do not wish it to be true !" 

" Poor child !" exclaimed Zenobia, rather 
contemptuously. " She is the type of wo- 



eliot's pulpit. 13 

manhood, such as man has spent centuries 
in making it. He is never content, unless 
he can degrade himself by stooping towards 
what he loves. In denying us our rights, 
he betrays even more blindness to his own 
interests than profligate disregard of ours !" 

" Is this true?" asked Priscilla, with sun- 
plicity, turning to HoUingsworth. " Is it 
all true, that Mr. Coverdale and Zenobia 
have been saying ?" 

" No, Priscilla !" answered HoUingsworth, 

* 

with his customary bluntness. " They have 
neither of them spoken one true word yet." 

" Do you despise woman ?" said Zenobia. 
" Ah, HoUingsworth, that would be most 
ungrateful !" 

" Despise her ? No !'' cried HoUingsworth, 
lifting his great shaggy head and shaking it 
at us, while his eyes glowed almost fiercely. 
"She is the most admirable handiwork of 
God, in her true place and character. Her 



14 THE BLTTHEDALE BOMANCE. 

place is at man's side. Her office^ that of 
the sympathiser; the unreserved, unques- 
tioning beUever; the recognition^ withheld 
in every other manner, but given, in pity, 
through woman's heart, lest man should 
utterly lose &ith in himself; the echo of 
God's own voice, pronouncing, ' It is well 
done !' All the separate action of woman 
is, and ever has been, and always shall be, 
false, foolish, vain, destructive of her own 
best and holiest qualities, void of every good 

4 

effect, and productive of intolerable mis- 
chief ! Man is a wretch without woman ; 
but woman is a monster — and, thank Hea- 
ven, an ahnost impossible and hitherto 
imaginary monster — without man as her 
acknowledged principal I As true as I had 
once a mother whom I loved, were there 
any possible prospect of woman's taking the 
social stand which some of them — poor, 
miserable, abortive creatures, who only dream 



bliot's pulpit. 15 

of such things because they have missed 
woman's peculiar happiness, or because na- 
ture made them really neither man nor wo- 
man I — ^if there were a chance of their at- 
taining the end which these petticoated 
monstrosities have in view, I would call 
upon my own sex to use its physical force, 
that unmistakable evidence of sovereignty, 
to scourge them back within their proper 
bounds ! But it will not be needful. The 
heart of true womanhood knows where its 
own sphere is, and never seeks to stray be- 
yond it !" 

Never was mortal blessed — ^if blessing it 
were — ^with a glance of such entire acquies- 
cence and imquestioning faith, happy in its 
completeness, as our little PriscUla uncon- 
sciously bestowed on Hollingsworth. She 
seemed to take the sentiment from his lips 
into her heart, and brood over it in perfect 
content. The very woman whom he pic- 



16 THE BLTTHEDALE BOBfANCE. 

tured — ^the gentle parasite, the soft reflec- 
tion of a more powerful existence — sat there 
at his feet. 

I looked at Zenobia, however, folly ex- 
pecting her to resent — as I felt, by the in- 
dignant ebullition of my own blood, that 
she ought — this outrageous affirmation of 
what struck me as the intensity of mascu- 
line egotism. It centred everything in it- 
self, and deprived woman of her very soul, 
her inexpressible and unfathomable all, to 
make it a mere incident in the great sum 
of man. Hollingsworth had boldly uttered 
what he, and millions of despots like him, 
really felt. Without intending it, he had 
disclosed the well- spring of all these trou- 
bled waters. Now, if ever, it surely be- 
hoved Zenobia to be the champion of her 
sex. 

But, to my surprise, and indignation too, 
she only looked humbled. Some tears 



\ 



eliot's pulpit. 17 

sparkled in her eyes, but they were wholly 
of grie^ not anger. 

'' Well, be it so," was all she said. " I 
at least, have deep cause to think you right. 
Let man be but manly and godlike, and 
woman is only too ready to become to him 
what you say !" 

I smiled — somewhat bitterly, it is true — 
in contemplation of my own ill-luck. How 
little did these two women care for me, 
who had freely conceded all their claims, 
and a great deal more, out of the fulness 
of my heart ; while Hollingsworth, by some 
necromancy of his horrible injustice, seemed 
to have brought them both to his feet ! 

" Women almost invariably behave thus," 
thought I. " What does the fact mean? 
Is it their nature ? Or is it, at last, the 
result of ages of compelled degradation? 
And, in either case, will it be possible ever 
to redeem them ?" 

VOL. II. c 



18 THE BUTHEDALE BOMANCE. 

An intuition now appeared to possess all 
the party, that, for this time at least, there 
was no more to be said. With one accord, 
we arose from the ground, and made our 
way through the tangled undergrowth to- 
wards one of those pleasant wood-paths that 
wound among the overarching trees. Some 
of the branches hung so low as partly to 
conceal the figures that went before from 
those who followed. Priscilla had leaped 
up more lightly than the rest of us, and ran 
along in advance, with as much airy ac- 
tivity of spirit as was typified in the motion 
of a bird, which chanced to be flitting from 
tree to tree, in the same direction as herself 
Never did she seem so happy as that* after- 
noon. She skipt, and could not help it, 
from very playfulness of heart. 

Zenobia and Hollingsworth went next, in 
close contiguity, but not with arm in arm. 
Now, just when they had passed the impend- 



bliot's pulpit. 19 

ing bough of a birch-tree, T plainly saw 
5Ienobia take the hand of Hollingsworth in 
both her own, press it to her bosom, and let 
it fall again! 

The gesture was sudden, and Ml of 
passion; the impulse had evidently taken 
her by surprise ; it expressed all ! Had 
Zenobia knelt before him, or flung herself 
upon his breast, and gasped out, " I love you, 
Hollingsworth I" I could not have been more 
certain of what it meant. They then walked 
onward, as before. But, methought, as the 
declining sun threw Zenobia's magnified 
shadow along the path, I beheld it tremulous; 
and the delicate stem of the flower which 
she wore in her hair was likewise responsive 
to her agitation. 

Priscilla — through the medium of her 
eyes, at least — could not possibly have been 
aware of the gesture above described. Yet, 

c2 



20 THE BLITHEDALE ROMANCE. 

at that instant, I saw her droop. The 
buoyancy, which just before had been so 
bird-like, was utterly departed; the life 
seemed to pass out of her, and even the sub- 
stance of her figure to grow thin and gray. 
I almost imagined her a shadow, fading 
gradually into the dimness of the wood. Her 
pace became so slow, that Hollings worth and 
Zenobia passed by, and I, without hastening 
my footsteps, overtook her. 

" Come, Priscilla," said I, looking her in- 
tently in the face, which was very pale and 
sorrowful, " we must make haste after our 
friends. Do you feel suddenly ill ? A mo- 
ment ago, you flitted along so lightly that I 
was comparing you to a bird. Now, on the 
contrary, it is as if you had a heavy heart, 
and very little strength to bear it with. Pray 
take my arm I" 

" No," said Priscilla, " I do not think it 



eliot's pulpit. 21 

would help me. It is my heart, as you say, 
that makes me heavy ; and I know not why. 
Just now, I felt very happy." 

No doubt it was a kind of sacrilege in me 
to attempt to come within her maidenly 
mystery ; but, as she appeared to be tossed 
aside by her other friends, or carelessly let 
fall, like a flower which they had done with, 
I could not resist the impulse to take just one 
peep beneath her folded petals. 

"Zenobia and yourself are dear friends, 
of late," I remarked. "At first — that first 
evening when you came to us — she did not 
receive you quite so warmly as might have 
been wished." 

"I remember it," said Priscilla. "No 
wonder she hesitated to love me, who was 
then a stranger to her, and a girl of no grace 
or beauty — she being herself so beautiful !** 

" But she loves you now, of course ?" sug- 



22 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

gestedl. " And at this v«7 instant you fed 
her to be your dearest friend ?" 

"Why do you ask me that question ?" 
exclaimed Priscilla, as if frightened at the 
scrutiny into her feelings which I compelled 
her to make. "It somehow puts strange 
thoughts into my mind. But I do love 
Zenobia dearly ! If she only loves me half 
as well, I shall be happy I" 

" How is it possible to doubt that, Pris- 
dUa?" I rejoined. "But observe how 
pleasantly and happily Zenobia and Hollings- 
worth are walking together. I call it a 
delightful spectacle. It truly rejoices me 
that HoUingsworth has found so fit and affec- 
tionate a friend! So many people in the 
world mistrust him — so many disbelieve and 
ridicule, while hardly any do him justice, or 
acknowledge him for the wonderful man he 
is — that it is really a blessed thing for him 



eliot's pulpit. 28 

to have won the sympathy of such a woman 
as Zenobia. Any man might be proud of 
that. Any man, even if he be as great as 
HoUingsworth, might love so magnificent a 
woman. How very beautiful Zenobia is I 
And HoUingsworth knows it, too." 

There may have been some petty malice 
in what I said. Generosity is a very fine 
thing, at a proper time, and within due 
lunits. But it is an insufferable bore to see 
one man engrossing every thought of all the 
Women, and leaving his friend to shiver in 
outer seclusion, without even the alternative 
of solacing himself with what the more for- 
tunate individual has rejected. Yes ; it was 
out of a foolish bitterness of heart that I had 
spoken. 

"Go on before," said Priscilla, abruptly, 
and with true feminine imperiousness, which 
heretofore I had never seen her exercise. 



24 THE BLITHEDALE ROMANCE. 

" It pleases me best to loiter along by myself. 
I do not walk so fast as you." 

With her hand, she made a little gesture 
of dismissal. It provoked me ; yet, on the 
whole, was the mo^t bewitching thing that 
Priscilla had ever done. I obeyed her, and 
strolled moodily homeward, wondering — as 
I had wondered a thousand times already — 
how Hollingsworth meant to dispose of these 
two hearts, which (plainly to my perception, 
and, as I could not but now suppose, to his) 
he had engrossed into his own huge egotism. 

There was likewise another subject hardly 
less fruitful of speculation. In what atti- 
tude did Zenobia present herself to Hollings- 
worth ? Was it in that of a free woman, 
with no mortgage on her affections nor 
claimant to her hand, but fully at liberty to 
surrender both, in exchange for the heart 
and hand which she apparently expected to 



eliot's pulpit. 25 

receive? But was it a vision that I had 
witnessed in the wood ? Was Westervelt a 
goblin ? Were those words of passion and 
agony, which Zenobia h*ad uttered in my 
hearing, a mere stage declamation? Were 
they formed of a material lighter than 
common air? Or, supposing them to bear 
sterling weight, was it not a perilous and 
dreadful wrong which she was meditating 
towards herself and Hollingsworth ? 

Arriving nearly at the farm-house, I looked 
back over the long slope of pasture-land, and 
beheld them standing together, in the light 
of sunset, just on the spot where, according 
to the gossip of the Community, they meant 
to build their cottage. Priscilla, alone and 
forgotten, was lingering in the shadow of 
the wood. 



n. 



A CBISI8. 



Thus the summer was passing away — a 
summer of toil, of interest, of something that 
was not pleasure, but which went deep into 
my heart, and there became a rich experi- 
ence. I found myself looking forward to 
years, if not to a lifetime, to be spent on the 
same system. The Community were now 
beginning to form their permanent plans. 
One of our purposes was to erect a Phalans- 
tery (as I think we called it, after Fourier ; 
but the phraseology of those days is not very 
fresh in my remembrance), where the great 



A csuos. 27 

and general family should liave its abiding- 
place. Individual members, too, who made 
it a point of religion to preserve the sanctity 
of an exclusive home, were selecting sites 
for their cottages, by the wood-side, or on 
the breezy swells, or in the sheltered nook 
of some little valley, according as their taste 
might lean towards snugness or the pictu- 
resque. Altogether, by projecting our minds 
outward, we had imparted a show of novelty 
to existence, and contemplated it as hope- 
foUy as if the soil beneath our feet had not 
been fathom-deep with the dust of deluded 
generations, on every one of which, as on 
ourselves, the world had imposed itself as a 
hitherto xmwedded bride. 

HoUingsworth and myself had often dis- 
cussed these prospects. It was easy to per- 
ceive, however, that he spoke with little or 
no fervour, btit either as questioning the 
fiilfilment of our anticipations, or, at any 



28 THE BUTHEDALE BOMAKCE. 

rate, with a quiet consciousness that it was 
no personal concern of his. Shortly after 
the scene at Eliot's pulpit, while he and I 
were repairing an old stone fence, I amused 
myself with sallymg forward into the future 
time. 

"When we come to be old men,'' I said, 
" they will call us uncles, or fathers — ^Father 
Hollingsworth and Uncle Coverdale — and 
we will look back cheerfiilly to these early 
days, and make a romantic story for the 
young people (and if a Uttle more romantic 
than truth may warrant, it will be no harm) 
out of our severe trials and hardships. In 
a century or two, we shall, every one of us, 
be mythical personages, or exceedingly pic- 
turesque and poetical ones, at all events. 
They will have a great public hall, in which 
your portrait, and mine, and twenty other 
&ce8 that are living now, shall be hung up ; 
and as for me, I will be painted in my shirt- 



A CBISIS. 29 

sleeves, and with tlie sleeves rolled up, to 
show my muscular development. What 
stories will be rife among them about our 
mighty strength !" continued I, lifting a big 
stone and putting it into its place ; " though 
our posterity will really be far stronger than 
ourselves, after several generations of a 
simple, natural, and active life. What le- 
gends of Zenobia's beauty, and Priscilla's 
slender and shadowy grace, and those mys- 
terious quahties which make her seem dia- 
phanous with spiritual light ! In due course 
of ages we must all figure heroically in an 
epic poem ; and we will ourselves — at least, 
I will — bend unseen over the future poet, 
and lend him inspiration while he writes it." 

" You seem," said Hollingsworth, " to be 
tr3ring how much nonsense you can pour out 
in a breath." 

"I wish you would see fit to compre- 
hend," retorted I, " that the profoundest 



30 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

wisdom must be mingled with nine-tenths 
of nonsense, else it is not worth the breath 
that utters it. But I do long for the cot- 
tages to be built, that the creeping- plants 
may begin to run over them, and the moss 
to gather on the waUs, and the trees — which 
we will set out — to cover them with a 
breadth of shadow. This spick-and-span 
novelty does not quite suit my taste. It is 
time, too, for children to be born among us. 
The first-born child is still to come. And 
I shall never feel as if this were a real, 
practical, as well as poetical, system of 
human life, until somebody has sanctified it 
by death." 

"A pretty occasion for martyrdom, truly !" 
said Hollingsworth. 

" As good as any other,'^ I replied. " I 
wonder, Hollingsworth, who, of all these 
strong men, and fair women and maidens, is 
doomed the first to die. Would it not be 



A CRISIS. 31 

well, even before we have absolute need 
of it, to fix upon a spot for a cemetery ? 
Let us choose the rudest, roughest, most un- 
cultivable spot, for Death's garden-ground ; 
and Death shall teach us to beautify it, 
grave by grave. By our sweet, calm way 
of dying, and the airy elegance out of which 
we will shape our funeral rites, and the 
cheerful allegories which we will model into 
tomb-stones, the final scene shall lose its 
terrors ; so that hereafter it may be happi- 
ness to live, and bliss to die. None of us 
must die young. Yet, should Providence 
ordain it so, the event shall not be sorrow- 
ful, but affect us with a tender, delicious, 
only half melancholy, and almost smiling 
pathos 1" 

" That is to say," muttered Hollingsworth, 
"you will die like a heathen, as you cer- 
tainly Kve like one. But, listen to me, 
Coverdale. Your fantastic anticipations 



32 THE BLITHEDALE ROMANCE. 

make me discern all the more forcibly what 
a wretched, unsubstantial scheme is this, on 
which we have wasted a precious summer 
of our lives. Do you seriously imagine that 
any such realities as you, and many others 
here, have dreamed of, will ever be brought 
to pass ?" 

" Certainly, I do," said I. " Of course, 
when the reality comes, it will wear the 
every-day, common-place, dusty, and rather 
homely garb, that reality always does put 
on. But, setting aside the ideal charm, I 
hold that our highest anticipations have a 
solid footing on common sense." 

'^Tou only half believe what you say," 
rejoined Hollingsworth ; " and as for me, I 
neither have faith in your dream, nor would 
care the value of this pebble for its realisa- 
tion, were that possible. And what more 
do you want of it ? It has given you a 
theme for poetry. Let that content you. 



A CBISIS. 33 

But now I ask you to be, at last, a man of 
sobriety and earnestness, and aid me in an 
enterprise which is worth all our strength, 
and the strength of a thousand mightier 
than we." 

There can be no need of giving in detail 
the conversation that ensued. It is enough 
to say that Hollingsworth once more brought 
forward his rigid and unconquerable idea ; 
a scheme for the reformation of the wicked 
by methods moral, intellectual, and indus- 
trial, by the sympathy of pure, humble, and 
yet exalted minds, and by opening to his 
pupils the possibility of a worthier life than 
that which had become their fate. It ap- 
peared, unless he over-estimated his own 
means, that Hollingsworth held it at his 
choice (and he did so choose) to obtain 
possession of the very ground on which we 
had planted our Community, and which 
had not yet been made irrevocably ours, by 

VOL. n. D 



34 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

purcliase. It was just tbe foundation that 
he desired. Our begbiuBgs might readfly 
be adapted to his great end. The arrange- 
ments already completed would work quietly 
into his system. So plausible looked his 
theory, and, more than that^ so practical — 
such an air of reasonableness had he, by 
patient thought, thrown ovef it, — each seg- 
mmit of it was contrived to dove-tail into 
aU the rest with such a complicated applica- 
bility, and so ready was be with a response 
for every objection, that, really, so far as 
logic and argument went, he had the matter 
all his own way. 

" But," said I, " whence can you^ having 
no means of your own, derive the enoamous 
capital which is essential to this experiment? 
State-street, I imagine, would not draw its 
purse-strings very liberally in aid of such a 
speculation." 

" I have the funds — as much,. at least, as 



A CRISIS. 35 

is needed for a commencement — at com* 
mand," he answered. "They can be pro- 
duced ^thin a month, if necessaiy." 

My thoughts reverted to Zenobia. It 
could <mly be her wealth which Rollings- 
worth was appropriating so lavishly. And 
on what conditions was it to be had ? Did 
she fling it into the scheme with the un- 
ealculatiog generosity that characterises a 
woman when it is her impulse to be gene- 
rous at all ? And did she fling herself along 
with it ? But HoUingsworth did not volun- 
teer an explanation. 

" And have you no regrets,** I inquired, 
"in overthrowing this fair system of our 
new life, which has been planned so deeply, 
and is now banning to flourish so hope- 
fidly around us ? How beautiful it is, and, 
80 &r as we can yet see, how practicable I 
The ages have waited for us, and here we 
are, the very first that have essayed to carry 

d2 



36 THE BUTHEDAIiE ROMANCE. 

« 

on our mortal existence in love and mutual 
help I Hollingswortli, I would be loth to 
take the ruia of this enterprise upon my 
conscience." 

" Then let it rest whoUy upon mine !" he 
answered, knitting his black brows. " I see 
through the system. It is full of defects — 
irremediable and damning ones ! — from first 
to last, there is nothing else ! I grasp it in 
my hand, and find no substance whatever. 
There is not human nature in it." 

" Why are you so secret in your opera- 
tions ?" I asked. " God forbid that I should 
accuse you of intentional wrong ; but the 
besetting sin of a philanthropist, it appears 
to me, is apt to be a moral obliquity. His 
sense of honour ceases to be the sense of 
other honourable men. At some point of 
his course — I know not exactly when or 
where — he is tempted to palter with the 
right, and can scarcely forbear persuading 



A CBISIS. 37 

himself that the importance of his public 
ends renders it allowable to throw aside his 
private conscience. 0, my dear friend, be- 
ware this error I K you meditate the over- 
throw of this establishment, call together our 
companions, state your design, support it 
with all your eloquence, but allow them an 
opportunity of defending themselves." 

" It does not suit me," said Hollings worth. 
" Nor is it my duty to do so." 

" I think it is," replied I. 

Hollingsworth frowned; not in passion, 
but, like fate, inexorably. 

"I will not argue the point," said he. 
** What I desire to know of you is — and you 
can tell me in one word — whether I am 
to look for your co-operation in this great 
scheme of good ? Take it up with me ! Be 
my brother in it ! It offers you (what you 
have told me, over and over again, that you 



38 THE BUTHSDAIiE BOMANCE. 

moet need) a parpoee in life, worthy of the 
eztremest self-devodoa — ^worthy of mart{nr- 
ionij ahoold Grod so orderiti In this view, 
I present it to you. You can greatly baiefit 
mankind. Your peculiar &culties, as I shall 
direct them, are capable of bdng so wrought 
into this enterprise that not one of them 
need lie idle. Strike hands with me, and 
from this moment you shall never again feel 
the languor and vague wretchedness of an 
indolent or half-occupied man. There may 
be no more aimless beauty in your life ; but, 
in its stead, there shall be strength, courage, 
immitigable will — everything that a manly 
and generous nature should desire I We 
shall succeed! We shall have done our 
best for this miserable world ; and happiness 
(which never comes but incidentally) will 
come to us unawares." 
It seemed his intention to say no more. 



A CRISIS. S9 

But, after he . had quite broken off, his deep 
eyes filled -with tears, and he held out both 
his hands to me. 

" Cioverdale,'* he murmured, " there is not 
the man in this wide world whom I can 
love as I could you. Do not forsake me.** 

As I look hack upon this scene, through 
the coldness and dimness of so many yeare, 
there is still a sensation as if HolHngsworth 
had caught hold of my heart, and were 
pulling it towards him with an almost irre- 
fflstible force. It is a mystery to me how I 
withstood it But, in truth, I saw in his 
scheme of philanthropy nothing but what 
was odious. A loathsomeness that was to 
be for ever in my daily work! A great, 
black ugliness of sin, which he proposed to 
collect out of a thousand human hearts, and 
that we should spend our lives in an experir 
ment of transmuting it into virtue ! Had I 
but touched his extended hsmd, HoUings- 



40 THE BLITHEDALE ROMANCE. 

worth's magnetism would perhaps have 
penetrated me with Tiis own conception of 
all these matters. But I stood aloof. I 
fortified myself with doubts whether his 
strength of purpose had not been too 
gigantic for his integrity, impeUing him to 
trample on considerations that should have 
been paramount to every other. 

"Is Zenobia to take part in our enter- 
prise ?" I asked. 

" She is," said Hollingsworth. 

" She I — ^the beautiful ! — the gorgeous !" 
I exclaimed. " And how have you prevailed 
with such a woman to work in this squalid 
element ?" 

" Through no base methods, as you seem 
to suspect," he answered; "but by ad- 
dressing whatever is best and noblest in 
her." 

Hollingsworth was looking on the ground. 
But, as he often did so, — generally, indeed. 



A CRISIS. 41 

in his habitual moods of thought, — I could 
not judge whether it was from any special 
jmwillingness now to meet my eyes. What 
it was that dictated my next question, I 
cannot precisely say. Nevertheless, it rose 
so inevitably into my mouth, and, as it were, 
asked itself so involuntarily, that there must 
needs have been an aptness in it. 

" What is to become of Prisdlla ?" 

HoUingsworth looked at me fiercely, and 
with glowing eyes. He could not have 
shown any other kind of expression than 
that, had he meant to strike me with a 
sword. 

*' Why do you bring in the names of these 
women ?" said he, after a moment of preg- 
nant silence. " What have they to do with 
the proposal which I make you? I must 
have your answer ! Will you devote your- 
self, and sacrifice all to this great end, and 
be my friend of friends for ever ?" 

" In Heaven's name,' HoUingsworth," cried 



42 THB BUTHEDALE BOICAHCE. 

I, getting ai^ry, and glad to be angry, 
because so only was it posBible to oppose 
his tremaidons concentratiFeneBS and indo- 
mitable will, '^ cannot you concdve that a 
man may wish well to the world, and 
stro^^ for its good, cm some other plan 
than {Hrecisely that which you have laid 
down ? And will you cast off a friend for 
no unworthiness, but merdy because he 
stands upon his right as an individual being, 
and looks at matters through his own optics, 
instead of yoiurs ?" 

"Be with me," said Hollingsworth, "ot 
foe against me ! There is no third choice 
for you,'' 

" Take this, then, as my decision," I an- 
swered. " I doubt the wisdom of your 
scheme. Furthermore, I greatly fear that 
the methods by which you allow yourself 
to pursue it are such as cannot stand the 
scrutiny of an unbiassed conscience." 

*^ And you will not join me ?" 



A GBZSB3» 43 

« No I" 

I never said the word — and certainly can 
never have it to say hereafter — that cost me 
a thousandth part so hard an eSbrt as did 
that one syllable. The heart-pang was not 
merely figurative, but an absolute torture of 
the breast. I was gaziog steadfastly at Hot 
lingsworth. It seemed to me that it struck 
him, too, like a bullet A ghastly paleness 
-^ways so terrific on a swaiUiy fkce- 
overspread his features. There was a con- 
vulsive movement of his throat, as if he 
were fordng down some words that struggled 
and fought for utterance. Whether words 
of anger, or words of grie^ I cannot tell; 
although, many and many a time, I have 
vainly tormented myself with conjecturing 
which of the two they were. One other 
appeal to my friendship, — such as once, 
already, Hollingsworth had made, — ^taking 
me in the revulsion that followed a strenuous 



44 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

exercise of opposing will, would completely 
have subdued me. But lie left the matter 
there. 

" Well I'' said he. 

And that was all ! I should have been 
thankful for one word more, even had it 
shot me through the heart, as mine did him. 
But he did not speak it; and, after a few 
moments, with one accord, we set to work 
again, repairing the stone fence. Hollings- 
worth, I observed, wrought like a Titan; 
and, for my own part, I lifted stones which 
at this day — or, in a calmer mood, at that 
one — I should no more have thought it pos- 
sible to stir than to carry off the gates of 
Gaza on my back.- 



III. 



LEAVE-TAKINGS. 



A FEW days after the tragic passage-at- 
arms between Hollingswortli and me, I ap- 
peared at the dinner-table actually dressed 
in a coat, instead of ray customary blouse ; 
with a satin cravat, too, a white vest, and 
several other things that made me seem 
strange and outlandish to myself. As for 
my companions, this unwonted spectacle 
caused a great stir upon the wooden benches 
that bordered either side of our homely 
board. 



46 THE BLTTHEDALE BOICANCE. 

" What's in the wind now, Miles ?" asked 
one of them. " Are you deserting us ?" 

"Yes, for a week or two," said I. "It 
strikes me that my health demands a little 
relaxation of laboxu*, and a short visit to the 
sea-side, during the dog-days." 

" You look like it !" grumbled Silas Foster, 
not greatly pleased with the idea of losing 
an efficient labourer before the stress of the 
season was well over. "Now, here's a 
{»:etty fellow I His shoulders have broad* 
ened a matter of six inches^ since he came 
among us ; he can do his day's work, if he 
likes, with any man or ox on the fEorm; and 
yet he talks about going to the sea-shore fi>r 
his health ! Well, well, old woman," added 
he to his wife, *' let me have a plate&l 
of that pork and cabbage ! I begin to 
feel in a very weakly way. When the 
others have had their turn, you and I wiH 
take a jaunt to Newport or Saratoga I" 



LSAYE-TAKIKGS. 47 

" Well, but Mr. Foster/' said I, " you 
must allow me to take a little br^tk'* 

" Breath I" retorted the old yeoman. 
"Your lungs have the jday of a pair of 
blacksmith's bellows already. What on 
earth do you want more ? But go along ! 
I understand the business. We shall never 
see your face hare again. Here ends the 
reformation of the world, so far as Miles 
Coverdale has a hand in it !'* 

" By no means^^' I repUed. " I am reso- 
lute to die in the last ditch, for the good of 
the cause.'' 

" Die in a ditch I" muttered gruff Sila^ 
with genuine Yankee intolerance cf any in- 
termission of toil, excefrt on Sunday, the 
fourth of July, the autumnal cattle-show, 
Thanksgiving, or the annual Fast. ^' Die in 
a ditch I I beJieve, in my conscience, you 
would, if there were no steadier means than 
your own labour to keep you out of it I" 



48 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

The truth was, that an intolerable discon- 
tent and irksomeness had come over me. 
Blithedale was no longer what it had been. 
Everything was suddenly faded. The sun- 
burnt and arid aspect of our woods and 
pastures, beneath the August sky, did but 
imperfectly symbolise the lack of dew and 
moisture that, since yesterday, as it were, had 
blighted my fields of thought, and penetrated 
to the innermost and shadiest of my contem- 
plative recesses. The change will be recog- 
nised by many, who, after a period of 
happiness, have endeavoured to go on with 
the same kind of life, in the same scene, 
in spite of the alteration or withdrawal of 
some principal circumstance. They discover 
(what heretofore, perhaps, they had not 
known) that it was this which gave the 
bright colour and vivid reality to the whole 
affair. 

I stood on other terms than before, not 



LEAYS-TAKINGS. 49 

only with Hollingsworth, but with Zenobia 
and Prisdlla. As r^arded the two latter, 
it was that dream-like and miserable sort of 
change that denies you the privil^e to com- 
plain, because you can assert no positive 
injury, nor lay your finger on anything tan- 
gible. It is a matter which you do not see, 
but feel, and which, when you try to analyse 
it, seems to lose its very existence, and re- 
solve itself into a sickly humour of your own. 
Your imderstanding, possibly, may put faith 
in this denial. But your heart will not so 
easily rest satisfied. It incessantly remon- 
strates, though, most of the time, in a bass- 
note, which you do not separately distin- 
guish J but, now and then, with a sharp cry, 
importimate to be heard, and resolute to 
claim belief " Things are not as they were !" 
it keeps saying. " You shall not impose on 
me ! I will never be quiet I I will throb 
painfully! I will be heavy, and desolate, 

VOL. n. £ 



50 THE BUTHEDALB ROMANCE. 

and shiver with cold! For I, your deep 
heart, know when to be mis^able, as once I 
knew when to be happy I All is changed 
for us ! You are beloved no more f And, 
were my life to be spent over again, I wcmld 
invariably lend my ear to thia Cassandra <rf 
the inward d^ths, however clamQ3X)ua the 
music and the merriment of a more super- 
ficial r^on. 

My outbreak with Hollingsworth, though 
never definitely known to our associates, had 
really an effect upon the moral atmosj^ere of 
the Community. It was inddentaL to the 
closeness of relationship into which we had 
brought ourselves, that an mifriendly state 
of feeling could not occur between any 
two members, without the whole society 
bdng more or less commcrted and made 
imcomfortable thereby. This species of ner- 
vous sympathy (though a pretty character- 
istic enough, sentimentally considered, and 



LEAYE-TAKINGS. 51 

apparently betokening an actual bond of 
love among m) was jet found rather incon- 
venient in its practical operation; mortal 
tempers being so infirm and variable as they 
are. If one of us happened to give hia 
neighbour a box on the ear, the tingle was 
immediately felt on the same side of every- 
body's^ head. Thus, even on the supposition 
that we were far less quarrelsome than the 
rest of the world, a great deal of time was 
necessarily wasted in rubbing our ears. 

Musing on all these matters, I felt an inex- 
pressible longing for at least a temporary no- 
velty. I thought of going across the Rocty' 
Mountains, or to Europe, or up the Nile ; of 
oflfering myself a volunteer on the Exploring 

Expedition ; of taking a ramble of years, no 
matter in what direction, and coming back 
on the other side of the world. Then, 
should the colonists of Blithedale have 
established their enterprise on a permanent 

E 2 



52 THE BLITHEDALE ROMANCE. 

basis, I might fling aside my pilgrim staff 
and dusty shoon, and rest as peacefully here 
as elsewhere. Or, in case Hollingsworth 
should occupy the ground with his School 
of Reform, as he now purposed, I might 
plead earthly guilt enough, by that time, to 
give me what I was inclined to think the 
only trustworthy hold on his affections. 
Meanwhile, before deciding on any ultimate 
plan, I determined to remove myself to a 
little distance, and take an exterior view of 
what we had all been about. 

In truth, it was dizzy work, amid such 
fermentation of opinions as was going on in 
the general brain of the Community. It 
was a kind of Bedlam, for the time being ; 
although out of the very thoughts that were 
wildest and most destructive might grow a 
wisdom holy, calm, and pure, and that should 
incarnate itself with the substance of a noble 
and happy life. But, as matters now were. 



LEAVE-TAKINGS. 53 

I felt myself (and, having a decided tendency 
towards the actual, I never liked to feel it) 
getting quite out of my reckoning, with 
regard to the existing state of the world. 
I was beginning to lose the sense of what 
kind of a world it was, among innumerable 
schemes of what it might or ought to be. 
It was impossible, situated as we were, not 
to imbibe the idea that everything in nature 
and human existence was fluid, or fast be- 
coming so ; that the crust of the earth in 
many places was broken, and its whole sur- 
face portentously upheaving ; that it was a 
day of crisis, and that we ourselves were in 
the critical vortex. Our great globe floated 
in the atmosphere of infinite space like an 
imsubstantial bubble. No sagacious man 
will long retain his sagacity, if he live ex- 
clusively among reformers and progressive 
people, without periodically returning into 
the settled system of things, to correct him- 



54 THE BLITHEDAI£ BOMANCE. 

self by a new observatioa &om that old 
stand.point. 

It was now' time for me, therefore, to go 
and hold a little talk with the conservatiTes, 
the writers of the North American Review, 
the merchants, the politicians, the Cam- 
bridge men, and all those respectable did 
blockheads who still, in this intangibility 
and mistiness of affairs, kept a death-grip on 
one or two ideas which had not come iirto 
vogue since yesterday morning. 

The brethren took leave of me with cor- 
dial kindness ; and as for the sisterhood, I 
had serious thoughts of kissing them all 
roimd, but forbore to do so, because, in all 
such general salutations, the penance is folly 
equal to the pleasure. So I kissed none of 
them ; and nobody, to say the truth, seemed 
to expect it. 

" Do you wish me," I said to Zenobia, 
" to annoimce, in town and at the watering- 



LEAVE-TAKINGS. 55 

places, your purpose to deliver a course of 
lectures on the rights of women ?" 

"Women possess no rights," said Zenobia, 
with a half-melancholy smile ; " or, at all 
ev^ats, only little girls and grandmothers 
would have the force to exercise them." 

She gave me her hand freely and kindly, 
and looked at me, I thought, with a pitying 
expression in her eyes ; nor was there any 
settled light of joy in them on her own 
behalf, but a troubled and passionate flame, 
flickering and fitful. 

"I regret, on the whole, that you are 
leaving us," she said; "and all the more, 
since I feel that this phase of our life is 
finished, and can never be lived over again. 
Do you know, Mr. Coverdale, that I have 
been several times on the point of making 
you my confidant, for lack of a better and 
wiser one ? But you are too young to be 
my father-confessor ; and you would not 



56 THE BUTflEDALE ROMANCE. 

thank me for treating you like one of those 
good little handmaidens who share the 
bosom-secrets of a tragedy-queen." 

" I would, at least, be loyal and faithful," 
answered I ; " and would counsel you with 
an honest purpose, if not wisely." 

" Yes," said Zenobia, " you would be 
only too wise, too honest. Honesty and 
wisdom are such a delightful pastime, at 
another person's expense !" 

" Ah, Zenobia !" I exclaimed, " if you 
would but let me speak !" 

" By no means," she replied, " especially 
when you have just resumed the whole 
series of social conventionalisms, together 
with that straight-bodied coat. I would as 
lief open my heart to a lawyer or a clergy- 
man ! No, no, Mr. Coverdale ; if I choose 
a counsellor, in the present aspect of my 
affairs, it must be either an angel or a mad- 
man ; and I rather apprehend that the latter 



LEAVE-TAKINGS. 57 

would be likeliest of the two to speak the 

fitting word. It needs a wild steersman 

when we voyage through chaos I The 

« 

anchor is up — ^farewell !" 

Priscilla, as soon as dinner was over, had 
betaken herself into a corner, and set to 
work on a little purse. As I approached 
her, she let her eyes rest on me with a calm, 
serious look; for, with all her delicacy of 
nerves, there was a singular self-possession 
in Priscilla, and her sensibilities seemed to 
lie sheltered from ordinary commotion, like 
the water in a deep well. 

" Will you give me that purse, Priscilla," 
said I, « 33 a parting keepsake ?" 
. " Yes," she answered, « if you wiU wait 
till it is finished." 

" I must not wait, even for that," I replied. 
'* Shall I find you here, on my return ?" 

" I never wish to go away," said she. 

" I have sometimes thought,'' observed I, 



58 THE BLITHSDALE ROMANCE. 

smiling, ^^that you, Prisdlla, are a little pro- 
phetess; or, at least, that you have spiritual 
intiinatioiis respecting matters which are 
dark to us grosser people* If that be the 
case^ I should like to ask you what is about 
to happen ; £3t I am tormented with a 
strong foreboding that, were I to return even 
so soon as to-morrow morning, I should find 
everything changed. Have you any im- 
pressions of this nature ?" 

^Ah, no," said Prisdlla, looking at me 
apprehensively. " If any such misfortune 
is coming, the shadow has not reached me 
yet. Heaven forbid ! I should be glad if 
there might never be any change, but one 
summer follow another, and all just lil^e 
this.'' 

^'No sununer ever came back, and no 
two summers ever were alike," said I, with 
a degree of Orphic wisdom that astonished 
myself. " Times change, and people change ; 



IiSAYE-TAXmOfiL 59 

and if our hearts do not change as readily, 
so much the worse for us. Good-by, Pris- 
cfllar 

I gave her hand a pressure, which, I 
think, she neither resisted nor returned. 
Priscilla's heart was deep, but of small com- 
pass ; it had room but for a very few dearest 
ones, among whom she never reckoned me. 

On the door-step I met HoUingsworth. 
I had a momentary impulse to hold out 
my hand, or at least to give a partii]^ nod, 
but resisted both. When a real and strong 
affection has come to an end, it is not well 
to mock the sacred past with any show oi 
those commonplace civilities that belong to 
ordinary intercourse. Being dead hence- 
forth to him, and he to me, there could 
be no propriety in our chilling one another 
widi the touch of two corpse-like hands, 
or playing at looks of courtesy with eyes 
that were impenetrable beneath the glaze 



60 THE BUTHEDALE ROMANCE. 

and the film. We passed, therefore, as if 
mutually invisible. 

I can nowise explain what sort of whim, 
prank, or perversity it was, that, after all 
these leave-takings, induced me to go to 
the pigsty, and take leave of the swine! 
There they lay, buried as deeply among 
the straw as they could burrow, four huge 
black grunters, the very symbols of sloth- 
ful ease and sensual comfort. They were 
asleep, drawing short and heavy breaths, 
which heaved their big sides up and down. 
Unclosing their eyes, however, at my ap- 
proach, they looked dimly forth at the 
outer world, and simultaneously uttered a 
gentle grunt ; not putting themselves to the 
trouble of an additional breath for that 
particular purpose, but grunting with their 
ordinaiy inhalation. They were involved, 
and almost stifled and buried alive, in their 
own corporeal substance. The very un- 



LEAVE-TAKINGS. 61 

readiness and oppression wherewith these 
greasy citizens gained breath enough to 
keep their life-machinery in sluggish move- 
ment, appeared to make them only the 
more sensible of the ponderous and fat sa- 
tisfaction of their existence. Peeping at 
me, an instant, out of their small, red, 
hardly perceptible eyes, they dropt asleep 
again ; yet not so far asleep but that their 
imctuous bliss was still present to them, 
betwixt dream and reality. 

"You must come back in season to eat 
part of a spare-rib," said Silas Foster, giving 
my hand a mighty squeeze. " I shall have 
these fat fellows hanging up by the heels, 
head downward, pretty soon, I tell you 1" 

" 0, cruel Silas, what a horrible idea !" 
cried I. " All the rest of us, men, women, 
and live-stock, save only these four porkers, 
are bedevilled with one grief or another; 
they alone are happy — and you mean to 



62 THE BUTHEDALE BOMANCE. 

cut their throats and eat them I It would 
be more for the general comfort to let them 
eat us; and bitter and sour morsels we 
should be 1" 



IV. 

THE HOTEL. 

* 

Abbiving in town (where my bachelor- 
rooms, long before this time, had received 
some other occupant), I established myself, 
for a day or two, in a certain respectable 
hotel. It was atuated somewhat aloof from 
my former track in life ; my present mood 
inchning me to avoid most of my old com- 
panions, from whom I was now sundered 
by other interests, and who would have 
been likely enough to amuse themselves at 
the expense of the amateur working-man. 
The hotel-keeper put me into a back-room 



46 THE BLITHEDALB ROMANCE* 

of the third story of his spacious establish- 
ment. The day was lowering, with occa- 
sional gusts of rain, and an ugly-t^mpered 
east wind, which seemed to come right off 
the chill and melancholy sea, hardly miti- 
gated by sweeping over the roo^ and amal- 
gamating itself with the dusky element of 
dty smoke. All the effeminacy of past days 
had returned upon me at once. Summer as 
it still was, I ordered a coal-fire in the rusty 
grate, and was glad to find myself growing a 
little too warm with an artificial temperature. 
My sensations were those of a traveUer, 
long sojourning in remote r^ions, and at 
length sitting down again amid customs once 
familiar. There was a newness and an 
oldness oddly combining themselves into 
one impression. It made me acutely sen- 
sible how strange a piece of mosaic-work had 
lately been wrought into my life. True, if 
you look at it in one way, it had been only 



TH£ HOTEL. 65 

a summer in the country. But, considered 
in a profounder relation, it was part of 
another age, a different state of society, a 
segment of an existence peculiar in its aims 
and methods, a leaf of some mysterious 
volume interpolated into the current history 
which time was writing off. At one moment, 
the very circumstances now surrounding me 
— ^my coal-fire, and the dingy room in the 
bustling hotel — appeared far off and intan- 
gible; the next instant Blithedale looked 
vague, as if it were at a distance both in 
time and space, and so shadowy that a 
question might be raised whether the whole 
afl^r had been anything more than the 
thoughts of a speculative man. I had never 
before experienced a mood that so robbed 
the actual world of its solidity. It never- 
theless involved a charm, on which — a de- 
voted epicure of my own emotions — I re- 

VOL. n. F 



66 THE BLITHEBALE BOMANCE. 

solved to pause, and enjoy the moral sillabub 
until quite dissolved away. 

Whatever had been my taste for solitude 
and natural scenery, yet the thick, foggy, 
stifled dement of cities, the entangled life of 
many men together, sordid as it was, and 
empty of the beautiful, took quite as strenuous 
a bold upon my mind. I &lt as if there 
could never be enough of it. Each charac- 
teristic sound was too suggestive to be passed 
over unnoticed. Beneath and around me, I 
heard the stir of the hotel ; the loud voices 
of guests, landlord, or barkeeper; steps 
echoing on the staircase ; the ringing q£ a 
bell, announcing arrivals or departures; tbe 
porter lumbering past my door with baggage, 
which he thumped down upon the Ikxas 
of neighbouring chambers; the lighter feet 
of chambermaids scudding along the pas- 
sages; — ^it is ridiculous to tlunk what an 



THE HOTEL* 67 

interest they had for me ! Prom the street 
came the tmnult of the pavements, pervading 
the vehole house with a continual uproar, so 
broad and deep that only an unaccustomed 
ear would dwell upon it. A company of 
the city soldiery, with a fiill military band, 
marched in front of the hotel, invisible to 
me, but stirringly audible both by its foot- 
tramp and the clangor of its instruments. 
Once or twice all the city bells jangled 
together, announcing a fire, which brought 
out the engine-men and their machines, like 
an army with its artillery rushing to battle 
Hour by hour the clocks in many steeples 
responded one to another. In some public 
hall, not a great way of^ there seemed to be 
an exhibition of a mechanical diorama ; for, 
three times during the day, occurred a re- 
petition of obstreperous music, winding up 
with the rattle of imitative cannon and 

f2 



68 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

musketry, and a huge final explosion. Then 
ensued the applause of the spectators, with 
clap of hands, and thump of sticks, and the 
energetic pounding of their heels. All this 
was just as valuable, in its way, as the sigh- 
ing of the breeze among the birch-trees that 
overshadowed Eliot's pulpit. 

Yet I felt a hesitation about plunging into 
this muddy tide of human activity and pas- 
time. It suited me better, for the present, 
to linger on the brink, or hover in the air 
above it. So I spent the first day and the 
greater part of the second in the laziest 
manner possible, in a rocking-chair, inhaling 
the firagrance of a series of cigars, with my 
legs and slippered feet horizontally disposed, 
and in my hand a novel purchased of a rail- 
road bibliopolist. The gradual waste of my 
cigar accomplished itself with an easy and 
gentle expenditure of breath. My book 
was of the dullest, yet had a sort of sluggish 



THE HOTEL. 69 

flow, like that of a stream in which your 
boat is as often aground as afloat. Had 
there been a more impetuous rush, a more 
absorbing passion of the narrative, I should 
the sooner have struggled out of its uneasy 
current, and have given myself up to the 
swell and subsidence of my thoughts. But, 
as it was, the torpid life of the book served 
as an unobtrusive accompaniment to the life 
within me and about me. At intervals, 
however, when its effect grew a little too 
soporific — ^not for my patience, but for the 
possibility of keeping my eyes open — I be- 
stirred myself, started fi:om the rocking- 
chair, and looked out of the window. 

A grey sky; the weathercock of a steeple, 
that rose beyond the opposite range of 
buildings, pointing from the eastward; a 
sprinkle of small, spitefiil-looking raindrops 
on the window-pane. In that ebb-tide of 



70 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

my energies, had I thought of venturing 
abroad, these tokens would have checked 
the abortive purpose. 

After several such visits to the window, 
I ' found myself getting pretty well ac- 
quainted with that little portion of the back- 
side of the universe which it prea^ited to 
my view. Over against the hotel and its 
adjacent houses, at the distance of forty or 
fifty yards, was the rear of a range of build- 
ings, which appeared to be spacious, modem, 
and calculated for fashionable residences. 
The interval between was apportioned into 
grass-plots, and here and there an apology 
for a garden, pertaimng severally to these 
dwellings. There were apple-trees, and 
pear and peach trees, too, the fruit on which 
looked singularly large, luxuriant, and 
abundant ; as well it might, in a situation so 
warm and sheltered, and where the soil had 



THE HOTEL, 71 

doubtless been enriclied to a more than 
natural fertility. In two or three places 
grape-vines clambered upon trellises, and 
bore dusters already purple, and promising 
liie nchness of Malta or Madeira in their 
ripened juica The blighting winds of our 
rigid dimate could not molest these trees 
md vines ; the sunshine, though descending 
kte into this area, and too early intercepted 
by the height of the surrounding houses, 
yet lay tropically there, even when less than 
temperate in every other region. Dreary 
as was the day, the scene was illuminated 
by not a few sparrows and other birds, 
which spread their wings, and flitted and 
fluttered, and alighted now here, now there, 
and busily scratched their food out of the 
wormy earth. Most of these winged people 
seemed to have their domicile in a robust 
and healthy button wood-tree. It aspired 
upward, high above the roof of the bouses, 



72 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

and spread a dense head of foliage half 
across the area. 

There was a cat — as there mvariably is in 
such places — who evidently thought herself 
entitled to all the privileges of forest-life, in 
this close heart of city conventionalisms. I 
watched her creeping along the low, flat 
roofs of the offices, descending a flight of 
wooden steps, gliding among the grass, and 
besieging the buttonwood-tree, with mur- 
derous purpose against its feathered citizens. 
But, after aU, they were birds of city breed- 
ing, and doubtless knew how to guard 
themselves against the peculiar perils of 
their position. 

Bewitching to my fancy are all those 
nooks and crannies, where Nature, like a 
stray partridge, hides her head among the 
long-established haunts of men ! It is like- 
wise to be remarked, as a general rule, that 
there is far more of the picturesque, more 



THE HOTEL. 73 

truth to native and characteristic tenden- 
cies, and vastly greater suggestiveness, in 
the back view of a residence, whether in 
town or country, than in its front. The 
latter is always artificial; it is meant for 
the world's eye, and is therefore a veil and 
a concealment. ReaUties keep in the rear, 
and put forward an advance-guard of show 
and humbug. The posterior aspect of any 
old farm-house, behind which a railroad has 
unexpectedly been opened, is so different 
fix)m that looking upon the immemorial 
highway, that the spectator gets new ideas 
of rural life and individuality in the puff or 
two of steam-breath which shoots him past 
the premises. In a city, the distinction be- 
tween what is offered to the public and what 
is kept for the family is certainly not less 
striking. 

But, to return to my window, at the back 
of the hotel. Together with a due con- 



74 THE BUTHEDALB BOliAKCE. 

templation of the fruit-trees, the grape* 
vines, the buttonwood-tree, the cat, the 
birds, and many other particulars, I fidled 
not to study the row of fashionable dwdl* 
ings to whidi all these appertained. ELesoe^ 
it must be confessed, there was a general 
sameness* From the upper stosy to the first 
floor they were so much alike, that I cotild 
only conceive of the inhabitants as cut out 
on one identical pattern, like little wooden 
toy-people of German manufacture. One 
long, united roo^ with its thousands of slates 
ghttering in the rain, extended over the 
whole. After the distinctness of sqiarate 
characters to which I bad recently been 
accustomed, it perplexed and annoyed me 
not to be able to resolve this combination of 
human interests into well-defined dements. 
It seemed hardly worth while for more than 
one of those £amilies to be in esistenoe, since 
they all had the same glimpse of the sky, all 



% 



THE HOTEL. 75 

looked into the same are% all received just 
their equal share of sunshine through the 
£ront windows, and all listened to precisely 
the same ncHses of the street on which th^ 
boarded. Men are so much alike in their 
nature, that. they grow intolerable xmless 
varied by their circumstances. 

Just about this time a waiter entered my 
room. The truth was, I had rung the bell 
and ordered a sherry-cobbler. 

" Can you tell me," I inquired, " what 
families reside in any of those houses oppo- 
site?" 

" The one right opposite is a rather stylish 
boarding-house," said the waiter. " Two of 
the gentlemen-boarders keep horses at the 
stable of our establishment. They do things 
in very good style, sir, the people that hve 
there." 

I might have found out nearly as much 
for myself on examining the house a little 



76 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

more closely. In one of the upper chambers 
I saw a young man in a dressing-gown, 
standing before the glass and brushing his 
hair for a quarter of an hour together. He 
then spent an equal space of time in the 
elaborate arrangement of his* cravat, and 
finally made his appearance in a dress-coat, 
which I suspected to be newly come from 
the tailor's, and now first put on for a 
dinner-party. At a window of the next 
story below, two children, prettily dressed, 
were looking out. By-and-by, a middle- 
aged gentleman came softly behind them, 
kissed the little girl, and playfully pulled 
the little boy's ear. It was a papa, no 
doubt, just come in £rom his counting-room 
or office ; and anon appeared mamma, steal- 
ing as softly behind papa as he had stolen 
behind the children, and laying her hand 
on his shoulder, to surprise him. Then 
followed a kiss between papa and mamma ; 




THB HOTEL. 77 

but a noiseless one, for the children did not 
turn their heads. 

" I bless God for these good folks 1" 
thought 1 to myself. "I have not seen a 
prettier bit of nature, in all my summer in 
the country, than they have shown me here, 
in a rather styUsh boardmg-house. I will 
pay them a little more attention, by-and- 
by." 

On the first floor, an iron balustrade ran 
along in fi:ont of the tall and spacious win- 
dows, evidently belonging to a back draw- 
ing-room; and, far into the interior, through 
the arch of the sUding-doors, I could discern 
a gleam firom the windows of the firont 
apartment. There were no signs of present 
occupancy in this suite of rooms ; the cur- 
tains being enveloped in a protective cover- 
ing, which allowed but a small portion of 
their crimson material to be seen. But two 



78 THE BLTTHEDALE BOMANCE. 

housemaids were industriously at work ; so 
that there was good prospect that the board- 
ing-house might not long suffer from the 
absence oi its most expensive and profitable 
guests. Meanwhile, until they should ap- 
pear, I cast my eyes downward to the 
lower r^ons. There, in the dusk that so 
early settles into such places, I saw the red 
glow of the kitchen-range. The hot cook, 
or one of her subordinates, with a ladle in 
her hand, came to draw a cool breath at 
the bac^-door. As soon as she disappeared, 
an Irish man-servant, in a white jacket, 
crept slyly forth, and threw away the frag- 
ments of a china dish, which, unquestion- 
ably, he had just broken. Soon afterwards, 
a lady, showily dressed, with a curling front 
of what must have been &lse hair, and 
reddish-brown, I suppose, in hue — ^though 
my remoteness allowed me only to guess at 




THE HOI£L. 79 

Buck particulaj:8 — Hm respectable mistress 
K3£ the boardifig-house made a momentary 
Ipra&sit across llie Idtchen window, and ap- 
peared no more. It was her £nal, com- 
prehensive glance, in order to make sure 
that soup, fish, and flesh, were in a proper 
state of readiness, before the serving up of 
dinner. 

There was nothing else worth noticing 
about the house, unless it be that on the 
peak of one of the dormer-windows, which 
opened out of the roof, sat a dove, looking 
very dreary and forlorn; insomuch that I 
wondered why she chose to sit there, in the 
chilly rain, while her kindred were doubt- 
less nestling in a warm and comfortable 
dove-cot. All at once, this dove spread 
her wings, and, launching herself in the air, 
came flying so straight across the intervening 
space, that I fiilly expected her to alight 
directly on my window-sill. In the latter 



80 THE BLITHEDALE BOMAKCE. 

part of her course, however, she swerved 
^de, flew upward, and vanished, as did, 
likewise, the slight, fantastic pathos with 
which I had invested her. 



V. 

THE BOARDING-HOUSE. 

The next day, as soon as I thought of 
looking again towards the opposite house, 
there sat the dove again, on the peak of the 
same dormer-window ! 

It was by no means an early hour, for, 
the preceding evening, I had ultimately 
mustered enterprise enough to visit the 
theatre, had gone late to bed, and slept 
beyond all limit, in my remoteness from 
Silas Foster's awakening horn. Dreams had 
tormented me throughout the night. The 
train of thoughts which, for months past, 

VOL. n. G 



82 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

had worn a track through my mind, and to 
escape which was one of my chief objects in 
leaving Blithedale, kept treading remorse- 
lessly to and fro in their old footsteps, while 
slumber left me impotent to regulate them. 
It was not till I had quitted my three 
friends that they first began to encroach 
upon my dreams. In those of the last 
night, Hollingsworth and Zenobia, standing 
on either side of my bed, had bent across it 
to exchange a kiss of passion. Priscilla, 
beholding this — ^for she seemed to be peep- 
ing in at the chamber-window — ^had melted 
gradually away, and left only the sadness 
of her expression in my heart There it 
still lingered, after I awoke; one of those 
imreasonable sadnesses that you know not 
how to deal with, because it involves nothing 
for common sense to clutch. 

It was a grey and dripping forenoon ; 
gloomy enough in town, and stiU gloomier 



THE BOARDING-HOUSB. 83 

in the haunts to which my recollections 
persisted in transporting me. For, in spite 
of my efforts to think of something else, I 
thought how the gusty rain was drifting 
over the slopes and valleys of our farm ; 
how wet must be the foliage that over- 
shadowed the pulpit-rock; how cheerless, 
in such a day, my hermitage — the tree- 
solitude of my owl-like humours — in the 
vine-encirded heart of the tall pine! It 
was a phase of home -sickness. I had 
wrenched myself too suddenly out of an 
accustomed sphere. There was no chance, 
now, but to bear the pang of whatever 
heart-strings were snapt asunder, and that 
illusive torment (like the ache of a limb 
long ago cut off) by which a past mode of 
life prolongs itself into the succeeding one. 
I was full of idle and shapeless regrets. 
The thought impressed itself upon me that 
I had left duties unperformed. With the 

g2 



$4 TH£ BLITHEDALE BOICANCE. 

jH>wer, perhaps, to act in the place of destiny 
md avert misfortune from my friends, I had 
resigned them to their fate. That cold ten- 
dency, between instinct and intellect, which 
made me pry with a speculative interest into 
people's passions and impulses, appeared to 
have gone far towards unhumanising my 
heart. 

But a man cannot always decide for him- 
self whether his own heart is cold or warm. 
It now impresses me that, if I erred at all 
in regard to Hollingsworth, Zenobia, and 
Priscilla, it was through too much sym- 
pathy, rather than too little. 

To escape the irksomeness of these medi- 
tations, I resumed my post at the window. 
At first sight, there was nothing new to be 
noticed. The general aspect of affairs was 
the same as yesterday, except that the more 
decided inclemency of to-day had driven 
the sparrows to shelter, and kept the 



THE BOABDD76-HOUSE. 85 

cat within doors; whence, however, she 
soon emerged, pursued by the cook, and 
with what looked like the better half of a 
roast chicken in her mouth. The young 
man in the dress-coat was invisible; the 
two children, in the story below, seemed 
to be romping about the room, under the 
superintendence of a nursery-maid. The 
damask curtains of the drawing-room, on 
the first floor, were now fully displayed, 
festooned gracefully from top to bottom of 
the windows, which extended firom the 
ceiling to the carpet. A narrower win- 
dow, at the left of the drawing-room, gave 
light to what was probably a small boudoir, 
within which I caught the faintest imagin- 
able glimpse of a girl's figure, in airy dra- 
pery. Her arm was in regular movement, 
as if she were busy with her German 
worsted, or some other such pretty and 
unprofitable handiwork. 



86 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

While intent upon making out this girl- 
ish shape, I became sensible that a figure 
had appeared at one of the windows of the 
drawing-room. There was a presentiment 
in my mind; or perhaps my first glance, 
imperfect and sidelong as it was, had suf- 
ficed to convey subtle information of the 
truth. At any rate, it was with no pc^- 
tive surprise, but as if I had all along ex- 
pected the incident, that, directing my eyes 
thitherward, I beheld — like a full-length 
picture, in the space between the heavy 
festoons of the window-curtains — ^no other 
than Zenobial At the same instant, my 
thoughts made sure of the identity of the 
figure in the boudoir. It could only be 
Priscilla. 

Zenobia was attired, not in the almost 
rustic costume which she had heretofore 
worn, but in a fashionable morning-dress. 
There was, nevertheless, one familiar point. 



THE B0ABDIN6-H0USE. 87 

She had, as usual, a flower in her hair, 
brilliant and of a rare variety, else it had 
not been Zenobia. After a brief pause at 
the vrindow, she turned away, exemplify- 
ing, in the few steps that removed her out 
of sight, that noble and beautifiil motion 
which characterised her as much as any 
Other personal charm. Not one woman in 
a thousand could move so admirably as 
Zenobia. Many women can sit gracefully; 
some can stand gracefully ; and a few, per- 
haps, can assume a series of graceful positions. 
But natural movement is the result and 
expression of the whole being, and cannot 
be well and nobly performed, unless respon- 
sive to something in the character. I often 
used to think that music — flight and airy, 
^d and passionate, or the fuU harmony 
of stately marches, in accordance with her 
varying mood — should have attended Ze- 
nobia's footsteps. 



88 THE BUTHEDALB BOMAKCE. 

I waited for her reappearance. It was 
one peculiarity, distinguishing Zenobia from 
most of her sex, that she needed for her 
moral weU-being, and never would forego, 
a large amount of physical exercise. At 
Blithedale, no inclemency of sky or mud- 
diness of earth had ever impeded her daily 
walks. Here, in town, she probably pre- 
ferred to tread the extent of the two draw- 
ing-rooms, and measure out the miles by 
spaces of forty feet, rather than bedra^le 
her skirts over the sloppy pavements. Ac- 
cordingly, in about the time requisite to 
pass through the arch of the shding-doors 
to the front window, and to return upon 
her steps, there she stood again, between 
the festoons of the crimson curtains. But 
another personage was now added to the 
scene. Behind Zenobia appeared that £Btce 
which I had first encountered in the wood- 
path; the iaan who had passed, side by 



THE BOABDING-HOUSE. 89 

side with her, in such mysterious familiarity 
and estrangement, beneath my vine-cur- 
tained hermitage in the tall pine-tree. It 
was Westervelt. And though he was look- 
ing closely over her shoulder, it still seemed 
to me, ad on the former occasion that Ze- 
nobia repelled him — that, perchance, they 
mutually repelled each other, by some in- 
compatibility of their spheres. 

This unpression, however, might have 
been altogether the result of fancy and pre- 
judice in me. The distance was so great as 
to obliterate any play of feature by which I 
might otherwise have been a partaker of 
their counsels. 

There now needed only Hollingsworth 
and old Moodie to complete the knot of 
characters, whom a real intricacy of events, 
greatly assisted by my method of insulating 
them from other relations, had kept so long 
upon my mental stage, as actors in a drama* 



90 THE BLITHEDALB BOlfANCE. 

la itself, perhaps, it was no very remarkable 
event that they should thus come across me, 
at the moment when I imagined myself free; 
Zenobia, as I well knew, had retained an 
establishment in town, and had not im« 
frequently withdrawn herself from ^the* 
dale during brief intervals, on one of which 
occasions she had taken PrisciUa along with 
her. Nevertheless, there seemed something 
fatal in the coincidence that had borne me 
to this one spot, of all others in a great city^ 
and transfixed me there, and compelled me 
again to waste my afready wearied sym- 
pathies on affairs which were none of mine, 
and persons who cared little for me. It 
irritated my nerves ; it affected me with a 
kind of heart-sickness. Afler the effort 
which it cost me to fling them off — after 
consummating my escape, as I thought, from 
these goblins of flesh and blood, and pausing 
to revive myself with a breath or two of an 



THE B0ABDINGhH0U8E. 91 

atmosphere in whicli they should have no 
share — it was a positive despair, to. find the 
same figures arraying themselves before me, 
and presenting their old problem in a shape 
that made it more insoluble than ever. 

I began to long for a catastrophe. If the 
noble temper of Hollingsworth's soul were 
doomed to be utterly corrupted by the too 
powerful purpose which had grown out of 
what was noblest in him ; if the rich and 
generous quaHties of Zenobia's womanhood 
might not save her j if Priscilla must perish 
by her tenderness and faith, so simple and 
so devout— rthen be it so I Let it all come I 
As for me, I would look on, as it seemed 
my part to do, understandingly. if my in- 
tellect could fathom the meaning and the 
moral, and, at all events, reverently and 
sadly. The curtain fallen, I would pass 
onward with my poor individual life, which 
was now attenuated of much of its proper 



92 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

substance, and diffused among many alien 
interests. 

Meanwhile, Zenobia and her companion 
had retreated from the window. Then fol^- 
lowed an interval, during which I directed 
my eyes towards the figure in the boudoir. 
Most certainly it was PrisciUa, although 
dressed with a novel and fanciful elegance. 
The vague perception of it, as viewed so far 
off, impressed me as if she had suddenly 
passed out of a chrysalis state and put forth 
wings. Her hands were not now in motion. 
She had dropt her work, and sat with her 
head thrown back, in the same attitude that 
I had seen several times before, when she 
seemed to be hstening to an imperfectly dis- 
tinguished sound. 

Again the two figures in the drawing-room 
became visible. They were now a little with- 
drawn from the window, face to face, and, as 
I could see by Zenobia's emphatic gestures, 



THE B0ABDIN6-H0USE. 93 

were discussing some subject in which she, 
at least, felt a passionate concern. By-and-by 
she broke away, and vanished beyond my 
ken. Westervelt approached the window, and 
leaned his forehead against a pane of glass, 
displaying the sort of smile on his handsome 
features which, when I before met him, had 
let me into the secret of his gold-bordered 
teeth. Every human being, when given 
over to the devil, is sure to have the wizard 
mark upon him^ in one form or another. I 
fancied that this smile, with its peculiar reve- 
lation, was the devil's signet on the Professor. 
This man, as I had soon reason to know, 
was endowed with a cat-like circum- 
spection; and though precisely the most 
unspiritual quality in the world, it was 
almost as effective as spiritual insight in 
making him acquainted with whatever it 
suited him to discover. He now proved it, 
considerably to my discomfiture, by detect- 



94 THE BLITHRDALE BOMAKCE. 

ing and recognisiDg me, at my post of obser- 
vation. Perhaps I ought to have blnslied at 
being caught in sach an evident scrutiny of 
Professor Westervelt and his affiurs. Perhaps 
I did blush. Be that as it might, I retained 
presence of mind enough not to make my po- 
sition yet more irksome, by the poltroixiery 
of drawing back. 

Westervelt looked into the depths of the 
drawing-room, and beckoned. Immediately 
afterwards, Zenobia appeared at the win- 
dow, with colour much heightened, and eyes 
which, as my conscience whispered me, were 
shooting bright arrows, barbed with scorn, 
across the intervening space, directed fiill at 
my sensibilities as a gentleman. If the truth 
must be told, Jbr as her flight-shot was, those 
arrows hit the mark* She signified her 
recognition of me by a gesture with her head 
and hand, comprising at once a salutation and 
dismissal. The next moment, she adminis- 




THE BOABDING-HOUSE. 95 

tered one of those pitiless rebukes which a 
woman always has at hand, ready for an 
offence (and which she so seldom spares, on 
due occasion), by letting down a white linen 
curtain between the festoons of , the damask 
ones. It fell like the drop-curtain of a 
theatre, in the interval between the acts. 

Priscilla had disappeared jfrom the boudoir. 
But the dove still kept her desolate perch on 
the peak of the attio-window. 



VI. 

zenobia's dbawing-boom. 

The remainder of the day, so far as I 
was concerned, was spent in meditating on 
these recent incidents. I contrived, and 
alternately rejected, innumerable methods of 
accounting for the presence of Zenobia and 
Priscilla, and the connexion of Westervelt 
with both. It must be owned, too, that I 
had a keen, revengeful sense of the insult 
inflicted by Zenobia's scornful recognition, 
and more particularly by her letting down 
the curtain; as if such were the proper 
barrier to be interposed between a character 



zbnobia's dbawing-boom. 97 

like hers and a perceptive faculty like mine. 
For, was mine a mere vulgar curiosity? 
Zenobia should have known me better than 
to suppose it. She should have been able 
to appreciate that quality of the intellect and 
the heart which impelled me (often against 
my own will, and to the detriment of my 
own comfort) to live in other lives, and to 
endeavour — by generous sjrmpathies, by de- 
licate intuitions, by taking note of things too 
slight for record, and by bringing my human 
spirit into manifold accordance with the 
companions whom God assigned me — to 
learn the secret which was hidden even from 
themselves. 

Of all possible observers, methought a 
woman like Zenobia and a man like Hoi- 
lingsworth should have selected me. And 
now, when the event has long been past, I 
retain the same opinion of my fitness for the 
office. True, I might have condemned them. 

VOL. n. H 



98 THB BLITHEDALE BOMANGK. 

Ebul I been judge, as well as witness, my 
sentenoe might have been stem as that of 
destiny itself. But, still, no trait of original 
nobihty of character, no struggle against 
temptation — ^no iron necessity of will^ on the 
oae hand, nor extenuating circumstance to 
be derived from passion and despair, on the 
other — ^no remorse that might co-exist with 
error, even if powerless to prevent it — ^no 
proud repentance that should claim retrir 
bution as a meed — ^would go unappreciated. 
True, again, I might give my fiill assent to 
the pimishment which was sure to follow. 
But it would be given mournfully, and with 
undiminished love. And, after all was 
finished, I would come, as if to gather up 
the white ashes of those who had perished 
at the stake, and to tell the world— ^the 
wrong being now atoned for — how much 
had perished there which it had never yet 
known how to praise. 



zesobia's drawing-boom. 99 

I sat in my TOckiDg-chair, too £u* with- 
drawn from the window to expose mjrself to 
another rebuke like that already inflicted. 
My eyes still wandered towards the opposite 
house, but without effecting any new disco- 
veries. Late in the afternoon, the weather- 
cock on the church spire indicated a change 
of wind; the sun shone dimly out, as if the 
golden wine of its beams were mmgled half- 
and-half with water. Nevertheless, they 
kindled up the whole range of edifices, 
threw a glow over the windows, glistened 
on the wet roofii, and, slowly withdrawing 
upward, perched upon the chimney-tops; 
thence they took a higher flight, and lin- 
gered an instant on the tip of the spire^ 
making it the final point of more cheerful 
light in the whole sombre scene. The next 
moment, it was all gone. The twilight fell 
into tl» area like a shower of dusky snow; 

h2 



100 THE BLTTHEDALE BOMANCE. 

and before it was quite dark, the gong of the 
hotel summoned me to tea. 

When I returned to my chamber, the 
glow of an astral-lamp was penetrating mis* 
tily through the white curtain of Zenobia's 
drawing-room. The shadow of a passing 
figure was now and then cast upon this 
medium, but with too vague an outline for 
even my adventurous conjectures to read the 
hieroglyphic that it presented. 

All at once, it occurred to me how very 
absurd was my behaviour, in thus torment- 
ing myself with crazy hypotheses as to what 
was going on within that drawing-room, 
when it was at my option to be personally 
present there. My relations with Zenobia, 
as yet imchanged — as a iamiliar friend, and 
associated in the same life-long enterprise — 
gave me the right, and made it no more than 
kindly courtesy demanded, to call on her. 




zenobta's drawing-boom. 101 

Nothing, except our habitual independence 
of conventional rules at Blithedale, could 
have kept me from sooner recognising this 
duty. At all events, it should now be 
performed. 

In compUance with this sudden impulse, 
I soon found myself actually within the 
house, the rear of which, for two days past, 
I had been so sedulously watching. A 
servant took my card, and immediately re- 
turning, ushered me up^stairs- On the way, 
I heard a rich, and, as it were, triumphant 
burst of music from a piano, in which I felt 
Zenobia's character, although heretofore I 
had known nothing of her skill upon the 
instrument. Two or three canary-birds, 
excited by this gush of sound, sang pierc- 
ingly, and did their utmost to produce a 
kindred melody. A bright illumination 
streamed through the door of the front 
drawing-room ; and I had barely stept 



102 THB BLrmEDAI£ WKAMCE. 

across the tlireshold before Z^obia came 
forward to meet me, laughing, and with an 
extended hand. 

"Ah, Mr. Coverdale," said she, rtill 
smiling, but, as I thought, with a good deal 
of scornful anger imdemeath, ^^ it has gra^ 
tified me to see the interest which you con- , 
tinue to take in .my affairs 1 I have loi^ 
recognised you as a sort of transcendental 
Yankee, with all the native propensity of 
your countrymen to investigate matters that 
come within their range, but rendered 
almost poetical, in your case, by the refined 
methods which you adopt for its gratifica- 
tion. After all, it was an unjustifiable stroke, 
on my part — was it not ? — to let down the 
window-curtain !" 

" I cannot call it a very wise one," returned 
I, with a secret bitterness, which, no doubt, 
Zenobia appreciated. "It is really impos- 
i^ible to hide anything in this world, to say 



ZBNOBIA'S DBAWING-BOOif. 103 

nothing of the next. All that we ought to 
askj therefore, is, that the witnesses of our 
conduct, and the speculators on our motives, 
should be capable of taking the highest view 
which the circumstancea of the case may 
admit. So much being secured, I, for one, 
would be most happy in feeling myself fdi- 
lowed everywhere by an indefatigable hu- 
man sympathy." 

" We must trust for intelligent sympathy 
to our guardian angels, if any -there be," 
said Zenobiau " As long as the only spec- 
tator of my poor tragedy is a young man at 
the window of his hotel, 1 must still claim 
the liberty to drop the curtain." 

While this passed, as Zenobia's hand was 
extended, I had appHed the very slightest 
touch of my fingers to her own. In spite of 
an external freedom, her manner made me 
sensible that we stood upon no real terms of 
confidence. The thought came sadly across 



104 T^B BLITHSDALE BOMANCE. 

me, how great was the contrast betwixt this 
interview and our first meeting. Then, in 
the. warm light of the country fireside, 
Zenobia had greeted me cheerily and hope- 
fully, with a full, sisterly grasp of the hand, 
conveying as much kindness in it as other 
women could have evinced by the pressure 
of both arms around my neck, or by yield- 
ing a cheek to the brotherly salute. The 
difference was as complete as between her 
appearance at that time — so simply attired, 
and with • only the one superb flower in her 
hair — and now, when her beauty was set off 
by all that dress and ornament could do for 
it. And they did much. Not, indeed, that 
they created or added anything to what Na- 
ture had lavishly done for Zenobia. But, 
those costly robes which she had on, those 
flaming jewels on her neck, served as lamps 
to display the personal advantages which 
required nothing less than such an illumina- 



zehobia's drawing-boom. 105 

tion to be folly seen. Even her characteris- 
tic flower, though it seemed to be still there, 
had undergone a cold and bright transfigura- 
tion ; it was a flower exquisitely imitated 
in jeweller's work, and imparting the last 
touch that transformed Zenobia into a work 
of art. 

" I scarcely feel," I could not forbear say- 
ing, " as if we had ever met before. How 
many years ago it seems since we last sat 
beneath Eliot's pulpit, with HoUingsworth 
extended on the fallen leaves, and Priscilla 
at his feet I Can it be, Zenobia, that you 
ever really numbered yourself with our little 
band of earnest, thoughtful, philanthropic 
labourers?" 

" Those ideas have their time and place," 
she answered, coldly. " But I fancy it must 
be a very circumscribed mind that can find 
room for no others." 

Her manner bewildered me. Literally, 



106 THE BUTHEDALE fiOMAJSTGE. 

moreover, I was dazzled by the hriUiancy 
of the room. A chandelier hung down k 
the catitre, glowing with I know not how 
many lights; there were separate lamps, 
also, oa two or three tables, and on marble 
brackets, adding their white radiance to that 
of the chandelier. The furniture was ex- 
ceedin^y rich. Fresh from our old farm- 
house, with its homely board and benches in 
the dining-room, and a few wicker chairs in 
the best padour, it struck me that here was 
the fixlfilment of every fantasy of an imagina- 
tion revelling in various methods of costly 
self-indulgence and splendid ease. Pictures, 
marbles, vases — ^in brief, more shapes of 
luxury than there could be any object in 
enumerating, except for an auctioneer's ad- 
vertisement — and the whole repeated and 
doubled by the reflection of a great mirror, 
which showed me Zenobia's ~ proud figure, 
li^wise, and my own. It cost me, I ac- 



ZSVOBIa!s (DRAWING-BOOM. 107 



knowledge, a bitter sense of shame, to per- 
ceive in myself a positive effort to bear up 
against the effect which Zenobia sought to 
impose on me. I reasoned against her, in 
my secret mind« and strove so to keep my 
footing. In the gorgeousness with which 
she had surrounded herself — ^in the redun- 
dance of personal ornament, which the large- 
neas of her physical nature and the rich 
^fpe of her beauty caused to seem so suitable 
—I malevdbntly beheld the true character 
of the woman, passionate, luxurious, lacking 
simplidty, not deeply refined, incapable of 
piare and perfect taste. 

But, the next instant, she was too power- 
ful for all my opposing struggles. I saw 
how fit it was that she should make herself 
as gorgeous as she pleased, and should do a 
thousand things that would have been ridi- 
. colons in the poor, thin, weakly characters 
of other women. To this day, however, I 



108 THE BUTHEDALE ROMANCE. 

hardly know whether I then beheld ZenO' 
bia in her truest attitude, or whether that 
were the truer one in which she had pre- 
sented herself at BHthedale. In both, there 
was something like the illusion which a 
great actress flings around her. 

" Have you given up Blithedale for ever?" 
I inquired. 

" Why should you think so?" asked she. 

" I cannot tell," answered I ; " except that 
it appears all like a dream that we were 
ever there together." 

" It is not so to me," said Zenobia. " I 
should think it a poor and meagre nature, 
that is capable of but one set of forms, and 
must convert all the past into a dream merely 
because the present happens to be imlike it. 
Why should we be content with our homely 
life of a few months past, to the exclusion 
of all other modes? It was good; but 
there are other lives as good, or better. 



zenobia's drawing-room. 109 

Not, you will understand, that I condemn 
those who give themselves up to it more en- 
tirely than I, for myself, should deem it wise 
to do.'* 

It irritated me, this self-complacent, con- 
descending, qualified approval and criticism 
of a system to which many individuals — 
perhaps as highly endowed as our gorgeous 
Zenobia — ^had contributed their all of earthly 
endeavour, and their loftiest aspirations. I 
determined to make proof if there were any 
spell that would exorcise her out of the part 
which she seemed to be acting. She should 
be compelled to give me a glimpse of some- 
thing true; soihe nature, some passion, no 
matter whether right or wrong, provided it 
were real. 

"Your allusion to that class of circum- 
scribed characters, who can live only in one 
mode of life," remarked I, coolly, " reminds 
me of our poor friend Hollingsworth. Pos- 



110 THS BUTHBIXAIJB BOMANGSL 

aibly he was in your thoughts when you 
qK>ke thus. Poor fdlow ! It is a pity that, 
by the fault of a narrow education, he should 
have so completely immolated himself to 
that one idea of his; especially as the 
slightest modicum of common sense would 
teach him its utter impraeticabihty. Now 
that I have returned into the world, and can 
look at his project from a distance, it re- 
quires quite all my real r^ard for thk re- 
spectable and well-intentioned man, to pre^ 
vent me laughing at him — as I find sociely 
at large does." 

Zenobia's eyes darted lightning ; her 
cheeks flushed; the vividness of her ex- 
pression was like the effect of a power&l 
light flaming up suddenly within her. My 
experiment had fully succeeded. She had 
shown me the true flesh and blopd of her 
heart, by thus involuntarily resenting my 
s%ht, pitying, half-kind, hal&scOTnfiil men- 




ZENOBIA's PBAWINChBOOlC 111 

tion of the man who was all in all with 
her. She herself probably felt this j for it 
was hardly a moment before she traiiquil- 
lised her uneven breath, and seemed as 
proud and self-possessed as ever. 

" I rather imagine," said she, quietly, 
"that your appreciation falls short of Mr. 
Hollingsworth*s just claims. Blind enthu- 
siasm, absorption in one idea, I grant, is 
generally ridiculous, and must be fatal to 
Ae r^ectability of an ordinary man ; it 
requires a very high and pow^ful character 
to make it otherwise. But a great man — 
as^ perhaps, you do not know — attains his 
normal condition only through the inspira- 
tion of one great idea. As a friend of 
Mr. Hollingsworth, and, at the same time> 
a calm observer, I must tell you that he 
seems to me such a man. But you are 
very pardonable for fancying him ridiculous* 



112 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

Doubtless, he is 80 — to you ! There can 
be no truer test of the noble and heroic, in 
any individual, than the d^ree in which 
he possesses the faculty of distinguishing 
heroism from absurdity." 

I dared make no retort to Zenobia's con- 
cluding apothegm. In truth, I admired her 
fidelity. It gave me a new sense of Hol- 
lingsworth's native power, to discover that 
his influence was no less potent with this 
beautiful woman, here, in the midst of arti- 
ficial life, than it had been at the foot of the 
grey rock, and among the wild birch-trees 
of the wood-path, when she so passionately 
pressed his hand against her heart. The 
great, rude, shaggy, swarthy man I And 
Zenobia loved him I 

"Did you bring Priscilla with you?" I 
resumed. " Do you know, I have sometimes 
fancied it not quite safe, considering the 



zsnobia's dbawing-boom. 113 

susceptibility of her temperament, that she 
should be so constantly within the sphere 
of a man like HoUingsworth. Such tender 
and delicate natures, among your sex, have 
often, I believe, a very adequate apprecia- 
tion of the heroic element in men. But 
then, again, I should suppose them as likely 
as any other women to make a reciprocal 
impression. HoUingsworth could hardly 
give his affections to a person capable of 
taking an independent stand, but only to 
one whom he might absorb into himself. 
He has certainly shown great tenderness for 
Priscilla." 

Zenobia had turned aside. But I caught 
the reflection of her face in the mirror, and 
saw that it was very pale — as pale, in her 
rich attire, as if a shroud were round her. 

** Priscilla is here," said she, her voice a 

« 

little lower than usual. "Have not you 
VOL. n. I 



114 THE BUTHSDALE BOHAMCB. 

learnt as much fix>m your cliamber-window? 
Would you like to see her ?" 

She made a step or two into the back 
drawing-room, and called, 

"Priscilla! Dear Prisdlla T 



I 



vn. 



THEY VANISH. 



Pmscilla immediately answered the sum- 
mons, and nmde her appearance through 
the door of the boudoir. 

I had conceived the idea, which I now 
recognised as a very foolish one, that Zeno- 
bia would have taken measures to debar me 
from an interview with this girl, between 
whom and herself there was so utter an 
opposition of their dearest interests, that, on 
one part or the other, a great grief, if not 
likewise a great wrong, seemed a matter of 
necessity. But, as Prisdlla was only a leaf 

i2 



116 THE BLITHEDALE ROMANCE. 

floating on the dark current of events, with- 
out influencing them by her own choice or 
plan — as she probably guessed not whither 
the stream was bearing her, nor perhaps 
even felt its inevitable movement — there 
could be no peril of her communicating to 
me any intelUgence with regard to Zenobia*s 
purposes. 

On perceiving me, she came forward with 
great quietude of manner ; and when I held 
out my hand, her own moved slightly to- 
wards it, as if attracted by a feeble degree 
of magnetism. 

*'I am glad to see you, my dear Priscilla," 
said I, holding her hand ; " but everything 
that I meet with, now-a-days, makes me 
wonder whether I am awake. You, espe- 
cially, have always seemed like a figure in a 
dream, and now more than ever." 

" 0, there is substance in these fingers of 
mine," she answered, giving my hand the 



THET VANISH. 117 

faintest possible pressure, and then taking 
away her own. "Why do you call me a 
dream? Zenobia is much more like one 
than I; she is so very, very beautiful! 
And, I suppose," added Priscilla, as if think- 
ing aloud, " everybody sees it, as I do." 

But, for my part, it was Priscilla's beauty, 
not Zenobia's, of which I was thmking at 
that moment. She was a person who could 
be quite obUterated, so far as beauty went, 
by anything unsuitable in her attire; her 
charm was not positive and material enough 
to bear up against a mistaken choice of 
colour, for instance, or fashion. It was 
safest, in her case, to attempt no art of 
dress; for it demanded the most perfect 
taste, or else the happiest accident in the 
world, to give her precisely the adornment 
which she needed. She was now dressed 
in pure white, set off with some kind of a 
gauzy fabric, which-»-as I bring up her figure 



118 THE BUTHEDALB BOMANGE. 

in my memory, with a faint gleam on her 
shadowy hair, and her dark eyes bent shyly 
on mine, through all the vanished yeaxs— 
seems to be floating about her like a misL 
I wondered what Zenobia meant by evolving 
so much loveliness out of this poor girL 
It was what few women could aflford to do ; 
for, as I looked from one to the other, the 
sheen and splendour of Zenobia's presence 
took nothing from Priscilla's softa: spell, if it 
might not rather be thought to add to it. 

"What do you think of her?" asked 
Zenobia. 

I could not understand the look of melan- 
<dioly kindness with which Zenobia regarded 
her. She advanced a step, and beckoning 
Priscilla near her, kissed her cheek j then, 
with a slight gesture of repulse, she moved 
to the other side of the room. I followed. 

" She is a wonderful creature," I said. 
^ Ever since she came among us, I have been 



THEY VANISH. 119 

dimly sensible of just this charm which you 
have brought out. But it was never ab- 
solutely viable till now. She is as lovely 
as a flower !" 

**Well, say so, if you like," answered 
Zenobia. "You are a poet, — at least, as 
poets go, now-a-days, — and must be allowed 
to make an opera-glass of your imagination, 
when you look at women. I wonder, in 
such Arcadian freedom of falling in love as 
we have lately eiijoyed, it never occurred 
to you to fall in love with Priscilla. In 
society, indeed, a genuine American never 
dreams of stepping across the inappreciable 
air-line which separates one class from 
another. But what was rank to the colonists 
of BUthedale ?" 

"There were other reasons," I replied, 
" why I should have demonstrated myself 
an ass, had I fallen in love with Priscilla. 



120 THE BLITHEDALE ROMANCE. 

By-the-by, has Hollingsworth ever seen her 
in this dress ?" 

" Why do you bring up his name at every 
turn ?" asked Zenobia, in an under tone, and 
with a malign look which wandered fix)m 
my face to Priscilla's. "You know not 
what you do ! It is dangerous, sir, believe 
me, to tamper thus with earnest human pas- 
sions, out of your own mere idleness, and for 
your sport. I will endure it no longer I 
Take care that it does not happen again ! 
I warn you !" 

" You partly wrong me, if not wholly," I 
responded. ^' It is an uncertain sense of some 
duty to perform, that brings my thoughts, 
and therefore my words, continually to that 
one point." 

" 0, this stale excuse of duty !" said Ze- 
nobia, in a whisper so full of scorn that it 
penetrated me like the hiss of a serpent. 



THEY VANISH. 121 

" I have often heaxd it before, from those 
who sought to interfere with me, and I know 
precisely what it signifies. Bigotry; self- 
conceit; an insolent curiosity ; a meddlesome 
temper ; a cold-blooded criticism, founded on 
a shallow interpretation of half-perceptions ; 
a monstrous scepticism in regard to any con- 
science or any wisdom, except one's own; a 
most irreverent propensity to thrust Provi- 
dence aside, and substitute one's self in its 
awful place ; — out of these, and other motives 
as miserable as these, comes your idea of 
duty I But, beware, sir ! With all your 
fancied acuteness, you step blindfold into 
these affairs. For any mischief that may 
follow your interference, I hold you respon- 
sible !" 

It was evident that, with but a Uttle 
further provocation, the lioness would turn 
to bay ; if, indeed, such were not her attitude 
abeady. I bowed, and, not very well know- 



122 THE BUTHEDALE BOMANGE. 

ing what else to do, was about to withdraw. 
But, glancing again towards Priscilla, who 
had retreated into a corner, there fell upon 
my heart an intolerable burthen of de- 
spondency, the purport of which I could 
not tell, but only felt it to bear reference to 
her. I approached her, and held out my 
hand; a gesture, however, to which she 
made no response. It was always one of 
her peculiarities that she seemed to shrink 
from even the most friendly touch. Unless it 
were Zenobia's or Hollingsworth's. Zenobia, 
all this while, stood watching us, but with a 
careless expression, as if it mattered very 
little what might pass. 

" Priscilla," I inquired, lowering my voice, 
" when do you go back to Blithedale ?" 

" Whenever they please to take me," said 
she. 

" Did you come away of yoxir own free 
wiH ?" I asked. 



THEY VANISH. 123 

" I am blown about like a leaf," she re- 
plied. ^^' I never have any free will." 

" Does Hollingsworth know that you are 
here?" said I. 

" He bade me come," answered Prisdlla. 

She looked at me, I thought, with an air 
of surprise, as if the idea were incompre- 
hensible that she should have taken this step 
without his agency. 

"What a gripe this man has laid upon 
her whole being !" muttered I, between my 
teeth. "Well, as Zenobia so kindly inti- 
mates, I have no more business here. I 
wash my hands of it all. On HoUings- 
worth's head be the consequences! Pris- 
cilla," I added, aloud, " I know not that ever 
we may meet again. Farewell I" 

As I spoke the word, a carriage had , 
rumbled along the street, and stopt before 
the house. The door-bell rang, and steps 
were immediately afterwards heard on the 



124 THE BUTHEDALE ROMANCE. 

staircase. Zenobia had thrown a shawl over 
her dress. 

"Mr. Coverdale/' said she, with cool 
courtesy,* " you will perhaps excuse us. We 
have an engagement, and are going out.^ 

"Whither?" I demanded. 

" Is not that a little more than you are 
entitled to inquire T said she, with a smile. 
" At all events, it does not suit me to tell 
you." 

The door of the drawing-room opened, 
and Westervelt appeared. I observed that 
he was elaborately dressed, as if for some 
grand entertainment. My dislike for this 
man was infinite. At that moment it 
amounted to nothing less than a creeping 
of the flesh, as when, feeling about in a 
dark place, one touches something cold and 
slimy, and questions what the secret hateful- 
ness may be. And still I could not but 
acknowledge that, for personal beauty, for 



THEY VANISH. 125 

polish of manner, for all that externally 
befits a gentleman, there was hardly another 
like him. After bowing to Zenobia, and 
graciously saluting Priscilla in her comer, 
he recognised me by a sUght but courteous 
inclination. 

" Come, Priscilla," said Zenobia ; " it is 
time. Mr. Coverdale, good evening." 

As Priscilla moved slowly forward, I met 
her in the middle of the drawing-room. 

" Priscilla," said I, in the hearing of them 
all, "do you know whither you are going?" 

" I do not know," she answered. 

" Is it wise to go, and is it your choice to 
go ?" I asked. " If not, I am your friend, 
and HoUingsworth's friend. Tell me so, at 
once." 

" Possibly," observed Wester velt, smiHng, 
" Priscilla sees in me an older friend than 
either Mr. Coverdale or Mr. HoUingsworth. 



1^ THE BUTHEDALE ROMANCE. 

I sihall willingly leave the matter at her 
option.'' 

While thus speaking, he made a gesture 
of kindly invitation, and Priscilla passed me, 
with the gliding movement of a sprite, and 
took his offered arm. He offered the other 
to Zenobia ; but she turned her proud and 
beautiful face upon him, with a look which 
— -judging from what I caught of it in prc^e 
— would undoubtedly have smitten the man 
dead, had he possessed any heart, or had 
this glance attained to it. It. seemed to 
rebound, however, from his courteous visage, 
like an arrow from polished steel. They 
all three descended the stairs ; and when I 
likewise reached the stxeet-door, the car- 
riage was already rolling away. 



VIII. 

AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE. 

Thus excluded from everybody's confi- 
dence, and attaining no further, by my most 
earnest study, than to an uncertain sense of 
something hidden from me, it would appear 
reasonable that I should have flung off all 
these alien perplexities. Obviously, my best 
course was to betake myself to new scenes. 
Here I was only an intruder. Elsewhere 
there might be circumstances in which I 
could establish a personal interest, and peo- 
ple who would respond, with a portion of 



128 THE BLITHEDALE ROMANCE. 

their sympathies, for so much as I should 
bestow of mine. 

Nevertheless, there occurred to me one 
other thing to be done. Remembering old 
Moodie, and his relationship with Priscilla, 
I determined to seek an interview, for the 
purpose of ascertaining whether the knot of 
affairs was as inextricable on that side as I 
found it on all others. Being tolerably well 
acquaiQted with the old man's haunts, I 
went, the next day, to the saloon of a cer- 
tain establishment about which he often 
lurked. It was a reputable place enough, 
affording good entertainment in the way of 
meat, drink, and fumigation ; and there, in 
my young and idle days and nights, when I 
was neither nice nor wise, I had often 
amused myself with watching the staid 
humours and sober jollities of the thirsty 
souls around me. 

At my first entrance, old Moodie was not 



AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE . 129 

there. The more patiently to await him, 
I lighted a cigar, and establishing myself in 
a corner, took a quiet, and, by sympathy, a 
boozy kind of pleasure in the customary life 
that was going forward. The saloon was 
fitted up with a good deal of taste. There 
were pictures on the walls^ and among them 
an oil-painting of a beefsteak, with such an 
admirable show of juicy tenderness, that the 
beholder sighed to think it merely visionary, 
and incapable of ever being put upon a 
gridiron. Another work of high art was 
the life-like representation of a noble sirloin ; 
another, the hind-quarters of a deer, retain- 
ing the hoofs and tawny fur ; another, 
the head and shoulders of a salmon ; and, 
still more exquisitely finished, a brace 
of canvas-back ducks, in which the mottled 
feathers were depicted with the accuracy 
of a daguerreotype. Some very hungry 
painter, I suppose, had wrought these sub- 

VOL. n. K 



130 THE BLITHEDALE ROMANCE. 

jects of still life, heightening his imagination 
with his appetite, and earning, it is to be 
hoped, the privilege of a daily dinner off 
whichever of his pictorial viands he liked 
best. Then, there was a fine old cheese, in 
which you could almost discern the mites ; 
and some sardines, on a small plate, very 
richly done, and looking as if oozy with the 
oil in which they had been smothered. All 
these things were so perfectly imitated, that 
you seemed to have the genuine article 
before you, and yet with an indescribable 
ideal charm ; it took away the grossness 
from what was fleshiest and fattest, and 
thus helped the life of man, even in its 
earthliest relations, to appear rich and noble, 
as well as warm, cheerful, and substantial. 
There were pictures, too, of gallant revellers 
— ^those of the old time — Flemish, appa- 
rently — with doublets and slashed sleeves — 
drinking their wine out of fantastic long- 
stemmed glasses ; quaffing joyously, quaffing 



AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE. 131 

for ever, with inaudible laughter and song, 
while the Champagne bubbled imuiortally 
against their mustaches, or the purple tide of 
Burgundy ran inexhaustibly down their 
throats. 

But, in an obscure comer of the saloon, 
there was a little picture — excellently done, 
moreover — of a ragged, bloated, New Eng- 
land toper, stretched out on a bench, in the 
heavy, apoplectic sleep of drunkenness. The 
death-in-life was too well portrayed. You 
smelt the fumy hquor that had brought on 
this syncope. Your only comfort lay in the 
forced reflection, that, real as he looked, the 
poor caitiff was but> imaginary — a bit of 
painted canvas, whom no delirium tremens, 
nor so much as a retributive headache, 
awaited, on the morrow. 

By this time, it being past eleven o'clock, 
the two barkeepers of the saloon were in 
pretty constant activity. One of these 

k2 



132 THE BLITHEDALB ROMANCE. 

young men had a rare faculty in the con- 
coction of gin-cocktails. It was a spectacle 
to behold, how, with a tumbler in each 
hand, he tossed the contents from one to the 
other. Never conveying it awry, nor spill- 
ing the least drop, he compelled the frothy 
liquor, as it seemed to me, to spout forth 
from one glass and descend into the other, 
in a great paraboUc curve, as well defined 
and calculable as a planet's orbit. He had 
a good forehead, with a particularly large 
development just above the eyebrows ; fine 
intellectual gifts, no doubt, which he had 
educated to this profitable endj being 
famous for nothing but gin»cocktails, and 
commanding a fair salary by his one accom- 
plishment. These cocktails, and other arti- 
ficial combinations of liquor (of which there 
were at least a score, though mostly, I 
suspect, fantastic in their differences), were 
much in favour with the younger class of 
customers, who, at fiirthest, had only reached 



AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE. 133 

the second stage of potatory life. The 
stanch old soakers, on the other hand — 
men who, if put on tap, would have yielded 
a red alcoholic liquor by way of blood — 
usually confined themselves to plain brandy- 
and- water, gin, or West India rum ; and, 
oftentimes, they prefaced their dram with 
some medicinal remark as to the wholesome- 
ness and stomachic qualities of that parti- 
cular drink. Two or three appeared to 
have bottles of their own behind the coun- 
ter ; and, winking one red eye to the bar- 
keeper, he forthwith produced these choicest 
and peculiar cordials, which it was a matter 
of great interest and favour, among their 
acquaintances, to obtain a sip of. 

Agreeably to the Yankee habit, under 
whatever circumstances, the deportment of 
all these good fellows, old or young, was 
decorous and thoroughly correct. They 
grew only the more sober in their cups; 



1S4 THS BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

there was no confused babble nor bois- 
terous laughter. They sucked in the joy- 
ous fire of the decanters, and kept it smoul- 
dering in their inmost recesses, with a bliss 
known only to the heart which it warmed 
and comforted. Their eyes twinkled a 
little, to be sure ; they hemmed vigorously 
after each glass, and laid a hand upon the 
pit of the stomach, as if the pleasant titiUa- 
tion- there was what constituted the tangible 
part of their enjoyment. In that spot, un- 
questionably, and not in the brain, was the 
acme of the whole affair. But the true pur- 
pose of their drinking— and one that wifl 
induce men to drink, or do something equi- 
valent, as long as this weary world shall en- 
dure — was the renewed youth and vigour, 
the brisk, cheerful sense of things present 
and to come, with which, for about a quar- 
ter of an hour, the dram permeated their 
systems. And when such quarters of an 



AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE. 135 

hour can be obtained in some mode less 
baneful to the great sum of a man's life — 
but, nevertheless, with a little spice of im- 
propriety, to give it a wild flavour — ^we 
temperance people may ring out our bells 
for victory ! 

The prettiest object in the saloon was a 
tiny fountain, which threw up its feathery 
jet through the counter, and sparkled down 
again into an oval basin, or lakelet, contain- 
ing several gold-fishes. There was a bed 
of bright sand at the bottom, strewn with 
coral and rock- work ; and the fishes went 
gleaming about, now turning up the sheen 
of a golden side, and now vanishing into 
the shadows of the water, like the fanciful 
thoughts that coquet with a poet in his 
dream. Never before, I imagine, did a 
company of water-drinkers remain so en- 
tirely uncontaminated by the bad example 
around them ; nor could I help wondering 



136 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

that it had not occurred to any freakish in- 
ebriate to empty a glass of liquor into their 
lakelet. What a delightful ide^I Who 
would not be a fish, if he could inhale 
jollity with the essential element of his ex- 
istence! 

I had began to despair of meeting old 
Hoodie, when, aU at once, I recognised his 
hand and arm protruding fix)m behind a 
screen that was set up for the accommoda- 
tion of bashful topers. As a matter of 
course, he had one of Priscilla's little purses, 
and was quietly insinuating it under the 
notice of a person who stood near. This 
was always old Hoodie's way. You hardly 
ever saw him advancing towards you, but 
became aware of his proximity without 
being able to guess how he had come thither. 
He glided about like a spirit, assuming 
visibility close to your elbow, offering his 
petty trifles of merchandise, remaining long 



AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE. 137 

enough for you to purchase, if so disposed, 
and then taking himself off, between two 
breaths, while you happened to be thinking 
of something else. 

By a sort of sympathetic impulse that 
often controlled me in those more impressible 
days of my life, I was induced to approach 
this old man in a mode as undemonstrative 
as his own. Thus, when, according to his 
custom, he was probably just about to vanish, 
he found me at his elbow. 

" Ahl" said he, with more emphasis than 
was usual with him. " It is Mr. Cover- 
dale !" 

" Yes, Mr. Moodie, your old acquaintance," 
answered I. " It is some time now since we 
ate our luncheon together at Blithedale, and 
a good deal longer since our little talk toge- 
ther at the street-comer." 

" That was a good while ago," said the 
old man. 



138 THE BLITHEDALE ROMAlSrCE. 

And he seemed inclined to say not a yrord 
more. His existence looked so colourless 
and torpid — so very faintly shadowed on the 
canvas of reality — that I was half afiraid 
lest he should altogether disappear, even 
while my eyes were fixed full upon his 
figure. He was certainly the wretchedest 
old ghost in the world, with his crazy hat, 
the dingy handkerchief about his throat, his 
suit of threadbare grey, and espedaUy that 
patch over his right eye, behind which he 
always seemed to be hiding himself. There 
was one method, however, of bringing him 
out into somewhat stronger relief. A glass 
of brandy would eflSect it. Perhaps the gen- 
tler influence of a bottle of claret might do 
the same. Nor could I think it a matter 
for the recording angel to write down against 
me, if — with my painful consciousness of the 
firost in this old man's blood, and the positive 
ice that had congealed about his heart — I 



AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE. 139 

should thaw him out, were it only for an 
hour, with the summer warmth of a little 
wine. What else could possibly be done 
for him? How else could he be imbued 
with energy enough to hope for a happier 
state hereafter ? How else be inspired to 
say his prayers? For there are states of 
our spiritual system when the throb of the 
soul's life is too faint and weak to render us 
capable of religious aspiration. 

" Mr. Moodie,'* said I, " shall we lunch 
together ? And would you like to drink a 
glass of wine ?" 

His one eye gleamed. He bowed; and 
it impressed me that he grew to be more of 
a man at once, either in anticipation of the 
wine, or as a grateftil response to my good 
feUowship in offering it. 

" With pleasure," he replied. 

The barkeeper, at my request, showed us 
into a private room, and soon afterwards set 



• ■• • ^ 



suit 

ahv 
Avas 
out ' 

of br 
tip 



/ 




AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE. 141 

he took courage, as it were, and uttered a 
feeble little laugh. "The flavour of this 
wine," added he, "and its perfume, still 
more than its taste, makes me remember 
that I was once a young man." 

"I wish, Mr. Moodie," suggested I — not 
that I greatly cared about it, however, but 
was only anxious to draw him into some 
talk about Priscilla and Zenobia — " I wish, 
while we sit ovei* our wine, you would 
favour me with a few of those youthful re- 
miniscences." 

"Ah," said he, shaking his head, "they 
might interest you more than you suppose. 
But I had better be silent, Mr. Coverdale. 
If this good wine — though claret, I suppose, 
is not apt to play such a trick — but if it 
should make my tongue run too freely, I 
could never look you in the face again." 

** You never did look me in the face, Mr. 



142 THE BLTTHEDALE BOMANCE. 

Moodie," I replied, "until this very mo- 
ment." 

" Ah 1" sighed old Moodie. 

It was wonderful, however, what an effect 
the mild grape-juice wrought upon him. It 
was not in the wine, but in the associations 
which it seemed to bring up. Instead of 
the mean, slouching, furtive, painfully de- 
pressed air of an old city vagabond, more 
like a grey kennel-rat than any other living 
thing, he began to take the aspect of a de- 
cayed gentleman. Even his garments — 
especially after I had myself quaffed a glass 
or two — looked less shabby than when we 
fii'st sat down. There was, by-and-by, a 
certain exuberance and elaborateness of ges- 
ture and manner, oddly in contrast with all 
that I had hitherto seen of him. Anon, 
with hardly any impulse from me, old 
Moodie began to talk. His communications 



AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE. 143 

referred exclusively to a long past and more 
fortunate period of his life, with only a few 
unavoidable allusions to the circumstances 
that had reduced him to his present state. 
But, having once got the clue, my subsequent 
researches acquainted me with the main 
facts of the following narrative; although, 
in writing it out, my pen has perhaps allowed 
itself a trifle of romantic and legendary 
licence, worthier of a small poet than of a 
grave biographer. 



IX. 



FAUNTLBBOT. 



FivE-AND-TWENTY yeoTs ago, at the epoch 
of this story, there dwelt in one of the 
Middle States a man whom we shall call 
Fauntleroy ; a man of wealth, and magnifi- 
cent tastes, and prodigal expenditure. His 
home might almost be styled a palace ; his 
habits, in the ordinary sense, princely. His 
whole being seemed to have crystallised 
itself into an external splendour, wherewith 
he glittered in the eyes of the world, and had 
no other life than upon this gaudy surface. 
He had married a lovely woman, whose 



FAUNTLEROY. 145 

nature was deeper than his own. But his 
affection for her, though it showed largely, 
was superficial, like all his other manifesta- 
tions and developments; he did not so truly 
keep this noble creature in his heart, as wear 
her beauty for the most brilliant ornament 
of his outward state. And there was bom 
to him a child, a beautiful daughter, whom 
he took firom the beneficent hand of God 
with no just sense of her immortal value, 
but as a man already rich in gems would 
receive another jewel. If he loved her, it 
was because she shone. 

After Fauntleroy had thus spent a few 
empty years, corruscating continually an un- 
natural light, the source of it — which was 
merely his gold — ^b^an to grow more shal- 
low, and finally became exhausted. He 
saw himself in imminent peril of losing all 
that had h^etofore distinguished him ; and, 
conscious of no innate worth to fall back 

VOL. II. L 



146 THE BLITHSDAUS ROMANCE. 

upon, he recoiled from this calamity, with 
the instinct of a soul shiinking from anni- 
hilation. To avoid it — ^wretched man 1 — or, 
rather to defer it, if but for a month, a day, 
or only to joxx^ure himself the life of a few 
breaths more amid the false glitter which 
was now less his own than ever — ^he made 
himself guilty of a crime. It was just the 
sort of crime, growing out of its artificial 
state, which society (imless it should change 
its entire constitution for this man's un- 
worthy sake) neither could nor ought to 
pardon. More safely might it pardon mur- 
der. Faimtleroy's guilt was discorered. He 
fled ; his wife perished, by the necessity of 
her innate nobleness, in its alliance with a 
being so ignoble ; and betwixt her mother's 
death and her father's ignominy, his daugh- 
ter was left worse than orphaned. 

There was no pursuit after Fauntleroy. 
His family connexions, who had great wealth. 



FAUNTLEROY. 147 

made socli arrangements with those whom 
he had attempted to wrong, as secured him 
from the retribution that would have over- 
taken an unfriended criminaL The wreck 
of his estate was divided among his credi- 
tors* His name, in a very brief space, was 
forgotten by the multitude who had passed 
it so diligently from mouth to mouth. Sel- 
dom, indeed, was it recalled, even by his 
closest former intimates. Nor could it have 
been otherwise. The man had laid no real 
touch oa any mortal's heart. Being a mere 
image^ an optical delusion,^ created by the 
sunshine of prosperity, it was his law to 
vanish into the shadow of the first intervening 
cloud. He seemed to leave no vacancy ; a 
phenomenon which, like many others that 
attended his bdef career, went far to prove 
the iUusiveness of his existence. 

Not, however, that the physical substance 
of Fauntleroy had literally melted into va- 

l2 



148 THE BUTHEDALE BOMANCE. 

pour. He had fled northward to the New 
England metropolis, and had taken up his 
abode, under another name, in a squalid 
street or court of the older portion of the 
city. There he dwelt among poverty- 
stricken wretches, smners, and forlorn good 
people, Irish, and whomsoever else were 
neediest. Many families were clustered in 
each house together, above stairs and below, 
in the little peaked garrets, and even in the 
dusky cellars. The house where Fauntleroy 
paid weekly rent for a chamber and a closet 
had been a stately habitation in its day. An 
old colonial governor had built it, and lived 
there, long ago, and held his levees* in a 
great room where now slept twenty Irish 
bedfellows ; and died in Fauntleroy's cham- 
ber, which his embroidered and white- 
wigged ghost still haunted. Tattered hang- 
ings, a marble hearth, traversed with many 
cracks and fissures, a richly-carved oaken 



FANUTLBEOY. 149 

mantelpiece, partly hacked away for kind- 
ling-stuff, a stuccoed ceiling, defaced with 
great, unsightly patches of the naked laths 
—such was the chamber's aspect, as if, with 
its splinters and rags of dirty splendour, it 
were a kind of practical gibe at this poor, 
ruined man of show. 

At first, and at irregular intervals, his 
relatives allowed Fauntleroy a little pittance 
to sustain life ; not from any love, perhaps, 
but lest poverty should compel him, by new 
offences, to add more shame to that with 
which he had already stained them. But 
he showed no tendency to further guilt. 
His character appeared to have been radi- 
cally changed (as, indeed, from its shallow- 
ness, it well might) by his miserable fate ; 
or, it may be, the traits now seen in him 
were portions of the same character, pre- 
senting itself in another phase. Instead of 
any longer seeking to live in the sight 



150 THE BLrraEDALE B0MA17CE. 

of the world, his impulse was to shiink 
into the nearest obscurity, and to be unseen 
of men, were it possible, even while standing 
before their eyes. He had no pride j it was 
all trodden in the dust. No ostentation; 
for how could it survive, when there was 
nothing left of Fauntleroy, save penury and 
shame! His very gait demonstrated that 
he would gladly have faded out of view, and 
have crept about invisibly, for the sake of 
sheltering himself from the irksomeness of 
a human glance. Hardly, it was averred, 
within the memory of those who knew him 
now, had he the hardihood to show his fiill 
front to the world. He skulked in comers, 
and crept about in a sort of noonday twi- 
light, making himself grey and misty, at all 
hours, with his morbid intolerance of sun- 
shine. 

In his torpid despair, however, he had 
done an act which that condition of the 



Ik 



VAUNTLBROT. 151 

spirit seems to prompt almost as often as 
prosperity and hope. Fauntleroy was again 
married. He had taken to wife a forlorn, 
meek-spirited, feeble young woman, a seam- 
stress, whom he found dwelling with her 
mother in a contiguous chamber of the old 
gubernatorial residence. This poor phantom 
— as the beautiftil and noble companion of 
his former life had done— brought him a 
daughter. And sometimes, as from one 
dream into another, Fauntleroy looked forth 
out of his present grimy environment into 
that past magnificence, and wondered whe- 
ther the grandee of yesterday or the pauper 
of to-day were real. But, in my mind, the 
one and the other were alike impalpable. 
In truth, it was Fauntleroy's fatality to 
behold whatever he touched dissolve. After 
a few years, his second wife (dim shadow 
that she had always been) faded finally out 
of the world, and left Fauntleroy to deal as 



152 THE BUTHEDALB B0MA17CE. 

he might with thfeir pale and nervous child. 
And, by this time, among his distant rela- 
tives — with whom he had grown a weary 
thought, linked with contagious infamy, and 
which they were only too willing to get rid 
of — he was himself supposed to be no more. 
The yoimger child, like his elder one, 
might be considered as the true ofl&pring of 
both parents, and as the reflection of their 
state. She was a tremulous little creature, 
shrinking involuntarily from all mankind, 
but in timidity, and no sour repugnance. 
There was a lack of human substance in 
her ; it seemed as if, were she to stand up 
in a sunbeam, it would pass right through 
her figure, and trace out the cracked and 
dusty window-panes upon the naked floor. 
But, nevertheless, the poor child had a 
heart; and from her mother's gentle cha- 
racter she had inherited a profound and 
still capacity of affection. And so her life 



FAUNTLEBOT. 153 

was one of love. She bestowed it partly 
on her father, but in greater part on an idea. 
For Fauntleroy, as they sat by their cheer- 
less fireside — ^which was no fireside, in truth, 
but only a rusty stove — had often talked to 
the little girl about his former wealth, the 
noble loveliness of his first wife, and the 
beautiftd child whom she had given him. 
Instead of the fidry tales which other 
parents tell, he told Priscilla this. And, 
out of the loneliness of her sad little exist- 
ence, Priscilla's love grew, and tended up- 
ward, find twined itself perseveringly around 
this unseen sister ; as a grape-vine might 
strive to clamber out of a gloomy hollow 
among the rocks, and embrace a young tree 
standing in the simny warmth above. It 
was almost like worship, both in its earnest- 
ness and its humility ; nor was it the less 
humble— though the more earnest— because 
Priscilla could claim human kindred with 



154 THE BLirHBDALB B0MA17CE. 

the being whom she so devoutly loved. As 
with worship, too, it gave her soul the re- 
freshment of a purer atmosphere. Save for 
this singular, this melancholy, and yet beauti- 
ful affection, the child could hardly have 
lived; or, had she lived, with a heart 
shrunken for lack of any sentiment to fiU 
it, she must have yielded to the barren 
miseries of her position, and have grown to 
womanhood characterless and worthless. 
But now, amid all the sombre coarseness 
of her father's outward Ufe, and of her own, 
Priscilla had a higher and imaginative life 
within. Some faint gleam thereof was often 
visible upon her face. It was as if, in her 
spiritual visits to her brilliant sister, a por- 
tion of the latter's brightness had permeated 
our dim Priscilla, and still lingered, shedding 
a faint illumination through the cheerless 
chamber, after she came back. 

As the child grew up, so paUid and so 



JAUNTLEROT. 155 

slender, and with much unaccountable ner- 
vousness, and all the weaknesses of neg- 
lected infancy still haunting her, the gross 
and simple neighbours whispered strange 
things about Prisdlla. The big, red, 
Irish matrons, whose innumerable progeny 
swanned out of the adjacent doors, used to 
mock at the pale, western child. They 
£mcied — or, at least, aflirmed it, between 
jest and earnest — ^that she was not so solid 
flesh and blood as other children, but mixed 
largely with a thinner element. They called 
her ghost-child, and said that she could 
indeed vanish when she pleased, but could 
never, in her densest moments, make her- 
self quite visible. The sun, at mid-day, 
would shine through her ; in the first grey 
of the twilight, she lost all the distinctness 
of her outline; and, if you followed the 
dim thing into a dark comer, behold ! she 
was not there. And it was true that Pris- 



156 THE BLITHEDALE BOHANCfi. 

cilia had strange ways ; strange ways, and 
stranger words, when she uttered any words 
at all. Never stirring out of the old gover- 
nor's dusky house, she sometimes talked of 
distant places and splendid rooms, as if |he 
had just left them. Hidden things were 
visible to her (at least, so the people in- 
ferred £rom obscure hints escaping unawares 
out of her mouth), and silence was audible. 
And in all the world there was nothing so 
difficult to be endured, by those who had 
any dark secret to conceal, as the glance of 
Prisdlla's timid and melancholy eyes. 

Her peculiarities were the theme of con- 
tinual gossip among the other inhabitants of 
the gubernatorial mansion. The rumour 
spread thence into a wider circle. Those 
who knew old Moodie, as he was now called, 
used often to jeer him, at the very street- 
comers, about his daughter's gift of second 
sight and prophecy. It was a period wlien 




FAUNTLEROY. 157 

science (though mostly through its empirical 
professors) was bringing forward, anew, a 
hoard of facts and imperfect theories, that 
had partially won credence in elder times, 
but which modem scepticism had swept 
away as rubbish. These things were now 
tossed up again, out of the surging ocean of 
human thought and experience. The story 
of Priscilla's preternatural manifestations, 
therefore, attracted a kind of notice of which 
it would have been deemed wholly unwor- 
thy a few years earlier. One day, a gentle- 
man ascended the creaking staircase, and 
inquired which was old Hoodie's chamber- 
door. And, several times, he came again. 
He was a marvellously handsome man — 
still youthful, too, and fashionably dressed. 
Except that Priscilla, in those days, had no 
beauty, and, in the languor of her existence, 
had not yet blossomed into womanhood, 
there would have been rich food for scandal 



158 THE BUTHEDALB BOMANCE. 

in these visits ; for the girl was unquestion- 
ably their sole object, although her father 
was supposed always to be present But, 
it must likewise be added, there was some- 
thing about Friscilla that calumny could 
not meddle with ; and thus &r was she 
privileged, either by the preponderance of 
what was spiritual, or the thin and watery 
blood that left her cheek so pallid. 

Yet, if the busy tongues of the naghbour- 
hood spared Priscilla in one way, they made 
themselves amends by renewed and wilder 
babble on another score. They averred that 
the strange gentleman was a wizard, and that 
he had taken advantage of Priscilla's lack of 
earthly substance to subject her to himself 
as his familiar spirit, through whose medium 
he gained cognisance of whatever happened, 
in regions near or remote. The boundaries 
of his power were defined by the verge of 
the pit of Tartarus on the one hand, and the 



FAUNTLEROY. 159 

third sphere of the celestial world on the 
other. Again, they declared their suspicion 
that the wizard, with aU his show of manly 
beauty, was really an aged and wizened 
figure, or else that his semblance of a human 
bod}^ was only a necromantic, or perhaps a 
mechanical contrivance, in which a demon 
walked about. In proof of it, however, they 
conld merely instance a gold band around his 
upper teeth, which had once been visible to 
several old women, when he smiled at them 
fix>m the top of the governor's staircase. Of 
course this was all absurdity, or mostly so. 
But, after every possible deduction, there 
remained certain very mysterious points 
about the stranger's character, as well as the 
connexion that he established with Prisdlla. 
Its nature at that period was even less 
imderstood than now, when miracles of this 
kind have grown so absolutely stale, that I 



160 THE BLTTHEDALE BOMANCE. 

would gladly, if the trutli allowed, dismiss 
the whole matter from my narrative. 

We must now glance backward, in quest 
of the beautiful daughter of Faimtleroj^s 
prosperity. What had become of her? 
Fauntleroy's only brother, a bachelor, and 
with no other relative so near, had adopted 
the forsaken child. She grew up in affluence, 
with native graces clustering luxuriantly 
about her. In her triumphant progress to- 
wards womanhood, she was adorned with 
every variety of feminine accomplishment. 
But she lacked a mother's care. With no 
adequate control, on any hand (for a man, 
however stern, however wise, can never 
sway and guide a female child), her charac- 
ter was left to shape itself. There was good 
in it, and evil. Passionate, self-willed, and 
imperious, she had a warm and generous 
nature; showing the richness of the soil, 



FAUNTLEROY. 161 

however, chiefly by the weeds that flourished 
in it, and choked up the herbs of grace. In 
her girlhood her uncle died. As Fauntleroy 
was supposed to be likewise dead, and no 
other heir was known to exist, his wealth 
devolved on her, although, dying suddenly, 
the uncle left no will. After his death, there 
were obscure passages in Zenobia's history. 
There were whispers of an attachment, and 
even a secret marriage, with a fascinating 
and accomplished but unprincipled young 
man. The incidents and appearances, how- 
ever, which led to this surmise, soon passed 
away, and were forgotten. 

Nor was her reputation seriously affected 
by the report. In fact, so great was her 
native power and influence, and such seemed 
the careless purity of her nature, that what- 
ever Zenobia did was generally acknowledged 
as right for her to do. The world never 
criticised her so harshly as it does most 

VOL. n. M 



162 THE BLTTHEDALE BOMANCE. 

women who transcend its rules. It almost 
yielded its assent, when it beheld her stepping 
out of the common path, and asserting the 
more extensive privil^es of her sex, both 
theoretically and by her practice. The 
sphere of ordinary womanhood was felt to be 
narrower than her development required. 

A portion of Zenobia's more recent life is 
told in the foregoing pages. Partly in ear- 
nest—and^ I imagine, as was her disposition, 
half in a proud jest, or in a kind of reckless- 
ness that had grown upon her, out of some 
hidden grief — she had given her countenance, 
and promised liberal pecimiary aid, to our 
experiment of a better social state. And 
Priscilla followed her to Blithedale. The sole 
bliss of her life had been a dream of this 
beautiful sister, who had never so much as 
known of her existence. By this time, too, 
the poor girl was enthralled in an intolerable 
bondage, from which she must either free 



FAUNTLEBOT. 163 

herself or perish. She deemed herself safest 
near Zenobia, into whose large heart -she 
hoped to nestle. 

One evening, months after Prisdlla's de- 
parture, when. Moodie (or shall we call him 
Faunderoy?) was sitting alone in the state- 
chamber of the old governor, there came 
footsteps up the staircase. There was a 
pause on the landing-place. A lady's musical 
yet haughty accents were heard making an 
inquiry from some denizen of the house, who 
had thrust a head out of a contiguous cham- 
ber. There was then a knock at Hoodie's 
door. 

" C<»ne in l" said he. 

And Zenobia entered. The details of the 
interview that followed being unknown to 
me — awhile, notwithstanding, it would be a 
pity quite to lose the picturesqueness of the 
situation — I shall attempt to sketch it, mainly 
from fancy, although with some general 

m2 



164 THE BUTHEDALE BOMANCE. 

grounds of surmise in regard to the old 
man's feelings. 

She gazed wonderingly at the dismal 
chamber. Dismal to her, who beheld it only 
for an instant; and how much more so to 
him, into whose brain each bare spot on the 
ceiling, every tatter of the paper-hangings, 
and all the splintered carvings of the mantel- 
piece, seen wearily through long years, had 
worn their several prints! Inexpressibly 
miserable is this familiarity with objects that 
have been from the first disgustful. 

" I have received a strange message," said 
Zenobia, after a moment's silence, " request- 
ing, or rather enjoining it upon me, to come 
hither. Kather from curiosity than any 
other motive — and because, though a woman, 
I have not all the timidity of one — I have 
complied. Can it be you, sir, who thus sum- 
moned me ?" 

" It was," answered Moodie. 



FAUNTLEROY. 165 

" And what was your purpose ?" she con^ 
tinued. " You require charity, perhaps ? lu 
that case, the message might have been more 
fitly worded. But you are old and poor, and 
age and poverty should be allowed their 
privileges. Tell me, therefore, to what extent 
you need my aid." 

" Put up your purse," said the sup- 
posed mendicant, with an inexplicable smile. 
"Keep it — keep all your wealth — ^until I 
demand it aU, or none ! My message had 
no such end in view. You are beautiful, 
they tell me ; and I desired to look at you." 

He took the one lamp that showed the 
discomfort and sordidness of his abode, and 
approaching Zenobia, held it up, so as to 
gain the more perfect view of her, from top 
to toe. So obscure was the chamber, that 
you could see the reflection of her diamonds 
thrown upon the dingy wall, and flickering 
with the rise and fall of Zenobia's breath. 



166 THE BUTHEDALE BOMANCE. 

It was the splendour of those jewels on her 
neck, like lamps that bum before some 6ar 
temple, and the jewelled flower in her hair, 
more than the murky, yellow light, that 
helped him to see her beauty. But he 
beheld it, and grew proud at heart; his 
own figure, in spite of his mean habiliments, 
assumed an air of state and grandeur^ 

" It is well," cried old Moodie. " E]eep 
your we^th- You are right worthy of it. 
Keep it, therefore ; but with one condition 
only." 

Zenobia thought the old man beside him- 
self, and was moved with pity* 

" Have you none to care for you ?" asked 
she. "No daughter? — no kind-hearted 
neighbour? — no means of procuring the 
attendance which you need ? Tell me, once 
agaio, can I do nothing for you ?" 

" Nothing," he replied. " I have beheld 
what I wished. Now leave me. Linger 



PAUNTLEBOY. 167 

not a moment longer, or I may be tempted 
to say what would bring a cloud over that 
queenly brow. Keep all your wealth, but 
with only this one condition : Be kind — be 
no less kind than sisters are — ^to my poor 
PrisciUa 1" 

And, it may be, after 2Jenobia withdrew, 
Fauntleroy paced his gloomy chamber, and 
communed with himself as follows; — or, at 
all events, it is the only solution which I 
can offer of the enigma presented in his 
character : 

"I am unchanged — the same man as of 
yore I" said he. '' True, my brother's 
wealth — ^he dying intestate — ^is legally my 
own. I know it ; yet, of my own choice, I 
live a b^gar, and go meanly clad, and hide 
myself behind a forgotten ignominy. Looks 
this like ostentation ? Ah ! but in Zenobia 
I live again 1 Beholding her, so beautiful 
— so fit to be adorned with all imaginable 



168 THE BLTTHEDALE BOICANCE. 

splendour of outward state — the cursed 
vanity, which, half a lifetime since, dropt 
off like tatters of once gaudy apparel firom 
my debased and ruined person, is all re- 
newed for her sake. Were I to reappear 
my shame would go with me firom darkness 
into daylight* Zenobia has the splendour, 
and not the shame. Let the world admire 
her, and be dazzled by her, the brilliant 
child of my prosperity! It is Fauntleroy 
that still shines through her !" 

But then, perhaps, another thought oc- 
curred to him. 

" My poor Priscilla ! And am I just to 
her, in surrendering all to this beautifiil 
Zenobia? Priscilla I I love her best — ^I 
love her only — ^but with shame, not pride. 
So dim, so pallid, so shrinking — the daugh- 
ter of my long calamity ! Wealth were but 
a mockery in Priscilla's hands. What is its 
u se, except to fling a golden radiance around 



PAUNTLBBOY. 169 

those who grasp it ? Yet let Zenobia take 
heed I Priscilla shall have no wrong !" 

But, while the man of show thus medi- 
tated — that very evening, so far as I can 
adjust the dates of these strange incidents — 
Priscilla — poor, pallid jflower ! — ^was either 
snatched from Zenobia's hand, or flung wil- 
fully away 1 



X. 

A VILLAGE-HALL. 

Well, I betook myself away, and wan- 
dered up and down, like an exorcised spirit 
that had been driven from its old haunts 
after a mighty struggle. It takes down the 
solitary pride of man, beyond most other 
things, to find the impracticability of fling- 
ing aside affections that have grown irksome. 
The bands that were silken once are apt to 
become iron fetters when we desire to shake 
them off. Our souls, after all, are not our 
own. We convey a property in them to 
those with whom we associate ; but to what 



A TILLAGE-HALL. 171 

extent can never be known, until we feel 
the tug, the agony, of our abortive eflfort to 
resume an exclusive sway over ourselves. 
Thus, in aU the weeks of my absence, my 
thoughts continually reverted back, brooding 
over .the by-gone months, and bringing up 
incidents that seemed hardly to have left a 
trace of themselves in their passage. I spent 
painful hours in recalling these trifles, and 
tendmng tbem more misty and unsubstan- 
tial than at first by the quantity of specula- 
tive musing thus kneaded in with them. 
Hollingsworth, Zenobia, Priscilla I These 
three had absorbed my life into themselves. 
Together with an inexpressible longing to 
know their fortunes, there was likewise a 
morbid resentment of my own pain, and a 
stubborn reluctance to come again within 
their sphere. 

All that I learned of them, therefore, was 
comprised in a few brief and pungent squibs. 



172 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

such as the newspapers were then in the 
habit of bestowing on our Socialist enter^ 
prise. There was one paragraph, which, if 
I rightly guessed its purport, bore reference 
to Zenobia, but was too darkly hinted to 
convey even thus much of certainty. Hol- 
lingsworth, too, with his philanthropic pro- 
ject, afforded the penny-a-liners a theme for 
some savage and bloody-minded jokes ; and, 
considerably to my surprise, they affected 
me with as much indignation as if we had still 
been friends. 

Thus passed several weeks; time long 
enough for my brown and toil-hardened 
hands to reaccustom themselves to gloves. 
Old habits, such as were merely external, 
retxurned upon me with wonderful prompti- 
tude. My superficial talk, too, assumed 
altogether a worldly tone. Meeting former 
acquaintances, who showed themselves in- 
cUned to ridicule my heroic devotion to the 



A VILLAGB-HALL. 173 

cause of human welfare, I spoke of the 
recent phase of my life as indeed fair matter 
for a jest. But I also gave them to under- 
stand that it was, at most, only an experi- 
ment, on which I had staked no valuable 
amount of hope or fear. It had enabled 
me to pass the summer in a novel and 
agreeable way, had afforded me some gro- 
tesque specimens of artificial simplicity, and 
could not, therefore, so far as I was con- 
cerned, be reckoned a failure. In no one 
instance, however, did I voluntarily speak 
of my three fciends. They dwelt in a pro- 
founder region. The more I consider my- 
self as I then was, the more do I recognise 
how deeply my connexion with those three 
had affected all my being. 

As it was already the epoch of annihilated 
space, I might, in the time I was away from 
Blithedale, have snatched a glimpse at Eng- 
land, and been back again. But my wan- 



174 THE BLTTHEDALE BOMANCE. 

derings were confined within a very limited 
sphere. I hopped and fluttered, Hke a bird 
with a string about its 1^, gyrating round a 
small circumference, and keeping up a rest- 
less activity to no purpose. Thus it was 
still in our funiliar Massachusetts — in oae of 
its white country-villages — that I must next 
particularise an incident. 

The scene was one of those lyceum-halls, 
of which almost every village has now its 
own, dedicated to that sober and pallid, or 
rather drab-coloured, mode of winter-even- 
ing entertainment, the lecture. Of late 
years, this has come strangely into vogue, 

when the natural tendency of things would 
seem to be to substitute lettered for oral 

methods of addressing the public. But, in 

halls like this, besides the winter course of 

lectures, there is a rich and varied series of 

other exhibitions. Hither comes the ven- 

triloquist, with all his mysterious tongues ; 



A ynXAGE-HALL. 175 

the thaumaturgist, too, witli his miraculous 
transformations of plates, doves, and rings, 
his pancakes smoking in your hat, and his 
cellar of choice Uquors represented in one 
small bottle. Here, also, the itinerant pro- 
fessor instructs separate classes of ladies and 
gentlemen in physiology, and demonstrates 
his lessons by the aid of real skeletons, and 
mannikins in wax, from Paris. Here is to 
be heard the choir of Ethiopian melodists, 
and to be seen the diorama of Moscow or 
Bunker Hill, or the moving panorama of the 
Chinese walL Here is displayed the mu- 
seimi of vrax figures, illustrating the wide 
cathohcism of earthly renown, by mixing 
up heroes and statesmen, the pope and the 
Mormon prophet, kings, queens, murderers, 
and beautiful ladies j every sort of person, 
in short, except authors, of whom I never 
beheld even the most femoms done in wax. 
And here, in this many-purposed hall (unless 



176 THE BUTHEDAUS BOMANCE. 

the select men of the village chance to have 
more than their share of the Puritanism 
which, however diversified with later patch- 
work, still gives its prevailing tint to New 
England character), here the company of 
strolling players sets up its little stage, 
and claims patronage for the Intimate 
drama. 

But, on the autumnal evening which I 
speak of, a number of printed handbills- 
stuck up in the bar-room, and on the sign- 
post of the hotel, and on the meeting-house 
porch, and distributed largely through the 
village— had promised the inhabitants an 
interview with that celebrated and hitherto 
inexplicable phenomenon, the Veiled Lady ! 

The hall was fitted up with an amphi- 
theatrical descent of seats towards a platform, 
on which stood a desk, two lights, a stool, 
and a capacious antique chair. The audience 
was of a generally decent and respectable 



A VILLAGE-HALL. 177 

character: old farmers, in their Sunday black 
coats, with shrewd, hard, sun-dried faces, 
and a cynical humour, oftener than any 
other expression, in their eyes; pretty girls, 
in many-coloured attire; pretty young men 
— ^the schoolmaster, the lawyer or student 
at law, the shopkeeper — all looking rather 
suburban than rural. In these days, there 
is absolutely no rusticity, except when the 
actual labour of the soil leaves its earth- 
mould on the person. There was likewise 
a considerable proportion of young and 
middle-aged women, many of them stern in 
feature, with marked foreheads, and a very 
definite line of eyebrow ; a type of woman- 
hood in which a bold intellectual develop- 
ment seems to be keeping pace with the 
progressive delicacy of the physical consti- 
tution. Of all these people I took note, at 
first, according to my custom. But I ceased 
to do so the moment that my eyes fell on an 

VOL. n. N 



178 THE BUTHEDALE BOMANCE. 

individual who sat two or three seats below 
me, immovable, apparently deep in thought, 
with his back, of course, towards me, and 
his face turned steadfastly upon the plat- 
form. 

After sittmg a while in contemplation of 
this person's famiUar contour, I was irre- 
sistibly moved to step over the intervenii^ 
benches, lay my hand on his shoulder, put 
my mouth close to his ear, and address him 
in a sepulchral, melodramatic whisper : 

'' Hollingsworth ! where have you left 
Zenobia ?" 

His nerves, however, were proof agamst 
my attack. He turned half aroimd, and 
looked me in the face with great, sad eyes, 
in which there was neither kindness nor 
resentment, nor any perceptible surprise. 

" Zenobia, when I last saw her," he an- 
swered, " was at Blithedale." 

He said no more. But there was a great 



A VILLAGE-HALL* 179 

deal of talk going on near me, among a knot 
of people who might be considered as repre- 
senting the mysticism, or rather the mystic 
sensuality, of this singular age. The nature 
of the exhibition that was about to take 
place had probably given the turn to their 
conversation. 

I heard, from a pale man in blue spoc- 
tacles, some stranger stories than ever were 
written in a romance ; told, too, with a 
simple, unimaginative steadfastness, which 
was terribly eflSicacious in compellii^ the 
auditor to receive them into the category of 
established facts. He cited instances of the 
miraculous power of one human being over 
the will and passions of another; insomuch 
that settled grief was but a shadow beneath 
the influence of a man possessing this potency, 
and the strong love of years melted away 
like a vapour. At the bidding of one of 
these wizards, the maiden, with her lover's 

n2 



180 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

kiss Still burning on her lips, would turn 
from Mm with icy indifference ; the newly- 
made widow would dig up her buried heart 
out of her young husband's grave before 
the sods had taken root upon it ; a mother, 
with her babe's milk in her bosom, would 
thrust away her child. Human character' 
was but soft wax in his hands ; and guilt, 
or virtue, only the forms into which he 
should see fit to mould it. The religious 
sentiment was a flame which he could blow 
up with his breath, or a spark that he could 
utterly extinguish. It is imutterable, the 
horror and disgust with which I listened, 
and saw that, if these things were to be 
believed, the individual soul was virtually 
annihilated, and all that is sweet and pure 
in our present life debased, and that the idea 
of man's eternal responsibility was made ridi- 
culous, and immortality rendered at once 
impossible, and not worth acceptance. But 



A VILLAGE-HALL. 181 

1 would have perished on the spot, sooner 
than beUeve it. 

The epoch of rapping spirits, and all the 
wonders that have followed in their train — 
such as tables upset by invisible agencies, 
bells self-tolled at funerals, and ghostly 
music performed on jewsharps — had not yet 
arrived. Alas, my countrymen, methinks 
we have fallen on an evil age ! If these 
phenomena have not humbug at the bottom, 
so much the worse for us. What can they 
indicate, in a spiritual way, except that the 
soul of man is descending to a lower point 
than it has ever before reached while incar- 
nate ? We are pursuing a downward course 
in the eternal march, and thus bring our- 
selves into the same range with beings whom 
death, in requital of their gross and evil 
lives, has degraded below humanity ! To 
hold intercourse with spirits of this order, 
we must stoop and grovel in some element 



182 THE BUTHEDALE ROMANCE. 

more vile than earthly dust. These goblins, 
if they exist at all, are but the shadows of 
past mortality, outcasts, mere refuse-stuff, 
adjudged unworthy of the eternal world, 
and, on the most favourable suppositicMi, 
dwindling gradually into nothingness. The 
less we have to say to them the better, lest 
we share their fate ! 

The audience now began to be impatient; 
they signified their demre for the entertain- 
ment to commence by thump of sticks and 
stamp of boot-heels. Nor was it a great 
while longer before, in response to their 
call, there appeared a bearded personage in 
oriental robes, looking Uke one of the en- 
chanters of the Arabian Nights. He came 
upon the platform from a side-door, saluted 
the spectators, not with a salaam, but a bow, 
took his station at the desk, and first blow- 
ing his nose with a white handkerchief, pre- 
pared to speak. The environment of the 



A VILLAGE-HALL. 183 

homely viUage-hall, and the absence of many- 
ingenious contrivances of stage-effect with 
which the exhibition had heretofore been 
set ofl^ seemed to bring the artifice of this 
character more openly upon the surfece. 
No sooner did I behold the bearded en- 
chanter, than, laying my hand again on 
HoUingsworth's shoulder, I whispered in his 
ear, 

" Do you know him ?" 

*^I never saw the man before," he mut- 
tered, without turning his head. 

But I had seen him three times already. 
Once, on occasion of my first visit to the 
Veiled Lady ; a second time, in the wood- 
path at Blithedale ; and lastly, in Zenobia's 
drawing-room. It was Westervelt. A quick 
association of ideas made me shudder fi:om 
head to foot ; and again, hke an evil spirit, 
bringing up reminiscences of a man's sins, I , 
whispered a question in HoUingsworth's ear, 



] 84 THE BLITHEDALE BOMAKCE. 

" What have you done with Prisdlla ?'* 
He gave a convulsive start, as if I had 
thrust a knife into him, writhed himself 
roimd on his seat, glared fiercely into my 
eyes, but answered not a word. 

The Professor began his discourse, ex- 
planatory of the psychological phenomena, 
as he termed them, which it was his purpose 
to exhibit to the spectators. There remains 
no very distinct impression of it on my 
memory. It was eloquent, ingenious, plau- 
sible, with a delusive show of spirituality, 
yet really imbued throughout with a cold 
and dead materialism. I shivered, as at a 
current of chill air issuing out of a sepul- 
chral vault, and bringing the smell of cor- 
ruption along with it. He spoke of a new 
era that was dawning upon the world ; an 
era that would link soul to soul, and the 
present life to what we call futurity, with a 
closeness that should finally convert both 



A VILLAGE-HALL. 185 

worlds into one great, mutually-conscious 
brotherhood. He described (in a strange, 
philosophical guise, with terms of art, as 
if it were a matter of chemical discovery) 
the agency by which this mighty result was 
to be effected ; nor would it have surprised 
me, had he pretended to hold up a portion 
of his universally pervasive fluid, as he 
affirmed it to be, in a glass phial. 

At the close of his exordium, the Pro- 
fessor beckoned with his hand — once, twice, 
thrice — and a figure came gliding upon the 
platform, enveloped in a long veil of silvery 
whiteness. It fell about her like the tex- 
ture of a summer cloud, with a kind of 
vagueness, so that the outline of the form 
beneath it could not be accurately discerned. 
But the movement of the Veiled Lady was 
graceful, free, and unembarrassed, like that 
of a person accustomed to be the spectacle 
of thousands ; or, possibly, a blindfold pri- 



i 



186 THE BLTTHEDALE BOMAKCE. 

soner within the sphere with which this 
dark earthly magician had surrounded her, 
she was wholly unconscious of being the 
central object to all those straining eyes. 

Pliant to his gesture (which had even an 
obsequious courtesy, but at the same time a 
remarkable decisiveness), the figure placed 
itself in the great chair. Sitting there, in such 
visible obscurity, it was perhaps as much 
like the actual presence of a disembodied 
spirit as anything that stage trickery could 
devise. The hushed breathing of the spec- 
tators proved how high- wrought were their 
anticipations of the wonders to be performed 
through the medium of this incomprehen- 
sible creature. I, too, was in breathless 
suspense, but with a £ar different presenti- 
ment of some strange event at hand. 

'' You see before you the Veiled Lady," 
said the bearded Professor, advancing to 
the verge of the platform. " By the agency 



% 



A VlLLAGE-flALL. 187 

of which I have just spoken, she is at this 
moment in commimion with the spiritual 
world. That silvery veil is, in one sense, 
an enchantment, having been dipped, as it 
were, •and essentially imbued, through the 
potency of my art, with the fluid mediimi 
of spirits. Slight and ethereal as it seems, 
the limitations of time and space have no 
existence within its folds. This hall — ^these 
hundreds of faces, encompassing her within 
so narrow an amphitheatre^ — are of thinner 
substance, in her view, than the airiest 
vapour that the clouds are made o£ She 
beholds the Absolute I" 

As preliminary to other and far more 
wonderful psychological experiments, the ex- 
hibitor suggested that some of his auditors 
should endeavour to make the Veiled Lady 
sensible of their presence by such methods — 
provided only no touch were laid upon her 
person — as they might deem best adapted to 



188 THE BLTTHSDALE BOMANCE. 

that end« Accordingly, several deep-lunged 
country-fellows, who looked as if they might 
have blovm the apparition away with a 
breath, ascended the platform. Mutually 
encouraging one another, they shouted so 
dose to her ear that the veil stirred like a 
vanishing mist ; they smote upon the floor 
with bludgeons ; they perpetrated so hideous 
a clamour, that methought it might have 
reached, at leasts a little way into the eternal 
sphere. Finally, with the assent of the Pro- 
fessor, they laid hold of the great chair, and 
were startled, apparently, to find it soar 
upward, as if lighter than the air through 
which it rose. But the Veiled Lady re- 
mained seated and motionless, with a com- 
posure that was hardly less than awful, 
because implying so immeasurable a distance 
betwixt her and these rude persecutors. 

" These efforts are wholly without avail," 
observed the Professor, who had been look- 



A VILLAGE-HALL. 189 

ing on with an aspect of serene indifference. 
" The roar of a battery of cannon would be 
inaudible to the Veiled Lady. And yet, 
were 1 to will it, sitting in this very hall, she 
could hear the desert wind sweeping over 
the sands as far off* as Arabia ; the icebergs 
grinding one against the other in the Polar 
Seas ; the rustle of a leaf in an East Indian 
forest ; the lowest whispered breath of the 
bashfulest maiden in the world, uttering the 
first confession of her love. Nor does there 
exist the moral inducement, apart from my 
own behest, that could persuade her to lift 
the silvery veil, or arise out of that chair." 

Greatly to the Professor's discomposure, 
however, just as he spoke these words, the 
Veiled Lady arose. There was a mysterious 
tremor that shook the magic veil. The 
spectators, it may be, imagined that she was 
about to take flight into that invisible sphere, 
and to the society of those purely spiritual 



190 THE BUTHEDALB BOMANCE. 

beings with whom theyieckoned her so near 
akin. Hollingsworth, a moment ago, had 
moimted the platform, and now stood gazing 
at the figme, with a sad intentness that 
bronght the whole power of his great, stern, 
yet tender soul into his glance. 

^' Come," said he, waving his hand towards 
her. " You are safe !" 

She threw off the veil, and stood before 
that multitude of people, pale^ tremulous, 
shrinking, as if only then had she discovered 
that a thousand eyes were gazing at her. 
Poor maiden ! How strangely had she been 
betrayed I Blazoned abroad as a wonder of 
the world, and performing what were ad- 
judged as miracles — ^in the &ith of many, a 
seeress and a prophetess; in the harsher 
judgment of others, a mountebank — she had 
kept, as I religiously believe, her virgin 
reserve and sanctity of soul throughout it alL 
Within that encircling veil, though im evil 



A VILLAGE-HALL. 191 

hand had flung it over her, there was as deep 
a seclusion as if this forsaken girl had, all 
the while, been sitting under the shadow of 
Eliot's pulpit, in the Blithedale woods, at the 
feet of him who now summoned her to the 
shelter of his arms. And the true heart- 
throb of a woman's affection was too powerful 
for the jugglery that had hitherto environed 
her. She uttered a shriek, and fled to 
Hollingsworth, like one escaping fix)m her 
deadliest enemy, and was safe for ever ! 



XL 

THE MASQUESADEBS. 

Two nights had passed since the foregoing 
occurrences, when, in a breezy September 
forenoon, I set forth from town, on foot, 
towai'ds Blithedale. 

It was the most delightfiil of all days for 
a walk, with a dash of invigorating ice- 
temper in the air, but a coolness that soon 
gave place to the brisk glow of exercise, 
while the vigour remained as elastic as before. 
The atmosphere had a spirit and sparkle in 
it. Each breath was like a sip of ethereal 
wine, tempered, as I said, with a crystal 



THE MASQUERADERS. 193 

lump of ice. I had started on this expedition 
in an exceedingly sombre mood, as well 
befitted one who found himself tending to- 
wards home, but was conscious that nobody 
would be quite oveijoyed to greet him there. 
My feet were hardly off the pavement, how- 
ever, when this morbid sensation began to 
yield to the lively influences of air and 
motion. Nor had I gone far, with fields yet 
green on either side, before my step became 
as swifl and light as if HolUngsworth were 
waiting to exchange a fiiendly hand-grip, 
and Zenobia's and Priscilla's open arms would 
welcome the wanderer's reappearance. It 
has happened to me, on other occasions, as 
well as this, to prove how a state of physical 
well-being can create a kind of joy, in spite 
of the profoundest anxiety of mind. 

The pathway of that walk still runs along, 
with sunny freshness, through my memory. 
I know not why it should be so. But my 

VOL. n. 



194 THE BLITHXDALS BOKAKCE. 

mental eye can even now discern the Sep- 
tember grass, bordering the pleasant roadside 
with a brighter verdure than while the smn- 
mer heats were scorching it ; the trees, too, 
mostly green, although here and there a 
branch or shrub has donned its vesture of 
crimson and gold a week or two before its 
fellows. I see the tufted barberry-bushes, 
with their small clusters of scarlet fruit ; the 
toadstools, likewise — some spotlessly white, 
others yeUow or red — mysterious growths, 
springing suddenly from no root or seed, and 
growing nobody can tell how or wherefore. 
In this respect they resembled many of the 
emotions in my breast. And I stiU see the 
little rivulets, chill, clear, and bright, that 
murmured beneath the road, through subter- 
ranean rocks, and deepened into mossy pools, 
where tiny fish were darting to and fro, and 
within which lurked the hermit-frog. But 
no — ^I never can account for it, that, with a 



THE MASQUEBADEBS. 195 

yearning interest to learn the upshot of aU 
my story, and returning to Blithedale for that 
sole purpose, I should examine these things 
so like a peacefiil-bosomed naturalist. Nor 
why, amid all my sympathies and fears, there 
shot, at times, a wild exhilaration through 
my frame. 

Thus I pursued my way along the Une of 
the ancient stone wall that Paul Dudley 
built, and through -white villages, and past 
orchards of ruddy apples, and fields of ripen- 
ing maize, and patches of woodland, and all 
such sweet rural scenery as looks the fairest, 
a little beyond the suburbs of a town. Hoi- 
lingsworth, Zenobia, Prisdlla ! They glided 
mistily before me, as I walked. Sometimes, 
in my solitude, I laughed with the bitterness 
of self-scorn, remembering how unrestrvedly 
I had given up my heart and soul to inter- 
ests that were not mine. What had I ever 
had to do with them ? And why, being now 

o2 



196 THE BLITHEDALS BOMAKCE. 

free, should I take this thraldom on me once 
agaiQ ? It was both sad and dangerous, I 
whispered to myself, to be in too dose affi- 
nity with the passions, the errors, and the 
misfortunes of individuals who stood within 
a circle of their own, into which, if I stept 
at all, it must be as an intruder, and at a 
peril that I could not estimate. 

Drawing nearer to Blithedale, a sickness 
of the spirits kept alternating with my 
flights of causeless buoyancy. I indulged in 
a hundred odd and extravagant conjectures. 
Either there was no such place as Blithe- 
dale, nor ever had been, nor any brother- 
hood of thoughtful labourers like what I 
seemed to recollect there, or else it was all 
changed during my absence. It had been 
nothing but dream-work and enchantment. 
I should seek in vain for the old farm-house, 
and for the greensward, the potato-fields, 
the root- crops, and acres of Indian com, and 



TUB MASQUEBADEBS. 197 

for all that configuration of the land which 
I had imagined. It would be another spot, 
and an utter strangeness. 

These vagaries were of the spectral throng 
so apt to steal out of an unquiet heart. 
They partly ceased to haunt me, on my 
arriving at a point whence, through the 
trees, I began to catch glimpses of the 
Blithedale farm. That surely was some- 
thing real. There was hardly a square 
foot of all those acres on which I had not 
trodden heavily, in one or another kind of 
toil. The curse of Adam's posterity — and, 
curse or blessing be it, it gives substance to 
the life around us — ^had first come upon me 
there. In the sweat of my brow I had 
there earned bread and eaten it, and so 
established my claim to be on earth, and 
my fellowship with all the sons of labour. 
I could have knelt down, and have laid 
my breast against that soil. The red clay 



198 THE BLTTHEDALE BOMANCE. 

of which my frame was moulded seemed 
nearer akin to those crumbling furrows than 
to any other portion of the world's dust 
There was my home, and there might be 
my grave. 

I felt an invincible reluctance, neverthe- 
less, at the idea of presenting myself before 
my old associates, without first ascertain- 
ing the state in which they were. A name- 
less foreboding weighed upon me. Perhaps, 
should I know all the circumstances that 
had occurred, I might find it my wisest 
course to turn back, unrecognised, unseen, 
and never look at Blithedale more. Had 
it been evening, I would have stolen soflily 
to some lighted window of the old farm- 
house, and peeped darkling in, to see all 
their well-known faces round the supper- 
board. Then, were there a vacant seat, I 
might noiselessly unclose the door, glide in, 
and take my place among them, without a 



THE MASQUEBADEBS. 199 

word. My entrance might be so quiet, my 
aspect so familiar, that they would forget 
how long I had been away, and suffer me 
to melt into the scene, as a wreath of va- 
pour melts into a larger cloud. I dreaded 
a boisterous greeting. Beholding me at 
table, Zenobia, as a matter of course, would 
send me a cup of tea, and HoUingsworth 
fill my plate firom the great dish of pan- 
dowdy, and Priscilla, in her quiet way, 
would hand the cream, and others help me 
to the bread and butter. Being one of 
them again, the knowledge of what had 
happened would come to me without a 
shock. For still, at every turn of my shift- 
ing ^tasies, the thought stared me in the 
face that some evil thing had befallen us, 
or was ready to befal. 

Yielding to this ominous impression, I now 
turned aside into the woods, resolving to spy 
out the posture of the Community, as craftily 



200 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

as the wild Indian before he makes his onset. 
I would go wandering about the outskirts of 
the farm, and, perhaps, catching sight of a 
sohtary acquaintance, would approach him 
amid the brown shadows of the trees (a kind 
of medium fit for spirits departed and re- 
visitant, like myself), and entreat him to tell 
me how all things were. 

The first living creature that I met was a 
partridge which sprung up beneath my feet, 
and whirred away ; the next was a squirrel; 
who chattered angrily at me fi:om an over- 
hanging bough. I trod along by the dark, 
sluggish river, and remember pausing on the 
bank, above one of its blackest and most 
placid pools — (the very spot, with the bark- 
less stump of a tree aslantwise over the 
water, is depicting itself to my fancy at tins 
instant), — and wondering how deep it was, 
and if any overladen soul had ever flung 
its weight of mortality in thither, and if it 



THE MASQUEBADEBS. 201 

thus escaped the burthen, or only made it 
heavier. And perhaps the skeleton of the 
drowned wretch still lay beneath the in- 
scrutable depth, clinging to some sunken log 
at the bottom with the gripe of its old 
despair. So slight, however, was the track 
of these gloomy ideas, that I soon forgot 
them in the contemplation of a brood of wild 
ducks, which were floating on the river, and 
anon took flight, leaving each a bright streak 
over the black surface. By-and-by, I came 
to my hermitage, in the heart of the white 
pine-tree, and clambering up into it, sat 
down to rest. The grapes, which I had 
watched throughout the summer, now 
dangled around me in abundant clusters of 
the deepest purple, deliciously sweet to the 
taste, and, though wild, yet free from that 
ungentle flavour which distinguishes nearly 
all our native and uncultivated grapes. Me- 
thought a wine might b^ pressed out of 



202 THS BLTTHEDALE BOMANCE. 

them possessing a pafisionate zest, and en- 
dowed with a new kind of intoxicatii^ 
quality, attended with such bacchanalian 
ecstasies as the tamer grapes of Madjeira, 
France, and the Shine, are inadequate to 
produce. And I longed to quaff a great 
goblet of it at that moment 1 

While devouring the grapes, I looked on all 
sides out of the peep-holes of my hermitage, 
and saw the farm-house, the fields, and almost 
every part of our domain, but not a single 
human figure in the landscape. Some of 
the windows of the house were open, but 
with no more signs of life than in a dead 
man's unshut eyes. The barn-door was sgar, 
and swinging in the breeze. The big old 
dog, — he was a reUc of the former dynasty 
of the farm, — that hardly ever stirred out 
of the yard, was nowhere to be seen. What, 
then, had become of all the fraternity and 
sisterhood ? Curious to ascertain this point, 



THE MA6QUEBADERS. 203 

I let myself down out of the tree, and going 
to the edge of the wood, was glad to perceive 
our herd of cows chewing the cud or grazing 
not far off. I fancied, by their manner, that 
two or three of them recognised me (as, 
indeed, they ought, for I had milked them 
and been their chamberlain times without 
number); but, after staring me in the face 
a little while, they phl^matically began 
grazing and chewing their cuds again. Then 
I grew foolishly angry at so cold a reception, 
and flung some rotten fragments of an old 
stump at these unsentimental cows. 

Skirting further round the pastiure, I heard 
voices and much laughter proceeding from 
the interior of the wood. Voices, male and 
feminine ; laughter, not only of fresh young 
throats, but the bass of grown people, as if 
solemn organ-pipes should pour out airs of 
merriment. Not a voice spoke, but I knew 
it better than my own; not a laugh, but its 



204 TH£ BLITH£DAL£ BOMANCE. 

cadences were familiar. The wood, in this 
portion of it, seemed as full of jollity as if 
Comus and his crew were holding their 
revels in one of its usually lonesome glades. 
Stealing onward as far as I durst, without 
hazard of discovery, I saw a concourse of 
strange figures beneath the overshadowing 
branches. They appeared, and vanished, 
and came again, confusedly, with the streaks 
of sunlight glimmering down upon them. 

Among them was an Indian chief, with 
blanket, feathers, and war-paint, and uplifted 
tomahawk; and near him, looking fit to be 
his woodland-bride, the goddess Diana, with 
the crescent on her head, and attended by 
our big lazy dog, in lack of any fleeter 
hoimd. Drawing an arrow from her quiver, 
she let it fly at a venture, and hit the very 
tree behind which I happened to be lurking. 
Another group consisted of a Bavarian 
broom-girl, a negro of the Jim Crow order. 



THE MASQUEBADEBS. 205 

one or two foresters of the middle ages, a 
Kentucky woodsman in his trimmed hunt- 
ing-shirt and deerskin leggings, and a Shaker 
elder, quaint, demure, broad-brimmed, and 
square-skirted. Shepherds of Arcadia, and 
allegoric figures from the Faerie Queen, were 
oddly mixed up with these. Arm in arm, 
or otherwise huddled together in strange 
discrepancy, stood grim Puritans, gay Cava- 
liers, and Revolutionary officers with three- 
cornered cocked hats, and queues longer 
than their swords. A bright-complexioned, 
dark-haired, vivacious little gipsy, with a red 
shawl over her head, went from one group to 
another, telling fortunes by palmistry; and 
Moll Pitcher, the renowned old witch of 
Lynn, broomstick in hand, showed herself 
prominently in the midst, as if announcing 
all these apparitions to be the offspring of 
her necromantic art. But Silas Foster, who 
leaned against a tree near by, in his customary 



206 THE BLTTHEDALE BOMANCE. 

blue frock, and smoking a abort pipe, did 
more to disenchant the scene, with his look 
of shrewd, acrid, Yankee observation, than 
twenty witches and necromancers could have 
done in the way of rendering it weird and 
fantastic. 

A little further off, some old-fashioned 
skinkers and drawers, all with portentously 
red noses, were spreading a banquet on the 
leaf-strewn earth ; while a homed and long- 
tailed gentleman (in whom I recognised 
the fiendish musician erst seen by Tarn 
O'Shanter) tuned his fiddle, and summoned 
the whole motley rout to a dance, before 
partaking of the festal cheer. So they 
joined hands in a circle, whirling round so 
swiftly, so madly, and so merrily, in time 
and tune with the Satanic music, that their 
separate incongruities were blended all to- 
gether, and they became a kind of entangle- 
ment that went nigh to turn one's brain 



THE MASQUEBADEBS. 207 

with merely looking at it. Anon they stopt 
all of a sudden, and staring at one another's 
figures, set up a roar of laughter ; whereat 
a shower of the September leaves (which, 
all day long, had been hesitating whether to 
fall or no) were shaken off by the movement 
of the air, and came eddying down upon 
the revellers. 

Then, for lack of breath, ensued a silence ; 
at the deepest point of which, tickled by 
the oddity of surprising my grave associates 
in this ' masquerading trim, I could not pos- 
sibly refrain from a burst of laughter on my 
own separate account. 

" Hush !" I heard the pretty gipsy fortune- 
teller say. " Who is that laughing ?" 

" Some profane intruder !" said the god- 
dess Diana. " I shall send an arrow through 
his heart, or change him into a stag, as I did 
Actaeon, if he peeps from behind the trees !" 

"Me take his scalp 1" cried the Indian 



208 THE BUTHEDALE BOMAKCE. 

chief, brandishing his tomahawk, and cut- 
ting a great caper in the air. 

^^ ni root him in the earth with a spell 
that I have at my tongue's end I" squeaked 
Moll Pitcher. ^^ And the green moss shall 
grow all over him, before he gets free 
again !" 

" The voice was Miles Coverdale's," said 
the fiendish fiddler, with a whisk of his tail 
and a toss of his horns. "My music has 
brought him hither. He is always ready to 
dance to the devil's tune !" 

Thus put on the right track, they all re- 
cognised the voice at once, and set up a 
simultaneous shout. 

" Miles ! Miles ! Miles Coverdale, where 
are you ?" they cried. " Zenobia I Queen 
Zenobia ! here is one of your vassals lurking 
in the wood. Command him to approach, 
and pay his duty !" 

The whole fantastic rabble forthwith 



THE MASQUEBADEBS. 209 

streamed off in pursuit of me, so that T 
was like a mad poet hunted by chimeras. 
Having fairly the start of them, however, 
I succeeded in making my escape, and soon 
left their merriment and riot at a good dis- 
tance in the rear. Its fainter tones assumed 
a kind of moumfulness, and were finally 
lost in the hush and solemnity of the wood. 
In my haste, I stumbled over a heap of logs 
and sticks that had been cut for firewood, a 
great while ago, by some former possessor 
of the soil, and piled up square, in order to 
be carted or sledded away to the farm-house. 
But, being forgotten, they had lain there per- 
haps fifty years, and possibly much longer ; 
until, by the accumulation of moss, and the 
leaves falling over them and decaying there, 
from autumn to autumn, a green mound 
was formed, in which the softened outline 
of the wood-pile was still perceptible. In 
VOL. ir. p 



210 TH£ BUTHBDALB BOHAHCE. 

the fitM mood that then swayed my mind, 
I fomid something strangely aJflEecting in this 
limple drcmnstanoe. I imagined the long- 
dead woodman,, and his long-dead wife and 
children, coming oat of their chill graves, 
and essaying to make a fire with this heap 
of mossy fuel I 

From this spot I strayed onward, quite 
lost in reverie, and neither knew nor cared 
whither I was goings until a low, soft, well- 
remembered voice spoke, at a little distance. 

" There is Mr. Coverdale P' 
. " Miles Coverdale !" said another voice, — 
and its tones were very stem. "Let him 
come forward, then !" 

"Yes, Mr. Coverdale," cried a woman's 
voice — dear and melodious,, but, just then, 
with something unnatural in its chord — 
" you are welcome ! But you come half an 
hour too late, and have missed a scene 
which you would have enjoyed !" 



THE MASQUEBADEBS. 211 

I looked up, and found myself nigh Eliot's 
pulpit, at the base of which sat Hollings- 
worth, with Priscilla at his feet, and Zenobia 
standing before them. 



p2 



XIL 

THE THREE TOGETHER. 

HoLUNGSWORTH was iu his ordinary 
working-dress. Priscilla wore a pretty and 
simple gown, with a kerchief about her 
neck, and a calash, which she had flung 
back from her head, leaving it suspended 
by the strings. But Zenobia (whose part 
among the maskers, as may be supposed, 
was no inferior one) appeared in a costume 
of fanciful magnificence, with her jewelled 
flower as the central ornament of what re- 
sembled a leafy crown, or coronet. She 



THE THBEE TOGETHEB. 213 

represented the oriental princess by whose 
name we were accustomed to know her. 
Her attitude was free and noble ; yet, if a 
queen's, it was not that of a queen trium- 
phant, but dethroned, on trial for her life, 
or, perchance, condemned, already. The 
spirit of the conflict seemed, nevertheless, 
to be alive in her. Her eyes were on fire ; 
her cheeks had each a crimson spot, so ex- 
ceedingly vivid, and marked with so definite 
an outline, that I at first doubted whether 
it were not artificial. In a very brief 
space, however, this idea was shamed by 
the paleness that ensued, as the blood sunk 
suddenly away. Zenobia now looked like 
marble. 

One always feels the fact, in an instant, 
when he has intruded on those who love, 
or those who hate, at some acme of their 
passion that puts them into a sphere of 
their own, where no other spirit can pre- 



214 THB BLTTHEDALB BOMANCE. 

tend to stand on equal groimd with tbem. 
I was confused — affected even with a spe- 
cies of terror — and wished mjrself away. 
The intentness of their feelings gave them 
the exclusive property of the soil and at- 
mosphere, and left me no right to be or 
breathe there. 

" HoUingsworth — ^Zenobia — I have just 
returned to Blithedale," said I, " and had 
no thought of finding you here. We shall 
meet again at the house. I will retire." 

"This place is free to you," answered 
HoUingsworth. 

" As firee as to ourselves,'' added Zenobia. 
" This long while past, you have been fol- 
lowing up your game, groping for human 
emotions in the dark comers of the heart. 
Had you been here a little sooner, you 
might have seen them dragged into the 
daylight. I could even wish to have my 
trial over again, with you standing by to 



THE THREE TOGETHEB. 215 

see fair play! Do you know, Mr. Cover- 
dale, I have been on trial for my life ?" 

She laughed, while speaking thus. But, 
in truth, as my eyes wandered from one of 
the group to another, I saw in HoUings- 
worth all that an artist could desire fox the 
grim portrait of a Puritan magistrate holding 
inquest of life and death in a case of witch- 
craft ; — ^in Zenobia, the sorceress herself not 
aged, wrinkled, and decrepit, but fidr enough 
to tempt Satan with a force reciprocal to 
his own ; — and, in Priscilla, the pale victim, 
whose soul and body had been wasted by her 
spells. Had a pile of fagots been heaped 
against the rock, this hint of impending doom 
would have completed the su^estive picture. 

" It was too hard upon me,^ continued 
Zenobia, addressing HoUingsworth, " that 
judge, jury, and accuser, should all be com- 
prehended in one man ! I demur, as I think 
the lawyers say, to the jurisdiction. But 



216 THE BUTHEDALE BOICAHGE. 

kt the learned Judge CoTerdale seat him- 
self on the top of the rock, and you and me 
stand at its base, dde by side, pleading our 
cause before him! There might, at least, 
be two criminals instead of one.** 

"You forced this on me,** replied Hol- 
lingsworth, looking her sternly in the hce. 
"Did I call you hither from among the 
masqueraders yonder ? Do I assume' to be 
your judge ? No ; except so far as I have 
an unquestionable right of judgment, in 
order to setde my own line of behaviour 
towards those with whom the events of 
life bring me in contact. True, I have 
already judged you, but not on the 
world's part — neither do I pretend to pass 
a sentence I" 

"Ah, this is very good I" said Zenobia, 
with a smile. "What strange beings you 
men are, Mr. Coverdalel — is it not so? 
It is the simplest thing in the world 



THE THBEE TOGETHER. 217 

with you to bring a woman before your 
secret tribunals, and judge and condemn 
her unheard, and then tell her to go free 
without a sentence. The misfortune is, that 
this same secret tribunal chances to be the 
only judgment-seat that a true woman stands 
in awe of, and that any verdict short of 
acquittal is equivalent to a death-sentence l" 
The more I looked at them, and the more 
I heard, the stronger grew my impression 
that a crisis had just come and gone. On 
HolUngsworth's brow it had left a stamp 
like that of irrevocable doom, of which hig 
own will was the instrument. In Zenobia's 
whole person, beholding her more closely, 
I saw a riotous agitation; the almost de- 
lirious disquietude of a great struggle, at 
the close of which the vanquished one felt 
her strength and courage still mighty within 
her, and longed to renew the contest. My 
sensations were as if I had come upon a 



218 TH£ EUXHEDALX SOOfASCB. 

battle-field befbie the smoke was as jei 
cleared awa j. 

And what subjects had been discussed 
here? All, no doubt, that for so many 
months past had kept my heart and my 
imagination idly feveiiBh. Zenofaia's whde 
character and history ; the true nature of 
her mysterious connexicm with Westerveh; 
her later purposes towards Hollingsworth, 
and, reciprocally, his in reference to her; 
and, finally, the degree in which Zenobia had 
been cognizant of the plot against Priscilla, 
and what, at last, had been the real object 
of that scheme. On these points, as before, 
I was left to my own conjectures. One 
thing, only, was certain. Zenobia and Hol- 
lingsworth were iiiends no longer. If their 
heart-strings were ever intertwined, the knot 
had been adjudged an entanglement, and 
was now violently broken. 

But Zenobia seemed unable to rest con- 



THE THBEE TOGETHEB. 219 

tent with the matter in the posture which 
it had assumed. 

"Ah! do we part so?" exclaimed she, 
seeing HoUingsworth about to retire. 

''And why not?" said he, with ahnost 
rude abruptness. " What is there further to 
be said between us ?" 

"Well, perhaps nothing," answered Ze- 
nobia, looking him in the face, and smiling. 
" But we have come, many times before, to 
this grey rock, and we have talked very 
softly among the whisperings of the birch 
trees. They were pleasant hours ! I love 
to make the latest of them, though not 
altogether so delightful, loiter away as slowly 
as may be. And, besides, you have put 
many queries to me at this, which you 
design to be our last, interview ; and being 
driven, as I must acknowledge, into a corner, 
I have responded with reasonable frankness. 
But now, with your free consent, I desire 



220 TH£ BUTHEDALE BOMAHGE. 

the privilege of asking a few queationsy in 
my turn/' 

^^ I have no concealments," said HoUings- 
worth. 

" We shall see," answered Zenobia. " I 
would first inquire whether you have sup- 
posed me to be wealthy ?'* 

" On that point," observed HoUingsworth, 
'^ I have had the opinion which the world 
holds." 

" And I held it likewise," said Zenobia. 
" Had I not, Heaven is my witness, the 
knowledge should have been as free to you 
as me. It is only three days since I knew 
the strange fact that threatens to make me 
poor; and your own acquaintance with it, 
I suspect, is of at least as old a date. I 
fancied myself affluent. You are aware, 
too, of the disposition which I purposed 
making of the larger portion of my imaginary 
opulence ; — ^nay, were it aD, I had not hesi- 



THE THREE TOGETHER. 221 

tated. Let me ask you, further, did I ever 
propose or intimate any terms of compact, 
on which depended this — as the world 
would consider it — so important sacrifice ?" 

" You certainly spoke of none," said Hol- 
lingsworth. 

"Nor meant any," she responded. "I 
was willing to reaUse your dream, freely — 
generously, as some might think — ^but, at 
all events, fully, and heedless though it 
shoidd prove the ruin of my fortune. If, in 
your own thoughts, you have imposed any 
conditions of this expenditure, it is you that 
must be held responsible for whatever is 
sordid and unworthy in them. And now, 
one other question. Do you love this girl ?" 

"0, Zenobial" exclaimed Priscilla, shrink- 
ing back, as if longing for the rock to topple 
over and hide her. 

** Do you love her ?" repeated Zenobia. 

'^ Had you asked me that question a short 



2B rsz «.iTHni,tTJB boxahge. 



smre.'^ rnc»i HoUiiigsworth, afiter a 
rTT-^rj w^Tff?K. it seemed to me, even 
:&tf »r:a I7»s mc^ dKxr whispering breath, 
-^l ^nxui iicii^ ttiiii yon — ^ No I* My fed- 
iiHs izr FS^nila irdfered little bom those of 
4tr ^i5s: b:!c:Q>3r. waccfaing tenderly over 
;&e ^ittftiff ssttr w^Kfm God his given him 

'^ Asa w^iic is 3Ecar ansver now?" per* 

'" I ijr Icvu jurr aid HoDingsworth, 
tffymtif ;aii imixis wick a deep inward 
^CQttCJ.. 322^;^^^ ^a: :^etikxng them outright 
^^^As wel cedmrt ii dtms as in any other 

LT. I CO love her T 

•^ Xow, God he jndp? b«ween ns,'' cried 
Zenobia, breaking ixi::^ sodden passion, 
^ which of us two has mosi caartaUy oflfended 
Him ! At least; I am a wcHiianf with every 
faulty it may be, that a woman ever had, — 
weak, vain, unprincipled (hke most of my 



THE THREE TOGETHEIL 223 

sex; for our virtues, when we have any, are 
merely impulsive and intuitive), passionate, 
too, and pursuing my fooUsh and unattain- 
able ends by indirect and cunning, though 
absurdly chosen means, as an hereditary 
bond-slave must ; false, moreover, to the 
whole circle of good, in my reckless truth 
to the little good I saw before me, — ^but 
still a woman ! A creature whom only a 
little change of earthly fortune, a little kinder 
smile of Hun who sent me hither, and one 
true heart to encourage and direct me, might 
have made all that a woman can be ! But 
how is it with you ? Are you a man ? No; 
but a monster! A cold, heartless, self- 
beginning and self-ending piece of mecha- 
nisml 

" With what, then^ do you charge me ?" 
asked Hollingsworth, aghast and greatly dis- 
turbed by this attack. "Show me one 
selfish end, in all I ever aimed at, and 



224 THE BUTHEDALB BOlfANCE. 

you may cut it out of my bosom with a 
knife r 

^^ It is all self !" answered 2ienobia, with 
sUll intenser bitterness. ^Nothing else; 
nothing but self^ self, self I The fiend, I 
doubt not, has made his choicest mirth of 
you, these seven years past, and especially 
in the mad summer which we have spent 
together. I see it now ! I am awake, dis- 
«ichanted« disenthralled! Seli^ sel^ self! 
You have embodied yourself in a project. 
You ai^ a better masquerader than the 
witches and gipdes yonder; for your dis- 
guise is a self-deception. See whither it has 
bn>ughi you ! First, you aimed a death- 
blow« and a treacherous one, at this scheme 
of a puier and higher life, which so many 
uoUo spirits had wrou^t out Then, be- 
c^u^^ Coveidale could not be quite your 
siav<\ yv>u threw him ruthlessly away. And 
wu look mo^ too. into your plan, as long as 



THE THBEE TOGETHER. 225 

there was hope of my being available, and 
now fling me aside again, a broken tool ! 
But, foremost and blackest of your sins, you 
stifled down your inmost consciousness ! — 
you did a deadly wrong to your own heart ! 
—you were ready to sacrifice this girl, whom, 
if God ever visibly showed a purpose, He 
put into your charge, and through whom He 
was striving to redeem you !" 

" This is a woman's view," said Hollings- 
worth, growing deadly pale — ^*'a woman's, 
whose whole sphere of action is in the he^, 
and who can conceive of no higher nor 
wider one !" 

« Be sUent !" cried Zenobia, imperiously. 
" You know neither man nor woman I The 
utmost that can be said in your behalf — and 
because I would not be wholly despicable in 
my own eyes, but would fain excuse my 
wasted feeUngs, nor own it wholly a delu- 
sion, therefore I say it — ^is, that a great and 

VOL. n- Q 



226 THE BLTTHEDAUB SOMAHCB. 

rich heart has been mined in your bieast 
Leave me, now. Yoa have done with ni€^ 
and I with you. Farewell !" 

" Prisdlla," said Hollingsworth, " come." 
Zenobia smiled; possibly I did so too. 
Not often, in human life, has a gnawing 
sense of injury found a sweeter morsel of 
revenge than was conveyed in the tone with 
which HoUingsworth spoke those two words. 
It was the abased and tremulous tone of a 
man whose faith in himself was shak^ and 
who sought, at last, to lean on an affection. 
Yes; the strong man bowed himself, and 
rested on this poor Priscilla I ! could 
she have failed him, what a triumph for the 
lookers-on ! 

And, at first, I half imagined that she was 
about to fail him. She rose up, stood shiver- 
ing like the birch-leaves that trembled over 
her head, and then slowly tottered, rather 
than walked, towards Zenobia. Arriving 



THE THREE TOGETHER. 227 

at her feet, she sank down there, in the very 
same attitude which she had assumed on 
their first meeting, in the kitchen of the old 
farm-house. Zenobia remembered it. 

«Ah, PrisciUa!" said she, shaking her 
head, " how much is changed since then I 
You kneel to a dethroned princess. You, the 
victorious one I But he is waiting for you. 
Say what you wish, and leave me." 

" We are sisters !" gasped PrisciUa. 

I fancied that I understood the word and 
action. It meant the offering of herself, and 
all she had, to be at Zenobia*s disposal. But 
the latter would not take it thus. 

" True, we are sisters !" she replied; and, 
moved by the sweet word, she stooped down 
and kissed PrisciUa; but not lovingly, for a 
sense of fatal harm received through her 
seemed to be lurking in Zenobia's heart. 
" We had one father ! You knew it from 
the first; I, but a Uttle whUe — else some 

q2 



228 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

things that have chanced might have been 
spared you. But I never wished you harm. 
You stood between me and an end which I 
desired. I wanted a clear path. No matter 
what I meant. It is over now. Do you 
forgive me ?" 

" 0, Zenobia," sobbed Prisdlla, "it is I 
that feel like the guilty one !" 

" No, no, poor little thing !" said Zenobia, 
with a sort of contempt. " You have been 
my evil fate; but there never was a babe 
with less strength or will to do an injury. 
Poor child ! Methinks you have but a 
melancholy lot before you, sitting all alone 
in that wide, cheerless heart, where, for 
aught you know — and as I, alas ! believe — 
the fire which you have kindled may soon 
go out. Ah, the thought makes me shiver 
for you I What will you do, Priscilla, when 
you find no spark among the ashes ?" 

" Die !" she answered. 



THE THREE TOGETHER. 229 

" That was well said 1" responded Ze- 
nobia, with an approving smile. " There is 
all a woman in your little compass, my poor 
sister. Meanwhile, go with him, and live !" 

She waved her away, with a queenly 
gesture, and turned her own face to the 
rock. I watched Priscilla, wondering what 
judgment she would pass between Zenobia 
and Hollingsworth J how interpret his be- 
haviour, so as to reconcile it with true faith 
both towards her sister and herself; how 
compel her love for him to keep any terms 
whatever with her sisterly affection ! But, 
in truth, there was no such difficulty as I 
imagined. Her .engrossing love made it all 
clear. Hollingsworth could have no fault. 
That was the one principle at the centre of 
the universe. And the doubtful guilt or pos- 
sible integrity of other people, appearances, 
self-evident facts, the testimony of her own 
senses— even Hollingsworth's self-accusation, 



230 THE BLFTHEDALE BOICANCE. 

had he volunteered it — ^would have weighed 
not the value of a mote of thistle-down on 
the other side. So secure was she of his 
right, that she never thought of companng 
it with another's wrong, but left the latter 
to itself. 

Hollingsworth drew her arm within his, 
and soon disappeared with her among the 
trees. I cannot imagine how Zenobia knew 
when they were out of sight; she never 
glanced again towards them. But, retaining 
a proud attitude so long as they might have 
thrown back a retiring look, they were no 
sooner departed — utterly departed — than she 
began slowly to sink down. It was as if 
a great, invisible, irresistible weight, were 
pressing her to the earth. Settling upon her 
knees, she leaned her forehead against the 
rock, and sobbed convulsively; dry sobs 
they seemed to be, such as have nothing to 
do with tears. 



XIII. 

ZENOBIA AND COTBBDALE. 

Zenobia had entirely forgotten me. She 
&ncied herself alone with her great grief 
And had it been only a common pity that I 
felt for her — ^the pity that her proud nature 
would have repelled, as the one worst wrong 
which the world yet held in reserve — the 
sacredness and awfulness of the crisis might 
have impelled me to steal away silently, so 
that not a dry leaf should rustle under my 
feet. I would have left her to struggle in 
that solitude, with only the eye of Grod upon 
her. But, so it happened, I never once 



232 THE BLITHEDALE BOliANCE. 

dreamed of questioning my right to be there 
now, as I had questioned it just before, when 
I came so suddenly upon Hollingsworth and 
herself in the passion of their recent debate. 
It suits me not to explain what was the 
analogy that I saw, or imagined, between 
Zenobia's situation and mine ; nor, I believe, 
will the reader detect this one secret, hidden 
beneath many a revelation which perhaps 
concerned me less. In simple truth, how- 
ever, as Zenobia leaned her forehead against 
the rock, shaken with that tearless agony, it 
seemed to me that the self-same pang, with 
hardly mitigated torment, leaped thrilling 
from her heart-strings to my own. Was it 
wrong, therefore, if I felt myself consecrated 
to the priesthood by sympathy like this, and 
called upon to minister to this woman's 
affliction, so far as mortal could ? 

But, indeed, what could mortal do for her? 
Nothing 1 The attempt would be a mockery 



ZEKOBIA AND COVEBDALE. 233 

and an anguish. Time, it is true, would 
steal away her grief, and bury it and the 
best of her heart in the same grave. But 
Destiny itself, methought, in its kindliest 
mood, could do no better for Zenobia, in the 
way of quick relief, than to cause the im- 
pending rock to impend a little fiirther, and 
fall upon her head. So I leaned against a 
tree, and listened to her sobs in unbroken 
silence. She was half prostrate, half kneeling, 
with her forehead still pressed against the 
rock. Her sobs were the only sound ; she 
did not groan, nor give any other utterance 
to her distress. It was all involuntary. 

At length, she sat up, put back her hair, 
and stared about her with a bewildered 
aspect, as if not distinctly recollecting the 
scene through which she had passed, nor 
cognisant of the situation in which it left her. 
Her face and brow were almost purple with 
the rush of blood. They whitened, however, 



234 THE BLITHEDALE ROMANCE. 

by-and-by, and for some time retained this 
death-like hue. She put her hand to her 
forehead, with a gesture that made me 
forcibly conscious of an intense and living 
pain there. 

Her glance, wandering wildly to and fro, 
passed over me several times, without ap- 
pearing to inform her of my presence. But, 
finally, a look of recognition gleamed from 
her eyes into mine. 

" Is it you. Miles Coverdale ?" said she, 
smiling. "Ah, I perceive what you are 
about ! You are turning this whole afEair 
into a ballad. Pray let me hear as many 
stanzas as you happen to have ready !" 

"0,hush, Zenobia!" I answered. "Heaven 
knows what an ache is in my soul 1" 

"It is genuine tragedy, is it not ?" rejoined 
Zenobia, with a sharp, light laugh. " And 
you are willing to allow, perhaps, that I have 
had hard measure. But it is a woman's doom, 



ZENOBIA AND COYEBDALE. 235 

and I have deserved it like a woman; so 
let there be no pity, as, on my part, there 
shall be no complaint. It is all right, now, 
or will shortly be so. But, Mr. Coverdale, 
by all means write this ballad, and put your 
soul's ache into it, and turn your sympathy 
to good account, as other poets do, and as 
poets must, unless they choose to give us 
glittering icicles instead of lines of fire. As 
for the moral, it shall be distilled into the 
final stanza, in a drop of bitter honey." 

" What shall it be, Zenobia ?" I inquired, 
endeavouring to fall in with her mood. 

" 0, a very old one will serve the purpose," 
she replied. "There are no new truths, 
much as we have prided ourselves on finding 
some. A moral ? Why, this : — ^that, in the 
battle-field of life, the downright stroke, that 
would fall only on a man's steel head-piece, 
is sure to light on a woman's heart, over 
which she wears no breastplate, and whose 



236 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCB. 

wisdom it is, therefore, to keep out of the 
conflict Or, this : — ^that the whole universe, 
her own sex and yours, and Providence, or 
Destiny, to boot, make common cause against 
the woman who swerves one hair's breadth 
out of the beaten track. Yes; and add (for 
I may as well own it, now) that, with that 
one hair's breadth, she goes aU astray, and 
never sees the world in its true aspect after- 
wards!" 

" This last is too stem a moral," I ob- 
served. " Cannot we soften it a little ?" 

" Do it, if you like, at your own peril, not 
on my responsibility," she answered. Then, 
with a sudden change of subject, she went 
on: "After all, he has flung away what 
would have served him better than the poor, 
pale flower he kept. What can Priscilla do 
for him ? Put passionate warmth into his 
heart, when it shall be chilled with frozen 
hopes ? Strengthen ' his hands, when they 



ZENOBIA AND COYEBDALE. 237 

are weary with much doing and no perform- 
ance ? No ! but only tend towards him 
with a blind, instinctive love, and hang her 
little puny weaknessjfor a clog upon his arm ! 
She cannot even give him such sympathy as 
is worth the name. For will he never, in 
many an hour of darkness, need that proud 
intellectual sympathy which he might have 
had from me ? — the sympathy that would 
flash light along his course, and guide as well 
as cheer him ? Poor HoUingsworth ! Where 
will he find it now ?" 

" HoUingsworth has a heart of ice !" said 
I, bitterly. " He is a wretch !" 

" Do him no wrong," interrupted Zenobia, 
turning haughtily upon me. " Presume not 
to estimate a man like HoUingsworth. It 
was my fault, all along, and none of his. I 
see it now I He never sought me. Why 
should he seek me ? What had I to offer 
him ? A miserable, bruised, and battered 



238 THE BLITHBDALE BOMAHCS. 

hearty spoilt long before he met me. A life, 
too, hopelessly entan^ed with a villain's i 
He did well to cast me oC €rod be praised, 
he did it ! And yet, had he trusted me, and 
borne with me a little longer, I would have 
saved him all this trouble.** 

She was silent for a time, and stood with 
her eyes fixed on the ground. Again raising 
them, her look was more mild and calm. 

" Miles Coverdale !" said she. 

" Well, Zenobia," I responded. " Can I 
do you any service ?" 

" Very little," she replied. " But it is my 
purpose, as you may well imagine, to remove 
from Blithedale ; and, most likely, I may not 
see Hollingsworth again. A woman in my 
position, you understand, feels scarcely at 
her ease among former fiiends. New fSw^es — 
imaccustomed looks — ^those only she can 
tolerate. She would pine among familiar 
scenes ; she would be apt to blush, too, under 



ZENOBIA AND COYEEDALE. 239 

the eyes that knew her secret; her heart 
might throb uncomfortably ; she would mor- 
tify herself, I suppose, with foolish notions 
of having sacrificed the honour of her sex at 
the foot of proud, contumacious man. Poor 
womanhood, with its rights and wrongs ! 
Here will be new matter for my course of 
lectures, at the idea of which you smiled, Mr. 
Coverdale, a month or two ago. But, as you 
have really a heart and sympathies, as far as 
they go, and as I shall depart without seeing 
Hollingsworth, I must entreat you to be a 
messenger between him and me." 

"Willingly," said I, wondering at the 
strange way in which her mind seemed to 
vibrate from the deepest earnest to mere 
levity. " What is the message ?" 

" True— what is it ?" exclaimed Zenobia. 
" After all, I hardly know. On better con- 
sideration, I have no message. TeU him — 
tell him something pretty and pathetic, that 



240 THE SUTBEDALE BOICAHCE. 



will come nicely and sweetly into yonr 
ballad — anything you please, so it be tender 
and submissive enou^ Tell him lie has 
murdered me! Tell him that Fll haunt 
him r — she spoke these words with the 
wildest energy. — ^* And give him — ^no, give 
Prisdlk— this r 

Thus saying, she took the jewelled flower 
out of her hair ; and it struck me as the act 
of a queen, when worsted in a combat, dis- 
crowning herself as if she found a sort of 
relief in abasing all her pride. 

"Bid her wear this for Zenobia's sake," 
she continued. " She is a pretty little crea- 
ture, and will make as soft and gentle a wife 
as the veriest Bluebeard could desire. Pity 
that she must fade so soon ! These delicate 
and puny maidens always do. Ten years 
hence, let Hollingsworth look at my face 
and Priscilla's, and then choose betwixt 
them. Or, if he pleases, let him do it now.'* 



ZBNOBIA AND COVEBDALE. 241 

How magnificently Zenobia looked, as she 
«aid this ! The effect of her beauty was 
even heightened by the over-consciousness 
and self-recognition of it, into which, I sup- 
pose, Hollingsworth's scorn had driven her. 
She understood the look of admiration in 
my face ; and — Zenobia to the last — ^it gave 
her pleasure. 

" It is an endless pity," said she, " that I 
had not bethought myself of winning your 
heart, Mr. Coverdale, instead of Hollings- 
worth's. I think I should have succeeded; 
and many women would have deemed you 
the worthier conquest of the two. You are 
certainly much the handsomest man. But 
there is a fate in these things. And beauty, 
in a man, has been of little account with 
me, since my earliest girlhood, when, for 
once, it turned my head. Now, farewell 1" 

"Zenobia, whither are you going?" I 
asked* 

VOL. n. B 



242 THE BLITHEDAL£ BOSIANGE. 

"No matter where," said she. "But I 
am weary of this place, and sick to death of 
playing at philanthropy and progress. Of 
all varieties of mock-life, we have surely 
blundered into the very emptiest mockery, 
in our ejflbrt to establish the one true system. 
I have done with it ; and Blithedale must 
find another woman to superintend the 
laundry, and you, Mr. Coverdale, another 
nurse to make your gruel, the next time you 
fall ill. It was, indeed, a foolish dream ! 
Yet it gave us some pleasant summer days, 
and bright hopes, while they lasted. It can 
do no more; nor will it avail us to shed 
tears over a broken bubble. Here is my 
hand I Adieu !" 

She gave me her hand, with the same 
free, whole-souled gesture as on the first 
afternoon of our acquaintance; and, being 
greatly moved, I bethought me of no better 
method of expressing my deep sympathy 



ZENOBIA AND COYEKBALE. 243 

than to cany it to my lips. In so doing, 
I perceived that this white hand — so hos- 
pitably warm, when I first touched it, five 
months since — ^was now cold as a veritable 
piece of snow. 

*' How very cold !" I exclaimed, holdii^ 
it between both my ovm, with the vain 
idea of warming it " What can be the rea- 
son ? It is really death-like !" 

" The extremities die first, they say," 
answered 2ienobia, laughing. " And so you 
kiss this poor, despised, rejected hand 1 Well, 
my dear fiiend, I thank you. You have re- 
served your homage for the fallen. Lip of 
man will never touch my hand again. I in- 
tend to become a Catholic, for the sake of 
going into a nunnery. When you next hear 
of Zenobia, her &ce will be behind the black 
veil ; so look your last at it now — ^for all is 
over ! Once more, farewell !" 

She withdrew her hand, yet left a linger- 

b2 



244 THE BUTHEDALE BOMAKCX. 

ing pressure, which I felt long afterwards. 
So intimately connected as I had been with 
perhaps the only man in whom she was ever 
truly interested, Zenobia looked on me as 
the representative of all the past, and was 
conscious that, in bidding me adieu, she 
likewise took final leave of HoUingsworth, 
and of this whole epoch of her life. Never 
did her beauty shine out more lustrously 
than in the last glimpse that I had of her. 
She departed, and was soon hidden among 
the trees. 

But, whether it was the strong impres- 
sion of the foregoing scene, or whatever else 
the cause, I was aflfected with a fantasy that 
Zenobia had not actually gone, but was still 
hovering about the spot and haunting it. I 
seemed to feel her eyes upon me. It was 
as if the vivid colouring of her character 
had left a brilliant stain upon the air. By 
degrees, however, the impression grew less 



ZENOBIA AND COVEBDALE. 245 

distinct. I flung myself upon the fallen 
leaves at the base of Eliot's pulpit. The 
sunshine withdrew up the tree-trunks, and 
flickered on the topmost boughs ; grey 
twilight made the wood obscure ; the stars 
brightened out ; the pendant boughs became 
wet with chill autumnal dews. But I was 
listless, worn out with emotion on my own 
behalf and sympathy for others, and had no 
heart to leave my comfortless lair beneath 
the rock. 

I must ^ have fallen asleep, and had a 
dream, all the circumstances of which ut- 
terly vanished at the moment when they 
converged to some tragical catastrophe, and 
thus grew too powerful for the thin sphere 
of slumber that enveloped them. Starting 
from the ground, I found the risen moon 
shining upon the rugged face of the rock, 
and myself all in a tremble. 



XIV. 



MIDNIGHT. 



It could not have been far from midnight 
when I came beneath HoUingsworth's win- 
dow, and, findmg it open, flung in a tuft of 
grass with earth at the roots, and heard it 
fell upon the floor. He was either awake or 
sleeping very lightly ; for scarcely a moment 
had gone by before he looked out, and dis- 
cerned me standing in the moonlight. 

" Is it you, Coverdale ?" he asked. " What 
is the matter ?" 

"Come down to me, Hollingsworth I" I 



i 



MIDNIGHT. 247 

answered. *'I am anxious to speak with 
you." 

The strange tone of my own voice startled 
me, and him, probably, no less. He lost no 
time, and soon issued fix)m the house-door, 
with his dress half arranged. 

" Again, what is the matter ?" he asked, 
impatiently. 

" Have you seen Zenobia," said I, " since 
you parted fix)m her at Eliot's pulpit ?" 

" No," answered Hollingsworth ; " nor did 
I expect it" 

His vqice was deep, but had a tremor in it. 
Hardly had he spoken, when Silas Foster 
thrust his head, done up in a cotton hand- 
kerchief out of another window, and took 
what he called — as it literally was — a squint 
at us. 

" Well, folks, what are ye about here ?" 
he demanded. " Aha ! are you there. Miles 
Coverdale ? Tou have been turning night 



248 THE BLnHEDAIX BCXKASCK. 

into day once yoa left u^ I ledoon ; and ao 
you find it quite natural to oome provfing 
about the house at this time o' n^^ ft^^ 
euiug my old woman out of her irita^ and 
making her disturb a tiied man out of Yob 
best nap. In with you, you vagaband, and 
to bed r 

" Dress yourself quietly, Foster," said L 
" We want your assistance.*" 

I could not, for the life of me, keep that 
strange tone out of my voice. Silas Foster, 
obtU80 as were his sensibilities, seemed to feel 
the ghastly earnestness that was conveyed in 
it as well as Hollingsworth did. He inmie- 
diately withdrew his head, and I heard him 
yawning, muttering to his wife, and again 
yawning heavily, while he hurried on his 
clothes. Meanwhile, I showed Hollings* 
wortli a delicate handkerchief, marked with 
a well-known cipher, and told where I had 
found it, and other circumstances, which had 



MIDNIOHT. 249 

filled me with a suspicion so terrible, that I 
left him, if he dared, to shape it out for 
himself. By the time my brief explanation 
was finished, we were joined by Silas Foster, 
in his blue woollen fix)ck. 

" Well, boys," cried he, peevishly, " what 
is to pay now ?" 

" Tell him, Hollingsworth," said I. 

HoUingsworth shivered, perceptibly, and 
drew in a hard breath betwixt his teeth. He 
steadied himself, however, and, looking the 
matter more firmly in the face than I had 
done, explained to Foster my suspicions, and 
the grounds of them, with a distinctness from 
which, in spite of my utmost eflForts, my 
words had swerved aside. The tough- 
nerved yeoman, in his comment, put a 
finish on the business, and brought out the 
hideous idea in its fiill terror, as if he were 
removing the napkin from the face of a 
corpse. 



250 THE BLITHBDALK BOMANCE. 

^' And SO you think sWs diowned herself?^ 
he cried. I ttmied away my face. 

^ What on earth should the young woman 
do that forr exdaimed Silas, his eyes halt 
out of his head with mere surprise. ^ Why, 
she has more means than she can use or 
waste, and lacks nothing to make her com- 
fortable but a husband, and iJiaf s an article 
she could have any day. There's some mis- 
take about this, I tell you T 

"Come," said I, shuddering; "let us go 
and ascertain the truth." 

" Well, well," answered Silas Foster ; "just 
as you say. Well take the long pole^ with 
the hook at the end, that serv^ to get the 
bucket out of the draw-well, when the rope 
is broken. With that, and a couple of long- 
handled hay-rakes, Til answer for finding 
her, if she's anywhere to be found. Strange 
enough ! Zenobia drown herself 1 No, no ; 
I don't believe it. She had too much sense, 



MIDNIGHT. 251 

and too much means, and enjoyed life a great 
deal too well." 

When our few preparations were com- 
pleted, we hastened, by a shorter than the 
customary route, through fields and pastures, 
and across a portion of the meadow, to the 
particular spot on the river-bank which I had 
paused to contemplate in the course of my 
afternoon's ramble. A nameless presenti- 
ment had again drawn me thither, after leav- 
ing Eliot's pulpit. I showed my companions 
where I had found the handkerchief, and 
pointed to two or three footsteps, impressed 
into the clayey margin, and tending towards 
the water. Beneath its shallow verge, among 
the water-weeds, there were further traces, 
as yet unobhterated by the sluggish current, 
which was there almost at a stand-still. Silas 
Foster thrust his face down close to these 
footsteps, and picked up a shoe that had 



2SS TSS, 'SLZ 

aOBBr^aasaLf. bengliilf imbedded 

"" T&SE s & isai ^oe dot Berer was made 
on a YadBK IokT iitamml lie. ^^I know 
eooQ^ of limwuin's cnft to tell that 
Fieiidi maoBE&cDBe; andy see wliat a high 
iiMtep! and Ivw ennhr dbe trod in it! 
There neirer was a wonan that stept hand- 
somer in her eboes dian Zenofaia did. Here,'' 
he added, addieaaiig H(JIii^BW0rth, ^ would 
you like to keep the shoe ?^ 
Hollingsworth started badL 
^* Give it to me, Foster," said L 
I dabbled it in the water, to rinse oflF the 
mud, and have kept it ever since. Not far 
from this spot lay an old, leaky punt, drawn 
up on the oozy river-side, and generally half 
full of water. It served the angler to go in 
quest of pickerel, or the sportsman to pick 

up his wild ducks. Setting this crazy bark 



MIDNIOHT. 253 

afloat, I seated myself in the stem with the 
paddle, while HoUingsworth sat in the bows 
with the hooked pole, and Silas Foster 
amidships with a hay-rake. 

" It puts me in mind of my young days," 
remarked Silas, *^ when I used to steal out of 
bed to go bobbing for horn-pouts and eels. 
Heigh-ho I — ^well, life and death together 
make sad work for us all ! Then I was a 
boy, bobbing for fish ; and now I'm getting 
to be an old fellow, and here I be, groping 
for a dead body I I tell you what, lads, if I 
thought anything had really happened to 
Zenobia, I should feel kind o' sorrow- 
ful/' 

" I wish, at least, you would hold your 
tongue," muttered I. 

The moon that night, though past the fiill, 
was still large and oval, and having risen be- 
tween eight and nine o'clock, now shone 
aslantwise over the river, throwing the high, 



864 THE BLITHEDtALS BOMANCE. 

opposite bank, with its woods, iato deep 
shadow, but lighting up the hither shore 
pretty effectually. Not a ray appeared to ML 
on the river itsel£ It lapsed imperceptibly 
away, a broad, black, inscrutable depth, 
keeping its own secrets from the eye of man, 
as impenetrably as mid-ocean could. 

*'Well, Miles CJoverdale," said Foster, 
^^ you are the helmsman. How do you mean 
to manage this business ?" 

" I shall let the boat drift, broadside fore- 
most, past that stmnp," I replied. " I know 
the bottom, having soimded it in fishing. The 
shore, on this side, after the first step or two, 
goes off very abruptly ; and there is a pool, 
just by the stump, twelve or fifteen feet deep. 
The current could not have force enough to 
sweep any simken object, even if partially 
buoyant, out of that hollow.'' 

" Come, then," said Silas; " but I doubt 
whether I can touch bottom ¥rith this hay- 



MIBNIQfiT. 255 

lake, if it's fis deep as you say. Mr. Hol- 
lingBWorth, I think you'll be the lucky man 
toHiight, such luck as it is." 

We floated past the stump. Silas Foster 
pHed his rake manfuUy, poking it as &r as 
he could into the water, and immersing the 
whole length of his arm besides. HoUings- 
worth at first sat motionless, with the hooked 
pole elevated in the air. But, by-and-by, with 
a nervous and jetky movement, he began to 
plunge it into the blackness that upbore us, 
setting his teeth, and making precisely such 
thrusts, methought, as if he were stabbing at 
a deadly enemy. I bent over the side of the 
boat So obscure, however, so awfully mys- 
terious, was that dark stream, that — and the 
thought made me shiver like a leaf — I might 
as well have tried to look into the enigma of 
the eternal world, to discover what had be- 
come of Zenobia's soul, as into the river's 
depths to find her body. And there, per- 



256 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

haps, she lay, with her face upward, while 
the shadow of the boat, and my own pale 
face peering downward, passed slowly be- 
twixt her and the sky ! 

Once, twice, thrice, I paddled the boat up 
stream, and again suffered it to glide, with 
the river's slow, funereal motion, downward. 
Silas Foster had raked up a large mass of 
stuff, which, as it came towards the sur&ce, 
looked somewhat like a flowing garment, but 
proved to be a monstrous tuft of water- weeds. 
Hollingsworth, with a gigantic effort, up- 
heaved a . sunken log. When once free of 
the bottom, it rose partly out of water — all 
weedy and sUmy, a devilish-looking object, 
which the moon had not shone upon for half 
a hundred years — then plunged again, and 
sullenly returned to its old resting-place, for 
the remnant of the century. 

'' That looked ugly I" quoth Silas. " I half 
thought it was the evil one, on the same 



MIDNIGHT. 257 

errand as ourselves — searching for Ze- 
nobia." 

" He shall never get her/' said I, giving 
the boat a strong impulse. 

" That's not for you to say, my boy," re- 
torted the yeoman. " Pray God he never 
has, and never may ! Slow work this, how- 
ever ! I should really be glad to find some- 
thing I Pshaw ! What a notion that is, 
when the only good luck woidd be to paddle, 
and drift, and poke, and grope, hereabouts, till 
morning, and have our labour for our pains ! 
For my part, I shouldn't wonder if the crea- 
ture had only lost her shoe in the mud, and 
saved her soul alive after all. My stars ! how 
she will laugh at us to-morrow morning !" 

It is indescribable what an image of Ze- 
nobia — at the breakfast-table, full of warm 
land mirthful life — this surmise of Silas 
Foster's brought before my mind. The ter- 
rible phantasm of her death was thrown 

VOL. n. 8 



238 THE BLTTHEDALE SOMANCE. 

by it into the remotest and dimmest back- 
ground, where it seemed to grow as impro^ 
bable as a myth. 

" Yes, Silas, it may be as you say," criedL 

The drift of the stream had again borne 
us a little below the stump, when I felt, — 
yes, felt, for it was as if the iron hook had 
smote my breast, — ^felt Hollingsworth's pole 
strike some object at the bottom of the 
river ! He started up, and almost overset 
the boat. 

"Hold on!" cried Foster; "you have 
her !" 

Putting a fury of strength into the eflfort, 
HoUingsworth heaved amain, and up came 
a white swash to the surface of the river. 
It was the flow of a woman's garments. A 
little higher, and we saw her dark hair 
streaming down the current. Black River 
of Death, thou hadst jnielded up thy victim I 
Zenobia was found ! 



MIDNIGHT. 259 

Silas Foster laid hold of the body; Hol- 
lingsworth, likewise, grappled with it; and 
I steered towards the bank, gazing all the 
while at Zenobia, whose Umbs were swaying 
in the current close at the boat's side. Ar- 
riving near the shore, we aU three stept into 
the water, bore her out, and laid her on the 
ground beneath a tree. 

^' Poor child I" said Foster, — and his dry 
old heart, I verily believe, vouchsafed a tear, 
— " I'm sorry for her 1" 

Were I to describe the perfect horror of 
the spectacle, the reader might justly reckon 
it to me for a sin and shame. For more 
than twelve long years I have borne it in 
my memory, and could now reproduce it as 
freshly as if it were still before my eyes. 
Of all modes of death, methinks it is the 
ugliest. Her wet garments swathed limbs 
of terrible inflexibility. She was the marble 
image of a death-agony. Her arms had 

s2 



260 THE BUTHSDALE SOICANCE. 

grown rigid in the act of strolling, and 
were bent before her with clenched hands; 
her knees, too, were bent, and — ^thank God 
for it I — ^in the attitude of prayer. Ah, that 
rigidity ! It is impossible to bear the terror 
of it. It seemed, — I must needs impart so 
much of my own miserable idea, — it seemed 
as if her body must keep the same position 
in the coffin, and that her skeleton would 
keep it in the grave ; and that when Zenobia 
rose at the day of judgment, it would be in 
just the same attitude as now I 

One hope I had; and that, too, was 

mingled half with fear. She knelt, as if in 
prayer. With the last, choking conscious- 
ness, her soul, bubbling out through her 
lips, it may be, had given itself up to the 
Father, reconciled and penitent. But her 
armsl They were bent before her, as if 
she struggled against Providence in never- 
ending hostility. Her hands! They were 



MIDNIGHT. 261 

clenched in immitigable defiance. Away with 
the hideous thought I The flitting moment 
after Zenobia sank into the dark pool — ^when 
her breath was gone, and her soul at her 
lips — ^was as long, in its capacity of God's 
infinite forgiveness, as the lifetime of the 
world I 

Foster bent over the body, and carefiilly 
examined it. 

" You have wounded the poor thing's 
breast," said he to Hollingsworth ; " close 
by her heart, too I" 

" Ha !" cried Hollingsworth, with a start. 

And so he had, indeed, both before and 
after death ! 

" See !" said Foster. /' That's the place 
where the iron struck her. It looks cruelly, 
but she never felt it I" 

He endeavoured to arrange the arms of 
the corpse decently by its side. His ut- 
most strength, however, scarcely sufficed to 



262 THE BLITHKDALB BOMAHCK. 

bring them down; and lisi^ ^'g'^ the 
next instant^ th^ bade him defiance, ex- 
act! j as before. He made another eflEbft^ 
with the same result. 

^In God's name, Silas Foster,** cned I, 
with bitter indignation, ^^ let that dead wo- 
man alone T 

^^ Why, man, it's not decent !** answered 
he, staring at me in amazement ^^ I can't 
bear to see her looking sol Well, well,** 
added he, after a third effort, ^ 'tis of no 
use, sure enough ; and we must leave the 
women to do their best with her, after we 
get to the house. The sooner that's done, 
the better." 

We took two rails from a neighbouring 
fence, and formed a bier by laying across 
some boards from the bottom of the boat. 
And thus we bore Zenobia homeward. 
Six hours before, how beautifiil I At mid- 
night, what a horror I A reflection occurs 




MIDNIGHT. 263 

9 

to me that will show ludicrously, I doubt 
not, on my page, but must come in, for its 
sterling truth. Being the woman that she 
was, could Zenobia have foreseen all these 
ugly circumstances of death — how ill it 
would become her, the altogether unseemly 
aspect which she must put on, and especially 
old Silas Foster's efforts to improve the mat- 
ter — she would no more have committed 
the dreadful act than have exhibited her- 
self to a public assembly in a badly-fitting 
garment! Zenobia, I have often thought, 
was not quite simple in her death. She 
had seen pictures, I suppose, of drowned 
persons in lithe and graceful attitudes. And 
she deemed it well and decorous to die as 
so many village maidens have, wronged in 
their first love, and seeking peace in the 
bosom of the old, familiar stream — so fa- 
miliar that they could not dread it — ^where, 
in childhood, they used to bathe their little 



264 THE BUTflKDALB BOMASCK. 

£pet, wading mid-leg deepy umnindfiil of wet 
skirts. But in Zenofaia's case there was 
scHDe tint of the Aicadian affipctation that 
had been visible enough in all our lives, 
for a few months past 

This, however, to my ocmoeption, takes 
nothing fix)m the tragedy. For, has not 
the world come to an awfully sophisticated 
pass, when, after a certain degree of ac- 
quaintance with it, we cannot even put 
ourselves to death in whole-hearted sim- 
plicity ? 

Slowly, slowly, with many a dreary pause 
—resting the bier often on some rock, or 
balancing it across a mossy log, to take 
fresh hold — we bore our burthen onward 
through the moonlight, and at last laid 
Zenobia on the floor of the old farm-house. 
By-and-by came three or four withered 
women, and stood whispering around the 
corpse, peering at it through their spec- 



MIDNIGHT. 265 

tades, holding up their skinny hands, shak- 
ing their night-capt heads, and taking coun- 
sel of one another's experience what was to 

be done. 

♦ 

With those tire-women we left Zenobia ! 



XV. 



BUTHEDALE PASTUBE. 



BuTHEDALE, thus far in its progress^ had 
never found the necessity of a burial-ground. 
There was some consultation among us in 
what spot Zenobia might most fitly be laid. 
It was my own wish that she should sleep 
at the base of Eliot's pulpit, and that on the 
rugged jfront of the rock the name by which 
we familiarly knew her — ^Zenobia— and not 
another word, should be deeply cut, and 
left for the moss and lichens to fill up at 
their long leisure. But Hollingsworth (to 
whose ideas on this point great deference 



BLITHEDALE FASTUBE. 267 

was due) made it his request that her grave 
might be dug on the gently sloping hill- 
side, in the wide pasture, where, as we 
once supposed, Zenobia and he had planned 
to build their cottage. And thus it was 
done, accordingly. 

She was buried very much as other people 
have been for hundreds of years gone by. 
In anticipation of a death, we Blithedale 
colonists had sometimes set our fancies at 
work to arrange a fimereal ceremony, which 
should be the proper symbolic expression 
of our spiritual faith and eternal hopes ; and 
this we meant to substitute for those cus- 
tomary rites which were moulded originally 

out of the Gothic gloom, and by long use, 

# 

like an old velvet pall, have so much more 
than their first death-smell in them. But 
when the occasion came, we found it the 
simplest and truest thing, after all, to con- 



268 THE BLTTHEDALB ROMANCE. 

tent ourselves with the old fashion, taking 
away what we could, but interpolating no 
novelties, and particularly avoiding all frip- 
pery of flowers and cheerful emblema. The 
procession moved from the farm-house. 
Nearest the dead walked an old man in 
deep mourning, his face mostly concealed 
in a white handkerchief, and with Prisdlla 
leaning on his arm. Hollingsworth and my- 
self came next. We all stood around the 
narrow niche in the cold earth ; all saw the 
coffin lowered in — all heard the rattle of the 
crumbly soil upon its lid — that final sound, 
which mortality awakens on the utmost 
verge of sense, as if in the vain hope of 
bringing an echo fi:om the spiritual world. 

I noticed a stranger — a stranger to most 
of those present, though known to me — 
who, after the coffin had descended, took 
up a handful of earth, and flung it first 



BUTHEDALE FASTUBE. 269 

into the grave. I had given up Hollings- 
worth's arm, and now found myself near 
this man. 

" It was an idle thing — a foolish thing — 
for Zenobia to do," said he. " She was the 
last woman in the world to whom death 
could have been necessary. It was too ab- 
surd ! I have no patience with her." 

" Why so ?" I inquired, smothering my 
horror at his cold comment in my eager 
curiosity to discover some tangible truth as 
to his relation with Zenobia. " If any crisis 
could justify the sad wrong she offered to 
herself, it was surely that in which she 
stood. Everything had failed her; — pros- 
perity, in the world's sense, for her opulence 
was gone,— the heart's prosperity, in love. 
And there was a secret burthen on her, the 
nature of which is best known to you. 
Toung as she was, she had tried Jife fully, 
had no more to hope, and something, 



270 THE BLTTHEDALE BOICANCE. 

perhaps, to fear. Had Providence taken 
her away in its own holy hand, I should 
have thought it the kindest dispensation 
that could be awarded to one so wrecked." 

"Tou mistake the matter completely/ 
rejoined Westervelt. 

" What, then, is your own view of it ?" I 
asked. 

" Her mind was active, and various in its 
powers," said he. " Her heart had a mani- 
fold adaptation ; her constitution an infinite 
buoyancy, which (had she possessed only a 
little patience to await the reflux of her 
troubles) would have borne her upward, 
triumphantly, for twenty years to come. Her 
beauty would not have waned — or scarcely 
so, and surely not beyond the reach of art to 
restore it — in all that time. She had life's 
summer all before her, and a hundred va- 
rieties of brilliant success. What an actress 
Zenobia might have been 1 It was one of 



BUTHEDALB PASTURE. 271 

her least valuable capabilities. How forcibly 
she might have wrought upon the world, 
either directly in her own person, or by her 
influence upon some man, or a series of men, 
of controlling genius I Every prize that could 
be worth a woman's having — and many 
prizes which other women are too timid to 
desire — ^lay within Zenobia's reach." 

" In all this," I observed, " there would 
have been nothing to satisfy her heart." 

^' Her heart !" answered Westervelt, con- 
temptuously. " That troublesome organ (as 
she had hitherto found it) would have been 
kept in its due place and degree, and have 
had all the gratification it could fairly claim. 
She would soon have established a control 
over it. Love had failed her, you say! 
Had it never failed her before ? Yet she 
survived it, and loved again — ^possibly not 
once alone, nor twice either. And now to 



272 THE BLTTHEDALE BOMANCE. 

drown herself for yonder dreamy philan- 
thropist r 

" Who are you," I exclaimed, indignantly, 
** that dare to speak thus of the dead ? Ton 
seem to intend a eulogy, yet leave out what- 
ev^ was noblest in her, and blacken while 
you mean to praise. I have long considered 
you as Zenobia's evil fate. Your sentiments 
confinn me in the idea, but leave me still 
Ignorant as to the mode in which you have 
influenced her life. The connexion may 
have been indissoluble, except by death. 
Then, indeed — always in the hope of Grod's 
infinite mercy — I cannot deem it a misfor- 
tune that she sleeps in yonder grave I'' 

" No matter what I was to her," he an- 
swered, gloomily, yet without actual emotion. 
** She is now beyond my reach. Had she 
lived, and hearkened to my counsels, we 
might have served each other well. But 



•\ 



BLITHEDALE PASTURE. 273 

there Zenobia lies in yonder pit, with the 
dull earth over her. Twenty years of a 
brilliant lifetime thrown away for a mere 
woman's whim !" 

Heaven deal with Westervelt according 
to his nature and deserts! — that is to say, 
annihilate him. He was altogether earthy, 
worldly, made for time and its gross objects, 
and incapable — except by a sort of dim re- 
flection caught from other minds — of so 
much as one spiritual idea. Whatever stain 
ZJenobia had was caught from him ; nor does 
it seldom happen that a character of admi- 
rable qualities loses its better life because the 
atmosphere that should sustain it is rendered 
poisonous by such breath as this man mingled 
with Zenobia's. Yet his reflections possessed 
their share of truth. It was a wofiil thought, 
that a woman of Zenobia's diversified capa- 
city should have fancied herself irretrievably 
defeated on the broad battle-field of life, and 

TOL. n. T 



3T4 THE BLITHEDALE BOMANCE. 

with no refuge, save to fall on her own sword, 
merely because Love had gone against her. 
It is nonsense, and a miserable wrong — the 
result, like so many others, of masculine 
^otism — that the success or failure of wo- 
man's existence should be made to depend 
wholly on the affections, and on one species 
of affection, yrhile man has such a multitude 
of other chances, that this seems but an inci- 
dent. For its own sake, if it will do no 
more, the world should throw open all its 
avenues to the passport of a woman's bleed- 
ing heart. 

As we stood around the grave, I looked 
often towards Priscilla, dreading to see her 
wholly overcome with grief. And deeply 
grieved, in truth, she was. But a character 
so simply constituted as hers h^ room only 
for a single predominant affection. No 
other feeling can touch the heart's inmost 
core, nor do it any deadly mischief. Thus, 



BMTHBDALE PASTURE. 275 

while we see that such a being responds to 
eveiy breeze with tremulous vibration, and 
imagine that she must be shattered by the 
first rude blast, we find her retaining her 
equilibrium amid shocks that might have 
overthrown many a sturdier firame. So 
with Prisdlla ; — ^her one possible misfortune 
was HoUingsworth's unkindness; and that 
was destined never to befal her — never yet, 
at least — ^for Priscilla has not died. 

But Hollingsworth ! After all the evil 
that he did, are we to leave him thus, blest 
with the entire devotion of this one true 
heart, and with wealth at his disposal, to 
execute the long-contemplated project that 
had led him so far astray ? Whatretribu- 
tion is there here ? My mind being vexed 
with precisely this query, I made a journey, 
some years since, for the sole purpose of 
catching a last glimpse at Hollingsworth, 
and judging for myself whether he were a 

t2 



276 THE BLTTHEDALE BOICANCE. 

happy man or no. I learned that he in- 
habited a small cottage, that his way of 
life was exceedingly retired, and that my 
only chance of encountering him or Pris- 
dlla was to meet them in a secluded lane, 
where, in the latter part of the afternoon, 
they were accustomed to walk. I did meet 
them, accordingly. As they approached 
me, I observed in HoUingsworth's face a 
depressed and melancholy look, that seemed 
habitual ; — ^the powerfuUy-built man showed 
a self-distrustful weakness, and a childlike 
or childish tendency to press close, and 
closer still, to the side of the slender wo- 
man whose arm was within his. In Pris- 
cilla's manner there was a protective and 
watchful quality, as if she felt herself the 
guardian of her companion; but, likewise, 
a deep, submissive, unquestioning reverence, 
and also a veiled happiness in her fair and 
quiet countenance. 



BLITHEDALE FASTUBE. 277 

Drawing nearer, Priscilla recognised me, 
and gave me a kind and friendly smile, but 
with a slight gesture, which I could not 
help interpreting as an entreaty not to make 
myself known to HoUmgsworth. Neverthe- 
less, an impulse took possession of me, and 
compelled me to address him. 

" I have come. Rollings worth," said I, 
" to view your grand edifice for the refor- 
mation of criminals. Is it finished yet ?" 

" No, nor begun," answered he, without 
raising his eyes. "A very small one an- 
swers all my purposes." 

Priscilla threw me an upbraiding glance. 
But I spoke again, with a bitter and re- 
vengeful emotion, as if flinging a poisoned 
arrow at Hollingsworth's heart. 

" Up to this moment," I inquired, " how 
many criminals have you reformed ?" 

" Not one," said Hollingsworth, with his 
eyes still fixed on the ground. " Ever since 



• 44 * ♦-• 



pntad, I b&mt been hosy inth a angle 



TheB tbe ^ens gosbed into my eyes, and 
I focsre Mai ; fisr I lemembeted the wild 
eoa^. the piaao nate aimi^ inth which 
Zenolu had sfAai those worfs— « Tdl 
him he has mardered me! Tell him that 
m haunt himT — and I knew what mur- 
defer he meant, and whose vindictiTe dia- 
dow dogged the side where PnsciUa was 
not 

The moral which presents itself to my 
reflections, as drawn from HoUingsworth's 
character and errors, is simply this — that, 
admitting what is called philanthropy, when 
adopted as a profession, to be often useful 
by its energetic impulse to society at large, 
it is perilous to the individual whose ruling 
passion, in one exclusive channel, it thus 
becomes. It ruins, or is fearfully apt to 
ruin, the heart, the rich juices of which 



BLITHEDALE PASTUBE. 279 

God never meant should be pressed vio- 
lently out, and distilled into alcoholic liquor, 
by an unnatural process, but should render 
life sweet, bland, and gently beneficent, and 
insensibly influence other hearts and other 
lives to the same blessed end. I see in 
HolKngsworth an exemplification of the 
most awful truth in Bunyan's book of such; 
— from the very gate of Heaven there is a 
by-way to the pit ! 

But, all this while, we have been stand- 
ing by Zenobia's grave. I have never since 
beheld it, but make no question that the 
grass grew all the better, on that little 
parallelogram of pasture-land, for the decay 
of the beautiful woman who slept beneath. 
How much Nature seems to love us ! And 
how readily, nevertheless, without a sigh or 
a complaint, she converts us to a meaner 
purpose, when her highest one — that of 
conscious intellectual life and sensibility — 



280 THE BUTHEDALB BOMAKCE. 

has been untimely balked I While Zenobia 
lived, Nature waa proud of her, and directed 
all eyes upon that radiant presence, as her 
fidrest handiwork. Zenobia perished. Will 
not Nature shed a tear? Ah, no! — she 
adopts the calamity at once into her system, 
and is just as well pleased, for aught we 
can see, with the tuft of ranker vegetation 
that grew out of Zenobia's heart, as with 
all the beauty which has bequeathed us 
no earthly representative except in this 
crop of weeds. It is because the spirit 
is inestimable that the lifeless body is so 
little valued. 



XVI. 

MILES COVBBDALE's CONFESSION. 

It remains only to say a few words about 
myself. Not improbably, the reader might 
be willing to spare me the trouble ; for I 
have made but a poor and dim figure in my 
own naixative, establishing no separate in- 
terest, and suffering my colourless life to take 
its hue from other lives. But one still re- 
tains some little consideration for one^s self; 
so I keep these last two or three pages for 
my individual and sole behoof. 

But what, after all, have I to tell? 
Nothing, nothing, nothing! I left Blithe- 



282 TBB BUTHKDALE SOMANC^ 

dale within the week afiier Zenobia's death, 
and went back thither no more. The whole 
soil of our £uin, for a long time afterwards, 
seemed but the sodded earth over her grave. 
I could not toil there, nor Hve upon its pro- 
ducts. Qfi^n, however, in these years that 
are darkening around me^ I rem^nber our 
beautiful scheme of a noble and unselfisli life ; 
and how &ir, in that first summer, appeared 
the prospect that it might endure for genera- 
tions, and be perfected, as the ages rolled away, 
into the system of a people and a w(»:ld ! 
Were my former associates now there — were 
there only three or four of those true- 
hearted men still labouring in the sun — I 
sometimes &ncy that I should direct my 
world-weary footsteps thitherward, and en- 
treat them to receive me, for old fi:iendship*s 
sake. More and more I feel that we had 
struck upon what ought to be a truth. 
Posterity may dig it up and profit by it. The 



MILBS COYEBDALE's CONFESSION. 28S 

experiment, so far as its original projectors 
were concerned, proved, long ago, a failure ; 
first lapsing into Fourierism, and dying, as it 
well deserved, for this infidelity to its own 
higher spirit. Where once we toiled with 
our whole hopeful hearts, the town-paupers, 
aged, nerveless, and disconsolate, creep slug- 
gishly a-field. Alas ! what faith is requisite 
to bear up against such results of generous 
effort! 

My subsequent life has passed — I was 
going to say happily — but, at all events, 
tolerably enough. I am now at middle age — 
well, well, a step or two beyond the midmost 
point, and I care not a fig who knows it ! — a 
bachelor, with no very decided purpose of 
ever being otherwise. I have been twice to 
Europe, and spent a year or two rather 
agreeably at each visit Being well to do in 
the world, and having nobody but myself to 
care for, I live very much at my ease, and 



284 IBM BUIHXDALS SOMAHGX. 



hie sampbaoosij every day. As for poetry; 
I have ffwea it up, notwithstanding that 
Dr. GMswold — as the reader, of course, 
knows — has placed me at a £sdr ^evation 
anuMig our minor minstrelsy} on the strengA 
of my pretty little volume, published ten 
years i^ As regards human progress (in 
spile of my irrepressible yearnings over the 
Blithedale reminiscences), let them believe 
in it who can, and aid in it who choose. If 
I could earnestly do either, it might be aQ 
the better for my comfort As Hollings- 
worth once told me, I lack a purpose. How 
strange ! He was ruined, morally, by an 
overplus of the very same ingredient, the 
want of which, I occasionally suspect, has 
rendered my own life all an emptiness. I by 

no means wish to die. Yet, were there any 
cause, in this whole chaos of human struggle, 
worth a sane man's dying for, and which my 
death would benefit, then — ^provided, how- 



MILES covebdale's coneessiok. 285 

ever, the effort did not involve an unreason- 
able amount of trouble — ^methinks I might 
be bold to offer up my life. If Kossuth, for 
example, would pitch the battle-field of 
Hungarian rights within an easy tide of my 
abode, and choose a mild, sunny morning, 
after breakfast, for the conflict, Miles Cover- 
dale would gladly be his man, for one brave 
rush upon the levelled bayonets. Further 
than that, I should be loth to pledge 
myself. 

I exaggerate my own defects. The reader 
must not take my own word for it, nor 
beHeve me altogether changed from the 
young man who once hoped strenuously, and 
struggled not so much amiss. Frostier heads 
than mine have gained honour in the world ; 
frostier hearts have imbibed new warmth, 
and been newly happy. Life, however, it 
must be owned, has come to rather an idle 
pass with me. Would my Mends like to 



386 THB BLITHSDALE BOMANCE. 

know what brought it thither ? There is one 
secret — I have concealed it all along, and 
never meant to let the least whisper of it 
escape — one foolish little secret, which pos- 
sibly may have had something to do with 
these inactive years of meridian manhood, 
with my bachelorship, with the unsatisfied 
retrospect that I fling back on life, and my 
listless glance towards the future. Shall I 
reveal it ? It is an absurd thing for a man 
in his afternoon — a man of the world, more- 
over, with these three white hairs in his 
brown mustache, and that deepening track 

# 

of a crow's-foot on each temple — an absurd 
thing ever to have happened, and quite the 
absurdest for an old bachelor like me to talk 
about. But it rises in my throat j so let it 
come. 

I perceive, moreover, that the confession, 
brief as it shall be, will throw a gleam of 
light over my behaviour throughout the 



MILES COVERDALE's CONFESSION. 287 

foregoing incidents, and is, indeed, essential 

to the fiill understanding of my story. The 

reader, therefore, since I have disclosed so 

much, is entitled to this one word more. 

As I write it, he will charitably suppose me 

to blush and turn away my face : 

I — I myself — was in love — with — Pris- 
cilla. 



THE END. 



WBHOrO BKAVFOBT HOUSE, STRAMD. 



u 

i 



It 











• • *- 1 



