
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



1751 





fGoGgie 



3 




HARVARD 
COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 



Digitized by 



Google 



.^.^ cf^>^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



3 




HARVARD 
COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 




Digitized by 



Google 



.^.^ ^/'2-)^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE GREAT STONE FACE 

AND Other Tales 

OF THE White Mountains 



Digitized by 



Google 



Al 1731 .liO. U 




OSPTRIOBT, l88a, 1883 AND 1889) BY HOUOBTON, MXWWha * CO. 
ALL UOBTS RX8BKVBD 



Digitized by 



Google 



CONTENTS 

Iktboductzon •••••••••••iii 

Tbb Qbbat Stonb Fact • • 6 

Thb Ambitious Gubbt ••••••••• 31 

Ths Qbbat Gabbunoui •••••••• 42 

Skstghes fbom Mxm okt •••••••» n 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



ILLUSTRATIONS 

Thb Old Man of ths Mountain FrmiMpMM 

Copyright Photograph by the Detroit PnUiildiig Co. 

Pkvuub Laxn, Franoonia Notch 8 

Photogn^h by A. H. Brainard 

Franoonia Notch and thb Pbofiijb Houbb from Echo Lakb 84 
Photograph by the Detroit Publishiiig Co. 

Echo Lakb, Franoonia Notch 40 

Photogn^h by A. H. Brainard 

Tbe Old Man of ths Mountain from thb Boad 56 

Photograph by E. R. Mixer, of Tbe Automobile Bhie 
Book PublidiiDg Co. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION. 



The first three numbers in this collection are tales 
of the White Hills in New Hampshire. The passages 
from Sketches from Memory show that Hawthorne 
had visited the mountains in one of his occasional ram- 
bles from home, but there are no entries in his Note 
Books which give accounts of such a visit. There is, 
however, among these notes the following interesting 
paragraph, written in 1840 and clearly foreshadowing 
The Great Stone Face: 

*^ The semblance of a human face to be formed on 
the side of a mountain, or in the fracture of a small 
stone, by a l\isu8 naturce [freak of nature]. The face 
is an object of curiosity for years or centuries, and by 
and by a boy is bom whose features gradually assume 
the aspect of that portrait. At some critical juncture 
the resemblance is found to be perfect. A prophecy 
may be connected.'' 

It is not impossible that this conceit occurred to 
Hawthorne before he had himself seen the Old Man 
of the Mountain, or the Profile, in the Franconia Notch 
which is generally associated in the minds of readers 
with The Great Storve Face. 

In The Ambitious Guest he has made use of the 
incident still told to travellers through the Notch, of 
the destruction of the Willey family in August, 1826. 
The house occupied by the family was on the slope of 
a mountain, and after a long drought there was a ter* 



Digitized by 



Google 



iv INTRODUCTION. 

rible tempest whioli not only raiBed the riyer to a great 
height but loosened the surface of the monntiun so that 
a great landslide took phice. The honse was in the 
track of the slide, and the family rashed out of doors. 
Had they remained within they wonld have been safe, 
for a lec^ above the honse parted the ayalanohe so 
that it was diverted into two paths and swept past the 
honse on either side. Mr. and BIrs. Willey, their five 
children, and two hired men were crushed under the 
weight of earth, rocks, and trees. 

In the Sketches from Memory Hawthorne gives an 
intimation of the tale which he might write and did 
afterward write of I%e Great Carbuncle. The paper 
is interesting as showing what were the actual experi- 
ences out of which he formed his imaginative stories. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE 6BEAT STONE FACE. 

One afternoon, when the son was gomg down^ a 
mother and her little boy sat at the door of their cot- 
tage, talking about the Ghreat Stone Face. They had 
but to lift their eyes, and there it was plainly to be 
seen, though miles away, with the sunshine brighten' 
ing all its features. 

And what was the Oreat Stone Face? 

Embosomed amongst a family of lofty mountains, 
there was a valley so spacious that it contained many 
thousand inhabitants. Some of these good people 
dwelt in log-huts, with the black forest all around 
them, on the steep and difficult hill-sides. Others had 
their homes in comfortable farm-houses, and cultivated 
the rich soil on the gentle slopes or level surfaces of 
the valley. Others, again, were congregated into pop* 
ulous villages, where some wild, highland rivulet, 
tumbling down from its birthplace in the upper moun* 
tain region, had been caught and tamed by human cun- 
ning, and compelled to turn the machinery of cotton- 
factories. The inhabitants of this valley, in short, 
were numerous, and of many modes of life. But aD 
of them, grown people and children, had a kind of 
familiarity with the Great Stone Face, although some 
possessed the gift of distinguishing this grand natural 
phenomenon more perfectly than many of their neigh 
bors. 

The Oreat Stone Face, then, was a work of Nature 
in her mood of majestic playfulness, formed on the 



Digitized by 



Google 



6 THE GREAT STONE FACE. 

perpendicular side of a montitain by some immense 
rocks, which had been thrown together in such a posi- 
tion as, when viewed at a proper distance, precisely to 
resemble the features of the human countenance. It 
seemed as if an enormous giant, or a Titan, had sculp* 
tured his own likeness on the precipice. There was 
the broad arch of the forehead, a hundred feet in 
height ; the nose, with its long bridge ; and the vast 
lips, which, if they could have spoken, would have 
rolled their thunder accents from one end of the val- 
ley to the other. True it is, that if the spectator ap- 
proached too near, he lost the outline of the gigantic 
visage, and could discern only a heap of ponderous and 
gigantic rocks, piled in chaotic ruin one upon another. 
Ketracing his steps, however, the wondrous features 
would again be seen; and the farther he withdrew 
from them, the more like a human face, with all its 
original divinity intact, did they appear; until, as it 
grew dim in the distance, with the clouds and glorified 
vapor of the mountains clustering about it, the Great 
Stone Face seemed positively to be alive. 

It was a happy lot for children to grow up to man- 
hood or womanhood with the Great Stone Face before 
their eyes, for all the features were noble, and the ex' 
pression was at once grand and sweet, as if it were the 
glow of a vast, warm heart, that embraced all mankind 
in its affections, and had room for more. It was an 
education only to look at it. According to the belief 
of many people, the valley owed much of its fertility 
to this benign aspect that was continually beaming 
over it, illuminating the clouds, and infusing its ten- 
derness into the sunshine. 

As we began with saying, a mother and her little 
boy sat at their cottage-door, gazing at the Great Stone 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE GREAT STONE FACE. 7 

Face, and talking abont it. The child's name was 
Ernest. 

^^ Mother/' said he, while the Titanic visage smiled 
on him, *' I wish that it could speak, for it looks so 
very kindly that its voice must needs be pleasant. If 
I were to see a man with such a face, I should love 
him dearly." 

^^ If an old prophecy should come to pass," answered 
his mother, ^* we may see a man, some time or other, 
with exactly such a face as that." 

"What prophecy do you mean, dear mother?" 
eagerly inquired Ernest. " Pray tell me all about 
it!" 

So his mother told him a story that her own mother 
bad told tc her, when she herself was younger than 
little Ernest; a story, not of things that were past, 
but of what was yet to come ; a story, nevertheless, so 
very old, that even the Indians, who formerly inhab- 
ited this valley, had heard it from their forefathers, to 
whom, as they affirmed, it had been murmured by the 
mountain streams, and whispered by the wind among 
the tree-tops. The purport was, that, at some future 
day, a child should be bom hereabouts, who was des- 
tined to become the greatest and noblest personage of 
his time, and whose countenance, in manhood, should 
bear an exact resemblance to the Great Stone Face. 
Not a few old-fashioned people, and young ones like- 
wise, in the ardor of their hopes, still cherished an 
enduring faith in this old prophecy. But others, who 
had seen more of the world, had watched and waited 
till they were weary, and had beheld no man with such 
a face, nor any man that proved to be much greater or 
nobler than his neighbors, concluded it to be nothing 
but an idle tale. At all events, the great man of the 
prophecy had not yet appeared. 



Digitized by 



Google 



8 TBE ORSAT STONE FACE. 

** O 'mother, dear mother I ** cried Ernest, okppmg 
bis hands above his head, ** I do hope that I shall liye 
to see him I " 

His mother was an affectionate and thoughtful 
woman, and felt that it was wisest not to discourage 
the generous hopes of her little boy. So she only said 
to him, " Perhaps you may." 

And Ernest never forgot the story that his mother 
told him. It was always in his mind, whenever he 
looked .upon the Great Stone Face. He spent his 
childhood in the log-cottage where he was bom, and 
was dutiful to his mother, and helpful to her in many 
things, assisting her much with his little hands, and 
more with his loving heart. In this manner, from a 
happy yet often pensive child, he grew up to be a 
mild, quiet, unobtrusive boy, and sun-browned with 
labor in the fields, but with more intelligence bright- 
ening his aspect than is seen in many lads who have 
been taught at famous schools. Yet Ernest had had 
no teacher, save only that the Great Stone Face be- 
came one to him. When the toil of the day was over, 
he would gaze at it for hours, until he began to im- 
agine that those vast features recognized him, and 
gave him a smile of kindness and encouragement, re- 
sponsive to his own look of veneration. We must not 
take upon us to affirm that this was a mistake, al- 
though the Face may have looked no more kindly at 
Ernest than at all the world besides. But the secret 
was that the boy's tender and confiding simplicity 
discerned what other people could not see ; and thus 
the love, which was meant for all, became his peculiar 
portion. 

About this time there went a rumor throughout the 
valley^ that the great man, foretold from ages long 



Digitized by 



Google 




B 



< 



Digitized by CjOOQIC 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE GREAT STONE FACE. 9 

ago, wlio was to bear a resemblanoe to the Great Stone 
Face, had appeared at last. It seemB that, many jears 
before, ayonng man had migrated from the valley and 
settled at a distant seaport, where, after getting to- 
gether a little money, he had set np as a shopkeeper. 
His name — bat I oould never learn whether it was 
his real one, or a nickname that had grown out of his 
habits and success in life — was Gathergold. Being 
shrewd and active, and endowed by Providence with 
that inscmtable faculty which develops itself in what 
the world calls luck, he became an exceedingly rich 
merchant, and owner of a whole fleet of buUgr-bot- 
tomed ships. All the countries of the globe appeared 
to join hands for the mere purpose of adding heap af- 
ter heap to the mountainous accumulation of this one 
man's wealth. The cold regions of the north, almost 
within the gloom and shadow of the Arctic Circle, 
sent him their tribute in the shape of furs ; hot Af- 
rica sifted for him the golden sands of her rivers, 
and gathered up the ivory tusks of her great elephants 
out of the forests ; the east came bringing him the 
rich shawls, and spices, and teas, and the effulgence 
ei diamonds, and the gleaming purity of large pearls. 
The ocean, not to be bdiindhand with the earth, 
yielded up her mighty whales, that Mr. Ghtthergold 
might sell their oil, and make a profit on it. Be the 
original commodity what it might, it was gold within 
his grasp. It might be said of him, as of Midas, in 
the fable, that whatever he touched with his finger im- 
mediately glistened, and grew yellow, and was changed 
at once into sterling metal, or, which suited him still 
better, into piles of coin. And, when Mr. Gather^^old 
had become so very rich that it would have taken him 
a hundred years only to count his wealth, he bethought 



Digitized by 



Google 



10 THE GREAT STONE FACE. 

himself of his natiye valley, and resolved to go back 
thither, and end his days where he was born. With 
this purpose in view, he sent a skilful architect to 
build him such a palace as should be fit for a man 
of his vast wealth to live in. 

As I have said above, it had already been rumored 
in the valley that Mr. Gathergold had turned out to 
be the prophetic personage so long and vainly looked 
for, and that his visage was the perfect and undeniable 
similitude of the Great Stone Face. People were the 
more ready to believe that this must needs be the fact, 
when they beheld the splendid edifice that rose, as if 
by enchantment, on the site of his father's old weather- 
beaten farm-house. The exterior was of marble, so 
dazzlingly white that it seemed as though the whole 
structure might melt away in the sunshine, like those 
humbler ones which Mr. Gathergold, in his young 
play-days, before his fingers were gifted with the touch 
of transmutation, had been accustomed to build of 
snow. It had a richly ornamented portico, supported 
by tall pillars, beneath which was a lofty door, studded 
with silver knobs, and made of a kind of variegated 
wood that had been brought from beyond the sea. 
The windows, from the floor to the ceiling of each 
stately apartment, were composed, respectively, of but 
one enormous pane of glass, so transparently pure that 
it was said to be a finer medium than even the vacant 
atmosphere. Hardly anybody had been permitted to 
see the interior of this palace; but it was reported^ 
and with good semblance of truth, to be far more gor^ 
geous than the outside, insomuch that whatever was 
iron or brass in other houses was silver or gold in 
this; and Mr. Gathergold's bedchamber, especially, 
made such a glittering appearance that no ordinaiy 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE ORE AT STONE FACE. 11 

man would have been able to close his eyes there. Bat, 
tm the other hand, Mr. Grathergold was now so inured 
to wealth, that perhaps he could not haye closed his 
eyes unless where the gleam of it was certain to find 
its way beneath his eyelids. 

In due time, the mansion was finished ; next came 
the upholsterers, with magnificent furniture ; then, a 
whole troop of black and white servants, the harbin- 
gers of Mr. Gathergold, who, in his own majestic per- 
son, was expected to arrive at sunset. Our friend 
Ernest, meanwhile, had been deeply stirred by the 
idea that the great man, the noble man, the man of 
prophecy, after so many ages of delay, was at length 
to be made manifest to his native valley. He knew, 
boy as he was, that there were a thousand ways in 
which Mr. Gathergold, with his vast wealth, might 
transform himself into an angel of beneficence, and 
assume a control over human affairs as wide and be- 
nignant as the smile of the Great Stone Face. Full 
of faith and hope, Ernest doubted not that what the 
people said was true, and that now he was to behold 
the living likeness of those wondrous features on the 
mountain-side. While the boy was still gazing up 
the valley, and fancying, as he always did, that the 
Great Stone Face returned his gaze and looked kindly 
at him, the rumbling of wheels was heard, approach- 
ing swiftly along the winding road. 

"Here he comes!" cried a group of people who 
were assembled to witness the arrival. " Here comes 
the great Mr. Gathergold ! " 

A. carriage, drawn by four horses, dashea round the 
turn of the road. Within it, thrust partly out of the 
window, appeared the physiognomy of the old man, 
with a skin as yellow as if his own Midas-hand had 



Digitized by 



Google 



12 THE GREAT STONE FACE 

transmuted it He had a low forehead, small, sharp 
eyes, puckered about with innumerable wrinkles, and 
very thin lips, whieh he made still thinner by pressing 
them forcibly together. 

''The very image of the Great Stone Face!" 
shouted the people. '' Sure enough, the old prophecy 
is true; and here we have the great man come, at 
kstl" 

And, what greatly perplexed Ernest, they seemed 
actually to believe that here was the likeness whieh 
they spoke of. By the roadside there chanced to be 
an old beggar woman and two little beggar-children, 
stragglers from some far-off region, who, as the car- 
riage rolled onward, held out their hands and lifted up 
their doleful voices, most piteously beseeching charity. 
A yellow claw — the very same that had clawed to- 
gether so much wealth — poked itself out of the coach- 
window, and dropt some copper coins upon the ground ; 
so that, though the great man's name seems to have 
been Grathergold, he might just as suitably have been 
nicknamed Scattercopper. Still, nevertheless, with an 
earnest shout, and evidently with as much good faith 
as ever, the people bellowed, — 

'^ He is the very image of the Oreat Stone Face I " 

But Ernest turned sadly from the wrinkled shrewd- 
ness of that sordid visage, and gazed up the valley, 
where, amid a gathering mist, gilded by the last sun- 
beams, he could still distinguish those glorious fea- 
tures which had impressed themselves into his soul. 
Their aspect cheered him. What did the benign lips 
seem to say? 

^ He will come I Fear not, Ernest ; the man will 
come I" 

The years went on, and Ernest ceased to be a boy* 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE GREAT STONE FACE. 18 

He had grown to be a young man now. He attracted 
little notice from the other inhabitants of the valley ; 
for they saw nothing remarkable in his way of life, 
save that, when the labor of the day was over, he still 
loved to go apart and gaze and meditate upon the 
Great Stone Face. According to their idea of the 
matter, it was a folly, indeed, but pardonable, inas- 
much as Ernest was industrious, kind, and neighborly, 
and neglected no duty for the sake of indulging this 
idle habit. They knew not that the Great Stone 
Face had become a teacher to him, and that the senti- 
ment which was expressed in it would enlarge the 
young man's heart, and fill it with wider and deeper 
sympathies than other hearts. They knew not that 
thence would come a better wisdom than could be 
learned from books, and a better life than could be 
moulded on the defaced example of other human lives. 
Neither did Ernest know that the thoughts and affeo« 
tions which came to him so naturally, in the fields and 
at the fireside, and wherever he communed with him- 
self, were of a higher tone than those which all men 
shared with him. A simple soul, — simple as when 
his mother first taught him the old prophecy, — he 
beheld the marvellous features beaming adown the 
valley, and still wondered that their human counter- 
part was so long in making his appearance. 

By this time poor Mr. Gathergold was dead and 
buried ; and the oddest part of the matter was, tha^ 
his wealth, which was the body and spirit of his ex 
istence, had disappeared before his death, leaving 
nothing of him but a living skeleton, covered over 
with a wrinkled, yellow skin. Since the melting away 
of his gold, it had been very generally conceded that 
there was no such striking resemblance, after allf 



Digitized by 



Google 



14 THE GREAT STONE FACE. 

betwixt tbe ignoble features of tbe ruined mercbant 
and that majestie face upon tbe mountain-side. So 
tbe people ceased to bonor bim during bis lifetime, 
and quietly consigned bim to f orgetfulness after bis 
decease. Once in a wbile, it is true, bis memory was 
brougbt up in connection witb tbe tnagnificent palace 
wbicb be bad built, and wbicb had long ago been 
turned into a hotel for tbe accommodation of stran- 
gers, multitudes of whom came, every summer, to visit 
that famous natural curiosity, tbe Great Stone Face. 
Thus, Mr. Gathergold being discredited and thrown 
into the shade, the man of prophecy was yet to come. 
It so happened that a native-bom son of the valley, 
many years before, had enlisted as a soldier, and, 
after a great deal of hard fighting, had now become 
an illustrious commander. Whatever be may be 
called in history, be was known in camps and on the 
battle-field under the nickname of Old Blood-and- 
Thunder. This war-worn veteran, being now infirm 
with age and wounds, and weary of the turmoil of a 
military life, and of the roll of the drum and the 
elangor of the trumpet, that bad so long been ringing 
in his ears, bad lately signified a purpose of returning 
to his native valley, hoping to find repose where he 
remembered to have left it. The inhabitants, bis old 
neighbors and their grown-up children, were resolved 
to welcome the renowned warrior with a salute of can- 
non and a public dinner ; and all the more enthusias- 
tically, it being affirmed that now, at last, the likeness 
of the Great Stone Face bad actually appeared. An 
aid-'de-camp of Old Blood-and-Thunder, travelling 
through the valley, was said to have been struck with 
the resemblance. Moreover the schoolmates and early 
acquaintances of tbe general were ready to testify, on 



Digitized by 



Google 



2SS OMBAT STONS FACE. 16 

oath, that, to the best of their leoollection, the af ore- 
said general had been exceedingly like the majestic 
image, even when a boy, only that the idea had never 
occurred to them at that period. Great, therefore, was 
the excitement throughout the valley ; and many peo- 
ple, who had never once thought of glancing at the 
. Ghreat Stone Face for years before, now spent their 
time in gazing at it, for the sake of knowing exactly 
how Gbneral Blood-and-Thunder looked. 

On the day of the great festival, Ernest, with ail 
the other people of the valley, left their work, and 
proceeded to the spot where tiie sylvan banquet was 
prepared. As he approached, the loud voice of the 
Bev. Dr. Battleblast was heard, beseeching a blessing 
on the good things set before them, and on the dis- 
tinguished friend of peace in whose honor they were 
assembled. The tables were arranged in a cleared 
space of the woods, shut in by the surrounding trees, 
except where a vista opened eastward, and afforded a 
distant view of the Great Stone Face. Over the gen- 
eral's chair, which was a relic from the home of Wash- 
ington, there was an arch of verdant boughs, with the 
laurel profusely intermixed, and surmounted by his 
country's banner, beneath which he had won his victo- 
ries. Our friend Ernest raised himself on his tiptoes, 
in hopes to get a glimpse of the celebrated guest ; but 
there was a mighty crowd about the tables anxious 
to hear the toasts and speeches, and to catch any word 
that might fall from the general in reply ; and a vol- 
unteer company, doing duty as a guard, pricked ruth- 
lessly with their bayonets at any particularly quiet 
person among the tiirong. So Ernest, being of an 
unobtrusive character, was thrust quite into the back* 
ipround, where he coidd see no more of Old Blood- 



Digitized by 



Google 



16 THE GREAT STONE FACE. 

and-Thunder's physiognomy than if it had been still 
blazing on the battle-field. To console himself, he 
turned towards the Great Stone Face, which, like a 
faithful and long-remembered friend, looked back 
and smiled upon him through the vista of the forest. 
Meantime, however, he could overhear the remarks of 
various individuals, who were comparing the features 
of the hero with the face on the distant mountain-side. 

^^ 'T is the same face, to a hair I " cried one man, 
cutting a caper for joy. 

^WonderfuUy like, that's a fact!'* responded 
another. 

'' Like I why, I call it Old Blood-and-Thnnder him- 
self, in a monstrous looking-glass 3 " cried a third. 

** And why not ? He 's the greatest man of this or 
any other age, beyond a doubt." 

And then all three of the speakers gave a great 
shout, which communicated electricity to the crowd,and 
called forth a roar from a thousand voices, that went 
reverberating for miles among the mountains, until 
you might have supposed that the Ghreat Stone Face 
had poured its thunder-breath into the cry. All these 
comments, and this vast enthusiasm, served the more 
to interest our friend ; nor did he think of questioning 
that now, at length, the mountain-visage had found its 
human counterpart. It is true, Ernest had imagined 
that this long-looked-f or personage would appear in 
the character of a man of peace, uttering wisdom, and 
doing good, and making people happy. But, taking 
an habitual breadth of view, with all his simplicity, 
he contended that Providence should choose its own 
method of blessing mankind, and oould conceive that 
this great end might be effected even by a warrior and 
a bloody sword, should inscrataUe wisdom see fit to 
order matters so* 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE OREAT 8T0NS FACE. IT 

^The general I the general I ** was now the ory. 
^ Hush I silence I Old Blood-and-Thnnder *b going to 
make a speech." 

Eyen so ; for, the cloth heing removed, the general's 
health had been drunk, amid shouts of applause, and 
he now stood upon his feet to thank the company. 
Ernest saw him. There he was, over the shoulders of 
the crowd, from the two glittering epaulets and em- 
broidered collar upward, beneath the arch of green 
boughs with intertwined laurel, and the banner droop- 
ing as if to shade his brow I And there, too, visible 
in the same glance, through the vista of the forest, ap- 
peared the Grreat Stone Face I And was there, in- 
deed, such a resemblance as the crowd had testified? 
Alas, Ernest could not recognize it I He beheld a 
war-worn and weatheivbeaten countenance, full of en» 
ergy, and expressive of an iron will; but the gentle 
wisdom, the deep, broad, tender sympathies, were al- 
together wanting in Old Blood-and-Thunder's visage ; 
and even if the Great Stone Face had assumed his 
look of stem command, the milder traits would still 
have tempered it. 

** This is not the man of prophecy," sighed Ernest 
to himself, as he made his way out of the throng. 
^ And must the world wait longer yet? " 

The mists had congregated about the distant moun- 
tain-side, and there were seen the grand and awful 
features of the Great Stone Face, awful but benignant, 
as if a mighty angel were sitting among the hills, and 
enrobing himself in a cloud-vesture of gold and pur- 
ple. As he looked, Ernest could hardly believe but 
that a smile beamed over the whole visage, with a ra- 
diance still brightening, although without motion of 
the lips. It was probably the effect of the western 



Digitized by 



Google 



18 TBS GREAT STONE PACE. 

simsbkie, melting durongli the thinly diffused vwpan 
that had swept between him and the object that he 
gazed at. But — as it always did — the aspect of his 
marvellous friend made Ernest as hopeful as if he had 
never hoped in vain* 

*^ Fear not, Ernest/' sidd his heart, even] as if the 
Great Face were whispering him, — '^fear not, Eiw 
nest ; he will come." 

More years sped swiftly and tranquilly away. Er- 
nest still|dwelt in his native valley, and was now a 
man of middle age. By imperceptible degrees, he had 
become known among the people. Now, as heretofore, 
he labored for his bread, and was the same simple- 
hearted man that he had always been. But he had 
thought and felt so much, he had given so many of 
the best hours of his life to unworldly hopes for some 
great good to mankind, that it seemed as though he 
had been talking with the angels, and had imbibed a 
portion of their wisdom unawares. It was visible in 
the calm and well-considered beneficence of his daily 
life, the quiet stream of which had made a wide green 
margin all along its course. Not a day passed by, that 
the world was not the better because this man, hum^ 
ble as he was, had lived. He never stepped aside 
from his own path, yet would always reach a blessing 
to his neighbor. Almost involuntarily, too, he had be- 
come a preacher. The pure and high simplicity of 
his thought, which, as one of its manifestations, took 
shape in the good deeds that dropped silently from his 
hand, flowed also forth in speech. He uttered truths 
that wrought upon and moulded the lives of those who 
beard him. His auditors, it may be, never suspected 
that Ernest, their own neighbor and familiar friend, 
was more than an ordinaiy man ; least of all did Er- 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE GREAT STONE FACE. 19 

\ himself suspect it ; but, inevitably as the rnnrmnr 
of a rivulet, came thoughts out of his mouth that no 
other human lips had spoken. 

When the people's minds had had a little time to 
cool, they were ready enough to acknowledge their 
mistake in imagining a similarity between General 
Blood-and-Thunder's truculent physiognomy and the 
benign visage on the mountain-side. But now, again, 
there were reports and many paragraphs in the news- 
papers, affirming that the likeness of the Great Stone 
Face had appeared upon the broad shoulders of a cer- 
tain eminent statesman. He, like Mr. Gathergold 
and old Blood-and-Thunder, was a native of the 
valley, but had left it in his early days, and taken 
up the trades of law and politics. Instead of the rich 
man's wealth and the warrior's sword, he had but a 
tongue, and it was mightier than both together. So 
wonderfully eloquent was he, that whatever he might 
choose to say, his auditors had no choice but to be- 
lieve him; wrong looked like right, and right like 
wrong; for when it pleased him, he could make a 
kind of illuminated fog with his mere breath, and ob- 
scure the natural daylight with it. His tongue, indeed, 
was a magic instrument: sometimes it rumbled like the 
thunder ; sometimes it warbled like the sweetest music. 
It was the blast of war, — the song of peace ; and it 
seemed to have a heart in it, when there was no such 
matter. In good truth, he was a wondrous man ; and 
when his tongue had acquired him all other imaginable 
success, — when it had been heard in balls of state, 
and in the courts of princes and potentates, — after 
it had made him known all over the world, even as a 
voice crying from shore to shore^ — it finally per* 
snaded Ids countrymen to select him for the Presi- 



Digitized by 



Google 



20 THE GREAT STONE FACE. 

denoy. Before this time, — indeed, as soon as he be- 
gan to grow celebrated, — his admirers had foand out 
the resemblance between him and the Great Stone 
Face; and so much were they struck by it, that 
throughout the country this distinguished gentleman 
was known by the name of Old Stony Phiz. The 
phrase was considered as giving a highly favorable as- 
pect to his political prospects ; for, as is likewise the 
case with the Popedom, nobody ever becomes Presi- 
dent without taking a name other than his own. 

While his friends were doing their best to make 
him President, Old Stony Phiz, as he was called, set 
out on a visit to the valley where he was bom. Of 
course, he had no other object than to shake hands 
with his fellow-citizens, and neither thought nor cared 
about any effect which his progress through the coun- 
try might have upon the election. Magnificent prep- 
arations were made to receive the illustrious states- 
man ; a cavalc^e of horsemen set forth to meet him 
at the boundary line of the State, and all the people 
left their business and gathered along the wayside to 
see him pass. Among these was £mest. Though 
more than once disappointed, as we have seen, he had 
such a hopeful and confiding nature, that he was al- 
ways ready to believe in whatever seemed beautiful 
and good. He kept his heart continually open, and 
thus was sure to catch the blessing from on high when 
it should come. So now again, as buoyantly as ever, 
he went forth to behold the likeness of tlie Gbeat^ 
Stone Face. 

The cavalcade came prancing along the road, with 
a great clattering of hoofs and a mighty doud of dust, 
which rose up so dense and high that the visage of the 
mountainndde was completely hidden from Ernest's 



Digitized by 



Google 



TBS GREAT STONE FACE. SI 

eyes. All the great men of the neighborhood were 
there on horseback; militia officers, in uniform; the 
member of Congress ; the sheriff of the county ; the 
editors of newspapers; and many a farmer, too, had 
mounted his patient steed, with his Sunday coat upon 
his back. It really was a very brilliant spectacle, es- 
pecially as there were numerous banners flaunting over 
the cavalcade, on some of which were gorgeous por- 
traits of the illustrious statesman and the Great Stone 
Face, smiling familiarly at one another, like two broth- 
ers. If the pictures were to be trusted, the mutual re- 
semblance, it must be confessed, was marvellous. We 
must not forget to mention that there was a band of 
music, which made the echoes of the mountains ring 
and reverberate with the loud triumph of its strains ; so 
that airy and soul-thrilling melodies broke out among 
all the heights and hollow|, as if every nook of his 
native valley had found a voice, to welcome the dis- 
tinguished guest. But the grandest effect was when 
the far-off mountain precipice flung back the music ; 
for then the Great Stone Face itself seemed to be 
swelling the triumphant chorus, in acknowledgment 
that, at length, the man of prophecy was come. 

All this while the people were throwing up their 
hats and shouting, with enthusiasm so contagious that 
the heart of Ernest kindled up, and he likewise threw 
up his hat, and shouted, as loudly as the loudest, 
^ Huzza for the great man I Huzza for Old Stony 
Phiz I " But as yet he had not seen him. 

^^Here he is, now I " cried those who stood near 
Ernest. ''There! There I Look at Old Stony Phiz 
and then at the Old Man of the Mountain, and see if 
they are not as like as two twin brothers I " 

In the midst of all this gallant array came an open 



Digitized by 



Google 



22 THE GREAT STONE FACE. 

barouche, drawn by four white horses; and in the ba* 
rouche, with his massive head unoovered, sat the illus- 
trious statesman, Old Stony Phiz himself. 

*^ Confess it," said one of Ernest's neighbors to him, 
** the Great Stone Face has met its match at last I " 

Now, it must be owned that, at his first glimpse of 
the countenance which was bowing and smiling from 
the barouche, Ernest did fancy that there was a re- 
semblance between it and the old familiar face upon 
the mountain-side. The brow, with its massive depth 
and loftiness, and all the other features, indeed, were 
boldly and strongly hewn, as if in emulation of a more 
than heroic, of a Titanic model. But the sublimity 
and stateliness, the grand expression of a divine sym- 
pathy, that illuminated the mountain visage and ethe* 
realized its ponderous granite substance into spirit, 
might here be sought in vain. Something had been 
originally left out, or had departed. And therefore 
the marvellously gifted statesman had always a weary 
gloom in the deep caverns of his eyes, as of a child 
that has outgrown its playthings or a man of mighty 
faculties and little aims, whose life, with all its high 
performances, was vague and empty, because no high 
purpose had endowed i< with reality. 

Still, Ernest's neighbor was thrusting his elbow 
into his side, and pressing him for an answer. 

*^ Confess I confess I Is not he the very picture of 
your Old Man of the Mountain ? " 

'' No I " said Ernest, bluntly, "^ I see little or no like- 
ness." 

^^Then so much the worse for the Gbeat Stone 
Face ! " answered his neighbor; and again he set up 
a shout for Old Stony Phiz. 

But Ernest turned away, melancholy, and almost 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE GREAT STONE FACE. 28 

despondent: for this was the saddest of his disap- 
pointments, to behold a man who might have fulfilled 
the prophecy, and had not willed to do so. Meantime, 
the cavalcade, the banners, the music, and the ba- 
rouches swept past him, with the vociferous crowd 
in the rear, leaving the dust to settle down, and the 
Great Stone Face to be revealed again, with the 
grandeur that it had worn for untold centuries. 

^^Lo, here I am, Ernest I '* the benign lips seemed 
to say. ^ I have waited longer than thou, and am not 
yet weary. Fear not ; the man will come." 

The years hurried onward, treading in their haste 
on one another's heels. And now they began to bring 
white hairs, and scatter them over the head of Ernest; 
they made reverend wrinkles across his forehead, and 
furrows in his cheeks. He was an aged man. But 
not in vain had he grown old : more than the white 
hairs on his head were the sage thoughts in his mind ; 
his wrinkles and furrows were inscriptions that Time 
had graved, and in which he had written legends of 
wisdom that had been tested by the tenor of a life. 
And Ernest had ceased to be obscure. Unsought for» 
undesired, had come the fame which so many seek, and 
made him known in the great world, beyond the limits 
of the valley in which he had dwelt so quietly. Col- 
lege professors, and even the active men of cities, came 
from far to see and converse with Ernest ; for the re- 
port had gone abroad that this simple husbandman 
had ideas unlike those of other men, not gained from 
books, but of a higher tone, — a tranquil and familiar 
majesty, as if he had been talking with the angels as 
his daily friends. Whether it were sage, statesman, 
or philanthropist, Ernest received these visitors with 
the gentle sincerity that had characterized him from 



Digitized by 



Google 



24 THE GREAT STONE FACE. 

boyhood, and spoke freely with them of whatever came 
uppermost, or lay deepest in his heart or their own. 
While they talked together, his face would kindle, un- 
awares, and shine upon them, as with a mild evening 
light. Pensive with the fulness of such discourse, his 
guests took leave and went their way ; and passing up 
the valley, paused to look at the Great Stone Face, 
imagining that they had seen its likeness in a human 
countenance, but could not remember where. 

While Ernest had been growing up and growing 
old, a bountiful Providence had granted a new poet 
to this earth. He, likewise, was a native of the valley, 
but had spent the greater part of his life at a distance 
from that romantic region, pouring out his sweet 
music amid the bustle and din of cities. Often, how- 
ever, did the mountains which had been familiar to 
him in his childhood lift their snowy peaks into the 
clear atmosphere of his poetry. Neither was tbd 
Great Stone Face forgotten, for the poet had cele- 
brated it in an ode, which was grand enough to have 
been uttered by its own majestic lips. This man of 
genius, we may say, had come down from heaven with 
wonderful endowments. If he sang of a mountain, 
the eyes of all mankind beheld a mightier grandeur 
reposing on its breast, or soaring to its summit, than 
had before been seen there. If his theme were a lovely 
lake, a celestial smile had now been thrown over it, 
to gleam forever on its surface. If it were the vast 
old sea, even the deep immensity of its dread bosom 
seemed to swell the higher, as if moved by the emo- 
tions of the song. Thus the world assumed another 
and a better aspect from the hour that the poet blessed, 
it with his happy eyes. The Creator had bestowed 
him, as the last best touch to his own handiwork* 



Digitized by 



Google 




Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE GREAT STONE FACE. 25 

Creation was not finished till the poet came to inter- 
pret, and so complete it. 

The effect was no less high and beautiful, when his 
human brethren were the subject of his verse. The 
man or wcmian, sordid with the common dust of life, 
who crossed his daily path, and the little child who 
played in it, were glorified if they beheld him in his 
mood of poetic faith. He showed the golden links of 
the g^reat chaiii that intertwined them with an angelic 
kindred ; he brought out the hidden traits of a celes- 
tial birth that made them worthy of such kin. Some, 
indeed, there were, who thought to show the soundness 
of their judgment by affirming that all the beauty and 
dignity of the natural world existed only in the poet's 
fancy. Let such men speak for themselves, who un- 
doubtedly appear to have been spawned forth by Na- 
ture with a contemptuous bitterness ; she having plas- 
tered them up out of her refuse stuff, after sdl the 
swine were made. As respects all things else, the 
poet's ideal was the truest truth. 

The songs of this poet found their way to Ernest. 
He read them after his customary toil, seated on the 
bench before his cottage-door, where for such a length 
of time he had filled his repose with thought, by gaz- 
ing at the Great Stone Face. And now as he read 
stanzas that caused the soul to thrill within him, he 
lifted his eyes to the vast countenance beaming on him 
so benignantly. 

" O majestic friend," he murmured, addressing the 
Great Stone Face, ^* is not this man worthy to resem- 
ble thee?" 

The face seemed to smile, but answered not a word. 

Now it happened that the poet, though he dwelt 
so far away, had not only heard of Ernest, but had 



Digitized by 



Google 



26 THE GREAT STONE FACE. 

meditated much upon his character, until he deemed 
nothing so desirable as to meet this man, whose un- 
taught wisdom walked hand in hand with the noble 
simplicity of his life. One summer morning, there- 
fore, he took passage by the railroad, and, in the de- 
cline of the afternoon, alighted from the cars at no 
great distance from Emest*s cottage. The great hotel, 
which had formerly been the palace of Mr. Gather- 
gold, was close at hand, but the poet, with his carpet- 
bag on his arm, inquired at once where Ernest dwelt, 
and was resolved to be accepted as his guest. 

Approaching the door, he there found the good old 
man, holding a volume in his hand, which alternately 
he read, and then, with a finger between the leaves, 
looked lovingly at the Great Stone Face. 

^^ Good evening,*' said the poet. ^^ Can you give a 
traveller a night's lodging? " 

" Willingly," answered Ernest ; and then he added, 
smiling, ^^ Methinks I never saw the Great Stone Face 
look so hospitably at a stranger." 

The poet sat down on the bench beside him, and he 
and Ernest talked together. Often had the poet held 
intercourse with the wittiest and the wisest, but never 
before with a man like Ernest, whose thoughts and feel- 
ings gushed up with such a natural feeling, and who 
made great truths so familiar by his simple utterance 
of them. Angels, as had been so often said, seemed 
to have wrought with him at his labor in the fields ; 
angels seemed to have sat with him by the fireside ; 
and, dwelling with angels as friend with friends, he 
had imbibed the sublimity of their ideas, and imbued 
it with the sweet and lowly charm of household words. 
So thought the poet. And Ernest, on the other hand, 
was moved and agitated by the living images which 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE GREAT 8TQNS FACE. ^ 

the poet flnag out of lus miod, and whieb peopled all 
the air about the cottage-door with shapes of beauty, 
both gay and pensiye. The sympathies of these two 
men instructed them with aprof ounder sense than either 
could have attained alone. Their minds accorded into 
one strain, and made delightful music which neither 
of them could have claimed as all his own, nor dis- 
tinguished his own share from the other's. They led 
one another, as it were, into a high pavilion of their 
thoughts, so remote, and hitherto so dim, that they 
had never entered it before, and so beautiful that they 
desired to be there always. 

As Ernest listened to the poet, he imagined that 
the Great Stone Face was bending forward to listen 
too* He gazed earnestly into the poet's glowing eyes. 

^^Who are you, my strangely gifted guest?" he 
said. 

The poet laid his finger on the volume that Ernest 
had been reading. 

^^ You have read these poems," said he* ^ You know 
.me, then, — for I wrote them.'' 

Again, and still more earnestly than before, Ernest 
examined the poet's features ; then turned towards the 
Great Stone Face ; then back, with an uncertain as- 
pect, to his guest. But his countenance fell ; he shook 
his head, and sighed. 

" Wherefore are you sad ? " inquired the poet. 

<« Because," replied Ernest, *^all through life I have 
awaited the fulfOment of a prophecy; and, when I 
read these poems, I hoped that it might be fulfilled 
in you." 

^^ You hoped," answered the poet, faintly smiling, 
^^ to find in me the likeness of the Great Stone Face. 
Andyou are dtsappointed,as formerly with Mr. Gather* 



Digitized by 



Google 



28 THE GREAT STONE FACE. 

gold, and old BIood-and-Thnnder, and Old Stony 
Phiz. Yes, Ernest, it is my doom. Yon most add my 
name to the illustrioos three, and record another fail- 
ure of your hopes. For] — in shame and sadness do I 
speak it, Ernest — I am not worthy to be ^ified by 
yonder benign and majestic image." 

''And why?'' asked Ernest. He pointed to the 
Yolame. '' Are not those thoughts divine ? ** 

^ They have a strain of the Divinity,'* replied the 
poet. '' You can hear in them the far-off echo of a 
heavenly song. But my life, dear Ernest, has not cor- 
responded with my thought. I have had grand dreams, 
but they have been only dreams, because I have lived 
— and that, too, by my own choice — among poor and 
mean realities. Sometimes, even — shall I diure to say 
it ? — I lack faith in the grandeur, the beauty, and the 
goodness, which my own works are said to have made 
more evident in nature and in human life. Why, then« 
pure seeker of the good and true, shouldst thou hope 
to find me, in yonder image of the divine ? " 

The poet spoke sadly, and his eyes were dim with 
tears. So, likewise, were those of Ernest. 

At the hour of sunset, as had long been his frequent 
custonr, Ernest was to discourse to an assemblage of 
the neighboring inhabitants in the open air. He and 
the poet, arm in arm, still talking together as they 
went along, proceeded to the spot. It was a smaU 
nook among the hills, with a gnj precipice behind, 
the stem front of which was relieved by the pleasant 
foliage of many creeping plants that made a tapestry 
for the naked rock, by hanging their festoons from all 
its rugged angles. At a small elevation above the 
groond, set in a rich framework of verdure, there ap» 
peered a niche, spaoioas enough to admit a human 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE GREAT STONE FACE. 29 

figure, with freedom for each gestures as spontaneously 
accompany earnest thought and genuine emotion. Into 
this natuial pulpit Ernest ascended, and threw a look 
of familiar kindness around upon his audience. They 
stood, or sat, or reclined upon the grass, as seemed 
good to each, with the departing sunshine falling ob- 
liquely over them, and mingling its subdued cheerful- 
ness with the solemnity of a grove of ancient trees, 
beneath and amid the boughs of which the golden rays 
were constrained to pass. In another direction was 
seen the Great Stone Face, with the same cheer, com- 
bined with the same solemnity, in its benignant as* 
pect 

Ernest began to speak, giving to the people of what 
was in his heart and mind. His words had power, 
because they accorded with his thoughts; and his 
thoughts had reality and depth, because they harmo* 
nized with the life which he had always lived. It was 
not mere breath that this preacher uttered ; they were 
the words of life, because a life of good deeds and h(^ 
love was melted into them. Pearls, pure and rich, luR 
been dissolved into this precious draught. The poet, 
IS he listened, felt that the being and character of 
Ernest were a nobler strain of poetry than he had ever 
written. His eyes glistening with tears, he gazed rev- 
erentially at the venerable man, and said within him- 
self that never was there an aspect so worthy of f 
prophet and a sage as that mild, sweet, thoughtful 
countenance, with the glory of white hair diffused 
about it. At a distance, but distinctly to be seen, 
high up in the golden light of the setting sun, ap- 
peared the Grreat Stone Face, with hoary mists around 
it, like the white hairs around the brow of Ernest. 
Its look of grand beneficence seemed to embrace the 
world. 



Digitized by 



Google 



80 THS GREAT 8T0NB FACS. 

At that moment, in sympathy with a thought which 
he was about to utter, the face of Ernest assumed a 
grandeur of expression, so imbued with benevolence, 
that the ]>oet, by an irresistible impulse, threw his 
arms aloft and shouted, — 

^Behold! Behold! Ernest is himself the likeness 
of the Oreat Stone Faoel *' 

Then all the people looked and saw that what the 
deep-sighted poet said was true. The prophecy was 
fulfilled. But Ernest, having finished what he had to 
say, took the poet's arm, and walked slowly homeward, 
still hoping that some wiser and better man than him> 
self would by and by appear, bearing a resemblance to 
khe Gbeat Stone Facb. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE AMBmonS GUEST. 

One September night a family had gathered round 
their hearth, and piled it high with the driftwood of 
mountain streams, the dry cones of the pine, and the 
splintered ruins of great trees that had come crashing 
down the precipice. Up the chimney roared the fire, 
and brightened the room with its broad blaze. The 
faces of the father and mother had a sober gladness ; 
the children laughed; the eldest daughter was the 
image of Happiness at seventeen ; and the aged grand- 
mother who sat knitting in the warmest place, was the 
image of Happiness grown old. They had found the 
^ herb, heart's-ease," in the bleakest spot of all New 
England. This family were situated in the Notch of 
the White Hills, where the wind was sharp throughout 
the year, and pitilessly cold in the winter, — giving 
their cottage all its fresh indemenoy before it de- 
scended on the valley of the Saco. They dwelt in a 
cold spot and a dangerous one ; for a mountain tow- 
ered above their heads, so steep, that the stones would 
often rumble down its sides and startle them at mid- 
night. 

The daughter had just uttered some sunple jest that 
filled them all with mirth, when the wind came through 
the Notch and seemed to pause before their cottage — 
rattling the door, with a sound of wailing and lamen- 
tation, before it passed into the valley. For a moment 
it saddened them, though there was nothing unusual in 
tiie tones. But the family were glad again when they 



Digitized by 



Google 



82 THE AMBITIOUS QUEST. 

perceived that the latch was lifted by some traveller, 
whose footsteps had been unheard amid the dreary 
blast which heralded his approach, and wailed as he 
was entering, and went moaning away from the door. 

Though they dwelt in such a solitude, these people 
held daily converse with the world. The romantic pass 
of the Notch is a great artery, through which the life- 
blood of internal commerce is continually throbbing 
between Maine, on one side, and the Green Mountains 
and the shores of the St. Lawrence, on the other. The 
stage-coach always drew up before the door of the 
oottage. The wayfarer, with no companion but his 
staff, paused here to exchange a word, that the sense 
of loneliness might not utterly overcome him ere he 
oould pass through the cleft of the mountain, or reach 
the first house in the valley. And here the teamster, 
on his way to Portland market, would put up for the 
night ; and, if a bachelor, might sit an hour beyond 
the usual bedtime, and steal a kiss from the mountain 
maid at parting. It was one of those primitive tav- 
erns where the traveller pays only for food and lodg- 
ing, but meets with a homely kindness beyond all price. 
When the footsteps were heard, therefore, between the 
outer door and the inner one, the whole family rose up, 
grandmother, children, and all, as if about to welcome 
some one who belonged to them, and whose fate was 
linked with theirs. 

The door was opened by a young man. His face at 
first wore the melancholy expression, almost despond- 
ency, of one who travels a wild and bleak road, at 
nightfall and alone, but soon brightened up when he 
saw the kindly warmth of his reception. He felt his 
heart spring forward to meet them all, from the old 
vromasif who wiped a chair with her apron, to the little 



Digitized by 



Google 



TffS AMBITIOUS QUEST. 88 

ebfld lihat held out its amis to him. One ^aaee and 
smile placed the stranger on a footing of innocent 
familiarity witih the eldest daughter. 

** Ah, this fire is the right thing I " cried he; ^^espe* 
eially when there is snch a pleasant drde round it. I 
am quite benumbed; for die Notch is just like the 
pipe of a great pair o| bellows ; it has blown a terriUe 
blast in my face all the way from Bartlett" 

^Then you are going towards Vermont?" said tiie 
master of the house, as he helped to take a light knap- 
sack off the young man's shoulders. 

^ Yes ; to Burlington, and far enough beyond," re- 
plied he. ^I meant to have been at Ethan Crawford's 
to-night; but a pedestrian lingers along such a road as 
Ihis. It is no matter ; for, when I saw Ihis good fire, 
and all your cheerful faces, I felt as if you had kindled 
it on purpose for me, and were waiting my arrival* 
So I shall sit down among you, and make myself at 
home." 

The frank-hearted stranger had just drawn bib chair 
to the fire when something like a heavy footstep was 
heard without, rushing down the steep side of the 
mountain, as with long and rapid strides, and taking 
such a leap in passing the cottage as to ^strike the op* 
posite precipice. The &mily held their breatlu be- 
cause they knew ihe sound, and their guest held his by 
mstmct. 

^The old mountain has thrown a stone at us, for 
fear we should forget him," said the landlord, recover- 
ing himself. **Ho sometimes nods his head and 
tibreatens to come down ; but we are old neighborsi 
and agree together pretty well upon the whole. Be- 
sides we have a sure place of refuge hard Vy ii h« 
should be coming in good eamesti^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



M tms AMBtTJOUS QUEST. 

Let QsnowBuppoae the steanger to have fimflhed Ids 
•upper of bear's meat ; and, by his natural felicity of 
manner, to have placed himself on a footing of kind* 
ness with the whole family, so that they talked as 
freefy together as if he belonged to their mountain 
brood. He was of a proud, yet gentle spirit — haughty 
and reserved among the rich and great ; but ever ready 
to stoop his head to the lowly cottage door, and be lil» 
a brother or a son at the poor man's fireude. In the 
household of the Notch he found warmth and simplicity 
of feeling, the pervading intelligence of New i^'^pglftt^df 
aad a poetiy of native growth, which they had gatb* 
•red when they little diought of it from the mountain 
peaks and diasms, and at the veiy threshold of their 
xomaniio and dangerous abode. He had travelled far 
and alone; his whole life, indeed, had been a solitary 
path; for, with the lofty caution of his nature, he had 
kept himself apart from those who might otherwise 
have been his companions. The family, too, though 
80 kind and hospitable, had that cimsciousness of unity 
among themselves, and separation from the world aft 
large, whioh, in every domestic drde, should still keep 
a holy place where no stranger may intrude. But this 
eveniog a prophetic sympathy impelled the refined 
and educated youth to pour out lids heart before the 
simple mountaineers, and constrained them to answer 
him with the same free confidence. And thus it should 
have been. Is not the kindred of a common fata a 
closer tie than that of birth ? 

The secret of the young man's character was a hij^ 
and abstracted ambition. He could have borne to live 
an undistinguished life, but not to be forgotten in the 
grave. Yearning desire had been transformed to hope; 
and hope^ lo «g cherished^ had fr y ^ nw like certainte^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



THB AMBITIOUS OUBSn 86 

lihftk, obsctoely a§ lie joutneyed dow, n glory was to 
beam on all his pathway, — though not, perhaps, whil» 
he was treading it. Bui when posterity should gaasa 
back into the gloom of what was now the present, they 
would traoe the brightness of his footsteps, brightening 
as meaner glories faded, and confess that a gifted one 
had passed from his cradle to his tomb with none to 
recognize him. 

^* As yet," cried the stranger — his cheek glowing 
and his eye flashing with enthusiasm — **as yet, I 
have done nothing. Were I to vanish from the earth 
to-morrow, none would know so much of me as you : 
that a nameless youth came up at nightfall from the 
yalley of the Saco, and opened his heart to you in the 
evening, and passed through the Notch by sunrise^ 
and was seen no more. Not a soul would ask, * Who 
was he? Whither did the wanderer go?' But I 
eannot die till I have achieved my destiny. Then, let 
Death come I I shall have built my monument I " 

There was a continual flow of natural emotion, gush* 
ing forth amid abstracted reverie, which enabled the 
family to understand diis young man's sentiments^ 
though so foreign from their own. With quick sensi- 
bility of the ludicrous, he blushed at the ardor into 
which he had been betrayed. 

^YoQ laugh at me," said he, taking the eldest 
daughter's hand, and laughing himself. *^ You think 
my ambition as nonsensical as if I were to freeze my« 
sdf to death on the top of Mount Washington, only 
that people might spy at me from the country round 
about. And, truly, that would be a noble pedestal for 
a man's statue I " 

** It is better to sit here by this fire," answered the 
girl, blushing, ^*and be comfortable and oontentedt 
though nobody thinks about ua.*' 



Digitized by 



Google 



IB THS AMBITIOUS GUEST. 

**I Boppoae^ said lier ta&eir^ after a fit of miuaiig; 
^ there is someihing natural in wbat the yotmg maa 
lays ; and if my mind had been turned that way» I 
inight have felt just the same. It is strange, wife, 
haw his talk has set my head nmning on things Hiat 
are pretty certain never to come to pass.*' 

** Perhaps they may/' obserred the mfe. ^Is the 
man thinking what he will do when he is awidower?** 

**No, nol" cried he, repelling the idea with re* 
proachful kindness. ^^ When I think of yonr death, 
Esther, I think of mine, too. But I was wishing we 
had a good farm in Bartlett, or Bethlehem, or Little- 
ton, or some other township round the White Mount- 
ains ; but not where they could tumble on our headtf. 
I should want to stand well with my neighbors and be 
called Squire, and sent to General Court for a term or 
two ; for a plain, honest man may do as much good 
there asalawyer. And when I should be grown quite 
an old man, and you an old woman, so as not to be 
long apart, I might die happy enough in my bed, and 
leave you all ciying around me. A slate gravestone 
would suit me as well as a marble one — with just my 
name and age, and a verse of a hymn, and something 
to let people know that I lived an honest man and died 
a Christian.'' 

^ There now I " exclaimed the stranger ; ^it is oar 
nature to desire a monument, be it slate or marblci or 
a pillar of granite, or a glorious memory in the uni» 
Tersal heart of man." 

** We 're in a strange way, to-night," said the wife, 
with tears in her eyes. ^'They say it's a sign of 
something, when folks' minds go a wandering sow 
Hark to the children I " 

Tbey listened accordingly. The younger ohildx^ ^* 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE AMBlTIOXra QUEST. 87 

Sad been put to bed in ano(iher room, bat in& an 
open door between, so that they could be heard talk- 
ing busily among themselves. One and all seemed to 
have caught the infection from the fireside circle, and 
were outvying each other in wild wishes, and childish 
projects of what they would do when they came to be 
men and women. At length a little boy, instead of 
addressing his brothers and sisters, called out to his 
mother. 

** I 'U tell you what I wish, mother," cried he. " I 
want you and father and grandma'm, and all of us, 
and the stranger too, to start right away, and go and 
take a drink out of the basin of the Hume I " 

Nobody could help laughing at the child's notion of 
leaving a warm bed, and dragging them from a cheer- 
ful fire, to visit the basin of the Flume, — a brook, 
which tumbles over the precipice, deep within the 
Notch. The boy had hardly spoken when a wagon 
rattled along the road, and stopped a moment before 
the door. It appeared to contain two or three men, 
who were cheering their hearts with the rough chorus 
of a song, which resounded, in broken notes, between 
the cliffs, while the singers hesitated whether to con- 
tinue their journey or put up here for the night." 

" Father," said the girl, " they are calling you by 
name." 

But the good man doubted whether they had really 
called him, and was unwilling to show himseU too 
solicitous of gain by inviting people to patronize his 
house. He therefore did not hurry to the door ; and 
tiie lash being soon applied, the travellers plunged 
into the Notch, still singing and laughing, though 
their music and mirth came back drearily from the 
iMftrt of the mountain. 



Digitized by 



Google 



tt THE AMBITIOUS QUEST. 

<* Theroi mother I'' cried the bo7, again. <«T1iegrM 
have given us a ride to the Flume." 

Again they laughed at the child's pertinacious fancj 
for a night ramble. But it happened that a light doud 
passed over the daughter's spirit ; she looked gravely 
into the fire, and drewabreath that was almost a sigh. 
It forced its way, in spite of a little struggle to re- 
press it. Then starting and blushing, she looked 
quickly round the circle, as if they had caught a 
glimpse into her bosom. The stranger asked what she 
had been thinking of. 

«« Nothing," answered she, with a downcast smile. 
^ Only I felt lonesome just then." 

** Oh, I have always had a gift of feeling what is in 
other people's hearts," said he, half seriously. *^ Shall 
I tell the secrets of yours? For I know what to think 
when a young girl shivers by a warm hearth, and com^ 
plains of lonesomeness at her mother's side. Shall I 
put these feelings into words?" 

^^They would not be a girl's feelings any longer if 
they could be put into words," replied the mountain 
nymph, laughing, but avoiding his eye. 

AU this was said apart Perhaps a germ of love 
was springing in their hearts, so pure that it might 
blossom in Paradise, since it could not be matured on 
earth ; for women worship such gentle dignity as his ; 
and the proud, contemplative, yet kindly soul is often* 
est captivated by simplicity like hers. But while they 
spoke softly, and he was watching the happy sadness 
the lightsome shadows, the shy yearnings of a maiden's 
nature, the wind through the Notch took a deeper and 
drearier sound. It seemed, as the fanciful stranger 
said, like the choral strain of the spirits of the blasti 
who in did Indian times had their dwelling among 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE AMBITIOUS GUB8K W 

Aete momitaiiis, and made liheir heigbts and roeo w oB 
a sacred region. There was a wail along the road, as 
if a funeral were passing. To chase away the gloom, 
the family threw pine branches on their fire, till the 
dry leaves crackled and the flame arose, disooyering 
once again a scene of peace and humble happiness. 
The light hovered about them fondly, and caressed 
them alL There were the little &ces of the children, 
peeping from their bed apart, and here the &ther'8 
frame of strength, the mcHlier's subdued and careful 
mien, the high-browed youth, the budding girl, and 
the good old grandam, still knitting in the warmest 
place. The aged woman looked up from her task, 
and, with fingers ever busy, was the next to speak. 

^ Old folks have their notions,'' said she, ^^ as well 
as young ones. You've been wishing and planning; 
and letting your heads run on one thing and another, 
till you 've set my mind a wandering too. Now what 
should an old woman wish for, when she can go but a 
step or two before she comes to her grave? Children, 
it will haunt me night and day till I tell you." 

^ What 18 it, mother?" cried the husband and wife 
at once. 

Then the old woman, with an air of mystery which 
drew the oirde closer round the fire, informed them 
that she had provided her grave^othes some years be* 
fore, — a nice linen shroud, a cap with a muslin ru£^ 
and everything of a finer sort than she had worn since 
her wedding day. But this evemng an old supersti- 
ticn had strangely recurred to her. It used to be said, 
in iiir younger days, that if anything were amiss with 
a orrpse, if only tiie ruff were not smooth, or the cap 
did not set right, the corpse in the cofi&n and beneal^ 
the dods would strive to put up its oold hands and 
anange it. The bare thought made her nervous.^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



40 TffB AMBITIOUS QUEST. 

^Dcm't talk so, grandmother I *' said the girl, shnA 
dering. 

*^ Now/' — oontinaed the old woman, with singular 
earnestness, yet smiling strangely at her own f oUy, — 
** I want one of you, my children — when your mother 
is dressed and in the coffin — I want one of you to 
hold a looking-glass over my &ce. Who knows but 
I may take a glimpse at myself, and see whether all *8 
right?'' 

*' Old and young, we dream of graves and monu« 
ments," murmured the stranger youth. ^^ I wonder 
how mariners feel when the ship is sinking, and they, 
unknown and undistinguished, are to be buried to- 
gether in the ocean — that wide and nameless sep- 
ulchre?" 

For a moment, the old woman's ghastly conception 
so engrossed the minds of her hearers that a sound 
abroad in the night, rising like the roar of a blast, 
had grown broad, deep, and terrible, before the fated 
group were conscious of it. The house and all within 
it trembled ; the foundations of the earth seemed to 
be shaken, as if diis awful sound were the peal of 
the last trump. Young and old exchanged one wild 
glance, and remained an instant, pale, affrighted, with- 
out utterance, or power to move. Then the same 
shriek burst simultaneously from all their lips. 

**TheSMeI TheSUdel" 

The simplest words must intimate, but not portray, 
the unutterable horror of the catastrophe. The vic- 
tims rushed from their cottage, and sought refuge in 
what they deemed a safer spot — where, in contempla- 
tion of such an emergency, a sort of barrier had been 
reared. Alas! they had quitted their security, and 
fled right into the pathway of destructian. Down 



Digitized by 



Google 




15 
< 

i 



H 

U^ 

2 

I 



Digitized by CjOOQIC 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE AMBITIOUS QUEST. 41 

eame the vAncAe side of the mountain, in a cataract 
of niin* Just before it reached the house, the stream 
broke into two branches — shivered not a window 
there, but overwhehned the whole viciniiy, blocked iq^ 
the road, and annihilated everything in its dreadful 
course. Long ere the thunder of the great Slide had 
ceased to roar among the mountains, the mortal agony 
had been endured, and the victims were at peace. 
Their bodies were never found. 

The next morning, the light smoke was seen steal- 
ing from the cottage chimney up the mountain side. 
Within, the fire was yet smouldering on the heartli, 
and the dudrs in a cLrde round it, as if the inhabit- 
ants had but gone forth to view the devastaticm of the 
Slide, and would shortly return, to thank Heaven for 
their miraculous escape. All had left separate tokens, 
by which those who had known the family were made 
to shed a tear for eacL Who has not heard their 
name? The story has been told far and wide, and 
win forever be a legend of these mountains. Poets 
have sung their fate. 

There were droumstances which led some to sup- 
pose that a stranger had been received into the cottage 
on this awful night, and had shared the catastroj^e of 
all its inmates. Others denied that there were suffi- 
cient grounds for such a conjecture. Woe for the 
high-souled youth, with his dream of Earthly Immor- 
tality I His name and person utterly unknown; his 
Instoxy, his way of life, his plans, a mystery never to 
be solved, his death and his existence equally a doubtl 
Whose was the agony of that death moment? 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE GREAT CARBTJNCLE.* 

^A MT8TEBY OF THE WHITE MOUlTrAIHB. 

At nightfall, onoe in the olden time, on the nigged 
tide of one of the Ciystal Hills, a party of adventurers 
were refreshing themselves, after a toilsome and fruit- 
less quest for the Gbeat Carbuncle. They had oome 
thither, not as friends nor partners in the enterprise, 
but each, save one youthful pair, impelled by his own 
selfish and solitary longing for this wondrous genu 
Their feeling of brotherhood, however, was strong 
enough to induce them to contribute a mutual aid in 
building a rude hut of branches, and kindling a gres* 
fire of shattered pines, that had drifted down the head- 
long current of the Amonoosuck, on the lower bank of 
which they were to pass the night. There was but ona 
of their number, perhaps, who had become so estranged 
from natural sympathies, by the absorbing spell of tlio 
pursuit, as to acdmowledge no satisfaction at the sight 
of human faces, in the remote and solitary region 
whither they had ascended. A vast extent of wilder- 
ness lay between them and the nearest settlementi 
while scant a mile above their heads was that black 
verge where the hills throw off their shaggy mantle, 
of forest trees, and either robe themselves in clouds 

^ The Indian tradition, on which this somewhat extraraguit tale It 
founded, is both too wild and too beantifnl to be adequately wrought 
up in prose. SuUivan, in his History of Maine, written since the Rev- 
olution, remarka, that eren then the <»irtepcs of ths Qnu Csrbondt 
MS Ml sntixsbr difdoditod. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE GREAT CARBUNCLE. 48 

or tower naked into the sky* The roar of the Anio- 
noosuck would have been too awful for endurance if 
only a solitary man had listened, while the mountain 
stream talked with the wind. 

The adventurers, therefore, exchanged hospitable 
greetings, and welcomed one another to the hut, where 
each man was the host, and all were the guests of the 
whole company. They spread their individual sup- 
plies of food on the flat surface of a rock, and partook 
of a general repast ; at the dose of which, a sentiment 
of good fellowship vras perceptible among the party, 
though repressed by the idea, that the renewed search 
for the Great Carbuncle must make then strangers 
again in the morning. Seven men and one yoimg 
woman, they warmed themselves together at the fire, 
which extended its bright wall along the whole front 
of their wigwam. As they observed the various and 
contrasted figures that made np the assemblage, each 
man looking like a caricature of himself, in the im« 
steady light that fiickered over him, they came muta« 
ally to the conclusion, that an odder society had never 
met, in city or wilderness, on mountain or plain. 

The eldest of the group, a tall, lean, weather-beaten 
man, some sixty years of age, was dad in the ckins of 
wild animals, whose fashion of dress he did well to 
imitate, since the deer, the wolf, and the bear, had 
long been his most intimate companions. He was one 
of those ill-fated mortals, such as the Indians told of, 
whom, in their early youth, the Grreat Carbuncle smote 
with a peculiar madness, and became the passionate 
dream of their existence. All who visited that region 
knew him as the Seeker, and by no other name. As 
none could remember when he first took up the search^ 
tiiere went a &ble in the valley of the Saco, that for 



Digitized by 



Google 



4ft TEE GREAT CARBUNCLS. 

Mb inordinate lust after the Great Carbnnole, lie liad 
been oondemned to wander among the mountains tiD 
the end of time, still with the same feverish hopes at 
sunrise — the same despair at eve. Near diis miser»* 
Ue Seeker sat a little elderly personage, wearing a 
high-orowned hat, shaped somewhat like a crudbla 
He was from beyond the sea, a Doctor Cacaphodely 
who had wilted and dried himselE into a mummy by 
continually stooping over charcoal furnaces, and in- 
haling unwholesome fumes during his researches in 
chemistry and alchemy. It was told of him, whether 
truly or not, that, at ^e commencemBnt of his studies, 
he had drained his body of all its richest blood, and 
wasted it, with other inestimable ingredients, in aa 
unsuccessful experiment — and had never been a weU 
man since. Another of the adventurers was Master 
Ichabod Pigsnort, a weighty merchant and selectmaa 
of Boston, and an elder of the famous Mr. Norton's 
diuroh* His enemies had a ridiculous story that Mas- 
ter Pigsnort was accustomed to spend a whole hour 
after prayer time, every morning and evening, in wal- 
lowing naked among a:i im* lense quantity of pine-tree 
shillings, which were the earliest silver coinage of Mas^ 
sachusetts. The fourth whom we shall notice had no 
name that his companions knew of, and was chiefly 
distinguished by a sneer that always contorted his thin 
visage, and by a prodigious pair of spectacles, which 
were supposed to deform and discolor the whole face 
of nature, to diis gentleman's perception. The fifth 
adventurer likewise lacked a name, which was the 
greater pity, as he appeared to be a poet He was a 
bright-eyed man, but wofully pined away, which was 
no more than natural, if, as some people affirmed, his 
ccdinaxy diet was fog, morning mist, and a slice of tfar 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE GREAT CARBUNCLE. 46 

densest doad within his leach, sauced with moonshine, 
whenever he could get it. Certain it is, that the po- 
etry which flowed from him had a smack of all these 
dainties. The sixth of the party was a young man of 
haughty mien, and sat somewhat apart from the rest, 
wearing his pltmied hat loftily among his elders, while 
the fire glittered on the rich embroidery of his dress 
and gleamed intensely on the jewelled pommel of hi& 
sword. This was the Lord de Yero, who, when at 
home, was said to spend much of his time in the burial 
vault of his dead progenitors, rummaging their mouldy 
coffins in search of all the earthly pride and vainglory 
that was hidden among bones and dust ; so that, be- 
sides his own share, he had the collected haughtiness 
of his whole line of ancestry. 

Lastly, there was l handsome youth in rustic garb, 
and by his side a blooming little person, in whom a 
delicate shade of maiden reserve was just melting into 
the rich glow of a young wife's affection. Her name 
was Hannah, and her husband's Matthew; two homely 
names, yet well enough adapted to the simple pair, 
who seemed strangely out of place among the whimsi- 
cal fraternity whose wits had been set agog by the 
Great Carbuncle. 

Beneath the shelter of one hut, in the bright blaze 
of the same fire, sat this varied group of adventurers, 
all so intent upon a single object, that, of whatever 
else they began to speak, their closing words wero 
sure to be illuminated with the Grreat Carbuncle. 
Several related the circumstances that brought them 
thither. One had listened to a traveller's tale of thi^^ 
marvellous stone in his own distant country, and Lad 
immediately been seized with such a thirst for behold- 
mg it 9M ooukL only be quenched in its intensesf 



Digitized by 



Google 



46 THE GREAT CARBUNCLE. 

iustre. Another, so long ago as when the fiunou 
Captain Smith visited these coasts, had seen it blazing 
far at sea, and had felt no rest in all the intervening 
years till now that he took up the search. A third, 
being encamped on a hunting expedition full forty 
miles south of the White Mountains, awoke at mid- 
night, and beheld the Great Carbuncle gleaming like 
a meteor, so that the shadows of the trees fell back- 
ward from it. They spoke of the innumerable at« 
tempts which had been made to reach the spot, and of 
the singular fatality which had hitherto withheld suo- 
cess from all adventurers, though it might seem so 
easy to follow to its source a light that overpowered 
the moon, and almost matched the sun. It was ob« 
servable that each smiled scornfully at the madness of 
every other in anticipating better fortune than the 
past, yet nourished a scarcely hidden conviction that 
he would himself be the favored one. As if to allay 
their too sanguine hopes, they recurred to the Indian 
traditions that a spirit kept watch about the gem, and 
bewildered those who sought it either by removing it 
from peak to peak of the higher hills, or by calling up 
a mist from the enchanted lake over which it hung. 
But these tales were deemed unworthy of credit, all 
professing to believe that the search had been baffled 
by want of sagacity or perseverance in the adventuiw 
ers, or such other causes as might naturally obstruct 
the passage to any given point among the intricacies 
of forest, valley, and mountain. 

In a pause of the conversation the wearer of the 
prodigious spectacles looked round upon the party, 
making each individual, in turn, the object of the 
aneer which invariably dwelt upon his countenance. 

*^So, fellow-pilgrims," said he, **here we are, seven 



Digitized by 



Google 



TPE GREAT CARBUNCLE. 4tl 

irise men, and one fair damsel — who, donbtless, is as 
inse as any graybeard of the company : here we are, 
I say, all bound on the same goodly enterprise. Me- 
ihinks, now, it were not amiss that each of us declare 
what he proposes to do with the Great Carbuncle, 
provided he have the good hap to clutch it. What 
says our friend in the bear skin? How mean you, 
good sir, to enjoy the prize which you have been seek- 
ing, the Lord knows how long, among the 'Crystal 
Hills?" 

^How enjoy it!'' exclaimed the aged Seeker, bit- 
terly. *^ I hope for no enjoyment from it ; that folly 
has passed long ago ! I keep up the search for this 
accursed stone because the vain ambition of my youth 
has become a fate upon me in old age. Hie pur- 
suit alone is my strength, — the energy of my soul, — 
the warmth of my blood, — and the pith and marrow 
of my bones I Were I to turn my back upon it I 
should fall down dead on the hither side of the Notch, 
which is the gateway of this mountain region. Yet 
not to have my wasted lifetime back again would I 
give up my hopes of the Grreat Carbuncle I Having 
found it, I shall bear it to a certain cavern that I wot 
of, and there, grasping it in my arms, lie down and 
die, and keep it buried with me forever." 

^^O wretch, regardless of the interests of science ! " 
eried Doctor Cacaphodel, with philosophic indigna- 
tion. "Thou art not worthy to behold, even from 
afar off, the lustre of this most precious gem that ever 
was concocted in the laboratory of Nature. Mine is 
the sole purpose for which a wise man may desire the 
possession of the Great Carbuncle. Immediately on 
obtaining it —for I have a presentiment, good people^ 
that the prize la reserved to crown my aoieiitifio lepo* 



Digitized by 



Google 



48 TBS GREAT CARBUNCLE. 

tation — I shall retom to Europe, and emploj my vsi 
maining years in redudng it to its first elements. A 
portion of the stone will I grind to impalpable pow^ 
der ; other parts shall be dissolved in acids, or what 
ever solvents will act upon so admirable a composi- 
tion ; and the remainder I design to melt in the cruci* 
ble, or set on fire with the blow-pipe. By these various 
methods I shall gain an accurate analysis, and finally 
bestow the result of my labors upon the world in a 
folio volume." 

** Excellent ! " quolli the man with the speotaclea. 
^Nor need you hesitate, learned sir, on account of the 
necessary destruction of the gem; since the perusal 
of your folio may teach every mother's son of us to 
ooncoct a Great Carbuncle of his own." 

** But, verily," said Master lohabod Pigsnort, ^for 
mine own part I object to the malring of these coun- 
terfeits, as being calculated to reduce the marketable 
value of the true gem. I tell ye frankly, sirs, I have 
an interest in keeping up the price. Here have I 
quitted my reg^ular traffic, leaving my warehouse in 
the care of my derks, and putting my credit to grea t 
haiard, and, furthermore, have put myself in peril of 
death or captivity by the accursed heatfien savages — 
and all this without daring to ask the prayers of the 
congregation, because the quest for llie Great Oar- 
bunde it deemed little better than a traffic with the 
Evil One. Now think ye that I would have done tiiia 
grievous wrong to my soul, body, reputation, and ea- 
tate, without a reasonable chance of profit ?** 

^ Not I, pious Master Pigsnort," said the man wUh 
fhe spectacles. ** I never laid such a great folly to 
Iby charge." 

"^ Truly » I hope B0t»"caid the menlml ««2iai% 



Digitized by 



Google 



TBB GREAT CARBVNCLM. 49 

as toacliing this Great Carbtmcle, I am free to own 
that I have never had a glimpse of it ; but be it only 
the hundredth part so bright as people tell, it will 
surely outvalue the Grreat Mogul's best diamond, which 
he holds at an incalculable sunu Wherefore, I am 
minded to put the Great Carbuncle on shipboard, and 
voyage with it to England, France, Spain, Italy, or 
into Heathendom, if Providence should send me 
thither, and, in a word, dispose of the gem to the best 
bidder among the potentates of the earth, that he may 
place it among his crown jewels. If any of ye have & 
wiser plan, let him expound it.'' 

^^ lliat have I, thou sordid man ! " exclaimed the 
poet. ^^ Dost thou desire nothing brighter than gold 
that thou wouldst transmute all this ethereal lustre 
into such dross as thou "^rallowest in already? For 
myself, hiding the jewel under my cloak, I shall hie 
me back to my attic chamber, in one of the darksome 
alleys of London. There, night and day, will I gaze 
upon it; my soul shall drink its radiance; it shall 
be diffused throughout my intellectual powers, and 
gleam brightly in every line of poesy that I indite. 
Thus, long ages after I am gone, the splendor of the 
Great Carbuncle will blaze around my name ! " 

'' Well said, Master Poet! " cried he of the specta- 
cles. " Hide it under thy doak, sayest thou ? Why, 
it will gleam through the holes, and make thee look 
like a jack-o'-lantem I " 

^ To think I " ejaculated the Lord de Vere, rather 
to himself than his companions, the best of whom he 
held utterly unworthy of his intercourse— ^ to think 
that a fellow in a tattered cloak should talk of convey, 
ing the Great Carbuncle to a garret in Grub Streetl 
Have not I resolved within myself that the whde 



Digitized by 



Google 



60 THE GREAT CARBUNCLE. 

esrfih contains no fitter ornament for the great hall of 
my ancestral castle? There shall it flame for ageSi 
making a noonday of midnight, glittering on the suitfv 
of armor, the banners, and escutcheons, that hang 
around the wall, and keeping bright the memory of 
heroes. Wherefore have all other adventurers sought 
the prize in vain but that I might win it, and make it 
a symbol of the glories of our lofty line? And never, 
on the diadem of the White Mountains, did the Great 
Carbuncle hold a place half so honored as is reserved 
for it in the hall of the De Veres I '' 

^^ It is a noble thought,'' said the Cynic, with an ob- 
sequious sneer. ^^ Yet, might I presume to say so, the 
gem would make a rare sepulchral lamp, and would 
display the glories of your lordship's progenitors more 
truly in the ancestral vault than in the castle halL'' 

" Nay, forsooth," observed Matthew, the young rus- 
tic, who sat hand in hand with his bride, ^^ the gentle- 
man has bethought himself of a profitable use for this 
bright stone. Hannah here and I are seeking it for a 
like purpose." 

^^ How, fellow I " exclaimed his lordship, in surprise. 
«« What castle hall hast thou to hang it in?" 

^' No castle," replied Matthew, *^ but as neat a cot- 
tage as any within sight of the Crystal Hills. Ye 
must know, friends, that Hannah and I, being wedded 
the last week, have taken up the search of tlie Great 
Carbuncle, because we shall need its light in the long 
winter evenings ; and it will be such a pretty thing to 
show the neighbors when they visit us. It will shine 
through the house so that we may pick up a pin in 
any comer, and will set all the windows aglowing as 
if there were a great fire of pine knots in the chimney. 
And then how pleasant, when we awake in the nigldi 
v.to be able to see one another's faces 1 " 



Digitized by 



Google 



. THS GREAT CARBUNCLE. 61 

There was a general smile among the a d venturers 
at the simplicity of the young couple's project in re- 
gard to this wondrous and invaluable stone, with which 
the greatest monardi on earth might have been proud 
to adorn Mb palace. Especially the man with specta- 
cles, who had sneered at all the company in turn, now 
twisted his visage into such an expression of ill-nat- 
ured mirth, that Matthew asked him, rather peevishly^ 
what he himself meant to do with the Great Car- 
buncle. 

^ The Grreat Carbuncle I *' answered the Cynic, with 
ineffable scorn. **Why, you blockhead, there is no 
such thing in rerum natura. I have come three thou- 
sand miles, and am resolved to set my foot on every 
peak of these mountains, and poke my head into every 
chasm, for the sole purpose of demonstrating to the 
satisfaction of any man one whit less an ass than thy* 
self that the Grreat Carbuncle is all a humbug I '' 

Vain and foolish were the motives that had brought 
most of the adventurers to the Crystal HiUs; but 
none so vain, so foolish, and so impious too, as that of 
the scoffer with the prodigious spectacles. He was 
one of those wretched and evil men whose yearnings 
are downward to the darkness, instead of heaven- 
ward, and who, could they but distinguish the lights 
which God hath kindled for us, would count the mid- 
night gloom their chief est glory. As the Cynic spoke, 
several of the party were startled by a gleam of red 
splendor, that showed the huge shapes of the sur- 
rounding mountains and the rock-bestrewn bed of the 
turbulent river with an illumination unlike that of 
their fire on the trunks and black boughs of the 
forest trees. They listened for the roll of thunder^ 
but heard nothing, and were glad that the tempest 



Digitized by 



Google 



52 THE GREAT CARBUNCLE. 

came not near them. The stars, those dial-pmnts of 
heaven, now warned the adventarers to dose their 
eyes on the blazdng logs, and open them, in dreams, to 
the glow of the Great Carbmide. 

The yomig married couple had taken their lod^ngt 
in the farthest comer of the wigwam, and were sepa> 
rated from the rest of the party by a curtain of 
curiously-woven twigs, such as might have hung, in 
deep festoons, around the bridal-bower of Eve. The 
modest little wife had wrought this piece of tapestiy 
while the other guests were talking. She and her 
husband fell asleep with hands tenderly dasped, and 
awoke from visions of unearthly radiance to meet the 
more blessed light of one another's eyes. They awoke 
at the same instant, and with one happy smile beam- 
ing over their two faces, which grew brighter with 
their consciousness of the reality of life and love. 
But no sooner did she recollect where they were, than 
the bride peeped through the interstices of the leafy 
curtain, and saw that the outer room of the hut was 
deserted. 

^'Up, dear Matthewl'* cried she, in haste. ^'Tbe 
etrange folk are all gone I Up, this very minute, or 
we shall loose the Grreat Carbuncle ! '' 

In truth, so little did these poor young people de* 
serve the mighty prize which had lured them thither^ 
that they had slept peacefully all night, and till the 
summits of the hills were glittering with sunshine; . 
while the other adventurers had tossed their limbs in 
feverish wakefulness, or dreamed of climbing preci* 
pices, and set off to realize their dreams with the 
earliest peep of dawn. But Matthew and Hannahi 
after their calm rest, were as light as two young deer^ 
end merely stopped to say their prayers and wash 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE GREAT CARBUNCLE. 68 

fhemselTes in a oold pool of the AmonoosndE, and 
then to taste a morsel of food, ere they turned their 
faces to the mountain-side. It was a sweet emblem of 
conjugal affection, as they toiled up the difficult as- 
cent, gathering strength from the mutual aid which 
they afforded. After several little accidents, such as 
a torn robe, a lost shoe, and the entanglement of Han^ 
nah's hair in a bough, they reached the upper verge of 
the forest, and were now to pursue a more adventu- 
rous course. The innumerable trunks and heavy fo- 
liage of the trees had hitherto shut in their thoughts, 
which now shrank affrighted from the region of wind 
and doud and naked rocks and desolate sunshine, that 
rose immeasurably above them. They gazed back at 
the obscure wilderness which they had traversed, and 
longed to be buried again in its depths rather than 
trust themselves to so vast and visible a solitude. 

*^ Shall we go on?" said Matthew, throwing his arm 
TMmd Hannah's waist, both to protect her and to com^ 
fort his heart by drawing her close to it. 

But the little bride, simple as she was, had a 
woman's love of jewels, and could not forego the hope 
of possessing the very brightest in the world, in spit^ 
6i the perils with which it must be won. 

^ Let us climb a little higher," whispered she, yet 
tremulously, as she turned her face upward to the 
lonely sky. 

*^ Come, then," said Matthew, mustering his manly 
courage and drawing her along with him, for she be- 
came timid again the moment tiiat he grew bold. 

And upward, accordingly, went the pilgrims of the 
Great Carbuncle, now treading upon the tops and 
thickly-interwoven branches of dwarf pines, which, by 
the growth of centuries, though mossy with age, had 



Digitized by 



Google 



S4 TBE GREAT CARBUNCLE. 

barelj reached three feet in altitude. Next, they 
came to masses and fragments of naked rock heaped 
confusedly together, like a cairn reared by giants in 
memory of a giant chief. In this bleak realm of 
upper air nothing breathed, nothing grew ; there was 
no life but what was concentrated in their two hearts , 
they had climbed so high that Nature herself seemed 
no longer to keep them company. She lingered be- 
neath them, within the verge of the forest trees, and 
sent a farewell glance after her children as they 
strayed where her own green footprints had never 
been. But soon they were to be hidden from her eye. 
Pensely and dark die mists began to gather below, 
casting black spots of shadow on the vast landscape, 
and sailing heavily to one centre, as if the loftiest 
mountain peak had summoned a council of its kindred 
clouds. Finally, the vapors welded themselves, as it 
were, into a mass, presenting the appearance of a 
pavement over which the wauderers might have 
trodden, but where they would vainly have sought an 
avenue to the blessed earth which they had lost. And 
the lovers yearned to behold that green earth again, 
more intensely, alas! than, beneath a clouded sky, 
they had ever desired a glimpse of heaven. They 
even felt it a relief to their desolation when the 
mists, creeping gradually up the mountain, concealed 
its lonely peak, and thus annihilated, at least fo^ 
them, the whole region of visible space. But they 
drew closer together, with a fond and melancholy 
gaze, dreading lest the universal doud should snatch 
them from each other's sight. 

Still, perhaps, they would have been resolute to 
dimb as far and as high, between earth and heaven, 
98 they could find foothold, if Hannah's strength had 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE GREAT CARBUNCLE. 66 

not began to fail, and with that, her oonrage also. 
Her breath grew short. She refused to burden her 
husband with her weight, but often tottered against 
his side, and recovered herself each time by a feebler 
effort At last, she sank down on one of the rocky 
«)teps of the acclivity. 

*^ We are lost, dear Matthew,'' said she, mournfully. 
^We shall never find our way to the earth again. 
And oh how happy we might have been in our cot- 
tage!" 

"Dear heart! — we will yet be happy there,** an- 
swered Matthew. " Look ! In this direction, the sun- 
shine penetrates the dismal mist. By its aid, I can 
direct our course to the passage of die Notch. Let 
us go back, love, and dream no more of the Grreat 
Carbuncle!** 

"The sun cannot be yonder,** said Hannah, with 
despondence. "By this time it must be noon. If 
there could ever be any sunshine here, it would come 
from above our heads." 

" But look I " repeated Matthew, in a somewhat 
altered tone. " It is brightening every moment. If 
not sunshine, what can it be ? " 

Nor could the young bride any longer deny that a 
radiance was breaking through the mist, and changing 
its dim hue to a dusky red, which continually grew 
more vivid, as if brilliant particles were interfused 
with the gloom. Now, also, the cloud began to roll 
away from the mountain, while, as it heavily with- 
drew, one object after another started out of its im- 
penetrable obscurity into sight, with precisely the ef- 
fect of a new creation, before the indistinctness of the 
old chaos had been con^pletely swallowed up. As the 
process went on, they saw the gleaming of water close 



Digitized by 



Google 



66 THE GREAT CARBUNCLE. 

at tiieir feet, and found themselves on the very bordef 
of a mountain lake, deep, bright, dear, and cabnly 
beautiful, spreading from brim to brim of a basin that 
had been scooped out of the solid rock. A ray of 
glory flashed across its surface. The pilgrims looked 
whence it should proceed, but closed their eyes with 
a thrill of awful admiration, to exclude the fervid 
splendor that glowed from the brow of a cliff impend* 
ing over the enchanted lake. For the simple pair had 
reached that lake of mystery, and found the long- 
sought shrine of the Great Carbuncle I 

They threw their arms around each other, and 
trembled at their own success ; for, as the legends of 
this wondrous gem rushed thick upon their memory^ 
they felt themselves marked out by fate — and the 
consciousness was f earfuL Often, from childhood up- 
ward, they had seen it shining like a distant star. And 
now that star was throwing its intensest lustre on their 
hearts. They seemed changed to one another's eyes» 
in the red brilliancy that flamed upon their cheeks, 
while it lent the same fire to the lake, the rocks, and 
bI^, and to the mists which had rolled back before its 
power. But, with their next glance, they beheld an 
object that drew their attention even from the mighty 
stone. At the base of the cliff, directly beneath the 
Gtreat Carbuncle, appeared the figure of a man, with 
his arms extended in the act of climbing, and his face 
turned upward, as if to drink the full gush of splendor. 
But he stirred not, no more than if changed to marble. 

^^ It is the Seeker," whispered Hannah, convulsively 
grasping her husband's arm. *^ Matthew, he is dead.' 

^^ The joy of success has killed him," replied Mat- 
thew, trembling violently. "Or, perhaps, the very 
light of the Great Carbuncle was death I " 



Digitized by 



Google 







•^ mmi^ 






U^ -»*i»? ~ 


» * * N_ I^ 




^^^v^^mc^M^ai^BW^-'^^*^ .-■' -T^rai 


^■««rm 


itB3. Ak.-^2 


^ ^^iii 





THE OLD MAN OF THE MOUNTAIN FROM THE ROAD 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE GREAT CARBUNCLE. 6T 

^ The Ghreat Carbuncle," cried a peevisli voice be- 
hind them. **The Grreat Humbug! If you have 
found it, prithee point it out to me." 

They turned their heads, and there was the Cynic, 
with his prodigious spectacles set carefuUy on his 
nose, staring now at the lake, now at the rocks, now 
at the distant masses of vapor, now right at the Great 
Carbuncle itself, yet seemingly as unconscious of its 
light as if all the scattered clouds were condensed 
about his person. Though its radiance actually threw 
the shadow of the unbeliever at his own feet, as he 
turned his back upon the glorious jewel, he would not 
be convinced that there was the least glimmer there. 

^ Where is your Great Humbug?" he repeated. 
^ I challenge you to make me see it ! " 

^ There," said Matthew, incensed at such perverse 
blindness, and turning the Cynic round towards the 
illuminated cliff. *^ Take off those abominable spec- 
tacles, and you cannot help seeing it ! '* 

Now these colored spectacles probably darkened 
the Cynic's sight, in at least as great a degree as the 
smoked glasses through which people gaze at an 
eclipse. With resolute bravado, however, he snatched 
them from his nose, and fixed a bold stare f uU upon 
the ruddy blaze of the Great Carbuncle. But scarcely 
had he encountered it, when, with a deep, shuddering 
groan, he dropped his head, and pressed both hands 
across his miserable eyes. Thenceforth there was, in 
very truth, no light of the Great Carbuncle, nor any 
other light on earth, nor light of heaven itself, for the 
poor Cynic. So long accustomed to view all objects 
through a medium that deprived them of every glimpse 
of brightness, a single flash of so glorious a pbenom* 
enon, striking upon his naked vision, had blinded him 
forever* 



Digitized by 



Google 



68 THE GREAT CARBUNCLE. 

^ Matthew," said Hannah, dinging to him, *^ let lu 
go hence I " 

Matthew saw that she was feint, and kneeling down, 
supported her in his arms, while he threw some of the 
thrillingly cold water of the enchanted lake upon her 
face and bosonu It revived her, but could not reno- 
vate her courage. 

^^ Yes, dearest ! " cried Matthew, pressing her tremn!- 
lous form to his breast, — ^we will go hence, and 
return to our humble cottage. The blessed sunshine 
and the quiet moonlight shall come through our win« 
dow. We will kindle the cheerful glow of our hearth, 
at eventide, and be happy in its light. But never 
again will we desire more light than all the world may 
share with us." 

" No," said his bride, " for how could we live by 
day, or sleep by night, in this awful blaze of the Great 
Carbuncle I " 

Out of the hollow of their hands, they drank each a 
draught from the lake, which presented them its waters 
uncontaminated by an earthly lip. Then, lending their 
guidance to the blinded Cynic, who uttered not a word, 
and even stifled his groans in his own most wretched 
heart, they began to descend the mountain. Yet, as 
they left tiie shore, till then untrodden, of the spirit's 
lake, they threw a farewell glance towards the cli£^ 
and beheld the vapors gathering in dense volumes, 
through which the gem burned duskily. 

As touching the other pilgrims of the Great Car. 
bunde, the legend goes on to tell, that the worshipful 
Master Ichabod Pigsnort soon gave up the quest as a 
desperate speculation, and wisely resolved to betake 
himself again to his warehouse, near the town dock, in 
Boston. But, as he passed through the Notch of the 



Digitized by 



Google 



\ 



THE GREAT CARBUNCLE. 69 

mountains, a war party of Indians captured our un- 
lucky merchant, and carried him to Montreal, there 
holding him in bondage, till, by the payment of a 
heavy ransom, he had wofully subtracted from his 
hoard of pine-tree shillings. By his long absence^ 
moreover, his affairs had become so disordered that» 
for the rest of his life, instead of wallowing in silver, 
he had seldom a sixpence worth of copper. Doctor 
Cacaphodel, the alchemist, returned to his laboratory 
with a prodigious fragment of granite, which he ground 
to powder, dissolved in acids, melted in the crucible, 
and burned with the blow-pipe, and published the re- 
sult of his experiments in one of the heaviest folios of 
the day. And, for all these purposes, the gem itself 
could not have answered better than the granite. The 
poet, by a somewhat similar mistake, made prize of a 
great piece of ice, which he found in a sunless chasm 
of the mountains, and swore that it corresponded, in 
all points, with his idea of the Great Carbuncle. The 
critics say, that, if his poetry lacked the splendor of 
the gem, it retamed all the coldness of the ice. The 
Lord de Yere went back to his ancestral hall, where 
he contented himself with a wax-lighted chandelier, 
and filled, in due course of time, another coffin in the 
ancestral vault. As the funeral torches gleamed within 
that dark receptacle, there was no need of the Great 
Carbuncle to show the vanity of earthly pomp. 

The Cynic, having cast aside his spectacles, wan- 
dered about the world, a miserable object, and was 
punished with an agonizing desire of light, for the wil- 
ful blindness of his former life. The whole night long, 
he would lift his splendor-blasted orbs to the moon 
and stars ; he turned his face eastward, at sunrise, as 
duly as a Persian idolater ; he made a pilgximage t9 



Digitized by 



Google 



60 TBS ORPAT CABBUNCLJff. 

Borne, to witness the magnificent illumination of St; 
Peter's Church; and finally perished in the great fire 
of London, into the midst of which he had thrust him« 
self, with the desperate idea of catching one feeble raj 
from the blaze that was kindling eartli and heaven. 

Matthew and his bride spent many peaceful yeara^ 
and were fond of telling the legend of the Great Caiv 
buncle. The tale, however, towards the close of their 
lengthened lives, did not meet with the full credenoo 
that had been accorded to it by those who remembered 
the ancient lustre of the gem. For it is affirmed that, 
from the hour when two mortals had shown themselves 
80 simply wise as to reject a jewel which would have 
dimmed all earthly things, its splendor waned. When 
other pilgrims reached the cliff , they found only an 
opaque stone, with particles of mica glittering on its 
surface. There is rJso a tradition that, as the youth- 
ful pair departed, the gem was loosened from the fore- 
head of the cliff , and fell into the enchanted lake, and 
that, at noontide, the Seeker's form may still be seen 
to bend over its quenchless gleam. 

Some few believe that this inestimable stone is blaz- 
ing as of old, and say that they have caught its radi- 
ance, like a flash of summer lightning, far down the 
the valley of the Saco. And be it owned that, many 
a mile from the Crystal HiUs, I saw a wondrous light 
around their summits, and was lured, by the faith oi 
poesy, to be the latest pilgrim of tiie Qs&AX CUjft* 

fiUHGLB. 



Digitized by 



Google 



SKETCHES FROM MEMOBT. 

XHB KOTCH OF THB WHITE MOUNTAINS. 

It was now the middle of September. We had 
eome since sunrise from Bartlett, passing up through 
the valley of the Saco, which extends between moun- 
tainous walls, sometimes with a steep ascent, but often 
as level as a church aisle. All that day and two pre- 
ceding ones we had been loitering towards the heart 
of the White Mountains, — those old crystal hills, 
whose mysterious brilliancy had gleamed upon our 
distant wanderings before we thought of visiting 
them. Height after height had risen and towered 
one above another till the clouds began to hang below 
the peaks. Down their slopes were the red pathways 
of the slides, those avalanches of earth, stones and 
trees, which descend into the hollows, leaving vestiges 
of their track hardly to be effaced by the vegetation 
of ages. We had mountains behind us and mountains 
on each side, and a group of mightier ones ahead. 
Still our road went up along the Saco, right towards 
the centre of that group, as if to climb above the 
clouds in its passage to the farther region. 

In old times the settlers used to be astounded by 
the inroads of the northern Indians coming down 
upon them from this mountain rampart through some 
defile known only to themselves. It is, indeed, a won- 
drous path. A demon, it might be fancied, or one of 
the Titaos, was travelling up the valley, elbowing the 



Digitized by 



Google 



62 SKETCHES FROM MEMORY. 

leiglits carelessly aside as he passed, till at length a 
great mountain took its stand directly across his in- 
tended road. He tarries not for such an obstacle, but, 
rending it asunder a thousand feet from peak to base, 
discloses its treasures of hidden minerals, its sunless 
waters, all the secrets of the mountain's inmost heart, 
with a mighty fracture of rugged precipices on each 
side. This is the Notch of the White Hills. Shame 
on me that I have attempted to describe it by so mean 
an image — feeling, as I do, that it is one of those 
symbolic scenes which lead the mind to the sentiment^ 
though not to the conception, of Omnipotence. 

We had now reached a narrow passage, which 
showed almost the appearance of having been cut by 
human strength and artifice in the solid rock. There 
was a wall of granite on each side, high and precip- 
itous, especially on our right, and so smooth that a 
few evergreens could hardly find foothold enough to 
grow there. This is the entrance, or, in the direction 
we were going, the extremiiy, of the romantic defile of 
the Notch. Before emerging from it, the rattling of 
wheels approached behind us, and a stage-coach rum- 
bled out of the mountain, with seats on top and trunks 
behind, and a smart driver, in a drab greatcoat, touchy 
ing the wheel horses with the whipstock and reining 
in the leaders. To my mind there was a sort of po- 
etry in such an incident, hardly inferior to what would 
have accompanied the painted array of an Indian war 
party gliding forth from the same wild chasm. All 
the passengers, except a very fat lady on the back 
Beat, had alighted. One was a mineralogist, a scien- 
tific, green-spectacled figure in black, bearing a heavy 
liammer, widi which he did great damage to the preo« 



Digitized by 



Google 



SKETCHES FROM MEMORY. 68 

ipioes, and put the fragments in his pocket. Another 
was a well-dressed young man, who carried an opera 
glass set in gold, and seemed to be making a quota* 
tion from some of Byron's rhapsodies on mountain 
flcenery. There was also a trader, returning from 
Portland to the upper part of Vermont; and a fair 
young girl, with a very faint bloom like one of those 
pale and delicate flowers which sometimes occur among 
alpine cliffs. 

They disappeared, and we followed them, passing 
through a deep pine forest, which for some miles al- 
lowed us to see nothing but its own dismal shade. 
Towards nightfall we reached a level amphitheatret 
surrounded by a great rampart of hills, which shut out 
the sunshine long before it left the external world. It 
was here that we obtained our first view, except at a 
distance, of the principal group of mountains. They 
are majestic, and even awful, when contemplated in a 
proper mood, yet, by their breadth of base and the 
long ridges which support them, give the idea of im- 
mense bulk rather than of towering height. Mount 
Washington, indeed, looked near to heaven : he was 
white with snow a mile downward, and had caught the 
only doud that was sailing through the atmosphere im 
veil his head. Let us forget the other names of Amer- 
ican statesmen that have been stamped upon these 
hills, but still call the loftiest Washingtox. Moun- 
tains are Earth's undecaying monuments. They must 
stand while she endures, and never should be conse- 
crated to the mere great men of their own age and 
country, but to the mighty ones alone, whose glory is 
tmiversal, and whom all time will render illustrious. 

The air, not often sultry in this elevated region, 
nearly two thousand feet above the sea, was now sharp 



Digitized by 



Google 



64 SKETCHES FROM MEMORY. 

and cold, like that of a clear November eyenmg in the 
lowlands. By morning, probably, there would be a 
frost, if not a snowfall, on the grass and rye, and an 
icy surface over the standing water. I was glad to 
perceive a prospect of comfortable quarters in a house 
which we were approaching, and of pleasant company 
in the guests who were assembled at the door. 

OUR EVENINO PARTY AMONQ THE MOUNTAINS. 

We stood in front of a good substantial farm-house» 
of old date in that wild country. A sign over the door 
denoted it to be the White Mountain Post Office, — 
an establishment which distributes letters and news* 
papers to perhaps a score of persons, comprising the 
population of two or three townships among the hills. 
The broad and weighty antlers of a deer, ^^ a stag of 
ten," were fastened at the comer of the house; a 
fox's bushy tail was nailed beneath them ; and a huge 
black paw lay on the ground, newly severed and still 
bleeding — the trophy of a bear hunt. Among sev- 
eral persons collected about the doorsteps, the most 
remarkable was a sturdy mountaineer, of six feet two 
and corresponding bulk, with a heavy set of features, 
such as might be moulded on his own blacksmith's an** 
vil, but yet indicative of mother wit and rough hu- 
mor. As we appeared, he uplifted a tin trumpet, 
four or five feet long, and blew a tremendous blast, 
either in honor of our arrival or to awaken an echo 
from the opposite hill. 

Ethan Crawford's guests were of such a motley de- 
ccription as to form quite a picturesque group, seldom 
seen together except at some place like this, at once 
the pleasure house of fashionable tourists and the 
luxmely inn of country travellero. Among the oom- 



Digitized by 



Google 



SKETCHES FROM MEMORY. 65 

pany at the door were the mmeralogist and the owner 
of die gold opera glass whom we had encountered in 
the Notch ; two Georgian gentlemen, who had chilled 
their southern blood that morning on the top of Mount 
Washington ; a physician and his wife from Conway ; 
a trader of Burlington, and an old squire of the Gbeen 
Mountains ; and two young married couples, all the 
way from Massachusetts, on the matrimonial jaunt. 
Besides these strangers, the rugged county of Coos, 
in which we were, was represented by half a dozen 
wood-cutters, who had slun a bear in the forest and 
smitten off his paw. 

I had joined the party, and had a moment's leisure 
to examine them before the echo of Ethan's blast re- 
turned from the hilL Not one, but many echoes had 
caught up the harsh and tuneless sound, untwisted its 
complicated threads, and found a thousand aerial har- 
monies in one stem trumpet tone. It was a distinct 
yet distant and dreamlike sjrmphony of melodious in- 
struments, as if an aiiy band had been hidden on the 
hill-side and made faint music at the summons. No 
subsequent trial produced so clear, delicate, and spir- 
itual a concert as the first. A field-piece was then dis- 
charged from the top of a neighboring hiU, and gave 
birth to one long reverberation, which ran round the 
circle of mountains in an unbroken chain of sound 
and rolled away without a separate echo. After these 
experiments, the cold atmosphere drove us all into the 
house, with the keenest appetites for supper. 

It did one's heart good to see the great fires that 
were kindled in the parlor and bar-room, especially 
the latter, where the fireplace was built of rough stone, 
and might have contained the trunk of an old tree for 
ft backlog. A man keeps a comfortable hearth when 



Digitized by 



Google 



66 8KETCESB FROM MEMORY. 

&1S own forest is at his very door. In the parlor, when 
the evening was fairly set in, we held our hands before 
our eyes to shield them from the ruddy glow, and be- 
gan a pleasant variety of conversation. The mineral- 
Dgist and the physician talked about the invigorating 
qualities of the mountain air, and its excellent effect on 
Ethan Crawford's father, an old man of seventy-five, 
with the unbroken &ame of middle life. The two 
brides and the doctor's wife held a whispered discus- 
sion, which, by their frequent titterings and a blush or 
two, seemed to have reference to the trials or enjoy- 
ments of the matrimonial state. The bridegrooms sat 
together in a comer, rigidly silent, like Quakers whom 
the spirit moveth not, being still in the odd predica- 
ment of bashfulness towards their own young wives. 
The Grreen Mountain squire chose me for his compan- 
ion, and described the difficulties he had met with half 
a century ago in travelling from the Connecticut River 
through the Notch to Conway, now a single day's 
journey, though it had cost him eighteen. The Greor- 
gians held the albmn between them, and favored us 
with the few specimens of its contents which they 
considered ridiculous enough to be worth hearing. 
One extract met with deserved applause. It was a 
^' Sonnet to the Snow on Mount Washington," and had 
been contributed that very afternoon, bearing a signa- 
ture of great distinction in magazines and annals. 
The lines were elegant and full of fancy, but too re- 
mote from familiar sentiment, and cold as their subjeoti 
resembling those curious specimens of crystallized va* 
por which I observed next day on the mountain top^ 
The poet was understood to be the young gentleman 
of the gold opera glass, who heard our laudatoiy v» 
marks with the oomposare of a veteran. 



Digitized by 



Google 



SKETCHES FROM MEMORY. 67 

Snbh was our party, and rach their ways of amass- 
ment. But on a winter evening another set of guests 
assembled at the hearth where these summer travellers 
were now sitting. I once had it in contemplation to 
spend a month hereabouts, in sleighing time, for the 
sake of studying the yeomen of New England, who 
then elbow each other through the Notch by hundreds, 
on their way to Portland. There could be no better 
school for such a place than Ethan Crawford's inn. 
Let the student go thither in December, sit down with 
the teamsters at their meals, share their evening mer- 
riment, and repose with them at night when every bed 
has its three occupants, and parlor, bar-room, anJ 
kitchen are strewn with slumberers around the fire. 
Then let him rise before daylight, button his great- 
coat, muffle up his ears, and stride with the departing 
caravan a mile or two, to see how sturdily they make 
head against the blast. A treasure of characteristio 
traits will repay all inconveniences, even should a fro- 
xen nose be of the number. 

The conversation of our party soon became more 
animated and sincere, and we recounted some tradi- 
tions of the Indians, who believed that the father and 
mother of their race were saved from a deluge by as- 
cending the peak of Mount Washington. The children 
of that pair have been overwhelmed, and found no such 
refuge. In the mythology of the savage, these moun- 
tains were afterwards considered sacred and inacces- 
sible, full of unearthly wonders, illuminated at lofty 
heights by the blaze of precious stones, and inhabited 
by deities, who sometimes shrouded themselves in 
the snow-storm and came down on the lower world. 
There are few legends more poetical than that of the 
^Great Carbuncle" of the White Mountains. Th« 



Digitized by 



Google 



68 SKETCHES FROM MEMORY. 

belief was communicated to the English settlers, and 
is hardly yet extinct, that a gem, of such immense 
size as to be seen shining miles away, hangs from a 
rock over a clear, deep lake, high up among the hills. 
They who had once beheld its 8|)lendor were inthralled 
with an unutterable yearning to possess it. But a 
spirit guarded that inestimable jewel, and bewildered 
the adventurer with a dark mist from the enchanted 
lake. Thus life was worn away in the vain search 
for an unearthly treasure, till at length the deluded 
one went up the mountain, still sanguine as in youth, 
but returned no more. On this theme methinks I 
could frame a tale with a deep moraL 

The hearts of the pale-faces would not thrill to these 
superstitions of the red men, though we spoke of them 
in the centre of the haunted region. The habits and 
sentiments of that departed people were too distinct 
from those of their successors to find much real sym* 
pathy. It has often been a matter of regret to me 
that I was shut out from the most peculiar field of 
American fiction by an inability to see any romance, 
or poetry, or grandeur, or beauty in the Indian char- 
acter, at least till such traits were pointed out by 
others. I do abhor an Indian story. Yet no writer 
can be more secure of a permanent place in our litera- 
ture than the biographer of the Indian chiefs. His 
subject, as referring to tribes which have mostly van- 
ished from the earth, gives him a right to be placed on 
a classic shelf, apart from the merits which will sustain 
him there. 

I made inquiries whether, in his researches about 
these parts, our mineralogist had found the three 
^ Silver HiUs ** which an Indian sachem sold to an 
Knglishman nearly two hundred yean agOf and tha 



Digitized by 



Google 



SKETCHES FROM MEMORY. 69 

treasure of which the posterily of the purchaser have 
been looking for ever since. But the man of science 
had ransacked every hill along the Saco, and knew 
nothing of these prodigious piles of wealth. By this 
time, as usual with men on the eve of great adventure, 
we had prolonged our session deep into the night, con- 
sidering how early we were to set out on our six miles' 
ride to the foot of Mount Washington. There was 
now a general breaking up. I scrutinized the faces 
of the two bridegrooms, and saw but little probability 
of their leaving the bosom of earthly bliss, in the first 
week of the honeymoon and at the frosty hour of 
three, to climb above tho clouds ; nor when I felt how 
sharp the wind was as it rushed through a broken 
pane and eddied between the chinks of my unplastered 
chamber, did I anticipate much alacrity on my own 
part, though we were to seek for the ^' Great Car- 
buncle.'' 



Digitized by 



Google 



CAlfBRIDGB . ICASSACHUSBTTS 
PRINTED IN THE U.S.A. 



Digitized by 



Google 



/ 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 




3 



2044 



|lMM|||mi|W 

021 135 678 



The borrower must return this item on or before 
the last date stamped below. If another user 
places a recall for this item, the borrower will 
be notified of the need for an earlier return. 

Non-receipt of overdue notices does not exempt 
the borrower from overdue fines. 



Harvard College Widener Library 
Cambridge, MA 02138 617-495-2413 




Please handle with care. 

Thank you for helping to preserve 
library collections at Harvard, 





3 ogle 



