This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/ 


The  marble  faun 


Nathaniel  Hawthorne 


KD   S'BrQ>D.y 


Ha.uJ  y  3 


HARVARD  UNIVERSITY 


LIBRARY  OF 


English  A 


Proceeds  op 

ExDono ENGUSwAManual 


Digitized 


by  Google 


IT 

■  1 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  FAUN  OF  PRAXITELES 


Digitized 


by  Google 


tS^lie  HtDettftDe  ILitetatnre  fmke 


THE  MARBLE  FAUN 

OB 

THE    ROMANCE   OP   MONTE  BENl 

BY 

NATHANIEL  HAWTHOKNE 

WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  AND  NOTES 
By  ANNIE  RUSSELL  MARBLE,  M.  A. 


BOSTON  NEW  TOBK  CHIOAQO 

HOUGHTON  MIFFLIN  COMPANT 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Kd  5^A^~ 


5H^'^ 


;)o  j 


Copyright,  1860, 
Bt  NATHANIEL  HAWTHORNE. 

Oopyright,  1883  and  1901, 
Bx  HOUGHTON,  MIFFLIN  &  GO. 

Oopyright,  1888, 
Bt  rose  HAWTHORNE  LATHBOF. 

AU  rights  reterved. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CONTENTS. 


/ 

PA''! 

blTRODCrCTION      •          •          •          •          •          .          •          .          •          .  vii 

Ch&okolooical    Summary    op    Hawtbobnb^s  Lifb   akd 

Wbitinos ziz 

CkAP.  L    MiBiAMr  Hilda,  Kenton,  Donatello  •       •       •  19 

n.    Thb  Faun 26 

ILL      SUBTEBSANBAN   RbMIMISOENCES      .          •          •          •  85 

IV.    The  Spbctbb  of  the  Catacomb     .       •       •       •  43 

y.    Mibiam'b  Stupio •       •  53 

VL    The  Vibgin's  Shbinb 68 

Vn.    Bbatbice 80 

Vm.    The  Sububban  Villa 89 

IX.    The  Faun  and  Nymph         •       .        •       •       .  97 

X.    The  Sylvan  Dance •       .106 

XL    Fbagmentaby  Sentences 114 

XXL    A  Stboll  on  the  Pincian      .       •       •       •       .  122 

XTTT.    A  Sculptob's  Studio 138 

XIV.    Cleopatba 149 

XV.    An  -^Esthetic  Company 158 

XVI.    A  Moonlight  Ramble 170 

XVIL    Miriam's  Tboublb 182 

XVHL    On  the  Edge  op  a  Pbecipicb         .       .       .       .191 

XIX.    The  Faun*s  Tbansfobmation      .       .       •       .  203 

XX.    The  Bdbial  Chant 210 

XXI.    The  Dead  Capuchin 219 

XXn.    The  Medici  Gabdens 229 

XXnL    MiBiAM  AND  Hilda        .        .        .        •        •        .  236 

XXIV.    The  Toweb  among  the  Apennines       •       •       .  248 

XXV.    Sunshine 256 

XXVL    The  Pbdiobee  of  Monte  Bsni      ....  267 


Digitized 


by  Google 


fv  CONTENTS. 

PAOI 

XXVn.  Myths       ...•..•..  280 

XXVIII.  Thb  Owl  Tower 291 

XXIX.  On  thb  Battlements 300 

XXX  DONATELLO'S  BcsT        .  * 312 

XXXI.  Thb  Mabblb  Saloon 320 

XXXIL  ScBNBs  BT  THE  Wat 332 

XXXIII.  Pictured  Windows 345 

XXXIV.  Market-Da Y  in  Perugia 355 

XXXV.  Thb  Bronze  Pontiff's  Bbnediction    .       .  363 

XXXVL  Hilda's  Tower 372 

XXXVIL  The  Emptiness  of  Picture  Galleries        .  380 

XXXVIII.  Altars  and  Incense .392 

XXXIX.  The  World's  Cathedral       ....  403 

XL.  Hilda  and  a  Friend 413 

XT  J.  Snow-Drops  and  Maidenly  Delights         .  425 

XLIL  Rkminisobnces  of  Miriam         ....  435 

•     XUn.  The  Extinction  of  a  IjAmp  ....  444 

XLTV.  The  Deserted  Shrine 454 

XLV.  The  Flight  of  Hilda's  Doves      .        .        .  465 

XLVL  A  Walk  on  the  Campaona      ....  474 

XLVIL  The  Peasant  and  Gontadika       .       .       •  482 

XLVnL  A  Scene  in  the  Ck)Rso 493 

XLIX.  A  Frolic  of  the  Carnival  ....  502 

Li  Miriam,  Hilda,  Kenton,  Donatello       •       •  514 

Kotks 629 


Digitized 


by  Google 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Thbs  Faun  of  Praxttbles  (page  21)  .        ,         Frontispiece, 

HiiaDA's  TowKB,  Via  Pobtoghbsb 68 

Guidons  Bbatbiob  Cenci 84 

Fountain  of  Trevi 172 

Thb  Ck>iJSEUM 182 

Abch  of  Constantinb    .       . 188 

Capuchin  Cbypt 226 

Grand  Ducal  Square,  and  Palazzo  Vbochio,  Flobencb  294 

Statue  of  Pope  Julius  III 370 

Saint  Peter's 398 

Interior  op  St.  Peter's 410 

Apollo  Bblybdbsb  •••••••••  446 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


INTRODUCTION 

The  history  of  American  literature,  prior  to  the 
(ast  half-century,  reveals  indifference  on  the  part  of 
readers  to  all  art-forms  and  tardy  recognition  of  na- 
tive genius.  During  the  last  few  years,  however,  the 
earlier  authors  have  received  increasing  study,  espe- 
cially the  four  who  first  won  recognition  by  their  dis- 
tinctive and  effective  fiction,  —  Irving,  Cooper,  Poe, 
and  Hawthorne.  To  Hawthorne,  so  long  '^  the  obscur- 
est man  of  letters  in  America,"  is  now  given  merited 
appreciation  by  youth  and  manhood.  Beading  his 
masterpieces,  and  contrasting  them  with  the  vast  out- 
put of  fiction  during  the  last  fifty  years,  we  are  stirred 
anew  with  pride  in  this  artist,  this  man  with  lofty 
ideals,  with  magical,  compulsive  imagination,  and  with 
sure  grasp  of  humanity  in  its  deepest  impulses  and 
most  subtle  actions. 

'*  The  Marble  Faun  "  represents  the  full  maturity 
of  his  genius,  the  culmination  of  many  qualities  dis- 
closed, in  part,  in  earlier  fiction,  beginning  with  the 
first  series  of  "Twice  Told  Tales"  in  1837,  which 
proclaimed  anew,  creative  spirit  in  national  literature. 
From  such  fantastic,  yet  human,  tales  there  was  a 
natural  progression  to  the  purposeful  romances, 
wherein  mysterious  tragedy  was  interwoven  with 
graceful  fancies  and  glowing  pictures  of  landscape 
and  life.  In  these  contrasting  shadows  and  sunshine, 
in  moral  and  spiritual  intensity,  **  The  Marble  Faun '' 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Viii  INTRODUCTION 

is  preeminent  among  the  creations  of  Hawthorne's' 
genius.  It  is  the  Kterary  record  of  the  happiest  years 
of  the  author's  manhood ;  it  is  also  the  portrayal  of  a 
new,  educative  experience,  a  broadening  and  culti- 
vation of  his  tastes,  his  mental  scope,  and  hist  social 
relations. 

In  America,  half  a  century  ago,  authorship,  as  a 
profession,  involved  a  constant  struggle  with  poverty 
and  uncongenial  tasks.  Hawthorne,  called  in  college 
"  Oberon,  the  Fairy,"  because  of  his  beauty  and  po- 
etic fancy,  was  compelled  to  perform  various  irksome 
services  to  gain  an  adequate  income.  The  aspirations 
of  the  author,  however,  were  never  dwarfed,  and  his 
experiences  gave  him  some  material  for  literary  use. 
He  was  scrupulously  honest  and  efficient  in  whatever 
duty  was  required  of  him.  During  the  early  years  of 
authorship  he  served  in  the  Custom  Houses  at  Boston 
and  Salem.  In  1853,  by  appointment  of  his  col- 
lege friend,  then  President  Franklin  Pierce,  he  went ' 
as  consul  to  Liverpool.  The  *'  English  Note-Books  " 
testify  to  the  zeal  and  loyalty  with  which  he  served 
in  this  office  for  five  years,  often  at  great  sacrifice  of 
mental  happiness.  With  boyish  enthusiasm  he  cele- 
brated his  release  by  ^^  his  first  real  holiday  "  in  Italy. 
Mrs.  Hawthorne  and  the  elder  daughter,  Una,  were 
zealous  students  of  art.  Primarily  to  give  them  pleas- 
ure, Hawthorne  planned  this  year  in  Rome  and  Flor- 
ence, though  he  was  at  first  indifferent,  as  well  as 
uninformed,  regarding  art  and  archaeology,  while  he 
suffered  keenly  from  the  discomforts  of  the  Italian 
•climate.  Through  his  "French  and  Italian  Note- 
Books,"  however,  it  is  interesting  to  trace  the  grad- 
ual unfolding  of  his  aesthetic  pleasure  and  his  leisurely 
study  of  classic  art  under  the  wise  guidance  of  his 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTION.  ix 

wife  and  certain  American  artist-friends,  notably  the 
sculptors,  W.  W.  Story  and  Hiram  Powers,  and  the 
painter,  Cephas  G.  Thompson.  Gradually,  Rome,  in 
its  glories  of  history  and  art,  appealed  to  his  awakened 
tastes  and  his  spiritual  faculties  until  it  became  a 
vital  force  in  his  developing  genius. 

For  seven  years  he  had  published  no  fiction.  His 
journals  and  letters  suggest  the  hope  that  he  might 
gain  material  for  two  romances,  one  with  English 
background,  the  other  an  Italian  story.  The  years 
in  Liverpool,  crowded  with  business  and  political  anx- 
ieties, gave  no  incentive  for  fiction.  His  restricted  con- 
tact with  English  men  of  letters  and  a£Eairs,  largely  due 
to  his  own  persistent  reserve,  gave  his  mind  a  critical 
bias  towards  certain  phases  of  English  life  that  found 
reflection,  not  in  romance,  but  in  the  much-censured 
studies  of  real  life,  "  Our  Old  Home,"  published  in 
1863.  In  Italy,  on  the  other  hand,  freed  from  vexing 
details  and  current  problems,  surrounded  by  sugges- 
tions for  poetical  and  fanciful  reflection,  his  mind  re- 
sponded to  any  associations  worthy  of  his  imagination, 
which  yearned  for  some  new  expression. 

In  the  leisurely  study  of  Roman  galleries,  two  works 
of  art  early  attracted  and  haunted  his  memory,  the 
Faun  of  Praxiteles  and  the  so-called  portrait  of  Bea- 
trice Cenci  by  Guido.  In  his  Note-Book,  April  18, 
1858,  he  recalls  the  famous  sculptures  in  the  Capitol, 
mentioned  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  romance,  and 
lingers  with  emphasis  upon  the  faun :  "  I  like  these 
strange,  sweet,  playful,  rustic  creatures,  —  linked  so 
prettily,  without  monstrosity,  to  the  lower  tribes. 
Their  character  has  never,  that  I  know  of,  been 
wrought  out  in  literature  ;  and  something  quite  goody 
funny,  and  philosophical,  as  well  as  poetic,  might  very 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Z  INTRODUCTION. 

likely  be  educed  from  them."  The  idea,  onoe  con« 
ceived,  strengthened  with  each  visit  to  the  Capitol. 
A  second  journal  comment  outlines  the  fancy  with 
more  definiteness  (i.  181)  :  ^^  It  seems  to  me  that  a 
story,  with  all  sorts  of  fun  and  pathos  in  it,  might  be 
contrived  on  the  idea  of  their  species  having  become 
intermingled  with  the  human  race  ;  a  family  with  the 
faun  blood  in  them  having  prolonged  itself  from  the 
classic  era  till  our  own  days.  The  tail  might  have 
disappeared,  by  dint  of  constant  intermarriage  with 
ordinary  mortals ;  but  the  pretty  hairy  ears  should  oc- 
casionally reappear  in  members  of  the  family ;  and 
the  moral  instincts  and  intellectual  characteristics  of 
the  faun  might  be  most  picturesquely  brought  out, 
without  detriment  to  the  human  interest  of  the  story. 
Fancy  this  combination  in  the  person  of  a  young 
lady  I " 

The  poetic  and  mystical  nucleus  of  the  story  thus 
chosen,  Hawthorne's  earnest,  moral  nature  awaited 
some  relevant  ^^  human  interest "  to  complete  the  dual 
plan  of  his  romance.  During  the  first  residence  in 
Borne,  while  visiting  the  Castle  of  St.  Angelo,  he  was 
reminded  of  the  cruel  sufferings  there  of  Beatrice 
Cenci  and  gave  passing  attention  to  Guide's  study  of 
her  face  in  the  Barberini  Palace.  The  summer  of 
1858  was  spent  at  Florence  at  the  picturesque  villa 
of  Montaiito,  on  Bellosguardo  Hill.  Here  the  roman- 
tic idea  of  the  faun  grew  in  the  author's  imagination ; 
here  he  found  the  rural  beauties  and  legendary  asso- 
ciations described  as  belonging  to  Monte  Beni,  the 
home  of  Donatello's  ancestors;  here  the  traditions 
of  the  monk,  mysteriously  murdered,  who  returned  to 
haunt  the  old  villa,  afforded  hints  for  episodes  in  the 
romance. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


INTRODUCTION  xi 

The  study  of  Florentine  art  and  the  unwonted  so^ 
cial  pleasures  enjoyed  by  Hawthorne,  amid  the  circle 
of  English  and  American  artists  and  poets,  prevented 
advance  in  literary  work  during  these  summer  months, 
though  he  mentions  that  he  is  ^^  sketching  out  a  ro- 
mance, which  whether  it  will  come  to  anything  is  a 
point  yet  to  be  decided  "  (ii.  96,  97).  After  his  re- 
turn to  Home  in  October,  his  anticipated  progress  was 
further  interrupted  by  the  serious  illness  of  his  daugh* 
ter  Una,  causing  a  grief  so  absorbing  that  even  his  jour- 
nal was  almost  neglected  during  the  anxious  weeks. 
With  her  recovery,  however,  came  renewed  interest  in 
his  outlined  story,  *'  which  he  had  been  trying  to  tear 
out  of  his  mind,"  according  to  a  letter  to  his  friend 
and  publisher  in  America,  James  T.  Fields.  There 
are  intimations  that  he  had  found  his  human,  spiritual 
problem.  Under  date  of  May  15,  1869,  he  records : 
"  Yesterday  afternoon  we  went  to  the  Barberini  pic- 
ture-gallery to  take  a  farewell  look  at  the  Beatrice 
Cenci,  which  I  have  twice  visited  before,  since  our  re- 
turn from  Florence.  I  attempted  a  description  of  it 
at  my  first  visit,  more  than  a  year  ago,  but  the  picture 
is  quite  indescribable  and  unaccountable  in  its  effect, 
for  if  you  attempt  to  analyze  it  you  can  never  succeed 
in  getting  at  the  secret  of  its  fascination  "  (ii.  241, 
242).  Then  follows  a  study  of  the  face  and  its  myste- 
rious tragedy,  given  in  expanded  form  in  the  conver- 
sation in  "  The  Marble  Faun,"  chapter  vii. 

Bearing  away  with  him  from  Rome  this  haunting 
question  about  the  guilt  of  Beatrice  and  her  suffer- 
ings as  victim  of  a  monster-father,  Hawthorne  had 
soon  interwoven  these  threads  of  tragic  history,  under 
a  new  form,  into  his  development  of  the  faun,  already 
formulated.    In  addition  to  these  two  themes,  which 


Digitized  by 


Google 


xii  INTRODUCTION. 

united  to  form  the  dramatic  motif  of  the  romance, 
Hawthorne  had  been  deeply  impressed  by  yet  another 
famous  painting,  Guide's  Archangel  Michael  triumph- 
ing over  Satan,  the  original  in  the  Church  of  the 
Capuchins  and  a  famous  mosaic  copy  in  St.  Peter's. 
The  earnest,  speculative  study  given  to  this  painting, 
representing  to  the  romancer  the  grand  symbolism  of 
"  the  triumph  of  good  over  the  evil  principle,"  is  evi- 
denced not  alone  in  journal  references  but  in  the  sig- 
nificant conversation  in  chapter  xx.  of  "  The  Marble 
Faun."  In  the  malignity  and  haunting  power  of  the 
face  of  the  prostrate  Satan,  the  author  found  vivid 
suggestions  for  his  mysterious  shadow  of  evil,  Miri- 
am's model,  and  the  resemblance  is  openly  noted. 

Again,  Hawthorne's  imaginative  delight  in  legend 
had  selected  one  supreme  object  for  special  use  in  his 
story,  the  pictorial,  romantic  palace  and  tower  in  the 
Via  Portoghese,  to  which  he  was  destined  to  give  the 
immortal  name  of  "  Hilda's  Tower."  The  recital  of 
this  tradition  in  Hawthorne's  Note-Books  (i.  218)  is 
testimony  to  his  early  impression  of  its  romantic 
possibilities :  "  Three  or  four  centuries  ago  this  pal- 
ace was  inhabited  by  a  nobleman  who  had  an  only 
son  and  a  large  pet  monkey,  and  one  ^ay  the  monkey 
caught  the  infant  up  and  clambered  to  this  lofty 
turret,  and  sat  there  with  him  in  his  arms,  grinning 
and  chattering  like  the  Devil  himself.  The  father 
was  in  despair,  but  was  afraid  to  pursue  the  monkey 
lest  he  should  fling  down  the  child  from  the  height  of 
the  tower  and  make  his  escape.  At  last  he  vowed 
that  if  the  boy  were  safely  restored  to  him  he  would 
build  a  shrine  at  the  summit  of  the  tower,  and  cause 
it  to  be  kept  as  a  sacred  place  forever.  By  and  by 
the  monkey  came  down  and  deposited  the  child  on 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTION.  xiii 

the  ground;  the  father  fulfilled  his  vow,  built  the 
'ihrine,  and  made  it  obligatory  on  all  future  possessors 
of  the  palace  to  keep  the  lamp  burning  before  it* 
Centuries  have  passed,  the  property  has  changed 
hands  ;  but  still  there  is  the  shrine  on  the  giddy  top 
of  the  tower,  far  aloft  over  the  street,  on  the  very 
spot  where  the  monkey  sat,  and  there  bums  the  lamp, 
in  memory  of  the  father's  vow."  This  legend  and 
existent  tower  at  Rome,  commingled  with  the  memory 
of  the  tower-studio  of  his  daughter  Una  in  their 
villa  at  Florence,  stand  in  the  foreground  of  this 
romance. 

During  the  weeks  of  secluded  leisure  at  the  quiet 
English  towns  of  Eedcar  and  Leamington,  he  finished 
and  revised  the  manuscript,  and,  before  the  close  of  the 
year  1859,  it  was  ready  for  publication.  The  choice 
of  title  gave  him  difficulty,  and  the  final  selections  of 
his  publishers,  ^'Transformation"  in  England,  and 
"  The  Marble  Faun  "  in  America,  are  less  poetic  and 
effective  than  the  title^phrases  for  his  earlier  fiction. 
The  romance  was  greeted  "with  expectancy  and  wide 
attention.  It  proved,  however,  a  disappointment  to 
scores  of  admirers  of  **The  Scarlet  Letter"  and 
"  The  House  of  the  Seven  Gables."  Compared  with 
these  simpler  novels  of  American  li^e,  this  latest 
work  seemed  to  many  critics  to  lack  unity  and  ease. 
Especially,  they  failed  to  appreciate  the  well-adjusted 
elements  of  fantastic  mystery  and  deep  humanity 
here  interlinked.  They  would  eliminate  all  the  poetic 
enigmas,  and  ruthlessly  inquired,  ^*  Did  Donatello 
have  furry  ears?"  and  *'  What  was  Miriam's  true 
history  ?  "  One  friend  and  intuitive  critic,  however, 
comprehended  the  author's  purpose  and  the  match-i 
less  skill  in  its  unfolding.     The  enthusiastic  letter 


Digitized 


by  Google 


xiv  INTRODUCTION. 

from  the  historian  Motley  is  familiar  to  all  readers 
of  Hawthorne's  biographies.  Many  a  later  student 
has  echoed  this  friend's  delight  in  ^^  those  shadowy, 
wierd,  fantastic,  Hawthomesqae  shapes  flitting 
through  the  golden  gloom  which  is  the  atmosphere  of 
the  book ; "  under  his  guidance  they  admire  the  deli* 
cate,  subtle  outlines  in  which  the  story  is  ^'  indicated 
rather  than  revealed  ;  "  they  applaud  his  grim  satire 
on  those  dull,  unimaginative  readers  to  whom  ^^  no- 
thing less  than  an  illustrated  edition,  with  a  gallows 
on  the  last  page,  with  Donatello  in  the  most  pensive 
of  attitudes  —  his  ears  revealed  through  a  white  night- 
cap —  would  be  satisfactory."  Unfortunately,  Haw- 
thorne listened  to  the  importunities  of  unwise  friends 
and  "  reluctantly "  added  a  "  Conclusion "  to  the 
second  edition.  It  has  trifling  import  except  as  a 
rebuke  to  the  prosy,  unresponsive  minds  that  exacted 
a  sequel.  The  author  did  not,  for  he  could  not, 
dispel  the  tangled  films  of  his  mystery  nor  dissect 
and  classify  his  poetic  Donatello. 

"  The  Marble  Faun  "  will  ever  be  a  subject  of  diverse 
judgment  with  readers.  In  the  range  of  fiction  it  is 
incomparable  and  unclassified.  Measured  by  strict 
canons  of  construction  and  portrayal,  it  has  marked 
defects  as  a  romance.  It  is  the  work  of  an  artist 
and  a  poet-romancer.  To  criticise  it  as  a  story  of 
mere  actualities  and  so  emphasize  its  improbabili- 
ties, is  to  ignore  the  artistic  purpose  of  the  author  and 
to  lose  the  imaginative  pleasures  of  the  sympathetic 
reader.  On  the  other  hand,  the  romance  is  more 
than  a  fantastic  tale,  for  with  its  mystic  poetry  is 
commingled  keen,  passionate  study  of  real  life.  As 
in  all  of  Hawthorne's  fiction,  the  drama  of  moral 
problem  is  developed  through  a  few  vivid  characters* 

Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC 


INTRODUCTION.  xT 

The  quartet  in  this  romance,  strongly  contrasted  in 
racial  and  personal  traits,  is  an  example  of  the  au- 
thor's skill  in  synthesis  of  character.  If  the  figures 
in  this  group  suggest  occasional  resemblances  to 
members  of  his  family  or  the  circle  of  his  artist 
friends,  they  are  neither  copiies  nor  types,  but  original 
creations  that  leave  powerful  impress  on  the  reader's 
memory.  Without  adopting  the  labored  analogy, 
applied  by  some  critics  to  these  characters,  one  may 
suggest  the  contrasting  qualities.  Hilda's  delicate, 
receptive  mind  and  her  spotless  Puritan  conscience, 
forming  a  strange  yet  consistent  character,  at  once 
rigorous  and  dependent,  is  a  marked  foil  to  Miriam's 
brilliant,  intense  intellect,  her  haunting  shadow  of 
evil,  and  her  weakened,  questioning,  moral  sense. 
Again,  Kenyon,  in  his  developed  manhood,  his  calm, 
cautious  judgment,  affords  a  strong  contrast  to  the 
impulsive,  sensuous  Donatello.  The  latter  is  a  most 
daring  and  difficult  conception.  Perhaps  he  is  never 
fully  revealed,  yet  his  creator  has  given  to  him  a 
vividness  and  charm  which  none  other  could  have 
achieved.  At  first  he  belongs  to  the  literary  clan  of 
Ariel  and  Undine,  but  as  the  romance  progresses,  his 
endowment  with  a  soul  and  his  transformation  into 
responsible  manhood  become  the  pivot  of  the  plot. 
By  subtle  suggestions,  the  traits  of  ancestral  fauns 
are  submerged  beneath  the  love  and  jealousy  which, 
uncontrolled,  lead  to  crime  and  suffering. 

Hawthorne  always  had  a  definite  moral  message, 
the  more  potent  because  never  emphasized  at  the 
expense  of  art.  Mr.  Henry  James,  in  his  life  of  the 
romancer,  has  analyzed  this  quality:  "He  com- 
bined in  a  singular  degree  the  spontaneity  of  the 
imagination  with  a  haunting  c^§  for  looral  problemsi 


Digitized 


by  Google 


xvi  INTRODUCTION. 

Man's  conscience  was  his  theme,  but  he  saw  it  in  the 
light  of  a  creative  fancy  which  added,  out  of  its  own 
substance,  an  interest,  and  I  may  ahnost  say,  an  im- 
portance." In  "The  Marble  Faun,"  amid  many 
minor  and  allied  teachings,  is  the  one  steadfast, 
world-old  truth,  that  human  life  is  sacred  and  its 
sacrifice  is  sure  to  bring  punishment  and  remorse. 

In  none  of  Hawthorne's  romances  is  there  unalloyed 
gloom.  Elfish  Pearl  dances  gayly  about  tragic  Hester 
and  Dimmesdale  ;  the  haunting  curse  of  "  The  House 
of  the  Seven  Gables"  leaves  no  taint  upon  light- 
hearted  Phoebe,  ''a  wood-flower  of  New  England 
girlhood  ;  "  sylvan  scenery  and  humorous  character- 
sketches  relieve  the  serious  study  of  "  The  Blithedale 
Romance ; "  the  care-free  jollity  and  happy  lives  of 
those  close  to  the  heart  of  Nature  brighten  many  a 
page  in  the  mystic  story  of  Monte  Beni.  Recall  the 
last  sentence  of  the  romance,  in  its  original  form, 
"  But  Hilda  had  a  hopeful  soul,  and  saw  sunlight  on 
the  mountain-tops." 

The  background  of  this  last  representative  ro- 
mance by  Hawthorne  has  held  a  place  undreamed 
by  the  author,  and  thereby  its  popularity  has  been 
greatly  increased.  Hawthorne  had  no  intention  of 
making  this  fiction  a  guide-book  to  Rome,  and  its 
favor  in  this  secondary  use  is  testimony  to  its  vivid- 
ness and  pictorial  skill.  According  to  the  t]:^ained 
judgment  of  modern  art-critics  there  are  obvious 
errors  in  comments  on  art  and  an  inadequate  appre- 
ciation of  many  classic  creations.  The  author  was 
not  an  artist  in  sculpture  or  in  painting,  but  in  liter- 
ature, and  he  chose  such  monuments  of  art  as  gave 
him  illustrative  material  for  his  romance.  As  his 
plastic  imagination  and  strong  sympathy  became  edu* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


INTRODUCTION,  xvii 

cated  daring  those  months  in  Italy,  he  noted  in  journal 
or  in  fiction  the  impress  on  his  intellect  and  soul  of 
those  works  of  art  which  made  direct  appeal  to  his 
imagination.  In  his  comments  he  often  read  a  new 
spiritual  meaning  into  some  classic  sculpture  or  paint* 
ing,  like  the  familiar  passages  on  the  Venus  of  Med- 
ici, Beatrice  Cenci,  or  Guido's  Archangel.  Professor 
liichardson,  in  appreciation  of  the  proper  adjustment 
of  scenic  effects,  has  said,  ^^The  elaboration  of  the 
romance  is  marked  by  that  finish  which  comes  of  the 
union  of  deliberate  art  in  conception  with  ample 
leisure  for  execution.  Florence  and  Rome  are  por- 
trayed in  a  series  of  pictures  that  are  both  incidental 
and  essential." 

In  Hawthorne's  own  judgment,  preference  was 
given  to  this  romance  above  all  his  other  works.  The 
subsequent 'fragmentary  fiction,  after  his  return  to 
America,  will  surely  bear  no  comparison  with  this 
work  of  vigorous  maturity.  There  are  many  critics, 
however,  who  give  precedence,  both  in  conception  and 
workmanship,  to  "The  Scarlet  Letter,"  and  in  its 
simplicity  yet  intensity  of  theme,  its  deep,  tragic  in- 
sight, and  its  subtle  charm  of  style,  they  proclaim  this 
novel  the  most  artistic  work  in  American  literature. 
If  "  The  Marble  Faun  "  has  less  dramatic  force  and 
unity  of  structure,  it  yet  affords  a  magical  delight  to 
the  imagination  and  incites  a  wide  intellectual  study, 
not  alone  of  the  associations  connected  with  history 
and  art  but  also  in  critical  survey  of  the  author's 
more  ambitious,  more  matured,  romantic  purpose  and 
evolution  of  his  genius.  Sin  and  remorse  as  educative 
media  for  the  soul  are  here  portrayed  with  more  tragic 
emphasis  than  in  "  The  Scarlet  Letter,"  though  the 
blending  of  myths  and  vital  life-problems  tends  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


xviii  INTRODUCTION. 

enhance  the  haunting  enigmas.  More  than  any  other 
fiction  by  Hawthorne  this  romance  brings  ample 
reward  for  sympathetic,  discriminating  reading.  In 
its  distinctive  and  elaborate  background,  in  its  union 
of  the  fantastic  and  the  real,  in  its  subtle  and  con- 
trasting studies  of  character  amid  joyance  and  suffer- 
ing, it  is  a  true  revelation  of  the  specific  traits  of 
*^  the  rarest  genius  America  has  given  to  literature." 
W0BGB8TBB,  Mass.,  July  10, 1901. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHRONOLOGICAL  SUMMARY  OP  HAWTHORNE'S 
LIFE  AND  WRITINGS. 

1804,  July  4.    Nathaniel  Hawthorne  bom  at  Salem,  Mass. 
1808.    Hawthorne's  father  died  at  Surinam,  Dutch  Guiana. 
1816-1818.    Years  of  happy  boyhood  at  Raymond,  near  Sebago 

Lake,  Maine. 
1818.    Returned  to  Salem  and  school  life. 
1821-1825.    Years  at  Bowdoin  College,  Maine. 
1825-1828.    Retired  life  and  early  authorship  at  Salem. 
1828.    Published  "  Fanshawe  "  at  his  own  expense. 

1836.  Editor  of  *<  American  Magazine  of  Useful  and  Enter- 
taining Knowledge." 

1837.  Published  First  Series  of  «  Twice-Told  Tales." 

1838.  Weigher  in  Custom  House,  Boston. 

1840.    Brief  Residence  at  Brook  Farm  Community,  Rozbury. 

1841-1842.    Published  «  Grandfather's  Chair." 

1842.  Married  Sophia  Feabody  ;  home  at  Old  Manse,  Concord, 

Mass. 
1842.    Published  Second  Series  of  «  Twice-Told  Tales." 
1842.    Published  "  Biographical  Stories  for  Children." 

1845.  Edited  **  Journal  of  an  African  Cruiser." 

1846.  Published  **  Mosses  from  an  Old  Manse." 
1846-1849.    Surveyor  of  Customs  at'  Salem. 
1850.    Published  «  The  Scarlet  Letter." 

1850.  Residence  at  Lenox,  Mass. 

1851.  Published  "The  House  of  the  Seven  Gables." 
1851.  Published  "  A  Wonder-Book  for  Girls  and  Boys." 
1851.  Published  "  True  Stories  from  History  and  Biography.^ 
1851.  Residence  at  West  Newton,  Mass. 

1851.  Published  "  The  Snow  Image  and  Other  Tales." 

1852.  Published  «  Life  of  Franklin  Pierce." 

1852.  Published  «  The  Blithedale  Romance." 

1853.  Home  at  The  Wayside,  Concord. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


XX  CHRONOLOGICAL    SUMMARY 

1863.    Published  «  Tanglewood  Tales." 

1853-1858.     Consul  at  Liverpool. 

1858,  January.     Trip  to  Rome,  with  family,  for  study  and  plea« 

sure. 
1858,  June.     Summer  in  Florence  ;    began  sketch  for  "  The 

Marble  Faun." 

1858.  October.    Returned  to  Rome  for  seven  months ;  illness 
of  daughter  Una. 

1859.  <*  The  Marble  Faun '  -  completed  at  Redcar  and  Leam- 
ington, England. 

1860.  Published  as  "Transformation"  in  England  and  as 
"  The  Marble  Faun  "  in  America. 

1860.     Returned  to  The  Wayside,  Concord. 

1863.  Published  «  Our  Old  Home." 

1864,  May  19.    Hawthorne  died  at  Plymouth,  New  Hampshire  ; 
buried  at  Sleepy  Hollow,  Concord,  Mass. 

POSTHUMOUS  PUBLICATIONS. 

1868.  "  American  Note-Books,"  edited  by  Mrs.  Hawthorne. 

1870.  "  English  Note-Books,"  edited  by  Mrs.  Hawthorne. 

1872.  «  French  and  Italian  Note-Books,"  edited  by  Mrs.  Haw- 
thorne. 

1872.  "Septimius  Felton  ;  or.  The  Elixir  of  Life." 

1876.  «  The  DoUiver  Romance." 

1883.  «  Dr.  Grimshawe's  Secret." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


INTRODUCTOEY  NOTE. 


THE  MARBLE  FAUN. 

The  last  of  Hawthorne's  completed  romances  wa» 
also  thought  by  its  author  to  be  his  best.  "The 
Marble  Faun  "  certainly  was  the  outcome  of  copious 
observation  and  mature  deliberation  ;  and  it  was  pro- 
duced  after  he  had  rested  from  composition  for  the 
space  of  five  years.  He  began  the  book  in  the  winter 
of  1859,  at  Kome,  wlvile  harassed  by  illness  in  his 
family,  and  to  some  extent  distracted  by  the  number 
of  intei-ests  appealing  to  him  on  aU  sides —  "  interrup- 
tions," as  he  expressed  it,  ''  from  things  to  see  and 
things  to  suffer." 

He  wrote  to  Mr.  Fields  at  this  time :  "  I  take  great 
credit  to  myself  for  having  sternly  shut  myself  up  for 
an  hour  or  two  almost  every  day,  and  come  to  close 
grips  with  a  romance  which  I  have  been  trying  to 
tear  out  of  my  mind.  As  for  my  success,  I  can't  say 
much.  •  •  •  I  only  know  that  I  have  produced  what 
seems  to  be  a  larger  amount  of  scribble  than  either 
of  my  former  romances,  and  that  portions  of  it  in 
terested  me  a  good  deal  while  I  was  writing  them." 

He  had  already  begun  to  sketch  the  romance  duiv 
ing  the  previous  summer  while  at  Florence,  where 
he  wrote,  in  his  journal,  with  reference  to  this  new 
scheme :    ^^  It  leaves  me  little  heart  for  journalizing 


Digitized 


by  Google 


8  INTRODUCTORY  NOTE. 

and  describing  new  things ;  and  six  months  of  unin- 
*^eiTupted  monotony  would  be  more  valuable  to  me  just 
iiow,  than  the  most  brilliant  succession  of  novelties.'* 
Soon  after  this  he  removed  from  Ms  quarters  in  the 
c'ty  to  the  villa  of  Montauto  on  the  hill  called  Bello- 
**^aardo,  about  a  mile  from  Florence.  This  is  a  lovely 
spjt,  and  the  view  from  it  over  the  valley  of  the  Amo 
has  since  been  described  by  a  sympathetic  traveller, 
himself  a  poet,  as  suggesting  an  outlook  upon  some 
"glade  of  heaven."  The  villa  itself,  which  remains 
standing,  aiid  is  occasionally  occupied  by  American 
tenants,  is  a  capacious,  old-fashioned  building,  with  a 
tower,  and  served  as.  the  model  for  Donatello's  ances- 
tral home,  Monte  Beni.  At  the  time  of  Hawthorne's 
residence  there,  it  was  invested  with  a  sort  of  tradi- 
tion not  likely  to  lessen  its  desirability  for  him  —  that 
of  being  haunted.  A  murder  was  said  to  have  been 
committed  at  some  epoch  conveniently  remote,  in  a 
small  oratory,  in  the  tower ;  and  from  time  to  time 
semi-imaccountable  sounds  —  the  rustling  of  unseen 
robes,  stealthy  steps,  and  groans  from  the  oratory,  — 
were  heard,  which  passed  as  evidence  that  the  tragedy 
was  reenacting  by  the  murderer  and  the  victim.  Here 
Hawthorne  continued,  no  doubt,  to  dream  over  his  new 
story,  perhaps  putting  an  occasional  touch  to  it.  On 
the  journey  thence  to  Siena,  in  October,  he  left  the 
manuscript  in  a  bag,  under  one  of  the  seats  in  the 
railway  carriage  ;  but,,  as  he  notes  down,  on  going  to 
search  for  his  luggage,  "  At  last  the  whole  of  our  ten 
crunks  and  tin  bandbox  were  produced,  and  finally 
my  leather  bag,  in  which  was  my  journal  and  a  manu* 
§cript  book  containing  my  sketch  of  a  romance.  It 
gladdened  my  very  heart  to  see  it." 

While  in  Rome,  Hawthorne  went  on  laboring  and 


Digitized 


by  Google 


^  INTRODUCTORY  NOTE.  9. 

meditating  upon  "The  Marble  Faun,"  the  general 
theme  and  scope  of  which  he  occasionally  descanted 
upon  to  his  friend  John  Lothrop  Motley,  during  the 
rambles  which  they  took  together;  though  the  ro- 
maneer  never  gave  the  historian  any  clew  to  the  whole 
problem  of  his  still  unfinished  work.  Partly  because 
of  the  interruptions  already  mentioned,  and  partly  for' 
other  reasons,  the  book  did  not  progress  beyond  the 
stage  of  an  elaborate  sketch  until  Hawthorne  quitted 
the  Continent.  "  I  find  this  Italian  air,"  he  had  said 
in  a  letter  from  Florence,  "  not  favorable  to  the  close 
toil  of  composition,  although  it  is  a  very  good  air  to 
dream  in.  I  must  breathe  the  fogs  of  old  England, 
or  the  east-winds  of  Massachusetts,  in  order  to  put  me 
into  working  trim."  Finally,  on  getting  to  England, 
he  systematically  set  about  concluding  his  task,  as 
Mrs.  Hawthorne  has  explained. 

"More  than  four  months  were  now  taken  up  in 
writing  *  The  Marble  Faun,'  in  great  part  at  the  sea- 
side town  of  Redcar,  Yorkshire,  Mr.  Hawthorne  having 
concluded  to  remain  another  year  in  England,  chiefly 
to  accomplish  that  romance.  In  Eedcar,  where  he  re- 
mained till  September  or  October,  he  wrote  no  jour- 
nal, but  only  the  book.  He  then  went  to  Leaming- 
ton, where  he  finished  ^  The  Marble  Faun,'  in  March 
[I860]."! 

"The  long,  hairy  ears  of  Midas,"  in  the  "Virtu^ 
oso's  Collection,"  have  already  been  spoken  of  as  fur- 
nishing a  slight  intimation  of  Hawthorne's  interest  in 
lueh  a  phenomenon,^  long  before  he  went  to  Italy, 
But  the  first  positive  trace  of  the  conception,  which 

»  French  and  Italian  Note-Boohs,  June  22,  1859. 
'  See  the  prefatory  note  to  Mosses  from  an  Old  Manse,  in  tbii 
iditkxL 


Digitized 


by  Google 


10  INTRODUCTORY  NOTE. 

was  to  ripen  into  ^'  The  Marble  Faun/'  appears  in  the 
"  French  and  Italian  Note-Books,"  under  the  date  of 
April  22,  1868.  Setting  down  a  brief  account  of  his 
visit  to  the  Capitol,  Hawthorne  says  :  — 

"We  afterwards  went  into  the  sculpture  gallery, 
where  I  looked  at  the  Faun  of  Praxiteles,  and  was 
sensible  of  a  peculiar  charm  in  it ;  a  sylvan  beauty  and 
homeliness,  friendly  and  wild  at  once.  The  length- 
ened but  not  preposterous  ears,  and  the  little  tail 
which  we  infer,  have  an  exquisite  effect,  and  make  the 
spectator  smile  in  his  very  heart.  This  race  of  fauns 
was  the  most  delightful  of  all  that  antiquity  imagined. 
It  seems  to  me  that  a  story,  with  aU  sorts  of  fun  and 
pathos  in  it,  might  be  contrived  on  the  idea  of  their 
species  having  become  intermingled  with  the  human 
race  .  .  .  the  pretty  hairy  ears  should  occasionally 
reappear  in  members  of  the  family;  and  the  moral 
instincts  and  intellectual  characteristics  of  the  faun 
might  be  most  picturesquely  brought  out,  without  det- 
riment to  the  human  interest  of  the  story.  Fancy 
this  combination  in  the  person  of  a  young  lady !  " 

It  is  believed  by  a  member  of  the  author's  family 
that  one  of  the  Counts  of  Montauto,  whose  personal 
appearance  and  grace  were  known  to  have  made  an 
impression  on  Hawthorne,  furnished  him  with  sugges- 
tions which  established  a  connection  between  the  Faun 
of  Praxiteles  and  the  Montiauto  villa  as  it  afterward 
appeared,  under  the  guise  of  Monte  Beni.  This  living 
figure  may  also  perhaps  have  assisted  him  in  giving 
reality  to  his  conception  of  Donatello.  The  young 
Italian  of  the  romance,  whose  resemblance  to  the 
statue  is  made  an  important  point,  receives  appropri- 
ately the  name  of  a  famous  Italian  sculptor ;  a  name 
of  which  the  associations  form  a  link  between  the  mar* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE,  11 

ble  and  the  man.  The  assertion  has  often  been  put 
forth  in  private,  and  it  may  be  in  print  also,  that 
Hawthorne  made  studies  for  other  personages  in  the 
story  from  people  of  his  acquaintance,  and  even  from 
members  of  his  own  family  or  household.  It  is  per- 
haps advisable  to  state  here  that  there  is  no  authority 
whatever  for  such  an  assertion,  excepting  the  unaided 
fancy  of  those  who,  having  known  something  of  his 
connections,  chose  to  trace  purely  imaginary  resem- 
blances. With  the  problem  of  DonateUo's  develop- 
ment into  a  being  with  a  conscience  was  interwoven 
the  mystery  of  Miriam's  situation,  concerning  which 
no  more  need  be  said  in  this  place  than  that  it  was 
evidently  inspired  by  the  author's  reflections  upon  the 
story  of  Beatrice  Cenci.^  Of  the  original  of  Hilda's 
tower  in  the  Via  Portoghese,  at  Rome,  a  description 
is  given  in  the  "Note-Books"  (May  15,  1858),  to- 
gether with  the  legend  accounting  for  the  perpetual 
light  at  the  Virgin's  shrine  on  the  tower.  (Among 
Italians,  this  story  has  imparted  to  the  building  the 
name  of  Torre  dd  SimioJ) 

Several  names  were  proposed  for  the  romance,  and 
among  them  "The  Transformation  of  the  Faim." 
This  the  English  publishers  shortened  to  "  Transfor- 
mation," while  in  America  the  work  was  brought  out 
with  the  better  known  title,  preferred  by  Hawthorne 
himself,  "The  Marble  Faun:  a  Romance  of  Monte 
Beni."  Among  the  many  tokens  of  success  which  its 
publication  brought  to  Hawthorne  was  a  letter  from 
Motley,  with  an  extract  from  which  this  note  may 
close :  — 

"  Everything  that  you  have  ever  written,  I  believe, 

^  Should  the  reader  care  to  see  a  discussion  of  this  matter,  the 
ninth  chapter  of  A  Study  of  Hawthorne  may  be  consulted. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


12  INTRODUCTORY  NOTE. 

I  have  read  many  times.  .  •  .  But  the  \  Romance  of 
Monte  Beni,'  has  the  additional  charm  for  me  that  it 
is  the  first  book  of  yours  that  I  have  read  since  I  had 
the  pleasure  of  making  your  personal  acquaintance. 
My  memory  goes  back  at  once  to  those  walks  (alas, 
not  too  frequent)  we  used  to  take  along  the  Tiber,  or 
4n  the  Campagna  ;  .  .  .  and  it  is  delightful  to  get 
hold  of  the  book  now,  and  know  that  it  is  impossible 
for  you  any  longer,  after  waving  your  wand  as  you 
occasionally  did  then,  indicating  where  the  treasure 
was  hidden,  to  sink  it  again  beyond  plummet's  sound. 
.  .  .  With  regard  to  the  story,  which  has  been  some- 
what criticised,  I  can  only  say  that  to  me  it  is  quite 
satisfactory.  I  like  those  shadowy,  weird,  fantastic, 
Hawthornesque  shapes  flitting  through  the  golden 
gloom  which  is  the  atmosphere  of  the  book.  I  like 
the  misty  way  in  which  the  story  is  indicated  rather 
than  revealed ;  the  outlines  are  quite  definite  enough 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  to  those  who  have  im- 
agination enough  to  follow  you  in  your  airy  flights ; 
and  to  those  who  complain,  I  suppose  jbhat  nothing  less 
than  an  illustrated  edition,  with  a  large  gallows  on  the 
last  page,  with  Donatello  in  the  most  pensile  of  atti- 
tudes —  his  ears  revealed  through  a  white  night-cap  — 
would  be  satisfactory." 

In  replying  to  this,  Hawthorne  wrote :  "  You  work 
out  my  imperfect  efforts  and  half  make  the  book  with 
your  warm  imagination ;  and  see  what  I  myself  saw, 
but  could  only  hint  at.  Well,  the  romance  is  a  suc- 
cess, even  if  it  never  finds  another  reader." 

G.  P.  L. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


PREFACE. 


It  is  now  seven  or  eight  years  (so  many,  at  all 
events,  that  I  cannot  precisely  remember  the  epoch) 
since  the  author  of  this  romance  last  appeared  before 
the  Public.  It  had  grown  to  be  a  custom  with  him 
to  introduce  each  of  his  hiunble  publications  with  a 
familiar  kind  of  preface,  addressed  nominally  to  the 
Public  at  large,  but  really  to  a  character  with  whom 
he  felt  entitled  to  use  far  greater  freedom.  He  meant 
it  for  that  one  congenial  friend, — more  comprehensive 
of  his  purposes,  more  appreciative  of  his  success,  more 
indulgent  of  his  shortcomings,  and,  in  all  respects, 
closer  and  kinder  than  a  brother,  —  that  all-sympa- 
thizing critic,  in  short,  whom  an  author  never  actually 
meets,  but  to  whom  he  implicitly  makes  his  appeal 
whenever  he  is  conscious  of  having  done  his  best. 

The  antique  fashion  of  Prefaces  recognized  this 
genial  personage  as  the  **  Kind  Reader,"  the  "  Gentle 
Reader,"  the  "  Beloved,"  the  "  Indulgent,"  or,  at  cold- 
est,  the  "Honored  Reader,*"  to  whom  the  prim  old 
author  was  wont  to  make  his  preliminary  explanations 
and  apologies,  with  the  certainty  that  they  would  be  fa- 
vorably received.  I  never  personally  encountered,  nor 
corresponded  through  the  post  with  this  representative 
essence  of  all  delightful  and  desirable  qualities  which 
a  reader  can  possess.  But,  fortunately  for  myself,  I 
never  therefore  concluded  him  to  be  merely  a  mythio 


Digitized 


by  Google 


14  PREFACE. 

character.  I  had  always  a  sturdy  faith  In  his  actual 
existence,  and  wrote  for  him  year  after  year,  during 
which  the  great  eye  of  the  Public  (as  well  it  might) 
almost  utterly  overlooked  my  small  productions. 

Unquestionably,  this  gentle,  kind,  benevolent,  indul- 
gent, and  most  beloved  and  honored  Reader  did  once 
exist  for  me,  and  (in  spite  of  the  infinite  chances 
against  a  letter's  reaching  its  destination  without  a 
definite  address)  duly  received  the  scrolls  which  1 
flung  upon  whatever  wind  was  blowing,  in  the  faith 
that  they  would  find  him  out.  But,  is  he  extant  now  ? 
In  these  many  years,  since  he  last  heard  from  me,  may 
he  not  have  deemed  his  earthly  task  accomplished,  and 
have  withdrawn  to  the  paradise  of  gentle  readers, 
wherever  it  may  be,  to  the  enjoyments  of  which  his 
kindly  charity  on  my  behalf  must  surely  have  entided 
him  ?  I  have  a  sad  foreboding  that  this  may  be  the 
truth.  The  "  Gentle  Reader,"  in  the  case  of  any  indi- 
vidual author,  is  apt  to  be  extremely  short-lived ;  he 
seldom  outlasts  a  literary  fashion,  and,  except  in  very 
rare  instances,  closes  his  weary  eyes  before  the  writer 
has  half  done  with  him.  If  I  find  him  at  all,  it  will 
probably  be  under  some  mossy  gravestone,  inscribed 
with  a  half -obliterated  name  which  I  shall  never  rec- 
ognize. 

Therefore,  I  have  little  heart  or  confidence  (es- 
pecially, writing  as  I  do,  in  a  foreign  land,  and  after 
a  long,  long  absence  from  my  own)  to  presume  upon 
the  existence  of  that  friend  of  friends,  that  unseen 
brother  of  the  soul,  whose  apprehensive  sympathy  has 
so  often  encouraged  me  to  be  egotistical  in  my  pref- 
aces, careless  though  unkindly  eyes  should  skim  orei 
what  was  never  meant  for  them.  I  stand  upon  cere- 
mony  now ;  and,  after  stating  a  few  particulars  about 


Digitized 


by  Google 


PREFACE.  16 

the  work  whicli  is  here  offered  to  the  Public,  must 
make  my  most  reverential  bow,  and  retire  behind  the 
curtain. 

This  Komance  was  sketched  out  during  a  residence 
of  considerable  length  in  Italy,  and  has  been  rewritten 
and  prepared  for  the  press  in  England.  The  author 
proposed  to  himself  merely  to  write  a  fanciful  story, 
evolving  a  thoughtful  moral,  and  did  not  purpose  at- 
tempting a  portraiture  of  Italian  manners  and  char- 
acter. He  has  lived  too  long  abroad  not  to  be  aware 
that  a  foreigner  seldom  acquires  that  knowledge  of  a 
country  at  once  flexible  and  profound,  which  may  jus- 
tify him  in  endeavoring  to  idealize  its  traits. 

Italy,  as  the  site  of  his  Eomance,  was  chiefly  valu- 
able to  him  as  affording  a  sort  of  poetic  or  fairy  pre- 
cinct, where  actualities  would  not  be  so  terribly  in- 
sisted upon  as  they  are,  and  must  needs  be,  in  Amer- 
ica. No  author,  without  a  trial,  can  conceive  of  the 
difficulty  of  writing  a  romance  about  a  country  where 
there  is  no  shadow,  no  antiquity,  no  mystery,  no  pic- 
turesque and  gloomy  wrong,  nor  anything  but  a  com- 
monplace prosperity,  in  broad  and  simple  daylight,  as 
is  happily  the  case  with  my  dear  native  land.  It  will 
be  very  long,  I  trust,  before  romance-writers  may  find 
congenial  and  easily  handled  themes,  either  in  the  an- 
nals of  our  stalwart  republic,  or  in  any  characteristio 
and  probable  events  of  our  individual  lives.  Ro- 
mance and  poetry,  ivy,  lichens,  and  wall-flowers,  need 
ruin  to  make  them  grow. 

In  rewriting  these  volumes,  the  author  was  some- 
what surprised  to  see  the  extent  to  which  he  had  in- 
troduced descriptions  of  various  Italian  objects,  an- 
tique, pictorial,  and  statuesque.  Yet  these  things  fill 
the  mind  everywhere  in  Italy,  and  especially  in  Borneo 


Digitized 


by  Google 


16  PREFACE. 

and  cannot  easily  be  kept  from  flowing  out  upon  the 
page  when  one  writes  freely,  and  with  self -enjoy- 
ment. And,  again,  while  reproducing  the  book,  on 
the  broad  and  dreary  sands  of  Redcar,  with  the  gr?iy 
German  Ocean  tumbling  in  upon  me,  and  the  north- 
em  blast  always  howling  in  my  ears,  the  complete 
change  of  scene  made  these  Italian  reminiscences 
shine  out  so  vividly  that  I  could  not  find  it  in  my 
heart  to  cancel  them. 

An  act  of  justice  remains  to  be  performed  towards 
two  men  of  genius  with  whose  productions  the  author 
has  allowed  himself  to  use  a  quite  imwarrantable  free- 
dom. Having  imagined  a  sculptor  in  this  Romance, 
it  was  necessary  to  provide  him  with  such  works  in 
marble  as  should  be  in  keeping  with  the  artistic  ability 
which  he  was  supposed  to  possess.  With  this  view, 
the  author  laid  felonious  hands  upon  a  certain  bust  of 
Milton,  and  a  statue  of  a  pearl-diver,  which  he  found 
in  the  studio  of  Mr.  Paul  Akers,  and  secretly  con- 
veyed them  to  the  premises  of  his  imaginary  friend,  in 
the  Via  Frezza.  Not  content  even  with  these  spoils, 
he  committed  a  further  robbery  upon  a  magnificent 
statue  of  Cleopatra,  the  production  of  Mr.  William 
W.  Story,  an  artist  whom  his  country  and  the  world 
will  not  long  fail  to  appreciate.  He  had  thoughts  of 
appropriating,  likewise,  a  certain  door  of  bronze  by 
Mr.  Randolph  Rogers,  representing  the  history  of 
Columbus  in  a  series  of  admirable  bas-reliefs,  but  was 
deterred  by  an  unwillingness  to  meddle  with  public 
property.  Were  he  capable  of  stealing  from  a  lady, 
he  would  certainly  have  made  free  with  Miss  Hos- 
Mer's  admirable  statue  of  Zenobia. 

He  now  wishes  to  restore  the  above-mentioned  beau* 
tiful  pieces  of  sculpture  to  their  proper  owners,  with 


Digitized 


by  Google 


PREFACE.  17 

many  thanks,  and  tihe  avowal  of  his  sincere  admira* 
tion.  What  he  has  said  of  them  in  the  Bomanee  does 
not  partake  of  the  fiction  in  which  they  are  imbedded^ 
but  expresses  his  genuine  opinion,  which,  he  has  little 
doubt,  will  be  found  in  accordance  with  that  of  the 
Public.  It  is,  perhaps,  unnecessary  to  say,  that,  while 
stealing  their  designs,  the  Author  has  not  taken  a 
similar  liberty  with  the  personal  characters  of  either 
of  these  gifted  sculptors;  his  own  man  of  marble 
being  entirely  imaginary. 

Lbamingtok,  December  15^  1869. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Ca 
a 

4 

it 
.1 

k 

k 

il 

k 

k 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE 

ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENI. 


CHAPTER  L 

MIRIAM,   HILDA,  KENTON,  DONATELLa 

FoUB  individuals,  in  whose  fortunes  we  should  be 
glad  to  interest  the  reader,  happened  to  be  standing 
in  one  of  the  saloons  of  the  sculpture  gallery  in  the 
Capitol  at  Rome.  It  was  that  room  (the  first,  after 
ascending  the  staircase)  in  the  centre  of  which  re^ 
clines  the  noble  and  most  pathetic  figure  of  the  Dy- 
ing Gladiator,  just  sinking  into  his  death -swoon. 
Around  the  walls  stand  the  Antinous,  the  Amazon, 
the  Lycian  Apollo,  the  Juno  ;  all  famous  productions 
of  antique  sculpture,  and  still  shining  in  the  un- 
diminished majesty  and  beauty  of  their  ideal  life,  al- 
though the  marble  that  embodies  them  is  yellow  with 
time,  and  perhaps  corroded  by  the  damp  earth  in 
which  they  lay  buried  for  centuries.  Here,  likewise, 
is  seen  a  symbol  (as  apt  at  this  moment  as  it  was 
two  thousand  years  ago)  of  the  Human  Soul,  with 
its  choice  of  Innocence  or  EvU  close  at  hand,  in  the 
pretty  figure  of  a  chUd,  clasping  a  dove  to  her  bosom, 
but  assaulted  by  a  snake. 

From  one  of  the  windows  of  this  saloon,  we  may 
lee  a  flight  of  broad  stone  steps,  descending  along 


Digitized 


by  Google 


20  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

side  the  antique  and  massive  foundation  of  the  Capi* 
tol,  towards  the  battered  triumphal  arch  of  Septimius 
Severus,  right  below.  Farther  on,  the  eye  skirts  along 
the  edge  of  the  desolate  Forum  (where  Koman  washer 
women  hang  out  their  Unen  to  the  sun),  passing  ovei 
a  shapeless  confusion  of  modem  edifices,  piled  rudely 
up  with  ancient  brick  and  stone,  and  over  the  domes 
of  Christian  churches,  buUt  on  the  old  pavements  of 
heathen  temples,  and  supported  by  the  very  pillars 
that  once  upheld  them.  At  a  distance  beyond  —  yet 
but  a  little  way,  considering  ho^  much  history  is 
heaped  into  the  intervening  space  —  rises  the  great 
sweep  of  the  Coliseum,  with  the  blue  sky  brightening 
through  its  upper  tier  of  arches.  Far  ofiF,  the  view 
is  shut  in  by  the  Alban  Mountains,  looking  just  the 
same,  amid  all  this  decay  and  change,  as  when  Eom- 
ulus  gazed  thitherward  over  his  half-finished  wall. 

We  glance  hastily  at  these  things,  —  at  this  bright 
sky,  and  those  blue  distant  mountains,  and  at  the 
ruins,  Etruscan,  Roman,  Christian,  venerable  with  a 
threefold  antiquity,  and  at  the  company  of  world-fa- 
mous statues  in  the  saloon,  —  in  the  hope  of  putting 
the  reader  into  that  state  of  feeling  which  is  experi- 
enced of  tenest  at  Eome.  It  is  a  vague  sense  of  pon- 
derous remembrances;  a  perception  of  such  weight 
and  density  in  a  by-gone  life,  of  which  this  spot  was 
the  centre,  that  the  present  moment  is  pressed  down 
or  crowded  out,  and  our  individual  affairs  and  inter- 
ests are  but  half  as  real  here  as  elsewhere.  Viewed 
through  this  medium,  our  narrative  —  into  which  are 
woven  some  airy  and  unsubstantial  threads,  inter- 
mixed with  others,  twisted  out  of  the  commonest  stuff 
of  human  existence  —  may  seem  not  widely  different 
from  the  texture  of  all  our  lives. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM,  HILDA,  KENYON,  DONATELLO.      21 

Side  by  side  with  the  massiveness  of  the  Bomaq 
Past,  all  matters  that  we  handle  or  dream  of  nowa* 
days  look  evanescent  and  visionary  alike. 

'It  might  be  that  the  four  persons  whom  we  ar( 
seeking  to  introduce  were  conscious  of  this  dreamj 
character  of  the  present,  as  compared  with  the  square 
blocks  of  granite  wherewith  the  Eomans  built  their 
lives.  Perhaps  it  even  contributed  to  the  fanciful 
merriment  which  was  just  now  their  mood.  When  we 
find  ourselves  fading  into  shadows  and  unrealities,  it 
seems  hardly  worth  while  to  be  sad,  but  rather  to 
laugh  as  gayly  as  we  may,  and  ask  little  reason  where- 
fore. 

Of  these  four  friends  of  ours,  three  were  artists,  or 
connected  with  art ;  and,  at  this  moment,  they  had 
been  simultaneously  struck  by  a  resemblance  between 
one  of  the  antique  statues,  a  well-known  masterpiece 
of  Grecian  sculpture,  and  a  young  Italian,  the  fourth 
member  of  their  party. 

"You  must  needs  confess,  Kenyon,"  said  a  dark« 
eyed  young  woman,  whom  her  friends  called  Miriam, 
"  that  you  never  chiselled  out  of  marble,  nor  wrought 
in  clay,  a  more  vivid  lilteness  than  this,  cunning  a 
bust-maker  as  you  think  yourself.  The  portraiture 
is  perfect  in  character,  sentiment,  and  feature.  If  it 
were  a  picture,  the  resemblance  might  be  half  illusive 
and  imaginary ;  but  here,  in  this  Pentelic  marble,  il 
is  a  substantial  fact,  and  may  be  tested  by  absolute 
touch  and  measurement.  Our  friend  Donatello  is  tho 
very  Faim  of  Praxiteles.     Is  it  not  true,  Hilda  ?  " 

"  Not  quite  —  almost  —  yes,  I  really  think  so,"  re- 
plied Hilda,  a  slender,  brown-haired.  New  England 
girl,  whose  perceptions  of  form  and  expression  were 
wonderfully  clear  and  delicate.     "  If  there  is  any  difv 


Digitized  by 


Google 


22  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

ference  between  the  two  faces,  the  reason  may  be,  I 
suppose,  that  the  Faun  dwelt  in  woods  and  fields,  and 
consorted  with  his  like ;  whereas,  DonateUo  has  knowti 
cities  a  little,  and  such  people  as  ourselves.  But  the 
resemblance  is  very  close,  and  very  strange." 

^'Not  so  strange,"  whispered  Miriam,  mischiev- 
ously ;  "  for  no  Faun  in  Arcadia  was  ever  a  greater 
simpleton  than  DonateUo.  He  has  hardly  a  man's 
share  of  wit,  small  as  that  may  be.  It  is  a  pity  there 
are  no  longer  any  of  this  congenial  race  of  rustic  crea- 
tures for  our  friend  to  consort  with  1 " 

"  Hush,  naughty  one  I  "  returned  Hilda.  "  You  are 
Very  ungrateful,  for  you  well  know  he  has  wit  enough 
to  worship  you,  at  all  events." 

**  Then  die  greater  fool  he  1 "  said  Miriam,  so  bit- 
terly that  Hilda's  quiet  eyes  were  somewhat  startled. 

"  DonateUo,  my  dear  friend,"  said  Kenyon,  in  Ital- 
ian, ^^  pray  gratify  us  aU  by  taking  the  exact  attitude 
of  this  statue." 

The  yoimg  man  laughed,  and  threw  himself  into  the 
position  in  which  the  statue  has  been  standing  for  two 
or  three  thousand  years.  In  truth,  aUowing  for  the 
difference  of  costiune,  and  if  a  lion's  skin  could  have 
been  substituted  for  his  modem  talma,  and  a  rustic 
pipe  for  his  stick,  DonateUo  might  have  figured  per- 
fectly as  the  marble  Faun,  miraculously  softened  into 
flesh  and  blood. 

'  "Yes;  the  resemblance  is  wonderful,"  observed 
Kenyon,  after  examining  the  marble  and  the  man 
with  the  accuracy  of  a  sculptor's  eye.  "  There  is  one 
point,  however,  or,  rather,  two  points,  in  respect  to 
which  our  friend  DonateUo's  abundant  curls  wiU  not 
permit  us  to  say  whether  the  Ukeness  is  carried  into 
minute  detaU." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM,   HILDA,  KENYON,  DONATELLO.      28 

And  the  sculptor  directed  the  attention  of  the  party 
to  the  ears  of  the  beautiful  statue  which  they  were  con- 
templating. 

But  we  must  do  more  than  merely  refer  to  this  exi* 
quisite  work  of  art;  it  must  be  described,  howevel 
inadequate  may  be  the  effort  to  express  its  magic  pe- 
culiarity in  words. 

The  Faun  is  the  marble  image  of  a  young  man, 
leaning  his  right  arm  on  the  trunk  or  stump  of  a  tree , 
one  hand  haags  carelessly  by  his  side ;  in  the  other  he 
holds  the  fragment  of  a  pipe,  or  some  such  sylvan  in- 
strument of  music.  His  only  garment —  a  lion's  skin, 
with  the  claws  upon  his  shoulder — falls  half-way 
down  his  back,  leaving  the  limbs  and  entire  front  of 
the  figure  nude.  The  form,  thus  displayed,  is  mar- 
vellously graceful,  but  has  a  fuller  and  more  roundied 
outline,  more  flesh,  and  less  of  heroic  muscle,  than 
the  old  sculptors  were  wont  to  assign  to  their  types 
of  masculine  beauty.  The  character  of  the  face  corre- 
sponds with  the  figure ;  it  is  most  agreeable  in  outline 
and  feature,  but  rounded  and  somewhat  voluptuously 
developed,  especially  about  the  throat  and  chin ;  the 
nose  is  almost  straight,  but  very  slightly  curves  in- 
ward, thereby  acquiring  an  indescribable  charm  of 
geniality  and  humor.  The  mouth,  with  its  full  yet 
delicate  lips,  seems  so  nearly  to  smile  outright,  that 
it  calls  forth  a  responsive  smile.  The  whole  statue 
—  unlike  anything  else  that  ever  was  wrought  in  that 
Bevere  material  of  marble  —  conveys  the  idea  of  an 
amiable  and  sensual  creature,  easy,  mirthful,  apt  for 
jollity,  yet  not  incapable  of  being  touched  by  pathos. 
It  is  impossible  to  gaze  long  at  this  stone  image  with* 
•ut  conceiving  a  kindly  sentiment  towards  it,  as  if  its 
lubstance  were  warm  to  the  touch,  and  imbued  with 


Digitized 


by  Google 


24  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

actual  life.    It  comes  very  close  to  some  of  oar  pleas 
antest  sympathies. 

Perhaps  it  is  the  very  lack  of  moral  severity,  of  any 
high  and  heroic  ingredient  in  the  character  of  the 
Faun,  that  makes  it  so  delightful  an  object  to  the  hu« 
man  eye  and  to  the  frailty  of  the  Auman  heart.  The 
being  here  represented  is  endowed  with  no  principle 
of  virtue,  and  would  be  incapable  of  comprehending 
such ;  but  he  would  be  true  and  honest  by  dint  of  his 
simplicity.  We  should  expect  fi'om  him  no  sacrifice 
or  effort  for  an  abstract  cause ;  there  is  not  an  atom 
of  martyr's  stuff  in  all  that  softened  marble ;  but  he 
has  a  capacity  for  strong  and  warm  attachment,  and 
might  act  devotedly  through  its  impulse,  and  even  die 
for  it  at  need.  It  is  possible,  too,  that  the  Faim  might 
be  educated  through  the  medium  of  his  emotions,  so 
that  the  coarser  animal  portion  of  his  nature  might 
eventually  be  thrown  into  the  background,  though 
never  utterly  expelled. 

The  animal  nature,  indeed,  is  a  most  essential  part 
of  the  Faim's  composition ;  for  the  characteristics  of 
the  brute  creation  meet  and  combine  with  those  of  hu- 
manity in  this  strange  yet  true  and  natural  conception 
of  antique  poetry  and  art.  Praxiteles  has  subtly  dif« 
fused  throughout  his  work  that  mute  mystery  which  ' 
so  hopelessly  perplexes  us  whenever  we  attempt  to 
gain  an  intellectual  or  sympathetic  knowledge  of  the 
lower  orders  of  creation.  The  riddle  is  indicated, 
however,  only  by  two  definite  signs ;  these  are  the  two 
ears  of  the  Faun,  which  are  leaf-shaped,  terminating 
in  little  peaks,  like  those  of  some  species  of  animals. 
Though  not  so  seen  in  the  marble,  they  are  probably 
to  be  considered  as  clothed  in  fine,  downy  fur.  In 
the  coarser  representations  of  this  class  of  mytholog. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM,  HILDA,  KENYON,  DONATELLO.      25 

ical  creatures,  there  is  another  token  of  brute  kindred, 
« —  a  certain  caudal  appendage ;  which,  if  the  Faun  of 
Praxiteles  must  be  supposed  to  possess  it  at  all,  is  hid- 
den by  the  lion's  skin  that  forms  his  garment.  Tho 
pointed  and  furry  ears,  therefore,  are  the  sole  indica* 
*ions  of  his  wild,  forest  natiu*e. 

Only  a  sculptor  of  the  finest  imagination,  the  most 
delicate  taste,  the  sweetest  feeling,  and  the  rarest  ap 
tistic  skill  —  in  a  word,  a  sculptor  and  a  poet  too  — 
could  have  first  dreamed  of  a  Faun  in  this  guise,  and 
then  have  succeeded  in  imprisoning  the  sportive  and 
frisky  thing  in  marble.  Neither  man  nor  animal,  and 
yet  no  monster,  but  a  being  in  whom  both  races  meet 
<m  friendly  ground.  The  idea  grows  coarse  as  we 
handle  it,  and  hardens  in  our  grasp.  But,  if  the  spec- 
tator broods  long  over  the  statue,  he  will  be  conscious 
Df  its  speU;  all  the  pleasantness  of  sylvan  life,  all 
the  genial  and  happy  characteristics  of  creatures  that 
dwell  in  woods  and  fields,  will  seem  to  be  mingled  and 
kneaded  into  one  substance,  along  with  the  kindred 
qualities  in  the  human  soul.  Trees,  grass,  flowers, 
woodland  streamlets,  cattle,  deer,  and  imsophisticated 
man.  The  essence  of  all  these  was  compressed  long 
ago,  and  still  exists,  within  that  discolored  marble  sur- 
face of  the  Faun  of  Praxiteles. 

And,  after  all,  the  idea  may  have  been  no  dream, 
but  rather  a  poet's  reminiscence  of  a  period  when 
man's  affinity  with  nature  was  more  strict,  and  his  fel- 
lowship with  every  living  tJdng  more  intimate  and 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAFTEBIL 

THB  H^XJN* 

^DowATELLO,"  playfully  cried  Miriam,  «*do  not 
leave  us  in  this  perplexity  I  Shake  aside  those  brown 
curls,  my  friend,  and  let  us  see  whether  this  marvel- 
lous resemblance  extends  to  the  very  tips  of  the  ears. 
If  so,  we  shall  like  you  all  the  better  I  " 

^^  No,  no,  dearest  signorina,"  answered  Donatello, 
laughing,  but  with  a  certain  earnestness.  *'  I  entreat 
you  to  take  the  tips  of  my  ears  for  granted."  As  he 
spoke,  the  young  Italian  made  a  skip  and  jump,  light 
enough  for  a  veritable  faun ;  so  as  to  place  himself 
quite  beyond  the  roach  of  the  fair  hand  that  was  out- 
stretched, as  if  to  settle  the  matter  by  actual  exami^ 
nation.  '^  I  shall  be  like  a  wolf  of  the  Apennines,"  he 
continued,  taking  his  stand  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Dying  Gladiator, "  if  you  touch  my  ears  ever  so  softly. 
None  of  my  race  could  endure  it.  It  has  always  been 
a  tender  point  with  my  forefathers  and  me." 

He  spoke  in  Italian,  with  the  Tuscan  rusticity  of 
accent,  and  an  unshaped  sort  of  utterance,  betokening 
that  he  must  heretofore  have  been  chiefly  conversant 
with  rural  people. 

**  Well,  well,"  said  Miriam,  "  your  tender  point  — 
your  two  tender  points,  if  you  have  them  —  shall  be 
safe,  so  far  as  I  am  concerned.  But  how  strange  this 
likeness  is,  after  all  I  and  how  delightful,  if  it  really 
includes  the  pointed  ears  I    Oh,  it  is  impossible,  of 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  FAUN.  '27 

ooTirse,"  she  continued,  in  English,  ^  with  a  real  and 
commonplace  young  man  like  Donatello ;  but  you  see 
how  this  peculiarity  defines  the  position  of  the  Faun ; 
and,  while  putting  him  where  he  cannot  exactly  assert 
his  brotherhood,  still  disposes  us  kindly  towards  the 
kindred  creature.  He  is  not  supernatural,  but  just  on 
the  verge  of  nature,  and  yet  within  it.  What  is  the ; 
nameless  charm  of  this  idea,  Hilda?  You  can  feel  it 
more  delicately  than  I." 

"It  perplexes  me,"  said  Hilda,  thoughtfully,  and 
shrinking  a  little  ;  "  neither  do  I  quite  like  to  think 
about  it." 

"  But,  surely,"  said  Kenyon,  "you  agree  with  Miriam 
and  me  that  there  is  something  very  touching  and  im* 
pressive  in  this  statue  of  the  Faun.  In  some  long-past 
age,  he  must  really  have  existed.  Nature  needed,  and 
still  needs,  this  beautiful  creature ;  standing  betwixt 
man  and  animal,  sympathizing  with  each,  comprehend* 
ing  the  speech  of  either  race,  and  interpreting  tiie 
whole  existence  of  one  to  the  other.  What  a  pity 
that  he  has  forever  vanil^hed  from  the  hard  and  dusty 
paths  of  life,  —  unless,"  added  the  sculptor,  in  a  sport- 
ive whisper,  "  Donatello  be  actually  he  1 " 

"  You  cannot  conceive  how  this  fantasy  takes  hold 
of  me,"  responded  Miriam,  between  jest  and  earnest. 
"  Imagine,  now,  a  refd  being,  similar  to  this  mythic 
Faun  ;  how  happy,  how  genial,  how  satisfactory  would 
be  his  life,  enjoying  the  warm,  sensuous,  earthy  side 
of  nature ;  revelling  in  the  merriment  of  woods  and 
9treams;  living  as  our  four-footed  kindred  do,  —  as 
mankind  did  in  its  innocent  childhood ;  before  sin, 
sorrow  or  morality  itself  had  ever  been  thought  off 
Ah !  Kenyon,  if  Hilda  and  you  and  I  —  if  I,  at  least 
«—  had  pdbted  ears  I     For  I  suppose  the  Faun  had  no 


Digitized 


by  Google 


28  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

conscience,  no  remorse,  no  burden  on  the  heart,  no 
ti*oublesome  recollections  of  any  sort ;  no  dark  future 
either." 

"  What  a  tragic  tone  was  that  last,  Miriam  1 "  said 
the  sculptor ;  and,  looking  into  her  face,  he  was  star« 
tied  to  behold  it  pale  and  tear-stained.  ^'Howsud« 
denly  this  mood  has  come  over  you !  " 

**  Let  it  go  as  it  came,"  said  Miriam,  "  like  a  tiiun- 
der-shower  in  this  Koman  sky.  All  is  sunshine  again, 
you  see  1 " 

Donatello's  refractoriness  as  regarded  his  ears  had 
evidently  cost  him  something,  and  he  now  came  close 
to  Miriam's  side,  ga^g  at  her  with  an  appealing  air, 
as  if  to  solicit  forgiveness.  His  mute,  helpless  ges- 
ture of  entreaty  had  something  pathetic  in  it,  and  yet 
might  well  enough  excite  a  laugh,  so  like  it  was  to 
what  you  may  see  in  the  aspect  of  a  hound  when  he 
thinks  himself  in  fault  or  disgrace.  It  was  difficult 
to  make  out  the  character  of  this  young  man.  So  full 
of  animal  life  as  he  was,  so  joyous  in  his  deportment* 
so  handsome,  so  physically  w6ll-developed,  he  made  no 
impression  of  incompleteness,  of  maimed  or  stinted 
nature.  And  yet,  in  social  intercourse,  these  familiar 
friends  of  his  habitually  and  instinctively  allowed  for 
him,  as  for  a  child  or  some  other  lawless  thing,  ex- 
acting no  strict  obedience  to  conventional  rules,  and 
hardly  noticing  his  eccentricities  enough  to  pardon 
them.  There  was  an  indefinable  characteristic  about 
T)onatello  that  set  him  outside  of  rules. 

He  caught  Miriam's  hand,  kissed  it,  and  gazed  into 
her  eyes  without  saying  a  word.  She  smiled,  and  be- 
stowed on  him  a  little  careless  caress,  singularly  like 
what  one  would  give  to  a  pet  dog  when  he  puts  him- 
self in  the  way  to  receive  it    Not  that  it  was  so  de» 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   FAUN.  29 

tided  a  caress  either,  but  only  the  merest  touch,  some* 
where  between  a  pat  and  a  tap  of  the  finger  ;  it  might 
be  a  mark  of  fondness,  or  perhaps  a  playful  pretence 
of  punishment.  At  all  events,  it  appeared  to  afford 
Donatello  exquisite  pleasure ;  insomuch  that  he  danced 
)uite  roimd  the  wooden  railing  that  fences  in  the  Dy* 
ing  Gladiator. 

"  It  is  the  very  step  of  the  Dahcing  Faun,"  said 
Miriam,  apart,  to  Hilda.  "  What  a  child,  or  what  a 
simpleton,  he  is !  I  continually  find  myself  treating 
Donatello  as  if  he  were  the  merest  unfledged  chicken ; 
and  yet  he  can  claim  no  such  privileges  in  the  right  of 
his  tender  age,  for  he  is  at  least — how  old  should 
you  think  him,  Hilda?" 

"Twenty  years,  perhaps,"  replied  Hilda,  glancing 
at  Donatello  ;  "  but,  indeed,  I  cannot  tell ;  hardly  so 
old,  on  second  thoughts,  or  possibly  older.  He  has 
nothing  to  do  with  time,  but  has  a  look  of  eternal 
youth  in  his  face." 

"  All  underwitted  people  have  that  look,"  said  Mir- 
iam,  scornfully. 

'*  Donatello  has  certainly  the  gift  of  eternal  youth, 
as  Hilda  suggests,"  observed  Kenyon,  laughing;  "for, 
judging  by  the  date  of  this  statue,  which,  I  am  more 
and  more  convinced,  Praxiteles  carved  on  purpose  for 
him,  he  must  be  at  least  twenty-five  centuries  old,  and 
he  still  looks  as  young  as  ever." 

"  What  age  have  you,  Donatello  ?  "  asked  Miriam. 

"  Signorina,  I  do  not  know,"  he  answered ;  "  no 
great  age,  however ;  for  I  have  only  lived  since  I  met 
you." 

"  Now,  what  old  man  of  society  could  have  turned  a 
tilly  compliment  more  smartly  than  that !  "  exclaimed 
tfiTrift.ni,     «^  Nature  and  art  are  just  at  one  sometimeab 


Digitized 


by  Google 


30  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

But  what  a  happy  ignorance  is  this  of  our  friend  Do* 
natello !  Not  to  know  his  own  age !  It  is  equivalent 
to  being  immortal  on  earth.  If  I  oould  only  forget 
mine ! " 

*'*'  It  is  too  soon  to  wish  that,"  observed  the  sculptor ; 
**  you  are  scarcely  older  than  Donatello  looks." 

"  I  shall  be  content,  then,"  rejoined  Miriam,  "  if  1 
<^uld  only  forget  one  day  of  all  my  life."  Then  she 
seemed  to  repent  of  this  allusion,  and  hastily  added, 
*^  A  woman's  days  are  so  tedious  that  it  is  a  boon  to 
leave  even  one  of  them  out  of  the  account." 

The  foregoing  conversation  had  been  carried  on  in 
a  mood  in  which  all  imaginative  people,  whether  ar- 
tists or  poets,  love  to  indulge.  In  this  frame  of  mind, 
they  sometimes  find  their  prof oundest  truths  side  by 
side  with  the  idlest  jest,  and  utter  one  or  tiie  other, 
apparently  without  distinguishing  which  is  the  most 
valuable,  or  assigning  any  considerable  value  to  either. 
The  resemblance  between  the  marble  Faun  and  tiieir 
living  companion  had  made  a  deep,  half -serious,  half' 
mirthful  impression  on  these  three  friends,  and  had 
taken  them  into  a  certain  airy  region,  lifting  up,  as  it 
is  so  pleasant  to  feel  them  lifted,  their  heavy  earthly 
feet  from  the  actual  soil  of  life.  The  world  had  been 
set  afloat,  as  it  were,  for  a  moment,  and  relieved  them,  ! 
for  just  so  long,  of  all  customary  responsibility  for 
(vhat  they  thought  and  said. 

It  might  be  under  this  influence  —  or,  perhaps, 
because  sculptors  always  abuse  one  another's  works 
—  that  Kenyon  threw  in  a  criticism  upon  the  Dying 
Gladiator. 

"  I  used  to  admire  tiiis  statue  exceedingly,"  he  re- 
marked, "but,  latterly,  I  find  myself  getting  weary 
and  annoyed  that  the  man  should  be  such  a  length  ol 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  FAUN.  81 

time  leaning  on  his  arm  in  the  very  act  of  death.  U 
he  is  so  terribly  hurt,  why  does  he  not  sink  down  and 
die  without  further  ado?  Flitting  moments,  immi- 
nent emergencies,  imperceptible  intervals  between  two 
breaths,  ought  not  to  be  incrusted  with  the  eternal  re* 
pose  of  marble ;  in  any  sculptural  subject,  there  should 
be  a  moral  stand-still,  since  there  must  of  necessity  be 
a  physical  one.  Otherwise,  it  is  like  flinging  a  block 
of  marble  up  into  the  air,  and,  by  some  trick  of  en< 
chantment,  causing  it  to  stick  there.  You  feel  that  it 
ought  to  come  down,  and  are  dissatisfied  that  it  does 
not  obey  the  natural  law." 

"  I  see,"  said  Miriam,  mischievously,  "  you  think 
that  sculpture  should  be  a  sort  of  fossilizing  process. 
But,  in  truth,  your  frozen  art  has  nothing  like  iSiQ. 
scope  and  freedom  of  Hilda's  and  mine.  In  painting 
there  is  no  similar  objection  to  the  representation  of 
brief  snatches  of  time ;  perhaps,  because  a  story  can 
be  so  much  more  fully  told  in  picture,  and  buttressed 
about  with  circumstances  that  give  it  an  epoch.  For 
instance,  a  painter  never  would  have  sent  down  yon- 
der Faun  out  of  his  far  antiquity,  lonely  and  desolate, 
with  no  companion  to  keep  his  simple  heart  warm." 
'  "  Ah,  the  Faun  1 "  cried  Hilda,  with  a  little  gesture 
;of  impatience  ;  "  I  have  been  looking  at  him  too  long ; 
^and  now,  instead  of  a  beautiful  statue,  immortally 
young,  I  see  only  a  corroded  and  discolored  stone. 
This  change  is  very  apt  to  occur  in  statues." 

"And  a  similar  one  in  pictures,  surely,"  retorted 
the  sculptor.  "  It  is  the  spectator's  mood  that  trans* 
figures  the  Transfiguration  itself.  I  defy  any  painter 
to  move  and  elevate  me  without  my  own  consent  and 
assistance." 

*^  Then  you  are  deficient  of  a  s^ise,"  said  Miriam. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


•'32  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

The  party  now  strayed  onward  from  hall  to  hall  ol 
that  rich  gallery,  pausing  here  and  there,  to  look  at 
the  multitude  of  noble  and  lovely  shapes,  which  have 
been  dug  up  out  of  the  deep  grave  in  which  old  Eome 
lies  buried.  And  still,  the  realization  of  the  antique 
Faun,  in  the  person  of  Donatello,  gave  a  more  vivid 
character  to  all  these  marble  ghosts.  Why  should  not 
each  statue  grow  warm  with  life!  Antinous  might 
lift  his  brow,  and  tell  us  why  he  is  forever  sad.  The 
Lycian  Apollo  might  strike  his  lyre ;  and,  at  tiie  first 
vibration,  that  other  Faun  in  red  marble,  who  keeps 
up  a  motionless  dance,  should  frisk  gayly  forth,  lead- 
ing yonder  Satyrs,  with  shaggy  goat-shanks,  to  clatter 
their  little  hoofs  upon  the  floor,  and  all  join  hands 
with  Donatello !  Bacchus,  too,  a  rosy  flush  diffusing 
itself  over  his  time-stained  surface,  could  come  down 
from  his  pedestal,  and  offer  a  cluster  of  purple  gi-apes 
to  Donatello's  lips;  because  the  god  recognizes  him 
IS  the  woodland  elf  who  so  often  shared  his  revels. 
And  here,  in  this  sarcophagus,  the  exquisitely  carved 
jBgures  might  assume  life,  and  chase  one  another 
round  its  verge  with  that  wild  merriment  which  is 
so  strangely  represented  on  those  old  burial  coffers : 
though  still  with  some  subtile  allusion  to  death,  care- 
fully veiled,  but  forever  peeping  forth  amid  emblems 
of  mirth  and  riot. 

As  the  four  friends  descended  the  stairs,  however, 
their  play  of  fancy  subsided  into  a  much  more  som- 
bre mood ;  a  result  apt  to  follow  upon  such  exhilar^ 
tion  as  that  which  had  so  recently  taken  possession  ot 
them. 

"  Do  you  know,"  said  Miriam,  confidentially  to 
Hilda,  "  I  doubt  the  reality  of  this  likeness  of  Dona* 
tello  to  the  Faun,  which  we  have  been  talking  so  mucb 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  FAUN.  88 

about  ?  To  say  the  truth,  it  never  struck  me  so  forci- 
bly as  it  did  Kenyon  and  yourself,  though  I  gave  in  to 
whatever  you  were  pleased  to  fancy,  for  the  sake  of  a 
moment's  mirth  and  wonder." 

"  I  was  certainly  in  earnest,  and  you  seemed  equally 
so,"  replied  Hilda,  glancing  back  at  Donatello,  as  ii 
to  reassure  herself  of  the  resemblance.  ^^But  faces 
change  so  much,  from  hour  to  hour,  that  the  same  set 
of  features  has  often  no  keeping  with  itself  :  to  an 
'eye,  at  least,  which  looks  at  expression  more  than 
outline.  How  sad  and  sombre  he  has  grown  all  of  a 
sudden  1 " 

"  Angry  too,  methinks  I  nay,  it  is  anger  much  more 
than  sadness,"  said  Miriam.  ^^  I  have  seen  Donatello 
in  this  mood  once  or  twice  before.  If  you  consider 
him  well,  you  will  observe  an  odd  mixture  of  the  bull- 
dog, or  some  other  equally  fierce  brute,  in  our  friend's 
composition ;  a  trait  of  savageness  hardly  to  be  ex- 
pected in  such  a  gentle  creature  as  he  usually  is. 
Donatello  is  a  very  strange  young  man.  I  wish  he 
would  not  haunt  my  footsteps  so  continually." 

'*  You  have  bewitched  the  p^r  lad,"  said  the  sculp- 
tor, laughing.  "You  have  a  faculty  of  bewitching 
people,  and  it  is  providing  you  with  a  singular  train 
of  followers.  I  see  another  of  them  behind  yonder 
pillar ;  and  it  is  his  presence  that  has  aroused  Dona- 
tello's  wrath." 

They  had  now  emerged  from  the  gateway  of  the  pal- 
ace ;  and  partly  concealed  by  one  of  the  pillars  of  the 
portico  stood  a  figure  such  as  may  often  be  encoun*- 
tered  in  the  streets  and  piazzas  of  Some,  and  nowhere 
else.  He  looked  as  if  he  might  just  have  stepped  out 
ivf  a  picture,  and,  in  truth,  was  likely  enough  to  find 
his  way  into  a  dozen  pictures ;  being  nq  oth^r  than  O&d 

VOL.  VI. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


84  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

of  tiiose  living  models,  dark,  bushy-bearded,  wild  ol 
aspect  and  attire,  whom  artists  convert  into  saints  or 
assassins,  according  as  their  pictorial  purposes  de- 
mand. 

''  Miriam,"  whispered  Hilda,  a  little  startled,  ^'it  is 
four  model  I " 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  m. 

0UBTEBBANBAN  BEM1NISGBK0E8. 

Miriam's  model  has  so  important  a  connection  with 
our  story,  that  it  is  essential  to  describe  the  singular 
mode  of  his  first  appearance,  and  how  he  subsequently 
became  a  self*appointed  follower  of  the  young  female 
artist.  In  the  first  place,  however,  we  must  devote  a 
page  or  two  to  certain  peculiarities  in  the  position  of 
Miriam  herself. 

There  was  an  ambiguity  about  this  young  lady, 
which,  though  it  did  not  necessarily  imply  anything 
wrong,  would  have  operated  unfavorably  as  regarded 
her  reception  in  society,  anywhere  but  in  Rome.  The 
truth  was,  that  nobody  knew  anything  about  Miriam, 
either  for  good  or  evil.  She  had  made  her  appear- 
ance without  introduction,  had  taken  a  studio,  put  her 
card  upon  the  door,  and  showed  very  considerable  tal- 
ent as  a  painter  in  oils.  Her  fellow-professors  of  tiie 
brush,  it  is  true,  showered  abundant  criticisms  upon 
her  pictures,  allowing  them  to  be  well  enough  for  the 
idle  half-efforts  of  an  amateur,  but  lacking  both  the 
trained  skill  and  the  practice  that  distinguish  the 
works  of  a  true  artist. 

Nevertheless,  be  their  faults  what  tiiey  might,  Mir- 
iam's pictures  met  with  good  acceptance  among  the 
patrons  of  modem  art.  Whatever  technical  merit 
they  lacked,  its  absence  was  more  than  supplied  by  a 
warmth  and  passionateness,  which  she  had  the  f  actdty 


Digitized 


by  Google 


86  ROMANCE   OF  MONTE  BENL 

of  putting  into  her  productions,  and  which  all  the 
world  could  feel.  Her  nature  had  a  great  deal  of 
color,  and,  in  accordance  with  it,  so  likewise  had  her 
pictures. 

Miriam  had  great  apparent  freedom  of  intercourse ; 
her  manners  were  so  far  from  evincing  shyness,  that 
it  seemed  easy  to  become  acquainted  with  her,  and  not 
difficult  to  develop  a  casual  acquaintance  into  intimacy. 
Such,  at  least,  was  the  impression  which  she  made, 
upon  brief  contact,  but  not  such  the  ultimate  conclu- 
sion of  those  who  really  sought  to  know  her.  So  airy, 
free,  and  affable  was  Miriam's  deportment  towards  all 
who  came  within  her  sphere,  that  possibly  they  might 
never  be  conscious  of  the  fact ;  but  so  it  was,  that 
they  did  not  get  on,  and  were  seldom  any  further  ad- 
vanced into  her  good  graces  to-day  than  yesterday* 
By  some  subtile  quality,  she  kept  people  at  .a  distance, 
without  so  much  as  letting  them  know  that  they  were 
excluded  from  her  inner  circle.  She  resembled  one  of 
those  images  of  light,  which  conjurers  evoke  and  cause 
to  shine  before  us,  in  apparent  tangibility,  only  an 
arm's-length  beyond  our  grasp :  we  make  a  step  in  ad- 
vance, expecting  to  seize  the  illusion,  but  find  it  still 
precisely  so  far  out  of  our  reach.  Finally,  society  be- 
gan to  recognize  the  impossibility  of  getting  nearer  to 
Miriam,  and  gruffly  acquiesced. 

There  were  two  persons,  however,  whom  she  ap- 
peared to  acknowledge  as  friends  in  the  closer  and 
truer  sense  of  the  word;  and  both  of  these  more  fa- 
vored individuals  did  credit  to  Miriam's  selection. 
One  was  a  young  American  sculptor,  of  high  promise 
and  rapidly  increasing  celebrity ;  the  other,  a  girl  of 
the  same  country,  a  painter  like  Miriam  herself,  but 
in  a  widely  different  sphere  of  art    Her  heart  flowed 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SUBTERRANEAN  REMINISCENCES.         ST 

out  towards  these  two ;  she  requited  herself  by  their 
society  and  friendship  (and  especially  by  Hilda's) 
for  all  the  loneliness  with  which,  as  regarded  the  rest 
of  the  world,  she  chose  to  be  surrounded.  Her  two 
friends  were  conscious  of  the  strong,  yearning  grasp 
which  Miriam  laid  upon  them,  and  gave  her  their 
affection  in  full  measure ;  Hilda,  indeed,  responding 
with  the  fervency  of  a  girl's  first  friendship,  and  Ken- 
yon  with  a  manly  regard,  in  which  there  was  nothing 
akin  to  what  is  distinctively  called  love. 

A  sort  of  intimacy  subsequently  grew  up  between 
these  three  friends  and  a  fourth  individual ;  it  was  a 
young  Italian,  who,  casually  visiting  Some,  had  been 
attracted  by  the  beauty  which  Miriam  possessed  in  a 
remarkable  degree.  He  bad  sought  her,  followed  her, 
and  insisted,  with  simple  perseverance,  upon  being  ad' 
mitted  at  least  to  her  acquaintance ;  a  boon  which  had 
been  granted,  when  a  more  artful  character,  seeking  it 
by  a  more  subtle  mode  of  pursuit,  would  probably  have 
failed  to  obtain  it.  This  young  man,  though  anything 
but  intellectually  brilliant,  had  many  agreeable  char- 
acteristics which  won  him  the  kindly  and  half -contemp- 
tuous regard  of  Miriam  and  her  two  friends.  It  was 
he  whom  they  called  Donatello,  and  whose  wonderful 
resemblance  to  the  Faun  of  Praxiteles  forms  the  key- 
note of  our  narrative. 

Such  was  the  position  in  which  we  find  Miriam 
some  few  months  after  her  establishment  at  Rome.  It 
must  be  added,  however,  that  the  world  did  not  per- 
mit her  to  hide  her  antecedents  without  making  her 
the  subject  of  a  good  deal  of  conjecture ;  as  was  nat- 
ural enough,  considering  the  abundance  of  her  per- 
sonal charms,  and  the  degree  of  notice  that  she  at- 
tracted as  an  artist.    There  were  many  stories  about 


Digitized 


by  Google 


88       ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

Miriam's  origin  and  previous  life,  some  of  which  had 
a  very  probable  air,  while  others  were  evidently  wild 
and  romantic  fables.  We  cite  a  few,  leaving  the 
reader  to  designate  them  either  mider  the  probable  or 
the  romantic  head. 

It  was  said,  for  example*  that  Miriam  was  the 
daughter  and  heiress  of  a  great  Jewish  banker  (an 
idea  perhaps  suggested  by  a  certain  rich  Oriental 
character  in  her  face),  and  had  fled  from  her  pater- 
nal home  to  escape  a  union  with  a  cousin,  the  heir  of 
another  of  that  golden  brotherhood ;  the  object  being, 
to  retain  their  vast  accumidation  of  wealth  within  the 
family.  Another  story  hinted  that  she  was  a  German 
princess,  whom,  for  reasons  of  state,  it  was  proposed 
to  give  in  marriage  either  tp  a  decrepit  sovereign,  or  a 
prince  still  in  his  cradle.  According  to  a  third  state- 
ment, she  was  the  offspring  of  a  Southern  American 
planter,  who  had  given  her  an  elaborate  education  and 
endowed  her  with  his  wealth ;  but  the  one  burning 
drop  of  African  blood  in  her  veins  so  affected  her  with 
a  sense  of  ignominy,  that  she  relinquished  all  and  fled 
her  country.  By  still  another  account  she  was  the 
lady  of  an  English  nobleman  ;  and,  out  of  mere  love 
and  honor  of  art,  had  thrown  aside  the  splendor  of  her 
rank,  and  come  to  seek  a  subsistence  by  her  pencil  in 
a  Roman  studio.  ^ 

In  all  the  above  cases,  the  fable  seemed  to  be  in- 
stigated by  the  large  and  bounteous  impression  which 
Miriam  invariably  made,  as  if  necessity  and  she  could 
have  nothing  to  do  with  one  another.  Whatever  de- 
privations she  underwent  must  needs  be  voluntary. 
But  there  were  other  surmises,  taking  such  a  common- 
place view  as  that  Miriam  was  the  daughter  of  a  meix 
chant  or  financier,  who  had  been  ruined  in  a  great 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SUBTERRANEAN  REMINISCENCES.         89 

eommercial  crisis  ;  and,  possessing  a  taste  for  art,  sho 
had  attempted  to  support  herself  by  the  pencil,  in  pref- 
erence to  the  alternative  of  going  out  as  governess. 

Be  these  things  how  they  might,  Miriam,  fair  as  she 
looked,  was  plucked  up  out  of  a  mystery,  and  had  its 
roots  dtill  clinging  to  her.  She  was  a  beautiful  and 
attractive  woman,  but  based,  as  it  were,  upon  a  cloud, 
and  all  surrounded  with  misty  substance ;  so  that  the 
result  was  to  render  her  sprite-like  in  her  most  ordi^ 
nary  manifestations.  This  was  the  case  even  in  respect 
to  Kenyon  and  Hilda,  her  especial  friends.  But  such 
was  the  effect  of  Miriam's  natural  language,  her  gen- 
erosity, kindliness,  and  native  truth  of  character,  that 
these  two  received  her  as  a  dear  friend  into  tiieir 
hearts,  taking  her  good  qualities  as  evident  and  genu- 
ine, and  never  imagining  that  what  was  hidden  must 
be  therefore  evil. 

We  now  proceed  with  our  narrative. 

The  same  party  of  friends,  whom  we  have  seen  at 
the  sculpture  gallery  of  the  Capitol,  chanced  to  have 
gone  together,  some  months  before,  to  the  catacomb  of 
St.  Calixtus.  They  went  joyously  down  into  that  vast 
tomb,  and  wandered  by  torchlight  through  a  sort  of 
dream,  in  which  reminiscences  of  church  -  aisles  and 
grimy  cellars  — and  chiefly  tiie  latter  —  seemed  to  be 
broken  into  fragments,  and  hopelessly  intermingled. 
The  intricate  passages  along  which  they  followed  their 
guide  had  been  hewn,  in  some  forgotten  age,  o^t  of  a 
dark-red,  crumbly  stone.  On  either  side  were  hori- 
zontal niches,  where,  if  they  held  their  torches  closely, 
the  shape  of  a  human  body  was  discernible  in  white 
ashes,  into  which  the  entire  mortality  of  a  man  or 
woman  had  resolved  itself.  Among  all  this  extinct 
dust,  there  might  perchance  be  a  thigh-bone,  wtuoh 


Digitized 


by  Google 


40  ROMANCE   OF  MONTE  BENL 

crumbled  at  a  touch  ;  or  possibly  a  skull,  grinning  at 
its  own  wretched  plight,  as  is  the  ugly  and  empty 
habit  of  the  thing. 

Sometimes  their  gloomy  pathway  tended  upward, 
so  that,  through  a  crevice,  a  little  daylight  glimmered 
down  upon  them,  or  even  a  streak  of  sunshine  peeped 
into  a  burial  niche  ;  then  again,  they  went  downward 
by  gradual  descent,  or  by  abrupt,  rudely  hewn  steps, 
into  deeper  and  deeper  recesses  of  the  earth.  Here 
and  there  the  narrow  and  tortuous  passages  widened 
somewhat,  developing  themselves  into  small  chapels; 
which  once,  no  doubt,  had  been  adorned  with  marble- 
work  and  lighted  with  ever-burning  lamps  and  tapers. 
All  such  illumination  and  ornament,  however,  had 
long  since  been  extinguished  and  stript  away ;  except, 
indeed,  that  the  low  roofs  of  a  few  of  these  ancient 
sites  of  worship  were  covered  with  dingy  stucco,  and 
frescoed  with  scriptural  scenes  and  subjects,  in  the 
dreariest  stage  of  ruin. 

In  one  such  chapel,  the  guide  showed  them  a  low 
arch,  beneath  which  the  body  of  St.  Cecilia  had  been 
buried  after  her  martyrdom,  and  where  it  lay  till  a 
sculptor  saw  it,  and  rendered  it  forever  beautiful  in 
marble. 

In  a  similar  spot  they  found  two  sarcophagi,  one 
containing  a  skeleton,  and  the  other  a  shrivelled  body, 
which  still  wore  the  garments  of  its  former  lifetime. 

*'  How  dismal  all  this  is !  "  said  Hilda,  shuddering. 
"  I  do  not  know  why  we  came  here,  nor  why  we  should 
stay  a  moment  longer." 

"  I  hate  it  all !  "  cried  Donatello,  with  peculiar  en- 
ergy. "  Dear  friends,  let  us  hasten  back  into  the 
blessed  daylight !  " 

From  the  first,  Donatello  had  shown  little  fa^cy  for 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SUBTERRANEAN  REMINISCENCES.         41 

£he  expedition  ;  for,  like  most  Italians,  and  in  especial 
accordance  with  the  law  of  his  own  simple  and  phys- 
ically happy  nature,  this  young  man  had  an  infinite  re- 
pugnance to  graves  and  skulls,  and  to  all  that  ghast- 
liness  which  the  Gothic  mind  loves  to  associate  with 
the  idea  of  death.  He  shuddered,  and  looked  fear- 
fully round,  drawing  nearer  to  Miriam,  whose  attrac- 
tive influence  alone  had  enticed  him  into  that  gloomy 
region. 

**  What  a  child  you  are,  poor  Donatello !  "  she  ob- 
served, with  the  freedom  which  she  always  used  to- 
wards him.     "  You  are  afraid  of  ghosts !  " 

"Yes,  signorina ;  terribly  afraid! "  said  the  truthful 
Donatello. 

"  I  also  believe  in  ghosts,"  answered  Miriam,  "  and 
could  tremble  at  them,  in  a  suitable  place.  But  these 
sepulchres  are  so  old,  and  these  skulls  and  white  ashes 
so  very  dry,  that  methinks  they  have  ceased  to  be 
haunted.  The  most  awful  idea  connected  with  the 
catacombs  is  their  interminable  extent,  and  the  possi- 
bility of  going  astray  into  this  labyrinth  of  darkness, 
which  broods  around  the  little  glimmer  of  our  ta- 
pers." 

"  Has  any  one  ever  been  lost  here  ?  "  asked  Kenyon 
of  the  guide. 

"  Surely,  signor ;  one,  no  longer  ago  than  my  fa- 
ther's time,"  said  the  guide ;  and  he  added,  with  the 
air  of  a  man  who  believed  what  he  was  telling,  "  but 
the  first  that  went  astray  here  was  a  pagan  of  old 
Rome,  who  hid  himself  in  order  to  spy  out  and  betray 
the  blessed  saints,  who  then  dwelt  and  worshipped  in 
these  dismal  places.  You  have  heard  the  stoiy,  sign* 
or  ?  A  miracle  was  wrought  upon  the  accursed  one ; 
and,  ever  since  (for  fifteen  centuries  at  least),  he  has 


Digitized 


by  Google 


42  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

been  groping  in  the  darkness,  seeking  his  way  out  of 
the  catacomb." 

"  Has  he  ever  been  seen?"  asked  Hilda,  who  had 
great  and  tremulous  faith  in  marvels  of  this  kind. 

"  These  eyes  of  mine  never  beheld  him,  signorina ; 
the  saints  forbid  1"  answered  the  guide.  "But  it  is 
well  known  that  he  watches  near  parties  that  come  into 
the  catacomb,  especially  if  they  be  heretics,  hoping  to 
lead  some  straggler  astray.  What  this  lost  wretch 
pines  for,  almost  as  much  as  for  the  blessed  sunshine, 
is  a  companion  to  be  miserable  with  him." 

"  Such  an  intense  desire  for  sympathy  indicates 
something  amiable  in  the  poor  fellow,  at  all  events," 
observed  Kenyon. 

They  had  now  reached  a  larger  chapel  than  those 
heretofore  seen ;  it  was  of  a  circular  shape,  and,  though 
hewn  out  of  the  solid  mass  of  red  sandstone,  had  pil- 
lars, and  a  carved  roof,  and  other  tokens  of  a  regular 
architectural  design.  Nevertheless,  considered  as  a 
church,  it  was  exceedingly  minute,  being  scarcely  twice 
a  man's  stature  in  height,  and  only  two  or  three  paces 
from  wall  to  wall ;  and  while  their  collected  torches 
illuminated  this  one  small,  consecrated  spot,  the  great 
darkness  spread  all  round  it,  like  that  immensttr  mys- 
tery which  envelops  our  little  life,  and  into  which 
friends  vanish  from  us,  one  by  one. 

**  Why,  where  is  Miriam  ?  "  cried  Hilda. 

The  party  gazed  hurriedly  from  face  to  face,  and 
became  aware  that  one  of  their  party  had  vanished 
into  the  great  darkness,  even  while  they  were  shudden 
ing  at  the  remote  possibility  of  such  a  misfortune. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  IV. 

THE  SPBCTRB  OF  THE  CATACOMB. 

^SuBELYy.she  cannot  be  lost!  "  exclaimed  Kenyoiu 
^  It  is  but  a  moment  since  she  was  speaking." 

^'  No,  no  I  "  said  Hilda,  in  great  alarm.  ^'  She  was 
behind  us  all ;  and  it  is  a  long  while  since  we  have 
heard  her  voice !  " 

"  Torches  I  torches  I  "  cried  Donatello,  desperately. 
*'  I  will  seek  her,  be  the  darkness  ever  so  dismal  1  '* 

But  the  guide  held  him  back,  and  assured  them  all 
that  there  was  no  possibility  of  assisting  their  lost 
companion,  unless  by  shouting  at  the  very  top  of  their 
voices.  As  the  sound  would  go  very  far  along  these 
close  and  narrow  passages,  there  was  a  fair  probability 
that  Miriam  might  hear  the  call,  and  be  able  to  re- 
trace her  steps. 

Accordingly,  they  all — Kenyon  with  his  bass  voice  j 
Donatello  with  his  tenor ;  the  guide  with  that  high  and 
hard  Italian  cry,  which  makes  the  streets  of  Rome  so 
resonant ;  and  Hilda  with  her  slender  scream,  piercing 
farther  than  the  united  uproar  of  the  rest  —  began  to 
shriek,  halloo,  and  bellow,  with  the  utmost  force  of 
their  lungs.  And,  not  to  prolong  the  reader's  sus« 
pense  (for  we  do  not  particularly  seek  to  interest  him 
in  this  scene,  telling  it  only  on  account  of  the  trouble 
and  strange  entanglement  which  followed),  they  soon 
beard  a  responsive  call,  in  a  female  voice. 

'^It  was  the  signorina  I ''  cried  DonateUo,  joyfully. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


44       ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

"  Yes ;  it  was  certainly  dear  Miriam's  voice,"  said 
Hilda.  "  And  here  she  comes !  Thank  Heaven  1  Thank 
Heaven ! " 

The  figure  of  their  friend  was  now  discernible  by 
her  own  torchlight,  approaching  out  of  one  of  the  cav- 
ernous passages.  Miriam  came  forward,  but  not  with 
the  eagerness  and  tremulous  joy  of  a  fearful  girl,  just 
rescued  from  a  labyrinth  of  gloomy  mystery.  She 
made  no  immediate  response  to  their  iuquiries  and 
tumultuous  congratulations;  and,  as  they  afterwards 
remembered,  there  was  something  absorbed,  thought- 
fid,  and  self  -  concentrated  in  her  deportment.  She 
looked  pale,  as  well  she  might,  and  held  her  torch 
with  a  nervous  grasp,  the  tremor  of  which  was  seen  in 
the  irregular  twinkling  of  the  flame.  This  last  was 
the  chief  perceptible  sign  of  any  recent  agitation  or 
alarm. 

"  Dearest,  dearest  Miriam,"  exclaimed  Hilda,  throw- 
ing her  arms  about  her  friend,  "  where  have  you  been 
straying  from  us  ?  Blessed  be  Providence,  which  has 
rescued  you  out  of  that  miserable  darkness  1 " 

"  Hush,  dear  Hilda ! "  whispered  Miriam,  with  a 
strange  little  laugh.  "  Are  you  quite  sure  that  it  was 
Heaven's  guidance  which  brought  me  back.  If  so,  it 
was  by  an  odd  messenger,  as  you  will  confess.  See ; 
there  he  stands." 

Startied  at  Miriam's  words  and  manner,  Hilda  gazed 
into  the  duskiness  whither  she  pointed,  and  there  be- 
held a  figure  standing  just  on  the  doubtful  limit  of 
obscurity,  at  the  threshold  of  the  small,  illuminated 
chapel.  Kenyon  discerned  him  at  the  same  instant, 
and  drew  nearer  with  his  torch ;  although  the  guide 
attempted  to  dissuade  him,  averring  that,  once  beyond 
the  consecrated  precincts  of  the  chapel,  the  apparition 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  SPECTRE  OF  THE  CATACOMB.  46 

would  have  power  to  tear  him  limb  from  limb.  It 
struck  the  sculptor,  however,  when  he  afterwards  re- 
curred to  these  cii*cumstances,  that  the  guide  mani- 
fested no  such  apprehension  on  his  own  account  as  he 
professed  on  behalf  of  others ;  for  he  kept  pace  with 
Kenyon  as  the  latter  approached  the  figure,  though 
still  endeavoring  to  restrain  him. 

In  fine,  they  both  drew  near  enough  to  get  as  good 
a  view  of  the  spectre  as  the  smoky  light  of  their 
torchesf  struggling  with  the  massive  gloom,  could  sup- 
ply. 

The  stranger  was  of  exceedingly  picturesque,  and 
even  melodramatic  aspect.  He  was  clad  in  a  volu« 
minous  cloak,  that  seemed  to  be  made  of  a  buffalo's 
hide,  and  a  pair  of  those  goat-skin  breeches,  with  the 
hair  outward,  which  are  still  commonly  worn  by  the 
peasants  of  the  Eoman  Campagna.  In  this  garb,  they 
look  like  antique  Satyrs;  and,  in  truth,  the  Spectre 
of  the  Catacomb  might  have  represented  the  last  sur- 
vivor of  that  vanished  race,  hiding  himself  in  sepul- 
chral gloom,  and  mourning  over  his  lost  life  of  woods 
and  streams. 

Furthermore,  he  had  on  a  broad  -  brimmed,  conical 
hat,  beneath  the  shadow  of  which  a  wild  visage  was 
indistinctly  seen,  floating  away,  as  it  were,  into  a 
dusky  wilderness  of  mustache  and  beard.  His  eyes 
winked,  and  turned  uneasily  from  the  torches,  like  a 
creature  to  whom  midnight  would  be  more  congenial 
than  noonday. 

On  the  whole,  the  spectre  might  have  made  a  con- 
siderable impression  on  the  sculptor's  nerves,  only 
that  he  was  in  the  habit  of  observing  similar  figures, 
almost  every  day,  reclining  on  the  Spanish  steps,  and 
waiting  for  some  artist  to  invite  them  within  the  magio 


Digitized 


by  Google 


46  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

realm  of  picture.  Nor,  even  thus  familiarized  with 
the  stranger's  peculiarities  of  appearance,  could  Ken- 
yon  help  wondering  to  see  such  a  personage,  shaping 
himself  so  suddenly  out  of  the  void  darkness  of  the 
catacomb. 

"What  are  you?"  said  the  sculptor,  advancing  his 
torch  nearer.  "And  how  long  have  you  been  wander- 
ing here  ?  " 

"A  thousand  and  five  hundred  years!"  muttered 
the  guide,  loud  enough  to  be  heard  by  all  the^  party. 
"  It  is  the  old  pagan  phantom  that  I  told  you  of,  who 
sought  to  betray  the  blessed  saints  ! " 

"  Yes  ;  it  is  a  phantom  !  "  cried  Donatello,  with  a 
shudder.  "All,  dearest  signorina,  what  a  fearful  thing 
has  beset  you  in  those  dark  corridors  !  " 

"Nonsense,  Donatello,"  said  the  sculptor.  "The 
man  is  no  more  a  phantom  than  yourself.  The  only 
marvel  is,  how  he  comes  to  be  hiding  himself  in  the 
catacomb.  Possibly,  our  guide  might  solve  the  rid- 
dle.^' 

The  spectre  himself  here  settled  the  point  of  his 
tangibility,  at  all  events,  and  physical  substance,  by 
approaching  a  step  nearer,  and  laying  his  hand  on 
Kenyon's  arm. 

"  Inquire  not  what  I  am,  nor  wherefore  I  abide  in 
the  darkness,"  said  he,  in  a  hoarse,  harsh  voice,  as  if 
a  great  deal  of  damp  were  clustering  in  his  throat. 
"  Henceforth,  I  am  nothing  but  a  shadow  behind  her 
footsteps.  She  came  to  me  when  I  sought  her  not. 
She  has  called  me  forth,  and  must  abide  the  conse- 
quences of  my  reappearance  in  the  world." 

"  Holy  Virgin !  I  wish  the  signorina  joy  of  her 
prize,"  said  the  guide,  half  to  himself.  "  And  in  ai^ 
case,  the  catacomb  is  well  rid  of  him." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  SPECTRE  OF  THE  CATACOMB.        47 

We  need  follow  the  scene  no  further.  So  much  is 
essential  to  the  subsequent  narrative,  that,  during  the 
short  period  while  astray  in  those  tortuous  passages, 
Miriam  had  encountered  an  unknown  man,  and  led 
him  forth  with  her,  or  was  guided  back  by  him,  first 
into  the  torchlight,  thence  into  the  sunshine.  • « 

It  was  the  further  singularity  of  this  affair,  that  the 
connection,  thus  briefly  and  casually  formed,  did  not 
terminate  with  the  incident  that  gave  it  birth.  As  if 
her  service  to  him,  or  his  service  to  her,  whichever 
it  might  be,  had  given  him  an  indefeasible  claim  on 
Miriam's  regard  and  protection,  the  Spectre  of  the 
Catacomb  never  long  allowed  her  to  lose  sight  of  him, 
from  that  day  forward.  He  haunted  her  footsteps 
with  more  than  the  customary  persistency  of  Italian 
mendicants,  when  once  they  have  recognized  a  bene- 
factor. For  days  together,  it  is  true,  he  occasionally 
vanished,  but  always  reappeared,  gliding  after  her 
through  the  narrow  streets,  or  climbing  the  hundred 
steps  of  her  staircase  and  sitting  at  her  threshold. 

Being  often  admitted  to  her  studio,  he  left  his  fea- 
tures, or  some  shadow  or  reminiscence  of  them,  in 
many  of  her  sketches  and  pictures.  The  moral  at- 
mosphere of  these  productions  was  thereby  so  influ- 
enced, that  rival  painters  pronounced  it  a  case  of 
hopeless  mannerism,  which  would  destroy  all  Miriam's 
prospects  of  true  excellence  in  art. 

Tlie  story  of  this  adventure  spread  abroad,  and 
made  its  way  beyond  the  usual  gossip  of  the  Fores- 
tieri,  even  into  Italian  circles,  where,  enhanced  by  a 
still  potent  spirit  of  superstition,  it  grew  far  more 
wonderful  than  as  above  recounted.  Thence,  it  came- 
back  among  the  Anglo-Saxons,  and  was  communi- 
eated  to  the  German  artists,  who  so  richly  supplied  it 


Digitized 


by  Google 


48  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

with  romantic  ornaments  and  excrescences,  after  their 
fashion,  that  it  became  a  fantasy  worthy  of  Tieck  or 
Hoffmann.  For  nobody  has  any  conscience  about  add- 
ing to  the  improbabilities  of  a  marvellous  tale. 

The  most  reasonable  version  pf  the  incident,  that 
could  anywise  be  rendered  acceptable  to  the  auditors, 
was  substantially  the  one  suggested  by  the  guide  of 
the  catacomb,  in  his  allusion  to  the  legend  of  Mem- 
mius.  This  man,  or  demon,  or  man-demon,  was  a  spy 
during  the  persecutions  of  the  early  Christians,  prob- 
ably under  the  Emperor  Diocletian,  and  penetrated 
into  the  catacomb  of  St.  Calixtus,  with  the  malignant 
purpose  of  tracing  out  the  hiding-places  of  the  refu- 
gees. But,  while  he  stole  craftily  through  those  dark 
corridors,  he  chanced  to  come  upon  a  little  chapel, 
where  tapers  were  burning  before  an  altar  and  a  cru- 
cifix, and  a  priest  was  in  the  performance  of  his  sacred 
office.  By  divine  indulgence,  there  was  a  single  mo- 
ment's grace  allowed  to  Memmius,  during  which,  had 
he  been  capable  of  Christian  faith  and  love,  he  might 
have  knelt  before  the  cross,  and  received  the  holy  light 
into  his  soul,  and  so  have  been  blest  forever.  But  he 
resisted  the  sacred  impulse.  As  soon,  therefore,  as 
that  one  moment  had  glided  by,  the  light  of  the  con- 
secrated tapers,  which  represent  all  truth,  bewildered 
the  wretched  man  with  everlasting  eiTor,  and  the 
blessed  cross  itself  was  stamped  as  a  seal  upon  his 
heart,  so  that  it  should  never  open  to  receive  convic- 
tion. 

Thenceforth,  this  heathen  Memmius  has  haunted 
the  wide  and  dreary  precincts  of  the  catacomb,  seek- 
ing, as  some  say,  to  beguile  new  victims  into  his  own 
misery ;  but,  according  to  other  statements,  endeavor- 
ing to  prevail  on  any  unwary  visitor  to  take  him  by 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  SPECTRE  OF  THE  CATACOMB.        49 

the  hand,  and  guide  him  out  into  the  daylight.  Should 
his  wiles  and  entreaties  take  effect,  however,  the  man* 
demon  would  remain  only  a  little  while  above  ground. 
He  would  gratify  his  fiendish  malignity  by  perpetrat- 
ing signal  mischief  on  his  benefactor,  and  perhaps' 
bringing  some  old  pestilence  or  other  forgotten  and 
long-buried  evil  on  society ;  or,  possibly,  teaching  the 
modem  world  some  decayed  and  dusty  kind  of  crime,' 
which  the  antique  Romans  knew;  and  then  would 
hasten  back  to  the  catacomb,  which,  after  so  long 
haunting  it,  has  grown  his  most  congenial  home. 

Miriam  herself,  with  her  chosen  friends,  the  sculp* 
tor  and  the  gentle  Hilda,  often  laughed  at  the  mon- 
strous fictions  that  had  gone  abroad  in  reference  to 
her  adventure.  Her  two  confidants  (for  such  they 
were,  on  all  ordinary  subjects)  had  not  failed  to  ask 
an  explanation  of  the  mystery,  since  undeniably  a 
mystery  there  was,  and  one  suiBRciently  perplexing  in 
itself,  without  any  help  from  the  imaginative  faculty. 
And,  sometimes  responding  to  their  inquiries  with  a 
melancholy  sort  of  playfulness,  Miriam  let  her  fancy 
run  off  into  wilder  fables  than  any  which  German  in- 
genuity or  Italian  superstition  had  contrived. 

For  example,  with  a  strange  air  of  seriousness  over 
all  her  face,  only  belied  by  a  laughing  gleam  in  her 
dark  eyes,  she  would  aver  that  the  spectre  (who  had 
been  an  artist  in  his  mortal  lifetime)  had  promised , 
to  teach  her  a  long  lost,  but  invaluable  secret  of  old 
Roman  fresco-painting.  The  knowledge  of  this  pro 
cess  would  place  Miriam  at  the  head  of  modem  art^ 
the  sole  condition  being  agreed  upon,  that  she  should 
return  with  him  into  his  sightless  gloom,  after  enrich- 
ing a  certain  extent  of  stuccoed  wall  with  the  most 
brilliant  and  lovely  designs.    And  what  true  votary  of 


Digitized 


by  Google 


60  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

art  would  not  purchase  unrivalled  excellence,  even  at 
so  vast  a  sacrifice ! 

Or,  if  her  friends  still  solicited  a  soberer  account, 
Miriam  replied,  that,  meeting  the  old  infidel  in  one  of 
the  dismal  passages  of  the  catacomb,  she  had  entered 
into  controversy  with  him,  hoping  to  achieve  the  glory 
and  satisfaction  of  converting  him  to  the  Christian 
faith.  For  the  sake  of  so  excellent  a  result,  she  had 
even  staked  her  own  salvation  against  his,  binding 
herself  to  accompany  him  back  into  his  penal  gloom^ 
if,  within  a  twelve-month's  space,  she  should  not  have 
convinced  him  of  the  errors  through  which  he  had  so 
long  groped  and  stumbled.  But,  alas !  up  to  the  pres* 
ent  time,  the  controversy  had  gone  direfully  in  favor 
of  the  man-demon ;  and  Miriam  (as  she  whispered  in 
Hilda's  ear)  had  awful  forebodings,  that,  in  a  few 
more  months,  she  must  take  an  eternal  farewell  of 
the  sun ! 

It  was  somewhat  remarkable  that  all  her  romantic 
fantasies  arrived  at  this  self-same  dreary  termination ; 
it  appeared  impossible  for  her  even  to  imagine  any 
other  than  a  disastrous  result  from  her  connection 
with  her  ill-omened  attendant. 

This  singularity  might  have  meant  nothing,  how* 
ever,  had  it  not  suggested  a  despondent  state  of  mind, 
which  was  likewise  indicated  by  many  other  tokens. 
Miriam's  friends  had  no  difficulty  in  perceiving  that, 
in  one  way  or  another,  her  happiness  was  very  seri- 
ously compromised.  Her  spirits  were  often  depressed 
into  deep  melancholy.  If  ever  she  was  gay,  it  was 
seldom  with  a  healthy  cheerfulness.  She  grew  moody, 
moreover,  and  subject  to  fits  of  passionate  ill-temper; 
which  usually  wreaked  itself  on  the  heads  of  those 
who  loved  her  best.     Not  that  Miriam's  indifferent 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  SPECTRE  OF  THE  CATACOMB.        51 

4tcquaiiitances  were  safe  from  similar  outbreaks  of  her 
displeasure,  especially  if  they  ventured  upon  any  allu- 
sion to  the  model.  In  such  cases,  they  were  left  with 
little  disposition  to  renew  the  subject,  but  inclined,  on 
the  other  hand,  to  interpret  the  whole  matter  as  much 
to  her  discredit  as  the  least  favorable  coloring  of  the 
facts  would  allow. 

It  may  occur  to  the  reader,  that  there  was  really  no 
demand  for  so  much  rumor  and  speculation  in  regard 
to  an  incident,  which  might  well  enough  have  been  ex* 
plained  without  going  many  steps  beyond  the  limits  of 
probability.  The  spectre  might  have  been  merely  a 
Homan  beggar,  whose  fraternity  often  harbor  in  stran- 
ger shelters  than  the  catacombs ;  or  one  of  those  pil- 
grims, who  still  journey  from  remote  countries  to 
kneel  and  worship  at  the  holy  sites,  among  which  these 
haunts  of  the  early  Christians  are  esteemed  especially 
sacred.  Or,  as  was  perhaps  a  more  plausible  theory, 
he  might  be  a  thief  of  the  city^  a  robber  of  the  Cam- 
pagna,  a  political  offender,  or  an  assassin,  with  blood 
upon  his  hand ;  whom  the  negligence  or  connivance  of 
the  police  allowed  to  take  refuge  in  those  subterranean; 
fastnesses,  where  such  outlaws  have  been  accuston^ed> 
to  hide  themselves  from  a  far  antiquity  downward* 
Or  he  might  have  been  a  lunatic,  fleeing  instinctively 
from  man,  and  making  it  Ids  dark  pleasure  to  dwell 
among  the  tombs,  like  him  whose  awful  cry  echoes 
afar  to  us  from  Scripture  times. 

And,  as  for  the  stranger's  attaching  himself  so  de* 
vpte^y  to  Miriam,  her  personal  magjietism  might  be 
allowed  a  certain  weight  in  the  explanation.  For 
what  remains,  his  pertinacity  need  not  seem  so  very 
singular  to  those  who  consider  how  slight  a  link  serves 
to  connect  these  vagabonds  of  idle  Italy  with  any  per- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


52  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

son  that  may  have  the  ill-hap  to  bestow  charity,  or  be 
otherwise  serviceable  to  them,  or  betray  the  slightest 
interest  in  their  fortunes. 

Thus  little  would  remain  to  be  accounted  for,  ex- 
cept the  deportment  of  Miriam  herself ;  her  reserve, 
her  brooding  melancholy,  her  petulance,  and  moody 
passion.  If  generously  interpreted,  even  these  morbid 
i^mptoms  might  have  sufficient  cause  in  the  stimulat- 
ing and  exhaustive  influences  of  imaginative  art,  exer- 
cised by  a  delicate  young  woman,  in  the  nervous  and 
unwholesome  atmosphere  of  Rome.  Such,  at  least,  was 
the  view  of  the  case  which  Hilda  and  Kenyon  endeav- 
ored to  impress  on  their  own  minds,  and  impart  to 
those  whom  their  opinions  might  influence. 

One  of  Miriam's  friends  took  the  matter  sadly  to 
heart.  This  was  the  young  Italian.  Donatello,  as  we 
have  seen,  had  been  an  eye-witness  of  the  stranger's 
first  appearance,  and  had  ever  since  noui'ished  a  sin- 
gular prejudice  against  the  mysterious,  dusky,  death- 
scented  apparition.  It  resembled  not  so  much  a  human 
dislike  or  hatred,  as  one  of  those  instinctive,  unrea- 
soning antipathies  which  the  lower  animsJs  sometimes 
display,  and  which  generally  prove  more  trustworthy 
I  than  the  acutest  insight  into  character.  The  shadow 
'of  the  model,  always  flung  into  the  light  which  Mir- 
iam diffused  around  her,  caused  no  slight  trouble  to 
Donatello.  Yet  he  was  of  a  nature  so  remarkably 
genial  and  Joyces,  so  simply  happy,  that  he  might 
well  afford  to  have  something  subtracted  from  his 
comfort,  and  make  tolerable  shift  to  live  upon  what 
remained. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  V. 

mibiam's  studio. 

The  court-yard  and  staircase  of  a  palace  biiilt  three 
hundred  years  ago  are  a  peculiar  feature  of  modem 
Borne,  and  interest  the  stranger  more  than  many 
things  of  which  he  has  heard  loftier  descriptions. 
You  pass  through  the  grand  breadth  and  height  of  a 
squalid  entrance  -  way,  and  perhaps  see  a  range  of 
dusky  pillars,  forming  a  sort  of  cloister  round  the 
court,  and  in  the  intervals,  from  pillar  to  pillar,  are 
strewn  fragments  of  antique  statues,  headless  and  legr 
less  torsos,  and  busts  that  have  invariably  lost  —  what 
it  might  be  weU  if  living  men  could  lay  aside  in  that 
unf ragrant  atanosphere  —  the  nose.  Bas  -  reliefs,  the 
spoil  of  some  far  older  palace,  are  set  in  the  surround* 
ing  walls,  every  stone  of  which  has  been  ravished 
from  the  Coliseum,  or  any  other  imperial  ruin  which 
earlier  barbarism  had  not  already  levelled  with  the 
earth.  Between  two  of  the  pillars,  moreover,  stands 
an  old  sarcophagus  without  its  lid,  and  with  all  its 
more  prominently  projecting  sculptures  broken  off; 
perhaps  it  once  held  famous  dust,  and  the  bony  frame- 
work  of  some  historic  man,  although  now  only  a  re- 
ceptacle for  the  rubbish  of  the  com1>-yard,  and  a  half- 
worn  broom. 

In  the  centre  of  the  court,  under  the  blue  Italian 
sky,  and  with  the  hundred  windows  of  the  vast  palace 
gazing  down  upon  it,  from  four  sides,  appears  a  f oun? 


Digitized 


by  Google 


54  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

fcain.  It  brims  over  from  one  stone  basin  to  anothex^ 
or  gushes  from  a  Naiad's  urn,  or  spurts  its  many  lit- 
tle jets  from  the  mouths  of  nameless  monsters,  which 
were  merely  grotesque  and  artificial  when  Bernini,  or 
whoever  was  their  unnatural  father,  first  produced 
them ;  but  now  the  patches  of  moss,  the  tufts  of  grass, 
the  trailing  maiden -hair,  and  all  sorts  of  verdant 
weeds  that  thrive  in  the  cracks  and  crevices  of  moist 
marble,  tell  us  that  Nature  takes  the  fountain  back 
into  her  great  heart,  and  cherishes  it  as  kindly  as  if 
it  were  a  woodland  spring.  And,  hark,  the  pleasant 
murmur,  the  gurgle,  the  plash  1  You  might  hear  just 
those  tinkling  sounds  from  any  tiny  waterfall  in  the 
forest,  though  here  they  gain  a  delicious  pathos  from 
the  stately  echoes  that  reverberate  their  natural  lan- 
guage. So  the  fountain  is  not  altogether  glad,  after 
all  its  three  centuries  at  play  ! 

In  one  of  the  angles  of  the  court-yard,  a  pillared 
door  -  way  gives  access  to  the  staircase,  with  its  spa- 
cious breadth  of  low,  marble  steps,  up  which,  in 
former  times,  have  gone  the  princes  and  cardinals  of 
the  great  Roman  family  who  biiilt  this  palace.  Or 
they  have  come  down,  with  still  grander  and  loftier 
mien,  on  their  way  to  the  Vatican  or  the  Quirinal^ 
there  to  put  off  their  scarlet  hats  in  exchange  for  the 
triple  crown.  But,  in  fine,  all  these  illustrious  per- 
sonages have  gone  down  their  hereditary  staircase  for 
the  last  time,  leaving  it  to  be  the  thoroughfare  of  am- 
bassadors, English  noblemen,  American  millionnaires, 
artists,  tradesmen,  washerwomen,  and  people  of  every 
degree ;  all  of  whom  find  such  gilded  and  marble- 
panelled  saloons  as  their  pomp  and  luxury  demand,  or 
such  homely  garrets  as  their  necessity  can  pay  for, 
^within  this  one  multifarious  abode.     Only,  iu  n.'t  a 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM'S  STUDIO.  55 

single  nook  of  the  palace  (built  for  splendor,  and  the 
accommodation  of  a  vast  retinue,  but  with  no  vision 
of  a  happy  fireside  or  any  mode  of  domestic  enjoy- 
ment) does  the  humblest  or  the  haughtiest  occupant 
find  comfort. 

Up  such  a  staircase,  on  the  morning  after  the  scene 
at  the  sculpture  gallery,  sprang  the  light  foot  of  Dona- 
tello.  He  ascended  from  story  to  story,  passing  lofty 
door-ways,  set  within  rich  frames  of  sculptured  mar* 
ble,  and  climbing  unweariedly  upward,  until  the  glories 
of  the  first  piano  and  the  elegance  of  the  middle 
height  were  exchanged  for  a  sort  of  Alpine  region, 
cold  and  naked  in  its  aspect.  Steps  of  rough  stone, 
rude  wooden  balustrades,  a  brick  pavement  in  the  pas- 
sages, a  dingy  whitewash  on  the  walls ;  these  were  here 
the  palatial  features.  Finally,  he  paused  before  an 
i>aken  door,  on  which  was  pinned  a  card,  bearing  the 
name  of  Miriam  Schaefer,  artist  in  oils.  Here  Dona- 
tello  knocked,  and  the  door  immediately  fell  some- 
what ajar ;  its  latch  having  been  pulled  up  by  means 
of  a  string  on  the  inside.  Passing  through  a  little 
anteroom,  he  found  himself  in  Miriam's  presence. 

"  Come  in,  wild  Faun,"  she  said,  "  and  tell  me  the 
latest  news  from  Arcady!  " 

The  artist  was  not  just  then  at  her  easel,  but  was 
busied  with  the  feminine  task  of  mending  a  pair  of 
gloves. 

There  is  something  extremely  pleasant,  and  even 
touching,  — at  least,  of  very  sweet,  soft,  and  winning 
eflFect,  —  in  this  peculiarity  of  needlework,  distinguish- 
ing women  from  men.  Our  own  sex  is  incapable  of 
any  such  by-play  aside  from  the  main  business  of  life  ; 
but  women  —  be  they  of  what  earthly  rank  they  may, 
bowever  gifted  with  intellect  or  genius,  or  endowed 


Digitized 


by  Google 


66  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

with  awful  beauty  —  have  always  some  little  handi-i 
work  ready  to  fill  the  tiny  gap  of  every  vacant  mo- 
ment. A  needle  is  familiar  to  the  fingers  of  them  all, 
A  queen,  no  doubt,  plies  it  on  occasion ;  the  woman 
poet  can  use  it  as  adroitly  as  her  pen ;  the  woman's 
eye,  that  has  discovered  a  new  star,  turns  from  its 
glory  to  send  the  polished  little  instrument  gleaming 
along  the  hem  of  her  kerchief,  or  to  dam  a  casual 
fray  in  her  dress.  And  they  have  greatly  the  advan- 
tage of  us  in  this  respect.  The  slender  thread  of  silk 
or  cotton  keeps  them  united  with  the  small,  familiar, 
gentle  interests  of  life,  the  continually  operating  in- 
fluences of  wliich  do  so  much  for  the  health  of  the 
character,  and  carry  off  what  would  otherwise  be  a 
dangerous  accumulation  of  morbid  sensibility.  A  vast 
deal  of  human  sympathy  runs  along  this  electric  line, 
stretching  from  the  throne  to  the  wicker  chair  of  the 
humblest  seamstress,  and  keeping  high  and  low  in  a 
species  of  communion  with  their  kindred  beings.  Me- 
tliinks  it  is  a  token  of  healthy  and  gentle  characterise 
tics,  when  women  of  high  thoughts  and  accomplish' 
ments  love  to  sew  ;  especially  as  they  are  never  more 
jit  home  with  their  own  hearts  than  while  so  occupied. 

And  when  the  work  falls  in  a  woman's  lap,  of  its 
own  accord,  and  the  needle  involuntarily  ceases  to  fly, 
it  is  a  sign  of  trouble,  quite  as  trustworthy  as  the 
throb  of  the  heart  itself.  This  waa  what  happened  to 
Miriam.  Even  while  DonateUo  stood  gazing  at  her, 
Bhe  seemed  to  have  forgotten  his  presence,  allowing 
him  to  drop  out  of  her  thoughts,  and  the  torn  glove 
lo  fall  from  her  idle  fingers.  Simple  as  he  was,  the 
young  man  knew  by  his  sympathies  that  something 
was  amiss. 

*'  Dear  lady,  you  are  sad,"  said  he,  drawing  close  ta 
her. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM'S  STUDIO.  6T 

•*It  is  nothing,  Donatello,"  she  replied,  resuming 
her  work ;  "  yes :  a  little  sad,  perhaps ;  but  that  is 
not  strange  for  us  people  of  the  ordinary  world,  espe- 
cially for  women.  You  are  of  a  cheerf uller  race,  my 
friend,  and  know  nothing  of  this  disease  of  sadness. 
But  why  do  you  come  into  tliis  shadowy  room  of 
mine?" 

**  Why  do  you  make  it  so  shadowy  ?  "  asked  he. 

**  We  artists  purposely  exclude  sunshine,  and  all 
but  a  partial  light,"  said  Miriam,  "  because  we  think  it 
necessary  to  put  ourselves  at  odds  with  Nature  before 
trying  to  imitate  her.  That  strikes  you  very  strangely, 
does  it  not  ?  But  we  make  very  pretty  pictures  some- 
times with  our  artfully  arranged  lights  and  shadows. 
Amuse  yourself  with  some  of  mine,  Donatello,  and  by 
and  by  I  shall  be  in  the  mood  to  begin  the  portrait  we 
were  talking  about." 

The  room  had  the  customary  aspect  of  a  painter's 
studio ;  one  of  those  delightful  spots  that  hardly  seem 
to  belong  to  the  actual  world,  but  rather  to  l>e  the  out- 
ward type  of  a  poet's  haunted  imagination,  where  there 
are  glimpses,  sketches,  and  half-developed  hints  of  be- 
ings and  objects  grander  and  more  beautiful  than  we 
can  anywhere  find  in  reality.  The  windows  were  closed 
with  shutters,  or  deeply  curtained,  except  one,  which 
was  partly  open  to  a  sunless  portion  of  the  sky,  admits 
ting  only  from  high  upward  that  partial  light  which, 
with  its  strongly  marked  contrast  of  shadow,  is  thf, 
first  requisite  towards  seeing  objects  pictoriaUy.  Pen- 
cil-drawings were  pinned  against  the  wall  or  scattered 
on  the  tables.  Unframed  canvases  turned  their  backs 
on  the  spectator,  presenting  only  a  blank  to  the  eye, 
and  churlishly  concealing  whatever  riches  of  scenery 
or  human  beauty  Miriam's  skill  had  depicted  on  the 
ether  side. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


58  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT, 

In  the  obscurest  part  of  the  room  Donatello  waa 
half  startled  at  perceiving  duskily  a  woman  with  long- 
dark  hair,  who  threw  up  her  arms  with  a  wild  gesture 
of  tragic  despair,  and  appeared  to  beckon  him  into 
the  darkness  along  with  her. 

"  Do  not  be  afraid,  Donatello,"  said  Miriam,  smil- 
ing to  see  him  peering  doubtfully  into  the  mysterious 
dusk.  '*  She  means  you  no  mischief,  nor  could  perpe- 
trat'e  any  if  she  wished  it  ever  so  much.  It  is  a  lady 
of  exceedingly  pliable  disposition ;  now  a  heroine  of 
romance,  and  now  a  rustic  maid;  yet  all  for  show; 
being  created,  indeed,  on  purpose  to  wear  rich  shawls 
and  other  garments  in  a  becoming  fashion.  This  is  the 
true  end  of  her  bemg,  although  she  pretends  to  assume 
the  most  varied  duties  and  perform  many  parts  in  life, 
while  really  the  poor  puppet  has  nothing  on  earth  to 
do.  Upon  my  word,  I  am  satirical  unawares,  and  seem 
to  be  describing  nine  women  out  of  ten  in  the  person 
of  my  lay-figure.  For  most  purposes  she  has  the  ad- 
vantage of  the  sisterhood.     Would  I  were  like  her  I  " 

"  How  it  changes  her  aspect,"  exclaimed  Donatello, 
"  to  know  that  she  is  but  a  jointed  figure !  When  my 
eyes  first  fell  upon  her,  I  thought  her  arms  moved,  as 
if  beckoning  me  to  help  her  in  some  direful  peril." 

'*  Are  you  often  troubled  with  such  sinister  freaks 
of  fancy  ?"  asked  Miriam.  "  I  should  not  have  sup- 
posed it." 

"  To  tell  you  the  truth,  dearest  signorina,"  answered 
the  young  Italian,  "  I  am  apt  to  be  fearful  in  old, 
gloomy  houses,  and  in  the  dark.  I  love  no  dark  or 
dusky  corners,  except  it  be  in  a  grotto,  or  among  the 
thick  green  leaves  of  an  arbor,  or  in  some  nook  of  the 
woods,  such  as  I  know  many  in  the  neighborhood  of 
my  home.  Even  there,  if  a  stray  simbeam  steal  in, 
the  shadow  is  all  the  better  for  its  cheerful  eflimmer.**^. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


*  MIRIAM'S  STUDIO.  59 

.  **  Yes ;  you  are  a  Faun,  you  know,"  said  the  fair 
artist,  laughing  at  the  remembrance  of  the  scene  of 
the  day  before.  ^'  But  the  world  is  sadly  changed 
nowadays ;  grievously  changed,  poor  Donatello,  since 
those  happy  times  when  your  race  used  to  dwell  in 
the  Arcadian  woods,  playing  hide-and-seek  with  the' 
nymphs  in  grottos  and  nooks  of  shrubbery.  You  have 
reappeared  on  eartli  some  centuries  too  late." 

"  I  do  not  understand  you  now,"  answered  Dona- 
tello, looking  perplexed ;  "  only  signorina,  I  am  glad 
to  have  my  lifetime  while  you  live ;  and  where  you 
are,  be  it  in  cities  or  fields,  I  would  fain  be  there  too." 

"  I  wonder  whether  I  ought  to  allow  you  to  speak  in 
th^s  way,"  said  Miriam,  looking  thoughtfully  at  him. 
"  Many  young  women  would  think  it  behoved  them  to 
be  offended.  Hilda  would  never  let  you  speak  so,  I 
dare  say.  But  he  is  a  mere  boy,"  she  added,  aside,  "  a 
simple  boy,  putting  his  boyish  heart  to  the  proof  on 
the  first  woman  whom  he  chances  to  meet.  If  yonder 
lay-figure  had  had  the  luck  to  meet  him  first,  she 
would  have  smitten  him  as  deeply  as  I." 

**  Are  you  angry  witli  me  ?  "  asked  Donatello,  dolo- 
rously. 

*'  Not  in  the  least,"  answered  Miriam,  frankly  giv- 
ing him  her  hand.  "  Pray  look  over  some  of  the.se 
sketches  till  1  have  leisure  to  chat  with  you  a  little.  I 
hardly  think  I  am  in  spirits  enough  to  begin  your  por- 
trait to-day." 

Donatello  was  as  gentle  and  docile  as  a  pet  spaniel ; 
as  playful,  too,  in  his  general  disposition,  or  sadden- 
ing with  his  mistress's  variable  mood  like  that  or  any 
other  kindly  animal  which  has  the  faculty  of  bestowing 
its  sympathies  more  completely  than  men  or  women 
eau  ever  do.     Accordingly,  as  Miriam  bade  him,  he 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CO  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENI, 

tried  to  turn  his  attention  to  a  great  pile  and  confu^ 
sion  of  pen-and-ink  sketches  and  pencil  -  drawings 
which  lay  tossed  together  on  a  table.  As  it  chanced, 
however,  they  gave  the  poor  youth  little  delight. 

The  first  that  he  took  up  was  a  very  impressive 
sketch,  in  which  the  artist  had  jotted  down  her  rough 
ideas  for  a  picture  of  Jael  driving  the  nail  through 
^ the  temples  of  Sisera.  It  was  dashed  off  with  remark- 
able power,  and  showed  a  touch  or  two  that  were  ac- 
tually life-like  and  death-like,  as  if  Miriam  had  been 
standing  by  when  Jael  gave  the  first  stroke  of  her 
murderous  hammer,  or  as  if  she  herself  were  Jael,  and 
felt  irresistibly  impelled  to  make  her  bloody  confes- 
sion in  this  guise. 

Her  first  conception  of  the  stem  Jewess  had  evi* 
dently  been  that  of  perfect  womanhood,  a  lovely  form, 
and  a  high,  heroic  face  of  lofty  beauty;  but,  dissat- 
isfied either  with  her  own  work  or  the  terrible  story 
itself,  Miriam  had  added  a  certain  wayward  quirk  of 
her  pencil,  which  at  once  converted  the  heroine  into 
a  vulgar  murderess.  It  was  evident  that  a  Jael  like 
this  would  be  sure  to  search  Sisera's  pockets  as  soon 
as  the  breath  was  out  of  his  body. 

In  another  sketch  she  had  attempted  the  story  of 
Juditli,  which  we  see  represented  by  the  old  masters 
so  often,  and  in  such  various  styles.  Here,  too,  be- 
ginning with  a  passionate  and  fiery  conception  of  the 
subject  in  all  earnestness,  she  had  given  the  last 
touches  in  utter  scorn,  as  it  were,  of  the  feelings  which 
at  first  took  such  powerful  possession  of  her  hand. 
The  head  of  Holofemes  (which  by  the  by  had  a  pair 
of  twisted  mustaches,  like  those  of  a  certain  potentate 
of  the  day)  being  fairly  cut  off,  was  screwing  its  eyes 
upward  and  twirling  its  features  into  a  diabolical  grin 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM'S  STUDIO.  61 

of  triumphant  malice,  whiofa  it  flmig  right  in  Judith's 
face.  On  her  part,  she  had  the  startled  aspect  that 
might  be  conceived  of  a  cook  if  a  calf's  head  should 
sneer  at  her  when  about  to  be  popped  into  the  dinner- 
pot. 

j  Over  and  over  again,  there  was  the  idea  of  woman, 
acting  the  pail;  of  a  revengeful  mischief  towards  man. 
It  was,  indeed,  very  singular  to  see  how  the  artist's 
imagination  seemed  to  run  on  these  stories  of  blood- 
shed, in  which  woman's  hand  was  crimsoned  by  the 
stain ;  and  how,  too,  —  in  one  form  or  another,  gro- 
tesque or  sternly  sad,  —  she  failed  not  to  bring  out 
the  moral,  that  woman  must  strike  through  her  own 
heart  to  reach  a  human  life,  whatever  were  the  motive 
that  impelled  her. 

One  of  the  sketches  represented  the  daughter  of 
Herodias  receiving  the  head  of  John  the  Baptist  in  a 
charger.  The  general  conception  appeared  to  be  taken 
from  Bernardo  Luini's  picture,  in  the  Uffizzi  Gallery 
at  Florence  ;  but  Miriam  had  imparted  to  the  saint's 
face  a  look  of  gentle  and  heavenly  reproach,  with  sad 
and  blessed  eyes  fixed  upward  at  the  maiden ;  by  the 
force  of  which  miraculous  glance,  her  whole  woman- 
hood was  at  once  awakened  to  love  and  endless  re- 
morse. 

These  sketches  had  a  most  disagreeable  effect  on 
Donatello's  peculiar  temperament.  He  gave  a  shud- 
der; his  face  assumed  a  look  of  trouble,  fear,  and 
disgust ;  he  snatched  up  one  sketch  after  another,  as 
if  about  to  tear  it  in  pieces.  Finally,  shoving  away 
the  pile  of  drawings,  he  shrank  back  from  the  table 
and  clasped  his  hands  over  his  eyes. 

"  What  is  the  matter,  Donatello  ?  "  asked  Miriam, 
looking  up  from  a  letter  which  she  was  now  writing. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


62  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

^^Ah!  I  did  not  mean  you  to  see  those  drawings. 
They  are  ugly  phantoms  that  stole  out  of  my  mind ; 
not  things  that  I  created,  but  things  that  haunt  me. 
See !  here  are  some  trifles  that  perhaps  will  please  you 
i  better." 

She  gave  him  a  portfolio,  the  sketches  in  which  in^ 
dicated  a  happier  mood  of  mind,  and  one,  it  is  to  be 
hoped,  more  truly  characteristic  of  the  artist.  Sup- 
posing neither  of  these  classes  of  subject  to  show  any- 
thing of  her  own  individualiiy,  Miriam  had  evidently 
a  great  scope  of  fancy,  and  a  singular  faculty  of  put- 
ting what  looked  like  heart  into  her  productions.  The 
latter  sketches  were  domestic  and  common  scenes,  so 
finely  and  subtilely  idealized  that  they  seemed  such 
as  we  may  see  at  any  moment,  and  everywhere ;  while 
still  there  was  the  indefinable  something  added,  or 
taken  away,  which  makes  all  the  difference  between 
sordid  life  and  an  earthly  paradise.  The  feeling  and 
sympathy  in  all  of  them  were  deep  and  true.  There 
was  the  scene,  that  comes  once  in  every  life,  of  the 
lover  winning  the  soft  and  pure  avowal  of  bashful  af- 
fection from  the  maiden  whose  slender  form  half  leans 
towards  his  arm,  half  shrinks  from  it,  we  know  not 
which.  There  was  wedded  affection  in  its  successive 
stages,  represented  in  a  series  of  delicately  conceived  ? 
designs,  touched  with  a  holy  fire,  that  burned  from 
youth  to  age  in  those  two  hearts,  and  gave  one  iden-' 
tical  beauty  to  the  faces  throughout  all  the  changes  of 
feature. 

There  was  a  drawing  of  an  infant's  shoe,  half  worn 
out,  with  the  airy  print  of  the  blessed  foot  within ;  a 
thing  that  would  make  a  mother  smile  or  weep  out 
of  the  very  depths  of  her  heart;  and  yet  an  actual 
mother  would  not  have  been  likely  to  appreciate  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM'S  STUDIO.  63 

poetry  of  the  little  shoe,  until  Miriam  revealed  it  to 
her.  It  was  wonderful,  the  depth  and  force  with 
which  the  above,  and  other  kindi*ed  subjects,  were  de- 
!  picted,  and  the  profound  significance  which  they  often 
.  acquired.  The  artist,  still  in  her  fresh  youth,  could 
not  probably  have  drawn  any  of  these  dear  and  rich 
experiences  from  her  own  life ;  unless,  perchance,  that 
first  sketch  of  all,  the  avowal  of  maiden  affection,  were 
.'  a  remembered  incident,  and  not  a  prophecy.  But  it  is 
more  delightful  to  believe  that,  from  first  to  last,  they 
were  the  productions  of  a  beautiful  imagination,  deal- 
ing with  the  warm  and  pure  suggestions  of  a  woman's 
heart,  and  thus  idealizing  a  truer  and  lovelier  picture 
of  the  life  that  belongs  to  woman,  than  an  actual  ac- 
quaintance with  some  of  its  hard  and  dusty  facts  could 
have  inspired.  So  considered,  the  sketches  intimated 
such  a  force  and  variety  of  imaginative  sympathies  as 
would  enable  Miriam  to  fill  her  life  richly  with  the 
bliss  and  suffering  of  womanhood,  however  barren  it 
might  individually  be. 

There  was  one  observable  point,  indeed,  betokening 
that  the  artist  relinquished,  for  her  personal  self,  the 
happiness  which  she  could  so  profoundly  appreciate 
for  others.  In  all  those  sketches  of  common  life,  and 
the  affections  that  .spiritualize  it,  a  figure  was  por- 
trayed apart :  now  it  peeped  between  the  branches  of 
a  shrubbery,  amid  which  two  lovers  sat ;  now  it  was 
looking  through  a  frosted  window,  from  the  outside, 
while  a  young  wedded  pair  sat  at  their  new  fireside 
within ;  and  once  it  leaned  from  a  chariot,  which  six 
horses  were  whirling  onward  in  pomp  and  pride,  and 
gazed  at  a  scene  of  humble  enjoyment  by  a  cottage- 
door.  Always  it  was  the  same  figure,  and  always  de- 
picted with  an  expression  of  deep   sadness;  and  in 


Digitized 


by  Google 


64  ROi\fANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

©very  instance,  sKghtly  as  they  were  brought  out,  the 
face  and  form  had  the  traits  of  Miriam's  own. 

"Do  you  like  these  sketches  better,  Donatollo ? ^ 
asked  Miriam. 

"  Yes,"  said  Donatello,  rather  doubtfully. 

"  Not  much,  I  fear,"  responded  she,  laughing.  **Aiid 
what  should  a  boy  like  you  —  a  Faun,  too  —  know 
about  the  joys  and  sorrows,  the  intertwining  light 
and  shadow,  of  human  life  ?  I  forgot  that  you  were 
a  Faun.  You  cannot  suffer  deeply ;  therefore  you 
can  but  half  enjoy.  Here,  now,  is  a  subject  which 
you  can  better  appreciate.'' 

The  sketch  represented  merely  a  rustic  dance,  but 
with  such  extravagance  of  fun  as  was  delightful  to  be- 
hold; and  here  there  was  no  drawback,  except  that 
strange  sigh  and  sadness  which  always  come  when  we 
are  merriest. 

"  I  am  going  to  paint  the  picture  in  oils,"  said  the 
artist ;  "  and  I  want  you,  Donatello,  for  the  wildest 
dancer  of  them  all.  Will  you  sit  for  me,  some  day? 
• —  or,  rather,  dance  for  me  ?  " 

"  Oh,  most  gladly,  signorina  1 "  exclaimed  Donatello. 
*•  See  ;  it  shall  be  like  this." 

And  forthwith  he  began  to  dance,  and  flit  about  the 
studio,  like  an  incarnate  sprite  of  jollity,  pausing  at 
last  on  the  extremity  of  one  toe,  as  if  that  were  the 
only  portion  of  himself  whereby  his  frisky  nature 
eould  come  in  contact  with  the  earth.  The  effect  in 
that  shadowy  chamber,  whence  the  artist  had  so  care* 
fully  excluded  the  sunshine,  was  as  enlivening  as  if 
one  bright  ray  had  contrived  to  shimmer  in  and  frolio 
around  the  walls,  and  finally  rest  just  in  the  centre  of 
the  floor. 

*^  That  was  admirable !  "  said  Miriam,  with  an  ap 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM'S  STUDIO.  65 

proving  smile.  "  If  I  can  catch  you  on  my  canvas,  it 
will  be  a  glorious  picture ;  only  I  am  afraid  you  will 
dance  out  of  it,  by  the  very  truth  of  the  representa- 
tion, just  when  I  shall  have  given  it  the  last  touch. 
We  will  try  it  one  of  these  days.  And  now,  to  reward 
you  for  that  jolly  exhibition,  you  shall  see  what  has 
been  shown  to  no  one  else." 

She  went  to  her  easel,  on  which  was  placed  a  pic- 
tore  with  its  back  turned  towards  the  spectator.  Re< 
versing  the  position,  there  appeared  the  portrait  of  a 
beautiful  woman,  such  as  one  sees  only  two  or  three, 
if  even  so  many  times,  in  all  a  lifetime  ;  so  beautiful, 
that  she  seemed  to  get  into  your  consciousness  and 
memory,  and  could  never  afterwards  be  shut  out,  but 
haunted  your  dreams,  for  pleasiu*e  or  for  pain  ;  hold- 
ing your  inner  realm  as  a  conquered  territorj^  though 
without  deigning  to  make  herself  at  home  there. 

She  was  very  youthful,  and  had  what  was  usually 
thought  to  be  a  Jewish  aspect ;  a  complexion  in  which 
there  was  no  roseate  bloom,  yet  neither  was  it  pale ; 
dark  eyes,  into  which  you  might  look  as  deeply  as  your 
glance  would  go,  and  still  be  conscious  of  a  depth  that 
you  had  not  soimded,  though  it  lay  open  to  the  day. 
She  had  black,  abundant  hair,  with  none  of  the  vidgar 
glossiness  of  other  women's  sable  locks ;  if  she  were 
really  of  Jewish  blood,  then  this  was  Jewish  hair,  and 
a  dark  glory  such  as  crowns  no  Christian  maiden's 
head.  Gazing  at  this  portrait,  you  saw  what  Eachel 
foight  have  been,  when  Jacob  deemed  her  worth  the 
,;ooing  seven  years,  and  seven  more ;  or  perchance  she 
might  ripen  to  be  what  Judith  was,  when  she  van- 
quished  Holofemes  with  her  beauty,  and  slew  him  for 
too  much  adoring  it. 

Miriam  watched  Donatello'f  cPQtempUtion  of  tl^ 


trot  VI. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


66  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

picture,  and  seeing  his  simple  capture,  a  smile  of  pleas- 
ure brightened  on  her  face,  mixed  with  a  little  scorn  ; 
at  least,  her  lips  curled,  and  her  eyes  gleamed,  as  if 
she  disdained  either  his  admiration  or  her  own  enjoy- 
ment of  it. 

"Then  you  like  the  picture,  Donatello?"  she  asked. 

"  Oh,  beyond  what  I  can  tell  I  "  he  answered.  "  So^ 
l>eautiful  I  —  so  beautiful ! " 

"  And  do  you  recognize  the  likeness  ?  " 

"  Signorina,"  exclaimed  Donatello,  turning  from  the 
picture  to  the  artist,  in  astonishment  that  she  should 
ask  the  question,  "  the  resemblance  is  as  little  to  be 
mistaken  as  if  you  had  bent  over  the  smooth  surface 
of  a  fountain,  and  possessed  the  witchcraft  to  call  forth 
the  image  that  you  made  there !     It  is  yourself !  " 

Donatello  said  the  truth ;  and  we  forbore  to  speak 
descriptively  of  Miriam's  beauty  earlier  in  our  narra- 
tive, because  we  foresaw  this  occasion  to  bring  it  per- 
haps more  forcibly  before  the  reader. 

We  know  not  whether  the  portrait  were  a  flattered 
likeness  ;  probably  not,  regarding  it  merely  as  the  de- 
lineation of  a  lovely  face ;  although  Miriam,  like  all 
self-painters,  may  have  endowed  herself  with  certain 
graces  whicli  other  eyes  might  not  discern.  Artists 
are  fond  of  painting  their  own  portraits ;  and,  in  Flor- 
ence, there  is  a  gallery  of  hundreds  of  them,  including 
the  most  illustrious,  in  all  of  which  there  are  autobi- 
ographical characteristics,  so  to  speak  ;  traits,  expres- 
sions, loftinesses,  and  amenities,  which  would  have  been 
invisible,  had  they  not  been  painted  from  within.  Yet 
their  reality  and  truth  are  none  the  less.  Miriam,  in 
like  manner,  had  doubtless  conveyed  some  of  the  inti- 
mate results  of  her  heart-knowledge  into  her  own  por- 
trait, and  p^haps  wished  to  try  whether  they  would 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM'S  STUDIO.  67 

be  perceptible  to  so  simple  and  natural  an  observer  as 
Donatello. 

"  Does  the  expression  please  you  ?  "  she  asked. 

"Yes,"  said  Donatello,  hesitatingly;  "if  it  would 
only  smile  so  like  the  sunshine  as  you  sometimes  do. 
No,  it  is  sadder  than  I  thought  at  first.  Cannot  you 
make  yourself  smile  a  little,  signorina?  " 

"  A  forced  smile  is  uglier  than  a  frown,"  said  Miriam, 
a  bright,  natural  smile  breaking  out  over  her  face  even 
as  she  spoke. 

"  Oh,  catch  it  now !  "  cried  Donatello,  clapping  his 
hands.  "  Let  it  shine  upon  the  picture  I  There !  it 
has  vanished  already !  And  you  are  sad  again,  very 
sad  ;  and  the  picture  gazes  sadly  forth  at  me,  as  if 
some  evil  had  befallen  it  in  the  little  time  since  I 
looked  last." 

"  How  perplexed  you  seem,  my  friend !  "  answered 
Miriam.  "  I  really  half  believe  you  are  a  Faim,  there 
is  such  a  mystery  and  terror  for  you  in  these  dark 
moods,  which  are  just  as  natural  as  daylight  to  us  peo- 
ple of  ordinary  mould.  I  advise  you,  at  all  events,  to 
look  at  other  faces  with  those  innocent  and  happy  eyes, 
and  never  more  to  gaze  at  mine  1  " 

"  You  speak  in  vain,"  replied  the  yoimg  man,  with 
a  deeper  emphasis  than  she  had  ever  before  heard  in 
his  voice ;  "  shroud  yourself  in  what  gloom  you  will,  I 
must  needs  follow  you." 

"Well,  well,  well,"  said  Miriam,  impatiently;  "but 
leave  me  now ;  for  to  speak  plainly,  my  good  friend, 
you  grow  a  little  wearisome.  I  walk  this  afternoon  in 
the  Borghese  grounds.  Meet  me  there,  if  it  suits  youi 
pleasure." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  VI. 

THE    virgin's    shrine. 

After  Donatello  had  left  the  studio,  Miriam  heiv 
self  came  forth,  and  taking  her  way  through  some 
of  the  intricacies  of  the  city,  entered  what  might  be 
called  either  a  widening  of  a  street,  or  a  small  piazza. 
The  neighborhood  comprised  a  baker's  oven,  emitting 
the  usual  fragrance  of  sour  bread ;  a  shoe-shop ;  a 
linen-draper's  shop  ;  a  pipe  and  cigar  shop  ;  a  lottery 
office ;  a  station  f  oi-  French  soldiers,  with  a  sentinel 
pacing  in  front;  and  a  fruit -stand,  at  which  a  Ko- 
man  matron  was  selling  the  dried  kernels  of  chest- 
nuts, wretched  little  figs,  and  some  bouquets  of  yester- 
day. A  church,  of  course,  was  near  at  hand,  the  fa- 
<jade  of  which  ascended  into  lofty  pinnacles,  whereon 
were  perched  two  or  three  winged  figures  of  stone, 
either  angelic  or  allegorical,  blowing  stone  trumpets 
in  close  vicinity  to  the  upper  windows  of  an  old  and 
shabby  palace.  This  palace  was  distinguished  by  a' 
feature  not  very  common  in  the  architecture  of  Roman 
edifices  ;  that  is  to  say,  a  mediaeval  tower,  square,  mas- ; 
sive,  lofty,  and  battlemented  and  machicolated  at  the  i 
summit. 

At  one  of  the  angles  of  the  battlements  stood  a 
shrine  of  the  Virgin,  such  as  we  see  everywhere  at  the 
street-comers  of  Rome,  but  seldom  or  never,  except 
in  this  solitary  instance,  at  a  height  above  the  ordi- 
nary level  of  men's  views  and  aspirations.    Connected 


Digitized 


by  Google 


HILDA'S  TOWER 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   VIRGIN'S  SHRINE.  69 

with  this  old  tower  and  its  lofty  shrine,  there  is  a 
legend  which  we  cannot  here  pause  to  tell ;  but  for 
centuries  a  lamp  has  been  burning  before  the  Virgin's 
image,  at  noon,  at  midnight,  and  at  all  hours  of  the 
twenty -four,  and  must  be  kept  burning  forever,  as 
long  as  the  tower  shall  stand;  or  else  the  tower  it- 
self, the  palace,  and  whatever  estate  belongs  to  it, 
shall  pass  from  its  hereditary  possessor,  in  accordance 
with  an  ancient  vow,  and  become  the  property  of  the 
Church. 

As  Miriam  approached,  she  looked  upward,  and 
saw,  —  not,  indeed,  the  flame  of  the  never-dying  lamp, 
which  was  swallowed  up  in  the  broad  sunlight  that 
brightened  the  shrine,  but  a  flock  of  white  doves, 
skimming,  fluttering,  and  wheeling  about  the  topmost 
height  of  the  tower,  their  silver  wings  flashing  in  the 
pure  transparency  of  the  air.  Several  of  them  sat  on 
the  ledge  of  the  upper  window,  pushing  one  another 
off  by  their  eager  struggle  for  this  favorite  station, 
and  all  tapping  their  beaks  and  flapping  their  wings 
tumultuously  against  the  panes ;  some  had  alighted  in 
the  street,  far  below,  but  flew  hastily  upward,  at  the 
sound  of  the  window  being  thrust  ajar,  and  opening  in 
the  middle,  on  rusty  hinges,  as  Roman  windows  do. 

A  fair  young  girl,  dressed  in  white,  showed  herself 
at  the  aperture  for  a  single  instant,  and  threw  forth 
as  much  as  her  two  small  hands  could  hold  of  some 
kind  of  food,  for  the  flock  of  eleemosynary  doves.  It 
seemed  greatly  to  the  taste  of  the  feathered  people ; 
for  they  tried  to  snatch  beakfuls  of  it  from  her  grasp, 
caught  it  in  the  air,  and  rushed  downward  after  it 
upon  the  pavement. 

"  What  a  pretty  scene  this  is,"  thought  Miriam,  with 
a  kindly  smile,  *^  and  how  like  a  dove  she  is  herself 


Digitized 


by  Google 


70  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

the  fair,  pure  creature  1  The  other  doves  know  her 
for  a  sister,  I  am  sure." 

Miriam  passed  beneath  the  deep  portal  of  the  pal^ 
ace,  and  turning  to  the  left,  began  to  mount  flight 
after  flight  of  a  staircase,  which,  for  the  loftiness  of 
its  aspiration,  was  worthy  to  be  Jacob's  ladder,  or,  at 
all  events,  the  staircase  of  the  Tower  of  Babel.  The 
city  bustle,  which  is  heard  even  in  Rome,  the  rumble 
of  wheels  over  the  imcomfortable  paving -stones,  the 
hard  harsh  cries  reechoing  in  the  high  and  narrow 
streets,  grew  faint  and  died  away ;  as  the  turmoil  of 
the  world  will  always  die,  if  we  set  our  faces  to  climb 
heavenward.  Higher,  and  higher  still ;  and  now, 
glancing  through  the  successive  windows  that  threv/  in 
their  narrow  light  upon  the  stairs,  her  view  stretched 
across  the  roofs  of  the  city,  unimpeded  even  by  the 
stateliest  palaces.  Only  the  domes  of  churches  as- 
cend into  this  airy  region,  and  hold  up  their  golden 
crosses  on  a  level  with  her  eye ;  except,  that,  out  of 
the  very  heart  of  Rome,  the  colmnn  of  Antoninus 
thrusts  itself  upward,  with  St.  Paul  upon  its  summit, 
the  sole  human  form  that  seems  to  have  kept  her  com- 
pany. 

Finally,  the  staircase  came  to  an  end;  save  that, 
«n  one  side  of  the  little  entry  where  it  terminated,  a 
ilight  of  a  dozen  steps  gave  access  to  the  roof  of  the 
tower  and  the  legendary  shrine.  On  the  other  side 
was  a  door,  at  which  Miriam  knocked,  but  rather  as  a 
friendly  announcement  of  her  presence  than  with  any 
doubt  of  hospitable  welcome;  for,  awaiting  no  re* 
sponse,  she  lifted  the  latch  and  entered. 

"  What  a  hermitage  you  have  found  for  yourself, 
dear  Hilda ! "  she  exclaimed.  *'  You  breathe  sweet 
air,  above  all  the  evil  scents  of  Rome ;  and  even  ao^ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   VIRGIN'S  SHRINK  71 

tn  your  maiden  elevation,  you  dwell  above  our  vanities 
and  passions,  our  moral  dust  and  mud,  with  the  doves 
and  the  angels  for  your  nearest  neighbors.  I  should 
not  wonder  if  the  Catholics  were  to  make  a  saint  of 
you,  like  your  namesake  of  old;  especially  as  you  have 
almost  avowed  yourself  of  their  religion,  by  under* 
taking  to  keep  the  lamp  alight  before  the  Virgin's 
shrine." 

"  No,  no,  Miriam  ! "  said  Hilda,  who  had  come  joy- 
fully forward  to  greet  her  friend.  "  You  must  not 
call  me  a  Catholic.  A  Christian  girl  —  even  a  daugh- 
ter of  the  Puritans  —  may  surely  pay  honor  to  the  idea 
of  divine  Womanhood,  without  giving  up  the  faith  of 
her  forefathers.  But  how  kind  you  are  to  climb  into 
my  dove-cote ! " 

"  It  is  no  trifling  proof  of  friendship,  indeed,"  an- 
swered Miriam;  "I  should  think  there  were  three 
hundred  stairs  at  least." 

*'  But  it  will  do  you  good,"  continued  Hilda.  *'  A 
height  of  some  fifty  feet  above  the  roofs  of  Rome  gives 
me  all  the  advantages  that  I  could  get  from  fifty 
miles  of  distance.  The  air  so  exhilarates  my  spiritfif, 
that  sometimes  I  feel  half  inclined  to  attempt  a  flight 
from  the  top  of  my  tower,  in  the  faith  that  I  should 
float  upward." 

"  Oh,  pray  don't  try  it !  "  said  Miriam,  laughing, 
**  If  it  should  turn  out  that  you  are  less  than  an  an- 
gel, you  would  find  the  stones  of  the  Roman  pavement 
very  hard ;  and  if  an  angel,  indeed,  I  am  afraid  you 
would  never  come  down  among  us  again." 

This  young  American  girl  was  an  example  of  the 
freedom  of  life  which  it  is  possible  for  a  female  artist 
to  enjoy  at  Rome.  She  dwelt  in  her  tower,  as  free  to 
descend  into  the  corrupted  atmosphere  of  the  city  be* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


72  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENI. 

neath,  as  one  of  her  companion  doves  to  fly  downward 
into  the  street ;  —  all  alone,  perfectly  independent,  un« 
der  her  own  sole  guardianship,  unless  watched  over  by 
the  Virgin,  whose  shrine  she  tended ;  doing  what  she 
liked  without  a  suspicion  or  a  shadow  upon  the  snowy 
whiteness  of  her  fame.  The  customs  of  artist  life 
bestow  such  liberty  upon  the  sex,  which  is  elsewhere 
restricted  within  so  much  narrower  limits ;  and  it  is 
perhaps  an  indication  that,  whenever  we  admit  women 
to  a  wider  scope  of  pursuits  and  professions,  we  must 
also  remove  the  shackles  of  our  present  conventional 
rules,  which  would  then  become  an  insufferable  re- 
straint on  either  maid  or  wife.  The  system  seems  to 
work  unexceptionably  in  Rome ;  and  in  many  other 
cases,  as  in  Hilda's,  purity  of  heart  and  life  are  al- 
lowed to  assert  themselves,  and  to  be  their  own  proof 
and  security,  to  a  degree  unknown  in  the  society  of 
other  cities. 

Hilda,  in  her  native  land,  had  early  shown  what  was 
pronounced  by  connoisseurs  a  decided  genius  for  the 
pictorial  art.  Even  in  her  school-days  ■^-  still  not  so 
very  distant  —  she  had  produced  sketches  that  were 
seized  upon  by  men  of  taste,  and  hoarded  as  among 
the  choicest  treasures  of  their  portfolios ;  scenes  deli- 
cately imagined,  lacking,  perhaps,  the  reality  which 
comes  only  from  a  close  acquaintance  with  life,  but  so 
softly  touched  with  feeling  and  fancy,  that  you  seemed 
to  be  looking  at  humanity  with  angels'  eyes.  With 
years  and  experience  she  might  be  expected  to  attain 
a  darker  and  more  forcible  touch,  which  would  impart 
to  her  designs  the  relief  they  needed.  Had  Hilda  re- 
mained in  her  own  country,  it  is  not  improbaMe  that 
she  might  have  produced  original  works  worthy  to 
hang  in  that  gallery  of  native  art  which,  we  hope,  is 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  VIRGIN'S  SHRINE.  73 

destined  to  extend  its  rich  length  through  many  fut- 
ure centuries.  An  orphan,  however,  without  near  rela- 
tives, and  possessed  of  a  little  property,  she  had  found 
it  within  her  possibilities  to  come  to  Italy ;  that  cen- 
tral clime,  whither  the  eyes  and  the  heart  of  every  ar- 
tist turn,  as  if  pictures  could  not  be  made  to  glow  in 
any  other  atmosphere,  as  if  statues  could  not  assume 
grace  and  expression,  save  in  that  land  of  whitest 
marble. 

Hilda's  gentle  courage  had  brought  her  safely  over 
land  and  sea ;  her  mild,  unflagging  perseverance  had 
made  a  place  for  her  in  the  famous  city,  even  like  a 
flower  that  finds  a  chink  for  itself,  and  a  little  earth 
to  grow  in,  on  whatever  ancient  wall  its  slender  roots 
may  fasten.  Here  she  dwelt,  in  her  tower,  possessing 
a  friend  or  two  in  Rome,  but  no  home  companion  ex^ 
cept  the  flock  of  doves,  whose  cote  was  in  a  ruinous 
chamber  contiguous  to  her  own.  They  soon  became 
as  familiar  with  the  fair-haired  Saxon  girl  r^  if  she 
were  a  born  sister  of  their  brood;  and  her  custom- 
ary white  robe  bore  such  an  analogy  to  their  snowy 
plumage  that  the  confraternity  of  artists  called  Hilda 
the  Dove,  and  recognized  her  aerial  apartment  as  tlie 
Dove-cote.  And  while  the  other  doves  flew  far  and 
wide  in  quest  of  what  was  good  for  them,  Hilda  like- 
wise spread  her  wings,  and  sought  such  ethereal  and 
imaginative  sustenance  as  God  ordains  for  creatures 
of  her  kind. 

We  know  not  whether  the  result  of  her  Italian  stud- 
ies, so  far  as  it  could  yet  be  seen,  will  be  accepted  as 
a  good  or  desirable  one.  Certain  it  is,  that  since  her 
arrival  in  the  pictorial  land,  Hilda  seemed  to  have 
entirely  lost  the  impulse  of  original  design,  which 
brought  her  thither.     No  doubt  the  girl's  early  dreams 


Digitized 


by  Google 


74  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

'  had  been  of  sending  forms  and  hues  of  beauty  into 
the  visible  world  out  of  her  own  mind  ;  of  compelling 
scenes  of  poetry  and  history  to  live  before  men's  eyes, 
through  conceptions  and  by  methods  individual  to  her- 
self. But  more  and  more,  as  she  grew  familiar  with 
the  miracles  of  art  that  enrich  so  many  galleries  in 
Kome,  Hilda  had  ceased  to  consider  herself  as  an  orig  < 
inal  artist.  No  wonder  that  this  change  should  have  ■ 
befallen  her.  She  was  endowed  with  a  deep  and  sen 
sitive  faculty  of  appreciation ;  she  had  the  gift  of  dis- 
cerning and  worshipping  excellence  in  a  most  unusual 
measure.  No  other  person,  it  is  probable,  recognized 
so  adequately,  and  enjoyed  with  such  deep  delight,  the 
pictorial  wonders  that  were  here  displayed.  She  saw 
—  no,  not  saw,  but  felt  —  through  and  through  a  pic- 
ture ;  she  bestowed  upon  it  all  the  warmth  and  rich- 
ness of  a  woman's  sympathy ;  not  by  any  intellectual 
effort,  but  by  this  strength  of  heart,  and  this  guiding 
light  of  sympathy,  she  went  straight  to  the  central 
point,  in  which  the  master  had  conceived  his  worji. 
Thus,  she  viewed  it,  as  it  were,  with  his  own  eyes,  and 
hence  her  comprehension  of  any  picture  that  interested 
her  was  perfect. 

This  power  and  depth  of  appreciation  depended 
paiily  upon  Hilda's  physical  organization,  which  was 
at  once  healthful  and  exquisitely  delicate ;  and,  con- 
nected with  this  advantage,  she  had  a  command  of 
hand,  a  nicety  and  force  of  touch,  which  is  an  endow- 
ment separate  from  pictorial  genius,  though  indispen- 
sable to  its  exercise. 

It  has  probably  happened  in  many  other  instances, 
as  it  did  in  Hilda's  case,  that  she  ceased  to  aim  at 
original  achievement  in  consequence  of  the  very  gifts 
which  so  exquisitely  fitted  her  to  profit  by  familiarity 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   VIRGIN'S  SHRINE.  T5 

with  the  works  of  the  mighty  old  masters.  Reverenc- 
ing  these  wonderful  men  so  deeply,  she  was  too  grate- 
ful for  all  they  bestowed  upon  her,  too  loyal,  too  hum- 
ble, in  their  awful  presence,  to  think  of  enrolling 
herself  in  their  society.  Beholding  the  miracles  of 
beauty  which  they  had  achieved,  the  world  seemed  al- 
ready rich  enough  in  original  designs,  and  nothing 
more  was  so  desirable  as  to  diffuse  those  self -same 
beauties  more  widely  among  mankind.  All  the  youth- 
ful hopes  and  ambitions,  the  fanciful  ideas  which  she 
had  brought  from  home,  of  great  pictures  to  be  con- 
ceived in  her  feminine  mind,  were  flung  aside,  and,  so 
far  as  those  most  intimate  with  her  could  discern,  re- 
hnquished  without  a  sigh.  All  that  she  would  hence- 
forth attempt  —  and  that  most  reverently,  not  to  say 
religiously  —  was  to  catch  and  reflect  some  of  the 
glory  which  had  been  shed  upon  canvas  from  the  im- 
mortal pencils  of  old. 

So  Hilda  became  a  copyist :  in  the  Pinacotheca  of 
the  Vatican,  in  the  galleries  of  the  Pamfili-Doria  pal- 
ace, the  Borghese,  the  Corsini,  the  Scfiarra,  her  easel 
was  set  up  before  many  a  famous  picture  by  Guido, 
Domenichino,  Raphael,  and  the  devout  painters  of 
earlier  schools  than  thege.  Other  artists  and  visitors 
from  foreign  lands  beheld  the  slender,  girlish  figure 
in  front  of  some  world-known  work,  absorbed,  uncon- 
scious of  everything  around  her,  seeming  to  live  only 
in  what  she  sought  to  do.  They  smiled,  no  doubt,  at 
the  audacity  which  led  her  to  dream  of  cop3ring  those 
mighty  achievements.  But,  if  they  paused  to  look 
over  her  shoulder,  and  had  sensibility  enough  to  un- 
derstand what  was  before  their  eyes,  they  soon  felt 
inclined  to  believe  that  the  spirits  of  the  old  masters 
irere  hovering  over  Hilda,  and  guiding  her  delicate 


Digitized 


by  Google 


76  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

white  hand.  In  truth,  from  whatever  realm  of  bBsa 
and  many-colored  beauty  those  spirits  might  descend, 
it  would  have  been  no  unworthy  errand  to  help  so 
gentle  and  pure  a  worshipper  of  their  genius  in  giving 
tho  last  divine  touch  to  her  repetitions  of  their  works. 

Her  copies  were  indeed  marvellous.  Accuracy  was 
not  the  phrase  for  them  ;  a  Chinese  copy  is  accurate. 
Hilda's  had  that  evanescent  and  ethereal  life  —  that 
flitting  fragrance,  as  it  were,  of  the  originals  —  which 
it  is  as  difficult  to  catch  and  retain  as  it  would  be  for 
a  sculptor  to  get  the  very  movement  and  varying  color 
of  a  living  man  into  his  marble  bust.  Only  by  watch- 
ing the  efforts  of  the  most  skilful  copyists —  men  who 
spend  a  lifetime,  as  some  of  them  do,  in  multiplying 
copies  of  a  single  picture  —  and  observing  how  invari- 
ably they  leave  out  just  the  indefinable  charm  that  in- 
volves the  last,  inestimable  value,  can  we  understand 
the  difficulties  of  the  task  which  they  undertake. 

It  was  not  Hilda's  general  practice  to  attempt  repro- 
ducing the  whole  of  a  great  picture,  but  to  select  some 
high,  noble,  and .  delicate  portion  of  it,  in  which  the 
spirit  and  essence  of  the  picture  culminated :  the  V^ir- 
gin's  celestial  sorrow,  for  example,  or  a  hovering  an- 
gel, imbued  with  immortal  ligbt,  or  a  aaint  with  the 
glow  of  heaven  in  his  dying  face,  —  and  these  woidd 
be  rendered  with  her  whole  soul.  If  a  picture  had 
darkened  into  an  indistinct  shadow  through  time  and 
neglect,  or  had  been  injured  by  cleaning,  or  retouched 
by  some  profane  hand,  she  seemed  to  possess  the 
faculty  of  seeing  it  in  its  pristine  glory.  The  copy 
would  come  from  her  hands  with  what  the  beholder 
felt  must  be  the  light  which  the  old  master  had  left 
upon  the  original  in  bestowing  his  final  and  most 
ethereal  touch.     In  some  instances  even  (at  least,  so 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   VIRGIN'S  SHRINE.  77 

tiiose  believed  who  best  appreciated  Hilda*s  power  and 
sensibility)  she  had  been  enabled  to  execute  what  the 
great  master  had  conceived  in  his  imagination,  but  had 
not  so  perfectly  succeeded  in  putting  upon  canvas ;  a 
result  surely  not  impossible  when  such  depth  of  sympa* 
thy  as  she  possessed  was  assisted  by  the  delicate  skill 
and  accuracy  of  her  slender  hand.  In  such  cases  the 
girl  was  but  a  finer  instrument,  a  more  exquisitely  ef- 
fective piece  of  mechanism,  by  the  help  of  which  the 
spirit  of  some  great  departed  painter  now  first  achieved 
his  ideal,  centuries  after  his  own  eai'thly  hand,  that 
other  tool,  had  turned  to  dust. 

Not  to  describe  her  as  too  much  a  wonder,  however, 
Hilda,  or  the  Dove,  as  her  well-wishers  half  laughingly 
delighted  to  call  her,  had  been  pronounced  by  good 
judges  incomparably  the  best  coppst  in  Rome.  After 
minute  examination  of  her  works,  the  most  skilful 
urtists  declared  that  she  had  been  led  to  her  results 
by  following  precisely  the  same  process  step  by  step 
through  which  the  original  painter  had  trodden  to  the 
development  of  his  idea.  Other  copyists  —  if  such 
they  are  worthy  to  be  called  —  atfempt  only  a  super- 
ficial imitation.  Copies  of  the  old  masters  in  this 
sense  are  produced  by  thousands  ;  there  are  artists,  as 
we  have  said,  who  spend  their  lives  in  painting  the 
works,  or  perhaps  one  single  work,  of  one  illustrious 
painter  over  and  over  again  :  thus  they  convert  them- 
selves into  Giiido  machines,  or  Raphaelic  machines. 
Their  performances,  it  is  true,  are  often  wonderfully 
deceptive  to  a  careless  eye ;  but  working  entirely  from 
rhe  outside,  and  seeking  only  to  reproduce  the  surface, 
these  men  are  sure  to  leave  out  that  indefinable  noth- 
ing,  that  inestimable  something,  that  constitutes  the 
life  and  soul  through  which  the  picture  gets  its  ini* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


78  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENu 

mortality.  Hilda  was  no  such  machine  as  this ;  she 
wrought  religiously,  and  therefore  wrought  a  miracle. 

It  strikes  us  that  there  is  something  far  higher  and 
nobler  in  all  this,  in  her  thus  sacrificing  herself  to  the 
devout  recognition  of  the  highest  excellence  in  art, 
than  there  would  have  been  in  cultivating  her  not 
inconsiderable  share  of  talent  for  the  production  of 
works  from  her  own  ideas.  She  might  have  set  up 
for  herself,  and  won  no  ignoble  name ;  she  might  have 
helped  to  fill  the  already  crowded  and  cumbered  world 
with  pictures,  not  destitute  of  merit,  but  falling  shorty 
if  by  ever  so  little,  of  the  best  that  has  been  done ;  she 
might  thus  have  gratified  some  tastes  that  were  in- 
capable of  appreciating  Raphael.  But  this  could  bo 
done  only  by  lowering  the  standard  of  art  to  the  com- 
prehension of  the  spectator.  She  chose  the  better  and 
loftier  and  more  unselfish  part,  laying  her  individual 
hopes,  her  fame,  her  prospects  of  enduring  remem. 
brance,  at  the  feet  of  those  great  departed  ones,  whom 
she  so  loved  and  venerated  ;  and  therefore  the  world 
was  the  richer  for  this  feeble  girl. 

Since  the  beauty  and  glory  of  a  great  picture  are 
confined  within  itself,  she  won  out  that  glory  by  pa- 
tient faith  and  self-devotion,  and  multiplied  it  for 
mankind.  From  the  dark,  chill  comer  of  a  gallery,  — 
trom  some  curtained  chapel  in  a  church,  where  the 
light  came  seldom  a,nd  aslant,  —  from  the  prince's 
carefully  guarded  cabinet,  where  not  one  eye  in  thou- 
sands was  permitted  to  behold  it,  —  she  brought  the 
wondrous  picture  into  daylight,  and  gave  all  its  magio 
splendor  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  world.  Hilda's  fac- 
ulty of  genuine  admiration  is  one  of  the  rarest  to  be 
found  in  human  nature  ;  and  let  us  try  to  recompense 
her  in  kind  by  admiring  her  generous  self-surrender, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   VIRGIN'S  SBRINE.  79 

lad  her  brave,  humble  magnanunity  in  choosing  to  be 
the  handmaid  of  those  old  magicians,  instead  of  a 
minor  enchantress  within  a  circle  of  her  own. 

The  handmaid  of  Raphael,  whom  she  loved  with  a 
virgin's  love !  Would  it  have  been  worth  Hilda's 
while  to  relinquish  this  office  for  the  sake  of  giving 
the  world  a  picture  or  two  which  it  would  call  orig- 
inal ;  pretty  fancies  of  snow  and  moonlight ;  the  coun* 
terpart  in  picture  of  so  many  feminine  achievements 
in  literature  I 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHArTEB  VH 

BEATRICE. 

Miriam  was  glad  to  find  the  Dove  in  her  turret 
home  ;  for  being  endowed  with  an  infinite  activity- 
and  taking  exquisite  delight  in  the  sweet  labor  of 
which  her  life  was  full,  it  was  Hilda's  practice  to  flee 
abroad  betimes,  and  haunt  the  giEdleries  till  dusk. 
Happy  were  those  (but  they  were  very  few)  whom  she 
ever  chose  to  be  the  companions  of  her  day ;  they  saw 
the  art-treasures  of  Rome,  under  her  guidance,  as  they 
had  never  seen  them  before.  Not  that  Hilda  could 
dissertate,  or  talk  learnedly  about  pictures ;  she  would 
probably  have  been  puzzled  by  the  technical  terms  of 
her  own  art.  Not  that  she  had  much  to  say  about 
what  she  most  profoundly  admired ;  but  even  her  si- 
lent sympathy  was  so  powerful  that  it  drew  your  own 
along  with  it,  endowing  you  with  a  second-sight  that 
enabled  you  to  see  excellences  with  almost  the  depth 
and  delicacy  of  her  own  perceptions. 

All  the  Anglo-Saxon  denizens  of  Rome,  by  this  time^  * 
knew  Hilda  by  sight.  Unconsciously,  the  poor  child 
had  become  one  of  the  spectacles  of  the  Eternal  City," 
and  was  often  pointed  out  to  strangers,  sitting  at  her 
easel  among  the  wild-bearded  young  men,  the  white- 
haired  old  ones,  and  the  shabbily  dressed,  painfully 
plain  women,  who  make  up  the  throng  of  copyists. 
The  old  custodes  knew  her  well,  and  watched  over  her 
as  their  own  child.     Sometimes  a  young  artist,  instead 


Digitized 


by  Google 


BEATRICE.  81 

of  going  on  with  a  copy  of  the  picture  before  which  he 
kid  placed  his  easel,  would  enrich  his  canvas  with  :ui 
original  portrait  of  Hilda  at  her  work.  A  lovelier  sub* 
ject  could  not  have  been  selected,  nor  one  which  re- 
quired nicer  skill  and  insight  in  doing  it  anything  like 
justice.  She  was  pretty  at  all  times,  in  our  native 
New  England  style,  with  her  light-brown  ringlets,  her 
delicately  tinged,  but  healthful  cheek,  her  sensitive, 
intelligent,  yet  most  feminine  and  kindly  face.  But, 
every  few  moments,  this  pretty  and  girlish  face  grew 
beautiful  and  striking,  as  some  inward  thought  and 
feeling  brightened,  rose  to  the  surface,  and  then,  as  it 
were,  passed  out  of  sight  again ;  so  that,  taking  into 
view  this  constantly  recurring  change,  it  really  seemed 
as  if  Hilda  were  only  visible  by  the  sunshine  of  her 
ftoul. 

In  other  respects,  she  was  a  good  subject  for  a  por- 
trait, being  distinguished  by  a  gentle  picturesqueness, 
which  was  perhaps  unconsciously  bestowed  by  some 
minute  peculiarity  of  dress,  such  as  artists  seldom  fail 
to  assume.  The  effect  was  to  make  her  appear  like 
an  inhabitant  of  picture-land,  a  partly  ideal  creature, 
not  to  be  handled,  nor  even  approached  too  closely. 
In  her  feminine  self,  Hilda  was  natural,  and  of  pleas-  - 
ant  deportment,  endowed  with  a  mild  cheerfulness  of 
temper,  not  overflowing  with  animal  spirits,  but  never 
long  despondent.  There  was  a  certain  simplicity  that 
made  every  one  her  friend,  but  it  was  combined  with  a 
subtile  attribute  of  reserve,  that  insensibly  kept  those 
at  a  distance  who  were  not  suited  to  her  sphere. 

Miriam  was  the  dearest  friend  whom  she  had  ever 
known.  Being  a  year  or  two  the  elder,  of  longer  ac- 
quaintance with  Italy,  and  better  fitted  to  deal  with 
its  crafty  and  selfish  inhabitants,  she  had  helped  Hilda 

VOL.    VI. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


62  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

to  arrange  her  way  of  life,  and  had  encouraged  h^T 
through  those  first  weeks,  when  Rome  is  30  dreary  tat 
every  new-comer/ 

^*But  how  lucky  that  you  are  at  home  to-day," 
said  Miriam,  continuing  the  conversation  which  was 
begun,  many  pages  hack.  *'I  hardly  hoped  to  find 
you,  though  I  had  a  favor  to  ask,  —  a  commission  to 
put  into  your  charge.     But  what  picture  is  this  ?  " 

"  See ! "  said  Hilda,  taking  her  friend's  hand,  and 
leading  her  in  front  of  the  easel.  "I  wanted  your 
opinion  of  it." 

"  If  you  have  really  suceeeded,"  observed  Miriam, 
recognizing  the  picture  at  the  first  glance,  "  it  will  be 
the  greatest  miracle  you  have  yet  achieved." 

The  picture  represented  simply  a  female  head;  a 
very  youthful,  girlish,  perfectly  beautiful  face,  envel- 
oped in  white  drapery,  from  beneath  which  strayed  a 
lock  or  two  of  what  seemed  a  rich,  though  hidden  laxt 
uriance  of  auburn  hair.  The  eyes  were  large  and 
brown,  and  met  those  of  the  spectator,  but  evidently 
with  a  strange,  ineffectual  effort  to  escape.  There 
was  a  little  redness  about  the  eyes,  very  slightly  indi- 
cated, so  that  you  would  question  whether  or  no  the 
girl  had  been  weeping.  The  whole  face  was  quiet ; 
there  was  no  distortion  or  disturbance  of  any  single 
feature ;  nor  was  it  easy  to  see  why  the  expression 
was  not  cheerful,  or  why  a  single  touch  of  the  artist's 
pencil  should  not  brighten  it  into  joyousness.  But, 
in  fact,  it  was  the  very  saddest  picture  ever  painted 
or  conceived;  it  involved  an  unfathomable  depth  of 
sorrow,  the  sense  of  which  came  to  the  observer  by  a 
sort  of  intuition.  It  was  a  sorrow  that  removed  this 
beautiful  girl  out  of  the  sphere  of  humanity,  and  set 
her  in  a  far-off  region,  the  remoteness  of  which  — 


Digitized 


by  Google 


BEATRICE.  83 

while  yet  her  face  is  so  close  before  us  —  makes  us 
shiver  as  at  a  spectre. 

"  Yes,  Hilda,"  said  her  friend,  after  closely  examin- 
ing the  picture,  "  you  have  done  nothing  else  so  won- 
derful as  this.  But  by  what  unheard-of  solicitations  or 
secret  interest  have  you  obtained  leave  to  copy  Guido's 
Beatrice  Cenci  ?  It  is  an  unexamplied  favor ;  and  the 
impossibility  of  getting  a  genuine  copy  has  filled  the 
Roman  picture-shops  with  Beatrices,  gay,  grievous,  or 
coquettish,  but  never  a  true  one  among  them." 

"  There  has  been  one  exquisite  copy,  I  have  heard," 
said  Hilda,  "  by  an  artist  capable  of  appreciating  the 
spirit  of  the  picture.  It  was  Thompson,  who  brought 
it  away  piecemeal,  being  forbidden  (like  the  rest  of 
us)  to  set  up  his  easel  before  it.  As  for  me,  I  knew 
the  Prince  Barberini  would  be  deaf  to  all  entreaties ; 
80  I  had  no  resource  but  to  sit  down  before  the  pic- 
ture, day  after  day,  and  let  it  sink  into  my  heart.  I 
do  believe  it  is  now  photographed  there.  It  is  a  sad 
face  to  keep  so  close  to  one's  heart ;  only,  what  is  so 
very  beautiful  can  never  be  quite  a  pain.  Well ;  after 
8tud3ring  it  in  this  way,  I  know  not  how  many  times,  I 
came  home,  and  have  done  my  best  to  transfer  the 
image  to  canvas." 

"  Here  it  is  then,"  said  Miriam,  contemplating  Hil- 
da's work  with  great  interest  and  delight,  mixed  with 
the  painful  sympathy  that  the  picture  excited.  "  Ev- 
erywhere we  see  oil-paintings,  crayon-sketches,  cameos, 
engravings,  lithographs,  pretending  to  be  Beatrice,  and 
representing  the  poor  girl  with  blubbered  eyes,  a  leer 
of  coquetry,  a  merry  look  as  if  she  were  dancing,  a 
piteous  look  as  if  she  were  beaten,  and  twenty  other 
modes  of  fantastic  mistake.  But  here,  is  Guido's  very 
Beatrice ;  she  that  slept  in  the  dungeon,  and  awoke. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


84  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

betimes,  to  ascend  the  scaffold.  And  now  that  you 
have  done  it,  Hilda,  can  you  interpret  what  the  feel- 
ing  is,  that  gives  this  picture  such  a  mysterious  force  ? 
For  my  part,  tliough  deeply  sensible  of  its  influence,  I 
cannot  seize  it." 

'^  Nor  can  I,  in  words,"  replied  her  friend.  **  But 
while  I  was  painting  her,  I  felt  all  the  time  as  if  she 
were  trying  to  escape  from  my  gaze.  She  knows  that 
her  sorrow  is  so  strange  and  so  immense,  that  she 
ought  to  be  solitary  forever,  both  for  the  world's  sake 
and  her  own ;  and  this  is  the  reason  we  feel  such  a  dis« 
tance  between  Beatrice  and  ourselves,  even  when  our 
eyes  meet  hers.  It  is  infinitely  heart-breaking  to  meet 
her  glance,  and  to  feel  that  nothing  can  be  done  to 
help  or  comfort  her ;  neither  does  she  ask  help  or  com- 
fort, knowing  the  hopelessness  of  her  case  better  than 
we  do.  She  is  a  fallen  angel,  —  fallen,  and  yet  sin- 
less; and  it  is  only  this  depth  of  sorrow,  with  its 
weight  and  darkness,  that  keeps  her  down  upon  earth, 
and  brings  her  within  our  view  even  while  it  sets  her 
beyond  our  reach." 

"  You  deem  her  sinless  ?  "  asked  Miriam  ;  "  that  is 
not  so  plain  to  me.  If  I  can  pretend  to  see  at  all  into 
that  dim  region,  whence  she  gazes  so  strangely  and 
sadly  at  us,  Beatrice's  own  conscience  does  not  acquit 
her  of  something  evil,  and  never  to  be  forgiven !  " 

"  Sorrow  so  black  as  hers  oppresses  her  very  nearly 
as  sin  would,"  said  Hilda. 

**  Then,"  inquired  Miriam,  "  do  you  think  that  there 
was  no  sin  in  the  deed  for  which  she  suffered  ?  " 

"Ah!"  replied  Hilda,  shuddering,  "I  really  had 
quite  forgotten  Beatrice's  history  and  was  thinking  of 
her  only  as  the  picture  seems  to  reveal  her  character. 
Yes,  yes ;  it  was  terrible  guilt,  an  inexpiable  crime, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


GUIDO'S  BEATRICE  CENCI 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


BEATRICE.  86 

and  she  feels  it  to  be  so.  Therefore  it  is  that  the  f or^ 
lorn  creature  so  longs  to  elude  our  eyes,  and  forever 
vanish  away  into  nothingness !     Her  doom  is  just  I " 

^^  O  Hilda,  your  innocence  is  like  a  sharp  steel 
sword  !  "  exclaimed  her  friend.  "  Your  judgments 
are  often  terribly  severe,  though  you  seem  all  made  up 
of  gentleness  and  mercy.  Beatrice's  sin  may  not  have 
been  so  great :  perhaps  it  was  no  sin  at  all,  but  the 
best  virtue  possible  in  the  circumstances.  If  she 
viewed  it  as  a  sin,  it  may  have  been  because  her  na- 
ture was  too  feeble  for  the  fate  imposed  upon  her. 
Ah ! "  continued  Miriam,  passionately,  ^^  if  I  could 
only  get  within  her  consciousness !  —  if  I  could  but 
clasp  Beatrice  Cenci's  ghost,  and  draw  it  into  myself  I 
I  would  give  my  life  to  know  whether  she  thought 
herself  innocent,  or  the  one  great  criminal  since  time 
began." 

As  Miriam  gave  utterance  to  these  words,  Hilda 
looked  from  the  picture  into  her  face,  and  was  startled 
to  observe  that  her  friend's  expression  had  become  al- 
most exactly  that  of  the  portrait ;  as  if  her  passionate 
wish  and  struggle  to  penetrate  poor  Beatrice's  mystery 
had  been  successful. 

"  Oh,  for  Heaven's  sake,  Miriam,  do  not  look  so  !  '^ 
she  cried.  *'  What  an  actress  you  are  !  And  I  never 
guessed  it  before.  Ah !  now  you  are  yourself  again  ! " 
she  added,  kissing  her.  "Leave  Beatrice  to  me  in 
future." 

"  Cover  up  your  magical  picture,  then,"  replied  her 
friend,  "else  I  never  can  look  away  from  it.  It  is 
strange,  dear  Hilda,  how  an  innocent,  delicate,  white 
soul  like  yours  has  been  able  to  seize  the  subtle  mys* 
tery  of  this  portrait ;  as  you  surely  must,  in  order  to 
reproduce  it  so  perfectly.     "Well ;  we  will  not  talk  of 


Digitized 


by  Google 


86  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

it  any  more.  Do  you  know,  I  have  come  to  you  this 
morning  on  a  small  matter  of  business.  Will  you  uii- 
dertake  it  for  me  ?  " 

"Oh,  certainly,"  said  Hilda,  laughing;  "if  you 
choose  to  trust  mo  with  business." 

"  Nay,  it  is  not  a  niatter  of  any  difficulty,"  answered 
Miriam ;  "  merely  to  take  charge  of  this  packet,  and 
keep  it  for  me  awhile." 

"  But  why  not  keep  it  yourself  ?  "  asked  Hilda. 

"Partly  because  it  will  be  safer  in  your  charge," 
said  her  friend.  "  I  am  a  careless  sort  of  person  in 
ordinary  thing's  ;  while  you,  for  all  you  dwell  so  high 
above  the  world,  have  certain  little  housewifely  ways 
of  accuracy  and  order.  The  packet  is  of  some  slight 
importance ;  and  yet,  it  may  be,  I  shall  not  ask  you 
for  it  again.  In  a  week  or  two,  you  know,  I  am  leav- 
ing Rome.  You,  setting  at  defiance  the  malarial  fever, 
mean  to  stay  here  and  haunt  your  beloved  galleries 
through  the  summer.  Now,  four  months  hence,  un- 
less you  hear  more  from  me,  I  would  have  you  deliver 
the  packet  according  to  its  address." 

Hilda  read  the  direction ;  it  was  to  Signore  Luoa 
Barboni,  at  the  Palazzo  Cenci,  third  piano. 

"I  wiU  deliver  it  with  my  own  hand,"  said  she, 
"precisely  four  months  from  to-day,  unless  you  bid 
me  to  the  contrary.  Perhaps  I  shall  meet  the  ghost 
of  Beatrice  in  that  grim  old  palace  of  her  forefathers." 

"In  that  case,"  rejoined  Miriam,  "do  not  fail  to 
speak  to  her,  and  try  to  win  her  confidence.  Poor 
thing!  she  would  be  all  the  better  for  pouring  her 
heart  out  freely,  and  would  be  glad  to  do  it,  if  she 
were  sure  of  sympathy.  It  irks  my  brain  and  heart  to 
think  of  her,  all  shut  up  within  herself."  She  withr 
drew  the  cloth  that  Hilda  had  drawn  over  the  picture^ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


BEATRICE.  8> 

and  took  another  long  look  at  it,  —  "  Poor  sister  Bea- 
trice !  for  she  was  still  a  woman,  Hilda,  still  a  sister, 
be  her  sin  or  sorrow  what  they  might.  How  well  you 
have  done  it,  Hilda !  I  know  not  whether  Ghiido  will 
thank  you,  or  be  jealous  of  your  rivalship." 

"Jealous,  indeed!"  exclaimed  Hilda.  "If  Guide 
had  not  wrought  through  me,  my  pains  would  have 
been  thrown  away." 

"After  all,"  reff^med  Miriam,  "if  a  woman  had 
painted  the  original  picture,  there  might  have  been 
something  in  it  which  we  miss  now.  I  have  a  great 
mind  to  undertake  a  copy  myself,  and  try  to  give  it 
what  it  lacks.  Well;  good -by.  But,  stay!  I  am 
going  for  a  little  airing  to  the  grounds  of  the  Villa 
Borghese  this  afternoon.  You  will  think  it  very  fool- 
ish, but  I  always  feel  the  safer  in  your  company, 
Hilda,  slender  little  maiden  as  you  are.  Will  you 
come?" 

**  Ah,  not  to-day,  dearest  Miriam,"  she  replied ;  "  I 
have  set  my  heart  on  giving  another  touch  or  two  to 
thLs  picture,  and  shall  not  stir  abroad  till  nearly  sun- 
set." 

**  Farewell,  then,"  said  her  visitor.  "  I  leave  you  in 
your  dove-cote.  What  a  sweet,  strange  life  you  lead 
ihere;  conversing  with  the  souls  of  the  old  masters, 
feeding  and  fondling  your  sister-doves,  and  trimming 
the  Virgin's  lamp !  Hilda,  do  you  ever  pray  to  the 
(  Virgin  while  you  tend  her  shrine  ?  " 

"  Sometimes  I  have  been  moved  to  do  so,"  replied 
the  Dove,  blushing,  and  lowering  her  eyes ;  "  she  was 
a  woman  once.     Do  you  think  it  would  be  wrong  ?  " 

**Nay,  that  is  for  you  to  judge,"  said  Miriam ;  "but 
when  you  pray  next,  dear  friend,  remember  me  1 " 

She  went  down  the  long  descent  of  the  lower  stair* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


88  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

case,  and  just  as  she  reached  the  street  the  flock  of 
doves  again  took  their  hurried  flight  from  the  pave- 
ment to  the  topmost  window.  She  threw  her  eyes 
upward  and  beheld  them  hovering  about  Hilda's  head ; 
for,  after  her  friend's  departure,  the  girl  had  been 
more  impressed  than  before  by  something  very  sad 
and  troubled  in  her  manner.  She  was,  therefore, 
leaning  forth  from  her  airy  abode,  and  flinging  down 
a  kind,  maidenly  kiss,  and  a  gesture  of  farewell,  in 
the  hope  that  tliese  might  alight  upon  Miriam's  heart, 
and  comfort  its  unknown  sorrow  a  little.  Kenyon  the 
sculptor,  who  chanced  to  be  passing  the  head  of  the 
street,  took  note  of  that  ethereal  kiss,  and  wished  that 
he  could  have  caught  it  in  the  air  and  got  Hilda's 
leave  to  keep  it. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  Vm. 

THE  SUBURBAN  VILLA. 

DoNATELLO,  while  it  was  still  a  doubtful  question 
lietwixt  afternoon  and  morning,  set  forth  to  keep  the 
aopointment  which  Miriam  had  carelessly  tendered 
him  in  the  grounds  of  the  Villa  Borghese. 

The  entrance  to  these  grounds  (as  all  my  readers 
know,  for  everybody  nowadays  has  been  in  Rome)  is 
just  outside  of  the  Porta  del  Popolo.  Passing  be- 
neath that  not  very  impressive  specimen  of  Michael 
Angelo's  architecture,  a  minute's  walk  will  transport 
the  visitor  from  the  small,  uneasy,  lava  stones  of  the 
Roman  pavement  into  broad,  gravelled  carriage-drives, 
whence  a  little  farther  stroll  brings  him  to  the  soft 
turf  of  a  beautiful  seclusion.  A  seclusion,  but  seldom 
a  solitude;  for  priest,  noble,  and  populace,  stranger 
and  native,  all  who  breathe  Roman  air,  find  free  ad- 
mission, and  come  hither  to  taste  the  languid  enjoy- 
ment of  the  day-dream  that  they  call  life. 

But  Donatello's  enjoyment  was  of  a  livelier  kind. 
He  soon  began  to  draw  long  and  delightful  breaths 
among  those  shadowy  walks.  Judging  by  the  pleas- 
ure which  the  sylvan  character  of  the  scene  excited  in 
liim,  it  might  be  no  merely  fanciful  theory  to  set  him 
down  as  the  kinsman,  not  far  remote,  of  that  wild, 
sweet,  playful,  rustic  creature,  to  whose  marble  image 
he  bore  so  strildng  a  resemblance.  How  mirthful  a 
discovery  would  it  be  (and  yet  with  a  touch  of  pathos 


Digitized 


by  Google 


90  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

in  it\  if  the  breeze  which  sported  fondly  with  hii» 
clustering  locks  were  to  waft  them  suddenly  aside, 
and  show  a  pair  of  leaf-shaped,  furry  ears !  What  an 
honest  strain  of  wildness  would  it  indicate !  and  into 
what  regions  of  rich  mystery  would  it  extend  Donar 
tello's  sympathies,  to  be  thus  linked  (and  by  no  mon- 
strous chain)  with  what  we  call  the  inferior  tribes  of 
being,  whose  simplicity,  mingled  with  his  human  in- 
telligence, might  partly  restore  what  man  has  lost  of 
the  divine ! 

The  scenery  amid  which  the  youth  now  strayed  was 
such  as  arrays  itself  in  the  imagination  when  we  read 
the  beautiful  old  myths,  and  fancy  a  brighter  sky,  a 
softer  turf,  a  more  picturesque  arrangement  of  vener- 
able trees,  than  we  find  in  the  rude  and  untrained 
landscapes  of  the  Western  world.  The  ilex-trees,  so 
ancient  and  time-honored  were  they,  seemed  to  have 
lived  for  ages  undisturbed,  and  to  feel  no  dread  of 
profanation  by  the  axe  any  more  than  overthrow  by 
the  thunder  -  stroke.  It  had  already  passed  out  of 
their  dreamy  old  memories  that  only  a  few  years  ago 
they  were  grievously  imperilled  by  the  Graul's  last  as- 
sault upon  the  walls  of  Rome.  As  if  confident  in  the 
long  peace  of  their  lifetime,  they  assumed  attitudes  of 
indolent  repose.  They  leaned  over  the  green  turf  in 
ponderous  grace,  throwing  abroad  their  great  branches 
without  danger  of  interfering  with  other  trees,  though 
other  majestic  trees  grew  near  enough  for  dignified 
society,  but  too  distant  for  constraint.  Never  was 
there  a  more  venerable  quietude  than  that  which  slept 
among  their  sheltering  boughs ;  never  a  sweeter  sun- 
shine than  that  now  gladdening  the  gentle  gloom 
which  these  leafy  patriarchs  strove  to  diffuse  over  the 
•welling  and  subsiding  lawns. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  SUBURBAN  VILLA.  91 

In  other  portions  of  the  grounds  the  stone-pines 
lifted  their  dense  clump, of  branches  upon  a  slender 
length  of  stem,  so  high  that  they  looked  like  green 
islands  in  the  air,  flinging  down  a  shadow  upon  the 
turf  so  far  off  that  you  hardly  knew  which  tree  had 
made  it.  Again,  there  were  avenues  of  cypress,  re- 
sembling dark  flames  of  huge  funeral  candles,  which 
spread  dusk  and  twilight  round  about  them  instead 
of  cheerful  radiance.  The  more  open  spots  were  all 
a-bloom,  even  so  early  in  the  season,  with  anemones 
of  wondrous  size,  both  white  and  rose-colored,  and 
violets  that  betrayed  themselves  by  their  rich  fra- 
grance, even  if  their  blue  eyes  failed  to  meet  your 
own.  Daisies,  too,  were  abundant,  but  larger  than 
the  modest  little  English  flower,  and  therefore  of 
small  account. 

These  wooded  and  flowery  lawns  are  more  beautiful 
than  the  finest  of  English  park-scenery,  more  touch- 
ing, more  impressive,  through  the  neglect  that  leaves 
Nature  so  much  to  her  own  ways  and  methods.  Since 
man  seldom  interferes  with  her,  she  sets  to  work  in 
her  quiet  way  and  makes  herself  at  home.  There  is 
enough  of  human  care,  it  is  true,  bestowed,  long  ago 
and  still  bestowed,  to  prevent  wildness  from  growing 
into  deformity ;  and  the  result  is  an  ideal  landscape,  a 
woodland  scene  that  seems  to  have  been  projected  out 
of  the  poet's  mind.  If  the  ancient  Faun  were  other 
than  a  mere  creation  of  old  poetry,  and  could  have  re- 
appeared any\f here,  it  must  have  been  in  such  a  scen( 
as  this. 

In  the  openings  of  the  wood  there  are  fountains 
plashing  into  marble  basins,  the  depths  of  which  are 
shaggy  with  water-weeds  ;  or  they  tumble  like  natural 
eascades  from  rock  to  rock,  sending  their  murmur 


Digitized 


by  Google 


92  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

afar,  to  make  the  quiet  and  silence  more  appreciabla 
Scattered  here  and  there  with  careless  artifice,  stand 
old  altars  bearing  Roman  inscriptions.  Statues,  gray 
with  the  long  corrosion  of  even  that  soft  atmosphere, 
half  hide  and  half  reveal  themselves,  high  on  pedestals, 
or  perhaps  fallen  and  broken  on  the  turf.  Terminal 
figures,  columns  of  marble  or  granite  porticos,  arches, 
are  seen  in  the  vistas  of  the  wood-paths,  either  verita^ 
ble  relics  of  antiquity,  or  with  so  exquisite  a  touch  of 
artful  ruin  on  them  that  they  are  better  than  if  really 
antique.  At  all  events,  grass  grows  on  the  tops  of  the 
shattered  pillars,  and  weeds  and  flowers  root  them- 
selves in  the  chinks  of  the  massive  arches  and  fronts 
of  temples,  and  clamber  at  large  over  their  pediments, 
as  if  this  were  the  thousandth  summer  since  their 
winged  seeds  alighted  there. 

What  a  strange  idea —  what  a  needless  labor  —  to 
construct  artificial  ruins  in  Rome,  the  native  soil  of 
ruin  1  But  even  these  sportive  imitations,  wrought  by 
man  in  emulation  of  what  time  has  done  to  temples 
and  palaces,  are  perhaps  centuries  old,  and,  beginning 
as  illusions,  have  grown  to  be  venerable  in  sober  ear- 
nest.  The  result  of  all  is  a  scene,  pensive,  lovely, 
dream-like,  enjoyable  and  sad,  such  as  is  to  be  found 
nowhere  save  in  these  princely  villa-residences  in  the 
neighborhood  of  Rome ;  a  scene  that  must  have  re- 
quired generations  and  ages,  during  which  growth, 
decay,  and  man's  intelligence  wrought  kindly  together, 
to  render  it  so  gently  wild  as  we  behold  it  now. 

The  final  charm  is  bestowed  by  the  malaria.  There 
is  a  piercing,  thrilling,  delicious  kind  of  regret  in  the 
idea  of  so  much  beauty  thrown  away,  or  only  enjoya* 
ble  at  its  half-development,  in  winter  and  early  spring, 
and  never  to  be  dwelt  amongst,  as  the  home-scenery 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  SUBURBAN  VILLA.  98 

of  any  hiinian  being.  For  if  you  come  hither  in  sum- 
mer, and  stray  through  these  glades  in  the  golden 
sunset,  fever  walks  arm  in  arm  with  you,  and  death 
awaits  you  at  the  end  of  the  dim  vista.  Thus  the 
scene  is  like  Eden  in  its  loveliness ;  like  Eden,  too, 
in  the  fatal  spell  that  removes  it  beyond  the  scope  of 
man's  actual  possessions.  But  Donatello  felt  nothing 
of  this  dream-like  melancholy  that  haunts  the  spotr 
As  he  passed  among  the  sunny  shadows,  his  spirit 
jeemed  to  acquire  new  elasticity.  The  flicker  of  the 
sunshine,  the  sparkle  of  the  fountain's  gush,  the  dance 
of  the  leaf  upon  the  bough,  the  woodland  fragrance, 
the  green  freshness,  the  old  sylvan  peace  and  freedom, 
were  all  intermingled  in  those  long  breaths  which  he 
drew. 

The  ancient  dust,  the  mouldiness  of  Rome,  the  dead 
atmosphere  in  which  he  had  wasted  so  many  months, 
the  hard  pavements,  the  smell  of  ruin  and  decaying 
generations,  the  chiU  palaces,  the  convent-bells,  the 
heavy  incense  of  altars,  the  life  that  he  had  led  in 
those  dark,  narrow  streets,  among  priests,  soldiers, 
nobles,  artists,  and  women,  —  all  the  sense  of  these 
things  rose  from  the  young  man's  consciousness  like  a 
cloud  which  had  darkened  over  him  without  his  know- 
ing how  densely. 

He  drank  in  the  natural  influences  of  the  scene,  and 
was  intoxicated  as  by  an  exhilarating  wine.  He  ran 
races  with  himself  along  the  gleam  and  shadow  of  the 
wood-paths.  He  leapt  up  to  catch  the  overhanging 
bough  of  an  ilex,  and  swinging  himself  by  it  alighted 
far  onward,  as  if  he  had  flown  thither  through  the  air. 
In  a  sudden  rapture  he  embraced  the  trunk  of  a  sturdy 
'  tree,  and  seemed  to  imagine  it  a  creature  worthy  of  a£> 
fection  and  capable  of  a  tender  response ;  he  clasped 


Digitized 


by  Google 


M  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

it  closely  in  his  arms,  as  a  Faun  might  have  clasped 
the  warm  feminine  grace  of  the  nymph,  whom  antiq* 
uity  supposed  to  dwell  within  that  rough,  encircling 
rind.  Then,  in  order  to  bring  himself  closer  to  the 
genial  earth,  with  which  his  kindred  instincts  linked 
him  so  strongly,  he  threw  himself  at  full  length  on  the 
turf,  and  pressed  down  his  lips,  kissing  the  violets  and 
daisies,  which  kissed  him  back  again,  though  shyly,  in 
their  maiden  fashion. 

While  he  lay  there,  it  was  pleasant  to  see  how  the 
green  and  blue  lizards,  who  had  been  basking  on  some 
rock  or  on  a  fallen  pillar  that  absorbed  the  warmth  of 
the  sun,  scrupled  not  to  scramble  over  him  with  their 
small  feet ;  and  how  the  birds  alighted  on  the  nearest 
twigs  and  sang  their  little  i*oundelays  unbroken  by  any 
chirrup  of  alarm ;  they  recognized  him,  it  may  be,  as 
something  akin  to  themselves,  or  else  they  fancied 
that  he  was  rooted  and  grew  there;  for  these  wild 
pets  of  nature  dreaded  him  no  more  in  his  buoyant 
life  than  if  a  mound  of  soil  and  grass  and  flowers  had 
long  since  covered  his  dead  body,  converting  it  back 
to  the  sympathies  from  which  hmnan  existence  had 
estranged  it. 

AU  of  us,  after  a  long  abode  in  cities,  have  felt  the 
blood  gush  more  joyously  through  our  veins  with  the 
first  breath  of  rural  air ;  few  could  feel  it  so  much  as 
DonateUo,  a  creature  of  simple  elements,  bred  in  the 
sweet  sylvan  life  of  Tuscany,  and  for  months  back 
dwelling  amid  the  mouldy  gloom  and  dim  splendor  of 
old  Rome.  Nature  has  been  shut  out  for  numberless 
centuries  from  those  stony-hearted  streets,  to  which  he 
had  latterly  grown  accustomed ;  there  is  no  trace  of 
her,  except  for  what  blades  of  grass  spring  out  of  th^ 
pavements  of  the  less  trodden  piazzas,  or  what  weed* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  SUBURBAN  VILLA.  95 

fluster  and  tuft  themselves  on  the  cornices  of  ruins, 
llierefore  his  joy  was  like  that  of  a  child  that  had 
gone  astray  from  home,  and  finds  him  suddenly  in  his 
mother's  arms  again. 

At  last,  deeming  it  full  time  for  Miriam  to  keep  her 
tryst,  he  climbed  to  the  tiptop  of  the  tallest  tree,  and 
thence  looked  about  him,  swaying  to  and  fro  in  the 
gentle  breeze,  which  was  like  the  respiration  of  that 
great  leafy,  living  thing.  Donatello  saw  beneath  him 
the  whole  circuit  of  the  enchanted  groimd ;  the  statues 
and  columns  pointing  upward  from  among  the  shrub« 
bery,  the  fountains  flashing  in  the  sunlight,  the  paths 
winding  hither  and  thither,  and  continually  finding 
out  some  nook  of  new  and  ancient  pleasantness.  He 
saw  the  villa,  too,  with  its  marble  front  incrusted  all 
over  with  bas-reliefs,  and  statues  in  its  many  niches. 
It  was  as  beautiful  as  a  fairy  palace,  and  seemed  an 
abode  in  which  the  lord  and  lady  of  this  fair  domain 
might  fitly  dwell,  and  come  forth  each  morning  to  en- 
joy as  sweet  a  life  as  their  happiest  dreams  of  the  past 
night  could  have  depicted.  All  this  he  saw,  but  his 
first  glance  had  taken  in  too  wide  a  sweep,  and  it  was 
not  till  his  eyes  fell  almost  directly  beneath  him,  that 
DonateUo  beheld  Miriam  just  turning  into  the  path 
that  led  across  the  roots  of  his  very  tree. 

He  descended  among  the  foliage,  waiting  for  her  to 
come  close  to  the  trunk,  and  then  suddenly  dropped 
from  an  impending  bough,  and  alighted  at  her  side. 
It  was  as  if  the  swaying  of  the  branches  had  let  a 
ray  of  sunlight  through.  The  same  ray  likewise  glim- 
mered among  the  gloomy  meditations  that  encom- 
passed Miriam,  and  lit  up  tlie  pale,  dark  beauty  of 
her  face,  while  it  responded  pleasantly  to  Donatello'i 
glance. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


96  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

"  I  hardly  know,"  said  she,  smiling,  "  whether  you 
have  sprouted  out  of  the  earth,  or  fallen  from  the 
clouds.     In  either  case  you  are  welcome." 

And  they  walked  onward  together. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  IX, 

^  THE  FAUN  Ain>  NYMPH. 

Mibiam's  sadder  mood,  it  might  be,  had  at  first  ati 
effect  on  Donatello's  spirits.  It  checked  the  joyous 
ebullition  into  which  they  would  otherwise  have  eflfer- 
vesced  when  he  found  himself  in  her  society,  not,  as 
heretofore,  in  the  old  gloom  of  Rome,  but  under  that 
bright  soft  sky  and  in  those  Arcadian  woods.  He 
was  silent  for  a  while ;  it  being,  indeed,  seldom  Dona- 
tello's impulse  to  express  himself  copiously  in  words. 
His  usual  modes  of  demonstration  were  by  the  natural 
language  of  gesture,  the  instinctive  movement  of  his 
agile  frame,  and  the  imconscious  play  of  his  features, 
which,  within  a  limited  range  of  thought  and  emotion, 
would  speak  volumes  in  a  moment. 

By  and  by,  his  own  mood  seemed  to  brighten  Mir- 
iam's, and  was  reflected  back  upon  himself.  He  be- 
gan inevitably,  as  it  were,  to  dance  along  the  wood- 
path,  flinging  himself  into  attitudes  of  strange  comic 
grace.  Often,  too,  he  ran  a  little  way  in  advance  or 
his  companion,  and  then  stood  to  watch  her  as  she  ap- 
proached along  the  shadowy  and  sun-fleckered  path. 
With  every  step  she  took,  he  expressed  his  joy  at  her 
nearer  and  nearer  presence  by  what  might  be  thought 
an  extravagance  of  gesticulation,  but  which  doubtless 
was  the  language  of  the  natural  man,  though  laid  aside 
and  forgotten  by  other  men,  now  that  words  have  been 
feebly  substituted  in  the  place  p{  si^s  mA  symbols* 

VOL.  vu 


Digitized 


by  Google 


88  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

He  gave  Miriam  the  idea  of  a  being  not  precisely  man, 
nor  yet  ^  child,  but,  in  a  high  and  beautiful  sense,  an 
anbnal,  —  a  creature  in  a  state  of  development  less 
than  what  mankind  has  attained,  yet  the  more  perfect 
^thin  itself  for  that  very  deficiency.  This  idea  filled 
her  mobile  imagination  with  agreeable  fantasies,  which, 
after  smiling  at  them  herself,  she  tried  to  convey  to 
the  young  man. 

"  What  are  you,  my  friend  ?  "  she  exclaimed,  always 
keeping  in  mind  his  singular  resemblance  to  the  Faun 
of  the  Capitol.  "  If  you  are,  in  good  truth,  that  wild 
and  pleasant  creature  whose  face  you  wear,  pray  make 
me  known  to  your  kindred.  They  will  be  found  here- 
abouts, if  anywhere.  Knock  at  the  rough  rind  of  this 
ilex -tree,  and  summon  forth  the  Dryad!  Ask  the 
water-nymph  to  rise  dripping  from  yonder  fountain, 
and  exchange  a  moist  pressure  of  the  hand  with  me  1 
Do  not  fear  that  I  shall  shrink,  even  if  one  of  your 
rough  cousins,  a  hairy  Satyr,  should  come  capering  on 
his  goat-legs  out  of  the  haunts  of  far  antiquity,  and 
propose  to  dance  with  me  among  th^se  lawns  1  And 
will  not  Bacchus,  —  with  whom  you  consorted  so  fa- 
miliarly of  old,  and  who  loved  you  so  well, —  will  he 
not  meet  us  here,  and  squeeze  rich  grapes  into  his  cup 
for  you  and  me  ?  " 

Donatello  smiled;  he  laughed  heartily,  indeed,  in 
sympathy  with  the  mirth  that  gleamed  out  of  Miriam's 
deep,  dark  eyes.  But  he  did  not  seem  quite  to  under- 
stand her  mirthful  talk,  nor  to  be  disposed  to  explain 
what  kind  of  creature  he  was,  or  to  inquire  with  what 
divine  or  poetic  kindred  his  companion  feigned  to  link 
him.  He  appeared  only  to  know  that  Miriam  was 
beautiful,  and  that  she  smiled  graciously  upon  him .; 
that  the  present  moment  was  very  sweet,  and  himself 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  FAUN  AND  NYMPH.  99 

mofit  happy,  with  the  sunshine,  the  sylvan  scenery, 
and  woman's  kindly  charm,  which  it  enclosed  within 
its  small  circumference.  It  was  delightful  to  see  the 
trust  which  he  i^eposed  in  Miriam,  and  his  pure  joy  in 
her  propinquity;  he  asked  nothing,  sought  nothing, 
save  to  be  near  the  beloved  object,  and  brimmed  over 
with  ecstasy  at  that  simple  boon.  A  creature  of  the 
happy  tribes  below  us  sometimes  shows  the  capacity 
of  this  enjoyment ;  a  man,  seldom  or  never. 

**  Donatello,"  said  Miriam,  looking  at  him  thought' 
fiilly,  but  amused,  yet  not  without  a  shade  of  sorrow, 
**  you  seem  very  happy ;  what  makes  you  so  ?  " 

"  Because  I  love  you !  "  answered  Donatello. 

He  made  this  momentous  confession  as  if  it  were 
the  most  natural  thing  in  the  world  ;  and  on  her  part, 
— such  was  the  contagion  of  his  simplicity,  —  Miriam 
heard  it  without  anger  or  disturbance,  though  with  no 
responding  emotion.  It  was  as  if  they  had  strayed 
across  the  limits  of  Arcadia,  and  come  under  a  civil 
polity  where  young  men  might  avow  their  passion 
with  as  little  restraint  as  a  bird  pipes  its  note  to  a 
similar  purpose. 

**  Why  should  you  love  me,  foolish  boy  ?  "  said  she. 
**  We  have  no  points  of  sympathy  at  all.  There  are 
not  two  creatures  more  unlike,  in  this  wide  world,  than 
you  and  I !  " 

"You  are  yourself,  and  I  am  Donatello,"  replied 
be.  "  Therefore  I  love  you  I  There  needs  no  other 
reason." 

Certainly,  there  was  no  better  or  more  explicable 
reason.  It  might  have  been  imagined  that  Donatello's 
unsophisticated  heart  would  be  more  readily  attracted 
to  a  feminine  nature  of  clear  simplicity  like  his  own, 
than  to  one  already  turbid  with  grief  or  wrong,  as 


Digitized 


by  Google 


100  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

Miriam's  seemed  to  be.  Perhaps,  on  the  other  hand, 
his  character  needed  the  dark  element,  which  it  found 
in  her.  The  force  and  energy  of  will,  that  sometimes 
Hashed  through  her  eyes,  may  have  taken  him  captive  ; 
or,  not  improbably,  tie  varying  lights  and  shadows  of 
her  temper,  now  so  mirthful,  and  anon  so  sad  with 
mysterious  gloom,  had  bewitched  the  youth.  Analyze 
the  matter  as  we  may,  the  reason  assigned  by  Dona- 
tello  himself  was  as  satisfactory  as  we  are  likely  to  at^ 
tain. 

Miriam  could  not  think  seriously  of  the  avowal  that 
had  passed.  He  held  out  his  love  so  freely,  in  his 
open  palm,  that  she  felt  it  could  be  nothing  but  a  toy, 
which  she  might  play  with  for  an  instant,  and  give 
back  again.  And  yet  Donatello's  heart  was  so  fresh 
a  fountain,  that,  had  Miriam  been  more  world -worn 
than  she  was,  she  might  have  found  it  exquisite  to 
slake  her  thirst  with  the  feelings  that  welled  up  and 
brimmed  over  from  it.  She  was  far,  very  far,  from 
the  dusty  mediaeval  epoch,  when  some  women  have  a 
taste  for  such  refreshment.  Even  for  her,  however, 
there  was  an  inexpressible  charm  in  the  simplicity 
that  prompted  Donatello's  words  and  deeds ;  though, 
unless  she  caught  them  in  precisely  the  true  light, 
they  seemed  but  folly,  the  offspring  of  a  maimed  or 
imperfectly  developed  intellect.  Alternately,  she  al- 
most admired,  or  wholly  scorned  him,  and  knew  not 
which  estimate  resulted  from  the  deeper  appreciation. 
But  it  could  not,  she  decided  for  herself,  be  other  than 
an  innocent  pastime,  if  they  two  —  sure  to  be  sepa- 
rated by  their  different  paths  in  life,  to-morrow — were 
to  gather  up  some  of  the  little  pleasures  that  chanced 
to  grow  about  their  feet,  like  the  violets  and  wood 
anemoneSft  to-day. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  FAUN  AND  NYMPH.  101 

Yet  an  impulse  of  rectitude  impelled  Miriam  to 
give  him  what  she  still  held  to  be  a  needless  warning 
against  an  imaginary  peril. 

"  If  you  were  wiser,  Donatello,  you  would  think  me 
a  dangerous  person,"  said  she.  "  If  you  follow  my 
footsteps,  they  will  lead  you  to  no  good.  You  ought 
to  be  afraid  of  me." 

^^I  would  as  soon  think  of  fearing  the  air  we 
breathe,"  he  replied. 

"  And  well  you  may,  for  it  is  full  of  malaria,"  said 
Miriam  ;  she  went  on,  hinting  at  an  intangible  confes- 
sion, such  as  persons  with  overburdened  hearts  often 
make  to  children  or  dumb  animals,  or  to  holes  in  the 
earth,  where  they  think  their  secrets  may  be  at  once 
revealed  and  buried.  "  Those  who  come  too  near  me 
are  in  danger  of  great  mischiefs,  I  do  assure  you. 
Take  warning,  therefore!  It  is  a  sad  fatality  that 
has  brought  you  from  your  home  among  the  Apen- 
nines, —  some  rusty  old  castle,  I  suppose,  with  a  vil- 
lage at  its  foot,  and  an  Arcadian  environment  of  vine- 
yards, fig-trees,  and  olive-orchards, — a  sad  mischance, 
I  say,  that  has  transported  you  to  my  side.  You  have 
had  a  happy  life  hitherto,  —  have  you  not,  Dona- 
teUo?" 

"  Oh,  yes,"  answered  the  young  man  ;  and,  though 
not  of  a  retrospective  turn,  he  made  the  best  effort  he 
could  to  send  his  mind  back  into  the  past.  ^^  I  re- 
member thinking  it  happiness  to  dance  with  the  con- 
tadinas  at  a  village  feast ;  to  taste  the  new,  sweet  wine 
at  vintage-time,  and  the  old,  ripened  wine,  which  our 
podere  is  famous  for,  in  the  cold  winter  evenings;  and 
to  devour  great,  luscious  figs,  and  apricots,  peaches, 
eherries,  and  melons.  I  was  often  happy  in  the  veoods, 
too,  with  hounds  and  horses,  and  very  happy  in  watch* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


102  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

ing  all  sorts  of  creatures  and  birds  that  haunt  th* 
leafy  solitudes.     But  never  half  so  happy  as  now  I  '* 

"  In  these  delightful  groves  ?  "  she  asked. 

"  Here,  and  with  you,"  answered  Donatello.  "Just 
as  we  are  now." 

"  What  a  fulness  of  content  in  him  1  How  silly, 
and  how  delightful ! "  said  Miriam  to  herself.  Then 
addressing  him  again:  "But,  Donatello,  how  long 
will  this  happiness  last?  " 

"  How  long ! "  he  exclaimed ;  for  it  perplexed  him 
even  more  to  think  of  the  future  than  to  remember 
the  past.  "  Why  should  it  have  any  end  ?  How  long  I 
Forever !  forever !  forever  I  " 

"  The  child !  the  simpleton  I "  said  Miriam,  with 
sudden  laughter,  and  checking  it  as  suddenly.  "  But 
is  he  a  simpleton  indeed  ?  Here,  in  those  few  natural 
words,  he  has  expressed  that  deep  sense,  that  profound 
conviction  of  its  own  immortality,  which  genuine  love 
never  fails  to  bring.  He  perplexes  me,  —  yes,  and 
bewitches  me,  —  wild,  gentle,  beautiful  creature  that 
he  is !     It  is  like  playing  with  a  young  greyhound  1 " 

Her  eyes  filled  with  tears,  at  the  same  time  that  a 
smile  shone  out  of  them.  Then  first  she  became  sen- 
sible of  a  delight  and  grief  at  once,  in  feeling  this 
zephyr  of  a  new  affection,  with  its  untainted  freshness, 
blow  over  her  weary,  stifled  heart,  which  had  no  right 
to  be  revived  by  it.  The  very  exquisiteness  of  the  en- 
joyment made  her  know  that  it  ought  to  be  a  forbid- 
den one. 

"  Donatello,"  she  hastily  exclaimed,  "  for  your  own 
sake,  leave  me  1  It  is  not  such  a  happy  thing  as  you 
imagine  it,  to  wander  in  these  woods  with  me,  a  girl 
from  another  land,  burdened  with  a  doom  that  she 
iells  to  none.     I  might  make  you  dread  me,  —  peF 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  FAUN  AND  NYMPH.  108 

haps  hate  me,  —  if  I  chose ;  and  I  must  choose,  if  I 
find  you  loving  me  too  well  1 " 

"  I  fear  nothing !  "  said  Donatello,  looking  into  her 
anfathomable  eyes  with  perfect  trust.  ^'  I  love  al< 
ways  1 " 

"  I  speak  in  vain,"  thought  Miriam  within  herself. 

"  Well,  then,  for  this  one  hour,  let  me  be  such  as 
he  imagines  me.  To-morrow  will  be  time  enough  to 
come  back  to  my  reality.  My  reality !  what  is  it  ?  Is 
the  past  so  indestructible  ?  the  future  so  immitigable  ? 
Is  the  dark  dream,  in  which  I  walk,  of  such  solid, 
stony  substance,  that  there  can  be  no  escape  out  of  its 
dungeon  ?  Be  :.t  so  1  There  is,  at  least,  that  ethereal 
quality  in  my  spirit,  that  it  can  make  me  as  gay  as 
Donatello  himself,  —  for  this  one  hour  ?  " 

And  immediately  she  brightened  up,  as  if  an  inward 
flame,  heretofore  stifled,  were,  now  permitted  to  fill  her 
with  its  happy  lustre,  glowing  through  lier  cheeks  and 
dancing  in  her  eye-beams. 

Donatella,  brisk  and  cheerful  as  he  seemed  before, 
showed  a  sensibility  to  Miriam's  gladdened  mood  by 
breaking  into  still  wilder  and  ever -varying  activity. 
He  frisked  around  her,  bubbling  over  with  joy,  which 
clothed  itself  in  words  that  had  little  individual  mean^ 
ing,  uid  in  snatches  of  song  that  seemed  as  natural  as 
bird -notes.  ThcK  they  both  laughed  together,  and 
heard  their  own  laughter  retm^ning  in  the  echoes, 
and  laughed  again  at  the  response,  so  that  the  ancient 
and  solemn  grove  became  full  of  merriment  for  these 
two  blithe  spirits.  A  bird  happening  to  sing  cheerily, 
Donatello  gave  a  peculiar  call,  and  the  little  feathered 
creature  came  fluttering  about  his  head,  as  if  it  had 
known  him  through  many  summers. 

^  How  close  he  stands  to  nature  I ''  said  Miiiam,  ob 


Digitized 


by  Google 


104      ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

Aerving  this  pleasant  familiarity  between  her  compaii« 
ion  and  the  bird.  ^'  He  shall  make  me  as  natural  as 
himself  for  this  one  hour." 

As  they  strayed  through  that  sweet  wilderness,  she 
felt  more  and  more  the  influence  of  his  elastic  tem- 
perament. Miriam  was  an  impressible  and  impulsive 
creature,  as  unlike  herself,  in  different  moods,  as  if  a 
melancholy  maiden  and  a  glad  one  were  both  bound*: 
within  the  girdle  about  her  waist,  and  kept  in  magio 
thraldom  by  the  brooch  that  clasped  it.  Naturally,  it 
is  true,  she  was  the  more  inclined  to  melancholy,  yet 
fully  capable  of  that  high  frolic  of  the  spirits  which 
richly  compensates  for  many  gloomy  hours;  if  her 
soul  was  apt  to  lurk  in  the  darkness  of  a  cavern,  she 
could  sport  madly  in  the  sunshine  before  the  cavern's 
mouth.  Except  the  freshest  mirth  of  animal  spirits, 
like  Donatello's,  there  is  no  merriment,  no  wild  ex- 
hilaration, comparable  to  that  of  melancholy  people 
escaping  from  the  dark  region  in  which  it  is  their  cus^ 
tom  to  keep  themselves  imprisoned. 

So  the  shadowy  Miriam  almost  outdid  Donatello  on 
his  own  ground.  They  ran  races  with  each  other,  side 
by  side,  with  shouts  and  laughter;  they  pelted  one 
another  with  early  flowers,  and  gathering  them  up 
twined  them  with  green  leaves  into  garlands  for  boti 
their  heads.  They  played  together  like  children,  or 
creatures  of  immortal  youth.  So  much  had  they  flung 
aside  the  sombre  habitudes  of  daily  life,  that  they 
seemed  bom  to  be  sportive  forever,  and  endowed  with 
eternal  mirthfulness  instead  of  any  deeper  joy.  It 
was  a  glimpse  far  backward  into  Arcadian  life,  or, 
further  still,  into  the  Golden  Age,  before  mankind 
was  burdened  with  sin  and  sorrow,  and  before  pleas* 
ure  had  been  dai*kened  with  those  shadows  that  bring 
tt  into  high  relief,  and  make  it  happiness. 

Digitized  by  LjOOQIC 


THE  FAUN  AND  NYMPH.  105 

**  Hark ! "  cried  Donatello,  stopping  short,  as  he 
was  about  to  bind  Miriam's  fair  hands  with  flowers, 
and  lead  her  along  in  trimnph,  ^^  there  is  music  some- 
where in  the  grove !  " 

"  It  is  your  kinsman,  Pan,  most  likely,"  said  Mir- 
iam,  "  playing  on  his  pipe.  Let  us  go  seek  him,  and 
make  him  puff  out  his  rough  cheeks  and  pipe  his  me]> 
riest  air !  Come ;  the  strain  of  music  will  guide  us 
onward  like  a  gayly  colored  thread  of  silk." 

"Or  like  a  chain  of  flowers,"  responded  DonatellO| 
drawing  her  along  by  that  which  he  had  twined* 
*^Thi8  way  1— Come!" 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  X. 

THE  STLV-IN  DAKCB. 

As  the  music  came  fresher  on  their  ears,  they 
danced  to  its  cadence,  extemporizing  new  steps  and 
attitudes.  Each  varying  movement  had  a  grace  which 
might  have  been  worth  putting  into  marble,  for  the 
long  delight  of  days  to  come,  but  vanished  with  the 
movement  that  gave  it  birth,  and  was  effaced  from 
memory  by  another.  In  Miriam's  motion,  freely  as 
she  flung  herself  into  the  frolic  of  the  hour,  there  was 
still  an  artful  beauty;  in  Donatello's,  there  was  a 
charm  of  indescribable  grotesqueness  hand  in  hand 
with  grace;  sweet,  bewitching,  most  provocative  of 
laughter,  and  yet  akin  to  pathos,  so  deeply  did  it 
touch  the  heart.  This  was  the  ultimate  peculiarity, 
the  final  touch,  distinguishing  between  the  sylvan 
creature  and  the  beautiful  companion  at  his  side. 
Setting  apart  only  this,  Miriam  resembled  a  Nymph, 
as  much  as  Donatello  did  a  Faun. 

There  were  flitting  moments,  indeed,  when  she 
played  the  sylvan  character  as  perfectly  as  he.  Catch- 
ing  glimpses  of  her,  then,  you  would  have  fancied  that 
an  oak  had  sundered  its  rough  bark  to  let  her  dance 
freely  forth,  endowed  with  the  same  spirit  in  her  hu- 
man form  as  that  which  rustles  in  the  leaves ;  or  that 
she  had  emerged  through  the  pebbly  bottom  of  a  f  oun* 
tain,  a  water-nymph,  to  play  and  sparkle  in  the  sui» 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  SYLVAN  DANCE.  107 

shine,  flinging  a  quivering  light  around  her,  and  sud« 
denly  disappearing  in  a  shower  of  rainbow  drops. 

As  the  fountain  sometimes  subsides  into  its  basin, 
so  in  Miriam  there  were  symptoms  that  the  frolic  of 
her  spirits  would  at  last  tire  itself  out. 

"  Ah !  Donatello,"  cried  she,  laughing,  as  she 
stopped  to  take  breath ;  "  you  have  an  unfair  advan* 
tage  over  me !  I  am  no  true  creature  of  the  woods  5 
while  you  are  a  real  Faun,  I  do  believe.  When  your 
curls  shook  just  now,  methought  I  had  a  peep  at  the 
pointed  ears." 

Donatello  snapped  his  fingers  above  his  head,  as 
fauns  and  satyrs  taught  us  &*st  to  do,  and  seemed  to 
radiate  jollity  out  of  his  whole  nimble  person.  Never^ 
theless,  there  was  a  kind  of  dim  apprehension  in  his 
face,  as  if  he  dreaded  that  a  moment's  pause  might 
break  the  spell,  and  snatch  away  the  sportive  compan- 
ion whom  he  had  waited  for  through  so  many  dreary 
months. 

"Dance!  dance!"  cried  he,  joyously.  "If  we 
take  breath,  we  shall  be  as  we  were  yesterday.  There, 
now,  is  the  music,  just  beyond  this  clump  of  trees. 
Dance,  Miriam,  dance  !  " 

They  had  now  reached  an  open,  grassy  glade  (of 
which  there  are  many  in  that  artfully  constructed  wil- 
derness), set  round  with  stone  seats,  on  which  the 
aged  moss  had  kindly  essayed  to  spread  itself  instead 
of  cushions.  On  one  of  the  stone  benches  sat  the 
musicians,  whose  strains  had  enticed  our  wild  couple 
thitherward.  They  proved  to  be  a  vagrant  band,  such 
as  Rome,  and  all  Italy,  abounds  with;  comprising  a 
harp,  a  flute,  and  a  violin,  which,  though  greatly  the 
worse  for  wear,  the  performers  had  skill  enough  to  pro- 
roke  and  modulate  into  tolerable  harmony.   It  chanced 


Digitized 


by  Google 


108  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

fco  be  a  feast-day ;  and,  instead  of  playing  in  the  svau 
scorched  piazzas  of  the  city,  or  beneath  the  windows  of 
some  unresponsive  palace,  they  had  bethought  them- 
selves to  try  the  echoes  of  these  woods ;  for,  on  the 
f  estas  of  the  Church,  Rome  scatters  its  merry-makers 
all  abroad,  ripe  for  the  dance  or  any  other  pastime. 

As  Miriam  and  Donatello  emerged  from  among  the 
trees,  the  musicians  scraped,  tinkled,  or  blew,  each  ac- 
cording to  his  various  kind  of  instrument,  more  in- 
spiringly  than  ever.  A  dark-cheeked  little  girl,  with 
bright  black  eyes,  stood  by,  shaking  a  tambourine  set 
round  with  tinkling  bells,  and  thimiping  it  on  its 
parchment  head.  Without  interrupting  his  brisk, 
though  measured  movement,  Donatello  snatched  away 
this  unmelodious  contrivance,  and  flourishing  it  above 
his  head,  produced  music  of  indescribable  potency, 
still  dancing  with  frisky  step,  and  striking  the  tam- 
bourine, and  ringing  its  little  bells,  all  in  one  jovial 
act. 

It  might  be  that  there  was  magic  in  the  sound,  or 
contagion,  at  least,  in  the  spirit  which  had  got  posses- 
sion of  Miriam  and  himself,  for  very  soon  a  niunber  of 
festal  people  were  drawn  to  the  spot,  and  struck  into 
the  dance,  singly,  or  in  pairs,  as  if  they  were  all  gone 
mad  with  jollity.  Among  them  were  some  of  the 
plebeian  damsels  whom  we  meet  bareheaded  in  the 
Roman  streets,  with  silver  stilettos  thrust  through 
their  glossy  hair  ;  the  contadinas,  too,  from  the  Cam- 
pagna  and  the  villages,  with  their  rich  and  picturesque 
costumes  of  scarlet  and  all  bright  hues,  such  as  fairer 
maidens  might  not  venture  to  put  on.  Then  came  the 
modem  Roman  from  Trastevere,  perchance,  with  his 
old  cloak  drawn  about  him  like  a  toga,  which  anon,  aa 
bis  active  motion  heated  him,  he  flung  aside.    Three 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  SYLVAN  DANCE.  109 

French  soldiers  capered  freely  into  the  throng,  in  wide 
scarlet  trousers,  their  short  swords  dangling  at  their 
sides ;  and  three  German  artists  in  gray  flaccid  hats 
and  flaunting  beards ;  and  one  of  the  Pope's  Swiss 
guardsmen  in  the  strange  motley  garb  which  Michael 
Angelo  contrived  for  them.  Two  young  English  tour- 
ists (one  of  them  a  lord)  took  contadine  partners  and 
dashed  in,  as  did  also  a  shaggy  man  in  goat -skin 
breeches,  who  looked  like  rustic  Pan  in  person,  and 
footed  it  as  merrily  as  he.  Besides  the  above  there 
was  a  herdsman  or  two  from  the  Campagna,  and  a 
few  peasants  in  sky-blue  jackets,  and  small-clothes 
tied  with  ribbons  at  the  knees ;  haggard  and  sallow 
were  these  last,  poor  serfs,  having  little  to  eat  and 
nothing  but  the  malaria  to  breathe ;  but  still  they 
plucked  up  a  momentary  spirit  and  joined  hands  in 
Donatello's  dance. 

Here,  as  it  seemed,  had  the  Golden  Age  come  back 
again  within  the  precincts  of  this  sunny  glade,  thaw- 
ing mankind  out  of  their  cold  formalities,  releasing 
them  from  irksome  restraint,  mingling  them  together 
in  such  childlike  gayety  that  new  flowers  (of  which 
the  old  bosom  of  the  earth  is  full)  sprang  up  beneath 
their  footsteps.  The  sole  exception  to  the  geniality 
of  the  moment,  as  we  have  understood,  was  seen  in  a 
countryman  of  our  own,  who  sneered  at  the  spectacle, 
%nd  declined  to  compromise  his  dignity  by  making 
part  of  it. 

The  harper  thrummed  with  rapid  fingers ;  the  vio- 
tin-player  flashed  his  bow  back  and  forth  across  the 
strings  ;  the  flautist  poured  his  breath  in  quick  puffs 
of  jollity,  while  Donatello  shook  the  tambourine  above 
his  head,  and  led  the  meiTy  throng  with  unweariable 
iteps.     As  they  followed  one  another  in  a  wild  ring 


Digitized 


by  Google 


no  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

of  mirth,  it  seemed  the  realization  of  one  of  those  bas« 
reliefs  where  a  dance  of  nymphs,  satyrs,  or  bacchanals 
is  twined  around  the  circle  of  an  antique  vase  ;  or  it 
was  like  the  sculptured  scene  on  the  front  and  sides 
)of  a  sarcophagus,  whei'e,  as  often  as  any  other  device, 
a  festive  procession  mocks  the  ashes  and  white  bones 
that  are  treasured  up  within.  You  might  take  it  for 
^a  marriage-pageant ;  but  after  a  while,  if  you  look  at 
fchese  merry-makers,  following  them  from  end  to  end 
of  the  marble  coffin,  you  doubt  whether  their  gay 
movement  is  leading  them  to  a  happy  close.  A  youth 
has  suddenly  fallen  in  the  dance ;  a  chariot  is  over- 
turned and  broken,  flinging  the  charioteer  headlong 
to  the  ground ;  a  maiden  seems  to  have  grown  faint 
or  weary  and  is  drooping  on  the  bosom  of  a  friend. 
Always  some  tragic  incident  is  shadowed  forth  or 
thrust  sidelong  into  the  spectacle ;  and  when  once  it 
has  caught  your  eye  you  can  look  no  more  at  the  fes- 
tal portions  of  the  scene,  except  with  reference  to  this 
one  slightly  suggested  doom  and  sorrow. 

As  in  its  mirth,  so  in  the  darker  characteristic  here 
alluded  to,  there  was  an  analogy  between  the  sculp- 
tured scene  on  the  sarcophagus  and  the  wild  dance 
which  we  have  been  describing.  In  the  midst  of  its 
'madness  and  riot  Miriam  found  herself  suddenly  con- 
fronted by  a  strange  figure  that  shook  its  fantastic 
garments  in  the  air,  and  pranced  before  her  on  its  tip- 
toes, almost  vying  with  the  agility  of  Donatello  him- 
self.    It  was  the  mbdel. 

A  moment  afterwards  Donatello  was  aware  that  she 
had  retired  from  the  dance.  He  hastened  towards 
her,  and  flung  himself  on  the  grass  beside  the  stone 
bench  on  which  Miriam  was  sitting.  But  a  strange 
distance  and  unapproachableness  had  all  at  once  exk 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  SYLVAN  DANCE.  lU 

veloped  her  ;  and  though  he  saw  her  withm  reach  of 
his  arm,  yet  the  light  of  her  eyes  seemed  as  far  off  as 
that  of  a  star,  nor  was  there  any  warmth  in  the  mel- 
ancholy smile  with  which  she  regarded  him. 

"  Come  back ! "  cried  he.  "  Why  should  this  happy 
hour  end  so  soon  ?  " 

''  It  must  end  here,  Donatello,"  said  she,  in  answer 
to  his  words  and  outstretched  hand ;  "  and  such  hours, 
I  believe,  do  not  often  repeat  themselves  in  a  lifetime. 
Let  me  go,  my  friend  ;  let  me  vanish  from  you  quietly 
among  the  shadows  of  those  trees.  See,  the  compan- 
ions  of  our  pastime  are  vanishing  already ! " 

Whether  it  was  that  the  harp-strings  were  broken, 
the  violin  out  of  time,  or  the  flautist  out  of  breath,  so 
it  chanced  that  the  music  had  ceased,  and  the  dancers 
come  abruptly  to  a  pause.  All  that  motley  throng  of 
rioters  was  dissolved  as  suddenly  as  it  had  been  drawn 
together.  In  Miriam's  remembrance  the  scene  had  a 
character  of  fantasy.  It  was  as  if  a  company  of  satyrs, 
fauns,  and  nymphs,  with  Pan  in  the  midst  of  them, 
had  been  disporting  themselves  in  these  venerable 
woods  only  a  moment  ago ;  and  now  in  another  mo- 
ment, because  some  profane  eye  had  looked  at  them 
too  closely,  or  some  intruder  had  cast  a  shadow  on 
their  mirth,  the  sylvan  pageant  had  utterly  disap- 
peared. If  a  few  of  the  merry-makers  lingered  among 
the  trees,  they  had  hidden  their  racy  peculiarities  un- 
der the  garb  and  aspect  of  ordinary  people,  and  shel- 
tered themselves  in  the  weary  commonplace  of  daily 
life.  Just  an  instant  before  it  was  Arcadia  and  the 
Golden  Age.  The  spell  being  broken,  it  was  now 
only  that  old  tract  of  pleasure-ground,  close  by  the 
people's  gate  of  Rome,  —  a  tract  where  the  crimes 
and  calamities  of  ages,  the  many  battles,  blood  reck 


Digitized 


by  Google 


112  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

lessly  poured  cut,  and  deaths  of  myriads,  have  cor 
rupted  all  the  soil,  creating  an  influence  that  makea 
the  air  vleadly  to  human  lungs. 

'•  You  must  leave  me,"  said  Miriam  to  Donatello, 
more  imperatively  than  before ;  "  have  I  not  said  it  ? 
Go  ;  and  look  not  behind  you." 

"  Miriam,"  whispered  Donatello,  grasping  her  hand 
forcibly,  ^^  who  is  it  that  stands  in  the  shadow  yonder, 
beckoning  you  to  follow  him  ?  " 

"  Hush ;  leave  me  I  "  repeated  Miriam.  "  Your 
hour  is  past ;  his  hour  has  come." 

Donatello  still  gazed  in  the  direction  which  he  had 
indicated,  and  the  expression  of  his  face  was  fearfully 
changed,  being  so  disordered,  perhaps  with  terror,  — 
at  all  events  with  anger  and  invincible  repugnance,  — 
that  Miriam  hardly  knew  him.  His  lips  were  drawn 
apart  so  as  to  disclose  his  set  teeth,  thus  giving  him 
a  look  of  animal  rage,  which  we  seldom  see  except  in 
persons  of  the  simplest  and  rudest  natures.  A  shuddef 
seemed  to  pass  through  his  very  bones. 

"  I  hate  him  !  "  muttered  he. 

"  Be  satisfied  ;  I  hate  him  too !  "  said  Miriam. 

She  had  no  thought  of  making  this  avowal,  but  was 
irresistibly  drawn  to  it  by  the  sympathy  of  the  dark 
emotion  in  her  own  breast  with  that  so  strongly  ex- 
pressed by  Donatello.  Two  drops  of  water  or  of  blood 
do  not  more  naturally  flow  into  each  other  than  did 
her  hatred  into  his. 

"Shall  I  clutch  him  by  the  throat?"  whispered 
Donatello,  with  a  savage  scowl.  "  Bid  me  do  so,  and 
we  are  rid  of  him  forever." 

*'  In  Heaven's  name,  no  violence ! "  exclaimed  Min* 
iam,  affrighted  out  of  the  scornful  control  which  sh^ 
had  hitherto  held  over  her  companion,  by  the  fierce^ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  SYLVAN  DANCE.  113 

ness  that  he  so  suddenly  developed.  "  Oh,  have  pity 
on  me,  Donatello,  if  for  nothing  else,  yet  because  in 
the  midst  of  my  wretchedness  I  let  myself  be  yoiur 
playmate  for  this  one  wild  hour  !  Follow  me  no 
farther.  Henceforth,  leave  me  to  my  doom.  Dear 
friend,  —  kind,  simple,  loving  friend,  —  make  me  not 
more  wretched  by  the  remembrance  of  having  thrown 
fierce  hates  or  loves  into  the  wellspring  of  your  happy 
life!" 

"  Not  follow  you ! "  repeated  Donatello,  soothed  from 
anger  into  sorrow,  less  by  the  purport  of  what  she  said, 
than  by  the  melancholy  sweetness  of  her  voice,  —  "  not 
follow  you  I     What  other  path  have  I  ?  " 

"  We  will  talk  of  it  once  again,"  said  Miriam,  still 
soothingly ;  "  soon — to-morrow— when  you  will  ,•  only 
leave  me  now.*' 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XI. 

FBAQMENTABY   SENTENCES. 

In  the  Borghese  Grove,  so  recently  uproarious  with 
merriment  and  music,  there  remained  only  Miriam  and 
her  sti'ange  follower. 

A  solitude  had  suddenly  spread  itself  around  them. 
It  perhaps  symbolized  a  peculiar  character  in  the  re- 
lation of  these  two,  insulating  them,  and  building  up 
an  insuperable  barrier  between  their  life-streams  and 
other  currents,  which  might  seem  to  flow  in  close 
vicinity.  For  it  is  one  of  the  chief  earthly  incommod- 
ities  of  some  species  of  misfortune,  or  of  a  great 
crime,  that  it  makes  the  actor  in  the  one,  or  the  suf- 
ferer of  the  other,  an  alien  in  the  world,  by  interpos- 
ing a  wholly  unsympathetic  medium  betwixt  himself 
and  those  whom  he  yearns  to  meet. 

Owing,  it  may  be,  to  this  moral  estrangement, — 
this  chill  remoteness  of  their  position,  —  there  have 
come  to  us  but  a  few  vague  whisperings  of  what  passed 
in  Miriam's  interview  that  afternoon  with  the  sinister 
personage  who  had  dogged  her  footsteps  ever  since  the 
visit  to  the  catacomb.  In  weaving  these  mystic  utter- 
ances into  a  continuous  scene,  we  undertake  a  task  re- 
sembling in  its  perplexity  that  of  gathering  up  and 
piecing  together  the  fragments  of  a  letter  which  has 
been  torn  and  scattered  to  the  winds.  Many  words  of 
deep  significance,  many  entire  sentences,  and  those 
possibly  the  most  important  ones,  have  flown  too  far 


Digitized 


by  Google 


FRAGMENTARY  SENTENCES,  115 

on .  the  winged  breeze  to  be  recovered.  If  we  insert 
our  own  conjectural  amendments,  we  perhaps  give  a 
purport  utterly  at  variance  with  the  true  one.  Yet 
unless  we  attempt  something  in  this  way,  there  must 
remain  an  unsightly  gap,  and  a  lack  of  continuousness 
and  dependence  in  our  narrative ;  so  that  it  would 
arrive  at  certain  inevitable  catastrophes  without  due 
warning  of  their  imminence. 

Of  so  much  we  are  sure,  that  there  seemed  to  be  a 
sadly  mysterious  fascination  in  the  influence  of  this  ill- 
omened  person  over  Miriam ;  it  was  such  as  beasts  and 
reptiles  of  subtle  and  evil  nature  sometimes  exercise 
upon  their  victims.  Marvellous  it  was  to  see  the  hope- 
lessness with  which  —  being  naturally  of  so  courageous 
a  spirit  —  she  resigned  herself  to  the  thraldom  in  which 
he  held  her.  That  iron  chain,  of  which  some  of  the 
massive  links  were  round  her  feminine  waist,  and  the 
others  in  his  ruthless  hand, — or  which,  perhaps,  bound 
the  pair  together  by  a  bond  equally  torturing  to  each, 
—  must  have  been  forged  in  some  such  unhallowed 
furnace  as  is  only  kindled  by  evil  passions  and  fed  by 
evil  deeds. 

Yet,  let  us  trust,  there  may  have  been  no  crime  in 
Miriam,  but  only  one  of  those  fatalities  which  are 
among  the  most  insoluble  riddles  propounded  to  mor- 
tal comprehension ;  the  fatal  decree  by  which  every 
crime  is  made  to  be  the  agony  of  many  innocent  per- 
sons, as  well  as  of  the  single  guilty  one. 

It  was,  at  any  rate,  but  a  feeble  and  despairing  kind 
of  remonstrance  which  she  had  now  the  energy  to  op- 
pose against  his  persecution. 

"  You  follow  me  too  closely,"  she  said,  in  low,  falter- 
ing accents ;  '*  you  allow  me  too  scanty  room  to  draw 
my  breath.  Do  you  know  what  will  be  the  end  of 
this?" 

Digitized  by  LjOOQIC 


116  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

"  1  know  well  what  must  be  the  end,"  he  replied. 

"  Tell  me^  then,"  said  Miriam,  "  that  I  may  com* 
pare  your  foreboding  with  my  own.  Mine  is  a  very 
dark  one." 

"  There  can  be  but  one  result,  and  that  soon,"  an- 
swered the  model.  "  You  must  throw  off  your  present 
mask  and  assume  another.  You  must  vanish  out  of 
the  scene :  quit  Rome  with  me,  and  leave  no  traoe 
whereby  to  follow  you.  It  is  in  my  power,  as  you  well 
know,  to  compel  your  acquiescence  in  my  bidding. 
You  are  aware  of  the  penalty  of  a  refusal." 

"Not  that  penalty  with  which  you  would  terrify 
me,"  said  Miriam ;  "  another  there  may  be,  but  not  so 
grievous." 

"  What  is  that  other  ?  "  he  inquired. 

"  Death !  simply  death  !  "  she  answered. 

**  Death,"  said  her  persecutor,  "  is  not  so  simple  and 
opportune  a  thing  as  you  imagine.  You  are  strong 
and  warm  with  life.  Sensitive  and  irritable  as  your 
spirit  is,  these  many  months  of  trouble,  this  latter 
thraldom  in  which  I  hold  you,  have  scarcely  made 
your  cheek  paler  than  I  saw  it  in  your  girlhood.  Mir- 
iam, —  for  1  forbear  to  speak  another  name,  at  which 
these  leaves  would  shiver  above  our  heads,  —  Miriam, 
you  cannot  die ! " 

"  Might  not  a  dagger  find  my  heart?  "  said  she,  fo* 
the  first  time  meeting  his  eyes.  "  Would  not  poison 
make  an  end  of  me  ?    Will  not  the  Tiber  drown  me  ?  *' 

*^It  might,"  he  answered;  "for  I  allow  that  you 
are  mortal.  But,  Miriam,  believe  me,  it  is  not  youi 
fate  to  die  while  there  remains  so  much  to  be  sinned 
and  suffered  in  the  world.  We  have  a  destiny  which 
we  must  needs  fulfil  together.  I,  too,  have  struggled 
to  escape  it.    I  was  as  anxious  as  yourself  to  break  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


FRAGMENTARY  SENTENCES.  117 

tie  between  us,  —  to  bury  the  past  in  a  fathomless 
grave,  —  to  make  it  impossible  that  we  should  ever 
meet,  imtil  you  confront  me  at  the  bar  of  Judgment ! 
You  little  can  imagine  what  steps  I  took  to  render  all 
this  secure ;  and  what  was  the  result  ?  Our  strange 
interview  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth  convinced  me  of 
the  futility  of  my  design." 

"  Ah,  fatal  chance  1 "  cried  Miriam,  covering  her 
face  with  her  hands. 

**  Yes,  your  heart  trembled  with  horror  when  you 
recognized  me,"  rejoined  he ;  "  but  you  did  not  guess 
that  there  was  an  equal  horror  in  my  own  I  " 

"Why  would  not  the  weight  of  earth  above  our 
heads  have  crumbled  down  upon  us  both,  forcing  us 
apart,  but  burying  us  equally  ? "  cried  Miriam,  in  a 
burst  of  vehement  passion.  "  Oh,  that  we  could  have 
wandered  in  those  dismal  passages  till  we  both  per- 
ished, taking  opposite  paths  in  the  darkness,  so  that 
when  we  lay  down  to  die  our  last  breaths  might  not 
mingle ! " 

"  It  were  vain  to  wish  it,"  said  the  model.  "  In  all 
that  Jabyrinth  of  midnight  paths,  we  should  have  found 
one  another  out  to  live  or  die  together.  Our  fates 
cross  and  are  entangled.  The  threads  are  twisted  into 
a  strong  cord,  which  is  dragging  us  to  an  evil  doom. 
Could  the  knots  be  severed,  we  might  escape.  But 
neither  can  your  slender  fingers  untie  these  knots,  nor 
my  masculine  force  break  them.     We  must  submit !  " 

"Pray  for  rescue,  as  I  have,"  exclaimed  Miriam. 
"  Pray  for  deliverance  from  me,  since  I  am  your  evil 
genius,  as  you  mine.  Dark  as  your  life  has  been,  I 
have  known  you  to  pray  in  times  past !  " 

At  these  words  of  Miriam,  a  tremor  and  horror  ap« 
peared  to  seize  upon  her  persecutor,  insomuch  that  he 


Digitized 


by  Google 


118  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

shook  and  grew  ashy  pale  before  her  eyes.  In  this 
man's  memory,  there  was  something  that  made  it  aw-* 
fill  for  him  to  think  of  prayer ;  nor  would  any  tortur^ 
be  more  intolerable  than  to  be  reminded  of  such  divine 
comfort  and  succor  as  await  pious  souls  merely  for  the 
asking.  This  torment  was  perhaps  the  token  of  a  na» 
live  temperament  deeply  susceptible  of  religious  im- 
pressions, but  which  had  been  wronged,  violated,  and 
debased,  until,  at  length,  it  was  capable  only  of  terror 
from  the  sources  that  were  intended  for  our  purest 
and  loftiest  consolation.  He  looked  so  fearfully  at 
her,  and  with  such  intense  pain  struggling  in  his  eyes, 
that  Miriam  felt  pity. 

And,  now,  all  at  once,  it  struck  her  that  he  mighi 
be  mad.  It  was  an  idea  that  had  never  before  seri- 
ously occurred  to  her  mind,  although,  as  soon  as  sug- 
gested, it  fitted  marvellously  into  niany  circumstances 
that  lay  within  her  knowledge.  But,  alas !  such  was 
her  evil  fortune,  that,  whether  mad  or  no,  his  power 
over  her  remained  the  same,  and  was  likely  to  be  used 
only  the  more  tyrannously,  if  exercised  by  a  limatic. 

"  I  would  not  give  you  pain,"  she  said,  soothingly ; 
"your  faith  allows  you  the  consolations  of  penance 
and  absolution.  Try  what  help  there  may  be  in  these, 
and  leave  me  to  myself." 

"  Do  not  think  it,  Miriam,"  said  he ;  "  we  are  bound 
together,  and  can  never  part  again." 

"  Why  should  it  seem  so  impossible  ?  "  she  rejoined. 
*'  Think  how  I  had  escaped  from  all  the  past !  I  had 
made  for  myself  a  new  sphere,  and  found  new  friends, 
new  occupations,  new  hopes  and  enjoyments.  My 
heart,  methinks,  was  almost  as  unburdened  as  if  there 
had  been  no  miserable  life  behind  me.  The  human 
spirit  does  not  perish  of  a  single  woimd,  nor  exhaust 


Digitized 


by  Google 


FRAGMENTARY  SENTENCES.  119 

itself  in  a  single  trial  of  life.  Let  us  but  keep  asun* 
der,  and  all  may  go  well  for  both." 

"  We  fancied  ourselves  forever  sundered,"  he  re- 
plied. "  Yet  we  met  once,  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth ; 
and,  were  we  to  part  now,  our  fates  would  fling  us 
together  again  in  a  desert,  on  a  mountain -top,  or  in 
whatever  spot  seemed  safest.  You  speak  in  vain, 
therefore." 

**  You  mistake  your  own  will  for  an  iron  necessity,'* 
said  Miriam ;  "  otherwise,  you  might  have  suffered  me 
to  glide  past  you  like  a  ghost,  when  we  met  among 
those  ghosts  of  ancient  days.  Even  now  you  might 
bid  me  pass  as  freely." 

"  Never  1  '^  said  he,  with  unmitigable  will ;  **  your 
reappearance  has  destroyed  the  work  of  years.  You 
know  the  power  that  I  have  over  you.  Obey  my  bid- 
ding ;  or,  within  a  short  time,  it  shall  be  exercised : 
nor  win  I  cease  to  haunt  you  till  the  moment  comes." 

"  Then,"  said  Miriam,  more  calmly,  "  I  foresee  the 
end,  and  have  already  warned  you  of  it.  It  will  be 
death  I " 

"  Your  own  death,  Miriam,  —  or  mine  ?  "  he  asked» 
looking  fixedly  at  her. 

"  Do  you  imagine  me  a  murderess  ?  "  said  she, 
shuddering ;  "  you,  at  least,  have  no  right  to  think  me 
so!" 

"Yet,"  rejoined  he,  with  a  glance  of  dark  meaning. 
**  men  have  said  that  this  white  hand  had  once  a  crim* 
son  stain."  He  took  her  hand  as  he  spoke,  and  held 
it  in  his  own,  in  spite  of  the  repugnance,  amounting 
to  nothing  short  of  agony,  with  which  she  struggled  to 
regain  it.  Holding  it  up  to  the  fading  light  (for  there 
was  already  dimness  among  the  trees),  he  appeared 
to  examine  it  closely,  as  if  to  discover  the  imaginary 


Digitized 


by  Google 


'120  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

blood-stain  with  which  he  taunted  her.  He  smiled  as 
he  let  it  go.  "  It  looks  very  white,"  said  he  ;  "  but  I 
have  known  hands  as  white,  which  all  the  water  in  the 
ocean  would  not  have  washed  clean." 

"  It  had  no  stain,"  retorted  Miriam,  bitterly,  "  until 
j  you  grasped  it  in  your  own." 

The  wind  has  blown  away  whatever  else  they  may 
have  spoken. 

They  went  together  towards  the  town,  and,  on  their 
vay,  continued  to  make  reference,  no  doubt,  to  some 
Bvrange  and  dreadful  history  of  their  former  life,  be- 
longing equally  to  this  dark  man  and  to  the  fair  and 
youthful  woman  whom  he  persecuted.  In  their  words, 
or  in  the  breath  that  uttered  them,  there  seemed  to 
be  an  odor  of  gmlt,  and  a  scent  of  blood.  Yet,  how 
can  we  imagine  that  a  stain  of  ensanguined  crime 
should  attach  to  Miriam  1  Or  how,  on  the  other  hand, 
should  spotless  innocenqe  be  subjected  to  a  thraldom 
like  that  which  she  endured  from  the  spectre,  whom 
she  herself  had  evoked  out  of  the  darkness  I  Be  this 
as  it  might,  Miriam,  we  have  reason  to  believe,  still 
continued  to  beseech  him,  humbly,  passionately,  wildly, 
only  to  go  his  way,  and  leave  her  free  to  follow  her 
own  sad  path. 

Thus  they  strayed  onward  through  the  green  wil- 
derness of  the  Borghese  grounds,  and  soon  came  near 
the  city  wall,  where,  had  Miriam  raised  her  eyes,  she 
might  have  seen  Hilda  and  the  sculptor  leaning  on 
the  parapet.  But  she  walked  in  a  mist  of  trouble,  and 
could  distinguish  little  beyond  its  limits.  As  they 
came  within  public  observation,  her  persecutor  fell  be- 
hind, throwing  oflE  the  imperious  manner  which  he  had 
assumed  during  their  solitary  interview.  The  Porta 
del  Popolo  swarmed  with  life.    The  merry-makers,  who- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


FRAGMENTARY  SEKTENCES,  121 

had  spent  the  feast-day  outside  the  walls,  were  now 
thronging  in ;  a  party  of  horsemen  were  entering  be- 
neath the  arch ;  a  travelling-carriage  had  been  drawi 
up  just  within  the  verge,  and  was  passing  through  the 
vilhmous  ordeal  of  the  papal  custom-house.  In  the 
broad  piazza,  too,  there  was  a  motley  crowd. 

But  the  stream  of  Miriam's  trouble  kept  its  waj 
through  this  flood  of  human  life,  and  neither  mingled 
with  it  nor  was  turned  aside.  With  a  sad  kind  oi 
feminine  ingenuity,  she  found  a  way  to  kneel  before 
her  tyrant  undetected,  though  in  full  sight  of  all  the 
people,  still  beseeching  him  for  freedom,  and  in  vain* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  Xn. 

A  STROLL  ON  THE  PINCIAlf, 

Hilda,  after  giving  the  last  touches  to  the  picture 
of  Beatrice  Cenci,  had  flown  down  from  her  dove-cote, 
late  in  the  afternoon,  and  gone  to  the  Pincian  Hill,  in . 
the  hope  of  hearing  a  strain  or  two  of  exhilarating 
music.  There,  as  it  happened,  she  met  the  sculptor ; 
for,  to  say  the  truth,  Kenyon  had  well  noted  the  fair 
artist's  ordinary  way  of  life,  and  was  accustomed  to 
shape  his  own  movements,  so  as  to  bring  him  often 
within  her  sphere. 

The  Pincian  Hill  is  the  favorite  promenade  of  the 
Koman  aristocracy.  At  the  present  day,  however,  like 
most  other  Eoman  possessions,  it  belongs  less  to  the 
native  inhabitants  than  to  the  barbarians  from  Gaul, 
Great  Britain,  and  beyond  the  sea,  who  have  estab- 
lished a  peaceful  usurpation  over  whatever  is  enjoya- 
ble or  memorable  in  the  Eternal  City.  These  foreign 
guests  are  indeed  ungrateful,  if  they  do  not  breathe  a 
prayer  for  Pope  Clement,  or  whatever  Holy  Father  it 
may  have  been,  who  levelled  the  summit  of  the  mount 
so  skilfully,  and  bounded  it  with  the  parapet  of  the 
city  wall ;  who  laid  out  those  broad  walks  and  drives, 
and  overhung  them  with  the  deepening  shade  of  many 
kinds  of  tree ;  who  scattered  the  flowers  of  all  seasons, 
and  of  every  clime,  abundantly  over  those  green,  cen- 
tral lawns ;  who  scooped  out  hollows,  in  fit  places, 
and,  setting  great  basins  of  marble  in  them,  caused 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A   STROLL   ON  THE  PTNCIAN.  128 

ever-gushing  fountains  to  fill  them  to  the  brim  ;  who 
reared  up  the  immemorial  obelisk  out  of  the  soil  that 
had  long  hidden  it;  who  placed  pedestals  along  the 
borders  of  the  avenues,  and  crowned  them  with  busts 
of  that  multitude  of  worthies  —  statesmen,  heroes,  art- 
ists, men  of  letters  and  of  song  —  whom  the  whole 
world  claims  as  its  chief  ornaments,  though  Italy  pro- 
duced them  all.  In  a  word,  the  Pincian  garden  is 
one  of  the  things  that  reconcile  the  stranger  (since  he 
fully  appreciates  the  enjoyment,  and  feels  nothing  of 
the  cost)  to  the  rule  of  an  irresponsible  dynasty  of 
Holy  Fathers,  who  seem  to  have  aimed  at  making  life 
as  agreeable  an  affair  as  it  can  well  be. 

In  this  pleasant  spot,  the  red-trousered  French  sol- 
diers are  always  to  be  seen  ;  bearded  and  grizzled  vet- 
erans, perhaps  with  medals  of  Algiers  or  the  Crimea 
on  their  breasts.  To  them  is  assigned  the  peaceful 
duty  of  seeing  that  children  do  not  trample  on  the 
flower-beds,  nor  any  youthful  lover  rifle  them  of  their 
fragrant  blossoms  to  stick  in  the  beloved  one's  hair. 
Here  sits  (drooping  upon  some  marble  bench,  in  the 
treacherous  sunshine)  the  consmnptive  girl,  whose 
friends  have  brought  her,  for  cure,  to  a  climate  that 
instils  poison  into  its  very  purest  breath.  Here,  all 
day,  come  nursery-maids,  burdened  with  rosy  English 
babies,  or  guiding  the  footsteps  of  little  travellers  from 
the  far  Western  world.  Here,  in  the  simi](jr  after* 
noons,  roll  and  rumble  all  kinds  of  equipages,  from  the 
cardinal's  (dd-fashioned  and  gorgeous  purple  carriage 
to  the  gay  barouche  of  modem  date.  Here  horsemen 
gallop  on  thoroughbred  steeds.  Here,  in  short,  all  the 
transitory  population  of  Bome,  the  world's  great  wa- 
tering-place, rides,  drives,  or  promenades  I  Here  are 
beautiful  sunsets ;  and  here,  whichever  way  you  turn 


Digitized 


by  Google 


12*  ROMANCE  OP  MONTE  BENL 

your  eyes,  are  scenes  as  well  worth  gazing  at,  botb  in 
themselves  and  for  their  historic  interest,  as  any  that 
the  sun  ever  rose  and  set  upon.  Here,  too,  on  certain 
afternoons  of  the  week,  a  French  military  band  flings 
out  rich  music  over  the  poor  old  city,  floating  her  with 
^trains  as  loud  as  those  of  her  own  echoless  triumphs. 

Hilda  and  the  sculptor  (by  the  contrivance  of  the 
latter,  who  loved  best  to  be  alone  with  his  young 
country-woman)  had  wandered  beyond  the  throng  of 
promenaders,  whom  they  left  in  a  dense  cluster  aroimd 
the  music.  'Kiey  strayed,  indeed,  to  the  farthest 
point  of  the  Pincian  Hill,  and  leaned  over  the  para- 
pet, looking  down  upon  the  Muro  Torto,  a  massive 
fragment  of  the  oldest  Roman  wall,  which  juts  over, 
as  if  ready  to  tumble  down  by  its  own  weight,  yet 
seems  still  the  most  indestructible  piece  of  work  that 
men's  hands  ever  piled  together.  In  the  blue  distance 
rose  Soracte,  and  other  heights,  which  have  gleamed 
afar,  to  our  imaginations,  but  look  scarcely  real  to  our 
bodily  eyes,  because,  being  dreamed  about  so  much, 
they  have  taken  the  aerial  tints  which  belong  only  to 
a  dream.  These,  nevertheless,  are  the  solid  frame- 
work of  hills  that  shut  in  Rome,  and  its  wide  sur* 
rounding  Campagna;  no  land  of  dreams,  but  the 
broadest  page  of  history,  crowded  so  full  with  mem- 
orable events  that  one  obliterates  another ;  as  if  Time 
had  crossed  and  recrossed  his  own  records  till  they 
grew  illegible. 

But,  not  to  meddle  with  history,  —  with  which  our 
narrative  is  no  otherwise  concerned,  than  that  the 
very  dust  of  Rome  is  historic,  and  inevitably  settles 
on  our  page  and  mingles  with  our  ink,  —  we  will  re* 
turn  to  our  two  friends,  who  were  still  leaning  over 
the  walL    Beneath  them  lay  the  broad  sweep  of  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A   STROLL  ON  THE  PINCIAN.  125 

Borgbese  grounds,  covered  with  trees,  amid  which  ap- 
peared the  white  gleam  of  pillars  and  statues,  and 
the  flash  of  an  upspringing  fountain,  all  to  be  over* 
fihadowed  at  a  later  period  of  the  year  by  the  thicker 
growth  of  foliage. 

The  advance  of  vegetation,  in  this  softer  climate,  is 
less  abrupt  than  the  inhabitant  of  the  cold  North  is 
accustomed  to  observe.  Beginning  earlier,  —  even  in 
February, —  Spring  is  not  compelled  to  burst  into 
Summer  with  such  headlong  haste;  there  is  time  to 
dwell  upon  each  opening  beauty,  and  to  enjoy  the 
budding  leaf,  the  tender  green,  the  sweet  youth  and 
freshness  of  the  year ;  it  gives  us  its  maiden  charm, 
before  settling  into  the  married  Summer,  which,  again, 
docs  not  so  soon  sober  itself  into  matronly  Autumn. 
In  our  own  country,  the  virgin  Spring  hastens  to  its 
bridal  too  abruptly.  But,  here,  after  a  month  or  two 
of  kindly  growth,  the  leaves  of  the  yoimg  trees,  which 
cover  that  portion  of  the  Borghese  grounds  nearest 
ibe  city  wall,  were  still  in  their  tender  half-develop- 
ment. 

In  the  remoter  depths,  among  the  old  groves  of  ilex- 
trees,  Hilda  and  Kenyon  heajrd  the  faint  soimd  of 
music,  laughter,  and  mingling  voices.  It  was  proba- 
bly the  uproar  —  spreading  even  so  far  as  the  walls 
of  Rome,  and  growing  faded  and  melancholy  in  its 
passage  —  of  that  wild  sylvan  merriment,  which  we 
have  already  attempted  to  describe.  By  and  by,  it 
ceased;  although  the  two  listeners  still  tried  to  dis- 
tinguish it  between  the  bursts  of  nearer  music  from 
the  military  band.  But  there  was  no  renewal  of  that 
distant  mirth.  Soon  afterwards,  they  saw  a  solitary 
figure  advancing  along  one  of  the  paths  that  lead  from 
the  obscurer  part  of  the  ground  towards  the  gateway* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


126  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

^ Look!  is  it  not  Donatello?"  said  Hilda. 

^^  He  it  is,  beyond  a  doubt,"  replied  the  scnlpton 
"  But  how  gravely  he  walks,  and  with  what  long  looks 
behind  him!  He  seems  either  very  weary,  op  very 
sad.  I  should  not  hesitate  to  call  it  sadness,  if  Dona* 
teUo  were  a  creature  capable  of  the  sin  and  folly  of 
low  spirits.  In  all  these  hundred  paces,  while  we 
have  been  watching  him,  he  has  not  made  one  of  those 
little  caprioles  in  the  air  which  are  characteristic  of 
his  natural  gait.  I  begin  to  doubt  whether  he  is  a 
veritable  Faun.'* 

"  Then,"  said  Hilda,  with  perfect  simplicity,  **  yon 
have  thought  him  —  and  do  think  him  —  one  of  that 
strange,  wild,  happy  race  of  creatures,  that  used  to 
laugh  and  sport  in  the  woods,  in  the  old,  old  times  ? 
So  do  I,  indeed!  But  I  never  quite  believed,  till 
now,  that  fauns  existed  anywhere  but  in  poetry." 

The  sculptor  at  first  merely  smiled.  Then,  as  the 
idea  took  further  possession  of  his  mind,  he  laughed 
outright,  and  wished  from  the  bottom  of  his  heart 
(being  in  love  with  Hilda,  though  he  had  never  told 
her  so)  that  he  could  have  rewarded  or  punished  her 
for  its  pretty  absurdity  with  a  kiss. 

^^  O  Hilda,  what  a  treasure  of  sweet  faith  and  pure 
imagination  you  hide  under  that  little  straw  hat ! "  ' 
cried  he,  at  length.  "  A  Faun !  a  Faun !  Great  Pan 
is  not  dead,  then,  after  all!  The  whole  tribe  of  myth- 
ical creatures  yet  live  in  the  moonlit  seclusion  of  a 
young  girl's  fancy,  and  find  it  a  lovelier  abode  and 
play-place,  I  doubt  not,  than  their  Arcadian  haunts  of 
yore.  What  bliss,  if  a  man  of  marble,  like  myself^ 
could  stray  thither,  too ! " 

"Why  do  you  laugh  so?'*  asked  Hilda,  redden^ 
'ng;  for  she  was  a  little  disturbed  at  Kenyon's  iid» 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A  STROLL  ON  THE  PINCIAN.  127 

cule,  however  kindly  expressed.  "  What  can  I  have 
said,  that  you  think  so  very  foolish  ?  " 

''  Well,  not  foolish,  then,"  rejoined  the  sculptor, 
**  but  wiser,  it  may  be,  than  I  can  fathom.  Really, 
however,  the  idea  does  strike  one  as  delightfully  fresh, 
when  we  consider  Donatello's  position  and  external 
environment.  Why,  my  dear  Hilda,  he  is  a  Tuscaa 
bom,  of  an  old  noble  race  in  that  part  of  Italy ;  and 
he  has  a  moss-grown  tower  among  the  Apennines, 
where  he  and  his  forefathers  have  dwelt,  under  their 
own  vines  and  fig-trees,  from  an  unknown  antiquity. 
His  boyish  passion  for  Miriam  has  introduced  him 
familiarly  to  our  little  circle ;  and  our  republican  and 
artistic  simplicity  of  intercourse  has  included  this 
young  Italian,  on  the  same  terms  as  one  of  ourselves. 
But,  if  we  paid  due  respect  to  rank  and  title,  we 
should  bend  reverentially  to  Donatello,  and  salute 
him  as  his  Excellency  the  Count  di  Monte  Beni." 

**  That  is  a  droU  idea,  —  much  droller  than  his  being 
a  Faun ! "  said  Hilda,  laughing  in  her  turn.  "  This 
does  not  quite  satisfy  me,  however,  especially  as  you 
yourself  recognized,  and  acknowledged  his  wonderful 
resemblance  to  the  statue." 

^^  Except  as  regards  the  pointed  ears,"  said  Ken- 
yon  ;  adding,  aside,  ^^  and  one  other  little  peculiarityi 
generally  observable  in  the  statues  of  fauns." 

^^  As  for  his  Excellency  the  Count  di  Monte  Beni's 
ears,"  replied  Hilda,  smiling  again  at  the  dignity  with 
which  this  title  invested  their  playful  friend,  "you 
know  we  could  never  see  their  shape,  on  account  of 
his  clustering  curls.  Nay,  I  remember,  he  once  started 
back,  as  shyly  as  a  wild  deer,  when  Miriam  made  a 
pretense  of  examining  them.  How  do  you  explain 
that?" 


Digitized 


by  Google 


128  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

"  Oh,  I  certainly  shall  not  contend  against  such  a 
weight  of  evidence;  the  fact  of  his  faunship  being 
otherwise  so  probable,"  answered  the  sculptor,  still 
hardly  retaining  his  gravity.  "Faun  or  not,  Dona- 
lello  —  or  the  Count  di  Monte  Beni  — is  a  singularly 
wild  creature,  and,  as  I  have  remarked  on  other  occa- 
sions, though  very  gentle,  does  not  love  to  be  touched. 
Speaking  in  no  harsh  sense,  there  is  a  great  deal  of 
animal  nature  in  him,  as  if  he  had  been  bom  in  the 
woods,  and  had  run  wild  all  his  childhood,  and  were 
as  yet  but  imperfectly  domesticated.  Life,  even  in 
our  day,  is  very  simple  and  unsophisticated  in  some  of 
the  shaggy  nooks  of  the  Apennines." 

"  It  annoys  me  very  much,"  said  Hilda,  "  this  incli- 
nation, which  most  people  have,  to  explain  away  the 
wonder  and  the  mystery  out  of  everything.  Why 
could  not  you  allow  me  —  and  yourself,  too  —  the  sat- 
isfaction of  thinking  him  a  Faun  ?  " 

"  Pray  keep  your  belief,  dear  Hilda,  if  it  makes  you 
any  happier,"  said  the  sculptor ;  "and  I  shall  do  my 
best  to  become  a  convert.  Donatello  has  asked  me  to 
spend  the  summer  with  him,  in  his  ancestral  tower, 
where  I  purpose  investigating  the  pedigree  of  these 
sylvan  coimts,  his  forefathers ;  and  if  their  shadows 
beckon  me  into  dreamland,  I  shall  willingly  follow. 
By  the  by,  speaking  of  Donatello,  there  is  a  point  on 
^Which  I  should  like  to  be  enlightened." 

"  Can  I  help  you,  then  ?  "  said  Hilda,  in  answer  to 
bis  look. 

"  Is  there  the  slightest  chance  of  his  winning  Mir- 
fam's  affections  ?  "  suggested  Kenyon. 

"Miriam!  she,  so  accomplished  and  gifted!"  ex 
claimed  Hilda;  "and  he,  a  rude,  uncultivated  boy  I 
No,  no,  no  1 " 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A   STROLL   ON  THE  PINCIAN.  129 

^^  It  would  seem  impossible,"  said  the  sculptor. 
''But,  on  the  other  hand,  a  gifted  woman  flings  away 
her  affections  so  unaccountably,  sometimes  I  Miriam, 
of  late,  has  been  very  morbid  and  miserable,  as  we 
both  know.  Yoimg  as  she  is,  the  morning  light  seems 
already  to  have  faded  out  of  her  life  ;  and  now  comes 
Donatello,  with  natural  sunshine  enough  for  himself 
and  her,  and  offers  her  the  opportunity  of  making  her 
heart  and  life  all  new  and  cheery  again.  People  of 
high  intellectual  endowments  do  not  require  similar 
ones  in  those  they  love.  They  are  just  the  persons  to 
appreciate  the  wholesome  gush  of  natural  feeling,  the 
honest  affection,  the  simple  joy,  the  fulness  of  content- 
ment with  what  he  loves,  which  Miriam  sees  in  Dona- 
tello. True  ;  she  may  call  him  a  simpleton.  It  is  a 
necessity  of  the  case  ;  for  a  man  loses  the  capacity  for 
this  kind  of  affection,  in  proportion  as  he  cultivates 
and  refines  hunself." 

"  Dear  me !  "  said  Hilda,  drawing  imperceptibly 
away  from  her  companion.  "  Is  this  the  penalty  of 
refinement  ?  Pardon  me  ;  I  do  not  believe  it.  It  is 
because  you  are  a  sculptor,  that  you  think  nothing  can 
be  finely  wrought  except  it  be  cold  and  hard,  like  the 
marble  in  which  your  ideas  take  shape.  I  am  a 
painter,  and  know  that  the  most  delicate  beauty  may 
be  softened  and  warmed  throughout." 

"  I  said  a  foolish  thing,  indeed,"  answered  the  sculp- 
tor. "  It  surprises  me,  for  I  might  have  drawn  a 
wiser  knowledge  out  of  my  own  experience.  It  is  the 
surest  test  of  genuine  love,  that  it  brings  back  our 
early  simplicity  to  the  worldliest  of  us." 

Thus  talking,^  they  loitered  slowly  along  beside  the 
parapet  which  borders  the  level  summit  of  the  Pincian 
with  its  irregular  sweep.     At  interv^  they  looked 


Digitized 


by  Google 


180  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

through  the  lattice-work  of  their  thoughts  at  the  varied 
prospects  that  lay  before  and  beneath  them. 

From  the  terrace  where  they  now  stood  there  is  an 
abrupt  descent  towards  the  Piazza  del  Popolo;  and 
looking  down  into  its  broad  space  they  beheld  the  tall 
palatial  edifices,  the  church-domes,  and  the  ornamented 
gateway,  which  grew  and  were  consolidated  out  of  the 
thought  of  Michael  Angelo.  They  saw,  too,  the  red 
granite  obelisk,  oldest  of  things,  even  in  Borne,  which 
rises  in  the  centre  of  the  piazza,  with  a  fourfold  foun«^ 
tain  at  its  base.  All  Roman  works  and  ruins  (whether 
of  the  empire,  the  far-off  republic,  or  the  still  more 
distant  kings)  assume  a  transient,  visionary,  and  im- 
palpable character  when  we  think  that  this  indestruo* 
tlble  monument  supplied  one  of  the  recollections  which 
Moses  and  the  Israelites  bore  from  Egypt  into  the  des- 
ert. Perchance,  on  beholding  the  cloudy  pillar  and 
the  fiery  column,  they  whispered  awe-stricken  to  one 
another,  *'In  its  shape  it  is  like  that  old  obelisk  which 
we  and  our  fathers  have  so  often  seen  on  the  borders 
of  the  Nile."  And  now  that  very  obelisk,  with  hardly 
a  trace  of  decay  upon  it,  is  the  first  thing  that  the 
modern  traveller  sees  after  entering  the  Flaminian 
Gate! 

Lifting  their  eyes,  Hilda  and  her  companion  gazed 
westward,  and  saw  beyond  the  invisible  Tiber  the  Cas- 
tle of  St.  Angelo ;  that  immense  tomb  of  a  pagan  em« 
peror,  with  the  archangel  at  its  summit. 

Still  farther  off  appeared  a  mighty  pile  of  buildings, 
surmounted  by  the  vast  dome,  which  all  of  us  have 
shaped  and  swelled  outward,  like  a  huge  bubble,  to 
the  utmost  scope  of  our  imaginations,  long  before  we 
Bee  it  floating  over  the  worship  of  the  city.  It  may 
be  most  worthily  seeu  from  precisely  the  point  wheiQ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A   STROLL  ON  THE  PINCIAN-  131 

©or  two  friends  were  now  standing.  At  any  nearer 
view  the  grandeur  of  St.  Peter's  hides  itself  behind 
the  immensity  of  its  separate  parts,  so  that  we  see 
only  the  front,  only  the  sides,  only  the  pillared  length 
and  loftiness  of  the  portico,  and  not  the  mighty  whole. 
But  at  this  distance  the  entire  outline  of  the  world's 
cathedral,  as  well  as  that  of  the  palace  of  the  world's 
chief  priest,  is  taken  in  at  once.  In  such  remoteness, 
moreover,  the  imagination  is  not  debarred  from  lend- 
ing its  assistance,  even  while  we  have  the  reality  be- 
fore our  eyes,  and  helping  the  weakness  of  human 
sense  to  do  justice  to  so  grand  an  object.  It  requires 
both  faith  and  .fancy  to  enable  us  to  feel,  what  is  nev- 
ertheless so  true,  that  yonder,  in  front  of  the  purple 
outline  of  hills,  is  the  grandest  edifice  ever  built  by 
man,  painted  against  God's  loveliest  sky. 

After  contemplating  a  little  while  a  scene  which 
their  long  residence  in  Rome  had  made  familiar  to 
them,  Kenyon  and  Hilda  again  let  their  glances  fall 
into  the  piazza  at  their  feet.  They  there  beheld  Mir- 
iam, who  had  just  entered  the  Porta  del  Popolo,  and 
was  standing  by  the  obelisk  and  fountain.  With  a 
gesture  that  impressed  Kenyon  as  at  once  suppliant 
and  imperious,  she  seemed  to  intimate  to  a  figure 
which  had  attended  her  thus  far,  that  it  was  now  her 
desire  to  be  left  alone.  The  pertinacious  model,  how* 
ever,  remained  immovable. 

And  the  sculptor  here  noted  a  circiunstance,  which^ 
according  to  the  interpretation  he  might  put  upon  it, 
was  either  too  trivial  to  be  mentioned,  or  else  so  mys- 
teriously significant  that  he  found  it  difficult  to  be- 
lieve his  eyes.  Miriam  knelt  down  on  the  steps  of  the 
fountain ;  so  far  there  could  be  no  question  of  the  fact. 
To  other  observers,  if  any  there  were,  she  probably 


Digitized 


by  Google 


132  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

appeared  to  take  this  attitude  merely  for  the  oonveik 
ience  of  dipping  her  fingera  into  the  gush  of  watei 
from  the  mouth  of  one  of  the  stone  lions.  But  as  she 
clasped  her  hands  together  after  thus  bathing  them, 
and  glanced  upward  at  the  model,  an  idea  took  strong 
possession  of  Kenyon's  mind  that  Miriam  was  kneel- 
ing to  this  dark  follower  there  in  the  world's  facel 

"  Do  you  see  it  ?  "  he  said  to  Hilda. 

"  See  what  ?  "  asked  she,  surprised  at  the  emotion 
of  his  tone.  "  I  see  Miriam,  who  has  just  bathed  her 
hands  in  that  delightfully  coo)  water.  I  often  dip  my 
fingers  into  a  Roman  fountain,  and  think  of  the  brook 
that  used  to  be  one  of  my  playmates  iu  my  New  Eng- 
land village." 

"  I  fancied  I  saw  something  else,"  said  Kenyon ; 
"  but  it  was  doubtless  a  mistake." 

But,  allowing  that  he  had  caught  a  true  glimpse 
into  the  hidden  significance  of  Miriam's  gesture,  what 
a  terrible  thraldom  did  it  suggest !  Free  as  she  seemed 
to  be,  —  beggar  as  he  looked,  —  the  nameless  vagrant 
must  then  be  dragging  the  beautiful  Miriam  through 
the  streets  of  Rome,  fettered  and  shackled  more  cruelly 
than  any  captive  queen  of  yore  following  in  an  em- 
peror's  triumph.  And  was  it  conceivable  that  she 
would  have  been  thus  enthralled  unless  some  great 
error  —  how  great  Kenyon  dared  not  think  —  or  some 
fatal  weakness  had  given  this  dark  adversary  a  van- 
tage-ground ? 

"  Hilda,"  said  he,  abruptly,  "  who  and  what  is  Mir* 
iam  ?     Pardon  me  ;  but  are  you  sure  of  her  ?  " 

"  Sure  of  her !  "  repeated  Hilda,  with  an  angry 
blush,  for  her  friend's  sake.  "  I  am  sure  that  she  is 
kind,  good,  and  generous  ;  a  true  and  faithful  friend, 
whom  I  love  deswly,  and  who  loves  me  as  well  I  What 
more  than  this  need  I  be  sure  of  ?  " 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A   STROLL  ON  THE  PINCIAN.  133 

•*And  your  delicate  instincts  say  all  this  in  her 
favor  ?  —  nothing  against  her  ?  "  continued  the  sculp- 
tor, without  heeding  the  irritation  of  Hilda's  tone. 
'*  These  are  my  own  impressions,  too.  But  she  is  such 
a  mystery !  We  do  not  even  know  whether  she  is  a 
countrywoman  of  ours,  or  an  Englishwoman,  or  a  Ger- 
man. There  is  Anglo-Saxon  blood  in  her  veins,  one 
would  say,  and  a  right  English  accent  on  her  tongue, 
but  much  that  is  not  English  breeding,  nor  American. 
Nowhere  else  but  in  Rome,  and  as  an  artist,  could  she 
hold  a  place  in  society  without  giving  some  clew  to 
her  past  life." 

**  I  love  her  dearly,'"  said  Hilda,  still  with  displeas- 
ure in  her  tone,  "  and  trust  her  most  entirely." 

"  My  heart  trusts  her  at  least,  whatever  my  head 
may  do,"  replied  Kenyon  ;  *'  and  Rome  is  not  like  one 
09:  our  New  England  villages,  where  we  need  the  per- 
mission of  each  individual  neighbor  for  every  act  that 
we  do,  every  word  that  we  utter,  and  every  friend  that 
we  make  or  keep.  In  these  particulars  the  papal  des- 
potism allows  us  freer  breath  than  our  native  air; 
and  if  we  like  to  take  generous  views  of  our  associates, 
we  can  do  so,  to  a  reasonable  extent,  without  ruining 
ourselves." 

"  The  music  has  ceased,"  said  Hilda ;  "  I  am  going 
now." 

There  are  three  streets  that,  beginning  close  beside 
each  other,  diverge  from  the  Piazza  del  Popolo  to- 
wards the  heart  of  Rome:  on  the  left,  the  Via  del 
Babuino  ;  on  the  right,  the  Via  della  Ripetta  ;  and  be- 
tween these  two  that  world-famous  avenue,  the  Corso. 
It  appeared  that  Miriam  and  her  strange  companion 
were  passing  up  the  first-mentioned  of  these  three,  and 
were  soon  hidden  from  Hilda  and  the  sculptor. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


134  ROMANCE   OF  MONTE  BENT. 

The  two  latter  left  the  Pincian  by  the  broad  and 
stately  walk  that  skirts  along  its  brow.  Beneath  them^ 
from  the  base  of  the  abrupt  descent,  the  city  spread 
wide  away  in  a  close  contiguity  of  red-earthen  roofs, 
above  which  rose  eminent  the  domes  of  a  hundred 
churches,  beside  here  and  there  a  tower,  and  the  up- 
per windows  of  some  taller  or  higher  situated  palace, 
looking  down  on  a  multitude  of  palatial  abodes.  At 
a  distance,  ascending  out  of  the  central  mass  of  edi- 
fices, they  could  see  the  top  of  the  Antonine  column, 
and  near  it  the  circular  roof  of  the  Pantheon  looking 
heavenward  with  its  ever-open  eye. 

Except  these  two  objects,  almost  everything  that 
they  beheld  was  mediaeval,  though  built,  indeed,  of  the 
massive  old  stones  and  indestructible  bricks  of  im- 
perial Rome  ;  for  the  ruins  of  the  Coliseum,  the 
Golden  House,  and  innumerable  temples  of  Roman 
gods,  and  mansions  of  Caesars  and  senators,  had  sup- 
plied the  material  for  all  those  gigantic  hovels,  and 
their  walls  were  cemented  with  mortar  of  inestimable 
cost,  being  made  of  precious  antique  statues,  buint 
long  ago  for  this  petty  purpose. 

Rome,  as  it  now  exists,  has  grown  up  under  tho 
Popes,  and  seems  like  nothing  but  a  heap  of  broken 
rubbish,  thrown  into  the  great  chasm  between  our  own 
days  and  the  Empire,  merely  to  fill  it  up ;  and,  for  the 
better  part  of  two  thousand  years,  its  annals  of  ob- 
scure policies,  and  wars,  and  continually  recurring 
misfortunes,  seem  also  but  broken  rubbish,  as  com- 
pared with  its  classic  history. 

If  we  consider  the  present  city  as  at  all  connected 
with  the  famous  one  of  old,  it  is  only  because  we  find 
it  built  over  its  grave.  A  depth  of  thirty  feet  of  soil 
has  covered  up  the  Rome  of  ancient  days,  so  that  it 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A   STROLL   ON  THE  PINCIAN.  185 

lies  like  the  dead  corpse  of  a  giant,  decaying  for  cen« 
taries,  vrith  no  survivor  mighty  enough  even  to  bury 
it,  until  the  dust  of  all  those  years  has  gathered  slowly 
over  its  recumbent  form  and  made  a  casual  sepulchre. 

We  know  not  how  to  characterize,  in  any  accordant 
and  compatible  terms,  the  Home  that  lies  before  us ; 
its  sunless  alleys,  and  streets  of  palaces ;  its  churches, 
lined  with  the  gorgeous  marbles  that  were  originally 
polished  for  the  adornment  of  pagan  temples;  its 
thousands  of  evil  smells,  mixed  up  with  fragrance  of 
rich  incense,  diffused  from  as  many  censers  ;  its  little 
life,  deriving  feeble  nutriment  from  what  has  long 
been  dead.  Everywhere,  some  fragment  of  ruin  sug- 
gesting the  magnificence  of  a  former  epoch ;  every- 
where, moreover,  a  Cross,  —  and  nastiness  at  the  foot 
of  it.  As  the  sum  of  all,  there  are  recollections  that 
kindle  the  soul,  and  a  gloom  and  languor  that  depress 
it  beyond  any  depth  of  melancholic  sentiment  that  can 
be  elsewhere  known. 

Yet  how  is  it  possible  to  say  an  unkind  or  irreveren- 
tial  word  of  Rome  ?  The  city  of  all  tune,  and  of  all 
the  world !  The  spot  for  which  man's  great  life  and 
deeds  have  done  so  much,  and  for  which  decay  has 
done  whatever  glory  and  dominion  could  not  do !  At 
this  moment,  the  evening  sunshine  is  flinging  its 
golden  mantle  over  it,  making  all  that  we  thought 
mean  magnificent ;  the  bells  of  all  the  churches  sud- 
denly ring  out,  as  if  it  were  a  peal  of  triumph  because 
Rome  is  still  imperial. 

"  I  sometimes  fancy,"  said  Hilda,  on  whose  sus- 
ceptibility the  scene  always  made  a  strong  impression^ 
^that  Rome  —  mere  Rome  — will  crowd  everything 
tlse  out  of  my  heart.'^ 

^  Heaven  forbid  I "  ejaculated  the  sculptor. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


186  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

They  had  now  reached  the  grand  stairs  that  ascend 
from  the  Piazza  di  Spagna  to  the  hither  brow  of  the 
Pincian  Hill.  Old  Beppo^  the  millionnaire  of  his 
ragged  fraternity,  —  it  is  a  wonder  that  no  artist 
paints  him  as  the  cripple  whom  St.  Peter  heals  at  the 
Beautiful  Gate  of  the  Temple,  —  was  just  mounting 
his  donkey  to  depart,  laden  with  the  rich  spoil  of  the 
day's  beggary. 

Up  the  stairs,  drawing  his  tattered  cloak  about  his 
face,  came  the  model,  at  whom  Beppo  looked  askance, 
jealous  of  an  encroacher  on  his  rightful  domain.  The 
figure  passed  away,  however,  up  the  Via  Sistina.  In 
the  piazza  below,  near  the  foot  of  the  magnificent 
steps,  stood  Miriam,  with  her  eyes  bent  on  the  ground, 
as  if  she  were  coimting  those  little,  square,  uncomfort- 
able paving-stones,  that  make  it  a  penitential  pilgrim- 
age to  walk  in  Rome.  She  kept  this  attitude  for  sev- 
eral minutes,  and  when,  at  last,  the  importunities  of  a 
beggar  disturbed  her  from  it,  she  seemed  bewildered 
and  pressed  her  hand  upon  her  brow. 

^^  She  has  been  in  some  sad  dream  or  other,  poor 
thing !  "  said  Kenyon,  sympathizingly ;  "  and  even 
now,  she  is  imprisoned  there  in  a  kind  of  cage,  the 
iron  bars  of  which  are  made  of  her  own  thoughts." 

"  I  fear  she  is  not  well,"  said  Hilda.  "  I  am  going 
down  the  stairs,  and  will  join  Miriam." 

"  Farewell,  then,"  said  the  sculptor.  "  Dear  Hilda, 
this  is  a  perplexed  and  troubled  world  I  It  soothes  me 
inexpressibly  to  think  of  you  in  your  tower,  with  white 
doves  and  white  thoughts  for  your  companions,  so  high 
above  us  all,  and  with  the  Virgin  for  your  household 
friend.  You  know  not  how  far  it  throws  its  Ught,  that 
lamp  which  you  keep  btu*ning  at  her  shrine  I  I  passed 
beneath  the  tower  last  night,  and  the  ray  cheered  me^ 
—  because  you  lighted  it" 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A  STROLL  ON  THE  PINCIAN.  137 

•*  It  has  for  me  a  religious  significance,"  replied 
Hilda,  quietly,  "  and  yet  I  am  no  Catholic." 

They  parted,  and  Kenyon  made  haste  along  the  Via 
Sistina,  in  the  hope  of  overtaking  the  model,  whose 
haunts  and  character  he  was  anxious  to  investigate, 
for  Miriam's  sake.  He  fancied  that  he  saw  him  a 
long  way  in  advance,  but  before  he  reached  the  Fouu« 
tain  of  the  Triton,  the  dusky  figure  had  vanished* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  Xm. 

A  sculptor's  studio. 

About  this  period,  Miriam  seems  to  have  been 
goaded  by  a  weary  restlessness  that  drove  her  abroad 
on  any  errand  or  none.  She  went  one  morning  to 
visit  Kenyon  in  his  studio,  whither  he  had  invited  her 
to  see  a  new  statue,  on  which  he  had  staked  many 
hopes,  and  which  was  now  ahnost  completed  in  the 
clay.  Next  to  Hilda,  the  person  for  whom  Miriam 
felt  most  affection  and  confidence  was  Kepyon ;  and 
in  all  the  difficulties  that  beset  her  life,  it  was  her 
impulse  to  draw  near  Hilda  for  feminine  sympathy, 
and  the  sculptor  for  brotherly  counsel. 

Yet  it  was  to  little  purpose  that  she  approached  the 
edge  of  the  voiceless  gulf  between  herself  and  them. 
Standing  on  the  utmost  verge  of  that  dark  chasm,  she 
might  stretch  out  her  hand,  and  never  clasp  a  hand  of 
theirs ;  she  might  strive  to  call  out,  "  Help,  friends ! 
help !  "  but,  as  with  dreamers  when  they  shout,  her 
voice  would  perish  inaudibly  in  the  remoteness  that 
seemed  such  a  little  way.  This  perception  of  an  in* 
finite,  shivering  solitude,  amid  which  we  cannot  come 
close  enough  to  human  beings  to  be  warmed  by  them, 
and  where  they  turn  to  cold^  chiUy  shapes  of  mist,  is 
one  of  the  most  forlorn  results  of  any  accident,  misfor- 
tune, crime,  or  peculiarity  of  character,  that  puts  an 
individual  ajar  with  the  world.  Very  often,  as  in 
Miriam's  case,  there  is  an  insatiable  instinct  that  de- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A   SCULPTOR'S  STUDIO.  189 

mands  friendship,  love,  and  intimate  communion,  but 
is  forced  to  pine  in  empty  forms ;  a  hunger  of  the 
heart,  which  jBnds  only  shadows  to  feed  upon. 

Kenyon's  studio  was  in  a  cross-street,  or,  rather,  an 
ugly  and  dirty  little  lane,  between  the  Corso  and  the 
Via  della  Ripetta ;  and  though  chill,  narrow,  gloomy, 
and  bordered  with  tall  and  shabby  structures,  the  lane 
was  not  a  whit  more  disagreeable  than  nine  tenths 
of  the  Roman  streets.  Over  the  door  of  one  of  the 
houses  was  a  marble  tablet,  bearing  an  inscription,  to 
the  purport  that  the  sculpture-rooms  within  had  for- 
merly been  occupied  by  the  illustrious  artist  Canova. 
In  these  precincts  (which  Canova's  genius  was  not 
quite  of  a  character  to  render  sacred,  though  it  cer- 
tainly made  them  interesting)  the  young  American 
sculptor  had  now  established  himself. 

The  studio  of  a  sculptor  is  generally  but  a  rough 
and  dreary-looking  place,  with  a  good  de^l  the  aspect, 
indeed,  of  a  stone-mason's  workshop.  Bare  floors  of 
brick  or  plank,  and  plastered  walls ;  an  old  chair  or 
two,  or  perhaps  only  a  block  of  marble  (containing, 
however,  the  possibility  of  idekl  grace  within  it)  to  sit 
down  upon;  some  hastily  scrawled  sketches  of  nude 
figures  on  the  whitewash  of  the  wall.  These  last  are 
probably  the  sculptor's  earliest  glimpses  of  ideas  that 
may  hereafter  be  solidified  into  imperishable  stone,  or 
perhaps  may  remain  as  impalpable  as  a  dream.  Next 
there  are  a  few  very  roughly  modelled  little  figures 
in  clay  or  plaster,  exhibiting  the  second  stage  of  the 
idea  as  it  advances  towards  a  marble  immortality;  and 
then  is  seen  the  exquisitely  designed  shape  of  clay, 
more  interesting  than  even  the  final  marble,  as  be- 
ing the  intimate  production  of  the  sculptor  himself, 
moulded  throughout  with  his  loving  hands,  and  near* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


140  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

est  to  his  imagination  and  heart  In  the  plaster-cast, 
from  this  clay  model,  the  beauty  of  the  statue  strangely 
disappears,  to  shine  forth  again  with  pure  white  radi* 
ance,  in  the  precious  marble  of  Carrara.  Works  in 
all  these  stages  of  advancement,  and  some  with  the 
final  touch  upon  them,  might  be  found  in  Kenyon's 
studio. 

Here  might  be  witnessed  the  process  of  actually 
chiselling  the  marble,  with  which  (as  it  is  not  quite 
satisfactory  to  think)  a  sculptor  in  these  days  has  very 
little  to  do.  In  Italy,  there  is  a  class  of  men  whose 
merely  mechanical  skill  is  perhaps  more  exquisite  than 
was  possessed  by  the  ancient  artificers,  who  wrought 
out  the  designs  of  Praxiteles  ;  or,  very  possibly,  by 
Praxiteles  himself.  Whatever  of  illusive  representa- 
tion can  be  effected  in  marble,  they  are  capable  of 
achieving,  if  the  object  be  before  their  eyes.  The 
sculptor  has  but  to  present  these  men  with  a  plaster- 
cast  of  his  design,  and  a  sufficient  block  of  marble, 
and  tell  them  that  the  figure  is  imbedded  in  the  stone, 
and  must  be  freed  from  its  encumbering  superfluities ; 
and,  in  due  time,  without  the  necessity  of  his  touching 
the  work  with  his  own  finger,  he  will  see  before  him 
the  statue  that  is  to  make  him  renowned.  His  creative 
power  has  wrought  it  with  a  word. 

In  no  other  art,  surely,  does  genius  find  such  effec- 
tive instruments,  and  so  happily  relieve  itself  of  the 
drudgery  of  actual  performance  ;  doing  wonderfully 
nice  things  by  the  hands  of  other  people,  when  it  may 
be  suspected^  they  could  not  always  be  done  by  the 
sculptor's  own.  And  how  much  of  the  admiration 
which  our  artists  get  for  their  buttons  and  button- 
holes,  their  shoe-ties,  their  neck-cloths,  — and  these,  at 
our  present  epoch  of  taste,  mak^  a  large  share  of  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A   SCULPTOR* S  STUmO.  141 

renown,  —  would  be  abated,  if  we  were  generally 
aware  that  the  sculptor  can  claim  no  credit  for  such 
pretty  performances,  as  immortalized  in  marble !  They 
are  not  his  work,  but  that  of  some  nameless  machine 
in  human  shape. 

Miriam  stopped  an  instant  in  an  antechamber,  to 
look  at  a  half-finished  bust,  the  features  of  which 
seemed  to  be  struggling  out  of  the  stone ;  and,  as  it 
were,  scattering  and  dissolving  its  hard  substance  by 
the  glow  of  feeling  and  intelligence.  As  the  skilful 
workman  gave  stroke  after  stroke  of  the  chisel  with 
apparent  carelessness,  but  sure  effect,  it  was  impos- 
sible not  to  think  that  the  outer  marble  was  merely 
an  extraneous  environment;  the  human  countenance 
within  its  embrace  must  have  existed  there  since  the 
limestone  ledges  of  Carrara  were  first  made.  Another 
bust  was  nearly  completed,  though  still  one  of  Ken- 
yon's  most  trustworthy  assistants  was  at  work,  giving 
delicate  touches,  shaving  off  an  impalpable  something, 
and  leaving  little  heaps  of  marble-dust  to  attest  it. 

"  As  these  busts  in  the  block  of  marble,"  thought 
Miriam,  "  so  does  our  individual  fate  exist  in  the  lime- 
stone of  time.  We  fancy  that  we  carve  it  out ;  but 
its  ultimate  shape  is  prior  to  all  our  action." 

Kenyon  was  in  the  inner  room,  but,  hearing  a  step 
in  the  antechamber,  he  threw  a  veil  over  what  he  was 
at  work  upon,  and  came  out  to  receive  his  visitor.  He 
was  dressed  in  a  gray  blouse,  with  a  little  cap  on  the 
top  of  his  head  ;  a  costume  which  became  him  better 
than  the  formal  garments  which  he  wore,  whenever  he 
passed  out  of  his  own  domains.  The  sculptor  had  a 
face  which,  when  time  had  done  a  little  more  for  it, 
would  offer  a  worthy  subject  for  as  good  an  artist  as 
himself :  features  finely  cut,  as  if  already  marble ;  an 


Digitized 


by  Google 


142  ROMANCE   OF  MONTE  BENL 

ideal  forehead,  deeply  set  eyes,  and  a  mouth  much 
hidden  in  a  light-brown  beard,  but  apparently  sensi- 
tive and  delicate. 

"I  will  not  oflfer  you  my  hand,"  said  he;  "it  is 
grimy  with  Cleopatra's  clay." 

"  No ;  I  will  not  touch  clay ;  it  is  earthy  and  hu- 
man," answered  Miriam.  "  I  have  come  to  try  whether 
there  is  any  calm  and  coolness  among  your  marblec^ 
My  own  art  is  too'  nervous,  too  passionate,  too  full  of 
agitation,  for  me  to  work  at  it  whole  days  together, 
without  intervals  of  repose.  So,  what  have  you  to 
show  me  ?  " 

"  Pray  look  at  everything  here,"  said  Kenyon.  "  I 
love  to  have  painters  see  my  work.  Their  judgment 
is  unprejudiced,  and  more  valuable  than  that  of  the 
world  generally,  from  the  light  which  their  own  art 
throws  on  mine.  More  valuable,  too,  than  that  of  my 
brother  sculptors,  who  never  judge  me  fairly,  —  nor  I 
them,  perhaps." 

To  gratify  him,  Miriam  looked  round  at  the  speci- 
mens in  marble  or  plaster,  of  which  there  we?^  several 
in  the  room,  comprising  originals  or  casts  of  most  of 
the  designs  that  Kenyon  had  thus  far  produced.  He 
was  still  too  young  to  have  accumulated  a  large  gal- 
lery of  such  things.  What  he  had  to  show  were 
chiefly  the  attempts  and  experiments,  in  various  di* 
rections,  of  a  beginner  in  art,  acting  as  a  stem  tutor 
to  himself,  and  profiting  more  by  his  failures  than  by 
any  successes  of  which  he  was  yet  capable.  Some  of 
them,  however,  had  great  merit ;  and  in  the  pure,  fine 
glow  of  the  new  marble,  it  may  be,  they  dazzled  the 
judgment  into  awarding  them  higher  praise  than  they 
deserved.  Miriam  admired  the  statue  of  a  beautiful 
youth,  a  pearl-fisher,  who  had  got  entangled  in  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A   SCULPTOR'S  STUDIO.  14S 

weeds  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  and  lay  dead  among 
the  pearl-oysters,  the  rich  shells,  and  the  sea-weeds, 
all  of  like  value  to  him  now. 

"The  poor  young  man  has  perished  among  the 
prizes  that  he  sought,"  remarked  she.  "  But  what  a 
strange  efficacy  there  is  in  death  I  If  we  cannot  all 
win  pearls,  it  causes  an  empty  shell  to  satisfy  us  just 
as  well.  I  like  this  statue,  though  it  is  too  cold  and 
stem  in  its  moral  lesson ;  and,  physically,  the  form 
has  not  settled  itself  into  sufficient  repose." 

In  another  style,  there  was  a  grand,  calm  head  of 
Milton,  not  copied  from  any  one  bust  or  picture,  yet 
more  authentic  than  any  of  them,  because  all  known 
representations  of  the  poet  had  been  profoundly  stud- 
ied, and  solved  in  the  artist's  mind.  The  bust  over 
the  tomb  in  Grey  Friars  Church,  the  original  minia- 
tures and  pictures,  wherever  to  be  found,  had  mingled 
each  its  special  truth  in  this  one  work  ;  wherein,  like- 
wise, by  long  perusal  and  deep  love  of  the  "  Paradise 
Lost,"  the  "Comus,"  the  "Lycidas,"  and  "L' Allegro," 
the  sculptor  had  succeeded,  even  better  than  he  knew, 
in  spiritualizing  his  marble  with  the  poet's  mighty 
genius.  And  this  was  a  great  thing  to  have  achieved, 
such  a  length  of  time  after  the  dry  bones  and  dust  of 
Milton  were  like  those  of  any  other  dead  man. 

There  were  also  several  portrait-busts,  comprising 
those  of  two  or  three  of  the  illustrious  men  of  our 
own  country,  whom  Kenyon,  before  he  left  America, 
had  asked  permission  to  model.  He  had  done  so,  be- 
cause he  sincerely  believed  that,  whether  he  wrought 
the  busts  in  marble  or  bronze,  the  one  would  corrode 
and  the  other  crumble  in  the  long  lapse  of  time,  be* 
iieath  these  great  men's  immortality.  Possibly,  how- 
ever, the  yoimg  artist  may  have  under-estimated  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


144  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

durability  of  his  material.  Other  faces  there  were^ 
too,  of  men  who  (if  the  brevity  of  their  remembrance, 
after  death,  can  be  augured  from  their  little  value  in 
Kfe)  should  have  been  represented  in  snow  rather 
than  marble.  Posterity  will  be  puzzled  what  to  do 
with  busts  like  these,  the  concretions  and  petrifactions 
of  a  vain  self -estimate ;  but  will  find,  no  doubt,  that 
they  serve  to  build  into  stone-walls,  or  bum  into  quick- 
'  lime,  as  well  as  if  the  marble  had  never  been  blocked 
into  the  guise  of  human  heads. 

But  it  is  an  awful  thing,  indeed,  this  endless  endur* 
ance,  this  almost  indestructibility,  of  a  marble  bust ! 
Whether  in  our  own  case,  or  that  of  other  men,  it 
bids  us  sadly  measure  the  little,  little  time  during 
which  our  lineaments  are  likely  to  be  of  interest 
to  any  human  being.  It  is  especially  singular  that 
Americans  should  care  about  perpetuating  themselves 
in  this  mode.  The  brief  duration  of  our  families, 
as  a  hereditary  household,  renders  it  next  to  a  cer- 
tainty that  the  great-grandchildren  will  not  know  their 
father's  grandfather,  and  that  half  a  century  hence  at 
furthest,  the  hammer  of  the  auctioneer  will  thump  its 
knock-down  blow  against  his  blockhead,  sold  at  so 
much  for  the  pound  of  stone !  And  it  ought  to  make 
us  shiver,  the  idea  of  leaving  our  features  to  be  a 
dusty-white  ghost  among  strangers  of  another  genera- 
tion, who  will  take  our  nose  between  their  thumb  and 
fingers  (as  we  have  seen  men  do  by  CaBsar's),  and  in- 
fallibly break  it  oflf  if  they  can  do  so  without  detec- 
tion! 

"  Yes,"  said  Miriam,  who  had  been  revolving  some 
such  thoughts  as  the  above,  "  it  is  a  good  state  of  mind 
for  mortal  man,  when  he  is  content  to  leave  no  more 
definite  memorial  than  the  grass,  which  will  sprout 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A  SCULPTOR'S  STUDIO.  145 

landly  and  speedily  over  his  grave,  if  we  do  not  make 
the  spot  barren  with  marble.  Methinks,  too,  it  will 
be  a  fresher  and  better  world,  when  it  flings  ofif  this 
great  burden  of  stony  memories,  whieh  the  ages  have 
deemed  it  a  piety  to  heap  upon  its  back." 

"  What  you  say,"  remarked  Kenyon,  "  goes  against 
my  whole  art.  Sculpture,  and  the  delight  which  men 
naturally  take  in  it,  appeal*  to  me  a  proof  that  it  is 
good  to  work  with  all  time  before  our  view." 

"  Well,  well,"  answered  Miriam,  "  I  must  not  quar» 
rel  with  you  for  flinging  your  heavy  stones  at  poor 
Posterity ;  and,  to  say  the  truth,  I  think  you  are  as 
hkely  to  hit  the  mark  as  anybody.  These  busts,  now. 
much  as  I  seem  to  scorn  them,  make  me  feel  as  if  you 
wer©  a  magician.  You  turn  feverish  men  into  cool, 
quiet  marble.  What  a  blessed  change  for  them! 
Would  you  could  do  as  much  for  me  ! " 

*'  Oh,  gladly !  "  cried  Kenyon,  who  had  long  wished 
to  model  that  beautiful  and  most  expressive  face. 
**  When  will  you  begin  to  sit  ?  " 

"  Poh !  that  was  not  what  I  meant,"  said  Miriam. 
"  Come,  show  me  something  else." 

"  Do  you  recognize  this  ?  "  asked  the  sculptor. 

He  took  out  of  his  desk  a  little  old-fashioned  ivory 
coffer,  yellow  with  age ;  it  was  richly  carved  with  an- 
tique figures  and  foliage ;  and  had  Kenyon  though  g 
fit  to  say  that  Benvenuto  Cellini  wrought  this  precious 
box,  the  skill  and  elaborate  fancy  of  the  work  would 
by  no  means  have  discredited  his  word,  nor  the  old 
artist's  fame.  At  least,  it  was  evidently  a  production 
of  Benvenuto's  school  and  century,  and  might  once 
have  been  the  jewel-case  of  some  grand  lady  at  the 
court  of  the  De'  Medici. 

Lifting  the  lid,  however,  no  blaze  of  diamonds  was 


Digitized 


by  Google 


146      ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

disclosed,  but  only,  lapped  in  fleecy  cotton,  a  small^ 
beautifully  shaped  hand,  most  delicately  sculptured  in 
marble.  Such  loving  care  and  nicest  art  had  heeu 
lavished  here,  that  the  palm  really  seemed  to  have  ^ 
tenderness  in  its  very  substance.  Touching  tho?e 
lovely  fingers,  —  had  the  jealous  sculptor  allowed  ycu 
to  touch,  —  you  could  hardly  believe  that  a  virgin 
warmth  would  not  steal  from  them  into  your  heart. 

"  Ah,  this  is  very  l)eautiful !  "  exclaimed  Miriam, 
with  a  genial  smile.  "  It  is  as  good  in  its  way  as  Lou- 
lie's  hand  with  its  baby-dimples,  which  Powers  showed 
me  at  Florence,  evidently  valuing  it  as  much  as  if  he 
had  wrought  it  out  of  a  piece  of  his  great  heart.  As 
good  as  Harriet  Hosmer's  clasped  hands  of  Browning 
and  his  wife,  symbolizing  the  individuality  and  heroic 
union  of  two  high,  poetic  lives !  Nay,  I  do  not  ques- 
tion that  it  is  better  than  either  of  those,  because  you 
must  have  wrought  it  passionately,  in  spite  of  its 
maiden  palm  and  dainty  finger-tips." 

"  Then  you  do  recognize  it? "  asked  Kenyon. 

"*  There  is  but  one  right  hand  on  earth  that  could 
have  supplied  the  model,"  answered  Miriam;  '*so 
small  and  slender,  so  perfectly  symmetrical,  and  yet 
with  a  character  of  delicate  energy.  I  have  watched 
it  a  hundred  times  at  its  work ;  but  I  did  not  dream 
that  you  had  won  Hilda  so  far !  How  have  you  per- 
suaded that  shy  maiden  to  let  you  take  her  hand  in 
marble?" 

"  Never !  She  never  knew  it !  "  hastily  replied 
Kenyon,  anxious  to  vindicate  his  mistress's  maidenly 
I'eserve.  "  I  stole  it  from  her.  The  hand  is  a  remi- 
.ciiscence.  After  gazing  at  it  so  often,  and  even  hold- 
ing  it  once  for  an  instant,  when  Hilda  was  not  think- 
ing of  me,  I  should  be  a  bungler  indeed,  if  I  could  not 
now  reproduce  it  to  something  like  the  life." 


Digitized  by 


Google 


A   SCULPTOR'S  STUDIO.  147 

**  May  you  win  the  original  one  day  1 "  said  Miriam, 
kindly. 

*'I  have  little  ground  to  hope  it,"  answered  the 
sculptor,  despondingly ;  "  Hilda  does  not  dwell  in  our 
mortal  atmosphere;  and  gentle  and  soft  as  she  ap- 
pears, it  will  be  as  difficult  to  win  her  heart  as  to  en- 
tice down  a  white  bird  from  its  sunny  freedom  in  the 
sky.  It  is  strange,  with  all  her  delicacy  and  fragility, 
the  impression  she  makes  of  being  utterly  sufficient  to 
herself.  No ;  I  shall  never  win  her.  She  p  abun- 
dantly capable  of  sympathy,  and  delights  to  receive  it, 
but  she  has  no  need  of  love." 

"  I  partly  agi*ee  with  you,"  said  Miriam.  *'  It  is  a 
mistaken  idea,  which  men  generally  entertain,  that  na- 
ture has  made  women  especially  prone  to  throw  their 
whole  being  into  what  is  technically  called  love.  We 
have,  to  say  the  least,  no  more  necessity  for  it  than 
yourselves ;  only  we  have  nothing  else  to  do  with  our 
hearts.  When  women  have  other  objects  in  life,  they 
are  not  apt  to  fall  in  love.  I  can  think  of  many 
women  distinguished  in  art,  literature,  and  science,  — 
and  multitudes  whose  hearts  and  minds  find  good  em- 
ployment in  less  ostentatious  ways,  —  who  lead  high, 
lonely  lives,  and  are  conscious  of  no  sacrifice  so  far  as 
your  sex  is  concerned." 

**  And  Hilda  wiU  be  one  of  these !  "  said  Kenyon, 
sadly ;  "  the  thought  makes  me  shiver  for  myself,  and 
—  and  for  her,  too." 

**  Well,"  said  Miriam,  smiling,  **  perhaps  she  may 
sprain  the  delicate  wrist  which  you  have  sculptured  to" 
such  perfection.  In  that  case  you  may  hope.  These 
old  masters  to  whom  she  has  vowed  herself,  and  whom 
her  slender  hand  and  woman's  heart  serve  so  faith* 
fully,  ate  your  only  rivals." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


148  ROMAtfCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

The  sculptor  sighed  as  he  put  away  the  treasure  of 
Hilda's  marble  hand  into  the  ivory  coflFer,  and  thought 
how  slight  was  the  possibility  that  he  should  ever  feel 
responsive  to  his  own  the  tender  dasp  of  the  original. 
He  dared  not  even  kiss  the  image  that  he  himself  had 
made :  it  had  assumed  its  share  of  Hilda's  remote  and 
shy  divinity. 

"  And  now,"  said  Miriam,  "  show  me  the  new  statue 
which  you  asked  me  hither  to  see.'' 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

CLEOPATRA. 

"  Mt  new  statue  I "  said  Kenyon,  who  had  positively 
forgotten  it  in  the  thought  of  Hilda ;  "  here  it  is,  un- 
der this  veil." 

"  Not  a  riude  figure,  I  hope,"  observed  Miriam. 
"  Every  young  sculptor  seems  to  think  that  he  must 
give  the  world  some  specimen  of  indecorous  woman- 
hood, and  call  it  Eve,  Venus,  a  Nymph,  or  any  name 
that  may  apologize  for  a  lack  of  decent  clothing.  I 
am  weary,  even  more  than  I  am  ashamed,  of  seeing 
such  things.  Nowadays  people  are  as  good  as  born  in 
their  clothes,  and  there  is  practically  not  a  nude  hu- 
man being  in  existence.  An  artist,  therefore,  as  you 
must  candidly  confess,  cannot  sculpture  nudity  with  a 
pure  heart,  if  only  because  he  is  compelled  to  steal 
guilty  glimpses  at  hired  models.  The  marble  inevita- 
bly loses  its  chastity  under  such  circumstances.  An 
old  Greek  sculptor,  no  doubt,  found  his  models  in  the 
open  sunshine,  and  among  piu*e  and  princely  maidens, 
and  thus  the  nude  statues  of  antiquity  are  as  modest 
as  violets,  and  sufficiently  draped  in  their  own  beauty. 
But  as  for  Mr.  Gibson's  colored  Venuses  (stained,  I 
believe,  with  tobacco-juice),  and  all  other  nudities  of 
tonlay,  I  really  do  not  understand  what  they  have  to 
8ay  to  this  generation,  and  would  be  glad  to  see  as 
many  heaps  of  quicklime  in  their  stead." 

*'You  are  severe  upon  the  professors  of  my  art," 


Digitized 


by  Google 


150  ROMANCE   OF  MONTE  BENI. 

said  Kenyon,  half  smiling,  half  seriously ;  "  not  that 
you  are  wholly  wrong,  either.  We  are  bound  to  ac- 
cept drapery  of  some  kind,  and  make  the  best  of  it. 
But  what  are  we  to  do  ?  Must  we  adopt  the  costume 
of  to-day,  and  carve,  for  example,  a  Venus  in  a  hoop- 
petticoat  ?  " 

**  That  would  be  a  bowlder,  indeed !  "  rejoined  Mir- 
iam, laughing.  ^^  But  the  difficulty  goes  to  confirm 
me  in  my  belief  that,  except  for  portrait-busts,  sculp 
ture  has  no  longer  a  right  to  claim  any  place  among 
living  arts.  It  has  wrought  itself  out,  and  come  fairly 
to  an  end.  There  is  never  a  new  group  nowadays ; 
never  even  so  much  as  a  new  attitude.  Greenough 
(I  take  my  examples  among  men  of  merit)  imagined 
nothing  new ;  nor  Crawford  either,  except  in  the  tai- 
loring line.  There  are  not,  as  you  will  own,  more  than 
half  a  dozen  positively  original  statues  or  groups  in 
the  world,  and  these  few  are  of  immemorial  antiquity. 
A  person  familiar  with  the  Vatican,  the  Uffizzi  Gal- 
lery, the  Naples  GuUery,  and  the  Louvre,  will  at  once 
refer  any  modern  production  to  its  antique  prototype ; 
which,  moreover,  had  begun  to  get  out  of  fashion,  even 
in  old  Koman  days." 

"  Pray  stop,  Miriam,"  cried  Kenyon,  "  or  I  shall 
fling  away  the  chisel  forever !  " 

"  Fairly  own  to  me,  then,  my  friend,"  rejoined  Mir- 
iam, whose  disturbed  mind  found  a  certain  relief  in 
this  declamation,  "  that  you  sculptors  are;  of  necessity, 
the  greatest  plagiarists  in  the  world." 

"  I  do  not  own  it,"  said  Kenyon,  "  yet  cannot  utterly 
contradict  you,  as  regards  the  actual  state  of  the  art 
But  as  long  as  the  Carrara  quarries  stUl  yield  pure 
blocks,  and  while  my  own  country  has  marble  moun* 
tains,  probably  as  fine  in  quality,  I  shall  steadfastly 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CLEOPATRA.  151 

believe  that  future  sculptors  will  revive  this  noblest 
of  the  beautiful  arts,  and  people  the  world  with  new 
shapes  of 'delicate  grace  and  massive  grandeur.  Per- 
haps," he  added,  smiling,  "  mankind  will  consent  to 
wear  a  more  manageable  costume ;  or,  at  worst,  we 
sculptors  shall  get  the  skill  to  make  broadcloth  trans- 
parent, and  render  a  majestic  human  character  visible 
through  the  coats  and  trousers  of  the  present  day." 

"  Be  it  so  I "  said  Miriam  ;  "  you  are  past  my  coun- 
sel. Show  me  the  veiled  figure,  which  I  am  afraid,  I 
have  criticised  beforehand.  To  make  amends,  I  am 
in  the  mood  to  praise  it  now." 

But,  as  Kenyon  was  about  to  take  the  cloth  ofiE  the 
clay  model,  she  laid  her  hand  on  his  arm. 

"  Tell  me  first  what  is  the  subject,"  said  she,  "  for  1 
have  sometimes  incurred  great  displeasure  from  mem« 
hers  of  your  brotherhood  by  being  too  obtuse  to  puzzle 
out  the  purport  of  their  productions.  It  is  so  difficult, 
you  know,  to  compress  and  define  a  character  or  story, 
and  make  it  patent  at  a  glance,  within  i3ie  narrow 
scope  attainable  by  sculpture !  Indeed  I  fancy  it  is 
still  the  ordinary  habit  with  sculptors,  first  to  finish 
their  group  of  statuary,  —  in  such  development  as  the 
particular  block  of  marble  wiU  aUow,  —  and  then  to 
choose  the  subject ;  as  John  of  Bologna  did  with  his 
'  Rape  of  the  Sabines.'  Have  you  followed  that  good 
example?" 

"  No ;  my  statue  is  intended  for  Cleopatra,"  replied 
Kenyon,  a  little  disturbed  by  Miriam's  raillery.  "  The 
special  epoch  of  her  history  you  must  make  out  foi 
yourself." 

He  drew  away  the  cloth  that  had  served  to  keep  the 
moisture  of  the  clay  model  from  being  exhaled.  The 
sitting  figure  of  a  woman  was  seen.     She  was  draped 


Digitized 


by  Google 


162  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

from  head  to  foot  in  a  costume  minutely  and  scrupn* 
lously  studied  from  that  of  ancient  Egypt,  as  revealed 
by  the  strange  sculpture  of  that  country,  its  coins,  draw- 
ings, painted  mummy-cases,  and  whatever  other  tokens 
have  been  dug  out  of  its  pyramids,  graves,  and  cata- 
combs. Even  the  stiff  Egyptian  head-dress  was  ad- 
hered to,  but  had  been  softened  into  a  rich  feminine 
adornment,  without  losing  a  particle  of  its  truth.  Dif- 
ficulties that  might  well  have  seemed  insurmountable 
had  been  courageously  encountered  and  made  flexible 
to  purposes  of  grace  and  dignity ;  so  that  Cleopatra 
sat  attired  in  a  garb  proper  to  her  historic  and  queenly 
state,  as  a  daughter  of  the  Ptolemies,  and  yet  such 
as  the  beautiful  woman  would  have  put  on  as  best 
adapted  to  heighten  the  magnificence  of  her  charms, 
and  kindle  a  tropic  fire  in  the  cold  eyes  of  Octavius. 

A  marvellous  repose  —  that  rare  merit  in  statuary, 
except  it  be  the  lumpish  repose  native  to  the  block 
of  stone  —  was  diffused  throughout  the  fig^ure.  The 
spectator  felt  that  Cleopatra  had  sunk  down  out  of 
the  fever  and  tiumoil  of  her  life,  and  for  one  instant 
—  as  it  were,  between  two  pulse-throbs  —  had  relin- 
quished all  activity,  and  was  resting  throughout  every 
vein  and  muscle.  It  was  the  repose  of  despair,  indeed ; 
for  Octavius  had  seen  her,  and  remained  insensible  to 
her  enchantments.  But  still  there  was  a  great  smoul- 
dering furnace  deep  down  in  the  woman's  heart.  The 
repose,  no  doubt,  was  as  complete  as  if  she  were  never 
to  stir  hand  or  foot  again  ;  and  yet,  such  was  the  crea- 
ture's latent  energy  and  fierceness,  she  might  spring 
upon  you  like  a  tigress,  and  stop  the  very  breath  thai 
you  were  now  drawing  midway  in  your  throat. 

The  face  was  a  miraculous  success.  The  sculptor 
had  not  shunned  to  give  the  full  Nubian  Ups,  and  other 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CLEOPATRA.  168- 

eliflracteristics  of  the  Egyptian  physiognomy.  His 
courage. and  integrity  had  been  abundantly  rewarded ; 
for  Cleopatra's  beauty  shone  out  richer,  warmer,  more 
triumphantly  beyond  comparison,  than  if,  shrinking 
timidly  from  the  truth,  he  had  chosen  the  tame  Grre- 
cian  type.  The  expression  was  of  profound,  gloomy, 
heavily  revolving  thought ;  a  glance  into  her  past  life 
and  present  emergencies,  while  her  spirit  gathered  it- 
self up  for  some  new  struggle,  or  was  getting  sternly 
reconciled  to  impending  doom.  In  one  view,  there 
was  a  certain  softness  and  tenderness,  — how  breathed 
into  the  statue,  among  so  many  strong  and  passionate 
elements,  it  is  impossible  to  say.  Catching  another 
glimpse,  you  beheld  her  as  implacable  as  a  stone  and 
cruel  as  fire. 

In  a  word,  all  Cleopatra — fierce,  voluptuous,  pas- 
sionate, tender,  wicked,  terrible,  and  full  of  poisonous 
and  rapturous  enchantment —  was  kneaded  into  what, 
only  a  week  or  two  before,  had  been  a  lump  of  wet 
clay  from  the  Tiber.  Soon,  apotheosized  in  an  inde- 
structible material,  she  would  be  one  of  the  images 
that  men  keep  forever,  finding  a  heat  in  them  which 
does  not  cool  down,  throughout  the  centuries. 

^^  What  a  woman  is  this !  "  exclaimed  Miriam,  after 
a  long  pause.  "  Tell  mo,  did  she  ever  try,  even  while 
you  were  creating  her,  to  overcome  you  with  her  fury 
or  her  love  ?  Were  you  not  afraid  to  touch  her,  as 
she  grew  more  and  more  towards  hot  life  beneath  your 
hand?  My  dear  friend,  it  is  a  great  work  I  How 
have  you  learned  to  do  it? " 

^^  It  is  the  concretion  of  a  good  deal  of  thought, 
emotion,  and  toil  of  brain  and  hand,"  said  Kenyon, 
not  without  a  perception  that  his  work  was  good; 
^  but  I  know  not  how  it  came  about  at  last.    I  kiif 


Digitized 


by  Google 


154  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

died  a  great  fire  within  my  mind,  and  threw  in  the 
material,  —  as  Aaron  threw  the  gold  of  the  Israelites 
into  the  furnace,  —  and  in  the  midmost  heat  uprose 
Cleopatra,  as  you  see  her." 

"  What  I  most  marvel  at,"  said  Miriam,  "  is  the 
womanhood  that  you  have  so  thoroughly  mixed  up 
with  aU  those  seemingly  discordant  elements.  Where 
did  you  get  that  secret  ?  You  never  found  it  in  your 
gentle  Hilda,  yet  I  recognize  its  truth." 

*^No^  surely,  it  was  not  in  Hilda,"  said  Kenyon. 
'^  Her  womanhood  is  of  the  ethereal  tjrpe,  and  incom- 
patible with  any  shadow  of  darkness  or  evil." 

"  You  are  right,"  rejoined  Miriam ;  **  there  are  wo- 
men of  that  ethereal  type  as  you  term  it,  and  Hilda 
is  one  of  them.  She  would  die  of  her  first  wrong- 
doing,—  supposing  for  a  moment  that  she  could  be 
capable  of  doing  wrong.  Of  sdrrow,  slender  as  she 
seems,  Hilda  might  bear  a  great  burden ;  of  sin,  not  a 
feather's  weight.  Methinks  now,  were  it  my  doom,  I 
could  bear  either,  or  both  at  once ;  but  my  conscience 
is  still  as  white  as  Hilda's.     Do  you  question  it  ?  " 

"  Heaven  forbid,  Miriam  !  "  exclaimed  the  sculptor. 

He  was  startled  at  the  strange  turn  which  she  had 
so  suddenly  given  to  the  conversation.     Her  voice,  too^ 

—  so  much  emotion  was  stifled  rather  than  expressed 
in  it,  —  sounded  imnatural. 

"  Oh,  my  friend,"  cried  she,  with  sudden  passion, 
*'  will  you  be  my  friend  indeed  ?  I  am  lonely,  lonely, 
lonely  !     There  is  a  secret  in  my  heart  that  bums  me, 

—  that  tortures  me !  Sometimes  I  fear  to  go  mad  of 
it ;  sometimes  I  hope  to  die  of  it ;  but  neither  of  the 
two  happens.  Ah,  if  I  could  but  whisper  it  to  only 
one  human  soul!  And  you  —  you  see  far  into  wa 
manhood ;  you  receive  it  widely  into  your  large  view 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CLEOPATRA.  155 

Perhaps  —  perhaps,  but  Heaven  oAly  knows,  you  might 
understand  me !     Oh,  let  me  speak  !  " 

'*  Miriam,  dear  friend,"  replied  the  sculptor,  "  if  I 
can  help  you,  speak  freely,  as  to  a  brother." 

"  Help  me  ?    No !  "  said  Mirianv. 

Kenyon's  response  had  been  perfectly  frank  and 
kind;  and  yet  the  subtlety  of  Miriam's  emotion  de- 
tected a  certain  reserve  and  alarm  in  his  warmly  ex- 
pressed readiness  to  hear  her  story.  In  his  secret 
boul,  to  say  the  truth,  the  sculptor  doubted  whether 
it  were  well  for  this  poor,  suffering  girl  to  speak  what 
she  so  yearned  to  say,  or  for  him  to  listen.  If  there 
were  any  active  duty  of  friendship  to  be  performed, 
then,  indeed,  he  would  jojrfuUy  have  come  forward  to 
do  his  best.  But  if  it  were  only  a  pent-up  heart  that 
sought  an  outlet  ?  in  that  case  it  was  by  no  means  so 
certain  that  a  confession  would  do  good.  The  more 
her  secret  struggled  and  fought  to  be  told,  the  more 
certain  would  it  be  to  change  all  former  relations  that 
had  subsisted  between  herself  and  the  friend  to  whom, 
she  might  reveal  it.  Unless  he  could  give  her  all  the 
sympathy,  and  just  the  kind  of  sympathy  that  the  oc- 
casion required,  Miriam  would  hate  him  by  and  by, 
and  herself  still  more,  if  he  let  her  speak. 

This  was  what  Kenyon  said  to  himself ;  but  his  re- 
luctance, after  all,  and  whether  he  were  conscious  of 
it  or  no,  resulted  from  a  suspicion  that  had  crept  into 
his  heart  and  lay  there  in  a  dark  corner.  Obscure  as 
it  was,  when  Miriam  looked  into  his  eyes,  she  detected 
it  at  once. 

*'Ah,  I  shall  hate  you  J'*  cried  she,  echoing  the 
thought  which  he  had  not  spoken  ;  she  was  half 
choked  with  the  gush  of  passion  that  was  thus  turned 
back  upon  her.  '^You  are  as  cold  and  pitiless  as 
your  own  marble." 

Digitized  by  LjOOQIC 


156  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

**  No ;  but  full  of  sympathy,  God  knows  \  **  replied 
he. 

In  truth  his  suspicions,  however  warranted  by  the 
mystery  in  which  Miriam  was  enveloped,  had  vanished 
in  the  earnestness  of  his  kindly  and  sorrowful  emotion. 
/He  was  now  ready  to  receive  her  trust. 

"  Keep  your  sympathy,  then,  for  sorrows  that  admit 
of  such  solace,''  said  she,  making  a  strong  effort  to 
compose  herself.  "  As  for  my  griefs,  I  know  how  to 
manage  them.  It  was  all  a  mistake :  you  can  do  notb» 
ing  for  me,  unless  you  petrify  me  into  a  marble  com- 
panion for  your  Cleopatra  there ;  and  I  am  not  of  her 
sisterhood,  I  do  assure  you.  Forget  this  foolish  scene, 
my  friend,  and  never  let  me  see  a  reference  to  it  in 
your  eyes  when  they  meet  mine  hereafter." 

*•  Since  you  desire  it,  all  shall  be  forgotten,"  an- 
swered the  sculptor,  pressing  her  hand  as  she  de- 
parted*; ^^  or,  if  ever  I  can  serve  you,  let  my  readiness 
to  do  so  be  remembered.  Meanwhile,  dear  Miriam, 
let  us  meet  in  the  same  dear,  friendly  light  as  hereto- 
fore." 

"You  are  less  sincere  than  I  thought  you,"  said 
Miriam,  "  if  you  try  to  make  me  think  that  there  wiU 
be  no  change." 

As  he  attended  her  through  the  antechamber,  she 
pointed  to  the  statue  of  the  pearl^liver. 

"  My  secret  is  not  a  pearl,"  said  she ;  "  yet  a  man 
might  drown  himself  in  plunging  after  it." 

After  Kenyon  had  closed  the  door,  she  went  wearily 
down  the  staircase,  but  paused  midway,  as  if  debating 
with  herself  whether  to  return. 

"The  mischief  was  done,"  thought  she;  "and  X 
might  as  well  have  had  the  solace  that  ought  to 
oome  with  it.     I  have  lost,  —  by  staggering  a  little 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CLEOPATRA.  157 

fray  beyond  the  mark,  in  the  blindness  of  my  distress^ 
—  I  have  lost,  as  we  shall  hereafter  find,  the  genuine 
friendship  of  this  clear-minded,  honorable,  true-hearted 
yoimg  man,  and  all  for  nothing.  What  if  I  should  go 
back  this  moment  and  compel  him  to  listen  ?  " 

She  ascended  two  or  ihree  of  the  stairs,  but  again 
paused,  murmured  to  herself,  and  shook  her  head. 

"  No,  no,  no,"  she  thought ;  "  and  I  wonder  how  I 
ever  came  to  dream  of  it.  Unless  I  had  his  heart  for 
my  own,  —  and  that  is  Hilda's,  nor  would  I  steal  it 
from  her,  —  it  should  never  be  the  treasure-place  of 
my  secret.  It  is  no  precious  pearl,  as  I  just  now  told 
him ;  but  my  dark-red  carbimcle  —  red  as  blood  —  is 
too  rich  a  gem  to  put  into  a  stranger's  casket." 

She  went  down  the  stairs,  and  found  her  Shadow 
iraiting  for  her  in  the  streets 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XV. 

AN   JESTHETIC   COMPANY. 

On  the  evening  after  Miriam's  visit  to  Kenyon's 
studio,  there  was  an  assemblage  composed  ahnost  en* 
tirely  of  Anglo-Saxons,  and  chiefly  of  American  ar- 
tists, with  a  sprinkling  of  their  English  brethren ;  and 
sopie  few  of  the  tourists  who  still  lingered  in  Borne, 
now  that  Holy  Week  was  past.  Miriam,  Hilda,  and 
the  sculptor  were  all  three  present,  and,  with  them, 
Donatello,  whose  life  was  so  far  turned  from  its  natu- 
ral bent,  that,  like  a  pet  spaniel,  he  followed  his  be- 
loved  mistress  wherever  he  could  gain  admittance. 

The  place  of  meeting  was  in  the  palatial,  but  some- 
what faded  and  gloomy  apartment  of  an  eminent  mem- 
ber  of  the  aesthetic  body.  It  was  no  more  formal  an 
occasion  than  one  of  those  weekly  receptions,  common 
among  the  foreign  residents  of  Eome,  at  which  pleas- 
ant people  —  or  disagreeable  ones,  as  the  case  may  be 
—  encounter  one  another  with  little  ceremony. 

If  anywise  interested  in  art,  a  man  must  be  difficult 
to  please  who  cannot  find  fit  companionship  among  a 
crowd  of  persons,  whose  ideas  and  pursuits  all  tend 
towards  the  general  purpose  of  enlarging  the  world's 
stock  of  beautiful  productions. 

One  of  the  chief  causes  that  make  Rome  the  favorite 
residence  of  artists  —  their  ideal  home  which  they  sigh 
for  in  advance,  and  are  so  loath  to  migrate  from,  after 
once  breathing  its  enchanted  air — is,  doubtless,  that 


Digitized 


by  Google 


AN  ESTHETIC  COMPANY.  159 

&ey  there  find  themselves  in  force,  and  are  nnmeroua 
enough  to  create  a  congenial  atmosphere.  In  every 
other  clime  they  are  isolated  strangers ;  in  this  land  of 
art,  they  are  free  citizens. 

Not  that,  individually,  or  in  the  mass,  there  appears 
to  be  any  large  stock  of  mutual  affection  among  the 
brethren  of  the  chisel  and  the  pencil.  On  the  con« 
trary,  it  will  impress  the  shrewd  observer  that  the  jeal- 
ousies and  petty  animosities,  which  the  poets  of  our 
day  have  flung  aside,  still  irritate  and  gnaw  into  the 
hearts  of  this  kindred  class  of  imaginative  men.  It  is 
not  difficult  to  suggest  reasons  why  this  should  be  the 
fact.  The  public,  in  whose  good  graces  lie  the  sculp- 
tor's or  the  painter's  prospects  of  success,  is  infinitely 
smaller  than  the  public  to  which  literary  men  make 
their  appeal.  It  is  composed  of  a  very  limited  body 
of  wealthy  patrons;  and  these,  as  the  artist  well 
knows,  are  but  blind  judges  in  matters  that  require 
the  utmost  delicacy  of  perception.  Thus,  success  in 
art  is  apt  to  become  partly  an  affair  of  intrigue  ;  and 
it  is  almost  inevitable  that  even  a  gifted  artist  should 
look  askance  at  his  gifted  brother's  fame,  and  be  chary 
of  the  good  word  that  might  help  him  to  sell  still 
another  statue  or  picture.  You  seldom  hear  a  painter 
heap  generous  praise  on  anything  in  his  special  line 
of  art ;  a  sculptor  never  has  a  favorable  eye  for  any 
marble  but  his  own. 

Nevertheless,  in  spite  of  all  these  professional 
gnidges,  artists  are  conscious  of  a  social  warmth  from 
each  other's  presence  and  contiguity.  They  shiver  at 
the  remembrance  of  their  lonely  studios  in  the  unsjrm- 
pathizing  cities  of  their  native  land.  For  the  sake  of 
Buch  brotherhood  as  they  can  find,  more  than  for  any 
good  that  they  get  from  galleries,  they  linger  year  af* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


160  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

ter  year  in  Italy,  wliile  their  originality  dies  out  of 
them,  or  is  polished  away  as  a  barbarism. 

The  company  this  evening  included  several  men  and 
women  whom  the  world  has  heard  of,  and  many  others, 
beyond  all  question,  whom  it  ought  to  know.  It  would 
^be  a  pleasure  to  introduce  them  upon  our  humble 
pages,  name  by  name,  and  —  had  we  confidence  enough 
in  our  own  taste  —  to  crown  each  well-deserving  brow 
according  to  its  deserts.  The  opportunity  is  tempting, 
but  not  easily  manageable,  and  far  too  perilous,  bo& 
in  respect  to  those  individuals  whom  we  might  bring 
forw^^,  and  the  far  greater  number  that  must  needs 
be  left  in  the  shade.  Ink,  moreover,  is  apt  to  have  a 
corrosive  quality,  and  might  chance  to  raise  a  blister, 
instead  of  any  more  agreeable  titillation,  on  skins  so 
sensitive  as  those  of  artists.  We  must  therefore 
forego  the  delight  of  illuminating  this  chapter  with 
personal  allusions  to  men  whose  renown  glows  richly 
on  canvas,  or  gleams  in  the  white  moonlight  of  mar- 
ble. 

Otherwise  we  might  point  to  an  artist  who  has  stud- 
ied Nature  with  such  tender  love  that  she  takes  him  to 
her  intimacy,  enabling  him  to  reproduce  her  in  land- 
scapes that  seem  the  reality  of  a  better  earth,  and  yet 
are  but  the  truth  of  the  very  scenes  around  us,  ob- 
served by  the  painter's  insight  and  interpreted  for  us 
by  his  skill.  By  his  magic,  the  moon  throws  her  light 
far  out  of  the  picture,  and  the  crimson  of  the  smnmer 
night  absolutely  glimmers  on  the  beholder's  face.  Or 
we  might  indicate  a  poei^^painter,  whose  song  has  the 
vividness  of  picture,  and  whose  canvas  is  peopled  with 
angels,  fairies,  and  water-sprites,  done  to  the  ethereal 
life,  because  he  saw  them  face  to  face  in  his  poetio 
mood.    Or  w)  might  bow  before  an  artist,  who  hat 


Digitized 


by  Google 


AN  ESTHETIC  COMPANY.  161 

wrought  too  sincerely,  too  religioiudy,  with  too  earnest 
a  feeling,  and  too  delicate  a  touch,  for  the  world  at 
once  to  recognize  how  much  toil  and  thought  are  com- 
pressed into  the  stately  brow  of  Prospero,  and  Miran- 
da's maiden  loveliness  ;  or  from  what  a  depth  within 
this  painter's  heart  the  Angel  is  leading  forth  St* 
Peter. 

Thus  it  would  be  easy  to  go  on,  perpetrating  a  score 
of  little  epigrammatical  allusions,  like  the  above,  all 
kindly  meant,  but  none  of  them  quite  hitting  the 
nuurk,  and  often  striking  where  they  were  not  aimed. 
It  may  be  allowable  to  say,  however,  that  American 
art  is  much  better  represented  at  Rome  in  the  picto- 
rial than  in  the  sculpturesque  department.  Yet  the 
men  of  marble  appear  to  have  more  weight  with  the 
public  than  the  men  of  canvas ;  perhaps  on  account  of 
the  greater  density  and  solid  substance  of  the  material 
in  which  they  work,  and  the  sort  of  physical  advantage 
which  their  labors  thus  acquire  over  the  illusive  unre^ 
ality  of  color.  To  be  a  sculptor  seems  a  distinction  in 
itself;  whereas  a  painter  is  nothing,  unless  individually 
eminent. 

One  sculptor  there  was,  an  Englishman,  endowed 
with  a  beautiful  fancy,  and  possessing  at  his  fingers' 
tads  the  capability  of  doing  beautiful  things.  He  was 
a  quiet,  simple,  elderly  personage,  with  eyes  brown 
and  bright,  under  a  slightly  impending  brow,  and  a 
Grredan  profile,  such  as  he  might  have  cut  with  his 
own  chiseL  He  had  spent  his  life,  for  forty  years,  in 
making  Venuses,  Cupids,  Bacchuses,  and  a  vast  deal 
of  other  marble  progeny  of  dream-work,  or  rather  frost- 
work :  it  was  all  a  vapory  exhalation  out  of  the  Grecian 
mythology,  crystallizing  on  the  dull  window-panes  of 
Co-day.    Gifted  with  a  more  delicate  pow^r  than  anjf 

VOL.  vx. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


162  ROMANCE   OF  MONTE  BENl. 

other  man  alive,  he  had  foregone  to  be  a  Christian  reat 
ity,  and  perverted  himself  into  a  Pagan  idealist,  whosf 
business  or  efficacy,  in  our  present  world,  it  would  be 
exceedingly  difficult  to  define.  And,  loving  and  rever- 
encing the  pure  material  in  which  he  wrought,  as  surely 
this  admirable  sculptor  did,  he  had  nevertheless  robbed 
the  marble  of  its  chastity,  by  giving  it  an  artificial 
warmth  of  hue.  Thus  it  became  a  sin  and  shame  to 
look  at  his  nude  goddesses.  They  had  revealed  them- 
selves to  his  imagination,  no  doubt,  with  all  their  deity 
about  them  ;  but,  bedaubed  with  buff-color,  they  stood 
forth  to  the  eyes  of  the  profane  in  the  guise  of  naked 
women.  But,  whatever  criticism  may  be  ventured  on 
his  style,  it  was  good  to  meet  a  man  so  modest  and 
yet  imbued  with  such  thorough  and  simple  conviction 
of  his  own  right  principles  and  practice,  and  so  quietly 
satisfied  that  his  kind  of  antique  achievement  was  aU 
that  sculpture  could  effect  for  modem  life. 

This  eminent  person's  weight  and  authority  among 
his  artistic  brethren  were  very  evident ;  for  beginning 
unobtrusively  to  utter  himself  on  a  topic  of  art,  he 
was  soon  the  centre  of  a  little  crowd  of  younger  sculp- 
tors. They  drank  in  his  wisdom,  as  if  it  would  serve 
all  the  purposes  of  original  inspiration ;  he,  mean- 
while, discoursing  with  gentle  calmness,  as  if  there 
could  possibly  be  no  other  side,  and  often  ratifying, 
as  it  were,  his  own  conclusions  by  a  mildly  emphatic 
**Yes." 

The  veteran  sculptor's  unsought  audience  was  com- 
posed mostly  of  our  own  countrymen.  It  is  fair  to 
say,  that  they  were  a  body  of  very  dexterous  and 
capable  artists,  each  of  whom  had  probably  given 
the  delighted  public  a  nude  statue,  or  had  won  credit 
for  even  higher  skill  by  the  nice  carving  of  buttoiv 


Digitized 


by  Google  ^ 


AN  ^ESTHETIC  COMPANY,  163 

holes,  shoe-ties,  coat-seams,  shirt-bosoms,  and  other  such 
graceful  peculiarities  of  modem  costume.  Smart, 
practical  men  they  doubtless  were,  and  some  of  them 
far  more  than  this,  but,  still,  not  precisely  what  an  un- 
initiated person  looks  for  in  a  sculptor.  A  sculptor, 
indeed,  to  meet  the  demands  which  our  preconceptions 
make  upon  him,  should  be  even  more  indispensably 
a  poet  than  those  who  deal  in  measured  verse  and 
rhyme.  His  material,  or  instrument,  which  serves 
him  in  the  stead  of  shifting  and  transitory  language, 
is  a  pure,  white,  undecaying  substance.  It  insures 
immortality  to  whatever  is  wrought  in  it,  and  there- 
fore makes  it  a  religious  obligation  to  commit  no  idea 
to  its  mighty  guardianship,  save  such  as  may  repay 
the  marble  for  its  faithful  care,  its  incorruptible  fidel- 
ity, by  warming  it  with  an  ethereal  life.  Under  this 
aspect,  marble  assumes  a  sacred  character;  and  no 
man  should  dare  to  touch  it  unless  he  feels  within 
himself  a  certain  consecration  and  a  priesthood,  the 
only  evidence  of  which,  for  the  public  eye,  wiU  be  the 
high  treatment  of  heroic  subjects,  or  the  delicate  evo- 
lution of  spiritual,  through  material  beauty. 

No  ideas  such  as  the  foregoing  — no  misgivings  sug- 
gested by  them  —  probably  troubled  the  self-compla- 
cency  of  most  of  these  clever  sculptors.  Marble,  in 
their  view,  had  no  such  sanctity  as  we  impute  to  it. 
It  was  merely  a  sort  of  white  limestone  from  Carrara, 
cut  into  convenient  blocks,  and  worth,  in  that  state, 
about  two  or  tlu*ee  dollars  per  pound ;  and  it  was  sus- 
ceptible of  being  wrought  into  certain  shapes  (by  their 
own  mechanical  ingenuity,  or  that  of  artisans  in  their 
employment)  which  would  enable  them  to  sell  it  again 
at  a  much  higher  figure.  Such  men,  on  the  strength 
of  some  small  knack  in  handling  clay,  wliich  might 


Digitized 


by  Google 


164  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENI. 

have  been  fitly  employed  in  making  wax -work,  are 
bold  to  call  themselves  sculptors.  How  terrible  should 
be  the  thought,  that  the  nude  woman  whom  the  mod- 
em artist  patches  together,  bit  by  bit,  from  a  dozen 
heterogeneous  models,  meaning  nothing  by  her,  shall 
last  as  long  as  the  Venus  of  the  Capitol!  —  that  his 
group  of —  no  matter  what,  since  it  has  no  moral  or 
intellectual  existence  —  will  not  physically  crumble 
any  sooner  than  the  immortal  agony  of  the  Laocoon  ! 

Yet  we  love  the  artists,  in  every  kind ;  even  these, 
whose  merits  we  are  not  quite  able  to  appreciate. 
Sculptors,  painters,  crayon  -  sketchers,  or  whatever 
branch  of  testhetics  they  adopted,  were  certainly  pleas* 
anter  people,  as  we  saw  them  that  evening,  than  the 
average  whom  we  meet  in  ordinary  society.  They 
were  not  wholly  confined  within  the  sordid  compass  of 
practical  life ;  they  had  a  pursuit  which,  if  followed 
faithfully  out,  would  lead  them  to  the  beautif id,  and 
always  had  a  tendency  thitherward,  even  if  they  lin- 
gered to  gather  up  golden  dross  by  the  wayside.  Their 
actual  business  (though  they  talked  about  it  very 
much  as  other  men  talk  of  cotton,  politics,  flour-bar- 
rels, and  sugar)  necessarily  illuminated  their  conver- 
sation with  something  akin  to  the  ideal.  So,  when, 
the  guests  collected  themselves  in  littie  groups,  here, 
and  there,  in  the  wide  saloon,  a  cheerful  and  airy  goa- 
sip  began  to  be  heard.  The  atmosphere  ceased  to  be 
precisely  that  of  common  life ;  a  faint,  mellow  tinge, 
such  as  we  see  in  pictures,  mingled  itself  with  tiie 
lamplight. 

This  good  effect  was  assisted  by  many  curious  lit- 
tie treasures  of  art,  which  the  host  had  taken  care  to 
strew  upon  his  tables.  They  were  principally  such 
bits  of  antiquity  as  the  soil  of  Bome  and  its  neighboi^ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


AN  ESTHETIC  COMPANY.  165 

hood  are  still  rich  in;  seals,  gems,  small  figmres  of 
bronze,  mediaeval  carvings  in  ivory ;  things  which  had 
been  obtained  at  little  cost,  yet  might  have  borne  no 
inconsiderable  value  in  the  museum  of  a  virtuoso. 

As  interesting  as  any  of  these  relics  was  a  large 
portfolio  of  old  drawings,  some  of  which,  in  the  opin- 
ion of  their  possessor,  boi*e  evidence  on  their  faces  of 
the  touch  of  master-hands.  Very  ragged  and  ill-con* 
ditioned  they  mostly  were,  yellow  with  time,  and  tat- 
tered with  rough  usage ;  and,  in  their  best  estate,  the 
designs  had  been  scratched  rudely  with  pen  and  ink, 
on  coarse  paper,  or,  if  drawn  with  charcoal  or  a  pen- 
cil, were  now  half  rubbed  out.  You  would  not  any- 
where see  rougher  and  homelier  things  than  these. 
But  this  hasty  rudeness  made  the  sketches  only  the 
more  valuable ;  because  the  artist  seemed  to  have  be- 
stirred himself  at  the  pinch  of  the  moment,  Ihatching 
up  whatever  material  was  nearest,  so  as  to  seize  the 
first  glimpse  of  an  idea  that  might  vanish  in  the 
twinkling  of  an  eye.  Thus,  by  the  spell  of  a  creased, 
soiled,  and  discolored  scrap  of  paper,  you  were  ena- 
bled to  steal  close  to  an  old  master,  and  watch  him  in 
the  very  eif ervescence  of  his  genius. 

According  to  the  judgment  of  several  connoisseurs, 
Raphael's  own  hand  had  commimicated  its  magnetism 
to  one  of  these  sketches ;  and,  if  genuine,  it  was  evi- 
dently his  first  conception  of  a  favorite  Madonna,  now 
hanging  in  the  private  apartment  of  the  Grand  Duke, 
at  Florence.  Another  drawing  was  attributed  to  Leo- 
nardo da  Vinci,  and  appeared  to  be  a  somewhat  varied 
design  for  his  picture  of  Modesty  and  Vanity,  in  the 
Sciarra  Palace.  There  were  at  least  half  a  dozen 
others,  to  which  the  owner  assigned  as  high  an  origin. 
It  was  delightful  to  believe  in  their  authenticiiy,  at 


Digitized 


by  Google 


166  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

all  events ;  for  these  things  make  the  spectator  more 
vividly  sensible  of  a  great  painter's  power,  than  the 
final  glow  and  perfected  art  of  the  most  consummate 
picture  that  may  have  been  elaborated  from  them. 
There  is  an  effluence  of  divinity  in  the  first  sketch ; 
and  there,  if  anywhere,  you  find  the  pure  light  of  in- 
spiration, which  the  subsequent  toil  of  the  artist  serves 
to  bring  out  in  stronger  lustre,  indeed,  but  likewise 
adulterates  it  with  what  belongs  to  an  inferior  mood. 
The  aroma  and  fragrance  of  new  thought  were  percep- 
tible in  these  designs,  after  three  centuries  of  wear 
and  tear.  The  charm  lay  partly  in  their  very  imper- 
fection ;  for  this  is  suggestive,  and  sets  the  imagina- 
tion at  work  ;  whereas,  the  finished  picture,  if  a  good 
one,  leaves  the  spectator  nothing  to  do,  and,  if  bad, 
confuses,  stupefies,  disenchants,  and  disheartens  him. 

Hilda  was  greatly  interested  in  this  rich  portfolio. 
She  lingered  so  long  over  one  particular  sketch,  that 
Miriam  asked  her  what  discovery  she  had  made. 

"  Look  at  it  carefully,"  replied  Hilda,  putting  the 
sketch  into  her  hands.  ^^  If  you  take  pains  to  disen- 
tangle the  design  from  those  pencil-marks  that  seem 
to  have  been  scrawled  over  it,  I  think  you  will  see 
something  very  curious." 

"  It  is  a  hopeless  affair,  I  am  afraid,"  said  Miriaim 
"  I  have  neither  your  faith,  dear  Hilda,  nor  your  pei^ 
ceptive  faculty.  Fie !  what  a  blurred  scrawl  it  is  in- 
deed I  " 

The  drawing  had  originally  been  very  slight,  and 
had  suffered  more  from  time  and  hard  usage  than  al- 
most any  other  in  the  collection ;  it  appeared,  too,  that 
there  had  been  an  attempt  (perhaps  by  the  very  hand 
that  drew  it)  to  obliterate  the  design.  By  Hilda's 
^elp,  however,  Miriam  pretty  distinctly  made  out  a 


Digitized 


by  Google 


AN  ESTHETIC   COMPANY.  167 

Innged  figure  with  a  drawn  sword,  and  a  dragon,  or  a 
demon,  prostrate  at  his  feet. 

"  I  am  convinced,"  said  Hilda,  in  a  low,  reverential 
tone,  ^^  that  Guido's  own  touches  are  on  that  ancient 
scrap  of  paper !  If  so,  it  must  be  his  original  sketch 
for  the  picture  of  the  Archangel  Michael  setting  his 
foot  upon  the  demon,  in  the  Church  of  the  Cappuccini. 
The  composition  and  general  arrangement  of  the  sketch 
are  the  same  with  those  of  the  picture ;  the  only  dif- 
ference being,  that  the  demon  has  a  more  upturned 
face,  and  scowls  vindictively  at  the  Archangel,  who 
turns  away  his  eyes  in  painful  disgust." 
•  "  No  wonder !  "  responded  Miriam.  "  The  expres- 
sion suits  the  daintiness  of  Michael* s  character,  as 
Guide  represents  him.  He  never  could  have  looked 
the  demon  in  the  face !  " 

"  Miriam ! "  exclaimed  her  friend,  reproachfully, 
'•you  grieve  me,  and  you  know  it,  by  pretending  to 
speak  contemptuously  of  the  most  beautiful  and  the 
divinest  figure  that  mortal  painter  ever  di^ew." 

"  Forgive  me,  Hilda !  "  said  Miriam.  "  You  take 
these  matters  more  religiously  than  I  can,  for  my  life. 
Guido's  Archangel  is  a  fine  picture,  of  course,  but  it 
never  impressed  me  as  it  does  you." 

"  Well ;  we  will  not  talk  of  that,"  answered  Hilda. 
"  What  1  wanted  you  to  notice,  in  this  sketch,  i«»  the 
face  of  the  demon.  It  is  entirely  unlike  the  demon 
of  the  finished  picture.  Guide,  you  know,  always  af- 
firmed that  the  resemblance  to  Cardinal  Pamfili  was 
either  casual  or  imaginary.  Now,  here  is  the  face  as 
he  first  conceived  it." 

'•  And  a  more  energetic  demon,  altogether,  than  that 
of  the  finished  picture,"  said  Kenyon,  taking  the  sketch 
into  his  hand.     "  What  a  spirit  is  conveyed  into  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


168  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

Ugliness  of  this  strong,  writhing,  squirming  dragOQi 
under  the  Archangel's  foot !  Neither  is  the  face  an 
impossible  one.  Upon  my  word,  I  have  seen  it  some^ 
where,  and  on  the  shoulders  of  a  living  man  I  " 

"  And  so  have  I,"  said  Hilda.  "  It  was  what  struck 
me  from  the  first." 

"  Donatello,  look  at  this  face ! "  cried  Kenyon. 

The  young  Italian,  as  may  be  supposed,  took  little 
interest  in  matters  of  art,  and  seldom  or  never  ven- 
tured an  opinion  respecting  them.  After  holding  the 
sketch  a  single  instant  in  his  hand,  he  flung  it  from 
him  with  a  shudder  of  disgust  and  repugnance,  and  a 
frown  that  had  all  the  bitterness  of  hatred.  • 

"I  know  the  face  well!"  whispered  he.  "It  is 
Miriam's  model ! " 

It  was  acknowledged  both  by  Kenyon  and  Hilda 
that  they  had  detected,  or  fancied,  the  resemblance 
which  Donatello  so  strongly  afiirmed ;  and  it  added 
not  a  little  to  the  grotesque  and  weird  character  which, 
half  playfully,  half  seriously,  they  assigned  to  Mir- 
iam's attendant,  to  think  of  him  as  personating  the 
demon's  part  in  a  picture  of  more  than  two  centuries 
ago.  Had  Ghiido,  in  his  effort  to  imagine  the  utmost 
of  sin  and  misery,  which  his  pencil  could  represent, 
hit  ideally  upon  just  this  face  ?  Or  was  it  an  actual 
portrait  of  somebody,  that  haunted  the  old  master,  as 
Miriam  was  haunted  now  ?  Did  the  ominous  shadow 
f oUow  him  through  all  the  sunshine  of  his  earlier  ca^ 
reer,  and  into  the  gloom  that  gathered  about  its  close  ? 
And  when  Guido  died,  did  the  spectre  betake  himself 
to  those  ancient  sepulchres,  there  awaiting  a  new  vic- 
tim, till  it  was  Miriam's  iU-hap  to  encounter  him  ? 

^^  I  do  not  acknowledge  the  resemblance  at  all,^ 
0aid  Miriam,  looking  narrowly  at  the  sketch;  "and,  as 


Digitized 


by  Google 


AN  jEsthetic  company.  169 

I  have  drawn  the  face  twenty  times,  I  think  you  will 
own  that  I  am  the  best  judge." 

A  discussion  here  arose,  in  reference  to  Guido's 
Archangel,  and  it  was  agreed  that  these  four  friends 
should  visit  the  Church  of  the  Cappuccini  the  next 
morning,  and  critically  examine  the  picture  in  ques- 
tion ;  the  similarity  between  it  and  jthe  sketch  being, 
at  all  events,  a  very  curious  circumstance. 

It  was  now  a  little  past  ten  o'clock,  when  some  of 
the  company,  who  had  been  standing  in  a  balcony,  de- 
clared the  moonlight  to  be  resplendent.  They  pro- 
posed a  ramble  through  the  streets,  taking  in  their 
way  some  of  those  scenes  of  ruin  which  produced  their 
best  effects  under  the  splendor  of  the  Italian  moon* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

A  MOONLIGHT   RAMBLE. 

The  proposal  for  a  moonlight  ramble  was  received 
with  acclamation  by  all  the  yomiger  portion  of  th%; 
company.  They  immediately  set  forth  and  descended 
from  story  to  story,  dimly  lighting  their  way  by  waxec 
tapers,  which  are  a  necessary  equipment  to  those  whose 
thoroughfare,  in  the  night  •  time,  lies  up  and  down  a 
Boman  staircase.  Emerging  from  the  court-yard  of 
the  edifice,  they  looked  upward  and  saw  the  sky  fall 
of  light,  which  seemed  to  have  a  delicate  purple  or 
crimson  lustre,  or,  at  least,  some  richer  tinge  than  tho 
cold,  white  moonshine  of  other  skies.  It  gleamed  over 
the  front  of  the  opposite  palace,  showing  the  architec- 
tural ornaments  of  its  cornice  and  pillared  portal,  as 
well  as  the  iron-barred  basement-windows,  that  gave 
such  a  prison-like  aspect  to  the  structure,  and  the 
shabbiness  and  squalor  that  lay  along  its  base.  A 
cobbler  was  just  shutting  up  his  little  shop,  in  the 
basement  of  the  palace ;  a  cigar-vender's  lantern  flared 
in  the  blast  that  came  through  the  archway;  a  French 
sentinel  paced  to  and  fro  before  the  portal ;  a  home- 
less dog,  that  haunted  thereabouts,  barked  as  obstrepe- 
rously at  the  party  as  if  he  were  the  domestic  guardian 
of  the  precincts. 

The  air  was  quietly  full  of  the  iwise  of  falling  water, 
the  cause  of  which  was  nowhere  visible,  though  appaov 
ently  near  at  hand.     This  pleasant,  natural  sound,  not 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A  MOONLIGHT  RAMBLE.  171 

nnlike  that  of  a  distant  cascade  in  the  forest,  may  be 
heard  in  many  of  the  Boman  streets  and  piazzas,  when 
the  tumult  of  the  city  is  hushed ;  for  consuls,  empe- 
rors, and  popes,  the  great  men  of  every  age,  have 
found  no  better  way  of  immortalizing  their  memories, 
than  by  the  shifting,  indestructible,  ever  new,  yet  un- 
changing, upgush  and  downfall  of  water.  They  have 
written  their  names  in  that  unstable  element,  and 
proved  it  a  more  durable  record  than  brass  or  marble. 

"  Donatello,  you  had  better  take  one  of  those  gay, 
boyish  artists  for  your  companion,"  said  Miriam, 
when  she  found  the  Italian  youth  at.  her  side.  "  1  am 
not  now  in  a  merry  mood,  as  when  we  set  all  the 
world  a-dancing  the  other  afternoon,  in  the  Borghese 
grounds." 

"  I  never  wish  to  dance  tany  more,"  answered  Dona- 
tello. 

"  What  a  melancholy  was  in  that  tone  !  "  exclaimed 
Miriam.  "  You  are  getting  spoilt  in  this  dreary  Rome, 
and  will  be  as  wise  and  as  wretched  as  all  the  rest  of 
mankind,  unless  you  go  back  soon  to  your  Tmscan 
vineyards.  Well ;  give  me  your  arm  then  !  But  take 
care  that  no  friskiness  comes  over  you.  We  must 
walk  evenly  and  heavily  to-night!  " 

The  party  arranged  itself  according  to  its  natural 
afiBnities  or  casual  likings  ;  a  sculptor  generally  choos- 
ing a  painter,  and  a  painter  a  sculptor,  for  his  com- 
panion, in  preference  to  brethren  of  their  own  art. 
Kenyon  would  gladly  have  taken  Hilda  to  himself, 
and  have  drawn  her  a  little  aside  from  the  throng  of 
merry  wayfarers.  But  she  kept  near  Miriam,  and 
seemed,  in  her  gentle  and  quiet  way,  to  decline  a  sepa- 
rate alliance  either  with  him  or  any  other  of  her  ac- 
quaintances. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


172  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

So  they  set  forth,  and  had  gone  but  a  little  way, 
when  the  narrow  street  emerged  into  a  piazza,  on  one 
side  of  which  glistening,  and  dimpling  in  the  moon- 
light,  was  the  most  famous  fountain  in  Bome.  Its 
murmur  —  not  to  say  its  uproar  —  had  been  in  the 
ears  of  the  company,  ever  since  they  came  into  the 
open  air.  It  was  the  Fountain  of  Trevi,  which  draws 
its  precious  water  from  a  source  far  beyond  the  walls, 
whence  it  flows  hitherward  through  old  subterranean 
aqueducts,  and  sparkles  forth  as  pure  as  the  virgin 
who  first  led  Agrippa  to  its  well-spring,  by  her  father's 
door. 

^'I  shall  sip  as  much  of  this  water  as  the  hollow 
of  my  hand  will  hold,"  said  Miriam.  **  I  am  leaving 
Rome  in  a  few  days ;  and  the  tradition  goes,  that  a 
parting  draught  at  the  Fountain  of  Trevi  insures  the 
traveller's  return,  whatever  obstacles  and  improbabili- 
ties may  seem  to  beset  him.  Will  you  drink,  Dona- 
tello?" 

'^  Signorina,  what  you  drink,  I  drink,"  said  the 
youth. 

They  and  the  rest  of  the  party  descended  some  steps 
to  the  water's  brim,  and,  after  a  sip  or  two,  stood  gaz- 
ing at  the  absurd  design  of  the  fountain,  where  some 
sculptor  of  Bernini's  school  had  gone  absolutely  mad 
in  marble.  It  was  a  great  palace-front,  with  niches 
and  many  bas-reliefs,  out  of  which  looked  Agrippa's 
legendary  virgin,  and  several  of  the  allegoric  sister- 
hood ;  while,  at  the  base,  appeared  Neptune,  with  his 
floundering  steeds,  and  Tritons  blowing  their  horns 
about  him,  and  twenty  other  artificial  fantasies,  which 
the  calm  moonlight  soothed  into  better  taste  than  was 
native  to  them. 

And,  after  all,  it  was  a<tf  magnificent  a  piece  of  work 


Digitized 


by  Google 


> 
O 


O 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A  MOONLIGHT  RAMBLE.  178 

as  ever  liumaii  skill  contrived.  At  the  foot  of  the  pa- 
latial  facade  was  strown,  with  careful  art  and  ordered 
irregularity,  a  broad  and  broken  heap  of  massive  rock, 
looking  as  if  it  might  have  lain  there  since  the  deluge. 
Over  a  central  precipice  fell  the  water,  in  a  semicircu* 
lar  cascade ;  and  from  a  hundred  crevices,  on  all  sides, 
snowy  jets  gushed  up,  and  streams  spouted  out  of  the 
mouths  and  nostrils  of  stone  monsters,  and  fell  in  glis^ 
tening  drops ;  while  other  rivulets,  that  had  run  wild, 
came  leaping  from  one  rude  step  to  another,  over 
stones  that  were  mossy,  slimy,  and  green  with  sedge, 
becaus3,  in  a  century  of  their  wild  play.  Nature  had 
adopted  the  Fountain  of  Trevi,  with  all  its  elaborate 
devices,  for  her  own.  Finally,  the  water,  tumbling, 
sparkling,  and  dashing,  with  joyous  haste  and  never- 
ceasing  murmur,  poured  itself  into  a  great  marble- 
brimmed  reservoir,  and  filled  it  with  a  quivering  tide ; 
on  which  was  seen,  continually,  a  snowy  semicircle  of 
momentary  foam  from  the  principal  cascade,  as  well 
as  a  multitude  of  snow-points  from  smaller  jets.  The 
basin  occupied  the  whole  breadth  of  the  piazza,  whence 
flights  of  steps  descended  to  its  border.  A  boat  might 
float,  and  make  voyages  from  one  shore  to  another  in 
this  mimic  lake. 

In  the  daytime,  there  is  hardly  a  livelier  scene  in 
Rome  than  the  neighborhood  of  the  Fountain  of  Trevi ; 
for  the  piazza  is  then  filled  with  the  stalls  of  vegetable 
and  fruit-dealers,  chestnut-roasters,  cigar-venders,  and 
other  people,  whose  petty  and  wandering  trafBc  is 
transacted  in  the  open  air.  It  is  likewise  thronged 
with  idlers,  lounging  over  the  iron  railing,  and  with 
Forestieri,  who  came  hither  to  see  the  famous  foun- 
tain.  Here,  also,  are  seen  men  with  buckets,  urchins 
with  cans,  and  maidens  (a  picture  as  old  as  the  patri* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


178  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

and  blameless  delights.  Have  you  found  aught  in  the 
world  that  is  worth  what  you  there  enjoyed  ?  Tell  me 
truly,  Donatello ! " 

"  Yes !  "  replied  the  young  man. 

"  And  what,  in  Heaven's  name  ?  "  asked  she. 

'*  This  burning  pain  in  my  heart,"  said  Donatello ; 
*♦  for  you  are  in  the  midst  of  it." 

By  this  time,  they  had  left  the  Fountain  of  Trevi 
considerably  behind  them.  Little  further  allusion  was 
made  to  the  scene  at  its  margin ;  for  the  party  re- 
garded Miriam's  persecutor  as  diseased  in  his  wits, 
and  were  hardly  to  be  surprised  by  any  eccentricity  in 
his  deportment. 

Threading  several  narrow  streets,  they  passed  through 
the  Piazza  of  the  Holy  Apostles,  and  soon  e^me  to 
Trajan's  Forum.  All  over  the  surface  of  what  once 
was  Rome,  it  seems  to  be  the  effort  of  Time  to  bury 
up  the  ancient  city,  as  if  it  were  a  corpse,  and  he  the 
sexton ;  so  that,  in  eighteen  centuries,  the  soil  over  its 
grave  has  grown  very  deep,  by  the  slow  scattering  of 
dust,  and  the  accumulation  of  more  modem  decay 
upon  older  ruin. 

This  was  the  fate,  also,  of  Trajan's  Forum,  until 
some  papal  antiquary,  a  few  hundred  years  ago,  began 
to  hollow  it  out  again,  and  disclosed  the  full  height 
of  the  gigantic  column  wreathed  round  with  bas-reliefs 
of  the  old  emperor's  warlike  deeds.  In  the  area  be- 
fore it  stands  a  grove  of  stone,  consisting  of  the  broken 
and  unequal  shafts  of  a  vanished  temple,  still  keeping 
a  majestic  order,  and  apparently  incapable  of  further 
demolition.  The  modern  edifices  of  the  piazza  (wholly 
built,  no  doubt,  out  of  the  spoil  of  its  old  magnifi- 
cence) look  down  into  the  hollow  space  whence  these 
pUlars  rise. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A   MOONLIGHT  RAMBLE.  179 

One  of  the  immense  gray  granite  shafts  lay  in  the 
piazza^  on  the  verge  of  the  area.  It  was  a  great,  solid 
fact  of  the  Past,  making  old  Rome  actually  sensible  to 
the  touch  and  eye ;  and  no  study  of  history,  nor  force 
of  thought,  nor  magic  of  song,  could  so  vitally  assure 
us  that  Rome  once  existed,  as  this  sturdy  specimen  of 
what  its  rulers  and  people  wrought. 

"  And  see  I  "  said  Kenyon,  laying  his  hand  upon  it, 
**  there  is  still  a  polish  remaining  on  the  hard  sub- 
stance of  the  pillar ;  and  even  now,  late  as  it  is,  I  can 
feel  very  sensibly  the  warmth  of  the  noonday  sun, 
which  did  its  best  to  heat  it  through.  This  shaft  will 
endure  forever.  The  polish  of  eighteen  centuries  ago, 
OS  yet  but  half  rubbed  off,  and  the  heat  of  to-day's 
sunshine,  lingering  into  the  night,  seem  almost  equally 
ephemeral  in  relation  to  it." 

"There  is  comfort  to  be  found  in  the  pillar,'*  re- 
marked Miriam,  "hard  and  heavy  as  it  is.  Lying 
here  forever,  as  it  will,  it  makes  all  human  trouble 
appear  but  a  momentary  annoyance." 

"And  human  happiness  as  evanescent  too,"  ob- 
served Hilda,  sighing ;  "  and  l>eautif ul  art  hardly  less 
so !  I  do  not  love  to  think  that  this  dull  stone, 
merely  by  its  massiveness,  will  last  infinitely  longer 
than  any  picture,  in  spite  of  the  spiritual  life  that 
ou^ht  to  give  it  immortality ! " 

"  My  poor  little  Hilda,"  said  Miriam,  kissing  her 
compassionately,  "would  you  sacrifice  this  greatest 
mortal  consolation,  which  we  derive  from  the  transi- 
toriness  of  all  things,  —  from  the  right  of  saying,  in 
every  conjecture,  *  This,  too,  will  pass  away,'  —  would 
you  give  up  this  unspeakable  boon,  for  the  sake  of 
making  a  picture  eternal  ?  " 

Their  moralizing  strain  was  interrupted  by  a  denv 


Digitized 


by  Google 


180  ROMANCE   OF  MONTE  BENL 

onstration  from  the  rest  of  the  party,  who,  after  talk- 
ing and  laughing  together,  suddenly  joined  their  voices, 
and  shouted  at  full  pitch,  — 

"Trajan!     Trajan!" 

**  Why  do  you  deafen  us  with  such  an  uproar  ?'*  in- 
quired Miriam. 

In  truth,  the  whole  piazza  had  been  filled  with  their 
I  idle  vociferation ;  the  echoes  from  the  surrounding 
houses  reverberating  the  cry  of  "Trajan,"  on  all 
sides ;  as  if  there  was  a  great  search  for  that  imperial 
personage,  and  not  so  much  as  a  handful  of  his  ashes 
to  be  found. 

*'  Why,  it  Was  a  good  opportunity  to  air  our  voices 
in  this  resounding  piazza,"  replied  one  of  the  artists. 
"  Besides,  we  had  really  some  hopes  of  summoning 
Trajan  to  look  at  his  column,  which,  you  know,  he 
never  saw  in  his  lifetime.  Here  is  your  model  (who, 
they  say,  lived  and  sinned  before  Trajan's  death)  still 
wandering  about  Rome ;  and  why  not  the  Emperor 
Trajan  ?  " 

"  Dead  emperors  have  very  little  delight  in  their 
columns,  I  am  afraid,"  observed  Kenyon.  "  All  that 
rich  sculpture  of  Trajan's  bloody  warfare,  twining 
from  the  base  of  the  pillar  to  its  capital,  may  be  but 
an  ugly  spectacle  for  his  ghostly  eyes,  if  he  considers 
that  this  huge,  storied  shaft  must  be  laid  before  tlie 
judgment-seat,  as  a  piece  of  the  evidence  of  what  ho 
did  in  the  flesh.  If  ever  I  am  employed  to  sculpture 
a  hero's  monument,  I  shall  think  of  this,  as  I  put  in 
the  ba»-relief  s  of  the  pedestal !  " 

"  There  are  sermons  in  stones,"  said  Hilda,  thought- 
fully, smiling  at  Kenyon's  morality ;  "  and  especially 
in  the  stones  of  Kome." 

The  party  moved  on,  but  deviated  a  little  from  the 
^straight  way,  in  order  to  glance  at  the  ponderous  re- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


A  MOONLIGHT  RAMBLE.  181 

mains  of  tbe  temple  of  Mars  Ultor,  within  which  a 
convent  of  nuns  is  now  established,  —  a  dove-cote,  in 
the  war-god*s  mansion.  At  only  a  little  distance,  they 
passed  the  portico  of  a  Temple  of  Minerva,  most  rich 
and  beautiful  in  architecture,  but  wof ully  gnawed  by 
time  and  shattered  by  violence,  besides  being  buried 
midway  in  the  accumulation  of  soil,  that  rises  over 
dead  Rome  like  a  flood-tide.  Within  this  edifice  of 
antique  sanctity,  a  baker's  shop  was  now  established, 
with  an  entrance  on  one  side ;  for,  everywhere,  the 
remnants  of  old  grandeur  and  divinity  have  been 
made  available  for  the  meanest  necessities  of  to-day. 

"The  baker  is  just  drawing  his  loaves  out  of  the 
oven,'*  remarked  Kenyon.  "  Do  you  smell  how  sour 
they  are  ?  I  should  fancy  that  Minerva  (in  revenge 
for  the  desecration  of  her  temple)  had  slyly  poured 
vinegar  into  the  batch,  if  I  did  not  know  that  the 
modem  Komans  prefer  their  bread  in  the  acetous  fer^ 
mentation." 

They  turned  into  the  Via  Alessandria,  and  thus 
gained  the  rear  of  the  Temple  of  Peace,  and,  passing 
beneath  its  great  arches,  pursued  their  way  along  a 
hedge-bordered  lane.  In  all  probability,  a  stately 
Roman  street  lay  buried  beneath  that  rustic-looking 
pathway ;  for  they  had  now  emerged  from  the  close 
and  narrow  avenues  of  the  modem  city,  and  were 
treading  on  a  soil  where  the  seeds  of  antique  grandeur 
had  not  yet  produced  the  squalid  crop  that  elsewhere 
sprouts  from  them.  Grassy  as  the  lane  was,  it  skirted 
along  heaps  of  shapeless  ruin,  and  the  bare  site  of  the 
vast  temple  that  Hadrian  planned  and  built.  It  ter- 
minated on  the  edge  of  a  somewhat  abrupt  descent,  at 
the  foot  of  which,  with  a  muddy  ditch  between,  rose, 
in  the  bright  moonlight,  the  great  curving  wall  and 
multitudinous  arches  of  the  Coliseiun, 

Digitized  by  LjOOQIC 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

mibiam's  trouble. 

As  usual  of  a  moonlight  evening,  several  carriages 
stood  at  the  entrance  of  this  famous  ruin,  and  the 
precincts  and  interior  were  anything  but  a  solitude. 
The  French  sentinel  on  duty  beneath  the  principal 
archway  eyed  our  party  curiously,  but  offered  no  ob- 
stacle to  their  admission.  Within,  the  moonlight 
filled  and  flooded  the  great  empty  space;  it  glowed 
upon  tier  above  tier  of  ruined,  grass-grown  arches, 
and  made  them  even  too  distinctly  visible.  The  splen- 
dor of  the  revelation  took  away  that  inestimable  effect 
of  dimness  and  mystery  by  which  the  imagination 
might  be  assisted  to  build  a  grander  structure  than 
the  Coliseum,  and  to  shatter  it  with  a  more  pictur- 
esque decay.  Byron's  celebrated  description  is  better 
than  the  reality.  He  beheld  the  scene  in  his  mind's 
eye,  through  the  witchery  of  many  intervening  years, 
and  faintly  illuminated  it  as  if  with  starlight  instead 
of  this  broad  glow  of  moonshine. 

The  party  of  our  friends  sat  down,  three  or  four  of 
them  on  a  prostrate  column,  another  on  a  shapeless 
lump  of  marble,  once  a  Eoman  altar;  others  on  the 
steps  of  one  of  the  Christian  shrines.  Goths  and  bar- 
barians though  they  were,  they  chatted  as  gayly  1»- 
gether  as  if  they  belonged  to  the  gentle  and  pleasant 
race  of  people  who  now  inhabit  Italy.  There  was 
much  pastime  and  gayety  just  then  in  the  area  of  tha 


Digitized 


by  Google 


w 

o 
u 

s 

H 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM'S  TROUBLE.  188 

Coliseum,  where  so  many  gladiators  and  wild  beasts 
had  fought  and  died,  and  where  so  much  blood  of 
Christian  martyrs  had  been  lapped  up  by  that  fiercest 
of  wild  beasts,  the  Koman  populace  of  yore.  Some 
youths  and  maidens  were  running  merry  races  across 
the  open  space,  and  playing  at  hide^md-seek  a  little 
way  within  the  duskiness  of  the  ground-tier  of  arches,, 
whence  now  and  then  you  could  hear  the  half-shriek«  ^ 
half-laugh  of  a  frolicsome  girl,  whom  the  shadow  had 
betrayed  into  a  young  man's  arms.  Elder  groups  were 
seated  on  the  fragments  of  pillars  and  blocks  of  marble 
that  lay  round  the  verge  of  the  arena,  talking  in  the 
quick,  short  ripple  of  the  Italian  tongue.  On  the  steps 
of  the  great  black  cross  in  the  centre  of  the  Coliseum 
sat  a  party  singing  scraps  of  songs,  with  much  laughter 
and  merriment  between  the  stanzas. 

It  was  a  strange  place  for  song  and  mirth.  That 
black  cross  marks  one  of  the  special  blood-spots  of  the 
earth  where,  thousands  of  times  over,  the  dying  gladia- 
tor fell,  and  more  of  human  agony  has  been  endured 
for  the  mere  pastime  of  the  multitude  than  on  the 
breadth  of  many  batde-fields.  From  all  this  crime 
and  suffering,  however,  the  spot  has  derived  a  more 
than  common  sanctity.  An  inscription  promises  seven 
years'  indulgence,  seven  years  of  remission  from  the 
pains  of  purgatory,  and  earlier  enjoyment  of  heavenly 
bliss,  for  each  separate  kiss  imprinted  on  the  black 
'cross.  What  better  use  could  be  made  of  life,  after 
middle-age,  when  the  accumulated  sins  are  many  and 
the  remaining  temptations  few,  than  to  spend  it  all  in 
kissing  the  black  cross  of  the  Coliseum ! 

Besides  its  central  consecration,  the  whole  area  has 
been  made  sacred  by  a  range  of  shrines,  which  are 
verected  round  the  circle,  each  conmiemorating  some 


Digitized 


by  Google 


184  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

scene  or  circumstance  of  the  Saviour's  passion  and 
suffering.  In  accordance  with  an  ordinary  custom  a 
pilgrim  was  making  his  progress  from  shrine  to  shrine 
upon  his  knees,  and  saying  a  penitential  prayer  at 
each.  Light-footed  girls  ran  across  the  path  along 
which  he  crept,  or  sported  with  their  friends  close  by 
the  shrines  where  he  was  kneeling.  The  pilgrim  took 
no  heed,  and  the  girls  meant  no  irreverence ;  for  in 
Italy  religion  jostles  along  side  by  side  with  business 
and  sport,  after  a  fashion  of  its  own,  and  people  are 
accustomed  to  kneel  down  and  pray,  or  see  others 
praying,  between  two  fits  of  merriment,  or  between 
two  sins. 

To  make  an  end  of  our  description,  a  red  twinkle  of 
light  was  visible  amid  the  breadth  of  shadow  that  fell 
across  the  upper  part  of  the  Coliseum.  Now  it  glim- 
mered through  a  line  of  arches,  or  threw  a  broader 
gleam  as  it  rose  out  of  some  profound  abyss  of  ruin ; 
now  it  was  muffled  by  a  heap  of  shrubbery  which  had 
adventurously  clambered  to  that  dizzy  height;  and 
tio  the  red  light  kept  ascending  to  loftier  and  loftier 
ranges  of  the  structure,  until  it  stood  like  a  star  where 
the  blue  sky  rested  against  the  Coliseum's  topmost 
wall.  It  indicated  a  party  of  English  or  Americans 
paying  the  inevitable  visit  by  moonlight,  and  exalting 
themselves  with  raptures  that  were  Byron's,  not  their 
own. 

Our  company  of  artists  sat  on  the  fallen  column, 
the  pagan  altar,  and  the  steps  of  the  Christian  shrine* 
enjoying  the  moonlight  and  shadow,  the  present  gay« 
ety  and  the  gloomy  reminiscences  of  the  scene,  in  ak 
most  equal  share.  Artists,  indeed,  are  lifted  by  the 
ideality  of  their  pursuits  a  little  way  off  the  earth,  and 
are  therefore  able  to  catch  the  evanescent  fragrance 


Digitized 


ed  by  Google 


MIRIAM'S  TROUBLE.  185 

tiiat  floats  in  the  atmosphere  of  life  above  the  heads 
of  the  ordinary  crowd.  Even  if  they  seem  endowed 
vith  little  imagination  individually,  yet  there  is  a 
property,  a  gift,  a  talisman,  common  to  their  class, 
entitling  them  to  partake  somewhat  more  bountifully 
than  other  people  in  the  thin  delights  of  moonshine 
and  romance. 

"How  delightful  this  is!"  said  Hilda;  and  she 
sighed  for  very  pleasure. 

"  Yes,"  said  Kenyon,  who  sat  on  the  column,  at  her 
side.  "The  Coliseum  is  far  more  delightful,  as  we 
enjoy  it  now,  than  when  eighty  thousand  persons  sat 
squeezed  together,  row  above  row,  to  see  their  f ellow- 
cteatures  torn  by  lions  and  tigers  limb  from  limb. 
What  a  strange  thought  that  the  Coliseum  was  really 
built  for  us,  and  has  not  come  to  its ;  best  uses  till  al- 
most two  thousand  years  after  it  was  finished !  " 

"The  Emperor  Vespasian  scarcely  had  us  in  his 
mind,"  said  Hilda,  smiling ;  "  but  I  thank  him  none 
the  less  for  building  it." 

'*'  He  gets  small  thanks,  I  fear,  from  the  people 
whose  bloody  instincts  he  pampered,"  rejoined  Ken- 
yoto.  "  Fancy  a  nightly  assemblage  of  eighty  thou- 
sand melancholy  and  remorseful  ghosts,  looking  down 
from  those  tiers  of  broken  arches,  striving  to  repent  of 
the  savage  pleasures  which  they  once  enjoyed,  but  still 
longing  to  enjoy  them  over  again." 

"  You  bring  a  Gothic  horror  into  this  peaceful  moon- 
light scene,"  said  Hilda. 

"  Nay,  I  have  good  authority  for  peopling  the  Coli-* 
seum  with  phantoms,"  replied  the  sculptor.  "  Do  you 
remember  that  veritable  scene  in  Benvenuto  Cellini's 
autobiography,  in  which  a  necromancer  of  his  acquaint* 
anee  draws  a  magic  circle  — *  just  where  the  black  cross 


Digitized 


by  Google 


186  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

stands  now,  I  suppose  —  and  raises  myriads  of  de^ 
mons?  Benvenuto  saw  them  with  his  own  eyes, — « 
giants,  pygmies,  and  other  creatures  of  frightful  a**- 
pect,  —  capering  and  dancing  on  yonder  walk.  Those 
spectres  must  have  been  Romans,  in  their  lifetime,  an') 
frequenters  of  this  bloody  amphitheatre.'* 

^^  I  see  a  spectre,  now ! ''  said  Hilda,  with  a  little 
thrill  of  uneasiness.  "  Have  you  watched  that  pil- 
grim, who  is  going  round  the  whole  circle  of  shrines, 
on  his  knees,  and  praying  with  such  fervency  at  every 
one  ?  Now  that  he  has  revolved  so  far  in  his  orbit, 
and  has  the  moonshine  on  his  face  as  he  turns  towards 
us,  methinks  I  recognize  him !  " 

"  And  so  do  I,"  said  Kenyon.  "  Poor  Miriam  I  Do 
you  think  she  sees  him  ?  " 

They  looked  round,  and  perceived  that  Miriam  had 
risen  from  the  steps  of  the  shrine  and  disappeared. 
She  had  shrunk  back,  in  fact,  into  the  deep  obscurity 
of  an  arch  that  opened  just  behind  them. 

Donatello,  whose  faithful  watch  was  no  more  to  be 
eluded  than  that  of  a  hound,  had  stolen  after  her, 
and  became  the  innocent  witness  of  a  spectacle  that 
had  its  own  kind  of  horror.  Unaware  of  his  pres- 
ence, and  fancying  herself  wholly  unseen,  the  beautiful 
Miriam  began  to  gesticulate  extravagantly,  gnashing 
her  teeth,  flinging  her  arms  wildly  abroad,  stamping 
with  her  foot.  It  was  as  if  she  had  stepped  aside  for 
an  instant,  solely  to  snatch  the  relief  of  a  brief  fit  of 
madness.  Persons  in  acute  trouble,  or  laboring  under 
strong  excitement,  with  a  necessity  for  concealing  it, 
are  prone  to  relieve  their  nerves  in  this  wild  way  i 
although,  when  practicable,  they  find  a  more  effectual 
Bolace  in  shrieking  aloud. 

Thus,  as  soon  as  she  threw  off  her  self-control,  under 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM'S   TROUBLE.  187 

khe  dusky  arclies  of  the  Coliseum,  we  may  consider 
Miriam  as  a  mad  woman,  concentrating  the  elements 
of  a  long  insanity  into  that  instant. 

"  Signorina  1  signorina  !  have  pity  on  me  1  "  cried 
Donatello,  approaching  her  ;  "  this  is  too  terrible !  " 

"  How  dare  you  look  at  me  1 "  exclaimed  Miriam, 
mth  a  start;  then,  whispering  below  her  breath,  "men 
have  been  struck  dead  for  a  less  offence!  " 

"  If  you  desire  it,  or  need  it,"  said  Donatello,  hum* 
Hy,  "  I  shall  not  be  loath  to  die." 

"  Donatello,"  said  Miriam,  coming  close  to  the  young 
man,  and  speaking  low,  but  still  the  almost  insanity  of 
the  moment  vibrating  in  her  voice,  **  if  you  love  your- 
self;  if  you  desire  those  earthly  blessings,  such  as  you, 
of  all  men,  were  made  for ;  if  you  would  come  to  a 
good  old  age  among  your  olive -orchards  and  your 
Tuscan  vines,  as  your  forefathers  did ;  if  you  would 
leave  children  to  enjoy  the  same  peaceful,  happy,  in- 
nocent life,  then  flee  from  me.  Look  not  behind  you  I 
Get  you  gone  without  another  word."  He  gazed  sadly 
at  her,  but  did  not  stir.  "  I  tell  you,"  Miriam  went 
on,  "  there  is  a  great  evil  hanging  over  me !  I  know 
it ;  I  see  it  in  the  sky ;  I  feel  it  in  the  air  1  It  will 
overwhelm  me  as  utterly  as  if  this  arch  should  crum- 
ble down  upon  our  heads  !  It  wiQ  crush  you,  too,  if 
you  stand  at  my  side  I  Depart,  then  ;  and  make  the 
sign  of  the  cross,  as  your  faith  bids  you,  when  an  evil 
spirit  is  nigh.     Cast  me  off,  or  you  are  lost  forever." 

A  higher  sentiment  brightened  upon  Donatello's 
face  than  had  hitherto  seemed  to  belong  to  its  simple 
expression  and  sensuous  beauty. 

"  I  will  never  quit  you,"  he  said  ;  "  you  cannot  drive 
me  from  you." 

^^  Poor  Donatello  I "  said  Miriam,  in  a  changed  tone^ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


188  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

and  rather  to  herself  than  him.  ^^  Is  there  no  othef 
that  seeks  me  out, — follows  me,  —  is  obstinate  to 
share  my  affliction  and  my  doom,  —  but  only  you  1 
They  call  me  beautiful ;  and  I  used  to  fancy  that,  at 
my  need,  I  could  bring  the  whole  world  to  my  feet. 
And  lo  I  here  is  my  utmost  n«ed ;  and  my  beauty  and 
my  gifts  have  brought  me  only  this  poor,  simple  boy. 
Half-witted,  they  call  him ;  and  surely  fit  for  nothing 
hut  to  be  happy.  And  I  accept  his  aid  1  To-morrow, 
to-morrow,  I  will  tell  him  all !  Ah !  what  a  sin  to 
stain  his  joyous  nature  with  the  blackness  of  a  woe 
like  mine  1 " 

She  held  out  her  hand  to  him,  and  smiled  sadly  as 
Donatello  pressed  it  to  his  lips.  They  were  now  about 
to  emerge  from  the  depth  of  the  arch ;  but,  just  then, 
the  kneeling  pilgrim,  in  his  revolution  round  the  orbit 
of  the  shrines,  had  reached  the  one  on  the  steps  of 
which  Miriam  had  been  sitting.  There,  as  at  the  other 
shrines,  he  prayed,  or  seemed  to  pray.  It  struck  Ken- 
yon,  however,  —  who  sat  close  by,  and  saw  his  face 
distinctly, — that  the  suppliant  was  merely  perform- 
ing an  enjoined  penance,  and  without  the  penitence 
that  ought  to  have  given  it  effectual  life.  Even  as  he 
knelt,  his  eyes  wandered,  and  Miriam  soon  felt  that 
he  had  detected  her,  half  hidden  as  she  was  within  the 
obscurity  of  the  arch. 

"  He  is  evidently  a  good  Catholic,  however,"  whis- 
pered  one  of  the  party.  "  After  all,  I  fear  we  cannot 
identify  him  with  the  ancient  pagan  who  haunts  the 
catacombs." 

"The  doctors  of  the  Propaganda  may  have  converted 
him,"  said  another ;  "  they  have  had  fifteen  hundred 
years  to  perform  the  task." 

The  company  now  deemed  it  time  to  continue  tbeii 


Digitized 


by  Google 


H 

8 

o 

X 
u 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM'S  TROUBLE.  189 

ramble.  Emerging  from  a  side  entrance  of  the  Coli- 
seum, they  had  on  their  left  the  Arch  of  Constantine, 
and,  above  it,  the  shapeless  ruins  of  the  Palace  of  the 
CaBsars  ;  portions  of  which  have  taken  shape  anew,  in 
mediaeval  convents  and  modem  villas.  They  turned 
their  faces  cityward,  and,  treading  over  the  broad 
flagstones  of  the  old  Roman  pavement,  passed  through 
the  Arch  of  Titus.  The  moon  shone  brightly  enough 
within  it,  to  show  the  seven-branched  Jewish  candle- 
stick, cut  in  the  marble  of  the  interior.  The  original 
of  that  awful  trophy  lies  buried,  at  this  moment,  in 
the  yellow  mud  of  the  Tiber ;  and,  could  its  gold  of 
Ophir  again  be  brought  to  light,  it  would  be  the  most 
precious  relic  of  past  ages,  in  the  estimation  of  both 
Jew  and  Gentile. 

Standing  amid  so  much  ancient  dust,  it  is  difficult 
to  spare  the  reader  the  commonplaces  of  enthusiasm, 
on  which  hundreds  of  tourists  have  already  insisted. 
Over  this  half-worn  pavement,  and  beneath  this  Arch 
of  Titus,  the  Roman  armies  had  trodden  in  their  out- 
ward march,  to  fight  battles,  a  world's  width  away. 
Returning  victorious,  with  royal  captives  and  inesti- 
mable spoil,  a  Roman  triumph,  that  most  gorgeous  pa- 
geant of  earthly  pride,  had  streamed  and  flaunted  in 
hundred-fold  succession  over  these  same  flagstones,  and 
through  this  yet  stalwart  archway.  It  is  politic,  how- 
ever, to  make  few  allusions  to  such  a  past ;  nor,  if  we 
would  create  an  interest  in  the  characters  of  our  story, 
is  it  wise  to  suggest  how  Cicero's  foot  may  have  stepped 
on  yonder  stone,  or  how  Horace  was  wont  to  stroll  near 
by,  making  his  footsteps  chime  with  the  measure  of  the 
ode  that  was  ringing  in  his  mind.  The  vejy  ghosts  of  ^ 
that  massive  and  stately  epoch  have  so  much  density' 
N^hat  the  actual  people  of  to-day  seem  the  thinner  of  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


190  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

two,  and  stand  more  ghostlike  by  the  arches  and  col* 
urnns,  letting  the  rich  sculpture  be  discerned  through 
their  ill-compacted  substance. 

The  party  kept  onward,  often  meeting  pairs  and 
groups  of  midnight  strollers  like  themselves.  On  such 
a  moonlight  night  as  this,  Bome  keeps  itself  awakei 
and  stirring,  and  is  full  of  song  and  pastime,  the  noise' 
of  which  mingles  with  your  dreams,  if  you  have  gone 
betimes  to  bed.  But  it  is  better  to  be  abroad,  and 
take  our  own  share  of  the  enjoyable  time ;  for  the 
languor  that  weighs  so  heavily  in  the  Roman  atmos- 
phere by  day  is  lightened  beneath  the  moon  and  stars. 

They  had  now  reached  the  precincts  of  the  Forum* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XVni. 

ON  THE  EDGE  OP  A  PREOIPICB. 

^^  Let  u&  settle  it,"  said  Kenyon,  stamping  his  foot 
firmly  down,  "that  this  is  precisely  the  spot  where  the 
chasm  opened,  into  which  Curtius  precipitated  his  good 
steed  and  himself.  Imagine  the  great,  dusky  gap,  im- 
penetrabiy  deep,  and  with  half -shaped  monsters  and 
hideous  faces  looming  upward  out  of  it,  to  the  vast  af- 
fright of  the  good  citizens  who  peeped  over  the  brim  I 
There,  now,  is  a  subject,  hitherto  unthought  of,  for  a 
grim  and  ghastly  story,  and,  methinks,  with  a  moral  as 
deep  as  the  gulf  itself.  Within  it,  beyond  a  question, 
there  were  prophetic  visions,  —  intimations  of  all  the 
future  calamities  of  Bome,  —  shades  of  Goths,  and 
Gauls,  and  even  of  the  French  soldiers  of  to-day.  It 
was  a  pity  to  close  it  up  so  soon !  I  would  give  much 
for  a  peep  into  such  a  chasm." 

"  I  fancy,"  remarked  Miriam,  "  that  every  person 
takes  a  peep  into  it  in  moments  of  gloom  and  despon^ 
dency ;  that  is  to  say,  in  his  moments  of  deepest  in- 
sight." 

"Where  is  it,  then?"  asked  Hilda.  "I  never 
peeped  into  it." 

"  Wait,  and  it  will  open  for  you,"  replied  her  friend. 
**  The  chasm  was  merely  one  of  the  orifices  of  that  pit 
of  blackness  that  lies  beneath  us,  everywhere.  The 
firmest  substance  of  himian  happiness  is  but  a  thin 
crust  spread  over  it,  with  just  reality  enough  to  bear 


Digitized 


by  Google 


192  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENI. 

up  the  illusive  stage-scenery  amid  which  we  tread.  1% 
needs  no  earthquake  to  open  the  chasm.  A  footstep, 
a  little  heavier  than  ordinary,  will  serve ;  and  we  must 
step  very  daintily,  not  to  break  through  the  crust  at 
any  moment.  By  and  by,  we  inevitably  sink!  It 
was  a  foolish  piece  of  heroism  in  Curtius  to  precipitate 
himself  there,  in  advance  ;  for  all  Rome,  you  see,  has 
been  swallowed  up  in  that  gulf,  in  spite  of  him.  The 
Palace  of  the  Caesars  has  gone  down  thither,  with  a 
hollow,  rumbling  sound  of  its  fragments!  All  the 
temples  have  timibled  into  it ;  and  thousands  of  stat- 
ues have  been  thrown  after  1  All  the  armies  and  the 
triumphs  have  marched  into  the  great  chasm,  with 
their  martial  music  playing,  as  they  stepped  over  the 
brink.  All  the  heroes,  the  statesmen,  and  the  poets  ! 
All  piled  upon  poor  Curtius,  who  thought  to  have 
saved  them  all !  I  am  loath  to  smile  at  the  self-con- 
ceit of  that  gallant  horseman,  but  cannot  well  avoid 
it." 

'•It  grieves  me  to  hear  you  speak  thus,  Miriam," 
said  Hilda,  whose  natural  and  cheerful  piety  was 
shocked  by  her  friend's  gloomy  view  of  human  desti- 
nies. "It  seems  to  me  that  there  is  no  chasm,  nor 
any  hideous  emptiness  under  our  feet,  except  what  the 
evil  within  us  digs.  If  there  be  such  a  chasm,  let  us 
bridge  it  over  with  good  thoughts  and  deeds,  and  we 
shall  tread  safely  to  the  other  side.  It  was  the  guilt 
of  Eome,  no  doubt,  that  caused  this  gulf  to  open  ;  and 
Curtius  filled  it  up  with  his  heroic  self-sacrifice  and 
patriotism,  which  was  the  best  virtue  that  the  old 
Romans  knew.  Every  wrong  thing  makes  the  gulf 
deeper;  every  right  one  helps  to  fill  it  up.  As  tho 
evil  of  Rome  was  far  more  than  its  good,  the  whole 
commonwealth  finally  sank  into  it,  indeed,  but  of  no 


Digitized 


by  Google 


ON  THE  EDGE  OF  A  PREClPICf!.        198 

•*  Well,  Hilda,  it  came  to  the  same  thing  at  last,** 
answered  Miriam,  despondingly. 

"  Doubtless,  too,"  resumed  the  sculptor  (for  his  im* 
agination  was  greatly  excited  by  the  idea  of  this  won- 
drous chasm),  "  all  the  blood  that  the  Romans  shed, 
whether  on  battle-fields,  or  in  the  Coliseum,  or  on  the 
cross,  —  in  whatever  public  or  private  murder,  —  ran 
into  this  fatal  gulf,  and  formed  a  mighty  subterranean 
lake  of  gore,  right  beneath  our  feet.  The  blood  from 
ttie  thirty  wounds  in  Caesar's  breast  flowed  hitherward, 
and  that  pure  little  rivulet  from  Virginia's  bosom,  too  I 
Virginia,  beyond  all  question,  was  stabbed  by  her  fa- 
ther, precisely  where  we  are  standing." 

"  Then  the  spot  is  hallowed  forever  1 "  said  Hilda. 

"Is  there  such  blessed  potency  in  bloodshed?" 
asked  Miriam.  "  Nay,  Hilda,  do  not  protest  I  I  take 
your  meaning  rightly." 

They  again  moved  forward.  And  still,  from  the 
Forum  and  the  Via  Sacra,  from  beneath  the  arches  of 
the  Temple  of  Peace  on  one  side,  and  the  acclivity  of 
the  Palace  of  the  Csesars  on  the  other,  there  arose 
singing  voices  of  parties  that  were  strolling  through 
the  moonlight.  Thus,  the  air  was  full  of  kindred 
melodies  that  encountered  one  another,  and  twined 
themselves  into  a  broad,  vague  music,  out  of  which  no 
single  strain  could  be  disentangled.  These  good  ex- 
amples, as  well  as  the  harmonious  influences  of  the 
hour,  incited  our  artist-friends  to  make  proof  of  their 
own  vocal  powers.  With  what  skill  and  breath  they 
had,  they  set  up  a  choral  strain,  —  "  Hail,  Columbia !  '* 
we  believe,  —  which  those  old  Roman  echoes  must 
have  found  it  exceeding  difficult  to  repeat  aright. 
Even  Hilda  poured  the  slender  sweetness  of  her  note 
into  her  country's  song*     h/Lmsm  W£^  &t  first  silentf 


Digitized 


by  Google 


194  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

being  perhaps  unfamiliar  with  the  air  and  burden. 
But,  suddenly,  she  threw  out  such  a  swell  and  gush  of 
sound,  that  it  seemed  to  pervade  the  whole  choir  of 
other  voices,  and  then  to  rise  above  them  all,  and  be- 
come audible  in  what  would  else  have  been  the  silence 
of  an  upper  region.  That  volume  of  melodious  voice 
was  one  of  the  tokens  of  a  great  trouble.  There  had 
long  been  an  impulse  upon  her  —  amountiug,  at  last, 
to  a  necessity  —  to  shriek  aloud ;  but  she  had  stmg« 
gled  against  it,  till  the  thunderous  anthem  gave  her 
an  opportunity  to  relieve  her  heart  by  a  great  cry. 

They  passed  the  solitary  Colimm  of  Phocas,  anji 
looked  down  into  the  excavated  spac^,  where  a  confu-* 
sion  of  pillars,  arches,  pavements,  and  shattered  blocks 
and  shafts — the  crumbs  of  various  ruin  dropped  from 
the  devouring  maw  of  Time  —  stand,  or  lie,  at  the 
base  of  the  Capitoline  Hill.  That  renowned  hillock 
(for  it  is  little  more)  now  arose  abruptly  above  them. 
The  ponderous  masonry,  with  which  the  hill-side  is 
built  up,  is  aa  old  as  Rome  itself,  and  looks  likely  to 
endure  while  the  world  retains  any  substance  or  per- 
manence. It  once  sustained  the  Capitol,  and  now 
bears  up  the  great  pile  which  the  mediaeval  builders 
raised  on  the  antique  foundation,  and  that  still  lof- 
tier tower,  which  looks  abroad  upon  a  larger  page  ol 
deeper  historic  interest  than  any  other  scene  can  show. 
On  the  same  pedestal  of  Roman  masonry,  other  struc- 
tures will  doubtless  rise,  and  vanish  like  ephemeral 
things. 

To  a  spectator  on  the  spot,  it  is  remarkable  xhat  the 
events  of  Roman  history,  and  Roman  life  itself,  ap- 
pear not  so  distant  as  the  Gothic  ages  which  succeeded 
them.  We  stand  in  the  Forum,  or  on  the  height  of 
the  Capitol,  and  seem  to  see  the  Roman  epoch  close  a| 


Digitized 


by  Google 


ON  THE  EDGE  OF  A  PRECIPICE.        195 

hand.  We  forget  that  a  chasm  extends  between  it 
and  ourselves,  in  which  lie  all  those  dark,  rude,  unlet- 
tered centuries,  around  the  birth-time  of  Christianity, 
as  well  as  the  age  of  chivalry  and  romance,  the  feudal 
system,  and  the  infancy  of  a  better  civilization  than 
that  of  Rome.  Or,  if  we  remember  these  mediaeval 
times,  they  look  further  off  than  the  Augustan  age« 
The  reason  may  be,  that  the  old  Roman  literature  sur^ 
vivos,  and  creates  for  us  an  intimacy  with  the  classic 
ages,  which  we  have  no  means  of  forming  with  the 
subsequent  ones. 

The  Italian  climate,  moreover,  robs  age  of  its  rever« 
ence  and  makes  it  look  newer  than  it  is.  Not  the  Coli-^ 
seum,  nor  the  tombs  of  the  Appian  Way,  nor  the  old- 
est piUar  in  the  Forum,  nor  any  other  Roman  ruin,  be 
it  as  dilapidated  as  it  may,  ever  give  the  impression  of 
venerable  antiquity  which  we  gather,  along  with  the 
ivy,  from  the  gray  walls  of  an  English  abbey  or  castle. 
And  yet  every  brick  or  stone,  which  we  pick  up  among 
the  former,  had  fallen  ages  before  the  foundation  of 
the  latter  was  begun.  This  is  owing  to  the  kindliness 
with  which  Nature  takes  an  English  ruin  to  her  heart, 
covering  it  with  ivy,  as  tenderly  as  Robin  Redbreast 
covered  the  dead  babes  with  forest  leaves.  She  strive** 
to  make  it  a  part  of  herself,  gradually  obliterating  the 
handiwork  of  man,  and  supplanting  it  with  her  own 
mosses  and  trailing  verdure,  till  she  has  von  the  whole 
structure  back.  But,  in  Italy,  whenever  man  has  once 
hewn  a  stone.  Nature  forthwith  relinquishes  her  right 
to  it,  and  never  lays  her  finger  on  it  again.  Age  after 
age  finds  it  bare  and  naked,  in  the  barren  sunshine, 
and  leaves  it  so.  Besides  this  natural  disadvantage, 
too,  each  succeeding  century,  in  Rome,  has  done  its 
best  to  ruin  the  very  ruins,  so  far  ac  their  picturesque 


Digitized 


by  Google 


196  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  DENT. 

effect  is  concerned,  by  stealing  away  the  marble  and 
hewn  stone,  and  leaving  only  yellow  bricks,  which 
never  can  look  venerable. 

The  party  ascended  the  winding  way  that  leads  from 
the  Forum  to  the  Piazza  of  the  Campidoglio  on  the 
summit  of  the  Capitoline  Hill.  They  stood  awhile  to 
contemplate  the  bronze  equestrian  statue  of  Marcus 
Aurelius.  The  moonlight  glistened  upon  traces  of  the 
gilding  which  had  once  covered  both  rider  and  steed ; 
these  were  almost  gone,  but  the  aspect  of  dignity  was 
still  perfect,  clothing  the  figure  as  it  were  with  an  im- 
perial robe  of  light.  It  is  the  most  majestic  represent 
tation  of  the  kingly  character  that  ever  the  world  has 
seen.  A  sight  of  the  old  heathen  emperor  is  enough 
to  create  an  evanescent  sentiment  of  loyalty  even  in 
a  democratic  bosom,  so  august  does  he  look,  so  fit  to 
rule^  so  worthy  of  man's  profoundest  homage  and 
obedience,  so  inevitably  attractive  of  his  love.  He 
stretches  forth  his  hand  with  an  air  of  grand  benefi- 
cence and  unlimited  authority,  as  if  uttering  a  decree 
from  which  no  appeal  was  permissible,  but  in  which 
the  obedient  subject  would  find  his  highest  interests 
consulted;  a  command  that  was  in  itself  a  benedie> 
tion. 

•'The  sculptor  of  this  statue  knew  what  a  king 
should  be,"  observed  Kenyon,  "and  knew,  likewise, 
the  heart  of  mankind,  and  how  it  craves  a  true  ruler, 
under  whatever  title,  as  a  child  its  father." 

"  Oh,  if  there  were  but  one  such  man  as  this ! "  ex- 
claimed Miriam.  "  One  such  man  in  an  age,  and  one 
in  all  the  world  ;  then  how  speedily  would  the  strife, 
wickedness,  and  sorrow  of  us  poor  creatures  be  re- 
lieved. We  would  come  to  him  with  our  griefs,  what* 
ever  they  might  be,  —  even  a  poor,  frail  woman  bui^ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


ON  THE  EDGE  OF  A   PRECIPICE.        197 

iened  with  her  heavy  heart,  —  and  lay  them  at  his 
feet,  and  never  need  to  take  them  up  again.  The 
rightful  king  would  see  to  all." 

"  What  an  idea  of  the  regal  office  and  duty !  "  said 
Kenyon,  with  a  smile.  "It  is  a  woman's  idea  of  the 
whole  matter  to  perfection.  It  is  Hilda's,  too,  no 
doubt?" 

"  No,"  answered  the  quiet  Hilda ;  "  I  should  never 
look  for  such  assistance  from  an  earthly  king." 

"Hilda,  my  religious  Hilda,''  whispered  Miriam, 
suddenly  drawing  the  girl  close  to  her,  "  do  you  know 
how  it  is  with  me  ?  I  would  give  all  I  have  or  hope 
—  my  life,  oh  how  freely  —  for  one  instant  of  your 
trust  in  God  !  You  little  guess  my  need  of  it.  You 
really  think,  then,  that  He  sees  and  cares  for  us  ?  " 

"  Miriam,  you  frighten  me." 

"Hush,  hush!  do  not  let  them  hear  you!"  whis- 
pered Miriam.  "  I  frighten  you,  you  say  ;  for  Heaven's 
sake,  how  ?  Am  I  strange  ?  is  there  anything  wild  in 
my  behavior  ?  " 

"  Only  for  that  moment,"  replied  Hilda,  "  because 
you  seemed  to  doubt  God's  providence." 

"  We  will  talk  of  that  another  time,"  said  her  friend. 
"  Just  now  it  is  very  dark  to  me." 

On  the  left  of  the  Piazza  of  the  Campidoglio,  as 
you  face  cityward,  and  at  the  head  of  the  long  and 
stately  flight  of  steps  descending  from  the  Capitoline 
Hill  to  the  level  of  lower  Home,  there  is  a  narrow 
lane  or  passage.  Into  this  the  party  of  our  friends 
now  turned.  The  path  ascended  a  little,  and  ran  along 
under  the  walls  of  a  palace,  but  soon  passed  through 
a  gateway,  and  terminated  in  a  small  paved  court- 
yard.    It  was  bordered  by  a  low  parapet. 

The  spot,  for  some  reason  or  other,  impressed  them 


Digitized 


by  Google 


198  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

as  exceedingly  lonely.  On  one  side  was  the  greal 
height  of  the  palace,  with  the  moonshine  falling  over 
it,  and  showing  all  the  windows  barred  and  shuttered* 
Not  a  human  eye  could  look  down  into  the  little  court- 
yard, even  if  the  seemingly  deserted  palace  had  a 
tenant.  On  all  other  sides  of  its  narrow  compass 
there  was  nothing  but  the  parapet,  which  as  it  now  ap 
peared  was  built  right  on  the  edge  of  a  steep  precipice. 
Gazing  from  its  imminent  brow,  the  party  beheld  a 
crowded  confusion  of  roofs  spreading  over  the  whole 
space  between  them  and  the  line  of  hills  that  lay  be- 
yond the  Tiber.  A  long,  misty  wreath,  just  dense 
enough  to  catch  a  little  of  the  moonshine,  floated 
above  the  houses,  midway  towards  the  hilly  line,  and 
showed  the  course  of  the  unseen  river.  Far  away  on 
the  right,  the  moon  gleamed  on  the  dome  of  St. 
Peter's  as  well  as  on  many  lesser  and  nearer  domes. 

"  What  a  beautiful  view  of  the  city ! ''  exclaimed 
Hilda ;  "  and  1  never  saw  £.ome  from  this  point  be« 
fore." 

"  It  ought  to  afford  a  good  prospect,"  said  the  sculp- 
tor ;  "  for  it  was  from  this  point  —  at  least  we  are  at 
liberty  to  think  so,  if  we  choose  —  that  many  a  famous 
Roman  caught  his  last  glimpse  of  his  native  city,  and 
of  all  other  earthly  things.  This  is  one  of  the  sides 
of  the  Tarpeian  Rock.  Look  over  the  parapet,  and 
see  what  a  sheer  tumble  there  might  still  be  for  a 
traitor,  in  spite  of  the  thirty  feet  of  soil  that  have  ao- 
cumulated  at  the  foot  of  the  precipice." 

They  all  bent  over,  and  saw  that  the  cliff  fell  per* 
pendicularly  downward  to  about  the  depth,  or  rather 
more,  at  which  the  tall  palace  rose  in  height  above  their 
heads.  Not  that  it  was  still  the  natural,  shaggy  front 
of  the  original  precipice  ;  for  it  appeared  to  be  cased 


Digitized 


by  Google 


ON  THE  EDGE  OF  .A  PRECIPICE.        199 

in  ancient  stone-work,  through  which  the  primeval  rock 
showed  its  face  here  and  there  grimly  and  doubtfully. 
Mosses  grew  on  the  slight  projections,  and  little  shrubs 
sprouted  out  of  the  crevices,  but  could  not  much  soften 
the  stem  aspect  of  the  cliff.  Brightly  as  the  Italian 
moonlight  fell  ardown  the  height,  it  scarcely  showed 
what  portion  of  it  was  man's  work,  and  what  was  na« 
ture's,  but  left  it  all  in  very  much  the  same  kind  of 
ambiguity  and  half-knowledge  in  which  antiquarians 
generally  leave  the  identity  of  Roman  remains. 

The  roofs  of  some  poor-looking  houses,  which  had 
been  built  against  the  base  and  sides  of  the  cliff,  rose 
nearly  midway  to  the  top ;  but  from  an  angle  of  the 
parapet  there  was  a  precipitous  plunge  straight  down- 
ward into  a  stone-paved  court. 

"  I  prefer  this  to  any  other  site  as  having  been  ver- 
itably the  Traitor's  Leap,"  said  Kenyon,  "  because  it 
was  so  convenient  to  the  Capitol.  It  was  an  admi- 
rable idea  of  those  stem  old  fellows  to  fling  their  po- 
litical criminals  down  from  the  very  smnmit  on  which 
etood  the  Senate  House  and  Jove's  Temple,  emblems 
of  the  institutions  which  they  sought  to  violate.  It 
symbolizes  how  sudden  was  the  fall  in  those  days 
from  the  utmost  height  of  ambition  to  its  profoundest 
ruin." 

"  Come,  come ;  it  is  midnight,"  cried  another  artist, 
^'too  late  to  be  moralizing  here.  We  are  literally 
dreaming  on  the  edge  of  a  precipice.  Let  us  go 
home." 

**  It  is  time,  indeed,"  said  Hilda. 

The  scidptor  was  not  without  hopes  that  he  might 
be  favored  with  the  sweet  charge  of  escorting  Hilda 
to  the  foot  of  her  tower.  Accordingly,  when  the  party 
prepared  to  turn  back,  he  offered  her  his  arm.     Hilda 


Digitized 


by  Google 


200  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

at  first  accepted  it ;  but  when  they  had  partly  threaded 
the  passage  between  the  little  court-yard  and  the  Pi- 
azza del  Campidoglio,  she  discovered  that  Miriam  had 
remained  behind. 

"  I  must  go  back,"  said  she,  withdrawing  her  arm 
from  Kenyon's ;  "  but  pray  do  not  come  with  me. 
Several  times  this  evening  I  have  had  a  fancy  that 
Miriam  had  something  on  her  mind,  some  sorrow  or 
perplexity,  which,  perhaps,  it  would  relieve  her  to  tell 
me  about.  No,  no ;  do  not  turn  back  i  Donatello  will 
be  a  sufficient  guardian  for  Miriam  and  me." 

The  sculptor  was  a  good  deal  mortified,  and  per- 
haps a  little  angry :  but  he  knew  Hilda's  mood  of 
gentle  decision  and  independence  too  well  not  to  obey 
her.  He  therefore  suffered  the  fearless  maiden  to  re- 
turn alone. 

Meanwhile  Miriam  had  not  noticed  the  departure 
of  the  rest  of  the  company ;  she  remained  on  the  edge 
of  the  precipice  and  Donatello  along  with  her. 

"  It  would  be  a  fatal  fall,  still,"  she  said  to  herself, 
looking  over  the  parapet,  and  shuddering  as  her  eye 
measured  the  depth.  "  Yes  ;  surely  yes  1  Even  with- 
out the  weight  of  an  overburdened  heart,  a  Jbuman 
body  would  fall  heavily  enough  upon  those  stones  to 
shake  all  its  joints  asunder.  How  soon  it  would  be 
over ! " 

Donatello,  of  whose  presence  she  was  possibly  not 
aware,  now  pressed  closer  to  her  side ;  and  he,  too, 
like  Miriam,  bent  over  the  low  parapet  and  trembled 
violently.  Yet  he  seemed  to  feel  that  perilous  fas- 
cination which  haunts  the  brow  of  precipices,  tempt- 
ing the  unwary  one  to  fling  himself  over  for  the  very 
horror  of  the  thing,  for,  after  drawing  hastily  back, 
he  again  looked  down,  thrusting  himself  out  farther 


Digitized 


by  Google 


ON  THE  EDGE   OF  A   PRECIPICE.        201 

than  before.  He  then  stood  silent  a  brief  space,  strug- 
gling, perhaps,  to  make  himself  conscious  of  the  his- 
toric associations  of  the  scene. 

"What  are  you  thinking  of,  Donatello?"  asked 
Miriam. 

"  Who  are  they,"  said  he,  looking  earnestly  in  her 
face,  "who  have  been  flung  over  here  in  days  gone 
by?" 

"  Men  that  cumbered  the  world,"  she  replied.  "  Men 
whose  lives  were  the  bane  of  their  fellow-creatures. 
Men  who  poisoned  the  air,  which  is  the  common 
breath  of  all,  for  their  own  selfish  purposes.  There 
was  short  work  with  such  men  in  old  Roman  times. 
Just  in  the  moment  of  their  triumph,  a  hand,  as  of  an 
avenging  giant,  clutched  them,  and  dashed  the  wretched 
down  this  precipice." 

"  Was  it  well  done  ?  "  asked  the  young  man. 

*'  It  was  well  done,"  answered  Miriam ;  "  innocent 
persons  were  saved  by  the  destruction  of  a  guilty  one, 
who  deserved  his  doom." 

While  this  brief  conversation  passed,  Donatello  had 
once  or  twice  glanced  aside  with  a  watchful  air,  just 
as  a  hound  may  often  be  seen  to  take  sidelong  note 
of  some  suspicious  object,  while  he  gives  his  more  di- 
rect attention  to  something  nearer  at  hand.  Miriam 
seemed  now  first  to  become  aware  of  the  silence  that 
had  followed  upon  the  cheerful  talk  and  laughter  of  a 
few  moments  before. 

Looking  round,  she  perceived  that  all  her  company 
of  merry  friends  had  retired,  and  Hilda,  too,  in  whost 
soft  and  quiet  presence  she  had  always  an  indescrib* 
able  feeling  of  security.  All  gone ;  and  only  herself 
and  Donatello  left  hanging  over  the  brow  of  the  omi 
nous  precipice. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


202  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

Not  so,  however ;  not  entirely  alone  I  In  the  base* 
meut  wall  of  the  palace,  shaded  from  the  moon,  there 
was  a  deep,  empty  niche,  that  had  probably  once  con- 
tained a  statue ;  not  empty,  either ;  for  a  figure  now 
came  forth  from  it  and  approached  Miriam.  She 
must  have  had  cause  to  dread  some  unspeakable  evil 
from  this  strange  persecutor,  and  to  know  that  this 
was  the  very  crisis  of  her  calamity ;  for,  as  he  drew 
near,  such  a  cold,  sick  despair  crept  over  her,  that  it 
impeded  her  breath,  and  benumbed  her  natural  promp- 
titude of  thought.  Miriam  seemed  dreamily  to  re- 
member falling  on  her  knees ;  but,  in  her  whole  recol- 
lection of  that  wild  moment,  she  beheld  herself  as  in  a 
dim  show,  and  could  not  well  distinguish  what  was 
done  and  suffered  ;  no,  not  even  whether  she  were 
really  an  actor  and  sufferer  in  the  scene. 

Hilda,  meanwhile,  had  separated  herself  from  the 
sculptor,  and  turned  back  to  rejoin  her  friend.  At  a 
distance,  she  still  heard  the  mirth  of  her  late  compan- 
ions, who  were  going  down  the  cityward  descent  of  the 
Capitoline  Hill ;  they  had  set  up  a  new  stave  of  mel- 
ody, in  which  her  own  soft  voice,  as  well  as  the  power- 
ful sweetness  of  Miriam's,  was  sadly  missed. 

The  door  of  the  little  court-yard  had  swung  upon 
its  hinges,  and  partly  closed  itself.  Hilda  (whose 
native  gentleness  pervaded  all  her  movements)  was 
quietly  opening  it,  when  she  was  startled,  midway,  by 
the  noise  of  a  struggle  within,  beginning  and  ending 
all  in  one  breathless  instant.  Along  with  it,  or  closely 
succeeding  it,  was  a  loud,  fearful  cry,  which  quivered 
upward  through  the  air,  and  sank  quivering  downward 
to  the  earth.  Then,  a  silence  I  Poor  Hilda  had  looked 
into  the  court-yard,  and  saw  the  whole  quick  passage 
of  a  deed,  which  tpok  but  that  little  time  to  grave  it 
Belf  in  the  eternal  adamant. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

THE  faun's  transformation. 

The  door  of  the  court-yard  swung  slowly,  and  closed 
itself  of  its  own  accord.  Miriam  and  Donatello  were 
now  alone  there.  She  clasped  her  hands,  and  looked 
wildly  at  the  young  man,  whose  form  seemed  to  have 
dilated,  and  whose  eyes  blazed  with  the  fierce  energy 
that  had  suddenly  inspired  hiin.  It  had  kindled  him 
into  a  man ;  it  had  developed  within  him  an  intelli- 
gence which  was  no  native  characteristic  of  the  Dona- 
tello whom  we  have  heretofore  known.  But  that  sim- 
ple and  joyous  creature  was  gone  forever. 

"  What  have  you  done  ?  "  said  Miriam,  in  a  horror- 
stricken  whisper. 

The  glow  of  rage  was  still  lurid  on  Donatello's  face, 
and  now  flashed  out  again  from  his  eyes. 

"  I  did  what  ought  to  be  done  to  a  traitor !  "  he  re- 
plied. "  I  did  what  your  eyes  bade  me  do,  when  I 
asked  them  with  mine,  as  I  held  the  wretch  over  the 
precipice !  " 

These  last  words  struck  Miriam  like  a  bullet.  Could 
It  be  so  ?  Had  her  eyes  provoked  or  assented  to  this 
deed  ?  She  had  not  known  it.  But,  alas !  looking 
back  into  the  frenzy  and  turmoil  of  the  scene  just 
acted,  she  could  not  deny  —  she  was  not  sure  whether 
it  might  be  so,  or  no  —  that  a  wild  joy  had  flamed  up 
in  her  heart,  when  she  beheld  her  persecutor  in  his 
mortal  peril.      Was  it  horror  ?  —  or  ecstasy  ?  —  or 


Digitized 


by  Google 


204  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

both  in  one?  Be  the  emotion  what  it  might,  it  had 
blazed  up  more  madly,  when  Donatello  Hung  his  vic- 
tim off  the  cliff,  and  more  and  more,  while  his  shriek 
went  quivering  downward.  With  the  dead  thump 
upon  the  stones  below,  had  come  an  unutterable  hor- 
jror. 

I  "  And  my  eyes  bade  you  do  it  I  "  repeated  she, 
'  They  both  leaned  over  the  parapet,  and  gazed  down- 
ward as  earnestly  as  if  some  inestimable  treasiure  had 
fallen  over,  and  were  yet  recoverable.  On  the  pave- 
ment, below,  was  a  dark  mass,  lying  in  a  heap,  with 
little  or  nothing  hiunan  in  its  appearance,  except  that 
the  hands  were  stretched  out,  as  if  they  might  have 
clutched,  for  a  moment,  at  the  small  square  stones. 
But  there  was  no  motion  in  them  now.  Miriam 
watched  the  heap  of  mortality  while  she  could  count  a 
hundred,  which  she  took  pains  to  do.  No  stir ;  not 
a  finger  moved ! 

"  You  have  killed  him,  Donatello  I  He  is  quite 
dead  !  "  said  she.  "  Stone  dead !  Would  I  were  so, 
too!" 

"  Did  you  not  mean  that  he  should  die  ?  "  sternly 
asked  Donatello,  still  in  the  glow  of  that  intelligence 
which  passion  had  devf^'oped  in  him.  "There  was 
short  time  to  weigh  tho  matter ;  but  he  had  his  trial 
in  that  breath  or  two  while  I  held  him  over  the  cliff, 
and  his  sentence  in  that  one  glance,  when  your  eyes 
responded  to  mine  I  Say  that  I  have  slain  him  against 
your  will,  —  say  tbit  he  died  without  your  whole  con- 
sent, —  and,  in  an'^  ther  breath,  you  shall  see  me  lying 
beside  him." 

"  Oh,  never ! "  ^ried  Miriam.  **  My  one,  own  friend  I 
Never,  never,  ne  er !  " 

She  turned  t )  him,  —  the  guilty,  blood  -  stained, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  FAUN'S  TRANSFORMATION.         205 

lonely  woman,  —  she  turned  to  her  fellow  -  criminal, 
the  youth,  so  lately  innocent,  whom  she  had  drawn 
into  her  doom.  She  pressed  him  close,  close  to  her 
bosom,  with  a  clinging  embrace  that  brought  their  two 
hearts  together,  till  the  horror  and  agony  of  each  was 
combined  into  one  emotion,  and  that  a  kind  of  rap- 
ture. 

*'  Yes,  Donatello,  you  speak  the  truth !  "  said  she ; 
"  my  heart  consented  to  what  you  did.  We  two  slew 
yonder  wretch.  The  deed  knots  us  together,  for  time 
and  eternity,  like  the  coil  of  a  serpent ! " 

They  threw  one  other  glance  at  the  heap  of  death 
below,  to  assure  themselves  that  it  was  there ;  so  like 
a  dream  was  the  whole  thing.  Then  they  turned  f  roiji 
that  fatal  precipice,  and  came  out  of  the  court-yard, 
arm  in  arm,  heart  in  heart.  Instinctively,  they  were 
heedful  not  to  sever  themselves  so  much  as  a  pace 
or  two  from  one  another,  for  fear  of  the  terror  and 
deadly  chill  that  would  thenceforth  wait  for  them  in 
solitude.  Their  deed  —  the  crime  which  Donatello 
wrought,  and  Miriam  accepted  on  the  instant  —  had 
wreathed  itself,  as  she  said,  like  a  serpent,  in  inextric- 
able links  about  both  their  souls,  and  drew  them  into 
one,  by  its  terrible  contractile  power.  It  was  closer 
than  a  marriage-bond.  So  intimate,  in  those  first  mo- 
ment's, was  the  union,  that  it  seemed  as  if  their  new 
sympathy  annihilated  all  other  ties,  and  that  they  were 
released  from  the  chain  of  humanity ;  a  new  sphere, 
a  special  law,  had  been  created  for  them  alone.  The 
World  could  not  come  near  them;  they  were  safe! 

When  they  reached  the  flight  of  steps  leading  down- 
ward from  the  Capitol,  there  was  a  far  -  off  noise  of 
ringing  and  laughter.  Swift,  indeed,  had  been  the 
rush  of  the  crisis  that  was  come  and  gone  I     This  was 


Digitized  by 


Google 


206  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

still  the  merriment  of  the  party  that  had  so  recently 
been  their  companions.  They  recognized  the  voices 
which,  a  little  while  ago,  had  accorded  and  sung  in 
cadence  with  their  own.  But  they  were  familiar  voices 
no  more ;  they  sounded  strangely,  and,  as  it  were,  out 
of  the  depths  of  space ;  so  remote  was  all  that  per* 
tained  to  the  past  life  of  these  guilty  ones,  in  the  moral 
seclusion  that  had  suddenly  extended  itself  around 
them.  But  how  close,  and  ever  closer,  did  the  breath 
of  the  immeasurable  waste,  that  lay  between  them  and 
all  brotherhood  or  sisterhood,  now  press  them  one 
within  the  other  1 

^^  O  friend  I  "  cried  Miriam,  so  putting  her  soul  into 
the  word  that  it  took  a  iieavy  richness  of  meaning, 
and  seemed  never  to  have  been  spoken  before,  —  "  O 
friend,  are  you  conscious,  as  I  am,  of  this  companion- 
ship that  knits  our  heart-strings  together  ?  " 

"I  feel  it,  Miriam,"  said  Donatello.  "We  draw 
one  breath ;  we  live  one  life ! " 

"  Only  yesterday,"  continued  Miriam ;  "  nay,  only 
a  short  half-hour  ago,  I  shivered  in  an  icy  solitude. 
No  friendship,  no  sisterhood,  could  come  near  enough 
to  keep  the  warmth  within  my  heart.  In  an  instant, 
all  is  changed !    There  can  be  no  more  loneliness ! " 

"  None,  Miriam !  "  said  Donatello. 

"  None,  my  beautiful  one ! "  responded  Miriam,  gaz- 
ing in  his  face,  which  had  taken  a  higher,  almost  an 
heroic  aspect,  from  the  strength  of  passion.  "  None, 
my  innocent  one  1  Surely,  it  is  no  crime  that  we  have 
committed.  One  wretched  and  worthless  life  has  been 
sacrificed  to  cement  two  other  lives  for  evermore." 

"  For  evermore,  Miriam !  "  said  Donatello  ;  "  ce 
mented  with  his  blood  1 " 

The  young  man  started  at  the  word  which  he  had 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  FAUN'S  TRANSFORMATION         207 

himself  spoken ;  it  may  be  that  it  brought  home,  to 
the  simplicity  of  his  imagination,  what  he  had  not  be- 
fore dreamed  of,  —  the  ever-increasing  loathsomeness 
of  a  imion  that  consists  in  guilt.  Cemented  with 
blood,  which  would  corrupt  and  grow  more  noisome 
forever  and  forever,  but  bind  them  none  the  less 
strictly  for  that. 

"  Forget  it !  Cast  it  all  behind  you ! "  said  Miriam, 
detecting,  by  her  sympathy,  the  pang  that  was  in  hia 
heart.  "  The  deed  has  done  its  office,  and  has  no  ex- 
istence any  more." 

They  flung  the  past  behind  tLem,  as  she  counselled, 
or  else  distilled  from  it  a  fiery  intoxication,  which  suf- 
ficed to  carry  them  triumphantly  through  those  first 
moments  of  their  doom.  For,  guilt  has  its  moment  of 
rapture  too.  The  foremost  result  of  a  broken  law  is 
ever  an  ecstatic  sense  of  freedom.  And  thus  there 
exhaled  upward  (out  of  their  dark  sympathy,  at  the 
base  of  which  lay  a  human  corpse)  a  bliss,  or  an  in- 
sanity, which  the  unhappy  pair  imagined  to  be  well 
worth  the  sleepy  innocence  that  was  forever  lost  to 
them. 

As  their  spirits  rose  to  the  solemn  madness  of  the 
occasion,  they  went  onward,  —  not  stealthily,  not  fear- 
fully,— but  with  a  stately  gait  and  aspect.  Passion 
lent  them  (as  it  does  to  meaner  shapes)  its  brief  no- 
bility of  carriage.  They  trod  through  the  streets  of 
Rome,  as  if  they,  too,  were  among  the  majestic  and 
guilty  shadows,  that,  from  ages  long  gone  by,  have 
haunted  the  blood-stained  city.  And,  at  Miriam's 
suggestion,  they  turned  aside,  for  the  sake  of  treading 
loftily  past  the  old  site  of  Pompey's  Forum. 

"  For  there  was  a  great  deed  done  here  !  "  she  said, 
—  "  a  deed  of  blood  like  ours  I     Who  knows,  but  we 


Digitized 


by  Google 


208  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

may  meet  the  high  and  ever-sad  fraternity  of  Cjesar'a 
murderers,  and  exchange  a  salutation  ?  " 

^*  Are  they  our  brethren,  now  ?  "  asked  Donatello. 

"  Yes  ;  all  of  them,"  said  Miriam  ;  "  and  many  an. 
other,  whom  the  world  little  dreams  of,  has  been  made 
our  brother  or  our  sister,  by  what  we  have  done  within 
this  hour !  " 

And,  at  the  thought,  she  shivered.  Where,  then,  was 
the  seclusion,  the  remoteness,  the  strange,  lonesome 
Paradise,  into  which  she  and  her  one  companion  had 
been  transported  by  their  crime  ?  Was  there,  indeed, 
no  such  refuge,  but  only  a  crowded  thoroughfare  and 
jostling  throng  of  criminals  ?  And  was  it  true,  that 
whatever  hand  had  a  blood-stain  on  it, — or  had  poured 
out  poison,  —  or  strangled  a  babe  at  its  birth,  —  or 
clutched  a  grandsire's  throat,  he  sleeping,  and  robbed 
him  of  his  few  last  breaths,  —  had  now  the  right  to 
offer  itself  in  fellowship  with  their  two  hands  ?  Too 
certainly,  that  right  existed.  It  is  a  terrible  thought, 
that  an  individual  wrong-doing  melts  into  the  great 
mass  of  human  crime,  and  makes  us,  —  who  dreamed 
only  of  our  own  little  separate  sin,  —  makes  us  guilty 
of  the  whole.  And  thus  Miriam  and  her  lover  were 
not  an  insulated  pair,  but  members  of  an  innumerable 
confraternity  of  guilty  ones,  all  shuddering  at  each 
other. 

"  But  not  now ;  not  yet,"  she  murmured  to  herself. 
^  To-night,  at  least,  there  shall  be  no  remorse  I " 

Wandering  without  a  purpose,  it  so  chanced  that 
they  turned  into  a  street,  at  one  extremity  of  which 
Rtood  Hilda's  tower.  There  was  a  light  in  her  high 
chamber  ;  a  light,  too,  at  the  Virgin's  shrine ;  and  the 
glimmer  of  these  two  was  the  loftiest  light  beneath 
the  stars.    Miriam  drew  Donatello's  arm,  to  make  him 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  FAUNAS  TRANSFORMATION.         209 

stop,  and  while  they  stood  at  some  distance  looking  at 
Hilda's  window,  they  beheld  her  approach  and  throw 
it  open.  She  leaned  far  forth,  and  extended  her  clasped 
hands  towards  the  sky, 

"The  good,  pure,  child!  She  is  praying,  Dona- 
tello,"  said  Miriam,  with  a  kind  of  simple  joy  at  wit« 
nessing  the  devoutness  of  her  friend.  Then  her  own 
sin  rushed  upon  her,  and  she  shouted,  with  the  rich 
strength  of  her  voice,  "  Pray  for  us,  Hilda ;  we  need 
it!" 

•  Whether  Hilda  heard  and  recognized  the  voice  we 
cannot  tell.  The  window  was  immediately  closed,  and 
her  form  disappeared  from  behind  the  snowy  curtain. 
l^Iiriam  felt  this  to  be  a  token  that  the  cry  of  her  con* 
demned  spirit  was  shut  out  of  heaven. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XX. 

THE   BURIAL   CHANT. 

The  Churcli  of  the  Capuchins  (where,  as  the  readef 
may  remember,  some  of  our  acquaintances  had  made 
an  engagement  to  meet)  stands  a  little  aside  from  the 
Piazza  Barberini.  Thither,  at  the  hour  agreed  upon, 
on  the  morning  after  the  scenes  last  described,  Miriam 
and  Donatello  directed  their  steps.  At  no  time  are 
people  so  sedulously  careful  to  keep  their  trifling  ap- 
pointments, attend  to  their  ordinary  occupations,  and 
thus  put  a  commonplace  aspect  on  life,  as  when  con- 
scious of  some  secret  that  if  suspected  would  make 
them  look  monstrous  in  the  general  eye. 

Yet  how  tame  and  wearisome  is  the  impression  of 
all  ordinary  things  in  the  contrast  with  such  a  fact ! 
How  sick  and  tremulous,  the  next  morning,  is  the 
spirit  that  has  dared  so  much  only  the  night  before  I 
How  icy  cold  is  the  heart,  when  the  fervor,  the  wild 
ecstasy  of  passion,  has  faded  away,  and  sunk  down 
among  the  dead  ashes  of  the  fire  that  blazed  so  fierce- 
ly, and  was  fed  by  the  very  substance  of  its  life !  How 
faintly  does  the  criminal  stagger  onward,  lacking  the 
impulse  of  that  strong  madness  that  hurried  him  into 
guilt,  and  treacherously  deserts  him  in  the  midst  of 
it! 

When  Miriam  and  Donatello  drew  near  the  churchy 
they  found  only  Kenyon  awaiting  them  on  the  steps. 
Hilda  had  likewise  promised  to  be  of  the  party,  bat 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  BURIAL  CHANT.  211 

had  not  yet  appeared.  Meeting  the  sculptor,  Miriam 
put  a  force  upon  herself  and  succeeded  in  creating  an 
artificial  flow  of  spirits,  which,  to  any  but  the  nicest 
observation,  was  quite  as  effective  as  a  natural  one. 
She  spoke  sympathizingly  to  the  sculptor  on  the  sub* 
ject  of  Hilda's  absence,  and  somewhat  annoyed  him 
by  alluding  in  Donatello's  hearing  to  an  attachment 
which  had  never  been  openly  avowed,  though  perhaps 
plainly  enough  betrayed.  He  fancied  that  Miriam  did 
not  quite  recognize  the  limits  of  the  strictest  delicacy ; 
he  even  went  so  far  as  to  generalize,  and  conclude 
within  himself,  that  this  deficiency  is  a  more  general 
failing  in  woman  than  in  man,  the  highest  refinement 
being  a  masculine  attribute. 

But  the  idea  was  unjust  to  the  sex  at  large,  and  es- 
pecially so  to  this  poor  Miriam,  who  was  hardly  re- 
sponsible for  her  frantic  efforts  to  be  gay.  Possibly, 
moreover,  the  nice  action  of  the  mind  is  set  ajar  by  any 
violent  shock,  as  of  great  misfortune  or  great  crime,  so 
that  the  finer  perceptions  may  be  blurred  thenceforth, 
and  the  effect  be  traceable  in  all  the  minutest  conduct 
of  life. 

"  Did  you  see  anything  of  the  dear  child  after  you 
left  us  ?  "  asked  Miriam,  still  keeping  Hilda  as  her 
topic  of  convei'sation.  "  I  missed  her  sadly  on  my  way 
homeward ;  for  nothing  insures  me  such  delightful  and 
innocent  dreams  (I  have  experienced  it  twenty  times} 
as  a  talk  late  in  the  evening  with  Hilda." 

"  So  I  should  imagine,"  said  the  sculptor,  gravely ; 
"  but  it  is  an  advantage  that  I  have  little  or  no  oppor* 
tunity  of  enjoying.  I  know  not  what  became  of  Hilda 
after  my  parting  from  you.  She  was  not  especially 
my  companion  in  any  part  of  our  walk.  The  last  I 
saw  of  her  she  was  hastening  back  to  rejoin  you  in  tho 
court-yard  of  the  Palaazo  CaffarellL" 

Digitized  by  LjOOQIC 


212  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

^*  Impossible  I  "  cried  Miriam,  staiting. 

"  Then  did  you  not  see  her  again?  "  inquired  Keiip 
yon,  in  some  alarm. 

"  Not  there,"  answered  Miriam,  quietly ;  "  indeed,  i 
followed  pretty  closely  on  the  heels  of  the  rest  of  the 
party.  But  do  not  be  alarmed  on  Hilda's  account; 
the  Virgin  is  bound  to  waich  over  the  good  child,  for 
the  sake  of  the  piety  with  which  she  keeps  the  lamp 
alight  at  her  shrine.  And,  besides,  I  have  always  felt 
that  Hilda  is  just  as  safe  in  these  evil  streets  of  Home 
as  her  white  doves  when  they  fiy  downwards  from  the 
tower-top,  and  run  to  and  fro  among  the  horses'  f eet^ 
There  is  certainly  a  providence  on  purpose  for  Hilda, 
if  for  no  other  human  creature." 

*'I  religiously  believe  it,"  rejoined  the  sculptor; 
**  and  yet  my  mind  would  be  the  easier,  if  I  knew  that 
she  had  returned  safely  to  her  tower." 

"  Then  make  yourself  quite  easy,"  answered  Miriam* 
*^  I  saw  her  (and  it  is  the  last  sweet  sight  that  I  re« 
member)  leaning  from  her  window  midway  between 
earth  and  sky !  " 

Kenyon  now  looked  at  Donatello. 

**  You  seem  out  of  spirits,  my  dear  friend,"  he  ob- 
served.  ^  This  languid  Roman  atmosphere  is  not  the 
airy  wine  that  you  were  accustomed  to  breathe  at 
home.  I  have  not  forgotten  your  hospitable  invita- 
tion to  meet  you  this  summer  at  your  castle  among 
the  Apennines.  It  is  my  fixed  purpose  to  come,  I  as- 
fsi\r%  you.  We  shall  both  be  the  better  for  some  deep 
draughts  of  the  mountain-breezes." 

^*'  It  may  be,"  said  Donatello,  with  unwonted  sombre- 
ness ;  ^^  the  old  house  seemed  joyous  when  I  was  a  child* 
But  as  I  remember  it  now  it  was  a  grim  place,  too." 

The  sculptor  looked  more  attentively  at  the  young 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  BURIAL  CHANT.  218 

man,  and  was  surprised  and  alarmed  to  observe  how 
entirely  the  fine,  fresh  glow  of  animal  spirits  had  de- 
parted out  of  his  face.  Hitherto,  moreover^  even  while 
he  was  standing  pei'f  eetly  still,  there  had  been  a  kind 
of  possible  gambol  indicated  in  his  aspect.  It  was 
!  quite  gone  now.  All  his  youthful  gayety,  and  with  it 
I  his  simplicity  of  manner,  was  eclipsed,  if  not  utterly 
exfinct. 

"You  are  surely  ill,  my  dear  fellow,"  exclaimed 
Kenyon. 

"Am  I?  Perhaps  so,"  said  Donatello  indifEer- 
ently  ;  "  I  never  have  been  ill,  and  know  not  what  it 
may  be." 

"  Do  not  make  the  poor  lad  fancy-sick,"  whispered 
Miriam,  pulling  the  sculptor's  sleeve.  "  He  is  of  a  na- 
ture to  lie  down  and  die  at  once,  if  he  finds  himself 
drawing  such  melancholy  breaths  as  we  ordinary  peo- 
ple are  enforced  to  burden  our  lungs  withal.  But  we 
must  get  him  away  from  this  old,  dreamy,  and  dreary 
Kome,  where  nobody  but  himself  ever  thought  of  being 
gay.  Its  influences  are  too  heavy  to  sustain  the  life  of 
such  a  creature." 

The  above  conversation  had  passed  chiefly  on  the 
steps  of  the  Cappuccini ;  and,  having  said  so  much, 
Miriam  lifted  the  leathern  curtain  that  hangs  before 
all  church-doors  in  Italy. 

"Hilda  has  forgotten  her  appointment,"  she  ob- 
served, "  or  else  her  maiden  slumbers  are  very  sound 
this  morning.     We  will  wait  for  her  no  longer." 

They  entered  the  nave.  The  interior  of  the  church 
was  of  moderate  compass,  but  of  good  architecture, 
with  a  vaulted  roof  over  the  nave,  and  a  row  of  dusky 
chapels  ou  either  side  of  it  instead  of  the  customary 
pide-aisles.     Each  chapel  had  its  saintly  shrine,  hung 


Digitized 


by  Google 


214  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENI. 

round  with  offerings ;  its  picture  above  the  altar,  al- 
though closely  veiled,  if  by  any  painter  of  renown ; 
and  its  hallowed  tapers,  burning  continually,  to  set 
alight  the  devotion  of  the  worshippers.  Tlie  pave- 
ment of  the  nave  was  chiefly  of  marble,  and  looked 
old  and  broken,  and  was  shabbily  patched  here  and 
there  with  tiles  of  brick;  it  was  inlaid,  moreover, 
with  tombstones  of  the  mediaeval  taste,  on  which  were 
quaintly  sculptured  borders,  figures,  and  portraits  in 
bas-relief,  and  Latin  epitaphs,  now  grown  illegible  by 
the  tread  of  footsteps  over  them.  The  church  apper- 
tains to  a  convent  of  Capuchin  monks ;  and,  as  usually 
happens  when  a  reverend  brotherhood  have  such  an 
edifice  in  charge,  the  floor  seemed  never  to  have  been 
scrubbed  or  swept,  and  had  as  little  the  aspect  of  sanc- 
tity as  a  kennel ;  whereas,  in  all  churches  of  nunneries, 
the  maiden  sisterhood  invariably  show  the  purity  of 
their  own  hearts  by  the  virgin  cleanliness  and  visible 
consecration  of  the  walls  and  pavement. 

As  our  friends  entered  the  church,  their  eyes  rested 
at  once  on  a  remarkable  object  in  the  centre  of  the 
nave.  It  was  either  the  actual  body,  or,  as  might 
rather  have  been  supposed  at  first  glance,  the  cun- 
ningly wrought  waxen  face  and  suitably  draped  figure 
of  a  dead  monk.  This  image  of  wax  or  clay-cold  real- 
ity, whichever  it  might  be,  lay  on  a  slightly  elevated 
bier,  with  three  tall  candles  burning  on  each  side, 
another  taU  candle  at  the  head,  and  another  at  the 
foot.  There  was  music,  too,  in  harmony  with  so  fune- 
real a  spectacle.  From  beneath  the  pavement  of  the 
church  came  the  deep,  lugubrious  strain  of  a  De  Pr<h 
fundis^  which  sounded  like  an  utterance  of  the  tomb 
itself;  so  dismally  did  it  rumble  through  the  burial^ 
vaults,  and  ooze  up  among  the  flat  gravestones  and  sa4 
epitaphs,  filling  the  church  as  with  a  gloomy  mist. 

Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC 


THE  BURIAL  CHANT.  216 

"  I  must  look  more  closely  at  that  dead  monk  before 
we  leave  the  church,"  remarked  the  sculptor.  "  In  the 
study  of  my  art,  I  have  gained  many  a  hint  from  the 
dead,  which  the  living  could  never  have  given  me." 

"  I  can  well  imagine  it,"  answered  Miriam.  "  One 
clay  image  is  readily  copied  from  another.  But  let 
us  first  see  Guide's  picture.  The  light  is  favorable 
now. 

Accordingly,  they  turned  into  the  first  chapel  on  the 
right  hand,  as  you  enter  the  nave ;  and  there  they  be- 
held, —  not  the  picture,  indeed,  —  but  a  closely  drawn 
curtain.  The  churchmen  of  Italy  make  no  scruple  of 
sacrificing  the  very  purpose  for  which  a  work  of  sacred 
art  has  been  created  ;  that  of  opening  the  way  for  re- 
ligious sentiment  through  the  quick  medium  of  sight, 
by  bringing'  angels,  saints,  and  martyrs  down  visibly 
upon,  earth ;  of  sacrificing  this  high  purpose,  and,  for 
aught  they  know,  the  welfare  of  many  souls  along  with 
it,  to  the  hope  of  a  paltry  fee.  Every  work  by  an  art- 
ist of  celebrity  is  hidden  behind  a  veil,  and  seldom  re- 
vealed, except  to  Protestants,  who  scorn  it  as  an  object 
of  devotion,  and  value  it  only  for  its  artistic  merit. 

The  sacristan  was  quickly  found,  however,  and  lost 
no  time  in  disclosing  the  youthful  Archangel,  setting 
his  divine  foot  on  the  head  of  his  fallen  adversary.  It 
was  an  image  of  that  greatest  of  future  events,  which 
we  hope  for  so  ardently, — at  least,  while  we  are  young, 
—  but  find  so  very  long  in  coming,  —  the  triumph  of 
goodness  over  the  evil  principle. 

"  Where  can  Hilda  be  ?  "  exclaimed  Kenyon.  "  It 
is  not  her  custom  ever  to  fail  in  an  engagement ;  and 
the  present  one  was  made  entirely  on  her  account 
Except  herself,  you  know,  we  were  all  agreed  in  oui 
recollection  of  the  picture." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


216  ROMANCE   OF  MONTE  BENl 

"  But  we  were  wrong,  and  Hilda  right,  as  you  per- 
ceive," said  Miriam,  directing  his  attention  to  the  point 
on  which  their  dispute  of  the  night  before  had  arisen. 
^^  It  is  not  easy  to  detect  her  astray  as  regards  any 
picture  on  which  those  clear,  soft  eyes  of  hers  have 
ever  rested." 

"  And  she  has  studied  and  admired  few  pictures  so 
much  as  this,"  observed  the  sculptor.  "  No  wonder ; 
for  there  is  hardly  another  so  beautiful  in  the  world. 
What  an  expression  of  heavenly  severity  in  the  Arch- 
ttngel's  face !  There  is  a  degree  of  pain,  trouble,  and 
disgust  at  being  brought  in  contact  with  sin,  even  for 
the  purpose  of  quelling  and  punishing  it ;  and  yet  a 
celestial  tranquillity  pervades  his  whole  being." 

"  I  have  never  been  able,"  said  Miriam,  "  to  admire 
this  picture  nearly  so  much  as  Hilda  does,  in  its  moral 
and  intellectual  aspect.  If  it  cost  her  more  trouble  to 
be  good,  if  her  soul  were  less  white  and  pure,  sh© 
would  be  a  more  competent  critic  of  this  picture,  and 
would  estimate  it  not  half  so  high.  I  see  its  defects 
to-day  more  clearly  than  ever  before." 

"  What  are  some  of  them  ?  "  asked  Kenyon. 

"  That  Archangel,  now,"  Miriam  continued  ;  "  how 
fair  he  looks,  with  his  unruffled  wings,  with  his  un*  ^ 
hacked  sword,  and  clad  in  his  bright  armor,  and  that/ 
exquisitely  fitting  sky-blue  tunic,  cut  in  the  latest  Pat-* 
adisiacal  mode!  What  a  dainty  air  of  the  first  ce- 
lestial society !  With  what  half-scornful  delicacy  he 
sets  his  prettily  sandalled  foot  on  the  head  of  his  pros- 
trate foe !  But,  is  it  thus  that  virtue  looks  the  mo- 
ment after  its  death-struggle  with  evil?  No,  no;  I 
could  have  told  Gruido  better.  A  full  third  of  the 
ArchangeFs  feathers  should  have  been  torn  from  his 
wings ;  the  rest  all  ruffled,  till  they  looked  like  Satan's. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  BURIAL   CHANT.  217 

own !  His  sword  should  be  streaming  with  blood,  and 
perhaps  broken  half-way  to  the  hilt ;  his  armor  crushed, 
his  robes  rent,  his  breast  gory ;  a  bleeding  gash  on  his 
brow,  cutting  right  across  the  stem  scowl  of  battle  I 
He  should  press  his  foot  hard  down  upon  the  old 
serpent,  as  if  his  very  soul  depended  upon  it,  feeling 
him  squirm  mightily,  and  doubting  whether  the  fight 
were  half  over  yet,  and  how  the  victory  might  turn ! 
And,  with  all  this  fierceness,  this  grimness,  this  unut- 
terable horror,  there  shoidd  still  be  something  high, 
tender,  and  holy  in  Michael's  eyes,  and  around  his 
mouth.  But  the  battle  never  was  such  child's  play  as 
Guide's  dapper  Archangel  seems  to  have  found  it." 

"  For  Heaven's  sake,  Miriam,"  cried  Kenyon,  aston- 
ished at  the  wild  energy  of  her  talk ;  "  paint  the  pic- 
ture of  man's  struggle  against  sin  according  to  your 
own  idea !     I  think  it  will  be  a  masterpiece." 

"  The  picture  would  have  its  share  of  truth,  I  as- 
sure you,"  she  answered ;  "  but  I  am  sadly  afraid  the 
victory  would  fall  on  the  wrong  side.  Just  fancy  a 
smoke  -  blackened,  fiery -eyed  demon,  bestriding  that 
nice  young  angel,  clutching  his  white  throat  with  one 
of  his  hinder  claws ;  and  giving  a  triumphant  whisk 
of  his  scaly  tail,  with  a  poiscmous  dart  at  the  end  of 
it !  That  is  what  they  risk,  poor  souls,  who  do  battle 
with  Michael's  enemy." 

It  now,  perhaps,  struck  Miriam  that  her  mental  dis« 
quietude  was  impelling  her  to  an  undue  vivacity ;  for 
she  paused,  and  turned  away  from  the  picture,  without 
saying  a  word  more  about  it.  All  this  while,  more? 
over,  Donatello  had  been  very  ill  at  ease,  casting  awe- 
stricken  and  inquiring  glances  at  the  dead  monk ;  as 
if  he  could  look  nowhere  but  at  that  ghastly  object, 
merely  because  it  shocked  him.     Death  has  probably 

♦Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


218  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENI. 

&  peculiar  horror  and  ugliness,  when  forced  upon  iho 
contemplation  of  a  person  so  naturally  joyous  as  Do* 
natello,  who  lived  with  completeness  in  the  present 
vnoment,  and  was  able  to  form  but  vague  images  of 
the  future. 

"  What  is  the  matter,  Donatello  ?  "  whispered  Mir- 
iam, soothingly.  "  You  are  quite  in  a  tremble,  my 
poor  friend !    What  is  it  ?  " 

"  This  awful  chant  from  beneath  the  church,"  an- 
swered Donatello;  "it  oppresses  me;  the  air  is  so 
heavy  with  it  that  I  can  scarcely  draw  my  breath* 
And  yonder  dead  monk !  I  feel  as  if  he  were  lying 
right  across  my  heart." 

"  Take  courage  1 "  whispered  she  again ;  "  come,  we 
will  approach  close  to  the  dead  monk.  The  only  way, 
in  such  cases,  is  to  stare  the  ugly  horror  right  in  the 
face  ;  never  a  sidelong  glance,,  nor  halt-look,  for  those 
are  what  show  a  frightful  thing  in  its  f rightf ullest  as- 
pect. Lean  on  me,  dearest  friend  I  My  heart  is  very 
strong  for  both  of  us.     Be  brave ;  and  all  is  welL" 

Donatello  hung  back  for  a  moment,  but  then  pressed 
close  to  Miriam's  side,  and  suffered  her  to  lead  him  up 
to  the  bier.  The  s)eulptor  followed.  A  number  of 
persons,  chiefly  women,  with  several  children  among 
them,  were  standing  about  the  corpse;  and  as  our 
three  friends  drew  nigh,  a  mother  knelt  down,  and 
caused  her  little  boy  to  kneel,  both  kissing  the  beads 
and  crucifix  that  hung  from  the  monk's  girdle.  Pos- 
sibly he  had  died  in  the  odor  of  sanctity ;  or,  at  all 
events,  death  and  his  brown  frock  and  cowl  made  a 
sacred  image  of  this  reverend  father. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


.  CHAPTER  XXI. 

THE  DEAD  CAPUCHHT. 

Ths  dead  monk  was  clad,  as  wken  alive,  in  tihe 
brown  woollen  frock  of  the  Capuchins,  with  the  hood 
drawn  over  his  head,  but  so  as  to  leave  the  features 
and  a  portion  of  the  beard  uncovered.  His  rosary  and 
cross  hung  at  his  side ;  his  hands  were  folded  over  his 
breast ;  his  feet  (he  was  of  a  barefooted  order  in  his 
lifetime,  and  continued  so  in  death)  protruded  from 
beneath  his  habit,  stiff  and  stark,  with  a  more  waxen 
look  than  even  his  face.  They  were  tied  together  at 
the  ankles  with  a  black  ribbon. 

The  countenance,  as  we  have  already  said,  was  fully 
displayed.  It  had  a  publish  hue  upon  it,  4mlike  the 
paleness  of  an  ordinary  corpse,  but  as  little  resembling 
the  flush  of  natural  life.  The  eyelids  were  but  par« 
tially  drawn  down,  and  showed  the  eyeballs  beneath ; 
as  if  the  deceased  friar  were  stealing  a  glimpse  at 
the  by-standers,  to  watch  whether  they  were  duly  im- 
pressed with  the  solemnity  of  his  obsequies.  The 
shaggy  eyebrows  gave  sternness  to  the  look. 

Miriam  passed  between  two  of  the  lighted  candles, 
and  stood  close  beside  the  bier. 

"  My  God !  "  murmured  she.     «  What  is  this  ?  " 

She  grasped  Donatello's  hand,  and,  at  thd  same  in» 
Btant,  felt  him  give  a  convulsive  shudder,  which  she 
knew  to  have  been  caused  by  a  sudden  and  terrible 
throb  of  the  heart.     His  hand,  by  an  instantaneous 


Digitized 


by  Google 


220  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

change,  became  like  ice  within  hers,  which  likewise 
grew  so  icy,  that  their  insensible  fingers  might  have 
rattled,  one  against  the  other.  No  wonder  that  their 
blood  curdled  ;  no  wonder  that  their  hearts  leaped  and 
paused !  The  dead  face  of  the  monk,  gazing  at  them 
beneath  its  half-^^losed  eyelids,  was  'the  same  visage 
that  had  glai*ed  upon  their  naked  souls,  the  past  mid- 
night, as  Donatello  flung  him  over  the  precipice. 

The  sculptor  was  standing  at  the  foot  of  the  bier, 
and  had  not  yet  seen  the  monk's  features. 

"  Those  naked  feet ! "  said  he.  **  I  know  not  why, 
but  they  affect  me  strangely.  They  have  walked  to 
and.  fro  over  the  hard  pavements  of  Rome,  and  through 
a  hundred  other  rough  ways  of  this  life,  where  the 
monk  went  beg^ng  for  his  brotherhood ;  along  the 
cloisters  and  dreary  corridors  of  his  convent,  too,  from 
his  youth  upward !  It  is  a  suggestive  idea,  to  track 
those  worn  feet  backward  through  all  the  paths  they 
have  trodden,  ever  since  they  were  the  tender  and  rosy 
little  feet  of  a  baby,  and  (cold  as  they  now  are)  were 
kept  warm  in  his  mother's  hand." 

As  his  companions,  whom  the  sculptor  supposed  to 
be  close  by  him,  made  no  response  to  his  fanciful 
musing,  he  looked  up,  and  saw  them  at  the  head  of 
the  bier.     He  advanced  thither  himself. 

"Ha !  *'  exclaimed  he. 

He  cast  a  horror-stricken  and  bewildered  glance  at 
Miriam,  but  withdrew  it  immediately.  Not  that  he 
had  any  definite  suspicion,  or,  it  may  be,  even  a  re- 
mote idea,  that  she  could  be  held  responsible,  in  the 
least  degree,  for  this  man's  sudden  death.  In  truth, 
it  seemed  too  wild  a  thought  to  connect,  in  reality, 
Miriam's  persecutor  of  many  past  months  and  the 
vagabond  of  the  preceding  night,  with  the  dead  Cap* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  DEAD  CAPUCHIN.  221 

Qchin  of  to-day.  It  resembled  one  of  those  unac- 
countable changes  and  interminglings  of  identity, 
which  so  often  occur  among  the  personages  of  a 
dream.  But  Kenyon,  as  befitted  the  professor  of 
an  imaginative  art,  was  endowed  with  an  exceedingly 
quick  sensibility,  which  was  apt  to  give  him  intima- 
tions of  the  true  state  of  matters  that  lay  beyond  his 
actual  vision.  There  was  a  whisper  in  his  ear;  it 
said,  ^^  Hush !  "  Without  asking  himself  wherefore, 
he  resolved  to  be  silent  as  regarded  the  mysterious 
discovery  which  he  had  made,  and  to  leave  any  re- 
mark or  exclamation  to  be  voluntarily  offered  by  Mir- 
iam. If  she  never  spoke,  then  let  the  riddle  be  un- 
solved. 

And  now  occurred  a  circumstance  that  would  seem 
too  fantastic  to  be  told,  if  it  had  not  actually  hap- 
pened, precisely  as  we  set  it  down.  As  the  three 
friends  stood  by  the  bier,  they  saw  that  a  little  stream 
of  blood  had  begun  to  ooze  from  the  dead  monk's 
nostrils ;  it  crept  slowly  towards  the  thicket  of  his 
beard,  where,  in  the  course  of  a  moment  or  two,  it;  hid 
itself. 

"  How  strange ! "  ejaculated  Kenyon.  "  The  monk 
died  of  apoplexy,  I  suppose,  or  by  some  sudden  acci- 
dent,  and  the  blood  has  not  yet  congealed." 

^^Do  you  consider  that  a  siifficient  explanation?" 
asked  Miriam,  with  a  smile  from  which  the  sculptor 
involuntarily  turned  away  his  eyes.  "Does  it  satisfy 
you?" 

"  And  why  not  T  ^'  he  inquired. 

"  Of  course,  you  know  the  old  superstition  about 
ibis  phenomenon  of  blood  flowing  from  a  dead  body," 
she  rejoined.  "How  can  we  tell  but  that  the  mur- 
derer of  this  monk  (or,  possibly,  it  may  be  only  that 


Digitized 


by  Google 


22s  ROMANCE   OF  MONTE  BENT. 

privileged  murderer,  his  physician)  may  have  just  en' 
tered  the  church? " 

^^  I  cannot  jest  about  it,"  said  Kenyon.  ^^  It  is  an 
ugly  sight! " 

"True,  true ;  horrible  to  see,  or  dream  of !  '*  she  re* 
plied,  with  one  of  those  long,  tremulous  sighs,  which 
so  often  betray  a  sick  heart  by  escaping  unexpectedly. 
•'  We  will  not  look  at  it  any  more.  Come  away,  Do- 
natello.  Let  us  escape  from  this  dismal  church.  The 
sunshine  will  do  you  good." 

When  had  ever  a  woman  such  a  trial  to  sustain  as 
this!  By  no  possible  supposition  could  Miriam  ex« 
plain  the  identity  of  the  dead  Capuchin,  quietly  and 
decorously  laid  out  in  the  nave  of  his  convent  church, 
with  that  of  her  murdered  persecutor,  flung  heedlessly 
at  the  foot  of  the  precipice.  The  effect  upon  her  im- 
agination  was  as  if  a  strange  and  unknown  corpse  had 
miraculously,  while  she  was  gazing  at  it,  assumed  the 
likeness  of  that  face,  so  terrible  henceforth  in  her  re* 
membrance.  It  was  a  symbol,  perhaps,  of  the  deadly 
iteration  with  which  she  was  doomed  to  behold  th& 
image  of  her  crime  reflected  back  upon  her  in  a  thou% 
sand  ways,  and  converting  the  great,  cahn  face  of  Na- 
ture, in  the  whole,  and  in  its  innumerable  details,  into 
a  manifold  reminiscence  of  that  one  dead  visage. 

No  sooner  had  Miriam  turned  away  from  the  bier, 
and  gone  a  few  steps,  than  she  fancied  the  likeness 
altogether  an  illusion,  which  would  vanish  at  a  closer 
and  colder  view.  She  must  look  at  it  again,  there* 
fore,  and  at  once ;  or  else  the  grave  would  close  over 
the  face,  and  leave  the  awful  fantasy  that  had  con« 
nected  itseH  therewith  fixed  ineffaceably  in  her  brain. 

"  Wait  for  me,  one  moment  I "  she  said  to  her  cod» 
{ftanions«    "  Only  a  moment  I " 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  DEAD  CAPUCHIN.  228 

So  she  went  back,  and  gazed  once  mord  at  the 
rorpse.  Yes ;  these  were  the  features  that  Miriam 
had  known  so  well ;  this  was  the  visage  that  she  re- 
membered from  a  far  longer  date  than  the  most  inti« 
mate  of  her  friends  suspected ;  this  form  of  clay  had 
held  the  evil  spirit  which  blasted  her  sweet  youth, 
and  compelled  her,  as  it  were,  to  stain  her  womanhood 
with  crime.  But,  whether  it  were  the  majesty  of 
death,  or  something  originally  noble  and  lofty  in  the 
character  of  the  dead,  which  the  soul  had  stamped 
upon  the  features,  as  it  left  them ;  so  it  was  that  Mir- 
iam now  quailed  and  shook,  not  for  the  vulgar  horror 
of  the  spectstcle,  but  for  the  severe,  reproachful  glance 
that  seemed  to  come  from  between  thpse  half-<;losed 
li^ls*  True,  there  had  been  nothing,  in  his  lifetime, 
viler  than  this  man.  She  knew  it ;  there  was  no  other 
fact  within  her  consciousness  that  she  felt  to  be  so 
certain;  and  yet,  because  her  persecutor  found  him- 
self safe  and  irrefutable  in  death,  he  frowned  upon  his 
victim,  and  threw  back  the  blame  on  her  I 

"Is  it  thou,  indeed?"  she  murmured,  under  her 
breath.  "  Then  thou  hast  no  right  to  scowl  upon  me 
so  I     But  art  thou  real,  or  a  vision  ?  " 

She  bent  down  over  the  dead  monk,  till  one  of  her 
rich  curls  brushed  against  his  forehead.  She  touched 
one  of  his  folded  hands  with  her  finger. 

"  It  is  he,"  said  Miriam.  "  There  is  the  scar,  that 
1  know  so  well,  on  his  brow.  And  it  is  no  vision :  he 
is  palpable  to  my  touch !  I  will  question  the  fact  no 
longer,  but  deal  with  it  as  I  best  can." 

tt  was  wonderful  to  see  how  the  crisis  developed  in 
Miriam  its  own  proper  strength,  and  the  faculty  of 
sustaining  the  demands  which  it  made  upon  her  f  orti- 
uide.    She  ceased  to  tremble;  the  beautiful  womw 


Digitized 


by  Google 


224  ROMANCE  OF  MONfE  BEKI. 

gazed  sternly  at  her  dead  enemy,  endeavoring  to  meet 
and  quell  the  look  of  accusation  that  he  threw  from 
between  his  half-closed  eyelids. 

"  No ;  thou  shalt  not  scowl  me  down !  "  said  she. 
•^Neither  now,  nor  when  we  stand  together  at  the 
judgment-seat.  I  fear  not  to  meet  thee  there.  Fare- 
well, till  that  next  encounter ! " 

Haughtily  waving  her  hand,  Miriam  rejoined  her 
friends,  who  were  awaiting  her  at  the  door  of  the 
church.  As  they  went  out,  the  sacristan  stopped  them, 
and  proposed  to  show  the  cemetery  of  the  convent, 
where  the  deceased  members  of  the  fraternity  are  laid 
to  rest  in  sacred  earth,  brought  long  ago  from  Jeru- 


"And  will  yonder  monk  be  buried  there?"  she 
asked. 

"  Brother  Antonio  ? "  exclaimed  the  sacristan. 
**  Surely,  our  good  brother  will  be  put  to  bed  there ! 
His  grave  is  already  dug,  and  the  last  occupant  has 
made  room  for  him.     Will  you  look  at  it,  signorina?  " 

*'  I  will !  "  said  Miriam. 

"  Then  excuse  me,"  observed  Kenyon ;  "  for  I  shall 
leave  you.  One  dead  monk  has  more  than  sufficed 
me ;  and  I  am  not  bold  enough  to  face  the  whole  mor« 
tality  of  the  convent." 

It  was  easy  to  see,  by  Donatello's  looks,  that  he,  as 
well  as  the  sculptor,  would  gladly  have  escaped  a  visit 
to  the  famous  cemetery  of  the  Cappuccini.  But  Mir- 
iam's nerves  were  strained  to  such  a  pitch,  that  she 
anticipated  a  certain  solace  and  absolute  relief  in  pass- 
ing from  one  ghastly  spectacle  to  another  of  long-ac- 
cumulated ugliness ;  and  there  was,  besides,  a  singu* 
lar  sense  of  duty  which  impelled  her  to  look  at  the 
fiiud  resting-place  of  the  being  whose  fate  had  been  so 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  DEAD  CAPUCHIN.  225 

disastrously  involved  with  her  own.  She  therefore 
followed  the  sacristan's  guidance,  and  di-ew  her  com- 
T>anion  along  with  her,  whispering  encouragement  as 
they  went. 

The  cemetery  is  beneath  the  church,  but  entirely 
above  ground,  and  lighted  by  a  row  of  iron-grated 
windows  without  glass.  A  corridor  runs  along  be- 
side these  windows,  and  gives  access  to  three  or  four 
vaulted  recesses,  or  chapels,  of  considerable  breadth 
and  height,  the  floor  of  which  consists  of  the  conse- 
crated earth  of  Jerusalem.  It  is  smoothed  decorously 
over  the  deceased  brethren  of  the  convent,  and  is  kept 
quite  free  from  grass  or  weeds,  such  as  would  grow 
even  in  these  gloomy  recesses,  if  pains  were  not  be- 
stowed to  root  them  up.  But,  as  the  cemetery  is  small, 
and  it  is  a  precious  privilege  to  sleep  in  holy  ground, 
the  brotherhood  are  immemorially  accustomed,  when 
one  of  their  number  dies,  to  take  the  longest -buried 
skeleton  out  of  the  oldest  grave,  and  lay  the  new  slum- 
berer  there  instead.  Thus,  each  of  the  good  friars,  in 
his  turn,  enjoys  the  luxury  of  a  consecrated  bed,  at- 
tended with  the  slight  drawback  of  being  forced  to  get 
up  long  before  daybreak,  as  it  were,  and  make  room 
for  another  lodger. 

The  arrangement  of  the  unearthed  skeletons  is  what 
makes  the  special  interest  of  the  cemetery.  The  arched 
and  vaulted  walls  of  the  burial  recesses  are  supported 
by  massive  pillars  and  pilasters  made  of  thigh-bones 
and  skulls;  the  whole  material  of  the  structure  ap- 
pears to  be  of  a  similar  kind ;  and  the  knobs  and 
embossed  ornaments  of  this  strange  architecture  are 
represented  by  the  joints  of  the  spine,  and  the  more 
delicate  tracery  by  the  smaller  bones  of  the  human 
(frame.    The  summits  of  the  arches  s^  adorned  with 


Digitized 


by  Google 


226  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

entire  skeletons,  looking  as  if  they  were  wrought  most 
skilfully  in  bas-relief.  There  is  no  possibility  of  de- 
scribing how  ugly  and  grotesque  is  the  eflfect,  com- 
bined with  a  certain  artistic  merit,  nor  how  much  per- 
verted ingenuity  has  been  shown  in  this  queer  way, 
nor  what  a  multitude  of  dead  monks,  through  how 
many  hundred  years,  must  have  contributed  their  bony 
framework  to  build  up  these  great  arches  of  mortality. 
On  some  of  the  skulls  there  are  inscriptions,  purport- 
ing that  such  a  monk,  who  formerly  made  use  of  that 
particular  headpiece,  died  on  such  a  day  and  year ; 
but  vastly  the  greater  number  are  piled  up  indistin- 
giiishably  into  the  architectural  design,  like  the  many 
deaths  that  make  up  the  one  glory  of  a  victory. 

In  the  side  walls  of  the  vaults  are  niches  where 
skeleton  monks  sit  or  stand,  clad  in  the  brown  habits 
that  they  wore  in  life,  and  labelled  with  their  names 
and  the  dates  of  their  decease.  Their  skulls  (some 
quite  bare,  and  others  still  covered  with  yellow  skin, 
and  hair  that  has  known  the  earth-damps)  look  out 
from  beneath  their  hoods,  grinning  hideously  repul- 
sive. One  reverend  father  has  his  mouth  wide  open, 
as  if  he  had  died  in  the  midst  of  a  howl  of  terror  and 
remorse,  which  perhaps  is  even  now  screeching  through 
eternity.  As  a  general  thing,  however,  these  f rocked 
and  hooded  skeletons  seem  to  take  a  more  cheerful 
view  of  their  position,  and  try  with  ghastly  smiles  to 
turn  it  into  a  jest.  But  the  cemetery  of  the  Capu- 
chins is  no  place  to  nourish  celestial  hopes :  the  soul 
sinks  forlorn  and  wretched  under  all  this  burden  of 
dusty  death ;  the  holy  earth  from  Jerusalem,  so  im- 
bued is  it  with  mortality,  has  grown  as  barren  of  the 
flowers  of  Paradise  as  it  is  of  earthly  weeds  and  grass. 
^Thank  Heaven  for  its  blue  sky ;  it  needs  a  long,  up- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


> 

DC 
U 


X 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  DEAD  CAPUCHIN.  22^ 

ward  gaze  to  give  us  back  our  faith.  Not  here  can 
we  feel  ourselves  immortal,  where  the  very  altars  in 
these  chapels  of  horrible  consecration  are  heaps  of  hu- 
man bones. 

Yet  let  us  give  the  cemetery  the  praise  that  it  de- 
serves. There  is  no  disagreeable  scent,  such  as  might 
have  been  expected  from  the  decay  of  so  many  holy 
persons,  in  whatever  odor  of  sanctity  they  may  have 
taken  their  departure.  The  same  number  of  living 
monks  would  not  smell  half  so  unexceptionably. 

Miriam  went  gloomily  along  the  corridor,  from  one 
vaulted  Golgotha  to  another,  until  in  the  farthest  re- 
cess she  beheld  an  open  grave. 

"  Is  that  for  him  who  lies  yonder  in  the  nave  ?  "  she 


"  Yes,  signorina,  this  is  to  be  the  resting-place  of 
Brother  Antonio,  who  came  to  his  death  last  night," 
answered  the  sacristan ;  "  and  in  yonder  niche,  you 
see,  sits  a  brother  who  was  buried  thirty  years  ago, 
and  has  risen  to  give  him  place." 

"It  is  not  a  satisfactory  idea,"  observed  Miriam, 
**that  you  poor  friars  cannot  call  even  your  graves 
permanently  your  own.  You  must  lie  down  in  them, 
methinks,  with  a  nervous  anticipation  of  being  dis- 
turbed, like  weary  men  who  know  that  they  shall  be 
summoned  out  of  bed  at  midnight.  Is  it  not  possible 
(if  money  were  to  be  paid  for  the  privilege)  to  leave 
Brother  Antonio  —  if  that  be  his  name — in  the  oc- 
cupancy of  that  narrow  grave  till  the  last  trumpet 
soimds?" 

"  By  no  means,  signorina ;  neither  is  it  needful  or 
desirable,"  answered  the  sacristan.  "  A  quarter  of  a 
century's  sleep  in  the  sweet  earth  of  Jerusalem  is 
better  than  a  thousand  years  in  any  other  soil.     Our 


Digitized 


by  Google 


228  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

brethren  find  good  rest  there.  No  ghost  was  ever 
known  to  steal  out  of  this  blessed  cemetery." 

"That  is  weU,"  responded  Miriam;  "may  he  whom 
you  now  lay  to  sleep  prove  no  exception  to  the  rule  I  " 

As  they  left  the  cemetery  she  put  money  into  the 
sacristan's  hand  to  an  amount  that  made  his  eyes  open 
wide  and  glisten,  and  requested  that  it  might  be  ex< 
pended  in  masses  for  the  repose  of  Father  Antonio'a 
souL 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XXIL 

THE  MEDICI   GARDENS. 

! 

**  DoNATELLO,"  said  Miriam,  anxiously,  as  they 
l^ame  through  the  Piazza  Barberini,  ^^what  can  I  do 
for  you,  my  beloved  friend  ?  You  are  shaking  as  with 
the  cold  fit  of  the  Roman  fever." 

**  Yes,"  said  Donatello ;  "  my  heart  shivers." 

As  soon  as  she  could  collect  her  thoughts,  Miriam 
led  the  young  man  to  the  gardens  of  the  Villa  Medici, 
hoping  that  the  quiet  shade  and  sunshine  of  that  de- 
lightful retreat  would  a  little  revive  his  spirits.  The 
grounds  are  there  laid  out  in  the  old  fashion  of  straight 
paths,  with  borders  of  box,  which  form  hedges  of  great 
height  and  density,  and  are  shorn  and  trimmed  to 
the  evenness  of  a  wall  of  stone,  at  the  top  and  sides. 
There  are  green  alleys,  with  long  vistas  overshadowed 
by  ilex-trees;  and  at  each  intersection  of  the  paths, 
the  visitor  finds  seats  of  lichen-covered  stone  to  repose 
upon,  and  marble  statues  that  look  forlornly  at  him, 
regretful  of  their  lost  noses.  In  the  more  open  por- 
tions of  the  garden,  before  the  sculptured  front  of  the 
villa,  you  see  fountains  and  flower-beds,  and,  in  their 
season,  a  profusion  of  roses,  from  which  the  genial  sun 
of  Italy  distils  a  fragrance,  to  be  scattered  abroad  by 
the  no  less  genial  breeze. 

But  Donatello  drew  no  delight  from  these  things. 
He  walked  onward  in  silent  apathy,  and  looked  at 
Miriam  with  strangely  half -awakened  and  bewildered 


Digitized 


by  Google 


280  ROMANCE   OF  MONTE  BENT. 

eyes,  ^hen  she  sought  to  bring  his  mind  into  sym* 
pathy  with  hers,  and  so  relieve  his  heart  of  the  burden 
that  lay  lumpishly  upon  it. 

She  made  him  sit  down  on  a  stone  bench,  where 
two  embowered  alleys  crossed  each  other ;  so  that  they 
could  discern  the  approach  of  any  casual  intruder  a 
long  way  down  the  path. 

"  My  sweet  friend,"  she  said,  taking  one  of  his  pas- 
sive hands  in  both  of  hers,  ^^  what  can  I  say  to  comfort 
you?" 

"  Nothing ! "  replied  Donatello,  with  sombre  reserve. 
**  Nothing  will  ever  comfort  me." 

"  I  accept  my  own  misery,"  continued  Miriam,  "  my 
own  guilt,  if  guilt  it  be ;  and,  whether  guilt  or  misery, 
I  shall  know  how  to  deal  with  it.  But  you,  dearest 
friend,  that  were  the  rarest  creature  in  all  this  world, 
and  seemed  a  being  to  whom  sorrow  could  not  cling, 
—  you,  whom  I  half  fancied  to  belong  to  a  race  that 
had  vanished  forever,  you  only  surviving,  to  show 
mankind  how  genial  and  how  joyous  life  used  to  be, 
in  some  long -gone  age,  —  what  had  you  to  do  with 
grief  or  crime  ?  " 

^'  They  came  to  me  as  to  other  men,"  said  Donatello, 
broodingly.     "  Doubtless  I  was  bom  to  them." 

"  No,  no ;  they  came  with  me,"  replied  Miriam. 
"  Mine  is  the  responsibility !  Alas !  wherefore  was  I 
born  ?  Why  did  we  ever  meet?  Why  did  I  not  drive 
you  from  me,  knowing  —  for  my  heart  foreboded  it  — 
that  the  cloud  in  which  I  walked  would  likewise  en« 
velop  you ! " 

Donatello  stirred  uneasily,  with  the  irritable  impa* 
tience  that  is  often  combined  with  a  mood  of  leaden 
despondency.  A  brown  lizard  with  two  tails  —  a 
monster  often  engendered  by  the  Roman  sunshine  'me 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  MEDICI  GARDENS.  281 

ran  across  his  foot,  and  made  him  start.  Then  he  sat 
silent  awhile,  and  so  did  Miriam,  trying  to  dissolve 
her  whole  heart  into  sympathy,  and  lavish  it  all  upon 
him,  were  it  only  for  a  moment's  cordial. 

LThe  young  man  lifted  his  hand  to  his  breast,  and, 
intentionally,  as  Miriam's,  hand  was  within  liis,  he 
lifted  that  along  with  it. 

"  I  have  a  great  weight  here !  "  said  he. 

The  fancy  struck  Miriam  (but  she  drove  it  reso- 
lutely down)  that  Donatello  almost  imperceptibly 
shuddered,  while,  in  pressing  his  own  hand  against 
his  heart,  he  pressed  hers  there  too. 

**  Rest  your  heart  on  me,  dearest  one ! "  she  resumed. 
**  Let  me  bear  all  its  weight ;  I  am  well  able  to  bear 
it ;  for  I  am  a  woman,  and  I  love  you !  I  love  you, 
Donatello  !  Is  there  no  comfort  for  you  in  this 
avowal  ?  Look  at  me !  Heretofore,  you  have  found 
me  pleasant  to  your  sight.  Gaze  into  my  eyes  I  Graze 
into  my  soul !  Search  as  deeply  as  you  may,  you  can 
never  see  half  the  tenderness  and  devotion  that  I 
henceforth  cherish  for  you.  All  that  I  ask  is  your 
acceptance  of  the  utter  self-sacrifice  (but  it  shall  be 
no  sacrifice,  to  my  great  love)  with  which  I  seek  to 
remedy  the  evil  you  have  incurred  for  my  sake ! " 

All  this  fervor  on  Miriam's  part;'  on  Donatello's,  a 
heavy  silence. 

"  Oh,  speak  to  me ! "  she  exclaimed.  "Only  promise 
ine  to  be,  by  and  by,  a  little  happy  I  " 

"  Happy  ?  "  murmured  Donatello.  "  Ah,  never 
again  !  never  again  !  " 

"  Never  ?  Ah,  that  is  a  terrible  word  to  say  to  me  I  '* 
answered  Miriam.  "A  terrible  word  to  let  fall  upon 
a  woman's  heart,  when  she  loves  you,  and  is  conscious 
of  having  caused  your  misery  /    If  you  love  me,  Dona* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


232  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

teUoy  speak  it  not  again.     And  surely  you  did  love 
me?" 

"  I  did,"  replied  Donatello,  gloomily  and  absently. 

Miriam  released  the  young  man's  hand,  but  suffered 
one  of  her  own  to  lie  close  to  his,  and  waited  a  moment 
to  see  whether  he  would  make  any  effort  to  retain  it. 
There  was  much  depending  upon  that  simple  experi^ 
ment. 

With  a  deep  sigh  —  as  when,  sometimes,  a  slum^ 
berer  turns  over  in  a  troubled  dream  —  Donatello 
changed  his  position,  and  clasped  both  his  hands  over 
his  forehead.  The  genial  warmth  of  a  Boman  April 
kindling  into  May  was  in  the  atmosphere  around 
them ;  but  when  Miriam  saw  that  involuntary  move- 
ment and  heard  that  sigh  of  relief  (for  so  she  inter- 
preted it),  a  shiver  ran  through  her  frame,  as  if  the 
iciest  wind  of  the  Apennines  were  blowing  over  her. 

^^  He  has  done  himself  a  greater  wrong  than  I 
dreamed  of,"  thought  she,  with  unutterable  compas« 
sibn.  ^^  Alas  I  it  was  a  sad  mistake !  He  might  have 
had  a  kind  of  bliss  in  the  consequences  of  this  deed, 
had  he  been  impelled  to  it  by  a  love  vital  enough  to 
survive  the  frenzy  of  that  terrible  moment,  — mighty 
enough  to  make  its  own  law,  and  justify  itself  against 
the  natural  remoi^.  But  to  have  perpetrated  a  dread- 
ful murder  (and  such  was  his  crime,  unless  love,  an« 
nihilating  moral  distinctions,  made  it  otherwise)  on  no 
better  warrant  than  a  boy's  idle  fantasy !  I  pity  him 
from  the  very  depths  of  my  soul !  As  for  myself,  I 
am  past  my  own  or  other's  pity." 

She  arose  from  the  young  man's  side,  and  stood  be- 
fore him  with  a  sad,  commiserating  aspect ;  it  was  the 
iook  of  a  ruined  soul,  bewailing,  in  him,  a  grief  less 
than  what  her  profounder  sympathies  imposed  upon 
herself. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  MEDICI  GARDENS.  283 

**  Donatello,  we  must  part,"  she  said,  with  melan« 
eholy  firmness.  "  Yes ;  leave  me  !  Go  back  to  your 
old  tower,  which  overlooks  the  green  valley  you  have 
told  me  of  among  the  Apennines.  Then,  all  that  has 
passed  will  be  recognized  as  but  an  ugly  dream.  For, 
in  dreams,  the  conscience  sleeps,  and  we  often  stain 
ourselves  with  guilt  of  which  we  should  be  incapable 
in  our  waking  moments.  The  deed  you  seemed  to  do, 
last  night,  was  no  more  than  such  a  dream  ;  there  was 
as  little  substance  in  what  you  fancied  yourself  doing. 
Go ;  and  forget  it  all !  " 

'*  Ah,  that  terrible  face  !  "  said  Donatello,  pressing 
his  hands  over  his  eyes.     "  Do  you  call  that  unreal  ?  " 

"  Yes ;  for  you  beheld  it  with  dreaming  eyes,"  re- 
plied Miriam.  ^^  It  was  imreal ;  and,  that  you  may 
feel  it  so,  it  is  requisite  that  you  see  this  face  of  mine 
no  more.  Once,  you  may  have  thought  it  beauti- 
ful ;  now,  it  has  lost  its  charm.  Yet  it  would  still  re- 
tain a  miserable  potency  to  bring  back  the  past  illu- 
sion, and,  in  its  train,  the  remorse  and  anguish  that 
would  darken  all  your  life.  Leave  me,  therefore,  and 
forget  me." 

*^  Forget  you,  Miriam  !  "  said  Donatello,  roused 
somewhat  from  his  apathy  of  despair.  "  If  I  could  re- 
member you,  and  behold  you,  apart  from  that  fright- 
ful visage  which  stares  at  me  over  your  shoulder,  that 
were  a  consolation,  at  least,  if  not  a  joy." 

"  But  since  that  visage  haunts  you  along  with  mine,'* 
rejoined  Miriam,  glancing  behind  her,  "  we  needs  must 
part.  Farewell,  then !  But  if  ever  —  in  distress,  peril, 
shame,  poverty,  or  whatever  anguish  is  most  poignant, 
whatever  burden  heaviest  —  you  should  require  a  life 
to  be  given  wholly,  only  to  make  your  own  a  little 
easier,  then  summon  me  I     As  the  case  now  stands 


Digitized 


by  Google 


284  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

between  us,  you  have  bought  me  dear,  and  find  me 
of  little  worth.  Fling  me  away,  therefore !  May  you 
never  need  me  morel  But,  if  otherwise,  a  wish  — 
almost  an  unuttered  wish  —  will  bring  me  to  you  1  " 

She  stood  a  moment,  expecting  a  reply.  But  Do- 
natello's  eyes  had  again  fallen  on  the  ground,  and  hi9 
had  not,  in  his  bewildered  mind  and  overburdened 
heart,  a  woi-d  to  respond. 

**  That  hour  I  speak  of  may  never  come,"  said  Mir- 
iam.    "  So  farewell,  —  farewell  forever." 

**  Farewell,"  said  DonateUo. 

His  voice  hardly  made  its  way  through  the  environ- 
ment of  unaccustomed  thoughts  and  emotions  which 
had  settled  over  him  Uke  a  dense  and  dark  cloud. 
Not  improbably,  he  beheld  Miriam  through  so  dim  a 
medium  that  she  looked  visionary ;  heard  her  speak 
only  in  a  thin,  faint  echo. 

She  turned  from  the  young  man,  and,  much  as  her 
heart  yearned  towards  him,  she  would  not  profane 
that  heavy  parting  by  an  embrace,  or  even  a  pressure 
of  the  hand.  So  soon  after  the  semblance  of  such 
mighty  love,  and  after  it  had  been  the  impulse  to  so 
terrible  a  deed,  they  parted,  in  all  outward  show,  as 
coldly  as  people  part  whose  whole  mutual  intercourse 
has  been  encircled  within  a  single  hour. 

And  DonateUo,  when  Miriam  had  departed,  stretched 
himself  at  full  length  on  the  stone  bench,  and  drew 
his  hat  over  his  eyes,  as  the  idle  and  light-hearted 
youths  of  dreamy  Italy  are  accustomed  to  do,  when 
they  lie  down  in  the  first  convenient  shade,  and  snatch 
a  noonday  slumber.  A  stupor  was  upon  him,  which 
he  mistook  for  such  drowsiness  as  he  had  known  in 
his  innocent  past  life.  But,  by  and  by,  he  raised  him* 
ielf  slowly  and  left  the  garden.     Sometimes  poor  Do 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  MEDICI  GARDENS.  236 

natello  started,  as  if  he  heard  a  shriek ;  sometimes  he 
shrank  back,  as  if  a  face,  fearful  to  behold,  were  thrust 
dose  to  his  own.  In  this  dismal  mood,  bewildered 
with  the  novelty  of  sin  and  grief,  he  had  little  left  of 
that  singular  resemblance,  on  account  of  which,  and 
for  their  sport,  his  three  friends  had  fantastically  reo- 
ognized  him  as  the  veritable  Faun  of  Praxitelea 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XXHL 

MIRIAM   AND  HILDA. 

On  leaving  the  Medici  Gardens  Miriam  felt  herself 
astray  in  the  world  ;  and  having  no  special  reason  to 
seek  one  place  more  than  another,  she  suffered  chance 
to  direct  her  steps  as  it  would.  Thus  it  happened, 
that,  involving  herself  in  the  crookedness  of  Rome, 
she  saw  Hilda's  tower  rising  before  her,  and  was  put 
in  mind  to  climb  to  the  young  girl's  eyry,  and  ask 
why  she  had  broken  her  engagement  at  the  church  of 
the  Capuchins.  People  often  do  the  idlest  acts  of 
their  lifetime  in  their  heaviest  and  most  anxious  mo- 
ments ;  so  that  it  would  have  been  no  wonder  had 
Miriam  been  impelled  only  by  so  slight  a  motive  of 
curiosity  as  we  have  indicated.  But  she  remembered, 
too,  and  with  a  quaking  heart,  what  the  sculptor  had 
mentioned  of  Hilda's  retracing  her  steps  towards  the 
court-yard  of  the  Palazzo  Caffarelli  in  quest  of  Miriam 
herself.  Had  she  l>een  compelled  to  choose  between 
infamy  in  the  eyes  of  the  whole  world,  or  in  Hilda's 
eyes  alone,  she  would  unhesitatingly  have  accepted  the 
former,  on  condition  of  remaining  spotless  in  the  esti- 
mation of  her  white  -  souled  friend.  This  possibility, 
therefore,  that  Hilda  had  witnessed  the  scene  of  the 
past  night,  was  unquestionably  the  cause  that  drew 
Miriam  to  the  tower,  and  made  her  linger  and  faltef 
as  she  approached  it. 

As  she  drew  near,  there  were  tokens  to  which  her 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM  AND  HILDA.  287 

disturbed  mind  gave  a  sinister  interpretation.  Some 
of  her  friend's  airy  family,  the  cloves,  with  their  heads 
imbedded  disconsolately  in  their  bosoms,  were  hud- 
dled in  a  comer  of  the  piazza ;  others  had  alighted  on 
the  heads,  wings,  shoulders,  and  trumpets  of  the  mar- 
ble angels  which  adorned  the  facade  of  the  neighbor- 
ing church ;  two  or  three  had  betaken  themselves  to 
the  Virgin's  shrine ;  and  as  many  as  could  find  room 
were  sitting  on  Hilda's  window-sill.  But  all  of  the^l, 
so  Miriam  fancied,  had  a  look  of  weary  expectation 
and  disappointment,  —  no  flights,  no  flutterings,  no 
cooing  mUrmur ;  something  that  ought  to  have  made 
their  day  glad  and  bright  was  evidently  left  out  of 
this  day's  history.  And,  furthermore,  Hilda's  white 
window-curtain  was  closely  drawn,  with  only  that  one 
little  aperture  at  the  side,  which  Miriam  remembered 
noticing  the  night  before. 

"  Be  quiet,"  said  Miriam  to  her  own  heart,  pressing 
her  hand  hard  upon  it.  "  Why  shouldst  thou  throb 
now?  Hast  thou  not  endured  more  terrible  things 
than  this?" 

Whatever  were  her  apprehensions,  she  would  not 
turn  back.  It  might  be  —  and  the  solace  would  be 
worth  a  world  —  that  Hilda,  knowing  nothing  of  the 
past  night's  calamity,  would  greet  her  friend  with  a 
sunny  smile,  and  so  restore  a  portion  of  the  vital 
warmth,  for  lack  of  which  her  soul  was  frozen.  But 
could  Miriam,  guilty  as  she  was,  permit  Hilda  to  kiss 
her  cheek,  to  clasp  her  hand,  and  thus  be  no  longer 
BO  imspotted  from  the  world  as  heretofore  ? 

"  I  will  never  permit  her  sweet  touch  again,"  said 
Miriam,  toiling  up  the  staircase,  "  if  I  can  find  strength 
of  heart  to  forbid  it.  But,  oh !  it  would  be  so  sooth* 
ing  in  this  wintry  fever-fit  of  my  heart.     There  can  be 


Digitized 


by  Google 


238  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

no  harm  to  my  white  Hilda  in  one  parting  kiss.  That 
shaUbealll" 

But,  on  reaching  the  upper  landing-place,  Miriam 
paused,  and  stirred  not  again  till  she  had  brought  her* 
self  to  an  immovable  resolve, 

"  My  lips,  my  hand,  shall  never  meet  Hilda's  more,** 
said  she. 

Meanwhile,  Hilda  sat  listlessly  in  her  painting-room. 
Had  you  looked  into  the  little  adjoining  chamber,  you 
might  have  seen  the  slight  imprint  of  her  figure  on 
the  bed,  but  would  also  have  detected  at  once  that  the 
white  counterpane  had  not  been  turned  down.  The 
pillow  was  more  disturbed ;  she  had  turned  her  face 
upon  it,  the  poor  child,  and  bedewed  it  with  some  of 
those  tears  (among  the  most  chill  and  forlorn  that 
gush  from  human  sorrow)  which  the  innocent  heart 
pours  forth  at  its  first  actual  discovery  that  sin  is  in 
the  world.  The  yo.ung  and  pure  are  not  apt  to  find 
out  that  miserable  truth  until  it  is  brought  home  to 
them  by  the  guiltiness  of  some  trusted  friend.  They 
may  have  heard  much  of  the  evil  of  the  world,  and 
seem  to  know  it,  but  only  as  an  impalpable  theory. 
In  due  time,  some  mortal,  whom  they  reverence  too 
highly,  is  commissioned  by  Providence  to  teach  them 
this  direful  lesson ;  he  perpetrates  a  sin ;  and  Adam 
falls  anew,  and  Paradise,  heretofore  in  unfaded  bloom, 
is  lost  again,  and  closed  forever,  with  the  fiery  swords 
gleaming  at  its  gates. 

The  chair  in  which  Hilda  sat  was  near  the  portrait 
of  Beatrice  Cenci,  which  had  not  yet  been  taken  from 
the  easel.  It  is  a  peculiarity  of  this  picture,  that 
its  profouudest  expression  eludes  a  straightforward 
glance,  and  can  only  be  caught  by  side  glimpses,  or 
when  the  ^e  falls  casually  upon  it;  even  as  if  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM  AND  HILDA.  289 

painted  face  had  a  life  and  consciousness  of  its  own, 
and,  resolving  not  to  betray  its  secret  of  grief  or  guilt, 
permitted  the  true  tokens  to  come  forth  only  when  it 
Imagined  itself  unseen.  No  other  such  magical  effect 
\ias  ever  been  wrought  by  pencil. 

Now,  opposite  the  easel  hung  a  looking-glass,  in 
which  Beatrice's  face  and  Hilda's  were  both  reflected. 
In  one  of  her  weary,  nerveless  changes  of  position, 
Hilda  happened  to  throw  her  eyes  on  the  glass,  and 
took  in  both  these  images  at  one  unpremeditated 
glance.  She  fancied  —  nor  was  it  without  horror  — 
that  Beatrice's  expression,  seen  aside  and  vanishing 
in  a  moment,  had  been  depicted  in  her  own  face  like- 
wise, and  flitted  from  it  as  timorously. 

"  Am  I,  too,  stained  with  guilt  ?  "  thought  the  poor 
girl,  hiding  her  face  in  her  hands. 

Not  so,  thank  Heaven !  But,  as  regards  Beatrice's 
picture,  the  incident  suggests  a  theory  which  may  ac- 
count for  its  unutterable  grief  and  mysterious  shadow 
of  guilt,  without  detracting  from  the  purity  which  we 
love  to  attribute  to  that  ill-fated  girl.  Who,  indeed, 
can  look  at  that  mouth,  —  with  its  lips  half  apart,  as 
innocent  as  a  baby's  that  has  been  crying,  —  and  not 
pronounce  Beatrice  sinless  ?  It  was  the  intimate  con- 
sciousness of  her  father's  sin  that  threw  its  shadow 
vver  her,  and  frightened  her  into  a  remote  and  inac- 
eessible  region,  where  no  sympathy  could  come.  It 
was  the  knowledge  of  Miriam's  guilt  that  lent  the 
same  expression  to  Hilda's  face. 

But  Hilda  nervously  moved  her  chair,  so  that  the 
images  in  the  glass  should  be  no  longer  visible.  She 
now  watched  a  speck  of  sunshine  that  came  through 
a  shuttered  window,  and  crept  from  object  to  object, 
indicating  each  with  a  touch  of  its  bright  finger,  and 


Digitized 


by  Google 


240  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

then  letting  them  all  vanish  suecessiyely.  In  like 
manner,  her  mind,  so  like  sunlight  in  its  natural  cheer- 
fulness, went  from  thought  to  thought,  but  found 
nothing  that  it  could  dwell  upon  for  comfort.  Never 
before  had  this  young,  energetic,  active  spirit  known 
what  it  is  to  be  despondent.  It  was  the  unreality  of 
the  world  that  made  her  so.  Her  dearest  friend, 
whose  heart  seemed  the  most  solid  and  richest  of 
Hilda's  possessions,  had  no  existence  for  her  any 
more ;  and  in  that  dreary  void,  out  of  which  Miriam 
had  disappeared,  the  substance,  the  truth,  the  integrity 
of  life,  the  motives  of  effort,  the  joy  of  success,  had 
departed  along  with  her. 

It  was  long  past  noon,  when  a  step  came  up  the 
staircase.  It  had  passed  beyond  the  limits  where 
there  was  communication  with  the  lower  regions  of 
the  palace,  and  was  mounting  the  successive  flights 
which  led  only  to  Hilda's  precincts.  Faint  as  the 
tread  was,  she  heard  and  recognized  it.  It  startled 
her  into  sudden  life.  Her  first  impulse  was  to  spring 
to  the  door  of  the  studio,  and  fasten  it  with  lock  and 
bolt.  But  a  second  thought  made  her  feel  that  this 
would  be  an  unworthy  cowardice,  on  her  own  part, 
and  also  that  Miriam  —  only  yesterday  her  closest 
friend  —  had  a  right  to  be  told,  face  to  face,  that 
thenceforth  they  must  be  forever  strangers. 

She  heard  Miriam  pause,  outside  of  the  door.  We 
have  already  seen  what  was  the  latter's  resolve  with 
respect  to  any  kiss  or  pressure  of  the  hand  between 
Hilda  and  herself.  We  know  not  what  became  of 
the  resolution.  As  Miriam  was  of  a  highly  impulsive 
character,  it  may  have  vanished  at  the  first  sight  of 
Hilda;  but,  at  all  events,  she  appeared  to  have  dressed 
herself  up  in  a  garb  of  simshine,  and  was  disclosed,  m 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM  AND  HILDA.  241 

the  door  swung  open,  in  all  the  glow  of  her  remarka- 
ble beauty.  The  truth  was,  her  heart  leaped  eonclu* 
sively  towards  the  only  refuge  that  it  had,  or  hoped. 
She  forgot,  just  one  instant,  all  cause  for  holding  her* 
self  aloof.  Ordinarily  there  was  a  certain  reserve  in 
;  Miriam's  demonstrations  of  affection,  in  consonance 
'with  the  delicacy  of  her  friend.  To-day,  she  opened 
her  arms  to  take  Hilda  in. 

^^  Dearest,  darling  Hilda !  "  she  exclaimed.  ^^  It 
gives  me  new  life  to  see  you  1  " 

Hilda  was  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  room. 
When  her  friend  made  a  step  or  two  from  the  door, 
she  put  forth  her  hands  with  an  involuntary  repellent 
gesture,  so  expressive,  that  Miriam  at  once  felt  a  great 
chasm  opening  itself  between  them  two.  They  might 
gaze  at  one  another  from  tlie  opposite  side,  but  with- 
out the  possibility  of  ever  meeting  more ;  or,  at  least, 
since  the  chasm  could  never  be  bridged  over,  they 
must  tread  the  whole  round  of  Eternity  to  meet  on 
the  other  side.  There  was  even  a  terror  in  the  thought 
of  their  meeting  again.  It  was  as  if  Hilda  or  Miriam 
were  dead,  and  could  no  longer  hold  intercourse  witl> 
out  violating  a  spiritual  law. 

Yet,  in  the  wantonness  of  her  despair,  Miriam  made 
one  more  step  towards  the  friend  whom  she  had  lost. 

"  Do  not  come  nearer,  Miriam !  "  said  Hilda. 

Her  look  and  tone  were  those  of  sorrowful  entreaty, 
and  yet  they  expressed  a  kind  of  confidence,  as  if  the 
girl  were  conscious  of  a  safeguard  that  could  not  be 
violated. 

**  What  has  happened  between  us,  Hilda?  "  asked 
Miriam.     "  Are  we  not  friends  ?  " 

**  No,  no !  "  said  Hilda,  shuddering. 

"At  least  we  have  been  friends/'  continued  Miriauu 

TOL.  v; 

Digitized  by  LjOOQIC 


242  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENI. 

"  I  loved  you  dearly  I  I  lore  you  still  I  You  were  to 
me  as  a  younger  sister ;  yes,  dearer  than  sisters  of  the 
same  blood  ;  for  you  and  I  were  so  lonely,  Hilda,  that 
the  whole  world  pressed  us  together  by  its  solitude 
and  strangeness.  Then,  will  you  not  touch  my  hand  ? 
Am  I  not  the  same  as  yesterday?  " 

^^  Alas !  no,  Miriam !  "  said  Hilda. 

"  Yes,  the  same,  —  the  same  for  you,  Hilda,"  re- 
joined her  lost  friend.  "  Were  you  to  touch  my  hand, 
you  would  find  it  as  warm  to  your  grasp  as  ever.  If 
you  were  sick  or  suffering,  I  would  watch  night  and 
day  for  you.  It  is  in  such  simple  offices  thkt  true  af- 
fection shows  itself ;  and  so  I  speak  of  them.  Yet 
now,  Hilda,  your  very  look  seems  to  put  me  beyond 
the  limits  of  hiunan  kind !  " 

"  It  is  not  I,  Miriam,"  said  Hilda ;  "  not  I  that  have 
done  this." 

"  You,  and  you  only,  Hilda,"  replied  Miriam, 
stirred  up  to  make  her  own  cause  good  by  the  repel- 
lent force  which  her  friend  opposed  to  her.  "  I  am  a 
woman,  as  I  was  yesterday ;  endowed  with  the  same 
truth  of  nature,  the  same  warmth  of  heart,  the  same 
genuine  and  earnest  love,  which  you  have  always 
known  in  me.  In  any  regard  that  concerns  yourself, 
I  am  not  changed.  And  believe  me,  Hilda,  when  a 
human  being  has  chosen  a  friend  out  of  all  the  world, 
it  is  only  some  faithlessness  between  themselves,  ren- 
dering true  intercourse  impossible,  that  can  justify 
either  friend  in  severing  the  bond.  Have  I  deceived 
you  ?  Then  cast  me  off  I  Have  I  wronged  you  per- 
sonally ?  Then  forgive  me,  if  you  can.  But,  have  I 
sinned  against  God  and  man,  and  deeply  sinned? 
Then  be  more  my  friend  than  ever,  for  I  need  you 
more." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM  AND  HILDA.  2i3 

**  Do  not  bewilder  me  thus,  Miriam  I "  exclaimed 
Hilda,  who  had  not  forborne  to  express,  by  look  and 
gesture,  the  anguish  which  this  interview  inflicted  on 
her.  *'  If  I  were  one  of  God's  angels,  with  a  nature 
incapable  of  stain,  and  garments  that  never  could  be 
spotted,  I  would  keep  ever  at  your  side,  and  try  to 
lead  you  upward.  But  I  am  a  poor,  lonely  girl,  whom 
God  has  set  here  in  an  evil  world,  and  given  her  only 
a  white  robe,  and  bid  her  wear  it  back  to  Him,  as 
white  as  when  she  put  it  on.  Your  powerful  magnet- 
ism would  be  too  much  for  me.  The  pure,  white  at- 
mosphere, in  which  I  try  to  discern  what  things  are 
good  and  true,  would  be  discolored.  And,  therefore, 
Miriam,  before  it  is  too  late,  I  mean  to  put  faitii  in 
this  awful  heart-quake,  which  warns  me  henceforth  to 
avoid  you/' 

"  Ah,  this  is  hard !  Ah,  this  is  terrible !  "  mur- 
mured Miriam,  dropping  her  forehead  in  her  handsc 
In  a  moment  or  two  she  looked  up  again,  as  pale  as 
death,  but  with  a  composed  countenance :  ^^  I  always 
said,  Hilda,  that  you  were  merciless ;  for  I  had  a  per- 
ception of  it,  even  while  you  loved  me  best.  You 
have  no  sin,  nor  any  conception  of  what  it  is;  and 
therefore  you  are  so  terribly  severe !  As  an  angel, 
you  are  not  amiss ;  but,  as  a  human  creature,  and  a 
woman  among  earthly  men  and  women,  you  need  a  sin 
to  soften  you." 

**  God  forgive  me,"  said  Hilda,  *'  if  I  have  said  a 
needlessly  cruel  word ! " 

"  Let  it  pass,"  answered  Miriam  ;  **  I,  whose  heart 
it  has  smitten  upon,  forgive  you.  And  tell  me,  before 
we  part  forever,  what  have  you  seen  or  known  of  me, 
smce  we  last  met  ?  " 

"'  A  terrible  thing,  Miriam,"  said  Hilda,  growing 
paler  than  before. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


244  ROkANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

"  Do  yoii  see  it  written  in  my  face,  or  painted  in 
my  eyes  ^ "  inquired  Miriam,  her  trouble  seeking  re- 
lief in  a  half-frenzied  raillery.  "  I  would  fain  know 
how  it  is  that  Providence,  or  fate,  brings  eye-witnesses 
to  watch  us,  when  we  fancy  ourselves  acting  in  the 
remotest  privacy.  Did  all  Rome  see  it,  then  ?  Or,  at 
least,  our  merry  company  of  artists  ?  Or  is  it  some 
blood-stain  on  me,  or  death-scent  in  my  garments? 
They  say  that  monstrous  deformities  sprout  out  of 
fiends,  who  once  were  lovely  angels.  Do  you  perceive 
such  in  me  already  ?  Tell  me,  by  our  past  friendship, 
Hilda,  all  you  know." 

Thus  adjured,  and  frightened  by  the  wild  emotion 
which  Miriam  could  not  suppress,  Hilda  strove  to  tell 
what  she  had  witnessed. 

"  After  the  rest  of  the  party  had  passed  on,  I  went 
back  to  speak  to  you,"  she  said ;  "  for  there  seemed 
to  be  a  trouble  on  your  mind,  and  I  wished  to  share  it 
with  you,  if  you  could  permit  me.  The  door  of  the 
little  court-yard  was  partly  shut ;  but  I  pushed  it  open, 
and  saw  you  within,  and  Donatello,  and  a  third  person, 
whom  I  had  before  noticed  in  the  shadow  of  a  niche. 
He  approached  you,  Miriam.  You  knelt  to  him !  — 
I  saw  Donatello  spring  upon  him !  I  would  have 
shrieked,  but  my  throat  was  dry.  I  would  have  rushed 
forward,  but  my  limbs  seemed  rooted  to  the  earth. 
It  was  like  a  flash  of  lightning.  A  look  passed  from 
your  eyes  to  Donatello's  —  a  look  "  — 

"  Yes,  Hilda,  yes !  "  exclaimed  Miriam,  with  intense 
eagerness.     "  Do  not  pause  now !     That  look  ?  " 

*'  It  revealed  all  your  heart,  Miriam,"  continued 
Hilda,  covering  her  eyes  as  if  to  shut  out  the  recoUec- 
tion  ;  "  a  look  of  hatred,  triumph,  vengeance,  and,  as 
it  were,  joy  at  some  unhoped-for  relief." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM  AND  HILDA.  245 

•*  Ah !  Donatello  was  right,  then,"  murmured  Miiv 
iam,  who  shook  throughout  all  her  frame.  ^^  My  eyes 
bade  him  do  it !     Go  on,  Hilda." 

**  It  all  passed  so  quickly,  —  all  like  a  glare  of 
lightning,"  said  Hilda,  '^  and  yet  it  seemed  to  me  that 
Donatello  had  paused,  while  one  might  draw  a  breath. 
But  that  look  I  —  Ah,  Miriam,  spare  me.  Need  I  tell 
more?" 

**No  more;  there  needs  no  more,  Hilda,"  replied 
Miriam,  bowing  her  head,  as  if  listening  to  a  sentence 
of  condemnation  from  a  supreme  tribunal.  ^^It  is 
enough!  You  have  satisfied  my  mind  on  a  point 
where  it  was  greatly  disturbed.  Henceforward,  I 
shall  be  quiet.    Thank  you,  Hilda." 

She  was  on  the  point  of  departing,  but  turned  back 
again  from  the  threshold. 

"This  is  a  terrible  secret  to  be  kept  in  a  young 
girFs  bosom,"  she  observed ;  **  what  will  you  do  with 
it,  my  poor  child?  " 

**  Heaven  help  and  guide  me,"  answered  Hilda, 
bursting  into  tears ;  '^  for  the  burden  of  it  crushes  me 
to  the  earth!  It  seems  a  crime  to  know  of  such  a 
thing,  and  to  keep  it  to  myself.  It  knocks  within  my 
heart  continually,  threatening,  imploring,  insisting  to 
be  let  out !  Oh,  my  mother !  —  my  mother !  Were 
she  yet  living,  I  would  travel  over  land  and  sea  to  tell 
her  this  dark  secret,  as  I  told  aU  the  little  troubles  of 
my  infancy.  But  I  am  alone  —  alone !  Miriam,  you 
were  my  dearest,  only  friend.    Advise  me  what  to  do." 

This  was  a  singular  appeal,  no  doubt,  from  the 
stainless  maiden  to  the  guilty  woman,  whom  she  had 
just  banished  from  her  heart  forever.  But  it  bore 
striking  testimony  to  the  impression  which  Miriam's 
natural   uprightness    and    impulsive    generosity  had 


Digitized 


by  Google 


246  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

made  on  the  friend  who  knew  her  best ;  and  it  deeply 
comforted  the  poor  criminal,  by  proving  to  her  that 
the  bond  between  Hilda  and  herself  was  vital  yet. 

As  far  as  she  was  able,  Miriam  at  once  responded 
to  the  girl's  cry  for  help. 

"  If  I  deemed  it  good  for  your  peace  of  mind,"  she 
said,  ^^  to  bear  testimony  against  me  for  this  deed,  in 
the  face  of  all  the  world,  no  consideration  of  myself 
should  weigh  with  me  an  instant.  But  I  believe  that 
you  would  find  no  relief  in  such  a  course.  What  men 
call  justice  lies  chiefly  in  outward  formalities,  and  has 
never  the  close  application  and  fitness  that  would  be 
satisfactory  to  a  soul  like  yours.  I  cannot  be  fairly 
tried  and  judged  before  an  earthly  tribunal ;  and  of 
this,  Hilda,  you  would  perhaps  become  fatally  con- 
scious when  it  was  too  late.  Eoman  justice,  above  all 
things,  is  a  byword.  What  have  you  to  do  with  it  ? 
Leave  all  such  thoughts  aside !  Yet,  Hilda,  I  would 
not  have  you  keep  my  secret  imprisoned  in  your  heart 
if  it  tries  to  leap  out,  and  stings  you,  like  a  wild,  ven- 
omous thing,  when  you  thrust  it  back  again.  Have 
you  no  other  friend,  now  that  you  have  been  forced  to 
give  me  up  ?  " 

"  No  other,"  answered  Hilda,  sadly. 

"  Yes ;  Kenyon  I  "  rejoined  Miriam. 

"  He  cannot  be  my  friend,"  said  Hilda,  "  because  — 
because  —  I  have  fancied  that  he  sought  to  be  some^ 
thing  more." 

"  Fear  nothing ! "  replied  Miriam,  shaking  her  head* 
with  a  strange  smile.  "  This  story  will  frighten  his 
new-born  love  out  of  its  little  life,  if  that  be  what  you 
wish.  Tell  him  the  secret,  then,  and  take  his  wise  and 
honorable  counsel  as  to  what  should  next  be  done,  i 
sknow  not  what  else  to  say." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM  AND  HILDA.  247 

**  1  never  dreamed,"  said  Hilda,  —  "  how  could  you 
flunk  it  ?  —  of  betraying  you  to  justice.  But  I  see  how 
it  is,  Miriam.  I  must  keep  your  secret,  and  die  of  it, 
unless  God  sends  me  some  relief  by  methods  which 
are  now  beyond  my  power  to  imagine.  It  is  very 
dreadful.  Ah !  now  I  understand  how  the  sins  of 
generations  past  have  created  an  atmosphere  of  sin 
for  those  that  follow.  While  there  is  a  single  guilty 
person  in  the  imiverse,  each  innocent  one  must  feel 
his  innocence  tortured  by  that  guilt.  Your  deed,  Mir- 
iam, has  darkened  the  whole  sky !  " 

Poor  Hilda  turned  from  her  unhappy  friend,  and, 
sinking  on  her  knees  in  a  comer  of  the  chamber,  could 
not  be  prevailed  upon  to  utter  another  word.  And 
Miriam,  with  a  long  regard  from  the  threshold,  bade 
farewell  to  this  doves'  nest,  this  one  little  nook  of  pure 
thoughts  and  innocent  enthusiasms,  into  which  she  had 
brought  such  trouble.  Every  crime  destroys  more 
Bidens  than  our  own  I 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XXIV, 

THE  TOWEB  AMONG  THE  APENNINES. 

It  was  in  June  that  the  sculptor,  Kenyon,  arrired 
on  horseback  at  the  gate  of  an  ancient  country-house 
(which,  from  some  of  its  features,  might  almost  bo 
called  a  castle)  situated  in  a  part  of  Tuscany  some- 
what remote  from  the  ordinary  track  of  tourists. 
Thither  we  must  now  accompany  him,  and  endeavor 
fco  make  our  story  flow  onward,  like  a  streamlet,  past 
a  gray  tower  that  rises  on  the  hill-side,  overlooking  a 
spacious  valley,  which  is  set  in  the  grand  framework 
of  the  Apennines. 

The  sculptor  had  left  Bome  with  the  retreating  tide 
of  foreign  residents.  For,  as  summer  approaches,  the 
Niobe  of  Nations  is  made  to  bewail  anew,  and  doubt- 
less with  sincerity,  the  loss  of  that  large  part  of  her 
population,  which  she  derives  from  other  lands,  and 
on  whom  depends  much  of  whatever  remnant  of  pros- 
perity 3he  still  enjoys.  Eome,  at  this  season,  is  per- 
vaded and  overhung  with  atmospheric  terrors,  and 
insulated  within  a  charmed  and  deadly  circle.  The 
crowd  of  wandering  tourists  betake  themselves  to 
Switzerland,  to  the  Rhine,  or,  from  this  central  home 
of  the  world,  to  their  native  homes  in  England  or 
America,  which  they  are  apt  thenceforward  to  look 
upon  as  provincial,  after  once  having  yielded  to  the 
spell  of  the  Eternal  City.  The  artist,  who  contem- 
plates an  indefinite  succession  of  winters  in  this  home 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  TOWER  AMONG  THE  APENNINES.    249 

of  art  (though  his  first  thought  was  merely  to  improve 
himself  by  a  brief  visit),  goes  forth,  in  the  summer 
time,  to  sketch  scenery  and  costume  among  the  Tuscan 
hills,  and  pour,  if  he  can,  the  purple  air  of  Italy  over 
his  canvas.  He  studies  the  old  schools  of  art  in  the 
mountain-towns  where  they  were  bom,  and  where  they 
are  still  to  be  seen  in  the  faded  frescos  of  Giotto  and 
Cimabue,  on  the  walls  of  many  a  church,  or  in  the 
dark  chapels,  in  which  the  sacristan  draws  aside  the 
veil  from  a  treasured  picture  pf  Perugino.  Thence, 
the  happy  painter  goes  to  walk  the  long,  bright  galler- 
ies of  Florence,  or  to  steal  glowing  colors  from  the  mi- 
raculous works,  which  he  finds  in  a  score  of  Venetian 
palaces.  Such  summers  as  these,  spent  amid  whatever 
is  exquisite  in  art,  or  wild  and  picturesque  in  nature, 
may  not  inadequately  repay  him  for  the  chill  neglect 
and  disappointment  through  which  he  has  probably, 
languished,  in  his  Roman  winter.  This  sunny,  shad- 
owy, breezy,  wandering  life,  in  which  he  seeks  for 
beauty  as  his  treasure,  and  gathers  for  his  winter's 
honey  what  is  but  a  passing  fragrance  to  all  other 
men,  is  worth  living  for,  come  afterwards  what  may? 
Even  if  he  die  unrecognized,  the  artist  has  had  his 
share  of  enjoyment  and  success. 

Kenyon  had  seen,  at  a  distance  of  many  miles,  the 
old  villa  or  castle,  towards  which  his  journey  lay,  look- 
ing from  its  height  over  a  broad  expanse  of  valley.  A& 
he  drew  nearer,  however,  it  had  been  hidden  among 
the  inequalities  of  the  hill-side,  until  the  winding  road 
brought  him  almost  to  the  iron  gateway.  The  sculp- 
tor found  this  substantial  barrier  fastened  with  lock 
and  bolt.  There  was  no  bell,  nor  other  instrument  of 
soond ;  and,  after  summoning  the  invisible  garrison 
with  his  voice,  instead  of  a  trumpet,  he  had  leisure  to 
'take  a  glance  at  the  exterior  of  Uie  fortress. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


250  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENl. 

About  thirty  yards  within  the  gateway  rose  a  square 
tower,  lofty  enough  to  be  a  very  prominent  object  in 
the  landscape,  and  more  than  sufficiently  massive  in 
proportion  to  its  height.  Its  antiquity  was  evidently 
such,  that,  in  a  climate  of  more  abundant  moisture, 
the  ivy  would  have  mantled  it  from  head  to  foot  in  a 
garment  that  might,  by  this  time,  have  been  centuries 
old,  though  ever  new.  In  the  dry  Italian  air,  how- 
ever. Nature  had  only  so  far  adopted  this  old  pile  of 
stone-work  as  to  cover  almost  every  hand's-breadth  of 
it  with  close-clinging  lichens  and  yellow  moss;  and 
the  immemorial  growth  of  these  kindly  productions 
rendered  the  general  hue  of  the  tower  soft  and  vener« 
able,  and  took  away  the  aspect  of  nakedness  which 
would  have  made  its  age  drearier  than  now. 

Up  and  down  the  height  of  the  tower  were  scattered 
three  or  four  windows,  die  lower  ones  grated  with  ircm 
bars,  the  upper  ones  vacant  both  of  window -frames 
and  glass.  Besides  these  larger  openings,  there  were 
several  loopholes  and  little  square  apertures,  which 
n^ght  be  supposed  to  light  the  staircase,  that  doubt- 
less climbed  the  interior  towards  the  battlemented  and 
machieolated  summit.  Widi  this  last-mentioned  war- 
like garniture  upon  its  stem  old  head  and  brow,  the 
tower  seemed  evidently  a  stronghold  of  times  long 
past.  Many  a  cross-bowman  had  shot  his  shafts  from 
those  windows  and  loopholes,  and  from  the  vantage- 
height  of  those  gray  battlements ;  many  a  flight  of  ar- 
rows, too,  had  hit  all  round  about  the  embrasures 
above,  or  the  apertures  below,  where  the  helmet  of 
a  defender  had  momentarily  glimmered.  On  festal 
nights,  moreover,  a  hundred  lamps  had  often  gleamed 
afar  over  the  valley,  suspended  from  the  iron  hooka 
that  were  ranged  for  the  purpose  beneath  the  battl^' 
V  ments  and  every  window. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  TOWER  AMONG  THE  APENNINES.    261 

Connected  with  the  tower,  and  extending  behind  it, 
ttiere  seemed  to  be  a  very  spacious  residence,  chiefly 
of  more  modem  date.  It  perhaps  owed  much  of  its 
fresher  appearance,  however,  to  a  coat  of  stucco  and 
yellow  wash,  which  is  a  sort  of  renovation  very  much 
in  vogue  with  the  Italians.  Kenyon  noticed  over  a 
doorway,  in  the  portion  of  t]ie  edifice  immediately  ad- 
jacent to  the  tower,  a  cross,  which,  with  a  bell  sus- 
pended  above  the  roof,  indicated  that  this  was  a  con- 
secrated precinct,  and  the  chapel  of  the  mansion. 

Meanwhile,  the  hot  sun  so  incommoded  the  unshel- 
tered traveller,  that  he  shouted  forth  another  impatient 
siunmons.  Happening,  at  the  same  moment,  to  look 
upward,  he  saw  a  figure  leaning  from  an  embrasure  of 
the  battlements,  and  gazing  down  at  him. 

"Ho,  Signore  Count ! "  cried  the  sculptor,  waving 
his  straw  hat,  for  he  recognized  the  face,  after  a  mo- 
ment's doubt.  "  This  is  a  warm  reception,  truly  I 
Pray  bid  your  porter  let  me  in,  before  the  sun  shriv- 
els me  quite  into  a  cinder." 

^^  I  will  come  myself,"  responded  Donatello,  flinging 
down  his  voice  out  of  the  clouds,  as  it  were ;  '^  old 
Tomaso  and  old  Stella  are  both  asleep,  no  doubt,  and 
the  rest  of  the  people  are  in  the  vineyard.  But  I  have 
expected  you,  and  you  are  welcome  I " 

The  young  Count — as  perhaps  we  had  better  desig- 
nate him  in  his  ancestral  tower  —  vanished  from  the 
battlements ;  and  Kenyon  saw  his  figure  appear  suc- 
cessively at  each  of  the  windows,  as  he  descended. 
On  every  reappearance,  he  turned  his  face  towards 
the  sculptor  and  gave  a  nod  and  smile ;  for  a  kindly 
impulse  prompted  him  thus  to  assure  his  visitor. of  a 
welcome,  after  keeping  him  so  long  at  an  inhospitable 
threshold. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


^262  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

Kenyon,  however  (naturally  and  professionally  exi 
pert  at  reading  the  expression  of  the  human  counte< 
nance),  had  a  vague  sense  that  this  was  not  the  young 
friend  whom  he  had  known  so  familiarly  in  Rome ; 
not  the  sylvan  and  untutored  youth,  whom  Miriam, 
Hilda,  and  himself  had  liked,  laughed  at,  and  sported 
with;  not  the  Donatello  whose  identity  they  had  so 
playfully  mixed  up  with  that  of  the  Faun  of  Prax- 
iteles. 

Finally,  when  his  host  had  emerged  from  a  side 
portal  of  the  mansion,  and  approached  the  gateway, 
the  traveller  still  felt  that  there  was  something  lost, 
or  something  gained  (he  hardly  knew  which),  that  set 
the  Donatello  of  to-day  irreconcilably  at  odds  with 
him  of  yesterday.  His  very  gait  showed  it,  in  a  cer- 
tain gravity,  a  weight  and  measure  of  step,  that  had 
nothing  in  common  with  the  irregular  buoyancy  which 
used  to  distinguish  him.  His  face  was  paler  and  thin- 
ner,  and  the  lips  less  full  and  less  apart. 

**  I  have  looked  for  you  a  long  while,"  said  Dona- 
tello ;  and,  though  his  voice  soimded  differently,  and 
cut  out  its  words  more  sharply  than  had  been  its  wont, 
dtill  there  was  a  smile  shining  on  his  face,  that,  for  the 
moment,  quite  brought  back  the  Faun.  "  I  shall  be 
more  cheerful,  perhaps,  now  that  you  have  come.  It 
is  very  solitary  here." 

"  I  have  come  slowly  along,  often  lingering,  often 
turning  aside,"  replied  Kenyon ;  "  for  I  found  a  great 
deal  to  interest  me  in  the  mediaeval  sculpture  hidden 
away  in  the  churches  hereabouts.  An  artist,  whether 
painter  or  sculptor,  may  be  pardoned  for  loitering 
through  such  a  region.  But  what  a  fine  old  tower! 
Its  tall  front  is  like  a  page  of  black-letter,  taken  from 
the  history  Of  the  Italian  republics." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  TOWER  AMONG  THE  APENNINES.    253 

**  I  know  little  or  nothing  of  its  history,"  said  the 
Count,  glancing  upward  at  the  battlements,  where  he 
had  just  been  standing.  '^  But  I  thank  my  foref athere 
for  building  it  so  high.  I  like  the  windy  summit  bet 
ter  than  the  world  below,  and  spend  much  of  my  time 
there,  nowadays." 

"It  is  a  piiy  you  are  not  a  star-gazer,"  observed 
Kenyon,  also  looking  up.  "  It  is  higher  than  Galileo's 
tower,  which  I  saw,  a  week  or  two  ago,  outside  of  the 
walls  of  Morenoe." 

*'  A  star-gazer?  I  am  one,"  replied  Donatello.  *' I 
sleep  in  the  tower,  and  often  watch  very  late  on  the 
battlements.  There  is  a  dismal  old  staircase  to  climb, 
however,  before  reaching  the  top,  and  a  succession  of 
dismal  chambers,  from  story  to  story.  Some  of  them 
were  prison  chambers  in  times  past,  as  old  Tomaso 
wiU  teU  you." 

The  repugnance  intimated  in  his  tone  at  the  idea  of 
this  gloomy  staircase  and  these  ghostly,  dimly  lighted 
rooms,  reminded  Kenyon  of  the  original  Donatello, 
much  more  than  his  present  custom  of  midnight  vigils 
on  the  battlements. 

"I  shall  be  glad  to  share  your  watch,"  said  the 
guest;  "especially  by  moonlight.  The  prospect  of 
this  broad  valley  must  be  very  fine.  But  I  was  not 
aware,  my  friend,  that  these  were  your  country  habits. 
I  have  fancied  you  in  a  sort  of  Arcadian  life,  tasting 
rich  figs,  and  squeezing  the  juice  out  of  the  sunniest 
grapes,  and  sleeping  soundly  all  night,  after  a  day  of 
simple  pleasures." 

"  I  may  have  known  such  a  life,  when  I  was  young- 
er," answered  the  Count,  gravely.  "  I  am  not  a  boy 
now.  Time  flies  over  us,  but  leaves  its  shadow  bo* 
hind." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


;264  ROMANCE   OF  MONTE  BENL 

I 

The  sculptor  could  not  but  smile  at  the  triteness  of 
the  remark,  which,  nevertheless,  had  a  kind  of  orig- 
inality as  coming  from  Donatello.  He  had  thought  it 
out  from  his  own  experience,  and  perhaps  considered 
himself  as  communicating  a  new  truth  to  mankind. 
^j  They  were  now  advancing  up  the  court-yard ;  and 
the  long  extent  of  the  villa,  with  its  iron-barred  lowet 
windows  and  balconied  upper  ones,  became  visible, 
stretching  back  towards  a  grove  of  trees. 

"  At  some  period  of  your  family  history,"  observed 
Eenyon,  ^'  the  Counts  of  Monte  Beni  must  have  led  a 
patriarchal  life  in  this  vast  house.  A  great-grandsire 
,  and  all  his  descendants  might  find  ample  verge  here, 
and  with  space,  too,  for  each  separate  brood  of  little 
ones  to  play  within  its  own  precincts.  Is  your  present 
household  a  large  one  ?  " 

"  Only  myself,"  answered  Donatello,  "  and  Tomaso, 
who  has  been  butler  since  my  grandfather's  time,  and 
old  Stella,  who  goes  sweeping  and  dusting  about  the 
chambers,  and  Girolamo,  the  cook,  who  has  but  an 
idle  life  of  it.  He  shall  send  you  up  a  chicken  forth- 
with. But,  first  of  all,  I  must  summon  one  of  the 
contadini  from  the  farm-house  yonder,  to  take  your 
horse  to  the  stable." 

Accordingly,  the  young  Count  shouted  amain,  and 
with  such  effect,  that,  after  several  repetitions  of  the 
outcry,  an  old  gray  woman  protruded  her  head  and  a 
broom-handle  from  a  chamber  window  ;  the  venerable 
butler  emerged  from  a  recess  in  the  side  of  the  house, 
where  was  a  well,  or  reservoir,  in  which  he  had  been 
cleansing  a  small  wine-cask ;  and  a  sunburnt  conta* 
dino,  in  his  shirt-sleeves,  showed  himself  on  the  out* 
skirts  of  the  vineyard,  with  some  kind  of  a  farming 
tool  in  his  hand.     Donatello  found  employment  for  all 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   TOWER  AMONG   THE  APENNINES.     265 

these  retainers  in  providing  accomodation  for  his  guest 
and  steed,  and  then  ushered  the  sculptor  into  the  vesti- 
bule of  the  house. 

It  was  a  square  and  lofty  entrance-room,  which,  by 
the  solidity  of  its  construction,  might  have  been  an 
Etruscan  tomb,  being  paved  and  walled  with  heavy 
jblocks  of  stone,  and  vaulted  almost  as  massively  over- 
head.  On  two  sides,  there  were  doors,  opening  into 
long  suites  of  anterooms  and  saloons ;  on  the  third 
side,  a  stone  staircase,*  of  spacious  breadth,  ascending, 
by  dignified  degrees  and  with  wide  resting-places,  to 
another  floor  of  similar  extent.  Through  one  of  the 
doors,  which  was  ajar,  Kenyon  beheld  an  almost  inter- 
minable vista  of  apartments,  opening  one  beyond  the 
other,  and  reminding  him  of  the  hundred  rooms  in 
Blue  Beard's  castle,  or  the  countless  halls  in  some 
palace  of  the  Arabian  Nights. 

It  must  have  been  a  numerous  family,  indeed,  that 
could  ever  have  sufiBced  to  people  with  human  life  so 
large  an  abode  as  this,  and  impart  social  warmth  to 
such  a  wide  world  within  doors.  The  sculptor  con- 
fessed to  himsel/:,  that  Donatello  could  allege  reason 
enough  for  growing  melancholy,  having  only  his  own 
personality  to  vivify  it  all. 

**  How  a  woman's  face  would  brighten  it  up ! "  he 
ejaculated,  not  intending  to  be  overheard. 

But,  glancing  at  Donatello,  he  saw  a  stem  and  sor« 
rowful  look  in  his  eyes,  which  altered  his  youthful 
face  as  if  it  had  seen  thirty  years  of  trouble ;  and,  at 
the  same  moment,  old  Stella  showed  herself  through 
one  of  the  doorways,  as  the  only  representative  of  hei 
Bex  at  Monte  Beni. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XXV, 

SUNSHINB. 

^  Comb,'*  said  the  Count,  "  I  see  you  already  find 
(he  old  house  dismal  So  do  I,  indeed  I  And  yet  it 
was  a  cheerful  place  in  my  boyhood*  But,  you  see,  in 
my  father's  days  (and  the  same  was  true  of  all  my 
endless  line  of  grandfathers,  as  I  have  heard),  there 
used  to  be  uncles,  aunts,  and  all  manner  of  kindred, 
dwelling  together  as  one  family.  They  were  a  merry 
and  kindly  race  of  people,  for  the  most  part,  and  kept 
one  another's  hearts  warm." 

"Two  hearts  might  be  enough  for  warmth,"  ob- 
served the  sculptor,  "  even  in  so  large  a  house  as  this. 
One  solitary  heart,  it  is  true,  may  be  apt  to  shiver  a 
little.  But,  I  trust,  my  friend,  that  the  genial  blood 
of  your  race  still  flows  in  many  veins  besides  your 
own?" 

"  I  am  the  last,"  said  Donatello,  gloomily.  "  They 
have  all  vanished  from  me,  since  my  childhood.  Old 
Tomaso  will  tell  you  that  the  air  of  Monte  Beni  is  not 
so  favorable  to  length  of  days  as  it  used  to  be.  But 
that  is  not  the  secret  of  the  quick  extinction  of  my 
kindred." 

"Then  you  are  aware  of  a  more  satisfactory  rea* 
$pn  ?  "  suggested  Kenyon. 

*'  I  thought  of  one,  the  other  night,  while  I  was  gazt 
ing  at  the  stars,"  answered  Donatello ;  "  but,  pardon 
me,  I  do  not  mean  to  tell  it.     One  cause,  however,  of 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SUNSHINE.  257 

tiie  longer  and  Healthier  life  of  my  forefathers  was, 
that  they  had  many  pleasant  customs,  and  means  of 
making  themselves  glad,  and  their  guests  and  friends 
along  with  them.     Nowadays  we  have  but  one  I  ". 

*^  And  what  is  that  ?  "  asked  the  sculptor, 

^^  You  shall  see !  "  said  his  young  host. 

By  this  time,  he  had  ushered  the  sculptor  into  one 
of  the  numberless  saloons;  and,  calling  for  refresh- 
ment, old  Stella  placed  a  cold  fowl  upon  the  table, 
and  quickly  followed  it  with  a  savory  omelet,  which 
Girolamo  had  lost  no  time  in  preparing.  She  also 
brought  some  cherries,  plums,  and  apricots,  and  a 
plate  full  of  particularly  delicate  figs,  of  last  year's 
growth.  The  butler  showing  his  white  head  at  the 
door,  his  master  beckoned  to  him. 

^^  Tomaso,  bring  some  Simshine !  "  said  he. 

The  readiest  method  of  obeying  this  order,  one 
might  suppose,  would  have  been,  to  fling  wide  the 
green  window-blinds,  and  let  the  glow  of  the  summer 
noon  into  the  carefully  shaded  room.  But,  at  Monte 
Beni,  with  provident  caution  agiainst  the  wintry  days, 
when  idiere  is  little  simshine,  and  the  rainy  ones,  when 
there  is  none,  it  was  the  hereditary  custom  to  keep 
their  Sunshine  stored  away  in  the  cellar.  Old  Tomaso 
quickly  produced  some  of  it  in  a  small,  straw-covered 
flask,  out  of  which  he  extracted  the  cork,  and  inserted 
a  little  cotton  wool,  to  absorb  the  olive-oil  that  kept 
the  precious  liquid  from  the  air. 

"  This  is  a  wine,"  observed  the  Coimt,  "  the  secret 
of  making  which  has  been  kept  in  pur  family  for  cen- 
turies upon  centuries  ;  nor  would  it  avail  any  man  to 
steal  the  secret,  unless  he  could  also  steal  the  vineyard, 
in  which  alone  the  Monte  Beni  grape  can  be  produced, 
rhere.is  little  else  left  m3,  save  that  p^tch  of  vines, 

.  VOU  VL 


Digitized 


by  Google 


268  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

Taste  some  of  their  juice,  and  tell  me  whether  it  i» 
worthy  to  be  called  Sunshine !  for  that  is  its  name." 

"  A  glorious  name,  too !  "  cried  the  sculptor. 

"  Taste  it,"  said  Donatello,  filling  his  friend's  glass, 
and  poinding  likewise  a  little  into  his  own.  "  But  first 
smell  its  fragrance  ;  for  the  wine  is  very  lavish  of  it, 
and  will  scatter  it  all  abroad." 

"  Ah,  how  exquisite !  "  said  Kenyon.  "  No  other 
wine  has  a  bouquet  like  this.  The  flavor  must  be  rare, 
indeed,  if  it  fulfil  the  promise  of  this  fragrance,  which 
is  like  the  airy  sweetness  of  youthful  hopes,  that  no 
realities  will  ever  satisfy  !  " 

This  invaluable  liquor  was  of  a  pale  golden  hue, 
like  other  of  the  rarest  Italian  wines,  and,  if  carelessly 
and  irreligiously  quaffed,  might  have  been  mistaken 
for  a  very  fine  sort  of  champagne.  It  was  not,  how- 
ever, an  effervescing  wine,  although  its  delicate  piq- 
uancy produced  a  somewhat  similar  effect  upon  the 
palate.  Sipping,  the  guest  longed  to  sip  again ;  but  the 
wine  demanded  so  deliberate  a  pause,  in  order  to  de- 
tect the  hidden  peculiarities  and  subtile  exquisiteness 
of  its  flavor,  that  to  drink  it  was  really  more  a  moral 
than  a  physical  enjoyment.  There  was  a  deliciousness 
in  it  that  eluded  analysis,  and  —  like  whatever  else  is 
superlatively  good  —  was  perhaps  better  appreciated 
in  the  memory  than  by  present  consciousness. 

One  of  its  most  ethereal  charms  lay  in  the  transitory 
life  of  the  wine's  richest  qualities ;  for,  while  it  re- 
quired a  certain  leisure  and  delay,  yet,  if  you  lingered 
too  long  upon  the  draught,  it  became  disenchanted 
both  of  its  fragrance  and  its  flavor. 

The  lustre  should  not  be  forgotten,  among  the  other 
admirable  endowments  of  the  Monte  Beni  wine ;  for, 
fts  it  stood  in  Kenyon's  glass,  a  little  circle  of  light 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SUNSHINE,  259 

glowed  on  the  table  round  about  it,  as  if  it  were  really 
so  much  golden  sunshine. 

^^  I  feel  myself  a  better  man  for  that  ethereal  pota- 
tion/' observed  the  sculptor.  "  The  finest  Orvieto,  or 
that  famous  wine,  the  Est  Est  Est  of  Montefiascone, 
is  vulgar  in  comparison.  This  is  surely  the  wine  of 
the  Golden  Age,  such  as  Bacchus  himself  first  taught 
mankind  to  press  from  the  choicest  of  his  grapes.  My 
dear  Count,  why  is  it  not  illustrious  ?  The  pale,  liquid 
gold,  in  every  such  flask  as  that,  might  be  solidified 
into  golden  scudi,  and  would  quickly  make  you  a  mil- 
lionnaire !  " 

Tomaso,  the  old  butler,  who  was  standfng  by  the 
table,  and  enjoying  the  praises  of  the  wine  quite  as 
much  as  if  bestowed  upon  himself,  made  answer,  — 

**  We  have  a  tradition,  signore,"  said  he,  "  that  this 
rare  wine  of  our  vineyard  would  lose  all  its  wonder- 
ful qualities,  if  any  of  it  were  sent  to  market.  The 
Counts  of  Monte  Beni  have  never  parted  with  a  single 
flask  of  it  for  gold.  At  their  banquets,  in  the  olden 
time,  they  have  entertained  princes,  cardinals,  and 
once  an  emperor,  and  once  a  pope,  with  this  delicious 
wine,  and  always,  even  to  this  day,  it  has  been  their 
custom  to  let  it  flow  freely,  when  those  whom  they 
love  and  honor  sit  at  the  board.  Biit  the  gi'and  duke 
himself  could  not  drink  that  wine,  except  it  were  un-* 
der  this  very  roof  !  " 

"  What  you  tell  me,  my  good  friend,"  replied  Ken- 
yon,  "  makes  me  venerate  the  Sunshine  of  Monte  Beni 
even  more  abundantly  than  before.  As  I  understand 
you,  it  is  a  sort  of  consecrated  juice,  and  symbolizes 
the  holy  virtues  of  hospitality  and  social  kindness  ?  " 

**  Why,  partly  so,  Signore,"  said  the  old  butler,  with 
a  shrewd  twinkle  in  his  eye ;  ^^  but,  to  speak  out  all 


Digitized 


by  Google 


260  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

the  truth,  there  is  another  excellent  reason  why  neither 
a  cask  nor  a  flask  of  our  precious  vintage  should  ever 
be  sent  to  market.  The  wine,  Signore,  is  so  fond  of 
its  native  home,  that  a  transportation  of  even  a  few 
miles  turns  it  quite  sour.  And  yet  it  is  a  wine  that 
keeps  well  in  the  cellar,  underneath  this  floor,  and 
gathers  fragrance,  flavor,  and  brightness,  in  its  dark 
du^geon•  That  very  flask  of  Sunshine,  now,  has  kept 
itself  for  you,  sir  guest  (as  a  maid  reserves  her  sweet- 
ness till  her  lover  comes  for  it),  ever  since  a  merry 
vintage-time,  when  the  Signore  Count  here  was  a 
boy!" 

**You  Inust  not  wait  for  Tomaso  to  end  his  dis- 
course  about  the  wine,  before  drinking  off  your  glass," 
observed  Donatello.  "When  once  the  flask  is  un- 
corked, its  finest  qualities  lose  little  time  in  making 
their  escape.  I  doubt  whether  your  last  sip  will  be 
quite  so  delicious  as  you  found  the  first." 

And,  in  truth,  the  sculptor  fancied  that  the  Sun- 
shine became  almost  imperceptibly  clouded,  as  he  ap- 
proached the  bottom  of  the  flask.  The  effect  of  the 
wine,  however,  was  a  gentle  exhilaration,  which  did 
not  so  speedily  pass  away. 

Being  thus  refreshed,  Kenyon  looked  around  him 
at  the  antique  saloon  in  which  they  sat.  It  was  con- 
structed in  a  most  ponderous  style,  with  a  stone  floor, 
on  which  heavy  pilasters  were  planted  against  the 
wall,  supporting  arches  that  crossed, one  another  in 
the  vaulted  ceiling.  The  upright  walls,  as  well  as  the 
compartments  of  the  roof,  were  completely  covered 
with  frescos,  which  doubtless  had  been  brilliant  when 
first  executed,  and  perhaps  for  generations  afterwarda 
The  designs  were  of  a  festive  and  joyous  character, 
representing  Arcadian  scenes,  where  nymphs,  faun% 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SUNSHINE.  261 

and  saiyrs  disported  themselves  among  mortal  youths 
and  maidens  ;  and  Pan,  and  the  god  of  wine,  and  he 
of  sunshine  and  music,  disdained  not  to  brighten  some 

'  sylvan  merry-making  witli  the  scarcely  veiled  glory  of 
their  presence.  A  wreath  of  dancing  figures,  in  ad* 
mirable  variety  of  shape  and  motion,  was  festooned 
quite  round  the  cornice  of  the  room. 

In  its  first  splendor,  the  saloon  must  have  presented 

,  an  aspect  both  gorgeous  and  enlivening;  for  it  invested 
some  of  the  cheerf  ullest  ideas  and  emotions  of  which 
the  human  mind  is  susceptible  with  the  external  real- 
ity of  beautiful  form,  and  rich,  harmonious  glow  and 
variety  of  color.  But  the  frescos  were  now  very  an- 
cient. They  had  been  rubbed  and  scrubbed  by  old 
Stella  and  many  a  predecessor,  and  had  been  defaced 
in  one  spot,  and  retouched  in  another,  and  had  peeled 
from  the  wall  in  patches,  and  had  hidden  some  of 
their  brightest  portions  under  dreary  dust,  till  the 
joyousness  haA  quite  vanished  out  of  them  all.  It  was 
often  difficult  to  puzzle  out  the  design;  and  even 
where  it  was  more  readily  intelligible,  the  figures 
showed  like  the  ghosts  of  dead  and  buried  joys, — 
the  closer  their  resemblance  to  the  happy  past,  the 
gloomier  now.  For  it  is  thus,  that  with  only  an  in- 
considerable change,  the  gladdest  objects  and  exist- 
ences become  the  saddest;  hope  fading  into  disappoint- 
ment; joy  darkening  into  grief,  and  festal  splendor 
into  funereal  duskiness;  and  all  evolving,  as  their 
moral,  a  grim  identity  between  gay  things  and  sorrow- 
ful ones.  Only  give  them  a  little  time,  and  they  turn 
out  to  be  just  alike  I 

^  There  has  been  much  festivity  in  this  saloon,  if  I 
may  judge  by  the  character  of  its  frescos,"  remarked 
Cenyon,  whose  spirits  were  still .  upheld  by  the .  mild 


Digitized 


by  Google 


262  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

potency  of  the  Monte  Beni  wine.  "  Your  forefathers^ 
my  dear  Count,  must  have  been  joyous  fellows,  keep- 
ing up  the  vintage  merriment  throughout  the  year. 
It  does  me  good  to  think  of  them  gladdening  the 
hearts  of  men  and  women,  with  their  wine  of  Sun« 
shine,  even  in  the  Iron  Age,  as  Pan  and  Bacchus, 
whom  we  see  yonder,  did  in  the  Golden  one  I  " 

"  Yes ;  there  have  been  merry  times  in  the  banquet- 
hall  of  Monte  Beni,  even  within  my  own  remembrance,'^ 
replied  Donatello,  looking  gravely  at  the  painticd  walls. 
^^It  was  meant  for  mirth,  as  you  see;  and  when  I 
brought  my  own  cheerfulness  into  the  saloon,  these 
frescos  looked  cheerful  too.  But,  methinks,  they  have 
all  faded  since  I  saw  them  last." 

"  It  would  be  a  good  idea,"  said  the  sculptor,  falling 
into  his  companion's  vein,  and  helping  him  out  with 
an  illustration  which  Donatello  himself  could  not  have 
put  into  shape,  ^^  to  convert  this  saloon  into  a  chapel ; 
and  when  the  priest  tells  his  hearers  of*  the  instability 
of  earthly  joys,  and  would  show  how  drearily  they  van- 
ish, he  may  point  to  these  pictures,  that  were  so  joy- 
ous and  are  so  dismal.  He  could  not  illustrate  his 
theme  so  aptly  in  any  other  way." 

**True,  indeed,"  answered  the  Count,  his  former 
simplicity  strangely  mixing  itself  up  with  an  experi- 
ence that  had  changed  him ;  "  and  yonder,  where  the 
minstrels  used  to  stand,  the  altar  shall  be  placed.  A 
sinful  man  might  do  all  the  more  effective  penance  in 
this  old  banquet-halL" 

"  But  I  should  regret  to  have  suggested  so  ungenial 
a  transformation  in  your  hospitable  saloon,"  continued 
Kenyon,  duly  noting  the  change  in  Donatello's  charac« 
teristics.  "  You  startle  me,  my  friend,  by  so  ascetic  a 
design  I    It  would  hardly  have  entered  your  head,  when 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SUNSHINE.  263 

we  first  met.  Pray  do  not,  —  if  I  may  take  the  free- 
dom of  a  somewhat  elder  man  to  advise  you,"  added 
he,  smiling,  —  "pray  do  not,  under  a  notion  of  im- 
provement, take  upon  yourself  to  be  sombre,  thought- 
ful, and  penitential,  like  all  the  rest  of  us." 

Donatello  made  no  answer,  but  sat  awhile,  appear* 
ing  to  follow  with  his  eyes  one  of  the  figures,  which 
was  repeated  many  times  over  in  the  groups  upon  the 
walls  and  ceiling.  It  formed  the  principal  link  of  an 
allegory,  by  which  (as  is  often  the  case  in  such  picto- 
rial designs)  the  whole  series  of  frescos  were  boimd 
together,  but  which  it  would  be  impossible,  or,  at  least, 
very  wearisome,  to  unravel.  The  sculptor's  eyes  took 
.  a  similar  direction,  and  soon  began  to  trace  through 
the  vicissitudes,  —  once  gay,  now  sombre,  —  in  which 
the  old  artist  had  involved  it,  the  same  individual  fig- 
ure. He  fancied  a  resemblance  in  it  to  Donatello 
himself ;  and  it  put  him  in  mind  of  one  of  the  pur- 
poses with  which  he  had  come  to  Monte  Beni. 

"  My  dear  Count,"  said  he,  "  I  have  a  proposal  to 
make.  You  must  let  me  employ  a  little  of  my  leisure 
in  modelling  your  bust.  You  remember  what  a  strik- 
ing resemblance  we  all  of  us — Hilda,  Miriam,  and  I  — 
found  between  your  features  and  those  of  the  Faun  of 
Praxiteles.  Then,  it  seemed  an  identity ;  but  now  that 
I  know  your  face  better,  the  likeness  is  far  less  appar- 
ent. Your  head  in  marble  would  be  a  treasure  to  me. 
Shall  I  have  it?" 

"I  have  a  weakness  which  I  fear  I  cannot  over- 
come," replied  the  Count,  turning  away  his  face.  "  It 
troubles  me  to  be  looked  at  steadfastly." 

"  I  have  observed  it  since  we  have  been  sitting  here, 
though  never  before,"  rejoined  the  sculptor.  "  It  is 
a  kind  of  nervousness,  I  apprehend,  which  you  caught 


Digitized 


by  Google 


'264  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

in  the  Roman  air,  and  which  grows  upon  you,  in  your 
solitary  life.  It  need  be  no  hindrance  to  my  taking 
your  bust ;  for  I  will  catch  the  likeness  and  expression 
by  side  glimpses,  which  (if  portrait-painters  and  bust- 
makers  did  but  know  it)  always  bring  home  richer  re- 
sults than  a  broad  stare." 

"You  may  take  me  if  you  have  the  power,"  said 
Donatello  ;  but,  even  as  he  spoke,  he  turned  away  his 
face;  "and  if  you  can  see  what  makes  me  shrink  from 
you,  you  are  welcome  to  put  it  in  the  bust.  It  is  not 
my  iwdll,  but  my  necessity,  to  avoid  men's  eyes.  Only," 
he  added,  with  a  smile  which  made  Kenyon  doubt 
whether  he  might  not  as  well  copy  the  Faun  as  model 
a  new  bust,  —  "  only,  you  know,  you  must  not  insist 
on  my  uncovering  these  ears  of  mine !  " 

"  Nay  ;  I  never  should  dream  of  such  a  thing,"  an- 
swered the  sculptor,  laughing,  as  the  young  Count 
shook  his  clustering  curls.  "  I  could  not  hope  to  per- 
suade you,  remembering  how  Miriam  once  failed !  " 

Nothing  is  more  unaccountable  than  the  spell  that 
often  lurks  in  a  spoken  word.  A  thought  may  be  pres- 
ent to  the  mind,  so  distinctly  that  no  uttet^nce  could 
make  it  more  so ;  and  two  minds  may  be  conscious  of 
the  same  thought,  in  which  one  or  both  take  the  pro- 
foundest  interest ;  but  as  long  as  it  remains  unspoken, 
their  familiar  talk  flows  quietly  over  the  hidden  idea, 
as  a  rivulet  may  sparkle  and  dimple  over  something 
sunken  in  its  bed.  But,  speak  the  word;  and  it  is 
like  bringing  up  a  drowned  body  out  of  the  deepest 
pool  of  the  rivulet,  which  has  been  aware  of  the  hoiv 
rible  secret  all  along,  in  spite  of  its  smiling  surface. 

And  even  so,  when  Kenyon  chanced  to  make  a  dis^ 
tinct  reference  to  Donatello's  relations  with  Miriam 
(though  the  subject  was  already  in  both  their  minds). 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SUNSHINE.  266 

a  ghastly  emotion  rose  up  out  of  the  depths  of  the 
young  Count's  heart.  He  trembled  either  with  anger 
or  terror,  and  glared  at  the  sculptor  with  wild  eyes, 
like  a  wolf  that  meets  you  in  the  forest,  and  hesitates 
whether  to  flee  or  turn  to  bay.  But,  as  Kenyon  still 
looked  calmly  at  him,  his  aspect  gradually  became  less 
disturbed,  though  far  from  resuming  its  former  quie- 
tude. 

^^  You  have  spoken  her  name,"  said  he,  at  last,  in  an 
altered  and  tremulous  tone ;  ^^  tell  me,  now,  all  that 
you  know  of  her." 

"  I  scarcely  think  that  I  have  any  later  intelligence 
than  yourself,"  answered  Kenyon ;  ^^  Miriam  left  Rome 
at  about  the  time  of  your  own  departure.  Within  a 
day  or  two  after  our  last  meeting  at  the  Church  of  the 
Capuchins,  I  called  at  her  studio  and  found  it  vacant. 
Whither  she  has  gone,  I  cannot  tell." 

Donatello  asked  no  further  questions. 

They  rose  from  table,  and  strolled  together  about  the 
premises,  whiling  away  the  afternoon  with  brief  inter- 
vals of  unsatisfactory  conversation,  and  many  shadowy 
silences.  The  sculptor  had  a  perception  of  change  in 
his  companion, — possibly  of  growth  and  development, 
but  certainly  of  change, — which  saddened  him,  be- 
cause it  took  away  much  of  the  simple  grace  that  was 
the  best  of  Donacello's  peculiarities. . 

Kenyon  betook  himself  to  repose  that  night  in  a 
grim,  old,  vaulted  apartment,  which,  in  the  lapse  of 
five  or  six  centuries,  had  probably  been  the  birth,  bri- 
dal, and  death  chamber  of  a  great  many  generations  of 
the  Monte  Beni  family.  He  was  aroused,  soon  after 
daylight,  by  the  clamor  of  a  tribe  of  beggars  who  had 
taken  their  stand  in  a  little  rustic  lane  that  crept  be- 
side that  portion  of  the  villa,  and  were  addressing  theix 


Digitized 


by  Google 


266  ROMANCE  aP  MONTE  BENL 

petitions  to  the  open  windows.  By  and  by,  they  apt 
peared  to  have  received  ahns,  and  took  their  depar- 
ture. 

^^Some  charitable  Christian  has  sent  those  vaga- 
bonds away,"  thought  the  sculptor,  as  he  resumed  his 
interrupted  nap ;  ^^  who  could  it  be  ?  Donatello  has 
his  own  rooms  in  the  tower ;  Stella,  Tomaso,  and  the 
cook  are  a  world's  width  off;  and  I  fancied  myself  the 
only  inhabitant  in  this  part  of  the  house." 

In  the  breadth  and  space  which  so  delightfully  char- 
acterize an  Italian  villa,  a  dozen  guests  might  have 
had  each  his  suite  of  apartments  without  infringing 
upon  one  another's  ample  precincts.  But,  so  far  as 
Kenyon  knew,  he  was  the  only  visitor  beneath  Dona* 
liello's  widely  extended  roof. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

THE   PEDIGREE   OF   MONTE  BENI. 

From  the  old  butler,  whom  he  found  to  be  a  very 
gracious  and  affable  personage,  Kenyon  soon  learned 
many  curious  particulars  about  the  family  history  and 
hereditary  peculiarities  of  the  Counts  of  Monte  Beni. 
There  was  a  pedigree,  the  later  portion  of  which  — 
that  is  to  say,  for  a  little  more  than  a  thousand  years 
—  a  genealogist  would  have  found  delight  in  tracing 
out,  link  by  link,  and  authenticating  by  records  and 
documentary  evidences.  It  would  have  been  as  diffi- 
cult, however,  to  follow  up  the  stream  of  Donatello's 
ancestry  to  its  dim  source,  as  travellers  have  found  it 
to  reach  the  mysterious  fountains  of  the  Nile.  And, 
far  beyond  the  region  of  definite  and  demonstrable 
fact,  a  romancer  might  have  strayed  into  a  region  of 
old  poetry,  where  the  rich  soil,  so  long  uncultivated 
and  untrodden,  had  lapsed  into  nearly  its  primeval 
state  of  wilderness.  Among  those  antique  paths,  now 
overgrown  with  tangled  and  riotous  vegetation,  the 
wanderer  must  needs  follow  his  own  guidance,  and  ar. 
rive  nowhither  at  last. 

The  race  of  Monte  Beni,  beyond  a  doubt,  was  one 
of  the  oldest  in  Italy,  where  f anulies  appear  to  survive 
at  least,  if  not  to  flourish,  on  their  half-decayed  roots, 
oftener  than  in  England  or  France.  It  came  down  in 
a  broad  track  from  the  Middle  Ages ;  but,  at  epochs 
anterior  to  those,  it  was  distinctly  visible  in  the  gloom 


Digitized 


by  Google 


268  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

of  the  period  before  chivalry  put  forth  its  flower ;  and 
further  still,  we  are  almost  afraid  to  say,  it  was  seen, 
though  with  a  fainter  and  wavering  course^  in  the  early 
mom  of  Christendom,  when  the  Roman  £mpire  had 
hardly  begun  to  show  symptoms  of  decline.  At  that 
venerable  distance,  the  heralds  gave  up  the  lineage  in 
despair. 

But  where  written  record  left  the  genealogy  of 
Monte  Beni,  tradition  took  it  up,  and  carried  it  with- 
out dread  or  shame  beyond  the  Imperial  ages  into  the 
times  of  the  Roman  republic;  beyond  those,  again, 
into  the  epoch  of  kingly  rule.  Nor  even  so  remotely 
among  the  mossy  centuries  did  it  pause,  but  strayed 
onward  into  that  gray  antiquity  of  which  there  is  no 
token  left,  save  its  cavernous  tombs,  and  a  few  bronzes^ 
and  some  quaintly  wrought  ornaments  of  gold,  and 
gems  with  mystic  figures  and  inscriptions.  There,  or 
thereabouts,  the  line  was  supposed  to  have  had  its  ori- 
gin in  the  sylvan  life  of  Etruria,  while  Italy  was  yet 
guiltless  of  Rome. 

Of  course,  as  we  regret  to  say,  the  earlier  and  very 
much  the  larger  portion  of  this  respectable  descent  — 
and  the  same  is  true  of  many  briefer  pedigrees — must 
be  looked  upon  a^  altogether  mythical.  Still,  it  threw 
a  romantic  interest  around  the  unquestionable  antiq- 
uity of  the  Monte  Beni  family,  and  over  that  tract 
of  their  own  vines  and  fig-trees,  beneath  the  shade  of 
which  they  had  unquestionably  dwelt  for  immemorial 
ages.  And  there  they  had  laid  the  foundations  of 
their  tower,  so  long  ago  that  one  half  of  its  height 
was  said  to  be  sunken  under  the  surface  and  to  hide 
subterranean  chambers  wnich  once  were  cheerful  with 
the  olden  sunshine. 

One  story,  or  myth,  that  had  mixed  itself  up  with 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  PEDIGREE  OF  MONTE  BENT.       269 

iheir  mouldy  genealogy,  interested  the  sculptor  by  its 
wild,  and  perhaps  grotesque,  yet  not  unf ascinating  pe- 
culiarity. He  caught  at  it  the  more  eagerly,  as  it 
afforded  a  shadowy  and  whimsical  semblance  of  ex- 
planation for  the  likeness  which  he,  with  Miriam  and 
Hilda,  had  seen  or  fancied,  between  Donatello  and  the 
Faun  of  Praxiteles. 

The  Monte  Beni  family,  as  this  legend  averred, 
drew  their  origin  from  the  Pelasgic  race,  who  peopled 
Italy  in  times  that  may  be  called  prehistoric.  It  was 
the  same  noble  breed  of  men,  of  Asiatic  birth,  that 
settled  in  Greece ;  the  same  happy  and  poetic  kindred 
who  dwelt  in  Arcadia,  and  —  whether  they  ever  lived 
such  life  or  not —  enriched  the  world  with  dreams,  at 
least,  and  fables,  lovely,  if  unsubstantial,  of  a  Golden 
Age.  In  those  delicious  times,  when  deities  and  demi* 
gods  appeared  f  aniiliarly  on  earth,  mingling  with  its 
inhabitants  as  friend  with  friend,  —  when  nymphs, 
satyrs,  and  the  whole  train  of  classic  faith  or  fable 
hardly  took  pains  to  hide  themselves  in  the  primeval 
woods,  —  at  that  auspicious  period  the  lineage  of 
Monte  Beni  had  its  rise.  Its  progenitor  was  a  being 
not  altogether  human,  yet  partaking  so  largely  of  the 
gentlest  human  qualities,  as  to  be  .neither  awful  nor 
shocking  to  the  imagination.  A  sylvan  creature,  na- 
tive among  the  woods,  had  loved  a  mortal  maiden, 
and  —  perhaps  by  kindness,  and  the  subtile  courtesies 
which  love  might  teach  to  his  simplicity,  or  possibly 
by  a  ruder  wooing  —  had  won  her  to  his  haunts.  In 
due  time,  he  gained  her  womanly  affection  ;  and,  mak- 
ing their  bridal  bower,  for  aught  we  know,  in  the  hol- 
low of  a  great  tree,  the  pair  spent  a  happy  wedded  life 
in  that  ancient  neighborhood  where  now  stood  Donar 
(ello's  tower. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


270  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

From  iMs  union  sprang  a  vigorous  progeny  that 
took  its  place  unquestioned  among  human  families. 
In  that  age,  however,  and  long  afterwards,  it  showed 
the  ineffaceable  lineaments  of  its  wild  paternity:  it 
was  a  pleasant  and  kindly  race  of  men,  but  capable  of 
savage  fierceness,  and  never  quite  restrainable  within 
the  trammels  of  social  law.  They  were  strong,  active, 
genial,  cheerful  as  the  sunshine,  passionate  as  the  tor 
nado.  Their  lives  were  rendered  blissful  by  an  un- 
sought harmony  with  nature. 

But,  as  centuries  passed  away,  the  Faun's  wild 
blood  had  necessarily  been  attempered  with  constant 
intermixtures  from  the  more  ordinary  streams  of  hu- 
man life.  It  lost  many  of  its  original  qualities,  and 
served,  for  the  most  part,  only  to  bestow  an  uncon- 
querable vigor,  which  kept  the  family  from  extinc- 
tion, and  enabled  them  to  make  their  own  part  good 
throughout  the  perils  and  rude  emergencies  of  their 
interminable  descent.  In  the  constant  wars  with 
which  Italy  was  plagued,  by  the  dissensions  of  her 
petty  states  and  republics,  there  was  a  demand  for 
native  hardihood. 

The  successive  members  of  the  Monte  Beni  family 
showed  valor  and  policy  enough,  at  all  events,  to  keep 
their  hereditary  possessions  out  of  the  clutch  of  grasp* 
ing  neighbors,  and  probably  differed  very  little  from 
the  other  feudal  barons  with  whom  they  fought  and 
feasted.  Such  a  degree  of  conformity  with  the  man* 
ners  of  the  generations,  through  which  it  survived^ 
must  have  been  essential  to  the  prolonged  continu- 
ance of  the  race. 

It  is  well  known,  however,  that  any  hereditary  pecul* 
iarity  —  as  a  supernumerary  finger,  or  an  anomalous 
shape  of  feature,  like  the  Austrian  lip  —  is  wont  to 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  PEDIGREE  OF  MONTE  BENL        271 

show  itself  in  a  family  after  a  very  wayward  fashion. 
It  skips  at  its  own  pleasure  along  the  line,  and,  latent 
for  half  a  century  or  so,  crops  out  again  in  a  great- 
grandson.  And  thus,  it  was  said,  from  a  period  be- 
yond memory  or  record,  there  had  ever  and  anon  been 
a  descendant  of  the  Monte  Benis  bearing  nearly  all 
the  characteristics  that  were  attributed  to  the  original 
founder  of  the  race.  Some  traditions  even  went  so 
far  as  to  enumerate  the  ears,  covered  with  a  delicate 
fur,  and  shaped  like  a  pointed  leaf,  among  the  proofs 
of  authentic  descent  which  were  seen  in  these  favored 
individuals.  We  appreciate  the  beauty  of  such  tokens 
of  a  nearer  kindred  to  the  great  family  of  nature  than 
other  mortals  bear  ;  but  it  would  be  idle  to  ask  credit 
for  a  statement  which  might  be  deemed  to  partake  so 
largely  of  the  grotesque. 

But  it  was  indisputable  that,  once  in  a  century,  or 
oftener,  a  son  of  Monte  Beni  gathered  into  himself 
the  scattered  qualities  of  his  race,  and  reproduced  the 
character  that  had  been  assigned  to  it  from  imme- 
morial times.  Beautiful,  strong,  brave,  kindly,  sincere, 
of  honest  impulses,  and  endowed  with  simple  tastes 
and  the  love  of  homely  pleasures,  he  was  believed  to 
possess  gifts  by  which  he  could  associate  himself  with 
the  wild  things  of  the  forests,  and  with  the  fowls  of 
the  air,  and  could  feel  a  sympathy  even  with  the  trees, 
among  which  it  was  his  joy  to  dwell.  On  the  other 
hand,  there  were  deficiencies  both  of  intellect  and 
heart,  and  especially,  as  it  seemed,  in  the  development 
of  the  higher  portion  of  man's  nature.  These  defects 
were  less  perceptible  in  early  youth,  but  showed  them- 
selves more  strongly  with  advancing  age,  when,  as  the 
animal  spirits  settled  down  upon  a  lower  level,  the 
representative  of  the  Monte  Benis  was  apt  to  become 


Digitized 


by  Google 


272  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

sensual,  addicted  to  gross  pleasures,  heavy,  unsympa« 
thizing,  and  insulated  within  the  narrow  limits  of  a 
surlj  selfishness. 

A  similar  change,  indeed<»  is  no  more  than  what  we 
constantly  observe  to  take  place  in  persons  who  are 
not  careful  to  substitute  other  graces  for  those  which 
they  inevitably  lose  along  with  the  quick  sensibility 
and  joyous  vivacity  of  youth.  At  worst,  the  reigning 
Count  of  Monte  Beni,  as  his  hair  grew  white,  was  still 
a  jolly  old  fellow  over  his  flask  of  wine,  —  the  wine 
that  Bacchus  himseU  was  fabled  to  have  taught  his 
sylvan  ancestor  how  to  express,  and  from  what  choic- 
est grapes,  which  would  ripen  only  in  a  certain  di- 
vinely favored  portion  of  the  Monte  Beni  vineyard. 

The  family,  be  it  observed,  were  both  proud  and 
ashamed  of  these  legends ;  but  whatever  part  of  them 
they  might  consent  to  incorporate  into  their  ancestral 
history,  they  steadily  repudiated  all  that  referred  to 
their  one  distinctive  feature,  the  p(»nted  and  furry 
ears.  In  a  great  many  years  past,  no  sober  credence 
had  been  yielded  to  the  mythical  portion  of  the  pedi- 
gree. It  might,  however,  be  considered  as  typify- 
ing some  such  assemblage  of  qualities  —  in  this  case, 
chiefly  remarkable  for  their  simplicity  and  naturalness 
—  as,  when  they  reappear  in  successive  generations, 
constitute  what  we  call  family  character.  The  sculp- 
tor found,  moreover,  on  the  evidence  of  some  old  por- 
traits, that  the  physical  features  of  the  race  had  long 
been  similar  to  what  he  now  saw  them  in  Donatello. 
With  accumulating  years,  it  is  true,  the  Monte  Beni 
face  had  a  tendency  to  look  grim  and  savage  ;  and,  in 
two  or  three  instances,  the  family  pictures  glared  at 
the  spectator  in  the  eyes  like  some  surly  animal,  that 
had  lost  its  good-humor  when  it  outlived  its  playf uk 
&ess. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  PEDIGREE   OF  MONTE  BENI.        27* 

The  young  Count  accorded  his  guest  full  liberty  to 
investigate  the  personal  annals  of  these  pictured  wor* 
fihies,  as  well  as  all  the  rest  of  his  progenitors ;  and 
ample  materials  were  at  hand  in  many  chests  of  worm- 
eaten  papers  and  yellow  parchments,  that  had  been 
gathering  into  larger  and  dustier  piles  ever  since  the 
dark  ages.  But,  to  confess  the  truth,  the  information 
afforded  by  these  musty  documents  was  so  much  more 
prosaic  than  what  Kenyon  acquired  from  Tomaso'a 
legends,  that  even  the  superior  authenticity  of  the  for- 
mer could  not  reconcile  him  to  its  dulness. 

What  especially  delighted  the  sculptor  was  the  anal- 
ogy between  Donatello's  character,  as  he  himself  knew 
it,  and  those  peculiar  traits  which  the  old  butler's  nar- 
rative assumed  to  have  been  long  hereditary  in  the 
race.  He  was  amused  at  finding,  too,  that  not  only 
Tomaso  but  the  peasantry  of  the  estate  and  neighbor- 
ing village  recognized  his  friend  as  a  genuine  Monte 
Beni,  of  the  original  type.  They  seemed  to  cherish 
a  great  affection  for  the  yoimg  Count,  and  were  full 
of  stories  about  his  sportive  childhood;  how  he  had 
played  among  the  little  rustics,  and  been  at  once  the 
wildest  and  the  sweetest  of  them  all ;  and  how,  in 
his  very  infancy,  he  had  plunged  into  the  deep  pools 
of  the  streamlets  and  never  been  drowned,  and  had 
clambered  to  the  topmost  branches  of  tall  trees  with- 
out ever  breaking  his  neck.  No  such  mischance  could 
happen  to  the  sylvan  child,  because,  handling  all  the 
elements  of  nature  so  fe^arlessly  and  freely,  nothing 
had  either  the  power  or  the  will  to  do  him  harm. 

He  grew  up,  said  these  humble  friends,  the  play- 
mate not  only  of  all  mortal  kind,  but  of  creatures  of 
the  woods  ;  although,  when  Kenyon  pressed  them  for 
cK>me  particulars  of  this  latter  mode  of  companionshipi 


Digitized 


by  Google 


i74  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

they  could  remember  little  more  than  a  few  anecdotei 
of  a  pet  fox,  which  used  to  growl  and  snap  at  every* 
body  save  Donatello  himself. 

But  they  enlarged  —  and  never  were  weary  of  the 
theme  —  upon  the  blithesome  effects  of  Donatello's 
presence  in  his  rosy  childhood  and  budding  youth.. 
Their  hovels  had  always  glowed  like  sunshine  when 
he  entered  them ;  so  that,  as  the  peasants  expressed 
it,  their  young  master  had  never  darkened  a  doorway 
in  his  life.  He  was  the  soul  of  vintage  festivals. 
While  he  was  a  mere  infant,  scarcely  able  to  run 
alone,  it  had  been  the  custom  to  make  him  tread  the 
wine-press  with  his  tender  little  feet,  if  it  were  only  to 
crush  one  cluster  of  the  grapes.  And  the  grape-juice 
that  gushed  beneath  his  childish  tread,  be  it  ever  so 
small  in  quantity,  sufficed  to  impart  a  pleasant  flavor 
to  a  whole  cask  of  wine.  The  race  of  Monte  Beni  — 
so  these  rustic  chroniclers  assured  the  sculptor  —  had 
possessed  the  gift  from  the  oldest  of  old  times  of  ex- 
pressing good  wine  from  ordinary  grapes,  and  a  rav- 
ishing liquor  from  the  choice  growth  of  their  vineyard. 

In  a  word,  as  he  listened  to  such  tales  as  these, 
Kenyon  could  have  imagined  that  the  valleys  and 
hill-sides  about  him  were  a  veritable  Arcadia ;  and 
that  Donatello  was  not  merely  a  sylvan  faun,  but  the 
genial  wine-god  in  his  very  person.  Making  many  al- 
lowances for  the  poetic  fancies  of  Italian  peasants,  he 
set  it  down  for  fact,  that  his  friend,  in  a  simple  way, 
and  among  rustic  folks,  had  been  an  exceedingly  de« 
lightful  fellow  in  his  younger  days. 

But  the  contadini  sometimes  added,  shaking  theiif 
heads  and  sighing,  that  the  young  Count  was  sadly 
ehanged  since  he  went  to  Rome.  The  village  girLi 
oow  missed  the  merry  smile  with  which  he  used  to 
greet  them. 

Digitized  by  LjOOQIC 


THE  PELIGRRE  OF  MONTE  BENL      '276 

r  The  sculptor  inquired  of  his  good  friend  Tomaso^ 
whether  he,  too,  had  noticed  the  shadow  which  was 
.said  to  have  recently  fallen  over  Donatello's  life, 

"  Ah,  yes,  Signore  !  "  answered  the  old  butler,  "  it  is 
even  so,  since  he  came  back  from  that  wicked  and  mis- 
erable city.  The  world  has  grown  either  too  evil,  or 
else  too  wise  and  sad,  for  such  men  as  the  old  Counts 
,of  Monte  Beni  used  to  be.  His  very  first  taste  of  it, 
as  you  see,  has  changed  and  spoilt  my  poor  yoimg 
lord.  There  had  not  been  a  single  count  in  the  fam- 
ily these  himdred  years  or  more,  who  was  so  true  a 
Monte  Beni,  of  the  antique  stamp,  as  this  poor  signo- 
,rino  ;  and  now  it  brings  the  tears  into  my  eyes  to  hear 
him  sighing  over  a  cup  of  Sunshine  I  Ah,  it?  is  a  sad 
world  now  I  " 

"  Then  you  think  there  was  a  merrier  world  once  ?  " 
asked  Kenyon. 

"  Surely,  Signore,"  said  Tomaso ;  "  a  merrier  world, 
and  merrier.  Counts  of  Monte  Beni  to  live  in  it  J 
Such  tales  of  them  as  I  have  heard,  when  I  was  a 
jchild  on  my  grandfather's  knee  !  The  good  old  man 
remembered  a  lord  of  Monte  Beni  —  at  least,  he  had 
heard  of  such  a  one,  though  I  will  not  make  oath  upon 
the  holy  crucifix  that  my  grand  sire  lived  in  his  time 
r—  wl^p  used  to  go  into  the  woods  and  call  pretty  dam- 
sels out  of  the  fountains,  and  out  of  the  trunks  of  the 
old  trees.  That  merry_  lord  was  known  to  dance  with 
them  3»  whole  long  summer  afternoon  I  When  shaJ] 
)we  see  such  frolics  in  our  days  ?  " 

**  Not  soon,  I  am  afraid,"  acquiesced  the  sculptor. 
^  Yovi  are  right,  excellent  Tomaso ;  the  world  is  sad' 
dernow!" 

-  ?  And,  in  truth,  while  our  friend  smiled  at  these  wild 
faUes,  he  sighed  in  the  same  breath  to  think  how  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


276  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

once  genial  earth  produces,  in  every  successive  general 
tion,  fewer  flowers  than  used  to  gladden  the  preced- 
ing ones.  Not  that  the  modes  and  seeming  possibili« 
ties  of  human  enjoyment  are  rarer  in  our  refined  and 
softened  era,  —  on  the  contrary,  they  never  before 
were  nearly  so  abundant,  —  but  that  mankind  are  get- 
ting so  far  beyond  the  childhood  of  their  race  that 
they  scorn  to  be  happy  any  longer.  A  simple  and 
joyous  character  can  find  no  place  for  itself  among 
the  sage  and  sombre  figures  that  would  put  his  unso- 
phisticated cheerfulness  to  shame.  The  entire  system 
of  man's  affairs,  as  at  present  established,  is  built  up 
purposely  to  exclude  the  careless  and  happy  soul.  The 
very  children  would  upbraid  the  wretched  individual 
who  should  endeavor  to  take  life  and  the  world  as — 
what  we  might  naturally  suppose  them  meant  for  —  a 
place  and  opportunity  for  enjoyment. 

It  is  the  iron  rule  in  our  day  to  require  an  object 
and  a  purpose  in  life.  It  makes  us  all  parts  of  a  com- 
plicated scheme  of  progress,  which  can  only  result  in 
our  arrival  at  a  colder  and  drearier  region  than  we 
were  bom  in.  It  insists  upon  everybody's  adding 
somewhat  —  a  mite,  perhaps,  but  earned  by  incessant 
effort  —  to  an  accumulated  pile  of  usefulness,  of  which 
the  only  use  wiU  be,  to  burden  our  posterity  with  even 
heavier  thoughts  and  more  inordinate  labor  than  oui 
own.  No  life  now  wanders  like  an  unfettered  stream ; 
there  is  a  miU-wheel  for  the  tiniest  rivulet  to  turn. 
We  go  all  wrong,  by  too  strenuous  a  resolution  to  go 
all  right. 

Therefore  it  was  —  so,  at  least,  the  sculptor  thought, 
although  partly  suspicious  of  Donatello's  darker  mis- 
fortune—  that  the  young  Count  found  it  impossible 
nowadays  to  be  what  his  forefathers  had  been.      He 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  PEDIGREE  OF  MONTE  BENT.       277 

eonld  not  live  their  healthy  life  of  animal  spirits,  in 
their  sympathy  with  nature,  and  brotherhood  with  all 
that  breathed  around  them.  Nature,  in  beast,  fowl, 
and  tree,  and  earth,  flood,  and  sl^,  is  what  it  was  of 
old ;  but  sin,  care,  and  self-consciousness  have  set  the 
human  portion  of  the  world  askew ;  and  thus  the  sim* 
plest  character  is  ever  the  soonest  to  go  astray. 

^^At  any  rate,  Tomaso,"  said  Kenyon,  doing  his 
best  to  comfort  the  old  man,  ^^  let  us  hope  that  youi' 
young  lord  will  still  enjoy  himself  at  vintage -time. 
By  the  aspect  of  the  vineyard,  I  judge  that  this  wiU 
be  a  famous  year  for  the  golden  wine  of  Monte  Beni. 
As  long  as  your  grapes  produce  that  admirable  liquor, 
sad  as  you  think  the  world,  neither  the  Count  nor  his 
guests  will  quite  forget  to  smile." 

"  Ah,  Signore,"  rejoined  the  butler  with  a  sigh, "  but 
he  scarcely  wets  his  lips  with  the  sunny  juice." 

"There  is  yet  another  hope,"  observed  Kenyon; 
"  the  young  Count  may  fall  in  love,  and  bring  home  a 
fair  and  laughing  wife  to  chase  the  gloom  out  of  yon- 
der old,  frescoed  saloon.  Do  you  think  he  could  do  a 
better  thing,  my  good  Tomaso  ?  " 

"  Maybe  not,  Signore,"  said  the  sage  butler,  look- 
ing earnestly  at  him ;  "  and,  maybe,  not  a  worse  1 " 

The  sculptor  fancied  that  the  good  old  man  had  it 
partly  in  his  mind  to  make  some  remark,  or  commimi- 
cate  some  fact,  which,  on  second  thoughts,  he  resolved 
to  keep  concealed  in  his  own  breast.  He  now  took  his 
departure  cellarward,  shaking  his  white  head  and  mut- 
tering to  himself,  and  did  not  reappear  till  dinner- 
time, when  he  favored  Kenyon,  whom  he  had  taken 
feir  into  his  good  graces,  with  a  choicer  flask  of  Sun- 
shine than  had  yet  blessed  his  palate. 

To  say  the  truth,  this  golden  wine  was  no  unneces- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


'278  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BEKL 

sary  ingredient  towards  making  the  life  of  Monte  Ben! 
I  palatable.  It  seemed  a  pity  that  Donatello  did  not 
drink  a  little  more  of  it,  and  go  jollily  to  bed  at  least, 
even  if  he  should  awake  with  an  accession  of  darker 
•melancholy  the  next  morning. 

Nevertheless,  there  was  no  lack  of  outward  means 
for  leading  an  agreeable  life  in  the  old  villa.  Wan-  ( 
dering  musicians  haunted  the  precincts  of  Monte  Beni,  j 
where  they  seemed  to  claim  a  prescriptive  right ;  they ' 
made  the  la\ni  and  shrubbery  tuneful  with  the  sound 
of  fiddle,  harp,  and  flute,  and  now  and  then  with  the 
tangled  squeaking  of  a  bagpipe.  Improwisatori  like- 
wise  came  and  told  tales  or  recited  verses  to  the  conta* 
dini — among  whom  Kenyon  was  often  an  auditor — 
after  their  day's  work  in  the  vineyard.  Jugglers,  too, 
obtained  permission  to  do  feats  of  magic  in  the  hall, 
where  they  set  even  the  sage  Tomaso,  and  Stella,  Gir- 
olamo,  and  the  peasant -girls  from  the  farm-house, 
ell  of  a  broad  grin,  between  merriment  and  wonder. 
These  good  people  got  food  and  lodging  for  their  pleas- 
ant pains,  and  some  of  the  small  wine  of  Tuscany,  and 
a  reasonable  handful  of  the  Grand  Duke's  copper  coin, 
to  keep  up  the  hospitable  renown  of  Monte  Beni. 
But  very  seldom  had  they  the  yoimg  Count  as  a  lis- 
tener or  a  spectator. 

There  were  sometimes  dances  by  moonlight  on  the 
lawn,  but  never  since  he  came  from  Kome  did  Dona- 
tello's  presence  deepen  the  blushes  of  the  pretty  conta- 
dinas,  or  his  footstep  weary  out  the  most  agile  partner 
or  competitor,  as  once  it  was  sure  to  do. 

Paupers  —  for  this  kind  of  vermin  infested  the 
house  of  Monte  Beni  worse  than  any  other  spot  in 
beggar-haunted  Italy  —  stood  beneath  all  the  windows, 
making  loud  supplication,  or  even  establishing  them* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  PEDIGREE  OF  MONTE  BENL       279 

selves  on  tbe  marble  steps  of  the  grand  entrance. 

[  They  ate  and  drank,  and  filled  their  bags,  and  pock- 
eted the  little  money  that  was  given  them,  and  went 

'  forth  on  their  devious  ways,  showering  blessings  innu« 
merable  on  the  mansion  and  its  lord,  and  on  the  souls 
of  his  deceased  forefathers,  who  had  always  been  jusi> 
such  simpletons  as  to  be  compassionate  to  beggary. 
But,  in  spite  of  their  favorable  prayers,  —  by  which 
Italian  philanthropists  set  great  store,  —  a  cloud 
seemed  to  hang  over  these  once  Arcadian  precincts, 
and  to  be  darkest  around  the  summit  of  the  tower 
where  Donatello  was  wont  to  sit  and  hrood. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XXVn. 

MYTHS. 

After  tiie  sculptor's  arrival,  however,  the  yocing 
Count  sometimes  came  down  from  his  forlorn  eleva- 
tion, and  rambled  with  him  among  the  neighboring 
woods  and  hills.  He  led  his  friend  to  many  enchant- 
ing nooks,  with  which  he  himself  had  been  familiar  in 
his  childhood.  But  of  late,  as  he  remarked  to  Kenyon, 
a  sort  of  straAgeness  had  overgrown  them,  like  clus- 
ters of  dark  shrubbery,  so  that  he  hardly  recognized 
the  places  which  he  had  known  and  loved  so  well. 

To  the  sculptor^s  eye,  nevertheless,  they  were  still 
rich  with  beauty.  They  were  picturesque  in  that 
sweetly  impressive  way  whiere  wildness,  in  a  long  lapse 
of  years,  has  crept  over  scenes  that  have  been  once 
adorned  with  the  careful  art  and  toil  of  man;  and 
when  man  could  do  no  more  for  them,  time  and  nature 
came,  and  wrought  hand  in  hand  to  bring  them  to  a 
soft  and  venerable  perfection.  There  grew  the  fig-tree 
that  had  nm  wild  and  taken  to  wife  the  vine,  which 
likewise  had  gone  rampant  out  of  all  human  control ; 
so  that  the  two  wild  things  had  tangled  and  knotted 
themselves  into  a  wild  marriage-bond,  and  hung  their 
various  progeny  —  the  luscious  figs,  the  grapes,  oozy 
with  the  Southern  juice,  and  both  endowed  with  a  wild 
flavor  that  added  the  final  charm  —  on  the  same  bough 
together. 

In  Kenyon's  opinion,  never  was  any  other  nook  9? 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MYTHS.  281 

tovely  as  a  certain  little  dell  which  he  and  Donatello 
visited.  It  was  hollowed  in  among  the  hills,  and  open 
to  a  glimpse  of  the  broad,  fertile  valley.  A  fountain 
had  its  birth  here,  and  fell  into  a  marble  basin,  which 
wras  all  covered  with  moss  and  shaggy  with  water- 
weeds.  Over  the  gush  of  the  small  stream,  with  an  urn 
in  her  arms,  stood  a  marble  nymph,  whose  nakedness 
the  moss  had  kindly  clothed  as  with  a  garment ;  and 
the  long  trails  and  tresses  of  the  maidenhair  had  done 
what  they  could  in  the  poor  thing's  behalf,  by  hanging 
themselves  about  her  waist.  In  former  days  —  it  might 
be  a  remote  antiquity  —  this  lady  of  the  fountain  had 
first  received  the  infant  tide  into  her  urn  and  poured 
it  thence  into  the  marble  basin.  But  now  the  sculp- 
tured urn  had  a  great  crack  from  top  to  bottom ;  and 
the  discontented  njrmph  was  compelled  to  see  the  basin 
£11  itself  through  a  channel  which  she  could  not  con- 
trol, although  with  water  long  ago  consecrated  to  her. 

For  this  reason,  or  some  other,  she  looked  terribly 
forlorn ;  and  you  might  have  fancied  that  the  whole 
f oimtain  was  but  the  overflow  of  her  lonely  tears. 

*'  This  was  a  place  that  I  used  greatly  to  delight  in," 
remarked  Donatello,  sighing.  ^^  As  a  child,  and  as  a 
boy,  I  have  been  very  happy  here." 

^^  And,  as  a  man,  I  should  ask  no  fitter  place  to  be 
happy  in,"  answered  Kenyon.  "  But  you,  my  friend, 
are  of  such  a  social  nature,  that  I  should  hardly  have 
thought  these  lonely  haunts  would  take  your  fancy.  It 
is  a  place  for  a  poet  to  dream  in,  and  people  it  with 
the  beings  of  his  imagination." 

"  I  am  no  poet,  that  I  know  of,"  said  Donatella 
**  but  yet,  as  I  tell  you,  I  have  been  very  happy  here, 
in  the  company  of  this  fountain  and  this  njrmph.  It 
Is  said  that  a  Faun,  my  oldest  forefather,  brought  home 


Digitized 


by  Google 


282*  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

hither  to  this  very  spot  a  human  maiden,  whom  he 
loved  and  wedded.  This  spring  of  delicious  water  was' 
their  household  well." 

^^  It  is  a  most  enchanting  fable ! "  exclaimed  Ken*- 
yon ;  "  that  is,  if  it  be  not  a  fact." 

"  And  why  not  a  fact  ?  "  said  the  simple  DonateUo, 
*'  There  is,  likewise,  another  sweet  old  story  connected 
with  this  spot.  But,  now  that  I  remember  it,  it  seems 
to  me  more  sad  than  sweet,  though  formerly  the  sor- 
row, in  which  it  closes,  did  not  so  much  impress  me. 
If  I  had  the  gift  of  tale-telling,  this  one  would  be  sure 
to  interest  you  mightily." 

"  Pray  tell  it,"  said  Kenyon ;  "  no  matter  whether 
well  or  ill.  These  wild  legends  have  often  the  most 
powerful  charm  when  least  artfully  told." 

So  the  young  Count  narrated  a  myth  of  one  of  his 
progenitors,  —  he  might  have  lived  a  century  ago,  or 
a  thousand  years,  or  before  the  Christian  epoch,  for 
anything  that  DonateUo  knew  to  the  contrary,  —  who 
had  made  acquaintance  with  a  fair  creature  belong* 
ing  to  this  fountain.  Whether  woman  or  sprite  was 
a  mystery,  as  was  all  else  about  her,  except  that  her 
life  and  soul  were  somehow  interfused  throughout  the 
gushing  water.  She  was  a  fresh,  cool,  dewy  thing, 
sunny  and  shadowy,  full  of  pleasant  little  mischiefs, 
fitful  and  changeable  with  the  whim  of  the  moment, 
but  yet  as  constant  as  her  native  stream,  which  kept 
the  same  gush  and  flow  forever,  while  marble  crum- 
bled over  and  around  it.  The  fountain  woman  loved 
the  youth,  —  a  knight,  as  DonateUo  called  him,  —  for, 
according  to  the  legend,  his  race  was  akin  to  hers. 
At  least,  whether  kin  or  no,  there  had  been  friendship 
and  sympathy  of  old  betwixt  an  ancestor  of  his,  with 
funy  ears,  and  the  long-lived  lady  of  the  fountain. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MYTHS.  288 

And,  after  all  those  ages,  she  was  siill  as  young  as  a 
May  morning,  and  as  frolicsome  as  a  bird  upon  a  tree, 
w  a  breeze  that  makes  merry  with  the  leaves. 

She  taught  him  how  to  call  her  from  her  pebbly 
source,  and  they  spent  many  a  happy  hour  together, 
more  especially  in  the  fervor  of  liie  summer  days. 
For  often  as  he  sat  waiting  for  her  by  the  margin  of 
the  spring,  she  would  suddenly  fall  down  around  him 
in  a  shower  of  sunny  rain-drops,  with  a  rainbow  glanc- 
ing through  them,  and  forthwith  gather  herself  up  into 
the  likeness  of  a  beautiful  girl,  laughing  —  or  was  it 
the  warble  of.  the  rill  over  the  pebbles  ?  —  to  see  the 
youth's  amazement. 

Thus,  kind  maiden  that  she  was,  the  hot  atmos- 
phere became  deliciously  cool  and  fragrant  for  this  f a- 
.vored  knight ;  and,  furthermore,  when  he  knelt  down 
to  drink  out  of  the  spring,*  nothing  was  more  common 
than  for  a  pair  of  rosy  lips  to  come  up  out  of  its  little 
depths,  and  touch  his  mouth  with  the  thrill  of  a  sweet, 
eool,  dewy  kiss ! 

"  It  is  a  delightful  story  for  the  hot  noon  of  your 
Tuscan  smnmer,"  observed  the  sculptor,  at  this  point. 
"But  the  deportment  of  the  watery  lady  must  have 
had  a  most  chilling  influence  in  midwinter.  Her  lover 
would  find  it,  very  literally,  a  cold  reception !  '* 

"I  suppose,"  said  DonateUo,  rather  sulkily,  "you 
are  making  fun  of  the  story.  But  I  see  nothing  laugh-^ 
able  in  the  thing  itself,  nor  in  what  you  say  about 
It" 

He  went  on  to  relate,  that  for  a  long  while  the 
knight  found  infinite  pleasure  and  comfort  in  the 
friendship  of  the  fountain  nymph.  In  his  merriest 
hours,  she  gladdened  him  with  her  sportive  humor. 
If  ever  he  was  annoyed  with  earthly  trouble,  she  laid 


Digitized 


by  Google 


284  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

her  moist  hand  upon  his  brow,  and  charmed  the  fret 
and  fever  quite  away. 

But  one  day  —  one  fatal  noontide  —  the  young 
knight  came  rushing  with  hasty  and  irregular  steps  to 
the  accustomed  fountain.  He  called  the  nymph  ;  but 
—  no  doubt  because  there  was  something  unusual  and 
frightful  in  his  tone  —  she  did  not  appear,  nor  answer 
him.  He  flimg  himself  down,  and  washed  his  hands 
and  bathed  his  feverish  brow  in  the  cool,  pure  water. 
And  then,  there  was  a  sound  of  woe ;  it  might  have 
been  a  woman's  voice ;  it  might  have  been  only  the 
sighing  of  the  brook  over  the  pebbles.  The  water 
shrank  away  from  the  youth's  hands,  and  left  his 
brow  as  dry  and  feverish  as  before.  — 

DonateUo  here  came  to  a  dead  pause. 

"Why  did  the  water  shrink  from  this  unhappy 
knight  ?  "  inquired  the  sculptor. 

"  Because  he  had  tried  to  wash  off  a  blood-stain !  '* 
said  the  young  Count,  in  a  horror-stricken  whisper^  i 
"  The  guilty  man  had  poUuted  the  pure  water.     The 
nymph  might  have  comforted  him  in  sorrow,  but  could 
not  .cleanse  his  conscience  of  a  crime." 

"  And  did  he  never  behold  her  more  ?  "  asked  Kea- 
yon. 

"  Never  but  once,"  replied  his  friend.  "  He  never 
beheld  her  blessed  face  but  once  again,  and  then  there 
was  a  blood-stain  on  the  poor  nymph's  brow ;  it  was 
the  stain  his  guilt  had  left  in  the  fountain  where  he 
tried  to  wash  it  off.  He  mourned  for  her  his  whole 
life  long,  and  employed  the  best  sculptor  of  the  time 
to  carve  this  statue  of  the  nymph  from  his  description 
of  her  aspect.  But,  though  my  ancestor  would  fain 
have  had  the  image  wear  her  happiest  look,  the  artist» 
imlike  yourself,  was  so  impressed  with  the  mournful' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MYTHS.  286 

I  of  the  story,  that,  in  spite  of  his  best  efforts,  he 
made  her  forlorn,  and  forever  weeping,  as  you  see  I " 

Kenyon  found  a  certain  charm  in  this  simple  leg- 
end. Whether  so  intended  or  not,  he  understood  it  as 
an  apologue,  typifying  the  soothing  and  genial  effects 
of  an  habitual  intercourse  with  nature,  in  all  ordinary 
cares  and  griefs ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  her  mild 
influences  fall  short  in  their  effect  upon  the  ruder  pas- 
sions, and  are  altogether  powerless  in  the  dread  f ever* 
fit  or  deadly  chill  of  guilt. 

**Do  you  say,"  he  asked,  "that  the  nymph's  face 
has  never  since  been  shown  to  any  mortal  ?  Methinks 
you,  by  your  native  qualities,  are  as  well  entitled  to 
her  favor  as  ever  your  progenitor  could  have  been. 
Why  have  you  not  summoned  her  ?  " 

**  I  called  her  often  when  I  was  a  silly  child,"  an- 
swered Donatellp ;  and  he  added,  in  an  inward  voice^ 
**  Thank  Heaven,  she  did  not  come  !  " 

**  Then  you  never  saw  her  ?  "  said  the  sculptor. 

**  Never  in  my  life !  "  rejoined  the  Count.  "  No, 
my  dear  friend,  I  have  not  seen  the  nymph ;  although 
here,  by  her  fountain,  I  used  to  make  many  strange 
acquaintances ;  for,  from  my  earliest  childhood,  I  was 
familiar  with  whatever  creatures  haunt  the  woods. 
Yon  would  have  laughed  to  see  the  friends  I  had 
among  them;  yes,  among  the  wild,  nimble  things, 
that  reckon  man  their  deadliest  enemy !  How  it  was 
first  taught  me,  I  cannot  tell ;  but  there  was  a  charm 
^—  a  voice,  a  murmur,  a  kind  of  chant  —  by  which  I 
called  the  woodland  inhabitants,  the  furry  people,  and 
the  feathered  people,  in  a  language  that  they  seemed 
to  understand." 

'*  I  have  heard  of  such  a  gift,"  responded  the  sculp* 
tor,  gravely,  "  but  never  before  met  with  a  person  eft 


Digitized 


by  Google 


^6  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

dowed  with  it.  Pray,  try  the  charm;  and  lest  I 
should  frighten  your  friends  away,  I  will  withdraw 
into  this  thicket,  and  merely  peep  at  them." 

"  I  doubt,"  said  Donatello,  "  whether  they  will  re* 
member  my  voice  now.  It  changes,  you  know,  as  the 
boy  grows  towards  manhood." 

Nevertheless,  as  the  young  Count's  good-nature  and 
easy  persuadability  were  among  his  best  characteris- 
tics, he  set  about  complying  with  Kenyon's  request. 
The  latter,  in  his  concealment  among  the  shrubberies^ 
heard  him  send  forth  a  sort  of  modulated  breath,  wild, 
rude,  yet  harmonious.  It  struck  the  auditor  as  at 
once  the  strangest  and  the  most  natural  utterance  that 
had  ever  reached  his  ears.  Any  idle  boy,  it  should 
seem,  singing  to  himself  and  setting  his  wordless  song 
to  no  other  or  more  definite  tune  than  the  play  of  his 
own  pulses,  might  produce  a  sound  almost  identical 
with  this  ;  and  yet,  it  was  as  individual  as  a  niurmur 
of  the  breeze.  Donatello  tried  it,  over  and  over  again, 
with  many  breaks,  at  first,  and  pauses  of  uncertainty ; 
then  with  more  confidence,  and  a  fuller  swell,  like  a 
wayfarer  groping  out  of  obscurity  into  the  light,  and 
moving  with  freer  footsteps  as  it  brightens  around 
him. 

Anon,  his  voice  appeared  to  fill  the  air,  yet  not  with 
an  obtrusive  clangor.  The  sound  was  of  a  murmurous 
character,  soft,  attractive,  persuasive,  friendly.  The 
sculptor  fancied  that  such  might  have  been  the  orig- 
inal voice  and  utterance  of  the  natural  man,  before 
the  sophistication  of  the  human  inteUect  formed  what 
we  now  call  language.  In  this  broad  dialect  —  broad 
as  the  sympathies  of  nature  — ■  the  human  brother 
might  have  spoken  to  his  inarticulate  brotherhood  that 
prowl  the  woods,  or  soar  upon  the  wing,  and  have 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MYTHS.  287 

been  intelligible  to  such  extent  as  to  win  their  eon 
Gdence. 

The  sound  had  its  pathos  too.  At  some  of  its 
simple  cadences,  the  tears  came  quietly  into  Kenyon's 
eyes.  They  welled  up  slowly  from .  his  heart,  which 
was  thrilling  with  an  emotion  more  delightful  than  he 
had  often  felt  before,  but  which  he  forbore  to  analyze, 
lest,  if  he  seized  it,  it  should  at  once  perish  in  his 
grasp. 

Donatello  paused  two  or  three  times,  and  seemed  to 
listen ;  then,  recommencing,  he  poured  his  spirit  and 
life  more  earnestly  into  the  strain.  And,  finally,  — 
or  else  the  sculptor's  hope  and  imagination  deceived 
him,  — soft  treads  were  audible  upon  the  fallen  leaves. 
There  was  a  rustling  among  the  shrubbery ;  a  whir  of 
wings,  moreover,  that  hovered  in  the  air.  It  may  have 
been  all  an  illusion ;  but  Kenyon  fancied  that  he  could 
distinguish  the  stealthy,  cat  -  like  movement  of  some 
small  forest  citizen,  and  that  he  could  even  see  its 
doubtful  shadow,  if  not  really  its  substance.  But,  all 
at  once,  whatever  might  be  fShe  reason,  there  ensued  a 
hurried  rush  and  scamper  of  little  feet ;  and  then  the 
sculptor  heard  a  wild,  sorrowful  cry,  and  through  the 
crevices  of  the  thicket  beheld  Donatello  fling  himself 
on  the  ground. 

Emerging  from  his  hiding-place,  he  saw  no  living 
thing,  save  a  brown  lizard  (it  was  of  the  tarantula 
species)  rustling  away  through  the  sunshine.  To  all 
present  appearance,  this  venomous  reptile  was  the 
only  creature  that  had  responded  to  the  young  Count's 
efforts  to  renew  his  intercourse  with  the  lower  orders 
of  nature. 

"  What  has  happened  to  you  ?  "  exclaimed  Kenyon, 
stooping  down  over  his  friend,  and  wondering  at  the 
tnguish  which  he  betrayed. 

Digitized  by  LjOOQIC 


288  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

''  Death,  death  I  "  sobbed  Donatello.  ''  They  know 
it!" 

He  grovelled  beside  the  fountain,  in  a  fit  of  such 
passionate  sobbing  and  weeping,  that  it  seemed  as  if 
his  heart  had  broken,  and  spilt  its  wild  sorrows  upon 
Ihe  ground.  His  unrestrained  grief  and  childish  tears 
made  Kenyon  sensible  in  how  small  a  degree  the  cus* 
toms  and  restraints  of  society  had  really  acted  upon 
this  young  man,  in  spite  of  the  quietude  of  his  ordi« 
nary  deportonent.  In  response  to  his  friend's  efforts 
to  console  him,  he  murmured  words  hardly  more  ar- 
ticulate than  the  strange  chant  which  he  had  so  re- 
cently been  breathing  into  the  air. 

"  They  know  it  I "  was  all  that  Kenyon  could  yefc 
distinguish,  —  "  they  know  it !  " 

**  Who  know  it?  "  asked  the  sculptor.  "  And  what 
is  it  they  know?" 

"They  know  it!"  repeated  Donatello,  trembling. 
"  They  shim  me !  All  nature  shrinks  from  me,  and 
shudders  at  me  I  I  live  in  the  midst  of  a  curse,  that 
hems  me  round  with  a  circle  of  fire  I  No  innocent 
thing  can  come  near  me." 

"Be  comforted,  my  dear  friend,"  said  Kenyon, 
kneeling  beside  him.  "You  labor  under  some  illu- 
sion, but  no  curse.  As  for  this  strange,  natural  spell, 
which  you  hftve  been  exercising,  and  of  which  I  have 
heard  before,  though  I  never  bdieved  in,  nor  expected 
to  witness  it,  I  am  satisfied  that  you  still  possess  it 
It  was  my  own  half-concealed  presence,  no  doubt,  and 
some  involuntary  little  movement  of  mine,  that  scared 
away  your  forest  friends." 

"They  are  friends  of  mine  no  longer,"  answered 
Donatello. 

"  We  all  of  us,  as  we  grow  older/'  rejoined  Kenyon, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MYTHS.  289 

*^  lose  somewhat  of  our  proximity  to  nature.  It  is  the 
price  we  pay  for  experience." 

"  A  heavy  price,  then  !  "  said  Donatello,  rising  from 
the  ground.  "  But  we  will  speak  no  more  of  it.  For- 
get this  scene,  my  dear  friend.  In  your  eyes,  it  must 
look. very  absurd.  It  is  a  grief,  I  presume,  to  all  men, 
to  find  the  pleasant  privileges  and  properties  of  early 
life  departing  from  them.  That  grief  has  now  be- 
fallen me.  WeU ;  I  shall  waste  no  more  tears  for  such 
a  cause  I " 

Nothing  else  made  Kenyon  so  sensible  of  a  change 
in  DonateUo,  as  his  newly  acquired  power  of  dealing 
with  his  own  emotions,  and,  after  a  struggle  more  or 
less  fierce,  thrusting  them  down  into  the  prison-ceUs 
where  he  usually  kept  them  confined.  The  restraint, 
which  he  now  put  upon  himself,  and  the  mask  of  dull 
composure  which  he  succeeded  in  clasping  over  his 
still  beautiful,  and  once  f aim-like  face,  affected  the 
sensitive  sculptor  more  sadly  than  even  the  unre- 
strained passion  of  the  preceding  scene.  It  is  a  very 
miserable  epoch,  when  the  evil  necessities  of  life,  in 
our  tortuous  world,  first  get  the  better  of  us  so  far 
as  to  compel  us  to  attempt  throwing  a  cloud  over  our 
transparency.  Simplicity  increases  in  value  the  longei 
we  can  keep  it,  and  the  further  we  carry  it  onward 
into  life ;  the  loss  of  a  child's  simplicity,  in  the  inevi- 
table lapse  of  years,  causes  but  a  natural  sigh  or  two, 
because  even  his  mother  feared  that  he  could  not  keep 
it  always.  But  after  a  yoimg  man  has  brought  it 
through  his  childhood,  and  has  still  worn  it  in  his 
bosom,  not  as  an  early  dew-drop,  but  as  a  diamond 
of  pure,  white,  lustre,  —  it  is  a  pity  to  lose  it,  then. 
And  thus,  when  Kenyon  saw  how  much  his  friend  had 
now  to  hide,  and  how  well  he  hid  it,  be  would  have 

VOL.  VI. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


290  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

W6pt,  although  his  tears  would  have  been  even  idlei 
than  those  which  Donatello  had  just  shed. 

They  parted  on  the  lawn  before  the  house,  the  Count 
to  climb  his  tower,  and  the  sculptor  to  read  an  antique 
edition  of  Dante,  which  he  had  found  among  some  old 
volumes  of  Catholic  devotion,  in  a  seldom- visited  room. 
Tomaso  met  him  in  the  entrance-hall,  and  showed  a, 
desire  to  speak. 

*'  Our  poor  signorino  looks  very  sad  to-day  I "  he 
said. 

"  Even  so,  good  Tomaso,"  replied  the  sculptor, 
"  Would  that  we  could  raise  his  spirits  a  little !  " 

"  There  might  be  means,  Signore,"  answered  the  old 
butler,  "  if  one  might  but  be  sure  that  they  were  the 
right  ones.  We  men  are  but  rough  nurses  for  a  sick 
body  or  a  sick  spirit." 

"  Women,  you  would  say,  my  good  friend,  are  bet* 
ter,"  said  the  sculptor,  struck  by  an  intelligence  in  the 
butler's  face.     "  That  is  possible !     But  it  depends." 

"  Ah ;  we  will  wait  a  little  longer,"  said  Tomasoj 
with  the  cust(Hnary  shake  of  his  head. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XXVnL 

THE  OWL  TOWKIU 

•*WiLL  you  not  show  me  your  tower?"  said  the 
•culptor  one  day  to  his  friend. 

^^It  is  plainly  enough  to  be  seen,  methinks,"  an- 
swered the  Count,  with  a  kind  of  sulkiness  that  often 
appeared  in  him,  as  one  of  the  little  symptoms  of  in- 
ward trouble. 

"Yes;  its  e;xterior  is  visible  far  and  wide,"  said 
Kenyon.  "  But  such  a  gray,  moss-grown  tower  as  this, 
however  valuable  as  an  object  of  scenery,  will  certainly 
be  quite  as  interesting  inside  as  out.  It  cannot  be  less 
than  six  hundred  years  old ;  the  foundations  and  lower 
story  are  much  older  than  that,  I  should  judge ;  and 
traditions  probably  cling  to  the  walls  within  quite  as 
plentifully  as  the  gray  and  yellow  lichens  cluster  on 
its  face  without." 

"  No  doubt,"  replied  Donatello ;  "  but  I  know  little 
of  such  things,  and  never  could  comprehend  the  inter" 
est  which  some  of  you  Forestieri  take  in  them.  A 
year  or  two  ago  an  English  signore,  with  a  venerable 
white  beard — they  say  he  was  a  magician,  too — came 
hither  from  as  far  off  as  Florence,  just  to  see  my 
tower." 

"  Ah,  I  have  seen  him  at  Florence,"  observed  Ken- 
yon. "  He  is  a  necromancer,  as  you  say,  and  dwells 
in  an  old  mansion  of  the  Knights  Templars,  close  by 
the  Ponte  Vecchio,  with  a  great  many  ghostly  books, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


292  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

pictures,  and  antiquities,  to  make  the  house  gloomy, 
and  one  bright-eyed  little  girl,  to  keep  it  cheerful  I  " 

"  I  know  him  only  by  his  white  beard,"  said  Dona* 
telle ;  ^'  but  he  could  have  told  you  a  great  deal  about 
the  tower,  and  the  sieges  which  it  has  stood,  and  the 
prisoners  who  have  been  confined  in  it.  And  he  gath« 
ered  up  all  the  traditions  of  the  Monte  Beni  family, 
and,  among  the  rest,  the  sad  one  which  I  told  you  at 
the  fountain  the  other  day.  He  had  known  mighty 
poets,  he  said,  in  his  earlier  life ;  and  the  most  illus- 
trious of  them  would  have  rejoiced  to  preserve  such 
a  legend  in  inmiortal  rhyme,  —  especially  if  he  could 
have  had  some  of  our  wine  of  Sunshine  to  help  out  his 
inspiration!" 

"  Any  man  might  be  a  poet,  as  well  as  Byron,  with 
such  wine  and  such  a  theme,"  rejoined  the  sculptor^ 
'*  But,  shall  we  climb  your  tower  ?  The  thunder-storm 
gathering  yonder  among  the  hiUs  will  be  a  spectacle 
worth  witnessing." 

^^  Come,  then,"  said  the  Count,  adding,  with  a  sigh, 
'^  it  has  a  wearv  staircase,  and  dismal  chambers,  and 
it  is  very  lonesome  at  the  sununitl" 

^^  Like  a  man's  life,  when  he  has  climbed  to  emi- 
nence," remarked  the  sculptor ;  ^^  or,  let  us  rather  say, 
with  its  difficult  steps,  and  the  dark  prison-cells  you 
speak  of,  your  tower  resembles  the  spiritual  experience 
of  many  a  sinful  soul,  which,  nevertheless,  may  strug- 
gle upward  into  the  pure  air  and  light  of  Heaven  at 
la^t!" 

Donatello  sighed  again,  and  led  the  way  up  into  the 
tower. 

Mounting  the  broad  staircase  that  ascended  from 
the  entrance-hall,  they  traversed  the  great  wilderness 
of  a  house,  through  some  obscure  passages,  and  camir 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  OWL  TOWER.  298 

lo  a  low,  ancient  doorway.  It  admitted  them  to  a 
narrow  turret -stair  which  zigzagged  upward,  lighted 
in  its  progress  by  loopholes  and  iron-barred  windows. 
Reaching  the  top  of  the  first  flight,  the  Count  threw 
open  a  door  of  worm-eaten  oak,  and  disclosed  a  cham- 
ber that  occupied  the  whole  area  of  the  tower.  It 
was  most  pitiably  forlorn  of  aspect,  with  a  brick-paved 
floor,  bare  holes  through  the  massive  walls,  grated 
with  iron,  instead  of  windows,  and  for  furniture  an 
old  stool,  which  increased  the  dreariness  of  the  place 
tenfold,  by  suggesting  an  idea  of  its  having  once  been 
tenanted. 

'^This  was  a  prisoner's  cell  in  the  old  days,"  said 
Donatcllo ;  "  the  white-bearded  necromancer,  of  whom 
I  told  you,  found  out  that  a  certain  famous  monk  was 
confined  here,  about  five  hundred  years  ago.  He  was 
r«  very  holy  man,  and  was  afterwards  burned  at  the 
stake  in  the  Grand-ducal  Square  at  Firenze.  There 
have  always  been  stories,  Tomaso  says,  of  a  hooded 
monk  creeping  up  and  down  these  stairs,  or  standing 
in  the  doorway  of  this  chamber.  It  must  needs  be 
the  ghost  of  the  ancient  prisoner.  Do  you  believe  in 
;?" 
I  can  hardly  teU,'*  replied  Kenyon ;  "  on  the 
whole,  I  think  not." 

"Neither  do  I,"  responded  the  Count;  "for,  if 
spirits  ever  come  back,  I  should  surely  have  met  one 
within  these  two  months  past.  Ghosts  never  rise  1  So 
much  I  know,  and  am  glad  to  know  it !  " 

Following  the  narrow  staircase  still  higher,  they 
came  to  another  room  of  similar  size  and  equally  for- 
lorn, but  inhabited  by  two  personages  of  a  race  which 
from  time  iir  memorial  have  held  proprietorship  and 
M)cupancy  m  ruined  towers.    These  were  a  pair  of 


Digitized 


by  Google 


2S4  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

owls,  who,  being  doubtless  acquainted  with  Donatella^ 
showed  little  sign  of  alarm  at  the  entrance  of  visitors. 
They  gave  a  dismal  croak  or  two,  and  hopped  aside 
into  the  darkest  comer,  since  it  was  not  yet  their  hour 
to  flap  duskily  abroad, 

(  "  They  do  not  desert  me,  like  my  other  feathered 
■acquaintances,"  observed  the  young  Count,  with  a  sad 
smile,  alluding  to  the  scene  which  Kenyon  had  wit-' 
nessed  at  the  fountain-side.  "When  I  was  a  wild, 
playful  boy,  the  owls  did  not  love  me  half  so  well." 

He  made  no  further  pause  here,  but  led  his  friend 
up  another  flight  of  steps ;  while,  at  every  stage,  the 
windows  and  narrow  loopholes  afforded  Kenyon  more 
extensive  eyeshots  over  hill  and  valley,  and  allowed 
him  to  taste  the  cool  purity  of  mid-atmosphere.  At 
length  they  reached  the  topmost  chamber,  directly 
beneath  the  roof  of  the  tower. 

"  This  is  my  own  abode,"  said  Donatello ;  "  my  own 
owl's  nest." 

In  fact,  the  room  was  fitted  up  as  a  bedchamber, 
though  in  a  style  of  the  utmost  simplicity.  It  likewise 
served  as  an  oratory;  there  being  a  crucifix  in  one 
corner,  and  a  multitude  of  holy  emblems,  such  as 
Catholics  judge  it  necessary  to  help  their  devotion 
withal.  Several  ugly  little  prints,  representing  the 
sufferings  of  the  Saviour,  and  the  martyrdoms  of 
saints,  hung  on  the  wall ;  and,  behind  the  crucifix* 
there  was  a  good  copy  of  Titian's  Magdalen  of  the 
Pitti  Palace,  clad  only  in  the  flow  of  her  golden  ring- 
lets. She  had  a  confident  look  (but  it  was  Titian's 
fault,  not  the  penitent  woman's),  as  if  expecting  to 
win  heaven  by  the  free  display  of  her  earthly  charms. 
Inside  of  a  glass  case  appeared  an  image  of  the  sa* 
vcred  Bambino,  in  the  guise  of  a  little  waxen  boy,  very 


Digitized 


by  Google 


GRAND  DUCAL  SQUARE,  AND  PALAZZO  VECCHIO,  FLORENCE 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  OWL  TOWER.  295' 

prettily  made,  reclining  among  flowers,  like  a  Capid, 
and  holding  up  a  heart  that  resembled  a  bit  of  red 
sealing-wax.  A  small  vase  of  precious  marble  was  full 
if  holy  water. 

Beneath  the  crucifix,  on  a  table,  lay  a  human  skull, 
which  looked  as  if  it  might  have  been  dug  up  out  of 
some  old  grave.  But,  examining  it  more  closely.  Ken- 
yon  saw  that  it  was  carved  in  gray  alabaster,  most 
skilfully  done  to  the  death,  with  accurate  imitation  of 
the  teeth,  the  sutures,  the  empty  eye-caverns,  and  the 
fragile  little  bones  of  the  nose.  This  hideous  emblem 
rested  on  a  cushion  of  white  marble,  so  nicely  wrought 
that  you  seemed  to  see  the  impression  of  the  heavy 
skull  in  a  silken  and  downy  substance. 

Donatello  dipped  his  fiingers  into  the  holy -water 
vase,  and  crossed  himself.   After  doing  so  he  trembled. 

"  I  have  no  right  to  make  the  sacred  symbol  on  a 
sinful  breast !  "  he  said. 

"On  what  mortal  breast  can  it  be  made,  then?" 
asked  the  sculptor.  "Is  there  one  that  hides  no 
sin?" 

"  But  these  blessed  emblems  make  you  smile,  I 
fear,"  resumed  the  Coimt,  looking  askance  at  his 
friend.  "  You  heretics,  I  know,  attempt  to  pray  with- 
evt  even  a  crucifix  to  kneel  at." 

"  I,  at  least,  whom  you  call  a  heretic,  reverence  thai 
holy  symbol,"  answered  Kenyoa.  "  What  I  am  most 
inclined  to  murmur  at  is  this  death's-head.  I  could 
laugh,  moreover,  in  its  ugly  face!  It  is  absurdly 
monstrous,  my  dear  friend,  thus  to  fling  the  dead* 
weight  of  our  mortality  upon  our  immortal  hopes. 
While  we  live  on  earth,  't  is  true,  we  must  needs  carry 
our  skeletons  about  with  us ;  but,  for  Heaven's  sake, 
do  not  let  us  burden  our  spirits  with  them,  in  our  fee* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


296  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

ble  efforts  to  soar  upward  I  Believe  me,  it  will  change 
the  whole  aspect  of  death,  if  you  can  once  disconnect 
it,  in  your  idea,. with  that  qorruption  from  which  it 
disengages  our  higher  part." 

"I  do  not  well  understand  you,"  said  Donatello*, 
and  he  took  up  the  alabaster  skull,  shuddering,  and 
evidently  feeling  it  a  kind  of  penance  to  touch  it.  "  I 
only  know  that  this  skull  has  been  in  my  family  for 
centuries.  Old  Tomaso  has  a  story  that  it  was  copied 
by  a  famous  sculptor  from  the  skull  of  that  same  un- 
happy knight  who  loved  the  fountain-lady,  and  lost 
her  by  a  blood-stain.  He  lived  and  died  with  a  deep 
sense  of  sin  upon  him,  and,  on  his  death-bed,  he  or- 
dained that  this  token  of  him  should  go  down  to  his 
posterity.  And  my  forefathers,  being  a  cheerful  race 
of  men  in  their  natural  disposition,  found  it  needful 
to  have  the  skull  often  before  their  eyes,  because  they 
dearly  loved  life  and  its  enjoyments,  and  hated  the 
very  thought  of  death." 

"  I  am  afraid,"  said  Kenyon,  "  they  liked  it  none 
the  better,  for  seeing  its  face  imder  this  abominable 
mask." 

Without  further  discussion,  the  Count  led  the  way 
up  one  more  flight  of  stairs,  at  the  end  of  which  they 
emerged  upon  the  summit  of  the  tower.  The  sculptor 
felt  as  if  his  being  were  suddenly  magnified  a  him- 
dred'fold  ;  so  wide  was  the  Umbrian  valley  that  sud- 
denly opened  before  him,  set  in  its  grand  framework 
of  nearer  and  more  distant  hills.  It  seemed  as  if  all 
Italy  lay  under  his  eyes  in  that  one  picture.  For  there 
was  the  broad,  sunny  smile  of  God,  which  we  fancy 
to  be  spread  over  that  favored  land  more  abundantly 
than  on  other  regions,  and,  beneath  it,  glowed  a  most 
rich  and  varied  fertility.     The  trim  vineyards  were 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  OWL   TOWER.  297 

Uiere,  and  the  fig-trees,  and  the  mulberries,  and  the 
«moky-hued  tracts  of  the  olive-orchards;  there,  too, 
were  fields  of  every  kind  of  grain,  among  which  waved 
the  Indian  com,  putting  Kenyon  in  mind  of  the  fondly 
remembered  acres  of  his  father's  homestead.  White 
villas,  gray  convents,  church -spires,  villages,  towns, 
each  with  its  battlemented  walls  and  towered  gate- 
way, were  scattered  upon  this  spacious  map ;  a  river 
gleamed  across  it ;  and  lakes  opened  their  blue  eyes 
in  its  face,  reflecting  heaven,  lest  mortals  should  for- 
get that  better  land  when  they  beheld  the  earth  so 
beautiful. 

What  made  the  valley  look  still  wider  was  the  two 
or  threb  varieties  of  weather  that  were  visible  on  its 
surface,  all  at  the  same  instant  of  time.  Here  lay  the 
quiet  sunshine ;  there  fell  the  great  black  patches  of 
ominous  shadow  from  the  clouds ;  and  behind  them, 
like  a  giant  of  league-long  strides,  came  hurrying  the 
thimder-storm,  which  had  already  swept  midway  across 
the  plain.  In  the  rear  of  the  approaching  tempest, 
brightened  forth  agailx  the  sunny  splendor,  which  its 
progress  had  darkened  with  so  terrible  a  frown. 

All  round  this  majestic  landscape,  the  bald-peaked 
or  forest-crowned  mountains  descended  boldly  upon  the 
plain.  On  many  of  their  spurs  and  midway  declivities, 
and  even  on  their  summits,  stood  cities,  some  of  them 
famous  of  old ;  for  these  had  been  the  seats  and  nurse- 
ries of  early  art,  where  the  flower  of  beauty  sprang  out 
of  a  rocky  soil,  and  in  a  high,  keen  atmosphere,  when 
the  richest  and  most  sheltered  gardens  failed  to  nour- 
ish it. 

"Thank  God  for  letting  me  s^ain  behold  this 
scene  1 "  said  the  sculptor,  a  devout  man  in  his  way, 
reverently  taking  off  his  hat.     "  I  have  viewed  it  front 


Digitized 


by  Google 


298      ROMANCE  OF  MONTR  BENI. 

i!aany  points,  and  never  without  as  full  a  sensation  ol 
gratitude  as  my  heart  seems  capable  of  feeling.  How 
it  strengthens  the  poor  human  spirit  in  its  reliance  on 
His  providence,  to  ascend  but  this  little  way  abcfve  the 
common  level,  and  so  attain  a  somewhat  wider  glimpse 
of  His  dealings  with  mankind  I  He  doeth  all  things 
right  1     His  will  be  done  I  " 

"  You  discern  something  that  is  hidden  from  me,'* 
observed  Donatello,  gloomily,  yet  striving  with  un- 
wonted grasp  to  catch  the  analogies  which  so  cheered 
his  friend.  "  I  see  sunshine  on  one  spot,  and  cloud  in 
another,  and  no  reason  for  it  in  either  case.  The  sun 
on  you ;  the  cloud  on  me !  What  comfort  can  I  draw 
from  this  ?  " 

"  Nay ;  I  cannot  preach,"  said  Kenyon,  "  with  a 
page  of  heaven  and  a  page  of  earth  spread  wide  open 
before  us !  Only  begin  to  read  it,  and  you  will  find  it 
interpreting  itself  without  the  aid  of  words.  It  is  a 
great  mistake  to  try  to  put  our  best  thoughts  into  hu- 
man language.  When  we  ascend  into  the  higher  re^ 
gions  of  emotion  and  spiritual  enjoyment,  they  are 
only  expressible  by  such  grand  hieroglyphics  as  these 
around  us." 

They  stood  awhile,  contemplating  the  scene ;  but,  as 
inevitably  happens  after  a  spiritual  flight,  it  was  not 
long  before  the  sculptor  felt  his  wings  flagging  in  the 
rarity  of  the  upper  atmosphere.  He  was  glad  to  let 
himself  quietly  downward  out  of  the  mid-sky,  as  it 
were,  and  alight  on  the  solid  platform  of  the  battle- 
mented  tower.  He  looked  about  him,  and  beheld 
growing  out  of  the  stone  pavement,  which  formed  the 
roof,  a  little  shrub,  with  green  and  glossy  leaves.  It 
was  the  only  green  thing  there ;  and  Heaven  knows 
how  its  seeds  had  ever  been  planted,  at  that  airy 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  OWL   TOWER.  299 

height,  or  how  it  had  found  nourishment  for  its  small 
life  in  the  chinks  of  the  stones ;  for  it  had  no  earth, 
and  nothing  more  like  soil  than  the  crumbling  mortar, 
which  had  been  crammed  into  the  crevices  in  a  long- 
past  age. 

Yet  the  plant  seemed  fond  of  its  native  site  |  and 
Donatello  said  it  had  always  grown  there,  from  his 
earliest  remembrance,  and  never,  he  believed^  any 
smaller  or  any  larger  than  they  saw  it  now* 

"  I  wonder  if  the  shrub  teaches  you  any  good  les- 
son," said  he,  observing  the  interest  with  which  Ken- , 
yon  examined   it.     "  If  the  wide  valley  has  a  great 
meaning,  the  plant  ought  to  have  at  least  a  little  one ; 
and  it  has  been  growing  on  our  tower  long  enough  to. 
have^learned  how  to  speak  it," 

"  Oh,  certainly! "  answered  the  sculptor 5  "the  shrub 
has  its  moral,  or  it  would  have  perished  long  ago. 
And,  no  doubt,  it  is  for  your  use  and  edification,  since 
you  have  had  it  before  your  eyes  all  your  lifetime,  and 
now  are  moved  to  ask  what  may  be  its  lesson.'' 

"  It  teaches  me  nothing,"  said  the  simple  Donatello, 
stooping  over  the  plant,  and  perplexing  himself  with  a 
minute  scrutiny.  "  But  here  was  a  worm  that  would 
have  killed  it ;  an  ugly  creature,  which  I  will  fling  ovei 
the  battlements.", 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CJHAPTEE  XXEL 

ON*  THE  BATTLEMENTS. 

The  sculptor  now  looked  through  an  embrasnrei 
and  threw  down  a  bit  of  lime,  watching  its  fall,  till 
it  struck  upon  a  stone  bench  at  the  rocky  foundation 
of  the  tower,  and  flew  into  many  fragments. 

"Pray  pardon  me  for  helping  Time  to  crumble 
away  your  ancestral  walls,"  said  he.  "  But  I  am  one 
of  those  persons  who  have  a  natural  tendency  to  climb 
heights,  and  to  stand  on  the  verge  of  them,  measuring 
the  depth  below.  If  I  were  to  do  just  as  I  like,  at 
this  moment,  I  should  fling  myself  down  after  that  bit 
of  lime.  It  is  a  very  singular  temptation,  and  all  but 
irresistible ;  partly,  I  believe,  because  it  might  be  so 
easily  done,  and  partly  because  such  momentous  con- 
sequences would  ensue,  without  my  being  compelled  to 
wait  a  moment  for  them.  Have  you  never  felt  this 
strange  impulse  of  an  evil  spirit  at  your  back,  shoving 
you  towards  a  precipice  ?  " 

"  Ah,  no !  '*  cried  Donatello,  shrinking  from  the  bafc- 
tlemented  wall  with  a  face  of  horror.  "  I  cling  to  life 
in  a  way  which  you  cannot  conceive ;  it  has  been  so 
rich,  so  warm,  so  stmnyl — and  beyond  its  verge, 
nothing  but  the  chilly  dark  I  And  then  a  fall  from 
a  precipice  is  such  an  awful  death  1 " 

"  Nay ;  if  it  be  a  great  height,"  said  Kenyon,  "  a 
man  would  leave  his  life  in  the  air,  and  never  feel 
the  hard  shock  at  the  bottom." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


ON  THE  BATTLEMENTS.  801 

**  That  is  not  the  way  with  this  kind  of  death  I  '*  ex- 
claimed Donatello,  in  a  low,  horror-stricken  voice, 
which  grew  higher  and  more  full  of  emotion  as  he 
proceeded.  "  Imagine  a  fellow-creature,  —  breathing, 
now,  and  looking  you  in  the  face, — and  now  tum- 
bling down,  down,  down,  with  a  long  shriek  wavering 
after  him,  all  the  way  I  He  does  not  leave  his  life 
in  the  air  I  No ;  but  it  keeps  in  him  till  he  thumps 
against  the  stones,  a  horribly  long  while;  then  he 
lies  there  frightfully  quiet,  a  dead  heap  of  bruised 
ilesh  and  broken  bones  I  A  quiver  runs  through  the 
crushed  mass;  and  no  more  movement  after  that! 
No ;  not  if  you  would  give  your  soul  to  make  him  stir 
a  finger  I  Ah,  terrible  I  Yes,  yes ;  I  would  fain  fling 
myself  down  for  the  very  dread  of  it,  that  I  might  en- 
dure it  once  for  all,  and  dream  of  it  no  more  1 " 

"  How  forcibly,  how  frightfully  you  conceive  this !  "^ 
said  the  sculptor,  aghast  at  the  passionate  horror  which 
was  betrayed  in  the  Count's  words,  and  still  more  in 
his  wild  gestures  and  ghastly  look.  "Nay,  if  the 
height  of  your  tower  affects  your  imagination  thus, 
you  do  wrong  to  trust  yourself  here  in  solitude,  and 
in  the  night-time,  and  at  all  unguarded  hours.  You 
are  not  safe  in  your  chamber.  It  is  but  a  step  or 
two ;  and  what  if  a  vivid  dream  should  lead  you  up 
hither,  at  midnight,  and  act  itself  out  as  a  reality  I  " 

Donatello  had  hidden  his  face  in  his  hands,  and  was 
leaning  against  the  parapet. 

"  No  fear  of  that  1 "  said  he.  "  Whatever  the  dream 
may  be,  I  am  too  genuine  a  coward  to  act  out  my  own 
death  in  it." 

The  paroxysm  passed  away,  and  the  two  friends 
continued  their  desultory  talk,  very  much  as  if  no  such 
interruption  had  occurred.   Nevertheless,  it  affected  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


802  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENl. 

Bculptor  with  infinite  pity  to  see  this  young  man,  who 
had  been  bom  to  gladness  as  an  assured  heritage,  noMT 
involved  in  a  misty  bewilderment  of  grievous  thoughts^ 
amid  which  he  seemed  to  go  staggering  blindfold.  Ken- 
yon,  not  without  an  unshaped  suspicion  of  the  definite 
fact,  knew  that  his  condition  must  have  resulted  from 
the  weight  and  gloom  of  life,  how  first,  through  the 
agency  of  a  secret  trouble,  making  themselves  felt  on  a 
character  that  had  heretofore  breathed  only  an  atmos- 
phere of  joy.  The  effect  of  this  hard  lesson,  upon 
Donatello's  intellect  and  disposition,  was  very  striking. 
It  was  perceptible  that  he  had  already  had  glimpses  of 
strange  and  subtle  matters  in  those  dark  caverns,  into 
which  all  men  must  descend,  if  they  would  know  any- 
thing beneath  the  surface  and  illusive  pleasures  of  ex- 
istence. And  when  they  emerge,  though  dazzled  and 
blinded  by  the  first  glare  of  daylight,  they  take  truer 
and  sadder  views  of  life  forever  afterwards. 

From  some  mysterious  source,  as  the  sculptor  felt 
assured,  a  soul  had  been  inspired  into  the  young 
Count's  simplicity,  since  their  intercourse  in  Rome. 
He  now  showed  a  far  deeper  sense,  and  an  intelli- 
gence that  began  to  deal  with  high  subjects,  though  in 
a  feeble  and  childish  way.  He  evinced,  too,  a  more 
definite  and  nobler  individuality,  but  developed  out  of 
grief  and  pain,  and  fearfully  conscious  of  the  pangs 
that  had  given  it  birth.  Every  human  life,  if  it  as* 
cends  to  truth  or  delves  down  to  reality,  must  undergo 
a  similar  change  ;  but  sometimes,  perhaps,  the  instruo* 
lion  comes  without  the  sorrow ;  and  oftener  the  sor* 
row  teaches  no  lesson  that  abides  with  us.  In  Dona- 
tello's case,  it  was  pitiful,  and  almost  ludicrous,  to  ob» 
»erve  the  confused  struggle  that  he  made ;  how  com. 
pletely  he  was  taken  by  surprise  :  how  ill-prepared  he 


Digitized 


by  Google 


ON  THE  BATTLEMENTS.  303 

fttood,  on  this  old  battle-field  of  the  world,  to  fight  with 
such  an  inevitable  foe  as  mortal  calamity,  and  sin  for 
its  stronger  ally. 

"  And  yet,"  thought  Kenyon,  "  the  poor  fellow  bears 
himself  like  a  hero,  too !  If  he  would  only  tell  me  his 
trouble,  or  give  me  an  opening  to  speak  frankly  about 
it,  I  might  help  him ;  but  he  finds  it  too  horrible  to  be 
uttered,  and  fancies  himself  the  only  mortal  that  ever 
felt  the  anguish  of  remorse.  Yes  ;  he  believes  that 
nobody  ever  endured  his  agony  before ;  so  that  — 
sharp  enough  in  itself  —  it  has  all  the  additional  zest 
of  a  torture  just  invented  to  plague  him  individually." 

The  sculptor  endeavored  to  dismiss  the  painful  sub- 
ject from  his  mind ;  and,  leaning  against  the  battle- 
ments, he  turned  his  face  southward  and  westward,  and 
gazed  across  the  breadth  of  the  valley.  His  thoughts 
flew  far  beyond  even  those  wide  boundaries,  taking 
an  air-line  from  Donatello's  tower  to  another  turitet 
that  ascended  into  the  sky  of  the  summer  afternoon, 
invisibly  to  him,  above  the  roofs  of  distant  Rome. 
Then  rose  tumultuously  into  his  consciousness  that 
strong  love  for  Hilda,  which  it  was  his  habit  to  con- 
fine in  one  of  the  heart's  inner  chambers,  because  he 
had  foimd  no  encouragement  to  bring  it  forward.  But 
now,  he  felt  a  strange  pull  at  his  heartstrings.  It 
could  not  have  been  more  perceptible,  if  all  the  way 
between  these  battlements  and  Hilda's  dove-cote  had 
stretched  an  exquisitely  sensitive  cord,  which,  at  the 
hither  end,  was  knotted  with  his  aforesaid  heartstrings, 
and,  at  the  remoter  one,  was  grasped  by  a  gentle 
hand.  His  breath  grew  tremulous.  He  put  his  hand 
to  his  breast ;  so  distinctly  did  he  seem  to  feel  that 
cord  drawn  once,  and  again,  and  again,  as  if  —  though 
Btill  it  was  bashfully  intimated  —  there  were  an  import 


Digitized 


by  Google 


804  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

tunate  demand  for  his  presenc3.  Oh,  for  the  white 
wings  of  Hilda's  doves,  that  he  might  have  flown 
thither,  and  alighted  at  the  Virgin's  shrine  1 

But  lovers,  and  Kenyon  knew  it  well,  project  so 
lifelike  a  copy  of  their  mistresses  out  of  their  own  im« 
aginations,  that  it  can  pull  at  the  heartstrings  almost 
as  perceptibly  as  the  genuine  original.  No  airy  inti- 
mations are  to  be  trusted;  no  evidences  of  respon* 
sive  affection  less  positive  than  whispered  and  broken 
words,  or  tender  pressures  of  the  hand,  allowed  and 
half  returned ;  or  glances,  that  distil  many  passionate 
avowals  into  one  gleam  of  richly  colored  light.  Even 
these  should  be  weighed  rigorously,  at  the  instant; 
for,  in  another  instant,  the  imagination  seizes  on  them 
as  its  property,  and  stamps  them  with  its  own  arbi- 
trary value.  But  Hilda's  maidenly  reserve  had  given 
her  lover  no  such  tokens,  to  be  interpreted  either  hy 
his  hopes  or  fears. 

"Yonder,  over  mountain  and  valley,  lies  Rome,'* 
said  the  sculptor  ;  "  shall  you  return  thither  in  the 
autumn  ?  '* 

"  Never  I  I  hate  Eome,"  answered  Donatello ; 
"and  have  good  cause." 

"  And  yet  it  was  a  pleasant  winter  that  we  spent 
there,"  observed  Kenyon,  "  and  with  pleasant  friends 
about  us.  You  would  meet  them  again  there, —  all 
of  them." 

"  AU?  "  asked  DonateUo. 

"  All,  to  the  best  of  my  belief,"  said  the  sculptor : 
"but  you  need  not  go  to  Rome  to  seek  them.  If 
there  were  one  of  those  friends  whose  lifetime  was 
twisted  with  your  own,  I  am  enough  of  a  fatalist  to  feel 
assured  that  you  will  meet  that  one  again,  wandei 
whither  you  may.    Neither  can  we  escape  the  compaiiF 


Digitized 


by  Google 


ON  THE  BATTLEMENTS.  805 

!ons  whom  Providence  assigns  for  us,  by  climbing  an 
old  tower  like  this." 

'^  Yet  the  stairs  are  steep  and  dark/'  rejoined  the 
Count;  "none  but  yourself  would  seek  me  here,  or 
find  me,  if  they  sought." 

As  Donatello  did  not  take  advantage  of  this  open* 
ing  which  his  friend  had  kindly  afforded  him  to  pour 
out  his  hidden  troubles,  the  latter  again  threw  aside 
the  subject,  and  returned  to  the  enjoyment  of  the 
scene  before  him.  The  thunder-storm,  which  he  had 
beheld  striding  across  the  valley,  had  passed  to  the 
left  of  Monte  Beni,  and  was  continuing  its  march  to- 
wards the  hills  that  formed  the  boundary  on  the  east- 
ward. Above  the  whole  valley,  indeed,  the  sky  was 
heavy  with  tumbling  vapors,  interspersed  with  which 
were  tracts  of  blue,  vividly  brightened  by  the  sun; 
but,  in  the  east,  where  the  tempest  was  yet  trailing  its 
ragged  skirts,  lay  a  dusky  region  of  cloud  and  sullen 
mist,  in  which  some  of  the  hills  appeared  of  a  dark- 
purple  hue.  Others  became  so  indistinct,  that  the 
spectator  could  not  tell  rocky  height  from  impalpable 
cloud.  Far  into  this  misty  cloud-region,  however,  -^ 
within  the  domain  of  chaos,  as  it  were,  —  hill -tops 
were  seen  brightening  in  the  sunshine ;  they  looked 
like  fragments  of  the  world,  broken  adrift  and  based 
on  nothingness,  or  like  portions  of  a  sphere  destined  to 
exist,  but  not  yet  finally  compacted. 

The  sculptor,  habitually  drawing  many  of  the  im- 
ages and  illustrations  of  his  thoughts  from  the  plastic 
art,  fancied  that  the  scene  represented  the  process  of 
the  Creator,  when  he  held  the  new,  imperfect  earth  in 
his  hand,  and  modelled  it. 

"  What  a  magic  is  in  mist  and*  vapor  among  the 
motmtains  I  "  he  exclaimed.     "  With  their  help,  one 


Digitized 


by  Google 


iftOe  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

Bingle  scene  becomes  a  thousand.  The  cloud-scenery 
gives  such  variety  to  a  hilly  landscape  that  it  would 
be  worth  while  to  journalize  its  aspect  from  hour  to 
hour.  A  cloud,  however,  —  as  I  have  myself  experi^ 
enced,  —  is  apt  to  grow  solid  and  as  heavy  as  a  stone 
the  instant  that  you  take  in  hand  to  describe  it.  But, 
in  my  own  heart,  I  have  found  great  use  in  clouds. 
Such  silvery  ones  as  those  to  the  northward,  for  ex- 
ample, have  often  suggested  sculpturesque  groups,  fig- 
ures, and  attitudes ;  they  are  especially  rich  in  atti- 
tudes of  living  repose,  which  a  sculptor  only  hits  upon 
by  the  rarest  good  fortune.  When  I  go  back  to  my 
dear  native  land,  the  clouds  along  the  horizon  will  bo 
my  only  gallery  of  art  I  " 

"  I  can  see  cloud-shapes,  too,"  said  Donatello ;  "  yon- 
der is  one  that  shifts  strangely ;  it  has  been  like  peo- 
ple whom  I  knew.  And  now,  if  1  watch  it  a  little 
longer,  it  will  take  the  figure  of  a  monk  reclining, 
with  his  cowl  about  his  head  and  drawn  partly  over 
his  face,  and  —  well  I  did  I  not  tell  you  so  ?  " 

"  I  think,"  remarked  Kenyon,  "  we  can  hardly  be 
gazing  at  the  same  cloud.  What  I  behold  is  a  reclin- 
ing figure,  to  be  sure,  but  feminine,  and  with  a  de- 
spondent air,  wonderfully  well  expressed  in  the  wav- 
ering outline  from  head  to  foot.  It  moves  my  very 
heart  by  something  indefinable  that  it  suggests." 

"I  see  the  figure,  and  almost  the  face,"  said  the 
Count ;  adding,  in  a  lower  voice,  "  It  is  Miriam's  1 " 

"  No,  not  Miriam's,"  answered  the  sculptor. 

While  the  two  gazers  thus  found  their  own  reminis- 
cences and  presentiments  floating  among  the  clouds, 
the  day  drew  to  its  close,  and  now  showed  them  the 
'  fair  spectacle  of  an  Italian  sunset.  The  sky  was  sc^ft 
and  bright,  but  not  so  gorgeous  as  Kenyon  had  seendl^ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


ON  THE  BATTLEMENTS.  807 

a  thousand  times,  in  America ;  for  there  the  western 
sky  is  wont  to  be  set  aflame  with  breadths  and  depths 
of  color  with  which  poets  seek  in  vain  to  dye  their 
verses,  and  which  painters  never  dare  to  copy.  As 
beheld  from  the  tower  of  Monte  Beni,  the  scone  was 
tenderly  magnificent,  with  mild  gradations  of  hue.  and 
a  lavish  outpouring  of  gold,^  but  rather  such  gold  as 
we  see  on  the  leaf  of  a  bright  flower  than  the  bur- 
nished glow  of  metal  from  the  mine.  Or,  if  metallic,  it 
looked  airy  and  unsubstantial,  like  the  glorified  dreams 
of  an  alchemist.  And  speedily  —  more  speedily  than 
in  our  own  clime  —  came  the  twilight,  and,  brighter 
ing  through  its  gray  transparency,  t^e  stars. 

A  swarm  of  minute  insects  that  had  been  hovering 
all  day  round  the  battlements  were  now  swept  away 
by  the  freshness  of  a  rising  breeze.  The  two  owls  in 
the  chamber  beneath  Donatello*s  uttered  their  soft 
melancholy  cry,  —  which,  with  national  avoidance  of 
harsh  sounds,  Italian  owls  substitute  for  the  hoot  of 
their  kindred  in  other  countries,  —  and  flew  darkling 
forth  among  the  shrubbery.  A  convent-bell  rang  out 
near  at  hand,  and  was  not  only  echoed  among  the 
hills,  but  answered  by  another  bell,  and  still  another, 
which  doubtless  had  farther  and  farther  responses,  at 
various  distances  along  the  valley ;  for,  like  the  Eng- 
lish drumbeat  around  the  globe,  there  is  a  chain  of 
convent-bells  from  end  to  end,  and  cross-wise,  aud  in 
all  possible  directions  over  priest-ridden  Italy. 

*'  Come,"  said  the  sculptor,  "  the  evening  air  grows 
cool.     It  is  time  to  descend." 

"  Time  for  you,  my  friend,"  replied  the  Count;  and 
he  hesitated  a  little  before  adding,  "I  must  keep  a 
vigil  here  for  some  hours  longer.  It  is  my  frequent 
custom  to  keep  vigils :  and  sometimes^  the  thought  oc* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


808  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENI. 

curs  to  me  whether  it  were  not  better  to  keep  them  iit 
yonder  convent,  the  bell  of  which  just  now  seemed 
to  summon  me.  Should  I  do  wisely,  do  you  think, 
to  exchange  this  old  tower  for  a  cell  ?  " 

"  What !  Turn  monk  ?  "  exclaimed  his  friend.  "  A 
horrible  idea  I " 

"  True,"  said  Donatello,  sighing.  "  Therefore,  if  at 
all,  I  purpose  doing  it." 

"  Then  think  of  it  no  more,  for  Heaven's  sake !  " 
cried  the  sculptor.  "  There  are  a  thousand  better  and 
more  poignant  methods  of  being  miserable  than  that, 
if  to  be  miserable  is  what  you  wish.  Nay  ;  I  question 
whether  a  monk  keeps  himself  up  to  the  intellectual 
and  spiritual  height  which  misery  implies.  A  monk 
—  I  judge  from  their  sensual  physiognomies,  which 
meet  me  at  every  turn  —  is  inevitably  a  beast  1  Their 
souls,  if  they  have  any  to  begin  with,  perish  out  of 
them,  before  their  sluggish,  swinish  existence  is  half 
done.  Better,  a  million  times,  to  stand  star-gazing  on 
these  airy  battlements,  than  to  smother  your  new  germ 
of  a  higher  life  in  a  monkish  cell !  " 

"  You  make  me  tremble,"  said  DonateUo,  "  by  your 
bold  aspersion  of  men  who  have  devoted  themselves 
to  God's  service  1 " 

"  They  serve  neither  God  nor  man,  and  themselves 
least  of  all,  though  their  motives  be  utterly  selfish," 
replied  Kenyon.  "  Avoid  the  convent,  my  dear  friend, 
as  you  would  shun  the  death  of  the  soul  I  But,  for 
my  own  part,  if  I  had  an  insupportable  burden,  — 
it,  for  any  cause,  1  were  bent  upon  sacrificing  every 
earthly  hope  as  a  peace-ofiFering  towards  Heaven,  —  I 
would  make  the  wide  world  my  cell,  and  good  deeds 
to  mankind  my  prayer.  Many  penitent  men  have 
done  this,  and  found  peace  in  it." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


ON  THE  BATTLEMENTS.  .809 

**  Ah,  but  you  are  a  heretic  I "  said  the  Count. 

Yet  his  face  brightened  beneath  the  stars;  and, 
looking  at  it  through  the  twilight,  the  sculptor's  re^ 
membranee  went  back  to  that  scene  in  the  Capitol, 
where,  both  in  features  and  expression,  Donatello  had 
seemed  identical  with  the  Faun.  And  still  there  was 
a  resemblance ;  for  now,  when  first  the  idea  was  sug- 
gested of  living  for  the  welfare  of  his  fellow-creatures, 
the  original  beauty,  which  sorrow  had  partly  effaced, 
came  back  elevated  and  spiritualized.  In  the  black 
depths,  the  Faun  had  found  a  soul,  and  was  strug^ 
gling  with  it  towards  the  light  of  heaven. 

The  illumination,  it  is  true,  soon  faded  out  of  Dona- 
tello's  face.  The  idea  of  life-long  and  unselfish  effort 
was  too  high  to  be  received  by  him  with  more  than  a 
momentary  comprehension.  An  Italian,  indeed,  sel- 
dom dreams  of  being  philanthropic,  except  in  bestow- 
ing alms  among  the  pau^rs,  who  appeal  to  his  benef- 
icence at  every  step;  nor  does  it  occur  to  him  that 
there  are  fitter  modes  of  propitiating  Heaven  than  by 
penances,  pilgrimages,  and  offerings  at  shrines.  Per- 
haps, too,  their  system  has  its  share  of  moral  advan- 
tages ;  they,  at  all  events,  cannot  well  pride  themselves, 
as  our  own  more  energetic  benevolence  is  apt  to  do, 
upon  sharing  in  the  counsels  of  Providence  and  kindly 
helping  out  its  otherwise  impracticable  designs. 

And  now  the  broad  valley  twinkled  with  lights,  that 
glimmered  through  its  duskiness,  like  the  fire-flies  in 
the  garden  of  a  Florentine  palace.  A  gleam  of  light- 
ning from  the  rear  of  the  tempest  showed  the  circum- 
ference of  hills,  and  the  great  space  between,  as  the 
last  cannon-flash  of  a  retreating  army  reddens  across 
the  field  where  it  has  fought.  The  sculptor  was  on 
the  point  of  descending  the  turret-stair,  when,  some* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


810  ROMANCE  0^  MONTE  BENT. 

where  in  the  darkness  that  lay  beneath  them,  a 
woman's  voice  was  heard,  singing  a  low,  sad  strain. 

^^  Hark  I "  said  he,  laying  his  hand  on  Donatello's 
arm. 

And  DonateUo  had  said,  *^  Hark  I "  at  thie  same  in- 
stant. 

The  song,  if  song  it  could  be  called,  that  had  only 
a  wild  rhythm,  and  flowed  forth  in  the  fitful  measure 
of  a  wind-harp,  did  not  clothe  itself  in  the  sharp  brill* 
iancy  of  the  Italian  tongue.  The  words,  so  far  as  they 
oould  be  distinguished,  were  German,  and  therefore 
unintelligible  to  the  Count,  and  hardly  less  so  to  the 
sculptor ;  being  softened  and  molten,  as  it  were,  into 
the  melancholy  richness  of  the  voice  that  sung  them* 
It  was  as  the  murmur  of  a  soul  bewildered  amid  the 
sinful  gloom  of  earth,  and  retaining  only  enough 
memory  of  a  better  state  to  make  sad  music  of  the 
wail,  which  would  else  have  Seen  a  despairing  shriek. 
Never  was  there  profounder  pathos  than  breathed 
through  that  mysterious  voice ;  it  brought  the  tears 
into  the  sculptor's  eyes,  with  remembrances  and  fore- 
bodings of  whatever  sorrow  he  had  felt  or  appre- 
hended ;  it  made  DonateUo  sob,  as  chiming  in  with 
the  anguish  that  he  found  unutterable,  and  giving  it 
the  expression  which  he  vaguely  sought. 

But,  when  the  emotion  was  at  its  prof oundest  depth, 
the  voice  rose  out  of  it,  yet  so  gradually  that  a  gloom 
seemed  to  pervade  it,  far  upward  from  the  abyss,  and 
not  entirely  to  fall  away  as  it  ascended  into  a  higher 
and  purer  region.  At  last,  the  auditors  would  have 
fancied  that  the  melody,  with  its  rich  sweetness  all 
there,  and  much  of  its  sorro,w  gone,  was  floating 
around  the  very  summit  of  the  tower. 

"DonateUo,"   said   the   sculptor,  when   there   waa 


Digitized 


by  Google 


ON  THE  BATTLEMENTS.  811 

Bilence  again,  ^^had  that  voice  no  message  for  yoiup 
ear?" 

"  I  dare  not  receive  it,"  said  Donatello ;  **  the  ait 
gnish  of  which  it  spoke  abides  with  me:  the  hope 
dies  away  with  the  breath  that  brought  it  hither.  It 
is  not  good  for  me  to  hear  that  voice." 

The  sculptor  sighed,  and  left  the  poor  peniteni 
keeping  his  vigil  on  the  tower. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

DONATELLO'S   BUST. 

Kenton,  it  will  be  remembered,  had  asked  Dona 
tello's  permission  to  model  his  bust.  The  work  had 
now  made  considerable  progress,  and  necessarily  kept 
the  sculptor's  thoughts  brooding  much  and  often  upon 
his  host's  personal  characteristics.  These  it  was  his 
difficult  office  to  bring  out  from  their  depths,  and 
interpret  them  to  all  men,  showing  them  what  they 
could  not  discern  for  themselves,  yet  must  be  com- 
pelled to  recognize  at  a  glance,  on  the  surface  of  a 
block  of  marble. 

He  had  never  undertaken  a  portrait  -  bust  which 
gave  him  so  much  trouble  as  Donatello's ;  not  that 
there  was  any  special  difficulty  in  hitting  the  likeness, 
though  even  in  this  respect  the  grace  and  harmony  of 
the  features  seemed  inconsistent  with  a  prominent  ex* 
pression  of  individuality ;  but  he  was  chiefly  perplexed 
how  to  make  this  genial  and  kind  type  of  countenance 
the  index  of  the  mind  within.  His  acuteness  and  his 
sympathies,  indeed,  were  both  somewhat  at  fault  in 
their  efforts  to  enlighten  him  as  to  the  moral  phase 
through  which  the  Count  was  now  passing.  If  at  one 
sitting  he  caught  a  glimpse  of  what  appeared  to  be  a 
genuine  and  permanent  trait,  it  would  probably  be 
less  perceptible  on  a  second  occasion,  and  perhaps 
have  vanished  entirely  at  a  third.  So  evanescent  a 
show  of  character  threw  the  sculptor  into  despair ;  not 


Digitized 


by  Google 


DONATELLO'S  BUST.  313 

marble  or  clay,  but  cloud  and  vapor,  was  the  material 
iu  which  it  ought  to  be  represented.  Even  the  ponder- 
ous depression  which  constantly  weighed  upon  Dona- 
tello's  heart  could  not  compel  him  into  the  kind  of 
repose  which  the  plastic  art  requires. 

Hopeless  of  a  good  result,  Kenyon  gave  up  all  pre-, 
conceptions  about  the  character  of  his  subject,  and  let 
his  hands  work  uncontrolled  with  the  clay,  somewhat 
as  a  spiritual  medium,  while  holding  a  pen,  yields  it 
to  an  unseen  guidance  other  than  that  of  her  own  will. 
Now  and  then  he  fancied  that  this  plan  was  destined 
to  be  the  successful  one.  A  skill  and  insight  beyond 
his  consciousness  seemed  occasionally  to  take  up  the 
task.  The  mystery,  the  miracle,  of  imbuing  an  inani- 
mate substance  with  thought,  feeling,  and  all  the  in- 
tangible attributes  of  the  soul,  appeared  on  the  verge 
of  being  wrought.  And  now,  as  he  flattered  himself, 
the  true  image  of  his  friend  was  about  to  emerge  from 
the  facile  material,  bringing  with  it  more  of  Donatel- 
lo's  character  than  the  keenest  observer  could  detect 
at  any  one  moment  in  the  face  of  the  original.  Vain 
expectation !  some  touch,  whereby  the  artist  thought 
to  improve  or  hasten  the  result,  interfered  with  the 
design  of  his  unseen  spiritual  assistant,  and  spoilt  the 
whole.  There  was  still  the  moist,  brown  clay,  indeed, 
and  the  features  of  Donatello,  but  without  any  sem- 
blance of  intelligent  and  sympathetic  life. 

"The  difficulty  will  drive  me  mad,  I  verily  be^ 
lievel"  cried  the  sculptor,  nervously.  "Look  at  the 
wretched  piece  of  work  yourself,  my  dear  friend,  and 
tell  me  whether  you  recognize  any  manner  of  likeness 
to  your  inner  man  ?  " 

"  None,"  replied  Donatello,  speaking  the  simple 
truth.     "  It  is  like  looking  a  stranger  in  the  face.'' 


Digitized 


by  Google 


814  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

This  frankly  unf avorauic  testimony  so  wrought  with 
the  sensitive  artist,  that  he  fell  into  a  passion  with  the 
stubborn  image,  and  cared  not  what  might  happe^ 
to  it  thenceforward.  Wielding  that  wonderful  power 
which  sculptors  possess  over  moist  clay,  however  re- 
fractory it  may  show  itself  in  certain  respects,  he  com-( 
pressed,  elongated,  widened,  and  otherwise  altered  the 
features  of  the  bust  in  mere  recklessness,  and  at  every 
change  inquired  of  the  Count  whether  the  expression 
became  anywise  more  satisfactory. 

'*  Stop  I "  cried  Donatello,  at  last,  catching  the  sculp^ 
tor's  hand.     "  Let  it  remain  so !  " 

By  some  accidental  handling  of  the  day,  entirely 
independent  of  his  own  will,  Kenyon  had  given  the 
countenance  a  distorted  and  violent  look,  combining 
animal  fierceness  with  intelligent  hatred.  Had  Hilda, 
or  had  Miriam,  seen  the  bust,  with  the  expression 
which  it  had  now  assumed,  they  might  have  recog- 
nized Donatello's  face  as  they  beheld  it  at  that  terri- 
ble moment  when  he  held  his  victim  over  the  edge  of 
the  precipice. 

"  What  have  I  done?"  said  the  sculptor,  shocked 
at  his  own  casual  production.  "  It  were  a  sin  to  let 
the  clay  which  l)ears  your  features  harden  into  a  look 
like  that.     Cain  never  wore  an  uglier  one." 

"  For  that  very  reason,  let  it  remain ! "  answered 
the  Count,  who  had  grown  pale  as  ashes  at  the  aspect 
of  his  crime,  thus  strangely  presented  to  him  in  an- 
other of  the  many  guises  under  which  guilt  stares  the 
criminal  in  the  face.  *'  Do  not  alter  it !  Chisel  it, 
rather,  in  eternal  marble !  I  will  set  it  up  in  my  ora- 
tory and  keep  it  continually  before  my  eyes.  Sadder 
and  more  horrible  is  a  face  like  this,  alive  with  my 
own  crime,  than  the  dead  skull  which  my  forefathers 
handed  down  to  me !  " 


Digitized 


by  Google 


DONATELLO'S  BUST.  815 

But,  without  in  the  least  heeding  Donatello's  remon- 
strances, the  sculptor  again  applied  his  artful  fingers 
to  the  clay,  and  compelled  the  bust  to  dismiss  the  ex- 
pression that  had  so  startled  them  both. 

^^  Believe  me,"  said  he,  turning  his  eyes  upon  his 
ifriend,  full  of  grave  and  tender  sympathy,  "you  know 
not  what  is  requisite  for  your  spiritual  growth,  seek- 
ing, as  you  do,  to  keep  your  soul  peppetually  in  the 
imwholesome  region  of  remorse.  It  was  needfid  for 
you  to  pass  through  that  dark  valley,  but  it  is  infi- 
nitely dangerous  to  linger  there  too  long;  there  is 
poison  in  the  atmosphere,  when  we  sit  down  and 
brood  in  it,  instead  of  girding  up  our  loins  to  press 
onward.  Not  despondency,  not  slothful  anguish,  is 
what  you  now  require,  —  but  effort  1  Has  there  been 
an  unalterable  evil  in  your  young  life  ?  Then  crowd 
it  out  with  good,  or  it  will  lie  corrupting  there  for- 
ever, and  cause  your  capacity  for  better  things  to  par- 
take its  noisome  corruption  !  " 

'*  You  stir  up  many  thoughts,"  said  Donatello,  press- 
ing his  hand  upon  his  brow,  "  but  the  multitude  and 
the  whirl  of  them  make  me  dizzy." 

They  now  left  the  sculptor's  temporary  studio,  with- 
out observing  that  his  last  accidental  touches,  with 
which  he  hurriedly  effaced  the  look  of  deadly  rage, 
had  given  the  bust  a  higher  and  sweeter  expression 
than  it  had  hitherto  worn.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that 
Kenyon  had  not  seen  it ;  for  only  an  artist,  perhaps, 
can  conceive  the  irksomeness,  the  irritation  of  brain, 
the  depression  of  spirits,  that  resulted  from  his  failure 
to  satisfy  himself,  after  so  much  toil  and  thought  as 
he  had  bestowed  on  Donatello's  bust.  In  case  of  suc- 
cess, indeed,  all  this  thoughtful  toil  would  have  been 
teckoned,  not  only  as  well  bestowed,  but  as  among  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


W6  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

happiest  hours  of  his  life ;  whereas,  deeming  himsell 
to  have  failed,  it  was  just  so  much  of  life  that  had  bet- 
ter never  have  been  lived ;  for  thus  does  the  good  or 
ill  result  of  his  labor  throw  back  sunshine  or  gloom 
upon  the  artist's  mind.  The  sculptor,  therefore,  would 
have  done  well  to  glance  again  at  his  work ;  for  here 
were  still  the  features  of  the  antique  Faun,  but  now 
illuminated  with  a  higher  meaning,  such  as  the  old 
marble  never  bore. 

Donatello  having  quitted  him,  Kenyon  spent  the 
rest  of  the  day  strolling  about  the  pleasant  precincts 
of  Monte  Beni,  where  the  summer  was  now  so  far  ad- 
vanced that  it  began,  indeed,  to  partake  of  the  ripe 
wealth  of  autumn.  Apricots  had  long  been  abundant, 
and  had  passed  away,  and  plums  and  cherries  along 
with  them.  But  now  came  great,  juicy  pears,  melting 
and  delicious,  and  peaches  of  goodly  size  and  tempt- 
ing aspect,  though  cold  and  watery  to  the  palate,  com- 
pared with  the  sculptor's  rich  reminiscences  of  that 
fruit  in  America.  The  purple  figs  had  already  en- 
joyed their  day,  and  the  white  ones  were  luscious  now. 
The  contadini  (who,  by  this  time,  knew  Kenyon  well) 
found  many  clusters  of  ripe  grapes  for  him,  in  every 
little  globe  of  which  was  included  a  fragrant  draught 
of  the  sunny  Monte  Beni  wine. 

Unexpectedly,  in  a  nook,  close  by  the  farm-house, 
he  happened  upon  a  spot  where  the  vintage  had  ac- 
tually commenced.  A  great  heap  of  early  ripened 
grapes  had  been  gathered,  and  thrown  into  a  mighty 
tub.  In  the  middle  of  it  stood  a  lusty  and  jolly  con- 
tadino,  nor  stood,  merely,  but  stamped  with  all  his 
might,  and  danced  amain  ;  while  the  red  juice  bathed 
his  feet,  and  threw  its  foam  midway  up  his  brown  and 
diaggy  legs.     Here,  then,  was  the  very  process  that 


Digitized 


by  Google 


DONATELLO*S  BUST.  817 

bIiows  so  picturesquely  in  Scripture  and  in  poetry,  of 
treading  out  the  wine-press  and  dyeing  the  feet  and 
garments  with  the  crimson  effusion  as  with  the  blood 
of  a  battle-field.  The  memory  of  the  process  does  not 
make  the  Tuscan  wine  taste  more  deliciously.  The 
contadini  hospitably  offered  Kenyon  a  sample  of  the 
new  liquor,  that  had  already  stood  fermenting  for  a 
day  or  two.  He  had  tried  a  similar  draught,  however, 
in  years  past,  and  was  little  inclined  to  make  proof  of 
it  again  ;  for  he  knew  that  it. would  be  a  sour  and  bit- 
ter juice,  a  wine  of  woe  and  tribulation,  and  that  the 
more  a  man  drinks  of  such  liquor,  the  sorrier  he  is 
likely  to  be. 

The  scene  reminded  the  sculptor  of  our  New  Eng- 
land vintages,  where  the  big  piles  of  golden  and  rosy 
apples  lie  under  the  orchard  trees,  in  the  mild,  autum- 
nal sunshine  ;  and  the  creaking  cider-mill,  set  in  mo- 
tion by  a  circumgyratory  horse,  is  all  a-gush  with  the 
luscious  juice.  To  speak  frankly,  the  cider-making  is 
the  more  picturesque  sight  of  the  two,  and  the  new, 
sweet  cider  an  infinitely  better  drink  than  the  ordi- 
nary, unripe  Tuscan  wine.  Such  as  it  is,  however, 
the  latter  fills  thousands  upon  thousands  of  small,  flat 
barrels,  and,  still  growing  thinner  and  sharper,  loses 
the  little  life  it  had,  as  wine,  and  becomes  apotheosized 
as  a  more  praiseworthy  vinegar. 

Yet  all  these  vineyard  scenes,  and  the  processes  con- 
nected with  the  culture  of  the  grape,  had  a  flavor  of 
poetry  about  them.  The  toil  that  produces  those 
kindly  gifts  of  nature  which  are  not  the  substance  of 
life,  but  its  luxury,  is  unlike  other  toil.  We  are  in- 
clined to  fancy  that  it  does  not  bend  the  sturdy  frame 
and  stiffen  the  overwrought  muscles,  like  the  labor 
^ihat  \^  devoted  in  sad,  hard  earnest  to  raise  grain  for 


Digitized 


by  Google 


818  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

sour  bread.  Certainly,  the  sunburnt  young  men  and 
dark -cheeked,  laughing  girls,  who  weeded  the  rich 
acres  of  Monte  Beni,  might  well  enough  have  passed 
for  inhabitants  of  an  unsophisticated  Arcadia.  Later 
in  the  season,  when  the  true  yintage-time  should  come, 
and  the  wine  of  Sunshine  gush  into  the  vats,  it  was 
hardly  too  wild  a  dream  that  Bacchus  himself  might 
revisit  the  haunts  which  he  loved  of  old.  But,  alas  I 
where  now  would  he  find  the  Faun  with  whom  we  see 
him  consorting  in  so  many  an  antique  group  ? 

Donatello's  remorseful  anguish  saddened  this  primi- 
tive and  delightful  life.  Kenyon  had  a  pain  of  his 
own,  moreover,  although  not  all  a  pain,  in  the  never- 
quiet,  never -satisfied  yearning  of  his  heart  towards 
Hilda.  He  was  authorized  to  use  little  freedom  to- 
wards  that  shy  maiden,  even  in  his  visions ;  so  that  he 
almost  reproached  himself  when  sometimes  his  imagi- 
nation pictured  in  detail  the  sweet  years  that  they 
might  spend  together,  in  a  retreat  like  this.  It  had 
just  that  rarest  quality  of  remoteness  from  the  actual 
and  ordinary  world  —  a  remoteness  through  which  all 
delights  might  visit  them  freely,  sifted  from  all  trou- 
bles —  which  lovers  so  reasonably  insist  upon,  in  their 
ideal  arrangements  for  a  happy  union.  It  is  possible, 
indeed,  that  even  Donatello's  grief  and  Kenyon's  pale, 
sunless  affection  lent  a  charm  to  Monte  Beni,  which  it 
would  not  have  retained  amid  a  more  abundant  joy*> 
ousness.  The  sculptor  strayed  amid  its  vineyards  and 
orchards,  its  dells  and  tangled  shrubberies,  with  some 
what  the  sensations  of  an  adventurer  who  should  find 
his  way  to  the  site  of  ancient  Eden,  and  behold  its  love- 
liness through  the  transparency  of  that  gloom  which 
has  been  brooding  over  those  haunts  of  innocence  ever 
since  the  falL    Adam  saw  it  in  a  brighter  sunshine^ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


DONATELLO'S  BUST.  819 

but  never  knew  the  shade  of  pensive  beauiy  which 
jSden  won  from  his  expulsion. 

It  was  in  the  decline  of  the  afternoon  that  Kenyon 
returned  from  his  long,  musing  ramble.  Old  Tomaso 
—  between  whom  and  himself  for  some  time  past  there 
had  been  a  mysterious  understanding,  —  met  him  b 
the  entrance-hall,  and  drew  him  a  little  aside. 

"The  signorina  would  speak  with  you,"  he  whia^ 
pered. 

*'  In  the  chapel?  "  asked  the  sculptor. 

"No ;  in  the  saloon  beyond  it,"  answered  the  but- 
ler :  "  the  entrance  —  you  once  saw  the  signorina  ap- 
pear through  it  —  is  near  the  altar,  hidden  behind  the 
tapestry." 

}«-«nyon  lost  no  time  in  obeying  the  summons. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 

THE   MABBLE  SALOON. 

In  an  old  Tuscan  villa,  a  chapel  ordinarily  makes 
one  among  the  numerous  apartments ;  though  it  often 
happens  that  the  door  is  permanently  closed,  the  key 
lost,  and  the  place  left  to  itself,  in  dusty  sanctity,  like 
that  chamber  in  man's  heart  where  he  hides  his  relig- 
ious awe.  This  was  very  much  the  case  with  the  chapel 
of  Monte  Beni.  One  rainy  day,  however,  in  his  wan- 
derings through  the  great,  intricate  house,  Kenyon  had 
unexpectedly  found  his  way  into  it,  and  been  impressed 
by  its  solemn  aspect.  The  arched  windows,  high  up- 
ward in  the  waU,  and  darkened  with  dust  and  cobweb, 
threw  down  a  dim  light  that  showed  the  altar,  with  a 
picture  of  a  martyrdom  above,  and  some  tall  tapers 
ranged  before  it.  They  had  apparently  been  lighted, 
and  burned  an  hour  or  two,  and  been  extinguished 
perhaps  half  a  century  before.  The  marble  vase  at 
the  entrance  held  some  hardened  mud  at  the  bottom, 
accruing  from  the  dust  that  had  settled  in  it  during 
the  gradual  evaporation  of  the  holy  water ;  and  a  spi- 
der (being  an  insect  that  delights  in  pointing  the  mora] 
of  desolation  and  neglect)  had  taken  pains  to  w^ave 
a  prodigiously  thick  tissue  across  the  circular  brim. 
An  old  family  banner,  tattered  by  the  moths,  drooped 
from  the  vaulted  roof.  In  niches  there  were  som<>  mo- 
diseval  busts  of  Donatello's  forgotten  ancestry;  and 
among  them,  it  might  be,  the  forlorn  visage  of  that 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  MARBLE  SALOON.  821 

hapless  knight  between  whom  and  the  fountain-nymph 
had  occurred  such  tender  love-passages. 

Throughout  all  the  jovial  prosperity  of  Monte  Beni, 
this  one  spot  within  the  domestic  walls  had  kept  itself 
silent,  stem,  and  sad.  When  the  individual  or  th9 
family  retired  from  song  and  mirth,  they  here  sought 
those  realities  which  men  do  not  invite  their  festive  as- 
sociates to.  share.  And  here,  on  the  occasion  above  re- 
ferred to,  the  sculptor  had  discovered  —  accidentally, 
so  far  as  he  was  concerned,  though  with  a  purpose  on 
her  part  —  that  there  was  a  guest  under  Donatello's 
roof,  whose  presence  the  Count  did  not  suspect.  An 
interview  had  since  taken  place,  and  he  was  now  sum- 
moned to  another. 

He  crossed  the  chapel,  in  compliance  with  Tomaso's 
instructions,  and,  passing  through  the  side  entrance, 
found  himself  in  a  saloon,  of  no  great  size,  but  more 
magnificent  than  he  had  supposed  the  villa  to  contain. 
As  it  was  vacant,  Kenyon  had  leisure  to  pace  it  once 
or  twice,  and  examine  it  with  a  careless  sort  of  scru- 
tiny, before  any  person  appeared. 

This  beautiful  hall  was  floored  with  rich  marbles,  in 
jtrtistically  arranged  figures  and  compartments.  The 
walls,  likewise,  were  almost  entirely  cased  in  marble  of 
various  kinds,  the  prevalent  variety  being  giallo  antico, 
intermixed  with  verd-antique,  and  others  equally  pre- 
cious. The  splendor  of  the  giallo  antico,  however,  was 
what  gave  character  to  the  saloon ;  and  the  large  and 
leep  niches,  apparently  intended  for  full-length  stat- 
ues, along  the  walls,  were  lined  with  the  same  costly 
material.  Without  -visiting  Italy,  one  can  have  no  idea 
of  the  beauty  and  magnificence  that  are  produced  by 
these  fittings-up  of  polished  marble.  Without  such 
experience,  indeed,  we  do  not  even  know  what  marble 

VOL.  VI. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


822  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

means,  in  any  sense,' save  as  the  white  limestone  of 
which  we  carve  our  mantel-pieces.  This  rich  hall  of 
Monte  Beni,  moreover,  was  adorned,  at  its  upper  end, 
with  two  pillars  that  seemed  to  consist  of  Oriental  ala- 
baster ;  and  wherever  there  was  a  space  vacant  of  pre- 
cious and  variegated  marble,  it  was  frescoed  with  cma- 
ments  in  arabesque.  Above,  there  was  a  coved  and 
vaulted  ceiling,  glowing  with  pictured  sceues,  which 
affected  Kenyon  with  a  vague  sense  of  splendor,  witl^ 
out  his  twisting  his  neck  to  gaze  at  them. 

It  is  one  of  the  special  excellences  of  such  a  saloon 
of  polished  and  richly  colored  marble,  that  decay  can 
never  tarnish  it.  Until  the  house  crumbles  down  upon 
it,  it  shines  indestructibly,  and,  with  a  little  dusting, 
looks  just  as  brilliant  in  its  three  hundredth  year  as 
the  day  after  the  final  slab  of  giallo  antico  was  fitted 
into  the  wall.  To  the  sculptor,  at  this  first  view  of  it, 
it  seemed  a  hall  where  the  sun  was  magically  impris- 
oned, and  must  always  shine.  He  anticipated  Miriam's 
entrance,  arrayed  in  queenly  robes,  and  beaming  with 
even  more  than  the  singular  beauty  that  had  hereto- 
fore distinguished  her. 

While  this  thought  was  passing  through  his  mind, 
the  pillared  door,  at  the  upper  end  of  the  saloon,  was 
I)artly  opened,  and  Miriam  appeared.  She  was  very 
pale,  and  dressed  in  deep  mourning.  As  she  advanced 
towards  the  sculptor,  the  feebleness  of  her  step  was  so 
apparent  that  he  made  haste  to  meet  her,  apprehending 
that  she  might  sink  down  on  the  marble  floor,  without 
the  instant  support  of  his  arm. 

But,  with  a  gleam  of  her  natural  self-reliance,  she 
declined  his  aid,  and,  after  touching  her  cold  hand  to 
his,  went  and  sat  down  on  one  of  the  cushioned  divans 
that  were  ranged  against  the  walL 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  MARBLE  SALOON.  823 

**  You  ai'e  very  ill,  Miriam  I "  said  Kenyon,  much 
shocked  at  her  appearance.  '^I  had  not  thought  oi 
this." 

"  No ;  not  so  ill  as  I  seem  to  you,"  she  answered ; 
adding  despondently,  "  yet  I  am  ill  enough  I  believe, 
to  die,  unless  some  change  speedily  occurs." 

"What,  then,  is  your  disorder?"  asked  the  sculp- 
tor ;  "  and  what  the  remedy  ?  " 

"  The  disorder !  "'  repeated  Miriam.  "  There  is 
none  that  I  know  of  save  too  much  life  and  strength, 
without  a  purpose  for  one  or  the  other.  It  is  my  too 
redundant  energy  that  is  slowly  —  or  perhaps  rapidly 
—  wearing  me  away,  because  I  can  apply  it  to  no  use. 
The  object,  which  I  am  bound  to  consider  my  only 
one  on  earth,  fails  me  utterly.  The  sacrifice  which  1 
yearn  to  make  of  myself,  my  hopes,  my  everything,  is 
coldly  put  aside.  Nothing  is  left  for  me  but  to  brood, 
brood,  brood,  all  day,  all  night,  in  improfitable  long- 
ings and  repinings." 

"  This  is  very  sad,  Miriam,"  said  Kenyon. 

"  Ay,  indeed;  I  fancy  so,"  she  replied,  with  a  short, 
unnatural  laugh. 

"  With  all  your  activity  of  mind,"  resumed  he,  "  so 
fertile  in  plans  as  I  have  known  you,  can  you  imagine 
no  method  of  bringing  your  resources  into  play  ?  " 

"  My  mind  is  not  active  any  longer,"  answered  Mir- 
iam, in  a  cold,  indifferent  tone.  "  It  deals  with  one 
thought  and  no  more.  One  recollection  paralyzes  it. 
It  is  not  remorse  ;  do  not  think  it !  I  put  myself  out 
of  the  question,  and  feel  neither  regret  nor  penitence 
Dn  my  own  behal£  But  what  benumbs  me,  what  robs 
me  of  all  power,  —  it  is  no  secret  for  a  woman  to  tell 
a  man,  yet  I  care  not  though  you  know  it,  —  is  the 
certainty  that  I  am,  and  must  ever  be,  an  object  of 
Jiortor  in  Donatello's  sight." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


824  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

The  sculptor — a  young  man,  and  cherishing  a  love 
which  insulated  him  from  the  wild  experiences  which 
some  men  gather  —  was  startled  to  perceive  how  Mir- 
iam's rich,  ill-regulated  nature  impelled  her  to  fling 
herself,  conscience  and  all,  on  one  passion,  the  object 
of  which  intellectually  seemed  far  beneath  her. 

"How  have  you  obtained  the  certainty  of  which  you 
speak  ?  "  asked  he,  after  a  pause. 

"  Oh,  by  a  sure  token,"  said  Miriam ;  "  a  gesture, 
merely;  a  shudder,  a  cold  shiver,  that  ran  through 
him  one  sunny  morning  when  his  hand  happened  to 
touch  mine  I     But  it  was  enough." 

"  I  firmly  believe,  Miriam,"  said  the  sculptor, "  that 
he  loves  you  still." 

She  started,  and  a  flush  of  color  came  tremulously 
over  the  paleness  of  her  cheek. 

"  Yes,"  repeated  Kenyon,  "  if  my  interest  in  Dona- 
tello  —  and  in  yourself,  Miriam  —  endows  me  with 
any  true  insight,  he  not  only  loves  you  still,  but  with 
a  force  and  depth  proportioned  to  the  stronger  grasp 
of  his  facilities,  in  their  new  development." 

"Do  not  deceive  me,"  said  Miriam,  growing  pale 
again. 

"  Not  for  the  world  I "  replied  Kenyon.  "  Here  is 
what  I  take  to  be  the  truth.  There  was  an  interval, 
no  doubt,  when  the  horror  of  some  calamity,  which  I 
need  not  shape  out  in  my  conjectures,  threw  Donatello 
into  a  stupor  of  misery.  Connected  with  the  first 
shock  there  was  an  intolerable  pain  and  shuddering 
repugnance  attaching  themselves  to  all  the  circum- 
stances and  surroundings  of  the  event  that  so  terribly 
affected  him.  Was  his  dearest  friend  involved  within 
the  horror  of  that  moment  ?  He  would  shrink  from 
her  as  he  shrank  most  of  all  from  himself.     But  as 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  MARBLE  SALOON.  825 

his  mind  roused  itself,  —  as  it  rose  to  a  higher  life 
than  he  had  hitherto  experienced,  —  whatever  had 
been  true  and  permanent  within  him  revived  by  the 
self -same  impulse.     So  has  it  been  with  his  love.'* 

"  But,  surely,"  said  Miriam,  "  he  knows  that  I  am 
here  I  Why,  then,  except  that  I  am  odious  to  him, 
does  he  not  bid  me  welcome  ?  " 

"  He  is,  I  believe,  aware  of  your  presence  here,"  an- 
swered the  sculptor.  "  Your  song,  a  night  or  two  ago, 
'.tnust  have  revealed  it  to  him,  and,  in  truth,  I  had  fan- 
ijied  that  there  was  already  a  consciousness  of  it  in  his 
mind.  But,  the  more  passionately  he  longs  for  your 
society,  the  more  religiously  he  deems  himself  bound 
to  avoid  it.  The  idea  of  a  life-long  penance  has  taken 
strong  possession  of  Donatello.  He  gropes  blindly 
about  him  for  some  method  of  sharp  self-torture,  and 
finds,  of  course,  no  other  so  efficacious  as  this." 

"  But,  he  loves  me,"  repeated  Miriam,  in  a  low 
voice,  to  herself.     "  Yes  ;  he  loves  me !  " 

It  was  strange  to  observe  the  womanly  softness  that 
came  over  her,  as  she  admitted  that  comfort  into  her 
bosom.  The  cold,  unnatural  indifference  of  her  man« 
ner,  a  kind  of  frozen  passionateness  which  had  shocked 
and  chilled  the  sculptor,  disappeared.  She  blushed, 
and  turned  away  her  eyes,  knowing  that  there  was 
moi.^  surprise  and  joy  in  their  dewy  glances  than  any 
man  save  one  ought  to  detect  there. 

"  In  other  respects,"  she  inquired  at  length,  "  is  he 
much  changed?" 

"A  wonderful  process  is  going  forward  in  Dona- 
tello's  mind,"  answered  the  sculptor.  **  The  germs  of 
faculties  that  have  heretofore  slept  are  fast  springing 
into  activity.  The  world  of  thought  is  disclosing  it- 
self to  his  inward  sight.     He  startles^  me,  at  timeS) 


Digitized 


by  Google 


826  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

Mrith  his  perception  of  deep  truths ;  and,  quite  as  often, 
it  must  be  owned,  he  compels  me  to  smile  by  the  inter- 
mixture of  his  former  simplicity  with  a  new  inteUi- 
genoe.  But,  he  is  bewildered  with  the  revelations 
that  each  day  brings.  Out  of  his  bitter  agony,  a  soul 
and  intellect,  I  could  almost  say,  have  been  inspired 
into  him." 

"  Ah,  I  could  help  him  here  I  "  cried  Miriam,  clasp- 
ing her  hands.  ^^  And  how  sweet  a  toil  to  bend  and 
f^pt  my  whole  nature  to  do  him  good  I  To  instruct, 
to  elevate,  to  enrich  his  mind  with  the  wealth  that 
would  flow  in  upon  me,  had  I  such  a  motive  for  ac- 
quiring it !  Who  else  can  perform  the  task  ?  Who 
else  has  the  tender  sympathy  which  he  requires? 
Who  else,  save  only  me,  —  a  woman,  a  sharer  in  the 
same  dread  secret,  a  partaker  in  one  identical  guilt, — 
could  meet  him  on  such  terms  of  intimate  equality 
as  the  case  demands?  With  this  object  before  me,  I 
might  feel  a  right  to  live  \  Without  it,  it  is  a  shame 
for  me  to  have  lived  so  long." 

"I  fully  agree  with  you,"  said  Kenyon,  ^^that  your 
true  place  is  by  his  side." 

"  Surely  it  is,"  replied  Miriam.  "  K  Donatello  is 
entitled  to  aught  on  earth,  it  is  to  my  complete  self- 
sacrifice  for  his  sake.  It  does  not  weaken  his  claim, 
methinks,  that  my  only  prospect  of  happiness  —  a 
fearful  word,  however — lies  in  the  good  that  may  ac- 
crue to  him  from  our  intercourse.  But  he  rejects  me ! 
He  will  not  listen  to  the  whisper  of  his  heart,  telling 
him  that  she,  most  wretched,  who  beguiled  him  into 
evil,  might  guide  him  to  a  higher  innocence  than  that 
from  which  he  fell.  How  is  this  first,  great  difficulty 
to  be  obviated?" 

^^It  lies  at  your  own  option,  Miriam,  to  do  awa;y 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  MARBLE  SALOON.  827 

the  obstacle,  at  any  moment,"  remarked  the  sculptor* 
"  It  is  but  to  ascend  Donatello's  tower,  and  you  will 
meet  him  there,  under  the  eye  of  God." 

"  I  dare  not,"  answered  Miriam.  "  No ;  I  dare 
not!" 

"  Do  you  fear,"  asked  the  sculptor,  "  the  dread  eye- 
witness whom  I  have  named  ?  " 

^^  No ;  for,  as  far  as  I  can  see  into  that  cloudy  and 
inscrutable  thing,  my  heart,  it  has  none  but  pure  mo< 
tives,"  replied  Miriam.  "  But,  my  friend,  you  little 
know  what  a  weak  or  what  a  strong  creature  a  woman 
is  !  I  fear  not  Heaven,  in  this  case,  at  least,  but  -^ 
shall  I  confess  it?  —  I  am  greatly  in  dread  of  Dona- 
tello.  Once  he  shuddered  at  my  touch.  If  he  shud- 
der once  again,  or  frown,  I  die !  " 

Kenyon  could  not  but  marvel  at  the  subjection  into 
which  this  proud  and  self-dependent  woman  had  wil- 
fully flung  herself,  hanging  her  life  upon  the  chance 
of  an  angry  or  favorable  regard  from  a  person  who,  a 
little  while  before,  had  seemed  the  plaything  of  a  mo- 
ment. But,  in  Miriam's  eyes,  Donatello  was  always^ 
thenceforth,  invested  with  the  tragic  dignity  of  their 
hour  of  crime ;  and,  furthermore,  the  keen  and  deep 
insight,  with  which  her  love  endowed  her,  enabled  her 
to  know  him  far  better  than  he  could  be  known  by 
ordinary  observation.  Beyond  all  question,  since  she 
loved  him  so,  there  was  a  force  in  Donatello  worthy 
of  her  respect  and  love. 

"  You  see  my  weakness,"  said  Miriani,  flinging  out 
her  hands,  as  a  person  does  when  a  defect  is  acknowl- 
edged, and  beyond  remedy.  "  What  I  need,  now,  is 
an  opportunity  to  show  my  strength." 

"  It  has  occurred  to  me,"  Kenyon  remarked,  "  that 
the  time  is  come  when  it  may  be  desirable  to  remove 


Digitized 


by  Google 


828  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

Donatello  from  the  complete  seclusion  in  which  he 
buries  himself.  He  has  struggled  long  enough  with 
one  idea.  He  now  needs  a  variety  of  thought,  which 
cannot  be  otherwise  so  readily  supplied  to  him,  as 
through  the  medium  of  a  variety  of  scenes.  His  mind 
is  awakened,  now ;  his  heart,  though  full  of  pain,  is 
no  longer  benumbed.  They  should  have  food  and 
solace.  If  he  linger  here  much  longer,  I  fear  that  he 
may  sink  back  into  a  lethargy.  The  extreme  excita- 
bility, which  circumstances  have  imparted  to  his  moral 
system,  has  its  dangei's  and  its  advantages ;  it  being 
one  of  the  dangers,  that  an  obdurate  scar  may  super- 
vene upon  its  very  tenderness.  Solitude  has  done 
what  it  could  for  him ;  now,  for  a  while,  let  him  be 
enticed  into  the  outer  world." 

"  What  is  your  plan,  then  ?  "  asked  Miriam. 

"  Simply,"  replied  Kenyon,  "  to  persuade  Donatello 
to  be  my  companion  in  a  ramble  among  these  hills 
and  valleys.  The  little  adventures  and  vicissitudes 
of  travel  will  do  him  infinite  good.  After  his  recent 
profound  experience,  he  will  re-create  the  world  by 
the  new  eyes  with  which  he  will  regard  it.  He  will 
escape,  I  hope,  out  of  a  morbid  life,  and  find  his  way 
into  a  healthy  one." 

"And  what  is  to  be  my  part  in  this  process?  "  in- 
quired Miriam,  sadly,  and  not  without  jealousy.  "  You 
are  taking  him  from  me,  and  putting  yourself,  and  all 
manner  of  living  interests,  into  the  place  which  I  ought 
to  fill!" 

"  It  would  rejoice  me,  Miriam,  to  yield  the  entire 
responsibility  of  this  office  to  yourself,"  answered  the 
sculptor.  "  I  do  not  pretend  to  be  the  guide  and  coun- 
sellor whom  Donatello  needs ;  for,  to  mention  no  other 
vbstacle,  I  am  a  man,  and  between  man  and  man  there 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  MARBLE  SALOON.  829 

is  always  an  insuperable  gulf.  They  can  never  quite 
grasp  each  other's  hands ;  and  therefore  man  never 
derives  any  intimate  help,  any  heart  sustenance,  from 
his  brother  man,  but  from  woman,  —  his  mother,  his 
sister,  or  his  wife.  Be  Donatello's  friend  at  need, 
therefore,  and  most  gladly  will  I  resign  him  I  " 

^^  It  is  not  kind  to  taunt  me  thus,"  said  Miriam. 
"  I  have  told  you  that  I  cannot  do  what  you  suggest, 
because  I  dare  not." 

"  Well,  then,"  rejoined  the  sculptor,  "  see  if  there 
is  any  possibility  of  adapting  yourself  to  my  scheme. 
The  incidents  of  a  journey  often  fling  people  together 
in  the  oddest  and  therefore  the  most  natural  way. 
Supposing  you  were  to  find  yourself  on  the  same 
route,  a  reunion  with  Donatello  might  ensue,  and  Prov- 
idence have  a  larger  hand  in  it  than  either  of  us." 

"  It  is  not  a  hopeful  plan,"  said  Miriam,  shaking 
her  head,  after  a  moment's  thought ;  "  yet  I  will  not 
reject  it  without  a  trial.  Only  in  case  it  fail,  here  is 
a  resolution  to  which  I  bind  myself,  come  what  come 
may  I  You  know  the  bronze  statue  of  Pope  Julius  in 
the  great  square  of  Perugia?  I  remember  standing  in 
the  shadow  of  that  statue  one  sunny  noontime,  and  be- 
ing impressed  by  its  paternal  aspect,  and  fancying  that 
a  blessing  fell  upon  me  from  its  outstretched  hand. 
Ever  since,  I  have  had  a  superstition,  —  you  will  call 
it  fooUsh,  but  sad  and  ill-fated  persons  always  dream 
such  things,  —  that,  if  I  waited  long  enough  in  that 
same  spot,  some  good  event  would  come  to  pass.  Well, 
my  friend,  precisely  a  fortnight  after  you  begin  your 
tour,  — -  unless  we  sooner  meet,  —  bring  Donatello,  at 
noon,  to  the  base  of  the  statue.  You  will  find  me 
there!" 

Kenyon  assented  to  the  proposed  arrangement,  and, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


830  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENI. 

after  some  conversation  respecting  his  contemplated 
line  of  travel,  prepared  to  take  his  leave.  As  he  met 
Miriam's  eyes,  in  bidding  farewell,  he  was  surprised 
at  the  new,  tender  gladness  that  beamed  out  of  them, 
and  at  the  appearance  of  health  and  bloom,  which,  in 
this  little  while,  had  overspread  her  face. 

"  May  I  tell  you,  Miriam,"  said  he,  smiling,  "  that 
you  are  still  as  beautiful  as  ever  ?  " 

"  You  have  a  right  to  notice  it,"  she  replied,  **  for, 
if  it  be  so,  my  faded  bloom  has  been  revived  by  the 
hopes  you  give  me.  Do  you,  then,  think  me  beautiful  ? 
I  rejoice,  most  truly.  Beauty  —  if  I  possess  it  —  shall 
be  one  of  the  instruments  by  which  I  will  tiy  to  edu- 
cate and  elevate  him,  to  whose  good  I  solely  dedicate 
myself." 

The  sculptor  had  nearly  reached  the  door,  when, 
hearing  her  call  him,  he  turned  back,  and  beheld  Mir- 
iam still  standing  where  he  had  left  her,  in  the  magnify 
icent  hall  which  seemed  only  a  fit  setting  for  her  beauty. 
She  beckoned  him  to  return. 

"  You  are  a  man  of  refined  taste,"  said  she  ;  "  more 
than  that,  —  a  man  of  delicate  sensibility.  Now  tell 
me  frankly,  and  on  your  honor !  Have  I  not  shocked 
you  many  times  during  this  interview  by  my  betrayal 
of  woman's  cause,  my  lack  of  feminine  modesty,  my 
reckless,  passionate,  most  indecorous  avowal,  that  I 
live  only  in  the  life  of  one  who,  perhaps,  scorns  and 
shudders  at  me  ?  " 

Thus  adjured,  however  difficult  the  point  to  which 
she  brought  him,  the  sculptor  was  not  a  man  to  swerve 
aside  from  the  simple  truth. 

"  Miriam,"  replied  he,  *'  you  exaggerate  the  impres- 
sion made  upon  my  mind;  but  it  has  been  painful, 
and  somewhat  of  the  character  which  you  suppose." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  MARBLE  SALOON.  331 

"  I  knew  it,"  said  Miriam,  moumfuUy,  and  with  no 
resentment.  ^^  What  i-emains  of  my  finer  nature 
would  have  told  me  so,  even  if  it  had  not  been  per- 
ceptible  in  all  your  manner.  Well,  my  dear  friend, 
when  you  go  back  to  Eome,  tell  Hilda  what  her  sever- 
ity has  done!  She  was  all  womanhood  to  me;  and 
when  she  cast  me  off,  I  had  no  longer  any  terms  to 
keep  with  the  reserves  and  decorums  of  my  sex. 
Hilda  has  set  me  free!  Pray  tell  her  so,  from  Mii^ 
iam,  and  thank  her !  " 

"  I  shall  tell  Hilda  nothing  that  will  give  her  pain," 
answered  Kenyon.  "  But,  Miriam,  —  though  I  know 
not  what  passed  between  her  and  yourself,  —  I  feel, 
—  and  let  the  noble  frankness  of  your  disposition  for- 
give me  if  I  say  so,  —  I  feel  that  she  was  right.  You 
have  a  thousand  admirable  qualities.  Whatever  mass 
of  evil  may  have  fallen  into  your  life,  —  pardon  me, 
but  your  own  words  suggest  it,  —  you  are  still  as  cap- 
able as  ever  of  many  high  and  heroic  virtues.  But 
the  white  shining  purity  of  Hilda's  nature  is  a  thing 
apart ;  and  she  is  bound,  by  the  undefiled  material  of 
which  God  moulded  her,  to  keep  that  severity  which  I, 
as  well  as  you,  have  recognized." 

"  Oh,  you  are  right ! "  said  Miriam ;  "  I  never  ques- 
tioned it ;  though,  as  I  told  you,  when  she  cast  me  off, 
it  severed  some  few  remaining  bonds  between  me  and 
decorous  womanhood.  But  were  there  anything  to 
forgive,  I  do  forgive  her.  May  you  win  her  virgin 
heart ;  for  methinks  there  can  be  few  men  in  this  evil 
world  who  are  not  more  unworthy  of  her  than  your* 
eelf." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XXXn. 

SCENES    BY    THE  WAT. 

"When  it  came  to  the  point  of  quitting  the  reposeftft 
Kxc  cf  Monte  Beni,  the  sculptor  was  not  without  re^ 
gret«,  and  would  willingly  have  dreamed  a  little  longer 
of  t^e  sweet  paradise  on  earth  that  Hilda's  presence 
there  :a:iight  make.  Nevertheless,  amid  all  its  repose, 
he  had  begun  to  be  sensible  of  a  restless  melancholy, 
to  which  the  cultivators  of  the  ideal  arts  are  more 
liable  than  sturdier  men.  On  his  own  part,  therefore, 
and  leaving  Donatello  out  of  the  case,  he  would  have 
judged  it  well  to  go.  He  made  parting  visits  to  the 
legendary  dell,  and  to  other  delightful  spots  with 
which  he  had  grown  familiar ;  he  climbed  the  tower 
again,  i  nd  saw  a  sunset  and  a  moonrise  over  the  great 
valley;  he  drank,  on  the  eve  of  his  departure,  one 
flask,  and  then  another,  of  the  Monte  Beni  Sunshine, 
and  stored  up  its  flavor  in  his  memory,  as  the  stand- 
ard of  what  is  exquisite  in  wine.  These  things  ac- 
complished, Kenyon  was  ready  for  the  journey. 

Donatello  had  not  very  <5asily  been  stirred  out  of 
the  peculiar  sluggishness,  which  inthralls  and  be- 
witches melancholy  people.  He  had  offered  merely  a 
passive  resistance,  however,  not  an  active  one,  to  his 
friend's  schemes  ;  and  when  the  appointed  hour  came^ 
he  yielded  to  the  impulse  which  Kenyon  failed  not  to 
apply;  and  was  started  upon  the  journey  before  he 
had  made  up  his  mind  to  underta]a>  it.    They  wan- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SCENES  BY  THE   WAY.  883 

dered  forth  at  large,  like  two.  knights -errant  among 
the  valleys,  and  the  mountains,  and  the  old  mountain- 
towns  of  that  picturesque  and  lovely  region.  Save  to 
keep  the  appointment  with  Miriam,  a  fortnight  there- 
after, in  the  great  square  of  Perugia,  there  was  noth- 
ing more  definite  in  the  sculptor's  plan,  than  that  they 
should  let  themselves  be  blown  hither  and  thither  like 
winged  seeds,  that  mount  upon  each  wandering  breeze. 
Yet  there  was  an  idea  of  fatality  implied  in  the  simile 
of  the  winged  seeds  which  did  not  altogether  suit  Ken- 
yon's  fancy ;  for,  if  you  look  closely  into  the  matter, 
it  will  be  seen  that  whatever  appears  most  vagrant, 
and  utterly  purposeless,  turns  out,  in  the  end,  to  have 
been  impelled  the  most  surely  on  a  preordained  and 
imswerving  track.  Chance  and  change  love  to  deal 
with  men's  settled  plans,  not  with  their  idle  vagaries. 
If  we  desire  imexpected  and  unimaginable  events,  we 
should  contrive  an  iron  framework,  such  as  we  fancy 
may  compel  the  future  to  take  one  inevitable  shape ; 
then  comes  in  the  unexpected,  and  shatters  our  design 
in  fragments. 

The  travellers  set  forth  on  horseback,  and  purposed 
to  perform  much  of  their  aimless  joumeyings  under 
the  moon,  and  in  the  cool  of  the  morning  or  evening 
twilight ;  the  midday  sun,  while  summer  had  hardly 
begun  to  trail  its  departing  skirts  over  Tuscany,  being 
still  too  fervid  to  allow  of  noontide  exposure. 

For  a  while,  they  wandered  in  that  same  broad 
valley  which  Kenyon  had  viewed  with  such  delight 
from  the  Monte  Beni  tower.  The  sculptor  soon  be- 
gan to  enjoy  the  idle  activity  of  their  new  life,  which 
the  lapse  of  a  day  or  two  sufficed  to  establish  as  a 
kind  of  system ;  it  is  so  natural  for  mankind  to  be  no- 
madic, that  a  very  little  taste  of  that  primitive  mode 


Digitized 


by  Google 


834  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

of  existence  subverts  the  settled  habits  of  many  pre- 
ceding  years.  Kenyon's  cares,  and  whatever  gloomy 
ideas  before  possessed  him,  seemed  to  be  left  at  Monte 
Beni,  and  were  scarcely  remembered  by  the  time  that 
its  gray  tower  grew  imdistinguishable  on  the  brown 
hill-side.  His  perceptive  faculties,  which  had  found 
little  exercise  of  late,  amid  so  thoughtful  a  way  of 
life,  became  keen,  and  kept  his  eyes  busy  with  a  hun- 
dred agreeable  scenes. 

He  delighted  in  the  picturesque  bits  of  rustic  char- 
acter and  manners,  so  little  of  which  ever  comes  upon 
the  surface  of  our  life  at  home.  There,  for  example, 
were  the  old  women,  tending  pigs  or  sheep  by  the 
wayside.  As  they  followed  the  vagrant  steps  of  their 
charge,  these  venerable  ladies  kept  spinning  yam  with 
that  elsewhere  forgotten  contrivance,  the  distaff ;  and 
so  wrinkled  and  stem  -  looking  were  they,  that  you 
might  have  taken  them  for  the  Parcae,  spinning  the 
threads  of  human  destiny.  In  contrast  with  their 
great-grandmothers  were  the  children,  leading  goats 
of  shaggy  beard,  tied  by  the  horns,  and  letting  them 
browse  on  branch  and  shrub.  It  is  the  fashion  of 
Italy  to  add  the  petty  industry  of  age  and  childhood 
to  the  hum  of  human  toil.  To  the  eyes  of  an  ob* 
server  from  the  Western  world,  it  was  a  strange  spec- 
tacle to  see  sturdy,  simbumt  creatures,  in  petticoats^ 
but  otherwise  manlike,  toiling  side  by  side  with  male 
laborers,  in  the  rudest  work  of  the  fields.  These 
sturdy  women  (if  as  such  we  must  recognize  them) 
wore  the  high-crowned,  broad-brimmed  hat  of  Tuscan 
straw,  the  customary  female  head-apparel;  and,  as 
every  breeze  blew  back  its  breadth  of  brim,  the  sun- 
shine constantly  added  depth  to  the  brown  glow  of 
their  cheeks.    The  elder  sisterhood,  however,  set  off 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SCENES  BY  THE   WAT.  885 

their  witch-like  ugliness  to  the  worst  adrantage  with 
black  felt  hats,  bequeathed  them,  one  would  fancy,  by 
their  long-buried  husbands. 

Anodier  ordinary  sight,  as  sylvan  as  the  above,  and 
more  agreeable,  was  a  girl,  bearing  on  her  back  a 
huge  bundle  of  green  twigs  and  shrubs,  or  grass,  in- 
termixed with  scarlet  poppies  and  blue  flowers;  the 
verdant  burden  being  sometimes  of  such  size  as  to 
hide  the  bearer's  figure,  and  seem  a  self -moving  mass 
of  fragrant  bloom  and  verdure.  Oftener,  however, 
the  bundle  reached  only  half-way  down  the  back  of 
the  rustic  nymph,  leaving  in  sight  her  well-developed 
lower  limbs,  and  the  crooked  knife,  hanging  behind 
her,  with  which  she  had  been  reaping  this  strange 
harvest  sheaf.  A  pre-Eaphaelite  artist  (he,  for  in- 
stance,  who  painted  so  marvellously  a  wind-swept  heap 
of  autumnal  leaves)  might  find  an  admirable  subject 
in  one  of  these  Tuscan  girls,  stepping  with  a  free, 
erect,  and  graceful  carriage.  The  miscellaneous  herb- 
age and  tangled  twigs  and  blossoms  of  her  bundle, 
crowning  her  head  (while  her  ruddy,  comely  face 
looks  out  between  the  hanging  side  festoons  like  a 
larger  flower),  would  give  the  painter  boundless  scope 
for  the  minute  delineation  which  he  loves. 

Though  mixed  up  with  what  was  rude  and  earth- 
like, there  was  still  a  remote,  dream  -  like.  Arcadian 
charm,  which  is  scarcely  to  be  found  in  the  daily  toil 
of  other  lands.  Among  the  pleasant  features  of  the 
wayside  were  always  the  vines,  clambering  on  fig-trees, 
or  other  sturdy  trunks ;  they  wreathed  themselves  in 
huge  and  rich  festoons,  from  one  tree  to  another,  sus- 
pending clusters  of  ripening  grapes  in  the  interval 
between.  Under  such  careless  mode  of  culture,  the 
luxuriant  vine  is  a  lovelier  spectacle  than  where  it 


Digitized 


by  Google 


836  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

produces  a  more  precious  liquor,  and  is  therefore  more 
artificially  restrained  and  trimmed.  Nothing  can  be 
more  picturesque  than  an  old  grape-vine,  with  almost 
a  trunk  of  its  own,  clinging  fast  around  its  supporting 
tree.  Nor  does  the  picture  lack  its  moral.  You  might 
twist  it  to  more  than  one  grave  purpose,  as  you  saw 
how  the  knotted,  serpentine  growth  imprisoned  within 
its  strong  embrace  die  friend  that  had  supported  its 
tender  infancy;  and  how  (as  seemingly  flexible  na- 
tures are  prone  to  do)  it  converted  the  sturdier  tree 
entirely  to  its  own  selfish  ends,  extending  its  innumer- 
able arms  on  every  bough,  and  permitting  hardly  a 
leaf  to  sprout  except  its  own.  It  occurred  to  Kenyon. 
that  the  enemies  of  the  vine,  in  his  native  land,  might 
here  have  seen  an  emblem  of  the  remorseless  gripe, 
which  the  habit  of  vinous  enjoyment  lays  upon  its  vic- 
tim, possessing  him  wholly,  and  letting  him  live  no 
life  but  such  as  it  bestows. 

The  scene  was  not  less  characteristic  when  their 
path  led  the  two  wanderers  through  some  small,  an- 
cient town.  There,  besides  the  pecidiarities  of  pres- 
ent life,  they  saw  tokens  of  the  life  that  had  long  ago 
been  lived  and  flung  aside.  The  little  town,  such  as 
we  see  in  our  mind's  eye,  would  have  its  gate  and  its 
surrounding  walls,  so  ancient  and  massive  that  ages 
had  not  su£Glced  to  crumble  them  away;  but  in  the 
lofty  upper  portion  of  the  gateway,  still  standing  over 
the  empty  arch,  where  there  was  no  longer  a  gate  to 
shut,  there  would  be  a  dove-cote,  and  peaceful  doves 
for  the  only  warders.  Pumpkins  lay  ripening  in  the 
open  chambers  of  the  structure.  Then,  as  for  the 
town-wall,  on  the  outside  an  orchard  extends  peace- 
fully along  its  base,  full,  not  of  apple-trees,  but  of 
those  old  humorists  with  gnarled  trunks  and  twisted 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SCENES  BY  THE   WAY.  337 

boughs,  the  olives.  Houses  have  been  built  upon  the 
ramparts,  or  burrowed  out  of  their  ponderous  founda- 
tion. Even  the  gray,  martial  towers,  crowned  with 
ruined  turrets,. have  been  converted  into  rustic  habita- 
tions, from  the  windows  of  which  hang  ears  of  In- 
dian com.  At  a  door,  that  has  been  broken  through 
the  massive  stone -work,  where  it  was  meant  to  be 
strongest,  some  contadini  are  winnowing  grain.  Small 
windows,  too,  are  pierced  through  the  whole  line  of 
ancient  wall,  so  that  it  seems  a  row  of  dwellings  with 
one  continuous  front,  built  in  a  strange  style  of  need- 
less strength;  but  remnants  of  the  old  battlements 
and  machicolations  are  interspersed  with  the  homely 
chambers  and  earthen-tiled  house-tops ;  and  all  along 
its  extent  both  grape-vines  and  running  flower-shrubs 
are  encouraged  to  clamber  and  sport  over  the  rough- 
ness  of  its  decay. 

Finally  the  long  grass,  intermixed  with  weeds  and 
wild-flowers,  waves  on  the  uppermost  height  of  the  shat- 
tered rampart ;  and  it  is  exceedingly  pleasant  in  the 
golden  sunshine  of  the  afternoon  to  behold  the  warlike 
precinct  so  friendly  in  its  old  days,  and  so  overgrown 
with  rural  peace.  In  its  guard-rooms,  its  prison-cham- 
bers, and  scooped  out  of  its  ponderous  breadth,  there 
are  dwellings  nowadays  where  happy  human  lives  are 
spent.  Human  parents  and  broods  of  children  nestle 
in  them,  even  as  the  swallows  nestle  in  the  little  crev- 
ices along  the  broken  summit  of  the  wall. 

Passing  through  the  gateway  of  this  same  little  town, 
challenged  only  by  those  watchful  sentinels,  the  pig- 
eons, we  find  ourselves  in  a  long,  narrow  street,  paved 
from  side  to  side  with  flagstones,  in  the  old  Soman 
fashion.  Nothing  can  exceed  the  grim  ugliness  of  the 
houses,  most  of  which  are  three  or  four  stories  high, 

VOL.  VI. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


838  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENI. 

stone  built,  gray,  dilapidated,  or  half-eovered  with 
plaster  in  patches,  and  contiguous  all  along  from  end 
to  end  of  the  town.  Nature,  in  the  shape  of  tree, 
shrub,  or  grassy  sidewalk,  is  as  much  shut  out  from 
the  one  street  of  the  rustic  village  as  from  the  heart  of 
any  swarming  city.  The  dark  and  half-ruinous  habi- 
tations, with  their  small  windows,  many  of  which  are 
drearily  closed  with  wooden  shutters,  are  but  magni' 
fied  hovels,  piled  story  upon  story,  and  squalid  with 
the  grime  that  successive  ages  have  left  bclhind  them. 
It  would  be  a  hideous  scene  to  contemplate  in  a  rainy 
day,  or  when  no  human  life  pervaded  it.  In  the  sum- 
mer-noon, however,  it  possesses  vivacity  enough  to 
keep  itself  cheerful ;  for  aU  the  within  -  doors  of  the 
village  then  bubbles  over  upon  the  flagstones,  or  looks 
out  from  the  small  windows,  and  from  here  and  there 
a  balcony.  Some  of  the  popidace  are  at  the  butcher's 
shop ;  others  are  at  the  fountain,  which  gushes  into  a 
marble  basin  that  resembles  an  antique  sarcophagus. 
A  tailor  is  sewing  before  his  door  with  a  young  priest 
seated  sociably  beside  him  ;  a  burly  friar  goes  by  with 
an  empty  wine -barrel  on  his  head  ;  children  are  at 
play;  women,  at  their  own  doorsteps,  mend  clothes, 
embroider,  weave  hats  of  Tuscan  straw,  or  twirl  the 
distaff.  Many  idlers,  meanwhile,  strolling  from  one 
group  to  another,  let  the  warm  day  slide  by  in  the 
sweet,  interminable  task  of  doing  nothing. 

From  all  these  people  there  comes  a  babblement  that 
seems  quite  disproportioned  to  the  number  of  tongues 
that  make  it.  So  many  words  are  not  uttered  in  a 
New  England  viUage  throughout  the  year  —  except  it 
be  at  a  political  canvass  or  town-meeting  —  as  are 
spoken  here,  with  no  especial  purpose,  in  a  single  day. 
Neither  so  many  words,  nor  so  much  laughter;  for 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SCENES  BY  THE   WAY.  889 

people  tsdk  about  nothing  as  if  they  were  terribly  in 
earnest,  and  make  merry  at  nothing  as  if  it  were  the 
best  of  all  possible  jokes.  In  so  long  a  time  as  they 
have  existed,  and  within  such  narrow  precincts,  these 
little  walled  towns  are  brought  into  a  closeness  of  so- 
c^ty  that  makes  them  but  a  larger  household.  All 
the  inhabitants  are  akin  to  each,  and  each  to  all ;  they 
assemble  in  the  street  as  their  common  saloon,  and 
thus  live  and  die  in  a  familiarity  of  intercourse,  such 
as  never  can  be  known  where  a  village  is  open  at  either 
end,  and  all  roundabout,  and  has  ample  room  within 
itself. 

Stuck  up  beside  the  door  of  one  house,  in  this  vil- 
lage street,  is  a  withered  bough ;  and  on  a  stone  seat, 
just  under  the  shadow  of  the  bough,  sits  a  party  of 
jolly  drinkers,  making  proof  of  the  new  wine,  or 
quaffing  the  old,  as  their  often-tried  and  comfortable 
friend.  Kenyon  draws  bridle  here  (for  the  bough, 
or  bush,  is  a  symbol  of  the  wine-shop  at  this  day  in 
Italy,  as  it  was  three  hundred  years  ago  in  England), 
and  calls  for  a  goblet  of  the  deep,  mild,  purple  juice, 
well  diluted  with  water  from  the  fountain.  The  Sun- 
shine of  Monte  Beni  would  be  welcome  now.  Mean- 
while, Donatello  has  ridden  onward,  but  alights  where 
a  shrine,  with  a  burning  lamp  before  it,  is  built  into 
the  wall  of  an  inn-stable.  He  kneels,  and  crosses  him- 
self, and  mutters  a  brief  prayer,  without  attracting 
notice  from  the  passers-by,  many  of  whom  are  paren- 
thetically devout,  in  a  similar  fashion.  By  this  time 
the  sculptor  has  drunk  off  his  wine-and-water,  and  our 
two  travellers  resume  their  way,  emerging  from  the 
opposite  gate  of  the  village. 

Before  them,  again,  lies  the  broad  valley,  with  a 
mist  so  thinly  scattered  over  it  as  to  be  perceptible 


Digitized 


by  Google 


840  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENI. 

only  in  the  distance,  and  most  so  in  the  nooks  of  uie 
hills.  Now  that  we  have  called  it  mist,  it  seems  a 
mistake  not  rather  to  have  called  it  sunshine ;  the 
glory  of  so  much  light  being  mingled  with  so  little 
gloom,  in  the  airy  material  of  that  vapor.  Be  it  mist 
or  sunshine,  it  adds  a  touch  of  ideal  beauty  to  the 
scene,  ahnost  persuading  the  spectator  that  this  valley 
and  those  hills  are  visionary,  because  their  visible  at- 
mosphere is  so  like  the  substance  of  a  dream. 

Immediately  about  them,  however,  there  were  abun- 
dant tokens  that  the  country  was  not  really  the  para- 
dise it  looked  to  be,  at  a  casual  glance.  Neither  the 
wretched  cottages  nor'  the  dreary  farm-houses  seemed 
to  partake  of  the  prosperity,  with  which  so  kindly  a 
climate,  and  so  fertile  a  portion  of  Mother  EarUi's 
bosom,  should  have  filled  them,  one  and  all.  But, 
possibly,  the  peasant  inhabitants  do  not  exist  in  so 
grimy  a  poverty,  and  in  homes  so  comfortless,  as  a 
stranger,  with  his  native  ideas  of  those  matters,  would 
be  likely  to  imagine.  The  Italians  appear  to  possess 
none  of  that  emulative  pride  which  we  see  in  our  New 
England  villages,  where  every  householder,  according 
to  his  taste  and  means,  endeavors  to  make  his  home^ 
stead  an  ornament  to  the  grassy  and  elm-shadowed 
wayside.  In  Italy  there  are  no  neat  doorsteps  and 
thresholds ;  no  pleasant,  vine-sheltered  porches ;  none 
of  those  grass-plots  or  smoothly  shorn  lawns,  which 
hospitably  invite  the  imagination  into  the  sweet  do- 
mestic interiors  of  English  life.  Everything,  however 
sunny  and  luxuriant  may  be  the  scene  around,  is  es- 
pecially disheartening  in  the  immediate  neighborhood 
of  an  Italian  home. 

An  artist,  it  is  true,  might  often  thank  his  stars  for 
those  old  houses,  so  picturesquely  time -stained,  and  ^ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SCENES  BY  THE    WAY,      -  841 

with  the  plaster  falling  in  blotches  from  the  ancient' 
brick-work.  The  prison -like,  iron -barred  windows, 
and  the  wide-arched,  dismal  entrance,  admitting  on  one 
hand  to  the  stable,  on  the  other  to  the  kitchen,  might 
impress  him  as  far  better  worth  his  pencil  than  the 
newly  painted  pine  boxes,  in  which  —  if  he  be  an 
I  American  —  his  countrymen  live  and  thrive.  But 
there  is  reason  to  suspect  that  a  people  are  waning 
to  decay  and  ruin  the  moment  that  their  life  becomes 
fascinating  either  in  the  poet's  imagination  or  the 
painter's  eye. 

As  usual,  on  Italian  waysides,  the  wanderers  pa9sed 
great,  black  crosses,  hung  with  all  the  instruments  of 
the  sacred  agony  and  passion :  there  were  the  crown  of 
thorns,  the  hammer  and  nails,  the  pincers,  the  spear, 
the  sponge ;  and  perched  over  the  whole,  the  cock  that 
crowed  to  St.  Peter's  remorseful  conscience.  Thus, 
while  the  fertile  scene  showed  the  never-failing  benef- 
icence of  the  Creator  towards  man  in  his  transitory 
state,  these  symbols  reminded  each  wayfarer  of  the 
Saviour's  infinitely  greater  love  for  him  as  an  im- 
mortal spirit.  Beholding  these  consecrated  stations, 
the  idea  seemed  to  strike  Donatello  of  converting  the 
otherwise  aimless  journey  into  a  penitential  pilgrim- 
age. At  each  of  them  he  alighted  to  kneel  and  kiss 
the  cross,  and  humbly  press  his  forehead  against  its 
foot;  and  this  so  invariably,  that  the  sculptor  soon 
learned  to  draw  bridle  of  his  own  accord.  It  may  be, 
too,  heretic  as  he  was,  that  Kenyon  likewise  put  up  a 
prayer,  rendered  more  fervent  by  the  symbols  before 
his  eyes,  for  the  peace  of  his  friend's  conscience,  and 
the  pardon  of  the  sin  that  so  oppressed  him. 

Not  only  at  the  crosses  did  Donatello  kneel,  but  at 
each  of  the  many  shrines,  where  the  Blessed  Virgin  kn 


Digitized 


by  Google 


842  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

fresco — faded  with  sunshine  and  half  washed  out' 
with  showers  —  looked  benignly  at  her  worshipper ; 
or  where  she  was  represented  in  a  wooden  image,  or  a 
bas-relief  of  plaster  or  marble,  as  accorded  with  the 
means  of  the  devout  person  who  built,  or  restored 
from  a.tnedisBval  antiquity,  these  places  of  wayside 
woi*ship.  They  were  everywhere :  imder  arched  niches, 
or  in  little  penthouses  with  a  brick  tiled  roof,  just 
large  enough  to  shelter  them ;  or  perhaps  in  some  bit 
of  old  Roman  masonry,  the  founders  of  whiph  had 
died  before  the  Advent;  or  in  the  wall  of  a  country 
inn  or  farm-house ;  or  at  the  midway  point  of  a  bridge ; 
or  in  the  shallow  cavity  of  a  natural  rock ;  or  high  up- 
ward  in  the  deep  cuts  of  the  road.  It  appeared  to  the 
sculptor  that  Donatello  prayed  the  more  earnestly  and 
the  more  hopefully  at  these  shrines,  because  the  mild 
face  of  the  Madonna  promised  him  to  intercede  as  a 
tender  mother  betwixt  the  poor  culprit  and  the  awful- 
ness  of  judgment. 

It  was  beautiful  to  observe,  indeed,  how  tender 
was  the  soul  of  man  and  woman  towards  the  Virgin 
mother,  in  recognition  of  the  tenderness  which,  as 
their  faith  taught  them,  she  immortally  cherishes  to- 
wards all  human  souls.  In  the  wire-work  screen,  be- 
fore each  shrine,  hung  offerings  of  roses,  or  whatever 
flower  was  sweetest  and  most  seasonable ;  some  already 
wilted  and  withered,  some  fresh  with  that  very  morn- 
ing's dew-drops.  Flowers  there  were,  too,  that,  being 
artificial,  never  bloomed  on  earth,  nor  would  ever  fade. 
The  thought  occurred  to  Kenyon,  that  flower -pots 
with  living  plants  might  be  set  within  the  niches,  or 
even  that  rose-trees,  and  all  kinds  of  flowering  shrubs, 
might  be  reared  under  the  shrines,  and  taught  to  twine 
and  wreathe  themselves  around;  so  that  the  Virgin 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SCENES  BY  THE   WAY.  848 

diould  dwell  within  a  bower  of  verdure,  bloom,  and 
fragrant  freshness,  symbolizing  a  homage  perpetually 
new.  There  are  many  things  in  the  religious  eustoma 
of  these  people  that  seem  good  ;  many  things,  at  least, 
that  might  be  both  good  and  beautiful,  if  the  soul  of 
goodness  and  the  sense  of  beauty  were  as  mueh  aliye 
in  the  Italians  now  as  they  must  have  been  when  those 
customs  were  first  imagined  and  adopted.  But,  in- 
stead of  blossoms  on  die  shrub,  or  freshly  gathered, 
with  the  dew-drops  on  their  leaves,  their  worship,  now- 
adays, is  best  symbolized  by  the  artificial  flower. 

The  sculptor  fancied,  moreover  (but  perhaps  it  was 
his  heresy  that  suggested  the  idea),  that  it  would  be 
of  happy  influence  to  place  a  comfortable  and  shady 
seat  beneath  every  wayside  shrine.  Then  the  weary 
and  sun-scorched  traveller,  while  resting  himself  imder 
her  protecting  shadow,  might  thank  the  Virgin  for  her 
hospitality.  Nor,  perchance,  were  he  to  regale  him- 
self, even  in  such  a  consecrated  spot,  with  the  fra- 
grance of  a  pipe,  would  it  rise  to  heaven  more  offen- 
sively than  the  smoke  of  priestly  incense.  We  do 
ourselves  wrong,  and  too  meanly  estimate  the  Holi- 
ness above  us,  when  we  deem  that  any  act  or  enjoy* 
ment,  good  in  itself,  is  not  good  to  do  religiously. 

Whatever  may  be  the  iniquities  of  the  papal  system, 
it  was  a  wise  and  lovely  sentiment  that  set  up  the  fre- 
quent shrine  and  cross  along  the  roadside.  No  way- 
farer, bent  on  whatever  worldly  errand,  can  fail  to  be 
reminded,  at  every  mile  or  two,  that  this  is  not  the 
business  which  most  concerns  him.  The  pleasure- 
seeker  is  silently  admonished  to  look  heavenward  for 
a  joy  infinitely  greater  than  he  now  possesses.  The 
wretch  in  temptation  beholds  the  cross,  and  is  warned 
that,  if  he  yield,  the  Saviour's  agony  for  his  sake  wiU 


Digitized 


by  Google 


844  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

have  been  endured  in  vain.  The  stubborn  criminali 
whose  heart  has  long  been  like  a  stone,  feels  it  throb 
anew  with  dread  and  hope ;  and  our  poor  Donatello, 
as  he  went  kneeUng  from  shrine  to  cross,  and  from 
cross  to  shrine,  doubtless  found  an  efficacy  in  these 
symbols  that  helped  him  towards  a  higher  penitence. 

Whether  the  young  Count  of  Monte  Beni  noticed 
the  fact,  or  no,  there  was  more  than  one  incident  of 
their  journey  that  led  Kenyon  to  believe  that  they 
were  attended,  or  closely  followed,  or  preceded,  near 
ui  hand,  by  some  one  who  took  an  interest  in  their 
motions.  As  it  were,  the  step,  the  sweeping  garment, 
die  faintly  heard  breath,  of  an  invisible  companion, 
was  beside  them,  as  they  went  on  their  way.  It  was 
like  a  dream  that  had  strayed  out  of  their  slumber, 
and  was  haunting  them  in  the  daytime,  when  its 
shadowy  substance  could  have  neither  density  nor  out- 
line, in  the  too  obtrusive  light.  After  sunset,  it  grew 
a  little  more  distinct. 

"  On  the  left  of  that  last  shrine,"  asked  the  sculp* 
tor,  as  they  rode,  under  the  moon,  "  did  you  observe 
the  figure  of  a  woman  kneeling,  with  her  face  hidden 
in  her  hands?" 

"  I  never  looked  that  way,"  replied  Donatello.  "  I 
was  saying  my  own  prayer.  It  was  some  penitent, 
perchance.  May  the  Blessed  Virgin  be  the  more  gn^ 
eious  to  the  poor  soul,  because  she  is  a  woman." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


C3HAPTER  XXXm. 

PICTURED    WINDOWS. 

After  wide  wanderings  through  the  valley,  the  twn 
travellers  directed  their  course  towards  its  boundary 
of  hills.  Here,  the  natural  scenery  and  men's  modifi* 
cations  of  it  immediately  took  a  different  aspect  from 
that  of  the  fertile  and  smiling  plain.  Not  unfre- 
quently  there  was  a  convent  on  the  hill-side ;  or,  on 
some  insulated  promontory,  a  ruined  castle,  once  the 
den  of  a  robber  chieftain,  who  was  accustomed  to  dash 
down  from  his  commanding  height  upon  the  road  that 
wound  below.  For  ages  back,  the  old  fortress  had 
been  flinging  down  its  crumbling  ramparts,  stone  by 
stone,  towards  the  grimy  village  at  its  foot. 

Their  road  wound  onward  among  the  hills,  which 
rose  steep  and  lofty  from  the  scanty  level  space  that 
lay  between  them.  They  continually  thrust  their  great 
bulks  before  the  wayfarers,  as  if  grimly  resolute  to 
forbid  their  passage,  or  closed  abruptly  behind  them, 
when  they  still  dared  to  proceed.  A  gigantic  hill  would 
set  its  foot  right  down  before  them,  and  only  at  the 
last  moment  would  grudgingly  withdraw  it,  just  far 
enough  to  let  them  creep  towards  another  obstacle. 
Adown  these  rough  heights  were  visible  the  dry  tracks 
of  many  a  mountain-torrent  that  had  lived  a  life  too 
fierce  and  passionate  to  be  a  long  one.  Or,  perhaps,  a 
stream  was  yet  hurrying  shyly  along  the  edge  of  a  far 
wider  bed  of  pebbles  and  shelving  f ock  than  it  seemed 


Digitized 


by  Google 


846  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

to  need,  though  not  too  wide  for  the  swollen  rage  of 
which  this  shy  rivulet  was  capable.  A  stone  bridge 
bestrode  it,  the  ponderous  arches  of  which  were  upheld 
and  rendered  indestructible  by  the  weight  of  the  very 
stones  that  threatened  to  crush  them  down.  Old  Bo« 
man  toil  was  pei*ceptible  in  the  foundations  of  that 
massive  bridge ;  the  first  weight  that  it  ever  bore  was 
that  of  an  army  of  the  Republic 

Threading  these  defiles,  they  would  arrive  at  some 
immemorial  city,  crowning  the  high  summit  of  a  hill 
with  its  cathedral,  its  many  churches,  and  public  edi« 
fices,  all  of  Gothic  architecture.  With  no  more  level 
ground  than  a  single  piazza,  in  the  midst,  the  ancient 
town  tumbled  its  crooked  and  narrow  streets  down  the 
mountain-side,  through  arched  passages,  and  by  steps 
of  stone.  The  aspect  of  everything  was  awfully  old ; 
older,  indeed,  in  its  effect  on  the  imagination,  than 
Rome  itself,  because  history  does  not  lay  its  finger  on 
these  forgotten  edifices  and  tell  us  all  about  their  ori- 
gin. Etruscan  princes  may  have  dwelt  in  them.  A 
thousand  years,  at  all  events,  would  seem  but  a  middle 
age  for  these  structures.  They  are  built  of  such  huge, 
square  stones,  that  their  appearance  of  ponderous  du- 
rability distresses  the  beholder  with  the  idea  that  they 
can  never  fall, —  never  crumble  away,  —  never  be  less 
At  than  now  for  human  habitation.  Many  of  them 
may  once  have  been  palaces^  and  still  retain  a  squalid 
grandeur.  But,  gazing  at  tkem,  we  recognize  how  un< 
desirable  it  is  to  build  the  tabernacle  of  our  brief  life- 
time out  of  permanent  materials,  and  with  a  view  to 
their  being  occupied  by  future  generations. 

All  towns  should  be  made  capable  of  purification  by 
fire,  or  of  decay,  within  each  half-century.  Otherwise^ 
they  become  the  hereditary  haunts  of  vermin  and  noir 


Digitized 


by  Google 


PICTURED   WJNDOWS.  841 

Bomeness,  besides  standing  apart  from  the  possibility 
of  such  improvements  as  are  constantly  introduced 
into  the  rest  of  man's  contrivances  and  accommoda- 
tions. It  is  beautiful,  no  doubt,  and  exceedingly  satis« 
factory  to  some  of  our  natural  instincts,  to  imagine  our 
far  posterity  dwelling  under  the  same  roof-tree  as  our* 
selves.  Stilly  when  people  insist  on  building  indestruc- 
tible houses,  they  incur,  or  their  children  do,  a  misfor- 
tune analogous  to  that  of  the  Sibyl,  when  she  obtained 
the  grievous  boon  of  immortality.  So,  we  may  build 
almost  immortal  habitations,  it  is  true ;  but  we  cannot 
keep  them  from  growing  old,  musty,  unwholesome^ 
dreary,  full  of  death-scents,  ghosts,  and  murder-stains ; 
in  short,  such  habitations  as  one  sees  everywhere  in 
Italy,  be  they  hovels  or  palaces. 

"You  should  go  with  me  to  my  native  country,'" 
rtwerved  the  sculptor  to  Donatello.  "  In  that  fortu- 
nate land,  each  generation  has  only  its  own  sins  and 
sorrows  to  bear.  Here,  it  seems  as  if  all  the  weary 
and  dreary  Past  were  piled  upon  the  back  of  the  Pres- 
ent. If  I  were  to  lose  my  spirits  in  this  country,  — 
if  I  were  to  siififer  any  heavy  misfortune  here,  —  mo- 
thinks  it  would  be  impossible  to  stand  up  against  it, 
under  such  adverse  influences." 

"  The  sky  itself  is  an  old  roof,  now,"  answered  the 
Count:  "and,  no  doubt,  the  sins  of  mankind  have 
made  it  gloomier  than  it  used  to  be." 

"  Oh,  my  poor  Faun,"  thought  Kenyon  to  himself, 
*^'  how  art  thou  changed  1 " 

A  city,  like  this  of  which  we  speak,  seems  a  sort  of 
Btony  growth  out  of  the  hill-side,  or  a  fossilized  town ; 
8o  ancient  and  strange  it  looks,  without  enough  of  life 
and  juiciness  in  it  to  be  any  longer  susceptible  of  de- 
^ay.  An  earthquake  would  afford  it  the  only  chancy 
of  being  ruined,  beyond  its  present  ruin. 

Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC 


848  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

Yet,  though  dead  to  all  the  purposes  for  which  we 
live  to-day,  the  place  has  its  glorious  recollections,  and 
not  merely  rude  and  warlike  ones,  but  those  of  brighter 
and  milder  triumphs,  the  fruits  of  which  we  still  en- 
joy. Italy  can  co>unt  several  of  these  lifeless  towns 
which,  four  or  five  hundred  years  ago,  were  each  the 
birthplace  of  its  own  school  of  art ;  nor  have  they  yet 
forgotten  to  be  proud  of  the  dark,  old  pictares,  and 
the  faded  frescos,  the  pristine  beauty  of  which  was  a 
light  and  gladness  to  the  world.  But  now,  unless  one 
happens  to  be  a  painter,  these  famous  works  make  us 
miserably  desperate.  They  are  poor,  dim  ghosts  of 
what,  when  Giotto  or  Cimabue  first  created  them, 
threw  a  splendor  along  the  stately  aisles  ;  so  far  gone 
towards  nothingness,  in  our  day,  that  scarcely  a  hint 
of  design  or  expression  can  glimmer  through  the  dusk. 
Those  early  artists  did  well  to  paint  their  frescos. 
Glowing  on  the  church-walls,  they  might  be  looked 
upon  as  symbols  of  the  living  spirit  that  made  Cathol- 
icism a  true  religion,  and  that  glorified  it  as  long  as 
it  retained  a  genuine  life ;  they  filled  the  transepts 
with  a  radiant  throng  of  saints  and  angels,  and  threw 
around  the  high  altar  a  faint  reflection  —  as  much  as 
mortals  could  see,  or  bear  —  of  a  Diviner  Presence; 
But  now  that  the  colors  are  so  wretchedly  bedimmed, 
—  now  that  blotches  of  plastered  wall  dot  the  frescos 
all  over,  like  a  mean  reality  thrusting  itself  through 
life's  brightest  illusions, —  the  next  best  artist  to  Cimn 
abue  or  Giotto  or  Ghirlandaio  or  Pinturicchio  will  be 
he  that  shall  reverently  cover  their  ruined  masterpieces 
with  whitewash  I 

Kenyon,  however,  being  an  earnest  student  and 
critic  of  Art,  lingered  long  before  these  pathetic  rel- 
ics; and  Donatello,  in  his  present  phase  of  penitence, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


PICTURED   WINDOWS.  849^ 

thought  no  time  spent  amiss  while  he  could  be  kneel-, 
ing  before  an  altar.  Whenever  they  found  a  cathe- 
dral, therefore,  or  a  Gothic  church,  the  two  travellers 
were  of  one  mind  to  enter  it.  In  some  of  these  holy 
edifices  they  saw  pictures  that  time  had  not  dimmed 
'  Qor  injured  in  the  least,  though  they  perhaps  belonged 
to  as  old  a  school  of  Art  as  any  that  were  perishing 
around  them.  These  were  the  painted  windows ;  and 
as  often  as  he  gazed  at  them  the  sculptor  blessed  the 
mediaeval  time,  and  its  gorgeous  contrivances  of  splen* 
dor ;  for  surely  the  skill  of  man  has  never  accomj. 
plished,  nor  his  mind  imagined,  any  other  beauty  or 
glory  worthy  to  be  compared  with  these. 

It  is  the  special  excellence  of  pictured  glass,  that 
the  light,  which  falls  merely  on  the  outside  of  other 
pictures,  is  here  interfused  throughout  the  work;  it 
illuminates  the  design,  and  invests  it  with  a  living  ra- 
diance ;  and  in  requital  the  unfading  colors  transmute 
the  common  daylight  into  a  miracle  of  richness  and 
glory  in  its  passage  through  the  heavenly  substance 
of  the  blessed  and  angelic  shapes  which  throng  the 
high-arched  window. 

"  It  is  a  woful  thing,"  cried  Kenyon,  while  one  of 
these  frail  yet  enduring  and  fadeless  pictures  threw  its 
hues  on  his  face,  and  on  the  pavement  of  the  church 
around  him,  —  "a  sad  necessity  that  any  Christian 
soul  should  pass  from  earth  without  once  seeing  an 
antique  painted  window,  with  the  bright  Italian  sun- 
shine glowing  through  it!  There  is  no  other  such 
true  symbol  of  the  glories  of  the  better  world,  where 
a  celestial  radiance  will  be  inherent  in  all  things  and 
persons,  and  render  each  continually  transparent  to 
the  sight  of  all." 

"  But  what  a  horror  it  would  be,"  said  Donatello, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


860  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

sadly,  "if  there  were  a  soul  among  them  through 
which  the  light  could  not  be  transfused  ! " 

"  Yes ;  and  perhaps  this  is  to  be  the  pimishment  of 
sin,"  replied  the^sculptor ;  "  not  that  it  shall  be  made 
evident  to  the  universe,  which  can  profit  nothing  by 
such  knowledge,  but  that  it  shall  insulate  the  sinner 
firom  all  sweet  society  by  rendering  him  impermeable 
to  light,  and,  therefore,  unrecogniz^le  in  the  abode 
of  heavenly  simplicity  and  truth.  Then,  what  remains 
for  him,  but  the  dreariness  of  infinite  and  eternal  soli- 
tude?" 

"  That  would  be  a  horrible  destiny,  indeed  1  "  said 
Donatello. 

His  voice  as  he  spoke  the  words  had  a  hollow  and 
dreary  cadence,  as  if  he  anticipated  some  such  frozen 
solitude  for  himself.  A  figure  in  a  dark  robe  was 
lurking  in  the  obscurity  of  a  side-chapel  close  by,  and 
made  an  impulsive  movement  forward,  but  hesitated 
as  DonateUo  spoke  again. 

'*  But  there  might  be  a  more  miserable  torture  than 
to  be  solitary  forever,"  said  he.  "  Think  of  having  a 
single  companion  in  eternity,  and  instead  of  finding 
any  consolation,  or  at  all  events  variety  of  torture,  to 
see  your  own  weary,  weary  sin  repeated  in  that  insep- 
arable soul." 

"I  think,  my  dear  Coimt,  you  have  never  read 
Dante,"  observed  Kenyoi;i.  "  That  idea  is  somewhat 
in  his  style,  but  I  cannot  help  regretting  that  it  came 
into  your  mind  just  then." 

The  dark-robed  figure  had  shrunk  back,  and  was 
quite  lost  to  sight  among  the  shadows  of  the  chapel. 

"There  w.'is  an  English  poet,"  resumed  Kenyon, 
turning  again  towards  the  window,  "who  speaks  of 
the  ^  dim,  religious  light,'  transmitted  through  painted 


Digitized 


by  Google 


PICTURED   WINDOWS.  851 

glass.  I  always  admired  this  ricUy  descriptive  phrase ; 
but,  though  he  was  once  in  Italy,  I  question  whether 
Milton  ever  saw  any  but  the  dingy  pictures  in  the  dusty 
windows  of  English  cathedrals,  imperfectly  shown  by 
the  gray  English  daylight.  He  would  else  have  illumi- 
nated that  word  ^  dim '  with  some  epithet  that  should 
not  chase  away  the  dimness,  yet  should  make  it  glow 
like  a  million  of  rubies,  sapphires,  emeralds,  and  to- 
pazes. Is  it  not  so  with  yonder  window  ?  The  pic- 
tures are  most  brilliant  in  themselves,  yet  dim  with 
tenderness  and  reverence,  because  God  himself  is  shin- 
ing through  them." 

"  The  pictures  fill  me  with  emotion,  but  not  such  as 
you  seem  to  experience,"  said  DonateUo.  "  I  tremble 
at  those  awful  saints ;  and,  most  of  all,  at  the  figure 
above  them.     He  glows  with  Divine  wrath  1  " 

"My  dear  friend,"  said  Kenyon,  "how  strangely 
your  eyes  have  transmuted  the  expression  of  the  fig- 
ure I     It  is  divine  love,  not  wrath  I  " 

"  To  my  eyes,"  said  DonateUo,  stubbornly,  "  it  is 
wrath,  not  love !     Each  must  interpret  for  himself." 

The  friends  left  the  chtirch,  and  looking  up,  from  the 
exterior,  at  the  window  which  they  had  just  been  con- 
templating within,  nothing  was  visible  but  the  merest 
outline  of  dusky  shapes.  Neither  the  individual  like- 
ness of  saint,  angel,  nor  Saviour,  and  far  less  the  com- 
bined scheme  and  purport  of  the  picture,  could  any- 
wise be  made  out.  That  miracle  of  radiant  art,  thus 
viewed,  was  nothing  better  than  an  incomprehensible 
obscurity,  without  a  gleam  of  beauty  to  induce  the  be- 
holder to  attempt  imravelling  it. 

"  All  this,"  thought  the  sculptor,  "  is  a  most  forcible 
emblem  of  the  different  aspect  of  religious  truth  and 
sacred  story,  as  viewed  from  the  warm  interior  of  be- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


862  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

lief,  or  from  its  cold  and  dreary  outside.  Christian 
faith  is  a  grand  cathedral,  with  divinely  pictured  win- 
dows. Standing  without,  you  see  no  glory,  nor  can 
possibly  imagine  any;  standing  within,  every  ray  of 
light  reveals  a  harmony  of  unspeakable  splendors.'' 

After  Kenyon  and  Doiiatello  emerged  from  the 
church,  however,  they  had  better  opportunity  for  a^ts 
of  charity  and  mercy  than  for  religious  contempla- 
tion ;  being  inmiediately  surrounded  by  a  swarm  of 
beggars,  who  are  the  present  possessors  of  Italy,  and 
share  the  spoil  of  the  stranger  with  the  fleas  and  mos- 
quitoes, their  formidable  allies.  These  pests  —  the  hu- 
man ones  —  had  himted  the  two  travellers  at  every 
stage  of  their  journey.  From  village  to  village,  rag- 
ged boys  and  girls  kept  almost  under  the  horses'  feet ; 
hoary  grandsires  and  grandames  caught  glimpses  of 
their  approach,  and  hobbled  to  intercept  them  at  some 
point  of  vantage ;  blind  men  stared  them  out  of  counte- 
nance with  their  sightless  orbs  ;  women  held  up  their 
unwashed  babies ;  cripples  displayed  their  wooden  legs, 
their  grievous  scars,  their  dangling,  boneless  arms,  their 
broken  backs,  their  burden  of  a  hump,  or  whatever  in- 
firmity or  deformity  Providence  had  assigned  them  for 
an  inheritance.  On  the  highest  moimtain  smnmit  — 
in  the  most  shadowy  ravine  —  there  was  a  beggar  wait- 
ing for  them.  In  one  small  village,  Kenyon  had  the 
curiosity  to  count  merely  how  many  children  were  cry- 
ing, whining,  and  bellowing  all  at  once  for  ahns.  They 
proved  to  be  more  than  forty  of  as  ragged  and  dirty 
little  imps  as  any  in  the  world  ;  besides  whom,  all  the 
wrinkled  matrons,  and  most  of  the  village  maids,  and 
not  a  few  stalwart  men,  held  out  their  hands  grimly, 
piteously,  or  smilingly  in  the  forlorn  hope  of  whatever 
trifle  of  coin  might  remain  in  pockets  already  so  fear- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


PICTURED   WINDOWS.  863 

fully  taxed.  Had  they  been  permitted,  they  would 
gladly  have  knelt  down  and  worshipped  the  travellers, 
and  have  cursed  them,  without  rising  from  their  knees, 
if  the  expected  boon  failed  to  be  awarded. 
,  Yet  they  were  not  so  miserably  poor  but  that  the 
grown  people  kept  houses  over  their  heads.  In  the 
way  of  food,  they  had,  at  least,  vegetables  in  their  lit- 
tle gardens,  pigs  and  chickens  to  kill,  eggs  to  fry  into 
omelets  with  oil,  wine  to  drink,  and  many  other  things 
to  make  life  comfortable.  As  for  the  children,  when 
no  more  small  coin  appeared  to  be  forthcoming,  they 
began  to  laugh  and  play,  and  turn  heels  over  head, 
showing  then&selves  jolly  and  vivacious  brats,  and  evi- 
dently as  well  fed  as  needs  be.  The  truth  is,  the  Ital- 
ian peasantry  look  upon  strangers  as  the  almoners  of 
Providence,  and  therefore  feel  no  more  shame  in  ask- 
ing and  receiving  alms,  than  in  availing  themselves  of 
providential  bounties  in  whatever  other  form. 

In  accordance  with  his  nature,  DonateUo  was  al- 
ways exceedingly  charitable  to  these  ragged  battalions, 
and  appeared  to  derive  a  certain  consolation  from  the 
prayers  which  many  of  them  put  up  in  his  behalf.  In 
Italy  a  copper  coin  of  minute  value,  will  often  make 
all  the  difference  between  a  vindictive  curse  —  death 
by  apoplexy  being  the  favorite  one  —  mumbled  in  an 
old  witch's  toothless  jaws  and  a  prayer  from  the  same 
lips,  so  earnest  that  it  would  seem  to  reward  the  char- 
itable soul  with  at  least  a  puff  of  grateful  breath  to 
help  him  heavenward.  Good  wishes  being  so  cheap, 
though  possibly  not  very  efficacious,  and  anathemas  so 
exceedingly  bitter,  —  even  if  the  greater  portion  ol 
their  poison  remain  in  the  mouth  that  utters  them,  — 
it  may  be  wise  to  expend  some  reasonable  amount  in 
the  purchase  of  the  former.     DpoateUo  invariably  did 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Jt54  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

BO ;  and  as  he  distributed  his  alms  under  the  pictured 
window,  of  which  we  have  been  speaking,  no  less  than 
seven  ancient  women  lifted  their  hands  and  besought 
blessings  on  his  head.  , 

"  Come,"  said  the  sculptor,  rejoicing  at  the  happier 
expression  which  he  saw  in  his  friend's  face.  "I 
think  your  steed  will  not  stumble  with  you  to-day. 
Each  of  these  old  dames  looks  as  much  like  Horace's 
Atra  Cura  as  can  well  be  conceived ;  but,  though  there 
are  seven  of  them,  they  wUl  make  your  burden  on 
horseback  lighter  instead  of  heavier." 

"  Are  we  to  ride  far?  "  asked  the  Count. 

"A  tolerable  journey  betwixt  now  and  to-morrow 
noon,"  Kenyon  replied  ;  ^^  for,  at  that  hour,  I  purpose 
to  be  standing  by  the  Pope's  statue  in  the  great  squaie 
<>f  Perugia." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

ICABKET-DAY  IN  VEKUGUL, 

Perugia,  on  its  lofty  hill-top,  was  reached  by  the 
two  travellers  before  the  sun  had  quite  kissed  away 
the  early  freshness  of  the  morning.  Since  midnight, 
there  had  been  a  heavy  rain,  bringing  infinite  refresh- 
ment to  the  scene  of  verdure  and  fertility  amid  which 
this  ancient  civilization  stands ;  insomuch  that  Kenyon 
loitered,  when  they  came  to  the  gray  city -wall,  and 
was  loath  to  give  up  the  prospect  of  the  sunny  wilder- 
ness that  lay  beiow.  It  was  as  green  as  England,  and 
bright  as  Italy  alone.  There  was  all  the  wide  valley, 
sweeping  down  and  spreading  away  on  all  sides  from 
the  weed-grown  ramparts,  and  bounded  afar  by  moun- 
tains, which  lay  asleep  in  the  sun,  with  thin  mists  and 
silvery  clouds  floating  about  their  heads  by  way  of 
morning  dreams. 

^^  It  lacks  still  two  hours  of  noon,"  said  the  sculptor 
to  his  friend,  as  they  stood  under  the  arch  of  the  gate- 
way, waiting  for  their  passports  to  be  examined ;  "  will 
you  come  with  me  to  see  some  admirable  frescos  by 
Perugino?  There  is  a  hall  in  the  Exchange,  of  no 
great  magnitude,  but  covered  with  what  must  have 
been  —  at  the  time  it  was  painted  —  such  magnificence 
and  beauty  as  the  world  had  not  elsewhere  to  show." 

"  It  depresses  me  to  look  at  old  frescos,"  responded 
the  Count ;  *'  it  is  a  pain,  yet  not  enough  of  a  pain  Uf 
answer  as  a  penance." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


856  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

**  Will  you  look  at  some  pictures  by  Fra  Angelico 
in  the  Church  of  San  Domenico?"  asked  Kenyon; 
**  they  are  full  of  religious  sincerity.  When  one  stud« 
ies  them  faithfully,  it  is  like  holding  a  conversation 
about  heavenly  things  with  a  tender  and  devout- 
minded  man." 

"  You  have  shown  me  some  of  Fra  Angelico's  pic- 
tures, I  remember,"  answered  Donatello ;  "  his  angels 
look  as  if  they  had  never  taken  a  flight  out  of  heaven ; 
and  his  saints  seem  to  have  been  born  saints,  and  al- 
ways to  have  lived  so.  Yoimg  maidens,  and  all  inno- 
cent persons,  I  doubt  not,  may  find  great  delight  and 
profit  in  looking  at  such  holy  pictures.  But  they  are 
not  for  me." 

**  Your  criticism,  I  fancy,  has  great  moral  depth," 
replied  Kenyon ;  *'  and  I  see  in  it  the  reason  why 
Hilda  so  highly  appreciates  Fra  Angelico's  pictures. 
Well ;  we  will  let  all  such  matters  pass  for  to-day,  and 
stroll  about  this  fine  old  city  till  noon." 

They  wandered  to  and  fro,  accordingly,  and  lost 
themselves  among  the  strange,  precipitate  passages, 
^^hich;  in  Perugia^  are  called  streets.  Some  of  them 
are  like  caverns,  beiag  arched  all  over,  and  plunging 
down  abruptly  towards  an  unknown  darkness  ;  which, 
when  you  hiave  fathomed  its  depths,  admits  you  to  a 
daylight  that  you  scarcely  hoped  to  behold  again. 
Here  they  met  shabby  men,  and  the  careworn  wives 
and  mothers  of  the  people,  some  of  whom  guided  chil< 
dren  in  leading-strings  through  those  dim  and  an* 
tique  thoroughfares,  where  a  hundred  generations  had 
passed  before  the  little  feet  of  to-day  began  to  tread 
them.  Thence  they  climbed  upward  again,  and  came 
to  the  level  plateau,  on  the  summit  of  the  lull,  where 
are  situated  the  grand  piazza  and  the  principal  publii 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MARKET-DAY  IN  PERUGIA.  857 

It  happened  to  be  market-day  in  Perugia.  The 
great  square,  therefore,  presented  a  far  more  viva- 
Icious  spectacle  than  would  have  been  witnessed  in  it 
jat  any  other  time  of  the  week,  though  not  so  lively  as 
)to  overcome  the  gray  solemnity  of  the  architectural 
>  portion  of  the  scene.  In  the  shadow  of  the  cathedral 
and  other  old  Gothic  structures  —  seeking  shelter 
from  the  simshine  that  fell  across  the  rest  of  the 
piazza  —  was  a  crowd  of  people,  engaged  as  buyers  or 
sellers  in  the  petty  traffic  of  a  country-fair.  Dealers 
had  erected  booths  and  stalls  on  the  pavement,  and 
overspread  them  with  scanty  awnings,  beneath  which 
they  stood,  vociferously  crying  their  merchandise; 
such  as  shoes,  hats  and  caps,  yam  stockings,  cheap 
jewelry  and  cutlery,  books,  chiefly  little  volumes  of  a 
religious  character,  and  a  few  French  novels ;  toys, 
tin-ware,  old  iron,  cloth,  rosaries  of  beads,  crucifixes, 
cakes,  biscuits,  sugar -plums,  and  innumerable  little 
odds  and  ends,  which  we  see  no  object  in  advertis- 
ing. Baskets  of  grapes,  figs,  and  pears  stood  on  the 
ground.  Donkeys,  bearing  panniers  stuffed  out  with 
kitchen  vegetables,  and  requiring  an  ample  roadway^ 
roughly  shouldered  aside  the  throng. 

Crowded  as  the  square  was,  a  juggler  found  room 
to  spread  out  a  white  cloth  upon  the  pavement,  and 
cover  it  with  cups,  plates,  balls,  cards,  —  the  whole 
material  of  his  magic,  in  short,  —  wherewith  he  pro- 
ceeded to  work  miracles  under  the  noonday  sun.  Ad 
organ-grinder  at  one  point,  and  a  clarion  and  a  flut( 
at  another,  accomplished  what  they  could  towards  fill- 
ing the  wide  space  with  tuneful  noise.  Their  small 
uproar,  however,  was  nearly  drowned  by  the  multitu- 
dinous voices  of  the  people,  bargaining,  quarrelling, 
laughing,  and  babbling  copiously  at  random ;  for  thd 


Digitized 


by  Google 


858  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

briskness  of  the  mountain  atmosphere,  or  some  othef 
cause,  made  everybody  so  loquacious,  that  more  words 
were  wasted  in  Perugia  on  this  one  market-day,  than 
the  noisiest  piazza  of  Rome  would  utter  in  a  month. 

Through  aU  this  petty  tumult,  which  kept  beguil- 
ing one's  eyes  and  upper  strata  of  thought,  it  was  de- 
lightful to  catch  glimpses  of  the  grand  old  architecture 
that  stood  around  the  square.  The  life  of  the  flitting 
moment,  existing  in  the  antique  shell  of  an  age  gone 
by,  has  a  fascination  which  we  do  not  find  in  either 
the  past  or  present,  taken  by  themselves.  It  might 
seem  irreverent  to  make  the  gray  cathedral  and  the 
tall,  time-worn  palaces  echo  back  the  exuberant  vocif- 
eration of  the  market;  but  they  did  so,  and  caused 
the  sound  to  assume  a  kind  of  poetic  rhythm,  and 
themselves  looked  only  the  more  majestic  for  their 
condescension. 

On  one  side,  there  was  an  immense  edifice  devoted 
to  public  purposes,  with  an  antique  gallery,  and  a 
range  of  arched  and  stone-muUioned  windows,  run- 
ning along  its  front ;  and  by  way  of  entrance  it  had  a 
central  Gothic  arch,  elaborately  wreathed  around  with 
sculptured  semicircles,  within  which  the  spectator  was 
aware  of  a  stately  and  impressive  gloom.  Though 
merely  the  municipal  council-house  and  exchange  of 
%  decayed  country  town,  this  structure  was  worthy  to 
have  held  in  one  portion  of  it  the  parliament-hall  of  a 
nation,  and  in  the  other,  the  state  apartments  of  its 
ruler.  On  another  side  of  the  square  rose  the  medi* 
eeval  front  of  the  cathedral,  where  the  imagination  of 
a  Gothic  architect  had  long  ago  flowered  out  inde* 
structibly,  in  the  first  place,  a  grand  design,  and  then 
covering  it  with  such  abundant  detail  of  ornamentt 
that  the  magnitude  of  the  work  seemed  less  a  miracle 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MARKET-DAY  IN  PERUGIA.  859 

than  its  minuteness.  You  would  suppose  that  lie 
must  have  softened  the  stone  into  wax,  until  his  most 
delicate  fancies  were  modelled  in  the  pliant  material, 
and  then  had  hardened  it  into  stone  again.  The  whole 
was  a  vast,  black-letter  page  of  the  richest  and  quaint- 
est poetry.  In  fit  keeping  with  all  this  old  magnifi- 
cence was  a  great  marble  foimtain,  where  again  the 
Gothic  imagination  showed  its  overflow  and  gratuity 
of  device  in  the  manifold  sculptures  which  it  lavished 
as  freely  as  the  water  did  its  shifting  shapes. 

Besides  the  two  venerable  structures  which  we  have 
described,  there  were  lofty  palaces,  perhaps  of  as  old 
a  date,  rising  story  above  story,  and  adorned  with 
balconies,  whence,  hundreds  of  years  ago,  the  princely 
occupants  had  been  accustomed  to  gaze  down  at  the 
sports,  business,  and  popular  assemblages  of  the  piazza* 
And,  beyond  all  question,  they  thus  witnessed  the  erec- 
tion of  a  bronze  statue,  which,  three  centuries  since, 
was  placed  on  the  pedestal  that  it  still  occupies. 

"  I  never  come  to  Perugia,"  said  Kenyon,  "  without 
spending  as  much  time  as  I  can  spare  in  studying 
yonder  statue  of  Pope  Julius  the  Third.  Those  sculp- 
tors of  the  Middle  Age  have  fitter  lessons  for  the  pro- 
fessors of  my  art  than  we  can  find  in  the  Grecian 
masterpieces.  They  belong  to  our  Christian  civiliza- 
tion ;  and,  being  earnest  works,  they  always  express 
something  which  we  do  not  get  from  the  antique. 
Will  you  look  at  it?" 

"Willingly,"  replied  the  Count,  "for  I  see,  even 
so  far  off,  that  the  statue  is  bestowing  a  benediction, 
and  there  is  a  feeling  in  my  heart  that  I  may  be  per- 
mitted to  share  it." 

Eemembering  the  similar  idea  which  Miriam  a  short 
time  before  had  expressed,  the  sculptor  smiled  hope* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


860  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

fully  at  the  coincidence.  They  made  their  way  through 
the  throng  of  the  market-place,  and  approached  close 
to  the  iron  railing  that  protected  the  pedestal  of  the 
statue. 

It  was  the  figure  of  a  pope,  arrayed  in  his  pontifical 
/robes,  and  crowned  with  the  tiara.  He  sat  in  a  bronze 
chair,  elevated  high  above  the  pavement,  and  seemed 
to  take  kindly  yet  authoritative  cognizance  of  the  busy 
scene  which  was  at  that  moment  passing  before  his 
eye.  His  right  hand  was  raised  and  spread  abroad, 
as  if  in  the  act  of  shedding  forth  a  benediction,  which 
every  man  —  so  broad,  so  wise,  and  so  serenely  affec- 
tionate was  the  bronze  pope's  regard  —  might  hope  to 
feel  quietly  descending  upon  the  need,  or  the  distress* 
tlutt  he  had  closest  at  his  heart.  The  statue  had  life 
and  observation  in  it,  as  well  as  patriarchal  majesty. 
An  imaginative  spectator  could  not  but  be  impressed 
with  the  idea  that  this  benignly  awful  representative 
of  divine  and  human  authority  might  rise  from  his 
brazen  chair,  should  any  great  public  exigency  demand 
his  interposition,  and  encourage  or  restrain  the  people 
by  his  gesture,  or  even  by  prophetic  utterances  worthy 
of  so  grand  a  presence. 

And,  in  the  long,  calm  intervals,  amid  the  quiet 
lapse  of  ages,  the  pontiff  watched  the  daily  turmoil 
around  his  seat,  listening  with  majestic  patience  to  the 
market  cries,  and  all  the  petty  uproar  that  awoke  the 
echoes  of  the  stately  old  piazza.  He  was  the  endur- 
ing friend  of  these  men,  and  of  their  forefathers  and 
children,  — the  familiar  face  of  generations. 

"The  pope's  blessing,  methinks,  has  fallen  upon 
you,"  observed  the  sculptor,  looking  at  his  friend. 

In  truth,  Donatello's  countenance  indicated  a  healtb 
Ver  spirit  than  while  he  was  brooding  in  his  melan 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MARKET-DAY  IN  PERUGIA:  861 

cboly  tower.  The  change  of  scene,  the  breaking  up 
of  custom,  the  fresh  flow  of  incidents,  the  sense  of 
being  homeless,  and  therefore  free,  had  done  some- 
thing for  our  poor  Faun  ;  these  circumstances  had  at 
least  promoted  a  reaction,  which  might  else  have  been 
slower  in  its  progress.  Then,  no  doubt,  the  bright 
day,  the  gay  spectacle  of  the  market-place,  and  the 
sympathetic  exhilaration  of  so  many  people's  cheerful- 
ness, had  each  their  suitable  effect  on  a  temper  natu- 
rally prone  to  be  glad.  Perhaps,  too,  he  was  magnet- 
ically conscious  of  a  presence  that  formerly  sufficed  to 
make  him  happy.  Be  the  cause  what  it  might,  Dona- 
tello's  eyes  shone  with  a  serene  and  hopeful  expression 
while  looking  upward  at  the  bronze  pope,  to  whose 
widely  diffused  blessing,  it  may  be,  he  attributed  all 
this  good  influence. 

"  Yes,  my  dear  friend,"  said  he,  in  reply  to  the  sculp* 
tor's  remark,  "  I  feel  the  blessing  upon  my  spirit." 

"It  is  wonderful,"  said  Kenyon,  with  a  smile, 
"  wonderful  and  delightful  to  think  how  long  a  good 
man's  beneficence  may  be  potent,  even  after  his  death. 
How  great,  then,  must  have  been  the  efficacy  of  this 
excellent  pontiff's  blessing  while  he  was  alive  !  " 

"  I  have  heard,"  remarked  the  Count,  "  that  there 
was  a  brazen  image  set  up  in  the  wilderness,  the  sight 
of  which  healed  the  Israelites  of  their  poisonous  and 
rankling  wounds.  If  it  be  the  Blessed  Virgin's  pleas- 
ure, why  should  not  this  holy  image  before  us  do  mo 
equal  good  ?  A  wound  has  long  been  rankling  in  my 
Boul,  and  filling  it  with  poison." 

"  I  did  wrong  to  smile,"  answered  Kenyon.  *'  It  is 
not  for  me  to  limit  Providence  in  its  operations  on 
man's  spirit." 

While  they  stood  talking,  the  clock  in  the  neigh 


Digitized 


by  Google 


862  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

boring  cathedral  told  the  hour,  with  twelve  reyerbeit 
ating  strokes,  which  it  flung  down  upon  the  crowded 
market-place,  as  if  warning  one  and  all  to  take  advan* 
tage  of  the  bronze  pontiff's  benediction,  or  of  Heaven's 
blessing,  however  proffered,  before  the  opportunity  were 
lost. 

'^  High  noon,"  said  the  sculptor.     ^^  It  is  Miriam's « 
hourP' 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 

THE  BRONZE  PONTIFP's  BENEDICTION. 

When  the  last  of  the  twelve  strokes  had  fallen 
from  the  cathedral  clock,  Kenyon  threw  his  eyes  over 
the  busy  scene  of  the  market-place,  expecting  to  dis- 
cern Miriam  somewhere  in  the  crowd.  He  looked 
next  towards  the  cathedral  itself,  where  it  was  rea- 
sonable to  imagine  that  she  might  have  taken  shelter^ 
while  awaiting  her  appointed  time.  Seeing  no  tiace 
of  her  in  either  direction,  his  eyes  came  back  from 
their  quest  somewhat  disappointed,  and  rested  on  a 
figure  which  was  leaning,  like  Donatello  and  himself, 
on  the  iron  balustrade  that  surrounded  the  statue. 
Only  a  moment  before,  they  two  had  been  alone. 

It  was  the  figure  of  a  woman,  with  her  head  bowed 
on  her  hands,  as  if  she  deeply  felt  —  what  we  have 
been  endeavoring  to  convey  into  our  feeble  description 
—  the  benign  and  awe  -  inspiring  influence  which  the 
pontiff's  statue  exercises  upon  a  sensitive  spectator. 
No  matter  though  it  were  modelled  for  a  Catholic 
chief  priest,  the  desolate  heart,  whatever  be  its  relig- 
ion, recognizes  in  that  image  the  likeness  of  a  father. 

"  Miriam,"  said  the  sculptor,  with  a  tremor  in  his 
voice,  "  is  it  yourself  ?  " 

*'  It  is  I,"  she  replied ;  *'  I  am  faithful  to  my  en- 
gagement, though  with  many  fears." 

She  lifted  her  head,  and  revealed  to  Kenyon  — re- 
vealed to  Donatello  likewise  —  the  well-remembered 


Digitized  by 


Google 


864  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

features  of  Miriam.  They  were  pale  and  worn,  but 
distinguished  even  now,  though  less  gorgeously,  by  a 
beauty  that  might  be  imagined  bright  enough  to  glim- 
mer with  its  own  light  in  a  dim  cathedral  aisle,  and 
had  no  need  to  shrink  from  the  severer  test  of  the 
mid-day  sun.  But  she  seemed  tremulous,  and  hardly 
able  to  go  through  with  a  scene  which  at  a  distance 
she  bad  found  courage  to  undertake. 

"  You  are  most  welcome,  Miriam !  "  said  the  sculp- 
tor, seeking  to  afford  her  the  encouragement  which  he 
saw  she  oo  greatly  required.  "  1  have  a  hopeful  trust 
that  the  result  of  this  interview  will  be  propitious. 
Come ;  let  me  lead  you  to  Donatello." 

"  No,  Kenyon,  no !  "  whispered  Miriam,  shrinking 
back ;  ^'  unless  of  his  own  accord  he  speaks  my  name, 
—  unless  he  bids  me  stay,  —  no  word  shall  ever  pass 
between  him  and  me.  It  is  not  that  I  take  upon  me 
to  be  proud  at  thiii  late  hour.  Among  other  feminine 
qualities,  I  threw  Away  my  pride  when  Hilda  cast  me 
off." 

"If  not  pride,  what  else  restrains  you?"  Kenyon 
asked,  a  little  anjp^y/at  her  unseasonable  scruples,  and 
also  at  this  half-complaining  reference  to  Hilda's  just 
severity.  "  After  daring  so  much,  it  is  no  time  for 
fear !  If  we  let  him  part  from  you  without  a  word, 
your  opportunity  of  doing  him  inestimable  good  is 
lost  forever." 

"  True ;  it  will  be  lost  forever !  "  repeated  Miriam, 
sadly.  "  But,  dear  friend,  will  it  be  my  fault  ?  I  will- 
ingly fling  my  woman's  pride  at  his  feet.  But  —  do 
you  not  see?  —  his  heart  must  be  left  freely  to  its 
own  decision  whether  to  recognize  me,  because  on  his 
voluntary  choice  depends  the  whole  question  whether 
my  devotion  will  do  him  good  or  harm.     Except  he 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  BRONZE  PONTIFF'S  BENEDICTION.    365 

feel  an  infinite  need  of  me,  I  am  a  burden  and  fatal 
obstioiction  to  him  1 " 

"  Take  your  own  course,  then,  Miriam,"  said  Ken- 
yon  ;  "  and,  doubtless,  the  crisis  being  what  it  is,  your 
spirit  is  better  instructed  for  its  emergencies  than 
mine." 

While  the  foregoing  words  passed  between  them 
they  had  withdrawn  a  little  from  the  immediate  vicin- 
ity of  the  statue,  so  as  to  be  out  of  Donatello's  hear- 
ing. Still,  however,  they  were  beneath  the  pontiff's 
outstretched  hand  ;  and  Miriam,  with  her  beauty  and 
her  sorrow,  looked  up  into  his  benignant  face,  as  if 
she  had  come  thither  for  his  pardon  and  paternal  af- 
fection, and  despaired  of  so  vast  a  boon. 

Meanwhile,  she  had  not  stood  thus  long  in  the  pub- 
lic square  of  Perugia,  without  attracting  the  observa- 
tion of  many  eyes.  With  their  quick  sense  of  beauty, 
these  Italians  had  recognized  her  loveliness,  and  spared 
not  to  take  their  fill  of  gazing  at  it ;  though  their  na- 
tive gentleness  and  courtesy  made  their  homage  far 
less  obtrusive  than  that  of  Germans,  French,  or  Anglo- 
Saxons  might  have  been.  It  is  not  improbable  that 
Miriam  had  plaimed  this  momentous  interview,  on  so 
public  a  spot  and  at  high  noon,  with  an  eye  to  the  sort 
of  protection  that  would  be  thrown  over  it  by  a  mul* 
titude  of  eye-witnesses.  In  circmnstances  of  profound 
feeling  and  passion,  there  is  often  a  sense  that  too 
great  a  seclusion  cannot  be  endured  ;  there  is  an  in- 
definite dread  of  being  quite  alone  with  the  object  of 
our  deepest  interest.  The  species  of  solitude  that  a 
crowd  harbors  within  itself  is  felt  to  be  preferable,  in 
certain  conditions  of  the  heart,  to  the  remoteness  of  a 
desert  or  the  depths  of  an  untrodden  wood.  Hatred, 
love,  or  whatever  kind  of  too  intense  emotion,  or  eveu 


Digitized  by 


Google 


866  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

indifference,  where  emotion  has  once  been,  instinctively 
Reeks  to  interpose  some  barrier  between  itself  and  the 
eorresponding  passion  in  another  breast.  This,  we 
suspect,  was  what  Miriam  had  thought  of,  in  coming 
t<>  the  thronged  piazza ;  partly  this,  and  partly,  as  she 
said,  her  superstition  that  the  benign  statue  held  good 
influences  in  store. 

But  Donateilo  remained  leaning  against  the  balus- 
trade. She  dared  not  glance  towards  him,  to  see 
whether  he  were  pale  and  agitated,  or  calm  as  ice. 
Only,  she  knew  that  the  moments  were  fleetly  lapsing 
away,  and  that  his  heart  must  call  her  soon,  or  the 
voice  would  never  reach  her.  She  turned  quite  away 
from  him  and  spoke  again  to  the  sculptor. 

**  I  have  wished  to  meet  you,"  said  she,  "for  more 
than  one  reason.  News,  has  come  to  me  respecting  a 
dear  friend  of  ours.  Nay,  not  of  mine !  I  dare  not 
call  her  a  friend  of  mine,  though  once  the  dearest." 

"  Do  you  speak  of  Hilda?  "  exclaimed  Kenyon,  with 
quick  alarm.  "  Has  anything  befallen  her  ?  When 
I  last  heard  of  her,  she  was  still  in  Kome,  and  well." 

"Hilda  remains  in  Rome,"  replied  Miriam,  "  nor  is 
she  ill  as  regards  physical  health,  though  much  de- 
pressed in  spirits.  She  lives  quite  alone  in  her  dove- 
cote ;  not  a  friend  near  her,  not  one  in  Home,  which, 
you  know,  is  deserted  by  all  but  its  native  inhabitants. 
I  fear  for  her  health,  if  she  continue  long  in  such  soli- 
tude, with  despondency  preying  on  her  mind.  I  tell 
you  this,  knowing  the  interest  which  the  rare  beauty 
of  her  character  has  awakened  in  you." 

"I  will  go  to  Rome!"  said  the  sculptor,  in  great 
emotion.  "  Hilda  has  never  allowed  me  to  manifest 
more  than  a  friendly  regard  ;  but,  at  least,  she  cannot 
prevent  my  watching  over  her  at  a  humble  distance. 
.1  will  set  out  this  very  hour." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  BRONZE  PONTIFF'S  BENEDICTION.    367 

"  Do  not  leave  us  now !  "  whispered  Miriam,  implor* 
ingly,  and  laying  her  hand  on  his  arm.  "One  mo« 
ment  more  !     Ah ;  he  has  no  word  for  me  I  " 

"  Miriam  1  "  said  Donatello. 

Though  but  a  single  word^and  the  first  that  he  had 
spoken,  its  tone  was  a  warrant  of  the  sad  and  tender 
depth  from  which  it  came.  It  told  Miriam  things  of 
infinite  importance,  and,  first  of  all,  that  he  still  loved 
her.  The  sense  of  their  mutual  crime  had  stunned, 
but  not  destroyed,  the  vitality  of  his  affection  ;  it  was 
theriefore  indestructible.  That  tone,  too,  bespoke  an 
altered  and  deepened  character ;  it  told  of  a  vivified 
intellect,  and  of  spiritual  instruction  that  had  come 
through  sorrow  and  remorse ;  so  that  instead  of  the 
wild  boy,  the  thing  of  sportive,  animal  nature,  the  syl- 
van Faun,  here  was  now  the  man  of  feeling  and  intel- 
ligence. 

She  turned  towards  him,  while  his  voice  still  rever- 
berated in  the  depths  of  her  soul. 

"  You  have  called  me !  "  said  she. 

"  Because  my  deepest  heart  has  need  of  you  !  "  he 
replied.  "  Forgive,  Miriam,  the  coldness,  the  hard- 
ness with  which  I  parted  from  you  1  I  was  bewildered 
with  strange  horror  and  gloom." 

"  Alas !  and  it  was  I  that  brought  it  on  you,"  said 
she.  "  What  repentance,  what  self-sacrifice,  can  atone 
for  that  infinite  wrong  ?  There  was  something  so  sa- 
cred in  the  innocent  and  joyous  life  which  you  were 
leading!  A  happy  person  is  such  an  unaccustomed 
and  holy  creature  in  this  sad  world !  And,  encoun- 
tering so  rare  a  being,  and  gifted  with  the  power  of 
sympathy  with  his  simny  life,  it  was  my  doom,  mine, 
to  bring  him  within  the  limits  of  sinful,  sorrowful 
moi*tality !    Bid  me  depart,  Donatello !    Fling  me  off  1 


Digitized 


by  Google 


868  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

No  good,  through  my  agency,  can  follow  upon  such 
A  mighty  evil !  " 

"  Miriam,"  said  he,  "  our  lot  lies  together.  Is  it  not 
BO  ?    Tell  me,  in  Heaven's  name,  if  it  be  otherwise." 

Donatello's  conscience  was  evidently  perplexed  with 
doubt,  whether  the .  communion  of  a  crime,  such  as 
they  two  were  jointly  stained  with,  ought  not  to  stifle 
all  the  instinctive  motions  of  their  hearts,  impelling 
them  one  towards  the  other.  Miriam,  on  the  other 
hand,  remorsefully  questioned  with  herself  whether  the 
misery,  already  accruing  from  her  influence,  should 
not  warn  her  to  withdraw  from  his  path.  In  this  mo- 
mentous interview,  therefore,  two  souls  were  groping 
for  each  other  in  the  darkness  of  guilt  and  sorrow,  and 
hardly  were  bold  enough  to  grasp  the  cold  hands  that 
they  found. 

The  sculptor  stood  watching  the  scene  with  earnest 
sympathy. 

"  It  seems  irreverent,"  said  he,  at  length ;  "  intru-' 
sive,  if  not  irreverent,  for  a  third  person  to  thrust  him- 
self between  the  two  solely  concerned  in  a  crisis  like 
the  present.  Yet,  possibly  as  a  by-stander,  though  a 
deeply  interested  one,  I  may  discern  somewhat  of 
truth  that  is  hidden  from  you  both ;  nay,  at  least  in^ 
terpret  or  suggest  some  ideas  which  you  might  not  -so 
readily  convey  to  each  other." 

"  Speak !  "  said  Miriam.     "  We  confide  in  you." 

"  Speak  !  "  said  Donatello.  "  You  are  true  and  up- 
right" 

"  I  well  know,"  rejoined  Kenyon,  "  that  I  shall  not 
succeed  in  uttering  the  few,  deep  words  which,  in  this 
matter,  as  in  all  others,  include  the  absolute  truth. 
But  here,  Miriam,  is  one  whom  a  terrible  misfortune 
has  begun  to  educate ;  it  has  taken  him,  and  through 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  BRONZE  PONTIFF'S  BENEDICTION.    869 

\  'Mxr  agency,  out  of  a  wild  and  happy  state,  which, 
Vi  .thin  circumscribed  limits,  gave  him  joys  that  he  can- 
m>fc  elsewhere  find  on  earth.  On  his  behalf,  you  have 
in-^urred  a  responsibility  which  you  cannot  fling  aside. 
Ai\d  here,  Donatello,  is  one  whom  Providence  marks 
out  as  intimately  connected  with  your  destiny.  The 
my&nerious  process,  by  which  our  earthly  life  instructs 
us  for  another  state  of  being,  was  begun  for  you  by 
her.     She  has  rich  gifts  of  heart  and  mind,  a  sugges- 

•  tive  power,  a  magnetic  influence,  a  sympathetic  knowl- 
edge, which,  wisely  and  religiously  exercised,  are  what 
your  condition  needs.  She  possesses  what  you  require, 
and,  with  utter  self-devotion,  will  use  it  for  your  good. 
The  bond  betwixt  you,  therefore,  is  a  true  one,  and, 
never  —  except  by  Heaven's  own  act  —  should  be  rent 
asunder." 

"  Ah  ;  he  has  spoken  the  truth  I  "  cried  Donatello,, 
grasping  Miriam's  hand. 

^     "  The  very  truth,  dear  friend,"  cried  Miriam. 

"  But  take  heed,"  resumed  the  sculptor,  anxious  not 
to  violate  the  integrity  of  his  own  conscience,  —  "  take^ 
heed ;  for  you  love  one  another,  and  yet  your  bond  is 
twined  with  such  black  threads  that  you  must  never 
look  upon  it  as  identical  with  the  ties  that  unite  other 
loving  souls.  It  is  for  mutual  support ;  it  is  for  one 
another's  final  good ;  it  is  for  effort,  for  sacrifice,  but 
not  for  earthly  happiness.  If  such  be  your  motive, 
believe  me,  friends,  it  were  better  to  relinquish  each 
other's  hands  at  this  sad  moment.  There  would  be 
no  holy  sanction  on  your  wedded  life." 

"None,"  said  Donatello,  shuddering.  "We  know 
it  well." 

"  None,"  repeated  Miriam,  also  shuddering.  "  United 

.'-'  miserably  entangled  with  me.  rather  —  by  a  bond 

*     VOL.   VI. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


870  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

of  guilt,  our  union  might  be  for  eternity,  indeed,  and 
most  intimate ;  but,  through  all  that  endless  duration, 
I  should  be  conscious  of  his  horror." 

"Not  for  earthly  bliss,  therefore,"  said  Kenyon, 
"but  for  mutual  elevation,  and  encouragement  to- 
wards a  severe  and  painful  life,  you  take  each  other's 
hands.  And  if,  out  of  toil,  sacrifice,  prayer,  penitence, 
and  earnest  effort  towards  right  things,  there  comes, 
at  length,  a  sombre  and  thoughtful  happiness,  taste  it, 
and  thank  Heaven  1  So  that  you  live  not  for  it,  —  so 
that  it  be  a  wayside  flower,  springing  along  a  path 
that  leads  to  higher  ends,  —  it  will  be  Heaven's  gra- 
cious gift,  and  a  token  that  it  recognizes  your  union 
here  below.*' 

*'  Have  you  no  more  to  say  ?  "  asked  Miriam,  ear- 
nestly. "  There  is  matter  of  sorrow  and  lofty  consola- 
tion strangely  mingled  in  your  words." 

"  Only  this,  dear  Miriam,"  said  the  sculptor ;  "  if 
ever  in  your  lives  the  highest  duty  should  require  \ 
from  either  of  you  the  sacrifice  of  the  other,  meet  the 
occasion  without  shrinking.     This  is  all." 

While  Kenyon  spoke,  Donatello  had  evidently  taken 
in  the  ideas  which  he  propounded,  and  had  ennobled 
them  by  the  sincerity  of  his  reception.  His  aspect  un- 
consciously assumed  a  dignity,  which,  elevating  his 
former  beauiy,  accorded  with  the  change  that  had  long 
been  taking  place  in  his  interior  self.  He  was  a  man, 
revolving  grave  and  deep  thoughts  in  his  breast.  He 
still  held  Miriam's  hand ;  and  there  they  stood,  the 
beautiful  man,  the  beautiful  woman,  united  forever, 
as  they  felt,  in  the  presence  of  these  thousand  eye- 
witnesses, who  gazed  so  curiously  at  the  unintelligible 
scene.  Doubtless,  the  crowd  recognized  them  as  lov. 
ers,  and  fancied  this  a  betrothal  Uiat  was  destined  to 


Digitized 


by  Google 


POPE  JULIUS  III 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


.    THE  BRON-ZE  PONTIFF'S  BENEDICTION.    871 

result  in  life-long  happiness.  And,  possibly,  it  might 
be  so.  Who  can  tell  where  happiness  may  come  ;  or 
where,  though  an  expected  guest,  it  may  never  show 
its  face  ?  Perhaps  —  shy,  subtle  thing  —  it  had  crept 
into  this  sad  marriage-bond,  when  the  partners  would 
have  trembled  at  its  presence  as  a  crime. 

"  Farewell !  "  said  Kenyon  ;  "  I  go  to  Rome.'* 

"  Farewell,  true  friend !  "  said  Miriam. 

"  Farewell !  "  said  DonateUo  too.  **  May  you  be 
happy.  You  have  no  guilt  to  make  you  shrink  from 
happiness.'' 

At  this  moment  it  so  chanced  that  all  the  three 
friends  by  one  impulse  glanced  upward  at  the  statue 
of  Pope  Julius ;  and  there  was  tiie  majestic  figurei 
stretching  out  the  hand  of  benediction  over  them,  and 
bending  down  upon  this  guilty  and  repentant  pair  its 
visage  of  grand  benignity.  There  is  a  singular  eflfect 
oftentimes  when,  out  of  the  midst  of  engrossing  thought 
and  deep  absorption,  we  suddenly  look  up,  and  catch 
a  glimpse  of  external  objects.  We  seem  at  such  mo- 
ments to  look  farther  and  deeper  into  them,  than  by 
any  premeditated  observation  ;  it  is  as  if  they  met  our 
eyes  alive,  and  with  all  their  hidden  meaning  on  the 
surface,  but  grew  again  inanimate  and  inscrutable  the 
instant  that  they  became  aware  of  our  glances.  So 
now,  at  that  unexpected  glimpse,  Miriam,  Donatello, 
and  the  sculptor,  all  three  imagined  that  they  beheld 
the  bronze  pontiff  endowed  with  spiritual  life.  A 
blessing  was  felt  descending  upon  them  from  his  out- 
stretched hand  ;  he  approved  by  look  and  gesture  the 
pledge  of  a  deep  union  that  had  passed  under  his  au* 
Bpices. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XXXVL 

Hilda's  tower. 

When  we  have  once  known  Borne,  and  left  hef 
where  she  lies,  like  a  long-decaying  corpse,  retaining 
a  trace  of  the  noble  shape  it  was,  but  with  accumu* 
lated  dust  and  a  fungous  growth  overspreading  all  its 
more  admirable  features,  —  left  her  in  utter  weari- 
ness, no  doubt,  of  her  narrow,  crooked,  intricate  streets, 
so  uncomfortably  paved  with  Uttle  squares  of  lava 
that  to  tread  over  them  is  a  penitential  pilgrimage,  so 
mdescribably  ugly,  moreover,  so  cold,  so  alley -like, 
mto  which  the  sun  never  f aUs,  and  where  a  chill  wind 
forces  its  deadly  breath  into  our  lungs, -^  left  her, 
tired  of  the  sight  of  those  inunense  seven-storied,  yel- 
low-washed hovels,  or  call  them  palaces,  where  all 
that  is  dreary  in  domestic  life  seems  magnified  and 
multiplied,  and  weary  of  climbing  those  staircases, 
which  ascend  from  a  ground-floor  of  cook-shops,  cob- 
blers' stalls,  stables,  and  regiments  of  cavalry,  to  a 
middle  region  of  princes,  cardinals,  and  ambassadors, 
and  an  upper  tier  of  artists,  just  beneath  the  unattain- 
able sky,  —  left  her,  worn  out  with  shivering  at  the 
cheerless  and  smoky  fireside  by  day,  and  feasting  with 
our  own  substance  the  ravenous  little  populace  of  a 
Koman  bed  at  night,  —  left  her,  sick  at  heart  of  Ital- 
ian trickery,  which  has  uprooted  whatever  faith  in 
man's  integrity  had  endured  till  now,  and  sick  at 
stomach  of  sour  bread,  sour  wine,  rancid  butter,  and 


Digitized 


by  Google 


HILDA* S  TOWER.  r  §7? 

bad  cookery,  needlessly  bestowed  on  evil  njeats,  —  left 
her,  disgusted  with  the  pretence  of  holiness  and  the 
reality  of  nastiness,  each  equally  omnipresent,  —  left 
her,  half  lifeless  from  the  languid  atmosphere,  the 
vital  principle  of  which  has  be^n  used  up  long  ago, 
or  corrupted  by  myriads  of  slaughters,  —  left  her, 
crushed  down  in  spirit  with  the  desolation  of  her  ruin, 
and  the  hopelessness  of  her  future,  —  left  her,  in  short, 
bating  her  with  all  our  might,  and  adding  our  indi- 
vidual curse  to  the  infinite  anathema  which  her  old 
crimes  have  unmistakably  brought  down,  — when  we 
have  left  Some  in  such  mood  as  this,  w0  are  aston* 
ished  by  the  discovery,  by  and  by,  that  our  hea^rt* 
strings  have  mysteriously  iattached  themselves  to  the 
Eternal  City,  and  are  drawing  us  thithei^ard  again, 
as  if  it  were  more  familiar,  more  intimately  oilr  home,^ 
than  even  the  spot  where  we  were  bom. 

It  is  with  a  kindred  sentiment,  that  we  now  follow 
the  course  of  our  story  back  through  the  Flaminian 
Grate,  and,  treading  our  way  to  the  Via  Portoghese, 
climb  the  staircase  to  the  upper  chamber  of  the  tower 
where  we  last  saw  Hilda. 

Hilda  all  along  intended  to  pass  th6  summer  in 
Kome  ;  for  she  had  laid  out  many  high  and  delightful 
tasks,  which  she  could  the  better  complete  while  her 
favorite  haunts  were  deserted  by  the  multitude  that 
thronged  them  throughout  the  winter  and  early  spring. 
Nor  did  she  dread  the  summer  atmosphere,  although 
generally  held  to  be  so  pestilential.  She  had  already 
made  trial  of  it,  two  years  before,  and  found  no  worse 
effect  than  a  kind  of  dreamy  languor,  which  was  dissi* 
pated  by  the  first  cool  breezes  that  came  with  autumn. 
The  thickly  populated  centre  of  the  city,  indeed,  is 
never  affected  by  the  feverish  influence  that  lie»  in 


Digitized 


by  Google 


874  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

wait  in  the  Campagna,  like  a  besieging  foe,  and  nightly 
haunts  those  beautiful  lawns  and  woodlands,  around 
the  suburban  villas,  just  at  the  season  when  they  most 
resemble  Paradise.  What  the  flaming  sword  was  to 
the  first  Eden,  such  is  the  malaria  to  these  sweet  gar- 
dens and  groves.  We  may  wander  through  them,  of 
an  afternoon,  it  is  true,  but  they  cannot  be  made  a 
home  and  a  reality,  and  to  sleep  among  them  is  death. 
They  are  but  illusions,  therefore,  like  the  show  of 
gleaming  waters  and  shadowy  foliage  in  a  desert. 

But  Rome,  within  the  walls,  at  this  dreaded  season, 
enjoys  its  festal  days,  and  makes  itself  merry  with 
characteristic  and  hereditary  pastimes,  for  which  its 
broad  piazzas  afford  abundant  room.  It  leads  its  own 
life  with  a  freer  spirit,  now  that  the  artists  and  for- 
eign visitors  are  scattered  abroad.  No  bloom,  perhaps, 
would  be  visible  in  a  cheek  that  should  be  unvisited, 
throughout  the  summer,  by  more  invigorating  winds 
than  any  within  fifty  miles  of  the  city ;  no  bloom,  but 
yet,  if  the  mind  kept  its  healthy  energy,  a  subdued 
and  colorless  well-being.  There  was  consequently  lit^ 
tie  risk  in  Hilda's  purpose  to  pass  the  siunmer  days 
in  the  galleries  of  Roman  palaces,  and  her  nights  in 
that  aerial  chamber,  whither  the  heavy  breath  of  the 
city  and  its  suburbs  could  not  aspire.  It  would  prob- 
ably harm  her  no  more  than  it  did  the  white  doves, 
who  sought  the  same  high  atmosphere  at  sunset,  and^ 
when  morning  came,  flew  down  into  the  narrow  streets, 
about  their  daily  business,  as  Hilda  likewise  did. 

With  the  Virgin's  aid  and  blessing,  which  might 
be  hoped  for  even  by  a  heretic,  who  so  religiously  lit 
the  lamp  before  her  shrine,  the  New  England  girl 
would  sleep  securely  in  her  old  Roman  tower,  and  go 
forth  on  her  pictorial  pilgrimages  without  dread  ot 


Digitized 


by  Google 


HILDA'S  TOWER.  875 

periL  In  view  of  such  a  summer,  Hilda  had  antici* 
pated  many  months  of  lonely,  but  unalloyed  enjoy* 
ment.  Not  that  she  had  a  churlish  disinclination  to 
society,  or  needed  to  be  told  that  we  taste  one  intel- 
lectual pleasure  twice,  and  with  double  the  result, 
V  when  we  taste  it  with  a  friend.  But,  keeping  a  maiden 
heart  within  her  bosom,  she  rejoiced  in  the  freedom 
tthat  enabled  her  still  to  choose  her  own  sphere,  and 
dwell  in  it,  if  she  pleased,  without  another  inmate. 

Her  expectation,  however,  of  a  delightful  summer 
was  wofully  disappointed.  Even  had  she  formed  no 
previous  plan  of  remaining  there,  it  is  improbable  that 
Hilda  would  have  gathered  energy  to  stir  from  Bome. 
A  torpor,  heretofore  unknown  to  her  vivacious  though 
quiet  temperament,  had  possessed  itself  of  the  poor 
girl,  like  a  half -dead  serpent  knotting  its  cold,  inex- 
tiicable  wreaths  about  her  limbs.  It  was  that  peculiar 
despair,  that  chill  and  heavy  misery,  which  only  the 
innocent  can  experience,  although  it  possesses  many 
of  the  gloomy  characteristics  that  mark  a  sense  of 
guilt.  It  was  that  heart-sickness,  which,  it  is  to  be 
hoped,  we  may  all  of  us  have  been  pure  enough  to 
feel,  once  in  our  lives,  but  the  capacity  for  which  is 
usually  exhausted  early,  and  perhaps  with  a  single 
agony.  It  was  that  dismal  certainty  of  the  existence 
of  evil  in  the  world,  which,  though  we  may  fancy  our- 
selves fully  assured  of  the  sad  mystery  long  before, 
never  becomes  a  portion  of  our  practical  belief  until 
it  takes  substance  and  reality  from  the  sin  of  some! 
guide,  whom  we  have  deeply  trusted  and  revered,  oi 
some  friend  whom  we  have  dearly  loved. 

When  that  knowledge  comes,  it  is  as  if  a  cloud  had 
suddenly  gathered  over  the  morning  light ;  so  dark  a 
doud,  that  there  seems  to  be,  no  longer  any  sunshine 


Digitized 


by  Google 


876  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

behind  it  or  above  it.  The  character  of  our  indivi'diuil 
beloved  one  having  invested  itself  with  all  the  attri- 
butes  of  right,  —  that  one  friend  being  to  us  the  sym- 
bol  and  I'cpresentative  of  whatever  is  good  and  true, 
—  when  he  falls,  the  effect  is  almost  as  if  the  sky  fell 
with  him,  bringing  down  in  chaotic  ruin  the  columns 
that  upheld  our  faith.  We  struggle  forth  again,  no 
doubt,  bruised  and  bewildered.  We  stare  wildly  about 
us,  and  discover  —  or,  it  may  be,  we  never  make  the 
discovery  —  that  it  was  not  actually  the  sky  that  has 
tumbled  down,  but  merely  a  frail  structure  of  our  own 
rearing,  which  never  rose  higher  than  the  house-tops, 
and  has  fallen  because  we  founded  it  on  nothing.  But 
the  crash,  and  the  affright  and  trouble,  are  as  over- 
whelming,  for  the  time,  as  if  the  catastrophe  involved 
the  whole  moral  world.  Kemembering  these  things,  let 
them  suggest  one  generous  motive  for  walking  heed- 
fully  amid  the  defilement  of  earthly  ways  1  Let  us  re- 
flect, that  the  highest  path  is  pointed  out  by  the  pure 
Ideal  of  those  who  look  up  to  us,  and  who,  if  we  tread 
less  loftily,  may  never  look  so  high  again. 

Hilda's  situation  was  made  infinitely  more  wretched 
by  the  necessity  of  confining  all  her  trouble  within  her 
own  consciousness.  To  this  innocent  girl,  holding  the 
knowledge  of  Miriam's  crime  within  her  tender  and 
delicate  soul,  the  effect  was  almost  the  same  as  if  she 
herself  had  participated  in  the  guilt.  Indeed,  partak- 
ing the  hmnan  nature  of  those  who  could  perpetrate 
such  deeds,  she  felt  her  own  spotlessness  impugned. 

Had  there  been  but  a  single  friend,  —  or,  not  a 
friend,  since  friends  were  no  longer  to  be  confided  in, 
after  Miriam  had  betrayed  her  trust,  —  but,  had  there 
been  any  calm,  wise  mind,  any  sympathizing  intelli- 
gence; or,  if  not  thes^,  any  dull,  half-listening  ear 


Digitized 


by  Google 


HILDA'S  TOWER.  8Tf 

into  wbich  she  might  have  flung  the  dreadful  secret, 
as  into  an  echoless  cavern,  —  what  a  relief  would  have 
endued  !  But  this  awful  loneliness !  It  enveloped  her 
whithersoever  she  went.  It  was  a  shadow  in  ihe  sim- 
shine  of  festal  days ;  a  mist  between  her  eyes  and  the 
pictures  at  which  she  strove  to  look  ;  a  chill  dungeon, 
which  kept  her  in  its  gray  tvrilight  and  fed  her  with 
its  unwholesome  air,  fit  only  for  a  criminal  to  breathe 
and  pine  in  !  She  could  not  escape  from  it.  In  the 
effort  to  do  so,  straying  farther  into  the  intricate  pas- 
sages of  our  nature,  she  stumbled,  ever  and  again, 
over  this  deadly  idea  of  mortal  guilt. 

Poor  sufferer  for  another's  sin  1  Poor  well-spring 
of  a  virgin's  heart,  into  which  a  murdered  corpse  had 
casually  fallen,  and  whence  it  could  not  be  drawn 
forth  again,  but  lay  there,  day  aftei:  day,  night  after 
night,  tainting  its  sweet  atmosphere  willi  the  scent  of 
crime  and  ugly  death ! 

The  strange  sorrow  that  had  befallen  Hilda  did  not 
fail  to  impress  its  mysterious  seal  upon  her  face,  and 
to  make  itself  perceptible  to  sensitive  observers  in  her 
manner  and  carriage.  A  young  Italian  artist,  who 
frequented  the  same  galleries  which  Hilda  haimted« 
grew  deeply  interested  in  her  expression.  One  day, 
while  she  stood  before  Leonardo  da  Vinci's  picture  of 
Joanna  of  Aragon,  but  evidently  without  seeing  it, — 
for,  though  it  had  attracted  her  eyes,  a  fancied  re- 
semblance to  Miriam  had  immediately  drawn  away 
her  thoughts,  —  this  artist  drew  a  hasty  sketch  which 
he  afterwards  elaborated  into  a  finished  portrait.  It 
represented  Hilda  as  gazing  with  sad  and  earnest  hor- 
ror at  a  blood-spot  which  she  seemed  just  then  to  have 
discovered  on  her  white  robe.  The  picture  attracted 
considerable  notice.     Copies  of  an  engraving  from  it 


Digitized 


by  Google 


8T8  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

may  still  be  found  in  the  print-shops  along  the  Corsow 
By  many  connoisseurs,  the  idea  of  the  face  was  sup< 
posed  to  have  been  suggested  by  the  portrait  of  Bea- 
trice Cenci ;  and,  in  fact,  there  was  a  look  somewhat 
similar  to  poor  Beatrice's  forlorn  gaze  out  of  the 
dreary  isolation  and  remoteness,  in  which  a  terrible 
doom  had  involved  a  tender  soul.  But  the  modem 
artist  strenuously  upheld  the  originality  of  his  own 
picture,  as  well  as  the  stainless  purity  of  its  subject, 
and  chose  to  call  it  —  and  was  laughed  at  for  his  pains 
—  "  Innocence,  dying  of  a  blood-stain !  " 

"  Your  picture,  Signore  Panini,  does  you  credit,"  re- 
marked the  picture-dealer,  who  had  bought  it  of  the 
young  man  for  fifteen  scudi,  and  afterwards  sold  it 
for  ten  times  the  sum ;  "  but  it  would  be  worth. a  bet- 
ter price  if  you  had  given  it  a  more  intelligible  title. 
Looking  at  the  face  and  expression  of  this  fair  signo« 
rina,  we  seem  to  comprehend  readily  enough,  that  she 
is  undergoing  one  or  another  of  those  troubles  of  the 
heart  to  which  yoimg  ladies  are  but  too  liable.  But 
what  is  this  blood-stain  ?  And  what  has  innocence  to 
do  with  it  ?  Has  she  stabbed  her  perfidious  lover  witk 
a  bodkin?" 

"  She  !  she  commit  a  crime !  "  cried  the  young  ar- 
tist. "  Can  you  look  at  the  innocent  anguish  in  her 
face,  and  ask  that  question  ?  No  ;  but,  as  I  read  the 
mystery,  a  man  has  been  slain  in  her  presence,  and 
the  blood,  spurting  accidentally  on  her  white  robe,  has 
made  a  stain  which  eats  into  her  life." 

"  Then,  in  the  name  of  her  patron  saint,"  exclaimed 
the  picture-dealer,  "  why  don't  she  get  the  robe  made 
white  again  at  the  expense  of  a  few  baiocchi  to  her 
washer-woman  ?  No,  no,  my  dear  Panini.  The  pic- 
ture being  now  my  property,  I  shall  call  it  *  The  Sig^ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


;  HILDA'S  TOWER.  879 

Dorina's  Vengeance.'  She  has  stabbed  her  lover  over- 
night, and  is  repenting  it  betimes  the  next  morning. 
So  interpreted,  the  picture  becomes  an  intelligible  and 
very  natural  representation  of  a  not  imcommon  fact." 

Thus  coarsely  does  the  world  translate  all  finer 
griefs  that  meet  its  eye.  It  is  more  a  coarse  world 
than  an  unkind  one. 

But  Hilda  sought  nothing  either  from  the  world's 
delicacy  or  its  pity,  and  never  dreamed  of  its  misinter- 
pretations. Her  doves  often  flew  in  through  the  win- 
dows of  the  tower,  winged  messengers,  bringing  her 
what  sympathy  they  could,  and  uttering  soft,  tender, 
and  complaining  sounds,  deep  in  their  bosoms,  which 
soothed  the  girl  more  than  a  distincter  utterance  might. 
And  sometimes  Hilda  moaned  quietly  among  the  doves, 
teaching  her  voice  to  accord  with  theirs,  and  thus  find- 
ing a  temporary  relief  from  the  burden  of  her  incom- 
mimicable  sorrow,  as  if  a  little  portion  of  it,  at  leasts 
had  been  told  to  these  innocent  friends,  and  been  un- 
derstood and  pitied. 

When  she  trimmed  the  lamp  before  the  Virgin's 
shrine,  Hilda  gazed  at  the  sacred  image,  and,  rude  as 
was  the  workmanship,  beheld,  or  fancied,  expressed 
with  the  quaint,  powerful  simplicity  which  sculptors 
sometimes  had  five  himdred  years  ago,  a  woman's  ten-: 
demess  responding  to  her  gaze.  If  she  knelt,  if  she 
prayed,  if  her  oppressed  heart  besoi^ht  the  sympathy 
of  divine  womanhood  afar  in  bliss,  but  not  remote,  be* 
cause  forever  humanized  by  the  memory  of  mortal 
griefs,  was  Hilda  to  be  blamed  ?  It  was  not  a  Catho- 
lic kneeling  at  an  idolatrous  shrine,  but  a  child  lifting 
its  tear-stained  face  to  seek  comfort  from  a  mother. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XXXVn. 

THB  EMPTINESS  OF  PICTUBE  GALLERIES. 

Hilda  descended,  day  by  day,  from  her  dove-cote, 
and  went  to  one  or  another  of  the  great,  old  palaces, 
—  the  Pamfili  Doria,  the  Corsini,  the  Seiarra,  the 
Borghese,  the  Colonna, — where  the  door-heepers  knew 
her  well,  and  offered  her  a  kindly  greeting.  But  they 
shook  their  heads  and  sighed,  on  observing  the  lan- 
guid step  with  which  the  poor  girl  toiled  up  the  grand 
marble  staircases.  There  was  no  more  of  that  cheery 
alacrity  with  which  she  used  to  flit  upward,  as  if  her 
doves  had  lent  her  their  wings,  nor  of  that  glow  of 
happy  spirits  which  had  been  wont  to  set  the  tarnished 
gilding  of  the  picture-frames  and  the  shabby  splendor 
of  the  furniture  all  a-glimmer,  as  she  hastened  to  her 
congenial  and  delightful  toil. 

An  old  Grerman  artist,  whom  she  often  met  in  the 
galleries,  once  laid  a  paternal  hand  on  Hilda's  head, 
and  bade  her  go  back  to  her  own  country. 

"  Go  back  soon,"  he  said,  with  kindly  freedom  and 
directness,  "  or  you  will  go  never  more.  And,  if  you 
go  not,  why,  at  least,  do  you  spend  the  whole  summer- 
time in  Rome  ?  The  air  has  been  breathed  too  often, 
in  so  many  thousand  years,  and  is  not  wholesome  for 
a  little  foreign  flower  like  you,  my  child,  a  delicate 
wood-anemone  from  the  western  forest-land." 

"I  have  no  task  nor  duty  anywhere  but  here,"  re- 
plied  Hilda.    '*  The  old  masters  will  not  set  me  free  I  ^ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


EMPTINESS  OF  PICTURE  GALLERIES.    881 

"  Ah,  those  old  masters ! "  cried  the  veteran  ar- 
tist, shaking  his  head.  *^  They  are  a  tyrannous  race  ? 
You  will  find  them  of  too  mighty  a  spirit  to  be  dealt 
with,  for  long  together,  by  the  slender  hand,  the  frag- 
ile mind,  and  the  delicate  heart,  of  a  young  girl.  Re- 
member that  Raphael's  genius  wore  out  that  divinest 
painter  before  half  his  life  was  lived.  Since  you  fee} 
his  influence  powerfully  enough  to  reproduce  his  mir- 
acles so  well,  it  will  assuredly  consume  you  like  a 
flame." 

"  That  might  have  been  my  peril  once,"  answered 
Hilda.     "  It  is  not  so  now." 

^^  Yes,  fair  maiden,  you  stand  in  that  peril  now !  " 
insisted  the  kind  old  man  ;  and  he  added,  smiling,  yet 
in  a  melancholy  vein,  and  with  a  German  grotesque- 
ness  of  idea,  '^  Some  fine  morning,  I  shall  come  to  the 
Pinacotheca  of  the  Vatican,  with  my  palette  and  my 
brushes,  and  shall  look  for  my  little  American  artist 
that  sees  into  the  very  heki*t  of  the  grand  pictures! 
And  what  shall  I  behold?  A  heap  of  white  ashes  on 
tl^  marble  floor,  just  in  front  of  the  divine  Raphael's 
picture  of  the  Madonna  da  Foligno !  Nothing  more, 
upon  my  word  1  The  fire,  which  the  poor  child  feels 
so  fervently,  will  have  gone  into  her  innermost,  and 
burnt  her  quite  up !  " 

,  "  It  would  be  a  happy  martyrdom  1 "  said  Hilda, 
faintly  smiling.  "  But  I  am  far  from  being  worthy  of 
it.  What  troubles  me  much,  among  other  troubles,  is 
quite  the  reverse  of  what  you  think.  The  old  masters 
hold  me  here,  it  is  true,  but  they  no  longer  warm  me 
with  their  influence^  It  is  not  flame  consuming,  but 
torpor  chilling  me,  that  helps  to  make  me  wretched." 

"  Perchance,  then,"  said  the  German,  looking  keenly 
at  her,  '^  Raphael  has  a  rival  in  your  heart?    He  wad 


Digitized 


by  Google 


882  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

your  first-love ;  but  young  maidens  are  not  always  con* 
stant,  and  one  flame  is  sometimes  extinguished  by  an« 
other!" 

Hilda  shook  her  head,  and  turned  away. 

She  had  spoken  the  truth,  however,  in  alleging  that 
torpor,  rather  than  fire,  was  what  she  had  now  to 
dread.  In  those  gloomy  days  that  had  befallen  her,  it 
was  a  great  additional  calamity  that  she  felt  conscious 
of  the  present  dimness  of  an  insight,  which  she  once 
possessed  in  more  than  ordinary  measure.  She  had 
lost  —  and  she  trembled  lest  it  should  have  departed 
forever — the  faculty  of  appreciating  tho^e  great  works 
of  art,  which  heretofore  had  made  so  large  a  portion 
of  her  happiness.     It  was  no  wonder. 

A  picture,  however  admirable  the  painter's  art,  and 
wonderful  his  power,  requires  of  the  spectator  a  sur- 
render of  himself,  in  due  proportion  with  the  miracle 
which  has  been  wrought.  Let  the  canvas  glow  as  it 
*nay,  you  must  look  with  the  eye  of  faith,  or  its  high- 
est excellence  escapes  you.  There  is  always  the  necesr 
sity  of  helping  out  the  painter's  art  with  your  own  re- 
sources of  sensibility  and  imagination.  Not  that  these 
qualities  shall  really  add  anything  to  what  the  master 
has  effected ;  but  they  must  be  put  so  entirely  under 
his  control,  and  work  along  with  him  to  such  an  ex- 
tent, that,  in  a  different  mood,  when  you  are  cold  and 
critical,  instead  of  sympathetic,  you  will  be  apt  to 
fancy  that  the  loftier  merits  of  the  picture  were  of 
your  own  dreaming,  not  of  his  creating. 

Like  all  revelations  of  the  better  life,  the  adequate 
perception  of  a  great  work  of  art  demands  a  gifted 
simplicity  of  vision.  In  this,  and  in  her  self-surren- 
der,  and  the  depth  and  tenderness  of  her  sympathy, 
had  lain  Hilda's  remarkable  power  as  a  copyist  of  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


£MPTINESS  OF  PICTURE  GALLERIES.    883 

old  masters.  And  now  that  her  capacity  of  emotion 
was  choked  up  with  a  horrible  experience,  it  inevita- 
bly followed  that  she  should  seek  in  vain,  among  those 
friends  so  venerated  and  beloved,  for  the  marvels 
which  they  had  heretofore  shown  her.  In  spite  of  a 
reverence  that  lingered  longer  than  her  recognition, 
their  poor  worshipper  became  almost  an  infidel,  and 
sometimes  doubted  whether  the  pictorial  art  be  not  al- ' 
together  a  delusion. 

For  the  first  time  in  her  life,  Hilda  now  grew  ac- 
quainted with  that  icy  demon  of  weariness,  who  haunts 
great  picture  galleries.  He  is  a  plausible  Mephistophe- 
les,  and  possesses  the  magic  that  is  the  destruction  of 
'  all  other  magic.  He  annihilates  color,  warmth,  and, 
more  especially,  sentiment  and  passion,  at  a  touch.  If 
he  spare  anything,  it  will  be  some  such  matter  as  an 
earthen  pipkin,  or  a  bunch  of  herrings  by  Teniers ;  a 
brass  kettle,  in  which  you  can  see  your  face,  by  Ge- 
rard Douw ;  a  furred  robe,  or  the  silken  texture  of  a 
mantle,  or  a  straw  hat,  by  Van  Mieris;  or  a  long- 
stalked  wine-glass,  transparent  and  full  of  shifting  re- 
flection, or  a  bit  of  bread  and  cheese,  or  an  over-ripe 
peach,  with  a  fly  upon  it,  truer  than  reality  itself,  by 
the  school  of  Dutch  conjurers.  These  men,  and  a  few 
Flemings,  whispers  the  wicked  demon,  were  the  only 
painters.  The  mighty  Italian  masters,  as  you  deem 
them,  were  not  human,  nor  addressed  their  work  to 
human  sympathies,  but  to  a  false  intellectual  taste, 
which  they  themselves  were  the  first  to  create.  Well 
might  they  call  their  doings  "  art,"  for  they  substi- 
tuted art  instead  of  nature.  Their  fashion  is  past, 
and  ought,  indeed,  to  have  died  and  been  buried  along 
with  them. 

Then  there  is  such  a  terrible  lack  of  variety  in  their 


Digitized 


by  Google 


884  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

-Bubjects.  The  churohmen,  their  great  patrons,  sng> 
gested  most  of  their  themes,  and  a  dead  mythology 
the  rest.  A  quarter-part,  probably,  of  any  large  col- 
lection of  pictures,  consists  of  Virgins  and  infant 
Christs,  repeated  over  and  over  again  in  pretty  much 
an  identical  spirit,  and  generally  with  no  more  mix- 
ture  of  the  Divine  than  just  enough  to  spoil  them  aa 
representations  of  maternity  and  childhood,  with  which 
everybody's  heart  might  have  something  to  do.  Half 
of  the  other  pictures  are  Magdalens,  Flights  into 
Egypt,  Crucifixions,  Depositions  from  the  Cross,  Pie- 
tas,  Noli-me-tangeres,  or  the  Sacrifice  of  Abraham,  or 
martyrdoms  of  saints,  originally  painted  as  altar-pieces, 
or  for  the  shrines  of  chapels,  and  wof ully  lacking  the 
accompaniments  which  the  artist  had  in  view. 

The  remainder  of  the  gallery  comprises  mytholog- 
ical subjects,  such  as  nude  Venuses,  Ledas,  Graces, 
and,  in  short,  a  general  apotheosis  of  nudity,  once  fresh 
and  rosy  perhaps,  but  yellow  and  dingy  in  our  day, 
and  retaining  only  a  traditionary  charm.  These  im« 
piu*e  pictures  are  from  the  same  illustrious  and  impi- 
ous hands  that  adventured  to  call  before  us  the  august 
forms  of  Apostles  and  Saints,  the  Blessed  Mother  of 
the  Redeemer,  and  her  Son,  at  his  death,  and  in  his 
glory,  and  even  the  awfulness  of  Him,  to  whom  the 
martyrs,  dead  a  thousand  years  ago,  have  not  yet 
dared  to  raise  their  eyes.  They  seem  to  take  up  one 
task  or  the  other  —  the  disrobed  woman  whom  they 
call  Venus,  or  the  type  of  highest  and  tenderest 
womanhood  in  the  mother  of  their  Saviour  —  with 
equal  readiness,  but  to  achieve  the  former  with  far 
more  satisfactory  success.  If  an  artist  sometimes  pro* 
duced  a  picture  of  the  Virgin,  possessing  warmth 
Knough  to  excite  devotional  feelings,  it  was  probablj 


Digitized 


by  Google 


EMPTINESS  OF  PICTURE  GALLERIES.    886 

tlie  object  of  his  earthly  love  to  whom  he  thus  pi^d 
the  stupendous  and  fearful  homage  of  setting  up  hei 
portrait  to  be  wprshipped,  not  figuratively  as  a  mortal, 
but  by  religious  souls  in  their  earnest  aspirations  to« 
wards  Divinity.  And  who  can  trust  the  religious  sen- 
timent of  Raphael,  or  receive  any  of  his  Virgins  aa 
heaven-descended  likenesses,  after  seeing,  for  example, 
the  Fornarina  of  the  Barberini  Palace,  and  feeling  how 
sensual  the  artist  must  have  been  to  paint  such  a  bra* 
«en  trollop  of  his  own  accord,  and  lovingly  ?  Would 
^e  Blessed  Mary  reveal  herself  to  his  spiritual  vision, 
and  favor  him  with  sittings  alternately  with  that  type 
of  glowing  earthliness,  the  Fornarina  ? 
.  But  no  sooner  have  we  given  expression  to  this  ir- 
reverent criticism,  than  a  throng  of  spiritual  faces  look 
reproachfully  upon  us.  We  see  cherubs  by  Raphael, 
yrhose  baby-innocence  could  only  have  been  nursed  in 
paradise ;  angels  by  Raphael  as  innocent  as  they,  but 
whose  serene  intelligence  embraces  both  earthly  and 
celestial  things  ;  madonnas  by  Raphael,  on  whose  lips 
he  has  impressed  a  holy  and  delicate  reserve,  implying 
sanctity  on  earth,  and  into  whose  soft  eyes  he  has 
thrown  a  light  which  he  never  could  have  imagined 
except  by  raising  his  own  eyes  with  a  pure  aspiration 
heavenward.  We  remember,  too,  that  divinest  coun- 
tenance in  the  Transfiguration,  and  withdraw  all  that 
we  have  said. 

Poor  Hilda,  however,  in  her  gloomiest  moments, 
was  never  guilty  of  the  high  treason  suggested  in  the 
above  remarks  against  her  beloved  and  honored  Ra 
phael.  She  had  a  faculty  (which,  fortunately  for 
tihemselves,  pure  women  often  have)  of  ignoring  all 
moral  blotches  ip  a  character  that  wqq  her  admira 

mus  VI. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


886  ROMANCE   OF  MONTE  BENI. 

,  tion.     She  purified  the  objects  of  heif  regard  by  ^be 
mere  act  of  turning  such  spotless  eyes  upon  them. 

Hilda's  despondency,  nevertheless,  while  it  dulled 
her  perceptions  in  one  respect,  had  deepened  them  in 
another;  she  saw  beauty  less  vividly,  but  felt  truth, 
or  the  lack  of  it,  more  profoundly.  She  began  to  sus- 
pect that  some,  at  least,  of  her  venerated  painters,  had 
left  an  inevitable  hoUowness  in  their  works,  because, 
in  the  most  renowned  of  them,  they  essayed  to  express 
to  the  world  what  they  had  not  in  their  own  souls. 
They  deified  their  light  and  wandering  affections,  and 
were  continually  playing  off  the  tremendous  jest,  al- 
luded to  above,  of  offering  the  features  of  some  venal 
beauty  to  be  enslirined  in  the  holiest  places.  A  de- 
ficiency of  earnestness  and  absolute  truth  is  generally 
discoverable  in  Italian  pictiu*es,  after  the  art  had  be- 
come consummate.  When  you  demand  what  is  deep- 
est, these  painters  have  not  wherewithal  to  respond. 
They  substituted  a  keen  intellectual  perception,  and  a 
marvellous  knack  of  external  arrangement,  instead  of 
the  live  sympathy  and  sentiment  which  should  have 
been  their  inspiration.  And  hence  it  happens,  that 
shallow  and  worldly  men  are  among  the  best  critics  of 
their  works ;  a  taste  for  pictorial  art  is  often  no  more 
than  a  polish  upon  the  hard  enamel  of  an  artificial 
character.  Hilda  had  lavished  her  whole  heart  upon 
it,  and  found  (just  as  if  she  had  lavished  it  upon  a 
hiunan  idol)  that  the  greater  part  was  thrown  away. 

For  some  of  the  earlier  painters,  however,  she  still 
retained  much  of  her  former  reverence.  Fra  Angel- 
ico,  she  felt,  must  have  breathed  a  humble  aspiration 
between  every  two  touches  of  his  brush,  in  order  to 
have  made  the  finished  picture  such  a  visible  prayer 
ibB  we  behold  it,  in  the  guise  of  a  prim  angel,  or  a 


Digitized 


by  Google 


EMPTINESS  OF  PICTURE   GALLERIES.    887 

saint  without  the  human  nature.  Through  all  these 
dusky  centuries,  his  works  may  still  help  a  struggling 
heart  to  pray.  Perugino  was  evidently  a  devout  man; 
[and  the  Virgin,  therefore,  revealed  herself  to  him  in 
Jloftier  and  sweeter  faces  of  celestial  womanhood,  and 
jyet  with  a  kind  of  homeliness  in  their  human  mould, 
'than  even  the  genius  of  Raphael  could  imagine.  So- 
\doma,  beyond  a  question,  both  prayed  and  wept,  while 
I  painting  his  fresco,  at  Siena,  of  Christ  bound  to  a 
pillar. 

In  her  present  need  and  hunger  for  a  spiritual  reve- 
lation, Hilda  felt  a  vast  and  weary  longing  to  see  this 
last-mentioned  picture  once  again.  It  is  inexpressibly 
touching.  So  weary  is  the  Saviour,  and  utterly  worn 
but  with  agony,  that  his  lips  have  fallen  apart  from 
mere  exhaustion ;  his  eyes  seem  to  be  set ;  he  tries  to 
lean  his  head  against  the  pillar,  but  is  kept  from  sink 
ing  down  upon  the  ground  only  by  the  cords  that 
bind  him.  One  of  the  most  striking  effects  produced 
is  the  sense  of  loneliness.  You  behold  Christ  de- 
serted both  in  heaven  and  earth;  that  despair  is  in 
him  which  wrung  forth  the  saddest  utterance  man 
ever  made,  "  Why  hast  Thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  Even 
j  in  this  extremity,  however,  he  is  still  divine.  The 
j  great  and  reverent  painter  has  not  suffered  the  Son  of 
J'  God  to  be  merely  an  object  of  pity,  though  depicting 
I  him  in  a  state  so  profoundly  pitiful.  He  is  rescued 
from  it,  we  know  not  how,  — ■  by  nothing  less  than 
miracle,  —  by  a  celestial  majesty  and  beauty,  and 
some  quality  of  which  these  are  the  outward  garni- 
ture. He  is  as  much,  and  as  visibly,  our  Redeemer, 
there  bound,  there  fainting,  and  bleeding  from  the 
scourge,  with  the  cross  in  view,  as  if  he  sat  on  his 
throne  of  glory  in  the  heavens!     Sodoma,  in  this 


Digitized 


by  Google 


888  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

matchless  picture,  has  done  more  towards  reconcilmg 
the  incongruity  of  Divine  Omnipotence  and  outraged, 
suffering  Humanity,  combined  in  one  person,  than  the 
theologians  ever  did. 

This  hallowed  work  of  genius  shows  what  pictorial 
art,  devoutly  exercised,  might  effect  in  behalf  of  relig- 
ious truth ;  involving,  as  it  does,  deeper  mysteries  of 
revelation,  and  bringing  them  closer  to  man's  heart, 
and  making  him  tenderer  to  be  impressed  by  them, 
than  the  most  eloquent  words  of  preacher  or  prophet. 

It  is  not  of  pictures  like  the  above  that  galleries,  in 
Home  or  elsewhere,  are  made  up,  but  of  productions 
immeasurably  below  them,  and  requiring  to  be  appre- 
ciated by  a  very  different  frame  of  mind.  Few  anuu 
teurs  are  endowed  with  a  tender  susceptibility  to  the 
sentiment  of  a  picture ;  they  are  not  won  from  an  evil 
life,  nor  anywise  morally  improved  by  it.  The  love 
of  art,  therefore,  differs  widely  in  its  influence  from 
the  love  of  nature;  whereas,  if  art  had  not  strayed 
Away  from  its  legitimate  paths  and  aims,  it  ought  to 
soften  and  sweeten  the  lives  of  its  worshippers,  m 
even  a  more  exquisite  degree  than  the  contemplation 
of  natural  objects.  But,  of  its  own  potency,  it  has  no 
such  effect ;  and  it  fails,  likewise,  in  that  other  test  of 
its  moral  value  which  poor  Hilda  was  now  involunta- 
rily trying  upon  it.  It  cannot  comfort  the  heart  in 
affliction ;  it  grows  dim  when  the  shadow  is  upon  us. 

So  the  melancholy  girl  wandered  through  those  long* 
galleries,  and  over  the  mosaic  pavements  of  vast^  sol- 
itary saloons,  wondering  what  had  become  of  the 
splendor  that  used  to  beam  upon  her  from  the  walls. 
She  grew  sadly  critical,  and  condemned  almost  every- 
thing that  she  was  wont  to  admire.  Heretofore,  her 
vjmpBtiij  went  deeply  into  a  picture,  yet  seemed  ti 


Digitized 


by  Google 


EMPTINESS  OF  PICTURE  GALLERIES.    889 

leave  a  depth  which  it  was  inadequate  to  sound ;  now, 
on  the  contrary,  her  perceptive  faculty  penetrated  the 
canvas  like  a  steel  probe,  and  found  but  a  crust  of 
paint  over  an  emptiness.  Not  that  she  gave  up  all 
art  as  worthless;  only  it  had  lost  its  consecration. 
One  picture  in  ten  thousand,  perhaps,  ought  to  live  in 
the  applause  of  mankind,  from  generation  to  genera- 
tion, until  the  colors  fade  and  blacken  out  of  sight, 
or  the  canvas  rc^  entirely  away.  For  the  rest,  let 
them  be  piled  in  garrets,  just  as  the  tolerable  poets 
are  shelved,  when  their  little  day  is  over.  Is  a  painter 
more  sacred  than  a  poet  ? 

And  as  for  these  galleries  of  Roman  palaces,  they 
were  to  Hilda,  —  though  she  still  trod  them  with  the 
forlorn  hope  of  getting  back  her  sympathies, — they 
were  drearier  than  the  whitewashed  waUs  of  a  prison 
corridor.  If  a  magnificent  palace  were  founded,  as 
was  generally  the  case,  on  hardened  guilt  and  a  stony 
conscience,  —  if  the  prince  or  cardinal  who  stole  the 
marble  of  his  vast  mansion  from  the  Coliseum,  or  some 
Koman  temple,  had  perpetrated  still  deadlier  crimes, 
as  probably  he  did,  —  there  could  be  no  fitter  punish- 
ment for  his  ghost  than  to  wander  perpetually  through 
these  long  suites  of  rooms,  over  the  cold  marble  or 
mosaic  of  the  floors,  growing  chiller  at  every  eternal 
footstep.  Fancy  the  progenitor  of  the  Dorias  thus 
liaunting  those  heavy  halls  where  his  posterity  reside  1 
Nor  would  it  assuage  his  monotonous  misery,  but  in- 
crease it  manifold,  to  be  compelled  to  scrutinize  those 
masterpieces  of  art,  which  he  collected  with  so  much 
cost  and  care,  and  gazing  at  them  unintelligently,  still 
leave  a  further  portion  of  his  vital  warmth  at  every 
one. 

Such,  or  of  a  similar  kind*  is  the  torment  of  those 


Digitized 


by  Google 


890  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

who  seek  to  enjoy  pictures  in  an  uncongenial  mood. 
Every  haunter  of  picture  galleries,  we  should  imagine, 
must  have  experienced  it,  in  greater  or  less  degree  *, 
Hilda  never  till  now,  but  now  most  bitterly. 

And  now,  for  the  first  time  in*  her  lengthened  ab 
sence,  comprising  so  many  years  of  her  young  life,  she 
began  to  be  acquainted  with  the  exile's  pain.  Her 
pictorial  imagination  brought  up  vivid  scenes  of  her 
native  village,  with  its  great,  old  elm-trees ;  and  the 
neat,  comfortable  houses,  scattered  along  the  vnde, 
grassy  margin  of  its  street,  and  the  white  meeting- 
house, and  her  mother's  very  door,  and  the  stream  of 
gold-brown  water,  which  her  taste  for  color  had  kept 
■  flowing,  all  this  while,  through  her  remembrance.*  Oh, 
dreary  streets,  palaces,  churches,  and  imperial  sepul- 
chres of  hot  and  dusty  Rome,  with  the  muddy  Tiber 
eddying  through  the  midst,  instead  of  the  gold-brown 
rivulet !  How  she  pined  under  this  crumbly  magnif- 
icence, as  if  it  were  piled  all  upon  her  himian  heart  I 
How  she  yearned  for  that  native  homeliness,  those 
familiar  sights,  those  faces  which  she  had  known 
always,  those  days  that  never  brought  any  strange 
event ;  that  life  of  sober  week-days,  and  a  solemn  sab- 
bath at  the  close  I  The  peculiar  fragrance  of  a  flower- 
bed, which  Hilda  used  to  cultivate,  came  freshly  to 
her  memory,  across  the  vrindy  sea,  and  through  the 
long  years  since  the  flowers  had  withered.  Her  heart 
grew  faint  at  the  himdred  reminiscences  that  were 
awakened  by  that  remembered  smell  of  dead  blos- 
soms; it  was  like  opening  a  drawer,  where  many 
things  were  laid  away,  and  every  one  of  them  scented 
with  lavender  and  dried  rose-leaves. 

We  ought  not  to  betray  Hilda's  secret ;  but  it  is  the 
truth,  that  being  so  sad,  and  so  utterly  alone,  and  in 


Digitized 


by  Google 


EMPTINESS  OF  PICTURE  GALLERIES.    891 

Buch  great  need  of  sympathy,  her  thoughts  sometimes 
recurred  to  the  sculptor.  Had  she  met  him  now,  her 
heart,  indeed,  might  not  have  been  won,  but  her  con- 
fidence would  have  flown  to  him  like  a  bird  to  its  nest. 
One  summer  afternoon,  especially,  Hilda  leaned  upon 
the  battlements  of  her  tower,  and  looked  over  Rome 
towards  the  distant  mountains,  whither  Kenyon  had 
told  her  that  he  was  going. 

"  Oh,  that  he  were  here  I "  she  sighed ;  "  I  perish  un- 
der this  terrible  secret ;  and  he  might  help  me  to  en- 
dure it.     Oh,  that  he  were  here  I  " 

That  very  afternoon,  as  the  reader  may  remember, 
Kenyon  felt  Hilda's  hand  pulling  at  the  silken  cord 
that  was  connected  with  his  heartstrings,  as  he  stood 
looking  towards  Bome  from  the  battlements  of  Monte 
Beni 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XXXVUX 

ALTARS  AND  INCENSE. 

Rome  has  a  certain  species  of  consolation  readier  at 
hand,  for  all  the  necessitous,  than  any  other  spot  un- 
der the  sky ;  and  Hilda's  despondent  state  made  her 
peculiarly  liable  to  the  peril,  if  peril  it  can  justly  be 
termed,  of  seeking,  or  consenting,  to  be  thus  consoled. 

Had  the  Jesuits  known  the  situation  of  this  trou- 
bled heart,  her  inheritance  of  New  England  Puritan- 
ism would  hardly  have  protected  the  poor  girl  from 
the  pious  strategy  of  those  good  fathers.  Knowing, 
as  they  do,  how  to  work  each  proper  engine,  it  would 
have  been  ultimately  impossible  for  Hilda  to  resist  the 
attractions  of  a  faith,  which  so  marvellously  adapts 
itself  to  every  human  need.  Not,  indeed,  that  it  can 
satisfy  the  soul's  cravings,  but,  at  least,  it  can  some- 
times help  the  soul  towards  a  higher  satisfaction  than 
the  faith  contains  within  itself.  It  supplies  a  multi- 
tude of  external  forms,  in  which  the  spiritual  may  bo 
clothed  and  manifested  ;  it  has  many  painted  windows, 
as  it  were,  through  which  the  celestial  sunshine,  else 
disregarded,  may  make  itself  gloriously  perceptible  in 
visions  of  beauty  and  splendor.  There  is  no  one  want 
or  weakness  of  human  nature  for  which  Catholicism 
will  own  itself  without  a  remedy ;  cordials,  certainly, 
it  possesses  in  abundance,  iEind  sedatives  in  inexhaus- 
tible variety,  and  what  may  once  have  been  genuine 
medicaments,  though  a  little  the  worse  for  long  keep 
ing. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


ALTARS  AND  INCENSE.    '  89S 

To  do  it  justice,  Catholicism  is  such  a  miracle  of 
fitness  for  its  own  ends,  many  of  which  might  seem 
to  be  admirable  ones,  that  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  it 
a  contrivance  of  mere  man.  Its  mighty  machinery 
was  forged  and  put  together,  not  on  middle  earth,  but 
either  above  or  below.  If  there  were  but  angels  to 
work  it,  instead  of  the  very  different  class  of  engi- 
neers who  now  manage  its  cranks  and  safety-valves, 
the  system  would  soon  vindicate  the  dignity  and  holi- 
ness of  its  origin. 

Hilda  had  heretofore  made  many  pilgrimages  among 
the  churches  of  Home,  for  the  sake  of  wondering  at 
their  gorgeousness.  Without  a  glimpse  at  these  pal- 
aces of  worship,  it  is  impossible  to  imagine  the  mag- 
nificence of  the  religion  that  reared  them.  Many  of 
them  shine  with  burnished  gold.  They  glow  with  pic- 
tures. Their  walls,  columns,  and  arches  seem  a  quarry 
of  precious  stones,  so  beautiful  and  costly  are  the  mar- 
bles with  which  they  are  inlaid.  Their  pavements  are 
often  a  mosaic,  of  rare  workmanship.  Around  their 
lofty  cornices  hover  flights  of  sculptured  angels ;  and 
within  the  vault  of  the  ceiling  and  the  swelling  in- 
terior of  the  dome,  there  are  frescos  of  such  brill- 
iancy, and  wrought  with  so  artful  a  perspective,  that 
the  sky,  peopled  with  sainted  forms,  appears  to  be 
opened,  only  a  little  way  above  the  spectator.  Then 
there  are  chapels,  opening  from  the  side-aisles  and 
transepts,  decorated  by  princes  for  their  own  burial- 
places,  and  as  shrines  for  their  especial  saints.  In 
these,  the  splendor  of  the  entire  edified  is  intensified 
and  gathered  to  a  focus.  Unless  words  were  gems, 
that  would  flame  with  many-colored  light  upon  the 
page,  and  throw  tlience  a  tremulous  glimmer  into  the 
reader's  eyes,  it  were  vain  to  attempt  a  description  of 
a  princely  chapel. 

Digitized  by  LjOOQIC 


894      ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

Kesdess  with  her  trouble,  Hilda  now  entered  upon 
another  pilgrimage  among  these  altars  and  shrines; 
She  climbed  the  hundred  steps  of  the  Ara  Coeli ;  she 
trod  the  broad,  silent  nave  of  St.  John  Lateran ;  she 
stood  in  the  Pantheon,  under  the  round  opening  in  the 
dome,  through  which  the  blue  sunny  sky  stiU  gazes 
down,  as  it  used  to  gaze  when  there  were  Roman; 
deities  in  the  aitique  niches.  She  went  into  every 
church  that  rose  before  her,  but  not  now  to  wonder  at 
its  magnificence,  when  she  hardly  noticed  more  than 
if  it  had  been  the  pine-built  interior  of  a  New  Eng- 
land meeting-house. 

She  went  —  and  it  was  a  dangerous  errand  —  to  ob- 
serve how  closely  and  comfortingly  the  popish  faith 
applied  itself  to  all  human  occasions.  It  was  impos- 
sible to  doubt  that  multitudes  of  people  found  their 
spiritual  advantage  in  it,  who  would  find  none  at  all 
in  our  own  formless  mode  of  worship ;  which,  besides, 
so  far  as  the  sympathy  of  prayerful  souls  is  concerned, 
can  be  enjoyed  only  at  stated  and  too  unfrequent  peri- 
ods. But  here,  whenever  the  hunger  for  divine  nutri- 
ment came  upon  the  soul,  it  could  on  the  instant  be 
appeased.  At  one  or  another  altar,  the  incense  was 
forever  ascending ;  the  mass  always  being  performed, 
and  carrying  upward  with  it  the  devotion  of  such  as 
had  not  words  for  their  own  prayer.  And  yet,  if  the 
worshipper  had  his  individual  petition  to  offer,  his  own 
heart-secret  to  whisper  below  his  breath,  there  were 
divine  auditors  ever  ready  to  receive  it  from  his  lips ; 
and  what  encouraged  him  still  more,  these  auditors 
had  not  always  been  divine,  but  kept,  within  their 
heavenly  memories,  the  tender  humility  of  a  human 
experience.  Now  a  saint  in  heaven,  but  once  a  man 
on  earth. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


ALTARS  AND  INCENSE.  895 

Hilda  saw  peasants,  citizens,  soldiers,  nobles,  women 
with  bare  heads,  ladies  in  their  silks,  entering  the 
ehurehes  individually,  kneeling  for  moments,  or  for 
hours,  and  directing  their  inaudible  devotions  to  the 
shrine  of  some  saint  of  their  own  choice.  In  his  hal- 
lowed person,  they  felt  themselves  possessed  of  an  own 
friend  in  heaven.  They  were  too  humble  to  approach 
the  Deity  directly.  Conscious  of  their  unworthiness, 
they  asked  the  mediation  of  their  sympathizing  patron, 
who,  on  the  score  of  his  ancient  martyrdom,  and  after 
many  ages  of  celestial  life,  might  venture  to  talk  with 
the  Divine  Presence,  almost  as  friend  with  friend. 
Though  dumb  before  its  Judge,  even  despair  could 
speak,  and  pour  out  the  misery  of  its  soul  like  water, 
to  an  advocate  so  wise  to  comprehend  the  case,  and 
eloquent  to  plead  it,  and  powerful  to  win  pardon, 
whatever  were  the  guilt.  Hilda  witnessed  what  she 
deemed  to  be  an  example  of  this  species  of  confidence 
between  a  yoimg  man  and  his  saint.  He  stood  before 
a  shrine,  writhing,  wringing  his  hands,  contorting  his 
whole  frame  in  an  agony  of  remorseful  recollection, 
but  finally  knelt  down  to  weep  and  pray.  If  this 
youth  had  been  a  Protestant,  he  would  have  kept  all 
that  torture  pent  up  in  his  heart,  and  let  it  bum  there 
till  it  seared  him  into  indifference. 

Often  and  long,  Hilda  lingered  before  the  shrines 
and  chapels  of  the  Virgin,  and  departed  from  them 
with  reluctant  steps.  Here,  perhaps,  strange  as  it 
may  seem,  her  delicate  appreciation  of  art  stood  her  in 
good  stead,  and  lost  Catholicism  a  convert.  If  the 
painter  had  represented  Mary  with  a  heavenly  face, 
poor  Hilda  was  now  in  the  very  mood  to  worship  her, 
and  adopt  the  faith  in  which  she  held  so  elevated  a 
position.    But  she  saw  that  it  was  merely  the  flattered 


Digitized 


by  Google 


AOMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

portrait  of  an  earthly  beauty ;  the  wife,  at  best,  of  the 
artist;  or,  it  might  be,  a  peasant-girl  of  the  Cam- 
pagna,  or  some  Koman  princess,  to  whom  he  desired 
to  pay  his  court.  For  love,  or  some  even  less  justifi* 
able  motive,  the  old  painter  had  apotheosized  these 
women ;  he  thus  gained  for  them,  as  far  as  his  skill 
would  go,  not  only  the  meed  of  immortality,  but  the 
privilege  of  presiding  over  Christian  altars,  and  of 
being  worshipped  with  far  holier  fervors  than  while 
they  dwelt  on  earth.  Hilda's  fine  sense  of  the  fit  and 
decorous  could  not  be  betrayed  into  kneeling  at  such  a 
shrine. 

She  never  found  just  the  virgin  mother  whom  she 
needed.  Here,  it  was  an  earthly  mother,  worshipping 
the  earthly  baby  in  her  lap,  as  any  and  every  mother 
does,  from  Eve's  time  downward.  In  another  picture^ 
there  was  a  dim  sense,  shown  in  the  mother's  face,  of 
some  divine  quality  in  the  child.  In  a  third,  the  artist 
seemed  to  have  had  a  higher  perception,  and  had 
striven  hard  to  shadow  out  the  Virgin's  joy  at  bring- 
ing the  Saviour  into  the  world,  and  her  awe  and  love, 
inextricably  mingled,  of  the  little  form  which  she 
pressed  against  her  bosom.  So  far  was  good.  But 
still,  Hilda  looked  for  something  more;  a  face  of 
celestial  beauty,  but  human  as  well  as  heavenly,  and 
with  the  shadow  of  past  grief  upon  it ;  bright  with 
immortal  youth,  yet  matronly  and  motherly ;  and  en- 
dowed with  a  queenly  dignity,  but  infinitely  tender, 
as  the  highest  and  deepest  attribute  of  her  diviniiy. 

"  Ah,"  thought  Hilda  to  herself,  "  why  should  not 
there  be  a  woman  to  listen  to  the  prayers  of  women  ? 
a  mother  in  heaven  for  all  motherless  girls  like  me  ? 
In  all  God's  thought  and  care  for  us,  can  he  have 
withheld  this  boon,  which  our  weakness  so  much 
needs?" 


Digitized 


by  Google 


ALTARS  AND  IlSrCENSE.  89T 

'•  Oftener  than  to  the  other  churches,  she  wandered 
into  St.  Peter's.  Within  its  vast  limits,  she  thought, 
and  beneath  the  sweep  of  its  great  dome,  there  should 
be  space  for  all  forms  of  Christian  truth ;  room  both 
for  the  faithful  and  the  heretic  to  kneel ;  due  help  for 
every  creature's  spiritual  want. 

Hilda  had  not  always  been  adequately  impressed  by 
the  grandeur  of  this  mighty  cathedral.  When  she 
first  lifted  the  heavy  leathern  curtain,  at  one  of  the 
doors,  a  shadowy  edifice  in  her  imagination  had  been 
dazzled  out  of  sight  by  the  reality.  Her  preconcep- 
tion of  St.  Peter's  was  a  structure  of  no  definite  out- 
line, misty  in  its  architecture,  dim  and  gray  and  huge, 
stretching  into  an  interminable  perspective,  and  over^ 
arched  by  a  dome  like  the  cloudy  firmament.  Beneath 
that  vast  breadth  and  height,  as  she  had  fancied  them^ 
the  personal  man  might  feel  his  littleness,  and  the 
9oul  triumph  in  its  immensity.  So,  in  her  earlier 
visits,  when  the  compassed  splendor  of  the  actual  in 
terior  glowed  before  her  eyes,  she  had  profanely  called 
it  a  great  prettiness;  a  gay  piece  of  cabinet-work, 
on  a  Titanic  scale ;  a  jewel-casket,  marvellously  mag« 
uified. 

This  latter  image  best  pleased  her  fancy ;  a  casket, 
all  inlaid,  in  the  inside,  with  precious  stones  of  vari- 
ous hue,  so  that  there  should  not  be  a  hair's-breadth 
of  the  small  interior  unadorned  with  its  resplendent 
gem.  Then,  conceive  this  minute  wonder  of  a  mosaic 
box,  increased  to  the  magnitude  of  a  cathedral,  with- 
out losing  the  intense  lustre  of  its  littleness,  but  all  its 
petty  glory  striving  to  be  sublime.  The  magic  trans- 
formation from  the  mii^ute  to  the  vast  has  not  been  so 
cunningly  effected  but  that  the  rich  adornment  still 
IQttnteracts  the  impression  of  iq)ao6  and  loftiness.  The 


Digitized 


by  Google 


ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

spectator  is  more  sensible  of  its  limits  than  of  its  es' 
tent. 

Until  after  many  visits,  Hilda  continued  to  mourn 
for  that  dim,  illimitable  interior,  which  with  her  eyes 
shut  she  had  seen  from  childhood,  but  whieh  vanished  < 
at  her  first  glimpse  through  the  actual  door.  Her( 
childish  vision  seemed  preferable  to  the  cathedral 
which  Michael  Angelo,  and  all  the  great  architects, 
had  built ;  because,  of  the  dream  edifice,  she  had  said, 
"  How  vast  it  is ! "  while  of  the  real  St.  Peter's  she 
could  only  say,  "  After  all,  it  is  not  so  immense !  '* 
Besides,  such  as  the  church  is,  it  can  nowhere  be  made 
visible  at  one  glance.  It  stands  in  its  own  way.  You 
see  an  aisle,  or  a  transept ;  you  see  the  nave,  or  the 
tribune ;  but,  on  account  of  its  ponderous  piers  and 
other  obstructions,  it  is  only  by  this  fragmentary  proc- 
ess that  you  get  an  idea  of  the  cathedral. 

There  is  no  answering  such  objections.  The  great 
church  smiles  calmly  upon  its  critics,  and,  for  all  re- 
sponse, says,  "  Look  at  me !  "  and  if  you  still  murmur 
for  the  loss  of  your  shadowy  perspective,  there  comes 
no  reply,  sj^ve,  "Look  at  me!  "  in  endless  repetition, 
as  the  one  thing  to  be  said.  And,  after  looking  many 
times,  with  long  intervals  between,  you  discover  that 
the  cathedral  has  gradually  extended  itself  over  the 
whole  compass  of  your  idea ;  it  covers  all  the  site  of 
your  visionary  temple,  and  has  room  for  its  cloudy 
pinnacles  beneath  the  dome. 

One  afternoon,  as  Hilda  entered  St.  Peter's  in  som- 
bre mood,  its  interior  beamed  upon  her  with  all  the 
effect  of  a  new  creation.  It  seemed  an  embodiment 
of  whatever  the  imagination  could  conceive,  or  the 
heart  desire,  as  a  magnificent,  comprehensive,  majestic 
symbol  of  religious  faith.     AU  splendor  was  inchided 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Oh 
H 

< 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


ALTARS  AND  INCENSE.  899 

within  its  verge,  and  there  was  space  for  all.  She 
gazed  w^.th  delight  even  at  the  multiplicity  of  oma- 
tneni.  She  was  glad  at  the  cherubim  that  fluttered 
upon  the  pilasters,  and  of  the  marble  doves,  hovering 
unexpectedly,  with  green  olive-branches  of  precious 
stones.  She  could  spare  nothing,  now,  of  the  mani« 
fold  magnificence  that  had  been  lavished,  in  a  hun- 
dred places,  richly  enough  to  have  made  world-famous 
shrines  in  any  other  chiirch,  but  which  here  melted 
away  into  the  vast  sunny  breadth,  and  were  of  no  sep- 
arate account.  Yet  each  contributed  its  little  all  to- 
wards the  grandeur  of  the  whole. 

She  would  not  have  banished  one  of  those  grim 
popes,  who  sit  each  over  his  own  tomb,  scattering  cold 
benedictions  out  of  their  marble  hands  ;  nor  a  single 
frozen  sister  of  the  Allegoric  family,  to  whom  —  as, 
like  hired  mourners  at  an  English  funeral,  it  costs  them 
no  wear  and  tear  of  heart  —  is  assigned  the  office  of 
weeping  for  the  dead.  If  you  choose  to  see  these 
things,  they  present  themselves ;  if  you  deem  them  im- 
suitable  and  out  of  place,  they  vanish,  individually, 
but  leave  their  life  upon  the  walls. 

The  pavement !  it  stretched  out  illimitably,  a  plain 
of  many-colored  marble,  where  thousands  of  worship- 
pers might  kneel  together,  and  shadowless  angels  tread 
among  them  without  brushing  their  heavenly  garments 
against  those  earthly  ones.  The  roof  !  the  dome  ! 
Rich,  gorgeous,  filled  with  sunshine,  cheerfully  sub- 
lime, and  fadeless  after  centuries,  those  lofty  depths 
seemed  to  translate  the  heavens  to  mortal  comprehen- 
sion, and  help  the  spirit  upward  to  a  yet  higher  and 
wider  sphere.  Must  not  the  faith,  that  built  this 
matchless  edifice,  and  warmed,  illuminated,  and  over- 
flowed f i*om  it,  include  whatever  can  satisfy  human  as* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


400  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

|)irations  at  the  loftiest,  or  minister  to  human  necessity 
at  the  sorest  ?  If  Beligion  had  a  material  home,  was 
it  not  here  ? 

As  the  seene  which  we  but  faintly  suggest  shone 
calmly  before  the  New  England  maiden  at  her  en- 
trance, she  moved,  as  if  by  very  instinct,  to  one  of  the 
vases  of  holy  water,  upborne  against  a  column  by  two 
mighty  cherubs.  Hilda  dipped  her  fingers,  and  had 
almost  signed  the  cross  upon  her  breast,  but  forbore, 
and  trembled,  while  shaking  the  water  from  her  finger- 
tips. She  felt  as  if  her  mother's  spirit,  somewhere 
within  the  dome,  were  looking  down  upon  her  child, 
the  daughter  of  Puritan  forefathers,  and  weeping  to 
behold  her  ensnared  by  these  gaudy  superstitions.  So 
she  strayed  sadly  onward,  up  the  nave,  and  towards 
the  hundred  golden  lights  that  swarm  before  the  high 
altar.  Seeing  a  woman,  a  priest,  and  a  soldier  kneel 
to  kiss  the  toe  of  the  brazen  St.  Peter,  who  protrudes 
it  beyond  his  pedestal,  for  the  purpose,  polished  bright 
with  former  salutations,  while  a  child  stood  on  tiptoe 
to  do  the  same,  the  glory  of  the  church  was  darkened 
before  Hilda's  eyes.  But  again  she  went  onward  into 
remoter  regions.  She  turned  into  the  ri^t  transept, 
and  thence  foimd  her  way  to  a  shrine,  in  the  extreme 
corner  of  the  edifice,  which  is  adorned  with  a  mosaic 
copy  of  Guide's  beautiful  Archangel,  treading  on  the 
prostrate  fiend. 

This  was  one  of  the  few  pictures,  which,  in  these 
dreary  days,  had  not  faded  nor  deteriorated  in  Hilda's 
estimation ;  not  that  it  was  better  than  many  in  which 
she  no  longer  took  an  interest ;  but  the  subtile  deli- 
cacy of  the  painter's  genius  was  peculiarly  adapted  to 
her  character.  She  felt,  while  gazing  at  it,  that  tiie 
artist  had  done  a  great  thing,  not  merely  for  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


ALTARS  AND  INCENSE.  401 

CSiurcIi  of  Rome,  but  for  the  cause  of  Good.  Tlie 
moral  of  the  picture,  the  immortal  youth  and  loveli* 
ness  of  Virtue,  and  its  irresistible  might  against  ugly 
Evil,  appealed  as  much  to  Puritans  as  Catholics. 

Suddenly,  and  as  if  it  were  done  in  a  dream,  Hilda 
found  herself  kneeling  before  the  shrine,  under  the 
ever-burning  lamp  that  throws  its  rays  upon  the  Arch- 
angel's face.  She  laid  her  forehead  on  the  marble 
steps  before  the  altar,  and  sobbed  out  a  prayer ;  she 
hardly  knew  to  whom,  whether  Michael,  the  Virgin, 
or  the  Father ;  she  hardly  knew  for  what,  save  only 
a  vague  longing,  that  thus  the  burden  of  her  spirit 
might  be  lightened  a  little. 

In  an  instant  she  snatched  herself  up,  as  it  were, 
from  her  knees,  all  a-throb  with  the  emotions  which 
were  struggling  to  force  their  way  out  of  her  heart  by 
the  avenue  that  had  so  nearly  been  opened  for  them. 
Yet  there  was  a  strange  sense  of  relief  won  by  that 
momentary,  passionate  prayer  ;  a  strange  joy,  more« 
over,  whether  from  what  she  had  done,  or  for  what 
she  had  escaped  doing,  Hilda  could  not  tell.  But  she 
felt  as  one  half  stifled,  who  has  stolen  a  breath  of  air. 

Next  to  the  shrine  where  she  had  knelt,  there  is  an* 
other,  adorned  with  a  picture  by  Guercino,  represent- 
ing a  maiden's  body  in  the  jaws  of  the  sepulchre,  and 
her  lover  weeping  over  it ;  while  her  beatified  spirit 
looks  down  upon  the  scene,  in  the  society  of  the  Sav^ 
iour  and  a  throng  of  saints.  Hilda  wondered  if  it 
were  not  possible,  by  some  miracle  of  faith,  so  to  rise 
above  her  present  despondency  that  she  might  look 
down  upon  what  she  was,  just  as  Petronilla  in  the 
picture  looked  at  her  own  corpse.  A  hope,  bom  of 
hysteric  trouble,  fluttered  in  her  heart.  A  presentLf 
ment,  or  what  she  fancied  such,  whispered  her,  that. 

I      Y^U  VL    \ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


402  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

before  she  had  finished  the  circuit  of  the  cathedral,  re* 
lief  would  come. 

The  unhappy  are  continually  tantalized  by  simihu 
delusions  of  succor  near  at  hand  ;  at  least,  the  despair 
is  very  dark  that  has  no  such  will-o'-the-wisp  to  glim- 
mer in  it. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

THE  world's   cathedral. 

Still  gliding  onward,  Hilda  now  looked  up  into 
the  dome,  where  the  sunshine  came  through  the  west- 
ern windows,  and  threw  across  long  shafts  of  light. 
They  rested  upon  the  mosaic  figures  of  two  evange- 
lists above  the  cornice.  These  great  beams  of  radi- 
ance, traversing  what  seemed  the  empty  space,  were 
made  visible  in  misty  glory,  by  the  holy  cloud  of  in- 
cense, else  imseen,  which  had  risen  into  the  middle 
dome.  It  was  to  Hilda  as  if  she  beheld  the  worship 
of  the  priest  and  people  ascending  heavenward,  puri- 
fied from  its  alloy  of  earth,  and  acquiring  celestial 
substance  in  the  golden  atmosphere  to  which  it  as- 
pired. She  wondered  if  angels  did  not  sometimes 
hover  within  the  dome,  and  show  themselves,  in  brief 
glimpses,  floating  amid  the  sunshine  and  the  glorified 
vapor,  to  those  who  devoutly  worshipped  on  the  pave* 
ment. 

She  had  now  come  into  the  southern  transept 
Around  this  portion  of  the  church  are  ranged  a  num- 
ber of  confessionals.  They  are  small  tabernacles  of 
carved  wood,  with  a  closet  for  the  priest  in  the  centre ; 
3,nd,  on  either  side,  a  space  for  a  penitent  to  kneel, 
and  breathe  his  confession  through  a  perforated  au- 
ricle into  the  good  father's  ear.  Observing  this  ar- 
rangement, though  already  familiar  to  her,  oiu*  poor 
Hilda  was  anew  impressed  with  the  infinite  convene 


Digitized 


by  Google 


404  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENI. 

ience — if  we  may  use  so  poor  a  phrase  —  of  the  Cath- 
olic religion  to  its  devout  believers. 

Who,  in  truth,  that  considers  the  matter,  can  re- 
sist a  similar  impression !  In  the  hottest  fever-fit  of 
life,  they  can  always  find,  ready  for  their  need,  a  cool, 
quiet,  beautiful  place  of  worship.  They  may  enter  its 
sacred  precincts  at  any  hour,  leaving  the  fret  and 
trouble  of  the  world  behind  them,  and  purifying  them- 
selves with  a  touch  of  holy  water  at  the  threshold.  In 
the  calm  interior,  fragrant  of  rich  and  soothing  in- 
cense, they  may  hold  converse  with  some  saint,  their 
awful,  kindly  friend.  And,  most  precious  privilege  of 
all,  whatever  perplexity,  sorrow,  guilt,  may  weigh  upon 
their  souls,  they  can  fling  down  the  dark  bui*den  at  the 
foot  of  the  cross,  and  go  forth  —  to  sin  no  more,  nor 
be  any  longer  disquieted  ;  but  to  live  again  in  the 
freshness  and  elasticity  of  innocence. 

"  Do  not  these  inestimable  advantages,"  thought 
Hilda,  "or  some  of  them  at  least,  belong  to  Chris- 
tianity itself  ?  Are  they  not  a  part  of  the  blessings 
which  the  system  was  meant  to  bestow  upon  mankind  ? 
Can  the  faith  in  which  I  was  born  and  bred  be  per- 
fect, if  it  leave  a  weak  girl  like  me  to  wander,  desolate, 
with  this  great  trouble  crushing  me  down  ?  " 

A  poignant  anguish  thrilled  within  her  breast;  it 
was  like  a  thing  that  had  life,  and  was  struggling  to 
get  out. 

"Oh,  help!  Oh,  help!'*  cried  Hilda;  "I  cannot, 
cannot  bear  it !  " 

Only  by  the  reverberations  that  followed  —  arch 
echoing  the  sound  to  arch,  and  a  pope  of  bronze  re. 
peating  it  to  a  pope  of  marble,  as  each  sat  enthroned 
over  his  tomb — did  Hilda  become  aware  that  she  had 
t^ally  spoken  above  her  breath.     But,  in  that  great 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   WORLD'S  CATHEDRAL.  405 

space,  there  is  no  need  to  hush  up  the  heart  within 
one's  own  bosom,  so  carefully  as  elsewhere ;  and  if  the 
cry  reached  any  distant  auditor,  it  came  broken  into 
many  fragments,  and  from  various  quarters  of  the 
church. 

Approaching  one  of  the  confessionals,  she  saw  a  wo- 
man kneeling  within.  Just  as  Hilda  drew  near,  the 
ipenitent  rose,  came  forth,  and  kissed  the  hand  of  the 
priest,  who  regarded  her  with  a  look  of  paternal  be- 
nignity, and  appeared  to  be  giving  hei*  some  spiritual 
counsel,  in  a  low  voice.  She  then  knelt  to  receive  his 
blessing,  which  was  fervently  bestowed.  Hilda  was  so 
struck  with  the  peace  and  joy  in  the  woman's  face, 
that,  as  the  latter  retired,  she  could  not  help  speaking 
to  her. 

"You  look  very  happy !  "  said  she.  "Is  it  so  sweet, 
then,  to  go  to  the  confessional  ?  " 

"  Oh,  very  sweet,  my  dear  signorina ! "  answered  the 
woman,  with  moistened  eyes  and  an  affectionate  smile; 
for  she  was  so  thoroughly  softened  with  what  she  had 
been  doing,  that  she  felt  as  if  Hilda  were  her  yoimger 
sister.  "  My  heart  is  at  rest  now.  Thanks  be  to  the 
Saviour,  and  the  Blessed  Virgin  and  the  saints,  and 
this  good  father,  there  is  no  more  trouble  for  poor  Te- 
resa ! " 

"  I  am  glad  for  your  sake,"  said  Hilda,  sighing  for 
6er  own.  "  I  am  a  poor  heretic,  but  a  human  sister ; 
,and  I  rejoice  for  you !  " 

,  She  went  from  one  to  another  of  the  confessionals, 
and,  looking  at  each,  perceived  that  they  were  inscribed 
,with  gilt  letters :  on  one.  Pro  Italic  a  Lingua  ;  on 
another.  Pro  Flandrica  Lingua  ;  on  a  third,  Pro 
JPoLONiCA  Lingua  ;  on  a  fourth.  Pro  Illyrica  Lin- 
gua; on  a  fifth,  Pro  Hispanica  Lingua.    In  this 


Digitized 


by  Google 


406  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

Vast  and  hospitable  cathedral,  worthy  to  be  the  reli^ 
ious  heart  of  the  whole  world,  there  was  room  for  all 
nations;  there  was  access  to  the  Divine  Grace  for 
every  Christian  soul ;  there  was  an  ear  for  what  the 
overburdened  heart  might  have  to  murmur,  speak  in 
what  native  tongue  it  would. 

When  Hilda  had  almost  completed  the  circuit  of 
the  transept,  she  came  to  a  confessional  —  the  central 
part  was  closed,  but  a  mystic  rod  protruded  from  it, 
indicating  the  presence  of  a  priest  within  —  on  which 
was  inscribed.  Pro  Anglica  Lingua. 

It  was  the  word  in  season !  If  she  had  heard  her 
mother's  voice  from  within  the  tabernacle,  calling  her, 
in  her  own  mother^tongue,  to  come  and  lay  her  poor 
head  in  her  lap,  and  sob  out  all  her  troubles,  Hilda 
could  not  have  responded  with  a  more  inevitable  obe- 
dience. She  did  not  think;  she  only  felt.  Within 
her  heart  was  a  great  need.  Close  at  hand,  within  the 
veil  of  the  confessional,  was  the  relief.  She  flung  her^ 
self  down  in  the  penitent's  place;  and,  tremulously, 
passionately,  with  sobs,  tears,  and  the  turbulent  over« 
flow  of  emotion  too  long  repressed,  she  poured  out  the 
dark  story  which  had  infused  its  poison  into  her  inno* 
cent  life. 

Hilda  had  not  seen,  nor  could  she  now  see  the  vis- 
age of  the  priest.  But,  at  intervals,  in  the  pauses  of 
that  strange  confession,  half  choked  by  the  struggle  of 
her  feelings  toward  an  outlet,  she  heard  a  mild,  calm 
voice,  somewhat  mellowed  by  age.  It  spoke  sooth- 
ingly ;  it  encouraged  her ;  it  led  her  on  by  apposite 
questions  that  seemed  to  be  suggested  by  a  great  and 
tender  interest,  and  acted  like  magnetism  in  attracting 
the  girl's  confidence  to  this  unseen  friend.  The  priest's 
«hare  in  the  interview,  indeed,  resembled  that  of  one 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   WORLD'S  CATHEDRAL.  407 

who  removes  the  stones,  clustered  branches,  or  what* 
ever  entanglements  impede  the  current  of  a  swollen 
stream.  Hilda  could  have  imagined  —  so  much  to  the 
purpose  were  his  inquiries  —  that  he  was  already  ac- 
quainted with  some  outline  of  what  she  strove  to  tell 
him. 

Thus  assisted,  she  revealed  the  whole  of  her  terrible 
secret  1  The  whole,  except  that  no  name  escaped  her 
lios. 

And,  ah,  what  a  relief !  When  the  hysteric  gasp, 
the  strife  between  words  and  sobs,  had  subsided,  what 
a  torture  had  passed  awaj''  from  her  soul !  It  was  all 
gone ;  hei'  bosom  was  as  pure  now  as  in  her  childhood. 
She  was  a  girl  again  ;  she  was  Hilda  of  the  dove-cote ; 
not  that  doubtful  creature  whom  her  own  doves  had 
hardly  recognized  as  their  mistress  and  playmate,  by 
reason  of  the  death-scent  that  clung  to  her  garments  I 

After  she  had  ceased  to  speak,  Hilda  heard  the  priest 
bestir  himself  with  an  old  man's  reluctant  movement. 
He  stepped  out  of  the  confessional ;  and  as  the  girl 
was  still  kneeling  in  the  penitential  comer,  he  sum- 
moned her  forth. 

"  Stand  up,  my  daughter,"  said  the  mild  voice  of 
the  confessor ;  "  what  we  have  f ui*ther  to  say  must  be 
spoken  face  to  face." 

Hilda  did  his  bidding,  and  stood  before  him  with  a 
downcast  visage,  which  flushed  and  grew  pale  again. 
But  it  had  the  wonderful  beauty  which  we  may  often 
observe  in  those  who  have  recently  gone  through  a 
great  struggle,  and  won  the  peace  that  lies  just  on  the 
other  side.  We  see  it  in  a  new  mother's  face ;  we  see 
it  in  the  faces  of  the  dead;  and  in  Hilda's  counte- 
nance —  which  had  always  a  rare  natural  charm  for 
her  friends  —  this  glorj'  of  peace  made  her  as  loveJy 
as  an  angeL 


Digitized 


by  Google 


408  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

On  her  part,  HUda  beheld  a  venerable  figure  with 
hair  as  white  as  snow,  and  a  face  strikingly  charac- 
terized by  benevolence.  It  bore  marks  of  thought, 
however,  and  penetrative  insight ;  although  the  keen 
glances  of  the  eyes  were  now  somewhat  bedimmed 
with  tears,  which  the  aged  shed,  or  almost  shed,  on 
lighter  stress  of  emotion  than  would  elicit  them  from 
younger  men, 

"  It  has  not  escaped  my  observation,  daughter,"  said 
the  priest,  "  that  this  is  your  first  acquaintance  with 
the  confessional.     How  is  this  ?  " 

"  Father,"  replied  Hilda,  raising  her  eyes,  and 
again  letting  them  fall,  "  I  am  of  New  England  birth, 
and  was  bred  as  what  you  call  a  heretic." 

"  From  New  England !  "  exclaimed  the  priest.  "  It 
was  my  own  birthplace,  likewise ;  nor  have  fifty  years 
of  absence  made  me  cease  to  love  it.  But,  a  heretic ! 
And  are  you  reconciled  to  the  Church  ?  " 

"  Never,  father,"  said  Hilda. 

"  And,  that  being  the  case,"  demanded  the  old  man, 
"  on  what  groimd,  my  daughter,  have  you  sought  to 
avail  yourself  of  these  blessed  privileges,  confined  ex- 
clusively to  members  of  the  one  true  Church,  of  con- 
fession and  absolution  ?  " 

"Absolution,  father?"  exclaimed  Hilda,  shrinking 
back.  "  Oh  no,  no !  I  never  dreamed  of  that !  Ohly 
our  Heavenly  Father  can  forgive  my  sins ;  and  it  is 
only  by  sincere  repentance  of  whatever  wrong  I  may 
have  done,  and  by  my  own  best  efforts  towards  a  higher 
life,  that  I  can  hope  for  his  forgiveness  !  God  forbid 
that  I  should  ask  absolution  from  mortal  man !  " 

"Then,  wherefore,"  rejoined  the  priest,  with  some- 
what less  mildness  in  his  tone,  —  "  wherefore,  I  ask 
again,  have  you  taken  possession,  as  I  may  term  it,  of 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   WORLD'S   CATHEDRAL.  409 

this  holy  ordinance  ;  being  a  heretic,  and  neither  seek- 
ing to  share,  nor  having  faith  in,  the  unspeakable  ad- 
vantages which  the  Church  offers  to  its  penitents  ?  " 

"•'Father,"  answered  Hilda,  trying  to  tell  the  old 
man  the  simple  truth,  "  I  am  a  motherless  girl,  and  a 
stranger  here  in  Italy.  I  had  only  God  to  take  care 
of  me,  and  be  my  closest  friend ;  and  the  terrible, 
terrible  crime,  which  I  have  revealed  to  you,  thrust 
itself  between  him  and  me ;  so  that  I  groped  for  him 
in  the  darkness,  as  it  were,  and  found  him  not,  — 
found  nothing  but  a  dreadful  solitude,  and  this  crime 
in  the  midst  of  it!  I  could  not  bear  it.  It  seemed  as 
if  I  made  the  awful  guilt  my  own,  by  keeping  it  hid- 
den in  my  heart.  I  grew  a  fearful  thing  to  myself. 
I  was  going  mad ! " 

"  It  was  a  grievous  trial,  my  poor  child  I "  observed 
the  confessor.  "  Your  relief,  I  trust,  will  prove  to  be 
greater  than  you  yet  know !  " 

"I  feel  already  how  immense  it  is!"  said  Hilda, 
looking  gratefully  in  his  face.  "  Surely,  father,  it  was 
the  hand  of  Providence  that  led  me  hither,  and  made 
me  feel  that  this  vast  temple  of  Christianity,  this  great 
home  of  religion,  must  needs  contain  some  cure,  some 
ease,  at  least,  for  my  unutterable  anguish.  And  it  has 
proved  so.  I  Iiave  told  the  hideous  secret;  told  it 
under  the  sacred  seal  of  the  confessional ;  and  now  it 
will  burn  my  poor  heart  no  more !  " 

"  But,  daughter,"  answered  the  venerable  priest,  not 
unmoved  by  what  Hilda  said,  "you  forget!  you  mis- 
take !  —  you  claim  a  privilege  to  which  you  have  not 
entitled  yourself !  The  seal  of  the  confessional,  do 
you  say  ?  God  forbid  that  it  should  ever  be  broken 
where  it  has  been  fairly  impressed;  but  it  applies 
only  to  matters  that  have  been  confided  to  its  keeping 


Digitized 


by  Google 


410  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  DENL 

in  a  certain  prescribed  method,  and  by  persons,  more- 
over, who  have  faith  in  the  sanctity  of  the  ordinance. 
I  hold  myself,  and  any  learned  casuist  of  the  Church 
would  hold  me,  as  free  to  disclose  all  the  particulars 
of  what  you  term  your  confession,  as  if  they  had  come 
to  my  knowledge  in  a  secular  way." 

"  This  is  not  right,  father !  "  said  Hilda,  fixing  her 
eyes  on  the  old  man's. 

"  Do  not  you  see,  child,"  he  rejoined,  with  some 
little  heat,  "  with  all  your  nicety  of  conscience,  cannot 
you  recognize  it  as  my  duty  to  make  the  story  known 
to  the  proper  authorities  ;  a  great  crime  against  public 
justice  being  involved,  and  further  evil  consequences 
likely  to  ensue?" 

"No,  father,  no!"  answered  Hilda,  courageously, 
her  cheeks  flushing  and  her  eyes  brightening  as  she 
spoke.  "  Trust  a  girl's  simple  heart  sooner  than  any 
casuist  of  your  Chiu^h,  however  learned  he  may  be. 
Trust  your  own  heart,  too!  I  came  to  your  con- 
fessional, father,  as  I  devoutly  believe,  by  the  direct 
impulse  of  Heaven,  which  also  brought  you  hither 
to-day,  in  its  mercy  and  love,  to  relieve  me  of  a  torture 
that  I  could  no  longer  bear.  I  trusted  in  the  pledge 
which  your  Church  has  always  held  sacred  between 
the  priest  and  the  human  soul,  which,  through  his  me- 
dium, is  struggling  towards  its  Father  above.  What 
I  have  confided  to  you  lies  sacredly  between  God  and 
yourself.  Let  it  rest  there,  father  ;  for  this  is  right, 
and  if  you  do  otherwise,  you  will  perpetrate  a  great 
wrong,  both  as  a  priest  and  a  man !  And,  believe  me, 
no  question,  no  torture,  shall  ever  force  my  lips  to 
utter  what  would  be  necessary,  in  order  to  make  my 
confession  available  towards  the  punishment  of  the 
guilty  ones.    Leave  Providence  to  deal  with  them  I " 


Digitized 


by  Google 


h' 

CO 

b 
O 

o 

H 
2 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   WORLD'S  CATHEDRAL.  411 

"My  quiet  little  countrywoman,"  said  the  priest, 
with  half  a  smile  on  his  kindly  old  face,  ^^you  can 
pluck  up  a  spirit,  I  perceive,  when  you  fancy  an  occa- 
sion for  one." 

"  I  have  spirit  only  to  do  what  I  think  right,"  re- 
plied  Hilda,  simply.  ^^  In  other  respects  I  am  timo- 
rous." 

"  But  you  confuse  yourself  between  right  feelings 
and  very  foolish  inferences,"  continued  the  priest,  "  as 
is  the  wont  of  women,  —  so  much  I  have  learnt  by 
long  experience  in  the  confessional,  —  be  they  young 
or  old.  However,  to  set  your  heart  at  rest,  there  is 
no  probable  need  for  me  to  reveal  the  matter.  What 
you  have  told,  if  I  mistake  not,  and  perhaps  more, 
is  already  known  in  the  quarter  which  it  most  con* 
cems." 

"  Known  !  "  exclaimed  Hilda.  "  Known  to  the  au- 
thorities of  Ilome!  And  what  will  be  the  conse- 
quence ?  " 

"  Hush,"  answered  the  confessor,  laying  his  finger 
on  his  lips.  "  I  tell  you  my  supposition  —  mind,  it  is 
no  assertion  of  the  fact  —  in  order  that  you  may  go 
the  more  cheerfully  on  your  way,  not  deeming  yourself 
burdened  with  any  responsibility  as  concerns  this  dark 
deed.  And  now,  daughter,  what  have  you  to  give  in 
return  for  an  old  man's  kindness  and  sympathy?" 

**  My  grateful  remembrance,"  said  Hilda,  fervently, 
"  as  long  as  I  live  ! " 

"  And  nothing  more  ?  "  the  priest  inquired,  with  a 
persuasive  smile.  "  Will  you  not  reward  him  with  a 
great  joy ;  one  of  the  last  joys  that  he  may  know  on 
earth,  and  a  fit  one  to  take  with  him  into  the  better 
world  ?  In  a  word,  will  you  not  allow  me  to  bring 
you,  as  a  stray  lamb  into  the  true  fold  ?    You  have 


Digitized 


by  Google 


412  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

experienced  some  little  taste  of  the  relief  and  comfort 
which  the  Church  keeps  abundantly  in  store  for  all 
its  faithful  children.  Come  home,  dear  child,  — poor 
wanderer,  who  hast  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  heavenly 
light,  —  come  home,  and  be  at  rest." 

"  Father,"  said  Hilda,  much  moved  by  his  kindly 
earnestness;  in  which,  however,  genuine  as  it  was, 
there  might  still  be  a  leaven  of  professional  craft,  "  I 
dare  not  come  a  step  farther  than  Providence  shall 
guide  me.  Do  not  let  it  grieve  you,  therefore,  if  I 
never  return  to  the  confessional ;  never  dip  my  fingers 
in  holy  water ;  never  sign  my  bosom  with  the  cross. 
I  am  a  daughter  of  the  Puritans.  But,  in  spite  of  my 
heresy,"  she  added  with  a  sweet,  tearful  smile,  "  you 
may  one  day  see  the  poor  girl,  to  whom  you  have  done 
this  great  Christian  kindness,  coming  to  remind  you 
of  it,  and  thank  you  for  it,  in  the  Better  Land." 

The  old  priest  shook  his  head.  But,  as  he  stretched 
out  his  hands  at  the  same  moment,  in  the  act  of  bene- 
diction, Hilda  knelt  down  and  received  the  blessing 
with  as  devout  a  simplicity  as  any  Catholic  of  them 
alL 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XL. 

HILDA  AND  A  FBIEND. 

When  Hilda  knelt  to  receive  the  priest's  benedic- 
tion, the  act  was  witnessed  by  a  person  who  stood  lean- 
ing against  the  marble  balustrade  that  surrounds  the 
hundred  golden  lights,  before  the  high  altar.  He  had 
stood  there,  indeed,  from  the  moment  of  the  girl's  en- 
trance into  the  confessional.  His  start  of  surprise,  at 
first  beholding  her,  and  the  anxious  gloom  that  after- 
wards settled  on  his  face,  sufficiently  betokened  that 
he  felt  a  deep  and  sad  interest  in  what  was  going  for- 
ward. 

After  Hilda  had  bidden  the  priest  farewell,  she 
came  slowly  towards  the  high  altar.  The  individual, 
to  whom  we  have  alluded,  seemed  irresolute  whether 
to  advance  or  retire.  His  hesitation  lasted  so  long, 
that  the  maiden,  straying  through  a  happy  reverie, 
had  crossed  the  wide  extent  of  the  pavement  between 
the  confessional  and  the  altar,  before  he  had  decided 
whether  to  meet  her.  At  last,  when  within  a  pace  or 
two,  she  raised  her  eyes  and  recognized  Kenyon. 

"  It  is  you ! "  she  exclaimed,  with  joyful  surprise* 
"  I  am  so  happy." 

In  trutli,  the  sculptor  had  never  before  seen,  nor 
hardly  imagined,  such  a  figure  of  peaceful  beatitude 
as  Hilda  now  presented.  While  coming  towards  him 
in  the  solemn  radiance  which,  at  that  period  of  the 
day,  is  diffused  through  the  transept,  and  showered 


Digitized 


by  Google 


414  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

down  beneath  the  dome,  she  seemed  of  the  same  sub- 
stanco  as  the  atmosphere  that  enveloped  her.  He 
could  scarcely  tell  whether  she  was  imbued  with  sun- 
shine, or  whether  it  was  a  glow  of  happiness  that 
shone  out  of  her. 

At  all  events,  it  was  a  marvellous  change  from  the 
sad  girl,  who  had  entered  the  confessional  bewildered 
with  anguish,  to  this  bright,  yet  softened  image  of  re- 
ligious consolation  that  emerged  from  it.  It  was  as  if 
one  of  the  throng  of  angelic  people,  who  might  be  hov- 
ering in  the  sunny  depths  of  the  dome,  had  alighted 
on  the  pavement.  Indeed,  this  capability  of  transfig- 
uration, which  we  often  see  wrought  by  inward  delight 
on  persons  far  less  capable  of  it  than  Hilda,  suggests 
how  angels  come  by  their  beauty.  It  grows  out  of 
their  happiness,  and  lasts  forever  only  because  that  is 
immortal. 

She  held  out  her  hand,  and  Kenyon  was  glad  to 
take  it  in  his  own,  if  only  to  assure  himself  that  she 
was  made  of  earthly  material. 

"  Yes,  Hilda,  I  see  that  you  are  very  happy,"  he  re- 
plied, gloomily,  and  withdrawing  his  hand  after  a  sin- 
gle pressure.  "  For  me,  I  never  was  less  so  than  at 
this  moment." 

"  Has  any  misfortune  befallen  you  ?  "  asked  Hilda, 
with  earnestness.  "  Pray  tell  me,  and  you  shall  have 
my  sympathy,  though  I  must  still  be  very  happy. 
Now,  I  know  how  it  is,  that  the  saints  above  are 
touched  by  the  sorrows  of  distressed  people  on  earth, 
and  yet  are  liever  made  wretched  by  them.  Not  that 
I  profess  to  be  a  saint,  you  know,"  she  added,  smiling 
radiantly,  "  But  the  heart  grows  so  large,  and  so 
rich,  and  so  variously  endowed,  when  it  has  a  great 
'B^Bnse  of  bliss,  that  it  can  give  smiles  to  some,  and 


Digitized 


by  Google 


HILDA  AND  A  FRIEND.  416 

tears  to  others,  with  equal  sincerity,  and  enjoy  its  own 
peace  throughout  all." 

"Do  not  say  you  are  no  saint !  "  answered  Kenyon, 
with  a  smile,  though  he  felt  that  the  tears  stood  in  his 
eyes.  "  You  will  still  be  Saint  Hilda,  whatever  church 
may  canonize  you." 

"Ah I  you  would  not  have  said  so,  had  you  se^i 
me  but  an  hour  ago  I  "  murmured  she.  "  I  was  so 
wretched,  that  there  seemed  a  grievous  sin  in  it." 

"  And  what  .has  made  you  so  suddenly  happy  ?  "  in- 
quired the  sculptor.  "But  first,  Hilda,  will  you  not 
tell  me  why  you  were  so  wretched  ?  " 

"  Had  I  met  you  yesterday,  I  might  have  told  you 
that,"  she  replied.     "  To-day,  there  is  no  need." 

"  Your  happiness,  then  ?  "  said  the  sculptor,  as  sadly 
^  before.     "  Whence  comes  it  ?  " 

"  A  great  burden  has  been  lifted  from  my  heart,  — 
from  my  conscience,  I  had  almost  said,"  —  answered 
Hilda,  without  shunning  the  glance  that  he  fixed  upon 
her.  "  I  am  a  new  creatiu^e,  since  this  morning. 
Heaven  be  praised  for  it !  It  was  a  blessed  hour  —  a 
blessed  impulse  —  that  brought  me  to  this  beautiful 
and  glorious  cathedral.  I  shall  hold  it  in  loving  r^ 
membrance  while  I  live,  as  the  spot  where  I  found  in« 
finite  peace  after  infinite  trouble." 

Her  heart  seemed  so  full,  that  it  spilt  its  new  gush 
of  happiness,  as  it  were,  like  rich  and  sunny  wine  out 
of  an  over-brimming  goblet.  Kenyon  saw  that  she 
was  in  one  of  those  moods  of  elevated  feeling,  when 
the  soul  is  upheld  by  a  strange  tranquillity,  which  is 
really  more  passionate,  and  less  controllable,  than 
emotions  far  exceeding  it  in  violence.  He  felt  that 
there  would  be  indelicacy,  if  he  ought  not  rather  to 
call  it  impiety,  in  his  stealing  upon  Hilda,  wliile  she 


Digitized 


by  Google 


416  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL  ^ 

was  thus  beyond  her  own  guardianship,  and  surprising 
her  out  of  secrets  which  she  might  afterwards  bitterly 
regret  betraying  to  him.  Therefore,  though  yearning 
to  know  what  had  happened,  he  resolved  to  forbear 
further  question.  •» 

Simple  and  earnest  people,  however,  being  accus-' 
tomed  to  speak  from  their  genuine  impulses,  cannot 
easily,  as  craftier  men  do,  avoid  the  subject  which 
they  have  at  heart.  As  often  as  the  sculptor  unclosed 
his  lips,  such  words  as  these  were  ready  to  burst 
out:  — 

"  Hilda,  have  you  flung  your  angelic  purity  into  that 
mass  of  unspeakable  corruption,  the  Roman  Church?  " 

"  What  were  you  saying  ?  "  she  asked,  as  Kenyon 
forced  back  an  almost  uttered  exclamation  of  this 
kind. 

"  I  was  thinking  of  what  you  have  just  remarked 
about  the  cathedral,"  said  he,  looking  up  into  the 
mighty  hollow  of  the  dome.  "  It  is  indeed  a  magnif- 
icent structure,  and  an  adequate  expression  of  the 
Faith  which  built  it.  When  I  behold  it  in  a  proper 
mood,  —  that  is  to  say,  when  I  bring  my  mind  into  a 
fair  relation  with  the  minds  and  purposes  of  its  spir- 
itual and  material  architects,  —  I  see  but  one  or  two 
criticisms  to  make.  One  is,  that  it  needs  painted  win- 
dows." 

"  Oh,  no !  "  said  Hilda.  "  They  would  be  quite  in- 
consistent with  so  much  richness  of  color  in  the  in- 
terior of  the  church.  Besides,  it  is  a  Gothic  ornament, 
and  only  suited  to  that  style  of  architecture,  which  re- 
quires a  gorgeous  dimness." 

"  Nevertheless,"  continued  the  sculptor,  "  yonder 
square  apertures,  filled  with  ordinary  panes  of  glass, 
are  quite  out  of  keeping  with  the  superabundant  splen* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


HILDA  AND  A  FRIEND.  417 

dor  of  everything  about  them.  They  remind  me  of 
that  portion  of  Aladdin's  palace  which  he  left  unfin* 
ished,  in  order  that  his  royal  father-in-law  might  put 
the  finishing  touch.  Daylight,  in  its  natural  state, 
ought  not  to  be  admitted  here.  It  should  stream 
through  a  brilliant  illusion  of  saints  and  hierarchies, 
and  old  scriptural  images,  and  symbolized  dogmas,' 
purple,  blue,  golden,  and  a  broad  flame  of  scarlet. 
Then,  it  would  be  just  such  an  illumination  as  the 
Catholic  faith  allows  to  its  believers.  But,  give  me 
—  to  live  and  die  in  —  the  pure,  white  light  of 
heaven !  " 

"  Why  do  you  look  so  sorrowfully  at  me  ?  "  asked 
Hilda,  quietly  meeting  his  disturbed  gaze.  "  What 
would  you  say  to  me  ?    I  love  the  white  light  too ! " 

"  I  fancied  so,"  answered  Kenyon.  "  Forgive  me, 
Hilda ;  but  I  must  needs  speak.  You  seemed  to  me  a 
rare  mixture  of  impressibility,  sympathy,  sensitiveness 
to  many  influences,  with  a  certain  quality  of  common 
sense ;  —  no,  not  that,  but  a  higher  and  finer  attri- 
bute, for  which  I  find  no  better  word.  However  trem- 
idously  you  might  vibrate,  this  quality,  I  supposed, 
would  always  bring  you  back  to  the  equipoise.  You 
were  a  creature  of  imagination,  and  yet  as  truly  a 
New  England  girl  as  any  with  whom  you  grew  up  in 
your  native  village.  If  there  were  one  person  in  the 
world  whose  native  rectitude  of  thought,  and  some* 
thing  deeper,  more  reliable,  than  thought,  I  would 
have  trusted  against  all  the  arts  of  a  priesthood,  — 
whose  taste  alone,  so  exquisite  and  sincere  that  it  rose 
to  be  a  moral  virtue,  I  would  have  rested  upon  as  a 
sufficient  safeguard,  —  it  was  yourself !  " 

"  I  am  conscious  of  no  such  high  and  delicate  quali* 
ties  as  you  alloM'  me,"  answered  Hilda.     "  But  what 


Digitized 


by  Google 


418  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

have  1  done  that  a  girl  of  New  England  birth  and  cm 
ture,  with  the  right  sense  that  her  mother  taught  her, 
and  the  conscience  that  she  developed  in  her,  should 
not  do?" 

"  Hilda,  I  saw  you  at  the  confessional ! "  said 
Kenyon. 

'  "  Ah,  well,  my  dear  friend,"  replied  Hilda  casting 
down  her  eyes,  and  looking  somewhat  confused,  yet 
not  ashamed,  "  you  must  try  to  forgive  me  for  that,  — ' 
if  you  deem  it  wrong, , —  because  it  has  saved  my  rea- 
son, and  made  me  very  happy.  Had  you  been  here 
yesterday,  I  would  have  confessed  to  you." 

"  Would  to  Heaven  I  had  !  "  ejaculated  Kenyon. 

"  I  think,"  Hilda  resumed,  "  I  shall  never  go  to  the 
confessional  again ;  for  there  can  scarcely  come  such 
a  sore  trial  twice  in  my  life.  If  I  had  been  a  wiser 
girl,  a  stronger,  and  a  more  sensible,  very  likely  I 
might  not  have  gone  to  the  confessional  at  all.  It  was 
the  sin  of  others  that  drove  me  thither ;  not  my  own, 
though  it  almost  seemed  so.  Being  what  I  am,  I  must 
either  have  done  what  you  saw  me  doing,  or  have  gone 
mad.     Would  that  have  been  better  ?  " 

"  Then  you  are  not  a  Catholic  ?  "  asked  the  sculptor, 
earnestly. 

"  Really,  I  do  not  quite  know  what  I  am,"  replied 
Hilda,  encountering  his  eyes  with  a  frank  and  simple 
gaze.  "  I  have  a  great  deal  of  faith,  and  Catholicism 
seems  to  have  a  great  deal  of  good.  Why  should  not 
I  be  a  Catholic,  if  I  find  there  what  I  need,  and  what 
I  cannot  find  elsewhere  ?  The  more  I  see  of  this  wor- 
ship, the  more  I  wonder  at  the  exuberance  with  which 
it  adapts  itself  to  all  the  demands  of  human  infirmity. 
If  its  ministers  were  but  a  little  more  than  humane 
above  all  error,  pure  from  all  inicjuity,  what  a  religion 
would  it  be !  " 


Digitized 


by  Google 


HILDA  AND  A  FRIEND.  418 

"  I  need  not  fear  your  conversion  to  the  Catholio 
faith,"  remarked  Kenyon,  "  if  you  are  at  all  aware  of 
the  bitter  sarcasm  implied  in  your  last  observation. 
It  is  very  just.  Only  the  exceeding  ingenuity  of  the 
system  stamps  it  as  the  contrivance  of  man,  or  some 
worse  author;  not  an  emanation  of  the  broad  and 
simple  wisdom  from  on  high." 

"It  may  be  so,"  said  Hilda;  "but  I  meant  no 
sarcasm." 

Thus  conversing,  the  two  friends  went  together 
down  the  grand  extent  of  the  nave.  Before  leaving 
the  church,  they  turned  to  admire  again  its  mighty 
breadth,  the  remoteness  of  the  glory  behind  the  altar, 
and  the  effect  of  visionary  splendor  and  magnificence 
imparted  by  the  long  bars  of  smoky  simshine,  which 
travelled  so  far  before  arriving  at  a  place  of  rest. 

"  Thank  Heaven  for  having  brought  me  hither  I " 
said  Hilda,  fervently. 

Kenyon's  mind  was  deeply  disturbed  by  his  idea  of 
her  Catholic  propensities ;  and  now  what  he  deemed 
her  disproportionate  and  misapplied  veneration  for  the 
sublime  edifice  stung  him  tnto  irreverence. 

"  The  best  thing  I  know  of  St.  Peter's,"  observed 
he,  "  is  its  equable  temperature.  We  are  now  enjoy- 
ing the  coolness  of  last  winter,  which,  a  few  months 
hence,  will  be  the  warmth  of  the  present  summer.  It 
has  no  cure,  I  suspect,  in  all  its  length  and  breadth, 
for  a  sick  soul,  but  it  would  make  an  admirable  at- 
mospheric  hospital  for  sick  bodies.  What  a  delightful 
shelter  would  it  be  for  the  invalids  who  throng  to 
Rome,  where  the  sirocco  steab  away  their  strength, 
and  the  tramontana  stabs  them  through  and  through, 
like  cold  steel  with  a  poisoned  point !  But  within  these 
walls,  the  thermometer  never   Varies.      Winter   a^id 


Digitized 


by  Google 


420  ROMANCE   OF  MONTE  BENT. 

Bttmmer  are  married  at  the  high  altar,  and  dwell  ti> 
gether  in  perfect  harmony." 

*^  Yes,"  said  Hilda ;  ^^  and  I  have  always  felt  this 
soft,  unchanging  climate  of  St.  Peter's  to  be  another 
manifestation  of  its  sanctity." 

"  That  is  not  precisely  my  idea,"  replied  Kenyon. 
^  Bat  what  a  delicions  life  it  would  be,  if  a  colony  of 
people  with  delicate  lungs  —  or  merely  with  delicate 
fancies  —  could  take  up  their  abode  in  tliis  ever-mild 
and  tranquil  air.  These  architectural  tombs  of  the 
popes  might  serve  for  dwellings,  and  each  brazen  se- 
pulchral doorway  would  become  a  domestic  threshold. 
Then  the  lover,  if  he  dared,  might  say  to  his  mistress, 
*Will  you  share  my  tomb  witb  me?'  and,  winning 
her  soft  consent,  he  would  lead  her  to  the  altar,  and 
thence  to  yonder  sepulchre  of  Pope  Gr^ory,  which 
should  be  their  nuptial  home.  What  a  life  would  be 
theirs,  Hilda,  in  their  marble  Eden !  " 

^^It  is  not  kind,  nor  like  yourself,"  said  Hilda, 
gently,  "  to  throw  ridicule  on  emotions  which  are  gen- 
uine. I  revere  this  glorious  church  for  itself  and  its 
purposes ;  and  love  it,  moreover,  because  here  I  have 
found  sweet  peace,  after  a  great  anguish." 

"  Forgive  me,"  answered  the  sculptor,  "  and  I  will 
do  so  no  more.  My  heart  is  not  so  irreverent  as  my 
words." 

They  went  through  the  piazza  of  St.  Peter's  and  the 
adjacent  streets,  silently  at  first ;  but,  before  reaching 
the  bridge  of  St.  Angelo,  Hilda's  flow  of  spirits  began 
to  bubble  forth,  like  the  gush  of  a  streamlet  that  has 
been  shut  up  by  frost,  or  by  a  heavy  stone  over  its 
source.  Kenyon  had  never  found  her  so  delightful  as 
now;  so  softened  out  of  the  chillness  of  her  virgin 
j;nride ;  so  full  of  fresh  thoughts,  at  which  he  was  often 


Digitized 


by  Google 


HILDA  AND  A   FRIEND.  421 

iioved  to  smile,  although,  on  turning  them  over  a  lit- 
tle more,  he  sometimes  discovered  that  they  looked 
fanciful  only  because  so  absolutely  true. 

But,  indeed,  she  was  not  quite  in  a  normal  state. 
Emerging  from  gloom  into  sudden  cheerfulness,  the 
effect  upon  Hilda  was  as  if  she  were  just  now  created^ 
After  long  torpor,  receiving  back  her  intellectual  ac- 
tivity, she  derived  an  exquisite  pleasure  from  the  use 
of  her  faculties,  which  were  set  in  motion  by  causes 
that  seemed  inadequate.  She  continually  brought  to 
Kenyon's  mind  the  image  of  a  child,  making  its  play- 
thing of  every  object,  but  sporting  in  good  faith,  and 
with  a  kind  of  seriousness.  Looldng  up,  for  example, 
at  the  statue  of  St.  Michael,  on  the  top  of  Hadrian's 
castellated  tomb,  Hilda  fancied  an  interview  between 
the  Archangel  and  the  old  emperor's  ghost,  who  was 
naturally  displeased  at  finding  his  mausoleum,  which 
he  had  ordained  for  the  stately  and  solemn  repose  of 
his  ashes,  converted  to  its  present  purposes. 

"  But  St.  Michael,  no  doubt,"  she  thoughtfully  re- 
marked, "would  finally  convince  the  Emperor  Ha- 
drian that  where  a  warlike  despot  is  sown  as  the  seed, 
a  fortress  and  a  prison  are  the  only  possible  crop." 

They  stopped  on  the  bridge  to  look  into  the  swift 
eddying  flow  of  the  yellow  Tiber,  a  mud-puddle  in 
strenuous  motion ;  and  Hilda  wondered  whether  the 
seven  -  branched  golden  candlestick,  —  the  holy  can- 
dlestick of  the  Jews, — which  was  lost  at  the  Ponte 
MoUe,  in  Constantine's  time,  had  yet  been  swept  as 
far  down  the  river  as  this. 

"  It  probably  stuck  where  it  fell,"  said  the  sculptor ; 
•*  and,  by  this  time,  is  imbedded  thirty  feet  deep  in 
the  mud  of  the  Tiber.  Nothing  will  ever  bring  it  ta 
light  again." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


422  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

"  I  fancy  you  are  mistaken,"  replied  Hilda,  smiling; 
^  There  was  a  meaning  and  purpose  in  each  of  its 
seven  branches,  and  such  a  candlestick  cannot  be  lost 
forever.  When  it  is  found  again,  and  seven  lights 
are  kindled  and  burning  in  it,  the  whole  world  will 
gain  the  illumination  which  it  needs.  Would  not  this 
be  an  admirable  idea  for  a  mystic  story  or  parable,  oi 
seven-branched  allegory,  full  of  poetry,  art,  philoso- 
phy, and  religion  ?  It  shall  be  caUed  '  The  Recovery 
of  the  Sacred  Candlestick.'  As  each  branch  is  lighted, 
it  shall  have  a  differently  colored  lustre  from  the 
other  six ;  and  when  all  the  seven  are  kindled,  their 
radiance  shall  combine  into  the  intense  white  light  of 
truth." 

"Positively,  Hilda,  this  is  a  magnificent  concep- 
tion," cried  Kenyon.  "The  more  I  look  at  it,  the 
brighter  it  bums." 

"  I  think  so  too,"  said  Hilda,  enjoying  a  childlike 
pleasure  in  her  own  idea.  "  The  theme  is  better  suited 
for  verse  than  prose ;  and  when  I  go  home  to  America, 
I  will  suggest  it  to  one  of  our  poets.  Or,  seven  poets 
might  write  the  poem  together,  each  lighting  a  sepa- 
rate branch  of  the  Sacred  Candlestick." 

"  Then  you  think  of  going  home  ?  "  Kenyon  asked. 

"Only  yesterday,"  she  replied,  "I  longed  to  flee 
away.  Now,  all  is  changed,  and,  being  happy  again,  1 
should  feel  deep  regret  at  leaving  the  Pictorial  Land. 
But,  I  cannot  tell.  In  Rome,  there  is  something 
dreary  and  awful,  which  we  can  never  quite  escape. 
At  least,  I  thought  so  yesterday." 

When  they  reached  the  Via  Portoghese,  and  ap^ 
proached  Hilda's  tower,  the  doves,  who  were  waiting 
aloft,  flung  themselves  upon  the  air,  and  came  floating 
down  about  her  head.     The  girl  caressed  them,  and 


Digitized 


by  Google 


.     HILDA   AND  A   FRIEND.  428 

responded  to  their  cooings  with  similar  sounds  from 
her  own  lips,  and  with  words  of  endearment;  and 
their  joyful  flutterings  and  airy  little  flights,  evidently 
impelled  by  pure  exuberance  of  spirits,  seemed  to 
show  that  the  doves  had  a  real  sympathy  with  their 
mistress's  state  of  mind.  For  peace  had  descended 
upon  her  like  a  dove. 

Bidding  the  sculptor  farewell,  Hilda  climbed  her 
tower,  and  came  forth  upon  its  summit  to  trim  the 
Virgin's  lamp.  The  doves,  well  knowing  her  custom, 
had  flown  up  thither  to  meet  her,  and  again  hovered 
about  her  head;  and  very  lovetly  was  her  aspect,  in 
the  evening  sunlight,  which  had  little  further  to  do 
with  the  world,  just  then,  save  to  fling  a  golden  glory 
on  Hilda's  hair,  and  vanish. 

Turning  her  eyes  down  into  the  dusky  street  which 
she  had  just  quitted,  Hilda  saw  the  sculptor  still 
there,  and  waved  her  hand  to  him. 

"  How  sad  and  dim  he  looks,  down  there  in  that 
dreary  street  I "  she  said  to  herself.  "  Something 
weighs  upon  his  spirits.  Would  I  could  comfort 
him ! " 

"  How  like  a  spirit  she  looks,  aloft  there,  with  the 
evening  glory  round  her  head,  and  those  winged  crea- 
tures claiming  her  as  akin  to  them ! "  thought  Ken- 
yon,  on  his  part.  "How  far  above  me!  how  unat- 
tainable! Ah,  if  I  could  lift  myself  to  her  region! 
Or,  —  if  it  be  not  a  sin  to  wish  it,  —  would  that  I 
might  draw  her  down  to  an  earthly  fireside !  " 

What  a  sweet  reverence  is  that,  when  a  young  man 
deems  his  mistress  a  little  more  than  mortal,  and  al- 
most chides  himself  for  longing  to  bring  her  close  to 
his  heart !  A  trifling  circumstance,  but  such  as  lovers 
^rnake  much  of,  gave  him  hope.     One  of  the  doves» 


Digitized 


by  Google 


424  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

which  had  been  resting  on  Hilda's  shoulder,  suddenly 
flew  downward,  as  if  recognizing  him  as  its  mistress's 
dear  friend;  and,  perhaps  commissioned  with  an  er- 
rand of  regard,  brushed  his  upturped  fac^  with  its 
wings,  and  again  soared  aloft. 

The  sculptor  watched  the  bird's  return,  -^nd  saw 
Hilda  greet  it  with  a  smile. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XLI. 

SKOW-DBOPS  AND  MAIDENLY  DELIGHTS. 

It  being  still  considerably  earlier  than  the  period  at 
which  artists  and  tourists  are  accustomed  to  assemble 
in  Rome,  the  sculptor  and  Hilda  found  themselves 
comparatively  alone  there.  The  dense  mass  of  native 
Roman  life,  in  the  midst  of  which  they  were,  served 
to  press  them  near  one  another.  It  was  as  if  they  had 
been  thrown  together  on  a  desert  island.  Or,  they 
seemed  to  have  wandered,  by  some  strange  chance,  out 
of  the  common  world,  and  encountered  each  other  in 
a  depopulated  city,  where  there  were  streets  of  lonely 
palaces,  and  unreckonable  treasures  of  beautiful  and 
admirable  things,  of  which  they  two  became  the  sole 
inheritors. 

In  such  circumstances,  Hilda's  gentle  reserve  must 
have  been  stronger  than  her  kindly  disposition  per- 
mitted, if  the  friendship  between  Kenyon  and  herself 
had  not  grown  as  warm  as  a  maiden's  friendship  can 
ever  be,  without  absolutely  and  avowedly  blooming  into 
love.  On  the  sculptor's  side,  the  amaranthine  flower 
was  already  in  full  blow.  But  it  is  very  beautiful, 
though  the  lover's  heart  may  grow  chill  at  the  percep- 
tion, to  see  how  the  snow  will  sometimes  linger  in  a 
virgin's  breast,  even  after  the  spring  is  well  advanced. 
In  such  alpine  soils,  the  summer  will  not  be  antici- 
pated ;  we  seek  vainly  for  passionate  flowers,  and  blos- 
soms of  fervid  hue  and  spicy  fragrance,  finding  only 


Digitized 


by  Google 


426  ROMANCE   OF  MONTE  BENL 

snow-drops  and  sunless  violets,  when  it  is  almost  the 
full  season  for  the  crimson  rose. 

With  so  much  tenderness  as  Hilda  had  in  her  na- 
ture, it  was  strange  that  she  so  reluctantly  admitted  the 
idea  of  love  ;  especially,  as,  in  the  sculptor,  she  found 
both  congeniality  and  variety  of  taste,  and  likenesses 
and  differences  of  character  ;  these  being  as  essential 
as  those  to  any  poignancy  of  mutual  emotion. 

So  Hilda,  as  far  as  Kenyon  could  discern,  still  did 
not  love  him,  though  she  admitted  him  within  the 
quiet  circle  <rf  her  affections  as  a  dear  friend  and  trusty 
counsellor.  If  we  knew  what  is  best  for  us,  or  could 
be  content  with  what  is  reasonably  good,  the  sculptor 
might  well  have  been  satisfied,  for  a  season,  with  this 
calm  intimacy,  which  so  sweetly  kept  him  a  stranger 
in  her  heart,  and  a  ceremonious  guest ;  and  yet  allowed 
him  the  free  enjoyment  of  all  but  its  deeper  recesses. 
The  flowers  that  grow  outside  of  those  minor  sanctities 
have  a  wild,  hasty  charm,  which  it  is  well  to  prove ; 
there  may  be  sweeter  ones  within  the  sacred  precinct, 
but  none  that  will  die  while  you  are  handling  them, 
and  bequeath  you  a  delicious  legacy,  as  these  do,  in 
the  perception  of  their  evanescence  and  unreality. 

And  this  may  be  the  reason,  after  all,  why  Hilda, 
like  so  many  other  maidens,  lingered  on  the  hither 
side  of  passion ;  her  finer  instinct  and  keener  sensi- 
bility made  her  enjoy  those  pale  delights  in  a  degree 
of  which  men  are  incapable.  She  hesitated  to  grasp 
a  richer  happiness,  as  possessing  already  such  measure 
of  it  as  her  heart  could  hold,  and  of  a  quality  most 
agreeable  to  her  virgin  tastes. 

Certainly,  they  both  were  very  happy.  Kenyon's 
genius,  unconsciously  wrought  upon  by  Hilda's  influ- 
ence, took  a  more  delicate  character  than  heretofore. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SNOW-DROPS  AND  MAIDENLY  DELIGHTS.    427 

He  modelled,  among  other  things,  a  beautiful  little 
statue  of  maidenhood  gathering  a  snow-drop.  It  was 
never  put  into  marble,  however,  because  the  sculptor 
soon  recognized  it  as  one  of  those  fragile  creations 
which  are  true  only  to  the  moment  that  produces 
them,  and  are  wronged  if  we  try  to  imprison  their 
airy  excellence  in  a  permanent  material. 

On  her  part,  Hilda  returned  to  her  customary  occu- 
pations with  a  fresh  love  for  them,  and  yet  with  a 
deeper  look  into  the  heart  of  things ;  such  as  those 
necessarily  acquire  who  have  passed  from  picture  gal- 
leries into  dungeon  gloom,  and  thence  come  back  to  the 
picture  gallery  again.  It  is  questionable  whether  she 
was  ever  so  perfect  a  copyist  thenceforth.  She  could 
not  yield  herself  up  to  the  painter  so  unreservedly  as 
in  times  past ;  her  character  had  developed  a  sturdier 
quality,  which  made  her  less  pliable  to  the  influence  of 
other  minds.  She  saw  into  the  picture  as  profoundly 
as  ever,  and  perhaps  more  so,  but  not  with  the  devout 
sympathy  that  had  formerly  given  her  entire  posses- 
sion of  the  old  master's  idea.  She  had  known  such 
a  reality,  that  it  taught  her  to  distinguish  inevita- 
bly the  large  portion  tliat  is  unreal,  in  every  work  of 
art.  Instructed  by  sorrow,  she  felt  that  there  is  some- 
thing beyond  almost  all  which  pictorial  genius  has 
produced  ;  and  she  never  forgot  those  sad  wanderings 
from  gallery  to  gallery,  and  from  church  to  church, 
where  she  had  vainly  sought  a  type  of  the  Virgin 
Mother,  or  the  Saviour,  or  saint,  or  martyr,  which  a 
soul  in  extreme  need  might  recognize  as  the  adequate 
one. 

How,  indeed,  should  she  have  found  such  ?  How 
could  holiness  be  revealed  to  the  artist  of  an  age  when 
the  greatest  of  them  put  genius  and  imagination  in 


Digitized 


by  Google 


428  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

the  place  of  spiritual  insight,  and  when,  from  the  pope 
downward,  all  Christendom  was  corrupt? 

Meanwhile,  months  wore  away,  and  Rome  received 
back  that  large  portion  of  its  life-blood  which  runs 
in  the  veins  of  its  foreign  and  temporary  population. 
English  visitors  established  themselves  in  the  hotels, 
and  in  all  the  sunny  suites  of  apartments,  in  the 
streets  convenient  to  the  Piazza  di  Spagna;  the  Eng- 
lish tongue  was  heard  familiarly  along  the  Corso,  and 
English  children  sported  in  the  Pincian  Gardens. 

The  native  Romans,  on  the  other  hand,  like  the 
butterflies  and  grasshoppers,  resigned  themselves  to 
the  short,  sharp  misery  which  winter  brings  to  a  peo- 
ple whose  arrangements  are  made  almost  exclusively 
with  a  view  to  summer.  Keeping  no  fire  within- 
doors, except  possibly  a  spark  or  two  in  the  kitchen, 
they  crept  out  of  their  cheerless  houses  into  the  nar- 
row, sunless,  sepulchral  streets,  bringing  their  firesides 
along  with  them,  in  the  shape  of  little  earthen  pots, 
vases,  or  pipkins,  full  of  lighted  charcoal  and  warm 
ashes,  over  which  they  held  their  tingling  finger-ends. 
Even  in  this  half-torpid  wretchedness,  they  still  seemed 
to  dread  a  pestilence  in  the  sunshine,  and  kept  on  the 
shady  side  of  the  piazzas,  as  scrupulously  as  in  sum- 
mer. Through  the  open  doorways  —  no  need  to  shut 
them  when  the  weather  within  was  bleaker  than  with- 
out—  a  glimpse  into  the  interior  of  their  dwellings 
showed  the  uncarpeted  brick  floors,  as  dismal  as  the 
pavement  of  a  tomb. 

They  drew  their  old  cloaks  about  them,  neverthe- 
less, and  threw  the  comers  over  their  shoulders,  with 
the  dignity  of  attitude  and  action  that  have  come 
down  to  these  modem  citizens,  as  their  sole  inheri- 
tance from  the  togated  nation.      Somehow  or  other, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SNOW-DROPS  AND  MAIDENLY  DELIGHTS.    429 

they  managed  to  keep  up  their  poor,  frost-bitten  hearts 
against  the  pitiless  atmosphere  with  a  quiet  and  un- 
complaining endurance  that  really  seems  the  most  re- 
spectable point  in  the  present  Roman  character.  For, 
:n  New  England,  or  in  Russia,  or  scarcely  in  a  hut  of 
the  Esquimaux,  there  is  no  such  discomfort  to  be 
borne  as  by  Romans  in  wintry  weather,  when  the 
orange-trees  bear  icy  fruit  in  the  gardens ;  and  when 
the  rims  of  all  the  fountains  are  shaggy  with  icicles, 
and  the  Fountain  of  Trevi  skimmed  almost  across 
with  a  glassy  surface  ;  and  when  there  is  a  slide  in  the 
piazza  of  St.  Peter's,  and  a  fringe  of  brown,  frozen 
foam  along  the  eastern  shore  of  the  Tiber,  and  some- 
times a  fall  of  great  snow-flakes  into  the  dreary  lanes 
and  alleys  of  the  miserable  city.  Cold  blasts,  that 
bring  death  with  them,  now  blow  upon  the  shivering 
invalids,  who  came  hither  in  the  hope  of  breathing 
balmy  airs. 

Wherever  we  pass  our  summers,  may  all  our  in- 
clement months,  from  November  to  April,  henceforth 
be  spent  in  some  country  that  recognizes  winter  as  an 
integral  portion  of  its  year ! 

Now,  too,  there  was  especial  discomfort  in  the  stately 
picture  galleries,  where  nobody,  indeed,  —  not  the 
princely  or  priestly  founders,  nor  any  who  have  in- 
herited their  cheerless  magnificence,  —  ever  dreamed 
of  such  an  impossibility  as  fireside  warmth,  since 
those  great  palaces  were  built.  Hilda,  therefore,  find- 
ing her  fingers  so  much  benumbed  that  the  spiritual 
influence  could  not  be  transmitted  to  them,  was  per- 
suaded to  leave  her  easel  before  a  picture,  on  one  of 
these  wintry  days,  and  pay  a  visit  to  Kenyon' s  studio. 
But  neither  was  the  studio  anything  better  than  a  dis- 
mal den,  with  its  marble  shapes  shivering  around  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


430  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

walls,  cold  as  the  snow-images  which  the  sculptor  used 
to  model  in  his  boyhood,  and  sadly  behold  them, weep 
themselves  away  at  the  first  thaw. 

Kenyon's  Roman  artisans,  all  this  while,  had  been 
at  work  on  the  Cleopatra.  The  fierce  Egyptian  queen 
had  now  struggled  almost  out  of  the  imprisoning  stone ; 
or,  rather,  the  workmen  had  found  her  within  the  mass 
of  marble,  imprisoned  there  by  magic,  but  still  fervid 
to  the  touch  with  fiery  life,  the  fossil  woman  of  an  age 
that  produced  statelier,  stronger,  and  more  passionate 
creatures  than  our  own.  You  already  felt  her  com- 
pressed heat,  and  were  aware  of  a  tiger-like  character 
even  in  her  repose.  If  Octavius  should  make  his  ap- 
pearance, though  the  marble  still  held  her  within  its 
embrace,  it  was  evident  that  she  would  tear  herself 
forth  in  a  twinkling,  either  to  spring  enraged  at  his 
throat,  or,  sinking  into  his  arms,  to  make  one  more 
proof  of  her  rich  blandishments,  or,  falling  lowly  at 
his  feet,  to  try  the  efficacy  of  a  woman's  tears. 

"  I  am  ashamed  to  tell  you  how  much  I  admire  this 
statue,"  said  Hilda.  "  No  other  sculptor  could  have 
done  it." 

**  This  is  very  sweet  for  me  to  hear,"  replied  Ken- 
yon  ;  "  and  since  your  reserve  keeps  you  from  saying 
more,  I  shall  imagine  you  expressing  everything  that 
an  artist  would  wish  to  hear  said  about  his  work." 

"  You  will  not  easily  go  beyond  my  genuine  opin- 
ion," answered  Hilda,  with  a  smile. 

"  Ah,  your  kind  word  makes  me  very  happy,"  said 
the  sculptor,  "  and  I  need  it,  just  now,  on  behalf  of 
my  Cleopatra.  That  inevitable  period  has  come,  — 
for  I  have  found  it  inevitable,  in  regard  to  all  my 
works,  —  when  I  look  at  what  I  fancied  to  be  a  statue, 
lacking  only  brtoth  to  make  it  live,  and  find  it  a  mere 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SNOW-DROPS  AND  MAIDENLY  DELIGHTS.    431 

lump  of  senseless  stone,  into  which  I  have  not  really 
succeeded  in  moulding  the  spiritual  part  of  my  idea. 
I  should  like,  now,  —  only  it  would  be  such  shameful 
treatment  for  a  discrowned  queen,  and  my  own  off- 
spring too,  —  I  should  like  to  hit  poor  Cleopatra  a  bit- 
ter blow  on  her  Egyptian  nose  with  this  mallet." 

"  That  is  a  blow  which  all  statues  seem  doomed  to 
receive,  sooner  or  later,  though  seldom  from  the  hand 
that  sculptured  them,"  said  Hilda,  laughing.  "But 
you  must  not  let  yourself  be  too  much  disheartened  by 
the  decay  of  your  faith  in  what  you  produce.  I  have 
heard  a  poet  express  similar  distaste  for  his  own  most 
exquisite  poem,  and  I  am  afraid  that  this  final  despair, 
and  sense  of  short-coming,  must  always  be  the  reward 
and  punishment  of  those  who  try  to  grapple  with  a 
great  or  beautiful  idea.  It  only  proves  that  you  have 
been  able  to  imagine  things  too  high  for  mortal  facul- 
ties to  execute.  The  idea  leaves  you  an  imperfect 
image  of  itself,  which  you  at  first  mistake  for  the 
ethereal  reality,  but  soon  find  that  the  latter  has  es- 
caped out  of  your  closest  embrace." 

"  And  the  only  consolation  is,"  remarked  Kenyon, 
^  that  the  blurred  and  imperfect  image  may  still  make 
a  very  respectable  appearance  in  the  eyes  of  those  who 
have  not  seen  the  original." 

*'  More  than  that,"  rejoined  Hilda ;  "  for  there  is  a 
class  of  spectators  whose  sympathy  will  help  them  to 
see  the  perfect  through  a  mist  of  imperfection.  No- 
Dody,  I  think,  ought  to  read  poetry,  or  look  at  pic- 
tures or  statues,  who  cannot  find  a  great  deal  more  in 
them  than  the  poet  or  artist  has  actually  expressed. 
Their  highest  merit  is  suggestiveness." 

*'  You,  Hilda,  are  yourself  the  only  critic  in  whom 
I  have  much  faith,"  said  Kenyon.  "Had  you  con* 
demned  Cleopatra,  nothing  should  have  saved  her." 

Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC 


482  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENI. 

"  You  invest  me  with  such  an  awful  responsibility,** 
she  replied,  ^'that  I  shall  not  dare  to  say  a  single 
word  about  your  other  works." 

"  At  least,"  said  the  sculptor,  "  tell  me  whether  you 
recognize  this  bust  ?  " 

He  pointed  to  a  bust  of  Donatello.  It  was  not  the 
one  which  Kenyon  had  begun  to  model  at  Monte 
Beni,  but  a  reminiscence  of  the  Count's  face,  wrought 
under  the  influence  of  all  the  sculptor's  knowledge  of 
his  history,  and  of  his  personal  and  hereditary  char- 
acter. It  stood  on  a  wooden  pedestal,  not  nearly  fin- 
ished,  but  with  fine  white  dust  and  small  chips  of  mar- 
ble scattered  about  it,  and  itself  incrusted  all  round 
with  the  white,  shapeless  substance  of  the  block.  In 
the  midst  appeared  the  features,  lacking  sharpness, 
and  very  much  resembling  a  fossil  countenance,  —  but 
we  have  already  used  this  simile,  in  reference  to  Cleo- 
patra,—  with  the  accumulations  of  long -past  ages 
clinging  to  it. 

And  yet,  strange  to  say,  the  face  had  an  expression, 
^nd  a  more  recognizable  one  than  Kenyon  had  suc- 
ceeded in  putting  into  the  clay  model  at  Monte  Beni. 
The  reader  is  probably  acquainted  with  Thorwaldsen's 
three-fold  analogy,  —  the  clay  model,  the  Life;  the 
plaster  cast,  the  Death ;  and  the  sculptured  marble,  the 
Resurrection, —  and  it  seemed  to  be  made  good  by  the 
spirit  that  was  kindling  up  these  imperfect  features, 
like  a  lambent  flame. 

'*  I  was  not  quite  sure,  at  first  glance,  that  I  knew 
the  face,  "  observed  Hilda  ;  "  the  likeness  surely  is  not 
a  striking  one.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  external  re- 
semblance, still,  to  the  features  of  the  Faun  of  Praxit- 
eles, between  whom  and  Donatello,  you  know,  we  once 
insisted  that  there  was  a  perfect  twin  -  brotherhoocL 
But  the  expression  is  now  so  very  different  I  " 


Digitized 


by  Google 


SNOW-DROPS  AND  MAIDENLY  DELIGHTS.    488' 

"  What  do  you  take  it  to  be  ?"  asked  the  sculptor. 

"  I  hardly  know  how  to  define  it,"  she  answered. 
"But  it  has  an  effect  as  if  I  could  see  this  counte- 
nance gradually  brightening  while  I  look  at  it.  It 
gives  the  impression  of  a  growing  intellectual  power 
and  moral  sense.  Donatello's  face  used  to  evince  lit- 
tle more  than  a  genial,  pleasurable  sort  of  vivacity, 
and  capability  of  enjoyment.  But,  here,  a  soul  is  be- 
ing breathed  into  him  ;  it  is  the  Faun,  but  advancing 
towards  a  state  of  higher  development." 

"  Hilda,  do  you  see  all  this  ?  "  exclaimed  Kenyon, 
in  considerable  surprise.  "  I  may  have  had  such  an 
idea  in  my  mind,  but  was  quite  unaware  that  I  had 
succeeded  in  conveying  it  into  the  marble." 

"  Forgive  me,"  said  Hilda,  "  but  I  question  whether 
this  sti'iking  effect  has  been  brought  about  by  any  skill 
or  purpose  on  the  sculptor's  part.  Is  it  not,  perhaps, 
the  chance  result  of  the  bust  being  just  so  far  shaped 
out,  in  the  marble,  as  the  process  of  moral  growth  had 
advanced  in  the  original  ?  A  few  more  strokes  of  the 
chisel  might  change  the  whole  expression,  and  so  spoil 
it  for  what  it  is  now  worth." 

"  I  believe  you  are  right,"  answered  Kenyon,  thought- 
fully examining  his  work  ;  "  and,  strangely  enough,  it 
was  the  very  expression  that  I  tried  unsuccessfully  to 
produce  in  the  clay  model.  Well ;  not  another  chip 
shall  be  struck  from  the  marble." 

And,  accordingly,  Donatello's  bust  (like  that  rude, 
rough  mass  of  the  head  of  Brutus,  by  Michael  Angelo, 
at  Florence)  has  ever  since  remained  in  an  unfinished 
state.  Most  spectators  mistake  it  for  an  unsuccessful 
attempt  towards  copying  the  features  of  the  Faun  of 
Praxiteles.  One  observer  in  a  thousand  is  conscious 
of  something  more,  and  lingers  long  over  this  mysteri- 

\     vol*.  VI. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


434  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT, 

ous  face,  departing  from  it  reluctantly,  and  with  many 
a  glance  thrown  backward.  What  perplexes  him  is 
the  riddle  tliat  he  sees  propounded  there ;  the  riddle 
of  the  soul's  growth,  taking  its  first  impulse  amid  re- 
morse and  pain,  and  struggling  through  the  incrusta- 
tions of  the  senses.  It  was  the  contemplation  of  this 
imperfect  portrait  of  Donatello  that  originally  inter- 
ested us  in  his  history,  and  impelled  us  to  elicit  from 
Kenyon  what  he  knew  of  his  friend's  adventures. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER    XLII. 

REMINISCENCES   OF  MIRIAM. 

When  Hilda  and  himseM  turned  away  from  the  un- 
finished bust,  the  sculptor's  mind  still  dwelt  upon  the 
reminiscences  which  it  suggested. 

"You  have  not  seen  Donatello  recently,"  he  re- 
marked, "  and  therefore  cannot  be  aware  how  sadly 
he  is  changed." 

"  No  wonder ! "  exclaimed  Hilda,  growing  pale. 

The  terrible  scene  which  she  had  witnessed,  when 
Donatello's  face  gleamed  out  in  so  fierce  a  light,  came 
back  upon  her  memory,  almost  for  the  first  time  since 
she  Imelt  at  the  confessional.  Hilda,  as  is  sometimes 
the  case  with  persons  whose  delicate  organization  re- 
quires a  peculiar  safeguard,  had  an  elastic  faculty  of 
throwing  off  such  recollections  as  would  be  too  painful 
for  endurance.  The  first  shock  of  Donatello's  and 
Miriam's  crime  had,  indeed,  broken  through  the  frail 
defence  of  this  voluntary  forgetfulness ;  but,  once  ena- 
bled to  relieve  herself  of  the  ponderous  anguish  over 
which  she  had  so  long  brooded,  she  had  practised  a 
subtile  watchfulness  in  preventing  its  return. 

"  No  wonder,  do  you  say  ?  "  repeated  the  sculptor, 
looking  at  her  with  interest,  but  not  exactly  with  sur- 
prise ;  for  he  had  long  suspected  that  Hilda  had  a 
painful  knowledge  of  events  which  he  himself  little 
more  than  surmised.  "  Then  you  know !  —  you  have 
heard !  But  what  can  you  possibly  have  heard,  and 
through  what  channel?  " 


Digitized 


by  Google 


436  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

"  Nothing  !  "  replied  Hilda,  faintly.  "  Not  one 
word  has  reached  my  ears  from  the  lips  of  any  hu- 
man being.  Let  iis  never  speak  of  it  again !  No,  no  1 
never  again ! " 

"And  Miriam ! "  said  Kenyon,  with  irrepressible  in^ 
terest.     "  Is  it  also  forbidden  to  speak  of  her  ?  " 

"Hush  I  do  not  even  utter  her  name  !  Try  not  to 
think  of  it !  "  Hilda  whispered.  "  It  may  bring  terri- 
ble consequences  I " 

"  My  dear  Hilda ! "  exclaimed  Kenyon,  regarding 
her  with  wonder  and  deep  sympathy.  "My  sweet 
friend,  have  you  had  this  secret  hidden  in  your  deli- 
cate, maidenly  heart,  through  all  these  many  months ! 
No  wonder  that  your  life  was  withering  out  of  you." 

"  It  was  so,  indeed  !  "  said  Hilda,  shuddering. 
"  Even  now,  I  sicken  at  the  recollection." 

"  And  how  could  it  have  come  to  your  knowledge  ?  " 
continued  the  sculptor.  "  But,  no  matter  I  Do  not 
torture  yourself  with  referring  to  the  subject.  Only, 
if  at  any  time  it  should  be  a  relief  to  you,  remember 
that  we  can  speak  freely  together,  for  Miriam  has  her- 
self suggested  a  confidence  between  us." 

"  Miriam  has  suggested  this !  "  exclaimed  Hilda. 
"  Yes,  I  remember,  now,  her  advising  that  the  secret 
should  be  shared  with  you.  But  I  have  survived  the 
death-struggle  that  it  cost  me,  and  need  make  no  fur- 
ther-revelations. And  Miriam  has  spoken  to  you  1 
What  manner  of  woman  can  she  be,  who,  after  shar- 
ing in  such  a  deed,  can  make  it  a  topic  of  conversation 
with  her  friends  ?  " 

"  Ah,  Hilda,"  replied  Kenyon,  "  you  do  not  know, 
for  you  could  never  learn  it  from  your  own  heart, 
which  is  all  purity  and  rectitude,  what  a  mixture  of 
good  there  may  be  in  things  evil ;  and  how  the  great- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


REMINISCENCES  OF  MIRIAM.  437 

est  criminal,  if  you  look  at  his  conduct  from  his  own 
point  of  view,  or  from  any  side-point,  may  seem  not  so 
unquestionably  guilty,  after  all.  So  with  Miriam  ;  so 
with  Donatello.  They  are,  perhaps,  partners  in  what 
we  must  call  awful  guilt ;  and  yet,  I  will  own  to  you, 
—  when  I  think  of  the  original  cause,  the  motives, 
the  feelings,  the  sudden  concurrence  of  circumstanced? 
thrusting  them  onward,  the  urgency  of  the  moment, 
and  the  sublime  unselfishness  on  either  part,  —  I  know 
not  well  how  to  distinguish  it  from  much  that  the 
world  calls  heroism.  Might  we  not  render  some  such 
Verdict  as  this? — *  Worthy  of  Death,  but  not  un- 
worthy of  Love ! ' " 

"  Never ! "  answered  Hilda,  looking  at  the  matter 
through  the  clear  crystal  medium  of  her  own  integrity. 
"  This  thing,  as  regards  its  causes,  is  all  a  mystery  to 
me,  and  must  remain  so.  But  there  is,  I  believe,  only 
one  right  and  one  wrong ;  and  I  do  not  understand, 
and  may  God  keep  me  from  ever  understanding,  how 
two  things  so  totally  unlike  can  be  mistaken  for  one 
another ;  nor  how  two  mortal  foes,  as  Right  and 
Wrong  surely  are,  can  work  together  in  the  same 
deed.  This  is  my  faith ;  and  I  should  be  led  astray, 
if  you  could  persuade  me  to  give  it  up." 

"Alas  for  poor  hinnan  nature,  then ! "  said  Kenyon, 
sadly,  and  yet  half  smiling  at  Hilda's  unworldly  and 
impracticable  theory.  "  I  always  felt  you,  my  dear 
friend,  a  terribly  severe  judge,  and  have  been  per- 
plexed to  conceive  how  such  tender  sympathy  could 
coexist  with  the  remorselessness  of  a  steel  blade.  You 
need  no  mercy,  and  therefore  know  not  how  to  show 
any." 

"  That  sounds  like  a  bitter  gibe,"  said  Hilda,  with 
the  tears  springing  into  her  eyes.      "But  I  cannot 


Digitized 


by  Google 


438  ROMANCE   OF  MONTE  BENT. 

help  it.  It  does  not  alter  my  perception  of  th»  truth. 
If  there  be  any  such  dreadful  mixture  of  good  and 
evil  as  you  a£Brm,  —  and  which  appears  to  me  almost 
more  shocking  than  pure  evil,  —  then  the  good  is 
turned  to  poison,  not  the  evil  to  wholesomeness." 

The  sculptor  seemed  disposed  to  say  something 
more,  but  yielded  to  the  gentle  steadfastness  with 
which  Hilda  declined  to  listen.  She  grew  very  sad  ; 
for  a  reference  to  this  one  dismal  topic  had  set,  as  it 
were,  a  prison-door  ajar,  and  allowed  a  throng  of  tor- 
turing recollections  to  escape  from  their  dimgeons 
into  the  pure  air  and  white  radiance  of  her  soul.  She 
bade  Kenyon  a  briefer  farewell  than  ordinary,  and 
went  homeward  to  her  tower. 

In  spite  of  her  efforts  to  withdraw  them  to  other 
subjects,  her  thoughts  dwelt  upon  Miriam ;  and,  as 
had  not  heretofore  happened,  they  brought  with  them 
a  painful  doubt  whether  a  wrong  had  not  been  com- 
mitted on  HUda's  part,  towards  the  friend  once  so  be- 
loved. Something  that  Miriam  had  said,  in  their  final 
conversation,  recurred  to  her  memory,  and  seemed 
now  to  deserve  more  weight  than  Hilda  had  assigned 
to  it,  in  her  horror  at  the  crime  just  perpetrated.  It 
was  not  that  the  deed  looked  less  wicked  and  terrible 
in  the  retrospect ;  but  she  asked  herself  whether  there 
were  not  other  questions  to  be  considered,  aside  from 
that  single  one  of  Miriam's  guilt  or  innocence  ;  as,  for 
example,  whether  a  close  bond  of  friendship,  in  which 
we  once  voluntarily  engage,  ought  to  be  severed  on  ac- 
count of  any  unworthiness,  which  we  subsequently  de- 
tect in  our  friend.  For,  in  these  imions  of  hearts,  — 
call  them  marriage,  or  whatever  else,  —  we  take  each 
other  for  better  for  worse.  Availing  ourselves  of  our 
friend's  intimate  affection,  we  pledge  our  own,  as  to  be 


Digitized 


by  Google 


REMimSCENCES  OF  MIRIAM.  489 

relied  upon  in  every  emergency.  And  what  sadder, 
more  desperate  emergency  could  there  be,  than  had  be- 
fallen Miriam  ?  Who  more  need  the  tender  succor  of 
I  the  innocent,  than  wretches  stained  with  guilt !  And 
/must  a  selfish  care  for  the  spodessness  of  our  own  gar- 
ments keep  us  from  pressing  the  guilty  ones  close  to 
our  hearts,  wherein,  for  the  very  reason  that  we  are 
innocent,  lies  their  securest  refuge  from  further  ill  ? 

It  was  a  sad  thing  for  Hilda  to  find  this  moral  en- 
igma propounded  to  her  conscience  ;  and  to  feel  that, 
whichever  way  she  might  settle  it,  there  would  be  a 
cry  of  wrong  on  the  other  side.  Still,  the  idea  stub- 
bornly came  back,  that  the  tie  between  Miriam  and 
herself  had  been  real,  the  affection  true,  and  that 
therefore  the  implied  compact  was  not  to  be  shaken 
off. 

"Miriam  loved  me  well,"  thought  Hilda,  remorse- 
fully, "  and  I  failed  her  at  her  sorest  need." 

Miriam  loved  her  well;  and  not  less  ardent  had 
been  the  affection  which  Miriam's  warm,  tender,  and 
generous  characteristics  had  excited  in  Hilda''s  more 
reserved  and  quiet  nature.  It  had  never  been  extin- 
guished ;  for,  in  part,  the  wretchedness  which  Hilda 
had  since  endured  was  but  the  struggle  and  writhing 
of  her  sensibility,  still  yearning  towards  her  friend. 
And  now,  at  the  earliest  encouragement,  it  awoke 
again,  and  cried  out  piteously,  complaining  of  the  vio- 
lence that  had  been  done  it. 

Recurring  to  the  delinquencies  of  which  she  fancied 
(we  say  "  fancied,"  because  we  do  not  unhesitatingly 
adopt  Hilda's  present  view,  but  rather  suppose  her 
misled  by  her  feelings)  —  of  which  she  fancied  herself 
guilty  towards  her  friend,  she  suddenly  remembered 
a  sealed  packet  that  Miriam  had  confided  to  her.     It 


Digitized 


by  Google 


440  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  DENT. 

had  been  put  into  her  hands  with  earnest  injunctions 
of  secrecy  and  care,  and  if  unclaimed  after  a  certain 
period,  was  to  be  delivered  according  to  its  address. 
Hilda  had  forgotten  it ;  or,  rather,  she  had  kept  the 
thought  of  this  commission  in  the  background  of  her 
consciousness,  with  all  other  thoughts  referring  to 
Miriam. 

But  now  the  recollection  of  this  packet,  and  the  evi- 
dent stress  which  Miriam  laid  upon  its  delivery  at  the 
specified  time,  impelled  Hilda  to  hurry  up  the  stair- 
case of  her  tower,  dreading  lest  the  period  should 
already  have  elapsed. 

No ;  the  hour  had  not  gone  by,  but  was  on  tiie  very 
point  of  passing.  Hilda  read  the  brief  note  of  in- 
struction, on  a  comer  of  the  envelope,  and  discovered, 
that,  in  case  of  Miriam's  absence  from  Rome,  the 
packet  was  to  be  taken  to  its  destination  that  very 
day. 

"  How  nearly  I  had  violated  my  promise !  "  said 
Hilda.  "  And,  since  we  are  separated  forever,  it  has 
the  sacredness  of  an  injunction  from  a  dead  friend. 
There  is  no  time  to  be  lost." 

So  Hilda  set  forth  in  the  decline  of  the  afternoon, 
and  pursued  her  way  towards  the  quarter  of  the  city 
in  which  stands  the  Palazzo  Cenci.  Her  habit  of  self- 
reliance  was  so  simply  strong,  so  natural,  and  now  so 
well  established  by  long  use,  that  the  idea  of  peril  sel- 
dom or  never  occurred  to  Hilda,  in  her  lonely  life. 

She  differed,  in  this  particular,  from  the  generality 
of  her  sex  ;  although  the  customs  and  character  of  her 
native  land  often  produce  women  who  meet  the  world 
with  gentle  fearlessness,  and  discover  that  its  terrors 
have  been  absurdly  exaggerated  by  the  tradition  of 
mankind.   In  ninety-nine  cases  out  of  a  hundred,  tho 


Digitized 


by  Google 


REMINISCENCES  OF  MIRIAM.  441 

apprehensiveness  of  women  is  quite  gratuitous.  Even 
as  matters  now  stand,  they  are  really  safer  in  peril- 
ous situations  and  emergencies  than  men ;  and  might 
be  still  more  so,  if  they  trusted  themselves  more  con- 
fidingly to  the  chivalry  of  manhood.  In  all  her  wan- 
derings about  Rome,  Hilda  had  gone  and  returned 
as  securely  as  she  had  been  accustomed  to  tread  the 
familiar  street  of  her  New  England  village,  where 
every  face  wore  a  look  of  recognition.  With  respect 
to  whatever  was  evil,  foul,  and  ugly,  in  this  populous 
and  corrupt  city,  she  trod  as  if  invisible,  and  not  only 
so,  but  blind.  She  was  altogether  unconscious  of  any- 
thing wicked  that  went  along  the  same  pathway,  but 
without  jostling  or  impeding  her,  any  more  than  gross 
substance  hinders  the  wanderings  of  a  spirit.  Thus  it 
is,  that,  bad  as  the  world  is  said  to  have  grown,  inno- 
cence continues  to  make  a  paradise  around  itself,  and 
keep  it  still  unfallen. 

Hilda's  present  expedition  led  her  into  what  was  — 
physically,  at  least  —  the  foulest  and  ugliest  part  of 
Rome.  In  that  vicinity  lies  the  Ghetto,  where  thou- 
sands of  Jews  are  crowded  within  a  narrow  compass, 
and  lead  a  close,  unclean,  and  multitudinous  life,  re- 
sembling that  of  maggots  when  they  over-populate  a 
decaying  cheese. 

Hilda  passed  on  the  borders  of  this  region,  but  had 
no  occasion  to  step  within  it.  Its  neighborhood,  how* 
ever,  naturally  partook  of  characteristics  like  its  own. 
There  was  a  confusion  of  black  and  hideous  houses, 
piled  massively  out  of  the  ruins  of  former  ages ;  rude 
and  destitute  of  plan,  as  a  pauper  would  build  his 
hovel,  and  yet  displaying  here  and  there  an  arched 
gateway,  a  cornice,  a  pillar,  or  a  broken  arcade,  that 
might  have  adorned  a  palace.    Many  of  the  housesi 


Digitized 


by  Google 


442  -   ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

iodeed,  as  they  stood,  might  once  have  been  palaoesg 
and  possessed  still  a  squalid  kind  of  grandeur.  Dirt 
was  everywhere,  strewing  the  narrow  streets,  and  in- 
crusting  the  tall  shabbiness  of  the  edifices,  from  the 
foimdations  to  the  roofs ;  it  lay  upon  the  thresholds, 
and  looked  out  of  the  windows,  and  assumed  the  guise 
of  human  life  in  the  children  that  seemed  to  be  engen- 
dered out  of  it.  Their  father  was  the  sun,  and  their 
mother  —  a  heap  of  S.oman  mud. 

It  is  a  question  of  speculative  interest,  whether  the 
ancient  Romans  were  as  unclean  a  people  as  we  every- 
where find  those  who  have  succeeded  them.  There 
appears  to  be  a  kind  of  malignant  spell  in  the  spots 
that  have  been  inhabited  by  these  masters  of  the 
world,  or  made  famous  in  their  history ;  an  inherited 
and  inalienable  curse,  impelling  their  successors  to 
fling  dirt  and  defilement  upon  whatever  temple,  col- 
umn, ruined  palace,  or  triumphal  arch  may  be  nearest 
at  hand,  and  on  every  monument  that  the  old  Romans 
built.  It  is  most  probably  a  classic  trait,  regularly 
transmitted  downward,  and  perhaps  a  little  nuxlified 
by  the  better  civilization  of  Christianity  ,•  so  that 
Caesar  may  have  trod  narrower  and  filthier  ways  in 
his  path  to  the  Capitol,  than  even  those  of  modem 
Rome. 

As  the  paternal  abode  of  Beatrice,  the  gloomy  old 
palace  of  the  Cencis  had  an  interest  for  Hilda,  al- 
though not  sufficiently  strong,  hitherto,  to  overcome 
the  disheartening  effect  of  the  exterior,  and  draw  her 
over  its  threshold.  The  adjacent  piazza,  of  poor  as- 
pect, contained  only  an  old  woman  selling  roasted 
ehestnuts  and  baked  squash-seeds  ;  she  looked  sharply 
at  Hilda,  and  inquired  whether  she  had  lost  her  way* 

**  No,"  said  Hilda;  "  I  seek  the  Palazzo  Cenci/' 


Digitized 


by  Google 


REMINISCENCES  OF  MIRIAM.  44? 

**  Yonder  it  is,  fair  signorina,"  replied  the  Roman 
matron.  "  If  you  wish  that  packet  delivered,  which  I 
see  in  your  hand,  my  grandson  Pietro  shall  run  with 
it  for  a  baiocco.  The  Cenci  palace  is  a  spot  of  iU- 
omen  for  young  maidens." 

Hilda  thanked  the  old  dame,  but  alleged  the  neces- 
sity of  doing  her  eiTand  in  person.  She  approached 
the  front  of  the  palace,  which,  with  all  its  inmiensity, 
had  but  a  mean  appearance,  and  seemed  an  abode 
which  the  lovely  shade  of  Beatrice  would  not  be  apt  to 
haunt,  unless  her  doom  made  it  inevitable.  Some  sol- 
diers stood  about  the  portal,  and  gazed  at  the  brown- 
haired,  fair-cheeked  Anglo-Saxon  girl,  with  approving 
glances,  but  not  indecorously.  Hilda  began  to  ascend 
the  staircase,  three  lofty  flights  of  which  were  to  be 
surmounted,  before  reaching  the  door  whither  she  was 
bound. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XLTTL 

THE  EXTINCTION  OF  A  LAMP. 

Between  Hilda  aiid  the  sculptor  there  had  been  a 
kind  of  half-expressed  understanding,  that  both  were 
tu  visit  the  galleries  of  the  Vatican  the  day  subsequent 
to  their  meeting  at  the  studio.  Kenyon,  accordingly, 
failed  not  to  be  there,  and  wandered  through  the  vast 
ranges  of  apartments,  but  saw  nothing  of  his  expected 
friend.  The  marble  faces,  which  stand  inniunerable 
along  the  walls,  and  have  kept  themselves  so  calm 
through  the  vicissitudes  of  twenty  centuries,  had  ao 
sympathy  for  his  disappointment ;  and  he,  on  the  other 
hand,  strode  past  these  treasures  and  marvels  of  an* 
tique  art,  with  the  indifference  which  any  preoccupa- 
tion of  the  feelings  is  apt  to  produce,  in  reference  to 
objects  of  sculpture.  Being  of  so  cold  and  pure  a  sub- 
stance, and  mostly  deriving  their  vitality  more  from 
thought  than  passion,  they  require  to  be  seen  through 
a  perfectly  transparent  medium. 

And,  moreover,  Kenyon  had  counted  so  much  upon 
Hilda's  delicate  perceptions  in  enabling  him  to  look 
at  two  or  three  of  the  statues,  about  which  they  had 
talked  together,  that  the  entire  purpose  of  his  visit 
was  defeated  by  her  absence.  It  is  a  delicious  sort  of 
mutual  aid,  when  the  united  power  of  two  sympathetic, 
yet  dissimilar,  intelligences  is  brought  to  bear  upon  a 
poem  by  reading  it  aloud,  or  upon  a  picture  or  statue 
by  viewing  it  in  each  other's  company.     Even  if  not 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  EXTINCTION  OF  A   LAMP.  445 

a  word  of  criticism  be  uttered,  the  insight  of  either 
party  is  wonderfully  deepened,  and  the  comprehension 
broadened ;  so  that  the  inner  mystery  of  a  work  of 
genius,  hidden  from  one,  will  often  reveal  itself  to  two. 
Missing  such  help,  Kenyon  saw  nothing  at  the  Vatican 
which  he  had  not  seen  a  thousand  times  before,  and 
more  perfectly  than  now. 

In  the  chill  of  his  disappointment,  he  suspected  that 
it  was  a  very  cold  art  to  which  he  had  devoted  him- 
self. He  questioned,  at  that  moment,  whether  scidp- 
ture  really  ever  softens  and  warms  the  material  which 
it  handles ;  whether  carved  marble  is  anything  but 
limestone,  after  all ;  and  whether  the  Apollo  Belve- 
dere itself  possesses  any  merit  above  its  physical 
beauty,  or  is  beyond  criticism  even  in  that  generally 
acknowledged  excellence.  In  flitting  glances,  hereto- 
fore, he  had  seemed  to  behold  this  statue,  as  some- 
thing ethereal  and  godlike,  but  not  now. 

Nothing  pleased  him,  unless  it  were  the  group  of 
the  Laocoon,  which,  in  its  immortal  agony,  impressed 
Kenyon  as  a  type  of  the  long,  fierce  struggle  of  man, 
involved  in  the  knotted  entanglements  of  Error  and 
Evil,  those  two  snakes,  which,  if  no  divine  help  inter- 
vene, will  be  sure  to  strangle  him  and  his  children  in 
the  end.  What  he  most  admired  was  the  strange 
calmness  diffused  through  this  bitter  strife ;  so  that  it 
resembled  the  rage  of  the  sea  made  calm  by  its  im- 
mensity, or  the  tumult  of  Niagara  which  ceases  to  be 
tumult  because  it  lasts  forever.  Thus,  in  the  Laocoon, 
the  horror  of  a  moment  grew  to  be  the  fate  of  inter- 
minable ages.  Kenyon  looked  upon  the  group  as  the 
one  triumph  of  sculpture,  creating  the  repose,  which 
is  essential  to  it,  in  the  very  acme  of  turbulent  effort ; 
but,  in  truth,  it  was  his  mood  of  unwonted  despon« 


Digitized 


by  Google 


446  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

dency  that  made  him  so  sensitive  to  the  terrible  mag« 
niHcenee,  as  well  as  to  the  sad  moral,  of  this  work. 
Hilda  herself  could  not  have  helped  him  to  see  it  with 
nearly  such  intelligence. 

A  good  deal  more  depressed  than  the  nature  of  the 
disappointment  warranted,  Kenyon  went  to  his  studio, 
and  took  in  hand  a  great  lump  of  clay.  He  soon 
f oimd,  however,  that  his  plastic  cunning  had  departed 
from  him  for  the  time.  So  he  wandered  forth  again 
into  the  imeasy  streets  of  Rome,  and  walked  up  and 
down  the  Corso,  where,  at  that  period  of  the  day,  a 
throng  of  passers-by  and  loiterers  choked  up  the  nar- 
row sidewalk.  A  penitent  was  thus  brought  in  con- 
tact with  the  sculptor. 

It  was  a  figure  in  a  white  robe,  with  a  kind  of  fea- 
tureless mask  over  the  face,  through  the  apertures  of 
which  the  eyes  threw  an  unintelligible  light.  Such 
odd,  questionable  shapes  are  often  seen  gliding  through 
the  streets  of  Italian  cities,  and  are  understood  to  be 
usually  persons  of  rank,  who  quit  their  palaces,  theit 
gayeties,  their  pomp,  and  pride,  and  assume  the  peni- 
tential garb  for  a  season,  with  a  view  of  thus  expiat- 
ing some  crime,  or  atoning  for  the  aggregate  of  petty 
sins  that  make  up  a  worldly  life.  It  is  their  custom 
to  ask  alms,  and  perhaps  to  measure  the  duration  o; 
their  penance  by  the  time  requisite  to  accimiulate  a 
sum  of  money  out  of  the  little  droppings  of  individual 
charity.  The  avails  are  devoted  to  some  beneficent  or 
religious  purpose ;  so  that  the  benefit  accruing  to  their 
own  souls  is,  in  a  manner,  linked  with  a  good  done, 
or  intended,  to  their  feUow-men.  These  figures  have 
a  ghastly  and  startling  effect,  not  so  much  from  any 
very  impressive  peculiarity  in  the  garb,  as  from  the 
mystery  which  they  bear  about  with  them,  and  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


APOLLO  BELVEDERE 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  EXTINCTION  OF  A  LAMP.  447 

sense  that  there  is  an  acknowledged  sinfukiess  as  the 
nucleus  of  it. 

In  the  present  instance,  however,  the  penitent  asked 
no  alms  of  Kenyon ;  although,  for  the  space  of  a  min- 
ute or  two,  they  stood  face  to  face,  the  hollow  eyes  of 
the  mask  encountering  the  sculptor's  gaze.  But,  just 
as  the  crowd  was  about  to  separate  them,  the  former 
spoke,  in  a  voice  not  unfamiliar  to  Kenyon,  though 
rendered  remote  and  strange  by  the  guilty  veil  through 
which  it  penetrated. 

"  Is  all  well  with  you,  Signore  ?  "  inquired  the  peni- 
tent, out  of  the  cloud  in  which  he  walked. 

"  All  is  well,"  answered  Kenyon.     "  And  with  you  ?  " 

But  the  masked  penitent  returned  no  answer,  being 
borne  away  by  the  pressure  of  the  throng. 

The  sculptor  stood  watching  the  figure,  and  was  al- 
most of  a  mind  to  hurry  after  him  and  follow  up  the 
conversation  that  had  been  begun ;  but  it  occurred  to 
him  that  there  is  a  sanctity  (or,  as  we  might  rather 
term  it,  an  inviolable  etiquette)  which  prohibits  the 
recognition  of  persons  who  choose  to  walk  imder  the 
veil  of  penitence. 

"  How  strange !  "  thought  Kenyon  to  himself.  "  It 
was  surely  DonateUo !  What  can  bring  him  to  Rome^ 
where  his  recollections  must  be  so  painful,  and  his 
presence  not  without  peril  ?  And  Miriam !  Can  she 
have  accompanied  him  ?  " 

He  walked  on,  thinking  of  the  vast  change  in  Dona- 
teUo, since  those  days  of  gayety  and  innocence,  when 
the  young  Italian  was  new  in  Rome,  and  was  just 
beginning  to  be  sensible  of  a  more  poignant  felicity 
than  he  had  yet  experienced,  in  the  sunny  warmth  of 
Miriam's  smile.  The  growth  of  a  soul,  which  the 
sculptor  half  imagined  that  he  had  witnessed  in  his 


Digitized 


by  Google 


448  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

friend,  seemed  hardly  worth  the  heavy  price  that  it 
had  cost,  in  the  sacrifice  of  those  simple  enjoyments 
that  were  gone  forever.  A  creature  of  antique  health* 
fulness  had  vanished  from  the  earth ;  and,  in  his 
stead,  there  was  only  one  other  morbid  and  remorse- 
ful man,  among  millions  that  were  cast  in  the  same 
indistinguishable  mould. 

The  accident  of  thus  meeting  Donatello  —  the  glad 
Faun  of  his  imagination  and  memory,  now  transformed 
into  a  gloomy  penitent  —  contributed  to  deepen  the 
cloud  that  had  fallen  over  Kenyon's  spirits.  It  caused 
him  to  fancy,  as  we  generally  do,  in  the  petty  troubles 
which  extend  not  a  handVbreadth  beyond  our  own 
sphere,  that  the  whole  world  was  saddening  aroimd 
him.  It  took  the  sinister  aspect  of  an  omen,  although 
he  could  not  distinctly  see  what  trouble  it  might  fore- 
bode. 

If  it  had  not  been  for  a  peculiar  sort  of  pique,  with 
which  lovers  are  much  conversant,  a  preposterous 
kind  of  resentment  which  endeavors  to  wreak  itself  on 
the  beloved  object,  and  on  one's  own  heart,  in  requital 
of  mishaps  for  which  neither  is  in  fault,  Kenyon 
might  at  once  have  betaken  himself  to  Hilda's  stu- 
dio, and  asked  why  the  appointment  was  not  kept. 
But  the  interview  of  to-day  was  to  have  been  so  rich 
in  present  joy,  and  its  results  so  important  to  his  fu- 
ture life,  that  the  bleak  failure  was  too  much  for  his 
equanimity.  He  was  angry  with  poor  Hilda,  and  cen- 
sured her  without  a  hearing ;  angry  with  himself,  too, 
and  therefore  inflicted  on  this  latter  criminal  the  se- 
verest penalty  in  his  power ;  angry  with  the  day  that 
was  passing  over  him,  and  would  not  permit  its  lat- 
ter hours  to  redeem  the  disappointment  of  the  morn* 
ing. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  EXTINCTION  OF  A  LAMP.  449 

To  confess  the  truth,  it  had  been  the  sculptor's  pur- 
pose to  stake  all  his  hopes  on  that  interview  in  the 
galleries  of  the  Vatican.  Straying  with  Hilda  through 
those  long  vistas  of  ideal  beauty,  he  meant,  at  last,  to 
utter  himself  upon  that  theme  which  lovers  are  fain 
to  discuss  in  village  lanes,  in  wood-paths,  on  sea-side 
sands,  m  crowded  streets ;  it  little  matters  where,  in- 
deed, since  roses  are  sure  to  blush  along  the.  way,  and 
daisies  and  violets  to  spring  beneath  the  feet,  if  the 
spoken  word  be  graciously  received.  He  was  resolved 
to  make  proof  whether  the  kindness  that  Hilda  evinced 
for  him  was  the  precious  token  of  an  individual  pref- 
erence, or  merely  the  sweet  fragrance  of  her  disposi- 
tion, which  other  friends  might  share  as  largely  as 
himself.  He  would  try  if  it  were  possible  to  take 
this  shy,  yet  frank,  and  innocently  fearless  creature 
captive,  and  imprison  her  in  his  heart,  and  make  her 
sensible  of  a  wider  freedom  there,  than  in  all  the 
world  besides. 

It  was  hard,  we  must  allow,  to  see  the  shadow  of  a 
wintry  sunset  falling  upon  a  day  that  was  to  have 
been  so  bright,  and  to  find  himself  just  where  yester- 
day had  left  him,  only  with  a  sense  of  being  drearily 
balked,  and  defeated  without  an  opportunity  for  strug- 
gle.  So  much  had  been  anticipated  from  these  now 
vanished  hours,  that  it  seemed  as  if  no  other  day  could 
bring  back  the  same  golden  hopes. 

In  a  case  like  this,  it  is  doubtful  whether  Kenyon 
could  have  done  a  much  better  thing  than  he  actually 
did,  by  going  to  dine  at  the  Caf^  Nuovo,  and  drink- 
ing a  flask  of  Montefiascone ;  longing,  the  while,  for  a 
beaker  or  two  of  Donatello's  Sunshine.  It  would  have 
been  just  the  wine  to  cure  a  lover's  melancholy,  by 
illuminating  his  heart  with  tender  light  and  warmth, 

VOL.  VI. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


450  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

and  suggestions  of  undefined  hopes,  too  ethereal  for 
his  morbid  humor  to  examine  and  reject  them. 

No  decided  improvement  resulting  from  the  draught 
of  Montefiascone,  he  went  to  the  Teatro  Argentino, 
and  sat  gloomily  to  see  an  Italian  comedy,  which 
ought  to  have  cheered  him  somewhat,  being  full  of 
glancing  merriment,  and  effective  over  everybody's 
risibilities  except  his  own.  The  sculptor  came  out 
however,  before  the  close  of  the  performance,  as  dis' 
consolate  as  he  went  in. 

As  he  made  his  way  through  the  complication  of 
narrow  streets,  which  perplex  that  portion  of  the  city, 
a  carriage  passed  him.  It  was  driven  rapidly,  but 
not  too  fast  for  the  light  of  a  gas-lamp  to  flare  upon  a 
face  within ;  especially  as  it  was  bent  forward,,  appear- 
ing to  recognize  him,  while  a  beckoning  hand  was 
protruded  from  the  window.  On  his  part,  Kenyon  at 
once  knew  the  face,  and  hastened  to  the  carriage, 
which  had  now  stopped. 

"Miriam!  you  in  Rome?"  he  exclaimed.  "And 
your  friends  know  nothing  of  it  ?  " 

"  Is  all  well  with  you  ?  "  she  asked. 

This  inquiry,  in  the  identical  words  which  Dona- 
tello  had  so  recently  addressed  to  him,  from  beneath 
the  penitent's  mask,  startled  the  sculptor.  Either  the 
previous  disquietude  of  his  mind,  or  some  tone  in  Mir- 
iam's voice,  or  the  unaccountableness  of  beholding  her 
there  at  all,  made  it  seem  ominous. 

"All  is  well,  I  believe,"  answered  he,  doubtfully. 
"  I  am  aware  of  no  misfortune.  Have  you  any  to  an- 
nounce ?  " 

He  looked  still  more  earnestly  at  Miriam,  and  felt 
a  dreamy  uncertainty  whether  it  was  really  herseU  to 
whom   he   spoke*      True ;  there  were  those  beautifu? 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  EXTINCTION  OF  A   LAMP.  451 

features,  the  contour  of  which  he  had  studied  too 
often,  and  with  a  sculptor's  accuracy  of  perception,  to 
be  in  any  doubt  that  it  was  Miriam's  identical  face. 
But  he  was  conscious  of  a  change,  the  nature  of  which 
he  could  not  satisfactorily  define ;  it  might  be  merely 
her  dress,  which,  imperfect  as  the  light  was,  he  saw  to 
be  richer  than  the  simple  garb  that  she  had  usually 
worn.  The  effect,  he  fancied,  was  partly  owing  to  a 
gem  which  she  had  on  her  bosom ;  not  a  diamond,  but 
something  that  glimmered  with  a  clear,  red  lustre,  like 
the  stars  in  a  southern  sky.  Somehow  or  other,  this 
colored  light  seemed  an  emanation  of  herself,  as  if  all 
that  was  passionate  and  glowing,  in  her  native  dispo- 
sition, had  crystallized  upon  her  breast,  and  were  just 
now  scintillating  more  brilliantly  than  ever,  in  sympa- 
thy with  some  emotion  of  her  heart. 

Of  course  there  could  be  no  real  doubt  that  it  was 
Miriam,  his  artist  friend,  with  whom  and  Hilda  he  had 
spent  so  many  pleasant  and  familiar  hours,  and  whom 
he  had  last  seen  at  Perugia,  bending  with  Donatello 
beneath  the  bronze  pope's  benediction.  It  must  be 
that  self-same  Miriam ;  but  the  sensitive  sculptor  felt 
a  difference  of  manner,  which  impressed  him  more 
than  he  conceived  it  possible  to  be  affected  by  so  ex- 
ternal a  thing.  He  remembered  the  gossip  so  preva- 
lent in  Kome  on  Miriam's  first  appearance  ;  how  that 
she  was  no  real  artist,  but  the  daughter  of  an  illus- 
trious or  golden  lineage,  who  was  merely  playing  at 
necessity ;  mingling  with  human  struggle  for  her  pas- 
time ;  stepping  out  of  her  native  sphere  only  for  an 
interlude,  just  as  a  princess  might  alight  from  her 
gilded  equipage  to  go  on  foot  through  a  rustic  lane. 
And  now,  after  a  mask  in  which  love  and  death  had 
performed  their  several  parts,  she  had  :;!;esumed  her 
proper  character. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


452  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

"  Have  you  anything  to  tell  me?  "  cried  he,  impa- 
tiently ;  for  nothing  causes  a  more  disagreeable  vibra- 
tion of  the  nerves  than  this  pcjrception  of  ambiguous- 
ness  in  familiar  persons  or  affairs.  "  Speak ;  for  my 
spirits  and  patience  have  been  much  tried  to-day." 

Miriam  put  her  finger  on  her  lips,  and  seemed  de-i 
sirous  that  Kenyon  should  know  of  the  presence  of  a 
third  person.  He  now  saw,  indeed,  that  there  was 
some  one  beside  her  in  the  carriage,  hitherto  concealed 
by  her  attitude;  a  man,  it  appeared,  with  a  sallow 
Italian  face,  which  the  sculptor  distinguished  biit  im- 
perfectly, and  did  not  recognize. 

"  I  can  tell  you  nothing,''  she  replied ;  and  leaning 
towards  him,  she  whispered, — appearing  then  more 
like  the  Miriam  whom  he  knew  than  in  what  had  be- 
fore passed,  —  "  Only,  when  the  lamp  goes  out  do  not 
despair." 

The  carriage  drove  on,  leaving  Kenyon  to  muse  over 
this  unsatisfactory  interview,  which  seemed  to  have 
served  no  better  purpose  than  to  fill  his  mind  with 
more  ominous  forebodings  than  before.  Why  were 
Donatello  and  Miriam  in  Rome,  where  both,  in  all 
likelihood,  might  have  much  to  dread  ?  And  why  had 
one  and  the  other  addressed  him  with  a  question  that 
seemed  prompted  by  a  knowledge  of  some  calamity, 
either  already  fallen  on  his  unconscious  head,  cr  im- 
pending closely  over  him  ? 

"  I  am  sluggish,"  muttered  Kenyon,  to  himself ;  "  a 
weak,  nerveless  fool,  devoid  of  energy  and  prompti- 
tude ;  or  neither  Donatello  nor  Miriam  could  have  es- 
caped me  thus  !  They  are  aware  of  some  misfortune 
that  concerns  me  deeply.  How  soon  am  I  to  know  it 
too?" 

There  seemed  but  a  single  calamity  possible  to  hap* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  EXTINCTION  OF  A  LAMP.  453 

pen  within  so  narrow  a  sphere  as  that  with  which  the 
sculptor  was  connected ;  and  even  to  that  one  mode  of 
evil  he  could  assign  no  definite  shape,  but  only  felt 
that  it  must  have  some  reference  to  Hilda. 

Flinging  aside  the  morbid  hesitation,  and  the  dally, 
ings  with  his  own  wishes,  which  he  had  permitted  to 
influence  his  mind  throughout  the  day,  he  now  has- 
tened to  tiie  Via  Portoghese,  Soon  the  old  palace 
stood  before  him,  with  its  massive  tower  rising  into 
the  clouded  night ;  obscured  from  view  at  its  midmost 
elevation,  but  revealed  again,  higher  upward,  by  the 
Virgin's  lamp  that  twinkled  on  the  summit.  Feeble 
as  it  was,  in  the  broad,  surrounding  gloom,  that  little 
ray  made  no  inconsiderable  illumination  among  Ken- 
yon's  sombre  thoughts ;  for,  remembering  Miriam's" 
last  words,  a  fantasy  had  seized  him  that  he  should 
find  the  sacred  lamp  extinguished. 

And,  even  while  he  stood  gazing,  as  a  mariner  at 
the  star  in  which  he  put  his  trust,  the  light  quivered, 
sank,  gleamed  up  again,  and  finally  went  out,  leaving 
the  battlements  of  Hilda's  tower  in  utter  darkness. 
For  the  first  time  in  centuries,  the  consecrated  and 
legendary  flame,  before  the  loftiest  shrine  in  S.omA, 
had  ceased  to  bum. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


C3HAPTER  XLIV. 

THE  DBSEBTED  SHRINE. 

Kenton  knew  tiie  sanctity  which  Hilda  (faithfiA 
Protestant,  and  daughter  of  the  Puritans,  as  the  girl 
was)  imputed  to  this  shrine.  He  was  aware  of  the 
profound  feeling  of  responsibility,  as  well  earthly  as 
j-eligious,  with  which  her  conscience  had  been  im- 
pressed, when  she  became  the  occupant  of  her  aerial 
chamber,  and  undertook  the  task  of  keeping  the  con- 
secrated lamp  alight.  There  was  an  accuracy  and  a 
certainty  about  Hilda's  movements,  as  regarded  all 
matters  that  lay  deep  enough  to  have  their  roots  in 
right  or  wrong,  which  made  it  as  possible  and  safe  to 
rely  upon  the  timely  and  careful  trimming  of  this 
lamp  (if  she  were  in  life,  and  able  to  creep  up  the 
steps),  as  upon  the  rising  of  to-morrow's  sun,  with 
lustre  undiminished  from  to-day. 

The  sculptor  could  scarcely  believe  his  eyes,  there- 
fore, when  he  saw  the  flame  flicker  and  expire.  His 
sight  had  surely  deceived  him.  And  now,  since  the 
light  did  not  reappear,  there  must  be  some  smoke- 
wreath  or  impenetrable  mist  brooding  about  the  tow- 
er's gray  old  head,  and  obscuring  it  from  the  lo^^er 
world.  But  no !  For  right  over  the  dim  battlements, 
as  the  wind  chased  away  a  mass  of  clouds,  he  beheld  a 
star,  and,  moreover,  by  an  earnest  concentration  of 
his  sight,  wa»  soon  able  to  discern  even  the  darkened 
Bhrine   itself.     There  was   no  obscurity  around  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  DESERTED  SHRINE.  465 

tower ;  no  infirmity  of  his  own  vision.  The  flame  had 
exhausted  its  supply  of  oil,  and  become  extinct.  But 
where  was  Hilda? 

A  man  in  a  cloak  happened  to  be  passing ;  and  Ken- 
yon —  anxious  to  distrust  the  testimony  of  his  senses, 
if  he  could  get  more  acceptable  evidence  on  the  other 
side  —  appealed  to  him. 

"  Do  me  the  favor,  Signore,"  said  he,  "  to  look  at 
the  top  of  yonder  tower,  and  tell  me  whether  you  see 
the  lamp  burning  at  the  Virgin's  shrine." 

"  The  lamp,  Signore  ?  "  answered  the  man,  without 
at  first  troubling  himself  to  look  up.  "  The  lamp  that 
has  burned  these  four  hundred  years !  how  is  it  possi- 
ble, Signore,  that  it  should  not  be  burning  now  ?  " 

"  But  look ! "  said  the  sculptor,  impatiently. 

With  good-natured  indulgence  for  what  he  seemed 
to  consider  as  the  whim  of  an  eccentric  Forestiero,  the 
Italian  carelessly  threw  his  eyes  upwards ;  but,  as 
soon  as  he  perceived  that  there  was  really  no  light,  he 
lifted  his  hands  with  a  vivid  expression  of  wonder  and 
alarm. 

"  The  lamp  is  extinguished !  "  cried  he.  "  The  lamp 
that  has  been  burning  these  four  hundred  years !  This 
surely  must  portend  some  great  misfortune ;  and,  by 
my  advice,  Signore,  you  will  hasten  hence,  lest  the 
tower  tumble  on  our  heads.  A  priest  once  told  me, 
that,  if  the  Virgin  withdrew  her  blessing,  and  the  light 
went  out,  the  old  Palazzo  del  Torre  would  sink  into 
the  earth,  with  all  that  dwell  in  it.  There  will  be  a 
terrible  crash  before  morning ! " 

The  stranger  made  the  best  of  his  way  from  tha 
doomed  premises ;  while  Kenyon  —  who  would  will- 
ingly have  seen  the  tower  crumble  down  before  his 
eyes,  on  condition  of  Hilda's  safety  —  determined^ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


456  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

late  as  it  was,  to  attempt  ascertainmg  if  she  were  in 
her  dove-cote. 

Passing  through  the  arched  entrance,  —  which,  as 
is  often  the  case  with  Koman  entrances,  was  as  acces- 
sible at  midnight  as  at  noon,  —  he  groped  his  way  to 
the  broad  staircase,  and,  lighting  his  wax  taper,  went 
glimmering  up  the  multitude  of  steps  that  led  to  Hil> 
da's  door.  The  hour  being  so  unseasonable,  he  in^ 
tended  merely  to  knock,  and,  as  soon  as  her  voice  from 
within  should  reassure  him,  to  retire,  keeping  his  ex* 
planations  and  apologies  for  a  fitter  time.  Accord* 
ingly,  reaching  the  lofty  height  where  the  maiden,  as 
he  trusted,  lay  asleep,  with  angels  watching  over  her, 
though  the  Virgin  seemed  to  have  suspended  her  care, 
he  tapped  lightly  at  the  door-panels,  —  then  knocked 
more  forcibly,  —  then  thundered  an  impatient  sum- 
mons. No  answer  came ;  Hilda,  evidently,  was  not 
there. 

After  assuring  himself  that  this  must  be  the  fact, 
Kenyon  descended  the  stairs,  but  made  a  pause  at 
every  successive  stage,  and  knocked  at  the  door  of  its 
apartment,  regardless  whose  slumbers  he  might  dis- 
turb, in  his  anxiety  to  learn  where  the  girl  had  last 
■been  seen.  But,  at  each  closed  entrance,  there  came 
those  hollow  echoes,  which  a  chamber,  or  any  dwell- 
ing,  great  or  small,  never  sends  out,  in  response  to 
human  knuckles  or  iron  hammer,  as  long  as  there  is 
life  within  to  keep  its  heart  from  getting  dreary. 

Once,  indeed,  on  the  lower  landing-place,  the  sculp^ 
tor  fancied  that  there  was  a  momentary  stir,  inside  the 
door,  as  if  somebody  were  listening  at  the  threshold. 
He  hoped,  at  least,  that  the  small,  iron-barred  aper. 
ture  would  be  imclosed,  through  which  Koman  house* 
keepers  are  wont  to  take  careful  cognizance  of  appU* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  DESERTED  SHRINE.  467 

cants  for  admission,  from  a  traditionary  dread,  perhaps, 
of  letting  in  a  robber  or  assassin.  But  it  remained 
shut ;  neither  was  the  soimd  repeated ;  and  Kenyon 
concluded  that  his  excited  nerves  had  played  a  trick 
upon  his  senses,  as  they  are  apt  to  do  when  we  most 
wish  for  the  clear  evidence  of  the  latter. 

There  was  nothing  to  be  done,  save  to  go  heavily 
away,  and  await  whatever  good  or  iU  to-morrow's  day- 
light might  disclose. 

Betimes  in  the  morning,  therefore,  Kenyon  went 
back  to  the  Via  Portoghese,  before  the  slant  rays  of 
the  sun  had  descended  half-way  down  the  gray  front 
of  Hilda's  tower.  As  he  drew  near  its  base,  he  saw 
the  doves  perched  in  full  session,  on  the  sunny  height 
of  the  battlements,  and  a  pair  of  them  —  who  were 
probably  their  mistress's  especial  pets,  and  the  con- 
fidants of  her  bosom-secrets,  if  HUda  had  any  —  came 
shooting  down,  and  made  a  feint  of  alighting  on  his 
shoulder.  But,  though  they  evidently  recognized  him, 
their  shyness  would  not  yet  allow  so  decided  a  demon- 
stration. Kenyon's  eyes  followed  them  as  they  flew 
upward,  hoping  that  they  might  have  come  as  joyful 
messengers  of  the  girl's  safety,  and  that  he  should  dis- 
cern her  slender  form,  half  hidden  by  the  parapet, 
trimming  the  extinguished  lamp  ^t  the  Virgin's  shrine, 
just  as  other  maidens  set  about  the  little  duties  of  a 
household.  Or,  perhaps,  he  might  see  her  gentle  and 
sweet  face  smiling  down  upon  him,  midway  towards 
heaven,  as  if  she  had  flown  thither  for  a  day  or  two, 
j'ust  to  visit  her  kindred,  but  had  been  drawn  earth- 
ward again  by  the  spell  of  unacknowledged  love. 

But  his  eyes  were  blessed  by  no  such  fair  vision  or 
reality ;  nor,  in  truth,  were  tiie  eager,  unquiet  flutter- 
ings  of  the  doves  indicative  of  any  joyful  intelligence, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


458  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENI. 

which  they  longed  to  share  with  Hilda's  friend,  but  of 
anxious  inquiries  that  they  knew  not  how  to  utter. 
They  could  not  tell,  any  more  than  he,  whither  their 
lost  companion  had  withdrawn  herself,  but  were  in  the 
same  void  despondency  with  him,  feeling  their  sunny 
and  airy  lives  darkened  and  grown  imperfect,  now  that 
her  sweet  society  was  taken  out  of  it. 

In  the  brisk  morning  air,  Kenyon  found  it  much 
easier  to  pursue  his  researches  than  at  the  preceding 
midnight,  when,  if  any  slumberers  heard  the  clamor 
that  he  made,  they  had  responded  only  with  sullen  and 
drowsy  maledictions,  and  turned  to  sleep  again.  It 
must  be  a  very  dear  and  intimate  reality  for  which 
people  will  be  content  to  give  up  a  dream.  When  the 
sun  was  fairly  up,  however,  it  was  quite  another  thing. 
The  heterogeneous  population,  inhabiting  the  lower 
floor  of  the  old  tower,  and  the  other  extensive  regions 
of  the  palace,  were  now  willing  to  tell  all  they  knew, 
and  imagine  a  great  deal  more.  The  amiability  of 
these  Italians,  assisted  by  their  sharp  and  nimble  wits, 
caused  them  to  overflow  with  plausible  suggestions,  and 
to  be  very  bounteous  in  their  avowals  of  interest  for 
the  lost  Hilda.  In  a  less  demonstrative  people,  such 
expressions  would  have  implied  an  eagerness  to  search 
land  and  sea,  and  never  rest  till  she  were  found.  In 
the  mouths  that  uttered  them,  they  meant  good  wishes, 
and  were,  so  far,  better  than  indifference.  There  was 
little  doubt  that  many  of  them  felt  a  genuine  kind- 
ness for  the  shy,  brown-haired,  delicate,  young  foreign 
maiden,  who  had  flown  from  some  distant  land  to 
alight  upon  their  tower,  where  she  consorted  only  with 
the  doves.  But  their  energy  expended  itself  in  ex- 
clamation, and  they  were  content  to  leave  all  more 
active  measures  to  Kenyon,  and  to  the  Virgin,  whose 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  DESERTED  SHRINE.  469 

affair  it  was,  to  see  that  the  faithful  votary  of  her 
lamp  received  no  harm. 

In  a  great  Parisian  domicile,  multifarious  as  its  in- 
habitants might  be,  the  concierge  under  the  archway 
would  be  cognizant  of  all  their  incomings  and  issuings 
forth.  But,  except  in  rare  cases,  the  general  entrance 
and  main  staircase  of  a  Roman  house  are  left  as  free 
as  the  street,  of  which  they  form  a  sort  of  by-lane. 
The  sculptor,  therefore,  could  hope  to  find  information 
about  Hilda's  movements  only  from  casual  observers. 

On  probing  the  knowledge  of  these  people  to  the 
bottom,  there  was  various  testimony  as  to  the  period 
when  the  girl  had  last  been  seen.  Some  said  that  it 
was  four  days  since  there  had  been  a  trace  of  her;  but 
an  English  lady,  in  the  second  piano  of  the  palace, 
was  rather  of  opinion  that  she  had  met  her,  the  morn- 
ing before,  with  a  drawing-book  in  her  hand.  Having 
no  acquaintance  with  the  young  person,  she  had  taken 
little  notice  and  might  liave  been  mistaken.  A  count, 
on  the  piano  next  above,  was  very  certain  that  he  had 
lifted  his  hat  to  Hilda,  under  the  archway,  two  after- 
noons ago.  An  old  woman,  who  had  formerly  tended 
the  shrine,  threw  some  light  upon  the  matter,  by  testi- 
fying that  the  lamp  required  to  be  replenished  once, 
at  least,  in  three  days,  though  its  reservoir  of  oil  was 
exceedingly  capacious. 

On  the  whole,  though  there  was  other  evidence 
enough  to  create  some  perplexity,  Kenyon  could  not 
satisfy  himself  that  she  had  been  visible  since  the 
afternoon  of  the  third  preceding  day,  when  a  fruit- 
seller  remembered  her  coming  out  of  the  arched  pas- 
sage, with  a  sealed  packet  in  her  hand.  As  nearly  as 
he  could  ascertain,  this  was  within  an  hour  after  Hilda 
had  taken  leave  of  the  sculptor,  at  his  own  studio, 


Digitized 


by  Google 


460  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

with  the  understanding  that  they  were  to  meet  at  the 
Vatican  the  next  day.  Two  nights,  therefore,  had  in- 
tervened, during  which  the  lost  maiden  was  unac- 
counted for. 

The  door  of  Hilda's  apartments  was  still  locked,  as 
on  the  preceding  night ;  but  Kenyon  sought  out  the 
wife  of  the  person  who  sublet  them,  and  prevailed  on 
her  to  give  him  admittance  by  means  of  the  duplicate 
key,  which  the  good  woman  had  in  her  possession. 
On  entering,  the  maidenly  neatness  and  simple  grace, 
recognizable  in  all  the  arrangements,  made  him  visibly 
sensible  that  this  was  the  daily  haunt  of  a  pure  soul, 
in  whom  religion  and  the  love  of  beauty  were  at  one. 

Thence,  the  sturdy  Roman  matron  led  the  sculptor 
across  a  narrow  passage,  and  threw  open  the  door  of 
a  small  chamber,  on  the  threshold  of  which  he  rever- 
ently paused.  Within,  there  was  a  bed,  covered  with 
white  drapery,  enclosed  with  snowy  curtains,  like  a 
tent,  and  of  barely  width  enough  for  a  slender  figure 
to  repose  upon  it.  The  sight  of  this  cool,  airy,  and 
secluded  bower  caused  the  lover's  heart  to  stir  as  if 
enough  of  Hilda's  gentle  dreams  were  lingering  there 
to  make  him  happy  for  a  single  instant.  But  then 
came  the  closer  consciousness  of  her  loss,  bringing 
along  with  it  a  sharp  sting  of  anguish. 

"  Behold,  Signore,"  said  the  matron ;  "  here  is  the 
little  staircase  by  which  the  signorina  used  to  ascend 
and  trim  the  Blessed  Virgin's  lamp.  She  was  worthy 
to  be  a  Catholic,  such  pains  the  good  child  bestowed 
to  keep  it  burning ;  and  doubtless  the  Blessed  Mary 
will  intercede  for  her,  in  consideration  of  her  pious  of- 
fices, heretic  though  she  was.  What  will  become  of 
the  old  palazzo,  now  that  the  lamp  is  extinguished,  the 
saints  above  us  only  know  I    Will  you  mount,  Signore^ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  DESERTED  SHRINE.  461 

to  the  battlements,  and  see  if  she  have  left  any  trace  of 
herself  there  ?  " 

The  sculptor  stepped  across  the  chamber  and  as- 
cended the  little  staircase,  which  gave  him  access  to 
the  breezy  summit  of  the  tower.  It  affected  him  inex- 
pressibly to  see  a  bouquet  of  beautiful  flowers  beneath 
the  shrine,  and  to  recognize  in  them  an  offering  of  his 
own  to  Hilda,  who  had  put  them  in  a  vase  of  water, 
and  dedicated  them  to  the  Virgin,  in  a  spirit  partly 
fanciful,  perhaps,  but  still  partaking  of  the  religious 
sentiment  which  so  profoundly  influenced  her  charac- 
ter. One  rose-bud,  indeed,  she  had  selected  for  her- 
self from  the  rich  mass  of  flowers ;  for  Kenyon  well 
remembered  recognizing  it  in  her  bosom  when  he  last 
saw  her  at  his  studio. 

"  That  little  part  of  my  great  love  she  took,"  said 
he  to  himself.  "  The  remainder  she  would  have  de- 
voted to  Heaven ;  but  has  left  it  withering  in  the  sun 
and  wind.  Ahl  Hilda,  Hilda,  had  you  given  me  a 
right  to  watch  over  you,  this  evil  had  not  come  I  " 

"  Be  not  downcast,  signorino  mio,"  said  the  Roman 
matron,  in  response  to  the  deep  sigh  which  struggled 
out  of  Kenyon's  breast.  "  The  dear  little  maiden,  as 
we  see,  has  decked  yonder  blessed  shrine  as  devoutly 
as  I  myself,  or  any  other  good  Catholic  woman,  could 
have  done.  It  is  a  religious  act,  and  has  more  than 
the  ef&cacy  of  a  prayer.  The  signorina  will  as  surely 
come  back  as  the  sun  will  fall  through  the  window  to- 
morrow no  less  than  to-day.  Her  own  doves  have 
often  been  missing  for  a  day  or  two,  but  they  were 
sure  to  come  fluttering  about  her  head  again,  when 
she  least  expected  them.  So  will  it  be  with  this  dove- 
like child." 

^^  It  might  be  so,"  thought  Eeuyou,  with  yearning 


Digitized 


by  Google 


462  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

anxiety,  "  if  a  pure  maiden  were  as  safe  as  a  dove,  in 
this  evil  world  of  ours." 

As  they  returned  through  the  studio,  with  the  fur- 
niture and  arrangements  of  which  the  sculptor  was 
familiar,  he  missed  a  small  ebony  writing-desk  that  he 
remembered  as  having  always  been  placed  on  a  table 
there.  He  knew  that  it  was  Hilda's  custom  to  deposit 
her  letters  in  this  desk,  as  weU  as  other  little  objects 
of  which  she  wished  to  be  specially  careful. 

"  What  has  become  of  it  ?  "  he  suddenly  inquired, 
laying  his  hand  on  the  table. 

"  Become  of  what,  pray  ?  "  exclaimed  the  woman,  a 
little  disturbed.  "Does  the  Signore  suspect  a  rob- 
bery, then  ?  " 

"  The  signorina's  writing  -  desk  Is  gone,"  replied 
Kenyon ;  "  it  always  stood  on  this  table,  and  I  myself 
saw  it  there  only  a  few  days  ago." 

"  Ah,  well !  "  said  the  woman,  recovering  her  com- 
posure, which  she  seemed  partly  to  have  lost.  "  The 
signorina  has  doubtless  taken  it  away  with  her.  The 
fact  is  of  good  omen ;  for  it  proves  that  she  did  not 
go  unexpectedly,  and  is  likely  to  return  when  it  may 
best  suit  her  convenience." 

"  This  is  very  singular,"  observed  Kenyon.  "  Have 
the  rooms  been  entered  by  yourself,  or  any  other  per- 
son, since  the  signorina's  disappearance  ?  " 

"  Not  by  me,  Si^ore,  so  help  me  Heaven  and  the 
saints  !  "  said  the  matron.  "  And  I  question  whether 
there  are  more  than  two  keys  in  Rome  that  will  suit 
this  strange  old  lock.  Here  is  one ;  and  as  for  the 
other,  the  signorina  carries  it  in  her  pocket." 

The  sculptor  had  no  reason  to  doubt  the  word  of 
this  respectable  dame.  She  appeared  to  be  well- 
meaning  and  kind-hearted,  as  Roman  matrons  genr 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  DESERTED  SHRINE.  463 

erally  are ;  except  when  a  fit  of  passion  incites  them 
to  shower  horrible  curses  on  an  obnoxious  individual, 
or  perhaps  to  stab  him  with  the  steel  stiletto  that 
serves  them  for  a  hair-pin.  But  Italian  asseverations 
of  any  questionable  fact,  however  true  they  may  chance 
to  be,  have  no  witness  of  their  truth  in  the  faces  of 
those  who  utter  them.  Their  words  are  spoken  with 
strange  earnestness,  and  yet  do  not  vouch  for  them- 
selves as  coming  from  any  depth,  like  roots  drawn  out 
of  the  substance  of  the  soul,  with  some  of  the  soil 
clinging  to  them.  There  is  always  a  something  in- 
scrutable, instead  of  frankness,  in  their  eyes.  In 
short,  they  lie  so  much  like  truth,  and  speak  truth  so 
much  as  if  they  were  telling  a  lie,  that  their  auditor 
suspects  himself  in  the  wrong,  whether  he  believes  or 
disbelieves  them  ;  it  being  the  one  thing  certain,  that 
falsehood  is  seldom  an  intolerable  burden  to  the  ten- 
derest  of  Italian  consciences. 

"  It  is  very  strange  what  can  have  become  of  the 
iesk ! "  repeated  Kenyon,  looking  the  woman  in  the 
face. 

"  Very  strange,  indeed,  Signore,"  she  replied  meekly, 
without  turning  away  her  eyes  in  the  least,  but  check- 
ing his  insight  of  them  at  about  half  an  inch  below 
the  surface.  "  I  think  the  signorina  must  have  taken 
it  with  her." 

It  seemed  idle  to  linger  here  any  longer.  Kenyon 
therefore  departed,  after  making  an  arrangement  with 
the  woman,  by  the  terms  of  which  she  was  to  allow  the 
apartments  to  remain  in  their  present  state,  on  his  as- 
suming the  responsibility  for  the  rent. 

He  spent  the  day  in  making  such  further  search  and 
investigation  as  he  found  practicable  ;  and,  though  at 
first  trammelled  by  an  unwillingness  to  draw  public 


Digitized 


by  Google 


464  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

attention  to  Hilda's  affairs,  the  urgency  of  the  circum- 
stances soon  compelled  him  to  be  thoroughly  in  ear- 
nest. In  the  course  of  a  week,  he  tried  all  conceiva- 
ble modes  of  fathoming  the  mystery,  not  merely  by 
his  personal  efforts  and  those  of  his  brother- artists 
and  friends,  but  through  the  police,  who  readily  under- 
took the  task,  and  expressed  strong  confidence  of  suc- 
cess. But  the  Roman  police  has  very  little  efficiency, 
except  in  the  interest  of  the  despotism  of  which  it  is  a 
tool.  With  their  cocked  hats,  shoulder-belts,  and 
swords,  they  wear  a  sufficiently  imposing  aspect,  and 
doubtless  keep  their  eyes  open  wide  enough  to  track 
a  political  offender,  but  are  too  often  blind  to  private 
outrage,  be  it  murder  or  any  lesser  crime.  Kenyon 
counted  little  upon  their  assistance,  and  profited  by  it 
not  at  all. 

Remembering  the  mystic  words  which  Miriam  had 
addressed  to  him«  he  was  anxious  to  meet  her,  but 
knew  not  whither  she  had  gone,  nor  how  to  obtain  an 
interview  either  with  herself  or  Donatello.  The  daya 
wore  away,  and  still  there  were  no  tidings  of  the  lost 
one ;  no  lamp  rekindled  before  the  Virgin's  shrine ;  no 
light  shining  into  the  lover's  heart ;  no  star  of  Hope 
—  he  was  ready  to  say,  as  h3  turned  his  eyes  almost 
reproachfully  upward  —  in  heaven  itself  1 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XLV. 

THE  FLIGHT  OF  HILDA'S  DQVES. 

Along  with  the  lamp  on  HQda's  tower,  the  sculptor 
now  felt  that  a  light  had  gone  out,  or,  at  least,  was 
ominously  obscured,  to  which  he  owed  whatever  cheer- 
fulness had .  heretofore  illuminated  his  cold,  artistic 
life.  The  idea  of  this  girl  had  been  like  a  taper  of 
virgin  wax,  burning  with  a  pure  and  steady  flame,  and 
chasing  away  the  evil  spirits  out  of  the  magic  circle  of 
its  beams.  It  had  darted  its  rays  afar,  and  modified 
the  whole  sphere  in  which  Kenyon  had  his  being.  Be- 
holding it  no  more,  he  at  once  found  himself  in  dark- 
ness and  astray. 

This  was  the  time,  perhaps,  when  Kenyon  first  be- 
came sensible  what  a  dreary  city  is  Rome,  and  what  a 
terrible  weight  is  there  imposed  on  human  life,  when 
any  gloom  within  the  heart  corresponds  tc  the  spell  of 
ruin,  that  has  been  thrown  over  the  site  of  ancient  em- 
pire. He  wandered,  as  it  were,  and  stumbled  oVer  the 
fallen  columns,  and  among  the  tombs,  and  groped  his 
way  into  the  sepulchral  darkness  of  the  catacombs,  and 
found  no  path  emerging  from  them.  The  happy  may 
well  enough  continue  to  be  such,  beneath  the  brilliant 
sky  of  Rome.  But,  if  you  go  thither  in  melancholy 
mood, — if  you  go  with  a  ruin  in  your  heart,  or  with  a 
vacant  site  there,  where  once  stood  the  airy  fabric  of 
happiness,  now  vanished, —  all  the  ponderous  gloom  of 
the  Roman  Past  will  pile  itself  upon  that  spot,  and 


Digitized 


by  Google 


466  ROMANCE   OF  MONTE  BENL 

crush  you  down  as  with  the  heaped-up  marble  and 
granite,  the  earth-mounds,  and  multitudinous  bricks  of 
\ts  material  decay. 

It  might  be  supposed  that  a  melancholy  man  would 
here  make  acquaintance  with  a  grim  philosophy.  He 
should  learn  to  bear  patiently  his  individual  griefs, 
that  endure  only  for  one  little  lifetime,  when  here  are 
the  tokens  of  such  infinite  misfortune  on  an  imperial 
scale,  and  when  so  many  far  landmarks  of  time,  all 
around  him,  are  bringing  the  remoteness  of  a  thousand 
years  ago  into  the  sphere  of  yesterday.  But  it  is  in 
vain  that  you  seek  this  shrub  of  bitter  sweetness  among 
the  plants  that  root  themselves  on  the  roughness  of 
massive  walls,  or  trail  downward  from  the  capitals  of 
pillars,  or  spring  out  of  the  green  turf  in  the  palace  of 
the  Csesars.  It  does  not  grow  in  Rome ;  not  even  among 
the  five  hundred  various  weeds  which  deck  the  grassy 
arches  of  the  Coliseum.  You  look  through  a  vista  of 
century  beyond  century,  —  through  much  shadow,  and 
a  little  sunshine,  —  through  barbarism  and  civilization, 
alternating  with  one  another  like  actors  that  have  pre- 
arranged their  parts,  —  through  a  broad  pathway  of 
progressive  generations  bordered  by  palaces  and  tem- 
ples, and  bestridden  by  old,  triumphal  arches,  until,  in 
the  distance,  you  behold  the  obelisks,  with  their  unin- 
telligible inscriptions,  hinting  at  a  past  infinitely  more 
remote  than  history  can  define.  Your  own  life  is  as 
nothing,  when  compared  with  that  immeasurable  dis- 
tance ;  but  still  you  demand,  none  the  less  earnestly, 
a  gleam  of  sunshine,  instead  of  a  speck  of  shadow,  on 
the  step  or  two  that  will  bring  you  to  your  quiet  rest. 

How  exceedingly  absurd !  AU  men,  from  the  date 
of  the  earliest  obelisk,  —  and  of  the  whole  world,  more- 
over, since  that  far  epoch,  and  before,  —  have  made  a 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE   FLIGHT  OF  HILDA'S  DOVES.        467 

similar  demand,  and  seldom  had  their  wish.  If  they 
had  it,  what  are  they  the  better  now?  But,  even  while 
you  tauQt  yourself  with  this  sad  lesson,  your  heart  cries 
out  obstreperously  for  its  small  share  of  earthly  hap- 
piness, and  will  not  be  appeased  by  the  myriads  of 
dead  hopes  that  lie  crushed  into  the  soil  of  Rome. 
How  wonderfid  that  this  our  narrow  foothold  of  t^e 
Present  shoidd  hold  its  own  so  constantly,  and,  while 
every  moment  changing,  should  still  be  like  a  rock  be- 
twixt the  encountering  tides  of  the  long  Past  and  the 
infinite  To-come ! 

Man  of  marble  though  he  was,  the  sculptor  grieved 
for  the  Irrevocable.  Looking  back  upon  Hilda's  way 
of  life,  he  marvelled  at  his  own  blind  stupidity,  which 
had  kept  him  from  remonstrating  —  as  a  friend,  if 
with  no  stronger  right  —  against  the  risks  that  she 
continually  encountered.  Being  so  innocent,  she  had 
no  means  of  estimating  those  risks,  nor  even  a  possi- 
bility of  suspecting  their  existence.  But  he — who  had 
spent  years  in  Rome,  with  a  man's  far  wider  scope  of 
observation  and  experience  —  knew  things  that  made 
him  shudder.  It  seemed  to  Kenyon,  looking  through 
the  darkly  colored  medium  of  his  fears,  that  all  modes 
of  crime  were  crowded  into  the  close  intricacy  of  Ro- 
man streets,  and  that  there  was  no  redeeming  element, 
such  as  exists  in  other  dissolute  and  wicked  cities. 

For  here  was  a  priesthood,  pampered,  sensual,  with 
red  and  bloated  cheeks,  and  carnal  eyes.  With  ap- 
parently a  grosser  development  of  animal  life  than 
most  men,  they  were  placed  in  an  unnatural  relation 
with  woman,  and  thereby  lost  the  healthy,  human  con- 
science that  pertains  to  other  human  beings,  who  own 
the  sweet  household  ties  connecting  them  with  wife  and 
daughter.     And  here  was  an  indolent  nobility,  with 


Digitized 


by  Google 


468  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

no  high  aims  or  opportunities,  but  cultivating  a  vicious 
way  of  life,  as  if  it  were  an  art,  and  the  only  one  which 
they  cared  to  learn.  Here  was  a  population,  high  and 
low,  that  had  no  genuine  belief  in  virtue ;  and  if  they 
recognized  any  act  as  criminal,  they  might  throw  off 
all  care,  remorse,  and  memory  of  it,  by  kneeling  a  lit- 
tle while  at  the  confessional,  and  rising  unburdened, 
active,  elastic,  and  incited  by  fresh  appetite  for  the 
next  ensuing  sin.  Here  was  a  soldiery  who  felt  Rome 
to  be  their  conquered  city,  and  doubtless  considered 
themselves  the  legal  inheritors  of  the  foul  license  which 
Gaul,  Goth,  and  Vandal  have  here  exercised  in  days 
gone  by. 

And  what  localities  for  new  crime  existed  in  those 
guilty  sites,  where  the  crime  of  departed  ages  used  to 
be  at  home,  and  had  its  long,  hereditary  haunt !  What 
street  in  Rome,  what  ancient  ruin,  what  one  place 
where  man  had  standing-room,  what  fallen  stone  was 
there,  unstained  with  one  or  another  kind  of  guilt! 
In  some  of  the  vicissitudes  of  the  city's  pride,  or  its 
calamity,  the  dark  tide  of  human  evil  had  swelled  over 
it,  far  higher  than  the  Tiber  ever  rose  against  the  ac- 
clivities of  the  seven  hills.  To  Kenyon's  morbid  view, 
there  appeared  to  be  a  contagious  element,  rising  fog- 
like from  the  ancient  depravity  of  Rome,  and  brood- 
ing over  the  dead  and  half-rotten  city,  as  nowhere  else 
on  earth.  It  prolonged  the  tendency  to  crime,  and  de- 
veloped an  instantaneous  growth  of  it,  whenever  an 
opportunity  was  found.  And  where  could  it  be  found 
so  readily  as  here !  In  those  vast  palaces,  there  were 
a  hundred  remote  nooks  where  Innocence  might  shriek 
in  vain.  Beneath  meaner  houses  there  were  unsus- 
pected dungeons  that  had  once  been  princely  cham- 
bers, and  open  to  the  daylight;   but,  on  account  of 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  FLIGHT  OF  HILDA* S  DOVES.        469 

some  wickedness  there  perpetrated,  each  passing  age 
had  thrown  its  handful  of  dust  upon  the  spot,  and 
buried  it  from  sight.  Only  ruffians  knew  of  its  ex- 
istence, and  kept  it  for  murder,  and  worse  crime. 

Such  was  the  city  through  which  Hilda,  for  three 
years  past,  had  been  wandering  without  a  protector  or 
a  guide.  She  had  trodden  lightly  over  the  crumble  of 
old  crimes ;  she  had  taken  her  way  amid  the  grime 
and  corruption  which  Paganism  had  left  there,  and 
a  pervei*ted  Christianity  had  made  more  noisome ; 
walking  saint-like  through  it  all,  with  white,  innocent 
feet ;  until,  in  some  dark  pitfall  that  lay  right  across 
her  path,  she  had  vanished  out  of  sight.  It  was  ter- 
rible to  imagine  what  hideous  outrage  might  havo 
thrust  her  into  that  abyss ! 

Then  the  lover  tried  to  comfort  himself  with  the 
idea  that  Hilda's  sanctity  was  a  sufficient  safeguard. 
Ah,  yes ;  she  was  so  pure  1  The  angels,  that  were  of 
the  same  sisterhood,  would  never  let  Hilda  come  to 
harm.  A  miracle  would  be  wrought  on  her  behalf,  as 
naturally  as  a  father  would  stretch  out  his  hand  to  save 
a  best-beloved  child.  Providence  would  keep  a  little 
area  and  atmosphere  about  her  as  safe  and  wholesome 
as  heaven  itself,  although  the  flood  of  perilous  iniquity 
might  hem  her  round,  and  its  black  waves  hang  curl- 
ing above  her  head!  But  these  reflections  were  of 
slight  avail.  No  doubt  they  were  the  religious  truth. 
Yet  the  ways  of  Providence  are  utterly  inscrutable ; 
and  many  a  murder  has  been  done,  and  many  an  in< 
nocent  virgin  has  lifted  her  white  arms,  beseeching  its 
aid  in  her  extremity,  and  all  in  vain  ;  so  that,  though 
providence  is  Infinitely  good  and  wise,  —  and  perhaps 
for  that  very  reason,  —  it  may  be  half  an  eternity  be- 
fore the  great  circle  of  its  scheme  shall  bring  us  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


470  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

enperabundant  recompense  for  all  these  sorrows !  But 
what  the  lover  asked  was  such  prompt  consolation  as 
might  consist  with  the  brief  span  of  mortal  life ;  the 
assurance  of  Hilda's  present  safety,  and  her  restora- 
tion within  that  very  hour. 

^  An  imaginative  man,  he  suffered  the  penalty  of  his 
endowment  in  the  hundred -fold  variety  of  gloomily 
tinted  scenes  that  it  presented  to  him,  in  which  Hilda 
was  always  a  central  figure.  The  sculptor  forgot  his 
marble.  Rome  ceased  to  be  anything,  for  him,  but  a 
labyrinth  of  dismal  streets,  in  one  or  another  of  which 
the  lost  girl  had  disappeared.  He  was  haunted  with 
the  idea,  that  some  circumstance,  most  important  to 
be  known,  and,  perhaps,  easily  discoverable,  had  hith- 
erto been  overlooked,  and  that,  if  he  coidd  lay  hold 
of  this  one  clew,  it  would  guide  him  directly  in  the 
track  of  Hilda's  footsteps.  With  this  purpose  in  view, 
he  went,  every  morning,  to  the  Via  Portoghese,  and 
made  it  the  starting-point  of  fresh  investigations- 
After  nightfall,  too,  he  invariably  returned  thither, 
with  a  faint  hope  fluttering  at  his  heart  that  the  lamp 
J[iight  again  be  shining  on  the  summit  of  the  tower, 
and  would  dispel  this  ugly  mystery  out  of  the  circle 
consecrated  by  its  rays.  There  being  no  point  of 
which  he  could  take  firm  hold,  his  mind  was  filled 
with  unsubstantial  hopes  and  fears.  Once,  Kenyon 
had  seemed  to  cut  his  life  in  marble  ;  now  he  vaguely 
clutched  at  it,  and  found  it  vapor. 

In  his  unstrung  and  despondent  mood,  one  trifling 
circumstance  affected  him  with  an  idle  pang.  The 
doves  had  at  first  been  faithful  to  their  lost  mistress. 
They  failed  not  to  sit  in  a  row  upon  her  window-sill, 
or  to  alight  on  the  shrine,  or  the  church-angels,  and 
on  the  roofs  and  portals  of  the  neighboring  houses,  w 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  FLIGHT  OF  HILDA  'S  DOVES.        471 

evident  expectation  of  her  reappearance.  After  the 
second  week,  however,  they  began  to  take  flight,  and 
dropping  off  by  pairs,  betook  themselves  to  other  dove^ 
cotes.  Only  a  single  dove  remained,  and  brooded 
drearily  beneath  the  shrine.  The  flock,  that  had  de- 
parted, were  like  the  many  hopes  that  had  vanished 
from  Kenyon's  heart ;  the  one  that  still  lingered,  and 
looked  so  wretched,  —  was  it  a  Hope,  or  already  a 
Despair  ? 

In  the  street,  one  day,  the  sculptor  met  a  priest  of 
mild  and  venerable  aspect;  and  as  his  mind  dwelt 
continually  upon  Hilda,  and  was  especially  active  in 
bringing  up  all  incidents  that  had  ever  been  connected 
with  her,  it  immediately  struck  him  that  this  was  the 
very  father  with  whom  he  had  seen  her  at  the  confes- 
sional. Such  trust  did  Hilda  inspire  in  him,  that 
Kenyon  had  never  asked  what  was  the  subject  of  the 
communication  between  herself  and  this  old  priest. 
He  had  no  reason  for  imagining  that  it  could  have 
any  relation  with  her  disappearance,  so  long  subse- 
quently ;  but,  being  thus  brought  face  to  face  with  a 
personage,  mysteriously  associated,  as  he  now  remem- 
bered, with  her  whom  he  had  lost,  an  impulse  ran  be- 
fore his  thoughts  and  led  the  sculptor  to  address  him. 

It  might  be  that  the  reverend  kindliness  of  the  old 
man's  expression  took  Kenyon's  heart  by  surprise ;  at 
all  events,  he  spoke  as  if  there  were  a  recognized  ac^ 
quaintanceship,  and  an  object  of  mutual  interest  be- 
tween them. 

"  She  has  gone  from  me,  father,"  said  he. 

"  Of  whom  do  you  speak,  my  son  ?  "  inquired  the 
priest. 

"  Of  that  sweet  girl,''  answered  Kenyon,  '*  who  knelt 
to  you  at  the  confessional  Surely,  you  remember 
her,  among  all  the  mortals  to  whose  confessions  you 

Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC 


172  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

have  listened !  For  she  alone  could  have  had  no  sins 
to  reveal." 

"  Yes ;  I  remember,"  said  the  priest,  with  a  gleam 
of  recollection  in  his  eyes.  ^^  She  was  made  to  bear  a 
miraculous  testimony  to  the  efficacy  of  the  divine  ordi- 
nances of  the  Church,  by  seizing  forcibly  upon  one  of 
them,  and  finding  immediate  relief  from  it,  heretic 
though  she  was.  It  is  my  purpose  to  publish  a  brief 
narrative  of  this  miracle,  for  the  edification  of  man- 
kind, in  Latin,  Italian,  and  English,  from  the  print- 
ing-press of  the  Propaganda.  Poor  child!  Setting 
apart  her  heresy,  she  was  spotless,  as  you  say.  And 
is  she  dead  ?  " 

"  Heaven  forbid,  father  1  "  exclaimed  Kenyon^ 
shrinking  back.  ^^  But  she  has  gone  from  me,  I  know 
not  whither.  It  may  be  —  yes,  the  idea  seizes  upon 
my  mind  —  that  what  she  revealed  to  you  will  sug- 
gest some  clew  to  the  mystery  of  her  disappearance." 

"  None,  my  son,  none,"  answered  the  priest,  shak- 
ing his  head ;  "  nevertheless,  I  bid  you  be  of  good 
cheer.  That  young  maiden  is  not  doomed  to  die  a 
heretic.  Who  knows  what  the  Blessed  Virgin  may 
at  this  moment  be  doing  for  her  soul !  Perhaps,  when 
you  next  behold  her,  she  will  be  clad  in  the  shining 
white  robe  of  the  true  faith." 

This  latter  suggestion  did  not  convey  all  the  com* 
fort  which  the  old  priest  possibly  intended  by  it ;  but 
he  imparted  it  to  the  sculptor,  along  with  his  blessing, 
as  the  two  best  things  that  he  could  bestow,  and  said 
nothing  further,  except  to  bid  him  f arewelL 

When  they  had  parted,  however,  the  idea  of  Hilda's 
conversion  to  Catholicism  recurred  to  her  lover's  mind, 
bringing  with  it  certain  reflections,  that  gave  a  new 
turn  to  his  surmises  about  the  mystery  into  which  shd 
fcad  vanished.     Not  that  he  seriously  apprehended  — ^  , 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


THE  FLIGHT  OF  HILDA  'S  DOVES.       478 

idthough  the  superabundance  of  her  religious  senti* 
ment  might  mislead  her  for  a  moment  —  that  the 
New  England  girl  would  permanently  suceimib  to  the 
scarlet  superstitions  which  surrounded  her  in  Italy. 
But  the  incident  of  the  confessional  —  if  known,  as 
probably  it  was,  to  the  eager  propagandists  who  prowl 
about  for  souls,  as  cats  to  catch  a  mouse  —  would 
surely  inspire  the  most  confident  expectations  of  bring- 
ing her  over  to  the  faith.  With  so  pious  an  end  in 
view,  would  Jesuitical  morality  be  shocked  at  the 
thought  of  kidnapping  the  mortal  body,  for  the  salce  of 
the  immortal  spirit  that  might  otherwise  be  lost  for- 
ever ?  Would  not  the  kind  old  priest,  himself,  deem 
this  to  be  infinitely  the  kindest  service  that  he  could 
perform  for  the  stray  lamb,  who  had  so  strangely 
sought  his  aid  ? 

If  these  suppositions  were  well  founded,  Hilda  was 
most  likely  a  prisoner  in  one  of  the  religious  establish- 
ments that  are  so  numerous  in  Rome.  The  idea,  ac- 
cording to  the  aspect  iti  which  it  was  viewed,  brought 
now  a  degree  of  comfoii;,  and  now  an  additional  per- 
plexity. On  the  one  hand,  Hilda  was  safe  from  any 
but  spiritual  assaults ;  on  the  other,  where  was  the 
possibility  of  breaking  through  all  those  barred  por- 
tals, and  searching  a  thousand  convent-cells,  to  set 
her  free  ? 

Kenyon,  however,  as  it  happened,  was  prevented 
from  endeavoring  to  follow  out  this  surmise,  which 
only  the  state  of  hopeless  uncertainty,  that  almost  be- 
wildered his  reason,  could  have  led  him  for  a  moment 
to  entertain.  A  communication  reached  him  by  an 
anknown  hand,  in  consequence  of  which,  and  within 
an  hour  after  receiving  it,  he  took  his  way  through 
one  of  the  gates  of  Home. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XLVI. 

A  WALK   ON   THE  CAMPAGNA. 

It  was  a  bright  forenoon  of  February ;  a  month  in 
which  the  brief  severity  of  a  Roman  winter  is  already 
past,  and  when  violets  and  daisies  begin  to  show  them- 
selves in  spots  favored  by  the  sun.  The  sculptor  came 
out  of  the  city  by  the  gate  of  San  Sebastiano,  and 
walked  briskly  along  the  Appian  Way. 

For  the  space  of  a  mile  or  two  beyond  the  gate,  this 
ancient  and  famous  road  is  as  desolate  and  disagree- 
able as  most  of  the  other  Roman  avenues.  It  extends 
over  small,  uncomf oi*table  paving-stones,  between  brick 
and  plastered  walls,  which  are  very  solidly  constructed, 
and  so  high  as  almost  to  exclude  a  view  of  the  sur- 
rounding country.  The  houses  are  of  most  uninviting 
aspect,  neither  picturesque,  nor  homelike  and  social ; 
they  have  seldom  or  never  a  door  opening  on  the  way- 
side, but  are  accessible  only  from  the  rear,  and  frown 
inhospitably  upon  the  traveller  through  iron -grated 
windows.  Here  and  there  appears  a  dreary  inn,  or  a 
wine-shop,  designated  by  the  withered  bush  beside  the 
entrance,  within  which  you  discern  a  stone-built  and 
sepulchral  interior,  where  guests  refresh  themselves 
with  sour  bread  and  goats'-milk  cheese,  washed  down 
with  wine  of  dolorous  acerbity. 

At  frequent  intervals  along  the  roadside  uprises  the 
ruin  of  an  ancient  tomb.  As  they  stand  now,  these 
structures  are  immensely  high  and  broken  mounds  of 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A    WALK  ON  THE  CAMPAGNA.  475 

conglomerated  brick,  stone,  pebbles,  and  earth,  all 
molten  by  time  into  a  mass  as  solid  and  indestructible 
as  if  each  tomb  were  composed  of  a  single  bowlder  of 
granite.  When  first  erected,  they  were  cased  exter- 
nally, no  doubt,  with  slabs  of  polished  marble,  art- 
fully wrought  bas-reliefs,  and  all  such  suitable  adorn- 
ments, and  were  rendered  majestically  beautiful  by 
grand  architectural  designs.  This  antique  splendor 
has  long  since  been  stolen  from  the  dead,  to  decorate 
the  palaces  and  churches  of  the  living.  Nothing  re- 
mains to  the  dishonored  sepulchres,  except  their  mas- 
siveness. 

Even  the  pyramids  form  hardly  a  stranger  spectacle, 
or  are  more  alien  from  human  sympathies,  than  the 
tombs  of  the  Appian  Way,  with  their  gigantic  height, 
breadth,  and  solidity,  defying  time  and  the  elements, 
and  far  too  mighty  to  be  demolished  by  an  ordinary 
earthquake.  Here  you  may  see  a  modem  dwelling, 
and  a  garden  with  its  vines  and  olive-trees,  perched 
on  the  lofty  dilapidation  of  a  tomb,  which  forms  a 
precipice  of  fifty  feet  in  depth  on  each  of  the  four 
sides.  There  is  a  home  on  that  funereal  mound,  where 
generations  of  children  have  been  bom,  and  succes- 
sive lives  been  spent,  undisturbed  by  the  ghost  of  the 
stem  Eoman  whose  ashes  were  so  preposterously  bur- 
dened. Other  sepulchres  wear  a  crown  of  grass,  shrub- 
bery, and  forest-trees,  which  throw  out  a  broad  sweep 
of  branches,  having  had  time,  twice  over,  to  be  a  thou- 
sand years  of  age.  On  one  of  them  stands  a  tower, 
which,  though  immemorially  more  modem  than  the 
tomb,  was  itself  built  by  immemorial  hands,  and  is 
now  rifted  quite  from  top  to  bottom  by  a  vast  fissure 
of  decay  ;  the  tomb-hillock,  its  foundation,  being  still 
as  firm  as  ever,  and  likely  to  endure  until  the  last 


Digitized 


by  Google 


476  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

tramp  shall  rend  it  wide  asunder,  and  summon  forth 
its  unknown  dead. 

Yes ;  its  unknown  dead  I  For,  except  in  one  or  two 
doubtful  instances,  these  mountainous  sepulchral  edi- 
fices have  not  availed  to  keep  so  much  as  the  bare 
name  of  an  individual  or  a  family  from  oblivion.  Am- 
bitious  of  everlasting  remembrance,  as  they  were,  the 
slumberers  might  just  as  well  have  gone  quietly  to 
rest,  each  in  his  pigeon-hole  of  a  columbarium,  or  un- 
der his  little  green  hillock,  in  a  graveyard,  without  a 
headstone  to  mark  the  spot.  It  is  rather  satisfactory 
than  otherwise,  to  think  that  all  these  idle  pains  have 
turned  out  so  utterly  abortive. 

About  two  miles,  or  more,  from  the  city-gate,  and 
right  upon  the  roadside,  Kenyon  passed  an  immense 
round  pile,  sepulchral  in  its  original  purposes,  like 
those  already  mentioned.  It  was  built  of  great  blocks 
of  hewn  stone,  on  a  vast,  square  foundation  of  rough, 
agglomerated  material,  such  as  composes  the  mass  of 
all  the  other  ruinous  tombs.  But  whatever  might  be 
the  cause,  it  was  in  a  far  better  state  of  preservation 
than  they.  On  its  broad  summit  rose  the  battlements 
of  a  mediaeval  fortress,  out  of  the  midst  of  which  (so 
long  since  had  time  begun  to  crumble  the  supplemen- 
tal structure,  and  cover  it  with  soil,  by  means  of  way- 
side dust)  grew  trees,  bushes,  and  thick  festoons  of 
ivy.  This  tomb  of  a  woman  had  become  the  citadel 
and  donjon-keep  of  a  castle  ;  and  all  the  care  that  Ce- 
cilia Metella's  husband  could  bestow,  to  secure  endless 
peace  for  her  beloved  relics,  had  only  sufficed  to  make 
that  handful  of  precious  ashes  the  nucleus  of  battles, 
long  ages  after  her  death. 

A  little  beyond  this  point,  the  sculptor  turned  aside 
from  the  Appian  Way,  and  directed  his  course  across 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A    WALK  ON  THE  CAMPAGNA.  477 

the  Campagna,  guided  by  tokens  that  were  obvious 
only  to  himself.  On  one  side  of  him,  but  at  a  dis' 
tance,  the  Claudian  aqueduct  was  striding  over  fields 
and  water-courses.  Before  him,  many  miles  away, 
with  a  blue  atmosphere  between,  rose  the  Alban  hills, 
\  brilliantly  silvered  with  snow  and  sunshine. 

He  was  not  without  a  companion.  A  buffalo-calf, 
that  seemed  shy  and  sociable  by  the  self-same  im- 
pulse, had  begun  to  make  acquaintance  with  him,  from 
the  moment  when  he  left  the  road.  This  frolicsome 
creature  gambolled  along,  now  before,  now  behind; 
standing  a  moment  to  gaze  at  him,  with  wild,  curious 
eyes,  he  leaped  aside  and  shook  his  shaggy  head,  as 
Kenyon  advanced  too  nigh;  then,  after  loitering  in 
the  rear,  he  came  galloping  up,  like  a  charge  of  cav- 
alry, but  halted,  all  of  a  sudden,  when  the  sculptor 
turned  to  look,  and  bolted  across  the  Campagna,  at 
the  slightest  signal  of  nearer  approach.  The  yoimg, 
sportive  thing,  Kenyon  half  fancied,  was  serving  him 
as  a  guide,  like  the  heifer  that  led  Cadmus  to  the  site 
of  his  destined  city ;  for,  in  spite  of  a  hundred  vaga- 
ries, his  general  course  was  in  the  right  direction,  and 
along  by  several  objects  which  the  sculptor  had  noted 
as  landmarks  of  his  way. 

In  this  natural  intercourse  with  a  rude  and  healthy 
form  of  animal  life,  there  was  something  that  wonder- 
fully revived  Kenyon's  spirits.  The  warm  rays  of  the 
sun,  too,  were  wholesome  for  him  in  body  and  soul ; 
and  so  was  a  breeze  that  bestirred  itself  occasionally, 
as  if  for  the  sole  purpose  of  breathing  upon  his  cheek, 
and  dying  softly  away,  when  he  would  fain  have  felt  a 
little  more  decided  kiss.  This  shy,  but  loving  breeze 
reminded  him  strangely  of  what  Hilda's  deportoient 
had  sometimes  been  towards  himself. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


478  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENI. 

The  weather  had  very  much  to  do,  no  doubt,  with 
these  genial  and  delightful  sensations,  that  made  the 
sculptor  so  happy  with  mere  life,  in  spite  of  a  head 
and  heart  full  of  doleful  thoughts,  anxieties,  and  fears, 
which  ought  in  all  reason  to  have  depressed  him.  It 
was  like  no  weather  that  exists  anywhere,  save  in  Par- 
adise and  in  Italy ;  certainly  not  in  America,  where  it 
is  always  too  strenuous  on  the  side  either  of  heat  or 
cold.  Young  as  the  season  was,  and  wintry  as  it 
would  have  been  under  a  more  rigid  sky,  it  resem- 
bled summer  rather  than  what  we  New-Englanders 
recognize  in  our  idea  of  spring.  But  there  was  an 
indescribable  something,  sweet,  fresh,  and  remotely 
affectionate,  which  the  matronly  summer  loses,  and 
which  thrilled,  and,  as  it  were,  tickled  Kenyon's  heart 
with  a  feeling  partly  of  the  senses,  yet  far  more  a  spir- 
itual delight.  In  a  word,  it  was  as  if  Hilda's  delicate 
breath  were  on  his  cheek. 

After  walking  at  a  brisk  pace  for  about  half  an 
hour,  he  reached  a  spot  where  an  excavation  appeared 
to  have  been  begun,  at  some  not  very  distant  period. 
There  was  a  hollow  space  in  the  earth,  looking  exceed- 
ingly like  a  deserted  cellar,  being  enclosed  within  old 
subterranean  walls,  constructed  of  thin  Roman  bricks, 
and  made  accessible  by  a  narrow  flight  of  stone  steps. 
A  suburban  villa  had  probably  stood  over  this  site,  in 
the  imperial  days  of  Rome,  and  these  might  have  been 
the  ruins  of  a  bath-room,  or  some  other  apartment 
that  was  required  to  be  wholly  or  partly  under  ground. 
A  spade  can  scarcely  be  put  into  that  soil,  so  rich  in 
lost  and  forgotten  things,  without  hitting  upon  some 
discovery  which  would  attract  all  eyes,  in  any  other 
\and.  If  you  dig  but  a  little  way,  you  gather  bits  of 
precious  marble,  coins,  rings,  and  engraved  gems ;  il 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A    WALK  ON  THE  CAMPAGNA.  479 

you  go  deeper,  you  break  into  columbaria,  or  into 
sculptured  and  richly  frescoed  apartments  that  look 
like  festive  halls,  but  were  only  sepulchres. 

The  sculptor  descended  into  the  cellar-like  cavity, 
and  sat  down  on  a  block  of  stone.  His  eagerness  had 
brought  him  thither  sooner  than  the  appointed  hour. 
The  sunshine  fell  slantwise  into  the  hollow,  and  hap- 
pened to  be  resting  on  what  Kenyon  at  first  took  to  be 
a  shapeless  fragment  of  stone,  possibly  marble,  which 
was  partly  concealed  by  the  crumbling  down  of  earth. 

But  his  practised  eye  was  soon  aware  of  something 
irtistic  in  this  rude  object.  To  relieve  the  anxious 
tedium  of  his  situation,  he  cleared  away  some  of  the 
goil,  which  seemed  to  have  fallen  very  recently,  and 
Jiscovered  a  headless  figure  of  marble.  It  was  earth- 
Btained,  as  well  it  might  be,  and  had  a  slightly  cor- 
roded surface,  but  at  once  impressed  the  sculptor  as  a 
Greek  production,  and  wonderfully  delicate  and  beau- 
tiful. The  head  was  gone;  both  arms  were  broken 
off  at  the  elbow.  Protruding  from  the  loose  earth, 
however,  Kenyon  beheld  the  fingers  of  a  marble  hand ; 
it  was  still  appended  to  its  arm,  and  a  little  further 
search  enabled  him  to  find  the  other.  Placing  these 
limbs  in  what  the  nice  adjustment  of  the  fractures 
proved  to  be  their  true  position,  the  poor,  fragmentary 
woman  forthwith  showed  that  she  retained  her  modest 
instincts  to  the  last.  She  had  perished  with  them,  and 
snatched  them  back  at  the  moment  of  revival.  For 
these  long-buried  hands  immediately  disposed  them- 
selves in  the  manner  that  nature  prompts,  as  the  an- 
tique artist  knew,  and  as  all  the  world  has  seen,  in  the 
Venus  de'  Medici. 

*^  What  a  discovery  is  here  I "  thought  Kenyon  to 
himself.  "  I  seek  for  Hilda,  and  find  a  marble  wo 
man  I     Is  the  omen  good  or  ill  ?  " 

Digitized  by  LjOOQIC 


480  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENI. 

In  a  comer  of  the  excavation  lay  a  small  round 
block  of  stone,  much  incrusted  with  earth  that  had 
dried  and  hardened  upon  it.  So,  at  least,  you  would 
have  described  this  object,  until  the  sculptor  lifted  it, 
turned  it  hither  and  thither  in  his  hands,  brushed  off 
the  clinging  soil,  and  finally  placed  it  on  the  slender 
neck  of  the  newly  discovered  statue.  The  effect  was 
magical.  It  immediately  lighted  up  and  vivified  the 
whole  figure,  endowing  it  with  personality,  soul,  and 
intelligence.  The  beautiful  Idea  at  once  asserted  its 
immortality,  and  converted  that  heap  of  forlorn  frag- 
ments into  a  whole,  as  perfect  to  the  mind,  if  not  to 
the  eye,  as -when  the  new  marble  gleamed  with  snowy 
lustre ;  nor  w  as  the  impression  marred  by  the  earth 
that  still  hung  upon  the  exquisitely  graceful  limbs^ 
and  even  filled  the  lovely  crevice  of  the  lips.  Ken- 
yon  cleared  it  away  from  between  them,  and  almost 
deemed  himself  rewarded  with  a  living  smile. 

It  was  either  the  prototype  or  a  better  repetition  of 
the  Venus  of  the  Tribune.  But  those  who  have  been 
dissatisfied  with  the  small  head,  the  narrow,  soulless 
face,  the  button  -  hole  eyelids,  of  that  famous  statue, 
and  its  mouth  such  as  nature  never  moulded,  should 
see  the  genial  breadth  of  this  far  nobler  and  sweeter 
countenance.  It  is  one  of  the  few  works  of  antique 
sculpture  in  which  we  recognize  womanhood,  and  that, 
moreover,  without  prejudice  to  its  divinity. 

Here,  then,  was  a  treasure  for  the  sculptor  to  have 
found !  How  happened  it  to  be  lying  there,  beside  its 
grave  of  twenty  centuries  ?  Why  were  not  the  tidings 
of  its  discovery  already  noised  abroad?  The  world 
was  richer  than  yesterday,  by  something  far  more  pre- 
cious than  gold.  Forgotten  beauty  had  come  back, 
as  beautiful  as  ever;  a  goddess  had  risen  from  het 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A   WALK  ON  THE  CAMfAGNA.  481 

long  slumber,  and  was  a  goddess  still.  Another  cabi« 
net  in  the  Vatican  was  destined  to  shine  as  lustrously 
as  that  of  the  Apollo  Belvedere ;  or,  if  the  aged  pope 
should  resign  his  claim,  an  emperor  would  woo  this 
tender  marble,  and  win  her  as  proudly  as  an  imper'al 
bride ! 

Such  were  the  thoughts  with  which  Kenyon  exag- 
gerated to  himself  the  importance  of  the  newly  discov- 
ered statue,  and  strove  to  feel  at  least  a  portion  of  the 
interest  which  this  event  would  have  inspired  in  him 
a  little  while  before.  But,  in  reality,  he  found  it  dif- 
ficult to  fix  his  mind  upon  the  subject.  He  could 
hardly,  we  fear,  be  reckoned  a  cohsummate  artist,  be- 
cause there  was  something  dearer  to  him  than  his  art ; 
and,  by  the  greater  strength  of  a  hiunan  affection,  the 
divine  statue  seemed  to  fall  asunder  again,  and  be- 
come only  a  heap  of  worthless  fragments. 

While  the  sculptor  sat  listlessly  gazing  at  it,  there 
was  a  sound  of  small  hoofs,  clumsily  galloping  on  the 
Campagna  ;  and,  soon,  his  frisky  acquaintance,  the 
buffalo-calf,  came  and  peeped  over  the  edge  of  the  ex- 
cavation. Almost  at  the  same  moment,  he  heard 
voices,  which  approached  nearer  and  nearer ;  a  man's 
voice,  and  a  feminine  one,  talking  the  musical  tongue 
of  Italy.  Besides  the  hairy  visage  of  his  four-footed 
friend,  Kenyon  now  saw  the  figures  of  a  peasant  and 
a  contadina,  making  gestures  of  salutation  to  him,  on 
the  opposite  verge  of  the  hollow  space* 

YOU  ru 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XLVn. 

THK  PEASANT   AND  CONTADINA. 

They  descended  into  the  excavation :  a  young  peas* 
imt,  in  the  short  blue  jacket,  the  small-clothes  buttoned 
at  the  knee,  and  buckled  shoes,  that  compose  one  of 
the  ugliest  dresses  ever  worn  by  man,  except  the  wear- 
er's form  have  a  grace  which  any  garb,  or  the  nudity 
of  an  antique  statue,  would  equally  set  off ;  and,  hand 
in  hand  with  him,  a  village  girl,  in  one  of  those  brill- 
iant costumes  largely  kindled  up  with  scarlet,  and 
decorated  with  gold  embroidery,  in  which  the  conta- 
dinas  array  themselves  on  feast-days.  But  Kenyon 
was  not  deceived ;  he  had  recognized  the  voices  of  his 
friends,  indeed,  even  before  their  disguised  figures 
came  between  him  and  the  sunlight.  Donatello  was 
the  peasant ;  the  contadina,  with  the  airy  smile,  half 
mirthful,  though  it  shone  out  of  melancholy  eyes,  — 
was  Miriam. 

They  both  greeted  the  sculptor  with  a  familiar  kind- 
ness which  reminded  him  of  the  days  when  Hilda  and 
they  and  he  had  lived  so  happily  together,  before  the 
mysterious  adventure  of  the  catacomb.  What  a  suc- 
cession of  sinister  events  had  followed  one  spectral  fig- 
ure out  of  that  gloomy  labyrinth. 

"  It  is  carnival  time,  you  know,"  said  Miriam,  as  if 
in  explanation  of  Donatello's  and  her  own  costume. 
*'  Do  you  remember  how  merrily  we  spent  the  Carni 
ral,  last  year?" 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  PEASANT  AND   CONTADINA.         488 

"It  seems  many  years  ago,"  replied  Kenyon.  "  We 
are  all  so  changed !  " 

When  individuals  approach  one  another  with  deep 
purposes  on  both  sides,  they  seldom  come  at  once  to 
the  matteir  which  they  have  most  at  heart.  They 
^dread  the  electric  shock  of  a  too  sudden  contact  with 
lit.  A  natural  impulse  leads  them  to  steal  gradually 
'onward,  hiding  themselves,  as  it  were,  behind  a  closer, 
and  still  a  closer  topic,  imtil  they  stand  face  to  face 
with  the  true  point  of  interest.  Miriam  was  conscious 
of  this  impulse,  and  partially  obeyed  it. 

"  So,  your  instincts  as  a  sculptor  have  brought  you 
into  the  presence  of  our  newly  discovered  statue,"  she 
observed.  "  Is  it  not  beautiful  ?  A  far  truer  image 
of  immortal  womanhood  than  the  poor  little  damsel  at 
Florence,  world-famous  though  she  be." 

"  Most  beautiful,"  said  Kenyon,  casting  an  indiffer* 
ent  glance  at  the  Venus.  "  The  time  has  been  when 
the  sight  of  this  statue  would  have  been  enough  to 
make  the  day  memorable." 

"  And  will  it  not  do  so,  now  ?  "  Miriam  asked.  "  I 
fancied  so,  indeed,  when  we  discovered  it  two  days 
ago.  It  is  Donatello's  prize.  We  were  sitting  here 
together,  planning  an  interview  with  you,  when  his 
keen  eyes  detected  the  fallen  goddess,  almost  entirely 
buried  under  that  heap  of  earth,  which  the  clumsy  ex- 
cavators showered  down  upon  her,  I  suppose.  We 
congratulated  ourselves,  chiefly  for  your  sake.  The 
eyes  of  us  three  are  the  only  ones  to  which  she  has  yet 
revealed  herself.  Does  it  not  frighten  you  a  little, 
like  the  apparition  of  a  lovely  woman  that  lived  of  old, 
and  has  long  lain  in  the  grave  ?  " 

"  Ah,  Miriam !  I  cannot  respond  to  you,"  said  the 
sculptor,  with  irrepressible  impatience.  "  Imagination 
/and  the  love  of  art  have  both  died  out  of  me." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


484  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

"Miriam,"  interposed  Donatello,  with  gentle  'grav. 
ily,  **  why  should  we  keep  our  friend  in  suspense  1 
We  know  what  anxiety  he  feels.  Let  us  give  him 
what  intelligence  we  can." 

"You  are  so  direct  and  immediate,  my  beloved 
friend  !  "  answered  Miriam  with  an  unquiet  smile. 
"  There  are  several  reasons  why  I  should  like  to  play 
round  this  matter  a  little  while,  and  cover  it  with  fan- 
ciful thoughts,  as  we  strew  a  grave  with  flowers." 

"  A  grave ! "  exclaimed  the  sculptor. 

"  No  grave  in  which  your  heart  need  be  buried," 
she  replied ;  "  you  hpve  no  such  calamity  to  dread. 
But  I  linger  and  hesitate,  because  every  word  I  speak 
brings  me  nearer  to  a  crisis  from  which  I  shrink.  Ah, 
Donatello !  let  us  live  a  little  longer  the  life  of  these 
last  few  days !  It  is  so  bright,  so  airy,  so  childlike, 
so  without  either  past  or  future  !  Here,  on  the  wild 
Campagna,  you  seem  to  have  found,  both  for  yourself 
and  me,  the  life  that  belonged  to  you  in  early  youth ; 
the  sweet  irresponsible  life  which  you  inherited  from 
your  mythic  ancestry,  the  Fauns  of  Monte  Beni.  Out 
8tei*n  and  black  reality  will  come  upon  us  speedilj 
enough.  But,  first,  a  brief  time  more  of  this  strange 
happiness." 

"I  dare  not  linger  upon  it,"  answered  Donatello, 
with  an  expression  that  reminded  the  sculptor  of  the 
gloomiest  days  of  his  remorse  at  Monte  Beni.  "I 
dare  to  be  so  happy  as  you  have  seen  me,  only  because 
I  have  felt  the  time  to  be  so  brief." 

"  One  day,  then  !  "  pleaded  Miriam.  "  One  more 
day  in  the  wild  freedom  of  this  sweet-scented  air." 

"Well,  one  more  day,"  said  Donatello,  smiling; 
and  his  smile  touched  Kenyon  with  a  pathos  beyond 
words^  there  being  gayety  and  sadness  both  melted 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  PEASANT  AND  CONTADINA.        485 

into  it ;  "  but  here  is  Hilda's  friend,  and  our  own. 
Comfort  him,  at  least,  and  set  his  heart  at  rest,  since 
you  have  it  partly  in  your  power." 

"Ah,  surely  he  might  endure  his  pangs  a  little 
longer !  "  cried  Miriam,  turning  to  Kenyon  with  a 
tricksy,  fitful  kind  of  mirth,  that  served  to  hide  some 
solemn  necessity,  too  sad  and  serious  to  be  looked  at 
in  its  naked  aspect.  "  You  love  us  both,  I  think,  and 
will  be  content  to  suffer  for  our  sakes,  one  other  day. 
Do  I  ask  too  much  ?  " 

"  Tell  me  of  Hilda,"  replied  the  sculptor ;  "  tell  me 
only  that  she  is  safe,  and  keep  back  what  else  you 
wiU." 

**  Hilda  is  safe,"  said  Miriam.  "  There  is  a  Provi- 
dence purposely  for  Hilda,  as  I  remember  to  have  told 
you  long  ago.  But  a  great  trouble  —  an  evil  deed,  let 
us  acknowledge  it  —  has  spread  out  its  dark  branches 
so  widely,  that  the  shadow  falls  on  innocence  as  well 
as  guilt.  There  was  one  slight  link  that  connected 
your  sweet  Hilda  with  a  crime  which  it  was  her  un- 
happy fortune  to  witness,  but  of  which  I  need  not  say 
she  was  as  guiltless  as  the  angels  that  looked  out  of 
heaven,  and  saw  it  too.  No  matter,  now,  what  the 
consequence  has  been.  You  shall  have  your  lost  Hilda 
back,  and  —  who  knows  ?  —  perhaps  tenderer  than  she 
was." 

"  But  when  will  she  return  ? "  persisted  the  sculp- 
tor ;  "  tell  me  the  when,  and  where,  and  how  I  " 

"  A  little  patience.  Do  not  press  me  so,"  said  Mir- 
iam ;  and  again  Kenyon  was  struck  by  the  spritelike, 
fitful  characteristic  of  her  manner,  and  a  sort  of  hys- 
teric gayety,  which  seemed  to  be  a  will-o'-the-wisp 
from  a  sorrow  stagnant  at  her  heart.  "You  have 
more  time  to  spare  than  I.    First,  listen  to  something 


Digitized 


by  Google 


486  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

that  I  have  to  tell.     We  will  talk  of  Hilda  hy  an4 

Then  Miriam  spoke  of  her  own  life,  and  told  facta 
that  threw  a  gleam  of  light  over  many  things  which 
had  perplexed  the  sculptor  in  all  his  previous  knowl- 
edge of  her.  She  described  herself  as  springing  from 
English  parentage,  on  the  mother's  side,  but  with  a 
vein,  likewise,  of  Jewish  blood ;  yet  connected,  through 
her  father,  with  one  of  those  few  princely  families  of 
Southern  Italy,  which  still  retain  great  wealth  and  in- 
fluence. And  she  revealed  a  name,  at  which  her  audi« 
tor  started,  and  grew  pale ;  for  it  was  one  that,  only 
a  few  years  before,  had  been  familiar  to  the  world  in 
connection  with  a  mysterious  and  terrible  event.  The 
reader  —  if  he  think  it  worth  while  to  recall  some  of 
the  strange  incidents  which  have  been  talked  of,  and 
forgotten,  within  no  long  time  past  —  will  remember 
Miriam's  name. 

"  You  shudder  at  me,  I  perceive,"  said  Miriam,  sud* 
denly  interrupting  her  narrative. 

"  No ;  you  were  innocent,"  replied  the  sculptor.  "1 
shudder  at  the  fatality  that  seems  to  haunt  your  foot- 
steps, and  throws  a  shadow  of  crime  about  your  path, 
you  being  guiltless." 

"There  was  such  a  fatality,"  said  Miriam;  "yes; 
the  shadow  fell  upon  me,  innocent,  but  I  went  astray 
in  it,  and  wandered  —  as  Hilda  could  tell  you  —  into 
crime." 

She  went  on  to  say,  that,  while  yet  a  child,  she  had 
lost  her  English  mother.  From  a  very  early  period 
of  her  life,  there  had  been  a  contract  of  betrothal  be- 
tween herself  and  a  certain  marchese,  the  represent- 
ative of  another  branch  of  her  paternal  house,  —  a 
family  arrangement  between  two  persons  of  dispro- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  PEASANT  AND  CONTADINA.        48t 

portioned  ages,  and  in  which  feeling  went  for  nothing* 
Most  Italian  girls  of  noble  rank  would  have  yielded 
themselves  to  such  a  marriage,  as  an  affair  of  course. 
But  there  was  something  in  Miriam's  blood,  in  her 
mixed  race,  in  her  recollections  of  her  mother,  —  some 
characteristic,  finally,  in  her  own  nature,  —  which  had 
given  her  freedom  of  thought,  and  force  of  will,  and 
made  this  prearranged  connection  odious  to  her.  More- 
over, the  character  of  her  destined  husband  would  have 
been  a  sufficient  and  insuperable  objection ;  for  it  be- 
trayed traits  so  evil,  so  treacherous,  so  vile,  and  yet  so 
strangely  subtle,  as  could  only  be  accounted  for  by  the 
insanity  which  often  develops  itself  in  old,  close-kept 
races  of  men,  when  long  unmixed  with  newer  blood. 
Reaching  the  age  when  the  marriage  contract  should 
have  been  fulfilled,  Miriam  had  utterly  repudiated  it. 

Some  time  afterwards  had  occurred  that  terrible 
event  to  which  Miriam  had  alluded,  when  she  re- 
vealed her  name ;  an  event,  the  frightful  and  mysteri- 
ous circumstances  of  which  will  recur  to  many  minds, 
biit  of  which  few  or  none  can  have  found  for  them- 
selves a  satisfactory  explanation.  It  only  concerns  the 
present  narrative,  inasmuch  as  the  suspicion. of  being 
at  least  an  accomplice  in  the  crime  fell  darkly  and 
directly  upon  Miriam  herself. 

"  But  you  know  that  I  am  innocent !  "*  she  cried,  in- 
terrupting herself  again,  and  looking  Kenyon  in  the 
face. 

"I  know  it  by  my  deepest  consciousness,"  he  an- 
swered ;  "  and  I  know  it  by  Hilda's  trust  and  entire 
affection,  which  you  never  could  have  won  had  you 
been  capable  of  guilt." 

"  That  is  sure  ground,  indeed,  for  pronouncing  me 
Wiocent/'  said  Miriam  with  the  tears  gushing  into  her 


Digitized 


by  Google 


488  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

eyes.  "Yet  I  have  since  become  a  horror  to  yom 
saint-like  Hilda,  by  a  crime  which  she  herself  saw  ma 
help  to  perpetrate  I " 

She  proceeded  with  her  story.  The  great  influence 
of  her  family  connections  had  shielded  her  from  some 
of  the  consequences  of  her  imputed  guilt.  But,  in  her 
despair,  she  had  fled  from  home,  and  had  surroimded 
her  flight  with  such  circumstances  as  rendered  it  the 
most  probable  conclusion  that  she  had  committed  sui- 
cide. Miriam,  however,  was  not  of  the  feeble  nature 
which  takes  advantage  of  that  obvious  and  poor  re- 
source  in  earthly  difficulties.  She  flung  herself  upon 
the  world,  and  speedily  created  a  new  sphere,  in  which 
Hilda's  gentle  purity,  the  sculptor's  sensibility,  clear 
thought,  and  genius,  and  Donatello's  genial  simplicity, 
had  given  her  almost  her  first  experi)ence  of  happiness. 
Then  came  that  ill-omened  adventure  of  the  catacomb. 
The  spectral  figure  which  she  encountered  there  was 
the  evil  fate  that  had  haunted  her  through  life. 

Looking  back  upon  what  had  happened,  Miriam  ob« 
served,  she  now  considered  him  a  madman.  Insanity 
must  have  been  mixed  up  with  his  original  composi- 
tion, and  developed  by  those  very  acts  of  depravity 
which  it  suggested,  and  still  more  intensified,  by  the 
remorse  that  ultimately  followed  them.  Nothing  was 
stranger  in  his  dark  career  than  the  penitence  which 
often  seemed  to  go  hand  in  hand  with  crime.  Since 
iiis  death,  she  had  ascertained  that  it  finally  led  him 
to  a  convent,  where  his  severe  and  self-inflicted  pen- 
ance had  even  acquired  him  the  reputation  of  unusual 
sanctity,  and  had  been  the  cause  of  his  enjoying  greater 
freedom  than  is  commonly  allowed  to  monks. 

"  Need  I  trll  you  more  ?  "  asked  Miriam,  after  pro- 
feeding  thn»  far.     "  It  is  still  a  dim  and  dreary  mya- 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  PEASANT  AND  CONTADINA.        489 

fiery,  a  glocmy  twilight  into  which  I  guide  you ;  but 
possibly  you  may  catch  a  glimpse  of  much  that  I  my- 
self can  explain  only  by  conjecture.  At  all  events, 
you  can  comprehend  what  my  situation  must  have 
been,  after  that  fatal  interview  in  the  catacomb.  My 
persecutor  had  gone  thither  for  penance,  but  followed 
me  forth  with  fresh  impulses  to  crime.  He  had  me  ia 
his  power.  Mad  as  he  was,  and  wicked  as  he  was, 
with  one  word  he  could  have  blasted  me  in  the  belie) 
of  all  the  world.  In  your  belief  too,  and  Hilda's  I 
Even  Donateilo  would  have  shrunk  from  me  with  hor- 
ror!" 

"  Never,"  said  Danatello,  *'  my  instinct  would  have 
known  you  innocent." 

"  Hilda  and  Donatallo  and  myself,  —  we  three 
would  have  acquitted  you,"  said  Kenyon,  "let  the 
world  say  what  it  might.  Ah,  Miriam,  you  should 
have  told  us  this  sad  story  sooner !  " 

"  I  thought  often  of  revealing  it  to  you,"  answered 
Miriam ;  "  on  one  occasion,  especially,  —  it  was  after 
you  had  shown  ma  your  Cleopatra ;  it  seemed  to  leap 
out  of  my  heart,  and  got  as  far  as  my  very  lips.  But 
finding  you  cold  t^  accept  my  confidence,  I  tlirust  it 
back  again.  Had  I  obeyed  my  first  impulse,  all  would 
have  turned  out  differently." 

"  And  Hilda !  "  resumed  the  sculptor.  "  What  can 
h^ve  been  her  connection  with  these  dark  incidents  ?  " 

"  She  will,  doubtless,  tell  you  with  her  own  lips," 
replied  Miriam.  "  Through  sources  of  information 
which  I  possess  in  Rome,  I  can  assure  you  of  her 
safety.  In  two  days  more  —  by  the  help  of  the  spe- 
cial Providence  that,  as  I  love  to  tell  you,  watchea 
over  Hilda  —  she  shall  rejoin  you." 

**  Still  two  days  more !  '*  murmured  the  sculptor. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


490  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

"Ah,  you  are  cruel  now!  More  cruel  than  yon 
know!"  exclaimed  Miriam,  with  another  gleam  of 
that  fantastic,  fitful  gayety,  which  had  more  than  once 
marked  her  manner,  during  this  interview.  "Spare 
your  poor  friends  !  " 

"  I  know  not  what  you  mean,  Miriam,"  said  Ken- 

"  No  matter,"  she  replied ;  "  you  will  understand 
hereafter.  But  could  you  think  it  ?  Here  is  Dona- 
tello  haimted  with  strange  remorse,  and  an  unmitigable 
resolve  to  obtain  what  he  deems  justice  upon  himself. 
He  fancies,  with  a  kind  of  direct  simplicity,  which  I 
have  vainly  tried  to  combat,  that,  when  a  wrong  has 
been  done,  the  doer  is  bound  to  submit  himself  to 
whatsoever  tribunal  takes  cognizance  of  such  things, 
and  abide  its  judgment.  I  have  assured  him  that 
there  is  no  such  thing  as  earthly  justice,  and  espe- 
cially none  here,  under  the  head  of  Christendom. 

"  We  will  not  argue  the  point  again,"  said  Dona- 
tello,  smiling.  "  I  have  no  head  for  argument,  but 
only  a  sense,  an  impulse,  an  instinct,  I  believe,  which 
sometimes  leads  me  right.  But  why  do  we  talk  now 
of  what  may  make  us  sorrowful  ?  There  are  still  two 
days  more.     Let  us  be  happy  !  " 

It  appeared  to  Kenyon  that  since  he  last  saw  Dona- 
tello,  some  of  the  sweet  and  delightful  characteristics 
of  the  antique  Faun  had  returned  to  him.  There  were 
slight,  careless  graces,  pleasant  and  simple  peculiari- 
ties, that  had  been  obliterated  by  the  heavy  grief 
through  which  he  was  passing  at  Monte  Beni,  and  out 
of  which  he  had  hardly  emerged,  when  the  sculptor 
parted  with  Miriam  and  him  beneath  the  bronze  pon- 
tiff's outstretched  hand.  These  happy  blossoms  had 
now  reappeared.    A  playfulness  came  out  of  his  hearti 


Digitized 


by  Google 


THE  PEASANT  AND   CONTADINA.        491 

and  glimmered  like  firelight  in  his  actions,  alternating, 
or  even  closely  intermingled,  with  profound  sympathy 
and  serious  thought. 

"  Is  he  not  beautiful  ?  "  said  Miriam,  watching  the 
sculptor's  eye  as  it  dwelt  admiringly  on  Donatello. 
"  So  changed,  yet  still,  in  a  deeper  sense,  so  much  the 
same!  He  has  travelled  in  a  circle,  as  all  things 
heavenly  and  earthly  do,  and  now  comes  back  to  his 
original  self,  with  an  inestimable  treasure  of  improve- 
ment won  from  an  experience  of  pain.  How  wonder- 
ful is  this  !  I  tremble  at  my  own  thoughts,  yet  must 
needs  probe  them  to  their  depths.  Was  the  crime  — - 
in  which  he  and  I  were  wedded  —  was  it  a  blessing, 
in  that  strange  disguise?  Was  it  a  means  of  educa- 
tion, bringing  a  simple  and  imperfect  nature  to  a  point 
of  feeling  and  intelligence  which  it  could  have  reached 
under  no  other  discipline  ?  " 

"  You  stir  up  deep  and  perilous  matter,  Miriam," 
replied  Kenyon.  "  I  dare  not  follow  you  into  the  un- 
fathomable abysses  whither  you  are  tending." 

"Yet  there  is  a  pleasure  in  them!  I  delight  to 
brood  on  the  verge  of  this  great  mystery,"  returned 
she.  "  The  story  of  the  fall  of  man !  Is  it  not  re- 
peated in  our  romance  of  Monte  Beni  ?  And  may  we 
follow  the  analogy  yet  further  ?  Was  that  very  sin, 
—  into  which  Adam  precipitated  himself  and  all  his 
race,  —  was  it  the  destined  means  by  which,  over  a 
long  pathway  of  toil  and  sorrow,  we  are  to  attain  a 
higher,  brighter,  and  profounder  happiness,  than  our 
lost  birthright  gave  ?  WiU  not  this  idea  account  for 
the  permitted  existence  of  sin,  as  no  other  theory 
uau?" 

''  It  is  too  dangerous,  Miriam !  I  cannot  follow 
you  I  "  repeated  the  sculptor.     "  Mortal  man  has  no 


Digitized 


by  Google 


/492  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

right  to  tread  on  the  ground  where  you  now  set  youp 
feet." 

"Ask  Hilda  what  she  thinks  of  it,"  said  Miriam, 
with  a  thoughtful  smile.  "  At  least,  she  might  con- 
^  elude  that  sin  — which  man  chose  instead  of  good  — 
'  has  been  so  beneficently  handled  by  omniscience  and 
omnipotence,  that,  whereas  our  dark  enemy  sought  to 
destroy  us  by  it,  it  has  really  become  an  instrument' 
most  effective  in  the  education  of  intellect  and  soul." 

Miriam  paused  a  little  longer  among  these  medita- 
tions, which  the  sculptor  rightly  felt  to  be  so  perilous ; 
she  then  pressed  his  hand,  in  token  of  farewell. 

"  The  day  after  to-morrow,"  said  she-.  "  an  hour  be- 
fore sunset,  go  to  the  Corso,  and  stand  in  front  of  the 
fifth  house  on  your  left,  beyond  the  Antonine  column. 
You  will  learn  tidings  of  a  friend." 

Kenyon  would  have  besought  her  for  more  definite 
intelligence,  but  she  shook  her  head,  put  her  finger  on 
her  lips,  and  turned  away  with  an  illusive  smile.  The 
fancy  impressed  him,  that  she,  too,  like  Donatello, 
had  reached  a  wayside  paradise,  in  their  mysterious 
life-journey,  where  they  both  threw  down  the  burden 
of  the  before  and  after,  and,  except  for  this  interview 
with  himself,  were  happy  in  the  flitting  moment.  To- 
day, Donatello  was  the  sylvan  Faun ;  to-day,  Miriam 
was  his  fit  companion,  a  Nymph  of  grove  or  fountain ; 
to-morrow,  —  a  remorseful  man  and  woman,  linked  by 
a  marriage-bond  of  crime,  —  they  would  set  forth  ta 
wards  an  inevitable  goaL 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XLVnL 

A  SCENE    IN  THE    CORSO. 

On  the  appointed  afternoon,  Kenyon  failed  not  to 
make  his  appearance  in  the  Corso,  and  at  an  hour 
much  earlier  than  Miriam  had  named. 

It  was  carnival  time.  The  merriment  of  this  fa* 
mous  festival  was  in  full  progress ;  and  the  stately 
avenue  of  the  Corso  was  peopled  with  hundreds  of  f  an« 
tastic  shapes,  some  of  which  probably  represented  the 
mirth  of  ancient  times,  surviving  through  all  manner 
of  calamity,  ever  since  the  days  of  the  Roman  Empire. 
For  a  few  afternoons  of  early  spring,  this  mouldy  gay- 
ety  strays  into  the  sunshine  ;  all  the  remainder  of  the 
year,  it  seems  to  be  shut  up  in  the  catacombs  or  some 
other  sepulchral  storehouse  of  the  past. 

Besides  these  hereditary  forms,  at  which  a  hundred 
generations  have  laughed,  there  were  others  of  modem 
date,  the  humorous  effluence  of  the  day  that  was  now 
passing.  It  is  a  day,  however,  and  an  age,  that  ap- 
pears to  be  remarkably  barren,  when  compared  with 
the  prolific  originality  of  former  times,  in  productions 
of  a  scenic  and  ceremonial  character,  whether  grave 
or  gay.  To  own  the  truth,  the  Carnival  is  alive,  this 
present  year,  only  because  it  has  existed  through  cen- 
turies gone  by.  It  is  traditionary,  not  actual.  If 
decrepit  and  melancholy  Rome  smiles,  and  laughs 
broadly,  indeed,  at  carnival  time,  it  is  not  in  the  old 
simplicity  of  real  mirth,  but  with  a  half  conscious 


Digitized 


by  Google 


494  '  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

effort,  like  our  self-deceptive  pretence  of  jollity  at  a 
threadbare  joke.  Whatever  it  may  once  have  been, 
it  is  now  but  a  narrow  stream  of  merriment,  noisy  of 
set  purpose,  running  along  the  middle  of  the  Corso, 
through  the  solemn  heart  of  the  decayed  city,  without 
extending  its  shallow  influence  on  either  side.  Nor, 
even  within  its  own  limits,  does  it  affect  the  mass  of 
spectators,  but  only  a  comparatively  few,  in  street  and 
balcony,  who  carry  on  the  warfare  of  nosegays  and 
counterfeit  sugar-plums.  The  populace  look  on  with 
fitaid  composure ;  the  nobility  and  priesthood  take  lit* 
tie  or  no  part  in  the  matter  ;  and,  but  for  the  hordes 
of  Anglo-Saxons  who  annually  take  up  the  flagging 
mirth,  the  Carnival  might  long  ago  have  been  swept 
away,  with  the  snow-drifts  of  confetti  that  whiten  all 
the  pavement. 

No  doubt,  however,  the  worn-out  festival  is  still  new 
to  the  youthful  and  light-hearted,  who  make  the  worn- 
out  world  itself  as  fresh  as  Adam  found  it  on  his  first 
forenoon  in  Paradise.  It  may  be  only  age  and  care 
that  chill  the  life  out  of  its  grotesque  and  airy  riot, 
with  the  impertinence  of  their  cold  criticism. 

Kenyon,  though  young,  had  care  enough  within  his 
breast  to  render  the  Carnival  the  emptiest  of  mocker- 
ies. Contrasting  the  stern  anxiety  of  his  present  mood 
with  the  frolic  spirit  of  the  preceding  year,  he  fancied 
that  so  much  trouble  had,  at  all  events,  brought  wis* 
dom  in  its  train.  But  there  is  a  wisdom  that  look£ 
grave,  and  sneers  at  merriment ;  and  again  a  deeper 
wisdom,  that  stoops  to  be  gay  as  often  as  occasion 
serves,  and  of tenest  avails  itself  of  shallow  and  trifling 
grounds  of  mirth ;  because,  if  we  wait  for  more  sub- 
stantial ones,  we  seldom  can  be  gay  at  all.  There- 
fore, had  it  been  possible,  Kenyon  would  have  done 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A   SCENE  IN  THE  CORSO.  495 

well  to  mask  himself  in  some  wild,  hairy  visage,  and 
plunge  into  the  throng  of  other  maskers,  as  at  the  Car- 
nival before.  Then,  Donatello  had  danced  along  the 
Corso  in  all  the  equipment  of  a  Faun,  doing  the  part 
with  wonderful  felicity  of  execution,  and  revealing 
furry  ears,  which  looked  absolutely  real ;  and  Miriam 
had  been,  alternately,  a  lady  of  the  antique  regime,  in 
powder  and  brocade,  and  the  prettiest  peasant-girl  of 
the  Campagna,  in  the  gayest  of  costumes ;  while  Hilda, 
sitting  demurely  in  a. balcony,  had  hit  the  sculptor 
with  a  single  rose-bud,  —  so  sweet  and  fresh  a  bud 
that  he  knew  at  once  whose  hand  had  flung  it. 

These  were  all  gone ;  all  those  dear  friends  whose 
sympathetic  mirth  had  made  him  gay.  Kenyon  felt 
as  if  an  interval  of  many  years  had  passed  since  the 
last  Carnival.  He  had  grown  old,  the  nimble  jollity 
was  tame,  and  the  maskers  dull  and  heavy ;  the  Corso 
was  but  a  narrow  and  shabby  street  of  decaying  pal- 
aces ;  and  even  the  long,  blue  streamer  of  Italian  sky, 
above  it,  not  half  so  brightly  blue  as  formerly. 

Yet,  if  he  could  have  beheld  the  scene  with  his 
clear,  natural  eyesight,  he  might  still  have  found  both 
merriment  and  splendor  in  it.  Everywhere,  and  all 
day  long,  there  had  been  tokens  of  the  festival,  in  the 
baskets  brimming  over  with  bouquets,  for  sale  at  the 
street-corners,  or  borne  about  on  people's  heads  ;  while 
bushels  upon  bushels  of  variously  colored  confetti  were 
displayed,  looking  just  like  veritable  sugar-plums ;  so 
that  a  stranger  would  have  imagined  that  the  whole 
commerce  and  business  of  stem  old  Rome  lay  in  flow- 
ers and  sweets.  And,  now,  in  the  sunny  afternoon, 
there  could  hardly  be  a  spectacle  more  picturesque 
than  the  vista  of  that  noble  street,  stretching  into  the 
interminable  distance  between  two  rows  of  lofty  edi« 


Digitized 


by  Google 


496  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

fices,  from  every  window  of  which,  and  many  a  "bal- 
cony,  flaunted  gay  and  gorgeous  carpets,  bright  silks, 
scarlet  cloths  with  rich  golden  fringes,  and  Gobelin 
tapestry,  still  lustrous  with  varied  hues,  though  the 
product  of  antique  looms.  Each  separate  palace  had 
put  on  a  gala-dress,  and  looked  festive  for  the  occasion, 
whatever  sad  or  guilty  secret  it  might  hide  within. 
Every  window,  moreover,  was  alive  with  the  faces  of 
women,  rosy  girls,  and  children,  all  kindled  into  brisk 
and  mirthful  expression,  by  the  incidents  in  the  street 
below.  In  the  balconies  that  projected  along  the  pal- 
ace fronts  stood  groups  of  ladies,  some  beautiful,  all 
richly  dressed,  scattering  forth  their  laughter,  shrill, 
yet  sweet,  and  the  musical  babble  of  their  voices,  to 
thicken  into  an  airy  tumult  over  the  heads  of  common 
mortals. 

All  these  innumerable  eyes  looked  down  into  the 
street,  the  whole  capacity  of  which  was  thronged  with 
festal  figures,  in  such  fantastic  variety  that  it  had 
taken  centuries  to  contrive  them ;  and  through  the 
midst  of  the  mad,  merry  stream  of  human  life,  rolled 
slowly  onward  a  never-ending  procession  of  all  the 
vehicles  in  Rome,  from  the  ducal  carriage,  with  the 
powdered  coachman  high  in  front,  and  the  three  golden 
lackeys,  clinging  in  the  rear,  down  to  the  rustic  cart 
drawn  by  its  single  donkey.  Among  this  various 
crowd,  at  windows  and  in  balconies,  in  cart,  cab,  ba- 
rouche, or  gorgeous  equipage,  or  bustling  to  and  fro 
*foot,  there  was  a  sympathy  of  nonsense;  a  true  and 
genial  brotherhood  and  sisterhood,  based  on  the  honest 
purpose  —  and  a  wise  one,  too — of  being  foolish,  all 
together.  The  sport  of  mankind,  like  its  deepest  ear- 
nest, is  a  battle;  so  these  festive  people  fought  one  an- 
other with  an  ammunition  of  sugar-plums  and  flowers. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A  SCENE  IN  THE  CORSO.  497 

Not  that  they  were  veritable  sugar-plums,  however, 
but  something  tiiat  resembled  them  only  as  the  apples 
of  Sodom  look  like  better  fruit.  They  were  concocted 
mostly  of  lime,  with  a  grain  of  oat,  or  some  other 
worthless  kernel,  in  the  midst.  Besides  the  hail-storm 
of  confetti,  the  combatants  threw  handfuls  of  flour 
or  lime  into  the  air,  where  it  himg  like  smoke  over  a 
•battle-field,  or,  descending,  whitened  a  black  coat  or 
priestly  robe,  and  made  the  curly  locks  of  youth  irrev- 
erently hoary. 

At  the  same  time  with  this  acrid  contest  of  quick- 
lime, which  caused  much  effusion  of  tears  from  suffer* 
ing  eyes,  a  gentler  warfare  of  flowers  was  carried  on, 
principally  between  knights  and  ladies.  Originally, 
no  doubt,  when  this  pretty  custom  was  first  instituted, 
it  may  have  had  a  sincere  and  modest  import.  Each 
youth  and  damsel,  gathering  bouquets  of  field -flowers, 
or  the  sweetest  and  fairest  that  grew  in  their  own  gar- 
dens, all  fresh  and  virgin  blossoms,  flung  them,  with 
true  aim,  at  the  one,  or  few,  whom  they  regarded  with 
a  sentiment  of  shy  partiality  at  least,  if  not  with  love. 
Often,  the  lover  in  the  Corso  may  thus  have  received 
from  his  bright  mistress,  in  her  father's  princely  bal- 
cony, the  first  sweet  intimation  that  his  passionate 
glances  had  not  struck  against  a  heart  of  marble 
What  more  appropriate  mode  of  suggesting  her  tendei 
secret  could  a  maiden  find  than  by  the  soft  hit  of  a 
rose-bud  against  a  young  man's  cheek. 

This  was  the  pastime  and  the  earnest  of  a  more  in- 
nocent and  homelier  age.  Nowadays,  the  nosegays 
are  gathered  and  tied  up  by  sordid  hands,  chiefly  of 
the  most  ordinary  flowers,  and  are  sold  along  the  Cor- 
so, at  mean  price,  yet  more  than  such  venal  things  are 
worth.     Buying  a  basketful,  you  find  them  miserably 

VOL,  TI. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


498  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

vrilted,  as  if  they  had  flown  hither  and  thither  throiigh 
two  or  three  carnival  days  already ;  muddy,  too,  hav- 
ing been  fished  up  from  the  pavement,  where  a  hun- 
dred feet  have  trampled  on  them.  You  may  see  throngs 
of  men  and  boys  who  thrust  themselves  beneath  the 
horses'  hoofs  to  gather  up  bouquets  that  were  aimed 
amiss  from  balcony  and  carriage ;  these  they  sell  again, 
and  yet  once  more,  and  ten  times  over,  defiled  as  they 
*ill  are  with  the  wicked  filth  of  Kome. 

Such  are  the  flowery  favors  —  the  fragrant  bunches 
of  sentiment — that  fly  between  cavalier  and  dame, 
and  back  again,  from  one  end  of  the  Corso  to  the 
other.  Perhaps  they  may  symbolize,  more  aptly  than 
was  intended,  the  poor,  battered,  wilted  hearts  of  those 
who  fling  them ;  hearts  which — crumpled  and  crushed 
by  former  possessors,  and  stained  with  various  mis- 
hap —  have  been  passed  from  hand  to  hand  along  the 
muddy  street-way  of  life,  instead  of  being  treasured 
in  one  faithful  bosom. 

These  venal  and  polluted  flowers,  therefore,  and 
those  deceptive  bonbons,  are  types  of  the  small  reality 
that  still  subsists  in  the  observance  of  the  CamivaL 
Yet  the  government  seemed  to  imagine  that  there 
might  be  excitement  enough,  —  wild  mirth,  perchance, 
following  its  antics  beyond  law,  and  frisking  from 
frolic  into  earnest,  —  to  render  it  expedient  to  guard 
the  Corso  with  an  imposing  show  of  military  power. 
Besides  the  ordinary  force  of  gendarmes,  a  strong 
patrol  of  papal  dragoons,  in  steel  helmets  and  white 
cloaks,  were  stationed  at  all  the  street-corners.  De- 
tachments of  French  infantry  stood  by  their  stacked 
muskets  in  the  Piazza  del  Popolo,  at  one  extremity  of 
the  course,  and  before  the  palace  of  the  Austrian  em^ 
bassy,  at  the  other,  and  by  the  column  of  Antoninus^ 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A   SCENE  IN  THE  CORSO,  499 

midway  between.  Had  that  chained  tiger-cat,  the  Ro- 
man populace,  shown  only  so  much  as  the  tip  of  his 
daws,  the  sabres  would  have  been  flashing  and  the 
bullets  whistling,  in  right  earnest,  among  the  comba- 
tants who  now  pelted  one  another  with  mock  sugar- 
plums and  wilted  flowers. 

But,  to  do  the  Roman  people  justice,  they  were  re- 
strained by  a  better  safeguard  than  the  sabre  or  the 
bayonet ;  it  was  their  own  gentle  courtesy,  which  im- 
parted a  sort  of  sacredness  to  the  hereditary  festival. 
At  first  sight  of  a  spectacle  so  fantastic  and  extrav- 
agant, a  cool  observer  might  have  imagined  the  whole 
town  gone  mad ;  but,  in  the  end,  he  would  see  that 
all  this  apparently  imbounded  license  is  kept  strictly 
within  a  limit  of  its  own  ;  he  would  admire  a  people 
who  can  so  freely  let  loose  their  mirthful  propensities, 
while  muzzling  those  fiercer  ones  that  tend  to  mis- 
chief. Everybody  seemed  lawless ;  nobody  was  rude. 
If  any  reveller  overstepped  the  mark,  it  was  sure  to 
be  no  Roman,  but  an  Englishman  or  an  American ; 
and  even  the  rougher  play  of  this  Gothic  race  was 
still  softened  by  the  insensible  influence  of  a  moral 
atmosphere  more  delicate,  in  some  respects,  than  we 
breathe  at  home.  Not  that,  after  all,  we  like  the  fine 
Italian  spirit  better  than  our  own  ;  popular  rudeness 
is  sometimes  the  symptom  of  rude  moral  health.  But, 
where  a  Carnival  is  in  question,  it  would  probably  pass 
off  more  decorously,  as  well  as  more  airily  and  delight- 
fully, in  Rome,  than  in  any  Anglo-Saxon  city. 

When  Kenyon  emerged  from  a  side-lane  into  the 
Corso,  the  mirth  was  at  its  height.  Out  of  the  seclu- 
sion of  his  own  feelings,  he  looked  forth  at  the  tapes- 
tried and  damask-curtained  palaces,  the  slow-moving, 
double  line  of  carriages,  and  the  motley  maskers  thai 


Digitized 


by  Google 


600  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

swarmed  on  foot,  as  if  he  were  gazing  through  the  iron 
lattice  of  a  prison-window.  So  remote  from  the  scene 
yere  his  sympathies,  that  it  affected  him  like  a  thin 
dream,  through  the  dim,  extravagant  material  of  which 
he  could  discern  more  substantial  objects,  while  too 
much  under  its  control  to  start  forth  broad  awake. 
Just  at  that  moment,  too,  there  came  another  specta- 
cle, making  its  way  right  through  the  masquerading 
throng. 

It  was,  first  and  foremost,  a  full  band  of  martial 
music,  reverberating,  in  that  narrow  and  confined, 
though  stately  avenue,  between  the  walls  of  the  lofty 
palaces,  and  roaring  upward  to  the  sky,  with  melody 
so  powerful  that  it  almost  grew  to  discord.  Next  came 
a  body  of  cavalry  and  mounted  gendarmes,  with  great 
display  of  military  pomp.  They  were  escorting  a  long 
train  of  equipages,  each  and  all  of  which  shone  as 
gorgeously  as  Cinderella's  coach,  with  paint  and  gild- 
ing. Like  that,  too,  they  were  provided  with  coach* 
men,  of  mighty  breadth,  and  enormously  tall  footmen, 
in  immense,  powdered  wigs,  and  all  the  splendor  of 
gold-laced,  three-cornered  hats,  and  embroidered  silk 
coats  and  breeches.  By  the  old-fashioned  magnificence 
of  this  procession,  it  might  worthily  have  included  his 
Holiness  in  person,  with  a  suite  of  attendant  Cardinals, 
if  those  sacred  dignitaries  would  kindly  have  lent  their 
aid  to  heighten  the  frolic  of  the  Carnival.  But,  for  all 
its  show  of  a  martial  escort,  and  its  antique  splendor 
of  costume,  it  was  but  a  train  of  the  municipal  au- 
thorities  of  Rome,  —  illusive  shadows,  every  one,  and 
among  them  a  phantom,  styled  the  Roman  Senator,  — » 
proceeding  to  the  Capitol. 

The  riotous  interchange  of  nosegays  and  confetti 
was  partially  suspended,  while  the  procession  passed 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A   SCENE  IN  THE   CORSO.  60i 

One  well-directed  shot,  however, — -it  was  a  double 
handful  of  powdered  lime,  flung  by  an  impious  New- 
Englander,  —  hit  the  coachman  of  the  Roman  Senator 
full  in  the  face,  and  hurt  his  dignity  amazingly.  It 
appeared  to  be  his  opinion,  that  the  Republic  was 
again  crumbling  into  ruin,  and  that  the  dust  of  it  now 
filled  his  nostrils ;  though,  in  fact,  it  would  hardly  be 
distinguished  from  the  official  powder  with  which  he 
was  already  plentifully  bestrewn. 

While  the  sculptor,  with  his  dreamy  eyes,  was  tak- 
ing idle  note  of  this  trifling  circumstance,  two  figures 
passed  before  him,  hand  in  hand.  The  countenance 
of  each  was  covered  with  an  impenetrable  black  mask ; 
but  one  seemed  a  peasant  of  the  Campagna ;  the  oihe:^ 
a  contadina  in  her  holiday  costume. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  XUX, 

A   FAOLIC   OF  THE  CARNIVAL. 

The  crowd  and  confusion,  just  at  that  momenti 
hindered  the  sculptor  from  pursuing  these  figures,  — 
the  peasant  and  contadina,  —  who,  indeed,  were  but 
two  of  a  numerous  tribe  that  thronged  the  Corso,  in 
similar  costume.  As  soon  as  he  could  squeeze  a  pas- 
sage, Kenyon  tried  to  follow  in  their  footsteps,  but 
quickly  lost  sight  of  them,  ana  was  thrown  off  the 
track  by  stopping  to  examine  various  groups  of  mas- 
queraders,  in  which  he  fancied  the  objects  of  his  search 
to  be  included.  He  found  many  a  sallow  peasant  or 
herdsman  of  the  Campagna,  in  such  a  dress  as  Dona^ 
tello  wore  ;  many  a  contadina,  too,  brown,  broad,  and 
sturdy,  in  her  finery  of  scarlet,  and  decked  out  with 
gold  or  coral  beads,  a  pair  of  heavy  ear-rings,  a  curi- 
ously wi'ought  cameo  or  mosaic  brooch,  and  a  silver 
comb  or  long  stiletto  among  her  glossy  hair.  But 
those  shapes  of  giace  and  beauty,  which  he  sought, 
had  vanished. 

As  soon  as  the  procession  of  the  Senator  had  passed , 
the  merry-makers  resumed  their  antics  with  fresh  spirit^ 
and  the  artillery  of  bouquets  and  sugar-plums,  sus* 
pended  for  a  moment,  began  anew.  The  sculptor 
himself,  being  probably  the  most  anxious  and  unquiet 
spectator  there,  was  especially  a  mark  for  missiles 
from  all  quarters,  and  for  the  practical  jokes  which 
the  license  of  the  Carnival  permits,     lu  fact,  his  sad 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A  FROLIC  OF  THE  CARNIVAL.  608 

and  contracted  brow  so  ill  accorded  with  the  scenet 
that  the  revellers  might  be  pardoned  for  thus  using 
him  as  the  butt  of  their  idle  mirth,  ^ince  he  evidently 
could  not  otherwise  contribute  to  it. 

Fantastic  figures,  with  bulbous  heads,  the  circum* 
ference  of  a  bushel,  grinned  enormously  in  his  face. 
Harlequins  struck  him  with  their  wooden  swoixis,  and 
appeared  to  expect  his  immediate  transformation  into 
some  jollier  shape.  A  little,  long-tailed,  homed  fiend 
sidled  up  to  him,  and  suddenly  blew  at  him  through  a 
tube,  enveloping  our  poor  friend  in  a  whole  harvest  of 
winged  seeds.  A  biped,  with  an  ass's  snout,  brayed 
close  to  his  ear,  ending  his  discordant  uproar  with  a 
peal  of  hmnan  laughter.  Five  strapping  damsels  — 
so,  at  least,  their  petticoats  bespoke  them,  in  spite  of 
an  awful  freedom  in  the  flourish  of  their  legs  —  joined 
hands,  and  danced  around  him,  inviting  him  by  their 
gestures  to  perform  a  hornpipe  in  the  midst.  Re- 
leased from  these  gay  persecutors,  a  clown  in  motley 
rapped  him  on  the  back  with  a  blown  bladder,  iu 
which  a  handful  of  dried  peas  rattled  horribly. 

Unquestionably,  a  care-stricken  mortal  has  no  busi- 
ness abroad,  when  the  rest  of  mankind  are  at  high 
carnival ;  they  must  either  pelt  him  and  absolutely 
martyr  him  with  jests,  and  finally  biuy  him  beneath 
the  aggregate  heap ;  or  else  the  potency  of  his  darker 
mood,  because  the  tissue  of  human  life  takes  a  sad  dye 
more  readily  than  a  gay  one,  will  quell  their  holiday 
humors,  like  the  aspect  of  a  death Vhead  at  a  banquet. 
Only  that  we  know  Kenyon's  errand,  we  could  hardly 
forgive  him  for  venturing  into  the  Corso  with  that 
troubled  face. 

Even  yet,  his  merry  martyrdom  was  not  half  over. 
There  came  along  a  gigantio  female  figure,  seven  feet 


Digitized 


by  Google 


504  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

high,  at  least,  and  taking  up  a  third  of  the  street's 
breadth  with  the  preposterously  swelling  sphere  of  her 
crinoline  skirts.  Singling  out  the  sculptor,  she  began 
to  make  a  ponderous  assault  upon  his  heart,  throwing 
amorous  glances  at  him  out  of  her  great  goggle-eyes, 
offering  him  a  vast  bouquet  of  sunflowers  and  nettles, 
and  soliciting  his  pity  by  all  sorts  of  pathetic  and  pas* 
sionate  dumb-show.  Her  suit  meeting  no  favor,  the 
rejected  Titaness  made  a  gesture  of  despair  and  rage ; 
then  suddenly  drawing  a  huge  pistol,  she  took  aim 
right  at  the  obdurate  sculptor's  breast,  and  pidled 
the  trigger.  The  shot  took  effect,  for  the  abominable 
plaything  went  off  by  a  spring,  like  a  boy's  popgun, 
covering  Kenyon  with  a  cloud  of  lime-dust,  under 
shelter  of  which  the  revengeful  damsel  strode  away. 

Hereupon,  a  whole  host  of  absurd  figures  surrounded 
him  pretending  to  sympathize  in  his  mishap.  Clowns 
and  party-colored  harlequins ;  orang-outangs ;  bear- 
headed,  bull-headed,  and  dog-headed  individuals ;  faces 
that  would  have  been  human,  but  for  their  enormous 
noses ;  one  terrific  creature,  with  a  visage  right  in  the 
centre  of  his  breast ;  and  all  other  imaginable  kinds 
of  monstrosity  and  exaggeration.  These  apparitions 
appeared  to  be  investigating  the  case,  after  the  fashion 
of  a  coroner's  jury,  poking  their  pasteboard  counte- 
nances close  to  the  sculptor's  with  an  unchangeable 
grin,  that  gave  still  more  ludicrous  effect  to  the  comic 
alarm  and  sorrow  of  their  gestures.  Just  then,  a  fig- 
ure came  by,  in  a  gray  wig  and  rusty  gown,  with  an 
inkhom  at  his  button-hole,  and  a  pen  behind  his  ear  j 
he  announced  himself  as  a  notary,  and  offered  to  make 
the  last  will  and  testament  of  the  assassinated  man. 
This  solemn  duty,  however,  was  interrupted  by  a  sur 
geon,  who  brandished  a  lancet,  three  feet  long,  and 
proposed  to  him  to  let  him  take  blood. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A  FROLIC  OF  THE  CARNIVAL.  605 

The  affair  was  so  like  a  feverish  dream,  that  Ken* 
yon  resigned  himself  to  let  it  take  its  com-se.  Fortu- 
nately the  hmnors  of  the  Carnival  pass  from  one  alv 
surdity  to  another,  without  lingering  long  enough  on 
any,  to  wear  out  even  the  slightest  of  them.  The  pas- 
siveness  of  his  demeanor  afforded  too  little  scope  for 
such  broad  merriment  as  the  masqueraders  sought. 
In  a  few  moments  they  vanished  from  Hm,  as  dreams 
and  spectres  do,  leaving  him  at  liberty  to  pursue  his 
quest,  with  no  impediment  except  the  crowd  that 
blocked  up  the  footway. 

He  had  not  gone  far  when  the  peasant  and  the  con- 
tadina  met  him.  They  were  still  hand  in  hand,  and 
appeared  to  be  straying  through  the  grotesque  and 
animated  scene,  taking  as  little  part  in  it  as  himself. 
It  might  be  because  he  recognized  them,  and  knew 
their  solemn  secret,  that  the  sculptor  fancied  a  mel- 
ancholy emotion  to  be  expressed  by  the  very  move- 
ment and  attitudes  of  these  two  figures  ;  and  even  the 
grasp  of  their  hands,  uniting  them  so  closely,  seemed 
to  set  them  in  a  sad  remoteness  from  the  world  at 
which  they  gazed. 

"  I  rejoice  to  meet  you,"  said  Kenyon. 

But  Uiey  looked  at  him  through  the  eye-holes  of 
their  black  masks,  without  answering  a  word. 

"  Pray  give  me  a  little  light  on  the  matter  which  1 
have  so  much  at  heart,"  said  he ;  "  if  you  know  any- 
thing of  Hilda,  for  Heaven's  sake,  speak  I " 

Still,  they  were  silent ;  and  the  sculptor  began  to  im- 
agine that  he  must  have  mistaken  the  identity  of  these 
figures,  there  being  such  a  multitude  in  similar  cos- 
tume. Yet  there  was  no  other  Donatello,  no  other 
Minam.  He  felt,  too,  that  spiritual  certainty  which 
impresses  us  with  the  presence  of  our  friendSf  apart 
from  any  testimony  of  tho  senses* 

Digitized  by  LjOOQIC 


506  ROMANCE   OF  MONTE  BENl. 

"You  are  unkind,'*  resumed  he,  — "knowing  the 
anxiety  which  oppresses  me,  —  not  to  relieve  it,  if  in 
your  power." 

The  reproach  evidently  had  its  effect ;  for  the  con- 
tadina  now  spoke,  and  it  was  Miriam's  voice. 

"  We  gave  you  all  the  light  we  could,"  said  she. 
^You  are  yourself  imkind,  though  you  little  think 
how  much  so,  to  come  between  us  at  this  hour.  There 
may  be  a  sacred  hour,  even  in  carnival  time." 

In  another  state  of  mind,  Kenyon  could  have  been 
amused  by  the  impulsiveness  of  this  response,  and  a 
sort  of  vivacity  that  he  had  often  noted  in  Miriam's 
conversation.  But  he  was  conscious  of  a  profound 
sadness  in  her  tone,  overpowering  its  momentary  irri- 
tation, and  assuring  him  that  a  pale,  tear-stained  face 
was  hidden  behind  her  mask. 

"  Forgive  me  !  "  said  he. 

Donatello  here  extended  his  hand,  —  not  that  which 
was  clasping  Miriam's, — and  she,  too,  put  her  free 
one  into  the  sculptor's  left ;  so  that  they  were  a  linked 
circle  of  three,  with  many  reminiscences  and  forebod- 
ings flashing  through  their  hearts.  Kenyon  knew  in- 
tuitively that  these  once  familiar  friends  were  parting 
with  him,  now. 

"Farewell ! "  they  all  throe  said,  in  the  same  breath. 

No  sooner  was  the  word  spoken,  than  they  loosed 
their  hands ;  and  the  uproar  of  the  Carnival  swept  like 
a  tempestuous  sea  over  the  spot,  which  they  had  in- 
cluded within  their  small  circle  of  isolated  feeling. 

By  this  interview,  the  sculptor  had  learned  nothing 
:n  reference  to  Hilda ;  but  he  understood  that  he  was 
CO  adhere  to  the  instructions  already  received,  and 
await  a  solution  of  the  mystery  in  some  mode  that  he 
^uld  not  yet  anticipate.     Passing  his  hands  over  hia 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A  FROLIC  OF  THE  CARNIVAL.  607 

eyes,  and  looking  about  him,  —  for  the  event  just 
described  bad  made  the  scene  even  more  dreamlike 
than  before,  —  he  now  found  himself  approaching  that 
broad  piazza  bordering  on  the  Corso,  which  has  for  its 
central  object  the  sculptured  column  of  Antoninus.  It 
was  not  far  from  this  vicinity  that  Miriam  had  bid  him 
wait.  Struggling  onward,  as  fast  as  the  tide  of  merry- 
makers, setting  strong  against  him,  would  permit,  he 
was  now  beyond  the  Palazzo  Colonna,  and  began  to 
count  the  houses.  The  fifth  was  a  palace,  with  a  long 
front  upon  the  Corso,  and  of  stately  height,  but  some- 
what grim  with  age. 

Over  its  arched  and  pillared  entrance  there  was  a 
balcony,  richly  hung  with  tapestry  and  damask,  and 
tenanted,  for  the  time,  by  a  gentleman  of  venerable  as- 
pect, and  a  group  of  ladies.  The  white  hair  and  whis- 
kers of  the  former,  and  the  winter-roses  in  his  cheeks, 
had  an  English  look ;  the  ladies,  too,  showed  a  fair- 
haired  Saxon  bloom,  and  seemed  to  taste  the  mirth  of 
the  Carnival  with  the  freshness  of  spectators  to  whom 
the  scene  was  new.  All  the  party,  the  old  gentleman 
with  grave  earnestness,  as  if  he  were  defending  a  ram- 
part, and  his  young  companions  with  exuberance  of 
frolic,  showered  confetti  inexhaustibly  upon  the  pas- 
sers-by. 

In  the  rear  of  the  balcony,  a  broad-brimmed,  eccle- 
siastical beaver  was  visible.  An  abbate,  probably  an 
acquaintance  and  cicerone  of  the  English  family,  was 
sitting  there,  and  enjoying  the  scene,  though  partially 
withdrawn  from  view,  as  the  deconmi  for  his  order 
dictated. 

There  seemed  no  better  nor  other  course  for  Kenyon, 
than  to  keep  watch  at  this  appointed  spot,  waiting 
ior  whatever  should  happen  next.     Clasping  his  arm 


Digitized 


by  Google 


^08  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

round  a  lamp-post,  to  prevent  being  carried  away  by 
the  turbulent  stream  of  wayfarers,  he  scrutinized  every 
face,  with  the  idea  that  some  one  of  them  might  meet 
his  eyes  with  a  glance  of  intelligence.  He  looked  at 
each  mask,  —  harlequin,  ape,  bulbous-headed  monster, 
or  anything  that  was  absurdest,  —  not  knowing  but 
that  the  messenger  might  come,  even  in  such  fantastic 
guise.  Or,  perhaps,  one  of  those  quaint  figures,  in  the 
stately  ruff,  the  cloak,  tunic,  and  trunk-hose,  of  three 
centuries  ago,  might  bring  him  tidings  o£  Hilda,  out 
of  that  long-past  age.  At  times,  his  disquietude  took 
a  hopeful  aspect ;  and  he  fancied  that  Hilda  might 
come  by,  her  own  sweet  self,  in  some  shy  disguise 
which  the  instinct  of  his  love  would  be  sure  to  pene- 
trate. Or,  she  might  be  borne  past  on  a  triumphal 
car,  like  the  one  just  now  approaching,  its  slow-mov- 
ing wheels  encircled  and  spoked  with  foliage,  and 
drawn  by  horses,  that  were  harnessed  and  wreathed 
with  flowers.  Being,  at  best,  so  far  beyond  the  bounds 
of  reasonable  conjecture,  he  might  anticipate  the  wild- 
est event,  or  find  either  his  hopes  or  fears  disappointed 
in  what  appeared  most  probable. 

The  old  Englishman  and  his  daughters,  in  the  op* 
posite  balcony,  must  have  seen  something  unutterably 
absurd  in  the  sculptor's  deportment,  poring  into  this 
whirlpool  of  nonsense  so  earnestly,  in  quest  of  what 
was  to  make  his  life  dark  or  bright.  Earnest  people, 
who  try  to  get  a  reality  out  of  human  existence,  are 
necessarily  absurd  in  the  view  of  the  revellers  and 
masqueraders.  At  all  events,  after  a  good  deal  of 
mirth  at  the  expense  of  his  melancholy  visage,  the 
fair  occupants  of  the  balcony  favored  Kenyon  with  a 
salvo  of  confetti,  which  came  rattling  about  him  lika 
«  haU-storm.    Looking  up,  instinctively,  he  was  sor 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A  FROLIC  OF  THE  CARNIVAL.  509 

prised  to  see  the  abbate  in  the  background  lean  for- 
ward and  give  a  courteous  sign  of  recognition. 

It  was  the  same  old  priest  with  whom  he  had  seen 
Hilda,  at  the  confessional ;  the  same  with  whom  he 
had  talked  of  her  disappearance  on  meeting  him  in  the 
street. 

Yet,  whatever  might  be  the  reason,  Kenyon  did  not 
now  associate  this  ecclesiastical  personage  with  the 
idea  of  Hilda.  His  eyes  lighted  on  the  old  man,  just 
for  an  instant,  and  then  returned  to  the  eddying 
throng  of  the  Corso,  on  his  minute  scrutiny  of  which 
depended,  for  aught  he  knew,  the  sole  chance  of  ever 
finding  any  trace  of  her.  There  was,  about  this  mo- 
ment, a  bustle  on  the  other  side  of  the  street,  the  cause 
of  which  Kenyon  did  not  see,  nor  exert  himself  to 
discover.  A  small  party  of  soldiers  or  gendarmes 
appeared  to  be  concerned  in  it;  they  were  perhaps 
arresting  some  disorderly  character,  who,  under  the 
influence  of  an  extra  flask  of  wine,  might  have  reeled 
across  the  mystic  limitation  of  carnival  proprieties. 

The  sculptor  heard  some  people  near  him  talking 
of  the  incident. 

"  That  contadina,  in  a  black  mask,  was  a  fine-  figure 
of  a  woman." 

*'  She  was  not  amiss,"  replied  a  female  voice  ;  "  but 
her  companion  was  far  the  handsomer  figure  of  the . 
two.     Could  they  be  really  a  peasant  and  a  contadina, 
do  you  imagine  ?  " 

"  No,  no,"  said  the  other.  "  It  is  some  frolic  of  the 
Carnival,  carried  a  little  too  far." 

This  conversation  might  have  excited  Kenyon's  in- 
terest ;  only  that,  just  as  the  last  words  were  spoken, 
he  was  hit  by  two  missiles,  both  of  a  kind  that  were 
flying  abundantly  on  that  gay  battle-field.     One,  we 


Digitized 


by  Google 


510  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

are  ashamed  to  say,  was  a  cauliflower,  which,  flung  hj 
a  young  man  from  a  passing  carriage,  came  with  a 
prodigious  thump  against  his  shoulder  ;  the  other  was 

I  a  single  rose-bud,  so  fresh  that  it  seemed  that  moment 

i  gathered.  It  flew  from  the  opposite  balcony,  smote 
gently  on  his  lips,  and  fell  into  his  hand.     He  looked 

'  upward,  and  beheld  the  face  of  his  lost  Hilda ! 

\  She  was  dressed  in  a  white  domino,  and  looked  pale 
and  bewildered,  and  yet  full  of  tender  joy.  Moreover, 
there  was  a  gleam  of  delicate  mirthf  ulness  in  her  eyes, 
which  the  sculptor  had  seen  there  only  two  or  three 
times,  in  the  course  of  their  acquaintance,  but  thought 
it  the  most  bewitching  and  fairy-like  of  all  Hilda's  ex- 
pressions. That  soft,  mirthful  smile  caused  her  to 
melt,  as  it  were,  into  the  wild  frolic  of  •  the  Carnival, 
and  become  not  so  strange  and  alien  to  the  scene,  as 
her  unexpected  apparition  must  otherwise  have  made 
her. 

Meanwhile,  the  venerable  Englishman  and  his 
daughters  were  staring  at  poor  Hilda  in  a  way  that 
proved  them  altogether  astonished,  as  well  as  inex- 
pressibly shocked,  by  her  sudden  intrusion  into  their 
private  balcony.  They  looked,  —  as,  indeed,  English 
people  of  respectability  would,  if  an  angel  were  to 
alight  in  their  circle,  without  due  introduction  from 
somebody  whom  they  knew,  in  the  court  above,  — 
they  looked  as  if  an  unpardonable  liberty  had  been 
taken,  and  a  suitable  apology  must  be  made ;  after 
which,  ^he  intruder  would  be  expected  to  withdraw. 

The  abbate,  however,  drew  the  old  gentleman  aside, 
and  whispered  a  few  words  that  served  to  mollify 
him ;  he  bestowed  on  Hilda  a  sufficiently  benignant, 
though  still  a  perplexed  and  questioning  regard,  and 
Invited  her,  in  dumb-show,  to  put  herself  at  her  ease. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A  FROLIC  OF  THE   CARNIVAL.  611 

But,  whoever  was  in  fault,  our  shy  and  gentle  Hilda 
had  dreamed  of  no  intrusion.  Whence  she  had  come, 
or  where  she  had  been  hidden,  during  this  mysterious 
interval,  we  can  but  imperfectly  surmise,  and  do  not 
mean,  at  present,  to  make  it  a  matter  of  formal  ex- 
planation with  the  reader.  It  is  better,  perhaps,  to 
fancy  that  she  had  been  snatched  away  to  a  land  of 
picture ;  that  she  had  been  straying  with  Claude  in 
the  golden  light  which  he  used  to  shed  over  his  land- 
scapes, but  which  he  could  never  have  beheld  with  his 
waking  eyes  till  he  awoke  in  the  better  clime.  We 
will  imagine  that,  for  the  sake  of  the  true  simplicity 
with  which  she  loved  them,  Hilda  had  been  permitted, 
for  a  season,  to  converse  with  the  great,  departed  mas- 
ters of  the  pencil,  and  behold  the  diviner  works  which 
they  have  painted  in  heavenly  colors.  Guido  had  shown 
her  another  portrait  of  Beatrice  Cenci,  done  from  the 
celestial  life,  in  which  that  forlorn  mystery  of  the 
earthly  countenance  was  exchanged  for  a  radiant  joy. 
Ferugino  had  allowed  her  a  glimpse  at  his  easel,  on 
which  she  discerned  what  seemed  a  woman's  face,  but 
3o  divine,  by  the  very  depth  and  softness  of  its  woman- 
hood, that  a  gush  of  happy  tears  blinded  the  maiden's 
eyes  before  she  had  time  to  look.  Eaphael  had  taken 
Hilda  by  the  hand,  —  that  fine,  forcible  hand  which 
Kenyon  sculptured,  —  and  drawn  aside  the  curtain  of 
gold-fringed  cloud  that  hung  before  his  latest  master  • 
piece.  On  earth,  Baphael  painted  the  Transfigura* 
tion.  What  higher  scene  may  he  have  since  depicted, 
not  from  imagination,  but  as  revealed  to  his  actual 
Bight ! 

Neither  will  we  retrace  the  steps  by  which  she  re- 
turned to  the  actual  world.  For  the  present,  be  it 
^ough  to  say  that  Hilda  had  been  summoned  forth 


Digitized 


by  Google 


512  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

from  a  secret  place,  and  led  we  know  not  through  what 
mysterious  passages,  to  a  point  where  the  tumult  of 
life  burst  suddenly  upon  her  ears.  She  heard  the  tramp 
of  footsteps,  the  rattle  of  wheels,  and  the  mingled  hum 
of  a  multitude  of  voices,  with  strains  of  music  and  loud 
laughter  breaking  through.  Emerging  into  a  great, 
gloomy  hall,  a  curtain  was  drawn  aside ;  she  found 
herself  gently  propelled  into  an  open  balcony,  whence 
she  looked  out  upon  the  festal  street,  with  gay  tapes* 
tries  flaunting  over  all  the  palace  fronts,  the  windows 
thronged  with  merry,  faces,  and  a  crowd  of  maskers 
rioting  upon  the  pavement  below. 

Immediately,  she  seemed  to  become  a  portion  of  the 
scene.  Her  pale,  large-eyed,  fragile  beauty,  her  won- 
dering aspect  and  bewildered  grace,  attracted  the  gaze 
of  many ;  and  there  fell  around  her  a  shower  of  bou- 
quets, and  bonbons  —  freshest  blossoms  and  sweetest 
sugar-plums,  sweets  to  the  sweet — such  as  the  revel- 
lers of  tjie  Carnival  reserve  as  tributes  to  especial  love- 
liness. Hilda  pressed  her  hand  across  her  brow ;  she 
let  her  eyelids  fall,  and,  lifting  them  again,  looked 
through  the  grotesque  and  gorgeous  show,  the  chaos 
of  mad  jollity,  in  quest  of  some  object  by  which  she 
might  assure  herself  that  the  whole  spectacle  was  not 
an  illusion. 

Beneath  the  balcony,  she  recognized  a  familiar  and 
fondly  remembered  face.  The  spirit  of  the  hoar  and 
the  scene  exercised  its  influence  over  her  quick  and 
sensitive  nature ;  she  caught  up  one  of  the  rose-buds 
that  had  been  showered  upon  her,  and  aimed  it  at  the 
sculptor.  It  hit  the  mark ;  he  turned  his  sad  eyes  up- 
ward, and  there  was  Hilda,  in  whose  gentle  presence 
his  own  secret  sorrow  and  the  obtrusive  uproar  of  the 
Caniival  alike  died  away  from  his  perception. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


A  FROLIC  OF  THE  CARNIVAL.  618 

That  night,  the  lamp  beneath  the  Virgin's  shrine 
burned  as  brightly  as  if  it  had  never  been  extinguished  ,* 
and  though  the  one  faithful  dove  had  gone  to  her  mel- 
ancholy perch,  she  greeted  Hilda  rapturously  the  next 
morning,  and  smnmoned  her  less  constant  companions, 
whithersoever  they  had  flown,  to  renew  their  homage. 

VOL.  VI. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  L. 

MIRIAM,   HILDA,   KENYON,   DONATELLa 

The  gentle  reader,  we  trust,  would  not  thank  us  foi 
one  of  those  minute  elucidations,  which  are  so  tedious, 
and,  after  all,  so  unsatisfactory,  in  clearing  up  the  ro- 
mantic mysteries  of  a  story.  He  is  too  wise  to  insist 
upon  looking  closely  at  the  wrong  side  of  the  tapestry, 
after  the  right  one  has  been  sufficiently  displayed  to 
him,  woven  with  the  best  of  the  artist's  skill,  and  cun- 
ningly arranged  with  a  view  to  the  harmonious  exhibi- 
tion of  its  colors.  If  any  brilliant,  or  beautiful,  or 
even  tolerable  effect  have  been  produced,  this  pattern 
of  kindly  readers  will  accept  it  at  its  worth,  without 
tearing  its  web  apart,  with  the  idle  purpose  of  discover- 
ing how  the  threads  have  been  knit  together ;  for  the 
sagacity  by  which  he  is  distinguished  will  long  ago 
have  taught  him  that  any  narrative  of  human  action 
and  adventure  —  whether  we  call  it  history  or  romance 
—  is  certain  to  be  a  fragile  handiwork,  more  easily 
rent  than  mended.  The  actual  experience  of  even  the 
most  ordinary  life  is  full  of  events  that  never  explain 
themselves,  either  as  regards  their  origin  or  their  ten- 
dency. 

It  would  be  easy,  from  conversations  which  we  have 
held  with  the  sculptor,  to  suggest  a  clew  to  the  mys- 
tery of  Hilda's  disappearance ;  although,  as  long  as  she 
remained  in  Italy,  there  was  a  remarkable  reserve  in 
her  commimications  upon  this  subject,  even  to  her  most 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM,  HILDA,  KEN  YON,  DONATELLO.      615 

intimate  friends.  Either  a  pledge  of  secrecy  had  been 
exacted,  or  a  prudential  motive  warned  her  not  to  re- 
veal the  stratagems  of  a  religious  body,  or  the  secret 
acts  of  a  despotic  government  —  whichever  might  be 
responsible  in  the  present  instance — while  still  within 
the  scope  of  their  jurisdiction.  Possibly,  she  might 
not  herself  be  fully  aware  what  poTcr  had  laid  its 
grasp  upon  her  person.  What  has  chiefly  perplexed 
us,  however,  among  Hilda's  adventures,  is  the  mode  of 
her  release,  in  which  some  inscrutable  tyranny  or  other 
seemed  to  take  part  in  the  frolic  of  the  Carnival.  We 
can  only  account  for  it,  by  supposing  that  the  fitful 
and  fantastic  imagination  of  a  woman  —  sportive,  be- 
cause she  must  otherwise  be  desperate  —  had  arranged 
this  incident,  and  made  it  the  condition  of  a  step  which 
her  conscience,  or  the  conscience  of  another,  required 
her  to  take. 

A  few  days  after  Hilda's  reappearance,  she  and  the 
sculptor  were  straying  together  through  the  streets  of 
Rome.  Being  deep  in  talk,  it  so  happened  that  they 
found  themselves  near  the  majestic,  pillared  portico, 
and  huge,  black  rotundity  of  the  Pantheon.  It  stands 
almost  at  the  central  point  of  the  labyrinthine  intrica- 
cies of  the  modem  city,  and  often  presents  itself  be- 
fore the  bewildered  stranger,  when  he  is  in  search  of 
other  objects,  Hilda,  looking  up,  proposed  that  they 
should  enter. 

"  I  never  pass  it  without  going  in,"  she  said,  "  to 
pay  my  homage  at  the  tomb  of  Raphael." 

*'  Nor  I,"  said  Kenyon,  "  without  stopping  to  admire 
the  noblest  edifice  which  the  barbarism  of  the  early 
ages,  and  the  more  barbarous  pontiffs  and  princes  of 
later  ones,  have  spared  to  us." 

They  went  in,  accordingly,  and  stood  in  the  free 


Digitized 


by  Google 


616  ROMANCE   OF  MONTE  BENL 

space  of  that  great  circle,  around  which  are  ranged  the 
arched  recesses  and  stately  altars,  formerly  dedicated 
to  heathen  gods,  but  Christianized  through  twelve  cen- 
turies gone  by.  The  world  has  nothing  else  like  the 
Pantheon.  So  grand  it  is,  that  the  pasteboard  statues 
over  the  lofty  cornice  do  not  disturb  the  effect,  any 
more  than  the  tin  crowns  and  hearts,  the  dusty  arti- 
ficial flowers,  and  all  manner  of  trumpery  gewgaws, 
hanging  at  the  saintly  shrines.  The  rust  and  dingi- 
ness  that  have  dimmed  the  precious  marble  on  the 
Walls ;  the  pavement,  with  its  great  squares  and  rounds 
of  porphyry  and  granite,  cracked  crosswise  and  in  a 
hundred  directions,  showing  how  roughly  the  trouble 
some  ages  have  trampled  here ;  the  gray  dome  above, 
with  its  opening  to  the  sky,  as  if  heaven  were  looking 
down  into  the  interior  of  this  place  of  worship,  left 
unimpeded  for  prayers  to  ascend  the  more  freely :  all 
these  things  make  an  impression  of  solemnity,  which 
St.  Peter's  itself  fails  to  produce. 

" I  think,"  said  the  sculptor,  "it  is  to  the  aperture 
in  the  dome  —  that  great  Eye,  gazing  heavenward  — - 
that  the  Pantheon  owes  the  peculiarity  of  its  effect. 
It  is  so  heathenish,  as  it  were, — so  unlike  all  the  snug- 
ness  of  our  modem  civilization!  Look,  too,  at  the 
pavement,  directly  beneath  the  open  space !  So  much 
rain  has  fallen  there,  in  the  last  two  thousand  years, 
that  it  is  green  with  small,  fine  moss,  such  as  grows 
over  tombstones  in  a  damp  English  churchyard." 

"I  like  better,"  replied  Hilda,  "to  look  at  the 
bright,  blue  sky,  roofing  the  edifice  where  the  builders 
left  it  open.  It  is  very  delightful,  in  a  breezy  day,  to 
see  the  masses  of  white  cloud  float  over  the  opening, 
and  then  the  sunshine  fall  through  it  again,  fitfully^ 
as  it  does  now.     Would  it  be  any  wonder  if  we  were 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM,  HILDA,  KENYON,  DONATELLO.    617 

to  see  angels  hovering  there,  partly  in  and  partly  out, 
with  genial,  heavenly  faces,  not  intercepting  the  light, 
but  only  transmuting  it  into  beautiful  colors  ?  Look 
at  that  broad,  golden  beam  —  a  sloping  cataract  of 
sunlight  —  which  comes  down  from  the  aperture  and 
rests  upon  the  shrine,  at  the  right  hand  of  the  en- 
trance I " 

"  There  is  a  dusky  picture  over  that  altar,"  observed 
the  sculptor.  "  Let  us  go  and  see  if  this  strong  illu- 
mination brings  out  any  iiLerit  in  it." 

Approaching  the  shrine,  they  found  the  picture  lit< 
tie  worth  looking  at,  but  could  not  forbear  smiling,  to 
see  that  a  very  plump  and  comfortable  tabby-cat  — 
whom  we  ourselves  have  often  observed  haunting  the 
Pantheon  —  had  established  herself  on  the  altar,  in 
the  genial  sunbeam,  and  was  fast  asleep  among  the 
holy  tapers.  Their  footsteps  disturbing  her,  she 
awoke,  raised  herself,  and  sat  blinking  in  the  sun, 
yet  with  a  certain  dignity  and  self-possession,  as  if 
conscious  of  representing  a  saint. 

"  I  presume,"  remarked  Kenyon,  "  that  this  is  the 
first  of  the  feline  race  that  has  ever  set  herself  up  as 
an  object  of  worship,  in  the  Pantheon  or  elsewhere, 
since  the  days  of  ancient  Egypt.  See ;  there  is  a 
peasant  from  the  neighboring  market,  actually  kneel- 
ing to  her !  She  seems  a  gracious  and  benignant  saint 
enough." 

"  Do  not  make  me  laugh,"  said  Hilda,  reproach- 
fully, "  but  help  me  to  drive  tne  creature  away.  It 
distresses  me  to  see  that  poor  man,  or  any  human  be- 
ing, directing  his  prayers  so  much  amiss." 

**'Then,  Hilda,"  answered  the  sculptor,  more  seri- 
ously, "  the  only  place  in  the  Pantheon  for  you  and 
me  to  kneel  is  on  the  pavement  beneath  the  central 


Digitized 


by  Google 


518  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

aperture.  If  we  pray  at  a  saint's  shrine,  we  shall  give 
utterance  to  earthly  wishes ;  but  if  we  pray  face  to 
face  with  the  Deity,  we  shall  feel  it  impious  to  petition 
for  aught  that  is  narrow  and  selfish.  Methinks,  it  is 
this  that  makes  the  Catholics  so  delight  in  the  wor- 
ship of  saints;  they  can  bring  up  all  their  little 
worldly  wants  and  whims,  their  individualities  and 
human  weaknesses,  not  as  things  to  be  repented  of, 
but  to  be  humored  by  the  canonized  humanity  to  which 
they  pray.     Indeed,  it  is  very  tempting ! " 

What  Hilda  might  have  answered  must  be  left  to 
conjecture ;  for  as  she  turned  from  the  shrine,  her  eyes 
were  attracted  to  the  figure  of  a  female  penitent,  kneel- 
ing on  the  pavement  just  beneath  the  great  central 
eye,  in  the  very  spot  which  Kenyon  had  designated  as 
the  only  one  whence  prayers  should  ascend.  The  up* 
turned  face  was  invisible,  behind  a  veil  or  mask,  which 
formed  a  part  of  the  garb. 

"It  cannot  be!"  whispered  Hilda,  with  emotion. 
*'  No  ;  it  cannot  be  1 " 

"  What  disturbs  you  ?  "  asked  Kenyon.  "  Why  do 
you  tremble  so  ?  " 

"  If  it  were  possible,"  she  replied,  "  I  should  fancy 
that  kneeling  figure  to  be  Miriam  !  " 

"  As  you  say,  it  is  impossible,"  rejoined  the  sculp 
tor.  "  We  know  too  well  what  has  befallen  both  her 
and  Donatello." 

"  Yes ;  it  is  impossible! "  repeated  Hilda. 

Her  voice  was  stiii  tremulous,  however,  and  she 
seemed  unable  to  withdraw  her  attention  from  the 
kneeling  figure.  Suddenly,  and  as  if  the  idea  of  Mir* 
iam  had  opened  the  whole  volume  of  Hilda's  remini» 
oences,  she  put  this  question  to  the  sculptor:— 

"  Was  Donatello  really  a  Faun?  " 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM,  HILDA,  KENYON,  DONATELLO.    519 

**  If  you  had  ever  studied  the  pedigree  of  the  f ar-de* 
scended  heir  of  Monte  Beni,  as  I  did,"  answered  Ken- 
yon,  with  an  irrepressible  smile,  "you  would  have 
retained  few  doubts  on  that  point.  Faun  or  not,  he 
had  a  genial  nature,  which,  had  the  rest  of  mankind 
been  in  accordance  with  it,  would  have  made  earth  a 
;  paradise  to  our  poor  friend.  It  seems  the  moral  of 
his  story,  that  human  beings  of  Donatello^s  character, 
compounded  especially  for  happiness,  have  no  longer 
any  business  on  earth,  or  elsewhere.  Life  has  grown 
so  sadly  serious,  that  such  men  must  change  their  na- 
ture, or  else  perish,  like  the  antediluvian  creatures, 
that  required,  as  the  condition  of  their  existence,  a 
more  summer-like  atmosphere  than  ours." 

"  I  will  not  accept  your  moral  I "  replied  the  hope- 
ful and  happy-natured  Hilda. 

"  Then  here  is  another ;  take  your  choice !  "  said 
the  sculptor,  remembering  what  Miriam  had  recently 
suggested,  in  reference  to  the  same  point.  "  He  per- 
petrated a  great  crime  ;  and  his  remorse,  gnawing  into 
his  soul,  has  awakened  it ;  developing  a  thousand  high 
capabilities,  moral  and  intellectual,  which  we  never 
should  have  dreamed  of  asking  for,  within  the  scanty 
compass  of  the  Donatello  whom  we  knew." 

"  I  know  not  whether  this  is  so,"  said  Hilda.  "  But 
what  then?" 

"Here  comes  my  perplexity,"  continued  Kenyon. 
"  Sin  has  educated  Donatello,  and  elevated  him.  Is 
sin,  then,  —  which  we  deem  such  a  dreadful  blackness 
in  the  universe,  —  is  it,  like  sorrow,  merely  an  element 
of  human  education,  through  which  we  struggle  to  a 
higher  and  purer  state  than  we  could  otherwise  have 
attained  ?  Did  Adam  fall,  that  we  might  ultimately 
rise  to  a  far  loftier  paradise  than  his  ?  " 


Digitized 


by  Google 


620  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENI. 

"  Oh,  hiish  I "  cried  Hilda,  shrinking  from  him  with 
an  expression  of  horror  which  wounded  the  poor,  spec- 
ulative sculptor  to  the  soul.  "  This  is  terrible ;  and  I 
could  weep  for  you,  if  you  indeed  believe  it.  Do  no/ 
you  perceive  what  a  mockery  your  creed  makes,  not 
only  of  all  religious  sentiments,  but  of  moral  law  ?  and 
how  it  annuls  and  obliterates  whatever  precepts  of 
Heaven  are  written  deepest  within  us?  You  have 
shocked  me  beyond  words  ! " 

"  Forgive  me,  Hilda ! "  exclaimed  the  sculptor,  start- 
led by  her  agitation;  "I  never  did  believe  it  I  But 
the  mind  wanders  wild  and  wide  ;  and,  so  lonely  as  I 
live  and  work,  I  have  neither  pole-star  above  nor  light 
of  cottage-windows  here  below,  to  bring  me  home. 
Were  you  my  guide,  my  counsellor,  my  inmost  friend, 
with  that  white  wisdom  which  clothes  you  as  a  celes- 
tial garment,  aU  would  go  well.  O  Hilda,  guide  me 
home!" 

"  We  are  both  lonely ;  both  far  from  home !  "  said 
Hilda,  her  eyes  filling  with  tears.  "  I  am  a  poor,  weak 
girl,  and  have  no  such  wisdom  as  you  fancy  in  me." 

What  further  may  have  passed  between  these  lov- 
ers, while  standing  before  the  pillared  shrine,  and  the 
marble  Madonna  that  marks  Raphael's  tomb,  whither 
they  had  now  wandered,  we  are  unable  to  record.  But 
when  the  kneeling  figure  beneath  the  open  eye  of  the 
Pantheon  arose,  she  looked  towards  the  pair,  and  ex- 
tended her  hands  with  a  gesture  of  benediction.  Then 
they  knew  that  it  was  Miriam.  They  suffered  her  to 
glide  out  of  the  portal,  however,  without  a  greeting ; 
for  those  extended  hands,  even  while  they  blessed, 
seemed  to  repel,  as  if  Miriam  stood  on  the  other  side 
of  a  fathomless  abyss,  and  warned  them  from  its  verge. 

So  Kenyon  won  the  gentle  Hilda's  shy  affectioiii 


Digitized 


by  Google 


MIRIAM,  HILDA,  KENYON,  DONATELLO.    621 

and  her  consent  to  be  his  bride.  Another  hand  must 
henceforth  trim  the  lamp  before  the  Virgin's  shrine ; 
for  Hilda  was  coming  down  from  her  old  tower,  to  be 
herself  enshrined  and  worshipped  as  a  household  saint, 
in  the  light  of  her  husband's  fireside.  And,  now  that 
life  had  so  much  human  promise  in  it,  they  resolved  to 
go  back  to  their  own  land ;  because  the  years,  after 
all,  have  a  kind  of  emptiness,  when  we  spend  too  many 
of  them  on  a  foreign  shore.  We  defer  the  reality  of 
life,  in  such  cases,  until  a  future  moment,  when  we 
shall  again  breathe  our  native  air ;  but,  by  and  by, 
there  are  no  future  moments ;  or,  if  we  do  return,  we 
find  that  the  native  air  has  lost  its  invigorating  qual- 
ity, and  that  life  has  shifted  its  reality  to  the  spot 
where  we  have  deemed  oui'selves  only  temporary  resi- 
dents. Thus,  between  two  countries,  we  have  none  at 
all,  or  only  that  little  space  of  either,  in  which  we 
finally  lay  down  our  discontented  bones.  It  is  wise, 
therefore,  to  come  back  betimes,  or  never. 

Before  they  quitted  Rome,  a  bridal  gi£t  was  laid  on 
Hilda's  table.  It  was  a  bracelet,  evidently  of  great 
cost,  being  composed  of  seven  ancient  Etruscan  gems, 
dug  out  of  seven  sepulchres,  and  each  one  of  them  the 
signet  of  some  princely  personage,  who  had  lived  an 
immemorial  time  ago.  Hilda  remembered  this  pre- 
cious ornament.  It  had  been  Miriam's;  and  once, 
with  the  exuberance  of  fancy  that  distinguished  her, 
she  had  amused  herself  with  telling  a  mythical  and 
magic  legend  for  each  gem,  comprising  the  imaginary 
adventures  and  catastrophe  of  its  former  wearer.  Thus, 
the  Etruscan  bracelet  became  the  connecting  bond  of 
a  series  of  seven  wondrous  tales,  all  of  which,  as  they 
were  dug  out  of  seven  sepulchres,  were  characterized 
by  a  seven-fold  sepulchral  gloom:  such  as  Miriam's 


Digitized 


by  Google 


622  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENT. 

imagination,  shadowed  by  her  own  misfortunes,  was 
wont  to  fling  over  its  most  sportive  flights. 

And  now,  happy  as  Hilda  was,  the  bracelet  brought 
the  tears  into  her  eyes,  as  being,  in  its  entire  circle, 
the  symbol  of  as  sad  a  mystery  as  any  that  Miriam 
had  attached  to  the  separate  gems.  For,  what  was 
Miriam's  life  to  be?  And  where  was  Donatello? 
But  Hilda  had  a  hopeful  soul,  and  saw  sunlight  on 
the  mountain-tops. 

CONCLUSION. 

Therb  comes  to  the  author,  from  many  readers  of 
the  foregoing  pages,  a  demand  for  further  elucidations 
respecting  the  mysteries  of  the  story. 

He  reluctantly  avails  himself  of  the  opportimity  af- 
forded by  a  new  edition,  to  explain  such  incidents  and 
passages  as  may  have  been  left  too  much  in  the  dark ; 
reluctantly,  he  repeats,  because  the  necessity  makes 
him  sensible  that  he  can  have  succeeded  but  imper- 
fectly, at  best,  in  throwing  about  this  Romance  the 
kind  of  atmosphere  essential  to  the  effect  at  which  he 
aimed. 

He  designed  the  story  and  the  characters  to  bear,  of 
course,  a  certain  relation  to  human  nature  and  human 
life,  but  still  to  be  so  artfully  and  airily  removed  from 
our  mundane  sphere,  that  some  laws  and  proprieties 
of  their  own  should  be  implicitly  and  insensibly  ac- 
knowledged. 

The  idea  of  the  modem  Faun,  for  example,  loses  all 
the  poetry  and  beauty  which  the  Author  fancied  in  it, 
and  becomes  nothing  better  than  a  grotesque  absurd- 
ity, if  we  bring  it  into  the  actual  light  of  day.  He 
had  hoped  to  mystify  this  anomalous  creature  between 
the  Real  and  the  Fantastic,  in  such  a  manner  that  the 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CONCLUSION.  528 

reader's  sympathies  might  be  excited  to  a  certain 
pleasurable  degree,  without  impelling  him  to  ask  how 
Cuvier  would  have  classified  poor  Donatello,  or  to  in- 
sist upon  being  told,  in  so  many  words,  whether  he 
had  furry  ears  or  no.  As  respects  all  who  ask  such 
\  questions,  the  book  is,  to  that  extent,  a  failure. 

Nevertheless,  the  Author  fortimately  has  it  in  his 
power  to  throw  light  upon  several  matters  in  which 
some  of  his  readers  appear  to  feel  an  interest.  To 
confess  the  truth,  he  was  himself  troubled  with  a  cu- 
riosity similar  to  that  which  he  has  just  deprecated 
on  the  part  of  his  readers,  and  once  took  occasion  to 
cross-examine  his  friends,  Hilda  and  the  sculptor,  and 
to  pry  into  several  dark  recesses  of  the  story,  with 
which  they  had  heretofore  imperfectly  acquainted  him. 

We  three  had  climbed  to  the  top  of  St.  Peter's, 
and  were  looking  down  upon  the  Rome  we  were  soon 
to  leave,  but  which  (having  already  sinned  sufficiently 
in  that  way)  it  is  not  my  purpose  further  to  describe. 
It  occurred  to  me,  that,  being  so  remote  in  the  upper 
air,  my  friends  might  safely  utter,  here,  the  secrets 
which  it  would  be  perilous  even  to  whisper  on  lower 
earth. 

*'  Hilda,"  I  began,  "  can  you  tell  me  the  contents  of 
that  mysterious  packet  which  Miriam  intrusted  to  your 
charge,  and  which  was  addressed  to  Signore  Luca 
'  Barboni,  at  the  Palazzo  Cenci  ?  " 

"  I  never  had  any  further  knowledge  of  it,'*  repliec 
Hilda,  "  nor  felt  it  right  to  let  myself  be  curious  upon 
the  subject." 

"As  to  its  precise  contents,"  interposed  Kenyon, 
"  it  is  impossible  to  speak.  But  Miriam,  isolated  as 
she  seemed,  had  family  connections  in  Rome,  one  of 
whom,  there  is  reason  to  believe,  occupied  a  position 
in  the  papal  government. 

Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC 


624  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENL 

"  This  Signore  Luca  Barboni  was  either  the  assumed 
name  of  the  personage  in  question,  or  the  medium  of 
communication  between  that  individual  and  Miriam. 
Now,  under  such  a  government  as  that  of  Rome,  it  ia 
obvious  that  Miriam's  privacy  and  isolated  life  could 
only  be  maintained  through  the  connivance  and  sup- 
port of  some  influential  person  connected  with  the  ad- 
ministration of  affairs.  Free  and  self -controlled  as 
she  appeared,  her  every  movement  was  watched  and 
investigated  far  more  thoroughly  by  the  priestly  rulers 
than  by  her  dearest  friends. 

^^  Miriam,  if  I  mistake  not,  had  a  purpose  to  with- 
draw herself  from  this  irksome  scrutiny,  and  to  seek 
real  obscurity  in  another  land  ;  and  the  packet,  to  be 
delivered  long  after  her  departure,  contained  a  refer- 
ence to  this  design,  besides  certain  family  dociunents, 
which  were  to  be  imparted  to  her  relative  as  from  one 
dead  and  gone." 

'*  Yes,  it  is  clear  as  a  London  fog,"  I  remarked. 
"  On  this  head  no  further  elucidation  can  be  desired. 
But  when  Hilda  went  quietly  to  deliver  the  packet, 
why  did  she  so  mysteriously  vanish  ?  " 

"  You  must  recollect,"  replied  Kenyon,  with  a  glance 
of  friendly  commiseration  at  my  obtuseness,  "that 
Miriam  had  utterly  disappeared,  leaving  no  trace  by 
which  her  whereabouts  could  be  known.  In  the  mean 
time,  the  municipal  authorities  had  become  aware  of 
the  murder  of  the  Capuchin ;  and  from  many  preced- 
ing circumstances,  such  as  his  persecution  of  Miriam, 
they  must  have  seen  an  obvious  connection  between 
herself  and  that  tragical  event.  Furthermore,  there 
is  reason  to  believe  that  Miriam  was  suspected  of  con- 
nection with  some  plot,  or  political  intrigue,  of  which 
tnere  may  have  been  tokens  in  the  packet.      And 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CONCLUSION.  525 

when  Hilda  appeared,  as  the  bearer  of  this  missive,  it 
was  really  quite  a  matter  of  course,  under  a  despotic 
government,  that  she  should  be  detained." 

"Ah,  quite  a  matter  of  coiu^e,  as  you  say,"  an* 
Bwered  I.  "  How  excessively  stupid  in  me  not  to 
have  seen  it  sooner  I  But  there  are  other  riddles.  On 
the  night  of  the  extinction  of  the  lamp,  you  met  Dona 
tello,  in  a  penitent's  garb,  and  afterwards  saw  and 
spoke  to  Miriam,  in  a  coach,  with  a  gem  glowing  on 
her  bosom.  What  was  the  business  of  these  two 
guilty  ones  in  Rome,  and  who  was  Miriam's  compan- 
ion?" 

"  Who  I  "  repeated  Kenyon,  "  why  her  official  rela- 
tive, to  be  sure  ;  and  as  to  their  business,  Donatello's 
still  gnawing  remorse  had  brought  him  hitherward,  in 
spite  of  Miriam's  entreaties,  and  kept  him  lingering 
in  the  neighborhood  of  Rome,  with  the  ultimate  pur- 
pose of  delivering  himself  up  to  justice.  Hilda's  dis- 
appearance, which  took  place  the  day  before,  was 
Imown  to  them  through  a  secret  channel,  and  had 
brought  them  into  the  city,  where  Miriam,  as  I  sur- 
mise, began  to  make  arrangements,  even  then,  for  that 
sad  frolic  of  the  Carnival." 

"And  where  was  Hilda  all  that  dreary  time  be- 
tween ?  "  inquired  I. 

"  Where  were  you,  Hilda  ?  "  asked  Kenyon,  smil- 
ing. 

Hilda  threw  her  eyes  on  all  sides,  and  seeing  that 
there  was  not  even  a  bird  of  the  air  to  fly  away  with 
the  secret,  nor  any  human  being  nearer  than  the  loit- 
erers by  the  obelisk,  in  the  piazza  below,  she  told  us 
about  her  mysterious  abode. 

"  I  was  a  prisoner  in  the  Convent  of  the  Sacr^ 
Coeur,  in  the  Trinity  de'  Monte/'  said  she,  "  but  in 


Digitized 


by  Google 


526  ROMANCE  OF  MONTE  BENl. 

Kuch  kindly  custody  of  pious  maidens,  and  watched 
over  by  such  a  dear  old  priest,  that  —  had  it  not  been 
for  one  or  two  disturbing  recollections,  and  also  be- 
cause I  am  a  daughter  of  the  Puritans  —  I  could  will- 
iugly  have  dwelt  there  forever. 

^^My  entanglement  with  Miriam's  misfortunes,  and 
the  good  abbate's  mistaken  hope  of  a  proselyte,  seem 
to  me  a  sufficient  clew  to  the  whole  mystery." 

"  The  atmosphere  is  getting  delightfully  lucid,"  ob- 
served I,  "  but  there  are  one  or  two  things  that  still 
puzzle  me.  Could  you  tell  me  —  and  it  shall  be  kept 
a  profound  secret,  I  assure  you  —  what  were  Miriam's 
real  name  and  rank,  and  precisely  the  nature  of  the 
troubles  that  led  to  all  those  direful  consequences  ?  " 

"  Is  it  possible  that  you  need  an  answer  to  those 
questions  ?  "  exclaimed  Kenyon,  with  an  aspect  of  vast 
surprise.  "  Have  you  not  even  surmised  Miriam's 
name?  Think  awhile,  and  you  wiU  assuredly  remem- 
ber it.  If  not,  I  congratulate  you  most  sincerely  ;  for 
it  indicates  that  your  feelings  have  never  been  har- 
rowed by  one  of  the  most  dreadful  and  mysterious 
events  that  liave  occurred  within  the  present  cen- 
tury ! " 

"  Well,"  resumed  I,  after  an  interval  of  deep  con- 
sideration, "  I  have  but  few  things  more  to  ask. 
Where,  at  this  moment,  is  Donatello  ?  " 

"  The  Castle  of  Saint  Angelo,"  said  Kenyon,  sadly, 
turning  his  face  towards  that  sepulchral  fortress,  "  is 
no  longer  a  prison ;  but  there  are  others  which  have 
dungeons  as  deep,  and  in  one  of  them,  I  fear,  lies  our 
poor  Faun." 

"  And  why,  then,  is  Miriam  at  large  ?  "  I  asked. 

"  Call  it  cruelty  if  you  like,  not  mercy,"  answered 
Kenyon.  "  But,  after  all,  her  crime  lay  merely  in  a 
glance.     She  did  no  murder  I " 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CONCLUSION.  627 

*^  Only  one  question  more,"  said  I,  with  intense  ear- 
nestness. "Did  Donatello's  ears  resemble  those  of 
the  Faun  of  Praxiteles  ?  " 

"  I  know,  but  may  not  tell,"  replied  Kenyon,  smil- 
ing mysteriously.  "  On  that  point,  at  all  events,  there 
shall  be  not  one  word  of  explanation." 

^-^AifiNGTON,  March  14«  I860. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


NOTES. 

Chapter  I.  Page  19.  The  Dying  Gladiator  ;  modern  schol- 
ars have  identified  the  features  and  pose  of  this  statue  with 
sculptures  of  Galatian  warriors,  rather  than  gladiators  ;  it  is 
now  called  "  The  Dying  Gaul ; "  found  in  the  16th  century 
in  the  ViUa  Ludovisi;  cf.  Byron's  "Childe  Harold,"  IV.  cxl., 
cxli. 

Page  19.  The  Antinous;  portrait-statue  found  at  Hadrian's 
Villa ;  has  been  regarded  as  statue  of  the  emperor's  favorite 
page,  who  was  drowned  in  the  Nile  ;  another  statue  of  Anti- 
nous,  as  Bacchus,  in  Vatican. 

Page  19*  The  Amazon ;  one  of  the  finest  sculptures  of  this 
mythical  race  of  wamors. 

Page  19.  TheLycian  Apollo;  or  Apollo  with  the  Lyre  ;  fa- 
mous embodiment  in  sculpture  of  the  Sun-god  ;  Juno,  or  Hera, 
goddess  of  earth  and  moon. 

Page  19.  Human  Soul ;  early  suggestion  of  the  symbolic  and 
moral  contrasts  in  the  romance. 

Page  20.  Arch  of  SepHmius  Severus  ;  erected  in  205,  in  honor 
of  the  victories  in  the  Bast  won  by  this  emperor  and  his  sous, 
Caracalla  and  Geta ;  adorned  with  famous  bronze  horses,  cha- 
riot, and  statue  of  victor. 

Page  20.  The  Coliseum  ;  vast  Flavian  Amphitheatre,  erected 
by  Vespasian  and  Titus,  72-80 ;  used  as  fortress  in  mediieval 
age;  partially  destroyed  by  floods  and  invasions,  but  still  grand 
in  ruins ;  symbol  of  Rome's  greatness  ;  cf.  Byron's  ''  Childe 
Harold,"  IV.  cxliii.-cxlv. ;  also,  "  Manfred,"  III.  hr. ;  Mme.  De 
Stael's  "Corinne,"  ch.  64. 

Page  20.  Romulus  .  .  .  wall;  portions  of  so-called  wall  of 
Romulus,  legendary  founder  of  city,  753  B.  a,  found  near 
Palatine  Hill. 

Page  21.  Pentelic  marble;  from  Monnt  Pentelicns  in  Attica  ; 
there  was  another  famous  quarry  at  Island  of  Paro0y  benne 
**  Parian  marble." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


530  NOTES. 

Page  21.  DonateUo;  Hawthorne  has  chosen  for  his  fantas^ 
tic  hero  the  name  of  a  famous  Italian  sculptor,  1386-1466. 

Page  21.  Faun  of  Praxiteles  ;  one  of  the  most  famous  and 
perfect  statues  of  classic  ages;  more  than  thirty  replicas  of  this 
exist;  in  style  it  closely  resembles  Hermes,  Aphrodite,  and 
other  works  by  Praxiteles,  who  lived  middle  of  the  fourth 
century  B.  c. 

Page  24.  Possible  ,  .  .  Faun  educated ;  key-note  of  plot  of 
romance. 

Chapter  II.  Page  32.  That  other  Faun;  in  Hall  of  the 
Faun,  at  the  Capitol ;  a  statue  of  rosso-antico,  or  deep-red  mar- 
ble, holding  a  bunch  of  grapes  to  his  mouth  ;  found  at  Hadri- 
an's Villa,  while  the  Faun  of  Praxiteles  was  found  in  the  ruins 
of  the  Villa  of  Antoninus  Pius. 

Page  32.  Satyrs  ;  Greek  word  for  Roman  Fauns;  terms  used 
interchangeably;  cf.  Milton's  Lycidas,  31-35. 

Chapter  III.  Page  35.  Ambiguity  .  .  .  this  young  lady;  au- 
thor's purpose  to  weave  mystic  film  over  Miriam's  past  history 
while  he  makes  keen  study  of  her  mental,  emotional,  and  spirit- 
ual traits. 

Page  36.  American  sculptor  ;  Kenyon  has  often  been  regarded 
as  a  portrait  of  William  Wetmore  Story,  American  sculptor 
and  poet,  who  was  in  Rome  for  many  years,  but  no  similarity  of 
character  exists,  though  references  are  made  to  some  of  his 
statuary;  see  Preface,  pp.  16, 17. 

Page  39.  Catacomb  of  St,  Calixtus  ;  one  of  the  famous  buri- 
al-places of  pagans  and  Christians  since  the  third  century ; 
many  frescoes,  inscriptions,  etc.,  removed  thence  to  museums  in 
Rome  and  elsewhere. 

Page  40.  Saint  Cecilia ;  martyred  about  230,  buried  here 
by  Pope  Urban  ;  in  820,  the  body  was  found  "  as  fresh  and 
perfect  as  when  first  it  was  laid  in  the  tomb,"  according  to  tradi- 
tion ;  tomb  now  at  the  Church  of  Saint  Cecilia,  Trastevere  ; 
statue  of  Saint  Cecilia  by  Stefano  Mademo,  famous  paintings 
by  Raphael  and  Rubens.  For  legends  of  this  saint  see  Mrs. 
Jameson's  "  Sacred  and  Legendary  Art,"  II.  571-586  ;  Mrs. 
Clement's  "  Stories  of  the  Saints  ; "  Chaucer's  "  Canterbury 
Tales"  (Second  Nun's  Tale);  Dryden's  "Ode  for  Saint  Ceci- 
lia's  Day." 

Chapter  IV.  Page  47.  Forestieri;  literally,  woodmen, 
foresters,  —  epithet  given  to  foreigners  by  latter-day  Romans. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


NOTES.  531 

Page  48.  Tieck,  Ludwig,  German  poet,  novelist,  and  trans- 
lator, 1773-1863. 

Page  48.  Hoffman:%;  Ernst,  Grerman  novelist  of  fantastic 
imagination,  1776-1822. 

Page  51.  Campagna ;  the  vast  plains  of  the  Tiher  and 
adjacent  streams,  between  the  Mediterranean  and  Sabine  and 
Alban  hills ;  beautiful,  but  malarious,  formerly  occupied  by 
towns,  villages,  etc.  See  Story's  "Roba  di  Roma,"  ch.  xiiL 
338-388. 

Page  51.  Scripture  times ;  story  of  Christ  and  the  devils, 
Matthew  8  :  28-34. 

Page  54.  Bernini;  Giovanni  Lorenzo,  Italian  architect, 
sculptor  and  painter,  1598-1680. 

Page  54.  Seven  Hilts  of  Rome  ;  Palatine,  Aventine,  Capito- 
line,  Quirinal,  Esquiliue,  Viminal,  Coslian  ;  later,  the  Vatican, 
Pinciau,  and  Jauiculum  were  included  among  the  famous 
hills. 

Page  54.  The  Vatican  ;  originally,  the  site  of  Etruscan  ora- 
cle, vates. 

Page  64.  The  Quirinal ;  here  former  temple  of  Quirinus,  op 
Romulus. 

Page  55.  Needlework;  an  example  of  the  author's  deft,  sub- 
tle suggestion. 

Page  60.    Joel .  . .  Sisera  ;  cf .  Judges  4  j  17-22. 

Page  60.  Holofemes  .  .  .  Judith;  story  of  the  book  of  Judith 
in  the  Apocrypha;  there  are  two  famous  paintings  on  this  theme 
by  Botticelli,  1447-1515,  in  the  Uffizi  Gallery,  Florence. 

Page  61.  Herodias .  .  .  John  the  Baptist;  cf .  Matthew  14  : 1- 
12  ;  Mark  6  :  14-29. 

Page  61.  Bernardo  Luini;  or  Luvini,  about  1475-1536,  pu- 
pil of  Da  Vinci ;  his  paiuting  entitled  "  Daughter  of  Hero- 
dias "  is  in  the  Uffizi  Gallery. 

Page  65.    Rachel . . .  Jacob  ;  cf.  Genesis  29  :  10-28. 

Page  67.  Borghese  grounds  ;  a  famous  park  established  by 
Cardinal  Scipio  Borghese  about  1605. 

Chapter  VI.  Page  68.  Lofty  shrine  ;  for  legends  of  this 
tower,  see  Introduction,  page  x. 

Page  69.  Eleemosynary  doves  ;  literally,  almsgiving  ;  Haw- 
thorne recalls  the  statue  of  '*  Girl  Protecting  a  Dove,"  in  the 
Capitol,  cf.  p.  19. 

Page  70.    Jacob's  ladder,  cf .  Genesis  28 :  12. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


632  NOTES. 

Page  70.     Tower  of  Babel ;  cf .  Genesis  11 : 1-9. 

Page  70.  Column  of  Antoninus  Pius  ;  with  famous  pedestal, 
found  1709 ;  Emperor  of  Rome,  138-161  ;  column  erected  by 
adopted  sons,  Marcus  Aurelius  and  Lucius  Verus. 

Page  75.  Pinacotheca  ;  Vatican  gallery,  founded  about  1815 
by  Pius  VII. 

Page  75.  Pavifili  .  .  .  Doria  ;  etc.  For  lists  of  famous  paint- 
ings in  these  galleries,  see  Hare's  "  Walks  in  Rome,"  i.  41, 56  ; 
ii.  192,  442  ;  also,  see  Bsedeker,  and  Crawford's  *'  Ave  Roma." 

Page  75.  Guido ;  Reni,  1575-1642.  Domenichino ;  1581- 
1641.  Raphael;  Sanzio  d'Urbino,  1483-1520.  For  more  de- 
tailed study,  see  Vasari's  ''Lires  of  the  Painters,"  and  Mrs. 
Jameson's  "  Memoirs  of  the  Early  Italian  Painters." 

Chapter  VII.  Page  83.  Guido's  Beatrice  Cenci;  ethical 
and  dramatic  motif  of  the  romance  ;  see  Introduction,  p.  ix  ; 
probably  this  was  not  a  portrait,  since  the  same  face  appears  in 
other  paintings  by  Guido,  and  ho  did  not  come  to  Rome  luitil 
after  Beatrice*s  death  ;  for  story  of  Beatrice  Cenci,  see  Shel- 
ley's "  The  Cenci,"  both  preface  and  poem;  cf.  Dickens's  de- 
scription of  the  picture,  in  "  Pictures  from  Italy." 

Page  83.  Thompson  ;  Cephas  Giovanni,  an  American  artist, 
1809-1888 ;  in  Rome  1852-1859  ;  see  Hawthorne's  "  French 
and  Italian  Note-Books,"  i.  69,  127  ;  Thompson  made  a  copy 
of  Beatrice  Cenci  and  portraits  of  Longfellow,  Bryant,  and 
Hawthorne  ;  see  later  references  to  his  work. 

Page  83.  Barberini ;  palace  finished  by  Bernini,  1640  ;  fa- 
mous library,  hall,  and  gallery. 

Page  86.  Piano ;  floor,  or  landing  ;  here  was  the  residence 
of  W.  W.  Story  for  many  years. 

Chapter  VIII.  Page  89.  Michael  Angelo ;  the  world's 
most  famous  architect,  sculptor,  and  painter,  1475-1564  ;  see 
Mrs.  Oliphaut's  "  Makers  of  Florence,"  vol.  iv. 

Page  90.  Gauls  .  .  .  last  assault ;  capture  of  Rome  by  Gauls, 
390  B.  c. ;  Rome  sacked  by  Vandals,  455,  and  by  eastern  Goths, 
646  and  549. 

Chapter  IX.  Page  98.  Bacchus;  here  stands  for  the 
spirit  of  jollity,  as  well  as  the  god  of  wine  ;  cf .  Dryden's  "  Al- 
exander's Feast ;"  Milton's  **  L' Allegro,"  16. 

Page  105.  Pan  ;  god  of  fields  and  flocks,  gradually  becom- 
ing the  symbol  of  Nature  ;  cf.  Milton's  "  Hymn  to  the  Nativ- 
ity," Shelley's  "  Hymn  to  Pan." 


Digitized 


by  Google 


NOTES.  533 

Chapter  X.  Page  108.  Trastevere;  portion  of  older  Rome 
across  the  Tiber. 

Page  112.  Shadow  on  (heir  mirth ;  introduced  at  most  dra- 
matic moments  in  the  plot. 

Chapter  XI.  Page  120.  Blood  stain  . .  .  hands  ;  cf .  <*  Mac- 
beth," V.  1. 

Page  120.  Porta  del  PoptUo;  built  by  Vignola,  an  Italian 
architect,  1561  ;  gates  by  Bernini,  1655 ;  northern  entrance  to 
Rome  ;  enlarged  by  side  portals  in  1878. 

Chapter  XII.  Page  122.  Pincian  HiU;  famous  prome- 
nade, formerly  Hill  of  Gardens,  with  grand  terraces,  bas-reliefs, 
etc. 

Page  124.    Muro  Torto ;  below  the  northeast  angle  of  Pin- 
cian Hill ;  it  was  a  fragment  of  Sylla's  wall,  in  first  century. 
,   Page  124.    Soracte;  or  Monte  Sant'  Oreste,  a  lofty  ascent 
east  of  Rome  ;  cf .  Virgil's  "  -ffineid,"  xi.  785. 

Page  128.  It  annoys  me ;  the  author's  prophetic  rebuke  t« 
readers  who  would  reduce  this  romance  to  cold  realism. 

Page  130.    Moses  and  the  Israelites  ;  cf .  Exodus  33  :  9. 
•  Page   130.     Obelisk;  first  obelisk  brought  from  Egypt  by 
Augustus  and  erected  by  him  in  Circus  Maximus  4  changed  to 
present  site,  1589. 

Page  130.  Castle  of  St.  Angelo;  erected  130-139  as  the  tomb 
of  Hadrian  and  later  emperors  ;  decorated  with  statues  by 
Praxiteles  and  Lysippus,  which  were  hurled  at  invading  Groths, 
used  later  as  fortress  and  prison  ;  cf .  Crawford's  "  Ave  Roma," 
ii.  202-216. 

Page  130.  Angel  at  its  Summit;  according  to  tradition,  when 
a  pestilence  raged,  St.  Michael  stood  above  the  fortress  sheath- 
ing his  sword,  and  so  saving  the  people  ;  in  commemoration,  his 
statue  was  erected. 

Page  131.  St.  Peter*s  ;  see  later  references  and  notes,  page 
642. 

Page  134.     The  Antonine  Column ;  see  notes,  page  531. 

Page  134.  The  Pantheon ;  the  finest  example  extant  of  Ro- 
man architecture  ;  built  27  B.  c.  by  Agrippa,  either  as  thermso 
or  temple  ;  now  Church  of  Santa  Maria  Rotonda  ;  cf.  Byron's 
"  Childe  Harold,"  IV.  cxlvi.-cxlvii. 

Page  134.  The  Golden  House ;  Nero's  palace  from  Palatine 
to  Esquiline,  with  golden  tiles  and  inlaid  walls. 

Page  136.  Cripple . .  ,  St.  Peter's  ;  subject  of  famous  cartoony 
ascribed  to  Raphael;  at  South  Kensington  Museumj,  London.    , 

Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC 


684  NOTES. 

Page  136.  How  far  it  throws  its  light;  cf.  ''Merchant  of 
Venice,"  V.l. 

Chapter  XIII.  Page  139.  Canova;  Antonio,  Italian  sculp- 
tor, 1757-1822. 

Page  140.  Carrara ;  town  in  Massare-Carrara,  Italy,  noted 
for  marble  quarries. 

Page  142.  Cleopatra  ;  a  statue  by  W.  W.  Story,  now  in  Me- 
tropolitan Art  Museum,  New  York ;  Hawthorne  carefully 
watched  the  growth  of  this  work  ;  see  Preface,  page  16,  and 
"  French  and  Italian  Note-Books,"  i.  179. 

Page  143.  Head  of  Milton ;  work  of  Benjamin  Paul  Akers, 
American  sculptor,  1825-1861 ;  see  Preface,  page  16  ;  other 
statues  by  Akers  were  The  Pearl  Diver,  Una  and  the  Lion, 
and  Saint  Elizabeth. 

Page  143.  Grey  Friars*  Church;  the  author  must  have  in- 
tended reference  to  St.  Giles  Church,  Cripplegate,  London, 
where  is  the  tomb  of  Milton  and  the  famous  bust  by  Bacon, 
1793. 

Page  143.  Portrait-busts ;  probably  the  portrait-busts  of 
Lowell,  Edward  Everett,  Theodore  Parker,  and  others  by  W. 
W.  Story. 

Page  145.  Betivenuto  Cellini;  Italian  sculptor  and  worker- 
in-gold,  1500-1571 ;  see  "  Autobiography,"  translated  by  J.  A. 
Symonds,  N.  Y.  1888. 

Page  146.  The  De  Medicis ;  famous  Italian  family,  culmi- 
nating in  court  of  Lorenzo  the  Magnificent,  at  Florence,  1449- 
1492  ;  the  Roman  villa  of  the  Medicis,  built  1540,  later  Acad- 
emy for  French  Art  Students,  has  a  fine  museum  of  casts  and 
is  surrounded  by  grand  terraces  and  gardens,  sometimes 
ascribed  to  Michael  Angelo. 

Page  146.  Loulie^s  hand .  .  .  Powers  ;  Hirain  Powers,  Ameri- 
can sculptor,  1805-1873,  friend  of  Hawthorne  at  Rome  ;  there 
'  is  a  reference  to  this  sculptured  hand  of  Powers's  daughter  in 
"  French  and  Italian  Note-Books,"  ii.  25. 

Page  146.  Harriet  Hosmer^s .  . .  clasped  hands  ;  cf.  Miss  Hos- 
mer's  "  Reminiscences  of  the  Brownings,"  "  Youth's  Compan- 
ion," August  9  and  November  15, 1900  ;  also  Mrs.  Browning's 
Letters,  ii.  166 ;  famous  statues  by  Miss  Hosmer  (bom  1830 
at  Watertown,  Mass.),  —  Zenobia,  Beatrice  Cenci,  The  Sleeping 
Faun,  Puck,  etc. 

Chapter  XIV.    Page  149.    Mr,  Gihson^s  colored  Venusesj 


Digitized  by 


Google 


NOTES.  686 

John  Gibson,  English  sculptor,  1790-1866,  who  reviyed  the 
Greek  art  of  tinting  etatoary  ;  cf .  "  French  and  Italian  Note- 
Books,"  L 130. 

Page  150.  Greenaughf  Horatio,  an  American  sculptor,  1805^ 
1852  ;  statnes  of  Washington,  near  Capitol  at  Washington, 
'* Rescue"  in  Capitol,  etc. 

Page  150.  Crawford,  Thomas,  American  sculptor,  1814- 
1857 ;  statues,  "  Orpheus,"  "  Armed  Liberty,"  and  Washing- 
ton, at  Richmond.     See  Crawford's  **  Ave  Roma,*'  i.  147. 

Page  151.  John  of  Bologna;  Flemish-Italian  sculptor,  1630- 
1608  ;  he  finished  the  Fountain  of  Neptune  at  Bologna,  hence  his 
name ;  other  famous  works  are  the  bronze  doors  at  Pisa  and 
•*  The  Rape  of  the  Sabines." 

Page  152.  Octavius;  Augustus  I.,  Emperor;  battle  of  A&i 
tium  and  conquest  of  Cleopatra  and  Antony,  31  B.  G. 

Page  154.    Aaron  threw  the  gold;  cf.  Exodus  32  :  24. 

Chapter  XV.  Page  160.  An  artist .  .  .  studied  nature;  the 
references  in  these  paragraphs  are  to  the  American  artists 
whom  Hawthorne  knew  in  Rome  ;  see  '*  French  and  Italian 
Note-Books,"  i.  177,  188 ;  the  nature-studies  of  Brown  and 
Wilde,  there  mentioned,  explain  this  sentence. 

Page  160.  Poet-painter;  probably  Thomas  Buchanan  Read, 
American  poet  and  painter,  1822-1872,  who  was  in  Rome  while 
Hawthorne  was  there,  and  mentioned  in  the  "Note-Books;" 
his  paintings,  which  never  gained  the  fame  of  his  poetry,  in« 
eluded  allegorical  and  mythological  themes,  like  "  The  Lost 
Pleiad,"  " The  Spirit  of  the  Waterfall,"  "Undine,"  etc. 

Page  161.  Prospero  .  .  .  Angel  leading  forth  St  Peter;  these 
are  subjects  of  paintings  by  Cephas  G.  Thompson ;  see  notes, 
page  532,  and  "  French  and  Italian  Note-Books,"  i.  69, 127. 

Page  161.     One  sculptor;  Gibson,  explained  page  534. 

Page  164.  Venus  of  the  Capitol ;  a  beautiful  statue  found  in 
a  walled  chamber  on  the  Quirinal,  and  protected  in  a  special 
cabinet. 

Page  164.  Laocoim;  cf.  Virgil's  ^neid,  ii.  209-234;  the 
statue  was  found,  1506. 

Page  165.  Favorite  Madonna  ;  Madonna  del  Gran  Duca,  the 
earliest  work  of  Raphael  after  he  came  to  Florence;  it  was  lost 
for  many  years,  and  sold  by  a  poor  widow  in  the  18th  century  ; 
it  became  the  property  of  the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany,  and  later 
was  placed  in  Florentine  gallery. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


536  NOTES. 

Page  165.  Modesty  and  Vanity ;  also  called  "  Sacred  and 
Profane  Love  ; "  sometimes  ascribed  to  Bernardo  Luini. 

Page  167.     Guidons  Archangel ;  see  notes,  page  538. 

Page  167.  Cardinal  Pamjili;  or  Pope  Innocent  X.,  1644- 
1655,  against  whom  Guido  had  a  personal  grievance. 

Chapter  XVI.  Page  171.  Unstable  element;  cLGenesut 
49:4. 

Page  172.  Fountain  of  Trevi;  erected  1735  by  Niccoli  Salvi, 
witli  statue  of  Neptune  by  Bracci. 

Page  172.  Agrippina^s  virgin  ;  there  is  a  legend  that  a  Ro- 
man maiden  led  the  Roman  soldiers  from  Prseueste  to  this 
hidden  spring,  hence  often  called  "  Aqua  Virgo." 

Page  174.  Corinne  and  Lord  Neville;  cf.  Mme.  de  Stael's 
"  Corinne,"  iv.  ch.  6. 

Page  178.  Trajan^s  Forum  ;  designed  by  Apollodoms  of  Da- 
mascus, 111-114  ;  the  largest  of  all  the  Fora ;  in  memory  of 
Trajan,  53-117,  with  famous  pillar,  temple,  and  library  ;  exca- 
vated in  16th  and  19th  centuries. 

Page  180.    Sermons  in  stones  ;  cf .  "  As  You  Like  It,"  II.  1. 

Page  181.  Mars  Ultor;  or  Mars  the  Avenger;  a  temple 
vowed  by  Augustus  at  Battle  of  Pl^lippi,  42  B.  c,  and  erected 
by  him  in  the  centre  of  his  forum  ;  it  was  adorned  with  famous 
Roman  eagles  recovered  from  Parthians  by  Augustus,  and  spoils 
of  war  were  here  collected. 

Page  181.  Temple  of  Peace;  or.  Basilica  of  Constantino; 
erected  by  Vespasian,  69-79  ;  destroyed  by  fire  191. 

Page  181.  Vast  temple ;  Temple  of  Venus  at  Rome,  on  the 
site  of  Nero's  Golden  House,  planned  by  Hadrian  to  rival 
Forum  of  Trajan  ;  it  was  the  last  pagan  temple  in  use  in  Rome ; 
the  column  and  cella  remain. 

Chapter  XVII.  Page  182.  The  Coliseum;  see  notes,  page 
529. 

Page  185.    Benvenuto  Cellini  ;  see  notes,  page  534. 

Page  188.  Doctors  of  the  Propaganda ;  CoUegio  de  Propa- 
ganda, founded  by  Gregory  XV.,  1621-1623,  to  educate  youths 
as  missionaries. 

Page  189.  Arch  of  Constantine;  dedicated  for  victories  of 
Constantino,  312 ;  bas-reliefs  taken  from  the  Arch  of  Trajan, 
etc. 

Page  189.  Palace  of  the  CoBsars ;  former  buildings  on  the 
Palatine,  palaces  of  the  Emperors,  connected  by  porticoes. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


NOTES.  C87 

Page  190.  Arch  of  Titus ;  built  to  celebrate  the  capture  of 
Jerusalem  by  Titus,  70  A.  D.  The  bas-reliefs  are  among  the 
most  famous  in  art,  including  the  Emperor  in  triumphal  char- 
iot, with  the  Jewish  spoils,  the  table  of  the  shew-bread  and  the 
seven-branched  candlestick;  cf.  Exodus  25  :  31-37,  Zechariah 
4  :  2,  and  Josephus,  Wars  of  the  Jews,  viii.  5. 

Page  189.  Gold  of  Ophir ;  cf.  1  Kings  9  :  28  ;  1  Chronicles 
29:4. 

Chapter  XVIII.  Page  191.  Curtius ;  Mettus  or  Mettius 
Curtius,  the  legendary  youth  who,  to  appease  the  gods  and 
fulfil  the  oracle,  threw  himself  and  horse  into  the  chasm  iu 
the  Forum  ;  cf.  Livy,  vii.  6. 

Page  193.  Virginia ;  daughter  of  Virginius,  the  centurion, 
who  saved  his  daughter  from  dishonor  at  the  hands  of  the  de- 
cemvir, Appius  Claudius,  by  taking  her  life,  449  B.  c.  See  Livy, 
iii.  44-68  ;  also  Macaulay's  "  Lays  of  Ancient  Rome,"  Vir- 
ginia. 

Page  194.  Column  of  Phocas  ;  erected  about  608,  probably 
to  Phocas,  "the  Tyrant  of  the  East;"  cf.  Byron's  "Childe 
Harold,"  IV.   ex.,    "  Thou   nameless  column  with   a  buried 


Page  194.  Gothic  ages  ;  invasions  by  Visigoths,  401-415  ;  by 
Ostrogoths,  493-553  ;  cf.  Gibbon's  "  Decline  and  Fall  of  the 
Roman  Empire,"  iv.  90. 

Page  195.  Augustan  age;  31  B.  c.  to  14  A.  D. ;  age  of  the 
authors  Virgil,  Horace,  Ovid)  and  Livy. 

Page  197.  Piazza  of  the  Campidoglio ;  in  the  square  of  the 
Capitol,  designed  by  Michael  Angelo  ;  in  the  centre  is  the  fa- 
mous equestrian  statue  of  Marcus  Aurelius. 

Page  198.  Tarpeian  Rock;  here  Tarpeia  betrayed  Rome  to 
the  Sabines,  and,  like  subsequent  traitors,  was  hurled  thence  to 
death;  cf.  Virgil's  "JEneid,"  viii.  347-364;  also  Byron's 
«  Childe  Harold,"  IV.  cxii. 

Page  202.  Little  court-yard;  until  1868  this  court,  door, 
etc.,  existed  as  described;  now  the  wall  has  been  removed. 

Chapter  XIX.  Page  203.  Your  eyes  hade  me;  note  the 
.uthor's  subtle  inquiries  about  Miriam's  guilt ;  see  pages  204, 
239,  244. 

Chapter  XX.  Page  210.  Church  of  the  Capuchins; 
founded  1624  by  Cardinal  Barberini ;  in  the  cemetery  beyond, 
with  earth  supposed  to  haye  been  brought  from  Jeruasdem,  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


538  NOTES. 

monk  who  has  been  buried  longest  is  removed  to  make  plaoe 
for  the  most  recent  deceased;  cf.  Hans  Andersen's  '^  Improvi- 
satore." 

Page  211.  Palazzo  CafareUi;  at  southwest  summit  of  Capi- 
toline  Hill,  built  about  1850,  from  designs  by  Raphael ;  now 
the  residence  of  the  German  embassy. 

Page  215.  De  Profundis;  the  first  words  of  Psalm  cxx., 
used  in  Roman  Qatholic  liturgy  for  committal  service. 

Page  215.  Guidons  Picture ;  famous  painting  of  Saint  Mi- 
chael and  Satan  ;  cf .  Introduction,  p.  x. ;  Mrs.  Jameson's  *'  Sa- 
cred and  Legendary  Art,"  i.  102,  103. 

Chapter  XXI.  Page  221.  A  circumstance;  actually  wit- 
nessed by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hawthorne  at  this  church  ;  see  "  French 
and  Italian  Note-Books,  i.  77 ;  also  **  Nathaniel  Hawthorne 
and  his  Wife,"  ii.  183, 184. 

Page  227.  Golgotha;  cf.  Matthew  27:33;  Luke  23:33; 
John  19  :  17  ;  also,  "Macbeth,"  I.  2. 

Chapter  XXII.  Page  229.  Heart  shivers;  a  matchless 
phrase.     Did  Donatello  suffer  from  fear  or  remorse  ? 

Page  229.    VUla  Medici ;  see  notes,  p.  ^34. 

Page  230.  Brown  lizard ;  an  experience  of  Hawthorne  and 
son  ;  see  "  French  and  Italian  Note-Books,"  i.  135. 

Chapter  XXIIl.  Page  238.  The  young  and  pure;  a  subtle, 
contrasting  study. 

Chapter  XXIV.  Page  248.  Niobe  of  Nations  ;  for  legend 
of  Niobe  ;  see  Ovid,  vi.  165-312 ;  for  phrase,  cf.  Byron's 
"Childe  Harold,"  IV.  Ixxix. 

Page  249.  Giotto ;  or  Giotto  di  Bondone,  Florentine  archi- 
tect and  Painter,  1276-1337,  a  pupil  of  Cimabue,  Giovanni, 
1240-1302,  called  "The  Father  of  Modern  Painting.?'  Peru- 
gino  ;  di  Vanucci,  of  Perugia,  1446-1524,  teacher  of  Raphael. 

Page  260,  Square  tower ;  this  old  castle,  Montaiito,  was 
Hawthorne's  residence  in  Florence  ;  see  "  French  and  Italian 
Note-Books,"  ii.  102-107. 

Page  253.  GalUeo^s  Tower;  Galileo  was  the  Italian  phy- 
sicist and  astronomer,  1564-1642. 

Page  265.  Bluebeard's  castle  ;  cf .  Tales  by  Charles  Perrault 
and  Tieck's  drama  of  Bluebeard. 

Page  255.  HaUs  in  the  Arabian  Nights  ;  see  "  History  of  the 
Third  Calendar." 

Chapter  XXV.  Page  259.   Orvieto;  a  small  town  in  Pern- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


NOTES.  689 

gia,  on  a  yolcanio  hill,  noted  for  its  wine  ;  Montefiascane  ;  a  hill 
town  in  the  province  of  Rome  celebrated  for  mnskat  wine. 

Page  262.  TJie  Iron  Age;  age  of  cruelty  and  harshness  ;  cf. 
"King  John,"  iv.  1. 

Chapter  XXVI.  Page  268.  One  story  or  myth ;  this  is  a 
grotesque  keynote  to  the  fantastic  element  in  the  romance. 

Page  270.  Austrian  lip;  the  large,  prominent  lip  character- 
istic of  the  House  of  Hapsburg. 

Page  278.  Improwissatori ;  reciters  of  impromptu  verses ; 
an  Italian  fashion  introduced  by  Petrarch,  1304-1374. 

Chapter  XXVII.  Page  285.  Friends  I  had ;  Donatello's 
kinship  with  animal  and  bird  life  is  similar  to  that  of  Sti  Francis 
and  Henry  Thoreau. 

Chapter  XXVIII.  Page  291.  Knights  Templar;  origi- 
nally founded  1118  for  defence  of  temple  in  Jerusalem  ;  later 
fraternal  organizations  adopted  the  name. 

Page  294.  Sacred  Bambino^  Italian,  little  boy  ;  image  of 
the  infant  Jesus  ;  the  most  famous  Bambino  is  in  Sta.  Maria  in 
Ara  Coeli  at  Rome. 

Page  294.  Titian* s  Magdalen;  cf.  Dickens'  description  in 
"  Pictures  from  Italy,"  page  13  ;  also  Mrs.  Jameson's  "  Sacred 
and  Legendary  Art,"  i.  355. 

Chapter  XXIX.  Page  302.  A  soul  had  been  inspired;  note 
the  ethical  purpose  of  author. 

Chapter  XXX.  Page  313.  A  skill  and  insight;  often 
achieved  by  a  true  artist ;  see  Willis's  "  Beauty  and  the 
Beast." 

Page  317.  Treading  out  the  wine-press;  cf.  Isaiah  63:3; 
Rev.  14 :  20. 

Chapter  XXXI.  Page  320.  A  spider  ;  a  fantastic  nucleus 
for  later  fragment  of  "  Dr.  Grimshawe's  Secret." 

Page  321.  GicUlo-antico ;  Naples  yellow,  a  lustrous  color  ; 
verde-antique ,  a  patina,  —  clear,  green  tone  found  on  ancient 
bronzes  and  copied  in  modem  art. 

Page  329.  Bronze  statue  ;  statue  of  Pope  Julius  III.  at  Peru- 
gia, by  Vincenzo  Danti,  1666  ;  distinguished  from  Michael  An- 
gelo's  Pope  Julius  II.  at  Bologna. 

Page  334.  The  Parcce,  or  Fates  ;  Clotho.  Lachesis,  and  At- 
ropos  ;  the  sculpture  is  by  Michael  Angelo  at  the  Pitti  Gallery, 
Florence. 

Page  335.     A  prC'Raphaelite  artist;  this  is  probably  not  a 


Digitized  by 


Google 


640  NOTES. 

reference  to  Millais's  "  Antumn  Leaves,''  as  has  been  suggested, 
but  rather  to  the  work  of  the  American  artist  Wilde,  thus  de- 
scribed in  Hawthorne's  "  French  and  Italian  Note-Books "  (i. 
188)  :  "  There  was  a  most  gorgeous  sketch  of  a  handful  of  weeds 
and  leaves,  such  as  may  be  seen  strewing  acres  of  forest  ground 
iu  an  American  autumn";  there  is  a  reference  also  to  this 
young  artist,  now  forgotten,  in  "  Letters  of  Mrs.  Browning," 
ii.  344. 

Page  343.  Wayside  shrine;  note  the  effect  of  this  and  later 
pictorial  features  of  Roman  religion  upon  the  emotional  and 
artistic  nature  of  the  New  England  romancer  ;  revealed  also  in 
the  character  of  Hilda. 

Chapter  XXXIII.  Page  347.  The  Sibyl;  she  failed  to 
ask  for  eternal  youth  when  she  gained  the  boon  of  immortality; 
cf.  Bulfinch's  "Age  of  Fable,"  ch.  32  ;  also  Horace's  "  Carmen 
Seculaire,"  stanza  ii. 

Page  348.  Giotto  ;  Cimahue  ;  see  notes,  page  538.  Ghirlan- 
dio ;  or  Ghirlandajo,  a  Florentine  painter  and  mosaicist,  144d- 
1494 ;  Pinturicchio ;  Perugian  painter  of  panels  and  frescoes, 
1454-1513. 

Page  360.  Dante  .  .  .  idea  ;  cf .  Dante's  "  Divine  Comedy," 
Inferno,  i.  10-50,  104-130,  Purgatorio,  xiii.  8-21,  etc. 

Page  350.  Dim^  religious  light;  cf.  Milton's  "II  Penseroso," 
line  159. 

Page  352.     Christian  faith  ;  a  fine,  familiar  imagery. 

Page  354.    Horace's  Atra  Cura  :  — 

"  Sed  Timor  at  Minae 
Scandant  eodem,  quo  dominus,  neque 
Decedit  aerata  triremi  et 
Post  equitem  sedet  Atra  Cura." 

Odes,  Bk.  iii. :  i.  37-40. 

Chapter  XXXIV.  Page  355.  Perugino ;  see  notes,  page 
638. 

Page  356.  Fra  Angelico;  Guido  di  Pietro,  1387-1456,  who, 
as  Dominican  monk,  was  called  Fra  Giovanni  da  Fiesole, 
painted  famous  altar-scenes,  frescoes,  and  illuminations,  also 
"  Descent  from  the  Cross,"  and  "  Coronation  of  the  Virgin," 
both  at  Florence. 

Page  361.  Brazen  image  in  the  wHdemess  ;  cf .  Numbers  21 1 
8,9. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


NOTES.  641 

Chapter  XXXV.  Page  367.  Man  of  feeling  ;  eulmiD&ilon 
of  Donatello's  development ;  one  of  the  most  dramatic  and  re- 
velatory chapters. 

Chapter  XXXVl.  Page  372.  Note  the  length  of  opening 
sentence  ;  criticise  the  rhetorical  purpose  and  merits. 

Page  373.     Eternal  City;  cf.  Virgil's  ^neid,  L  71-«0. 

Page  374.     Flaming  sword  ;  cf .  Grenesis  3  :  24. 

Page  377.  Joanna  of  Aragon  ;  a  painting  of  Joanna  of  Ara- 
gon,  by  the  **  school  of  Da  Vinci,"  but  not  included  in  any  list 
of  the  master's  works,  is  in  the  Doria  Gallery,  Rome;  Raphael's 
famous  Jeanne  of  Aragon  b  in  the  Louvre,  Paris ;  Da  Vinci 
painted  Isabel  of  Aragon,  1500. 

Page  378.     Baiocchi  ;  papal  penny. 

Chapter  XXXVII.  Page  381.  Madonna  da  Foligno ; 
painted  by  Raphael  for  Sigmondi  Conti,  officer  of  Julius  II., 
who  narrowly  escaped  death  by  a  -thunderbolt ;  in  the  back- 
ground is  the  city  of  Foligno,  shadowed  by  a  meteor  or  thunder- 
bolt. 

Page  383.  Mephistopheles ;  one  of  the  fallen  angels ;  the 
jeering  tempter  or  devil  in  Marlowe's  "  Dr.  Faustus "  and 
Goethe's  "Faust." 

Page  383.  Teniers ;  David,  the  younger ;  Flemish  genre 
school,  1610-1690.  Gerard  Douw;  or  Dow,  pupil  of  Rem- 
brandt, Dutch  genre  school,  1613-1676.  Van  Mieris ;  Franz, 
the  elder,  1635-1681,  Dutch  genre  school. 

Page  384.  Magdalens;  by  Guide,  Dolci,  Cimabue,  Titian, 
etc. 

Flights  into  Egypt;  there  is  a  famous  one  by  Claude  Lorraine; 
also  one  by  Hof  mann. 

Crucifixions ;  by  Fra  Angelico,  Van  Dyke,  Giotto,  Raphael, 
etc. 

Depositions  ;  by  Raphael,  Daniel  da  Volterra,  Rubens,  etc. 

Pietas  ;  by  Michael  Angelo,  Fra  Angelico,  etc. 

Nolh-me-tangeres  ;  there  is  a  famous  one  by  Bronzino. 

Such  pages  reveal  Hawthorne's  defective  appreciation  of  clas- 
sic art ;  see  criticism  in  Henry  James's  "  Life  of  Hawthorne," 
5h.  vi.  165-167. 

Page  386.  Fomarina  ;  a  famous  portrait-painting,  probably 
of  Raphael's  mistress  ;  the  original  is  in  Barberini  PaJace,  copies 
are  at  Borghese  and  Sciarra  galleries ;  another  so-called  "  La 
Fornarina"  ia.in  the  Tribune  at  Florence. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


642  NOTES. 

Page  385.  The  Transfiguration ;  Raphael's  last  work,  car- 
ried in  his  funeral  procession  ;  cf .  Vasari's  **  Lives  of  the 
Painters,"  iii.  210 ;  also,  Hawthorne's  deep  impressions  in 
"French  and  Italian  Note-Books,"  i.  186, 187. 

Page  387.  Sodoma  .  .  .  fresco  at  Sienna,  Giovanni  Anto- 
nio Bazzi  or  Razzi,  1477-1549 ;  famous  paintings,  **  Christ 
Scourged,"  and  **  Deposition  from  the  Cross  ;  see  *'  French  and 
Italian  Note-Books,"  ii.  178,  217,  218. 

Page  387.  Why  hast  Thou  forsaken  me  t  Psalms  22  : 1;  Mat- 
thew 27 :  46. 

Page  389.  Dorias  ;  a  famous  palace  and  gallery  with  one  of 
the  finest  private  collections  in  Rome  ;  formerly  Pamfili-Doria; 
see  notes,  page  532. 

Chapter  XXXVITI.  Page  394.  Ara  Coeli;  at  the  north- 
ern summit  of  the  Capitoline  ;  the  *'  Church  of  the  Altar  of 
Heaven,"  according  to  a  legend,  was  erected  by  Augustus  to 
commemorate  the  Delphic  oracle  which  prophesied  the  coming 
of  Christ ;  in  this  church,  with  its  beautiful  mosaics  and  relics, 
Gibbon,  in  1764,  conceived  the  plan  for  writing  his  "  Decline 
and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire." 

Page  394.  5^  John  Lateran;  founded  by  Constantino  on 
site  of  the  palace  of  Plautus  Lateranus,  Senator  under  Nero;  it 
has  been  partially  destroyed  and  rebuilt,  enlarged  1876-1885, 
adorned  with  bronzes,  pilasters,  statues,  etc. 

Page  398.  St,  Peter's  .  .  .  interior;  cf.  Byron's  «  Childo 
Harold,"  IV.  cliii.-clix.;  see,  also,  Hare's  "  Walks  in  Rome,'* 
ii.  238-247. 

Page  399.  Allegoric  family  ;  History  and  Time,  Power  and 
Wisdom  support  the  tomb  of  Pius  VII.  by  Thorvaldsen  ;  Jus- 
tice and  Charity,  Prudence  and  Truth,  on  the  tomb  of  Alexan- 
der VII.  by  Bernini. 

Page  401.  Guercino  ;  Giovanni  Francesco  Barbieri  or  Guer- 
cino,  the  Squinter,  1590-1666  ;  Bolognese  school ;  the  original 
painting  of  Saint  Petronilla,  daughter  of  St.  Peter,  is  in  the 
Capitol  at  Rome  ;  there  is  a  famous  copy  in  mosaic  over  an 
altar  at  St.  Peter's  ;  cf .  Mrs.  Jameson's  "  Sacred  and  Legend- 
ary Art,"  i.  206. 

Chapter  XXXIX.  Page  406.  She  did  not  think  .  .  .  shi 
only  felt ;  a  pithy,  climactic  statement  of  Hilda's  mental  condi- 
tion and  her  confession  ;  cf.  also  pages  409,  411. 

Chapter  XL.  Page  415.  Saint  Hilda;  614-680,  founded 
the  monastery  at  Whitby,  England,  658.  .  . 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


NOTES.  543 

Page  417.  Aladdin's  Palace;  one  of  the  twenty-four  win- 
dows, studded  with  precious  gems,  was  left  for  the  Sultan  to 
finish  ;  but  his  gems  were  exhausted  and  the  window  was  never 
completed;  cf.  Longfellow's  elegy,  *< Hawthorne;''  last  stanza  : 

**  Ah  I  who  shall  lift  that  wand  of  magic  power, 
And  the  lost  clew  reg^ain  ? 
The  unfinished  window  in  Aladdin's  tower 
Unfinished  must  remain !  " 

Page  419.    Sirocco  .  .  .  tramonta ;  east  wind  ;  north  wind. 

Page  420.  Pope  Gregory;  possibly  the  monument  to  Greg- 
ory XIII.,  supported  by  Religion  and  Power,  or,  the  simple  urn 
of  Gregory  XIV. 

Page  421.  Hadrian's  tomb  ;  now  Castle  of  St.  Angelo  ;  see 
notes,  page  633. 

Page  421.     Goldeti  candlestick;  see  notes,  page  537. 

Chapter  XLI.  Page  425.  Amaranthine  flower  ;  Qi.y^orA^ 
worth's  «  Weak  is  the  Will  of  Man."  , 

Page  428.  Piazza  di  Spagna  ;  the  central  location  for  shops 
and  hotels  for  the  use  of  foreigners. 

Page  432.  Thorwaldsen;  Bertel  Thorvaldsen,  the  most 
noted  Danish  sculptor,  1770-1844 ;  his  mausoleum  and  a  collec- 
tion of  bis  works  are  at  Copenhagen. 

Page  433.  Head  of  Brutus;  among  the  last,  unfinished 
works  of  Michael  Angelo,  begun  for  Cardinal  Ridolfi,  1535. 

Chapter  XLI  I.  Page  441.  Ghetto;  from  Hebrew  word 
«  chat,"  broken,  dispersed  ;  cf .  Isaiah  14  :  12  ;  15  :  2 ;  Jeremiah 
45  :  25,  27.  The  Jews  were  shut  within  the  walls  of  the  Ghetto 
by  Pope  Paul  IV. ;  laws  were  later  relaxed ;  the  Ghetto  no 
longer  exists;  cf.  Story's  "  Roba  di  Roma,"  ii.  104-160 ;  Craw- 
ford's "  Ave  Roma,"  ii.  1,  2. 

Page  443.  Cenci  Palace;  a  gloomy,  feudal  building  in 
"  Seventh  Region,"  Rome. 

Chapter  XLIII.  Page  445.  Apollo  Belvedere;  found  in  the 
ruins  of  Antium,  1503  ;  a  majestic  copy  of  Greek  bronze  by  an 
unknown  artist,  possibly  Calamis  of  fifth  century  b.  C;  kept 
in  Belvedere  apartment  at  Vatican  ;  cf.  Byron's  **  Childe  Har- 
old," IV.  clxi. 

Page  445.    Laocodn  ;  see  notes,  page  535. 

Page  451.  Clear,  red  lustre ;  Miriam's  carbuncle  ;  see  page 
157. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


644  NOTES. 

Chapter  XLIV.  Page  455.  Light  went  out;  see  Introdno* 
tion,  page  x. 

Chapter  XLV.  Page  465.  Dreary  city  ;  author's  own  ex- 
perience during  daughter's  illness  ;  see  Introduction,  page  ix. 

Page  468.     Gauls  ;  last  attack  on  Rome,  see  notes,  page  532. 

Page  468.    Seven  hills  ;  see  notes,  page  531. 

Chapter  XL VI.  Page  474.  Appian  Way ;  the  first  great 
Roman  road  to  Brundisium,  begun  312  B.  c,  by  Appius  Clan- 
dius,  the  censor ;  excavated  in  part  1850-1853  ;  it  is  bordered 
by  monuments  and  ruins. 

Page  476.  Cecilia  MeteUa's  tomb  ;  wife  of  Sylla  and  daugh- 
ter of  Quintus  Metellus  ;  the  tomb  was  built  79  b.  c,  and  made 
fortress  in  13th  century ;  cf .  Byron's  "  Childe  Harold,"  IV. 
xcix.-cv.  ^ 

Page  477.  Claudian  aqueduct ;  built  38-52  ;  it  is  the  most 
famous  of  sixteen  Roman  aqueducts. 

Page  477.  Cadmus  ;  who,  seeking  sister  Europa,  was  shown 
the  way  by  a  calf,  and,  in  obedience  to  oracle,  built  city  of 
Thebes.  * 

Page  479.  Marble  woman  ;  for  a  detailed  recital  of  discov- 
ery of  this  Venus,  see  "  French  and  Italian  Note-Books,"  iL 
237-240. 

Page  480.  Venus  of  the  Tribune;  Venus  of  Medici  in  the 
Tribune  of  Uffizi  Grallery,  Florence,  distinguished  from  Venus 
de  Melos  or  Milo,  in  the  Louvre  at  Paris;  found  1820  on  Island 
of  Melos. 

Chapter  XLVII.  Page  491.  Sin  .  .  .  Adam;  cf.  Gene- 
sis 3  :  1-24.     Puritanical  speculation  on  sin  and  retribution. 

Chapter  XLVIII.  Page  493.  CamtynZ;  from  second  Sat- 
urday before  Ash  Wednesday  to  Shrove  Tuesday  ;  it  has  at- 
tracted less  popular  interest  since  1870  ;  cf .  Story's  "  Roba  di 
Roma,"i.  272-278;   Crawford's   "Ave   Roma,"  ii.  193-203. 

Page  497.  Apples  of  Sodom  ;  apple-trees  on  the  sides  of  the 
Dead  Sea,  which  bear  apples  of  beauty  that  are  like  ashes 
within  ;  cf.  Byron's  "  Childe  Harold,"  III.  xxxiv.  ^ 

Page  500.  Cinderella^s  Coach;  cf.  Grimm's  Fairy  Tales, 
Cinderella,  or  Perrault's  Tales. 

Chapter  XLIX.  Page  504.  Titaness ;  mythical  warrior- 
daughter  of  Heaven  and  Earth  ;  hence  a  gigantic,  lawless  wo* 
man. 

Page  507.    Abbate  ;  priest 


Digitized 


by  Google 


NOTES.  545 

Page  511.  Claude;  Claude  Gel^  of  Lorraine,  1600-1682, 
French  landscape  painter ;  note  the  author's  delicate,  fanciful 
vision. 

Chapter  L.  Page  514.  Romantic  mysteries ;  reiteration  of 
the  author's  intent  in  this  romance. 

Page  515.  Tomb  of  Raphael;  in  third  chapel  on  left  in 
Pantheon. 

Page  5^9.  Sin  has  educated  Donatello  ;  final  ethical  message 
of  book. 

Conclusion.  Page  522.  Reluctantly  ;  it  is  unfortunate  that 
Hawthorne  did  not  maintain  bis  unwillingness  to  add  this  sup- 
plementary chapter. 

Page  523.  Cuvier;  Greorge  Leopold  Cuvier,  French  natural- 
ist and  anatomist,  1769-1832. 

Page  525.  Convent  of  Sacre  Ccsur;  connected  with  Church 
8.  Trinita  de'  Monte  ;  the  convent  has  a  fine  library  and  the 
nuns  are  women  of  rank  and  education. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


CHAPTER  OUTLINES  AND  STUDY  SUGGESTIONS. 
By  T.  Q.  Alfobd. 

flOBMULT  PBOraiPAL  OF  TBI  M AMUAL  TRAIHIMe  IDSH  BOHOOL,  IMDUVAPOUS,  tKDlAMA, 

GENERAL  DIVISIONS  OF  THEME. 

L  Oman  thi  Ouonr  of  Sm.    Chapters  I.  to  XXin.  indiuive. 
II.  How  THB  OuiLTT  MOAPB  TBI  CoMMQUBNCBS  OF  SoT.    Chapters  ZXIT.  to 

XXXY.  inclusive. 
m.  BrFaoTS  of  Sim  om  thou  who  asm  Ihmoobht.  Chapters  ZXXVL  to  L.  in- 

clnsire. 

CHAPTEE  I. 

Outline.  —  A  room  in  the  Capitol  and  a  view  from  a  win« 
dow.  —  Resemblance  between  Donatello  and  the  Faun  of  Praxi- 
teles. —  A  description  of  the  Fann. 

RsBfARKS.  —  "A  symbol  of  the  human  soul."  In  this  sen- 
tence is  given  the  thought  of  the  entire  book  —  freedom  to  choose 
the  good  amid  the  evil. 

The  characteristics  of  the  Faun  as  presented  in  this  chapter 
should  be  studied  in  connection  with  those  of  Donatello  as 
brought  out  in  the  next. 

**lt  is  possible  that  the  Faun  might  be  educated  through  the 
medium  of  his  emotions."  The  possibility  of  training  the  intel- 
lect through  the  emotions  is  an  important  thought. 

CHAPTER  II. 

Outline.  —  A  conversation  on  the  resemblance  of  Donatello 
to  the  Faun,  and  on  the  Faun's  place  in  nature.  —  A  criticism  on 
the  Dying  Gladiator  which  leads  to  a  comparison  of  Sculpture 
and  Painting.  —  Effect  of  the  realization  of  the  antique  faun  in 
the  person  of  Donatello.  —  Sudden  change  in  the  mood  of  Dona- 
tello. 

Remarks.  —  Kenyon's  speech,  on  page  27,  makes  the  Faun 
(Donatello)  a  kind  of  moral  and  intellectual  connecting  link 
between  animal  and  man.  Immediately  following  this,  Imriam 
makes  it  represent  the  innocent  childhood  of  mankind. 

In  her  reference  to  **  troublesome  recollections "  on  page  28, 
and  to  her  desire  to  **  only  forget  one  day  "  on  page  30,  Miriam 
hints  at  a  mystery  in  her  past  life  that  will  have  a  great  influ- 
ence on  the  course  of  our  narrative. 

Childish  simplicity  and  brute  ferocity  are  the  leading  charao- 
teristics  of  Donatello. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


648  CHAPTER  OUTLINES 


CHAPTER  III. 

Outline. —  Peculiarities  in  the  position  of  Miriam.  —  Con- 
jectures as  to  Miriam's  antecedents.  —  A  visit  to  the  catacomb 
of  St.  Calixtus.  —  Going  astray  of  the  pagan  of  old  Rome  and  of 
Miriam. 

Remarks.  —  **  Donatello's  wonderful  resemblance  to  the 
Faun  "  is  the  key-note  of  our  narrative.  Having  sounded  this, 
the  author  brings  in  an  antecedent  incident  for  the  purpose 
of  introducing  some  tones  which  will  prove  rather  discordant. 
''Miriam  was  plucked  up  out  of  a  mysterv.''  The  solution  of 
this  mystery  is  one  of  the  difficult  though  mteresting  problems 
of  this  book. 

It  is  evident  from  the  incidents  of  the  following  chapter  that 
the  guide's  story  of  the  ''  Paean  of  old  Rome  "  is  based  on  bis 
knowledge  of  a  present  inhabitant  of  the  Catacomb. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Outline.  —  Miriam's  rescue.  —  The  Spectre  of  the  Catacomb, 
or  Miriam's  Model.  —  Effect  of  this  mysterious  incident  on  Mir- 
iam. —  Donatello's  antipathy  for  the  death-scented  apparition. 

Remarks.  —  Miriam's  conduct  after  her  rescue  indicates  that 
this  was  not  her  first  meeting  with  the  Spectre.  His  reply  to 
Keuyon's  **  What  are  you  ?  "  would  indicate  the  same. 

The  guide's  attempt  to  dissuade  Kenyon  from  approaching 
the  apparition  seems  to  be  a  feint,  and  shows  that  he  knows 
more  of  the  stranger  than  he  is  willing  to  tell. 

Did  Miriam  lead  this  unknown  man,  or  did  he  guide  her  into 
the  torchlight,  thence  into  sunshine  ? 

The  story  of  Memmius  and  *'the  single  moment's  grace"  by 
divine  indulgence  allowed  him,  the  dreary  termination  of  all 
Miriam's  romantic  fantasies,  the  serious  compromise  of  her  hap- 
piness, the  trustworthy  antipathy  of  Donatello,  all  indicate  the 
nature  of  this  man-demon. 

As  Donatello  represents  the  innocent  childhood  of  mankind, 
so  the  Model  represents  one  who  has  made  an  irrevocable  choice 
of  evil  as  his  worldly  mission. 

CHAPTER  V. 

Outline.  —  Description  of  a  palace  built  three  hundred  years 
ago.  —  The  work  falling  from  her  hand,  a  sign  of  Miriam's  sad- 
ness. —  Her  pictures  and  sketches  examined  by  Donatello.  —  A 
picture  of  Miriam  painted  by  herself. 

Remarks.  —  *<  When  the  work  falls  in  a  Woman's  lap,"  etc 
This  paragraph  shows  that  a  great  sadness  b  now  resting  on 
Miriam. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


AND  STUDY  SUGGESTIONS.  649 

**  Tfao  idea  of  a  woman  acting  the  part  of  a  revengef al  mis- 
chief towards  man  '*  is  brought  out  in  the  picture  of  the  lay- 
figure,  in  the  sketches  of  Jael  and  Sisera,  of  Judith  and  Holo- 
fernes,  of  Herodias  and  John  the  Baptist. 

**  The  artist  relinquished  the  happiness  which  she  could  so 
profoundly  appreciate  for  others.''  In  tha  sketches  from  tlie 
portfolio,  she  had  represented  herself  as  an  observer  of  the 
happiness  of  others,  and  always  with  an  expression  of  deep  sad- 


The  sad  expression  of  Miriam's  own  painting  of  herself  as 
described  by  Donatello  shows  how  thoroughly  this  feeling  had 
taken  possession  of  her.  It  seems  to  bopntirely  due  to  her 
peculiar  relation  to  the  Spectre. 

This  chapter  furnishes  another  excellent  opportunity  to  study 
the  character  of  Donatello. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Outline.  —  A  descciption  of  Hilda's  tower.  —  Hilda's  posi- 
tion in  Rome.  —  Original  in  America,  she  becomes  a  copyist  in 
Rome.  —  A  discussion  to  justify  this  change  of  purpose. 

Remarks.  —  This  chapter  gives  an  insight  into  Hilda's  char- 
acter. It  consists  of  womanly  purity,  accuracy  of  judgment 
based  almost  entirely  on  delicacy  of  sentiment,  and  devotion  to 
the  carrying  out  of  a  purpose. 

In  the  work  she  is  doing,  the  copying  of  the  works  of  the  old 
masters,  Hawthorne  has  prepared  the  way  for  developing  in  the 
next  chapter  the  source  from  which  he  draws  the  characters  of 
both  Miriam  and  Hilda. 

CHAPTER  VII. 

Outline.  —  Additional  light  on  the  character  of  Hilda.  ~- 
Hilda's  copy  of  Beatrice.  —  A  discussion  on  the  subtle  mystery 
of  this  portrait.  —  A  small  matter  of  business  that  may  have 
important  consequences. 

Remarks.  —  Beatrice  was  the  daughter  of  Francesco  Cenci, 
a  rich  nobleman  of  Rome,  who  treated  her  most  inhumanly. 
She  was  tried  and  executed  on  a  charge  of  having,  in  connection 
with  her  brother  and  step-mother,  planned  and  executed  the 
murder  of  her  unnatural  father.  Hawthorne  speaks  of  the  ex- 
pression of  Guide's  picture  as  "  a  sorrow  that  removed  this  beau- 
tiful girl  out  of  the  sphere  of  humanity."  In  the  discussion 
between  Hilda  and  Miriam  as  to  the  cause  of  this  sorrow,  the 
former  holds  that  it  was  the  result  of  an  "inexpiable  crime;** 
the  latter,  that  her  conduct  was  **  the  best  virtue  possible  under 
the  circumstances."  It  was  doubtful  whether  or  not  she  was 
guilty  of  the  charge  on  which  she  was  executed. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


660  CHAPTER  OUTLINES 

^  Hilda  was  Btartled  to  observe  that  Miriam's  ezpression  had 
become  almost  exactly  that  of  the  portrait."  This  incident,  to* 
gether  with  the  address  on  the  package  delivered  by  Miriam  to 
Hilda,  shows  that  the  character  of  Miriam  is  very  close  to  the 
author's  idea  of  Beatrice.  The  story  of  the  <*  beautiful  parri« 
cide,"  then,  is  the  key  to  the  mystery  that  hovers  over  Miriam's 
past  life  and  to  her  relation  to  the  Model. 

In  a  later  chapter  we  shall  find  that  the  character  of  Hilda  is 
the  author's  idea  of  the  effect  of  Beatrice's  surroundings  on  a 
temperament  very  different  from  that  of  Miriam. 

CHAPTER  Vin.  j 

Outline.  —  Donatello's  enjoyment  derived  from  nature.  —  A 
description  of  the  scenery  in  the  grounds  of  the  Villa  Borghese. 

—  Influences  of  Rome  and  of  nature  on  Donatello. 
Remarks.  —  **  The  simplicity  of  the  inferior  beings  mingled 

with  Donatello's  human  intelligence  might  partly  restore  what 
man  has  lost  of  the  divine  I "  This  sentence  indicates  that  the 
author  intends  to  represent  in  the  character  of  Donatello  man's 
condition  before  the  fall,  or  that  of  the  individual  before  he  has 
wilfully  sinned. 

This  chapter  presents  the  influence  of  nature  on  a  sinless 
being. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Outline.  —  Mutual  relation  between  Donatello  and  Miriam* 
»—  Miriam's  warning. —  An  hour's  forgetf  ulness  of  sin  and  sorrow* 

Remarks.  — **  He  [Donatello||  expressed  his  joy  by  an  extrav- 
agance of  gesticulation,  but  which  doubtless  was  the  language 
of  the  natural  man."  The  emotional  Donatello  f umbhes  a  good 
illustration  of  the  origin  and  development  of  language. 

Miriam,  burdened  with  sin  or  sorrow,  and  Donatello,  un* 
touched  by  the  same,  are  here  thrown  into  such  relation  as  to 
bring  out  their  mutual  influence  on  each  other. 

Their  playfulness  **  was  a  &;limpse  far  backward,  before  man- 
kind was  burdened  by  sin  and  sorrow."  This  power  of  Miriam's 
to  lay  aside  for  an  hour  her  burden  has  a  profound  meaning. 
That  burden  had  its  origin  without  and  not  within  her  heart,— 
she  was  innocent. 

CHAPTER  X. 

Outline.  —  Donatello's  dance  the  climax  of  a  happy  hour.  -— 

—  A  parallel  between  this  sylvan  dance  and  the  sculptured  scene 
on  a  sarcophagus.  —  The  Model's  appearance  almost  leads  to  a 
tragedy. 

Remarks.  —  "  In  Miriam's  motion  there  was  still  an  artful 


Digitized 


by  Google 


AND  STUDY  SUGGESTIONS.  661 

beauty."  Is  it  one  of  the  e£fect8  of  sin  that  even  in  our  highest 
merriment  we  cannot  be  quite  natural  ? 

**  Your  hour  is  past;  bis  hour  is  come."  The  influence  of 
Donatello  and  that  of  the  Model  on  Miriam  are  here  contrasted. 

<'  Be  satisfied  ;  I  hate  him  too  ! "  said  Miriam.  This  avowal 
and  plea  with  Donatello  for  no  violence  indicate  the  state  of 
Miriam's  feeling  toward  the  Model.  It  will  be  of  interest  to  the 
reader  to  watch  the  growth  of  this  hatred  until  it  causes  Miriam 
to  change  her  plea. 

CHAPTER  XI. 

Outline.  —  An  interview  between  Miriam  and  the  Model 
which  contains  important  hints.  —  Their  return  to  Rome. 

Remarks.  —  This  chapter  gives  ''  due  warning  **  of  a  '*  cer- 
tain inevitable  catastrophe.'* 

"  The  chain  which  bound  the  pair  [Miriam  and  the  Model] 
must  have  been  forged  in  some  such  unhallowed  furnace  as  is 
only  kindled  by  evil  passions  and  fed  by  evil  deeds."  This 
passage  calls  up  again  the  story  of  Beatrice  and  her  unnatural 
father ;  but  a  careful  study  of  the  context  will  lead  us  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  crime  has  been  entirely  on  the  part  of  the 
Model,  and  that  on  Miriam's  part  it  is  *'  one  of  those  sad  fatali- 
ties which  are  among  the  most  insoluble  riddles  propounded  to 
human  comprehension." 

The  secret  power  of  the  Model  over  Miriam,  her  suggestion 
to  him  **  to  pray  for  rescue,"  mistaking  his  will  for  an  iron 
necessity,  and  her  threatened  suicide,  seem  to  be  the  points  from 
which  this  chapter  may  be  interpreted. 

The  Model's  sophistry  as  to  his  effort  to  break  the  bond,  and 
his  accusation  of  <*  a  crimson  stain,"  sound  like  the  cunning  and 
audacity  of  Satan  himself. 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Outline.  —  A  description  of  the  Pincian  garden.  —  The  peo- 
ple who  resort  hither.  —  During  their  stroll,  Hilda  and  Kenyon 
talk  of  Miriam  and  Donatello.  —  A  view  from  a  terrace.  —  An 
incident  suggestive  of  Miriam's  thraldom.  —  Modern  Rome  and 
its  relation  to  the  Rome  of  antiquity. 

Remarks.  —  The  events  of  this  chapter  run  parallel  with 
those  of  the  preceding  chapter.  In  it,  we  have  the  beginning 
of  that  attachment  between  Hilda  and  Kenyon  that  will  have 
a  much  deeper  significance  toward  the  close  of  the  book  than,  an 
ordinary  love  affair. 

The  changed  mood  of  Donatello  through  the  double  emotion 
of  love  for  Miriam  and  hatred  for  the  Model,  as  observed  by 
Kenyon  and  Hilda,  is  an  important  stage  in  the  growth  of  his 
character. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


652  CHAPTER  OUTLINES 

The  mysterions  relation  between  Miriam  and  the  Model  puz- 
zles Kenyon.  He  says  :  *<  My  heart  trusts  her,  whatever  my 
head  may  do."  Hilda,  with  a  woman's  fidelity,  trusts  Miriam 
without  allowing  her  reason  to  be  excited  by  the  mystery  of  her 
friend's  past  life.    , 

CHAPTER  Xni. 

Outline.  —  Miriam  aiar  with  the  world.  —  Description  of 
a  sculptor's  studio.  —  A  description  of  Kenyon.  —  Miriam's  visit 
to  Kenyon's  studio. 

Remarks.  —  In  the  beginning  of  the  chapter,  Miriam  is  repre- 
sented as  in  <<  an  infinite  shivering  solitude,"  beyond  the  reach 
of  human  comfort. 

**A8  these  busts  in  the  block  of  marble,"  thought  Miriam, 
<<  so  does  our  individual  fate  exist  in  the  limestone  of  time."  In 
her  trouble  she  has  been  driven  to  accept  Fatalism. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

Outline.  —  Miriam's  criticism  on  modem  sculpture.  —  Ken- 
yon's Cleopatra.  —  Kenyon's  reserve  prevents  Miriam  from  re- 
vealing her  secret. 

Remarks.  —  The  aimless  wanderines  of  Miriam  referred  ta 
in  the  last  chapter,  the  heated  discussion  with  Kenyon  as  to  the 
position  of  sculpture  as  an  art,  and  her  appeal  to  him  for  aid  as 
a  true  friend,  show  the  troubled  state  of  her  mind. 

From  what  is  said  about  the  statue  of  Cleopatra  and  the 
womanhood  that  is  mixed  up  with  its  discordant  elements,  it 
may  be  inferred  that  Kenyon  has  drawn  largely  upon  his  con- 
ception of  Miriam  in  its  production. 

CHAPTER  XV. 

Outline.  —  Rome  the  favorite  residence  of  artists.  —  A  meet- 
ing of  artists.  —  Some  sketches  which  bear  the  touch  of  the  old 
masters.  —  Hilda  discovers  the  original  sketch  of  Guide's  picture 
of  the  Archangel  Michael. 

Remarks.  —  Hilda's  discovery  of  the  first  sketch  of  Guide's 
Archangel  is  an  important  incident.  The  resemblance  between 
Lucifer  in  that  sketch  and  Miriam's  Model  illustrates  the  fact  that 
a  continued  course  of  evil  produces  the  same  outward  expression 
in  all  ages.  Miriam's  protest  against  this  fancied  resemblance 
shows  a  kind  of  regard  for  the  old  fiend. 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

Outunb.  —  A  description  of  the  Fountain  of  Trevi.  — -  An  inci« 
dent  in  which  Miriam,  Donatello,  and  the  Model  are  the  actors* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


AND  STUDY  SUGGESTIONS,  668 

^Trajan's  Forum,  Mars  Ultor,  Temple  of  Minerva,  and  the 
Temple  of  Peace. 

Remarks.  —  "I  never  wish  to  dance  any  more,**  answered 
Donatello.  What  had  thus  spoiled  his  simplicity  of  nature  and 
was  to  make  him  as  wise  and  as  wretched  as  the  rest  of  man- 
kind?   His  love  and  his  hate  have  begun  to  educate  him. 

Miriam's  exorcism,  in  which  she  cries:  **  In  the  name  of  all  the 
Saints,  vanish.  Demon,  and  let  me  be  free  of  you  now  and  for- 
ever ! "  and  Donatello's  hint  at  drowning  the  Model,  show  that 
we  are  approaching  a  catastrophe. 

Compare  this  incident  with  that  at  the  close  of  the  dance  in 
the  Borghese  grounds,  and  note  the  change  in  both  Miriam  and 
Donatello. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

Outline.  —  Coliseum  by  moonlight.  —  Miriam  without  self- 
control,  and  the  Model's  penance  without  penitence.  —  Faces 
turned  city- ward. 

Remarks.  —  Miriam's  conduct  under  the  obscure  arch  of  the 
Coliseum  is  an  excellent  psychological  study  of  the  methods  of 
relief  from  acute  trouble,  when  under  the  necessity  of  secrecy; 
her  effort  to  persuade  Donatello  to  flee  from  her  that  he  may 
escape  the  impending  doom  that  hangs  over  her,  shows  in  what 
light  she  now  regards  him.  Her  beauty  and  her  gifts  could  call 
to  her  aid  none  but  this  simple,  half'-witted  boy. 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Outline.  —  Different  interpretations  of  the  story  of  Curtius. 
—  A  comparison  of  the  ruins  in  different  climates.  —  The  statue 
of  Marcus  Aurelius  and  some  remarks  thereon.  —  The  Tarpeian 
Rock.  —  Miriam,  Donatello,  and  the  Model,  alone  on  the  brow 
of  the  ominous  precipice.  —  The  crisis  of  Miriam's  calamity  and 
a  hint  of  a  fearful  deed. 

Remarks.  —  In  her  discussion  of  the  nature  of  the  chasm 
which  was  closed  by  the  patriotic  devotion  of  Curtius,  Miriam 
again  expresses  herself  as  a  Fatalist.  Her  argument  seems  to 
conform  to  experience,  but  must  be  accepted  as  coming  from  an 
intellect  beclouded  by  sin  or  sorrow.  In  her  reply,  Hilda  speaks 
as  one  without  this  experience,  either  from  within  her  own  soul 
or  from  surrounding  circumstances.  The  true  view  of  human 
destiny  must  be  found  between  these  extremes.  "  I  [Miriam] 
would  give  all  I  have  or  hope,  for  one  instant  of  your  [Hilda's] 
trust  in  God."  The  trouble  of  the  one  had  driven  her  not  only 
to  forget,  but  to  doubt  God's  providence;  the  other's  pure  nature, 
never  having  been  put  to  the  test,  was  shocked  at  even  the  ex-* 
pression  of  doubt. 

In  her  meditations  on  the  brow  of  the  preeipice  it  is  evident 


Digitized 


by  Google 


654  CHAPTER  OUTLINES 

that  Miriam  contemplates  suicide;  but  in  her  explanation  to 
Donatelloy  as  to  who  had  been  flung  over  the  Tarpeian  Rock  in 
days  gone  by,  she  seems  to  think  that  the  Model  should  be  the 
one  to  take  that  leap.  The  question  of  Donatello  which  led  to 
this  explanation  is  the  first  indication  of  an  effort  on  his  part 
really  to  think.  This  marks  the  change  from  emotional  to  intel- 
lectual impulse  to  action.  His  question,  **  Was  it  well  done?  " 
and  his  glance  at  the  Model  show  that  he  is  trying  to  justify  his 
trying  this  ancient  punishment  on  Miriam's  persecutor.  To  ad- 
just Uie  responsibility  of  this  murder  between  these  participants 
18  a  delicate  moral  question. 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

Outline.  —  Miriam  and  Donatello  adjust  the  responsibility 
of  their  crime.  —  The  immediate  effect  of  a  broken  law.  —  The 
brotherhood  created  by  crime. 

Remarks.  —  The  commission  of  this  crime  **  has  developed  in 
Donatello  an  intelligence  which  was  no  native  characteristic," 
and  with  this  a  consciousness  of  a  moral  quality  in  his  acts.  He 
has  eaten  of  **  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil."  This 
develops  in  him  a  conscience  wmch  approves  the  good  and 
condemns  the  evil.  He  says,  <'  I  did  what  ought  to  be  done  to 
a  traitor." 

**  He  had  his  trial  in  the  breath  or  two  while  I  held  him  over 
the  cliff;  and  his  sentence  in  that  one  glance,  when  your  eyes 
responded  to  mine."  This  is  the  story  of  Adam  and  £ve  re3n- 
acting  the  fall  of  man. 

**  The  foremost  result  of  a  broken  law  is  ever  an  ecstatic  sense 
of  freedom."  This  is  a  fact  of  experience,  from  a  careful  study 
of  which  much  may  be  gained.  It  is  not  safe  to  judge  your  own 
acts  or  those  of  others  while  this  sense  of  freedom  continues. 

"It  is  a  terrible  thought,  that  an  individual  wrong-doing 
melts  into  the  great  mass  of  human  crime  and  makes  us, — 
who  dreamed  only  of  our  own  little  separate  sin,  —  makes  us 
guilty  of  the  whole."  If  this  idea  of  "confraternity  of  the 
guilty  "  were  understood,  what  effect  would  it  have  on  crime? 

CHAPTER  XX. 

Outline. — Meeting  at  the  Church  of  the  Capuchins. — The 
interior  of  the  church.  —  Miriam's  undue  vivacity  in  criticising 
Guido's  **  Archangel  Michael."  —  The  guilty  pair  approach  the 
bier  of  a  dead  monk. 

Remarks.  —  Unusual  care  to  keep  trifling  appointments  and 
creating  artificial  flow  of  spirits  are  the  means  employed  by 
Miriam  to  conceal  her  guilt.  Her  efforts  to  conceal  are  the  ex« 
pression  of  a  guilty  conscience. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


AND  STUDY  SUGGESTIONS.  655 

There  being  no  artfulness  in  Donatello,  the  e£fect8  of  crime 
are  noticeable  by  what  he  has  lost — simplicity — rather  than 
by  what  he  does.  The  student  of  human  nature  will  be  much 
interested  in  these  manifestations  of  a  guilty  conscience. 

There  is  a  study  in  the  different  views  held  by  Miriam  and 
Hilda  of  Guide's  picture  of  the  Archangel  subduing  Lucifer. 
The  former  reads  the  picture  from  the  standpoint  of  one  who 
has  engaged  in  the  contest  with  sin  ;  the  latter,  from  the  stand- 
point of  innocence  and  inexperience. 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

Outline.  —  The  discovered  identity  of  the  dead  Capuchin.  — 
An  old  superstition  which  increases  Miriam's  trial.  —  Her  second 
look  at  the  corpse  and  a  hint  at  past  relations.  —  The  cemetery 
of  the  Capucini.  —  Brother  Antonio's  (the  Model's)  last  resting- 
place. 

Remarks.  —  The  way  Miriam  sustained  her  severe  trial  at 
the  bier  of  the  dead  monk  is  one  of  the  finest  portrayals  of  art- 
fulness in  literature.  How  was  it  possible  for  her  to  sustain 
Donatello  and  at  the  same  time  face  the  keen  interpretation  of 
Kenyon  ?  At  the  point  where  she  must  have  otherwise  failed, 
Hawthorne  has  adroitly  brought  Kenyon's  discretion  to  her 
relief. 

In  the  '*  Italian  Note-Book,"  we  are  told  that  the  author  saw 
a  corpse  in  this  church,  from  the  nostril  of  which  the  blood  actu- 
ally flowed  as  described  in  this  chapter. 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

Outline.  —  Miriam's  efforts  to  comfort  Donatello. — Their 
separation. 

Kem ARKS.  —  When  the  guilty  pair  are  alone  in  the  Medici 
gardens,  and  there  is  no  longer  any  need  of  concealment  or 
artfulness,  the  reaction  of  the  crime  is  pictured  with  remark- 
able skill  in  the  play  of  feelingps  there  represented.  Donatello's 
**  leaden  despondency  "  and  his  refusal  to  be  comforted,  Miri- 
am's misery,  self-accusation,  and  efforts  to  comfort  her  com- 
panion in  crime,  make  this  a  most  touching  scene. 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

Outline.  —  Miriam's  resolution  before  visiting  Hilda.-— 
Through  Miriam's  crime,  Hilda  discovers  that  sin  is  in  the 
world.  —  Interview  between  Miriam  and  Hilda. 

Remarks.  —  Miriam's  resolution,  or  rather  want  of  resolu- 
tion, while  ascending  to  Hilda's  dove-cote,  shows  that  she  does 
not  know  how  to  approach  her  white-souled  friend. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


666  CHAPTER  OUTLINES 

Contrast  this  meeting  with  that  of  Miriam  and  Eenyon  at  the 
bier  of  the  dead  monk.  His  judgment  shows  the  discretion  and 
sympathy  of  a  man  of  experience  ;  Hilda's  shows  her  incapable 
of  mercy,  because  she  has  never  felt  the  need  of  having  mercy 
shown  to  her. 

The  similarity  of  expression  discovered  by  Hilda  in  her  own 
agonized  face  to  that  of  her  copy  of  Beatrice  gives  the  key  to 
this  character.  In  Hilda  and  Miriam,  the  author  is  representing 
the  effect  of  the  circumstances  which  surround  Beatrice  on  two 
very  different  temperaments. 

*'  Every  crime  destroys  more  Edens  than  our  own."  This  idea 
of  crime  destroying  the  happiness  of  others  and  of  other  gener- 
ations makes  it  an  awful  thing  to  contemplate. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Outline.  —  The  denizens  of  Rome  retreat  from  it  in  summer. 
—  A  description  of  Donatello's  castle.  —  Donatello  welcomes 
Kenyon  to  his  ancestral  home.  —  The  interior  of  Donatello's 
abode. 

Remarks.  —  **  The  traveller  still  felt  that  there  was  something 
lost  or  something  g^ned  (he  hardly  knew  which),  that  set  the 
Donatello  of  to-day  irreconcilably  at  odds  with  him  of  yester- 
day." This  change  may  represent  the  development  either  of  the 
race  or  of  the  individual.    The  causes  are  the  same  in  both. 

In  Donatello's  smile  of  welcome,  and  in  his  repugnance  to 
whatever  is  gloomy  or  ghostly,  Kenyon  can  still  catch  glimpses 
of  the  former  being  so  like  the  Faun  of  Praxiteles.  It  is  a  sad 
sight  thus  to  see  the  innocence  of  childhood  fading  with  the  ap- 
proach of  sin  and  sorrow.  This  is  a  time  when  every  one  needs 
all  the  aid  and  comfort  that  can  be  given  him.  Kenyon,  accord- 
ingly, suggests  the  need  of  a  woman's  face  to  brighten  up  the 
old  castle  of  Donatello. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

Outline.  —  **  Sunshine "  the  only  means  left  Donatello  to 
make  his  guests  welcome.  —  The  saloon  of  Donatello  shows  the 
identity  between  the  gay  and  the  sorrowful.  —  Kenyon's  request 
and  Douatello's  inquiry.  —  A  hint  that  there  may  be  another 
guest  at  Monte  Beni. 

Remarks.  —  ''A  sinful  man  might  do  all  the  more  effective 
penance  in  this  old  banquet-hall."  The  place  where  his  ances- 
tors were  merry  being  changed  like  himself,  Donatello  thinks  it 
a  fit  place  for  him  to  do  penance  for  his  sin. 

Donatello  says  :  **  It  troubles  me  to  be  looked  at  steadfastly." 
He  then  adds  :  **  It  is  not  my  will,  but  my  necessity,  to  avoid 


Digitized 


by  Google 


AND  STUDY  SUGGESTIONS.  667 

men's  eyes."    This  shows  a  fcdl  consciousness  of  crime,  and  a 
sorrow  for  the  same. 

The  incident  of  the  tribe  of  beggars  is  introduced  to  give  a  hint 
of  another  visitor  in  the  palace. 

CHAPTEB   XXVI. 

OuTUNE.  —  Antiquity  of  the  Monte  Beni  family.  —  The  legend 
of  the  origin  of  this  family.  —  The  characteristics  of  this  race.  — 
The  tradition  of  a  hereditary  peculiarity.  —  Analogy  between 
Donatello's  character  and  these  hereditary  traits.  —  The  changes 
in  Donatello  compared  with  those  in  the  race.  —  Means  for  lead- 
ing  an  agreeable  life  in  the  old  villa. 

Remarks.  —  This  chapter  is  a  poetic  presentation  of  the 
theory  of  evolution,  and  is  g^ven  for  the  purpose  of  furnishing  a 
foundation  for  the  inferences  that  have  been  drawn  in  regard  to 
the  character  of  Donatello. 

*'  No  life  now  wanders  like  an  unfettered  stream.  There  is 
a  mill-wheel  for  the  tiniest  rivulet  to  turn."  The  author  has 
certainly  given  here  the  great  characteristic  of  our  age.  No  one 
has  time  to  be  happy.  **  Sin,  care,  and  self-consciousness  have 
set  the  human  portion  of  the  world  askew.'* 

CHAPTER   XXVII. 

OtJTLiNB.  —  A  fountain  where  a'  Faun,  the  oldest  forefather 
of  Donatello,  wedded  a  human  maiden.  —  The  myth  of  one  of 
Donatello's  progenitors  and  a  water-nymph.  —  His  grief  at 
having  lost  his  proximity  to  nature. 

Remarks.  —  This  chapter  places  strong  emphasis  on  the  early 
friendly  relations  between  man  and  Nature,  and  on  the  cause  of 
the  estrangement. 

The  innocent  simplicity  of  man  is  the  only  condition  under 
which  it  is  possible  to  realize  this  harmonious  relation.  When 
Donatello's  progenitor  attempted  to  wash  away  the  blood-stain, 
the  water-nymph  would  no  longer  come  at  his  bidding ;  when 
Donatello  had  committed  the  crime  of  murder,  he  could  no  longer 
call  to  his  side  ^  whatever  creatures  haunt  the  woods."  Only  a 
tarantula  would  come. 

This  power  that  Donatello  had  acquired,  of  dealing  with  his 
own  emotions,  is,  after  all,  but  the  power  to  act  the  hypocrite, 
by  concealing  from  the  world  that  which  is  within  the  mind. 
It  is  evil  seed  producing  evil  fruit. 

We  have  another  hint  at  the  close  of  this  chapter  that  Tomaso 
has  something  to  reveal  to  Kenyon,  but  the  time  is  not  yet  ripe. 

CHAPTER   XXVIII- 

Outline.  —  The  ascent  of  the  tower.  —  A  description  of  Dona- 
tello's chamber.  —  The  view  from  the  summit  of  the  tower. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


668  CHAPTER  OUTLINES 

Remarks.  —  In  the  description  of  Donatello's  bedchamber, 
we  find  evidence  of  another  change  in  his  life.  We  have  seen 
him  in  the  simplicity  of  innocence,  in  the  leaden  despondency 
which  follows  the  commission  of  a  great  crime,  and  now  we  are 
to  see  him  in  the  role  of  a  penitent. 

In  Kenyon's  emotion,  occasioned  by  the  view  from  the  sum- 
mit of  the  tower,  we  may  learn  the  true  use  of  Kature.  It  was 
intended  that  those  who  are  capable  should  draw  lessons  of  wis- 
dom in  reg^ard  to  their  development.  To  those  who,  like  Dona- 
tello,  cannot  discern  these  lessons,  Nature  furnishes  a  comfort 
in  sorrow,  but  cannot  cleanse  the  conscience  of  crime. 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

Outline.  —  Kenyon's  impulse  on  the  battlements  and  Dona- 
tello's  horror.  —  Donatello's  preparation  to  fight  with  mortal 
calamity.  —  A  pull  at  Kenyon's  heartstrings.  —  Inward  senti- 
ments reflected  from  the  clouds.  —  Penitents  methods  in  search- 
ing for  peace.  —  The  low,  sad  strain  of  a  woman's  voice  from  the 
depth  below. 

Remarks. — The  impulse  to  fling  one's  self  from  a  preci- 
pice is  an  almost  universal  experience.  Is  the  author's  explana- 
tion of  the  temptation  sufficient?  This  thought  of  Kenyon's 
struck  Donatello  in  a  tender  spot. 

**  Every  human  life,  if  it  ascends  to  truth  or  delves  down  to 
reality,  must  undergo  a  similar  change,  but  sometimes,  perhaps,' 
the  instruction  comes  without  the  sorrow,  and  oftener  the  sor- 
row teaches  no  lesson  that  abides  with  us."  Is  it  the  many  or 
the  few  that  attempt  to  fulfil  the  condition  of  ascending  to  truth 
or  delving  to  reality  ?  How  can  we  develop  the  "  soul "  within, 
the  "  higher  intelligence,"  and  the  "  nobler  individuality,"  with- 
out suffering  the  sorrow  ?  It  is  a  sad  state  if  we  must  endure 
the  sorrow  and  lose  the  lesson  which  is  the  only  blessing  it  can 
bestow. 

Donatello's  custom  to  keep  vigils  shows  that  his  is  a  condition 
of  penitence,  and  Kenyon's  hint  at  <*good  deeds  to  mankind,"  as 
the  only  prayer  which  brings  peace,  seems  to  be  the  first  ray 
that  has  brightened  his  pathway  since  the  night  of  his  crime. 

This  chapter  closes  with  a  hint  of  that  other  presence  that 
Tomaso  has  two  or  three  times  been  on  the  eve  of  revealing. 

CHAPTER  XXX. 

Outline.  —  Difficulties  in  producing  a  portrait  bust  of  Dona- 
tello. -^  A  description  of  vintage  in  Tuscany.  —  Donatello's  grief 
and  Kenyon's  affection  lend  a  charm  to  Monte  Beni. 

Remarks.  —  In  the  failure  of  Kenyon  to  produce  the  right 
expression  in  Donatello's  bust,  there  is  a  good  illustration  of  the 


Digitized 


tized  by  Google 


AND  STUDY  SUGGESTIONS.  659 

inability  to  penetrate  the  mask  that  every  one  wears  over  his 
inner  self. 

**  Has  there  been  an  unalterable  evil  in  your  young  life  ? 
Then  crowd  it  out  with  good,  or  it  will  lie  corrupting  there  for- 
ever, and  cause  your  capacity  for  better  things  to  partake  of  its 
noisome  corruption."  From  a  human  standpoint,  this  is  the  only 
cure  for  sin.  To  cease  to  do  evil  is  not  enough;  there  must  be 
positive  good  to  take  its  place. 

CHAPTER  XXXI. 

Outline.  —  The  chapel  of  Monte  Beni  and  its  adjacent  saloon. 

—  Interview  of  Miriam  and  Kenyon.  —  A  plan  for  Donatello's 
release  from  the  thraldom  of  a  single  idea. 

Remarks.  —  **The  sculptor  was  startled  to  perceive  how 
Miriam's  rich,  ill-regulated  nature  impelled  her  to  fling  herself, 
conscience  and  all,  on  one  passion,  the  object  of  which  intellectu- 
ally seemed  far  beneath  her."  It  attracts  much  less  attention 
for  a  man  to  bestow  his  affections  on  his  inferior  intellectually 
than  for  a  woman  to  do  the  same  thing.  Why  this  is  so  is  one  of 
the  difficult  social  problems. 

**  The  germs  of  faculties  that  have  heretofore  slept  are  fast 
springing  into  activity."  This  is  said  of  Douatello,  and  it  sug- 
gests the  great  hidden  possibilities  in  man  which  favorable 
conditions  may  develop.  Not  that  sin  is  necessary  to  man's 
development;  hut  when  by  his  own  choice  he  has  brought  this 
upon  himself,  a  kind  Providence  has  utilized  it  for  man's  good 

—  to  insure  a  soul  and  an  intellect  within  him. 

CHAPTER  XXXII. 

Outline.  —  Farewell  to  Monte  Beni  and  the  beginning  of 
a  journey.  —  Rustic  character  and  manners  of  Tuscany.  —  A  de- 
scription of  an  ancient  town.  -^  Homes  of  peasants.  —  The  shrines 
and  crosses  by  the  roadside. 

Remarks.  —  The  point  of  interest  in  the  development  of  our 
narrative  to  be  found  in  this  chapter  is  the  spirit  of  penitence 
displayed  by  Donatello,  as  he  kneels  from  shrine  to  cross  and 
from  cross  to  shrine. 

"  May  the  Blessed  Virgin  be  more  gracious  to  the  poor  soul, 
because  she  is  a  woman."  This  expression  of  Donatello's  indi- 
cates a  change  of  mind  that  seems  to  foreshadow  a  reconciliation 
between  him  and  Miriam. 

CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

Outline.  —  The  ruins  on  the  hilltops.  —  The  hereditary 
haunts  of  vermin.  —  A  dissertation  on  pictured  windows.  '- 
Swarms  of  Italian  beggars. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


660  CHAPTER  OUTLINES 

Remarks.  —  In  the  diffeirent  purposes  which  led  onr  two  pil- 
grims to  stop  at  each  church,  we  have  still  further  evidence  of 
the  state  of  penitence  of  Donatello.  The  happy  expression  of 
Doiiatello's  face  after  he  had  distributed  alms  to  the  Italian  beg- 
gars is  a  shadowy  illustration  of  the  effect  of  good  deeds  on  a 
sinful  conscience.  This  mode  of  relief  was  suggested  to  Dona- 
tello by  Kenyon,  before  they  left  Monte  Beni. 

CHAPTER   XXXIV. 

Outline.  —  Our  travellers  enter  Perugia,  and  wander  among 
the  strange,  precipitate  passages  called  streets.  —  The  great 
square  of  Perugia  on  market  day.  —  A  description  of  the  archi- 
tecture surrounding  it.  —  The  statue  of  Pope  Julius  III.  —  His 
blessing  on  Donatello. 

Remarks.  —  The  heathen  spirit  indicated  in  Donatello's  coun- 
tenance, as  he  stands  before  the  statue  of  Pope  Julius,  is  an  evi- 
dence of  the  returning  sunshine  brought  to  him  through  penitence 
and  good  works. 

CHAPTER  XXXV. 

Outline.  —  Interview  of  Miriam  and  Kenyon  at  the  pontiff's 
statue.  —  Donatello  feels  the  need  of  Miriam,  and  calls  her.  —  A 
strange  marriage  ceremony. 

Remarks.  —  In  the  relations  which  these  three  characters 
sustain  to  one  another  is  a  profound  study  of  the  human  heart. 
Donatello  has  passed  from  a  state  of  innocence  into  one  of 
crime.  In  this  latter  condition,  he  has  experienced  a  <<  leaden 
despondency  "  that  for  a  time  so  benumbed  the  heart  that  it  was 
incapable  even  of  penitence;  but  after  the  first  shock  which  re- 
sulted from  his  crime  had  passed  away,  he  shows  true  penitence 
in  his  spirit  of  devotion.  His  <<  terrible  misfortune  has  begun 
to  educate  him ; "  and  now  his  greatest  need  is  for  assistance  to 
fill  his  life  with  something  good,  ^hich  shall  take  the  place  of 
the  simplicity,  the  despondency,  and  the  penitence  of  his  past 
existence.  The  mystery  of  Miriam's  early  life  has  led  her  to  the 
responsibility  of  having  produced  these  great  changes  in  the 
life  of  Donatello.  Since  hers  is  the  responsibility  for  his  great 
necessity,  she  alone  can  meet  it.  Before  the  condition  of  the 
one  can  be  improved  by  the  powers  of  the  other,  Donatello  must 
by  "  voluntary  choice  "  accept  the  assistance  which  Miriam  must 
bestow  through  self-sacrifice.-  He  is  prevented  from  making  the 
choice  by  the  mistaken  idea  that  the  '^  communion  of  crime  ought 
to  stifie  all  the  instinctive  motions  of  their  hearts,  impelling 
toward  each  other."  She  is  prevented  from  making  the  sacrifice 
by  the  mistaken  idea  that  the  '*  misery  already  accruing^  from  her 
influence  should  warn  her  to  withdraw  from  his  path.''  It  is  the 
office  of  Kenyon  to  clear  away  these  mistaken  ideas,  and  to  point 


Digitized 


by  Google 


AND  STUDY  SUGGESTIONS.  661 

out  the  fact  that  hereafter  they  must  live  for  the  good  of  others, 
and  not  for  their  own  happiness. 

CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

Outline.  —  Absence  causes  a  change  in  feeling  for  the  Eternal 
City.  —  Hilda's  anticipations  of  a  summer's  unalloyed  eu  joy  inent. 
—  Her  anticipations  disappointed  by  the  act  of  Miriam.  —  Her 
sorrow  and  the  world's  interpretation  of  it. 

Remarks.  —  The  effects  of  cri^le  are  not  limited  to  those 
who  commit  it,  so  Hilda  is  made  to  suffer  by  her  first  real 
knowledge  that  sin  is  in  the  world.  Added  to  this  is  the  suffer- 
ing occasioned  by  having  to  keep  her  terrible  secret. 

The  expression  g^ven  to  her  picture  by  the  young  Italian  artist 
brings  up  again  Hawthorne's  interpretation  of  Guido's  <<  Beatrice 
Cenci." 

The  language  of  the  picture-dealer  shows  how  little  of  the 
finer  feelings  of  the  heart  can  be  appreciated  by  the  average 
person. 

CHAPTER   XXXVII. 

Outline.  —  An  old  German  artist's  view  of  Hilda's  sorrow.  — 
Hilda's  dimness  of  insight  in  viewing  pictures.  —  The  Mephisto- 
pheles  of  great  picture-galleries.  —  in  her  despair,  Hilda  dreams 
of  home  and  longs  for  Kenyon. 

Remarks.  —  The  first  effect  on  Hilda  of  a  knowledge  of 
Miriam's  crime  was  moral  bewilderment.  In  this  chapter  we 
see  some  of  the  later  effects.  Among  these  are  physical  and 
spiritual  languor,  loss  of  the  power  of  appreciation,  sensitiveness 
as  to  truth  or  falsehood,  adverse  criticism  on  things  formerly 
admired,  homesickness,  and  a  longing  for  the  sculptor.  If  a 
knowledge  of  crime  produce  such  effects,  what  would  have  fol- 
lowed if  a  person  of  so  sensitive  a  nature  had  committed  the 
crime  ? 

CHAPTER  XXXVHI. 

Outline.  —  Adaptability  of  Catholicism.  —  The  Roman  pal- 
aces of  worship.  —  Hilda's  dangerous  errand.  —  Disappointment 
in  first  viewing  St.  Peter's.  —  A  time  when  it  satisfies  Hilda's 
ideal. 

Remarks.  —  Any  severe  shock  to  the  moral  sensibilities  is 
a  severe  strain  on  the  faith  in  human  nature,  but  never  quite 
destroys  it.  Hilda  lost  her  power  of  appreciating  the  pictures 
of  nearly  all  the  old  masters,  but  there  were  some  in  which  she 
still  had  faith;  this  saved  her  from  utter  ruin. 

There  is  a  point  in  the  depths  of  despair  at  which  the  mind 
seems  to  have  reached  bottom ;  from  this  point,  either  naturally 
or  from  the  smallest  of  causes,  it  tends  upward  toward  its  nor* 


Digitized 


by  Google 


662  CHAPTER  OUTLINES 

mal  condition.  Gnido's  << Archangel'*  impelled  her  to  kneel 
before  the  shrine  over  which  the  picture  hung;  the  <*  passionate 
prayer  '*  gave  her  relief.  The  picture  of  Petronilla  gave  her 
hope  that  by  faith  she  might  rise  above  her  present  condition  of 
despondency. 

CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

Outline.  —  A  holy  cloud  of  incense.  —  The  confessional  as 
adapted  to  man's  needs.  —  Testimony  as  to  the  relief  it  aflfords. 

—  Hilda  flings  herself  down  in  the  penitent's  place.  —  Her  inter- 
view with  the  priest. 

Remarks.  —  Hilda's  depression  on  account  of  her  secret  of  the 
great  crime  could  find  relief  only  in  communication  and  sympa- 
thy. These  were  to  be  found  only  in  the  confessional.  Such  an 
appeal  seems  natural  even  to  the  aaughter  of  a  Puritan,  when  we 
consider  her  lonely  condition.  The  confessional  was  no  more  to 
her  than  the  mother  or  friend  would  be  under  ordinary  circum- 
stances. 

CHAPTER  XL. 

Outline.  —  The  cause  of  Hilda's  happiness  gives  sadness  to 
Eenyon.  —  They  converse  of  St.  Peter's,  and  take  different  views. 

—  Things  seen  and  said  on  the  way  to  Hilda's  tower.  —  In  reverie 
they  pxpress  their  opinion  of  each  other. 

Remarks.  —  The  well-balanced  Kenyon  seems  a  little  piqued 
with  jealousy  that  Hilda  had  not  saved  her  confession  for  him. 
He  was  disappointed  in  finding  her  so  happy  that  she  did  not 
need  his  consolation. 

CHAPTER  XLI. 

Outline.  —  Hilda  lingers  on  the  hither  side  of  passion.  —  She 
returns '  to  her  occupation  with  a  new  power.  —  Discomforts  of 
Rome  in  winter.  —  Hilda's  visit  to  Kenyon's  studio,  and  the  con- 
versation on  the  statue  of  Cleopatra.  —  The  riddle  propounded  in 
the  unfinished  bust  of  Donatello. 

Remarks.  —  In  this  chapter  the  passionate  love  of  Kenyon  is 
contrasted  with  the  maidenly  reserve  of  Hilda. 

Kenyon  could  not  produce  his  ideal  in  his  statue  of  Cleopatra; 
still  his  work  would  suggest  his  thought  to  those  who  could 
appreciate  it;  an  honest  effort  toward  an  ideal  will  always  be 
appreciated. 

The  unfinished  bust  of  Donatello  suggests  his  transformation 
and  the  stage  of  his  development. 

CHAPTER  XLH. 

Outline.  —  A  reference  to  a  dismal  topic  sets  free  a  throng 
of  torturing  recollections.  —  Hilda  has  a  troubled  conscience  in 


Digitized 


by  Google 


AND  STUDY  SUGGESTIONS.  663 

regard  to  her  treatment  of  Miriam.  —  Hilda  delivers  Miriam's 
packet  at  the  Palazzo  Cenci. 

Remarks.  —  **  What  a  mixture  of  good  there  may  be  in  things 
eyil  I "  What  is  to  become  of  that  good  is  one  of  the  most  pro« 
found  problems  of  religion. 

Was  it  Hilda's  sober  second  thought,  or  was  it  her  suffering, 
that  made  her  conscience  trouble  her  in  regard  to  her  treatment 
of  Miriam?  Her  power  to  show  mercy  is  certainly  develop- 
ing. 

CHAPTER  XLIH. 

Outline.  —  Hilda  fails  to  keep  a  second  engagement,  and 
Kenyon  is  not  happy.  —  Kenyon  meets  Donatelio  in  a  peuiteut's 
garb.  —  The  lover's  purpose  balked,  and  his  efforts  at  consolation. 
—  He  meets  Miriam  in  a  new  role.  —  The  lamp  at  the  Virgin's 
shrine  extinguished. 

Remarks.  —  The  questions  asked  Kenyon  by  Donatelio  and 
Miriam  indicate  that  they  know  more  of  Hilda's  whereabouts 
than  they  have  told.  This  strengthens  the  view  that  Miriam  is  in 
some  way  connected  with  Beatrice  Cenci. 

In  this  chapter  we  have  the  first  real  disturbance  of  Kenyon's 
even  temper.  It  is  caused  indirectly  by  the  great  crime  of 
Miriam  and  Donatelio. 

CHAPTER  XLIV. 

Outline.  —  Kenyon  tries  to  mistrust  his  own  senses  rather 
than  Hilda.  —  He  visits  the  Dove-Cote,  but  finds  no  one.  —  He 
seeks  information  in  regard  to  Hilda  from  casual  observers.  — 
He  visits  her  abode.  —  He  seeks  the  aid  of  brother  artists  and  of 
the  police. 

Remarks.  —  In  addition  to  Kenyon's  trial,  this  chapter  gives 
two  or  three  glimpses  of  Italian  life  and  character. 

CHAPTER  XLV. 

Outline.  —  The  effect  of  Rome  on  persons  in  a  melancholy 
mood.  —  Wickedness  of  Rome  is  Hilda's  danger.  —  Her  purity 
her  only  safeguard.  —  An  interview  with  a  priest  which  leads  to 
a  new  theory  in  regard  to  her  disappearance. 

Remarks.  —  All  the  sad  lessons  of  ancient  Rome  cannot  teach 
a  single  man  to  be  content  with  sadness. 

The  picture  of  the  wickedness  of  Rome  and  of  the  localities 
which  invite  new  crime  is  not  encouraging  as  to  Hilda's  safety. 

Miriam's  crime  took  Hilda  to  the  confessional,  and  her  con- 
scientious discharge  of  duty  in  regard  to  the  package  placed  her 
in  the  hands  of  Catholic  influence.  Kenyon's  surmise  had  reason 
for  its  foundation. 


Digitized 


by  Google 


664  CHAPTER  OUTLINES 

CHAPTER  XLVI. 

Outline.  —  Meditations  on  the  scenes  along  the  Appian  Way. 
—  Kenyon's  spirits  revived.  —  While  waiting  for  an  eugagement 
to  be  fulfilled,  Keuyon  finds  a  treasure  of  antique  art. 

Remarks.  —  This  chapter  is  to  pave  the  way  to  the  solution 
of  the  mysterious  question  asked  by  Donatello  and  by  Miriam, 
when  Kenyon  accidentally  met  them  in  Rome. 

Here  we  have  an  illustration  of  the  extent  to  which  the  riches 
of  antique  art  lie  hidden  in  the  accumulated  soil  about  Rome. 

The  incident  of  the  buffalo  calf  is  taken  from  the  author's 
experience  as  told  in  his  ^  Note-Book." 

CHAPTER  XLVII. 

Outline.  —  A  gradual  approach  to  a  deep  purpose.  —  Miriam 
tells  Kenyon  the  story  of  her  life.  —  A  discussion  of  the  purpose 
of  sin. 

Remarks.  —  *<But  I  [Miriam]  linger  and  hesitate  because 
every  word  I  speQ,k  brings  me  near  to  a  crisis  from  which  I 
shrink."  This  and  what  follows  indicates  that  the  reunion  of 
Hilda  and  Kenyon  means  the  separation  of  Miriam  and  Dona- 
tello. It  is  probable  that  the  meaning  to  be  conveyed  is  that 
Hilda's  knowledge  of  the  crime  had  caused  her  to  be  detained 
when  she  went  to  deliver  Miriam's  package.  She  can  be  released 
only  by  Donatello's  surrendering  himself  up  to  justice.  By  so 
doing  he  is  acting  in  the  interest  of  Kenyon,  who  had  taught  him 
and  Miriam  that  their  lives  must  be  devoted  to  the  happiness  of 
others. 

The  mystery  of  Miriam's  life  before  the  adventure  of  the 
Catacomb  forms  a  background  for  this  picture  of  crime  and  its 
effects.  The  explanation  of  this  mystery  is  no  part  of  the  author's 
purpose  in  connection  with  this  book.  There  perhaps  is  as  great 
a  mystery  connected  with  every  crime  of  murder;  but  we  never 
think  of  trying  to  explain  it.  Still  our  curiosity  leads  us  to  grasp 
at  the  hints  presented  in  this  chapter,  to  try  to  unravel  the  mys- 
tery and  to  discover  its  relation  to  our  story.  The  early  mar^ 
riage  contract  which  she  repudiated,  the  <*  mysterious  and  terrible 
crime  "  of  which  she  was  suspected  as  being  an  accomplice,  and 
the  encounter  of  the  Spectre  in  the  Catacomb  illustrate  ''the 
evil  fate  that  haunted  her  through  life."  Was  the  Model  her 
ancient  lover,  who  had  gained  a  new  hold  on  her  by  his  know- 
ledge of  the  **  great  crime  "  in  which  she  was  suspected  of  being 
an  accomplice  ? 

'*  He  [Donatello]  travels  in  a  circle,  as  all  things  heavenly 
and  earthly  do,  and  now  comes  back  to  his  original  self  with  an 
inestimable  treasure  of  improvement,  won  from  experience  and 
pain."     In  a  state  of  innocence,  man  is  in  perfect  harmony  with 


Digitized 


by  Google 


AND  STUDY  SUGGESTIONS.  666 

the  purpose  of  his  existence;  through  crime  of  his  own  choosing 
this  harmony  is  destroyed;  educated  hy  the  experience  and  pain 
caused  by  this  crime,  man  rises  »to  a  higher  harmony  based  on 
virtue. 

Miriam's  reasoning  as  to  why  sin  is  permitted  to  exist  is  at 
fault  in  supposing  that  it  is  the  '*  destined  "  means  fur  man's 
development.  The  better  argument  is  g^ven  in  what  she  says 
Hilda  would  concede,  —  "  Sin  is  the  result  of  man's  choice  of 
evil;  thus  brought . into  existence,  kind  Providence  has  made  it 
a  means  (not  the  destined  means)  of  man's  education."  Had 
man  chosen  the  good,  God  would  have  devised  other  and  better 
means  for  his  development. 

CHAPTER   XLVni. 

Outline.  —  The  Carnival  of  to-day.  —  Chang^e  in  Kenyon  since 
the  last  Carnival.  —  The  Corso  on  an  afternoon  of  the  Carnival. 

—  The  gentle  courtesy  of  the  Italians.  —  The  Roman  Senator  on 
his  way  to  the  Capitol. 

Remarks.  —  We  have  in  this  chapter  a  picture  of  the  decay- 
ing  splendor  of  Rome  even  in  the  mirth  of  heb  Carnival.-  This 
scene  is  in  contrast  with  the  gloomy  feelings  of  Kenyon. 

CHAPTER  XLIX. 

Outline.  —  The  anxious  look  of  Kenyon  a  mark  for  the  prac- 
tical jokes  of  the  Carnival.  —  Miriam -and  Donatello  bid  Kenyon 
farewell. —  Kenyon  finds  the  object  of  his  search  under  peculiar 
circumstances.  —  An  explanation  of  Hilda's  absence  that  does  not 
explain. 

Remarks.  —  As  our  narrative  draws  to  a  close,  we  have  a  fine 
illustration  of  one  of  Hawthorne's  characteristics  as  a  novelist. 
He  leaves  out  all  those  unimportant  minutiae  to  whicli  most 
writers  give  undue  attention,  and  presents  only  those  incidents 
bearing  on  the  great  truth  he  would  teach.  We  have  here  pre- 
sented the  reunion  of  Hilda  and  Kenyon,  and  are  left  to  fill  out 
the  picture  by  contrasting  the  bond  which  unites  them  with  that 
which  joined  together  Donatello  and  Miriam. 

CHAPTER  L. 

Outline.  —  A  clue  to  Hilda's  disappearance  and  to  the 
manner  of  her  release.  —  Hilda  and  Kenyon  visit  the  Pantheon.' 

—  A  discussion  of  the  relation  of  sin  to  man's  development, 
the  introduction  to  Kenyon's  proposal  of  marriage.  —  Miriam's 
bridal  gift  to  Hilda.  —  A  postscript  in  which  the  mysteries  are 
explained. 

Remarks.  —  Hawthorne  has  followed  common  experience  in 


Digitized 


by  Google 


666  CHAPTER  OUTLINES, 

leaving  anexplained  the  mysteries  of  the  origin  and  tendencies 
of  the  events  of  his  book.  It  will  be  worth  much  to  the  reader 
to  have  his  attention  called  to  the  mysteries  of  the  events  of 
ordinary  life. 

The  discussion  of  the  relation  of  sin  to  man's  development  is 
repeated  in  this  chapter,  and  the  author  leaves  it  with  the  same 
conclusion  as  in  previous  chapters.  "  Man  is  responsible  for  the 
existence  of  sin,  and  God  has  made  it  a  means  of  his  develop- 
ment, but  it  is  not  a  necessity  to  that  end." 

The  bond  of  union  between  Hilda  and  Kenyon  is  one  of  affec- 
tion, pure  and  deep.  It  is  the  natural  coming  together  of  two 
hearts  that  are  capable  of  making  each  other  truly  happy. 

Conclusion.  —  The  book  is  an  allegory,  to  which  the  follow- 
ing interpretations  have  been  given :  — 

1.  All  the  characters  represent  society :  the  Model,  those  who 
do  evil  from  choice;  Donatello  and  Miriam,  those  who  do  evil 
through  temptation;  Hilda,  those  who  are  innocent,  but  suffer 
on  account  of  the  sins  of  others;  and  Kenyon,  the  noblest  man- 
hood. 

2.  The  whole  represents  an  individual:  Donatello  is  body,  the 
Model  is  propensity  for  evil,  Miriam  is  soul,  Kenyon  is  reasoi^ 
snd  Hilda  is  conscience. 


1 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


Digitized 


by  Google 


T I    A     vi\w    i^^uw^iMyi^i^  ,yy^wp^^pH^^p'^wPl^l|  I.I  jif^i|i.ipt>^-' 


r: 


Digitizec  by 


y  Google 


