This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/ 


L    /  7  3/.  ^-/X^'J 


HARVARD 

COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 


L    /  7  3/.  ^7^.  7 


HARVARD 

COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 


V 


Wa^tfide  C&ition 


THE  COMPLETE  WORKS 

OP 

NATHANIEL  HAWTHORNE 

IN  THIRTEEN  VOLUMES 
VOLUME  VIII 


OUR  OLD  HOME,  AND  ENGLISH 
NOTE-BOOKS 


BY 


NATHANIEL   HAWTHORNE 


VOLUME  II 


BOSTON   AND   NEW   YORK 
HOUGHTON,   MIFFLIN    AND    COMPANY 

1902 


HARVARD^ 

UrilVcRSfTYl 
LfBRARY 


Copyright,  1870, 
By  SOPHIA  HAWTHORNE. 

Copyright,  1883, 
By  HOUGHTON,  MIFFLIN  «&  CO. 

Copyright,  1898, 
By  rose  HAWTHORNE  LATHROP. 

All  rights  reserved* 


The  Riverside  Press ^  Cambridge^  Mass.^  U.  S.  A. 
Electrotyped  and  Printed  by  H.  O.  Houghton  &  Co. 


PASSAGES  FROM 

THE  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS 

OF 

NATHANIEL  HAWTHOBNK 


PASSAGES  FROM 
THE  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS. 


TO  THE  LAKES. 

July  ^ih.  —  I  left  Leamington  on  Monday,  shortly 
after  twelve,  having  been  accompanied  to  the  railway 

station  by  U and  J ,  whom  I  sent  away  before 

the  train  started.  While  I  was  waiting,  a  rather  gen- 
tlemanly, well-to-do,  English-looking  man  sat  down  by 
me,  and  began  to  talk  of  the  Crimea,  of  hmnan  affairs 
in  general,  of  God  and  his  Providence,  of  the  coming 
troubles  of  the  world,  and  of  spiritualism,  in  a  strange 
free  way  for  an  Englishman,  or,  indeed,  for  any  man. 
It  was  easy  to  see  that  he  was  an  enthusiast  of  some 
hue  or  other.  He  being  bound  for  Birmingham  and  I 
for  Rugby,  we  soon  had  to  part ;  but  he  asked  my 
name,  and  told  me  his  own,  which  I  did  not  much  at- 
tend to,  and  immediately  forgot.  « 

[Here  follows  a  long  account  of  a  visit  to  Lichfield 
and  Uttoxeter,  condensed  in  "  Our  Old  Home."] 

Jvly  Qth.  —  The  day  after  my  arrival,  by  way  of 
Lichfield  and  Uttoxeter,  to  Liverpool,  the  door  of  the 
Consulate  opened,  and  in  came  the  very  sociable  per-- 
sonage  who  accosted  me   at  the  railway  station  at 
Leamington.     He  was  on  his  way  towards  Edinburgh, 


6  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  [1855. 

to  deliver  a  course  of  lectures  or  a  lecture,  and  had 
called,  he  said,  to  talk  with  me  about  spiritualism,  be- 
ing desirous  of  having  the  judgment  of  a  sincere  mind 
on  the  subject.  In  his  own  mind,  I  should  suppose,  he 
is  past  the  stage  of  doubt  and  inquiry ;  for  he  told  me 
that  in  every  action  of  his  life  he  is  governed  by  the 
counsels  received  from  the  spiritual  world  through  a 
medium.  I  did  not  inquire  whether  this  medium  (who 
is  a  small  boy)  had  suggested  his  visit  to  me.  My  re- 
marks to  him  were  quite  of  a  sceptical  character  in  re- 
gard to  the  faith  to  which  he  had  surrendered  himself. 
He  has  formerly  lived  in  America,  and  had  had  a  son 
bom  there.  He  gave  me  a  pamphlet  written  by  him- 
self, on  the  cure  of  consumption  and  other  diseases  by 
antiseptic  remedies.  I  hope  he  will  not  bore  me  any 
more,  though  he  seems  to  be  a  very  sincere  and  good 
man ;  but  these  enthusiasts  who  adopt  such  extrava- 
gant ideas  appear  to  me  to  lack  imagination,  instead 
of  being  misled  by  it,  as  they  are  generally  supposed 
to  be. 


NEWBY  BRIDGE.  —  FOOT  OF  WINDERMERE. 

July  IZih.  —  I  left  Liverpool  on  Saturday  last,  by 
the  London  and  Northwestern  Railway,  for  Leaming- 
ton, epent  Sunday  there,  and  started  on  Monday  for 
the  English  lakes,  with  the  whole  family.  We  should 
not  have  taken  this  journey  just  now,  but  I  had  an 
official  engagement  which  it  was  convenient  to  com- 
bine with  a  pleasure-excursion.  The  first  night  we 
arrived  at  Chester,  and  put  up  at  the  Albion  Hotel, 
where  we  found  ourselves  very  comfortable.  We  took 
the  rail  at  twelve  the  next  day,  and  went  as  far  as 
Milnethorpe  station,  where  we  engaged  seats  in  an  old* 


1855.]     NEWBY  BRIDGE.— WINDERMERE.  7 

fashioned  stage-coacli,  and  came  to  Newby  Bridge.  I 
suppose  there  are  not  many  of  these  coaches  now  run- 
ning on  any  road  in  Great  Britain  ;  but  this  appears 
to  be  the  genuine  machine,  in  all  respects,  and  es- 
pecially in  the  round,  ruddy  coachman,  weU  moistened 
with  ale,  good-natured,  courteous,  and  with  a  proper 

sense  of  his  dignity  and  important  position.     U , 

J ^  and  I  mounted  atop,  S ,  nurse,  and  R 

got  inside,  and  we  bowled  off  merrily  towards  the 
hearts  of  the  hills.  It  was  more  than  half  past  nine 
when  we  arrived  at  Newby  Bridge,  and  alighted  at  the 
Swan  Hotel,  where  we  now  are. 

It  is  a  very  agreeable  place;  not  striking  as  to 
scenery,  but  with  a  pleasant  rural  aspect.  A  stone 
bridge  of  five  arches  crosses  the  river  Leven  (which 
is  the  communication  between  Windermere  Lake  and 
Morecambe  Bay)  close  to  the  house,  which  sits  low 
and  well  sheltered  in  the  lap  of  hills,  —  an  old-fash- 
ioned inn,  where  the  landlord  and  his  people  have  a 
simple  and  friendly  way  of  dealing  with  their  guests, 
and  yet  provide  them  with  all  sorts  of  facilities  for  be- 
ing comfortable.  They  load  our  supper  and  breakfast 
tables  with  trout,  cold  beef,  ham,  toast,  and  muffins ; 
and  give  us  three  fair  courses  for  dinner,  and  excellent 
wine,  the  cost  of  all  which  remains  to  be  seen.  This 
is  not  one  of  the  celebrated  stations  among  the  lakes ; 
but  twice  a  day  the  stage  -  coach  passes  from  Milne- 
thorpe  towards  Ulverston,  and  twice  returns,  and  three 
times  a  little  steamer  passes  to  and  fro  between  our 
hotel  and  the  head  of  the  lake.  Yoimg  ladies,  in 
broad-brimmed  hats,  stroll  about,  or  row  on  the  river 
in  the  light  shallops,  of  which  there  are  abundance ; 
sportsmen  sit  on  the  benches  under  the  windows  of 
the  hotel,  arranging  their  fishing-tackle ;  phaetons  and 


8  ENGLISH  NOTE^BOOKS.  [1855. 

post-chaises,  with  postilions  in  scarlet  jackets  and 
white  breeches,  with  one  high-topped  boot,  and  the 
other  leathered  far  up  on  the  leg  to  guard  against  fric- 
tion between  the  horses,  dash  up  to  the  door.  Morn- 
ing and  night  comes  the  stage-coach,  and  we  inspect 
the  outside  passengers,  almost  face  to  face  with  us, 
from  our  parlor-windows,  up  one  pair  of  stairs.  Lit- 
tle boys,  and  J-- among  them,  spend  hours  on  hours 

fishing  in  the  clear,  shallow  river  for  the  perch,  chubs, 
and  minnows  that  may  be  seen  flashing,  like  gleams 
of  light,  over  the  flat  stones  with  which  the  bottom  is 

paved.    I  cannot  answer  for  the  other  boys,  but  J 

catches  nothing. 

There  are  a  good  many  trees  on  the  hiQs  and  round- 
about, and  pleasant  roads  loitering  along  by  the  gentle 
river-side,  and  it  has  been  so  sunny  and  warm  since 
we  came  here  that  we  shall  have  quite  a  genial  recol- 
lection of  the  place,  if  we  leave  it  before  the  skies  have 
time  to  frown.  The  day  after  we  came,  we  climbed  a 
high  and  pretty  steep  hill,  through  a  path  shadowed 
with  trees  and  shrubbery,  up  to  a  tower,  from  the  sum- 
mit of  which  we  had  a  wide  view  of  mountain  scenery 
and  the  greater  part  of  Windermere.  This  lake  is  a 
lovely  little  pool  among  the  hills,  long  and  narrow, 
beautifully  indented  with  tiny  bays  and  headlands ; 
and  when  we  saw  it,  it  was  one  smile  (as  broad  a  smile 
as  its  narrowness  allowed)  with  really  brilliant  stm- 
shine.  All  the  scenery  we  have  yet  met  with  is  in 
excellent  taste,  and  keeps  itself  within  very  proper 
bounds,  —  never  getting  too  wild  and  rugged  to  shock 
the  sensibilities  of  ctdtivated  people,  as  American 
scenery  is  apt  to  do.  On  the  rudest  surface  of  Eng- 
lish earth,  there  is  seen  the  effect  of  centuries  of  civil- 
ization, so  that  you  do  not  quite  get  at  naked  Nature 


1865.]  FdRNESS  ABBEY.  9 

anywhere.  And  then  every  point  of  beauty  is  so  well 
known,  and  has  been  described  so  much,  that  one  must 
needs  look  through  other  people's  eyes,  and  feels  as  if 
he  were  seeing  a  picture  rather  than  a  reality.  Man 
has,  in  short,  entire  possession  , of  Nature  here,  and  I 
should  think  young  men  might  sometimes  yearn  for  a 
fresher  draught.     But  an  American  likes  it. 

FUENESS   ABBEY. 

Yesterday,  July  12th,  we  took  a  phaeton  and  went 
to  Fumess  Abbey,  —  a  drive  of  about  sixteen  miles, 
passing  along  the  course  of  the  Leven  to  Moreoambe 
Bay,  and  through  Ulvergton  and  other  villages.  These 
villages  all  look  antique,  and  the  smallest  of  them 
generally  are  formed  of  such  close,  contiguous  clusters 
of  houses,  and  have  ^uch  narrow  and  crooked  streets, 
that  they  give  you  an  idea  of  a  metropolis  in  minia- 
ture. The  houses  along  the  road  (of  which  there  are 
not  many,  except  in  the  villages)  are  almost  invaria- 
bly old,  built  of  stone,  and  covered  with  a  light  gray . 
plaster ;  generally  they  have  a  little  flower-garden  in 
front,  and,  often,  honeysuckles,  roses,  or  some  other 
irt^eet  and  pretty  rustic  adornment,  are  flowering  over 
the  porch.  I  have  hardly  had  such  images  of  simple, 
quiet,  rustic  comfort  and  beauty,  as  from  the  look  of 
these  houses ;  and  the  whole  impression  of  our  wind- 
ing and  undulating  road,  bordered  by  hedges,  luxuri- 
antly green,  and  not  too  closely  clipped,  accords  with 
this  aspect.  There  is  nothing  arid  in  an  English 
landscape;  and  one  cannot  but  fancy  that  the  same 
may  be  true  of  English  rural  life.  The  people  look 
wholesome  and  weU-to-do,  —  not  specimens  of  hard,* 
dry,  sunburnt  muscle,  like  our  yeomen,  —  and  are 
kind  and  civil  to  strangers,  sometimes  making  a  little 


lO  ENGLISH  NOTE-^BOOKS.  [1855. 

Inclination  of  the  head  in  passing.  Miss  Martineau, 
liowever,  does  not  seem  to  think  well  of  their  mental 
and  moral  condition. 

We  reached  Fumess  Abbey  about  twelve.  There 
is  a  railway  station  close  by  the  ruins;  and  a  new 
hotel  stands  within  the  precincts  of  the  abbey  grounds ; 
and  continually  there  is  the  shriek,  the  whiz,  the  rum- 
ble, the  bell-ringing,  denoting  the  arrival  of  the  trains; 
and  passengers  alight,  and  step  at  once  (as  their 
choice  may  be)  into  the  refreshment-room,  to  get  a 
glass  of  ale  or  a  cigar,  —  or  upon  the  gravelled  paths 
of  the  lawn,  leading  to  the  old  broken  walls  and  arches 
of  the  abbey.  The  rums  are  extensive,  and  the  en- 
closure of  the  abbey  is  stated  to  have  covered  a  space 
of  sixty-five  acres.  It  is  impossible  to  describe  them. 
The  most  interesting  part  is  that  which  was  formerly 
the  church,  and  which,  though  now  roofless,  is  still 
surrounded  by  walls,  and  retains  the  remnants  of  the 
pillars  that  formerly  supported  the  intermingling  curves 
of  the  arches.  The  floor  is  all  overgrown  with  grass, 
strewn  with  fragments  and  capitals  of  pillars.  It  was 
a  great  and  stately  edifice,  the  length  of  the  nave  and 
choir  having  been  nearly  three  hundred  feet,  and  that 
of  the  transept  more  than  half  as  much.  The  pillars 
along  the  nave  were  alternately  a  round,  solid  one  and 
a  clustered  one.  Now,  what  remains  of  some  of  them 
is  even  with  the  ground ;  others  present  a  stump  just 
high  enough  to  form  a  seat ;  and  others  are,  perhaps, 
a  man's  height  from  the  ground,  —  and  aU  are  mossy, 
and  with  grass  and  weeds  rooted  into  their  chinks, 
and  here  and  there  a  tuft  of  flowers,  giving  its  tender 
little  beauty  to  their  decay.  The  material  of  the  edi- 
fice is  a  soft  red  stone,  and  it  is  now  extensively  over- 
oTOwn  with  a  lichen  of  a  very  light  gray  hue,  which, 


1855.]  FURNESS  ABBEY.  11 

at  a  litde  distance,  makes  the  walls  look  as  if  they 
had  long  ago  been  whitewashed,  and  now  had  par- 
tially iretumed  to  their  original  color.  The  arches  of 
the  nave  and  transept  were  noble  and  immense ;  there 
were  four  of  them  together,  supporting  a  tower  which 
has  long  since  disappeared,  —  arches  loftier  than  I 
ever  conceived  to  have  been  made  by  man.  Very 
possibly,  in  some  cathedral  that  I  have  seen,  or  am 
yet  to  see,  there  may  be  arches  as  stately  as  these; 
but  I  doubt  whether  they  can  ever  show  to  such  ad- 
vantage in  a  perfect  edifice  as  they  do  in  this  ruin,  — 
most  of  them  broken,  only  one,  as  far  as  I  recollect, 
still  completing  its  sweep.  In  this  state  they  suggest 
a  greater  majesty  and  beauty  than  any  finished  human 
work  can  show ;  the  crumbling  traces  of  the  half-ob- 
literated design  producing  somewhat  of  the  effect  of 
the  first  idea  of  anything  admirable,  when  it  dawns 
upon  the  mind  of  an  artist  or  a  poet,  —  an  idea,  which, 
do  what  he  may,  he  is  sure  to  fall  short  of  in  his  at- 
tempt to  embody  it. 

In  the  middle  of  the  choir  is  a  much-dilapidated 
monument  of  a  cross-legged  knight  (a  Crusader,  of 
course)  in  armor,  very  rudely  executed ;  and,  against 
the  wall,  lie  two  or  three  more  bruised  and  battered 
warriors,  with  square  helmets  on  their  heads  and  vi- 
sors down.  Nothing  can  be  uglier  than  these  figures ; 
the  sculpture  of  those  days  seems  to  have  been  far  be- 
hind the  architecture.  And  yet  they  knew  how  to  put 
a  grotesque  expression  into  the  faces  of  their  images, 
and  we  saw  some  fantastic  shapes  and  heads  at  the 
lower  points  of  arches  which  would  do  to  copy  into 
**  Punch."  In  the  chancel,  just  at  the  point  below 
where  the  high  altar  stands,  was  the  burial-place  of 
the  old  Barons  of  Kendal.    The  broken  Crusader,  per> 


12  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

haps,  represents  one  of  them ;  and  some  of  their  stal- 
wart bones  might  be  found  by  digging  down.  Against 
the  wall  of  the  choir,  near  the  vacant  space  whiere  the 
altar  was,  are  some  stone  seats  with  canopies  richly 
carved  in  stone,  all  quite  perfectly  preserved,  where 
the  priests  used  to  sit  at  intervals^  during  the  celebra* 
tion  of  mass.  Conceive  all  these  shattered  walls,  with 
here  and  there  an  arched  door,  or  the  great  arched 
vacancy  of  a  window ;  these  broken  stones  and  monu- 
ments scattered  about;  these  rows  of  pillars  up  and 
down  the  nave;  these  arches,  through  which  a  giant 
might  have  stepped,  and  not  needed  to  bow  his  head, 
unless  in  reverence  to  the  sanctity  of  the  place, — 
conceive  it  all,  with  such  verdure  and  embroidery  of 
flowers  as  the  gentle,  kindly  moisture  of  the  English 
climate  procreates  on  all  old  things,  making  them  more 
beautiful  than  new,  —  conceive  it  with  the  grass  for 
sole  pavement  of  the  long  and  spacious  aisle,  and  the 
sky  above  for  the  only  roof.  The  sky,  to  be  sure,  is 
more  majestic  than  the  tallest  of  those  arches;  and 
yet  these  latter,  perhaps,  make  the  stronger  impres- 
sion of  sublimity,  because  they  translate  the  sweep  of 
the  sky  to  our  finite  comprehension.  It  was  a  most 
beautiful,  warm,  sunny  day,  and  the  ruins  had  all  the 
pictorial  advantage  of  bright  light  and  deep  shadows. 
I  must  not  forget  that  J^irds  flew  in  and  out  among 
the  recesses,  and  chirped  and  warbled,  and  made  them- 
selves at  home  there.  Doubtless,  the  birds  of  the 
present  generation  are  the  posterity  of  those  who  first 
settled  in  the  nuns,  after  the  Reformation ;  and  per- 
haps the  old  monks  of  a  still  earlier  day  may  have 
watched  them  building  about  the  abbey,  before  it  was 
a  ruin  at  all. 

We  had  an  old  description  of  the  place  with  us, 


1855.]  FURNESS  ABBEY.  13 

aided  by  which  we  traced  out  the  principal  part  of  the 
edifice,  such  as  the  church,  as  already  mentioned,  and, 
contiguous  to  this,  the  chapter-house,  which  is  better 
preserved  than  the  church ;  also  the  kitchen,  and  the 
room  where  the  monks  met  to  talk;  and  the  range  of 
wall,  where  their  cells  probably  were.  I  never  before 
had  given  myself  the  trouble  to  form  any  distinct  idea 
of  what  an  abbey  or  monastery  was,  —  a  place  where 
holy  rites  were  daily  and  continually  to  be  performed, 
with  places  to  eat  and  sleep  contiguous  and  conven- 
ient, in  order  that  the  monks  might  always  be  at  hand 
to  perform  those  rites.  They  lived  only  to  worship, 
and  therefore  lived  under  the  same  roof  with  their 
place  of  worship,  which,  of  course,  was  the  principal 
object  in  the  edifice,  and  hallowed  the  whole  of  it. 
We  f  oimd,  too,  at  one  end  of  the  i*uins,  what  is  sup- 
posed to  have  been  a  school-house  for  the  children  of 
the  tenantry  or  villeins  of  the  abbey.  All  round  this 
room  is  a  bench  of  stone  against  the  wall,  and  the 
pedestal  also  of  the  master's  seat.  There  are,  like- 
wise, the  ruins  of  the  mill ;  and  the  mill-stream,  which 
is  just  as  new  as  ever  it  was,  still  goes  murmuring  and 
babbling,  and  passes  under  two  or  three  old  bridges, 
consisting  of  a  low  gray  arch  overgrown  with  grass 
and  shrubbery.  That  stream  was  the  most  fleeting 
and  vanishing  thing  about  the  ponderous  and  high- 
piled  abbey ;  and  yet  it  has  outlasted  everything  else, 
and  might  still  outlast  another  such  edifice,  and  be 
none  the  worse  for  wear. 

There  is  not  a  great  deal  of  ivy  upon  the  walls,  and 
though  an  ivied  wall  is  a  beautiful  object,  yet  it  is  bet- 
ter  not  to  have  too  much,  —  else  it  is  but  one  wall  of 
unbroken  verdure,  on  which  you  can  see  none  of  the 
sculptural  ornaments,  nor  any  of  the  hieroglyphics  of 


X4  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1865. 

Time.  A  sweep  of  ivy  here  and  there,  with  the  gray 
vrall  everywhere  showing  through,  makes  the  better 
picture ;  and  I  think  that  nothing  is  so  effective  as  the 
little  bunches  of  flowers,  a  mere  handful,  that  grow  in 
spots  where  the  seeds  have  been  carried  by  the  wind 
ages  ago. 

I  have  made  a  miserable  botch  of  this  description  5 
it  is  no  description,  but  merely  an  attempt  to  preserve 
something  of  the  impression  it  made  on  me,  and  in 
this  I  do  not  seem  to  have  succeeded  at  all.  I  liked 
the  contrast  between  the  sombreness  of  the  old  walls, 
and  the  sunshine  falling  through  them,  and  gladden- 
ing the  grass  that  floored  the  aisles  ;  also,  I  liked  the 
effect  of  so  many  idle  and  cheerful  people,  strolling 
into  the  haunts  of  the  dead  monks,  and  going  babbling 
about,  and  peering  into  the  dark  nooks  ;  and  listening 
to  catch  some  idea  of  what  the  building  was  from  a 
clerical-looking  personage,  who  was  explaining  it  to 
a  party  of  his  friends.  I  don't  know  how  weU  ac- 
quainted this  gentleman  might  be  with  the  subject; 
but  he  seemed  anxious  not  to  impart  his  knowledge  too 
extensively,  and  gave  a  pretty  direct  rebuff  to  an  hon- 
est man  who  ventured  an  inquiry  of  him.  I  think  that 
the  railway,  and  the  hotel  within  the  abbey  groimds, 
add  to  the  charm  of  the  place.  A  moonlight  solitary 
visit  might  be  very  good,  too,  in  its  way ;  but  I  believe 
that  one  great  charm  and  beauty  of  antiquity  is,  that 
we  view  it  out  of  the  midst  of  quite  another  mode  of 
life  ;  and  the  more  perfectly  this  can  be  done,  the  bet- 
ter. It  can  never  be  done  more  perfectly  than  at  Fur- 
ness  Abbey,  which  is  in  itself  a  very  sombre  scene, 
and  stands,  moreover,  in  the  midst  of  a  melancholy 
vaUey,  the  Saxon  name  of  which  means  the  Vale  of 
the  Deadly  Nightshade. 


1855.]  FURNESS  ABBEY.  15 

The  entrance  to  the  stable-yard  of  the  hotel  is  be-^ 
neath  a  pointed  arch  of  Saxon  architecture,  and  on 
one  side  of  this  stands  an  old  building,  looking  like  a 
chapel,  but  which  may  have  been  a  porter's  lodge. 
The  Abbot's  residence  was  in  this  quarter ;  and  the 
clerical  personage,  before  alluded  to,  spoke  of  those  as 
the  oldest  part  of  the  ruins. 

About  half  a  mile  on  the  hither  side  of  the  abbey 
stands  the  village  of  Dalton,  in  which  is  a  castle  built 
on  a  Roman  foundation,  and  which  was  afterwards 
used  by  the  abbots  (in  their  capacity  of  feudal  lords) 
as  a  prison.  The  abbey  was  founded  about  1027  by 
King  Stephen,  before  he  came  to  the  throne  ;  and  the 
faces  of  himself  and  of  his  queen  are  still  to  be  seen 
on  one  of  the  walls. 

We  had  a  very  agreeable  drive  home  (our  drive 
hither  had  been  uncomfortably  sunny  and  hot),  and  we 

stopped  at  Ulverton  to  buy  a  pair  of  shoes  for  J 

and  some  drawing-books  and  stationery.  As  we  passed 
through  the  little  town  in  the  morning,  it  was  all  alive 
with  the  bustle  and  throng  of  the  weekly  market ;  and 
though  this  had  ceased  on  our  return,  the  streets  still 
looked  animated,  because  the  heat  of  the  day  drew 
most  of  the  population,  I  should  imagine,  out  of  doors. 
Old  men  look  very  antiquated  here  in  their  old-fash- 
ioned coats  and  breeches,  sunning  themselves  by  the 
wayside. 

We  reached  home  somewhere  about  eight  o'clock, — 
home  I  see  I  have  called  it ;  and  it  seems  as  homelike 
a  spot  as  any  we  have  found  in  England,  —  the  old 
inn,  close  by  the  bridge,  beside  the  clear  river,  pleas- 
antly overshadowed  by  trees.  It  is  entirely  English, 
and  like  nothing  that  one  sees  in  America  ;  and  yet  I 
feel  as  if  I  might  b^Vg  lived  here  a  long  while  ago,  and 


16  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

had  now  come  back  because  I  retained  pleasant  recol- 
lections of  it.     The  children,  too,  make  themselves  at 

home.     J spends  his  time  from  morning  to  night 

fishing  for  minnows  or  trout,  and  catching  nothing  at 

all,  and  U and  R have  been  riding  between 

fields  and  barn  in  a  hay-cart.  The  roads  give  us  beau- 
tiful walks  along  the  river-side,  or  wind  away  among 
the  gentle  hills  ;  and  if  we  had  nothing  else  to  look  at 
in  these  walks,  the  hedges  and  stone  fences  would  af- 
ford interest  enough,  so  many  and  pretty  are  the  flow- 
ers, roses,  honeysuckles,  and  other  sweet  things,  and 
so  abundantly  does  the  moss  and  ivy  grow  among  the 
old  stones  of  the  fences,  which  would  never  have  a  sin- 
gle shoot  of  vegetation  on  them  in  America  till  the 
very  end  of  time.  But  here,  no  sooner  is  a  stone  fence 
built,  than  Nature  sets  to  work  to  make  it  a  part  of 
herself.  She  adopts  it  and  adorns  it,  as  if  it  were  her 
own  child.  A  little  sprig  of  ivy  may  be  seen  creeping 
up  the  side,  and  clinging  fast  with  its  many  feet ;  a 
tuft  of  grass  roots  itself  between  two  of  the  stones, 
where  a  little  dust  from  the  road  has  been  moistened 
into  soil  for  it ;  a  smaU  bunch  of  fern  grows  in  an- 
other such  crevice ;  a  deep,  soft,  green  moss  spreads 
itself  over  the  top  and  all  along  the  sides  of  the  fence ; 
and  wherever  nothing  else  will  grow,  lichens  adhere  to 
the  stones  and  variegate  their  hues.  Finally,  a  great 
deal  of  shrubbery  is  sure  to  cluster  along  its  extent, 
and  take  away  all  hardness  from  the  outline ;  and  so 
the  whole  stone  fence  looks  as  if  God.  had  had  at  least 
as  much  to  do  with  it  as  man.  The  trunks  of  the  trees, 
too,  exhibit  a  similar  parasitical  vegetation.  Parasit- 
ical is  an  unkind  phrase  to  bestow  on  this  beautiful 
love  and  kindness  which  seems  to  exist  here  between 
one  plant  and  another  ;  the  strong  thing  being  always 


1856.]  THE  LAKES.  17 

ready  to  give  support  and  sustenance,  and  the  weak 
thing  to  repay  with  beauty,  so  that  both  are  the  richer, 
—  as  in  the  case  of  ivy  and  woodbine,  clustering  up  the 
trunk  of  a  tall  tree,  and  adding  Corinthian  grace  to  its 
lofty  beauty. 

Mr.  W ,  our  landlord,  has  lent  us  a  splendid 

work  with  engravings,  illustrating  the  antiquities  of 
Fumess  Abbey.  I  gather  from  it  that  the  hotel  must 
have  been  rebuilt  or  repaired  from  an  old  manor-house, 
which  was  itself  erected  by  a  family  of  Prestons,  after 
the  Reformation,  and  was  a  renewal  from  the  Abbot's 
residence.  Much  of  the  edifice  probably,  as  it  exists 
now,  may  have  been  part  of  the  original  one;  and 
there  are  baia-relief  s  of  Scripture  subjects,  sculptured 
in  stone,  and  fixed  in  the  wall  of  the  dining-room,  which 
have  been  there  since  the  Abbot's  time.  This  author 
thinks  that  what  we  had  supposed  to  be  the  school- 
house  (on  the  authority  of  an  old  book)  was  really  the 
building  for  the  reception  of  guests,  with  its  chapel. 
He  says  that  the  tall  arches  in  the  church  are  sixty 
feet  high.  The  Earl  of  Burlington,  I  believe,  is  the 
present  proprietor  of  the  abbey. 

THE  LAKES. 

Jvly  \6ih.  —  On  Saturday,  we  left  Newby  Bridge, 
and  came  by  steamboat  up  Windermere  Lake  to  Low- 
wood  Hotel,  where  we  now  are.  The  foot  of  the  lake 
is  just  above  Newby  Bridge,  and  it  widens  from  that 
point,  but  never  to  such  a  breadth  that  objects  are 
not  pretty  distinctly  visible  from  shore  to  shore.  The 
steamer  stops  at  two  or  three  places  in  the  course  of 
its  voyage,  the  principal  one  being  Bowness,  which 
has  a  little  bustle  and  air  of  business  about  it  proper 
to  the  principal  port  of  the  lake.     There  are  several 


18  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1865. 

small  yachts,  and  many  skiffs  rowing  about.  The 
banks  are  everywhere  beautiful,  and  the  water,  in  one 
portion,  is  strewn  with  islands  ;  few  of  which  are  large 
enough  to  be  inhabitable,  but  they  all  seem  to  be  ap- 
propriated, and  kept  in  the  neatest  order.  As  yet,  I 
have  seen  no  wildness ;  everything  is  perfectly  sub- 
dued and  polished  and  imbued  with  human  taste,  ex 
cept,  indeed,  the  outlines  of  the  hills,  which  continue 
very  much  the  same  as  God  made  them.  As  we  ap- 
proached the  head  of  the  lake,  the  congregation  of 
great  hills  in  the  distance  became  very  striking.  The 
shapes  of  these  English  mountains  are  certainly  far 
more  picturesque  than  those  which  I  have  seen  in 
Eastern  America,  where  their  summits  are  almost  in- 
variably rounded,  as  I  remember  them.  They  are 
great  hillocks,  great  bunches  of  earth,  similar  to  one 
another  in  their  developments.  Here  they  have  vari- 
ety of  shape,  rising  into  peaks,  falling  in  abrupt  prec- 
ipices, stretching  along  in  zigzag  outlines,  and  thus 
making  the  most  of  their  not  very  gigantic  masses, 
and  producing  a  remarkable  effect. 

We  arrived  at  the  Lowwood  Hotel,  which  is  very 
near  the  head  of  the  lake,  not  long  after  two  o'clock. 
It  stands  almost  on  the  shore  of  Windermere,  with 
only  a  green  lawn  between,  — an  extensive  hotel,  cov- 
ering a  good  deal  of  ground;  but  low,  and  rather 
village-inn-like  than  lofty.  We  found  the  house  so 
crowded  as  to  afford  us  no  very  comfortable  accommo- 
dations, either  as  to  parlor  or  sleeping-rooms,  and  we 
find  nothing  like  the  home-feeling  into  which  we  at 
once  settled  down  at  Newby  Bridge.  There  is  a  very 
pretty  vicinity,  and  a  fine  view  of  mountains  to  the 
northwest,  sitting  together  in  a  family  group,  some- 
times in  full  sunshine,  sometimes  with  only  a  golden 


1855.]  THE  LARES.  19 

gleam  on  one  or  two  of  them,  sometimes  all  in  a  veil 
of  cloud,  from  which  here  and  there  a  great,  dusky 
head  raises  itself,  while  you  are  looking  at  a  dim  ob- 
scurity. Nearer,  there  are  high  green  slopes,  well 
wooded,  but  with  such  decent  and  well-behaved  wood 
as  you  perceive  has  grown  up  under  the  care  of  man  \ 
still  no  wildness,  no  ruggedness,  —  as  how  should  there 
be,  when  every  half-mile  or  so  a  porter's  lodge  or  a 
gentleman's  gateway  indicates  that  the  whole  region 
is  used  up  for  villas.  On  the  opposite  shore  of  the 
lake  there  is  a  mimic  castle,  which  I  suppose  I  might 
have  mistaken  for  a  real  one  two  years  ago.  It  is  a 
great,  foolish  toy  of  gray  stone. 

A  steamboat  comes  to  the  pier  as  many  as  six  times 
a  day,  and  stage-coaches  and  omnibuses  stop  at  the 
door  still  oftener,  communicating  with  Ambleside  and 
the  town  of  Windermere,  and  with  the  railway,  which 
opens  London  and  all  the  world  to  us.  We  get  no 
knowledge  of  our  fellow-guests,  all  of  whom,  like  our- 
selves, live  in  their  own  circles,  and  are  just  as  remote 
from  us  as  if  the  Igke  lay  between.  The  only  words  I 
have  spoken  since  arriving  here  have  been  to  my  own 
family  or  to  h,  waiter,  save  to  one  or  two  young  pedes- 
trians who  met  me  on  a  walk,  and  asked  me  the  dis- 
tance to  Lowwood  Hotel.  "  Just  beyond  here,"  said 
I,  and  I  might  stay  for  months  without  occasion  to 
speak  again. 

Yesterday  forenoon  J and  I  walked  to  Amble- 
side, —  distant  barely  two  miles.  It  is  a  little  town, 
chiefly  of  modem  aspect,  built  on  a  very  uneven  hill- 
side, and  with  very  irregular  streets  and  lanes,  which 
bewilder  the  stranger  as  much  as  those  of  a  larger  city. 
Many  of  the  houses  look  old,  and  are  probably  the  cot- 
tages and  farm-houses  which  composed  the  rude  vil- 


20  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1865. 

lage  a  century  ago  ;  but  there  are  stuccoed  shops  and 
dwellings,  such  as  may  have  been  built  within  a  year 
or  two  ;  and  three  hotels,  one  of  which  has  the  look  of 
a  good  old  village  inn  ;  and  the  others  are  fashionable 
or  commercial  establishments.  Through  the  midst  of 
the  village  comes  tumbling  and  rumbling  a  mountain 
streamlet,  rushing  through  a  deep,  rocky  dell,  gliding 
under  an  old  stone  arch,  and  turning,  when  occasion 
calls,  the  great  block  of  a  water-mill.  This  is  the  only 
very  striking  feature  of  the  village,  —  the  stream  tak- 
ing its  rough  pathway  to  the  lake  as  it  used  to  do  be- 
fore the  poets  had  made  this  region  fashionable. 

In  the  evening,  just  before  eight  o'clock,  I  took  a 
walk  alone,  by  a  road  wMch  goes  up  the  hill,  back  of 
our  hotel,  and  which  I  supposed  might  be  the  road  to 
the  town  of  Windermere.  But  it  went  up  higher  and 
higher,  and  for  the  mile  or  two  that  it  led  me  along, 
winding  up,  1  saw  no  traces  of  a  town ;  but  at  last  it 
turned  into  a  valley  between  two  high  ridges,  leading 
quite  away  from  the  lake,  within  view  of  which  the 
town  of  Windetmere  is  situated.  It  was  a  very  lonely 
road,  though  as  smooth,  hard,  and  well  kept  as  any . 
thoroughfare  in  the  suburbs  of  a  city ;  hardly  a  dwell- 
ing on  either  side,  except  one,  half  bam,  half  farm- 
house, and  one  gentleman's  gateway,  near  the  begin- 
ning of  the  road,  and  another  more  than  a  mile  above. 
At  two  or  three  points  there  were  stone  bams,  which 
are  here  built  with  great  solidity.  At  one  place  there 
was  a  painted  board,  announcing  that  a  field  of  five 
acres  was  to  be  sold,  and  referring  those  desirous  of 
purchasing  to  a  solicitor  in  London.  The  lake  country 
is  but  a  London  suburb.  Nevertheless,  the  walk  was 
lonely  and  lovely  ;  the  copses  and  the  broad  hill-side, 
the  glimpses  of  the  lake,  the  great  misty  company  oi 


1865.]  THE  LAKES.  21 

pikes  and  fells,  beguUed  me  into  a  sense  of  something 
like  solitude ;  and  the  bleating  of  the  sheep,  remote 
and  near,  had  a  like  tendency.  Gaining  the  summit  of 
the  hill,  I  had  the  best  view  of  Windermere  which  I 
have  yet  attained,  —  the  best,  I  should  think,  that  can 
be  had,  though,  being  towards  the  south,  it  brings  the 
softer  instead  of  the  more  striking  features  of  the  land 
scape  into  view.  But  if  shows  nearly  the  whole  extent 
of  the  lake,  all  the  way  from  Lowwood,  beyond  Newby 
Bridge,  and  I  think  there  can  hardly  be  anything 
more  beautiful  in  the  world.  The  water  was  like  a 
strip  and  gleam  of  sky,  fitly  set  among  lovely  slopes 
of  earth.  It  was  no  broader  than  many  a  river,  and 
yet  you  saw  at  once  that  it  could  be  no  river,  its  out- 
line being  so  different  from  that  of  a  running  stream, 
not  straight  nor  winding,  but  stretching  to  one  side  or 
the  other,  as  the  shores  made  room  for  it. 

This  morning  it  is  raining,  and  we  are  not  very  com- 
fortable nor  contented,  being  all  confined  to  our  little 
parlor,  which  has  a  broken  window,  against  which  I 
have  pinned  the  "  Times  "  to  keep  out  the  chill  damp 

air.     U has  been  ill,  in  consequence  of  having 

been  overheated  at  Newby  Bridge.  We  have  no  books 
except  guide-books,  no  means  of  amusement,  nothing 
to  do.  There  are  no  newspapers,  and  I  shall  remem- 
ber Lowwood  not  very  agreeably.  As  far  as  we  are 
concerned,  it  is  a  scrambling,  ill-ordered  hotel,  with 
insufficient  attendance,  wretched  sleeping-accommoda- 
tions, a  pretty  fair  table,  but  German-silver  forks  and 
spoons ;  our  food  does  not  taste  very  good,  and  yet 
there  is  really  no  definite  fault  to  be  found  with  it. 

Since  writing  the  above,  I  have  found  the  first  vol- 
ume of  "  Sir  Charles  Grandison,"  and  two  of  G.  P.  E. 
James's  works,  in  the  coffee-room.     The  days  pass 


22  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

heavily  here,  and  leave  behind  them  a  sense  of  hav* 
ing  answered  no  very  good  purpose.     They  are  long 
enough,  at  all  events,  for  the  sun  does  not  set  till  after 
eight  o'clock,  and  rises  I  know  not  when.    One  of  the 
most  remarkable  distinctions  between  England  and  the 
United  States  is  the  ignorance  into  which  we  fall  of 
whatever  is  going  on  in  the  world  the  moment  we  get 
away  from  the  great  thoroughfares  and  centres  of  life. 
In  Leamington  we  heard  no  news  from  week's  end  to 
week's  end,  and  knew  not  where  to  find  a  newspaper ; 
and  here  the  case  is  neither  better  nor  worse.     The 
rural  people  really  seem  to  take  no  interest  in  public 
affairs  ;  at  aU  events,  they  have  no  intelligence  on  such 
subjects.      It  is  possible   that  the  cheap  newspapers 
may,  in  time,  find  their  way  into  the  cottages,  or,  at 
least,  into  the  country  taverns  ;  but  it  is  not  at  all  so 
now.     If  they  generally  know  that  Sebastopol  is  be- 
sieged, it  is  the  extent  of  their  knowledge.     The  pub- 
lic life  of  America  is  lived  through  the  mind  and 
heart  of  every  man  in  it ;  here  the  people  feel  that 
they  have  nothing  to  do  with  what  is  going  forward, 
and,  I  suspect,  care  little  or  nothing  about  it'.     Such 
things  they  permit  to  be  the  exclusive  concern  of  the 
higher  classes. 

In  front  of  our  hotel,  on  the  lawn  between  us  and 
the  lake,  there  are  two  trees,  which  we  have  hitherto 
taken  to  be  yews ;  but  on  examining  them  more  closely, 
I  find  that  they  are  pine-trees,  and  quite  dead  and  dry, 
although  they  have  the  aspect  of  dark  rich  life.  But 
this  is  caused  by  the  verdure  of  two  ^eat  ivy-vines, 
which  have  twisted  round  them  like  gigantic  snakes, 
and,  clambering  up  and  throttling  the  life  out  of  them, 
have  put  out  branches,  and  made  crowns  of  thick  green 
(eaves,  so  that,  at  a  little  distance,  it  is  quite  impo» 


1855.]  THE  LAKES.  23 

sible  not  to  take  them  for  genuine  trees.  The  trunks 
of  the  ivy-vines  must  be  more  than  a  foot  in  circum- 
ference, and  one  feels  they  have  stolen  the  life  that 
belonged  to  the  pines.  The  dead  branches  of  one  of 
the  pines  stick  out  horizontally  through  the  ivy-boughs. 
The  other  shows  nothing  but  the  ivy,  and  in  shape  a 
good  deal  resembles  a  poplar.  When  the  pine  trunks 
shall  have  quite  crumbled  away,  the  ivy -stems  will 
doubtless  have  gained  suf&cient  strength  to  sustain 
themselves  independently. 

July  19th.  —  Yesterday  S went  down  the  lake 

in  the  steamboat  to  take  U ,  baby,  and  nurse  to 

Newby  Bridge,  while  the  three  rest  of  us  should  make 
a  tour  through  the  lake  region.  After  mamma's  de- 
parture, and  when  I  had  finished  some  letters,  J 

and  I  set  out  on  a  walk,  which  finally  brought  us  to 
Bowness,  through  much  delightful  shade  of  woods,  and 
past  beautiful  rivulets  or  brooklets,  and  up  and  down 
many  hills.  This  chief  harbor  of  the  lakes  seemed 
alive  and  bustling  with  tourists,  it  being  a  sunny  and 
pleasant  day,  so  that  they  Were  all  abroad,  like  sum- 
mer insects.  The  town  is  a  confused  and  irregular 
little  place,  of  very  uneven  surface.  There  is  an  old 
church  in  it,  and  two  or  three  large  hotels.  We 
stayed  there  perhaps  half  an  hour,  and  then  went  to 
the  pier,  where  shortly  a  steamer  arrived,  with  music 
sounding,  —  on  the  deck  of  which,  with  her  back  to 

us,  sat  a  lady  in  a  gray  travelling-dress.     J cried 

out,  "  Mamma !  mamma !  "  to  which  the  lady  deigned 
no  notice,  but,  he  repeating  it,  she  turned  round,  and 
was  as  much  surprised,  no  doubt,  to  see  her  husband 
and  son,  as  if  this  little  lake  had  been  the  great  ocean, 
and  we  meeting  each  other  from  opposite  shores  of  it. 


24  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

We  soon  steamed  back  to  Lowwood,  and  took  a  car 
thence  for  Rydal  and  Grasmere,  after  a  cold  luncheon. 
At  Bowness  I  met  Miss  Charlotte  Cushman,  who  has 
been  staying  at  the  Lowwood  Hotel  with  us  since  Mon- 
day, without  either  party  being  aware  of  it. 

Our  road  to  Rydal  lay  through  Ambleside,  which 
is  certainly  a  very  pretty  town,  and  looks  cheerfully  in 
a  sunny  day.  We  saw  Miss  Martineau's  residence, 
called  "The  Knoll,"  standing  high  up  on  a  hillock, 
and  having  at  its  foot  a  Methodist  chapel,  for  which, 
or  whatever  place  of  Christian  worship,  this  good  lady 
can  have  no  occasion.  We  stopped  a  moment  in  the 
street  below  her  house,  and  deliberated  a  little  whether 
to  call  on  her ;  but  concluded  we  would  not. 

After  leaving  Ambleside,  the  road  winds  in  and  out 
among  the  hills,  and  soon  brings  us  to  a  sheet  (or 
napkin,  rather  than  a  sheet)  of  water,  which  the  driver 
tells  us  is  Rydal  Lake !  We  had  already  heard  that 
it  was  but  three  quarters  of  a  mile  long  and  one  quar* 
ter  broad ;  still,  it  being  an  idea  of  considerable  size 
in  our  minds,  we  had  inevitably  drawn  its  ideal,  phys- 
ical proportions  on  a  somewhat  corresponding  scale. 
It  certainly  did  look  very  small ;  and  I  said,  in  my 
American  scorn,  that  I  coidd  carry  it  away  easily  in  a 
porringer ;  for  it  is  nothing  more  than  a  grassy-bor- 
dered pool  among  the  surrounding  hills  which  ascend 
directly  from  its  margin  ;  so  that  one  might  fancy  it, 
not  a  permanent  body  of  water,  but  a  rather  extensive 
accmnulation  of  recent  rain.  Moreover,  it  was  rippled 
with  a  breeze,  and  so,  as  I  remember  it,  though  the 
sun  shone,  it  looked  dull  and  sulky,  like  a  child  out  of 
humor.  Now,  the  best  thing  these  small  ponds  can  do 
is  to  keep  perfectly  calm  and  smooth,  and  not  attempt 
to  show  off  any  airs  of  their  own,  but  content  them 


i855.]  THE  LAKES.  26 

selves  with  serving  as  a  mirror  for  whatever  of  beauti' 
ful  or  picturesque  there  toay  be  in  the  scenery  around 
them.  The  hills  about  Eydal  Water  are  not  very 
lofty,  but  are  sufficiently  so  as  objects  of  every-day 
view,  —  objects  to  live  with  ;  and  they  are  craggier 
than  those  we  have  hitherto  seen,  and  bare  of  wood, 
which,  indeed,  would  hardly  grow  on  some  of  their 
precipitous  sides. 

On  the  roadside,  as  we  reach  the  foot  of  the  lake, 
stands  a  spruce  and  rather  large  house  of  modem  as- 
pect, but  with  several  gables  and  much  overgrown 
with  ivy,  —  a  very  pretty  and  comfortable  house,  built, 
adorned,  and  cared  for  with  commendable  taste.  We 
inquired  whose  it  was,  and  the  coachman  said  it  was 
"Mr.  Wordsworth's,"  and  that "  Mrs.  Wordsworth  was 
still  residing  there."  So  we  were  much  delighted  to 
have  seen  his  abode,  and  as  we  were  to  stay  the  night 
at  Grasmere,  about  two  miles  farther  on,  we  deter, 
mined  to  come  back  and  inspect  it  as  particularly  as 
should  be  allowable.  Accordingly,  after  taking  rooms 
at  Brown's  Hotel,  we  drove  back  in  our  return  car, 
and  reaching  the  head  of  Kydal  Water,  alighted  to 
walk  through  this  familiar  scene  of  so  many  years  of 
Wordsworth's  life.  We  ought  to  have  seen  De  Quin- 
cey's  former  residence,  and  Hartley  Coleridge's  cot- 
tage, I  believe,  on  our  way,  but  were  not  aware  of  it 
at  the  time.  Near  the  lake  there  is  a  stone-quarry,  and 
a  cavern  of  some  extent,  artificially  formed,  probably 
by  taking  out  the  stone.  Above  the  shore  of  the  lake, 
not  a  great  way  from  Wordsworth's  residence,  there  is 
a  flight  of  steps  hewn  in  a  rock  and  ascending  to  a 
rock  seat  where  a  good  view  of  the  lake  may  be  at- 
tained; and,  as  Wordsworth  has  doubtless  sat  there 
hundreds  of  times,  so  did  we  ascend  and  sit  down,  and 
look  at  the  hills  and  at  the  flags  on  the  lake's  shore. 


26  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

Reaching  the  house  that  had  been  pointed  out  to  us 
as  Wordsworth's  residence,  we  began  to  peer  about  at 
its  front  and  gables,  and  over  the  garden  wall,  on  both 
sides  of  the  road,  quickening  our  enthusiasm  as  much 
as  we  could,  and  meditating  to  pilfer  some  flower  or 
ivy-leaf  from  the  house  or  its  vicinity,  to  be  kept  as 
sacred  memorials.  At  this  juncture  a  man  approached 
who  announced  himself  as  the  gardener  of  the  place, 
and  said,  too,  that  this  was  not  Wordsworth's  house 
at  all,  but  the  residence  of  Mr.  Ball,  a  Quaker  gen- 
tleman ;  but  that  his  ground  adjoined  Wordsworth's, 
and  that  he  had  liberty  to  take  visitors  through  the 
latter.  How  absurd  it  would  have  been  if  we  had  car- 
ried away  ivy -leaves  and  tender  recollections  from 
this  domicile  of  a  respectable  Quaker  I  The  gardener 
was  an  intelligent  man,  of  pleasant,  sociable,  and  re- 
spectful address;  and  as  we  went  along  he  talked 
about  the  poet,  whom  he  had  known,  and  who,  he 
said,  was  very  familiar  with  the  country  people.  He 
led  us  through  Mr.  Ball's  grounds,  up  a  steep  hill-side, 
by  winding,  gravelled  walks,  with  summer-houses  at 
points  favorable  for  them.  It  was  a  very  shady  and 
pleasant  spot,  containing  about  an  acre  of  ground, 
and  all  turned  to  good  account  by  the  manner  of  lay- 
ing it  out ;  so  that  it  seemed  more  than  it  really  is. 
In  one  place,  on  a  small,  smooth  slab  of  slate,  let  into 
a  rock,  there  is  an  inscription  by  Wordsworth,  which 
I  think  I  have  read  in  his  works,  claiming  kindly  re- 
gards from  those  who  visit  the  spot  after  his  depart- 
ure, because  many  trees  had  been  spared  at  his  inter- 
cession. His  own  grounds,  or  rather  his  ornamental 
garden,  is  separated  from  Mr.  Ball's  only  by  a  wire 
fence,  or  some  such  barrier,  and  the  gates  have  no 
fastening,  so  that  the  whole  appears  like  one  posses* 


1855.]  THE  LAKES.  27 

sion,  and  doubtless  was  so  as  regarded  the  poet's  walks 
and  enjoyments.  We  approached  by  paths  so  winding 
that  I  hardly  know  how  the  house  stands  in  relation 
to  the  road ;  but,  after  much  circuity,  we  really  did 
see  Wordsworth's  residence,  —  an  old  house  with  an 
uneven  ridge-pole,  built  of  stone,  no  doubt,  but  plas- 
tered over  with  some  neutral  tint,  —  a  house  that 
would  not  have  been  remarkably  pretty  in  itself,  but 
so  delightfully  situated,  so  secluded,  so  hedged  about 
with  shrubbery,  and  adorned  with  flowers,  so  ivy- 
grown  on  one  side,  so  beautified  with  the  personal  care 
of  him  who  lived  in  it  and  loved  it,  that  it  seemed  the 
very  place  for  a  poet's  residence ;  and  as  if,  while  he 
lived  so  long  in  it,  his  poetry  had  manifested  itself  in 
flowers,  shrubbery,  and  ivy.  I  never  smelt  such  a  de- 
lightful fragrance  of  flowers  as  there  was  all  through 
the  garden.  In  front  of  the  house  there  is  a  circular 
terrace  of  two  ascents,  in  raising  which  Wordsworth 
had  himself  performed  much  of  the  labor ;  and  here 
there  are  seats,  from  which  we  obtained  a  fine  view 
down  the  vaUey  of  the  Rothay,  with  Windermere  in 
the  distance,  —  a  view  of  several  miles,  and  which  we 
did  not  suppose  could  be  seen,  after  winding  among 
the  hills  so  far  from  the  lake.     It  is  very  beautiful 

and  picture-like.    While  we  sat  here,  S happened 

to  refer  to  the  ballad  of  little  Barbara  Lewthwaite, 

and  J- began  to  repeat  the  poem  concerning  her, 

and  the  gardener  said  that  "  little  Barbara  "  had  died 
not  a  great  while  ago,  an  elderly  woman,  leaving 
grown-up  children  behind  her.  Her  marriage-name 
wais  Thompson,  and  the  gardener  believed  there  was 
nothing  remarkable  in  her  character. 

There  is  a  summer-house  at  one  extremity  of  the 
groimds,   in   deepest   shadow,  but  with   glimpses   of 


28  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1855. 

mountain  views  through  trees  which  shut  it  in,  and 
which  have  spread  intercepting  boughs  since  Words- 
worth died.  It  is  lined  with  pine-cones,  in  a  pretty 
way  enough,  but  of  doubtful  taste.  I  rather  wonder 
that  people  of  real  taste  should  help  Nature  out,  and 
beautify  her,  or  perhaps  rather  prettify  her  so  much 
as  they  do,  —  opening  vistas,  showing  one  thing,  hid- 
ing another,  making  a  scene  picturesque,  whether  or 
no.  I  cannot  rid  myself  of  the  feeling  that  there  is 
something  false  —  a  kind  of  humbug  —  in  all  this. 
At  any  rate,  the  traces  of  it  do  not  contribute  to  my 
enjoyment,  and,  indeed,  it  ought  to  be  done  so  exqui- 
sitely  as  to  leave  no  trace.  But  I  ought  not  to  criti 
cise  in  any  way  a  spot  which  gave  me  so  much  pleas- 
ure,- and  where  it  is  good  to  think  of  Wordsworth  in 
quiet,  past  days,  walking  in  his  home-shadow  of  trees 
which  he  knew,  and  training  flowers,  and  trimming 
shrubs,  and  chanting  in  an  undertone  his  own  verses 
up  and  down  the  winding  walks. 

The  gardener  gave  J a  cone  from  the  summer- 
house,  which  had  fallen  on  the  seat,  and  S got 

some  mignonette,  and  leaves  of  laurel  and  ivy,  and 
we  wended  our  way  back  to  the  hotel.  Wordsworth 
was  not  the  owner  of  this  house ;  it  being  the  prop- 
erly of  Lady  Fleming.  Mrs.  Wordsworth  still  lives 
there,  and  is  now  at  liome. 

Mve  o'clock,  —  All  day  it  has  been  cloudy  and 
showery,  with  thunder  now  and  then ;  the  mists  hang 
low  on  the  surrounding  hiUs,  adown  which,  at  various 
points,  we  can  see  the  snow-white  fall  of  little  stream- 
lets ("  forces  "  they  call  them  here)  swollen  by  the 
rain.  An  overcast  day  is  not  so  gloomy  in  the  hill- 
country  as  in  the  lowlands;  there  are  more  breaks^ 
more  transfusion  of  skylight  through  the  gloom,  as  has 


1855.]  THE  LAKES,  29 

been  the  case  to-day,  and  as  I  found  in  Lenox ;  we  get 
better  acquainted  with  clouds  by  seeing  at  what  height 
they  lie  on  the  hill-sides,  and  find  that  the  difference 
betwixt  a  fair  day  and  a  cloudy  and  rainy  one  is  very 
superficial,  after  aU.  Nevertheless,  rain  is  rain,  and 
wets  a  man  just  as  much  among  the  mountains  as 
anywhere  else ;  so  we  have  been  kept  within  doors  all 

day,  till  an  hour  or  so  ago,  when  J and  I  went 

down  to  the  village  in  quest  of  the  post-office. 

We  took  a  path  that  leads  from  the  hotel  across  the 
fields,  and,  coming  into  a  wood,  crosses  the  Eothay 
by  a  one-arched  bridge,  and  passes  the  village  church. 
The  Hothay  is  very  swift  and  turbulent  to-day,  and 
hurries  along  with  foam-specks  on  its  surface,  filling 
its  banks  from  brim  to  brim,  —  a  stream  perhaps 
twenty  feet  wide,  perhaps  more  ;  for  I  am  willing  that 
the  good  little  river  should  have  aU  it  can  fairly  claim. 
It  is  the  St.  Lawrence  of  several  of  these  English 
lakes,  through  which  it  flows,  and  carries  off  their  su- 
perfluous waters.  In  its  haste,  and  with  its  rushing 
sound,  it  was  pleasant  both  to  see  and  hear ;  and  it 
sweeps  by  one  side  of  the  old  churchyard  where 
Wordsworth  lies  buried,  —  the  side  where  his  grave 
is  made.  The  church  of  Grrasmere  is  a  very  plain 
structure,  with  a  low  body,  on  one  side  of  which  is  a 
small  porch  with  a  pointed  arch.'  The  tower  is  square 
and  looks  ancient;  but  the  whole  is  overlaid  with 
plaster  of  a  buff  or  pale  yellow  hue.  It  was  origi- 
nally  built,  I  suppose,  of  rough  shingly  stones,  as 
many  of  the  houses  hereabouts  are  now,  and,  like 
many  of  them,  the  plaster  is  used  to  give  a  finish. 
We  found  the  gate  of  the  churchyard  wide  open ;  and 
the  grass  was  lying  on  the  graves,  having  probably 
been  mowed  yesterday.     It  is  but  a  small  churchyard,    ^ 


so  ENGLISH  NOTE'-BOOKS.  [1865. 

and  with  few  monuments  of  any  pretension  in  it,  most 
of  them  being  slate  headstones,  standing  erect.  From 
the  gate  at  which  we  entered,  a  distinct  foot-track 
leads  to  the  comer  nearest  the  riverside,  and  I  turned 
into  it  by  a  sort  of  instinct,  the  more  readily  as  I  saw 
a  tourist-looking  man  approaching  from  that  point., 
and  a  woman  looking  among  the  gravestones.  Both  of 
these  persons  had  gone  by  the  time  I  came  up,  so  that 

J and  I  were  left  to  find  Wordsworth's  grave  iaU 

by  ourselves. 

At  this  comer  of  the  churchyard  there  is  a  haw- 
thorn bush  or  tree,  the  extremest  branches  of  which 
stretch  as  far  as  where  Wordsworth  lies.  This  whole 
comer  seems  to  be  devoted  to  himself  and  his  family 
and  friends ;  and  they  all  lie  very  closely  together,  side 
by  side,  and  head  to  foot,  as  room  could  conveniently 
be  found.  Hartley  Coleridge  lies  a  little  behind,  in 
the  direction  of  the  church,  his  feet  being  towards 
Wordsworth's  head,  who  lies  in  the  row  of  those  of 
his  own  blood.  I  found  out  Hartley  Coleridge's  grave 
sooner  than  Wordsworth's ;  for  it  is  of  marble,  and, 
though  simple  enough,  has  more  of  sculptured  device 
about  it,  having  been  erected,  as  I  think  the  inscrip- 
tion states,  by  his  brother  and  sister.  Wordsworth 
has  only  the  very  simplest  slab  of  slate,  with  "  Wil- 
liam Wordsworth"  and  nothing  else  upon  it.  As  I 
recollect  it,  it  is  the  midmost  grave  of  the  row.  It  is 
or  has  been  well  grass-grown,  but  the  grass  is  quite 
worn  away  from  the  top,  though  sufficiently  luxuriant 
at  the  sides.  It  looks  as  if  people  had  stood  upon  it, 
and  so  does  the  grave  next  to  it,  which  I  believe  is 
one  of  his  children.  I  plucked  some  grass  and  weeds 
from  it,  and  as  he  was  buried  within  so  few  years  they 
may  fairly  be  supposed  to  have  drawn  their  nutriment 


1855.]  THE  LAKES,  81 

from  his  mortal  remains,  and  I  gathered  them  from 
just  above  his  head.  There  is  no  fault  to  be  found 
with  his  grave,  —  within  view  of  the  hills,  within  sound 
of  the  river,  murmuring  near  by,  —  no  fault  except 
that  he  is  crowded  so  closely  with  his  kindred ;  and, 
moreover,  that,  being  so  old  a  churchyard,  the  earth 
over  him  must  all  have  been  human  once.  He  might 
have  had  fresh  earth  to  himself;  but  he  chose  this 
grave  deliberately.  No  very  stately  and  broad-based 
monument  can  ever  be  erected  over  it  without  infring- 
ing upon,  covering,  and  overshadowing  the  graves,  not 
only  of  his  family,  but  of  individuals  who  probably 
were  quite  disconnected  with  him.  But  it  is  pleasant 
to  think  and  know  —  were  it  but  on  the  evidence  of 
this  choice  of  a  resting-place  —  that  he  did  not  care 
for  a  stately  monmnent. 

After  leaving  the  churchyard,  we  wandered  about 
in  quest  of  the  post-office,  and  for  a  long  time  without 
success.  This  little  town  of  Grasmere  seems  to  me  as 
pretty  a  place  as  ever  I  met  with  in  my  life.  It  is 
quite  shut  in  by  hills  that  rise  up  immediately  around 
it,  like  a  neighborhood  of  kindly  giants.  These  hills 
descend  steeply  to  the  verge  of  the  level  on  which  the 
village  stands,  and  there  they  terminate  at  once,  the 
whole  site  of  the  little  town  being  as  even  as  a  floor. 
X  call  it  a  village ;  but  it  is  no  village  at  all,  —  all  the 
dwellings  standing  apart,  each  in  its  own  little  do- 
main, and  each,  I  believe,  with  its  own  little  lane 
leading  to  it,  independently  of  the  rest.  Most  of 
these  are  old  cottages,  plastered  white,  with  antique 
porches,  and  roses  and  other  vines  trained  against 
them,  and  shrubbery  growing  about  them ;  and  some 
are  covered  with  ivy.  There  are  a  few  edifices  of 
more  pretension  and  of  modern  build,  but  not  so  strike 


82  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1865. 

ingly  so  as  to  put  the  rest  out  of  countenance.  The 
post-office,  when  we  found  it,  proved  to  be  an  ivied 
cottage,  with  a  good  deal  of  shrubbery  round  it,  hav- 
ing its  own  pathway,  like  the  other  cottages.  The 
whole  looks  like  a  real  seclusion,  shut  out  from  tlie 
great  world  by  these  encircling  hills,  on  the  sides  of 
which,  whenever  they  are  not  too  steep,  you  see  the 
division  lines  of  property,  and  tokens  of  cultivation, 
—  taking  from  them  their  pretensions  to  savage  maj- 
esty, but  bringing  them  nearer  to  the  heart  of  man. 
Since  writing  the  above,  I  have  been  again  with 

S to  see  Wordsworth's  grave,  and,  finding  the 

door  of  the  church  open,  we  went  in.  A  woman  and 
little  girl  were  sweeping  at  the  farther  end,  and  the 
woman  came  towards  us  out  of  the  cloud  of  dust 
which  she  had  raised.  We  were  surprised  at  the  ex- 
tremely antique  appearance  of  the  church.  It  is  paved 
with  bluish -gray  flagstones,  over  which  uncounted 
generations  have  trodden,  leaving  the  floor  as  well 
laid  as  ever.  The  walls  are  very  thick,  and  the  arched 
windows  open  through  them  at  a  considerable  distance 
above  the  floor.  There  is  no  middle  aisle ;  but  first 
a  row  of  pews  next  either  wall,  and  then  an  aisle  on 
each  side  of  the  pews,  occupying  the  centre  of  the 
church,  —  then,  two  side  aisles,  but  no  middle  one. 
And  down  through  the  centre  of  the  church  runs  a 
row  of  five  arches,  very  rude  and  round-headed,  all  of 
rough  stone,  supported  by  rough  and  massive  pillars, 
or  rather  square,  stone  blocks,  which  stand  in  the 
pews,  and  stood  in  the  same  places,  probably,  long  be- 
.ore  the  wood  of  those  pews  began  to  grow.  Above 
this  row  of  arches  is  another  row,  built  upon  the  same 
mass  of  stone,  and  almost  as  broad,  but  lower ;  and  on 
this  upper  row  rests  the  framework,  the  oaken  beams, 


1865.3  THE  LAKES.  33 

t^e  black  skeleton  of  the  roof.  It  is  a  Tery  clumsy 
oontriYance  for  supporting  the  roof,  and  if  it  were 
modem,  we  certainly  should  condemn  it  as  very  ugly  j 
but  being  the  relic  of  a  simple  age,  it  comes  in  weU 
with  the  antique  simplicity  of  the  whole  structure. 
The  roof  goes  up,  bam-like,  into  its  natural  angle, 
and  all  the  rafters  and  cross-beams  are  visible.  There 
is  an  old  font ;  and  in  the  chancel  is  a  niche,  where 
(judging  from  a  similar  one  in  Fumess  Abbey)  the 
holy  water  used  to  be  placed  for  the  priest's  use  while 
celebrating  mass.  Around  the  inside  of  the  porch  is 
a  stone  bench,  against  the  wall,  narrow  and  uneasy, 
but  where  a  great  many  people  had  sat,  who  now  have 
found  quieter  resting-places. 

The  woman  was  a  very  intelligent-looking  person, 
not  of  the  usual  English  ruddiness,  but  rather  thin 
and  somewhat  pale,  though  bright  of  aspect.  Her 
way  of  talking  was  very  agreeable.  She  inquired  if 
we  wished  to  see  Wordsworth's  monument,  and  at 
once  showed  it  to  us,  —  a  slab  of  white  marble  fixed 
against  the  upper  end  of  the  central  row  of  stone 
arches,  with  a  pretty  long  inscription,  and  a  profile 
bust,  in  bas-relief,  of  his  aged  countenance.  The  mon- 
ument is  placed  directly  over  Wordsworth's  pew,  and 
could  best  be  seen  and  read  from  the  very  comer  seat 
where  he  used  to  sit.  The  pew  is  one  of  those  oc- 
cupying the  centre  of  the  church,  and  is  just  across 
the  aisle  from  the  pulpit,  and  is  the  best  of  all  for 
the  purpose  of  seeing  and  hearing  the  clergyman,  and 
likewise  as  convenient  as  any,  from  its  neighborhood 
to  the  altar.  On  the  other  side  of  the  aisle,  beneath 
the  pulpit,  is  Lady  Fleming's  pew.  This  and  one  or 
two  others  are  curtained,  Wordsworth's  was  not.  I 
think  I  can  bring  up  his  image  in  that  comer  seat  of 


84  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1865. 

his  pew —  a  white-headed,  tall,  spare  man,  plain  in  as- 
pect—  better  than  in  any  other  situation.  The  wo- 
man said  that  she  had  known  him  very  well,  and  that 
he  had  made  some  verses  on  a  sister  of  hers.  She 
repeated  the  first  lines,  something  about  a  lamb,  but 
neither  S nor  I  remembered  them. 

On  the  walls  of  the  chancel  there  are  monuments  to 
the  Flemings,  and  painted  escutcheons  of  their  arms ; 
and  along  the  side  walls  also,  and  on  the  square  pil- 
lars of  the  row  of  arches,  there  are  other  monuments, 
generally  of  white  marble,  with  the  letters  of  the  in- 
scription blackened.  On  these  pillars,  likewise,  and 
in  many  places  in  the  walls,  were  hung  verses  from 
Scripture,  painted  on  boards.  At  one  of  the  doors 
was  a  poor-box,  —  an  elaborately  carved  little  box,  of 
oak,  with  the  date  1648,  and  the  name  of  the  church 
—  St.  Oswald's  —  upon  it.  The  whole  interior  of  the 
edifice  was  plain,  simple,  almost  to  grimness,  —  or 
would  have  been  so,  only  that  the  foolish  church-war- 
dens, or  other  authority,  have  washed  it  over  with  the 
same  buff  color  with  which  they  have  overlaid  the  ex- 
terior. It  is  a  pity ;  it  lightens  it  up,  and  desecrates 
it  greatly,  especially  as  the  woman  says  that  there 
were  formerly  paintings  on  the  walls,  now  obliterated 
forever.  I  could  have  stayed  in  the  old  church  mucb 
longer,  and  could  write  much  more  about  it,  but  there 
must  be  an  end  to  everything.  Pacing  it  from  the 
farther  end  to  the  elevation  before  the  altar,  I  found 
that  it  was  twenty-five  paces  long. 

On  looking  again  at  the  Rothay,  I  find  I  did  it 
some  injustice  ;  for  at  the  bridge,  in  its  present  swol- 
len state,  it  is  nearer  twenty  yards  than  twenty  feet 
across.  Its  waters  are  very  clear,  and  it  rushes  along 
with  a  speed  which  is  delightful  to  see,  after  an  ao* 


1855.]  THE  LAKES.  36 

quaintance  with  the  muddy  and  sluggish  Avon  and 
Learn. 

Since  tea  I  have  taken  a  stroll  from  the  hotel  in  a 
different  direction  from  heretofore,  and  passed  the 
Swan  Inn,  where  Scott  used  to  go  daily  to  get  a 
draught  of  liquor,  when  he  was  visiting  Wordsworth, 
who  had  no  wine  nor  other  inspiriting  fluid  in  his 
house.  It  stands  directly  on  the  wayside,  —  a  small, 
whitewashed  house,  with  an  addition  in  the  rear  that 
seems  to  have  been  built  since  Scott's  time.  On  the 
door  is  the  painted  sign  of  a  swan,  and  the  name 
"  Scott's  Swan  Hotel."  I  walked  a  considerable  dis- 
tance beyond  it,  but,  a  shower  coming  up,  I  turned 
back,  entered  the  inn,  and,  following  the  mistress  into 
a  snug  little  room,  was  served  with  a  glass  of  bitter 
ale.  It  is  a  very  plain  and  homely  inn,  and  certainly 
could  not  have  satisfied  Scott's  wants  iE  he  had  re- 
quired anything  very  far-fetched  or  delicate  in  his  po- 
tations. I  found  two  Westmoreland  peasants  in  the 
room,  with  ale  before  them.  One  went  away  almost 
immediately ;  but  the  other  remained,  and,  entering 
into  conversation  with  him,  he  told  me  that  he  was 
going  to  New  Zealand,  and  expected  to  sail  in  Sep- 
tember. I  announced  myself  as  an  American,  and  he 
said  that  a  large  party  had  lately  gone  from  here- 
abouts to  America ;  but  he  seemed  not  to  understand 
that  there  was  any  distinction  between  Canada  and 
the  States.  These  people  had  gone  to  Quebec.  He 
was  a  very  civil,  well-behaved,  kindly  sort  of  person, 
of  a  simple  character,  which  I  took  to  belong  to  the 
class  and  locality,  rather  than  to  himself  individually. 
I  could  not  very  well  understand  all  that  he  said, 
owing  to  his  provincial  dialect ;  and  when  he  spoke  to 
his  own  countrymen,  or  to  the  women  of  the  house,  I 


86  ENGLISH  NOTEr-^OOKS.  [18«5. 

lec^ly  ooiild  but  just  oat^h  a  word  here  and  there* 
How  long  it  takes  to  melt  English  down  into  a  homo* 
geneoua  mass !  He  told  me  that  there  was  a  publio 
library  in  Grasmere  to  which  he  has  access  in  common 
with  the  other  inhabitants,  and  a  reading-room  con* 
i^ected  with  it,  where  he  reads  the  "  Times  "  ijx  the 
evening.  There  was  no  American  smartness  in  his 
inind.  When  I  left  the  house,  it  was  showering  brisk- 
ly ;  but  the  drops  quite  ceased,  and  the  clouds  began 
tp  break  away  before  I  reached  my  hotel,  and  I  saw 
the  new  moon  over  my  right  shoulder. 

July  2l8t  —  We  left  Grasmere  yesterday,  after 
breakfast;  it  being  a  delightful  morning,  with  some 
clouds,  but  the  cheerf ullest  simshine  on  great  part  of 
^e  mountain-sides  and  on  ourselves.  We  returned, 
in  the  first  place,  to  Ambleside,  along  the  border  of 
Grasmere  Lake,  which  would  be  a  pretty  little  piece 
of  water,  with  its  steep  and  high  surrounding  hills, 
were  it  not  that  a  stubborn  and  straight-lined  stone 
fence,  running  along  the  eastern  shore,  by  the  road- 
side, quite  spoils  its  appearance.  Rydal  Water, 
though  nothing  can  make  a  lake  of  it,  looked  prettier 
and  less  diminutive  than  at  the  first  view ;  and,  in 
fact,  I  find  that  it  is  impossible  to  know  accurately 
how  any  prospect  or  other  thing  looks,  until  after  at 
least  a  second  view,  which  always  essentially  corrects 
the  first.  Thia,  I  think,  is  especially  true  in  regard  to 
objects  which  we  have  heard  much  about,  and  exer- 
cised our  imagination  upon ;  the  first  view  being  a 
vain  attempt  to  reconcile  our  idea  with  the  reality,  and 
at  the  second  we  begin  to  accept  the  thing  for  what  it 
really  is.  Wordsworth's  situation  is  really  a  beautiful 
Djie ;  and  Nab  Scaur  behind  his  house  risea  with  9 


.855. J  THE  LAKM&  8^ 

grand,  protei6tiiig  feir.  We  passed  Nab*s  cottkge,  in 
which  De  Quincey  formerly  Kved,  and  where  Hartley 
Coleridge  lived  and  died.  It  is  a  small,  buff-tinted, 
plastered  stone  cottage,  immediately  on  the  roadside, 
and  originally,  I  should  think,  of  a  very  humble  class  ; 
but  it  now  looks  as  if  persons  of  taste  might  some 
time  or  other  have  sat  down  in  it,  and  caused  flowers 
to  spring  up  about  it.  It  is  very  agreeably  situated 
under  the  great,  precipitous  hill,  and  with  Rydal  Wa- 
ter close  at  hand,  on  the  other  side  of  the  road.  An 
advertisement  of  lodgings  to  let  was  put  up  on  -Qm 
cottage. 

I  queistion  whether  any  part  of  the  world  looks  so 
beautiful  as  England  —  this  part  of  England,  ^t  least 
—  on  a  fine  summer  morning.  It  makes  one  think 
the  more  cheerfully  of  human  life  to  see  such  a  bright 
universal  verdure ;  such  sweet,  rural,  peaceful,  flower- 
bordered  cottages,  -^^  not  cottages  of  gentility,  but 
dwellings  of  the  laboring  poor ;  such  nice  viUas  along 
the  lx)adside,  «o  tastefully  contrived  for  comfoi*t  iand 
beauty,  and  adorned  more  and  more,  year  after  yeat, 
with  the  care  and  after-thought  of  people  who  mean  to 
live  in  them  a  great  while,  and  feel  as  if  their  childreii 
might  live  in  them  also,  —  and  so  they  plant  trees  to 
overshadow  their  walks,  and  train  ivy  and  all  beauti- 
ful vines  up  against  their  walls,  and  thus  live  for  the 
future  in  another  sense  than  we  Americans  do.  And 
the  climate  helps  them  out,  and  makes  everything 
moist,  and  green,  and  full  of  tender  life,  instead  of 
dry  and  arid,  as  human  life  and  vegetable  life  is  so  apt 
to  be  with  us.  Certainly,  England  can  present  a  more 
attractive  face  than  we  can;  even  in  its  humbler 
modes  of  life,  to  say  nothing  of  the  beautiful  lives  that 
might  be  led,  one  would  think,  by  the  higher  classea^ 


88  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  L185& 

whose  gateways,  with  broad,  smooth  gravelled  drives 
leading  through  them,  one  sees  every  mile  or  two 
along  the  road,  winding  into  some  proud  seclusion. 
All  this  is  passing  away,  and  society  must  assume  new 
relations ;  but  there  is  no  harm  in  believing  that  there 
has  been  something  very  good  in  English  life,  —  good 
for  all  classes  while  the  world  was  in  a  state  out  of 
which  these  forms  naturally  grew. 

Passing  through  Ambleside,  our  phaeton  and  pair 
turned  towards  Ullswater,  which  we  were  to  reach 
through  the  Pass  of  Kirkstone.  This  is  some  three  or 
four  miles  from  Ambleside,  and  as  we  approached  it 
the  road  kept  ascending  higher  and  higher,  the  hills 
grew  more  bare,  and  the  country  lost  its  soft  and  de- 
lightful verdure.  At  last  the  road  became  so  steep 
that  J and  I  alighted  to  walk.  This  is  the  aspir- 
ing road  that  Wordsworth  speaks  of  in  his  ode ;  it 
passes  through  the  gorge  of  precipitous  hills,  —  or  al- 
most precipitous,  —  too  much  so  for  even  the  grass  to 
grow  on  many  portions,  which  are  covered  with  gray 
shingly  stones ;  and  I  think  this  pass,  in  its  middle 
part,  must  have  looked  just  the  same  when  the  Ko- 
mans  marched  through  it  as  it  looks  now.  No  trees 
could  ever  have  grown  on  the  steep  hill-sides,  whereon 
even  the  English  climate  can  generate  no  available 
soil.  1  do  not  know  that  I  have  seen  anything  more 
impressive  than  the  ^tem  gray  sweep  of  these  naked 
mountains,  with  nothing  whatever  to  soften  or  adorn 
them.  The  Notch  of  the  White  Mountains,  as  I  re- 
member it  in  my  youthful  days,  is  more  wonderful 
and  richly  picturesque,  but  of  quite  a  different  char- 
acter. 

About  the  centre  and  at  the  highest  point  of  the 
pass  stands  an  old  stone  building  of  mean  appearancCi 


1855.]  THE  LAKES.  89 

with  the  usual  sign  of  an  alehouse,  '^  Licensed  to  re* 
tail  foreign  spirits,  ale,  and  tobacco,"  over  the  door, 
and  another  small  sign,  designating  ifc  as  the  highest 
inhabitable  house  in  England.  It  is  a  chill  and  deso- 
late place  for  a  residence.  They  keep  a  visitor's  book 
here,  and  we  recorded  our  names  in  it,  and  were  not 
too  sorry  to  leave  the  mean  little  hovel,  smelling  ag  * 
it  did  of  tobacco-smoke,  and  possessing  all  other  char- 
acteristics of  the  humblest  alehouse  on  the  level  earth. 

The  Kirkstone,  which  gives  the  pass  its  name,  is  not 
seen  in  approaching  from  Ambleside,  until  some  time 
after  you  begin  to  descend  towards  Brothers'  Water. 
When  the  driver  first  pointed  it  out,  a  little  way  up 
the  hill  on  our  left,  it  looked  no  more  than  a  bowlder  of 
a  ton  or  two  in  weight,  among  a  hundred  others  nearly 
as  big  ;  and  I  saw  hardly  any  resemblance  to  a  church 
or  church-spire,  to  which  the  fancies  of  past  genera- 
tions have  likened  it.  As  we  descended  the  pass,  how- 
ever, and  left  the  stone  farther  and  farther  behind,  it 
continued  to  show  itself,  and  assumed  a  more  striking 
and  prominent  aspect,  standing  out  clearly  relieved 
against  the  sky,  so  that  no  traveller  would  fail  to  ob- 
serve it,  where  there  are  so  few  defined  objects  to  at- 
tract notice,  amid  the  naked  monotony  of  the  stem 
hills ;  though,  indeed,  if  I  had  taken  it  for  any  sort  of 
an  edifice,  it  would  rather  have  been  for  a  wayside  inn 
or  a  shepherd's  hut  than  for  a  church.  We  lost  sight 
of  it,  and  again  beheld  it  more  and  more  brought  out 
against  the  sky,  by  the  turns  of  the  road,  several  times 
in  the  course  of  our  descent.  There  is  a  very  fine 
view  of  Brothers'  Water,  shut  in  by  steep  hills,  as  we 
go  down  Kirkstone  Pass. 

At  about  half  past  twelve  we  reached  Patterdale,  at 
the  foot  of  Ullswater,  and  here  took  luncheon.     The 


40  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  ,[186& 

hotels  are  mostly  very  good  all  through  this  region, 
and  this  deserved  that  dharacter.  A  black -ooated 
waiter,  of  more  gentlemanly  appearance  than  most 
Englishmen,  yet  taking  a  sixpence  with  as  little  scru- 
ple as  a  lawyer  would  take  his  f ee ;  the  mistress,  in 
lady-like  attire,  receiving  us  at  the  door,  and  waiting 
upon  us  to  the  carriage  -  steps ;  clean,  comely  house- 
maids everywhere  at  hand,  —  all  appliances,  in  short, 
for  being  comfortable,  and  comfortable,  too,  within 
one's  own  circle.  And,  on  taking  leave,  everybody 
who  has  done  anything  for  you,  or  who  might  by  pos- 
sibility have  done  anything,  is  to  be  feed.  You  pay 
the  landlord  enough,  in  all  conscience ;  and  then  you 
pay  all  his  servants,  who  have  been  your  servants  for 
the  time.  But,  to  say  the  truth,  there  is  a  degree  of 
the  same  kind  of  annoyance  in  an  American  hotel,  al- 
though it  is  not  so  much  an  acknowledged  custom* 
Here,  in  the  houses  where  attendance  is  not  charged 
in  the  bill,  no  wages  are  paid  by  the  host  to  those 
servants  —  chambermaid,  waiter,  and  boots  —  who 
come  into  immediate  contact  with  travellers.  The 
drivers  of  the  cars,  phaetons,  and  flys  are  likewise 
unpaid,  except  by  their  passengers,  and  claim  three- 
pence a  mile  with  the  same  sense  of  right  a»  their 
masters  in  charging  for  the  vehicles  and  horses. 
When  you  come  to  understand  this  claim,  not  as  an 
appeal  to  your  generosity,  but  as  an  actual  and  neces- 
sary part  of  the  cost  of  the  journey,  it  is  yielded  to 
with  a  more  comfortable  feeling;  and  the  traveller 
has  really  option  enough,  as  to  the  amount  which  he 
wiU  give,  to  insure  civility  and  good  behavior  on  the 
driver's  part. 

Ullswater  is  a  beautiful  lake,  with  steep  hills  wall^ 
mg  it  about,  — so  steep,  on  the  eastern  side,  that  there 


1855.]  THE  LAKES.  41 

seems  hardly  room  for  a  road  to  run  along  the  base. 
We  passed  up  the  western  shore,  and  turned  off  from 
it  about  midway,  to  take  the  road  towards  Keswick. 
We  stopped,  howerer,  at  Lyulph's  Tower,  while  our 
chariot  went  on  up  a  hill,  and  took  a  guide  to  show 
us  the  way  to  Airey  Force,  —  a  small  cataract,  which 
is  claimed  as  private  property,  and  out  of  which,  no 
doubt,  a  pretty  little  revenue  is  raised.  I  do  not 
think  that  there  can  be  any  rightful  appropriation,  as 
private  property,  of  objects  of  natural  beauty*  The 
fruits  of  the  land,  and  whatever  human  labor  can  pro- 
duce from  it,  belong  fairly  enough  to  the  person  who 
has  a  deed  or  a  lease  ;  but  the  beautiful  is  the  property 
of  him  who  can  hive  it  and  enjoy  it.  It  is  very  unsat- 
isfactory to  think  of  a  cataract  under  lock  and  key. 
However,  we  were  shown  to  Airey  Force  by  a  tall  and 
graceful  mountain-maid,  with  a  healthy  cheek  and  a 
step  that  had  no  possibility  of  weariness  in  it.  The 
cascade  is  an  irregular  streak  of  foamy  water,  pouring 
adown  a  rude  shadowy  glen.  I  Uked  well  enough  to 
see  it ;  but  it  is  wearisome,  on  the  whole,  to  go  the 
rounds  of  what  everybody  thinks  it  necessary  to  see. 
It  makes  me  a  little  ashamed.  It  is  somewhat  as  if 
we  were  drinking  out  of  the  same  glass,  and  eating 
from  the  same  dish,  as  a  multitude  of  other  people. 

Within  a  few  miles  of  Keswick,  we  passed  along 
at  the  foot  of.  Saddleback,  and  by  the  entrance  of  the 
Vale  of  St.  John,  and  down  the  valley,  on  one  of  the 
slopes,  we  saw  the  Enchanted  Castle.  Thence  we 
drove  along  by  the  course  of  the  Greta,  and  soon  ar- 
rived at  Keswick,  which  lies  at  the  base  of  Skiddaw, 
and  among  a  brotherhood  of  picturesque  eminences^ 
and  ia  itself  a  compact  little  town,  with  a  market* 
bou8e»  built  of  the  old  stones  of  the  Earl  of  Derwent- 


42  ENGLISH  NOTE'-BOOKS.  [1855. 

water's  mined  castle,  standing  in  the  centre,  —  the 
principal  street  forking  into  two  as  it  passes  it.  We 
alighted  at  the  King's  Arms,  and  went  in  search  of 
Southey's  residence,  which  we  found  easUy  enough,  as 
it  lies  just  on  the  outskirts  of  the  town.  We  inquired 
of  a  group  of  people,  two  of  whom,  I  thought,  did  not 
seem  to  know  much  about  the  matter ;  but  the  thirA 
an  elderly  man,  pointed  it  out  at  once,  —  a  house  sui> 
rounded  by  trees,  so  as  to  be  seen  only  partially,  and 
standing  on  a  little  eminence,  a  hundred  yards  or  so 
from  the  road. 

We  went  up  a  private  lane  that  led  to  the  rear  of 
the  place,  and  so  penetrated  quite  into  the  back-yard 
without  meeting  anybody, —  passing  a  small  kennel, 
in  which  were  two  hounds,  who  gazed  at  us,  but  nei- 
ther growled  nor  wagged  their  tails.  The  house  is 
three  stories  high,  and  seems  to  have  a  great  deal  of 
room  in  it,  so  as  not  to  discredit  its  name,  "  Greta 
Hall,"  —  a  very  spacious  dwelling  for  a  poet.  The 
windows  were  nearly  all  closed ;  there  were  no  signs 

of  occupancy,  but  a  general  air  of  neglect.     S ^ 

who  is  bolder  than  I  in  these  matters,  ventured  through 
what  seemed  a  back  garden  gate,  and  I  soon  heard  her 
in  conversation  with  some  man,  who  now  presented 
himself,  and  proved  to  be  a  gardener.  He  said  he 
had  formerly  acted  in  that  capacity  for  Southey,  al- 
though a  gardener  had  not  been  kept  by  him  as  a  reg- 
ular part  of  his  establishment.  This  was  an  old  man 
with  an  odd  crookedness  of  legs,  and  strange,  dis- 
jointed limp.      S had  told   him   that   we   were 

Americans,  and  he  took  the  idea  that  we  had  come 
this  long  distance,  over  sea  and  land,  with  the  sole 
purpose  of  seeing  Southey's  residence,  so  that  he  was 
inclined  to  do  what  he  could  towards  exhibiting  it 


1855.]  THE  LAKES.  43 

This  was  but  little ;  the  present  occupant  (a  Mr.  Bad- 
day,  I  believe  the  gardener  called  him)  being  away, 
and  the  house  shut  up. 

But  he  showed  us  about  the  grounds,  and  allowed  us 
to  peep  into  the  windows  of  what  had  been  Southey's 
library,  and  into  those  of  another  of  the  front  apart- 
ments, and  showed  us  the  window  of  the  chamber  in 
the  rear,  in  which  Southey  died.  The  apartments  into 
which  we  peeped  looked  rather  small  and  low,  —  not 
particularly  so,  btt  enough  to  indicate  an  old  building. 
They  are  now  handsomely  furnished,  and  we  saw  over 
one  of  the  fireplaces  an  inscription  about  Southey ;  and 
in  the  comer  of  the  same  room  stood  a  suit  of  bright 
armor.  It  is  taUerthan  the  country-houses  of  English 
gentlemen  usually  are,  and  it  is  even  stately.  All 
about,  in  front,  beside  it  and  behind,  there  is  a  great 
profusion  of  trees,  most  of  which  were  planted  by 
Southey,  who  came  to  live  here  more  than  fifty  years 
ago,  and  they  have,  of  course,  grown  much  more  shad- 
owy now  than  he  ever  beheld  them  ;  for  he  died  about 
fourteen  years  since.  The  grounds  are  well  laid  out, 
and  neatly  kept,  with  the  usual  lawn  and  gravelled 
walks,  and  quaint  little  devices  in  the  ornamental  way. 
These  may  be  of  later  date  than  Southey's  time.  The 
gardener  spoke  respectfully  of  Southey,  and  of  his  first 
wife,  and  observed  that  ^^  it  was  a  great  loss  to  the 
neighborhood  when  that  family  went  down." 

The  house  stands  directly  above  the  Greta,  the  mur- 
mur of  which  is  audible  all  about  it ;  for  the  Greta  is 
a  swift  little  river,  and  goes  on  its  way  with  a  contin- 
ual sound,  which  has  both  depth  and  breadth.  The 
gardener  led  us  to  a  walk  along  its  banks,  close  by  the 
Hall,  where,  he  said,  Southey  used  to  walk  for  hours 
!md  hours  together.     He  might,  indeed,  get  there  from 


ENGLJ&H  NOTE-^OOKS.  [185& 

study  in  a  moment.  There  were  two  paths,  one 
above  the  other,  well  laid  out  on  the  steep  declivity  of 
the  high  bank ;  and  there  is  such  a  very  thick  shade 
o£  oaks  and  elms,  planted  by  Southey  himself  over  the 
bank,  that  all  the  ground  and  grass  were  moist,  al- 
though it  had  been  a  sunny  day.  It  is  a  very  sombre 
walk;  not  many  glimpses  of  the  sky  through  those 
dense  boughs.  The  Greta  is  here,  perhaps,  twenty- 
yards  acrosB,  and  very  dark  of  hue,  and  its  voice  is 
melancholy  and  very  suggestive  of  musings  and  rev- 
eries ;  but  I  should  question  whether  it  were  favorable 
to  any  settled  scheme  of  thought.  Th^  gardener  told 
us  that  there  used  to  be  a  pebbly  beach  on  the  margin 
pf  the  river,  and  that  it  was  Southey'^s  habit  to  sit  and 
vrrite  there,  using  a  tree  of  peculiar  shape  for  a  table. 
An  alteration  in  the  current  of  the  river  has  swept 
away  the  beach,  and  the  tree,  too,  has  fallen.  All  these 
things  were  interesting  to  me,  although  Soudiey  was 
not,  I  think,  a  picturesque  man,  —  not  one  whose  per^ 
Bonal  character  takes  a  strong  hold  on  the  imagination. 
Jn  these  walks  he  used  to  wear  a  pair  of  shoes  heavily 
damped  with  iron;  very  ponderous  they  must  have 
been,  from  the  particularity  with  which  the  gardener 
mentioned  them. 

The  gardener  took  leave  of  us  at  the  front  entrance 
of  the  grounds,  and,  returning  to  the  King's  Arms,  we 
ordered  a  one-horsie  fly  for  the  fall  of  Lodore.  Our 
drive  thither  was  along  the  banks  of  Derwentwater, 
and  it  is  as  beautiful  a  road,  I  imagine,  as  can  be  found 
in  England,  or  anywhere  else.  1  like  Derwentwater 
the  best  of  all  the  lakes,  so  far  as  I  have  yet  seen  them. 
Skiddaw  lies  at  the  head  of  a  long  even  ridge  of  moun< 
tains,  rising  into  several  peaks,  and  one  higher  than 
the  rest.     On  the  eastern  side  there  are  many  noble 


!^ 


id5&.]  Tsn  LA^ns.  46 

eminences,  aiid  on  the  west^  aloiig;  wliich  Vre  droy^, 
there  is,  a  part  of  the  way,  a  lovely  wood,  and  nearly 
the  whole  distance  a  precipitous  range  of  lofty  cliffs, 
descending  sheer  down  without  any  slope,  except  What 
has  been  formed  in  the  lapse  of  ages  by  the  fall  of 
fragments,  and  the  washing  down  of  smaller  stones. 
The  declivity  thus  formed  along  the  base  of  the  cliffs 
is  in  some  places  covered  with  trees  or  shrubs ;  else- 
where it  is  quite  bare  and  barren.  The  precipitous 
parts  of  the  cliffs  are  very  grand  ;  the  whole  scene,  in- 
deed, might  be  characterized  as  one  of  stem  grandeur 
with  aii  embroidery  of  rich  beauty,  without  lauding  it 
too  much.  All  the  sternness  of  it  is  softened  by  vegeta- 
tive beauty  wherever  it  can  possibly  be  thrown  in  ;  and 
there  Is  not  here,  so  strongly  as  along  Windermere, 
evidence  that  human  art  has  been  helping  out  Nature. 
I  wish  it  Were  possible  to  give  any  idea  of  the  shapes  of 
the  hills  ;  with  these,  at  least,  man  has  nothing  to  do, 
tior  ever  will  have  anything  to  do.  As  we  approached 
the  bottom  of  the  lake,  and  of  the  beautiful  vftlley  in 
which  it  lies.  We  saw  one  hlU  that  seemed  to  crouch 
down  like  a  Titanic  watch-dog,  with  its  rear  towards 
the  spectator,  guarding  the  entrance  to  the  valley. 
Th6  great  superiority  of  these  mountains  over  those  of 
New  England  is  their  variety  and  definiteneds  of  shape, 
besides  the  abundance  everywhere  of  water  prospects, 
which  are  wanting  among  our  own  hills.  They  rise  up 
decidedly,  and  each  is  a  hill  by  itself,  while  ours  mingle 
into  one  another,  and,  besides,  have  such  large  bases 
that  you  can  neither  tell  where  they  begin  nor  where 
they  end.  Many  of  these  Cumberland  mountains  have 
a  marked  vertebral  shape,  so  that  they  often  look  like 
a  group  of  huge  lions,  lying  down  with  their  backs 
turned  toward  each  other.    They  slope  dcrwn  steeply 


46  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  [1855. 

from  narrow  ridges ;  hence  their  picturesque  seclusions 
ot  valleys  and  dales,  which  subdivide  the  lake  region 
into  so  many  communities.  Our  hills,  like  apple- 
dumplings  in  a  dish,  have  no  such  valleys  as  these. 

There  is  a  good  inn  at  Lodore,  —  a  small,  prim- 
itive country  inn,  which  has  latterly  been  enlarged 
and  otherwise  adapted  to  meet  the  convenience  of 
the  guests  brought  thither  by  the  fame  of  the  cascade ; 
but  it  is  still  a  country  inn,  though  it  takes  upon  itself 
the  title  of  hotel. 

We  found  pleasant  rooms  here,  and  established  our- 
selves for  the  night.  From  this  point  we  have  a  view 
of  the  beautiful  lake,  and  of  Skiddaw  at  the  head  of  it. 
The  cascade  is  within  three  or  four  minutes'  walk, 
through  the  garden  gate,  towards  the  cliff,  at  the  base 
of  which  the  inn  stands.  The  visitor  would  need  no 
other  guide  than  its  own  voice,  which  is  said  to  be  au- 
dible sometimes  at  the  distance  of  four  miles.  As  we 
were  coming  from  Keswick,  we  caught  glimpses  of  its 
white  foam  high  up  the  precipice;  and  it  is  only 
glimpses  that  can  be  caught  anywhere,  because  there 
is  no  regular  sheet  of  falling  water.  Once,  I  think,  it 
must  have  fallen  abruptly  over  the  edge  of  the  long 
line  of  precipice  that  here  extends  along  parallel  with 
the  shore  of  the  lake  ;  but,  in  the  course  of  time,  it  has 
gnawed  and  sawed  its  way  into  the  heart  of  the  cliff, 
—  this  persistent  little  stream,  —  so  that  now  it  has 
formed  a  rude  gorge,  adown  which  it  hurries  and  tum- 
bles in  the  wildest  way,  over  the  roughest  imaginable 
staircase.  Standing  at  the  bottom  of  the  fall,  you 
have  a  far  vista  sloping  upward  to  the  sky,  with  the 
water  everywhere  as  white  as  snow,  pouring  and  pour- 
ing down,  now  on  one  side  of  the  gorge,  now  on  the 
other,  among  immense  bowlders,  which  try  to  choke 


1855.]  THE  LAKES.  47 

its  passage.  It  does  not  attempt  to  leap  over  these 
huge  rocks^  bat  finds  its  way  in  and  out  among  them, 
and  finally  gets  to  the  bottom  after  a  hundred  tum- 
bles. It  cannot  be  better  described  than  in  Southey's 
verses,  though  it  is  worthy  of  better  poetry  than  that. 
After  all,  I  do  not  know  that  the  cascade  is  anything 
more  than  a  beautiful  fringe  to  the  grandeur  of  the 
scene ;  for  it  is  very  grand,  —  this  fissure  through 
the  cliff,  —  with  a  steep,  lofty  precipice  on  the  right 
hand,  sheer  up  and  down,  and  on  the  other  hand,  too, 
another  lofty  precipice,  with  a  slope  of  its  own  ruin 
on  which  trees  and  shrubbery  have  grown.  The  right- 
hand  precipice,  however,  has  shelves  affording  suffi- 
cient hold  for  small  trees,  but  nowhere  does  it  slant. 
If  it  were  not  for  the  white  little  stream  falling  gently 
downward,  and  for  the  soft  verdure  upon  either  preci- 
pice, and  even  along  the  very  pathway  of  the  cascade, 
it  would  be  a  very  stem  vista  up  that  gorge. 

I  shall  not  try  to  describe  it  any  more.  It  has  not 
been  praised  too  much,  though  it  may  have  been 
praised  amiss.  I  went  thither  again  in  the  morning, 
and  climbed  a  good  way  up,  through  the  midst  of  its 
rocky  descent,  and  I  think  I  could  have  reached  the 
top  in  this  way.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  bounds  of 
the  water,  from  one  step  of  its  broken  staircase  to 
another,  give  an  impression  of  softness  and  gentle- 
ness ;  but  there  are  black,  turbulent  pools  among  the 
great  bowlders,  where  the  stream  seems  angry  at  the 
difficulties  which  it  meets  with.  Looking  upward  in 
the  sunshine,  I  could  see  a  rising  mist,  and  I  should 
not  wonder  if  a  speck  of  rainbow  were  sometimes  visi- 
ble. I  noticed  a  small  oak  in  the  bed  of  the  cascade, 
and  there  is  a  lighter  vegetation  scattered  about. 

At  noon  we  took  a  car  for  Portinscale,  and  drove 


48  ENGLISH  NOTE^BOOKS.  [1855. 

back  along  the  road  to  Keswiok,  through  which  we 
passed,  stopping  to  get  a  perhaps  of  letters  at  the 
post-office,  and  reached  Portinseale,  which  is  a  mile 
from  Keswick.  After  dinner  we  walked  over  a 
bridge,  and  through  a  green  lane,  to  the  church  where 
Southey  is  buried.  It  is  a  white  church,  of  Norman 
architecture,  with  a  low,  square  tower.  As  we  ap- 
proached, we  saw  two  persons  entering  the  portal, 
and,  following  them  in,  we  found  the  sexton,  who  was 
a  tall,  thin  old  man,  with  white  hair,  and  an  intelli- 
gent, reverent  face,  showing  the  edifice  to  a  stout,  red- 
faced,  self-important,  good-natured  John  Bull  of  a 
gentleman.  Without  any  question  on  our  part,  the 
old  sexton  immediately  led  us  to  Southey's  monument, 
which  is  placed  in  a  side  aisle,  where  there  is  not 
breadth  for  it  to  stand  free  of  the  wall ;  neither  is 
it  in  a  very  good  light.  But  it  seemed  to  me  a  good 
work  of  art,  —  a  recumbent  figure  of  white  marble,  on 
a  couch,  the  drapery  of  which  he  has  drawn  about 
him,  —  being  quite  enveloped  in  what  may  be  a 
shroud.  The  sculptor  has  not  intended  to  represent 
death,  for  the  figure  lies  on  its  side,  and  has  a  boc^ 
in  its  hand,  and  the  face  is  lifelike,  and  looks  full  of 
expression,  —  a  thin,  high-featured,  poetic  face,  with 
a  finely  proportioned  head  and  abundant  hair.  It  re- 
presents Southey  rightly,  at  whatever  age  he  died,  in 
the  full  maturity  of  manhood,  when  he  was  strongest 
and  richest.  I  liked  the  statue,  and  wished  that  it  lay 
in  a  broader  aisle,  or  in  the  chancel,  where  there  is  an 
old  tomb  of  a  knight  and  lady  of  the  Ratcliffe  family, 
who  have  held  the  place  of  honor  long  enough  to  yield 
it  now  to  a  poet.  Southey's  sculptor  was  Lough.  I 
must  not  forget  to  mention  that  John  Bull,  climbing 
on  a  bench,  to  get  a  better  view  of  the  statue,  tumbled 


1866.]  THE  LAKES.  49 

off  with  a  riMsket  that  resounded  irreverently  through 
the  church. 

The  old,  white-headed,  thin  sexton  was  a  model  man 
of  his  class,  and  appeared  to  take  a  loving  and  cheer- 
ful interest  in  the  building,  and  in  those  who,  from  age 
to  age,  have  worshipped  and  been  buried  there.  It  is 
a  very  ancient  and  interesting  church.  Within  a  few 
years  it  has  been  thoroughly  repaired  as  to  the  inte- 
rior, and  now  looks  as  if  it  might  endure  ten  more 
centuries ;  and  I  suppose  we  see  little  that  is  really 
ancient,  except  the  double  row  of  Norman  arches,  of 
light  freestone,  that  support  the  oaken  beams  and 
rafters  of  the  roof.  All  the  walls,  however,  are  ven- 
erable, and  quite  preserve  the  identity  of  the  edifice* 
There  is  a  stained-glass  window  of  modem  manufac^ 
ture,  and  in  one  of  the  side  windows,  set  amidst  plain 
glass,  there  is  a  single  piece,  five  hundred  years  old, 
representing  St.  Anthony,  very  finely  executed,  though 
it  looks  a  little  faded.  Along  the  walls,  on  each  side, 
between  the  arched  windows,  there  are  marble  slabs 
affixed,  with  inscriptions  to  the  memories  of  those  who 
used  to  occupy  the  seats  beneath.  I  remember  none  of 
great  antiquity,  nor  any  old  monument,  except  that  in 
the  chancel,  over  the  knight  and  lady  of  the  Batcliffe 
family.  This  consists  of  a  slab  of  stone,  on  four  small 
stone  pillars,  abo^it  two  feet  high*  The  slab  is  inlaid 
with  a  brass  plate,  on  which  is  sculptured  the  knight 
in  armor,  and  the  lady  in  the  costume  of  Elizabeth's 
time,  exceedingly  well  done  and  well  preserved,  and 
each  figure  about  eighteen  inches  in  length.  The 
sexton  showed  us  a  rubbing  of  them  on  paper.  Under 
the  slab,  which,  supported  by  the  low  stone  pillars, 
forms  a  canopy  for  them,  lie  two  sculptured  figures 
of  stone,  of  life  size,  and  at  f uU  length,  representing 

VOL.  yui.  4 


y 


50  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  [185fil 

the  same  persons ;  but  I  think  the  sculptor  was  hardly 
equal  in  his  art  to  the  engraver. 

The  most  curious  antique  relic  in  the  church  is  the 
font.  The  bowl  is  very  capacious,  sufficiently  so  to 
J  admit  of  the  complete  immersion  of  a  child  of  two  or 
y/''  three  months  old.  On  the  outside,  in  several  com- 
partments, there  are  bas-reliefs  of  Scriptural  and  sym- 
bolic subjects,  —  such  as  the  tree  of  life,  the  word 
proceeding  out  of  God's  mouth,  the  crown  of  thorns, 
—  all  in  the  quaintest  taste,  sculptured  by  some  hand 
of  a  thousand  years  ago,  and  preserving  the  fancies  of 
monkish  brains,  in  stone.  The  sexton  was  very  proud 
of  this  font  and  its  sculpture,  and  took  a  kindly  per- 
sonal interest  in  showing  it ;  and  when  we  had  spent 
as  much  time  as  we  could  inside,  he  led  us  to  South- 
ey's  grave  in  the  churchyard.  He  told  us  that  he  had 
known  Southey  long  and  well,  from  early  manhood  to 
old  age ;  for  he  was  only  twenty-nine  when  he  came  to 
Keswick  to  reside.  He  had  known  Wordsworth,  too, 
and  Coleridge,  and  Level ;  and  he  had  seen  Southey 
and  Wordsworth  walking  arm  in  arm  together  in  that 
churchyard.  He  seemed  to  revere  Southey's  memory, 
and  said  that  he  had  been  much  lamented,  and  that 
as  many  as  a  hundred  people  came  to  the  churchyard 
when  he  was  buried.  He  spoke  with  great  praise  of 
Mrs.  Southey,  his  first  wife,  telling  of  her  charity  to 
the  poor,  and  how  she  was  a  blessing  to  the  neighbor- 
hood ;  but  he  said  nothing  in  favor  of  the  second  Mrs. 
Southey,  and  only  mentioned  her  selling  the  library, 
and  other  things,  after  her  husband's  death,  and  going 
CO  London.  Yet  I  think  she  was  probably  a  good 
woman,  and  meets  with  less  than  justice  because  she 
took  the  place  of  another  good  woman,  and  had  not 
time  and  opportunity  to  prove  herself  as  good.     Aa 


1856.]  THE  LAKES.  61 

for  Souihey  himself,  my  idea  is,  that  few  better  or 
more  blameless  men  have  ever  lived ;  but  he  seems  to 
lack  color,  passion,  warmth,  or  something  that  should 
enable  me  to  bring  him  into  close  relation  with  my- 
self. The  graveyard  where  his  body  lies  is  not  so 
rural  and  picturesque  as  that  where  Wordsworth  is 
buried;  although  Skiddaw  rises  behind  it,  and  the 
Greta  is  murmuring  at  no  very  great  distance  away. 
But  the  spot  itself  has  a  somewhat  bare  and  bold  as- 
pect, with  no  shadow  of  trees,  no  shrubbery. 

Over  his  grave  there  is  a  ponderous,  oblong  block 
of  slate,  a  native  mineral  of  this  region,  as  hard  as 
iron,  and  which  will  doubtless  last  quite  as  long  as 
Southey's  works  retain  any  vitality  in  English  litera- 
ture. It  is  not  a  monument  fit  for  a  poet.  'There  is 
nothing  airy  or  graceful  about  it,  —  and,  indeed,  there 
cannot  be  many  men  so  solid  and  matter-of-fact  as  to 
deserve  a  tomb  like  that.  Wordsworth's  grave  is  much 
better,  with  only  a  simple  headstone,  and  the  grass 
growing  over  his  mortality,  which,  for  a  thousand 
years,  at  least,  it  never  can  over  Southey's.  Most  of 
the  monuments  are  of  this  same  black  slate,  and  some 
erect  headstones  are  curiously  sculptured,  and  seem  to 
have  been  recently  erected. 

We  now  returned  to  the  hotel,  and  took  a  car  for 
the  valley  of  St.  John.  The  sky  seemed  to  portend 
rain  in  no  long  time,  and  Skiddaw  had  put  on  his  cap; 
cmt  the  people  of  the  hotel  and  the  driver  said  that 
there  would  be  no  rain  this  afternoon,  and  their  opin- 
ion proved  correct.  After  driving  a  few  miles,  we 
again  came  within  sight  of  the  Enchanted  Castle.  It 
stands  rather  more  than  midway  adown  the  declivity 
of  one  of  the  ridges  that  form  the  valley  to  the  left,  as 
f  ou  go  southward,  and  its  site  would  have  been  a  good 


52  ENGLISH  Nom^^OOKS.  [1»65. 

one  for  a  foHiresd,  intended  to  defend  thd  loW^r  eti- 
trance  of  this  mountain  defile*  At  a  proper  distance, 
it  looks  not  unlike  the  gray  dilapidation  of  a  Gothic 
castle,  which  has  been  crumbling  and  crumbling  away 
for  ages,  until  Time  might  be  supposed  to  have  imper- 
ceptibly stolen  its  massive  pile  from  man  and  given  it 
back  to  Nature ;  its  towers  and  battlements  and  arched 
entrances  being  so  much  defaced  and  decayed  that  all 
the  marks  of  human  labor  had  nearly  been  obliterated, 
and  the  angles  of  the  hewn  stone  rounded  away,  while 
mosses  and  weeds  and  bushes  grow  over  it  fts  finely  as 
over  a  natural  ledge  of  rocks.  It  is  conceivable,  that 
in  some  lights,  and  in  some  states  of  the  atmosphere,  a 
traveller,  at  the  entrance  of  the  valley,  might  really 
imagine  that  he  beheld  a  castle  here ;  but,  for  myself, 
I  must  acknowledge  tiiat  it  required  a  willing  fancy  to 
make  me  see  it*  As  we  drew  nearer,  the  delusion  did 
not  immediately  grow  less  strong ;  but^  at  length,  we 
found  ourselves  passing  at  the  foot  of  the  declivity^ 
and,  behold  I  it  was  nothing  but  an  etiorinoils  ledge  of 
rock,  coming  squarely  out  of  the  hill-side,  with  other 
parts  of  the  ledge  cropping  out  in  its  vicinity^  Look- 
ing back,  after  passing,  we  saw  a  knoll  or  hillock,  of 
which  the  castled  rock  is  the  b&re  face.  Ther^  are  two 
or  three  stone  cottages  along  the  roadside,  beneath  the 
magic  castle,  and  within  the  enchanted  ground.  Scott^ 
in  the  Bridal  of  Triermain,  locates  the  castle  in  the 
middle  of  the  valley,  and  makes  King  Arthur  ride 
around  it,  which  any  mortal  would  have  great  diffi- 
culty in  doing.  This  Vale  of  St.  John  has  very  strik- 
ing scenery.  Blencathra  shuts  it  in  to  the  northward, 
lying  right  across  the  entrance;  and  on  either  side 
there  are  lofty  crags  and  declivities,  those  to  the  west 
being  more  broken  and  better  wooded  than  the  ridgcr 


18W.]  THE  LAKES.  58 

to  the  eastward,  which  atretehes  along  for  several  miles, 
steep,  high,  and  bare,  producing  only  grass  enough  for 
sheep  pasture,  until  it  rises  into  the  dark  brow  of  Hel- 
vellyn.  Adown  this  ridge,  seen  afar,  like  a  white  rib- 
bon, comes  here  and  there  a  cascade,  sending  its  voice 
before  it,  which  distance  robs  of  all  its  fury,  and  makes 
it  the  quietest  sound  in  the  world ;  and  while  you  see 
the  foamy  leap  of  its  upper  course  a  mile  or  two  away, 
you  may  see  and  hear  the  self-same  little  brook  bab- 
bling through  a  field,  and  passing  under  the  arch  of  a 
rustic  bridge  beneath  your  feet.  It  is  a  deep  seclusion, 
with  mountains  and  crags  on  all  sides. 

About  a  mile  beyond  the  castle  we  stopped  at  a  lit- 
tle wayside  inn,  the  King's  Head,  and  put  up  for  the 
night.  This,  I  believe,  is  the  only  inn  which  I  have 
found  in  £ngland —  the  only  one  where  I  have  eaten 
and  slept — that  does  not  call  itself  a  hotel.  It  is  very 
primitive  in  its  arrangements,  — a  long,  low,  white- 
washed, unadorned,  and  ugly  cottage  of  two  stories. 
At  one  extremity  is  a  bam  and  cow-house,  and  nert  to 
these  the  part  devoted  to  the  better  class  of  guests, 
where  we  had  our  parlor  and  chambers,  contiguous  to 
which  is  the  kitchen  and  common  room,  paved  with 
flagstones,  -^  and,  lastly,  another  bam  and  stable ;  all 
which  departments  are  not  under  separate  roofs,  but 
onder  the  same  long  contiguity,  and  forming  the  same 
building.  Our  parlor  opens  immediately  upon  the 
roadside,  without  any  vestibule.  The  house  appears 
to  be  of  some  antiquity,  with  beams  across  the  low 
ceilings;  but  the  people  made  us  pretty  comfortable 
at  bed  and  board,  and  fed  us  with  ham  and  eggs,  veal- 
steaks,  honey,  oatcakes,  gooseberry  -  tarts,  and  such 
eates  and  dainties,  —  making  a  moderate  charge  for 
fltU.     The  parlor  was  adorned  with  mde  engravings. 


54  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

I  remember  only  a  plate  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington, 
at  three  stages  of  his  life ;  and  there  were  minerals, 
delved,  doubtless,  out  of  the  hearts  of  the  mountains, 
upon  the  mantel-piece.  The  chairs  were  of  an  anti- 
quated fashion,  and  had  very  capacious  seats.  We 
were  waited  upon  by  two  women,  who  looked  and 
acted  not  unlike  the  country-folk  of  New  England,  — 
say,  of  New  Hampshire,  —  except  that  these  may  have 
been  more  deferential. 

While  we  remained  here,  I  took  various  walks  to  get 
a  glimpse  of  Helvellyn,  and  a  view  of  Thirlmere,  — 
which  is  rather  two  lakes  than  one,  being  so  narrow  at 
one  point  as  to  be  crossed  by  a  foot-bridge.  Its  shores 
are  very  picturesque,  coming  down  abruptly  upon  it, 
and  broken  into  crags  and  prominences,  which  view 
their  shaggy  faces  in  its  mirror ;  and  HelveDyn  slopes 
steeply  upward,  from  its  southern  shore,  into  the 
clouds.  On  its  eastern  bank,  near  the  foot-bridge, 
stands  Armboth  House,  which  Miss  Martineau  says 
is  haimted;  and  I  saw  a  painted  board,  at  the  en- 
trance of  the  road  which  leads  to  it,  advertising  lodg- 
ings there.  The  ghosts,  of  course,  pay  nothing  for 
their  accommodations. 

At  noon  on  the  day  after  our  arrival,  J and  I 

went  to  visit  the  Enchanted  Castle ;  and  we  were  so 
venturesome  as  to  turn  aside  from  the  road,  and  as- 
cend the  declivity  towards  its  walls,  which,  indeed,  we 
hoped  to  surmount.  It  proved  a  very  difficult  under- 
taking, the  site  of  the  fortress  being  much  higher  and 
fiteeper  than  we  had  supposed ;  but  we  did  clamber 
upon  what  we  took  for  the  most  elevated  portion,  when 
lo  I  we  found  that  we  had  only  taken  one  of  the  out- 
works, and  that  there  was  a  gorge  of  the  hill  betwixt 
us  and  the  main  walls ;   while  the  citadel  rose  high 


1865.]  THE  LAKES.  65 

above,  at  more  than  thrice  the  elevation  which  we  had 

climbed.     J wished  to  go  on,  and  I  allowed  him 

to  climb,  till  he  appeared  to  have  reached  so  steep  and 
lofty  a  height  that  he  looked  hardly  bigger  than  a 
monkey,  and  I  should  not  at  all  have  wondered  had 
he  come  rolling  down  to  the  base  of  the  rock  where  I 
sat.  But  neither  did  he  get  actually  within  the  (^stle, 
though  he  might  have  done  so  but  for  a  higb'stone 
fence,  too  difficult  for  him  to  climb,  which  runs  from 
the  rock  along  the  hill-side.  The  sheep  probably  go 
thither  much  oftener  than  any  other  living  thing,  and 
to  them  we  left  the  castle  of  St.  John,  with  a  shrub 
waving  from  its  battlements,  instead  of  a  banner. 

After  dinner  we  ordered  a  car  for  Ambleside,  and 
while  it  was  getting  ready,  I  went  to  look  at  the  river 
of  St.  John,  which,  indeed,  flows  close  beside  our  inn, 
only  just  across  the  road,  though  it  might  well  be 
overlooked  unless  you  specially  sought  for  it.  It  is  a 
brook  brawling  over  the  stones,  very  much  as  brooks 
do  in  New  England,  only  we  never  think  of  calling 
them  rivers  there.     I  could  easily  have  made  a  leap 

from  shore  to  shore,  and  J scrambled  across  on 

no  better  footing  than  a  raiL  I  believe  I  have  com- 
plained of  the  want  of  brooks  in  other  parts  of  Eng- 
land, but  there  is  no  want  of  them  here,  and  they  are 
nlways  interesting,  being  of  what  size  they  may. 

We  drove  down  the  valley,  and  gazed  at  the  vast 
slope  of  Helvellyn,  and  at  Thirlmere  beneath  it,  and 
at  Eagle's  Crag  and  Raven's  Crag,  which  beheld  them- 
selves in  it,  and  we  cast  many  a  look  behind  at  Blen- 
cathra,  and  that  noble  brotherhood  of  mountains  out 
of  the  midst  of  which  we  came.  But,  to  say  the  truth, 
I  was  weary  of  fine  scenery,  and  it  seemed  to  me  that 
tbad  eaten  a  score  of  mountains,  and  quaffed  as  many 


66  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185*. 

lakes,  all  in  the  space  of  two  or  three  days,  -^  and  the 
natural  consequence  was  a  surfeit.  There  was  scarcely 
a  single  place  in  all  our  tour  where  I  should  not  haye 
been  glad  to  spend  a  month ;  but,  by  flitting  so  quiddy 
from  one  point  to  another,  I  lost  all  the  more  recon^ 
dite  beauties,  and  had  come  away  without  retaining 
even  the  surface  of  much  that  I  had  seen,  I  am  slow 
to  feel,  —  slow,  I  suppose,  to  comprehend,  and,  like 
the  anaconda,  I  need  to  lubricate  any  object  a  great 
deal  before  I  can  swallow  it  and  actually  make  it  my 
own.  Yet  I  shall  always  enjoy  having  made  this  jour- 
ney, and  shall  wonder  the  more  at  England  which  com- 
prehends so  much,  such  a  rich  variety,  within  its  nar- 
row bounds.  If  England  were  all  iJie  world,  it  still 
would  have  been  worth  while  for  the  Creator  to  have 
made  it,  and  mankind  would  have  had  no  cause  to  find 
fault  with  their  abode ;  except  that  there. is  not  room 
enough  for  so  many  as  might  be  happy  here. 

We  left  the  great  inverted  arch  of  the  valley  behind 
us,  looking  back  as  long  as  we  could  at  Blencathra, 
and  Skiddaw  over  its  shoulder,  and  the  clouds  were 
gathering  over  them  at  our  last  glimpse.  Passing  by 
Dunmail  Raise  (which  is  a  mound  of  stones  over  an 
old  British  King),  we  entered  Westmoreland,  and 
soon  had  the  vale  of  Grasmere  before  us,  with  the 
church  where  Wordsworth  lies,  and  Nab  Scaur  and 
Rydal  Water  farther  on.  At  Ambleside  we  took  an- 
other car  for  Newby  Bridge,  whither  we  drove  along 
the  eastern  shore  of  Windermere.  The  superb  scen- 
ery through  which  we  had  been  passing  made  what  we 
now  saw  look  tame,  although  a  week  ago  we  should 
have  thought  it  more  than  ccmimonly  interesting. 
Hawkshead  is  the  only  village  on  our  road,  —  a  small^ 
whitewashed  old  town,  with  a  whitewashed  old  Non 


1856.]  THE  LAKES.  57 

tnan  ohurch,  low,  and  with  a  low  tower,  on  the  same 
pattern  with  others  that  we  have  seen  hereabouts.  It 
was  between  seven  and  eight  o'clock  when  we  reached 

Newby  Bridge,  and  heard  U 's  voice  greeting  us, 

and  saw  her  head,  crowned  with  a  wreath  of  flowers, 
looking  down  at  us  out  of  the  window  of  our  parlor. 

And  to-day,  July  23d,  I  have  written  the  most  in- 
complete and  unsatisfactory  record  of  what  we  have 
done  and  seen  since  Wednesday  last.  I  am  pretty 
well  convinced  that  all  attempts  at  describing  scenery, 
especially  mountain  scenery,  are  sheer  nonsense.  For 
one  thing,  the  point  of  view  being  changed,  the  whole 
description,  which  you  made  up  from  the  previous 
point  of  view,  is  immediately  falsified.  And  when 
you  have  done  your  utmost,  such  items  as  those  set- 
ting forth  the  scene  in  a  play,  —  ^^a  mountainous 
country,  in  the  distance  a  cascade  tumbling  over  a 
precipice,  and  in  front  a  lake ;  on  one  side  an  ivy-cov- 
ered cottage,"  —  this  dry  detail  brings  the  matter  be- 
fore one's  mind's  eyes  more  effectually  than  all  the  art 
of  word  painting. 

July  27th.  —  We  are  still  at  Newby  Bridge,  and 
nothing  has  occurred  of  remarkable  interest,  nor  have 
we  made  any  excursions,  beyond  moderate  walks. 
Two  days  have  been  rainy,  .and  to-day  there  is  more 
rain.  We  find  such  weather  as  tolerable  here  as  it 
would  probably  be  anywhere;  but  it  passes  rather 
heavily  with  the  children,  —  and  for  myself,  I  should 
prefer  sunshine,  though  Mr.  White's  books  afford  me 
some  entertainment,  especially  an  odd  volume  of  Ben 
Jonson's  |^ys,  containing  "Volpone,"  "The  Aldhe- 
mist,"  "  Bartholomew  Fair,"  and  others.  "  The  Al- 
chemifit,"  is  certainly  a  gfeat  play.    We  watch  all 


58  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1855. 

arrivals  and  other  events  from  our  parlor  window, — a 
stage-coach  driving  up  four  times  in  the  twenty-four 
hours  with  its  forlorn  outsiders,  all  saturated  with 
rain ;  the  steamer,  from  the  head  of  the  lake,  landing 
a  crowd  of  passengers,  who  stroll  up  to  the  hotel, 
drink  a  glass  of  ale,  lean  over  the  parapet  of  the 
bridge,  gaze  at  the  flat  stones  which  pave  the  bottom 
of  the  river,  and  then  hurry  back  to  the  steamer  again; 
cars,  phaetons,  horsemen,  all  damped  and  disconso- 
late. There  are  a  number  of  young  men  staying  at 
the  hotel,  some  of  whom  go  forth  in  aU  the  rain,  fish- 
ing, and  come  back  at  nightfall,,  trudging  heavily,  but 
with  creels  on  their  backs  that  do  not  seem  very  heavy. 
Yesterday  was  fair,  and  enlivened  us  a  good  deal. 
Returning  from  a  walk  in  the  forenoon,  I  f oimd  a 
troop  of  yeomanry  cavalry  in  the  stable-yard  of  the 
hotel.  They  were  the  North  Lancashire  Regiment, 
and  were  on  their  way  to  Liverpool  for  the  purpose  of 
drill.  Not  being  old  campaigners,  their  uniforms  and 
accoutrements  were  in  so  much  the  finer  order,  all 
bright,  and  looking  span-new,  and  they  themselves 
were  a  body  of  handsome  and  stalwart  young  men; 
and  it  was  pleasant  to  look  at  their  helmets,  and  red 
jackets  and  carbines,  and  steel  scabbarded  swords,  and 
gallant  steeds,  —  all  so  martial  in  aspect,  —  and  to 
know  that  they  were  only  play-soldiers,  after  all,  and 
were  never  likely  to  do  nor  suffer  any  warlike  mis- 
chief. By  and  by  their  bugles  sounded,  and  they 
trotted  away,  wheeling  over  the  ivy-grown  stone  bridge, 
and  disappearing  behind  the  trees  on  the  Milnethorpe 
road.  Our  host  comes  forth  from  the  bar  with  a  bill, 
which  he  presents  to  an  orderly-sergeant.  He,  the 
host,  then  teUs  me  that  he  himseK  once  rode  many 
years,  a  trooper,  in  this  regiment,  and  that  all  his 


1855.]  THE  LAKES.  59 

comrades  were  larger  men  than  himself.  Yet  Mr. 
Thomas  White  is  a  good-sized  man,  and  now,  at  all 
events,  rather  overweight  for  a  dragoon. 

Yesterday  came  one  of  those  bands  of  music  that 
seem  to  itinerate  everywhere  about  the  country.  It 
consisted  of  a  young  woman  who  played  the  harp,  a 
bass-viol  player,  a  fiddler,  a  flutist,  and  a  bugler,  be- 
sides a  little  child,  of  whom,  I  suppose,  the  woman 
was  the  mother.  They  sat  down  on  a  bench  by  the 
roadside,  opposite  the  house,  and  played  several  tunes, 
and  by  and  by  the  waiter  brought  them  a  large  pitcher 
of  ale,  which  they  quaffed  with  apparent  satisfaction ; 
though  they  seemed  to  be  foreigners  by  their  musta- 
chios  and  sallow  hue,  and  would  perhaps  have  pre- 
ferred a  vinous  potation.  One  would  like  to  follow 
these  people  through  their  vagrant  life,  and  see  them 
in  their  social  relations,  and  overhear  their  talk  with 
each  other.  All  vagrants  are  interesting ;  and  there  is 
a  much  greater  variety  of  them  here  than  in  America, 
—  people  who  cast  themselves  on  Fortune,  and  take 
whatever  she  gives  without  a  certainty  of  anything. 
I  saw  a  travelling  tinker  yesterday,  —  a  man  with  a 
leather  apron,  and  a  string  of  skewers  hung  at  his 
girdle,  and  a  pack  over  his  shoulders,  in  which,  no 
doubt,  were  his  tools  and  materials  of  trade. 

It  is  remarkable  what  a  natural  interest  everybody 
feels  in  fishing.  An  angler  from  the  bridge  immedi- 
ately attracts  a  group  to  watch  his  luck.  It  is  the 
same  with  J ,  fishing  for  minnows,  on  the  plat- 
form near  which  the  steamer  lands  its  passengers. 

By  the  by,  U caught  a  minnow  last  evening,  and, 

immediately  after,  a  good-sized  perch,  —  her  first  fish. 

July  30^A.  —  We  left  Newby  Bridge,  all  of  us,  on 


60  ENGLISH  NOTE^BOOKS.  [1865. 

Saturday,  at  twelve  o'cloak,  and  steamed  up  the  lake 
to  Ambleside ;  a  pretty  good  day  as  to  weather,  biit 
with  a  little  tendency  to  shower.  There  was  nothing 
new  on  the  lake,  and  no  new  impressions,  as  far  as  I 

can  remember.     At  Ambleside,  S^ and  nurse  went 

shopping,  after  which  we  took  a  carriage  for  Gras* 
mere,'  and  established  ourselves  at  Brown's  Hotel.  I 
find  that  my  impressions  from  our  previous  sight  of 
all  these  scenes  do  not  change  on  revision.  They  are 
very  beautiful;  but,  if  I  must  say  it,  I  ain  a  little 
weary  of  them.  We  soon  tire  of  things  which  we 
visit  merely  by  way  of  spectacle,  and  with  which  we 
have  no  real  and  permanent  connection.  In  such 
cases  we  very  quickly  wish  the  spectacle  to  be  taken 
away,  and  another  substituted ;  at  all  events  I  do  not 
care  about  seeing  anything  more  of  the  English  lakes 
for  at  least  a  year. 

Perhaps  a  part  of  my  weariness  is  owing  to  the 
hotel-life  which  we  lead.  At  an  English  hotel  the 
traveller  feels  as  if  everybody,  f rotn  the  landlord,  down- 
ward, united  in  a  joint  and  individual  purpose  to  fleece 
him,  because  all  the  attendants  who  come  in  contact 
with  him  are  to  be  separately  considered.  So,  after 
paying,  in  the  first  instance,  a  very  heavy  biU,  for 
what  would  seem  to  cover  the  whole  indebtedness, 
there  remain  divers  dues  stiU  to  be  paid,  to  no  trifling 
amount,  to  the  landlord's  servants,  —  dues  not  to  be 
ascertained,  and  which  you  never  can  ki>ow  whether 
you  have  properly  satisfied.  You  can  know,  perhaps, 
when  you  have  less  than  satisfied  them,  by  the  aspect 
of  the  waiter,  which  I  wish  I  could  describe,  —  not 
disrespectful  in  the  slightest  degree,  but  a  look  of  pro. 
found  surprise,  a  gaze  at  the  offered  coin  (which  he 


t855.]  THE  LAKES.  61 

neyerthelesa  pockets)  as  if  he  either  did  not  see  it,  or 
did  not  know  it,  or  could  not  believe  his  eyesight ;  — 
all  this,  however,  with  the  most  quiet  forbearance,  a 
Christian-like  non-recognition  of  an  unmerited  wrong 
and  insult;  and  finally,  all  in  a  moment's  space  in- 
deed, he  quits  you  and  goes  about  his  other  business. 
If.  you  have  given  him  too  much,  you  are  made  sensi- 
ble of  y^ur  folly  by  the  extra  amount  of  his  gratitude, 
and  the  bows  with  which  he  salutes  you  from  the 
doorstep.  Generally,  you  cannot  very  decidedly  say 
whether  you  have  been  right  or  wrong ;  but,  in  almost 
all  cases,  you  decidedly  feel  that  you  have  been  fleeced. 
Then  the  living  at  the  best  of  English  hotels,  so  far 
as  my  travels  have  brought  me  acquainted  with  them, 
deserves  but  moderate  praise,  and  is  especially  lack- 
ing in  variety.  Nothing  but  joints,  joints,  joints; 
sometimes,  perhaps,  a  meat-pie,  which,  if  you  eat  it, 
weighs  upon  your  conscience,  with  the  idea  that  you 
have  eaten  the  scraps  of  other  people's  dinners.  At 
the  lake  hotels,  the  fare  is  lamb  and  mutton  and  trout, 
— the  latter  not  always  fresh,  and  soon  tired  of.  We 
pay  like  nabobs^  and  are  expected  to  be  content  with 
plain  mutton. 

We  spent  the  day  yesterday  at  Grasmere,  in  quiet 
walks  about  the  hotel ;  and  at  a  little  past  six  in  the 
afternoon,  I  took  my  departure  in  the  stage-coach  for 
Windermere.  The  coach  was  greatly  overburdened 
with  outside  passengers,  —  fifteen  in  all,  besides  the 
four  insiders,  —  and  one  of  the  fifteen  formed  thf 
apex  of  an  immense  pile  of  luggage  on  the  top.  I' 
eeems  to  me  miraculous  that  we  did  not  topple  over 
the  road  being  so  hiUy  and  uneven,  and  the  driver,  1 
suspect,  none  the  steadier  for  his  visits  to  all  the  tap 
tooms  along  the  route  from  Cockermouth.    There  was 


62  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

a  tremendous  vibration  of  the  coach  now  and  then ; 
and  I  saw  that,  in  case  of  our  going  over,  I  should  be 
flung  headlong  against  the  high  stone  fence  that  bor- 
dered most  of  the  road.  In  view  of  this  I  determined 
to  muffle  my  head  in  the  folds  of  my  thick  shawl  at 
the  moment  of  overturn,  and  as  I  could  do  no  better 
for  myself,  I  awaited  my  fate  with  equanimity.  As 
far  as  apprehension  goes,  I  had  rather  travel  from 
Maine  to  Georgia  by  rail,  than  from  Grasmere  to 
Windermere  by  stage-coach. 

At  Lowwood,  the  landlady  espied  me  from  the  win- 
dow, and  sent  out  a  large  packet  that  had  arrived  by 
mail ;  but  as  it  was  addressed  to  some  person  of  the 
Christian  name  of  William,  I  did  not  venture  to  open 
it.  She  said,  also,  that  a  gentleman  had  been  there, 
who  very  earnestly  desired  to  see  me,  and  I  have  since 
had  reason  to  suppose  that  this  was  Allingham,  the 
poet.  We  arrived  at  Windermere  at  half  past  seven, 
and  waited  nearly  an  hour  for  the  train  to  start.  I 
took  a  ticket  for  Lancaster,  and  talked  there  about 
the  war  with  a  gentleman  in  the  coffee-room,  who  took 
me  for  an  Englishman,  as  most  people  do  nowadays, 
and  I  heard  from  him  —  as  you  may  from  all  his 
countrymen  —  an  expression  of  weariness  and  dissat- 
isfaction with  the  whole  business.  These  fickle  isl- 
anders !  How  differently  they  talked  a  year  ago ! 
John  Bull  sees  now  that  he  never  was  in  a  worse  pre- 
dicament in  his  life  ;  and  yet  it  would  not  take  much 
to  make  him  roar  as  bellicosely  as  ever.  I  went  to 
bed  at  eleven,  and  slept  unquietly  on  feathers. 

I  had  purposed  to  rise  betimes,  and  see  the  town 
of  Lancaster  before  breakfast.  But  here  I  reckoned 
without  my  host ;  for,  in  the  first  place,  I  had  no  water 
for  my  ablutions,  and  my  boots  were  not  brushed ;  and 


1855.]  THE  LAUNCH.  63 

BO  I  could  not  get  down  stairs  till  the  hour  I  named 
for  my  coffee  and  chops  ;  and,  secondly,  the  breakfast 
was  delayed  half  an  hour,  though  promise'd  every  min- 
ute. In  fine,  I  had  but  just  time  to  take  a  hasty  walk 
round  Lancaster  Castle,  and  see  what  I  could  of  the 
town  on  my  way,  —  a  not  very  remarkable  town,  built 
of  stone,  with  taller  houses  than  in  the  middle  shires 
of  England,  narrow  streets  up  and  down  an  eminence 
on  which  the  castle  is  situated,  with  the  town  immedi- 
ately about  it.  The  castle  is  a  satisfactory  edifice,  but 
so  renovated  that  the  walls  look  almost  entirely  mod- 
em, with  the  exception  of  the  fiaie  old  front,  with  the 
statue  of  an  armed  warrior,  very  likely  John  of  Gaunt 
himself,  in  a  niche  over  the  Norman  arch  of  the  en- 
trance.    Close  beside  the  castle  stands  an  old  church. 

The  train  left  Lancaster  at  half  past  nine,  and 
reached  Liverpool  at  twelve,  over  as  flat  and  uninter- 
esting a  country  as  I  ever  travelled.  I  have  betaken 
myself  to  the  Rock  Ferry  Hotel,  where  I  am  as  com- 
fortable as  I  could  be  anywhere  but  at  home ;  but  it  is 
rather  comfortless  to  think  of  home  as  three  years  off, 
and  three  thousand  miles  away.  With  what  a  sense 
of  utter  weariness,  not  fully  realized  till  then,  we  shall 
sink  down  on  our  own  threshold,  when  we  reach  it. 
The  moral  effect  of  being  without  a  settled  abode  is 
very  wearisome. 

Our  coachman  from  Grasmere  to  Windermere  looked 
like  a  great  beer-barrel,  oozy  with  his  proper  liquor.  J 
suppose  such  solid  soakers  never  get  upset. 

THE  LAUNCH. 

August  2d,  —  Mr. has  urged  me  very  much 

to  go  with  his  father  and  family  to  see  the  launch  of 
a  great  ship  which  has  been  built  for  their  house,  and 


\ 


64  ENGLISH  NOTE^BOOKS.  [1865. 

afterwards  ix>  partake  of  a  picnic ;  so,  on  Tuesday 
morning  I  presented  myself  at  the  landing-stage,  and 
met  the  party,  to  take  passage  for  Chester.  It  was  a 
showeiy  morning,  and  looked  wofully  like  a  rainy 
day;  but  nothing  better  is  to  be  expected  in  !Eng- 
land ;  and,  after  aU,  there  is  seldom  such  a  day  that 
you  cannot  glide  about  pretty  securely  between  the 
drops  of  rain.  This,  however,  did  not  turn  out  oifie  of 
those  tolerable  days,  but  grew  darker  and  darker,  and 
worse  and  worse ;  and  was  worst  of  all  when  we  had 
passed  about  six  miles  beyond  Chester,  and  were  just 
on  the  borders  of  Wales,  on  the  hither  side  of  the 
river  Dee,  where  the  ship  was  to  be  launched.  Here 
the  train  stopped,  and  absolutely  deposited  our  whole 
party  of  excursionists,  under  a  heavy  shower,  in  the 
midst  of  a  muddy  potato -field,  whence  we  were  to 
wade  through  mud  and  mire  to  the  ship-yard,  almost 
half  a  mile  off.  Some  kind  Christian,  I  know  not 
whom,  gave  me  half  of  his  umbrella,  and  half  of  his 
cloak,  and  thereby  I  got  to  a  shed  near  the  ship,  with- 
out being  entirely  soaked  through. 

The  ship  had  been  built  on  the  banks  of  the  Dee,  at 
a  spot  where  it.  is  too  narrow  for  her  to  be  launched 
directly  across^  and  so  she  lay  lengthwise  of  the  river, 
and  was  so  arranged  as  to  take  the  water  parallel 
with*  the  stream.  She  is,  for  aught  I  know,  the  larg- 
est ship  in  the  world ;  at  any  rate,  longer  than  the 
Great  Britain,  —  an  iron-screw  steamer,  —  and  looked 
immense  and  magnificent,  and  was  gorgeously  dressed 
out  in  flags.  Had  it  been  a  pleasant  day,  all  Ches- 
ter and  half  Wales  would  have  been  there  to  see  the 
launch ;  and,  in  spite  of  the  rain,  there  were  a  good 
many  people  on  the  opposite  shore,  as  well  as  on  oui 
Bide ;  and  one  or  two  booths,  and  many  of  the  charac* 


1856.]  THE  LAUNCH,  66 

teristics  of  a  fair,  —  that  is  to  say,  men  and  women 
getting  intoxicated  without  any  great  noise  and  con- 
fusion. 

The  ship  was  expected  to  go  off  at  about  twelve 

o'clock,  and  at  that  juncture  all  Mr. 's  friends 

assembled  under  the  bows  of  the  ship,  where  we  were 
a  little  sheltered  from  the  rain  by  the  projection  of 
that  part  of  the  vessel  over  our  heads.  The  bottle  of 
port  wine  with  which  she  was  to  be  christened  was  sus- 
pended from  the  bows  to  the  platform  where  we  stood 
by  a  blue  ribbon ;  and  the  ceremony  was  to  be  per- 
formed by  Mrs. ,  who,  I  could  see,  was  very  ner- 
vous in  anticipation  of  the  ceremony.     Mr. kept 

giving  her  instructions  in  a  whisper,  and  showing  her 
how  to  throw  the  bottle ;  and  as  the  critical  moment 
approached,  he  took  hold  of  it  along  with  her.  All 
this  time  we  were  waiting  in  momentary  expectation 
of  the  ship  going  off,  everything  being  ready,  and  only 
the  touch  of  a  spring,  as  it  were,  needed  to  make  her 
slide  into  the  water.  But  the  chief  manager  kept  de- 
laying a  little  longer,  and  a  little  longer ;  though  the 
pilot  on  board  sent  to  tell  him  that  it  was  time  she 
was  off.  "  Yes,  yes ;  but  I  want  as  much  water  as  I 
can  get,"  answered  the  manager ;  and  so  he  held  on 
tiU,  I  suppose,  the  tide  had  raised  the  river  Dee  to  its 
veiy  acme  of  height.     At  last  the  word  was  given; 

the  ship  began  slowly  to  move ;  Mrs. threw  the 

bottle  against  the  bow  with  a  spasmodic  effort  that 
dashed  it  into  a  thousand  pieces,  and  diffused  the 
fragrance  of  the  old  port  all  around,  where  it  lingered 
several  minutes.  I  did  not  think  that  there  could 
have  been  such  a  breathless  moment  in  an  affair  of 
this  kind. 

The  ship  moved  majestically  down  toward  the  river; 


66  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

and  unless  it  were  Niagara,  I  never  saw  anything 
grander  and  more  impressive  tha^  tlie  motion  of  this 
mighty  mass  as  she  departed  from  us.  We  on  thf 
platform,  and  everybody  along  both  shores  of  the  Dee, 
took  off  our  hats  in  the  rain,  waved  handkerchiefs, 
cheered,  shouted,  —  "  Beautiful !  "  "  What  a  noble 
launch ! "  "  Never  was  so  fair  a  sight ! "  —  and,  really, 
it  was  so  grand,  that  calm,  majestic  movement,  that  I 
felt  the  tears  come  into  my  eyes.  The  wooden  path- 
way adown  which  she  was  gliding  began  to  smoke 
with  the  friction  ;  when  all  at  o^ce,  when  we  expected 
to  see  her  plunge  into  the  Dee,  she  came  to  a  full  stop, 

Mr. ,  the  father  of  my  friend,  a  gentleman  with 

white  hair,  a  dark,  expressive  face,  bright  eyes,  and  au 
Oriental  cast  of  features,  immediately  took  the  alarm. 
A  moment  before  his  countenance  had  been  kindled 
with  triumph ;  but  now  he  turned  pale  as  death,  and 
seemed  to  grow  ten  years  older  while  I  was  looking  at 
him.  Well  he  might,  for  his  noble  ship  was  stuck 
fast  in  the  mud  of  t^e  Dee,  and  without  deepening  the 
bed  of  the  river,  I  do  not  see  how  her  vast  iron  hulk 
is  ever  to  be  got  out. 

[This  steamer  was  afterwards  successfully  floated  off 
on  the  29th  of  the  same  month.] 

There  was  no  help  for  it.  A  steamboat  was  hitched 
on  to  the  stranded  vessel,  but  broke  two  or  three  cables 
without  stirring  her  an  inch.  So,  after  waiting  long 
after  we  had  given  up  all  hope,  we  went  to  the  ofl&ce 
of  the  ship-yard,  and  there  took  a  lunch ;  and  still  the 
rain  was  pouring,  pouring,  pouring,  and  I  never  ex- 
perienced a  blacker  affair  in  all  my  days.  Then  wo 
had  to  wait  a  great  while  for  a  train  to  take  us  back, 
BO  that  it  was  almost  five  o'clock  before  we  arrived  kt 
Chester,  where  I  spent  an  hour  in  rambling  about  the 


1865.]  THE  LAUNCH,  |57 

old  town,  under  the  Bows ;  and  on  the  walls,  looking 
down  on  the  tree -tops  directly  under  my  feet,  and 
through  their  thick  branches  at  the  canal,  which  creeps 
at  the  base,  and  at  the  cathedral ;  walking  under  the 
dark  intertwining  arches  of  the  cloisters,  and  looking 
up  at  the  great  cathedral  tower,  so  wasted  away  exter- 
nally by  time  and  weather  that  it  looks,  save  for  the 
difference  of  color  between  white  snow  anci  red  free- 
stone, like  a  structure  of  snow,  half  dissolved  by  sev- 
eral warm  days. 

At  the  lunch  I  met  with  a  graduate  of  Cambridge 
(England),  tutor  of  a  grandson  of  Percival,  with  his 
pupil  (Percival,  the  assassinated  mii^ister,  I  mean). 
I  should  not  like  this  position  of  tutor  to  a  young 
Englishman  ;  it  certainly  has  an  ugly  tw^g  of  upper 
servitude.  I  observed  that  the  tutor  gave  his  pupil 
the  best  seat  in  the  railway  carriag0,  and  in  all  re- 
spects provided  for  his  comfort  before  thinkiiig  of  his 
own ;  and  this,  not  as  a  father  does  for  his  child,  out 
of  love,  but  from  »  sense  of  place  and  duty,  which  I 
did  not  quite  see  how  a  gentleman  could  consent  to 
feeL  And  yet  this  Mr.  C — : —  was  evidently  a  gentle- 
man, and  a  quiet,  intelligent,  agreeable,  anid,  no  doubt, 

learned  man.     K being  mentioned,  Mr.  C 

observed  that  he  had  known  him  well  at  college,  hav- 
ing been  his  contemporary  there.  He  did  not  like 
him,  however,  —  thought  him  "a  dangerous  man,"  as 
well  as  I  could  gather ;  he  thinks  there  is  some  rad- 
ical defect  in  K 's  moral  nature,  a  lack  of  sincer- 
ity ;  and,  furthermore,  he  believes  him  to  be  a  sensu- 
alist in  his  disposition,  in  support  of  which  view  he 

said  Mr.  K had  made  drawings,  such  as  no  pure 

man  could  have  made,  or  could  allow  himself  to  show 
or  look  at.    This  wa^  the  only  fact  which  Mr.  C 


68  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1855. 

adduced,  bearing  on  his  opinion  of  K ;  otherwise, 

it  seemed  to  be  one  of  those  early  impressions  which 
a  collegian  gets  of  his  fellow-students,  and  which  he 
never  gets  rid  of,  whatever  the  character  of  the  person 
may  turn  out  to  be  in  after  years.  I  have  judged 
several  persons  in  this  way,  and  still  judge  them  so, 
though  the  world  has  come  to  very  different  conclu- 
sions. Which  is  right?  —  the  world,  which  has  the 
man's  whole  mature  life  on  its  side ;  or  his  early  com- 
panion, who  has  nothing  for  it  but  some  idle  passages 
of  his  youth  ? 

Mr.  M remarked  of  newspaper  reporters,  that 

they  may  be  known  at  all  celebrations,  and  on  any 
public  occasion,  by  the  enormous  quantity  of  lunch- 
eon they  eat. 

August  12th. — Mr.  B dined  with  us  at  the 

Bock  Ferry  Hotel  the  day  before  yesterday.  Speak- 
ing of  Helvellyn,  and  the  death  of  Charles  Gough, 
about  whom  Wordsworth  and  Scott  have  both  sung, 

Mr.  B mentioned  a  version  of  that  story  which 

rather  detracts  from  the  character  of  the  faithful  dog. 

But  somehow  it  lowers  one's  opinion  of  human  na- 
ture itself,  to  be  compelled  so  to  lower  one's  standard 
of  a  dog's  nature.  I  don't  intend  to  believe  the  dis- 
paraging story,  but  it  reminds  me  of  the  story  of  the 
New-Zealander  who  was  asked  whether  he  loved  a  mis- 
sionary who  had  been  laboring  for  his  soul  and  those 
of  his  countrymen.  "  To  be  sure  I  loved  him.  Why, 
I  ate  a  piece  of  him  for  my  breakfast  this  morning !  " 

For  the  last  week  or  two  I  have  passed  my  time  be- 
tween the  hotel  and  the  Consulate,  and  a  weary  life  it 
is,  and  one  that  leaves  little  of  profit  behind  it.     I  am 


1855.]  THA CKERA  F,  -  CARLYLE.  69 

sick  to  death  of  my  office,  —  brutal  captains  and  bru- 
tal sailors;  continual  complaints  of  mutual  wrong, 
whicli  I  have  no  power  to  set  right,  and  which,  indeed, 
seem  to  have  no  right  on  either  side  ;  calls  of  idleness 
or  ceremony  from  my  travelling  countrymen,  who  sel- 
dom know  what  they  are  in  search  of  at  the  commence* 
ment  of  their  tour,  and  never  have  attained  any  desir 
able  end  at  the  close  of  it ;  beggars,  cheats,  simpletons, 
unfortunates,  so  mixed  up  that  it  is  impossible  to  dis- 
tinguish one  from  another,  and  so,  in  self-defence,  the 
Consul  distrusts  them  all.  .  .    . 

At  the  hotel,  yesterday,  there  was  a  large  company 
of  factory  people  from  Preston,  who  marched  up  from 
the  pier  with  a  band  of  military  music  playing  before 
them.  They  spent  the  day  in  the  gardens  and  ball- 
room of  the  hotel,  dancing  and  otherwise  merrymak- 
ing; but  I  saw  little  of  them,  being  at  the  Consu- 
late. Towards  evening  it  drizzled,  and  the  assemblage 
melted  away  gradually ;  and  when  the  band  marched 
down  to  the  pier,  there  were  few  to  follow,  although 
one  man  went  dancing  before  the  musicians,  flinging 
out  his  arms,  and  footing  it  with  great  energy  and 
gesticulation.  Some  young  women  along  the  road 
likewise  began  to  dance  as  the  music  approached. 

Thackeray  has  a  dread  of  servants,  insomuch  that 
he  hates  to  address  them,  or  to  ask  them  for  anything. 
His  morbid  sensibility,  in  this  regard,  has  perhaps  led 
him  to  study  and  muse  upon  them,  so  that  he  may  be 
presumed  to  have  a  more  intimate  knowledge  of  this 
class  than  any  other  man* 

Carlyle  dresses  so  badly,  and  wears  such  a  rough 
ontside,  that  the  flimkies  are  rude  to  him  at  gentle- 
men's doors. 


(fO  EMLISH  NOt^'BOOKS.  [1855. 

In  the  afternoon  J arid  I  took  a  ¥^alk  towards 

Tranmere  Hall,  and  beyond,  as  far  as  Oxton.  This 
part  of  the  country,  being  so  near  Liverpool  and  Bir- 
kenhead, is  all  sprinkled  over  with  what  they  call 
"  Terraces,"  "  Bellevues,"  and  other  pretty  liames  for 
semi-detached  villas  ("  Recluse  Cottage  "  was  one)  for 
a  somewhat  higher  class.  But  the  old,  whitewashed 
stone  cottage  is  still  frequent,  with  its  roof  of  slate  or 
thatch,  which,  perhaps,  is  green  with  Weeds  or  grass. 
Through  its  open  door,  you  see  that  it  has  a  pavement 
of  flagstones,  or  perhaps  of  red  fi*eestone ;  and  hogs 
atid  donkeys  are  familiar  with  the  threshold.  The 
door  always  opens  directly  into  the  kitchen,  without 
any  vestibule  ;  and,  glimpsing  in,  you  see  that  a  cot- 
tager's life  must  be  the  very  plainest  and  homeliest 
that  ever  was  lived  by  men  and  women.  Yet  the 
flowers  about  the  door  often  indicate  a  native  capacity 
for  the  beautiful ;  but  often  there  is  only  a  pavement 
of  round  stones  or  of  flagstones,  like  those  within.  At 
one  point  where  there  was  a  little  bay,  as  it  were,  in 
the  hedge  fence,  we  saw  something  like  a  small  tent  or 
wigwam,  • —  an  arch  of  canvas  three  or  four  feet  high, 
and  open  in  front,  imder  which  sat  a  dark-complex- 
ioned woman  and  some  children.  The  woman  was 
sewing,  and  I  took  them  for  gypsies. 

August  nth,  • —  Yesterday  afternoon  J and  1 

went  to  Birkenhead  Park,  which  I  have  already  de- 
scribed. ...  It  so  happened  that  there  was  a  large 
school  spending  its  holiday  there;  a  school  of  girls  of 
the  lower  classes,  to  the  number  of  a  hundred  and  fifty, 
who  disported  themselves  on  the  green  under  the  di- 
rection of  the  schoolmistresses  and  of  an  old  gentle* 
man.    It  struck  me,  to  it  always  has,  to  observe  how 


X855.]  BIRKENHEAD  PARR.  71 

the  lower  orders  of  this  country  mdicate  theii*  birth 
and  station  by  their  aspect  and  features.  In  America 
there  would  be  a  good  deal  of  grace  and  beauty  among 
a  hundred  and  fifty  children  and  budding  girls,  be- 
longing to  whatever  rank  of  life.  But  here  they  had 
universally  a  most  plebeian  look, — stubbed,  sturdy 
figures,  round,  coarse  faces,  snub-noses,  —  the  most  * 
evident  specimens  of  the  brown  bread  of  human  na- 
ture. They  looked  wholesome  and  good  enough,  and 
fit  to  sustain  their  rough  share  of  life ;  but  it  would 
have  been  impossible  to  make  a  lady  out  of  any  one  of 
them.  Climate,  no  doubt,  has  most  to  do  with  diffus- 
ing a  slender  elegance  over  American  young-woman- 
hood ;  but  something,  perhaps,  is  also  due  to  the  cir- 
cumstance of  classes  not  being  kept  apart  there  as 
they  are  here :  they  interf  use^  amid  the  continual  ups 
and  downs  of  our  Social  life;  and  so,  in  the  lowest 
stations  of  life,  you  may  see  the  refining  infiuence  of 
gentle  blood.  At  all  events,  it  is  only  necessary  to 
look  at  such  an  assemblage  of  children  as  I  saw  yes- 
terday, to  be  convinced  that  birth  and  blood  do  pro- 
duce certain  characteristics.  To  be  sure^  I  have  seen?* 
no  s^nilar  evidence  in  England  or  elsewhere  of  old 
gentility  refining  and  elevating  the  race. 

These  girls  were  all  dressed  in  black  gowns,  with 
white  aprons  and  neckerchiefs,  and  White  linen  caps 
on  their  heads,  —  a  very  dowdyish  attire,  and  well 
suited  to  their  figures.  I  saw  otily  two  of  their  games, 
—  in  one,  they  stood  in  a  circle,  while  two  of  their 
number  chased  one  another  within  and  without  the 
ring  of  girls,  which  opened  to  let  the  fugitive  pass, 
but  closed  again  to  impede  the  passage  of  the  pursuer. 
The  o&er  was  blind-man's-buff  on  a  new  plan :  sev- 
eral of  -the  girls,  sometimes  as  many  as  twenty,  b^ing 


72  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

blinded  at  once,  and  pursuing  a  single  one,  who  rang 
a  liand-bell  to  indicate  her  whereabouts.  This  was 
very  funny;  the  bell-girl  keeping  just  beyond  their 
reach,  and  drawing  them  after  her  in  a  huddled  group, 
so  that  they  sometimes  tumbled  over  one  another  and 
lay  sprawling.  I  think  I  have  read  of  this  game  in 
Strutt's  "  English  Sports  and  Pastimes." 

We  walked  from  the  Park  home  to  Eock  Ferry,  a 
distance  of  three  or  four  miles,  —  a  part  of  which  was 
made  delightful  by  a  foot-path,  leading  us  through 
fields  where  the  grass  had  just  been  mown,  and  others 
where  the  wheat  harvest  was  commenced.  The  path 
led  us  into  the  very  midst  of  the  rural  labor  that  was 
going  forward ;  and  the  laborers  rested  a  moment  to 
look  at  us ;  in  fact,  they  seemed  to  be  more  willing  to 
rest  than  American  laborers  would  have  been.  Chil- 
dren were  loitering  along  this  path  or  sitting  down 
beside  it ;  and  we  met  one  Htde  maid,  passing  froni 
village  to  village,  intent  on  some  errand.  Reaching 
Tranmere,  I  went  into  an  alehouse,  nearly  opposite  the 
Hall,  and  called  for  a  glass  of  ale.  The  doorstep  before 
the  house,  and  the  flagstone  floor  of  the  entry  and  tap- 
room, were  chalked  all  over  in  corkscrew  lines,  —  an 
adornment  that  gave  an  impression  of  care  and  neat- 
ness, the  chalked  lines  being  evidently  freshly  made. 
It  was  a  low,  old-fashioned  room,  ornamented  with  a 
couple  of  sea-shells,  and  an  earthen-ware  figure  on  the 
mantel-piece ;  also  with  advertisements  of  AUsop^s  ale, 
and  other  drinks,  and  with  a  pasteboard  handbill  of 
**  The  Ancient  Order  of  Foresters  " ;  any  member  of 
which,  paying  sixpence  weekly,  is  entitled  to  ten  shil- 
lings per  week,  and  the  attendance  of  a  first-rate  phy- 
sician in  sickness,  and  twelve  pounds  to  be  paid  to  his 
{riends  in  case  of  death.     Any  member  of  this  order 


\ 


1855.]  SMITHELL'S  HALL.  .      73 

when  travelling,  is  sure  (says  the  handbill)  to  meet 
with  a  brother  member  to  lend  him  a  helping  hand, 
there  being  nearly  three  thousand  districts  of  this 
order,  and  more  than  a  hundred  and  nine  thousand 
members  in  Great  Britain,  whence  it  has  extended  to 
Australia,  America,  and  other  countries. 

Looking  up  at  the  gateway  of  Tranmere   Hall, 

J discovered  an  inscription  on  the  red  freestone 

lintel,  and,  though  much  time-worn,  I  succeeded  in 
reading  it.  "  Labor  omnia  vincit.  1614."  There  were 
likewise  some  initials  which  I  could  not  satisfactorily 
make  out.  The  sense  of  this  motto  would  rather  befit 
the  present  agricultural  occupants  of  the  house  than 
the  idle  gentlefolks  who  built  and  formerly  inhab* 
ited  it. 

sMithell's  hall. 

August  25th.  —  On  Thursday  I  went  by  invitation 
to  Smithell's  Hall,  in  Bolton  le  Moors,  to  dine  and 
spend  the  night.  The  Hall  is  two  or  three  miles  from 
the  town  of  Bolton,  where  I  arrived  by  railway  from 
Liverpool,  and  which  seems  to  be  a  pretty  large  town, 
though  the  houses  are  generally  modem,  or  with  mod- 
ernized fronts  of  brick  or  stucco.  It  is  a  manufac- 
turing town,  and  the  tall  brick  chimneys  rise  numer- 
ously in  the  neighborhood,  and  are  so  near  Smithell's 
Hall  that  I  suspect  the  atmosphere  is  somewhat  im- 
pregnated with  their  breath.     Mr. can  comfort 

himself  with  the  rent  which  he  receives  from  the  fac- 
tories erected  upon  his  own  grounds ;  and  I  suppose 
the  value  of  his  estate  has  greatly  increased  by  the 
growth  of  manufactories ;  although,  unless  he  wish  to 
sell  it,  I  do  not  see  what  good  this  can  do  him. 

Smithell's  Hall  is  one  of  the  oldest  residences  of 


r4  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

England,  and  still  retains  very  much  the  aspeet  that 
it  must  have  had  several  centuries  ago*  The  house 
formerly  stood  around  all  four  sides  of  a  quadrangle, 
enclosing  a  court,  and  with  an  entrance  through  an 
archway.     One  side  of  this  quadrangle  waa  removed 

in  the  time  of  the  present  Mr. 's  father,  and  the 

front  is  now  formed  by  the  remaining  three  sides. 
They  look  exceedingly  ancient  and  venerable,  with 
their  range  of  gables  and  lesser  peaks.  The  house  is 
probably  timber  -  framed  throughout,  and  is  overlaid 
with  plaster,  and  its  generally  light  hue  is  painted 
with  a  row  of  trefoils  in  black,  producing  a  very 
quaint  effect.  The  wing,  forming  one  side  of  the 
quadrangle,  is  a  chapel,  and  has  been  so  from  time 

immemorial ;   and  Mr. told  me  that  he  had  a 

clergyman,  and  even  a  bishop,  in  his  own  diocese. 
The  drawing-room  is  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  quad- 
rangle ;  and  through  an  arched  door,  in  the  central 
portion,  there  is  a  passage  to  the  rear  of  the  house. 
It  is  impossible  to  describe  such  an  old  rambling  edi- 
fice as  this,  or  to  get  any  clear  idea  of  its  plan,  even 

by  going  over  it,  without  the  aid  of  a  map.     Mr. 

has  added  some  portions,  and  altered  others,  but  with 
due  regard  to  harmony  with  the  original  structure, 
and  the  great  body  of  it  is  still  mediaeval. 

The  entrance-hall  opens  right  upon  the  quadrangu- 
lar court ;  and  is  a  large,  low  room,  with  a  settle  of 
carved  old  oak,  and  other  old  oaken  furniture,  —  a 
centre-table  with  periodicals  and  newspapers  on  it,  — 
some  family  pictures  on  the  walls,  —  and  a  large, 
bright  coal -fire  in  the  spacious  grate.  The  fire  is 
always  kept  up,  throughout  summer  and  winter,  and 
it  seemed  to  me  an  excellent  plan,  and  rich  with  cheer* 
ful  effects ;  insuring  one  comfortable  place,  and  that 


1855.]  SMJTHELL'S  H^LL,  7S 

the  most  central  in  the  hou^e,  whatey^r  m^j  he  th^ 
inclemency  of  the  weather.  It  was  £^  cloudy,  mpi^t^ 
showery  day,  when  I  ai^ived ;  and  this  fire  gave  m^ 
the  hrightest  and  most  hospitable  smile,  and  took 
away  my  shivery  feeling  by  its  mere  presence.  The 
servant  showed  me  thence  into  a  low-Btud4ed  dining- 
room,  where   soon  Mrp.  -. made  her  appearance, 

and,  after  some  talk^  brought  me  into  the  biUiard- 

room,  opening  from  the  haU,  where  Mr.  t a|id  a 

young  gentleman  were  playing  billiards  and  two  ladie^ 

looking  on.     After  the  game  was  finished,  Mr. r- 

took  me  round  to  see  the  house  and  grounds, 

The  peculiarity  of  this  house  is  what  i^  called  "  The 
Bloody  Footstep."  In  the  time  of  Bloody  Mary,  a 
Prptestant  clergyman —:- George  Marsh,  by  nj^me— r 
was  examined  before  the  then  proprietor  of  the  Hall, 
Sir  Roger  Barton,  I  think^  and  committed  to  prison 
for  his  heretical  opinions,  and  was  ultimately  bu^ed 
at  the  stake.  As  h|s  guards  were  conducting  him 
from  the  justice  -  room,  through  the  stone-paved  pas- 
sage that  leads  from  front  to  rear  of  Smithell's  Hall, 
he  stamped  his  foot  upon  one  of  the  flagstpue§  iu  ear- 
nest protestation  against  the  wrong  which  he  wa^  un- 
dergoing. The  foot,  as  some  say,  Jeft  a  Woody  mark 
in  the  stcme ;  others  have  it,  tha^t  tbej  atone^  yielded 
like  wax  under  his  foot,  and  that  there  has  been  a 
shallow  cavity  ever  since.     This  miraculous  footprint 

is  still  extant ;  and  Mrs. showed  it  to  me  before 

her  husband  took  me  round  the  estate.  It  is  almost 
at  the  threshold  of  the  door  opening  from  the  rear  of 
the  house,  a  stone  two  or  three  feet  square,  set  among 
similar  ones,  that  seem  to  have  been  worn  by  the  tread 
of  many  generations.  The  footprint  is  a  dark  brown 
gtain  in  the  smooth  gray  surface  of  the  flagstone ;  and, 


76  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

looking  sidelong  at  it,  there  is  a  shallow  cavity  per- 
ceptible, which  Mrs. accounted  for  as  having 

been  worn  by  people  setting  their  feet  just  on  this 
place,  so  as  to  tread  the  very  spot  where  the  martyr 
wrought  the  miracle.  The  mark  is  longer  than  any 
mortal  foot,  as  if  caused  by  sliding  along  the  stone, 
rather  than  sinking  into  it ;  and  it  might  be  supposed 
to  have  been  made  by  a  pointed  shoe,  being  blunt  at 
the  heel,  and  decreasing  towards  the  toe.  The  blood- 
stained version  of  the  story  is  more  consistent  with 
the  appearance  of  the  mark  than  the  imprint  would 
be ;  for  if  the  martyr's  blood  oozed  out  through  his 
shoe  and  stocking,  it  might  have  made  his  foot  slide 
along  the  stone,  and  thus  have  lengthened  the  shape. 
Of  course  it  is  all  a  humbug,  —  a  darker  vein  crop- 
ping up  through  the  gray  flagstone ;  but  it  is  probably 
a  fact,  and,  for  aught  I  know,  may  be  found  in  Fox's 
Book  of  Martyrs,  that  George  Marsh  underwent  an 
examination  in  this  house ;  and  the  tradition  may  have 
connected  itself  with  the  stone  within  a  short  time 
after  the  martyrdom ;  ^  or,  perhaps,  when  the  old 
persecuting  knight  departed  this  life,  and  Bloody 
Mary  was  also  dead,  people  who  had  stood  at  a  little 
distance  from  the  Hall  door,  and  had  seen  George 
Marsh  lift  his  hand  and  stamp  his  foot  just  at  this 
spot,  —  perhaps  they  remembered  this  action  and  ges- 
ture, and  really  believed  that  Providence  had  thus 
made  an  indelible  record  of  it  on  the  stone  ;  although 
the  very  stone  and  the  very  mark  might  have  lain 
there  at  the  threshold  hundreds  of  years  before.     But, 

1  There  is  a  full  and  pathetic  account  of  the  examination  and  ma^ 
tyrdom  of  George  Marsh  in  the  eleventh  section  of  Fox's  Book  of  Mar- 
tyrs, as  I  have  jast  found  {June  9,  1867).  He  went  to  Smithell's 
Hall,  among  other  places,  to  be  questioned  by  Mr.  Barton.  —  Ed. 


1865.]  SMITHELL'S  HALL.  77 

even  if  it  had  been  always  there,  the  footprint  might, 
after  the  fact,  be  looked  upon  as  a  prophecy,  from  the 
time  when  the  foundation  of  the  old  house  was  laid, 
that  a  holy  and  persecuted  man  shoiild  one  day  set 
his  foot  here,  on  the  way  that  was  to  lead  him  to  the 
stake.     At  any  rate,  the  legend  is  a  good  one. 

Mrs. tells  me  that  the  miraculous  stone  was 

once  taken  up  from  the  pavement,  and  flung  out  of 
doors,  where  it  remained  many  years ;  and  in  proof  of 
this,  it  is  cracked  quite  across  at  one  end.  This  is  a 
pity,  and  rather  interferes  with  the  authenticity,  if  not 
of  the  stone  itself,  yet  of  its  position  in  the  pavement. 
It  is  not  far  from  the  foot  of  the  staircase,  leading  up 
to  Sir  Roger  Barton's  examination-room,  whither  we 
ascended,  after  examining  the  footprint.  This  room 
now  opens  sideways  on  the  Chapel,  into  which  it  looks 
down,  and  which  is  spacious  enough  to  accommodate 
a  pretty  large  congregation.  On  one  of  the  walls  of 
the  Chapel  there  is  a  marble  tablet  to  the  memory  of 
one  of  the  present  family,  —  Mr. 's  father,  I  sup- 
pose ;  he  being  the  first  of  the  name  who  possessed 
the  estate.  The  present  owners,  however,  seem  to  feel 
pretty  much  the  same  pride  in  the  antiquity  and  leg- 
ends of  the  house  as  if  it  had  come  down  to  them  in 
an  unbroken  succession  of  their  own  forefathers.  It 
has,  in  reality,  passed  several  times  from  one  family 
to  another,  since  the  Conquest. 

Mr. led  me  through  a  spacious  old  room,  which 

was  formerly  panelled  with  carved  oak,  but  which  is 
converted  into  a  brew-house,  up  a  pair  of  stairs,  into 
the  garret  of  ^one  of  the  gables,  in  order  to  show  me 
the  ancient  framework  of  the  house.  It  is  of  oak,  and 
preposterously  ponderous,  —  immense  beams  and  raf- 
ters, which  no  modem  walls  could  support,  —  a  gigan- 


tS  ENGI^ISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855, 

tic  old  skeleton,  which  architects  say  must  have  stood 
a  thousand  years ;  and,  indeed,  it  is  impossible  to  as- 
certain the  date  of  the  original  foundation,  though  it 
is  known  to  have  been  repaired  and  restored  between 
five  and  six  centuries  ago.  Of  course,  in  the  lapse  of 
ages,  it  must  continually  have  been  undergoing  minor 
changes,  but  without  at  all  losing  its  identity.     Mr. 

-" says  that  this  old  oak  wood,  though  it  looks  as 

Btrong  and  as  solid  as  ever,  hsts  really  lost  its  strength, 
and  that  it  would  snap  short  off  on  application  of  any 
foipce. 

After  this  we  took  our  walk  through  the  grounds, 
which  are  well  wooded,  though  the  trees  will  bear  no 
comparison  with  those  which  I  have  seen  in  the  mid- 
land parts  of  England.  It  takes,  I  suspect,  a  much 
longer  time  for  trees  to  attain  a  good  size  here  than  in 

America ;  and  these  trees,  I  think  Mr. told  me, 

were  principally  set  oUt  by  himself.  He  is  upwards 
of  sixty,  —  a  good  specimen  of  the  old  English  eoun- 
try-geiitleman^  sensible,  loving  his  land  and  his  trees 
and  his  dogs  and  his  game,  doing  a  little  justice-busi- 
ness, and  showing  a  fitness  for  his  position ;  ^o  that 
you  feel  satisfied  to  have  him  keep  it*  He  was  for- 
merly iEt  member  of  Parliament.  I  had  met  him  be- 
fore at  dinner  at  Mrs.  H 's.  *  .  .  He  took  pleas- 
ure in  showing  tnfe  his  grounds,  through  which  he  has 
laid  out  a  walk,  winding  up  and  down  through  dells 
and  over  hillocks,  and  now  and  then  dressing  a  rustic 
bridge  ;  so  that  you  have  an  idea  of  quite  an  extensive 
domain. 

Beneath  the  trees  there  is  a  thick  growth  of  ferns, 
serving  as  cover  for  the  game.  A  little  terrier-dog, 
who  had  hitherto  kept  us  company,  all  at  once  disap- 
peared ;  and  soon  afterwards  we  heard  the  squeak  of 


1855.]  SMITHELL'S  HALL.  79 

Bome  poor  victim  in  the  cover,  whereupoii  Mr.  .■ 
set  out  with  agility,  and  ran  to  the  rescue.  By  and  by 
the  terrier  came  back  with  a  very  guilty  look.  From 
the  wood  we  passed  into  the  open  park,  whence  we  had 
a  distant  view  of  the  house;  and  returning  thither^ 
we  viewed  it  in  other  aspects^  and  on  all  sides.     One 

portion  of  it  is  occupied  by  Mr. 's  gardener,  and 

seems  not  to  have  been  repaired,  d.t  least  as  to  its 
exterior,  for  a  great  maliy  years,  —  showing  the  old 
wooden  frame,  painted  black,  with  plaster  in  the  in- 
terstices ;  and  broad  windows,  extending  across  the 
whole  breadth  of  the  rooms,  with  hundreds  of  little 
diamond-shaped  panes  of  glass.  Before  dinner  I  was 
«hown  to  my  room,  which  opens  from  dn  ancient  gal- 
lery, lined  iwdth  oak,  and  lighted  by  a  row  of  windows 
along  one  side  of  the  quadrangle.  Along  this  gallery 
are  the  doors  of  several  sleeping -chambers,  one  of 
which  —  I  think  it  is  here  —  is  called  "  The  Dead 
Man's  Chamber."  It  is  supposed  to  have  been  the 
room  wher^  the  corpses  of  persons  connected  with  the 
household  used  to  be  laid  out.  My  own  room  was 
called  '^  The  Beam  Chamber,"  from  an  immense  cross- 
beam that  projects  from  the  ceiling,  and  seems  to  be 
an  entire  tree,  laid  across,  and  left  rough-hewn,  though 
at  present  it  is  whitewashed.  The  butt  of  the  tree 
(for  it  diminishes  from  one  end  of  the  chamber  to  the 
other)  is  nearly  two  feet  square,  in  its  visible  part. 

We  dined  at  seven  o'clock,  in  a  room  some  thirty- 
five  or  forty  feet  long,  and  proportionably  broad,  all 

panelled  with  the  old  carved  oak  which  Mr. took 

from  the  room  which  he  had  converted  into  a  brew- 
house.  The  oak  is  now  of  a  very  dark  brown  hue, 
and,  being  highly  polished,  it  produces  a  sombre  but 
rich  effect.     It  is  supposed  to  be  of  the  era  of  Henry 


80  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1865. 

the  Seventh,  and  when  I  examined  it  the  next  morn- 
ing, I  found  it  very  delicately  and  curiously  wrought. 
There  are  carved  profiles  of  persons  in  the  costume  of 
the  times,  done  with  great  skill ;  also  foliage,  intricate 
puzzles  of  intersecting  lines,  sacred  devices,  anagrams, 
and,  among  others,  the  device  of  a  bar  across  a  tun, 
indicating  the  name  of  Barton.  Most  of  the  carving, 
however,  is  less  elaborate  and  intricate  than  these  spec- 
imens, being  in  a  perpendicular  style,  and  on  one  pat- 
tern. Before  the  wood  grew  so  very  dark,  the  beauty 
of  the  work  must  have  been  much  more  easily  seen 
than  now,  as  to  particulars,  though  I  hardly  think 
that  the  general  effect  could  have  been  better ;  at  least, 
the  sombre  richness  that  overspreads  the  entire  square 
of  the  room  is  suitable  to  such  an  antique  house.  An 
elaborate  Gothic  cornice  runs  round  the  whole  apart- 
ment. The  sideboard  and  other  furniture  are  of 
Gothic  patterns,  and,  very  likely,  of  genuine  antiqui- 
ty ;  but  the  fireplace  is  perhaps  rather  out  of  keeping, 
being  of  white  marble,  with  the  arms  of  this  family 
sculptured  on  it. 

Though  hardly  sunset  when  we  sat  down  to  dinner, 
yet,  it  being  an  overcast  day,  and  the  oaken  room  so 
sombre,  we  had  candles  burning  on  the  table ;  and, 
long  before  dinner  was  over,  the  candle-light  was  all 
the  light  we  had.      It  is  always  pleasanter  to  dine 

by  artificial  light.     Mrs. 's  dinner  was  a  good 

one,  and  Mr. 's  wines  were  very  good.     I  had 

Mrs. on  one  side,  and  another  lady  on  the  other 

side.  •  •  • 

After  dinner  there  were  two  card-parties  formed  in 
the  dining-room,  at  one  of  which  there  was  a  game  of 
Vingt-et-un,  and  at  the  other  a  game  of  whist,  at 
which  Mrs. and  I  lost  several  shillings  to  a  Mrs. 


1866.]  SMITHELL'S  HALL.  81 

Halton  and  Mr.  Graskell.  .  .  .  After  finishing  our 
games  at  cards,  Mrs.  Halton  drove  off  in  a  pony* 
chaise  to  her  own  house  ;  the  other  ladies  retired,  and 
the  gentlemen  sat  down  to  chat  awhile  over  the  hall 
fire,  occasionally  sipping  a  glass  of  wine-and-water, 
and  finally  we  all  went  off  to  our  rooms.  It  was  past 
twelve  o'clock  when  I  composed  myself  to  sleep,  and 
I  could  not  have  slept  long,  when  a  tremendous  clap 
of  thunder  woke  me  just  in  time  to  see  a  vivid  flash  of 

lightning.     I  saw  no  ghosts,  though  Mrs.  tells 

me  there  is  one,  which  makes  a  disturbance,  unless 
religious  services  are  regularly  kept  up  in  the  Chapel. 

In  the  morning,  before  breakfast,  we  had  prayers, 

read  by  Mr.  ,  in  the  oak  dining  -  room,  aU  the 

servants  coming  in,  and  everybody  kneeling  down.  1 
should  like  to  know  how  much  true  religious  feeling 
is  indicated  by  this  regular  observance  of  religious 
rites  in  English  families.  In  America,  if  people  kneel 
down  to  pray,  it  is  pretty  certain  that  they  feel  a  gen- 
uine interest  in  the  matter,  and  their  daily  life  is  sup- 
posed to  be  in  accordance  with  their  devotions.  If  an 
American  is  an  infidel,  he  knows  it ;  but  an  English* 
.man  is  often  so  without  suspecting  it,  —  being  kept 
from  that  knowledge  by  this  formality  of  family  pray- 
er, and  his  other  regularities  of  ej^temal  worship.  .  .  . 

There  was  a  parrot  in  a  comer  of  the  dining-room, 

and,  when  prayers  were  over,  Mrs.  praised  it 

very  highly  for  having  been  so  silent ;  it  being  Poll's 
habit,  probably,  to  break  in  upon  the  sacred  exercises 
with  unseemly  interjections  and  remarks.  While  we 
were  at  breakfast,  Poll  began  to  whistle  and  talk  very 
vociferously,  and  in  a  tone  and  with  expressions  that 
surprised  me,  till  I  learned  that  the  bird  is  usually 
kept  in  the  kitchen  and  servants'  hall,  and  is  only 


82  ENGLISH  NOTE^BOOKS.  [1855; 

brought  into  the  dining-room  at  prayer  -  time  and 
breakfast.  Thus  its  mouth  is  full  of  kitchen  talk, 
which  flows  out  before  the  gentlefolks  with  the  queer- 
est effect. 

After  breakfast   I  examined  the  carvings  of  the 

ro6m.      Mr.  has  added  to  its  decorations  the 

coats  of  arms  of  all  the  successive  possessors  of  the 
house,  with  those  of  the  families  into  which  they  mar- 
ried, including  the  Batcliffes,  Stanleys,  and  others. 
From  the  dining-room  I  passed  into  the  library,  whicH 
contains  books  enough  to  make  a  rainy  day  pass  pleas- 
antly. I  remember  nothing  else  that  I  need  to  record  3 
and  as  I  sat  by  the  hall  fire,  talking  with  Mr.  Gaskell, 
at  about  eleven  o'clock,  the  butler  brought  me  word 
that  a  fly,  which  I  had  bespoken,  was  ready  to  convey 

ine  to  the  railway.     I  took  leave  of  Mrs.  ,  her 

last  request  being  that  I  would  write  a  ghost-story  for 
her  house,  —  and  drove  off. 

SHREWSBURY. 

September  6th.  —  Yesterday  we  all  of  us  set  forth 
fi'om  Eock  Ferry  at  half  past  twelve,  and  reached 
Shrewsbury  between  three  and  four  o'clock,  and  took, 
up  our  quarters  at  the  Lion  Hotel.  We  found  Shrews- 
bury situated  on  an  eminence,  around  which  the  Severn 
winds,  making  a  peninsula  of  it,  quite  densely  covered 
by  the  town.  The  streets  ascend^  and  curve  about^ 
and  intersect  each  other  with  the  customary  irregu- 
larity of  these  old  English  towns,  so  that  it  is  quite 
impossible  to  go  directly  to  any  given  point,  or  for  a 
stranger  to  find  his  way  to  a  place  which  he  wishes 
to  reach,  though,  by  what  seems  a  singular  good  for- 
tune, the  sought-f or  place  is  always  offering  itself  when 
least  eispected.     On  this  account  I  never  knew  such 


18W.]  SHRE  W8BUR  Y.  88 

pleasant  walking  as  in  old  streets  like  those  of  Shrews- 
bury. And  there  are  passages  opening  under  arch- 
ways, and  winding  up  between  high  edifices,  very 
tempting  to  the  explorer,  and  generally  leading  to 
some  court,  or  some  queer  old  range  of  buildings  or 
piece  of  architecture,  which  it  would  be  the  greatest 
pity  to  miss  seeing.  There  was  a  delightful  want  of 
plan  in  the  laying  out  of  these  ancient  towns.  In  fact, 
they  never  were  laid  out  at  all,  nor  were  restrained  by 
any  plan  whatever,  but  grew  naturally,  with  streets  as 
eccentric  as  the  pathway  of  a  young  child  toddling 
about  the  floor. 

The  first  curious  thing  we  particularly  noticed,  when 
we  strolled  out  after  dinner,  was  the  old  market-house, 
which  stands  in  the  midst  of  an  oblong  square ;  a  gray 
edifice,  elevated  on  pillars  and  arches,  and  with  the 
statue  of  an  armed  knight,  Richard  Plantagenet,  Duke 
of  York,  in  a  central  niche,  in  its  front.  The  siatiie 
is  older  than  the  market-house,  having  been  moved 
thither  from  one  of  the  demolished  towers  of  the  city 
wall  in  1795.  The  market-house  was  erected  in  1695. 
There  are  other  curious  sculptures  and  carvings  and 
quirks  of  architecture  about  this  building ;  and  the 
houses  that  stand  about  the  square  are,  many  of  them^ 
very  striking  specimens  of  what  dwelling-houses  used 
to  be  in  Elizabeth's  time,  and  earlier.  I  have  seen  no 
such  stately  houses,  in  that  style,  as  we  found  here 
in  Shrewsbury.  There  were  no  such  fine  ones  in  Cov- 
entry, Stratford,  Warwick,  Chester,  nor  anywhere  else 
where  we  have  been.  Their  stately  height  and  spa- 
ciousness seem  to  have  been  owing  to  the  fact  that 
Shrewsbury  was  a  sort  of  metropolis  of  the  country 
round  about,  and  therefore  the  neighboring  gentry 
had  their  town-houses  there,  when  London  was  several 


84  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

days'  journey  off,  instead  of  a  very  few  hours ;  and, 
besides,  it  was  once  much  the  resort  of  kings,  and  the 
centre-point  of  great  schemes  of  war  and  policy.  One 
such  house,  formerly  belonging  to  a  now  extinct  fam- 
ily, that  of  Ireland,  rises  to  the  height  of  four  stories, 
and  has  a  front  consisting  of  what  look  like  four  pro- 
jecting towers.  There  are  ranges  of  embowed  win- 
dows, one  above  another,  to  the  full  height  of  the 
house,  and  these  are  surmounted  by  peaked  gables* 
The  people  of  those  times  certainly  did  not  deny 
themselves  light ;  and  while  window-glass  was  an  arti- 
cle of  no  very  remote  introduction,  it  was  probably 
a  point  of  magnificence  and  wealthy  display  to  have 
enough  of  it.  One  whole  side  of  the  room  must  often 
have  been  formed  by  the  window.  This  Ireland  man- 
sion, as  well  as  all  the  rest  of  the  old  houses  in  Shrews- 
bury, is  a  timber  house,  — that  is,  a  skeleton  of  oak, 
filled  up  with  brick,  plaster,  or  other  material,  and 
with  the  beams  of  the  timber  marked  out  with  black 
paint;  besides  which,  in  houses  of  any  pretension, 
there  are  generally  trefoils,  and  other  Gothic-looking 
ornaments,  likewise  painted  black.  They  have  an  in- 
describable charm  for  me,  —  the  more,  1  think,  be- 
cause they  are  wooden  ;  but,  indeed,  I  cannot  tell  why 
it  is  that  I  like  them  so  well,  and  am  never  tired  of 
looking  at  them.  A  street  was  a  development  of  hu- 
man life,  in  the  days  when  these  houses  were  built, 
whereas  a  modem  street  is  but  the  cold  plan  of  an 
architect,  without  individuality  or  character,  and  with- 
out the  human  emotion  which  a  man  kneads  into  the 
walls  which  he  builds  on  a  scheme  of  his  own. 

We  strolled  to  a  pleasant  walk  under  a  range  of 
trees,  along  the  shore  of  the  Severn.  It  is  called  the 
Quarry  Walk.     The  Severn  is  a  pretty  river,  the  larg. 


1855.]  SHREWSBURY,  85 

est,  I  think  (unless  it  be  such  an  estuary  as  the  Mer- 
sey),  that  I  have  met  with  in  England ;  that  is  to  say, 
about  a  fair  stone's-throw  across.  It  is  very  gentle  in 
its  course,  and  winds  along  between  grassy  and  sedgy 
banks,  with  a  good  growth  of  weeds  in  some  part  of 
its  current.  It  has  one  stately  bridge,  called  the  Eng- 
lish Bridge,  of  several  arches,  and,  as  we  sauntered 
along  the  Quarry  Walk,  we  saw  a  ferry  where  the 
boat  seemed  to  be  navigated  across  by  means  of  a 
rope,  stretched  from  bank  to  bank  of  the  river.  After 
leaving  the  Quarry  Walk,  we  passed  an  old  tower  of 
red  freestone,  the  only  one  remaining  of  those  for- 
merly standing  at  intervals  along  the  whole  course  of 
the  town  wall ;  and  we  also  went  along  what  little  is 
now  left  of  the  wall  itself.  And  thence,  through  the 
irregular  streets,  which  gave  no  account  of  themselves, 
we  found  our  way,  I  know  not  how,  back  to  our  hotel. 
It  is  an  uncheerf  ul  old  hotel,  which  takes  upon  itself 
to  be  in  the  best  class  of  English  country  hotels,  and 
charges  the  best  price  ;  very  dark  in  the  lower  apart- 
ments, pervaded  with  a  musty  odor,  but  provided  with 
a  white-neckclothed  waiter,  who  spares  no  ceremony  in 
serving  the  joints  of  mutton. 

J and  I  afterwards  walked  forth   again,  and 

went  this  time  to  the  castle,  which  stands  exactly  above 
the  railway  station.  A  path,  from  its  breadth  quite  a 
street,  leads  up  to  the  arched  gateway ;  but  we  found 
a  board,  giving  notice  that  these  are  private  grounds, 
and  no  strangers  admitted ;  so  that  we  only  passed 
through  the  gate  a  few  steps,  and  looked  about  us,  and 
retired,  on  perceiving  a  man  approaching  us  through 
the  trees  and  shrubbery.  A  private  individual,  it 
seems,  has  burrowed  in  this  old  warlike  den,  and 
turned  the  keep,  and  any  other  available  apartment. 


86  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185«|^ 

into  a  modern  dwelling,  and  laid  out  his  pleasuror 
grounds  within  the  precincts  of  the  castle  wall,  which 
allows  verge  enough  for  the  purpose.  The  ruins  haye 
been  considerably  repaired.  This  castle  was  built  at 
various  times,  the  keep  by  Edward  I.,  and  other  por* 
tions  at  an  earlier  period,  and  it  stands  on  the  isthmus 
left  by  the  Severn  in  it«  wandering  course  about  the 
town.  The  Duke  of  Cleveland  iiow  owns  it.  I  do 
not  know  who  occupies  it. 

In  Hie  course  of  this  walk,  we  passed  St.  Mary's 
Church,  —  a  very  old  church  indeed,  no  matter  how 
old,  but  say,  eight  hundred  or  a  thousand  years.  It 
has  a  very  tall  spire,  and  the  spire  is  now  undergoing 
repairs ;  and,  seeing  the  doqr  open,  I  went  into  the 
porch,  but  found  no  admission  further.  Then,  walk- 
ing around  it,  through  the  churchyard,  we  saw  that  all 
the  venerable  Gothic  windows  —  one  of  them  grand  in 
size  —  were  set  with  stained  glass,  representing  coat^ 
of  arms,  and  ancient  armor,  and  kingly  robes,  and 
saints  with  glories  about  their  heads,  and  Scriptural 
people;  but  all  of  these,  as  far  as  our  actual  peiv 
ception  was  poncemed,  quite  colorless,  and  with  cmly 
a  cold  outline,  dimly  filled  up,  Yet,  had  we  been 
within  thQ  church,  and  bad  the  sunlight  been  stream- 
ing  through,  what  a  warm,  rich,  gorgeous,  roseate, 
golden  life  would  these  figures  have  showed  I 

In  the  churchyard,  close  upon  the  street,  so  that  its 
dust  must  be  continually  scattered  over  the  spot,  I 
saw  a  heavy  gray  tombstone,  with  a  Latin  inscription, 
purporting  that  Bishop  Butler,  the  author  of  the  Anal- 
ogy, in  his  lifetime  had  chosen  this  as  a  burial-place 
for  himself  and  his  family.  *  There  is  a  statue  of  him 
within  the  church.  From  the  top  of  the  spire  a  man, 
above  a  hundred  years  ago,  attempted  to  descend,  by 


1855.]  SHREWSBURY.  81 

means  of  a  rope,  to  the  other  side  of  the  Severn ;  but 
the  rope  broke,  and  he  fell  in  his  midway  flight,  and 
was  killed.  It  was  an  undertaking  worthy  of  Sam 
Patch.  There  is  a  record  of  the  fact  on  the  outside 
of  the  tower. 

I  remember  nothing  more  that  we  saw  yesterday ; 

but,  before  breakfast,  J and  I  sallied  forth  again, 

and  inspected  the  gateway  and  interior  court  of  the 
Council  House,  —  a  very  interesting  place,  both  in  it- 
self and  for  the  circumstances  connected  with  it,  it 
having  been  the  place  where  the  councillors  for  the 
Welsh  marches  used  to  reside  during  their  annual 
meetings ;  and  Charles  the  First  also  lived  here  for 
six  weeks  in  1642.  James  II.  likewise  held  his  court 
here  in  1687.  The  house  was  originally  built  in  1501, 
• —  that  is,  the  Council  House  itself,  —  the  gateway, 
and  the  house  tiu*ough  which  it  passes,  being  of  as  late 
date  as  1620.  This  latter  is  a  fine  old  house,  in  the 
usual  style  of  timber  architecture,  with  the  timber 
lines  marked  out,  and  quaint  adornments  in  black 
paint ;  and  the  pillars  of  the  gateway,  which  passes  be- 
neath the  front  chamber,  are  of  curiously  carved  oak, 
which  has  probably  stood  the  action  of  JSnglish  atmos- 
phere better  than  marble  would  have  done.  Passing 
through  this  gateway,  we  entered  a  court,  and  saw 
some  old  buildings  more  or  less  modernized,  but  with- 
out destroying  their  aged  stateliness,  standing  round 
three  sides  of  it,  with  arched  entrances  and  bow-win- 
dows, and  windows  in  the  roofs,  and  peaked  gables, 
and  all  the  delightful  irregularity  and  variety  that 
these  houses  have,  and  which  make  them  always  so 
fresh,  —  and  with  so  much  detail  that  every  minute 
you  see  something  heretofore  unseen.  It  must  have 
been  no  unfit  residence  for  a  king  and  his  court,  when 


88  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1855. 

those  thre^  sides  of  the  square,  all  composing  one 
great  fantastic  house,  were  in  their  splendor.  The 
square  itself,  too,  must  have  been  a  busy  and  cheerful 
scene,  thronged  with  attendants,  guests,  horses,  etc. 

After  breakfast,  we  all  walked  out,  and,  crossing 
the  English  Bridge,  looked  at  the  Severn  over  its  par- 
apet.    The  river  is  here  broader  than  elsewhere,  and 
veiy  shallow,  and  has  an  island  covered  with  bushes, 
about  midway  across.     Just  over  the  bridge  we  saw 
a  church,  of  red  freestone,  and  evidently  very  ancient. 
This  is  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Cross,  and  is  a  por- 
tion of  the  Abbey  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  John,  which 
formerly  covered  ten  acres  of  ground.     We  did  not 
have  time  to  go  into  the  church ;  but  the  windows  and 
other  points  of  architecture,  so  far  as  we  could  discern 
them,  and  knew  how  to  admire  them,  were  exceedingly 
venerable  and  beautiful.     On  the  other  side  of  the 
street,  over  a  wide  space,  there  are  other  remains  of 
the  old  abbey ;  and  the  most  interesting  w^ts  a  stone 
pulpit,  now  standing  in  the  open  air,  seemingly  in  a 
garden,  but  which  originally  stood  in  the  refectory  of 
the  abbey,  and  was   the  station  whence  one  of  the 
monks  read  to  his  brethren  at  their  meals.     The  pul- 
pit is  much  overgrown  with  ivy.     We  should  have 
made  further  researches  among  these  remains,  though 
they  seem  now  to  be  in  private  grounds ;  but  a  large 
mastiff  came  out  of  his  kennel,  and,  approaching  us 
to  the  length  of  his  iron  chain,  began  barking  very 
fiercely.     Nor  had  we  time  to  see  half  that  we  would 
gladly  have  seen  and  studied  here  and  elsewhere  about 
Shrewsbury.     It  would  have  been  very  interesting  to 
have  visited  Hotspur's  and  Falstaff 's  battle-field,  which 
is  four  miles  from  the  town ;  too  distant,  certainly,  for 
Falstaff  to  have  measured  the  length  of  the  fight  bj 


1855.]  SHREWSBURY.  89 

Shrewsbury  clock.  There  is  now  a  church,  built  there 
by  Henry  IV.,  and  said  to  cover  the  bones  of  those 
slain  in  the  battle. 

Eetuming  into  the  town,  we  penetrated  some  narrow 
lanes,  where,  as  the  old  story  goes,  people  might  almost 
shake  hands  across  from  the  top  windows  of  the  op- 
posite houses,  impending  towards  each  other.  Emerg- 
ing into  a  wider  street,  at  a  spot  somewhat  more  ele- 
vated than  other  parts  of  the  town,  we  went  into  a 
shop  to  buy  some  Royal  Shrewsbury  cakes,  which  we 
had  seen  advertised  at  several  shop  windows.  They 
are  a  very  rich  cake,  with  plenty  of  eggs,  sugar,  and 
butter,  and  very  little  flour. 

A  small  public  building  of  stone,  of  modem  date, 
was  close  by ;  and  asking  the  shopwoman  what  it  was, 
she  said  it  was  the  Butter  Cross,  or  market  for  butter, 
eggs,  and  poultry.  It  is  a  remarkable  site,  for  here,  in 
ancient  times,  stood  a  stone  cross,  where  heralds  used 
to  make  proclamation,  and  where  criminals  of  state 
used  to  be  executed.  David,  the  last  of  the  Welsh 
princes,  was  here  cruelly  put  to  death  by  Edward  I., 
and  many  noblemen  were  beheaded  on  this  spot,  after 
being  taken  prisoners  in  the  battle  of  Shrewsbury. 

I  can  only  notice  one  other  memorable  place  in 
Shrewsbury,  and  that  is  the  Raven  Inn,  where  Far- 
quhar  wrote  his  comedy  of  "  The  Recruiting  Officer," 
in  1704.  The  window  of  the  room  in  which  he  wrote 
is  said  to  look  into  the  inn  yard,  and  I  went  through 
the  arched  entrance  to  see  if  I  could  distinguish  it. 
The  hostlers  were  currying  horses  in  the  yard,  and  so 
stared  at  me  that  I  gave  but  the  merest  glance.  The 
Shrewsbury  inns  have  not  only  the  customary  names  of 
English  inns,  —  as  the  Lion,  Uie  Stag, — but  they  have 
also  the  carved  wooden  figures  of  the  object  named, 
whereas,  in  all  other  towns,  the  name  alone  remains. 


90  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1865. 

We  left  ShrewsbtQy  at  half  past  ten,  and  amved 
in  London  at  about  four  in  the  afternoon. 

LONDON. 

September  1th,  — On  Wednesday,  just  before  dusk^ 
J and  I  walked  forth,  for  the  first  time,  in  Lon- 
don. Our  lodgings  are  in  George  Street,  Hanover 
Square,  No.  24 ;  and  St.  George's  Church,  where  so 
many  marriages  in  romance  and  in  fashionable  life 
have  been  celebrated,  is  a  short  distance  below  our 
house,  in  the  same  street.  The  edifice  seems  to  be 
of  white  marble,  now  much  blackened  with  London 
smoke,  and  has  a  Grecian  pillared  portico.  In  the 
square,  just  above  us,  is  a  stsitue  of  William  Pitt. 
We  went  down  Bond  Street,  and  part  of  Kegent 
Street,  jtist  estraying  a  little  way  from  our  temporary 
nest,  and  taking  good  account  of  landmarks  and  cor- 
ners, so  as  to  find  our  way  readily  back  again.  It  is 
long  since  I  have  had  such  a  childish  feeling ;  btlt  all 
that  I  had  heard  and  felt  about  the  vastness  of  London 
made  it  seem  like  swimming  in  a  boundless  ocean,  to 
venture  one  step  beyond  the  only  spot  I  knew.  My 
first  actual  impression  of  London  was  of  stately  slnd 
spacious  streets,  and  by  no  means  so  dusky  and  grimy 
as  I  had  expected,  —  not  merely  in  the  streets  about 
this  quarter  of  the  town,  which  is  the  aristocratic  quar- 
ter, but  in  all  the  streets  through  which  we  had  passed 
from  the  railway  station.  If  I  had  not  first  been  so 
imbued  with  the  smoke  and  dingiiiess  of  Liverpool,  I 
should  doubtless  have  seen  a  stronger  contrast  betwixt 
dusky  London  and  the  cheerful  glare  of  our  American 
cities.  There  are  no  red  bricks  here ;  all  are  of  a 
dark  hue,  and  whatever  of  stone  or  stucco  has  be^ii 
white  soon  clothes  itself  in  mourning. 


18W.]  LONDON.  91 

Yesterday  forenooti  I  went  out  alone,  and  plunged 
headlong  into  London,  and  wandered  about  all  day, 
without  any  particular  object  in  view,  but  only  to  lose 
myself  for  the  sake  of  finding  myself  unexpectedly 
among  things  that  I  had  always  read  and  dreamed 
about.  The  plan  was  perfectly  successful,  for,  besides 
Tague  and  unprofitable  wanderings^  1  saw,  in  the 
course  of  the  day,  Hyde  Park,  Begent's  Park,  White- 
hall, the  two  '  new  Houses  of  Parliament,  Charing 
Cross,  St.  Paul's,  the  Strand,  Fleet  Street,  Cheapside, 
Whitechapel,  Leadenhall  Street,  the  Haymarket,  and 
a  great  many  other  places,  the  names  of  which  were 
classic  in  my  memory.  1  think  what  interests  me 
most  here  is  the  London  of  the  writers  of  Queen 
Anne's  age,  —  whatever  Pope,  "The  Spectator,"  De 
Foe,  and  down  as  late  as  Johnson  and  Goldsmith, 
have  mentioned.  The  Monument,  for  instance,  which 
is  of  no  great  height  nor  beauty  compared  with  that 
on  Bunker  Hill,  charmed  me  prodigiously.  St.  Paul's 
appeared  to  me  unspeakably  grand  and  noble,  and  the 
more  so  from  the  tJirong  and  bustle  continually  going 
on  around  its  base,  without  in  the  least  disturbing  the 
sublime  repose  of  its  great  dome,  and,  indeed,  of  all 
its  massive  height  and  breadth.  Other  edifices  may 
crowd  close  to  its  foimdation,  and  people  iliay  tramp 
as  they  like  about  it ;  but  still  the  great  cathedral  is 
as  quiet  and  serene  as  if  it  stood  in  the  middle  of 
Salisbury  Plain.  There  cannot  be  anything  else  in  its 
way  so  good  in  the  world  as  just  this  effect  of  St» 
Paul's  in  the  very  heart  and  densest  tumult  of  Lon- 
don. I  do  not  know  whether  the  church  is  built  of 
marble,  or  of  whatever  other  white  or  nearly  white  ma- 
terial ;  but  in  the  time  that  it  has  been  standing  there, 
it  has  grown  black  with  the  smoke  of  ages,  thtough 


92  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  [1855. 

which  there  are,  nevertheless,  gleams  of  white,  thai 
make  a  most  picturesque  impression  on  the  whole.  It 
is  much  better  than  staring  white  ;  the  edifice  would 
not  be  nearly  so  grand  without  this  drapery  of  black. 

I  did  not  find  these  streets  of  the  old  city  so  nar- 
row and  irregular  as  I  expected.  All  the  principal 
ones  are  sufficiently  broad,  and  there  are  few  houses 
that  look  antique,  being,  1  suppose,  generally  modern- 
fronted,  when  not  actually  of  modem  substance.  There 
is  little  or  no  show  or  pretension  in  this  part  of  Lon- 
don ;  it  has  a  plain,  business  air,  —  an  air  of  homely, 
actual  life,  as  of  a  metropolis  of  tradesmen,  who  have 
been  carrying  on  their  traffic  here,  in  sober  earnest, 
for  hundreds  of  years.  You  observe  on  the  sign- 
boards, "  Established  ninety  years  in  Threadneedlb 
Street,"  "  Established  in  1709,"  —denoting  long  pecB- 
grees  of  silk-mercers  and  hosiers,  —  De  Foe's  contem- 
poraries still  represented  by  their  posterity,  who  handle 
the  hereditary  yardstick  on  the  same  spot. 

I  must  not  forget  to  say  that  I  crossed  the  Thames 
over  a  bridge,  which,  I  think,  is  near  Charing  Cross. 
Afterwards,  I  found  my  way  to  London  Bridge,  where 
there  was  a  delightful  density  of  throng.  The  Thames 
is  not  so  wide  and  majestic  as  I  had  imagined,  —  noth- 
ing like  the  Mersey,  for  example.  As  a  picturesque 
object,  however,  flowing  through  the  midst  of  a  city, 
it  would  lose  by  any  increase  of  width.  .  .  . 

Omnibuses  are  a  most  important  aid  to  wanderers 
about  London.  I  reached  home,  well  wearied,  about 
six  o'clock.  In  the  course  of  the  day,  I  had  seen  one 
person  whom  I  knew,  —  Mr.  Clarke,  to  whom  Henry 

B introduced  me,  when  we  went  to  see  the  great 

ship  launched  on  the  Dee.     This,  I  believe,  was  in  Re- 
gent Street.     In  that  street,  too,  I  saw  a  company  o{ 


1855.]  LONDON.  93 

dragoons,  beautifully  mounted,  and  defensively  aimed, 
in  brass  helmets  and  steel  cuirasses,  polished  to  the 
utmost  excess  of  splendor.  It  was  a  pretty  sight.  At 
one  of  the  public  edifices,  on  each  side  of  the  portal, 
sat  a  mounted  trooper,  similarly  armed,  and  with  his 
carbine  resting  on  his  knee,  just  as  motionless  as  a 
statue.  This,  too,  as  a  picturesque  circumstance,  was 
very  good,  and  really  made  an  impression  on  me  with 
respect  to  the  power  and  stability  of  the  government, 
though  I  could  not  help  smiling  at  myself  for  it.  But 
then  the  thought,  that  for  generations  an  armed  war- 
rior has  always  sat  just  there,  on  his  war-steed,  and 
with  his  weapon  in  his  hand,  is  pleasant  to  the  imagi* 
nation,  —  although  it  is  questionable  whether  his  car- 
bine be  loaded ;  and,  no  doubt,  if  the  authorities  had 
any  message  to  send,  they  would  choose  some  other 
messenger  than  this  heavy  dragoon,  —  the  electric  wire, 
for  instance.  Still,  if  he  and  his  horse  were  to  be  with- 
drawn from  their  post,  night  or  day  (for  I  suppose  the 
sentinels  are  on  duty  all  night),  it  seems  as  if  the  mon- 
archy would  be  subverted,  and  the  English  constitu- 
tion crumble  into  rubbish  ;  and,  in  honest  fact,  it  will 
signify  something  like  that,  when  guard  is  relieved 
there  for  the  last  time. 

September  Sth.  —  Yesterday  forenoon  S ^  the 

two  eldest  children,  and  I,  went  forth  into  London 
streets,  and  proceeded  down  Regent  Street,  and  thence 
to  St.  James's  Park,  at  the  entrance  of  which  is  a 
statue  of  somebody,  —  I  forget  whom.  On  the  very 
spacious  gravel  -  walks,  covering  several  acres,  in  the 
rear  of  the  Horse  Guards,  some  soldiers  were  going 
through  their  exercise ;  and,  after  looking  at  them 
awhile,  we  strolled  through  the  Park,  alongside  of  a 


94  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185^ 

sheet  of  water,  in  which  yariaus  kinds  of  ducks,  geese, 
and  rare  species  of  water-fowl  were  swimming.  There 
was  one  swan  of  immense  size,  which  moved  abani; 
among  the  lesser  fowls  like  a  stately  full-rigged  ship 
among  gunboats.  By  and  by  we  found  ourselves  near 
what  we  since  have  discovered  to  be  Buckingham  Pal- 
ace, —  a  long  building,  in  the  Italian  style,  but  of  no 
impressiveness,  and  which  one  soon  wearies  of  looking 
at.  The  Queen  having  gone  to  Scotland  the  day  be- 
fore, the  palace  now  looked  deserted,  although  there 
was  a  one-horse  cab,  of  shabby  aspect,  standing  at 
the  principal  front,  where  doubtless  the  carriages  of 
princes  and  the  nobility  draw  up.  There  is  a  foun- 
tain playing  before  the  palace,  and  water-fowl  love  to 
swim  under  its  perpetual  showers.  These  ducks  and 
geese  are  very  tame,  and  swim  to  the  margin  of  the 
pond  to  be  fed  by  visitors,  looking  up  at  you  with 
great  intelligence. 

S asked  a  man  in  a  sober  suit  of  livery  (of 

whom  we  saw  several  about  the  Park),  whose  were 
some  of  the  large  mansions  which  we  saw,  and  he 
pointed  out  Stafford  House,  the  residence  of  the  Duke 
of  Sutherland,  —  a  very  noble  edifice,  much  more 
beautiful  than  the  palace,  though  not  so  large;  also 
the  house  of  the  Earl  of  Ellesmere,  and  residences  of 
other  noblemen.  This  range  of  mansions,  along  the 
Park,  from  the  spot  whence  we  viewed  them,  looks 
very  much  like  Beacon  Street,  in  Boston,  bordering 
on  the  Common,  allowing  for  a  considerable  enlarge- 
ment of  scale  in  favor  of  the  Park  residences.  The 
Park,  however,  has  not  the  beautiful  elms  that  over- 
shadow Boston  Common,  nor  such  a  pleasant  undula- 
tion of  surface,  nor  the  fine  off-view  of  the  country, 
like  that  across  Charles  Kiver.     I  doubt  whether  Lon- 


N 


1855.]  LONDON.  % 

don  can  show  so  delightful  a  spot  as  th^t  Common, 
always  excepting  the  superiority  of  English  lawns, 
which,  however,  is  not  so  evident  in  the  London  parks, 
there  being  le^s  care  bestowed  on  the  grass  than  I 
should  have  expected. 

From  this  place  we  wandered  into  what  I  believe  to 
be  Hyde  Park,  attracted  by  a  gigantic  figure  on  horse- 
back, which  loomed  up  in  the  distance.  The  effect  of 
this  enormous  steed  and  his  rider  is  very  grand,  seen 
in  the  misty  atmosphere.  I  do  not  understand  why 
we  did  not  see  St.  James's  Palace,  which  is  situated,  I 
believe,  at  the  extremity  of  the  same  range  of  map* 
sions  of  which  Stafford  House  is  the  opposite  end. 
From  the  entrance  of  Hyde  Park,  we  seem  to  have 
gone  along  Piccadilly,  and,  making  two  or  three  turns, 

and  getting  bewildered,  I  put  S and  the  children 

into  a  cab  and  sent  them  home.  Continuing  my  wan- 
derings, I  went  astray  among  squares  of  large  aristo- 
cratic-looking edifices,  all  apparently  new,  with  no 
shops  among  them,  some  yet  unfinished,  and  the  whole 
seeming  like  a  city  built  for  a  colony  of  gentlefolks, 
who  might  be  expected  to  emigrate  thither  in  a  body. 
It  was  a  dreary  business  to  wander  there,  turning  cor- 
ner after  comer,  and  finding  no  way  of  getting  into  a 
less  stately  and  more  genial  region.  At  last,  however, 
I  passed  in  front  of  the  Queen's  Mews,  where  sentinels 
were  on  guard,  and  where  a  jolly-looking  man,  in  a 
splendidly  laced  scarlet  coat  and  white-topped  boots, 
was  lounging  at  the  entrance.  He  looked  like  the 
prince  of  grooms  or  coachmen.  .  .  . 

The  corner  of  Hyde  Park  was  within  a  short  dis- 
tance, and  I  took  a  Hansom  at  the  cab-stand  there, 
and  drove  to  the  American  Despatch  Agency,  26  Hen- 
rietta Street,  Covent  Garden,  having  some  documents 


96  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

of  state  to  be  sent  by  to-day's  steamer.  The  business 
of  forwarding  despatches  to  America,  and  distributing 
them  to  the  various  legations  and  consulates  in  Eu' 
rope,  must  be  a  pretty  extensive  one  ;•  for  Mr.  Miller 
has  a  large  office,  and  two  clerks  in  attendance. 

From  this  point  1  went  through  Covent  Garden 
Market,  and  got  astray  in  the  city,  so  that  I  can  give 
no  clear  accoimt  of  my  afternoon's  wanderings.  I 
passed  through  Holbom,  however,  and  I  think  it  was 
from  that  street  that  I  passed  through  an  archway 
(which  I  almost  invariably  do,  when  I  see  one),  and 
found  myself  in  a  very  spacious,  gravelled  square,  sur- 
rounded on  the  four  sides  by  a  continuous  edifice  of 
dark  brick,  very  plain,  and  of  cold  and  stem  aspect. 
This  was  Grayfs  Inn,  all  tenanted  by  a  multitude  of 
lawyers.  Passing  thence,  I  saw  "  Fumival's  Inn " 
over  another  archway,  but,  being  on  the  opposite  side 
of  the  street,  I  did  not  go  thither.  In  Holborn,  still, 
I  went  through  another  arched  entrance,  over  which 
was  "  Staples  Inn,"  and  here,  likewise,  seemed  to  be 
offices,  but,  in  a  court  opening  inwards  from  this,  there 
was  a  surrounding  seclusion  of  quiet  dwelling-houses, 
with  beautiful  green  shrubbery  and  grass-plots  in  the 
court,  and  a  great  many  sunflowers  in  full  bloom. 
The  windows  were  open ;  it  was  a  lovely  summer  af- 
ternoon, and  I  have  a  sense  that  bees  were  humming 
in  the  court,  though  this  may  have  been  suggested  by 
my  fancy,  because  the  sound  would  have  been  so  well 
suited  to  the  scene.  A  boy  was  reading  at  one  of  the 
windows.  There  was  not  a  quieter  spot  in  England 
than  this,  and  it  was  very  strange  to  have  drifted  into 
it  so  suddenly  out  of  the  bustle  and  rumble  of  Hol- 
bom ;  and  to  lose  all  this  repose  as  suddenly,  on  pass- 
ing through  the  arch  of  the  outer  court.     In  all  the 


1855.]  LONDON.  97 

hundreds  of  years  since  London  was  built,  it  has  not 
been  able  to  sweep  its  roaring  tide  over  that  little 
island  of  quiet.  In  Holbom  I  saw  the  most  antique- 
looking  houses  that  I  have  yet  met  with  in  London, 
but  none  of  very  remarkable  aspect. 

I  think  I  must  have  been  under  a  spell  of  enchant- 
ment to-day,  connecting  me  with  St.  Paul's  ;  for,  try- 
ing to  get  away  from  it  by  various  avenues,  I  stiU  got 
bewildered,  and  again  and  again  saw  its  great  dome 
and  pinnacles  before  me.  I  observe  that  the  smoke 
has  chiefly  settled  on  the  lower  part  of  the  edifice, 
leaving  its  loftier  portions  and  its  spires  much  less  be- 
grimed. It  is  very  beautiful,  very  rich.  I  did  not 
think  that  anything  but  Gothic  architecture  could  so 
have  interested  me.  The  statues,  the  niches,  the  em- 
broidery, as  it  were,  of  sculpture  traced  around  it,  pro- 
duced a  delightful  effect.  In  front  of  St.  Paul's  there 
is  a  statue  of  Queen  Anne,  which  looks  rather  more 
majestic,  I  doubt  not,  than  that  fat  old  dame  ever  did. 
St.  Paul's  Churchyard  had  always  been  a  place  of  imr 
mense  interest  in  my  imagination.  It  is  merely  the 
not  very  spacious  street,  running  round  the  base  of 
the  church,  —  at  least,  this  street  is  included  in  the 
churchyard,  together  with  the  enclosure  immediately 
about  the  church,  sowed  with  tombstones.  I  meant  to 
look  for  the  children's  book-shop,  but  forgot  it,  or  neg- 
lected it,  from  not  feeling  so  much  interiest  in  a  thing 
near  at  hand  as  when  it  seemed  unattainable. 

I  watched  a  man  tearing  down  the  brick  wall  of  a 
house  that  did  not  appear  very  old ;  but  it  surprised  * 
me  to  see  how  crumbly  the  brick-work  was,  one  stroke 
of  his  pick  often  loosening  several  bricks  in  a  row.    It 
is  my  opinion  that  brick  houses,  after  a  moderate 


98  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

term  of  years,  stand  more  by  habit  and  courtesy  than 
through  any  adhesive  force  of  the  old  mortar. 

I  reconmienced  my  wanderings;  but  I  remember 
nothing  else  particularly  claiming  to  be  mentioned, 
unless  it  be  Paternoster  Kow,  —  a  little,  narrow,  dark- 
some lane,  in  which,  it  being  now  dusk  in  that  density 
of  the  city,  I  could  not  very  well  see  what  signs  were 
over  the  doors.  In  this  street,  or  thereabouts,  I  got 
into  an  omnibus,  and,  being  set  down  near  Regent's 
Circus,  reached  home  well  wearied. 

September  9th.  — Yesterday,  having  some  tickets  to 
the  Zoological  Gardens,  we  went  thither  with  the  two 
eldest  children.  It  was  a  most  beautiful  sunny  day, 
the  very  perfection  of  English  weather,  — which  is  as 
much  as  to  say,  the  best  weather  in  the  world,  ex- 
cept, perhaps,  some  few  days  in  an  American  October. 
These  gardens  are  at  the  end  of  Regent's  Park  farthest 
from  London,  and  they  are  very  extensive ;  though,  I 
think,  not  quite  worthy  of  London,  —  not  so  good  as 
one  would  expect  them  to  be,  —  not  so  fine  and  per- 
fect a  collection  of  beasts,  birds,  and  fishes,  as  one 
might  fairly  look  for,  when  the  greatest  metropolis  of 
the  world  sets  out  to  have  such  a  collection  at  all. 
My  idea  was,  that  here  every  living  thing  was  pro- 
vided for,  in  the  way  best  suited  to  its  nature  and 
habits,  and  that  the  refinement  of  civilization  had  here 
restored  a  garden  of  Eden,  where  all  the  animal  king- 
dom had  regained  a  happy  home.  This  is  not  quite 
the  case ;  though,  I  believe,  the  creatures  are  as  com- 
fortable as  could  be  expected,  and  there  are  certainly 
a  good  many  strange  beasts  here.  The  hippopotamus 
is  the  chief  treasure  of  the  collection,  —  an  immense, 
almost  misshapen,  mass  of  flesh.     At  this  moment  I 


1855.]  LONDON.  99 

do  not  remember  anything  that  interested  me  except  a 
sick  monkey,  —  a  very  large  monkey,  and  elderly  he 
seemed  to  be.  His  keeper  brought  him  some  sweet- 
ened apple  and  water,  and  some  tea ;  for  the  monkey 
had  quite  lost  his  appetite,  and  refused  all  ordinary 
diet.  He  came,  however,  quite  eagerly,  and  smelt  of 
the  tea  and  apple,  the  keeper  exhorting  him  very  ten- 
derly to  eat.  But  the  poor  monkey  shook  his  head 
slowly,  and  with  the  most  pitiable  expression,  at  the 
same  time  extending  his  hand  to  take  the  keeper's,  as 
if  claiming  his  sympathy  and  friendship.  By  and  by 
the  keeper  (who  is  rather  a  surly  fellow)  essayed 
harsher  measures,  and  insisted  that  the  monkey  should 
eat  what  had  been  brought  for  him,  and  hereupon  en- 
sued somewhat  of  a  struggle,  and  the  tea  was  over- 
turned upon  the  straw  of  the  bed.  Then  the  keeper 
scolded  him,  and,  seizing  him  by  one  arm,  drew  him 
out  of  his  little  bedroom  into  the  larger  cage,  upon 
which  the  wronged  monkey  began  a  loud,  dissonant, 
reproachful  chatter,  more  expressive  of  a  sense  of  in- 
jury than  any  words  could  be. 

Observing  the  spectators  in  front  of  the  cage,  he 
seemed  to  appeal  to  them,  and  addressed  his  chatter 
thitherward,  and  stretched  out  his  long,  lean  arm  and 
black  hand  between  the  bars,  as  if  claiming  the  grasp 
of  any  one  friend  he  might  have  in  the  whole  world. 
He  was  placable,  however ;  for  when  the  keeper  called 
him  in  a  gentler  tone,  he  hobbled  towards  him  with  a 
very  stiff  and  rusty  movement,  and  the  scene  closed 
with  their  affectionately  hugging  one  another.  But  I 
fear  the  poor  monkey  will  die.  In  a  future  state  of 
being,  I  think  it  wiQ  be  one  of  my  inquiries,  in  refer- 
ence to  the  mysteries  of  the  present  state,  why  mon- 
keys were  made.     The  Creator  could  not  surely  have 


100  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185& 

meant  to  ridicule  his  own  work.  It  might  rather  be 
fancied  that  Satan  had  perpetrated  monkeys,  with  a 
malicious  purpose  of  parodying  the  masterpiece  of  cre- 
ation I 

The  Aquarium,  containing,  in  some  of  its  compart- 
ments, specimens  of  the  animal  and  vegetable  life  of 
the  sea,  and,  in  others,  those  of  the  fresh  water,  was 
richly  worth  inspecting ;  but  not  nearly  so  perfect  as 
it  might  be.  Now  I  think  we  have  a  nght  to  claim, 
in  a  metropolitan  establishment  of  this  kind,  in  all  its 
departments,  a  degree  of  perfection  that  shall  quite 
outdo  the  unpractised  thought  of  any  man  on  that 
particular  subject. 

There  were  a  good  many  well-dressed  people  and 
children  in  the  gardens,  Saturday  being  a  fashiona- 
ble day  for  visiting  them.  One  great  amusement  was 
feeding  some  bears  with  biscuits  and  cakes,  of  which 
they  seemed  exceedingly  fond.  One  of  the  three  bears 
clambered  to  the  top  of  a  high  pole,  whence  he  invited 
the  spectators  to  hand  him  bits  of  cake  on  the  end 
of  a  stick,  or  to  toss  them  into  his  mouth,  which  he 
opened  widely  for  that  purpose.  Another,  apparently 
an  elderly  bear,  not  having  skill  nor  agility  for  these 
gymnastics,  sat  on  the  ground,  on  his  hinder  end, 
groaning  most  pitifully.  The  third  took  what  stray 
bits  he  could  get,  without  earning  them  by  any  antics. 

At  four  o'clock  there  was  some  music  from  the  band 
of  the  First  Life-Guards,  a  great  multitude  of  chairs 
being  set  on  the  greensward  in  the  sunshine  and  shade, 
for  the  accommodation  of  the  auditors.  Here  we  had 
the  usual  exhibition  of  English  beauty,  neither  supe- 
rior nor  otherwise  to  what  I  have  seen  in  other  parts 
of.  England.  Before  the  music  was  over,  we  walked 
slowly  homeward,  along  beside  Regent's  Park,  which 


1855.]  LONDON,  101 

is  very  prettily  laid  out,  but  lacks  some  last  touch  of 
richness  and  beauty ;  though,  after  all,  I  do  not  well 
see  what  more  could  be  done  with  grass,  trees,  and 

gravel  -  walks.     The  children,  especially  J ,  who 

had  raced  from  one  thing  to  another  all  day  long, 
grew  tired ;  so  we  put  them  into  a  cab,  and  walked 
slowly  through  Portland  Place,  where  are  a  great 
many  noble  mansions,  yet  no  very  admirable  archi- 
tecture ;  none  that  possessed,  nor  that  ever  can  pos- 
sess, the  indefinable  charm  of  some  of  those  poor  old 
timber  houses  in  Shrewsbury.  The  art  of  domestic 
architecture  is  lost.  We  can  rear  stately  and  beauti- 
ful dwellings  (though  we  seldom  do),  but  they  do  not 
seem  proper  to  the  life  of  man,  in  the  same  way  that 
his  shell  is  proper  to  the  lobster  ;  nor,  indeed,  is  the 
mansion  of  the  nobleman  proper  to  him,  in  the  same 
kind  and  degree,  that  a  hut  is  proper  to  a  peasant. 

From  Portland  Place  we  passed  into  Begent  Street, 
and  soon  reached  home. 

September  lO^A.  —  Yesterday  forenoon  we  walked 
out  with  the  children,  intending  for  Charing  Cross; 
but,  missing  our  way,  as  usual,  we  went  down  a  rather 
wide  and  stately  street,  and  saw  before  us  an  old  brick 
edifice  with  a  pretty  extensive  front,  over  which  rose 
a  clock -tower,  —  the  whole  dingy,  and  looking  both 
gloomy  and  mean.  There  was  an  arched  entrance 
beneath  the  clock-Aower,  at  which  two  Guardsmen,  in 
their  bear-skin  caps,  were  stationed  as  sentinels ;  and 
from  this  circumstance,  and  our  having  some  guess  at 
the  locality,  we  concluded  the  old  brick  building  to 
be  St.  James's  Palace.  Otherwise  we  might  have 
taken  it  for  a  prison,  or  for  a  hospital,  which,  in  truth, 
it  was  at  first  intended  for      But,  certainly,  there 


102  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

are  many  paupers  in  England  who  live  in  edifices  of 
far  more  architectural  pretension  externally  than  this 
principal  palace  of  the  English  sovereigns. 

Seeing  other  people  go  through  the  archway,  we 
also  went,  meeting  no  impediment  from  the  sentinels, 
and  found  ourselves  in  a  large  paved  court,  in  the 
centre  of  which  a  banner  was  stuck  down,  with  a  few 
soldiers  standing  near  it.  This  flag  was  the  banner 
of  the  regiment  of  guards  on  duty.  The  aspect  of 
the  interior  court  was  as  naked  and  dismal  as  the  out- 
side, the  brick  being  of  that  dark  hue  almost  universal 
in  England.  On  one  side  of  the  court  there  was  a 
door  which  seemed  to  give  admission  to  a  chapel,  into 
which  several  persons  went,  and  probably  we  might 
have  gone  too,  had  we  liked.  From  this  court,  we 
penetrated  into  at  least  two  or  three  others ;  for  the 
palace  is  very  extensive,  and  all  of  it,  so  far  as  I  could 
see,  on  the  same  pattern,  —  large,  enclosed  courts, 
paved,  and  quite  bare  of  grass,  shrubbery,  or  any 
beautiful  thing,  —  dark,  stem,  brick  walls,  without  the 
slightest  show  of  architectural  beauty,  or  even  an  or- 
nament over  the  square,  commonplace  windows,  look- 
ing down  on  those  forlorn  courts.  A  carriage  -  drive 
passes  through  it,  if  I  remember  aright,  from  the  prin- 
cipal front,  emerging  by  one  of  the  sides ;  and  I  sup- 
pose that  the  carriages  roll  through  the  palace,  at  the 
levees  and  drawing-rooms.  There  was  nothing  to  de^ 
tain  us  here  any  long  time,  so  we  ij^ent  from  court  to 
court,  and  came  out  through  a  side  -  opening.  The 
edifice  is  battlemented  all  round,  and  this,  with  some- 
what of  fantastic  in  the  shape  of  the  clock-tower,  is 
the  only  attempt  at  ornament  in  the  whole. 

Then  we  skirted  along  St.  James's  Park,  passing 
Marlborough  House,  —  a  red  brick  building,  —  and  a 


1855.]  LONDON.  108 

very  long  range  of  stone  edifices,  which,  whether  they 
were  public  or  private,  one  house  or  twenty,  we  knew 
not.  We  ascended  the  steps  of  the  York  Column,  and 
soon  reached  Charing  Cross  and  Trafalgar  Square, 
where  there  are  more  architectural  monuments  than 
in  any  other  one  place  in  London ;  besides  two  foun- 
tains, playing  in  large  reservoirs  of  water,  and  vari- 
ous edifices  of  note  and  interest. 

Northumberland  House,  now,  and  for  a  long  while, 
the  town  residence  of  the  Percys,  stands  on  the  Strand 
side,  —  over  the  entrance  a  lion,  very  spiritedly  sculp- 
tured, flinging  out  his  long  tail.  On  another  side 
of  the  square  is  Morley's  Hotel,  exceedingly  spacious, 
and  looldng  more  American  than  anything  else  in  the 
hotel  line  that  I  have  seen  here. 

The  Nelson  monument,  with  Lord  Nelson,  in  a 
cocked  hat,  on  its  top,  is  very  grand  in  its  effect. 
All  about  the  square  there  were  sundry  loungers,  peo- 
ple looking  at  the  bas-reliefs  on  Nelson's  Column, 
children  paddling  in  the  reservoirs  of  the  fountains ; 
and,  it  being  a  simny  day,  it  was  a  cheerful  and  light- 
some, as  well  as  an  impressive  scene.  On  second 
thoughts,  I  do  not  know  but  that  London  should  have 
a  far  better  display  of  architecture  and  sculpture  than 
this,  on  its  finest  site,  and  in  its  very  centre ;  for,  after 
all,  there  is  nothing  of  the  very  best.  But  I  missed 
nothing  at  the  time. 

In  the  afternoon  S and  I  set  out  to  attend  di- 
vine service  in  Westminster  Abbey.  On  our  way 
thither  we  passed  through  Pall  Mall,  which  is  full  of 
club-houses,  and  we  were  much  struck  with  the  beauty 
of  the  one  lately  erected  for  the  Carleton  Club.  It  is 
built  of  a  buff-colored  or  yellowish  stone,  with  pillars 
or  pilasters  of  polished  Aberdeen  granite,  wonderfully 


104  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  [1855. 

ricli  and  beautiful ;  and  there  is  a  running  border  of 
sculptured  figures  all  round  the  upper  part  of  the 
building,  besides  other  ornament  and  embroidery, 
wherever  there  was  room  or  occasion  for  it.  It  be- 
ing an  oblong  square,  the  smooth  and  polished  aspect 
in  this  union  of  two  rich  colors  in  it  —  this  delicacy 
and  minuteness  of  finish,  this  lavish  ornament  —  made 
me  think  of  a  lady's  jewel-box;  and  if  it  could  be 
reduced  to  the  size  of  about  a  foot  square,  or  less,  it 
would  make  the  very  prettiest  one  that  ever  was  seen. 
I  question  whether  it  have  any  right  to  be  larger  than 
a  jewel-box ;  but  it  is  certainly  a  most  beautiful  edifice. 
We  turned  down  Whitehall,  at  the  head  of  which, 
over  the  very  spot  where  the  Regicides  were  executed, 
stands  the  bronze  equestrian  statue  of  Charles  I.,  — 
the  statue  that  was  buried  under  the  earth  during  the 
whole  of  Cromwell's  time,  and  emerged  after  the  Res- 
toration. We  saw  the  Admiralty  and  the  Horse- 
Guards,  and,  in  front  of  the  latter,  the  two  mounted 
sentinels,  one  of  whom  was  flirting  and  laughing  with 
some  girls.  On  the  other  side  of  the  street  stands  the 
Banqueting-House,  built  by  Inigo  Jones ;  from  a  win- 
dow of  which  King  Charles  stepped  forth,  wearing  a 
kingly  head^  which,  within  a  few  minutes  afterwards, 
fell  with  a  dead  thump  on  the  scaffold.  It  was  nobly 
done,  —  and  nobly  suffered.  How  rich  is  history  in 
the  little  space  around  this  spot  I 

I  find  that  the  day  after  I  reached  London,  I  en- 
tirely passed  by  Westminster  Abbey  without  knowing 
it,  partly  because  my  eyes  were  attracted  by  the  gau- 
dier show  of  the  new  Houses  of  Parliament,  and  partly 
because  this  part  of  the  Abbey  has  been  so  much  re- 
paired and  renewed  that  it  has  not  the  marks  of  age. 
liooking  at  its  front,  I  now  f oimd  it  very  grand  and 


1865.]  LONJ)ON.  105 

venerable ;  but  it  is  useless  to  attempt  a  deseription : 
these  things  are  not  to  be  translated  into  words ;  they 
can  be  known  only  by  seeing  them,  and,  until  seen,  it 
is  well  to  shape  out  no  idea  of  them.  Impressions, 
states  of  mind,  produced  by  noble  spectacles  of  what- 
ever kind,  are  all  that  it  seems  worth  while  to  attempt 
reproducing  with  the  pen. 

After  coming  out  of  the  Abbey,  we  looked  at  the 
two  Houses  of  Parliament,  directly  across  the  way,  — 
an  immense  structure,  and  certainly  most  splendid, 
built  of  a  beautiful  warm-colored  stone.  The  build- 
ing has  a  very  elaborate  finish,  and  delighted  me  at 
first;  but  by  and  by  I  began  to  be  sensible  of  a  wear- 
iness in  the  effect,  a  lack  of  variety  in  the  plan  and 
ornament,  a  deficiency  of  invention ;  so  that  instead  of 
being  more  and  more  interested  the  longer  one  looks, 
as  is  the  case  with  an  old  Gothic  edifice,  and  continu- 
ally reading  deeper  into  it,  <nie  finds  that  one  has  seen 
all  in  seeing  a  little  piece,  and  that  the  magnificent 
palace  has  nothing  better  to  show  one  or  to  do  for  one. 
It  is  wonderful  how  the  old  weather-stained  and  smoke- 
blackened  Abbey  shames  down  this  brand  -  newness  • 
not  that  the  Parliament  Houses  are  not  fine  objects  to 
look  at,  too. 

Yesterday  morning  we  walked  to  Charing  Cross, 

^th  U and  J ,  and  there  took  a  cab  to  the 

Tower,  driving  thither  through  the  Strand,  Fleet 
Street,  past  St.  Paul's,  and  amid  aU  the  thickest 
throng  of  the  city.  I  have  not  a  very  distinct  idea 
of  the  Tower,  but  remember  that  our  cab  drove  within 
ya  outer  gate,  where  we  alighted  at  a  ticket-office ;  the 
old  royal  fortress  being  now  a  regular  show-place,  at 
sixpence  a  head,  including  the  sight  of  armory  and 
Brown-jewels.    We  saw  about  the  gate  several  warders 


106  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1865>, 

or  yeomen  of  the  guard,  or  beef-eaters,  dressed  in  scar- 
let coats  of  antique  fashion,  richly  embroidered  with 
golden  crowns,  both  on  the  breast  and  back,  and  other 
royal  devices  and  insignia ;  so  that  they  looked  very 
much  like  the  kings  on  a  pack  of  cards,  or  regular 
trumps,  at  all  events.  I  believe  they  are  old  soldiers, 
promoted  to  this  position  for  good  conduct.  One  of 
them  took  charge  of  us,  and  when  a  sufficient  number 
of  visitors  had  collected  with  us,  he  led  us  to  see  what 
very  small  portion  of  the  Tower  is  shown.        \ 

There  is  a  great  deal  of  ground  within  the  outer 
precincts ;  and  it  has  streets  and  houses  and  inhabi- 
tants and  a  church  within  it ;  and,  going  up  and  down 
behind  the  warder,  without  any  freedom  to  get  ac- 
quainted with  Ae  place  by  strolling  about,  I  know 
little  more  about  it  than  when  I  went  in,  —  only  rec- 
ollecting a  mean  and  disagreeable  confusion  of  brick 
walls,  barracks,  paved  courts,  with  here  and  there  a 
low  bulky  turret,  of  rather  antique  aspect,  and,  in  front 
of  one  of  the  edifices,  a  range  of  curious  old  cannon, 
lying  on  the  ground,  some  of  them  immensely  large 
and  long,  and  beautifully  wrought  in  brass.  I  ob- 
served by  a  plan,  however,  that  the  White  Tower,  con- 
taining  the  armory,  stands  about  in  the  centre  of  the 
fortress,  and  that  it  is  a  square,  battlemented  struc- 
ture, having  a  turret  at  each  angle.  We  followed  the 
warder  into  the  White  Tower,  and  there  saw,  in  the 
first  place,  a  long  gallery  of  mounted  knights,  and 
men  at  arms,  which  has  been  so  often  described  that 
when  I  wish  to  recall  it  to  memory  I  shall  turn  to 
some  other  person's  accoimt  of  it.  I  was  much  struck, 
however,  with  the  beautiful  execution  of  a  good  many 
of  the  suits  of  armor,  and  the  exquisite  detail  with 
which  they,  were  engraved.     The  artists  of  those  daya 


1855.]  LONDON.  107 

attained  veiy  great  skill  in  this  kind  of  manufacture. 
The  figures  of  the  knights,  too,  in  full  array,  undoubt- 
edly may  have  shown  a  combination  of  stateliness  and 
grace  which  heretofore  I  have  not  believed  in,  —  not 
seeing  how  it  could  be  compatible  with  iron  garments. 
But  it  is  quite  incomprehensible  how,  in  the  time  of 
the  heaviest  armor,  they  could  strike  a  blow,  or  pos- 
sess any  freedom  of  movement,  except  such  as  a  turtle 
is  capable  of ;  and,  in  truth,  they  are  said  not  to  have 
been  able  to  rise  up  when  overthrown.  They  proba- 
bly stuck  out  their  lances,  and  rode  straight  at  the 
enemy,  depending  upon  upsetting  him  by  their  mass 
and  weight.  In  the  row  of  knights  is  Heniy  VIII. ; 
also  Charles  Brandon,  Duke  of  Suffolk,  who  must 
have  been  an  immensely  bulky  man ;  also,  a  splendid 
suit  of  armor,  gilded  all  over,  presented  by  the  city  of 
London  to  Charles  I. ;  also,  two  or  three  suits  of  boys' 
armor,  for  the  little  princes  of  the  House  of  Stuart. 
They  began  to  wear  these  burdens  betimes,  in  order 
that  their  manhood  might  be  the  more  tolerant  of 
iliem.  We  went  through  this  gallery  so  hastily  that 
it  would  have  been  about  as  well  not  to  have  seen  it 
at  all. 

Then  we  went  up  a  winding  stair  to  another  room, 
containing  armor  and  weapons,  and  beautiful  brass 
cannon,  that  appeared  to  have  been  for  ornament 
rather  than  use,  some  of  them  being  quite  covered 
with  embossed  sculpture,  marvellously  well  wrought. 
In  this  room  was  John  of  Gaunt's  suit,  indicating  a 
man  seven  feet  high,  and  the  armor  seems  to  bear 
the  marks  of  much  wear;  but  this  may  be  owing 
to  great  scrubbing,  throughout  the  centuries  since 
John  of  Gaunt  died.  There,  too,  we  saw  the  cloak 
in  which  Wolfe  fell,  on  the  Plains  of  Abraham,  —  a 


108  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [185& 

eoarse,  faded,  threadbare,  light-colored  garment,  folded 
up  under  a  glass  case.  Many  other  things  we  might 
have  seen,  worthy  of  being  attended  to,  had  there  been 
time  to  look  at  them. 

Following  into  still  another  room,  we  were  told  that 
this  was  Sir  Walter  Raleigh's  apartment,  while  con* 
fined  in  the  Tower,  so  that  it  was  within  these  walls 
that  he  wrote  the  History  of  the  World.  The  room 
was  formerly  lighted  by  lancet  windows,  and  must 
have  been  very  gloomy;  but,  if  he  had  the  whole 
length  of  it  to  himself,  it  was  a  good  space  to  walk 
and  meditate  in.  On  one  side  of  the  apartment  is  a 
low  door,  giving  admittance,  we  were  told,  to  the  cell 
where  Kaleigh  slept ;  so  we  went  in,  and  found  it  des- 
titute of  any  window,  and  so  dark  that  we  could  not 
estimate  its  small  extent  except  by  feeling  about.  At 
the  threshold  of  this  sleeping-kennel,  there  were  one 
or  two  inscriptions,  scratched  in  the  wall,  but  not,  I 
believe,  by  Kaleigh. 

In  this  apartment,  among  a  great  many  other  cu« 
/ious  things,  are  shown  the  devilish  instruments  of 
torture  which  the  Spaniards  were  bringing  to  England 
in  their  Armada ;  and,  at  the  end  of  the  room,  sits 
Queen  Elizabeth  on  horseback,  in  her  high  ruff  and 
faded  finery.  Very  likely  none  of  these  clothes  were 
ever  on  her  actual  person.  Here,  too,  we  saw  a  heads- 
man's block,  —  not  that  on  which  Raleigh  was  be- 
headed, which  I  would  have  given  gold  to  see,  but  the 
one  which  was  used  for  the  Scotch  Lords  Kilmarnock^ 
Lovat,  and  others,  executed  on  account  of  the  Rebel- . 
lion  of  1745.  It  is  a  block  of  oak,  about  two  feet 
high,  with  a  large  knot  in  it,  so  that  it  would  not  ea- 
sily be  split  by  a  blow  of  the  axe;  hewn  and  smoothed 
m  a  very  workmanlike  way,  and  with  a  hollow  to  aot 


1855.]  LONDON.  109 

oommodate  the  head  and  shoulders  on  each  side.  There 
were  two  or  three  very  strong  marks  of  the  axe  in  the 
part  over  which  the  neck  lay,  and  several  smaller  cuts; 
as  if  the  first  stroke  nearly  severed  the  head,  and  then 
the  chopping  off  was  finished  by  smaller  blows,  as  we 
see  a  butcher  cutting  meat  with  his  cleaver.  A  heads- 
man's axe  was  likewise  shown  us,  — its  date  unknown. 

In  the  White  Tower  we  were  shown  the  Regalid., 
under  a  glass,  and  within  an  iron  cage.  Edward  the 
Confessor's  golden  staff  was  very  finely  wrought ;  and 
there  were  a  great  many  pretty  things ;  but  I  have  a 
suspicion,  I  know  not  why,  that  these  are  not  the  real 
jewels,  —  at  least,  that  such  inestimable  ones  as  the 
Koh-i-noor  (or  however  it  is  spelt)  are  less  freely  ex- 
hibited. 

The  warder  then  led  us  into  a  paved  court,  which 
he  said  was  the  place  of  execution  of  all  royal  person- 
ages and  others,  who,  from  motives  of  fear  or  favor, 
were  beheaded  privately.  Raleigh  was  among  these, 
and  so  was  Anne  Boleyn.  We  then  followed  to  the 
Beauchamp  Tower,  where  many  state  prisoners  of 
note  were  confined,  and  where,  on  the  walls  of  one  of 
the  chambers,  there  are  several  inscriptions  and  sculp- 
tures of  various  devices,  done  by  the  prisoners,  —  and 
very  skilfully  done,  too,  though  perhaps  with  no  bet- 
ter instrument  than  an  old  nail.  These  poor  wretches 
had  time  and  leisure  enough  to  spend  upon  their  work. 
This  chamber  is  lighted  by  small  lancet  windows, 
pierced  at  equal  intervals  round  the  circle  of  the  Beau- 
champ  Tower ;  and  it  contains  a  large,  square  fire- 
place, in  which  is  now  placed  a  small  modem  stove. 
We  were  hurried  away,  before  we  could  even  glance 
at  the  inscriptions,  and  we  saw  nothing  else,  except 
the  low,  obscure  doorway  in  the  Bloody  Tower,  lead- 


110  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

ing  to  the  staircase,  under  which  were  found  tiie  sup 
posed  bones  of  the  little  princes ;  and  lastly,  the  round, 
Norman  arch,  opening  to  the  water  passage,  called  the 
Traitor's  Gate.  Finally,  we  ate  some  cakes  and  buns 
in  the  refreshment  -  room  connected  with  the  ticket- 
office,  and  then  left  the  fortress.  The  ancient  moat, 
by  the  way,  has  been  drained  within  a  few  years,  and 
now  forms  a  great  hollow  space,  with  grassy  banks, 
round  about  the  citadel. 

We  now  wished  to  see  the  Thames,  and  therefore 
threaded  our  way  along  Thames  Street,  towards  Lon- 
don Bridge,  passing  through  a  fish-market,  which  I 
suppose  to  be  the  actual  Billingsgate,  whence  origi- 
nated all  the  foul  language  in  England.  Under  Lon- 
don Bridge  there  is  a  station  for  steamers  running  to 
Greenwich  and  Woolwich.  We  got  on  board  one  of 
these,  not  very  weU  knowing,  nor  much  caring,  whither 
it  might  take  us,  and  steamed  down  the  river,  which 
is  bordered  with  the  shabbiest,  blackest,  ugliest,  mean- 
est buildings :  it  is  the  back  side  of  the  town;  and,  in 
truth,  the  muddy  tide  of  the  Thames  deserves  to  see 
no  better.  There  was  a  great  deal  of  shipping  in  the 
river,  and  many  steamers,  and  it  was  much  more 
crowded  than  the  Mersey,  where  all  the  ships  go  into 
docks ;  but  the  vessels  were  not  so  fine.  By  and  by 
we  re^hed  Greenwich,  and  went  ashore  there,  pro- 
ceeding up  from  the  quay,  past  beer-shops  and  eating- 
houses  in  great  numbers  and  variety.  Greenwich  Hos- 
pital is  here  a  very  prominent  object,  and  after  passing 
along  its  extensive  front,  facing  towards  the  river,  we 
entered  one  of  the  principal  gates,  as  we  found  oiuv 
selves  free  to  do. 

We  now  left  the  hospital,  and  steamed  back  to 


1855.]  LONDON,  111 

London  Bridge,  whence  we  went  up  into  the  city,  and, 
to  finish  the  labors  of  the  day,  ascended  the  Monu- 
ment. This  seems  to  be  still  a  favorite  adventure 
with  the  cockneys;  for  we  heard  one  woman,  who 
went  up  with  us,  saying  that  she  had  been  thinking  of 
going  up  all  her  life,  and  another  said  that  she  had 
gone  up  thirty  years  ago.  There  is  an  iron  railing, 
or  rather  a  cage,  roimd  the  top,  through  which  it 
would  be  impossible  for  people  to  force  their  way,  in 
order  to  precipitate  themselves,  as  six  persons  have 
heretofore  done.  There  was  a  mist  over  London,  so 
that  we  did  not  gaia  a  very  clear  view,  except  of  the 
swarms  of  people  running  about,  like  ants,  in  the 
streets  at  the  foot  of  the  Moniunent. 

Descending,  I  put  S and  the  children  into  a 

cab,  and  I  myself  wandered  about  the  city.  Passing 
along  Fleet  Street,  I  turned  in  through  an  archway, 
which  I  rightly  guessed  to  be  the  entrance  to  the 
Temple.  It  is  a  very  large  space,  containing  many 
large,  solemn,  and  serious  edifices  of  dark  brick,  and 
no  sooner  do  you  pass  under  the  arch  than  all  the 
rumble  and  bustle  of  London  dies  away  at  once ;  and 
it  seems  as  if  a  person  might  live  there  in  perfect 
quiet,  without  suspecting  that  it  was  not  always  a 
Sabbath.  People  appear  to  have  their  separate  resi- 
dences here;  but  I  do  not  understand  what  is  the 
economy  of  their  lives.  Qui^  in  the  deepest  interior 
of  this  region,  there  is  a  large  garden,  bordering  on 
the  Thames,  along  which  it  has  a  gravel-walk,  and 
benches  where  it  would  be  pleasant  to  sit.  On  one 
edge  of  the  garden,  there  is  some  scanty  shrubbery, 
and  flowers  of  no  great  brilliancy;  and  the  green- 
sward, with  which  the  garden  is  mostly  covered,  is  not 
particularly  rich  nor  verdant. 


112  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1865, 

Emerging  from  the  Temple,  I  stopped  at  a  tavern 
in  the  Strand,  the  waiter  of  which  observed  to  me, 
"They  say  Sebastopol  is  taken,  sir!"  It  was  only 
such  an  interesting  event  that  could  have  induced  an 
English  waiter  to  make  a  remark  to  a  stranger,  not 
called  for  in  the  way  of  business. 

The  best  view  we  had  of  the  Tower — in  fact,  the 
only  external  view,  and  the  only  time  we  really  saw 
the  White  Tower  —  was  from  the  river,  as  we  steamed 
past  it.  Here  the  high,  square,  battlemented  White 
Tower,  with  the  four  turrets  at  its  corners,  rises  prom- 
inently above  all  other  parts  of  the  fortress. 


September  ISth.  —  Mr. ,  the  American  Minis- 
ter, called  on  me  on  Tuesday,  and  left  his  card ;  an 
intimation  that  I  ought  sooner  to  have  paid  my  re- 
spects to  him ;  so  yesterday  forenoon  I  set  out  to  find 
his  residence,  56  Harley  Street.  It  is  a  street  out  of 
Cavendish  Square,  in  a  fashionable  quarter,  although 
fashion  is  said  to  be  ebbing  away  from  it.  The  am- 
bassador seems  to  intend  some  little  state  in  his  ar- 
rangements; but,  no  doubt,  the  establishment  com- 
pares shabbily  enough  with  those  of  the  legations  of 
other  great  countries,  and  with  the  houses  of  the  Eng- 
lish aristocracy.  A  servant,  not  in  livery,  or  in  a 
very  unrecognizable  one,  opened  the  door  for  me,  and 
gave  my  card  to  a  sort  of  upper  attendant,  who  took 

it  in  to  Mr. .     He  had  three  gentlemen  with  him, 

so  desired  that  I  should  be  ushered  into  the  office  of 
the  legation,  until  he  should  be  able  to  receive  me. 

Here  I  foimd  a  clerk,  or  attacks^  Mr.  M ,  who  has 

been  two  or  three  years  on  this  side  of  the  water ;  an 
intelligent  person,  who  seems  to  be  in  correspondence 


1855.]  LONDON.  118 

with  the  New  York  "  Courier  and  Enquirer."  By  and 
by  came  in  aift>ther  American  to  get  a  passport  for 
the  Continent,  and  soon  the  three  gentlemen  took 
leave  of  the  Ambassador,  and  I  was  invited  to  his 
presence. 

The  tall,  large  figure  of  Mr. has  a  certain  air 

of  state  and  dignity;  he  carries  his  head  in  a  very 
awkward  way,  but  still  looks  like  a  man  of  long  and 
high  authority,  and,  with  his  white  hair,  is  now  quite 
venerable.  There  is  certainly  a  lack  of  polish,  a  kind 
of  rusticity,  notwithstanding  which  you  feel  him  to  be 
a  man  of  the  world.  I  should  think  he  might  succeed 
very  tolerably  in  English  society,  being  heavy  and 
sensible,  cool,  kindly,  and  good-humored,  with  a  great 
deal  of  experience  of  life.  We  talked  about  various 
matters,  politics  among  the  rest;  and  he  observed 
that  if  the  President  had  taken  the  advice  which  he 
gave  him  in  two  long  letters,  before  his  inauguration, 
he  would  have  had  a  perfectly  quiet  and  successful 
term  of  office.  The  advice  was,  to  form  a  perfectly 
homogeneous  cabinet  of  Union  men,  and  to  satisfy  the 
extremes  of  the  party  by  a  fair  distribution  of  minor 
offices;  whereas  he  formed  his  cabinet  of  extreme 
men,  on  both  sides,  and  gave  the  minor  offices  to  mod- 
erate ones.     But  the  antislavery  people,  surely,  had 

no  representative  in  the  cabinet.     Mr. further 

observed,  that  he  thought  the  President  had  a  fair 
chance  of  re-nomination,  for  that  the  South  could  not, 
in  honor,  desert  him ;  to  which  I  replied  that  the 
South  had  been  guilty  of  such  things  heretofore.     Mr. 

thinks  that  the  next  Presidential  term  will  be 

more  important  and  critical,  both  as  to  our  foreign 
relations  and  internal  affairs,  than  any  preceding  one, 
—  which  I  should  judge  likely  enough  to  be  the  case, 


114  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1865. 

although  I  heard  the  same  prophecy  often  made  re- 
specting the  present  term.  b 

The  ambassador  dined  with  us  at  Bock  Park  a  year 
or  two  ago,  and  I  then  felt,  and  always  feel,  as  if  he 
were  a  man  of  hearty  feeling  and  simplicity,  and  cer- 
tainly it  woidd  be  imjust  to  conclude  otherwise  merely 
from  the  fact  (very  suspicious,  it  is  true)  of  his  hav- 
ing been  a  life -long  politician.  After  we  had  got 
through  a  little  matter  of  business  (respecting  a  young 
American  who  has  enlisted  at  Liverpool),  the  Minis- 
ter rang  his  bell,  and  ordered  another  visitor  to  be  ad- 
mitted ;  and  so  I  took  my  leave.  In  the  other  room  I 
found  the  Secretary  of  Legation,  —  a  tall,  slender  man 
of  about  forty,  with  a  small  head  and  face,  —  gentle- 
manly enough,  sensible,  and  well  informed,  yet,  I 
should  judge,  not  quite  up  to  his  place.  There  was 
also  a  Dr.  B  from  Michigan  present,  and  I  rather 
fancy  the  ambassador  is  quite  as  much  bored  with  vis- 
itors as  the  consul  at  Liverpool.  Before  I  left  the  of- 
fice, Mr. came  in  with  Miss  Sarah  Clarke  on  his 

his  arm.  She  had  come  thither  to  get  her  passport 
vis^d ;  and  when  her  business  was  concluded,  we  went 
out  together. 

She  was  going  farther  towards  the  West  End,  and 
I  into  the  city ;  so  we  soon  parted,  and  I  lost  myself 
among  the  streets  and  squares,  arriving  at  last  at  Ox- 
ford Street,  though  even  then  I  did  not  know  whether 
my  face  were  turned  cityward  or  in  the  opposite  direc- 
tion. Crossing  Regent  Street,  however,  I  became 
sure  of  my  whereabout,  and  went  on  through  Holbom, 
and  sought  hither  and  thither  for  Grace  Church  Street, 
in  order  to  find  the  American  Consul,  General  Camp- 
bell; for  I  needed  his  aid  to  get  a  bank  post-biU 
eashed.     But  I  could  not  find  the  street,  go  where  I 


1865.]  LONDON.  116 

would ;  so  at  last  I  went  to  No.  65  Cheapside,  and  in- 
troduced myself  to  Mr. ,  whom  I  already  knew  by 

letter,  and  by  a  good  many  of  his  poems,  which  he 
has  sent  me,  and  by  two  excellent  watches,  which  I 
bought  of  him.  This  establishment,  though  it  has  the 
ordinary  front  of  dingy  brick,  common  to  buildings  in 
the  city,  looks  like  a  time-long  stand,  the  old  shop  of 
a  London  tradesman,  with  a  large  figure  of  a  watch 
over  the  door,  a  great  many  watches  (and  yet  no  gor- 
geous show  of  them)  in  the  window,  a  low,  dark  front 
shop,  and  a  little  room  behind,  where  there  was  a  chair 

or  two.     Mr. is   a  small,  slender  young  man, 

quite  un-English  in  aspect,  with  black,  curly  hair,  a 
thin,  dark,  colorless  visage,  very  animated  and  of 
quick  expression,  with  a  nervous  temperament.  .  .  . 
He  dismounted  from  a  desk  when  my  card  was  handed 
to  him,  and  turned  to  me  with  a  vivid,  glad  look  of 
recognition. 

We  talked,  in  the  first  place,  about  poetry  and  such 
matters,  about  England  and  America,  and  the  nature 
and  depth  of  their  mutual  dislike,  and,  of  course,  the 
slavery  question  came  up,  as  it  always  does,  in  one 
way  or  another.    Anon,  I  produced  my  bank  post-bill ; 

and  Mr. kindly  engaged  to  identify  me  at  the 

bank,  being  ready  to  swear  to  me,  he  said,  on  the 
strength  of  my  resemblance  to  my  engraved  portrait. 
So  we  set  out  for  the  Bank  of  England,  and,  arriving 
there,  were  directed  to  the  proper  clerk,  after  much  in- 
quiry ;  but  he  told  us  that  the  bill  was  not  yet  due, 
having  been  drawn  at  seven  days,  and  having  two  still 
to  run,  —  which  was  the  fact.     As  I  was  almost  shil- 

lingless,  Mr. now  offered  to  cash  it  for  me.     He 

is  very  kind  and  good.  .  .  Arriving  at  his  shop 
again,  he  went  out  to  procure  the  money,  and  soon  re- 


\ 


16  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185& 

Jamed  with  it.  At  my,  departure  he  gave  me  a  copy 
of  a  new  poem  of  his,  entitled  "  Verdicts,"  somewhat 
in  the  manner  of  Lowell's  satire.  .  .  .  Mr. re- 
sides now  at  Greenwich,  whither  he  hoped  I  would 
come  and  see  him  on  my  return  to  London.  Perhaps 
I  will,  for  I  like  liim.  It  seems  strange  to  see  an 
Englishman  with  so  little  physical  ponderosity  and 
obtuseness  of  nerve. 

After  parting  from  him,  it  being  three  o'clock  or 
thereabouts,  I  resumed  my  wanderings  about  the  city, 
of  which  I  never  weary  as  long  as  I  can  put  one  foot 
before  the  other. 

Seeing  that  the  door  of  St.  Paul's,  under  one  of  the 
semicircular  porches,  was  partially  open,  I  went  in, 
and  found  that  the  afternoon  service  was  about  to  be 
performed ;  so  I  remained  to  hear  it,  and  to  see  what 
I  could  of  the  cathedral.  What  a  total  and  admirable 
contrast  between  this  and  a  Gothic  church !  the  latter 
so  dim  and  mysterious,  with  its  various  aisles,  its  in- 
tricacy of  pointed  arches,  its  dark  walls  and  columns 
and  pavement,  and  its  painted  glass  windows,  bedim- 
ming  even  what  daylight  might  otherwise  get  into  its 
eternal  evening.  But  this  cathedral  was  full  of  light, 
and  light  was  proper  to  it.  There  were  no  painted 
windows,  no  dim  recesses,  but  a  wide  and  airy  space 
beneath  the  dome ;  and  even  through  the  long  perspec- 
tive of  the  nave  there  was  no  obscurity,  but  one  lofty 
and  beautifully  rounded  arch  succeeding  to  another, 
as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach.  The  walls  were  white, 
the  pavement  constructed  of  squares  of  gray  and  white 
marble.  It  is  a  most  grand  and  stately  edifice,  and 
its  characteristic  seems  to  be  to  continue  forever  fresh 
and  new ;  whereas  such  a  church  as  Westminster  Ab« 
bey  must  have  been  as  venerable  as  it  is  now  from  the 


1855.]  LONDON.  117 

first  day  when  it  grew  to  be  an  edifice  at  all.  How 
wonderful  man  is  in  his  works !  How  glad  I  am  that 
there  can  be  two  such  admirable  churches,  in  their  op- 
posite styles,  as  St.  Paul's  and  Westminster  Abbey ! 

The  organ  was  played  while  I  was  there,  and  there 
was  an  anthem  beautifully  chanted  by  voices  that 
came  from  afar  off  and  remotely  above,  as  if  out  of  a 
sunny  sky.  Meanwhile  I  looked  at  such  monuments 
as  were  near ;  chiefly  those  erected  to  military  or  naval 
men,  —  Picton,  General  Ponsonby,  Lord  St.  Vincent, 
^d  others ;  but  against  one  of  the  piUars  stands  a 
statue  of  Dr.  Johnson,  —  a  noble  and  thoughtful  fig- 
ure, with  a  development  of  muscle  befitting  an  athlete. 
I  doubt  whether  sculptors  do  not  err  in  point  of  taste, 
by  making  all  their  statues  models  of  physical  perfec- 
tion, instead  of  expressing  by  them  the  individual 
character  and  habits  of  the  man.  The  statue  in  the  y 
market-place  at  Lichfield  has  more  of  the  homely 
truth  of  Johnson's  actual  personality  than  this. 

St.  Paul's,  as  yet,  is  by  no  means  crowded  with 
moniunents ;  there  is,  indeed,  plenty  of  room  for  a  mob 
of  the  illustrious,  yet  to  come.  But  it  seems  to  me 
that  the  character  of  the  edifice  woidd  be  injured  by 
allowing  the  moniunents  to  be  clustered  together  so 
closely  as  at  Westminster,  by  incrusting  the  walls  with 
them,  or  letting  the  statues  throng  about  the  pedestals 
of  columns.  There  must  be  no  confusion  in  such  a 
cathedral  as  this,  and  I  question  whether  the  effect 
will  ever  be  better  than  it  is  now,  when  each  monu- 
ment has  its  distinct  place ;  and  as  your  eye  wanders 
around,  you  are  not  distracted  from  noting  each  mar- 
ble man,  in  his  niche  against  the  wall,  or  at  the  base 
of  a  marble  pillar.  Space,  distance,  light,  regularity, 
lure  to  be  preserved,  even  if  the  result  should  be  a  de^ 
gree  of  nakedness. 


118  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1865. 

I  saw  Mr.  Appleton  of  the  Legation,  and  Dr. 
Brown,  on  the  floor  of  the  cathedral.  They  were 
about  to  go  over  the  whole  edifice,  and  had  engaged 
a  guide  for  that  purpose ;  but,  as  I  intend  to  go  thither 

again    with  S ,  I  did  not   accompany  them,  but 

went  away  the  quicker  that  one  of  the  gentlemen  put 
on  his  hat,  and  I  was  ashamed  of  being  seen  in  com- 
pany with  a  man  who  could  wear  his  hat  in  a  cathe- 
dral. Not  that  he  meant  any  irreverence  ;  but  simply 
felt  that  he  was  in  a  great  public  building,  —  as  big, 
nearly,  as  all  out  of  doors, —  and  so  forgot  that  it  was 
a  consecrated  place  of  worship.  The  sky  is  the  dome 
of  a  greater  cathedral  than  St.  Paul's,  and  built  by  a 
greater  architect  than  Sir  Christopher  Wren,  and  yet 
We  wear  our  hats  unscrupulously  beneath  it. 

I  remember  no  other  event  of  importance,  except 
that  I  penetrated  into  a  narrow  lane  or  court,  either  in 
the  Strand  or  Fleet  Street,  where  was  a  tavern,  call- 
ing itself  the  "  Old  Thatched  House,"  and  purporting 
to  have  been  Nell  Gwynn's  dairy.  I  met  with  a  great 
many  alleys  and  obscure  archways,  in  the  course  of 
the  day's  wanderings. 

September  14ih.  — Yesterday,  in  the  earlier  part  of 
the  day,  it  poured  with  rain,  and  I  did  not  go  out  tUI 
five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  ;  nor  did  I  then  meet  with 
anything  interesting.  I  walked  through  Albemarle 
Street,  for  the  purpose  of  looking  at  Murray's  shop^ 
but  missed  it  entirely,  at  my  first  inquisition.  The 
street  is  one  of  hotels,  principally,  with  only  a  few 
tradesmen's  shops,  and  has  a  quiet,  aristocratic  aspect. 
On  my  return,  down  the  other  sidewalk,  I  did  discover 
the  famous  publisher's  locality ;  but  merely  by  the 
name  ^*  Mr.  Murray,"  engraved  on  a  rather  lurge  brass 


1855.]  LONDON.  119 

plate,  such  as  doctors  use,  on  the  door.  There  was  no 
sign  of  a  book,  nor  of  its  being  a  place  of  trade  in  any 
way ;  and  I  should  have  taken  the  house  to  be,  if  not 
a  private  mansion,  then  a  lawyer's  office. 

At  seven  o'clock  S ,  U ^  and  I  went  to  dine 

with  Mr.  E S in  Portland  Place.  .  .  .  Mr. 

S 's  house  is  a  very  fine  one,  and  he  gave  us  a  very 

quiet,  elegant,  and  enjoyable  dinner,  in  much  better 
taste  and  with  less  fuss  than  some  others  we  have  at- 
tended elsewhere.  Mr.  S is  a  friend  of  Thack- 
eray, and,  speaking  of  the  last  number  of  "  The  New- 
comes,"  —  so  touching  that  nobody  can  read  it  aloud 
without  breaking  down,  —  he  mentioned  that  Thack- 
eray himself  had  read  it  to  James  Russell  Lowell  and 
William  Story  in  a  cider-cellar !  I  read  all  the  pre- 
ceding numbers  of  "  The  Newcomes  "  to  my  wife,  but 
happened  not  to  have  an  opportunity  to  read  this  last, 
and  was  glad  of  it,  —  knowing  that  my  eyes  would  fill, 

and  my  voice   quiver.     Mr.    S likes  Thackeray, 

and  thinks  him  a  good  fellow.     Mr.  S has  a  — or 

I  don't  know  but  I  ought  better  to  say  the — beauti- 
ful full-length  picture  of  Washington  by  Stuart,  and  I 
was  proud  to  see  that  noblest  face  and  figure  here  in 
England.  The  picture  of  a  man  beside  whom,  consid- 
ered physically,  any  English  nobleman  whom  I  have 
seen  would  look  like  common  clay. 

Speaking  of  Thackeray,  I  cannot  but  wonder  at  his 
coolness  in  respect  to  his  own  pathos,  and  compare  it 
with  my  emotions,  when  I  read  the  last  scene  of  "  The 
Scarlet  Letter"  to  my  wife,  just  after  writing  it, — 
tried  to  read  it  rather,  for  my  voice  swelled  and 
heaved,  as  if  I  were  tossed  up  and  down  on  an  ocean 
as  it  subsides  after  a  storm.  But  I  was  in  a  very 
uervoos  state  then,  having  gone  trough  a  great  di« 


120  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1863k 

versity  of  emotion,  while  writing  it,  for  many  montlis. 
I  think  I  have  never  overcome  my  own  adamant  in 
any  other  instance. 

Timiblers,  hand  •  organists,  puppet -showmen,  bag« 
pipers,  and  all  such  vagrant  mirth  -  makers,  are  very 
numerous  in  the  streets  of  London.  The  other  day, 
passing  through  Fleet  Street,  I  saw  a  crowd  filling  up 
a  narrow  court,  and  high  above  their  heads  a  tumbler, 
standing  on  his  head,  on  the  top  of  a  pole,  that  reached 
as  high  as  the  third  story  of  the  neighboring  houses. 
Sliding  down  the  pole  head  foremost,  he  disappeared 
out  of  my  sight.  A  midtitude  of  Punches  go  the 
rounds  continually.  Two  have  passed  through  Han^ 
over  Street,  where  we  reside,  this  morning.  The  first 
asked  two  shillings  for  his  performance ;  so  we  sent 
him  away.  The  second  demanded,  in  the  first  place, 
half  a  crown ;  but  finally  consented  to  take  a  shilling, 
and  gave  us  the  show  at  that  price,  though  mucJi 
maimed  in  its  proportions.  Besides  the  spectators  in 
our  windows,  he  had  a  little  crowd  on  the  sidewalk,  to 
whom  he  went  round  for  contributions,  but  I  did  not 
observe  that  anybody  gave  him  so  much  as  a  halfpenny. 
It  is  strange  to  see  how  many  people  are  aiming  at  the 
small  change  in  your  pocket.  In  every  square  a  beg* 
gar-woman  meets  you,  and  turns  back  to  follow  your 
steps  with  her  miserable  murmur.  At  the  street-cross- 
ings there  are  old  men  or  little  girls  with  their  brooms ; 
urchins  propose  to  brush  your  boots ;  and  if  you  get 
uito  a  cab,  a  man  runs  to  open  the  door  for  you,  and 
touches  his  hat  for  a  fee,  as  he  closes  it  again. 

September  \bth. —  It  was  raining  yesterday,  and  I 
kept  within  doors  till  after  four  o'clock,  when  J— ^ 


1855.]  LONDON.  121 

and  I  took  a  walk  into  the  city.  Seeing  the  entrance 
to  Clement's  Inn,  we  went  through  it,  and  saw  the  gar- 
den, with  a  kneeling  bronze  figure  in  it;  and  when 
just  in  the  midst  of  the  Inn,  I  remembered  that  Jus- 
tice Shallow  was  of  old  a  student  there.  I  do  not  well 
understand  these  Inns  of  Court,  or  how  they  differ 
from  other  places.  Anybody  seems  to  be  free  to  re- 
side in  them,  and  a  residence  does  not  seem  to  involve 
any  obligation  to  study  law,  or  to  have  any  connection 
therewith.  Clement's  Inn  consists  of  large  brick 
houses,  accessible  by  narrow  lanes  and  passages,  but, 
by  some  peculiar  privilege  or  enchantment,  enjoying  a 
certain  quiet  and  repose,  though  in  close  vicinity  to 
the  noisiest  part  of  the  city.  I  got  bewildered  in  the 
neighborhood  of  St.  Paul's,  and,  try  how  I  might  to 
escape  from  it,  its  huge  dusky  dome  kept  showing  it- 
self before  me,  through  one  street  and  another.  In  my 
endeavors  to  escape  it,  I  at  one  time  found  myself  in 
St.  John's  Street,  and  was  in  hopes  to  have  seen  the 
old  St.  John's  Gate,  so  familiar  for  above  a  century  on 
the  cover  of  the  "Gentleman's  Magazine."  But  I  sup- 
pose it  is  taken  down,  for  we  went  through  the  entire 
street,  I  think,  and  saw  no  trace  of  it.  Either  after- 
wards or  before  this  we  came  upon  Smithfield,  a  large 
irregular  square,  filled  up  with  pens  for  cattle,  of 
which,  however,  there  were  none  in  the  market  at  that 
time.     I  leaned  upon  a  post,  at  the  western  end  of  the 

square,  and  told  J how  the  martyrs  had  been 

burnt  at  Smithfield  in  Bloody  Mary's  days.  Again 
we  drifted  back  to  St.  Paul's ;  and,  at  last,  in  despair 
of  ever  getting  out  of  this  enchanted  region,  I  took 
a  Hansom  cab  to  Charing  Cross,  whence  we  easily 
made  our  way  home. 


122  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

LIVERPOOL. 

September  IQth,  —  I  took  the  ten-o'clock  train  yes* 
terday  morning  from  the  Euston  station,  and  arrived 
at  Liverpool  at  about  five,  passing  through  the  valley 
of  Trent,  without  touching  at  Birmingham.  English 
scenery,  on  the  tracks,  is  the  tamest  of  the  tame, 
hardly  a  noticeable  hill  breaking  the  ordinary  gentle 
imdulation  of  the  landscape,  but  still  the  verdure  and 
finish  of  the  fields  and  parks  make  it  worth  while  to 
throw  out  a  glance  now  and  then,  as  you  rush  by. 
Few  separate  houses  are  seen,  as  in  America;  but 
sometimes  a  village,  with  the  square,  gray,  battle- 
mented  tower  of  its  Norman  church,  and  rows  of 
thatched  cottages,  reminding  one  of  the  clustered  mud- 
nests  of  swallows,  under  the  eaves  of  a  barn;  here 
and  there  a  lazy  little  river,  like  the  Trent ;  perhaps, 
if  you  look  sharply  where  the  guide-book  indicates, 
the  turrets  of  an  old  castle  in  the  distance ;  perhaps 
the  great  steeple  and  spires  of  a  cathedral ;  perhaps 
the  tall  chimney  of  a  manufactory  ;  but,  on  the  whole, 
the  traveller  comes  to  his  journey's  end  unburdened 
with  a  single  new  idea.  I  observe  that  the  harvest  is 
not  all  gathered  in  as  yet,  and  this  rainy  weather  must 
look  very  gloomy  to  the  farmer.  I  saw  gleaners,  yes- 
terday, in  the  stubble-fields.  There  were  two  gentle- 
men in  the  same  railway-carriage  with  me,  and  we 
did  not  exchange  half  a  dozen  words  the  whole  day. 

I  am  here,  established  at  Mrs.  Blodgett's  board- 
ing-house, which  I  find  quite  full ;  insomuch  that  she 
had  to  send  one  of  her  sea-captains  to  sleep  in  another 
house,  in  order  to  make  room  for  me.  It  is  exclu- 
sively American  society :  four  shipmasters,  and  a  doc- 
tor from  Pennsylvania,  who  has  been  travelling  a  yeai 


1855.]  LIVERPOOL.  128 

on  the  Continent,  and  who  seems  to  be  a  man  of  very 
active  intelligence,  interested  in  everything,  and  es- 
pecially in  agriculture.  .  .  .  He  asserted  that  we  are 
fifty  years  ahead  of  England  in  agricidtural  science, 
and  that  he  could  cultivate  English  soil  to  far  better 
advantage  than  English  farmers  do,  and  at  vastly  less 
expense.  Their  tendency  to  cling  to  old  ideas,  which 
retards  them  in  everything  else,  keeps  them  behind- 
hand in  this  matter  too.  Keally,  I  do  not  know  any 
other  place  in  England  where  a  man  can  be  made  so 
sensible  that  he  lives  in  a  progressive  world  as  here 
in  Mrs.  Blodgett's  boarding-house. 

The  captains  talk  together  about  their  voyages,  and 
how  they  manage  with  their  unruly  mates  and  crews  ,* 
and  how  freights  are  in  America,  and  the  prospects  of 
business ;  and  of  equinoctial  gales,  and  the  qualities 
of  difPerent  ships,  and  their  commanders,  and  how 
crews,  mates,  and  masters  have  all  deteriorated  since 
their  remembrance.  .  •  .  But  these  men  are  alive, 
aiid  talk  of  real  matters,  and  of  matters  which  they 
know.  The  shipmasters  who  come  to  Mrs.  Blodgett's 
are  favorable  specimens  of  their  class ;  being  all  re- 
spectable men,  in  the  employ  of  good  houses,  and 
raised  by  their  capacity  to  the  command  of  first-rate 
ships.  In  my  official  intercourse  with  them,  I  do  not 
generally  see  their  best  side ;  as  they  are  seldom  be- 
fore me  except  as  complainants,  or  when  siunmoned 
to  answer  to  some  complaint  made  by  a  seaman.  But 
hearing  their  daily  talk,  and  listening  to  what  is  in 
their  minds,  and  their  reminiscences  of  what  they  have 
gone  through,  one  becomes  sensible  that  they  are  men 
of  energy  and  ability,  fit  to  be  trusted,  and  retaining 
a  hardy  sense  of  honor,  and  a  loyalty  to  their  own 
country,  the  stronger  because  they  have  compared  it 


124  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

with  many  others.  Most  of  them  are  gentlemen,  too, 
to  a  certain  extent, —  some  more  than  others,  per- 
haps; and  none  to  a  very  exquisite  point,  or,  if  so,  it 
is  none  the  better  for  them  as  sailors  or  as  men. 

September  llth.  —  It  is  singular  to  feel  a  sense  of 
my  own  country  returning  upon  me  with  the  inter- 
course of  the  people  whom  I  find  here.  .  .  . 

The  doctor  is  much  the  most  talkative  of  our  com- 
pany, and  sometimes  bores  me  thereby;  though  he 
seldoms  says  anything  that  is  not  either  instructive 
or  amusing.  He  tells  a  curious  story  of  Prince  Albert, 
and  how  he  avails  himself  of  American  sharp-shoot- 
ing. During  the  doctor's  tour  in  Scotland,  which  he 
has  just  finished,  he  became  acquainted  with  one  of 
the  Prince's  attachSs^  who  invited  him  very  earnestly 
to  join  his  Eoyal  Highness's  party,  promising  him  a 
good  gun,  and  a  keeper  to  load  it  for  him,  two  good 
dogs,  besides  as  many  cigars  as  he  could  smoke  and 
as  much  wine  as  he  could  drinkj  on  the  condition  that 
whatever  game  he  shot  should  be  the  Prince's.  "  The 
Prince,"  said  the  attacks^  "is  very  fond  of  having 
Americans  in  his  shooting-parties,  on  account  of  their 
being  such  excellent  shots ;  and  there  was  one  with 
him  last  year  who  shot  so  admirably  that  his  Royal 
Highness  himself  left  off  shooting  in  utter  astonish- 
ment." The  attachS  oflEered  to  introduce  the  doctor 
to  the  Prince,  who  would  be  certain  to  receive  him 
very  graciously.  .  .  . 

I  think,  perhaps,  we  talk  of  kings  and  queens  more 
at  our  table  than  people  do  at  other  tables  in  Eng- 
land ;  not,  of  course,  that  we  like  them  better,  or  ad- 
mire them  more,  but  that  they  are  curiosities.  Yet  I 
would  not  say  that  the  doctor  may  not  be  susceptible 


1855.]  LIVERPOOL.  125 

on  the  point  of  royal  attentions  ;  for  he  told  us  with 
great  complaeeney  how  emphatically,  on  two  or  three 
occasions,  Louis  Napoleon  had  returned  his  bow,  and 
the  last  time  had  turned  and  made  some  remark  (evi* 
dently  about  the  doctor)  to  the  Empress.  •  .  . 

I  ought  not  to  omit  mentioning  that  he  has  been 
told  in  France  that  he  personally  resembles  the  Em« 
peror,  and  I  suspect  he  is  trying  to  heighten  the  re- 
semblance by  training  his  mustache  on  the  pattern  of 
that  which  adorns  the  imperial  upper  lip.  He  is  a 
genuine  American  character,  though  modified  by  a 
good  deal  of  travel;  a  very  intelligent  man,  full  of 
various  ability,  with  eyes  all  over  him  for  any  object 
of  interest,  —  a  little  of  the  bore,  sometimes,  —  quick 
to  appreciate  character,  with  a  good  deal  of  tact,  gen- 
tlemanly in  his  manners,  but  yet  lacking  a  deep  and 
delicate  refinement.  Not  but  that  Americans  are  as 
capable  of  this  la^t  quality  as  other  people  are ;  but 
what  with  the  circumstances  amid  which  we  grow  up, 
and  the  peculiar  activity  of  our  minds,  we  certainly 
do  often  miss  it.  By  the  by,  he  advanced  a  singular 
proposition  the  other  evening,  namely,  that  the  Eng- 
lish people  do  not  so  well  understand  comfort,  or  at- 
tain it  so  perfectly  in  their  domestic  arrangements,  as 
we  do.  I  thought  he  hardly  supported  this  opinion 
so  satisfactorily  as  some  of  his  other  new  ideas. 

I  saw  in  an  American  paper  yesterday,  that  an 
opera,  still  unfinished,  had  been  written  on  the  story 
of  '"'  The  Scarlet  Letter,"  and  that  several  scenes  of  it 
had  been  performed  successfully  in  New  Yoik.  I 
should  think  it  might  possibly  succeed  as  an  opera, 
though  it  woidd  certainly  fail  as  a  play. 


126  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

LONDON. 

September  24fA. — On  Saturday,  at  half  past  three 
o'clock,  I  left  Liverpool  by  the  London  and  North- 
west  Railway  for  London.  Mrs.  Blodgett's  table  had 
been  thinned  by  several  departures  during  the  week. 
.  .  .  My  mind  had  been  considerably  enlivened,  and 
my  sense  of  American  superiority  renewed,  by  inter- 
course with  these  people ;  and  there  is  no  danger  of 
one's  intellect  becoming  a  standing  pool  in  such  soci- 
ety. I  think  better  of  American  shipmasters,  too, 
than  I  did  from  merely  meeting  them  in  my  ofl&ce. 
They  keep  up  a  continual  discussion  of  professional 
matters,  and  of  all  things  having  any  reference  to  their 
profession ;  the  laws  of  insurance,  the  rights  of  ves- 
sels in  foreign  ports,  the  authority  and  customs  of  ves- 
sels of  war  with  regard  to  merchantmen,  etc., — with 
stories  and  casual  anecdotes  of  their  sea-adventures, 
gales,  shipwrecks,  icebergs,  and  collisions  of  vessels, 
and  hair-breadth  escapes.  Their  talk  runs  very  much 
on  the  sea,  and  on  the  land  as  connected  with  the  sea ; 
and  their  interest  does  not  seem  to  extend  very  far 
beyond  the  wide  field  of  their  professional  concerns. 

Nothing  remarkable  occurred  on  the  journey  to  Lon- 
don. The  greater  part  of  the  way  there  were  only  two 
gentlemen  in  the  same  compartment  with  me  ;  and  we 
occupied  each  our  comer,  with  little  other  conversa- 
tion than  in  comparing  watches  at  the  various  stations. 
I  got  out  of  the  carriage  only  once,  at  Rugby,  I  think, 
and  for  the  last  seventy  or  eighty  miles  the  train  did 
not  stop.  There  was  a  clear  moon  the  latter  part  of 
the  journey,  and  the  mist  lay  along  the  ground,  look- 
ing very  much  like  a  surface  of  water.  We  reached 
London  at  about  ten,  and  I  found  S — ■  -^  expecting 
me. 


1855.]  LONDON,  127 

Yesterday  the  children  went  with  Fanny  to  the  Zo- 
ological Grardens ;  and,  after  sending  them  off,  S 
and  I  walked  to  Piccadilly,  and  there  took  a  cab  for 
Kensington  Grardens.  It  was  a  delightful  day,  — the 
best  of  all  weather,  the  real  English  good  weather,  — 
more  like  an  Indian  summer  than  anything  else  within 
my  experience ;  a  mellow  sunshine,  with  great  warmth 
in  it,  -^  a  soft,  balmy  air,  with  a  slight  haze  through  it. 
If  the  sun  made  us  a  little  too  warm,  we  had  but  to 
go  into  the  shade  to  be  immediately  refreshed.  The 
light  of  these  days  is  very  exquisite,  so  gently  bright, 
without  any  glare,  —  a  veiled  glow.  In  short,  it  is 
the  kindliest  mood  of  Nature,  and  almost  enough  to 
compensate  for  chill  and  dreary  months.  Moreover, 
there  is  more  of  such  weather  here  than  the  English 
climate  has  ever  had  credit  for. 

Kensington  Gardens  form  an  eminently  beautiful 
piece  of  artificial  woodland  and  park  scenery.  The 
old  palace  of  Kensington,  now  inhabited  by  the  Duch< 
ess  of  Inverness,  stands  at  one  extremity  ;  an  edifice  of 
no  great  mark,  built  of  brick,  covering  much  ground, 
and  low  in  proportion  to  its  extent.  In  front  of  it,  at 
a  considerable  distance,  there  is  a  sheet  of  water ;  and 
in  all  directions  there  are  vistas  of  wide  paths  among 
noble  trees,  standing  in  groves,  or  scattered  in  clumps ; 
everything  being  laid  out  with  free  and  generous 
spaces,  so  that  you  can  see  long  streams  of  sunshine 
among  the  trees,  and  there  is  a  pervading  influence  of 
quiet  and  remoteness.  Tree  does  not  interfere  with 
tree ;  the  art  of  man  is  seen  conspiring  with  Nature* 
as  if  they  had  consulted  together  how  to  make  a  beau- 
tiful scene,  and  had  taken  ages  of  quiet  thought  and 
tender  care  to  accomplish  it.  We  strolled  slowly  along 
these  paths,  and  sometimes  deviated  from  them^  to 


128  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [186& 

walk  beneath  the  trees,  many  of  the  leaves  of  which  lay 
beneath  our  feet,  yellow  and  brown,  and  with  a  pleas* 
ant  smell  of  vegetable  decay.  These  were  the  leaves 
of  chestnut-trees ;  the  other  trees  (unless  elms)  have 
yet  hardly  begun  to  shed  their  foliage,  although  you 
can  discern  a  sober  change  of  hue  in  the  woodland 
masses ;  and  the  trees  individualize  themselves  by  as« 
suming  each  its  own  tint,  though  in  a  very  modest 
way.  If  they  could  have  undergone  the  change  of  an 
American  autumn,  it  would  have  been  like  putting  on 
a  regal  robe.  Autumn  often  puts  one  on  in  America, 
but  it  is  apt  to  be  very  ragged. 

There  were  a  good  many  well-dressed  people  scat- 
tered through  the  grounds,  —  young  men  and  girls, 
husbands  with  their  wives  and  children,  nursery-maids 
and  little  babes  playing  about  in  the  grass.  Anybody 
might  have  entered  the  gardens,  I  suppose ;  but  only 
well-dressed  people  were  there,  —  not  of  the  upper 
classes,  but  shop-keepers,  clerks,  apprentices,  and  re- 
spectability of  that  sort.  It  is  pleasant  to  think  that 
the  people  have  the  freedom,  and  therefore  the  prop- 
erty, of  parks  like  this,  more  beautiful  and  stately 
than  a  nobleman  can  keep  to  himself.  The  extent  of 
Kensington  Gardens,  when  reckoned  together  with 
Hyde  Park,  from  which  it  is  separated  only  by  a  fence 
of  iron  rods,  is  very  great,  comprising  miles  of  green- 
sward and  woodland.  The  large  artificial  sheet  of 
water,  called  the  Serpentine  River,  lies  chiefly  in  Hyde 
Park,  but  comes  partly  within  the  precincts  of  the  gar- 
dens.  It  is  entitled  to  honorable  mention  among  the 
English  lakes,  being  larger  than  some  that  are  world- 
celebrated,  —  several  miles  long,  and  perhaps  a  stone's- 
throw  across  the  widest  part.  It  forms  the  paradise  of 
a  great  many  ducks  of  various  breeds,  which  are  ae- 


1865.J  LONDON.  129 

customed  to  be  fed  by  visitors,  and  come  flying  from 
afar,  touching  the  water  with  their  wings,  and  quack- 
ing  loudly  when  bread  or  cake  is  thrown  to  them.  I 
bought  a  bun  of  a  little  hunchbacked  man,  who  kept 
a  refreshment-stall  near  the  Serpentine,  and  bestowed 
it  piece-meal  on  these  ducks,  as  we  loitered  along  the 
bank.  We  left  the  park  by  another  gate,  and  walked 
homeward,  tiU  we  came  to  Tybumia,  and  saw  the  iron 
memorial  which  marks  where  the  gallows  used  to 
stand.  Thence  we  turned  into  Park  Lane,  then  into 
Upper  Grosvenor  Street,  and  reached  Hanover  Square 
sooner  than  we  expected. 

In  the  evening  I  walked  forth  to  Charing  Cross,  and 
thence  along  the  Strand  and  Fleet  Street,  where  I 
made  no  new  discoveries,  unless  it  were  the  Mitre 
Tavern.  I  mean  to  go  into  it  some  day.  The  streets 
were  much  thronged,  and  there  seemed  to  be  a  good 
many  young  people,  —  lovers,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  —  who 
had  spent  the  day  together,  and  were  going  innocently 
home.     Perhaps  so,  —  perhaps  not. 

September  2bth.  —  Yesterday  forenoon  J and  I 

walked  out,  with  no  very  definite  purpose ;  but,  seeing 
a  narrow  passageway  from  the  Strand  down  to  the 
river,  we  went  through  it,  and  gained  access  to  a  steam- 
boat, plying  thence  to  London  Bridge.  The  fare  was 
a  halfpenny  apiece,  and  the  boat  almost  too  much 
crowded  for  standing-room.  This  part  of  the  river 
presents  the  water-side  of  London  in  a  rather  pleas- 
anter  aspect  than  below  London  Bridge.,  —  the  Tem- 
ple, with  its  garden,  Somerset  House,  —  and,  gener- 
ally, a  less  tumble-down  and  neglected  look  about  the 
buildings ;  although,  after  all,  the  metropolis  does  not 
see  a  very  stately  face  in.  its  mirror.     I  saw  Alsatia 


180  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185& 

betwixt  the  Temple  and  Blaekfriar's  Bridge.  Its  pre- 
cincts looked  very  narrow,  and  not  particularly  distin* 
oruishable,  at  this  day,  from  the  portions  of  the  city  on 
either  side  of  it.  At  London  Bridge  we  got  aboard  of 
a  Woolwich  steamer,  and  went  farther  down  the  river, 
passing  the  Custom  House  and  the  Tower,  the  only 
prominent  objects  rising  out  of  the  dreary  range  of 
shabbiness  which  stretches  along  close  to  the  water's 
edge. 

From  this  remote  part  of  London  we  walked  to- 
wards the  heart  of  the  city ;  and,  as  we  went,  matters 
seemed  to  civilize  themselves  by  degrees,  and  the  streets 
grew  crowded  with  cabs,  omnibuses,  drays,  and  carts. 
We  passed,  I  think,  through  Whitechapel,  and,  reach- 
ing St.  Paul's,  got  into  an  omnibus,  and  drove  to  Ee* 
gent  Street,  whence  it  was  but  a  step  or  two  home. 

In  the  afternoon,  at  four  o'clock,  S and  I  went 

to  call  on  the  American  Ambassador  and  Miss  L . 

The  lady  was  not  at  home,  but  we  went  in  to  see  Mr. 

,  and  were  shown  into  a  stately  drawing-room,  the 

furniture  of  which  was  sufficiently  splendid,  but  rather 
the  worse  for  wear,  —  being  hired  furniture,  no  doubt. 
The  ambassador  shortly  appeared,  looking  venerable, 
as  usual,  —  or  rather  more  so  than  usual,  —  benign, 
and  very  pale.  His  deportment  towards  ladies  is 
highly  agreeable  and  prepossessing,  and  he  paid  very 

kind  attention  to  S ,  thereby  quite  confirming  her 

previous  good  feeling  towards  him.  She  thinks  that 
he  is  much  changed  since  she  saw  him  last,  at  dinner, 
at  our  house,  r— more  infirm,  more  aged,  and  with  a 
singular  depression  in  his  manner.  I,  too,  think  that 
age  has  latterly  come  upon  him  wjth  great  rapidity. 

He  said  that  Miss  L was  going  home  on  the  6th 

of  October,  and  that  he  himself  had  long  purposed  go* 


1855.]  LONDON.  131 

ing,  but  bad  received  despatcbes  wbieb  obliged  bim  to 
put  off  bis  departure.  Tbe  President,  be  said,  bad 
just  written,  requesting  bim  to  remain  till  April,  but 
tbis  be  was  determined  not  to  do.  I  ratber  tbink  tbat 
be  does  really  wisb  to  return,  and  not  for  any  ambi- 
tious views  concerning  tbe  Presidency,  but  from  an 
old  man's  natural  desire  to  be  at  borne,  and  among  bis 
own  people. 

S spoke  to  bim  about  an  order  from  tbe  Lord 

Cbamberlain  for  admission  to  view  tbe  two  Houses  of 
Parliament;  and  tbe  ambassador  drew  from  bis  pocket 
a  colored  silk  bandkercbief ,  and  made  a  knot  in  it,  in 
order  to  remind  bimself  to  ask  tbe  Lord  Cbamberlain. 
Tbe  bomeliness  of  tbis  little  incident  bas  a  sort  of  pro- 
priety and  keeping  witb  mucb  of  Mr. 's  manner, 

but  I  would  ratber  not  bave  bim  do  so  before  Englisb 
people.  He  arranged  to  send  a  close  carriage  for  us 
to  come  and  see  bim  socially  tbis  evening.  After  leav- 
ing bis  bouse  we  drove  round  Hyde  Park,  and  tbence 
to  Portland  Place,  wbere  we  left  cards  for  Mrs.  Rus- 
sell Sturgis;  tbence  into  Regent's  Park,  and  tbence 

bome.     U and  J accompanied  us  tbrougbout 

tbese  drives,  but  remained  in  tbe  carriage  during  our 

call  on  Mr. .     In  tbe  evening  I  strolled  out,  and 

walked  as  far  as  St.  Paul's,  —  never  getting  enougb 
of  tbe  bustle  of  London,  wbicb  may  weary,  but  can 
never  satisfy  me.  By  nigbt  London  looks  wild  and 
dreamy,  and  fills  me  witb  a  sort  of  pleasant  dread.  It 
was  a  clear  evening  witb  a  bright  Englisb  moon,  — 
that  is  to  say,  what  we  Americans  should  call  ratber 
dim. 

September  26th.  —  Yesterday,  at  eleven,  I  walked 
towards  Westminster  Abbey,  and  as  1  drew  near  tbe 


132  ENGLISH  NOTE^BOOKS.  [1853. 

Abbey  bells  were  clamorous  for  joy,  ehiimng  merrilyi 
musically,  and  obstreperously,  —  the  most  rejoicing 
sound  that  canr  be  conceived ;  and  we  ought  to  have  a 
chime  of  bells  in  every  American  town  and  village, 
were  it  only  to  keep  alive  the  celebration  of  the  Fourth 
of  July,  I  conjectured  that  there  might  have  been 
another  victory  over  the  Kussians,  that  perhaps  the 
northern  side  of  Sebastopol  had  surrendered;  but 
soon  I  saw  the  riddle  that  these  merry  beUs  were  pro- 
claiming. There  were  a  great  many  private  carriages, 
and  a  large  concourse  of  loungers  and  spectators,  near 
the  door  of  the  church  that  stands  close  under  the 
•  eaves  of  the  Abbey.  Gentlemen  and  ladies,  gayly 
dressed,  were  issuing  forth,  carriages  driving  away, 
and  others  drawing  up  to  the  door  in  their  turn ;  and, 
in  short,  a  marriage  had  just  been  celebrated  in  the 
church,  and  this  was  tiie  wedding-party.  The  last 
time  I  was  there,  Westminster  was  flinging  out  its 
great  voice  of  joy  for  a  national  triumph;  now,  for 
the  happy  union  of  two  lovers.  What  a  mighty  sym- 
pathizer is  this  old  Abbey  I 

It  is  pleasant  to  recognize  the  mould  and  fashion  of 
English  features  through  the  marble  of  many  of  the 
statues  and  busts  in  ihe  Abbey,  even  though  they 
may  be  clad  in  Roman  robes.  I  am  inclined  to  think 
tiiem,  in  many  cases,  faithful  likenesses ;  and  it  brings 
them  nearer  to  the  mind,  to  see  these  original  sculp- 
tures, —  you  see  the  man  at  but  one  remove,  as  if  you 
caught  his  image  in  a  looking-glass.  The  bust  of  Gay 
seemed  to  me  very  good,  —  a  thoughtful  and  hu- 
morous sweetness  in  the  face.  Goldsmith  has  as  good 
a  position  as  any  poet  in  the  Abbey,  his  bust  and 
tablet  filling  the  pointed  arch  over  a  door  that  seems 
to  lead  towards  the  cloisters.   No  doubt  he  would  have 


1855.]  LONDON.  188 

liked  to  be  assured  of  so  conspicuons  a  place.  There  is 
one  monument  to  a  native  American,  "  Charles  Wragg, 
Esq.,  of  South  Carolina,"  —  the  only  one,  I  suspect, 
in  Westminster  Abbey,  and  he  acquired  this  memorial 
by  the  most  un-American  of  qualities,  his  loyalty  to 
his  king.  He  was  one  of  the  refugees  leaving  Amer- 
ica in  1777,  being  shipwrecked  on  his  passage,  and 
the  monument  was  put  up  by  his  sister.  It  is  a  small 
tablet  with  a  representation  of  Mr.  Wragg's  shipwreck 
at  the  base.  Next  to  it  is  the  large  monument  of  Sir 
Cloudesley  Shovel,  which  I  think  Addison  ridicules, 
—  the  Admiral,  in  a  f uU-bottomed  wig  and  Soman 
dress,  but  with  a  broad  English  face,  reclining  with 
his  head  on  his  hand,  and  looking  at  you  with  great 
placidity.  I  stood  at  either  end  of  the  nave,  and  en- 
deavored to  take  in  the  full  beauty  and  majesty  of  the 
edifice ;  but  apparently  was  not  in  a  proper  state  of 
mind,  for  nothing  came  of  it.  It  is  singular  how  like 
an  avenue  of  overarching  trees  are  these  lofty  aisles 
of  a  cal7hedral. 

Leaving  the  Abbey  about  one  o'clock,  I  walked  into 
the  city  as  far  as  Grace  Church  Street,  and  there  called 

on  the  American  Consul,  General ,  who  had  been 

warmly  introduced  to  me  last  year  by  a  letter  from  the 
President.  I  like  the  General ;  a  kindly  and  honora- 
ble man,  of  Simple  manners  and  large  experience  of 
life.  Afterwards  I  called  on  Mr.  Oakford,  an  Amer- 
ican connected  in  business  with  Mr.  Crosby,  from  whom 
I  wanted  some  information  as  to  the  sailing  of  steamers 
•from  Southampton  to  Lisbon.  Mr.  Crosby  was  not  in 
town.  .  .  . 

At  eight  o'clock  Mr. sent  his  carriage,  accord- 
ing to  previous  arrangement,  to  take  us  to  spend  the 
evening  socially.     Miss  L received  us  with  proper 


184  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1855. 

cordiality,  and  looked  quite  becomingly,  —  more  sweet 
and  simple  in  aspect  than  when  I  have  seen  her  in  full 
dress.  Shortly  the  ambassador  appeared,  and  made 
himself  highly  agreeable;  not  that  he  is  a  brilliant 
conversationist,  but  his  excellent  sense  and  good-hu- 
mor, and  all  that  he  has  seen  and  been  a  part  of,  are 
sufficient  resources  to  draw  upon.  We  talked  of  the 
Queen,  whom  he  spoke  of  with  high  respect ;  ...  of 
the  late  Czar,  whom  he  knew  intimately  while  minister 
to  Russia,  —  and  he  quite  confirms  all  that  has  been 
said   about  the   awful   beauty  of  his  person.     Mr. 

's  characterization  of  him  was  quite  favorable; 

he  thought  better  of  his  heart  than  most  people,  and 
adduced  his  sports  with  a  school  of  children,  — twenty 
of  whom,  perhaps,  he  made  to  stand  rigidly  in  a  row, 
like  so  many  bricks,  —  then  giving  one  a  push,  would 
laugh  obstreperously  to  see  the  whole  row  tumble 
down.  He  would  lie  on  his  back,  and  allow  the  little 
things  to  scramble  over  him.  His  Majesty  admitted 
Mr. to  great  closeness  of  intercourse,  and  in- 
formed him  of  a  conspiracy  which  was  then  on  foot 
for  the  Czar's  murder.  On  the  evening  when  the  as- 
sassination was  to  take  place,  the  Czar  did  not  refrain 
from  going  to  the  public  place  where  it  was  to  be  per- 
petrated, although,  indeed,  great  precautions  had  been 
taken  to  frustrate  the  schemes  of  the  conspirators. 

Mr. said,  that,  in  case  the  plot  had  succeeded, 

all  the  foreigners,  including  himseK,  would  likewise 
have  been  murdered,  the  native  Eussians  having  a 
bitter  hatred  against  foreigners.  He  observed  that  he. 
had  been  much  attached  to  the  Czar,  and  had  never 
joined  in  the  English  abuse  of  him.  His  sympathiesL 
however,  are  evidently  rather  English  than  Bussian, 
in  this  war.    Speaking  of  the  present  emperor,  he  said 


1855.]  LONDON.  135 

that  Lord  Heytebuiy,  formerly  English  ambassador  in 
Russia,  lately  told  him  that  he  complimented  the  Czar 
Nicholas  on  the  good  qualities  of  his  son,  saying  that 
he  was  acknowledged  by  aU  to  be  one  of  the  most 
amiable  youths  in  the  world.  '\Too  amiable,  I  fear, 
for  his  position,''  answered  the  Czar.  ^^  He  has  too 
much  of  his  mother  in  him." 

September  21th,  —  Yesterday,  much  earlier  than 

English  people  ever  do  such  things.  General  

made  us  a  call  on  his  way  to  the  Consulate,  and  sat 
talking  a  stricken  hour  or  thereabouts.  Scarcely  had 
he  gone  when  Mrs.  Oakf  ord  and  her  daughter  came. 

After  sitting  a  long  while,  they  took  U to  their 

house,  near  St.  John's  Wood,  to  spend  the  night.  I 
had  been  writing  my  journal  and  official  correspond- 
ence during  such  intervals  as  these  calls  left  me;  and 

now,  concluding  these  businesses,  S ^  J ,  and 

I  went  out  and  took  a  cab  for  the  terminus  of  the 
Crystal  Palace  Bailway,  whither  we  proceeded  over 
Waterloo  Bridge,  and  reached  the  palace  not  far  from 
three  o'clock.  It  was  a  beautifully  bright  day,  such 
as  we  have  in  wonderful  succession  this  month.  The 
Crystal  Palace  gleamed  in  the  sunshine  ;  but  I  do  not 
think  a  very  impressive  edifice  can  be  built  of  glass, 
—  light  and'  airy,  to  be  sure,  but  stiU  it  will  be  no 
other  than  an  overgrown  conservatory.  It  is  unlike 
anything  else  in  England  ;  uncongenial  with  the  Eng- 
lish character,  without  privacy,  destitute  of  mass, 
weight,  and  shadow,  unsusceptible  of  ivy,  lichens,  or 
any  mellowness  from  age. 

The  train  of  carriages  stops  within  the  domain  of 
the  palace,  where  there  is  a  long  ascending  corridor 
np  into  the  edifice.    There  was  a  very  pleasant  odor 


186  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

of  heliotrope  diffused  through  the  air;  and,  indeed, 
the  whole  atmosphere  of  the  Crystal  Palace  is  sweet 
with  various  flower-scents,  and  mild  and  balmy,  though 
sufficiently  fresh  and  cool.  It  would  be  a  delightful 
climate  for  invalids  to  spend  the  winter  in  ;  and  if  all 
England  could  be  roofed  over  with  glass,  it  would  be 
a  great  improvement  on  its  present  condition. 

The  first  thing  we  did,  before  fairly  getting  into  the 
palace,  was  to  sit  down  in  a  large  ante-hall,  and  get 
some  bread  and  butter  and  a  pint  of  Bass's  pale  ale, 

together  with  a  cup  of  coffee  for  S .     This  was 

the  best  refreshment  we  could  find  at  that  ^ot  5  but 
farther  within  we  found  abundance  of  refreshment- 
rooms,  and  John  Bull  and  his  wife  and  famUy  at  fifty 
little  round  tables,  busily  engaged  with  cold  fowl,  cold 
beef,  ham,  tongue,  and  bottles  of  ale  and  stout,  and 
half-pint  decanters  of  sherry.  The  English  probably 
eat  with  more  simple  enjoyment  than  any  other  peo- 
ple ;  not  ravenously,  as  we  often  do,  and  not  exqui- 
sitely and  artificially,  like  the  French,  but  deliberately 
and  vigorously,  and  with  due  absorption  in  the  busi- 
ness, 80  that  nothing  good  is  lost  upon  them.  ...  It 
is  remarkable  how  large  a  featiure  the  refreshment- 
rooms  make  in  the  arrangements  of  the  Crystal  Pal- 
ace. 

The  Crystal  Palace  is  a  gigantic  toy  for  the  Eng- 
lish people  to  play  with.  The  design  seems  to  be  to 
reproduce  all  past  ages,  by  representing  the  features  of 
their  interior  architecture,  costume,  religion,  domestic 
life,  and  everything  that  can  be  expressed  by  paint 
and  plaster ;  and,  likewise,  to  bring  all  climates  and 
regions  of  the  earth  within  thdse  enchanted  precincts, 
with  their  inhabitants  and  animals  in  living  semblance, 
and  their  vegetable  productions,  as  far  as  possible, 


1865.]  LONDON.  18T| 

i 
alive  and  reaL  Some  part  of  the  design  is  already  ac< 
Gomplished  to  a  wonderful  degree.  The  Indian,  the 
Egyptian,  and  especially  the  Arabian,  courts  are  ad« 
mirably  executed.  I  never  saw  or  conceived  anything 
so  gorgeous  as  the  Alhambra.  There  are  Byzantine 
and  mediaeval  representations,  too,  —  reproductions  of 
ancient  apartments,  decorations,  statues  from  tombs, 
monuments,  religious  and  funereal,  —  that  gave  me 
new  ideas  of  what  antiquity  has  been.  It  takes  down 
one's  overweening  opinion  of  the  present  time,  to  see 
how  many  kinds  of  beauty  and  magnificence  have 
heretofore  existed,  and  are  now  quite  passed  away  and 
forgotten ;  and  to  find  that  we,  who  suppose  that,  in 
all  matters  of  taste,  our  age  is  the  very  flower-season 
of  the  time,  —  that  we  are  poor  and  meagre  as  to 
many  things  in  which  they  were  rich.  There  is  noth* 
ing  gorgeous  now.  We  live  a  very  naked  life.  This 
was  the  only  reflection  I  remember  making,  as  we 
passed  from  century  to  century,  through  the  succes- 
sion of  classic.  Oriental,  and  mediaeval  courts,  adown 
the  lapse  of  time,  —  seeing  all  these  ages  in  as  brief  a 
space  as  the  Wandering  Jew  might  glance  along  them 
in  his  memory.  I  suppose  a  Pompeian  house  with  its 
courts  and  interior  apartments  was  as  faithfully  shl^wn 
as  it  was  possible  to  do  it.  I  doubt  whether  I  ever 
should  feel  at  home  in  such  a  house. 

In  the  pool  of  a  fountain,  of  which  there  are  several 
beautiful  ones  within  the  palace,  besides  larger  ones  m 
the  garden  before  it,  we  saw  tropical  plants  growing, 
—  larg^  water-lilies  of  various  colors,  some  white,  like 
our  Concord  pond-lily,  only  larger,  and  more  numer- 
ously leafed.  There  were  great  circular  green  leaves, 
lying  flat  on  the  water,  with  a  circimiference  equal  to 
that  of  a  centre-table.     Tropical  trees,  too,  varieties  of 


138  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185& 

palm  and  others,  grew  in  immense  pots  or  tubs,  but 
seemed  not  to  enjoy  themselves  much.  The  atmos- 
phere must,  after  all,  be  far  too  cool  to  bring  out  their 
native  luxuriance  ;  and  this  difficulty  can  never  be  got 
over  at  a  less  expense  than  that  of  absolutely  stewing 
the  visitors  and  attendants.  Otherwise,  it  would  be 
very  practicable  to  have  all  the  vegetable  world,  at 
least,  within  these  precincts. 

The  palace  is  very  large,  and  our  time  was  short,  it 
being  desirable  to  get  home  early ;  so,  after  a  stay  of 
little  more  than  two  hours,  we  took  the  rail  back  again, 
and  reached  Hanover  Square  at  about  six.  After 
tea  I  wandered  forth,  with  some  thought  of  going  to 
the  theatre,  and,  passing  the  entrance  of  one,  in  the 
Strand,  I  went  in,  and  found  a  farce  in  progress.  It 
was  one  of  the  minor  theatres,  very  minor  indeed; 
but  the  pieces,  so  far  as  I  saw  them,  were  sufficiently 
laughable.  There  were  some  Spanish  dances,  too, 
very  graceful  and  pretty.  Between  the  plays  a  girl 
from  the  neighboring  saloon  came  to  the  doors  of  the 
boxes,  offering  lemonade  and  ginger-beer  to  the  occu- 
pants. A  person  in  my  box  took  a  glass  of  lemonade, 
and  shared  it  with  a  yoimg  lady  by  his  side,  both 
sipping  out  of  the  same  glass.  The  audience  seemed 
rathei*  heavy,  —  not  briskly  responsive  to  the  efforts 
of  the  performers,  but  good-natured,  and  willing  to 
be  pleased,  especially  with  some  patriotic  dances,  in 
which  much  waving  and  intermingling  of  the  French 
and  English  flags  was  introduced.  Theatrical  per- 
formances soon  weary  me  of  late  years ;  and  I  came 
away  before  the  curtain  rose  on  the  concluding  piece. 

September  28^A.  —  S and  I  walked  to  Charing 

Cross  yesterday  forenoon,  and  there  took  a  Hansom 


1855.]  LONDON.  139 

cab  to  St.  Paul's  CathedraL  It  had  been  a  thick, 
foggy  mqrmng,  but  had  vrarmed  and  brightened  into 
one  of  the  bahniest  and  sunniest  of  noons.  As  we  en- 
tered the  cathedral,  the  long  bars  of  sunshine  were 
falling  from  its  upper  windows  through  the  great  in- 
terior atmosphere,  and  were  made  visible  by  the  dust, 
or  mist,  floating  about  in  it.  It  is  a  grand  edifice,  and 
I  liked  it  quite  as  much  as  on  my  first  view  of  it,  al- 
though a  sense  of  coldness  and  nakedness  is  felt  when 
we  compare  it  with  Gothic  churches.  It  is  more  an 
external  work  than  the  Gothic  churches  are,  and  is 
not  so  made  out  of  the  dim,  awful,  mysterious,  gro- 
tesque, intricate  nature  of  man.  But  it  is  beautiful 
and  grand.  I  love  its  remote  distances,  and  wide,  clear 
spaces,  its  airy  massiveness ;  its  noble  arches,  its  sky- 
like  dome,  which,  I  think,  should  be  all  over  light, 
with  ground-glass,  instead  of  being  dark,  with  only  di- 
minutive windows. 

.  We  walked  round,  looking  at  the  monuments,  which 
are  so  arranged,  at  the  bases  of  columns  and  in  niches, 
as  to  coincide  with  the  regularity  of  the  cathedral,  and 
be  each  an  additional  ornament  to  the  whole,  however 
defective  individually  as  works  of  art.  We  thought 
that  many  of  these  monuments  were  striking  and  im- 
pressive, though  there  was  a  pervading  sameness  of 
idea,  —  a  great  many  Victorys  and  Valors  and  Bri- 
tannias,  and  a  great  expenditure  of  wreaths,  which 
must  have  cost  Victory  a  considerable  sum  at  any 
florist's  whom  she  patronizes.  A  very  great  majority 
of  the  memorials  are  to  naval  and  military  men,  slain 
in  Bonaparte's  wars  ;  men  in  whom  one  feels  little  or 
no  interest  (except  Picton,  Abercrombie,  Moore,  Nel- 
son, of  course,  and  a  few  others  really  historic),  they 
having  done  nothing  remarkable,  save  having  been 


140  ENGLISB  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

shot,  nor  shown  any  more  brains  than  the  cannon-balls 
that  killed  them.  All  the  statues  have  the  dust  of 
years  upon  them,  strewn  thic^kly  in  the  folds  of  their 
marble  garments,  and  on  any  limb  stretched  horizon*i 
tally,  and  on  their  noses,  so  that  the  expression  is 
much  obscured.  I  think  the  nation  m^ht  employ 
people  to  brush  away  the  dust  from  the  statues  of  its 
heroes.  But,  on  the  whole,  it  is  very  fine  to  look 
through  the  broad  arches  of  the  cathedral,  and  see, 
at  the  foot  of  some  distant  pillar,  a  group  of  sculp- 
tured figures,  commemorating  some  man  and  deed 
that  (whether  worth  remembering  or  no)  the  nation 
is  so  happy  as  to  reverence.  In  Westminster  Abbey, 
the  monuments  are  so  crowded,  and  so  oddly  patched 
together  upon  the  walls,  that  they  are  ornamental  only 
in  a  mural  point  of  view ;  and,  moreover,  the  quaint 
and  grotesque  taste  of  many  of  them  might  well  make 
the  spectator  laugh,  —  an  effect  not  likely  to  be  pro- 
duced by  the  monuments  in  St.  Paul's.  But,  after  aU, 
a  man  might  read  the  walls  of  the  Abbey  day  after 
day  with  ever-fresh  interest,  whereas  the  cold  propri- 
ety of  liie  cathedral  would  weary  him  in  due  time. 

We  did  not  ascend  to  the  galleries  and  other  points 
of  interest  aloft,  nor  go  down  into  the  vaultsi,  where 
Nelson's  sarcophagus  is  shown,  and  many  monuments 
of  the  old  Gothic  cathedral,  which  stood  on  this  site, 
before  the  great  fire.  They  say  that  these  lower  re- 
gions are  comfortably  warm  and  dry ;  but  as  we 
walked  round  in  front,  within  the  iron  railing  of  the 
churchyard,  we  passed  an  open  door,  giving  access 
to  the  crypt,  and  it  breathed  out  a  chiU  like  death 
upon  us. 

It  is  pleasant  to  stand  in  the  centre  of  the  cathe- 
dral, and  hear  the  noise  of  London,  loudest  all  round 


1855.]  LONDON.  141 

this  spot,  —  haw  it  is  calmed  into  a  sound  as  proper 
to  be  heard  through  the  aisles  as  the  tones  of  its  own 
organ.  If  St.  Paul's  were  to  be  burnt  again  (having 
already  been  burnt  and  risen  three  or  four  times  since 
the  sixth  century),  I  wonder  whether  it  would  ev^  be 
rebuilt  in  the  same  spot !  I  doubt  whether  the  city 
and  the  nation  are  so  religious  as  to  consecrate  Iheir 
midmost  heart  for  the  site  of  a  church,  where  land 
would  be  so  raluable  by  the  square  inch. 

Coming  from  the  cathedral,  we  went  through  Pater- 
noster Row,  and  saw  Ave  Mary  Lane ;  all  this  locality 
appearing  to  have  got  its  nomenclature  from  monk- 
ish personages.  We  now  took  a  cab  for  the  British 
Museum,  but  found  this  to  be  one  of  the  days  ou 
which  strangers  are  not  admitted ;  so  we  slowly  walked 
into  Oxford  Street,  and  then  strolled  homeward,  till, 
coming  to  a  sort  of  bazaar,  we  went  in  and  found  a 
gaflery  of  pictures.  This  bazaar  proved  to  be  the 
Pantheon,  and  the  first  picture  we  saw  in  the  gallery 
was  Haydon's  Resurrection  of  Lazarus, --a  great 
height  and  breadth  of  canvas,  right  before  you  as  you 
ascend  the  stairs.  The  face  of  Lazarus  Is  very  awful, 
and  not  to  be  forgotten ;  it  is  as  true  as  if  the  painter 
had  seen  it,  or  had  been  himself  the  resurrected  man 
and  felt  it ;  but  the  rest  of  the  picture  signified  noth- 
ing, and  is  vulgar  and  disagreeable  besides.  There  are 
several  other  pictures  by  Haydon  in  this  collection,  — 
the  Banishment  of  Aristides,  Nero  with  his  Harp,  and 
the  Conflagration  of  Rome ;  but  the  last  is  perfectly 
ridiculous,  and  all  of  them  are  exceedingly  unpleasant. 
I  should  be  sorry  to  live  in  a  house  that  contained  one 
of  them.  The  best  thing  of  Haydon  was  a  hasty  dash 
of  a  sketch  for  a  small,  full-length  portrait  of  Words- 
worth, sitting  on  the  crag  of  a  mountain.     I  doubt 


142  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

whether  Wordsworth's  likeness  has  ever  been  so  poet- 
ically brought  out.  This  gallery  is  altogether  of  mod- 
em  painters,  and  it  seems  to  be  a  receptacle  for  pic- 
tures by  artists  who  can  obtain  places  nowhere  else,  — . 
at  least,  1  never  heard  of  their  names  before.  They 
were  very  uninteresting,  almost  without  exception,  and 
yet  •some  of  the  pictures  were  done  cleverly  enough. 
There  is  very  little  talent  in  this  world,  and  what 
there  is,  it  seems  to  me,  is  pretty  well  known  and  ac- 
knowledged. We  don't  often  stumble  upon  geniuses 
in  obscure  comers. 

Leaving  the  gallery,  we  wandered  through  the  rest 
of  the  bazaar,  which  is  devoted  to  the  sale  of  ladies' 
finery,  jewels,  perfumes,  children's  toys,  and  all  man- 
ner of  small  and  pretty  rubbish.  •  .  •  In  the  evening 
I  again  sallied  forth,  and  lost  myself  for  an  hour  or 
two ;  at  last  recognizing  my  whereabouts  in  Tottenham 
Court  Road.  In  such  quarters  of  London  it  seems  to 
be  the  habit  of  people  to  take  their  suppers  in  the 
open  air.  You  see  old  women  at  the  corners,  with 
kettles  of  hot  water  for  tea  or  coffee ;  and  as  I  passed 
a  butcher's  open  shop,  he  was  just  taking  out  large 
quantities  of  boiled  beef,  smoking  hot.  Butchers' 
stands  are  remarkable  for  their  profuse  expenditure 
of  gas ;  it  belches  forth  from  the  pipes  in  great  jBar- 
ing  jets  of  flame,  uncovered  by  any  glass,  and  broadly 
illuminating  the  neighborhood.  I  have  not  observed 
that  London  ever  goes  to  bed. 

September  29^A. — Yesterday  we  walked  to  the  Brit- 
ish Museum.  A  sentinel  or  two  kept  guard  before 
the  gateway  of  this  extensive  edifice  in  Great  Eussell 
Street,  and  there  was  a  porter  at  the  lodge,  and  one 
or  two  policemen  lounging  about,  but  entrance  was 


1855.]  LONDON,  143 

free,  and  we  walked  in  without  question.  Officials 
and  policemen  were  likewise  scattered  about  the  great 
entrance-hall,  none  of  whom,  however,  interfered  with 
us  ;  so  we  took  whatever  way  we  chose,  and  wandered 
about  at  will.  It  is  a  hopeless,  and  to  me,  generally^ 
a  depressing  business  to  go  through  an  immense  mul- 
tifarious show  like  this,  glancing  at  a  thousand  things* 
and  conscious  of  some  little  titillation  of  mind  from 
them,  but  really  taking  in  nothing,  and  getting  no 
good  from  anything.  One  need  not  go  beyond  the 
limits  of  the  British  Museum  to  be  profoundly  accom- 
plished in  all  branches  of  science,  art,  and  literature : 
only  it  would  take  a  lifetime  to  exhaust  it  in  any  one 
department ;  but  to  see  it  as  we  did,  and  with  no  pros- 
pect of  ever  seeing  it  more  at  leisure,  only  impressed 
me  with  the  truth  of  the  old  apothegm,  ^^  Life  is  shorty 
and  Art  is  long."  The  fact  is,  the  world  is  accumu- 
lating too  many  materials  for  knowledge.  We  do  not 
recognize  for  rubbish  what  is  really  rubbish ;  and  un- 
der this  head  might  be  reckoned  very  many  things  one 
sees  in  the  British  Museum ;  and,  as  each  generation 
leaves  its  fragments  and  potsherds  behind  it,  such  will 
finally  be  the  desperate  conclusion  of  the  learned. 

We  went  first  among  some  antique  marbles,  — 
busts,  statues,  terminal  gods,  with  several  of  the  Ro- 
man emperors  among  them.  We  saw  here  the  bust 
whence  Haydon  took  his  ugly  and  ridiculous  likeness 
of  Nero,  —  a  foolish  thing  to  do.  Julius  Caesar  was 
there,  too,  looking  more  like  a  modem  old  man  than 
any  other  bust  in  the  series.  Perhaps  there  may  be  a 
universality  in  his  face,  that  gives  it  this  independence 
of  race  and  epoch.  We  glimpsed  along  among  the 
old  marbles,  —  Elgin  and  others,  which  are  esteemed 
such  treasures  of  art ;  —  the  oddest  fragments,  many 


144  ENGLISH  NOTE^BOOKS.  [1855. 

of  tbem  smashed  by  their  fall  from  high  places,  or  by 
being  pounded  to  pieces  by  barbarians,  or  gnawed 
away  by  time ;  the  surface  roughened  by  being  rained 
upon  for  thousands  of  years ;  almost  always  a  nose 
knocked  off ;  sometimes  a  headless  form ;  a  great  de- 
ficiency of  feet  and  hands,  —  poor,  maimed  veterans 
in  this  hospital  of  incurables.  The  beauty  of  the  most 
perfect  of  them  must  be  ratlier  guessed  at,  and  seen 
by  faith,  than  with  the  bodily  eye  ;  to  look  at  the  cor- 
roded faces  and  forms  is  Kke  trying  to  see  angels 
through  mist  and  cloud.  I  suppose  nine  tenths  of 
those  who  seem  to  be  in  raptures  about  these  frag- 
ments do  not  really  care  about  them;  neither  do  I. 
And  if  I  were  actually  moved,, I  should  doubt  whether 
it  were  by  the  statues  or  by  my  own  fancy. 

We  passed,  too,  through  Assyrian  saloons  and  Egyp- 
tian saloons,  —  all  full  of  monstrosities  and  horrible 
uglinesses,  especially  the  Egyptian,  and  all  the  innum- 
erable relics  that  I  saw  of  them  in  these  saloons,  and 
among  the  mummies,  instead  of  bringing  me  closer  to 
them,  removed  me  farther  and  farther ;  there  being  no 
common  ground  of  sympathy  between  them  and  us. 
Their  gigantic  statues  are  certainly  very  curious.  I 
saw  a  hand  and  arm  up  to  the  shoulder  fifteen  feet  in 
length,  and  made  of  some  stone,  that  deemed  harder 
and  heavier  than  granite,  not  having  lost  its  polish  in 
all  the  rough  usage  that  it  has  imder^one.  There  was 
a  fist  on  a  still  larger  scale,  almost  as  big  as  a  hogs- 
head. Hideous,  blubber  -  lipped  faces  of  giants,  and 
human  shapes  with  beasts'  heads  on  them.  The  Egyp- 
tian controverted  Nature  in  all  things,  only  using  it  as 
a  groundwork  to  depict  the  unnatural  upon.  Their 
mummifying  process  is  a  result  of  this  tendency.  We 
saw  one  very  perfect  mummy,  • —  a  priestess,  with  ap 


1856.]  LONDON.  145 

parently  only  one  more  fold  of  linen  betwixt  us  and 
her  antique  flesh,  and  this  fitting  closely  to  her  person 
from  head  to  foot,  so  that  we  could  see  the  lineaments 
of  her  face  and  the  shape  of  her  limbs  as  perfectly  as 
if  quite  bare.  I  judge  that,  she  may  have  been  very 
beautiful  in  her  day,  —  whenever  that  was.  One  or 
two  of  the  poor  tiling's  toes  (her  feet  were  wonderfully 
small  and  delicate)  protruded  from  the  linen,  and, 
perhaps,  not  having  been  so  perfectly  embalmed,  the 
flesh  had  fallen  away,  leaving  only  some  little  bones. 
I  don't  think  this  young  woman  has  gained  much  by 
not  turning  to  dust  in  the  time  of  the  Pharaohs.'  We 
also  saw  some  bones  of  a  king  that  had  been  taken  out 
of  a  pjrramid ;  a  very  fragmentary  skeleton.  Ainong 
the  classic  marbles  I  peeped  into  an  urn  that  once  con- 
tained the  ashes  of  dead  people,  and  the  bottom  still 
had  an  ashy  hue.  I  like  this  mode  of  disposing  of 
dead  bodies ;  but  it  would  be.  still  better  to  bum  them 
and  scatter  the  ashes,  instead  of  hoarding  them  up, 

—  to  scatter  them  oyer  wheat-fields  or  flower-beds. 
Besides  these  antique  halls,  we  wandered  through 

saloons  of  antediluvian  animals,  some  set  up  in  skele- 
tons, others  imprisoned  in  solid -stone ;  also  specimens 
of  still  extant  animals,  birds,  reptiles,  shells,  minerals, 

—  the  whole  circle  of  human  knowledge  and  guess- 
work,—  till  I  wished  that  the  whole  Past  mi^t  be 
swept  away,  and  each  generation  compelled  to  bury 
and  destroy  whatever  it  had  produced,  before  being 
permitted  to  leave  the  stage.-  When  we  quit  a  house, 
we  are  expected  to  make  it  clean  for  the  next  occu- 
pant ;  why  ought  we  not  to  leave  a  clean  world  for  the 
next  generation  ?  We  did  not  see  the  library  of  above 
half  a  million  of  volumes;  else,  I  suppose,  I  should 
have  found  full  occasion  to  wish  that  burnt  and  buried 

VOL.  Tin.  10 


146  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  [1855. 

likewise.  In  truth,  a  greater  part  of  it  is  as  good  as 
buried,  so  far  as  any  readers  are  concerned.  Leaving 
the  Museum,  we  sauntered  home.  After  a  little  rest, 
I  set  out  for  St.  John's  Wood,  and  arrived  thither  by 
dint  of  repeated  inquiries.  It  is  a  pretty  suburb,  in- 
habited by  people  of  the  middling  class.     U met 

me  joyfully,  but  seemed  to  have  had  a  good  time  with 
Mrs.  Oakf ord  and  her  daughter ;  and,  being  pressed 
to  stay  to  tea,  I  could  not  well  help  it.  Before  tea  I 
sat  talking  with  Mrs.  Oakford  and  a  friend  of  hers. 
Miss  Clinch,  about  the  Americans  and  the  English, 
especially  dwelling  on  the  defects  of  the  latter, — 
among  which  we  reckoned  a  wretched  meanness  in 
money  transactions,  a  lack  of  any  embroidery  of  honor 
and  liberality  in  their  dealings,  so  that  they  require 
close  watching,  or  they  will  be  sure  to  take  you  at  ad- 
vantage. I  hear  this  character  of  them  from  Ameri- 
cans on  all  hands,  and  my  own  experience  confirms  it 
as  far  as  it  goes,  not  merely  among  tradespeople,  but 
among  persons  who  call  themselves  gentlefolks.  The 
cause,  no  doubt,  or  one  cause,  lies  in  the  fewer  chances 
of  getting  money  here,  the  closer  and  sharper  regula- 
tion of  all  the  modes  of  life  ;  nothing  being  left  to  lib- 
eral and  gentlemanly  feelings,  except  fees  to  servants. 
They  are  not  gamblers  in  England,  as  we  to  some  ex- 
tent are ;  and  getting  their  money  painfully,  or  living 
within  an  accurately  known  income,  they  are  disin- 
clined to  give  up  so  much  as  a  sixpence  that  they  can 
possibly  get.  But  the  result  is,  they  are  mean  in  petty 
things. 

By  and  by  Mr.  Oakford  came  in,  well  soaked  with 
the  heaviest  shower  that  I  ever  knew  in  England, 
which  had  been  rattling  on  the  roof  of  the  Uttle  side 
room  where  we  sat,  and  had  caught  him  on  the  outside 


1866.]  LONDON.  147 

of  the  omnibus.  At  a  little  before  eight  o^clock  I 
came  home  with  U in  a  cab,  — the  gaslight  glit- 
tering on  the  wet  streets  through  which  we  drove, 
though  the  sky  was  clear  overhead. 

September  30^A.  —  Yesterday,  a  little  before  twelve, 
we  took  a  cab,  and  went  to  the  two  Houses  of  Parliar 
ment, — the  most  immense  building,  methinks,  that 
ever  was  built;  and  not  yet  finished,  though  it  has 
now  been  occupied  for  years.  Its  exterior  lies  hugely 
along  the  ground,  and  its  great  unfinished  tower  is 
still  climbing  towards  the  sky  ;  but  the  result  (unless 
it  be  the  river-front,  v^ich  I  have  not  yet  seen)  seems 
not  very  impressive.  The  interior  is  much  more  suc- 
cessful. Nothing  can  be  more  magnificent  and  gravely 
gorgeous  than  the  Chamber  of  Peers,  —  a  large  oblong 
hall,  panelled  with  oak,  elaborately  carved,  to  the 
height  of  perhaps  twenty  feet.  Then  the  balustrade 
of  the  gallery  runs  around  the  hall,  and  above  the 
gallery  are  six  arched  windows  on  each  side,  richly 
painted  with  historic  subjects.  The  roof  is  orna- 
mented and  gilded,  and  everywhere  throughout  there 
is  embellishment  of  color  and  carving  on  the  broadest 
scale,  and,  at  the  same  time,  most  minute  and  elab- 
orate ;  statues  of  full  size  in  niches  aloft ;  small  heads 
of  kings,  no  bigger  than  a  doll ;  and  the  oak  is  carved 
in  all  parts  of  the  panelling  as  faithfully  as  they  used 
to  do  it  in  Henry  VH.'s  time,  —  as  faithfully  and  with 
as  good  workmanship,  but  with  nothing  like  the  vari- 
ety and  invention  which  I  saw  in  the  dining-room  of 
Smithell's  Hall.  There  the  artist  wrought  with  his 
heart  and  head ;  but  much  of  this  work,  I  suppose, 
was  done  by  machinery.  Be  that  as  it  may,  it  is  a 
most  noble  and  splendid  apartment,  and,  tliough  so 


148  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

fine,  there  is  not  a  touch  of  finery;  it  glistens  and 
glows  with  even  a  sombre  magnificence,  owing  to  the 
rich,  deep  hues,  and  the  dim  light,  bedimmed  with  rich 
colors  by  coming  through  the  painted  windows.  In 
arched  recesses,  that  serve  as  frames,  at  each  end  of 
the  hall,  there  are  three  pictures  by  modem  artists 
from  English  history ;  and  though  it  was  not  possible 
to  see  them  well  as  pictures,  they  adorned  and  en- 
riched the  walls  marvellously  as  architectural  embel- 
lishments. The  Peers'  seats  are  four  rows  of  long 
sofas  on  each  side,  covered  with  red  morocco;  com- 
fortable seats  enough,  but  not  adapted  to  any  other 
than  a  decorously  exact  position.  The  woolsack  is 
between  these  two  divisions  of  sofas,  in  the  middle 
passage  of  the  floor,  —  a  great  square  seat,  covered 
with  scarlet,  and  with  a  scarlet  cushion  set  up  perpen- 
dicularly for  the  Chancellor  to  lean  against.  In  front 
of  the  woolsack  there  is  another  still  larger  ottoman, 
on  which  he  might  lie  at  full  length,  —  for  what  pur- 
pose intended,  I  know  not.  I  should  take  the  woolsack 
to  be  not  a  very  comfortable  seat,  though  I  suppose  it 
was  originally  designed  to  be  the  most  comfortable  one 
that  could  be  contrived,  in  view  of  the  Chancellor's 
much  sitting. 

The  throne  is  the  first  object  you  see  on  entering 
the  hall,  being  close  to  the  door ;  a  chair  of  antique 
form,  with  a  high,  peaked  back,  and  a  square  canopy 
above,  the  whole  richly  carved  and  quite  covered  with 
burnished  gilding,  besides  being  adorned  with  rows  of 
rock  crystals,  —  which  seemed  to  me  of  rather  ques- 
tionable taste. 

It  is  less  elevated  above  the  floor  than  one  imagines 
it  ought  to  be.  While  we  were  looking  at  it,  I  saw 
two  Americans,  —  Western  men,  I  should  judge,  — 


1855.]  LONDON.  149 

one  of  them  with  a  true  American  slouch,  talking  to 
the  policeman  in  attendance,  and  describing  our  Sen* 
ate  Chamber  in  contrast  with  the  House  of  Lords. 
The  policeman  smiled  and  ah-ed,  and  seemed  to  make 
as  courteous  and  liberal  responses  as  he  could.  There 
was  quite  a  mixed  company  of  spectators,  and,  I  think, 
other  Americans  present  besides  the  above  two  and 
ourselves.  The  Lord  Chamberlain's  tickets  appear  to 
be  distributed  with  great  impartiality.  There  were 
two  or  three  women  of  the  lower  middle  class,  with 
children  or  babies  in  arms,  one  of  whom  lifted  up  its 
voice  loudly  in  the  House  of  Peers. 

We  next,  after  long  contemplating  this  rich  hall, 
proceeded  through  passages  and  corridors  to  a  great 
central  room,  very  beautiful,  which  seems  to  be  used 
for  purposes  of  refreshment,  and  for  electric  tele- 
graphs ;  though  I  should  not  suppose  tins  could  be  its 
primitive  and  ultimate  design.  Thence  we  went  into 
the  House  of  Commons,  which  is  larger  than  the 
Chamber  of  Peers,  and  much  less  richly  ornamented, 
though  it  would  have  appeared  splendid  had  it  come 
first  in  order.  The  speaker's  chair,  if  I  remember 
rightly,  is  loftier  and  statelier  than  the  throne  itself. 
Both  in  this  hall  and  in  that  of  the  Lords,  we  were  at 
first  surprised  by  the  narrow  limits  within  which  the 
great  ideas  of  the  Lords  and  Commons  of  England 
are  physically  realized ;  they  would  seem  to  require  a 
vaster  space.  When  we  hear  of  members  rising  on 
opposite  sides  of  the  House,  we  think  of  them  as  but 
dimly  discernible,  to  their  opponents,  and  uplifting 
their  voices,  so  as  to  be  heard  afar ;  whereas  they  sit 
closely  enough  to  feel  each  other's  spheres,  to  note  all 
expression  of  face,  and  to  give  the  debate  the  charac- 
ter of  a  conversation.     In  this  view  a  debate  seems  a 


150  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  [1855. 

mucli  more  earnest  and  real  thing  than  as  we  read  it 
in  a  newspaper.  Think  of  the  debaters  meeting  each 
other's  eyes,  their  faces  flushing,  their  looks  interpret- 
ing their  words,  their  speech  growing  into  eloquence, 
without  losing  the  genuineness  of  talk  I  f  et,  in  fact, 
the  Chamber  of  Peers  is  ninety  feet  long  and  half  as 
broad  and  high,  and  the  Chamber  of  Commons  is  still 
larger. 

'^•'Thence  we  went  to  "Westminster  Hall,  through  a 
gallery  with  statues  on  each  side,  —  beautiful  statues 
too,  I  thought ;  seven  of  them,  of  which  four  were 
from  the  times  of  the  civil  wars,  —  Clarendon,  Falk- 
land, Hampden,  Selden,  Somers,  Mansfield,  and  Wal- 
pole.  There  is  room  for  more  in  this  corridor,  and 
there  are  niches  for  hundreds^  of  their  marble  brother- 
hood throughout  the  edifice ;  but  I  suppose  future  ages 
will  have  to  fiii  the  greater  part  of  them.  Yet  I  can- 
not help  imagining  that  this  rich  and  noble  edifice  has 
more  to  do  with  the  past  than  with  the  future ;  that  it 
is  the  glory  of  a  declining  empire ;  and  that  the  per- 
fect bloom  of  this  great  stone  flower,  growing  out  of 
the  institutions  of  England,  forebodes  that  they  have 
nearly  lived  out  their  life.  It  sums  up  all.  Its 
beauty  and  magnificence  are  made  out  of  ideas  that 
are  gone  by. 

We  entered  Westminster  Hall  (which  is  incorpo- 
rated into  this  new  edifice,  and  forms  an  integral  part 
of  it)  through  a  lofty  archway,  whence  a  double  flight 
of  broad  steps  descends  to  the  stone  pavement.  After 
the  elaborate  ornament  of  the  rooms  we  had  just  been 
viewing,  tliis  venerable  hall  looks  extremely  simple 
and  bare,  —  a  gray  stone  floor,  gray  and  naked  stone 
walls,  but  a  roof  sufliciently  elaborate,  its  vault  being 
filled  with  carved  beams  and  rafters  of  chestnut,  very 


1855.]  LONDON.  161 

much  admired  and  wondered  at  for  the  design  and  ar* 
rangement.  I  think  it  would  have  pleased  me  more 
to  have  seen  a  clear  vaulted  roof,  instead  of  this  intri« 
cacy  of  wooden  points,  by  which  so  much  skylight 
space  is  lost.  They  make  (be  it  not  irreverently  said) 
the  vast  and  lofty  apartment  look  like  the  ideal  of  an 
immense  bam.  But  it  is  a  noble  space,  and  aU  with- 
out the  support  of  a  single  pillar.  It  is  about  eighty 
of  my  paces  from  the  foot  of  the  steps  to  the  opposite 
end  of  the  hall,  and  twenty-seven  from  side  to  side ; 
very  high,  too,  though  not  quite  proportionately  to  its 
other  dimensions.  I. love  it  for  its  simplicity  and  an- 
tique nakedness,  and  deem  it  worthy  to  have  been  the 
haunt  and  home  of  History  through  the  six  centuries 
since  it  was  built.  I  wonder  it  does  not  occur  to  mod- 
em ingenuity  to  make  a  scenic  representation,  in  this 
very  hall,  of  the  ancient  trials  for  life  or  death,  pomps, 
feasts,  coronations,  and  every  great  historic  incident 
in  the  lives  of  kings.  Parliaments,  Protectors,  and  all 
illustrious  men,  that  have  occurred  here.  The  whole 
world  cannot  show  another  hall  such  as  this,  so  tapes- 
tried with  recollections  of  whatever  is  most  striking  in 
human  annals. 

Westminster  Abbey  being  just  across  the  street,  we 
went  thither  from  the  haU,  and  sought  out  the  clois- 
ters, which  we  had  not  yet  visited.  They  are  in  excel- 
lent preservation,  —  broad  walks,  canopied  with  inter- 
mingled arches  of  gray  stone,  on  which  some  sort  of 
Uchen,  or  other  growth  of  ages  (which  seems,  however, 
to  have  little  or  nothing  vegetable  in  it),  has  grown. 
The  pavement  is  entirely  made  of  flat  tombstones,  in- 
scribed with  half-effaced  names  of  the  dead  people  be- 
neath ;  and  the  wall  all  round  bears  the  marble  tablets 
which  give  ai  fuller  record  of  their  virtues.     I  think  it 


i52  ENGLISH  NOTE^BOOKS.  [1865. 

was  from  a  meditation  in  these  cloisters  that  Addison 
wrote  one  of  his  most  beautiful  pieces  in  the  "  Specta^ 
tor."  It  is  a  pity  that  this  old  fashion  of  a  cloistered 
walk  is  not  retained  in  our  modem  edifices ;  it  was  so 
excellent  for  shelter  and  for  shade  during  a  thought- 
ful hour,  —  this  sombre  corridor  beneath  an  arched 
stone  roof,  with  the  central  space  of  richest  grass,  on 
which  the  sim  might  shine  or  the  shower  fall,  while 
the  monk  or  student  paced  through  the  prolonged 
archway  of  his  meditations. 

As  we  came  out  from  the  cloisters,  and  walked 
along  by  the  churchyard  of  the  Abbey,  a  woman  came 
begging  behind  us  very  earnestly.  "  A  bit  of  bread," 
she  said,  ''  and  I  will  give  you  a  thousand  blessings  I 
Hunger  is  hard  to  bear.  O  kind  gentleman  and  kind 
lady,  a  penny  for  a  bit  of  bread  I  It  is  a  hard  thing 
that  gentlemen  and  ladies  should  see  poor  people  want- 
ing bread,  and  make  no  difference  whether  they  are 
good  or  bad,"  And  so  she  followed  us  almost  all 
round  the  Abbey,  assailing  our  hearts  in  most  plain- 
tive terms,  but  with  no  success ;  for  she  did  it  far  too 
well  to  be  anything  but  an  impostor,  and  no  doubt  she 
bad  breakfasted  better,  and  was  likely  to  have  a  bols- 
ter dinner,  than  ourselves.  And  yet  the  natural  man  - 
cries  out  against  the  philosophy  that  rejects  beggars. 
It  is  a  thousand  to  one  that  they  are  impostors,  but 
yet  we  do  ourselves  a  wrong  by  hardening  our  hearts 
against  them.  At  last,  without  turning  round,  I  told 
her  that  I  should  give  her  nothing,  —  with  some  as- 
perity, doubtless,  for  the  effort  to  refuse  creates  a  bit- 
terer repulse  than  is  necessary.  She  still  followed  us 
a  little  farther,  but  at  last  gave  it  up,  with  a  deep 
groan.  I  could  not  have  pei^ormed  this  act  of  hero 
ism  on  my  first  arrival  from  America. 


1865.]  LONDON,  168 

Wheliier  the  beggar-woman  had  invoked  curses  on 
us,  and  Heaven  saw  fit  to  grant  some  slight  response, 
I  know  not,  but  it  now  began  to  rain  on  my  wife's 
velvet ;  so  I  put  her  and  J into  a  cab,  and  has- 
tened to  ensconce  myself  in  Westminster  Abbey  while 
the  shower  should  last.  Poets'  Comer  has  never 
seemed  like  a  strange  place  to  me ;  it  has  been  famil- 
iar f rcHU  the  very  first ;  at  all  events,  I  cannot  now 
recollect  the  previous  conception,  of  which  the  reality 
has  taken  the  place,  I  seem  always  to  have  known 
that  somewhat  dim  comer,  with  the  bare  brown  stone- 
work of  the  old  edifice  aloft,  and  a  window  shedding 
down  its  light  on  the  marble  busts  and  tablets,  yel- 
low with  time,  that  cover  the  three  walls  of  the  nook 
up  to  a  height  of  about  twenty  feet.  Prior's  is  the 
largest  and  richest  monument.  It  is  observable  that 
the  bust  and  monument  of  Congreve  are  in  a  distant 
part  of  the  Abbey.  His  duchess  probably  thought  it 
a  degradation  to  bring  a  gentleman  among  the  beg- 
garly poets. 

I  walked  round  the  aisles,  and  paced  the  nave,  and 
came  to  the  conclusion  that  Westminster  Abbey,  both 
in  itself  and  for  the  variety  and  interest  of  its  monu- 
ments, is  a  thousand  times  preferable  to  St.  Paul's. 
There  is  as  much  difference  as  between  a  snow-bank 
and  a  chimney-comer  in  their  relation  to  the  human 
heart.  By  the  by,  the  monuments  and  statues  in  the 
Abbey  seem  all  to  be  carefully  dusted. 

The  shower  being  over,  I  walked  down  into  the  city, 

where  I  called  on  Mr.  B and  left  S 's  watch 

to  be  examined  and  put  in  order.  He  told  me  that  he 
and  his  brother  had  lately  been  laying  out  and  letting 
a  piece  of  land  at  Blackheath,  that  had  been  left  them 
by  their  father,  and  that  the  ground-rent  would  bring 


164  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1856. 

them  in  two  thousand  pounds  per  annum.  With  such 
an  independent  income,  I  doubt  whether  any  Ameri- 
can would  consent  to  be  anything  but  a  gentleman,  — • 
certainly  not  an  operative  watchmaker.  How  sensv 
ble  these  Englishmen  are  in  some  things  I 

Thence  I  went  at  adventure,  and  lost  myself,  of 
course.  At  one  part  of  my  walk  I  came  upon  Sto 
Luke's  Hospital,  whence  I  returned  to  St.  Paul's,  and 
thence  along  Fleet  Street  and  the  Strand.  Contigu- 
ous to  the  latter  is  Holywell  Street,  —  a  narrow  lane, 
filled  up  with  little  bookshops  and  bookstalls,  at  some 
of  which  I  saw  sermons  and  other  works  of  divinity, 
old  editions  of  classics,  and  all  such  serious  matters, 
while  at  stalls  and  windows  close  beside  them  (and, 
possibly,  at  the  same  stalls)  there  were  books  with 
title-pages  displayed,  indicating  them  to  be  of  the 
most  indecent  kind. 

October   2d. — Yesterday   forenoon    I   went   with 

J into  the  city  to  67  Grace  Church  Street,  to  get 

a  bank  post-note  cashed  by  Mr.  Oakford,  and  after- 
wards to  the  offices  of  two  lines  of  steamers,  in  Moor- 
gate  Street  and  LeadenhaU  Street.  The  city  was  very 
much  thronged.  It  is  a  marvel  what  sets  so  many 
people  a  going  at  all  hours  of  the  day.  Then  it  is  to 
be  considered  that  these  are  but  a  small  portion  of 
those  who  are  doing  the  business  of  the  city;  much 
the  larger  part  being  occupied  in  offices  at  desks,  in 
discussions  of  plans  of  enterprise,  out  of  sight  of  the 
public,  while  these  earnest  hurriers  are  merely  the 
froth  in  the  pot. 

After  seeing  the  steam-officials,  we  went  to  London 
Bridge,  which  always  swarms  with  more  passengers 


1855.]  LONDON.  155 

than  any  of  the  streets.  Descending  the  steps  that 
lead  to  the  level  of  the  Thames,  we  took  passage  in  a 
a  boat  bound  up  the  river  to  Chelsea,  of  which  there 
is  one  starting  every  ten  minutes,  the  voyage  being  of 
forty  minutes'  duration.  It  began  to  sprinkle  a  little 
just  as  we  started ;  but  after  a  slight  showeriness,  last- 
ing till  we  had  passed  Westminster  Bridge,  the  day 
grew  rather  pleasant. 

At  Westminster  Bridge  we  had  a  good  view  of  the 
river-front  of  the  two  Houses  of  Parliament,  which 
look  very  noble  from  this  point,  —  a  long  and  mas* 
sive  extent,  with  a  delightful  promenade  for  the  legis- 
lative people  exactly  above  the  margin  of  the  river. 
This  is  certainly  a  magnificent  edifice,  and  yet  I  doubt 
whether  it  is  so  impressive  as  it  might  and  ought  to 
have  been  made,  considering  its  immensity.  It  makes 
no  more  impression  than  you  can  well  account  to  your- 
self for,  and  you  rather  wonder  that  it  does  not  make 
more.  The  reason  must  be  that  the  architect  has  not 
'^builded  better  than  he  knew."  He  felt  no  power 
higher  and  wiser  than  himself,  making  him  its  instru- 
ment. He  reckoned  upon  and  contrived  all  his  effects 
with  malice  aforethought,  and  therefore  missed  the 
crowning  glory,  —  that  being  a  happiness  which  God, 
out  of  his  pure  grace,  mixes  up  with  only  the  simple- 
hearted,  best  efforts  of  men. 


October  Sd.  —  I  again  went  into  the  city  yesterday 
forenoon,  to  settle  about  the  passages  to  Lisbon,  tak- 
ing J with  me.     From  Hungerford  Bridge  we 

took  the  steamer  to  London  Bridge,  that  being  an 
easy  and  speedy  mode  of  accomplishing  distances  that 


156  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [l^bb, 

take  many  footsteps  through  the  crowded  thorough- 
fares. After  leaving  the  steamer-offiee,  we  went  back 
through  the  Strand,  and,  crossing  Waterloo  Bridge, 
walked  a  good  way  on  to  the  Surrey  side  of  the  river ; 
a  coarse,  dingy,  disagreeable  suburb,  with  shops  ap 
parently  for  country  produce,  for  old  clothes,  second- 
band  furniture,  for  iron-ware,  and  other  things  bulky 
and  inelegant.  How  many  scenes  and  sorts  of  life  are 
comprehended  within  London!  There  was  much  in 
the  aspect  of  these  streets  that  reminded  me  of  a  busy- 
country  village  in  America  on  an  immensely  magni« 
fied  scale. 

Growing  rather  weary  anon,  we  got  into  an  omni- 
bus, \diich  took  us  as  far  as  the  Surrey  Zoological 

Gardens,  which  J wished  very  much  to  see.     They 

proved  to  be  a  rather  poor  place  of  suburban  amuse- 
ment; poor,  at  least,  by  daylight,  —  their  chief  attrac- 
tion for  the  ptiblic  consisting  in  out-of-door  repre- 
sentations of  battles  and  sieges.  The  storming  of 
Sebastopol  (as  likewise  at  the  Cremome  Gardens) 
was  advertised  for  the  evening,  and  we  saw  the  scen- 
ery of  Sebastopol,  painted  on  a  vast  scale,  in  the  open 
air,  and  really  looking  like  miles  and  miles  of  hill  and 
water;  with  a  space  for  the  actual  manoeuvring  of 
fihips  on  a  sheet  of  real  water  in  front  of  the  scene,  on 
which  some  ducks  were  now  swimming  about  in  place 
of  men-of-war.  The  climate  of  England  must  often 
interfere  with  this  sort  of  performance;  and  I  can 
conceive  of  nothing  drearier  for  spectators  or  perform- 
ers than  a  drizzly  evening.  Convenient  to  this  central 
spot  of  entertainment  there  were  liquor  and  refresh- 
ment rooms,  with  pies  and  cakes.  The  menagerie, 
though  the  ostensible  staple  of  the  gardens,  is  rather 
poor  and  scanty ;  pretty  well  provided  with  lions  and 


1866.]  LONDON.  157 

lionesses,  also  one  or  twp  giraffes,  some  camels,  a 
polar  bear,  —  who  plunged  into  a  pool  of  water  for 
bits  of  cake,  —  and  two  black  bears,  who  sat  on  their 
haunches  or  climbed  poles;  besides  a  wilderness  of 
monkeys,  some  parrots  and  macaws,  an  ostrich,  vari- 
ous ducks»  and  other  animal  and  ornithological  trump- 
ery ;  some  skins  of  snakes  so  well  stuffed  that  I  took 
them  for  living  serpents  till  J discovered  the  de- 
ception, and  an  aquarium,  with  a  good  many  common 
fishes  swimming  among  the  sea-weed. 

The  garden  is  shaded  with  trees,  and  set  out  with 
greensward  and  gravel-walks,  from  which  the  people 
were  sweeping  the  withered  autumnal  leaves,  which 
now  fall  every  day.  Plaster  statues  stand  here  aud 
there,  one  of  them  without  a  head,  thus  disclosing  the 
hollowness  of  the  trunk ;  there  were  one  or  two  little 
drizzly  fountains,  with  the  water  dripping  over  the 
rock- work,  of  which  the  English  are  so  fond ;  and  the 
buildings  for  the  animals  and  other  purposed  had  a 
flimsy,  pasteboard  aspect  of  pretension.  The  garden 
was  in  its  undress;  few  visitors,  I  suppose,  coming 
hither  at  this  time  of  day, — only  here  and  there  a 
lady  and  children,  a  yoimg  man  and  girl,  or  a  couple 
of  citizens,  loitering  about.  I  take  pains  to  remem- 
ber these  small  items,  because  they  suggest  the  day- 
life  or  torpidity  of  what  may  look  very  brilliajit  at 
night.  These  corked-up  fountains,  slovenly  green- 
sward, cracked  casts  of  statues,  pasteboard  castles, 
and  duck -pond  Bay  of  Balaclava  then  shining  out 
in  magic  splendor,  and  the  shabby  attendants  whom 
we  saw  sweeping  and  shovelling  probably  transformed 
into  the  heroes  of  Sebastopol. 

J thought  it  a  delightful  place ;  but  I  soon  grew 

7ery  weary,  and  came  away  about  four  o'clock,  and. 


158  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1865. 

getting  into  a  city  omnibus,  we  alighted  on  the  hither 
side  of  Blackfriar's  Bridge.  Turning  into  Fleet  Street, 
I  looked  about  for  a  place  to  dine  at,  and  chose  the 
Mitre  Tavern,  in  memory  of  Johnson  and  BoswelL 
It  stands  behind  a  front  of  modem  shops,  through 
which  is  an  archway,  giving  admittance  into  a  narrow 
court -yard,  which,  I  suppose,  was  formerly  open  to 
Fleet  Street.  The  house  is  of  dark  brick,  and,  com- 
paring it  with  other  London  edifices,  I  should  take  it 
to  have  been  at  least  ref routed  since  Johnson's  time ; 
but  within,  the  low,  sombre  coffee-room  which  we  en- 
tered might  well  enough  have  been  of  that  era  or  ear- 
lier. It  seems  to  be  a  good,  plain,  respectable  inn ;  and 
the  waiter  gave  us  each  a  plate  of  boiled  beef,  and,  for 
dessert,  a  damson  tart,  which  made  up  a  comfortable 
dinner.  After  dinner,  we  zigzagged  homeward  through 
Clifford's  Inn  passage,  Holbom,  Drury  Lane,  the 
Strand,  Charing  Cross,  Pall  Mall,  and  Regent  Street ; 
but  I  remember  only  an  ancient  brick  gateway  as  par- 
ticularly remarkable.  I  think  it  was  the  entrance  to 
Lincoln's  Inn.     We  reached  home  at  about  six. 

There  is  a  woman  who  has  several  times  passed 
through  this  Hanover  Street,  in  which  we  live,  stop- 
ping occasionally  to  sing  songs  under  the  windows; 
and  last  evening,  between  nine  and  ten  o'clock,  she 
came  and  sang  "Kathleen  O'Moore"  richly  and  sweet- 
ly. Her  voice  rose  up  out  of  the  dim,  chill  street, 
and  made  our  hearts  throb  in  unison  with  it  as  we 
sat  in  our  comfortable  drawing-room.  I  never  heard 
a  voice  that  touched  me  more  deeply.  Somebody 
told  her  to  go  away,  and  she  stopped  like  a  nightin- 
gale suddenly  shot;  but,  finding  that  S wished 

to  know  something  about  her,  Fanny  and  one  of  the 
maids  ran  after  her,  and  brought  her  into  the  hall. 


i855.]  LONDON.  159 

It  seems  she  was  educated  to  sing  at  the  opera,  and 
married  an  Italian  opora  -  singer,  who  is  now  dead; 
lodging  in  a  model  lodging-house  at  three-pence  a 
night,  and  being  a  penny  short  to-night,  she  tried  this 
method,  in  hope  of  getting  this  penny.  She  takes  in 
plain  sewing  when  she  can  get  any,  and  picks  up  a 
trifle  about  the  street  by  means  of  her  voice,  which, 
she  says,  was  once  sweet,  but  has  now  been  injured 
by  the  poorness  of  her  living.  She  is  a  pale  woman, 
with  black  eyes,  Fanny  says,  and  may  have  been 
pretty  once,  but  is  not  so  now.  It  seems  very  strange, 
that  with  such  a  gift  of  Heaven,  so  cultivated,  too,  as 
her  voice  is,^  making  even  an  unsusceptible  heart  vi- 
brate like  a  harp-string,  she  should  not  have  had  an 
engagement  among  the  hundred  theatres  and  singing- 
rooms  of  London ;  that  she  should  throw  away  her 
melody  in  the  streets  for  the  mere  chance  of  a  penny, 
when  sounds  not  a  hundredth  part  so  sweet  are  worth 
from  other  lips  purses  of  gold. 

Octoher  5th.  —  It  rained  almost  all  day  on  Wednes- 
day, so  that  I  did  not  go  out  till  late  in  the  afternoon, 
and  then  only  took  a  stroll  along  Oxford  Street  and 
Holbom,  and  back  through  Fleet  Street  and  the 
Strand.  Yesterday,  at  a  little  after  ten,  I  went  to 
the  ambassador's  to  get  my  wife's  passport  for  Lis- 
bon.    While  I  was  talking  with  the  clerk,  Mr. 

made  his  appearance  in  a  dressing-gown,  with  a  morn- 
ing cheerfulness  and  alacrity  in  his  manner.  He  was 
going  to  Liverpool  with  his  niece,  who  returns  to 
America  by  the  steamer  of  Saturday.  She  has  had 
a  good  deal  of  success  in  society  here ;  being  pretty 
enough  to  be  remarked  among  English  women,  and 
with  cool,  self-possessed,  frank,  and  quiet  manners, 
which  look  very  like  the  highest  breeding. 


160  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS,  [18^5. 

I  next  went  to  Westminster  Abbey,  where  I  had 
long  promised  myself  another  ^quiet  visit ;  for  I  iMnk 
I  never  could  be  weary  of  it ;  and  when  1  finally  leave 
England,  it  will  be  this  spot  which  I  shall  feel  most 
unwilling  to  quit  forever.  I  found  a  party  going 
through  the  seven  chapels  (or  whatever  their  number 
may  be),  and  again  saw  those  stately  and  quaint  old 
tombs,  —  ladies  and  knights  stretched  out  on  marble 
slabs,  or  beneath  arches  and  canopies  of  stone,  let  into 
the  walls  of  the  Abbey,  reclining  on  their  elbows,  in 
ruff  and  farthingale  or  riveted  armor,  or  in  robes  of 
state,  once  painted  in  rich  colors,  of  which  only  a  few 
patches  of  scarlet  now  remain  ;  bearded  faces  of  noble 
knights,  whose  noses,  in  many  cases,  had  been  smitten 
off ;  and  Mary  Queen  of  Scots  had  lost  two  fingers  of 
her  beautiful  hands,  which  she  is  clasping  in  prayer. 
There  must  formerly  have  been  very  free  access  to 
these  tombs ;  for  I  observed  that  all  the  statues  (so 
far  as  I  examined  them)  were  scratched  with  the  ini- 
tials of  visitors,  some  of  the  names  being  dated  above 
a  century  ago.  The  old  coronation-chair,  too,  is  quite 
covered,  over  the  back  and  seat,  with  initials  cut  into 
it  with  pocket-knives,  just  as  Yankees  would  do  it ; 
only  it  is  not  whittled  away,  as  would  have  been  its 
fate  in  our  hands.  Edward  the  Confessor's  shrine, 
which  is  chiefly  of  wood,  likewise  abounds  in  these 
inscriptions,  although  this  was  esteemed  the  holiest 
shrine  in  England,  so  that  pilgrims  still  come  to  kneel 
and  kiss  it.  Our  guide,  a  rubicund  verger  of  cheer- 
ful demeanor,  said  that  this  was  true  in  a  few  in- 
stances. 

There  is  a  beautiful  statue  in  memory  of  Horace 
Walpole's  mother ;  and  I  took  it  to  be  really  a  like- 
aess,  till  the  verger  said  that  it  was  a  copy  of  a  statue 


1855.]  LONDON.  161 

which  her  son  had  admired  in  Italy,  and  so  had  trans- 
ferred it  to  his  mother's  grave.  There  is  something 
characteristic^  in  this  mode  of  filial  duty  and  honor. 
In  all  these  chapels,  full  of  the  tombs  and  e£Bgies  of 
kings,  dukes,  arch-prelates,  and  whatever  is  proud  and 
pompous  in  mortality,  there  is  nothing  that  strikes 
me  more  than  the  colossal  statue  of  plain  Mr.  Watt, 
sitting  quietly  in  a  chair,  in  St.  Paul's  Chapel,  and 
reading  some  papers.  He  dwarfs  the  warriors  and 
statesmen ;  and  as  to  the  kings,  we  smile  at  them. 
Telford  is  in  another  of  the  chapels.  This  visit  to  the 
chapels  was  much  more  satisfactory  than  my  former 
one ;  although  I  in  vain  strove  to  feel  it  adequately, 
and  to  make  myself  sensible  how  rich  and  venerable 
was  what  I  saw.  This  realization  must  come  at  its 
own  time,  like  the  other  happinesses  of  life.  It  is  un- 
accountable that  I  could  not  now  find  the  seat  of  Sir 
George  Downing's  squire,  though  I  examiaed  partic- 
ularly every  seat  on  that  side  of  Henry  VII.'s  Chapel, 
where  I  before  found  it.     I  must  try  again.  .  .  . 

October  Qth.  —  Yesterday  was  not  an  eventful  day. 

I  took  J with  me  to  the  city,  called  on  Mr.  Stur- 

gis,  at  the  Barings'  House,  and  got  his  checks  for  a 
bank  post-note.  The  house  is  at  8  Bishopsgate  Street 
Within.  It  has  no.  sign  of  any  kind,  but  stands  back 
from  the  street,  behind  an  iron -grated  fence.  The 
firm  appears  to  occupy  the  whole  edifice,  which  is 
spacious,  and  fit  for  princely  merchants.  Thence  I 
went  and  paid  for  the  passages  to  Lisbon  C<£32)  at 
the  Peninsular  Steam  Company's  ofi&ce,  and  thence  to 

call  on  General .     I  forgot  to  mention,  that,  first 

of  all,  I  went  to  Mr.  B 's,  whom  I  found  kind  and 

vivacious  as  usual.     It  now  ramed  heavily,  and,  be- 

VOI*.  VIII.  11 


162  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1855. 

ing  still  showery  when  we  came  to  Cheapside  again, 
we  first  stood  under  an  archway  (a  usual  resort  for 
passengers  through  London  streets),  and  then  betook 
ourselves  to  sanctuary,  taking  refuge  in  St.  Paul's 
CathedraL  The  afternoon  service  was  about  to  be- 
gin, so,  after  looking  at  a  few  of  the  monuments,  we 
sat  down  in  the  choir,  the  richest  and  most  oma- 
mented  part  of  the  cathedral,  with  screens  or  parti- 
tions of  oak,  cunningly  carved.  Small  white -robed 
choristers  were  flitting  noiselessly  about,  making  prep- 
arations for  the  service,  which  by  and  by  began.  It 
is  a  beautiful  idea,  that,  several  times  in  the  course  of 
the  day,  a  man  can  slip  out  of  the  thickest  throng  and 
bustle  of  London  into  this  religious  atmosphere,  and 
hear  the  organ,  and  the  music  of  yoimg,  pure  voices  ; 
but,  after  all,  the  rites  are  lifeless  in  our  day.  We 
found,  on  emerging,  that  we  had  escaped  a  very  heavy 
shower,  and  it  still  sprinkled  and  misted  as  we  went 
homeward  through  Holborn  and  Oxford  Street. 

SOUTHAMPTON. 

October  11th.  —  We  all  left  London  on  Sunday 
morning,  between  ten  and  eleven,  from  the  Waterloo 
station,  and  arrived  in  Southampton  about  two,  with- 
out meeting  with  anything  very  remarkable  on  the 
way.  We  put  up  at  Chappie's  Castle  Hotel,  which  is 
one  of  the  class  styled  "  commercial,"  and,  though  re- 
spectable, not  such  a  one  as  the  nobility  and  gentry 
usually  frequent.  I  saw  little  difference  in  the  accom* 
modation,  except  that  young  women  attended  us  in- 
stead of  men,  —  a  pleasant  change.    It  was  a  showery 

day,  but  J and  I  walked  out  to  see  the  shore  and 

the  town  and  the  docks,  and,  if  possible,  the  ship  in 
which  S    ■      was  to  saiL   The  most  noteworthy  object 


1855.]  SOUTHAMPTON,  163 

was  the  remains  of  an  old  castle,  near  the  water-side ; 
the  square,  gray,  weed-grown,  weird  keep  of  which 
shows  some  modem  chimney-pots  above  its  battlements, 
while  remaining  portions  of  the  fortress  are  made  to 
seem  as  one  of  the  walls  for  coal-depots,  and  perhaps 
for  small  dwellings.  The  English  characteristically 
patch  new  things  into  old  things  in  this  manner,  mate- 
rially, legally,  constitutionally,  and  morally.  Walking 
along  the  pier,  we  observed  some  pieces  of  ordnance, 
one  of  which  was  a  large  brass  cannon  of  Henry  VIII.'s 
time,  about  twelve  feet  long,  and  very  finely  made. 
The  bay  of  Southampton  presents  a  pleasant  prospect, 
and  I  believe  it  is  the  great  rendezvous  of  the  yacht- 
club.  Old  and  young  seafaring  people  were  strolling 
about,  and  lounging  at  comers,  just  as  they  do  on 
Sunday  afternoons  in  the  minor  seaports  of  America. 

From  the  shore  we  went  up  into  the  town,  which  is 
handsome,  and  of  a  cheerful  aspect,  with  streets  gen- 
erally wide  and  well  paved,  —  a  cleanly  town,  not 
smoke-begrimed.  The  houses,  if  not  modem,  are,  at 
least  with  few  exceptions,  new  fronted.  We  saw  one 
reKc  of  antiquity,  —  a  fine  mediaeval  gateway  across 
the  principal  street,  much  more  elevated  than  the 
gates  of  Chester,  with  battlements  at  the  top,  and  a 
spacious  apartment  over  the  great  arch  for  the  pas- 
sage of  carriages,  and  the  smaller  one  on  each  side  for 
foot-passengers.  There  were  two  statues  in  armor  or 
antique  costume  on  the  hither  side  of  the  gateway, 
and  two  old  paiatings  on  the  other.  This,  so  far  as 
I  know,  is  the  only  remnant  of  the  old  wall  of  South- 
ampton. 

On  Monday  the  morning  was  bright,  alternating 

with  a  little  showeriness.     U ,  J ,  and  I  went 

into  the  town  to  do  some  shopping  before  the  steamer 


164  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

should  sail ;  and  a  litde  after  twelve  we  drove  down  to 
the  dock.  The  Madeira  is  a  pleasant -looking  ship 
enough,  not  very  large,  but  accommodating,  I  believe, 
about  seventy  passengers.  We  looked  at  my  wife's 
little  state-room,  with  ^its  three  berths  for  herself  and 
the  two  children;  and  then  sat  down  in  the  saloon, 
and  afterwards  on  deck,  to  spend  the  irksome  and 
dreary  hour  or  two  before  parting.  Many  of  the  pas- 
sengers seemed  to  be  Portuguese,  undersized,  dark, 
mustachioed  people,  smoking  cigars.     John  Bull  was 

fairly  represented  too.  .  .  .    U was  cheerful,  and 

E seemed  anxious  to  get  off.     Poor  Fanny  was 

altogether  cast  down,  and  shed  tears,  either  from  re- 
gret at  leaving  her  native  land,  or  dread  of  searsick- 
ness,  or  general  despondency,  being  a  person  of  no 
spring  of  spirits.  I  waited  till  the  captain  came  on 
board,  —  a  middle-aged  or  rather  elderly  man,  with  a 
sensible  expression,  but,  methought,  with  a  hard,  cold 
eye,  to  whom  I  introduced  my  wife,  recommending  her 
to  his  especial  care,  as  she  was  unattended  by  any  gen« 
tleman ;  and  then  we  thought  it  best  to  cut  short  the 
parting  scene.    So  we  bade  one  another  farewell ;  and, 

leaving  them  on  the  deck  of  the  vessel,  J and  I 

returned  to  the  hotel,  and,  after  dining  at  the  table 
W  h6te^  drove  down  to  the  railway.  This  is  the  first 
great  parting  that  we  have  ever  had. 

It  was  three  o'clock  when  we  left  Southampton. 
In  order  to  get  to  Worcester,  where  we  were  to  spend 
the  night,  we  strode,  as  it  were,  from  one  line  of  rail- 
way to  another,  two  or  three  times,  and  did  not  arrive 
at  our  journey's  end  till  long  after  dark. 

At  Worcester  we  put  ourselves  into  the  hands  of  a 
cabman,  who  drove  us  to  the  Crown  Hotel,  — one  of 


1865.]  WORCESTER.  165 

the  old-fashioned  hotels,  with  an  entrance  throngh  an 
arched  passage,  by  which  vehicles  were  admitted  into 
the  inn-yard,  which  has  also  an  exit,  I  believe,  into  an- 
other street.  On  one  side  of  the  arch  was  the  coffee- 
room,  where,  after  looking  at  our  sleeping-chambers  on 
the  other  side  of  the  arch,  we  had  some  cold  pigeon^ 
pie  for  supper,  and  for  myself  a  pint  of  ale. 

It  should  be  mentioned,  that  in  the  morning,  be- 
fore embarking  S— —  and  the  children  on  board  the 
steamer,  I  saw  a  fragment  of  a  rainbow  among  the 
clouds,  and  remembered  the  old  adage  bidding  ^^  sail- 
ors take  warning."     In  the  afternoon,  as  J and  I 

were  railing  from  Southampton,  we  saw  another  frag- 
mentary rainbow,  which,  by  the  same  adage,  should 
be  the  "sailor's  delight."  The  weather  has  rather 
tended  to  confirm  the  first  omen,  but  the  sea-captains 
tell  me  that  the  steamer  must  have^ne  beyond  the 
scope  of  these  winds. 

WOECESTEB. 

October  14^A.  —  In  the  morning  of  Tuesday,  after 

breakfast  in  the  coffee-room,  J and  I  walked 

about  to  see  the  r^markables  of  Worcester.  It  is  not 
a  particularly  interesting  ciiy,  compared  with  other 
old  English  cities ;  the  general  material  of  the  houses 
being  red  brick,  and  almost  all  modernized  externally, 
whatever  may  be  the  age  of  their  original  framework. 
We  saw  a  large  brick  jail  in  castellated  style,  with 
battlements,  —  a  very  barren  and  dreary-looking  edi- 
fice ;  likewise,  in  the  more  central  part  of  the  town,  a 
(juildhall  with  a  handsome  front,  ornamented  with  a 
Btatne  of  Queen  Anne  above  the  entrance,  and  statues 
of  Charles  I.  and  Charles  II.  on  either  side  of  the 


166  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1865. 

door,  with  the  motto,  "  Moreat  semper  ci vitas  fidelis." 
Worcester  seems  to  pride  itself  upon  its  loyalty.  We 
entered  the  building,  and  in  the  large  interior  hall 
saw  some  old  armor  hanging  on  the  wall  at  one  end,  — 
corselets,  helmets^  greaves,  and  a  pair  of  breeches  of 
chain  mail.  An  inscription  told  us  that  these  suits  of 
armor  had  been  left  by  Charles  II.  after  the  battle  of 
Worcester,  and  presented  to  the  city  at  a  much  later 
date  by  a  gentleman  of  the  neighborhood.  On  the 
stone  floor  of  the  hall,  under  the  armor,  were  two  brass 
cannon,  one  of  which  had  been  taken  from  the  French 
in  a  naval  battle  within  the  present  century;  the 
other  was  a  beautiful  piece,  bearing,  I  think,  the  date 
of  1632,  and  manufactured  in  Brussels  for  the  Count 
de  Burgh,  as  a  Latin  inscription  testified.  This  like- 
Mrise  was  a  relic  of  the  battle  of  Worcester,  where  it 
had  been  lost  by  Charles.  Many  gentlemen  —  con- 
nected with  the  ^ty  government,  I  suppose  —  were 
passing  through  the  hall ;  and,  looking  through  its  in- 
terior doors,  we  saw  stately  staircases  and  council- 
rooms  panelled  with  oak  or  other  dark  wood.  There 
seems  to  be  a  good  deal  of  state  in  the  government  of 
these  old  towns. 

Worcester  Cathedral  would  havjB  impressed  me 
much  had  I  seen  it  earlier ;  though  its  aspect  is  less 
venerable  than  that  of  Chester  or  Lichfield,  having 
been  faithfully  renewed  and  repaired,  and  stone-cut- 
ters and  masons  were  even  now  at  work  on  the  exte- 
rior. At  our  first  visit,  we  found  no  entrance ;  but 
coming  again  at  ten  o'clock,  when  the  service  was  to 
begin,  we  found  the  door  open,  and  the  chorister-boys, 
in  their  white  robes,  standing  in  the  nave  and  aisles, 
with  elder  people  in  the  same  garb,  and  a  few  black- 
robed  ecclesiastics  and  an  old  verger.     The  interior  of 


1855.]  WORCESTER.  167 

the  cathedral  has  been  covered  with  a  light  -  colored 
paint  at  some  recent  period.  There  is,  as  I  remembei^ 
very  little  stained  glass  to  Enrich  and  bedim  the  light ; 
and  the  effect  produced  is  a  naked,  daylight  aspect, 
unlike  what  I  have  seen  in  any  other  Gothic  cathedral. 
The  plan  of  the  edifice,  too,  is  simple ;  a  nave  and  side 
aisles,  with  great  clustered  pillars,  from  which  spring 
th^  intersecting  arches ;  and,  somehow  or  other,  the 
venerable  mystery  which  I  have  found  in  Westminster 
Abbey  and  elsewhere  does  not  lurk  in  these  arches 
and  behind  these  pillars.  The  choir,  no  doubt,  is 
richer  and  more  beautiful ;  but  we  did  not  enter  it.  I 
remember  two  tombs,  with  recumbent  figures  on  them, 
between  the  pillars  that  divide  the  nave  from  the  side 
aisles,  and  there  were  also  mural  monuments,  *— one, 
well  executed,  to  an  officer  slain  in  the  Peninsular 
war,  representing  him  falling  from  his  horse ;  another 
by  a  young  widow  to  her  husband,  with  an  inscription 
of  passionate  grief,  and  a  record  of  herpurpose  finally 
to  sleep  beside  him.  He  died  in  1803.  I  did  not  see 
on  the  monument  any  record  of  the  consmnmation  of 
her  purpose ;  and  so  perhaps  she  sleeps  beside  a  sec- 
ond husband.  There  are  more  antique  memorials  than 
these  two  on  the  wall,  and  I  should  have  been  inter- 
ested to  examine  them ;  but  the  service  was  now  about 
to  begin  in  the  choir,  and  at  the  far-off  end  of  the 
nave  the  old  verger  waved  his  hand  to  banish  us  from 
the  cathedral.  At  the  same  time  he  moved  towards 
us,  probably  to  say  that  he  would  show  it  to  us  after 
service ;  but  having  little  time,  and  being  so  moder- 
ately impressed  with  what  I  had  already  seen,  I  took 
my  departure,  and  so  disappointed  the  old  man  of  his 
expected  shilling  or  half-crown.  The  tomb  of  King 
John  is  somewhere  in  this  cathedral. 


168  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  [1855. 

We  renewed  our  rambles  through  the  town,  and, 
passing  the  Museiun  of  the  Worcester  Natural  History 

Society,  I  yielded  to  J 's  wish  to  go  in.     There 

are  three  days  in  the  week,  I  believe,  on  which  it  is 
open  to  the  public;  but  this  being  one  of  the  close 
days,  we  were  admitted  on  payment  of  a  shilling.  It 
seemed  a  very  good  and  well  -  arranged  collection  in 

most  departments  of  Natural  History,  and  J ,  who 

takes  more  interest  in  these  matters  than  I  do,  was 
much  delighted.  We  were  left  to  examine  the  hall 
and  galleries  quite  at  our  leisure.  Besides  the  speci- 
mens of  beasts,  birds,  shells,  fishes,  minerals,  fossils, 
insects,  and  all  otheir  natural  things  before  the  flood 
and  since,  there  was  a^ftone,  bearing  a  Roman  inscrip- 
tion, and  various  antiquifef^,  coins,  and  medals,  and 
likewise  portraits,  some  of  wh&t  were  old  and  curious. 

Leaving  the  museum,  we  walked^down  to  the  stone 
bridge  over  the  Severn,  which  is  here^e  largest  river 
I  have  seen  in  England,  except,  of  coumSW  the  Mersey 
and  the  Thames.  A  flight  of  steps  lead^rom  the 
bridge  down  to  a  walk  along  the  river-side,  j^d  tl^ 
we  followed  till  we  reached  the  spot  where  an  ^^ngler 
was  catching  chubs  and  dace,  under  the  walls  ^  ^® 
bishop's  palace,  which  here  faces  the  river.  It  i 
to  be  an  old  building,  but  with  modem  repairs 
improvements.  The  angler  had  pretty  good  succ^ 
while  we  were  looking  at  him,  drawing  out  two 
three  silvery  fish,  and  depositing  them  in  his  baske 
which  was  already  more  than  half  full.  The  Severn 
not  a  transparent  stream,  and  looks  sluggish,  but  h^j 
really  movement  enough  to  carry  the  angler's  florj 
along  pretty  fast.  There  were  two  vessels  of  consic 
erable  size  (that  is,  as  large  as  smaU  schooners)  lyin] 
at  the  bridge.     We  now  passed  imder  an  old  stoi 


1855.]  LIVERPOOL.  169 

archway,  through  a  lane  that  led  us  from  the  river-side 
up  past  the  cathedral,  whence  a  gentleman  and  lady 
were  just  emerging,  and  the  verger  was  closing  the 
door  behind  them. 

We  returned  to  our  hotel,  and  ordered  luncheon,  — 
some  cold  chicken,  cold  ham,  and  ale,  and  after  pay- 
ing the  bill  (about  fifteen  shillings,  to  which  I  added 
five  shillings  for  attendance)  we  took  our  departure  in 
a  fly  for  the  railway.  The  waiter  (a  young  woman), 
chamber-maid,  and  boots,  all  favored  us  with  the  most 
benign  and  deferential  looks  at  parting,  whence  it  was 
easy  to  see  that  I  had  given  them  more  than  they  had 
any  claim  to  receive.  Nevertheless,  this  English  sys- 
tem of  fees  has  its  good  side,  and  I  never  travel  with- 
out finding  the  advantage  of  it,  especially  on  railways, 
where  the  ofi&cials  are  strictly  forbidden  to  take  fees, 
and  where,  in  consequence,  a  fee  secures  twice  as  much 
good  service  as  anywhere  else.  Be  it  recorded  that  I 
never  knew  an  Englishman  to  refuse  a  shilling,  —  or, 
for  that  matter,  a  halfpenny. 

From  Worcester  we  took  tickets  to  Wolverhampton, 
and  thence  to  Birkenhead.  It  grew  dark  before  we 
reached  Chester,  and  began  to  rain ;  and  when  we  got 
to  Birkenhead  it  was  a  pitiless,  pelting  storm,  under 
which,  on  the  deck  of  the  steamboat,  we  Crossed  the 
detestable  Mersey,  two  years'  trial  of  which  has  made 
me  detest  it  every  day  more  and  more.  It  being  the 
night  of  rejoicing  for  the  taking  of  Sebastopol  and  the 
visit  of  the  Duke  of  Cambridge,  we  found  it  very  dijBfi- 
cult  to  get  a  cab  on  the  Liverpool  side  ;  but  after 
much  waiting  in  the  rain,  and  afterwards  in  one  of 
the  refreshment-rooms  on  the  landing  stage,  we  took  a 
Hansom  and  drove  off.  The  cloudy  sky  reflected  the 
illuminations,  and  we  saw  some  gas-lighted  stars  and 


170  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

other  devices,  as  we  passed,  very  pretty,  but  much 
marred  by  the  wind  and  rain.  So  we  finally  arrived 
at  Mrs.  Blodgett's,  and  made  a  good  supper  of  ham 
and  cold  chicken,  like  our  luncheon,  after  which,  wet 
as  we  were,  and  drizzling  as  the  weather  was,  and 
though  it  was  two  hours  beyond  his  bedtime,  I  took 

J out  to  see  the  illuminations.     I  wonder  what 

his  mother  would  have  said.  But  the  boy  must  now 
begin  to  see  life  and  to  feel  it. 

There  was  a  crowd  of  people  in  the  street ;  such  a 
crowd  that  we  could  hardly  make  a  passage  through 
them,  and  so  many  cabs  and  omnibuses  that  it  was  dif- 
ficult to  cross  the  ways.  Some  of  the  illuminations 
were  very  brilliant ;  but  there  was  a  woful  lack  of  va- 
riety and  invention  in  the  devices.  The  star  of  the 
garter,  which  kept  flashing  out  from  the  continual  ex- 
tinguishment of  the  wind  and  rain,  —  V  and  A,  in 
capital  letters  of  light,  —  were  repeated  a  hundred 
times ;  as  were  loyal  and  patriotic  mottoes,  —  crowns 
formed  by  colored  lamps.  In  some  instances  a  sensi- 
ble tradesman  had  illimiinated  his  own  sign,  thereby 
at  once  advertising  his  loyalty  and  his  business.  In- 
numerable flags  wei*e  suspended  before  the  houses  and 
across  the  streets,  and  the  crowd  plodded  on,  silent, 
heavy,  and  without  any  demonstration  of  joy,  unless  by 
the  discharge  of  pistols  close  at  one's  ear.  The  rain, 
to  be  sure,  was  quite  sufficient  to  damp  any  joyous 
ebullition  of  feeling;  but  the  next  day,  when  the  rain 
had  ceased,  and  when  the  streets  were  still  thronged 
with  people,  there  was  the  same  heavy,  purposeless 
strolling  from  place  to  place,  with  no  more  alacrity  of 
spirit  than  while  it  rained.  The  English  do  not  know 
how  to  rejoice ;  and,  in  their  present  circumstances,  to 
say  the  truth,  have  not  much  to  rejoice  for.     We  soon 


1855.]  LIVERPOOL.  171 

eame  home  ;  but  I  believe  it  was  nearly,  if  not  quite, 
eleven. 

At  Mrs.  Blodgett's,  Mr.  Archer  (surgeon  to  some 
prison  or  house  of  correction  here  in  Liverpool)  spoke 
of  an  attorney  who  many  years  ago  committed  for- 
gery, and,  being  apprehended,  took  a  dose  of  prussic 
acid.  Mr.  Archer  eame  with  the  stomach-pump,  and 
asked  the  patient  how  much  prussic  acid  he  had  taken. 
"  Sir,"  he  replied,  attorney-like,  "  I  decline  answering 
that  question ! "  He  recovered,  and  afterwards  arrived 
at  great  wealth  in  New  South  Wales. 

November  l^th. — At  dinner  at  Mr.  Bright's,  a 
week  or  two  ago,  Mr.  Robertson  Gladstone  spoke  of 
a  magistrate  of  Liverpool,  many  years  since.  Sir  John 
.  Of  a  morning,  sitting  on  the  bench  in  the  po- 
lice court,  he  would  take  five  shillings  out  of  his  pocket 
and  say,  "  Here,  Mr.  Clerk,  so  much  for  my  fine.  I 
was  drunk  last  night !  "  Mr.  Gladstone  witnessed  this 
personally. 

November  IQih.  —  I  went  to  the  North  Hospital 
yesterday,  to  take  the  deposition  of  a  dying  man  as  to 
his  ill-treatment  by  the  second  and  third  mates  of  the 
ship  Assyria,  on  the  voyage  from  New  Orleans.  This 
hospital  is  a  very  gloomy  place,  with  its  wide  bleak 
entries  and  staircases,  which  may  be  very  good  for 
summer  weather,  but  which  are  most  ungenial  at  this 
bleak  November  season.  I  found  the  physicians  of 
the  house  laughing  and  talking  very  cheerfully  with 
Mr.  Wilding,  who  had  preceded  me.  We  went  forth- 
with up  two  or  three  pairs  of  stairs,  to  the  ward  where 
the  sick  man  lay,  and  where  there  were  six  or  eight 
other  beds,  in  almost  each  of  which  was  a  patient*--^ 


172  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185*. 

narrow  beds,  shabbily  furnished.  The  man  whcmi  I 
came  to  see  was  the  only  one  who  was  not  perfectly 
quiet ;  neither  was  he  very  restless.  The  doctor,  in- 
forming him  of  my  presence,  intimated  that  his  dis- 
ease might  be  fatal,  and  that  I  was  come  to  hear  what 
he  had  to  say  as  to  the  causes  of  his  death.  After- 
wards, a  Testament  i^s  sought  for,  in  order  to  swear 
him,  and  I  administered  the  oath,  and  made  him  kiss 
the  book.  He  then  (in  response  to  Mr.  Wilding's 
questions)  told  how  he  had  been  beaten  and  ill-treated, 
banged  and  thwacked,  from  the  moment  he  came  on 
board,  to  which  usage  he  ascribed  his  death.  Some* 
times  his  senses  seemed  to  sink  away,  so  that  I  almost 
thought  him  dead ;  but  by  and  by  the  questions  would 
appear  to  reach  him,  and  bring  him  back,  and  he  went 
on  with  his  evidence,  interspersing  it,  however,  with 
dying  groans,  and  almost  death  rattles.  In  the  midst 
of  whatever  he  was  saying,  he  often  recurred  to  a  sum 
of  four  dollars  and  a  half,  which  he  said  he  had  put 
into  the  hands  of  the  porter  of  the  hospital,  and  which 
he  wanted  to  get  back.  Several  times  he  expressed 
his  wish  to  return  to  America  (of  which  he  was  not  a 
native),  and,  on  the  whole,  I  do  not  think  he  had  any 
real  sense  of  his  precarious  condition,  notwithstanding 
that  he  assented  to  the  doctor's  hint  to  that  effect. 
He  sank  away  so  much  at  one  time,  that  they  brought 
him  wine  in  a  tin  cup,  with  a  spout  to  drink  out  of, 
and  he  mustered  strength  to  raise  himself  in  his  bed 
and  driok ;  then  hemmed,  with  rather  a  disappointed 
air,  as  if  it  did  not  stimulate  and  refresh  him,  as 
drink  ought  to  do.  When  he  had  finished  his  evi- 
dence (which  Mr.  Wilding  took  down  in  writing  from 
his  mouth),  he  marked  his  cross  at  the  foot  of  the  pat 
per,  and  we  ceased  to  torment  him  with  further  que? 


1856.]  LIVERPOOL.  178 

tion.  His  deposition  will  probably  do  no  good,  so  far 
as  the  punishment  of  the  persons  implicated  is  con- 
cerned ;  for  he  appears  to  have  come  on  board  in  a 
sickly  state,  and  never  to  have  been  well  during  the 
passage.  On  a  pallet,  close  by  his  bed,  lay  another 
seaman  of  the  same  ship,  who  had  likewise  been 
abused  by  the  same  men,  and  bore  more  ostensible 
marks  of  ill  usage  than  this  man  did,  about  the  head 
and  face.  There  is  a  most  dreadful  state  of  things 
aboard  our  ships.  Hell  itself  can  be  no  worse  than 
some  of  them,  and  I  do  pray  that  some  New-Eng- 
lander  with  the  rage  of  reform  in  him  may  turn  his 
thoughts  this  way.  The  first  step  towards  better 
things  —  the  best  practicable  step  for  the  present  — 
is  to  legalize  flogging  on  ship-board;  thereby  doing 
away  with  the  miscellaneous  assaults  and  batteries, 
kickings,  fisticuffings,  ropes'-endings,  marline-spikings, 
which  the  inferior  officers  continually  perpetrate,  zb 
the  only  mode  of  keeping  up  anything  like  discipline. 
As  in  many  other  instances,  philanthropy  has  over- 
shot itself  by  the  prohibition  of  flogging,  causing  the 
captain  to  avoid  the  responsibility  of  solemn  punish- 
ment, and  leave  his  mates  to  make  devils  of  them- 
selves, by  habitual  and  hardly  avoidable  ill-treatment 
of  the  seamen. 

After  I  left  the  dying  sailor,  his  features  seemed  to 
contract  and  grow  sharp.  Some  young  medical  stu- 
dents stood  about  the  bed,  watching  death  creep  upon 
him,  and  anticipating,  perhaps,  that  in  a  day  or  two 
they  would  have  the  poor  f  eUow's  body  on  the  dissect- 
ing-table.  Dead  patients,  I  believe,  undergo  this  fate, 
unless  somebody  chooses  to  pay  their  funeral  expenses; 
but  the  captain  of  the  Assyria  (who  seems  to  be  re- 
spectable and  kind-hearted,  though  master  of  a  float* 


174  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

ing  hell)  tells  me  that  he  means  to  bury  the  man  at 
his  own  cost.  This  morning  there  is  a  note  from  the 
surgeon  of  the  hospital,  announcing  his  death,  and 
likewise  the  dangerous  state  of  his  shipmate  whom  I 
saw  on  the  pallet  beside  him. 

Sea<3aptains  caU  a  dress-coat  a  ''  claw-hammer." 

November  22d.  —  I  went  on  board  the  ship  Wil- 
liam Tapscott,  lying  in  the  river,  yesterday,  to  take 
depositions  in  reference  to  a  homicide  committed  in 
New  York.  I  sat  on  a  sofa  in  the  cabin,  and  Mr. 
Wilding  at  a  table,  with  his  writing-materials  before 
him,  and  the  crew  were  summoned,  one  by  one, — 
rough,  piratical-looking  fellows,  contrasting  strongly 
with  the  gewgaw  cabin  in  which  I  received  them. 
There  is  no  such  finery  on  land  as  in  the  cabin  of 
one  of  these  ships  in  the  Liverpool  trade,  finished  off 
with  a  complete  panelling  of  rose-wood,  mahogany, 
and  bird's-eye  maple,  polished  and  varnished,  and 
gilded  along  the  cornices  and  the  edges  of  the  panels. 
It  is  all  a  piece  of  elaborate  cabinet-work;  and  one 
does  not  altogether  see  why  it  should  be  given  to  the 
gales,  and  the  salt-sea  atmosphere,  to  be  tossed  upon 
the  waves,  and  occupied  by  a  rude  shipmaster  in  his 
dreadnaught  clothes,  when  the  fairest  lady  in  the  land 
has  no  such  boudoir.  A  telltale  compass  hung  be- 
neath the  skylight,  and  a  clock  was  fastened  near  it, 
and  ticked  loudly.  A  stewardess,  with  the  aspect  of 
a  woman  at  home,  went  in  and  out  of  the  cabin,  about 
her  domestic  calls.  Through  the  cabin  door  (it  being 
a  house  on  deck)  I  could  see  the  arrangement  of  the 
ship. 

The  first  sailor  that  I  examined  was  a  black-haired, 


1855.]  LIVERPOOL.  175 

powerful  fellow,  in  an  oil-skin  jacket,  with  a  good  face 
enough,  though  he,  too,  might  have  been  taken  for  a 
pirate.  In  the  affray  in  which  the  homicide  occurred, 
he  had  received  a  cut  across  the  forehead,  and  another 
slantwise  across  his  nose,  which  had  quite  cut  it  in 
two,  on  a  level  with  the  face,  and  had  thence  gone 
downward  to  his  lower  jaw.  But  neither  he  nor  any 
one  else  could  give  any  testimony  elucidating  the  mat- 
ter into  which  I  had  come  to  inquire.  A  seaman  had 
beemstabbed  just  before  the  vessel  left  New  York,  and 
had  been  sent  on  shore  and  died  there.  Most  of  these 
men  were  in  the  affray,  and  all  of  them  were  within  a 
few  yards  of  the  spot  where  it  occurred;  but  those 
actually  present  all  pleaded  that  they  were  so  drunk 
that  the  whole  thing  was  now  like  a  dream,  with  no 
distinct  images ;  and,  if  any  had  been  sober,  they  took 
care  to  know  nothing  that  could  inculpate  any  indi- 
vidual. Perhaps  they  spoke  truth ;  they  certainly  had 
a  free  and  honest-like  way  of  giving  their  evidence,  as 
if  their  only  object  was  to  tell  all  the  truth  they  knew. 
But  I  rather  think,  in  the  forecastle,  and  during  the 
night-watches,  they  have  whispered  to  one  another  a 
great  deal  more  than  they  told  me,  and  have  come  to 
a  pretty  accurate  conclusion  as  to  the  man  who  gave 
the  stab. 

While  the  examination  proceeded,  there  was  a  draW' 
ing  of  corks  in  a  side  closet ;  and,  at  its  conclusion, 
the  captain  asked  us  to  stay  to  dinner,  but  we  excused 
ourselves,  and  drank  only  a  glass  of  wine.  The  cap- 
tain apologized  for  not  joining  us,  inasmuch  as  he  had 
drunk  no  wine  for  the  last  seventeen  years.  He  ap- 
pears to  be  a  particularly  good  and  trustworthy  man, 
and  is  the  only  shipmaster  whom  I  have  met  with,  who 
9ays  that  a  crew  can  best  be  governed  by  kindness. 


176  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1855. 

In  the  inner  closet  there  was  a  cage  containing  two 
land-birds,  who  had  come  aboard  him,  tired  almost  to 
death,  three  or  four  himdred  miles  from  shore ;  and 
he  had  fed  them  and  been  tender  of  them,  from  a 
sense  of  what  was  due  to  hospitality.  He  means  to 
give  them  to  J . 

November  28th.  — I  have  grown  wofully  aristocratic 
in  my  tastes,  I  fear,  since  coming  to  England ;  at  all 
events,  I  am  conscious  of  a  certain  disgust  at  goiftg  to 
dine  in  a  house  with  a  small  entrance-hall  and  a  nar- 
row staircase,  parlor  with  chintz  curtains,  and  all  other 
arrangements  on  a  similar  scale.  This  is  pitiable. 
However,  I  really  do  not  think  I  should  mind  these 
things,  were  it  not  for  the  bustle,  the  affectation,  the 
intensity,  of  the  mistress  of  the  house.  It  is  certain 
that  a  woman  in  England  is  either  decidedly  a  lady  or 
decidedly  not  a  lady.  There  seems  to  be  no  respect- 
able medium.  Bill  of  fare:  broiled  soles,  half  of  a 
roast  pig,  a  haricot  of  mutton,  stewed  oysters,  a  tart, 
pears,  figs,  with  sherry  and  port  wine,  both  good,  and 
the  port  particularly  so.  I  ate  some  pig,  and  could 
hardly  resist  the  lady's  importunities  to  eat  more^ 
though  to  my  fancy  it  tasted  of  swill,  —  had  a  flavor 
of  the  pigsty.  On  the  parlor  table  were  some  poor 
editions  of  popular  books,  Longfellow's  poems  and 
others.  The  lady  affects  a  literary  taste,  and  bothered 
me  about  my  own  productions. 

A  beautiful  subject  for  a  romance,  or  for  a  sermon, 
would  be  the  subsequent  life  of  the  young  man  whom 
Jesus  bade  to  sell  all  he  had  and  give  to  the  poor  ; 
and  he  went  away  sorrowful,  and  is  not  recorded  to 
have  done  what  he  was  bid. 


1856.]  LIVERPOOL.  177 

December  llth.  —  This  has  been  a  foggy  morning 
and  forenoon,  snowing  a  little  now  and  then,  and  dis- 
agreeably cold.  The  sky  is  of  an  inexpressibly  dreary 
dun  color.  It  is  so  dark  at  times  that  I  have  to  hold 
my  book  close  to  my  eyes,  and  then  again  it  lightens 
np  a  little.  On  the  whole,  disgustingly  gloomy ;  and 
thus  it  has  been  for  a  long  while  past,  although  the 
disagreeableness  seems  to  lie  very  near  the  earth,  and 
just  above  the  steeples  and  house-tops  very  probably 
there  may  be  a  bright,  simshiny  day.  At  about  twelve 
there  is  a  faint  glow  of  sunlight,  like  the  gleaming  re- 
flection from  a  not  highly  polished  copper  kettle. 

Deeemher  26^A.  —  On  Christmas  Eve  and  yesterday, 
there  were  little  branches  of  mistletoe  hanging  in  sev- 
eral parts  of  the  house,  in  the  kitchen,  the  entries,  the 
parlor,  and  the  smoking-room,  —  suspended  from  the 
gas-fittings.  The  maids  of  the  house  did  their  utmost 
to  entrap  the  gentlemen  boarders,  old  and  young,  un- 
der the  privileged  places,  and  there  to  kiss  them,  after 
which  they  were  expected  to  pay  a  shilling.  It  is  very 
queer,  being  customarily  so  respectful,  that  they  should 
assume  this  license  now,  absolutely  trying  to  pull  the 
gentlemen  into  the  kitchen  by  main  force,  and  kissing 
the  harder  and  more  abundantly  the  more  they  were 
resisted.  A  little  rosy-cheeked  Scotch  lass  —  at  other 
times  very  modest  —  was  the  most  active  in  this  busi- 
ness. I  doubt  whether  any  gentleman  but  myself  es- 
caped.    I  heard  old  Mr.  S parleying  with  the 

maids  last  evening,  and  pleading  his  age;  but  he 
seems  to  have  met  with  no  mercy,  for  there  was  a 
sound  of  prodigious  smacking  immediately  afterwards. 

J was  assaulted,  and  fought  most  vigorously ;  but 

was  outrageously  kissed,  —  receiving  some  scratches, 

VOL.  yni.  12 


178  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1856. 

moreover,  in  the  conflict.  The  mistletoe  has  white, 
wax-looking  berries,  and  dull  green  leaves,  with  a  par- 
asitical stem. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  Christmas  Day,  long  before 
daylight,  I  heard  music  in  the  street,  and  a  woman's 
voice,  powerful  and  melodious,  singing  a  Christmas 
hymn.  Before  bedtime  I  presume  one  half  of  Eng- 
land, at  a  moderate  calculation,  was  the  worse  for 
liquor. 

The  market-houses,  at  this  season,  show  the  national 
taste  for  heavy  feeding,  —  carcasses  of  prize  oxen,  im- 
mensely fat  and  bulky ;  fat  sheep,  with  their  woolly 
heads  and  tails  still  on,  and  stars  and  other  devices  in- 
geniously wrought  on  the  quarters ;  fat  pigs,  adorned 
with  flowers,  like  corpses  of  virgins ;  hares,  wild-fowl, 
geese,  ducks,  turkeys  ;  and  green  boughs  and  banners 
suspended  about  the  stalls,  —  and  a  great  deal  of  dirt 
and  griminess  on  the  stone  floor  of  the  market-house, 
and  on  the  persons  of  the  crowd. 

There  are  some  Englishmen  whom  I  like,  — one  or 
two  for  whom  I  might  say  I  have  an  affection ;  but 
still  there  is  not  the  same  union  between  us  as  if  they 
were  Americans.  A  cold,  thin  medium  intervenes  be- 
twixt our  most  intimate  approaches.  It  puts  me  in 
mind  of  Alnaschar  and  his  princess,  with  the  cold  steel 
blade  of  his  scimitar  between  them.  Perhaps  if  I  were 
at  home  I  might  feel  differently ;  bttt  in  a  foreign  land 
I  can  never  forget  the  distinction  between  English  and 
American. 

January  Ist^  1856. — Last  night,  at  Mrs.  Blodgett's, 
we  sat  up  till  twelve  o'clock  to  open  the  front  door, 
and  let  the  New  Year  in.  After  the  coming  guest  was 
fairly  in  the  house,  the  back  door  was  to  be  opened,  to 


1856.]  LIVERPOOL,  179 

let  the  Old  Year  out ;  but  I  wajs  tired,  and  did  not 
wait  for  the  latter  ceremony.  When  the  New  Year 
made  its  entrance,  there  was  a  general  shaking  of 
hands,  and  one  of  the  shipmasters  said  that  it  was 
customary  to  kiss  the  ladies  all  round ;  but,  to  my  great 
satisfaction,  we  did  not  proceed  to  such  extremity. 
There  was  singing  in  the  streets,  and  many  voices  of 
people  passing,  and  when  twelve  had  struck,  all  the 
bells  of  the  town,  I  believe,  rang  out  together.    I  went 

up  stairs,  sad  and  lonely,  and  stepping  into  J 's 

little  room,  wished  him  a  Happy  New  Year,  as  he 
slept,  and  many  of  them. 

To  a  cool  observer,  a  country  does  not  show  to  best 
advantage  during  a  time  of  war.  All  its  self-conceit 
is  doubly  visible,  and,  indeed,  is  sedulously  kept  upper- 
most by  direct  appeals  to  it.  The  country  must  be 
humbugged,  in  order  to  keep  its  courage  up. 

Sentiment  seems  to  me  more  abundant  in  middle- 
aged  ladies  in  England  than  in  the  United  States.  I 
don't  know  how  it  may  be  with  young  ladies. 

The  shipmasters  bear  testimony  to  the  singular  deli- 
cacy of  common  sailors  in  their  behavior  in  the  pres- 
ence of  women ;  and  they  say  that  this  good  trait  is 
still  strongly  observable  even  in  the  present  race  of 
seamen,  greatly  deteriorated  as  it  is.  On  shipboard, 
there  is  never  an  indecorous  word  or  unseemly  act 
said  or  done  by  sailors  when  a  woman  can  be  cogni- 
zant of  it ;  and  their  deportment  in  this  respect  differs 
greatly  from  that  of  landsmen  of  similar  position  in 
society.  This  is  remarkable,  considering  that  a  sail- 
or's female  acquaintances  are  usually  and  exclusively 


180  ENGLISH  NaTE'-BOOKS.  [1856. 

of  the  worst  kind,  and  that  his  intercourse  with  them 
has  no  relation  whatever  to  morality  or  decency.  For 
this  very  reason,  I  suppose,  he  regards  a  modest  wo- 
man as  a  creature  divine  and  to  be  reverenced. 

January  16th.  —  I  have  suffered  wofuUy  from  low 
spirits  for  some  time  past ;  and  this  has  not  often  been 
the  case  since  I  grew  to  be  a  man,  even  in  the  least 
auspicious  periods  of  my  life.  My  desolate  bachelor 
condition,  I  suppose,  is  the  caiise.  EeaUy,  I  have  no 
pleasure  in  anything,  and  I  feel  my  tread  to  be  heavier, 
and  my  physical  movement  more  sluggish,  than  in  hap- 
pier times.  A  weight  is  always  upon  me.  My  appetite 
is  not  good.  I  sleep  ill,  lying  awake  till  late  at  night, 
to  think  sad  thoughts  and  to  imagine  sombre  things, 
and  awaking  before  light  with  the  same  thoughts  and 
fancies  still  in  my  mind.  My  heart  sinks  always  as  I 
ascend  the  stairs  to  my  office,  from  a  dim  augury  of 
ill  news  from  Lisbon  that  I  may  perhaps  hear,  —  of 
black-sealed  letters,  or  some  such  horrors.  Nothing 
gives  me  any  joy.  I  have  learned  what  the  bitterness 
of  exile  is,  in  these  days ;  and  I  never  should  have 
known  it  but  for  the  absence  of .  "  Remote,  un- 
friended, melancholy,  slow,"  —  I  can  perfectly  appre- 
ciate that  line  of  Goldsmith ;  for  it  well  expresses  my 
own  torpid,  unenterprising,  joyless  state  of  mind  and 
heart.  I  am  lik&  an  uprooted  plant,  wilted  and  droop- 
ing. Life  seems  so  purposeless  as  not  to  be  worth  the 
trouble  of  carrying  it  on  any  further. 

I  was  at  a  dinner,  tke  other  evening,  at  Mr.  B 's, 

where  the  entertainment  was  almost  entirely  Amer- 
ican, —  New  York  oysters,  raw,  stewed,  and  fried ; 
Boup  of  American  partridges,  particularly  good ;  also 


1856.1  LIVERPOOL.  181 

terrain  soap,  rich,  but  not  to  my  taste ;  American 
pork  and  beans,  baked  in  Yankee  style ;  a  noble 
American  turkey,  weighing  thirty-one  pounds ;  and, 
at  the  other  end  of  the  table,  an  American  round  of 
beef,  which  the  Englishmen  present  allowed  to  be  de- 
licious, and  worth  a  guinea  an  ounce.  I  forget  the 
other  American  dishes,  if  there  were  any  more,  —  Oh 
yes !  —  canvas-back  ducks,  coming  on  with  the  sweets, 
in  the  usual  English  fashion.  We  ought  to  have  had 
Catawba  wine ;  but  this  was  wanting,  although  there 
was  plenty  of  hock,  champagne,  sherry,  madeira,  port, 
and  claret.  Our  host  is  a  very  jolly  man,  and  the 
dinner  was  a  merrier  and  noisier  one  than  any  Eng« 
lish  dinner  within  my  experience. 

February  8^A.  —  I  read  to-day,  in  the  little  ofiSoe- 
Bible  (greasy  with  perjuries)  St.  Luke's  account  of 
the  agony,  the  trial,  the  crucifixion,  and  the  resurrec- 
tion ;  and  how  Christ  appeared  to  the  two  disciples, 
on  their  way  to  Emmaus,  and  afterwards  to  a  com- 
pany of  disciples.  On  both  these  latter  occasions  he 
expoimded  the  Scriptures  to  them,  and  showed  the 
application  of  the  old  prophecies  to  himself ;  and  it  is 
to  be  supposed  that  he  made  them  fully,  or  at  least 
sufficiently,  aware  what  his  character  was,  —  whether 
God,  or  man,  or  both,  or  something  between,  together 
with  all  other  essential  points  of  doctrine.  But  none 
of  this  doctrine  or  of  these  expositions  is  recorded,  the 
mere  facts  being  most  simply  stated,  and  the  conclu- 
sion to  which  he  led  them,  that,  whether  God  himself, 
or  the  Son  of  God,  or  merely  the  Son  of  man,  he  was, 
at  all  events,  the  Christ  foretold  in  the  Jewish  Scrip- 
tures. This  last,  therefore,  must  have  been  the  one  es* 
sential  point. 


182  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185& 

February  '[%th.  —  On  Saturday  there  called  on  mo 

an  elderly  Robinson-Crusoe  sort  of  man,  Mr.  H ^ 

shipwright,  I  believe,  of  Boston,  who  has  lately  been 
travelling  in  the  East.  About  a  year  ago  he  was 
here,  after  being  shipwrecked  on  the  Dutch  coast,  and 
I  assisted  him  to  get  home.  Again,  I  have  supplied 
him  with  five  pounds,  and  my  credit  for  an  outside 
garment.  He  is  a  spare  man,  with  closely  cropped 
gray,  or  rather  white  hair,  close-cropped  whiskers 
fringing  round  his  chin,  and  a  close-cropped  white 
mustache,  with  his  under  lip  and  a  portion  of  his  chin 
bare  beneath,  —  sunburnt  and  weather-worn.  He  has 
been  in  Syria  and  Jerusalem,  through  the  Desert,  and 
at  Sebastopol ;  and  says  he  means  to  get  Ticknor  to 
publish  his  travels,  and  the  story  of  his  whole  adven- 
turous life,  on  his  return  home.  A  free-spoken,  con- 
fiding, hardy,  religious,  unpolished,  simple,  yet  world- 
experienced  man  ;  very  talkative,  and  boring  me  with 
longer  visits  than  I  like.  He  has  brought  home, 
among  other  curiosities,  "  a  lady's  arm,"  as  he  calls  it, 
two  thousand  years  old,  —  a  piece  of  a  mummy,  of 
course  ;  also  some  coins,  one  of  which,  a  gold  coin  of 
Vespasian,  he  showed  me,  and  said  he  bought  it  of 
an  Arab  of  the  desert.  The  Bedouins  possess  a  good 
many  of  these  coins,  handed  down  immemorially  from 
father  to  son,  and  never  seU  them  unless  compelled 
by  want.  He  had  likewise  a  Hebrew  manuscript  of 
the  Book  of  Ruth,  on  a  parchment  roll,  which  was  put 
into  his  care  to  be  given  to  Lord  Haddo. 

He  was  at  Sebastopol  during  the  siege,  and  nearly 
got  his  head  knocked  off  by  a  cannon-ball.  His 
strangest  statement  is  one  in  reference  to  Lord  Rag- 
lan. He  says  that  an  English  officer  told  him  thal^  his 
Lordship   shut   himself   up,  desiring  not  to  be  \  dis- 


1856  ]  LIVERPOOL.  188 

tnrbed,  as  he  needed  sleep.  When  fifteen  hours  had 
gone  by,  his  attendants  thought  it  time  to  break  open 
the  door ;  and  Lord  Raglan  was  found  dead,  with  a 
bottle  of  strychnine  by  the  bedside.  The  affair,  so 
far  as  the  circumstances  indicated  suicide,  was  hushed 
up,  and  his  death  represented  as  a  natural  one.  The 
English  officer  seems  to  have  been  an  unscrupulous 
fellow,  jesting  thus  with  the  fresh  memory  of  his  dead 
commander  ;  for  it  is  impossible  to  believe  a  word  of 
the  story.  Even  if  Lord  Raglan  had  wished  for  death, 
he  would  hardly  have  taken  strychnine,  when  there 
were  so  many  chances  of  being  honorably  shot.  In 
Wood's  Narrative  of  the  Campaign,  it  is  stated  that 
he  died  surrounded  by  the  members  of  his  staff,  after 
haying  been  for  some  time  ill.  It  appears,  however, 
by  the  same  statement,  that  no  serious  apprehensions 
had  been  entertained,  until,  one  afternoon,  he  shut 
himself  up,  desiring  not  to  be  disturbed  till  evening. 
After  two  or  three  hours  he  called  Lord  Burghersh,  — 
*'  Frank,  Frank  1  "  and  was  found  to  be  almost  in  a 

state  of  collapse,  and  died  that  evening.    Mr.  H 's 

story  might  very  weU  have  been  a  camp  rumor. 

It  seems  to  me  that  the  British  Ministry,  in  its  no- 
tion of  a  life-peerage,  shows  an  entire  misunderstand- 
ing of  what  makes  people  desire  the  peerage.  It  is 
not  for  the  immediate  personal  distinction ;  but  be- 
cause it  removes  the  peer  and  his  consanguinity  from 
the  common  rank  of  men,  and  makes  a  separate  order 
of  them,  as  if  they  should  grow  angelic.  A  life-peer  is 
but  a  mortal  amid  the  angelic  throng. 

February  28^A.  —  I  went  yesterday  with  Mrs.        «* 

and  another  lady,  and  Mr.  M ,  to  the  West  Derby 

Workhouse.  .  .  . 


184  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [186G. 

[Here  comes  in  the  visit  to  the  West  Derby  Work- 
house, which  was  made  the  subject  of  a  paper  in  ^^  Our 
Old  Home,"  called  "  Outside  Glimpses  of  English  Pov- 
erty." As  the  purpose  in  publishing  these  passages 
from  the  private  note-books  is  to  give  to  those  who 
ask  for  a  memoir  of  Mr.  Hawthorne  every  possible  in- 
cident recorded  by  himself  which  shows  his  character 
and  nature,  the  editor  thinks  it  proper  to  disclose  the 
fact  that  Mr.  Hawthorne  was  himself  the  gentleman 
of  that  party  who  took  up  in  his  arms  the  little  child, 
so  fearfully  repulsive  in  its  condition.  And  it  seems 
better  to  quote  his  own  words  in  reference  to  it,  than 
merely  to  say  it  was  he. 

Under  date  February  28,  1856. 

"  After  this,  we  went  to  the  ward  where  the  chil- 
dren were  kept,  and,  on  entering  this,  we  saw,  in  the 
first  place,  two  or  three  unlovely  and  unwholesome  lit- 
tle imps,  who  were  lazily  playing  together.  One  of 
them  (a  child  about  six  years  old,  but  I  know  not 
whether  girl  or  boy)  immediately  took  the  strangest 
fancy  for  me.  It  was  a  wretehed,  pale,  half-torpid  lit- 
tle thing,  with  a  humor  in  its  eyes  which  the  Governor 
said  was  the  scurvy.  I  never  saw,  till  a  few  moments 
afterwards,  a  child  that  I  should  feel  less  inclined  to 
fondle.  But  this  little,  sickly,  humor -eaten  fright 
prowled  around  me,  taking  hold  of  my  skirts,  follow- 
ing at  my  heels,  and  at  last  held  up  its  hands,  smiled 
in  my  face,  and,  standing  directly  before  me,  insisted 
on  my  taking  it  up !  Not  that  it  said  a  word,  for  I 
rather  think  it  was  underwitted,  and  could  not  talk ; 
but  its  face  expressed  such  perfect  confidence  that  it 
was  going  to  be  taken  up  and  made  much  of,  that  it 
was  impossible  not  to  do  it.  It  was  as  if  God  had 
promised  the  child  this  favor  on  my  behalf,  and  that  I 


1856.]  LIVERPOOL.  185 

must  needs  fulfil  the  contract.  I  held  my  undesirar 
bl^  burden  a  little  while ;  and,  after  setting  the  child 
down,  it  still  followed  me,  holding  two  of  my  fingers 
and  playing  with  them,  just  as  if  it  were  a  child  of  my 
own.  It  was  a  foundling,  and  out  of  all  human  kind 
it  chose  me  to  be  its  father !  We  went  up  stairs  into 
another  ward  ;  and,  on  coming  down  again,  there  was 
this  same  child  waiting  for  me,  with  a  sickly  smile 
round  its  defaced  mouth,  and  in  its  dim  red  eyes.  .  .  • 
I  never  should  have  forgiven  myself  if  I  had  repelled 
its  advances."  — Ed.] 

After  leaving  the  workhouse,  we  drove  to  Norris 

Green  ;  and  Mrs. showed  me  round  the  grounds, 

which  are  very  good  and  nicely  kept.  Oh,  these  Eng- 
lish homes,  what  delightful  places  they  are  I  I  won- 
der how  many  people  live  and  die  in  the  workhouse, 
having  no  other  home,  because  other  people  have  a 
great  deal  more  home  than  enough.  .  .  .  We  had  a 

very  pleasant  dinner,  and  Mr.  M and  I  walked 

back,  four  miles  and  a  half,  to  Liverpool,  where  we  ar- 
rived just  before  midnight. 

Why  did  Christ  curse  the  fig-tree  ?  It  was  not  in 
the  least  to  blame ;  and  it  seems  most  unreasonable  to 
have  expected  it  to  bear  figs  out  of  season.  Instead 
of  withering  it  away,  it  would  have  been  as  great  a 
miracle,  and  far  more  beautiful,  —  and,  one  would 
think,  of  more  beneficent  influence,  —  to  have  made 
it  suddenly  rich  with  ripe  fruit.  Then,  to  be  sure,  it 
might  have  died  joyfully,  having  answered  so  good  a 
pui'pose.  I  have  been  reminded  of  this,  miracle  by  the 
story  of  a  man  in  Heywood,  a  town  in  Lancashire, 
who  used  such  horribly  profane  language  that  a  plane- 
tree  in  front  of  his  cottage  is  sajd  to  have  withered 


186  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1856. 

away  from  that  hour.  I  can  draw  no  moral  from  the 
incident  of  the  fig-tree,  unless  it  be  that  all  things  per- 
ish from  the  instant  when  they  cease  to  answer  some 
divine  purpose. 

March  6th.  —  Yesterday  I  lunched  on  board  Cap-^ 
tain  RusseU's  ship,  the  Princeton.  These  daily  lunches 
on  shipboard  might  answer  very  well  the  purposes  of 
a  dinner ;  being,  in  fact,  noontide  dinners,  with  soup, 
roast  mutton,  mutton-chops,  and  a  macaroni  pudding, 
—  brandy,  port  and  sherry  wines.  There  were  three 
elderly  Englishmen  at  table,  with  white  heads,  — 
which,  I  think,  is  of  tener  the  predicament  of  elderly 
heads  here  than  in  America.  One  of  these  was  a  re- 
tired Custom  House  officer,  and  the  other  two  were 
connected  with  shipping  in  some  way.  There  is  a  sat- 
isfaction in  seeing  Englishmen  eat  and  drink,  they  do 
it  so  heartily,  and,  on  the  whole,  so  wisely,  —  trusting 
so  entirely  that  there  is  no  harm  in  good  beef  and 
mutton,  and  a  reasonable  quantity  of  good  liquor ;  and 
these  three  hale  old  men,  who  had  acted  on  this  whole- 
some faith  for  so  long,  were  proofs  that  it  is  weU  on 
earth  to  live  like  earthly  creatures.  In  America,  what 
squeamishness,  what  delicacy,  what  stomachic  appre- 
hension, would  there  not  be  among  three  stomachs  of 
sixty  or  seventy  years'  experience !  I  think  this  fail- 
ure of  American  stomachs  is  partly  owing  to  our  ill 
usage  of  our  digestive  powers,  and  partly  to  our  want 
of  faith  in  them. 

After  lunch,  we  all  got  into  an  omnibus,  and  went 
to  the  Mersey  Iron  Foundry,  to  see  the  biggest  piece 
of  ordnance  in  the  world,  which  is  almost  finished. 
The  overseer  of  the  works  received  us,  and  escorted 
us  courteously  throughout  the  establishment ;  which  is 


1856.]  LIVERPOOL.  187 

very  extensive,  giving  employment  to  a  thousand  men, 
what  with  night-work  and  day-work.  The  big  gun  is 
still  on  the  axle,  or  turning-machine,  by  means  of 
which  it  has  been  bored.  It  is  made  entirely  of 
wrought  and  welded  iron,  fifty  tons  of  which  were 
originally  used;  and  the  gun,  in  its  present  state, 
bored  out  and  smoothed  away,  weighs  nearly  twenty- 
three  tons.  It  has,  as  yet,  no  trunnions,  and  does  not 
look  much  like  a  cannon,  but  only  a  huge  iron  cylin- 
der, inmiensely  solid,  and  with  a  bore  so  large  that  a 
young  man  of  nineteen  shoved  himself  into  it,  the 
whole  length,  with  a  light,  in  order  to  see  whether  it 
is  duly  smooth  and  regular.  I  suppose  it  will  have  a 
better  effect,  as  to  the  impression  of  size,  when  it  is 
finished,  polished,  mounted,  and  fully  equipped,  after 
the  fashion  of  ordinary  cannon.  It  is  to  throw  a  baU 
of  three  hundred  pounds'  weight  five  miles,  and  woe 
be  to  whatever  ship  or  battlement  shall  bear  the 
brunt  I 

After  inspecting  the  gun  we  went  through  other 
portions  of  the  establishment,  and  saw  iron  in  various 
stages  of  manufacture.  I  am  not  usually  interested 
in  manufacturing  processes,  being  quite  imable  to  im- 
derstand  them,  at  least  in  cotton  -  machinery  and  the 
like ;  but  here  there  were  such  exhibitions  of  mighty 
strength,  both  of  men  and  machines,  that  I  had  a 
satisfaction  in  looking  on.  We  saw  lumps  of  iron, 
intensely  white-hot,  and  in  aU  but  a  melting  state, 
passed  through  rollers  of  various  size  and  pressure, 
and  speedily  converted  into  long  bars,  which  came 
curling  and  waving  out  of  the  roUers  like  great  red 
ribbons,  or  like  fiery  serpents  wriggling  out  of  Tophet ; 
and  finally,  being  straightened  out,  they  were  laid  to 
fool  in  heaps.     Trip-hammers  are  very  pleasant  things 


188  ENGLISH  NOTE-^BOOKS.  HSMu 

to  look  at,  working  so  massively  as  they  do,  and  yet 
so  accurately ;  chewing  up  the  hot  iron,  as  it  were,  and 
fashioning  it  into  shape,  with  a  sort  of  mighty  and  gi- 
gantic gentleness  in  their  mode  of  action.  What  great 
things  man  has  contrived,  and  is  continually  perform- 
ing !     What  a  noble  brute  he  is ! 

Also,  I  found  much  delight  in  looking  at  the  molten 
iron,  boiling  and  bubbling  in  the  furnace,  and  some- 
times slopping  over,  when  stirred  by  the  attendant. 
There  were  numberless  fires  on  all  sides,  blinding  us 
with  their  intense  glow;  and  continually  the  pound- 
ing strokes  of  huge  hammers,  some  wielded  by  ma- 
chinery and  others  by  human  arms.  I  had  a  respect 
for  these  stalwart  workmen,  who  seemed  to  be  near 
kindred  of  the  machines  amid  which  they  wrought,  — 
mighty  men,  smiting  stoutly,  and  looking  into  the 
fierce  eyes  of  the  furnace  fearlessly,  and  handling  the 
iron  at  a  temperature  which  would  have  taken  the  skin 
off  from  ordinary  fingers.  They  looked  strong,  in- 
deed, but  pale  ;  for  the  hot  atmosphere  in  which  they 
live  cannot  but  be  deleterious,  and  I  suppose  their  very 
strength  wears  them  quickly  out.  But  I  would  rather 
live  ten  years  as  an  iron-smith  than  fifty  as  a  tailor. 

So  much  heat  can  be  concentrated  into  a  mass  of 
iron,  that  a  lump  a  foot  square  heats  all  the  atmos- 
phere about  it,  and  bums  the  face  at  a  considerable 
distance.  As  the  trip-hammer  strikes  the  lump,  it 
seems  still  more  to  intensify  the  heat  by  squeezing  it 
together,  and  the  fluid  iron  oozes  out  like  sap  or  juice. 

"  He  was  ready  for  the  newest  fashions !  "  —  this 
expression  was  used  by  Mrs.  Blodgett  in  reference  to 

Mr on  his  first  arrival  in  England,  and  it  is  a 

very  tender  way  of  signifying  that  a  person  is  rather 
poorly  off  as  to  apparel. 


1856.]  LIVERPOOL.  189 

March  15th.  —  Mr. ,  our  new  ambassador,  ar- 
rived on  Thursday  afternoon  by  the  Atlantic,  and  I 
called  at  the  Adelphi  Hotel,  after  dinner,  to  pay  him 
my  respects.  I  found  him  and  his  family  at  supper. 
.  .  •  They  seem  to  be  plain,  affable  people.  .  .  • 
The  ambassador  is  a  venerable  old  gentleman,  with  a 
full  head  of  perfectly  white  hair,  looking  not  unlike 
an  old-fashioned  wig  ;  and  this,  together  with  his  col- 
larless  white  neckcloth  and  his  brown  coat,  gave  him 
precisely  such  an  aspect  as  one  would  expect  in  a  re* 
spectable  person  of  pre  -  revolutionary  days.  There 
was  a  formal  simplicity,  too,  in  his  manners,  that  might 
have  belonged  to  the  same  era.  He  must  have  been  a 
very  handsome  man  in  his  youthfid  days,  and  is  now 
comely,  veiy  erect,  moderately  tall,  not  overburdened 
with  flesh;  of  benign  and  agreeable  address,  with  a 
pleasant  smile ;  but  his  eyes,  which  are  not  very  large, 
impressed  me  as  sharp  and  cold.  He  did  not  at  all 
stamp  himself  upon  me  as  a  man  of  much  intellectual 
or  characteristic  vigor.  I  found  no  such  matter  in  his 
conversation,  nor  did  I  feel  it  in  the  indefinable  way 
by  which  strength  always  makes  itself  acknowledged. 
B ,  though,  somehow,  plain  and  uncouth,  yet  vin- 
dicates himself  as  a  large  man  of  the  world,  able,  ex- 
perienced, fit  to  handle  difficult  circumstances  of  life  ; 
dignified,  too,  and  able  to  hold  his  own  in  any  society. 

Mr. has  a  kind  of  venerable  dignity ;  but  yet,  if 

a  person  could  so  little  respect  himself  as  to  insult  him, 

I  should  say  that  there  was  no  innate  force  in  Mr. 

to  prevent  it.  It  is  very  strange  that  he  should  have 
made  so  considerable  a  figure  in  public  life,  filling  of- 
fices that  the  strongest  men  would  have  thought  wor- 
thy of  their  highest  ambition.  There  must  be  some- 
thing shrewd  and  sly  under  his  apparent  simplicity  ,* 


190  ENGLISH  NOTE^BOOKS.  [1856. 

narrow,  cold,  selfish,  perhaps.  I  fancied  these  things 
in  his  eyes.  He  has  risen  in  life  by  the  lack  of  too 
powerful  qualities,  and  by  a  certain  tact,  which  enables 
him  to  take  advantage  of  circumstances  and  opportuni- 
ties, and  avail  himself  of  his  unobjectionableness,  just 
at  the  proper  time.  I  suppose  he  must  be  pronounced  a 
humbug,  yet  almost  or  quite  an  innocent  one.  Yet  he 
is  a  queer  representative  to  be  sent  from  brawling  and 
boisterous  America  at  such  a  critical  period.  It  will 
be  funny  if  England  sends  him  back  again,  on  hearing 

the  news  of 's  dismissal.     Mr. gives  me  the 

impression  of  being  a  very  amiable  man  in  his  own 
family.  He  has  brought  his  son  with  him,  as  Secre- 
tary of  Legation,  —  a  small  young  man,  with  a  little 
mustache.     It  will  be  a  feeble  embassy. 

I  called  again  the  next  morning,  and  introduced 

Mrs. ^,    who,  I   believe,   accompanied  the   ladies 

about  town.     This  simplicity  in  Mr. 's  manner 

puzzles  and  teases  me ;  for,  in  spite  of  it,  there  was 
a  sort  of  self-consciousness,  as  if  he  were  being  looked 
at,  —  as  if  he  were  having  his  portrait  taken. 

LONDON. 

March  22c?.  —  Yesterday,  —  no,  day  before  yester- 
day, —  I  left  Liverpool  for  London  by  rail,  from  the 
Lime  Street  station.  The  journey  was  a  dull  and 
monotonous  one,  as  usual.  Three  passengers  were  in 
the  same  carriage  with  me  at  starting,  but  they  dropped 
off,  and  from  Rugby  I  was  alone.  We  reached  Lon« 
don  after  ten  o'clock  ;  and  I  took  a  cab  for  St.  James's 

Place,  No.  32,  where  I  found  Mr.  B expecting 

me.  He  had  secured  a  bed-room  for  me  at  this  lodg- 
ing-house, and  I  am  to  be  free  of  his  drawing-room 
during  my  stay.     We  breakfasted  at  nine,  and  then 


1856.]  LONDON.  191 

walked  down  to  his  countdng-room,  in  Old  Broad  Street 
in  the  city.  It  being  a  dim,  dingy  morning,  London 
looked  very  dull,  the  more  so  as  it  was  Good  Friday, 
and  therefore  the  streets  were  comparatively  thin  of 
people  and  vehicles,  and  had  on  their  Sunday  aspect. 
If  it  were  not  for  the  human  life  and  bustle  of  Lon« 
don,  it  would  be  a  very  stupid  place,  with  a  heavy  and 
dreary  monotony  of  unpicturesque  streets.  We  went 
up  Bolt  Court,  where  Dr.  Johnson  used  to  live ;  and 
this  was  the  only  interesting  site  we  saw.  After  spend- 
ing some  time  in  the  counting-room,  while  Mr. 

read  his  letters,  we  went  to  London  Bridge,  and  took 
the  steamer  for  Waterloo  Bridge,  with  partly  an  intent 
to  go  to  Eichmoud,  but  the  day  was  so  damp  and  dusky 
that  we  concluded  otherwise.  So  we  came  home,  visit- 
ing, on  our  way,  the  site  of  Covent  Garden  Theatre, 
lately  burnt  down.  The  exterior  walls  still  remain 
perfect,  and  look  quite  solid  enough  to  admit  of  the 
interior  being  renewed,  but  I  believe  it  is  determined 
to  take  them  down. 

After  a  slight  lunch  and  a  glass  of  wine,  we  walked 
out,  along  Piccadilly,  and  to  Hyde  Park,  which  already 
looks  very  green,  and  where  there  were  a  good  many 
people  walking  and  driving,  and  rosy-faced  children 
at  play.  Somehow  or  other  the  shine  and  charm  are 
gone  from  London,  since  my  last  visit ;  and  I  did  not 
very  much  admire,  nor  feel  much  interested  in  any- 
thing. We  returned  (and  I,  for  my  part,  was  much 
wearied)  in  time  for  dinner  at  five.     The  evening  was 

spent  at  home,  in  various  talk,  and  I  find  Mr. a 

very  agreeable  eompanion,  and  a  young  man  of  thought 
and  information,  with  a  self-respecting  character,  and 
I  think  him  a  safe  person  to  live  with. 

This  St.  James's  Place  is  in  close  vicinity  to  St 


192  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

James's  Palace,  the  gateway  and  not  very  splendid 
front  of  which  we  can  see  from  the  comer.  The  club- 
houses and  the  best  life  of  the  town  are  near  at  hand. 
Addison,  before  his  marriage,  used  to  live  in  St. 
James's  Place,  and  the  house  where  Mr.  Rogers  re- 
cently died  is  up  the  court,  —  not  that  this  latter  res-^ 
idence  excites  much  interest  in  my  mind.  I  remember 
nothing  else  very  noteworthy  in  this  first  day's  expe- 
rience, except  that  on  Sir  Watkins  Williams  Wynn's 
door,  not  far  from  this  house,  I  saw  a  gold  knocker, 
which  is  said  to  be  unscrewed  every  night  lest  it 
should  be  stolen.  I  don't  know  whether  it  be  really 
gold ;  for  it  did  not  look  so  bright  as  the  generality  of 

brass  ones.     I  received  a  very  good  letter  from  J 

this  morning.  He  was  to  go  to  Mr.  Bright's,  at  Sand- 
tays,  yesterday,  and  remain  till  Monday.. 

After  writing  the  above,  I  walked  along  the  Strand, 
Fleet  Street,  Ludgate  Hill  and  Cheapside  to  Wood 
Street,  —  a  very  narrow  street,  insomuch  that  one  has 
to  press  close  against  the  wall  to  escape  being  grazed 
when  a  cart  is  passing.  At  No.  77  I  foimd  the  place 
of  business  of  Mr.  Bennoch,  who  came  to  see  me  at 
Eock  Ferry  with  Mr.  Jerdan,  not  long  after  my  ar- 
rival in  England.  I  found  him  in  his  office ;  but  he 
did  not  at  first  recognize  me,  so  much  stouter  have  I 
grown  during  my  residence  in  England,  —  a  new  man, 
as  he  says.  Mr.  Bennoch  is  a  kindly,  frank,  very 
good  man,  and  was  bounteous  in  his  plans  for  making 

my  time  pass   pleasantly.     We  talked  of ,*  from 

whom  he  had  just  received  a  letter,  and  who  says  he 
will  fight  for  England  in  case  of  a  war.  I  let  Bennoch 
know  that  I,  at  least,  should  take  the  other  side. 

After  arranging  to  go  to  Greenwich  Fair,  and  after^ 


38M.]  HAMPTON  COURT.  193 

wards  td  dme  with  Bennocli,  I  left  him  and  went  to 

Mr.  -^ 's  office,  and  afterwards  strayed  forth  again, 

and  crossed  London  Bridge.  Thence  I  rambled  rather 
drearily  along  tlnroQ^  several  shabl^  and  uninterest- 
ing streets  on  the  odier  side  of  the  Thames  ;  and  the 
dull  streets  in  London  are  really  the  dullest  and  most 
disheartening  in  the  world*  By  and  by  I  found  my 
way  to  Southwark  Bridge,  and  so  crossed  to  Upper 
Thames  Street,  which  was  likewise  very  stupid,  though 
I  believe  Clennam's  paternal  house  in  ^^  Little  Dorrit " 
stands  thereabouts.  •  •  •  Next,  I  got  into  Ludgate 
Hill,  near  St.  Paul's,  and  being  quite  foot-weary,  I 
took  a  Paddington  omnibus,  and  rode  up  into  Regent 
Street,  whenq^  I  came  home. 

March  2Mh.  —  Yesterday  being  a  clear  day  for 
England,  we  determined  upon  an  expedition  to  Hamp- 
ton Court ;  so  walked  out  betimes  towards  the  Water- 
loo station  ;  but  first  crossed  the  Thames  by  Westmin- 
ster Bridge,  and  went  to  Lambeth  Palace.  It  stands 
immediately  on  the  bank  of  the  river,  not  far  above 
the  bridge.  We  merely  walked  roimd  it,  and  saw  only 
an  old  stone  tower  or  two,  partially  renewed  with  brick, 
and  a  high  connecting  wall,  widiin  which  appeared  ga- 
bles and  other  portions  of  the  palace,  all  of  an  ancient 
plan  and  venerable  aspect,  thou^  evidently  much 
patched  up  and  restored  in  the  course  of  the  many 
ages  since  its  foundation.  There  is  likewise  a  church, 
part  of  which  looks  old,  connected  with  the  palace. 
The  streets  surrounding  it  have  many  gabled  houses, 
and  a  general  look  of  antiquity,  more  than  some  other 
parts  of  London. 

We  then  walked  to  the  Waterloo  station,  on  the 
Bame  side  of  the  river ;  and  at  twenty  minutes  past  one 

VOL.  VIII.  13 


194  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856, 

took  the  rail  for  Hampton  Court,  distant  some  twelve 
or  fifteen  miles.  On  arriving  at  the  terminus,  we  be- 
held Hampton  Palaee,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Thames, 
—  an  extensive  structure,  with  a  front  of  red  brick, 
long  and  comparatively  low,  with  the  great  Hall  which 
Wolsey  built  rising  high  above  the  rest.  We  crossed 
the  river  (which  is  here  but  a  narrow  stream)  by  a 
stone  bridge.  The  entrance  to  the  palace  is  about  half 
a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  railway,  through  arched 
gates,  which  give  a  long  perspective  into  the  several 
quadrangles.  These  quadrangles,  one  beyond  another, 
are  paved  with  stone,  and  surrounded  by  the  brick 
walls  of  the  palace,  the  many  windows  of  which  look 
in  upon  them.  Soldiers  were  standing  sentinels  at  the 
exterior  gateways,  and  at  the  various  doors  of  the  pal- 
ace ;  but  they  admitted  everybody  without  question 
and  without  fee.  Policemen,  or  other  attendants,  were 
in  most  of  the  rooms,  but  interfered  with  no  one ;  so 
that,  in  this  respect,  it  was  one  of  the  pleasantest 
places  to  visit  that  I  have  found  in  England.  A  good 
many  people,  of  all  classes,  were  strolling  through  the 
apartments. 

We  first  went  into  Wolsey's  great  Hall,  up  a  most 
spacious  staircase,  the  walls  and  ceiling  of  which  were 
covered  with  an  allegorical  fresco  by  Verrio,  wonder- 
fully bright  and  well  preserved ;  and  without  caring 
about  the  design  or  execution,  I  greatly  liked  the  brill- 
iancy of  the  colors.  The  great  Hall  is  a  most  noble 
and  beautiful  room,  above  a  hundred  feet  long  and 
sixty  high  and  broad.  Most  of  the  windows  are 
of  stained  or  painted  glass,  with  elaborate  designs, 
whether  modern  or  ancient  I  know  not,  but  certainly 
brilliant  in  effect.  The  walls,  from  the  floor  to  per- 
haps half  their  height,  are  covered  with  antique  tapes' 


1856.]  HAMPTON  COURT,  195 

try,  which,!  though  a  good  deal  faded,  still  retains  color 
enough  to  be  a  very  effective  adornment,  and  to  give 
an  idea  of  how  rich  a  mode  of  decking  a  noble  apart- 
ment this  must  have  been.  The  subjects  represented 
were  from  Scripture,  and  the  figures  seemed  colossal. 
On  looking  closely  at  this  tapestry,  you  could  see  that 
it  was  thickly  interwoven  with  threads  of  gold,  still 
glistening.  The  windows,  except  one  or  two  that  are 
long,  do  not  descend  below  the  top  of  this  tapestry, 
and  are  therefore  twenty  or  thirty  feet  above  the  floor ; 
and  this  manner  of  lighting  a  great  room  seems  to  add 
much  to  the  impressiveness  of  the  enclosed  space.  The 
roof  is  very  magnificent,  of  carved  oak,  intricately  and 
elaborately  arched,  pnd  still  as  perfect  to  all  appear- 
ance as  when  it  was  first  made.  There  are  banners, 
so  fresh  in  their  hues,  and  so  untattered,  that  I  think 
they  must  be  modem,  suspended  along  beneath  the 
cornice  of  the  hall,  and  exhibiting  Wolsey's  arms  and 
badges.  On  the  whole,  this  is  a  perfect  sight  in  its 
way. 

Next  to  the  hall  there  is  a  withdrawing-room,  more 
than  seventy  feet  long,  and  twenty-five  feet  high.  The 
walls  of  this  apartment,  too,  are  covered  with  ancient 
tapestry,  of  allegorical  design,  but  more  faded  than 
that  of  the  hall.  There  is  also  a  stained-glass  window ; 
and  a  marble  statue  of  Venus  on  a  couch,  very  lean 
and  not  very  beautiful;  and  some  cartoons  of  Carlo 
Cignani,  which  have  left  no  impression  on  my  mem- 
ory ;  likewise,  a  large  model  of  a  splendid  palace  of 
some  East  Indian  nabob. 

I  am  not  sure,  after  all,  that  Verrio's  frescoed  grand 
staircase  was  not  in  another  part  of  the  palace  ;  for  I 
remember  that  we  went  from  it  through  an  immensely 
long  suite  of  apartments,  beginning  with  the  Guard* 


^ 


196  ENGLISH  NOTE^BOOKS.  [185«. 

chamber.  All  these  tocnxis  aie  wainscoted  wi<ii  ook, 
which  looks  new,  being,  I  believe,  of  the  date  of  King 
William's  reign.  Over  many  of  the  doorways,  or 
around  the  panels,  th^e  are  carvings  in  W4»od  by  Gib- 
bons, representing  wreadts  of  flowers,  fruit,  and  foli- 
age, the  most  perfectly  beautiful  that  can  be  conceived ; 
and  the  wood  being  of  a  light  hue  (lime-wood,  I  be- 
Heve),  it  has  a  fine  effect  on  the  dark  oak  panelling. 
The  apartments  open  one  beyond  another,  in  long, 
long,  long  succession,  -^  zooms  of  slate,  and  kings'  and 
queens'  bedchambers,  and  royal  closets  bigger  than  or- 
dinary drawing-rooms,  so  that  the  whole  s«dte  must  be 
half  a  mile,  or  it  may  be  a  mile,  in  extent.  From  t^e 
windows  you  get  views  of  the  palace*ground8,  broad 
and  stately  walks,  and  groves  of  trees,  and  lawns,  and 
fountains,  and  the  Thames  and  adjacent  coimtry  be- 
yond. The  walls  of  all  these  rooms  are  absolutely 
covered  with  pictures,  including  works  of  all  the  great 
masters,  which  would  require  long  study  before  a  new 
eye  could  enjoy  them ;  and,  seeing  so  many  of  them  ait 
mice,  and  having  such  a  nothing  of  time  to  look  at 
them  all,  I  did  not  even  try  to  see  any  merit  in  them. 
Vandyke's  picture  of  Charles  I.,  on  a  white  horse  be- 
neath an  arched  gateway,  made  more  impression  on  me 
than  any  other,  and  as  I  recall  it  now,  it  seems  as  if  I 
could  see  the  king's  noble,  melancholy  face,  and  armed 
f orm^i  remembered  not  m  picture,  but  in  reality.  All 
Sir  Peter  Lely's  lewd  women,  and  Kneller's  too,  were 
in  these  rooms ;  and  the  jolly  old  stupidity  of  George 
III.  and  his  family,  many  times  repeated ;  and  pictures 
by  Titian,  Rubens,  and  other  famoiis  hands,  intermixed 
with  many  by  West,  which  provokingly  drew  the  eye 
away  from  their  betters.  It  seems  to  me  that  a  pic- 
ture, of  all  other  things,  should  be  by  itself;  whc»rea9 


1866.]  HAMPTON  COURT.  197 

people  always  oottgr^^te  them  in  galleries.  To  en* 
dearor  really  to  see  them,  so  arranged,  is  like  trying 
to  read  a  hundred  poems  at  onoe,  —  a  most  absurd  at- 
tempt. Of  all  these  pictures,  I  hardly  recollect  any  so 
well  as  a  ridiculous  old  travesty  of  the  Resurrection 
and  Lag^  Judgment,  where  the  dead  people  are  repre* 
sented  as  coming  to  life  at  the  sound  of  the  trumpei^ 
—  the  flesh  reestablishing  itself  on  the  bones,  —  one 
man  picking  up  his  skull,  and  putting  it  on  his  shoul- 
ders, -r  d^nd  all  appearing  greatly  startled^  only  half 
awake,  and  at  a  loi^  what  to  do  next.  Some  devils 
are  drs^ging  away  the  damned  by  the  heels  and  on 
hedges,  and  above  sits  ilie  Redeemer  and  some  augelio 
and  sainted  people,  looking  complaoeatly  down  upon 
the  scene ! 

We  saw,  in  one  of  &e  rooms,  the  funeral  canopy 
beneath  which  Uie  Duke  of  Wellington  lay  in  state, — 
very  gorgeous^  of  black  velvet  eotnbioidered  with  sil* 
ver  imd  adorued  witih  eseutdieons ;  also,  the  state  bed 
of  Queen  Anne,  broad,  and  of  comfortable  appearance^ 
though  it  was  a  qtteen's,  —  the  materials  of  die  eur^ 
tains,  quilt,  and  furniture,  red  velvet,  still  brilliant  in 
hue  ;  also  King  William's  bed  and  his  queen  Mary's^ 
with  enormously  tall  posts,  and  a  good  deal  the  worse 
for  time  and  wear. 

The  last  apartment  we  entered  was  the  gallery  con- 
taining Raphael's  cartoons,  which  I  shall  not  pretend 
to  admire  nor  to  und^stand.  I  can  conceive,  indeed, 
that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  expression  in  them^  and 
very  probably  they  may,  in  every  respect,  deserve  aU 
their  fame ;  but  on  this  point  I  can  give  no  testimony. 
To  my  perception  they  were  a  series  of  very  much 
faded  pictures,  dimly  seen  (for  this  part  of  the  palace 
was  now  in  shadow),  and  representing  figures  neither 


198  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1856. 

graceful  nor  beautiful,  nor,  as  far  as  I  could  discern, 
particularly  grand.  But  I  came  to  them  with  a  wear- 
ied mind  and  eye  ;  and  also  I  had  a  previous  distaste 
to  them  through  the  medium  of  engravings. 

But  what  a  noble  palace,  nobly  enriched,  is  this 
Hampton  Court !  The  English  government  does  well 
to  keep  it  up,  and  to  admit  the  people  freely  into  it,  for 
it  is  impossible  for  even  a  Republican  not  to  feel  some- 
thing lUke  awe  —  at  least  a  profound  respect  —  for  all 
this  state,  and  for  the  institutions  which  are  hei^e  rep- 
resented, the  sovereigns  whose  moral  magnificence 
demands  such  a  residence ;  and  its  permanence,  too, 
enduring  from  age  to  age,  and  each  royal  generation 
adding  new  splendors  to  those  accumulated  by  their 
predecessors.  If  one  views  the  matter  in  another  way, 
to  be  sure,  we  may  feel  indignant  that  such  dolt-heads, 
rowdies,  and  every  way  mean  people,  as  many  of  the 
English  sovereigns  have  been,  should  inhabit  these 
stately  halls,  contrasting  its  splendors  with  their  little- 
ness; but,  on  the  whole,  I  readily  consented  widiin 
myself  to  be  impressed  for  a  moment  with  the  feeling 
that  royalty  has  its  glorious  side.  By  no  possibility 
can  we  ever  have  such  a  place  in  America. 

Leaving  Hampton  Court  at  about  four  o'clock,  we 
walked  through  Bushy  Park,  —  a  beautiful  tract  of 
groimd,  well  wooded  with  fine  old  trees,  green  with 
moss,  all  up  their  twisted  trunks, — through  several 
villages,  Twickenham,  among  the  rest,  to  Richmond. 
Before  entering  Twickenham,  we  passed  a  lath-and- 
plaster  castellated  edifice,  much  time-worn,  and  with 
the  plaster  peeling  ofif  from  the  laths,  which  I  fancied 
might  be  Horace  Walpole's  toy- castle.  Not  that  it 
really  could  have  been ;  but  it  was  like  the  image 
wretchedly  mean  and  shabby,  which  one  forms  of  suet 


1856.]  LONDON.  199 

a  place,  in  its  decay.  From  Hampton  Court  to  the 
Star  and  Garter,  on  Kichmond  Hill,  is  about  six 
miles.  After  glancing  cursorily  at  the  prospect,  which 
is  famous,  and  doubtless  very  extensive^  and  beautiful 
if  the  English  mistiness  would  only  let  it  be  seen,  we 
took  a  good  dinner  in  the  large  and  handsome  coffee- 
room  of  the  hotel,  and  then  wended  our  way  to  the 
rail-station,  and  reached  home  between  eight  and  nine 
o'clock.  We  must  have  walked  not  far  from  fifteen 
miles  in  the  course  of  the  day. 

March  26^A. — Yesterday,  at  one  o'clock,  I  called 
by  appointment  on  Mr.  Bennoch,  and  lunched  with 
him  and  his  partners  and  clerks.  This  lunch  seems  to 
be  a  legitimate  continuation  of  the  old  London  custom 
of  the  master  living  at  the  same  table  with  his  appren- 
tices. The  meal  was  a  dinner  for  the  latter  class.  The 
table  was  set  in  an  upper  room  of  the  establishment ; 
and  the  dinner  was  a  large  joint  of  roast  miutton,  to 
which  ten  people  sat  down,  including  a  German  silk- 
merchant  as  a  guest,  besides  myself.  Mr.  Bennoch  was 
at  the  head  of  the  table,  and  one  of  his  partners  at  the 
foot.  For  the  apprentices  there  was  porter  to  drink, 
and  for  the  partners  and  guests  some  sparkling  Mo* 
selle,  and  we  had  a  sufficient  dinner  with  agreeable 
conversation.  Bennoch  said  that  G.  G  -^^^ —  used  to 
be  very  fond  of  these  lunches  while  in  England. 

After  lunch,  Mr.  Bennoch  took  me  roimd  the  estab- 
lishment, which  is  quite  extensive,  occupying,  I  think, 
two  or  three  adjacent  houses,  and  requiring  more. 
He  showed  me  innumerable  packages  of  ribbons,  and 
other  silk  manufactures,  and  all  sorts  of  silks,  from 
the  raw  thread  to  the  finest  fabrics.  He  then  offered 
to  show  me  some  of  the  curiosities  of  old  London,  and 


200  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185a 

took  me  first  to  Barber-Sttrgeons'  HaU,  in  Monkwell 
Street.  It  was  at  this  place  that  the  first  anatomical 
studies  were  instituted  in  England.  At  the  tifiie  oi 
its  foundation,  the  Barbers  and  Surgeons  were  one 
company ;  but  the  latter,  I  bdieve,  aare  now  the  exclu- 
sive possessors  of  the  hall.  The  edifice  was  built  by 
Inigo  Jones,  and  the  principal  room  is  a  fine  one, 
with  finely  carved  wood-work  on  the  ceiling  and  walls. 
There  is  a  skylight  in  the  roof,  letting  down  a  suffi- 
cient radiance  on  the  long  table  beneath,  where,  no 
doubt,  dead  people  have  been  dissected,  and  where, 
for  many  generations,  it  has  been  the  custom  of  the 
society  to  hold  its  stated  feasts.  In  this  room  hangs 
the  most  valuable  picture  by  Holbein  now  in  exist- 
ence, representing  the  company  of  Barber- Surgeons 
kneeling  before  Henry  VIII.,  and  receiving  tlieir 
charter  from  his  hands.  The  picture  is  about  six  feet 
square.  The  king  is  dressed  in  scarlet,  and  quite  ful- 
fils one's  idea  of  his  aspect.  The  Barber-Surgeons,  all 
portraits,  are  an  assemblage  of  grave-looking  person- 
ages, in  dark  costumes.  The  company  has  refused 
five  thousand  pounds  for  this  unique  picture  ;  and  the 
keeper  of  the  Hall  told  me  that  Sir  Eobert  Peel  had 
offered  a  thousand  pounds  for  liberty  to  take  out  only 
one  of  the  heads,  that  of  a  person  named  Pen,  he  con- 
ditioning to  have  a  perfect  fac-simile  painted  in.  I 
did  not  see  any  merit  in  this  head  over  the  others. 

Beside  this  great  picture  hung  a  most  exquisite  por- 
trait by  Vandyke ;  an  elderly,  bearded  man,  of  noble 
and  refined  coimtenance,  in  a  rich,  grave  dress.  There 
are  many  other  pictures  of  distinguished  men  of  the 
company,  in  long  past  times,  and  of  some  of  the  kings 
and  great  people  of  England,  all  darkened  with  ag^ 
and  producing  a  rich  and  sombre  effect,  in  this  stately 


1856.]  LONDON.  201 

old  hall.  Nothing  is  more  carious  in  London  than 
these  ancient  localities  and  customs  of  the  City  Com- 
panies,—  each  trade  and  profession  having  its  own 
hall,  and  its  own  institutions.  The  keeper  next  showed 
OS  the  plate  which  is  used  at  the  banquets. 

I  should  like  to  be  present  at  one  <^  these  feasts.  I 
saw  also  an  old  vellum  manuscript,  in  black-letter, 
which  appeared  to  be  a  record  of  the  proceedings  of 
the  company ;  and  at  the  end  there  were  many  pages 
ruled  for  further  entries,  but  none  had  been  made  in 
the  volume  for  the  last  three  or  four  hundred  years. 

I  think  it  was  in  the  neighborhood  of  Barber-Sur- 
geons' Hall,  which  stands  amid  an  intricacy  of  old 
streets,  where  I  should  never  have  thought  of  going, 
that  I  saw  a  row  of  ancient  almshouses,  of  Elizabethan 
structure.  They  looked  wof ully  dilapidated.  In  front 
of  one  of  them  was  an  inscription,  setting  forth  that 
some  worthy  alderman  had  f oimded  this  establishment 
for  the  support  of  six  poor  men ;  and  these  six,  or 
their  successors,  are  still  supported,  but  no  larger 
number,  although  the  valu^  of  the  property  left  for 
that  purpose  would  now  suffice  for  a  much  larger 
number. 

Then  Mr.  Bennoch  took  me  to  Cripplegate,  and, 
entering  the  door  of  a  house,  which  proved  to  be  a 
sexton's  residence,  we  passed  by  a  side  entrance  into 
the  church-porch  of  St.  Giles,  of  which  the  sexton's 
house  seems  to  be  an  indivisible  contiguity.  This  is  a 
very  ancient  church,  that  escaped  the  great  fire  of 
London.  The  galleries  are  supported  by  arches,  the 
pillars  of  which  are  cased  high  upwards  with  oak; 
but  all  this  oaken  work  and  the  oaken  pews  are  com- 
paratively modem,  though  so  solid  and  dark  that 


202  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185a 

they  agree  well  enough  with  the  general  effect  of  the 
church.  Proceeding  to  the  high  altar,  we  found  it 
surrounded  with  many  very  curious  old  monuments 
and  memorials,  some  in  carved  oak,  some  in  marble  ; 
grim  old  worthies,  mostly  in  the  costume  of  Queen 
Elizabeth's  time.  Here  was  the  bust  of  Speed,  the 
historian  ;  here  was  the  monument  of  Fox,  author  of 
The  Book  of  Martyrs.  High  up  on  the  wall,  beside 
the  altar,  there  was  a  black  wooden  coffin,  and  a  lady 
sitting  upright  within  it,  with  her  hands  clasped  in 
prayer,  it  being  her  awakening  moment  at  the  Besur- 
rection.  Thence  we  passed  down  the  centre  aisle,  and 
about  midway  we  stopped  before  a  marble  bust,  fixed 
against  one  of  the  pillars.  And  this  wses  the  bust  of 
Milton!  Yes,  and  Milton's  bones  lay  beneath  our 
feet ;  for  he  was  buried  under  the  pew  over  the  door 
of  which  I  was  leaning.  The  bust,  I  believe,  is  the 
original  of  the  one  in  Westminster  Abbey. 

Treading  over  the  tombstones  of  the  old  citizens  of 
London,  both  in  the  aisles  and  the  porch,  and  within 
doors  and  without,  we  went  into  the  churchyard,  one 
side  of  which  is  fenced  in  by  a  portion  of  London 
Wall,  very  solid,  and  still  high,  though  the  accumula- 
tion of  human  dust  has  covered  much  of  its  base. 
This  is  the  most  considerable  portion  now  remdi^ng 
of  the  ancient  wall  of  London.  The  sexton  now  asked 
us  to  go  into  the  tower  of  the  church,  that  he  might 
show  us  the  oldest  part  of  the  structure,  and  we  dicl 
so,  and,  looking  down  from  the  organ  gallery,  I  saw  a 
woman  sitting  alone  in  the  church,  waiting  for  the  rec- 
tor, whose  ghostly  consolation,  I  suppose*  she  needed. 

This  old  church-tower  was  formerly  lighted  by  three 
large  windows,  —  one  of  them  of  very  great  size ;  but 
the  thrifty  church-wardens  of  a  generation  or  two  ago 


1856.]  LONDON.  208 

had  l)uilt  them  up  with  brick,  to  the  great  disfigare- 
ment  of  the  church.  The  sexton  called  my  attention 
to  the  organ-pipe,  which  is  of  sufficient  size,  I  believe, 
to  admit  three  men. 

From  Cripplegate  we  went  to  Milton  Street  (as  it  is 
now  called),  through  which  we  walked  for  a  very  ex- 
cellent reason ;  for  this  is  the  veritable  Grrub  Street, 
where  my  literary  kindred  of  former  times  used  to 
congregate.  It  is  still  a  shabby-looking  street,  with 
old-fashioned  houses,  and  inhabited  chiefly  by  people 
of  the  poorer  classes,  though  not  by  authors.  Next 
we  went  to  Old  Broad  Street,  and,  being  joined  by 

Mr.  B ,  we  set  ofiE  for  London  Bridge,  turning  out 

of  our  direct  course  to  see  London  Stone  in  Watling 
Street.  This  famous  stone  appears  now  to  be  built 
into  the  wall  of  St.  Swithin's  Church,  and  is  so  en- 
cased that  you  can  only  see  and  touch  the  top  of  it 
through  a  circular  hole.  There  are  one  or  two  long 
cuts  or  indentations  in  the  top,  which  are  said  to  have 
been  made  by  Jack  Cade's  sword  when  he  struck  it 
against  the  stone.  If  so,  his  sword  was  of  a  redoubt- 
able temper.  Judging  by  what  I  saw,  London  Stone 
was  a  rudely  shaped  and  unhewn  post. 

At  the  London  Bridge  station,  we  took  the  rail  for 
Greenwich,  and,  it  being  only  about  five  miles  off,  we 
were  not  long  in  reaching  the  town.  It  was  Easter 
Monday;  and  during  the  first  three  days  of  Easter, 
from  time  immemorial,  a  fair  has  been  held  at  Green* 
wich,  and  this  was  what  we  had  come  to  see. 

[This  fair  is  described  in  "  Our  Old  Home,"  in  "  A 
London  Suburb."] 

•         .*•.•••• 

Beaching  Mr.  Bennoch's  house,  we  found  it  a  pretty 
and  comfortable  one,  and  adorned  with  many  works  of 


204  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  [1856. 

art ;  for  he  seems  to  be  a  patron  of  art  and  literature, 
and  a  warm-hearted  man,  of  active  benerolenee  and 
Tivid  sympathies  in  many  directions.  His  face  shows 
this.  I  have  never  seen  eyes  of  a  warmer  glow  than 
his.  On  the  walls  of  one  room  there  were  a  good 
many  sketches  by  Haydon,  and  several  artists^  proofs 
of  fine  ^igravings,  presented  by  persons  to  whom  he 
had  been  kind.  In  the  drawing-room  there  ¥ras  a 
marble  bust  of  Mrs.  — -^,  and  one,  I  think,  of  him- 
self, and  one  of  the  Queen,  which  Mr.  Bennooh  said 
was  very  good,  and  it  is  unlike  any  other  I  have  seen. 
It  is  intended  as  a  gift,  from  a  number  of  subscribers, 
to  Miss  Nightingale.    Likewise  a  crayon  sketch  of 

,  looking  rather  morbid  and  unwholesome,  as  the 

poor  lady  really  is.  Also,  a  small  picture  of  Mr.  Ben- 
noch  in  a  military  dress,  as  an  officer,  probably,  of  city- 
horse.  By  and  by  came  in  a  young  gentleman,  son  of 
Haydon,  tiie  painter  of  high  art,  and  one  or  two  ladies 
staying  in  the  house,  and  anon  Mrs.  ^ — .  And  so 
we  went  in  to  dinner. 

Bennoch  is  an  admirable  host,  and  warms  his  guests 
like  a  household  fire  by  the  influence  of  his  kindly  face 
and  glowing  eyes,  and  by  such  hospitable  demeanor  as 
best  suits  this  aspect.  After  the  cloth  was  removed, 
came  in  Mr.  Newton  Grosland,  a  young  man  who  once 
called  on  me  in  Liverpool,  —  the  husband  of  a  literary 
lady,  formerly  Camilla  Toulmin.  The  lady  herself  was 
coming  to  spend  the  evening.  The  husband  (and  I 
presume  the  wife)  is  a  decided  believer  in  spiritual 
^^t^anifestations.  We  talked  of  politics  and  spiritual- 
ist and  literature;  and  before  we  rose  from  the 
tabFe,  Mr.  Bennoch  drank  the  health  of  the  ladies,  and 
especjally  of  Mrs.  H— ,  in  terms  very  kind  towards 
her  and  me.    I  responded  in  her  behalf  as  well  as  I 


1856.]  LONDON.  205 

eould,  and  left  it  to  Mr.  Bowman,  d4l  a  baohelor,  to 
respond  for  the  ladies  generally,  -«  which  he  did 
briefly,  toasting  Mrs.  B 

We  had  heard  the  sound  of  the  piano  in  the  draw- 
ing-room for  some  time,  and  now  adjourning  thither,  I 
had  the  pleasure  to  be  introduced  to  Mrs.  Newton 
Crosland,  —  a  rather  tall,  thin,  pale,  and  lady-like 
person,  looking,  I  thought,  of  a  sensitive  character. 
She  expressed  in  a  low  tone  and  quiet  way  great  de- 
light at  seeing  my  distinguished  self  I  for  she  is  a  vast 
admirer  of  ^^  The  Scarlet  Letter,"  and  especially  of  the 
character  of  Hester;  indeed,  I  remember  seeing  a 
most  favorable  criticism  of  the  book  from  her  pen,  in 
one  of  the  London  magazines.  •  •  . 

At  eleven  o*clock  Mrs.  Crosland  entered  the  tiniest 
pony-carriage,  and  set  forth  for  her  owii  residence, 
with  a  lad  walking  at  the  pony's  head,  and  canning  a 
lantern.  .  .  . 

March  26f A.  —  Yesterday  was  not  a  very  eventful 
day.  After  writing  in  my  journal  I  went  out  at 
twelve,  and  visited,  for  the  first  time,  the  National 
GraDery.  It  is  of  no  use  for  me  to  criticise  pictures, 
or  to  try  to  describe  them,  but  I  have  an  idea  that  I 
might  acquire  a  taste,  with  a  little  attention  to  the 
subject,  for  I  find  I  already  begin  to  prefer  some  pic- 
tures to  others.-  T|ns  is  encouraging.  Of  those  that 
I  saw  yesterday,  I  think  I  liked  several  by  Murillo 
best.  There  were  a  great  many  people  in  the  gallery, 
ahnost  entirely  of  the  middle,  with  a  few  of  the  lower 
classes  ;  and  I  should  think  that  the  effect  of  the  ex- 
hibition must  at  least  tend  towards  refinement.  Nev- 
ertheless, the  only  emotion  that  I  saw  displayed  was 
m  broad  grins  on  the  faces  of  a  man  and  two  women, 


206  t  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1856. 

at  sight  of  a  small  picture  of  Yenus,  with  a  Satyr 
peeping  at  her  with  bh  expression  of  gross  animal  de- 
light  and  merriment.  Without  being  aware  of  it,  this 
man  and  the  two  women  were  of  that  same  Satyr 
breed. 

If  I  lived  in  London,  I  would  endeavor  to  educate 
myself  in  this  and  other  galleries  of  art;  but  as  the 
ease  stands,  it  would  be  of  no  use.  I  saw  two  of  Tuiv 
ner's  landscapes ;  but  did  not  see  so  much  beauty  in 
them  as  in  some  of  Claude's.  A  view  of  the  grand 
canal  in  Venice,  by  Canaletto,  seemed  to  me  wonder- 
ful, —  absolutely  perfect,  —  a  better  reality,  for  I 
could  see  the  water  of  the  canal  moving  and  dimp- 
ling ;  and  the  palaces  and  buildings  on  each  side  were 
quite  ad  good  in  their  way. 

Leaving  the  gallery,  I  walked  down  into  the  city, 
and  passed  through  Smithfield,  where  I  glanced  at  St. 
Bartholomew's  Hospital.  .  .  .  Then  I  went  into  St. 
Paul's,  and  walked  all  round  the  great  cathedral,  look- 
ing, I  believe,  at  every  monument  on  the  floor.  There 
is  certainly  nothing  very  wonderful  in  any  of  them, 
and  I  do  wish  it  would  not  so  generally  happen  that 
English  warriors  go  into  battle  almost  nude ;  at  least, 
we  must  suppose  so,  from  their  invariably  receiving 
their  death-wounds  in  that  condition.  I  will  not  be- 
lieve that  a  sculptor  or  a  painter  is  a  man  of  genius 
unless  he  can  make  the  nobleness  of  his  subject  illu- 
minate and  transfigure  any  given  pattern  of  coat  and 
breeches.  Nevertheless,  I  never  go  into  St.  Paul's 
without  being  impressed  anew  with  the  grandeur  of 
the  edifice,  and  the  general  effect  of  these  same  groups 
of  statuary  ranged  in  their  niches  and  at  the  bases  of 
the  pillars  as  adornments  of  the  cathedral. 

Coming  homeward,  I  went  into  the  enclosure  of  the 


1856.]  LONDON.  207 

Temple,  and  near  the  entrance  saw  ^^  Dr.  Johnson's 
staircase"  printed  over  a  doorway;  so  I  not  only 
looked  in,  but  went  up  the  first  flight  of  some  broad, 
well-worn  stairs,  passing  my  hand  over  a  heavy,  an- 
cient, broken  balustrade,  on  which,  no  doubt,  John- 
son's hand  has  often  rested.  It  was  here  that  Boswell 
used  to  visit  him,  in  their  early  acquaintance.  Before 
my  lunch,  I  had  gone  into  Bolt  Court,  where  he  died. 

This  morning  there  have  been  letters  from  Mr. 
Wilding,  enclosing  an  invitation  to  me  to  be  one  of 
the  stewards  of  the  anniversary  dinner  of  the  Literary 
Fund. 

No,  I  thank  you,  gentlemen  I 

Mai^h  21th Yesterday  I  went  out  at  about 

twelve,  and  visited  the  British  Museum ;  an  exceed- 
ingly tiresome  affair.  It  quite  crushes  a  person  to 
see  so  much  at  once,  and  I  wandered  from  hall  to 
hall  with  a  weary  and  heavy  heart,  wishing  (Heaven 
forgive  me !)  that  the  Elgin  Marbles  and  the  frieze  of 
the  Parthenon  were  all  burnt  into  lime,  and  that  the 
granite  Egyptian  statues  were  hewn  and  squared  into 
building-stones,  and  that  the  mummies  had  all  turned 
to  dust  two  thousand  years  ago ;  and,  in  fine,  that  all 
the  material  relics  of  so  many  successive  ages  had  dis« 
appeared  with  the  generations  that  produced  them. 
The  present  is  burdened  too  much  with  the  past.  We 
have  not  time,  in  our  earthly  existence,  to  appreciate 
what  is  warm  with  life,  and  immediately  aroimd  us ; 
yet  we  heap  up  these  old  shells,  out  of  which  human 
life  has  long  emerged,  casting  them  off  forever.  I  do 
not  see  how  future  ages  are  to  stagger  onward  under 
ilU  this  dead  weight,  with  the  additions  that  will  be 
continually  made  to  it. 


208  ENGLISH  NOTEBOOKS.  [1856, 

After  leaying  the  Museum,  I  went  to  see  Benndeh, 
and  arrange  with  him  our  expedition  of  to-daj ;  and 
he  read  me  a  letter  from  Tupper,  very  earnestly  invit- 
ing me  to  come  and  spend  a  night  or  two  with  him. 
Then  I  wandered  about  the  city,  and  was  lost  in  the 
vicinity  of  Holbom ;  so  that  for  a  lonig  while  I  was 
under  a  spell  of  bewilderment,  and  kept  returning,  in 
the  strangest  way,  to  the  same  poi^t  in  Lincoln's  Inn 
Fields.  ...  ^ 

Mr.  Bowman  and  I  went  to  the  Princess's  Theatre 
in  the  evening.  Charles  Kean  performed  in  Louis  XL 
very  well  indeed,  ^-^  a  thoughtful  and  highly  skilled 
actor,  —  much  improved  since  I  saw  him,  many  years 
ago,  in  America. 

ALDERSHOTT  CAMP. 

April  Ist  -^  After  my  last  date  on  Thursday,  I 
visited  the  National  GaUei^y.  At  three  o'clock,  having 
packed  a  travelling-bag,  I  went  to  Bennoch's  office, 
and  limched  with  him ;  and  at  about  five  we  took  the 
rail  from  the  Waterloo  station  for  Aldershott  Camp. 
At  Tamborough  we  were  cordially  received  by  Lieu- 
tenant Shaw,  of  the  North  Cork  Rifles,  and  were  es- 
corted by  him,  in  a  fly,  to  his  quarters.  The  camp  is 
a  large  city,  composed  of  numberless  wooden  barracks, 
arranged  in  regular  streets,  on  a  wide,  bleak  heath, 
with  an  extensive  and  dreary  prospect  on  all  sides. 
Lieutenant  Shaw  assigned  me  one  room  in  his  hut, 
and  Bennoch  another,  and  made  us  as  comfortable  as 
kind  hospitality  could ;  but  the  huts  are  very  small, 
and  the  rooms  have  no  size  at  all ;  neither  are  they 
air-tight,  and  the  sharp  wind  whistles  in  at  the  crev- 
ices ;  and,  on  the  whole,  of  all  discomf  ortable  places, 
I  am  inclined  to  reckon  Aldershott  Camp  the  most  sa 


Ib56.]  ALDBRSHOTT  CAMP.  209 

I  suppose  the  goyermnent  has  placed  the  oamp  on  ihat 
windy  heath,  and  built  such  wretched  huts,  for  the 
very  purpose  of  rendering  life  as  little  desirable  as 
may  be  to  the  soldieirs,  so  that  they  should  throw  it 
away  the  more  willingly. 

At  seven  o'clock  we  dined  at  the  regimental  mess^ 
with  the  officers  of  die  North  Cork.  The  mess-room 
is  by  far  the  most  endurable  place  to  be  found  in 
camp.  The  hut  is  large,  and  the  mess-room  is  capa- 
ble of  receiving  between  thirty  and  forty  guests,  be« 
sides  the  officers  of  the  regiment,  when  a  great  din- 
ner-party is  given.  As  I  saw  it,  the  whole  space  was 
divided  into  a  dining-room  and  two  anterooms  by  red 
curtains  drawn  across ;  and  the  second  anteroom  seems 
to  be  a  general  rendesvous  for  the  officers,  where  they 
meet  at  all  times,  and  talk,  or  look  over  the  newspar 
pers  and  the  army-register,  which  constitute  the  chief 
of  their  reading.  The  Colonel  and  Lieutenant^Colonel 
of  the  regiment  received  Bennoch  and  me  with  great 
cordiality,  as  did  all  the  other  officers,  and  we  sat 
down  to  a  splendid  dinner. 

All  the  officers  of  the  regiment  are  Irishmen,  and 
all  of  them,  I  believe,  men  of  fortune ;  and  they  do 
what  they  can  towards  alleviating  their  hardships  in 
camp  by  eating  and  drinking  of  the  best  that  can  be 
obtained  of  all  good  things.  The  table  service  and 
plate  were  as  fine  as  those  in  any  nobleman's  establish* 
ment;  the  dishes  numerous  and  admirably  got  up; 
and  the  wines  delectable  and  genuine,  —  as  they  had 
need  to  be ;  for  there  is  a  great  consumption  of  them. 
I  liked  these  Irish  officers  exceedingly,  —  not  that  it 
would  be  possible  to  live  long  among  them  without 
finding  existence  a  bore;  for  they  have  no  thought, 
no  intellectual  movement,  no  ideas,  that  I  was  aware 

Yoi*.  vm.  14 


210  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1866. 

of,  beyond  horses,  dogs,  drill,  garrisons,  field-days, 
whist,  wine,  cigars,  and  all  that  kind  of  thing;  yet 
they  were  really  gentlemen,  living  on  the  best  terms 
with  one  another,  —  courteous,  kind,  most  hospitable, 
with  a  rich  Irish  humor,  softened  down  by  social  re- 
finements, —  not  too  refined  either,  but  a  most  happy 
sort  of  behavior,  as  natural  as  that  of  children,  and 
with  a  safe  freedom  that  made  me  feel  entirely  at  my 
ease.  I  think  well  of  the  Irish  gentlemen,  for  their 
sakes ;  and  I  believe  I  might  fairly  attribute  to  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Stowell  (next  whom  I  sat)  a  higher 
and  finer  cultivation  than  the  above  description  indi- 
cates. Indeed,  many  of  them  may  have  been  capable 
of  much  more  intellectual  intercoui'se  than  that  of  the 
mess-table ;  but  I  suppose  it  would  not  have  been  in 
keeping  with  their  camp  life,  nor  suggested  by  it. 
Several  of  the  elder  officers  were  men  who  had  been 
long  in  the  army ;  and  the  Colonel  —  a  bliifP,  hearty 
old  soldier,  with  a  profile  like  an  eagle's  head  and 
beak  —  was  a  veteran  of  the  Peninsula,  and  had  a 
medal  on  his  breast  with  clasps  for  three  famous  bat- 
tles besides  that  of  Waterloo. 

The  regimental  band  played  during  dinner,  and  the 
Lieutenant-Colonel  apologized  to  me  for  its  not  play- 
ing ^'Hail  Columbia,"  the  tune  not  coming  within 
their  musical  accomplishments.  It  was  no  great  mat- 
ter, however;  for  I  should  not  have  distinguished  it 
from  any  other  tune ;  but,  to  do  me  what  honor  was 
possible,  in  the  way  of  national  airs,  the  band  was 
ordered  to  play  a  series  of  negro  melodies,  and  I  was 
entirely  satisfied.  It  is  really  fimny  that  the  "  wood- 
notes  wild"  of  those  poor  black  slaves  should  have 
been  played  in  a  foreign  land  as  an  honorable  oompli-^ 
sient  to  one  of  their  white  countrymen. 


1866.]  ALDERSHOTT  CAMP.  211 

After  dinner  we  played  whist,  and  then  had  some 
broiled  bones  for  supper,  and  finally  went  home  to  our 
respective  huts  not  much  earlier  than  four  o'clock. 
But  I  don't  wonder  these  gentlemen  sit  up  as  long  as 
they  can  keep  their  eyes  open;  for  never  was  there 
anything  so  utterly  comfortless  as  their  camp-beds. 
They  are  really  worse  than  the  bed  of  honor, —nc 
wider,  no  softer,  no  warmer,  and  afPording  not  nearly 
so  sound  sleep.  Indeed,  I  got  hardly  any  sleep  at  all, 
and  almost  as  soon  as  I  did  close  my  eyes,  the  bugles 
sounded,  and  the  drums  beat  reveille,  and  from  that 
moment  the  camp  was  all  astir ;  so  I  pretty  soon  up- 
rose, and  went  to  the  mess-room  for  my  breakfast, 
feeling  wonderfully  fresh  and  well,  considering  what 
my  night  had  been. 

Long  before  this,  however,  this  whole  regiment,  and 
all  the  other  regiments,  marched  off  to  take  part  in  a 
general  review,  and  Bennoch  and  I  followed,  as  soon 
as  we  had  eaten  a  few  mutton-chops.  It  was  a  bright, 
sunshiny  day ;  but  with  a  strong  east-wind,  as  pierc- 
ing and  pitiless  as  ever  blew ;  and  this  wide,  undulat- 
ing plain  of  Aldershott  seemed  just  the  place  where 
the  east-wind  was  at  home.  StiU,  it  acted,  on  the 
whole,  like  an  invigoi'ating  cordial;  and  whereas  in 
pleasanter  circumstances  I  should  have  lain  down,  and 
gone  to  sleep,  I  now  felt  as  if  I  could  do  without  sleep 
for  a  month. 

In  due  time  we  found  out  the  place  of  the  North 
Cork  B^giment  in  the  general  battle-array,  and  were 
greeted  as  old  comrades  by  the  Colonel  and  other 
officers.  Soon  the  soldiers  (who,  when  we  first  reached 
ihem,  were  strolling  about,  or  standing  at  ease)  were 
tailed  into  order ;  and  anon  we  saw  a  group  of  mounted 
officers  riding  along  the  lines,  and  among  them  a  gen* 


212  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

ileman  In  a  civilian's  round  hat,  and  plain  frock  and 
trousers,  riding  on  a  white  horse.  This  group  of  rid- 
ers turned  the  front  of  the  regiment,  and  then  passed 
along  the  rear,  coming  close  to  where  we  stood ;  and 
as  the  plainly  dressed  gentleman  rode  by,  he  bent 
towards  me,  and  I  tried  to  raise  my  hat,  but  did  not 
succeed  very  well,  because  the  fierce  wind  had  com- 
pelled me  to  jam  it  tightly  upon  my  head.  The  Duke 
of  Cambridge  (for  this  was  he)  is  a  comely^ooking, 
gentlemanly  man,  of  bluff  English  face,  with  a  great 
deal  of  brown  beard  about  it.  Though  a  pretty  tall 
man,  he  appears,  on  horseback,  broad  and  round  in 
proportion  to  his  height.  I  looked  at  him  with  a  oer^ 
tain  sort  of  interest,  and  a  feeling  of  kindness;  for 
one  does  feel  kindly  to  whatever  human  being  is  any- 
wise marked  out  from  the  rest,  unless  it  be  by  hid  dis- 
agreeable qualities. 

The  troops,  from  twelve  to  fifteen  thousand,  now 
fell  into  marching  order,  and  went  to  attack  a  wood, 
where  we  were  to  suppose  the  enemy  to  be  stationed. 
The  sham-fight  seemed  to  me  rather  clumsily  man* 
aged,  and  without  any  striking  incident  or  result. 
The  officers  had  prophesied,  the  night  before,  that 

General  K •,  commanding  in  the  camp,  would  vbake 

a  muddle  of  it ;  and  probably  he  did.  After  th^  re- 
view, the  Duke  of  Cambridge  with  his  attendant  loffl- 
cers  took  their  station,  and  all  the  regiments  marched 
in  front  of  him,  saluting  as  they  passed.  As  each 
colonel  rode  by,  and  as  the  banner  of  each  regimient 
was  lowered,  the  Duke  lifted  his  hat. 

The  most  splendid  effect  of  this  parade  was  the 
gleam  of  the  sun  upon  the  long  line  of  bayonets,  — 
the  sheen  of  all  that  steel  appearing  like  a  wavering 


1866.]  ALDERSHOTT  CAMP.  218 

fringe  of  light  upcm  the  dark  masses  of  troops  below. 
It  was  very  fine.  But  I  was  glad  when  all  was  done, 
and  I  oouLi  go  back  to  the  mess-room,  whither  I  car- 
ried an  excellent  appetite,  for  luncheon.  After  this 
we  walked  about  the  camp,  —  looked  at  some  model 
tents,  inspected  the  arrangements  and  modes  of  living 
in  the  huts  of  the  privates ;  and  thus  gained  more  and 
more  adequate  ideas  of  the  vile  uncomfortableness  of 
a  military  life.  Finally,  I  went  to  the  anteroom  and 
tamed  over  the  regimental  literatiure, — a  peerage 
and  baronetage,  —  an  army  and  militia  register,  a 
number  of  the  ^^  Sporting  Magazine,"  and  one  of  the 
^^  United  Service,"  while  Bennoch  took  another  walk. 
Before  dinner  we  both  tried  to  catch  a  little  nap  by 
way  of  compensation  for  last  night's  deficiencies ;  but, 
for  my  part^  the  attempt  was  fruitless. 

The  dinner  was  as  splendid  and  as  agreeable  as  that 
of  the  evening  before ;  and  I  believe  it  was  nearly  two 
o'clock  when  Bennoch  and  I  bade  farewell  to  our  kind 
entertainers.  For  my  part  I  fraternized  with  these 
militcoy  gentiemen  in  a  way  that  augurs  the  vary  best 
things  for  the  future  peace  of  the  two  countries.  They 
all  repressed  the  warmest  sympathies  towards  Amer- 
ica, and  it  was  easy  to  judge  from  their  conversation 
that  there  is  no  real  fri^idliness  on  the  part  of  the  mil- 
itary towards  the  French.  The  old  antipathy  is  just 
aA  strong  as  ever,  —  stronger  than  ever,  perhaps,  on 
account  of  the  comparatively  more  brilliant  success  of 
the  French  in  this  Russian  war.  So,  with  most  Chris- 
tian sentiments  of  peace  and  brotherly  love,  we  returned 
to  our  hut,  and  lay  down,  each  in  his  narrow  bed; 

Early  in  the  morning  the  drums  and  bugles  began 
the  usual  bedevilment;  and  shortly  after  six  I  dressed, 
and  we  bad  breakfast  at  the  mess-room,  shook  hands 


216  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

have  a  glimpse  (A  a  dining-rocHn,  with  a  table  laid 
for  three  or  four  guests,  and  looking  quite  brilliant 
with  plate  and  glass  and  snowy  napery.'  There  was 
a  fire,  too,  in  this  one  room.  Mr. -.  is  making  ex- 
tensive alterations  in  the  house,  or  has  recently  done 
so,  and  this  is  perhaps  one  reason  of  its  ungenial 
meagreness  and  lack  of  finish. 

Before  our  departure  from  Wooton,  Tupper  had 

asked  me  to  leave  my  card  for  Mr. ' ;  but  I  had 

no  mind  to  overstep  any  limit  of  formal  courtesy  in 
dealing  with  an  Englishman,  and  therefore  declined. 
Tupper,  however,  on  his  own  responsibility,  wrote  his 
name,  Bennoch's,  and  mine  on  a  piece  of  paper,  and 

told  the  servant  to  show  them  to  Mr. .    We  soon 

had  experience  of  the  good  effect  of  this ;  f oi:  we  had 
scarcely  got  back  before  somebody  drove  up  to  Tup- 
per's  door,  and  one  of  the  girls,  looking  out,  exclaimed 
^that  there  was  Mr. himself,  and  another  gentle- 
man. He  had  set  out,  the  instant  he  heard  of  our 
call,  to  bring  the  three  precious  volumes  for  me  to 
see.  This  surely  was  most  kind ;  a  kindness  which  I 
should  never  have  dreamed  of  expecting  from  a  shy, 
retiring  man  like  Mr. . 

So  he  and  hi^  friend  were  ushered  into  the  dining- 
room,  and  introduced.     Mr. Is  a  young-looking 

man,  dark,  with  a  mustache,  rather  small,  and  though 
he  has  the  manners  of  a  man  who  has  seen  the  world, 
it  evidently  requires  an  effort  in  him  to  speak  to  any- 
body; and  I  could  see  his  whole  person  slightly  writh- 
ing itself,  as  it  were,  while  he  addressed  me.  This  is 
strange  in  a  man  of  his  public  position,  member  for 
the  county,  necessarily  mixed  up  with  life  in  many 
forms,  the  possessor  of  sii^teen  thousand  pounds  a  year, 
and  the  representative  of  an  ancient  name.    Neverthe* 


3866.]  WOOTON.  217 

less,  I  liked  him,  and  felt  as  if  I  could  beo6me  inti- 
mately aequainted  with  him,  if  eircumstances  were 
faY<H*al:de;  bat,  at  a  brief  interview  like  this,  it  was 
hopeless  to  break  through  two  great  reserves;  so  I 
talked  more  wi&  his  compomon  —  a  pleasant  young 
man,  fresh  from  coU^e,  I  should  imagine  —  than 
with  Mr. himself. 

The  three  books  were  really  of  very  great  interest. 
One  was  an  octavo  volume  of  manuscript  in  John  Eve* 
lyn's  own  hand,  the  beginning  of  his  published  Diary, 
written  as'distinetly  as  print,  in  a  small,  dear  charac- 
ter. It  can  be  read  just  as  easily  as  any  printed  book. 
AnodMr  was  a  Church  of  England  prayer-book,  which 
King  Charles  used  on  the  scaffold,  and  which  was 
stained  with  his  sacred  blood,  and  underneath  are  two 
or  three  lines  in  John  Evelyn's  hand,  certifying  this 
to  be  the  very  book.  It  is  an  octavo,  or  small  foUo, 
and  seems  to  have  been  very  little  used,  scarcely 
opened,  except  in  one  spot;  its  leaves  elsewhere  re- 
taining their  original  freshness  and  elasticity.  It 
opens  most  readily  at  ti^  commencement  of  the  com- 
mon service;  and  there,  on  the  left-hand  page,  is  a 
discoloration,  of  a  yellowish  or  brownish  hue,  about 
two  thirds  of  an  inch  large,  which,  two  hundred  years 
ago  and  a  little  more,  was  doubtless  red.  For  on  that 
page  had  fallen  a  drop  of  King  Charles's  blood. 

The  other  volume  was  large,  and  contained  a  great 
many  qriginal  letters,  written  by  ilie  king  during  his 
troubles.  I  had  not  time  to  examine  them  with  any 
minuteness,  and  remember  only  one  document,  which 

Mr. pointed  out,  and  which  had  a  strange  pathos 

and  pitif  ulness  in  it.  It  was  a  sort  of  due-bill,  prom- 
ising to  pay  a  small  sum  for  beer,  which  had  been  sup- 
plied to  his  Majesty,  so  soon  as  God  should  enable 


218  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1856. 

him,  or  the  distracted  circumstances  of  his  kingdom 
make  it  possible,  —  or  some  touching  and  helpless  ex- 
pression of  that  kind.  Prince  Hal  seemed  to  consider 
it  an  unworthy  matter,  that  a  great  prince  should  think 
of  '^  that  poor  creature,  small  beer,"  at  all ;  but  that 
a  great  prince  should  not  be  able  to  pay  for  it  is  far 
worse. 

Mr. expressed  his  regret  that  I  was  not  staying 

longer  in  this  part  of  the  country,  as  he. would  gladly 
have  seen  me  at  Wooton,  and  l^e  succeeded  in  saying 
something  about  my  books ;  and  I  hope  I  partly  suc- 
ceeded in  showing  him  that  I  was  very  sensible  of  his 
kindness  in  letting  me  see  those  relics.  I  cannot  say 
whether  or  no  I  expressed  it  sufficiently.  It  is  better 
with  such  a  man,  or,  indeed,  with  any  man,  to  say  too 
little  than  too  much ;  and,  in  fact,  it  would  have  been 
indecorous  in  me  to  take  too  much  of  his  kindness  to 
my  own  share,  Bennoch  being  likewise  in  question. 

We  had  a  cup  of  coffee,  and  then  took  our  leave ; 
Tupper  accompanying  us  part  way  down  the  village 
street,  and  bidding  us  an  affectionate  farewell. 


BATTLE  ABBEY. 

Bennoch  and  I  recommenced  our  travels,  and,  chang- 
ing from  one  railway  to  another,  reached  Tunbridge 
Wells  at  nine  or  ten  in  the  evening.  .  .  .  The  next 
day  was  spent  at  Tunbridge  Wells,  which  is  famous 
for  a  chalybeate  spring,  and  is  a  watering-place  of 
note,  most  healthily  situated  on  a  high,  breezy  hill, 
with  many  pleasant  walks  in  the  neighborhood.  .  .  . 
From  Tunbridge  Wells  we  transported  ourselves  to 
Battle,  —  the  village  in  which  is  Battle  Abbey.  It  is 
a  large  village,  with  many  antique  houses  and  some 


!856.]  BATTLE  ABBEY.  219 

new  ones ;  and  in  its  principal  street,  on  one  side,  with 
a  wide,  green  space  before  it,  you  see  the  gray,  em- 
battled, outer  wall,  and  great,  square,  battlemented  en- 
trance tower  (with  a  turret  at  each  comer},  of  the  an- 
cient Abbey.  It  is  the  perfect  reality  of  a  Gothic 
battlement  and  gateway,  just  as  solid  and  massive  as 
when  it  was  first  built,  though  hoary  and  venerable 
with  the  many  intervening  centuries.  There  are  only 
two  days  in  the  week  on  which  visitors  are  allowed  en- 
trance, and  this  was  not  one  of  them.  Nevertheless, 
Bennoch  was  determined  to  get  in,  and  he  wished  me 
to  send  Lady  Webster  my  card  with  his  own ;  but  this 
I  utterly  refused,  for  the  honor  of  America  and  for 
my  own  honor ;  because  I  will  not  do  anything  to  in- 
crease the  reputation  we  already  have  as  a  very  for- 
ward people.  Bennoch,  however,  called  at  a  bookshop 
on  the  other  side  of  the  street,  near  the  gateway  of  the 
castle;  and  making  friends,  as  he  has  a  marvellous 
tact  in  doing,  with  the  bookseller,  the  latter  ofPered  to 
take  in  his  card  to  the  housekeeper,  and  see  if  Lady 
Webster  would  not  relax  her  rule  in  our  favor.  Mean- 
while, we  went  into  the  old  church  of  Battle,  which 
was  built  in  Norman  times,  though  subsequently  to  the 
Abbey.  As  we  entered  the  church  door,  the  bell  rang 
for  joy  at  the  news  of  peace,  which  had  just  been  an- 
nounced by  the  London  papers. 

The  church  has  been  whitewashed  in  modem  times, 
and  does  not  look  so  venerable  as  it  ought,  with  its 
arches  and  pillared  aisles.  In  the  chancel  stands  a 
marble  tomb,  heavy,  rich,  and  elaborate,  on  the  top 
of  which  lie  the  broken-nosed  statues  of  Sir  Anthony 
Browne  and  his  lady,  who  were  the  Lord  and  Lady  of 
Battle  Abbey  in  Henry  VIII.'s  time.  The  knight  is 
in  armor,  and  the  lady  in  stately  garb,  and  (save  for 


220  ENGLISti  PfOTE^BOOKS.  [1856. 

theit  btoken  noses)  they  are  in  excellent  preservation. 
The  pavement  of  the  chancel  and  aisles  is  all  Is^  with 
tombstones,  and  on  two  or  three  of  these  there  were 
engraved  brasses,  representing  knights  in  armor,  and 
churchmen,  with  inscriptions  in  Latin.  Some  of  them 
are  very  old.  On  the  walls,  too,  there  are  various 
monuments,  principally  of  di^itaries  connected  with 
the  Abbey.  Two  hatchments,  in  honor  of  persons  re- 
cently dead,  were  likewise  suspended  in  the  chancel. 
The  best  pew  of  the  church  is,  of  course,  that  of  tiie 
Webster  family.  It  is  curtained  round,  carpeted,  for- 
tiished  with  chairs  and  footstools,  and  more  resembles 
a  parlor  Aan  a  pew :  especially  as  there  is  a  fireplace 
in  one  of  the  pointed  archways,  which  I  suppose  has 
been  bricked  up  in  order  to  form  it.  •  On  the  opposite 
side  of  the  aisle  is  the  pew  of  some  other  magnate,  con* 
taining  a  stove.  The  rest  of  the  parishioners  have  to 
keep  themselves  warm  with  the  fervor  of  their  own 
piety.  I  have  forgotten  what  else  was  interesting,  ex- 
cept that  we  were  shown  a  stone  coffin,  recently  dug 
up,  in  which  was  hollowed  a  place  for  the  head  of  the 
corpse. 

Returning  to  the  bookshop,  we  found  that  Lady 
Webster  had  sent  her  compliments,  and  would  be  very 
happy  to  have  us  see  the  Abbey.  How  thoroughly 
kind  these  English  people  can  be  ^liien  tiiey  like,  and 
how  often  tlley  like  to  be  so ! 

We  lost  no  time  in  ringing  the  bell  at  the  arched 
entrance,  under  the  great  tower,  and  were  admitted  by 
an  old  woman  who  lives,  I  believe,  in  the  thi<&ness  of 
the  wall.  She  told  us  her  room  used  to  be  the  prison 
of  the  Abbey,  and  under  the  great  arch  she  pointed  to 
a  projecting  beam,  where  she  said  criminals  used  to  be 
hanged.    At  two  of  the  intersecting  points  of  the 


1856.]  BATTLE  ABBEY.  221 

arches,  wlucli  form  the  roof  of  the  gateway,  were 
carved  faces  of  stone,  said  to  represent  King  Harold 
and  William  the  CSonqueror.  The  exterior  wall,  of 
which  this  tower  is  the  gateway,  extends  far  along  the 
village  street,  and  ^o/closes  a  very  large  space,  within 
which  stands  the  mansicm,  quite  sedluded  from  unau- 
thorized visitors,  or  even  from  the  sight  of  those  with- 
out, unless  it  be  at  very  distant  eyeshot. 

We  rang  at  the  principal  door  of  the  edifice  (it  is 
under  a  de^  arch,  in  the  Norman  style,  but  of  mod- 
em date),  and  a  footman  let  us  in,  and  then  delivered 
us  over  to  a  respectable  old  lady  in  black.  She  was  a 
Frenchwonum  by  birth,  but  had  been  very  long  in  the 
service  of  the  family,  and  spoke  English  almost  with- 
out an  accent ;  her  French  blood  being  indicated  only 
by  her  thin  and  withered  aspect,  and  a  greater  gentil- 
ity of  manner  than  would  have  been  seen  in  an  Eng- 
lishwoman of  similar  station.  She  ushered  us  fir&^ 
into  a  grand  and  noble  hall,  the  arched  and  carved 
oaken  roof  of  which  ascended  into  the  gable.  It  was 
nearly  sixty  feet  long,  and  its  height  equal  to  its 
length,  —  as  stately  a  hall,  I  should  imagine,  as  is 
anywh^e  to  be  found  in  a  private  mansion.  It  was 
lighted,  at  one  end,  by  a  great  window,  beneath  which, 
occupying  the  whole  breadth  of  the  hall,  hung  a  vast 
picture  of  the  Battle  of  Hastings ;  and,  whether  a  good 
picture  or  no,  it  was  a  rich  adornment  of  the  hall. 
The  walls  were  wainscoted  high  upward  with  oak: 
they  were  almost  covered  with  noble  pictures  of  ances- 
try,  and  of  kings  and  great  men,  and  beautiful  women ; 
there  were  trophies  of  armor  hung  aloft;  and  two 
armed  figures,  one  in  brass  mail,  the  other  in  l»*ight 
steel,  stood  on  a  raised  dais,  underneath  the  great  pic- 
ture.    At  the  end  of  the  hall,  opposite  the  picture,  a 


222  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

third  of  the  way  up  towards  the  roof,  was  a  gallery. 
All  these  things  that  I  have  enumerated  were  in  per- 
fect condition,  without  rust,  untouched  by  decay  or  in- 
jury of  any  kind ;  but  yet  they  seemed  to  belong  to  a 
past  age,  and  were  mellowed,  softened  in  their  splen- 
dor, a  little  dimmed  with  time,  —  toned  down  into  a 
venerable  magnificence.  Of  all  domestic  things  that 
I  have  seen  in  England,  ijb  satisfied  me  most. 

Then  the  Frenchwoman  showed  us  into  various 
rooms  and  offices,  most  of  which  were  contrived  out 
of  the  old  abbey -cloisters,  and  the  vaulted  cells  and 
apartments  in  which  the  monks  used  to  live.  If  any 
house  be  haunted,  I  should  suppose  this  might  be.  If 
any  church -property  bring  a  curse  with  it,  as  people 
say,  I  do  not  see  how  the  owners  of  Battle  Abbey  can 
escape  it,  taking  possession  of  and  dwelling  in  these 
holy  precincts,  as  they  have  done,  and  laying  their 
kitchen  hearth  with  the  stones  of  overthrown  altars. 
The  Abbey  was  first  granted,  I  believe,  to  Sir  An-t 
thony  Browne,  whom  I  saw  asleep  with  his  lady  in  the 
church.  It  was  his  first  wife.  I  wish  it  had  been  his 
second  ;  for  she  was  Surrey's  Geraldine.  The  poster- 
ity of  Sir  Anthony  kept  the  place  tiU  1719,  and  then 
sold  it  to  the  Websters,  a  family  of  Baronets,  who  are 
still  the  owners  and  occupants.  The  present  proprie- 
tor is  Sir  Augustus  Webster,  whose  mother  is  the  lady 
that  so  kindly  let  us  into  the  Abbey. 

Mr.  Bennoch  gave  the  nice  old  French  lady  half  a 
crown,  and  we  next  went  round  among  the  ruined 
portions  of  the  Abbey,  under  the  gardener's  guidance. 
We  saw  two  ivied  towers,  insulated  from  all  other 
ruins ;  and  an  old  refectory,  open  to  the  sky,  and  a 
vaulted  crypt,  supported  by  pillars ;  and  we  saw,  too, 
the  foundation  and  scanty  remains  of  a  chapel,  which 


1856.]  HASTINGS.  /223 

had  been  long  buried  out  of  sight  of  man,  and  only 
dug  up  within  present  memory,  —  about  forty  years 
ago.  There  had  always  been  a  tradition  that  this  was 
the  spot  where  Harold  had  planted  his  standard,  and 
where  his  body  was  found  after  the  battle ;  and  the 
discovery  of  iiie  ruined  chapel  confirmed  the  tradi- 
tion. 

I  might  have  seen  a  great  deal  more,  had  there 
been  time ;  and  I  have  forgotten  much  of  what  I  did 
see ;  but  it  is  an  exceedingly  interesting  place.  There 
is  an  avenue  of  old  yew-trees,  which  meet  above  like  a 
cloistered  arch ;  and  this  is  called  the  Monks'  Walk. 
I  rather  think  they  were  ivy,  though  growing  unsup- 
ported. 

As  we  were  retiring,  the  gardener  suddenly  stopped, 
as  if  he  were  alarmed,  and  motioned  to  us  to  do  the 
same,  saying,  "  I  believe  it  is  my  lady  I  "  And  so  it 
was,  —  a  tall  and  stately  lady  in  black,  trimming 
shrubs  in  the  garden.  She  bowed  to  us  very  gra- 
ciously, —  we  raised  our  hats,  and  thus  we  met  and 
parted  without  more  ado.  As  we  went  through  the 
arch  of  the  entrance  tower,  Bennoch  gave  the  old  fe- 
male warder  a  shilling,  and  the  gardener  followed  us 
to  get  half  a  crown. 

HASTINGS. 

We  took  a  fly  and  driver  from  the  principal  hotel 
of  Battle,  and  drove  ofB  for  Hastings,  about  seven 
miles  distant.  Hastings  is  now  a  famous  watering  and 
sea-bathing  place,  and  seems  to  be  well  sheltered  from 
the  winds,  though  open  to  the  sea,  which  here  stretches 
off  towards  France.  We  climbed  a  high  and  steep 
hill,  terraced  round  its  base  with  streets  of  modern 
lodging-houses,  and  crowned  on  its  summit  with  the 


224  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

nuBS  oi  a  easUe,  the  f oundaiion  of  whiek  was  anterior 
to  the  Conquest.  This  castle  has  no  wall  towards  the 
aea,  the  precipice  being  too  high  and  sheer  to  admit 
of  attack  on  that  side.  I  have  quite  exhausted  my 
descriptive  faculty  for  the  presept,  so  shall  say  noth< 
ing  of  this  old  castle,  which  indeed  (the  remains  be« 
ing  somewhat  scanty  and  scraggling)  is  chiefly  pictu- 
resque  and  interesting  from  its  bold  position  on  such 
a  headlong  hill. 

Clambering  down  on  another  side  from  that  of  our 
ascent^  we  entered  the  town  of  Hastings,  which  seems 
entirely  modem,  and  made  up  of  lodging-houses,  shops, 
hotels,  parades,  and  all  such  makings  up  of  watering- 
places  generally.  We  took  a  delightful  warm  bath, 
washing  off  all  weariness  and  naughtiness,  and  coming 
out  new  xneiB.  Then  we  walked  to  St.  Leonard's,  —  a 
part  of  Hastings,  I  believe,  but  a  mile  or  two  from  the 
eastle,  and  there  called  at  the  lodgings  of  two  friends 
of  Bennoch. 

These  were  Mr.  Martin,  the  author  of  Bon  Gaol- 
tier's  ballads,  and  his  wife,  the  celebrated  actress, 
Helen  Fancit.  Mr.  Martin  is  a  barrister,  a  gentle- 
man whose  face  and  manners  suited  me  at  once;  a 
simple,  refined,  sincere,  not  too  demonstrative  person. 
His  wife,  too,  I  liked ;  a  tall,  dark,  fine,  and  lady-like 
woman,  with  the  simplest  manners,  that  give  no  trou- 
ble at  all,  and  so  must  be  perfect.  With  these  two 
persons  I  felt  myself,  almost  in  a  moment,  on  friendly 
terms,  and  in  true  accord,  and  so  I  talked,  I  think, 
more  than  I  have  at  any  time  since  coming  to  Lon- 
don. 

We  took  a  pleasant  lunch  at  their  house ;  and  then 
they  walked  with  us  to  the  railway  station,  and  there 
they  took  leave  of  Bennoch  affectionately,  and  of  me 


1856J  LONDON.  225 

hardlj  less  so ;  for,  in  truth,  we  had  grown  to  be  al- 
most  friends  in  this  very  little  while.  And  as  we  rat- 
tled away,  I  said  to  Bennoch  earnestly,  "  What  good 
people  they  are !  "  —  and  Bennoch  smiled,  as  if  he 
had  known  perfectly  well  that  I  should  think  and 
say  so.  And  thus  we  rushed  onward  to  London ; 
and  I  reached  St.  James's  Place  between  nine  and 
ten  o'clock,  after  a  very  interesting  tour,  the  record 
of  which  I  wish  I  could  have  kept  as  we  went  along, 
writing  each  day's  history  before  another  day's  adven- 
tures began. 

LONDON.  —  MILTON-CLUB   DINNER. 

April  4th,  1856.  —  On  Tuesday  I  went  to  No.  14 
Ludgate  Hill,  to  dine  with  Bennoch  at  the  Milton 
Club  ;  a  club  recently  founded  for  dissenters,  non-con- 
formists, and  people  whose  ideas,  religious  or  political, 
are  not  precisely  in  train  with  the  establishment  in 
church  and  state.  I  was  shown  into  a  largo  reading- 
room,  well  provided  with  periodicals  and  newspapers, 
and  found  two  or  three  persons  there  •,  but  Bennoch 
had  not  yet  arrived.  In  a  few  moments,  a  tall  gentle- 
man with  white  hair  came  in,  —  a  fine  and  intelligent- 
looking  man,  whom  I  guessed  to  be  one  of  those  who 
were  to  meet  me.  He  walked  about,  glancing  at  the 
periodicals ;  and  soon  entered  Mr.  Tupper,  and,  with- 
out seeing  me,  exchanged  warm  greetings  with  the 
white-haired  gentleman.  "I  suppose,"  began  Mr. 
Tupper,  "  you  have  come  to  meet " —  Now,  conscious 
that  my  name  was  going  to  be  spoken,  and  not  know- 
ing but  the  excellent  Mr.  Tupper  might  say  something 
which  he  would  not  quite  like  me  to  overhear,  I  ad- 
ranced  at  once,  with  outstretched  hand,  and  saluted 

VOL.  VIIIp  15 


226  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

him.  He  expressed  great  joy  at  the  recognition,  and 
immediately  introduced  me  to  Mr.  Hall. 

The  dining-room  was  pretty  large  and  lofty,  and 
there  were  sixteen  guests  at  table,  most  of  them  au- 
thors, or  people  connected  with  the  press ;  so  that  the 
party  represented  a  great  deal  of  the  working  intellect 
of  London  at  this  present  day  and  moment,  —  the  men 
whose  plays,  whose  songs,  whose  articles,  are  just  now 
in  vogue.  Mr.  Tom  Taylor  was  one  of  the  very  few 
whose  writings  I  had  known  anything  about.  He  is  a 
tail,  slender,  dark  young  man,  not  English -looking, 
and  wearing  colored  spectacles,  so  that  I  should  read- 
ily have  taken  him  for  an  American  literary  man.  I 
did  not  have  much  opportunity  of  talking  with  him, 

nor  with  anybody  else,  except  Dr. ^  who  seemed 

a  shrewd,  sensible  man,  with  a  certain  slight  acerbity 
of  thought.  Mr.  Herbert  Ingram,  recently  elected 
member  of  Parliament,  was  likewise  present,  and  sat 
on  Bennoch's  left. 

It  was  a  very  good  dinner,  with  an  abundance  of 
wine,  which  Bennoch  sent  round  faster  than  was  for 
the  next  day's  comfort  of  his  guests.     It  is  singular 

that  I  should  thus  far  have  quite  forgotten  W 

H ,  whose  books  I  know  better  than  those  of  any 

other  person  there.  He  is  a  white-headed,  stout,  firm- 
looking,  and  rather  wrinkled  -  faced  old  gentleman 
whose  temper,  I  should  imagine,  was  not  the  very 
sweetest  in  the  world.  There  is  an  abruptness,  a  kind 
of  sub -acidity,  if  not  bitterness,  in  his  address;  he 
seemed  not  to  be,  in  short,  so  genial  as  I  should  have 
anticipated  from  his  books. 

As  soon  as  the  cloth  was  removed,  Bennoch,  without 
rising  from  his  chair,  made  a  speech  in  honor  of  his 
eminent  and  distinguished  guest,  which  illustrious  peF« 


1856.]  LONDON.  227 

son  happened  to  be  sitting  in  the  self -same  chair  that 
I  myself  occupied.  I  have  no  recollection  of  what  he 
said,  nor  of  what  I  said  in  reply,  but  I  remember  that 
both  of  us  were  cheered  and  applauded  much  more 
than  the  occasion  deserved.  Then  followed  about  fifty 
other  speeches;  for  every  single  individual  at  table 
was  called  up  (as  Tupper  said,  ^^  toasted  and  roast- 
ed "  ),  and,  for  my  part,  I  was  done  entirely  brown 
(to  continue  T 's  figure).  Everybody  said  some- 
thing hind,  not  a  word  or  idea  of  which  can  I  find  in 
my  memory.  Certainly,  if  I  never  get  any  more  praise 
in  my  life,  I  have  had  enough  of  it  for  once.  I  made 
another  little  bit  of  a  speech,  too,  in  response  to  some- 
thing that  was  said  in  reference  to  the  present  diffi- 
culties between  England  and  America,  and  ended,  as 
a  proof  that  I  deemed  war  impossible,  with  drinking 
success  to  the  British  army,  and  calling  on  Lieutenant 
Shaw,  of  the  Aldershott  Camp,  to  reply.  I  am  afraid 
I  must  have  said  something  very  wrong,  for  the  ap- 
plause was  vociferous,  and  I  could  hear  the  gentlemen 
whispering  about  the  table,  "  Good ! "  " Good ! "  "Yes, 
he  is  a  fine  fellow," —  and  other  such  ill-earned  praises ; 
and  I  took  shame  to  myself  and  held  my  tongue  (pub- 
licly) the  rest  of  the  evening.  But  in  such  cases  some- 
thing must  be  allowed  to  the  excitement  of  the  mo- 
ment, and  to  the  effect  of  kindness  and  good-will,  so 
broadly  and  warmly  displayed;  and  even  a  sincere 
man  must  not  be  held  to  speak  as  if  he  were  under 


We  separated,  in  a  blessed  state  of  contentment 
with  one  another,  at  about  eleven  ;  and  (lest  I  should 

starve   before  morning)  I  went  with  Mr.  D to 

take  supper  at  his  house  in  Park  Lane.     Mr.  D 

is  a  pale  young  gentleman,  of  American  aspect,  being 


228  ENGLISH  NOTE^BOOKS.  flSSSr 

a  West-Indian  by  birth.  He  is  one  of  the  principal 
writers  of  editorials  for  the  "  Times."  We  were  ac- 
eompanUd  in  the  carriage  by  another  gentleman,  Mr. 

M ,  who  is  connected  with  the  management  of  Ae 

same  paper.  He  wrote  the  letters  from  Scutari,  which 
drew  so  much  attention  to  the  state  of  the  hospitals. 

Mr.  D is  the  husband  of  the  former  Miss , 

the  actress,  and  when  we  reached  his  house,  we  found 
that  she  had  just  come  home  from  the  theatre,  and  was 
taking  off  her  stage-dress.  Anon  she  came  down  to 
the  drawing-room, —  a  seemingly  good,  simple,  and 
intelligent  lady,  not  at  all  pretty,  and,  I  should  think, 
older  than  her  husband.  She  was  very  kind  to  me, 
and  told  me  that  she  had  read  one  of  my  books  — 
"The  House  of  the  Seven  Gables" — thirteen  years 
ago ;  which  I  thought  remarkable,  because  I  did  not 
write  it  till  eight  or  nine  years  afterwards. 

The  principal  talk  during  supper  (which  consisted 
of  Welsh -rabbit  and  biscuits,  with  champagne  and 
soda-water)  was  about  the  "  Times,"  and  the  two  con- 
tributors expressed  vast  admiration  of  Mr. ^  wha 

has  the  chief  editorial  management  of  the  paper.  It 
is  odd  to  find  how  little  we  outsiders  know  of  men  who 
really  exercise  a  vast  influence  on  affairs,  for  this  Mr.  '^ 

is  certainly  of  far  more  importance  in  the  worid 

than  a  minister  of  state.  He  writes  nothing  himself ; 
but  the  character  of  the  "Times"  seems  to  depend 
upon  his  intuitive,  unerring  judgment ;  and  if  ever  he 
is  absent  from  his  post,  even  for  a  day  or  two,  they 
say  that  the  paper  immediately  shows  it.  In  reply  to 
my  questions,  they  appeared  to  acknowledge  that  he 
was  a  man  of  expediency,  but  of  a  very  high  expedi« 
ency,  and  that  he  gave  the  public  the  very  best  prin- 
ciples which  it  was  capable  of  receiving.     Perhaps  it 


1856.]  LONDON.  229 

may  be  so :  the  "  Hmcs's"  articles  are  certainly  not 
written  in  so  high  a  moral  vein  as  might  be  wished ; 
but  what  th^  kck  in  height  they  gain  in  breadth. 
Every  sensible  man  in  England  finds  his  own  best 
common-isense  there ;  and,  in  effect,  I  think  its  influ* 
ence  is  wholesome. 

Apropos  of  public  speaking.  Dr. said  that  Sir 

Lytton  Bulwer  asked  him  (I  think  the  anecdote  was 
personal  to  himself)  whether  he  felt  his  heart  beat 
when  he  was  going  to  speak.  "  Yes."  "  Does  your 
Yoioe  frighten  you?"  "Yes."  "Do  all  your  ideas 
forsake  you?"  "Yes."  "Do  you  wish  the  floor  to 
open  afid  swallow  you?"   "Yes."  "Why,  then,  you'll 

make  an  orator  I "    Dr. told  of  Canning,  too, 

how  onoe,  before  rising  to  speak  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  he  bade  his  friend  jEeel  his  pulse,  which  was 
throbbing  terrifically.  "  I  know  I  shall  make  one  of 
my  best  speeches,"  said  Canning,  "because  I'm  in 
such  an  awful  fuidi: ! "  President  Fi^*oe,  who  has  a 
great  deal  of  oratorical  power,  is  subject  to  a  similar 
horror  and  reluctance. 

BEFOBM-CLUB  DINNEB. 

April  5th,  —  On  Thursday,  at  eight  o'clock,  I  went 

to  the  Eeform  Club,  to  dine  with  Dr.  .    The 

waiter  admitted  me  into  a  great  basement  hall  with  a 
tessellated  or  mosaic  or  somehow  figured  floor  of  stone, 
and  lighted  from  a  dome  of  lofty  height.     In  a  few 

minutes  Dr. appeared,  and  showed  me  about  the 

edifice,  which  is  rery  noble  and  of  a  substantial  mag- 
nificence  that  was  most  satisfactory  to  behold,  —  no 
wood-work  imitating  better  materials,  but  pillars  and 
balustrades  of  marble,  and  everything  that  it  pur* 
ports  to  be.    The  reading  room  is  very  large,  and  lux* 


230  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1866. 

nriously  comfortable,  and  contains  an  admirable  li- 
brary: there  are  rooms  and  conveniences  for  every 
possible  purpose;  and  whatever  material  for  enjoy- 
ment a  bachelor  may  need,  or  ought  to  have,  he  can 
surely  find  it  here,  and  on  such  reasonable  terms  that 
a  smaU  income  will  do  as  much  for  him  as  a  far 
greater  one  on  any  other  system. 

In  z,  colonnade,  on  the  first  floor,  surroimding  the 
great  basement  hall,  there  are  portraits  of  distinguished 
reformers,  and  blank  niches  for  others  yet  to  come. 
Joseph  Hume,  I  believe,  is  destined  to  fill  one  of  these 
blanks;  biit  I  remarked  that  the  larger  part  of  the 
portraits,  already  hung  up,  are  of  men  of  high  rank, 
—  the  Duke  of  Sussex,  for  instance;  Lord  Durham, 
Lord  Grey;  and,  indeed,  I  remember  no  commoner. 
In  one  room,  I  saw  on  the  wall  the  fac-simile,  so  com- 
mon in  the  United  States,  of  our  Declaration  of  Inde- 
pendence. 

Descending  again  to  the  basement  hall,  an  elderly 
gentleman  came  in,  and  was  warmly  welcomed  by  Dr. 

.     He  was  a  very  short  man,  but  with  breadth 

enough,  and  a  back  excessively  bent,  —  bowed  almost 
to  deformity ;  very  gray  hair,  and  a,  face  and  expres- 
sion of  remarkable  briskness  and  intelligence.  His 
profile  came  out  pretty  boldly,  and  his  eyes  had  the 
prominence  that  indicates,  I  believe,  volubility  of 
speech,  nor  did  he  fail  to  talk  from  the  instant  of  his 
appearance ;  and  in  the  tone  of  his  voice,  and  in  his 
glance,  and  in  the  whole  man,  there  was  something 
racy,  —  a  flavor  of  the  humorist.  His  step  was  that 
of  an  aged  man,  and  he  put  his  stick  down  very  de- 
cidedly at  every  footfall;  though,  as  he  afterwards 
told  me  that  he  was  only  fifty-two,  he  need  not  yet 
have  been  infirm.     But  perhaps  he  has  had  the  goutj 


1856.]  LONDON.  231 

his  feet,  however,  are  by  no  means  swollen,  but  unusu< 

ally  small.     Dr. introduced  him  as  Mr.  Douglas 

Jerrold,  and  we  went  into  the  coffee-room  to  dine. 

The  coffee-room  occupies  one  whole  side  of  the  edi- 
fice, and  is  provided  with  a  great  many  tables,  calcu- 
lated for  three  or  four  persons  to  dine  at ;  and  we  sat 

down  at  one  of  these,  and  Dr, ordered  some  mul- 

lagatawny  soup,  and  a  bottle  of  white  French  wine. 
The  waiters  in  the  coffee-room  are  very  numerous, 
and  most  of  them  dressed  in  the  livery  of  the  Club, 
comprising  plush  breeches  and  white -silk  stockings; 
for  these  English  Reformers  do  not  seem  to  include 
Kepublican  simplicity  of  manners  in  their  system. 
Neither,  perhaps,  is  it  anywise  essential. 

After  the  soup,  we  had  turbot,  and  by  and  by  a 
bottle  of  Chateau  Margaux,  very  delectable ;  and  then 
some  lambs'  feet,  delicately  done,  and  some  cutlets  of 
I  know  not  what  peculiar  type ;  and  finally  a  ptarmi- 
gan, which  is  of  the  same  race  of  birds  as  the  grouse, 
but  feeds  high  up  towards  the  summits  of  the  Scotch 
mountains.  Then  some  cheese,  and  a  bottle  of  Cham- 
bertin.  It  was  a  very  pleasant  dinner,  and  my  com- 
panions were  both  very  agreeable  men ;  both  taking  a 
shrewd,  satirical,  yet  not  ill-natured,  view  of  life  and 
people ;  and  as  for  Mr.  Douglas  Jerrold,  he  often  re- 
minded me  of  E C ,  in  the  richer  veins  of  the 

latter,  both  by  his  face  and  expression,  and  by  a  tinc- 
ture of  something  at  once  wise  and  humorously  absiu-d 
in  what  he  said.     But  I  think  he  has  a  kinder,  more 

genial,  wholesomer  nature  than  E ,  and  under  a 

very  thin  crust  of  outward  acerbity  I  grew  sensible  of 
H  very  warm  heart,  and  even  of  much  simplicity  of 
character,  in  this  man,  bom  in  London,  and  accusK 
tombed  always  to  London  life« 


232  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

I  wish  I  had  any  faculty  whatever  of  lemembering 
what  people  say;  but,  though  I  appreciate  anything 
good  at  the  moment,  it  never  stays  in  my  memory ; 
nor  do  I  think,  in  fact,  that  anytiiing  definite,  rounded, 
pointed,  separable,  and  transferable  from  the  general 
lump  of  conversation  was  said  by  anybody.    I  recollect 

that  they  laughed  at  Mr. ^  and  at  his  shedding  a 

tear  into  a  Scottish  river,  on  occasion  of  some  literary 
festival.  .  .  .  They  spoke  approvingly  of  Bulwer,  as 
valuing  his  literary  position,  and  holding  himself  one 
of  the  brotherhood  of  authors ;  and  not  so  approvingly 
of  Charles  Dickens,  who,  bom  a  plebeian,  aspires  to 
aristocratic  society.  But  I  said  that  it  was  easy  to 
condescend,  and  that  Bulwer  knew  he  could  not  put 
off  his  rank,  and  that  he  would  have  all  the  advan- 
tages of  it  in  spite  of  his  authorship.  We  talked 
about  the  position  of  men  of  letters  in  England,  and 
they  said  that  the  aristocracy  hated  and  despised  and 
feared  them;  and  I  asked  why  it  was  that  literary 
men,  having  really  so  much  power  in  their  hands, 
were  content  to  live  unrecognized  in  the  State. 

Douglas  Jerrold  talked  of  Thackeray  and  his  suc- 
cess in  America,  and  said  that  he  himself  purposed 
going  and  had  been  invited  thither  to  lecture.  I  asked 
him  whether  it  was  pleasant  to  a  writer  of  plays  to  see 
them  performed ;  and  he  said  it  was  intolerable,  the 
presentation  of  the  author's  idea  being  so  imperfect ; 

and  Dr.  observed  that  it  was  excruciating  to 

hear  one  of  his  own  songs  simg.  Jerrold  spoke  of  tibe 
Duke  of  Devonshire  witii  great  warmth,  as  a  true, 
honest,  simple,  most  kind-hearted  man,  from  whom  he 
himself  had  received  great  courtesies  and  kindnesses 
(not,  as  I  understood,  in  the  way  of  patronage  <mp  es- 
sential favors)  ;  and  I  (Heaven  forgive  me  I)  queried 


1856.]  LONDON,  283 

within  myself  whether  this  English  reforming  author 
would  have  been  quite  so  sensible  of  the  Duke's  ex- 
cellence if  his  Grrace  had  not  been  a  duke.  But,  in- 
deed, a  nobleman,  who  is  at  the  same  time  a  true  and 
whole-hearted  man,  feeling  his  brotherhood  with  men, 
does  really  deserve  some  credit  for  it. 

In  the  course  of  the  evening  Jerrold  spoke  with  high 
appreciation  of  Emerson;  and  of  Longfellow,  whose 
"  Hiawatha  "  he  considered  a  wonderful  performance ; 
and  of  Lowell,  whose  "Fable  for  Critics"  he  especially 
admired.     I  mentioned  Thoreau,  and  proposed  to  send 

his  works  to  Dr. ,  who,  being  connected  with  the 

"  Illustrated  News,"  and  otherwise  a  writer,  might  be 
inclined  to  draw  attention  to  them.  Douglas  Jerrold 
asked  why  he  should  not  have  them  too.  I  hesitated 
a  little,  but  as  he  pressed  me,  and  would  have  an  an- 
swer, I  said  that  I  did  not  feel  quite  so  sure  of  his 
kindly  judgment  on  Thoreau's  books ;  and  it  so 
chanced  that  I  used  the  word  "  acrid  "  for  lack  of  a 
better,  in  endeavoring  to  express  my  idea  of  Jerrold's 
way  of  looking  at  men  and  books.  It  was  not  quite 
what  I  meant ;  but,  in  fact,  he  often  is  acrid,  and  has 
written  pages  and  volumes  of  acridity,  though,  no 
doubt,  with  an  honest  purpose,  and  from  a  manly  dis- 
gust at  the  cant  and  humbug  of  the  world.     Jerrold 

said  no  more,  and  I  went  on  talking  with  Dr. ; 

but,  in  a  minute  or  two,  I  became  aware  that  some- 
thing had  gone  wrong,  and,  looking  at  Douglas  Jer- 
rold, there  was  an  expression  of  pain  and  emotion  on 
his  face.  By  this  time  a  second  bottle  of  Burgundy 
had  been  opened  (Clos  Vougeot,  the  best  the  Club 
could  produce,  and  far  richer  than  the  Chambertin), 
and  that  warm  and  potent  wine  may  have  had  some- 
thing to  do  with  the  depth  and  vivacity  of  Mr.  Jep= 


234  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856, 

rold's  feelings.  But  he  was  indeed  greatly  hurt  by 
that  little  word  "  acrid.''  "  He  knew,"  he  said,  "  that 
the  world  considered  him  a  sour,  bitter,  ill-natured 
man  ;  but  that  such  a  man  as  I  should  have  the  same 
opinion  was  almost  more  than  he  could  bear."  As  he 
spoke,  he  threw  out  his  arms,  sank  back  in  his  seat, 
and  I  was  really  a  little  apprehensive  of  his  actual 
dissolution  into  tears.  Hereupon  I  spoke,  as  was  good 
need,  and  though,  as  usual,  I  have  forgotten  every- 
thing I  said,  I  am  quite  sure  it  was  to  the  purpose, 
and  went  to  this  good  fellow's  heart,  as  it  came  warmly 
from  my  own.  I  do  remember  saying  that  I  felt  him 
to  be  as  genial  as  the  glass  of  Burgundy  which  I  held 
in  my  hand ;  and  I  think  that  touched  the  very  right 
spot ;  for  he  smiled  and  said  he  was  afraid  the  Bur- 
gundy was  better  than  he,  but  yet  he  was  comforted. 

Dr. said  that  he  likewise  had  a  reputation  for 

bitterness ;  and  I  assured  him,  if  I  might  venture  to 
join  myself  to  the  brotherhood  of  two  such  men,  that 
I  was  considered  a  very  ill-natured  person  by  many 
people  in  my  own  country.  Douglas  Jerrold  said  he 
was  glad  of  it. 

We  were  now  in  sweetest  harmony,  and  Jerrold 
spoke  more  than  it  would  become  me  to  repeat  in 
praise  of  my  own  books,  which  he  said  he  admired, 
and  he  found  the  man  more  admirable  than  his  books  t 
I  hope  so,  certainly. 

We  now  went  to  the  Haymarket  Theatre,  where 
Douglas  Jerrold  is  on  the  free  list ;  and  after  seeing  a 
ballet  by  some  Spanish  dancers,  we  separated,  and  be- 
took ourselves  to  our  several  homes.  I  like  Douglas 
Jerrold  very  much. 

April  8^A.  —  On  Saturday  evening,  at  ten  o'clock. 


i^ 


1856.]  FIRFIELD.  235 

I  went  to  a  supper-party  at  Mr.  D 's,  and  there 

met  five  or  six  people,  —  Mr.  Faed,  a  young  and  dis- 
tinguished artist ;  Dr.  Eliotson,  a  dark,  sombre,  taci- 
turn, powerful-looking  man,  with  coal-black  hair,  and 
a  beard  as  black,  fringing  round  his  face ;  Mr.  Charles 
Keade,  author  of  ^^  Christie  Johnstone  "  and  other  nov- 
els, and  many  plays,  —  a  tall  man,  more  than  thirty, 
fair-haired,  and  of  agreeable  talk  and  demeanor. 


FIKFIELD. 

On  April  6th,  I  went  to  the  Waterloo  station,  and 

there  meeting  Bennoch  and  Dr. ,  took  the  rail  for 

Woking,  where  we  found  Mr.  Hall's  carriage  waiting 
to  convey  us  to  Addlestone,  about  five  miles  off.  On 
arriving  we  found  that  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hall  had  not  yet 
returned  from^  church.  Their  place  is  an  exceedingly 
pretty  one,  and  arranged  in  very  good  taste.  The 
house  is  not  large ;  but  is  filled,  in  every  room,  with 
fine  engravings,  statuettes,  ingenious  prettinesses  or 
beautifulnesses  in  the  way  of  flower-stands,  cabinets, 
and  things  that  seem  to  have  bloomed  naturally  out  of 
the  characters  of  its  occupants.  There  is  a  conserva- 
tory connected  with  the  drawing-room,  and  enriched 
with  lovely  plants,  one  of  which  has  a  certain  interest 
as  being  the  plant  on  which  Coleridge's  eyes  were  fixed 
when  he  died.  This  conservatory  is  likewise  beau- 
tified with  several  very  fine  casts  of  statues  by  mod- 
em sculptors,  among  which  was  the  Greek  Slave  of 
Powers,  which  my  English  friends  criticised  as  being 
too  thin  and  meagre ;  but  I  defended  it  as  in  accord- 
ance with  American  ideas  of  feminine  beauty.  From 
the  conservatory  we  passed  into  the  garden,  but  did 
not  minutely  examine  it,  knowing  that  Mr.  Hall  would 


286  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

wish  to  lead  us  through  it  in  person.  So,  in  the  mean 
time,  we  took  a  walk  in  the  neighborhood,  over  stiles 
and  along  by-paths,  for  two  or  three  miles,  till  we 
reached  the  old  village  of  Chertsey.  In  one  of  its 
streets  stands  an  ancient  house,  gabled,  and  with  the 
second  story  projecting  over  the  first,  and  bearing  an 
inscription  to  the  purport  that  the  poet  Cowley  had 
once  resided,  and,  I  think,  died  there.  Thence  we 
passed  on  till  we  reached  a  bridge  over  the  Thames, 
which  at  this  point,  about  twenty-five  miles  from  Lon- 
don, is  a  narrow  river,  but  looks  clean  and  pure,  and 
unconscious  what  abominations  the  city  sewers  will 
pour  into  it  anon.  We  were  caught  in  two  or  three 
showers  in  the  course  of  our  walk ;  but  got  back  to 
Firfield  without  being  very  much  wetted. 

Our  host  and  hostess  had  by  this  time  returned 
from  church,  and  Mrs.  Hall  came  frankly  and  heartily 
to  the  door  to  greet  us,  scolding  us  (kindly)  for  hav- 
ing got  wet.  ...  I  liked  her  simple,  easy,  gentle,  quiet 
manners,  and  I  liked  her  husband  too. 

He  has  a  wide  and  quick  sympathy,  and  expresses 
it  freely.  .  .  .  The  world  is  the  better  for  him. 

The  shower  being  now  over,  we  went  out  upon  the 
beautiful  lawn  before  his  house,  where  there  were  a 
good  many  trees  of  various  kinds,  many  of  which  have 
been  set  out  by  persons  of  great  or  small  distinction, 
and  are  labelled  with  their  names.  Thomas  Moore's 
name  was  appended  to  one ;  Maria  Edgeworth's  to 
another ;  likewise  Fredrika  Bremer's,  Jenny  Lind's  ; 
also  Grace  Greenwood's,  and  I  know  not  whose  be- 
sides. This  is  really  a  pleasant  method  of  enriching 
one's  grounds  with  memorials  of  friends,  nor  is  there 
any  harm  in  making  a  shrubbery  of  celebrities,   lliree 


1866.]  FIRFIELD.  287 

holes  were  already  dug,  and  three  new  trees  lay  ready 
to  be  planted,  and  for  me  there  was  a  siunach  to  plant, 
—  a  tree  I  never  liked ;  but  Mr.  Hall  said  that  they 
had  tried  to  dig  up  a  hawthorn,  but  found  it  clung 
too  fast  to  the  soil.  So,  since  better  might  not  be, 
and  telling  Mr.'  Hall  that  I  supposed  I  should  have  a 
right  to  hang  myself  on  this  tree  whenever  I  chose,  I 
seized  a  spade,  and  speedily  shovelled  in  a  great  deal 
of  dirt;  and  there  stands  my  sumach,  an  object  of  in^^ 

terest  to  posterity  I     Bennoch  also  and  Dr. set 

out  their  trees,  and,  indeed,  it  was  in  some  sense  a 
joint  affair,  for  the  rest  of  the  party  held  up  each  tree, 
while  its  godfather  shovelled  in  the  earth ;  but,  after 
all,  the  gardener  had  more  to  do  with  it  than  we. 
After  this  important  business  was  over,  Mr.  Hall  led 
us  about  his  grounds,  which  are  very  nicely  planned 
and  ordered ;  and  all  this  he  has  bought,  and  built, 
and  laid  out,  from  the  profits  of  his  own  and  his  wife's 
Uterary  exertions. 

We  dined  early,  and  had  a  very  pleasant  dinner, 
and,  after  the  cloth  was  removed,  Mr.  Hall  was  gra- 
ciously pleased  to  drink  my  health,  following  it  with 
a  long  tribute  to  my  genius.  I  answered  briefly ;  and 
one  half  of  my  short  speech  was  in  all  probability  very 
foolish.  ... 

After  the  ladies  (there  were  three,  one  being  a 
girl  of  seventeen,  with  rich  auburn  hair,  the  adopted 

daughter  of  the  Halls)  had  retired,  Dr. ^  having 

been  toasted  himself,  proposed  Mrs.  Hall's  health. 

I  did  not  have  a  great  deal  of  conversation  with 
Mrs.  Hall ;  but  enough  to  make  me  think  her  a  genu- 
ine and  good  woman,  unspoilt  by  a  literary  career,  and 
retaining  more  sentiment  that  even  most  girls  keep 


238  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  [1856. 

beyond  seventeen.  She  told  me  that  it  had  been  the 
dream  of  her  life  to  see  Longfellow  and  myself  I  .  .  . 
Her  dream  is  half  accomplished  now,  and,  as  they  say 
Longfellow  is  coming  over  this  summer,  the  remainder 
may  soon  be  rounded  out.  On  taking  leave,  our  kind 
hosts  presented  me  with  some  beautiful  flowers,  and 
with  three  volumes  of  a  work,  by  themselves,  on  Ire* 

land ;  and  Dr. was  favored  also  with  some  flow- 

ers,  and  a  plant  in  a  pot,  and  Bennoch  too  had  his 
hands  full,  .  •  .  and  we  went  on  our  way  rejoicing. 

[Here  follows  an  account  of  the  Lord  Mayor's  din- 
ner, taken  mostly  for  "  Our  Old  Home ;  "  but  I  think 
I  will  copy  this  more  exact  description  of  the  lady  men- 
tioried  in  "  Civic  Banquets."  —  Ed.] 

.  .  .  My  eyes  were  mostly  drawn  to  a  young  lady, 
who  sat  nearly  opposite  me,  across  the  table.  She 
was,  I  suppose,  dark,  and  yet  not  dark,  but  rather 
seemed  to  be  of  pure  white  marble,  yet  not  white ;  but 
the  purest  and  finest  complexion,  without  a  shade  of 
color  in  it,  yet  anything  but  sallow  or  sickly.  Her 
hair  was  a  wonderful  deep  raven-black,  black  as  night, 
black  as  death ;  not  raven-black,  for  that  has  a  shiny 
gloss,  and  hers  had  not,  but  it  was  hair  never  to  be 
painted  nor  described,  —  wonderful  hair,  Jewish  hair. 
Her  nose  had  a  beautiful  outline,  though  I  could  see 
that  it  was  Jewish  too  ;  and  that,  and  all  her  features, 
were  so  fine  that  sculpture  seemed  a  despicable  art  be- 
side her,  and  certainly  my  pen  is  good  for  nothing. 
If  any  likeness  could  be  given,  however,  it  must  be  by 
sculpture,  not  painting.  She  was  slender  and  youth- 
ful, and  yet  had  a  stately  and  cold,  though  soft  and 
womanly  grace ;  and,  looking  at  her,  I  saw  what  were 
the  ^ves  of  the  old  patriarchs  in  their  maiden  or 
early-married  days,  —  what  Judith  was,  for,  womanly 


1856.]  LONDON.  239 

as  she  looked,  I  doubt  not  she  could  have  slain  a  man 
in  a  just  cause,  —  what  Bathsheba  was,  only  she 
seemed  to  have  no  sin  in  her,  —  perhaps  what  Eve 
was,  though  one  could  hardly  think  her  weak  enough 
to  eat  the  apple.  .  .  .  Whether  owing  to  distinctness 
of  race,  my  sense  that  she  was  a  Jewess,  or  whatever 
else,  I  felt  a  sort  of  repugnance,  simultaneously  with 
my  perception  that  she  was  an  admirable  creature. 

THE  HOUSE  OF  COMMONS. 

At  ten  o'clock  the  next  day  [after  the  Lord  May- 
or's dinner]  I  went  to  lunch  with  Bennoch,  and 
afterwards  accompanied  him  to  one  of  the  government 
offices  in  Downing  Street.  He  went  thither,  not  on 
official  business,  but  on  a  matter  connected  with  a 
monument  to  Miss  Mitford,  in  which  Mr.  Harness,  a 
clergyman  and  some  sort  of  a  government  clerk,  is  in- 
terested. I  gathered  from  this  conversation  that  there 
is  no  great  enthusiasm  about  the  monumental  affair 
among  the  British  public.  It  surprised  me  to  hear 
allusions  indicating  that  Miss  Mitford  was  not  the 
invariably  amiable  person  that  her  writings  would  sug- 
gest; but  the  whole  drift  of  what  they  said  tended, 
nevertheless,  towards  the  idea  that  she  was  an  excel- 
lent and  generous  person,  loved  most  by  those  who 
knew  her  best. 

From  Downing  Street  we  crossed  over  and  entered 
Westminster  Hall,  and  passed  through  it,  and  up  the 
flight  of  steps  at  its  farthest  end,  and  along  the  avenue 
of  statues,  into  the  vestibule  of  the  House  of  Com- 
mons. It  was  now  somewhat  past  five,  and  We  stood 
at  the  inner  entrance  of  the  House,  to  see  the  mem- 
bers pass  in,  Bennoch  pointing  out  to  me  the  distin- 
guished ones.     I  was  not  much  impressed  with  the  ap- 


240  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185a 

pearance  of  the  members  generally;  they  seemed  to 
me  rather  shabbier  than  English  gentlemen  usually, 
and  I  saw  or  fancied  in  many  of  them  a  certain  self- 
importance,  as  they  passed  into  the  interior,  betoken* 
ing  them  to  be  very  full  of  their  dignity.  Some  of 
them  looked  more  American  —  more  like  American 
politicians  —  than  most  Englishmen  do.  There  wivS 
now  and  then  a  gray-headed  country  gentleman,  the 
very  type  of  stupidiiy ;  and  two  or  three  ciiy  members 
came  up  and  spoke  to  Bennoch,  and  showed  them- 
selves quite  as  dull,  in  their  aldermanic  way,  as  the 
country  squires.  •  •  .  Bennoch  points  out  liord  John 
Bussell,  a  small,  very  short,  elderly  gentleman,  in  a 
brown  coat,  and  so  large  a  hat  —  not  large  of  brii^, 
but  large  like  a  peck-measure — that  I  saw  really  no 
face  beneath  it.  By  and  by  came  a  rather  taU,  slen- 
der person,  in  a  black  f  rock-«oat,  buttoned  up,  and 
black  pantaloons,  taking  long  steps,  but  I  thought 
rather  feebly  or  listlessly.  His  shoulders  were  round, 
or  else  he  had  a  habitual  stoop  in  them.  He  had  a 
prominent  nose,  a  thin  face,  and  a  sallow,  very  sallow 
complexion ;  •  .  •  and  had  I  seen  him  in  America,  I 
should  have  taken  him  for  a  hard-worked  editor  of  a 
newspaper,  weary  and  worn  with  night-labor  and  want 
of  exercise,  —  aged  before  his  time.  It  was  Disraeli, 
and  I  never  saw  any  other  Englishman  look  in  the 
least  like  him;  though,  in  America,  his  appearance 
would  not  attract  notice  as  being  unusuaL  I  do  not 
remember  any  other  noteworthy  person  whom  we  saw 
enter;  in  fact,  the  House  had  already  been  some  time 
in  session,  and  most  of  the  members  were  in  their 
places. 

We  were  to  dine  at  the  Refectory  of  the  House  with 
the  new  member  for  Boston;  and,  meanwhile,  Bei^ 


1856.]  LONDON.  241 

noch  obtained  admittaaoe  for  us  into  the  Speaker's 
gallery,  where  we  had  a  view  of  the  members,  and 
could  hear  what  was  going  on.  A  Mr.  Muntz  was 
speaking  on  tt^e  Income  Tax,  and  he  was  followed  by 
Sir  George  Comewall  Lewis  and  others ;  but  it  was 
all  very  uninteresting,  without  the  slightest  animation 
or  attempt  at  oratory,  —  which,  indeed,  would  have 
been  quite  out  of  place.  We  saw  Lord  Falmerston ; 
but  at  too  great  a  distance  to  distinguish  anything  but 
a  gra]r  head.  The  House  had  daylight  in  it  when  we 
entered,  and  for  some  time  afterwards ;  but,  by  and 
by,  the  roof^  which  I  had  taken  to  be  a  solid  and 
opaque  ceiling,  suddenly  brightened,  and  showed  it- 
self to  be  transparent ;  a  vast  expanse  of  tinted  and 
figured  glass,  through  which  came  down  a  great,  mild 
radiance  on  the  members  below.  The  character  of  the 
debate,  however,  did  not  grow  more  luminous  X>v  viva* 
cious ;  so  we  went  down  into  the  vestibule,  and  there 

waited  for  Mr. ^  who  soon  came  and  led  us  into 

the  Bef ectory.  It  was  very  much  like  the  coffee-room 
of  a  club.  The  strict  rule  forbids  the  entrance  of  any 
but  members  of  Parliament;  but  it  seems  to  be  winked 
at,  although  there  h  another  room,  opening  beyond 
this,  where  the  law  of  seclusion  is  strictly  enforced. 

The  dinner  was  good,  not  remarkably  so,  but  good 
enough,  —  a  soup,  sopie  tnrbot  or  salmon,  cutlets,  and 
I  know  not  what  else,  and  claret,  sherry,  and  port ; 
for,  as  Mr.  — —  said,  "  he  did  not  wish  to  be  stingy." 

Mr. is  a  self-made  man,  and  a  strong  instance  of 

the  difference  between  the  Englishman  and  the  Ameri- 
ean,  when  self-made,  and  without  early  education.  He 
is  no  more  a  gentleman  now  than  when  he  began  life, 
—  not  a  whit  more  refined,  either  outwardly  or  in* 
Irardly;  while  the  American  would  have  been,  after 


242  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

the  same  experience,  not  distinguishable  outwardly, 
and  perhaps  as  refined  within,  as  nine  tenths  of  the 
gentlemen  born,  in  the  House  of  Commons.  And,  be- 
sides, an  American  comes  naturally  to  any  distinctions 
to  which  success  in  life  may  bring  him  ;  he  takes  them 
as  if  they  were  his  proper  inheritance,  and  in  no  wise 

to  be  wondered  at.     Mr. ,  on  the  other  hand,  took 

evidently  a  childish  delight  in  his  position,  and  felt  a 
childish  wonder  in  having  arrived  at  it ;  nor  did  it 
seem  real  to  him,  after  aU.  ... 

We  again  saw  Disraeli,  who  has  risen  from  the  peo- 
ple by  modes  perhaps  somewhat  like  those  of  Mr. . 

He  came  and  stood  near  our  table,  looking  at  the  bill 
of  fare,  and  then  sat  down  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
room  with  another  gentleman,  and  ate  his  dinner.  The 
story  of  his  marriage  does  him  much  credit ;  and  in- 
deed I  am  inclined  to  like  Disraeli,  as  a  man  who  has 
made  his  own  place  good  among  a  hostile  aristocracy, 
and  leads  instead  of  following  them. 

From  the  House  of  Commons  we  went  to  Albert 
Smith's  exhibition,  or  lecture,  of  the  ascent  of  Mont 
Blanc,  to  which  Bennoch  had  orders.  It  was  very 
amusing,  and  in  some  degree  instructive.  We  re- 
mained in  the  saloon  at  the  conclusion  of  the  lecture ; 
and  when  the  audience  had  dispersed,  Mr.  Albert 
Smith  made  his  appearance.  ... 

Nothing  of  moment  happened  the  next  day,  at  least, 
not  till  two  o'clock,  when  I  went  with  Mr.  Bowman  to 
Birch's  eating-house  (it  is  not  Birch's  now,  but  this 
was  the  name  of  the  original  founder,  who  became  an 
alderman,  and  has  long  been  dead)  for  a  basin  of  tur- 
tle-soup. It  was  very  rich,  very  good,  better  than  we 
had  at  the  Lord  Mayor's,  and  the  best  I  ever  ate. 

In  the  evening,  Mr.  J.  B.  Davis,  formerly  our  Seo 


1856.]  LONDON.  243 

retary  of  Legation,  called  to  take  us  to  dine  at  Mr: 

's  in  Camden  Town.     Mr.  r  calls  his 

residence  Vermont  House ;  but  it  hardly  has  a  claim 
to  any  separate  title,  being  one  of  the  centre  houses  of 
a  block.  I  forget  whether  I  mentioned  his  calling  on 
me.  He  is  a  Vermonter,  a  graduate  of  Yale  CoUege, 
who  has  been  here  several  years,  and  has  established  a 
sort  of  book  brokerage,  buying  libraries  for  those  who 
want  them,  and  rare  works  and  editions  for  American 
collectors.  His  business  naturally  brings  him  into  re- 
lations with  literary  people ;  and  he  is  himself  a  kindly 
and  pleasant  man.     On  our  arrival  we  found  Mr. 

D and  one  of  his  sisters  already  there  and  soon 

came  a  Mr.  Peabody,  who,  if  I  mistake  not,  is  one  of 
the  Salem  Peabodys,  and  has  some  connection  with 
the  present  eminent  London  Mr.  Peabody.  At  any 
rate,  he  is  a  very  sensible,  well-instructed,  and  widely 
and  long  travelled  man.  Mr.  Tom  Taylor  was  also 
expected ;  but,  owing  to  some  accident  or  mistake,  he 
did  not  come  for  above  an  hour,  all  which  time  our 
host  waited.  .  .  .  But  Mr.  Tom  Taylor,  a  wit,  a  satir- 
ist, and  a  famous  diner  out,  is  too  formidable  and  too 
valuable  a  personage  to  be  treated  cavalierly. 

In  the  interim  Mr. showed  us  some  rare  old 

books,  which  he  has  in  his  private  collection,  a  black- 
letter  edition  of  Chaucer,  and  other  specimens  of  the 
early  English  printers ;  and  I  was  impressed,  as  I  have 
often  been,  with  the  idea  that  we  have  made  few,  if 
any,  improvements  in  the  art  of  printing,  though  we 
have  greatly  facilitated  the  modes  of  it.  He  showed 
us  Dryden's  translation  of  Virgil,  with  Dr.  Johnson's 
autograph  in  it;  and'  a  large  collection  of  Bibles,  of 
all  dates,  —  church  Bibles,  family  Bibles  of  the  com- 
mon trandation,  and  older  ones.    He  says  he  has  writ- 


244  ENGLISH  NOTE^BOOKS,  [1856 

ten  or  is  writing  a  history  of  the  Bible  (as  a  printed 
work,  I  presume).  Many  of  these  Bibles  had,  no 
doubt,  been  in  actual  and  daily  use  from  generation 
to  generation ;  but  they  were  now  all  splendidly  bound, 
and  were  likewise  very  clean  and  smooth,  —  in  fact, 
every  leaf  had  been  cleansed  by  a  delicate  process,  a 
part  of  which  consisted  in  soaking  the  whole  book  in 
a  tub  of  water,  during  several  days.  Mr. is  like- 
wise rich  in  manuscripts,  having  a  Spanish  document 
with  the  signature  of  the  son  of  Columbus ;  a  whole 
little  volume  in  Franklin's  handwriting,  being  the  first 
specimen  of  it ;  and  the  original  manuscripts  of  many 
of  the  songs  of  Bums.  Among  these  I  saw  '^  Auld 
Lang  Syne,"  and  '^Bruce's  Address  to  his  Army." 
We  amused  ourselves  with  these  matters  as  long  as  we 
could ;  but  at  last,  as  there  was  to  be  a  party  in  the 
evening,  dinner  could  no  longer  be  put  off ;  so  we  took 
our  seats  at  table,  and  immediately  afterwards  Mr, 
Taylor  made  his  appearance  with  his  wife  and  another 
lady. 

Mr.  Taylor  is  reckoned  a  brilliant  conversationist ; 
but  I  suppose  he  requires  somebody  to  draw  him  out 
and  assist  him ;  for  I  could  hear  nothing  that  I  thought 
very  remarkable  on  this  occasion.  He  is  not  a  kind 
of  man  whom  I  can  talk  with,  or  greatly  help  to  talk ; 
so,  though  I  sat  next  to  him,  nothing  came  of  it.  He 
told  me  some  stories  of  his  life  in  the  Temple,  —  little 
fiinny  incidents,  that  he  afterwards  wrought  into  his 
dramas;  in  short,  a  sensible,  active -minded,  clearly 
perceptive  man,  with  a  humorous  way  of  showing  up 
men  and  matters.  ...  I  wish  I  could  know  exactly 
what  the  English  style  good  conversation*  Probably 
it  is  something  like  plum-pudding, — as  heavy,  but 
seldom  so  rich. 


1856.]  LONDON.  246 

After  dinner  Mr.  Tom  Taylor  and  Mr.  D  ,  with 
their  respective  ladies,  took  iheir  leave ;  but  when  we 
returned  to  the  drawing-room,  we  found  it  thronged 
with  a  good  many  people.  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  was  there 
with  his  wife,  whom  I  was  glad  to  see  again,  for  this 
was  th*e  third  time  of  meeting  her,  and,  in  this  whirl 
of  new  acquaintances,  I  felt  quite  as  if  she  were  an 
old  friend.  Mr.  William  Howitt  was  also  there,  and 
introduced  me  to  his  wife,  —  a  very  natural,  kind,  and 
pleasant  lady;  and  she  presented  me  to  one  or  two 
daughters.  Mr.  Marston,  the  dramatist,  was  also  in- 
troduced to  me ;  and  Mr.  Helps,  a  thin,  scholarly,  cold 
sort  of  a  man.  Dr.  Mackay  and  his  wife  were  there, 
too ;  and  a  certain  Mr.  Jones,  a  sculptor,  —  a  jolly, 
large,  elderly  person,  with  a  twinkle  in  his  eye.  Also 
a  Mr.  Godwin,  who  impressed  me  as  quite  a  superior 
person,  gentlemanly,  cultivated,  a  man  of  sensibility ; 
but  it  is  quite  impossible  to  take  a  clear  imprint  from 
any  one  character,  where  so  many  are  stamped  upon 
one's  notice  at  once.  This  Mr.  Godwin,  as  we  were 
discussing  Thackeray,  said  that  he  is  most  beautifully 
tender  and  devoted  to  his  wife,  whenever  she  can  be 
sensible  of  his  attentions.  He  says  that  Thackeray,  in 
his  real  self,  is  a  sweet,  sad  man.  I  grew  weary  of  so 
niany  people,  especially  of  the  ladies,  who  were  rather 
superfluous  in  their  oblations,  quite  stifling  me,  indeed, 
with  the  incense  that  they  burnt  under  my  nose.  So 
far  as  I  could  judge,  they  had  all  been  invited  there  to 
see  me.  It  is  ungracious,  even  hoggish,  not  to  be  grati- 
fied with  the  interest  they  expressed  in  me ;  but  then  it 
is  really  a  bore,  and  one  does  not  know  what  to  do  or 
say.  I  felt  like  (he  hippopotamus,  or — to  use  a  more 
modest  illustration  —  Hke  some  strange  insect  impris- 
oned under  a  tumbler,  with  a  dozen  eyes  watching 


246  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

whatever  I  did.  By  and  by,  Mr.  Jones,  the  sculptor, 
relieved  me  by  standing  up  against  the  mantel-piece, 
and  telling  an  Irish  story,  not  to  two  or  three  auditors, 
but  to  the  whole  drawing-room,  all  attentive  as  to  a 
set  exhibition.     It  was  very  funny. 

The  ne3ct  day  after  this  I  went  with  Mr.  Bbwman 
to  call  on  our  minister,  and  found  that  he,  and  four  of 
the  ladies  of  his  family,  with  his  son,  had  gone  to  the 
Queen's  Drawing-room.  We  lunched  at  the  Welling- 
ton; and  spent  an  hour  or  more  in  looking  out  of 
the  window  of  that  establishment  at  the  carriages, 
with  their  pompous  coachmen  and  footmen,  driving  to 
and  from  the  Palace  of  St.  James,  and  at  the  Horse 
Guards,  with  their  bright  cuirasses,  stationed  along  the 
street.  .  .  .  Then  I  took  the  rail  for  Liverpool.  .  .  . 

While  I  was  still  at  breakfast  at  the  Waterloo,  J 

came  in,  ruddy-cheeked,  smiling,  very  glad  to  see  me, 
and  looking,  I  thought,  a  good  deal  taller  than  when 
I  left  him.  And  so  ended  my  London  excursion, 
which  has  certainly  been  rich  in  incident  and  charac- 
ter, though  my  account  of  it  be  but  meagre. 

SCOTLAND.  —  GLASGOW. 

May  lOth.  —  Last  Friday,  May  2d,  I  took  the  rail, 
with  Mr.  Bowman,  from  the  Lime  Street  station,  for 
Glasgow.  There  was  nothing  of  much  interest  along 
the  road,  except  that,  when  we  got  beyond  Penrith,  we 
saw  snow  on  the  tops  of  some  of  the  hills.  Twilight 
came  on  as  we  were  entering  Scotland ;  and  I  have 
only  a  recollection  of  bleak  and  bare  hills  and  villages 
dimly  seen,  until,  nearing  Glasgow,  we  saw  the  red 
blaze  of  furnace  -  lights  at  frequent  iron-founderies« 
W^e  put  up  at  the  Queen's  Hotel,  where  we  arrived 
about  ten  o'clock ;  a  better  hotel  than  I  have  anywhere 


1856.]  GLASGOW.  247 

found  in  England,  —  new,  well  arranged,  and  with 
brisk  attendance. 

In  the  morning  I  rambled  largely  about  Glasgow, 
and  found  it  to  be  chiefly  a  modem-built  city,  with 
streets  mostly  wide  and  regular,  and  handsome  houses 
and  public  edifices  of  a  dark  gi^y  stone.  In  front  of 
our  hotel,  in  an  enclosed  green  space,  stands  a  tall 
column  surmounted  by  a  statue  of  Sir  Walter  Scott, 
—  a  good  statue,  I  should  think,  as  conveying  the  air 
and  personal  aspect  of  the  man.  There  is  a  bronze 
equestrian  statue  of  the  Queen  in  one  of  the  streets, 
and  one  or  two  more  equestrian  or  other  statues  of 
eminent  persons.  I  passed  through  the  Trongate  and 
the  GaUow-Gate,  and  visited  the  Salt-Market,  and  saw 
the  steeple  of  the  Tolbooth,  aU  of  which  Scott  has 
made  interesting ;  and  I  went  through  the  gate  of  the 
University,  and  penetrated  into  its  enclosed  courts, 
round  which  the  College  edifices  are  built.  They  are 
not  Gothic,  but  of  the  age,  I  suppose,  of  James  I.,  — 
with  odd-looking,  conical-roofed  towers,  and  here  and 
there  the  bust  of  a  benefactor  in  niches  round  the 
courts,  and  heavy  stone  staircases  ascending  from  the 
pavement,  outside  the  buildings,  all  of  dai*k  gray 
granite,  cold,  hard,  and  venerable.  The  University 
stands  in  High  Street,  in  a  dense  part  of  the  town, 
and  a  very  old  and  shabby  part,  too.  I  think  the 
poorer  classes  of  Glasgow  excel  even  those  in  Liver- 
pool in  the  bad  eminence  of  filth,  uncombed  and  un- 
washed children,  drunkenness,  disorderly  deportment, 
evil  smell,  and  all  that  makes  city  poverty  disgusting. 
In  my  opinion,  however,  they  are  a  better-looking  peo- 
ple than  the  English  (and  this  is  true  of  all  classes), 
more  intelligent  of  aspect,  with  more  regular  features. 
I  looked  for  the  high  cheek  bones,  which  have  been 


248  ENGLISH  NOTB^BOOKS.  [185e. 

attributed,  as  a  characteristic  feature,  to  the  Scotch, 
but  could  not  find  them.  What  most  distinguishes 
them  from  the  English  is  the  regularity  of  the  nose, 
which  is  straight,  or  sometimes  a  little  curved  inward ; 
whereas  the  English  nose  has  no  law  whatever,  but 
disports  itself  in  all  \nanner  of  irregularity.  I  very 
soon  learned  to  recognize  the  Scotch  face,  and  when 
not  too  Scotch,  it  is  a  handsome  one. 

In  another  part  of  the  High  Street,  up  a  pretty 
steep  slope,  and  on  one  side  of  a  public  green,  near  an 
edifice  which  I  think  is  a  medical  college,  stands  St. 
Mungo's  Cathedral.  It  is  hardly  of  cathedral  dimen- 
sions, though  a  large  and  fine  old  church.  The  price 
of  a  ticket  of  admittance  is  twopence  ;  so  small  that  it 
might  be  as  well  to  make  the  entrance  free.  The  in- 
terior is  in  excellent  repair,  with  the  nave  and  side 
aisles,  and  clustered  pillars,  and  intersecting  arches, 
that  belong  to  all  these  old  churches ;  and  a  few  mon- 
uments along  the  walls.  I  was  going  away  without 
seeing  any  more  than  this ;  but  the  verger,  a  friendly 
old  gentleman,  with  a  hearty  Scotch  way  of  speaking, 
told  me  that  the  crypts  were  what  chiefly  interested 
strangers ;  and  so  he  guided  me  down  into  the  f  ounda* 
tion-story  of  the  church,  where  there  is  an  intricacy 
and  entanglement  of  immensely  massive  and  heavy 
arches,  supporting  the  structure  above.  The  view 
through  these  arches,  among  the  great  shafts  of  the 
columns,  was  very  striking.  In  the  central  part  is  a 
monument ;  a  recumbent  figure,  if  I  remember  rightly, 
but  it  is  not  known  whom  it  conmiemorates.  There  is 
also  a  monument  to  a  Scotch  prelate,  which  seems  to 
have  been  purposely  defaced,  probably  in  Covenant 
limes.     These  intricate  arches  were  the  locality  of  one 


1866.]  LOCH  LOMOND.  24fl 

of  the  scenes  in  "  Rob  Roy,"  when  Rob  gives  Frank 
Osbaldistoue  some  message  or  warning,  and  dien  es- 
capes from  him  into  the  obscurity  behind.  In  one 
comer  is  St.  Mungo's  well,  secured  with  a  wooden 
cover ;  but  I  should  not  care  to  drink  water  that  comes 
froni  among  so  many  old  graves. 

After  viewing  the  cathedral,  I  got  back  to  the  hotel 
just  in  time  to  go  from  thence  to  tiie  steamer  wharf, 
and  take  passage  up  the  Clyde.  There  was  nothing 
very  interesting  in  this  little  voyage.  We  passed 
many  small  iron  steamers,  and  some  large  ones  ;  and 
green  fields  along  the  river-shores,  villas,  villages,  and 
all  such  suburban  objects;  neither  am  I  quite  sure  of 
the  name  of  the  place  we  landed  at,  though  I  think  it 
was  Bowling.  Here  we  took  the  railway  for  BaUoch ; 
and  the  only  place  or  thing  I  remember  during  this 
transit  was  a  huge  bluff  or  crag,  rising  abruptly  from 
a  river-side,  and  looking,  in  connection  with  its  vicin- 
ity to  the  Highlands,  just  such  a  site  as  would  be 
taken  for  the  foundation  of  a  castle.  On  inquiry  it 
turned  out  that  this  abrupt  and  double-headed  hill 
(for  it  has  two  summits,  with  a  cleft  between)  is  the 
site  of  Dumbarton  Castle,  for  ages  one  of  the  strong- 
est fortresses  in  Scotland,  and  still  kept  up  as  a  gar- 
risoned place.  At  the  distance  and  point  of  view  at 
which  w«  passed  it,  tilie  castle  made  no  show. 

Arriving  at  Balloch,  we  found  it  a  small  village, 
\yith  no  marked  features,  and  a  hotel,  where  we  got 
some  lunch,  and  then  we  took  a  stroll  over  the  bridge 
across  the  Leven,  while  waiting  for  the  steamer  to 
take  us  up  Loch  Lomond.  It  was  a  beautiful  after- 
noon, warm  and  sunny ;  and  after  waHdug  about  a 
mile,  we  had  a  fine  view  of  Loch  Lomond,  and  of  the 
mountains  around  and  beyond  it,  —  Ben    Lomond 


260  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856 

among  the  rest.  It  is  vain,  at  a  week's  distance,  to 
try  to  remember  the  shapes  of  mountains ;  so  I  shall 
attempt  no  description  of  them,  and  content  myself 
with  saying  that  they  did  not  quite  come  up  to  my  an- 
ticipations. In  due  tiihe  we  returned  to  our  hotel, 
and  found  in  the  coffee-room  a  tall,  white-haired,  ven-- 
erable  gentleman,  and  a  pleasant-looking  young  lady, 
his  daughter.  They  had  been  eating  lunch,  and  the 
young  lady  helped  her  father  on  with  his  outside  gar- 
ment, and  his  comforter,  and  gave  him  his  stick,  just 
ais  any  other  daughter  might  do,  —  all  of  which  I  men- 
tion because  he  was  a  nobleman  ;  and,  moreover,  had 
engaged  all  the  post-horses  at  the  inn,  so  that  wq  could 
not  continue  our  travels  by  land,  along  the  side  of 
Loch  Lomond,  as  we  had  first  intended.  At  four 
o'clock  the  railway  train  arrived  again,  with  a  very 
moderate  number  of  passengers,  who  (and  we  among 
them)  immediately  embarked  on  board  a  neat  little 
steamer  which  was  waiting  for  us. 

The  day  was  bright  and  cloudless  ;  but  there  was  a 
strong,  cold  breeze  blowing  down  the  lake,  so  that  it 
was  impossible,  without  vast  discomfort,  to  stand  in 
the  bow  of  the  steamer  and  look  at  the  scenery.  I 
looked  at  it,  indeed,  along  the  sides,  as  we  passed,  and 
on  our  track  behind ;  and  no  doubt  it  was  very  fine ; 
but  from  all  the  experience  I  have  had,  I  do  not  think 
scenery  can  be  well  seen  from  the  water.  At  any 
rate,  the  shores  of  Loch  Lomond  have  faded  com- 
pletely out  of  my  memory ;  nor  can  I  conceive  that 
they  really  were  very  striking.  At  a  year's  interval,  I 
can  recollect  the  cluster  of  hills  around  the  head  of 
Lake  Windermere ;  at  twenty  years'  interval,  I  re- 
member the  shores  of  Lake  Champlain ;  but  of  the 
shores  of  this  Scottish  lake  I  remember  nothing  ex- 


1856.]  LOCH  LOMOND,  251 

cept  some  oddly  shaped  rocks,  called  "The  Cobbler 
and  his  Daughter,"  on  a  mountain-top,  just  before  we 
landed.  But,  indeed,  we  had  very  imperfect  glimpses 
of  the  hills  along  the  latter  part  of  the  course,  because 
the  wind  had  grown  so  very  cold  that  we  took  shelter 
below,  and  merely  peeped  at  Loch  Lomond's  sublimi- 
ties from  the  cabin-windows. 

The  whole  voyage  up  Loch  Lomond  is,  I  think, 
about  thirty-two  miles;  but  we  landed  at  a  place 
called  Tarbet,  much  short  of  the  ultimate  point. 
There  is  here  a  large  hotel ;  but  we  passed  it,  and 
walked  onward  a  mile  or  two  to  Arroquhar,  a  secluded 
glen  among  the  hills,  where  is  a  new  hotel,  built  in 
the  old  manor-house  style,  and  occupying  the  site  of 
what  was  once  a  castle  of  the  chief  of  the  MacFar- 
lanes.  Over  the  portal  is  a  stone  taken  from  the'  for- 
mer house,  bearing  the  date  1697.  There  is  a  little 
lake  near  the  house,  and  the  hills  shut  in  the  whole 
visible  scene  so  closely  that  there  appears  no  outlet 
nor  communication  with  the  external  world ;  but  in 
reality  this  little  lake  is  connected  with  Loch  Long, 
and  Loch  Long  is  an  arm  of  the  sea ;  so  that  there  is 
water  commmiication  between  Arroquhar  and  Glas- 
gow. We  found  this  a  very  beautiful  place;  and 
being  quite  sheltered  from  all  winds  that  blew,  we 
strolled  about  late  into  the  prolonged  twilight,  and 
admired  the  outlines  of  the  surrounding  hills,  and 
fancied  resemblances  to  various  objects  in  the  shapes 
of  the  crags  against  the  evening  sky.  The  sun  had 
not  set  till  nearly,  if  not  quite,  eight  o'clock ;  and  be- 
fore the  daylight  had  quite  gone,  the  northern  lights 
streamed  out,  and  I  do  not  think  that  there  was  much 
darkness  over  the  glen  of  Arroquhar  that  night.  At 
all  events,  before  the  darkness  came,  we  withdrew  into 
the  coflfee-room. 


258  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

W'e  had  exceUent  beds  and  Bleeping-rooms  in  this 
new  hotel,  and  I  remember  nothing  more  till  morning, 
when  we  were  astir  betimes,  and  had  some  chops  for 
breakfast.  Then  our  host,  Mr.  Macgregor,  who  is  also 
the  host  of  our  hotel  at  Glasgow,  aaid  has  many  of  the 
characteristics  of  an  American  landlord,  claiming  to  be 
a  gentleman  and  the  equal  of  his  guests,  took  us  in  9 
drosky,  and  drove  us  to  the  shore  of  Loch  Lomond,  at 
a  point  about  four  miles  from  Arroquhar.  The  lake 
is  here  a  mile  and  a  half  wide,  and  it  was  our  object 
to  cross  to  Inversnaid,  on  the  opposite  shore ;  so  first 
we  waved  a  handkerchief,  and  then  kindled  some 
straw  on  the  beach,  in  order  to  attract  the  notice  of 
the  ferryman  at  Inversnaid.  It  was  half  an  hour  be- 
fore our  signals  and  shoutings  resulted  in  the  putting 
oft  of  a  boat,  with  two  oarsmen,  who  made  the  transit 
pretty  speedily ;  and  thus  we  got  across  Loch  Lomond. 
At  Inversnaid  there  is  a  small  hotel,  and  over  the  rock 
on  which  it  stands  a  little  waterfall  tumbles  into  the 
lake,  —  a  very  little  one,  though  I  believe  it  is  reck- 
oned among  the  other  picturesque  fe,atures  of  the 
scene. 

We  were  now  in  Rob  Roy's  country,  and  at  the  dis- 
tance of  a  mile  or  so,  along  the  shore  of  tiie  lake,  is 
Rob  Roy's  cave,  where  he  and  his  followers  are  sup- 
posed to  have  made  their  abode  in  troublous  times. 
While  limch  was  getting  ready,  we  again  took  the 
boat,  and  went  thither.  Landing  beneath  a  precipi- 
tous, though  not  very  lofty  crag,  we  clambered  up  a 
rude  pathway,  and  came  to  the  mouth  of  the  cave, 
which  is  nothing  but  a  fissure  or  fissures  among  some 
great  rocks  that  have  tumbled  confusedly  togethec 
There  is  hardly  anywhere  space  enough  for  half  a 
dozen  persons  to  crowd  themselves  togethet,  nor  room 


1856.]  INVERSNAID.  25S 

to  stand  upright.  On  the  whole,  it  is  no  cave  at  all, 
but  only  a  crevice ;  and,  in  the  deepest  and  darkest 
part,  you  can  look  up  and  see  the  sky.  It  may  have 
sheltered  Rob  Roy  for  a  night,  and  might  partially 
shelter  any  Christian  during  a  shower. 

Returning  to  the  hotel,  we  started  in  a  drosky  (I  do 
not  know  whether  this  is  the  right  name  of  the  vehi- 
cle, or  whether  it  has  a  right  name,  but  it  is  a  carriage 
in  which  four  persons  sit  back  to  back,  two  before  and 
two  behind}  for  Aberfoyle.  The  mountain-side  as- 
cends very  steeply  from  the  inn  door,  and,  not  to  damp 
the  horse's  courage  in  the  outset,  we  went  up  on  foot. 
The  guide-book  says  that  the  prospect  from  the  sum- 
mit of  the  ascent  is  very  fine  ;  but  I  really  believe  we 
forgot  to  turn  round  and  look  at  it.  All  through  our 
drive,  however,  we  had  mountain  views  in  plenty,  es- 
pecially of  great  Ben  Lomond,  with  his  snow-covered 
head,  round  which,  since  our  entrance  into  the  High- 
lands, we  ha4  been  making  a  circuit.  Nothing  can 
possibly  be  drearier  than  the  mountains  at  this  season ; 
bare,  barren,  and  bleak,  with  black  patches  of  with- 
ered heath  variegating  the  dead  brown  of  the  herbage 
on  their  ^des  ;  and  as  regards  trees  the  hills  are  per- 
fectly naked.  There  were  no  frightful  precipices,  no 
boldly  picturesque  features,  along  our  road ;  but  high, 
weary  slopes,  showing  miles  and  miles  of  heavy  soli* 
tude,  with  here  and  there  a  highland  hut,  built  of  stone 
and  thatched  ;  and,  in  one  place,  an  old  gray,  ruinous 
fortress,  a  station  of  the  English  troops  after  the  Re- 
belli(m  of  1745 ;  and  once  or  twice  a  village  of  huts, 
the  inhabitants  of  which,  old  and  young,  ran  to  their 
doors  to  stare  at  us»  For  several  miles  after  we  left 
Inversnaid,  the  mountain-stream  which  makes  the  wa- 
terfall brawled  along  the  roadside.     All  the  hills  are 


254  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

sheep-pastures,  and  I  never  saw  such  wild,  rough,  rag* 
ged-looking  creatures  as  the  sheep,  with  their  black 
faces  and  tattered  wool.  The  little  lambs  were  very 
numerous,  poor  things,  coming  so  early  in  the  season 
into  this  inclement  region ;  and  it  was  laughable  to  see 
how  invariably,  when  startled  by  our  approach,  they 
scampered  to  their  mothers,  and  immediately  began  to 
suck.  It  would  seem  as  if  they  sought  a  draught  from 
the  maternal  udder,  wherewith  to  fortify  and  encour- 
age their  poor  little  hearts ;  but  I  suppose  their  in- 
stinct merely  drove  them  close  to  their  dams,  and,  be- 
ing theye,  they  took  advantage  of  their  opportunity. 
These  sheep  must  lead  a  hard  life  during  the  winter ; 
for  they  are  never  fed  nor  sheltered. 

The  day  was  sunless,  and  very  uncomfortably  cold ; 
and  we  were  not  sorry  to  walk  whenever  the  steepness 
of  the  road  gave  us  cause.  I  do  not  remember  what 
o'clock  it  was,  but  not  far  into  the  afternoon,  when  we 
reached  the  Baillie  Nicol-Jarvie  Inn  at  Aberfoyle ;  a 
scene  which  is  much  more  interesting  in  the  pages  of 
"  Rob  Roy  "  than  we  found  it  in  reality.  Here  we  got 
into  a  sort  of  cart,  and  set  out,  over  another  hill-path, 
as  dreary  as  or  drearier  than  the  last,  for  the  Trosachs. 
On  our  way,  w^  saw  Ben  Venue,  and  a  good  many 
other  famous  Bens,  and  two  or  three  lochs ;  and  when 
we  reached  the  Trosachs,  we  should  probably  have 
been  very  much  enraptured  if  our  eyes  had  not  already 
been  weary  with  other  mountain  shapes.  But,  in 
truth,  I  doubt  if  anybody  ever  does  really  see  a  moun- 
tain, who  goes  for  the  set  and  sole  purpose  of  seeing 
it.  Nature  will  not  let  herself  be  seen  in  such  cases. 
You  must  patiently  bide  her  time ;  and  by  and  by,  at 
some  unforeseen  moment,  she  will  quietly  and  suddenly 
unveil  herself,  and  for  a  brief  space  allow  you  to  look 


1866.]  THE   TROSACHS.  255 

right  into  the  heart  of  her  mystery.  But  if  you  call 
out  to  her  peremptorily,  '* Nature!  imveil  yourself  this 
very  moment!"  she  only  draws  her  veil  the  closer; 
and  you  may  look  with  all  your  eyes,  and  imagine 
that  you  see  all  that  she  can  show,  and  yet  see  noth- 
ing. Thus,  I  saw  a  wild  and  confused  assemblage  of 
heights,  crags,  precipices,  which  they  call  the  Trosachs, 
but  I  saw  them  calmly  and  coldly,  and  was  glad  when 
the  drosky  was  ready  to  take  us  on  to  Callender. 
The  hotel  at  the  Trosachs,  by  the  by,  is  a  very  splen- 
did one,  in  the  form  of  an  old  feudal  castle,  with  tow- 
ers and  turrets.  All  among  these  wild  hills  there  is 
set  preparation  for  enraptured  visitants ;  and  it  seems 
strange  that  the  savage  features  do  not  subside  of  their 
own  accord,  and  that  there  should  still  be  cold  winds 
and  snow  on  the  top  of  Ben  Lomond,  and  rocks  and 
heather,  and  ragged  sheep,  now  that  there  are  so  many 
avenues  by  which  the  commonplace  world  is  sluiced  in 
among  the  Highlands.  I  think  that  this  fashion  of 
the  picturesque  will  pass  away. 

We  drove  along  the  shore  of  Lake  Vennachar,  and 
onward  to  Callender,  which  I  believe  is  either  the  first 
point  in  the  Lowlands  or  the  last  in  the  Highlands. 
It  is  a  large  village  on  the  river  Teith.  We  stopped 
here  to  dine,  and  were  some  time  in  getting  any 
warmth  into  our  benumbed  bodies  ;  for,  as  I  said  be- 
fore, it  was  a  very  cold  day.  Looking  from  the  win- 
dow of  the  hotel,  I  saw  a  young  man  in  Highland 
dress,  with  bare  thighs,  marching  through  the  village 
street  towards  the  Lowlands,  with  a  martial  and  elas- 
tic step,  as  if  he  were  going  forth  to  conquer  and  oc- 
cupy the  world.  I  suppose  he  was  a  soldier  who  had 
been  absent  on  leave,  returning  to  the  garrison  at  Stir- 
ling. I  pitied  his  poor  thighs,  though  he  certainly 
did  not  look  uncomfortable. 


ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

After  dinner,  as  dusk  was  coming  on  and  we  had 
still  a  long  drive  before  us  (eighteen  miles,  I  believe), 
we  took  a  close  carriage  and  two  horses,  and  set  off 
for  Stirling.  The  twilight  was  too  obscure  to  show 
many  things  along  the  road,  and  by  the  time  we  drove 
into  Stirling  we  could  but  dimly  see  the  houses  in  the 
long  street  in  which  stood  our  hotel.  There  was  a  good 
fire  in  the  coffee-room,  which  looked  like  a  drawing- 
room  in  a  large  old-fashioned  mansion,  and  was  hung 
aroimd  with  engravings  of  the  portraits  of  the  county 
members,  and  a  master  of  fox-hounds,  and  other  pic- 
tures. We  made  ourselves  comfortable  with  some  tea, 
and  retired  early. 

In  the  morning  we  were  stirring  betimes,  and  found 
Stirling  to  be  a  pretty  large  town,  of  rather  ancient 
aspect,  with  many  gray  stone  houses,  the  gables  of 
which  are  notched  on  either  side,  like  a  flight  of  stairs. 
The  town  stands  on  the  slope  of  a  hill,  at  the  summit 
of  which,  crowning  a  long  ascent,  up  which  the  paved 
street  reaches  all  the  way  to  its  gate,  is  Stirling  Castle. 
Of  course  we  went  thither,  and  found  free  entrance, 
although  the  castie  is  garrisoned  by  five  or  six  hun- 
dred men,  among  whom  are  barelegged  Highlanders 
(I  must  say  that  this  costume  is  very  fine  and  becom- 
ing, though  their  thighs  did  look  blue  and  frost-bit- 
ten) and  also  some  soldiers  of  other  Scotch  regiments, 
with  tartan  trousers.  Almost  immediately  on  passing 
the  gate,  we  found  an  old  artillery-man,  who  under- 
took to  show  us  round  the  castie.  Only  a  small  por- 
tion of  it  seems  to  be  of  great  antiquity.  The  princi- 
pal edifice  within  the  castle  wall  is  a  palace,  that  was 
either  built  or  renewed  by  James  VI. ;  and  it  is  or- 
namented with  strange  old  statues,  oue  of  which  is  his 
own.   The  old  Scottish  Parliament  House  is  also  here. 


1856.]  STIRLING.  257 

The  most  ancient  part  of  the  castle  is  the  tower,  where 
one  of  the  Earls  of  Douglas  was  stabbed  by  a  king, 
and  afterwards  thrown  out  of  the  window.  In  read- 
ing this  story,  one  imagines  a  lofty  turret,  and  the 
dead  man  tumbling  headlong  from  a  great  height; 
but,  in  reality,  the  window  is  not  more  than  fifteen  or 
twenty  feet  from  the  garden  into  which  he  f elL  This 
part  of  the  castle  was  burned  last  autumn ;  but  is 
now  under  repair,  and  the  wall  of  the  tower  is  still 
stanch  and  strong.  We  went  up  into  the  chamber 
where  the  murder  took  place,  and  looked  through  the 
historic  window. 

Then  we  mounted  the  castle  wall,  where  it  broods 
over  a  precipice  of  many  hundred  feet  perpendicular, 
looking  down  upon  a  level  plain  below,  and  forth  upon 
a  landscape,  every  foot  of  which  is  richly  studded  with 
historic  events.  There  is  a  small  peep-hole  in  the 
wall,  which  Queen  Mary  is  said  to  have  been  in  the 
habit  of  looking  through.  It  is  a  most  splendid  view ; 
in  the  distance,  the  blue  Highlands,  with  a  variety  of 
mountain  outlines  that  I  could  have  studied  unweari- 
ably;  and  in  another  direction,  beginning  almost  at 
the  foot  of  the  Castle  HiD,  were  the  Links  of  Forth, 
where,  over  a  plain  of  miles  in  extent  the  river  mean^ 
dered,  and  circled  about,  and  returned  upon  itself 
again  and  again  and  again,  as  if  knotted  into  a  silver 
chain,  which  it  was  difficult  to  imagine  to  be  all  one 
stream.  The  history  of  Scotland  might  be  read  from 
this  castle  wall,  as  on  a  book  of  mighty  page;  for 
here,  within  the  compass  of  a  few  miles,  we  see  the 
field  where  Wallace  won  the  battle  of  Stirling,  and 
likewise  the  battle-field  of  Bannockburn,  and  that  of 
Falkirk,  and  Sheriflfmuir,  and  I  know  not  how  many 
besides. 

VOL.    VIII.  17 


258  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

Around  the  Castle  Hill  there  is  a  walk,  witli  seats 
for  old  and  infirm  persons,  at  points  sheltered  from 
the  wind.  We  followed  it  downward,  and  I  think  we 
passed  over  the  site  where  the  games  used  to  be  held, 
and  where,  this  morning,  some  of  the  soldiers  of  the 
garrison  were  going  through  their  exercises.  I  ou^t 
to  have  mentioned,  that,  passing  through  the  inner 
gateway  of  the  castle,  we  saw  the  round  tower,  and 
glanced  into  the  dungeon,  where  the  Boderic  Dhu  of 
Scott's  poem  was  left  to  die.  It  is  one  of  the  two 
round  towers,  between  which  the  portcullis  rose  and 
feU. 

EDINBURGH. — THE  PALACE  OF  HOLTBOOD. 

At  eleven  o'clock  we  took  the  rail  for  Edinburgh, 
and  I  remember  nothing  more,  except  that  the  cultiva* 
tion  and  verdure  of  the  country  were  very  agreeable, 
after  our  experience  of  Highland  barrenness  and  deso- 
lation, until  we  found  the  train  passing  close  at  the 
base  of  the  ru^ed  crag  of  Edinburgh  Castle.  We 
established  ourselves  at  Queen's  Hotel,  in  Prince's 
Street,  and  then  went  out  to  view  the  ciiy.  The  mon- 
ument to  Sir  Walter  Scott  —  a  rather  fantastic  and 
not  very  impressive  affair,  I  thought  —  stands  almost 
directly  in  front  of  a  hotel.  We  went  along  Prince's 
Street,  and  thence,  by  what  turns  I  know  not,  to  the 
Palace  of  Holyrood,  which  stands  on  a  low  and  shel- 
tered site,  and  is  a  venerable  edifice.  Arthur's  Seat 
rises  behind  it,  —  a  high  hiD,  with  a  plain  between* 
As  we  drew  near  the  Palace,  Mr.  Bowman,  who  has 
been  here  before,  pointed  out  the  windows  of  Queen 
Mary's  apartments,  in  a  circular  tower  on  the  left  of 
the  gateway.  On  entering  the  enclosed  quadrangle, 
we  bought  tickets  for  sixpence  each,  admitting  us  to 


1856.]  EDINBURGH.  —  HOLYROOD.  259 

all  parts  of  the  Palace  that  are  shown  to  visitors ;  and 
first  we  went  into  a,  noble  hall  or  gallery, —  a  long 
and  stately  room,  hung  with  pictures  of  ancient  Scot- 
tish kings ;  and  though  the  pictures  were  none  of  them 
authentic,  they,  at  least,  answer  an  excellent  purpose 
in  the  way  of  upholstery.  It  was  here  that  the  young 
Pretender  gave  the  ball  which  makes  one  of  the  scenes 
in  Waverley. 

Thence  we  passed  into  the  old  historic  rooms  of  the 
Palace,  —  Damley's  and  Queen  Mary's  apartments, 
which  everybody  has  seen  and  described.  They  are 
very  dreary  and  shabby -looking  rooms,  with  bare 
floors,  and  here  and  there  a  piece  of  tapestry,  faded 
into  a  neutral  tint ;  and  carved  and  ornamented  ceil- 
ings, looking  shabbier  than  plain  whitewash.  We 
saw  Queen  Mary's  old  bedstead,  low,  with  four  tall 
posts,  —  and  her  looking-glass,  which  she  brought  with 
her  from  France,  and  which  has  often  reflected  the 
beauty  that  set  everybody  mad,  —  and  some  needle- 
work and  other  womanly  matters  of  hers ;  and  we 
went  into  the  little  closet  where  she  was  having  such 
a  cosey  supper-party  with  two  or  three  friends,  when 
the  conspirators  broke  in,  and  stabbed  Rizzio  before 
her  face.  We  saw,  too,  the  blood-stain  at  the  thresh- 
old of  the  door  in  the  next  room,  opening  upon  the 
stairs.  The  body  of  Rizzio  was  flung  down  here,  and 
the  attendant  told  us  that  it  lay  in  that  spot  all  night. 
The  blood-stain  covers  a  large  space,  —  much  larger 
than  I  supposed,  —  and  it  gives  the  impression  that 
there  must  have  been  a  great  pool  and  sop  of  blood 
on  all  the  spot  covered  by  Rizzio's  body,  staining  the 
floor  deeply  enough  never  to  be  washed  out.  It  is  now 
of  a  dark  brown  hue ;  and  I  do  not  see  why  it  may 
aot  be  the  genuine,  veritable  stain.     The  floor,  there- 


260  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

abouts,  appears  not  to  have  been  scrubbed  much ;  for  I 
touched  it  with  my  finger,  and  found  it  slightly  rough ; 
but  it  is  strange  that  the  many  footsteps  should  not 
have  smoothed  it,  in  three  hundred  years. 

One  of  the  articles  shown  us  in  Queen  Mary's  apart- 
ments was  the  breastplate  supposed  to  have  been  worn 
by  Lord  Ruthven  at  the  murder,  a  heavy  plate  of  iron, 
and  doubtless  a  very  uncomfortable  waistcoat. 

HOLYROOD  ABBEY. 

From  the  Palace  we  passed  into  the  contiguous  ruin 
of  Holyrood  Abbey ;  which  is  roofless,  although  the 
front,  and  some  broken  columns  along  the  nave,  and 
fragments  of  architecture  here  and  there,  afford  hints 
of  a  magnificent  Gothic  church  in  by-gone  times.  It 
deserved  to  be  magnificent ;  for  here  have  been  stately 
ceremonials,  marriages  of  kings,  coronations,  investi- 
tures, before  the  high  altar,  which  has  now  been  over- 
thrown or  crumbled  away ;  and  the  floor  —  so  far  as 
there  is  any  floor  —  consists  of  tombstones  of  the  old 
Scottish  nobility.  There  are  likewise  monuments, 
bearing  the  names  of  illustrious  Scotch  families  ;  and 
inscriptions,  in  the  Scotch  dialect,  on  the  walls. 

In  one  of  the  front  towers,  —  the  only  remaining 
one,  indeed,  —  we  saw  the  marble  tomb  of  a  noble- 
man. Lord  Belhaven,  who  is  represented  reclining  on 
the  top,  —  with  a  bruised  nose,  of  course.  Except,  in 
Westminster  Abbey,  I  do  not  remember  ever  to  have 
seen  an  old  monumental  statue  with  the  nose  entire. 
In  aU  political  or  religious  outbreaks,  the  mob's  first 
impulse  is  to  hit  the  illustrious  dead  on  their  noses. 

At  the  other  end  of  the  Abbey,  near  the  high  altar, 
is  the  vault  where  the  old  Scottish  kings  used  to  be 
buried ;   but,  looking  in  through  the  window,  I  saw 


1866.]  EDINBURGH  CASTLE.  261 

only  a  vacant  space,  —  no  skull,  no  bone,  nor  the  least 
fragment  of  a  coffin.  In  fact,  I  believe  the  royal  dead 
were  turned  out  of  their  last  home,  on  occasion  of  the 
Revolutionary  movements,  at  the  accession  of  William 
III. 

HIGH   STREET  AND  THE  GRASS-MARKET. 

Quitting  the  Abbey  and  the  Palace,  we  turned  into 
the  Canongate,  and  passed  thence  into  High  Street, 
which,  I  think,  is  a  continuation  of  the  Canongate ; 
and  being  now  in  the  old  town  of  Edinburgh,  we  saw 
those  immensely  tall  houses,  seven  stories  high,  where 
the  people  live  in  tiers,  all  the  way  from  earth  to  mid- 
dle air.  They  were  not  so  quaint  and  strange  looking 
as  I  expected;  but  there  were  some  houses  of  very 
antique  individuality,  and  among  them  that  of  John 
Knox,  which  looks  still  in  good  repair.  One  thing  did 
not  in  the  least  fall  short  of  my  expectations,  —  the 
evil  odor,  for  which  Edinburgh  has  an  inmiemorial 
renown,  —  nor  the  dirt  of  the  inhabitants,  old  and 
young.  The  town,  to  say  the  truth,  when  you  are  in 
the  midst  of  it,  has  a  very  sordid,  grimy,  shabby,  un- 
swept,  unwashen  aspect,  grievously  at  variance  with 
all  poetic  and  romantic  associations. 

From  the  High  Street  we  turned  aside  into  the 
Grrass- Market,  the  scene  of  the  Porteous  Mob;  and 
we  found  in  the  pavement  a  cross  on  the  site  where 
the  execution  of  Porteous  is  supposed  to  have  taken 
place. 

THE  CASTLE. 

Returning  then  to  the  High  Street,  we  followed  it 
up  to  the  Castle,  which  is  nearer  the  town,  and  of 
more  easy  access  from  it,  than  I  had  supposed.    There 


262  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

is  a  large  court  or  parade  before  the  casde  gate,  with  a 
parapet  on  the  abrupt  side  of  the  hill,  looking  towards 
Arthur's  Seat  and  Salisbury  Crags,  and  overhanging  a 
portion  of  the  old  town.  As  we  leaned  over  this  para- 
pet, my  nose  was  conscious  of  the  bad  odor  of  Edin- 
burgh, although  the  streets,  whence  it  must  have  come, 
were  hundreds  of  feet  below,  I  have  had  some  expe- 
rience of  this  ugly  smell  in  the  poor  streets  of  Liver- 
pool :  but  I  think  I  never  perceived  it  before  crossing 
the  Atlantic.  It  is  the  odor  of  an  old  system  of  life ; 
the  scent  of  the  pine  forests  is  still  too  recent  with  us 
for  it  to  be  known  in  America. 

The  Castle  of  Edinburgh  is  free  (as  appears  to  be 
the  case  with  all  garrisoned  places  in  Great  Britain) 
to  the  entrance  of  any  peaceable  person.  So  we  went 
in,  and  found  a  large  space  enclosed  within  the  walls, 
and  dwellings  for  officers,  and  accommodation  for  sol- 
diers, who  were  being  drilled,  or  loitering  about ;  and 
as  the  hill  still  ascends  within  the  external  wall  of  the 
castle,  we  climbed  to  the  summit,  and  there  found  an 
old  soldier,  whom  we  engaged  to  be  our  guide.  He 
showed  us  Mons  Meg,  a  great  old  cannon,  broken  at 
the  breech,  but  still  aimed  threateningly  from  the  high- 
est ramparts;  and  then  he  admitted  us  into  an  old 
chapel,  said  to  have  been  built  by  a  Queen  of  Scot- 
land, the  sister  of  Harold,  King  of  England,  and  oc- 
cupying the  very  highest  part  of  the  hilL  It  is  the 
ffinallest  place  of  worship  I  ever  saw,  but  of  venerable 
architecture,  and  of  very  solid  construction.  The  old 
soldier  had  not  much  more  to  show  us  ;  but  he  pointed 
out  the  window  whence  one  of  the  kings  of  Scotland 
is  said,  when  a  baby,  to  have  been  lowered  down,  the 
whole  height  of  the  castle,  to  the  bottom  of  the  preci- 
pice, on  which  it  stands,  —  a  distance  of  seven  hmh 
dred  feet. 


1856.]  MELROSE. 

After  the  soldier  had  shown  ns  to  the  extent  of  his 
jurisdiction,  we  went  into  a  suite  of  rooms,  in  one  of 
which  I  saw  a  portrait  of  Queen  Mary,  which  gave  me, 
for  the  first  time,  an  idea  that  she  was  really  a  very 
beautiful  woman.  In  this  picture  she  is  wonderfully 
so,  —  a  tender  womanly  grace,  which  was  none  the 
less  tender  and  graceful  for  being  equally  imbued  with 
queenly  dignity  and  spirit.  It  was  too  lovely  a  head 
to  be  cut  off.  I  should  be  glad  to  know  the  authen- 
ticity of  this  picture. 

I  do  not  know  that  we  did  anything  else  worthy 
of  note,  before  learing  Edinburgh.  There  is  matter 
enough,  in  and  about  the  town,  to  interest  the  visitor 
for  a  very  long  time  ;  but  wh^i  the  visit  is  calculated 
on  such  brevity  as  ours  was,  we  get  weary  of  the  place, 
before  e^ven  these  few  hours  come  to  an  end.  Thus, 
for  my  part,  I  was  not  sorry  when,  in  the  course  of  the 
afternoon,  we  took  the  rail  for  Melrose,  where  we  duly 
arrived,  and  put  up  at  the  George  Inn. 

MELROSE. 

Melrose  is  a  village  of  rather  antique  aspect,  situa- 
ted on  the  slope  and  at  the  bottom  of  the  Eildon  Hills, 
which,  from  this  point  of  view,  appear  like  one  hill, 
with  a  double  summit.  The  village,  as  I  said,  has  an 
old  look,  though  many  of  the  houses  have  at  least  been 
refronted  at  some  recent  date;  but  others  are  as  an- 
cient, I  suppose,  as  the  days  when  the  Abbey  was  in 
its  splendor,  —  a  rustic  and  peasant  -  like  antiquity, 
however,  low-roofed,  and  straw-thatehed.  There  is  an 
aged  cross  of  stone  in  the  centre  of  the  town. 

Our  first  object,  of  course,  was  to  see  the  Abbey, 
which  stands  just  on  the  outskirts  of  the  village,  ajid 
is  attainable  only  by  applying  at  a  neighboring  hous^ 


2(!>4  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185a 

the  inhabitant  of  which  probably  supports  himself,  and 
most  comfortably,  too,  as  a  showman  of  the  ruin.  He 
unlocked  the  wooden  gate,  and  admitted  us  into  what 
is  left  of  the  Abbey,  comprising  only  the  ruins  of  the 
church,  although  the  refectory,  the  dormitories,  and 
the  other  parts  of  the  establishment,  formerly  covered 
the  space  now  occupied  by  a  dozen  village  houses, 
Melrose  Abbe^  is  a  very  satisfactory  ruin,  all  carpeted 
along  its  nave  and  transepts  with  green  grass ;  and 
there  are  some  well-grown  trees  within  the  walls.  We 
saw  the  window,  now  empty,  through  which  the  tints 
of  the  painted  glass  fell  on  the  tombstone  of  Michael 
Scott,  and  the  tombstone  itself,  broken  in  three  pieces, 
but  with  a  cross  engraven  along  its  whole  length.  It 
must  have  been  the  monument  of  an  old  monk  or 
abbot,  rather  than  a  wizard.  There,  too,  is  still  the 
"  marble  stone  "  on  which  the  monk  and  warrior  sat 
them  down,  and  which  is  supposed  to  mark  the  rest- 
ing-place of  Alexander  of  Scotland.  There  are  re- 
mains, both  without  and  within  the  Abbey,  of  most 
curious  and  wonderfully  minute  old  sculpture,  —  fo- 
liage, in  places  where  it  is  almost  impossible  to  see 
them,  and  where  the  sculptor  could  not  have  supposed 
that  they  would  be  seen,  but  which  yet  are  finished 
faithfully,  to  the  very  veins  of  each  leaf,  in  stone ;  and 
there  is  a  continual  variety  of  this  accurate  toil.  On 
the  exterior  of  the  edifice  there  is  equal  minuteness  of 
finish,  and  a  great  many  niches  for  statues  ;  all  of 
which,  I  believe,  are  now  gone,  although  there  are 
carved  faces  at  some  points  and  angles.  The  grave- 
yard around  the  Abbey  is  stiU  the  only  one  which  the 
village  has,  and  is  crowded  with  gravestones,  among 
which  I  read  the  inscription  of  one  erected  by  Sir 
Walter  Scott  to  the  memory  of  Thomas  Purdy,  one  oi 


1856.]  MELROSE.  ^  265 

his  servants.  Some  sable  birds  —  either  rooks  or  jack- 
daws —  were  flitting  about  the  ruins,  inside  and  out. 

Mr.  Bowman  and  I  talked  about  revisiting  Melrose 
by  moonlight ;  but,  luckily,  there  was  to  be  no  moon 
that  evening.  I  do  not  myself  think  that  daylight 
and  sunshine  make  a  ruin  less  effective  than  twilight 
or  moonshine.  In  reference  to  Scott's  description,  I 
think  he  deplorably  diminishes  the  impressiveness  of 
the  scene  by  saying  that  the  alternate  buttresses,  seen 
by  moonlight,  look  as  if  made  of  ebon  and  ivory.  It 
suggests  a  small  and  very  pretty  piece  of  cabinet- 
work; not  these  gray,  rough  walls,  which  Time  has 
gnawed  upon  for  a  thousand  years,  without  eating 
them  away. 

Leaving  the  Abbey,  we  took  a  path  or  a  road  which 
led  us  to  the  river  Tweed,  perhaps  a  quarter  of  a  mile 
off ;  and  we  crossed  it  by  a  foot-bridge,  —  a  pretty 
wide  stream,  a  dimpling  breadth  of  transparent  water 
flowing  between  low  banks,  with  a  margin  of  pebbles. 
We  then  returned  to  our  inn,  and  had  tea,  and  passed 
a  quiet  evening  by  the  fireside.  This  is  a  good,  un- 
pretentious inn ;  and  its  visitors'  book  indicates  that 
it  affords  general  satisfaction  to  those  who  come  here. 

In  the  morning  we  breakfasted  on  broiled  sahnon, 
taken,  no  doubt,  in  the  neighboring  Tweed.  There 
was  a  very  coarse-looking  man  at  table  with  us,  who 
informed  us  tUat  he  owned  the  best  horse  anywhere 
roimd  the  Eildon  Hills,  and  could  make  the  best  cast 
for  a  salmon,  and  catch  a  bigger  fish  than  anybody,  — 
with  other  self  -  laudation  of  the  same  kind.  The 
waiter  afterwards  told  us  that  he  was  the  son  of  an 
Admiral  in  the  neighborhood ;  and  soon,  his  horse  be- 
ing brought  to  the  door,  we  saw  him  mount  and  ride 
away.    He  sat  on  horseback  with  ease  and  grace, 


266  ENGLISH  NOTE-rBOOKS.  fl85«. 

ihough  I  rather  snspect,  early  as  it  was,  that  he  was 
already  in  his  cups.  Tbe  Scotch  seem  to  me  to  get 
drunk  at  very  unseasonable  hours.  I  have  seen  more 
drunken  people  here  than  during  all  my  residence  in 
England,  and,  generally,  early  in  the  day.  Ilieir 
liquor,  so  far  as  I  have  observed,  makes  them  good- 
natured  and  sociable,  imparting  a  perhaps  needed 
geniality  to  their  cold  natures. 

After  breakfast  we  took  a  drosky,  or  whatever 
these  fore4utid-aft-seated  vehicles  are  called,  and  set 
out  for 

DRYBUBGH  ABBEY, 

three  miles  distant.  It  was  a  cold  though  rather 
bright  morning,  with  a  most  shrewd  and  bitter  wind, 
which  Uew  directly  in  my  face  as  I  sat  beside  the 
driver.  An  English  wind  is  bad  enough,  but  me- 
thinks  a  Scotch  one  is  rather  worse ;  at  any  rate,  I 
was  half  frozen,  and  wished  Diyburgh  Abbey  in 
Tophet,  where  it  would  have  been  warmer  work  to 
go  and  see  it.  Some  of  the  border  hills  were  strik- 
ing, especially  the  Cowden  Knowe,  which  ascends 
into  a  prominent  and  lofty  peak.  Such  villages  as 
we  passed  did  not  greatly  differ  from  English  vil* 
lages.  By  and  by  we  came  to  the  banks  of  the  Tweed, 
at  a  point  where  there  is  a  ferry.  A  carriage  was  on 
the  river-bank,  the  driver  waiting  beside  it ;  for  the 
people  who  came  in  it  had  already  been  ferried  across 
to  see  the  Abbey. 

The  ferryman  here  is  a  young  girl ;  and,  stepping 
into  the  boat,  she  shoved  off,  and  so  skilfully  took  ad- 
vantage of  the  eddies  of  the  stream,  which  is  here  deep 
and  rapid,  that  we  were  soon  on  the  other  side.  She 
was  by  no  means  an  uncomely  maiden,  with  pleasanl 


1866. j  DRYBURGH  ABBEY.  267 

Scot^  features,  and  a  quiet  iotelligeiice  of  aspect, 
gleaming  into  a  smile  when  spoken  to ;  much  tanned 
with  all  kinds  of  weather,  and,  though  sl^ider,  yet  so 
Agile  and  muscular  that  it  was  no  shame  for  a  man  to 
let  himself  be  rowed  by  her. 

From  the  ferry  we  had  a  walk  of  half  a  mile,  more 
or  less,  to  a  cottage,  where  we  found  anoth^  young 
girl,  whose  business  it  is  to  show  the  Abbey,  She 
was  of  another  mould  than  the  £erry-maiden,  —  a 
queer,  shy,  plaintive  sort  of  a  body,  —  and  answered 
all  our  questions  in  a  low,  wailing  tone.  Passing 
through  an  apple-orchard,  we  were  not  long  in  reach- 
ing the  Abbey,  the  ruins  of  which  are  much  more  ex- 
tensive and  more  picturesque  than  those  of  Melrose, 
being  overrun  with  bushes  and  shrubbery,  and  twined 
about  with  ivy,  and  all  such  vegetation  as  belongs, 
naturally,  to  old  walls.  There  are  the  remains  of  the 
refectory,  and  other  domestic  parts  of  the  Abbey,  as 
well  as  the  church,  and  all  in  delightful  state  of  decay, 
—  not  so  far  gone  but  that  we  had  bits  of  its  former 
grandeur  in  the  colunms  and  broken  arched,  and  in 
some  portions  of  the  edifice  that  still  retain  a  roof. 

In  the  diapter-house  we  saw  a  marble  statue  of 
Newton,  wofuUy  maltreated  by  damps  and  weather; 
and  though  it  had  no  sort  of  business  there,  it  fitted 
into  the  ruins  picturesquely  enough.  There  is  another 
statue,  equally  unauthorized ;  bol^  having  been  placed 
here  by  a  former  Earl  of  Buchan,  who  seems  to  have 
been  a  little  astray  in  his  wits. 

On  one  side  of  the  church,  within  an  arched  recess, 
are  the  monuments  of  Sir  Walter  Scott  and  his  fam- 
ily, —  three  ponderous  tombstones  of  Aberdeen  gran- 
ite, polished,  but  already  dimmed  and  dulled  by  the 
weatdier.    The  whole  floor  of  ihe  recess  is  cov^ed  by 


268  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1866. 

these  monuments,  that  of  Sir  Walter  being  the  middle 
one,  with  Lady  (or,  as  the  inscription  calls  her.  Dame) 
Scott  beyond  him,  next  to  the  church  wall,  and  some 
one  of  his  sons  or  daughters  on  the  hither  side.  The 
effect  of  his  being  buried  here  is  to  make  the  whole 
of  Dryburgh  Abbey  his  monument.  There  is  another 
arched  recess,  twin  to  the  Scott  burial-place,  and  con- 
tiguous to  it,  in  which  are  buried  a  Pringle  family ;  it 
being  their  ancient  place  of  sepulture.  The  spectator 
almost  inevitably  feels  as  if  they  were  intruders,  al^ 
though  their  rights  here  are  of  far  older  date  than 
those  of  Scott. 

Dryburgh  Abbey  must  be  a  most  beautiful  spot  of 
a  summer  afternoon ;  and  it  was  beautiful  even  on 
this  not  very  genial  morning,  especially  when  the  sun 
blinked  out  upon  the  ivy,  and  upon  the  shrubberied 
paths  that  wound  about  tlie  ruins.  I  think  I  recollect 
the  birds  chirruping  in  this  neighborhood  of  it.  After 
viewing  it  sufficiently,  —  sufficiently  for  this  one  time, 
—  we  went  back  to  the  ferry,  and,  being  set  across  by 
the  same  Undine,  we  drove  back  to  Melrose.  No  longer 
riding  against  the  wind,  I  found  it  not  nearly  so  cold 
as  before.  I  now  noticed  that  the  Eildon  Hills,  seen 
from  this  direction,  rise  from  one  base  into  three  dis- 
tinct summits,  ranged  in  a  line.  According  to  "  The 
Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel,"  they  were  cleft  into  this 
dhape  by  the  magic  of  Michael  Scott.  Beaching  Mel- 
rose .  .  .  without  alighting,  wc  set  off  for 

ABBOTSFOKD, 

three  miles  off.     The  neighborhood  of  Melrose,  lead- 
ing to  Abbotsford,  has  many  handsome  residences  of 
modem  build  and  very  recent  date,  —  suburban  villas 
each  Mrith  its  little  lawn  and  garden  ground,  such  as 


1866.]  ABBOTSFORD.  269 

we  see  in  the  vicinity  of  Liverpool.  I  noticed,  too, 
one  castellated  house,  of  no  great  size,  but  old,  and 
looking  as  if  its  tower  were  built,  not  for  show,  but 
for  actual  defence  in  the  old  border  warfare. 

We  were  not  long  in  reaching  Abbotsford.  The 
house,  which  is  more  compact,  and  of  considerably 
less  extent  than  I  anticipated,  stands  in  full  view  from 
the  road,  and  at  only  a  short  distance  from  it,  lower 
down  towards  the  river.  Its  aspect  disappointed  me ; 
but  so  does  everything.  It  is  but  a  villa,  after  all ; 
no  castle,  nor  even  a  large  manor-house,  and  very  un- 
satisfactory when  you  consider  it  in  that  light.  In- 
deed, it  impressed  me,  not  as  a  real  house,  intended 
for  the  home  of  human  beings,  —  a  house  to  die  in  or 
to  be  bom  in,  —  but  as  a  plaything,  —  something  in 
the  same  category  as  Horace  Walpole's  Strawberry 
Hill.  The  present  owner  seems  to  have  found  it  in- 
sufficient for  the  actual  purposes  of  life;  for  he  is 
adding  a  wing,  which  promises  to  be  as  extensive  as 
the  original  structure. 

We  rang  at  the  front  door  (the  family  being  now 
absent),  and  were  speedily  admitted  by  a  middle-aged 
or  somewhat  elderly  man,  —  the  butler,  I  suppose,  or 
some  upper  servant,  —  who  at  once  acceded  to  our  re- 
quest to  be  permitted  to  see  the  house.  We  stepped 
from  the  porch  immediately  into  the  entrance-hall; 
and  having  the  great  Hall  of  Battle  Abbey  in  my 
memory,  and  the  idea  of  a  baronial  hall  in  my  mind, 
I  was  quite  taken  aback  at  the  smallness  and  narrow- 
ness and  lowness  of  this ;  which,  however,  is  a  very 
fine  one,  on  its  own  little  scale.  In  truth,  it  is  not 
much  more  than  a  vestibule.  The  ceiling  is  carved  ; 
and  every  inch  of  the  walls  is  covered  with  claymores, 
targets,  and  other  weapons  and  armor,  or   old-time 


270  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856 

curiosities,  tastefully  arranged,  many  of  wMch,  no 
doubt,  have  a  history  attached  to  them,  —  or  had,  in 
Sir  Walter's  own  mind.  Our  attendant  was  a  very 
intelligent  person,  and  pointed  out  much  that  was  in- 
teresting ;  but  in  such  a  multitudinous  variety  it  was 
almost  impossible  to  fix  the  eye  upon  any  one  thing. 
Probably  die  apartment  looked  smaller  than  it  really 
was,  on  account  of  being  so  wainscoted  and  festooned 
with  curiositieB.  I  remember  nothing  particularly, 
unless  it  be  the  coal-grate  in  the  firephu^e,  which  was 
one  formerly  used  by  Archbishop  Sharpe,  the  prelate 
whom  Balfour  of  Biu*ley  murdered.  Either  in  this 
room  or  the  next  one,  there  was  a  glass  case  contain* 
ing  the  suit  of  clothes  last  worn  by  Scott,  —  a  short 
green  coat,  somewhat  worn,  with  silvered  buttons,  a 
pair  of  gray  tartan  trousers,  and  a  white  hat.  It  was 
in  the  hall  that  we  saw  these  things ;  for  there  too,  I 
recollect,  were  a  good  many  walking-sticks  that  had 
been  used  by  Scott,  and  the  hatchet  with  which  he 
was  in  the  habit  of  lopping  branches  from  his  trees^ 
as  he  walked  among  them. 

From  the  hall  we  passed  into  the  study,  —  a  smaU 
room,  lined  with  the  books  which  Sir  Walter,  no 
doubt,  was  most  frequently  accustomed  to  refer  to ; 
and  our  guide  pointed  out  some  volumes  of  the  ^^Moni- 
teur,"  which  he  used  while  writing  the  history  of  Napo- 
leon. Probably  these  were  the  driest  and  dullest  vol- 
umes in  his  whole  library.  About  mid-height  of  the 
walls  of  the  study  there  is  a  gallery,  with  a  short 
flight  of  steps  for  the  convenience  of  getting  at  the 
upper  books.  A  study-table  occupied  the  centre  of  the 
room,  and  at  one  end  of  the  table  stands  an  easy-chair, 
covered  with  morocco,  and  with  ample  space  to  fling 
one's  self  back.     The  servant  told  me  that  I  might  sit 


1866.1  ABBOTSFORD.  271 

down  in  this  chair,  for  that  Sir  Walter  sat  there  while 
writing  his  romances,  ^^  and  perhaps,"  quoth  tlie  man, 
smiling,  ^^  you  may  catch  some  inspiration."  What  a 
bitter  word  this  would  have  been  if  he  had  known  me 
to  be  a  romance-writer  1  "  No,  I  never  shall  be  in- 
spired to  write  romances  I "  I  answered,  as  if  such 
an  idea  had  never  occurred  to  me.  I  sat  down,  how 
ever.  This  study  quite  satisfied  me,  being  planned  on 
principles  of  common-sense,  and  made  to  work  in,  and 
^thout  any  fantastic  adaptation  of  old  forms  to  mod- 
em uses. 

Next  to  the  study  is  the  library,  an  apartment  of 
respectable  size,  and  containing  as  many  books  as  it 
can  hold,  all  protected  by  wire-work.  I  did  not  ob- 
serve what  or  whose  works  were  here;  but  the  at- 
tendant showed  us  one  whole  compartment  full  of  vol- 
umes having  reference  to  ghosts,  witchcraft,  and  the. 
supernatural  generally.  It  is  remarkable  that  Scott 
should  have  felt  interested  in  such  subjects,  being  such 
a  worldly  and  earthly  man  as  he  was ;  but  then,  in- 
deed, almost  all  forms  of  popular  superstition  do  clothe 
the  ethereal  with  earthly  attributes,  and  so  make  it 
grossly  perceptible. 

The  library,  Kke  the  study,  suited  me  well,  —  merely 
the  fashion  of  the  apartment  I  mean,  —  and  I  doubt 
not  it  contains  as  many  curious  volumes  as  are  any- 
where to  be  met  with  within  a  similar  space.  The 
drawing-room  adjoins  it ;  and  here  we  saw  a  beautiful 
ebony  cabinet,  which  was  presented  to  Sir  Walter  by 
Greorge  IV. ;  and  some  pictures  of  much  interest,  — 
one  of  Scott  himself  at  thirty-five,  rather  portly,  with 
a  heavy  face,  but  shrewd  eyes,  which  seem  to  observe 
you  closely.  There  is  a  full-length  of  his  eldest  son, 
an  officer  of  dragoons,  leaning  on  his  charger ;  and  a 


272  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

portrait  of  Lady  Scott,  —  a  brunette,  with  black  hair 
and  eyes,  very  pretty,  warm,  vivacious,  and  un-Eng. 
lish  in  her  aspect.  I  am  not  quite  sure  whether  I  saw 
all  these  pictures  in  the  drawing-room,  or  some  of 
them  in  the  dining-room ;  but  the  one  that  struck  me 
most  —  and  very  much  indeed  —  was  the  head  of 
Mary  Queen  of  Scots,  literally  the  head  cut  off,  and 
lying  on  a  dish.  It  is  said  to  have  been  painted  by 
an  Italian  or  French  artist,  two  days  after  her  death. 
The  hair  curls  or  flows  all  about  it ;  the  face  is  of  § 
death-like  hue,  but  has  an  expression  of  quiet,  after 
much  pain  and  trouble,  —  very  beautiful,  very  sweet 
and  sad ;  and  it  affected  me  strongly  with  the  horror 
and  strangeness  of  such  ^a  head  being  severed  from  its 
body.  Methinks  I  should  not  like  to  have  it  always 
in  the  room  with  me.  I  thought  of  the  lovely  picture 
.of  Mary  that  I  had  seen  at  Edinburgh  Castle,  and 
reflected  what  a  symbol  it  would  be,  —  how  expres- 
sive  of  a  human  being  having  her  destiny  in  her  own 
hands,  —  if  that  beautiful  young  (^een  were  painted 
as  carrying  this  dish,  containing  her  own  woful  hktd^ 
and  perhaps  casting  a  curious  and  pitiful  glance  down 
upon  it,  as  if  it  were  not  her  own. 

Also,  in  the  drawing-room,  there  was  a  plaster  cast 
of  Sir  Walter's  face,  taken  after  death ;  the  only  one 
in  existence,  as  our  guide  assured  us.  It  is  not  often 
that  one  sees  a  homelier  set  of  features  than  this ;  no 
elevation,  no  dignity,  whether  bestowed  by  nature  or 
thrown  over  them  by  age  or  death ;  sunken  cheeks,  the 
bridge  of  the  nose  depressed,  and  the  end  turned  up  ; 
the  mouth  puckered,  and  no  chin  whatever,  or  hardly 
any.  The  expression  was  not  calm  and  happy ;  but 
rather  as  if  he  were  in  a  perturbed  slumber,  perhaps 
nothing  short  of  nightmare.     I  wonder  that  the  family 


1856.]  ABBOTSFORD.  278 

allow  this  cast  to  be  shown,  —  the  last  record  that 
there  is  of  Scott's  personal  reality,  and  conveying  such 
a  wretched  and  unworthy  idea  of  it. 

Adjoining  the  drawing-room  is  the  dining-room,  in 
one  comer  of  which,  between  two  windows,  Scott 
died.  It  was  now  a  quarter  of  a  century  since  his 
death  ;  but  it  seemed  to  me  that  we  spoke  with  a  sort 
of  hush  in  our  voices,  as  if  he  were  still  dying  here,  or 
had  but  just  departed.  I  remember  nothing  else  in 
this  room.  The  next  one  is  the  armory,  which  is  the 
smallest  of  all  that  we  had  passed  through ;  but  its 
walls  gleam  with  the  steel  blades  of  swords,  and  the 
barrels  of  pistols,  matchlocks,  firelocks,  and  all  man- 
ner of  deadly  weapons,  whether  European  or  Orien- 
tal ;  for  there  are  many  trophies  here  of  East  Indian 
warfare. .  I  saw  Rob  Roy's  gun,  rifled  and  of  very 
large  bore ;  and  a  beautiful  pistol,  formerly  Claver- 
house's;  and  the  sword  of  Montrose,  given  him  by 
King  Charles,  the  silver  hilt  of  which  I  grasped. 
There  was  also  a  superb  claymore,  in  an  elaborately 
wrought  silver  sheath,  made  for  Sir  Walter  Scott,  and 
presented  to  him  by  the  Highland  Society,  for  his  ser- 
vices in  marshalling  the  clans  when  George  IV.  came 
to  Scotland.  There  were  a  thousand  other  things, 
which  I  knew  must  be  most  curious,  yet  did  not  ask 
nor  care  about  them,  because  so  many  curiosities  drive 
one  crazy,  and  fret  one's  heart  to  death.  On  the 
whole,  there  is  no  simple  and  great  impression  left 
by  Abbotsf ord ;  and  I  felt  angry  and  dissatisfied  with 
myself  for  not  feeling  something  which  I  did  not  and 
could  not  feel.  But  it  is  just  like  going  to  a  museum., 
if  you  look  into  particulars ;  and  one  learns  from  it, 
too,  that  Scott  could  not  have  been  really  a  wise  man, 
nor  an  earnest  one,  nor  one  that  grasped  the  truth  of 

VOL.  Yin.  18 


274  ENGLISH  NOTE--BOOKS.  [IMa 

life ;  lie  did  but  play,  aaid  the  play  grew  very  sad  to 
ward  its  close.  In  a  certain  way,  however,  I  under- 
stand his  romances  the  better  for  having  seen  his 
house ;  and  his  house  the  better  for  having  read  his 
romances.     They  throw  light  on  one  another. 

We  had  now  gone  through  all  the  show-rooms  ;  and 
the  next  door  admitted  us  again  into  the  entrance-hall, 
where  we  recorded  our  names  in  the  visitors'  book.  It 
contains  more  names  of  Americans,  I  should  judge, 
from  casting  my  eyes  back  over  last  year's  record, 
than  of  all  other  people  in  the  world,  including  Great 
Britain. 

Bidding  farewell  to  Abbotsford,  I  cannot  but  con- 
fess a  sentiment  of  remorse  for  having  visited  the 
dwelling-place  —  as  just  before  I  visited  the  grave  — 
of  the  mighty  minstrel  and  romancer  with  so  cold  a 
heart  and  in  so  critical  a  mood,  —  his  dwelling-place 
and  his  grave  whom  I  had  so  admired  and  loved,  and 
who  had  done  so  much  for  my  happiness  when  I  was 
young.  But  I,  and  the  world  generally,  now  look  at 
him  &om  a  different  point  of  view ;  and,  besides,  these 
visits  to  the  actual  haunts  of  famous  people,  though 
long  dead,  have  the  effect  of  making  us  sensible,  in 
some  degree,  of  their  human  imperfections,  as  if  we 
actually  saw  them  alive.  I  felt  this  effect,  to  a  certain 
extent,  even  with  respect  to  Shakespeare,  when  I  vis- 
ited Stratford-on-Avon.  As  for  Scott,  I  still  cherish 
him  in  a  warm  place,  and  I  do  not  know  that  I  have 
any  pleasanter  anticipation,  as  regards  books,  than 
that  of  reading  all  his  novels  over  again  after  we  get 
back  to  the  Wayside. 

[This  Mr.  Hawthorne  did,  aloud  to  his  family,  the 
year  following  his  return  to  America.  —  Ed.] 

It  was  now  one  or  two  o'clock,  and  time  for  us  to 


1856.]  BERWICK.  276 

take  the  rail  across  the  borders.  Many  a  mile  behind 
us,  as  we  rushed  onward,  we  could  see  the  threefold 
Eildon  Hill,  and  probably  every  pant  of  the  engine 
carried  us  over  some  spot  of  ground  which  Scott  has 
made  fertile  with  poetry.  For  Scotland  —  cold, 
cloudy,  barren  Utile  bit  of  earth  that  it  is  —  owes  all 
the  interest  that  the  world  feels  in  it  to  him.  Few 
men  have  done  so  much  for  their  country  as  he.  How- 
ever, having  no  guide-book,  we  were  none  the  wiser 
for  what  we  saw  out  of  the  window  of  the  rail-carrii^e ; 
but,  now  iand  then,  a  castle  appeared,  on  a  command- 
ing height,  visible  for  miles  round,  and  seemingly  ia 
good  repair,  —  now,  in  some  low  and  sheltered  spot, 
the  gray  walls  of  an  abbey ;  now,  on  a  little  eminence, 
the  ruin  of  a  border  fortress,  and  near  it  the  modern 
residence  of  the  laird,  with  its  trim  lawn  and  shrub, 
bery.    We  were  not  long  in  coming  to 

BERWICK^ 

a  town  which  seems  to  belong  both  to  England  and 
Scotland,  or  perhaps  is  a  kingdom  by  itself,  for  it 
stands  on  both  sides  of  the  boundary  river,  the  Tweed, 
where  it  empties  into  the  Germaoi  Ocean.  From  the 
railway  bridge  we  had  a  good  view  over  the  town, 
which  looks  ancient,  with  red  roofs  on  all  the  gabled 
houses  ;  and  it  being  a  sunny  afternoon,  though  bleak 
and  chill,  the  searview  was  very  fine.  The  Tweed  is 
here  broad,  and  looks  deep,  flowing  far  beneath  the 
bridge,  between  high  banks.  This  is  all  that  I  can 
say  of  Berwick  (pronounced  Berrick),  for  though  we 
spoilt  above  an  hour  at  the  station  waiting  for  the 
train,  we  were  so  long  in  getting  our  dinner,  that  we 
had  not  time  for  anything  else.  I  remember,  however, 
some  gray  walls,  that  looked  like  the  last  remains  of 


276  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

an  old  castle,  near  the  railway  station.  We  next  took 
the  train  for 

NEWCASTLE, 

the  way  to  which,  for  a  considerable  distance,  lies 
within  sight  of  the  sea ;  and  in  close  vicinity  to  the 
shore  we  saw  Holy  Isle,  on  which  are  the  ruins  of  an 
abbey.  Norham  Castle  must  be  somewhere  in  this 
neighborhood,  on  the  English  shore  of  the  Tweed.  It 
was  pretty  late  in  the  afternoon  —  almost  nightfall  — 
when  we  reached  Newcastle,  over  the  roofs  of  which, 
as  over  those  of  Berwick,  we  had  a  view  from  the  rail- 
way, and  like  Berwick,  it  was  a  congregation  of  mostly 
red  roofs ;  but,  unlike  Berwick  (the  atmosphere  over 
which  was  clear  and  transparent),  there  came  a  gush 
of  smoke  from  every  chimney,  which  made  it  the  dim- 
mest and  smokiest  place  I  ever  saw.  This  is  partly 
owing  to  the  iron  f ounderies  and  furnaces ;  but  each 
domestic  chimney,  too',  was  smoking  on  its  own  ac- 
count, —  coal  being  so  plentiful  there,  no  doubt,  that 
the  fire  is  always  kept  freshly  heaped  with  it,  reason 
or  none.  Out  of  this  smoke-cloud  rose  tall  steeples ; 
and  it  was  discernible  that  the  town  stretched  widely 
over  an  uneven  surface,  on  the  banks  of  the  Tyne, 
which  is  navigable  up  hither  ten  miles  from  the  sea 
for  pretty  large  vessels. 

We  established  ourselves  at  the  Station  Hotel,  and 
then  walked  out  to  see  something  of  the  town ;  but  I 
remember  only  a  few  streets  of  duskiness  and  dingi- 
ness,  with  a  glimpse  of  the  turrets  of  a  castle  to  which 
we  could  not  find  our  way.  So,  as  it  was  getting 
twilightish  and  very  cold,  we  went  back  to  the  hotelj 
which  is  a  very  good  one,  better  than  any  one  I  have 
seen  in  the  South  of  England,  and  almost  or  quite  as 


1866.]  NEWCASTLE.  277 

good  as  those  of  Scotland.  The  coffee-room  is  a  spa- 
cious and  handsome  apartment,  adorned  with  a  fult 
length  portrait  of  Wellington,  and  other  pictures,  and 
in  the  whole  establishment  there  was  a  well-ordered 
alacrity  and  liberal  provision  for  the  comfort  of  guests 
that  one  seldom  sees  in  English  inns.  There  are  a 
good  many  American  guests  in  Newcastle,  and  through 
all  the  North. 

An  old  Newcastle  gentleman  and  his  friend  came 
into  the  smoking-room,  and  drank  three  glasses  of  hot 
whiskey-toddy  apiece,  and  were  still  going  on  to  drink 
more  when  we  left  them.  These  respectable  persons 
probably  went  away  drunk  that  night,  yet  thought 
none  the  worse  of  themselves  or  of  one  another  for 
it.  It  is  like  returning  to  times  twenty  years  gone  by 
for  a  New-Englander  to  witness  such  simplicity  of 
manners. 

The  next  morning.  May  8th,  I  rose  and  breakfasted 
early,  and  took  the  rail  soon  after  eight  o'clock,  leav- 
ing Mr.  Bowman  behind ;  for  he  had  business  in  New- 
castle, and  would  not  follow  till  some  hours  afterwards. 
There  is  no  use  in  trying  to  make  a  narrative  of  any- 
thing that  one  sees  along  an  English  railway.  All  I 
remember  of  this  tract  of  coimtry  is  that  one  of  the 
stations  at  which  we  stopped  for  an  instant  is  called 
^^  Washington,"  and  this  is,  no  doubt,  the  old  family 
place,  where  the  De  Wessyngtons,  afterwards  the 
Washingtons,  were  first  settled  in  England.  Before 
reaching  York,  first  one  old  lady  and  then  another 
(Quaker)  lady  got  into  the  carriage  along  with  me ; 
and  they  seemed  to  be  going  to  York,  on  occasion  of 
some  fair  or  celebration.  This  was  all  the  company  I 
had,  and  their  advent  the  only  incident.  It  was  about 
eleven  o'clock  when  I  beheld  York  Cathedral  rising 


278  ENGLISH  NOTEBOOKS.  [186«. 

huge  above  tiie  old  cily,  which  stands  on  the  riyer 
Ouse,  separated  by  it  from  the  railway  station,  but 
communicating  by  a  ferry  (or  two)  and  a  bridge.  I 
wandered  forth,  and  found  my  way  over  the  latter  into 
the  ancient  and  irr^ular  streets  of 

YORK,  ^ 

crooked,  narrow,  or  of  unequal  width,  puzding,  and 
many  of  them  bearing  the  name  of  the  particular  gate 
in  the  old  walls  of  the  city  to  which  they  lead.  There 
were  no  such  fine,  ancient,  sibaAelj  houses  as  some  of 
those  in  Shrewsbury  were,  nor  such  an  aspect  of  an- 
tiquity as  in  Chester ;  but  still  York  is  a  quaint  old 
place,  and  what  looks  most  modem  is  probably  only 
something  old,  hiding  itself  behind  a  new  front,  as 
elsewhere  in  England. 

I  found  my  way  by  a  sort  of  instinct,  as  directly  as 
possible,  to 

YORK  MINSTER. 

It  stands  in  the  midst  of  a  small  open  q)ace, — or  a 
space  that  looks  small  in  comparison  with  the  vast 
bulk  of  the  cathedral.  I  was  not  so  much  impressed 
by  its  exterior  as  I  have  usually  been  by  Gothic  build- 
ings, because  it  is  rectangular  in  its  general  outline 
and  in  its  towers,  and  seems  to  lack  the  complexity  and 
mysterious  plan  which  perplexes  and  wonder-strikes 
me  in  most  cathedrals.  Doubtless,  however,  if  I  had 
known  better  how  to  admire  it,  I  should  have  found  it 
wholly  admirable.  At  all  events,  it  has  a  satisfactory 
hugeness.  Seeking  my  way  in,  I  at  first  intruded 
upon  the  Registry  of  Deeds,  which  occupies  a  building 
patched  up  against  the  mighty  side  of  the  cathedral, 
and  hardly  discernible,  so  small  the  one  and  so  large 


1366.]  YORK.  279 

the  other.  I  finally  hit  upon  the  right  door,  and  I 
felt  no  disappointment  in  my  first  ^ance  around  at 
the  immensity  of  enclosed  space :  I  see  now  in  my 
mind's  eye  a  dim  length  of  nave,  a  breadth  in  the 
transepts  like  a  great  plain,  and  such  an  airy  height 
beneath  the  central  tower  tiiat  a  worshipper  could  cer- 
tainly get  a  good  way  towards  heaven  widiout  rising 
above  it.  I  only  wish  that  the  screen,  or  whatever 
they  call  it,  between  the  choir  and  nave,  could  be 
thrown  down,  so  as  to  give  us  leave  to  take  in  the 
whole  vastitiHle  at  once.  I  never  could  understand 
why,  after  building  a  great  church,  they  dioose  to 
sunder  it  in  halves  by  this  mid  -  partition.  But  let 
me  be  thankful  for  what  I  got,  and  especially  for  the 
height  and  massiveness  of  the  clustered  pillars  that 
support  the  arches  on  which  rests  the  central  tower. 
I  remember  at  Fumess  Abbey  I  saw  two  tall  pillars 
supporting  a  broken  arch,  and  thought  it  the  most 
majestic  fragment  of  architecture  that  could  possibly 
be.  But  these  pillars  have  a  nobler  height,  and  these 
arches  a  greater  sweep.  What  nonsense  to  try  to  write 
about  a  cathedral  I 

There  is  a  great,  cold  bareness  and  bleakness  about 
the  interior ;  for  there  are  very  few  monuments,  and 
those  seem  chiefly  to  be  of  ecclesiastical  people.  I 
saw  no  armed  knights,  asleep  on  the  tops  of  their 
tombs;  but  there  was  a  curious  representation  of  a 
skeleton,  at  full  length,  under  the  table-dab  of  one  of 
the  monuments.  The  walls  are  of  a  grayish  hue,  not  so 
agreeable  as  the  rich  dark  tint  of  i^e  inside  of  West- 
minster Abbey ;  but  a  great  many  of  the  windows  are 
still  filled  with  ancient  painted  glass,  the  very  small 
squares  and  pieces  of  which  are  composed  into  splendid 
designs  of  saints  and  angels,  and  scenes  from  Scrip- 
ture. 


280  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  |185«. 

There  were  a  few  watery  blinks  of  sunshine  out 
of  doors,  and  whenever  these  came  through  the  old 
painted  windows,  some  of  the  more  vivid  colors  were 
faintly  thrown  upon  the  pavement  of  the  cathedral,  — 
very  faintly,  it  is  true ;  for,  in  the  first  place,  the  sun- 
shine was  not  brilliant ;  and  painted  glass,  too,  fades 
in  the  course  of  the  ages,  perhaps,  like  all  man's  other 
works.  There  were  two  or  three  windows  of  modem 
manufacture,  and  far  more  magnificent,  as  to  bright- 
ness of  color  and  material  beauty,  than  the  ancient 
ones ;  but  yet  they  looked  vulgar,  glaring,  and  imper- 
tinent in  comparison,  because  such  revivals  or  imita- 
tions of  a  long-Klisused  art  cannot  have  the  good  &uth 
and  earnestness  of  the  originals. '  Indeed,  in  the  very 
coloring,  I  felt  the  same  difference  as  between  heart's 
blood  and  a  scarlet  dye.  It  is  a  pily,  however,  that 
the  old  windows  cannot  be  washed,  both  inside  and 
out,  for  now  they  have  the  dust  of  centuries  upon  them. 

The  screen  or  curtain  between  the  nave  and  choir 
has  eleven  carved  figures,  at  full  length,  which  ap- 
peared to  represent  kings,  some  of  them  wearing  crowns 
and  bearing  sceptres  or  swords.  They  were  in  wood, 
and  wrought  by  some  Gothic  hand.  These  carvings, 
and  the  painted  windows,  and  the  few  monuments,  are 
all  the  details  that  the  mind  can  catch  hold  of  in  the 
immensity  of  this  cathedral ;  and  I  must  say  that  it 
was  a  dreary  place  on  that  cold,  cloudy  day.  I  doubt 
whether  a  cathedral  is  a  sort  of  edifice  suited  to  the 
£nglish  climate.  The  first  buildings  of  the  kind  were 
probably  erected  by  people  who  had  bright  and  con- 
Btant  sunshine,  and  who  desired  a  shadowy  awfiilness 
—  like  that  of  a  forest,  with  its  arched  wood-paths  -^ 
mto  which  to  retire  in  their  religious  moments. 

In  America,  on  a  hot  summer's  day,  how  delightful 


1856]  YORK.  281 

its  cool  and  solemn  depths  would  be!  The  painted 
windows,  too,  were  evidently  contrived,  in  the  first  in- 
stance, by  persons  who  saw  how  eflfective  they  would 
prove  when  a  vivid  sun  shone  through  them.  But  in 
England,  the  interior  of  a  cathedral,  nine  days  out  of 
ten,  is  a  vast  sullenness,  and  as  chill  as  death  and  the 
tomb.  At  any  rate,  it  was  so  to-day,  and  so  thought 
one  of  the  old  vergers,  who  kept  walking  as  briskly 
as  he  could  along  the  width  of  the  transepts.  There 
were  several  of  ihiese  old  men  when  I  first  came  in, 
but  they  went  off,  all  but  this  one,  before  I  departed. 
None  of  them  said  a  word  to  me,  nor  I  to  them ;  and 
admission  to  the  Minster  seems  to  be  entirely  free. 

After  emerging  from,  this  great  gloom,  I  wandered 
to  and  fro  about  York,  and  contrived  to  go  astray 
within  no  very  wide  space.  If  its  history  be  authen- 
tic, it  is  an  exceedingly  old  city,  having  been  founded 
about  a  thousand  years  before  the  Christian  era. 
There  used  to  be  a  palace  of  the  Boman  emperors 
here,  and  the  Emperor  Severus  died  here,  as  did  some 
of  his  successors ;  and  Constantine  the  Great  was  bom 
here.  I  know  not  what,  if  any,  relics  of  those  earlier 
times  there  may  be;  but  York  is  still  partly  sur- 
rounded with  a  wall,  and  has  several  gates,  which  the 
city  authorities  take  pains  to  keep  in  repair.  I  grew 
weary  in  my  endeavor  to  find  my  way  back  to  the 
railway,  and  inquired  it  of  one  of  the  good  people  of 
York,  —  a  respectable,  courteous,  gentlemanly  person, 
—  and  he  told  me  to  walk  along  the  walls.  Then  he 
went  on  a  considerable  distance,  but  seemed  to  repent 
of  not  doing  more  for  me ;  so  he  waited  till  I  came 
up,  and,  walking  along  by  my  side,  pointed  out  the 
castle,  now  the  jail,  and  the  place  of  execution,  and 
directed  me  to  the  principal  gateway  of  the  city,  and 


282  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [18^6. 

instructed  me  how  to  reach  the  ferry.  The  path  along 
the  wall  leads,  in  one  place,  through  a  room  over  the 
arch  of  a  gateway,  —  a  low,  thick-walled,  stone  apart- 
ment, where  doubtless  the  gate-keeper  used  to  lodge, 
and  to  parley  with  those  who  desired  entrance. 

I  found  my  way  to  the  ferry  over  the  Ouse,  accord* 
ing  to  this  kind  Yorkist's  instructions.  The  ferryman 
told  me  that  the  fee  for  crossing  was  a  halfpenny, 
which  seemed  so  ridiculously  small  that  I  offered  him 
more ;  but  this  unparalleled  Englishman  declined  tak- 
ing anything  beyond  his  rightful  halfpenny.  This 
seems  so  wonderful  to  me  that  I  can  hardly  trust  my 
own  memory. 

Beaching  the  station,  I  got  some  dinner,  and  at 
four  o'clock,  just  as  I  was  starting,  came  Mr.  Bow- 
man, my  very  agreeable  and  sensible  travelling  com- 
panion. Our  journeying  together  was  ended  here; 
for  he  was  to  keep  on  to  London,  and  I  to  return  ^  to 
Liverpool.  So  we  parted,  and  I  took  the  rail  west- 
ward across  England,  through  a  very  beautiful,  and  in 
some  degree  picturesque,  tract  of  coimtry,  diversified 
with  hills,  through  the  valleys  and  vistas  of  whidi 
goes  the  railroad,  with  dells  diverging  from  it  on  either 
hand,  and  streams  and  arched  bridges,  and  old  vil- 
lages, and  a  hundred  pleasant  English  sights.  After 
passing  Rochdale,  however,  the  dreary  monotony  of 
Lancashire  succeeded  this  variety.  Between  nine  and 
ten  o'clock  I  reached  the  Tithebam  station  in  Liver- 
pool.  Ever  since  until  now.  May  17th,  I  have  em- 
ployed my  leisure  moments  in  scribbling  off  the  jour- 
nal of  my  tour ;  but  it  has  greatly  lost  by  not  having 
been  written  daily,  as  the  scenes  and  occurrences  were 
fresh.  The  most  picturesque  points  can  be  seized  m 
no  other  way,  and  the  hues  of  the  affair  fade  as  quickly 


1856.]  LIVERPOOL. 

as  those  of  a  dying  dolphin ;  or  as,  acoording  to  Au* 
dubon,  the  plumage  of  a  dead  bird. 

One  thing  that  struck  me  as  much  as  anything  else 
in  the  Hi^ilands  I  had  forgotten  to  put  down.  In 
our  walk  at  Balloch,  along  the  road  within  view  of 
Loch  Lomond  and  the  neighboring  hills,  it  was  a  brill- 
iant sunshiny  afternoon,  and  I  never  saw  any  atmos- 
phere so  beautiful  as  that  among  the  mountains.  It 
was  a  clear,  transparent,  ethereal  blue,  as  distinct  as 
a  vapor,  and  yet  by  no  means  vaporous,  but  a  pure, 
crystalline  medium.  I  have  witnessed  nothing  like 
this  among  the  Berkshire  hills  nor  elsewhere. 

York  is  full  of  old  churches,  some  of  them  very  an- 
tique in  appearance,  the  stones  weather-worn,  their 
edges  rounded  by  time,  blackened,  and  with  all  tl^ 
tokens  of  sturdy  and  age-long  decay ;  and  in  some  of 
them  I  noticed  windows  quite  full  of  old  painted  glass^ 
a  dreary  kind  of  minute  patchwork,  all  of  one  dark 
and  dusty  hue,  when  seen  from  the  outside.  Yet  had 
I  seen  tiiem  from  the  interior  of  the  church,  there 
doubtless  would  have  been  rich  and  varied  apparitions 
of  saints  with  their  glories  round  their  heads,  and 
bright-winged  angels,  and  perhaps  even  the  Almighty 
Father  himself,  so  far  as  conceivable  and  representa- 
ble  by  human  powers.  It  requires  light  from  heaven 
to  make  them  visible.  If  the  church  were  merely  il- 
luminated from  the  inside,  —  that  is,  by  what  light  a 
man  can  get  from  his  own  understanding,  —  the  pic- 
tures would  be  invisible,  or  wear  at  best  but  a  misera- 
ble aspect. 

LIVERPOOL. 

May  24th,  —  Day  before  yesterday  I  had  a  call  at 
the  Consulate  from  one  of  the  Potentates  of  the  Earth, 


284  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [18561 

—  a  woolly-haired  negro,  rather  thin  and  spare,  be- 
tween forty  and  fifty  years  of  age,  plainly  dressed ;  at 
the  first  glimpse  of  whom,  I  could  readily  have  mis- 
taken him  for  some  ship's  steward,  seeking  to  enter  a 
complaint  of  his  captain.  However,  this  was  Presi^ 
dent  Koberts,  of  Liberia,  introduced  by  a  note  from 
Mrs.  O'SulliVan,  whom  he  has  recently  met  in  Ma» 
deira.  I  was  rather  favorably  impressed  with  him; 
for  his  deportment  was  very  simple,  and  without  any 
of  the  flourish  and  embroidery  which  a  negro  might  be 
likely  to  assume  on  finding  himself  elevated  from  sla- 
very to  power.  He  is  rather  shy,  —  reserved,  at  least, 
and  undemonstrative,  yet  not  harshly  so,  —  in  fine, 
with  manners  that  offer  no  prominent  points  for  notice 
or  criticism ;  although  I  felt,  or  thought  I  felt,  tiiat 
his  color  was  continually  before  his  mind,  and  that  he 
walks  cautiously  among  men,  as  conscious  that  every 
new  introduction  is  a  new  experiment.  He  is  not  in 
the  slightest  degree  an  interesting  man  (so  far  as  I 
discovered  in  a  very  brief  interview),  apart  from  his 
position  and  history ;  his  face  is  not  striking,  nor  so 
agreeable  as  if  it  were  jet  black;  but  there  may  be 
miles  and  miles  of  depth  in  him  which  I  know  nothing 
of.  Our  conversation  was  of  the  most  unimportant 
character;  for  he  had  called  merely  to  deliver  the 
note,  and  sat  only  a  few  minutes,  during  which  he 
merely  responded  to  my  observations,  and  originated 
no  remarks.  Intelligence,  discretion,  tact,  —  these  are 
probably  his  traits ;  not  force  of  character  and  inde- 
pendence. 

The  same  xlay  I  took  the  rail  from  the  Lime  Street 
station  for 


1866.]  MANCHESTER.  285 

MANCHESTEB, 

to  meet  Bennoch,  who  had  asked  me  thither  to  dine 
with  him.  I  had  never  visited  Manchester  before, 
though  now  so  long  resident  within  twenty  miles  of 
it ;  neither  is  it  particularly  worth  visiting,  unless  for 
the  sake  of  its  factories,  which  I  did  not  go  to  see.  It 
is  a  dingy  and  heavy  town,  with  very  much  the  aspect 
of  Liverpool,  being,  like  the  latter,  built  almost  en- 
tirely within  the  present  century.  I  stopped  at  the 
Albion  Hotel,  and,  as  Bennoch  was  out,  I  walked  forth 
to  view  the  city,  and  made  only  such  observations  as 
are  recorded  above.  Opposite  the  hotel  stands  the  In« 
firmary,  —  a  very  large  edifice,  which,  when  erected, 
was  on  the  outskirts,  or  perhaps  in  the  rural  suburbs, 
of  the  town,  but  it  is  now  almost  in  its  centre.  In  the 
enclosed  space  before  it  stands  the  statue  of  Peel,  and 
sits  a  statue  of  Dr.  Dalton,  the  celebrated  chemist, 
who  was  a  native  of  Manchester. 

Eeturning  to  the  hotel,  I  sat  down  in  the  room 
where  we  were  to  dine,  and  in  due  time  Bennoch 
made  his  appearance,  with  the  same  glow  and  friendly 
warmth  in  his  face  that  I  had  left  burning  there  when 
we  parted  in  London.  If  this  man  has  not  a  heart, 
then  no  man  ever  had.  I  like  him  inexpressibly  for 
his  heart  and  for  his  intellect,  and  for  his  flesh  and 
blood;  and  if  he  has  faults,  I  do  not  know  them,  nor 
care  to  know  them,  nor  value  him  the  less  if  I  did 
know  them.  He  went  to  his  room  to  dress ;  and  in 
the  mean  time  a  middle-aged,  dark  man,  of  pleasant 
aspect,  with  black  hair,  black  eyebrows,  and  bright, 
dark  eyes  came  in,  limping  a  little,  but  not  much. 
He  seemed  not  quite  a  man  of  the  world,  a  little  shy 
m  manner,  yet  he  addressed  me  kindly  and  sociably 


286  ENGLISH  NOTE-^BOOKS.  [186«. 

I  guessed  him  to  be  Mr.  Charles  Swain,  the  poet, 
whom  Mr.  Bennoch  had  invited  to  dinner.  Soon 
came  another  guest,  whom  Mr.  Swain  introduced  to 

me  as  Mr. ^  editor  of  the  Manchester  "  Examiner.'* 

Then  came  Bennoch,  who  made  us  all  regularly  ac- 
quainted,  or  took  for  granted  that  we  were  so;  and 

lastly  appeared  a  Mr.  W ,  a  merchant  in  Man* 

cheater,  and  a  very  intelligent  man ;  and  the  party  was 
then  complete.  Mr.  Swain,  the  poet,  is  not  a  man  of 
fluent  conversation ;  he  said,  indeed,  very  little,  but 
gave  me  the  impression  of  amiability  and  simplicily 
of  character,  with  much  feeling. 

Mr.  W is  a  very  sensible  man.     He  has  spent 

two  or  three  years  in  America,  and  seems  to  have 
formed  juster  conclusions  about  us  than  most  of  his 
countrymen  do.  He  is  the  only  Englishman,  I  think, 
whom  I  have  met,  who  fairly  acknowledges  that  the 
English  do  cherish  doubt,  jealousy,  suspicion,  in  short, 
an  unfriendly  feeling,  towards  the  Americans.  It  is 
wonderful  how  every  American,  whatever  class  of  the 
English  he  mingles  with,  is  conscious  of  this  feeling, 

and  how  no  Englishman,  except  this  sole  Mr.  W ^ 

will  confess  it.  He  expressed  some  very  good  ideas, 
too,  about  the  English  and  American  press,  and  the 
reasons  why  the  "Times"  may  fairly  be  taken  as 
the  exponent  of  British  feeling  towards  us,  while  the 
"New  York  Herald,"  immense  as  its  circulation  is, 
can  be  considered,  in  no  similar  degree  or  kind,  the 
American  exponent. 

We  sat  late  at  table,  and  after  the  other  guests  had 
retired,  Bennoch  and  I  had  some  very  friendly  talk, 
and  he  proposed  that  on  my  wife's  return  we  should 
take  up  our  residence  in  his  house  at  Blackheath,  while 


1856.]  MANCHESTER.  287 

Mrs.  Bennoch  and  himself  ware  absent  for  two  mondis 
on  a  trip  to  Germany.  If  his  wife  and  mine  ratify  the 
idea,  we  will  do  so. 

The  next  morning  we  went  oat  to  see  the  Exchange, 
and  whateyer  was  noticeable  about  the  town.  Time 
being  brief,  I  did  not  visit  the  cathedral,  which,  I  be* 
lieve,  is  a  thousand  years  old.  There  are  many  hand- 
some shops  in  Manchester;  and  we  went  into  one 
establishment,  devoted  to  pictures,  engravings,  and 
decorative  art  generally,  which  is  most  perfect  and 
extensive.  The  firm,  if  I  remember,  is  that  of  the 
Messrs.  Agnew,  and,  though  originating  here,  they 
have  now  a  house  in*  London.  Here  I  saw  some  in- 
teresting objects,  purchased  by  them  at  the  recent  sale 
of  the  Rogers  collection  ;  among  other  things,  a  slight 
pencil  and  water-color  sketch  by  Raphael.  An  unfin- 
ished affair,  done  in  a  moment,  as  this  must  have  been, 
seems  to  bring  us  closer  to  the  hand  that  did  it  than 
the  most  elaborately  painted  picture  can.  Were  I  to 
see  the  Transfiguration,  Raphael  would  still  be  at  the 
distance  of  centuries.  Seeing  this  little  sketch,  I  had 
him  very  near  me.  I  know  not  why,  —  perhaps  it 
might  be  fancied  that  he  had  only  laid  down  the  pen- 
cil for  an  instant,  and  would  take  it  up  again  in  a  mo- 
ment more.  I  likewise  saw  a  copy  of  a  handsome, 
illustrated  edition  of  "  Childe  Harold,"  presented  by 
old  John  Murray  to  Mr.  Rogers,  with  an  inscription 
on  the  fly-leaf,  purporting  that  it  was  a  token  of  grati- 
tude from  the  publisher,  because,  when  everybody  else 
thought  him  imprudent  in  giving  four  hundred  guineas 
for  the  poem,  Mr.  Rogers  told  him  it  would  turn  out 
the  best  bargain  he  ever  made. 

There  was  a  new  picture  by  Millais,  the  distin- 
guished Pre-Raphaelite  artist,  representing  a  melan* 


288  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1866. 

choly  parting  between  two  lovers.  The  lady's  face 
had  a  great  deal  of  sad  and  ominous  expression  ;  but 
an  old  brick  wall,  overrun  with  foliage,  was  so  exqui- 
sitely and  elaborately  wrought  that  it  was  hardly  pos- 
sible to  look  at  the  personages  of  the  picture.  Every 
separate  leaf  of  the  climbing  and  clustering  shrubbery 
was  painfully  made  out ;  and  the  wall  was  reality  it- 
self, with  the  weather-stains,  and  the  moss,  and  the 
crumbling  Ume  between  the  bricks.  It  is  not  well  to 
be  so  perfect  in  the  inanimate,  unless  the  artist  can 
likewise  make  man  and  woman  as  lifelike,  and  to  as 
great  a  depth,  too,  as  the  Creator  does. 

fiennoch  left  town  for  some  place  in  Yorkshire,  and 
I  for  Liverpool.  I  asked  him  to  come  and  dine  with 
me  at  the  Adelphi,  meaning  to  ask  two  or  three  peo- 
ple to  meet  him  ;  but  he  had  other  engagements,  and 
could  not  spare  a  day  at  present,  though  he  promises 
to  come  before  long. 

Dining  at  Mr.  Rathbone's  one  evening  last  week 
(May  21st),  it  was  mentioned  that 

BOEKOW, 

author  of  "The  Bible  in  Spain,"  is  supposed  to  be  of 
gypsy  descent  by  the  mother's  side.  Hereupon  Mr. 
Martineau  mentioned  that  he  had  been  a  schoolfellow 
of  Borrow,  and  though  he  had  never  heard  of  his 
gypsy  blood,  he  thought  it  probable,  from  Borrow's 
traits  of  character.  He  said  that  Borrow  had  once 
run  away  from  school,  and  carried  with  him  a  party 
of  other  boys,  meaning  to  lead  a  wandering  life. 

If  an  Englishman  were  individually  acquainted  with 
sdl  our  twenty-five  millions  of  Americans,  and  likiie    ^ 


185«.J  LIVERPOOL.  289 

e'vterp  one  of  tbem^  and  believed  that  eaoh  man  of  ihose 
millions  was  a  Christian,  honest,  upright,  and  kind, 
he  would  doubt,  despise,  and  hate  them  in  the  aggre- 
gate^ however  he  might  love'  aad  honor  i^e  individ- 
uals. 

Captain and  his  wife  Oakum :  they  spent  an 

evening  at  Mrs.  B 's.  The  Captain  is  a  Marble- 
head  man  by  birth,  not  far  from  sixty  years  old ;  very 
talkative  and  anecdotic  in  regard  to  his  adventures .; 
funny,  good-humored,  and  full  of  various  nautical  ex- 
perience. Oakum  (it  is  a  nickname  which  he  gives 
his  wife)  is  an  inconceivably  tall  woman,  — taller  than 
he,  — six  feet,  at  least,  and  with  a  well-proportioned 
largeness  in  all  respects,  but  looks  kind  and  good,  gen- 
tle, smiling,  —  and  almost  any  other  woman  might  sit 
like  a  baby  on  her  lap;  She  does  not  look  at  all  aw- 
ful and  belligerent,  like  the  massive  English  women 
one  often  sees.  You  at  once  feel  her  to  be  a  benevo- 
lent giantess,  and  apprehend  no  harm  from  her.  She 
is  a  lady,  and  perfectly  well  mannered,  but  with  a  sort 
of  naturalness  and  simplicity  that  becomes  her;  for 
any  the  slightest  affectation  would  be  so  magiiified  in 
her  vast  personality  that  it  would  be  absolutely  Hie 
height  of  the  ridicul()tis.  This  wedded  pair  have  no 
children,  and  Oakum  has  so  long  acc(»npanied  her 
husband  on  his  voyages  that  I  suppose  by  this  time 
she  could  command  a  ship  as  well  as  he.  They  sat 
till  pretty  late,  diffusing  cheerfulness  all  about  them, 
and  then,  "  Come,  Oakum,"  cried  the  Captain,  "  we 
must  hoist  sail ! "  and  up  rose  Oakum  to  the  ceiling, 
and  moved  tower-like  to  the  door,  looking  down  with 
a  benignant  smUe  on  the  poor  little  pygmy  women 
about  her.     "Six  feet,"  did  I  say?     Why,  she  must 

VOL.  VIII.  19 


290  ENGLISH  NOTE^BOOKS.  [1856. 

be  seven,  eight,  nine ;  and,  whatever  be  her  size,  she 
is  as  good  as  she  is  big. 

June  11th.  —  Monday  night  (9th),  just  as  I  was  re- 
tiring, I  received  a  telegraphic  message  announcing 
my  wife's  arrival  at 

SOUTHAMPTON. 

So,  the  next  day,  I  arranged  the  consular  business 

for  an  absence  of  ten  days,  and  set  forth  with  J •, 

and  reached  Birmingham,  between  eight  and  nine, 
evening.  We  put  up  at  the  Queen's  Hotel,  a  very 
large  establishment,  contiguous  to  the  railway.  Next 
morning  we  left  Birmingham,  and  made  our  first  stage 
to  Leamington,  where  we  had  to  wait  nearly  an  hour, 
which  we  spent  in  wandering  through  some  of  the 
streets  that  had  been  familiar  to  us  last  year.  Leam- 
ington is  certainly  a  beautiful  town,  new,  bright,  clean, 
and  as  unlike  as  possible  to  the  business  towns  of 
England.  However,  the  sun  was  burning  hot,  and  I 
could  almost  have  fancied  myself  in  America.  From 
Leamington  we  took  tickets  for  Oxford,  where  we 
were  obKged  to  make  another  stop  of  two  hours ;  and 
these  we  employed  to  what  advantage  we  could,  driv- 
ing up  into  town,  and  straying  hither  and  thither,  till 

J ^'s  weariness  weighed  upon  me,  and  I  adjourned 

with  him  to  a  hotel.  Oxford  is  an  ugly  old  town,  of 
crooked  and  irregular  streets,  gabled  houses,  mostly 
plastered  of  a  buff  or  yellow  hue ;  some  new  fronts ; 
and  as  for  the  buildings  of  the  University,  they  seem 
to  be  scattered  at  random,  without  any  reference  to 
one  another.  I  passed  through  an  old  gateway  of 
Christ  Church,  and  looked  at  its  enclosed  square,  and 
that  is,  in  truth,  pretty  much  all  I  then  saw  of  the 


1866.]  TO  SOUTHAMPTON.  291 

University  of  Oxford.  From  Christ  Church  we  ram- 
bled along  a  street  that  led  us  to  a  bridge  across  the 
Isis ;  and  we  saw  many  row-boats  lying  in  the  river, 
—  the  lightest  craft  imaginable,  unless  it  were  an  In- 
dian canoe.  The  Isis  is  but  a  narrow  stream,  and 
with  a  sluggish  current.  I  believe  the  students  of 
Oxford  are  famous  for  their  skill  in  rowing. 

To  me  as  well  as  to  J the  hot  streets  were  ter- 
ribly oppressive ;  so  we  went  into  the  Roebuck  Hotel, 
where  we  found  a  cool  and  pleasant  coffee-room.  The 
entrance  to  this  hotel  is  through  an  arch,  opening  from 
High  Street,  and  giving  admission  into  a  paved  court, 
the  buildings  all  around  being  part  of  the  establish- 
ment,—  old  edifices  with  pointed  gables  and  old-fash- 
ioned projecting  windows,  but  all  in  fine  repair,  and 
wearing  a  most  quiet,  retired,  and  comfortable  aspect. 
The  court  was  set  all  round  with  flowers,  growing  in 
pots  or  large  pedestalled  vases ;  on  one  side  was  the 
coffee-room,  and  all  the  other  public  apartments,  and 
the  other  side  seemed  to  be  taken  up  by  the  sleeping- 
chambers  and  parlors  of  the  guests.  This  arrange- 
ment of  an  inn,  I  presume,  is  very  ancient,  and  it  re- 
sembles what  I  have  seen  in  the  hospitals,  free  schools, 
and  other  charitable  establishments  in  the  old  Eng- 
lish towns;  and,  indeed,  all  large  houses  were  ar- 
ranged on  somewhat  the  same  principle. 

By  and  by  two  or  three  young  men  came  in,  in 
wide-awake  hats,  and  loose,  blouse -like,  summerish 
garments;  and  from  their  talk  I  found  them  to  be 
students  of  the  University,  although  their  topics  of 
conversation  were  almost  entirely  horses  and  boats. 
One  of  them  sat  down  to  cold  beef  and  a  tankard  of 
ale;  the  other  two  drank  a  tankard  of  ale  together, 
and  went  away  without  paying  for  it,  —  rather  to  the 


ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [186«. 

waiter's  discontent.  Students  are  veiy  much  alike, 
all  the  world  over,  and,  I  suppose,  in  all  time ;  but  I 
doubt  whether  many  of  my  fellows  at  college  would 
have  gone  oflF  without  paying  for  their  host. 

We  reached  Southampton  between  seven  and  eight 
o'clock.     I  cannot  write  to^ay. 

Jun&  \btk.  —  The  first  day  after  we  reached  South- 
ampton was  sunny  and  pleasant ;  but:  we  made  little  use 

of  the  fine  weather,  except  that  S and  I  walked 

once  along  the  High  Street,  and  J^ and  I  took  a 

little  ramble  about  town  in  the  afternoon.  The  next 
day  there  was  a  high  and  disagreeable  wind,  and  I  did 
not  once  stir  out  of  the  house.  The  third  day,  too,  I 
kept  entirely  within  doors,  it  being  a  storm  of  wind 
and  rain.  The  Castle  Hotel  stands  within  fifty  yards 
of  the  water-side ;  so  that  this  gusty  day  showed  itself 
to  the  utmost  advantage,  —  the  vessels  pitching  and 
tossing  at  their  moorings,  the  waves  breaking  white 
out  of  a  tumultuous  gray  surface,  the  opposite  shore 
glooming  mistily  at  the  distance  of  a  mile  or  two ;  and 
on  the  hither  side  boatmen  and  seafaring  people  scud- 
ding about  the  pier  in  waterproof  clothes  ;  and  in  the 
street,  before  the  hotel  door,  a  cabman  or  two,  stand«- 
ing  drearily  beside  his  horse.  But  we  were  simny 
within  doors. 

Yesterday  it  was  breezy,  sunny,  shadowy,  showery ; 
and  we  ordered  a  cab  to  take  us  to  Clifton  Villa,  to 

call  on  Mrs. ,  a  friend  of  B— — 's,  who  called  on 

us  the  day  after  our  arrival.     Just  as  we  were  ready 

to  start,  Mrs. again  called,  and  accompanied  us 

back  to  her  house.  It  is  in  Shirley,  about  two  miles 
from  Southampton  pier,  and  is  a  pleasant  suburban 
villa,  with  a  pretty  ornamented  lawn  and.  shrubbery 


1866,]  SALISBURY.  298 

about  it.     Mrs. is  an  instructress  of  young  la- 

di^  ;  and  at  B— — 's  suggestion,  she  is  willing  to  re- 
ceive us  for  two  or  three  weeks,  during  the  vacation, 
until  we  are  ready  to  go  to  London.  She  seems  to  be 
a  pleasant  and  sensible  woman,  and  to-morrow  we 
shall  decide  whether  to  go  there.  There  was  nothing 
very  remarkable  in  this  drive ;  and,  indeed,  my  stay 
hereabouts  thus  far  has  been  very  barren  of  sights  and 
incidents  externally  interesting,  though  the  inner  life 
has  been  rich. 

Southampton  is  a  very  pretly  town,  and  has  not  the 
dinginess  to  which  I  have  been  accustomed  in  many 
English  towns.  The  High  Street  reminds  me  very 
much  of  American  streets  in  its  'general  effect ;  the 
houses  being  mostly  stuccoed  white  or  light,  and  cheer- 
ful in  aspect,  though  doubtless  they  are  centuries  old 
at  heart.  The  old  gateway,  which  I  presume  I  have 
mentioned  in  describing  my  former  visit  to  South- 
ampton, stands  across  High  Street,  about  in  ihe  centre 
of  the  town,  and  is  almost  the  only  token  of  antiquily 
that  presents  itself  to  the  eye. 

SALISBUEY. 

June  nth.  —  Yesterday  morning,  June  16th,  S f, 

Mrs. ^  and  I  took  the  rail  for  Salisbury,  where  we 

duly  arrived  without  any  accident  or  ajiything  notice- 
able, except  the  usual  verdure  and  richness  of  an  Eng- 
lish summer  landscape.  From  the  railway  station  we 
walked  up  into  Salisbury,  with  the  tall  spire  (four 
hundred  feet  high)  of  the  cathedral  before  our  eyes. 
Salisbury  is  an  antique  city,  but  with  streets  more 
regular  than  I  have  seen  in  most  old  towns,  and  the 
houses  have  a  more  picturesque  aspect  than  those  of 
Oxford,  far  instance,  where  almost  rail  aore  mean-look 


294  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1866. 

ing  alike,  — though  I  could  hardly  judge  of  Oxford 
on  that  hot,  weary  day.  Through  one  or  more  of  the 
streets  there  runs  a  swift,  clear  little  stream,  which, 
being  close  to  the  pavement,  and  bordered  with  stone, 
may  be  called,  I  suppose,  a  kennel,  though  possessing 
the  transparent  purity  of  a  rustic  rivulet.  It  is  a 
brook  in  city  garb.  We  passed  under  the  pointed  arch 
of  a  gateway,  which  stands  in  one  of  the  principal 
streets,  and  soon  came  in  front  of 

THE  CATHEDBAL. 

I  do  not  remember  any  cathedral  with  so  fine  a  site 
as  this,  rising  up  out  of  the  centre  of  a  beautiful  green, 
extensive  enough  to  show  its  full  proportions,  relieved 
and  insulated  from  all  other  patchwork  and  imperti- 
nence of  rusiy  edifices.  It  is  of  gray  stone,  and  looks 
as  perfect  as  when  just  finished,  and  with  the  perfec- 
tion, too,  that  could  not  have  come  in  less  than  six 
centuries  of  venerableness,  with  a  view  to  which  these 
edifices  seem  to  have  been  built.  A  new  cathedral 
would  lack  the  last  touch  to  its  beauty  and  grandeur. 
It  needs  to  be  mellowed  and  ripened,  like  some  pic- 
tures ;  although  I  suppose  this  awfulness  of  antiquity 
was  supplied,  in  the  minds  of  the  generation  that  built 
cathedrals,  by  the  sanctity  which  they  attributed  to 
them.  Salisbury  Cathedral  is  far  more  beautiful  than 
that  of  York,  the  exterior  of  which  was  really  disagree- 
able to  my  eye  ;  but  this  mighty  spire  and  these  mul- 
titudinous gray  pinnacles  and  towers  ascend  towards 
heaven  with  a  kind  of  natural  beauty,  not  as  if  man 
had  contrived  them.  They  might  be  fancied  to  have 
grown  up,  just  as  the  spires  of  a  tuft  of  grass  do,  at 
the  same  time  that  they  have  a  law  of  propriety  and 
regularity  among  themselves.    The  tall  spire  is  of  suck 


1856.]  SALISBURY.  296 

admirable  proportion  that  it  does  not  seem  gigantic ; 
and  indeed  the  effect  of  the  whole  edifice  is  of  beauty 
rather  than  weight  and  massiveness.  Perhaps  the 
bright,  balmy  sunshine  in  which  we  saw  it  contributed 
to  give  it  a  tender  glory,  and  to  soften  a  little  its  maj- 
esty. 

When  we  went  in,  we  heard  the  organ,  the  forenoon 
service  being  near  conclusion.  If  I  had  never  seen  the 
interior  of  York  Cathedral,  I  should  have  been  quite 
satisfied,  no  doubt,  with  the  spaciousness  of  this  nave 
and  these  side  aisles,  and  the  height  of  their  arches, 
and  the  girth  of  these  pillars  ;  but  with  that  recollec- 
tion in  my  mind  they  fell  a  little  short  of  grandeur. 
The  interior  is  seen  to  disadvantage,  and  in  a  way  the 
builder  never  meant  it  to  be  seen ;  because  there  is 
little  or  no  painted  glass,  nor  any  such  mystery  as  it 
makes,  but  only  a  colorless  common  daylight,  reveal- 
ing everything  without  remorse.  There  is  a  general 
light  hue,  moreover,  like  that  of  whitewash,  over  the 
whole  of  the  roof  and  walls  of  the  interior,  pillars; 
monuments,  and  all ;  whereas,  originally,  every  pillar 
was  polished,  and  the  ceiling  was  ornamented  in  brill- 
iant colors,  and  the  light  came,  many-hued,  through 
the  windows,  on  all  this  elaborate  beauty,  in  lieu  of 
which  there  is  nothing  now  but  space. 

Between  the  pillars  that  separate  the  nave  from  the 
side  aisles,  there  are  ancient  tombs,  most  of  which 
have  recumbent  statues  on  them.  One  of  these  is 
Longsword,  Earl  of  Salisbury,  son  of  Fair  Kosamond, 
in  chain  mail ;  and  there  are  many  other  warriors  and 
bishops,  and  one  cross-legged  Crusader,  and  on  one 
tombstone  a  recumbent  skeleton,  which  I  have  like- 
wise seen  in  two  or  three  other  cathedrals.  The  pave- 
ment of  the  aisles  and  nave  is  laid  in  great  part  with 


296  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

flat  tombstones,  the  inscriptions  on  which  are  half  ob- 
literated, and  on  the  walls,  especially  in  the  transepts, 
there  are  tablets,  among  which  I  saw  one  to  the  poet 
Bowles,  who  was  a  canon  of  this  cathedraL  The  ec- 
clesiastical dignitaries  bury  themselves  and  monument 
themselves  to  the  exclusion  of  almost  everybody  else, 
in  these  latter  times  ;  though  still,  as  oi  old,  the  war- 
rior has  his  place.  A  young  officer,  slain  in  the  In- 
dian wars,  was  memorialized  by  a  tablet,  and  may  be 
remembered  by  it,  six  hundred  years  hence,  as  we  now 
remember  the  old  Knights  and  Crusaders.  It  de- 
serves to  be  mentioned  that  I  saw  one  or  two  noses 
still  unbroken  among  these  recumbent  figures.  Most 
of  the  antique  statues,  on  close  examination,  proved  to 
be  almost  entirely  covered  with  names  and  initials, 
scratched  over  the  once  polished  surface.  The  cathe- 
dral and  its  relics  must  have  been  far  less  carefully 
watched,  at  some  former  period,  tiian  now. 

Between  the  nave  and  the  choir,  as  usual,'  there  is  a 
screen  that  half  destroys  the  majesty  of  the  building, 
by  abridging  the  spectator  of  the  long  vista  which  he 
might  otherwise  have  of  the  whole  interior  at  a  glance. 
We  peeped  through  the  barrier,  and  saw  some  elabo- 
rate monuments  in  the  chancel  beyond ;  but  the  doors 
of  the  screen  are  kept  locked?  so  that  the  verges  may 
raise  a  revenue  by  showing  strangers  through  the  rich- 
est part  of  the  cathedral.  By  and  by  one  of  these  ver- 
gers came  through  the  screen,  with  a  gentleman  and 
lady  whom  he  was  taking  round,  and  we  joined  our- 
selves to  the  party.  He  showed  us  into  the  cloisters, 
which  had  long  been  neglected  and  ruinous,  until  the 
time  of  Bishop  Dennison,  the  last  prelate,  who  has 
been  but  a  few  years  dead.  This  Bighop  has  repaired 
and  restored  the  cloisters  in  faithful  a^ereiic^  to  tb^ 


1856.]  SALISBURY.  297 

original  plan ;  and  they  now  form  a  most  delightful 
walk  about  a  pleasant  and  verdant  enclosure,  in  the 
centre  of  which  sleeps  good  Bishop  Dennison,  with  a 
wife  on  either  side  of  him,  all' three  beneath  broad  flat 
stones.  Most  cloisters  are  darksome  and  grim;  but 
these  have  a  broad  paved  walk  beneath  the  vista  of 
arches,  and  are  light,  airy,  and  cheerful;  and  from 
one  comer  you  can  get  the  best  possible  view  of  the 
whole  height  and  beautiful  proportion  of  the  cathedral 
spire.  One  side  of  this  cloistered  walk  seems  to  be 
the  length  of  the  nave  of  the '  cathedral.  There  is  a 
square  of  four  such  sides ;  and  of  places  for  meditar 
tion,  grave,  yet  not  too  sombre,  it  seemed  to  me  one  of 
the  best.  While  we  stayed  there,  a  jackdaw  was  walk- 
ing to  and  fro  across  the  grassy  enclosure,  and  haunt- 
ing around  the  good  Bishop's  grave.  He  was  clad  in 
black,  and  looked  like  a  feathered  ecclesiastic ;  but  I 
know  not  whether  it  were  Bishop  Dennison's  ghost,  or 
that  of  some  old  monk. 

On  one  side  of  the  cloisters,  and  contiguous  to  the 
main  body  of  the  cathedral,  stands  the  chapter-house. 
Bishop  Dennison  had  it  much  at  heart  to  repair  this 
part  of  the  holy  edifice ;  and,  if  I  mistake  not,  did  be- 
gin the  work ;  for  it  had  been  long  ruinous,  and  in 
Cromwell's  time  his  dragoons  stationed  their  horses 
there.  Little  progress,  however,  had  been  made  in 
the  repairs  when  the  Bishop  died ;  and  it  was  decided 
to  restore  the  building  in  his  honor,  and  by  way  of 
monument  to  him.  The  repairs  are  now  nearly  com- 
pleted ;  and  the  interior  of  this  chapter-house  gave  me 
the  first  idea,  anywise  adequate,  of  the  splendor  of 
these  Gothic  church  edifices.  The  roof  is  sustained 
by  one  great  central  pillar  of  polished  marble,  —small 
pillars  clustered  about  a  great  central  column,  which 


298  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

rises  to  tiie  ceiling,  and  there  gushes  out  with  various 
beauty,  that  overflows  all  the  walls;  as  if  the  fluid 
idea  had  sprung  out  of  that  fountain,  and  grown  solid 
in  what  we  see.  The  pavement  is  elaborately  orna- 
mented; the  ceiling  is  to  be  brilliantly  gilded  and 
painted,  as  it  was  of  yore,  and  the  tracery  and  sculp- 
tures around  the  walls  are  to  be  faithfully  renewed 
from  what  remains  of  the  original  patterns. 

After  viewing  the  chapter-house,  the  verger  —  an 
elderly  man  of  grave,  benign  manner,  clad  in  black 
and  talking  of  the  cathedral  and  the  monuments  as 
if  he  loved  them  —  led  us  again  into  the  nave  of  the 
cathedral,  and  thence  within  the  screen  of  the  choir. 
The  screen  is  as  poor  as  possible,  —  mere  barren 
wood-work,  without  the  least  attempt  at  beauty.  In 
the  chancel  there  are  some  meagre  patches  of  old 
glass,  and  some  of  modern  date,  not  very  well  worth 
looking  at.  We  saw  several  interesting  monuments 
in  this  part  of  the  cathedral,  —  one  belonging  to  the 
ducal  family  of  Somerset,  and  erected  in  the  reign  of 
James  I. ;  it  is  of  marble,  and  extremely  splendid  and 
elaborate,  with  kneeling  figures  and  all  manner  of 
magnificence,  —  more  than  I  have  seen  in  any  monu- 
ment except  that  of  Mary  of  Scotland  in  Westminster 
Abbey.  The  more  ancient  tombs  are  also  very  numer- 
ous, and  among  them  that  of  the  Bishop  who  founded 
the  cathedral.  Within  the  screen,  against  the  wall, 
is  erected  a  monument,  by  Chantrey,  to  the  Earl  of 
Malmesbury ;  a  full-length  statue  of  the  Earl  in  a  half- 
recumbent  position,  holding  an  open  volume  and  look- 
ing upward,  —  a  noble  work,  —  a  calm,  wise,  thought- 
ful, firm,  and  not  unbenignant  face.  Beholding  its 
expression,  it  really  was  impossible  not  to  have  f  aitb 
in  the  high  character  of  the  individual  thus  repre 


1866.]  SALISBURY.  299 

sented;  and  I  liave  seldom  felt  this  effect  from  any 
monumental  bust  or  statue,  though  I  presume  it  is  al- 
ways aimed  at. 

I  am  weary  of  tidying  to  describe  cathedrals.  It  is 
utterly  useless ;  there  is  no  possibility  of  giving  the 
general  effect,  or  any  shadow  of  it,  and  it  is  miserable 
to  put  down  a  few  items  of  tombstones,  and  a  bit  of 
glass  from. a  painted  window,  as  if  the  gloom  and 
glory  of  the  edifice  were  thus  to  be  reproduced.  Ca- 
thedrals are  almost  the  only  things  (if  even  those)  that 
have  quite  filled  out  my  ideal  here  in  this  old  world ; 
and  cathedrals  often  make  me  miserable  from  my  in- 
adequacy to  take  them  wholly  in ;  and^  above  all,  I 
despise  myself  when  I  sit  down  to  describe  them. 

We  now  walked  around  the  Close,  which  is  sur- 
rounded by  some  of  the  quaintest  and  comfortablest 
ecclesiastical  residences  that  can  be  imagined.  These 
are  the  dwelling-houses  of  the  Dean  and  the  canons, 
and  .whatever  other  high  officers  compose  the  Bishop's 
staff ;  and  there  was  one  large  brick  mansion,  old,  but 
not  so  ancient  as  the  rest,  which  we  took  to  be  the 
Bishop's  palace.  I  never  beheld  anything  —  I  must 
say  again  —  so  cpsey,  so  indicative  of  domestic  com- 
fort for  whole  centuries  together, — houses  so  fit  to 
live  in  or  to  die  in,  and  whei^  it  would  be  so  pleasant 
to  lead  a  young  wife  beneath  the  antique  portal,  and 
dwell  with  her  till  husband  and  wife  were  patriarchal, 
—  as  these  delectable  old  houses.  They  belong  natu- 
rally to  the  cathedral,  and  have  a  necessary  relation  to 
it,  and  its  sanctity  is  somehow  thrown  over  them  all, 
so  that  they  do  not  quite  belong  to  this  world,  though 
they  look  full  to  overflowing  of  whatever  earthly 
things  are  good  for  man.  These  are  places,  however, 
!n  which  mankind  makes   no   progress;  the  rushing 


ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185* 

ftumull  of  liitman  life  here  subeides  into  a  deep,  qniel 
pool,  with  perhaps  a  gentle  ciTCular  eddy,  but  no  on« 
ward  movement.  The  same  identical  thought,  I  sup- 
pose, goes  round  in  a  slow  whirl  from  one  generation 
to  another,  as  I  hare  seen  a  withered  leaf  do  in  the 
vortex  of  a  brook.  In  the  front  of  the  cathedral  there 
is  a  most  stately  and  beautiful  tree,  which  flings  its 
verdure  upward  to  a  very  lofty  height ;  but  far  above 
it  rises  the  tall  spire,  dwarfing  the  great  tree  by  com- 
parison. 

When  the  cathedral  had  sufficiently  oppressed  us 
with  its  beauty,  we  returned  to  sublunary  matters, 
and  went  wandering  about  Salisbury  in  search  of  a 
luncheon,  which  we  finally  took  in  a  eonfectioiier's 
shop.  Hien  we  inquired  hither  and  thither,  at  various 
livery-stables,  for  a  conveyance  to  Stonehengei)  and  at 
fost  took  a  fly  from  the  Lamb  Hotel.  The  drive  was 
over  a  turnpike  for  the  first  seven  miles,  over  a  bare, 
ridgy  country,  showing  Httle  to  interest  us,  .We 
passed  a  party  of  seven  or  eight  men,  in  a  coarse  uni- 
form dress,  resembling  that  worn  by  convicts,  and  ap- 
parently under  the  guardianship  of  a  stout,  authorita- 
tive, yet  rather  kindly-looking  man  with  a  cane.  Our 
driver  said  that  they  were  lunatics  from  a  neighbtuv 
ing  asylum,  out  for  a  walk. 

Seven  miles  from  Salisbuiy,  we  turned  aside  from 
the  turnpike,  and  drove  two  miles  across  Salisbury 
Plain,  which  is  an  apparently  boundless  extent  of  un- 
enclosed land,  treeless  and  houseless.  It  is  not  exactly 
a  plain,  but  a  green  sea  of  long  and  gentle  swells  and 
subsidences,  affording  views  of  miles  upon  miles  to  a 
very  far  horizon.  We  passed  large  flocks  of  sheep, 
with  the  shepherds  watching  them ;  but  the  dogs  seemed 
to  take  most  of  the  care  of  the  flocks  upon  tibeir  om 


1856.]  STONEHENGE.  801 

Bhouldens  and  would  scamper  to  turn  the  sheep  when 
they  inclined  to  stl'ay  whither  they  should  not ;  and 
then  arose  a  thousand-fold  bleating,  not  unpleasant  to 
the  ear  ^  for  it  did  not  apparently  indicate  any  fear  or 
discomfort  on  the  part  of  Ijie  flock.  The  sheep  and 
lambs  are  all  black-faced,  and  have  a  very  funny  ex^- 
pression.  As  we  drove  over  the  plain  (my  seat  was 
beside  the  driver),  I  saw  at  a  distance  a  cluster  of 
large  gray  stones,  mostly  standing  upright,  and  some 
of  them  slightly  inclined  towards  each  other,  —  very 
irregular,  and  so  far  off  forming  no  very  picturesque 
or  noteworthy  spectacle*  Of  course  I  knew  at  once 
that  this  was 

BTOKEBISSGEj 

and  also  knew  that  the  reality  was  going  to  dwindle 
wofuUy  within  my  ideal,  as  almost  everything  else 
does.  When  we  reached  the  spot,  we  found  a  picnio- 
party  just  finishing  their  dinner,  on  one  of  the  over- 
thrown stones  of  the  druidical  temple ;  and  within  the 
sacred  circle  an  artist  was  painting  a  wretched  daub 
of  the  scene,  and  an  old  shepherd-— the  very  Shep- 
herd of  Salisbury  Plain  —  sat  erect  in  the  centre  of 
the  ruin. 

There  never  was  a  ruder  thing  than  Stonehenge 
made  by  mortal  hands.  It  is  so  very  rude  that  it 
seems  as  if  Nature  and  man  had  worked  upon  it  with 
one  consent,  and  so  it  is  all  the  stranger  and  more  im- 
pressive  from  its  rudeness.  The  spectator  wonders  to 
see  art  and  contrivance,  and  a  regidar  and  even  some- 
what intricate  plan,  beneath  all  the  uncouth  simplicity 
of  this  arrangement  of  rough  stones;  and  certainly, 
whatever  was  the  intellectual  and  scientific  advancCi 
«ient  of  the  people  who  built  Stonehenge,  no  succeed 


802  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

ing  architects  will  ever  have  a  right  to  triumph  over 
them  ;  for  nobody's  work  in  after  times  is  likely  to  en- 
dure till  it  becomes  a  mystery  as  to  who  built  it,  and 
how,  and  for  what  purpose.  Apart  from  the  moral 
considerations  suggested  by  it,  Stonehenge  is  not  very 
well  worth  seeing.  Materially,  it  is  one  of  the  poorest 
of  spectacles,  and  when  complete,  it  must  have  been 
even  less  picturesque  than  now,  —  a  few  huge,  rough 
stones,  very  imperfectly  squared,  standing  on  end,  and 
each  group  of  two  supporting  a  third  large  stone  on 
their  tops;  other  stones  of  the  same  pattern  over- 
thrown and  tumbled  one  upon  another ;  and  the  whole 
comprised  within  a  circuit  of  about  a  hundred  feet 
diameter  ;  the  short,  sheep-cropped  grass  of  Salisbury 
Plain  growing  among  all  these  uncouth  bowlders.  I 
am  not  sure  that  a  misty,  lowering  day  would  not 
have  better  suited  Stonehenge,  as  the  dreary  midpoint 
of  the  great,  desolate,  trackless  plain ;  not  literally 
trackless,  however,  for  the  London  and  Exeter  Road 
passes  within  fifty  yards  of  the  ruins,  and  another 
road  intersects  it. 

After  we  had  been  there  about  an  hour,  there  %ame 
a  horseman  within  the  Druid's  circle, —  evidently  a 
clerical  personage  by  his  white  neckcloth,  though  his 
loose  gray  riding  pantaloons  were  not  quite  in  keep- 
ing.    He  looked  at  us  rather  earnestly,  and  at  last 

addressed  Mrs. ,  and  announced  himself  as  Mr. 

Hinchman,  —  a  clergyman  whom  she  had  been  trying 
to  find  in  Salisbury,  in  order  to  avail  herself  of  him  as 
a  cicerone  ;  and  he  had  now  ridden  hither  to  meet  us. 
He  told  us  that  the  artist  whom  we  f  oimd  here  could 
give  us  more  information  than  anybody  about  Stone- 
henge ;  for  it  seems  he  has  spent  a  great  many  years 
here,  painting  and  selling  his  poor  sketches  to  visitors. 


1856.]  STONEHENGE.  803 

and  also  selling  a  book  which  his  father  wrote  about 
the  remains.  This  man  showed,  indeed,  a  pretty  ac- 
curate acquaintance  with  these  old  stones,  and  pointed 
out  what  is  thought  to  be  the  altar-stone,  and  told  us 
of  some  relation  between  this  stone  and  two  other 
stones,  and  the  rising  of  the  sun  at  midsummer,  which 
might  indicate  that  Stonehenge  .was  a  temple  of  solar 
worship.  He  pointed  out,  too,  to  how  little  depth  the 
stones  were  planted  in  the  .earth,  insomuch  that  I  have 
no  doubt  the  American  frosts  would  overthrow  Stone- 
henge in  a  single  winter ;  and  it  is  wonderful  that  it 
should  have  stood  so  long,  even  in  England.  I  have 
forgotten  what  else  he  said ;  but  I  bought  one  of  his 
books,  and  find  it  a  very  unsatisfactory  performance, 
being  chiefly  taken  up  with  an  attempt  to  prove  these 
remains  to  be  an  antediluvian  work,  constructed,  I 
think  the  author  says,  under  the  superintendence  of 
Father  Adam  himself  1  Before  our  departure  we  were 
requested  to  write  our  names  in  the  album  which  the 
artist  keeps  for  the  purpose  ;  and  he  pointed  out  Ex- 
President  Fillmore's  autograph,  and  those  of  one  or 
two  other  Americans  who  have  been  here  within  a 
short  time.  It  is  a  very  curious  life  that  this  artist 
leads,  in  this  great  solitude,  and  haunting  Stonehenge 
like  the  ghost  of  a  Druid;  but  he  is  a  brisk  little  man, 
and  very  communicative  on  his  one  subject. 

Mr.  Hinchman  rode  with  us  over  the  plain,  and 
pointed  out  Salisbury  spire,  visible  close  to  Stone- 
henge. Under  his  guidance  we  returned  by  a  differ- 
ent road  from  that  which  brought  us  thither,  —  and  a 
much  more  delightful  one.  I  think  I  never  saw  such 
continued  sylvan  beauty  as  this  road  showed  us,  pass- 
ing through  a  good  deal  of  woodland  scenery,  —  fine 
old  trees,  standing  each  within  its  own  space,  and  thus 


804  ENGLISff  NOTE-BOOKS,  [1866, 

having  full  liberty  to  outspread  itself,  and  wax  strong 
and  broad  for  ages,  instead  of  being  crowded,  and  thus 
stifled  and  emaciated,  as  human  beings  are  here,  and 
forest-trees  are  in  America.  Hedges,  too,  and  the 
rich,  rich  verdure  of  England ;  and  villages  f idl  of  pic- 
turesque old  houses,  thatched,  and  ivied,  or  perhaps 
overrun  with  roses, -^  and  a  stately  mansion  in  the 
Elizabethan  style ;  and  a  quiet  stream,  gliding  onward 
without  a  ripple  from  its  own  motion,  but  rippled  by  a 
large  fish  darting  across  it ;  and  over  all  this  scene  a 
gentle,  friendly  sunshine,  not  ardent  enough  to  crisp 
a  single  leaf  or  blade  of  grass.  Nor  must  the  vills^o 
church  be  forgotten,  with  its  square,  battlemented 
tower,  dating  back  to  the  epoch  of  the  Normans.    We 

called  at  a  house  where  one  of  Mrs. 's  pupils  was 

residing  with  her  aunt,  —a  thatched  house  of  two  sto- 
ries high,  built  in  what  was  originally  a  sand-pit,  but 
which,  in  the  course  of  a  good  many  years,  has  been 
transformed  into  the  most  delightful  and  homelike  lit- 
tle nook  almost  that  can  be  found  in  England.  A 
thatched  cottage  suggests  a  very  rude  dwelling  indeed; 
but  this  had  a  pleasant  parlor  and  drawing-room,  and 
((chambers  with  lattice-windows,  opening  close  beneath 
the  thatched  roof ;  and  the  Ihatch  itself  gives  an  air 
to  the  place  as  if  it  were  a  bird's-nest,  or  some  such 
simple  and  natural  habitation.  The  occupants  are  an 
elderly  clergyman,  retired  from  professional  duty,  and 
his  sister;  and  having  nothing  else  to  do,  and  sufB- 
cient  means,  they  employ  themselves  in  beautifying 
this  sweet  little  retreat,  —  planting  new  shrubbery, 
laying  out  new  walks  around  it,  and  helping  Nature 
to  add  continually  another  charm ;  and  Nature  is  cer- 
tainly a  more  genial  playfellow  in  England  thaa  in 
my  own  country.  She  is  always  ready  to  lend  her  aid 
to  any  beautifying  purpose. 


1856.]  ON  TO  LIVERPOOL.  806 

Leaving  tibese  good  people,  who  were  yery  hospi- 
table, giving  tea  and  offering  wine,  we  reached  Salia* 
bury  in  time  to  take  the  train  for  Southampton. 

June  X%ih. — Yesterday  we  left  the  Castle  Hotel, 
after  paying  a  bill  of  £20  for  a  little  more  than  a 
week's  board.  In  Amerioa  we  could  not  very  well 
have  lived  so  simply,  but  we  might  have  lived  luxuri- 
ously for  half  the  money*  This  Castle  Hotel  was  once 
an  old  Soman  castle,  the  landlord  says,  and  the  circu- 
lar sweep  of  the  tower  is  still  seen  towards  the  street, 
although,  being  painted  white,  and  built  up  with  mod- 
em additions,  it  would  not  be  taken  for  an  ancient 
structure.  There  is  a  dungeon  beneath  it,  in  which 
the  landlord  keeps  his  wine, 

J and  I,  quitting  the  hotel,  walked  towards 

Shirley,  along  the  water-side,  leaving  the  rest  of  the 
family  to  follow  in  a  fly.  There  are  many  traces, 
along  the  shore,  of  the  fortifications  by  which  South- 
ampton was  formerly  defended  towards  the  water,  and 
very  probably  their  foundations  may  be  as  ancient 
as  Roman  times*  Our  hotel  was  no  doubt  connected 
with  this  chain  of  defences,  which  seems  to  have  con- 
sisted of  a  succession  of  round  towers,  with  a  wall  ex- 
tending from  one  to  another.  We  saw  two  or  three 
of  these  towers  still  standing,  and  likely  to  stand, 
though  ivy-grown  and  ruinous  at  the  summit,  and  in- 
termixed and  even  amalgamated  with  pot-houses  and 
mean  dwellings ;  and  often,  through  an  antique  arch, 
there  was  a  narrow  doorway,  giving  access  to  the 
house  of  some  sailor  or  laborer  or  artisan,  and  his 
wife  gossiping  at  it  with  her  neighbor,  or  his  children 
playing  about  it. 

After  getting  beyond  the  precincts  of  Southampton 
VOL.  yiiL  ao 


806  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1856. 

our  walk  was  not  very  interesting,  except  to  J- 


wlio  kept  running  down  to  the  verge  of  the  water, 
looking  for  shells  and  sea  insects. 

^une  29^A.  — Yesterday,  28th,  I  left  Liverpool  from 
the  Lime  Street  station ;  an  exceedingly  hot  day  for 
England,  insomuch  that  the  rail  carriages  were  really 
uncomfortable.  I  have  now  passed  over  the  London 
and  Northwestern  Railway  so  often  that  the  northern 
part  of  it  is  very  wearisome,  especially  as  it  has  few 
features  of  interest  even  to  a  new  observer.  At  Staf^ 
ford  —  no,  at  Wolverhampton  —  we  diverged  to  a 
track  which  I  have  passed  over  only  once  before.  We 
stopped  an  hour  and  a  quarter  at  Wolverhampton,  and 
I  walked  up  into  the  town,  which  is  large  and  old,  — 
old,  at  least,  in  its  plan,  or  lack  of  plan,  —  the  streets 
being  irregulai',  and  straggling  over  an  uneven  sur- 
face. Like  many  of  the  English  towns,  it  reminds 
me  of  Boston,  though  dingier.  The  sun  was  so  hot 
that  I  actually  sought  the  shady  sides  of  the  streets ; 
and  this,  of  itself,  is  one  long  step  towards  establishing 
a  resemblance  between  an  English  town  and  an  Amer- 
ican one. 

English  railway  carriages  seem  to  me  more  tire- 
some than  any  other ;  and  I  suppose  it  is  owing  to  the 
greater  motion,  arising  from  their  more  elastic  springs. 
A  slow  train,  too,  like  that  which  I  was  now  in,  is 
more  tiresome  than  a  quick  one,  at  least  to  the  spirits, 
whatever  it  may  be  to  the  body.  We  loitered  along 
through  afternoon  and  evening,  stopping  at  every  lit- 
tie  station,  and  nowhere  getting  to  the  top  of  our 
speed,  till  at  last,  in  the  late  dusk,  we  reached 


1866.]  GLOUCESTER.  807 

GLOUCESTER, 

and  I  put  up  at  the  Wellington  Hotel,  which  is  but  a 
little  way  from  the  station.  I  took  tea  and  a  slice  or 
two  of  ham  in  the  coffee-room,  and  had  a  little  talk 
with  two  people  there ;  one  of  whom,  on  learning  that 
I  was  an  American,  said,  '^  But  I  suppose  you  have 
now  been  in  England  some  time  ?  "  He  meant,  find- 
ing me  not  absolutely  a  savage,  that  I  must  have  bees 
caught  a  good  while  ago.  ... 

The  next  morning  I  went  into  the  city,  the  hotel 
being  on  its  outskirts,  and  rambled  along  in  search  of 
the  cathedral.  Some  church-bells  were  chiming  and 
clashing  for  a  wedding  or  other  festal  occasion,  and  I 
followed  the  sound,  supposing  that  it  might  proceed 
from  the  cathedral,  but  this  was  not  the  case.  It  was 
not  till  I  had  got  to. a  bridge  over  the  Severn,  quite 
out  of  the  town,  that  I  saw  again  its  tower,  and  knew 
how  to  shape  my  course  towards  it. 

I  did  not  see  much  that  was  strange  or  interesting 
in  Gloucester.  It  is  old,  with  a  good  many  of  those 
antique  Elizabethan  houses  with  two  or  three  peaked 
gables  on  a  line  together ;  several  old  churches,  which 
always  cluster  about  a  cathedral,  like  chickens  round 
a  hen ;  a  hospital  for  decayed  tradesmen ;  another  for 
blue-coat  boys ;  a  great  many  butcher's  shops,  scattered 
in  all  parts  of  the  town,  open  in  front,  with  a  counter 
or  dresser  on  which  to  display  the  meat,  just  in  the  old 
fashion  of  Shakespeare's  house.  It  is  a  large  town, 
and  has  a  good  deal  of  liveliness  and  bustle,  in  a  pro- 
vincial way.  In  short,  judging  by  the  sheep,  cattle, 
and  horses,  and  the  people  of  agricultural  aspect  that 
I  saw  about  the  streets,  I  should  think  it  must  have 
been  market-day.    I  looked  here  and  there  for  tiie  old 


808  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [IM^L 

Bell  Inn,  because,  unless  I  misremember,  Fielding 
brings  Tom  Jones  to  this  inn,  while  he  and  Partridge 
were  trayelling  together.  It  is  still  extant;  for,  on 
my  arrival  the  night  before,  a  runner  from  it  had 
adted  me  to  go  thither ;  but  I  forgot  its  celebrity  at 
the  moment.  I  saw  nothing  of  it  in  my  rambles  about 
Gloucester,  but  at  last  I  found 

THE  CATHEDRAL, 

though  I  f oimd  no  point  from  which  a  good  view  of 
the  exterior  can  be  seen. 

It  has  a  very  beautiful  and  rich  outside,  however, 
and  a  lofty  tower,  very  large  and  ponderous,  but  so 
finished  off,  and  adorned  with  pinnacles,  and  all  man- 
ner of  architectural  devices, — wherewith  these  old 
builders  knew  how  to  alleviate  their  massive  struc- 
tures, —  that  it  seems  to  sit  lightly  in  the  air.  The 
porch  was  open,  and  some  workmen  were  trundling 
barrows  into  the  nave ;  so  I  followed,  and  found  t^  o 
young  women  sitting  just  within  the  porch,  one  of 
whom  .offered  to  show  me  round  the  cathedral.  There 
was  a  great  dust  in  the  nave,  arising  from  the  opera- 
tions of  the  workmen.  They  had  been  laying  a  new 
pavement,  and  scraping  away  the  plaster,  which  had 
heretofore  been  laid  over  the  pillars  and  walls.  The 
piUars  come  out  from  the  process  as  good  as  new,  — 
great,  round,  massive  columns,  not  clustered  like  those 
of  most  cathedrals;  they  are  twenty-one  feet  in  cir- 
cumference, and  support  semicircular  arches.  I  think 
there  are  seven  of  these  columns,  on  each  side  of  the 
nave,  which  did  not  impress  me  as  very  spacious ;  and 
the  dust  and  racket  of  the  work-people  quite  destroyed 
the  effect  which  should  have  been  produced  by  the 
ftbles  and  arches ;  so  that  I  hardly  stopped  to  glance 


18500  GLOUCESTER.  809 

at  this  part,  though  I  saw  some  mural  monnments  and 
recumbent  statues  along  the  walls. 

The  choir  is  separated  from  the  nave  by  the  usual 
screen,  and  now  by  a  sail-cloth  or  something  of  that 
kind,  drawn  across,  in  order  to  keep  out  the  dust, 
while  the  repairs  are  going  on.  When  the  young 
woman  conducted  me  hither,  I  was  at  once  struck  by 
the  magnificent  eastern  window,  the  largest  in  Eng- 
land, which  fills,  or  looks  vast  enough  to  fill,  all  that 
end  of  the  cathedral,  —  a  most  splendid  window,  full 
of  old  painted  glass,  which  looked  as  bright  as  sun- 
shine, though  the  sun  was  not  really  shining  through 
it.  The  roof  of  the  choir  is  of  oak  and  very  fine,  and 
as  much  as  ninety  feet  high.  There  are  chapels  open- 
ing from  the  choir,  and  within  them  the  monuments 
of  the  eminent  people  who  built  them,  and  of  bene- 
factors or  prelates,  or  of  those  otherwise  illustrious  in 
their  day.  My  recollection  of  what  I  saw  here  is  very 
dim  and  confused ;  more  so  than  I  anticipated.  I  re- 
member somewhere  within  the  choir  the  tomb  of  Ed- 
ward II.  with  his  effigy  upon  the  top  of  it,  in  a  long 
robe,  with  a  crown  on  his  head,  and  a  baU  and  sceptre 
in  his  hand ;  likewise,  a  statue  of  Robert,  son  of  the 
Conqueror,  carved  in  Irish  oak  and  painted.  He  lolls 
in  an  easy  posture  on  his  tomb,  with  one  leg  crossed 
lightly  over  the  other,  to  denote  that  he  was  a  C^ru- 
sader.  There  are  several  monuments  of  mitred  abbots 
who  formerly  presided  over  the  cathedral.  A  Cavalier 
and  his  wife,  with  the  dress  of  the  period  elaborately 
represented,  lie  side  by  side  in  excellent  preservation ; 
and  it  is  remarkable  that,  though  their  noses  are  very 
prominent,  they  have  come  down  from  the  past  with- 
out any  wear  and  tear.  The  date  of  the  CavaEer's 
death  is  1697,  and  I  think  his  statue  could  not  have 


810  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

been  sculptured  until  after  the  Restoration,  else  he  and 
his  dame  would  hardly  have  come  through  Cromwell's 
time  unscathed.  Here,  as  in  all  the  other  churches  in 
England,  Cromwell  is  said  to  have  stabled  his  horses, 
and  broken  the  windows,  and  belabored  the  old  mon- 
uments. 

There  is  one  large  and  beautiful  chapel,  styled  the 
Lady's  Chapel,  which  is,  indeed,  a  church  by  itself, 
being  ninety  feet  long,  and  comprising  everything  that 
appertains  to  a  place  of  worship.  Here,  too,  there  are 
monuments,  and  on  the  floor  are  many  old  bricks  and 
tiles,  with  inscriptions  on  them,  or  Gothic  devices, 
and  flat  tombstones,  with  coats  of  arms  sculptured  on 
them ;  as,  indeed,  there  are  everywhere  else,  except  in 
the  nave,  where  the  new  pavement  has  obliterated 
them.  After  viewing  the  choir  and  the  chapels,  the 
young  woman  led  me  down  into  the  crypts  below, 
where  the  dead  persons  who  are  commemorated  in  the 
upper  regions  were  buried.  The  low  ponderous  pillars 
and  arches  of  these  crypts  are  supposed  to  be  older 
than  the  upper  portions  of  the  building.  They  are 
about  as  perfect,  I  suppose,  as  when  new,  but  very 
damp,  dreary,  and  darksome ;  and  the  arches  intersect 
one  another  so  intricately,  that,  if  the  girl  had  de- 
serted me,  I  might  easily  have  got  lost  there.  These 
are  chapels  where  masses  used  to  be  said  for  the  souls 
of  the  deceased  ;  and  my  guide  said  that  a  great  many 
skulls  and  bones  had  been  dug  up  here.  No  doubt  a 
vast  population  has  been  deposited  in  the  course  of 
a  thousand  years.  I  saw  two  white  skulls,  in  a  niche, 
grinning,  as  skulls  always  do,  though  it  is  impossible 
to  see  the  joke.  These  crypts,  or  crypts  like  these,  are 
doubtless,  what  Congreve  calls  the  ^^  aisles  and  moni:^ 
mental  caves  of  Death,"  in  that  passage  which  Di; 


1856.]  GLOUCESTER.  Sll 

Johnson  admired  so  much.     They  are  very  singular, 
—  something  like  a  dark  shadow  or  dismal  repetition^ 
of  the  upper  church  below  ground. 

Ascending  from  the  crypts,  we  went  next  to  the 
cloisters,  which  are  in  a  very  perfect  state,  and  form 
an  unbroken  square  about  the  green  grass-plot,  en- 
closed within.  Here  also  it  is  said  Cromwell  stabled 
his  horses;  but  if  so,  they  were  remarkably  quiet 
beasts,  for  tombstones,  which  form  the  pavement,  are 
not  broken,  nor  cracked,  nor  bear  any  hoof -marks. 
All  around  the  cloisters,  too,  the  stone  tracery  that 
shuts  them  in  like  a  closed  curtain,  carefully  drawn, 
remains  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  the  monks,  insomuch 
that  it  is  not  easy  to  get  a  glimpse  of  the  green  en- 
closure. Probably  there  used  to  be  painted  glass  in 
the  larger  apertures  of  this  stone-work ;  otherwise  it  is 
perfect.  These  cloisters  are  very  different  from  the 
free,  open,  and  airy  ones  of  Salisbury  ;  but  they  are 
more  in  accordance  with  our  notions  of  monkish  hab- 
its ;  and  even  at  this  day,  if  I  were  a  canon  of  Glouces- 
ter, I  would  put  that  dim  ambulatory  to  a  good  use. 
The  library  is  adjacent  to  the  cloisters,  and  I  saw  some 
rows  of  folios  and  quartos.  I  have  nothing  else  to  re- 
cord about  the  cathedral,  though  if  I  were  to  stay 
there  a  month,  I  suppose  it  might  then  begin  to  be 
imderstood.  It  is  wicked  to  look  at  these  solemn  old 
churches  in  a  hurry.  By  the  by,  it  was  not  built  in  a 
hurry ;  but  in  full  three  hundred  years,  having  been 
begun  in  1188  and  only  finished  in  1498,  not  a  great 
many  years  before  Papistry  began  to  go  out  of  vogue 
in  England. 

From  Gloucester  I  took  the  rail  for  Basingstoke  be- 
fore noon.  The  first  part  of  the  journey  was  through 
%a  unconunonly  beautiful  tract  of  country,  hiUy,  but 


812  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856^ 

not  wild;  a  tender  and  graeeful  pictnredquenesft, — - 
^fine,  single  trees  and  clumps  of  trees,  and  sometimes 
wide  woods,  scattered  over  tbe  landscape,  and  filling 
the  nooks  of  the  hiUs  with  luxuriant  foliage.  Old  vil- 
lages scattered  frequently  along  our  track,  looking 
very  peaceful,  with  the  peace  of  past  ages  lingering 
about  them ;  and  a  rich,  rural  verdure  of  antique  cul- 
tivation everywhere*  Old  country-seats  —  specimens 
of  tbe  old  English  hall  or  manor-house  —  appeared  on 
the  hill-sides,  with  park-sceneiy  surrounding  the  manr 
sions ;  and  the  gray  churches  rose  in  die  midst  of  aU 
the  little  towns.  The  beauty  of  English  scenery  makes 
me  desperate,  it  is  so  impossible  to  describe  it,  or  in 
any  way  to  record  its  impression,  and  such  a  pity  to 
leave  it  undescribed ;  and,  moreover,  I  always  feel  that 
I  do  not  get  from  it  a  hundredth  or  a  millionth  part 
of  tiie  enjoyment  that  there  really  is  in  it,  hurrying 
past  it  thus.  I  was  really  glad  when  we  rumbled  into 
a  tunnel,  piercing  for  a  long  distance  through  a  hill ; 
and  emerging  on  the  other  side,  we  found  ourselves  in 
a  comparatively  level  and  uninteresting  tract  of  coun- 
try, which  lasted  till  we  reached  Southampton.  Eng- 
lish sceneiy,  to  be  appreciated  and  to  be  reproduced 
with  pen  and  pencil,  requires  to  be  dwelt  upon  long, 
and  to  be  wrought  out  with  the  nicest  touches.  A 
coarse  and  hasty  brush  is  not  the  instrument  for  such 
work. 

July  6th.  — Monday,  June  30th,  was  a  warm  and 
beautiful  day,  and  my  wife  and  I  took  a  cab  from 
Southampton  and  drove  to 

NETLEY  ABBEY, 

about  three  or  four  miles.     The  remains  of  the  Abbey 


1«56.]  NETLEY  ABBEY.  818 

Stand  in  a  sbdtoed  place,  but  withiti  view  of  South- 
sum^ptou  Water ;  and  it  is  a  most  picturesque  and  per- 
fect ruin,  all  ivy-grown,  of  ^course,  and  with  great  trees 
where  the  pillars  of  the  nave  used  to  stand,  and  also 
in  the  refectory  and  the  cloister  court ;  and  so  much 
soil  on  the  summit  of  the  broken  walls,  that  weeds 
flour^h  abmidantly  there,  and  grass  too ;  and  there 
was  a  wild  rose-bush,  in  full  bloom,  as  much  as  thirty 
or  f ojsty  feet  from  the  ^ound.  S~ —  and  I  ascended 
a  winfliag^  stair,  leading  up  within  a  round  tower,  the 
steps  «Em<^  ioot-worn ;  aa>d,  Teaohiioig  the  top,  we  came 
forth  at  the  height  where  a  gallei^  had  formerly  ruB 
round  the  church,  in  the  thickness  of  the  walL  The 
upper  portions  of  42ic  edifice  were  now  chiefly  thrown 
down ;  but  I  followed  .a  foot-path,  on  the  top  of  the 
renaming  wall,  quite  to  the  western  entrance  of  the 
Qhurcb.  Since  the  time  when  the  Abbey  was  taken 
from  tiae  monks,  it  has  beea  private  propedy;  and 
the  possessor,  in  Henry  VIII.'s  days,  or  aubsequ^i^tly, 
bidlt  a  residence  foar  himself  widiin  its  precincts  out  of 
the  old  materials.  This  has  bow  -entirely  disappeared^ 
all  but  some  unsightly  old  mascmry,  patched  into  the 
ordinal  waUs.  Large  portions  of  the  ruin  have  been 
remoi^  likev^,  to  be  used  as  building  -  materials 
elsewhere ;  and  this  is  the  Abbey  mentioned,  I  think, 
by  Dr,  Watts,  conoOTuing  which  a  Mr,  WiUiam  Tay- 
lor had  a  dream  while  he  was  oontempladn^  pulling  it 
down.  He  dreamed  that  a  part  of  it  fell  upon  his 
head ;  and,  sure  enough,  a  piece  of  the  wall  did  come 
down  land  crush  him.  In  the  aoave  I  saw  a  large  Miass 
of  conglomerated  stone  that  had  fallen  frcmi  the  wall 
between  the  nave  and  cloisters,  and  thought  that  perw 
haps  tins  was  the  very  mass  that  killed  po(»r  Mr. 
T^lor. 


314  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

The  ruins  are  ^rt^nsive  and  very  interesting ;  but  I 
have  put  off  describing  them  too  long,  and  cannot 
make  a  distinct  picture  of  them  now.  Moreover,  ex- 
cept to  a  spectator  skilled  in  architecture,  all  ruined 
abbeys  are  pretty  much  alike.  As  we  came  away,  we 
noticed  dome  women  making  baskets  at  the  entrance, 
and  one  of  them  urged  us  to  buy  some  of  her  ^paudi- 
work ;  for  that  she  was  the  gypsy  of  Netley  Abbey, 
and  had  lived  among  the  ruins  these  thirty  years.  So 
I  bought  one  for  a  shilling.  She  was  a  woman  with  a 
prominent  nose,  and  weather-tanned,  but  not  very  pic- 
turesque or  striking. 

TO  BLACKHEATH. 

On  the  6th  July,  we  left  the  Villa,  with  our  enor- 
mous luggage,  and  took  oiu*  departure  frbm  South- 
ampton by  the  noon  train.  The  main  street  of  Souths 
ampton,  though  it  looks  pretty  fresh  and  bright,  must 
be  really  antique,  there  being  a  great  many  projecting 
windows,  in  the  old-time  style,  and  these  make  the 
vista  of  the  street  very  picturesque.  I  have  no  doubt 
that  I  missed  seeing  many  things  more  interesting 
than  the  few  that  I  saw.  Our  journey  to  London  was 
without  any  remarkable  incident,  and  at  the  Waterloo 
station  we  found  one  of  Mr.  Bennoch's  clerks,  imder 
whose  guidance  we  took  two  cabs  for  the  East  Kent 
station  at  London  Bridge,  and  there  railed  to  Black- 
heath,  where  we  arrived  in  the  afternoon. 

On  Thursday  I  went  into  London  by  one  of  the 
morning  trains,  and  wandered  about  all  day,  —  visit- 
ing the  Exhibition  of  the  Royal  Academy,  and  West- 
minster Abbey  and  St.  Patd's,  the  two  latter  of  which 
I  have  already   written   about  in  former  journals. 


1856.]  TO  BLACKHEATH.  816 

On   Friday,   S ,  J ,  and  I  walked  over  the 

heath,  and  through  the  Park  to  Greenwich,  and 
spent  some  hours  in  the  Hospital.  The  painted  hall 
struck  me  much  more  than  at  my  first  view  of  it ;  it 
is  very  beautiful  indeed,  and  the  effect  of  its  fres- 
coed ceiling  most  rich  and  magnificent,  the  assemblage 
of  glowing  hues  producing  a  general  result  of  splen- 
dor. ... 

In  the  evening  I  went  with  Mr.  and  Mrs. to  a 

conversazione  at  Mrs.  Newton  Crosland's,  who  lives  on 
Blackheath.  ...  I  met  with  one  person  who  inter- 
ested me,  —  Mr.  Bailey,  the  author  of  "  Festus  " ;  and 
I  was  surprised  to  find  myself  already  acquainted  with 
him.     It  is  the  same  Mr.  Bailey  whom  I  met  a  few 

months  ago,  when  I  first  dined  at  Mr. 's,  —  a 

dark,  handsome,  rather  picturesque-looking  man,  with 
a  gray  beard,  and  dark  hair,  a  little  dimmed  with 
gray.     He  is  of  quiet  and  very  agreeable  deportment, 

and  I  liked  him  and  believed  in  him There  is 

sadness  glooming  out  of  him,  but  no  unkindness  nor 
asperity.  Mrs.  Crosland's  conversazione  was  enriched 
with  a  supper,  and  terminated  with  a  dance,  in  which 

Mr. joined  with  heart  and  soul,  but  Mrs. 

went  to  sleep  in  her  chair,  and  I  would  gladly  have 
followed  her  example  if  I  could  have  found  a  chair  to 
sit  upon.  In  the  course  of  the  evening  I  had  some 
talk  with  a  pale,  nervous  young  lady,  who  has  been  a 
noted  spiritual  medium. 

Yesterday  I  went  into  town  by  the  steamboat  from 
Greenwich  to  London  Bridge,  with  a  nephew  of  Mr. 
's,  and,  calling  at  his  place  of  business,  he  pro- 
cured us  an  order  from  his  wine-merchants,  by  means 
of  which  we  were  admitted  into. 


816  ENGtlS^H  MOTE'BDOKS,  ll^^ 


THE  WINE-VAULTS  OP  THE  LONDON  DOCKS. 

We  there  f  oimd  parties,  with  an  acquaintance,  who 
was  going,  with  two  Frenc^h  gentlemen,  into  the  vaultSo 
It  is  a  good  deal  like  going  down  into  a  mine,  each 
visitor  being  provided  with  a  lamp  at  the  end  of  a 
stick ;  and  following  the  guide  along  dismal  passages, 
running  beneath  the  streets,  and  extending  away  in- 
terminably, —  roughly  arched  overhead  with  stone» 
from  which  depend  festoons  of  a  sort  of  black  fungus, 
caused  by  the  ^xihalations  of  the  wine.  Nothing  was 
ever  uglier  iJian  this  fungus.  It  is  strange  that  the 
most  ethereal  effervescence  of  rich  wine  can  produce 
nothing  better. 

The  first  series  of  vaults  which  we  entered  were 
filled  with  port-wine,  and  occupied  a  space  variously 
estimated  at  from  eleven  to  sixteen  acres,  —  which  I 
suppose  would  hold  more  port -wine  than  ^ver  was 
made.  At  any  rate,  the  pipes  and  l>utts  were  se 
thickly  piled  that  in  some  places  we  could  hardly 
squeeze  past  them.  We  drank  from  two  or  three  vint- 
ages ;  but  I  was  not  impressed  with  any  especial  ex- 
cellence in  the  wine.  We  were  not  the  only  visitors, 
for,  far  in  the  depths  of  the  vault,  we  passed  a  gentle- 
man and  two  young  ladies,  wandering  about  like  the 
ghosts  of  defunct  wine-bibbers,  in  a  Tophet  specially 
prepared  for  them.  People  employed  here  sometimes 
go  astray,  and,  their  lamps  being  extinguished,  they 
remain  long  in  this  everlasting  gloom.  We  went  like- 
wise to  the  vaults  of  sherry-wine,  which  have  the  same 
characteristics  as  those  just  described,  but  are  less  ex- 
tensive. 

It  is  no  guaranty  for  the  excellence  or  even  for  th« 
purity  of  the  wine,  that  it  is  kept  in  these  cellars,  un« 


1856.]  LONDON.  817 

der  the  lock  aaid  key  of  the  government ;  for  Ae  mer- 
ehants  are  allowed  to  mix  different  vintages,  accord* 
ing  to  their  own  pleasure,  and  to  adulterate  it  as  they 
like.  Very  little  o£  the  wine  probably  comes  out  as  it 
goes  in,  or  is  exactly^  what  it  pretends  to  be.     I  went 

back  to  Mr.  's  office,  and  we  drove  together  to 

make  some  caUs  jointly  and  separately.     I  went  alone 

to  Mrs.  Heywood's  ;  afterwards  with  Mr. to  the 

American  minister's,  whom  we  found  at  home;  and 
I  requested  of  him,  on  the  part  of  the  Americans  at 
Liverpool,  to  tell  me  the  facts  about  the  American 
gentleman  being  refused  admittance  to  the  Levee. 
The  ambassador  did  not  seem  to  me  to  make  his  point 
good  for  having  withdrawn  with  the  rejected  guest. 


July  9th.  (Our  wedding^ay.)  —  We  were  invited 
yesterday  evening  to  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall's,  where  Jenny 
Lind  was  to  sing;  so  we  left  Blackheath  at  about 
eight  o'clock  in  a  brougham,  and  reached  Ashley 
Place,  as  the  dusk  was  gathering,  after  nine.  The 
Halls  reside  in  a  handsome  suite  of  apartments,  ar- 
ranged on  the  new  system  of  flats,  each  story  con- 
stituting a  separate  tenement,  and  the  various  families 
having  an  entrance-hall  in  common.  The  plan  is  bor- 
rowed from  the  Continent,  and  seems  rather  alien  to 
the  traditionary  habits  of  the  English ;  though,  no 
doubt,  a  good  degree  of  seclusion  is  compatible  with 
it.  Mr.  Hall  received  us  with  the  greatest  cordiality 
before  we  entered  the  drawing-room.  Mrs.  Hall,  too, 
greeted  us  with  most  kindly  warmth.  Jenny  Lind 
had  not  yet  arrived ;  but  I  found  Dr.  Mackay  there, 
and  I  was  introduced  to  Miss  Catherine  Sinclair,  who 
is*a  literary  lady,  4;hough  none  of  her  works  happen  to 


818  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1856. 

be  known  to  me.  Soon  the  servant  announced  Madam 
Goldschmidt,  and  this  famous  lady  made  her  appear- 
ance, looking  quite  different  from  what  I  expected. 
Mrs.  Hall  established  her  in  the  inner  drawing-room, 
where  was  a  piano  and  a  harp  ;  and  shortly  after,  our 
hostess  came  to  me,  and  said  that  Madam  Grold- 
Schmidt  wished  to  be  introduced  to  me.  There  was 
a  gentle  peremptoriness  in  the  sunmions,  that  made 
it  something  like  being  conunanded  into  the  presence 
of  a  princess  ;  a  great  favor,  no  doubt,  but  yet  a  little 
humbling  to  the  recipient.  However,  I  acquiesced 
with  due  gratitude,  and  was  presented  accordingly. 
She  made  room  for  me  on  the  sofa,  and  I  sat  down, 
and  began  to  talk. 

Jenny  Lind  is  rather  tall,  — quite  tall,  for  a  woman, 
—  certainly  no  beauty,  but  with  sense  and  self-reliance 
in  her  aspect  and  manners.  She  was  suffering  under 
a  severe  cold,  and  seemed  worn  down  besides,  so  prob- 
ably I  saw  her  under  disadvantages.  Her  conversa- 
tion is  quite  simple,  and  I  should  have  great  faith  in 
her  sincerity ;  and  there  is  about  her  the  manner  of 
a  person  who  knows  the  world,  and  has  conquered  it. 
She  said  something  or  other  about  "  The  Scarlet  Let- 
ter"  ;  and,  on  my  part,  I  paid  her  such  compliments  as 
a  man  could  pay  who  had  never  heard  her  sing.  .  .  . 
Her  conversational  voice  is  an  agreeable  one,  rather 
deep,  and  not  particularly  smooth.  She  talked  about 
America,  and  of  our  unwholesome  modes  of  life,  as  to 
eating  and  exercise,  and  of  the  ill-health  especially  of 
our  women ;  but  I  opposed  this  view  as  far  as  I  could 
with  any  truth,  insinuating  my  opinion  that  we  are 
about  as  healthy  as  other  people,  and  affirming  for  a 
certainty  that  we  live  longer.  In  good  faith,  so  far 
Its  I  have  any  knowledge  of  the  matter,  the  women  ^f 


1856.]  LONDON.  819 

England  are  as  generally  out  of  health  as  those  of 
America;  always  something  has  gone  wrong  with 
them ;  and  as  for  Jenny  Lind,  she  looks  wan  and  worn 
enough  to  be  an  American  herself.  This  charge  of 
ill-health  is  almost  universally  brought  forward  against 
us  nowadays,  —  and,  taking  the  whole  country  to- 
gether, I  do  not  believe  the  statistics  will  bear  it  out. 

The  rooms,  which  were  respectably  filled  when  we 
arrived,  were  now  getting  quite  full.  I  saw  Mr.  Ste- 
vens, the  American  man  of  libraries,  and  had  some 
talk  with  him ;  and  Durham,  the  sculptor ;  and  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Hall  introduced  me  to  various  people,  some 
of  whom  were  of  note,  —  for  instance.  Sir  Emerson 
Tennent,  a  man  of  the  world,  of  some  parliamentary 
distinction,  wearing  a  star ;  Mr.  Samuel  Lover,  a  most 
good-natured,  pleasant  Irishman,  with  a  shining  and 
twinkling  visage ;  Miss  Jewsbury,  whom  I  found  very 
conversable.  She  is  known  in  literature,  but  not  to 
me.  We  talked  about  Emerson,  whom  she  seems  to 
have  been  well  acquainted  with  while  he  was  in  Eng- 
land ;  and  she  mentioned  that  Miss  Martineau  had 
given  him  a  lock  of  hair ;  it  was  not  her  own  hair,  but 
a  mummy's. 

After  our  return,  Mrs. told  us  that  Miss  Jews- 
bury  had  written,  among  other  things,  three  histories, 

and  as  she  asked  me  to  introduce  her  to  S -,  and 

means  to  cultivate  our  acquaintance,  it  would  be  well 
to^know  something  of  them.  We  were  told  that  she 
is  now  employed  in  some  literary  undertaking  of  Lady 
Morgan's,  who,  at  the  age  of  ninety,  is  still  circulat- 
ing in  society,  and  is  as  brisk  in  faculties  as  ever.  I 
diould  like  to  see  her  ladyship,  that  is,  I  should  not 
be  sorry  to  see  her ;  for  distinguished  people  are  so 


820  ENGLISB  JSrOTE'BOOKS.  [1856. 

much  on  a  par  with  others,  socially,  l^at  it  would  be 
foolish  to  be  overjoyed  at  seeing  anybody  whomsoever. 
Leaving  out  the  illustrious  Jenny  Lind,  I  suspect 
that  I  was  myself  the  greatest  lion  of  the  evening ;  for 
a  good  many  persons  sought  the  felicity  of  knowing 
me,  and  had  little  or  nothing  to  say  when  l&at  honor 
and  happiness  was  conferred  on  them.     It  is  surely 
very  wrong  and  ill-mannered  in  people  to  ask  for  an 
introduction  unless  they  are  prepared  to  make  talk ; 
it  throws  too  great  an  expense  and  trouble  on  the 
wretched  lion,  who  is  compelled,  on  the  spur  of  the 
moment,  to  convert  a  conversable  substance  out  of  thin 
air,  perhaps  for  the  twentieth  time  that  evening.     I 
am  sure  I  did  not  say — and  I  think  I  did  not  hear  said 
—  one  rememberable  word  in  the  course  of  this  visit ; 
though,  nevertheless,  it  was  a  raliier  agreeable  one.    In 
due  season  ices  and  jellies  were  handed  about ;  and  some 
ladies  and  gentlemen  —  professional,  perhaps  —  were 
kind  enough  to  sing  songs,  and  play  on  the  piano  and 
harp,  while  persons  in  remote  comers  went  on  with 
whatever  conversation  they  had  in  hand.     Then  came 
supper ;  but  there  were  so  many  people  to  go  into  the 
supper-room  that  we  could  not  all  crowd  thither  to- 
gether, and,  coming  late,  I  got  nothing  but  some 
sponge-cake  and  a  glass  of  champagne,  neither  of 
which  I  care  for.     After  supper,  Mr.  Lover  sang  some 
Irish  songs,  his  own  in  music  and  words,  with  rich 
humorous  effect,  to  which  tiie  comicality  of  his  face 
contributed  almost  as  much  as  his  voice  and  wortft. 
The  Lord  Mayor  looked  in  for  a  little  while,  and 
though  a  hard-featured  Jew  enough,  was  the  most  pic- 
turesque person  there. 

July  10th.  —  Mrs.  Heywood  had  invited  me  to  din. 


1856.]  •     LONDON.  321 

ner  last  evening.  .  .  .  Her  house  is  very  finely  situ- 
ated, overlooking  Hyde  Park,  and  not  a  great  way 
from  where  Tyburn  tree  used  to  stand.  When  I  ar- 
rived there  were  no  guests  but  Mr.  and  Mrs.  D ; 

but  by  and  by  came  Mr.  Monekton  Milnes  and  a  lady, 
the  Bishop  of  Lichfield,  Mr.  Tom  Taylor,  Mr.  Ewart, 
M.  P.,  Sir  Somebody  Somerville,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Mus- 
grave,  and  others.  Mr.  Milnes,  whom  I  had  not  seen 
for  more  than  a  year,  greeted  me  very  cordially,  and 
so  did  Mr.  Taylor.  I  took  Mrs.  Musgrave  in  to  din- 
ner. She  is  an  Irish  lady,  and  Mrs.  Heywood  had 
recommended  her  to  me  as  being  very  conversable ; 

but  I  had  a  good  deal  more  talk  with  Mrs.  M , 

with  whom  I  was  already  acquainted,  than  with  her. 

Mrs.  M is  of  noble  blood,  and  therefore  not 

snobbish,  —  quite  unaffected,  gentle,  sweet,  and  easy 
to  get  on  with,  reminding  me  of  the  best  -  mannered 
American  women.  But  how  can  anything  character- 
istic be  said  or  done  among  a  dozen  people  sitting  at 
table  in  full  dress  ?  Speaking  of  full  dress,  the  Bishop 
wore  small-clothes  and  silk  stockings,  and  entered 
the  drawing-room  with  a  three-cornered  hat,  which  he 
kept  fiattened  out  under  his  arm.  He  asked  the  brief- 
est blessing  possible,  and,  sitting  at  the  ultra  end  of 
the  table,  I  heard  nothing  further  from  him  till  he  of- 
ficiated as  briefly  before  the  cloth  was  withdrawn. 
Mrs.  M — : —  talked  about  Tennyson,  with  whom  her 
husband  was  at  the  University,  and  whom  he  contin- 
ues to  know  intimately.  She  says  that  he  considers 
"  Maud  "  his  best  poem.  He  now  lives  in  the  Isle  of 
Wight,  spending  all  the  year  round  there,  and  has 
recently  bought  the  place  on  which  he  resides.  She 
was  of  opinion  that  he  would  have  been  gratified  by 
my  calling  on  him,  which  I  had  wished  to  do,  while 

VOL.  VIII.  21 


822  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856, 

we  were  at  Southampton ;  but  this  is  a  Kbeiiy  which  I 
should  hardly  venture  upon  with  a  shy  man  like  Ten- 
nyson, —  more  especially  as  he  might  perhaps  suspect 
me  of  doing  it  on  the  score  of  my  own  literary  char- 
acter. But  I  should  like  much  to  see  him.  .  .  .  Mr. 
Tom  Taylor,  during  dinner,  made  some  fun  for  the 
benefit  of  the  ladies  on  either  side  of  him.  I  liked 
him  very  well  this  evening. 

When  the  ladies  had  not  long  withdrawn,  and  after 
the  wine  had  once  gone  round,  I  asked  Mr.  Heywood 
to  make  my  apologies  to  Mrs.  Heywood,  and  took 
leave ;  all  London  lying  betwixt  me  and  the  London 
Bridge  station,  where  I  was  to  take  the  rail  home- 
ward. At  the  station  I  found  Mr.  Bennoch,  who  had 
been  dining  with  the  Lord  Mayor  to  meet  Sir  Wil- 
liam Williams,  and  we  railed  to  Greenwich,  and 
reached  home  by  midnight.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bennoch 
have  set  out  on  their  Continental  Journey  to-day,  — 
leaving  us,  for  a  little  space,  in  possession  of  what 
will  be  more  like  a  home  than  anything  that  we  shall 
hereafter  find  in  EnglaQd. 

This  afternoon  I  had  taken  up  the  fourth  volume  of 
Jerdan's  Autobiography,  —  wretched  twaddle,  though 
it  records  such  constant  and  apparently  intimate  in- 
tercourse with  distinguished  people,  —  and  was  read- 
ing it,  between  asleep  and  awake,  on  the  sofa,  when 
Mr.  Jerdan  himself  was  announced.  I  saw  him  in 
company  with  Mr.  Bennoch,  nearly  three  years  ago, 
at  Kock  Park,  and  wondered  then  what  there  was  in 
so  uncouth  an  individual  to  get  him  so  freely  into  pol- 
ished society.  He  now  looks  rougher  than  ever, — 
time-worn,  but  not  reverend;  a  thatch  of  gray  hair 
on  his  head ;  an  imperfect  set  of  false  teeth ;  a  care* 


1856.]  LONDON,  823 

less  apparel,  checked  trousers,  and  a  stick,  for  lie  had 
walked  a  mile  or  two  from  his  own  dwelling. 

I  suspect  —  and  long  practice  at  the  Consulate  has 
made  me  keen-sighted — that  Mr.  Jordan  contemplated 
some  benefit  from  my  purse ;  and,  to  the  extent  of  a 
sovereign  or  so,  I  would  not  mind  contributing  to  his 

comfort.     He  spoke  of  a  secret  purpose  of  Mr. 

and  himself  to  obtain  me  a  degree  or  diploma  in  some 
Literary  Institution,  —  what  one  I  know  not,  and  did 
not  ask ;  but  the  honor  cannot  be  a  high  one,  if  this 
poor  old  fellow  can  do  aught  towards  it.  I  am  afraid 
he  is  a  very  disreputable  senior,  but  certainly  not  the 
less  to  be  pitied  on  that  account ;  and  there  was  some- 
thing very  touching  in  his  stiff  and  infirm  movement, 
as  he  resumed  his  stick  and  took  leave,  waving  me  a 
courteous  farewell,  and  turning  upon  me  a  smile,  grim 
with  age,  as  he  went  down  the  steps.  In  that  gesture 
and  smile.  I  fancied  some  trace  of  the  polished  man  of 
society,  such  as  he  may  have  once  been ;  though  time 
and  hard  weather  have  roughened  him,  as  they  have 
the  once  polished  marble  pillars  which  I  saw  so  rude 
in  aspect  at  Netley  Abbey. 

Speaking  of  Dickens  last  evening,  Mr. men- 
tioned his  domestic  tastes,  —  how  he  preferred  home 
enjoyments  to  all  others,  and  did  not  willingly  go 

much  into  society.     Mrs. ,  too,  the  other  day  told 

us  of  his  taking  on  himself  all  possible  trouble  as  re- 
gards his  domestic  affairs.  .  .  .  There  is  a  great  va- 
riety of  testimony,  various  and  varied,  as  to  the  char- 
acter of  Dickens.  I  must  see  him  before  I  finally 
leave  England. 

July  13^A.  —  On  Friday  morning  (11th),  at  nine 
o'clock,  I  took  the  rail  into  town  to  breakfast  with  Mr. 


824  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

Milnes.  As  he  had  named  a  little  after  ten  as  the 
hour,  I  could  not  immediately  proceed  to  his  house, 
and  so  walked  moderately  over  London  Bridge  and 
into  the  city,  meaning  to  take  a  cab  from  Charing 
Cross,  or  thereabouts.  Passing  through  some  street 
or  other,  contiguous  to  Cheapside,  I  saw  in  a  court- 
yard the  entrance  to  the  Guildhall,  and  stepped  in  to 
look  at  it.  It  is  a  spacious  hall,  about  one  hundred 
and  fifty  feet  long,  and  perhaps  half  as  broad,  paved 
with  flagstones  which  look  worn  and  some  of  them 
cracked  across;  the  roof  is  very  lofty  and  was  once 
vaulted,  but  has  been  shaped  anew  in  modem  times. 
There  is  a  vast  window  partly  filled  with  painted  glass, 
extending  quite  along  each  end  of  the  hall,  and  a  row 
of  arched  windows  on  either  side,  throwing  their  light 
from  far  above  downward  upon  the  pavement.  This 
fashion  of  high  windows,  not  reaching  within  twenty 
or  thirty  feet  of  the  floor,  serves  to  give  great  effect  to 
the  large  enclosed  space  of  an  antique  hall.  Against 
the  walls  are  several  marble  monuments ;  one  to  the 
Earl  of  Chatham,  a  statue  of  white  marble,  with  va- 
rious allegorical  contrivances,  fronting  an  obelisk  or 
pyramid  of  dark  marble ;  and  another  to  his  son,  Wil- 
liam Pitt,  of  somewhat  similar  design  and  of  equal 
size ;  each  of  them  occupying  the  whole  space,  I  be- 
lieve, between  pavement  and  ceiling.  There  is  like- 
wise a  statue  of  Beckford,  a  famous  Lord  Mayor,  — 
the  most  famous  except  Whittington,  and  that  one 
who  lulled  Wat  Tyler ;  and  like  those  two,  his  fame  is 
perhaps  somewhat  mythological,  though  he  lived  and 
bustled  within  less  than  a  century.  He  is  said  to  have 
made  a  bold  speech  to  the  King ;  but  this  I  will  not 
believe  of  any  Englishman  —  at  least,  of  any  plebeian 
Englishman  —  until  I  hear  it.     But  there  stands  his 


1856.]  LONDON.  825 

statue  in  the  Guildhall  in  the  act  of  making  his  speech, 
as  if  the  monstrous  attempt  had  petrified  him. 

Lord  Nelson,  too,  has  a  monument,  and  so,  I  think, 
has  some  other  modem  worthy.  At  one  end  of  the 
hall,  under  one  of  the  great  painted  windows,  stand 
three  or  four  old  statues  of  mediaeval  kings,  whose 
identities  I  forget ;  and  in  the  two  comers  of  the  op- 
posite end  are  two  gigantic  absurdities  of  painted 
wood,  with  grotesque  visages,  whom  I  quickly  recog- 
nized as  Gog  and  Magog.  They  stand  each  on  a  pil- 
lar, and  seem  to  be  about  fifteen  feet  high,  and  look 
like  enormous  playthings  for  the^  children  of  giants ; 
and  it  is  strange  to  see  them  in  this  solemn  old  hall, 
among  the  memorials  of  dead  heroes  and  statesmen. 
There  is  an  annual  banquet  in  the  Ghiildhall,  given  by 
the  Lord  Mayor  and  sheriffs,  and  I  believe  it  is  the 
very  acme  of  civic  feasting. 

After  viewing  the  hall,  as  it  still  lacked  something 
of  ten,  I  continued  my  walk  through  that  entangle- 
ment of  city  streets,  and  quickly  found  myself  getting 
beyond  my  reckoning.  I  cannot  tell  whither  I  went, 
but  I  passed  through  a  very  dirty  region,  and  I  re- 
member a  long,  narrow,  evil-odored  street,  cluttered 
up  with  stalls,  in  which  were  vegetables  and  little  bits 
of  meat  for  sale ;  and  there  was  a  frowzy  multitude  of 
buyers  and  sellers.  Still  I  blundered  on,  and  was  get- 
ting out  of  the  density  of  the  city  into  broader  streets, 
but  still  shabby  ones,  when,  looking  at  my  watch,  I 
f  oimd  it  to  be  past  ten,  and  no  cab-stand  within  sight. 
It  was  a  quarter  past  when  I  finally  got  into  one  ;  and 
the  driver  told  me  that  it  would  take  half  an  hour  to 
go  from  thence  to  Upper  Brook  Street ;  so  that  I  was 
likely  to  exceed  the  license  implied  in  Mr.  Milnes's  in^ 
vitation.     Whether  I  was  quite  beyond  rule  I  cannot 


326  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185a 

say;  but  it  did  not  lack  more  than  ten  minutes  of 
eleven  when  I  was  ushered  up  stairs,  and  I  found  aU 
the  company  assembled.  However,  it  is  of  little  con- 
sequence, except  that  if  I  had  come  early,  I  should 
have  been  introduced  to  many  of  the  guests,  whom 
now  I  could  only  know  across  the  table.  Mrs.  Milnes 
greeted  me  very  kindly,  and  Mr.  Milnes  came  towards 
me  with  an  elderly  gentleman  in  a  blue  coat  and  gray 
pantaloons,  —  with  a  long,  rather  thin,  homely  visage, 
exceedingly  shaggy  eyebrows,  though  no  great  weight 
of  brow,  and  thin  gray  hair,  and  introduced  me  to  the 
Marquis  of  Lansdo^wne.  The  Marquis  had  his  right 
hand  wrapped  up  in  a  black-silk  handkerchief ;  so  he 
gave  me  his  left,  and,  from  some  awkwardness  in  meet- 
ing it,  when  I  expected  the  right,  I  gave  him  only 
three  of  my  fingers,  —  a  thing  I  never  did  before  to 
any  person,  and  it  is  droll  that  I  should  have  done  it 
to  a  Marquis.  He  addressed  me  with  great  simplicity 
and  natural  kindness,  complimenting  me  on  my  works, 
and  speaking  about  the  society  of  Liverpool  in  former 
days.  Lord  Lansdowne  was  the  friend  of  Moore,  and 
has  about  him  the  aroma  communicated  by  the  memo- 
ries of  many  illustrious  people  with  whom  he  has  as- 
sociated. 

Mr.  Ticknor,  the  Historian  of  Spanish  Literature, 
now  greeted  me.  Mr.  Milnes  introduced  me  to  Mrs. 
Browning,  and  assigned  her  to  me  to  conduct  into  the 
breakfast-room.  She  is  a  small,  delicate  woman,  with 
ringlets  of  dark  hair,  a  pleasant,  intelligent,  and  sen- 
sitive face,  and  a  low,  agreeable  voice.  She  looks 
youthful  and  comely,  and  is  very  gentle  and  lady-like. 
And  so  we  proceeded  to  the  breakfast-room,  which  is 
hung  round  with  pictures;  and  in  the  middle  of  it 
i^tood  a  large  round  table,  worthy  to  have  been  King 


1856.]  LONDON.  S27 

Arthur's,  and  here  we  seated  ourselves  without  any 
question  of  precedence  or  ceremony.  On  one  side  of 
me  was  an  elderly  lady,  with  a  very  fine  countenance^ 
and  in  the  course  of  breakfast  I  discovered  her  to 
be  the  mother  of  Florence  Nightingale.  One  of  her 
daughters  (not  Florence)  was  likewise  present.  Mrs. 
Milnes,  Mrs.  Browning,  Mrs.  Nightingale,  and  her 
daughter  were  the  only  ladies  at  table ;  and  I  think 
there  were  as  many  as  eight  or  ten  gentlemen,  whose 
names  —  as  I  came  so  late  —  I  was  left  to  find  out  for 
myself,  or  to  leave  unknown. 

It  was  a  pleasant  and  sociable  meal,  and,  thanks  to 
my  cold  beef  and  coffee  at  home,  I  had  no  occasion  to 
trouble  myself  much  about  the  fare ;  so  I  just  ate 
some  delicate  chicken,  and  a  very  small  cutlet,  and  a 
slice  of  dry  toast,  and  thereupon  surceased  from  my 
labors.  Mrs.  Browning  and  I  talked  a  good  deal  dur- 
ing breakfast,  for  she  is  of  that  quickly  appreciative 
and  responsive  order  of  women  with  whom  I  can  talk 
more  freely  than  with  any  man ;  and  she  has,  besides, 
her  own  originality,  wherewith  to  help  on  conversa- 
tion, though,  I  should  say,  not  of  a  loquacious  ten- 
dency. She  introduced  the  subject  of  spiritualism, 
which,  she  says,  interests  her  very  much ;  indeed,  she 
seems  to  be  a  believer.  Mr.  Browning,  she  told  me, 
utterly  rejects  the  subject,  and  will  not  believe  even 
in  the  outward  manifestations,  of  which  there  is  such 
overwhelming  evidence.  We  also  talked  of  Miss  Ba- 
con ;  and  I  developed  something  of  that-  lady's  theory 
respecting  Shakespeare^  greatly  to  the  horror  of  Mrs. 
Browning,  and  that  of  her  next  neighbor,  —  a  noble- 
man, whose  name  I  did  not  hear.  On  the  whole,  I 
like  her  the  better  for  loving  the  man  Shakespeare 
with  a  personal  love.     We  talked,  too,  of  Margaret 


328  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

Fuller,  who  spent  her  last  night  in  Italy  with  the 
Brownings ;  and  of  William  Story,  with  whom  they 
have  been  intimate,  and  who,  Mrs.  Browning  says,  is 
much  stirred  about  spiritualism.  Beally,  I  cannot 
help  wondering  that  so  fine  a  spirit  as  hers  should 
not  reject  the  matter,  till,  at  least,  it  is  forced  upon 
her.     I  like  her  very  much. 

Mrs.  Nightingale  had  been  talking  at  first  with 
Lord  Lansdowne,  who  sat  next  her,  but  by  and  by  she 
turned  to  me,  and  began  to  speak  of  London  smoke. 
.  .  .  Then,  there  being  a  discussion  about  Lord  Byron 
on  the  other  side  of  the  table,  she  spoke  to  me  about 
Lady  Byron,  whom  she  knows  intimately,  characteriz- 
ing her  as  a  most  excellent  and  exemplary  person, 
high-principled,  unselfish,  and  now  devoting  herself  to 
the  care  of  her  two  grandchildren,  —  their  mother, 
Byron's  daughter,  being  dead.  Lady  Byron,  she  says, 
writes  beautiful  verses.  Somehow  or  other,  all  this 
praise,  and  more  of  the  same  kind,  gave  me  an  idea 
of  an  intolerably  irreproachable  person ;  and  I  asked 
Mrs.  Nightingale  if  Lady  Byron  were  warm-hearted. 
With  some  hesitation,  or  mental  resei*vation,  —  at  all 
events,  not  quite  outspokenly,  —  she  answered  that  she 
was. 

I  was  too  much  engaged  with  these  personal  talks 
to  attend  much  to  what  was  going  on  elsewhere ;  but 
all  through  breakfast  I  had  been  more  and  more  im- 
pressed by  the  aspect  of  one  of  the  guests,  sitting  next 
to  Milnes.  He  was  a  man  of  large  presence,  —  a 
portly  personage,  gray-haired,  but  scarcely  as  yet 
aged ;  and  his  face  had  a  remarkable  intelligence,  not 
vivid  nor  sparkling,  but  conjoined  with  great  qui- 
etude, —  and  if  it  gleamed  or  brightened  at  one  time 
more  than  another,  it  was  like  the  sheen  over  a  broad 


>856.J  LONDON.  829 

Burface  of  sea.  There  was  a  somewhat  careless  self- 
possession,  large  and  broad  enough  to  be  called  dig- 
nity ;  and  tiie  more  I  looked  at  him,  the  more  I  knew 
that  he  was  a  distinguished  person,  and  wondered 
who.  He  might  have  been  a  minister  of  state ;  only- 
there  is  not  one  of  them  who  has  any  right  to  such  a 
face  and  presence.  At  last,  —  I  do  not  know  how  the 
conviction  came,  —  but  I  became  aware  that  it  was 
Macaiday,  and  began  to  see  some  slight  resemblance 
to  his  portraits.  But  I  have  never  seen  any  that  is 
not  wretchedly  unworthy  of  the  original.  As  soon  as 
I  knew  him,  I  began  to  listen  to  his  conversation,  but 
he  did  not  talk  a  great  deal,  —  contrary  to  his  usual 
custom ;  for  I  am  told  he  is  apt  to  engross  all  the  talk 
to  himself.  Probably  he  may  have  been  restrained  by 
the  presence  of  Ticknor,  and  Mr.  Palfrey,  who  were 
among  his  auditors  and  interlocutors ;  and  as  the  con- 
versation seemed  to  turn  much  on  American  subjects, 
he  could  not  well  have  assmned  to  talk  them  down.  I 
am  glad  to  have  seen  him,  —  a  face  fit  for  a  scholar,  a 
man  of  the  world,  a  cultivated  intelligence. 

After  we  left  the  table,  and  went  into  the  library, 
Mr.  Browning  introduced  himself  to  me,  —  a  younger 
man  than  I  expected  to  see,  handsome,  with  brown 
hair.  He  is  very  simple  and  agreeable  in  manner, 
gently  impulsive,  talking  as  if  his  heart  were  upper- 
most. He  spoke  of  his  pleasure  in  meeting  n^p,  and 
his  appreciation  of  my  books;  and  —  which  has  not 
often  happened  to  me  —  mentioned  that  "  The  Blithe- 
dale  Romance  "  was  the  one  he  admired  most.  I  won- 
der why.  I  hope  I  showed  as  much  pleasure  at  his 
praise  as  he  did  at  mine ;  for  I  was  glad  to  see  how 
pleasantly  it  moved  him.  After  this,  1  talked  with 
Ticknor  and  Milnes,  and  with  Mr.  Palfrey,  to  whom 


330  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [186a 

I  had  been  introduced  very  long  ago  by  George  Hil- 
lard,  and  had  never  seen  him  since.  We  looked  at 
some  autographs,  of  which  Mr.  Milnes  has  two  or 
three  large  volumes.  1  recollect  a  leaf  from  Swift's 
Journal  to  Stella ;  a  letter  from  Addison ;  one  from 
Chatterton,  in  a  most  neat  and  legible  hand ;  and  a 
characteristic  sentence  or  two  and  signature  of  Oliver 
Cromwell,  written  in  a  religious  book.  There  were 
many  curious  volumes  in  the  library,  but  I  had  not 
time  to  look  at  them. 

I  liked  greatly  the  manners  of  almost  all,  —  yes,  as 
far  as  I  observed,  —  all  the  people  at  this  breakfast, 
and  it  was  doubtless  owing  to  their  being  all  people 
either  o{  high  rank  or  remarkable  intellect,  or  both. 
An  Englishman  can  hardly  be  a  gentleman,  unless  hci 
enjoy  one  or  other  of  these  advantages  ;  and  perhapu 
the  surest  way  to  give  him  good  manners  is  to  make 
a  lord  of  him,  or  rather  of  his  grandfather  or  great- 
grandfather. In  the  third  generation,  scarcely  sooner, 
he  will  be  polished  into  simplicity  and  elegance,  and 
his  deportment  will  be  all  the  better  for  the  homely 
material  out  of  which  it  is  wrought  and  refined.  The 
Marquis  of  Lansdowne,  for  instance,  would  have  been 
a  very  commonplace  man  in  the  common  ranks  of  life ; 
but  it  has  done  him  good  to  be  a  nobleman.  Not  that 
his  tact  is  quite  perfect.  In  going  up  to  breakfast,  he 
made  me  precede  him  ;  in  returning  to  the  library,  he 
did  the  same,  although  I  drew  back,  till  he  impelled 
me  up  the  first  stair,  with  gentle  persistence.  By  in- 
sisting upon  it,  he  showed  his  sense  of  condescension 
much  more  than  if,  when  he  saw  me  unwilling  to  take 
precedence,  he  had  passed  forward,  as  if  the  point  were 
not  worth  either  asserting  or  yielding.  Heaven  knows, 
it  was  in  no  humility  that  I  would  have  trodden  be> 


1856.]  LONDON.  831 

hind  him.  But  he  is  a  kind  old  man ;  and  I  am  will- 
ing to  believe  of  the  English  aristocracy  generally  that 
they  are  kind,  and  of  beautiful  deportment ;  for  cer- 
tainly there  never  can  have  been  mortals  in  a  position 
more  advantageous  for  becoming  so.  I  hope  there 
will  come  a  time  when  we  shall  be  so ;  and  J  already 
know  a  few  Americans,  whose  noble  and  delicate  man- 
ners may  compare  well  with  any  I  have  seen. 

I  left  the  house  with  Mr.  Palfrey.  He  has  come  to 
England  to  make  some  researches  in  the  State  Paper 
Office,  for  the  purposes  of  a  work  which  he  has  in 
hand.  He  mentioned  to  me  a  letter  which  he  had 
seen,  written  from  New  England  in  the  time  of 
Charles  II.  and  referring  to  the  order  sent  by  the 
minister  of  that  day  for  the  appearance  of  Governor 
Bellingham  and  my  ancestor  on  this  side  of  the  water. 
The  signature  of  this  letter  is  an  anagram  of  my  an- 
cestor's name.  The  letter  itself  is  a  very  bold  and 
able  one,  controverting  the  propriety  of  the  measure 
above  indicated  ;  and  Mr.  Palfrey  feels  certain  that  it 
was  written  by  my  aforesaid  ancestor.  I  mentioned 
my  wish  to  ascertain  the  place  in  England  whence  the 
family  emigrated ;  and  Mr.  Palfrey  took  me  to  the 
Record  Office,  and  introduced  me  to  Mr.  Joseph  Hun- 
ter, —  a  venerable  and  courteous  gentleman,  of  anti- 
quarian pursuits.  The  office  was  odorous  of  musty 
parchments,  hundreds  of  years  old.  Mr.  Hunter  re- 
ceived me  with  great  kindness,  and  gave  me  various 
old  records  and  rolls  of  parchment,  in  which  to  seek 
for  my  family  name ;  but  I  was  perplexed  with  the 
crabbed  characters,  and  soon  grew  weary  and  gave  up 
the  quest.  He  says  that  it  is  very  seldom  that  an 
American  family,  springing  from  the  early  settlers, 
can  be  satisfactorily  traced  back  to  their  English  an- 
eestiy. 


882  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

July  \6th,  —  Monday  morning  I  took  the  rail  from 
Blackheath  to  London.  It  is  a  very  pleasant  place, 
Blackheath,  and  far  more  rural  than  one  would  ex- 
pect, within  five  or  six  miles  of  London,  —  a  great 
many  trees,  making  quite  a  mass  of  foliage  in  the  dis- 
tance ;  green  enclosures ;  pretty  viUas,  with  their  nicely 
kept  lawns,  and  gardens,  with  grass-plots  and  flower 
borders ;  and  village  streets,  set  along  the  sidewalks 
with  ornamental  trees  ;  and  the  houses  standing  a  lit- 
tle back,  and  separated  one  from  another,  —  all  this 
within  what  is  called  the  Park,  which  has  its  gateways, 
and  the  sort  of  semi-privacy  with  which  I  first  became 
acquainted  at  Bock  Park. 

From  the  London  Bridge  station  I  took  a  cab  for 
Paddington,  and  then  had  to  wait  above  two  hours  be- 
fore a  train  started  for  Birkenhead.  Meanwhile  1 
walked  a  little  about  the  neighborhood,  which  is  very 
dull  and  uninteresting ;  made  up  of  crescents  and  ter^- 
races,  and  rows  of  houses  that  have  no  individuality, 
and  second-rate  shops,  —  in  short,  tlie  outskirts  of  the 
vast  city,  when  it  begins  to  have  a  kind  of  village 
character  but  no  rurality  or  sylvan  aspect,  as  at  Black- 
heath. My  journey,  when  at  last  we  started,  was 
quite  unmarked  by  incident,  and  extremely  tedious ; 
it  being  a  slow  train,  which  plods  on  without  haste 
and  without  rest.  At  about  ten  o'clock  we  reached 
Birkenhead,  and  there  crossed  the  familiar  and  detest- 
able Mersey,  which,  as  usual,  had  a  cloudy  sky  brood- 
ing over  it.  Mrs.  Blodgett  received  me  most  hospi- 
tably, but  was  impelled,  by  an  overflow  of  guests,  to 
put  me  into  a  little  back  room,  looking  into  the  court, 
and  formerly  occupied  by  my  predecessor.  General 
Armstrong.  .  .  .  She  expressed  a  hope  that  I  might 
not  see  his  ghost,  —  nor  have  I,  as  yet. 


1856.]  LONDON.  838 

Speaking  of  ghosts,  Mr.  H.  A.  B  told  me  a  sin- 
gular story  to-day  of  an  apparition  that  haunts  the 
'*  Times  "  Office,  in  Printing-House  Square.     A  Mr. 

W is  the  engineer  of  the  establishment,  and  has 

his  residence  in  the  edifice,  which  is  built,  1  believe,  on 
the  site  of  Merchant  Taylor's  school,  —  an  old  house 
that  was  no  longer  occupied  for  its  original  purpose, 
and,  being  supposed  haunted,  was  left  untenanted. 

The  father-in-law  of  Mr.  W ,  an  old  sea-captain, 

came  on  a  visit  to  him  and  his  wife,  and  was  put  into 
their  guest-chamber,  where  he  passed  the  night.  The 
next  morning,  assigning  no  very  satisfactory  reason, 
he  cut  his  visit  short  and  went  away.  Shortly  after- 
wards, a  young  lady  came  to  visit  the  W 's  ;  but 

she  too  went  away  the  next  morning,  —  going  first  to 
make  a  call,  as  she  said,  to  a  friend,  and  sending 

thence  for  her  trunks.     Mrs.  W wrote  to  this 

young  lady,  asking  an  explanation.  The  young  lady 
replied,  and  gave  a  singular  account  of  an  apparition, 
—  how  she  was  awakened  in  the  night  by  a  bright 
light  shining  through  the  window  which  was  parallel 
to  the  bed ;  then,  if  I  remember  rightly,  her  curtains 
were  withdrawn,  and  a  shape  looked  in  upon  her,  —  a 
woman's  shape,  she  called  it ;  but  it  was  a  skeleton, 
with  lambent  flames  playing  about  its  bones,  and  in 
and  out  among  the  ribs.  Other  persons  have  since 
slept  ill  this  chamber,  and  some  have  seen  the  shape, 
others  not.  Mr.  W has  slept  there  himself  with- 
out seeing  anything.  He  has  had  investigations  by 
scientific  people,  apparently  under  the  idea  that  the 
phenomenon  might  have  been  caused  by  some  of  the 
*'  Times's  "  work-people,  playing  tricks  on  the  magic- 
lantern  principle ;  but  nothing  satisfactory  has  thus 
far  been  elucidated.     Mr.  B — —  had  this  story  from 


384  ENGLISH  NOTE^BOOKS.  [2866; 

Mrs.  Gaskell.  .  .  «  Supposing  it  a  ghost,  nothing  else 
is  so  remarkable  as  its  choosing  to  haunt  the  pre* 
cincts  of  the  "  Times  "  newspaper. 

July  2Qth,  —  On  Saturday,  26th,  I  took  the  rail 
from  the  Lime  Street  station  for  London,  via  the  Trent 
VaUey,  and  reached  Blackheath  in  the  evening.  .  .  . 

Sunday  morning  my  wife  and  I,  with  J ,  railed 

into  London,  and  drove  to  the  Essex  Street  Chapel, 
where  Mr.  Channing  was  to  preach.  The  Chapel  is 
the  same  where  Priestley  and  Belsham  used  to  preach, 
—  one  of  the  plainest  houses  of  worship  I  was  ever  in, 
as  simple  and  undecorated  as  the  faith  there  incul- 
cated. They  retain,  however,  all  the  form  and  cere- 
monial of  the  English  Established  Church,  though  so 
modified  as  to  meet  the  doctrinal  views  of  the  Unita- 
rians. There  may  be  good  sense  in  this,  inasmuch  as 
it  greatly  lessens  the  ministerial  labor  to  have  a  stated 
form  of  prayer,  instead  of  a  necessity  for  extempore 
outpourings ;  but  it  must  be,  I  should  think,  exces- 
sively tedious  to  the  congregation,  especially  as,  hav- 
ing made  alterations  in  these  prayers,  they  camiot  at- 
tach much  idea  of  sanctity  to  them. 

[Here  follows  a  long  record  of  Mr.  Hawthorne's 
visit  to  Miss  Bacon,  —  condensed  in  "  Our  Old  Home," 
in  the  paper  called  ^^  BecoUections  of  a  Gifted 
Woman."] 

August  2d,  —  On  Wednesday  (30th  July)  we  went 
to  Marlborough  House  to  see  the  Vernon  galltiry  of 
pictures.  They  are  the  works,  almost  entirely,  of 
English  artists  of  the  last, and  present  century,  and 
comprise  many  famous  paintings;  and  I  must  ac- 
knowledge that  I  had  more  enjoyment  of  them  than  of 


1856.]  LONDON.  886 

those  portions  of  the  National  Gallery  which  I  had 
before  seen, —^  including  specimens  of  the  grand  old 
masters.  My  comprehension  has  not  reached  their 
height.  I  think  nothing  pleased  me  more  than  a  pic- 
ture by  Sir  David  Wilkie,  —  The  Parish  Beadle,  with 
a  vagrant  boy  and  a  monkey  in  custody;  it  is  ex- 
ceedingly  good  and  true  throughout,  and  especially 
the  monkey's  face  is  a  wonderful  production  of  gen- 
ius, condensing  within  itself  the  whole  moral  and  pa- 
thos of  the  picture. 

Marlborough  House  was  the  residence  of  the  Great 
Duke,  and  is  to  be  that  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,  when 
another  place  is  |ound  for  the  pictures.  It  adjoins  St. 
James's  Palace.  In  its  present  state  it  is  not  a  very 
splendid  mansion,  the  rooms  being  small,  though  hand- 
somely shaped,  with  vaulted  ceilings,  and  carved  white- 
marble  fireplaces.     I  left  S here  after  an  hour  or 

two,  and  walked  forth  into  the  hot  and  busy  city  with 

J .  ...  I  called  at  Routledge's  bookshop,  in  hopes 

^to  make  an  arrangement  with  him  about  Miss  Bacon's 
business.  But  Routledge  himself  is  making  a  journey 
in  the  north,  and  neither  of  the  partners  was  there,  so 
that  I  shall  have  to  go  thither  some  other  day.  Then 
we  stepped  into  St.  Paul's  Cathedral  to  cool  ourselves, 
and  it  was  delightful  so  to  escape  from  the  sunny,  sultry 
turmoil  of  fleet  Street  and  Ludgate,  and  find  ourselves 
at  once  in  this  remote,  solemn,  shadowy  seclusion, 
marble-cool.  Oh  that  we  had  cathedrals  in  America, 
were  it  only  for  the  sensuous  luxury!     We  strolled 

roimd  the  cathedral,  and  I  delighted  J much  by 

pointing  out  the  monuments  of  three  British  generals, 
who  were  slain  in  America  in  the  last  war,  —  the 
naughty  and  blood-thirsty  little  man  I  We  then  went 
to  Guildhall,  where  J  thought  J     .     would  like  to 


836  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

see  Gog  and  Magog ;  but  he  had  never  heard  of  those 
illustrious  personages,  and  took  no  interest  in  them. 
.  .  .  But  truly  I  am  grateful  to  the  piety  of  former 
times  for  raising  this  vast,  cool  canopy  of  marble  [St. 
Paul's]  in  the  midst  of  the  feverish  city.  I  wandered 
quite  round  it,  and  saw,  in  a  remote  comer,  a  monu- 
ment to  the  officers  of  the  Coldstream  Guards,  slain 
in  the  Crimea.  It  was  a  mural  tablet,  with  the  names 
of  the  officers  on  an  escutcheon ;  and  two  privates  of 
the  Guards,  in  marble  bas-relief,  were  mourning  over 
them.  Over  the  tablet  hung  two  silken  banners,  new 
and  glossy,  with  the  battles  in  which  the  regiment  has 
been  engaged  inscribed  on  them, — not  merely  Cri- 
mean but  Peninsular  battles.  These  banners  will  hang 
there  till  they  drop  away  in  tatters. 

After  thus  refreshing  myself  in  the  cathedtal,  I 
went  again  to  Eoutledge's  in  Farringdon  Street,  and 
saw  one  of  the  firm.  He  expressed  great,  pleasure  at 
seeing  me,  as  indeed  he  might,  having  published  and 
sold,  without  any  profit  on  my  part,  uncounted  thou- ' 
sands  of  my  books.  I  introduced  the  subject  of  Miss 
Bacon's  work ;  and  he  expressed  the  utmost  willing- 
ness to  do  everything  in  his  power  towards  bringing  it 
before  the  world,  but  thought  that  his  firm  —  it  being 
their  business  to  publish  for  the  largest  circle  of  read- 
ers —  was  not  the  most  eligible  for  the  publication  of 
such  a  book.  Very  likely  this  may  be  so.  At  all 
events,  however,  I  am  to  send  him  the  manuscript, 
and  he  will  at  least  give  me  his  advice  and  assistance 
in  finding  a  publisher.  He  was  good  enough  to  ex- 
press great  regret  that  I  had  no  work  of  my  own  to 
give  him  for  publication ;  and,  truly,  I  regret  it  too, 
since,  being  a  resident  in  England,  I  could  now  have 
all  the  publishing  privileges  of  a  native  author.    He 


J856.]  LONDON,  837 

presented  me  with  a  copy  of  an  illustrated  edition  of 
Longfellow's  Poems,  and  I  took  my  leave. 

Thence  I  went  to  the  Picture  Gallery  at  the  British 
Institution,  where  there  are  three  rooms  full  of  paint- 
ings by  the  first  masters,  the  property  of  private 
persons.  Every  one  of  them,  no  doubt,  was  worth 
studying  for  a  long,  long  time ;  and  I  suppose  I  may 
have  given,  on  an  average,  a  minute  to  each.  What 
an  absurdity  it  would  seem,  to  pretend  to  read  two  or 
three  hundred  poems,  of  all  degrees  between  an  epic 
and  a  ballad,  in  an  hour  or  two  I  And  a  picture  is  a 
poem,  only  requiring  the  greater  study  to  be  felt  and 
comprehended ;  because  the  spectator  must  necessarily 
do  much  for  himself  towards  that  end.  I  saw  many 
beautiful  things,  —  among  them  some  landscapes  by 
Claude,  which  to  the  eye  were  like  the  flavor  of  a  rich, 
ripe  melon  to  the  palate. 


August  7th.  —  Yesterday  we  took  the  rail  for  Lon- 
don, it  being  a  fine,  sunny  day,  though  not  so  very 
warm  as  many  of  the  preceding  days  have  been.  .  .  . 
We  went  along  Piccadilly  as  far  as  the  Egyptian 
Hall.  It  is  quite  remarkable  how  comparatively  quiet 
the  town  has  become,  now  that  the  season  is  over. 
One  can  see  the  difference  in  all  the  region  west  of 
Temple  Bar ;  and,  indeed,  either  the  hot  weather  or 
some  other  cause  seems  to  have  operated  in  assuaging 
the  turmoil  in  the  city  itself.  I  never  saw  London 
Bridge  so  little  thronged  as  yesterday.  At  the  Egyp- 
tian  Hall,  or  in  the  same  edifice,  there  is  a  gallery  of 
pictures,  the  property  of  Lord  Ward,  who  allows  the 
public  to  see  them,  five  days  of  the  week,  without  any 
trouble  or  restriction,  —  a  great  kindness  on  his  Lord- 

VOL.  vni.  22 


838  ENGLISH  NO'TE'BOOKS.  [IS^fi* 

ship's  part,  It  must  be  owned.  It  is  a  veiy  valuable 
collection,  I  presume,  containing  specimens  of  many 
famous  old  masters ;  some  of  the  early  and  hard  pic* 
tures  by  Raphael,  and  his  master  and  fellow-pupils,  — 
very  curious,  and  nowise  beautiful ;  a  perfect,  sunny 
glimpse  of  Venice,  by  Canaletto;  and  saints,  and 
Scriptural,  allegorical,  and  mythological  people,  by 
Titian,  Guido,  Correggio,  and  many  more  names  than 
I  can  remember.  There  is  likewise  a  dead  Magdalen 
by  Canova,  and  a  Venus  by  the  same,  very  pretty, 
and  with  a  vivid  light  of  joyous  expression  in  her 
face ;  .  .  .  also  Powers's  Greek  Slave,  in  which  I  see 
little  beauty  or  merit ;  and  two  or  three  other  statues. 

We  then  drove  to  Ashley  Place,  to  call  on  Mrs.  S. 
C.  Hall,  whom  we  found  at  home.  In  fact,  Wednes- 
day is  her  reception-day ;  although,  as  now  everybody 
is  out  of  town,  we  were  the  only  callers.  She  is  an 
agreeable  and  kindly  woman.  She  told  us  that  her 
husband  and  herself  propose  going  to  America  next 
year,  and  I  heartily  wish  they  may  meet  with  a  warm, 
and  friendly  reception.  I  have  been  seldom  more  ash 
sured  of  the  existence  of  a  heart  than  in  her ;  also  a 
good  deal  of  sentiment.     She  had  been  visiting  Bessie, 

the  widow  of  Moore,  at  Sloperton,  and  gave'S a 

rose  from  his  cottage.  Such  things  are  very  true  and 
unaffected  in  her.  The  only  wonder  is  that  she  has 
not  lost  such  girlish  freshness  of  feeling  as  prompts 
them.  We  did  not  see  Mr.  Hall,  he  having  gone  to 
the  Crystal  Palace.  ^. 

Taking  our  leave,  we  returned  along  Victoria  Stre<)t 
—  a  new  street,  penetrating  through  what  was  re- 
cently one  of  the  worst  parts  of  the  town,  and  now'V, 
bordered  with  large  blocks  of  buildings,  in  a  dreary^       "* 


1856.]  LIVERPOOL.  339 

half -finished  state,  and  left  so  for  want  of  funds  —  till 
we  came  to  Westminster  Abbey.  We  went  in  and 
spent  an  hour  there,  wandering  all  round  the  nave 
and  aisles,  admiring  the  grand  old  edifice  itself,  but 
finding  more  to  smile  at  than  to  admire  in  the  mon- 
uments. .  .  .  The  interior  view  of  the  Abbey  is  bet- 
ter than  can  be  described ;  the  heart  aches,  as  one 
gazes  at  it,  for  lack  of  power  and  breadth  enough  to 
take  its  beauty  and  grandeur  in.  The  effect  was 
heightened  by  the  sun  shining  through  the  painted 
window  in  the  western  end,  and  by  the  bright  sun- 
shine that  came  through  the  open  portal,  and  lay  on 
the  pavement,  —  that  space  so  bright,  the  rest  of  the 
vast  floor  so  solemn  and  sombre.  At  the  western  end, 
in  a  comer  from  which  spectators  are  barred  out, 
there  is  a  statue  of  Wordsworth,  which  I  do  not  rec- 
ollect seeing  at  any  former  visit.  Its  only  compan- 
ion in  the  same  nook  is  Pope's  friend,  Secretary 
Craggs. 

Downing  Street,  that  famous  official  precinct,  took 
its  name  from  Sir  George  Downing,  who  was  proprie- 
tor or  lessee  of  property  there.  He  was  a  native  of 
my  own  old  native  town,  and  his  descendants  still 
reside  there, — collateral  descendants,  I  suppose,-— 
and  follow  the  dry-goods  business  (drapers). 

August  10th.  —  I  journeyed  to  Liverpool  via  Ches- 
ter. .  .  .  One  sees  a  variety  of  climate,  temperature, 
and  season  in  a  ride  of  two  hundred  miles,  north  and 
south,  through  England.  Near  London,  for  instance, 
the  grain  was  reaped,  and  stood  in  sheaves  in  the 
stubble-fields,  over  which  girls  and  children  might  be 
Been  gleaning;  farther  norths  the  golden,  or  greenish* 


840  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

golden,  crops  were  waving  in  the  wind.  In  one  part 
of  our  way  the  atmosphex^e  was  hot  and  dry ;  at 
another  point  it  had  been  cooled  and  refreshed  by  a 
heavy  thunder -shower,  the  pools  of  which  still  lay 
along  our  track.  It  seems  to  me  that  local  varieties 
of  weather  are  more  common  in  this  island,  and 
within  narrower  precincts,  than  in  America.  ...  I 
never  saw  England  of  such  a  dusky  and  dusiy  green 
before,  —  almost  sunbrowned,  indeed.  Sometimes 
the  green  hedges  formed  a  marked  framework  to  a 
broad  sheet  of  golden  grain-field.  As  we  drew  near 
Oxford,  just  before  reaching  the  station  I  had  a  good 
view   of   its   domes,   towers,   and   spires,  —  better,  I 

think,  than  when  J and  I  rambled  through  the 

town  a  month  or  two  ago. 

Mr.  Frank  Scott  Haydon,  of  the  Kecord  Office, 
London,  writes  me  that  he  has  found  a  "  Henry  Atte 
Hawthorne,"  on  a  roll  which  he  is  transcribing,  of  the 
first  Edward  III.  He  belonged  to  the  Parish  of  Al- 
dremeston,  in  the  hundred  of  Blakenhurste,  Worces- 
ter County. 

August  2l8f.  —  Yesterday,  at  twelve  o'clock,  I  took 
the  steamer  for  Runcorn,  from  the  pier-head.  In  the  . 
streets,  I  had  noticed  that  it  was  a  breezy  day ;  but 
on  the  river  there  was  a  very  stiff  breeze  from  the 
northeast,  right  ahead,  blowing  directly  in  our  face 
the  whole  way ;  and  truly  this  river  Mersey  is  never 
without  a  breeze,  and  generally  in  the  direction  of  its 
course,  — •  an  evil-tempered,  unkindly,  blustering  wind, 
that  you  cannot  meet  without  being  exasperated  by 
it.  As  it  came  straight  against  us,  it  was  impossible 
to  find  a  shelter  anywhere  on  deck,  except  it  were  bev 


1866.]  RUNCORN.  841 

hind  the  stove-pipe ;  and,  besides,  the  day  was  over- 
east  and  threatening  rain.  I  have  undergone  very 
miserable  hours  on  the  Mersey,  where,  in  the  space  of 
two  years,  1  voyaged  thousands  of  miles,  —  and  this 
trip  to  Runcorn  reminded  me  of  them,  though  it  was 
less  disagreeable  after  more  than  a  twelvemonth's 
respite.  We  had  a  good  many  passengers  on  board, 
most  of  whom  were  of  the  second  class,  and  congre- 
gated on  the  forward  deck ;  more  women  than  men,  I 
think,  and  some  of  them  with  their  husbands  and  chil- 
dren. Several  produced  lunch  and  bottles,  and  re- 
freshed themselves  very  soon  after  we  started.  By 
and  by  the  wind  became  so  disagreeable  that  I  went 
below,  and  sat  in  the  cabin,  only  occasionally  looking 
out,  to  get  a  peep  at  the  shores  of  the  river,  which  I 
had  never  before  seen  above  Eastham.  However, 
they  are  not  worth  looking  at ;  level  and  monotonous, 
without  trees  or  beauty  of  any  kind,  —  here  and  there 
a  village,  and  a  modern  church,  on  the  low  ridge  be- 
hind ;  perhaps,  a  windmill,  which  the  gusty  day  had 
set  busily  to  work.  The  river  continues  very  wide  — 
no  river,  indeed,  but  an  estuary  —  during  almost  the 
whole  distance  to  Euncom  ;  and  nearly  at  the  end  of 
our  voyage  we  approached  some  abrupt  and  promi- 
nent hills,  which,  many  a  time,  I  have  seen  on  my  pas- 
sages to  Rock  Ferry,  looking  blue  and  dim,  and  serv- 
ing for  prophets  of  the  weather ;  for  when  they  can 
be  distinctly  seen  adown  the  river,  it  is  a  token  of 
coming  rain.  We  met  many  vessels,  and  passed 
many  which  were  beating  up  against  the  wind,  and 
which  keeled  over,  so  that  their  decks  must  have 
dipped,  —  schooners  and  vessels  that  come  from  the 
Bridgewater  Canal.  We  shipped  a  sea  ourselves, 
which  gave  the  fore-deck  passengers  a  wetting. 


342  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.     .  [1856. 

Before  reaching  Kuncom,  we  stopped  to  land  some 
passengers  at  another  little  port,  where  there  was  a 
pier  and  a  light-house,  and  a  church  within  a  few 
yards  of  the  river-side,  —  a  good  many  of  the  river- 
craft,  too,  in  dock,  forming  quite  a  crowd  of  masts. 
About  ten  minutes'  further  steaming  brought  us  to 
Kuncom,  where  were  two  or  three  tall  manufacturing 
chimneys,  with  a  pennant  of  black  smoke  from  each  ; 
two  vessels  of  considerable  size  on  the  stocks ;  a 
church  or  two  ;  and  a  meagre,  uninteresting,  shabby, 
brick-built  town,  rising  from  the  edge  of  the  river, . 
with  irregular  streets,  —  not  village-like,  but  paved, 
and  looking  like  a  dwarfed,  stunted  city.  I  wandered 
through  it  till  I  came  to  a  tail,  high,  pedestaUed  wind- 
mill on  the  outer  verge,  the  vans  of  which  were  going 
briskly  round.  Thence  retracing  my  steps,  I  stopped 
at  a  poor  hotel,  and  took  lunch,  and,  finding  that  I 
was  in  time  to  take  the  steamer  back,  I  hurried  on 
board,  and  we  set  sail  (or  steam)  before  three.  I 
have  heard  of  an  old  castle  at  Runcorn,  but  could  dis- 
cover nothing  of  it.  It  was  well  that  I  returned  so 
promptly,  for  we  had  hardly  left  the  pier  before  it  be- 
gan to  rain,  and  there  was  a  heavy  downfall  through- 
out the  voyage  homeward.  Runcorn  is  fourteen  miles 
from  Liverpool,  and  is  the  farthest  point  to  which  a 
steamer  runs.  I  had  intended  to  come  home  by  rail, 
—  a  circuitous  route,  —  but  the  advice  of  the  landlady 
of  the  hotel,  and  the  aspect  of  the  weather,  and  a  feel- 
ing of  general  discouragement,  prevented  me. 

An  incident  in  S.  C.  HaU's  Ireland,  of  a  stone 
cross,  buried  in  Cromwell's  time,  to  prevent  its  de^ 
struction  by  his  soldiers.  It  was  forgotten,  and  be- 
came a  mere  doubtful  tradition,  but  one  old  man  had 


1856.]  SOUTHPORT.  843 

been  told  by  his  father,  and  he  by  his  father,  etc., 
that  it  was  buried  near  a  certain  spot ;  and  at  last, 
two  hundred  years  after  the  cross  was  buried,  the 
vicar  of  the  parish  dug  in  that  spot  and  found  it.  In 
my  (English)  romance,  an  American  might  bring  the 
tradition  from  over  the  sea,  and  so  discover  the  cross, 
which  had  been  altogether  forgotten, 

August  24ith,  —  Day  before  yesterday  I  took  the 
rail  for  Southport,  —  a  cool,  generally  overcast  day, 
with  glimmers  of  faint  sunshine.  The  ride  is  through 
a  most  uninteresting  tract  of  country,  —  at  first, 
glimpses  of  the  river,  with  the  thousands  of  masts  in 
the  docks ;  the  dismal  outskirts  pf  a  great  town,  still 
spreading  onward,  with  beginnings  of  streets,  and  in- 
sulated brick  buildings  and  blocks  ;  farther  on,  a  wide 
monotony  of  level  plain,  and  here  and  there  a  village 
and  a  church;  almost  always  a  windmill  in  sight, 
there  being  plenty  of  breeze  to  turn  its  vans  on  this 
windy  coast.  The  railway  skirts  along  the  sea  the 
whole  distance,  but  is  shut  out  from  the  sight  of  it  by 
the  low  sand-hills,  which  seem  to  have  been  heaped  up 
by  the  waves.  There  are  one  or  two  light-houses  on 
the  shore.  I  have  not  seen  a  drearier  landscape,  even 
in  Lancashire. 

Keaching  Southport  at  three,  I  rambled  about,  with 
a  view  to  discover  whether  it  be  a  suitable  residence 
for  my  family  during  September.  It  is  a  large  village, 
or  rather  more  than  a  village,  which  seems  to  be  al- 
most entirely  made  up  of  lodging-houses,  and,  at  any 
rate,  has  been  buUt  up  by  the  influx  of  summer  visit- 
ors, —  a  sandy  soil,  level,  and  laid  out  with  well-paved 
streets,  the  principal  of  which  are  enlivened  with  ba- 
zaars, markets,  shops,  hotels  of  various  degrees,  and  a 


844  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

showy  vivacity  of  aspect.  There  are  a  great  many 
donkey-carriages,  —  large  vehicles,  drawn  by  a  pair  of 
donkeys  ;  bath-chairs,  with  invalid  ladies  ;  refresh- 
ment-rooms in  great  nmnbers,  —  a  place  where  every- 
body seems  to  be  a  transitory  guest,  nobody  at  home. 
The  main  street  leads  directly  down  to  the  sea-shore, 
along  which  there  is  an  elevated  embankment,  with  a 
promenade  on  the  top,  and  seats,  and  the  toll  of  a 
penny.  The  shore  itself,  the  tide  being  then  low, 
stretched  out  interminably  seaward,  a  wide  waste  of 
glistering  3ands  ;  and  on  the  dry  border,  people  were 
riding  on  donkeys,  with  the  drivers  whipping  behind ; 
and  children  were  digging  with  their  little  wooden 
spades ;  and  there  were  donkey-carriages  far  out  on 
the  sands,  —  a  pleasant  and  breezy  drive.  A  whole 
city  of  bathing-machines  was  stationed  near  the  shore, 
and  I  saw  others  in  the  seaward  distance.  The  sea- 
air  was  refreshing  and  exhilarating,   and  if   S 

needs  a  seaside  residence,  I  should  think  this  might 
do  as  well  as  any  other. 

I  saw  a  large  brick  edifice,  enclosed  within  a  wall, 
and  with  somewhat  the  look  of  an  almshouse  or  hospi- 
tal ;  and  it  proved  to  be  an  Infirmary,  charitably  es- 
tablished for  the  reception  of  poor  invalids,  who  need 
sea-air  and  cannot  afford  to  pay  for  it.  Two  or  three 
of  such  persons  were  sitting  under  its  windows.  I  do 
not  think  that  the  visitors  of  Southport  are  generally 
of  a  very  opulent  class,  but  of  the  middle  rank,  from 
Manchester  and  other  parts  of  this  northern  region. 
The  lodging-houses,  however,  are  of  sufficiently  hand 
some  style  and  arrangement. 


1856.]  OXFORD.  345 

OXFORD. 

[Mr.  Hawthorne  extracted  from  his  recorded  Ox- 
ford experiences  his  excursion  to  Blenheim,  but  left  his 
observations  of  the  town  itself  untouched,  —  and  these 
I  now  transcribe.  —  Ed.] 

August  31s^  — .  .  .  Yesterday  we  took  the  rail 
for  London,  and  drove  across  the  city  to  the  Padding- 
ton  station,  where  we  met  Bennoch,  and  set  out  with 
him  for  Oxford.  I  do  not  quite  understand  the  mat- 
ter, but  it  appears  that  we  were  expected  guests  of  Mr. 
Spiers,  a  very  hospitable  gentleman,  and  Ex-Mayor  of 
Oxford,  and  a  friend  of  Bennoch  and  of  the  Halls. 
Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  met  us  at  the  Oxford  station,  and 
under  his  guidance  we  drove  to  a  quiet,  comfortable 
house  in  St.  Giles  Street,  where  rooms  had  been  taken 
for  us.    Durham,  the  sculptor,  is  likewise  of  the  party. 

After  establishing  ourselves  at  these  lodgings,  we 
walked  forth  to  take  a  preliminary  glimpse  of  the  city, 
tnd  Mr.  Hall,  being  familiar  with  the  localities,  served 
^idmirably  as  a  guide.  If  I  remember  aright,  I  spoke 
very  slightingly  of  the  exterior  aspect  of  Oxford,  as  I 

^aw  it  with  J during  an  hour  or  two's  stay  here, 

on  my  way  to  Southampton  (to  meet  S on  her  re- 
turn from  Lisbon).  1  am  bound  to  say  that  my  im- 
pressions are  now  very  different ;  and  that  I  find  Ox- 
ford exceedingly  picturesque  and  rich  in  beauty  and 
grandeur  and  in  antique  stateliness.  I  do  not  remem- 
ber very  particularly  what  we  saw,  — time-worn  fronts 
of  famous  colleges  and  halls  of  learning  everywhere 
about  the  streets,  and  arched  entrances  ;  passing 
through  which,  we  saw  bits  of  sculpture  from  monkish 
hands,  —  the  most  grotesque  and  ludicrous  faces,  as  if 


846  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  [1856. 

the  slightest  whim  of  these  old  carvers  took  shape  in 
stone,  the  material  being  so  soft  and  manageable  by 
them  ;  an  ancient  stone  pulpit  in  the  quadrangle  of 
Maudlin  College  (Magdalen),  one  of  only  three  now 
extant  in  England ;  a  splendid  —  no,  not  splendid, 
but  dimly  magnificent  — chapel,  belonging  to  the  same 
College,  with  painted  windows  of  rare  beauty,  not 
brilliant  with  diversified  hues,  but  of  a  sombre  tint. 
In  this  chapel  there  is  an  alabaster  monument,  —  a  re- 
cumbent figure  of  the  founder's  father,  as  large  as  life, 
—  which,  though  several  centuries  old,  is  as  well  pre- 
served as  if  fresh  from  the  chisel. 

In  the  High  Street,  which,  I  suppose,  is  the  noblest 
old  street  in  England,  Mr.  Hall  pointed  out  the  Crown 
Inn,  where  Shakespeare  used  to  spend  the  night,  and 
was  most  hospitably  welcomed  by  the  pretty  hostess 
(the  mother  of  Sir  William  Davenant),  on  his  passage 
between  Stratford  and  London.  It  is  a  three-story 
house,  with  other  houses  contiguous,  —  an  old  timber 
mansion,  though  now  plastered  and  painted  of  a  yel- 
lowish hue.  The  ground-floor  is  occupied  as  a  shoe- 
shop  ;  but  the  rest  of  the  house  is  still  kept  as  a  tav- 
ern. .  .  . 

It  is  not  now  term  time,  and  Oxford  loses  one  of  its 
most  characteristic  features  by  the  absence  of  the 
gownsmen  ;  but  still  there  is  a  good  deal  of  liveliness 
in  the  streets.  We  walked  as  far  as  a  bridge  beyond 
Maudlin  College,  and  then  drove  homeward. 

At  six  we  went  to  dine  with  the  hospitable  Ex- 
Mayor,  across  the  wide,  tree-bordered  street ;  for  his 
house  is  nearly  opposite  our  lodgings.  He  is  an  intel- 
ligent and  gentlemanly  person,  and  was  Mayor  two 
years  ago,  and  has  done  a  great  deal  to  make  peace  be- 
tween the  University  and  tiie  town,  heretofore  bitterly 


1856.J  OXFORD,  847 

inimical.  His  house  is  adorned  with  pictures  and 
drawings,  and  he  has  an  especial  taste  for  art.  .  .  . 
The  dinner-table  was  decorated  with  pieces  of  plate, 
vases,  and  other  things,  which  were  presented  to  him 
as  tokens  of  public  or  friendly  regard  and  approbation 
of  his  action  in  the  Mayoralty.  After  dinner,  too, 
he  produced  a  large  silver  snuflF-box,  which  had  been 
given  him  on  the  same  account ;  in  fact,  the  inscrip- 
tion affirmed  that  it  was  one  of  five  pieces  of  plate  so 
presented.  The  vases  are  really  splendid,  —  one  of 
them  two  feet  high,  and  richly  ornamented.  It  will 
hold  five  or  six  bottles  of  wine,  and  he  said  that  it  had 
been  filled,  and,  I  believe,  sent  round  as  a  loving-cup 
at  some  of  his  entertainments.  He  cordially  enjoys 
these  things,  and  his  genuine  benevolence  produces  all 
this  excellent  hospitality.  .  .  .  But  Bennoch  proposed 
a  walk,  and  we  set  forth.  We  rambled  pretty  exten- 
sively about  the  streets,  sometimes  seeing  the  shapes 
of  old  edifices  dimly  and  doubtfully,  it  being  an  over- 
cast night ;  or  catching  a  partial  view  of  a  gray  wall, 
or  a  pillar,  or  a  Gothic  archway,  by  lamplight.  .  .  . 
The  clock  had  some  time  ago  struck  eleven,  when  we 
were  passing  under  a  long  extent  of  antique  wall  and 
towers,   which  were   those  of  Baliol   College.      Mr. 

D led  us  into  the  middle  of  the  street,  and  showed 

us  a  cross,  which  was  paved  into  it,  on  a  level  with  the 
rest  of  the  road.  This  was  the  spot  where  Latimer  and 
Jlidley  and  another  Bishop  were  martyred  in  Bloody 
Mary's  time.  There  is  a  memorial  to  them  in  another 
street ;  but  this,  where  1  set  my  foot  at  nearly  mid- 
night, was  the  very  spot  where  their  flesh  burned  to 
ashes,  and  their  bones  whitened.  It  has  been  a  most 
beautiful  morning,  and  I  have  seen  few  pleasanter 
scenes  than  this  street  in  which  we  lodge,  with  its  spar- 


848  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

cious  breadth,  its  two  rows  of  fine  old  trees,  with  side- 
walks as  wide  as  the  whole  width  of  some  streets  ;  and, 
on  the  opposite  side,  the  row  of  houses,  some  of  them 
ancient,  with  picturesque  gables,  partially  disclosed 
through  the  intervening  foliage.  .  .  .  From  our  win- 
dow we  have  a  slantwise  glimpse,  to  the  right,  of  the 
walls  of  St.  John's  College,  and  the  general  aspect  of 
St.  Giles.  It  is  of  an  antiquity  not  to-  shame  those 
mediaeval  halls.  Our  own  lodgings  are  in  a  house 
that  seems  to  be  very  old  with  panelled  walls,  and 
beams  across  the  ceilings,  lattice-windows  in  the  cham- 
bers, and  a  musty  odor  such  as  old  houses  inevitably 
have.  Nevertheless,  everything  is  extremely  neat, 
clean,  and  comfortable ;  and  in  term  time  our  apart- 
ments are  occupied  by  a  Mr.  Stebbing,  whose  father  ia 
known  in  literature  by  some  critical  writings,  and  who 
is  a  graduate,  and  an  admirable  scholar.  There  is  a 
bookcase  of  five  shelves,  containing  his  books,  mostly 
standard  works,  and  indicating  a  safe  and  solid  taste. 
After  lunch  to-day  we    (that  is,  Mrs.   Hall,  her 

adopted  daughter,  S ,  and  I,  with  the  Ex-Mayor) 

set  forth,  in  an  open  barouche,  to  see  the  remarkables 
of  Oxford,  while  the  rest  of  the  ^guests  went  on  foot. 
We  first  drew  up  at  New  College  (a  strange  name  for 
such  an  old  place,  but  it  was  new  some  time  since  the 
Conquest),  and  went  through  its  quiet  and  sunny  quad- 
rangles, and  into  its  sunny  and  shadowy  gardens.  I 
am  in  despair  about  the  architecture  and  old  edifices 
of  these  Oxford  colleges,  it  is  so  impossible  to  express 
them  in  words.  They  are  themselves  —  as  the  archi- 
tect left  them,  and  as  Time  has  modified  and  improved 
them  —  the  expression  of  an  idea  which  does  not  ad- 
mit of  being  otherwise  expressed,  or  translated  into 
anything  else.     Those  old  battlemented  walls  around 


1856.]  OXFORD. 

the  quadrangles  ;  many  gables  ;  the  windows  Wi^^ 
stone  pavilions,  so. very  antique,  yet  some  of  them 
adorned  with  fresh  flowers  in  pots,  —  a  very  sweet  con- 
trast ;  the  ivy  mantling  the  gray  stone ;  and  the  infi- 
nite repose,  both  in  sunshine  and  shadow,  —  it  is  as  if 
half  a  dozen  by-gone  centuries  had  set  up  tlieir  rest 
here,  and  as  if  nothing  of  the  present  time  ever  passed 
through  the  deeply  recessed  archway  that  shuts  in  the 
College  from  the  street.  Not  but  what  people  have 
very  free  admittance  ;  and  many  parties  of  young  men 
and  girls  and  children  came  into  the  gardens  while  we 
were  there. 

These  gardens  of  New  College  are  indescribably 
beautiful,  —  not  gardens  in  an  American  sense,  but 
lawns  of  the  richest  green  and  softest  velvet  grass, 
shadowed  over  by  ancient  trees,  that  have  lived  a  quiet 
life  here  for  centuries,  and  have  been  nursed  and 
tended  with  such  care,  and  so  sheltered  from  rude 
winds,  that  certainly  they  must  have  been  the  happiest 
of  aU  trees.  Such  a  sweet,  quiet,  sacred,  stately  seclu- 
sion —  so  age-long  as  this  has  been,  and,  I  hope,  wiU 
continue  to  be  —  cannot  exist  anywhere  else.  One 
side  of  the  garden  wall  is  formed  by  the  ancient  wall 
of  the  city,  which  Cromwell's  artillery  battered,  and 
which  still  retains  its  pristine  height  and  strength.  At 
intervals,  there  are  round  towers  that  formed  the  bas- 
tions ;  that  is  to  say,  on  the  exterior  they  are  round 
towers,  but  within,  in  the  garden  of  the  College,  they 
are  semicircular  recesses,  with  iron  garden -seats  ar- 
ranged round  them.  The  loop-holes  through  which 
the  archers  and  musketeers  used  to  shoot  still  pierce 
through  deep  recesses  in  the  wall,  which  is  here  about 
six  feet  thick.  I  wisK  I  could  put  into  one  sentence 
the  whole  impression  of  this  garden,  but  it  could  not 
be  done  in  many  pages. 


860  ENGLISH  NOTE^BOOKS.  [185S. 

We  looked  also  at  the  outside  of  the  wall,  and  Mr. 
Parker,  deeply  skilled  in  the  antiquities  of  the  spot, 
showed  us  a  weed  growing,  —  here  in  little  sprigs^ 
there  in  large  and  heavy  festoons,  —  hanging  plenti- 
fully downward  from  a  shallow  root.  It  is  called  the 
Oxford  plant,  being  found  only  here,  and  not  easily, 
if  at  all,  introduced  anywhere  else.  It  bears  a  small 
and  pretty  blue  flower,  not  altogether  unlike  the  for- 
get-me-not, and  we  took  some  of  it  away  with  us  for  a 
memorial.  We  went  into  the  chapel  of  New  College, 
which  is  in  such  fresh  condition  that  I  think  it  must 
be  modem ;  and  yet  this  cannot  be,  since  there  are  old 
brasses  inlaid  into  tombstones  in  the  pavement,  rep- 
resenting mediaeval  ecclesiastics  and  college  dignita- 
ries; and  busts  against  the  walls,  in  antique  garb;  and 
old  painted  windows,  unmistakable  in  their  antiquity. 
But  there  is  likewise  a  window,  lamentable  to  look  at, 
which  was  painted  by  Sir  Joshua  Eeynolds,  and  ex- 
hibits strikingly  the  difference  between  the  work  of  a 
man  who  performed  it  merely  as  a  matter  of  taste  and 
business,  and  what  was  done  religiously  and  with  the 
whole  heart ;  at  least,  it  shows  that  the  artists  and  pub- 
lic of  the  last  age  had  no  sympathy  with  Gothic  art. 
In  the  chancel  of  this  church  there  are  more  painted 
windows,  which  I  take  to  be  modern,  too,  though  they 
are  in  much  better  taste,  and  have  an  infinitely  better 
effect,  than  Sir  Joshua's.  At  any  rate,  with  the  sun- 
shine through  them,  they  looked  very  beautiful,  and 
tinted  the  high  altar  and  the  pavement  with  brilliant 
hues. 

The  sacristan  opened  a  tall  and  narrow  little  recess 
in  the  wall  of  the  chancel,  and  showed  it  entirely  filled 
with  the  crosier  of  William  of  Wickham.  It  appears 
to  be  made  of  silver  gilt,  and  is  a  most  rich  and  elab* 


1856.]  OXFORD.  851 

orate  relic,  at  least  six  feet  high.  Modem  art  cannot, 
or  does  not,  equal  the  chasing  and  carving  of  this 
splendid  crosier,  which  is  enriched  with  figures  of 
saints  and  apostles,  and  various  Gothic  devices,  —  very 
minute,  but  all  executed  as  faithfully  as  if  the  artist's 
salvation  had  depended  upon  every  notch  he  made  in 
the  silver.  ... 

Leaving  New  College,  Bennoch  and  I,  under  Mr. 
Parker's  guidance,  walked  round  Christ  Church  mead- 
ows, part  of  our  way  lying  along  the  banks  of  the 
Cherwell,  which  unites  with  the  Isis  to  form  the 
Thames,  I  believe.  The  CherweU  is  a  narrow  and  re- 
markably sluggish  stream ;  but  is  deep  in  spots,  and 
capriciously  so,  —  so  that  a  person  may  easily  step 
from  knee-deep  to  fifteen  feet  in  depth.  A  gentleman 
present  used  a  queer  expression  in  reference  to  the 
drowning  of  two  college  men ;  he  said  "  it  was  an  awk- 
ward affair."  1  think  this  is  equal  to  Longfellow's 
story  pf  the  Frenchman  who  avowed  himself  very 
much  "  displeased  "  at  the  news  of  his  father's  death. 
At  the  confluence  of  the  Cherwell  and  Isis  we  saw  a 
good  many  boats,  belonging  to  the  students  of  the  va- 
rious colleges ;  some  of  them  being  very  large  and 
handsome  barges,  capable  of  accommodating  a  numer- 
ous party,  with  room  on  board  for  dancing  and  merry- 
making.  Some  of  them  are  calculated  to  be  drawn  by 
horses,  in  the  manner  of  canal-boats ;  others  are  pro- 
pellable  by  oars.  It  is  practicable  to  perform  the  voy- 
age between  Oxford  and  London  —  a  distance  of  about 
one  hundred  and  thirty  miles  —  in  three  days.  The 
students  of  Oxford  are  famous  boatmen ;  there  is  a 
constant  rivalship,  on  this  score,  among  the  different 
colleges  ;  and  annually,  I  believe,  there  is  a  match  be- 
tween Oxford  and  Cambridge.  The  Cambridge  men 
beat  the  Oxonians  in  this  year's  trial. 


852  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [?85a 

On  our  return  into  the  city,  we  passed  through 
Christ  Church;  which,  as  regards  the  number  of  stu- 
dents, is  the  most  considerable  college  of  the  Univer- 
sity. It  has  a  stately  dome ;  but  my  memory  is  con- 
fused with  battlements,  towers,  and  gables,  and  Gothic 
staircases  and  cloisters.  If  there  had  been  nothing 
else  in  Oxford  but  this  one  establishment,  my  antici- 
pations would  not  have  been  disappointed.  The  bell 
was  tolling  for  worship  in  the  chapel ;  and  Mr.  Parker 
told  us  that  Dr.  Pusey  is  a  canon,  or  in  some  sort  of 
dignity,  in  Christ  Church,  •  and  would  soon  probably 
make  his  appearance  in  the  quadrangle,  on  his  way 
to  chapel ;  so  we  walked  to  and  fro,  waiting  an  oppor- 
tunity to  see  him.  A  gouty  old  dignitary,  in  a  white 
surplice,  came  hobbling  along  from  one  extremity  of 
the  court ;  and  by  and  by,  from  the  opposite  corner, 
'  appeared  Dr.  Pusey,  also  in  a  white  surplice  and  with 
a  lady  by  his  side.  We  met  him,  and  I  stared  pretty 
fixedly  at  him,  as  I  well  might ;  for  he  looked  on  the 
ground,  as  if  conscious  that  he  would  be  stared  at. 
He  is  a  man  past  middle  life,  of  sufficient  breadth 
and  massiveness,  with  a  pale,  intellectual,  manly  face* 
He  was  talking  with  the  lady,  and  smiled,  but  not 
jollily.  Mr..  Parker,  who  knows  him,  says  that  he  is 
a  man  of  kind  and  gentle  affections.  The  lady  was 
his  niece. 

Thence  we  went  through  High  Street  and  Broad 
Street,  and  passing  by  Baliol  College,  —  a  most  satis- 
factory pile  and  range  of  old  towered  and  gabled  edi- 
fices, —  we  came  to  the  cross  on  the  pavement,  which 
is  supposed  to  mark  the  spot  where  the  bishops  were 
martyred.  But  Mr.  Parker  told  us  the  mortifying 
fact,  that  he  had  ascertained  that  this  could  not  pos< 
ribly  have  been  the  genuine  spot  of  martyrdom,  which 


iMy6.]  OXFORD.  868 

mii9t  ha^e  taken  place  «t  a  point  within  view,  but 
eonsiderablj  too  far  off  to  be  moistened  by  any  tears 
that  may  be  shed  heve.  It  is  too  bad.  We  concluded 
the  rambles  of  the  day  by  vi»ting  the  gardens  of  St. 
John^s  College ;  and  I  desire,  if  possible,  to  say  even 
mace  in  admiratian  of  them  than  of  those  of  New 
College,  —  such  beautiful  lawns,  wi&  tall,  ancient 
trees,  and  heavy  clouds  of  foliage,  and  sunny  glimpses 
through  arohway«  of  leafy  brandhes,  where,  to-day, 
we  could  see  parties  of  girls,  making  cheerful  contrast 
with  the  sombre  walls  and  solemn  shade.  The  world, 
surely,  has  not  another  plaee  tike  Oxford  ;  it  is  a  de- 
spair to  see  smdi  a  place  and  ever  to  leave  it,  for  it 
would  take  a  lifetime  and  more  than  one,  to  compre- 
hend and  enjoy  it  satiafaotorily. 

At  dinner,  to-day,  the  golden  vases  were  all  ranged 
on  the  table,  the  largest  and  central  one  containing  a 
most  magnificent  bouquet  of  dahlias  and  other  brigbt- 
hued  flowers. 


CHEI8T  CHURCH. 

On  Tuesday,  our  first  visit  was  to  Christ  Church, 
where  we  saw  the  large  and  stately  hall,  above  a  hun- 
dred feet  long  by  forty  wide,  and  fifty  to  the  top  of 
its  carved  oaken  roof,  which  is  ornamented  with  fes- 
toons, as  it  were,  and  pendants  of  solid  timber.  The 
walls  are  panelled  with  oak,  perhaps  half-way  upward, 
and  above  are  the  rows  of  arched  windows  on  each 
side;  but,  near  the  upper  end,  two  great  windows 
come  nearly  to  the  floor.  There  is  a  dais,  where  the 
great  men  of  the  College  and  the  distinguished  guests 
Bit  at  table,  and  the  tables  of  the  students  are  ar- 
ranged along  the  length  of  the   hall.     All  around, 


854  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

looking  down  upon  those  who  sit  at  meat,  are  the  poiv 
traits  of  a  multitude  of  illustrious  personages  who 
were  members  of  the  learned  fraternity  in  times  past; 
not  a  portrait  being  admitted  there  (unless  it  be  a 
king,  and  1  remember  only  Henry  VIII.)  save  those 
who  were  actually  students  on  the  foundation,  receiv- 
ing the  eleemosynary  aid  of  the  College.  Most  of 
them  were  divines ;  but  there  are  likewise  many  states- 
men, eminent  during  the  last  three  hundred  years,  and, 
among  many  earlier  ones,  the  Marquis  of  Wellesley 
and  Canning.  It  is  an  excellent  idea,  for  their  own 
glory,  and  as  examples  to  the  rising  generations,  to 
have  this  multitude  of  men,  who  have  done  good  and 
great  things,  before  the  eyes  of  those  who  ought  to 
do  as  well  as  they,  in  their  own  time.  Archbishops, 
Prime  Ministers,  poets,  deep  scholars,  —  but,  doubt- 
less, an  outward  success  has  generally  been  their  claim 
to  this  position,  and  Christ  Church  may  have  forgot- 
ten a  better  man  than  the  best  of  them.  It  is  not,  I 
think,  the  tendency  of  English  life,  nor  of  the  educar 
tion  of  their  colleges,  to  lead  young  men  to  high 
moral  excellence,  but  to  aim  at  illustrating  themselves 
in  the  sight  of  mankind. 

Thence  we  went  into  the  kitchen,  which  is  arranged 
very  much  as  it  was  three  centuries  ago,  with  twc 
immense  fireplaces.  There  was  likewise  a  gridiron, 
which,  without  any  exaggeration,  was  large  enough  to 
have  served  for  the  martyrdom  of  St.  Lawrence.  The 
college  dinners  are  good,  but  plain,  and  cost  the  stu- 
dents one  shilling  and  eleven  pence  each,  being  rather 
cheaper  than  a  similar  one  could  be  had  at  an  inn. 
There  is  no  provision  for  breakfast  or  supper  in  com- 
mons ;  but  they  can  have   these  meals  sent  to  theii 


1856.]  OXFORD.  865 

rooms  from  the  buttery,  at  a  charge  proportioned  to 
the  dishes  they  order.  There  seems  to  be  no  neces- 
sity for  a  great  expenditure  on  the  part  of  Oxford 
students. 

From  the  kitchen  we  went  to  the  chapel,  which  is 
the  cathedral  of  Oxford,  and  well  worth  seeing,  if 
there  had  not  been  so  many  other  things  to  see.  It  is 
now  under  repair,  and  there  was  a  great  heap  of  old 
wood-work  and  panelling  lying  in  one  of  the  aisles, 
which  had  been  stripped  away  from  some  of  the  an- 
cient pillars,  leaving  them  as  good  as  new.  There 
is  a  shrine  of  a  saint,  with  a  wooden  canopy  over  it ; 
and  some  painted  glass,  old  and  new;  and  a  statue 
of  Cyril  Jackson,  With  a  face  of  shrewdness  and  in- 
sight ;  and  busts,  as  mural  monuments. 

Our  next  visit  was  to 

MEBTON  COLLEGE, 

which,  though  not  one  of  the  great  colleges,  is  as  old 
as  any  of  them,  and  looks  exceedingly  venerable.  We 
were  here  received  by  a  friend  of  Mr.  Spiers,  in  his 
academic  cap,  but  without  his  gown,  which  is  not 
worn,  except  in  term  time.  He  is  a  very  civil  gen- 
tleman, and  showed  us  some  antique  points  of  archi- 
tecture,— such  as  a  Norman  archway,  with  a  passage 
over  it,  through  which  the  Queen  of  Charles  I.  used 
to  go  to  chapel ;  and  an  edifice  of  the  thirteenth  cen- 
tury, with  a  stone  roof,  which  is  considered  to  be  very 
curious. 

How  ancient  is  the  aspect  of  these  coUege  quad-* 
rangles!  so  gnawed  by  time  as  they  are,  so  crumbly, 
BO  blackened,  and  so  gray  where  they  are  not  black,  — 
so  quaintly  shaped,  too,  with  here  a  line  of  battlement 
and  there  a  row  of  gables;  and  here  a  turret,  with 


S56  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  flSS^. 

probably  a  iraiding  stair  inside ;  and  lattioe^wiadows, 
with  stone  mullioxis,  and  little  panes  of  glass  set  in 
lead  ;  and  the  cioisteis,  with  a  long  arcade,  lookiog 
upon  the  green  or  pebbled  enclosure.  The  quality  of 
Ihe  stone  has  a  great  ^al  to  do  vdth  ihe  apparcmt  an- 
tiquity*  It  is  a  stone  found  in  the  neighborhood  of 
Oxford,  and  very  soon  begins  to  crumble  and  decay 
superficially,  when  exposed  to  the  weather;  so  Ukalt 
twenty  years  do  the  work  of  a  hundred,  so  far  as  ap- 
pearances go.  If  you  strike  one  of  the  old  walls  with 
a  stick,  a  portion  of  it  eomes  powdering  down.  The 
^ect  of  this  decay  is  very  picturesque,  and  is  espe- 
cially striking,  I  think,  on  edifices  of  classic  architec- 
ture, such  as  6<nne  of  the  Oxford  colleges  are,  greatly 
enriching  the  Grceeian  colmnas,  which  look  so  cold 
when  the  outlines  are  hard  and  distinct.  The  Oxford 
people,  however,  are  tired  of  this  crmnbly  stone,  and 
when  repairs  are  necessary,  they  use  a  more  durable 
material,  ininch  does  not  well  assort  with  the  antiquity 
into  which  it  is  intruded. 

Mr.  E'  '  ■  showed  us  the  library  of  Merton  Col- 
lege. It  occupies  two  sides  of  an  old  building,  and 
has  a  very  delightful  fragrance  of  ancient  books.  The 
halls  contaimng  it  are  vaulted,  and  roofed  with  oak, 
not  carved  and  ornamented,  but  laid  flat,  so  that  diey 
look  very  like  a  grand  and  spacious  old  garret.  All 
along,  ihere  is  a  row  of  alcoves  on  each  side,  with  rude 
benches  and  reading-dedcs,  in  the  simplest  style,  and 
nobody  knows  how  old.  The  books  look  as  old  as  the 
building.  The  more  valuable  were  formerly  chained 
to  the  boc^cases;  and  a  few  of  them  have  not  yet 
broken  their  chains.  It  was  a  good  emblem  of  tlie 
dark  and  monkish  ages,  when  learning  was  imprisoned 
in  their  ckisters,  and  chained  in  their  libraries,  in  the 


1866.}  OXFORD.  867 

days  when  the  schoolmaster  had  not  yet  goioe  aibroitd* 

Mr.  E showed  us  a  very  old  copy  of  the  Bible  ; 

and  a  vellum  manuscript,  most  beautifully  written  in 
black-letter  and  illominated,  of  the  works  of  Duns 
Scotus,  who  was  a  scholar  of  Merton  CoUege. 

He  then  showed  ns  the  chapel,  a  large  part  oi  which 
has  been  renewed  and  ornamented  with  pictured  win* 
dows  and  other  ecclesiastical  splendor,  and  paved  with 
encaustic  tiles,  according  to  the  Puseyite  taste  of  the 
day ;  for  Merton  has  adopted  the  Pus^te  doctrines, 
and  is  one  of  their  chief  stroiigholds  in  Oxford.  I£ 
they  do  no  other  good,  they  at  least  do  much  fov  pres^ 
ervation  and  characteristic  restoration  of  the  old  Ikig* 
lish  churches ;  but  perhaps,  even  here,  there  is  as  much 
antiq^uity  spoiled  as  retained.  In  the  portion  of  the- 
chapel  not  yet  restored,,  we  saw  the  rude  old  pavemeuty 
inlaid  with  gravestones,  in  some  of  which  were  brasses, 
with  the  figures  of  tiie  college  dignitaries  whose  dust 
slumbered  beneath ;  and  I  think  it  was  here  that  I 
saw  the  tombstone  of  Anthony-a-Woody  the  gossiping 
biographer  of  the  learned  men  of  Oxford. 

From  the  chapel  we  went  into  the  college  gardenA, 
which  are  very  pleasant,  and  possess  the  advantag)e> 
of  looking  out  an  the  broad  verdure  of  CSoist  Church 
meadows  and  the  river  beyond.     We  loitered  herd 

awhile,  and  tiien  went  to  Mr.  E ^'s  rooaus,  to  which 

the  entrance  is  by  a  fine  old  staircase.  They  had  a 
very  comfortable  aspect,  —  a  wainscoted  parlor  and 
bedroom^  as  nice  and  cosey  as  a  bachelor  could  desire, 
with  a  good  collection  of  theological  bookft ;  and  on  a 
peg  hung  his  gown,  with  a  red  border  about  it,  denot* 
ing  hun  to  be  a  proproctor.  He  was  kind  enough  to 
order  a  bmeh,  consisting  of  bread  and  cheese,,  college 
ale,  and  a  certain  liquor  called  ^'Archdeacon.''  •  •  > 


858  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOORS.  [1856. 

We  ate  and  drank,  .  .  .  and,  bidding  farewell  to 
good  Mr.  E ,  we  pursued  our  way  to  the 

BATCLIFFE  LIBRARY. 

This  is  a  very  handsome  edifice,  of  a  circular  shape ; 
the  lower  story  consisting  altogether  of  arches,  open 
on  all  sides,  as  if  to  admit  anybody  to  the  learning 
here  stored  up.  I  always  see  great  beauty  and  light- 
someness  in  these  classic  and  Grecian  edifices,  though 
they  seem  cold  and  intellectual,  and  not  to  have  had 
their  mortar  moistened  with  human  life-blood,  nor  to 
have  the  mystery  of  human  life  in  them,  as  Gothic 
structures  do.  The  library  is  in  a  large  and  beauti- 
ful room,  in  the  story  above  the  basement,  and,  as  far 
as  I  saw,  consisted  chiefly  or  altogether  of  scientific 
works.  I  saw  Silliman's  Journal  on  one  of  the  desks, 
being  the  only  trace  of  American  science,  or  American 
learning  or  ability,  in  any  department,  which  I  discov- 
ered in  the  University  of  Oxford.  After  seeing  the 
library,  we  went  to  the  top  of  the  building,  where  we 
had  an  excellent  view  of  Oxford  and  the  surrounding 
country.     Then  we  went  to  the  Convocation  Hall,  and 

afterwards  to  the  theatre,  where  S sat  down  in 

the  Chancellor's  chair,  which  is  very  broad,  and  pon- 
derously wrought  of  oak.  I  remember  little  here,  ex- 
cept the  amphitheatre  of  benches,  and  the  roof,  which 
seems  to  be  supported  by  golden  ropes,  and  on  the 
wall,  opposite  the  door,  some  full-length  portraits, 
among  which  one  of  that  ridiculous  coxcomb,  George 
IV.,  was  the  most  prominent.  These  kings  thrust 
tiiemselves  impertinently  forward  by  bust,  statue,  and 
picture,  on  all  occasions,  and  it  is  not  wise  in  them  to 
show  their  shallow  foreheads  among  men  of  mind. 


1856.]  OXFORD.  859 

THE  BODLEIAN  UBBABT. 

Mr«  Spiers  tried  to  get  us  admittance  to  the  Bod- 
leian Libr^iry ;  but  this  is  just  the  moment  when  it  is 
closed  for  the  purpose  of  being  cleaned  ;  so  we  missed 
seeing  the  principal  halls  of  this  library,  and  were  only 
admitted  into  what  was  called  the  Picture  Gallery. 
This,  however,  satisfied  all  my  desires,  so  far  as  the 
backs  of  books  are  concerned,  for  they  extend  through 
a  gallery,  running  round  three  sides  of  a  quadrangle, 
making  an  aggregate  length  of  more  than  four  hun- 
dred feet,  —  a  solid  array  of  bookcases,  full  of  books, 
within  a  protection  of  open  iron-work.  Up  and  down 
the  gaUery  there  are  models  of  classic  temples ;  and 
about  midway  in  its  extent  stands  a  brass  statue  of 
Earl  Pembroke,  who  was  Chancellor  of  the  University 
in  James  I.'s  time ;  not  in  scholarly  garb,  however,  but 
in  plate  and  mail,  looking  indeed,  like  a  thunderbolt 
of  war.  I  rapped  him  with  my  knuckles,  and  he 
seemed  to  be  solid  metal,  though,  I  should  imagine, 
hollow  at  heart.  A  thing  which  interested  me  very 
much  was  the  lantern  of  Guy  Fawkes.  It  was  once 
tinned,  no  doubt,  but  is  now  nothing  but  rusty  iron, 
partly  broken.  As  this  is  called  the  Picture  Gallery, 
I  must  not  forget  the  pictures,  which  are  ranged  in 
long  succession  over  the  bookcases,  and  include  almost 
all  Englishmen  whom  the  world  has  ever  heard  of, 
whether  in  statesmanship  or  literature.  I  saw  a  can- 
vas on  which  had  once  been  a  lovely  and  unique  por- 
trait of  Mary  of  Scotland ;  but  it  was  consigned  to  a 
picture-cleaner  to  be  cleansed,  and,  discovering  that  it 
was  painted  over  another  picture,  he  had  the  curiosity 
to  clean  poor  Mary  quite  away,  thus  revealing  a  wishy- 
washy  woman's  face,  which  now  hangs  in  the  gallery. 


8fi0  ENGLISH  NOTB^BOOKS,  [ia«. 

I  am  so  tired  of  seeing  notable  things  that  I  abnost 
wish  that  whatever  else  is  r^nai^able  in  Oxford  could 
be  obliterated  in  some  similar  manner. 
From  the  Bodleian  we  went  io 

THE  TAYLOB  INSTITUTE, 

which  was  likewise  dosed  ;  but  the  woman  who  had  it 
in  charge  had  formerly  been  a  servant  of  Mr.  Spiers, 
and  he  so  overpersuaded  her  that  die  finally  smiled 
and  admitted  us.  It  would  truly  have  been  a  pity  to 
miss  it ;  for  here,  on  the  basement  floor,,  are  the  orig- 
inal models  of  Chantrey's  busts  and  statues,  great  and 
small ;  and  in  the  rooms  above  aro  a  far  ridier  trea»^ 
ure,  —  a  large  collection  oi  original  drawings  by  Raph*- 
ael  and  Michel  Angelo.  These  are  far  better  for  my 
purpose  than  theii?  finished  pictures,  —  that  is  to  say, 
they  bring  me  much  closer  to  the  hands  that  drew 
them  and  the  minds  thai  ims^ined  them*  It  is  like 
looking  into  their  brains,  and  seeing  the  &*st  concep- 
tion before  it  took  shape  outwardly  (I  have  somewhere 
else  said  about  the  same  thing  of  sudi  sketches).  I 
noticed  one  of  RaphaeFs  drawings,  representing  the 
effect  of  eloquence  ;  it  was  a  man  speaidng  in  the  cen- 
tre of  a  group,  between  whose  earsr  and  the  orator's 
mouth  connecting  lines  were  drawn.  Raphael's  idea 
must  have  been  to  compose  his  picture  in  such  a  way 
that  their  auricular  organs  should  not  fail  to  be  in  a 
proper  relation  with  the  eloquent  voice ;  and  though 
this  relation  would  not  have  been  individually  trace- 
able in  the  finished  picture,  yet  the  general  effect— < 
Hiat  of  deep  and  entranced  attention  --*  would  have 
been  produced. 

In  another  room  there  are  some  copies  of  RaphaeFd 
cartoons,  and  some  queer  medieval  pictures,  as  stiff 


1656.]  OXFORD,  861 

fund  uglj  fi.8  cfia  Vf^  be  conceiyed,  y^  tsueoessful  m 
telling  their  oum  story.  We  looked  »  little  wJule  at 
these,  and  then,  thank  Heaven !  went  home  and  dressed 
for  dinner.  I  can  write  no  more  to-day.  Indeed^ 
what  a  mockSry  it  is  to  wlite  at  alll 

[Here  follows  the  drive  to  Cumnor  Place,  Stantoi: . 
Harcourt,  Nnneham  Courtoey,  Grodstowe,  ^.,  —  alf 
ready  published  in  "  Our  Old  Home,"  —  B©,] 

September  9tK  —  The  morning  after  our  excursion 
0&  tbe  Thames  was  as  bright  aiul  beautiful  as  many 
preceding  ones  had  been*  After  breakfast  S  ■  ■■  and 
I  walked  a  little  about  tibe  town,  and  bou^it  ^'Thomas 

a  Kempis,"  in  both  French  and  English,  for  U-- . 

•  •  .  Mr.  De  la  Motte,  the  photographer,  had  brealo 
fasted  with  us,  and  Mr.  Spiers  wished  him  to  take  a 
photo^aph  of  our  whole  party.  So,  in  the  first  place, 
before  the  rest  were  assembled,  he  made  aa  esperimenr 
ial  group  of  such  as  were  tiiere;  and  I  did  n<xb  like  my 
own  aspect  very  much.  Afterwards,  when  we  were  all 
come,  he  arranged  us  under  a  tree  in  the  garden,  — 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Spiers,  with  their  eldest  son,  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Hall  and  Fanny,  Mr.  Addisim,  my  wife^  and  me, 
r-^  and  stained  the  glass  wiiii  our  figures  and  &ces  in 

the  twinkling  of  an  ^ye ;  not  6 's  face,  however, 

for  she  turned  it  away,  and  left  only  a  portion  oi  her 
bonnet  and  dress,  —  and  Mrs.  HaU,  too,  r^sed  to 
countenance  the  proceeding.  But  all  the  rest  of  us 
were  caught  to  the  life,  and  Z  was  really  a  littiie  start- 
led at  recognizing  myself  so  apaart  from  myself,  and 
done  so  quickly  too. 

This  was  the  last  im^riant  ineident  of  our  visit  to 
Oxford,  exoept  that  Mr.  Spiers  was  again  most  hospir 
toble  at  lunch.    Never  did  anybody  attend  more  faHh^ 


362  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [185«. 

fully  to  the  comfort  of  his  friends  than  does  this  good 
gentleman.  But  he  has  shown  himself  most  kind  in 
every  possible  way,  and  I  shall  always  feel  truly  grate- 
ful. No  better  way  of  showing  our  sense  of  his  hos- 
pitality,  and  all  the  troubled  he  has  taken  for  us  (and 
our  memory  of  him),  has  occurred  to  us,  than  to  pre. 
sent  him  with  a  set  of  my  Tales  and  Romances ;  so, 
by  the  next  steamer,  I  shall  write  to  Ticknor  &  Fields 

to  send  thelh,  elegantly  bound,  and  S will  emblar 

zon  his  coat  of  arms  in  each  volume.  He  aecompar 
nied  us  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hall  to  the  railway  station, 
and  we  left  Oxford  at  two  o'clock. 

It  had  been  a  very  pleasant  visit,  and  all  the  per- 
sons whom  we  met  were  kind  and  agreeable,  and  dis- 
posed to  look  at  one  another  in  a  sunny  aspect.  I  saw 
a  good  deal  of  Mr.  Hall.  He  is  a  thoroughly  genuine 
man,  of  kind  heart  and  true  affections,  a  gentleman  of 
taste  and  refinement,  and  full  of  honor. 

On  the  Saturday  after  our  return  to  Blackheath,  we 
went  to 

HAMPTON    COURT, 

about  which,  as  I  have  already  recorded  a  visit  to  it,  I 
need  say  little  here.  But  I  was  again  impressed  with 
the  stately  grandeur  of  Wolsey's  great  Hall,  with  its 
great  window  at  each  end,  and  one  side  window,  de- 
scending almost  to  the  floor,  and  a  row  of  windows  on 
each  side,  high  towards  the  roof,  and  throwing  down 
their  many-colored  light  on  the  stone  pavement,  and 
on  the  Gobelin  tapestry,  which  must  have  been  gop* 
geously  rich  when  the  walls  were  first  clothed  with  it 
I  fancied,  then,  that  no  modem  architect  could  pro* 
duce  so  fine  a  room  ;  but  oddly  enough,  in  the  great 
entrance-hall  of  the  Euston  station,  yesterday,  1  could 


1856.]  HAMPTON  COURT.  868 

not  see  how  this  last  fell  very  much  short  of  Wolsey's 
Hall  in  grandeur.  We  were  quite  wearied  in  pass- 
ing through  the  endless  suites  of  rooms  in  Hampton 
Court  and  gazing  at  the  thousands  of  pictures;  it  is 
too  much  for  one  day, — almost  enough  for  one  life,  in 
such  measure  as  life  can  be  bestowed  on  pictures.  It 
would  have  refreshed  us  had  we  spent  half  the  time  in 
wandering  about  the  grounds,  which,  as  we  glimpsed 
at  them  from  the  windows  of  the  Palace,  seemed  very 
beautiful,  though  laid  out  with  an  antique  formality  of 
straight  lines  and  broad  gravelled  paths.  Before  the 
central  window  there  is  a  beautiful  sheet  of  water,  and 
a  fountain  upshooting  itself  and  plashing  into  it,  with 
a  continuous  and  pleasant  sound.  How  beautifully 
the  royal  robe  of  a  monarchy  is  embroidered !  Pal- 
aces, pictures,  parks  I  They  do  enrich  life ;  and  kings 
and  aristocracies  cannot  keep  these  things  to  them- 
selves ;  they  merely  take  care  of  them  for  others.  Even 
a  king,  with  all  the  glory  that  can  be  shed  around 
him,  is  but  the  liveried  and  bedizened  footman  of  his 
people,  and  the  toy  of  their  delight.  I  am  very  glad 
that  I  came  to  this  country  while  the  English  are  still 
playing  with  such  a  toy. 

Yesterday  J and  I  left  Blackheath,  and  reached 

Liverpool  last  night.  The  rest  of  my  family  wiU  fol- 
low in  a  few  days ;  and  so  finishes  our  residence  in 
Bennoch's  house,  where  I,  for  my  part,  have  spent 
some  of  the  happiest  hours  that  I  have>  known  since 
we  left  our  American  home.  It  is  a  strange,  vagabond, 
gypsy  sort  of  life, — this  that  we  are  leading;  and  I 
know  not  whether  we  shall  finally  be  spoiled  for  any 
other,  or  shall  enjoy  our  quiet  Wayside,  as  we  never 
did  before,  when  once  we  reach  it  again. 


864  ENGLISH  NOTE--B00KS.  [185«. 

The  evening  flet  in^nusty  and  obscure ;  and  it  was 

dark  almost  when  J and  I  arrived  at  the  landing 

«tage  on  onr  return.  I  was  struck  with  the  pictur- 
esque effect  of  ihe  hi^  tower  and  tall  spire  of  St. 
Nicholas,  rising  upward,  with  dim  outline,  into  the 
duskiness ;  while  midwaj  of  its  height  the  dial-plates 
€i  an  illuminated  clock  blazed  out,  like  two  great  eyes 
of  a  giant. 

S^temher  XZih,  —  On  Saturday  my  wife,  with  all 

k«r  iarain,  arrived  at  Mrs.  B 's ;  and  on  Tuesday 

~  vagabonds  as  we  are  —  we  again  struck  our  tent, 
and  set  out  for 

BOUTHPOBT. 

I  do  not  know  what  sort  of  character  it  will  form  in 
the  children,  —  Ais  unsettled,  shifting,  vagrant  life, 
with  no  central  home  to  turn  to,  except  what  we  carry 
in  ourselves.  It  was  a  windy  day,  and,  judging  by  the 
look  of  the  trees,  cm  the  way  to  Southport,  it  must  be 
almost  always  windy,  and  with  the  blast  in  one  pre- 
vailing direction  5  for  invariably  their  branches,  and 
the  whole  contour  and  attitude  of  the  tree,  turn  from 
seaward,  with  a  strangely  forlorn  aspect.  Reaching 
Southport,  we  took  an  omnibus,  and  under  the  driver's 
guidance  came  to  our  tall  stone  house,  fronting  on  the 
sands,  and  styled  "  Bnmswick  Terrace."  .  .  . 

The  English  system  of  lodging-houses  has  its  good 
points  ;  but  it  is,  nevertheless,  a  contrivance  for  bear- 
ing the  domestic  cares  of  home  about  with  you  whith- 
ersoever  you  go ;  and  immediately  you  have  to  set 
about  producing  your  own  bread  and  cheese.  How- 
ever, Fanny  took  most  of  this  trouble  off  our  hands, 
though  there  was  inevitably  the  stiffness  and  disconiF 


law.]  souTMpaRT.  865 

fort  of  a  new  honaekeeping  on  the  first  ^j  of  our  ai> 
rival ;  besides  tiiat^  it  was  eool,  and  the  wind  whistiled 
and  gmmbled  and  eddied  into  the  clunks  of  the 
bouse. 

Meanwhile^  in  all  my  experience  of  Southport,  1 
have  never  yet  seen  the  sea,  but  only  an  interminable 
breadth  of  sands,  looking  pool/  or  plashy  in  some 
places,  and  barred  aeross  with  drier  reaehes  of  sand, 
but  no  expanse  of  water*  It  most  be  miles  and  mUess 
at  low  water,  to  the  veritalde  searshore.  We  are  abont 
twenty  miles  north  of  Liverpool,  on  the  border  of  tibe 
Irish  Sea;  and  Ireland,  and,  I  suppose,  the  Isle  of 
Man  intervene  betwixt  us  and  the  ocean,  not  much  to 
our  benefit ;  for  tiie  air  of  the  English  coast,  under 
ocean  influences,  is  said  to  be  milder  than  when  it 
oomes  across  the  laaeid,  — >  milder,  therefore,  above  or 
below  Ireland,  because  then  the  Gulf  Stream  amelio^ 
rates  it 

Betimes,  the  forenoon  after  our  arrival,  I  had  to 
take  the  rail  to  Liverpool,  but  returned,  a  Htde  after 
five,  in  the  midst  of  a  rain,  —  still  low  water  and  in* 
terminable  sands ;  still  a  dreary,  howling  blast.  We 
had  a  eheerful  fiiQside,  however,  and  should  have  had 
a  pleasant  evening,  only  that  the  wind  on  the  sea  made 
us  excessively  drowsy*  This  morning  we  awoke  to 
hear  the  wind  still  blustering,  and  blowing  up  douds^ 
with  fitful  little  showers,  and  soon  blowing  them  away 
again,  and  letting  the  brightest  of  sunshine  fall  over 
the  plashy  waste  of  sand.    We  have  already  walked 

forth  on  tiie  shore  with  J »  and  S--^ — ^  who  pick 

up  shells,  and  dig  wells  in  the  sand  with  th^  little 
wooden  spades :  but  soon  we  saw  a  rainbow  on  the 
western  sky,  and  then  a  shower  came  spattering  down 
upon  us  in  good  earnest.    We  first  took  refuge  und^ 


866  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1866. 

the  bridge  that  stretches  between  the  two  portions  of 
the  promenade  ;  but  as  there  was  a  chill  draught 
there,  we  nmde  the  best  of  our  way  home.  The  sun 
has  now  again  come  out  brightly,  though  the  wind  is 
still  tumbling  a  great  many  clouds  about  the  sky. 


Evening.  —  Later,  I  walked  out  with  U ,  and, 

looking  seaward,  we  saw  the  foam  and  spray  of  the  ad- 
vancing tide,  tossed  about  on  the  verge  of  tibe  horizon, 
— -  a  long  line,  like  the  crests  and  gleaming  helmets  of 
an  aimy.  In  about  half  an  hour  we  found  ahnost  the 
whole  waste  of  sand  covered  with  water,  and  white 
waves  breaking  out  aU  over  it ;  but,  the  bottom  being 
so  nearly  level,  and  the  water  so  shallow,  there  was 
little  of  the  spirit  and  exultation  of  the  sea  in  a  strong 
breeze.  Of  the  long  line  of  bathing-machines,  one 
after  another  was  hitched  to  a  horse,  and  trundled 
forth  into  the  water,  where,  at  a  long  distance  from 
shore,  the  bathers  found  themselves  hardly  middle 
deep. 

September  19^A.  —  The  wind  grumbled  and  made 
itself  miserable  all  last  night,  and  this  morning  it  is 
still  howling  as  ill-naturedly  as  ever,  and  roaring  and 
rumbling  in  the  chimneys.  The  tide  is  far  out,  but, 
from  an  upper  window,  I  fancied,  at  intervals,  that  I 
could  see  the  plash  of  the  surf -wave  on  the  distant 
limit  of  the  sand;  perhaps,  however,  it  was  only  a 
gleam  on  the  sky.  Constantly  there  have  been  sharp 
spatters  of  rain,  hissing  and  rattling  against^the  win- 
dows, while  a  little  before  or  after,  or  perhaps  simul- 
taneously, a  rainbow,  somewhat   watery  of  texture, 

'mts  itself  on  the  western   clouds.      Gray,  sulleit 


1856.]  SOUTHPORT.  867 

clouds  hang  about  the  sky,  or  sometimes  cover  it  with 
a  uniform  dulness ;  at  other  times,  the  portions  to- 
wards the  sun  gleam  almost  lightsomely;  now,  there 
may  be  an  airy  glimpse  of  -riear  blue  sky  in  a  fissure 
of  the  clouds  ;  now,  the  very  brightest  of  sunshine 
comes  out  all  of  a  sudden,  and  gladdens  everything. 
The  breadth  of  sands  has  a  various  aspect,  according 
as  there  are  pools,  or  moisture  enough  to  glisten,  or  a 
drier  tract;  and  where  the  light  gleams  along  a  yellow 
ridge  or  bar,  it  is  like  sunshine  itself.  Certainly  the 
temper  of  the  day  shifts ;  but  the  smiles  come  far  the 
seldomest,  and  its  frowns  and  angry  tears  are  most 
reliable.  By  seven  o'clock  pedestrians  began  to  walk 
along  the  promenade,  dose  buttoned  against  the  blast; 
later,  a  single  bathing-machine  got  under  way,  by 
means  of  a  horse,  and  travelled  forth  seaward  ;  but 
within  what  distance  it  finds  the  invisible  margin  I 
cannot  say,  —  at  all  events,  it  looks  like  a  dreary 
journey.  Just  now  I  saw  a  sea-gull,  wheeling  on  the 
blast,  dose  in  towards  the  promenade. 

September  2l8t  —  Yesterday  morning  was  bright, 
sunny  and  windy,  and  cool  and  exhilarating.  I  went 
to  Liverpool  at  deven,  and,  returning  at  five,  found 
the.  weather  still  bright  and  cooL  The  temperature, 
methinks,  must  soon  diminish  the  population  of  South- 
port,  which,  judging  from  appearances,  must  be  mainly 
made  up  of  temporary  visitors.  There  is  a  newspaper, 
*'  The  Southport  Visitor,"  published  weekly,  and  con- 
taining a  register  of  all  the  visitants  in  the  various  ho- 
tels and  lodging-houses.  It  covers  more  than  two  sides 
of  the  paper,  to  the  amount  of  some  hundreds.  The 
guests  come  chiefly  from  Liverpool,  Manchester,  and 
the  neighboring  country -towns,  and  belong  to  the 


868  ENGLISH  NOTB^BOOKS.  [1«W- 

middle  dasfles.  It  is  not  a  f adiioiuble  wateriog-«plaoe.^ 
Only  one  nobleman's  name,  and  those  of  twa  oi"  three 
baronets,  now  adorn  the  list*  The  pe<^le  whom  we 
see  loitering  along  the  beach  and  the  promenade  hayey 
at  best,  a  well-to-do^  ttadesmanlike  air.  I  do  not  find 
that  there  are  anj  pubUe  amusements;  nothing  but 
strolling  on  tibe  sands,  donkey -lidingt  or  drives  in 
donkey-carts;  and  solitary  visitors  must  find  it  a 
dreary  place.  Yet  one  or  two  of  tibe  streets  are  brisk 
and  Uvely,  and,  being  well  thronged^  have  a  holiday 
aspect.  There  are  no  carriages  in  town  save  donkeys 
carts;  some  of  which  are  drawn  by  three  d(mkeya 
abreast,  and  are  large  enough  to  hold  a  whole  f  am-* 
ily.  These  conveyances  will  take  yon  far  out  on  the 
sands  through  wet  and  dry.  The  beach  is  haunted  by 
The  Flying  Dutchman,  — ■  a  sort  of  boat  on  wheels, 
schooner*rigged  with  sails,  and  which  sometimes  makee 
pretty  good  speed,  with  a  fair  wind* 

This  morning  we  have  been  walking  with  J — —  and 

R out  over  the  "  ribbed  sea  sands,"  a  good  di<^- 

tance  from  shore.  Throughout  the  week,  the  tides 
will  be  so  low  as  not  to  cover  the  shallow  basdn  of  this 
bay,  if  a  bay  it  be.  The  weatiber  was  sullen,  with  now 
and  then  a  faint  gleam  of  Simshine,  lazily  tracing  Our 
shadows  on  the  sand ;  the  wind  rather  quieter  tiian  on 
preceding  days.  .  •  ^  In  the  sunshine  the  sands  seem 
to  be  frequented  by  great  numbers  of  gulls^  who  bo- 
gin  to  find  the  northern  climate  too  wintry.  You  see 
their  white  wings  in  the  sunlight,  but  they  become  al- 
most or  quite  invisible  in  the  shade.  We  shall  soon 
have  an  opportunity  of  seeing  how  a  watering -jda^e 
looks  when  the  season  is  quite  over ;  for  we  have  con- 
cluded to  remain  here  till  December,  and  everybody 
else  will  take  flight  in  a  week  or  two. 


mt.-]  AOUTHPOMT.  869 

A  shoft  iim^  sugo^  in  llie  ^rening,  In  a  tftreet  of  Lir- 
erpool,  I  naw  il  deeetit  maii^  of  the  lower  orders,  taken 
much  aback  by  being  roughly  brushed  against  by  a 
rowdy  fellow.  He  looked  after  him,  and  exclaimed 
indignantly,  **'  Is  tiiat  a  Yankee  ?  "  It  shows  the  kind 
of  character  we  have  here. 

Oetober  7tA.  *^  On  Saturday  erening,  I  gave  a  din- 
ner to  Bennoch,  at  tibe  Addlphi  Hotel.  The  chief 
point  or  characteristic  of  English  customs  was,  that 
Mr.  Radley,  our  landlord,  himself  attended  at  table, 
and  oMeiated  as  chief  waiter.  He  has  a  fortune  of 
^^100,000,  — half  a  million  of  dollars, -- and  is  an  A- 
derly  man  of  good  address  and  appearance.  In  Ameit 
ica,  such  a  man  would  very  probably  be  in  Congress ; 
at  any  rate  he  would  never  conceive  the  possibility  of 
changing  plates,  or  passing  round  the  table  with  hock 
and  champagne.  Some  of  his  hock  was  a  most  rich  and 
imperial  wine,  such  as  can  hardly  be  had  on  the  Rhine 
itself.    There  were  eight  gentlemen  besides  BennocL 

A  donkey,  the  other  day,  stubbornly  refusing  to 
come  out  of  a  boat  which  had  brought  Um  across  the 
Mersey ;  at  last,  after  many  kicks  had  been  applied, 
and  other  persecutions  of  that  kind,  a  man  stepped 
forward,  addressing  him  affectionately,  **'  Come  along, 
brother,**  —  and  the  donkey  obeyed  at  once. 

October  26th.  —  On  Thursday,  instead  of  taking 
the  rail  for  Liverpool,  I  set  out,  about  eleven,  for  a 
long  walk.  It  was  an  overcast  morning,  such  as  in 
New  England  would  have  boded  rain ;  but  English 
clouds  are  not  nearly  so  portentous  as  American  in 
that  respect.     Accordingly,  the  sun  soon  began  to 

VOL.  ym.  24 


870  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1866. 

peep  throngH  crevices,  and  I  had  not  gone  more  than 
a  mile  or  two  when  it  shone  a  little  too  warmly  for 
comfort,  yet  not  more  than  I  liked.  It  was  very  much 
like  our  pleasant  October  days  at  home ;  indeed,  the 
climates  of  the  two  countries  more  nearly  coincide  dur- 
ing the  present  month  than  at  any  other  season  of  the 
year.  The  air  was  almost  perfectly  still ;  but  once  in 
a  while  it  stirred,  and  breathed  coolly  in  my  face ;  it 
is  very  delightful,  this  latent  freshness,  in  a  warm  at- 
mosphere. 

Hie  country  about  Southport  has  as  few  charms  as 
it  is  possible  for  any  region  to  have.  In  the  close 
neighborhood  of  the  shore,  it  is  nothing  but  sand-hil- 
locks, covered  with  coarse  grass ;  and  this  is  the  orig- 
inal nature  of  the  whole  site  on  which  the  town  stands, 
although  it  is  now  paved,  and  has  been  covered  with 
soil  enough  to  make  gardens,  and  to  nourish  here  and 
there  a  few  trees.  A  little  farther  inland  the  surface 
seems  to  have  been  marshy,  but  has  been  drained  by 
ditches  across  the  fields  and  along  the  roadside ;  and 
the  fields  are  embanked  on  all  sides  with  parapets  of 
earth  which  appear  as  if  intended  to  keep  out  inunda- 
tions. In  fact,  Holland  itself  cannot  be  more  com- 
pletely on  a  level  with  the  sea.  The  only  dwellings 
are  the  old,  whitewashed  stone  cottages,  with  thatched 
roofs,  on  the  brown  straw  of  which  grow  various  weeds 
and  mosses,  brightening  it  with  green  patches,  and 
sprouting  along  the  ridge-pole,  —  the  homeliest  hovels 
that  ever  mortals  lived  in,  and  which  they  share  with 
pigs  and  cows  at  one  end.  Hens,  too,  run  in  and  out 
of  the  door.  One  or  two  of  these  hovels  bore  signs, 
"Licensed  to  sell  beer,  ale,  and  tobacco,"  and  gen- 
erally there  were  an  old  woman  and  some  children 
visible.     In  all  cases  there  was  a  ditch,  fuU  of  watei^ 


1856.]  SOUTHPORT.  871 

close  at  hand,  stagnant,  and  often  quite  covered  with 
a  growth  of  water-weeds,  —  very  unwholesome,  one 
would  think,  in  the  neighborhood  of  a  dwelling ;  and, 
in  truth,  the  children  and  grown  people  did  look  pale. 

In  the  fields,  along  the  roadside,  men  and  women 
were  harvesting  their  carrots,  and  other  root-crops, 
especially  digging  potatoes,  —  the  pleasantest  of  all 
farm  labor,  in  my  opinion,  there  being  such  a  contin- 
ual interest  in  opening  the  treasures  of  each  hill.  As 
I  went  on,  the  country  began  to  get  almost  impercep- 
tibly less  fiat,  and  there  was  some  little  appearance  of 
trees.  I  had  determined  to  go  to  Omskirk,  but  soon 
got  out  of  the  way,  and  came  to  a  little  hamlet  that 
looked  antique  and  picturesque,  with  its  small  houses 
of  stone  and  brick,  built  with  the  one  material  and  re- 
paired with  the  other  perhaps  ages  afterward.  Here 
I  inquired  my  way  of  a  woman,  whd  told  me,  in  broad 
Lancashire  dialect,  ^^  that  I  maun  go  back,  and  turn  to 
my  left,  till  I  came  to  a  finger-post  '^ ;  and  so  I  did, 
and  found  another  little  hamlet,  the  principal  object 
in  which  was  a  public-house,  with  a  large  sign  repre- 
senting a  dance  round  a  May-pole.  It  was  now  about 
one  o'clock ;  so  I  entered,  and,  being  ushered  into 
what,  I  suppose,  they  called  the  coffee-room,  I  asked 
for  some  cold  meat  and  ale.  There  was  a  joUy,  round, 
rather  comely  woman  for  a  hostess,  with  a  free,  hospi- 
table, yet  rather  careless  manner. 

The  coffee-room  smelt  rather  disagreeably  of  bad  to- 
bacco-smoke, and  was  shabbily  furnished  with  an  old 
sofa  and  fiag-bottomed  chairs,  and  adorned  with  a 
print  of  "  Old  Billy,"  a  horse  famous  for  a  longevity 
of  about  sixty  years ;  and  also  with  colored  engravings 
of  old-fashioned  hunting-scenes,  conspicuous  with  scar- 
let coats.     There  was  a  very  small  bust  of  Milton  on 


872  ENGLISH  mTE-hOOKS.  [l»5d 

ihe  mantel-piece.  By  and  by  the  temaim  of  an  im* 
mense  round  of  beef,  three  quarter*  cut  away,  Were 
put  on  the  table;  then  some  dmoking-hot  potatoes; 
and  finally  the  hostess  told'  me  that  their  own  dinner 
was  just  ready,  and  so  AkQ  had  brought  me  in  some 
hot  chops,  thinking  I  might  pref  ef  them  to  the  cold 
meat  I  did  prefer  them ;  and  they  were  stewed  or 
fried  ©hops,  instead  of  broiled,  and  were  veiy  dairory. 
There  was  household  bread  too,  and  ridh  el^ese,  and 
a  pint  of  ale,  home  brewed,  not  vety  mighty,  but  good 
to  quench  thirst,  and,  by  way  of  condiment,  some 
pickled  cabbage ;  so,  instead  of  a  lunch,  1  made  quite 
a  comfortable  dinner.  Moreover,  there  was  a  cold 
pudding  on  the  table,  and  I  called  for  a  clean  plate, 
and  helped  myself  to  some  of  it.  It  was  of  rice,  and 
was  strewn  over,  rather  than  intermbted,  with  some 
kinds  of  berries,  the  nature  of  which  I  could  not  ex- 
actly make  out. 

I  then  set  forth  again.  It  was  still  sunny  and  warm, 
and  I  walked  more  slowly  than  before  dinner;  in  fact, 
I  did  little  more  than  lounge  along,  sitting  down,  at 
last,  on  the  stone  parapet  of  a  bridge. 

The  eounta*y  grew  moi^e  pleasant,  more  sylvan,  and, 
though  still  of  a  level  character,  not  so  drearily  flat. 
Soon  appeared  the  first  symptom  that  I  had  seen  of  a 
gentleman^s  residence, -^  a  lodge  at  a  park  gate,  then 
a  long  stretch  of  wall,  with  a  green  lawn,  and  after- 
wards an  extent  of  wooded  land ;  then  another  gate- 
way, with  a  neat  lodge  on  each  side  of  it,  and,  lastly, 
another  extent  of  wood.  The  Hall  or  Mansion-house, 
however,  was  nowhere  apparent,  being,  doubtless,  se- 
cluded deep  and  far  within  its  grounds.  I  inquired 
of  a  boy  who  was  the  owner  of  the  estate,  and  he  an- 
swered, "  Mr.  Scarybrick  " ;  and  no  doubt  it  is  a  fam 
Uy  of  local  eminence. 


1866.]  0M8KIRK  CHURCH.  878 

Along  tiie  road, -^ an  oM  inn;  some  aged  8tone 
houses,  built  for  merely  respectable  oecupants  ;  a 
eanal,  witb  two  canal-boats,  heaped  up.  with  a  cargo  o£ 
potatoes ;  two  little  girls,  who  were  watching  lest  some 
eowB  should  go  astray,  and  had  tlieir  two  little  chairs 
by  the  roadside,  and  their  dolls  and  other  playthings, 
and  ao  followed  the  footsteps  of  the  cows  all  day  long. 
I  met  two  boys,  coining  from  Omskirk,  mounted  on 
donkeys,  widi  empty  panniers,  on  which  they  had 
carried  vegetables  to  market.  Finally,  between  two 
and  three  o'clock,  I  saw  the  great  tower  of  Omskirk 
Ohurch,  with  its  spire,  not  rising  out  of  the  tower,  but 
sprouting  up  close  beside  it ;  and,  entering  the  town, 
I  directed  my  steps  first  to  this  old  church. 

omskibk:  chuech. 

It  stands  on  a  gentle  eminence,  sufficient  to  giro  it 
a  good  site,  and  has  a  pavement  of  flat  gravestones  in 
front.  It  is  doubtless,  as  regards  its  foundation,  a 
very  ancient  church,  but  has  not  exactly  a  venerable 
aspect,  being  in  too  good  repair,  and  much  restored 
in  various  parts;  not  ivy-grown,  either,  though  green 
"wiA  moss  here  and  there.  The  tower  is  square  and 
immensely  massive,  and  might  have  supported  a  very 
loity  spire ;  so  that  it  is  the  more  strange  that  what 
epire  it  has  should  be  so  oddly  stuck  beside  it,  spring- 
ing out  of  the  church  wall.  I  should  have  liked  well 
enough  to  enter  the  church,  as  it  is  the  burial-place 
of  the  Earls  of  Derby,  and  perhaps  may  contain  some 
interesting  nH)numents ;  but  as  it  was  all  shut  up, 
and  even  ihe  iron  gates  of  the  churchyard  closed  and 
locked,  I  merely  looked  at  the  outside. 

Vvoai  the  ehureh,  a  street  lea/As  to  the  market-place, 
bi  wfaieh  I  found  a  throng  of  men  and  women,  it  being 


874  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185«. 

market-day ;  wares  of  yarious  kinds,  tin,  earthen,  and 
cloth,  set  out  on  the  pavements ;  droves  of  pigs  ;  ducks 
and  fowls ;  baskets  of  eggs  ;  and  a  man  selling  quack 
medicines,  recommending  his  nostrums  as  well  as  he 
could.  The  aspect  of  the  crowd  was  very  English,  — 
portly  and  ruddy  women ;  yeomen  with  small-clothes 
and  broad-brimmed  hats,  all  very  quiet  and  heavy  and 
good-humored.  Their  dialect  was  so  provincial  that  I 
could  not  readily  understand  more  than  here  and  there 
a  word. 

But,  after  all,  there  were  few  traits  that  could  be 
made  a  note  of.  I  soon  grew  weary  of  the  scene,  and 
so  I  went  to  the  railway  station,  and  waited  there 
nearly  an  hour  for  the  train  to  take  me  to  Southport. 
Omskirk  is  famous  for  its  gingerbread,  which  women 
sell  to  the  railway  passengers  at  a  sixpence  for  a  rou« 
leau  of  a  dozen  little  cakes. 

November  30^A.  —  A  week  ago  last  Monday,  Her- 
man Melville  came  to  see  me  at  the  Consulate,  looking 
much  as  he  used  to  do,  and  with  his  characteristic 
gravity  and  reserve  of  manner.  •  .  .  We  soon  found 
ourselves  on  pretty  much  our  former  terms  of  sociabil- 
ity and  confidence.  ...  He  is  thus  far  on  his  way  to 
Constantinople.  I  do  not  wonder  that  he  found  it 
necessary  to  take  an  airing  through  the  world,  after 
so  many  years  of  toilsome  pen-labor,  following  upon 
so  wild  and  adventurous  a  youth  as  his  was.  I  invited 
him  to  come  and  stay  with  us  at  Southport,  as  long  as 
he  might  remain  in  this  vicinity,  and  accordingly  he 
did  come  the  next  day.  .  .  .  On  Wednesday  we  took 
a  pretty  long  walk  together,  and  sat  down  in  a  hol« 
low  among  the  sand-hills,  sheltering  ourselves  from 
Vhe  high  cool  wind.      MelviUe,  as  he  always  doe% 


1856.]  CHESTER.  875 

began  to  reason  of  Providence  and  futurily,  and  of 
everything  else  that  lies  beyond  human  ken.  .  .  •  He 
has  a  very  high  and  noble  nature,  and  is  better  worth 
immortality  than  the  most  of  us.  •  .  •  On  Saturday 
we  went  to  Chester  together.  I  love  to  take  every 
opportunity  of  going  to  Chester ;  it  being  the  one  only 
place,  within  easy  reach  of  Liverpool,  which  possesses 
any  old  English  interest. 

We  went  to 

THE  GATHEDEAL* 

Its  gray  nave  impressed  me  more  than  at  any  former 
visit.  Passing  into  the  cloisters,  an  attendant  took 
possession  of  us,  and  showed  us  about. 

"Within  the  choir  there  is  a  profusion  of  very  rich 
oaken  carving,  both  on  the  screen  that  separates  it 
from  the  nave,  and  on  the  seats  and  walls ;  very  curi- 
ous and  most  elaborate,  and  lavished  (one  would  say) 
most  wastefully,  where  nobody  would  think  of  looking 
for  it,  —  where,  indeed,  amid  the  dimness  of  the  cathe- 
dral, the  exquisite  detail  of  the  elaboration  could  not 
possibly  be  seen.  Our  guide  lighted  some  of  the  gas* 
burners,  of  which  there  are  many  hundreds,  to  help  us 
see  them;  but  it  required  close  scrutiny,  even  then. 
It  must  have  been  out  of  the  question,  when  the  whole 
means  of  illumination  were  only  a  few  smoky  torches 
or  candles.  There  was  a  row  of  niches,  where  the 
monks  used  to  stand,  for  four  hours  together,  in  the 
performance  of  some  of  their  services ;  and  to  relieve 
them  a  little,  they  were  allowed  partially  to  sit  on  a 
projection  of  the  seats,  which  were  turned  up  in  the 
niche  for  that  purpose ;  but  if  they  grew  drowsy,  so  as 
to  fail  to  balance  themsdves,  the  seat  was  so  contrived 


S76  ENGLISH  NOTB-BOOKS.  {1850. 

as  to  slip  down,  thus  bringing  the  monk  to  the  floor. 
These  projections  on  the  seats  are  each  and  all  of 
them  carved  witii  curious  devices,  no  two  alike.  The 
guide  showed  us  one,  representing,  apparently,  the 
first  quarrel  of  a  new-^married  couple,  wrought  with 
wonderful  expression.  Indeed,  the  artist  never  failed 
to  bring  out  his  idea  in  the  most  striking  manner,  — ^ 
as,  for  instance,  Satan,  under  the  guise  of  a  lion,  de 
vouring  a  sinner  bodily ;  and  again  in  the  figure  of  a 
dragon,  with  a  man  half-way  down  his  gullet,  the  legs 
hanging  out.  The  carver  may  not  have  seen  anything 
grotesque  in  this,  nor  intended  it  at  all  by  way  of  joke ; 
but  certainly  there  would  appeu*  to  be  a  grim  mhrth- 
f  ulneas  in  some  of  the  designs.  One  does  not  see  why 
such  fantasies  should  be  strewn  about  the  holy  interior 
ef  a  cadiedral,  unless  it  were  iotended  to  contain  every- 
thing that  belongs  to  the  heart  of  maji,  both  upward 
ftnd  downward. 

In  a  side  aisle  of  the  choir,  we  saw  a  tontb,  said  to 
be  that  of  the  Emperor  Henry  lY.  6t  Germany,  though 
on  very  indistinct  authority.  This  is  an  oMong  tomb, 
carved,  and,  asx  one  side,  painted  with  bright  colors 
and  gilded.  During  a  very  long  period  it  was  built 
and  plastered  into  tiie  wall,  and  the  exterior  side  was 
whitewashed ;  but,  on  being  removed,  the  inner  side 
was  £(Hmd  to  have  been  ornamented  with  gold  and 
color,  in  the  manner  in  which  we  now  see  it.  If  this 
were  customary  wiih  tombs,  it  must  have  added  vastly 
to  tilie  gorgeous  magnificence,  to  which  the  painted 
windows  and  polished  pillars  and  ornamented  ceilings 
contributed  so  mu(A.  In  fact,  a  catiiedral  in  its  fresh 
estate  seems  to  have  been  like  a  pavilion  of  the  sun- 
set, all  purple  and  gold ;  whereas  now  it  more  re8eo»* 
bles  deepest  and  grayest  twilight. 


18««.J  CffBSTER.  8TT 

AftieFWaids,  we  were  shown  into  tfie  aneient  refeo- 
tory^  now  ilsed  ste  the  eity  grammar  school,  and  fur' 
nished  with  the  usual  desks  and  seats  for  the  boys« 
In  one  otHnier  of  this  large  room,  was  the  sort  i>i  pulpit 
or  elevated  seat,  with  jsl  broken  staircase  of  stone  as* 
eending  to  it,  where  one  of  the  monks  used  to  read  to 
his  brethren,  while  sitting  at  their  sepals.  The  desks 
wei^e  cut  and  cafved  with  tilie  scholars'  knives,  just  as 
they  used  to  be  in  the  school-rooms  where  I  was  a 
scholar.  Thence  we  passed  into  the  ehapter-housey 
but,  before  that,  we  went  through  a  small  room,  in 
wMch  Melville  <^ned  a  cupboard,  and  discovered  a 
dozen  or  two  of  wine-bottles;  but  our  guide  t<^d  u» 
that  they  were  now  empty,  and  never  were  meant  f or" 
jollity,  having  held  only  sacramental  wine.  In  the 
chapter-house^  we  saw  tiie  library,  some  c£  the  v(d- 
umes  of  which  were  antique  folios.  There  were  two 
dusty  and  taitered  banners  hanging  on  the  wall,  and 
the  attendant  promised  to  make  us  laugh  by  somethu^ 
that  he  would  tell  us  about  them.  The  jc^e  was  that 
these  two  banners  had  been  in  the  batde  of  Bunker 
Hill ;  and  our  countrymen,  be  said,  always  smiled  on 
hearing  thisw  He  had  discovered  us  to  be  Americans 
by  the  notice  we  took  of  a  mural  tablet  in  the  choir^ 
to  the  memory  of  a  Lieutenant-Governor  Clarke^  of 
New  Yoric,  who  died  in  Chester  b^ore  the  Revolution. 
From  the  chapter-house  be  ushered  us  back  into  the 
nave,  ever  and  anon  pointing  out  some  portion  of  the 
edifice  more  anci^t  than  the  rest,  and  when  I  asked 
him  bow  he  knew  this,  he  said  that  he  had  learnt  it 
from  the  arclueok>gists^  who  could  read  off  such  things 
like  a  book.  This  guide  was  a  lively,  quick-witted 
man,  who  did  his  business  less  bj  rote,  and  more  with 
a  vivaoiouft  interest^  than  any  guide  I  ever  met. 


878  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

After  leaving  the  cathedral  we  sought  out  the  Yacht 
Inn,  near  the  water-gate.  This  was,  for  a  long  period 
of  tune,  the  principal  inn  of  Chester,  and  was  the 
house  at  which  Swift  once  put  up,  on  his  way  to  Holy- 
head, and  where  he  invited  the  clergy  to  come  and  sup 
with  him.  We  sat  down  in  a  small  snuggery,  convers- 
ing with  the  landlord.  The  Chester  people  are,  accord* 
ing  to  my  experience,  very  affable,  and  fond  of  talking 
with  strangers  about  the  antiquities  and  picturesque 
characteristics  of  their  town.  It  partly  lives,  the  land- 
lord told  us,  by  its  visitors,  and  many  people  spend 
the  summer  here  on  account  of  i^e  antiquities  and  the 
good  air.  He  showed  us  a  broad,  balustraded  staircase, 
leading  into  a  large,  comfortable,  old-fashioned  parlor, 
with  windows  looking  on  the  street  and  on  the  Custom 
House  that  stood  opposite.  This  was  the  room  where 
Swift  expected  to  receive  the  clergy  of  Chester ;  and 
on  one  of  the  window-panes  were  two  acrid  lines,  writ- 
ten with  the  diamond  of  his  ring,  satirizing  those  ven- 
erable gentlemen,  in  revenge  for  their  refusing  his  in- 
vitation. The  first  line  begins  rather  indistinctly ;  but 
the  writing  grows  fully  legible  as  it  proceeds. 

The  Yacht  Tavern  is  a  very  old  house,  in  the  gabled 
style.  The  timbers  and  framework  are  still  perfectly 
sound.  In  the  same  street  is  the  Bishop's  house  (so 
called  as  having  been  the  residence  of  a  prelate  long 
s-go)?  which  is  covered  with  curious  sculpture,  repre- 
senting Scriptural  scenes.  And  in  the  same  neighbor- 
hood is  the  county  court,  accessible  by  an  archway, 
through  which  we  penetrated,  and  found  ourselves  in 
a  passage,  very  ancient  and  dusky,  overlooked  from 
the  upper  story  by  a  gallery,  to  which  an  antique  stair- 
ease  ascended,  with  balustrades  and  square  landing, 
places.     A  printer  saw  us  here,  and  asked  us  into  his 


1856.]  LIVERPOOL.  879 

printing-office,  and  talked  very  affably;  indeed,  He 
could  have  h&rdly  been  more  civil,  if  be  had  known 
that  both  Melville  and  I  have  given  a  good  deal  of 
employment  to  the  brethren  of  his  craft. 

December  15th. — An  old  gentleman  has  recently 
paid  me  a  good  many  visits,  —  a  Kentucky  man,  who 
has  been  a  good  deal  in  England  and  Europe  gener- 
ally without  losing  the  freshness  and  unconventionality 
of  his  earlier  life.  He  was  a  boatman,  and  afterwards 
captain  of  a  steamer  on  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi ;  but 
has  gained  property,  and  is  now  the  owner  of  mines  of 
coal  and  iron,  which  he  is  endeavoring  to  dispose  of 
here  in  England.  A  plain,  respectable,  well-to-do- 
looking  personage,  of  more  than  seventy  years  ;  very 
free  of  conversation,  and  beginning  to  talk  with  every- 
body as  a  matter  of  course ;  tall,  stalwart,  a  dark  face, 
with  white  curly  hair  and  keen  eyes ;  and  an  expres- 
sion shrewd,  yet  kindly  and  benign.  He  fought 
through  the  whole  "War  of  1812,  beginning  with  Gen- 
eral Harrison  at  the  battle  of  Tippecanoe,  which  he 
described  to  me.  He  says  that  at  the  beginning  of 
the  battle,  and  for  a  considerable  time,  he  heard  Te- 
cumseh's  voice,  loudly  giving  orders.  There  was  a  man 
named  Wheatley  in  the  American  camp,  a  strange, 
incommunicative  person,  —  a  volunteer,  making  war 
entirely  on  his  own  hook,  and  seeking  revenge  for 
some  relatives  of  his,  who  had  been  killed  by  the  In- 
dians.    In  the  midst  of  the  battle  this  Wheatley  ran 

at  a  slow  trot  past  R (my  informant),  trailing 

his  rifle,  and  making  towards  the  point  where  Tecum- 
seh's  voice  was  heard.  The  fight  drifted  around,  and 
R — —  along  with  it;  and  by  and  by  he  reached  a 
spot  where  Wheatley  lay  dead,  with  his  head  on  T^ 


880  ENGLISH  I^OTE^BOOKS.  [1856 

cftmdeh'&f  breast.  Tiectimiieli  had  beesi  sbot  With  %  rifles 
but,  before  expiring,  appeared  to  have  sBot  Wheatley 
ifrith  a  pistol^  which  he  still  held  in  his  hand«  B  ■  ■ 
affirms  that  Tecums^  was  flayed  by  the  Ketitacky 
men  on  the  spot,  and  his  skin  converted  into  razor- 
strops.  I  have  left  ont  the  most  strikiBg  point  of  the 
narrative,  after  all,  as  R  told  it,  viz.  that  soon 

after  Wheatley  passed  him,  he  suddenly  eeased  to  hear 
Tecnmseh's  voice  ringing  through  tfce  foiest,  as  hd 
gave  his  orders^  He  was  at  the  battle  of  New  Orleans, 
and  gave  me  the  story  of  it  from  b^inning  to  end ; 
bat  I  remember  only  a  few  particulars  in  which  he 
was  personally  concerned.  He  confesses  that  his  hair 
bristled  upright  —  every  hair  in  his  head  — when  he 
heard  the  shouts  of  the  British  soldiers  before  ad^ 
vancing  to  the  attack.  His  uncomfortable  sensations 
lasted  till  he  began  to  fire,  after  which  he  felt  no  mare 
of  them.  It  was  in  the  dusk  of  l^e  morning,  or  a 
little  before  sunrise,  when  the  assault  was  made ;  and 
the  fight  lasted  about  two  hours  and  a  half,  during 

which  R fired  twenty-four  times ;  and  said  he,  "  I 

saw  my  object  distinctly  each  time,  and  I  was  a  good 
rifle-shot."  He  was  raising  his  rifle  to  fire  the  twenty- 
fifth  time,  when  an  American  officer.  General  Carroll, 
pressed  it  down,  and  bade  him  fire  no  more«  ^^  Enough 
is  enough,**  quoth  the  General.  For  there?  needed  no 
more  slaughter,  the  British  being  in  utter  rout  and 
confusion.  In  this  retreat  many  of  the  enemy  wouM 
drop  down  among  the  dead,  then  rise,  run  a  consider^ 
able  distance,  and  drop  again,  thus  confusing  the  rifle* 
men's  aim.  One  fellow  had  thus  got  about  four  hufi* 
dred  and  fifty  yards  from  the  American  fine,  and, 
thinking  himself  secure,  he  made  a  derisive  gesturer 
**I'll  have  a  shot  at  him,  anyhow,"  cried  a  riflemaas 
;o  he  fired,  and  the  poor  devil  dropped. 


1856.J  IIVBRPOOL.  881 

R— —  himself,  with  one  of  his  twenty-four  dbots, 
hit  a  British  oSBicer,  who  fell  forward  on  his  face, 
about  thirty  paces  from  our  lizie,  axid  as  the  enemy 
were  Uien  retreating  (they  advanced  and  were  re- 
pelled two  or  thj^iee  times)  R ran  out,  and  turned 

him  OY^  on  his  back.  The  officer  was  a  man  about 
thirty-eight,  tall  and  fine-looking ;  his  eyes  were  wide 
jopen,  clear,  and  bright,  aad  were  fixed  full  on  E — ^ — 
with  a  somewhat  stern  glance,  but  there  was  the  sweet- 
est and  happiest  smile  over  bis  face  that  could  be  con- 

<5eived.     He  sewied  to  be  dead;  —  at  least,  R 

thinks  that  he  did  not  really  see  him,  fixedly  as  he  ap- 
peared to  gaze.     The  officer  held  his  sword  in  his 

hand,  and  R tried  in  vain  to  wrest  it  from  him, 

until  suddenly  the  clutch  relaxed.     R still  keeps 

the  sword  hung  up  over  his  mantel-piece.  I  asked 
him  how  th^  dead  man's  aspect  affected  him.  He  re- 
plied that  he  felt  nothing  at  the  time ;  but  that  ev^r 
since,  in  all  trouble,  in  uneasy  «leep,  and  whenever  he 
is  out  of  tune,  or  waking  early,  or  lying  awake  at 
nightj  he  sees  this  officer's  face,  with  the  clear  bright 
eyes  and  the  pleasant  ^nile,  just  as  distinctly  as  if  he 
wexie  bending  over  him.     His  wound  was  in  the  breast, 

«xa^y  on  the  spot  fljat  R had  aimed  at,  and 

bled  profusely.  The  enemy  advanced  in  such  masses, 
he  says^  that  it  was  impossible  not  to  hit  them  unless 
by  purposely  firing  over  their  heads. 

After  the  battle,  R leaped  over  the  rampart, 

and  took  a  prisoner  who  was  standing  unarmed  in  the 
midst  of  the  slain,  having  probably  dropped  down 
during  the  heat  of  the  action,  to  avoid  the  hail-storm 
-of  rifle-shots.  As  he  led  him  in,  the  prisoner  paused^ 
and  pointed  to  an  officer  who  was  lying  dead  beside 
his  dead  horse,  with  his   foot  still   in   ihh   stirrup 


882  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1866, 

"There  Kes  our  General,"  said  he.  The  horse  had 
been  killed  by  a  grape-shot,  and  Pakenham  himself, 
apparently,  by  a  six-pounder  ball,  which  had  first 
struck  the  earth,  covering  him  from  head  to  foot  with 
mud  and  clay,  and  had  then  entered  his  side,  and 
gone  upward  through  his  breast.  His  face  was  all  be- 
smirched with  the  moist  earth.     R took  the  slain 

general's  foot  out  of  the  stirrup,  and  tilien  went  to  re- 
port his  death. 

Much  more  he  told  me,  being  an  exceedingly  talk- 
ative old  man,  and  seldom,  I  suppose,  finding  so  good 
a  listener  as  myself.  I  like  the  man,  —  a  good-tem- 
pered, upright,  bold  and  free  old  fellow ;  of  a  rough 
breeding,  but  sufficiently  smoothed  by  society  to  be  of 
pleasant  intercourse.  He  is  as  dogmatic  as  possible, 
having  formed  his  own  opinions,  often  on  very  disput- 
able grounds,  and  hardened  in  them;  taking  queer 
views  of  matters  and  things,  and  giving  shrewd  and 
not  ridiculous  reasons  for  them;  but  with  a  keen, 
strong  sense  at  the  bottom  of  his  character. 

A  little  while  ago  I  met  an  Englishman  in  a  rail- 
way carriage,  who  suggests  himself  as  a  kind  of  con- 
trast to  this  warlike  and  vicissitudinous  backwoods- 
man.    He  was  about  the  same  age  as  R ^  but  had 

spent,  apparently,  his  whole  life  in  Liverpool,  and  has 
long  occupied  the  post  of  Inspector  of  Nuisances,  —  a 
rather  puffy  and  consequential  man;  gracious,  how- 
ever, and  affable,  even  to  casual  strangers  like  myself. 
The  great  contrast  betwixt  him  and  the  American  lies 
in  the  narrower  circuit  of  his  ideas ;  the  latter  talking 
about  matters  of  history  of  his  own  country  and  the 
world,  —  glancing  over  the  whole  field  of  politics,  pro- 
pounding opinions  and  theories  of  his  own,  and  show 


1866.]  LIVERPOOL.  888 

ing  evidence  that  his  mind  had  operated  for  better  op 
worse  on  ahnost  all  conceivable  matters;  while  the 
Englishman  was  odorous  of  his  office,  strongly  fla- 
vored with  that,  and  otherwise  most  insipid.  He  be- 
gan his  talk  by  telling  me  of  a  dead  body  which  he 
had  lately  discovered  in  a  house  in  Liverpool,  where  it 
had  been  kept  about  a  fortnight  by  the  relatives,  partly 
from  want  of  funds  for  the  burial,  and  partly  in  ex- 
pectation of  the  arrival  of  some  friends  from  Glasgow. 
There  was  a  plate  of  glass  in  the  coffin-lid,  through 
which  the  Inspector  of  Nuisances,  as  he  told  me,  had 
looked  and  seen  the  dead  man's  face  in  an  ugly  state 
of  decay,  which  he  minutely  described.  However,  his 
conversation  was  not  altogether  of  this  quality ;  for  he 
spoke  about  larks,  and  how  abundant  they  are  just 
now,  and  what  a  good  pie  they  make,  only  they  must 
be  skinned,  else  they  will  have  a  bitter  taste.  We 
have  since  had  a  lark-pie  ourselves,  and  I  believe  it 
was  very  good  in  itself ;  only  the  recollection  of  the 
Nuisance-man's  talk  was  not  a  very  agreeable  flavor, 
A  very  racy  and  peculiarly  English  character  might 
be  made  out  of  a  man  like  this,  having  his  life-con- 
cern wholly  with  the  disagreeables  of  a  great  city. 
He  seemed  to  be  a  good  and  kindly  person,  too,  but 
earthy,  —  even  as  if  his  frame  had  been  moulded  of 
clay  impregnated  with  the  draining  of  slaughter-houses. 


DeceTnber  2l8t  —  On  Thursday  evening  I  dined 
for  the  first  time  with  the  new  Mayor  at  the  Town 
Hall.  I  wish  to  preserve  all  the  characteristic  traits 
of  such  banquets,  because,  being  peculiar  to  England, 
these  municipal  feasts  may  do  well  to  picture  in  a 
noveL    There  was  a  big  old  silver  tobacco-box,  nearly 


$84  ENGLISH  NOTEBOOKS.  [18M. 

•or  quite  bs  large  round  as  an  ordinarj  plote^  out  of 
leeHch  the  tlignitaiies  of  LiiFei^ool  used  to  fill  &Bvt 
pipes,  wMle  sitting  in  coiiDdl  or  after  their  dinners. 
The  date  '^^  1690  "  was  on  the  lidi  Ifc  is  now  used  as 
a  snuff-box,  and  wends  its  way,  from  guest  to  guest, 
ro-utnd  the  table.  We  had  (turtle,  and,  among  other 
^ood  things,  American  canvas-back  dudes.  .  .  .  These 
^dinners  are  eerteduly  a  good  institution,  and  likely  to 
be  promotive  of  good  feeling ;  the  Mayor  giving  Uiem 
of ten^  and  inviting^  xq  their  tuna,  all  the  resectable 
and  eminent  citizens  of  whatever  politieal  bias.  About 
fifty  gentlemen  were  present  that  eveniii^.  I  had  the 
post  of  honor  at  the  Mayor's  right  hand ;  and  France, 
Turkey,  and  Austria  were  toasted  before  the  £epa]> 
lie,  for,  as  the  Mayor  whispered  me,  he  must  first  get 
his  allies  out  of  the  way.  The  Turkish  Consul  and 
the  Austrian  both  made  better  English  speeches  than 
any  Englishmao,  during  the  evening ;  for  it  is  incon^ 
ceivable  what  shapeless  and  ragged  utterances  Eng- 
Hshmen  are  content  to  put  forth,  without  attempting 
anythii^  like  a  wholeness ;  but  inserting  a  patch  here 
and  a  patch  there,  aud  finally  getting  out  what  they 
wish  to  say,  indeed,  but  in  most  disorganized  guise. 
...  I  can  conceive  of  very  high  enjoyment  in  mak- 
ing a  speech ;  one  is  in  such  a  curious  sympa^^y  with 
his  audience,  feeling  instantly  how  every  sentence  af» 
feets  them,  and  wonderfully  excited  and  encouraged 
by  the  sense  that  it  has  gone  to  the  right  spot.  Then, 
too,  the  imminent  emergency,  when  a  man  is  over- 
board, and  must  sink  or  swim,  sharpens,  concentrates, 
and  invigorates  the  mind,  and  causes  matters  of  thought 
and  sentiment  to  assume  shape  and  expression,  though, 
perhaps,  it  seemed  hopeless  to  express  them,  just  be- 
fore you  rose  to  speak.     Yet  I  question  much  whetibef 


1866.1  LIVERPOOL.  885 

public  speaking  tends  to  elevate  the  orator,  intellect* 
ually  or  morally;  the  effort,  of  course,  being  to  say 
what  is  immediately  received  by  the  audience,  and  to 
produce  an  effect  on  the  instant.  I  don't  quite  see 
how  an  honest  man  can  be  a  good  and  successful  ora^ 
tor ;  but  I  shall  hardly  undertake  to  decide  the  ques- 
tion  on  my  merely  post-prandial  experience. 

The  Mayor  toasted  his  guests  by  their  professions, 
— the  merchants,  ior  instance,  the  bankers,  the  solici- 
tors, —  and  while  one  of  the  number  responded,  his 
brethren  also  stood  up,  each  in  his  place,  thus  giving 
their  assent  to  what  he  said.  I  think  the  very  worst 
orator  was  a  major  of  Artillery,  who  spoke  in  a  meek, 
little,  nervous  voice,  and  seemed  a  good  deal  more  dia- 
composed  than  probably  he  would  have  been  in  the 
face  of  the  enemy.  The  first  toast  was  ''  The  Ladies," 
to  which  an  old  bachelor  responded. 

December  Slst.  —  Thus  far  we  have  come  through 
the  winter,  on  thig^,  bleak  and  blasty  shore  of  the  Irish 
Sea,  where,  perhaps,  the  drowned  body  of  Milton's 
friend  Lycidas  might  have  been  washed  ashore  more 
than  two  centuries  ago.  This  would  not  be  very 
likely,  however,  so  wide  a  tract  of  sands,  never  deeply 
covered  by  the  tide,  intervening  betwixt  us  and  the 
sea.  But  it  is  an  excessively  windy  place,  especially 
here  on  the  Promenade  ;  always  a  whistle  and  a  howl, 
—  always  an  eddying  gust  through  the  corridors  and 
chambers,  —  often  a  patter  of  hail  or  rain  or  snow 
against  the  windows ;  and  in  the  long  evenings  the 
sounds  outside  are  very  much  as  if  we  were  on  ship* 
board  in  mid-ocean,  with  the  waves  dashing  against 
die  vessel's  sides.  I  go  to  town  almost,  daily,  starting 
at  about  eleveil,  and  reaching  Southport  again  at  a 

VOL.  vui.  25 


886  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1856. 

little  past  five ;  by  which  time  it  is  quite  dark,  and 
continues  so  till  nearly  eight  in  the  morning. 

Christmas  time  has  been  marked  by  few  character- 
istics. For  a  week  or  two  previous  to  Christmas  Day, 
the  newspapers  contained  rich  details  respecting  mar- 
ket-stalls and  butchers'  shops,  —  what  magnificent  car- 
casses of  prize  oxen  and  sheep  they  displayed.  .  .  • 

The  Christmas  Waits,  came  to  us  on  Christmas  Eve, 
and  on  the  day  itself,  in  the  shape  of  little  parties  of 
boys  or  girls,  singing  wretched  doggerel  rhymes,  and 
going  away  well  pleased  with  the  guerdon  of  a  penny 
or  two.  Last  evening  came  two  or  three  older  choris- 
ters at  pretty  near^  bedtime,  and  sang  some  carols  at 
our  door.  They  were  psalm  tunes,  however.  Every- 
body with  whom  we  have  had  to  do,  in  any  manner  of 
service,  expects  a  Christmas-box ;  but,  in  most  cases, 
a  shilling  is  quite  a  satisfactory  amount.  We  have 
had  holly  and  mistletoe  stuck  up  on  the  gas-fixtures 
and  elsewhere  about  the  house. 

On  the  mantel-piece  in  the  coroner's  court  the  other 
day,  I  saw  corked  and  labelled  phials,  which  it  may 
be  presumed  contained  samples  of  poisons  that  have 
brought  some  poor  wretches  to  their  deaths,  either  by 
murder  or  suicide.  This  court  might  be  wrought  into 
a  very  good  and  pregnant  description,  with  its  grimy 
gloom  illuminated  by  a  conical  skylight,  constructed 
to  throw  daylight  down  on  corpses ;  its  greasy  Testa- 
ment covered  over  with  millions  of  perjured  kisses ; 
the  coroner  himself,  whose  life  is  fed  on  all  kinds  of 
unnatural  death  ;  its  subordinate  officials,  who  go 
about  scenting  murder,  and  might  be  supposed  to 
have  caught  the  scent  in  their  own  garments;  its 
stupid,  brutish  juries,  settling  round  corpses  like  flies ; 
its  criminals,  whose  guilt  is  brought  fe«e  to  face  with 


1867.]  \        SOUTHPORT.  887 

them  here,  in  closer  contact  than  at  the  subsequent 
triaL 

O P ,  the  famous  Mormonite,  called  on  me 

a  little  while  ago,  —  a  short,  black-haired,  dark-com- 
plexioned man;  a  shrewd,  intelligent,  but  unrefined 
countenance,  excessively  unprepossessing  ;  an  uncouth 
gait  and  deportment ;  the  aspect  of  a  person  in  com- 
fortable circumstances,  and  decently  behaved,  but  of  a 
vulgar  nature  and  destitute  of  early  culture.  I  think 
I  should  have  taken  him  for  a  shoemaker,  accustomed 
to  reflect  in  a  rude,  strong,  evil-disposed  way  on  mat- 
ters of  this  world  and  the  next,  as  he  sat  on  his  bench. 
He  said  he  l^ad  been  residing  in  Liverpool  about  six 
months ;  and  his  business  with  me  was  to  ask  for  a 
letter  of  introducticm  that  should  gain  him  admittance 
to  the  British  Museum,  he  intending  a  visit  to  Lon- 
don. He  offered  to  refer  me  to  respectable  people  for 
his  character ;  but  I  advised  him  *to  apply  to  Mr. 
Dallas,  as  the  proper  person  for  his  purpose. 

March  1«^,  1867.  —  On  the  night  of  last  Wednesh 
day  week,  our  house  was  broken  into  by  robbers. 
They  entered  by  the  back  window  of  the  breakfastr 
room,  which  is  the  children's  school-room,  breaking 
or  cutting  a  pane  of  glass,  so  as  to  undo  the  fasten- 
ing. I  have  a  dim  idea  of  having  heard  a  noise 
through  my  sleep ;  but  if  so,  it  did  not  more  than 

slightly  disturb  me.      U heard  it,  she  being  at 

watch  with  E ?  and  J ,  having  a  cold,  was 

also  wakeful,  and  thought  the  noise  was  of  servants 
moving  about  below.     Neither  did  the  idea  of  robbers 

occur  to  U .     J ^  however,  hearing  U at 

her  mother's  door,  asking  for  medicine  for  K ^ 


880  ENGLISH  NOTJS^BOOKS.  [IBM 

cmxmh'&  br^a^t.  Tiectimseh  had  been  skot  with  a  rifi^ 
but,  heiare  expiring,  appeared  to  have  allot  Wheatley 
irith  a  pistol,  which  he  still  held  in  his  hand*  R  ■ 
affirms  that  Tecums^  was  flayed  by  the  Kentucky 
men  on  the  spot,  and  his  skin  converted  into  razor- 
strops.  I  have  left  out  the  most  striking  point  of  the 
narrative,  after  all^  as  It — ^  told  it,  vix.  that  soon 
after  Wheatley  passed  him,  he  suddenly  ceased  to  hear 
Tecimftseh's  voice  ringing  through  the  fotest,  as  he 
gave  his  ordersw  He  was  at  the  battle  of  New  Oleans, 
and  gave  me  the  story  of  it  from  beginning  to  end ; 
but  I  remember  only  a  few  particulars  in  which  he 
was  personally  concerned.  He  confesses  that  his  hsip 
brisl^d  upright  —  every  hair  in  his  head— when  he 
heard  the  shouts  of  the  British  soldiers  before  ad^ 
vancing  to  the  attack.  His  uncomfortable  sensaticma 
lasted  till  he  began  to  fire,  after  whieh  he  felt  no  more 
of  them.  It  was  in  the  dusk  of  tiie  morning,  or  a 
Bttle  before  sunrise,  when  the  assault  was  made ;  and 
the  fight  lasted  about  two  hours  and  a  half,  during 

which  R fired  twenty-four  times ;  and  said  he,  **  I 

saw  my  object  distinctly  each  time,  and  I  was  a  good 
rifle-shot.''  He  was  raising  his  rifle  to  fire  the  twenty^ 
fifth  time,  when  an  Ammeaai  officer,  General  Carroll, 
pressed  it  down,  and  bade  him  fire  no  mo^*  "Enough 
is  enough,''  quoth  the  General.  For  them  needed  no 
more  slaughter,  the  British  being  in  utter  rout  and 
confusion.  In  this  retreat  many  of  the  enemy  would 
drop  down  among  the  dead,  then  rise,  run  a  consider- 
able distance,  and  drop  again,  thus  confusing  the  riflO' 
men's  aim.  One  fellow  had  thus  got  about  four  hva^ 
dred  and  fifty  yards  from  the  American  line,  and, 
thinking  himself  secure,  he  made  a  derisive  gestorer 
••I'll  have  a  shot  at  him,  anyhow,"  cried  a  rifiemaas 
80  he  fired,  and  the  poor  devil  dropped. 


lase.j  LIVERPOOL.  881 

Br-' —  himself,  with  one  af  his  twenty-four  diots, 
hit  a  British  officer,  who  £ell  forward  on  his  face, 
Skbout  thirty  paces  from  our  line,  aad  as  the  enemy 
were  then  retreating  (they  advanced  and  were  re- 
pelled two  OT  thiiee  times)  R ran  out,  and  turned 

him  over  on  his  baek^  The  officer  was  a  nian  about 
thirty-ei^t,  tall  aiid  fine-looking ;  his  eyes  were  wide 
open,  dear,  wid  bright,  and  were  fixed  full  on  R — ^ — 
with  a  somewhat  stern  glance,  but  there  was  the  sweet- 
est and  happiest  smile  over  his  face  that  could  be  con- 
ceived-    He  seamed  to  be  dead;  —  at  least,  R 

thinks  tiiat  he  did  not  really  see  him,  fixedly  as  he  ap- 
peared to  gaze.     The  officer  held  his  sword  in  his 

hand,  and  R tried  in  vain  to  wrest  it  from  him, 

until  suddenly  the  clutch  relaxed*     R still  keeps 

the  sword  hung  up  over  his  mantel-piece.  I  asked 
faun  how  th^  dead  man's  aspect  affected  him.  He  re- 
plied that  he  felt  nothing  at  t^e  time ;  but  that  ever 
since,  in  all  trouble,  in  uneasy  sleep,  and  whenever  he 
is  out  of  tune,  or  waking  early,  or  lying  awake  at 
night,  he  sees  this  officer's  face,  with  the  clear  bright 
eyes  and  the  pleasant  smile,  just  as  distinctly  as  if  he 
weue  bending  over  him.     His  wound  was  in  the  breast, 

exactly  on  tibe  spot  that  R had  aimed  at,  and 

bled  profusely.  The  enemy  advanced  in  such  masses, 
he  says^  that  it  was  impossible  not  to  hit  them  unless 
by  purposely  firing  ovex  their  heads. 

After  the  battle,  R leaped  over  the  rampart, 

and  took  a  prisoner  who  was  standing  unarmed  in  the 
midst  of  the  slain,  having  probably  dropped  down 
during  the  heat  of  the  action,  to  avoid  the  hail-storm 
of  rifle-shots.  As  he  led  him  in,  the  prisoner  paused^ 
and  pointed  to  an  officer  who  was  lying  dead  besidfi 
his  dead  horse,  with  his   foot   still   in   the   stirrup 


890  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

lice  knew  them  already,  and  they  seemed  not  much 
abashed  by  their  position.  There  were  half  a  dozen 
magistrates  on  the  bench,  —  idle  old  gentlemen  of 
Southport  and  the  vicinity,  who  lounged  into  the 
court,  more  as  a  matter  of  amusement  than  anything 
else,  and  lounged  out  again  at  their  own  pleasure ;  for 
these  magisterial  duties  are  a  part  of  the  pastime  of 
the  country  gentlemen  of  England.  They  wore  their 
hats  on  the  bench.  There  were  one  or  two  of  them 
more  active  than  their  fellows ;  but  the  real  duty  was 
done  by  the  Clerk  of  the  Court.  The  seats  within  the 
bar  were  occupied  by  the  witnesses,  and  around  the 
great  table  sat  some  of  the  more  respectable  people  of 
Southport ;  and  without  the  bar  were  the  commonalty 
in  great  numbers  ;  for  this  is  said  to  be  the  first  bur- 
glary that  has  occurred  here  within  the  memory  of 
man,  and  so  it  has  caused  a  great  stir. 

There  seems  to  be  a  strong  case  against  the  prison- 
ers. A  boy  attached  to  the  railway  testified  to  hav- 
ing seen  them  at  Birchdale  on  Wednesday  afternoon, 
and  directed  them  on  their  way  to  Southport ;  Peter 
Pickup  recognized  them  as  having  applied  to  him  for 
lodgings  in  the  course  of  that  evening ;  a  pawnbroker 
swore  to  one  of  them  as  having  offered  my  top-coat 
for  sale  or  pledge  in  Liverpool ;  and  my  boots  were 
found  on  the  feet  of  one  of  them,  —  all  this  in  addi- 
tion to  other  circumstances  of  pregnant  suspicion.  So 
they  were  committed  for  trial  at  the  Liverpool  assizes, 
to  be  holden  some  time  in  the  present  month.  I  rather 
wished  them  to  escape. 

February  27th.  —  Coming  along  the  promenade,  a 
little  before  simset,  I  saw  the  mountains  of  the  Welsh 
coast  shadowed  very  distinctly  against  the  horizon. 


1857.]  SKIPTON.  891 

Mr.  Channing  told  me  that  he  had  seen  these  moun- 
tains once  or  twice  during  his  stay  at  Southport ;  but, 
though  constantly  looking  for  them,  they  have  never 
before  greeted  my  eyes  in  all  the  months  that  we  have 
spent  here.  It  is  said  that  the  Isle  of  Man  is  likewise 
discernible  occasionally ;  but  as  the  distance  must  be 
between  sixty  and  seventy  miles,  I  should  doubt  it. 
How  misty  is  England !  I  have  spent  four  years  in  a 
gray  gloom.     And  yet  it  suits  me  pretty  well. 

TO  YORK. 

April  10th.  —  At  Skipton.     My  wife,  J ,  and  I 

left  Southport  to-day  for  a  short  tour  to  York  and  its 
neighborhood.  The  weather  has  been  exceedingly  dis- 
agreeable for  weeks  past,  but  yesterday  and  to-day 
have  been  pleasant,  and  we  take  advantage  of  the  first 
glimpses  of  spring-like  weather.  We  came  by  Pres- 
ton, along  a  road  that  grew  rather  more  interesting  as 
we  proceeded  to  this  place,  which  is  about  sixty  miles 
from  Southport,  and  where  we  arrived  between  five 
and  six  o'clock.  First  of  all,  we  got  some  tea ;  and 
then,  as  it  was  a  pleasant  dunset,  we  set  forth  from  our 
old-fashioned  inn  to  take  a  walk. 

Skipton  is  an  ancient  town,  and  has  an  ancient 
though  well-repaired  aspect,  the  houses  being  built  of 
gray  stone,  but  in  no  picturesque  shapes ;  ihe  streets 
well  paved  ;  the  site  irregular  and  rising  gradually  to- 
wards Skipton  Castle,  which  overlooks  the  town,  as 
an  old  lordly  castle  ought  to  overlook  the  feudal  vil- 
lage which  it  protects.  The  castle  was  built  shortly 
after  the  Conquest  by  Bobert  de  Komeli,  and  was  af- 
terwards the  property  and  residence  of  the  famous 
Cliffords.  We  met  an  honest  man,  as  we  approached 
the  gateway,  who  kindly  encouraged  us  to  apply  for 


892  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  £1857. 

admittance,  notwithstanding  it  was  Good  Friday ;  tell- 
ing us  how  to  find  the  hoosekeeper,  who  would  prob- 
ably show  us  over  the  castle.  So  we  passed  through 
the  gate,  between  two  embattled  towers ;  and  in  the 
castle  court  we  met  a  flock  of  young  damsels,  who  had 
been  rambling  about  the  precincts.  They  likewise 
directed  us  in  our  search  for  the  housekeeper,  and 

g ^  being  bolder  than  I  in  such  assaults  on  feudal 

castles,  led  the  way  down  a  dark  archway,  and  up  an 
exterior  stairway,  and,  knocking  at  a  door,  immediately 
brought  the  housekeeper  to  a  parley. 

She  proved  to  be  a  nowise  awful  personage,  but  a 
homely,  neat,  kindly,  intelligent,  and  middle-aged 
body.  She  seemed  to  be  all  alone  in  this  great  old 
casde,  and  at  once  consented  to  show  us  about,  —  be- 
ing, no  doubt,  glad  to  see  any  Christian  visitors.  The 
castle  is  now  the  property  of  Sir  R.  Tufton ;  but  the 
present  family  do  not  make  it  tiieir  permanent  resi- 
dence, and  have  only  occasionally  visited  it.  Indeed, 
it  could  not  well  be  made  an  eligible  or  comfortable 
residence,  according  to  modem  ideas ;  the  rooms  occu- 
pying the  several  stories  of  large  round  towers,  and 
looking  gloomy  and  sombre,  if  not  dreary,  —  not  the 
less  so  for  what  has  been  done  to  modernize  them ;  for 
instance,  modem  paper-hangings,  and,  in  some  of  the 
rooms,  marble  fireplaces.  They  need  a  great  deal 
more  light  and  higher  ceilings  ;  and  I  rather  imagine 
that  the  warm,  rich  effect  of  glowing  tapestry  is  es- 
sential to  keep  one's  spirit  cheerful  in  l^ese  ancient 
rooms.  Modem  paper-hangings  are  too  superficial 
and  wishy-washy  for  the  purpose.  Tapestry,  it  is  true, 
there  is  now,  completely  covering  the  walls  of  several 
of  the  rooms,  but  all  faded  into  ghastliness ;  nor  could 
some  of  it  have  been  otherwise  than  ghastly,  even  in 


1857.J  SKIPTON. 

its  newness,  for  it  represented  persons  suffering  irari- 
ous  kinds  of  torture,  with  crowds  of  monks  and  nuns 
looking  on.  In  another  room  there  was  the  story  of 
Solomon  and  the  Queen  of  Sheba,  and  other  subjects 
not  to  be  readily  distinguished  in  the  twilight  that 
was  gathering  in  these  antique  chambers.  We  saw, 
too,  some  very  old  portraits  of  the  Cliffords  and  the 
Thanets,  in  black  frames,  and  the  pictures  themselves 
sadly  faded  and  n^lected.  The  famous  Countess 
Anne  of  Pembroke,  Dorset,  and  Montgomery  was  rep- 
resented on  one  of  the  leaves  of  a  pair  of  folding 
doors,  and  one  of  her  husbands,  I  believe,  on  the  other 
leaf.  There  was  the  picture  of  a  little  idiot  lordling, 
who  had  choked  himself  to  death ;  and  a  portrait  of 
Oliver  Cromwell,  who  battered  this  old  castle,  together 
with  abnost  every  other  English  or  Welsh  castle  that 
I  ever  saw  or  heard  of.  The  housekeeper  pointed  out 
the  grove  of  trees  where  his  cannon  were  planted  dur- 
ing the  siege.  There  was  but  little  furniture  in  the 
rooms;  amongst  other  articles,  an  antique  chair,  in 
which  Mary  Queen  of  Scots  is  said  to  have  rested. 

The  housekeeper  next  took  us  into  the  part  of  the 
castle  which  has  never  been  modernized  since  it  was 
repaired,  after  the  siege  of  Cromwell.  This  is  a  dis- 
mal series  of  cellars  above  ground,  with  immensely 
thick  walls,  letting  in  but  scanty  light,  and  dim  stair^ 
cases  of  stone ;  and  a  large  hall,  with  a  vast  fireplace, 
where  every  particle  of  heat  must  needs  have  gone  up 
chimney,  —  a  chill  and  heart-breaking  place  enough. 
Quite  in  the  midst  of  this  part  of  the  castle  is  the 
court-yard,  —  a  space  of  some  thirty  or  forty  feet  in 
length  and  breadth,  open  to  the  sky,  but  shut  com* 
pletely  in  on  every  side  by  the  buildings  of  the  castle, 
vnd  paved  over  with  flat  stones.   Out  of  this  pavement, 


894  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

however,  grows  a  yew-tree,  ascending  to  the  tops  of  the 
towers,  and  completely  fOling,  with  its  branches  and 
foliage,  the  whole  open  space  between  them.  Some 
small  birds  —  quite  a  flock  of  them  —  were  twittering 
and  fluttering  among  the  upper  branches.  We  went 
upward,  through  two  or  three  stories  of  dismal  rooms, 
—  among  others,  through  the  ancient  guard-room,  — 
till  we  came  out  on  the  roof  of  one  of  the  towers,  and 
had  a  very  fine  view  of  an  amphitheatre  of  ridgy  hilla 
which  shut  in  and  seclude  the  castle  and  the  town. 
The  upper  foliage  was  within  our  reach,  close  to  the 
parapet  of  the  tower ;  so  we  gathered  a  few  twigs  as 
memorials.  The  housekeeper  told  us  that  the  yew-tree 
is  supposed  to  be  eight  hundred  years  old,  and,  com- 
paring it  with  other  yews  that  I  have  seen,  I  should 
judge  that  it  must  measure  its  antiquity  by  centuries, 
at  all  events.     It  still  seems  to  be  in  its  prime. 

Along  the  base  of  the  castle,  on  the  opposite  side  to 
the  entrance,  flows  a  stream,  sending  up  a  pleasant 
murmur  from  among  the  trees.  The  housekeeper  said 
it  was  not  a  stream,  but  only  a  "  wash,"  whatever  that 
may  be ;  and  I  conjecture  that  it  creates  the  motive- 
power  of  some  factory-looking  edifices,  which  we  saw 
on  our  first  arrival  at  Skipton. 

We  now  took  our  leave  of  the  housekeeper,  and 
came  homeward  to  our  inn,  where  I  have  written  the 
foregoing  pages  by  a  bright  fire  ;  but  I  think  I  write 
better  descriptions  after  letting  the  subject  lie  in  my 
mind  a  day  or  two.  It  is  too  new  to  be  properly 
dealt  with  immediately  after  coming  from  the  scene. 

The  castle  is  not  at  all  crumbly,  but  in  excellent  re* 
pair,  though  so  venerable.  There  are  rooks  cawing 
about  the  shapeless  patches  of  their  nests,  in  the  tops 
of  the  trees.     In  the  castle  wall,  as  well  as  in  the 


1857.]  BOLTON  PRIORY.  395 

tound  towers  of  the  gateway,  there  seem  to  be  little 
tenements,  perhaps  inhabited  by  the  servants  and  de- 
pendants of  the  family.  They  looked  in  very  good 
order,  with  tokens  of  present  domesticity  about  them. 
The  whole  of  this  old  castle,  indeed,  was  as  neat  as  a 
new,  small  dwelling,  in  spite  of  an  inevitable  musty 
odor  of  antiquity. 

April  Wth. — This  morning  we  took  a  carriage  and 
two  horses,  and  set  out  for 

BOLTON  PBIORT, 

a  distance  of  about  six  miles.  The  morning  was  cool, 
with  breezy  clouds,  intermingled  with  sunshine,  and, 
on  the  whole,  as  good  as  are  nine  tenths  of  English 

mornings.     J sat  beside  the  driver,  and  S— — 

and  I  in  the  carriage,  all  closed  but  one  window.  As 
we  drove  through  Skipton,  the  little  town  had  a 
livelier  aspect  than  yesterday  when  it  wore  its  Good 
Friday's  solemnity;  but  now  its  market-place  was 
thronged,  principally  with  butchers,  displaying  their 
meat  under  little  movable  pent-houses,  and  their  cus- 
tomers. The  English  people  really  like  to  think  and 
talk  of  butcher's  meat,  and  gaze  at  it  with  delight; 
and  they  crowd  through  the  avenues  of  the  market- 
houses  and  stand  enraptured  round  a  dead  ox. 

We  passed  along  by  the  castle  wall,  and  noticed  the 
escutcheon  of  the  Cliffords  or  the  Thanets  carved  in 
stone  over  the  portal,  with  the  motto  Desormais^  the 
application  of  which  I  do  not  well  see ;  these  ances- 
tral devices  usually  referring  more  to  the  past  than  to 
the  future.  There  is  a  large  old  church,  just  at  the 
extremity  of  the  village,  and  just  below  the  castle,  on 
the  slope  of  the  hill.     The  gray  wall  of  the  castle  ex* 


896  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [185T. 

fcends  albng  the  road  a  considerable  distance,  in  good 
repair,  with  here  and  there  a  buttress,  and  the  semi- 
circular bulge  of  a  tower. 

The  scenery  along  the  road  was  not  particularly 
striking,  —  long  slopes,  descending  &om  ricjges  ;  a 
generally  hard  outline  of  country,  with  not  many 
trees,  and  those,  a£i  yet,  destitute  of  foliage.  It  needs 
to  be  softened  with  a  good  deal  of  wood.  There  were 
stone  farm-houses,  looking  ancient,  and  able  to  last 
till  twice  as  old.  Instead  of  the  hedges,  so  universal 
in  other  parts  of  England,  there  were  stone  fences  of 
good  height  and  painful  construction,  made  of  small 
stones,  which  I  suppose  have  been  picked  up  out  of 
the  fields  through  hundreds  of  years.  They  reminded 
me  of  old  Massachusetts,  though  very  unlike  our  rude 
stone  walls,  which,  nevertheless,  last  longer  than  any* 
thing  else  we  build.  Another  New  England  feature 
was  the  little  brooks,  which  here  and  there  flowed 
across  our  road,  rippling  over  the  pebbles,  dear  and 
bright.  I  fancied,  too,  an  intelligence  and  keenness 
in  some  of  the  Yorkshire  physiognomies,  akin  to  those 
characteristics  in  my  coimtrymen's  faces. 

We  passed  an  ancient,  many-gabled  inn,  large,  low, 
and  comfortable,  bearing  the  name  of  the  Devonshire 
House,  as  does  our  own  hotel,  for  the  Duke  of  Devon- 
shire is  a  great  proprietor  in  these  parts.  A  mile  or 
so  beyond,  we  came  to  a  gateway,  .broken  through 
what,  I  believe,  was  an  old  wall  of  the  Priory  grounds ; 
and  here  we  alighted,  leaving  our  driver  to  take  the 
carriage  to  the  inn.  Ptosing  through  this  hole  in  the 
wall,  we  saw  the  ruins  of  the  Priory  at  the  bottom  of 
the  beautiful  valley  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  off ;  and, 
well  as  the  monks  knew  how  to  choose  the  sites  of 
their  establishments,  I  think  they  never  chose  a  bet* 


I857.J  BOLTON  PRIORY.  89T 

ter  site  than  this,  —  in  the  green  lap  of  protecting 
hills,  beside  a  stream,  and  with  peace  and  fertility 
looking  down  upon  it  on  every  side.  The  view  down 
the  valley  is  very  fine,  and,  for  my  part,  I  am  glad 
that  some  peaceable  and  comfort  -  loving  people  pos- 
sessed these  precincts  for  many  hundred  years,  when 
nobody  else  knew  how  to  appreciate  peace  and  com- 
fort. 

The  old  gateway  tower,  b^ieath  which  was  formerly 
the  arched  entrance  into  the  domain  of  the  Priory,  is 
now  the  central  part  of  a  hunting-seat  of  the  Duke  of 
Devonshire,  and  the  edifice  is  completed  by  a  wing  of 
recent  date  on  each  side.  A  few  hundred  yards  from 
this  hunting-box  are  the  remains  of  the  Priory,  cion- 
sisting  of  the  nave  of  the  old  church,  which  is  still  in 
good  repair,  and  used  as  the  worshipping-place  of  the 
neighborhood  (being  a  perpetual  curaxjy  of  the  parish 
<rf  Skipton),  and  the  old  ruined  choir,  roofless,  with 
broken  arches,  ivy-grown,  but  not  so  rich  and  rare  a 
ruin  as  either  Melrose,  Netley,  or  Fumess.  Its  situ- 
ation miJies  its  charm.  It  stands  near  the  river 
Wharf e,  —  a  broad  and  rapid  stream,  which  hurries 
along  between  high  banks,  with  a  sound  which  the 
monks  must  have  found  cong^iial  to  their  slumberous 
moods.  It  is  a  good  river  for  trout,  too ;  and  I  saw 
two  or  tiu^e  anglers,  with  their  rods  and  baskets,  pass- 
ing through  the  ruins  towards  its  shore.  It  was  in 
this  river  Wharf e  that  the  boy  of  Egremont  was 
drowned,  at  the  Strid,  a  mile  or  two  higher  up  the 
stream. 

In  the  first  place,  we  rambled  round  the  exterior  of 
the  ruins ;  but,  as  I  have  said,  they  are  rather  bare 
and  meagre  in  comparison  with  other  abbeys,  and  I 
am  not  sure  that  the  especial  care  and  neatness  with 


ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

which  they  are  preserved  does  not  lessen  their  efiFect 
on  the  beholder.  Neglect,  wildness,  crumbling  walls, 
the  climbing  and  conquering  ivy ;  masses  of  stone  ly- 
ing where  they  fell ;  trees  of  old  date,  growing  (where 
the  pillars  of  the  aisles  used  to  stand,  —  these  are  the 
best  points  of  ruined  abbeys.  But  everything  here  is 
kept  with  such  trimness  that  it  gives  you  the  idea  of 
a  petrifaction.  Decay  is  no  longer  triumphant ;  the 
Duke  of  Devonshire  has  got  the  better  of  it.  The 
grounds  around  the  church  and  the  ruins  are  still 
used  for  burial,  and  there  are  several  flat  tombstones 
and  altar  tombs,  with  crosiers  engraved  or  carved 
upon  them,  which  at  first  I  took  to  be  the  memorials 
of  bishops  or  abbots,  and  wondered  that  the  sculpture 
should  still  be  so  distinct.  On  one,  however,  I  read  the 
date  1850  and  the  name  of  a  layman ;  for  the  tomb- 
stones were  all  modem,  the  humid  English  atmos- 
phere giving  them  their  mossy  look  of  antiquity,  and 
the  crosier  had  been  assumed  only  as  a  pretty  device. 
Close  beside  the  ruins  there  is  a  large,  old  stone 
f  arm-house,  which  must  have  been  built  on  the  site  of 
a  part  of  the  Priory,  —  the  cells,  dormitories,  refec- 
tory, and  other  portions  pertaining  to  the  monks' 
daily  life,  I  suppose,  and  built,  no  doubt,  with  the  sar 
cred  stones.  I  should  imagine  it  would  be  a  haunted 
house,  swarming  with  cowled  spectres.  We  wished  to 
see  the  interior  of  the  church,  and  procured  a  guide 
from  this  farm  -  house,  —  the  sexton,  probably,  —  a 
gray-haired,  ruddy,  cheery,  and  intelligent  man,  of  fa- 
miliar though  respectful  address.  The  entrance  of 
the  church  was  undergoing  improvement,  under  the 
last  of  the  abbots,  when  the  Seformation  occurred; 
and  it  has  ever  remained  in  an  unfinished  state,  till 
now  it  is  mossy  with  age,  and  has  a  beautiful  tuft  of 


1857.]  BOLTON  PRIORY.  899 

wall-flowers  growing  on  a  ledge  over  flie  Gotbic  arch 
of  the  doorway.  The  body  of  the  church  is  of  much 
anterior  date,  though  the  oaken  roof  is  supposed  to 
have  been  renewed  in  Henry  VIII.'s  time.  This,  as  I 
said  before,  was  the  nave  of  the  old  Abbey  church, 
and  has  a  one-sided  and  unbalanced  aspect,  there  be- 
ing only  a  single  aisle,  with  its  row  of  sturdy  piUars. . 
The  pavement  is  covered  with  pews  of  old  oak,  very 
homely  and  unomamental ;  on  the  side  opposite  the 
aisle  tliere  are  two  or  three  windows  of  modem  stained 
glass,  somewhat  gaudy  and  impertinent ;  there  are  like^ 
wise  some  hatchments  and  escutcheons  over  the  altar 
and  elsewhere.  On  the  whole,  it  is  not  an  impressive 
interior  ;  but,  at  any  rate,  it  had  the  true  musty  odor 
which  I  never  conceived  of  till  I  came  to  England,  — 
the  odor  of  dead  men's  decay,  garnered  up  and  shut 
in,  and  kept  from  generation  to  generation ;  not  dis- 
gusting nor  sickening,  because  it  is  so  old,  and  of  the 
past. 

On  one  side  of  the  altar  there  was  a  small  square 
chapel,  —  or  what  had  once  been  a  chapel,  —  sepa- 
rated from  the  chancel  by  a  partition  about  a  man's 
height,  if  I  remember  aright.  Our  guide  led  us  into 
it,  and  observed  that  some  years  ago  the  pavement 
had  been  taken  up  in  this  spot,  for  burial  purposes ; 
but  it  was  found  that  it  had  already  been  used  in  that 
way,  and  that  the  corpses  had  been  buried  upright. 
Inquiring  further,  I  found  that  it  was  the  Clapham 
family,  and  another  that  was  called  Morley,  that  were 
so  buried ;  and  then  it  occurred  to  me  that  this  was 
the  vault  Wordsworth  refers  to  in  one  of  his  poems, 
—  the  burial-place  of  the  Claphams  and  Mauleverers, 
whose  skeletons,  for  aught  I  know,  were  even  then 
standing  upright  under  our  feet.    It  is  but  a  narrow 


400  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

place,  perhaps  a  square  of  ten  feet.  We  saw  litde  or 
nothing  else  that  was  memorable,  unless  it  were  the 
signature  of  Queen  Adelaide  in  a  visitors'  book. 

On  our  way  back  to  Skipton  it  rained  and  hailed, 
but  the  sun  again  shone  out  before  we  arrived.  We 
took  the  train  for  Leeds  at  half  past  ten,  and  arrived 
there  in  the  afternoon,  passing  the  ruined  Abbey  of 
Kirkstall  on  our  way.  The  ruins  looked  more  inter- 
esting than  those  of  Bolton,  though  not  so  de%htfully 
situated,  and  now  in  the  close  vicinity  of  manufacto- 
ries, and  only  two  or  three  miles  from  Leeds.  We 
took  a  dish  of  soup,  and  spent  a  miserable  hour  in 
and  about  the  railway  station  of  Leeds ;  whence  we 
departed  at  four,  and  reached 

YORK 

in  an  hour  or  two.  We  put  up  at  the  Black  Swan, 
and  before  tea  went  out,  on  the  cool  bright  edge  of 
evening,  to  get  a  glimpse  of  the  cathedral,  which  im- 
pressed me  more  grandly  than  when  I  first  saw  it, 
nearly  a  year  ago.  Indeed,  almost  any  object  gains 
upon  me  at  the  second  sight.  I  have  spent  the  even* 
ing  in  writing  up  my  journal,  —  an  act  of  real  vir- 
tue. 

After  walking  round  the  cathedral,  we  went  up  a 
narrow  and  crooked  street,  very  old  and  shabby,  but 
with  an  antique  house  projecting  as  much  as  a  yard 
over  the  pavement  on  one  side,  —  a  timber  house  it 
seemed  to  be,  plastered  over  and  stained  yellow  or 
buff.  There  was  no  external  door  affording  entrance 
into  this  edifice;  but  about  midway  of  its  front  we 
came  to  a  low,  Gothic,  stone  archway,  passing  right 
through  the  house ;  and  as  it  looked  much  time-worn, 
tnd  was  sculptured  with  untraceable  devices,  we  went 


1867.]  YORK.  401 

through.  Thete  wa^t  ati  exceedingly  antique^  b^tteted^ 
and  shattered  pair  of  oaken  leaves,  which  used  doubt- 
leas  to  shut  up  the  passage  in  former  times,  and  keep 
it  secure ;  but  for  tiie  last  centuries,  probably,  there 
has  been  free  ingress  and  egress.  Indeed,  the  portal 
arch  may  never  have  been  closed  since  the  Reforma- 
tion. Within,  we  found  a  quadrangle,  of  which  the 
house  upon  the  street  formed  one  side,  the  others  be- 
ing composed  of  ancient  houses,  with  gables  in  a  row, 
all  looking  upon  the  paved  quadrangle,  through  quaint 
windows  of  various  fashion.  An  elderly,  neat,  pleas* 
ant-looking  woman  now  came  in  beneath  the  arch,  and 
as  she  had  a  look  of  being  acquainted  here,  we  asked 
her  what  the  place  was ;  and  she  told  us,  that  in  the 
old  popish  times  the  prebends  of  the  cathedral  used 
to  live  here,  to  keep  them  from  doing  mischief  in  the 
town.  The  establishment,  she  said,  was  now  called 
^^  The  College,"  and  was  let  in  rooms  and  small  tene- 
ments to  poor  people.  On  consulting  the  York  Guide, 
I  find  that  her  account  was  pretiy  correct ;  the  house 
having  been  founded  in  Henry  VI.'s  time,  and  called 
St.  William's  College,  the  statue  of  the  patron  saint 
being  scidptured  over  the  arch.  It  was  intended  for 
the  residence  of  the  parsons  and  priests  of  the  cathe- 
dral, who  had  formerly  caused  troubles  and  scandals 
by  living  in  the  town. 

We  returned  to  the  front  of  the  cathedral  on  our 
way  homeward,  and  an  old  man  stopped  us,  to  inquire 
if  we  had  ever  seen  the  Fiddler  of  York.  We  an- 
swered in  the  negative,  and  said  that  we  had  not  time 
to  see  him  now ;  but  the  old  gentleman  pointed  up  to 
the  highest  pinnacle  of  the  southern  front,  where  stood 
the  Fiddler  of  York,  one  of  those  Gothic  quaintnesses 

voi*.  vni.  36 


402  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

which  blotch  the  grandeur  and  solemnity  of  this  and 
other  cathedrals. 

April  12th,  —  This  morning  was  bleak  and  most 
migenial ;  a  chilly  sunshine,  a  piercing  wind,  a  preva- 
lence of  watery  cloud,  —  April  weather,  without  the 
tenderness  that  ought  to  be  half  revealed  in  it.     This  is 

EASTEE    SUNDAY, 

and  service  at  the  cathedral  commenced  at  half  past 
ten ;  so  we  set  out  betimes  and  found  admittance  into 
the  vast  nave,  and  thence  into  the  choir/  An  attend- 
ant ushered  S and  J to  a  seat  at  a  distance 

from  me,  and  then  gave  me  a  place  in  one  of  the  stalls 
where  the  monks  used  to  sit  or  kneel  while  chanting  the 
services.  I  think  these  stalls  are  now  appropriated  to 
the  prebends.  They  are  of  carved  oaken  wood,  much 
less  elaborate  and  wonderfully  wrought  than  those  of 
Chester  Cathedral,  where  all  was  done  with  head  and 
heart,  each  a  separate  device,  instead  of  cut  by  machin- 
ery like  this.  The  whole  effect  of  this  carved  work, 
however,  lining  the  choir  with  its  light  tracery  and  pin- 
nacles, is  very  fine.  The  whole  choir,  from  the  roof 
downward,  except  the  old  stones  of  the  outer  walls,  is 
of  modem  renovation,  it  being  but  a  few  years  since 
this  part  of  the  cathedral  was  destroyed  by  fire.  The 
arches  and  pillars  and  lofiy  roof,  however,  have  been 
well  restored  ;  and  there  was  a  vast  east  window,  full 
of  painted  glass,  which,  if  it  be  modem,  is  wonderfully 
chaste  and  Gothic-like.  All  the  other  windows  have 
painted  glass,  which  does  not  flare  and  glare  as  if 
newly  painted.  But  the  light,  whitewashed  aspect  of 
the  general  interior  of  the  choir  has  a  cold  and  dreary 
effect.     There  is  an  enormous  organ,  all  clad  in  rich 


1857.]  YORK.  403 

oaken  carving,  of  similar  pattern  to  that  of  the  stalls. 
It  was  communion  day,  and  near  the  high  altar,  with- 
in a  screen,  I  saw  the  glistening  of  the  gold  vessels 
wherewith  the  services  were  to  be  performed. 

The  choir  was  respectably  filled  with  a  pretiy  nu- 
merous congregation,  among  whom  I  saw  some  officers 
in  full  dres^  with  their  swords  by  their  sides ;  and  one 
old  white-bearded  warrior,  who  sat  near  me,  seemed 
very  devout  at  his  religious  exercises.  In  front  of  me 
and  on  the  corresponding  benches,  on  the  other  side  of 
the  choir,  sat  two  rows  of  white-robed  choristers,  twen- 
ty in  all,  and  these,  with  some  women,  performed  the 
Tocal  part  of  the  music.  It  is  not  good  to  see  musi- 
cians, for  they  are  sometimes  coarse  and  vulgar  people, 
and  so  the  auditor  loses  faith  in  any  fine  and  spiritual 
tones  that  they  may  breathe  forth. 

The  services  of  Easter  Sunday  comprehend  more 
than  the  ordinary  quantity  of  singing  and  chanting ; 
at  all  events,  nearly  an  hour  and  a  half  were  thus  em- 
ployed, with  some  intermixture  of  prayers  and  reading 
of  Scriptures  ;  and  being  almost  congealed  with  cold, 
I  thought  it  would  never  come  to  an  end.  The  spirit 
of  my  Puritan  ancestors  was  mighty  within  me,  and  I 
did  not  wonder  at  their  being  out  of  patience  with  all 
this  mummery,  which  seemed  to  me  worse  than  papis- 
try because  it  was  a  corruption  of  it.  At  last  a  canon 
gave  out  the  text,  and  preached  a  sermon  about  twenty 
minutes  long,  —  the  coldest,  driest,  most  superficial 
rubbish  ;  for  this  gorgeous  setting  of  the  magnificent 
cathedral,  the  elaborate  music,  and  the  rich  ceremo- 
nies seem  inevitably  to  take  the  life  out  of  the  sermon^ 
which,  to  be  anything,  must  be  all.  The  Puritans 
showed  their  strength  of  mind  and  heart  by  preferring 
a  sermon  an  hour  and  a  half  long,  into  which  the 


404  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  i;i857. 

preacher  put  his  vrbole  soul,  and  lopping  away  all  these 
externals,  into  which  religioia  life  had  first  leafed  and 
flowered,  and  then  petrified. 

After  the  service,  while  waiting  for  my  wife  in  the 
nave,  I  was  accosted  by  a  young  gentleman  .who  seemed 
to  be  an  American,  and  whom  I  have  certainly  seen 
before,  but  whose  name  I  could  not  rec(^leot.  This, 
he  said,  was  his  first  visit  to  York,  and  he  was  evi> 
dently  inclined  to  join  me  in  viewing  the  curiosities  of 
the  place,  but,  not  knowing  his  name,  I  could  not  in- 
troduce him  to  my  wife,  and  so  made  a  parting  salute. 

After  dinner,  we  set  forth  and  took  a  promenade 
.  along  the  wall,  and  a  ramble  through  some  of  tiie 
crooked  streets,  noting  the  old,  jutting-storied  houses, 
story  above  story,  and  the  old  churches,  gnawed  like 
a  bone  by  the  teeth  of  Time,  till  we  came  suddenly 
to  the  Black  Swan  before  we  expected  it.  •  •  •  I 
rather  fancy  that  I  must  have  observed  most  of  the 
external  peculiarities  at  my  former  visit,  and  tliere- 
f ore  need  not  make  another  record  of  them  in  this 
journal. 

In  the  course  of  our  walk  we  saw  a  procession  of 
about  fifty  charity-school  boys,  in  flat  caps,  each  with 
bands  under  his  chin,  and  a  green  collar  to  his  coat ; 
all  looking  unjoyous,  and  as  if  they  had  no  home  nor 
parents'  love.  They  turned  into  a  gateway,  which 
closed  behind  them  ;  and  as  the  adjoining  edifice 
seemed  to  be  a  public  institution,  —  at  least,  not  pri- 
vate, —  we  asked  what  it  was,  and  found  it  to  be  a 
hospital  or  residence  for  Old  Maiden  ladies,  founded 
by  a  gentlewoman  of  York ;  I  know  not  whether  she 
herself  is  of  the  sisterhood.  It  must  be  a  very  singu- 
lar institution,  and  worthy  of  intimate  study,  if  it  were 
possible  to  make  one's  way  within  the  portaL 


1857.]  YORK.  405 

After  writing  the  above,  J and  I  went  out  for 

another  ramble  before  tea ;  and,  taking  a  new  course, 
we  came  to  a  grated  iron  fence  and  gateway,  through 
which  we  could  see  the  ruins  of  St.  Mary's  Abbey* 
They  are  very  extensive,  and  situated  quite  in  the 
midst  of  the  city,  and  the  wall  and  then  a  tower  of  the 
Abbey  seem  to  border  more  than  one  of  the  streets. 
Our  walk  was  interesting,  as  it  brought  us  unexpect- 
edly upon  several  relics  of  antiquiiy,  —  a  loop-holed 
and  battlemented  gateway ;  and  at  various  points  frag- 
ments of  the  old  Gothic  stone-work,  built  in  among 
more  recent  edifices,  which  themselves  were  old  ;  grim- 
ness  intermixed  with  quaintness  and  grotesqueness ; 
old  fragments  of  religious  or  warlike  architecture  min- 
gled with  queer  domestic  structures, — the  general  ef- 
fect sombre,  sordid,  and  grimy ;  but  yet  with  a  fasci- 
nation that  makes  us  fain  to  linger  about  such  scenes, 
and  come  to  them  again. 

We  passed  round  the  cathedral,  and  saw  jackdaws 
fluttering  round  the  pinnacles,  while  the  bells  chimed 
the  quarters,  and  little  children  played  on  the  steps 
under  the  grand  arch  of  the  entrance.  It  is  very 
stately,  very  beautiful,  this  minster;  and  doubtless 
would  be  very  satisfactory,  could  I  only  know  it  long 
and  well  enough,  —  so  rich  as  its  front  is»  even  with 
almost  all  the  niches  empty  of  their  statues ;  not 
stem  in  its  effect,  which  I  suppose  must  be  owing  to 
the  elaborate  detail  with  which  its  great  surface  is 
wrought  all  over,  like  the  chasing  of  a  lady's  jewel- 
box,  and  yet  so  grand !  There  is  a  dwelling-house  on 
one  side,  gray  with  antiquity,  which  has  apparently 
grown  out  of  it  like  an  excrescence ;  and  though  a 
good-sized  edifice,  yet  the  cathedral  is  so  large  thai»  its 
vastness  is  not  in  l^e  least  deformed  by  it     If  it  be  a 


406  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

dwellmg-house,  I  suppose  it  is  inhabited  by  the  person 
who  takes  care  of  the  cathedral.  This  morning,  while 
listening  to  the  tedious  chanting  and  lukewarm  ser- 
mon, I  depreciated  the  whole  affair,  cathedral  and  all ; 
but  now  I  do  more  justice,  at  least  to  the  latter,  and 
am  only  sorry  that  its  noble  echoes  must  follow  at 
every  syllable,  and  re-reverberate  at  the  commas  and 
semicolons,  such  poor  discourses  as  the  canon's.  But, 
after  all,  it  was  the  Puritans  who  made  the  sermon  of 
such  importance  in  religious  worship  as  we  New-Eng- 
landers  now  consider  it ;  and  we  are  absurd  in  con- 
sidering this  magnificent  church  and  all  those  embroi- 
dered ceremonies  only  in  reference  to  it. 

Before  going  back  to  the  hotel,  I  went  again  up  the 
narrow  and  twisted  passage  of  College  Street,  to  take 
another  glance  at  St.  William's  College.  I  underesti- 
mated the  projection  of  the  front  over  the  street ;  it  is 
considerably  more  than  three  feet,  and  is  about  eight 
or  nine  feet  above  the  pavement.  The  little  statue 
of  St.  William  is  an  alto-relievo  over  the  arched  en- 
trance, and  has  an  escutcheon  of  arms  on  each  side, 
all  much  defaced.  In  the  interior  of  the  quadrangle, 
the  houses  have  not  gables  nor  peaked  fronts,  but 
have  peaked  windows  on  the  red-tiled  roofs.  The 
doorway,  opposite  the  entrance-arch,  is  rather  stately ; 
and  on  one  side  is  a  large,  projecting  window,  which 
is  said  to  belong  to  the  room  where  the  printing-press 
of  Charles  I.  was  established  in  the  days  of  the  Parlia- 
ment. 

THE  MINSTEK. 

Monday,  April  ISth.  —  This  morning  was  chill, 
and,  worse,  it  was  showery,  so  that  our  purposes  to  see 
York  were  muoh  thwarted.  At  about  ten  o'clock,  ho¥F> 


1857.J  YORK.  '  407 

ever,  we  took  a  cab,  and  drove  to  the  cathedral,  where 
we  arrived  while  service  was  going  on  in  the  choir, 
and  ropes  were  put  up  as  barriers  between  us  and  the 
nave ;  so  that  we  were  limited  to  the  south  transept, 
and  a  part  of  one  of  the  aisles  of  the  choir.  It  was 
dismally  cold.  We  crept  cheerlessly  about  within  our 
narrow  precincts  (narrow,  that  is  to  say,  in  propor- 
tion to  the  vast  length  and  breadth  of  the  cathedral), 
gazing  up  into  the  hollow  height  of  the  central  tower, 
and  looking  at  a  monumental  brass,  fastened  against 
one  of  the  pillars,  representing  a  beruffled  lady  of  the 
Tudor  times,  and  at  the  canopied  tomb  of  Archbishop 
de  Grrey,  who  ruled  over  the  diocese  in  the  thirteenth 
century.  Then  we  went  into  the  side  aisle  of  the  choir, 
where  there  were  one  or  tw6  modem  monuments  ; 
and  I  was  appalled  to  find  that  a  sermon  was  being 
preached  by  the  ecclesiastic  of  the  day,  nor  were  there 
any  signs  of  an  imminent  termination.  I  am  not 
aware  that  there  was  much  pith  in  the  discourse,  but 
there  was  certainly  a  good  deal  of  labor  and  earnest- 
ness in  the  preacher's  mode  of  delivery;  although, 
when  he  came  to  a  close,  it  appeared  that  the  audi- 
ence was  not  more  than  half  a  dozen  people. 

The  barriers  being  now  withdrawn,  we  walked 
adown  the  length  of  the  nave,  which  did  not  seem  to 
me  so  dim  and  vast  as  the  recollection  which  I  have 
had  of  it  since  my  visit  of  a  year  ago.  But  my  pre- 
imaginations  and  my  inemories  are  both  apt  to  play 
me  false  with  all  admirable  things,  and  so  create  dis- 
appointments for  me,  while  perhaps  the  thing  itself  is 
really  far  better  than  I  imagine  or  remember  it.  We 
engaged  an  old  man,  one  of  the  attendants  pertaining 
to  the  cathedral,  to  be  our  guide,  and  he  showed  us 
first  the  stone  screen  in  front  of  the  choir,  with  its 


408  'ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857, 

sculptured  kings  of  England ;  and  then  tke  tomBs  in 
the  north  transept,  —  one  of  a  modem  archbishop,  and 
one  of  an  ancient  one,  behind  which  the  insane  person 
who  set  fire  to  the  church  a  few  years  ago  hid  himself 
at  nightfall.  Then  our  guide  unlocked  a  side  door, 
and  led  us  into  the  chapter  -  house,  —  an  octagonal 
hall,  with  a  vaulted  roof,  a  tessellated  floor,  and  seven 
arched  windows  of  old  painted  glass,  the  richest  that  I 
ever  saw  or  imagined,  each  looking  Uke  an  inestimable 
treasury  of  precious  stones,  with  a  gleam  and  glow 
even  in  the  sullen  light  of  this  gray  morning.  What 
would  they  be  with  the  sun  shining  through  them  I 
With  all  their  brilliancy,  moreover,  they  were  as  soft 
as  rose-leaves.  I  never  saw  any  piece  of  human  ar- 
chitecture so  beautiful  as  this  chapter-house ;  at  least, 
I  thought  so  while  I  was  looking  at  it,  and  think  so 
still ;  and  it  owed  its  beauty  in  very  great  measure  to 
the  painted  windows :  I  remember  looking  at  these 
windows  from  the  outside  yesterday,  and  seeing  noth- 
ing but  an  opaque  old  crust  of  conglomerated  panes 
of  glass ;  but  now  that  gloomy  mystery  was  radiantly 
solved. 

Betuming  into  the  body  of  the  cathedral,  we  next 
entered  the  choir,  where,  instead  of  the  crimson  cush- 
ions and  draperies  which  we  had  seen  yesterday,  we 
found  everything  folded  in  black.  It  was  a  token  of 
mourning  for  one  of  the  canons,  who  died  on  Satur- 
day night.  The  great  east  window,  seventy-five  feet 
high,  and  full  of  old  painted  glass  in  many  exquisitely 
wrought  and  imagined  Scriptural  designs,  is  consid- 
ered the  most  splendid  object  in  the  minster.  It  is 
a  pity  that  it  i&  partially  hidden  from  view,  even  in 
the  choir,  by  a  screen  before  the  high  altar ;  but  in- 
deed, the  Gothic  architects  seem  first  to  imagine  beau- 


1867.]  YORK.  409 

tifnl  and  noble  things,  and  then  to  consider  how  they 
may  bei^  be  partially  screened  from  sight.  A  certaiD 
secrecy  and  twilight  effect  belong  to  their  plan. 

We  next  went  round  the  side  aisles  of  the  choir, 
which  contain  many  interesting  monuments  of  prel- 
ates, and  a  specimen  of  the  very  common  Elizabethan 
design  of  an  old  gentleman  in  a  double  ruff  and  trunk 
breeches,  with  one  of  his  two  wives  on  either  side  of 
him,  all  kneeling  in  prayer ;  and  their  conjoint  chil- 
dren, in  two  rows,  kneeling  in  the  lower  compartments 
of  the  tomb.  We  saw,  too,  a  rich  marble  monument 
of  one  of  the  Strafford  family,  and  the  tombstone  of 
the  famous  Earl  himself,  —  a  flat  tombstone  in  the 
pavement  of  the  aisle,  covering  the  vault  where  he  was 
buried,  and  with  four  iron  rings  fastened  into  the  four 
comers  of  ihe  stone  whereby  to  lift  it. 

And  now  the  guide  led  us  into  the  vestry,  where 
there  was  a  good  fire  burning  in  the  grate,  and  it 
really  thawed  my  heart,  which  was  congealed  with  the 
dismal  clull  of  the  cathedraL  Here  we.  saw  a  good 
many  curious  things,  — for  instance,  two  wooden  fig- 
ures in  knightly  armor,  which  had  stood  sentinels  be- 
side the  ancient  clock  before  it  was  replaced  by  a  mod- 
em one ;  and,  opening  a  closet,  the  guide  produced  an 
old  iron  helmet,  which  had  been  found  in  a  tomb 
where  a  knight  had  been  buried  in  his  armor ;  and 
three  gold  rings  and  one  brass-  one,  taken  out  of  the 
graves,  and  off  the  finger-bones  of  mediaeval  archbish- 
ops, —  one  of  them  with  a  ruby  set  in  it ;  and  two  sil- 
ver-gilt chalices^  also  treasures  of  the  tombs ;  and  a 
wooden  head,  carved  in  human  likeness,  and  painted 
to  the  life,  likewise  taken  from  a  grave  where  an  arch- 
bishop was  supposed  to  have  been  buried.  They  found 
no  veritahle  s^ull  nor  bones,  but  only  this  block-head. 


410  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1867. 

as  if  Death  had  betrayed  ihe  secret  of  ^hat  the  poor 
prelate  really  was.  We  saw,  too,  a  canopy  of  cloth, 
wrought  with  gold  threads,  which  had  been  borne  oi^r 
the  head  of  King  James  I.,  when  he  came  to  York,  on 
his  way  to  receive  the  English  Crown.  There  were 
also  some  old  brass  dishes,  in  which  pence  used  to  be 
collected  in  monkish  times.  Over  the  door  of  this 
vestry  were  hung  two  banners  of  a  Yorkshire  regi- 
ment, tattered  in  the  Peninsular  wars,  and  inscribed 
with  the  names  of  the  battles  through  which  they  had 
been  borne  triumphantly ;  and  Waterloo  was  among 
them.  The  vestry,  I  think,  occupies  that  excrescen- 
tial  edifice  which  I  noticed  yesterday  as  having  grown 
out  of  the  cathedral. 

After  looking  at  these  things,  we  went  down  into 
the  crypts,  under  the  choir.  These  were  very  interest- 
ing, as  far  as  we  could  see  them;  being  more  antique 
than  anything  above  ground,  but  as  dark  as  any  cel- 
lar. There  is  here,  in  the  midst  of  these  sepulchral 
crypts,  a  spring  of  water,  said  to  be  very  pure  and  de- 
licious, owing  to  the  limestone  through  which  the  rain 
that  feeds  its  source  is  filtered.  Near  it  is  a  stone 
trough,  in  which  the  monks  used  to  wash  their  hands. 

I  do  not  remember  anything  more  that  we  saw  at 
the  cathedral,  and  at  noon  we  returned  to  the  Black 

Swan.     The  rain  still  continued,  so  that  S could 

not  share  in  any  more  of  my  rambles,  but  J and 

J.  went  out  again,  and  discovered  the  Guildhall.  It  is 
a  very  ancient  edifice  of  Richard  II.'s  time,  and  has 
a  statue  over  the  entrance  which  looks  time-gnawed 
enough  to  be  of  coeval  antiquiiy,  although  in  reality  it 
is  only  a  representation  of  George  II.  in  his  royal 
robes.  We  went  in,  and  found  ourselves  in  a  large 
and  lofty  hall  with  an  oaken  roof  and  a  stone  pave- 


1857.]  MANCHESTER.  411 

ment,  and  the  farther  end  was  partitioned  off  as  a 
court  of  justice.  In  that  portion  of  the  hall  the  Judge 
was  on  the  bench,  and  a  trial  was  going  forward  ;  but 
in  the  hither  portion  a  mob  of  people,  with  their 
hats  on,  were  lounging  and  talking,  and  enjoying  the 
warmth  of  the  stoves.  The  window  over  the  judg* 
ment-seat  had  painted  glass  in  it,  and  so,  I  think,  had 
some  of  the  hall  windows.  At  the  end  of  the  hall 
hung  a  great  picture  of  Paul  defending  himself  before 
Agrippa,  where  the  Apostle  looked  like  an  athlete, 
and  had  a  remarkably  bushy  black  beard.  Between 
two  of  the  windows  hung  an  Indian  bell  from  Bur- 
mah,  ponderously  thick  and  massive.  Both  the  pic- 
ture and  the  bell  had  beei^  presented  to  the  city  as 
tokens  of  affectionate  remembrance^  by  its  children ; 
and  it  is  pleasant  to  think  that  such  feelings  exist  in 
these  old  stable  communities,  and  that  there  are  per- 
manent localities  where  such  gifts  can  be  kept  from 
generation  to  generation. 

At  four  o'clock  we  left  the  city  of  York,  still  in  a 
pouring  rain.  The  Black  Swan,  where  we  had  been 
staying,  is  a  good  specimen  of  the  old  English  inn, 
sombre,  quiet,  with  dark  staircases,  dingy  rooms,  cur- 
tained beds, — all  the  possibilities  of  a  comfortable  life 
and  good  English  fare,  in  a  fashion  which  cannot  have 
been  much  altered  for  half  a  century.  It  is  very  home- 
like when  one  has  one's  family  about  him,  but  must  be 
prodigiously  stupid  for  a  solitary  man. 

We  took  the  train  for 

MANCHESTER, 

over  pretty  much  the  same  route  that  I  travelled  last 
year.  Many  of  the  higher  hills  in  Yorkshire  were 
white  with  snow,  which,  in  our  lower  region,  softened 


412  ENGLISH  KOTE-BOOKS,  [1857. 

into  rain ;  but  d^s  we  a^roached  Manchester,  the  west- 
em  sky  reddened,  and  gave  promise  of  better  weather. 
We  arrived  at  nearly  eight  o'clock,  and  put  up  at  the 
Palatine  Hotel.  In  the  evening  I  scrawled  away  at 
my  journal  till  past  ten  o'clock;  for  I  have  really 
made  it  a  matter  of  conscience  to  keep  a  tolerably  full 
record  of  my  travels,  though  conscious  that  everything 
good  escapes  in  the  process.  In  the  morning  we  went 
out  and  visited  the 

MANCHESTER  CATHEDEAL, 

a  particularly  black  and  grimy  edifice,  containing 
some  genuine  old  wood  carvings  within  die  choir. 
We  stayed  a  good  while,  in  order  to  see  some  people 
married.  One  couple,  with  their  groomsman  and 
bride's-maid,  were  sitting  within  the  choir ;  but  when 
the  clergyman  was  robed  and  ready,  there  entered  five 
other  couples,  each  attended  by  groomsman  and  bride's- 
maid.  They  were  all  of  the  lower  orders  ;  one  or  two 
respectably  dressed,  but  most  of  them  poverty-stricken, 
—  the  men  in  their  ordinary  loafer's  or  laborer's  at- 
tire, the  women  with  their  poor,  shabby  shawls  drawn 
closely  about  them  ;  faded  untimely,  wrinkled  with 
penury  and  care ;  nothing  fresh,  virgin-like,  or  hope- 
ful about  them ;  joining  themselves  to  their  mates  with 
the  idea  of  making  their  own  misery  less  intolerable 
by  adding  another's  to  it.  All  the  six  couple  stood 
up  in  a  row  before  the  altar,  with  the  groomsm^i  and 
bride's-  maids  in  a  row  behind  them  ;  and  the  clergy- 
man proceeded  to  marry  them  in  such  a  way  that  it 
almost  seemed  to  make  every  man  and  woman  the  hus- 
band and  wife  of  every  other.  However,  there  were 
dome  small  portions  of  the  service  directed  towards 
each  separate  couple;   and  they  appeared  to  assort 


1857.]  LIVERPOOL.  418 

themselves  in  their  own  fashion  afterwards,  each  one 
saluting  his  bride  with  a  kiss.  The  clergyman,  the 
sexton,  and  the  clerk  all  seemed  to  find  something 
funny  in  this  affair ;  and  the  woman  who  admitted  us 
into  the  church  smiled  too,  when  she  told  us  that  a 
wedding-party  was  waiting  to  be  married.  But  I  think 
it  was  the  saddest  thing  we  have  seen  since  leaving 
home ;  though  funny  enough  if  one  likes  to  look  at  it 
from  a  ludicrous  point  of  view.  This  mob  of  poor 
marriages  was  caused  by  the  fact  that  no  marriage 
fee  is  paid  during  Easter. 

This  ended  the  memorable  things  of  our  tour ;  for 

my  wife  and  J left  Manchester  for  Southport, 

and  I  for  Liverpool,  before  noon. 

April  19th,  —  On  the  16th,Tiaving  been  invited  to 
attend  at  the  laying  of  the  coroer-stone  of 

MK.  Browne's  free  library, 

I  went  to  the  Town  Hall,  according  to  the  programme, 
at  eleven  o'clock.  There  was  already  a  large  number 
of  people  (invited  guests,  members  of  the  Historical 
Society,  and  other  local  associations)  assembled  in  the 
great  ball-room,  and  one  of  these  was  delivering  an 
address  to  Mr.  Browne  as  I  entered.  Approaching 
the  outer  edge  of  the  circle,  I  was  met  and  cordially 
greeted  by  Monckton  Milnes,  whom  I  like,  and  who 
always  reminds  me  of  Longfellow,  though  his  physical 
man  is  more  massive.  While  we  were  talking  to- 
gether, a  young  man  approached  him  with  a  pretty  lit- 
tle expression  of  surprise  and  pleasure  at  seeing  him 
there.  He  had  a  slightly  affected  or  made-up  manner, 
and  was  rather  a  comely  person.  Mr.  Milnes  intro* 
duced  him  to  me  as  Lord .     Hereupon,  of  course^ 


414  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

I  observed  him  more  closely ;  and  I  must  say  that  I 
was  not  long  in  discovering  a  gentle  dignity  and  half* 
imperceptible  reserve  in  his  manner ;  but  still  my  first 
impression  was  quite  as  real  as  my  second  one.  He 
occupies,  I  suppose,  the  foremost  position  among  the 
young  men  of  England,  and  has  the  fairest  prospects  of 
a  high  course  before  him ;  nevertheless,  he  did  not  im- 
press me  as  possessing  the  native  qualities  that  could 
entitle  him  to  a  high  public  career.  He  has  adopted 
public  life  as  his  hereditary  profession,  and  makes 
the  very  utmost  of  all  his  abilities,  cultivating  him- 
self to  a  determined  end,  knowing  that  he  shall  have 
every  advantage  towards  attaining  his  object.  His 
natural  disadvantages  must  have  been,  in  some  re- 
spects, unusually  great ;  his  voice,  for  instance,  is  not 
strong,  and  appeared  to  me  to  have  a  more  positive 
defect  than  mere  weakness.  Doubtless  he  has  strug- 
gled manfully  against  this  defect ;  and  it  made  me  feel 
a  certain  sympathy,  and,  indeed,  a  friendliness,  for 
which  he  would  not  at  all  have  thanked  me,  had  he 
known  it.  I  felt,  in  his  person,  what  a  burden  it  is 
upon  hmnan  shoulders,  the  necessity  of  keeping  up 
the  fame  and  historical  importance  of  an  illustrious 
house  ;  at  least,  when  the  heir  to  its  honors  has  suffi- 
cient intellect  and  sensibility  to  feel  the  claim  that  his 
country  and  his  ancestors  and  his  posterity  all  have 

upon  him.     Lord is  fully  capable  of  feeling  these 

claims ;  but  I  would  not  care,  methinks,  to  take  his 
position,  unless  I  could  have  considerably  more  than 
his  strength. 

In  a  little  while  we  formed  ourselves  into  a  proces- 
sion, four  in  a  row,  and  set  forth  from  the  Town  Hall, 
through  James  Street,  Lord  Street,  Lime  Sti'eet,  all 
the  way  through  a  line  of  policemen  and  a  throng  ol 


1857.]  LIVERPOOL.  416 

people ;  and  the  windows  were  alive  with  heads,  and  I 
never  before  was  so  conscious  of  a  great  mass  of  hu- 
manity, though  perhaps  I  may  often  have  seen  as  great 
a  crowd.  But  a  procession  is  the  best  point  of  view 
from  which  to  see  the  crowd  that  collects  together. 
The  day,  too,  was  very  fine,  even  sunshiny,  and  the 
streets  dry,  —  a  blessing  which  cannot  be  overesti- 
mated ;  for  we  should  have  been  in  a  strange  trim  for 
the  banquet,  had  we  been  compelled  to  wade  through 
the  ordinary  mud  of  Liverpool.  The  procession  itself 
eould  not  have  been  a  very  striking  object.  In  Amer- 
ica, it  would  have  had  a  hundred  picturesque  and  per- 
haps ludicrous  features, — the  symbols  of  the  differ- 
ent trades,  banners  with  strange  devices,  flower-shows, 
children,  volunteer  soldiers,  cavalcades,  and  every  suit- 
able and  unsuitable  contrivance ;  but  we  were  merely 
a  trail  of  ordinary-looking  individuals,  in  great-coats, 
and  with  precautionary  umbrellas.  The  only  charac- 
teristic or  professional  costume,  as  far  as  I  noticed, 
was  that  of  the  Bishop  of  Chester,  in  his  flat  cap  and 
black  -  silk  gown ;  and  that  of  Sir  Henry  Smith,  the 
General  of  the  District,  in  full  uniform,  with  a  star 
and  half  a  dozen  medals  on  his  breast.  Mr.  Browne 
himself,  the  hero  of  the  day,  was  the  plainest  and  sim- 
plest man  of  all,  —  an  exceedingly  unpretending  gen- 
tleman in  black ;  small,  white-haired,  pale,  quiet,  and 
respectable.  I  rather  wondered  why  he  chose  to  be 
the  centre  of  all  this  ceremony ;  for  he  did  not  seem 
either  particularly  to  enjoy  it,  or  to  be  at  all  incom- 
moded by  it,  as  a  more  nervous  and  susceptible  man 
might  have  been. 

The  site  of  the  projected  edifice  is  on  one  of  the* 
streets  bordering  on  St.  George's  Hall ;  and  when  we 
came  within  the  enclosure,  the  comer-stone,  a  large 


416  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  [1857. 

square  of  red  freestone,  was  already  suspended  over 
its  destined  place.  It  has  a  Inrass  plate  let  into  it^ 
with  an  inscription,  which  will  perhaps  not  be  seen 
again  till  the  present  English  type  has  grown  as  an- 
tique as  black-letter  is  now.  Two  or  three  j^oto- 
graphs  were  now  taken  of  the  site,  the  comer- stone, 
Mr.  Browne,  the  distinguished  guests,  and  the  crowd 
at  large ;  then  ensued  a  prayer  from  the  Bishop  of 
Chester,  and  speeches  from  Mr.  Holme,  Mr.  Browne, 

Lord ,  Sir  John  Pakington,  Sir  Henry  Smith, 

and  as  many  others  as  there  was  time  for.     Lord 

acquitted  himself  very  creditably,  though  brought  out 
unexpectedly,  and  with  evident  reluctance.  I  am  con- 
vinced that  men,  liable  to  be  called  on  to  address  the 
public,  keep  a  constant  supply  of  commonjdaces  in 
their  minds,  which,  with  little  variation,  can  be  adapt- 
ed to  one  subject  about  as  well  as  to  another ;  and 
thus  they  are  always  ready  to  do  well  enough,  though 
seldom  to  do  particularly  well. 

From  the  scene  of  the  comer-stone  we  went  to  St. 
George's  Hall,  where  a  drawing-room  and  dressing, 
room  had  been  prepared  for  the  principal  guests.  Be- 
fore the  banquet,  I  had  some  conversation  with  Sir 
James  Kay  Shuttleworth,  who  had  known  Miss 
Bronte  very  intimately,  and  bore  testimony  to  the 
wonderful  fidelity  of  Mrs.  Gaskell's  life  of  her.  He 
seemed  to  have  had  an  affectionate  regard  for  her, 
and  said  that  her  marriage  promised  to  have  been 
productive  of  great  happiness  ?  her  husband  being  not 
a  remarkable  man,  but  with  the  merit  of  an  exceeding 
love  for  her. 

*  Mr.  Browne  now  took  me  up  into  the  gallery,  which 
by  this  time  was  full  of  ladies ;  and  thence  we  had  a 
fine  view  of  the  noble  hall,  with  the  tables  kud^  in 


1857.]  LIVERPOOL.  417 

readiness  for  the  banquet  I  oannot  conceive  of  any- 
thing finer  than  this  hall ;  it  needs  nothing  but  painted 
windows  to  make  it  perfect,  and  those  I  hope  it  may 
have  one  day  or  another. 

At  two  o'clock  we  sat  down  to  the  banquet,  which 
hardly  justified  that  name,  being  only  a  cold  collation, 
though  sufficiently  splendid  in  its  way.  In  truth,  it 
would  have  been  itnpossible  to  provide  a  hot  dinner  for 
nine  hundred  people  in  a  place  remote  from  kitchens. 
The  principal  table  extended  lengthwise  of  the  hall, 
and  was  a  little  elevated  above  the  other  tables,  which 
stretched  across,  about  twenty  in  all.  Before  each 
guest,  besides  the  bill  of  fare,  was  laid  a  programme 
of  the  expected  toasts,  among  which  appeared  my 
own  name,  to  be  proposed  by  Mr.  Monckton  Milnes. 
These  things  do  not  trouble  me  quite  as  much  as 
they  used,  though  still  it  sufficed  to  prevent  much  of 
the  enjoyment  which  I  might  have  had  if  I  could 
have  felt  myself  merely  a  spectator.  My  left-band 
neighbor  was  Colonel  Campbell,  of  the  Artillery ;  my 
right-hand  one  was  Mr.  Picton,  of  the  Library  Com- 
mittee ;  and  I  found  them  both  companionable  men, 
especially  the  Colonel,  who  had  served  in  China  and 
in  the  Crimea,  and  owned  that  he  hated  the  French* 
We  did  not  make  a  very  long  business  of  the  eatables, 
and  then  came  the  usual  toasts  of  ceremony,  and  after- 
wards those  more  peculiar  to  the  occasion,  one  of  the 
first  of  which  was  "  The  House  of  Stanley,"  to  which 

Lord responded.     It  was  a  noble  subject,  giving 

scope  for  as  much  eloquence  as  any  man  could  have 
brought  to  bear  upon  it,  and  capable  of  being  so 
wrought  out  as  to  develop  and  illustrate  any  sort  of 
conservative  or  liberal  tendencies  which  the  speaker 
might  entertain.     There  could  not  be  a  richer  oppor- 

VOL.  viu.  27 


418  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

tunity  for  reconciling  and  maMng  friends  betwixt  the 

old  system  of  society  and  the  new ;  but  Lord did 

not  seem  to  make  anything  of  it.  I  remember  noth- 
ing that  he  said  excepting  his  statement  that  the  fam- 
ily had  been  five  hundred  years  connected  with  the 
town  of  Liverpool.  I  wish  I  could  have  responded  to 
"  The  House  of  Stanley,"  and  his  Lordship  could  have 
spoken  in  my  behalf.  None  of  the  speeches  were  re- 
markably good ;  the  Bishop  of  Chester's  perhaps  the 
best,  though  he  is  but  a  little  man  in  aspect,  not  at  all 
filling  up  one's  idea  of  a  bishop,  and  the  rest  were  on 
an  indistinguishable  level,  though,  being  all  practised 
speakers,  they  were  less  hum-y  and  ha-y  than  English 
orators  ordinarily  are. 

I  was  really  tired  to  death  before  my  own  turn 
came,  sitting  all  that  time,  as  it  were,  on  the  scafifold, 
with  the  rope  round  my  neck.  At  last  Monckton 
Milnes  was  called  up  and  made  a  speech,  of  which,  to 
my  dismay,  I  could  hardly  hear  a  single  word,  owing 
to  his  being  at  a  considerable  distance,  on  the  other 
side  of  the  chairman,  and  flinging  his  voice,  which  is  a 
bass  one,  across  the  hall,  instead  of  adown  it,  in  my 
direction.  I  could  not  distinguish  one  word  of  any  al- 
lusions to  my  works,  nor  even  when  he  came  to  the 
toast,  did  I  hear  the  terms  on  which  he  put  it,  nor 
whether  I  was  toasted  on  my  own  basis,  or  as  rep- 
resenting American  literature,  or  as  Consul  of  the 
United  States.  At  all  events,  there  was  a  vast  deal  of 
clamor ;  and  uprose  peers  and  bishop,  general,  mayor, 
knights,  and  gentlemen,  everybody  in  the  hall  greeting 
me  with  all  the  honors.  I  bad  uprisen,  too,  to  com- 
mence my  speech,  but  had  to  sit  down  again  till  mat- 
ters grew  more  quiet,  and  then  I  got  up,  and  proceeded 
to  deliver  myself  with  as  much  composure  as  I  ever 


1857.]  SOUTHPORT.  419 

felt  at  my  own  fireside.  It  is  very  strange,  this  self- 
possession  and  clear-sightedness  which  I  have  experi- 
enced when  standing  before  an  audience,  showing  me 
my  way  through  aU  the  difficulties  resulting  from  my 
not  having  heard  Monckton  Milnes's  speech ;  and  on 
since  reading  the  latter,  I  do  not  see  how  I  could  have 
answered  it  better.  My  speech  certainly  was  better 
cheered  than  any  other ;  especially  one  passage,  where 
I  made  a  colossus  of  Mr.  Browne,  at  which  the  audi- 
ence grew  so  tumultuous  in  their  applause  that  they 
drowned  my  figure  of  speech  before  it  was  half  out  of 
my  mouth. 

After  rising  from  table.  Lord and   I  talked 

about  our  respective  oratorical  performances ;  and  he 
appeared  to  have  a  perception  that  he  is  not  naturally 

gifted  in  this   respect.     I  like  Lord ^  and  wish 

that  it  were  possible  that  we  might  know  one  another 
better.  If  a  nobleman  has  any  true  friend  out  of  his 
own  class,  it  ought  to  be  a  republican.  Nothing  fur- 
ther of  interest  happened  at  the  banquet,  and  the  next 
morning  came  out  the  newspapers  with  vile  reports  of 
my  speech,  attributing  to  me  a  variety  of  forms  of 
ragged  nonsense,  which,  poor  speaker  as  I  am,  I  was 
quite  incapable  of  uttering. 

May  10th.  —  The  winter  is  over,  but  as  yet  we 
scarcely  have  what  ought  to  be  called  spring ;  nothing 
but  cold  east-winds,  accompanied  with  sunshine,  how- 
ever, as  east-winds  generally  are  in  this  countryo  All 
milder  winds  seem  to  bring  rain.  The  grass  has  been 
green  for  a  month,  —  indeed^  it  has  never  been  en- 
tirely brown,  —  and  now  the  trees  and  hedges  are  be- 
ginning to  be  in  foliage.  Weeks  ago  the  daisies 
bloomed,  even  in  the  sandy  grass-plot  bordering  on 


420  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  CiSST, 

the  promenade  beneath  our  front  windows ;  and  in  the 
progress  of  l^e  dais^,  and  towards  its  consummation, 
I  saw  the  propriety  of  Bums's  epithet,  '*  wee,  modest, 
erimaonrtipped  flower,"  —  its  little  white  petals  in  the 
bnd  being  fringed  all  round  with  crimson,  which  fades 
into  pure  white  when  the  flower  blooms.  At  the  be- 
ginning of  this  month  I  saw  fruit-trees  in  blossom, 
stretched  out  flat  against  stone  walls,  reminding  me  of 
a  dead  bird  nailed  against  the  side  of  a  bam.  But  it 
has  been  a  backward  and  dreary  spring ;  and  I  think 
Southport,  in  the  course  of  it,  has  lost  its  advantage 
over  the  rest  of  the  Liverpool  neighborhood  in  point 
of  milder  atmosphere.  The  east -wind  feels  even 
rawer  here  than  in  the  city. 

Nevertheless,  the  columns  of  the  "  Southport  Vis- 
itor" begin  to  be  well  replenished  with  the  names  of 
guests,  and  the  town  is  assuming  its  aspect  of  summer 
life.  To  say  the  truth,  except  where  cultivation  has 
done  its  utmost,  there  is  very  little  difference  between 
winter  and  summer  in  the  mere  material  aspect  of 
Southport ;  there  being  nothing  but  a  waste  of  sand 
intermixed  with  plashy  pools  to  seaward,  and  a  desert 
;«.f  sand-hillocks  on  the  land  side.  But  now  the  brown, 
weather-hardened  donkey- women  haunt  people  that 
stray  along  the  reaches,  and  delicate  persons  face  the 
cold,  rasping,  ill-tempered  blast  on  the  promenade, 
and  children  dig  in  the  sands ;  and,  for  want  of  some* 
thing  better,  it  seems  to  be  determined  that  this  shall 
be  considered  spring. 

Southport  is  as  stupid  a  place  as  t  ever  lived  in ; 
and  I  cannot  but  bewail  our  ill  fortune  to  have  been 
compelled  to  spend  so  many  months  on  these  barren 
sands,  when  almost  every  other  square  yard  of  Eng* 
land  contains  something  that  would  have  been  histop 


1857.]  SOUTHPORT.  421 

ically  or  poetically  interesting.  Our  life  here  has  been 
a  blank.  There  was,  indeed,  a  shipwreck,  a  month  or 
two  ago,  when  a  large  ship  came  ashore  within  a  mile 
from  our  windows;  the  larger  portion  of  the  crew 
landing  safely  on  the  hither  sands,  while  six  or  seven 
betook  themselves  to  the  boat,  and  were  lost  in  at- 
tempting to  gain  the  shore,  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Kibble.  After  a  lapse  of  several  weeks,  two  or  three 
of  their  drowned  bodies  were  found  floating  in  this 
vicinity,  and  brought  to  Southport  for  burial  $  so  that 
it  really  is  not  at  all  improbable  that  Milton's  Lycidas 
floated  hereabouts,  in  the  rise  and  lapse  of  the  tides, 
and  that  his  bones  may  still  be  whitening  among  the 
sands. 

In  the  same  gale  that  wrecked  the  above-mentioned 
vessel,  a  portion  of  a  ship's  mast  was  driven  ashore, 
after  evidently  having  been  a  very  long  time  in  and 
imder  water ;  for  it  was  covered  with  great  bamades, 
and  torn  sea-weed,  insonvuch  that  there  was  scarcely 
a  bare  place  along  its  whole  length ;  dusters  of  sea- 
anemones  were  sticking  to  it,  and  I  know  not  what 

strange  marine  productions  besides.     J at  once 

recognized  the  sea-anemones,  knowing  them  by  his 
much  reading  of  Gosse's  Aquarium ;  and  though  they 
must  now  have  been  two  or  three  days  high  and  dry 
out  of  water,  he  made  an  extempore  aquarium  out  of  a 
bowl,  and  put  in  above  a  dozen  of  these  strange  crea- 
tures. In  a  little  while  they  bloomed  out  wonderfully, 
and  even  seemed  to  produce  young  anemones ;  but, 
from  some  fault  in  his  management,  they  afterwards 

grew  sickly  and  died.      S thinks   tliat  the  old 

storm-shattered  mast,  so  studded  with  the  growth  of 
the  ocean  depths,  is  a  relic  of  the  Spanish  Armada 
which  strewed  its  vnrecks  along  all  the  shores  of  Eng- 


422  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

land ;  but  I  hardly  think  it  would  have  taken  three 
hundred  years  to  produce  this  crop  of  barnacles  and 
sea  -  anemones.  A  single  summer  might  probably 
have  done  it. 

Yesterday  we  all  of  us  except  R went  to  Liver- 
pool to  see  the  performances  of  an  American  circus 
company.    I  had  previously  been,  a  day  or  two  before* 

with  J ,  and  had  been  happy  to  perceive  that  the 

fact  of  its  being  an  American  establishment  really  in- 
duced some  slight  swelling  of  the  heart  within  me.  It 
is  ridiculous  enough,  to  be  sure,  but  I  like  to  find  my- 
self not  wholly  destitute  of  this  noble  weakness,  pa- 
triotism. As  for  the  circus,  I  never  was  fond  of  that 
species  of  entertainment,  nor  do  I  find  in  this  one  the 
flash  and  glitter  and  whirl  which  I  remember  in  other 
American  exhibitions. 

[Here  follow  the  visits  to  Lincoln  and  Boston, 
printed  in  "  Our  Old  Home."  —  Ed.] 

May  21th.  —  We  left  Boston  by  railway  at  noon, 
and  arrived  in 

PETERBOROUGH 

in  about  an  hour  and  a  quarter,  and  have  put  up  at 
the  Kailway  Hotel.  After  dinner  we  walked  into  the 
town  to  see 

THE  CATHEDRAL, 

of  the  towers  and  arches  of  which  we  had  already  had 
a  glimpse  from  our  parlor  window. 

Our  journey  from  Boston  hitherward  was  through 
a  perfectly  level  country,  — the  fens  of  Lincolnshire, 
—  green,  green,  and  nothing  else,  with  old  villager 
and  farm-houses  and  old  church-towers ;  very  pleasant 


1857.]  PETERBOROUGH.  423 

and  rather  wearisomely  monotonous.  To  return  to 
Peterborough.  It  is  a  town  of  ancient  aspect ;  and 
we  passed,  on  our  way  towards  the  market  -  place,  a 
very  ancient -looking  church  with  a  very  far  project- 
ing porch,  opening  in  front  and  on  each  side  through 
arches  of  broad  sweep.  The  street  by  which  we  ap 
proached  from  our  hotel  led  us  into  the  market-place, 
which  had  what  looked  like  an  old  Guildhall  on  one 
side.  On  the  opposite  side,  above  the  houses,  appeared 
the  towers  of  the  cathedral,  and  a  street  leads  from 
the  market-place  to  its  front,  through  an  arched  gate- 
way, which  used  to  be  the  external  entrance  to  the  ab- 
bey, I  suppose,  of  which  the  cathedral  was  formerly 
the  church.  The  front  of  the  cathedral  is  very  strik- 
ing, and  unlike  any  other  that  I  have  seen;  being 
formed  by  three  lofty  and  majestic  arches  in  a  row, 
with  three  gable  peaks  above  them,  forming  a  sort  of 
colonnade,  within  which  is  the  western  entrance  of  the 
nave.  The  towers  are  massive,  but  low  in  proportion 
to  their  bulk.  There  are  no  spires,  but  pinnacles  and 
statues,  and  all  the  rich  detail  of.  Gothic  architecture, 
the  whole  of  a  venerable  gray  hue.  It  is  in  perfect 
repair,  and  has  not  suffered  externally,  except  by  the 
loss  of  multitudes  of  statues,  gargoyles,  and  miscella- 
neous eccentricities  of  sculpture,  which  used  to  smile, 
frown,  laugh,  and  weep  over  the  faces  of  these  old 
fabrics. 

We  entered  through  a  side  portal,  and  sat  down  on 
a  bench  in  the  nave,  and  kept  ourselves  quiet ;  for  the 
organ  was  sounding,  and  the  choristers  were  chanting 
in  the  choir.  The  nave  and  transepts  are  very  noble, 
with  clustered  pillars  and  Norman  arches,  and  a  great 
height  under  the  central  tower ;  the  whole,  however, 
being  covered  with  plaster  and  whitewash,  except  the 


424  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

toof )  which  18  of  painted  oak.  This  latter  adornment 
has  the  merit,  I  believe,  of  being  veritably  ancient ; 
but  certainly  I  should  prefer  the  oak  of  its  native  hue, 
for  the  efFect  of  the  paint  is  to  make  it  appear  as  if 
the  ceiling  were  covered  with  imi&ition  mosaic -work 
or  an  oil-cloth  carpet. 

After  sitting  awhile,  we  were  invited  by  a  voider, 
who  came  from  within  the  Screen,  to  enter  the  choir 
and  hear  the  rest  of  the  Service.  We  found  the  chor- 
isters there  in  their  white  garments,  and  an  audience 
of  half  a  dozen  people,  and  had  time  to  look  at  the  in- 
terior of  the  choir.  All  the  carved  wood-work  of  the 
tabernacle,  the  bishop's  throne,  the  prebends'  stalls, 
and  whatever  else,  is  modem ;  for  this  cathedral  seems 
to  have  suffered  wof ully  from  Cromwell's  soldiers,  who 
hacked  at  the  old  oak,  and  hammered  and  pounded 
upon  the  marble  tombs,  till  nothing  of  the  first  and 
very  few  of  the  latter  remain.  It  is  wonderful  how 
suddenly  the  English  people  lost  their  sense  of  the 
sanctity  of  all  manner  of  externals  in  religion,  without 
losing  their  religion  too.  The  French,  in  their  Revo- 
lution, underwent  as  sudden  a  change ;  but  they  be- 
came pagans  and  atheists,  and  threw  away  the  sub- 
stance with  the  shadow. 

I  suspect  that  the  interior  arrangement  of  the  choir 
and  the  chancel  has  been  greatly  modernized ;  for  it  is 
quite  unlike  anything  that  I  have  seen  elsewhere.  In- 
stead of  one  vast  eastern  window,  there  are  rows  of 
windows  lighting  the  Lady  Chapel,  and  seen  through 
rows  of  arches  in  the  screen  of  the  chancel ;  the  effect 
being,  whoever  is  to  have  the  credit  of  it,  very  rich 
and  beautiful.  There  is,  I  think,  no  stained  glass  in 
the  windows  of  the  nave,  though  in  the  windows  of  the 
diancel  there  is  some  of  recent  date,  and  from  frag^ 


JtWT.J  PETERBOROUGH.  426 

menta  of  Teiitable  antique.  The  effect  of  the  whole 
interior  is  grand,  expansive,  and  both  ponderous  and 
airy ;  not  dim,  mysterious,  and  involved,  as  Gothic  in- 
teriors often  are,  the  roundness  and  openness  of  the 
arches  being  opposed  to  this  latter  effect. 

When  the  chanting  came  to  a  close,  one  verger  took 
his  stand  at  the  etitrance  of  the  choir,  and  another 
stood  farther  up  the  aisle,  and  then  the  door  of  a  stall 
opened,  and  forth  came  a  clerical  dignity  of  much 
breadth  and  substance,  aged  and  infirm,  and  was 
ushered  out  of  the  choir  with  a  great  deal  of  cere- 
mony. We  took  him  for  the  bishop,  but  he  proved  to 
be  only  a  canon.  We  now  engaged  an  attendant  to 
show  us  through  the  Lady  Chapel  and  the  other  pene- 
tralia, which  it  did  not  take  him  long  to  aocompUsh. 
One  of  the  first  things  he  showed  us  was  the  tomb- 
stone, in  the  pavement  of  the  southern  aisle,  beneath 
which  Mary  Queen  of  Scots  had  been  originally  buiv 
ied,  and  where  she  lay  for  a  quarter  of  a  century,  till 
borne  to  her  present  resting-place  in  Westminster  Ab- 
bey. It  is  a  plain  marble  slab,  with  no  inscription. 
Near  this,  there  was  a  Saxon  monument  of  the  date 
870,  with  sculpture  in  relief  upon  it,  —  the  memorial 
of  an  Abbot  Hedda,  who  was  killed  by  the  Danes 
when  they  destroyed  the  monastery  that  preceded  the 
abbey  and  church.  I  remember,  likewise,  the  recum- 
bent figure  of  the  prelate,  whose  face  has  been  quite 
obliterated  by  Puritanic  violence;  and  I  think  that 
there  is  not  a  single  tomb  older  than  the  parliamen- 
tary wars,  which  has  not  been  in  like  manner  battered 
and  shattered,  except  the  Saxon  abbot's  just  men- 
tioned. The  most  pretentious  monument  remaining 
is  that  of  a  Mr.  Deacon,  a  gentleman  of  George  I.'s 
time,  in  wig  and  breeches,  leaning  on  his  elbow,  and 


426  ENGLISH  NOTE-^BOOKS.  [1857. 

resting  one  hand  upon  a  skull.  In  the  north  aisle,  pre- 
cisely opposite  to  that  of  Queen  Mary,  the  attendant 
pointed  out  to  us  the  slab  beneath  whicljt  lie  the  ashes 
of  Catharine  of  -'lAjagon,  the  divorced  queen  of  Henry 
VIII. 

In  the  nave  there  was  an  ancient  font,  a  venerable 
and  beautiful  relic,  which  has  been  repaired  not  long 
ago,  but  in  such  a  way  as  not  to  lessen  its  individu- 
ality. This  sacred  vessel  suffered  especial  indignity 
from  Cromwell's  soldiers  ;  insomuch  that  if  anything 
could  possibly  destroy  its  sanctity,  they  would  have 
effected  that  bad  end.  On  the  eastern  wall  of  the 
nave,  and  near  the  entrance,  hangs  the  picture  of  old 
Scarlet,  the  sexton  who  buried  both  Mary  of  Scotland 
and  Catharine  of  Aragon,  and  not  only  these  two 
queens,  but  everybody  else  in  Peterborough,  twice 
over.  I  think  one  feels  a  sort  of  enmity  and  spite 
against  these  grave-diggers,  who  live  so  long,  and 
seem  to  contract  a  kindred  and  partnership  with 
Death,  being  boon  companions  with  him,  and  taking 
his  part  against  mankind. 

In  a  chapel  or  some  side  apartment,  there  were 
two  pieces  of  tapestry  wretchedly  faded,  the  handi* 
work  6f  two  nuns,  and  copied  from  two  of  Raphael's 
cartoons. 

We  now  emerged  from  the  cathedral,  and  walked 
round  its  exterior,  admiring  it  to  our  utmost  capacity, 
and  all  the  more  because  we  had  not  heard  of  it  be- 
forehand, and  expected  to  see  nothing  so  huge,  majes- 
tic, grand,  and  gray.  And  of  all  the  lovely  closes 
that  I  ever  beheld,  that  of  Peterborough  Cathedral  is 
to  me  the  most  delightful ;  so  quiet  it  is,  so  solemnly 
and  nobly  cheerful,  so  verdant,  so  sweetly  shadowed| 


1857.]  PETERBOROUGH.  42T 

and  so  presided  over  by  the  stately  minster,  and  sur- 
rounded by  ancient  and  comely  habitations  of  Chris- 
tian men.  The  most  enchanting  place,  the  most  envi* 
able  as  a  residence  in  all  this  world,  seemed  to  me 
that  of  the  Bishop's  secretary,  standing  in  the  rear  of 
the  cathedral,  and  bordering  on  the  churchyard  ;  so 
that  you  pass  through  hallowed  precincts  in  order  to 
come  at  it,  and  find  it  a  Paradise,  the  holier  and 
sweeter  for  the  dead  men  who  sleep  so  near.  We 
looked  through  the  gateway  into  the  lawn,  which 
really  seemed  hardly  to  belong  to  this  world,  so  bright 
and  soft  the  sunshine  was,  so  fresh  the  grass,  so  lovely 
the  trees,  so  trained  and  refined  and  mellowed  down 
was  the  whole  nature  of  the  spot,  and  so  shut  in  and 
guarded  from  all  intrusion.  It  is  in  vain  to  write 
about  it ;  nowhere  but  in  England  can  there  be  such  a 
spot,  nor  anywhere  but  in  the  close  of  Peterborough 
Cathedral. 

May  2%th*  — I  walked  up  into  the  town  this  morn- 
ing, and  again  visited  the  cathedral.  On  the  way,  I 
observed  the  Falcon  Inn,  a  very  old-fashioned  hos- 
telry, with  a  thatched  roof,  and  what  looked  like  the 
bam  door  or  stable  door  in  a  side  front.  Very  likely 
it  may  have  been  an  inn  ever  since  Queen  Elizabeth's 
time.  The  Guildhall,  as  I  supposed  it  to  be,  in  the 
market-place,  has  a  basement  story  entirely  open  on 
all  sides,  but  from  its  upper  story  it  communicates 
with  a  large  old  house  in  the  rear.  I  have  not  seen 
an  older-looking  town  than  Peterborough ;  but  there 
is  little  that  is  picturesque  about  it,  except  within 
the  domain  of  the  cathedral.  It  was  very  fortunate 
for  the  beauty  and  antiquity  of  these  precincts  that 
Henry  YIII.  did  not  suffer  the  monkish  edifices  of 


428  ENGUSH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [ISaT- 

tlie  abbey  to  be  overihrown  and  utterfy  destroyed^  as 
was  the  caae  with  ao  many  abbeys^  at  the  Eeformar 
tion ;  but,  eonverting  the  abbey  ohureh  into  a  cathe- 
dral, he  preserved  much  of  the  other  arrangement  of 
the  buildings  connected  with  it.  And  so  it  happens 
tiiat  to  this  day  we  have  the  massive  and  stately  gate- 
way, with  its  great  pointed  arch,  still  keeping  <Hit  the 
world  from  those  who  have  inherited  the  habitationsi 
of  the  old  monks ;  for  though  the  gate  is  never  dosed, 
one  feels  himself  in  a  saered  seclusion  the  instant  he 
passes  under  the  ardiway.  And  everywhere  there  are 
old  houses  that  appear  to  have  been  adapted  from  the 
monkish  residences,  or  from  their  spacious  ofEices^  and 
made  into  convenient  dwellings  for  ecdesiaatics,  or 
vergers,  or  great  or  small  people  connected  with  the 
cathedral ;  and  with  all  modem  c(»nf ort  the^  still 
retain  much  of  the  quaintness  of  the  olden  time,  — 
arches,  even  rows  of  arcades,  pillars,  walls,  beautified 
with  patches  of  Gothic  sculpture,  not  wilfully  put  on 
by  modem  taste,  but  lingering  from  a  long  past ;  deep 
niches,  let  into  the  fronts  of  houses,  and  occupied  by 
images  of  saints;  a  growth  of  ivy,  overspreading  walk, 
and  just  allowing  the  windows  to  peep  through, — 
so  that  no  novelty,  nor  anything  of  our  hard^  ^y> 
and  actual  life  comes  into  these  limits,  through  the  de- 
fences of  the ,  gateway,  without  being  mollified  and 
modified.  Except  in  some  of  the  old  colleges  of  Ox- 
ford, I  have  not  seen  any  other  place  that  impressed 
me  in  this  way;  and  the  grounds  of  Peterborough 
Cathedral  have  the  advantage  over  even  the  Oxford 
colleges,  insomuch  that  the  life  is  here  domestic,  — 
that  of  the  family,  that  of  the  affections,  —  a  natural 
life,  which  one  deludes  himself  with  imagining  may  be 
made  into  som^hing  sweeter  and  purer  in  this  beau* 


1857.]  PETUBBOROUGff.  429 

tiful  spot  tKan  anywhere  eke.  Doubtless  the  inhabi« 
tants  find  it  a  stupid  and  tiresome  place  enough,  and 
get  morbid  and  snlhy^  and  heavy  and  obtuse  of  head 
and  heart,  with  the  monotony  of  their  life.  But  still 
I  must  needs  believe  that  a  man  witib  a  full  mind,  and 
objects  to  employ  his  affection,  ought  to  be  very  happy 
here.  And  perhaps  the  forms  and  appliances  of  hu- 
man life  are  never  fit  to  make  people  happy  until  diey 
oease  to  be  used  for  t^e  purposes  for  which  they  were 
directly  intended,  and  Bxe  taken,  as  it  were,  in  a  side- 
long aj^licaiion.  I  mean  that  the  monks,  probably, 
never  enjoyed  tlieir  own  edifices  while  they  were  a 
part;  of  the  actual  life  of  the  day,  so  much  as  these 
present  inhabitants  now  enjoy  them  when  a  new  use 
has  grown  up  apart  from  the  original  one. 

Towards  noon  we  all  walked  into  the  town  again, 
and  on  our  way  went  into  ttie  old  church  with  the  pro- 
jecting portal,  which  I  mentioned  yesterday.  A  wo- 
man came  hasrfeening  m^  the  keys  when  she  saw  us 
looking  up  at  the  door.  The  interior  had  an  exceed- 
ing musty  odor,  and  was  very  ancient,  widi  side  aisles 
opening  by  a  row  of  pointed  arches  into  Ae  nave,  and 
a  gallery  of  wood  on  each. side,  and  built  across  the 
two  TOWS  of  arches.  It  was  paved  wiih  tombstones, 
and  I  suppose  the  dead  people  contributed  to  the 
musty  odor.  Very  naked  and  unadorned  it  was,  ex- 
oept  with  a  few  mural  monuments  of  no  great  interest. 
We  stayed  but  a  littJe  while,  and  amjdy  rewarded  the 
poor  woman  with  a  sixpence.  Thence  we  proceeded 
to  the  cathedral,  pausing  by  the  way  to  look  at  the  old 
€ruildhall,  which  is  no  long^  a  Guildhall,  but  a  butter- 
market  ;  and  then  we  bought  some  prints  of  exterior 
and  interior  views  of  the  minster,  of  which  there  are  a 
great  variely  on  note-paper,  letter-sheets,  k»ge  en|^?vr 


430  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

ings,  and  lithographs.  It  is  very  beautiful ;  there  seems 
to  be  nothing  better  than  to  say  this  oyer  again.  We 
found  the  doors  most  hospitably  open,  and  every  part 
entirely  free  to  us,  —  a  kindness  and  liberality  which 
we  have  nowhere  else  experienced  in  England,  whether 
as  regards  cathedrals  or  any  other  public  buildings. 
My  wife  sat  down  to  draw  the  font,  and  I  walked 
through  the  Lady  Chapel  meanwhile,  pausing  over 
the  empty  bed  of  Queen  Mary,  and  the  grave  of 
Queen  Catharine,  and  looking  at  the  rich  and  sump- 
tuous roof,  where  a  fountain,  as  it  were,  of  groins  of 
arches  spouts  from  numberless  pilasters,  intersecting 
one  another  in  glorious  intricacy.  Under  the  central 
tower,  opening  to  either  transept,  to  the  nave,  and  to 
the  choir,  are  four  majestic  arches,  which  I  think  must 
equal  in  height  those  of  which  I  saw  the  ruins,  and 
one,  all  but  perfect,  at  Fumess  Abbey.  They  are 
about  eighty  feet  high. 

I  may  as  well  give  up  Peterborough  here,  though  I 
hate  to  leave  it  undescribed  even  to  the  tufts  of  yellow 
flowers,  which  grow  on  the  projections  high  out  of 
reach,  where  the  winds  have  sown  their  seeds  in  soil 
made  by  the  aged  decay  of  the  edifice.  I  could  write 
a  page,  too,  about  the  rooks  or  jackdaws  that  flit  and 
clamor  about  the  pinnacles,  and  dart  in  and  out  of  the 
eyelet-holes,  the  piercings,  —  whatever  they  are  called, 
—  in  the  turrets  and  buttresses.     On  our  way  back  to 

the  hotel,  J saw  an  advertisement  of  some  knights 

in  armor  that  were  to  tilt  to-day ;  so  he  and  I  waited, 
and  by  and  by  a  prooession  appeared,  passing  through 
the  antique  market-place,  and  in  front  of  the  abbey 
gateway,  which  might  have  befitted  the  same  spot 
three  hundred  years  ago.  They  were  about  twenty 
men-at-arms  on  horseback,  with  lances  and  banners 


1857.]  GRANTHAM.  431 

We  were  a  little  too  near  for  the  full  enjoyment  of  the 
spectacle ;  for,  though  some  of  the  armor  was  real«  I 
could  not  help  observing  that  other  suits  were  made  of 
silver  paper  or  gold  tinseL  A  policeman  (a  queer 
anomaly  in  reference  to  such  a  mediaeval  spectacle) 
told  us  that  they  were  going  to  joust  and  run  at  the 
ling,  in  a  field  a  little  beyond  the  bridge. 

TO  NOTTINGHAM. 

May  28<A.  —  We  left  Peterborough  this  afternoon, 
and,  however  reluctant  to  leave  the  cathedral,  we  were 
glad  to  get  away  from  the  hotel;  for,  though  out- 
wardly pretentious,  it  is  a  wretched  and  uncomfortable 
place,  with  scanty  table,  poor  attendance,  and  enor- 
mous charges.  The  first  stage  of  our  journey  to-day 
was  to  Grantham,  through  a  country  the  greater  part 
of  which  was  as  level  as  the  Lincolnshire  landscapes 
have  been,  throughout  our  experience  of  them.  We 
saw  several  old  villages,  gathered  round  their  several 
churches ;  and  one  of  these  little  communities,  ^^Little 
Byf orth,"  had  a  very  primitive  appearance,  —  a  group 
of  twenty  or  thirty  dwellings  of  stone  and  thatch,  with- 
out a  house  among  them  that  could  be  so  modem  as  a 
hundred  years.  It  is  a  little  wearisome  to  think  of 
people  living  from  century  to  century  in  the  same  spot, 
going  in  and  out  of  the  same  doors,  cultivating  the 
same  fields,  meeting  the  same  faces,  and  marrying  one 
another  over  and  over  again ;  and  going  to  the  same 
church,  and  lying  down  in  the  same  churchyard,  —  to 
appear  again,  and  go  through  the  same  monotonous 
round  in  the  next  generation. 

At  Grantham,  o\a  route  branches  off  from  the  main 
line ;  and  there  was  a  delay  of  about  an  hour,  during 
which  we  walked  up  into  the  town,  to  take  a  nearer 


4S2  ENGLISS  XrOTlE^BOOKS.  [ISST. 

view  of  a  tall  gray  steeple  wliich  -we  «aw  from  the  rail. 
way  station,    llie  streets  tiiat  led  from  the  dtatioti 
were  poor  and  cmnmon^ace ;  and^  indeed,  a  railw^ty 
seems  to  have  the  effect  of  making  its  own  Ticinitrf 
mean.     We  noticed  nol^iing  remarkable  until  wb  got 
to  the  marketplace,  in  the  centre  of  which  there  is  a 
cross,  doubtless  of  great  antiquity,  though  it  is  in  too 
good  condition  not  to  have  been  recentiy  repaired.     It 
consists  of  an  upright  pillar,  with  a  pedestal  of  half  a 
dozen  stone  steps,  which  are  worn  hollow  by  the  many 
feet  tiiat  have  scraped  their  faolmailed  shoes  uposi 
them.     Among  these  feet,  it  is  highly  probabid,  may 
have  been  those  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  who  was  a 
scholar  of  the  free  school  of  tiiis  town;  and  when 
J scampered  up  the  steps,  we  told  him  so.    Visi- 
ble from  the  market-place  also  stands  iiie  Angel  Inn, 
which  Seoul's    to  be   a  wonderfully  old   inn,   b^ng 
adorned  with  gargoyles  and  other  antique  sculpture, 
witii  projecting  windows,  and  an  arched  entrance,  and 
presenting  altogether  a  frontispiece  of  so  much  vener- 
able state  that  I  feel  curious  to  know  its  history.    Had 
I  been  aware  that  the  chief  hotel  of  Grantham  were 
such  a  time-honored  establishment,  I  should  have  ar- 
ranged to  pass  the  night  there,  espedially  as  tiiere  were 
interesting  objects  enough  in  the  town  to  occupy  us 
pleasantly.    The  church  —  the  steeple  of  which  is  seen 
over  the  market-place,  but  is  removed  from  it  by  a 
street  or  two  —  is  very  fine ;  the  tower  and  spire  be- 
ing adorned  with   arches,   canopies,   and  nidies,  — 
twelve  of  tiie  latter  for  the  twelve  Apostles,  all  of 
whom  have  now  vanished,  —  and  with  fragments  of 
other  Gothic  ornaments.     The  jackdaws  have  taken 
ap  their  abodes  in  the  crevices  and  crannies  of  &e 
apper  half  of  the  steeple. 

We  left  Grantham  at  nearly  seven,  and  reached 


iwrj  mTTTNGSAii.  488 

NOmNOHAM 

just  before  eight  The  oastle,  situated  on  a  high  and 
precipitous  rock,  directly  over  the  edge  of  which  look 
the  walls,  was  visible,  as  we  drove  from  the  station  to 
our  hotel.  We  fcdlowed  the  advice  of  a  railway  at- 
tendant in  going  fitst  to  <he  May  Pole,  which  proved 
to  be  a  commercial  inn,  with  the  air  of  a  drinking- 
shop,  in  a  by-alley ;  and,  furthermore,  they  could  not 
take  us  in.  So  we  drove  to  the  George  the  Fourth, 
which  seems  to  be  an  excellent  house ;  and  here  I  have 
remained  quiet,  the  size  of  the  town  discouraging  me 
from  going  out  in  the  twilight  which  was  fast  coming 
on  after  tea.  These  are  glorious  long  days  for  travel ; 
daylight  fairly  between  four  in  the  mording  and  nine 
^t  night,  and  a  margin  of  twi%ht  on  either  side. 

May  29th.  —  After  breakfast,  this  moming,  I  wan- 
dered out  and  lost  myself ;  but  at  last  found  the  post- 
office,  and  a  letter  from  Mr,  Wilding,  witii  some  per- 
plexing intelligence.  Nottingham  is  an  unlovely  and 
uninteresting  town.  The  castle  I  did  not  see ;  but  I 
happened  upon  a  large  and  stately  old  church,  almost 
cathedralic  in  its  dimensions.  On  returning  to  the 
hotel,  we  deliberated  on  the  mode  of  getting  to  New- 
stead  Abbey,  and  we  finally  decided  upon  taking  a 
fly ;  in  which  conveyance,  accordingly,  we  set  out  be- 
fore twelve.  It  was  a  slightly  overcast  day,  about  half 
intermixed  of  shade  and  sunshine,  and  rather  cool,  but 
not  so  cool  that  we  could  exactly  wish  it  warmer.  Our 
drive  to  Newstead  lay  through  what  was  once  a  por- 
tion of  Sherwood  Forest,  though  all  of  it,  I  believe, 
has  now  become  private  prcfperty,  and  is  converted 
into  fertile  fields,  except  where  the  owners  of  estates 

TOL.  VIII.  28 


484  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  [1867. 

have  set  out  plantations.  We  have  now  passed  out  of 
the  fen-country,  and  the  land  rises  and  f aUs  in  gentle 
swells,  presenting  a  pleasant,  but  not  striking,  chaxao- 
ter  of  scenery.  I  remember  no  remarkable  object  on 
the  road,  — here  and  there  an  old  inn,  a  gentleman's 
seat  of  moderate  pretension,  a  great  deal  of  taU  and 
continued  hedge,  a  quiet  English  greenness  and  rural- 
ity,  —  till,  drawing  near 

NEWSTEAD  ABBEY, 

we  began  to  see  copious  plantations,  principally  of 
firs,  larches,  and  trees  of  that  order,  looking  very 
sombre,  though  with  some  intermingling  of  lighter 
foliage.  It  was  after  one  when  we  reached  "The 
Hut," — a  small,  modem  wayside  inn,  almost  directly 
across  the  road  from  the  entrance-gate  of  Newstead. 
The  post-boy  calls  the  distance  ten  miles  from  Not^ 
tingham.  He  also  averred  that  it  was  forbidden  to 
drive  ^visitors  within  the  gates ;  so  we  left  the  fly  at 
th0  inn,  and  set  out  to  walk  from  the  entrance  to  the 
house.  There  is  no  porter's  lodge ;  and  the  grounds, 
in  this  outlying  region,  had  not  the  appearance  of 
being  very  primly  kept,  but  were  well  wooded  with 
evergreens,  and  much  overgrown  with  ferns,  serving 
for  cover  for  hares,  which  scampered  in  and  out  ot 
their  hiding-places.  The  road  went  winding  gently 
along,  and,  at  the  distance  of  nearly  a  mile,  brought 
us  to  a  second  gate,  through  which  we  likewise  passed, 
and  walked  onward  a  good  way  farther,  seeing  much 
wood,  but  as  yet  nothing  of  the  Abbey.  At  last, 
through  the  trees,  we  caught  a  glimpse  of  its  battle- 
ments, and  saw,  too,  the  gleam  of  water,  and  then  ap- 
peared the  Abbey's  venerable  front.  It  comprises  the 
western  wall  of  the  church,  which  is  all  that  remains 


1857.]  NEWSTEAD  ABBEY.  485 

of   that  fabric,  —  a  great,  central  window,   entirely 
empty,  without  tracery  or  mullions ;  the  ivy  clamber- 
ing up  on  the  inside  of  the  wall,  and  hanging  over  in 
front.     The  front  of  the  inhabited  part  of  tiie  house 
extends  along  on  a  line  with  this  church  wall,  rather 
low,  with  battlements  along  its  top,  and  aU  in  good 
keeping  with  the  ruinous  remnant.     We  met  a  ser- 
vant, who  replied  civilly  to  our  inquiries  about  the 
mode  of  gaining  admittance,  and  bade  us  ring  a  bell 
at  the  comer  of  the  principal  porch.     We  rang  ac- 
cordingly, and  were  forthwith  admitted  into  a  low, 
vaulted  basement,  ponderously  wrought  with  intersect- 
ing arches,  dark  and  rather  chilly,  just  like  what  I 
remember  to  have  seen  at  Battle  Abbey ;  and,  after 
waiting  here  a  little  while,  a  respectable  elderly  geiitle- 
woman  appeared,  of  whom  we  requested  to  be  shown 
round  the  Abbey.     She  courteously  acceded,  first  pre- 
senting to  us  a  book  in  which  to  inscribe  our  names. 
I  suppose  ten  thousand  people,  three  fourths  of  them 
Americans,  have  written  descriptions  of  Newstead  Ab- 
bey ;  and  none  of  them,  so  far  as  I  have  read,  give 
any  true  idea  of  the  place ;  neither  will  my  descrip- 
tion, if  I  write  one.     In  fact,  I  forget  very  much  that 
I  saw,  and  especially  in  what  order  the  objects  came. 
In  the  basement  was  Byron's  bath,  —  a  dark  and  cold 
and  cellar-like  hole,  which  it  must  have  required  good 
courage  to  plunge  into ;  in  this  region,  too,  or  near  it, 
was  the  chapel,  which  Colonel  Wildman  has  decorously 
fitted  up,  and  where  service  is  now  regularly  performed, 
but  which  was  used  as  a  dog's  kennel  in  Byron's  time. 
After  seeing  this,  we  were  led  to  Byron's  own  bed- 
chamber, which  remains  just  as  when  he  slept  in  it,  — 
the  furniture  and  all  the  other  arrangements  being 
religiously  preserved.     It  was.  in  the  plainest  possible 


486  ENGLISH  NOTEBOOKS.  .[^857. 

i^le,  homely,  indeed,  and  almo^  mean,  —  an  ordi- 
nary paper-hanging,  and  ererything  so  commonplace 
that  it  was  only  the  deep  embrasure  of  the  window 
that  made  it  look  unlike  a  bedchamber  in  a  middling-- 
class  lodging-house.     It  would  have  seemed  difficult, 
bef ordiand,  to  fit  up  a  room  in  that  picturesque  old 
edifice  so  that  it  should  be  utterly  void  of  picturesque- 
ness ;  but  it  was  effected  in  this  apartment,  and  I  sup- 
pose it  is  a  specimen  of  the  way  in  which  old  man- 
sions used  to  be  robbed  of  thehr  antique  character,  and 
adapted  to  modem  tastes,  before  mediaBval  antiquities 
came  into  fashion.     Some  prints  of  the  Cambridge 
colleges,  and  other  pictures  indicating  Byron's  predi- 
lections at  the  time,  and  which  he  himself  had  hung 
there,  were  on  the  walls.     This,  the  housekeeper  told 
us,  had  been  the  Abbot's  chamber,  in  the  monastic 
time.     Adjoining  it  is  the  haunted  room,  where  the 
ghostly  monk,  whom  Byron  introduces  into  Don*  Juan, 
is  said  to  have  his  lurking  place.     It  is  fitted  up  in 
the  same  style  as  Byron's,  and  used  to  be  occupied 
by  his  valet  or  page.     No  doubt,  in  his  Lordship's 
day,  these  were  the  only  comfortable  bedrooms  in  the 
Abbey;   and  by  the  housekeeper's  account  of  what 
Colonel  Wildman  has  done,  it  is  to  be  inferred  that 
the  place  must  have  been  in  a  most  wild,  shaggy,  tum- 
ble-down condition,  inside  and  out,  when  he  bought  it. 
It  is  very  different  now.     After  showing  us  these 
two  apartments  of  Byron  and  his  servant,  the  house- 
keeper led  us  from  one  to  another  and  another  magnif- 
icent chamber  fitted  up  in  antique  style,  with  oak 
panelling,  and  heavily  carved  bedsteads,  of  Queen 
Elizabeth's  time,  or  of  the  Stuarts,  hung  with  rich 
tapestry  curtains  of  similar  date,  and  with  beautifu] 
old  cabinets  of  carved  wood,  sculptured  in  relief,  oi 


1857.]  NEWSTEAD  ABBEY.  487 

tortoise-shell  and  iiTOiy.  The  veiy  pictures  and  reali« 
ties,  ^se  rooms  were,  of  stately  comfort;  and  they 
were  called  by  the  name  of  kings, — King  Edward's, 
King  Charles  II.'s,  King  Henry  YII.'s  chamber ;  and 
they  were  hmig  with  beautiful  pictures,  many  of  them 
portraits  of  these  kings.  The  chimney-pieces  were 
carved  and  emblazoned;  and  all,  so  far  as  I  could 
judge,  was  in  p^ect  keeping,  so  that  if  a  prince  or 
noble  of  three  centuries  ago  were  to  come  to  lodge  at 
Newstead  Abbey,  he  would  hardly  know  that  he  had 
strayed  out  of  his  own  century.  And  yet  he  might 
have  known  by  some  token,  for  there  are  yolumes  of 
poetry  and  light  literature  on  the  tables  in  these  royal 
bedchambers,  and  in  that  of  Henry  VII.  I  saw  ^'The 
House  of  tiie  SeTsn  Grables "  and  ^^  The  Scarlet  Let- 
ter," in  Boutledge's  edition. 

Certainly  the  house  is  admirably  fitted  up;  and 
there  must  haye  been  something  very  excellent  and 
comprehensive  in  the  domestic  arrangements  of  the 
monks,  since  they  adapt  themselves  so  well  to  a  state 
of  society  entirely  different  from  that  in  which  they 
originated.  The  library  is  a  very  comfortable  room, 
and  provocative  of  studious  ideas,  though  lounging 
and  luxurious.  It  is  long,  and  rather  low,  furnished 
with  soft  couches,  and  on  the  whole,  though  a  man 
might  dream  of  study,  I  think  he  would  be  most  likely 
to  read  nothing  but  novels  there.  I  know  not  what 
the  room  was  in  monkish  times,  but  it  was  waste  and 
ruinous  in  Lord  Byron's.  Here,  I  think,  the  house- 
keeper unlocked  a  beautiful  cabinet,  and  took  out  the 
famous  skull  which  Lord  Byron  transformed  into  a 
drinking -goblet.  It  has  a  silver  rim  and  stand,  but 
still  the  ugly  skull  is  bare  and  evident,  and  the  naked 
nmer  bone  receives  the  wine.     I  should  think  it  would 


488  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1857. 

hold  at  least  a  quart,  —  enough  to  overpower  any  liv- 
ing head  into  which  this  death's-head  should  transfer 
its  contents ;  and  a  man  must  be  either  very  drunk  or 
very  thirsty,  before  he  would  taste  wine  out  of  such  a 
goblet.  I  think  Byron's  freak  was  outdone  by  that 
of  a  cousin  of  my  own,  who  once  solenmly  assured  me 
that  he  had  a  spittoon  made  out  of  the  skull  of  his 
enemy.  The  ancient  coffin  in  which  the  goblet-skull 
was  found  was  shown  us  in  the  basement  of  the  Abbey. 
There  was  much  more  to  see  in  the  house  than  I 
had  any  previous  notion  of;  but  except  the  two  cham- 
bers a^ady  noticed,  nothing  remained  the  least  as 
Byron  left  it.  Yes,  another  place  there  was,  —  his 
own  small  dining-room  with  a  table  of  moderate  size, 
where,  no  doubt,  the  skull-goblet  has  often  gone  its 
rounds.  Colonel  Wildman's  dining-room  was  once 
Byron's  shooting-gallery,  and  the  original  refectory  of 
the  monks.  It  is  now  magnificently  arranged,  with  a 
vaulted  roof,  a  music-gallery  at  one  end,  suits  of  armor 
and  weapons  on  the  walls,  and  mailed  arms  extended, 
holding  candelabras.  There  are  one  or  two  painted 
windows,  commemorative  of  the  Peninsular  War,  and 
the  battles  in  which  the  Colonel  and  his  two  broth- 
ers fought,  —  for  these  Wildmen  seem  to  have  been 
mighty  troopers,  and  Colonel  Wildman  is  represented 
as  a  fierce-looking  mustachioed  hussar  at  two  different 
ages.  The  hoiisekeeper  spoke  of  him  affectionately, 
but  says  that  he  is  now  getting  into  years,  and  that 
they  fancy  him  failing.  He  has  no  children.  He  ap- 
pears to  have  been  on  good  terms  with  Byron,  and 
had  the  latter  ever  returned  to  England,  he  was  under 
promise  to  make  his  first  visit  to  his  old  home,  and  it 
was  in  such  an  expectation  that  Colonel  Wildman  had 
kept  Byron's  private  apartments  in  the  same  condition 


3867.]  NEWSTEAD  ABBEY.  439 

in  which  he  found  them.  Byron  was  informed  of  all 
the  Colonel's  fittings  up  and  restorations,  and  when 
he  introduces  the  Abbey  in  Don  Juan,  the  poet  de- 
scribes it,  not  as  he  himself  left  it,  but  as  Colonel 
Wildman  has  restored  it.  There  is  a  beautiful  draw- 
ing-room, and  all  these  apartments  are  adorned  with 
pictures,  the  collection  being  especially  rich  in  por- 
traits by  Sir  Peter  Lely,  —  that  of  Nell  Gwynn  being 
one,  who  is  one  of  the  few  beautiful  women  whom  I 
haye  seen  on  canvas. 

We  parted  with  the  housekeeper,  and  I  with  a  good 
many  shillings,  at  the  door  by  which  we  entered ;  and 
our  next  business  was  to  see  the  private  grounds  and 
gardens.  A  littie  boy  attended  us  through  the  first 
part  of  our  progress,  but  soon  appeared  the  veritable 
gardener,  —  a  shrewd  and  sensible  old  man,  who  has 
been  very  many  years  on  the  place.  There  was  noth- 
ing of  special  interest  as  concerning  Byron  until  we 
entered  the  original  old  monkish  garden,  which  is  still 
laid  out  in  the  same  fashion  as  the  monks  left  it,  with 
a  large,  oblong  piece  of  water  in  the  centre,  and  ter- 
raced banks  rising  at  two  or  three  different  stages 
with  perfect  regularity  around  it ;  so  that  the  sheet  of 
water  looks  like  the  plate  of  an  immense  looking-glass, 
of  which  the  terraces  form  the  frame.  It  seems  as  if, 
were  there  any  giant  large  enough,  he  might  raise  up 
this  mirror  and  set  it  on  end.  In  the  monks'  garden 
there  is  a  marble  statue  of  Pan,  which,  the  gardener 
told  us,  was  brought  by  the  "  Wicked  Lord  "  (great- 
uncle  of  Byron)  from  Italy,  and  was  supposed  by  the 
country  people  to  represent  the  Devil,  and  to  be  the 
object  of  his  worship,  —  a  natural  idea  enough,  in 
view  of  his  horns  and  cloven  feet  and  tail,  though  this 
indicates,  at  all  events,  a  very  jolly  devil.     There  is 


440  ENGLISH  NCTE'-BOOKS.  [1857. 

also  a  female  statue,  beautiful  from  the  waist  upward 
but  shaggy  and  cloven-footed  below,  and  holding  a  Ut- 
ile cloven-footed  child  by  the  hand.  This,  the  old 
gardener  assured  us,  was  Pandora,  wife  of  the  above- 
mentioned  Pan,  with  her  son.  Not  far  from  thia  spot, 
we  came  to  the  tree  on  which  Byron  carved  his  own 
name  and  that  of  his  sister  Augusta.  It  is  a  tree  of 
twin  stems,  —  a  birch-tree,  I  think,  —  growing  up  side 
by  ride.  One  of  the  stems  still  lives  and  flourishes, 
but  that  on  which  he  carved  the  two  names  is  quite 
dead,  as  if  there  had  been  something  fatal  in  the  in- 
scription that  has  made  it  forever  famous.  The  names 
are  stiU  very  legible,  although  the  letters  had  been 
closed  up  by  the  growth  of  the  bark  before  the  tree 
died.     They  must  have  been  deeply  cut  at  first. 

There  are  old  yew-trees  of  unknown  antiquity  in 
this  garden,  and  many  other  interesting  things ;  and 
among  them  may  be  reckoned  a  fountain  of  very  pure 
water,  called  the  "Holy  Well,"  of  which  we  drank. 
There  are  several  fountains,  besides  the  large  mirror 
in  the  centre  of  the  garden  ;  and  these  are  mostly  in- 
habited by  carp,  the  genuine  descendants  of  ^ose 
which  peopled  the  fish-ponds  in  the  days  of  the 
monks.  Coming  in  front  of  the  Abbey,  the  gardener 
showed  us  the  oak  that  Byron  planted,  now  a  vigorous 
young  tree ;  and  the  monument  which  he  erected  to 
his  Newfoundland  dog,  and  which  is  larger  than  most 
Christians  get,  being  composed  of  a  marble,  altar- 
shaped  tomb,  surrounded  by  a  circular  area  of  steps, 
as  much  as  twenty  feet  in  diameter.  The  gardener 
said,  however,  that  Byron  intended  this,  not  merely 
as  the  burial-place  of  his  dog,  but  for  himself  too^ 
and  his  sister.  I  know  not  how  this  may  have  been, 
but  this  inconvenience  would  have  attended  his  being 


1857.]  NEWSTEAD  ABBEY.  441 

buried  thete,  that,  on  transfet  of  the  estate,  his  mor^ 
tal  remains  would  have  become  the  property  of  some 
other  man. 

We  had  now  oome  to  the  empty  space, — a  smooth 
green  lawn,  where  had  once  been  the  Abbey  church* 
The  length  had  been  sixty-four  yards,  the  gardener 
said,  and  within  his  remembrance  there  had  been  many 
remains  of  it,  but  now  they  are  quite  removed,  with 
the  exception  of  the  one  ivy-grown  western  wall, 
which,  as  I  mentioned,  forms  a  picturesque  part  of 
the  present  front  of  the  Abbey.  Through  a  door  in 
this  wall  the  gardener  now  let  us  out.  .  .  . 

In  the  evening  our  landlady,  who  seems  to  be  a  very 
intelligent  woman,  of  a  superior  class  to  most  landla* 
dies,  came  into  our  parlor,  while  I  was  out,  and  talked 
about  the  present  race  of  Byrons  and  Lovelaces,  who 
have  often  been  at  this  house.  There  seems  to  be  a 
taint  in  the  Byron  blood  which  makes  those  who  in* 
herit  it  wicked,  mad,  and  miserable.  Even  Colonel 
Wildman  comes  in  for  a  share  of  this  ill  luck,  for  he 
has  almost  ruined  himself  by  his  expenditure  on  the 
estate,  and  by  his  lavish  hospitality,  especially  to  the 
Duke  of  Sussex,  who  liked  the  Colonel,  and  used  often 
to  visit  him  during  his  lifetime,  and  his  Boyal  High- 
uess's  gentlemen  ate  and  drank  Colonel  Wildmau  al- 
most up.  So  says  our  good  landlady.  At  any  rate, 
looking  at  this  miserable  race  of  Byrons,  who  held  the 
estate  so  long,  and  at  Colonel  Wildman,  whom  it  has 
ruined  in  f orly  years,  we  m^ht  see  grounds  for  be- 
lieving in  the  evil  fate  which  is  supposed  to  attend 
confiscated  church  property.  Nevertheless,  I  would 
accept  the  estate,  were  it  offered  me. 

.  .  .  Glancing  back,  I  see  that  I  have  omitted  some 
items  that  were  curious  in  describing  the  house  ;  for 


442  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  £1857. 

instance,  one  of  the  cabinets  had  been  the  personal 
property  of  Queen  Elizabeth.  It  seems  to  me  that 
the  fashion  of  modern  furniture  has  nothing  to  equal 
these  old  cabinets  for  beauty  and  convenience.  In 
the  state  apartments,  the  floors  were  so  highly  waxed 
and  polished  that  we  slid  on  them  as  if  on  ice,  and 
could  only  make  sure  of  our  footing  by  treading  on 
strips  of  carpeting  that  were  laid  down, 

June  7th.  —  We  left  Nottingham  a  week  ago,  and 
made  our  first  stage  to  Derby,  where  we  had  to  wait 
an  hour  or  two  at  a  great,  bustling,  pell-mell,  crowded 
railway  station.  It  was  much  thronged  with  second 
and  third  class  passengers,  coming  and  departing  in 
continual  trains ;  for  these  were  the  Whitsuntide  holi- 
days, which  set  all  the  lower  orders  of  English  people 
astir.  This  time  of  festival  was  evidently  the  origin 
of  the  old  **  Election  "  holidays  in  Massachusetts ;  the 
latter  occurring  at  the  same  period  of  the  year,  and 
being  celebrated  (so  long  as  they  could  be  so)  in  very 
much  the  same  way,  with  games,  idleness,  merriment 
of  set  purpose,  and  drunkenness.  After  a  weaiy  while 
we  took  the  train  for 

MATLOCK, 

via  Ambergate,  and  arrived  at  the  former  place  late 
in  the  afternoon.  The  village  of  Matlock  is  situated 
on  the  banks  of  the  Derwent,  in  a  delightful  little 
nook  among  the  hills,  which  rise  above  it  in  steeps, 
and  in  precipitous  crags,  and  shut  out  the  world  so  ef- 
fectually that  I  wonder  how  the  railway  ever  found  it 
out.  Indeed,  it  does  make  its  approach  to  this  region 
through  a  long  tunnel.  It  was  a  beautiful,  sunny 
afternoon  when  we  arrived,  and  my  present  impres- 


1857.]  MATLOCK.  443 

sions  are,  that  I  haye  never  seen  anywhere  else  such 
exquisite  scenery  as  that  which  surrounds  the  village. 
The  street  itself,  to  be  sure,  is  commonplace  enough, 
and  hot,  dusty,  and  disagreeable;  but  if  you  look 
above  it,  or  on  either  side,  there  are  green  hills  de- 
scending abruptly  down,  and  softened  with  woods, 
amid  which  are  seen  villas,  cottages,  castles ;  and  be- 
yond the  river  is  a  line  of  crags,  perhaps  three  hun- 
cired  feet  high,  clothed  with  shrubbery  in  some  parts 
from  top  to  bottom,  but  in  other  places  presenting 
a  sheer  precipice  of  rock,  over  which  tumbles,  as  it 
were,  a  cascade  of  ivy  and  creeping  plants.  It  is  very 
beautiful,  and,  I  might  ahnost  say,  very  wild ;  but  it 
has  those  characteristics  of  finish,  and  of  being  re- 
deemed from  nature,  and  converted  into  a  portion  of 
the  adornment  of  a  great  garden,  which  I  find  in  all 
English  scenery.  Not  that  I  complain  of  this ;  on  the 
contrary,  there  is  nothing  that  delights  an  American 
more,  in  contrast  with  the  roughness  and  ruggedness 
of  his  native  scenes,  —  to  which,  also,  he  might  be  glad 
to  return  after  a  while. 

We  put  up  at  the  old  Bath  Hotel,  —  an  immense 
house,  with  passages  of  such  extent  that  at  first  it 
seemed  almost  a  day's  journey  from  parlor  to  bed- 
room. The  house  stands  on  a  declivity,  and  after  as- 
cending one  pair  of  stairs,  we  came,  in  travelling  along 
the  passage-way,  to  a  door  that  opened  upon  a  beauti- 
fully arranged  garden,  with  arbors  and  grottos,  and 
the  hiU-side  rising  steep  above.  -During  all  the  time  of 
our  stay  at  Matlock  there  was  brilliant  sunshine,  and, 
the  grass  and  foliage  being  in  their  freshest  and  most 
luxuriant  phase,  the  place  has  left  as  bright  a  picture 
as  I  have  anywhere  in  my  memory. 

The  morning  after  our  arrival  we  took  a  walk,  and, 


444  ENGLISH  NOTE-^BOOKS.  [lBti7. 

following  the  sound  of  a  cburch-bell,  entered  what  ap- 
peared to  be  a  park,  and,  passing  along  a  road  at  the 
base  of  a  line  of  crags,  soon  came  in  sight  of  a  beauti- 
ful church.  I  rather  imagine  it  to  be  the  place  of 
worship  of  the  Arkwright  family,  whose  seat  is  in  this 
vicinity,  —  the  descendants  of  the  famous  Arkwright 
who  contributed  so  much  towards  turning  England 
into  a  cotton  -  manufactory.  We  did  not  enter  the 
church,  but  passed  beyond  it,  and  over  a  bridge,  and 
along  a  road  that  ascended  among  the  hills,  and  finally 
brought  us  ont  by  a  circuit  to  the  other  end  of  Mat- 
lock village,  after  a  walk  of  three  or  four  miles.  In 
the  afternoon  we  took  a  boat  across  the  Derwent,  — 
a  passage  which  half  a  dozen  strokes  of  the  oars  ac- 
complished, —  and  reached  a  very  pleasant  seclusion 
called  "The  Lovers'  Walk.'*  A  ferriage  of  twopence 
pays  for  the  transit  across  the  river,  and  gives  the 
freedom  of  these  grounds,  which  are  threaded  with 
paths  that  meander  and  zigzag  to  the  top  of  tiie  pre- 
cipitous ridge,  amid  trees  and  shrubbery,  and  the  occa- 
sional ease  of  rustic  seats.  It  is  a  sweet  walk  for  lov- 
ers, and  was  so  for  us ;  although  J ^  with  his  scram- 

blings  and  disappearances,  and  shouts  from  above,  and 
headlong  scamperings  down  the  precipitous  paths,  oc- 
casionally frightened  his  mother.  After  gaining  the 
heights,  the  path  skirts  along  the  precipice,  allowing 
us  to  see  down  into  the  village  street,  and,  nearer,  the 
Derwent  winding  through  the  valley  so  close  beneath 
us  that  we  might  have  flung  a  stone  into  it.  These 
crags  would  be  very  rude  and  harsh  if  left  to  them- 
selves, but  they  are  quite  softened,  and  made  sweet 
and  tender,  by  the  great  deal  of  foliage  that  clothes 
their  sides,  and  creeps  and  clambers  over  them,  only 
letting  a  stem  face  of  rock  be  seen  here  and  there^ 
^md  with  a  smile  rather  than  a  frown. 


1857.]  MATLOCK.  445 

The  next  day,  Monday,  we  went  to  see  the  grand 
cavern.  The  entrance  is  high  up  on  the  hill-side, 
whither  we  were  led  by  a  guide,  of  whom  there  are 
many,  and  they  all  pay  tribute  to  the  proprietor  of  the 
cavern.  There  is  a  small  shed  by  the  side  of  the  cav- 
ern mouth,  where  the  guide  provided  himself  and  us 
with  tallow  candles,  and  then  led  us  into  the  darksome 
and  ugly  pit,  the  entrance  of  which  is  not  very  impos- 
ing, for  it  has  a  door  of  rough  pine  boards,  and  is  kept 
under  lock  and  key.  This  is  the  disagreeable  phase  — 
one  of  the  disagreeable  phases  —  of  man's  conquest 
over  nature  in  England,  —  cavern  mouths  shut  up 
with  cellar  doors,  cataracts  under  lock  and  key,  precip- 
itous crags  compelled  to  figure  in  ornamented  gardens, 
— and  all  accessible  at  a  fixed  amount  of  shillings  or 
pence.  It  is  not  possible  to  draw  a  full  free  breath 
under  such  circumstances.  When  you  think  of  it,  it 
makes  the  wildest  scenery  look  like  the  artificial  rock- 
work  which  Englishmen  are  so  fond  of  displaying  in 
the  little  bit  of  grass-plot  under  their  suburban  parlor 
windows.  However,  the  cavern  was  dreary  enough 
and  wild  enough,  though  in  a  mean  sort  of  way ;  for  it 
is  but  a  long  series  of  passages  and  crevices,  generally 
so  narrow  that  you  scrape  your  elbows,  and  so  low 
that  you  hit  your  head.  It  has  nowhere  a  lofty  height, 
though  sometimes  it  broadens  out  into  ample  space, 
but  not  into  grandeur,  the  roof  being  always  within 
reach,  and  in  most  places  smoky  with  the  tallow  can- 
dles that  have  been  held  up  to  it.  A  very  dirty,  sor- 
did, disagreeable  burrow,  more  like  a  cellar  gone  mad 
than  anything  else  ;  but  it  served  to  show  us  how  the 
crust  of  the  earth  is  moulded.  This  cavern  was  known 
to  the  Romans,  and  used  to  be  worked  by  them  as  a 
lead-mine.     Derbyshire  spar  is  now  taken  from  it; 


446  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

and  in  some  of  its  crevices  the  gleam  of  the  tallow 
candles  is  faintly  reflected  from  the  crystallizatioiis ; 
but,  on  the  whole,  I  felt  like  a  mole,  as  I  went  creep- 
ing along,  and  was  glad  when  we  came  into  the  sun- 
shine again.  I  rather  think  my  idea  of  a  cavern  is 
taken  from  the  one  in  the  Forty  Thieves,  or  in  Gil 
Bias,  —  a  vast,  hollow  womb,  roofed  and  curtained 
with  obscurity.     This  reality  is  very  mean. 

Leaving  the  cavern,  we  went  to  the  guide's  cottage, 
situated  high  above  the  village,  )vhere  he  showed  us 
specimens  of  ornaments  and  toys  manufactured  by 
lumseK  from  Derbyshire  spar  and  other  materials. 
There  was  very  pretty  mosaic  work,  flowers  of  spar, 
and  leaves  of  malachite,  and  miniature  copies  of  Cleo- 
patra's Needle,  and  other  Egyptian  monuments,  and 
vases  of  graceful  pattern,  brooches,  too,  and  many 
other  things.  The  most  valuable  spar  is  called  Blue 
John,  and  is  only  to  be  found  in  one  spot,  where,  also, 
the  supply  is  said  to  be  growing  scant.  We  bought 
a  number  of  articles,  and  then  came  homeward,  still 
with  our  guide,  who  showed  us,  on  the  way,  the  Ro- 
mantic Rocks.  These  are  some  crags  which  have  been 
rent  away  and  stand  insulated  from  the  hill-side,  af- 
fording a  pathway  between  it  and  them ;  while  the 
places  can  yet  be  seen  where  the  sundered  rocks  would 
fit  into  the  craggy  hill  if  there  were  but  a  Titan  strong 
enough  to  adjust  them  again.  It  is  a  very  picturesque 
spot,  and  the  price  for  seeing  it  is  twopence  ;  though 
in  our  case  it  was  included  in  the  four  shillings  which 
we  had  paid  for  seeing  the  cavern.  The  representa- 
tive men  of  England  are  the  showmen  and  the  police- 
men ;  both  very  good  people  in  their  way. 

Ketuming  to  the  hotel,  J and  his  mother  went 

through   the  village  to  the  river,  near   the  railway, 


1857.]  f  MATLOCK.  447 

where  J set  himself  -to  fishing,  and  caught  three 

minnows.      I  followed,  after  a  while,  to  fetch  them 
back,  and  we  called  into  one  or  two  of  the  many  shops 
in  the  village,  which  have  articles  manufactured  of  the 
spar  for  sale.     Some  of  these  are  nothing  short  of 
magnificent.     There  was  an  inlaid  table,  valued  at 
sixty  guineas,  and  a  splendid  ornament  for  any  draw- 
ing-room ;  another,  inlaid  with  the  squares  of  a  chess- 
board.    We  heard  of  a  table  in  the  possession  of  the 
Marquis  of  Westminster,  the  value  of  which  is  three 
hundred  guineas.     It  would  be  easy  and  pleasant  to 
spend  a  great  deal  of  money  in  such  things  as  we 
saw  there ;  but  all  our  purchases  in  Matlock  did  not 
amount  to  more  than  twenty  shillings,  invested  in 
brooches,  shawl-pins,  little  vases  and  toys,  which  will 
be  valuable  to  us  as  memorials  on  the  other  side  of 
the  water.     After  this,  we  visited  a  petrifying  cave,  of 
which  there  are  several  hereabouts.     The  process  of 
petrifaction  requires  some  months,  or  perhaps  a  year 
or  two,  varying  with  the  size  of  the  article  to  be  oper- 
ated upon.     The  articles  are  placed  in  the  cave,  under 
the  drippings  from  the  roof,  and  a  hard  deposit  is 
formed  upon  them,  and  sometimes,  as  in  the  case  of  a 
bird's-nest,  causes  a  curious  result,  —  every  straw  and 
hair  being  immortalized  and  stiffened  into  stone.     A 

horse's  head  was  in  process  of  petrifaction ;  and  J 

bought  a  broken  eggshell  for  a  penny,  though  larger 
articles  are  expensive.  The  process  would  appear  to 
be  entirely  superficial,  —  a  mere  crust  on  the  outside 
of  things,  —  but  we  saw  some  specimens  of  petrified 
oak,  where  the  stony  substance  seemed  to  be  inti- 
mately incorporated  with  the  wood,  and  to  have  really 
changed  it  into  stone.  These  specimens  were  im- 
mensely ponderous,  and  capable  of  a  high  polish^ 
which  broutrht  out  beautiful  streaks  and  shades. 


M8  ENG^ISff  NOTE-BOOKS.  [IMl 

One  might  spend  a  very  pleasant  aummer  in  Mat- 
lock, and  I  think  there  can  be  no  more  beautiful  place 
in  the  world ;  but  we  left  it  that  afternoon,  and  railed 
to  Manchester,  where  we  arrived  between  ten    and 

eleven  at  night.     The  next  day  I  left  S to  go  to 

the  Art  Exhibition,  and  took  J with  me  to  Liver- 
pool, where  I  had  an  engagement  that  admitted  of  no 
delay.  Thus  ended  our  tour,  in  which  we  had  seen 
but  a  little  bit  of  England,  yet  rich  with  variety  and 
interest.  What  a  wonderful  land  1  It  is  our  fore- 
fathers' land ;  our  land,  for  I  will  not  give  up  such  a 
precious  inheritance.  We  are  now  back  again  in  flat 
and  sandy  Southport,  which,  during  the  past  week, 
has  been  thronged  with  Whitsuntide  people,  who 
crowd  the  streets,  and  pass  to  and  fro  along  the  prom- 
enade, with  a  universal  and  monotonous  air  of  noth- 
ing to  do,  and  very  little  enjoyment.  It  is  a  pity  that 
poor  folks  cannot  employ  their  little  hour  of  leisure  to 
better  advantage,  in  a  country  where  the  soil  is  so 
veined  with  gold. 

These  are  delightfully  long  days.  Last  night,  at 
half  past  nine,  I  could  read  with  perfect  ease  in  parts 
of  the  room  remote  from  the  window ;  and  at  nearly 
half  past  eleven  there  was  a  broad  sheet  of  daylight 
in  the  west,  gleaming  brightly  over  the  plashy  sands. 
I  question  whether  there  be  any  total  night  at  this 
season. 

June  2l8t,  —  Southport,  I  presume,  is  now  in  its 
most  vivid  aspect ;  there  being  a  multitude  of  visit- 
ors here,  principally  of  the  middling  classes,  and  a 
frequent  crowd,  whom  I  take  to  be  working-people 
from  Manchester  and  other  factory  towns.  It  is  the 
strangest  place  to  come  to  for  the  pleasures  of  the  sea, 


1857.]  SOUTHPORT.  449 

of  which  we  scarcely  have  a  glimpse  from  month's  end 
to  month's  end,  nor  any  fresh,  exhilai^ating  breath 
from  it,  but  a  lazy,  languid  atmosphere,  brooding  over 
the  waste  of  sands ;  or  even  i^  there  be  a  sulky  and 
bitter  wind  blowing  .along  the  promenade,  it  stiU 
brings  no  salt  elixir.  I  never  was  more  weary  of  a 
place  in  all  my  life,  and  never  felt  such  a  disinter- 
ested pity  as  of  thfe  people  who  come  here  for  pleas- 
ure. Nevertheless,  the  town  has  its  amusements :  in 
the  first  place,  the  daylong  and  perennial  one  of  don- 
key-riding along  the  sands,  large  parties  of  men  and 
girls  pottering  along  together;  the  Flying  Dutch- 
man trundles  hither  and  thither  when  there  is  breeze 
enough ;  an  archery-man  sets  up  his  targets  on  the 
beach ;  the  bathing-houses  stand  by  scores  and  fifties 
along  the  shore,  and  likewise  on  the  banks  of  the  Kib- 
ble, a  mile  seaward ;  the  hotels  have  their  billiard- 
rooms  ;  there  is  a  theatre  every  evening ;  from  morn- 
ing till  night  comes  a  succession  of  organ  -  grinders, 
playing  interminably  under  your  window ;  and  a  man 
with  a  bassoon  and  a  monkey,  who  takes  your  pennies 
and  pulls  off  his  cap  in  acknowledgment ;  and  wan- 
dering minstrels,  with  guitar  and  voice ;  and  a  High- 
land bagpipe,  squealing  out  a  tangled  skein  of  discord, 
together  with  a  Highland  maid,  who  dances  a  horn- 
pipe ;  and  Punch  and  Judy,  —  in  a  word,  we  have 
specimens  of  all  manner  of  vagrancy  that  infests  Eng- 
land. In  these  long  days,  and  long  and  pleasant  ones, 
the  promenade  is  at  its  liveliest  about  nine  o'clock, 

which  is  but  just  after  sundown  ;  and  our  little  R 

finds  it  difficult  to  go  to  sleep  amid  so  much  music  as 
comes  to  her  ears  from  bassoon,  bagpipe,  organ,  gui- 
tar, and  now  and  then  a  military  band.  One  feature 
of  the  place  is  the  sick  and  infirm  people,  whom  we 


450  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  [1857. 

see  dragged  along  in  bath- chairs,  or  dragging  their 
own  limbs  languidly ;  or  sitting  on  benches ;  or  meet- 
ing in  the  streets,  and  making  acquaintance  on  the 
strength  of  mutual  maladies,  —  pale  men  leaning  on 
their  ruddy  wives  ;  cripples,  three  or  four  together  in 
a  ring,  and  planting  their  crutches  in  the  centre.  I 
don't  remember  whether  I  have  ever  mentioned  among 
the  notabilities  of  Southport  the  Town  Crier,  —  a 
meek-looking  old  man,  who  sings  out  his  messages  in 
a  most  doleful  tone,  as  if  he  took  his  title  in  a  literal 
sense,  and  were  really  going  to  cry,  or  crying  in  the 
world's  behalf ;  one  other  stroller,  a  foreigner  with  a 
dog,  shaggy  round  the  head  and  shoulders,  and  closely 
shaven  behind.  The  poor  little  beast  jumped  through 
hoops,  ran  about  on  two  legs  of  one  side,  danced  on 
its  hind  legs,  or  on  its  fore  paws,  with  its  hind  ones 
straight  up  in  the  air,  —  all  the  time  keeping  a  watch 
on  his  master's  eye,  and  evidently  mindful  of  many  a 
beating. 

June  25th.  —  The  war-steamer  Niagara  came  up 
the  Mersey  a  few  days  since,  and  day  before  yesterday 
Captain  Hudson  called  at  my  office,  —  a  somewhat 
meagre,  elderly  gentleman,  of  simple  and  hearty  man- 
ners and  address,  having  his  purser,  Mr.  Eldredge, 
with  him,  who,  I  think,  rather  prides  himself  upon 
having  a  Napoleonic  profile.  The  captain  is  an  old 
acquaintance  of  Mrs.  Blodgett,  and  has  come  ashore 
principally  with  a  view  to  calling  on  her;  so,  after 
we  had  left  our  cards  for  the  Mayor,  I  showed  these 
naval  gentlemen  the  way  to  her  house.  Mrs.  Blod- 
gett and  Miss  W were  prodigiously  glad  to  see 

him ;  and  they  all  three  began  to  talk  of  old  times  and 
old  acquaintances^  for  when  Mrs.  Blodgett  was  a  ricl) 


1857.]  LIVERPOOL,  451 

• 
lady  at  Gibraltar,  she  used  to  have  the  whole  navy- 
list  at  her  table,  —  young  midshipmen  and  lieutenants 
then,  perhaps,  but  old,  gouty,  paralytic  commodores 
now,  if  stiU  even  partly  alive.  It  was  arranged  that 
Mrs.  Blodgett,  with  as  many  of  the  ladies  of  her  fam- 
ily as  she  chose  to  bring,  should  accompany  me  on  my 
official  visit  to  the  ship  the  next  day;  and  yesterday 

we  went  accordingly,  —  Mrs.  Blodgett,  Miss  W , 

and  six  or  seven  American  captains'  wives,  their  hus- 
bands following  in  another  boat.  I  know  too  little  of 
ships  to  describe  one,  or  even  to  feel  any  great  in- 
terest in  the  details  of  this  or  of  any  other  ship ;  but 
the  nautical  people  seemed  to  see  much  to  admire. 
She  lay  in  the  Sloyne,  in  the  midst  of  a  broad  basin  of 
the  Mersey,  with  a  pleasant  landscape  of  green  Eng- 
land, now  warm  with  summer  sunshine,  on  either  side, 
with  churches  and  villa  residences,  and  suburban  and 
rural  beauty.  The  officers  of  the  ship  are  gentle- 
manly men,  externally  very  well  mannered,  although 
not  polished  and  refined  to  any  considerable  extent. 
At  least,  I  have  not  found  naval  men  so,  in  general ; 
but  still  it  is  pleasant  to  see  Americans  who  are  not 
stirred  by  such  motives  as  usually  interest  our  country- 
men, —  no  hope-  nor  desire  of  growing  rich,  but  plant- 
ing their  claims  to  respectability  on  other  grounds, 
and  therefore  acquiring  a  certain  nobleness,  whether 
it  be  inherent  in  their  nature  or  no.  It  always  seems 
to  me  they  look  down  upon  civilians  with  quiet  and 
not  ill-natured  scorn,  which  one  has  the  choice  of  smil- 
ing or  being  provoked  at.  It  is  not  a  true  life  which 
they  lead,  but  shallow  and  aimless ;  and  unsatisfac- 
tory it  must  be  to  the  better  minds  among  them  ;  npr 
do  they  appear  to  profit  by  what  would  seem  the  ad- 
vantages presented  to  them  in  their  world-wide,  though 


452  .  ENGLISH  NOTE-'BOOKS.  C1857. 

not  world-deep  experiencer-  They  get  to  be  very  claii^ 
nish  too. 

After  seeing  the  ship,  we  landed,  all  of  us,  ladies 
and  captain,  and  went  to  the  gardens  of  the  Rock 

Ferry  Hotel,  where  J and  I  stayed  behind   the 

rest. 

TO   SCOTLAND. 

June  28th.  —  On  the  26th  my  wife,  J ,  and  I 

left  Southport,  taking  the  train  for  Preston,  and  as  we 
had  to  stop  an  hour  or  two  before  starting  for  Carlisle, 
I  walked  up  into  the  town.  The  street  through  which 
most  of  my  walk  lay  was  brick-built,  lively,  bustling, 
and  not  particularly  noteworthy ;  but,  taming  a  little 
way  down  another  street^  the  town  had  a  more  ancient 
aspect.  The  day  was  intensely  hot,  the  sun  lying 
bright  and  broad  as  ever  I  remember  it  in  an  Ameri- 
can city ;  so  that  I  was  glad  to  get  back  again  to  the 
shade  and  shelter  of  the  station.  The  heat  and  dust, 
moreover,  made  our  journey  to  Carlisle  very  uncom- 
fortable. It  was  through  very  pretty,  and  sometimes 
picturesque  scenery,  being  on  the  confines  of  the  hill- 
country,  which  we  could  see  on  our  left,  dim  and  blue ; 
and  likewise  we  had  a  refreshing  breath  from  the  sea 
in  passing  along  the  verge  of  Morecambe  Bay.  We 
reached  Carlisle  at  about  five  o'clock,  and,  after  taking 
tea  at  the  Bush  Hotel,  set  forth  to  look  at  the  town. 

The  notable  objects  were  a  castle  and  a  cathedral ; 
and  we  first  found  our  way  to  the  castle,  which  stands 
on  elevated  ground,  on  the  side  of  the  city  towards 
Scotland.  A  broad,  well-constructed  path  winds  roimd 
the  castle  at  the  base  of  the  wall,  on  the  verge  of  a 
steep  descent  to  the  plain  beneath,  through  which 
winds  the  river  Eden.     Along  this  path  we  walked 


1857.]  CARLISLE,  453 

quite  round  the  castle,  a  circuit  of  perhaps  half  a  mile, 
—  pleasant,  being  shaded  by  the  castle's  height  and 
by  the  foliage  of  trees.  The  walls  have  been  so  much 
rebuilt  and  restored  that  it  is  only  here  and  there  that 
we  see  an  old  buttress,  or  a  few  time-worn  stones  in- 
termixed with  the  new  facing  with  which  the  aged  sub- 
stance is  overlaid.  The  material  is  red  free -stone, 
whi^ch  seems  to  be  very  abundant  in  this  part  of  the 
country.  We  found  no  entrance  to  the  castle  till  the 
path  had  led  us  from  the  free  and  airy  country  into 
a  very  mean  part  of  the  town,  where  the  wretched  old 
houses  thrust  themselves  between  us  and  the  castle 
wall,  and  then,  passing  through  a  narrow  street,  we 
walked  up  what  appeared  like  a  by-lane,  and  the  por- 
tal of  the  castle  was  before  us.  There  was  a  sentry- 
box  just  within  the  gate,  and  a  sentinel  was  on  guard,  ^ 
for  Carlisle  Castle  is  a  nai;ional  fortress,  and  has  usu- 
ally been  a  depot  for  arms  and  ammunition.  The  ser- 
geant, or  corporal  of  the  guard,  sat  reading  within  the 
gateway,  and,  on  my  request  for  admittance,  he  civilly 
appointed  one  of  the  soldiers  to  conduct  us  to  the  cas- 
tle. As  I  recollect,  the  chief  gateway  of  the  castle, 
with  the  guard-room  in  the  thickness  of  the  wall,  is 
situated  some  twenty  yards  behind  the  first  entrance 
where  we  met  the  sentinel. 

It  was  an  intelligent  young  soldier  who  showed  us 
round  the  castle,  and  very  civil,  as  I  always  find  sol- 
diers to  be.  He  had  not  anything  particularly  inter- 
esting to  show,  nor  very  much  to  say  about  it ;  and 
what  he  did  say,  so  far  as  it  referred  to  the  history  of 
the  castle,  was  probably  apocryphal. 

The  castle  has  an  inner  and  outer  ward  on  the  de- 
scent  of  the  hill,  and  included  within  the  circuit  of  the 
exterior  wall.     Having  been  always  occupied  by  soli' 


454  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  1'1857. 

diers,  it  has  not  been  permitted  to  assume  the  pictur- 
esque  aspect  of  a  ruin,  but  the  buildings  of  the  interior 
have  either  been  constantly  repaired,  as  they  required 
it,  or  have  been  taken  down  when  past  repair.      We 
saw  a  small  part  of  the  tower  where  Mary  Queen  of 
Scots  was  confined  on  her  first  coming  to  England; 
these  remains  consist  only  of  a  portion  of  a  winding 
stone  staircase,  at  which  we  glanced  through  a  ^pyin* 
dow.     The  keep  is  very  large  and  massive,  and,  no 
doubt,  old  in  its  inner  substance.     We  ascended  to 
the  castle  walls,  and  looked  out  over  the  river  towards 
the  Scottish  hills,  which  are  visible  in  the  distance,  — 
the  Scottish  border  being  not  more  than  eight  or  nine 
miles  off.     Carlisle  Castle  has  stood  many  sieges,  and 
witnessed  many  battles  under  its  walls.     There  are 
now,  on  its  ramparts,  only  some  half  a  dozen  old-fash- 
ioned guns,  which  our  soldier  told  us  had  gone  quite 
out  of  use  in  these  days.     They  were  long  iron  twelve- 
poimders,  with  one  or  two  carronades.    The  soldier 
was  of  an  artillery  regiment,  and  wore  the  Crimean 
medal.     He  said  the  garrison  now  here  consists  only 
of  about  twenty  men,  all  of  whom  had  served  in  the 
Crimea,  like  himself.     They  seem  to  lead  a  very  dull 
and  monotonous  life,  as  indeed  it  must  be,  without 
object  or  much  hope,  or  any  great  employment  of  the 
present,  like  prisoners,  as  indeed  they  are.    Our  guide 
showed  us  on  the  rampart  a  place  where  the  soldiers 
had  been   accustomed   to   drop   themselves  down  at 
night,  hanging  by  their  hands  from  the  top  of  the 
wall,  and  alighting  on  their  feet  close  beside  the  path 
on  the  outside.     The  height  seemed  at  least  that  of  an 
\>rdinary  house,  but  the  soldier  said  that  nine  times 
out  of  ten  the  fall  might  be  ventured  without  harm; 
imd  he  spoke  from  experience,  having  himself  got  out 


1857.]  CARLISLE.  465 

of  the  castle  m  this  manner.  The  place  is  now  boarded 
up,  so  as  to  make  egress  difficult  or  impossible. 

The  castle,  after  all,  was  not  particularly  worth  see- 
ing. The  soldier's  most  romantic  story  was  of  a 
daughter  of  Lord  Scroope,  a  former  governor  of  the 
castle,  when  Mary  of  Scotland  was  confined  here. 
She  attempted  to  assist  the  Queen  in  escaping,  but 
was  shot  dead  in  the  gateway  by  the  warder ;  and  the 
soldier  pointed  out  the  very  spot  where  the  poor  young 
lady  feu  and  died,  —  all  which  would  be  very  inter- 
esting were  there  a  word  of  truth  in  the  story.  But 
we  liked  our  guide  for  his  intelligence,  simplicity,  and 
for  the  pleasure  which  he  seemed  to  take,  as  an  epi- 
sode of  his  dull  daily  life,  in  talking  to  strangers.  He 
observed  that  the  castle  walls  were  solid,  and,  indeed, 
there  was  breadth  enough  to  drive  a  coach  and  four 
along  the  top ;  but  the  artillery  of  the  Crimea  would 
have  shelled  them  into  ruins  in  a  very  few  hours. 
"When  we  got  back  to  the  guard-house,  he  took  us  in- 
side, and  showed  the  dismal  and  comfortless  rooms 
where  soldiers  are  confined  for  drunkenness,  and  other 
offences  against  military  laws,  telling  us  that  he  him- 
self had  been  confined  there,  and  almost  perished  with 
cold.  I  should  not  much  wonder  if  he  were  to  get 
into  durance  again,  through  misuse  of  the  fee  which  I 
put  into  his  hand  at  parting. 

The  cathedral  is  at  no  great  distance  from  the  cas- 
tle ;  and  though  the  streets  are  mean  atid  sordid  in  the 
vicinity,  the  close  has  the  antique  repose  and  shadowy 
peace,  at  once  domestic  and  religious,  which  seem  pe- 
culiar and  universal  in  cathedral  closes.  The  founda- 
tion of  this  cathedral  church  is  very  ancient,  it  having 
been  the  church  portion  of  an  old  abbey,  the  refectory 
and  other  remains  of  which  are  still  seen  around  the 


466  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

close.     But  the  whole  exterior  of  the  btdlding,  except 
here  and  there  a  buttress,  and  one  old  patch  of  gray 
stones,  seems  to  have  been  renewed  within  a  very  few 
years  with  red  freestone  ;  and,  reaUy,  I  think  it  is  all 
the  more  beautiful  for  being  new,  —  the  ornamental 
parts  being  so  sharply  cut,  and  the  stone,  moreover, 
showing  various  shadings,  which  will  disappear  when 
it  gets  weather-worn.     There  is  a  very  large  and  fine 
east  window,  of  recent  construction,  wrought  with  del- 
icate stone  tracery.     The  door  of  the  south  transept 
stood  open,  though  barred  by  an  iron  grate.     We 
looked  in,  and  saw  a  few  monuments  on  the  wall,  but 
found  nobody  to  give  us  admittance.     The  portal  of 
thi3  entrance  is  very  lovely  with  wreaths  of  stone  foli- 
age and  flowers  round  the  arch,  recently  carved  ;  yet 
not  so  recently  but  that  the  swallows  have  given  their 
sanction  to  it,  as  if  it  were  a  thousand  years  old,  and 
have  built  their  nests  in  the  deeply  carved  recesses. 
While  we  were  looking,  a  little  bird  flew  into  the 
small  opening  between  two  of  these  petrified  flowers, 
behind  which  was  his  nest,  quite  out  of  sight.     After 
some  attempts  to  find  the  verger,  we  went  back  to  the 
hotel.  ... 

In  the  morning  my  wife  and  J went  back  to 

see  the  interior  of  the  cathedral,  while  I  strayed  at 
large  about  the  town,  again  passing  round  the  castle 
site,  and  thence  round  the  city,  where  I  found  some 
inconsiderable  portions  of  the  wall  which  once  girt  it 
about.  It  was  market-day  in  Carlisle,  and  the  princi- 
pal streets  were  much  thronged  with  human  life  and 
business  on  that  account ;  and  in  as  busy  a  street  as 
any  stands  a  marble  statue,  in  robes  of  antique  state, 
fitter  for  a  niche  in  Westminster  Abbey  than  for  the 
thronged  street  of  a  town.     It  is  a  statue  of  the  Earl 


1857.]  CARLISLE.  457 

of  Lonsdale,  Lord  Lieutenant  of  Cumberland,  who 
died  about  twenty  years  ago. 

[Here  follows  the  record  of  the  visits  to  the  "  Haunts 
of  Bums,"  already  published  in  "  Our  Old  Home."  — 
Ed.] 

GLASGOW. 

July  Ist  —  Immediately  after  our  arrival  yester- 
day we  went  out  and  inquired  our  way  to  the  cathe- 
dral, which  we  reached  through  a  good  deal  of  Scotch 
dirt,  and  a  rabble  of  Scotch  people  of  all  sexes  and 
ages.  The  women  of  Scotland  have  a  faculty  of  look- 
ing exceedingly  ugly  as  they  grow  old.  The  cathedral 
I  have  already  noticed  in  the  record  of  my  former 
visit  to  Scotland.  I  did  it  no  justice  then,  nor  shall 
do  it  any  better  justice  now;  but  it  is  a  fine  old  church 
although  it  makes  a  colder  and  severer  impression 
than  most  of  the  Gothic  architecture  which  I  have 
elsewhere  seen.  I  do  not  know  why  this  should  be 
so ;  for  portions  of  it  are  wonderfully  rich,  and  every- 
where there  are  arches  opening  beyond  arches,  and 
clustered  pillars  and  groined  roofs,  and  vistas,  length- 
ening along  the  aisles.  The  person  who  shows  it  is  an 
elderly  ^lan  of  jolly  aspect  and  demeanor ;  he  is  en- 
thusiastic about  the  edifice,  and  makes  it  the  thought 
and  object  of  his  life ;  and  being  such  a  merry  sort  of 
man,  always  saying  something  mirthfully,  and  yet,  in 
all  his  thoughts,  words,  and  actions,  having  reference 
to  this  solemn  cathedral,  he  has  the  effect  of  one  of 
the  corbels  or  gargoyles,  —  those  ludicrous,  strange 
sculptures  which  the  Gothic  architects  appended  to 
their  arches.  * 

The  upper  portion  of  the  minster,  though  very 
stately  and  beautiful,  is  not  nearly  so  extraordinary 


458  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1857. 

as  the  crypts.     Here  the  intricacy  of  the  arches,  and 
the  profound  system  on  which  they  are  arranged,  is  in- 
conceivable, even  when  you  see  them, — a  whole  cjom- 
pany  of  arches  uniting  in  one  keystone ;  arches  uniting 
to  form  a  glorious  canopy  over  the  shrine  or  tomb  of 
a  prelate ;  arches  opening  through  and  beyond  one  an- 
other, whichever  way  you  look,  —  all  amidst  a  shad- 
owy gloom,  yet  not  one  detail  wrought  out  the  less 
iSeautif  ully  and  delicately  because  it  could  scarcely  be 
seen.     The  wreaths  of  flowers  that  festoon  one  of  the 
arches  are  cut  in  such  relief  that  they  do  but  just  ad- 
here to  the  stone  on  which  they  grow*    The  pillars  are 
massive,  and  the  arches  very  low,  the  effect  being  a 
twilight,  which  at  first  leads  the  spectator  to  imagine 
himself  underground ;  but  by  and  by  I  saw  that  the 
sunshine  came  in  through  the  narrow  windows,  though 
it  scarcely  looked  like  sunshine  then.    For  many  years 
these  crypts  were  used  as  burial-ground,  and  earth 
was  brought  in,  for  the  purpose  of  making  graves  ;  so 
that  the   noble  columns  were  half  buried,  and  the 
beauty  of  the  architecture  quite  lost  and  forgotten. 
Now  the  dead  men's  bones  and  the  earth  that  covered 
them  have  all  been  removed,  leaving  the  original  pave- 
ment of  the  crypt,  or  a  new  one  in  its  stead,  with  only 
the  old  relics  of  saints,  martyrs,  and  heroes  under- 
neath, where  they  have  lain  so  long  that  they  have  be- 
come a  part  of  the  spot.  ...     I  was  quite  chilled 
through,  and  the  old  verger  regretted  that  we  had  not 
come  during  the  late  hot  weather,  when  the  everlast- 
ing damp  and  chiU  of  the  spot  would  have  made  us 
entirely  comfortable.     These  crypts  originated  in  the 
necessity  of  keeping  the  floor  of  the  upper  cathedral 
on  one  level,  the  edifice  being  built  on  a  declivity,  and 
the  height  of  the  crypt  being  measured  by  the  descent 
of  the  site. 


1857.]  GLASGOW.  459 

After  writing  the  above,  we  walked  out  and  saw 
something  of  the  newer  portion  of  Glasgow  ;  and, 
really,  I  am  inclined  to  think  it  the  stateliest  of  cities. 
The  Exchange  and  other  public  buildings,  and  the 
shops  in  Buchanan  Street,  are  very  magnificent ;  the 
latter  especially,  excelling  those  of  London.  There  is^ 
however,  a  pervading  sternness  and  grimness  result- 
ing from  the  dark  gray  granite,  which  is  the  imiversal 
building -material  both  of  the  old  and  new  edifices. 
Later  in  the  forenoon  we  again  walked  out,  and  went 
along  Argyle  Street,  and  through  the  Trongate  and 
the  Salt-Market.  The  two  latter  were  formerly  the 
principal  business  streets,  and,  together  with  High 
Street,  the  abode  of  the  rich  merchants  and  other 
great  people  of  the  town.  High  Street,  and,  still 
more,  the  Salt-Market,  now  swarm  with  the  lower  or- 
ders to  a  degree  which  I  never  witnessed  elsewhere ; 
so  that  it  is  difficult  to  make  one's  way  among  the 
sullen  and  unclean  crowd,  and  not  at  all  pleasant  to 
breathe  in  the  noisomeness  of  the  atmosphere.  The 
children  seem  to  have  been  unwashed  from  birth. 
Some  of  the  gray  houses  appear  to  have  once  been 
stately  and  handsome,  and  have  their  high  gable  ends 
notched  at  the  edges,  like  a  flight  of  stairs.  We  saw 
the  Tron  steeple,  and  the  statue  of  King  William  III., 
and  searched  for  the  Old  Tolbooth.  .  .  •  Wandering 
up  the  High  Street,  we  turned  once  more  into  the 
quadrangle  of  the  University,  and  mounted  a  broad 
stone  staircase  which  ascends  square,  and  with  right- 
angular  turns  on  one  comer,  on  the  outside  of  the  edi- 
fices. It  is  very  striking  in  appearance,  being  orna- 
mented with  a  balustrade,  on  which  are  large  globes 
of  stone,  and  a  great  lion  and  unicorn  curiously  sculp- 
tured on  the  opposite  side.     While  we  waited  here, 


460  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

staring  about  as,  a  man  approached,  and  offered  to 
show  us  the  interior.     He  seemed  to  be  in  charge  of 
the  College  buildings.     We  accepted  his  offer,  and 
were  led  first  up  this  stone  staircase,  and  into  a  large 
and  stately  hall,  panelled  high  towards  the  ceiling 
with  dark  oak,  and  adorned  with  elaborately  carved 
cornices,  and  other  wood -work.     There  was  a  long 
reading-table  towards  one  end  of  the  hall,  on  which 
were  laid  pamphlets  and  periodicals ;  and  a  venerable 
old  gentleman,  with  white  head  and  bowed  shoulders, 
sat  tiiere  reading  a  newspaper.    This  was  the  Princi- 
pal of  the  Uniyersity,  and  as  he  looked  towards  us 
graciously,  yet  as  if  expecting  some  explanation  of  our 
entrance,  I  approached  and  apologized  for  intruding 
on  the  plea  of  our  being  strangers  and  anxious  to  see 
the  College.     He  made  a  courteous  response,  though 
in  exceedingly  decayed  and  broken  accents,  being  now 
eighty-six  years  old,  and  gave  us  free  leave  to  inspect 
everything  that  was  to  be  seen.     This  hall  was  erected 
two  years  after  the  Restoration  of  Ch&rles  II.,  and 
has  been  the  scene,  doubtless,  of  many  ceremonials 
and  high  banquetings  since  that  period ;  and,  among 
other  illustrious  personages.  Queen  Victoria  has  hon- 
ored it  with  her  presence.     Thence  we  went  into  sev- 
eral recitation  or  lecture  rooms  in  various  parts  of  the 
buildings  ;  but  they  were  all  of  an  extreme  plainness, 
very  unlike  the  rich  old  Gothic  libraries  and  chapels 
and  halls  which   we   saw  in  Oxford.      Indeed,  the 
contrast  between  this  Scotch  severity  and  that  noble 
luxuriance,  and  antique  majesty,  and  rich  and  sweet 
repose  of  Oxford,  is  very  remarkable,  both  within  the 
edifices  and  without.     But  we  saw  one  or  two  curious 
things,  —  for  instance,  a  chair  of  mahogany,  elabo* 
lately  carved  with  the  arms  of  Scotland  and  oth^  de« 


K 


1857.]  .GLASGOW.  4Sl 

vices,  and  having  a  piece  of  the  kingly  stone  of  Scone 
inlaid  in  its  seat.  This  chair  is  used  by  the  Principal 
on  certain  high  occasions,  and  we  ourselves,  of  course, 
sat  down  in  it.  Our  guide  assigned  to  it  a  date  pre- 
posterously earlier  than  could  have  been  the  true  one, 
judging  either  by  the  character  of  the  carving  or  by 
the  fact  that  mahogany  has  not  been  known  or  used 
much  more  than  a  century  and  a  half. 

Afterwards  he  led  us  into  the  Divinity  Hall,  where, 
he  said,  there  were  some  old  portraits  of  historic  peo* 
pie,  and  among  them  an  original  picture  of  Mary 
Queen  of  Scots.  There  was,  indeed,  a  row  of  old  por- 
traits at  each  end  of  the  apartment, — for  instance, 
Zachariah  Boyd,  who  wrote  the  rhyming  version  of 
the  Bible,  which  is  slill  kept,  safe  from  any  critical 
eye,  in  the  library  of  the  University,  to  which  he  pre- 
sented this,  besides  other  more  valuable  benefactions, 
—  for  which  they  have  placed  his  bust  in  a  niche  in 
the  principal  quadrangle;  also,  John  Eiiox  makes 
one  of  the  row  of  portraits ;  and  a  dozen  or  two  more 
of  Scotch  worthies,  all  very  dark  and  dingy.  As  to 
the  picture  of  Mary  of  Scotland,  it  proved  to  be  not 
hers  at  all,  but  a  picture  of  Queen  Mary,  the  consort 
of  William  III.,  whose  portrait,  together  with  that  of 
her  sister,  Queen  Anne,  hangs  in  the  same  row.  We 
told  our  guide  this,  but  he  seemed  unwilling  to  accept 
it  as  a  fact.  There  is-  a  museum  belonging  to  the 
University ;  but  this,  for  some  reason  or  other,  could 
not  be  shown  to  us  just  at  this  time,  and  there  was 
little  else  to  show.  We  just  looked  at  the  gardens, 
but,  though  of  large  extent,  they  are  so  meagre  and 
bare  —  so  unlike  that  lovely  shade  of  the  Oxford  gar- 
dens — that  we  did  not  care  to  make  further  acquaint- 
ance with  them. 


462  ENGLISH  NOTE'-BOOKS,  [1857. 

Then  we  went  back  to  our  hotel,  and  if  there  were 
not  already  more  than  enough  of  description,  both 
past  and  to  come,  I  should  describe  George's  Square, 
on  one  side  of  which  the  hotel  is  situated.  A  tall 
column  rises  in  the  grassy  centre  of  it,  lifting  far  into 
the  upper  air  a  fine  statue  of  Sir  Walter  Scott,  which 
we  saw  to  great  advantage  last  night,  relieved  against 
the  sunset  sky;  and  there  are  statues  of  Sir  John 
Moore,  a  native  of  Glasgow,  and  of  James  Watt,  at 
comers  of  the  square.  Glasgow  is  certainly  a  noble 
city. 

After  lunch  we  embarked  on  board  the  steamer, 
and  came  up  the  Clyde.  Ben  Lomond,  and  other 
Highland  hills,  soon  appeared  on  the  horizon  ;  we 
passed  Douglas  Castle  on  a  point  of  land  projecting 
into  the  river ;  and,  passing  under  the  precipitous  . 
height  of  Dumbarton  Castle,  which  we  had  long  be- 
fore seen,  came  to  our  voyage's  end  at  this  village, 
where  we  have  put  up  at  the  Elephant  HoteL 

July  2d.  —  After  tea,  not  far  from  seven  o'clock,  it 
being  a  beautiful  decline  of  day,  we  set  out  to  walk  to 

DUMBAKTON  CASTLE, 

which  stands  apart  from  the  town,  and  is  said  to  have 
been  once  surrounded  by  the  waters  of  the  Clyde. 
The  rocky  height  on  which  the  castle  stands  is  a  very 
striking  object,  bulging  up  out  of  the  Clyde,  with  ab- 
rupt decision,  to  the  elevation  of  five  hundred  feet 
The  summit  is  cloven  in  twain,  the  cleft  reaching 
nearly  to  the  bottom  on  the  side  towards  the  river, 
but  not  coming  down  so  deeply  on  the  landward  side. 
It  is  precipitous  all  around ;  and  wherever  the  steep- 
ness admits,  or  does  not  make  assault  impossible,  there 


1857.]  DUMBARTON.  463 

are  gray  ramparts  round  the  hill,  with  cannon  threat- 
ening the  lower  world.  Oar  path  led  us  beneath  one 
of  these  precipices  several  hundred  feet  sheer  down, 
and  with  an  ivied  fragment  of  ruined  wall  at  the  top. 
A  soldier  who  sat  by  the  wayside  told  us  that  this  was 
called  the  "  Lover's  Leap,"  because  a  young  girl,  in 
some  love-exigency,  had  once  jumped  down  from  it, 
and  came  safely  to  the  bottom.  We  reached  the  castle 
gate,  which  is  near  the  shore  of  the  Clyde,  and  there 
found  another  artillery  soldier,  who  guided  us  through 
the  fortress.  He  said  that  there  were  now  but  about 
a  dozen  soldiers  stationed  in  the  castle,  and  no  officer. 
The  lowest  battery  looks  towards  the  river,  and  con- 
sists of  a  few  twelve-pound  cannon ;  but  probably  the 
chief  danger  of  attack  was  from  the  land,  and  the 
chief  pains  have  been  taken  to  render  the  castle  defen- 
sible in  that  quarter.  There  are  flights  of  stone  stairs 
ascending  up  through  the  natural  avenue,  in  the  cleft 
of  the  double-summited  rock ;  and  about  midway  there 
is  an  arched  doorway,  beneath  which  there  used  to  be 
a  portcullis,  —  so  that  if  an  enemy  had  won  the  lower 
part  of  the  fortress,  the  upper  portion  was  still  inac- 
cessible. Where  the  cleft  of  the  rock  widens  into  a 
gorge,  there  are  several  buildings,  old,  but  not  apper- 
taining to  the  ancient  castle,  which  has  almost  entirely 
disappeared.  We  ascended  both  summits,  and,  reach- 
ing the  loftiest  point  on  the  right,  stood  upon  the  foun- 
dation of  a  tower  that  dates  back  to  the  fifth  century, 
whence  we  had  a  glorious  prospect  of  Highlands  and 
Lowlands  ;  the  chief  object  being  Ben  Lomond,  with 
its  great  dome,  among  a  hundred  other  blue  and  misty 
hills,  with  the  sun  going  down  over  them  ;  and,  in  an- 
other direction,  the  Clyde,  winding  far  downward 
through  the  plain,  with   the   headland   of   Dumbeck 


464  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  [1857. 

close  at  hand,  and  Douglas  Castle  at  no  great  distance. 
On  the  ramparts  beneath  us  the  soldier  pointed  out 
the  spot  where  Wallace  scaled  the  wall,  climbing  an 
apparently  inaccessible  precipice,  and  taking  the  cas« 
tie.     The  principal  parts  of  the  ancient  castle  appear 
to  have  been  on  the  other  and  lower  summit  of   the 
hill,  and  thither  we  now  went,  and  traced  the  outline 
of  its  wall,  although  none  of  it  is  now  remaining. 
Here  is  the  magazine,  still  containing  some  powder, 
and  here  is  a  battery  of  eighteen-pound  guns,  with  pyr- 
amids of  balls,  all  in  readiness  against  an  assault; 
which,  however,  hardly  any  turn  of  human  affairs  can 
hereafter  bring  about.     The  appearance  of  a  fortress 
is  kept  up  merely  for  ceremony's  sake ;  and  these  can- 
non have  grown  antiquated.     Moreover,  as  the  soldier 
told  us,  they  are  seldom  or  never  fired,  even  for  pur- 
poses of  rejoicing  or  salute,  because  their  thunder  pro- 
duces the  singular  effect  of  depriving  the  garrison  of 
water.     There  is  a  large  tank,  and  the  concussion 
causes  the  rifts  of  the  stone  to  open,  and  thus  lets  the 
water  out.     Above  this  battery,  and  elsewhere  about 
the  fortress,  there  are  warders'  turrets  of  stone,  resem- 
bling great  pepper-bo:(es.     When  Dr.  Johnson  visited 
the  castle,  he  introdujoed  his  bulky  person  into  one  of 
these  narrow  receptacles,  and  found  it  difficult  to  get 
out  again.     A  gentleman  who  accompanied  him  was 
just  stepping  forward  to  offer  his  assistance,  but  Bos* 
well  whispered  him  to  take  no  notice,  lest  Johnson 
should  be  offended ;  so  they  left  him  to  get  out  as  he 
could.     He  did  finally  extricate  himself,  else  we  might 
have  seen  his  skeleton  in  the  turret.     Boswell  does 
not  tell  this  story,  which  seems  to  have  been  handed 
down  by  local  tradition. 

The  less  abrupt  declivities  of  the  rock  are  covwed 


1867.]  DUMBARTON.  466 

with  grass,  and  afford  food  for  a  few  sheep,  who  scam* 
per  about  the  heights,  and  seem  to  have  attained  the 
dexterity  of  goats  in  clambering,  I  never  knew  a 
purer  air  than  this  seems  to  be,  nor  a  h>yelier  golden 
sunset. 

Descending  into  the  gorge  again,  we  went  into  the 
armory,  which  is  in  one  of  th^  buildings  occupying 
the  space  between  the  two  hill-tops.  It  formerly  con- 
tained a  large  collection  of  arms ;  but  these  have  been 
removed  to  the  Tower  of  London,  and  there  are  now 
only  some  tattered  banners,  of  which  I  do  not  know 
the  history,  and  some  festoons  of  pistols,  and  grenades, 
shells,  and  grape  and  canister  shot,  kept  merely  as 
curiosities  ;  and,  far  more  interesting  than  the  above, 
a  few  battle-axes,  daggers,  and  spear-heads  from  the 
field  of  Bannockbum  ;  and,  more  interesting  still,  the 
sword  of  William  Wallace.  It  is  a  formidable-look- 
ing weapon,  made  for  being  swayed  with  both  hands, 
and,  with  its  hilt  on  ^the  floor,  reached  about  to  my 
chin ;  but  the  young  girl  who  showed  us  the  armory 
said  that  about  nine  inches  had  been  broken  off  the 
point.  The  blade  was  not  massive,  but  somewhat 
thin,  compared  with  its  great  length;  and  I  found 
that  I  could  brandish  it,  using  both  hands,  with  per- 
fect ease.  It  is  two-edged,  without  any  gaps,  and  is 
quite  brown  and  lustreless  with  old  rust,  from  point  to 
hilt. 

These  were  all  the  memorables  of  our  visit  to  Dum- 
barton Castle,  which  is  a  most  interesting  spot,  and 
connected  with  a  long  series  of  historical  events.  It 
was  first  besieged  by  the  Danes,  and  had  a  prominent 
share  in  all  the  warfare  of  Scotland,  so  long  as  the  old 
warlike  times  and  manners  lasted.  Our  soldier  was 
very  intelligent  and  courteous,  but,  as  usual  with  these 

vox*  VIII.  30 


466  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  •  [1857. 

guides,  was  somewhat  apocryphal  in  his  narrative ;  tell* 
ing  us  that  Mary  Queen  of  Scots  was  confined  here 
before  being  taken  to  England,  and  that  the  cells  in 
which  she  then  lived  are  still  extant,  under  one  of  the 
ramparts.  The  fact  is,  she  was  brought  here  when  a 
child  of  six  years  old,  before  going  to  France,  and 
doubtless  scrambled  up  and  down  these  heights  as 
freely  and  merrily  as  the  sheep  we  saw. 

We  now  returned  to  our  hotel,  a  very  nice  one,  and 
found  the  street  of  Dumbarton  all  alive  in  the  sununer 
evening  with  the  sports  of  children  and  the  gossip  of 
grown  people.  There  was  ahnost  no  night,  for  at 
twelve  o'clock  there  was  still  a  golden  daylight,  and 
Yesterday,  before  it  died,  must  have  met  the  Mor- 
row. 

In  the  lower  part  of  the  fortress  there  is  a  large 
sundial  of  stone,  which  was  made  by  a  French  officer 
imprisoned  here  during  the  Peninsular  War.  It  still 
numbers  faithfully  the  hours  that  are  sunny,  and  it  is 
a  lasting  memorial  of  him,  in  the  stronghold  of  his 
enemies. 

INVERANNAN. 

Evening.  —  After  breakfast  at  Dumbarton,  I  went 
out  to  look  at  the  town,  which  is  of  considerable  size, 
and  possesses  both  conmierce  and  manufactures.  There 
was  a  screw-steamship  at  the  pier,  and  many  sailor- 
looking  people  were  seen  about  the  streets.  There 
are  very  few  old  houses,  though  still  the  town  retains 
an  air  of  antiquity  which  one  does  not  well  see  how  to 
account  for,  when  everywhere  there  is  a  modem  front, 
and  all  the  characteristics  of  a  street  built  to-day 
Turning  from  the  main  thoroughfare,  I  crossed  a 
bridge  over  the  Clyde,  and  gained  from  it  the  best 


1857.]  UP  LOCH  LOMOND,  467 

view  of  the  cloven  crag  of  Dumbarton  Castle  that  I 
had  yet  found.  The  two  summits  are  wider  apart, 
more  fully  relieved  from  each  other,  than  when  seen 
from  other  points ;  and  the  highest  ascends  into  a  per- 
fect pyramid,  the  lower  one  being  obtusely  rounded. 
There  seem  to  be  iron-works,  or  some  kind  of  manu- 
factory, on  the  farther  side  of  the  bridge ;  and  I  no* 
ticed  a  quaint,  ch&teau-like  mansion,  with  hanging  tur- 
rets, standing  apart  from  the  street,  probably  built  by 
some  person  enriched  by  business. 

We  left  Dumbarton  at  noon,  taking  the  rail  to  Bal«^ 
loch,  and  the  steamer  to  the  head  of  Loch  Lomond. 

Wild  mountain  scenery  is  not  very  good  to  describe, 
nor  do  I  think  any  distinct  impressions  are  ever  con* 
veyed  by  such  attempts;  so  I  mean  to  be  brief  in  what 
I  saw  about  this  part  of  our  tour,  especially  as  I  sus- 
pect that  I  have  said  whatever  I  knew  how  to  say  in 
the  record  of  my  former  visit  to  the  Highlands.  As 
for  Loch  Lomond,  it  lies  amidst  very  striking  scenery, 
being  poured  in  among  the  gorges  of  steep  and  lofty 
mountains,  which  nowhere  stand  aside  to  give  it  room, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  do  flieir  best  to  shut  it  in.  It  is 
everywhere  narrow,  compared  with  its  length  of  thirty 
miles ;  but  it  is  the  beauty  of  a  lake  to  be  of  no 
greater  width  than  to  allow  of  the  scenery  of  one  of 
its  shores  being  perfectly  enjoyed  from  the  other. 
The  scenery  of  the  Highlands,  so  far  as  I  have  seen  it, 
cannot  properly  be  called  rich,  but  stem  and  impres- 
sive, with  very  hard  outlines,  which  are  unsoftened, 
mostly,  by  any  foliage,  though  at  this  season  they  are 
green  to  their  summits.  They  have  hardly  flesh 
enough  to  cover  their  bones,  —  hardly  earth  enough  to 
lie  over  their  rocky  substance,  —  as  may  be  seen  by 
the  minute  variety,  —  the  notched  and  jagged  appeaj> 


468  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS,  [1857. 

ance  of  the  profile  of  their  sides  and  tc^ ;  this  being 
caused  by  the  scarcely  covered  rocks  wherewith  these 
great  hills  are  heaped  together. 

Our  little  steamer  stopped  at  half  a  dozen  pla€3es  on 
its  voyage  up  the  lake,  most  of  them  being  stations 
where  hotels   have  been  established.      Morally,   the 
Highlands  must  have  been  more  completely  sophisti- 
cated by  the  invention  of  railways   and  steamboats 
than  almost  any  other  part  of  the  world ;  but  phys- 
ically it  can  have  wrought  no  great  change.     These 
mountains,  in  their  general  aspect,  must  be  very  much 
the  same  as  they  were  thousands  of  years  ago ;  for 
their  sides  never  were  capable  of  cultivation,  nor  even 
with  such  a  soil  and  so  bleak  an   atmosphere  could 
they  have  been  much  more  richly  wooded  than  we  see 
them  now.     They  seem  to  me  to  be  among  the  un- 
changeable things  of  nature,  like  the  sea  and  sky ;  but 
there  is  no   saying  what  use  human  ingenuity  may 
hereafter  put  them  to.     At  all  events,  I  have  no  doubt 
in  the  world  that  they  will  go  out  of  fashion  in  due 
time ;  for  the  taste  for  mountains  and  wild  scenery  is, 
with  most  people,  an  acquired  taste,  and  it  was  easy  to 
see  to-day  that  nine  people  in  ten  care  nothing  about 
them.     One  group  of  gentlemen  and  ladies  —  at  least, 
men  and  women  —  spent  the  whole  time  in  listening 
to  a  trial  for  murder,  which  was  read  aloud  by  one 
of  their  number  from  a  newspaper.     I  rather  imagine 
that  a  taste  for  trim  gardens  is  the  most  natural  and 
universal  taste  as  regards  landscape.     But  perhaps  it 
is  necessary  for  the  health  of  the  human  mind  and 
heart  that  there  should  be  a  possibility  of  taking  ref- 
uge in  what  is  wild  and  uncontaminated  by  any  med- 
dling of  man's  hand,  and  so  it  has  been  ordained  that 
science  shall  never  alter  the  aspect  of  the  sky,  whether 


1857.]  UP  LOCH  LOMOND,  469 

stem,  aiigry,  or  beneficent,  ^  nor  of  the  awful  sea, 
either  in  calm  or  tempest,  —  nor  of  these  rude  High- 
lands. But  they  will  go  out  of  general  fashion,  as  I 
have  said,  and  perhaps  the  next  fashionable  taste  will 
be  for  cloud  land,  —  that  is,  looking  skyward,  and  ob- 
serving the  wonderful  variety  of  scenery,  that  now 
constantly  passes  unnoticed,  among  the  clouds. 

At  the  head  of  the  lake,  we  found  that  there  was 
only  a  horse-cart  to  convey  our  luggage  to  tihe  hotel  at 
Inverannan,  and  that  we  ourselves  must  walk,  the  dis- 
tance being  two  miles.  It  had  sprinkled  occasionally 
during  our  voyage,  but»was  now  sunshiny,  and  not  ex- 
cessively warm ;  so  we  set  forth  contentedly  enough, 
and  had  an  agreeable  walk  along  an  almost  perfectly 
level  road  ;  for  it  is  one  of  the  beauties  of  these  hills, 
that  they  descend  abruptly  down,  instead  of  undulat- 
ing away  forever.  There  were  lofty  heights  on  each 
side  of  us,  but  not  so  lofty  as  to  have  won  a  distinc- 
tive name ;  and  adown  their  sides  we  could  see  the 
rocky  pathways  of  cascades,  which,  at  this  season,  are 
either  quite  dry,  or  mere  trickles  of  a  rUl.  The  hills 
and  valleys  abound  in  streams,  sparkling  through  peb- 
bly beds,  and  forming  here  and  there  a  dark  pool ; 
and  they  would  be  populous  with  trout  if  all  England, 
mth  one  fell  purpose,  did  not  come  hither  to  fish 
them.  A  fisherman  must  find  it  difficult  to  gratify 
his  propensities  in  these  days  ;  for  even  the  lakes  and 

streams  in  Norway  are  now  preserved.     J ,  by  the 

way,  threatens  ominously  to  be  a  fisherman.  He  rode 
the  latter  portion  of  the  way  to  the  hotel  on  the  lug- 
gage-cart ;  and  when  we  arrived,  we  found  that  he 
had  already  gone  off  to  catch  fish,  or  to  attempt  it  (for 
kbere  is  as  much  chance  of  his  catching  a  whale  as  a 
trout),  in  a  mountain  stream  neat  the  house.     I  went 


470  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857 

ill  search  of  him,*  but  without  success,  and  was  some- 
what startled  at  the  depth  and  blackness  of  some  of 
the  pools  into  which  the  stream  settled  itself  and  slept 
Finally,  he  came  in  while  we  were  at  dinner.  We  af- 
terwards walked  out  with  him,  to  let  him  play  at  fish- 
ing again,  and  discovered  on  the  bank  of  the  stream 
a  wonderful  oak,  with  as  many  as  a  doze/i  boles  spring- 
ing either  from  close  to  the  ground  or  within  a  foot  or 
two  of  it,  and  looking  like  twelve  separate  trees,  at 
least,  instead  of  one. 

INVERSNAID. 

July  Sd.  —  Last  night  seemed  to  close  in  clear,  and 
even  at  midnight  it  was  still  light  enough  to  read ;  but 
this  morning  rose  on  us  misty  and  chill,  with  spatter- 
ing showers  of  rain.     Clouds  momentarily  settled  and 
shifted  on  the  hill-tops,  shutting  us  in  even  more  com- 
pletely than  these  steep  and  rugged  green  walls  would 
be  sure  to  do,  even   in  the  clearest  weather.     Often 
these  clouds  came  down  and  enveloped  us  in  a  drizzle, 
or  rather  a  shower,  of  such  minute  drops  that  they  had 
not  weight  enough   to   fall.     This,  I  suppose,  was  a 
genuine  Scotch  mist ;  and  as  such  it  is  well  enough  to 
have  experienced  it,  though  I  would  willingly  never 
see  it  again.     Such  being  the  state  of  the  weatiier,  my 
wife  did  not  go  out  at  all,  but  I  strolled  about  the 
premises,  in  the  intervals  of  rain-drops,  gazing  up  at 
the  hill-sides,  and  recognizing  that  there  is  a  vast  va- 
riety of  shape,  of  light  and   shadow,  and   incidental 
circumstance,  even  in  what   looks   so  monotonous  at 
first  as  the  green  slope  of  a  hill.     The  little  rills  that 
come  down  from  the  summits  were  rather  more  dis- 
tinguishable than  yesterday,  having  been  refreshed  by 
the  night's  rain  ;  but  stiU  they  were  very  much  out  of 


1867.]  INVERSNAID.  471 

proportion  with  the  wide  pathways  of  bare  rock  adown 
which  they  ran.  These  little  rivulets,  no  doubt,  often 
lead  through  the  wildest  scenery  that  is  to  be  found  in 
the  Highlands,  or  anywhere  else,  and  to  the  formation 
and  wildness  of  which  they  have  greatly  contributed 
by  sawing  away  for  countless  ages,  and  thus  deepening 
the  ravines. 

I  suspect  the  American  clouds  are  more  picturesque 
than  those  of  Great  Britain,  whatever  our  mountains 
may  be ;  at  least,  I  remember  the  Berkshire  hills  look- 
ing grander,  under  the  influence  of  mist  and  cloud, 
than  the  Highlands  did  to-day.  Our  clouds  seem  to 
be  denser  and  heavier,  and  more  decided,  and  form 
greater  contrasts  of  light  and  shade.  I  have  remarked' 
in  England  that  the  cloudy  firmament,  even  on  a  day 
of  settled  rain,  always  appears  thinner  than  those  I 
had  been  accustomed  to  at  home,  so  as  to  deceive  me 
with  constant  expectations  of  better  weather.  It  has 
been  the  same  to-day.  Whenever  I  looked  upward,  I 
thought  it  might  be  going  to  clear  up  ;  but,  instead  of 
that,  it  began  to  rain  more  in  earnest  after  midday, 
and  at  half  past  two  we  left  Inverannan  in  a  smart 
shower.  At  the  head  of  the  lake,  we  took  the 
steamer,  with  the  rain  pouring  more  heavily  than  ever, 
and  landed  at  Inversnaid  under  the  same  dismal  au- 
spices. We  left  a  very  good  hotel  behind  us,  and 
have  come  to  another  that  seems  also  good.  We  are 
more  picturesquely  situated  at  this  spot  than  at  Inver- 
annan, our  hotel  being  within  a  short  distance  of  the 
lake  shore,  with  a  glen  just  across  the  water,  which 
will  doubtless  be  worth  looking  at  when  the  mist  per. 
mits  us  to  see  it.  A  good  many  tourists  were  stand* 
ing  about  the  door  when  we  arrived,  and  looked  at  us 
with  the  curiosity  of  idle  and  weather-bound  people- 


472  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  [1857. 

The  lake  is  here  narrow,  but  a  hundred  fathoms  deep  ; 
BO  that  a  great  part  of  the  l^ight  of  i^e  mountains 
which  beset  it  roimd  is  hidden  beneath  its  surface. 

Jvly  ^th.  —  This  morning  opened  still  misty,  but 
with  a  more  hopeful  promise  than  yesterday,  and  when 
I  went  out,  after  breakfast,  there  were  gleams  of  sun- 
shine here  and  there  on  the  hill-sides,  falling  one  did 
not  exactly  see  how,  through  the  volmnes  of  cloud. 
Close  beside  the  hotel  of  Inversnaid  is  the  wateri^l ; 
all  night,  my  room  being  on  that  side  of  the  house^  I 
had  heard  its  voice,  and  now  I  ascended  beside  it  to  a 
point  where  it  is  crossed  by  a  wooden  bridge.     There 
is  thence  a  view,  upward  and  downward,  of  the  most 
striking  descents  of  the  river,  as  I  believe  they  call  it, 
though  it  is  but  a  mountain -stream,  whidi  tumbles 
down  an  irregular  and  broken  staircase  in  its  headlong 
haste  to  reach  the  lake.     It  is  very  picturesque,  how- 
ever, with  its  ribbons  of  white  foam  over  the  precipi- 
tous steps,  and  its  deep  black  pools,  overhung  by  black  . 
rocks,  which  reverberate  the  rumble  of  the  falling  wa- 
ter.    J and  I  ascended  a  little  distance  alcmg  the 

cascade,  and  then  turned  aside ;  he  going  up  the  hill, 
and  I  taking  a  path  along  its  side  whidi  gave  me  a 
view  across  the  lake.  I  rather  think  this  particular 
stretch  of  Loch  Lomond,  in  front  of  Inversnaid,  is  the 
most  beautiful  lake  and  mountain  view  that  I  have 
ever  seen.  It  is  so  shut  in  that  you  can  see  nothing 
beyond,  nor  would  suspect  anything  more  to  exist  than 
this  watery  vale  among  the  hills ;  except  that,  directly 
opposite,  there  is  the  beautiful  glen  of  Inverugkss, 
which  winds  away  among  the  feet  of  Bwi  Crook,  Ben 
Ein,  Ben  Vain,  and  Ben  Voirlich,  standing  mist-in« 
wreathed  together.     The  mists,  this  morning,  had  ft 


1857.]  INVERSNAID.  473 

very  soft  and  beautiful  effect,  and  made  the  mountains 
tenderer  than  I  have  hitherto  felt  them  to  be;  and 
they  lingered  about  their  heads  like  morning-dreams 
flitting  and  retiring,  and  letting  the  sunshine  in,  and 
snatching  it  away  again.  My  wife  came  up,  and  we 
enjoyed  it  together,  till  the  steamer  came  smoking  its 
pipe  along  the  loch,  stopped  to  land  some  passengers, 
and  stesuned  away  again.  While  we  stood  there,  a 
Highlander  passed  by  us,  with  a  very  dark  tartan,  and 
bare  shanks,  most  enormously  calved.  I  presume  he 
wears  the  dress  for  the  sole  purpose  of  displaying  those 
stalwart  legs;  for  he  proves  to  be  no  genuine  Gael, 
but  a  manufacturer,  who  has  a  shooting-box,  or  a  share 
in  one,  on  the  hill  above  the  hotel. 

We  now  engaged  a  boat,  and  were  rowed  to  Rob 
Roy's  cave,  which  is  perhaps  half  a  mile  distant  up 
the  lake.  The  shores  look  much  more  striking  from 
a  row-boat,  creeping  along  near  the  margin,  than  from 
a  steamer  in  the  middle  of  the  loch ;  and  the  ridge, 
beneath  which  Rob's  cave  lies,  is  precipitous  with  gray 
rocks,  and  clothed,  too,  with  thick  foliage.  Over  the 
cave  itself  there  is  a  huge  ledge  of  rock,  from  which 
immense  fragments  have  tumbled  down,  ages  and  ages 
ago,  and  fallen  together  in  such  a  way  as  to  leave  a 
large  irregular  crevice  in  Rob  Roy's  cave.  We  scram- 
bled up  to  its  mouth  by  some  natural  stairs,  and  scram- 
bled down  into. its  depths  by  the  aid  of  a  ladder.  I 
suppose  I  have  already  described  this  hole  in  the  rec- 
ord of  my  former  visit.  Certainly,  Rob  Roy,  and 
Robert  Bruce,  who  is  said  to  have  inhabited  it  before 
him,  were  not  to  be  envied  their  accommodations ;  yet 
these  were  not  so  very  intolerable  when  compared  with 
a  Highland  cabin,  or  with  cottages  such  as  Bums 
lived  in. 


474  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1857. 

J had  chosen  to  remain  to  fish.    On  our  return 

from  the  cave,  we  found  that  he  had  caught  nothing ; 
but  just  as  we  stepped  into  the  boat,  a  fish  drew  his 

float  far  under  water,  and  J tugging  at  one  end  of 

the  line,  and  the  fish  at  the  other,  the  latter  escaped, 

with  the  hook  in  his  mouth.     J avers  that  he  saw 

the  fish,  and  gives  its  measurement  as  about  eighteen 
inches;  but  the  fishes  that  escape  us  are  always  of 
tremendous  size.  The  boatman  thought,  however,  that 
it  might  have  been  a  pike. 

THE  TROSACHS'   HOTEL. — ABDCHEANOGHBOCHAN. 

Jvly  5th. —  .  .  .  Not  being  able  to  get  a  post- 
chaise,  we  took  places  in  the  omnibus  for  the  head  of 
Loch  Katrine.     Going  up  to  pay  a  parting  visit  to  the 

waterfall  before  starting,  I  met  with  Miss  C ,  as 

she  lately  was,  who  is  now  on  her  wedding-tour  as 

Mrs.  B .     She  was  painting  the  falls  in  oil,  with 

good  prospect  of  a  successful  picture.    She  came  down 

to  the  hotel  to  see  my  wife,  and  soon  afterwards  J 

and  I  set  out  to  ascend  the  steep  hill  that  comes  down 
upon  the  lake  of  Inversnaid,  leaving  the  omnibus  to 
follow  at  leisure.  The  Highlander  who  took  us  to  Rob 
Roy's  cave  had  foreboded  rain,  from  the  way  in  which 
the  white  clouds  hung  about  the  mountain-tops ;  nor 
was  his  augury  at  fault,  for  just  at  three  o'clock,  the 
time  he  foretold,  there  were  a  few  rain-drops,  and  a 
more  defined  shower  during  the  afternoon,  while  we 
were  on  Loch  Katrine.     The  few  drops,  however,  did 

not  disturb  us ;  and,  reaching  the  top  of  the  hill,  J 

and  I  turned  aside  to  examine  the  old  stone  fortress 
which  was  erected  in  this  mountain  pass  to  bridle  the 
Highlanders  after  the  rebellion  of  1745.  It  stands  in 
a  very  desolate  and  dismal  situation,  at  the  foot  of  long 


1857. J  OLD  STONE  FORTRESS.  476 

bare  slopes,  on  mossy  ground,  in  the  midst  of  a  dis- 
heartening loneliness,  only  picturesque  because  it  is  so 
exceedingly  ungenial  and  unlovely.  The  chief  inter- 
est of  this  spot  is  the  fact  that  Wolfe,  in  his  earlier 
military  career,  was  stationed  here.  The  fortress  was 
a  very  plain  structure,  built  of  rough  stones,  in  the 
form  of  a  parallelogram,  one  side  of  which  I  paced, 
and  found  it  between  thirty  and  forty  of  my  paces 
long.  The  two  ends  have  fallen  down ;  the  two  sides 
that  remain  are  about  twenty  feet  high,  and  have  little 
port-holes  for  defence,  but  no  openings  of  the  size  of 
windows.  The  roof  is  gone,  and  the  interior  space 
overgrown  with  grass.  Two  little  girls  were  at  play 
in  one  comer,  and,  going  round  to  the  rear  of  the  ruin, 
I  saw  that  a  small  Highland  cabin  had  been  built 
against  the  wall.  A  dog  sat  in  the  doorway,  and  gave 
notice  of  my  approach,  and  some  hens  kept  up  their 
peculiarly  domestic  converse  about  the  door. 

We  kept  on  our  way,  often  looking  back  towards 
Loch  Lomond,  and  wondering  at  the  grandeur  which 
Ben  Vain  and  Ben  Voirlich,  and  the  rest  of  the  Ben 
fraternity,  had  suddenly  put  on.  The  mists  which  had 
hung  about  them  all  day  had  now  descended  lower, 
and  lay  among  the  depths  and  gorges  of  the  hills, 
where  also  the  sun  shone  softly  down  among  them,  and 
filled  those  deep  mountain  laps,  as  it  were,  with  a  dim- 
mer sunshine.  Ben  Vain,  too,  and  his  brethren,  had  a 
veil  of  mist  all  about  them,  which  seemed  to  render 
them  really  transparent ;  and  they  had  unaccountably 
grown  higher,  vastly  higher,  than  when  we  viewed 
them  from  the  shore  of  the  lake.  It  was  as  if  we  were 
looking  at  them  through  the  medium  of  a  poet's  imag- 
ination. All  along  the  road,  since  we  left  Inversnaid, 
there  had  been  the  stream,  which  there  formed  the 


476  ENGLISH  NOTE^BOOKS.  [1867. 

waterfall,  and  which  here  was  brawling  down  little  de- 
clivities, and  sleeping  in  black  pools,  which  we  dis- 
turbed by  flinging  stones  into  them  from  the  roadside. 
We  passed  a  drunken  old  gentleman,  who  civilly  bade 
me  "  Good  day  " ;  and  a  man  and  woman  at  work  in  a 
field,  the  former  of  whom  shouted  to  inquire  the  hour ; 
and  we  had  come  in  sight  of  little  Loch  Arklet  before 
the  omnibus  came  up  with  us.  It  was  about  five 
o'clock  when  we  reached  the  head  of 

LOCH    KATBINE, 

and  went  on  board  the  steamer  Rob  Roy ;  and,  setting 
forth  on  our  voyage,  a  Highland  piper  made  music 
for  us  the  better  part  of  the  way. 

We  did  not  see  Loch  Katrine,  perhaps,  under  its 
best  presentment ;  for  the  surface  was  roughened  with 
a  little  wind,  and  darkened  even  to  inky  blackness  by 
the  clouds  that  overhung  it.     The  hill-tops,  too,  wore 
a  very  dark  frown.     A  lake  of  this  size  cannot  be  ter- 
rific, and  is  therefore  seen  to  best  advantage  when  it 
is  beautiful.     The  scenery  of  its  shores  is  not  alto- 
gether so  rich  and  lovely  as  I  had  preimagined ;  not 
equal,  indeed,  to  the  best  parts  of  Loch  Lomond,  — 
the  hills  being  lower  and  of  a  more  ridgy  shape,  and 
exceedingly  bare,  at  least  towards  the  lower  end.    But 
they  turn  the  lake  aside  wit^  headland  after  headland, 
and  shut  it  in  closely,  and  open  one  vista  after  an- 
other, so  that  the  eye  is  never  weary,  and,  least  of  all, 
as  we  approach  the  end.     The  length  of  the  loch  is 
ten  miles,  and  at  its  termination  it  meets  the  pass  of 
the  Trosachs,  between  Ben  An  and  Ben  Venue,  which 
are  the  rudest  and  shaggiest  of  hills.     Hie  steamer 
passes  Ellen's  Isle,  but  to  the  right,  which  is  the  side 
Dpposite  to  that  on  which  Fitz-James  must  be  sup* 


1857.]  THE   TROSACHS.  477 

posed  to  hav6  approached  it.  It  is  a  very  small  isl- 
and, situated  where  the  loch  narrows,  and  is  perhaps 
less  than  a  quarter  of  a  mile  distant  from  either  shore. 
It  looks  like  a  lump  of  rock,  with  just  soil  enough  to 
support  a  crowd  of  dwarf  oaks,  birches,  and  firs,  which 
do  not  grow  so  high  as  to  be  shadowy  trees.  Our 
voyage  being  over,  we  landed,  and  found  two  omni- 
buses, one  of  which  took  us  through  the  famous  pass 
of  the  Trosachs,  a  distance  of  a  mile  and  a  quarter, 
to  a  hotel,  erected  in  castellated  guise  by  Lord  Wil- 
loughby  d'Eresby.  We  were  put  into  a  parlor  within 
one  of  the  round  towers,  panelled  all  round,  and  with 
four  narrow  windows,  opening  through  deep  embra- 
sures. No  play-castle  was  ever  more  like  the  reality, 
and  it  is  a  very  good  hotel,  like  all  that  we  have  had 
experience  of  in  the  Highlands.  After  tea  we  walked 
out,  and  visited  a  little  kirk  that  stands  near  the  shore 
of  Loch  Achray,  at  %  good  point  of  view  for  seeing 
the  hills  round  about. 

This  morning  opened  cloudily  ;  but  after  breakfast 
I  set  out  alone,  and  walked  through  the  pass  of  the 
Trosachs,  and  thence  by  a  path  along  the  right  shore 
of  the  lake.  It  is  a  very  picturesque  and  beautiful 
path,  following  the  windings  of  the  lake,  —  now  along 
the  beach,  now  over  an  impending  bank,  until  it  comes 
opposite  to  Ellen's  Isle,  which  on  this  side  looks  more 
worthy  to  be  the  island  of  the  poem  than  as  we  first 
saw  it.  Its  shore  is  craggy  and  precipitous,  but  there 
was  a  point  where  it  seemed  possible  to  land,  nor  was 
it  too  much  to  fancy  that  there  might  be  a  rustic  habi- 
tation among  the  shrubbery  of  this  rugged  spot.  It  is 
foolish  to  look  into  these  matters  too  strictly.  Scott 
evidently  used  as  much  freedom  with  his  natural  scen- 
ery as  he  did  with  his  historic  incidents ;  and  he  could 


478  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  £1857. 

have  made  nothing  of  either  one  or  the  other  if  he  had 
been  more  scrupulous  in  his  arrangement  and  adorn- 
ment of  them.  In  his  description  of  the  Trosachs,  he 
has  produced  something  very  beautiful,  and  as  true  as 
possible,  though  certainly  its  beauty  has  a  little  of  the 
scene-painter's  gloss  on  it.  Nature  is  better,  no  doubt, 
but  Nature  cannot  be  exactly  reproduced  on  canvas  or 
in  print;  and  the  artist's  only  resource  is  to  substi- 
tute something  that  may  stand  instead  of  and  suggest 
the  truth. 

The  path  still  kept  onward,  after  passing  Ellen's 
isle,  and  I  followed  it,  finding  it  wilder,  more  shadowy 
with  overhanging  foliage  of  trees,  old  and  young,  — 
more  like  a  mountain-path  in  Berkshire  or  New  Hamp- 
shire, yet  still  with  an  Old  World  restraint  and  culti- 
vation about  it,  —  the  farther  I  went.     At  last  I  came 
upon  some  bars,  and  though  the  track  was  still  seen 
beyond,  I  took  this  as  a  hint  to  stop,  especially  as  I 
was  now  two  or  three  miles  from  the  hotel,  and  it  just 
then  began  to  rain.     My  umbrella  was  a  poor  one  at 
best,  and  had  been  tattered  and  turned  inside  out,  a 
day  or  two  ago,  by  a  gust  on  Loch  Lomond ;  but  I 
spread  it  to  the  shower,  and,  furthermore,  took  shelter 
under  the  thickest  umbrage  I  could  find.     The  rain 
came  straight  down,  and  bubbled  in  the  loch  ;  the  lit- 
tle rills  gathered  force,  and  plashed  merrily  over  the 
stones ;  die  leaves  of  the  trees  condensed  the  shower 
into  large  drops,  and  shed  them  down  upon  me  where 
I  stood.     Still  I  was  comfortable  enough  in  a  thick 
Skye  Tweed,  and  waited  patiently  till  the  rain  abated,* 
then  took  my  way  homeward,  and  admired  the  pass  of 
the  Trosachs  more  than  when  I  first  traversed  it.    If 
it  has  a  fault,  it  is  one  that  few  scenes  in  Grreat  Brit- 
ladn  share  with  it,  —  that  is,  the  trees  and  shrubbery 


1857.]  THE   TROSACHS.  479 

vrith  which  the  precipices  are  shagged,  conceal  them  a 
little  too  much.  A  crag,  streaked  with  black  and 
i^hite,  here  and  there  shows  its  head  aloft,  or  its  whole 
height  from  base  to  smnmit,  and  suggests  that  more  of 
such  sublimity  is  hidden  than  revealed.  I  think,  how- 
ever, that  it  is  this  unusual  shagginess  which  made  the 
scene  a  favorite  with  Scott,  and  with  the  people  on 
this  side  of  the  ocean  generally.  There  are  many 
scenes  as  good  in  America,  needing  only  the  poet. 

Jvly  Qth.  —  We  dined  yesterday  at  the  table  cChdte^ 
at  the  suggestion  of  the  butler,  in  order  to  give  less 
trouble  to  the  servants  of  the  hotel,  and  afford  them 
an  opportimity  to  go  to  kirk.  The  dining-room  is  in 
accordance  with  the  rest  of  the  architecture  and  fit- 
tings up  of  the  house,  and  is  a  very  good  reproduction 
of  an  old  baronial  hall,  with  high  panellings  and  a 
roof  of  dark,  polished  wood.  There  were  about  twenty 
guests  at  table ;  knd  if  they  and  the  waiters  had  been 
dressed  in  mediaeval  costume,  we  might  have  imagined 
ourselves  banqueting  in  the  Middle  Ages. 

After  dinner  we  all  took  a  walk  through  the  Tro- 
sachs'  pass  again,  and  by  the  right-hand  path  along 
the  lake  as  far  as  Ellen's  Isle.  It  was  very  pleasant, 
there  being  gleams  of  calm  evening  sunshine  gilding 
the  mountain-sides,  and  putting  a  golden  crown  occa- 
sionally on  the  head  of  Ben  Venue.  It  is  wonderful 
how  many  aspects  a  mountain  has,  —  how  many  moun- 
tains there  are  in  every  single  mountain !  —  how  they 
vary,  too,  in  apparent  attitude  and  bulk.  When  we 
leached  the  lake  its  surface  was  almost  unruffled,  ex- 
cept by  now  and  then  the  narrow  pathway  of  a  breeze, 
as  if  the  wing  of  an  unseen  spirit  had  just  grazed  it  in 
flitting  across.     The  scene  was  very  beautiful,  and,  on 


480  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

the  whole.  I  do  not  know  that  Walter  Scott  has  over- 
charged  his  description,  although  he  has  symbolized 
the  reality  by  types  and  images  which  it  miglit  not 
precisely  suggest  to  other  minds.  We  were  reluctant 
to  quit  the  spot,  and  cherish  still  a  hope  of  seeing  it 
again,  though  the  hope  does  not  seem  very  likely  to 
be  gratified. 

This  was  a  lowering  and  sullen  morning,  but  soon 
after  breakfast  I  took  a  walk  in  the  opposite  directioii 
to  Loch  Katrine,  and  reached  the  Brig  of  Turk,  a  lit- 
tle beyond  which  is  the  new  Trosachs'  Hotel,  and  the 
little  rude  village  of  Duncraggan,  consisting  of  a  few 
hovels  of  stone,  at  the  foot  of  a  bleak  and  dreary  hill 
To  the  left,  stretching  up  between  this  and  other  hills, 
is  the  valley  of  Glenfinlas,  —  a  very  awful  l*egion  in 
Scott's  poetry  and  in  Highland  tradition,  as  the  haimt 
of  spirits  and  enchantments.      It  presented  a   very 
desolate  prospect.     The  walk  back  to  the  Trosachs 
showed  me  Ben  Venue  and  Ben  Ah  under  new  as- 
pects, —  the  bare  summit  of  the  latter  rising  in  a  per- 
fect pyramid,  whereas,  from  other  points  of  view,  it 
looks  like  quite  a  different  moimtain.     Sometimes  a 
gleam  of  sunshine  came  out  upon  the  rugged  side  of 
Ben  Venue,  but  his  prevailing  mood,  like  that  of  the 
rest  of  the  landscape,  was  stem  and  gloomy.     I  wish 
I  could  give  an  idea  of  the  variety  of  surface  upon  one 
of  these  hill-sides,  —  so  bulging  out  and  hollowed  in, 
so  bare  where  the  rock  breaks  through,  so  shaggy  in 
other  places  with  heath,  and  then,  perhaps,  a  thick 
umbrage  of  birch,  oak,  and  ash,  ascending  from  the 
base  high  upward.     When  I  think  I  have  described 
them,  I  remember  quite  a  different  aspect,  and  find  it 
equally  true,  and  yet  lacking  something  to  make  it  the 
whole  or  an  adequate  truth. 


1857.]  BRIG   OF  ALLAN.  481 

J had  gone  with  me   part  of  the  way,   but 

stopped  to  fish  with  a  pin-hook  in  Loch  Achray, 
which  bordered  along  our  path.  When  I  returned, 
I  found  him  much  elated  at  having  caught  a  fish, 
which,  however,  had  got  away,  carrying  his  pin-hook 
along  with  it.  Then  he  had  amused  himself  with 
taking  some  lizards  by  the  tail,  and  had  collected 
several  in  a  small  hollow  of  the  rocks.  We  now 
walked  home  together,  and  at  half  past  three  we  took 
our  seats  in  a  genuine  old-fashioned  stage-coach,  of 
which  there  are  few  specimens  now  to  be  met  with. 
The  coachman  was  smartly  dressed  in  the  Queen's 
scarlet,  and  was  a  very  pleasant  and  affable  person- 
age, conducting  himself  towards  the  passengers  with 
courteous  authority.     Inside  we  were  four,  including 

J ,  but  on  the  top  there  were  at  least  a  dozen,  and 

I  would  willingly  have  been  there  too,  but  had  taken 
an  inside  seat,  under  apprehension  of  rain,  and  was 
not  allowed  to  change  it.  Our  drive  was  not  marked 
by  much  describable  incident.  On  changing  horses  at 
Callander,  we  alighted,  and  saw  Ben  Ledi  behind  us, 
making  a  picturesque  background  to  the  little  town, 
which  seems  to  be  the  meeting-point  of  the  Highlands 
and  Lowlands.'  We  again  changed  horses  at  Doune, 
an  old  town,  which  would  doubtless  have  been  well 
worth  seeing,  had  time  permitted.  Thence  we  kept 
on  till  the  coach  drew  up  at  a  spacious  hotel,  where 
we  alighted,  fancying  that  we  had  reached  Stirling, 
which  was  to  have  been  our  journey's  end ;  but  after 
fairly  establishing  ourselves,  we  found  that  it  was  the 

BRIG  OF  ALLAN. 

The  place  is  three  miles  short  of  Stirling.  Neverthe- 
less, we  did  not  much  regret  the  mistake,  finding  that 

VOL.  VIII.  31 


482  ENGLISH  NOTE--BOOKS.  [1857. 

the  Brig  of  Allan  is  the  principal  Spa  of  Scotland, 
and  a  very  pleasant  spot,  to  all  outward  appearance. 
After  tea  we  walked  out,  both  up  and  down  the  vil- 
lage street,  and  across  the  bridge,  and  up  a  gentle 
eminence  beyond  it,  whence  we  had  a  fine  view  of  a 
glorious  plain,  out  of  which  rose  several  insulated 
headlands.  One  of  tibese  was  the  height  on  which 
stands  Stirling  Castle,  and  which  reclines  on  the  plain 
like  a  hound  or  a  lion  or  a  sphinx,  holding  the  castle 
on  the  highest  part,  where  its  head  should  be.  A  mile 
or  two  distant  from  this  picturesque  hill  rises  another, 
still  more  striking,  called  the  Abbey  Craig,  on  which 
is  a  ruin,  and  where  is  to  be  built  the  monument  to 
William  Wallace,  I  cannot  conceive  a  nobler  or 
more  fitting  pedestal.  The  suUenness  of  the  day  had 
vanished,  the  air  was  cool  but  invigorating,  and  the 
cloud  scenery  was  as  fine  as  that  below  it.  .  .  .  Though 
it  was  nearly  ten  o'clock,  the  boys  of  the  village  were 
in  full  shout  and  play,  for  these  long  and  late  summer 
evenings  keep  the  children  out  of  bed  interminably. 

STIRLING. 

July  1th,  — We  bestirred  ourselves  early  this  mom* 
ing,  .  .  .  and  took  the  rail  for  Stirling  before  eight. 
It  is  but  a  few  minutes'  ride,  so  that  doubtless  we 
were  earlier  on  the  field  than  if  we  had  slept  at  Stir- 
ling. After  our  arrival  our  first  call  was  at  the  post- 
office,  where  I  found  a  large  package  containing  let- 
ters from  America,  but  none  from  U .     We  then 

went  to  a  bookseller's  shop,  and  bought  some  views 
of  Stirling  and  the  neighborhood ;  and  it  is  surprising 
what  a  quantity  and  variety  of  engravings  there  are 
of  every  noted  place  that  we  have  visited.  You  sel- 
dom find  two  sets  alike.     It  is  rather  nauseating  to 


ia57.]  STIRLING,  483 

find  that  what  you  came  to  see  has  already  been 
looked  at  in  all  its  lights,  over  and  over  again,  with 
thousand-fold  repetition ;  and,  beyond  question,  its 
depictment  in  words  has  been  attempted  still  oftener 
than  with  the  pencil.  It  will  be  worth  while  to  go 
back  to  America,  were  it  only  for  the  chance  of  find- 
ing a  stiU  virgin  scene. 

We  climbed  the  steep  slope  of  the  Castle  Hill, 
sometimes  passing  an  antique  -  looking  house,  with  a 
high,  notched  gable,  perhaps  with  an  ornamented 
front,  until  we  came  to  the  sculptures  and  battle- 
mented  waU,  with  an  archway,  that  stands  just  below 
the  castle.  ...  A  shabby-looking  man  now  accosted 
us,  and  could  hardly  be  shaken  off.  I  have  met  with 
several  such  boors  in  my  experience  of  sight-seeing. 
He  kept  along  with  us,  in  spite  of  all  hints  to  the 
contrary,  and  insisted  on  pointing  out  objects  of  in- 
terest. He  showed  us  a  house  in  Broad  Street,  below 
the  castle  and  cathedral,  which  he  said  had  once  been 
inhabited  by  Henry  Darnley,  Queen  Mary's  husband. 
There  was  little  or  nothing  peculiar  in  its  appearance ; 
a  large,  gray,  gabled  house  standing  lengthwise  to  the 
street,  with  three  windows  in  the  roof,  and  connected 
with  other  houses  on  each  side.  Almost  directly 
across  the  street,  he  pointed  to  an  archway,  through 
the  side  of  a  house,  and,  peeping  through  it,  we  found 
a  soldier  on  guard  in  a  court-yard,  the  sides  of  which 
were  occupied  by  an  old  mansion  of  .the  Argyle  family, 
having  towers  at  the  comers,  with  conical  tops,  like 
those  reproduced  in  the  hotel  at  the  Trosachs.  It  is 
now  occupied  as  a  military  hospital.  Shaking  off  our 
self-inflicted  guide,  we  now  made  our  way  to  the  castle 
parade,  and  to  the  gateway,  where  a  soldier  with  a 
tremendously  red  nose  and  two  medals  at  once  took 
charge  of  us. 


i84  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

Beyond  all  doubt,  I  have  written  quite  as  good  a 
description  of  the  castle  and  Carse  of  Stirling  in  a 
former  portion  of  my  journal  as  I  can  now  write.    We 
passed   through  the  outer  rampart  of  Queen  Anne; 
through  the  old  round  gate-tower  of  an  earlier  day,  and 
beneath  the  vacant  arch  where  the  portcullis  used  to 
fall,  thus  reaching  the  inner  region,  where  stands  the 
old  palace  on  one  side,  and  the  old  Parliament  House 
on  the  other.     The  former  looks   aged,  ragged,  and 
rusty,  but  makes  a  good  appearance  enough  pictoriaUj, 
being  adorned  all  round   about  with  statues,  which 
may  have  been  white  marble  once,  but  are  as  gray 
as  weather-beaten  granite  now,  and  look  down  from 
between  the  windows  above  the  basement  story.     A 
photograph  would  give  the  idea  of  very  rich  antiquity, 
but  as  it  really  stands,  looking  on  a  gravelled  court- 
yard, and  with  "Canteen"  painted  on  one  of  its 
doors,  the  spectator  does  not  find  it  very  impressive. 
The  great  hall  of  this  palace  is  now  partitioned  off 
into  two  or  three  rooms,  and  the  whole  edifice  is  ar- 
ranged to  serve  as  barracks.     Of  course,  no  trace  of 
ancient  magnificence,  if  anywise  destructible,  can  be 
left  in  the  interior.     We  were   not  shown  into  this 
palace,  nor  into  the  Parliament  House,  nor  into  the 
tower,  where  King  James  stabbed  the  Earl  of  Doug- 
las.    When  I  was  here  a  year  ago,  I  went  up  the  old 
staircase,  and  into  the  room  where  the  murder  was 
committed,  although  it  had  recently  been  the  scene  of 
a  fire,  which  consumed  as  much  of  it  as  was  inflamma- 
ble.   The  window  whence  the  Earl's  body  was  thrown 
then  remained;  but  now  the  whole   tower  seems  to 
have  been  renewed,  leaving  only  the  mullions  of  the 
historic  window.  i 

We  merely  looked  up  at  the  new,  light-colored  free 


1857.]  STIRLING.  486 

Btone  of  the  restored  tower  in  passing,  and  ascended 
to  .the  ramparts,  where  we  found   one  of  the  most 
splendid  views,  morally  and  materially,  that  this  world 
can  show.     Indeed,  I  think  there   cannot  be  such  a 
landscape  as  the  Carse  of  Stirling,  set  in  such  a  frame 
as  it  is,  —  the  Highlands,  comprehending  our  friends, 
Ben  Lomond,  Ben  Venue,  Ben  An,  and  the  whole  Ben 
brotherhood,  with  the  Grampians  surrounding  it  to  the 
westward  and  northward,  and  in  other  directions  some 
range  of  prominent  objects   to  shut  it  in;  and  the 
.plain  itself,  so  worthy  of  the  richest  setting,  so  fertile, 
so  beautiful,  so  written  over  and  over  again  with  his- 
tories.    The  silver  Links  of  Forth  are  as  sweet  and 
gently  picturesque  an  object  as  a  man  sees  in  a  life- 
time.    I  do  not  wonder  that  Providence  caused  great 
things  to  happen  on  this  plain  ;  it  was  like  choosing  a 
good  piece  of  canvas  to  paint  a  great  picture  upon. 
The  battle  of  Bannockbum  (which  we  saw  beneath 
us,  with  the  Gillie's  HiQ  on  the  right)  could  not  have 
been  fought  upon  a  meaner  plain,  nor  Wallace's  vic- 
tory gained ;  and  if  any  other  great  historic  act  still 
remains  to  be  done  in  this  country,  I  should  imagine 
the  Carse   of  Stirling  to  be  the  future   scene  of  it. 
Scott  seems  to  me  hardly  to  have  done  justice  to  this 
landscape,  or  to  have  bestowed  pains  enough  to  put  it 
in  strong  relief  before  the  world ;  although  it  is  from 
the  lights   shed  on   it,  and  so  much   other  Scottish 
scenery,  by  his  mind,  that  we  chiefly  see  it,  and  take 
an  interest  in  it.  .  .  . 

I  do  not  remember  seeing  the  hill  of  execution  be- 
fore,—  a  mound  on  the  same  level  as  the  castle's 
base,  looking  towards  the  Highlands.  A  solitary  cow 
was  now  feeding  upon  it.  I  should  imagine  that  no 
person  could  ever  have  been  unjustly  executed  there; 


486  ENGLISH  NOTE-^BOOKS.  [1857. 

the  spot  is  too  much  in  the  sight  of  heaven  and  earth 
to  countenance  injustice. 

Descending  from  the  ramparts,  we  went   into  the 
Armory,  which  I  did  not  see  on  my  former  visit.    The 
superintendent  of   this  department  is  an  old  soldier 
of  very  great  intelligence  and  vast  communicativeness, 
and  quite  absorbedan  thinking  of  and  handling  weap- 
ons ;  for  he  is  a  practical  armorer.   He  had  few  things 
to  show  us  that  were  very  interesting,  —  a  helmet  or 
two,  a  bomb  and  grenade  from  the  Crimea ;  also  some 
muskets  from  the  same  quarter,  one  of  which,  with  a 
sword  at  the  end,  he  spoke  of  admiringly,  as  the  best 
weapon  in  the  collection,  its  only  fault  being  its  ex- 
treme weight.     He  showed  us,  too,  some  Minie  rifles, 
and  whole  ranges  of  the  old-fashioned  Brown  Bess, 
which  had  helped  to  win  Wellington's  victories ;  also 
the  halberds  of  sergeants  now  laid  aside,  and  some 
swords  that  had  been  used  at  the  battle  of  Sheriffmuir. 
These  latter  were  very  short,  not  reaching  to  the  floor, 
when  I  held  one  of  them,  point  downward,  in   my 
hand.     The  shortness  of   the  blade  and  consequent 
closeness  of  the  encounter  must  have  given  the  weapon 
a  most  dagger-like  murderousness.     Hanging  in  the 
hall  of  arms,  there  were  two  tattered  banners  that  had 
gone  through  the  Peninsular  battles,  one  of  them  be- 
longing to  the  gallant  42d  Regiment.     The  armorer 
gave  my  wife  a  rag  from  each  of  these  banners,  conse- 
crated by  so  much  battle-smoke ;  also  a  piece  of  old 
oak,  half  burned  to  charcoal,  which  had  been  rescued 
from  the  panelling  of  the  Douglas  Tower.     We  saw 
better  things,  moreover,  than  all  these  rusty  weapons 
and  ragged  flags ;  namely,  the  pulpit  and  commimion* 
table  of  John  Knox.     The  frame  of  the  former,  if  1 
remember  aright,  is  complete ;  but  one  or  two  of  the 


1857.]  STIRLING.  487 

panels  are  knocked  out  and  lost,  and,  on  the  whole,  it 
looks  as  if  it  had  been  shaken  to  pieces  by  the  thun- 
der of  his  holdings  forth,  —  much  worm-eaten,  too,  is 
the  old  oak  wood,  as  well  it  may  be,  for  the  letters 
MD  (1500)  are  carved  on  its  front.  The  communion- 
table is  poHshed,  and  in  much  better  preservation. 

Then  the  armorer  showed  us  a  Damascus  blade,  of 
the  kind  that  will  cut  a  delicate  silk  handkerchief 
while  floating  in  the  air ;  and  some  inlaid  matchlock 
guns.  A  child's  little  toy-gun  was  lying  on  a  work- 
bench among  all  this  array  of  weapons ;  and  when  I 
took  it  up  and  smiled,  he  said  that  it  was  his  son's. 
So  he  called  in  a  little  fellow  four  years  old,  who  was 
playing  in  the  castle  yard,  and  made  him  go  through 
the  musket  exercise,  which  he  did  with  great  good- 
will. This  small  Son  of  a  Gun,  the  father  assured  us, 
cares  for  nothing  but  arms,  and  has  attained  all  his 
skill  with  the  musket  merely  by  looking  at  the  soldiers 
on  parade.  .  •  • 

Our  soldibr,  who  had  resigned  the  care  of  us  to  the 
armorer,  met  us  again  at  the  door,  and  led  us  round 
the  remainder  of  the  ramparts,  dismissing  us  finally 
at  the  gate  by  which  we  entered.  All  the  time  we 
were  in  the  castle  there  had  been  a  great  discordance 
of  drums  and  fifes,  caused  by  the  musicians  who  were 
practising  just  under  the  walls ;  likewise  the  sergeants 
were  drilling  their  squads  of  men,  and  putting  them 
through  strange  gymnastic  motions.  Most,  if  not  all, 
of  the  garrison  belongs  to  a  Highland  regiment,  and 
those  whom  we  saw  on  duty,  in  full  costiune,  looked 
very  martial  and  gallant.  Emerging  from  the  castle, 
we  took  the  broad  and  pleasant  foot-path,  which  cir- 
cles it  about  midway  on  the  grassy  steep  which  de- 
scends from  the  rocky  precipice  on  which  the  walls  are 


488  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

built.  This  is  a  yeiy  beautiful  walk,  and  affords  a 
most  striking  view  of  the  castle,  right  above  our  heads, 
the  height  of  its  wall  forming  one  line  with  the  preci- 
pice. The  grassy  hill-side  is  almost  as  precipitous  as 
the  dark  gray  rock  that  rises  out  of  it,  to  form  the 
foimdations  of  the  castle ;  but  wild  rose-bushes,  both 
of  a  white  and  red  variety,  are  abundant  here,  and  all 
in  bloom ;  nor  are  these  the  only  flowers.  There  is 
also  shrubbery  in  some  spots,  tossing  up  green  waves 
against  the  precipice;  and  broad  sheets  of  ivy  here 
and  there  mantle  the  headlong  rock,  which  also  has 
a  growth  of  weeds  in  its  crevices.  The  castle  walls 
above,  however,  are  quite  bare  of  any  such  growth. 
Thus,  lookii^g  up  at  the  old  storied  fortress,  and  look- 
ing down  over  the  wide,  historic  plain,  we  wandered 
half-way  round  the  castle,  and  then,  retracing  our 
steps,  entered  the  town  close  by  an  old  hospital. 

A  hospital  it  was,  or  had  been  intended  for;  but 
the  authorities  of  the  town  had  made  some  convenient 
arrangement  with  those  entitled  to  its  charity,  and  had 
appropriated  the  ancient  edifice  to  themselves.  So 
said  a  boy  who  showed  us  into  the  Guildhall,  —  an 
apartment  with  a  vaulted  oaken  roof,  and  otherwise  of 
antique  aspect  and  furniture ;  all  of  which,  however, 
were  modem  restorations.  We  then  went  into  an  old 
church  or  cathedral,  which  was  divided  into  two  parts ; 
one  of  them,  in  which  I  saw  the  royal  arms,  being 
probably  for  the  Church-of-England  service,  and  the 
other  for  the  Kirk  of  Scotland.  I  remember  little  or 
nothing  of  this  edifice,  except  that  the  Covenanters 
had  uglified  it  with  pews  and  a  gallery,  and  whitewash ; 
though  I  doubt  not  it  was  a  stately  Gothic  church  with 
innumerable  enrichments  and  incrustations  of  beauty, 
when  it  passed  from  popish  hands  into  theirs.   Thence 


1857.]  STIRLING.  489 

we  wandered  downward,  through  a  back  street,  amid 
very  shabby  houses,  some  of  which  bore  tokens  of  hav- 
ing once  been  the  abodes  of  courtly  and  noble  person- 
ages. We  paused  before  one  that  displayed,  I  think, 
the  sign  of  a  spirit-retailer,  and  looked  as  disreputa- 
ble as  a  house  could,  yet  was  built  of  stalwart  stone, 
and  had  two  circular  ^wers  in  front,  once,  doubtless, 
crowned  with  conical  tops.  We  asked  an  elderly  man 
whether  he  knew  anything  of  the  history  of  this  house; 
and  he  said  that  he  had  been  acquainted  with  it  for 
almost  fifty  years,  but  never  knew  anything  note- 
worthy about  it.  Eeaehing  the  foot  of  the  hill,  along 
whose  back  the  streets  of  Stirling  run,  and  which 
blooms  out  into  the  Castle  Craig,  we  returned  to  the 
railway,  and  at  noon  took  leave  of  Stirling. 

I  forgot  to  tell  of  the  things  that  awakened  rather 
more  sympathy  in  us  than  any  other  objects  in  the 
castle  armory.  These  were  some  rude  weapons  — 
pikes,  very  roughly  made ;  and  old  rusty  muskets, 
broken  and  otherwise  out  of  order  ;  and  swords,  by  no 
means  with  Damascus  blades  —  that  had  been  taken 
from  some  poor  weavers  and  other  handicraft  men 
who  rose  against  the  government  in  1820.  I  pitied 
the  poor  fellows  much,  Seeing  how  wretched  were  their 
means  of  standing  up  against  the  cannon,  bayonets, 
swords,  shot,  shell,  and  all  manner  of  murderous  facil- 
ities possessed  by  their  oppressors.  Afterwards,  our 
guide  showed,  in  a  gloomy  quadrangle  of  the  castle, 
the  low  windows  of  the  dungeons  where  two  of  the 
leaders  of  the  insurrectionists  had  been  confined  be- 
fore their  execution.  I  have  not  the  least  shadow  of 
doubt  that  these  men  had  a  good  cause  to  fight  for; 
but  what  availed  it  with  such  weapons  I  and  so  few 
fven  of  those  I 


490  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1851. 

...  I  believe  I  cannot  go  on  to  recount  any  f  iii> 
ther  this  evening  the  experiences  of  to-day.  It  lias 
been  a  very  rich  day;  only  that  I  have  seen  more  than 
my  sluggish  powers  of  reception  can  well  take  in  at 
once.  After  quitting  Stirling,  we  came  in  somewhat 
less  than  an  hour  to 

LINLITHGOW, 

and,  alighting,  took  up  our  quarters  at  the  Star  and 
Grarter  Hotel,  which,  like  almost  all  the  Scottish  cara- 
vansaries of  which  we  have  had  experience,  turns  out 
a  comfortable  one.  .  .  .  We  stayed  within  doors  for 
an  hour  or  two,  and  I  busied  myself  with  writing  up 
my  journal.     At  about  three,  however,  the  sky  bright- 
ened a  little,  and  we  set  forth  through  the  ancient, 
rusty,  and  queer-looking  town  of  Linlithgow,  towards 
the  palace  and  the  ancient  church,  which  latter  was 
one  of  St.  David's  edifices,  and  both  of  which  stand 
close  together,  a  little  removed  from  the  long  street 
of  the  village.     But  I  can  never  describe  them  more 
worthily,  and  shall  make  nothing  of  the  description  if 
I  attempt  it  now. 

July  %ih,  —  At  about  three  o'clock,  yesterday,  as  I 
said,  we  walked  forth  through  the  ancient  street  of 
liinlithgow,  and,  coming  to  the  market-place,  stopped 
to  look  at  an  elaborate  and  heavy  stone  fountain,  which 
we  found  by  an  inscription  to  be  a  f ac-simile  of  an  old 
one  that  used  to  stand  on  the  same  site.  Turning  to 
the  right,  the  outer  entrance  to  the  palace  fronts  on 
this  market-place,  if  such  it  be ;  and  close  to  it,  a  little 
on  one  side,  is  the  church.  A  young  woman,  with  a 
key  in  her  hand,  offered  to  admit  us  into  the  latter; 
so  we  went  in,  and  found  it  divided  by  a  wall  across 


1857.]  LINLITHGOW.  491 

the  middle  into  two  parts.  The  hither  portion,  being 
the  nave,  was  whitewashed,  and  looked  as  bare  and 
uninteresting  as  an  old  Gothic  church  of  St.  David's 
epoch  possibly  could  do.  The  interior  portion,  being 
the  former  choir,  is  covered  with  pews  over  the  whole 
floor,  and  further  defaced  i)y  galleries,  that  unmer- 
cifully cut  midway  across  the  stately  and  beautiful 
arches.  It  is  likewise  whitewashed.  There  were,  I  be- 
lieve, some  mural  monuments  of  Bailies  and  other  such 
people  stuck  up  about  the  walls,  but  nothing  that  much 
interested  me,  except  an  ancient  oaken  chair,  which 
the  girl  said  was  the  chair  of  St.  Crispin,  and  it  was 
fastened  to  the  wall,  in  the  holiest  part  of  the  chui*ch. 
I  know  not  why  it  was  there  ;  but  as  it  had  been  the 
chair  of  so  distinguished  a  personage,  we  all  sat  down 
in  it.  It  was  in  this  church  that  the  apparition  of  St. 
James  appeared  to  King  James  IV.,  to  warn  him 
against  engaging  in  that  war  which  resulted  in  the 
battle  of  Modden,  where  he  and  the  flower  of  his  no- 
bility were  slain.  The  young  woman  showed  *us  the 
spot  where  the  apparition  spake  to  him,  —  a  side 
chapel,  with  a  groined  roof,  at  the  end  of  the  choir 
next  the  nave.  The  Covenanters  seem  to  have  shown 
some  respect  to  this  one  chapel,  by  refraining  from 
drawing  the  gaUery  across  its  height ;  so  that,  except 
for  the  whitewash,  and  the  loss  of  the  painted  glass  in 
the  window,  and  probably  of  a  good  deal  of  rich  ar- 
chitectural detail,  it  looks  as  it  did  when  the  ghostly 
saint  entered  beneath  its  arch,  while  the  king  was 
kneeling  there. 

We  stayed  but  a  little  while  in  the  church,  and  then 
proceeded  to  the  palace,  which,  as  I  said,  is  close  at 
hand.  On  entering  the  outer  enclosure  through  an 
ancient  gateway,  we  were  surprised  to  find  how  entire 


492  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857 

the  walls  seemed  to  be  ;  but  the  reason  is,  I  suppose, 
that  the  ruins  have  not  been  used  as  a  stone-quarry, 
as  has  almost  always  been  the  case  with  old  abbeys 
and  castles.     The  palace  took  fire  and  was  consumed^ 
so  far  as  consumable,  in  1745,  while  occupied  by  the 
soldiers  of  General  Hawley;  but  even  yet  the  walls 
appear  so  stalwart  that  I  should  imagine  it  quite  pos- 
sible to  rebuild  and  restore  the  stately  rooms  on  their 
original  plan.   It  was  a  noble  palace,  one  hundred  and 
seventy-five  feet  in  length  by  one  hundred  and  sixty- 
five  in  breadth,  and  though  destitute  of  much  architec- 
tural beauty  externally,  yet  its  aspect  from  the  quad- 
rangle which  the  four  sides  enclose  is  venerable  and 
sadly  beautiful.   At  each  of  the  interior  angles  there  is 
a  circular  tower,  up  the  whole  height  of  the  edifice  and 
overtopping  it,  and  another  in  the  centre  of  one  of  the 
sides,  all  containing  winding  staircases.     The    walls 
facing  upon  the  enclosed  quadrangle  are  pierced  with 
many  windows,  and  have  been  ornamented  with  sculp- 
ture, rich  traces  of  which  still  remain  over  the  arched 
entrance-ways ;  and  in  the  grassy  centre  of  the  court 
there  is  the  ruin  and  broken  fragments  of  a  fountain 
which  once  used  to  play  for  the  delight  of  the  king 
and  queen,  and  lords  and  ladies,  who  looked  down  upon 
it  from  hall  and  chamber.   Many  old  carvings  that  be- 
longed to  it  are  heaped  together  there  ;  but  the  water 
has  disappeared,  though,  had  it  been  a  natural  spring, 
it  would  have  outlasted  all  the  heavy  stone-work. 

As  far  as  we  were  able,  and  could  find  our  way,  we 
went  through  every  room  of  the  palace,  all  round  the 
four  sides.  From  the  first  floor  upwards  it  is  entirely 
roofless.  In  some  of  the  chambers  there  is  an  accur 
mulation  of  soil,  and  a  goodly  crop  of  grass ;  in  others 
there  is  still  a  flooring  of  flags  or  brick  tiles,  though 


1857.]  LINLITHGOW,  493 

damp  and  moss-grown,  and  with  weeds  sprouting  be- 
tween the  crevices.  Grass  and  weeds,  indeed^  have 
found  soil  enough  to  flourish  in,  even  on  the  highest 
ranges  of  the  walls,  though  at  a  dizzy  height  above  the 
ground ;  and  it  was  like  an  old  and  trite  touch  of  ro- 
mance, to  see  how  the  weeds  sprouted  on  the  many 
hearth-stones  and  aspired  under  the  chimney-flues,  as. 
if  in  emulation  of  the  long-extinguished  flame.  It 
was  very  mournful,  very  beautiful,  very  delightful, 
too,  to  see  how  Nature  takes  back  the  palace,  now  that 
kings  have  done  with  it,  and  adopts  it  as  a  part  of  her 
great  garden. 

On  one  side  of  the  quadrangle  we  found  the  roofless 
chamber  where  Mary  Queen  of  Scots  was  bom,  and 
in  the  same  range  the  bedchamber  that  was  occupied 
by  several  of  the  Scottish  Jameses ;  and  in  one  comer 
of  the  latter  apartment  there  is  a  narrow,  winding 
staircase,  down  which  I  groped,  expecting  to  find  a 
door,  either  into  the  enclosed  quadrangle  or  to  the 
outside  of  the  palace.  But  it  ends  in  nothing,  unless 
it  be  a  dungeon ;  and  one  does  not  well  see  why  the 
bedchamber  of  the  king  should  be  so  convenient  to  a 
dungeon.  It  is  said  that  King  James  III.  once  es- 
caped down  this  secret  stair,  and  lay  concealed  from 
some  conspirators  who  had  entered  his  chamber  to 
murder  him.  This  range  of  apartments  is  terminated, 
like  the  other  sides  of  the  palace,  by  a  circular  tower 
enclosing  a  staircase,  up  which  we  mounted,  winding 
round  and  round,  and  emerging  at  various  heights, 
until  at  last  we  found  ourselves  at  the  very  topmost 
point  of  the  edifice;  and  here  there  is  a  small  pepper- 
box of  a  turret,  ahnost  as  entire  as  when  the  stones 
were  first  laid.  It  is  called  Queen  Margaret's  bower, 
and  looks  forth  on  a  lovely  prospect  of  mountain  and 


494  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  [1857. 

plain,  and  on  the  old  red  roofs  of  Linlithgow  town, 
and  on  the  little  loch  that  lies  within  the  palace  grounds. 
The  cold  north-wind  blew  chill  upon  us  through  the 
empty  window-frames,  which  very  likely  were  never 
glazed ;  but  it  must  be  a  delightful  nook  in  a  calmer 
and  warmer  summer  evening. 

Descending  from  this  higli  perch,  we  walked  along 
ledges  and  through  arched  corridors,  and  stood,  con- 
templative, in  the  dampness  of  the  banqueting-hall, 
and  sat  down  on  the  seats  that  still  occupy  the  em- 
brasures of  the  deep  windows.  In  one  of  tibe  rooms, 
the  sculpture  of  a  huge  fireplace  has  recently  been 
imitated  and  restored,  so  as  to  give  an  idea  of  what 
the  richness  of  the  adornments  must  have  been  when 
the  building  was  perfect.  We  burrowed  down,  too,  a 
little  way,  in  the  direction  of  the  cells,  where  prison- 
ers used  to  be  confined ;  but  these  were  too  ugly  and 
too  impenetrably  dark  to  tempt  us  far.  One  vault, 
exactly  beneath  a  queen's  very  bedchamber,  was  des- 
ignated as  a  prison.  I  should  think  bad  dreams 
would  have  winged  up,  and  made  her  pillow  an  un- 
comfortable one. 

There  seems  to  be  no  certain  record  as  respects  the 
date  of  this  palace,  except  that  the  most  recent  part 
was  built  by  James  I.,  of  England,  and  bears  the  fig- 
ures 1620  on  its  central  tower.  In  this  part  were  the 
kitchens  and  other  domestic  offices.  In  Eobert  Bruce's 
time  there  was  a  castle  here,  instead  of  a  palace,  and 
an  ancestor  of  our  friend  Bennoch  was  the  means  of 
taking  it  from  the  English  by  a  stratagem  in  which 
valor  went  halves.  Four  centuries  afterwards,  it  was 
a  royal  residence,  and  might  still  have  been  nomi- 
nally so,  had  not  Hawley's  dragoons  lighted  their  fires 
on  the  floors  of  the  magnificent  rooms;  but,  on  the 


1857.]  LINLITHGOW.  495 

whole,  I  think  it  more  valuable  as  a  ruin  than  if  it 
were  still  perfect.  Scotland,  and  the  world,  needs 
only  one  Holyrood;  and  Linlithgow,  were  it  still  a 
perfect  palace,  must  have  been  second  in  interest  to 
that,  from  its  lack  of  association  with  historic  events 
so  grand  and  striking. 

After  tea  we  took  another  walk,  and  this  time  went 
along  the  High  Street,  in  quest  of  the  house  whence 
Bothwellhaugh  fired  the  shot  that  killed  the  Regent 
Murray.  It  has  been  taken  down,  however;  or,  if 
any  part  of  it  remain,  it  has  been  built  into  and  incor- 
porated with  a  small  house  of  dark  stone  which  forms 
one  range  with  two  others  that  stand  a  few  feet  back 
from  the  general  line  of  the  street.  It  is  as  mean- 
looking  and*  commonplace  an  edifice  as  is  anywhere  to 
be  seen,  and  is  now  occupied  by  one  Steele,  a  tailor. 
We  went  under  a  square  arch  (if  an  arch  can  be 
square),  that  goes  quite  through  the  house,  and  found 
ourselves  in  a  little  court ;  but  it  was  not  easy  to  iden- 
tify anything  as  connected  with  the  historic  event,  so 
we  did  but  glance  about  us,  and  returned  into  the 
street.  It  is  here  narrow,  and  as  Bothwellhaugh  stood 
in  a  projecting  gallery,  the  Regent  must  have  been 
within  a  few  yards  of  the  muzzle  of  his  carbine.  The 
street  looks  as  old  as  any  that  I  have  seen,  except, 
perhaps  a  vista  here  and  there  in  Chester,  —  the  houses 
all  of  stone,  many  of  them  tall,  with  notched  gables, 
and  with  stone  staircases  going  up  outside,  the  steps 
much  worn  by  feet  now  dust;  a  pervading  ugliness, 
which  yet  does  not  fail  to  be  picturesque ;  a  general 
filth  and  evil  odor  of  gutters  and  people,  suggesting 
sorrowful  ideas  of  what  the  inner  houses  must  be  when 
the  outside  looks  and  smells  so  badly ;  and,  finally,  a 
great  rabble  of  the  inhabitants,  talking,  idling,  sport- 


496  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

ing,  staring  about  their  own  thresholds  and  those  of 
dram-shops,  the  town  being  most  alive  in  the  long 
twilight  of  the  summer  evening.  There  was  nothing 
uncivil  in  the  deportment  of  these  dirty  people,  old  or 
young ;  but  they  did  stare  at  us  most  unmercifully. 

We  walked  very  late,  entering,  after  all  that  we 
had  seen,  into  the  palace  grounds,  and  skirting  along 
Linlithgow  Loch,  which  would  be  very  beautiful  if  its 
banks  were  made  shadowy  with  trees,  instead  of  being 
ahnost  bare.  We  viewed  the  palace  on  the  outside, 
too,  and  saw  what  had  once  been  the  principal  en- 
trance, but  now  looked  like  an  arched  window,  pretty 
high  in  the  wall ;  for  it  had  not  been  accessible  except 
by  a  drawbridge.  I  might  write  pages  in  telling  how 
venerable  the  ruin  looked,  as  the  twilight  fell  deeper 
and  deeper  around  it^  but  we  have  had  enough  of 
Linlithgow,  especially  as  there  have  been  so  many  old 
palaces  and  old  towns  to  write  about,  and  there  will 
still  be  more.  We  left  Linlithgow  early  this  morn- 
ing, and  reached  Edinburgh  in  haLE  an  hour.  To- 
morrow I  suppose  I  shall  try  to  set  down  what  I  see ; 
at  least  some  points  of  it. 

July  9ih.  —  Arriving  at 

EDINBUEGH, 

and  acting  under  advice  of  the  cabman,  we  drove  to 
Addison's  Alma  Hotel,  which  we  find  to  be  in  Prince's 
Street,  having  Scott's  monument  a  few  hundred  yards 
below,  and  the  Castle  Hill  about  as  much  above. 

The  Edinburgh  people  seem  to  be  accustomed  to 
climb  mountains  within  their  own  houses ;  so  we  had 
to  mount  several  staircases  before  we  reached  our  par- 
k)r,  which  is  a  very  good  one,  and  commands  a  beautir 


1857.]  EDINBURGH.  497 

fill  view  of  Prince's  Street,  and  of  the  picturesque  old 
town,  and  the  valley  between,  and  of  the  castle  on  its 
hill. 

Our  first  visit  was  to  the  castle,  which  we  reached 
by  going  across  the  causeway  that  bridges  the  valley, 
and  has  some  edifices  of  Grecian  architecture  on  it, 
contrasting  strangely  with  the  nondescript  ugliness  of 
the  old  town,  into  which  we  immediately  pass.  As 
this  is  my  second  visit  to  Edinburgh,  I  surely  need 
not  dwell  upon  describing  it  at  such  length  as  if  I  had 
never  been  here  before.  After  climbing  up  through 
various  wards  of  the  castle  to  the  topmost  battery, 
where  Mons  Meg  holds  her  station,  looking  like  an  im- 
couth  dragon,  — with  a  pile  of  huge  stone  balls  beside 
her  for  eggs,  —  we  foimd  that  we  could  not  be  ad- 
mitted to  Queen  Mary's  apartments,  nor  to  the  crown- 
room,  till  twelve  o'clock ;  moreover,  that  there  was 
no  admittance  to  the  crown-room  without  tickets  from 
the  crown-office,  in  Parliament  Square.     There  being 

no  help  for  it,  I  left  my  wife  and  J to  wander 

through  the  fortress,  and  came  down  through  High 
Street  in  quest  of  Parliament  Square,  which  I  found 
after  many  inquiries  of  policemen,  and  after  first  go- 
ing to  the  Justiciary  Court,  where  there  was  a  great 
throng  endeavoring  to  get  in ;  for  the  trial  of  Miss 
Smith  for  the  murder  of  her  lover  is  causing  great 
excitement  just  now.     There  was  no  difficulty  made 

about  the  tickets,   and,  returning,  found  S and 

J ;  but  J grew  tired  of  waiting,  and  set  out 

to  return  to  our  hotel,  through  the  great  strange  city, 
all  by  himself.  Through  means  of  an  attendant,  we 
were  admitted  into  Queen  Margaret's  little  chapel,  on 
the  top  of  the  rock ;  and  then  we  sat  down,  in  such 
shelter  as  there  was,  to  avoid  the  keen  wind,  blowing 

VOL.  YIII.  32 


498  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1857. 

through  the  embrasures  of  the  ramparts,  and  waited 
as  patiently  as  we  could. 

Twelve  o'clock  came,  and  we  went  into  the  crown- 
room,  with  a  throng  of  other  visitors,  —  so  many  that 
they  could  only  be  admitted  in  separate  groups.  The 
Regalia  of  Scotland  lie  on  a  circular  table  within  ar 
iron  railing,  round  and  round  which  the  visitors  pass, 
gazing  with  all  their  eyes.  The  room  was  dark,  how« 
ever,  except  for  the  dim  twinkle  of  a  candle  or  gas- 
light ;  and  the  regalia  did  not  show  to  any  advantage, 
though  there  are  some  rich  jewels,  set  in  their  ancient 
gold.  The  articles  consist  of  a  two-handed  sword,  with 
a  hilt  and  scabbard  of  gold,  ornamented  with  gems, 
and  a  mace,  with  a  silver  handle,  all  very  beautifully 
made ;  besides  the  golden  collar  and  jewelled  badge  of 
the  Grarter,  and  something  else  which  I  forget.  Why 
they  keep  this  room  so  dark  I  cannot  tell ;  but  it  is  a 
poor  show,  and  gives  the  spectator  an  idea  of  the  pov^ 
erty  of  Scotland,  and  the  minuteness  of  her  sover- 
eignty, which  I  had  not  gathered  from  her  royal  pal- 
aces. 

Thence  we  went  into  Queen  Mary's  room,  and  saw 
that  beautiful  portrait  —  that  very  queen  and  very 
woman  —  with  which  I  was  so  much  impressed  at  my 
last  visit.  It  is  wonderful  that  this  picture  does  not 
drive  all  the  other  portraits  of  Mary  out  of  the  field, 
whatever  may  be  the  comparative  proofs  of  their  au- 
thenticity. I  do  not  know  the  history  of  this  one,  ex- 
cept that  it  is  a  copy  by  Sir  William  Gordon  of  a  pic- 
ture by  an  Italian,  preserved  at  Dunrobin  Castle. 

After  seeing  what  the  castle  had  to  show,  which  is 
but  little  except  itself,  its  rocks,  and  its  old  dwellings 
of  princes,  and  prisoners,  w^  came  down  through  the 
High  Street,  inquiring  for  John  Ejiox's  house.     It  i« 


1857.]  EDINBURGH.  499 

a  strange-looking  edifice,  with  gables  on  high,  project- 
ing far,  and  some  sculpture,  and  inscriptions  referring 
to  Knox.  There  is  a  tobacconist's  shop  in  the  base- 
ment story,  where  I  learned  that  the  house  used  to 
be  shown  to  visitors  till  within  three  months,  but  it 
is  now  closed,  for  some  reason  or  other.  Thence  we 
crossed  a  bridge  into  the  new  town,  and  came  back 
through  Prince's  Street  to  the  hotel,  and  had  a  good 
dinner,  as  preparatory  to  fresh  wearinesses ;  for  there 
is  no  other  weariness  at  all  to  be'  compared  to  that  of 
sight-seeing. 

In  mid  afternoon  we  took  a  cab  and  drove  to  Holy- 
rood  Palace,  which  I  have  already  described,  as  well 
as  the  chapel,  and  do  not  mean  to  meddle  with  either 
of  them  again.  We  looked  at  our  faces  in  the  old 
mirrors  that  Queen  Mary  brought  from  France  with 
her,  and  which  had  often  reflected  her  own  lovely  face 
and  figure ;  and  I  went  up  the  winding  stair  through 
which  the  conspirators  ascended.  This,  I  think,  was 
not  accessible  at  my  former  visit.  Before  leaving  the 
palace,  one  of  the  attendants  advised  us  to  see  some 
pictures  in  the  apartments  occupied  by  the  Marquis  of 
Breadalbane  during  the  queen's  residence  here.  We 
found  some  fine  old  portraits  and  other  paintings  by 
Vandyke,  Sir  Peter  Lely,  Sir  Godfrey  Eneller,  and  a 
strange  head  by  Rubens,  amid  all  which  I  walked  wear- 
ily, wishing  that  there  were  nothing  worth  looking  at 
in  the  whole  world.  My  wife  differs  altogether  from 
me  in  this  matter ;  .  .  .  but  we  agreed,  on  this  occa- 
sion, in  being  tired  to  death.  Just  as  we  got  through 
with  the  pictures,  I  became  convinced  of  what  I  had 
been  dimly  suspecting  all  the  while,  namely,  that  at 
my  last  visit  to  the  palace  I  had  seen  these  selfsame 
pictures,  and  listened  to  the   selfsame  woman's  civil 


500  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

answers,  in  just  the  selfsame  miserable  weariness  of 
mood. 

We  left  the  palace,  and  toiled  up  through  the  dirty 
Canongate,  looking  vainly  for  a  fly,  and  employing  our 
time,  as  well  as  we  could,  in  looking  at  the  squalid 
mob  of  Edinburgh,  and  peeping  down  the  horrible 
vistas  of  the  closes,  which  were  swarming  with  dirty 
life,  as  some  mouldy  and  half -decayed  substance  might 
swarm  with  insects,  —  vistas  down  alleys  where  sin, 
sorrow,  poverty,  drunkenness,  all  manner  of  sombre 
and  sordid  earthly  circumstances,  had  imbued  the 
stone,  brick,  and  wood  of  the  habitations  for  hundreds 
of  years.  And  such  a  multitude  of  children  too ;  that 
was  a  most  striking  feature.  | 

After  tea  I  went  down  into  the  valley  between  the 
old  town  and  the  new,  which  is  now  laid  out  as  an 
ornamental  garden,  with  grass,  shrubbery,  flowers, 
gravelled  walks,  and  frequent  seats.  Here  the  sun 
was  setting,  and  gilded  the  old  town  with  its  parting 
rays,  making  it  absolutely  the  most  picturesque  scene 
possible  to  be  seen.  The  mass  of  tall,  ancient  houses, 
heaped  densely  together,  looked  like  a  Gothic  dream  ; 
for  there  seemed  to  be  towers  and  all  sorts  of  stately 
architecture,  and  spires  ascended  out  of  the  mass ; 
and  above  the  whole  was  the  castle,  with  a  diadem  of 
gold  on  its  topmost  turret.  It  wanted  less  than  a 
quarter  of  nine  when  the  last  gleam  faded  from  the 
windows  of  the  old  town,  and  left  the  crowd  of  build- 
ings dim  and  indistinguishable,  to  reappear  on  the 
morrow  in  squalor,  lifting  their  meanness  skyward, 
the  home  of  layer  upon  layer  of  unfortunate  htuman- 
ity.  The  change  symbolized  the  difference  between  a 
poet's  imagination  of  life  in  the  past  —  or  in  a  state 
which  he  looks  at  through  a  colored  and  illuminated^ 
medium  —  and  the  sad  reality. 


1857.]  EDINBURGH,  601 

This  morning  we  took  a  cab,  and  set  forth  between 
ten  and  eleven  to  see  Edinburgh  and  its  environs ; 
driving  past  the  University,  and  other  noticeable  ob- 
jects in  the  old  town,  and  thence  out  to  Arthur's  Seat. 
Salisbury  Crags  are  a  very  singular  feature  of  the  out- 
skirts.    From  the  heights,  beneath  Arthur's  Seat,  we 
had  a  fine  prospect  of  the  sea,  with  Leith  and  Porto- 
bello  in  the  distance,  and  of  a  fertile  plain  at  the  -foot 
of  the  hill.     In  the  course  of  our  drive  our  cabman 
pointed  out  Dumbiedikes'  house ;  also  the  cottage  of 
Jeanie  Deans,  —  at  least,  the  spot  where  it  formerly 
stood ;  and  Muschat's  Cairn,  of  which  a  small  heap  of 
stones  is  yet  remaining.     Near  this  latter  object  are 
the  ruins  of  St.  Anthony's  Chapel,  a  roofless  gable, 
and  other  remains,  standing  oik  the  abrupt  hill-side. 
We  drove  homeward  past  a  parade-aground  on  which  a 
body  of  cavalry  was  exercising,  and  we  met  a  company 
of  infantry  on  their  route  thither.     Then  we  drove 
near  Calton  Hill,  which  seems  to  be  not  a  burial- 
ground,  although  the  site  of  stately  monuments.     In 
fine,  we  passed  through  the  Grass-Market,  where  we 
saw  the  cross  in  the  pavement  in  the  street,  marking 
the  spot,  as  I  recorded  before,  where  Porteous  was  ex- 
ecuted.    Thence  we  passed  through  the  Cowgate,  all 
the  latter  part  of  our  drive  being  amongst  the  tall, 
quaint  edifices  of  the  old  town,  alike  venerable  and 
squalid.     From  the  Grass-Market  the  rock  of  the  cas- 
tle looks  more  precipitous  than  as  we  had  hitherto 
seen  it,  and  its  prisons,  palaces,  and  barracks  approach 
close  to  its  headlong  verge,  and  form  one  steep  line 
with  its  descent.     We  drove  quite  round  the  Castle 
Hill,  and  returned  down  Prince's  Street  to  our  hotel. 
There  can  be  no  other  city  in  the  world  that  affords 
more  splendid  scenery,  botJi  natural  and  architectural, 
than  Edinburgh. 


502  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

Then  we  went  to  St.  Giles's  Cathedral,  which  I 
shall  not  describe,  it  having  been  kirkified  into  three 
interior  divisions  by  the  Covenanters ;  and  I  left  my 

wife   to  take  drawings,  while  J and  I  went   to 

Short's  Observatory,  near  the  entrance  of  iuke  castle. 
Here  we  saw  a  camera-obscura,  which  brought  before 
us,  without  our  stirring  a  step,  almost  all  the  strik- 
ing objects  which  we  had  been  wandering  to  and  fro 
to  see.  We  also  saw  the  mites  in  cheese,  giganti- 
cally magnified  by  a  solar  microscope ;  likewise  some 

dioramic  views,  with  all  which  J was  mightily 

pleased,  and  for  myself,  being  tired  to  death  of  sights, 
I  would  as  lief  see  them  as  anything  else.  We  found, 
on  calling  for  mamma  at  St.  Giles's,  that  she  had 
gone  away ;  but  she  j-ejoined  us  between  four  and  five 
o'clock  at  our  hotel,  where  the  next  thing  we  did  was 
to  dine.  Again  after  dinner  we  walked  out,  looking 
at  the  shop -windows  of  jewellers,  where  ornaments 
made  of  cairngorm  pebbles  are  the  most  peculiar  at- 
traction.    As  it  was  our  wedding-day,  ...  I  gave 

S a  golden  and  amethyst-bodied  cairngorm  beetle 

with  a  ruby  head ;  and  after  sitting  awhile  in  Prince's 
Street  Gardens,  we  came  home. 

July  10th,  —  Last  evening  I  walked  round  the  cas- 
tle rock,  and  through  the  Grass-Market,  where  I  stood 
on  the  inlaid  cross  in  the  pavement,  thence  down  fche 
High  Street  beyond  John  Knox's  house.  The  throng 
in  that  part  of  the  town  was  very  great.  There  is  a 
strange  fascination  in  these  old  streets,  and  in  the 
peeps  down  the  closes ;  but  it  doubtless  would  be  a 
great  blessing  were  a  fire  to  sweep  through  the  whole 
of  ancient  Edinburgh.  This  system  of  living  on  flats, 
up  to  I  know  not  what  story,  must  be  most  unfavora 


i857.]  EDINBURGH,  508 

ble  to  cleanliness,  since  they  have  to  fetch  their  water 
all  that  distance  towards  heaven,  and  how  they  get  rid 
of  their  rubbish  is  best  known  to  themselves. 

My  wife  has  gone  to  Boslin  this  morning,  and  since 

her  departure  it  has  been  drizzly,  so  that  J ■  and 

I,  after  a  walk  through  the  new  part  of  the  town,  are 
imprisoned  in  our  parlor  with  little  resource  except  to 
look  across  the  valley  to  the  castle,  where  Mons  Meg 
is  plainly  visible  on  the  upper  platform,  and  the  lower 
ramparts,  zigzagging  about  the  edge  of  the  precipice, 
which  nearly  in  front  of  us  is  concealed  or  softened  by 
a  great  deal  of  shrubbery,  but  farther  off  descends 
steeply  down  to  the  grass  below.  Somewhere  on  uiis 
side  of  the  rock  was  the  point  where  Claverhouse,  on 
quitting  Edinburgh  before  the  battle  of  Killiecrankie, 
clambered  up  to  hold  an  interview  with  the  Duke  of 
Gordon.  What  an  excellent  thing  it  is  to  have  such 
striking  and  indestructible  landmarks  and  time-marks 
that  they  serve  to  afi&x  historical  incidents  to,  and 
thus,  as  it  were,  nail  down  the  Past  for  the  benefit  of 
all  future  ages ! 

The  old  town  of  Edinburgh  appears  to  be  situated, 
in  its  densest  part,  on  the  broad  back  of  a  ridge, 
which  rises  gradually  to  its  termination  in  the  precip- 
itous rock,  on  which  stands  the  castle.  Between  the 
old  town  and  the  new  is  the  valley,  which  runs  along 
at  the  base  of  this  ridge,  and  which,  in  its  natural 
state,  was  probably  rough  and  broken,  like  any  moun- 
tain gorge.  The  lower  part  of  the  valley,  adjacent  to 
the  Canongate,  is  now  a  broad  hollow  space,  fitted  up 
with  dwellings,  shops,  or  manufactories ;  the  next  por- 
tion, between  two  bridges,  is  converted  into  an  oma^ 
mental  garden  free  to  the  public,  and  contains  Scott's 
beautiful  monument,  —  a  canopy  of  Gothic  arches  and 


504  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [ISSZ 

a  fantastic  SDire.  beneath  which  he  sits^  thoughtful 
and  observant  of  what  passes  in  the  contiguous  street ; 
the  third  portion  of  the  valley,  above  the  last  bridge, 
is  another  ornamental  garden,  open  only  to  those  who 
have  pass-keys.  It  is  an  admirable  garden,  with  a 
great  variety  of  surface,  and  extends  far  round  the 
castle  rock,  with  paths  that  lead  up  to  its  very  base, 
among  leafy  depths  of  shrubbery,  and  winds  beneath 

the  sheer,  black  precipice.     J and  I  walked  there 

this  forenoon,  and  took  refuge  from  a  shower  beneath 
an  overhanging  jut  of  the  rock,  where  a  bench  had 
been  placed,  and  where  a  curtain  of  hanging  ivy 
helped  to  shelter  us.  On  our  return  to  the  hotel,  we 
foimd  manmia  just  alighting  from  a  cab.  She  had 
had  very  bad  fortune  in  her  excursion  to  Roslin,  hav- 
ing had  to  walk  a  long  distance  to  the  chapel,  and  be- 
ing caught  in  the  rain  ;  and,  after  all,  she  could  only 
spend  seven  minutes  in  viewing  the  beautiful  Koslin 
architecture. 

MELBOSE. 

July  Wth.  —  We  left  Edinburgh,  where  we  had 
found  Addison's,  87  Prince's  Street,  the  most  com- 
fortable hotel  in  Great  Britain,  and  went  to  Melrose, 
where  we  put  up  at  the  George.  This  is  all  travelled 
ground  with  me,  so  that  I  need  not  much  perplex  my- 
self with  further  description,  especially  as  it  is  impos- 
sible, by  any  repetition  of  attempts,  to  describe  Mel- 
rose Abbey.  We  went  thither  immediately  after  tea, 
and  were  shown  over  the  ruins  by  a  very  delectable 
old  Scotchman,  incomparably  the  best  guide  I  ever  met 
with.  I  think  he  must  take  pains  to  speak  the  Scotch 
dialect,  he  does  it  with  such  pungent  felicity  and  effect^ 
and  it  gives  a  flavor  to  everytibing  he  says  like  the 


1867.]  MELROSE.  605 

mustard  and  vinegar  in  a  salad.  This  is  not  the  man 
I  saw  when  here  before.  The  Scotch  dialect  is  still,  in 
a  greater  or  less  degree,  universally  prevalent  in  Scot- 
land, insomuch  that  we  generally  find  it  difficult  to 
comprehend  the  answers  to  our  questions,  though  more, 
I  think,  from  the  unusual  intonation  than  either  from 
strange  words  or  pronunciation.  But  this  old  man, 
though  he  spoke  the  most  unmitigated  Scotch,,  was 
perfectly  intelligible,  —  perhaps  because  his  speech  so 
well  accorded  with  the  classic  standard  of  the  Waver- 
ley  Novels.  Moreover,  he  is  thoroughly  acquainted 
with  the  Abbey,  stone  by  stone ;  and  it  was  curious  to 
see  him,  as  we  walked  among  its  aisles,  and  over  the 
grass  beneath  its  roofless  portions,  pick  up  the  with- 
ered leaves  that  had  fallen  there,  and  do  other  such 
little  things,  as  a  good  housewife  might  do  to  a  parlor. 
I  have  met  with  two  or  three  instances  where  the  guar- 
dian of  an  old  edifice  seemed  really  to  love  it,  and  this 
was  one,  although  the  old  man  evidently  had  a  Scotch 
Covenanter's  contempt  and  dislike  of  the  faith  that 
founded  the  Abbey.  He  repeated  King  David's  dic- 
tum that  King  David  the  First  was  "  a  sair  saint  for 
the  crown,"  as  bestowing  so  much  wealth  on  religious 
edifices ;  but  really,  unless  it  be  Walter  Scott,  I  know 
not  any  Scotchman  who  has  done  so  much  for  his  coun- 
try as  this  same  St.  David.  As  the  founder, of  Mel- 
rose and  many  other  beautiful  churches  and  abbeys,  he 
left  magnificent  specimens  of  the  only  kind  of  poetry 
which  the  age  knew  how  to  produce  ;  and  the  world  is 
the  better  for  him  to  this  day,  —  which  is  more,  I  be- 
lieve, than  can  be  said  of  any  hero  or  statesman  in 
Scottish  annals. 

We  went  all  over  the  ruins,  of  course,  and  saw  the 
marble  stone  of  King  Alexander,  and  the  spot  where 


506  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

Brace's  heart  is  said  to  be  buried,  and  the  slab  of 
Michael  Scott,  with  the  cross  engraved  upon  it  ;  also 
the  exquisitely  sculptured  kail-leaves,  and  other  foli- 
age and  flowers,  with  which  the  Gothic  artists  in- 
wreathed  this  edifice,  bestowing  more  minute  and 
faithful  labor  than  an  artist  of  these  days  would  do 
on  the  most  delicate  piece  of  cabinet-work.  We  came 
away  sooner  than  we  wished,  but  we  hoped  to  return 
thither  this  morning ;  and,  for  my  part,  I  cherish  a 
presentiment  that  this  will  not  be  our  last  visit  to 

Scotland  and  Melrose.  .  .  .  J= and  I  then  walked 

to  the  Tweed,  where  we  saw  two  or  three  people  an- 
gling, with  naked  legs,  or  trousers  turned  up,  and  wad- 
ing among  the  rude  stones  that  make  something  like 
a  dam  over  the  wide  and  brawling  stream.     I  did  not 

observe  that  they  caught  any  fish,  but  J was  so 

fascinated  with  the  spectacle  that  he  pulled  oat  his 
poor  little  fishing-lin^,  and  wished  to  try  his  chance 
forthwith.  I  never  saw  the  angler's  instinct  stronger 
in  anybody.     We  walked  across  the  foot-bridge  that 

here  spans  the  Tweed ;  and  J observed  that  he  did 

not  see  how  William  of  Deloraine  could  have  found  so 
much  difficulty  in  swimming  his  horse  across  so  shal- 
low a  river.  Neither  do  I.  It  now  began  to  sprinkle, 
and  we  hastened  back  to  the  hotel. 

It  was  not  a  pleasant  morning ;  but  we  started  im« 
mediately  after  breakfast  for 

ABBOTSFOKD, 

which  is  but  about  three  miles  distant.  The  country 
between  Melrose  and  that  place  is  not  in  the  least 
beautiful,  nor  very  noteworthy,  —  one  or  two  old  ip» 
regular  villages  ;  one  tower  that  looks  principally  do- 
mestic, yet  partly  warlike,  and  seems  to  be  of  some  an- 


1857.]  ABBOTSFORR  507 

fciquity ;  and  an  undulation,  or  rounded  hilly  surface 
of  the  landscape,  sometimes  affording  wide  vistas  be* 
tween  the  slopes.  These  hills,  which,  I  suppose,  are 
some  of  them  on  the  Abbotsford  estate,  are  partly  cov- 
ered with  woods,  but  of  Scotch  fir,  or  some  tree  of 
that  species,  which  creates  no  softened  undulation,  but 
overspreads  the  hill  like  a  tightly  fitting  wig.  It  is  a 
cold,  dreary,  disheartening  neighborhood,  that  of  Ab- 
botsford ;  at  least,  it  has  appeared  so  to  me  at  both  of 
my  visits,  —  one  of  which  was  on  a  bleak  and  windy 
May  morning,  and  this  one  on  a  chill,  showery  morn- 
ing of  midsummer. 

The  entrance-way  to  the  house  is  somewhat  altered 
since  my  last  visit;  and  we  now,  following  the  direction 
of  a  painted  finger  on  the  wall,  went  round  to  a  side 
door  in  the  basement  story,  where  we  found  an  elderly 
man  waiting  as  if  in  expectation  of  visitors.  He  asked 
us  to  write  our  names  in  a  book,  and  told  us  that  the 
desk  on  the  leaf  of  which  it  lay  was  the  one  in  which 
Sir  Walter  found  the  forgotten  manuscript  of  Wa- 
verley,  while  looking  for  some  fishing-tackle.  There 
was  another  desk  in  the  room,  which  had  belonged 
to  the  Colonel  Gardiner  who  appears  in  Waverley. 
The  first  apartment  into  which  our  guide  showed  us 
was  Sir  Walter's  study,  where  I  again  saw  his  clothes, 
and  remarked  how  the  sleeve  of  his  old  green  coat  was 
worn  at  the  cuff,  —  a  minute  circumstance  that  seemed 
to  bring  Sir  Walter  very  near  me.  Thence  into  the 
library;  thence  into  the  drawing-room,  whence,  me- 
thinks,  we  should  have  entered  the  dining-room,  the 
most  interesting  of  all,  as  being  the  room  where  he 
died.  But  this  room  seems  not  to  be  shown  now.  We 
saw  the  armory,  with  the  gun  of  Rob  Boy,  into  the  muz- 
de  of  which  I  put  my  finger,  and  found  the  bore  very 


508  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

large ;  the  beautifully  wrought  pistol  of  Claverhouse, 
and  a  pair  of  pistols  that  belonged  to  Napoleon ;  the 
sword  of  Montrose,  which  I  grasped,  and  drew  half  out 
of  the  scabbard ;  and  Queen  Mary's  iron  jewel-box,  six 
or  eight  inches  long,  and  two  or  three  high,  with  a  lid 
rounded  like  that  of  a  trunk,  and  much  corroded  with 
rust.  There  is  no  use  in  making  a  catalogue  of  these 
curiosities.  The  feeling  in  visiting  Abbotsford  is  not 
that  of  awe ;  it  is  little  more  than  going  to  a  museum. 
I  do  abhor  this  mode  of  making  pilgrimages  to  the 
shrines  of  departed  great  men.  There  is  certainly 
something  wrong  in  it,  for  it  seldom  or  never  produces 
(in  me,  at  least)  the  right  feeling.  It  is  an  odd  truth, 
too,  that  a  house  is  forever  after  spoiled  and  ruined  as 
a  home,  by  having  been  the  abode  of  a  great  man. 
His  spirit  haunts  it,  as  it  were,  with  a  malevolent  ef- 
fect, and  takes  hearth  and  hall  away  from  the  nominal 
possessors,  giving  all  the  world  the  right  to  enter  there 
because  he  had  such  intimate  relations  with  all  the 
world. 

We  had  intended  to  go  to  Dryburgh  Abbey;  but  as 
the  weather  more  than  threatened  rain,  ...  we  gave 
up  the  idea,  and  so  took  the  rail  for  Berwick,  after  one 
o'clock.  On  our  road  we  passed  several  ruins  in  Scot- 
land, and  some  in  England,  —  one  old  castle  in  partio- 
ular,  beautifully  situated  beside  a  deep-banked  stream. 
The  road  lies  for  many  miles  along  the  coast,  afford- 
ing a  fine  view  of  the  German  Ocean,  which  was  now 
blue,  sunny,  and  breezy,  the  day  having  risen  out  of 
its  morning  sulks.     We  waited  an  hour  or  more  at 

Berwick,  and  J and  I  took  a  hasty  walk  into  the 

town.  It  is  a  rough  and  rude  assemblage  of  rather 
mean  houses,  some  of  which  are  thatched.  There 
seems  to  have  been  a  wall  about  the  town  at  a  f ormei 


1857.]  DURHAM.  609 

period,  and  we  passed  through  one  of  the  gates. 
The  view  of  the  river  Tweed  here  is  very  fine,  both 
above  and  below  the  railway  bridge,  and  especially 
v^here  it  flows,  a  broad  tide,  and  between  high  banks, 
into  the  sea.  Thence  we  went  onward  along  the  coast, 
as  I  have  said,  pausing  a  few  moments  in  smoky  New-- 
castle,  and  reaching  Durham  about  eight  o'clock. 

DUKHAM. 

I  wandered  out  in  the  dusk  of  the  evening,  — for 
the  dusk  comes  on  comparatively  early  as  we  draw 
southward, — and  found  a  beautiful  and  shadowy  path 
along  the  river-side,  skirting  its  high  banks,  up  and 
adown  which  grow  noble  elms.  I  could  not  well  see, 
in  that  obscurity  of  twilight  boughs,  whither  I  was  go- 
ing, or  what  was  around  me ;  but  I  judged  that  the 
castle  or  cathedral,  or  both,  crowned  the  highest  line 
of  the  shore,  and  that  I  was  walking  at  the  base  of 
their  walls.  There  was  a  pair  of  lovers  in  front  of 
me,  and  I  passed  two  or  three  other  tender  couples. 
The  walk  appeared  to  go  on  interminably  by  the  river- 
side, through  the  same  sweet  shadow;  but  I  turned 
and  found  my  way  into  the  cathedral  close,  beneath 
an  ancient  archway,  whence,  issuing  again,  I  inquired 
my  way  to  the  Waterloo  Hotel,  where  we  had  put  up. 

Items.  —  We  saw  the  Norham  Castle  of  Marmion, 
at  a  short  distance  from  the  station  of  the  same  name. 
Viewed  from  the  railway,  it  has  not  a  very  picturesque 
appearance,  —  a  high,  square  ruin  of  what  I  suppose 
was  the  keep.  —  At  Abbotsford,  treasured  up  in  a 
glass  case  in  the  drawing-room,  were  Qiemorials  of  Sir 
Walter  Scott's  servants  and  humble  friends,  —  for  in- 
stance, a  brass  snuff-box  of  Tom  Purdy,  —  there,  too* 


510  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

among  precious  relics  of  illustrious  persons.  —  In  the 
armory,  I  grasped  with  some  interest  the  sword  of 
Sir  Adam  Ferguson,  which  he  had  worn  in  the  Penin- 
sular War.  Our  guide  said,  of  his  own  knowledge, 
that  "  he  was  a  very  funny  old  gentleman."  He  died 
only  a  year  or  two  since. 

July  llth,  —  The  morning  after  our  arrival  in  Dur- 
ham being  Sunday,  we  attended  service  in  the  cathe- 
dral. •  .  .  We  found  a  tolerable  audience,  seated  on 
benches,  within  and  in  front  of  the  choir ;  and  people 
continually  strayed  in  and  out  of  the  sunny  church- 
yard, and  sat  down,  or  walked  softly  and  quietly  up 
and  down  the  side  aisle.  Sometimes,  too,  one  of  the 
vergers  would  come  in  with  a  handful  of  little  boys, 
whom  he  had  caught  playing  among  the  tombstones. 

DURHAM  CATHEDRAL 

has  one  advantage  over  the  others  which  I  have  seen, 
there  being  no  organ-screen,  nor  any  sort  of  partition 
between  the  choir  and  nave  ;  so  that  we  saw  its  entire 
length,  nearly  five  hundred  feet,  in  one  vista.  The 
pillars  of  the  nave  are  immensely  thick,  but  hardly  of 
proportionate  height,  and  they  support  the  round  Nor- 
man arch ;  nor  is  there,  as  far  as  I  remember,  a  single 
pointed  arch  in  the  cathedral.  The  effect  is  to  give 
the  edifice  an  air  of  heavy  grandeur.  It  seems  to 
have  been  built  before  the  best  style  of  church  archi- 
tecture had  established  itself ;  so  that  it  weiglis  upon 
the  soul,  instead  of  helping  it  to  aspire.  First,  there 
are  these  round  arches,  supported  by  gigantic  col- 
umns ;  then,  immediately  above,  another  row  of  round 
arches,  behind  which  is  the  usual  gallery  that  runs, 
as  it  were,  in  the  thickness  of  the  wall,  around  the 


1857.]  DURHAM.  611 

nave  of  the  cathedral ;  then,  above  all,  another  row  of 
round  arches,  enclosing  the  windows  of  the  clere-story. 
The  great  pillars  are  ornamented  in  various  ways,  — 
some  with  a  great  spiral  groove  running  from  bottom 
to  top ;  others  with  two  spirals,  ascending  in  different 
directions,  so  as  to  cross  over  one  another ;  some  are 
fluted  or  channelled  straight  up  and  down ;  some  are 
wrought  with  chevrons,  like  those  on  the  sleeve  of  a 
police-inspector.  There  are  zigzag  cuttings  and  carv- 
ings, which  I  do  not  know  how  to  name  scientifically, 
round  the  arches  of  the  doors  and  windows ;  but  noth- 
ing that  seems  to  have  flowered  out  spontaneously,  as 
natural  incidents  of  a  grand  and  beautiful  design.  In 
the  nave,  between  the  columns  of  the  side  aisles,  I  saw 
one  or  two  monuments.  .  .  . 

The  cathedral  service  is  very  long ;  and  though  the 
choral  part  of  it  is  pleasant  enough,  I  thought  it  not 
best  to  wait  for  the  sermon,  especially  as  it  would  have 
been  quite  imintelligible,  .so  remotely  as  I  sat  in  the 
great  space.  So  I  left  my  seat,  and  after  strolling  up 
and  down  the  aisle  a  few  times,  sallied  forth  into  the 
churchyard.  On  the  cathedral  door  there  is  a  curious 
old  knocker,  in  the  form  of  a  monstrous  face,  which 
was  placed  there,  centuries  ago,  for  the  benefit  of  fugi- 
tives from  justice,  who  used  to  be  entitled  to  sanctuary 
here.  The  exterior  of  the  cathedral,  being  huge,  is 
therefore  grand ;  it  has  a  great  central  tower,  and  two 
at  the  western  end;  and  reposes  in  vast  and  heavy 
length,  without  the  multitude  of  niches,  and  crum- 
bling statues,  and  richness  of  detail,  that  make  the 
towers  and  fronts  of  some  cathedrals  so  endlessly  in- 
teresting. One  piece  of  sculpture  I  remember,  —  a 
carving  of  a  cow,  a  milkmaid,  and  a  monk,  in  refer- 
ence to  the  legend  that  the  site  of  the  cathedral  was. 


512  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

in  some  way,  determined  by  a  woman  bidding  her  cow 
go  home  to  Dunhohne.  Cadmus  was  guided  to  the 
site  of  his  destined  city  in  some  such  way  as  this. 

It  was  a  very  beautiful  day,  and  though  the  shadow 
of  the  cathedral  fell  on  this  side,  yet,  it  being  about 
noontide,  it  did  not  cover  the  churchyard  entirely,  but 
left  many  of  the  graves  in  sunshine.     There  were  not 
a  great  many  monuments,  and  these  were  chiefly  hori- 
zontal slabs,  some  of  which  looked  aged,  but  on  closer 
inspection  proved  to  be  mostly  of  the  present  century. 
I  observed  an  old  stone  figure,  however,  half  worn 
away,  which  seemed  to  have  something  like  a  bishop's 
mitre  on  its  head,  and  may  perhaps  have  lain  in  the 
proudest  chapel  of  the  cathedral  before  occupying  its 
present  bed  among  the  grass.     About  fifteen  paces 
from  the  central  tower,  and  within  its  shadow,  I  found 
a  weather-worn  slab  of  marble,  seven   or  eight  feet 
long,  the  inscription  on  which  interested  me  some- 
what.    It  was  to  the  memory  of  Bobert  Dodsley,  the 
bookseller,  Johnson's  acquaintance,  who,  as  his  tomb- 
stone rather  superciliously  avers,  had  made  a  much 
better  figure  as  an  author  than  ^^  could  have  been  ex- 
pected in  his  rank  of  life."     But,  after  all,  it  is  inevi- 
table that  a  man's  tombstone  should  look  down  on 
him,  or,  at  all  events,  comport  itself  towards  him  "  de 
haut  en  bas."     I  love  to  find  the  graves  of  men  con- 
nected with  literature.     They  interest  me  more,  even 
though  of  no  great  eminence,  than  those  of  persons 
far  more  illustrious  in  other  walks  of  life.     I  know 
not  whether  this  is  because  I  happen  to  be  one  of  the 
literary  kindred,  or  because  all  men  feel  themselves 
akin,  and  on  terms  of  intimacy,  with  those  whom  they 
know,  or  might  have  known,  in  books.     I  rather  be- 
Ueve  that  the  latter  is  the  case.  ' 


1857.]  DURHAM.  613 

My  wife  had  stayed  in  the  cathedral,  but  she  came 
out  at  the  eud  of  the  sermon,  and  told  me  of  two  little 
birds,  who  had  got  into  the  vast  interior,  and  were  in 
great  trouble  at  not  being  able  to  find  their  way  out 
again.  Thus,  two  winged  souls  may  often  have  been 
imprisoned  within  a  faith  of  heavy  ceremonials. 

We  went  roimd  the  edifice,  and,  passing  into  the 
close,  penetrated  through  an  arched  passage  into  the 
crypt,  which,  methought,  was  in  a  better  style  of  ar- 
chitecture than  the  nave  and  choir.  At  one  end  stood 
a  crowd  of  venerable  figures  leaning  against  the  wall, 
being  stone  images  of  bearded  saints,  apostles,  patri- 
archs, kings,  —  personages  of  great  dignity,  at  all 
events,  who  had  doubtless  occupied  conspicuous  niches 
in  and  about  the  cathedral  till  finally  imprisoned  in 
this  cellar.  I  looked  at  every  one,  and  found  not  an 
entire  nose  among  them,  nor  quite  so  many  heads  as 
they  once  had. 

Thence  we  went  into  the  cloisters,  which  are  entire, 
but  not  particularly  interesting.  Indeed,  this  cathe- 
dral has  not  taken  hold  of  my  affections,  except  in 
one  aspect,  when  it  was  exceedingly  grand  and  beau- 
tiful. 

After  looking  at  the  crypt  and  the  cloisters,  we  re- 
turned through  the  close  and  the  churchyard,  and  went 
back  to  the  hotel  through  a  path  by  the  river- side. 
This  is  the  same  dim  and  dusky  path  through  which 
I  wandered  the  night  before,  and  in  the  sunshine  it 
looked  quite  as  beautiful  as  I  knew  it  must,  —  a 
shadow  of  elm-trees  clothing  the  high  bank,  and  over- 
arching the  paths  above  and  below ;  some  of  the  elms 
growing  close  to  the  water-side,  and  flinging  up  their 
topmost  boughs  not  nearly  so  high  as  where  we  stood, 
and  others  climbing  upward  and  upward,  till  our  way 

VOL.   VIII.  33 


614  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

wound  among  their  roots ;  while  through  the  foliage 
the  quiet  river  loitered  along,  with  this  lovely  shade 
on  both  its  banks,  to  pass  through  the  centre  of  the 
town.     The  stately  cathedral  rose  high  above  us,  and 
farther  onward,  in  a  line  with  it,  the  battleraented 
walls  of  the  old  Norman  castle,  gray  and  warlike, 
though  now  it  has  become  a  University.     This  de- 
lightful walk  terminates  at  an  old  bridge  in  the  heart 
of  the  town ;  and  the  castle  hangs  immediately  over 
its  busiest  street.     On  this  bridge,  last  night,  in  the 
embrasure,  or  just  over  the  pier,  where  there   is  a 
stone  seat,  I  saw  some  old  men  seated,  smoking  their 
pipes  and  chatting.     In  my  judgipent,  a  river  flowing 
through  the  centre  of  a  town,  and  not  too  broad  to 
make  itself  familiar,  nor  too  swift,  but  idling  along,  as 
if  it  loved  better  to  stay  there  than  to  go,  is  the  pleas- 
antest  imaginable  piece  of  scenery ;  so  transient  as  it 
is,  and  yet  enduring,  -7-  just  the  same  from  life's  end 
to  life's  end;  and  this  river  Wear,  with  its  sylvan 
wildness,  and  yet  so  sweet  and  placable,  is  the  best  of 
all  little  rivers,  —  not  that  it  is  so  very  small,  but  with 
a  bosom  broad  enough  to  be  crossed  by  a  three-arched 
bridge.     Just  above  the  cathedral  there  is  a  mill  upon 
its  shore,  as  ancient  as  the  times  of  the  Abbey. 

We  went  homeward  through  the  market-place  and 
one  or  two  narrow  streets  ;  for  the  town  has  the  irreg- 
ularity of  all  ancient  settlements,  and,  moreover,  un- 
dulates upward  and  downward,  and  is  also  made  more 
unintelligible  to  a  stranger,  in  its  points  and  bearings, 
by  the  tortuous  course  of  the  river. 

After  dinner  J and  I  walked  along  the  bank 

opposite  to  that  on  which  the  cathedral  stands,  and 
found  the  paths  there  equally  delightful  with  those 
which  I  have  attempted  to  describe.     We  went  on- 


1867.]  YORK.  515 

waxd,  while  the  river  gleamed  through  the  f olis^e  be- 
neath us,  and  passed  so  far  beyond  ^e  cathedral  that 
we  began  to  think  we  were  getting  into  the  country, 
and  that  it  was  time  to  return ;  when  all  at  once  we 
saw  a  bridge  before  us,  and  beyond  that,  on  the  op- 
posite bank  of  the  Wear,  the  cathedral  itself !  The 
stream  had  made  a  circuit  without  our  knowing  it. 
We  paused  upon  the  bridge,  and  admired  and  won- 
dered at  the  beauty  and  glory  of  the  scene,  with  those 
vast,  ancient  towers  rising  out  of  the  green  shade,  and 
looking  as  if  they  were  based  upon  it.  The  situation 
of  Durham  Cathedral  is  certainly  a  noble  one,  finer 
even  than  that  of  Lincoln,  though  the  latter  stands 
even  at  a  more  lordly  height  above  the  town.  But  as 
I  saw  it  then,  it  wa£^  grand,  venerable,  and  sweet,  all 
at  once ;  and  I  never  saw  so  lovely  and  magnificent  a 
scene,  nor,  being  content  with  this,  do  I  care  to  see  a 
better.  The  castle  beyond  came  also  into  the  view, 
and  the  whole  picture  was  mirrored  in  the  tranquil 
stream  below.  And  so,  crossing  the  bridge,  the  path 
led  us  back  through  many  a  bower  of  hollow  shade ; 
and  we  then  quitted  the  hotel,  and  took  the  rail  for 

YORK, 

where  we  arrived  at  about  half  past  nine.  We  put 
up  at  the  Black  Swan,  with  which  we  had  abeady 
made  acquaintance  at  our  previous  visit  to  York.  It 
is  a  very  ancient  hotel ;  for  in  the  coffee-room  I  saw 
on  the  wall  an  old  printed  advertisement,  announcing 
that  a  stage-coach  would  leave  the  Black  Swan  in 
London,  and  arrive  at  the  Black  Swan  in  York,  with 
God's  permission,  in  four  days.  The  date  was  1706  ; 
and  still,  after  a  hundred  and  fifty  years,  the  Black 
Swan  receives  travellers  in  Coney  Street.    It  is  a  very 


516  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  flSSZ 

good  hotel,  and  was  much  thronged  with  guests  ^when 
we  arrived,  as  the  Sessions  come  on  this  week.  We 
found  a  very  smart  waiter,  whose  English  faculties 
have  been  brightened  by  a  residence  of  several  years 
in  America. 

In  the  morning,  before  breakfast,  I  strolled  out^ 
and  walked  round  the  cathedral,  passing  on  my  waj^ 
the  sheriff's  javelin-men,  in  long  gowns  of  faded  pur- 
ple embroidered  with  gold,  canying  halberds  in  their 
hands ;  also  a  gentleman  in  a  cocked  hat,  gold-lace, 
and  breeches,  who  no  doubt,  had  something  to  do  with 
the  ceremonial  of  the  Sessions.     I  saw,  too,  a  proces- 
sion of  a  good  many  old  cabs  and  other  carriages, 
filled  with  people,  and  a  banner  flaunting  above  each 
vehicle.     These  were  the  piano-forte  makers  of  York, 
who  were  going  out  of  town  to  have  a  jollification  to- 
gether. 

After  breakfast  we  all  went  to  the  cathedral,  and 
no  sooner  were  we  within  it  than  we  found  how  much 
our  eyes  had  recently  been  educated,  by  our  greater 
power  of  appreciating  this  magnific^nt  interior ;  for  it 
impressed  us  both  with  a  joy  that  we  never  felt  before. 

J felt  it  too,  and  insisted  that  the  cathedral  must 

have  been  altered  and  improved  since  we  were  last 
here.  But  it  is  only  that  we  have  seen  much  splendid 
architecture  since  then,  and  so  have  grown  in  some  de- 
gree fitted  to  enjoy  it.  York  Cathedral  (I  say  it  now, 
for  it  is  my  present  feeling)  is  the  most  wonderful 
work  that  ever  came  from  the  hands  of  man.  Indeed, 
it  seems  like  "a  house  not  made  with  hands,"  but 
rather  to  have  come  down  from  above,  bringing  an 
awful  majesty  and  sweetness  with  it ;  and  it  is  so  light 
and  aspiring,  with  all  its  vast  columns  and  pointed 
arches,  that  one  would  hardly  wonder  if  it  should  as- 


1857.]  MANCHESTER.  617 

cend  back  to  heaven  again  by  its  mere  spirituality. 
^Positively  the  pillars  and  arches  of  the  choir  are  so 
very  beautiful  that  they  give  the  impression  of  being 
exquisitely  polished,  though  such  is  not  the  f  ^ ;  but 
their  beauty  throws  a  gleam  around  them.  I  thank 
Grod  that  I  saw  this  caHiedral  again,  and  I  thank  him 
that  he  inspired  the  builder  to  make  it,  and  that  man- 
kind has  so  long  enjoyed  it,  and  will  continue  to  en- 
joy it. 

July  14dh.  —  We  left  York  at  twelve  o'clock,  and 
were  delayed  an  hour  or  two  at  Leeds,  waiting  for  a 
train.  I  strolled  up  into  the  town,  and  saw  a  fair, 
with  puppet-shows,  booths  of  penny  actors,  merry-go- 
rounds,  clowns,  boxers,  and  other  such  things  as  I  saw, 
above  a  year  ago,  at  Greenwich  fair,  and  likewise  at 
Tranmere,  during  the  Whitsuntide  holidays. 

We  resumed  our  journey,  and  reached  Southport  in 
pretty  good  trim  at  about  nine  o'clock.  It  has  been  a 
very  interesting  tour.  We  find  Southport  just  as  we 
left  it,  with  its  regular  streets  of  little  and  big  lodg- 
ing-houses, where  the  visitors  perambulate  to  and  fro 
without  any  imaginable  object.  The  tide,  too,  seems 
not  to  have  been  up  over  the  waste  of  sands  since  we 
went  away ;  and  far  seaward  stands  the  same  row  of 
bathing-machines,  and  just  on  the  verge  of  the  horizon 
a  gleam  of  water,  —  even  this  being  not  the  sea,  but 
the  mouth  of  the  river  Bibble,  seeking  the  sea  amid 
the  sandy  desert.  But  we  shall  soon  say  good-by  to 
Southport 

OLD  TRAFFOBD,  MANCHESTER. 

July  22d.  —  We  left  Southport  for  good  on  the 
20th,  and  have  established  ourselves  in  this  place,  in 


618  ENGLISH  NOTE'-BOOKS.  [185:. 

lodgings  that  had  been  provided  for  us  by  Mr,  S^waiD ; 
our  principal  object  being  to  spend  a  few  weeks  in  the 
proximity  of  the  Arts'  Exhibition.  "We  are  here, 
about  three  miles  from  the  Victoria  Railway  station 
in  Manchester  on  one  side,  and  nearly  a  mUe  from  the 
Exhibition  on  the  other.  This  is  a  suburb  of  Man- 
chester, and  consists  of  a  long  street,  called  the  Stret- 
ford  Road,  bordered  with  brick  houses  two  stories 
high,  such  as  are  usually  the  dwellings  of  tradesmen 
or  respectable  mechanics,  but  which  are  now  in  de- 
mand for  lodgings,  at  high  prices,  on  account  of  the 
Exhibition.  It  seems  to  be  rather  a  new  precinct  of 
the  city,  and  the  houses,  though  ranged  along  a  con- 
tinuous street,  are  but  a  brick  border  of  the  green 
fields  in  the  rear.  Occasionally  you  get  a  glimpse  of 
this  country  aspect  between  two  houses ;  but  the 
street  itself,  even  with  its  little  grass-plots  and  bits 
of  shrubbery  under  the  front  windows,  is  as  ugly  as 
it  can  be  made.  Some  of  the  houses  are  better  than 
I  hare  described ;  but  the  brick  used  here  in  building 
is  very  unsightly  in  hue  and  surface. 

Betimes  in  the  morning  the  Exhibition  omnibuses 
begin  to  trundle  along,  and  pass  at  intervals  of  two 
and  a  half  minutes  through  the  day,  —  immense  vehi- 
cles constructed  to  carry  thirty-nine  passengers,  and 
generally  with  a  good  part  of  that  number  inside  and 
out.  The  omnibuses  are  painted  scarlet,  bordered 
with  white,  have  three  horses  abreast,  and  a  conductor 
in  a  red  coat.  They  perform  the  journey  from  this 
point  into  town  in  about  half  an  hour ;  and  yesterday 
morning,  being  in  a  hurry  to  get  to  the  railway  sta- 
tion, I  found  that  I  could  outwalk  them,  taking  into 
account  their  frequent  stoppages. 

We  have  taken  the  whole  house  (except  some  in^ 


1857.]  MANCHESTER.  519 

scrutable  holes,  into  which  the  family  creeps),  of  re- 
spectable people,  who  never  took  lodgers  until  this 
juncture.     Their  furniture,  however,  is   of  the  true 
lodging-house  pattern,  — sofas  and  chairs  which  have 
no  possibility  of  repose  in  them ;  rickety  tables ;  an 
old  piano  and  old  music,  with  "Lady  Helen  Elizar 
beth"  somebody's  name  written  on  it.      It  is  very 
strange  how  nothing  but  a  genuine  home  can  ever 
look  homelike.     They  appear  to  be  good  people;  a 
little  girl  of  twelve,  a  daughter,  waits  on  table :  and 
there  is  an  elder  daughter,  who  yesterday  answered 
the  door-bell,  looking  very  like  a  young  lady,  besides 
five  or  six  smaller  children,  who  make  less  uproar  of 
grief  or  merriment  than  could  possibly  be  expected. 
The  husband  is  not  apparent,  though  I  see  his  hat  in 
the  hall.     The  house  is  new,  and  has  a  trim,  light- 
colored  interior  of  half -gentility.     I  suppose  the  rent, 
in  ordinary  times,  might  be  <£25  per  annum ;  but  we 
pay  at  the  rate  of  <£338  for  the  part  which  we  occupy. 
This,  like  all  the  other  houses  in  the  neighborhood, 
was  evidently  built  to  be   sold  or  let;   the  builder 
never  thought  of  living  in  it  himself,  and  so  that 
subtile  element,  which  would   have  enabled  him  to 
create  a  home,  was-  entirely  left  out. 

This  morning,  J and  I  set  forth  on  a  walk, 

first  towards  the  palace  of  the  Arts'  Exhibition,  which 
looked  small  compared  with  my  idea  of  it,  and  seems 
to  be  of  the  Crystal  Palace  order  of  architecture,  only 
with  more  iron  to  its  glass.  Its  front  is  composed  of 
three  round  arches  in  a  row.  We  did  not  go  in.  .  .  . 
Turning  to  the  right,  we  walked  onward  two  or  three 
miles,  passing  the  Botanic  Garden,  and  thence  along 
by  suburban  villas,  Belgrave  terraces,  and  other  such 
prettinesses   in   the   modem   Gothic   or  Elizabethan 


520  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

style,  with  fancifully  ornamented  flower-plots  before 
them;  thence  by  hedgerows  and  fields,  and  through 
two  or  three  villages,  with  here  and  there  an  old.  plas- 
ter and  timber-built  thatched  house,  among  a  streei 
fuU  of  modem  brick-fronts,  —  the  alehouse,  or  rural 
inn,  being  generally  the  most  ancient  house  in  the 
village.  It  was  a  sultry,  heavy  day,  and  I  walked 
without  much  enjoyment  of  the  air  and  exercise.  We 
crossed  a  narrow  and  swift  river,  flowing  between  deep 
banks.  It  must  have  been  either  the  Mersey,  still  an 
infant  stream,  and  little  dreaming  of  the  thousand 
mighty  ships  that  float  on  its  farther  tide,  or  else  the 
IrweU,  which  empties  into  the  Mersey.  We  passed 
through  the  village  beyond  this  stream,  and  went  to 
the  railway  station,  and  then  were  brought  back  to 
Old  TraflEord,  and  deposited  close  by  the  Exhibition. 

It  has  showered  this  afternoon ;  and  I  beguiled  m^y 
time  for  half  an  hour  by  setting  down  the  vehicles  that 
'went  past ;  not  that  they  were  particularly  numerous, 
but  for  the  sake  of  knowing  the  character  of  the  travel 
along  the  road. 


July  2Qth.  —  Day  before  yesterday  we  went  to  the 
Arts'  Exhibition,  of  which  I  do  not  think  that  I  have 
a  great  deal  to  say.  The  edifice,  being  built  more  for 
convenience  than  show,  appears  better  in  the  interior 
than  from  without,  —  long  vaulted  vistas,  lighted  from 
above,  extending  far  away,  all  himg  with  pictures; 
and,  on  the  floor  below,  statues,  knights  in  armor, 
cabinets,  vases,  and  all  manner  of  curious  and  beau- 
tiful things,  in  a  regular  arrangement.  Scatter  five 
thousand  people  through  the  scene,  and  I  do  not  know 
how  to  make  a  better  outline  sketch.     I  was  unquiet^ 


1857.]  MANCHESTER.  621 

from  a  hopelessness  of  being  able  to  enjoy  it  fully. 
Nothing  is  more  depressing  to  me  than  the  sight  of  a 
great  many  pictures  together;  it  is  like  having  in- 
numerable  books  open  before  you  at  once,  and  being 
able  to  read  only  a  sentence  or  two  in  each.  They 
bedazzle  one  another  with  cross  lights.  There  never 
should  be  more  than  one  picture  in  a  room,  nor  more 
than  one  picture  to  be  studied  in  one  day.  Galleries 
of  pictures  are  surely  the  greatest  absurdities  that  ever 
were  contrived,  there  being  no  excuse  for  them,  except 
that  it  is  the  only  way  in  which  pictures  can  be  made 
generally  available  and  accessible. 

We  went  first  into  the  Gallery  of  British  Painters, 
where  there  were  hundreds  of  pictures,  every  one  of 
which  would  have  interested  me  by  itself ;  but  I  could 
not  fix  my  mind  on  one  more  than  another,  so  I  wan^ 
dered  about,  to  get  a  general  idea  of  the  Exhibition. 
Truly  it  is  very  fine ;  truly,  also,  every  great  show  is 
a  kind  of  humbug.  I  doubt  whether  there  were  half 
a  dozen  people  there  who  got  the  kind  of  enjoyment 
that  it  was  intended  to  create,  —  very  respectable  peo- 
ple they  seemed  to  be,  and  very  well  behaved,  but  all 
skimming  the  surface,  as  I  did,  and  none  of  them  so 
feeding  on  what  was  beautiful  as  to  digest  it,  and 
make  it  a  part  of  themselves.  Such  a  quantity  of  ob- 
jects must  be  utterly  rejected  before  you  can  get  any 
real  profit  from  one !  It  seemed  like  throwing  away 
time  to  look  twice  even  at  whatever  was  most  pre- 
cious ;  and  it  was  dreary  to  think  of  not  fully  enjoying 
this  collection,  the  very  flower  of  Time,  which  never 
bloomed  before,  and  never,  by  any  possibility,  can 
bloom  again.  Viewed  hastily,  moreover,  it  is  some- 
what sad  to  think  that  mai^ind,  after  centuries  of 
mltivation  of  the  beautiful  arts,  can  produce  no  more 


522  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [186T 

gplendid  spectacle  than  this.  It  is  not  so  yery  grand, 
although,  poor  as  it  is,  I  lack  capacity  to  take  in  even 
the  whole  of  it. 

What  gave  me  most  pleasure  (because  it  required 
no  trouble  nor  study  to  come  at  the  heart  of  it)  were 
the  individual  relics  of  antiquity,  of  which  there  are 
some  very  curious  ones  in  the  cases  ranged  along  the 
principal  saloon  or  nave  of  the  building.     For  exam- 
ple, the  dagger  with  which  Felton  killed  the  Duke 
of  Buckingham, — a  knife  with  a  bone  handle  and  a 
curved  blade,  not  more  than  three  inches  long ;  sharp- 
pointed,  murderous-looking,  but  of  very  coarse  manu- 
facture.     Also,  the  Duke  of  Alva's  leading  staff  of 
iron ;  and  the  target  of  the  Emperor  Charles  Y.,  which 
seemed  to  be  made  of  hardened  leather,  with  designs 
artistically  engraved  upon  it,  and  gilt.     I  saw  Wol- 
sey's  portrait,  and,  in  close  proximity  to  it,  his  verita- 
ble cardinal's  hat  in  a  richly  ornamented  glass  case,  on 
which  was  an  inscription  to  the  effect  that  it  had  been 
bought  by  Charles  Kean  at  the  sale  of  Horace  Wal- 
pole's  collection.     It  is  a  felt  hat  with  a  brim  about 
six  inches  wide  all  round,  and  a  rather  high  crown ; 
the  color  was,  doubtless,  a  bright  red  originally,  but 
now  it  is  mottled  with  a  grayish  hue,  and  there  are 
cracks  in  the  brim,  as  if  the  hat  had  seen  a  good  deal 
of  wear.    I  suppose  a  far  greater  curiosity  than  this  is 
the  signet-ring  of  one  of  the  Pharaohs,  who  reigned 
over  Egypt  during  Joseph's  prime  ministry,  —  a  large 
ring  to  be  worn  on  the  thumb,  if  at  all,  —  of  massive 
gold,  seal  part  and  all,  and  inscribed  with  some  char- 
acters that  looked  like  Hebrew.     I  had  seen  this  be- 
fore in  Mr.  Mayer's  collection  in  Liverpool.    The  med- 
iaeval and  English  relics,  however,  interested  me  more, 
—  such  as  the  golden  and  enamelled  George  worn  by 


1857,]  MANCHESTER.  628 

Sir  Thomas  More ;  or  the  embroidered  shirt  of  Charles 
I.,  —  the  very  one,  I  presume,  which  he  wore  at  his  ex- 
ecution. Hiere  are  no  blood-marks  on  it,  it  being  very 
nicely  washed  and  folded.  The  texture  of  the  linen 
cloth  —  if  linen  it  be  —  is  coarser  than  any  peasant 
would  wear  at  this  day,  but  the  needle-work  is  exceed- 
ingly fine  and  elaborate.  Another  relic  of  the  same 
period,  —  the  Cavalier  General  Sir  Jacob  Astley's 
buS-coat,  with  his  belt  and  sword ;  the  leather  of  the 
buff-coat,  for  I  took  it  between  my  fingers,  is  about  ^ 
quarter  of  an  inch  thick,  of  the  same  material  as  % 
wash-leather  glove,  and  by  no  means  smoothly  dressed, 
though  the  sleeves  are  covered  with  silver-lace.  Of 
old  armor,  there  are  admirable  specimens ;  and  it 
makes  one's  head  ache  to  look  at  the  iron  pots  which 
men  used  to  thrust  their  heads  into.  Indeed,  at  one 
period  they  seem  to  have  worn  an  inner  iron  cap  un- 
derneath the  helmet.  I  doubt  whether  there  ever  was 
any  age  of  chivalry.  ...  It  certainly  was  no  chivalric 
sentiment  that  made  men  case  themselves  in  impene- 
trable iron,  and  ride  about  in  iron  prisons,  fearfully 
peeping  at  their  enemies  through  little  slits  and  gim- 
let-holes. The  unprotected  breast  of  a  private  soldier 
must  have  shamed  his  leaders  in  those  days.  The 
point  of  honor  is  very  different  now, 

I  mean  to  go  again  and  again,  many  times  more, 
and  will  take  each  day  some  one  department,  and  so 
endeavor  to  get  some  real  use  and  improvement  out  of 
what  I  see.  Much  that  is  most  valuable  must  be  im- 
mitigably  rejected;  but  something,  according  to  the 
measure  of  my  poor  capacity,  will  really  be  taken  into 
my  mind.  After  all,  it  was  an  agreeable  day,  and  I 
think  the  next  one  will  be  more  sa 


524  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

Jvly  28^A.  —  Day  before  yesterday  I  paid  a  second 
visit  to  the  Exhibition,  and  devoted  the  day  mainly  to 
seeing  the  works  of  British  painters,  which  fill  a  very 
large  space,  — two  or  three  great  saloons  at  the  right 
side  of  the  nave.     Among  the  earliest  are  Hogarth's 
pictures,  including  the  Sigismunda,  which  I  remember 
to  have  seen  before,  with  her  lover's  heart  in  her  hand, 
looking  like  a  monstrous  strawberry ;  and  the  March 
to  Finchley,  than  which  nothing  truer  to  English  life 
and  character  was  ever  painted,  nor  ever  can  be ;  and 
a  large  stately  portrait  of  Captain  Coram,  and  others, 
all  excellent  in  proportion  as  they  come  near  to  ordi- 
nary life,  and  are  wrought  out  through  its  forms.    All 
English  painters  resemble  Hogarth  in  this  respect. 
They  cannot  paint  anything  high,  heroic,  and  ideal, 
and  their  attempts  in  that  direction  are  wearisome  to 
look  at ;  but  they  sometimes  produce  good  effects  by 
means  of  awkward  figures  in  ill-made  coats  and  small- 
clothes, and  hard,  coarse-complexioned  faces,  such  aft 
they  might  see  anywhere  in  the  street.     They  an* 
strong  in  homeliness  and  ugliness,  weak  in  their  ef  • 
forts  at  the  beautiful.    Sir  Thomas  Lawrence  attains  a 
sort  of  grace,  which  you  feel  to  be  a  trick,  and  there- 
fore get  disgusted  with  it.     Reynolds  is  not  quite  gen- 
uine, though  certainly  he  has  produced  some  noble  and 
beautiful  heads.      But  Hogarth  is  the  only  English 
painter,  except  in  the  landscape  department ;  there  are 
no  others  who  interpret  life  to  me  at  all,  unless  it  be 
some  of  the  modem  Pre-Raphaelites.     Pretty  village 
scenes  of  common  life,  —  pleasant  domestic  passages, 
with  a  touch  of  easy  humor  in  them,  —  little  pathoses 
and  fancynesses,  are  abimdant  enough ;  and  Wilkie,  to 
be  sure,  has  done  more  than  this,  though  not  a  great 
deal  more.     His  merit  lies,  not  in  a  high  aim,  but  in 


1857.]  MANCHESTER.  626 

accomplishing  his  aim  so  perfectly.  It  is  miaccomita- 
ble  that  the  English  painters'  achievements  should  be 
so  much  inferior  to  those  of  the  English  poets^  who 
have  really  elevated  the  human  mind ;  but,  to  be  sure, 
painting  has  only  become  an  English  art  subsequently 
to  the  epochs  of  the  greatest  poets,  and  since  the  be- 
ginning of  the  last  century,  during  which  England  had 
no  poets.  I  respect  Haydon  more  than  I  once  did,  not 
for  his  pictures,  they  being  detestable  to  see,  but  for 
his  heroic  rejection  of  whatever  his  countrymen  and 
he  himself  could  really  do,  and  his  bitter  resolve  to 
achieve  something  higher,  —  failing  in  which,  he  &ied. 
No  doubt  I  am  doing  vast  injustice  to  a  great  many 
gifted  men  in  what  I  have  here  written,  —  as,  for  in- 
stance, Copley,  who  certainly  has  painted  a  slain  man 
to  the  life ;  and  to  a  crQwd  of  landscape-painters,  who 
have  made  wonderful  reproductions  of  little  English 
streams  and  shrubbery,  and  cottage  doors  and  coun- 
try lanes.  And  there  is  a  picture  called  The  Evening 
Gun,  by  Danby, — a  ship  of  war  on  a  calm,  glassy  tide, 
at  simset,  with  the  cannon  -  smoke  puffing  from  her 
port-hole ;  it  is  very  beautiful,  and  so  effective  that 
you  can  even  hear  the  report  breaking  upon  the  still- 
ness, with  so  grand  a  roar  that  it  is  almost  like  still* 
ness  too.  As  for  Turner,  I  care  no  more  for  his  light- 
colored  pictures  than  for  so  much  lacquered  ware  or 
painted  gingerbread.  Doubtless  this  is  my  fault,  my 
own  deficiency ;  but  I  cannot  help  it,  —  not,  at  least, 
without  sophisticating  myself  by  the  effort.  The  only 
modem  pictures  that  accomplish  a  higher  end  than 
that  of  pleasing  the  eye — the  only  ones  that  really 
take  hold  of  my  mind,  and  with  a  kind  of  acerbity, 
Uke  unripe  fruit — are  the  works  of  Hunt,  and  one  or 
two  other  painters  of  the  Pre-Baphaelite  schooL    They 


526  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1867. 

seem  wilfully  to  abjure  all  beauty,  and  to  make  their 
pictures  disagreeable  out  of  mere  malice ;  but  at  any 
rate,  for  the  thought  and  feeling  which  are  ground  up 
with  the  paint,  they  will  bear  looking  at,  and  disclose 
a  deeper  value  the  longer  you  look*     Never  was  any- 
thing so  stiff  and  unnatural  as  they  appear ;  although 
every  single  thing  represented  seems  to  be  taken  di- 
rectly out  of  life  and  reality,  and,  as  it  were,  pasted 
down  upon  the  canvas.     They  almost  paint  even  sepa- 
rate hairs.     Accomplishing  so  much,  and  so  perfectly, 
it  seems  unaccountable  that  the  picture  does  not  live ; 
but  Nature  has  an  art  beyond  these  painters,  and  they 
leave  out  some  medium,  —  some  enchantment   that 
should  intervene,  and  keep  the  object  from  pressing 
so  baldly  and  harshly  upon  the  spectator's  eyeballs. 
With  the  most  lifelike  reproduction,  there  is  no  illu- 
sion.     I  think  if  a  semi-obscurity  were  thrown  over 
the  picture  after  finishing  it  to  this  nicety,  it  might 
bring  it  nearer  to  nature.     I  remember  a  heap  of  au- 
tumn leaves,  every  one  of  which  seems  to  have  been 
stiffened  with  gum  and  varnish,  and  then  put  carefully 
down  into  the  stiffly  disordered  heap.     Perhaps  these 
artists  may  hereafter  succeed  in  combining  the  truth 
of  detail  with  a  broader  and  higher  truth.     Coming 
from  such  a  depth  as  their  pictm*es  do,  and  having 
really  an  idea  as  the  seed  of  them,  it  is  strange  that 
they  should  look  like  the  most  made-up  things  imagi- 
nable.    One  picture  by  Hunt  that  greatly  interested 
me  was  of  some  sheep  that  had  gone  astray  among 
heights  and  precipices,  and  I  could  have  looked  all 
day  at  these  poor,  lost  creatures,  —  so  true  was  their 
meek  alarm  and  hopeless  bewilderment,  their  huddling 
together,  without  the  slightest  confidence  of  mutual 
help ;  all  that  the  courage  and  wisdom  of  the  bravest 


1867.]  MANCHESTER.  527 

and  wisest  of  them  could  do  being  to  bleat,  and  only  a 
few  having  spirits  enough  even  for  this. 

After  going  through  these  modem  masters,  among 
whom  were  some  French  painters  who  do  not  interest 
me  at  all,  I  did  a  miscellaneous  business,  chiefly  among 
the  water  -  colors,  and  photographs,  and  afterwards 
among  the  antiquities  and  works  of  om^ental  art. 
I  have  forgotten  what  I  saw,  except  the  breastplate 
and  helmet  of  Henry  of  Navarre,  of  steel,  engraved 
with  designs  that  have  been  half  obliterated  by  scrub- 
bing. I  remember,  too,  a  breastplate  of  an  Elector  of 
Saxony,  with  a  bullet-hole  through  it.  He  received 
his  mortal  wound  through  that  hole,  and  died  of  it  two 
days  afterwards,  three  hundred  years  ago. 

There  was  a  crowd  of  visitors,  insomuch  that  it  was 
difficult  to  get  a  satisfactory  view  of  the  niost  interest* 
ing  objects.  They  were  nearly  all  middling-class  peo- 
ple ;  the  Exhibition,  I  think,  does  not  reach  the  lower 
classes  at  all ;  in  fact,  it  could  not  reach  them,  nor 
their  betters  either,  without  a  good  deal  of  study  to 
help  it  out.  I  shall  go  to-day,  and  do  my  best  to  get 
profit  out  of  it. 

Jvly  ZOth.  —  We  aU,  with  R and  Fanny,  went 

to  the  Exhibition,  yesterday,  and  spent  the  day  there ; 
not  J ,  however,  for  he  went  to  the  Botanical  Gar- 
dens. After  some  little  skirmishing  with  other  things, 
I  devoted  myself  to  the  historical  portraits,  which  hang 
on  both  sides  of  the  great  nave,  and  went  through 
them  pretty  faithfully.  The  oldest  are  pictures  of 
Richard  II.  and  Henry  IV.  and  Edward  IV.  and  Jane 
Shore,  and  seem  to  have  little  or  no  merit  as  works 
of  art,  being  cold  and  stiff,  the  life  having,  perhaps, 
faded  out  of  them :  but   these  older  painters  were 


628  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  £1857. 

trustworthy,  inasmuch  as  they  had  no  Idea  of  making 
a  picture,  but  only  of  getting  the  face  before  them  on 
canvas  as  accurately  as  they  could.     All  Englisli  his- 
tory scarcely  supplies  half  a  dozen  portraits  before  the 
time  of  Henry  VIII. ;  after  that  period,  and  through 
the  reigns  of  Elizabeth  and  James,  there  are  man; 
ugly  pictures  by  Dutchmen  and  Italians ;  and  the  col 
lection  is  wonderfully  rich  in  portraits  of  the  time  of 
Charles  I.  and  the  Commonwealth.     Vandyke  seems 
to  have  brought  portrait-painting  into  fashion;  and 
very  likely  the  king's  love  of  art  diffused  a  taste  for 
it  throughout  the  nation,  and  remotely  suggested,  even 
to  his  enemies,  to  get  their  pictures  painted.     Eliza- 
beth has  perpetuated  her  cold,  thin  visage  on  many 
canvases,  and  generally  with  some  fantasy  of  costume 
that  makes  her  ridiculous  to  aU  time.     There  are  sev- 
eral of  Mary  of  Scotland,  none  of  which  have  a  gleam 
of  beauty;  but  the  stiff  old  brushes  of  these  painters 
could  not  catch  the  beautiful.     Of  aU  the  older  pic- 
tures, the  only  one  that  I  took  pleasure  in  looking  at 
was  a  portrait  of  Lord  Deputy  Falkland,  by  Vanso- 
mer,  in  James  I.'s  time,  —  a  very  stately,  full-length 
figure  in  white,  looking  out  of  the  picture  as  if  he  saw 
you.     The  catalogue  says  that  this  portrait  suggested 
an  incident  in  Horace  Walpole's  "  Castle  of  Otran- 
to  " ;  but  I  do  not  remember  it. 

I  have  a  haunting  doubt  of  the  value  of  portrait- 
painting;  that  is  to  say,  whether  it  gives  you  a  genu- 
ine idea  of  the  person  purporting  to  be  represented. 
I  do  not  remember  ever  to  have  recognized  a  man  by 
having  previously  seen  his  portrait.  Vandyke's  pic- 
tures are  full  of  grace  and  nobleness,  but  they  do  not 
look  likjB  Englishmen, — the  burly,  rough,  wine-flushed 
and  weather -reddened  faces,  and  sturdy  flesh  and 


1867.]  MANCHESTER.  629 

blood,  which  we  see  even  at  the  present  day,  when 
they  mnst  naturally  have  become  a  good  deal  refined 
from  either  the  country  gentleman  or  the  courtier  of 
the  Stuarts'  age.  There  is  an  old,  fat  portrait  of 
Gervoyse  HoUes,  in  a  bufif-coat, — a  coarse,  hoggish, 
yet  manly  man.  The  painter  is  unknown ;  but  I 
honor  him,  and  Gervoyse  Holies  too,  —  for  one  was 
willing  to  be  truly  rendered,  and  the  other  dared  to  do 
it.  It  seems  to  be  the  aim  of  portrait-painters  gener- 
ally, especially  of  those  who  have  been  most  famous, 
to  make  their  pictures  as  beautiful  and  noble  as  can 
anywise  consist  with  retaining  the  very  slightest  re- 
semblance to  the  person  sitting  to  them.  They  sel^ 
dom  attain  even  the  grace  and  beauty  which  they  aim 
at,  but  only  hit  some  temporary  or  individual  taste. 
Vandyke,  however,  achieved  graces  that  rise  above 
time  and  fashion,  and  so  did  Sir  Peter  Lely,  in  his 
female  portraits;  but  the  doubt  is,  whether  the  works 
of  either  are  genuine  history.  Not  more  so,  I  suspect, 
than  the  narrative  of  a  historian  who  should  seek  to 
make  poetry  out  of  the  events  which  he  relates,  reject- 
ing those  which  could  not  possibly  be  thus  idealized. 

I  observe,  furthermore,  that  a  full-length  portrait  has 
seldom  face  enough ;  not  that  it  lacks  its  fair  propor- 
tion by  measurement,  but  the  artist  does  not  often  find 
it  possible  to  make  the  face  so  intellectually  prominent 
as  to  subordinate  the  figure  and  drapery.  Vandyke 
does  this,  however.  In  his  pictures  of  Charles  I.,  for 
instance,  it  is  the  melancholy  grace  of  the  visage  that 
attracts  the  eye,  and  it  passes  to  the  rest  of  the  com- 
position only  by  an  effort.  Earlier  and  later  pictures 
are  but  a  few  inches  of  face  to  several  feet  of  figure 
and  costume,  and  more  insignificant  than  the  latter, 
because  seldom  so  well  done ;  and  I  suspect  the  same 

VOL.  Yin.  34 


530  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  [1857. 

would  generally  be  the  case  now,  only  that  the  present 
simplicity  of  costume  gives  the  face  a  chance  to  be 
seen* 

I  was  interrupted  here,   and  cannot  resmne    the 
thread ;  but  considering  how  much  of  his  own  conceit 
the  artist  puts  into  a  portrait,  how  much  affectation  the 
sitter  puts  on,  and  then  again  that  no  face  is  the  same 
to  any  two  spectators ;  also,  that  these  portraits  aj*e 
darkened  and  faded  with  age,  and  can  seldom  be  more 
than  half  seen,  being  hung  too  high,  or  somehow  or 
other  inconvenient,  —  on  the  whole,  I  question  whether 
there  is  much  use  in  looking  at  them.     The  truest  test 
would  be,  for  a  man  well  read  in  English  history  and 
biography,  and  himself  an  observer  of  insight,  to  go 
through  l!he  series  without  knowing  what  personages 
they  represented,  and  write  beneatih  each  the  name 
which  the  portrait  vindicated  for  itself. 

After  getting  through  the  portrait-gallery,  I  went 
among  the  engravings  and  photographs,  and  then 
glanced  along  the  old  masters,  but  without  seriously 
looking  at  anything.     While  I  was  among  the  Dutch 

painters,  a  gentleman  accosted  me.    It  was  Mr.  J ^ 

whom  I  once  met  at  dinner  with  Bennoch.  He  told 
me  that  *'  the  Poet  Laureate  "  (as  he  called  him)  was 
in  the  Exhibition  rooms  ;  and  as  I  expressed  great  in- 
terest, Mr.  J was  kind  enough  to  go  in  quest  of 

him.  Not  for  the  purpose  of  introduction,  however, 
for  he  was  not  acquainted  with  Tennyson.     Soon  Mr. 

J returned,  and  said  that  he  had  found  the  Poet 

Laureate,  —  and,  going  into  the  saloon  of  the  old  mas- 
ters,  we  saw  him  there,  in  company  with  Mr.  Woolner, 
whose  bust  of  him  is  now  in  the  Exhibition. 

Grazing  at  him  with  all  my  eyes,  I  liked  him  well, 


1867.]  MANCHESTER.  531 

and  rejoiced  more  in  him  than  in  att  the  other  won- 
ders of  the  Exhibition. 

How  strange  that  in  these  two  or  three  pages  I  can- 
not get  one  single  touch  that  may  call  him  up  here- 
after I 

I  would  most  gladly  have  seen  more  of  this  one  poet 
of  our  day,  but  forbore  to  follow  him ;  for  I  must  own 
,  that  it  seemed  mean  to  be  dogging  him  through  the  sa- 
loons, or  even  to  look  at  him,  since  it  was  to  be  done 
stealthily,  if  at  aU. 

He  is  as  un-English  as  possible ;  indeed,  an  Eng- 
lishman of  genius  usually  lacks  the  national  character- 
istics, and  is  great  abnormally.  Even  the  great  sailor, 
Nelson,  was  unlike  his  countrymen  in  the  qualities 
that  constituted  him  a  hero ;  he  was  not  the  perfection 
of  an  Englishman,  but  a  creature  of  another  kind,  — 
sensitive,  nervous,  excitable,  and  really  more  like  a 
Frenchman. 

Un-English  as  he  was,  Tennyson  had  not,  however, 
an  American  look.  I  cannot  well  describe  the  differ- 
ence ;  but  there  was  something  more  mellow  in  him, — 
softer,  sweeter,  broader,  more  simple  than  we  are  apt 
to  be.  Living  apart  from  men  as  he  does  would  hurt 
any  one  of  us  more  than  it  does  him.  I  may  as  well 
leave  him  here,  for  I  cannot  touch  the  central  point. 

August  2d.  —  Day  before  yesterday  I  went  again 
to  the  Exhibition,  and  began  the  day  with  looking  at 
the  old  masters.  Positively,  I  do  begin  to  receive 
some  pleasure  from  looking  at  pictures ;  but  as  yet  it 
has  nothing  to  do  with  any  technical  merit,  nor  do  I 
think  I  shall  ever  get  so  far  as  that.    Some  landscapes 


582  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [l%bl 

by  Ruysdael,  and  some  portraits  by  Murillo,  Velas- 
quez, and  Titian,  were  those  which  I  was  most  able  to 
appreciate  ;  and  I  see  reason  for  allowing,  contrary  to 
my  opinion,  as  expressed  a  few  pages  back,  that  a  po^ 
trait  may  preserve  some  valuable  characteristics  of  the 
person  represented.  The  pictures  in  the  English  por 
trait^gaUery  are  mostly  very  bad,  and  that  may  be  the 
reason  why  I  saw  so  little  in  them.  I  saw  too,  at  this 
last  visit,  a  Virgin  and  Child,  which  appeared  to  me 
to  have  an  expression  more  adequate  to  the  subject 
than  most  of  the  innumerable  virgins  and  children^ 
in  which  we  see  only  repetitions  of  siipple  maternity ; 
indeed,  any  mother,  with  her  first  child,  would  serve 
an  artist  for  one  of  them.  But  in  this  picture  the 
Virgin  had  a  look  as  if  she  were  loving  the  infant  as 
her  own  child,  and  at  the  same  time  rendering  him  an 
awful  worship,  as  to  her  Creator. 

While  1  was  sitting  in  the  central  saloon,  listening 
to  the  music,  a  young  man  accosted  me,  presuming 
that  I  was  so-and-so,  the  American  author.  He  him- 
self was  a  traveller  for  a  publishing  firm ;  and  he  in- 
troduced conversation  by  talking  of  Uttoxeter,  and  my 
description  of  it  in  an  annual.  He  said  that  the  ac- 
count had  caused  a  good  deal  of  pique  among  the 
good  people  of  Uttoxeter,  because  of  the  ignorance 
which  I  attribute  to  them  as  to  the  circumstance  which 
connects  Johnson  with  their  town.  The  spot  where 
Johnson  stood  can,  it  appears,  still  be  pointed  out.  It 
is  on  one  side  of  the  market-place,  and  not  in  the 
neighborhood  of  the  church.  I  forget  whether  I  re- 
corded, at  the  time,  that  an  Uttoxeter  newspaper  was 
sent  me,  containing  a  proposal  that  a  statue  or  memo- 
rial should  be  erected  on  the  spot.  It  would  gratify 
me  exceedingly  if  such  a  result  should  come  from  my 
pious  pilgrimage  thither. 


1857.]  MANCHESTER.  533 

My  new  acquaintance,  who  was  cockneyish,  but  very 
intelligent  and  agreeable,  went  on  to  talk  about  many 
literary  matters  and  characters  ;  among  others,  about 
Miss  Brontd,  whom  he  had  seen  at  the  Chapter  Cof- 
fee-House, when  she  and  her  sister  Anne  first  went  to 
London.     He  was  at  that  time  connected  with  the 

house  of and ,  and  he  described  the  surprise 

and  incredulity  of  Mr. ,  when  this  little,  common- 

place4ooking  woman  presented  herself  as  the  author 
of  "  Jane  Eyre."  His  story  brought  out  the  insignifi- 
cance of  Charlotte  Brontd's  aspect,  and  the  bluff  re- 
jection of  her  by  Mr. ,  much  more  strongly  than 

Mrs.  Graskell's  narrative. 

Chorlton  Hoadj  August  9th.  —  We  have  changed 
our  lodgings  since  my  last  date,  those  at  Old  Trafford 
being  inconvenient,  and  the  landlady  a  sharp,  peremp- 
tory housewife,  better  fitted  to  deal  with  her  own  fam- 
ily than  to  be  complaisant  to  guests.  We  are  now  a 
little  farther  from  the  Exhibition,  and  not  much  bet- 
ter off  as  regards  accommodation,  but  the  housekeeper 
is  a  pleasant,  civil  sort  of  a  woman,  auspiciously  named 
Mrs.  Honey.  The  house  is  a  specimen  of  the  poorer 
middle -class  dwellings  as  built  nowadays,  —  narrow 
staircase,  thin  walls,  and,  being  constructed  for  sale, 
very  ill  put  together  indeed,  —  the  floors  with  wide 
cracks  between  the  boards,  and  wide  crevices  admit- 
ting both  air  and  light  over  the  doors,  so  that  the 
house  is  full  of  draughts.  The  outer  walls,  it  seems 
to  me,  are  but  of  one  brick  in  thickness,  and  the  par* 
tition  walls  certainly  no  thicker ;  and  the  movements, 
and  sometimes  the  voices,  of  people  in  the  contiguous 
house  are  audible  to  us.  The  Exhibition  has  tempora- 
rily so  raised  the  value  of  lodgings  here  that  we  have 
to  pay  a  high  price  for  even  such  a  house  as  this. 


534  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  [1857. 

Mr.  Wilding  having  gone  on  a  tour  to  Scodand,  I 
had  to  1;)e  at  the  Consulate  every  day  last  week  till 
yesterday ;  when  I  absented   myself  from  duty,  and 

went  to  the  Exhibition.     U and  I  spent  an  hour 

together,  looking  principally  at  the  old  Dutch  masters, 
who  seem  to  me  the  most  wonderful  set  of  men  that 
ever  handled  a  brush.  Such  lifdike  representations 
of  cabbages,  onions,  brass  kettles,  and  kitchen  crock- 
ery ;  such  blankets,  with  the  woollen  fuzz  upon  them ; 
such  everything  I  never  thought  that  the  skill  of  man 
could  produce!  Even  the  photograph  cannot  equal 
their  miracles.  The  closer  you  look,  the  more  minutely 
true  the  picture  is  found  to  be,  and  I  doubt  if  even 
the  microscope  could  see  beyond  the  painter's  touch. 
Gerard  Dow  seems  to  be  the  master  among  these 
queer  magicians.  A  straw  mat,  in  one  of  his  pictures, 
is  the  most  miraculous  thing  that  human  art  has  yet 
accomplished ;  and  there  is  a  metal  vase,  with  a  dent 
in  it,  that  is  absolutely  more  real  than  reality.  These 
painters  accomplish  all  they  aim  at,  —  a  praise,  me- 
thinks,  which  can  be  given  to  no  other  men  since  the 
world  began.  They  must  have  laid  down  their  brushes 
with  perfect  satisfaction,  knowing  that  each  one  of 
their  million  touches  had  been  necessary  to  the  effect, 
and  that  there  was  not  one  too  few  nor  too  many. 
And  it  is  strange  how  spiritual  and  su^estive  the 
commonest  household  article  —  an  earthen  pitcher, 
for  example  —  becomes,  when  represented  with  entire 
accuracy.  These  Dutchmen  got  at  the  soul  of  com- 
mon things,  and  so  made  them  types  and  interpreters 
of  the  spiritual  world. 

Afterwards  I  looked  at  many  of  the  pictures  of  the 
old  masters,  and  found  myself  gradually  getting  a 
taste  for  them ;  at  least  they  give  me  more  and  more 


1857.]  MANCHESTER.  685 

pleasure  the  oftener  I  come  to  see  them.  Doubtless, 
I  shall  be  able  to  pass  for  a  man  of  taste  by  the  time 
I  return  to  America.  It  is  an  acquired  taste^  like 
that  for  wines ;  and  I  question  whether  a  man  is  really 
any  truer,  wiser,  or  better  for  possessing  it.  From  the 
old  masters,  I  went  among  the  English  painters,  and 
found  myself  more  favorably  inclined  towards  some 
of  them  than  at  my  previous  visits ;  seeing  something 
wonderful  even  in  Turner's  lights  and  mists  and 
yeasty  waves,  although  I  should  like  him  still  better 
if  his  pictures  looked  in  the  least  like  what  they 
typify.  The  most  disagreeable  of  English  painters  is 
Etty,  who  had  a  diseased  appetite  for  woman's  flesh, 
and  spent  his  whole  life,  apparently,  in  painting  them 
with  enormously  developed  busts.  I  do  not  mind 
nudity  in  a  modest  and  natural  way ;  but  Etty's  wo- 
men really  thrust  their  nudity  upon  you  with  malice 
aforethought,  •  •  •  and  the  worst  of  it  is  they  are  not 
beautiful. 

Among  the  last  pictures  that  I  looked  at  was  Ho- 
garth's March  to  Finchley;  and  surely  nothing  can 
be  covered  more  thick  and  deep  with  English  nature 
than  that  piece  of  canvas.  The  face  of  the  tail  gren- 
adier in  the  centre,  between  two  women,  both  of  whom 
have  daims  on  him,  wonderfully  expresses  trouble 
and  perplexity ;  and  every  touch  in  the  picture  meant 
something  and  expresses  what  it  meant. 

The  price  of  admission,  after  two  o'clock,  being  six- 
pence, the  Exhibition  was  thronged  with  a  class  of 
people  who  do  not  usually  come  in  such  large  num- 
bers. It  was  both  pleasant  and  touching  to  see  how 
earnestly  some  of  them  sought  to  get  instruction  from 
what  they  beheld.  The  English  are  a  good  aoid  simple 
people,  and  take  Hf  e  in  earnest. 


686  ENGLISH  NOTE-^BOOKS.  [1857. 

August  lith. — Passing  by  the  gateway  of  the 
Manchester  Cathedral  the  other  morning,  on  my  way 
to  the  station,  I  found  a  crowd  collected,  and,  high 
overhead,  the  bells  were  chiming  for  a  wedding.  These 
chimes  of  bells  are  exceedingly  impressive,  so  broadly 
gladsome  as  they  are,  filling  the  whole  air,  and  every 
nook  of  one's  heart,  vrith  sympathy.  They  are  good 
for  a  people  to  rejoice  with,  and  good  also  for  a  mar- 
riage, because  through  all  their  joy  there  is  something 
solemn,  —  a  tone  of  that  voice  which  we  have  heard 
so  often  at  funerals.  It  is  good  to  see  how  everybody, 
up  to  this  old  age  of  the  world,  takes  an  interest  in 
weddings,  and  seems  to  have  a  faith  that  now,  at  last, 
a  couple  have  come  together  to  make  each  other 
happy.  The  high,  black,  rough  old  cathedral  tower 
sent  out  its  chime  of  bells  as  earnestly  as  for  any 
bridegroom  and  bride  that  came  to  be  married  five 
htmdred  years  ago.  I  went  into  the  churchyard,  but 
there  was  such  a  throng  of  people  on  its  pavement  of 
flat  tombstones,  and  especially  such  a  cluster  along 
the  pathway  by  which  the  bride  was  to  depart,  that  I 
could  only  see  a  white  dress  waving  along,  and  really 
do  not  know  whether  she  was  a  beauty  or  a  fright. 
The  happy  pair  got  into  a  post-chaise  that  was  wait- 
ing at  the  gate,  and  immediately  drew  some  crimson 
curtains,  and  so  vanished  into  their  Paradise.  There 
were  two  other  post-chaises  and  pairs,  and  all  three 
had  postilions  in  scarlet.  This  is  the  same  cathedral 
where,  last  May,  I  saw  a  dozen  couples  married  in 
the  lump. 

In  a  railway  carriage,  two  or  three  days  ago,  an  old 
merchant  made  rather  a  good  point  of  one  of  the  u»- 
3omfortable  results  of  the  electric  telegraph.     He  said 


1857.]  MANCHESTER.  637 

that  formerly  a  man  was  safe  from  bad  news,  such  as 
intelligence  of  failure  of  debtors,  except  at  the  hour  of 
opening  his  letters  in  the  morning ;  and  then  he  was 
in  some  degree  prepared  for  it,  since  among  (say) 
fifteen  letters,  he  would  be  pretty  certain  to  find  some 
"  queer  "  one.  But  since  the  telegraph  has  come  into 
play,  he  is  never  safe,  and  may  be  hit  with  news  of 
failure,  shipwreck,  fall  of  stocks,  or  whatever  disaster, 
at  all  hours  of  the  day. 

I  went  to  the  Exhibition  on  Wednesday  with  U , 

and  looked  at  the  pencil  sketches  of  the  old  masters ; 
also  at  the  pictures  generally,  old  and  new.  I  particu- 
larly remember  a  spring  landscape,  by  John  Linnell 
the  younger.  It  is  wonderfully  good  ;  so  tender  and 
fresh  that  the  artist  seems  really  to  have  caught  the 
evanescent  April  and  made  her  permanent.  Here  at 
last,  is  eternal  spring. 

I  saw  a  little  man,  behind  an  immense  beard,  whom 
I  take  to  be  the  Duke  of  Newcastle ;  at  least,  there 
was  a  photograph  of  him  in  the  gallery,  with  just  such 
a  beard.     He  was  at  the  Palace  on  that  day. 

August  \Qth,  —  I  went  again  to  the  Exhibition  day 
before  yesterday,  and  looked  much  at  both  the  modem 
and  ancient  pictures,  as  also  at  the  water-colors.  I  am 
making  some  progress  as  a  connoisseur,  and  have  got 
so  far  as  to  be  able  to  distinguish  the  broader  differ- 
ences of  style,  —  as,  for  example,  between  Kubens  and 
Rembrandt.  I  should  hesitate  to  claim  any  more  for 
myself  thus  far.  In  fact,  however,  I  do  begin  to  have 
a  liking  for  good  things,  and  to  be  sure  that  they  are 
good.  Murillo  seems  to  me  about  the  noblest  and 
purest  painter  that  ever  lived,*  and  his  Good  Shep- 
herd the  loveliest  picture  I  have  seen.     It  is  a  hope- 


638  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS,  [1857. ' 

ful  symptom,  moreover,  of  improving  taste,  that  I  see 
more  merit  in  th^  crowd  of  painters  than  I  was  at  first 
competent  to  acknowledge.  I  could  see  some  of  their 
defects  from  the  very  first ;  but  that  is  the  earliest 
stage  of  connoisseurship,  after  a  formal  and  ignorant 
admiration.  Mounting  a  few  steps  higher,  one  sees 
beauties.  But  how  much  study,  how  many  opportuni- 
ties, are  requisite  to  form  and  cultivate  a  taste !  The 
Exhibition  must  be  quite  thrown  away  on  the  mass  of 
spectators. 

Both  they  and  I  are  better  able  to  appreciate  the 
specimens  of  ornamental  art  contained  in  the  Oriental 
Eoom,  and  in  the  numerous  cases  that  are  ranged  up 
and  down  the  nave.  The  gewgaws  of  all  Time  are 
here,  in  precious  metals,  glass,  china,  ivory,  and  every 
other  material  that  could  be  wrought  into  curious  and 
beautiful  shapes  ;  great  basins  and  dishes  of  embossed 
gold  from  the  Queen's  sideboard,  or  from  the  beaufets 
of  noblemen ;  vessels  set  with  precious  stones ;  the  pas- 
toral staffs  of  prelates,  some  of  them  made  of  silver 
or  gold,  and  enriched  with  gems,  and  what  have  been 
found  in  the  tombs  of  the  bishops ;  state  swords,  and 
silver  maces;  the  rich  plate  of  colleges,  elaborately 
wrought,  —  great  cups,  salvers,  tureens,  that  have 
been  presented  by  loving  sons  to  their  Alma  Mater ; 
the  heirlooms  of  old  families,  treasured  from  genera^ 
tion  to  generation,  and  hitherto  only  to  be  seen  by  far 
vored  friends  ;  famous  historical  jewels,  some  of  which 
are  painted  in  the  portraits  of  the  historical  men  and 
women  that  hang  on  the  walls ;  numerous  specimens 
of  the  beautiful  old  Venetian  glass,  some  of  which  looks 
so  fragile  that  it  is  a  wonder  how  it  could  bear  even 
the  weight  of  the  wine,  that  used  to  be  poured  into  it, 
without  breaking.     These  are  the  glasses  that  tedted 


1867.]  MANCHESTER.  589 

poison,  by  being  shattered  into  fragments  at  its  touch. 
The  strangest  and  ugliest  old  crockery,  pictured  over 
with  monstrosities,  —  the  Palissy  ware,  embossed  with 
vegetables,  fishes,  lobsters,  that  look  absolutely  real ; 
the  delicate  Sevres  china,  each  piece  made  inestimable 
by  pictures  from  a  master's  hand ;  —  in  short,  it  is 
a  despair  and  misery  to  see  so  much  that  is  curious 
and  beautiful,  and  to  feel  that  far  the  greater  portion 
of  it  will  slip  out  of  the  memory,  and  be  as  if  we  had 
never  seen  it.  But  I  mean  to  look  again  and  again  at 
these  things.  We  soon  perceive  that  the  present  day 
does  not  engross  all  the  taste  and  ingenuity  that  has 
ever  existed  in  the  mind  of  man ;  that,  in  fact,  we 
are  a  barren  age  in  that  respect. 

August  20^A.  —  I  went  to  the  Exhibition  on  Mon- 
day, and  again  yesterday,  and  measurably  enjoyed 
both  visits.  I  continue  to  think,  however,  that  a  pic- 
ture cannot  be  fully  enjoyed  except  by  long  and  inti- 
mate acquaintance  with  it,  nor  can  I  quite  understand 
what  the  enjoyment  of  a  connoisseur  is.  He  is  not  us- 
ually, I  think,  a  mair  of  deep,  poetic  feeling,  and  does 
not  deal  with  the  picture  through  his  heart,  nor  set  it 
in  a  poem,  nor  comprehend  it  morally.  If  it  be  a  land- 
scape, he  is  not  entitled  to  judge  of  it  by  his  intimacy 
with  nature;  if  a  picture  of  human  action,  he  haa 
no  experience  nor  sympathy  of  life's  deeper  passages. 
However,  as  my  acquaintance  with  pictures  increases, 
I  find  myself  recognizing  more  and  more  the  merit  of 
the  acknowledged  masters  of  the  art ;  but,  possibly,  it 
is  only  because  I  adopt  the  wrong  principles  which  may 
have  been  laid  down  by  the  connoisseurs.  But  there 
can  be  no  mistake  about  Murillo,  —  not  that  I  am 
worthy  to  admire  him  yet,  however. 


/ 


ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

Seeing  the  many  pictures  of  Holy  Families,  and 
the  Virgin  and  Child,  which  have  been  painted  for 
churches  and  convents,  the  idea  occurs,  that  it  was  in 
this  way  that  the  poor  monks  and  nuns  gratified,  as 
far  as  they  could,  their  natural  longing  for  earthly 
happiness.  It  was  not  Mary  and  her  heavenly  Child 
that  they  really  beheld,  or  wished  for ;  but  an  earthly 
mother  rejoicing  over  her  baby,  and  displaying  it  prob- 
ably to  the  world  as  an  object  worthy  to*  be  admired 
by  kings,  —  as  Mary  does,  in  the  Adoration  of  the 
Magi.  Every  mother,  I  suppose,  feels  as  if  her  first 
child  deserved  everybody's  worship. 

I  left  the  Exhibition  at  three  o'clock,  and  went  to 

Manchester,  where  I  sought  out  Mr.  C S— —  in 

his  little  office.  He  greeted  me  warmly,  and  at  five  we 
took  the  omnibus  for  his  house,  about  four  miles  from 
town.  He  seems  to  be  on  pleasant  terms  with-  his 
neighbors,  for  almost  everybody  that  got  into  the  omni- 
bus exchanged  kindly  greetings  with  him,  and  indeed 
his  kindly,  simple,  genial  nature  comes  out  so  evi- 
dently that  it  would  be  difficult  not  to  like  him.  His 
house  stands,  with  others,  in  a  gr%en  park,  —  a  small, 
pretty,  semi-detached  suburban  residence  of  brick, 
with  a  lawn  and  garden  round  it.  In  close  vicinity, 
there  is  a  deep  clough  or  dell,  as  shaggy  and  wild  as 
a  poet  could  wish,  and  with  a  little  stream  running 
through  it,  as  much  as  five  miles  long. 

The  interior  of  the  house  is  very  pretty,  and  nicely, 
even  handsomely  and  almost  sumptuously,  furnished  ; 
and  I  was  very  glad  to  find  him  so  comfortable.  His 
recognition  as  a  poet  has  been  hearty  enough  to  give 
him  a  feeling  of  success,  for  he  showed  me  various 
tokens  of  the  estimation  in  which  he  is  held,  -. —  for  in* 


1857.]  MANCHESTER.  541 

stance,  a  presentation  copy  of  Southey's  works,  in 
which  the  latter  had  written  "  Amicus  amico,  —  poeta 
poetse."  He  said  that  Southey  had  always  been  most 
kind  to  him.  .  .  .  There  were  various  other  testimo- 
nials from  people  of  note,  American  as  well  as  Eng- 
lish. In  his  parlor  there  is  a  good  oil-painting  of  him- 
self, and  in  the  drawing-room  a  very  fine  crayon 
sketch,  wherein  his  face,  handsome  and  agreeable,  is 
lighted  up  with  aU  a  poet's  ecstasy ;  likewise  a  large 
and  fine  engraving,  from  the  picture.  The  government 
has  recognized  his  poetic  merit  by  a  pension  of  fifty 
pounds,  —  a  small  sum,  it  is  true,  but  enough  to  mark 
him  out  as  one  who  has  deserved  well  of  his  country. 
.  .  .  The  man  himself  is  very  good  and  lovable.  .  .  . 
I  was  able  to  gratify  him  by  saying  that  I  had  re- 
cently seen  many  favorable  notices  of  his  poems  in  the 
American  newspapers  ;  an  edition  having  been  pub- 
lished a  few  months  since  on  our  side  of  the  ocean. 
He  was  much  pleased  at  this,  and  asked  me  to  send 
him  the  notices.  .  .  . 

August  Zdth.  —  I  have  been  two  or  three  times  to 
the  Exhibition  since  my  last  date,  and  enjoy  it  more 
as  I  become  familiar  with  it.  There  is  supposed  to 
be  about  a  third  of  the  good  pictures  here  which  Eng- 
land jcontains ;  and  it  is  said  that  the  Tory  nobility 
and  gentry  have  contributed  to  it  much  more  freely 
and  largely  than  the  Whigs.  The  Duke  of  Devon- 
shire, for  instance,  seems  to  have  sent  nothing.  Mr. 
Ticknor,  the  Spanish  historian,  whom  I  met  yesterday, 
observed  that  we  should  not  think  quite  so  much  of 
this  Exhibition  as  the  English  do  after  we  have  been 
to  Italy,  although  it  is  a  good  school  in  which  to  gain 
flt  preparatory  knowledge  of  the  different  styles  of  art. 


542  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

I  am  glad  to  hear  that  there  are  better  things  Btdll  to 
be  seen.  Nevertheless,  I  should  suppose  that  certain 
painters  are  better  represented  here  than  they  ever 
have  been  or  will  be  elsewhere.  Vandyke,  certainly, 
can  be  seen  nowhere  else  so  well ;  Kembrandt  and  Ku- 
bens  have  satisfactory  specimens ;  and  the  whole  series 
of  English  pictorial  achievement  is  shown  more  per- 
fectly than  within  any  other  walls.  Perhaps  it  vrould 
be  wise  to  devote  myself  to  the  study  of  this  latter, 
and  leave  the  foreigners  to  be  studied  on  their  own 
soil.  MuriUo  can  hardly  have  done  better  than  in 
the  pictures  by  him  which  we  see  here.  There  is  noth- 
ing of  Eaphael's  here  that  is  impressive.  Titian  has 
some  noble  portraits,  but  little  else  that  I  care  to  see. 
In  all  these  old  masters,  Murillo  only  excepted,  it  is 
very  rare,  I  must  say,  to  find  any  trace  of  natural  feel- 
ing and  passion ;  and  I  am  weary  of  naked  goddesses 
who  never  had  any  real  life  and  warmth  in  the  paint- 
er's imagination,  —  or,  if  so,  it  was  the  impure  warmth 
of  an  unchaste  woman,  who  sat  for  him. 

Last  week  I  dined  at  Mr.  F.  Heywood's  to  meet 
Mr.  Adolphus,  the  author  of  a  critical  work  on  the 
Waverley  Novels,  published  long  ago,  and  intended  to 
prove,  from  internal  evidence,  that  they  were  written 
by  Sir  Walter  Scott.  .  .  .  His  wife  was  likewise  of 
the  party,  .  .  .  and  also  a  young  Spanish  lady^their 
niece,  and  daughter  of  a  Spaniard  of  literary  note. 
She  herself  has  literary  tastes  and  ability,  and  is  well 
known  to  Prescott,  whom,  I  believe,  she  has  assisted 
in  his  historical  researches,  and  also  to  Professor 
Ticknor ;  and  furthermore  she  is  very  handsome  and 
unlike  an  English  damsel,  very  youthful  and  maid- 
enlike ;  and  her  manners  have  an  ardor  and  enthusi* 
asm  that  were  pleasant  to  see,  especially  as  she  spoke 


1857.]  MANCHESTER.  543 

warmly  of  my  writings ;  and  yet  I  should  wrong  her 
if  I  left  the  impression  of  her  being  forth-putting  and 
obtrusive,  for  it  was  not  the  fact  in  the  least.  She 
speaks  English  like  a  native,  insomuch  that  I  should 
never  have  suspected  her  to  be  anything  else. 

My  nerves  recently  have  not  been  in  an  exactly 
quiet  and  normal  state.  I  begin  to  weary  of  England 
and  need  another  clime. 


September  6th.  —  I  think  I  paid  my  last  visit  to 
the  Exhibition,  and  feel  as  if  I  had  had  enough  of  it, 
although  I  have  got  but  a  small  part  of  the  profit  it 
might  have  afiEorded  me.  But  pictures  are  certainly 
quite  other  things  to  me  now  from  what  they  were  at 
my  first  visit ;  it  seems  even  as  if  there  were  a  sort 
of  illumination  within  them,  that  makes  me  see  them 
more  distinctly.  Speaking  of  pictures,  the  miniature  of 
Anne  of  Cleves  is  here,  on  the  faith  of  which  Henry 
VIII.  married  her ;  also,  the  picture  of  the  Infanta  of 
Spain,  which  Buckingham  brought  over  to  Charles  I. 
while  Prince  of  Wales.  This  has  a  delicate  rosy  pret- 
tiness. 

One  rather  interesting  portion  of  the  Exhibition  is 
the Befreshment-room,  or  rather  rooms;  for  very  much 
space  is  allowed  both  to  the  first  and  second  classes. 
I  have  looked  most  at  the  latter,  because  there  John 
Bull  and  his  wife  may  be  seen  in  full  gulp  and  guz- 
de,  swallowing  vast  quantities  of  cold  boiled  beef, 
thoroughly  moistened  with  porter  or  bitter  ale;  and 
very  good  meat  and  drink  it  is. 

At  my  last  visit,  on  Friday,  I  met  Judge  Pollock  of 
Liverpool,  who  introduced  to  me  a  gentleman  in  a 


544  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  Cl^^Z 

gray  slouched  hat  as  Mr.  Du  Yal,  an  artist,  resident 
in  Manchester ;  and  Mr.  Du  Yal  invited  me  to  dine 
with  him  at  six  o'clock.     So  I  went  to  Carlton  Grove, 
his  residence,  and  found  it  a  very  pretty  house,  with 
its  own  lawn  and  shrubbery  about  it.  .  .  .  There  was 
a  mellow  fite  in  the  grate,  which  made  the  drawing- 
room  very  cosey  and  pleasant,  as  the  dusk  came  oq 
before  dinner.     Mr.  Du  Val  looked  like  an  artist,  and 
like  a  remarkable  man.  .  .  .  We  had  very  good  talk, 
chiefly  about  the  Exhibition,  and  Du  Val  spoke  gen- 
erously and  intelligently  of  his  brother -artists.      He 
says  that  England  might  furnish  five  exhibitions,  each 
one  as  rich  as  the  present.     I  find  that  the  most  fa- 
mous picture  here  is  one  that  I  have  hardly  looked 
at,  The  Three  Marys,  by  Annibal  Caracci.     In  the 
drawing-room  there  were  several  pictures  and  sketches 
by  Du  Val,  one  of  which  I  especially  liked,  —  a  misty, 
moonlight  picture  of  the  Mersey,  near  Seacombe.     I 
never  saw  painted  such  genuine  moonlight.  .  •  • 

T  took  my  leave  at  half  past  ten,  and  found  my  cab 
at  the  door,  and  my  cabman  snugly  asleep  inside  of 
it ;  and  when  Mr.  Du  Val  awoke  him,  he  proved  to 
be  quite  drunk,  insomuch  that  I  hesitated  whether  to 
let  him  clamber  upon  the  box,  or  to  take  post  myself, 
and  drive  the  cabman  home.  However,  I  propounded 
two  questions  to  him :  first,  whether  his  horse  would 
go  of  his  own  accord ;  and,  secondly,  whether  he  him- 
self was  invariably  drunk  at  that  time  of  night,  be- 
cause, if  it  were  his  normal  state,  I  should  be  safer 
with  him  drunk  than  sober.  Being  satisfied  on  these 
points,  I  got  in,  and  was  driven  home  without  accident 
or  adventure ;  except,  indeed,  that  the  cabman  drew  up 
and  opened  the  door  for  me  to  alight  at  a  vacant  lot 
on  Stretford  Koad,  just  as  if  there  had  been  a  house 


1857.]  JLEAMINGTON.  545 

and  home  and  cheerful  lighted  windows  in  that  va- 
cancy.  On  my  remonstrance  he  resumed  the  whip 
and  reins,  and  reached  Boston  Terrace  at  last ;  and, 
thanking  me  for  an  extra  sixpence  as  well  as  he  could 
speak,  he  begged  me  to  inquii'e  for  "Little  John'' 
whenever  I  next  wanted  a  cab.  Cabmen  are,  as  a 
body,  the  most  ill-natured  and  ungenial  men  in  the 
vrorld ;  but  this  poor  little  man  was  excellently  good- 
humored. 

Speaking  of  the  former  rudeness  of  manners,  now 
gradually  refining  away,  of  the  Manchester  people. 

Judge said  that,  when  he  first  knew  Manchester, 

women,  meeting  his  wife  in  the  street,  would  take 
hold  of  her  dress  and  say,  "Ah,  three  and  sixpence  a 
yard !  "  The  men  were  very  rough,  after  the  old 
Lancashire  fashion.  They  have  always,  however,  been 
a  musical  people,  and  this  may  have  been  a  germ  of 
refinement  in  them.  They  are  still  much  more  simple 
and  natural  than  the  Liverpool  people,  who  love  the 
aristocracy,  and  whom  they  heartily  despise.  It  is 
singular  that  the  great  Art  -  Exhibition  should  have 
come  to  pass  in  the  rudest  great  town  in  England. 

LEAMINGTON. 

Lansdowne  Circus^  September  lO^A.  —  We  have 
become  quite  weary  of  our  small,  mean,  uncomfort- 
able, and  unbeautif  ul  lodgings  at  Chorlton  Road,  with 
poor  and  scaniy  furniture  within  doors,  and  no  better 
prospect  from  the  parlor  windows  than  a  mud-puddle, 
larger  than  most  English  lakes,  on  a  vacant  build- 
ing-lot opposite  our  house.  The  Exhibition,  too,  was 
fast  becoming  a  bore ;  for  you  must  really  love  a  pic- 
ture, in  order  to  tolerate  the  sight  of  it  many  times. 
Moreover,  the  smoky  and  sooty  air  of  that  abomiuar 

VOL.  VIII.  35 


j546  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

ble  Manchester  affected  my  wife's  throat  disadvanta- 
geously ;  so,  on  a  Tuesday  morning,  we  struck  our  tent 
and  set  forth  again,  regretting  to  leave  nothing  except 
the  kind  disposition  of  Mrs.  Honey,  our  housekeeper. 
I  do  not  remember  meeting  with  any  other  lodgings 
house  keeper  who  did  not  grow  hateful  and  fearful 
on  short  acquaintance;  but  I  attribute  this,  not  so 
much  to  the  people  themselves,  as,  primarily,  to  the 
unfair  and  ungenerous  conduct  of  some  of  their  Eng- 
lish guests,  who  feel  so  sure  of  being  cheated  that  they 
always  behave  as  if  in  an  enemy's  country,  and  there- 
fore they  find  it  one. 

The  rain  poured  down  upon  us  as  we  drove  away  in 
two  cabs,  laden  with  mountainous  luggage,  to  the  Lon- 
don Road  station ;  and  the  whole  day  was  grim  with 
cloud  and  moist  with  showers.  We  went  by  way  of 
Birmingham,  and  stayed  three  hours  at  the  great 
dreary  station  there,  waiting  for  the  train  to  Leam- 
ington, whither  Fanny  had  gone  forward  the  day  be- 
fore to  secure  lodgings  for  us  (as  she  is  English,  and 
understands  the  matter).  .  .  .  We  all  were  tired  and 
dull  by  the  time  we  reached  the  Leamington  station, 
where  a  note  from  Fanny  gave  us  the  address  of  our 
lodgings.  Lansdowne  Circus  is  really  delightful  af- 
ter that  ugly  and  grimy  suburb  of  Manchester.  In- 
deed,  there  could  not  possibly  be  a  greater  contrast 
than  between  Leamington  and  Manchester,  —  the  lat- 
ter built  only  for  dirty  uses,  and  scarcely  intended  as 
a  habitation  for  man ;  the  former  so  cleanly,  so  set 
out  with  shade  trees,  so  regular  in  its  streets,  so  neatly 
paved,  its  houses  so  prettily  contrived  and  nicely  stuc- 
coed, that  it  does  not  look  like  a  portion  of  the  work- 
aday world. 


18570  KENILWORTH.  647 

KENILWORTH. 

September  IZth.  —  The  weather  was  very  uncertain 
through  the  last  week,  and  yesterday  morning,  too, 
was  misty  and  sunless  ;  notwithstanding  which  we 
took  the  rail  for  Kenilworth  before  eleven.  The  dis- 
tance from  Leamington  is  less  than  five  miles,  and  at 
the  Kenilworth  station  we  found  a  little  bit  of  an 
onmibus,  into  which  we  packed  ourselves,  together 
with  two  ladies,  one  of  whom,  at  least,  was  an  Amer- 
ican. I  begin  to  agree  partly  with  the  English,  that 
we  are  not  a  people  of  elegant  manners.  At  all  events, 
there  is  sometimes  a  bare,  hard,  meagre  sort  of  de- 
portment, especially  in  our  women,  that  has  not  its 
parallel  elsewhere.  But  perhaps  what  sets  off  this 
kind  of  behavior,  and  brings  it  into  alto  relievo^  is  the 
fact  of  such  imcultivated  persons  travelling  abroad, 
and  going  to  see  sights  that  would  not  be  interesting 
except  to  people  of  some  education  and  refinement. 

We  saw  but  little  of  the  village  of  Kenilworth,  pass- 
ing through  it  sidelong  fashion,  in  the  omnibus ;  but  I 
learn  that  it  has  between  three  and  four  thousand  in- 
habitants, and  is  of  immemorial  antiquiiy.  We  saw  a 
few  old,  gabled,  and  timber-framed  houses ;  but  gen- 
erally the  town  was  of  modem  aspect,  although  less 
so  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  castle  gate,  across 
the  road  from  which  there  was  an  inn,  with  bowling- 
greens,  and  a  little  bunch  of  houses  and  shops.  Apart 
from  the  high  road  there  is  a  gate-house,  ancient,  but 
in  excellent  repair,  towered,  turreted  and  battlemented, 
and  looking  like  a  castle  in  itself.  Until  Cromwell's 
time,  the  entrance  to  the  castle  used  to  be  beneath  an 
arch  that  passed  through  this  structure  ;  but  the  gate- 
house being  granted  to  one  of  the  Parliament  officers, 


(648  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

he  converted  it  into  a  residence,  and  apparently  added 
on  a  couple  of  gables,  which  now  look  quite  as  vener- 
able as  the  rest  of  the  edifice.  Admission  within  the 
outer  grounds  of  the  castle  is  now  obtained  through  a 
little  wicket  close  beside  the  gate-house,  at  which  sat 
one  or  two  old  men,  who  touched  their  hats  to  us  in 
humble  willingness  to  accept  a  fee.  One  of  them  had 
guide-books  for  sale ;  and,  finding  that  we  were  not 
to  be  bothered  by  a  cicerone,  we  bought  one  of  his 
books. 

The  ruins  are  perhaps  two  hundred  yards  from  the 
gate-house  and  the  road,  and  the  space  between  is  a 
pasture  for  sheep,  which  also  browse  in  the  inner 
court,  and  shelter  themselves  in  the  dungeons  and 
state  apartments  of  the  castle.  Goats  would  be  fitter 
occupants,  because  they  would  climb  to  the  tops  of  the 
crumbling  towers,  and  nibble  the  weeds  and  shrubbery' 
that  grow  there.  The  first  part  of  the  castle  which 
we  reach  is  called  Cassar's  Tower,  being  the  oldest 
portion  of  the  ruins,  and  still  very  stalwart  and  mas- 
sive, and  built  of  red  freestone,  like  all  the  rest.  Cae- 
sar's Tower  being  on  the  right,  Leicester's  Buildings, 
erected  by  the  Earl  of  Leicester,  Queen  Elizabeth's 
favorite,  are  on  the  left ;  and  between  these  two  for- 
merly stood  other  structures  which  have  now  as  en- 
tirely disappeared  as  if  they  had  never  existed ;  and 
through  the  wide  gap,  thus  opened,  appears  the  grassy 
inner  court,  surrounded  on  three  sides  by  half-fallen 
towers  and  shattered  walls.  Some  of  these  were 
erected  by  John  of  Gaunt ;  and  among  these  ruins  is 
the  Banqueting-Hall,  —  or  rather  was,  —  for  it  has 
now  neither  floor  nor  roof,  but  only  the  broken  vstone- 
work  of  some  tall,  arched  windows,  and  the  beautiful, 
old  ivied  arch  of  the  entrance-way,  now  inaccessible 


1857.]  KENILWORTH.  649 

Erom  the  ground.     The  ivy  is  very  abundant  about 
the  ruins,  and  hangs  its  green  curtains  quite  from  top 
to  bottom  of  some  of  the  windows.    There  are  likewise 
very  large  and  aged  trees  within  the  castle,  there  be- 
ing no  roof  nor  pavement  anywhere,  except  in  some 
dungeon-like  nooks ;  so  that  the  trees  having  soil  and 
air   enough,   and    being   sheltered    from    unfriendly 
blasts,  can  grow  as  if  in  a  nursery.     Hawthorn,  how- 
ever, next  to  ivy,  is  the  great  ornament  and  comforter 
of  these  desolate  ruins.     I  have  not  seen  so  much  nor 
such  thriving  hawthorn  anywhere  else,  —  in  the  court, 
high  up  on  crumbly  heights,  on  the  sod  that  carpets 
roofless  rooms,  —  everywhere,  indeed,  and  now  rejoic- 
ing in  plentiful  crops  of  red  berries.     The  ivy  is  even 
more  wonderfully  luxuriant ;  its  trunks  being,  in  some 
places,  two  or  three  feet  in  diameter,  and  foiming  real 
buttresses  against  the  walls,  which  aretfu^tually  sup- 
ported and  vastly  strengthened  by  this  parasite,  that 
clung  to  them  at  first  only  for  its  own  convenience, 
and  now  holds  them  up,  lest  it  should  be  ruined  by 
their  fall.     Thus  an  abuse  has  strangely  grown  into  a 
use,  and  I  think  we  may  sometimes  see  the  same  fact, 
morally,  in  English  matters.     There  is  something  very 
em'ious  in  the  close,  firm  grip  which  the  ivy  fixes  upon 
the  wall,  closer  and  closer  for  centuries.     Neither  is  it 
at  all  nice  as  to  what  it  clutches,  in  its  necessiiy  for 
support.     I  saw  in  the  outer  court  an  old  hawthorn- 
tree,  to  which  a  plant  of  ivy  had  married  itself,  and 
the  ivy  trunk  and  the  hawthorn  trunk  were  now  ab- 
solutely incorporated,  and  in  their  close  embrace  you 
could  not  teU  which  was  which. 

At  one  end  of  the  Banqueting-Hall  there  are  two 
large  bay-windows,  one  of  which  looks  into  the  inner 
court,  and  the  other  affords  a  view  of  the  surrounding 


550  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

coraitry.  The  former  is  called  Queen  Elizabeth's 
Dressing-room.  Beyond  the  Banqueting-Hall  is  what 
is  called  the  Strong  Tower,  up  to  the  top  of  which  we 
climbed  principally  by  the  aid  of  the  stones  that  have 
tumbled  down  from  it.  A  lady  sat  half-way  down  the 
crumbly  descent,  within  the  castle,  on  a  camp-stool, 
and  before  an  easel,  sketching  this  tower,  on  the  sum. 
mit  of  which  we  sat.  She  said  it  was  Amy  Robsart's 
Tower ;  and  within  it,  open  to  the  day,  and  quite  ac- 
cessible, we  saw  a  room  that  we  were  free  to  imagine 
had  been  occupied  by  her.  I  do  not  find  that  these 
associations  of  real  scenes  with  fictitious  events  greatly 
heighten  the  charm  of  them. 

By  this  time  the  sun  had  come  out  brightly,  and 
with  such  warmth  that  we  were  glad  to  sit  down  in 
the  shadow.  Several  sight-seers  were  now  rambling 
about,  and  among  them  some  school -boys,  who  kept 
scrambling  up  to  points  whither  no  other  animal,  ex- 
cept a  goat,  would  have  ventured.  Their  shouts  and 
the  sunshine  made  the  old  castle  cheerful ;  and  what 
with  the  ivy  and  the  hawthorn,  and  the  other  old 
trees,  it  was  very  beautiful  and  picturesque.  But  a 
castle  does  not  make  nearly  so  interesting  and  impres- 
sive a  ruin  as  an  abbey,  because  the  latter  was  built 
for  beauty,  and  on  a  plan  in  which  deep  thought  and 
feeling  were  involved ;  and  having  once  been  a  gpi-and 
and  beautiful  work,  it  continues  grand  and  beautif id 
through  all  the  successive  stages  of  its  decay.  But  a 
castle  is  rudely  piled  together  for  strength  and  other 
material  conveniences  ;  and,  having  served  these  ends, 
it  has  nothing  left  to  fall  back  upon,  but  crumbles 
into  shapeless  masses,  which  are  often  as  little  pict- 
uresque as  a  pile  of  bricks.  Without  the  ivy  and  the 
shrubbery,  this  huge  Kenilworth  would  not  be  a  pleas*^ 


1857.]  KENILWORTH.  661 

ant  object,  except  for  one  or  two  window-frames,  with 
broken  tracery,  in  the  Banqueting-Hall.  .  .  . 

We  stayed  from  eleven  till  two,  and  identified  the 
"various  parts  of  the  castle  as  well  as  we  could  by  the 
guide-book.  The  ruins  are  very  extensive,  though 
less  so  than  I  should  have  imagined,  considering  that 
seven  acres  were  included  within  the  castle  wall.  But 
a  large  part  of  the  structures  have  been  taken  away  to 
build  houses  in  Kenilworth  village  and  elsewhere,  and 
much,  too,  to  make  roads  with,  and  a  good  deal  lies 
under  the  green  turf  in  the  court-yards,  inner  and 
outer.  As  we  returned  to  the  gate,  my  wife  and 
U — \ — went  into  the  gate-house  to  see  an  old  chim- 
ney-piece, and  other  antiquities ;  and  J — ■—  and  I  pro- 
ceeded a  little  way  round  the  outer  wall,  and  saw  the 
remains  of  the  moat,  and  Lin's  Tower,  —  a  real  and 
shattered  fabric  of  John  of  Gaunt. 

The  omnibus  now  drove  up,  and  one  of  the  old  men 
at  the  gate  came  hobbling  up  to  open  the  door,  and 
was  rewarded  with  a  sixpence,  and  we  drove  down 
to  the  King's  Head.  .  .  .  We  then  walked  out  and 
bought  prints  of  the  castle,  and  inquired  our  way  to 
the  church  and  to  the  ruins  of  the  Priory.  The  lat- 
ter, so  far  as  we  could  discover  them,  are  very  few  and 
uninteresting ;  and  the  church,  though  it  has  a  vener- 
able exterior,  and  an  aged  spire,  has  been  so  modern- 
ized within,  and  in  so  plain  a  fashion,  as  to  have  lost 
what  beauty  it  may  once  have  had.  There  were  a  few 
brasses  and  mural  monuments,  one  of  which  was  a 
marble  group  of  a  dying  woman  and  her  family,  by 
Westmacott.  The  sexton  was  a  cheerful  little  man, 
but  knew  very  little  about  his  church,  and  nothing  of 
the  remains  of  the  Priory.  The  day  was  spent  very 
pleasantly  amid  this  beautiful  green  English  sccinery, 


562  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

these  fine  old  Warwickshire  trees,  and  broad,  gently 
swelling  fields. 

LIVERPOOL. 

September  llih.  —  I  took  the  train  for  Rugby,  and 
thence  to  Liverpool.     The  most  noticeable  character 

at  Mrs.  Blodgett's  now  is  Mr.  T ,  a  Yankee,  who 

has  seen  the  world,  and  gathered  much  information 
and  experience  already,  though  still  a  young  man,  — 
a  handsome  man  with  black  curly  hair,  a  dark,  intelli- 
gent, bright  face,  and  rather  cold  blue  eyes,  but  a 
very  pleasant  air  and  address.  His  observing  facul- 
ties are  very  strongly  developed  in  his  forehead,  and 
his  reflective  ones  seem  to  be  adequate  to  making  some, 
if  not  the  deepest,  use  of  what  he  sees.  He  has  voy- 
aged and  travelled  almost  all  over  the  world,  and  has 
recently  published  a  book  of  his  peregrinations,  which 
has  been  well  received.  He  is  of  exceeding  fluent 
talk,  though  rather  too  much  inclined  to  unfold  the 
secret  springs  of  action  in  Louis  Napoleon,  and  other 
potentates,  and  to  tell  of  revolutions  that  are  coming 
at  some  unlooked-for  moment,  but  soon.  Still  I  be- 
lieve in  his  wisdom  and  foresight  about  as  much  as  in 
any  other  man's.  There  are  no  such  things.  He  is  a 
merchant,  and  meditates  settling  in  London,  and  mak- 
ing a  colossal  fortune  there  during  the  next  ten  or 
twenty  years ;  that  being  the  period  during  which 
London  is  to  hold  the  exchanges  of  the  world,  and  to 
continue  its  metropolis.  After  that.  New  York  is  to 
be  the  world's  queen  ciiy. 

There  is  likewise  here  a  young  American,  named 

A ,  who  has  been  at  a  German  University,  and 

favors  us  with  descriptions  of  his  student  life  there, 
which  seems  chiefly  to  have  consisted  in  drinking  beer 


1857.]  LEAMINGTON.  668 

and  fighting  duels.  He  shows  a  cut  on  his  nose  as  a 
trophy  of  these  combats.  He  has  with  him  a  dog  of 
St.  Bernard,  who  is  a  much  more  remarkable  character 
than  himself,  —  an  immense  dog,  a  noble  and  gentle 
creature ;  and  really  it  touches  my  heart  that  his  mas- 
ter is  going  to  take  him  from  his  native  snow-moun- 
tain to  a  Southern  plantation  to  die.     Mr.  A says 

that  there  are  now  but  five  of  these  dogs  extant  at  the 
convent ;  there  having,  vdthin  two  or  three  years,  been 
a  disease  among  them,  with  which  this  dog  also  has 
suffered.  His  master  has  a  certificate  of  his  genuine- 
ness, and  of  himself  being  the  rightful  purchaser ;  and 
he  says  that  as  he  descended  the  mountain,  every  peas- 
ant along  the  road  stopped  him,  and  would  have  com- 
pelled him  to  give  up  the  dog  had  he  not  produced 
this  proof  of  property.  The  neighboring  mountain- 
eers are  very  jealous  of  the  breed  being  taken  away, 
considering  them  of  such  importance  to  their  own 
safety.  This  huge  animal,  the  very  biggest  dog  I  ever 
saw,  though  only  eleven  months  old,  and  not  so  high 
by  two  or  three  inches  as  he  will  be,  allows  Mr.  — — 
to  play  with  him,  and  take  him  on  his  shoulders  (he 
weighs,  at  least,  a  hundred  pounds),  like  any  lapdog. 

LEAMINGTON. 

Lansdowne  Circus^  October  lO^A.  — ^I  returned 
hither  from  Liverpool  last  week,  and  have  spent  the 
time  idly  since  then,  reposing  myself  after  the  four 
years  of  unnatural  restraint  in  the  Consulate.  Being 
already  pretty  well  acquainted  with  the  neighborhood 
of  Leamington,  I  have  little  or  nothing  to  record  about 
the  prettiest,  cheerfullest,  cleanest  of  English  towns. 

On  Saturday  we  took  the  rail  for  Coventry,  about  a 


664  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857c 

balf-hour's  travel  distant  I  had  been  there  before, 
more  than  two  years  ago.  ...  No  doubt  1  described 
it  on  my  first  visit ;  and  it  is  not  remarkable  enough 
to  be  worth  two  descriptions,  —  a  large  town  of  crooked 
and  irregular  streets  and  lanes,  not  looking  nearly  so 
ancient  as  it  is,  because  of  new  brick  and  stuccoed 
fronts  which  have  been  plastered  over  its  antiquity; 
although  still  there  are  interspersed  the  peaked  gables 
of  old-fashioned,  timber-bmlt  houses;  or  an  archway 
of  worn  stone,  which,  if  you  pass  through  it,  shows 
like  an  avenue  from  the  present  to  the  past ;  for  just 
in  the  rear  of  the  new-fangled  aspect  lurks  the  old  ar- 
rangement of  court-yards,  and  rustiness,  and  grinmess, 
that  would  not  be  suspected  from  the  exterior. 

Eight  across  the  narrow  street  stands  St.  Michael's 
Church  with  its  tall,  tall  tower  and  spire.  The  body 
of  the  church  has  been  almost  entirely  recased  with 
stone  since  1  was  here  before ;  but  the  tower  still  re- 
tains its  antiquity,  and  is  decorated  with  statues  that 
look  down  from  their  lofty  niches  seemingly  in  good 
preservation.  The  tower  and  spire  are  most  stately 
and  beautiful,  the  whole  church  very  noble.  We  went 
in,  and  found  that  the  vulgar  plaster  of  Cromwell's 
time  has  been  scraped  from  the  pillars  and  arches, 
leaving  them  all  as  fresh  and  splendid  as  if  just  made. 

We  looked  also  into  Trinity  Church,  which  stands 
close  by  St.  Michael's,  separated  only,  I  think,  by  the 
churchyard.  We  also  visited  St.  John's  Church,  which 
is  very  venerable  as  regards  its  exterior,  the  stone 
being  worn  and  smoothed  —  if  not  roughened,  rather 
—  by  centuries  of  storm  and  fitful  weather.  This 
wear  and  tear,  however,  has  almost  ceased  to  be  a 
charm  to  my  mind,  comparatively  to  what  it  was  when 


1857.]  COVENTRY.  665 

I  first  began  to  see  old  buildings.  Within,  the  church 
is  spoiled  by  wooden  galleries,  built  ax^ross  the  beauti« 
f  ul  pointed  aj*ches. 

We  saw  nothing  else  particularly  worthy  of  remark 
except  Ford's  Hospital,  in  Grey  Friars'  Street.  It 
has  an  Elizabethan  front  of  timber  and  plaster,  fac- 
ing on  the  street,  with  two  or  three  peaked  gables  in 
a  row,  beneath  which  is  a  low,  arched  entrance,  giving 
admission  into  a  small  paved  quadrangle,  open  to  the 
sky  above,  but  surrounded  by  the  walls,  lozenge-paned 
windows,  and  gables  of  the  Hospital.  The  quadrangle 
is  but  a  few  paces  in  width,  and  perhaps  twenty  in 
length;  and,  through  a  half -closed  doorway,  at  the 
farther  end,  there  was  a  glimpse  into  a  garden.  Just 
within  the  entrance,  through  an  open  door,  we  saw  the 
neat  and  comfortable  apartment  of  the  Matron  of  the 
Hospital;  and,  along  the  quadrangle,  on  each  side, 
there  were  three  or  four  doors,  through  which  we 
glanced  into  little  rooms,  each  containing  a  fireplace, 
a  bed,  a  chair  or  two,  —  a  little,  homely,  domestic 
scene,  with  one  old  woman  in  the  midst  of  it ;  one  old 
woman  in  each  room.  They  are  destitute  widows,  who 
have  their  lodging  and  home  here,  —  a  small  room  for 
each  one  to  sleep,  cook,  and  be  at  home  in,  —  and 
three  and  sixpence  a  week  to  feed  and  clothe  them- 
selves with,  —  a  cloak  being  the  only  garment  be- 
stowed on  them.  When  one  of  the  sisterhood  dies, 
each  old  woman  has  to  pay  twopence  towards  the  fu- 
neral; and  so  they  slowly  starve  and  wither  out  of 
life,  and  claim  each  their  twopence  contribution  in 
turn.     I  am  afraid  they  have  a  very  dismal  time. 

There  is  an  old  man's  hospital  in  another  part  of  the 
town,  on  a  similar  plan.  A  collection  of  sombre  and 
lifelike  tales  might  be  written  on  the  idea  of  giving 


566  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

the  e^eriences  of  these  Hospitallers,  male  and  fe- 
male ;  and  they  might  be  supposed  to  be  written  by 
the  Matron  of  one,  who  had  acquired  literary  taste 
and  practice  as  a  governess,  —  and  by  the  Master  of 
the  other,  a  retired  school-usher. 

It  was  market-day  in  Coventry,  and  far  adown  the 
street  leading  from  it  there  were  booths  and  stalls, 
and  apples,  pears,  toys,  books,  —  among  which  I  saw 
my  "Twice -Told  Tales,"  with  an  awful  portrait  of 
myself  as  frontispiece,  —  and  various  country  produce, 
offered  for  sale  by  men,  women,  and  girls.  The  scene 
looked  lively,  but  had  not  much  vivacity  in  it. 


October  27th.  —  The  autumn  has  advanced  progres- 
sively, and  is  now  fairly  established,  though  still  there 
is  much  green  foliage,  in  spite  of  many  brown  trees, 
and  an  enormous  quantity  of  withered  leaves,  too 
damp  to  rustle,  strewing  the  paths, — whence,  how- 
ever, they  are  continually  swept  up  and  carried  off  in 
wheelbarrows,  either  for  neatness  or  for  the  agricul- 
tural worth,  as  manure,  of  even  a  withered  leaf.  The 
pastures  look  just  as  green  as  ever,  —  a  deep,  bright 
verdure,  that  seems  almost  sunshine  in  itself,  however 
sombre  the  sky  may  be.  The  little  plats  of  grass  and 
flowers,  in  front  of  our  circle  of  houses,  might  still  do 
credit  to  an  American  midsummer;  for  I  have  seen 
beautiful  roses  here  within  a  day  or  two ;  and  dahlias, 
asters,  and  such  autumnal  flowers,  are  plentiful ;  and 
I  have  no  doubt  that  the  old  year's  flowers  will  bloom 
till  those  of  the  new  year  appear.  Really,  the  English 
winter  is  not  so  terrible  as  ours. 


1857.]  WARWICK.  657 

October  SOth. — Wednesday  was  one  of  the  most 
beautiful  of  all  days,  and  gilded  almost  throughout 
with  the  precious  English  sunshine,  —  the  most  de« 
lightful  sunshine  ever  made,  both  for  its  positive  fine 
qualities  and  because  we  seldom  get  it  without  too 
great  an  admixture  of  water.  We  made  no  use  of 
this  lovely  day,  except  to  walk  to  an  Arboretum  and 

Pinetum  on  the  outskirts  of  the  town.     U and 

Mrs.  Shepard  made  an  excursion  to  Guy's  Cliff. 

[Here  comes  in  the  visit  to  Leicester's  Hospital 
and  Redfern's  Shop,  and  St.  Mary's  Church,  printed 
in  "  Our  Old  Home."  —  Ed.] 

From  Redfern's  we  went  back  to  the  market-place, 
expecting  to  find  J — —  at  the  Museum,  hut  the 
keeper  said  he  had  gone  away.  We  went  into  this 
Museum,  which  contains  the  collections  in  Natural 
History,  etc.,  of  a  county  society.  It  is  very  well  ar- 
ranged, and  is  rich  in  specimens  of  ornithology, 
among  which  was  an  albatross,  huge  beyond  imagina- 
tion. I  do  not  think  that  Coleridge  could  have 
known  the  size  of  the  fowl  when  he  caused  it  to  be 
hung  round  the  neck  of  his  Ancient  Mariner.  There 
were  a  great  many  humming-birds  from  various  parts 
of  the  world,  and  some  of  their  breasts  actually 
gleamed  and  shone  as  with  the  brightest  lustre  of 
sunset.  Also',  many  strange  fiishes,  and  a  huge  pike 
taken  from  the  river  Avon,  and  so  long  tibat  I  wonder 
how  he  could  turn  himself  about  in  such  a  little  river 
as  the  Avon  is  near  Warwick.  A  great  curiosity  was 
a  bunch  of  skeleton  leaves  and  flowers,  prepared  by  a 
young  lady,  and  preserving  all  the  most  delicate  fibres 
of  the  plant,  looking  like  inconceivably  fine  lace-work, 
white  as  snow,  while  the  substance  was  quite  taken 
away.     In  another  room  there  were  mineralsi  sheila. 


658  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

and  a  splendid  collection  of  fossils,  among  which  were 
remains  of  antediluvian  creatures,  several  feet  long. 
In  still  another  room,  we  saw  some  historical  curiosi- 
ties, —  the  most  interesting  of  which  were  two  locks 
of  reddish-brown  hair,  one  from  the  head  and  one  from 
the  beard  of  Edward  IV.     They  were  fastened  to  a 
manuscript  letter  which  authenticates  the  hair  as  hav- 
ing been  taken  fr6m  King  Edward's  tomb  in  1789, 
Near  these  relics  was  a  seal  of  the  great  Earl  of  War- 
wick, the  mighty  king-maker  ;  also  a  sword  from  Bos- 
worth  Field,  smaller  and  shorter  than  those  now  in 
use;  for,  indeed,  swords  seem  to  have  increased   in 
length,  weight,  and  formidable  aspect,  now  that  the 
weapon  has  almost  ceased  to  be  used  in  a<$tual  war- 
fare.     The  short  Roman   sword  was  probably  more 
murderous  than  any  weapon  of  the  same  species,  ex- 
cept the  bowie-knife.     Here,  too,  were  Parliamentary 
cannon-balls,  etc.  .  .  . 

[The  visit  to  Whitnash  intervenes  here.  —  Ed.] 

LONDON. 

24  Great  Russell  Street^  November  lO^A.  —  We 
have  been  thinking  and  negotiating  about  taking  lodg- 
ings in  London  lately,  and  this  morning  we  left  Leam- 
ington and  reached  London  with  no  other  misadven- 
ture than  that  of  leaving  the  great  bulk  of  our  luggage 
behind  us,  —  the  van  which  we  hired  to  take  it  to  the 
railway  station  having  broken  down  under  its  prodig- 
ious weight,  in  the  middle  of  the  street.     On  our  jour- 
ney we  saw  nothing  particularly  worthy  of  note, — 
but  everywhere  the  immortal  verdure  of   England, 
scarcely  less  perfect  than  in  June,  so  far  as  the  fields 
are  concerned,  though  the   foliage  of  the  trees  presents 
pretty  much  the  same  hues  as  those  of  our  own  forests^ 


1857.]  LONDON.  569 

after  the  gayety  and  gorgeousness  have  departed  from 
them. 

Our  lodgings  are  in  close  vicinity  to  the  British  Mu- 
seum, which  is  the  great  advantage  we  took  them  for. 

I  felt  restless  and  uncomfortable,  and  soon  strolled 
forth,  without  any  definite  object,  and  walked  as  far 
as  Charing  Cross.  Very  dull  arid  dreary  the  city 
looked,  and  not  in  the  least  lively,  even  where  the 
throng  was  thickest  and  most  brisk.  As  I  trudged 
along,  my  reflection  was,  that  never  was  there  a  din- 
gier, uglier,  less  picturesque  city  than  London ;  and 
that  it  is  really  wonderful  that  so  much  brick  and 
stone,  for  centuries  together,  should  have  been  built 
tip  with  so  poor  a  result.  Yet  these  old  names  of  the 
city — Fleet  Street,  Ludgate  Hill,  the  Strand  —  used 
to  throw  a  glory  over  these  homely  precincts  when  I 
first  saw  them,  and  still  do  so  in  a  less  degree. 
Where  Farringdon  Street  opens  upon  Fleet  Street, 
moreover,  I  had  a  glimpse  of  St.  Paul's,  along  hvA- 
gate  Street,  in  the  gathering  dimness,  and  felt  as  if  I 
saw  an  old  friend.  In  that  neighorhood  —  speaking 
of  old  friends  —  I  met  Mr.  Parker,  of  Boston,  who 
told  me  sad  news  of  a  friend  whom  I  love  as  much  as 
if  I  had  known  him  for  a  lifetime,  though  he  is,  in- 
deed, but  of  two  or  three  years'  standing.  He  said 
that  my  friend's  bankruptcy  is  in  today's  "  Gazette." 
Of  all  men  on  earth,  I  had  rather  this  misfortune 
should  have  happened  to  any  other ;  but  I  hope  and 
think  he  has  sturdiness  and  buoyancy  enough  to  rise 
up  beneath  it.  I  cannot  conceive  of  hi?  face  other- 
wise than  with  a  glow  on  it,  like  that  of  the  sun  at 
noonday. 

Before  I  reached  our  lodgings,  the  dusk  settled  into 
the  streets,  and  a  mist  bedewed  and  bedamped  me, 


660  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

and  I  went  astray,  as  is  usual  with  me,  and  had  to 
inquire  my  way  ;  indeed,  except  in  the  principal 
thoroughfares,  London  is  so  miserably  lighted  that  it 
is  impossible  to  recognize  one's  whereabouts.  On  my 
arriyal  I  found  our  parlor  looking  cheerful  with  a 
brisk  fire  ;  .  .  .  but  the  first  day  or  two  in  new  lodg- 
ings is  at  best  an  uncomfortable  time.  Fanny  has 
just  come  in  with  more  unhappy  news  about  — . 
Pray  Heaven  it  may  not  be  true  I  .  .  .  Troubles  are 
a  sociable  brotherhood ;  they  love  to  come  hand  in 
hand,  or  sometimes,  even,  to  come  side  by  side  with 
long  looked-f or  and  hoped-for  good  fortune.  .  •  • 

November  Uth,  —  This  morning  we  all  went  to  the 
British  Museum,  always  a  most  wearisome  and  de- 
pressing task  to  me.  I  strolled  through  the  lower 
rooms  with  a  good  degree  of  interest,  looking  at  the 
antique  sculptures,  some  of  which  were  doubtless  grand 
and  beautiful  in  their  day.  .  .  .  The  Egyptian  remains 
are,  on  the  whole,  the  more  satisfactory ;  for,  though 
inconceivably  ugly,  they  are  at  least  miracles  of  size 
and  ponderosity,  —  for  example,  a  hand  and  arm  of 
poUshed  granite,  as  much  as  ten  feet  in  length.  The 
upper  rooms,  containing  millions  of  specimens  of  Nat- 
ural History,  in  all  departments,  really  made  my  heart 
ache  with  a  pain  and  woe  that  I  have  never  idt  any- 
where but  in  the   British  Museum,  and   I  hurried 

through  them  as  rapidly  as  I  could  persuade  J to 

follow  me.  We  had  left  the  rest  of  the  parly  still  in- 
tent on  the  Grecian  sculptures;  and  though  J was 

much  interested  in  the  vast  collection  of  shells,  he 
chose  to  quit  the  Museum  with  me  in  the  prospect  of 
a  stroll  about  London.  He  seems  to  have  my  own 
passicm  for  thronged  streets,  and  the  utmost  bustle  oi 
human  life. 


1857.]  LONDON.  661 

We  went  first  to  the  railway  station,  in  quest  of  our 
luggage,  which  we  found.  Then  we  made  a  pretty 
straight  course  down  to  Holbom,  and  through  New« 
gate  Street,  stopping  a  few  moments  to  look  through 
the  iron  fence  at  the  Christ's  Hospital  boys,  in  their 
long  blue  coats  and  yellow  petticoats  and  stockings. 
It  was  between  twelve  and  one  o'clock ;  and  I  suppose 
this  was  their  hour  of  play,  for  they  were  running 
about  the  enclosed  space,  chasing  and  overthrowing 
one  another,  without  their  caps,  with  their  yellow  pet- 
ticoats tucked  up,  and  all  in  immense  activity  and  en< 
joyment.  They  were  eminently  a  healthy  and  hand- 
some set  of  boys. 

Then  we  went  into  Cheapside,  where  I  called  at 
Mr.  Bennett's  shop,  to  inquire  what  are  the  facts 
about .     When  I  mentioned  his  name,  Mr.  Ben- 
nett shook  his  head  and  expressed  great  sorrow  ;  but, 
on  further  talk,  I  found  that  he  referred  only  to  the 
failure,  and  had  heard  nothing  about  the  other  rumor- 
It  cannot,  therefore,  be  true  ;  for  Bennett  lives  iwe'r, 
neighborhood,  and  could  not  have  remained  showed 
of .  such  a  calamity.     There  must  be   soup,  so  as  to 
none,  however,  in  regard  to  the  failure,  itlrst  visited 
announced  in  the  "  Times."  i  of  many 

From  Bennett's  shop  —  which  is  so  near  occupants 
of  Bow  Church  that  it  would  tumble  upon  ilptions  of 
over  —  we  strolled  still  eastward,  aiming  ae  of  the 
Bridge ;  but  missed  it,  and  bewildered  ourselvinstance 
many  dingy  and  frowzy  streets  and  lanes.  I  a  long 
wards  the  right,  however,  knowing  that  tha^dndow, 
must  ultimately  bring  me  to  the  Thames;  em  times  ; 
I  saw  before  me  ramparts,  towers,  circularowing  in  a 
with  battlemented  summits,  large  sweepickness  of  the 
fortification,  as  well  as  straight  and  n  room  to  be  pic* 

¥OL.  YUI.  86 


562  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

chimneys  behind  them  (all  a  great  confusion  —  to  my 
eye),  of  ancient  and  more  modem  structure,  and  four 
loftier  turrets  rising  in  the  midst;  the  whole  great 
space  surrounded  by  a  broad,  dry  moat,  which  now 
seemed  to  be  used  as  an  ornamental  walk,  bordered 
partly  with  trees.  This  was  the  Tower;  but  seen 
from  a  different  and  more  picturesque  point  of  view 
than  I  have  heretofore  gained  of  it.  Being  so  conven- 
ient for  a  visit,  I  determined  to  go  in.  At  the  outer 
gate,  which  is  not  a  part  of  the  fortification,  a  sentinel 
walks  to  and  fro,  besides  whom  there  was  a  warder,  in 
the  rich  old  costume  of  Henry  VIII.'s  time,  looking 
very  gorgeous  indeed,  —  as  much  so  as  scarlet  and 
gold  can  make  him. 

As  J and  I  were  not  going  to  look  at  the  Jewel- 
room,  we  loitered  about   in  the   open   space,  before 
the  White  Tower,  while  the  tall,  slender,  white-haired, 
^ftntlemanly  warder  led  the  rest  of  the  party  into  that 
fl'^e,  ^-^ent.      We  found  what  one  might  take  for  a 
m^nceiVi*.  ^  town,  with   gabled   houses  lifting  their 
ana  ponaero^^  gj^^^  ^^^  various  edifices  enclosing  the 
pousnea  grap^j^^  ^^  great  White  Tower,  —  now  more 
"PI^_^™^ white,  —  rising  venerable,  and  rather  pict- 
""fl  Histor^  Otherwise,  the  most  prominent  object  in 
ac  e  wit    X    J  \^yQ  no  plan  nor  available  idea  of  it 
w  ere   *^^^n  my  mind,  but  it  seems  really  to  be  a  town 
rough  t^^j£^  ^^j^  streets,  avenues,  and  all  that  per- 
o  ow  mi  jj^jjna,n   life.      There   were    soldiers    going 
n   on  ti^.^i^gijf  exercise  in  the  open  space,  and  along  at 
uo     mter^^j^^  White  Tower  lay  a  great  many  cannon 
^      ^^   *some  of  which  were  of  Turkish  manufao* 
a  stroU  about  ^.^^sely  long  and   ponderous.     Others, 
passion  for  throu^,^  ^^^  j^  ^^  belonged  to  the  far 
human  life. 


1857.]  LONDON.  663 

mous  ship  Great  Harry,  and  had  lain  for  ages  under 
the  sea.  Others  were  East-Indian.  Several  were  beau- 
tiful specimens  of  workmanship.  The  mortars  —  some 
so  large  that  a  fair-sized  man  might  easily  be  rammed 
into  them  —  held  their  great  mouths  slanting  upward 
to  the  sky,  and  mostly  contained  a  quantity  of  rain- 
water.    While  we  were  looking  at  these  warlike  toys, 

—  for  I  suppose  not  one  of  them  will  ever  thunder  in 
earnest  again,  —  the  warder  reappeared  with  his  la- 
dies, and,  leading  us  all  to  a  certain  part  of  the  open 
space,  he  struck  his  foot  on  the  small  stones  with 
which  it  is  paved,  and  told  us  that  we  were  standing 
on  the  spot  where  Anne  Boleyn  and  Catharine  How- 
ard were  beheaded.  It  is  not  exactly  in  the  centre  of 
the  square,  but  on  a  line  with  one  of  the  angles  of  the 
White  Tower.  I  forgot  to  mention  that  the  middle 
of  the  open  space  is  occupied  by  a  marble  statue  of 
Wellington,  which  appeared  to  me  very  poor  and  la- 
boriously spirited. 

Lastly,  the  warder  led  us  under  the  Bloody  Tower, 
and  by  the  side  of  the  Wakefield  Tower,  and  showed 
us  the  Traitor's  Gate,  which  is  now  closed  up,  so  as  to 
afford  no  access  to  the  Thames.  No ;  we  first  visited 
the  Beauchamp  Tower,  famous  as  the  prison  of  many 
historical  personages.  Some  of  its  former  occupants 
have  left  their  initials  or  names,  and  inscriptions  of 
piety  and  patience,  cut  deep  into  the  freestone  of  the 
walls,  together  with  devices  —  as  a  crucifix,  for  instance 

—  neatly  and  skilfully  done.  This  room  has  a  long 
deep  fireplace ;  it  is  chiefly  lighted  by  a  large  window, 
which  I  fancy  must  have  been  made  in  modem  times ; 
but  there  are  four  narrow  apertures,  throwing  in  a 
little  light  through  deep  alcoves  in  the  thickness  of  the 
octagon  wall.   One  would  expect  such  a  room  to  be  pic* 


564  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

turesque ;  but  it  is  really  not  of  strikiag  aspect,  being 
low,  with  a  plastered  ceiling,  — the  beams  just  show- 
ing through  the  plaster,  —  a  boarded  floor,  and  the 
walls  being  washed  over  with  a  bu£E  color.  A  warder 
sat  within  a  railing,  by  the  great  window,  with  six- 
penny books  to  sell,  containing  transcripts  of  the  in- 
scriptions on  the  walls. 

We  now  left  the  Tower,  and  made  our  way .  devi- 
ously westward,  passing  St.  Paul's,  which  looked 
magnificently  and  beautifully,  so  huge  and  dusky  as  it 
was,  with  here  and  there  a  space  on  its  vast  form 
where  the  original  whiteness  of  the  marble  came  *  out 
like  a  streak  of  moonshine  amid  the  blackness  with 
which  time  has  made  it  grander  than  it  was  in  its 
newness.  It  is  a  most  noble  edifice ;  and  I  delight, 
too,  in  the  statues  that  crown  some  of  its  heights,  and 
in  the  wreaths  of  sculpture  which  are  hung  around  it. 


November  12th,  —  This  morning  began  with  such 
fog,  that  at  the  window  of  my  chamber,  lighted  only 
from  a  small  court-yard,  enclosed  by  high,  dingy  walls, 
I  could  hardly  see  to  dress.  It  kept  alternately  dark 
ening,  and  then  brightening  a  little,  and  darkening 
again,  so  much  that  we  could  but  just  discern  the  op- 
posite houses ;  but  at  eleven  or  thereabouts  it  grew  so 
much  clearer  that  we  resolved  to  venture  out.  Our 
plan  for  the  day  was  to  go  in  the  first  place  to  West- 
minster Abbey,  and  to  the  National  Gallery,  if  we 
should  find  time.  •  •  •  The  fog  darkened  again  as  we 
.  went  down  Regent  Street,  and  the  Duke  of  York's 
Column  was  but  barely  visible,  looming  vaguely  be- 
fore us  ;  nor,  from  Pall  Mall,  was  Nelson's  Pillar 
much  more  distinct,  though  methought  his  statue  stood 


t857.]  LONDON.  665 

aloft  in  a  somewhat  clearer  atmosphere  than  ours. 
Passing  Whitehall,  however,  we  could  scarcely  see 
Inigo  Jones's  Banqueting-House,  on  the  other  side  of 
the  street;  and  the  towers  and  turrets  of  the  new 
Houses  of  Parliament  were  all  but  invisible,  as  was 
the  Abbey  itself ;  so  that  we  really  were  in  some  doubt 
whither  we  were  going.  We  found  our  way  to  Poets' 
Comer,  however,  and  entered  those  holy  precincts, 
which  looked  very  dusky  and  grim  in  the  smoky  light. 
...  I  was  strongly  impressed  with  the  perception 
that  very  commonplace  people  compose  the  great  bulk 
of  society  in  the  home  of  the  illustrious  dead.  It  is 
wonderful  how  few  names  there  are  that  one  cares 
anything  about  a,hundred  years  after  their  departure ; 
but  perhaps  each  generation  acts  in  good  faith  in  can- 
onizing its  own  men.  .  .  .  But  the  fame  of  the  bur- 
ied person  does  not  make  the  marble  live,  —  the  mar- 
ble keeps  merely  a  cold  and  sad  memory  of  a  man 
who  would  else  be  forgotten.  No  man  who  needs  a 
monument  ever  ought  to  have  one. 

The  painted  windows  of  the  Abbey,  though  mostly 
modem,  are  exceedingly  rich  and  beautiful ;  and  I  do 
think  that  human  art  has  invented  no  other  such  mag- 
nificent method  of  adornment  as  this. 

Our  final  visit  toJay  was.  to  the  National  Gallery, 
where  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  Murillo's  St.  John 
was  the  most  lovely  picture  I  have  ever  seen,  and  that 
there  never  was  a  painter  who  has  really  made  the 
i^orld  richer,  except  Murillo. 


November  12tJu  —  This  morning  we  issued  fortK 


666  ENGLISH  NOTE'-BOOKS,  [1857. 

and  found  the  atmosphere  chill  and  ahnost  frosty^  tin- 
gling upon  our  cheeks.  .  .  .    The  gateway  of  Sonaerset 
House  attracted  us,  and  we  walked  round  its  spacious 
quadrangle,   encountering    many  government    clerks 
hurrying  to  their  various  offices.      At  least,   I   pre- 
sumed them  to  be  so.     This  is  certainly  a  handsome 
square  of  buildings,  with  its  Grecian  faQades  and  pil- 
lars, and  its  sculptured  bas-reliefs,  and  the  group  of 
statuary  in  the  midst  of  the  court.     Besides  the  part 
of  the  edifice  that  rises  above  ground,  there  appear  to 
be  two  subterranean  stories  below  the  surface.     From 
Somerset  House  we  pursued  our  way  through  Temple 
Bar,  but  missed  it,  and  therefore  entered  by  the  pas- 
sage from  what  was  formerly  Alsatia,  but  which  now 
seems  to  be  a  very  respectable  and  humdrum  part  of 
London.     We  came  immediately  to  the  Temple  Gar- 
dens, which  we  walked  quite  round.    The  grass  is  still 
green,  but  the  trees  are  leafless,  and  had  an  aspect  of 
not  being  very  robust,  even  at  more   genial  seasons 
of  the  year.    There  were,  however,  large  quantities  of 
brilliant   chrysanthemums,   golden   and  of  all   hues, 
blooming  gorgeously  all  about  the  borders ;  and  sev- 
eral gardeners  were  at  work,  tending  these  flowers,  and 
sheltering  them  from  the  weather.    I  noticed  no  roses, 
nor  even  rose-bushes,  in  the  spot  where  the  factions  of 
York  and  Lancaster  plucked  their  two  hostile  flowers. 
Leaving  these  grounds,  we  went  to  the  Hall  of  the 
Middle  Temple,  where  we  knocked  at  the  portal,  and, 
finding  it  not  fastened,  thrust  it  open.     A  boy  ap- 
peared within,  and  the  porter  or  keeper,  at  a  distance, 
along  the  inner  passage,  called  to  us  to  enter ;  and, 
opening  the  door  of  the  great  hall,  left  us  to  view  it 
till  he  should  be  at  leisure  to  attend  to  us.     Truly  it 
is  a  most  magnificent  apartment  ;  very  lofty,  •  —  so 


J  85  7.]  LONDON,  667 

lofty,  indeed,  that  the  antique  oak  roof  was  quite  hid* 
den,  as  regarded  all  its  details,  in  the  sombre  gloom 
that  brooded  under  its  rafters.  The  hall  was  lighted 
by  four  great  windows,  I  think,  on  each  of  the  two 
sides,  descending  half-way  from  the  ceiling  to  the 
floor,  leaving  all  beneath  enclosed  by  oaken  panelling, 
which,  on  three  sides,  was  carved  with  escutcheons  of 
such  members  of  the  society  as  have  held  the  ofi&ce  of 
reader.  There  is  likewise,  in  a  large  recess  or  tran- 
sept, a  great  window,  occupying  the  full  height  of  the 
hall,  and  spendidly  emblazoned  with  the  arms  of  the 
Templars  who  have  attained  to  the  dignity  of  Chief 
Justices.  The  other  windows  are  pictured,  in  like 
manner,  with  coats  of  arms  of  local  dignities  con« 
nected  with  the  Temple ;  and  besides  all  these  there 
are  arched  lights,  high  towards  the  roof,  at  either  end, 
full  of  richly  and  chastely  colored  glass,  and  all  the 
illumination  that  the  great  hall  had  came  through 
these  glorious  panes,  and  they  seemed  the  richer  for 
the  sombreness  in  which  we  stood.  I  cannot  describe, 
or  even  intimate,  the  effect  of  this  transparent  glory, 
glowing  down  upon  us  in  that  gloomy  depth  of  the 
hall.  The  screen  at  the  lower  end  .was  of  carved  oak, 
very  dark,  and  highly  polished,  and  as  old  as  Queen 
Elizabeth's  time.  The  keeper  told  us  that  the  story  of 
the  Armada  was  said  to  be  represented  in  these  carv- 
ings, but  in  the  imperfect  light  we  could  trace  nothing 
of  it  out.  Along  the  length  of  the  apartment  were  set 
two  oaken  tables  for  the  students  of  law  to  dine  upon ; 
and  on  the  dais,  at  the  upper  end,  there  was  a  cross- 
table  for  the  big-wigs  of  the  society  ;  the  latter  being 
provided  with  comfortable  chairs,  and  the  former  with 
oaken  benches.  From  a  notification,  posted  near  the 
ioor,  I  gathered  that  the  cost  of  dinners  is  two  shilr 


668  ENGLISH  NOTE^BOOKS.  [1857. 

lings  to  each  gentleman,  including,  as  the  attendant 
told  me,  ale  and  wine.  I  am  reluctant  to  leave  this 
hall  without  expressing  how  grave,  how  grand,  how 
sombre,  and  how  magnificent  I  feel  it  to  be.  As  re- 
gards historical  association,  it  was  a  favorite  dancing- 
hall  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  and  Sir  Christopher  Hatton 
danced  himself  into  her  good  graces  there. 

We  next  went  to  the  Temple  Church,,  and,  finding 
the  door  ajar,  made  free  to  enter  beneath  its  Norman 
arches,  which  admitted  us  into  a  circular  vestibule, 
very  ancient   and   beautiful.      In  the   body   of    the 
church  beyond   we   saw   a  boy  sitting,  but  nobody 
either  forbade  or  invited  our  entrance.     On  the  floor 
of  the  vestibule  lay  about  half  a  score  of  Templars,  — 
the  representatives  of  the  warlike  priests  who  built 
this  church  and  formerly  held  these  precincts,  —  all  in 
chain  armor,  grasping  their  swords,  and  with  their 
shields  beside  them.     Except  two  or  three,  they  lay 
cross-legged,  in  token  that  they  had  really  fought  for 
the  Holy  Sepulchre.     I  think  I  have  seen  nowhere 
else  such  well-preserved  monimoiental  knights  as  these. 
We  proceeded  into  the  interior  of  the  church,  and 
were  greatly  impressed  with  its  wonderful  beauty,  — 
the  roof  springing,  as  it  were  in  a  harmonious  and  ac- 
cordant fountain,  out  of  the  clustered  pillars  that  sup- 
port its  groined  arches ;  and  these  pillars,  immense  as 
they  are,  are  polished  like  so  many  gems.     They  are 
of  Purbeck  marble,  and,  if  I  mistake  not,  had  been 
covered  with  plaster  for  ages,  until  latterly  redeemed 
and  beautified  anew.     But  the  glory  of  the  church  is 
its  old  painted  windows ;  and,  positively,  those  great 
spaces  over  the  chancel  appeared  to  be  set  with  all 
manner  of  precious  stones,  —  or  it  was  as  if  the  many 
solored  radiance  of  heaven  were  breaking  upon  us,  — 


1857.]  LONDON.  569 

or  as  if  i^e  saw  the  wings  of  angels,  storied  over  with 
richly  tinted  pictures  of  holy  things.  But  it  is  idle  to 
talk  of  this  marvellous  adornment ;  it  is  to  be  seen  and 
>?vondered  at,  not  written  about.  Before  we  left  the 
church,  the  porter  made  his  appearance,  in  time  to 
receive  his  fee,  —  which  somebody,  indeed,  is  always 
ready  to  stretch  out  his  hand  for.  And  so  ended  our 
^sit  to  the  Temple,  which,  by  the  by,  though  close  to 
the  midmost  bustle  of  London,  is  as  quiet  as  if  it  were 
always  Sunday  there. 

We  now  went  to  St.  Paul's.    U and  Miss  Shep- 

ard  ascended  to  the  Whispering  Gallery,  and  we,  sit- 
ting under  the  dome,  at  the  base  of  one  of  the  pillars, 
saw  them  far  above  us,  looking  very  indistinct,  for 
those  misty  upper -depths  seemed  almost  to  be  hung 
with  clouds.  This  cathedral,  I  think,  does  not  profit 
by  gloom,  but  requires  cheerful  sunshine  to  show  it  to 
the  best  advantage.  The  statues  and  sculptures  in  St. 
Paul's  are  mostly  covered  with  years  of  dust,  and  look 
thereby  very  grim  and  ugly ;  but  there  are  few  memo- 
ries there  from  which  I  should  care  to  brush  away  the 
dust,  they  being,  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  naval  and 
military  heroes  of  second  or  third  class  merit.  I  really 
remember  no  literary  celebrity  admitted  solely  on  that 
account,  except  Dr.  Johnson.  The  Crimean  War  has 
supplied  two  or  three  monuments,  chiefly  mural  tab- 
lets ;  and  doubtless  more  of  the  same  excrescences  will 
yet  come  out  upon  the  walls.  One  thing  that  I  newly 
noticed  was  the  beautiful  shape  of  the  great,  covered 
marble  vase  that  serves  for  a  font. 

From  St.  Paul's  we  went  down  Cheapside,  and, 
turning  into  King  Street,  visited  Gtuldhall,  which  we 
found  in  process  of  decoration  for  a  public  ball,  to 
take  place  next  week.     It  looked  rather  gewgawiah 


670  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857, 

than  gorgeous,  being  hung  with  flags  of  all  nations, 
and  adorned  with  military  trophies;  and  the  scene 
was  repeated  by  a  range  of  looking-glasses  at  one  end 
of  the  room.  The  execrably  painted  windows  reaUy 
shocked  us  by  their  vulgar  glare,  after  those  of  the 
Temple  Hall  and  Church;  yet,  a  few  years  ago,  I 
might  very  likely  have  thought  them  beautiful.  Our 
own  national  banner,  I  must  remember  to  say,  was 
hanging  in  Guildhall,  but  with  only  ten  Stars,  and  an 
insufficient  number  of  Stripes. 


Ncyvemher  Ibth.  —  Yesterday  morning  we  went  to 
London  Bridge  and  along  Lower  Thames  Street,  and 
quickly  found  ourselves  in  Billingsgate  Market,  —  a 
dirty,  evil-smelling,  crowded  precinct,  thronged  with 
people  carrying  fish  on  their  heads,  and  lined  with 
fish-shops  and  fish-stalls,  and  pervaded  with  a  fishy 
odor.  The  f  ootwalk  was  narrow,  —  as  indeed  was  the 
whole  street,  —  ani filthy  to  travel  upon;  and  we  had 
to  elbow  our  way  among  rough  men  and  slatternly 
women,  and  to  guard  our  heads  from  the  contact  of 
fish-trays ;  very  ugly,  grimy,  and  misty,  moreover,  is 
Billingsgate  Market,  and  though  we  heard  none  of  the 
foul  language  of  which  it  is  supposed  to  be  the  foun- 
tain-head, yet  it  has  its  own  peculiarities  of  behavior. 

For  instance,  U tells  me  that  one  man,  staring 

at  her  and  her  governess  as  they  passed,  cried  out, 
"What  beauties  I  "  —  another,  looking  under  her  veil, 
greeted  her  with,  "  Good  morning,  my  love  !  "  We 
were  in  advance,  and  heard  nothing  of  these  civilities. 
Struggling  through  this  fishy  purgatory,  we  caught 
sight  of  the  Tower,  as  we  drew  near  the  end  of  the 
street ;  and  I  put  all  my  party  under  charge  of  one  of 


1857.]  LONDON.  571 

the  Trump  Cards,  not  being  myself  inclined  to  make 
the  rounds  of  the  small  part  of  the  fortress  that  is 
shown,  so  soon  after  my  late  visit. 

When  they  departed  with  the  warder,  I  set  out  by 
myself  to  wander  about  the  exterior  of  the  Tower, 
looking  with  interest  at  what  I  suppose  to  be  Tower 
Hill,  —  a  slight  elevation  of  the  large  open  space  into 
which  Great  Tower  Street  opens;  though,  perhaps, 
what  is  now  called  Trinity  Square  may  have  been  a 
part  of  Tower  Hill,  and  possibly  the  precise  spot  where 
the  executions  took  place.  Keeping  to  the  right,  round 
the  Tower,  I  found  the  moat  quite  surrounded  by  a 
fence  of  iron  rails,  excluding  me  from  a  pleasant 
gravel-path,  among  flowers  and  shrubbery,  on  the  in- 
side, where  I  could  see  nursery-maids  giving  children 
their  airings.  Possibly  these  may  have  been  the  privi- 
leged inhabitants  of  the  Tower,  which  certainly  might 
contain  the  population  of  a  large  village.  The  aspect 
of  the  fortress  has  so  much  that  is  new  and  modem 
about  it  that  it  can  hardly  be  called  picturesque,  and 
yet  it  seems  unfair  to  withhold  that  epithet  from  such 
a  collection  of  gray  ramparts.  I  followed  the  iron 
fence  quite  round  the  outer  grounds,  till  it  approached 
the  Thames,  and  in  this  direction  the  moat  and  the 
pleasure-ground  terminate  in  a  narrow  graveyard, 
which  extends  beneath  the  walls,  and  looks  neglected 
and  shaggy  with  long  grass.  It  appeared  to  contain 
graves  enough,  but  only  a  few  tombstones,  of  which  I 
CQuld  read  the  inscription  of  but  one;  it  commemo- 
rated a  Mr.  George  Gibson,  a  person  of  no  note,  nor 
apparently  connected  with  the  place.  St.  Katharine's 
Dock  lies  along  the  Thames,  in  this  vicinity;  and 
while  on  one  side  of  me  were  the  Tower,  the  quiet 
gravel-path,  and  the  shaggy  graveyard,  on  the  other 


572  ENGLISH  NOTE^BOOKS.  [1857. 

were  draymen  and  their  horses,  dock-laborers,  sailors, 
empty  puncheons,  and  a  miscellaneous  spectacle  of 
life,  —  including  organ-grinders,  men  roasting  chest- 
nuts over  small  ovens  on  the  sidewalk,  boys  and  -wo- 
men with  boards  or  wheelbarrows  of  apples,  oyster- 
stands,  besides  pedlars  of  small  wares,  dirty  children 
at  play,  and  other  figures  and  things  that  a  Dutch 
painter  would  seize  upon. 

I  went  a  little  way  into  St.  Katharine's  Dock,  and 
found  it  crowded  with  great  ships;   then,  returning, 
I  strolled  along  the  range  of  shops  that  front  towards 
this  side  of  the  Tower.     They  have  all  something  to 
do  with  ships,  sailors,  and  commerce;  being  for  the 
sale  of  ships'  stores,  nautical  instruments,  arms,  cloth- 
ing, together  with  a  tavern  and  grog-shop  at  every 
other  door ;  bookstalls,  too,  covered  with  cheap  novels 
and  song-books ;   cigar-shops  in  great  numbers ;   and 
everywhere  were  sailors,  and'  here  and  there  a  soldier, 
and  children  at  the  doorsteps,  and  women  showing 
themselves  at  the  doors  or  windows  of  their  domiciles. 
These  latter  figures,  however,  pertain  rather  to  the 
street  up  which  I  walked,  penetrating  into  the  interior 
of  this  region,  which,  I  think,  is  BlackwaU  —  no,  I 
forget  what  its  name  is.     At  all  events,  it  has  an  an- 
cient and  most  grimy  and  rough  look,  with  its  old 
gabled  houses,  each  of  them  the  seat  of  some  petty 
trade  and  business  in  its  basement  story.     Among 
these  I  saw  one  house  with  three  or  four  peaks  along 
its  front,  —  a  second  story  projecting  over  the  base- 
ment, and  the  whole  clapboarded  over.    .  .   .   There 
was  a  butcher's  stall  in  the  lower  story,  with  a  front 
open  to  the  street,  in  the  ancient  fashion,  which  seems 
to  be  retained  only  by  butchers'  shops.     This  part  of 
London  having  escaped  the  Great  Fire,  I  suppose 


1857.]  LONDON.  673 

there  may  be  many  relics  of  architectural  antiquity 
hereabouts. 

At  the  end  of  an  hour  I  went  back  to  the  Refresh- 
ment-room, within  the  outer  gate  of  the  Tower,  where 
the  rest  of  us  shortly  appeared.  We  now  returned 
westward  by  way  of  Great  Tower  Street,  Eastcheap, 
and  Cannon  Street,  and,  entering  St.  Paul's,  sat  down 
beneath  the  misty  dome  to  rest  ourselves.  The  muffled 
roar  of  the  city,  as  we  heard  it  there,  is  very  soothing, 
and  keeps  one  listening  to  it,  somewhat  as  the  flow  of 
a  river  keeps  us  looking  at  it.  It  is  a  grand  and  quiet 
sound ;  and,  ever  and  anon,  a  distant  door  slammed 
somewhere  in  the  cathedral,  and  reverberated  long 
and  heavily,  like  the  roll  of  thunder  or  the  boom  of 
cannon.  Every  noise  that  is  loud  enough  to  be  heard 
in  so  vast  an  edifice  melts  into  the  great  quietude. 
The  interior  looked  very  sombre,  and  the  dome  hung 
over  us  like  a  cloudy  sky.  I  wish  it  were  possible  to 
pass  directly  from  St.  Paul's  into  York  Minster,  or 
from  the  latter  into  the  former ;  that  is,  if  one's  mind 
could  manage  to  stagger  under  both  in,  the  same  day. 
There  is  no  other  way  of  judging  of  their  compara- 
tive effect. 

Under  the  influence  of  that  grand  lullaby,  —  the 
roar  of  the  city,  —  we  sat  for  some  time  after  we  were 
sufficiently  rested;  but  at  last  plunged  forth  again, 
and  went  up  Newgate  Street,  pausing  to  look  through 
the  iron  railings  of  Christ's  Hospital.  The  boys,  how- 
ever, were  not  at  play ;  so  we  went  onward,  in  quest 
of  Smithfield,  and  on  our  way  had  a  greeting  from 
Mr.  Silsbee,  a  gentleman  of  our  own  native  town. 
Parting  with  him,  we  found  Smithfield,  which  is  still 
^cupied  with  pens  for  cattle,  though  I  believe  it  has 
ceased  to  be  a  cattle-market.     Except  it  be  St.  Bar- 


574  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1867 

iholomew's  Hospital  on  one  side,  there  is  nothing  in- 
teresting in  this  ugly  square ;  though,  no  doubt,  a  few 
feet  under  the  pavement  there  are  bones  and  ashes  as 
precious  as  anything  of  the  kind  on  earth.  I  wonder 
when  men  will  begin  to  erect  monuments  to  human  er- 
ror ;  hitherto  their  pillars  and  statues  have  only  been 
for  the  sake  of  glorification.  But,  after  all,  the  pres* 
ent  fashion  may  be  the  better  and  wholesomer.  .  .  • 

November  IQth.  —  Mr.  Silsbee  called  yesterday,  and 
talked  about  matters  of  art,  in  which  he  is  deeply  in- 
terested, and  which  he  has  had  good  opportunities  of 
becoming  acquainted  with,  during  three  years'  travel 
on  the  Continent.  He  is  a  man  of  great  intelligence 
and  true  feeling,  and  absolutely  brims  over  with  ideas, 
—  his  conversation  flowing  in  a  constant  stream,  which 
it  appears  to  be  no  trouble  whatever  to  him  to  keep 
up.  .  .  .  He  took  his  leave  after  a  long  call,  and  left 
with  us  a  manuscript,  describing  a  visit  to  Berlin, 
which  I  read  to  my  wife  in  the  evening.  It  was  well 
worth  reading.  He  made  an  engagement  to  go  with 
us  to  the  Crystal  Palace,  and  came  hither  for  that 
purpose  this  morning. 

Wie  drove  to  the  London  Bridge  station,  where  we 
bought  return  tickets  that  entitled  us  to  admission 
to  the  Palace,  as  well  as  conveyance  thither,  for  half 
a  crown  apiece.  On  our  arrival  we  entered  by  the 
garden  front,  thus  gaining  a  fine  view  of  the  orna- 
mental grounds,  with  their  fountains  and  stately  path- 
ways, bordered  with  statues  ;  and  of  the  edifice  itself, 
so  vast  and  fairy-like,  looking  as  if  it  were  a  bubble, 
and  might  vanish  at  a  touch.  There  is  as  little 
beauty  in  the  architecture  of  the  Crystal  Palace,  how- 
ever, as  was  possible  to  be  with  such  gigantic  use  of 


1867.]  CRYSTAL  PALACE.  675 

£uch  a  material.  No  doubt,  an  architectural  order  of 
which  we  have  as  yet  little  or  no  idea  is  to  be  de- 
veloped from  the  use  of  glass  as  a  building-material, 
instead  of  brick  and  stone.  It  will  have  its  own  rules 
and  its  own  results ;  but,  meanwhile,  even  the  present 
Palace  is  positively  a  very  beautiful  object.  On  en- 
tering we  found  the  atmosphere  chill  and  comfortless, 

—  more  so,  it  seemed  to  me,  than  the  open  air  itself. 
It  was  not  a  genial  day ;  though  now  and  then  the  sun 
gleamed  out,  and  once  caused  fine  effects  in  the  glass- 
work  of  a  crystal  fountain  in  one  of  the  courts. 

We  were  under  Mr.  Silsbee's  guidance  for  the  day, 
.  .  .  and  first  we  looked  at  the  sculpture,  which  is  com- 
posed chiefly  of  casts  or  copies  of  the  most  famous 
statues  of  all  ages,  and  likewise  of  those  crumbs  and 
little  fragments  which  have  fallen  from  Time's  jaw, 

—  and  half-picked  bones,. as  it  were,  that  have  been 
gathered  up  from  spots  where  he  has  feasted  full,  — 
torsos,  heads  and  broken  limbs,  some  of  them  half 
worn  away,  as  if  they  had  been  rolled  over  and  over 
in  the  sea.  I  saw  nothing  in  the  sculptural  way,  either 
inodd!m  or  antique,  that  impressed  me  so  much  as  a 
statue  of  a  nude  mother  by  a  French  artist.  In  a  sit- 
ting posture,  with  one  knee  over  the  other,  she  was 
clasping  her  highest  knee  with  both  hands;  and  in 
the  hollow  cradle  thus  formed  by  her  arms  lay  two 
sweet  little  babies,  as  snug  and  close  to  her  heart  as 
if  they  had  not  yet  been  bom,  —  two  little  love-blos- 
soms, —  and  the  mother  encircling  them  and  pervad- 
ing them  with  love.  But  an  infinite  pathos  and  strange 
terror  are  given  to  this  beautiful  group  by  some  faint 
bas-reliefs  on  the  pedestal,  indicating  that  the  happy 
mother  is  Eve,  and  Cain  and  Abel  the  two  innocent 
babes. 


676  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

Then  we  went  to  the  Alhambra,  which  looks  like 
an  enchanted  palace.     If  it  had  been  a  sunny  day,  I 
should  have  enjoyed  it  more  ;  but  it  was  miserable  to 
shiver  and  shake  in  the  G>urt  of  the  Lions,  and  in 
those  chambers  which  were  contrived  as  places  of  ref- 
uge from  a  fervid  temperature.     Furthermore,  it  is 
not  quite  agreeable  to  see  such  clever  specimens  of 
stage  decoration ;  they  are  so  very  good  that  it  gets 
to  be  past  a  joke,  without  becoming  actual  earnest.     I 
had  not  a  similar  feeling  in  respect  to  the  reproduc- 
tion of  mediaeval  statues,  arches,  doorways,  all  brill- 
iantly colored  as  in  the  days  of  their  first  glory  ;  yet 
I  do  not  know  but  that  the  first  is  as  little  objection- 
able as  the  last.     Certainly,  in  both  cases,  scenes  and 
objects,  of  a  past  age  are  here  more  vividly  presented 
to  the  dullest  mind  than  without  such  material  facili- 
ties they  could  possibly  be  brought  before  the  most 
powerful  imagination.     Truly,  the  Crystal  Palace,  in 
all  its  departments,  ofiPers  wonderful  means  of  educa* 
tion.     I  marvel  what  will  come   of  it.     Among  the 
things  that  I  admired  most  was  Benvenuto  Cellini's 
statue  of  Perseus  holding  the  head  of  Medusa*  and 
standing  over  her  headless  and  still  writhing  body,  out 
of  which,  at  the  severed  neck,  gushed  a  vast  exuber- 
ance of  snakes.     Likewise,  a  sitting  statue,  by  Michel 
Angelo,  of  one  of  the  Medici,  full  of  dignity  and  grace 
and  reposeful  might.     Also  the  bronze  gate  of  a  bap- 
tistery in  Florence,  carved*  all  over  with  relievos  of 
Scripture  subjects,  executed  in  the  most  lifelike  and 
expressive  manner.     The  cast  itself  was  a  miracle  of 
art.     I  should  have  taken  it  for  the  genuine  original 
bronze. 

We  then  wandered  into  the  House  of  Diomed,  which 
seemed  to  me  a  dismal  abode,  affording  no  possibilil^ 


1867.]  CRYSTAL  PALACE.  677 

of  comfort.  We  sat  down  in  one  of  the  rooms,  on  an 
iron  bench,  very  cold. 

It  being  by  this  time  two  o'clock,  we  went  to  the 
Hefreshment-room  and  lunched;  and  before  we  had 
finished  our  repast,  my  wife  discovered  that  she  had 
lost  her  sable  tippet,  which  she  had  been  carrying  on 
her  arm.  Mr.  Silsbee  most  kindly  and  obligingly  im- 
mediately went  in  quest  of  it,  .  .  .  but  to  no  pur* 
pose.  ... 

Upon  entering  the  Tropical  Saloon,  we  found  a  most 
welcome  and  delightful  change  of  temperature  among 
those  gigantic  leaves  of  banyan-trees,  and  the  broad 
expanse  of  water-plants,  floating  on  lakes,  and  spacious 
aviaries,  where  birds  of  brilliant  plumage  sported  and 
sang  amid  such  foliage  as  they  knew  at  home.  How- 
beit,  the  atmosphere  was  a  little  faint  and  sickish,  per- 
haps owing  to  the  odor  of  the  half -tepid  water.  The 
most  remarkable  object  here  was  the  trunk  of  a  tree, 
huge  beyond  imagination,  —  a  pine-tree  from  Califor- 
nia. It  was.  only  the  stripped-off  bark,  however,  which 
had  been  conveyed  hither  in  segments,  and  put  to- 
gether again  beyond  the  height  of  the  palace  roof; 
and  the  hollow  interior  circle  of  the  tree  was  large 
enough  to  contain  fifty  people,  I  should  think.  We 
entered  and  sat  down  in  all  the  remoteness  from  one 
another  that  is  attainable  in  a  good -sized  drawing- 
room.  We  then  ascended  the  gallery  to  get  a  view  of 
this  vast  tree  from  a  more  elevated  position,  and  found 
it  looked  even  bigger  from  above.  Then  we  loitered 
slowly  along  the  gallery  as  far  as  it  extended,  and  af- 
terwards descended  into  the  nave ;  for  it  was  getting 
dusk,  and  a  horn  had  sounded,  and  a  bell  rung  a  warn- 
ing to  such  as  delayed  in  the  remote  regions  of  the 
building.     Mr.  Silsbee   again  most  kindly   went   in 

VOL.  VIII  37 


bis  ENGLISH  NOTB-BCOKS.  [1857. 

quest  of  the  sables,  bat  still  without  success.  ...  I 
have  not  much  enjoyed  the  Crystal  Palace,  but  think 
it  a  great  and  admirable  achievement. 

NofoembefT  l%th.  —  On  Tuesday  evening  Mr.  Sils- 
bee  came  to  read  s(xne  letters  which  he  has  written  to 
his  friends,  chiefly  giving  his  observations  on  Art,  to- 
gether with  descripticms  of  Venice  and  other  cities  on 
the  Continent.  They  were  very  good,  and  indicate 
much  sensibility  and  talent.  After  the  reading  we 
had  a  little  oyster-supper  and  wine. 

I  had  written  a  note  to ,  and  received  an  an- 
swer indicating  that  he  was  much  weighed  down  by  his 
financial  misfortune.  .  .  .  However,  he  desired  me  to 
come  and  see  him;  so  yesterday  morning  I  wended 
my  way  down  into  the  city,  aAd  after  various  reluc- 
tant circumlocutions  arrived  at  his  house.  The  inte- 
rior looked  confused  and  dismal. 

It  seems  to  me  nobody  else  runs  such  risks  as  a  man 
of  business,  because  he  risks  everything.  Every  other 
man,  into  whatever  depth  of  poverty  he  may  sink,  has 
still  something  left,  be  he  author,  scholar,  handicraft- 
man,  or  what  not ;  the  merchant  has  nothing. 

We  parted  with  a  long  and  strong  grasp  of  the  hand, 
and promised  to  come  and  see  us  so<m.  .  .  . 

On  my  way  home  I  called  at  Triibner's  in  Pater 
Noster  Row.  ...  I  waited  a  few  minutes,  he  being 
busy  with  a  tall,  muscular,  English  -  built  man,  who, 
after  he  had  taken  leave,  Triibner  told  me  was  Charles 
Reade.  I  once  met  him  at  an  evening  party,  but 
should  have  been  glad  to  meet  him  again,  now  that  I 
appreciate  him  so  much  better  after  reading  *'  Never 
too  Late  to  Mend." 


1857.]  LONDON.  579 

December  6^A.  —  All  these  days,  since  my  last  date, 
have  been  marked  by  nothing  very  well  worthy  of  de- 
tail and  description.  I  have  walked  the  streets  a  great 
deal  in  the  dull  November  days,  and  always  take  a 
certain  pleasure  in  being  in  the  midst  of  human  life, 
—  as  closely  encompassed  by  it  as  it  is  possible  to  be 
anywhere  in  this  world ;  and  in  that  way  of  viewing 
it  there  is  a  dull  and  sombre  enjoyment  always  to  be 
had  in  Holbom,  Fleet  Street,  Cheapside,  and  the  other 
busiest  parts  of  London.  It  is  human  life  ;  it  is  this 
material  world ;  it  is  a  grim  and  heavy  reality.  I  have 
never  had  the  same  sense  of  being  surrounded  by  ma- 
terialisms and  hemmed  in  with  the  grossness  of  this 
earthly  existence  anywhere  else ;  these  broad,  crowded 
streets  are  so  evidently  the  veins  and  arteries  of  an 
enormous  city.  London  is  evidenced  in  every  one  of 
them,  just  as  a  megatherium  is  in  each  of  its  separate 
bones,  even  if  they  be  small  ones.  Thus  I  never  fail 
of  a  sort  of  self-congratulation  in  finding  myself,  for 
instance,  passing  along  Ludgate  Hill ;  but,  in  spite  of 
this,  it  is  really  an  ungladdened  life  to  wander  through 
these  huge,  thronged  ways,  over  a  pavement  foul  with 
mud,  ground  into  it  by  a  million  of  footsteps ;  jostling 
against  people  who  do  not  seem  to  be  individuals,  but 
all  one  mass,  so  homogeneous  is  the  street-walking  a^ 
pect  of  them;  the  roar  of  vehicles  pervading  me, — 
wearisome  cabs  and  omnibuses  ;  everywhere  the  dingy 
brick  edifices  heaving  themselv^  up,  and  shutting  out 
all  but  a  strip  of  sullen  cloud,  that  serves  London  for 
a  slcy,  —  in  short,  a  general  impression  of  grime  and 
sordidness ;  and  at  this  season  always  a  fog  scattered 
along  the  vista  of  streets,  sometimes  so  densely  as  al- 
most to  spiritualize  the  materialism,  and  make  the 
scene   resemble   the   other  world  of  worldly  people, 


680  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

gross  even,  in  ghostliness.     It  is  strange  how  little 
splendor  and  brilliancy  one  sees  in  London,  —  in  the 
city  almost  none,  though  some  in  the  shops  of  Regent 
Street.     My  wife  has  had  a  season  of  indisposition 
within  the  last  few  weeks,  so  that  my  rambles  have 
generally  been  solitary,  or  with  J only  for  a  com- 
panion.    I  think  my  only  excursion  with  my  wife  was 
a  week  ago,  when  we  went  to  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields, 
which  truly  are  almost  fields  right  in  the  heart  of  Lon- 
don, and  as  retired  and  secluded  as  if  the  surrounding 
city  were  a  forest,  and  its  heavy  roar  were  the  wind 
among  the  branches.     We  gained  admission  into  the 
noble  Hall,  which  is  modem,  but  built  in  antique  style, 
and  stately  and  beautiful  exceedingly.     I  have  forgot- 
ten all  but  the  general  effect,  with  its  lofty  oaken  roof, 
its  panelled  walls,  with  the  windows  high  above,  and 
the  great  arched  window  at  one  end  full  of  painted 
coats  of  arms,  which  the  light  glorifies  in   passing 
through  them,  as  if  each  were  the  escutcheon  of  some 
illustrious  personage.   Thence  we  went  to  the  chapel  of 
Lincoln's  Inn,  where,  on  entering,  we  found  a  class  of 
young  choristers  receiving  instruction  from  their  mu- 
sic-master, while  the  organ  accompanied  their  strains. 
These  young,  clear,  fresh,  elastic  voices  are  wonder- 
fully beautiful;   they  are  like  those  of  women,  yet 
have  something  more  birdlike  and  aspiring,  more  like 
what  one  conceives  of  the  singing  of  angels.     As  for 
the  singing  of  saints  £|nd  blessed  spirits  that  have  once 
been  human,  it  never  can  resemble  that  of  these  young 
voices;  for  no  duration  of  heavenly  enjoyments  will 
ever  quite  take  the  mortal  sadness  out  of  it. 

In  this  chapel  we  saw  some  painted  windows  of  the 
time  of  James  I.,  a  period  much  subsequent  to  the  age 
when  painted  glass  was  in  its  glory ;  but  the  pictures 


1857.]  LONDON.  681 

of  Scriptural  people  in  these  windows  were  certainly- 
very  fine,  —  the  figures  being  as  large  as  life,  and  the 
faces  having  much  expression.  The  sunshine  came  in 
through  some  of  them,  and  produced  a  beautiful  effect, 
almost  as  if  the  painted  forms  were  the  glorified  spirits 
of  those  holy  personages.  I 

After  leaving  Lincoln's  Inn,  we  looked  at  Gray's 
Inn,  which  is  a  great,  quiet  domain,  quadrangle  be- 
yond quadrangle,  close  beside  Holbom,  and  a  large 
space  of  greensward  enclosed  within  it.  It  is  very 
strange  to  find  so  much  of  ancient  quietude  right  in 
the  monster  city's  very  jaws,  which  yet  the  monster 
shall  not  eat  up,  —  right  in  its  very  belly,  indeed, 
which  yet,  in  all  these  ages,  it  shall  not  digest  and 
convert  into  the  same  substance  as  the  rest  of  its  bus- 
tling streets.  Nothing  else  in  London  is  so  like  the  ef- 
fect of  a  spell,  as  to  pass  under  one  of  these  archways, 
and  find  yourself  transported  from  the  jumble,  mob, 
tumult,  uproar,  as  of  an  age  of  week-days  condensed 
into  the  present  hour,  into  what  seems  an  eternal  sab- 
bath. Thence  we  went  into  Staples  Inn,  I  think  it  was, 
—  which  has  a  front  upon  Holbom  of  four  or  five  an- 
cient gables  in  a  row,  and  a  low  arch  under  the  im- 
pending story,  admitting  you  into  a  paved  quadrangle, 
beyond  which  you  have  the  vista  of  another.  I  do  not 
understand  that  the  residences  and  chambers  in  these 
Inns  of  Court  are  now  exclusively  let  to  lawyers; 
though  such  inhabitants  certainly  seem  to  preponder- 
ate there. 

Since  then  J and   I  walked  down   into   the 

Strand,  and  found  ourselves  unexpectedly  mixed  up 
with  a  crowd  that  grew  denser  as  we  approached  Char- 
ing Cross,  and  became  absolutely  impermeable  when 
we  attempted  to  make  our  way  to  Whitehall.     The 


582  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

wicket  in  the  gate  of  Northumberland  House,  by  the 
by,  was  open,  aiid  gave  me  a  glimpse  of  the  front  of 
the  edifice  within,  —  a  very  partial  glimpse,  however, 
and  that  obstructed  by  the  solid  person  of  a  foot- 
man, who,  with  some  women,  was  passing  out  from 
within.  The  crowfd  was  a  real  English  crowd,  per- 
fectly  undemonstrative,  and  entirely  decorous,  being 
composed  mostly  of  well-dressed  people,  and  largely 
of  women.  The  cause  of  the  assemblage  was  the  open- 
ing of  Parliament  by  the  Queen,  but  we  were  too  late 
for  any  chance  of .  seeing  her  Majesty.  However,  we 
extricated  ourselves  from  the  multitude,  and,  going 
along  Fall  Mall,  got  into  the  Park  by  the  steps  at  the 
foot  of  the  Duke  of  York's  Column,  and  thence  went 
to  the  Whitehall  Grateway,  outside  of  which  we  found 
the  Horse  Guards  drawn  up  —  a  regiment  of  black 
horses  and  burnished  cuirasses.  On  our  way  thither 
an  open  carriage  came  through  the  gateway  into  the 
Park,  conveying  two  ladies  in  court  dresses ;  and  an- 
other splendid  chariot  pressed  out  through  the  gate- 
way, —  the  coachman  in  a  cocked  hat  and  scarlet  and 
gold  embroidery,  and  two  other  scarlet  and  gold  fig- 
ures hanging  behind.  It  was  one  of  the  Queen's  car- 
riages, but  seemed  to  have  nobody  in  it.  I  have  for- 
gotten to  mention  what,  I  think,  produced  more  efFect 
on  me  than  anything  else,  namely,  the  clash  of  the 
bells  from  the  steeple  of  St.  Martin's  Church  and 
those  of  St.  Margaret.  Really,  London  seemed  to  cry 
out  through  them,  and  bid  welcome  to  the  Queen. 

Decemher  7th.  —  This  being  a  muddy  and  dismal 
day,  I  went  only  to  the 


1857.]  I^ONDON.  688 

BBITISH  MUSEUM, 

■which  is  but  a  short  walk  down  the  street  (Great  Eus- 
Bell  Street).  I  have  now  visited  it  often  enough  to  be 
on  more  familiar  terms  with  it  than  at  first,  and  there' 
fore  do  not  feel  myself  so  weighed  down  by  the  many 
things  to  be  seen.  I  have  ceased  to  expect  or  hope  or 
wish  to  devour  ^nd  digest  the  whole  enormous  collec- 
tion ;  so  I  content  myself  with  individual  things,  and 
succeed  in  getting  now  and  then  a  little  honey  from 
them.  Unless  I  were  studying  some  particuhur  branch 
of  history  or  science  or  art,  this  is  the  best  that  can  be 
done  with  the  British  Museum. 

I  went  first  to-day  into  the  Townley  Gallery,  and  so 
along  through  all  the  ancient  sculpture,  and  was  glad 
to  find  myself  able  to  sympathize  more  than  hereto- 
fore with  the  forms  of  grace  and  beauty  which  are 
preserved  there,  —*  poor,  maimed  immortalities  as  they 
are,  —  headless  and  legless  trunks,  godlike  cripples, 
faces  beautiful  and  broken  -  nosed,  —  heroic  shapes 
which  have  stood  so  long,  or  lain  prostrate  so  long,  in 
the  open  air,  that  even  the  atmosphere  of  Greece  has 
almost  dissolved  the  external  layer  of  the  marble;  and 
yet,  however  much  they  be  worn  away,  or  battered  and 
shattered,  the  grace  and  nobility  seem  as  deep  in  them 
as  the  very  heart  of  the  stone.  It  cannot  be  destroyed, 
except  by  grinding  them  to  powder.  In  «hort,  I  do 
really  believe  that  there  was  an  excellence  in  ancient 
sculpture,  which  has  yet  a  potency  to  educate  and  re- 
fine the  minds  of  those  who  look  at  it  even  so  care- 
lessly and  casually  as  I  do.  As  regards  the  frieze  of 
the  Parthenon,  I  must  remark  that  the  horses  repre- 
sented on  it,  though  they  show  great  spirit  and  life- 
likeness,  are  rather  of  the  pony  species  than  what 


584  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

would  be  considered  fine  horses  now.  Doubtless,  mod- 
em breeding  has  wrought  a  difference  in  the  animaL 
Flaxman,  in  his  outlines,  seems  to  have  imitated  these 
classic  steeds  of  the  Parthenon,  and  thus  has  produced 
horses  that  always  appeared  to  me  affected  and  dimin- 
utively monstrous. 

From  the  classic  sculpture,  I  passed  through  an 
Assyrian  room,  where  the  walls  are  lined  with  great 
slabs  of  marble  sculptured  in  bas-relief  with  scenes  in 
the  life  of  Sennacherib,  I  believe ;  very  ugly,  to  be 
sure,  yet  artistically  done  in  their  own  style,  and  in 
wonderfully  good  preservation.  Indeed,  if  the  chisel 
had  cut  its  last  stroke  in  them  yesterday,  the  work 
could  not  be  more  sharp  and  distinct.  In  glass  cases, 
in  this  room,  are  little  relics  and  scraps  of  utensils, 
and  a  great  deal  of  fragmentary  rubbish,  dug  up  by 
Layard  in  his  researches,  —  things  that  it  is  hard  to 
call  anything  but  trash,  but  which  yet  may  be  of  great 
significance  as  indicating  the  modes  of  life  of  a  long- 
past  race.  I  remember  nothing  particularly  just  now, 
except  some  pieces  of  broken  glass,  iridescent  with 
certainly  the  most  beautiful  hues  in  the  world,  —  in- 
describably beautiful,  and  unimaginably,  unless  one 
can  conceive  of  the  colors  of  the  rainbow,  and  a  thou- 
sand glorious  sunsets,  and  the  autumnal  forest-leaves 
of  America,  all  condensed  upon  a  little  fragment  of 
a  glass  cup,  —  and  that,  too,  without  becoming  in  the 
least  glaring  or  flagrant,  but  mildly  glorious,  as  we 
may  fancy  the  shifting  hues  of  an  angel's  wing  may 
be.  I  think  this  chaste  splendor  will  glow  in  my 
memory  for  years  to  come.  It  is  the  effect  of  time, 
and  cannot  be  imitated  by  any  known  process  of  art. 
I  have  seen  it  in  specimens  of  old  Boman  glass,  which 
has  been  famous  here  in  England ;  but  never  in  any* 


1857.]  LONDON.  685 

thing  is  there  the  brilliancy  of  these  Oriental  frag- 
ments. How  strange  that  decay,  in  dark  places,  and 
underground,  and  where  there  are  a  billion  chances  to 
one  that  nobody  will  ever  see  its  handiwork,  should 
produce  these  beautiful  effects !  The  glass  seems  to 
become  perfectly  brittle,  so  that  it  would  vanish,  like 
a  soap-bubble,  if  touched. 

Ascending  the  stairs,  I  went  through  the  halls  of 
fossil  remains,  —  which  I  care  little  for,  though  one  of 
them  is  a  human  skeleton  in  limestone,  —  and  through 
several  rooms  of  mineralogical  specimens,  including  all 
the  gems  in  the  world,  among  which  is  seen,  not  the 
Koh-i-noor  itself,  but  a  f ac-simile  of  it  in  crystal.  I 
think  the  aerolites  are  as  interesting  as  anything  in 
this  department,  and  one  piece  of  pure  iron,  laid 
against  the  wall  of  the  room,  weighs  about  fourteen 
hundred  pounds.  Whence  could  it  have  come?  If 
these  aerolites  are  bits  of  other  planets,  how  happen 
they  to  be  always  iron  ?  But  I  know  no  more  of  this 
than  if  I  were  a  philosopher. 

Then  I  went  through  rooms  of  shells  and  fishes, 
and  reptiles  and  tortoises,  crocodiles  and  alligators  and 
insects,  including  all  manner  of  butterflies,  some  of 
which  had  wings  precisely  like  leaves,  a  little  withered 
and  faded,  even  the  skeleton  and  fibres  of  the  leaves 
represented;  and  immense  hairy  spiders,  covering, 
with  the  whole  circumference  of  their  legs,  a  space 
as  big  as  a  saucer ;  and  centipedes  little  less  than  a 
foot  long;  and  winged  insects  that  look  like  jointed 
twigs  of  a  tree.  In  America,  I  remember,  when  I 
lived  in  Lenox,  I  found  an  insect  of  this  species,  and 
at  first  really  mistook  it  for  a  twig.  It  was  smaller 
than  these  specimens  in  the  Museum.  I  suppose 
eveiy  creature,  almost,  that  runs  or  creeps  or  swims 


586  ENGLISH  NOTB^BOOKS.  [1867. 

or  flies,  is  repiesented  in  this  oaUecticm  of  Natural 
History ;  and  it  puzzles  me  to  think  what  thej  were 
all  made  for,  though  it  is  quite  as  mysterious  why  man 
himself  was  made. 

By  and  by  I  entered  the  room  of  Egyptian  niuni« 
mies,  of  which  there  are  a  good  many,  one  of  which, 
the  body  of  a  priestess,  is  unrolled,  except  the  inner- 
most layer  of  linen.  The  outline  of  her  face  is  per- 
fectly yisiUe.  Mummies  of  cats,  dogs,  snakes,  and 
children  are  in  the  wall-cases,  together  with  a  vast 
many  articles  of  Egyptian  manufacture  and  use, — 
even  children's  toys ;  bread,  too,  in  flat  cakes;  grapes, 
that  have  turned  to  raisins  in  the  grave ;  queerest  of 
all,  methinks,  a  curly  wig,  that  is  supposed  to  have  be- 
longed to  a  woman,  —  together  with  the  wooden  box 
that  held  it.  The  hair  is  brown,  and  the  wig  is  as 
perfect  as  if  it  had  been  made  for  some  now  living 
dowager. 

From  Egypt  we  pass  into  rooms  containing  vases 
and  other  articles  of  Grecian  and  Roman  workman- 
ship, and  funeral  urns,  and  beads,  and  rings,  none  of 
them  very  beautiful.  I  saw  some  splendid  specimens, 
however,  at  a  former  visit,  when  I  obtained  admis- 
sion to  a  room  not  indiscriminately  shown  to  visitors. 
What  chiefly  interested  me  in  that  room  was  a  cast 
taken  from  the  face  of  Cromwell  after  death ;  repre- 
senting a  wide-mouthed,  long-chinned,  uncomely  vis- 
age, with  a  triangular  English  nose  in  the  very  centre. 
There  were  various  other  curiosities,  which  I  fancied 
were  safe  in  my  memory,  but  they  do  not  now  come 
apx>ermost. 

To  return  to  my  to-day's  progress  through  the  Mu- 
Bemn :  next  to  the  classic  rooms  are  the  collections 
of  Saxon  and  British  and  early  English  antiquities 


1857.]  LONDON.  687 

the  earlier  portions  of  which  are  not  very  interesting 
to  me,  possessing  little  or  no  beauty  in  themselves,  and 
indicating  a  hind  of  life  too  remote  from  our  own  to 
be  readily  sympathized  with.  Who  cares  for  glass 
beads  and  copper  brooches,  and  knives,  spear-heads, 
and  swords,  all  so  rusty  that  they  look  as  much  like 
pieces  of  old  iron  hoop  as  anything  else  ?  The  bed  of 
the  Thames  has  been  a  rich  treasury  of  antiquities, 
from  the  time  of  the  Roman  Conquest  downwards  ;  it 
seems  to  preserve  bronze  in  considerable  perfection, 
but  not  iron. 

Among  the  mediaeval  relics,  the  carvings  in  ivory 
are  often  very  exquisite  and  elaborate.  There  are 
likewise  caskets  and  coffers,  and  a  thousand  other  Old 
World  ornamental  works;  but  I  saw  so  many  and 
such  superior  specimens  of  them  at  the  Manchester  Ex- 
hibition, that  I  shall  say  nothing  of  them  here.  The 
seal-ring  of  Maiy  Queen  of  Scots  is  in  one  of  the 
cases  ;  it  must  have  been  a  thumb-ring,  judging  from  ' 
its  size,  and  it  has  a  dark  stone,  engraved  with  armo- 
rial bearings.  '  In  another  case  is  the  magic  glass  for- 
merly used  by  Dr.  Dee,  and  in  which,  if  I  rightly  re- 
member, used  to  be  seen  prophetic  visions  or  figures 
of  persons  and  scenes  at  a  distance.  It  is  a  round 
ball  of  glass  or  crystal,  slightly  tinged  with  a  pinkish 
hue,  and  about  as  big  as  a  small  apple,  or  a  little  big- 
ger than  an  egg  would  be  if  perfectly  round.  This 
ancient  humbug  kept  me  looking  at  it  perhaps  ten 
minutes ;  and  I  saw  my  own  face  dimly  in  it,  but  no 
other  vision.  Lastly,  I  passed  through  the  Ethno- 
graphical Booms ;  but  I  care  little  for  the  varieties  of 
the  human  race,  —  all  that  is  really  important  and  in- 
teresting being  found  in  our  own  variety.  Perhaps 
equally  in  any  other.     This  brought  me  to  the  head  of 


588  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

one  of  the  staircases,  descending  which  I  entered  the 
library. 

Here — not  to  speak  of  the  noble  rooms  and  halls — 
there  are  numberless  treasures  beyond  all  price;  too 
valuable  in  their  way  for  me  to  select  any  one  as  more 
curious  and  valuable  than  many  others.  Letters  of 
statesmen  and  warriors  of  all  nations,  and  several  cen 
turies  back,  —  among  which,  long  as  it  has  taken  £u- 
rope  to  produce  them,  I  saw  none  so  illustrious  as 
those  of  Washington,  nor  more  so  than  Franklin's, 
whom  America  gave  to  the  world  in  her  nonage ;  and 
epistles  of  poets  and  artists,  and  of  kings,  too,  whose 
chirography  appears  to  have  been  much  better  than  I 
should  have  expected  from  fingers  so  often  cramped  in 
iron  gauntlets.  In  another  case  there  were  the  orig- 
inal autograph  copies  of  several  famous  works,  —  for 
example,  that  of  Pope's  Homer,  written  on  the  backs 
of  letters,  the  direction  and  seals  of  which  appear  in 
the  midst  of  "  the  Tale  of  Troy  divine,"  which  also 
is  much  scratched  and  interlined  with  Pope's  correc- 
tions ;  a  manuscript  of  one  of  Ben  Jonson's  masques  i 
of  the  "  Sentimental  Journey,"  written  in  much  more 
careful  and  formal  style  than  might  be  expected, 
the  book  pretending  to  be  a  harum-scarum ;  of  Wal- 
ter Scott's  "  Kenilworth,"  bearing  such  an  aspect  of 
straightforward  diligence  that  I  shall  hardly  think  of 
it  again  as  a  romance ;  —  in  short,  I  may  as  well  drop 
the  whole  matter  here. 

All  through  the  long  vista  of  the  king's  library,  we 
come  to  cases  in  which  —  with  their  pages  open  be- 
neath the  glass  —  we  see  books  worth  their  weight  in 
gold,  either  for  their  uniqueness  or  their  beauty,  or  be- 
cause  they  have  belonged  to  illustrious  men,  and  have 
their  autographs  in  them.     The  copy  of  the  Englis]p 


1857.]  LONDON.  589 

translation  of  Montaigne,  containing  the  strange  scrawl 
of  Shakespeare's  autograph,  is  here.  Bacon's  name  is 
in  another  book ;  Queen  Elizabeth's  in  another ;  and 
there  is.  a  little  devotional  volume,  with  Lady  Jane 
Grey's  writing  in  it.  She  is  supposed  to  have  taken 
it  to  the  scafiPold  ^ith  her.  Here,  too,  I  saw  a  copy, 
which  was  printed  at  a  Venetian  press  at  the  time,  of 
the  challenge  which  the  Admirable  Crichton  caused  to 
be  posted  on  the  church  doors  of  Venice,  defying  all 
the  scholars  of  Italy  to  encounter  him.  But  if  I  men- 
tion one  thing,  I  find  fault  with  myself  for  not  put- 
ting down  fifty  others  just  as  interesting,  —  and,  after 
all,  there  is  an  official  catalogue,  no  doubt,  of  the 
whole. 

As  I  do  not  mean  to  fill  any  more  pages  with  the 
British  Museum,  I  will  just  mention  the  hall  of  Egyp- 
tian antiquities,  on  the  ground -floor  of  the  edifice, 
though  I  did  not  pass  through  it  to-day.  They  con- 
sist of  things  that  would  be  very  ugly  and  contempti- 
ble ff  they  were  not  so  inunensely  magnified ;  but  it 
is  impossible  not  to  acknowledge  a  certain  grandeur, 
resulting  from  the  scale  on  which  those  strange  old 
sculptors  wrought.  For  instance,  there  is  a  granite 
fist  of  prodigious  size,  at  least  a  yard  across,  and 
looking  as  if  it  were  doubled  in  the  face  of  Time,  de- 
fying him  to  destroy  it.  All  the  rest  of  the  statue  to 
which  it  belonged  seems  to  have  vanished;  but  this 
fist  will  certainly  outlast  the  Museum,  and  whatever 
else  it  contains,  unless  it  be  some  similar  Egyptian 
ponderosity.  There  is  a  beetle,  wrought  out  of  im- 
mensely hard  black  stone,  as  big  as  a  hogshead.  It  is 
satisfactory  to  see  a  thing  so  big  and  heavy.  Then 
there  are  huge  stone  sarcophagi,  engraved  with  hiero- 
glyphics within  and  without,  all  as  good  as  new,  though 


690  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

their  age  is  reckoned  by  thousands  of  years.  These 
great  coffins  are  of  vast  weight  and  mass,  insomuch 
that  when  once  the  accurately  fitting  lids  were  shut 
down,  there  might  have  seemed  little  chance  of  their 
being  lifted  again  till  the  Resurrection.  I  positively 
like  these  coffins,  they  are  so  faithfully  made,  and 
so  black  and  stem,  —  and  polished  to  such  a  nicety, 
only  to  be  buried  forever ;  for  the  workmen  and  the 
kings  who  were  laid  to  sleep  within  could  never  have 
dreamed  of  the  British  Museum. 

There  is  a  deity  named  Pasht^  who  sits  in  the  hall, 
very  big,  very  grave,  carved  of  black  stone,  and  very 
ludicrous,  wearing  a  dog^s  head.  I  will  just  mention 
the  Sosetta  Stone,  with  a  Greek  inscription,  and  an- 
other in  Egyptian  characters  which  gave  the  clew  to  a 
whole  field  of  history ;  and  shall  pretermit  all  further 
handling  of  this  unwieldy  subject. 

In  all  the  rooms  I  saw  people  of  the  poorer  classes, 
some  of  whom  seemed  to  view  the  objects  intelligently, 
and  to  take  a  genuine  interest  in  them.  A  poor  man 
in  London  has  great  opportunities  of  cultivating  him- 
self if  he  will  only  make  the  best  of  them ;  and  such 
an  institution  as  the  British  Museum  can  hardly  fail 
to  attract,  as  the  magnet  does  steel,  the  minds  that  are 
likeliest  to  be  benefited  by  it  in  its  various  depart- 
ments* I  saw  many  children  there,  and  some  ragged 
boys. 

It  deserves  to  be  noticed  that  some  small  figures  of 
Indian  Thugs,  represented  as  engaged  in  their  profes- 
sion and  handiwork  of  cajoling  and  strangling  travel- 
lers, have  been  removed  from  the  place  which  they 
formerly  occupied  in  the  part  of  the  Museum  shown 
to  the  general  public.  They  are  now  in  the  more  pri 
vate  room,  and  the  reason  of  their  withdrawal  ii,  that, 


1«57.]  LONDON.  691 

according  to  the  Chaplain  of  Newgate,  the  practice  of 
garroting  was  suggested  to  the  English  thieves  by  this 
representation  of  Indian  Thugs.  It  is  edifying,  after 
what  I  have  written  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  to 
find  that  the  only  lesson  known  to  have  been  incul- 
cated here  is  that  of  a  new  mode  of  outrage. 

December  8th,  —  This  morning,  when  it  was  time 
to  rise,  there  was  but  a  glimmering  of  daylight,  and 
we  had  candles  on  the  breakfast-table  at  nearly  ten 
o'clock.  All  abroad  there  was  a  dense  dim  fog  brood- 
ing through  the  atmosphere,  insomuch  that  we  could 
hardly  see  across  the  street.  At  eleven  o'clock  I  went 
out  into  the  midst  of  the  fog-bank,  which  for  the  mo^ 
ment  seemed  a  little  more  interfused  with  daylight ;  for 
there  seem  to  be  continual  changes  in  the  density  of 
this  dim  medium,  which  varies  so  much  that  now  you 
can  but  just  see  your  hand  before  you,  and  a  moment 
afterwards  you  can  see  the  cabs  dashing  out  of  the 
duskiness  a  score  of  yards  off.  It  is  seldom  or  never, 
moreover,  an  unmitigated  gloom,  but  appears  to  be 
mixed  up  with  simshine  in  different  proportions ;  some- 
times only  one  part  sun  to  a  thousand  of  smoke  and 
fog,  and  sometimes  sunshine  enough  to  ^ve  the  whole 
mass  a  coppery  hue.  This  would  have  been  a  bright 
sunny  day  but  for  the  interference  of  the  fog;  and 
before  I  had  been  out  long,  I  actually  saw  the  sun 
looking  red  and  rayless,  much  like  the  millionth  mag» 
nification  of  a  new  half-penny. 

I  was  boimd  towards  Bennoch's;  for  he  had  written 
a  note  to  apologize  for  not  visiting  us,  and  I  had  prom- 
ised to  call  and  see  him  to-day. 

I  went  to  Marlborough  House  to  look  at  the  Eng- 


592  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

lish  pictures,  which  I  care  more  about  seeing,  here  is 
England,  than  those  of  foreign  artists,  because  the  lat- 
ter will  be  found  more  numerously  and  better  on  the 
Continent.     I  saw  many  pictures  that  pleased   me; 
nothing  that  impressed  me  very  strongly.     Pictorial 
talent  seems  to  be  abundant  enough,  up  to  a  certain 
point ;  pictorial  genius,  I  should  judge,  is  among  the 
rarest  of  gifts.     To  be  sure,  I  very  likely  might  not 
recognize  it  where  it  existed ;  and  yet  it  ought  to  have 
the  power  of  making  itself  known  even  to  the  nnin- 
Btructed  mind,  as  literary  genius  does.     If  it  exist 
only  for  connoisseurs,  it  is  a  very  suspicious  matter. 
I  looked  at  all  Turner's  pictures,  and  at  many  of  his 
drawings ;  and  must  again  confess  myself  wholly  un- 
able to  understand  more  than  a  very  few  of  them. 
Even  those  few  are  tantalizing.    At  a  certain  distance 
you  discern  what  appears  to  be  a  grand  and  beautiful 
picture,  which  you  shaU  admire  and  enjoy  infinitely  if 
you  can  get  within  the  range  of  distinct  vision.     You 
come  nearer,  and  find  only  blotches  of  color  and  dabs 
of  the  brush,  meaning  nothing  when  you  look  closely, 
and  meaning  a  mystery  at  the  point  where  the  painter 
intended  to  station  you.     Some  landscapes  there  were, 
indeed,  full  of  imaginative  beauty,  and  of  the  better 
truth  etherealized  out  of  the  prosaic  truth  of  Nature ; 
only  it  was  still  impossible  actually  to  see  it.     There 
was  a  mist  over  it ;  or  it  was  like  a  tract  of  beautiful 
dreamland,  seen  dimly  through  sleep,  and  glimmering 
out  of  sight,  if  looked  upon  with  wide-open  eyes. 
These  were  the  more  satisfactory  specimens.     There 
were  many  others  which  I  could  not  comprehend  in 
the  remotest  degree ;  not  even  so  far  as  to  conjecture 
whether  they  purported  to  represent  earth,  sea,  or  sky. 
In  fact,  I  should  not  have  known  them  to  be  pictures 


1857.]  LONDON.  593 

at  all,  but  might  have  supposed  that  the  artist  had  been 
trying  his  brush'  on  the  canvas,  mixing  up  all  sorts  of 
hues,  but  principally  white  paint,  and  now  and  then 
producing  an  agreeable  harmony  of  color  without  par- 
ticularly intending  it.  Now  that  I  have  done  my  best 
to  imderstand  them  without  an  interpreter,  I  mean  to 
buy  Ruskin's  pamphlet  at  my  next  visit,  and  look  at 
<them  through  his  eyes.  But  I  do  not  think  that  I  can 
be  driven  out  of  the  idea  that  a  picture  ought  to  have 
something  in  common  with  what  the  spectator  sees  in 
nature. 

Marlborough  House  may  be  converted,  I  think,  into 
a  very  handsome  residence  for  the  young  Prince  of 
Wales.  The  entrance  from  the  court-yard  is  into  a 
large,  squai'e  central  hall,  the  painted  ceiling  of  which 
is  at  the  whole  height  of  the  edifice,  and  has  a  gallery 
on  one  side,  whence  it  would  be  pleasant  to  look  down 
on  a  festal  scene  below.  The  rooms  are  of  fine  pro- 
portions, with  vaulted  ceilings,  and  with  fireplaces  and 
mantel -pieces  of  great  beauty,  adorned  with  pillars 
and  terminal  figures  of  white  and  of  variegated  mar- 
ble ;  and  in  the  centre  of  each  mantel-piece  there  is 
a  marble  tablet,  exquisitely  sculptured  with  classical 
designs,  done  in  such  high  relief  that  the  figures  are 
sometimes  almost  disengaged  from  the  background. 
One  of  the  subjects  was  Androcles,  or  whatever  was 
his  name,  taking  the  thorn  out  of  the  lion's  foot.  I 
suppose  these  works  are  of  the  era  of  the  first  old 
Duke  and  Duchess.  After  all,  however,  for  some  rea- 
son or  other,  the  house  does  not  at  first  strike  you  as 
a  noble  and  princely  one,  and  you  have  to  convince 
yourself  of  it  by  examining  it  more  in  detail. 

On  leaving  Marlborough  House  I  stepped  for  a  few 
moments  into  the  National  Gallery,  and  looked,  among 

VOL.  YIll.  38 


594  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

other  things,  at  the  Turners  and  Claudes  that  hung 
there  side  by  side.  These  pictures,  I  think,  are  quite 
the  most  comprehensible  of  Turner's  productions ;  but 
I  must  say  I  prefer  the  Claudes.  The  latter  catches 
"the  light  that  never  was  on  sea  or  land"  without 
taking  you  quite  away  from  nature  for  it.  Neverthe' 
less,  I  will  not  be  quite  certain  that  I  care  for  any 
painter  except  Murillo,  whose  St.  John  I  should  like 
to  own.  As  far  as  my  own  pleasure  is  concerned,  I 
could  not  say  as  much  for  any  other  picture ;  for  I 
have  always  found  an  infinite  weariness  and  disgust 
resulting  from  a  picture  being  too  frequently  before 
my  eyes.  I  had  rather  see  a  basilisk,  for  instance, 
than  the  very  best  of  those  old,  familiar  pictures  in 
the  Boston  AthensBum ;  and  most  of  those  in  the  Na- 
tional Gallery  might  soon  affect  me  in  the  same  way. 

From  the  Grallery  I  almost  groped  my  way  towards 
the  city,  for  the  fog  seemed  to  grow  denser  and  denser 
as  I  advanced ;  and  when  I  reached  St.  Paul' s,  the 
sunny  intermixture  above  spoken  of  was  at  its  mini- 
mum, so  that  the  smoke-cloud  grew  really  black  about 
the  dome  and  pinnacles,  and  the  statues  of  saints  looked 
down  dimly  from  their  stand-points  on  high.  It  was 
very  grand,  however,  to  see .  the  pillars  and  porticos, 
and  the  huge  bulk  of  the  edifice,  heaving  up  its  dome 
from  an  obscure  foundation  into  yet  more  shadowy  ob- 
scurity; and  by  the  time  I  reached  the  comer  of  the 
churchyard  nearest  Cheapside,  the  whole  vast  cathe- 
dral had  utterly  vanished,  leaving  "  not  a  wrack  be- 
hind," unless  those  thick,  dark  vapors  were  the  ele- 
ments of  which  it  had  been  composed,  and  into  which 
it  had  again  dissolved.  It  is  good  to  think,  neverthe* 
less,  —  and  I  gladly  accept  the  analogy  and  the  moral, 
^-  that  the  cathedral  was  really  there,  ai^d  h&  s^b^i^^EOh 


1867.]  LONDON.  695 

tial  as  ever,  though  those  earthly  mists  had  hidden  it 
from  mortal  eyes. 

I  f oimd in  better  spirits  than  when  I  saw  him 

last,  but  his  misfortune  has  been  too  real  not  to  af- 
fect lum  long  and  deeply.  He  was  cheerful,  however, 
and  his  face  shone  with  ahnost  its  old  lustre.  It  has 
still  the  pheeriest  glow  that  I  ever  saw  in  any  humaTi 
countenance. 

I  went  home  by  way  of  Holbom,  and  the  fog  was 
denser  than  ever,  -r- very  black,  indeed  more  like  a 
distillation  of  mud  than  anything  else ;  the  ghost  of 
mud,  —  the  spiritualized  medium  of  departed  mud, 
through  which  the  dead  citizens  of  London  probably 
tread  in  the  Hades  whither  they  are  translated.  So 
heavy  was  the  gloom,  that  gas  was  lighted  in  all  the 
shc^windows  ;  and  the  little  charcoal-furnaces  of  the 
women  and  boys,  roasting  chestnuts,  threw  a  ruddy, 
misty  glow  around  them.  And  yet  I  liked  it.  This 
fog  seems  an  atmosphere  proper  to  huge,  grimy  Lon- 
don ;  as  proper  to  London  as  that  light  neither  of  the 
sun  nor  moon  is  to  the  New  Jerusalem. 

On  reaching  home,  I  found  the  same  fog  diffused 
through  the  drawing-room,  though  how  it  could  have 
got  in  is  a  mystery.  Since  nightfall,  however,  the  at- 
mosphere is  clear  again. 

December  2Qih.  —  Here  we  are  still  in  London,  at 
least  a  month  longer  than  we  expected,  and  at  the 
very  dreariest  and  dullest  season  of  the  year.  Had  I 
thought  of  it  sooner,  I  might  have  found  interesting 
people  enough  to  know,  even  when  all  London  is  said 
to  be  out  of  town;  but  meditating  a  stay  only  of  a 
week  or  two  (on  our  way  to  Rome),  it  did  not  seem 
worth  while  to  seek  acquaintances. 


596  ENGLISH  NOTE'BOOKS.  [1857. 

I  have  been  out  only  for  one  evening ;  and  that  was 

at  Dr. ^'s,  who  had  been  attendmg  all  the  chfldren 

in  the  measles.  (Their  illness  was  what  detained  us.) 
He  is  a  homoeopathist,  and  is  known  in  scientific  or 
general  .literature ;  at  all  events,  a  sensible  and  en- 
lightened man,  with  an  un-English  freedom  of  mind 
on  some  points.  For  example,  he  is  a  Swedenborgian, 
and  a  believer  in  modem  spiritualism.  He  showed 
me  some  drawings  that  had  been  made  under  the  spir- 
itual influence  by  a  miniature-painter  who  possesses 
no  imaginative  power  of  his  own,  and  is  merely  a 
good  mechanical  and  literal  copyist ;  but  these  draw- 
ings, representing  angels  and  allegorical  people,  were 
done  by  an  influence  which  directed  the  artist's  hand, 
he  not  knowing  what  his  next  touch  would  be,  nor 
what  the  final  result.  The  sketches  certainly  did 
show  a  high  and  fine  expressiveness,  if  examined  4n  a 

trustful  mood.     Dr.  also  spoke  of  Mr.  Harris, 

the  American  poet  of  spiritualism,  as  being  the  best 
poet  of  the  day ;  and  he  produced  his  works  in  several 
volmnes,  and  showed  me  songs,  and  paragraphs  of 
longer  poems,  in  support  of  his  opinion.  They  seemed 
to  me  to  have  a  certain  light  and  splendor,  but  not  to 
possess  much  power,  either  passionate  or  intellectoal 
Mr.  Harris  is  the  medium  of  deceased  poets,  Milton 

and  Lord  Byron  among  the  rest ;  and  Dr. said 

that  Lady  Byron  —  who  is  a  devoted  admirer  of  her 
husband,  in  spite  of  their  conjugal  troubles  —  pro- 
nounced some  of  these  posthumous  strains  to  be  wor- 
thy of  his  living  genius.  Then  the  Doctor  spoke  of 
various  strange  experiences  which  he  himseH  has  had 
in  these  spiritual  matters;  for  he  has  witnessed  the 
miraculous  performances  of  Home,  the  American  me- 
dium, and  he  has  seen  with  his  own  eyes,  and  felt 


1857.]  LONDON.  697 

with  his  own  touch,  those  ghostly  hands  and  arms  the 
reality  of  which  has  been  certified  to  me  by  other  be- 
holders.    Dr.  tells  me  that  they  are  cold,  and 

that  it  is  a  somewhat  awful  matter  to  see  and  feel 
them.  I  should  think  so,  indeed.  Do  I  believe  in 
these  wonders  ?  Of  course ;  for  how  is  it  possible  to 
doubt  either  the  solemn  word  or  the  sober  observation 

of  a  learned  and  sensible  man  like  Dr.  ?    But 

again,  do  I  really  believe  it?  Of  course  not;  for  I 
cannot  consent  to  have  heaven  and  earth,  this  world 
and  the  next,  beaten  up  together  like  the  white  and 

yolk  of  an  egg,  merely  out  of  respect  to  Dr. 's 

sanity  and  integrity.  I  would  not  believe  my  own 
sight,  nor  touch  of  the  spiritual  hands ;  and  it  would 
take  deeper  and  higher  strains  than  those  of  Mr.  Har- 
ris to  convince  me.  I  think  I  might  yield  to  higher 
poetry  or  heavenlier  wisdom  than  mortals  in  the  flesh 
have  ever  sung  or  uttered.  Meanwhile,  this  matter  of 
spiritualism  is  surely  the  strangest  that  ever  was  heard 
of ;  and  yet  I  feel  unaccountably  little  interest  in  it, 
—  a  sluggish  disgust,  and  repugnance  to  meddle  with 
it, — insomuch  that  I  hardly  feel  as  if  it  were  worth 
this  page  or  two  in  my  not  very  eventful  journal. 

One  or  two  of  the  ladies  present  at  Dr. ^'s  little 

party  seemed  to  be  mediums. 

I  have  made  several  visits  to  the  pictiu^-galleries 
since  my  last  dat^;  and  I  think  it  fair  towards  my 
own  powers  of  appreciation  to  record  that  I  begin  to 
appreciate  Turner's  pictures  rather  better  than  at  first. 
Not  that  I  have  anything  to  recant  as  respects  those 
strange,  white-grounded  performances  in  the  chambers 
at  the  Marlborough  House ;  but  some  of  his  happier 
productions  (a  large  landscape  illustrative  of  "  Childe 
Harold,"  for  instance)  seem  to  me  to  have  more  magic 


598  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1857. 

in  them  than  any  other  pictures.  I  admire,  too,  that 
misty,  morning  landscape  in  the  National  Grallery; 
and,  no  doubt,  his  very  monstrosities  are  such  as  only 
he  could  have  painted,  and  may  have  an  infinite  value 
for  those  who  can  appreciate  the  genius  in  them. 

The  shops  in  London  begin  to  show  some  tokens  of 
approaching  Christmas ;  especially  the  toy-shops,  and 
the  confectioners',  —  the  latter  ornamenting  their  win- 
dows with  a  profusion  of  bonbons  and  all  manner  of 
pygmy  figures  in  sugar ;  the  former  exhibiting  Christ- 
mas-trees, hung  with  rich  and  gaudy  fruit.     At  the 
butchers'  shops,  there  is  a  great  display  of  fat  car- 
casses, and  an  abundance  of  game  at  the  poulterers'. 
We  think  of  going  to  the  Crystal  Palace  to  spend  the 
festival  day,  and  eat  our  Christmas  dinner ;  but,  do 
what  we  may,  we  shall  have  no  home  feeling  or  fire- 
side enjoyment.     I  am  weary,  weary  of  London  and 
of  England,  and  can  judge  now  how  the  old  Loyalists 
must  have  felt,  condemned  to  pine  out  their  lives  here, 
when  the  Revolution  had  robbed  them  of  their  native 
country.     And  yet  there  is  still  a  pleasure  in  being 
in  this  dingy,  smoky,  midmost  haunt  of  men;  and  I 
trudge  through  Fleet  Street  and  Ludgate  Street  and 
along  Cheapside  with  an  enjoyment  as  great  as  I  ever 
felt  in  a  wood-path  at  home;  and  I  have  come  to 
know  these  streets  as  well,  I  believe,  as  I  ever  knew 
Washington  Street  in  Boston,  or  even  Essex  Street  in 
my  stupid  old  native  town.     For  Piccadilly  or  for  Re- 
gent Street,  though  more  brilliant  promenades,  I  do 
not  care  nearly  so  much. 

December  27th.  —  Still  leading  an  idle  life,  which 
however,  may  not  be  quite  thrown  away,  as  I  see  some 
things,  and  think  many  thoughts. 


1857.]  LONDON,  599 

The  other  day  we  went  to  Westminster  Abbey,  and 
through  the  chapels ;  and  it  being  as  sunny  a  day  as 
could  well  be  in  London,  and  in  December,  we  could 
judge,  in  some  small  degree,  what  must  have  been  the 
splendor  of  those  tombs  and  monuments  when  first 
erected  there. 

I  presume  I  was  sufficiently  minute  in  describing 
my  first  visit  to  the  chapels,  so  I  shall  only  mention 
the  stiff  figure  of  a  lady  of  Queen  Elizabeth's  court, 
reclining  on  the  point  of  her  elbow  under  a  mural 
arch  through  all  these  dusty  years ;  .  .  .  and  the  old 
coronation-chair,  with  the  stone  of  Scone  beneath  the 
seat,  and  the  wood-work  cut  and  scratched  all  over 
with  names  and  initials.  .  .  . 

I  continue  to  go  to  the  picture-galleries.  I  have  an 
idea  that  the  face  of  Murillo's  St.  John  has  a  certain 
mischievous  intelligence  in  it.  This  has  impressed  me 
almost  from  the  first.  It  is  a  boy's  face,  very  beauti- 
ful and  very  pleasant  too,  but  with  an  expression  that 
one  might  fairly  suspect  to  be  roguish  if  seen  in  the 
face  of  a  living  boy. 

About  equestrian  statues,  as  those  of  various  kings 
at  Charing  Cross,  and  otherwhere  about  London,  and 
of  the  Duke  of  Wellington  opposite  Apsley  House, 
and  in  front  of  the  Exchange,  it  strikes  me  as  absurd, 
the  idea  of  putting  a  man  on  horseback  on  a  place 
where  one  movement  of  the  steed  forward  or  back- 
ward or  sideways  would  infallibly  break  his  own  and 
his  rider's  neck.  The  English  sculptors  generally 
seem  to  have  been  aware  of  this  absurdity,  and  have 
endeavored  to  lessen  it  by  making  the  horse  as  quiet 
as  a  cab-horse  on  the  stand,  instead  of  rearing  ram- 
pant,'like  the  bronze  group  of  Jackson  at  Washings 
ion.     The  statue  of  Wellington,  at  the  Piccadilly  cop- 


600  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1858. 

ner  of  the  Park,  hBs  a  stately  and  imposing  effect,  seen 
from  far  distances,  in  approaching  either  through  the 
Green  Park,  or  from  the  Oxford  Street  comer  of 
Hyde  Park. 

January  Sd^  1858. — On  Thursday  we  had  the 
pleasure  of  a  call  from  Mr.  Coventry  Patmore,  to 
whom  Dr.  Wilkinson  gave  me  a  letter  of  introduction, 
and  on  whom  I  had  called  twice  at  the  British  Mu- 
seum without  finding  him.  We  had  read  his  "Be- 
trothal" and  "Angel  in  the  House"  with  unusual 
pleasure  and  sympathy,  and  therefore  were  very  glad 
to  make  his  personal  acquaintance.  He  is  a  man  of 
much  more  youthful  aspect  than  I  had  expected,  .  .  . 
a  slender  person  to  be  an  Englishman,  though  not  re- 
markably so  had  he  been  an  American ;  with  an  in- 
telligent, pleasant,  and  sensitive  face,  —  a  man  very 
evidently  of  refined  feelings  and  cultivated  mind.  .  .  . 
He  is  very  simple  and  agreeable  in  his  manners ;  a 
little  shy,  yet  perfectly  frank,  and  easy  to  meet  on 
real  grounds.  .  .  .  He  said  that  his  wife  had  proposed 
to  come  with  him,  and  had,  indeed,  accompanied  him 
to  town,  but  was  kept  away.  .  .  .  We  were  very  sorry 
for  this,  because  Mr.  Patmore  seems  to  acknowledge 
her  as  the  real  "  Angel  in  the  House,"  although  he 
says  she  herself  ignores  all  connection  with  the  poem. 
It  is  well  for  her  to  do  so,  and  for  her  husband  to  feel 
that  the  character  is  her  real  portrait;  and  both,  I 
suppose,  are  right.  It  is  a  most  beautiful  and  origi- 
nal poem,  —  a  poem  for  happy  married  people  to  read 
together,  and  to  understand  by  the  light  of  their  own 
past  and  present  life  ;  but  I  doubt  whether  the  gener- 
ality of  English  people  are  capable  of  appreciating  it, 
I  told  Mr.  Patmore  that  I  thought  his  popularity  in 


1868.]  LONDON.  601 

America  would  be  greater  than  at  home,  and  he  said 
that  it  was  abeady  so ;  and  he  appeared  to  estimate 
highly  his  AVnerican  fame,  and  also  our  general  gift 
of  quicker  and  more  subtle  recognition  of  genius  than 
the  English  public.  .  .  .  We  mutually  gratified  each 
other  by  expressing  high  admiration  of  one  another's 
works,  and  Mr.  Patmore  regretted  that  in  the  few  days 
of  our  further  stay  here  we  should  not  have  time  to 
visit  him  at  his  home.  It  would  really  give  me  pleasure 
to  do  so.  ...  I  expressed  a  hope  of  seeing  him  in  Italy 
during  our  residence  there,  and  he  seemed  to  think  it 
possible,  as  his  friend,  and  our  countryman,  Thomas 
Buchanan  Read,  had  asked  him  to  come  thither  and 
be  his  guest.  He  took  his  leave,  shaking  hands  with 
all  of  us  because  he  saw  that  we  were  of  his  own  peo- 
ple, recognizing  him  as  a  true  poet.  He  has  since 
given  me  the  new  edition  of  his  poems,  with  a  kind 
note. 

We  are  now  making  preparations  for  our  departure, 
which  we  expect  will  take  place  on  Tuesday ;  and  yes- 
terday I  went  to  our  Minister's  to  arrange  about  the 
passport.  The  very  moment  I  rang  at  his  door,  it 
swung  open,  and  the  porter  ushered  me  with  great 
courtesy  into  the  anteroom ;  not  that  he  knew  me,  or 
anything  about  me,  except  that  I  was  an  American 
citizen.  This  is  the  deference  which  an  American 
servant  of  the  public  finds  it  expedient  to  show  to  his 
sovereigns.  Thank  Heaven,  I  am  a  sovereign  again, 
and  no  longer  a  servant;  and  really  it  is  very  sin- 
gular how  I  look  down  upon  our  ambassadors  and 
dignitaries  of  all  sorts,  not  excepting  the  President 
himself.  I  doubt  whether  this  is  altogether  a  good 
influence  of  our  mode  of  government. 

I  did  not  see,  and,  in  fact,  declined  seeing,  the  Min- 


602  ENGLISH  NOTE-BOOKS.  [1858. 

ister  himself,  but  only  his  son,  the  Secretary  of  Liega- 

tion,  and  a  Dr.   P ^  an  American  traveller  just 

from  the  Continent.  He  gave  a  fearful  accovint  of 
the  difficulties  that  beset  a  person  landing  with  much 
luggage  in  Italy,  and  especially  at  Civit^  Vecchia,  the 
very  port  at  which  we  intended  to  debark.  I  have 
been  so  long  in  England  that  it  seems  a  cold  and  shiv- 
ery thing  to  go  anywhere  else. 

Bennoch  came  to  take  tea  with  us  on  the  5tli,  it 
being  his  first  visit  since  we  came  to  London,  and 
likewise  his  farewell  visit  on  our  leaving  for  the  Con- 
tinent. 

On  his  departure,  J and  I  walked  a  good  way 

down  Oxford  Street  and  Holbom  with  him,  and  I 
took  leave  of  him  with  the  kindest  wishes  for  his  wel- 
fare. 


INDEX. 


Abbbt  Craio,  ii.  482. 

Abbeys,  ii.  160,  202,  550.  See  Battle  Ab- 
bey, Bolton  Priory,  Dryburgh,  Fur- 
neas,  Holyrood,  Kirkatall,  Melrose, 
Netley,  St.  Mary's,  St.  Peter's  and  St. 
John's,  and  Westminster  Abbeys.  See 
Architecture. 

Abbotsford,  i.  457 ;  ii.  268,  506,  509. 

Abel,  statue  of,  U.  675. 

Abercrombie,  General,  ii.  139. 

Aberfoyle,  ii.  253. 

About  Warwick,  i.  85. 

Achray,  Loch,  ii.  477. 

Actress,  the,  in  the  almshouse,  i.  350. 

Addison,  Joseph,  i.  159, 317 ;  U.  152, 192, 

Addison,  Mr.  (of  Oxford),  ii.  361. 

Addison's  Alma  Hotel,  u.  496,  504. 

Addlestone,  ii.  235. 

Adelaide,  Queen,  ii.  400. 

Adelphi  Hotel,  the,  ii.  369. 

Admiralty,  the,  ii.  104. 

Admiration,  desire  of,  i.  350. 

Adolphus,  Mr.,  ii.  542. 

Adversity,  an  Englishman  in,  i.  641. 

Advice,  giving,  i.  46. 

Age,  i.  119, 199,  349,  373. 

Agnew,  Messrs.,  ii.  287. 

Aiken,  Mr.  (of  Chester),  i.  456. 

AiUa  Craig,  i.  253. 

Aimwell,  i.  159. 

Airey  Force,  ii.  41. 

Albatross,  an,  ii.  557. 

Albert,  Prince,  ii.  124. 

Albion  Hotel,  ii.  6. 

Aldershott  Camp,  ii.  208. 

Alexander,  Miss^  i.  243. 

Alexander  Mr.,  i.  244. 

Alexander  of  Scotland,  ii.  264,  605. 

Alhambra,  ii.  576. 

AUan,  Brig  of,  ii.  4B1. 

AUingham,  William,  i.  480 ;  ii.  62. 

AUoway  Kirk,  L  248,  250. 

Almshouses,  i.  344 ;  ii.  201. 

Alnaschar,  ii.  178. 

Alsatia,  i.  301 ;  ii.  129,  566. 

Alva,  Duke  of,  i.  112 ;  ii.  522. 

Ambleside,  ii.  19,  24,  36.  56,  60. 

America,  her  destiny,  i.  16;  compared 

with  Eiufland,  16 ;  claims  to  oitisen- 

Bhipin,^ 


American  ambassador,  the,  i.  560  *,  ii 

112, 130, 133 ;  the  new,  189. 
American  Despatch  Agency,  ii.  96. 
American  flag,  the,  ii.  570. 
American  Hotel,  i.  448. 
American  mercantile  marine,  i.  48. 
AmeHcan  Note-Books^  i.  408. 
Americans,  vagabond  habits,  i.  25 ;  ^r^ 

tended,  47  ;  compared  with  English. 

men,  373  ;  insane,  446,  447,  468 ;  pen- 

niless,  459;    u.  122;  traveling,  647; 

deference  of  officials  to,  601. 
An,  Ben,  ii.  476,  480,  485. 
Ancient  Order  of  Foresters,  ii.  72. 
Andr^,  Major,  i.  158. 
Androcles,  ii.  593. 
Angel  in  the  House^  the,  ii.  600. 
Angel  Inn,  ii.  432. 
Anglesea,  i.  503. 

Angling,  i.  486 ;  ii.  69,  469,  474,  606. 
Anne  of  Cleves,  ii.  543. 
Anne  Page,  i.  106. 
Anne,  Queen,  i.  210 ;  statue,  IL  97, 166, 

197 ;  portrait,  461. 
Antagonism,  American  and  English,  L 

84 ;  ii.  178,  286,  288. 
Anthony-^ Wood,  ii.  357. 
Antiquary,  an,  i.  190. 
Antiquity,  i.  90  ;  ii.  14;  odor  of,  399; 

Appleton,  John,  ii.  118. 

AfMsley  House,  ii.  590. 

Aquarium,  the,  ii.  100. 

Arabella  Stuart,  i.  473. 

Archdeacon  Ale,  i.  213 ;  ii.  367. 

Archer,  i.  169. 

Archer,  Surgeon,  ii.  171. 

Architecture,  i.  88,  90,  91,  119 :  Oothic, 
153, 173, 197,  309 ;  Cathedral,  178  ;  of 
Westminster  Abbey,  307;  454 ;  at  Cov- 
entry, 582  ;  at  Shrewsbury,  ii.  83.  See 
Abbeys,  Castles,  Catiiedrals,  Chapels, 
and  Churches. 

Arctic,  the,  i.  542. 

Ardcheanochrochan,  iL  474. 

Arklet,  Loch,  ii.  476. 

Arkwright  family,  the,  ii.  444. 

Arkwright,  Sir  Richaxd,  ii.  444. 

Armada,  the,  ii,  567. 

Armboth  House,  ii.  64. 

Armor,  ii.  106. 

Armour,  Jean,  i.  234,  246. 


604 


INDEX. 


Annatrong,  General,  ii.  332. 

Arnold,  General,  i.  490. 

Arnold,  William  Fitch,  1.  490. 

Arroqnhar,  ii.  251 ;  hotel,  251. 

Arthur,  King,  i.  501,  529 ;  U.  52. 

Arthar^B  Seat,  ii.  258. 

Arts'  Exhibition,  the,  u.  518,  519,  620, 

541,  543,  545. 
At  You  Like  Ity  i.  146. 
Aspirations,  i.  27,  30. 
Assaults,  1.  464. 
Assisi,  i.  341. 
Associations,  1.  G9. 
Assyria,  the,  U,  171, 173. 
Assyrian  acidpture,  ii.  584. 
Astley,  Sir  Jacob,  U.  523. 
Aston,  Sir  Arthur,  i.  466. 
Atheism,  i.  518. 
Athenteum  Club,  i.  418. 
Athenseum  Exhibition,  i.  274. 
Athol  famUy,  the,  i.  508. 
AUantie  Monthly,  1.  9. 
Auchinleck,  i.  243. 


Augustus,  i.  109. 
Auld,  Gapti 


,  Gaptain,  i.  430,  432. 
Autographs,  ii.  588. 
Autumn,  ii.  666. 
Ave  Mary  Lane,  U.  140. 
Avon,  the  River,  i.  86, 102, 126. 
"  Awkward  affair,"  an,  ii.  361. 
Ayr,  i.  246. 
Ayr,  the  River,  i.  246. 

Bablake  School,  i.  686. 

Bacon,  Lord,  i.  106, 130,  132,  136,  137, 

138  ;  autograph,  ii.  589. 
Bacon,  Hiss,  i.  129  ;  her  theory,  130 ;  her 

death,  143  ;  ii.  327,  334,  336. 
Bailey,  Philip  James,  ii.  315. 
BaiUie  Nicol-Jarvie  Inn,  ii.  264. 
Balfour  of  Burley,  ii.  270. 
Baliol  College,  ii.  347,  362. 
BaU,  Mr.,  ii.  26. 
Balloch,  ii.  249. 
Ballochmyle,  i.  244,  246. 
**  Bang  Beggar,'*  i.  470. 
Bangor,  i.  503. 
Bank  of  England,  ii.  116. 
Bankruptcy,  ii.  669,  561,  678,  596i 
Bannockbnm,  U.  257,  465,  485. 
Banqueting-Houae,  the,  ii.  104. 
Banquets,  i.  363. 
Barbara  Lewthwaite,  ii.  27. 
Barber-Surgeons'  Hall,  i.  369  ;  ii.  200. 
Barnard,  D.  D.,  i.  463. 
Barnes,  the  James,  i.  538. 
Barnes,  the  Messrs.,  i.  538. 
Barrows,  1.  270. 
Barton,  Sir  Roger,  ii.  76. 
Bath  Hotel,  ii.  443. 
Bathing-machines,  ii.  366,  367. 
Bathsheba,  ii.  239. 

Battle  (the  village),  ii.  218  ;  church,  219. 
Battle  Abbey,  ii.  218. 
Beam  Chamber,  the,  ii.  79. 
Bear  and  Ragged  Staff,  i.  89,  92,  94,  95, 

105;  Inn,  216. 


Bears,  ii.  100. 

Beauchamp  Chapel,  L  108. 

Beauchamp,  Richard,  i.  108. 

Beaumaris  Castle,  i.  602. 

Beaux'  Stratagem,  i.  159. 

Bebbington,  i.  74,  83,  437  ;  Charch,  4TS^ 

577,  579. 
Beckford,  Lord  Mayor,  ii.  324. 
Bedouins,  ii.  182. 
Beechum  Chapel,  i.  108. 
Beer  drinkers,  i.  575. 
Beggars,  i.  340,  471 ;  crippled,  475  ;  r» 

spectable,  543  ;  558,  559 ;  U.  120,  152. 
Belhaven,  Lord,  iL  260. 
Bell  Inn,  U.  308. 
Bellingham,  Gtovemor,  ii.  331. 
Belmont,  August,  i.  38. 
Belsham,  Thomas,  ii.  334. 
Bennet,  W.  C,  i.  628 ;  ii.  661. 
Bennoch,  Francis,  dedication  to,  i.  406 1 

U.  192,  199 ;  house,  203,  208 ;  215,  219^ 

224, 239,  286,  322,  346,  363;  dinner  tou 

369 ;  494, 691,  602. 
Bennoch,  Mrs.,  ii.  322. 
Bentley,  William,  i.  468. 
Benton,  Colonel,  i.  656. 
Benton,  Jesse,  i.  555. 
Benvenuto  CelUni,  i.  192. 
Berwick,  u.  275,  508. 
Betrothal,  The,  U.  600. 
Bettesworth,  Sergeant,  i.  379. 
Bibles,  U.  243,  367. 
Bickley  Hall,  i.  466. 
Billingsgate,  ii.  110,  670. 
Birch,  Sir  Thomas,  i.  487,  663. 
Birch's  eating-house,  ii.  242. 
Birkenhead,  i.  483,  494. 
Birkenhead  Park,  i.  609. 
Birkenhead  Priory,  1.  446,  481,  494 ;  fi. 

70. 
Birmingham,  i.  172,  680. 
Bishops,  i.  378. 
BUck  Bear,  the,  i.  201,  213. 
Black  Swan,  the,  i.  148;  ii.  411,  515. 
Black-ballers,  i.  19. 
Blackheath,  i.  268,  261;  ii.  314,  332. 
Bladensburgh,  i.  303. 
BlandeviUe,  De,  Earl  of  Oiester,  i.  622, 
Blencathra,  ii.  52,  55,  56. 
Blenheim,  i.  201,  202,  223,  228;  u.  345. 
BlUhedale  Romance,  The,  ii.  329. 
Blodgett,  Mr.  (Liverpool),  i.  416,  417. 
Blodgett,  Mrs.  (Uverpool),L  449;  ii.  122 

170,  178, 188,  332,  m. 
Bloody  Footstep,  ii.  ^. 
Bloody  Mary,  ii.  76. 
Bluebeard  and  his  wife,  i.  394. 
Boating,  ii.  351. 
Bodleian  Library,  ii.  359. 
Boleyn,  Anne,  ii.  109,  563. 
Bolt  Court,  ii.  191,  207. 
Bolton,  i.  169. 
Bolton  Chapel,  ii.  399. 
Bolton  le  Moors,  ii.  73. 
Bolton  Priory,  ii.  395 ;  church,  39T- 
Bon  GaulHer'8  Ballads,  ii.  224. 
Bond's  Hospital,  L  686, 668. 


INDEX, 


605 


Boniface,  Mr.,  i.  148. 

Borghese  Gardens,  i.  268. 

Borrow,  Geonre,  ii.  288. 

Boston,  new,  L  188, 194,  196, 198,  444. 

Boston,  old,  i.  169,  184, 186;  compared 

with  new,  198. 
Boswell,  Sir  Alexander,  i.  243. 
BosweU,  James,  i.  150,  162, 163  ;  ii.  158, 

207,  464. 
BosweU,  Sir  James,  i.  243. 
Bosworth  Field,  Battle  of,  i.  221 ;  ii.  558. 
Bothwellhaugh,  James  Hamilton  of,  ii. 

495. 
Bowles,  William  Lisle,  ii.  296. 
Bowman,  Mr.,  U.  205,  208,  242,  246,  258, 

282. 
Bowness,  ii.  17,  23,  24.' 
Bowring,  Dr.,  i.  417. 
Boyd,  Zachariah,  ii.  461. 
Bradford,  G.  P.,  i.  511. 
Bradon,  i.  588. 
Brandon,  Charles,  Duke  of  Suffolk,  U. 

107. 
Breadalbane,  Marquis  of,  ii.  499. 
Bremer,  Fredrika,  ii.  236. 
Brewster,  Elder,  i.  537. 
Bridal  of  Triermam.  The.  ii.  52. 
Bridge,  BIr.,  i.  11. 
Bridge  of  Doon,  i.  248,  249. 
Bright,  Henry,  i.  481. 
Bright,  Mr.  (of  Sandhays),  L  502,  658, 

5Cl ;  ii.  171,  192. 
Bristol,  Earl  of,  i.  498. 
British  Institution,  the,  ii.  337. 
British  Museum,  i.  193  ;   relics  in,  270; 

ii.  141, 142,  207,  559,  560,  683. 
British  Scientific  Association,  i.  537. 
Bronte,  Anne,  ii.  633. 
Bronte,  Charlotte,  ii.  416,  533. 
Brontes,  the,  i.  170. 
Brooke,  Lord,  i.  110,  552. 
Brotherhood,  i.  351. 
Brothers'  Water,  ii.  39. 
Brown,  CapabiUty,  i.  203,  208. 
Brown,  Dr.,  ii.  118. 
Brown's  Hotel,  ii.  25. 
Browne,  Mr.  (of  Liverpool),  ii.  415,  416, 

419. 
Browne,  Sir  Anthony  and  Lady,  ii.  219, 

222. 
Browne,  William,  i.  551,  552. 
Browne's  Free  Library,  ii.  413. 
Browning,  Elizabeth  Barrett,  ii.  326. 
Browning,  Robert,  ii.  327,  329. 
Bruce,  Robert,  ii.  473,  506. 
Brunswick  Street,  i.  19. 
Brunswick  Terrace,  ii.  364. 
Buchan,  Earl  of,  ii.  267. 
Buchanan,  James,  i.  31,  55, 133. 
Buckingham,  Duke  of,  i.  112,  219 ;  ii. 

522j  543. 
Biickmgham  Palace,  u.  94. 
Biickland,  Dean,  i.  194. 
Bulkely,  Sir  Richard,  i.  503. 
Bulwer,  Sir  Lytton,  ii.  229,  232. 
Bunker  Hill,  i.  200  ;  u.  377. 
Bunyan,  John,  i.  281,  537. 


Burgh,  Count  de,  ii.  166. 

Burghersh,  Lord,  ii.  183. 

Bunal-fees,  i.  434. 

Burial-grounds,. Lillington,  i.  73 ;  Char- 
ter Street,  73  ;  Ipswich,  73 ;  Bebbing- 
ton,  74,  439,  479 ;  Boston,  188  ;  Dum- 
fries,  233;  Uverpool,  424,  433;  St. 
James's,  449;  Unitarian,  483;  Kirk 
Madden,  508 ;  Chester,  511 ;  Grasmere, 
u.  29;  Melrose,  264;  Durham,  512; 
the  Tower,  571.  See  Cathedrals,  Chap- 
els, and  Churches. 

Buried  alive,  i.  495. 

Burke,  Bishop,  i.  567. 

Burleigh,  LoM,  i.  191. 

Burlington,  Earl  of,  ii.  17. 

Burnet,  Bishop,  i.  204. 

Bums,  Robert,  i.  231 ;  grave,  233;  fami- 
ly,  234 ;  seat  in  church,  237 ;  farm,  239 ; 
birth-place,  247  ;  portrait,  247 ;  monu- 
ment,  248 ;  sons,  466 ;  songs ;  457 ;  iL 
244,420. 

Bushy  Park,  u.  198. 

Butler,  Bishop,  ii.  86. 

Butler,  Samuel,  i.  314. 

Byforth,  LitUe,  ii.  431. 

Byron,  Augusta,  ii.  440. 

Byron,  Lady,  ii.  328. 

Byron,  Lord,  ii.  328,  436,  596. 

Byron,  the  '^Wicked  Lord,"  U.  43a 

Byrons,  the,  ii.  441. 

Cabman,  a  drunken,  ii.  644. 

Cade,  Jack,  ii.  203. 

Cadmus,  ii.  612. 

Caesar,  i.  296. 

Cain,  statue  of,  ii.  675. 

Cairngorm  pebbles,  ii.  602. 

California  tree,  a,  ii.  677. 

Callender,  ii.  481. 

Calton  Hill,  ii.  501. 

Cambridge  (America),  i.  5l0. 

Cambridge  (Enghud),  i.  213 ;  ii.  361. 

Cambridge,  Duke  of,  li.  169,  212. 

Campagna,  the,  i.  262. 

Campbell,  Colonel,  ii.  417. 

Campbell,  General,  i.  133 ;  ii.  114. 

Campbell,  Mrs.,  i.  444. 

Campbell,  Thomas,  i.  317. 

Canaletto,  Anthony,  ii.  206,  338. 

Canning,  George,  i.  309 ;  u.  229,  354. 

Canova,  Anthony,  ii.  338. 

Captains,  American,  L  485 ;  Captain  J. 

672;  U.  123,289. 
Caracci,  Annibal,  ii.  644. 
Cards,  ii.  80. 
Carfax,  the,  i.  227. 
Carleton  Club,  U.  103. 
Cariisle,  i.  231 ;  U.  462. 
CarUsle  Castle,  ii.  452. 
Carlisle  Cathedral,  ii.  465. 
Carlton  Grove,  ii.  544. 
Carlyle,  Thomas,  i.  133,  480;  ii  69L 
Carroll,  General,  ii.  380. 
Caskets,  i.  110. 
Cass,  General,  i.  49. 
Castle  Hotel,  ii.  306. 


606 


INDEX, 


CatUe  0/  Otrtmio,  ii.  628. 

Castles,  Warwick,  i.  69, 85, 86, 680 ;  Tat- 
terahall,  186 :  Stanton  Harcourt,  218 : 
BeaumariB,  602  ;  Conway,  605,  521, 
522, 524 ;  Rhyddlan,  520,  SS\  ;  Ruthin, 
530 ;  Dalton,  U.  15 ;  St.  John's,  55 ; 
Lancaster,  62  ;  Shrewsbury,  85 ;  at 
Hastings,  224 ;  Dumbarton,  249,  462; 
StirUng,  266;  Edinburgh,  261,  497, 
603;  iforham.  276, 509 ;  Skipton,  391; 
Dunrobin,  498 ;  Kemlworth,  547.  See 
Arcliitecture. 

Catharine  Howard,  ii.  663. 

Catharine  of  Aragon,  ii.  426. 

Cathedrals,  ii.  299.  See  Carlisle,  Ches- 
ter, Durham,  Glasgow,  Gloucester, 
Lichfield,  Lincoln,  Manchester,  Ox- 
ford, Peterborough,  Salbbury,  St. 
Asaph's,  St.  Giles's,  St.  Mungo^s,  St. 
Paul's,  Worcester,  and  York  Cathe- 
drals. See  also  Abbeys,  Architecture, 
Cliapels,  and  Churcbea. 

Catholics,  i.  548. 

Catrine,  i.  244. 

Caution,  English,  i.  475. 

Cavern,  the  MaUock,  U.  445. 

Cecil,  Mr.,  i.  501. 

Cedars  of  Lebanon,  1.  102. 

Cellini,  Benvenuto,  ii.  576. 

Cliamber  of  Commerce,  i.  416,  417. 

Chambers,  Robert,  i.  457. 

Champlain,  Lake,  ii.  250. 

Change,  i.  78,  477,  542. 

Channing,  Rev.  W.  H.,  i.  561 ;  ii.  334, 
391. 

Ghantrey,  Sir  Francis,  ii.  298,  360. 

Chapels,  Leicester's  Hospital,  i.  101 ; 
Beauchamp  or  Beechum,  108;  Blen- 
heim, 210;  Stanton  Harcourt,  222; 
Greenwich,  274;  Chelsea,  302;  Uni- 
tarian, 483^  at  Edinburgh,  ii.  262  ;  Es- 
sex St.,  334;  Magdalen  College,  346; 
New  CoUege,  350 ;  Christ  Church,  356 ; 
Merton  College,  357  ;  Bolton,  399 ;  St. 
Anthony's,  501 :  Lincoln's  Iim,  580. 
See  Abbeys,  Cathedrals,  and  Churches. 

Chapham  family,  the,  ii.  399. 

Chappie's  Castle  Hotel,  ii.  162. 

Chapter-house,  Salisbury,  ii.  297. 

Character,  English,  i.  267. 

Charing  Cross,  ii.  91,  103. 

Charlecote  Park,  i.  143. 

Charles  I.,  i.  101,  194,  208,  309,  463  ;  ii. 
87;  statues,  104,  165;  armor,  107; 
portraits,  196,  529 ;  prayer-book,  215, 
217  ;  273,  406,  523,  543. 

Charlds  II.,  i.  272,  302,  308,  370  ;  U.  165, 
166. 

Charles  V.,  Emperor,  ii.  522. 

Charles  Edward,  Prince,  i.  233. 

Chastity,  i.  48(5. 

Chatham,  Earl  of,  11.  324. 

Chatterton,  Thomas,  ii.  330. 

Chaucer,  Geoifrey,  i.  318 ;  ii.  243. 

Cheapside,  ii.  91. 

Chelsea,  i.  302  ;  Hospital,  302. 

Chertaey,  ii.  236. 


Gherwell,  the  River,  U.  351. 

Cheshire,  i.  74,  465, 469. 

Chester,  i.  57,  88,  122,  173  :  wall,  452; 
514 ;  the  Rows,  454,  514,  617 ;  liistory ; 
460,  606  ;U.  64,  66,  375. 

Chester,  Bishop  of,  i.  656;  U.  415,  416^ 
418. 

Chester  Catiiedral,  ii.  402. 

Chester,  Constable  of,  i.  460. 

Chester,  Earl  of,  i.  522,  534. 

Chester.  Randal,  Earl  of,  i.  460. 

Childe  Harold,  U.  287,  597. 

Children,  i.  337 ;  in  almshouses,  361;  429^ 
439,  462 ;  English  and  American,  com- 
pared, ii.  70. 

Chimes,  i.  479. 

Chivalry,  ii.  523. 

Christ,  his  character,  iL  181 ;  coxaing 
the  fig-tree,  186. 

Christ  Church  College,  U.  362,  363; 
chapel,  355. 

Christ  Church  meadows,  iL  351. 

Christ's  Hospital,  ii.  561. 

Christie  Johnstone,  ii.  235. 

Christmas,  i.  549;  u.  177,  386;  Waits, 
386,598. 

Church-property,  i.  92. 

Churches,  Lillington,  i.  72  ;  Whitnaali, 
76  :  Hatton,  80 ;  St.  Mary's,  85, 107  ;  IL 
86,  557 ;  Leicester's  Hospital,  i.  101 ; 
Holy  Trinity,  118;  Stratford-on-Avon, 
125;  Uttoxeter,  163;  St.  Botolph's, 
186,  105,  200;  Cnmnor,  214;  Stanton 
Harcourt,  220  ;  St.  Michael^s,  233,  236, 
3<>7,  584 ;  ii.  554  ;  Kirk  Alloway,  i.  248, 
250 ;  St.  Nicholas's,  424,  443,  445,  446 ; 
ii.  363:  Bebbington,  i.  438,  577,  579; 
St.  Andrew's,  441 ;  St.  George's,  445 ;  ii. 
90 ;  St.  John's,  i.  461,  511,  586;  ii.  554 ; 
Eastham,  i.  491 ;  Kirk  Madden,  507 ; 
Trinity,  585;  ii.  554;  Grasmen)  (St. 
Oswald's),  29,  32:  at  Portinscale,  48; 
the  Holy  Cross,  88 ;  St.  GUes's,  201  ; 
St.  Swithm's,  203  ;  Battle,  219  ;  283 ; 
Ormskirk,  373  :  Bolton  Priory,  397  ; 
Peterborough,  429  ;  Grantham,  432  ; 
Stirling,  488;  Linlithgow,  490;  Kenil- 
worth,  551 ;  the  Temple,  568.  See  Ab^ 
beys,  Cathedrals,  and  Chapels. 

Cignani,  Carlo,  ii.  195. 

Circus,  an  American,  ii.  432. 

Civic  Banquets,  i.  363. 

Clarendon,  Earl  of,  ii.  150. 

Clarendon  Hotel,  i.  580. 

Clarke,  Lieutenant-Governor,  ii.  377. 

Clarke,  Miss  Sarah,  ii.  114. 

Clarke,  Mr.,  ii.  92. 

Class  distinctions,  i.  474. 

Claude  Lorraine,  ii.  206,  337,  594. 

Claverhouse,  John  Graliam  of,  iL  273 
503,  508. 

Claw-hammer,  a,^i.  174. 

Clement'a  Inn,  ii.  121. 

Clennam,  ii.  193. 

Clergymen,  i.  195. 

Cleveland,  Duke  of,  ii.  86. 

Clitfords,  the,  ii.  391.  393,  306. 


INDEX. 


607 


Clifton  Villa,  ii.  292. 

Cliach,  Miss,  ii.  146. 

Clwyd,  i.  521,  531. 

Clyde,  the  River,  ii.  249,  462,  463. 

Coldstream  Guarids'  monument,  ii.  336. 

Coleridge,  Hartley,  ii.  25,  30,  37. 

Coleridge,  S.  T.,  li.  50,  236,  557. 

Colombus,  Ghristoplier,  iL  244. 

Combe,  John  a',  i.  124,  127,  128. 

Commons,  the  Hou&e  of,  ii.  239. 

Concord,  i.  9.  444. 

Congreve,  William,  ii.  153,  310. 

Gonnaught  Rangers,  i.  481,  493. 

Conner,  Mr.,  i.  105. 

Connoisseurship,  ii.  537,  539. 

Conservatism,  1.90, 110,  477. 

Constantine  the  Great,  li.  281. 

Consol,  the,  visitors,  i.  23,  545,  573 ;  ii. 

283 ;  a  Kentuckiaii,  379  ;  duties,  i.  39, 

46,  64 ;   qualificatiqus,  52 ;  business, 

469  ;  visit  to  a  djrin^sailor,  567. 
Consular  experiences,  i.  19. 
Consulate,  the,  i.  19,  415 ;  weariness  of, 

U.  69. 
Convocation  Hall,  ii.  358. 
Conway,  L  505  ;  Castle,  i.  506,  521,  622, 

524. 
Conway,  Lord,  i.  626. 
Conway,  the  lUver,  i.  523. 
Copley,  John  Singleton,  ii.  525. 
Coram,  Captain,  li.  524. 
Cornhill  Coffee-House,  i.  366. 
Cornwall,  Barry,  i.  213,  325,  498. 
Coroner,  Diary  of  a,  i.  486. 
Coroner's  Court,  i.  484 ;  ii.  386. 
Correggio,  Antonio  Allegri  da,  ii.  338. 
Cottage  Library,  i.  517. 
Cottages,  i.  70, 118,  437,  484 ;  ii.  70,  370. 
Cotton,  i.  671. 

Cotton,  Rev.  John,  i.  189,  194,  197,  200. 
Covent  Garden  Market,  ii.  96. 
Covent  Garden  Theatre,  ii.  191. 
Coventry,  i.  80, 151,  367,  582 ;  U.  663 
Cowden  Knowe,  ii.  266. 
Cowgate,  ii.  601. 
Cowley,  Abraham,  ii.  236. 
Craggs,  Secretary,  ii.  339. 
Crawfurd,  i.  267. 

Cremome  Gardens,  i.  302 :  chapel,  302. 
Cresswell,  Mr.  Justice,  i.  661. 
Crewe,  Lord,  i.  537. 
Crichton,  James,  "  the  Admirable,**  ii. 

589. 
Cripplegate,  ii.  201. 
Crittenden.  Colonel,  i.  417,  427. 
Cromwell  (builder  of  Tattersliall  Castle), 

i.  186. 
Cromwell,  Oliver,  i.  101, 179 ;  ii.  310^  330, 

393 ;  cast,  58G. 
Crook,  Ben,  ii.  472. 
Crosby,  Mr.  (of  London),  ii.  133. 
Crosland,  Newton,  if.  204. 
Crosland,  Mrs.  Newton  iL  315. 
Cross,  a  buried,  ii.  342. 
Crowds,  i.  499,  579. 
Crown  Court,  i.  510. 
Crown  Hotel,  ii.  164. 


Crown  Inn,  ii.  346. 

Croxteth,  i.  489. 

Crystal  Pahice,  i.  305 ;  ii.  135,  674. 

Cuckoos,  i.  675. 

Cumberland,  i.  57  ;  mountain,  ii.  46. 

Cumnor,  i.  214.  ^ 

Cushman,  Charlotte,  ii.  24. 

Custom  House,  ii.  130. 

Cymbeline,  King,  i.  85,  91, 102. 

Czar,  the,  ii.  134. 

Daisy,  the,  U.  419. 

Dallas,  George  M.,  ii.  387,  601. 

Dallas,  Philip  N.,  U.  602. 

Dalton,  ii.  15. 

Dalton,  Dr.,  ii.  286. 

Danby,  Francis,  ii.  525. 

Damley,  Henry,  Earl  of,  ii.  269,  483. 

Dauphin,  the,  i.  601. 

Davenant,  Sir  William,  i.  124 ;  IL  346. 

David,  i.  295. 

David,  King,  ii.  506. 

David  (Welsh  Prince),  i.  604 ;  ii.  89. 

Davis,  J.  B.,  ii.  242. 

Dawson,  Richard,  i.  466. 

Deacon,  Mr.,  monument  of,  ii.  425. 

Dead  Man's  Cluunber,  ii.  79. 

Deans,  Jeanie,  ii.  601. 

Death,  i.  156. 

Declaration  of  Independence,  il.  230. 

Dedication,  i.  11,  13, 15. 

Dee,  Dr.,  U.  587. 

Dee,  the  River,  i.  453,  467  ;  u.  64. 

Deer,  i.  144. 

De  Foe,  Daniel,  ii.  91. 

D<^jrvvpr,  n,  i.  538,  564. 

D.'uLi^f]K  ].  r,'>, 

D-Lj]ii.4.,Li,  isj.^li.pp,  U.  296.  • 

Dij  Quljiuey,  Tfciomas,  ii.  25,  37. 

Dtrby,  %%f\  oU  I.  169,  476,  488. 

Di  rby,  Harlsj  (*f,  ii.  373. 

Di.'rhy,  EJwnnl.  Eari  of,  i.  446. 

D'  r>>>  fnmnj',  tUe,  i.  382,  446. 

DrvK;,.  \Vt^^t\  i.  446. 

D  .  Be,  West,  i.  351 ;  il.  183. 

D<..„^„.;io*.i>i*r,ii.  445. 

Derwent,  the  River,  ii.  442,  444. 

Derwentwater,  ii.  44. 

Derwentwater,  Earl  of,  ii.  41. 

Devonshire,  Duke  of,  ii.  232,  396,  397, 
398,  541. 

Devonshire  House,  ii.  396. 

Dickens,  Charles,  i.  464  ;  ii.  232,  323. 

Dingle,  the,  i.  483. 

Dmners,  i.  363;  the  Mayor's,  371,  427, 
655;  Lord  Mayor's,  386;  li.  238 ;  at 
Poulton  Hall,  419,  422  ;  ii.  176 :  Ameri- 
can, 180  ;  Apprentices',  199 ;  Mr.  Ben- 
noch's,  204  ;  in  camp,  209 ;  at  the  Mil- 
ton Club,  225;  at  the  Reform  Club, 
229;  at  the  Refectory  of  the  House, 
ii.  240 ;  at  the  Adelphi,  369 ;  near  South- 
port,  371;  with  the  Mavor,  383; 
Browne's  Free  Library,  417.  See 
Eating. 

Diomed,  House  of,  ii.  676. 

Dirt,  i.  278,  326. 


608 


INDEX. 


Dicraeli,  Benjamin,  ii.  240,  242. 

Doctor  of  Dirinity,  story  of,  i.  It,  40. 

Doddey,  Robert,  ii.  572. 

Dogs,  U.  68,  78. 

J)mi  Juan.  ii.  436,  439. 

Donkeys,  ii.  369. 

Doon,  the  tlver,  i.  247,  252. 

Dorset,  Countess  Anne  of,  ii.  363. 

Douglas,  Earl  of,  ii.  257,  484. 

Douglas,  Judge,  i.  464. 

Dow,  Gerard,  ii.  534. 

Downing,  Sir  George,  ii.  161,  339. 

Downing  Street,  ii.  339. 

Dragoons,  ii.  92. 

Dreams,  i.  549. 

Druids,  i.  270. 

Drunken  cabman,  a,  ii.  544. 

Dryburgh  Abbey,  ii.  266. 

Dryden,  John,  ii.  243. 

Dumbarton,  ii.  466. 

Dumbarton  Castle,  U.  249,  4G2. 

Dumbiedikes'  house,  iL  501. 

Dumfries,  i.  231. 

Duncrag^^,  ii.  480. 

Dnnholme,  ii.  512. 

DunmaU  Raise,  U.  56. 

Dunrobin  Castle,  ii.  498. 

Durham,  ii.  509. 

Durham  Cathedral,  ii.  510,  515. 

Durliam,  Joseph,  ii.  319,  345. 

Durham,  Lord,  ii.  230. 

Dutch  masters,  ii.  534. 

Dutton,  Ralph,  i.  461. 

Duttons  of  Dutton,  i.  461. 

Du  Val  (artist),  ii.  544. 

Eaglets  Crag,  ii.  56. 

Early  impressions,  ii.  68. 

East  wind,  i.  567  ;  ii.  211,  419. 

Easter  Sunday,  ii.  402. 

Eastham,  i.  491 ;  Church,  491 ;  inn,  492 ; 

509. 
Eating,  ii.  136, 186, 543.    See  Dinners. 
Eaton,  i.  467. 
Eaton  Hall,  i.  511,  514. 
Edge  Hill,  i.  101, 102. 
Edgeworth,  Maria,  ii.  236. 
Edinburgh,    i.  57;    ii.    261,    496,    500; 

Chapel,  262,  496 ;  garden,  503. 
Edinburgh  Castle,  ii.  261,  497,  503. 
Edward  the  Confessor,  i.  316;    iL  109, 

160. 
Edward  I.,  i.  520,  634 ;  ii.  86,  89. 
Edward  II.,  ii.  309. 
Edward  IV.,  i.  110/  U.  527,  558. 
Egremont,  the  bov  of.  ii.  397. 
Egyptian  antiquities,  ii.  589. 
Egyptian  Hall,  i.  391. 
EUdou  HiUs,  ii.  263,  268,  275. 
Ein,  Ben,  ii.  472. 
Eldredge,  Mr.,  purser,  ii.  450. 
Eleanor,  Queen,  i.  521,  526. 
"  Election  "  holidays,  ii.  442. 
Elector  of  Saxony,  an,  ii.  527. 
Elgin  marbles,  ii.  143,  207. 
Eliotsou,  Dr.,  ii.  235. 


Elisabeth,  Queen,  i.  193,  272;  iL  101 
528,  568 ;  autograph,  68^  ^ 

Ellen^s  Isle,  U.  476. 

Ellesmere,  Earl  of,  ii.  94. 

Elwes,  Gervase,  i.  498. 

Elwes,  Henry,  i.  498. 

Elwes,  John  Maggott  Twining,  i.  498. 

Emerson,  Ralph  Waldo,  ii.  233,  319. 

Enchanted  Castle,  U.  41,  51,  64. 

Enfield,  Rev.  William,  i.  483. 

Enflel(Pg  Speaker,  i.  483. 

English  Note-Book*^  i.  407. 

English,  Philip,  i.  583. 

English  Sports  and  Pastimes,  ii.  72. 

Englishmen  compared  with  AmericaDi, 
i.  373. 

Enthusiast,  an,  ii.  5. 

Epitaphs,  L  75,  450,  469.  See  Burial 
grounds. 

Eresby,  Lord  WUloughby  d%  iL  477. 

Essex  Street  Chapel,  ii.  334. 

Estates,  claims  to,  L  30,  33. 

Eternity,  i.  555. 

Etty,  William,  ii.  535. 

Eugene,  Prince,  i.  209. 

Eve,  statue  of,  i.  575. 

Evelyn  family,  the,  ii.  214. 


Evelyn,  John,  ii.  214,  215,  217. 
felyn^s  Diary,  ii.  217. 


Evel 


Ewart,  WilUam,  M.  P.,  U.  32U 
Exclusiveness,  i.  262. 
Exile,  ii.  180. 
Exiles,  i.  573. 

Faed,  Thomas,  ii.  236. 

Falcon  Inn,  ii.  427. 

Falkirk,  ii.  257. 

FalUand,  Lord  Deputy,  iL  628. 

Falkland,  Viscount,  ii.  150. 

Falstaff,  ii.  88. 

Farquhar,  George,  i.  148  ;  iL  88. 

Farrar,  Mrs.,  L  133. 

Faucit,  Helen,  ii.  224. 

Fawkes,  Guy,  ii.  359. 

Fees,  i.  123 ;  at  Blenheim,  207, 237 ;  bu» 
ial,  434 ;  492 ;  ii.  40,  60,  120, 169 :  de- 
clined, 282 ;  439,  445,  446,  569. 

"  Fellow,  How  to  Kill,"  L  194. 

Felton,  John,  ii.  522. 

Ferguson,  Sir  Adam,  ii.  510. 

Fiddler  of  York,  ii.  401. 

Fielding,  Henry,  i.  333. 

Fields,  James  T.,  i.  9,  10, 11,  407. 

Fillmore,  Ex-President,  iL  303. 

Firfleld,  u.  235. 

Fitswilliam,  Earl,  L  172. 

Flats,  ii.  502. 

Flattery,  ii.  245. 

Flaxraan,  John,  ii.  684. 

Fleet  Street,  ii.  91. 

Fleming,  Lady,  li.  28,  33. 

Flemings,  the,  ii.  34. 

Flodden,  battle  of,  ii.  491. 

Flowers  i.  484. 

Flying  Dutehnian,  the,  if.  368,  44ft. 

Footman,  a  handsome,  i.  663. 

Ford's  Hospital,  U.  565. 


INDEX. 


609 


Torster,  Anthony, !.  iSVU. 

r-orth,  the  Rirer,  u.  257,  485. 

<*orty-aecond  Regiment,  ii.  486. 

rotmdry,  Mersey  Iron,  ii.  186. 

f!ox,  Charles  James,  i.  310. 

fox,  Tohn,  ii.  202. 

F'oa;**  Book  of  Martyrt^  ii.  76,  202. 

fcTranklin,  Benjamin,  i.  494 ;  ii.  244,  688. 

F'rederiok,  the  Emperor,  i.  601. 

B^rench  retenui.  a,  L  483. 

B*renchman,  a,  in  want,  i.  644. 

Fruit,  i.  420. 

Full  dreaa,  ii.  821. 

Fuller,  Margaret,  ii.  327. 

*'  Fun  of  the  Fair,  the,"  i.  280. 

Funerals,  i.  432  ;  Mrs.  O.'s,  653. 

Fumesa  Abbey,  U.  9, 17,  33, 279. 

£Hirnival*s  Inn;  ii.  96. 

Oardens,  Bleoh^m,  1.  211;  London,  257 ; 
Borghese,  268 ;  "  Tea  Gardens,"  288  ; 
Cremome,  302;    Zoiflogical,  ii.    98; 
Kensington,  127 ;  Surrey  Zodlogioal, 
156 ;  Coll^,  349, 363, 357;  Edinburgh, 
603 ;  the  Temple,  666.  . 
Oardiner,  Colonel,  ii.  607. 
Oarrick,  David,  i.  l69. 
Oarroting,  ii.  591. 
Garter,  Order  of  the,  1.  221. 
Oaskell,  Mr.,  ii.  81,  82. 
Oaakell,  Mrs.,  ii.  334,  416,  533. 
Gay,  John,  i.  281 ;  ii.  132. 
Genius  in  an  Englishman,  L  276 ;  ii.  631. 
George  II.,  i.  193 ;  statue  of,  u.  410. 
George  IH.,  ii.  196. 
George  IV.,  i.  198 ;  U.  271,  273,  358. 
George  Inn,  ii.  263,  266. 
Geraldine,  Surra's,  ii.  222. 
Ghosts,  i.  468,  600 ;  ii.  64,  81,  333. 
Gibbons,  Qrhilhig,  ii.  196. 
Gibson,  George,  H  571. 
Gil  Bias,  i.  342. 
Gillie's  imi,  iL  486. 
Giordano,  Luke,  i.  192. 
Gladstone,  Robertson,  ii.  171. 
GhMgow,  L  67,  253  ;  ii.  246,  457. 
GhMgow  Cathedral,  ii.  457. 
Glasgow  University,  ii.  247,  469. 
Glenfinlass,  u.  480. 
Gloucester,  ii.  307. 
Gloucester  Cathedral,  ii.  SOB. 
Gloucestershire,  i.  93. 
Godiva,  Countess,  L  869. 
Godstowe,  i.  225. 
Godwin,  Mr.,  ii.  246. 
Gog  and  Magog,  ii.  325,  336. 
Goldschmid£  Madame,  ii.  31&  SeeJeany 

Lind. 
Goldsmith,  OUver,  ii.  91, 132. 
Good  Friday,  i.  494. 
Goose  and  Gridiron,  i.  19. 
Gordon,  Duke  of,  ii.  503. 
Gordon,  Sir  William,  iL  498. 
Goree  Arcade,  i.  19. 
Gosling,  Giles,  i.  216. 
GoMe'«  Aquarium^  ii.  421. 
Gough,  Charles,  U.  68. 


Government,  English  and  Ajaazicaa,  !• 

Grampians,  the,  ii.  485. 

Grantham,  ii.  431 ;  church,  432. 

Grasmere,  U.  24,  25,  29,  31,  66,  60. 

Gray,  Thomas,  i.  315. 

Gray^s  Inn,  ii.  96,  681. 

Great  Britain,  the,  i.  428»  427 ;  ii  64. 

Great  Harry,  the,  ii.  663. 

Great  men,  i.  124. 

Great  Tom,  i.  177. 

Greek  sculpture,  ii.  683. 

Greek  Slave,  u.  236,  338. 

Greenwich,  i.  264 ;  ii.  110 ;  obiwrvatory, 

i.  266  ;  park,  265,  266,  267 ;  pension^ 

ers,  269,  271,  282;  Hospital,  270,  802; 

ii.  110,  315 ;  chapel,  i.  274  j  Fair,  278* 

288  ;  ii.  203. 
Greenwood,  Grace,  ii*  236. 
Greta  Hall,  u.  42. 
Greta,  the  River,  U.  41,  43, 61. 
Gretna  Green,  i.  231. 
Grevilles,  the,  i.  110. 
Grey,  Archbishop  de,  ii.  407. 
Grey,  Lady  Jane.  ii.  589. 
Grey,  Lord,  ii.  m. 
Growing  old,  i.  119. 
Grub  Street,  ii.  203. 
Guernsey,  i.  466. 
Guido  Canlassl,  ii.  338. 
GuildhaU,  U.  324,  335,  410, 669. 
Gulliver,  Captain  Lemuel,  L  273L 
Gwynn,  Nell,  U.  118,  439. 
Gypsies,  U.  70. 

Haddo,  Lord,  U.  182. 

Hadrian,  i.  109. 

HaU  Columbia,  U.  210. 

Hair,  growth  hi  the  tomb*  L  494. 

Hall,  Dr.,  i.  126. 

H^Mr.  S.  C,  ii.  226,  236, 236, 246,  317, 

Hall,*Mrs!  S.  C,  ii.  286,  236,  287,24% 

317,  388,  348,  861,  362. 
Halton,  Wn,,  ii.  81. 

TT«.mnrifti«gmJt.h  ^  i.  819. 

Hampden,  John,  ii.  160. 

Hampson,  Elisabeth,  i.  469. 

Hampton  Court,  ii.  193, 194,  862. 

Hampton  Palace,  ii.  194. 

Hannibal,  i.  296. 

Harcourt  family,  the,  1.  218,  220,  227. 

Harness,  Bev.  Mr.,  ii.  239. 

Harold,  King,  U.  221,  223,  262. 

Harris,  Master  of  Leicester's  Hospital,  i 

104. 
Harris,  Thomas  L.,  ii.  696. 
Harrison,  General,  ii.  379. 
Harrowby,  Earl  of,  i.  637. 
Hastings,  ii.  223 ;  Castle,  224. 
Hastings,  Battle  of,  ii.  221. 
Hatton,  i.  80, 103. 
Hatton,  Sir  Christopher,  ii.  608. 
Hawkshead,  ii.  56. 
Hawley,  General,  U.  482,  48^ 


610 


INDEX. 


Hawthorn,  li.  549. 
Hawthorne  HaU,  i.  470. 
Hawthorne,  Henry  Atte,  ii.  340. 
Hawthorne,  Nathaniel,  i.  407 ;  biography, 

411 ;  character,  412 ;  portrait,  517  ;  U. 

666 ;  incident,  184. 
Hawthorne,  Mrs.  Nathaniel,  i.  407,  408. 
Hawthorne,  William,  i.  498. 
Hawthomes,  the,  i.  498. 
Haydon,  Benjamin  Robert,  ii.  141,  204, 

Haydon,  Frank  Scott,  li.  340. 

Haymarket  Theatre,  U.  91,  234. 

Hasels,  the,  i.  487. 

Haslitt,  WUliam,  L  130. 

Hedda,  Abbott,  11.  426. 

Hedges,  1. 116. 

Helps,  Sir  Arthur,  U.  245. 

HelTellyn,  ii.  53,  64,  65, 68. 

Henry  IV.,  U.  89,  627. 

Henry  V.,  i.  316. 

Henry  VI.,  1.  109,  367. 

Henry  VII.,  ii.  79. 

Henry  VIII..  i.  92,  370  ;  11. 107,  364. 

Henry  IV.  of  Germany,  ii.  376. 

Henry  of  Navarre,  ii.  627. 

Henry  of  Richmond,  i.  221. 

Herald,  New  York.  U.  286. 

Heroes,  1.  276. 

Herrey,  Isabella,  i.  496. 

Henrey,  Sir  Thomas,  i.  498. 

Heytebnry,  Lord,  U.  136. 

Heywood,  ii.  186. 

Heywood,  F.,  IL  642. 

Heywood,  John,  i.  636,  562. 

Heywood,  Mrs.,  U.  317,  320. 

//iotoo/Aa,  11.233. 

Highland  Mary,  i.  249. 

Hilbree,  i.  494. 

HUIard,  George,  ii.  330. 

Hhichman,  1^.,  ii.  302. 

History  of  the  World,  The,  1.  130,  294 ;  ii. 

108. 
Hogarth,  William,  i.  387 ;  ii.  524,  535. 
Holbehi,  Hans,  i.  369 ;  U.  200. 
Holbom,  il.  96,  97,  208. 
Holland,  Mr.  (of  London),  i.  464. 
Holies,  Genroyse,  ii.  529. 
Holme.  Mr.,  ii.  416. 
Holy  Fair,  the,  i.  238,  239. 
Holy  Funilies,  ii.  540. 
Holy  Isle,  ii.  276. 
Holy  Trinity,  Church  of,  i.  119. 
Holyrood  Abbey,  ii.  260. 
Holyrood  Palace,  i.  193 ;  ii.  258. 
HolyweU  Street,  11.  154. 
Home,  i.  58,  64,  146,  254,  658;  a  ship, 

572 ;  ii.  63,  185. 
Home,  Daniel  Dunglas,  ii.  596. 
Homer,  Pope^s,  ii.  588. 
Honey,  Mrs.,  ii.  533,  546. 
Hooping-cough,  i.  499. 
Horse  Guards,  ii.  93,  104. 
Hospitals,    Leicester^  i-   92;    ii.  557; 

Greenwich,  i.  270,  ii.  110;  Chelsea,  i. 

496,  ii.  302;  for  old   maiden  ladies, 

404 ;  Ford»s,  655  ;  Christ's,  561. 


Hotels,  Black  Swan,  L  148;  Saracen' 
Head,  172  ;  Peacock,  187 ;  Loadouo 
237  ;  King's  Arms,  246 ;  Royal  Bock 
416 ;  Rock  Ferry,  441 ;  American,  44» 
Royal,  456;  Albion,  ii.  6;  Swan,  7 
Lowwood,  17,  18,  21  ;  Brown's  25 
Scott's  Swan,  35 ;  at  Ullswater,  40  ;  lif 
in,  60 ;  Lion,  U.  82,  85 ;  Morley's,  103 
Chappie's  Castle,  162;  Crown,  IM 
Queen'e,  246 ;  at  Arroquhar,  261 ;  Clai 
endon,  i.  580  ;  Red  lion,  586  ;  at  th( 
Troeachs,  ii.  265;  at  Stirling,  256 
Station,  276;  Roeback,  291;  Castle 
305 ;  Wellington,  307 ;  Adelphi,  369 
at  Peterborough,  431 ;  Bath,  443  ;  Tro 
Sachs's,  474,  477,  479  ;  Star  and  Gar 
ter,  490;  Addison's  Alma,  496,  5M 
Black  Swan,  411;  515.    See  Inna. 

Hotspur,  ii.  88. 

House  of  the  Seven  OcMeSj  The,  L  517] 
11.  228,  437. 

Howard,  Catherine,  ii.  663. 

Howitt,  Mary,  ii.  246. 

Howitt,  William,  ii.  246. 

Hudson,  Captain,  U.  460. 

Hume,  Joseph,  11.  230. 

Humphrey  Clinker,  1.  286. 

Hunt,  Leigh,  i.  319. 

Hunt,  William  Henry,  ii.  625,  626. 

Hunter,  Joseph,  ii.  331. 

HuskisBon,  WilUam,  i.  450. 

Hyde  Park,  ii.  91,  95, 128, 191. 


Idealising,  i.  165. 

Ignorance,  ii.  22. 

Iliad,  Pope'*,  i.  219, 228. 

Illuminations,  ii.  169. 

lUustraied  News,  ii.  233. 

Imogen,  i.  102. 

Infanta  of  Spain,  an,  ii.  543. 

Ingram.  Herbert,  ii.  226. 

Innate  ideas,  i.  83. 

Inns,  English,  i.  173;  Black  Bear,  201, 
213;  Bear  and  Ragged  Staff,  216; 
Loudoun  Hotel,  237;  Eastham,  4%; 
Swan,  U.  7, 35 ;  the  highest  in  Enghmd. 
39;  at  Lodore,  46;  King's  Head,  53, 
Raven,  89 ;  Gray's  96 ;  Fumival's,  98: 
Staples,  96;  Clement's,  121;  Lhicoln's, 
ii.  158;  Baillie  Nicol^arvie,  251; 
George,  263,  265;  Bell,  308;  Crowi^ 
346  ;  Tacht,  378 ;  Dev  nshire  Houm^' 
ii.  396 ;  Black  Swan,  411,  515 ;  VA 
con,  427 ;  Angel,  432  ;  Lincoln's,  580  ;i 
Gray's,  580 ;  Stoples,  581.  See  UoUk 
and  Taverns. 

Inspector  of  Nuisances,  an,  ii.  382. 

Insurrectionists,  ii.  489.  , 

Interviews,  i.  24. 

Intolerance,  i.  547.  i 

Introductory  Note,  i.  407.  ' 

Invalids,  treatment  of,  i.  346.  i 

Inverannan,  ii.  466,  469.  I 

Inverness,  Duchess  of,  ii.  127. 

Inversuaid,  U.  252,  470,  471,  474L 

Inveruglass,  ii.  472. 

Irdand,  (S.  C.  HaU's),  il.  342. 


INDEX. 


6H 


Ireland,  family  of,  ii.  84. 
>laxn,  i.  470. 
Ir'weU,  the  River,  li.  520. 
[sis,  the  River,  ii.  291,  351. 
TsrcuA  Pottery  i.  27. 
[vy,  i.  527 ;  ii.  13,  22,  549. 

FatclMon,  Cyril,  ii.  356. 

FsMskson,  General,  i.  21,  565,  66& 

rames  I.,  i.  96, 106 ;  iL  410,  494. 

Tames  II.,  ii.  87. 

James  UI.,  ii.  493. 

Tames  IV.,  ii.  491. 

Tames  VI.,  ii.  256,  484. 

Tames,  G.  P.  R.,  i.  299  ;  ii.  21. 

Jane  EyrCy  ii.  533. 

Japan,  i.  548. 

Jephson,  Dr.,  i.  61. 

Jephson  Garden,  i.  61,  76. 

Jerdan,  Mr.,ii.  192. 

Jerdan,  WiUiam,  ii.  322. 

J&rdan's  Autobiography ^  ii.  322. 

Jerrold,  Douglas,  U.  230. 

Jewess's  House,  the,  i.  174. 

Je-ws  of  Lincoln,  i.  178. 

Jewsbury,  Miss  Geraldine,  ii.  319. 

John,  Kmg,  ii.  167. 

John  of  Gaunt,  i.  178  ;  ti.  63,  107,  648, 
651. 

Johnson,  Dr.,  i.  149,  159;  birth-place, 
160 ;  statue,  160  ;  penance,  161 ;  rel- 
ics, 554 ;  ii.  91, 117, 158, 191 ;  staircase, 
207;  autograph,  243;  310,  464,  532, 
569. 

Johnson,  Michael,  i.  160, 162, 163, 166. 

Jones,  Inigo,  ii.  104 ;  200,  565. 

Jones,  Mr.  (sculptor),  ii.  245,  246. 

Jones,  Paul,  i.  496. 

Jonson,  Ben,  i.  314  ;  ii.  57,  588. 

Joseph  Andrews,  i.  286. 

Judges,  i.  377. 

Judith,  ii.  238. 

Julius  CsBsar,  ii.  143. 

Justice  Shallow,  ii.  121. 

Kathleen  O^Moore^  ii.  158. 
Katrine,  Loch,  ii.  476. 
Kean,  Charles,  ii.  208,  522. 
Kemble,  John,  i.  310. 
Kemble,  Roger,  i.  552. 
Kempis,  Thomas  ^  li.  361. 
Kendal,  Barons  of,  ii.  11. 
KenUworth,  i.  80, 105  ;  ii.  547,  688. 
Kenilworth  Castle,  ii.  547. 
Kenilworth  Church,  ii.  551. 
Kenilworth  Priory,  ii.  551. 
Kensington,  i.  266. 
Kensington  Gardens,  ii.  127. 
Kensington  Palace,  ii.  127. 
Keutuckian,  a,  ii.  379. 
Keswick,  ii.  41,  46. 

Killiecrankie,  Battle  of,  ii.  603. 

Kilmarnock,  Lord,  ii.  108. 

King's  Arms  Hotel,  L  246 

King's  Head,  ii.  53. 

Kings,  U.  363. 

Kirk  Alloway.L  248,  250. 


Kirk  Madden,  i.  507. 

KirkstaU,  Abbey  of,  u.  400. 

Kirkstone,  the,  ii.  39. 

Kirkstone,  Pass  of,  ii.  38. 

*'  Kissing  m  the  Rmg,"  i.  283. 

Kneller,  Sir  Godfrey,  i.  312  ;  ii.  19&  489 

"  Knoll,  the,"  ii.  24. 

Knowles,  James  Sheridan,  i.  538. 

Knowsley  Park,  i.  487,  488. 

Knox,  John,  ii.  261,  461,  486,  498. 

Koh-i-noor,  U.  585. 

L.,  Miss,  i.  652. 

Lacy,  Roger,  i.  460. 

Lakes,  the,  i.  117. 

Lambeth  Palace,  i.  301 ;  ii.  193w 

Lamplighter,  The,  i.  517. 

Lancashire,  i,  169 ;  ii.  282. 

Lancashire,  History  of,  i.  662. 

Lancashire  Ninth  Re^ment,  ii.  68. 

Lancaster,  ii.  62. 

Lancaster,  faction  of,  ii.  566. 

Landseer,  Sir  Edwin,  i.  537. 

Luisdowne  Circus,  i.  58. 

Lansdowne,  Marquis  of,  ii.  326, 33Q. 

Lapscott,  the  William,  ii.  174. 

Larkhill,  i.  558. 

Lark-pie,  ii.  383. 

Larks,  i.  575. 

Lass  of  Ballochmyle,  the,  I.  24a 

Lathoms,  the,  i.  470. 

Latimer,  Bishop,  U.  347,  352. 

Launch,  a,  ii.  63. 

Laurence,  i.  364. 

Law,  Dr.,  i.  161. 

Lawrence,  Sir  Thomas,  i.  487  ;  ii.  624. 

Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel,  The,  ii.  268. 

Layard,  Austen  Henry,  ii.  584. 

Layard,  Mr.,  M.  P.,  i.  564. 

Leadenhall  Street,  ii.  91. 

Leam,  the  River,  i.  60,  61,  63» 

Leamington  Spa,  i.  58,  85,  86, 113,  14& 

580:  ii.  5,  22,  290,  646,  663. 
Lear,  i.  274. 
Ledi,  Ben,  U.  481. 
Leeds,  ii.  517. 
Legal  documents,  i.  644. 
Legation,  the,  U.  112. 
Legends,  i.  422,  468. 
Leicester,  Countess  of,  i.  108. 
Leicester,  Earl  of,  i.  466. 
Leicester,  Robert  Dudley,  Earl  of,  i.  93L 

101, 108 ;  ii.  548. 
Leicester's  Hospital,  i.  92 ;  iL  657. 
Leighs,  the,  i.  470. 
Lely,  Sir  Peter,  U.  196,  215, 439,  499,  629. 

liQUOX    i    444 

Lestrange,  Sir  Nicholas,  i.  92. 

Lewis,  Sir  George  Comewall,  ii.  241. 

Leycester,  Sir  Peter,  i.  461. 

Libraries,  Blenheim,  i.  210 ;  at  Poulton 
Hall,  421;  Chester,  453;  Grasmere, 
ii.  36;  buying,  243;  Merton  College, 
356;  the  Ratclifle,  358;  the  Bod- 
leian, 359*,  Mr.  Browne's  Free,  413. 

Lichfield,  i.  148 :  meaning  of  the  i 
149. 


612 


INDEX. 


Uchfleld,  BiBhop,  11.  321. 

Lillington,  i.  68. 

Unc^  1.172. 

Lincoln^s  Inn,  IL  168. 

Lincoln's  Ion  Chapel,  11.  580. 

Lliifloln's  Inn  Fields,  11.  208,  560. 

Lincoln's  Inn  HaU,  11.  580. 

Lincolnshire,  i.  172, 187 ;  11.  422. 

Lind,  Jenny,  U.  236,  317,  318,  319. 

Linkwater,  Sir  John,  1.  377. 

Linlithgow,  11.  490. 

Linlithgow  Church,  11.  490. 

Linlithgow  Palace,  ii.  491,  498. 

linnell,  John,  the  younger,  U.  637. 

lion  Hotel,  11.  82,  85. 

lions,  11.  3i0. 

Liquors,  1.  213,  327,  376. 

Lisbon,  ii.  155, 169, 161. 

lisle,  Lords  de,i.  95. 

Literary  Fond,  11.  207. 

LUtle  Dorrit,  ii.  193. 

*<  Little  John,"  11.  644. 

Liverpool,  1.  67, 172,  415,  423,  4£i4;  hia- 
torv  of ,  445 ;  IL  283,  Sfia. 

liandadBO,  1.  523^ 

lioyd.  Mayor,  i.  637. 

lioyd,  Ifrs.,  1.  537. 

Lodgings,  1.  519,  581 ;  at  Oxford,  U.  346, 
348T3M,  518,  533,  545,  546. 

Lodore,  11.  44,  46. 

Lomond,  Ben,  1.  253 ;  IL  248,  263,  463, 
485. 

Lomond,  Loch,  1.  57 ;  11.  249,  252,  467, 
472. 

London,  1. 150,  264;  distant  Tlew,  263  ; 
children,  264 ;  U.  90 ;  bridge,  92 ;  by 
night,  131 ;  return  to,  190 ;  wall,  202 ; 
m,  558 ;  fog,  664, 579, 691, 694 ;  weari- 
ness of,  598. 

London  Stone,  ii.  203. 

London  Suborb,  A,  L  254. 

Long,  toch.  ii.  261. 

LongfeUow,  H.  W.,  1.  636 ;  U.  233,  238 ; 
Poems,  337;  351,  413. 

Longsword,  Earl  of  Sall^ury,  11.  295. 

Lonsdale,  Earl  of,  11.  457. 

Lopez,  Narclsso,  L  573. 

Lord  Mayor,  the.  i.  386 ;  U.  320. 

Loudoun  Hotel,  1.  237. 

Lough,  John  Graham,  ii.  48. 

Louis  XIV.,  1. 194. 

Lousie  Thorn,  the,  L  239. 

Lovat,  Lord/ii.  108. 

Lovel,  Robert,  11.  60. 

Lovelaces,  the,  ii.  441. 

Lover,  Samuel,  11.  319,  320. 

"  Lover's  Leap,"  ii.  463. 

Lovers'  Grove,  1.  69. 

Loving-cup,  1.  370,  394. 

Lowell,  James  Russell,  11. 119,  233. 

Lowwood  Hotel,  IL  17,  18,  21,  62. 

Loyalty,  1.  379. 

Lucas,  Mr.  (sculptor),  1.  161. 

Luce,  Captain,  L  642. 

Lucy,  Sir  Thomas,  1.  146. 

Lngar.  the  River,  1.  244. 

Lunatic  Asylum,  a,  1.  449,  468. 


Luncheon,  i.  686. 
Lupus,  Hugh,  1.  515. 
Lynlph's  Tower,  ii.  41. 

Macaulay,  Thomas  Babington,  IL  326^ 

Macclesfield  Hundxed,  1.  470. 

Macdonald,  James,  11.  390. 

Macdonald,  John,  IL  380. 

Macfarlaiies,  the.  ii.  551. 

Macgregor,  Mr.  (of  Arroquhar),  iL  2^ 

Mackay,  Dr.,  ii.  245,  317. 

Mackay,  Mrs.,  11.  245. 

Madeira,  the,  ii.  164. 

Madness,  1.  546,  555. 

Magdalen  GoUege  Chi^l,  ii.  34& 

Magistrates,  U.  390. 

Mainwaring  family,  the,  L^  46S. 

Malay  pirates,  i.  3^. 

Malcolm,  Sir  John,  1.  309. 

Malmesbury,  Earl  of,  11.  296. 

Malpas,  i.  466. 

Man,  Isle  of,  i.  67,  607 ;  ii.  391. 

Manchester,  1.   169,  172,  369;    tt.  281% 

411,  617 ;  roughness,  645 ;  540. 
Manchester  Ca^edral,  ii.  412,  <i36. 
Manners,  iL  380. 
Mansfield,  Earl,  11.  160. 
Mansfield,  Lord,  i.  310. 
Mansfield,  Mr.  (magistrate),  i.  479. 
Mansion  House,  the,  1.  386. 
March  to  Finchley,  11.  624,  535. 
Marlborough,  Duchess  of,  L  210. 
Marlborough,  Duke  of,  i.  202,  204,  20Es 

209,212;ii.  335. 
Marlborough  family,  the,  i.  202. 
Marlborough  House,  11. 102,  334,  591, 593L 
Marmion,  Ii.  609. 
Marsh,  George,  i.  562 ;  11.  75. 
Marston,  WestUnd.  U.  245. 
Martin,  Theodore,  u.  224. 
Martineau,  Harriet,  1.  618  ;  it  10,  24,  64^ 

Martineau,  Mr.,  ii.  288. 

Mary,  Queen  of  Ens^iuid,  ii.  197,  461. 

Mary,  Queen  of  Soots,  i.  191,  193;  iL 
160,  267,  268 ;  portraits,  263,  272,  359, 
461,498,  528;  393;  burial-place,  425, 
426 ;  454,  455,  466 ;  blrtbrplace,  483j 
499,  508  ;  ring,  587. 

Mason,  William,  1.  228. 

Matlock,  U.  442. 

Mauchline,  i.  237. 

Maud,  ii.  321. 

Mauleverera,  the,  ii.  399. 

Maury,  Consul,  1.  52. 

Mayer,  Mr.,  ii.  522. 

Mayflower,  the,  i.  537. 

McClellan,  General,  1.  47. 

McKay,  Donald,  i.  538,  564. 

McNeil,  Dr.,  i.  557. 

Meanness,  English,  ii.  146. 

Medici,  statue  of  one  of  the,  iL  ($76w 

Medusa,  statue  of,  ii.  576. 

Meldnun,  Sir  John,  1.  446. 

Meleager,  1.  564. 

Melrose,  ii.  263,  604. 

Melrose  Abbey,  0.  268,  IMML 


INDEX. 


618 


Melville,  Hernuui,  L  27, 648 ;  tt.  874, 877, 

379. 
Memd  Stnito,  i.  606. 
Mersey  Iron  Foundry,  il.  186w 
Mersey,  the  Biver,  L  290, 418,  423,  446 ; 

ii.  169,  340. 
Merton  Gollego^  U.  366  ;  Ubr»ry,  366 ; 

chapel,  367. 
Messenden  Abbey,  Little,  i  480. 
Methodist  chapet  %  L  480. 
Methodists,  i.  268,  m 
Michel  Angelo,  ii.  860,  676» 
Mickle,  William  Julius,  i.  214. 
Middle  Temple,  HaU  of  the,  ii.  666. 
MUitary  life,  ii.  208. 
Militia,  i.  89;  ii.  68. 
Millais,  John  EvereU,  U.  287. 
liiller,  Mr.  (American  Despatch  Agen- 
cy), iL  96. 
Milnes,  Monckton,  i.  417,  418,  636,  637 ; 

ii.  321,  324,  326,  413. 
Milnes,  Mrs.  Monckton,  ii.  326. 
MUtOQ  dab,  it  226. 
Hilton,  John,  L  314,  337,  363;  biut,  iL 

202,  371 ;  506. 
Mines,  i.  623. 
Mmster  Pool,  i.  162. 
Mistletoe,  ii.  177. 
Mitford,  Mary  Russell,  ii.  239. 
Mitre  Tavern,  ii.  129, 168. 
Molly  Seagrim,  i.  333. 
MowUeur,  the,  ii.  270. 
Monkey,  the,  u.  99. 
Montagu,  Lady  Mary  Wortley,  i.  156. 
Monta%ne,  Michael  de,  i.  130 ;  ii.  689. 
Montgomery,  Countess  Anne  of,  ii.  383. 
MonUt,  in  England,  a,  i.  306. 
Montrose,  Marquess  of,  iL  273,  608. 
Monument,  the,  iL  91,  111. 
Monuments,  ii.  566. 
Moon,  the,  L  647. 
Moore,  Bramley,  L  482. 
Moore,  Sir  John,  iL  139,  462. 
Moore,  Thomas,  L  406 ;  ii.  236, 32& 
Moore,  Mrs.  Thomas,  ii.  338. 
More,  Sir  John  de  la.  L  446. 
More,  Sir  Thomas,  iL  623. 
Morecambe  Bay,  U.  79. 
Morgan,  Lady,  iL  319. 
Morley  family,  the,  iL  399. 
Morley's  Hotel,  a.  103. 
Mormons,  iL  387. 
Moses,  L  296. 
Moas  Oiel,  L  239. 

Moaesfrom  an  Old  Manw,  L  409. 
Motte,  Mr.  De  la,  ii.  361. 
Mottoes,  L  94,  466,  494 ;  U.  73, 166,  396. 
Mulgrave  family,  the,  L  490. 
Mummies,  iL  144, 182,  586. 
Muntz,  Mr.,  M.  P.,  ii.  241. 
Murillo,  Bartholomew  Stephen,  iL  206» 

532,  537.  539,  642,  566, 694, 690. 
Murray,  Colonel,  L  508. 
Murray,  James  Stuifft,  Earl  of,  iL  496. 
Murray,  John,  il.  287. 
Murray,  John,  his  shop,  ii.  118. 
Miuo]iat'»OAini,iL.601. 


Mnnfwim,  Warwick,  iL  56T. 

Musgrave,  Mr.,  iL  321. 
Musgrave,  Mrs.,  iL  321. 
Musicians,  vagabond,  L  499,  679. 

Nab  Scaur,  iL  36,  66. 

Nab's  cottage,  U.  37. 

Nag^s  Head,  L  166. 

Names  of  places,  L  66,  484 ;  iL  70. 

Napoleon  I.,  L  193 ;  ii.  608. 

Napoleon  /.,  History  of.,  iL  270. 

Napoleon,  Louis,  iL  126. 

Narraiive  oftJie  Campaign,  ii.  188. 

Nash,  Thomas,  i.  126. 

Nasmyth,  Alexander,  L  247. 

National  Gallery,  iL  206, 336,  688, 

Natural  History  Collection,  IL  666. 

NaturaUzed  citixens,  L  64$. 

Nature,  ii.  264. 

Naval  of&cers,  iL  450. 

Naylor,  Mr.,  L  537. 

Near  Oxford,  L  201. 

Negro  melodies,  ii.  210. 

TSftSaon,  Admiral,  L  274,  276;  iL  139  { 

sarcophagus,  140 ;  325, 631 ;  pillar,  664. 
Nelson  Monument,  iL103. 
Nero,  bust  of,  iL  143. 
Nervous  persons,  ii.  474. 
Netley  Abbey,  u.  312. 
Never  Too  Late  to  Mend^  ii.  678. 
New  College,  ii.  348 ;  chapel,  360. 
New  Orleans,  Battle  of,  L  21 ;  ii.  380. 
New  South  Wales,  Bishop  of,  L  666. 
New  Year,  U.  178. 
Newby  Bridge,  il.  7, 17,  67. 
Newcastle,  i.  172 ;  iL  276. 
Newcastle,  Duchess  of,  1.  309. 
Newcastle,  Duke  of,  L  309 ;  ii.  637. 
Newcomea,  The,  iL  119. 
Newgate,  Chaplain  of,  iL  591. 
Newstead  Abbey,  ii.  433. 
Newton,  Sir  Isaac,  statue  of ,  iL  267 ;  432. 
Newton,  West,  L  444. 
Niagara,  the,  iL  460. 
Nightingale,  Florence,  ii.  204,  327. 
Nightingale,  Mrs.,  iL  327,  328. 
Nile,  Battle  of  the,  L  277. 
NUometer,  L  103. 
*'  Nmety-«econd  Street,  Philadelphia," 

L27. 
Nixon,  L  466. 
Noah,  L  296. 
NobiUty,  L  660. 
Norfolk,  Duke  of,  L  646. 
Norham  Castle,  iL  276,  509. 
Norman  Castle,  a,  1.  181. 
Norris  Oreen,  L  536 ;  iL  186. 
North  Cork  Regiment,  ii.  211. 
Northumberland  House,  ii.  103,  682. 
Norton,  Oeorge,  i.  446. 
Note-Books,  character  of,  L  412. 
Nothelert,  L  460. 
Nottingham,  iL  433. 
Nuneham  Courtney,  *»  218, 223,  227. 

Oakford,  Mr.  (of  St  John>  Wood),  ik 
133,164. 


614 


INDEX. 


Oftkfoid,  Hn.  (of  St  Jolm*8  Wood),  U. 

136,  146. 
OakB,  i.  114. 
Oakum.  U.  289. 
Obsequioiuneas,  i.  476. 
Offden,  Mr.  (an  American),  i.  426. 
Old  Maiden  Ladies'  Hospital,  U.  404. 
Old  Manse,  i.  9,  444. 
Old  Masters,  i.  192 ;  li.  634. 
"  Old  Thatched  Hooae,"  ii.  118. 
Omskirk,  ii.  373;  ginirerbread,  374. 
Omakirk  Church,  B.  378. 
Oratory,  i.  381,  396,  428.    See  Speech- 


^rt»«»w,  i.  460. 

Ormes'  Head,  the  Great,  i.  623. 

Ornamental  art,  iL  538. 

O'SulllTan,  Mr.,  i.  519,  622. 

O'Sulllvan,  Mrs.,  ii.  284. 

Otaheite,  Queen  of,  i.  191. 

Otterpool,  i.  658. 

Outside  Glimpses  of  English  Poverty,  i. 

326. 
Oxford,  i.  201,  204,  210;  ale,  213;  214, 

226,  228;  ii.  290,  346  ;  Ex-Mayor  of, 

346,  348;  plant,  360;  cathedral,  366 ; 

theatre,  368. 
Oxfordshire,  i.  201. 
Oxton,  U.  70. 

P.,  Commodore,  i.  648. 

P.,  Dr.,  U.  602. 

Paddlngton,  U.  332. 

Page,  Thomas  Leigh,  i.  470. 

Pages,  the,  i.  470. 

Pdiited  Hall,  i.  274. 

Painters,  ii.  624 ;  Dutch,  634 ;  old  nuM- 

ters,634. 
Pakenham,  General,  Ii.  382. 
PaUngton,  Sir  John,  ii.  416. 
Palaces,  Lambeth,  i.  .%1 ;  ii.  193;  C17S- 

tal,  i.  305  ;  ii.  186  ;  Buckingham,  ^; 

St.  James's,  95,  101,  192;  Kenshigton, 

127;  Hampton,  194;  Holyrood,  268; 

Stirling,  484 ;  Linlithgow,  491,  496. 
Palfrey,  Mr.,  U.  329,  331. 
Palissy  ware,  ii.  639. 
Pall  Mall,  ii.  103. 
Palmerston,  Lord,  i.  665 ;  ii.  241. 
Pan,  statue  of,  U.  439. 
Pandora,  statue  of,  ii.  440. 
Panic,  i.  399. 
Pantheon,  ii.  141. 
Parade,  the,  i.  65. 
Paralysis,  i.  171. 
Paraman,  i.  478. 
Paraaitea,  i.  115 ;  ii.  16. 
Pardy,  Thomas,  Ii.  264. 
"Pariah  Beadle,  Tlie,"  U.  336. 
Parker,  Mr.  (of  Boston),  ii.  569. 
Parker,  Mr.  (of  Oxford),  ii.  350. 
Parliament  House,  Scottish,  ii.  256. 
ParUament,  Houses  of,  i.  301 ;  ii.  91, 

104,  106,  130;  description,  147,156; 

665. 
Parr,  Dr.,  i.  80, 103. 
Plarrot,  a,  iL  81. 


Paaht,  ii.  600. 

Past,  the,  U.  207. 

Pastimes,  L  258,  263,  278;  regattas,  289. 
436,  573  ;  ii.  71, 120,  449. 

Paternoster  Row,  ii.  98. 

Patmore,  Coventry,  ii.  60O. 

Patmore,  Mrs.  Coventry,  iL  60O. 

PatriotUnn,  i.  547,  569. 

Patterdale,  ii.  89. 

Peabody,  Mr.  (of  Salem),  ii.  248. 

Peacock,  the,  i.  187. 

Pearoe,  Mr.  (Yice-Consul),  i.  62,  41& 
427. 

Peel,  Sir  Robert,  i.  370 ;  U.  200,  286. 

Peerages,  Ufe,  ii.  183. 

Pembroke,  Countess  Anne  of,  IL  398. 

Pembroke,  Earl,  ii.  369. 

Pen,  ii.  200. 

Percival,  Spencer,  ii.  67. 

Percys,  the,  ii.  103. 

Permanence,  i.  77. 

Perseus,  statue  of,  ii.  676. 

Peterborough,  ii.  422;  ohurch,  429: 
hotel,  43f. 

Peterborough  Cathedral,  U.  422,  427. 

Petrifactions,  ii.  447. 

Pharaoh,  i.  112;  U.  522. 

Phipps,  Colonel,  i.  490. 

Piccadilly,  ii.  95. 

Pickup,  Peter,  ii.  390. 

Picton,  General,  U.  117, 139. 

Picton,  Mr.  (of  the  Browne  library 
Committee),  ii.  417. 

Picture  GaUeries,  Blenheim,  i.  208 ;  iL 
141  ;  Hampton,  196;  National,  205, 
693,  698;  Vernon,  834;  British  Insti- 
tution, 337 ;  Lord  Ward's,  337  ;  Bod. 
leian,  369;  Arts'  Exhibition,  620; 
Marlborough  House,  691,  697. 

Pierce,  FrankUn,  i.  11,  IS,  16 ;  ii.  229. 

PUgrimage  to  Old  Boston,  i.  168. 

Pitt,  WUfiam,  i.  310 ;  ii.  90,  324. 

PUgue,  the,  i.  465,  466. 

Plantagenet,  Richard,  iL  83. 

PoetsTi.  315. 

Poets'  Comer,  i.  314 ;  ii.  163,  566.  Sea 
Westminster  Abbey. 

Poictiers,  Roger  de,  1.  446. 

Police  court,  i.  577. 

Police  court  cases,  i.  477,  478. 

Police^>fflce.  a,  ii.  388. 

Policemen,  i.  339,  578. 

Polk,  James  K.,  i.  551. 

PoUock,  Judge,  ii.  543. 

Ponsonby,  General,  ii.  117. 

Pope,  Alexander,  i.  219,  223  ;  U.  91,  688. 

Porteous  Mob,  ii.  261,  501. 

Porter,  Mr.,  virtuoso  of  old  Boston,  L  19a 

Portinacale,  u.  47. 

Portland  Place,  U.  101. 

Portrait-painting,  ii.  627,  628,  632. 

Posie  Nansie.  1.  238. 

Posthumus,  i.  102. 

Poulton  Hall,  i.  419. 

Poverty,  i.  326 ;  cases  of,  361;  461,  467; 
468,  470,  471,  473, 557 ;  ii.  183 ;  Scotdk 
247.  469,  500  ;  656. .  5e«  / ^^^ 


INDEX. 


615 


Pdwen,  Hiram,  li.  338. 

Praue,  i.  323. 

Prayers,  family,  ii.  81. 

Preaching,  open-air,  i.  268  ;  in  Westmin- 
ster Abbey,  307  ;  in  Chester  Cathedral, 
466. 

Preface  i.  411. 

Pre-Raphaelites,  ii.  524,  525. 

Prescott,  William  H.,  U.  542. 

Preston,  ii.  452. 

Prestons,  family  of,  ii.  17. 

Pretender,  the  young,  ii.  259. 

Priestley,  Dr.  Joseph,  ii.  334. 

Princess's  Theatre,  ii.  208. 

Princeton,  the^  li.  186. 

Pringle  family,  the,  ii.  268. 

Prior,  Matthew,  ii.  153. 

Procter,  Bryan  Waller,  i.  498. 

Profanity,  ii.  185. 

Proverbial  Philosophy^  ThCj  i.  523. 

Province  House,  i.  429. 

Public-houses,  i.  164. 

Purbeck  marble,  ii.  568. 

Purdy,  Tom,  ii.  509. 

Puritans,  ii.  403. 

Purity,  i.  286,  336. 

Pusey,  Dr.,  ii;  352. 

Pyramids,  L  109. 

Quebec,  ii.  36. 
Queen's  Hotel,  ii.  246. 
Queen's  Mews,  ii.  95. 

Badday.  Mr.  (occupant  of  Southey's 
house),  ii.  43. 

Radley,  Mr.  (landlord  of  the  Adelphi 
Hotel),  U.  369. 

Raglan,  Lord,  i.  574 ;  ii.  182. 

Raihroads,  ii.  306. 

RambowB,  ii.  165. 

Raleigh,  Sir  Walter,  i.  130, 135, 138,  294 ; 
ii.  108, 109. 

Raphael,  i.  192,  208;  cartoons,  ii.  197; 
287,  ^,  360,  428,  542. 

Ratcliife  family,  the,  ii.  48,  49,  82. 

Ratcli£fe  Library,  ii.  358. 

Rathbone,  Mr.,  ii.  288. 

Raven  Inn,  ii.  89. 

Raven's  Crag,  ii.  55. 

Read,  Thomas  Buchanan,  ii.  601. 

Reade,  Charles,  ii.  235,  578. 

Recollections  of  a  Gifted  Woman,  i. 
113. 

Record  Office,  ii.  331. 

Recruiting  Officer^  The.  ii.  89. 

Red  Lion,  i.  586. 

Redfem's  Shop,  i.  Ill ;  ii.  557. 

Reform  Club,  ii.  229. 

Regalia  of  Enghind,  ii.  109. 

RegaUa  of  Scotland,  IL  498. 

Regatta,  a,  i.  289. 

Regent's  Park,  U.  91,  98, 100.         ^ 

Regiment,  the  28th,  i.  481.  ^ 

ReUcs,  of  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  i.  109 ;  Ed- 
ward rV.,  110 ;  111 ;  Shakespeare,  122 ; 
Boston,  190 ;  Ma^  Queen  of  Scots,  191, 
193 ;  Lord  Burld^h,  191 ;  Queen  Eliz- 


abetb,  193 ;  Raphael,  \9\ ;  Louis  XIV., 
194  ;  Kmg  Charles  the  Martyr,  194 ; 
Bums,  249;  in  the  British  Museum, 
270  ;  Nelson,  277  ;  at  Chelsea,  303 ;  at 
Chester,  454 ;  at  Portinscale,  ii.  50 ;  of 
King  Charles,  215,  217  ;  at  Holyrood, 
259;  at  Abbotaford,  273,  508,  609;  a 
tobacco  box,  383 ;  at  York,  409  ;  at  Pe- 
terborough, 426 ;  at  Newstead  Abbey, 
437,  442  ;  at  Stirling,  486,  489  p  at  the 
Arts  Exhibition,  522  -,  at  the  British 
Museum,  587. 

Religion,  externals  in,  ii.  424. 

Rembrandt  van  Ryn,  Paul  Gerritz,  L 
192  ;  U.  542. 

Reputations,  i.  216. 

Reynolds,  Sir  Joshua,  i.  161;  ii.  350, 

Rhyd'dlan  Castle,  i.  520,  531. 

Rhyddlan  marsh,  i.  521,  534. 

Rhyl,  i.  518. 

Ribble,  the  River,  U.  517. 

Richard  n.,ii.  527. 

Ridley,  Bishop,  ii.  347,  352. 

Rizzio,  David,  ii.  259. 

Rob  Roy,  ii.  249,  252,  254,  273,  473,  607. 

Robbery,  ii.  387. 

Robert,  (son  of  the  Conqueror),  ii.  309. 

Roberts,  President,  ii.  284. 

Robsart,  Amy,  i.  105,  108 ;  ii.  550. 

Rochester,  Wilmot,  Earl  of,  i.  204. 

Rock  Ferry,  i.  418 ;  Hotel,  441 ;  u.  63. 

Rock  Park,  i.  443,  578. 

Roderick  Dhu,  U.  258. 

Roderick  Random,  i.  286. 

Roebuck  Hotel,  ii.  291. 

Rogers,  Samuel,  ii.  192,  287. 

Roman  arches,  i.  180. 

Ronoan  glass,  ii.  585. 

Ronoan  pavements,  i.  180. 

Romance,  a,  i.  564. 

Romance,  subject  for,  ii.  176,  475. 

Rome,  i.  256. 

Romeli,  Robert  de,  ii.  391. 

Rooks,  i.  489. 

Rosamond,  **fair  Rosamond,"  i.  205, 
225;  ii.  295. 

Roscoe,  William,  i.  483. 

Rosetta  Stone,  ii.  590. 

Rothay,  the  River,  ii.  27,  29,  34. 

Rotherhithe,  i.  272,  297. 

Rotttledge,  i.  480 ;  U.  335,  336,  437. 

Royal  Hotel,  i.  456. 

Royal  Rock  Hotel,  i.  416. 

Rubens,  Peter  Paul,  i.  208,  515 ;  ii.  196, 
499,  542. 

Runcorn,  ii.  342. 

Rupert,  Prince,  i.  446. 

Ruahton,  Mr.  (mi^strate),  i.  477. 

Ruskin,  John,  U.  593. 

Russell,  Captain,  u.  186. 

Russell,  Lord  John,  remonstrance  on  be- 
half of  seamen,  i.  149 ;  iL  240. 

Buih,  Book  of,  ii.  182. 

Ruthin,  i.  528,  529 ;  Castle,  530. 

Ruthven,  Lord,  ii.  260. 

Ruysdael,  Jacob,  ii.  632. 


616 


INDEX. 


Bjdal  Water,  IL  M,  26, 36»  66. 
Byrivmoh,  John  HichMl,  L  2X0. 

Sftchererall,  Dr.,  i.  161. 

Sacrament  Sunday,  i.  239. 

Saddleback,  ii.  41. 

St.  Anthony,  ii.  49. 

St.  Anthony's  Chapel,  IL  601. 

St.  Aaaph,  Cathedral  of,  t  628. 

St.  Bernard  dog,  a,  U.  563. 

St.  Botolph^B  Church,  i.  186. 

St.  Chad,  i.  49. 

St.  CriBpin,  iL  491. 

St.  David,  U.  490,  505. 

St.  George  and  the  Dragon,  i.  493. 

St.  George's  Church,  i.  446  ;  ii.  90. 

St  George's  HaU,  L  661,  662. 

St.  GUes,  ii.  201. 

St.  GUes^s  Cathedral,  iL  602. 

St  GUes's  College,  iL  348. 

St  Hugh,  L  178. 

St  James,  ii.  491. 

St.  Jameses  Palace,  U.  96, 101, 192. 

St  James's  Park,  ii.  93, 102. 

St  John,  (Murillo's),  U.  666,  694, 699. 

St  John,  the  River,  ii.  66. 

St.  John,  VaUey  of,  ii.  41,  61,  62. 

St.  John^s  Church,  i.  611.  686 ;  ii.  664. 

St.  John's  College,  ii.  318 ;  gardens,  363. 

St.  John's  Gate,  U.  121. 

St.  John's  School-House,  i.  86. 

St.  Katharine's  Dock,  U.  671. 

St.  Leonard's,  ii.  224. 

St.  Mary's  Abbey,  ii.  406. 

St.  Mary's  Church,  i.  86, 107 ;  U.  86, 667. 

St  Mary's  Hall,  i.  367,  586. 

St  Michael  and  the  Dragon,  i.  616. 

St.  Michael's  Church,  i.  »^,  684 ;  U.  654. 

St.  Mungo's  Cathedral,  U.  248. 

St.  Mungo's  WeU,  ii.  249. 

St  Nichohis,  ii.  364. 

St.  Oswald's  Church,  ii.  34. 

St.  Paul's  Cathedral,  i.  256,  300  ;  U.  91, 
97, 116, 121, 139, 153 ;  service  in,  162 ; 
206,  336,  669,  664,  669,  673 ;  in  a  fog, 
694. 

St.  Swithin's  Church,  ii.  203. 

St  Vincent,  Lord,  ii.  117. 

St.  William's  CoUege,  ii.  401,  406. 

Salem,  L  88 ;  Custom  House,  103,  444. 

Salisbury,  ii.  293. 

Salisbury  Cathedral,  ii.  293,  303w 

Salisbury  Close,  i.  175. 

Salisbury,  Longsword.  Earl  of,  ii.  296. 

Salisbury  Plain,  U.  300;  shepherd  of, 
301. 

Salvator  Rosa,  i.  192. 

Sancho  Panza,  i.  376. 

Sanctuaxy^ght  of,  ii.  511. 

Saracen's  Head,  i.  172, 183. 

Satyr,  a,  U.  206. 

Scarlet,  (sexton),  U.  426. 

Scarlet  Letier,  The,  i.  217,  517 ;  U.  119, 
125,  205,  318,  437. 

Scarybrick.  Mr.,  U.  372. 

Scenery,  BngUdi  and  American,  com- 
pared, L  113  ;  lEoglisb,  170,  iL  9, 16, 


18,87,  308,  311,396,  443; 
L  504;  ti.  44,  67,  wi;  a  surfeit  of,  55; 
60;  on  railways,  iL  122 ;  Scotch,  253, 
267,  283,  467-482. 
Scbool&St  John's,  L  86  ;  Boston  Cha^ 

Soipios,  the,  1. 109. 

Scone,  stone  of,  iL  461, 699. 

Scotch  dialect,  ti.  604. 

Scotch  dress,  ii.  255,  266,  473. 

Scotch  drunkenness,  iL  266. 

Scotch  fir,  ii.  607. 

Scotch  guide,  a,  ii.  504. 

Scotch  mist,  a,  ii.  470. 

Scotch  women,  ii.  266,  457. 

ScotUnd,  ii.  246,  462. 

Scott,  Lady,  iL  267.  272. 

Scott,  Michael,  ii.  264,  268,  606. 

Scott  Walter,  L  122,  214,  216,  457,  527; 

iL  36,  62,  68;  statues, 247,  462,  503; 

monument   268.  267,  603;  264,  a66» 

276,  477,  485,  SOT,  609,  642,  68& 
Scott's  Swan  Hotd,  iL  36. 
Scotus,  Duns,  ii.  3OT. 
Soroope,  Lr>rd,  ii.  466. 
Sculpture,  iL  683. 
Scutari,  ii.  228. 
Sea,  the,  iL  366. 
Seamen,  i.  19 ;  condition,  48 ;    wrongs, 

460, 667 ;  ii.  171. 174 ;  robbery,  L  477 ; 

assaults,  478,  496 ;  an  ancient  mariner, 

665 ;  behavior  to  women,  ii.  179. 
Sebaatopol,  false  reports,  i.  641 ;  u.  112, 

156, 169, 182. 
Sefton,  Lord,  L  489,  648. 
Selden,  John,  iL  150. 
Self-made  men,  ii.  241. 
Selkirk,  Alexander,  L  364. 
Senate  Chamber,  ii.  149. 
Sentiment  ii.  179. 
Senlimental  Jowmey,  ii.  689. 
Septimius  Felton,  i.  408. 
Serpentine,  the,  ii.  128. 
Severn,  the  River,  iL  82,  84,  88, 168, 
Severuk  Emperor,  ii.  28i. 
B6vx«sri.ll2;  ii.639. 
Seward,  Miss  Anna,  i.  159. 
Shakespeare,  i.  86, 118,  119 ;  houoe,  120, 

232 ;  grave,  125 ;  daughter,  126 ;  boat, 

126;    Mias  Bacon's  theory  of,  130; 

death,  662;   IL  274,  827,  346; 

gn4>h,  U.  589. 
Sharpe,  Archbishop,  ii.  270. 
Shaw,  Lieutenant,  ii.  208,  214,  227. 
Sheep,  ii.  254,  300,  526. 
Sheffield,  i.  170, 172. 
Shepard,  Miss,  U.  569. 
Shepard,  Mrs.,  ii.  657. 
Sheriflmuir,  ii.  257,  486. 
Sherwood  Forest,  i.  172 ;  U.  438. 
Shibboleth,  i.  47. 
Ships,  i.  423,  441. 
Ship^ecks,  iL  401. 
Shore.  Mistress  Jane,  i.  110  ;  U.  527. 
Short's  Observatory,  ii.  502. 
Shovel,  Sir  Cloudeatoy.  ii.  133. 
Shrewsbury,  i.  173,  Ml ;  U.  82. 


INDEX. 


617 


Shrewsbury  Castle,  ii.  8S^ 

Shuttleworthf  Sir  James  Kay,  ii.  416. 

Sickles,  Daniel  £.,  i.  4&L 

Sigismtmda,  the,  ii.  624. 

SUliman'8  Journal,  ii.  358. 

Silsbee,  Mr.  (of  Salem),  u.  573,  574,  575, 

577,  578. 
Sinclair,  Miss  Catherine,  ii.  317. 
Sir  Charles  Grandison.  ii.  21. 
Skating,  i.  558. 
Skiddaw,  U.  41,  44,  46,  51,  S6. 
Skipton,  ii.  391,  395,  397. 
Skipton  Castle,  ii.  391,  395. 
Skulls,  u.  437. 
Slender,  Master,  i.  106. 
Smith,  Albert,  ii.  242. 
Smith,  Daniel,  L  667. 
Smith,  Miss,  trial  of,  U.  497. 
Smith,  Sir  Henry,  ii.  415, 416. 
Smithell's  Hall,  i.  562;  ii.  73,  147. 
Smithlleld,  U.  121,  573. 
Sneyd,  Honora,  L  168. 
Snow,  L  476. 
Snowdon,  1.  504. 
Soldier-crab,  the,  1.  679. 
Some  of  the  Hamnts  of  Buma,  L  231. 
Somers,  Lord,  ii.  150. 
Somerset,  Duke  of,  i.  662. 
Somerset,  family  of,  ii.  298. 
Somerset  House,  i.  301 ;  ii.  129,  666. 

Somerville,  Sir ,  ii.  321. 

Southampton,  ii.  162,  290,  292,  305,  314. 

Souther,  Robert,  i.  276,  317 ;  house,  ii. 

42 ;  47  ;  monument,  48 ;  grave,  60 ;  641. 

Southey,  Mrs.  Robert,  (Caroline  Bowles), 

ii.60. 
Southey,  Mrs.  Robert,  (Edith  Fricker), 

ii.50. 
Southport,  U.  343,  364,  420,  448,  517. 
StnUhport  Visitor,  the,  ii.  367. 
Spanish  Udy,  a.  ii.  542. 
Spectator,  the,  u.  91. 
Speech-making,    i.  381,  396,   417,   428, 
539,  656 ;  ii.  226,  229,  384.    See  Orar 
tory. 
Speed,  John,  ii.  202. 
Spenser,  Edmund,  1 138,  314. 
Spiers,  Mr.  (of  Oxford),  ii.  345,  365,  369, 

360  361. 
Spiers,  Mrs.  (of  Oxford),  Ii.  361. 
Spiritualism,  U.  6,  327,  696. 
Spring,  ii.  419. 
Squarey,  Mr.,  i.  466. 
Stafford  House,  ii.  94,  95. 
Stage-coaches,  ii.  7,  61,  481. 
Stanley  family,  the,  i.  609 ;  U.  82 
Stanley,  the  House  of,  U.  417. 
Stanley,  Lord,  i.  382. 
Stanley,  Sir  John,  i.  445. 
Stanton  Harcourt,  i.  217,  228. 
Staples  Inn,  ii.  96,  581. 
Star  and  Garter  Hotel,  ii.  490. 
Station  Hotel,  ii.  276. 
Statues,  i.  310. 
Statues,  equestrian,  ii.  699. 
Stebbing.  Mr.  (of  Oxford),  U  348. 
Steele,  Mr.  (of  Bock  Ferry),  i.  664 


Stephen,  King,  U.  15. 

Sterne,  Laurence,  i.  192 ;  his  wife,  192. 

Stevens,  Henry,  ii.  319. 

Stirling,  U.  256  ;  hotel,  256,  482 ;  piOaoe, 

484 ;  CKrse  of,  484,  485;  churd^  488. 
Stirling,  Battle  of,  ii.  257. 
Stirlmg  CasUe,  ii.  266,  482,  483. 
Stonehenge,  U.  300,  301. 
Story,  William,  ii.  119,  328. 
Stowell,  Lieutenant><3olouel,  ii.  210. 
Strafford,  Earl  of,  ii.  409. 
Stratford  famUy,  the,  ii.  409. 
Strand,  the,  ii  91. 
Stratford-on-Avon,  i.  80, 118. 
Strutt,  Joseph,  ii.  72. 
Stuart,  OUbert,  ii.  119. 
Sturgis,  Mr.  (at  the  Barings*  HoweV  K. 

Sturgis,  Mrs.  Russell,  ii.  131. 

Success,  effect  on  an  Englishman,  1.  541 

Suffolk,  Duke  of,  ii.  107. 

Summers,  English,  i.  118,  214,  269. 

Sunderland,  Lord,  1.  209. 

Sundial,  a,  ii.  466. 

Surrey^s  Oenddine,  ii.  222. 

Sussex,  Duke  of,  u.  230,  441. 

Sutherland,  Duke  of,  ii.  94. 

SutorWat,i.250. 

Swain,  Charles,  ii.  286,  518. 

Swan  Hotel,  ii.  7. 

Swan  Inn,  iL  35. 

Swedenborgian,  a,  ii.  596. 

Swift,  Dean,  i.  37,  379  ;  ii.  330,  d7& 

Sw3mford,  Catherine,  1 178. 

Sylva,  the,  ii.  214. 

Tabbs,  i.  216. 

Tact,  ii.  330. 

Tales  and  Romances,  ii.  362. 

Ttilking  Oak,  i.  114. 

Tam  O'Shanter,  i.  260. 

Tamborough,  ii.  208. 

Tapestry,  fl.  194. 

TattershaU  Castle,  i.  186. 

Taverns,  the  Mitre,  ii.  129,  158.     See 

Hotels  and  Inns. 
Taylor,  General,  i.  21. 
Taylor  Institute,  Ii.  360. 
Taylor,  Merchant,  ii.  333. 
Taj^r,  Tom,    ii.    226,    243,    244,    321, 

Taylor,  William,  U.  313. 

Tecumseh,  ii.  379. 

Telegraph,  the,  ii.  536. 

Telford,  Thomas,  ii.  161. 

TeUs,  the  three,  i.  601. 

Templars,  ii.  568. 

Temple,  the,  i.  301 ;  II.  Ill,  129. 

Temple  Church,  ii.  568. 

Temple  Gardens,  ii.  666. 

Ten  Thousand  a  Year,  i.  561. 

Tennent,  Sir  Emerson,  ii.  319. 

Tennia-oourts,  i.  602. 

Tennyson,  Alfred,  i.  69,  114,  117,  381, 

480,  538 ;  U.  321,  530. 
Thackeray,  William  Makepeace,  IL  68^ 

119,  232,  246. 


618 


INDEX. 


lluuneB,  the  River,  t.  225,  288;  ii.  92, 

110, 129, 165. 
Thames  Tunnel,  i.  291. 
Thanets,  the,  U.  393,  395. 
Theatres,  U.  138;  the  Princess's,  208, 

281. 
Thirlmere,  ii  54,  66. 
Thorn,  Rer.  John  Hamilton,  i.  483. 
Thompson,  Mrs.  (Barbara  Lewthwaite), 

11.27. 
Thoreao,  H.  D.,  U.  233. 
Thomhill,  Sir  James,  L  208,  274. 
Three  Marys,  the,  il.  544. 
Thugs,  Indian,  ii.  690. 
TickeU,  Thomas,  L  317. 
Ticknor,  George,  1.  462,  456 ;  U.  326,  329, 

541  642. 
Tim^,   Tht,  i.  477 ;   ii.  228,  286 ;  ghost, 

Tippe'oanoe,  battle  of,  U.  379. 

Titian,  11. 196,  338,  532,  642. 

Toasts,  i.  379,  396,  539,  566 ;  il.  384,  417. 

8w  Speech-making. 
Tim,  Jonet,  i.  286. 
Tones,  English  and  Aihexlcaa  oompared, 

1.  474. 
Tottenham  Coort  Road,  11. 142. 
Toulmin,  Camilla,  11.  204. 
Tower,  the,  i.  138, 272,  298  ;  IL  105, 112, 

130,  561,  670. 
Tower  HIU,  11.  671. 
Tradesmen,  il.  92. 
Trafalgar,  I.  277. 
Trafalgar  Square,  11. 103. 
Trafford,  Old,  ii.  617. 
Tranmere,  i.  483,  573 ;  11.  72. 
Tranmere  Hall,  1.  660 ;  11.  70,  73. 
Travel,  books  of,  1.  306. 
Tredagh,  i.  465. 
Treeo,  John,  1.  76. 
Trees,  1.  114,  422,  488,  514 ;  IL  22,  78 ; 

planting,  236. 
Trent,  the  River,  11. 122. 
Trinity  Ale,  i.  213. 
Trinity  Church,  i.  685 ;  11.  554. 
Tnvia,  i.  281. 
Tron  steeple,  11.  459. 
Troaachs,  the,  ii.  254 ;  hotel,  256. 
Troaachs,  pass  of,  ii.  477. 
Trosanhs's  Hotel,  IL  474,  477,  479. 
Troubles,  ii.  560. 
Tnibner,  ii.  578. 
Tuckerman,  H.  T.,  1.  306. 
Tufton,  Sir  R.,  ii.  392. 
Tuubridge  Wells,  U.  218. 
Tapper,  Martm  Farquhar,  11.  208,  216, 

216,  218,  225,  227. 
Tupper,  Mrs.,  li.  215. 
Turner,  J.  M.  W.,  1.  537  ;  11.  206,  525, 

535,  592,  594,  597. 
Tamer,  Mr.  (of  Liverpool),  1  579. 
Tutors,  ii.  G7. 

Tweed,  the  River,  ii.  265,  275,  509. 
Twice-Told  Tales,  i.  617 ;  ii.  656. 
Twickenham,  ii.  198. 
Twining,  John  Maggott,  1.  496. 
Two  Briffgs  of  Ayr,  1.  246. 


Tyburn  tree,  11.  321. 
Tybumia,  U.  129. 
Tyler,  Wat,  U.  324. 
Tyne,  the  River,  ii.  276. 

UUswater,  U.  38,  39,  40. 
Ulverston,  iL  7,  9. 
Unitarian  Chapel,  a,  1.  483. 
Unitarians,  1.  483 ;  li.  334. 
Up  the  Thames,  1.  288. 
Uttozeter,  L  148, 162 ;  U.  532. 

Vagabonds,  i.  25. 

Vagrants,  ii.  59. 

ViSi,  Ben,  11.  472,  475. 

Val,  Du,  Mr.  (artist),  11. 644. 

Vale  of  the  Deadly  Nightshade,  ii.  14. 

Vale  of  St.  John,  U.  41,  61,  52. 

Vandyck,  Anthony,  1. 208 ;  U.  196,  20(\ 

499,  528,  529,  542. 
Vanity  of  Human  Withes,  The,  1. 160. 
Vansomer,  Paul,  11. 528. 
Velasouez,  James  Rodriguez  de  Silva,  y, 

Veiietian  gh»ss,  1.  112 ;  11.  538. 

Vennachar,  Lake,  11.  256. 

Venue,  Ben,  ii.  254,  476,  479,  480,  485. 

Venus,  statue  of,  IL  196 ;  picture  of,  20& 

Verdicts,  11. 116. 

Vermont  House,  ii.  243. 

Vernon  GaUery,  ii.  334. 

Verrio,  Anthony,  ii.  194. 

Vespasian,  coin  of,  ii.  182. 

Vice-Consul,  1.  52,  416. 

Victoria,  Queen,  her  Connecticat  visitor, 
1.  30  ;  chiims  to  rehitionship  to,  36 ;  iL 
134 ;  bust,  204;  statue, 247 ;  460 ;  open- 
ing of  Parliament  by,  582. 

Virgfl,  ii.  243. 

VoirUch,  Ben,  li.  472,  475. 

Wales,  1.  460. 

Wales,  North,  1.  57, 153,  602. 

Wales,  Prince  of,  ii.  335,  593. 

Walks,  1.  68,  519;  to  Rhyl,  534;  iL  20, 

23  72  3Gd. 
WalUce'  Sir  William,  ii.  257,  464,  46S^ 

482,  485. 
Walmesley,  Gilbert,  1. 166. 
Walpole,  Horace,  U.  622,  528. 
Walpole,  Sir  Robert,  11. 160, 160. 
Wappmg,  1.  272,  297. 
War,  L  399,  481,  493,  660;  U.  62,  179, 

379. 
Ward*  Lord,  ii.  337. 
Warren,  Samuel,  1.  561. 
Warren,  Sir  Peter,  1.  309. 
Warrington,  1.  446. 
Warwick,  i.  80,  85,  88;  memorials  o£ 

111 ;  Museum,  11.  657. 
Warwick  Castle,  i.  69,  85,  86,  580. 
Warwick,  Earls  of,  i.  93,  96,  102,  108L 

109;  iL  558. 
Warwick,  Guy  of,  i.  102. 
Warwickshire,  i.  60 ;  elms,  64,  93. 
Washmgton  Buildings,  1. 19. 
Washkigton,  the  cit^  of,  1.  303,  IL  277. 


INDEX. 


619 


Washingtoo,  Genenl,  i.  2T7,  481 ;  U.  119, 

588. 
Waahingtons,  the,  ii.  2T7. 
Watch,  a,  L  528. 
Waterloo,  Battle  of,  i.  304. 
Watt,  James,  ii  161,462. 
Watts,  Dr.,  U.  313. 
Waverley,  ii.  607. 

Wayside,  The,  i.  9, 12 ;  ii.  274,  363. 
Wear,  the  River,  ii.  514. 
Weather,  i.  576 ;  u.  339,  365,  470,  471. 
Webster,  Sir  Augustus,  ii.  222. 
Webster  famUy,  the,  ii.  220, 222 
Webster,  Lady,  ii.  219. 
Weddings,  i.  459  ;  Ii.  132,  412,  636.' 
Wellesley,  Marquis  of.  ii.  354. 
Wellington,  Duke  of,  ii.  54, 197 ;  statues, 

Weilington  Hotel,  ii.  307. 

Welsh,  i.  504,  529,  531. 

Wessyngtons,  De,  the,  ii.  277. 

West,  Benjamin,  i.  274 ;  ii.  196. 

Westmacott,  Bichard,  ii.  551. 

Westminster  Abbey,  i.  138, 221,  274,  301, 
306 ;  ii.  103, 104, 116, 131 ;  monuments, 
140 ;  cloisters,  151;  153,  160,  202,  279, 
339,425,565,599.    /Sm  Poets*  comer. 

Westmhister  Bridge,  ii.  155. 

Westminster  Hall,  ii.  150. 

Westminster,  Bfarquis  of,  i.  467. 

Westmoreland,  i.  57 ;  ii.  35,  56. 

Wharfe,  the  River,  ii.  397. 

Whealby,  Thomas,  i.  587. 

Wheatley,  (Americim  volunteer),  ii.  379. 

White,  Blanco,  i.  483. 

White,  Thomas,  ii.  57,  69. 

Whitechapel,  U.  91. 

Whitefoords,  the,  i.  245. 

Whitefrrars,  i.  301. 

Whitehall,  ii.  91, 104. 

Whitnash,  i.  76,  ii.  558. 

Whitsuntide,  i.  578 ;  U.  442,  448. 

Whitthigton,  Richard,  i.  387. 

Wickham,  William  of,  ii.  350. 

Wigan,  i.  467. 

Wigs,  i.  510. 

Wilberforce,  William,  i.  310. 

WUding,  Mr.  (Vice-Gonsul),  i.  52,  476, 
497,567  ;  ii.  171, 174,  207,  433,  534. 

WUdman,  Colonel,  ii.  435,  436,  441. 

Wilkle,  Sir  David,  i.  537  ;  ii.  335,  524. 

WiUdns,  Sergeant,  i.  379,  383,  386. 

Wilkinson,  Dr.,  ii.  600. 

William  I.,  the  Conqueror,  ii.  221. 

William  m.,  ii.  197,  261,  459. 

William  of  Deloraine,  ti.  506. 

Williams,  Miss  Anna,  i.  565. 

Williams,  Sir  William,  ii.  322. 


Wilmot,  Earl  of  Rochester,  i.  204. 

Windermere,  ii.  6,  17,  27,  56,  62,  250. 

Wine-vaults  of  the  London  Docks,  it 
316. 

Winter,  i.  549  ;  U.  177. 

Witham,  the  River,  i.  184, 189. 

Wolfe,  General,  U.  107,  475. 

Wolsey,  Cardinal,  U.  194,  362,  522. 

Wolvertiampton,  ii.  306. 

Women,  English,  i.  65,  66,  284,  332; 
American,  335;  in  almshouses,  346, 
357 ;  at  public  dinners,  390,  393^  ii. 
238 ;  English  and  American  compared, 
i.  390,  418,  436;  ii.  70;  carrying  bur. 
dens,  426  ;  literary,  432 ;  of  the  lowest 
classes,  576 ;  Scotch,  266 ;  health,  318. 

Wood,  Anthony*4-,ii.  357. 

WooiVt  Narrative  of  the  Campaign,  ii. 
183. 

Woodstock,  L  201. 

Woodstock,  New,  i.  201. 

Woodstock  Park,  i.  204. 

Woolner,  Thomas,  ii.  630. 

Woolwich,  i.  269. 

Wooton,  ii.  214. 

Worcester,  U.  164 ;  Cathedral,  166 ;  Nat- 
ural History  Society,  168. 

Wordsworth,  William,  house,  ii.  26; 
grave,  29,  51,  66 ;  monument,  33 ;  35, 
36,  38,  60,  68;  portrait,  141;  statue, 

Wordsworth,  Mrs.  William,  ii.  26,  28. 

Workhouses.    See  Almshouses. 

Wragg,  Charles,  ii.  133. 

Wrekjb,  the,  L  680. 

Wren,  Sir  Christopher,  1. 107. 

Wynn,  Sir  WatUns  Williams,  U.  192. 

Tacht  Inn,  U.  378. 

Taboos,  i.  37. 

Yankee,  a,  ii.  662. 

Yankees,  their  reputation,  ii.  369. 

Yesterday 8  wiih  Authors^  i.  9. 

Yew-tree,  the,  i.  77;  of  Eastham,  492, 

609 ;  of  Skipton,  ii.  394. 
York,  ii.  278,  281, 391,  400,  516. 
York  Cathedral,  ii.  277,  278,  294,  295, 

401,  402,  405  i  "  a  house  not  made  with 

hands,''  516 
York  chapter-house,  ii.  408. 
York  Column,  ii.  103,  664. 
York,  Duke  of,  U.  83. 
York,  faction  of,  U.  666. 
Yorkshire,  i.  117, 171. 

Zealand,  New,  ii.  36. 
Zoological  Gkffdens,  i   605  ;  ii.  98 ;  Bui" 
rey,  ii.  156.  ^ 


This  book  should  be  returned  to  . 
the  Library  on  or  before  the  last  date 
stamped  below. 

A  fine  is  incurred  by  retaining  it 
beyond  the  specified  time. 

Please  return  promptly. 


MI\Y20'!:SB 
DEC    6  71H 


"ANCELl 


!  ' 


JUN  0  7  1991 


19M 


D 


-^72  h 


