Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/| 



fil J?Vh i3. it 







HARVARD 
COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 



THE 



SCARLET LETTER 









/i ROMANCE 



BY 

NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 



ILLUSTRATED BY 
H. P. BARNES 



PHILADELPHIA 

HENRY ALTEMUS COMPANY 



* 






CO LLCS C 



OckVYItlGMT. X899, Xff 

THE CASSINO ART COMPANY 



PREFACE 

TO THE SECOND EDITION 

MUCH to the author's surprise, and 
(if he may say so without additional 
offence) considerably to his amusement, 
he finds that his sketch of official life, 
introductory to The Scarlet Letter, 
has created an unprecedented excitement 
in the respectable community immediately 
around him. It could hardly have been 
more violent, indeed, had he burned down 
the Custom-House, and quenched its last 
smoking ember in the blood of a certain 
venerable personage, against whom he is 
supposed to cherish a peculiar malevolence. 
As the public disapprobation would weigh 
very heavily on him, \vere he conscious of 
deserving it, the author begs leave to say, 
that he has carefully read over the intro- 
ductory pages, with a purpose to alter or 
expunge whatever might be found amiss, 
and to make the best reparation in his 

• •• 
HI 



PREFACE 

TO THE SECOND EDITION 

MUCH to the author's surprise, and 
(if he may say so without additional 
offence) considerably to his amusement, 
he finds that his sketch of official life, 
introductory to The Scarlet Letter, 
has created an unprecedented excitement 
in the respectable community immediately 
around him. It could hardly have been 
more violent, indeed, had he burned down 
the Custom-House, and quenched its last 
smoking ember in the blood of a certain 
venerable personage, against whom he is 
supposed to cherish a peculiar malevolence. 
As the public disapprobation would weigh 
very heavily on him, 'were he conscious of 
deserving it, the author begs leave to say, 
that he has carefully read over the intro- 
ductory pages, with a purpose to alter or 
expunge whatever might be found amiss, 
and to make the best reparation in his 

• ■ • 
HI 



Iv Preface 

power for the atrocities of which he has 
been adjudged guilty. But it appears to 
him, that the only remarkable features of 
the sketch are its frank and genuine good- 
humour, and the general accuracy with 
which he has conveyed his sincere impres- 
sions of the characters therein described. 
As to enmity» or ill-feeling of any kind, per- 
sonal or political, he utterly disclaims such 
motives. The sketch might, perhaps, have 
been wholly omitted, without loss to the 
public, or detriment to the book ; but, 
having undertaken to write it, he conceives 
that it could not have been done in a better 
or a kindlier spirit, nor, so far as his abili- 
ties availed, with a livelier effect of truth. 

The author is constrained, therefore, to 
republish his introductory sketch without 
the change of a word. 

Salem, March 30, 1850. 



F 



CONTENTS 



The Custom-House. — Introductorv .... i 

L Tmb Prison-Door 79 

IL The Markbt-Place 83 

JIL The Recognition 105 

IV. The Interview tij 

V. Hester at her Needle 136 

VI. Pearl 15S 

VIL The Governor's Hall 175 

VIIL The Elf-Chilu and the Minister . . 190 

IX. The Leech 108 

K. The Leech and his Patient .... i>8 

XL The Interior of a Heart 147 

xn. The Minister's Vigil a6i 

Xin. Another View of Hf.ster 883 

XIV. Hester and the Physician 299 

'. Hester and Pearl 31J 

. XVI. A Forest Walk 324 

^XVIL The Pastor and his Parishioner . . 337 



vi Contents 

CtCAT. FAGB 

XVIII. A Flood of Sunshine 356 

XIX, The Child at the Brook-side . . . 368 

XX. The Minister in a Maze 382 

XXI. The New England Holiday .... 403 

XXII. The Procession 421 

XXIII. The Revelation of the Scarlet Letter 442 

XXIV. Conclusion 458 



THE CUSTOM-HOUSE 



INTRODUCTORY TO "THE SCARLET LETTER" 



IT is a little remarkable, that — though 
disinclined to talk overmuch of myself 
and my affairs at the fireside, and to my per- 
sonal friends — an autobiographical impulse 
should twice in my life have taken posses- 
sion of me, in addressing the public. The 
first time was three or four years since, 
when I favoured the reader — inexcusably, 
and for no earthly reason, that either the 
indulgent reader or the intrusive author 
could imagine — with a description of my 
way of life in the deep quietude of an Old 
Manse. And now — because, beyond my 
deserts, I was happy enough to find a 
listener or two on the former occasion — I 
again seize the public by the button, and 
talk of my three years' experience in a Cus- 
tom-House. The example of the famous 
"P. P., Clerk of this Parish," was never 
more faithfully followed. The truth seems 

1 



2 The Scarlet Letter 

to be, however, that, when he casts his 
leaves forth upon the wind, the author ad- 
dresses, not the many who will fling aside 
his volume, or never take it up, but the few 
who will understand him, better than most 
of his schoolmates and lifemates. Some 
authors, indeed, do far more than this, and 
indulge themselves in such confidential 
depths of revelation as could fittingly be 
addressed, only and exclusively, to the 
one heart and mind of perfect sympathy ; 
as if the printed book, thrown at large 
on the wide world, were certain to find 
out the divided segment of the writer's 
own nature, and complete his circle of 
existence by bringing him into commun- 
ion with it. It is scarcely decorous, how- 
ever, to speak all, even where we speak 
impersonally. But — as thoughts are fro- 
zen and utterance benumbed, unless the 
speaker stand in some true relation with 
his audience — it may be pardonable to 
imagine that a friend, a kind and appre- 
hensive, though not the closest friend, is 
listening to our talk ; and then, a native 
reserve being thawed by this genial con- 
sciousness, we may prate of the circum- 
stances that lie around us, and even of 
ourself, but still keep the inmost Me 



The Custom-Honse 3 

behind its veil. To this extent and within 
these limits, an author, methinks, may be 
autobiographical, without violating either 
the reader's rights or his own. 

It will be seen, likewise, that this Custom- 
House sketch has a certain propriety, of 
a kind always recognised in literature, as 
explaining how a large portion of the fol- 
lowing pages came into my possession, and 
as offering proofs of the authenticity of a 
narrative therein contained. This, in fact, 
— a desire to put myself in my true posi- 
tion as editor, or very little more, of the 
most prolix among the tales that make up 
my volume, — this, and no other, is my 
true reason for assuming a personal rela- 
tion with the public. In accomplishing the 
main purpose, it has appeared allowable, 
by a few extra touches, to give a faint rep- 
resentation of a mode of life not hereto- 
fore described, together with some of the 
characters that move in it, among whom 
the author happened to make one. 

In my native town of Salem, at the 
head of what, half a century ago, in the 
days of old King Derby, was a bustling 
wharf, — but which is now burdened with 
decayed \vopden ^rarehouses, and exhibits 



The Scarlet Letter 



few or no symptoms of commerical life ; 
except, perhaps, a bark or brig, half-way 
down its melancholy length, discharging 
hides ; or, nearer at hand, a Nova Scotia 
schooner, pitching out her cargo of fire- 
wood, — at the head, I say, of this dilapi- 
dated wharf, which the tide often overflows, 
and along which, at the base and in the 
rear of the row of buildings, the track of 
many languid years is seen in a bcfrder of 




unthrifty grass, — here, with a view from 
its front windows adown this not very en- 
livening prospect, and thence across the 
harbour, stands a spacious edifice of brick. 
From the loftiest point of its roof, dur- 
ing precisely three and a half hours of 
each forenoon, floats or droops, in breeze 
or calm, the banner of the republic ; but 
with the thirteen stripes turned vertically, 
instead of horizontally, and thus indicating ■ 



Tie Custom-House J 

that a civil, and not a military post of 
Uncle Sam's government, is here estab- 
lished. Its front is ornamented with a por- 
tico of half a dozen wooden pillars, sup- 
porting a balcony, beneath which a flight 
of wide granite steps descends towards 
the street. Over the entrance hovers an 




enormous specimen of the American eagle, 
with outspread wings, a shield before her 
breast, and, if I recollect aright, a bunch 
of intermingled thunderbolts and barbed 
■, arrows in each claw. With the customary 
infirmity of temper that characterises this 
unhappy fowl, she appears, by the fierce- 
ness of her beak and eye and the general 



r 



6 The Scarlet Letter 

truculency of her attitude, to threaten 
mischief to the inoffensive community ; 
and especially to warn all citizens, careful 
of their safety, against intruding on the 
premises which she overshadows with her 
wings. Nevertheless, vixenly as she looks, 
many people are seeking, at this very 
moment, to shelter themselves under the 
wing of the federal eagle ; imagining, I 
presume, that her bosom has all the soft- 
ness and snugness of an eider-down pillow. 
But she has no great tenderness, even in 
her best of moods, and, sooner or later, — 
of tener soon than late, — is apt to fling off 
her nestlings with a scratch of her claw, a 
dab of her beak, or a rankling wound from 
her barbed arrows. 

The pavement round about the above- 
described edifice — which we may as well 
name at once as the Custom-House of the 
port — has grass enough growing in its 
chinks to show that it has not, of late days, 
been worn by any multitudinous resort of 
business. In some months of the year, 
however, there often chances a forenoon 
when affairs move onward with a live- 
lier tread. Such occasions might remind 
the elderly citizen of that period, before 
the last war with England, when Salem 






The Custom-House 7 

was a port by itself ; not scorned, as she 
is now, by her own merchants and ship- 
owners, who permit her wharves to crumble 
to ruin, while their ventures go to swell. 




needlessly and imperceptibly, the mighty 
flood of commerce at New York or Boston. 
On some such morning, when three or four 
vessels happen to have arrived at once — 
usually from Africa 
or South America, — 
or to be on the verge 
of their departure 
thitherward, there is 
a sound of frequent 
feet, passing briskly 
up and down the 
granite steps. Here, 
before his own wife 
has greeted him, you 
may greet the sea- 
flushed ship-master, just in port, with his 




The Scarlet Letter 



vessel's papers under his arm in a tarnished 
tin box. Here, too, comes his owner, 
cheerful or sombre, gracious or in the sulks, 
accordingly as his scheme of the now ac- 
complished voyage has been realised in 
merchandise that will readily be turned to 
gold, or has buried him under a bulk of in- 
commodities, such as nobody will care to 
rid him of. Here, likewise, — the germ of 
the wrinkled-browed, grizzly-bearded, care- 
worn merchant, — we have the smart 
young clerk, who gets the taste of trafKc 
as a wolf-cub does of blood, and already 
sends adventures in his master's ships, 
when he had better be sailing mimic boats 
upon a mill-pond. Another figure in the 
scene is the out- 
ward-bound sailor, 
in quest of a pro- 
tection ; or the re- 
cently arrived one, 
pale and feeble, 
seeking a passport 
the hospital. 
_ Nor must we for- 
get the captains 
of the rusty little 
schooners that 
liring firewood from the British provinces; 




The Custom-House 9 

a rough-looking set of .tarpaulins, without 
the alertness of the Yankee aspect, but 
contributing an item of no slight impor- 
tance to our decaying trade. 

Cluster all these individuals together, as 
they sometimes were, with other miscella- 
neous ones to diversify the group, and, for 
the time being, it made the Custom-House 
a stirring scene. More frequently, how- 
ever, on ascending the steps, you would 
discern — in the entry, if it were summer 
time, or in their appropriate rooms, if 
wintry or inclement weather — a row of 
venerable figures, sitting in old-fashioned 
chairs, which were tipped on their hind 
legs back against the wall. Oftentimes 
they were asleep, but occasionally might be 
heard talking together, in voices between 
speech and a snore, and with that lack of 
energy that distinguishes the occupants of 
alms-houses, and all other human beings 
who depend for subsistence on charity, on 
monopolised labour, or any thing else but 
their own independent exertions. These 
old gentlemen — seated, like Matthew, at 
the receipt of custom, but not very liable 
to be summoned thence, like him, for 
apostolic errands — were Custom-Hou3^ 
officers. 



The Scarlet Letter 



Furthermore, on . the left hand as you 
enter the front door is a certain room or 
office, about fifteen feet square, and of a 
lofty height ; with two of its arched win- 
dows command- 
mg a view of the 
aforesaid dilapi- 
dated wharf, and 
the third look- 
ing across a nar- 
row lane, and 
along a portion 
of Derby Street. 
All three give 
glimpses of the 
shops of grocers, 
block-makers, 
slop sellers, and 
ship chandlers; 
around the doors 
of which are gen- 
erally to be seen, 
laughing and gossiping, clusters of old 
salts, and such other wharf-rats as haunt 
the Wapping of a seaport. The room 
itself is cobwebbed, and dingy with old 
paint ; its floor is strewn with grey sand, 
in a fashion that has elsewhere fallen into 
long disuse; aiid it is easy to conclude, 




The Custom-House 



from the general slovenliness of the place, 
that this is a sanctuary into which woman- 
kind, with her tools of magic, the broom 
and mop, has very infrequent access. In 
the way of furniture, there is a stove with 
a voluminous funnel ; an old pine desk, 
with a three-legged stool beside it ; two or 
three wooden-bottom chairs, exceedingly 
decrepit and infirm ; and, — not to forget 
the library, — on some shelves, a score or 
two of volumes of the Acts of Congress, 
and a bulky Digest of the Revenue Laws. 
A tin pipe ascends 
through the ceiling 
and forms a medium 
of vocal communi 
cation with other 
parts of the edifice 
And here, some six 
months ago, — pac j . j 
ing from corner to 
corner, or lounging 
on the long-legged 
stool, with his elbow 
on the desk, and 
his eyes wandcnng up and down the 
columns of the mommg newspaper — you 
might have recognised honoured reader; 
the same individual who welcomed you into 




td The Scarlet Letter 

his cheery little study, where the sunshine 
glimmered so pleasantly through the willow 
branches, on the western side of the Old 
Manse. But now, should you go thither to 
seek him, you would inquire in vain for the 
Loco-foco Surveyor. The besom of reform 
has swept him out of office ; and a worthier 
successor wears his dignity and pockets 
his emoluments. 

This old town of Salem — my native 
place, though I have dwelt much away 
from it, both in boyhood and maturer years 
— possesses, or did possess, a hold on my 
affections, the force of which I have never 
realised during my seasons of actual resi- 
dence here. Indeed, so far as its physical 
aspect is concerned, with its flat, unvaried 
surface, covered chiefly with wooden houses, 
few or none of which pretend to architec- 
tural beauty, — its irregularity, which is 
neither picturesque nor quaint, but only 
tame, — its long and lazy street, lounging 
wearisomely through the whole extent of 
the peninsula, with Gallows Hill and New 
Guinea at one end, and a view of the alms- 
house at the other, — such being the feat- 
ures of my native town, it would be quite 
as reasonable to form a sentimental attach- 
ment to a disarranged checkerboard. And 



\ 



The Custom-House 13 

yet, though invariably happiest elsewhere, 
there is within me a feeling for old Salem, 
which, in lack of a better phrase, I must be 
content to call affection. The sentiment 
is probably assignable to the deep and aged 
roots which my family has struck into the 
soil. It is now nearly two centuries and 
a quarter since the original Briton, the 
earliest emigrant of my name, made his ap- 
pearance in the wild and forest-bordered 
settlement, which has since become a city. 
And here his descendants have been born 
and died, and have mingled their earthy 
substance with the soil ; until no small 
portion of it must necessarily be akin to 
the mortal frame wherewith, for a little 
while, I walk the streets. In part, there- 
fore, the attachment which I speak of is 
the mere sensuous sympathy of dust for 
dust. Few of my countrymen can know 
what it is ; nor, as frequent transplanta- 
tion is perhaps better for the stock, need 
they consider it desirable to know. 

But the sentiment has likewise its moral 
quality. The figure of that first ancestor, 
invested by family tradition with a dim 
and dusky grandeur, was present to my 
boyish imagination, as far back as I can 
reiiietnber. It still haunts me, and induces 



14 The Scarlet Letter 

a sort of home-feeling with the past, which 
I scarcely claim in reference to the present 
phase of the town. I seem to have a 
stronger claim to a residence here on ac- 
count of this grave, bearded, sable-cloaked, 
and steeple-crowned progenitor, — who 
came so early, with his Bible and his 
sword, and trode the unworn street with 
such a stately port, and made so large a 
figure, as a man of war and peace, — a 
stronger claim than for myself, whose name 
is seldom heard and my face hardly known. 
He was a soldier, legislator, judge ; he was 
a ruler in the Church ; he had all the Puri- 
tanic traits, both good and evil. He was 
likewise a bitter persecutor ; as witness the 
Quakers, who have remembered him in 
their histories, and relate an incident of 
his hard severity towards a woman of their 
sect, which will last longer, it is to be 
feared, than any record of his better deeds, 
although these were many. His son, too, 
inherited the persecuting spirit, and made 
himself so conspicuous in the martyrdom 
of the witches, that their blood may fairly 
be said to have left a stain upon him. So 
deep a stain, indeed, that his old dry bones, 
in the Charter-Street burial-ground, must 
§tiU retain it, if they have not grumbled 



The Custom-House 15 

utterly to dust ! I know not whether 
these ancestors of mine bethought them- 
selves to repent, and ask pardon of Heaven 
for their cruelties ; or whether they are now 
groaning under the heavy consequences 
of them, in another state of being. At 
all events, I, the present writer, as their 
representative, hereby take shame upon 
myself for their s^kes, and pray that any 
curse incurred by them — as I have heard, 
and as the dreary and unprosperous con- 
dition of the race, for many a long year 
back, would argue to exist — may be now 
and henceforth removed. 

Doubtless, however, either of these stern 
and black-browed Puritans would have 
thought it quite a sufficient retribution for 
his sins, that, after so long a lapse of years, 
the old trunk of the family tree, with so 
much venerable moss upon it, should have 
borne, as its topmost bough, an idler like 
myself. No aim, that I have ever cherished, 
would they recognise as laudable ; no suc- 
cess of mine — if my life, beyond its do- 
mestic scope, had ever been brightened by 
success — would they deem otherwise than 
worthless, if not positively disgraceful. 
" What is he f " murmurs one grey shadow 
of my forefathers to the other. " A writer 



l6 The Scarlet Letter 

of story-books ! What kind of a business 
in life, — what mode of glorifying God, or 
being serviceable to mankind in his day 
and generation, — may that be ? Why, the 
degenerate fellow might as well have been 
a fiddler ! " Such are the compliments 
bandied between my great-grandsires and 
myself, across the gulf of time ! And yet, 
let them scorn me as they will, strong traits 
of their nature have intertwined them- 
selves with mine. 

Planted deep, in the town's earliest in- 
fancy and childhood, by these two earnest 
and energetic men, the race has ever since 
subsisted here ; always, too, in respectabil- 
ity ; never, so far as I have known, dis- 
graced by a single unworthy member ; but 
seldom or never, on the other hand, after 
the first two generations, performing any 
memorable deed, or so much as putting 
forward a claim to public notice. Grad- 
ually, they have sunk almost out of sight ; 
as old houses, here and there about the 
streets, get covered half-way to the eaves 
by the accumulation of new soil. From 
father to son, for above a hundred years, 
they followed the sea ; a grey-headed ship- 
master, in each generation, retiring from 
the quarter-deck to the homestead, while a 



\ 



Tlu Custom-House \f 

boy of fourteen took the hereditary place 
before the mast, confronting the salt spray 
and the gale, which had blustered against 
his sire and grandsire. The boy, also, in 
due time, passed from the forecastle to the 
cabin, spent a tempestuous manhood, and 
returned from his world-wanderings, to 
grow old, and die, and mingle his dust with 
the natal earth. This long connection of 
a family with one spot, as its place of birth 
and burial, creates a kindred between the 
human being and the locality, quite inde- 
pendent of any charm in the scenery or 
moral circumstances that surround him. 
It is not love, but instinct. The new 
inhabitant — who came himself from a 
'foreign land, or whose father or grandfather 
came — has little claim to be called a 
Salemite ; he has no conception of the 
oyster-like tenacity with which an old 
settler, over whom his third century is 
creeping, clings to the spot where his suc- 
cessive generations have been imbedded. 
It is no matter that the place is joyless for 
him ; that he is weary of the old wooden 
houses, the mud and dust, the dead level of 
site and sentiment, the chill east wind, and 
the chillest of social atmospheres ; — all 
these^ and whatever faults besides he may 



1 8 The Scarlet Letter 

see or imagine, are nothing to the purpose. 
The spell survives, and just as powerfully 
as if the natal spot were an earthly paradise. 
So has it been in my case. I felt it almost 
as a destiny to make Salem my home ; so 
that the mould of features and cast of 
character which had all along been familiar 
here — ever, as one representative of the 
race lay down in his grave, another assum- 
ing, as it were, his sentry-march along the 
Main Street — might still in my little day 
be seen and recognised in the old town. 
Nevertheless, this very sentiment is an 
evidence that the connection, which has 
become an unhealthy one, should at last 
be severed. Human nature will not 
flourish, any more than a potato, if it be * 
planted and replanted, for too long a series 
of generations, in the same worn-out soil. 
My children have had other birthplaces, 
and, so far as their fortunes may be within 
my control, shall strike their roots into un- 
accustomed earth. 

On emerging from the Old Manse, it 
was chiefly this strange, indolent, unjoyous 
attachment for my native town, that 
brought me to fill a place in Uncle Sam's 
brick edifice, when I might as well, or 
better, have gone somewhere else. My 



I 



The Custom-House 19 

doom was on me. It was not the first time, 
nor the second, that I had gone away, — 
as it seemed, permanently, — but yet re- 
turned, like the bad half-penny ; or as if 
Salem were for me the inevitable centre of 
the universe. So, one fine morning, I 
ascended the flight of granite steps, with 
the President's commission in my pocket, 
and was introduced to the corps of gentle- 
men who were to aid me in my weighty 
responsibility, as chief executive officer of 
the Custom-House. 

I doubt greatly — or rather, I do not 
doubt at all — whether any public func- 
tionary of the United States, either in the 
civil or military line, has ever had such 
a patriarchal body of veterans under his 
orders as myself. The whereabouts of the 
Oldest Inhabitant was at once settled, 
when I looked at them. For upwards of 
twenty years before this epoch, the in- 
dependent position of the Collector had 
kept the Salem Custom-House out of the 
whirlpool of political vicissitude, which 
makes the tenure of office generally so 
fragile. A soldier, — New England's most 
distinguished soldier, — he stood firmly 
on the pedestal of his gallant services ; 
and, himself secure in the wise liberality 



20 The Scarlet Letter 

of the successive administrations through 
which he had held office, he had been the 
safety of his subordinates in many an 
hour of danger and heart-quake. General 
Miller was radically conservative; a man 
over whose kindly nature habit had no 
slight influence ; attaching himself strong- 
ly to familiar faces, and with difficulty 
moved to change, even when change might 
have brought unquestionable improvement. 
Thus, on taking charge of my department, 
I found few but aged men. They were 
ancient sea-captains, for the most part, 
who, after being tost on every sea, and 
standing up sturdily against life's tem- 
pestuous blast, had finally drifted into this 
quiet nook ; where, with little to disturb 
them, except the periodical terrors of a 
Presidential election, they one and all 
acquired a new lease of existence. Though 
by no means less liable than their fellow- 
men to age and infirmity, they had evi- 
dently some talisman or other that kept 
death at bay. Two or three of their num- 
ber, as I was assured, being gouty and 
rheumatic, or perhaps bed-ridden, never 
dreamed of making their appearance at 
the Custom-House, during a large part of 
the year ; but, after a torpid winter, would 



The Custom-House 2i 

creep out into the warm sunshine of May 
or June, go lazily about what they termed 
duty, and, at their own leisure and con- 
venience, betake themselves to bed again. 
I must plead guilty to the charge of 
abbreviating the official breath of more 
than one of these venerable servants of 
the republic. They were allowed, on my 
representation, to rest from their arduous 
labours, and soon afterwards — as if their 
sole principle of life had been zeal for 
their country's service ; as I verily believe 
it was — withdrew to a better world. It 
is a pious consolation to me, that, through 
my interference, a sufficient space was 
allowed them for repentance of the evil 
and corrupt practices, into which, as a 
matter of course, every Custom-House 
officer must be supposed to fall. Neither 
the front nor the back entrance of the 
Custom-House opens on the road to Para- 
dise. 

The greater part of my officers were 
Whigs. It was well for their venerable 
brotherhood, that the new Surveyor was 
not a politician, and, though a faithful 
Democrat in principle, neither received 
nor held his office with any reference to 
political services. Had it been otherwise, 



22 The Scarlet Letter 

— had an active politician been put into 
this influential post, to assume the easy 
task of making head against a Whig Col- 
lector, whose infirmities withheld him from 
the personal administration of his office, 

— hardly a man of the old corps would 
have drawn the breath of official life, 
within a month after the exterminating 
angel had come up the Custom-House 
steps. According to the received code in 
such matters, it would have been nothing 
short of duty, in a politician, to bring 
every one of those white heads under the 
axe of the guillotine. It was plain enough 
to discern, that the old fellows dreaded 
some such discourtesy at my hands. It 
pained, and at the same time amused me, 
to behold the terrors that attended my 
advent ; to see a furrowed cheek, weather- 
beaten by half a century of storm, turn 
ashy pale at the glance of so harmless an 
individual as myself ; to detect, as one or 
another addressed me, the tremor of a 
voice, which, in long-past days, had been 
wont to bellow through a speaking-trumpet, 
hoarsely enough to frighten Boreas himself 
to silence. They knew, these excellent 
old persons, that, by all established rule, 

— and, as regarded some of them, weighed 



I 
k 



The Custom-House 23 

by their own lack of efficiency for busi- 
ness, — they ought to have given place to 
younger men, more orthodox in politics, 
and altogether fitter than themselves to 
serve our common Uncle. I knew it too, 
but could never quite find in my heart 
to act upon the knowledge. Much and 
deservedly to my own discredit, therefore, 
and considerably to the detriment of my 
official conscience, they continued, during 
my incumbency, to creep about the 
wharves, and loiter up and down the Cus- 
tom-House steps. They spent a good deal 
of time, also, asleep in their accustomed 
comers, with their chairs tilted back 
against the wall ; awaking, however, once 
or twice in a forenoon, to bore one another 
with the several thousandth repetition of 
old sea-stories, and mouldy jokes, that had 
grown to be pass-words and countersigns 
among them. 

The discovery was soon made, I imagine, 
that the new Surveyor had no great harm 
in him. So, with lightsome hearts, and 
the happy consciousness of being usefully , 
employed, — in their own behalf, at least, 
if not for our beloved country, — these 
good old gentlemen went through the 
various formalities of office. Sagaciously, 



24 The Scarlet Letter 

under their spectacles, did they peep into 
the holds of vessels ! Mighty was their 
fuss about little matters, and marvellous, 
sometimes, the obtuseness that allowed 
greater ones to slip between their fingers 1 
Whenever such a mischance occurred, — 
when a wagon-load of valuable merchandise 
had been smuggled ashore, at noonday, 
perhaps, and directly beneath their unsus- 
picious noses, — nothing could exceed the 
vigilance and alacrity with which they pro- 
ceeded to lock, and double-lock, and secure 
with tape and sealing-wax, all the avenues 
of the delinquent vessel. Instead of a 
reprimand for their previous negligence, 
the case seemed rather to require an eulo- 
gium on their praiseworthy caution, after 
the mischief had happened ; a grateful 
recognition of the promptitude of their 
zeal, the moment that there was no longer 
any remedy ! 

Unless people are more than commonly 
disagreeable, it is my foolish habit to con- 
tract a kindness for them. The better 
part of my companion's character, if it 
have a better part, is that which usually 
comes uppermost in my regard, and forms 
the type whereby I recognise the man. 
As most of these old Custom-House officers 



The Custom-House 2$ 

had good traits, and as my position in 
reference to them, being paternal and pro- 
tective, was favourable to the growth of 
friendly sentiments, I soon grew to like 
them all. It was pleasant in the summer 
forenoons, — when the fervent heat, that 
almost liquefied the rest of the human 
family, merely communicated a genial 
warmth to their half -torpid systems, — it 
was pleasant to hear them chatting in the 
back entry, a row of them all tipped against 
the wall, as usual ; while the frozen wit- 
ticisms of past generations were thawed 
out, and came bubbling with laughter from 
their lips. Externally, the jollity of aged 
men has much in common with the mirth 
of children ; the intellect, any more than 
a deep sense of humour, has little to do 
with the matter ; it is, with both, a gleam 
that plays upon the surface, and imparts a 
sunny and cheery aspect alike to the green 
branch, and grey, mouldering trunk. In 
one case, however, it is real sunshine ; in 
the other, it more resembles the phos- 
phorescent glow of decaying wood. 

It would be sad injustice, the reader 
must understand, to represent all my ex- 
cellent old friends as in their dotage. In 
the first place, my coadjutors were not 



26 The Scarlet Letter 

invariably old ; there were men among 
them in their strength and prime, of 
marked ability and energy, and altogether 
superior to the sluggish and dependent 
mode of life on which their evil stars had 
cast them. Then, moreover, the white 
locks of age were sometimes found to be 
the thatch of an intellectual tenement in 
good repair. But, as respects the major- 
ity of my corps of veterans, there will be 
no wrong done, if I characterise them gen- 
erally as a set of wearisome old souls, who 
had gathered nothing worth preservation 
from their varied experience of life. They 
seemed to have flung away all the golden 
grain of practical wisdom, which they had 
enjoyed so many opportunities of harvest- 
ing, and most carefully to have stored their 
memories with the husks. They spoke 
with far more interest and unction of their 
morning's breakfast, or yesterday's, to- 
day's, or to-morrow's dinner, than of the 
shipwreck of forty or fifty years ago, and 
all the world's wonders which they had 
witnessed with their youthful eyes. 

The father of the Custom-House — the 
patriarch, not only of this little squad of 
officials, but, I am bold to say, of the re- 
spectable body of tide-waiters all over the 



Tfu Custom-House 



27 



United States — was a certain permanent 
Inspector. He might truly be termed a 
legitimate son of the revenue system,' dyed 
in the wool, or rather, born in the purple ; 
since his sire, a Revolutionary colonel, and 
formerly collector of the port, had created 
an office for him, and appointed him to fill 




it, at a period of the early ages which few 
living men can now remember. This In- 
spector, when 1 first knew him, was a man 
of fourscore years, or thereabouts, and cer- 
tainly one of the most wonderful specimens 
of winter-green that you would be likely 
to discover in a Ufetime's search. With 
his florid cheek, his compact figure, smartly 



28 The Scarlet Letter 

arrayed in a bright-buttoned blue coat, his 
brisk and vigorous step, and his hale and 
hearty aspect, altogether, he seemed — not 
young, indeed — but a kind of new con- 
trivance of Mother Nature in the shape 
of man, whom age and infirmity had no 
business to touch. His voice and laugh, 
which perpetually reechoed through the 
Custom-House, had nothing of the tremu- 
lous quaver and cackle of an old man's 
utterance ; they came strutting out of his 
lungs, like the crow of a cock, or the blast 
of a clarion. Looking at him merely as an 
animal, — and there was very little else to 
look at, — he was a most satisfactory ob- 
ject, from the thorough healthfulness and 
wholesomeness of his system, and his ca- 
pacity, at that extreme age, to enjoy all, 
or nearly all, the delights which he had 
ever aimed at, or conceived of. The care- 
less security of his life in the Custom- 
House, on a regular income, and with but 
slight and infrequent apprehensions of re- 
moval, had no doubt contributed to make 
time pass lightly over him. The original 
and more potent causes, however, lay 
in the rare perfection of his animal na- 
ture, the moderate proportion of intellect, 
and the very trifling admixture of moral and 



The Custom-House 29 

spiritual ingredients; these latter qualities, 
indeed, being in barely enough measure to 
keep the old gentleman from walking on all- 
fours. He possessed no power of thought, 
no depth of feeling, no troublesome sensi- 
bilities; nothing, in short, but a few com- 
monplace instincts, which, aided by the 
cheerful temper that grew inevitably out 
of his physical well-being, did duty very 
respectably, and to general acceptance, in 
lieu of a heart. He had been the husband 
of three wives, all long since dead; the 
father of twenty children, most of whom, 
at every age of childhood or maturity, had 
likewise returned to dust. Here, one would 
suppose, might have been sorrow enough 
to imbue the sunniest disposition, through 
and through, with a sable tinge. Not so 
with our old Inspector! One brief sigh 
sufficed to carry off the entire burden of 
these dismal reminiscences. The next 
moment, he was as ready for sport as any 
unbreeched infant; far readier than the 
Collector's junior clerk, who, at nineteen 
years, was much the elder and graver man 
of the two. 

I used to watch and study this patri- 
archal personage with, I think, livelier cu- 
riosity than any other form of humanity 



30 The ^Scarlet Letter 

there presented to my notice. He was, 
in truth, a rare phenomenon; so perfect in 
one point of view; so shallow, so delusive, 
so impalpable, such an absolute nonentity, 
in every other. My conclusion was that 
he had no soul, no heart, no mind ; nothing, 
as I have already said, but instincts; and 
yet, withal, so cunningly had the few mate- 
rials of his character been put together, 
that there was no painful perception of 
deficiency, but, on my part, an entire con- 
tentment with what I found in him. It 
might be difficult — and it was so — to 
conceive how he should exist hereafter, so 
earthy and sensuous did he seem; but 
surely his existence here, admitting that 
it was to terminate with his last breath, 
had been not unkindly given; with no 
higher moral responsibilities than the 
beasts of the field, but with a larger scope 
of enjoyment than theirs, and with all their 
blessed immunity from the dreariness and 
duskiness of age. 

One point, in which he had vastly the 
advantage over his four-footed brethren, 
was his ability to recollect the good din- 
ners which it had made no small portion 
of the happiness of his life to eat. His 
gourmandism was a highly agreeable trait; 



\ 



The Custom-House 31 

and to hear him talk of roast-meat was as 
appetising as a pickle or an oyster. As he 
possessed no higher attribute, and neither 
sacrificed nor vitiated any spiritual endow- 
ment by devoting all his energies and 
ingenuities to subserve the delight and 
profit of his maw, it always pleased and 
satisfied me to hear him expatiate on fish, 
poultry, and butcher's meat, and the most 
eligible methods of preparing them for the 
table. His reminiscences of good cheer, 
however ancient the date of the actual 
banquet, seemed to bring the savour of pig 
or turkey under one's very nostrils. There 
were flavours on his palate, that had lin- 
gered there not less than sixty or seventy 
ye^rs, and were still apparently as fresh 
as that of the mutton-chop which he had 
just devoured for his breakfast. I have 
heard him smack his lips over dinners, every 
guest at which, except himself, had long 
been food for worms. It was marvellous 
to observe how the ghosts of bygone meals 
were continually rising up before him; not 
in anger or retribution, but as if grateful 
for his former appreciation, and seeking to 
repudiate an endless series of enjoyment, 
at once shadowy and sensual. A tender- 
loin of beef, a hind-quarter of veal, a spare- 



32 The Scarlet Letter 

rib of pork, a particular chicken, or a 
remarkably praiseworthy turkey, which 
had perhaps adorned his board in the days 
of the elder Adams, would be remembered ; 
while all the subsequent experience of our 
race, and all the events that brightened or 
darkened his individual career, had gone 
over him with as little permanent effect as 
the passing breeze. The chief tragic event 
of the old man's life, so far as I could 
judge, was his mishap with a certain goose, 
which lived and died some twenty or forty 
years ago; a goose of most promising fig- 
ure, but which, at table, proved so invet- 
erately tough that the carving-knife would 
make no impression on its carcass ; and it 
could only be divided with an axe and 
handsaw. 

But it is time to quit this sketch; on 
which, however, I should be glad to dwell 
at considerably more length, because, of 
all men whom I have ever known, this in- 
dividual was fittest to be a Custom-House 
officer. Most persons, owing to causes 
which I may not have space to hint at, 
suffer moral detriment from this peculiar 
mode of life. The old Inspector was in- 
capable of it, and, were he to continue in 
office to the end of time, would be just as 



The Custom-House 33 

good as he was then, and sit down to din- 
ner with just as good an appetite. 

There is one likeness, without which my 
gallery of Custom-House portraits would 
be strangely incomplete; but which my 
comparatively few opportunities for obser- 
vation enable me to sketch only in the 
merest outline. It is that of the Collec- 
tor, our gallant old General, who, after his 
brilliant military service, subsequently to 
which he had ruled over a wild Western 
territory, had come hither, twenty years 
before, to spend the decline of his varied 
and honourable life. The brave soldier had 
already numbered, nearly or quite, his 
threescore years and ten, and was pursu- 
ing the remainder of his earthly march, 
burdened with infirmities which even the 
martial music of his own spirit-stirring 
recollections could do little towards light- 
ening. The step was palsied now, that 
had been foremost in the charge. It was 
only with the assistance of a servant, and 
by leaning his hand heavily on the iron 
balustrade, that he could slowly and pain- 
fully ascend the Custom-House steps, and, 
with a toilsome progress across the floor, 
attain his customary chair beside the fire- 
place. There he used to sit, gazing with 



34 T^he Scarlet Letter 

a somewhat dim serenity of aspect at the 
figures that came and went ; amid the 
rustle of papers, the administering of oaths, 
the discussion of business, and the casual 
talk of the office; all which sounds and 
circumstances seemed but indistinctly to 
impress his senses, and hardly to make 
their way into his inner sphere of con- 
templation. His countenance, in this re- 
pose, was mild and kindly. If his notice 
was sought, an expression of courtesy and 
interest gleamed out upon his features ; 
proving that there was light within him, 
and that it was only the outward medium 
of the intellectual lamp that obstructed the 
rays in their passage. The closer you 
penetrated to the substance of his mind, 
the sounder it appeared. When no longer 
called upon to speak, or listen, either of 
which operations cost him an evident ef- 
fort, his face would briefly subside into its 
former not uncheerful quietude. It was 
not painful to behold this look ; for, though 
dim, it had not the imbecility of decaying 
age. The framework of his nature, origi- 
nally strong and massive, was not yet crum- 
bled into ruin. 

To observe and define his character, 
however, under such disadvantages, was 



i 



The Custom-House 35 

as difficult a task as to trace out and build 
up anew, in imagination, an old fortress, 
like Ticonderoga, from a view of its grey 
and broken ruins. Here and there, per- 
chance, the walls may remain almost com- 
plete; but elsewhere may be only a 
shapeless mound, cumbrous with its very 
strength, and overgrown, through long 
years of peace and neglect, with grass 
and alien weeds. 

Nevertheless, looking at the old warrior 
with affection, — for, slight as was the 
communication between us, my feeling 
towards him, like that of all bipeds and 
quadrupeds who knew him, might not im- 
properly be termed so, — I could discern 
the main points of his portrait. It was 
marked with the noble and heroic qualities 
which showed it to be not by a mere acci- 
dent, but of good right, that he had won 
a distinguished name. His spirit could 
never, I conceive, have been characterised 
by an uneasy activity; it must, at any 
period of his life, have required an impulse 
to set him in motion ; but, once stirred up, 
with obstacles to overcome, and an ade- 
quate object to be attained, it was not in 
the man to give out or fail. The heat that 
had formerly pervaded his nature, and which 



36 The Scarlet Letter 

was not yet extinct, was never of the kind 
that flashes and flickers in a blaze, but, 
rather, a deep, red glow, as of iron in a 
furnace. Weight, solidity, firmness; this 
was the expression of his repose, even in 
such decay as had crept untimely over 
him, at the period of which I speak. But I 
could imagine, even then, that, under some 
excitement which should go deeply into 
his consciousness, — roused by a trumpet- 
peal, loud enough to awaken all of his 
energies that were not dead, but only slum- 
bering, — he was yet capable of flinging 
off his infirmities like a sick man's gown, 
dropping the staff of age to seize a battle- 
sword, and starting up once more a war- 
rior. And, in so intense a moment, his 
demeanour would have still been calm. 
Such an exhibition, however, was but to 
be pictured in fancy; not to be anticipated, 
nor desired. What I saw in him — as evi- 
dently as the indestructible ramparts of 
Old Ticonderoga, already cited as the most 
appropriate simile — were the features of 
stubborn and ponderous endurance, which 
might well have amounted to obstinacy in 
his earlier days ; of integrity, that, like 
most of his other endowments, lay in a 
somewhat heavy mass, and was just as 



i 



The Custom-House 37 

unmalleable and unmanageable as a ton 
of iron ore; and of benevolence, which, 
fiercely as he led the bayonets on at Chip- 
pewa or Fort Erie, I take to be of quite as 
genuine a stamp as what actuates any or 
all the polemical philanthropists of the 
age. He had slain men with his own 
hand, for aught I know; — certainly, they 
had fallen, like blades of grass at the sweep 
of the scythe, before the charge to which 
his spirit imparted its triumphant energy; 
— but, be that as it might, there was never 
in his heart so much cruelty as would have 
brushed the down off a butterfly's wing. 
I have not known the man, to whose innate 
kindliness I would more confidently make 
an appeal. 

Many characteristics — and those, too, 
which contribute not the least forcibly to 
impart resemblance in a sketch — must 
have vanished, or been obscured, before 
I met the General. All merely graceful 
attributes are usually the most evanescent; 
nor does Nature adorn the human ruin with 
blossoms of new beauty, that have their 
roots and proper nutriment only in the 
chinks and crevices of decay, as she sows 
wall-flowers over the ruined fortress of 
Ticonderoga. Still, even in respect of 



3^ The Scarlet Letter 

grace and beauty, there were points well 
worth noting. A ray of humour, now and 
then, would make its way through the 
veil of dim obstruction, and glimmer pleas- 
antly upon our faces. A trait of native 
elegance, seldom seen in the masculine 
character after childhood or early youth, 
was shown in the Generars fondness for 
the sight and fragrance of flowers. An old 
soldier might be supposed to prize only 
the bloody laurel on his brow; but here 
was one, who seemed to have a young 
girl's appreciation of the floral tribe. 

There, beside the fireplace, the brave old 
General used to sit; while the Surveyor — 
though seldom, when it could be avoided, 
taking upon himself the difficult task of 
engaging him in conversation — was fond 
of standing at a distance and watching his 
quiet and almost slumberous countenance. 
He seemed away from us, although we saw 
him but a few yards off; remote, though 
we passed close beside his chair; unattain- 
able, though we might have stretched forth 
our hands and touched his own. It might 
be, that he lived a more real life within his 
thoughts, than amid the unappropriate en- 
vironment of the Collector's office. The 
evolutions of the parade; the tumult of 



The Custom^House 39 

the battle; the flourish of old, heroic 
music, heard thirty years before ; — such 
scenes and sounds, perhaps, were all alive 
before his intellectual sense. Meanwhile, 
the merchants and ship-masters, the spruce 
clerks, and uncouth sailors, entered and de- 
parted; the bustle of this commercial and 
Custom-House life kept up its little mur- 
mur round about him; and neither with 
the men nor their affairs did the General 
appear to sustain the most distant relation. 
He was as much out of place as an old 
sword — now rusty, but which had flashed 
once in the battle's front, and showed still 
a bright gleam along its blade — would 
have been, among the inkstands, paper-fold- 
ers, and mahogany rulers, on the Deputy 
.Collector's desk. 

There was one thing that much aided 
me in renewing and re-creating the stal- 
wart soldier of the Niagara frontier, — the 
man of true and simple energy. It was 
the recollection of those memorable words 
of his, — ' "Fll try. Sir !" — spoken on the 
very verge of a desperate and heroic enter- 
prise, and breathing the soul and spirit of 
New England hardihood, comprehending 
all perils, and encountering all. If, in our 
country, valour were rewarded by heraldic 



40 



The Scarlet Letter 



honour, this phrase — which it seems so 
easy to speak, but which only he, with such 
a task of danger and glory before him, has 
ever spoken — would be the best and fittest 
of all mottoes for the General's shield of 
arms. 

It contributes greatly towards a man's 
moral and intellectual health, to be brought 
into habits of companionship with indi- 
viduals unlike himself, who care little for 
his pursuits, and whose sphere and abilities 
he must go out of himself to appreciate. 
The accidents of my life have often af- 
forded me this advantage, but never with 
more fulness and variety than during my 
continuance in office. There was one man, 
especially, the observation of whose charac- 
ter gave me a new idea of talent. His 
gifts were emphatically those of a man of 
business; prompt, acute, clear-minded; 
with an eye that saw through all perlexi- 
ties, and a faculty of arrangement that 
made them vanish, as by the waving of 
an enchanter's wand. Bred up from boy- 
hood in the Custom-House, it was his 
proper field of activity ; and the many 
intricacies of business, so harassing to the 
interloper, presented themselves before him 
with the regularity of a perfectly compre- 



The Custom-House 41 

hended system. In my contemplation, he 
stood as the ideal of his class. He was, 
indeed, the Custom-House in himself; or, 
at all events, the main-spring that kept its 
variously revolving wheels in motion; for, 
in an institution like this, where its officers 
are appointed to subserve their own profit 
and convenience, and seldom with a lead- 
ing reference to their fitness for the duty 
to be performed, they must perforce seek 
elsewhere the dexteritv which is not in 
them. Thus, by an inevitable necessity, 
as a magnet attracts steel-filings, so did 
our man of business draw to himself the 
difficulties which everybody met with. 
With an easy condescension, and kind for- 
bearance towards our stupidity, — which, 
to his order of mind, must have seemed 
little short of crime, — would he forthwith, 
by the merest touch of his finger, make 
the incomprehensible as clear as daylight. 
The merchants valued him not less than we, 
his esoteric friends. His integrity was 
perfect; it was a law of nature with him, 
rather than a choice or a principle; nor 
can it be otherwise than the main condi- 
tion of an intellect so remarkably clear and 
accurate as his, to be honest and regular 
in the administration of affairs. A stain 



42 The Scarlet Letter 

on his conscience, as to any thing that 
came withki the range of his vocation, 
would trouble such a man very much in 
the same way, though to a far greater 
degree, than an error in the balance of an 
account, or an ink-blot on the fair page of 
a book of record. Here, in a word, — and 
it is a rare instance in my life, — I had 
met 'with a person thoroughly adapted to 
the' situation which he held. 

Such were some of the people with 
whom I now found myself connected. I 
took it in good part at the hands of Provi- 
dence, that I was thrown into a position so 
little akin to my past habits; and set my- 
self seriously to gather from it whatever 
profit was to be had. After my fellowship 
of toil and impracticable schemes, with the 
dreamy brethren of Brook Farm; after 
living for three years within the subtile 
influence of an intellect like Emerson's ; 
after those wild, free days on the Assabeth, 
indulging fantastic speculations beside our 
fire of fallen boughs, with Ellery Chan- 
ning; after talking with Thoreau about 
pine-trees and Indian relics, in his hermit- 
age at Walden ; after growing fastidious 
by sympathy with the classic refinement 
of Hillard's culture; after becoming im- 



The Custom-House 43 

bued with poetic sentiment at Longfellow's 
hearth-stone; — it was time, at length, that 
I should exercise other faculties of my 
nature, and nourish myself with food for 
which I had hitherto had little appetite. 
Even the old Inspector was desirable, as a 
change of diet, to a man who had known 
Alcott. I looked upon it as an evidence, 
in some measure, of a system naturally well 
balanced, and lacking no essential part of 
a thorough organization, that, with such 
associates to remember, I could mingle at 
once- with men of altogether different quali- 
ties, and never murmur at the change. 

Literature, its exertions and objects, 
were now of little moment in my regard. 
I cared not, at this period, for books; they 
were apart from me. Nature, — except it 
were human nature, — the nature that is 
developed in earth and sky, was, in one 
sense, , hidden from me; and all the imagi- 
native delight, wherewith it had been spir- 
itualised, passed away out of my mind. A 
gift, a faculty, if it had not departed, 
was suspended and inanimate within me. 
There would have been something sad, 
unutterably dreary, in all this, had I not 
been conscious that it lay at my own 
option to recall whatever was valuable in 



44 



The Scarlet Letter 



the past. It might be true, indeed, that 
this was a Hfe which could not, with im- 
punity, be lived too long; else, it might 
make me permanently other than I had 
been, without transforming me into any 
shape which it would be worth my while 
to take. But I never considered it as 
other than a transitory life. There was 
always a prophetic instinct, a low whisper 
in my ear, that, within no long period, and 
whenever a new change of custom should 
be essential to my good, a change would 
come. 

Meanwhile, there I was, a Surveyor of 
the Revenue, and, so far as I have been 
able to understand, as good a Surveyor as 
need be. A man of thought, fancy, and 
sensibility, (had he ten times the Sur- 
veyor's proportion of those qualities,) may, 
at any time, be a man of affairs, if he will 
only choose to give himself the trouble. 
My fellow-officers, and the merchants and 
sea-captains with whom my official duties 
brought me into any manner of connec- 
tion, viewed me in no other light, and 
probably knew me in no other character. 
None of them, I presume, had ever read a 
page of my inditing, or would have cared a 
fig the more for me, if they had read them 



The Custotn-House 45 

all ; nor would it have mended the matter, 
in the least, had those same unprofitable 
pages been written with a pen like that of 
Burns or of Chaucer, each of whom was a 
Custom-House officer in his day, as well 
as I. It is a good lesson — though it may 
often be a hard one — for a man who has 
dreamed of literary fame, and of making 
for himself a rank among the world's dig- 
nitaries by such means, to step aside out 
of the narrow circle in which his claims 
are recognised, and to find how utterly 
devoid of significance, beyond that circle, 
is all that he achieves, and all he aims at. I 
know not that I especially needed the 
lesson, either in the way of warning or 
rebuke ; but, at any rate, I learned it 
thoroughly ; nor, it gives me pleasure to 
reflect, did the truth, as it came home to 
my perceptfon, ever cost me a pang, or 
require to be thrown off in a sigh. In the 
way of literary talk, it is true, the Naval 
Officer — an excellent fellow, who came 
into office with me, and went out only a 
little later — would often engage me, in a 
discussion about one or the other of his 
favourite topics. Napoleon or Shakspeare. 
The Cpllector's junior clerk, too, — a young 
gentleman who, it was whispered, occa- 



46, 



The Scarlet Letter 



sionally covered a sheet of Uncle Sam's 
letter-paper with what, (at the distance of 
a few yards,) looked very much like poetry, 
— used now and then to speak to me of 
books, as matters with which I might pos- 
sibly be conversant. This was my all of 
lettered intercourse ; and it was quite suf- 
ficient for my 
necessities. 

No longer seek- 
ing nor caring 
that my name 
should be blazon- 
ed abroad on title- 
pages, I smiled to 
think that it had 
now another kind 
of vogue. The 
Custom-House 
marker imprinted 
it, with a stencil 
and black paint, on pepper-bags, and bas- 
kets of anatto, and cigar-boxes, and bales 
of all kinds of dutiable merchandise, in 
testimony that these commodities had paid 
the impost, and gone regularly through the 
office. Borne on such queer vehicle of 
fame, a knowledge of my existence, so far 
as a name conveys it, was carried where it 




The Custom- Hotise 47 

had never been before, and, I hope, will 
never go again. 

But the past was not dead. Once in a 
great while, the thoughts, that had seemed 
so vital and so active, yet 'had been put to 
rest so quietly, revived again. One of the 
most remarkable occasions, when the habit 
of bygone days awoke in me, was that 
which brings it within the law of literary 
propriety to offer the public the sketch 
which I am now writing. 

In the second story of the Custom- 
House, there is a large room, in which the 
brick-work and naked rafters have never 
been covered with panelling and plaster. 
The edifice — originally projected on a scale 
adapted to the old commerical enterprise 
of the port, and with an idea of subsequent 
prosperity destined never to be realised — 
contains far more space than its occupants 
know what to do with. This airy hall, 
therefore, over the Collector's apartments, 
remains unfinished to this day, and, in spite 
of the aged cobwebs that festoon its dusky 
beams, appears still to await the labour of 
the carpenter and mason. At one end of the 
room, in a recess, were a number of barrels, 
piled one upon another, containing bundles 
of official documents. Large quantities of 



48 



The Scarlet Letter 



similar rubbish lay lumbering the floor. 
It was sorrowful to think how many days, 
and weeks, and months, and years of toil, 
had been wasted on these musty papers, 
which were now only an encumbrance on 
earth, and were hidden away in this for- 
gotten corner, never more to be glanced at 
by human eyes. But, then, what reams of 
other manuscripts — filled, not with the 
dulness of official formalities, but with the 
thought of inventive brains and the rich 
effusion of deep hearts — had gone equally 
to oblivion ; and that, moreover, without 
serving a purpose in their day, as these 
heaped-up papers had, and — saddest of 
all — without purchasing for their writers 
the comfortable livelihood which the clerks 
of the Custom-House had gained by these 
worthless scratchings of the pen ! Yet 
not altogether worthless, perhaps, as mate- 
rials of local history. Here, no doubt, 
statistics of the former commerce of Salem 
might be discovered, and memorials of her 
princely merchants, — old King Derby, — 
old Billy Gray, — old Simon Forrester, — 
and many another magnate in his day; 
whose powdered head, however, was 
scarcely in the tomb, before his mountain- 
pile of wealth began to dwindle. The 



The Custom-House 49 

founders of the greater part of the families 
which now compose the aristocracy of 
Salem might here be traced, from the petty 
and obscure beginnings of their traffic, at 
periods generally much posterior to the 
Revolution, upward to what their children 
look upon as long-established rank. 

Prior to the Revolution, there is a dearth 
of records ; the earlier documents and 
archives of the Custom-House having, 
probably, been carried off to Halifax, 
when all the King's officials accompanied 
the British army in its flight from Boston. 
It has often been a matter of regret with 
me ; for, going back, perhaps, to the days 
of the Protectorate, those papers must have 
contained many references to forgotten or 
remembered men, and to antique customs, 
which would have affected me with the 
same pleasure as when I used to pick up 
Indian arrow-heads in the field near the 
Old Manse. 

But, one idle and rainy day, it was my 
fortune to make a discovery of some little 
interest. Poking and burrowing into the 
heaped-up rubbish in the corner ; unfold- 
ing one and another document, and reading 
the names of vessels that had long ago 
foundered at sea or rotted at the wharves. 



50 The Scarlet Letter 

and those of merchants, never heard of 
now on 'Change, nor very readily decipher- 
able on their mossy tombstones ; glancing 
at such matters with the saddened, weary, 
half-reluctant interest which we bestow on 
the corpse of dead activity, — and exerting 
my fancy, sluggish with little use, to raise 
up from these dry bones an image of the 
old town's brighter aspect, when India was 
a new region, and only Salem knew the 
way thither, — I chanced to lay my hand 
on a small package, carefully done up in a 
piece of ancient yellow parchment. This 
envelope had the air of an official record of 
some period long past, when clerks en- 
grossed their stiff and formal chirography 
on more substantial materials than at 
present. There was something about it 
that quickened an instinctive curiosity, 
and made me undo the faded red tape, 
that tied up the package, with the sense 
that a treasure would here be brought to 
light. Unbending the rigid folds of the 
parchment cover, I found it to be a com- 
mission, under the hand and seal of Gov- 
ernor Shirley, in favor of one Jonathan 
Pue, as Surveyor of his Majesty's Customs 
for the port of Salem, in the Province of 
Massachusetts Bay. I remembered to have 



The Custom-Mouse ^i 

read (probably in Felt's Annals) a notice 
of the decease of Mr. Surveyor Pue, about 
fourscore years ago ; and likewise, in a 
newspaper of recent times, an account of 
the digging up of his remains in the little 
grave-yard of St. Peter's Church, during 
the renewal of that edifice. Nothing, if I 
rightly call to mind, was left of my re- 
spected predecessor, save an imperfect 
skeleton, and some fragments of apparel, 
and a wig of majestic frizzle ; which, unlike 
the head that it once adorned, was in very 
satisfactory preservation. But, on examin- 
ing the papers which the parchment com- 
mission served to envelop, I found more 
traces of Mr. Pue's mental part, and the 
internal operations of his head, than the 
frizzled wig had contained of the venerable 
skull itself. 

They were documents, in short, not offi- 
cial, but of a private nature, or, at least, 
written in his private capacity, and appar- 
ently with his own hand. I could account 
for their being included in the heap of 
Custom-House lumber only by the fact, 
that Mr. Pue's death had happened sud- 
denly ; and that these papers, which he 
probably kept in his official desk, had never 
come to the knowledge of his heirs, or 



52 The Scarlet Letter 

were supposed to relate to the business of 
the revenue. On the transfer of the 
archives to Halifax, this package, proving 
to be of no public concern, was left behind, 
and had remained ever since unopened. 

The ancient Surveyor — being little mo- 
lested, I suppose, at that early day, with 
business pertaining to his office — seems 
to have devoted some of his many leisure 
hours to researches as a local antiquarian, 
and other inquisitions of a similar nature. 
These supplied material for petty activity 
to a mind that would otherwise have been 
eaten up with rust. A portion of his facts, 
by the by, did me good service in the prep- 
aration of the article entitled "Main 
Street," included in the present volume. 
The remainder may perhaps be applied to 
purposes equally valuable, hereafter ; or 
not impossibly may be worked up, so far 
as they go, into a regular history of Salem, 
should my veneration for the natal soil 
ever impel me to so pious a task. Mean- 
while, they shall be at the command of 
any gentleman, inclined, and competent, 
to take the unprofitable labour off my hands. 
As a final disposition, I contemplate de- 
positing them with the Essex Historical 
Society. 



The Custom-House 53 

But the object that most drew my atten- 
tion, in the mysterious package, was a cer- 
tain affair of fine red cloth, much worn and 
faded. There were traces about it of gold 
embroidery, which, however, was greatly 
frayed and defaced ; so that none, or very 
little, of the glitter was left. It had been 
wrought, as was easy to perceive, with 
wonderful skill of needlework ; and the 
stitch (as I am assured by ladies conver- 
sant with such mysteries) gives evidence 
of a now forgotten art, not to be recovered 
even by the process of picking out the 
threads. This rag of scarlet cloth, — for 
time, and wear, and a sacrilegious moth, 
had reduced it to little other than a rag, — on 
careful examination, — :~-"^~_^ 

assumed the shape of 
a letter. It was the 
capital letter A. By 
an accurate measure- 
ment, each limb proved 
to be precisely three 
inches and a quarter 
in length. It had been intended, there 
could be no doubt, as an ornamental article 
of dress ; but how it was to be worn, or 
what rank, honour, and dignity, in by-past 
times, were signified by it, was a riddle 




54 The Scarlet Letter 

which (so evanescent are the fashions of 
the world in these particulars) I saw little 
hope of solving. And yet it strangely 
interested me. My eyes fastened them- 
selves upon the old scarlet letter, and 
would not be turned aside. Certainly, 
there was some deep meaning in it, most 
worthy of interpretation, and which, as it 
were, streamed forth from the mystic sym- 
bol, subtly communicating itself to my 
sensibilities, but evading the analysis of 
my mind. 

While thus perplexed, — and cogitating, 
among other hypotheses, whether the letter 
might not have been one of those decora- 
tions which the white men used to con- 
trive, in order to take the eyes of Indians, 
— I happened to place it on my breast. It 
seemed to me, — the reader may smile, but 
must not doubt my word, — it seemed to 
me, then, that I experienced a sensation 
not altogether physical, yet almost so, as 
of burning heat ; and as if the letter were 
not of red cloth, but red-hot iron. I shud- 
dered, and involuntarily let it fall upon the 
floor. 

In the absorbing contemplation of the 
scarlet letter, I had hitherto neglected to 
examine a small roll of dingy paper, around 



I 



The Custom-House §5 

which it had been twisted. This I now 
opened, and had the satisfaction to find, 
recorded by the old Surveyor's pen, a 
reasonably complete explanation of the 
whole affair. There were several foolscap 
sheets, containing many particulars respect- 
ing the life and conversation of one Hester 
Prynne, who appeared to have been rather 
a noteworthy personage in the view of our 
ancestors. She had flourished during a 
period between the early days of Massa- 
chusetts and the close of the seventeenth 
century. Aged persons, alive in the time 
of Mr. Surveyor Pue, and from whose oral 
testimony he had made up his narrative, 
remembered her, in their youth, as a very 
old, but not decrepit woman, of a stately 
and solemn aspect. It had been her habit, 
from an almost immemorial date, to go 
about the country as a kind of voluntary 
nurse, and doing whatever miscellaneous 
good she might ; taking upon herself, like- 
wise, to give advice in all matters, especially 
those of the heart ; by which means, as a 
person of such propensities inevitably must, 
she gained from many people the rever- 
ence due to an angel, but, I should imagine, 
was looked upon by others as an intruder 
and a nuisance. Prying farther into the 



56 The Scarlet Letter 

manuscript, I found the record of other 
doings and sufferings of this singular 
woman, for most of which the reader is 
referred to the story entitled "The Scar- 
let Letter ** ; and it should be borne 
carefully in mind, that the main facts of 
that story are authorised and authenticated 
by the document of Mr. Surveyor Pue. 
The original papers, together with the 
scarlet letter itself, — a most curious relic, 
— are still in my possession, and shall be 
freely exhibited to whomsoever, induced 
by the great interest of the narrative, may 
desire a sight of them. I must not be 
understood as affirming, that, in the dress- 
ing up of the tale, and imagining the 
motives and modes of passion that influ- 
enced the characters who figure in it, I 
have invariably confined myself within the 
limits of the old Surveyor's half a dozen 
sheets of foolscap. On the contrary, I 
have allowed myself, as to such points, 
nearly or altogether as much license as if 
the facts had been entirely of my own in- 
vention. What I contend for is the authen- 
ticity of the outline. 

This incident recalled my mind, in some 
degree, to its old track. There seemed to 
be here the groundwork of a tale. It 



^ 

\ 



The Custom-House J7 

impressed me as if the ancient Surveyor, 
in his garb of a hundred years gone by, 
;ind wearing his immortal wig, — which 
was buried with him, but did not perish in 
the grave, — had met me in the deserted 
chamber of the Custom-House. In his port 
was the dignity of one who had borne his 
Majesty's commission, and who was there- 
fore illuminated by a ray of the splendour 
that shone so dazzlingly about the throne. 
How unlike, alas ! the hang-dog look of a 
republican official, who, as the servant of 
the people, feels himself less than the 
least, and below the lowest, of his masters. 
With his own ghostly hand, the obscurely 
seen, but majestic, figure had imparted to 
me the scarlet symbol, and the little roll 
of explanatory manuscript. With his own 
ghostly voice, he had exhorted me, on the 
sacred consideration of my filial duty and 
reverence towards him, — who might reason- 
ably regard himself as my official ancestor, 
— to bring his mouldy and moth-eaten lucu- 
brations before the public " Do this," said 
the ghost of Mr. Surveyor Pue, emphati- 
cally nodding the head that looked so im- 
posing within its memorable wig, "do this, 
and the profit shall be all your own ! You 
will shortly need it ; for it is not in your 



I 



t 

58 Tie Scarlet Letter / 

days as it was in mine, when a man's <: 
office was a life-lease, and oftentimes an 
heirloom. But, I charge you, in this mat- 
ter of old Mistress Prynne, give to youv 
predecessor's memory the credit which will 
be rightfully its due I " And I said to the 
ghost of Mr. Surveyor Pue, — "I will ! " 

On Hester Prynne's story, therefore, I 
bestowed much thought. It was the sub- 
ject of my meditations for many an hour, 
while pacing to and fro across my room, 
or traversing, with a hundredfold repeti- 
tion, the long extent from the front-door 
of the Custom-House to the side-entrance, 
and back again. Great were the weariness 
and annoyance of the old Inspector and the 
Weighers and Gaugers, whose slumbers 
were disturbed by the unmercifully length- 
ened tramp of my passing and returning 
footsteps. Remembering their own for- 
mer habits, they used to say that the Sur- 
veyor was walking the quarter-deck. They 
probably fancied that my sole object — and, 
indeed, the sole object for which a sane 
man could ever put himself into voluntary 
motion — was, to get an appetite for dinner. 
And to say the truth, an appetite, sharp- 
ened by the east-wind that generally blew 
along the passage, was the only valuable 



The Custom-House 59 

result of so much indefatigable exercise. 
So little adapted is the atmosphere of a 
Custom-House to the delicate harvest of 
fancy and sensibility, that, had I remained 
there through ten Presidencies yet to come, 
I doubt whether the tale of " The Scarlet 
Letter" would ever have been brought 
before the public eye. My imagination 
was a tarnished mirror. It would not 
reflect, or only with miserable dimness, the 
figures with which I did my best to people 
it. The characters of the narrative would 
not be warmed and rendered malleable, by 
any heat that I could kindle at my intel- 
lectual forge. They would take neither 
the glow of passion nor the tenderness of 
sentiment, but retained all the rigidity of 
dead corpses, and stared me in the face 
with a fixed and ghastly grin of contemptu- 
ous defiance. " What have you to do with 
us } " that expression seemed to say. " The 
little power you might once have possessed 
over the tribe of unrealities is gone ! You 
have bartered it for a pittance of the public 
gold. Go, then, and earn your wages ! " 
In short, the almost torpid creatures of 
my own fancy twitted me with imbecility, 
and not without fair occasion. 

It was not merely during the three hours 



6o The Scarlet Letter 

and a half which Uncle Sam claimed as his 
share of my daily life, that this wretched 
numbness held possession of me. It went 
with me on my sea-shore walks and ram- 
bles into the country, whenever — which 
was seldom and reluctantly — I bestirred 
myself to seek that invigourating charm of 
Nature, which used to give me such fresh- 
ness and activity of thought, the moment 
that I stepped across the threshold of the 
Old Manse. The same torpor, as regarded 
the capacity for intellectual effort, accom- 
panied me home, and weighed upon me in 
the chamber which I most absurdly termed 
my study. Nor did it quit me, when, late 
at night, I sat in the deserted parlour, 
lighted only by the glimmering coal-fire 
and the moon, striving to picture forth 
imaginary scenes, which, the next day, 
might flow out on the brightening page in 
many-hued description. 

If the imaginative faculty refused to act 
at such an hour, it might well be deemed a 
hopeless case. Moonlight, in a familiar 
room, falling so white upon the carpet, and 
showing all its figures so distinctly, — 
making every object so minutely visible, 
yet so unlike a morning or noontide visi- 
bility, — is a medium the most suitable for 



The Custom-House 6l 

a romance-writer to get acquainted with 
his illusive guests. There is the little 
domestic -scenery of the well-known apart- 
ment ; the chairs, with each its separate 
individuality; the centre-table, sustaining 
a work-basket, a volume or two, and an ex- 
tinguished lamp ; the sofa ; the book-case ; 
the picture on the wall ; — all these details, 
so completely seen, are so spiritualised by 
the unusual light, that they seem to lose 
their actual substance, and become things 
of intellect. Nothing is too small or too 
trifling to undergo this change, and acquire 
dignity thereby. A child's shoe ; the doll, 
seated in her little wicker carriage ; the 
hobby-horse; — whatever, in a word, has 
been used or played with, during the day, 
is now invested with a quality of strange- 
ness and remoteness, though still almost 
as vividly present as by daylight. Thus, 
therefore, the floor of our familiar room 
has become a neutral territory, somewhere 
between the real world and fairy-land, 
where the Actual and the Imaginary may 
meet, and each imbue itself with the nature 
of the other. Ghosts might enter here, 
without affrighting us. It would be too 
much in keeping with the scene to excite 
surprise, were we to look about us and 



62 The Scarlet Letter 

discover a form, beloved, but gone hence, 
now sitting quietly in a streak of this 
magic moonshine, with an aspect that 
would make us doubt whether it had 
returned from afar, or had never once 
stirred from our fireside. 

The somewhat dim coal-fire has an 
essential influence in producing the effect 
which I would describe. It throws its 
unobtrusive tinge throughout the room, 
with a faint ruddiness upon the walls and 
ceiling, and a reflected gleam from the 
polish of the furniture. This warmer light 
mingles itself with the cold spirituality of 
the moonbeams, and communicates, as it 
were, a heart and sensibilities of human 
tenderness to the forms which fancy sum- 
mons up. It converts them from snow- 
images into men and women. Glancing at 
the looking-glass, we behold — deep within 
its haunted verge — the smouldering glow 
of the half-extinguished anthracite, the 
white moonbeams on the floor, and a repeti- 
tion of all the gleam and shadow of the pic- 
ture, with one remove farther from the 
actual, and nearer to the imaginative. Then, 
at such an hour, and with this scene before 
him, if a man, sitting all alone, cannot 
dream strange things, and make them look 



The Custam-Hause 63 

like truth, he need never try to write 
rdmainces. 

But, for myself, during the whole of my 
Custom-House experience, moonlight and 
sunshine, and the glow of fire-light, were 
just alike in my *-egard; and neither of 
them was of one whit more avail than the 
twinkle of a tallow-candle. An entire class 
of susceptibilities, and a gift connected 
with them, — of no great richness or value, 
but the best I had, — was gone from me. 

It is my belief, however, that, had I at^ 
tempted a different order of composition, 
my faculties would not have been found so 
pointless and inefficacious. I might, for 
instance, have contented myself with writ- 
ing out the narratives of a veteran ship- 
master, one of the Inspectors, whom I 
should be most ungrateful not to mention ; 
since scarcely a day passed that he did not 
Stir me to laughter and admiration by his 
tnarvellous gifts as a story-teller. Could I 
have preserved the picturesque force of his 
style, and the humorous colouring which 
nature taught him how to throw over his 
descriptions, the result, I honestly believe, 
would have been something new in litera- 
ture. Or I might readily have found a 
more serious task. It was a folly, with 



Kii-.i- : 



64 The Scarlet Letter 

the materiality of this daily life pressing 
so intrusively upon me, to attempt to fling 
myself back into another age ; or to insist 
on creating the semblance of a world out 
of airy matter, when, at every moment, the 
impalpable beauty of my soap-bubble was 
broken by the rude contact of some actual 
circumstance. The wiser effort would 
have been, to diffuse thought and imagi- 
nation through the opaque substance of 
to-day, and thus to make it a bright trans- 
parency ; to spiritualise the burden that 
began to weigh so heavily ; to seek, reso- 
lutely, the true and indestructible value 
that lay hidden in the petty and wearisome 
incidents, and ordinary characters, with 
which I was now conversant. The fault 
was mine. The page of life that was 
spread out before me seemed dull and 
commonplace, only because I had not 
fathomed its deeper import. A better 
book than I shall ever write was there; 
leaf after leaf presenting itself to me, just 
as it was written out by the reality of the 
flitting hour, and vanishing as fast as writ- 
ten, only because my brain wanted the 
insight and my hand the cunning to tran- 
scribe it. At some future day, it may be, 
I shall remember a few scattered frag- 



The Custom-House 65 

ments and broken paragraphs, and write 
them down, and find the letters turn to 
gold upon the page. 

These perceptions have come too late. 
At the instant, I was only conscious that 
what would have been a pleasure once was 
now a hopeless toil. There was no occa- 
sion to make much moan about this state 
of affairs. I had ceased to be a writer of 
tolerably poor tales and essays, and had 
become a tolerably good Surveyor of the 
Customs. That was all. But, neverthe- 
less, it is anything but agreeable to be 
haunted by a suspicion that one's intellect 
is dwindling away ; or exhaling, without your 
consciousness, like ether out of a phial; 
so that, at every glance, you find a smaller 
and less volatile residuum. Of the fact, 
there could be no doubt ; and, examining 
myself and others, I was led to conclusions 
in reference to the effect of public office 
on the character, not very favourable to 
the mode of life in question. In some 
other form, perhaps, I may hereafter de- 
velop these effects. Suffice it here to say, 
that a Custom-House officer, of long con- 
tinuance, can hardly be a very praiseworthy 
or respectable personage, for many reasons ; 
one of them, the tenure by which he holds 



66 The Scarlet Letter 

his situation, and another, the very nature 
of his business, which — though, I trust, an 
honest one — is of such a sort that he does 
not share in the united effort of mankind. 

An effect — which I believe to be observ- 
able, more or less, in every individual who 
has occupied the position — is, that, while 
he leans on the mighty arm of the Re- 
public, his own proper strength departs 
from him. He loses, in an extent propor- 
tioned to the weakness or force of his 
original nature, the capability of self-sup- 
port. If he possess an unusual share of 
native energy, or the enervating magic of 
place do not operate too long upon him, 
his forfeited powers may be redeemable. 
The ejected officer — fortunate in the un- 
kindly shove that sends him forth betimes, 
to struggle amid a struggling world — may 
return to himself, and become all that he 
has ever been. But this seldom happens. 
He usually keeps his ground just long 
enough for his own ruin, and is then thrust 
out, with sinews all unstrung, to totter 
along the difficult footpath of life as he 
best may. Conscious of his own infirmity, 
— that his tempered steel and elasticity are 
lost, — he for ever afterwards looks wist- 
fully about him in quest of support external 



The Custom-House 67 

to himself. His pervading and continual 
hope — a hallucination, which, in the face 
of all discouragement, and making light of 
impossibilities, haunts him while he lives, 
and, I fancy, like the convulsive throes of 
the cholera, torments him for a brief space 
after death — is, that finally, and in no long 
time, by some happy coincidence of cir- 
cumstances, he shall be restored to office. 
This faith, more than any thing else, steals 
the pith and availability out of whatever 
enterprise he may dream of undertaking. 
Why should he toil and moil, and be at so 
much trouble to pick himself up out of the 
mud, when, in a little while hence, the 
strong arm of his Uncle will raise and sup- 
port him } Why should he work for his 
living here, or go to dig gold in California, 
when he is so soon to be made happy, at 
monthly intervals, with a little pile of glit- 
tering coin out of his Uncle's pocket } It is 
sadly curious to observe how slight a taste 
of office suffices to infect a poor fellow with 
this singular disease. Uncle Sam's gold — 
meaning no disrespect to the worthy old 
gentleman — has, in this respect, a quality 
of enchantment like that of the Devil's 
wages. Whoever touches it should look 
well to himself, or he may find the bargain 



68 The Scarlet Letter 

to go hard against him, involving, if not his 
soul, yet many of its better attributes ; its 
sturdy force, its courage and constancy, its 
truth, its self-reliance, and all that gives the 
emphasis to manly character. 

Here was a fine prospect in the dis- 
tance! Not that the Surveyor brought 
the lesson home to himself, or admitted 
that he could be so utterly undone, either 
by continuance in office, or ejectment. Yet 
my reflections were not the most comfort- 
able. I began to grow melancholy and 
restless ; continually prying into my mind, 
to discover which of its poor properties 
were gone, and what degree of detriment 
had already accrued to the remainder. I 
endeavoured to calculate how much longer 
J could stay in the Custom-House, and yet 
go forth a man. To confess the truth, 
it was my greatest apprehension, — as it 
would never be a measure of policy to turn 
out so quiet an individual as myself, and it 
being hardly in the nature of a public offi- 
cer to resign, — it was my chief trouble, 
therefore, that I was likely to grow grey 
and decrepit in the Surveyorship, and be 
come much such another animal as the old 
Inspector. Might it not, in the tedious 
lapse of official life that lay before me, 



«. 



» 






The Ctistont'House 69 

finally be with me as it was with this ven- 
erable friend, — to make the dinner-hour 
the nucleus of the day, and to spend the 
rest of it, as an old dog spends it, asleep in 
the sunshine or in the shade ? A dreary 
look-forward this, for a man who felt it to 
be the best definition of happiness to live 
throughout the whole range of his faculties 
and sensibilities! But, all this while, I 
was giving myself very unnecessary alarm. 
Providence had meditated better things for 
me than I could possibly imagine for my- 
self. 

A remarkable event of the third year of 
my Surveyorship — to adopt the tone of 
** P. P." — was the election of General Tay- 
lor to the Presidency. It is essential, in 
order to a complete estimate of the advan- 
tages of official life, to view the incumbent 
at the in-coming of a hostile administra- 
tion. His position is then one of the most 
singularly irksome, and, in every contin- 
gency, disagreeable, that a wretched mortal 
can possibly occupy ; with seldom an alterna- 
tive of good, on either hand, although what 
presents itself to him as the worst event 
may very probably be the best. But it 
is a strange experience, to a man of pride 
and sensibility, to know that his interests 



> 






yo The Scarlet Letter 

are within the control of individuals who 
neither love nor understand him, and by 
whom, since one or the other must needs 
happen, he would rather be injured than 
obliged. Strange, too, for one who has kept 
his calmness throughout the contest, to ob- 
serve the bloodthirstiness that is developed 
in the hour of triumph, and to be conscious 
that he is himself among its objects ! There 
are few uglier traits of human nature than 
this tendency — which I now witnessed in 
men no worse than their neighbours — to 
grow cruel, merely because they possessed 
the power of inflicting harm. If the guil- 
lotine, as applied to office-holders, were a 
literal fact, instead of one of the most apt 
of metaphors, it is my sincere belief, that 
the active members of the victorious party 
were sufficiently excited to have chopped 
oflf all our heads, and have thanked Heav- 
en for the opportunity ! It appears to me 
— who have been a calm and curious ob- 
server, as well in victory as defeat — that 
this fierce and bitter spirit of malice and 
revenge has never distinguished the many 
triumphs of my own party as it now did 
that of the Whigs. The Democrats take 
the offices, as a general rule, because they 
need them, and because the practice of 



The Custom-House 71 

many years has made it the law of political 
warfare, which, unless a diflFerent system 
be proclaimed, it were weakness and cow- 
ardice to murmur at. But the long habit 
of victory has made them generous. They 
know how to spare, when they see occa- 
sion; and when they strike, the axe may 
be sharp, indeed, but its edge is seldom 
poisoned with ill-will ; nor is it their custom 
ig^ominiously to kick the head which they 
have just struck off. 

In short, unpleasant as was my predic- 
ament, at best, I saw much reason to con- 
gratulate myself that I was on the losing 
side, rather than the triumphant one. If, 
heretofore, I had been none of the warmest 
of partisans, I began now, at this season of 
peril and adversity, to be pretty acutely 
sensible with which party my predilections 
lay ; nor was it without something like re- 
gret and shame, that, according to a rea- 
sonable calculation of chances, I saw my 
own prospect of retaining office to be better 
than those of my Democratic brethren. 
But who can see an inch into futurity, 
beyond his nose ? My own head was the 
first that fell ! 

The moment when a man's head drops 
off is seldom or never, I am inclined to 



►»i..' . -. 



72 The Scarlet Letter 

think, precisely the most agreeable of his 
life. Nevertheless, like the greater part of 
our misfortunes, even so serious a contin- 
gency brings its remedy and consolation 
with it, if the sufferer will but majce the 
best, rather than the worst, of the accident 
which has befallen him. In my particular 
case, the consolatory topics were close at 
hand, and, indeed, had suggested them- 
selves to my meditations a considerable 
time before it was requisite to use them. 
In view of my previous weariness of office, 
and vague thoughts of resignation, my for- 
tune somewhat resembled that of a person 
who should entertain an idea of committing 
suicide, and, although beyond his hopes, 
meet with the good hap to be murdered. 
In the Custom-House, as before in the Old 
Manse, I had spent three years ; a term 
long enough to rest a weary brain ; long 
enough to break oflf old intellectual habits, 
and make room for new ones ; long enough, 
and too long, to have lived in an unnatural 
state, doing what was really of no advan- 
tage nor delight to any human being, and 
withholding myself from toil that would, 
at least, have stilled an unquiet impulse in 
me. Then, moreover, as regarded his un- 
ceremonious ejectment, the late Surveyor 



The Custom- House 73 

was not altogether ill-pleased to be recog- 
nised by the Whigs as an enemy ; since 
his inactivity in political affairs, — his ten- 
dency to roam, at will, in that broad and quiet 
field where all mankind may meet, rather 
than confine himself to those narrow paths 
where brethren of the same household 
must diverge from one another, — had 
sometimes made it questionable with his 
brother Democrats whether he was a 
friend. Now, after he had won the crown 
of martyrdom, (though with no longer a 
head to wear it on,) the point might be 
looked upon as settled. Finally, little he- 
roic as he was, it seemed more decorous to 
be overthrown in the downfall of the party 
with which he had been content to stand, 
than to remain a forlorn survivor, when so 
many worthier men were falling ; and, at 
last, after subsisting for four years on 
the mercy of a hostile administration, to 
be compelled then to define his position 
anew, and claim the yet more humiliating 
mercy of a friendly one. 

Meanwhile the press had taken up my 
affair, and kept me, for a week or two, 
careering through the public prints, in my 
decapitated state, like Irving's Headless 
Horseman ; ghastly and grim, and longing 



74 The Scarlet Letter 

to be buried, as a politically dead man 
ought. So much for my figurative self. 
The real human being, all this time, with 
his head safely on his shoulders, had 
brought himself to the comfortable con- 
clusion, that every thing was for the best ; 
and, making an investment in ink, paper, 
and steel-pens, had opened his long-disused 
writing-desk, and was again a literary man. 
Now it was, that the lucubrations of 
my ancient predecessor, Mr. Surveyor Pue, 
came into play. Rusty through long idle- 
ness, some little space was requisite before 
my intellectual machinery could be brought 
to work upon the tale, with an efifect in any 
degree satisfactory. Even yet, though my 
thoughts were ultimately much absorbed in 
the task, it wears, to my eye, a stern and 
sombre aspect ; too much ungladdened by 
genial sunshine ; too little relieved by the 
tender and familiar influences which soften 
almost every scene of nature and real life, 
and, undoubtedly, should soften every pic- 
ture of them. This uncaptivating effect is 
perhaps due to the period of hardly accom- 
plished revolution, and still seething tur- 
moil, in which the story shaped itself. It 
is no indication, however, of a lack of 
cheerfulness in the writer's mind ; for he 



The Custom-House 75 

was happier, while straying through the 
gloom of these sunless fantasies, than at 
any time since he had quitted the Old 
Manse. Some of the briefer articles, which 
contribute to make up the volume, have 
likewise been written since my involuntary 
withdrawal from the toils and honours of 
public life, and the remainder are gleaned 
from annuals and magazines, of such antique 
date that they have gone round the circle, 
and come back to novelty again.* Keep- 
ing up the metaphor of the political guillo- 
tine, the whole may be considered as the 
Posthumous Papers of a Decapitated 
Surveyor ; and the sketch which I am now 
bringing to a close, if too autobiographical 
for a modest person to publish in his life- 
time, will readily be excused in a gentle- 
man who writes from beyond the grave. 
Peace be with all the world ! My blessing 
on my friends ! My forgiveness to my 
enemies ! For I am in the realm of quiet ! 
The life of the Custom-House lies like a 
dream behind me. The old Inspector, — 
who, by the by, I regret to say, was over- 

* At the time of writing this article, the author in- 
tended to publish, along with " The Scarlet Letter," 
several shorter tales and sketches. These it has been 
Uiought advisable to defer. 



76 



The Scarlet Letter 



thrown and killed by a horse, some time 
ago ; else he would certainly have lived for 
ever, — he, and all those other venerable 
personages who sat with him at the receipt 
of custom, are but shadows in my view ; 
white-headed and wrinkled images, which 
my fancy used to sport with, and has now 
flung aside for ever. The merchants, — 




Pingree, Phillips, Shepard, Upton, Kimball, 
Bertram, Hunt, — these, and many other 
names, which had such a classic familiarity 
for my ear six months ago, — these men of 
traffic, who seemed to occupy so important 
a position in the world, — how little time 
has it required to disconnect me from them 
all, not merely in act, but recollection ! It 



The Custom-House 77 

is with an effort that I recall the figures 
and appellations of these few. Soon, like- 
wise, my old native town will loom upon 
me through the haze of memory, a mist- 
brooding over and around it ; as if it were 
no portion of the real earth, but an over- 
grown village in cloud-land, with only im- 
aginary inhabitants to people its wooden 
houses, and walk its homely lanes, and the 
unpicturesque prolixity of its main street. 
Henceforth, it ceases to be a reality of my 
life. I am a citizen of somewhere else. 
My good townspeople will not much regret 
me; for — though it has been as dear an 
object as any, in my literary efforts, to be 
of some importance in their eyes, and to 
win myself a pleasant memory in this 
abode and burial-place of so many of my 
forefathers — there has never been, for me, 
the genial atmosphere which a literary man 
requires, in order to ripen the best harvest 
of his mind. I shall do better amongst 
other faces ; and these familiar ones, it 
need hardly be said, will do just as well 
without me. 

It may be, however, — O, transporting 
and triumphant thought ! — that the great- 
grandchildren of the present race may 
sometimes think kindly of the scribbler of 



78 



The Scarlet Letter 



bygone days, when the antiquary of days 
to come, among the sites memorable in the 
town's history, shall point out the locality 
of The Town-Pump ! 




THE SCARLET LETTER 



THE PRISON-DOOR 

A THRONG of bearded men, in sad- 
coloured garments, and grey, steeple- 
crowned hats, intermixed with women, some 
wearing hoods and others bareheaded, was 




assembled in front of a wooden edifice, the 
door of which was heavily timbered with 
oak, and studded with iron spikes. 

The founders of a new colony, whatever 
Utopia of human virtue and happiness they 
might originally project, have invariably 



Tke Scarlet Letter 



recognised it among their earliest practical 
necessities to allot a portion of the virgin 
soil as a cemetery, and another portion as 
the site of a prison. In accordance with 
this rule, it may safely be assumed that 
the forefathers of Boston had built the first 
prison-house somewhere in the vicinity of 



Comhill, almost 




chres 
of King's Chapel, 



seasonably as they 
marked out the first 
burial-ground, on 
Isaac Johnson's 
lot, and round 
about his grave, 
which sub- 
__ sequently 
became 
the nucleus 
of all the 
congregated sepul- 
iho old church-yard 
Certain it is, that, 



some fifteen or twenty years after the 
settlement of the town, the wooden jail 
was already marked with weather-stains 
and other indications of age, which gave a 
yet darker aspect to its beetle-browed and 
gloomy front. The rust on the ponderous 
iron-work of its oaken door looked more 
antique than anything else in the New 



The Prison-Door 



World. Like all that pertains to crime, it 
seemed never to have known a youthful 
era. Before this ugly edifice, and between 
it and the wheel-track of the street, was a 
grass-plot, much overgrown with burdock, 
pigweed, apple-peril, and such unsightly 
vegetation, which evidently found some- 
thing congenial in the soU that had so 
early borne the black flower of civilised 
society, a prison. But, on 
one side of the portal, 
and rooted almost at tht, 
threshold, was a wild rosi. 
bush, covered, in this 
month of June, with 
its delicate gems, 
which might be im 
agined to offer their 
fragrance and fragile 
beauty to the pns '' 

oner as he went m, 
and to the condemned 
criminal as he came forth to his doom, 
in token that the deep heart of Nature 
could pity and be kind to him. 

This rose-bush, by a strange chance, has 
been kept alive in history ; but whether it 
had merely survived out of the stern old 
\vilderness, so long after the fall of the 




82 



The Scarlet Letter 



gigantic pines and oaks that originally over- 
shadowed it, — or whether, as there is fair 
authority for believing, it had sprung up 
under the footsteps of the sainted Ann 
Hutchinson, as she entered the prison-door, 
— we shall not take upon us to determine. 
Finding it so directly on the threshold of 




our narrative, which is now about to issue 
from that inauspicious portal, we could 
hardly do otherwise than pluck one of its 
flowers, and present it to the reader. It 
may serve, let us hope, to symbolise some 
sweet mora] blossom, that may be found 
along the track, or relieve the darkening 
close of a tale of human frailty and sor- 
row. 



THE MARKET-PLACE 

THE grasa-plot before the jail, in Prison 
Lane, on a certain summer morning, 
not less than two centuries ago, was occu- 
pied by a pretty large number of the in- 
habitants of Boston ; all with their eyes 
intently fastened on the iron-clamped oaken 
door. Amongst any other population, or 




at a later period in the history of New 
England, the grim' rigidity that petrified 
the bearded physiognomies of these good 
people would have argued some awful busi- 
83 



84 The Scarlet Letter 

ness in hand. It could have betokened 
nothing short of the anticipated execution 
of some noted culprit, on whom the sen- 
tence of a legal tribunal had but confirmed 
the verdict of public sentiment. But, in 
that early severity of the Puritan character, 
an inference of this kind could not so in- 
dubitably be drawn. It might be that a 
sluggish bond-servant, or an undutif ul child, 
whom his parents had given over to the 
civil authority, was to be corrected at the-^ 
whipping-post. It might be, that an Anti- j 
nomian, a Quaker, or other heterodox re- t 
ligionist was to be \ 
scourged out of the ' 
town, or an idle and j 
vagrant Indian, whom~'~ 
the white man's fire- 
water had made riot- 
ous about the streets, 
was to be driven 
with stripes into the 
shadow of the forest. It might be, too, 
that a witch, like old Mistress Hibbins, 
the bitter-tempered widow of the mag- 
istrate, was to die upon the gallows. In 
either case, there was very much the 
same solemnity of demeanour on the part 
of the spectators ; as befitted a people 




The Haiket-l'lact 



85 



amongst^ whom religion and law were \ 
almost identical, and in whose character I 
both were so thoroughly interfused, that 
the mildest and the severest acts of public 
discipline were alike made venerable and 
awful. Meagre, indeed, and cold was the 
sympathy that a transgressor might look 
for, from such bystanders, at the scaffold. 
On the other hand, a penalty, which, in our 
days, would infer a degree of mocking in- 
famy and ridicule, might then be invested 
with almost as stern a dignity as the pun- 
ishment of death itself. 




It was a circumstance to be noted, on the 
summer morning when our story begins 
its course, that the women, of whom there 
were several in the crowd, appeared to 
take a peculiar interest in whatever penal 



The Scarlet Letter 



infliction might be expected to ensue. The 
age had not so much refinement, that any 
sense of impropriety restrained the wearers 
of petticoat and farthingale from stepping 
forth into the public ways, and wedging 
their not unsubstantial 
persons, if occasion 
were, into the throng 
nearest to the scaffold 
at an execution. Mor- 
ally, as well as materi- 
ally, there was a coarser 
fibre in those wives and 
maidens of old English 
birth and breeding, thar 
in their fair descend- 
ants, separated from 
them by a series of six or seven gen- 
erations; for, throughout that chain of 
ancestry, every successive mother has 
transmitted to her child a fainter bloom, 
a more delicate and briefer beauty, and 
a slighter physical frame, if not a char- 
acter of less force and solidity, than her 
own. The women who were now stand- 
ing about the prison-door stood within less 
than half a century of the period when 
the man-like Elizabeth had been the not 
altogether unsuitable representative of the 




The Market-place 



37 



sex. They were her countrywomen ; and 
the beef and ale of their native land, with 
a moral diet not a whit more refined, en- 
tered largely into their composition. The 
bright morning sun, therefore, shone on 
broad shoulders and well-developed busts, 
and on round and rud- 
dy cheeks, that had 
ripened in the far-off 
island, and had hardly 
yet grown paler or thin- 
ner in the atmosphere 
of New England. Tht;rc 
was, moreover, a bold- 
ness and rotundity of 
speech among these 
matrons, as most of them 
seemed to be, that would 
startle us at the present 
day, whether in respect 
to its purport or its vol- 
ume of tone. 

" Goodwives," said a hard-featured dame 
of fifty, "I'll tell ye a piece of my mind. 
It would be greatly for the public behoof, 
if we women, being of mature age and 
church-members in good repute, should 
have the handling of such malefactresses 
as this Hester Prynne, What think ye. 




88 The Scarlet Letter 

gossips? If the hussy stood up tor judg- 
ment before us five, that are now here in 
a knot together, would she come off with 
such ,a sentence as the worshipful magis- 
trates have awarded ? Marry, I trow not ! " 




' People say said another, " that the 
Reverend Master Dimmesdale, her godly 
pastor, takes it very grievously to heart 
that such a scandal should have come upon 
his congregation." 

" The magistrates are God-fearing gen- 
tlemen, but merciful overmuch, — that is a 
truth," added a third autumnal matron. 
" At the very least, they should have put 
the brand of a hot iron on Hester Prynne's 
forehead. Madam Hester would have 
winced at that, I warrant me. But she, 



i 



The Market-Place 89 

— the naughty baggage, — little will she 
care what they put upon the bodice of her 
gown ! Why, look you, she may cover it 
with a brooch, or such like heathenish 
adornment, and so walk the streets as 
brave as ever ! " 

"Ah, but," interposed, more softly, a 
young wife, holdmg a child by the hand 
"let her cover the mark as she will the 
pang of it will be always m her heart 




" What do we talk of marks and brands, 
whether on the bodice of her gown, .or the 
flesh of her forehead?" cried another fe- 
male, the ugliest as well as the most piti- 
less of these self -constituted judges. " This 
woman has brought shame upon us all, and 



90 The Scarlet Lettet 

ought to die. Is there no law for it ? Truly, 
there is, both in the Scripture and the 
statute-book. Then let the magistrates, 
who have made it of no effect, thank them- 
selves if their own wives and daughters go 
astray ! " 

" Mercy on us, goodwife,*' exclaimed a 
man in the crowd, ** is there no virtue in 
woman, save w.hat springs from a whole- 
some fear of the gallows? That is the 
hardest word yet ! Hush, now, gossips ! 
for the lock is turning in the prison-door, 
and here comes Mistress Prynne herself.*' 

The door of the jail being flung open 
from within, there appeared, in the first 
place, like a black shadow emerging into 
sunshine, the grim and grisly presence of 
the town-beadle, with a sword by his side, 
and his staff of office in his hand. This 
personage prefigured and represented in 
his aspect the whole dismal severity of the 
Puritanic code of law, which it was his 
business to administer in its final and clos- 
est application to the offender. Stretch- 
ing forth the official staff in his left hand, 
he laid his right upon the shoulder of a 
young woman, whom he thus drew for- 
ward ; until, on the threshold of the prison- 
door, she rebelled him, by an action marked 



92 The Scarlet Letter 

with dignity and force of character, and 
stepped into the open air, as if by her own 
free will. She bore in her arms a child, 
a baby of some three months old, who 
winked and turned aside its little face from 
the too vivid light of day ; because its exist- 
ence, heretofore, had brought it acquainted 
only with the grey twilight of a dungeon, 
or other darksome apartment of the prison. 
When the young woman — the mother 
of this child — stood fully revealed before 
the crowd, it seemed to be her first impulse 
to clasp the infant closely to her bosom ; 
not so much by an impulse of motherly 
affection, as that she might thereby con- 
ceal a certain token, which was wrought 
or fastened into her dress. In a moment, 
however, wisely judging that one token of 
her shame would but poorly serve to hide 
another, she took the baby on her arm, and, 
with a burning blush, and yet a haughty 
smile, and a glance that would not be 
abashed, looked around at her townspeople 
and neighbours. On the breast of her gown, 
in fine red cloth, surrounded with an elab- 
orate embroidery and fantastic flourishes 
of gold-thread, appeared the letter A. It 
was so artistically done, and with so much 
fertility and gorgeous luxuriance of fancy, 



The Market-Place 93 

that it had all the effect of a last and fit- 
ting decoration to the apparel which she 
wore ; and which was of a splendour in ac- 
cordance with the taste of the age, but 
greatly beyond what was allowed by the 
sumptuary regulations of the colony. 

The young woman was tall, with a figure 
of perfect elegance on a large scale. She 
had dark and abundant hair, so glossy that 
it threw off the sunshine with a gleam, and 
a face which, besides being beautiful from 
regularity of feature and richness of com- 
plexion, had the impressiveness belonging 
to a marked brow and deep black eyes. 
She was lady-like, too, after the manner • 
of the feminine gentility of those days; : 
characterised by a certain state and dig- 
nity, rather than by the delicate, evanes- 
cent, and indescribable grace, which is now 
recognised as its indication. And never 
had Hester Prynne appeared more lady- 
like, in the antique interpretation of the 
term, than as she issued from the prison. 
Those who had before known her, and had 
expected to behold her dimmed and ob- 
scured by a disastrous cloud, were aston- 
ished, and even startled, to perceive how_ 
her beauty shone out, and made a halo of \ 
the misfortune and ignominy in which she 



94 The Scarlet Letter 

was enveloped. It may be true, that, to 
a sensitive observer, there was something 
exquisitely painful in it. Her attire, which, 
indeed, she had wrought for the occasion, 
in prison, and had modelled much after her 
own fancy, seemed to express the attitude 
of her spirit, the desperate recklessness of 
her mood, by its wild and picturesque pe- 
culiarity. But the point which drew all 
eyes, and, as it were, transfigured the 
wearer, — so that both men and women, 
who had been familiarly acquainted with 
Hester Prynne, were now impressed as if 
they beheld her for the first time, — was 
that Scarlet Letter, so fantastically em- 
broidered and illuminated upon her bosom. 
It had the effect of a spell, taking her 
out of the ordinary relations with hu- 
manity, and enclosing her in a sphere by 
herself. 

" She hath good skill at her needle, 
that's certain," remarked one of her female 
spectators ; " but did ever a woman, before 
this brazen hussy, contrive such a way of 
showing it ! Why, gossips, what is it but 
to laugh in the faces of our godly magis- 
trates, and make a pride out of what they, 
worthy gentlemen, meant for a punish- 
ment ? " 



\ 



The Alarkct-Phce 95 

" It were well," muttered the most iron- 
visaged of the old dames, " if we stripped 
Madam Hester's rich gown off her dainty 
shoulders ; and as for the red letter, which 
she hath stitched so curiously, I'll bestow 




a rag of mine own rheumatic flannel, to 
make a fitter one! " 

" O, peace, neighbours, peace ! " whis- 
pered their youngest companion. "Do not 
let her hear you 1 Not a stitch in that em- 
broidered letter, but she has felt it in her 
heart." 

The grim beadle now made a gesture 
with his staff. 



96 The Scarlet Letter 

" Make way, good people, make way, in 
the King's name ! " cried he. " Open a 
passage ; and, I promise ye. Mistress 
Prynne shall be set where man, woman, 
and child may have a fair sight of her 
brave apparel, from this time till an hour 
past meridian, A blessing on the right- 
eous Colony of the Massachusetts, where 
iniquity is dragged out into the sunshine ! 
Come along. Madam Hester, and show 
your scarlet letter in the market-place ! '\ 

A lane was forthwith opened through 
the crowd of spectators. Preceded by the 
beadle, and attended by an irregular pro- 
cession of stern-browed men and unkindly- 
visaged women, Hester Prynne set forth 
towards the place appointed for her pun- 
ishment. A crowd of eager and curious 
schoolboys, understanding little of the 
matter in hand, except that it gave them 
a half-holiday, ran before her progress, 
turning their heads continually to stare 
into her face, and at the winking baby in 
her arms, and at the ignominious letter on 
her breast. It was no great distance, in 
those days, from the prison-door to the 
market-place. Measured by the prisoner's 
experience, however, it might be reckoned 
a journey of some length ; for, haughty a^ 



The Market-Place 97 

her demeanour was, she perchance under- 
went an agony from every footstep of those 
that thronged to see her, as if her' heart 
had been flung into the street for them all 
to spurn and trample upon. In our nature, "^ 
however, there is a provision, alike marvel-; 
lous and merciful, that the sufferer should \ 
never know the intensity of what he eiv 
dures by its present torture, but chiefly by 
the pang that rankles after it. With almost -^ 
a serene deportment, therefore, Hester 
Prynne passed through this portion of her 
ordeal, and came to a sort of scaffold, at 
the western extremity of the market-place. 
It stood nearly beneath the eaves of Bos- 
ton's earlieft church, and appeared to be 
a fixture there. 

In fact, this scaffold constituted a portion 
of a penal machine, which now, for two or 
three generations past, has been merely 
historical and traditionary among us, but 
was held, in the old time, to be as effectual 
an agent in the promotion of good citizen- 
ship, as ever was the guillotine among the 
terrorists of France. It was, in short, the 
platform of the pillory ; and above it rose 
the framework of that instrument of disci- 
pline, so fashioned as to confine the human 
head in its tight grasp, and thus hold it up 



V ^ 



98 The Scarlet Letter 

to the public gaze. The very ideal of igno- 
miny was embodied and made manifest in 
this contrivance of wood and iron. There 
can be no outrage, methinks, against our 
common nature, — whatever be the delin- 
quencies of the individual, -— no outrage 
more flagrant than to forbid the culprit to 
hide his face for shame ; as it was the es- 
sence of this punishment to do. In Hester 
Prynne's instance, however, as not unfre- 
quently in other cases, her sentence bore, 
that she should stand a certain time upon 
the platform, but without undergoing that 
gripe about the neck and confinement of 
the head, the proneness to which was the 
most devilish characteristic of ttiis ugly en- 
gine. Knowing well her part, she ascended 
a flight of wooden steps, and was thus dis- 
played to the surrounding multitude, at 
about the height of a man's shoulders above 
the street. 

Had there been a Papist among the crowd 
of Puritans, he might have seen in this beau- 
tiful woman, so picturesque in her attire and 
mien, and with the infant at her bosom, 
an object to remind him of the image of 
Divine Maternity, which so many illustrious 
painters have vied with one another to rep- 
resent ; something which should remind 



The Market-Place 99 

him, indeed, but onljr by contrast, of that 
sacred image of sinless motherhood, whose 
infant was to redeem the world. Here, 
there was the taint of deepest sin in the 
most sacred quality of human life, working 
such effect, that the world was only the 
darker for this woman's beauty, and the 
more lost for the infant that she had borne. 
The scene was not without a mixture of 
awe, such as must always invest the spec- ^ 

tacle of guilt and shame in a fellow-creature, 
before society shall have grown corrupt 
enough to smile, instead of shuddering, at 
it. The witnesses of Hester Prynne's dis- 
grace had not yet passed beyond their 
simplicity. They were stern enough to 
look upon her death, had that been the 
sentence, without a murmur at its se- 
verity, but had none of the heartlessness 
of another social state, which would find 
only a theme for jest in an exhibition like 
the present. Even had there been a dis- 
position to turn the matter into ridicule, it 
must have been repressed and overpowered 
by the solemn presence of men no less 
dignified than the Governor, and several of 
his counsellors, a judge, a general, and the 
ministers of the town ; all of whom sat or 
stood in a balcony of the meeting-house, 



lOO The Scarlet Letter 

looking down upon the platform. When 
such personages could constitute a part of 
the spectacle, without risking the majesty 
or reverence of rank and office, it was 
safely to be inferred that the infliction of 
a legal sentence would have an earnest 
and effectual meaning. Accordingly, the 
crowd was sombre and grave. The un- 
happy culprit sustained herself as best a 
woman might, under the heavy weight of 
a thousand unrelenting eyes, all fastened 
upon her, and concentrated at her bosom. 
It was almost intolerable to be borne. Of 
an impulsive and passionate nature, she 
had fortified herself to encounter the stings 
and venomous stabs of public contumely, 
wreaking itself in every variety of insult ; 
but there was a quality so much more 
terrible in the solemn mood of the popular 
mind, that she longed rather to behold all 
those rigid countenances contorted with 
scornful merriment, and herself the object. 
Had a roar of laughter burst from the 
multitude, — each man, each woman, each 
little shrill-voiced child, contributing their 
individual parts, — Hester Prynne might 
have repaid them all with a bitter and dis- 
dainful smile. But, under the leaden in- 
fliction which it wa§ ber doom to endure, 



■\ 



The Market-Place 1 01 

she felt, at moments, as if she must needs 
shriek out with the full power of her lungs, 
and cast herself from the scaffold down 
upon the ground, or else go mad at once. 

Yet there were intervals when the whole 
scene, in which she was the most conspic- 
uous object, seemed to vanish from her 
eyes, or, at least, glimmered indistinctly 
before them, like a mass of imperfectly 
shaped and spectral images. Her mind, 
and especially her memory, was preternat- 
urally active, and kept bringing up other 
scenes than this roughly hewn street of a 
little town, on the edge of the Western 
wilderness ; other faces than were lowerihg 
upon her from beneath the brims of those 
steeple-crowned hats. Reminiscences, the 
most trifling and immaterial, passages of 
infancy and school-days, sports, childish 
quarrels, and the little domestic traits of 
her maiden years, came swarming back 
upon her, intermingled with recollections 
of whatever was gravest in her subsequent 
life ; one picture precisely as vivid as an- 
other ; as if all were of similar importance, 
or all alike a play. Possibly, it was an in- 
stinctive device of her spirit, to relieve 
itself, by the exhibition of these phantas- 
magoric forms, from the cruel weight and 
hardness of the reality. 



I02 The Scarlet Letter 

Be that as it might, the scaffold of the 
pillory was a point of view that revealed to 
Hester Prynne the entire track along which 
she had been treading, since her happy in- 
fancy. Standing on that miserable emi- 
nence, she saw again her native village, in 
Old England, and her paternal home ; a 



decayed house of grey stone, with a poverty- 
stricken aspect, but retaining a half-oblit- 
erated shield of arms over the portal, in 
token of antique gentility. She saw her 
father s face with its bald brow, and rev- 
erend white beard that flowed over the 
old-fashioned Elizabeth- 
an niff; her mother's, 
too, with the look of 
heedful and anxious 
love which it always 
wore in her remem- 
brance, and which, 
even since her death, 
had so often laid the 
impediment of a gentle 
remonstrance m her daughter's pathway. 
She saw her own face, glowing with 




The Market-Place 



103 



girlish beauty, and illuminating all the 
interior of thu dusky mirror in which 
she had been wont 
to gaze at it. Th e 
she beheld anothc 
countenance, of a man 
/ well stricken in yea s 
a pale, thin, schola 
like visage, with eyes 
dim and bleared by 
the lamp-light that 
had served them to 
pore over many pon 
derous books. Y t 
those same blea ed 
optics had a strange 
penetrating powe 
when it was the r 
owner's purpose o 
read the human soul 
This figure of he 
study and the clois e 
as Hester Prynne 
womanly fancy fa led 
not to recall, \ s 
slightly deform 1 
with the left shoul I 
than the right. Next rose before her, 
in memory's picture-gallery, the intricate 




t fie h gher 



I04 



The Scarlet Letter 



and narrow thoroughfares, the tall, grey 
houses, the huge cathedrals, and the pub- 
lic edifices, ancient in date and quaint in 
architecture, of a Continental city ; where 
a new life had awaited her, still in connec- 
tion with the misshapen scholar ; a new life, 
but feeding itself on time-worn materials, 
like a tuft of green moss on a crumbling 
wall. Lastly, in lieu of these shifting 
scenes, came back the rude market-place of 
the Puritan settlement, with all the towns- 
people assembled and levelling their stern 
regards at Hester Prynne, — yes, at her- 
self, — who stood on the scaffold of the 
pillory, an infant on her arm, and the letter 
A, in scarlet, fantastically embroidered with 
gold thread, upon her bosom ! 

Could it be true ? She clutched the child 
so fiercely to her breast, that it sent forth 
a cry ; she turned her eyes downward at 
the scarlet letter, and even touched it with 
her finger, to assure herself that the infant 
and the shame were real. Yes! — these 
were her realities, — all else had vanished ! 



^. 



THE RECOGNITION 



FROM this intense consciousness of 
being the object of severe and univer- 
sal observation, the wearer of the scarlet 
letter was at length relieved by discerning, 
on the outskirts of the crowd, a figure 
which irresistibly took possession of her 
thoughts. An Indian, in his native garb, 
was standing th ere ; 
but the red men 
were not so infre- 
quent visitors of 
the English settle- 
ments, that one of 
them would have 

attracted any no- 17/V"* Ui 

tice from Hester ^ 

Prynne, at such a time ; much less would he 
have excluded all other objects and ideas 
from her mind. By the Indian's side, and 
evidently sustaining a companionship with 
him, stood a white man, clad in a strange 
disarray of civilised and savage costume. 




io6 The Scarlet Letter 

He was small in stature, with a furrowed 
visage, which, as yet, could hardly be 
termed aged. There was a remarkable 
intelligence in his features, as of a person 
who had so cultivated his mental part that 
it could not fail to mould the physical to 
itself, and become manifest by unmistak- 
able tokens. Although, by a seemingly 
careless arrangement of his heterogeneous 
garb, he had endeavoured to conceal or 
abate the peculiarity, it was sufficiently 
evident to Hester Prynne, that one of this 
man's shoulders rose higher than the other. 
Again, at the first instant of perceiving 
that thin visage, and the slight deformity 
of the figure, she pressed her infant to her 
bosom, with so convulsive a force that the 
poor babe uttered another cry of pain. 
But the mother did not seem to hear it. 

At his arrival in the market-place, and 
some time before she saw him, the stranger 
had bent his eyes on Hester Prynne. It 
was carelessly, at first, like a man chiefly 
accustomed to look inward, and to whom 
external matters are of little value and im- 
port, unless they bear relation to something 
within his mind. Very soon, however, his 
look became keen and penetrative. A 
writhing horror twisted itself across his 



The Rccogfiition 107 

features, like a snake gliding swiftly over 
them, and making one little pause, with all 
its wreathed intervolutions in open sight. 
His face darkened with some powerful 
emotion, which, nevertheless, he so instan- 
taneously controlled by an effort of his will, 
that, save at a single moment, its expres- 
sion might have passed for calmness. After 
a brief space, the convulsion grew almost 
imperceptible, and finally subsided into the 
depths of his nature. When he found the 
eyes of Hester Prynne fastened on his own, 
and saw that she appeared to recognise J 
him, he slowly and calmly raised his finger, 1 
made a gesture with it in the air, and laid * 
it on his lips. 

Then, touching the shoulder of a towns- 
man who stood next to him, he addressed 
him in a formal and courteous manner. 

"I pfay you, good Sir," said he, "who is 
this woman } — and wherefore is she here 
set up to public shame V 

" You must needs be a stranger in this 
region, friend," answered the townsman, 
looking curiously at the questioner and his 
savage companion ; " else you would surely 
have heard of Mistress Hester Prynne, and 
her evil doings. She hath raised a great 
scandal, I promise you, in godly Master 
Dimmesdale's church." 



/ 



lo8 The Scarlet Letter 



" You say truly," replied the other. " I 
am a stranger, and have been a wanderer, 
sorely against my will. I have met with 
grievous mishaps by sea and land, and have 
been long held in bonds among the heathen- 
folk, to the southward ; and am now brought 
hither by this Indian, to be redeemed out 
of my captivity. Will it please you, there- 
fore, to tell me of Hester Prynne's, — have 
I her name rightly.? — of this woman's of- 
fences, and what has brought her to yonder 
scaffold?" 




** Truly, friend, and methinks it must 
gladden your heart, after your troubles and 
sojourn in the wilderness," said the towns- 
man, "to find yourself, at length, in a land 
where iniquity is searched out, and pun- 
ished in the sight of rulers and people ; as 
here in our godly New England. Yonder 
woman. Sir, you must know, was the wife 
of a certain learned man, English by birth, 
but who had long dwelt in Amsterdam, 
whence, some good time agone, he was 
minded to cross over and cast in his lot 



The RecogmtioH 109 

with us of the Massachusetts. To this 
purpose, he sent his wife before him, re- 
maining himself to look after some neces- 
sary affairs. Marry, good Sir, in some two 
years, or less, that the woman has been a 
dweller here in Boston, no tidings have 
come of this learned 
gentleman. Master 
Prynne ; and his young 
wife, look you, being 
left to her own mis- 
guidance " 

" Ah ! — aha ! — I con- 
ceive you," said the 
stranger, with a bitter 
smile. "So learned a 
man as you speak of 
should have learned 
this too in his books. 
And who, by your favour, Sir, may be the 
father of yonder babe — it is some three or 
four months old, I should judge — which 
Mistress Prynne is holding in her arms ?" 

"Of a truth, friend, that matter remain- 
cth a riddle ; and the Daniel who shall ex- ' 
pound it is yet a-wanting," answered the 
townsman. " Madam Hester absolutely re- 
fuseth to speak, and the magistrates have 
laid their heads together in vain. Perad- 




/V^v 



no The Scarlet Letter 

venture the guilty one stands looking on 

at this sad spectacle, unknown of man, and 

forgetting that God sees him." 

"The learned man,"observed the stranger, 

, with another smile, " should come himself 

i to look into the mystery." 

" It behooves him well, if he be still in 
life," responded the townsman. "Now, 
good Sir, our Massachusetts magistracy, 
bethinking themselves that this woman is 
youthful and fair, and doubtless was strongly 
tempted to her fall ; — and that, moreover, 
as is most likely, her husband may be at 
the bottom of the sea; — they have not 
been bold to put in force the extremity of 
our righteous law against her. The pen- 
alty thereof is death. But in their great 
mercy and tenderness of heart, they have 
doomed Mistress Prynne to stand only a 
space of three hours on the platform of the 
pillory, and then and thereafter, for the re- 
mainder of her natural life, to wear a mark 
of shame upon her bosom." 
\ "A wise sentence!" remarked the stran- 
^ ger, gravely bowing his head. " Thus she 
will be a living sermon against sin, until the 
ignominious letter be engraved upon her 
S^ tombstone. It irks me, nevertheless, that 
\ the partner of her iniquity should not, at 



_->. 



The Recognition IH 

least, stand on the scaffold by her side. 
But he will be known ! — he will be known t 
— he will be known ! " 

He bowed courteously to the communi- 
cative townsman, and, whispering a few 
words to his Indian attendant, they both 
made their way through 
the crowd. 

While this passed, Hes 
ter Prynne had been stand 
ing on her pedestal, still 
with a fixed gaze towards 
the stranger ; so fixed a 
gaze, that, at moments of 
intense absorption, all other 
objects in the visible world 
seemed to vanish, leavmg 
only him and her. Such an 
interview, perhaps, would 
have been more terrible 
than even to meet him as 
she now did, with the 
hot, midday sun burning 
down upon her face, and lighting up its 
shame ; with the scarlet token of infamy on 
her breast ; with the sin-bom infant in her 
arms ; with a whole people, drawn forth as 
to a festival, staring at the features that 
should have been seen only in the quiet 



] 




1 1 2 The Scarlet Letter 

gleam of the fireside, in the happy shadow 
of a home, or beneath a matronly veil, at 
church. Dreadful as it was, she was con- 
scious of a shelter in the presence of these 
thousand witnesses. It was better to stand 
thus, with so many betwixt him and her, 
than to greet him, face to face, they two 
alone. She fled for refuge, as it were, to 
the public exposure, and dreaded the 
moment when its protection should be 
withdrawn from her. Involved in these 
thoughts, she scarcely heard a voice behind 
her, until it had repeated her name more 
than once, in a loud and solemn tone, audi- 
ble to the whole multitude. 

" Hearken unto me, Hester Prynne," said 
the voice. 

It has already been noticed, that directly 
over the platform on which Hester Prynne 
stood was a kind of balcony, or open gal- 
lery, appended to the meeting-house. It 
was the place whence proclamations were 
wont to be made, amidst an assemblage of 
the magistracy, with all the ceremonial 
that attended such public observances in 
those days. Here, to witness the scene 
which we are describing, sat Governor 
Bellingham himself, with four sergeants 
about his chair, bearing halberds, as a guard 




The RecoguitioH II3 

of honour. He wore a dark feather in bis 
hat, a border of em- 
broidery on his cloak, 
and a black velvet tu 
nic beneath ; a gentle 
man advanced in years, 
and with a hard 
perience written 
his wrinkles. He 
was not ill fitted to be 
the head and represen- 
tative of a community, which owed its ori- 
gin and progress, and its present state of de- 
velopment, not to the impulses of youth, 
but to the stem and tempered energies of 
manhood, and the sombre sagacity of age ; 
accomplishing so much, precisely because 
it imagined and hoped so little. The other 
eminent characters, by 
whom . the chief ruler 
was surrounded, were 
distinguished by a 
dignity of mien, belong 
ing to a period when 
the forms of authority were felt to possess 
the sacredness of divine institutions. They 
were, doubtless, good men, just, and sage. 
But, out of the whole human family, it would 
not have heen easy to select the same num- 




114 Tf^^ Scarlet Letter 

ber of wise and virtuous persons, who should 
be less capable of sitting in judgment on 
an erring woman's heart, and disentangling 
its mesh of good and evil, than the sages of 
rigid aspect towards whom Hester Prynne 
now turned her face. She seemed con- 
scious, indeed, that whatever sympathy she 
might expect lay in the larger and warmer 
heart of the multitude ; for, as she lifted 
her eyes towards the balcony, the unhappy 
woman grew pale and trembled. 

The voice which had called her attention 
was that of the reverend and famous John 
Wilson, the eldest clergyman of Boston, 
a great scholar, like most of his contempo- 
raries in the profession, and withal a man 
of kind and genial spirit. This last attri- 
bute, however, had been less carefully 
developed than his intellectual gifts, and 
was, in truth, rather a matter of shame 
than self-congratulation with him. There 
he stood, with a border of grizzled locks 
beneath his skull-cap ; while his grey eyes, 
accustomed to the shaded light of his 
study, were winking, like those of Hester's 
infant, in the unadulterated sunshine. He 
looked like the darkly engraved portraits 
which we see prefixed to old volumes of 
sermons ; and had no more right than one 



\ 



The Recognition 115 

of those portraits would have, to step forth, 
as he now did, and meddle with a question 
of human guiltj passion, and anguish. 

" Hester Prynne,'* said the clergyman, 
"I have striven with my young brother 
here, under whose preaching of the word 
you have been privileged to sit," — here 
Mr. Wilson laid his hand on the shoulder 
of a pale young man beside him, — " I have 
sought, I say, to persuade this godly youth, 
that he should deal with you, here in the 
face of Heaven, and before these wise and 
upright rulers, and in hearing of all the 
people, as touching the vileness and black- 
ness of your sin. Knowing your natural 
temper better than I, he could the better 
judge what arguments to use, whether of 
tenderness or terror, such as might prevail 
oyer your hardness and obstinacy; inso- 
much that you should no longer hide the 
name of him who tempted you to this 
grievous fall. But he opposes to me, (with 
a young man*s ovcr-softncss, albeit wise 
beyond his years,) that it were wronging 
the very nature of woman to force her to 
lay open her heart's secrets in such broad 
daylight, and in presence of so great a 
multitude. Truly, as I sought to convince 
him, the shame lay in the commission of 



ii6 



Tke Scarlet Letter 



the sin, and not in the showing of it forth. 
What say you to it, once again, brother 
Dimmesdale? Must it be thou or I that 
shall deal with this poor sinner's soul ? " 
There was a murmur among the digni- 
fied and reverend occu- 
pants of the balcony; 
and Governor Belling- 
ham gave expression to 
its purport, speaking in 
an authoritative voice, 
although tempered with 
respect towards the 
youthful clergyman 
whom he addressed. 

"Good Master Dim- 
mesdale," said he, "the 
responsibility of this 
woman's soul lies greatly 
with you. It behooves 
you, therefore, to exhort her to repentance, 
and to confession, as a proof and conse- 
quence thereof." 

The directness of this appeal drew the 
eyes of the whole crowd upon the Reverend 
Mr. Dimmesdale; a young clergyman, who 
had come from one of the great English 
universities, bringing all the learning of 
the age into our wild forest-land. His 




The Recognition 



"7 



eloquence and religious fervour had already 
given the earnest of high eminence in his 
profession. He was a person of very strik- 
ing aspect, with a white, lofty, and impend- 
ing brow, large, brown, melancholy eyes, and 
a mouth which, unless when he forcibly 
compressed it, was apt to be tremulous, 
expressing both nervous sensibility and a 
vast power of self-restraint. Notwithstand- 
ing his high native gifts and scholar-like 
attainments, there was an air about this 
young minister, — an apprehensive, a star 
tied, a half frightened 
look, — as of a bemg 
who felt himself quite 
astray and at a loss m 
the pathway of human 
existence, and could onlj 
be at ease in some seclu 
) sion of his own There 
fore, so far as his duties 
would permit, he trode 
in the shadowy by paths, 
and thus kept himself 
simple and childlike ; coming forth, when 
occasion was, with a freshness, and fra- 
grance, and dewy purity of thought, which, 
as many people said, affected them lik9 ^ 
the speech of an angel. 




Ii8 The Scarlet Letter 

Such was the young man whom the 
Reverend Mr. Wilson and the Governor 
had introduced so openly to the public 
notice, bidding him speak, in the hearing 
of all men, to that mystery of a woman's 
soul, so sacred even in its pollution. The 
trying nature of his position drove the 
blood from his cheek, and made his lips 
tremulous. 

" Speak to the woman, my brother," 
said Mr. Wilson. " It is of moment to 
her soul, and therefore, as the worshipful 
Governor says, momentous to thi ne own^^ 
in whose charge hers is. Exhort her to 
confess the truth ! " 

The Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale bent his 
head, in silent prayer, as it seemed, and 
then came forward. 

" Hester Prynne," said he, leaning over 
the balcony, and looking down steadfastly 
into her eyes, " thou hearest what this 
good man says, and seest the accounta- 
bility under which I labour. If thou feelest 
it to be for thy soul's peace, and that thy 
earthly punishment will thereby be made 
more effectual to salvation, I charge thee 
to speak out the name of thy fellow-sinner 
and fellow-sufferer ! Be not silent from 
any mistaken pity and tenderness for him ; 



The Rccogtiition !i9 

for, believe me, Hester, though he were to 
step down from a high place, and stand 
there beside thee, on thy pedestal of 
shame, yet better were it so, than to hide 
a guilty heart through life. What can thy 
silence do for him, except it tempt him — 
yea, compel him, as it were — to add hy- j 

pocrisy to sin ? Heaven hath granted thee 
an open ignominy, that thereby thou may- 
est work out an open triumph over the 
evil within thee, and the sorrow without. 
Take heed how thou deniest to him — 
who, perchance, hath not the courage to 
grasp it for himself — the bitter, but whole- 
some, cup that is now presented to thy 
lips ! " 

The young pastor's voice was tremu- 
lously sweet, rich, deep, and broken. The 
feeling that it so evidently manifested, 
rather than the direct purport of the 
words, caused it to vibrate within all 
hearts, and brought the listeners into one 
accord of sympathy. Even the poor baby, 
at Hester's bosom, was affected by the 
same influence ; for it directed its hitherto 
vacant gaze towards Mr. Dimmesdale, and 
held up its little arms, with a half pleased, 
half plaintive murmur. So powerful seemed 
the minister's appeal, that the people could 



I20 The Scarlet Letter 

not believe but that Hester Prynne would 
speak out the guilty name ; or else that 
the guilty one himself, in whatever high 
or lowly place he stood, would be drawn 
forth by an inward and inevitable neces- 
sity, and compelled to ascend the sca£Eold. 

Hester shook her head. 

" Woman, transgress not beyond the 
limits of Heaven's mercy ! ** cried the 
Reverend Mr. Wilson, more harshly than 
before. " That little babe hath been 
gifted with a voice, to second and confirm 
the counsel which thou hast heard. Speak 
out the name ! That, and thy repentance, 
may avail to take the scarlet letter off thy 
breast." 

" Never ! " replied Hester Prynne, look- 
ing, not at Mr. Wilson, but into the deep 
and troubled eyes of the younger clergy- 
man. " It is too deeply branded. Ye 
cannot take it off. And would that I 
might endure his agony, as well as mine I 

"Speak, woman!" said another voice, 
coldly and sternly, proceeding from the 
crowd about the scaffold. " Speak ; and 
give your child a father ! " 

" I will not speak ! " answered Hester, 
turning pale as death, but responding to 
this voice, which she too surely recognised. 



»» . 



The Recognition 12I 

" And my child must seek a heavenly 
Father; she shall never know an earthly 
one ! " 

"She will not speak!" murmured Mr. 
Dimmesdale, who, leaning over the bal- 
cony, with his hand upon his heart, had 
awaited the result of his appeal. He 
now drew back, with a long respiration. 
"Wondrous strength and generosity of a 
woman's Tieart ! She will not speak ! " 

Discerning the impracticable state of the 
poor culprit's mind, the elder clergyman, 
who had carefully prepared himself for the 
occasion, addressed to the multitude a dis- 
course on sin, in all its branches, but with 
continual reference to the ignominious 
letter. So forcibly did he dwell upon this 
symbol, for the hour or more during which 
his periods were rolling over the people's 
heads, that it assumed new terrors in their 
imagination, and seemed to derive its scar- 
let hue from the flames of the infernal pit. 
Hester Prynne, meanwhile, kept her place 
upon the pedestal of shame, with glazed 
eyes, and an air of weary indifference. 
She had borne, that morning, all that 
nature could endure ; and as her tempera- 
ment was not of the order that escapes 
from too intense suffering by a swoon, her 



The Scarlet Letter 



spirit could only shelter itself beneath a 
stony crust of insensibility, while the fac- 
ulties of animal life remained entire. In 
this state, the voice of the 
preacher thundered remorse- 
lessly, but unavailingly, upon 
her ears. The infant, during 
the latter portion of her 
ordeal, pierced the air with 
Its wailings and screams ; 
she strove to hush it, me- 
chanically, but seemed 
scarcely to sympathise with 
Its trouble. With the same 
hard demeanour, she was 
led back to prison, and vanished from the 
public gaze within its iron-clamped portal. 
It was whispered, by those who peered after 
her, that the scarlet letter threw a lurid 
gleam along the dark passage-way of the 
interior. 




IV 

THE INTERVIEW 

AFTER her return to the prison, Hes- 
ter Prynne was found to be in a 
state of nervous excitement that demanded 
constant watchfulness, lest she should per- 
petrate violence on herself, or do some 
half-frenzied mischief to the poor babe. 
As night approached, it proving impossible 
, to quell her insubordination by rebuke or 
threats of punishment. Master Brackett, 
the jailer, thought fit to introduce a physi- 
cian. He described, him as a man of skill 
in all Christian modes of physical science, 
and likewise familiar with whatever the 
savage people could teach, in respect to 
medicinal herbs and roots that grew in the 
forest. To say the truth, there was much 
need of professional assistance, not merely 
for Hester herself, but still more urgently 
for the child ; who, drawing its sustenance 
from the maternal bosom, seemed to have 
drank in with it all the turmoil, the anguish, 
and despair, which pervaded the mother's 

123 



124 ^^ Scarlet Letter 

system. It now writhed in convulsions of 
pain, and was a forcible type, in its little 
frame, of the moral agony which Hester 
Prynne had borne throughout the day. 

Closely following the jailer into the dis- 
mal apartment, appeared that individual, 
of singular aspect, whose presence in the 
crowd had been of such deep interest to 
the wearer of the scarlet letter. He was 
lodged in the prison, not as suspected of 
any offence, but as the most convenient 
and suitable mode of disposing of him, 
until the magistrates should have conferred 
with the Indian sagamores respecting his 
ransom. His name was announced as 
Roger Chillingworth. The jailer, after 
ushering him into the room, remained a 
moment, marvelling dt the comparative 
quiet that followed his entrance ; for Hes- 
ter Prynne had immediately become as still 
as death, although the child continued to 
moan. • 

" Prithee, friend, leave me alone with my 
patient," said the practitioner. " Trust me, 
good jailer, you shall briefly have peace in 
your house ; and, I promise you, Mistress 
Prynne shall hereafter be more amenable 
to just authority than you may have found 
her heretofore." 



■1 



The Interview \2% 

"Nay, if your worship can accomplish 
that," answered Master Brackett, " I shall 
own you for a man of skill indeed ! Verily, 
the woman hath been like a po ssessed on e ; 
and there lacks little, that I should take in 
hand to drive Satan out of her with 
stripes." 

The stranger had entered the room with 
the characteristic quietude of the profes- 
sion to which he announced himself as 
belonging. Nor did his demeanour change, 
when the withdrawal of the prison-keeper 
left him face to face with the woman, 
whose absorbed notice of him, in the crowd, 
had intimated so close a relation between 
himself and her. His first care was given 
to the child ; whose cries, indeed, as she 
lay writhing on the trundle-bed, made it of 
peremptory necessity to postpone all other 
business to the task of soothing her. He 
examined the in- 
fant carefully, 
and then pro- 
ceeded to un- 
clasp a leathern 
case, which he took from beneath his dress. 
It appeared to contain certain medical 
preparations, one of which he mingled with 
a cup of water. 




W 



126 The Scarlet Letter 

" My old studies in alchemy," observed 
he, "and my sojourn, for above a year 
past, among a people well versed in the 
kindly properties of simples, have made a 
better physician of me than many that 
claim the medical degree. Here, woman ! 
The child is yours, — she is none of mine, 
— neither will she recognise my voice or 
aspect as a father's. Administer this 
draught, therefore, with thine own hand.** 

Hester repelled the offered medicine, at 
the same time gazing with strongly marked 
apprehension into his face. 

" Wouldst thou avenge thyself on the in- 
nocent babe } " whispered she. 

" Foolish woman ! " responded the phy- 
sician, half coldly, half soothingly. " What 
should ail me to harm this misbegotten and 
miserable babe.? The medicine is potent 
for good; and were it niy child, — yea, 
mine own, as well as thine ! — I could do no 
better for it." 

As she still hesitated, being, in fact, in 
no reasonable state of mind, he took the in- 
fant in his arms, and himself administered 
the draught. It soon proved its eflScacy, 
and redeemed the leech's pledge. The 
moans of the little patient subsided; its 
convulsive tossings gradually ceased ; and 



'i 



The Interview 127 

in a few moments, as is the custom of 
young children after relief from pain, it 
sanlc into a profound and dewy slumber. 
The physician, as he had a fair right to be 
termed, next bestowed his attention on the 
mother. With calm and intent scrutiny, 
he felt her pulse, looked into her eyes, — a 
gaze that made her heart shrink and shud- 
der, because so familiar, and yet so strange 
and cold, — and, finally, satisfied with his 
investigation, proceeded to mingle another 
draught. 

"I know not Lethe nor Nepenthe," re- 
marked he ; " but I have learned many new 
secrets in the wilderness, and here is one 
of them, — a recipe that an Indian taught 
me, in requital of 
some lessons of my 
own, that were as old 
as Paracelsus. Drink 
it ! It may be less 
soothing than a sin- 
less conscience. That 
I cannot give thee. 
But it will calm theJ 
swell and heaving of ' 
thy passion, like oil 
thrown on the waves of a tempestuous sea." 

He presented the cup to Hester, who 



\ 




128 The Scarlet Letter 

received it with a slow, earnest look into his 
face ; not precisely a look of fear, yet full 
of doubt and questioning, as to what his 
purposes might be. She looked also at 
her slumbering child. 

"I have thought of death," said she, — 
" have wished for it, — would even have 
prayed for it, were it fit that such as I 
should pray for any thing. Yet, if death 
be in this cup, I bid thee think again, ere 
thou beholdest me quaff it. See ! It is 
even now at my lips." 

" Drink, then," replied he, still with the 
same cold composure. "Dost thou know 
me so little, Hester Prynne } Are my pur- 
poses wont to be so shallow } Even if I 
imagine a scheme of vengeance, what could 
I do better for my object than to let thee 
live, — than to give thee medicines against 
all harm and peril of life, — so that this 
burning shame may still blaze upon thy 
bosom .^" — As he spoke, he laid his long 
forefinger on the scarlet letter, which forth- 
with seemed to scorch into Hester's breast, 
as if it had been red-hot. He noticed her 
involuntary gesture, and smiled. — " Live, 
therefore, and bear about thy doom with 
thee, in the eyes of men and women, — in 
the eyes of him whom thou didst call thy 



The Interview 129 

husband, — in the eyes of yonder child ! 
And, that thou maycst live, take off this 
draught." 

Without further expostulation or delay, 
Hester Prynne drained the cup, and, at the 
motion of the man of skill, seated herself 
on the bed where the child was sleeping ; 
while he drew the only chair which the 
room afforded, and took his own seat be- 
side her. She could not but tremble at 
these preparations ; for she felt that — hav- 
ing now done all that humanity, or prin- 
ciple, or, if so it were, a refined cruelty, 
impelled him to do, for the relief of physi- 
cal suffering — he was next to treat with 
her as the man whom she had most deeply 
and irreparably injured. 

" Hester," said he, " I ask not wherefore, 
nor how, thou hast fallen into the pit, or 
say rather, thou hast ascended to the pedes- 
tal of infamy, on which I found thee. The 
reason is not far to seek. It was my folly, 
and thy weakness. I, — a" man of thought, 
— the book-worm of great libraries, — a 
man already in decay, having given my 
best years to feed the hungry dream of 
knowledge, — what had I to do with youth 
and beauty like thine own ! Misshapen 
from my birth-hour, how could I delude 



130 The Scarlet Letter 

myself with the idea that intellectual gifts 
might veil physical deformity in a young 
girl's fantasy ! Men call me wise. If sages 
~ were ever wise in their own behoof, I might 
have foreseen all this. I might have known 
that, as I came out of the vast and dismal 
forest, and entered this settlement of Chris- 
tian men, the very first object to meet my 
eyes would be thyself, Hester Prynne, 
standing up, a statue of ignominy, before 




the people. Nay, from the moment when we 
came down the old church-steps together, 
a married pair, I might have beheld the 
bale-fire of that scarlet letter blazing at the 
end of our path ! " 

"Thou knowest," said Hester, —for, de- 
pressed as she was, she could not endure 
this last quiet stab at the token of her 
shame, — "thou knowest that I was frank 
with thee. I felt no love, nor feigned any." 



The Interview 131 

"True," replied he. " It was my folly ! 
I have said it. But, up to that epoch of 
my life, I had lived in vain. The world 
had been so cheerless ! My heart was a 
habitation large enough for many guests, 
but lonely and chill, and without a house- 
hold fire. I longed to kindle one ! It 
seemed not so wild a dream, — old as I was, 
and sombre as I was, and misshapen as I 
was, — that the simple bliss, which is scat- 
tered far and wide, for all mankind to 
gather up, might yet be mine. And so, 
Hester, I drew thee into my heart, into its 
innermost chamber, and sought to warm 
thee by the warmth which thy presence 
made there ! " 

"I have greatly wronged thee," mur- 
mured Hester. 

"We have wronged each other," an- 
swered he. " Mine was the first wrong, 
when I betrayed thy budding youth into a 
false and unnatural relation with my decay. 
Therefore, as a man who has not thought 
and philosophised in vain, I seek no ven- 
geance, plot no evil against thee. Between 
thee and me, the scale hangs fairly bal- 
anced. But, Hester, the man lives who 
has wronged us both ! Who is he .^ " 

" Ask me not ! " replied Hester Prynne, 



132 The Scarlet Letter 

I 
looking firmly into his face. " That thou 

shalt never know ! " 

" Never, sayest thou ? " rejoined he, with 
a smile of dark and self-relying intelligence. 
" Never know him ! Believe me, Hester, 
there are few things, — whether in the out- 
ward world, or, to a certain depth, in the 
invisible sphere of thought, — few things 
hidden from the man, who devotes himself 
earnestly and unreservedly to the solution 
of a mystery. Thou mayest cover up thy 
secret from the prying multitude. Thou 
mayest conceal it, too, from the ministers 
and magistrates, even as thou didst this 
day, when they sought to wrench the name 
out of thy heart, and give thee a partner 
on thy pedestal. But, as for me, I come 
to the inquest with other senses than they 
possess. I shall seek this man, as I have 
sought truth in books ; as I have sought 
gold in alchemy. There is a sympathy 
that will make me conscious of him. I 
shall see him tremble. I shall feel myself 
shudder, suddenly and unawares. Sooner 
or later, he must needs be mine ! " 

The eyes of the wrinkled scholar glowed 
so intensely upon her, that Hester Prynne 
clasped her hands over her heart, dreading 
lest he should read the secret there at 
once. 



The Inten'iew 133 

"Thou wilt not reveal his name? Not 
the less he is mine," resumed he, with a 
look of conficlenec, as if destiny were at 
one with him. " He bears no letter of in- 
^my wrought into his <;armciit, as thou 
dost ; but I shall read it on his heart. 
Yet fear not for him ! Think not that t 
shall interfere with Heaven's own method 
erf retribution, or, to my own loss, betray 




him to the gripe of humin law Neither 
_do thou ima^methat I shall contrive aught 
gainst his life no nor i^ainst his fame, 
if, as I judge he be a m^n of fair repute. 
Let him live ! Let him hide himself in 
outward honour, if he may ! Not the less 
he shall be mine ! " 

"Thy acts are like mercy," said Hester, 
bewildered and appalled. "Rut thy words 
interpret thee as a terror ! " 



134 '^^^ Scarlet Letter 

"One thing, thou that wast my wife, I 
would enjoin upon thee," continued the 
scholar. ** Thou hast kept the secret of thy 
paramour. Keep, likewise, mine ! There 
are none in this land that know me. 
Breathe not, to any human soul, that thou 
didst ever call me husband ! Here, on 
this wild outskirt of the earth, I shall pitch 
my tent ; for, elsewhere a wanderer, and 
isolated from human interests, I find here 
a woman, a man, a child, amongst whom 
and myself there exist the closest liga- 
ments. No matter whether of love or 
hate ; no matter whether of right or wrong ! 
Thou and thine, Hester Prynne, belong to 
me. My home is where thou art, and 
where he is. But betray me not ! " 

** Wherefore dost thou desire it } " in- 
quired Hester, shrinking, she hardly knew 
why, from this secret bond. "Why not 
announce thyself openly, and cast me off 
at once } " 

" It may be," he replied, " because I 
will not encounter the dishonour that be- 
smirches the husband of a faithless woman. 
It may be for other reasons. Enough, it 
is my purpose to live and die unknown. 
Let, therefore, thy husband be to the 
world as one already dead, and of whom 



I 



The Interview 135 

no tidings shall ever come. Recognise 
me not, by word, by sign, by look ! 
Breathe not the secret, above all, to the 
man t hou wott est of . Shouldst thou fail 
me in this, beware ! His fame, his posi- 
tion, his life, will be in my hands. Be- 
ware ! 

" I will keep thy secret, as I have his," 
said Hester. 

" Swear it ! " rejoined he. 

And she took the oath. 

" And now, Mistress Prynne," said old 
Roger Chillingworth, as he was hereafter 
to be named, " I leave thee alone ; alone 
with thy infant, and the scarlet letter ! 
How is it, Hester.^ Doth thy sentence 
bind thee to wear the token in thy sleep } 
Art thou not afraid of nightmares and hid- 
eous dreams ? " 

"Why dost thou smile so at me.?" in- 
quired Hester, troubled at the expression 
of his eyes. " Art thou like the Black 
Man that haunts the forest round about 
us .? Hast thou enticed me into a bond 
that will prove the ruin of my soul .? " 

"Not thy soul," he answered, with an- j 
other smile. " No, not thine ! " ' 



HESTER AT HER NEEDLE 



HESTER PRYNNE'S term of con- 
finement was now at an end. Her 
prison-door was thrown open, and she 
came forth into the 
sunshine, which, 
falling on all alike, 
seemed, to her sick 
and morbid heart, 
as if meant for no 
other purpose than 
to reveal the sdarlet 
letter on her breast. 
Perhaps there was 
a more real torture 
in her first unattended footsteps from 
the threshold of the prison, than even 
in the procession and spectacle that have 
been described, where she was made the 
common infamy, at which all mankind 
was summoned to point its finger. Then, 
she was supported by an unnatural tension 
of the nerves, and by all the combative 
136 




Hester at Her Needle 137 

energy of her character, which enabled her 
to convert the scene into a kind of lurid 
triumph. It was, moreover, a separate 
and insulated event, to occur but once in 
her lifetime, and to meet which, therefore, 
reckless of economy, she might call up the 
vital strength that would have sufficed for 
many quiet years. The very law that con- 
demned her — a giant of stern features, 
but with vigour to support, as well as to 
annihilate, in his iron arm — had held her 
up, through the terrible ordeal of her 
ignominy. But now, with this unattended 
walk from her prison-door, began the daily 
custom, and she must either sustain and 
carry it forward by the ordinary resources 
of her nature, or sink beneath it. She 
could no longer borrow from the future, to 
help her through the present grief. To- 
morrow would bring its own trial with it ; 
so would the next day, and so would the 
next ; each its own trial, and yet the very 
same that was now so unutterably grievous 
to be borne. The days of the far-off future 
would toil onward, still with the same bur- 
den for her to take up, and bear along with 
her, but never to fling down ; for the ac- 
cumulating days, and added years, would 
pile up their misery upon the heap of shame. 



\ 



{ 



138 T/te Scarlet Letter 

Throughout them all, giving up her indi- 
viduality, she would become the general 
symbol at which the preacher and moralist 
might point, and in which they might vivify 
and embody their images of woman's frailty 
and sinful passion. Thus the young and 
pure would be taught to look at her, with 
the scarlet letter flaming on her breast, — 
at her, the child of honourable parents, — at 
her, the mother of a babe, that would here- 
after be a woman, — at her, who had once 
been innocent, — as the figure, the body, 
the reality of sin. And over her grave, the 
infamy that she must carry thither would 
be her only monument. 

It may seem marvellous, that, with the 
world before her, — kept by no restrictive 
clause of her condemnation within the 
limits of the Puritan settlement, so remote 
and so obscure, — free to return to her 
birth-place, or to any other Europoan land, 
and there hide her character and identity 
under a new exterior, as completely as if 
emerging into another state of being, — and 
having also the passes of the dark, inscru- 
table forest open to her, where the wildness 
of her nature might assimilate itself with a 
people whose customs and life were alien 
from the law that had condemned her, — /it 



Hesttr at Her Needle 139 

may seem marvellous, that this woman 
should still call that place her home, where, 
and where only, she must needs be the type 
of shame. But there is a fatality, a feeling 
so irresistible and inevitable that it has the 
force of doom, which almost invariably com- 
pels human beinj^s to linj^er around and 
haunt, ghost-like, the spot where some great 
and marked event has given the colour to 
their lifetime; and still the more irresistibly, 
the darker the tinge that saddens it. Her 
sin, her ignominy, were the roots which she 
had struck into the soil. It was as if a new, 
birth, with stronger assimilations than the 
first, had converted the forest-land, still so 
uncongenial to every other pilgrim and 
wanderer, into Hester Piynne's wild and 
dreary, but life - long 
home. All other scenes 
of earth — even that 
village of rural England, 
where happy infancy and 
stainless maidenhood 
seemed yet to be in her 
mother's keeping, like 
garments put off long 
ago — were foreign to her in comparison. 
The chain that bound her here was of iron 
links, and galling to her inmost soul, but 
never could be broken. 




140 The Scarlet Letter 

It might be, too, — doubtless it was so, 
although she hid the secret from herself, 
and grew pale whenever it struggled out 
of her heart, like a serpent from its hole, 
— it might be that another feeling kept 
her within the scene and pathway that had 
been so fatal. There dwelt, there trode the 
feet of one with whom she deemed herself 
connected in a union, that, unrecognised 
on earth, would bring them together be- 
fore the bar of final judgment, and make 
that their marriage-altar, for a joint futurity 
of endless retribution. Over and over 
again, the tempter of souls had thrust this 
idea upon Hester's contemplation, and 
laughed at the passionate and desperate 
joy with which she seized, and then strove 
to cast it from her. She barely looked the 
idea in the face, and hastened to bar it in 
its dungeon. What she compelled herself 
to believe, — what, finally, she reasoned 
upon, as her motive for continuing a resi- 
dent of New England, — was half a truth, 
and half a self-delusion. Here, she said to 
herself, had been the scene of her guilt, 
and here should be the scene of her 
earthly punishment ; and so, perchance 
the torture of her daily shame would at 
length purge her soul, and work out an- 



J. 
4 



Hester at Her Needle 141 

other purity than that which she had lost ; 
more saint-like, because the result of 
martyrdom, - ■' 

Hester Prynne, therefore, did not flee. 
On the outskirts of the town, within the 
verge of the peninsula, but not in close 
vicinity to any other habitation, there was 
a small thatched cottage. It had been 
built by an earlier settler, and abandoned, 
because the soil about it was too sterile for 




cultivation, while 'its comparative remote- 
ness put it out of the sphere of that social 
activity which already marked the habits 
of the emigrants. It stood on the shore, 
looking across a basin of the sea at the 
forest -covered hills, towards the west. A 
clump of scrubby trees, such as alone 
grew on the peninsula, did not so much con- 
ceal the cottage from view, as seem to de- 
note that here was some object which would 
fain have been, or at least ought to be, con- 



142 



The Scarlet Letter 



cealed. In this little, lonesome dwelling, 
with some slender means that she pos- 
sessed, and by the license of the magis- 
trates, who still kept an inquisitorial watch 
over her, Hester established herself, with ■ 
her infant child. A mystic shadow of sus- 
picion immediately attached itself to the 
spot. Children, too 
young to compre- 
hend wherefore this 
woman should be 
shut out from the 
sphere of human 
charities, would 
creep nigh enough 
to behold her plying 
her needle at the 
cottage-window, or standing in the door- 
way, or labouring in her little garden, or 
coming forth along the pathway that led 
townward ; and, discerning the scarlet 
letter on her breast, would scamper off, 
with a strange, contagious fear. 

Lonely as was Hester's situation, and 
without a friend on earth who dared to show 
himself, she, however, incurred no risk of 
want. She possessed an art that sufficed, 
even in a land that afforded comparatively 
little scope for its exercise, to supply food 




Hester at Her Needle 143 

for her thriving infant and herself. It was 
the art — then, as now, almost the only one 
within a woman's grasp — of needle-work. 
She bore on her breast, in the curiously 
embroidered letter, a specimen of her deli- 
cate and imaginative skill, of which the 
dames of a court might gladly have availed 
themselves, to add the richer and more 
spiritual adornment of human ingenuity 
to their fabrics of silk and gold. Here, 
indeed, in the sable simplicity that gener- 
ally characterised the Puritanic modes of 
dress, there might be an infrequent call for 
the finer productions of her handiwork. 
Yet the taste of the age, demanding what- 
ever was elaborate in compositions of this 
kind, did not fail to extend its influence 
over our stern progenitors, who had cast 
behind them so many fashions which it 
might seem harder to dispense with. Pub- 
lic ceremonies, such as ordinations, the in- 
stallation of magistrates, and all that could 
give majesty to the forms in which a new 
government manifested itself to the people, 
were, as a matter of policy, marked by a 
stately and well-conducted ceremonial, 
and a sombre, but yet a studied magnifi- 
cence. Deep ruffs, painfully wrought 
bands, and gorgeously embroidered gloves, 



144 "^kf Scarlet Letter 

were all deemed necessary to the official 
state of men assuming the reigns of power ; 
and were readily allowed to individuals 




dignified by rank or wealth, even while 
sumptuary laws forbade these and similar 
extravagances to the plebeian order. In 
the array of funerals, too, — whether for 
the apparel of the dead body, or to typify, 
by manifold emblematic devices of sable 
cloth and snowy lawn, the sorrow of the 
survivors, — there was a frequent and 
characteristic demand for such labour as 
Hester Prynne could supply. Baby-Hnen 
— for babies then wore robes of state — 
afforded still another possibility of toil and 
emolument. 

By degrees, nor very slowly, her handi- 
work became what would now be termed 
the fashion. Whether from commiseration 
for a woman of so miserable a destiny ; or 



Hester at- Her Needle I4S 

from 4hc morbid curiosity that gives a fic- 
titious value even to common or worthless 
things ; or by whatever other intangible cir- 
cumstance was then, as now, sufficient to 
bestow, on some persons, what others might 
seek in vain ; or because Hester really filled 
a gap which must otherwise have remained 
vacant ; it is certain that she had ready 
and fairly requited employment for as many 
hours as she saw fit to occupy with her 
needle. Vanity, it may be, chose to mor- 
tify itself, by putting on, for ceremonials of 
pomp and state, the garments that had been 
wrought by her sinful hands. Her needle- 
work was seen on the ruff of the Governor ; 
military men wore it on 
their scarts, and the min- 
ister on his band ; it 
decked the baby's little 
cap ; it was shut up, to ^ 
be mildewed and moulder 
away, in the coffin of 
the dead. But it is not recorded that, in 
a single instance, her skill was called in 
aid to embroider the white veil which was 
to cover the pure blushes of a bride The 
exception indicated the ever relentless 
vigour with which society frowned upon her 




146 The Scarlet Letter 

Hester sought not to acquire anything 
beyond a subsistence, of the plainest and 
most ascetic description, for herself, and a 
simple abundance for her child. Her own 
dress was of the coarsest materials and the 
most sombre hue ; with only that one orna- 
ment, — the scarlet letter, — which it was 
her doom to wear. The child's attire, on 
the other hand, was distinguished by a fan- 
ciful, or, we might rather say, a fantastic in- 
genuity, which served, indeed, to heighten 
the airy charm that early began to develop 
itself in the little girl, but which appeared 
to have also a deeper meaning. We may 
speak further of it hereafter. Except for 
that small expenditure in the decoration of 
her infant, Hester bestowed all her super- 
fluous means in charity, on wretches less 
miserable than herself, and who not unfre- 
quently insulted the hand that fed them. 
Much of the time, which she might readily 
have applied to the better efforts of her art, 
she employed in making coarse garments for 
the poor. It is probable that there was an 
idea of penance in this mode of occupation, 
and that she offered up a real sacrifice of 
enjoyment, in devoting so many hours to 
such rude handiwork. She had in her 
nature a rich, voluptuous, Oriental charac- 



Hester at Her Needle 147 

teristic, — a taste for the gorgeously beauti- 
ful, which, save in the exquisite productions 
of her needle, found nothing else, in all the 
possibilities of her life, to exercise itself 'j 
upiohi. Women derive a pleasure, incom- 1 
prehensible to the other sex, from the deli- ' 
cate toil of the needle. To Hester Prynne ^ 
it might have been a mode of expressing, 
and therefore soothing, the passion of her 
life. Like all other joys, she rejected it as 
sin. This morbid meddling of conscience 
with an immaterial matter betokened, it is 
to be feared, no genuine and steadfast pen- 
itence, but something doubtful, something 
that might be deeply wrong, beneath. 

In this manner, Hester Prynne came to 
have a part to perform in the world. With 
her native energy of character, and rare 
capacity, it could not entirely cast her off, 
although it had set a mark upon her, more 
intolerable to a woman's heart than that 
which branded the brow of Cain. In all 
her intercourse with society, however, there 
was nothing that made her feel as if she 
belonged to it. Every gesture, every word, 
and even the silence of those with whom 
she came in contact, implied, and often ex- 
pressed, that she was banished, and as 
much alone as if she inhabited another 



148 The Scarlet Letter 

sphere, or communicated with the common 
nature by other organs and senses than 
the rest of human kind. She stood apart 
from mortal interests, yet close beside 
them, like a ghost that revisits the familiar 
fireside, and can no longer make itself seen 
or felt ; no more smile with the household 
joy, nor mourn with the kindred sorrow ; 
or, should it succeed in manifesting its 
forbidden sympathy, awakening only terror 
and horrible repugnance. These emotions, 
in fact, and its bitterest scorn besides, 
seemed to be the sole portion that she re- 
tained in the universal heart. It was not 
an age of delicacy; and her position, al- 
though she understood it well, and was in 
little danger of forgetting it, was often 
brought before her vivid self-perception, 
like a new anguish, by the rudest touch 
upon the tenderest spot. The poor, as we 
have already said, whom she sought out to 
be the objects of her bounty, often reviled 
the hand that was stretched forth to succour 
them. Dames of elevated rank, likewise, 
whose doors she entered in the way of her 
occupation, were accustomed to distil drops 
of bitterness into her heart ; sometimes 
through that alchemy of quiet malice, by 
which women can concoct a subtile poison 



■t- 



Hester at Her Needle 149 

from ordinary trifles ; and sometimes, also, 
by a coarser expression, that fell upon the 
sufferer's defenceless breast like a rough 
blow upon an ulcerated wound. Hester 
had schooled herself long and well ; she 
never responded to these attacks, save by 
a flush of crimson that rose irrepressibly 
over her pale cheek, and again subsided 
into the depths of her bosom. She was 
patient, — a martyr, indeed, — but she for- 
bore to pray for her enemies ; lest, in spite 
of her forgiving aspirations, the words of 
the blessing should stubbornly twist them- 
selves into a curse. 

Continually, and in a thousand other 
ways., did she feel the innumerable throbs 
of anguish that had been so cunningly con- 
trived for her by the undying, the ever- 
active sentence of the Puritan tribunal. 
Clergymen paused in the street to address 
words of exhortation, that brought a crowd, 
with its mingled grin and frown, around the 
poor, sinful woman. If she entered a 
church, trusting to share the Sabbath 
smile of the Universal Father, it was often 
her mishap to find herself the text of the 
discourse. She grew to have a dread of 
children ; for they had imbibed from their 
parents avague idea of somethinghorrible in 



150 The Scarlet Letter 

this dreary woman, gliding silently through 
the town, with never any companion but 
one only child. Therefore, first allowing 
her to pass, they pursued her at a distance 
with shrill cries, and the utterance of a 
word that had no distinct purport to their 
own minds, but was none the less terrible 
to her, as proceeding from lips that babbled 
it unconsciously. It seemed to argue so 
wide a diffusion of her shame, that all na- 




ture knew of it ; it could have caused htr 
no deeper pang, had the leaves of the trees 
whispered the dark story among themselves, 
— had the summer breeze murmured about 
it, — had the wintry blast shrieked it aloud! 
Another peculiar torture was felt in the 
gaze of a new eye. When strangers looked 
curiously at the scarlet letter, — and none 
ever failed to do so, — they branded it 
afresh into Hester's soul; so that, often- 
times, she could scarcely refrain, yet al- 
ways did refrain, from covering the symbol 



Hester at Her Needle 151 



• 



with her hand. But then, again, an accus- 
tomed eye had likewise its own anguish to 
inflict. Its cool stare of familiarity was 
intolerable. From first to last, in short, 
Hester Prynne had always this dreadful 
agony in feeling a human eye upon the 
token ; the spot never grew callous ; it 
seemed, on the contrary, to grow more 
sensitive with daily torture. 

But sometimes, once in many days, or 
perchance in many months, she felt an eye 
— a human eye — upon the ignominious 
brand, that seemed to give a momentary 
relief, as if half of her agony were shared. 
The next instant, back it all rushed again, 
with still a deeper throb of pain ; for, in 
that brief interval, she had sinned anew. 
Had Hester sinned alone } 

Her imagination was somewhat affected, 
and, had she been of a softer moral and 
intellectual fibre, would have been still 
more so, by the strange and solitary an- 
guish of her life. Walking to and fro, with 
those lonely footsteps, in the little world 
with which she was outwardly connected, 
it now and then appeared to Hester, — if 
altogether fancy, it was nevertheless too 
potent to be resisted, — she felt or fancied, I 
then, that the scarlet letter had endowed 



-:>< 



Hester at Her Needle 153 

nothing human within the scope of view, 
save the form of this earthly saint ! Again, 
a mystic sisterhood would contumaciously 
assert itself, as she met the sanctified frown 
of some matron, who, according to the 
rumour of all tongues, had kept cold snow 
within her bosom throughout life. That 
unsunned snow in the matron's bosom, and 
the burning shame on Hester Prynne's, — 




what had the two in common ? Or, once 
more, the electric thrill would give her 
warning, — " Behold, Hester, here is a 
companion !" — and, looking up, she would 
detect the eyes of a young maiden glancing 
at the scarlet letter, shyly and aside, and 
quickly averted, with a faint, chill crimson 
in her cheeks ; as if her purity were some- 
what sullied by that momentary glance. O 



154 ^^^ Scarlet Letter 

Fiend, whose talisman was that fatal sym- 
bol, wouldst thou leave nothing, whether in 
youth or age, for this poor sinner to revere ? 
I — Such loss of faith is ever one of the sad- 
^ dest results of sin. Be it accepted as a' 
proof that all was not corrupt in this poor 
victim of her own frailty, and man's hard 
law, that Hester Prynne yet struggled to 
believe that no fellow-mortal was guilty 
like herself. 

The vulgar, who, in those dreary old 
times, were always contributing a gro- 
tesque horror to what interested their 
imaginations, had a story about the scarlet 
letter which we might readily work up in- 
to a terrific legend. They averred, that 
the symbol was not mere scarlet cloth, 
tinged in an earthly dye-pot, but was red- 
hot with infernal fire, and could be seen 
glowing all alight, whenever Hester 
Prynne walked abroad in the night-time. 
And we must needs say, it seared Hester's 
bosom so deeply, that perhaps there was 
more truth in the rumour than our modern 
incredulity may be inclined to admit. 



/ 



VI 

PEARL 

WE have as yet hardly spoken of the 
infant ; that little creature, whose 
innocent life had sprung, by the inscruta- 
ble decree of Providence, a lovely and 
immortal flower , out of the rank luxu- 
riance of a guilty passion. How~st range 
it seemed to the sad woman, as she 
watched the growth, and the beauty that 
became every day more brilliant, and the 
intelligence that threw its quivering sun- 
shine over the tiny features of this 
child ! Her Pearl ! — For so had Hester 
called her ^ not as a name expressive of 
her aspect, which had nothing of the calm, 
white, unimpassioned lustre that would be 
indicated by the comparison. But she 
named the infant "Pearl,*' as being of 
great price, — purchased with all she had, 
— her mother's only treasure ! How 
strange, indeed ! Man had marked this 
woman's sin by a scarlet letter, which had 
such potent and disastrous efficacy that no 
human sympathy could reach her, save it 

'55 



156 The Scarlet Letter 

were sinful like herself. God, as a direct 
consequence of the sin which man thus 
punished, had given her a lovely child, 
whose place was on that same dishonoured 
bosom, to connect her parent for ever with 
the race and descent of mortals, and to be 
finally a blessed soul in heaven ! Yet these 
thoughts affected Hester Prynne less with 
hope than apprehension. She knew that 
her deed had been evil ; she could have no 
faith, therefore, that its result would be 
good. Day after day, she looked fearfully 
into the child's expanding nature ; ever 
dreading to detect some dark and wild 
peculiarity, that should correspond with 
the guiltiness to which she owed her 
being. 

Certainly, there was no physical defect. 
3y its perfect shape, its vigour, and its nat- 
ural dexterity in the use of all its untried 
limbs, the infant was worthy to have been 
brought forth in Eden ; worthy to have 
been left there, to be the plaything of the 
angels, after the world's first parents were 
driven out. The child had a native grace 
which does not invariably coexist with 
faultless beauty ; its attire, however sim- 
ple, always impressed the beholder as if it 
were the very garb that precisely became 



Pearl 157 

it best. But little Pearl was not clad in 
rustic weeds. Her mother, with a morbid 
purpose that may be better understood 
hereafter, had bought the richest tissues 
that could be procured, and allowed her 
imaginative faculty its full play in the ar- 
rangement and decoration of the dresses 
which the child wore, before the public 
eye. So magnificent was the small figure, 
when thus arrayed, and such was the 
splendour of PearFs own proper beauty, 
shining through the gorgeous robes which 
might have extinguished a paler loveliness, 
that there was an absolute circle of radi- 
ance around her, on the darksome cottage 
floor. And yet a russet gown, torn and 
soiled with the child's rude play, made a 
picture of her just as perfect. PearFs as- 
pect was imbued with a spell of infinite 
variety ; in this one child there were many 
children, comprehending the full scope be- 
tween the wild-flower prettincss of a peas- 
ant-baby, and the pomp, in little, of an 
infant princess. Throughout all, however, 
there was a trait of passion, a certain depth 
of hue, which she never lost ; and if, in 
any of her changes, she had grown fainter 
or paler, she would have ceased to be 
herself; — it would have been no longer 
Pearl ! 



158 



The Scarlet Letter 



This outward mutability indicated, and 
did not more than fairly express, the vari- 
ous properties of her inner life. Her 
nature appeared to possess depth, too, as 
well as variety ; but — or else Hester's 
fears deceived her — it lacked reference 
and adaptation to the world into which she 
was born. The child could not be made 
amenable to rules. In giving her existence, 
a great law had been broken ; and the 
result was a being whose elements were 
perhaps beautiful and brilliant, but all in 
disorder ; or with an order peculiar to them- 
selves, amidst which the point of variety 
and arrangement was difficult or impos- 
sible to be discovered. Hester could only 
account for the child's character — and 
even then most vaguely and imperfectly 
— by recalling what she herself had been, 
during that momentous period while Pearl 
was imbibing her soul from the spiritual 
world, and her bodily frame from its mate- 
rial of earth. The mother's impassioned 
state had been the medium through which 
were transmitted to the unborn infant the 
rays of its moral life ; and, however white 
and clear originally, they had taken the 
deep stains of crimson and gold, the fiery 
lustre, the black shadow, and the untem- 



Pearl 1 59 

pe\\.\i ii^ht, of the intervening substance. 
Above all, the warfare of Hester's spirit, at 
that epoch, was perpetuated in Pearl. She 
could recognise her wild, desperate, defiant 
mood, the flightiness of her temper, and 
even some of the very cloud-shapes of 
gloom and desi.ondency that had brooded 
in her heart. They were now illuminated 
by the morning radiance of a young child's 
disposition, but, later in the day of earthly 
existence, might be prolific of the storm 
and whirlwind. 

The discipline of the family, in those 
days, was of a far more rigid kind than 
now. The frown, the harsh rebuke, the 
frequent application of the rod, enjoined 
by Scriptural authority, were used, not 
merely in the way of punishment for actual 
oflFences, but as a wholesome regimen for 
the growth and promotion of all childish 
virtues. Hester Prynne, nevertheless, the 
lonely mother of this one child, ran little 
risk of erring on the side of undue severity. 
Mindful, however, of her own errors and 
misfortunes, she early sought to impose a 
tender,' but strict control over the infant 
immortality that was committed to her 
charge. But the task was beyond her skill. 
After testing both smiles and frowns, and 



i6o 



The Scarlet Letter 



proving that neither mode of treatment 
possessed any calculable influence, Hester 
was ultimately compelled to stand aside, 
and permit the child to be swayed by her 
own impulses. Physical compulsion or 
restraint was effectual, of course, while it 
lasted. As to any other kind of discipline, 
whether addressed to her mind or heart, 
little Pearl might or might not be within 
its reach, in accordance with the caprice 
that ruled the moment. Her mother, 
while Pearl was yet an infant, .gjrew ac- 
quainted with a certain peculiar look,) that 
warned her when it would be labour 
thrown away to insist, persuade, or plead. 
It was a look so intelligent, yet inexplic- 
able, so perverse, sometimes so malicious, 
but generally accompanied by a wild flow 
of spirits, that Hester could not help ques- 
tioning, at such moments, whether Pearl 
was a human child. She seemed rather 
an airy sprite, which, after playing its fan* 
tastic sports for a little while upon the 
cottage-floor, would flit away with a mock- 
ing smile. Whenever that look appeared 
in her wild, bright, deeply black eyes, it 
invested her with a strange remoteness 
and intangibility ; it was as if she were 
hovering in the air and might vanish, like 



Peart 



a glimmering light that comes we know 

not whence, and goes we know not whitherj , 

Beholding it, Hester was constrained to 

rush towards the child, — to pursue the 

little elf in the flight 

which she invariably / ^ 

began, — to snatch 

her to her bosom, with jj^ 

a close pressure and 

earnest kisses, — not 

so much from over 

flowing love, as to as 

sure herself that Pearl \ 

was flesh and blood, \ WU 

and not utterly delu vSJ 

sive. But Pearl's 

laugh, when she was 

caught, though full of 

merriment and music 

made hermother more 

doubtful than before 

Heart-smitten at this bewildering and 
baflHing spell, that so often came between 
herself and her sole treasure, whom she 
had bought so dear, and who was all her 
world, Hester sometimes burst into pas- 
sionate tears. Then, perhaps, — for there 
was no foreseeing how it might affect her, 
— Pearl would frown, and clinch her little 




l62 The Scarlet Letter 

fist, and harden her small features into a 
stern, unsympathising look of discontent. 
Not seldom, she would laugh anew, and 
louder than before, like a thing incapable 
and unintelligent of human sorrow. Or — 
but this more rarely happened — she would 
be convulsed with a rage of grief, and sob 
out her love for her mother, in broken 
words, and seem intent on proving that she 
had a heart, by breaking it. Yet Hester 
was hardly safe in confiding herself to that 
gusty tenderness ; it passed, as suddenly 
as it came. Brooding over all these mat- 
ters,, the mother felt like one who has 
evoked a spirit, but, by some irregularity 
in the process of conjuration, has failed to 
win the master-word that should control 
this new and incomprehensible intelligence. 
(Her only real comfort was when the child 
lay in the placidity of sleep. Then she was 
sure of her, and tasted hours of quiet, sad, 
delicious happiness; until — perhaps with 
that perverse expression glimmering from 
beneath her opening lids — little Pearl 
awoke ! 

How soon — with what strange rapid- 
ity, indeed ! — did Pearl arrive at an age 
that was capable of social intercourse, be- 
yond the mother's ever-ready smile and 



Pearl 163 

nonsense-words ! And then what a happi- 
ness would it have been, could Hester 
Prynne have heard her clear, bird-like voice 
mingling with the uproar of other childish 
voices, and have distinguished and unrav- 
elled her own darling's tones, amid all the 
entangled outcry of a group of sportive chil- 
dren ! But this could never be. Pearl 
was a born outcast of the infantile world. 
An imp of evil^ emblem and product of sin, 
she had no right among christened irffants. 
Nothing was more remarkable than the in- 
stinct, as it seemed, with which the child 
comprehended her loneliness ; the destiny 
that had drawn an inviolable circle round 
about her ; the whole peculiarity, in short, 
of her position in respect to other children. 
Never, since her release from prison, had 
Hester met the public gaze without her. 
In all her walks about the town. Pearl, too, 
was there ; first as the babe in arms, and 
afterwards as the little girl, small com- 
panion of her mother, holding a forefinger 
with her whole grasp, and tripping along 
at the rate of three or four footsteps to one 
of Hester's. She saw the children of the 
settlement, on the grassy margin of the 
street, or at the domestic thresholds, dis- 
porting themselves in such grim fashion as 



1 64 The Scarlet Letter 

the Puritanic nurture would permit ; play- 
ing ut going to church, perchance; or at 
scourging Quakers ; or taking scalps in a 
sham-fight with the Indians ; or scaring 
one another with freaks of imitative witch- 
craft. Pearl saw, and gazed intently, but 
never sought to make acquaintance. If 
spoken to, she would not speak again. If 
the children gathered about her, as they 
sometimes did. Pearl would grow positively 
terrible in her puny wrath, snatching up 
stones to fling at them, with shrill, inco- 
herent exclamations that made her mother 
tremble, because they had so much the 
soiHul of a witch's anathemas in some un- 
known tongue. 

The truth was, that the little Puritans, 
bcin^ of the most intolerant brood that 
<.\er lived, had got a vague idea of some- 
iliiui; outhmdish, unearthly, or at variance 
\\\\\\ ordinary fashions, in the mother and 
V liiUl ; and therefore scorned them in their 
lu. Ills, and not unfrequently reviled them 
\\\\\\ ihrir tongues. Pearl felt the senti- 
nu ni. and requited it with the bitterest 
\\ lu^^l that ran be supposed to rankle in a 
JuMka^ bosom. These outbreaks of a fierce 
L *iti.. » \\m\ a kind of value, and even com- 
i'>w^ u>( tui mother; because there was at 



Pearl 165 

least an intelligible earnestness in the 
mood, instead of the fitful caprice that so 
often thwarted her in the child's manifes- 
tations. It appalled her, nevertheless, to 
discern here, again, a shadowy reflection of 
the evil that had existed in herself. All 
this enmity and passion had Pearl inherited, 
by inalienable right, out of Hester's heart. 
Mother and daughter stood together in the 
same circle of seclusion from human so- 
ciety ; and in the nature of the child seemed 
to be perpetuated those unquiet elements 
that had distracted Hester Prynne before 
Pearl's birth, but had since begun to be 
soothed away by the softening influences 
of maternity. 

At home, within and around her mother's 
cottage. Pearl wanted not a wide and various 
circle of acquaintance. The spell of life 
went forth from her ever creative spirit, 
and communicated itself to a thousand ob- 
jects, as a torch kindles a flame wherever 
it may be applied. The unlikeliest mate- 
rials, a stick, a bunch of rags, a flower, were 
the puppets of Pearl's witchcraft, and, with- 
out undergoing any outward change, became 
spiritually adapted to whatever drama occu- 
pied the stage of her inner world. Her one 
baby-voice served a multitude of imaginary 



i66 



The Scarlet Letter 




personages, old and young, to talk withal. 
The pine-trees, aged, 
black, and solemn, 
^ and flinging groans 
h and other melancholy 
i utterances on the 
breeze, needed little 
transformation to fig- 
ure as Puritan elders ; 
the ugliest weeds 
of the garden were 
their children, whom Pearl smote down 
and uprooted, most unmercifully. It was 
wonderful, the vast variety of forms into 
which she threw her intellect, with no con- 
tinuity indeed but dirting up and dancing, 
always m a state of pre- 
ternatural activity, — 
soon sinking down, as 
if exhausted by so rapid 
and feverish a tide of 
life — and succeeded 
by other shapes of a 
similir wild energy, 
' It WIS like nothing so 
much as the phantasma- 
j,()ric play of thcnorthern 
lights In tht, mert, txtrcise of the fancy, 
huwc\cr anil the sportiveness of a growing 




Pearl 167 

mind, there might be little more than was 
observable in other children of bright 
faculties ; except as Pearl, in the dearth of 
human playmates, was thrown more upon 
the visionary throng which she created. The 
singularity lay in the hostile feelings with 
which the child regarded all these offspring 
of her own "heart and mind. She never 
created a friend, but seemed always to be 
sowing broadcast the dragon's teeth, whence 
sprung a harvest of armed enemies, against 
whom she rushed to battle. It was inex- 
pressibly sad — then what depth of sorrow 
to a mother, who felt in her own heart the 
cause ! — to observe, in one so young, this 
constant recognition of an adverse world, 
and so fierce a training of the energies 
that were to make good her cause, in the 
contest that must ensue. 

Gazing at Pearl, Hester Prynne often 
dropped her work upon her knees, and 
cried out with an agony which she would 
fain have hidden, but which made utter- 
ance for itself, betwixt speech and a groan, 
— "O Father in Heaven, -^ if Thou art 
still my Father, — what is this being which 
I have brought into the world!" And 
Pearl, overhearing the ejaculation, or 
aware, through some more subtile channel, 



1 68 The Scarlet Letter 

of those throbs of anguish, would turn her 
vivid and beautiful little face upon her 
mother, smile with sprite-like intelligence, 
and resume her play. 

One peculiarity of the child's deport- 
ment remains yet to be told. The very 
first thing which she had noticed, in her 
life, was — what.? — not the mother's smile, 
responding to it, as other babies do, by 
that faint, embryo smile of the little mouth, 
remembered so doubtfully afterwards, and 
with such fond discussion whether it were 
indeed a smile. By no means ! But that 
first object of which Pearl seemed to be- 
come aware was — shall we say it.? — the 
scarlet letter on Hester's bosom ! One 
day, as her mother stooped over the cradle, 
the infant's eyes had been caught by the 
glimmering of the gold embn^idery about 
the letter ; and, putting up her little hand, 
she grasped at it, smiling, not doubtfully, 
but with a decided gleam that gave her 
face the look of a much older child. 
Then, gasping for breath, did Hester 
Prynne clutch the fatal token, instinctively 
endeavouring to tear it away ; so infinite 
was the torture inflicted by the intelligent 
touch of Pearl's baby-hand. Again, as if 
her mother's agonised gesture were meant 



Pearl 169 

only to make sport for her, did little Pearl 

look into her eyes, and smile ! From that 

epoch, except when 

the child was asleep, 

Hester had never felt 

a moment's safety ; ^ 

not a moment's calm 

enjoyment of her. 

Weeks, it is true, 

would sometimes 

elapse, during which 

Pearl's gaze might 

never once be fixed 

upon the scarlet let- 
ter; but then, again, 
it would come at un- 
awares, like the stroke of sudden death, 
and always with that peculiar smile, and an 
odd expression of the eyes. 

Once, this freakish, elvish cast came in- 
to the child's eyes, while Hester was look- 
ing at her own image in them, as mothers 
are fond of doing ; and, suddenly, — for 
women in solitude, and with troubled 
hearts, are pestered with unaccountable 
delusions, — she fancied that she beheld, 
not her own miniature portrait, but another 
face in the small black mirror of Pearl's 
eye. It was a face, fiend-like, full of smil- 







ira:. 




run sunziers 
•v.:h z^raer- 



. r.tf ry cce, at 

;;:er ■; bosom; 
^ -^- ir.-i iown, 
:::-e sir. when- 
;>.;; ait the 

:e!:tir Hes- 
::rs: aortoa 
L-en to ojver 
.- •>.-m with 
■v"-^:;'i;r Eiom 
■-'■ -^ ihdt her 
,'•: .!_: ".-;■ :his 

■ ■<■•_ i;iiiiy 



Pearl 171 

battery of flowers, almost invariably hitting 
the mark, and covering the mother's breast 
with hurts for which she could find no 
balm in this world, nor knew how to seek 
it in another. At last, her shot being all 
expended, the child stood still and gazed 
at Hester, with that little, laughing image 
of a fiend peeping out — or, whether it 
peeped or no, her mother so imagined it — 
from the unsearchable abyss of her black 
eyes. 

" Child, what art thou ? " cried the 
mother. 

" O, I am your little Pearl ! " answered 
the child. 

But, while she said it, Pearl laughed and 
began to dance up and down, with the 
humoursome gesticulation of a little imp, 
whose next freak might be to fly up the 
chimney. 

"Art thou my child, in very truth?" 
asked Hester. 

Nor did she put the question altogether 
idly, but, for the moment, with a portion 
of genuine earnestness ; for, such was 
Pearl's wonderful intelligence, that her 
mother half doubted whether she were not 
acquainted with the secret spell of her ex- 
istence, and might not now reveal herself. 



172 The Scarlet Letter 

"Yes; I am little Pearl!" repeated the 
chUd, continuing her antics. 

"Thou art not my child ! Thou art no 
Pearl of mine ! " said the mother, half play- 
fully ; for it was often the case that a spor- 
tive impulse came over her m the midst of 

j4J 




her deepest suffermg. "Tell me, then, 
what thou art, and who sent thee hither ? " 

"Tell me, mother!" said the child, se- 
riously, coming up to Hester, and pressing 
herself close to her knees. " Do thou tell 
me! " 

"Thy Heavenly Father sent thee ! " an- 
swered Hester Prynne. 



Pearl 173 

But she said it with a hesitation that did 
not escape the acuteness of the child. 
Whether moved only by her ordinary freak- 
ishness, or because an evil spirit prompted 
her, she put up her small forefinger, and 
touched the scarlet letter. 

" He did not send me ! " cried she posi- 
tively. " I have no Heavenly Father ! '* 

" Hush, Pearl, hush ! Thou must not 
talk so ! '* answered the mother, suppressing 
a groan. "He sent us all into this world. 
He sent even me, thy mother. Then, much 
more, thee ! Or, if not, thou strange and 
elfish child, whence didst thou come.?" 

"Tell me! Tell me!" repeated Pearl, 
no longer seriously, but laughing, and ca- 
pering about the floor. " It is thou that 
must tell me ! " 

But Hester could not resolve the query, 
being herself in a dismal labyrinth of doubt. 
She remembered — betwixt a smile and a 
shudder — the talk of the neighbouring 
townspeople ; who, seeking vainly else- 
where for the child's paternity, and observ- 
ing some of her odd attributes, had given 
out that poor little Pearl was a demon off- 
spring ; such as, ever since old Catholic 
times, had occasionally been seen on earth, 
through the agency of their mother's sin, 



174 'The Scarlet Letter 

and to promote some foul and wicked pur- 
pose. Luther, according to the scandal of 
his monkish enemies, was a brat of that 
hellish breed ; nor was Pearl the only child 
to whom this inauspicious origin was as- 
signed, among the New England. Puritans. 



THE GOVERNOR'S HALL 

HESTER PRYNNE went, one day. 
to the mansion of Governor Belling- 
ham, with a pair of gloves, which she had 
fringed and embroidered to his order and 
which were to be worn 
on some great occasion 
of state ; for, though the 
chances of a popular 
election had caused this 
former ruler to descend 
a step or two from the 
highest rank, he still 
held an honourable and 
influential place among 
the colonial magistracy. 

Another and far more important reason 
than the delivery of a pair of embroidered 
gloves impelled Hester, at this time, to 
seek an interview with a personage of so 
much power and activity in the affairs of 
the settlement. It had reached her ears, 
that there was a design on the part of some 
'75 




1/6 The Scarlet Letter 

of the leading inhabitants, cherishing the 
more rigid order of principles in religion and 
government, to deprive her of her child. 
On the supposition that Pearl, as already 
hinted, was of demon origin, these good 
people not unreasonably argued that a 
Christian interest in the mother's soul re- 
quired them to remove such a stumbling- 
block from her path. If the child, on the 
other hand, were really capable of moral 
and religious growth, and possessed the 
elements of ultimate salvation, then, surely, 
it would enjoy all the fairer prospect of 
these advantages by being transferred to 
wiser and better guardianship than Hester 
Prynne's. Among those who promoted 
the design, Governor Bellingham was said 
to be one of the most busy. It may ap- 
pear singular, and, indeed, not a littl.e ludi- 
crous, that an affair of this kind, which, in 
Liter days, would have been referred to no 
higher jurisdiction than that of the select- 
men of the town, should then have been a 
question publicly discussed, and on which 
statesmen of eminence took sides. At 
that epoch of pristine simplicity, however, 
matters of even slighter public interest, 
and of far less intrinsic weight than the 
welfare of Hester and her child, were 



The Governors Hall 



i;; 



strangely mixed up with the deliberations 
of legislators and acts of state. The period 
was hardly, if at all, earlier than that of 
our story, when a dispute concerning the 
right of property in a pig, not only caused 
a fierce and Bitter con- 
test in the legislative 
body of the colony, 
but resulted in an 
important modifi- 
cation of the frame- 
work itself of the 
legislature. 

Full of concern, 
therefore, — but so 
conscious of her own 
right, that it seemed 
scarcely an unequal 
match between the 
public, on the one 
side, and a lonely 
woman, backed by 
the sympathies of 
nature, on the other, — Hester Prynne set 
forth from her solitary cottage. Little 
Pearl, of course, was her companion. She 
was now of an age to run lightly along by 
her mother's side, and, constantly in mo- 
tion from mom till sunset, could have 




1/8 The Scarlet Letter 

accomplished a much longer journey than 
that before her. Often, nevertheless, more 
from caprice than necessity, she demanded 
to be taken up in arms, but was soon as 
imperious to be set down again, and frisked 
onward before Hester on the grassy path- 
way, with many a harmless trip and tum- 
ble. We have spoken of Pearl's rich and 
luxuriant beauty ; a beauty that shone 
with deep and vivid tints ; a bright com- 
plexion, eyes possessing intensity both ot 
depth and glow, and hair already of a deep, 
glossy brown, and which, in after years, 
would be nearly akin to black. There 
was fire in her and throughout her ; she 
seemed the unpremeditated offshoot of a 
passionate moment. Her mother, in con- 
triving the child's garb, had allowed the 
gorgeous tendencies of her imagination 
their full play ; arraying her in a crimson 
velvet tunic, of a peculiar cut, abundantly 
embroidered with fantasies and flourishes of 
gold thread. So much strength of colour- 
ing, which must have given a wan and 
|)alli(l aspect to cheeks of a fainter 
bloom, was admirably adapted to Pearl's 
bi:auty, and made her the very brightest 
little jet of flame that ever danced upon 
the earth. 



The Governor s Hall 179 

But it was a remarkable attribute of this 
garb, and, indeed, of the child's whole 
appearance, that it irresistibly and inevi- VTr. 
tably reminded the beholder of the token 
which Hester Prynne was doomed to wear 
upon her bosom. It was the scarlet letter 
in another form ; the scarlet letter endowed 
with life ! The mother herself — as if the 
red ignominy were so deeply scorched into 
her brain, that all her conceptions assumed 
its form — had carefully wrought out the 
similitude ; lavishing many hours of mor- 
bid ingenuity, to create an analogy between ^^ 
the object of her affection, and the emblem 
of her guilt and torture. But, in truth. 
Pearl was the one, as well as the other ; 
and only in consequence of that identity 
had Hester contrived so perfectly to rep- 
resent the scarlet letter in her appear- 
ance. 

As the two wayfarers came within the 
precincts of the town, the children of the 
Puritans looked up from their play, — or 
what passed for play with those sombre 
little urchins, — and spake gravely one to 
another : — 

" Behold, verily, there is the woman of 
the scarlet letter ; and, of a truth, more- 
over, there is the likeness of the scarlet 



i8o The Scarlet Letter 

letter running along by her side ! Come, 
therefore, and let us fling mud at them ! " 
But Pearl, who was a dauntless child, 
after frowning, stamping her foot, and 
shaking her little hand with a variety of 
threatening gestures, suddenly made a 
rush at the knot of her enemies, and put 
them all to flight. She resembled, in her 
fierce pursuit of them, an infant pestilence, 




— the scarlet fever, or some such half-fledged 

angel of judgment, — whose mission was 
to punish the sins of the rising generation. 
She screamed and shouted, too, with a ter- 
rific volume of sound, which doubtless 
caused the hearts of the fugitives to quake 
within them. The victory accomplished, 
Pearl returned quietly to her mother, and 
looked up smiling into her face. 



The Governor s Hall i8i 

Without further adventure, they reached 
the dwelling of Governor Bellingham. This 
was a large wooden house, built in a fashion 
of which there are specimens still extant 
in the streets of our elder towns ; now 
moss-grown, crumbling to decay, and mel- 
ancholy at heart with the many sor- 
T(j)wful or joyful occurrences, remembered 
oif forgotten, that have happened, and 
passed away, within their dusky chambers. 
Tjfhen, however, there was the freshness of 
le passing year on its exterior, and the 
^cheerfulness, gleaming forth from the sunny 
windows, of a human habitation, into which 
death had never entered. It had indeed a 
very cheery aspect ; the walls being over- 
spread with a kind of stucco, in which 
fragments of broken glass were plentifully 
intermixed; so that, when the sunshine 
fell aslant-wise over the front of the edifice, 
it glittered and sparkled as if diamonds had 
been flung against it by the double handful. 
The brilliancy might have befitted Aladdin's 
palace, rather than the mansion of a grave 
old Puritan ruler. It was further decorated 
with strange and seemingly cabalistic fig- 
ures and diagrams, suitable to the quaint 
taste of the age, which had been drawn in 
the stucco when newly laid on, and had 



i\ 



1 82 



The Scarlet Letter 



now grown hard and durable, for the admi- 
ration of after times. 

Pearl, looking at this bright wonder of a 
house, began to caper and dance, and im- 
peratively required that the whole breadth 




of sunshine should be stripped off its front, 
and given her to play with. 

" No, my little I'carl ! " said her mother. 
"Thou must gather thine own sunshine. 
I have none to give thee ! " 

They approached the door; which was 



i 



The Governor s Hall 183 

of an arched form, and flanked on each 
side by a narrow tower or projection of 
the edifice, in both of which were lattice- 
windows, with wooden shutters to close 
over them at need. Lifting the iron ham- 
mer that hung at the portal, Hester Prynne 
gave a summons, which was answered by 
one of the Governor's bond-servants ; a 
free-born Englishman, but now a seven 
years' slave. During that term he was to be 
the property of his master, and as much a 
commodity of bargain and sale as an ox, 
or a joint-stool. The serf wore the blue 
coat, which was the customary garb of 
serving-men at that period, and long be- 
fore, in the old hereditary halls of England. 

" Is the worshipful Governor Bellingham 
within.^'* inquired Hester. 

" Yea, forsooth," replied the bond-ser- 
vant, staring with wide-open eyes at the 
scarlet letter, which, being a new-comer in 
the country, he had never before seen. 
" Yea, his honourable worship is within. 
But he hath a godly minister or two with 
him, and likewise a leech. Ye may not see 
his worship now." 

"Nevertheless, I will enter," answered 
Hester Prynne ; and the bond-servant, per- 
haps judging from the decision of her air 



184 The Scarlet Letter 

and the glittering symbol in her bosom, 
that she was a great lady in the land, offered 
no opposition. 

So the mother and little Pearl were ad- 
mitted into the hall of entrance. With 
many variations, suggested by the nature 
of his building-materials, diversity of cli- 
mate, and a different mode of social life, 
Governor Bellingham had planned his new 
habitation after the residences of gentle- 
men of fair estate in his native land. Here, 
then, was a wide and reasonably lofty hall, 
extending through the whole depth of the 
house, and forming a medium of general 
communication, more or less directly, with 
all the other apartments. At one ex- 
tremity, this spacious room was lighted by 
the windows of the two towers, which 
formed a small recess on either side of the 
portal. At the other end, though partly 
muffled by a curtain, it was more power- 
fully illuminated by one of those embowed 
hall-windows which we read of in old books, 
and which was provided with a keep and 
cushioned seat. Here, on the cushion, lay 
a folio tome, probably of the Chronicles of 
England, or other such substantial litera- 
ture ; even as, in our own days, we scatter 
gilded volumes on the centre-table, to be 



The Governor's Hall 185 

turned over by the casual guest. The 
furniture of the hall consisted of some pon- 
derous chairs, the backs of which were 
elaborately carved with wreaths of oaken 
flowers ; and likewise a table in the same 
taste ; the whole being of the Elizabethan 
age, or perhaps earlier, and heirlooms, 
transferred hither from the Governor's pa- 
ternal home. On the 
table — in token that the 
sentiment of old English 
hospitality had not been 
left behind — stood a 
large pewter tankard, at ^ 
the bottom of which, 
had Hester or Pearl 
peeped into it, they might have seen the 
frothy remnant of a recent draught of ale. 
On the wall hung a row of portraits, rep- 
resenting the forefathers of the Bellingham 
lineage, some with armour on their breasts, 
and others with stately ruffs and robes 
of peace. All were characterised by the 
sternness and severity which old portraits 
so invariably put on ; as if they were the 
ghosts, rather than the pictures, of de- 
parted worthies, and were gazing with harsh 
and intolerant criticism at the pursuits and 
enjoyments of living men. 




1 86 The Scarlet Lettet 

At about the centre of the oaken panels, 
that lined the hall, was suspended a suit of 
mail, not, like the pictures, an ancestral 
relic, but of the most modern date ; for it 
had been manufactured by a skilful armourer 
in London, the same year in which Gov- 
ernor Bellingham came over to New Eng- 
land. There was a steel head-piece, a 
cuirass, a gorget, and greaves, with a pair 
of gauntlets and a sword hanging beneath ; . 
all, and especially the helmet and breast- 
.plate, so highly burnished as to glow with 
white radiance, and scatter an illumination 
everywhere about upon the floor. This 
bright panoply was not meant for mere 
idle show, but had been worn by the 
Governor on many a solemn muster and 
training field, and had glittered, moreover, 
at the head ot a regiment in the Pequod 
war. For, though bred a lawyer, and 
accustomed to speak of Bacon, Coke, 
Noye, and Finch, as his professional asso- 
ciates, the exigencies of this new coun- 
try had transformed Governor Bellingham 
into a soldier, as well as a statesman and 
ruler. 

Little Pearl — who was as greatly pleased 
with the gleaming armour as she had been 
with the glittering frontispiece of the house 



; ( 



The Governor s Hall 187 

— spent some time looking into the pol- 
ished mirror of the breastplate. 

" Mother,'* cried she, " I see you here. 
Look! Look!" 

Hester looked, by way of humouring the 
child ; and she saw that, owing to the pecu- !y 

liar effect of this convex mirror, the scarlet 
letter was represented in exaggerated and 
gigantic proportions, so as to be greatly 
the most prominent feature of her appear- 
ance. In truth, she seemed absolutely 
hidden behind it. Pearl pointed upward, 
also, at a similar picture in the head-piece ; 
smiling at her mother, with the elfish in- 
telligence that was so familiar an expres- 
sion on her small physiognomy. That look 
of naughty merriment was likewise reflected 
in the mirror, with so much breadth and 
intensity of effect, that it made Hester 
Prynne feel as if it could not be the image 
of her own child, but of an imp who was 
seeking to mould itself into Pearl's shape. 

** Come along. Pearl ! " said she, drawing 
her away. " Come and look into this fair 
garden. It may be, we shall see flowers 
there; more beautiful ones than we find in 
the woods.*' 

Pearl, accordingly, ran to the bow-window, 
at the farther end of the hall, and looked 



1 88 The Scarlet Letter 

along the vista of a garden-walk, carpeted 
with closely shaven grass, and bordered 
with some rude and immature attempt at 
shrubbery. But the proprietor appeared 
already to have relinquished, as hopeless, 
the effort to perpetuate on this side of the 
Atlantic, in a hard soil and amid the close 
struggle for subsistence, the native English 
taste for ornamental gardening. Cabbages 
grew in plain sight ; and a pumpkin-vine, 
rooted at some distance, had run across 
the intervening space, and deposited one 
of its gigantic products directly beneath 
the hall-window ; as if to warn the Gov- 
ernor that this great lump of vegetable 
gold was as rich an ornament as New Eng- 
land earth would offer him. There were a 
few rose-bushes, however, and a number 
of apple-trees, probably the descendants of 
those planted by the Reverend Mr. Black- 
stone, the first settler of the peninsula; 
that half mythological personage who rides 
through our early annals, seated on the 
back of a bull. 

Pearl, seeing the rose-bushes, began to 
cry for a red rose, and would not be paci- 
fied. 

" Hush, child, hush ! " said her mother 
earnestly. '* Do not cry, dear little Pearl ! 



The Governor s Hall 189 

I hear voices in the garden. The Gov- 
ernor is Coming, and gentlemen along with 
him ! " 

In fact, adown the vista of the garden- 
avenue, a number of persons were seen 
approaching towards the house. Pear'., ',\\ 




utter scorn of her mother's attempt to 
quiet Iier, gave an eldritch scream, and 
then became silent ; not from any notion 
of obedience, but because the quick and 
mobile curiosity of her disposition was ex- 
cited by the appearance of these new per- 
sonages. 



THE ELF-CHILD AND THE MINISTER 

GOVERNOR EELLINGHAM, in a 
loose gown and easy cap, — such as 
elderly gentlemen loved to indue them- 
selves with, in their domestic privacy, — 
walked foremost, and appeared to be show- 
ing off his estate, and expatiating on his 
projected improvements. The wide circum-' 
ference of an elabo- 
rate ruff, beneath his 
grey beard, in the 
antiquated fashion of 
King James's reign, 
l[|^ caused his head to look 
not a little like that of 
John the Baptist in 
a charger. The im- 
pression made by his 
aspect, so rigid and severe, and frost-bitten 
with more than autumnal age, was hardly 
in keeping with the appliances of worldly 
enjoyment wherewith he had evidently 
done his utmost to surround himself. But 
190 




The Elf -Child and the Minister 191 

it is an error to suppose that our grave 
forefathers — though accustomed to speak 
and think of human existence as a state 
merely of trial and warfare, and though un- 
feignedly prepared to sacrifice goods and 
life at the behest of duty — made it a mat- 
ter of conscience to reject such means of 
comfort, or even luxury, as lay fairly within 
their grasp. This creed was never taught, 
for instance, by the venerable pastor, John 
Wilson, whose beard, white as a snow-drift, 
was seen over Governor Bellingham's 
shoulder ; while its wearer suggested that 
pears and peaches might yet be naturalised 
in the New England climate, and that pur- 
ple grapes might possibly be compelled to 
flourish, against the sunny garden-wall. 
The old clergyman, nurtured at the rich 
bosom of the English Church, had a long 
established and legitimate taste for all 
good and comfortable things ; and however 
stern he might show himself in the pulpit, 
or in his public reproof of such transgres- 
sions as that of Hester Prynne, still, the 
genial benevolence of his private life had 
won him warmer affection than was ac- 
corded to any of his professional contem- 
poraries. 

Behind the Governer and Mr. Wilson 



i»>j The Scarlet Letter 

kcimc twi> other guests ; one, the Reverend 
.Viihui Piinmesdale, whom the reader may 
ii,-iiK'itiN.'i', as having taken a brief and 
iiIxni.iLit part in the scene of Hester 
I "i \ II Lie's ilis^race ; and, in close companion- 
>Iu|' with him, old Roger Chill ingworth, a 
person of great skill in 
physic, who, for two or 
three years past, had been 
settled in the town. It 
was understood that this 
learned man was the phy- 
sician as well as friend of 
the young minister, whose 
health had severely suf- 
fered, of late, by his too 
unreserved self-sacrifice to 
the labours and duties of 
the pastoral relation. 
The Governor, in ad- 
\ vance of his visitors, as- 
cended one or two steps, 
and, throwing open the 
_i;ifat hail window, found him- 
' hllle Pearl. The shadow of 
till un Hester Prynne, and 
^^MledhLT. 

m- we here?" said Governor 
ti'oking with surprise at the 




The Elf 'Child and the Minister 193 

scarlet little figure before him. " I pro- 
fess, I have never seen the like, since my 
days of vanity, in old King James's time, 
when I was wont to esteem it a high favour 
to be admitted to a court mask ! There 
used to be a swarm of these small appari- 
tions, in holiday-time ; and we called them 
children of the Lord of Misrule. But how 
gat such a guest into my hall } *' 

" Ay, indeed ! " cried good old Mr. Wil- 
son. " What little bird of scarlet plumage 
may this be? Methinks I have seen just 
such figures, when the sun has been shin- 
ing through a richly painted window, and 
tracing out the golden and crimson images 
across the floor. But that was in the old 
land. Prithee, young one, who art thou, 
and what has ailed thy mother to bedizen 
thee in this strange fashion } Art thou a 
Christian child, -— ha .^ Ppst know thy 
catechism } Or art thou one of those 
naughty elfs or fairies, whom we thought 
to have left behind us, with other relics of 
Papistry, in merry old England } " 

" I am mother's child," answered the 
scarlet vision, " and my name is Pearl ! " 

" Pearl } — Ruby, rather ! — or Coral ! — 
or Red Ros e, at the very least, judging 
from thy hue ! " responded the old min- 






194 The' Scarlet Letter 

ister, putting forth his hand in a vain 
attempt to pat little Pearl on the cheek. 
" But where is this mother of thine ? Ah ! 
I see," he added ; and, turning to Governor 
Bellingham, whispered, — " This is the 
selfsame child of whom we have held 
speech together; and behold here the 
unhappy woman, Hester Prynne, her 
mother ! " 

Sayest thou so ? " cried the Governor. 

Nay, we might have judged that such a 
child's mother must needs be a scarlet 
woman, and a worthy type of her of/ Baby- 
lon ! But she comes at a good time ; and 
we will look into this matter forthwith." 

Governor Bellingham stepped through 
the window into the hall, followed by his 
three guests. 

"Hester Prynne," said he, fixing his 
naturally stern regard on the wearer of 
the scarlet letter, " there hath been much 
question concerning thee, of late. The 
point hath been weightily discussed, 
whether we, that are of authority and 
influence, do well discharge our con- 
sciences by trusting an immortal soul, 
such as there is in yonder child, to the 
guidance of one who hath stumbled and 
fallen, amid the pitfalls of this world. 



The Elf 'Child and the Minister 195 

Speak thou, the child's own mother ! Were 
it not, thinkest thou, for thy little one's 
temporal and eternal welfare, that she be 
taken out of thy charge, and clad soberly, 
and disciplined strictly, and instructed in 
the truths of heaven and earth ? What 
canst thou do for the child, in this kind ? " 

" I can teach my little Pearl what I 
have learned from this ! " answered Hester 
Prynne, laying her finger on the red token. 

"Woman, it is thy badge of shame!" 
replied the stern magistrate. " It is be- 
cause of the stain which that letter indi- 
cates, that we would transfer thy child to 
other hands." 

" Nevertheless," said the mother calmly, 
though growing more pale, " this badge 
hath taught me, — it daily teaches me, — 
it is teaching me at this moment, — les- 
sons whereof my child may be the wiser 
and better, albeit they can profit nothing 
to myself." 

" We will judge warily," said Belling- 
ham, " and look well what we are about to 
do. Good Master Wilson, I pray you, ex- 
amine this Pearl, — since that is her name, 
— and see whether she hath had such Chris- 
tian nurture, as befits a child of her age." 

The old niinister 3eated himself in aa 



,«. « ' 



196 The Scarlet Letter 

arm-chair, and made an effort to draw 
Pearl betwixt his knees. But the child, 
unaccustomed to the touch or familiarity 
of any but her mother, escaped through 
the open window and stood on the upper 
step, looking like a wild, tropical bird, of rich 
plumage, ready to take flight into the 
upper air. Mr. Wilson, not a little as- 
tonished at this outbreak, — for he was 
a grandfatherly sort of personage, and 
usually a vast favourite with children, — 
essayed, however, to proceed with the 
examination. 

** Pearl,'* said he, with great solemnity, 
" thou must take heed to instruction, that 
so, in due season, thou mayest wear in thy 
bosom the pearl of great price. Canst 
thou tell me, my child, who made thee } *' 

Now Pearl knew well enough who made 
her ; for Hester Prynne, the daughter of a 
pious home, very soon after her talk with 
the child about her Heavenly Father, had 
begun to inform her of those tnoths which 
the human spirit, at whatever stage of 
immaturity, imbibes with such eager inter- 
est. Pearl, therefore, so large were the 
attainments of her three years' lifetime, 
could have borne a fair examination in the 
New England Primer, or the first column 



The Elf 'Child and the Minister 1 97 

of the Westminster Catechisms, although 
unacquainted with the outward form of 
either of those celebrated works. But 
that perversity, which all children have 
more or less of, and of which little Pearl 
had a tenfold portion, now, at the most 
inopportune moment, took thorough pos- 
session of her, and closed her lips, or im- 
pelled her to speak words amiss. After 
putting her finger in her mouth, with many 
ungracious refusals to answer good Mr. 
Wilson's question, the child finally an- 
nounced that she had not been made at all, 
but had been plucked by her mother off 
the bush of wild roses, that grew by the 
prison-door. 

This fantasy was probably suggested by 
the near proximity of the Governor's red 
roses, as Pearl stood outside of the win- 
dow ; together with her recollection of the 
prison rose-bush, which she had passed in 
coming hither. 

Old Roger Chillingworth, with a smile 
on his face, whispered something in the 
young clergyman's ear. Hester Prynne 
looked at the man of skill, and even then, 
with her fate hanging in the balance, was 
startled to perceive what a change had 
come over his features, — how much uglier 



198 The Scarlet Letter 

they were, — how his dark complexion 
seemed to have grown duskier, and his 
figure more misshapen, — since the days 
when she had familiarly known him. She 
met his eyes for an instant, but was im-, 
mediately constrained to give all her atten- 
tion to the scene now going forward. 

"This is awful!*' cried the Governor, 
slowly recovering from the astonishment 
into which Pearl's response had thrown 
him. " Here is a child of three years old, 
and she cannot tell who made her ! With- 
out question, she is equally in the dark as 
to her soul, its present depravity, and future 
destiny! Methinks, gentlemen, we need 
inquire no further." 

Hester caught hold of Pearl, and drew 
her forcibly into her arms, confronting the 
old Puritan magistrate with almost a fierce 
expression. Alone in the world, cast oflf by 
it, and with this sole treasure to keep her 
heart alive, she felt that she possessed in- 
defeasible rights against the world, and was 
ready to defend them to the death. 

" God gave me the child I " cried she. 
"He gave her, in requital of all things else, 
which ye had taken from me. She is my 
happiness I — she is my torture, none the 
less ! Pearl keeps me here in life ! Pearl 



TfuElf-CkildmrndOu Minister 199 

punishes me too ! See ye not. she n the 
scarlet letter, only capaUe of being loved, 
and so endowed with a millioa-fold the 




power of retribution for mj ye shall 

not take her ! I will die fi » 

" My poor woman," said not unkind 

old minister, " the child || ^^^^^ 

for ! — far better than thi j^ ■. ,, 



200 The Scarlet Letter 

"God gave her into my keeping," re- 
peated Hester Prynne, raising her voice 
almost to a shriek. " I will not give her 
up ! *' — And here, by a sudden impulse, she 
turned to the young clergyman, Mr. Dim- 
mesdale, at whom, up to this moment, she 
had seemed hardly so much as once to 
direct her eyes. — " Speak thou for me ! " 
cried she. "Thou wast my pastor, and 
hadst charge of my soul, and knowest me 
better than these men can. I will not lose 
the child ! Speak for me ! Thou knowest, 
— for thou hast sympathies which these 
men lack ! — thou knowest what is in my 
heart, and what are a mother's rights, and 
how much the stronger they are, when that 
mother has but her child and the scarlet 
letter ! Look thou to it ! I will not lose 
the child! Look to it!" 

At this wild and singular appeal, which 
indicated that Hester Prynne*s situation 
had provoked her to little less than mad- 
ness, the young minister at once came for- 
ward, pale, and holding his hand over his 
heart, as was his custom whenever his pe- 
culiarly nervous temperament was thrown 
into agitation. He looked now more care- 
worn and emaciated than as we described 
him at the scene of Hester's public i^o- 



The Elf 'Child and the Minister 201 

miny ; and whether it were his failing 
health, or whatever the cause might be, his 
large dark eyes had a world of pain in their 
troubled and melancholy depth. 

" There is truth in what she says," be- 
gan the minister, with a voice sweet, trem- 
ulous, but powerful, insomuch that the 
hall reechoed, and the hollow armour rang 
with it, — "truth in what Hester says, and 
in the feeling which inspires her ! God 
gave her the child, and gave her, too, an 
instinctive knowledge of its nature and 
requirements, -^— both seemingly so pecul- 
iar, — which no other mortal being can 
possess. And, moreover, is there not a 
quality of awful sacred ness in the relation 
between this mother and this child.?'* 

" Ay ! — how is that, good Master 
Dimmesdale?" interrupted the Governor. 
** Make that plain, I pray you ! '* 

"It must be even so," resumed the min- 
ister. " For, if we deem it otherwise, do 
we not thereby say that the Heavenly 
Father, the Creator of all flesh, hath lightly 
recognised a deed of sin, and made of no 
account the distinction between unhal- 
lowed lust and holy love t This child of 
its father's guilt and its mother's shame 
hath come from the hand of God, to work 



202 The Scarlet Letter 

in many ways upon her heart, who pleads 
so earnestly, and with such bitterness of 
spirit, the right to keep her. It was meant 
for a blessing ; for the one blessing of 
her life ! It was meant, doubtless, as the 
mother herself hath told us, for a retribu- 
tion too ; a torture, to be felt at many an 
unthought of moment ; a pang, a sting, an 
ever-recurring agony, in the midst of a 
troubled joy ! Hath she not expressed 
this thought in the garb of the poor child, 
so forcibly reminding us of that red sym- 
bol which sears her bosom ? '' 

" Well said, again ! *' cried good Mr. 
Wilson. " I feared the woman had no bet- 
ter thought than to make a mountebank of 
her child ! " 

"O, not so! — not so!'* continued Mr. 
Dimmesdale. "She recognises, believe 
me, the solemn miracle which God hath 
wrought, in the existence of that child. 
And may she feel, too, — what, methinks, 
is the very truth, — that this boon was 
meant, above all things else, to keep the 
mother's soul alive, and to preserve her 
from blacker depths of sin into which 
Satan might else have sought to plunge her! 
Therefore it is good for this poor, sinful 
woman that she hath an infant immortal- 



The Elf 'Child and the Minister 203 

ity, a being capable of eternal joy or sor- 
row, confided to her care, — to be trained 
up by her to righteousness, — to remind 
her, at every moment, of her fall, — but 
yet to teach her, as it were by the Crea- 
tor's sacred pledge, that, if she bring the 
child to heaven, the child also will bring 
its parent thither! Herein is the sinful 
mother happier than the sinful father. 
For Hester Prynne's sake, then, and no 
less for the poor child's sake, let us leave 
them as Providence hath seen fit to place 
them ! " 

"You speak, my friend, with a strange 
earnestness," said old Roger Chillingworth, 
smiling at him. 

** And there is a weighty import in what 
my young brother hath spoken," added 
the Reverend Mr. Wilson. "What say 
you, worshipful Master Bellingham } Hath 
he not pleaded well for the poor woman } " 

" Indeed hath he," answered the magis- 
trate, " and hath adduced such arguments, 
that we will even leave the matter as it 
now stands ; so long, at least, as there 
shall be no further scandal in the woman. 
Care must be had, nevertheless, to put the 
child to due and stated examination in the 
catechism at thy hands or Master- Dim- 



2A4 



The Scarlet Letter 



mesdalc's. Moreover, at a proper season, 

the tithiiifj-men must take heed that she go 
both to school and to meeting." 
The young minister, on ceasing to speak. 




haul withilrawn a few stops from the group, 
.in,! stiniii with hi:; face p.irti;i;iy concealed 
:;; the heavy foMs of thi' window curtain; 
white the shadow ol his tijiure. which the 
s;:n'.i^:-.: ».ast uj'on tho rioor. was tremu- 



The Elf 'Child and the Minister 205 

lous with the vehemence of his appeal. 
Pearl, that wild and flighty little elf, stole 
softly towards him, and, taking his hand 
in the grasp of both her own, laid her cheek 
against it ; a caress so tender, and withal 
so unobfrusive, that her mother, who was 
looking on, asked herself, — " Is that my 
Pearl ? '* Yet she knew that there was 
love in the child's heart, although it mostly 
revealed itself in passion, and hardly twice 
in her lifetime had been softened by such 
gentleness as now. The minister, — for, 
save the long-sought regards of woman, 
nothing is sweeter than these marks of 
childish preference, accorded spontaneously 
by a spiritual instinct, and therefore seem- 
ing to imply in us something truly worthy 
to be loved, — the minister looked round, 
laid his hand on the child's head, hesitated 
an instant, and then kissed her brow. Lit- 
tle Pearl's unwonted mood of sentiment 
lasted no longer ; she laughed, and went ca- 
pering down the hall, so airily, that old Mr. 
Wilson raised a question whether even her 
tiptoes touched the floor. 

" The little baggage hath witchcraft in 
her, I profess," said he to Mr. Dimmesdale. 
** She needs no old woman's broom§tick to 
fly withal ! " 



2o6 The Scarlet Letter 

" A strange child ! " remarked old Roger 
Chillingworth. "It is easy to see the 
mother's part in her. Would it be beyond 
a philosopher's research, think ye, gentle- 
men, to analyse that child's nature, and, 
from its make and mould, to give a shrewd 
guess at the father ? " 

"Nay; it would be sinful, in such a 
question, to follow the clew of profane phi- 
losophy," said Mr. Wilson. " Better to 
fast and pray upon it ; and still better, it 
may be, to leave the mystery as we find it, 
unless Providence reveal it of its own ac- 
cord. Thereby, every good Christian man 
hath a title to show a father's kindness 
towards the poor, deserted babe." 

The affair being so satisfactorily con- 
cluded, Hester Prynne, with Pearl, departed 
from the house. As they descended the 
steps, it is averred that the lattice of a 
chamber-window was thrown open, and 
forth into the sunny day was thrust the 
face of Mistress Hibbins, Governor Belling- 
ham's bitter-tempered sister, and the same 
who, a few years later, was executed as a 
witch. 

" Hist, hist ! " said she, while her ill- 
omened physiognomy seemed to cast a 
shadow over the cheerful newness of th^ 



) 



The Elf 'Child and the Minister 207 

house. " Wilt thou go with us to-night ? 
There will be a merry company in the 
forest ; and I wellnigh promised the Black 
Man that comely Hester Prynne should 
make one." 

"Make my excuse to him, so please 
you ! " answered Hester, with a triumphant 
smile. " I must tarry at home, and keep 
watch over my little Pearl. Had they 
taken her from me, I would willingly have 
gone with thee into the forest, and signed 
my name in the Black Man's book too, and 
that with mine own blood ! *' 

" We shall have thee there anon ! " said 
the witch-lady, frowning, as she drew back 
her head. 

But here — if we suppose this interview 
betwixt Mistress Hibbins and Hester 
Prynne to be authentic, and not a parable 
— was already an illustration of the young 
minister's argument against sundering the 
relation of a fallen mother to the offspring 
of her frailty. Even thus early had the 
child saved her from Satan's snare. 



IX 

THE LEECH 

UNDER the appellation of Roger Chil- 
lingworth, the reader will remember, 
was hidden another name, which its former 
wearer had resolved should never more be 
spoken. It has been related, how, in the 
crowd that witnessed Hester Prynne's 
ignominious exposure, stood a man, elderly, 
travel-worn, who, just emerging from the 
perilous wilderness, beheld the woman, in 
whom he hoped to find embodied the 
warmth and cheerfulness of home, set up 
as a type of sin before the people. Her 
matronly fame was trodden under all men's 
feet. Infamy was babbling around her in 
the public market-place. For her kindred, 
should the tidings ever reach them, and for 
the companions of her unspotted life, there 
remained nothing but the contagion of her 
dishonour ; which would not fail to be dis- 
tributed in strict accordance and proportion 
with the intimacy and sacrcdness of their 
previous relationship. Then why — since 
208 



The Leech 209 

the choice was with himself — should the 
individual, whose connection with the fallen 
woman had been the most intimate and 
sacred of them all, come forward to vindi- 
cate his claim to an inheritance so little 
desirable ? He resolved not to be pilloried 
beside her on her pedestal of shame. Un- 
known to all but Hester Prynne, and pos- 
sessing the lock and key of her silence, 
he chose to withdraw his name from the 
roll of mankind, and, as regarded his 
former ties and interests, to vanish out of 
life as completely as if he indeed lay at 
the bottom of the ocean, whither rumour 
had long ago consigned him. This pur- 
pose once effected, new interests would 
immediately spring up, and likewise a new 
purpose ; dark, it is true, if not guilty, but 
of force enough to engage the full strength 
of his faculties. . 

In pursuance of this resolve, he took up 
his residence in the Puritan town, as Roger 
Chillingworth, without other introduction 
than the learning and intelligence of which 
he possessed more than a common measure. 
As his studies, at a previous period of his 
life, had made him extensively acquainted 
with the medical science of the day, it was 
as a physician that he presented himself. 



2IO The Scarlet Letter 

and as such was cordially received. Skil- 
ful men, of the medical and chirurgical pro- 
fession, were of rare occurrence in the 
colony. They seldom, it would appear, 
partook of the religious zeal that brought 
other emigrants across the Atlantic. In 
their researches into the human frame, it 
may be that the higher and more subtile 
faculties of such men were materialised, 
and that they lost the spiritual view of ex- 
istence amid the intricacies of that won- 
drous mechanism, which seemed to involve 
art enough to comprise all of life within 
itself. At all events, the health of the 
good town of Boston, so far as medicine 
had aught to do with it, had hitherto lain 
in the guardianship of an aged deacon and 
apothecary, whose piety and godly deport- 
ment were stronger testimonials in his 
favour, than any that he could have pro- 
duced in the shape of a diploma. The only 
surgeon was one who combined the occa- 
sional exercise of that noble art with the 
daily and habitual flourish of a razor. To 
such a professional body Roger Chilling- 
worth was a brilliant acquisition. He soon 
manifested his familiarity with the ponder- 
ous and imposing machinery of antique 
physic ; in which every remedy contained 



The Leech 211 

a multitude of far-fetched and heterogene- 
ous ingredients, as elaborately compounded 
as if the proposed result had been the 
Elixir of Life. In his Indian captivity, 
moreover, he had gained much knowledge 
of the properties of native herbs and roots ; 
nor did he conceal from his patients, that 
these simple medicines. Nature's boon to 




the untutored savage had quite as large a 
share of his own confidence as the Euro- 
pein pharmacopceia which so many learned 
doctors had spent centuries in elaborating. 
This learned stranger was exemplary, as 
regarded at least the outward forms of a 
religious life, and, early after his arrival, 
had chosen for his spiritual guide the Rev- 
erend Mr. Dimmesdale. ■ The young divine, 



212 The Scarlet Letter 

whose scholar-like renown still lived in Ox- 
ford, was considered by his more fervent 
admirers as little less than a heaven-or- 
dained apostle, destined, should he live and 
labour for the ordinary term of life, to do as 
great deeds for the now feeble New Eng- 
land Church, as the early Fathers had 
achieved for the infancy of the Christian 
faith. About this period, however, the 
health of Mr. Dimmesdale had evidently 
begun to fail. By those best acquainted 
with his habits, the paleness of the young 
minister's cheek was accounted for by his 
too earnest devotion to study, his scrupu- 
lous fulfilment of parochial duty, and, more 
than all, by the fasts and vigils of which 
he made a frequent practice, in order to 
keep the grossness of this earthly state 
from clogging and obscuring his spiritual 
lamp. Some declared, that, if Mr. Dim- 
mesdale were really going to die, it was 
cause enough, that the world was not 
worthy to be any longer trodden by his 
feet. He himself, on the other hand, with 
characteristic humility, avowed his belief, 
that, if Providence should see fit to remove 
him, it would be because of his own un- 
worthiness to perform its humblest mission 
here on earth. With all this difference of 



The Leech 



213 



opinion as to the cause of his decline, 
there could be no question of the fact. 
His form grew emaciated ; his voice, though 
still rich and sweet, had a certain melan- 
choly prophecy of decay in it ; he was 
often observed, on any slight alann or 
other sudden accident, to put his hand 
over his heart, with first a flush and then 
a paleness, indicative of pain. 

Such was the young clergyman's condi 
tion, and so imminent the prospect that 
his dawning light would be ex- 
tinguished, all untimely, when 
Roger Chillingworth made 
his advent to the town. His 
first entry on the 
scene, few people 
could tell whence, 
dropping down, as it 
were, out of the sky, . » 
or starting from the /»' 
nether earth, had an ^f. 
aspect of mystery, 
which was easily 
heightened to the 
miraculous. He was 
now known to be a man 
of skill ; it was observed 
that he gathered herbs, and 




v 



.. ^ 



»••• 



214 The Scarlet Letter 

the blossoms of wild-flowers, and dug up 
roots, and plucked off twigs from the forest- 
trees, like one acquainted with hidden virtues 
in what was valueless to common eyes. He 
was heard to speak of Sir Kenelm Digby, 
and other famous men, — whose scientific 
attainments were esteemed hardly less 
than supernatural, — as having been his 
correspondents or associates. Why, with 
such rank in the learned world, had he 
come hither.^ What could he, whose 
sphere was in great cities, be seeking in 
the wilderness } In answer to this query, 
a rumour gained ground, — and, however 
absurd, was entertained by some very sen- 
sible people, — that Heaven had wrought 
an absolute miracle, by transporting an 
eminent Doctor of Physic, from a German 
university, bodily through the air, and set- 
ting him down at the door of Mr. Dimmes- 
dale's study! Individuals of wiser faith, 
indeed, who knew that Heaven promotes 
its purposes without aiming at the stage- 
effect of what is called miraculous inter- 
position, >yere inclined to see a providential 
hand in Roger Chillingworth's so oppor- 
tune arrival. 

This idea was countenanced by the strong 
interest which the physician evermj^nifested 



The Leech 215 

in the young clergyman ; he attached him- 
self to him as a parishioner, and sought to 
win a friendly regard and confidence from 
his naturally reserved sensibility. He ex- 
pressed great alarm at his pastor's state of 
health, but was anxious to attempt the 
curg y and, if early undertaken, seemed not \ 

despondent of a favourable result. The 
elders, the deacons, the motherly dames, .. 
and the young and fair maidens, of- Mr. 
Dimmesdale's flock, were alike importunate 
that he should make trial of the physician's 
frankly offered skill. Mr. Dimmesdak 
gently repelled their entreaties. 

" I need no medicine," said he. 

But how could the young minister say 
so, when, with every successive Sabbath, 
his cheek was paler and thinner, and his 
voice more tremulous than before, — when 
it had now become a constant habit, rather 
than a casual gesture, to press his hand 
over his heart } Was he weary of his 
labours } Did he wish to die ? These 
questions were solemnly propounded to 
Mr. Dimmesdale by the elder ministers of 
Boston and the deacons of his church, who, 
to use their own phrase, " dealt with him " 
on the sin of rejecting the aid which Provi- 
dence so manifestly held out. He listened 



2l6 



The Scarlet Letter 



in silence, and finally promised to confer 
with the physician. 

"Were it God's will," said the Reverend 
Mr. Dimmesdale, when, in fulfilment of 
this pledge, he requested old Roger Chil- 
lingworth's professional advice, " I could 
be well content, that my labours, and my 
sorrows, and my sins, and my pains, should 
shortly end with me, and what is earthly of 
them be buried in my grave, and the spirit- 
ual go with me to my eternal state, rather 
than that you should put your skill to the 
proof in my behalf." 

" Ah," replied Roger Chillingworth, with 
that quietness which, whether imposed or 
natural, marked all his deportment, "it is 
thus that a young clergyman is apt ta 
speak. Youthful men, not having taker 
a deep root, give up their hold of life s'j 
easily ! And saintly men, who walk with 
God on earth, would fain be away, to walk 
with him on the golden pavements of the 
new Jerusalem." 

" Nay," rejoined the young minister, 
putting his hand to his heart, with a flush 
of pain flitting over his brow, " were I 
worthier to walk there, I could be better 
content to toil here." 

" Good men ever interpret themselves 
too meanly," said the physician. 



The Leech 2\y 

In this manner, the mysterious old Roger 
Chillingworth became the medical adviser 
of the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale. As not 
only the disease interested the physician, 
but he was strongly moved to look into the 
character and qualities of the patient, these 
two men, so different in age, came gradu- 
ally to spend much time together. For 
the sake of the minister's health, and to 
enable the leech to gather plants with heal- 
ing balm in them, they took long walks on 
the seashore, or in the forest ; mingling 
various talk with the plash and murmur of 
the waves, and the solemn wind-anthem 
among the tree-tops. Often, likewise, one 
was the guest of the other, in his place of 
study and retirement. There was a fasci- 
nation for the minister in the company of 
the man of science, in whom he recognised 
an intellectual cultivation of no moderate 
depth or scope ; together with a range and 
freedom of ideas, that he would have vainly 
looked for among the members of his own 
profession. In truth, he was startled, if 
not shocked, to find this attribute in the 
physician. Mr. Dimmesdale was a true 
priest, a true religionist, with the reverential 
sentiment largely developed, and an order 
of mind that impelled itself powerfully 



2i8 The Scarlet Letter 

along the track of a creed, and wore its 
passage continually deeper with the lapse 
of time. In no state of society would he 
have been what is called a man of liberal 
views ; it would always be essential to his 
peace to feel the pressure of a faith about 
him, supporting, while it confined him with- 
in its iron framework. Not the less, how- 
ever, though with a tremulous enjoyment, 
did he feel the occasional relief of looking 
at the universe through the medium of 
another kind of intellect than those with 
which he habitually held converse. It was 
as if a window were thrown open, admitting 
a freer atmosphere into the close and stifled 
study, where his life was wasting itself 
away, amid lamp-light, or obstructed day- 
beams, and the musty fragrance, be it 
sensual or moral, that exhales from books. 
But the air was too fresh and chill to be 
long breathed, with comfort. So the min- 
ister, and the physician with him, withdrew 
again within the limits of what their church 
defined as orthodox. 

Thus Roger Chillingworth scrutinised 
his patient carefully, both as he saw him 
in his ordinary life, keeping an accustomed 
pathway in the range of thoughts familiar 
to him, and as he appeared when thrown 



The Leech 219 

amidst other moral scenery, the novelty of 
which might call out something new to the 
surface of his character. He deemed it 
essential, it would seem, to know the man, 
before attempting to do him good. Wher- 
ever there is a heart and an intellect, the 
diseases of the physical frame are tinged 
with the peculiarities of these. In Arthur 
Dimmesdale, thought and imagination 
were so active, and sensibility so intense, 
that the bodily infirmity would be likely to 
have its groundwork there. So Roger 
Chillingworth — the man of skill, the kind 
and friendly physician — strove to go deep 
into his patient's bosom, delving among 
his principles, prying into his recollections, 
and probing every thing with a cautious 
touch, like a treasure-seeker in a dark 
cavern. Few secrets can escape an inves- 
tigator, who has opportunity and license to 
undertake such a quest, and skill to follow 
it up. A man burdened with a secret 
should especially avoid the intimacy of his 
physician. If the latter possess native 
sagacity, and a nameless something more, 
— let us call it intuition; if he show no 
intrusive egotism, nor disagreeably promi- 
nent characteristics of his own ; if he have 
the power, which must be born with him, 



•.s 



220 The Scarlet Letter 

to bring his mind into such affinity with 
his patient's, that this last shall unawares 
have spoken what he imagines himself 
only to have thought ; if such revelations 
be received without tumult, and acknowl- 
edged not so often by an uttered sym- 
pathy, as by silence, an inarticulate breath, 
and here and there a word, to indicate that 
all is understood ; if, to these qualifications 
of a confidant be joined the advantages 
afforded by his recognised character as 
a physician ; — then, at some inevitable 
moment, will the soul of the sufferer be 
dissolved, and flow forth in a dark, but 
transparent stream, bringing all its mys- 
teries into the daylight. 

Roger Chillingworth possessed all, or 
most, of the attributes above enumerated. 
Nevertheless, time went on ; a kind of inti- 
macy, as we have said, grew up between 
these two cultivated minds, which had as 
wide a field as the whole sphere of human 
thought and study, to meet upon ; they 
discussed every topic of ethics and relig- 
ion, of public affairs, and private character ; 
they talked much, on both sides, of mat- 
ters that seemed personal to themselves ; 
and yet no secret, such as the physician 
fancied must exist there, ever stole out of 



The Leech 



the minister's consciousness into his com- 
panion's ear. The latter had his suspi- 
cions, indeed, that even the nature of Mr. 
Dimmesdale's bodily disease had never 
tairXy been revealed to him. It was a 
strange reser\'e ! 

After a time, at a hint from Roger Chil- 
lingworth, the friends of Mr. Dimmesdale 
effected an arrangement by which the two 
were lodged in the 
same house ; so that 
every ebb and flow of 
the minister's life tide 
might pa.ss under the 
eye of his an,\ious and 
attached physician 
There was much joy 
throughout the town, 
when this greatly de- 
sirable object WIS 
attained. It was held 
to be the best pos 
sible measure for the 
young clergyman's welfare ; unless, indeed, 
as often urged by such as felt authorised 
to do so, he had selected some one of the 
many blooming damsels, spiritually de- 
voted to him, to become his devoted wife. 
This latter step, however, there was no 





222 The Scarlet Letter 

present prospect that Arthur Dimmesdale 
would be prevailed upon to take ; he re- 
jected all suggestions of 
the kind, as if priestly 
celibacy were one of his 
articles of church-disci- 
pline Doomed by his 
own choice, therefore, 
as Mr. Dimmesdale so 
evidently was, to eat his 
unsavoury morsel always 
_ ^ at another's board, and 

' endure the life-long chill 

which must be his lot who seeks to warm 
himself only at another's fireside, it truly 
seemed that this sagacious, experienced, 
.benevolent, old physician, with his concord 
of paternal and reverential love for the 
young pastor, was the very man, of all 
mankind, to be constantly within reach of 
his voice. 

The new abode of the two friends was 
with a pious widow, of good social rank, _ 
who dwelt in a house covering pretty 
nearly the site on which the venerable 
structure of King's Chapel has since been 
built. It had the grave-yard, originally 
Isaac Johnson's home-field, on one side, 
and so was well adapted to call up serious 



Tkt Letch 223 

reflections, suited to their respective em- 
ployments, in both minister and man of 
physic. The motherly care of the good 
widow assigned to Mr. Dimmesdale a front 
apartment, with a sunny exposure, and 
heavy window-curtains to create a noontide 
shadow, when desirable. The walls were 
hung round with tapestry, said to be from 
the Gobelin looms, and, at all events, rep- 




resenting the Scriptural story of David 
and Bathsheba, and Nathan the Prophet, 
in colours still unfaded, but which made the 
fair woman of the scene almost as grimly 
picturesque as the woe-denouncing seer. 
Here, the pale clergyman piled up his 
library, rich with parchment- bound folios 
of the Fathers, and the lore of Rabbis, 
and monkish erudition, of which the Prot- 



224 The Scarlet Letter 

estant divines, even while they vilified and 
decried that class of writers, were yet con- 
strained often to avail themselves. On the 
other side of the house, old Roger Chilling- 
worth arranged his study and laboratory ; 
not such as a modern man of science 
would reckon even tolerably complete, but 
provided with a distilling apparatus, and 
the means of compounding drugs and 
chemicals, which the practised alchemist 
knew well how to turn to purpose. With 
such commodiousness of situation, these 
two learned persons sat themselves down, 
each in his own domain, yet familiarly 
passing from one apartment to the other, 
and bestowing a mutual and not incurious 
inspection into one another's business. 

And the Reverend Arthur Dimmesdale's 
best discerning friends, as we have inti- 
mated, very reasonably imagined that the 
hand of Providence had done all this, for 
the purpose — besought in so many public, 
and domestic, and secret prayers — of re- 
storing the young minister to health. But 
— it must now be said — another portion 
of the community had latterly begun to 
take its own view of the relation betwixt 
Mr. Dimmesdale and the mysterious old 
physician. When an uninstructed multi- 



The Leech 225 

tude attempts to see with its eyes, it is 
exceedingly apt to be deceived. When, 
however, it forms its judgment, as it 
usually does, on the intuitions of its great 
and warm heart, the conclusions thus 
attained are often so profound and so ^1 
unerring, as to possess the character of ^ ' 

truths supernaturally revealed. The peo- - ' ' • 
pie, in the case of which we speak, could C\ i . '^ ' 
justify its prejudice against Roger Chilling- 
worth by no fact or argument worthy of 
serious refutation. There was an aged 
handicraftsman, it is true, who had been a 
citizen of London at the period of Sir 
Thomas Overbury's murder, now some 
thirty years agone ; he testified to having 
seen the physician, under some other 
name, which the narrator of the story had 
now forgotten, in company with Doctor 
Forman, the famous old conjurer, who was 
implicated in the affair of Overbury. Two 
or three individuals hinted, that the man 
of skill, during his Indian captivity, had 
enlarged his medical attainments by join- 
ing in the incantations of the savage 
priests ; who were universally acknowl- 
edged to be powerful enchanters, often 
performing seemingly miraculous cures by 
their skill in the black art. A large num- 



226 The Scarlet Letter 

ber — and many of these were persons of 
such sober sense and practical observation, 
that their opinions would have been valu- 
able, in other matters — affirmed that 
Roger Chillingworth's aspect had under- 
gone a remarkable change while he had 
dwelt in town, and especially since his 
abode with Mr. Dimmesdale. At first, his 
expression had been calm, meditative, 
scholar-like. Now, there was something 
ugly and evil in his face, which they had 
not previously noticed, and which grew 
still the more obvious to sight, the oftener 
they looked upon him. According to the 
vulgar idea, the fire in his laboratory had 
been brought from the lower regions, and 
was fed with infernal fuel ; and so, as 
might be expected, his visage was getting 
sooty with the smoke. 

To sum up the matter, it grew to be a 
widely diffused opinion, that the Reverend 
Arthur Dimmesdale, like many other per- 
sonages of especial sanctity, in all ages of 
the Christian world, was haunted either by 
Satan himself, or Satan's emissary, in the 
guise of old Roger Chillingworth. This 
diabolical agent had the Divine permission, 
for a season, to burrow into the clergy- 
man's intimacy, and plot against his soul. 



The Leech 22J 

No sensible man, it was confessed, could 
doubt on which side the victory would 
turn. The people looked, with an un- 
shaken hope, to see the minister come 
forth out of the conflict, transfigured with 
the giory which he would unquestionably 
win. Meanwhile; nevertheless, it was sad 
to think of the perchance mortal agony 
through which he must struggle towards 
his triumph. 

Alas, to judge from the gloom and terror 
in the depths of the poor minister's eyes, 
the battle was a sore one, and the victory 
any thing but secure ! 






;■ • 



THE LEECH AND HIS PATIENT 



o 



^LD Roger Chillingworth, throughout 
life, had been calm in temperament, 
kindly, though not of warm affections, but 
ever, and in all his relations with the world, 
a pure and upright man. He had begun an 
investigation, as he imagined, with the 
severe and equal integrity of a judge, 
desirous only of truth, even as if the ques- 
tion involved no more than the air-drawn 
lines and figures of a geometrical problem, 
instead of human passions, and wrongs 
inflicted on himself. But, as he proceeded, 
a terrible fascination, a kind of fierce, 
though still calm, necessity seized the old 
man within its gripe, and never set him 
free aeain, until he had done all its bid- 
ding, (pe now dug into the poor clergy- 
man's heart, like a miner searching for 
\/ gold ; or, rather, like a sexton delving into 

a grave, possibly in quest of a jewel that 
had been buried on the dead man's bosom, 
but likely to find nothing save mortalitj^ 
22S 



. L 



■ J^ 



The Leech and His Patient 220 

and corruption. Alas for his own.JSQuL if 
these were what he sout^ht ! 

Sometimes, a light glimmered out of the 
physician's eyes, burning blue and omi- 
nous, like the reflection of a furnace, or, 
let us say, like one of those gleams of 
ghastly fire that darted from Bunyan's 
awful doorway in the hill-side, and quivered 
on the pilgrim's face. The soil where this 
dark miner was working had perchance 
shown indications that encouraged him. 

" This man," said he, at one such moment, 
to himself, " pure as they deem him, — all 
spiritual as he seems, — hath inherited a 
strong animal nature from his father or his 
mother. Let us dig a little farther in the 
direction of this vein ! '* 
/Then, after long search into the minis- 
ter's dim interior, and turning gver many 
precious materials, in the shape of high 
aspirations for the welfare of his race, warm 
love of souls, pure sentiments, natural pi- 
ety, strengthened by thought and study, 
and illuminated by revelation, — all of 
which invaluable gold was perhaps no better 
than rubbish to the seeker, — he would turn 
back, discouraged, and begin his quest 
towards another point. He groped along 
as stealthily, with as cautious a tread, and 



,>■-* 



230 The Scarlet Letter 

as wary an outlook, as a thief entering a 
chamber where a man lies only half asleep, 
— or, it may be, broad awake, — with 
purpose to steal the very treasure which 
this man guards as the apple of his eye. 
In spite of his premeditated carefulness, 
the floor would now and then creak; his 
garments would rustle ; the shadow of his 
presence, in a forbidden proximity, would 
be thrown across his victim. In other 
words, Mr. Dimmesdale, whose sensibility 
of nerve often produced the effect of spirit- 
ual intuition, would become vaguely aware 
that something inimical to his peace had 
thrust itself into relation with him. But 
old Roger Chillingworth, too, had percep- 
tions that were almost intuitive ; and when 
the minister tlirew his startled eyes towards 
him, there the physician sat ; his kind, 
watchful, sympathising, but never intrusive 
friend. 

Yet Mr. Dimmesdale would perhaps 
have seen this individual's character more 
perfectly, if a certain morbidness, to which 
sick hearts are liable, had not rendered 
him suspicious of all mankind. Trusting 
no man as his friend, he could not recog- 
nise his enemy When the latter actually 
appeared. He therefore still kept up a 



The Leech and His Patient 231 

familiar intercourse with Iiim, daily receiv- 
ing the old physician in his study ; or visit- 
ing the laboratory, and, for recreation's 
sake, watching the processes by which 
weeds were converted into drugs of potency. 

One day, leaning his forehead on his 
hand, and his el- 
bow on the sill of 
the open window, 
that looked to- 
wards the grave- 
yard, he talked 
with Roger Chil- 
lingworth, while 
the old man was 
examining a bun- 
dle of unsightly 
plants. 

" Where," asked he, with a look askance 
at them, — for it was the clergyman's pecul- 
iarity that he seldom, now-a-days, looked 
straightforth at any object, whether human 
or inanimate, — " where, my kind doctor, 
did you gather those herbs, with such a 
dark, flabby leaf?" 

" Even in the grave-yard, here at hand," 
answered the physician, continuing his 
employment. "They are new to me. I 
found them growing on a grave, which bore 




232 The Scarlet Letter 

no tombstone, nor other memorial of the 
dead man, save these ugly weeds that have 
taken upon themselves to keep him in re- 
membrance. They grew out of his heart, 
and typify, it may be, some hideous secret 
that was buried with him, and which he 
had done better to confess during his life- 
time." 

" Perchance,'* said Mr. Dimmesdale, " he 
earnestly desired it, but could not." 

"And wherefore.^*' rejoined the physi- 
cian. "Wherefore not ; since all the pow- 
ers of nature call so earnestly for the con- 
fession of sin, that these black weeds have 
sprung up out of a buried heart, to make 
manifest an unspoken crime } " 

"That, good Sir, is but a fantasy of 
yours," replied the minister. " There can 
be, if I forebode aright, no power, short of 
the Divine mercy, to disclose, whether by 
uttered words, or by type or emblem, the 
secrets that may be buried with a human 
heart. The heart, making itself guilty of 
such secrets, must perforce hold them, un- 
til the day when all hidden things shall be 
revealed. Nor have I so read or inter- 
preted Holy Writ, as to understand that 
the disclosure of human thoughts and 
deeds, then to be made, is intended as a 



'a 



The Leech and His Patient 233 

p yt of the retribution. That, surely, were 
a shallow view of it. No ; these revela- 
tions, unless I greatly err, are meant 
merely to promote the intellectual satis- 
faction of all intelligent beings, who will 
stand waiting, on that day, to see the dark 
problem of this life made plain. A knowl- 
edge of men's hearts will be needful to 
the completest solution of that problem. 
And I conceive, moreover, that the hearts 
holding such miserable secrets as you 
speak of will yield them up, at that last 
day, not with reluctance, but with a joy 
unutterable." 

"Then why not reveal them here.^'* 
asked Roger Chillingworth, glancing qui- 
etly aside at the minister. " Why should 
not the guilty ones sooner avail themselves 
of this unutterable solace } " 

"They mostlj do," said the clergyman, 
griping hard at his breast, as if afflicted 
with an importunate throb of pain. "Many, 
many a poor soul hath given its confidence 
to me, not only on the death-bed, but while 
strong in life, and fair in reputation. And 
ever, after such an outpouring, O, what a 
relief have I witnessed in those sinful 
brethren ! even as in one who at last draws 
free air, after long stifling with his own 



234 ^/^^ Scarlet Letter 

polluted breath. How can it be otherwise ? 
Why should a wretched man, guilty, we 
will say, of murder, prefer to keep the dead 
corpse buried in his own heart, rather than 
fling it forth at once, and let the universe 
take care of it ! '* 

"Yet some men bury their secrets 
thus," observed the calm physician. 

"True; there are such men," answered 
Mr. Dimmesdale. "But, not to suggest 
more obvious reasons, it may be that they 
are kept silent by the very constitution of 
their nature. Or, — can we not suppose 
it } — guilty as they may be, retaining, nev- 
ertheless, a zeal for God's glory and man's 
welfare, they shrink from displaying them- 
selves black and filthy in the view of men ; 
because, thenceforward, no good can be 
achieved by them ; no evil of the past be 
redeemed by better service. So, to their 
own unutterable torment, they go about 
among their fellow-creatures, looking pure 
as new-fallen snow ; while their hearts are 
all speckled and spotted with iniquity of 
which they cannot rid themselves." 

"These men deceive themselves," said 
Roger Chillingworth, with somewhat more 
emphasis than usual, and making a slight 
gesture with his forefinger. "They fear 



The Leech and His Patient 235 

to take up the shame that rightfully be- 
longs to them. Their love for man, their 
zeal for God*s service, — these holy im- 
pulses may or may not coexist in their 
hearts with the evil inmates to which their 
guilt has unbarred the door, and which 
must needs propagate a hellish breed 
within them. But, if they seek to glorify 
God, let them not lift heavenward their 
unclean hands ! If they would serve their 
fellow-men, let them do it by making man- 
ifest the power and reality of conscience, 
in constraining them to penitential self- 
abasement ! Wouldst thou have me to be- 
lieve, O wise and pious friend, that a false 
show can be better — can be more for 
God's glory, or man's welfare — than God*s 
own truth } Trust me, such men deceive 
themselves ! " 

" It maybe so," said the young clergyman 
indifferently, as waiving a discussion that 
he considered irrelevant or unseasonable. 
He had a ready faculty, indeed, of escap- 
ing from any topic that agitated his too sen- 
sitive and nervous temperament. — " But, 
now, I would ask of my well-skilled physi- 
cian, whether, in good sooth, he deems me 
to have profited by his kindly care of this 
weak fr^me of mine t '* 



!;> 



236 The Scarlet Letter 

Before Roger Chillingworth could an- 
swer, they heard the clear, wild laughter of 
a young child's voice, proceeding from the 
adjacent burial-ground. Looking instinc- 
tively from the open window, — for it was 
summer-time, — the minister beheld Hester 
Prynne and little Pearl passing along the 
footpath that traversed the inclosure. 
Pearl looked as beautiful as the day, but 
was in one of those moods of perverse 
merriment which, whenever they occurred, 
seemed to remove her entirely out of the 
sphere of sympathy or human contact. 
She now skipped irreverently from one 
grave to another; until, coming to the 
broad, flat, armorial tombstone of a departed 
worthy, — perhaps of Isaac Johnson him- 
self, — she began to dance upon it. In re- 
ply to her mother's command and entreaty 
that she would behave more decorously, 
little Pearl paused to gather the prickly 
burrs from a tall burdock, which grew 
beside the tomb. Taking a handful of 
these, she arranged them along the lines of 
the scarlet letter that decorated the mater- 
nal bosom, to which the burrs, as their na- 
ture was, tenaciously adhered. Hester did 
not pluck them off. 

Roger Chillingworth had by this time 




The Leech mid His I'alieiit 237 

appToachui the window, 
and smiled grimly down 
' There is no law. 
nor reverence for 
authority, no re- 
gard for human 
ordinances or 
opinions, right 
' or wrong, 

4^>>^* ■~- mixed up 
^ with that 

child'scom- 
position, remarked he as much to himself 
as to his compinion I saw her, the 
other diy bespatter the Governor himself 
with water, at the cattle-trough in Spring 
Lane. What, in Heaven's 
name, is she \ Is the imp 
altogether evil ' Hath 
she affections ' Hath she ^ /^ 
any discoveriblc 
principle of be 
ing?" 

"None, — save 
the freedom of a V 
broken law an \ 
swered Mr Dim 
mesdale, in a quiet 
way, as if he had 




238 The Scarlet Letter 

been discussing the point within himself. 
" Whether capable of good, I know not." 

The child probably overheard their 
voices ; for, looking up to the window, 
with a bright, but naughty smile of mirth 
and intelligence, she threw one of the 
prickly burrs at the Reverend Mr. Dim- 
mesdale. The sensitive clergyman shrunk, 
with nervous dread, from the light missile. 
Detecting his emotion. Pearl clapped her 
little hands in the most extravagant ecstasy. 
Hester Prynne, likewise, had involuntarily 
looked up ; and all these four persons, old 
and young, regarded one another in 
silence, till the child laughed aloud, and 
shouted, — " Come away, mother ! Come 
away, or yonder old Black Man will catch 
you ! He hath got hold of the minister 
already. Come away, mother, or he will 
catch you ! But he cannot catch little 
Pearl ! " 

So she drew her mother away, skipping, 
dancing, and frisking fantastically among 
the hillocks of the dead people, like a 
creature that had nothing in common with 
a bygone and buried generation, nor owned 
herself akin to it. It was as if she had 
been made afresh, out of new elements, 
and must perforce be permitted to live her 



The Leech and His Patient ^39 

own life, and be a law unto herself, without 
her eccentricities being reckoned to her for 
a crime. 

"There goes a woman," resumed Roger 
Chillingworth, after a pause, ** who, be her 
demerits what they may, hath none of that 
mystery of hidden sinfulness which you 
deem so grievous to be borne. Is Hester 
Prynne the less miserable, think you, for 
that scarlet letter on her breast } *' 

"I do verily believe it," answered the 
clergyman. "Nevertheless, I cannot an- 
swer for her. There was a look of pain in 
her face, which I would gladly have been 
spared the sight of. But still, methinks, 
it must needs be better for the sufferer to 
be free to show his pain, as this poor 
woman Hester is, than to cover it all up 
in his heart." 

There was another pause ; and the phy- 
sician began anew to examine and arrange 
the plants which he had gathered. 

" You inquired of me, a little time agone," 
said he, at length, "my judgment as touch- 
ing your health." 

"I did," answered the clergyman, "and 
would gladly learn it. Speak frankly, I pray 
you, be it for life or death." 

"Freely, then, and plainly," said the 



240 The Scarlet Letter 

physician, still busy with his plants, but 
keeping a wary eye on Mr. Dimmesdale, 
" the disorder is a strange one ; not so 
much in itself, nor as outwardly mani- 
fested, — in so far, at least, as the symp- 
toms have been laid open to my observation. 
Looking daily at you, my good Sir, and 
watching the tokens of your aspect, now for 
months gone by, I should deem you a man 
sore sick, it may be, yet not so sick but 
that an instructed and watchful physician 
might well hope to cure you. But — I 
know not what to say — the disease is 
what I seem to know, yet know it not." 

" You speak in riddles, learned Sir," said 
the pale minister, glancing aside out of the 
window. 

**Then, to speak more plainly," continued 
the physician, *'and I crave pardon. Sir,— 
should it seem to require pardon, — for this 
needful plainness of my speech. Let me 
ask, — as your friend, — as one having 
charge, under Providence, of your life and 
physical well-being, — hath all the opera- 
tion of this disorder been fairly laid open 
and recounted to me .^ " 

" How can you question it } " asked the 
minister. " Surely, it were child's play to 
call in a physician, and then hide the 
sore ! " 



The Leech and His Patient 241 

" You would tell me, then, that I know 
all?" said Roger Chillingworth, deliber- 
ately, and fixing an eye, bright with intense 
and concentrated intelligence, on the min- 
ister's face. " Be it so ! But, again ! He 
to whom only the outward and physical 
evil is laid open knoweth, oftentimes, but 
half the evil which he is called upon to 
cure. A bodily disease, which we look 
upon as whole and entire within itself, 
may, after all, be but a symptom of some 
ailment in the spiritual part. Your par- 
don, once again, good Sir, if my speech 
give the shadow of offence. You, Sir, of 
all men whom I have known, are he whose 
body is the closest conjoined, and imbued, 
and identified, so to speak, with the spirit 
whereof it is the instrument." 

"Then I need ask no further," said the 
clergyman, somewhat hastily rising from 
his chair. "You deal not, I take it, in 
medicine for the soul ! " 

"Thus, a sickness," continued Roger 
Chillingworth, going on, in an unaltered 
tone, without heeding the interruption, — 
but standing up, and confronting the ema- 
ciated and white-cheeked minister, with 
his low, dark, and misshapen figure, — "a 
sickness, a sore place, if we may so call it. 



242 



The Scarlet Letter 



in your spirit, hath immediately its appro- 
priate manifestation in your bodily frame. 
Would you, therefore, 
that your physician 
heal the bodily evil ? 
How may this be, 
unless you first lay 
open to him thewound 
or trouble in your 
soul ?" 

'No! —not to thee! 
— not to an earthly 
I physician!" cried Mr. 
Dimmesdale, pas- 
' sionately, and turn- 
I'l/ mg his eyes, full and 
"' bright, and with a 
kmd of fierceness, on 
old Roger Chilling- 
worth. " Not to thee ! 
But, if it be the soul's 
[ commit myself to the 
one Physician of the soul ! He, if it stand 
with his good pleasure, can cure ; or he 
can kill ! Let him do with me as, in bis 
justice and wisdom, he shall see good. 
But who art thou, that meddlest in this 
matter? — that dares thrust himself between 
the sufferer and his God .' " 




disease, then do ! 



The Leech and His Patient 243 

With a frantic gesture, he rushed out of 
the room. 

" It is as well to have made this step," 
said Roger Chillingworth to himself, look- 
ing after the minister with a grave smile. 
"There is nothing lost. We shall be 
friends again anon. But see, now, how 
passion takes hold upon this man, and 
hurrieth him out of himself ! As with one 
passion, so with another ! He hath done 
a wild thing ere now, this pious Master 
Dimmesdale, in the hot passion of his 
heart ! " 

It proved not difficult to reestablish the 
intimacy of the two companions, on the 
same footing and in the same degree as 
heretofore. The young clergyman, after a 
few hours of privacy, was sensible that the 
disorder of his nerves had hurried him into 
an unseemly outbreak of temper, which 
thereTiad been nothing in the physician's 
words to excuse or palliate. He marvelled, 
indeed, at the violence with which he had 
thrust back the kind old man, when merely 
proffering the advice which it was his duty 
to bestow, and which the minister himself 
had expressly sought. With these remorse- 
ful feelings, he lost no time in making 
the amplest apologies, and besought his 



244 



The Scarlet Letter 



friend still to continue the care, which, if 
not successful in restoring him to health, 
had, in all probability, been the means of 
prolonging his feeble existence to that hour. 
Roger Chillingworth readily assented, and 
went on with his medical supervision of 
the minister ; doing his best for him, in all 
good faith, but always quitting the patient's 
apartment, at the close of a professional 
interview, with a mysterious and puzzled 
smile upon his lips. This expression was 
invisible in Mr. Dimmesdale's presence, 
but grew strongly evident as the physician 
crossed the threshold. 

" A rare case ! " he muttered. "I must 
needs look deeper into it. A strange 
sympathy betwixt soul and body ! Were it 
only for the art's sake, I must search this 
matter to the bottom ! " 

It came to pass, not long after the scene 
above recorded, that the Reverend* Mr. 
Dimmesdale, at noonday, and entirely un- 
awares, fell into a deep, deep slumber, sit- 
ting in his chair, with a large black-letter 
volume open before him on the table. It 
must have been a work of vast ability in the 
somniferous school of literature. The pro- 
found depth of the minister's repose was 
the more remarkable ; inasmuch as he was 



The Leech and His Patient 245 

one of those persons whose sleep, ordina- 
rily, is as light, as fitful, and as easily scared 
away, as a small bird hopping on a twig. 
To such an unwonted remoteness, however, 
had his spirit now withdrawn into itself, 
that he stirred not in his chair, when old 
Roger Chillingworth, without any extraor- 
dinary precaution, came into the room. 
The physician advanced directly in front 
of his patient, laid his hand upon his 
bosom, and thrust aside the vestment, 
that, hitherto, had always covered it even 
from the professional eye. 

Then, indeed, Mr. Dimmesdale shud- 
dered, and slightly stirred. 

After a brief pause, the physician turned 
away. 

But with what a wild look of wonder, 
joy, and horror! With what a ghastly rap- 
ture, as it were, too mighty to be expressed 
only by the eye and features, and therefore 
bursting forth through the whole ugliness 
of his figure, and making itself even riot- 
ously manifest by the extravagant gestures 
with which he threw up his arms towards 
the ceiling, and stamped his foot upon the 
floor ! Had a man seen old Roger Chilling- 
worth, at that moment of his ecstasy, he 
would have had no need to ask how Satan 



246 The Scarlet Letter 

* 
comports himself, when a precious human 

soul is lost to heaven, and won into his 
kingdom. 

But what distinguished the physician's 
ecstasy from Satan's was the trait of won- 
der in it ! 



XI 

THE INTERIOR OF A HEART 

AFTER the incident last described, the 
intercourse between the clergyman 
and the physician, though externally the 
same, was really of another character than 
it had previously been. The intellect of 
Roger Chillingworth had now a sufficiently 
plain path before it. It was not, indeed, 
precisely that which he had laid out for 
himself to tread. Calm, gentle, passion- 
less, as he appeared, there was yet, we 
fear, a quiet depth of malice, hitherto 
latent, but active now, in this unfortunate 
old man, which led him to imagine a more 
intimate revenge than any mortal had ever 
wreaked upon an enemy. To make him- 
self the one trusted friend, to whom should 
be confided all the fear, the remorse, the 
agony, the ineffectual repentance, the 
backward rush of sinful thoughts, expelled 
in vain ! All that guilty sorrow, hidden 
from the world, whose great heart would 

have pitied and forgiven, to be revealed to 

247 



24^ The Scarlet Letter 

liiin, the Pitiless, to him, the Unforgiving! 
All that dark treasure to be lavished on 
I ho vorv man, to whom nothing else could 
so .ulcquately pay the debt of vengeance ! 

The clergyman's shy and sensitive re- 
soive had balked this scheme. Roger 
C'hilUni^worth, however, was inclined to be 
hardly, if at all, less satisfied with the 
as^H^vt of affairs, which Providence — using 
the avenger and his victim for its own pur- 
l)v>scs, and, perchance, pardoning, where it 
socmei.1 most to punish — had substituted 
u»i his black devices. A revelation, he 
vAHiKl almost say, had been granted to him. 
li inattored little, for his object, whether 
vvK'Niial, or from what other region. By 
111 .livl. in all the subsequent relations be- 
iv\i\t him and Mr. Dimmesdale, not merely 
\\w v'xirrnal presence, but the very inmost 
..'111 \A the latter seemed to be brought out 
N. i.'u' his eyes, so that he could see and 
.^'mMohrnd its every movement. He be- 
. iMix\ ii\onceforth, not a spectator only, 
'"!i I \.\\\A actor, in the poor minister's 
'"uii»M world. He could play upon him 
\^ W V Iwvso. Would he arouse him with 
i iiiu'N ol agony? The victim was for 
« \xi iM» \W rack; it needed only to know 
\-». M*«n\>; that controlled the engine; — 



The Interior of a Heart 249 

and the physician knew it well ! Would 
he startle him with sudden fear ? As at 
the waving of a magician's wand, uprose a 
grisly phantom, - - uprose a thousand phan- 
toms, — in many shapes, of death, or more 
awful shame, all flocking round about the 
clergyman, and pointing with their fingers 
at his breast ! 

All this was accomplished with a subtlety 
so perfect, that the minister, though he had 
constantly a dim perception of some evil 
influence watching over him, could never 
gain a knowledge of its actual nature. 
True, he looked doubtfully, fearfully, — 
even, at times, with horror and the bitter- 
ness of hatred, — at the deformed figure 
of the old physician. His gestures, his 
gait, his grizzled beard, his slightest and 
most indifferent acts, the very fashion of 
his garments, were odious in the clergy- 
man's sight ; a token implicitly to be re- 
lied on, of a deeper antipathy in the breast 
of the latter than he was willing to ac- 
knowledge to himself. For, as it was im- 
possible to assign a reason for such distrust 
and abhorrence, so Mr. Dimmesdale, con- 
scious that the poison of one morbid spot 
was infecting his heart's entire substance, 
attributed all his presentiments to no other 



2 so The Scarlet Letter 

cause. He took himself to task for his bad 
sympathies in reference to Roger Chilling- 
worth, disregarded the lesson that he should 
have drawn from them, and did his best to 
root them out. Unable to accomplish this, 
he nevertheless, as a matter of principle, 
continued his habits of social familiarity 
with the old man, and thus gave him con- 
stant opportunities for perfecting the pur- 
pose to which — poor, forlorn creature that 
he was, and more wretched than his vie- 
tim — the avenger had devoted himself. 

While thus suffering under bodily disease, 
and gnawed and tortured by some black 
trouble of the soul, and given over to the 
machinations of his deadliest enemy, the 
Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale had achieved 
a brilliant popularity in his sacred office. 
He won it, indeed, in great part, by his 
sorrows. His intellectual gifts, his moral 
perceptions, his power of experiencing 
and communicating emotion, were kept 
in a state of preternatural activity by the 
prick and anguish of his daily life. His 
fame, though still on its upward slope, al- 
ready overshadowed the soberer reputa- 
tions of his fellow-clergymen, eminent as 
several of them were. There were scholars 
among them, who had spent more years in 






The Interior of a Heart 25 1 

acquiring abstruse lore, connected with the 
divine profession, than Mr. Dimmesdale 
had lived ; and who might well, therefore, 
be more profoundly versed in such solid 
and valuable attainments than their youth- 
ful brother. There were men, too, of a 
sturdier texture of mind than his, and en- 
dowed with a far greater share of shrewd, 
hard, iron or granite understanding ; which, 
duly mingled with a fair proportion of doc- 
trinal ingredient, constitutes a highly 
respectable, efficacious, and unamiable 
variety of the clerical species. There 
were others, again, true saintly fathers, 
whose faculties had been elaborated by 
weary toil among their books, and by 
patient thought, and etherealised, more- 
over, by spiritual communications with the 
better world, into which their purity of life 
had almost introduced these holy person- 
ages, with their garments of mortality still 
clinging to them. All that they lacked 
was the gift that descended upon the 
chosen disciples, at Pentecost, in tongues 
of flame ; symbolising, it would seem, not 
the power of speech in foreign and un- 
known languages, but that of addressing 
the whole human brotherhood in the heart's 
native language. These fathers, otherwise 



252 The Scarlet Letter 

so apostolic, lacked Heaven's last and rarest 
attestation of their office, the Tongue of 
Flame. They would have vainly sought 
— had they ever dreamed of seeking — to 
express the highest truths through the 
humblest medium of familiar words and 
images. Their voices came down, afar and 
indistinctly, from the upper heights where 
they habitually dwelt. 

Not improbably, it was to this latter 
class of men that Mr. Dimmesdale, by 
many of his traits of character, naturally 
belonged. To the high mountain-peaks of 
faith and sanctity he would have climbed, 
had not the tendency been thwarted by the 
burden, whatever it might be, of crime or 
anguish, beneath which it was his doom to 
totter. It kept him down, on a level with 
the lowest ; him, the man of ethereal attri- 
butes, whose voice the angels might else 
have listened to and answered ! But this 
very burden it was, that gave him sym- 
pathies so intimate with the sinful brother- 
hood of mankind ; so that his heart vibrated 
in unison with theirs, and received their 
pain into itself, and sent its own throb 
of pain through a thousand other hearts, 
in gushes of sad, persuasive eloquence. 
Oftenest persuasive, but sometimes ter- 



The Interior of a Heart 253 

rible! The people knew not the power 
Jthat moved them thus. They deemed the 
young clergyman a miracle of holiness. 
They fancied him the mouth-piece of 
Heaven's messages of wisdom, and re- 
buke, and love. In their eyes, the very 
ground on which he trod was sanctified. 
The virgins of his church grew pale around 
him. victims of a passion so imbued with 
religious sentiment that they imagined it 
to be all religion, and brought it openly, 
in their white bosoms, as their most ac- 
ceptable sacrifice before the altar. The 
aged members of his flock, beholding Mr. 
Dimmesdale's frame so feeble, while they 
were themselves so rugged in their infirm- 
ity, believed that he would go heavenward 
before them, and enjoined it upon their 
children, that their old bones should be 
buried close to their young pastor's holy 
grave. And, all this time, perchance, 
when poor Mr. Dimmesdale was thinking 
of his grave, he questioned with himself 
whether the grass would ever grow on it, 
because an accursed thing must there be 
buried ! 

It is inconceivable, the agony with which 
this public veneration tortured him ! It 
was hi§ genuine impulse to adore the truth, 



i^54 ^^^ Scarlet Letter 

and to reckon all things shadow-like, and 
utterly devoid of weight or value, that had 
not its divine essence as the life within 
their life. Then, what was he? — a sub- 
stance ? — or the dimmest of all shadows ? 
He longed to speak out, from his own pul- 
pit, at the full height of his voice, and tell 
the people what he was. "I, whom you 
behold in these black garments of the 
priesthood, — I, who ascend the sacred 
desk, and turn my pale face heavenward, 
taking upon myself to hold communion, in 
your behalf, with the Most High Omni- 
science, — I, in whose daily life you dis- 
cern the sanctity of Enoch, — I, whose 
footsteps, as you suppose, leave a gleam 
along my earthly track, whereby the pil- 
grims that shall come after me may be 
guided to the regions of the blest, — I, 
who have laid the hand of baptism upon 
your children, — I, who have breathed the 
parting prayer over your dying friends, to 
whom the Amen sounded faintly from a 
world which they had quitted, — I, your 
pastor, whom you so reverence and trust, 
am utterly a pollution and a lie ! " 

More than once, Mr. Dimmesdale had 
gone into the pulpit, with a purpose never 
to come down its steps, until he should have 



k 



The Interior of a Heart 255 

spoken words tike the above. More than 
once, he had cleared his throat, and drawn 
in the long, deep, and tremulous breath, 
which, when sent forth again, would come 
burdened with the 
black secret of his soul. 
More than once — nay, 
more than a hun- 
dred times — he 
had actually 
spoken ! Spoken ! 
But how? He 
had told his hearers 
that he was altotj,Lther 
vile, a viler companion 
of the vilest, the worst 
of sinners, an abomma 
tion, a thing of unim 
aginable iniquity ; and 
that the only wonder 
was, that they di^l not 
see his wretched body 
shrivelled up btfure 
their eyes, by the burn 
ing wrath of the Al 
mighty ! Could there be plainer speech 
than this? Would not the people start 
up in their seats, by a simultaneous im- 
pulse, and tear him down out of the 




256 The Scarlet Letter 

pulpit which he defiled ? Not so, indeed ! 
They heard it all, and did but rever- 
ence him the more. They little guessed 
what deadly purport lurked in those self- 
condemning words. *'The godly youth!" 
said they among themselves. "The saint 
on earth ! Alas, if he discern such sin- 
fulness in his own white soul, what hor- 
rid spectacle would he behold in thine 
or mine!" The minister well knew — 
subtle, but remorseful hypocrite that he 
was ! — the light in which his vague con- 
fession would be viewed. He had striven 
to put a cheat upon himself by making the 
avowal of a guilty conscience, but had 
gained only one other sin, and a self- 
acknowledged shame, without the momen- 
tary relief of being self-deceived. He had 
spoken the very truth, and transformed it 
into the veriest falsehood. And yet, by 
the constitution of his nature, he loved the 
truth, and loathed the lie, as few men ever 
did. Therefore, above all things else, he 
loathed his miserable self ! 

His inward trouble drove him to prac- 
tices, more in accordance with the old, 
corrupted faith of Rome, than with the 
better light of the church in which he had 
been born and bred. In Mr. Pimmesd^e'9 



The Interior of a Heart 257 

secret closet, under lock and key, there 
was a bloody scourge. Oftentimes, this 
Protestant and I'uritan divine had plied it 
on his own shoulders ; laughing bitterly at 
himself the while, and smiting so much the 
more pitilessly, because of that bitter 
laugh. It was his custom, too, as it has 




been that of many other pious Puritans, to 
fast, — not, however, like them, in order to 
purify the body and render it the fitter 
medium of celestial illumination, but rigor- 
ously, and until his knees trembled beneath 
him, as an act of penance. He kept vigils, 
likewise, night after night, sometimes in 



258 



The Scarlet Letter 



utter darkness ; sometimes with a glim- 
mering lamp; and sometimes, viewing his 
own face in a looking-glass, by the most 
powerful light which he could throw upon 
it. He thus typified the constant introspec- 
tion wherewith he tortured, but could not 
^ purify, himself. In these 

lengthened vigils, his 
brain often reeled, and 
visions seemed to flit be- 
fore him ; perhaps seen 
doubtfully, and by a faint 
' light of their own, in the 
remote dimness of the 
chamber, or more vividly, 
and close beside him, 
within the looking-glass. 
Now It was a herd of dia- 
bolic shapes, that grinned 
and mocked at the pale 
minister, and beckoned 
him away with them; now 
a group of shining an- 
gels, who flew upward heavily, as sorrow- 
laden, but grew more ethereal as they rose. 
Now came the dead friends of his youth, and 
his white-bearded father, with a saint-like 
frown, and his mother, turning her face 
away as she passed by. Ghost of a mother. 




The Interior of a Heart 259 

— thinnest fantasy of a mother, — me- 
thinks she might yet have thrown a pity- 
ing glance towards her son ! And now, 
through the chamber which these spec- 
tral thoughts had made so ghastly, glided 
Hester Prynne, leading along little Pearl, 
in her scarlet garb, and pointing her fore- 
finger, first, at the scarlet letter on her 
bosom, and then at the clergyman's own 
breast. 

None of these visions ever quite deluded 
him. At any moment, by an effort of his 
will, he could discern substances through 
their misty lack of substance, and convince 
himself that they were not solid in their 
nature, like yonder table of carved oak, or 
that big, square, leathern-bound and bra- 
zen-clasped volume of divinity. But, for 
all that, they were, in one sense, the truest 
and most substantial things which the poor 
minister now dealt with. It is the unspeak- 
able misery of a life so false as his, that it 
steals the pith and substance out of what- 
ever realities there are around us, and which 
were meant by Heaven to be the spirit's 
joy and nutriment. To the untrue man, 
the whole universe is false, — it is impal- 
pable, — it shrinks to nothing within his 
grasp. And he himself, in so far as he 



26o The Scarlet Letter 

shows himself in a false light, becomes a 
shadow, or, indeed, ceases to exist. The 
only truth, that continued to give Mr. 
Dimmesdale a real existence on this earth, 
was the anguish in his inmost soul, and 
the undissembled expression of it in his 
aspect. Had he once found power to 
smile, and wear a face of gayety, there 
would have been no such man ! 

On one of those ugly nights, which we 
have faintly hinted at, but forborne to pic- 
ture forth, the minister started from his 
chair. A new thought had struck him. 
There might be a moment's peace in it. 
Attiring himself with as much care as if 
it had been for public worship, and pre- 
cisely in the same manner, he stole softly 
down the staircase, undid the door, and 
issued forth. 



w 



THE MINISTER'S VIGIL 

ALKING in the shadow of a dream, 
as it were, and perh; i i I ii"\ n- 
der the influence of a ^. 

species of snmnani- ^S 

bnlism, Mr. iJimmes- 
dale reachcJ Unj s]>ot, 
where, now so long 
since, Hester I'rynne 
had lived through her 
first hour of public 
ignominy. The same 
platform or scaffold, 
black and weather- 
stained with the storm 
or sunshine of seven 
long years, and foot- 
worn, too, with the 
tread of many culprits 
who had since as- 
cended it, remained 
standing beneath the 
balcony of the meeting-house. The min- 
ister went up the steps. 




262 The Scarlet Letter 

It was an obscure night of early May. 
An unvaried pall of cloud muffled the 
whole expanse of sky from zenith to hori- 
zon. If the same multitude which had 
stood as eyewitnesses while Hester Prynne 
sustained her punishment could now have 
been summoned forth, they would have 
discerned no face above the platform, nor 
hardly the outline of a human shape, in the 
dark grey of the midnight. But the town 
was all asleep. There was no peril of dis- 
covery. The minister might stand there, 
if it so pleased him, until morning should 
redden in the east, without other risk than 
that the dank and chill night-air would 
creep into his frame, and stiffen his joints 
with rheumatism, and clog his throat with 
catarrh and cough ; thereby defrauding the 
expectant audience of to-morrow's prayer 
and sermon. No eye could see him, save 
that ever-wakeful one which had seen him 
in his closet, wielding the bloody scourge. 
Why, then, had he come hither ? Was it 
but the mockery of penitence ? A mock- 
ery, indeed, but in which his soul trifled 
with itself ! A mockery at which angels 
blushed and wept, while fiends rejoiced, 
with jeering laughter! He had been 
driven hither by the impulse of that Re- 



The Minister s Vigil 263 

morse which dogged him everywhere, and 
whose own sister and closely linked com- 
panion was that Cowardice which invaria- 
bly drew him back, with her tremulous 
gripe, just when the other impulse had 
hurried him to the verge of a disclosure. 
Poor, miserable man! what right had in- 
firmity like his to burden itself with crime ? 
Crime is for the iron-nerved, who have 
their choice either to endure it, or, if it 
press too hard, to exert their fierce and 
savage strength for a good purpose, and 
fling it off at once ! This feeble and most 
sensitive of spirits could do neither, yet 
continually did one thing or another, which 
intertwined, in the same inextricable knot, 
the agony of heaven-defying guilt and vain 
repentance. 

And thus, while standing on the scaf- 
fold, in this vain show of expiation, Mr. 
Dimmesdale was overcome with a great 
horror of mind, as if the universe were 
gazing at a scarlet token on his naked 
breast, right over his heart. On that 
spot, in very truth, there was, and there 
had long been, the gnawing and poisonous 
tooth of bodily pain. Without any effort \ 
of his will, or power to restrain himself, he V'- 
shrieked aloud ; an outcry that went peal- 



V 



264 The Scarlet Letter 

ing through the night, and was beaten 
back from one house to another, and rever- 
berated from the hills in the background ; 
as if a company of devils, detecting so 
much misery and terror in it, had made a 
plaything of the sound, and were bandying 
it to and fro. 

** It is done ! " muttered the minister, 
covering his face with his hands. "The 
whole town will awake, and hurry forth, 
and find me here !" 

But it was not so. The shriek had per- 
haps sounded with a far greater power, to 
his own startled ears, than it actually pos- 
sessed. The town did not awake ; or, if it 
did, the drowsy slumberers mistook the 
cry either for something frightful in a 
dream, or for the noise of witches ; whose 
voices, at that period, were often heard to 
pass over the settlements or lonely cot- 
tages, as they rode with Satan through the 
air. The clergyman, therefore, hearing no 
symptoms of disturbance, uncovered his 
eyes and looked about him. At one of 
the chamber-windows of Governor Belling- 
ham's mansion, which stood at some dis- 
tance, on the line of another street, he 
beheld the appearance of the old magis- 
trate himself, with a lamp in his hand, a 



Tlie Minister s Vigil 265 

white night-cap on his head, and a long 
white gown enveloping his figure. He 
looked like a ghost, evoked unseasonably 
from the grave. The cry had evidently 
startled him. At another window of the 
same house, moreover, appeared old Mis- 
tress Hibbins, the Governor's sister, also 
with a lamp, which, even thus far off, 
revealed the expression of her sour and 
discontented face. She thrust forth her 
head from the lattice, and looked anxiously 
upward. Beyond the shadow of a doubt, 
this venerable witch-lady had heard Mr. 
Dimmesdale's outcry, and interpreted it, 
with its multitudinous echoes and rever- 
berations, as the clamour of the fiends and 
night-hags, with whom she was well known 
to make excursions into the forest. 

Detecting the gleam of Governor Bel- 
lingham's lamp, the old lady quickly ex- 
tinguished her own, and vanished. Possi- 
bly, she went up among the clouds. The 
minister saw nothing further of her mo- 
tions. The magistrate, after a wary obser- 
vation of the darkness — into which, never- 
theless, he could see but little farther than 
he might into a mill-stone — retired from 
the window. 

The minister grew comparatively calm. 



266 The Scarlet Letter 

His eyes, however, were soon greeted by 

a little, glimmering light, which, at first a 
long way off, was approaching up the street. 
It threw a gleam of recognition on here a 
post, and there a garden-fence, and here a 
latticed window-pane, and there a pump, 
with its full trough of water, and here, 
again, an arched door 
of oak, with an iron 
knocker, and a rough 
log for the door-step. 
, The Reverend Mr. 
' Dimmcsdale noted all 
these minute particu- 
lars even while firmly 
convinced that the 
doom of his existence 
WIS stcahng onward, in 
the footsteps which he 
now heard ; and that 
the gleam of the Ian. 
tern would fall upon 
him in a few mo- 
ments more, and reveal his long-hidden 
secret. As the light drew nearer, he be- 
held, within its illuminated circle, his 
brother clergyman, — or, to speak more 
accurately, his professional father, as well 
as highly valued friend, — the Reverend 




The Minister s Vigil 267 

Mr. Wilson ; who, as Mr. Dimmesdale 
now conjectured, had been praying at the 
bedside of some dying man. And so he 
had. The good old minister came freshly 
from the death-chamber of Governor Win- 
throp, who had passed from earth to heaven 
within that very hour. And now, sur- 
rounded, like the saint-like personages of 
olden times, with a radiant halo, that glori- 
fied him amid this gloomy night of sin, — 
as if the departed Governor had left him 
an inheritance of his glory, or as if he had 
caught upon himself the distant shine of 
the celestial city, while looking thither- 
ward to see the triumphant pilgrim pass 
within its gates, — now, in short, good 
Father Wilson was moving homeward, 
aiding his footsteps with a lighted lan- 
tern ! The glimmer of this luminary sug- 
gested the above conceits to Mr. Dimmes- 
dale, who smiled, — nay, almost laughed 
at them, — and then wondered if he were 
going mad. 

As the Reverend Mr. Wilson passed 
beside the scaffold, closely muffling his 
Geneva cloak about him with one arm, 
and holding the lantern before his breast 
with the other, the minister could hardly 
restrain himself from speaking. 



*■> N. 



268 The Scarlet Letter 

" A good evening to you, venerable 
Father Wilson ! Come up hither, I pray 
you, and pass a pleasant hour with me ! " 

Good heavens ! Had Mr. Dimmesdale 
actually spoken ? For one instant, he 
believed that these words had passed his 
lips. But they were uttered only within 
his imagination. The venerable Father 
Wilson continued to step slowly onward, 
looking carefully at the muddy pathway 
before his feet, and never once turning his 
head towards the guilty platform. When 
the light of the glimmering lantern had 
faded quite away, the minister discovered, 
by the faintness which came over him, 
that the last few moments had been a 
crisis of terrible anxiety ; although his 
mind had made an involuntary effort to 
relieve itself by a kind of lurid playful- 
ness. 

Shortly afterwards, the like grisly sense 
of the humorous again stole in among the 
solemn phantoms of his thought. He felt his 
limbs growing stiff with the unaccustomed 
chilliness of the night, and doubted whether 
he should be able to descend the steps of 
the scaffold. Morning would break, and 
find him there. The neighbourhood would 
begin to rouse itself. The earliest riser. 



The Minister s Vigil 269 

coming forth in the dim twilight, would 
perceive a vaguely defined figure aloft on 
the* place of shame ; and, half crazed 
betwixt alarm and curiosity, would go, 
knocking from door to door, summoning 
all the people to behold the ghost — as he 
needs must think it — of some defunct 
transgressor. A dusky tumult would flap 
its wings from one house to another. 
Then — th^ morning light still waxing 
stronger — old patriarchs would rise up in 
great haste, each in his flannel gown, and 
matronly dames, without pausing to put 
off their night-gear. The whole tribe of 
decorous personages, who had never here- 
tofore been seen with a single hair of their 
heads awry, would start into public view, 
with the disorder of a nightmare in their 
aspects. Old Governor Bellingham would 
come grimly forth, with his King James's 
ruff fastened askew ; and Mistress Hib- 
bins, with some twigs of the forest cling- 
ing to her skirts, and looking sourer than 
ever, as having hardly got a wink of sleep 
after her night ride ; and good Father 
Wilson, too, after spending half the night 
at a death-bed, and liking ill to be dis- 
turbed, thus early, out of his dreams 
about the glorified saints. Hither, like- 



270 The Scarlet Letter 

wise, would come the elders and deacons 
of Mr. Dimmesdale's church, and the 
young virgins who so idolised their minis- 
ter, and had made a shrine for him in 
their white bosoms ; which now, by the 
by, in their hurry and confusion, they 
would scantly have given themselves time 
to cover with their kerchiefs. All people, 
in a word, would come stumbling over 
their thresholds, and turning up their 
amazed and horror-stricken visages around 
the scaffold. Whom would they discern 
there, with the red eastern light upon his 
brow } Whom, but the Reverend Arthur 
Dimmesdale, half frozen to death, over- 
whelmed with shame, and standing where 
Hester Prynne had stood ! 

Carried away by the grotesque horror of 
this picture, the minister, unawares, and to 
his own infinite alarm, burst into a great 
peal of laughter. It was immediately re- 
sponded to by a light, airy, childish laugh, 
in which, with a thrill of the heart, — but 
he knew not whether of exquisite pain, or 
pleasure as acute, — he recognised the 
tones of little Pearl. 

" Pearl ! Little Pearl ! " cried he, after 
a moment's pause ; then, suppressing his 
voice, — " Hester ! Hester Prynne ! Are, 
you there .^" 



The Minister's Vigil 271 

"Yes; it is Hester Frynne!" she re- 
plied, in a tone of surprise ; and the minis- 
ter heard her footsteps approaching from 
the sidewalk, along which she had been 
passing. — "It is I, and my little Pearl." 

"Whence come you, Hester?" asked 
theminister. "What 
sent you hither .' " 

"I have been 
watching at a death- 
bed," answered Hes 
ter Prynne ; — "at 
Governor Win- 
throp's death ■ bed, ■ 
and have taken his 
measure for a robe, 
and am now going 
homeward to my 
dwelling." 

"Come up hither, 
Hester, thou and 
little Pearl," said 
the Reverend Mr. 
Dimmesdale. "Ye have both been here 
before, but I was not with you. Come up 
hither once again, and we will stand all 
three together! " 

She silently ascended the steps, and 
stood on the platform, holding little Pearl 




272 The Scarlet Letter 

by the hand. The minister felt for the 
child's other hand, and took it. The 
moment that he did so, there came what 
seemed a tumultuous rush of new life, 
other life than his own, pouring like a tor- 
rent into his heart, and hurrying through 
all his veins, as if the mother and the 
child were communicating their vital 
warmth to his half-torpid system. The 
three formed an electric chain. 

"Minister!" whispered little Pearl. 

"What wouldst thou say, child.?" asked 
Mr. Dimmesdale. 

" Wilt thou stand here with mother and 
me, to-morrow noontide.?" inquired Pearl. 

"Nay; not so, my little Pearl!" an- 
swered the minister ; for, with the new 
energy of the moment, all the dread of 
public exposure, that had so long been the 
anguish of his life, had returned upon him ; 
and he was already trembling at the con- 
junction in which — with a strange joy, 
nevertheless — he now found himself. 
" Not so, my child. I shall, indeed, stand 
with thy mother and thee one other day, 
but not to-morrow ! " ; 

Pearl laughed, and attempted to pull 
away her hand. But the minister held it 
fast. 



The Minister s Vigil 273 

"A moment longer, my child ! " said he. 

"But wilt thou promise," asked Pearl, 
** to take my hand, and mother's hand, to- 
morrow noontide ? " 

"Not then, Pearl," said the minister, 
"but another time ! " 

"And what other time?" persisted the 
child. 

" At the great judgment day ! " whispered 
the minister, — and, strangely enough, the 
sense that he was a professional teacher of / 
the truth impelled him to answer the child 
so. " Then, and there, before the judgment- 
seat, thy mother, and thou, and I, must 
stand together ! But the daylight of this 
world shall not see our meeting ! " 

Pearl laughed again. 

But, before Mr. Dimmesdale had done 
speaking, a light gleamed far and wide 
over all the muffled sky. It was doubtless 
caused by one of those meteors, which the 
night-watcher may so often observe burn- 
ing out to waste, in the vacant regions 
of the atmosphere. So powerful was its ' 
radiance, that it thoroughly illuminated 
the dense medium of cloud betwixt the 
sky and earth. The great vault brightened, 
like the dome of an immense lamp. It 
showed the familiar scene of the street, 



\> . 



274 ^^ Scarlet Letter 

with the distinctness of mid-day, but also 
with the awf ulness that is always imparted 
to familiar objects by an unaccustomed 
light. The wooden houses, with their jut- 
ting stories and quaint gable-peaks; the 
door-steps and thresholds, with the early 
grass springing up about them ; the gar- 
den-plots, black with freshly turned earth ; 
the wheel-track, little worn, and, even in 
the market-place, margined with green on 
either side ; — all were visible, but with a 
singularity of aspect that seemed to give 
another moral interpretation to the things 
of this world than they had ever borne be- 
fore. And there stood the minister, with 
his hand over his heart ; and Hester 
Prynne, with the embroidered letter glim- 
mering on her bosom ; and little Pearl, 
herself a symbol, and the connecting link 
between those two. They stood in the 
noon of that strange and solemn splendour, 
as if it were the light that is to reveal all 
secrets, and the daybreak that shall unite 
all who belong to one another. 

There was witchcraft in little Pearl's 
eyes ; and her face, as she glanced upward 
at the minister, wore that naughty smile 
which made its expression frequently so 
elvish. She withdrew her hand from Mr. 



The Minister s Vigil 275 

Dimmesdale's, and pointed across the 
street. But he clasped both his hands 
over his breast, and cast his eyes towards 
the zenith. 

Nothing was more common, in those 
days, than to interpret all meteoric appear- 
ances, and other natural phenomena, that 
occurred with less regularity than the rise 
and set of sun and moon, as so many reve- 
lations from a supernatural source. Thus, 
a blazing spear, a sword of flame, a bow, or 
a sheaf of arrows, seen in the midnight sky, 
prefigured Indian warfare. Pestilence was 
known to have been foreboded by a shower 
of crimson light. We doubt whether any 
marked event, for good or evil, ever befell 
New England, from its settlement down 
to Revolutionary times, of which the in- 
habitants had not been previously warned 
by some spectacle of this nature. Not 
seldom, it had been seen by multitudes. 
Oftener, however, its credibility rested on 
the faith of some lonely eyewitness, who 
beheld the wonder through the coloured, 
magnifying, and distorting medium of his 
imagination, and shaped it more distinctly 
in his after-thought. It was, indeed, a 
majestic idea, that the destiny of nations 
should be revealed, in these awful hiero- 



2/6 The Scarlet Letter 

glyphics, on the cope of heaven. A scroll 
so wide might not be deemed too expan- 
sive for Providence to write a people's 
doom upon. The belief was a favourite 
one with our forefathers, as betokening 
that their infant commonwealth was under 
a celestial guardianship of peculiar inti- 
macy and strictness. But what shall we 
say, when an individual discovers a reve- 
lation, addressed to himself alone, on the 
same vast sheet of record ! In such a 
case, it could only be the symptom of 
a highly disordered mental state, when a 
man, rendered morbidly self-contemplative 
by long, intense, and secret pain, had 
extended his egotism over the whole ex- 
panse of nature, until the firmament itself 
should appear no more than a fitting page 
for his soul's history and fate. 

We impute it, therefore, solely to the 
disease in his own eye and heart, that the 
minister, looking upward to the zenith, 
beheld there the appearance of an im- 
mense letter, — the letter A, — marked 
out in lines of dull red light. Not but 
the meteor may have shown itself at that 
point, burning duskily through a veil of 
cloud ; but with no such shape as his 
guilty imagination gave it; or, at leasts 



The Minister s Vigil 



277 



with so little definiteness, that another's 
guilt might have seen another symbol in 
it. 

There was a singular circumstance that 
characterised Mr. Dimmesdale's psycho- 
logical state, at this 
moment. All the time 
that he gazed up 
ward to the zenith, he 
was, nevertheless, per 
fectly aware that lit 
tie Pearl was pointmg 
her finger towards 
old Roger Chilling 
worth, who stood at 
no great distance from 
the scaffold. The 
minister appeared to 
see him, with the 
same glance that dis 
cemed the miraculous 
letter. To his feat- 
ures, as to all other 
objects, the meteoric light imp; 
new expression ; or it might well be that 
the physician was not careful then, as at 
all other times, to hide the malevolence 
with which he looked upon his victim. 
.Certainly, ii the meteor kindled up the 




2/8 The Scarlet Letter 

sky, and disclosed the earth, with an awf ul- 
ness that admonished Hester Prynne and 
the clergyman of the day of judgment, 
then might Roger Chillingworth have 
passed with them for the arch-fiend, 
standing there with a smile and scowl, 
to claim his own. So vivid was the ex- 
pression, or so intense the minister's per 
ception of it, that it seemed still to remain 
painted on the darkness, after the meteor 
had vanished, with an effect as if the 
street and all things else were at once 
annihilated. 

"Who is that man, Hester.^" gasped 
Mr. Dimmesdale, overcome with terror. 
"I shiver at him! Dost thou know the 
man } I hate him, Hester! *' 

She remembered her oath and was 
silent. 

"I tell thee, my soul shivers at him," 
muttered the minister again. " Who is he } 
Who is he } Canst thou do nothing for 
me } I have a nameless horror of the 



man." 



" Minister," said little Pearl, " I can tell 
thee who he is ! " 

** Quickly, then, child!" said the minis- 
ter, bending his ear close to her lips. 
''Quickly! — and as low as thou canst 
whisper." 



The Minister's Vigil 279 

Pearl mumbled something into his ear, 
that sounded, indeed, like human language, 
but was only such gibberish as children 
may be heard amusing themselves with, 
by the hour together. At all events, if it 
involved any secret information in regard 
to old Roger Chillingworth, it was in a 
tongue unknown to the erudite clergyman, 
and did but increase the bewilderment of 
his mind. The elvish child then laughed 
aloud. 

"Dost thou mock me now.^" said the 
minister. 

"Thou wast not bold! — thou wast notl 
true ! " answered the child. " Thou wouldst 
not promise to take my hand, and mother's \ 
hand, to-morrow noontide ! * 

" Worthy Sir," answered the physician, 
who had now advanced to the foot of the 
platform. " Pious Master Dimmesdale ! 
can this be you t Well, well, indeed ! We 
men of study, whose heads are in our 
books, have need to be straitly looked 
after! We dream in our waking mo- 
ments, and walk in our sleep. Come, 
good Sir, and my dear friend, I pray you, 
let me lead you home ! " 

"How knewest thou that I was here?" 
asked the minister, fearfully. 



28o The Scarlet Lettet 

"Verily, and in good faith/* answered 
Roger Chillingworth, " I knew nothing of 
the matter. I had spent the better part 
of the night at the bedside of the worship- 
ful Governor Winthrop, doing what my 
poor skill might to give him ease. He 
going home to a better world, I, likewise, 
was on my way homeward, when this 
strange light shone out. Come with me, 
I beseech you, Reverend Sir; else you 
will be poorly able to do Sabbath duty 
to-morrow. Aha ! see now, how they 
trouble the brain, — these books ! — these 
books ! You should study less, good Sir, 
and take a little pastime ; or these night- 
whimseys will grow upon you ! " 

" I will go home with you," said Mr. 
Dimmesdale. 

With a chill despondency, like one awak- 
ing, all nerveless, from an ugly dream, he 
yielded himself to the physician, and was 
led away. 

The next day, however, being the Sab- 
bath, he preached a discourse which was 
held to be the richest and most powerful, 
and the most replete with heavenly influ* 
ences, that had ever proceeded from his 
lips. Souls, it is said, more souls than 
one, were brought to the truth by the effi- 



The Minister's Vigil 281 

cacy of that sermon, and vowed within 
themselves to cherish a holy gratitude 
towards Mr. Dimmesdale throughout the 
long hereafter. Hut, as he came down the 
pulpit-steps, the grey-bearded sexton met 
him, holding up a black glove, which the 
minister recognised as his own. 

"It was found," said the sexton, "this 
morning, on the scaffold, where evil-doers 
are set up to public shame. Satan dropped 
it there, I take it, intending a scurrilous 
jest against your reverence. But, indeed, 
he was blind and foolish, as he ever and 
always is. A pure hand needs no glove to 
cover it ! ** 

"Thank you, my good friend," said the 
minister, gravely, but startled at heart ; 
for, so confused was his remembrance, 
that he had almost brought himself to 
look at the events of the past night as 
visionary. "Yes, it seems to be my glove 
indeed ! " 

"And, since Satan saw fit to steal it, 
your reverence must needs handle him 
without gloves, henceforward,*' remarked 
the old sexton, grimly smiling. " But did 
your reverence hear of the portent that 
was seen last night } A great red letter 
in the sky, — the letter A, — which we 



282 



The Scarlet Letter 



interpret to stand for Angel. For, as our 
good Governor Winthrop was made an 
angel this past night, it was doubtless 
held fit that there should be some notice 
thereof ! " 

"No," answered the minister. "I had 
not heard of it.*' 



XIII 

ANOTHER VIEW OF HESTER 

IN her late singular interview with 
Mr. Dimmesdale, Hester Prynne was 
shocked at the condition to which she 
found the clergyman reduced. His nerve 
seemed absolutely destroyed. His moral 
force was abased into more than childish 
weakness. It grovelled helpless on the 
ground, even while his intellectual faculties 
retained their pristine strength, or had 
perhaps acquired a morbid energy, which 
disease only could have given them. With 
her knowledge of a train of circumstances 
hidden from all others, she could readily 
infer, that, besides the legitimate action of 
his own conscience, a terrible machinery 
had been brou2:ht to bear, and was still 
operating, on Mr. Dimmesdale's well-being 
and repose. Knowing what this poor, 
fallen man had once been, her whole soul 
was moved by the shuddering terror with 
which he had appealed to her, — the out- 
cast woman, — for support against his 

283 



284 The Scarlet Letter 

instinctively discovered enemy. She de- 
cided, moreover, that he had a right to her 
utmost aid. Little accustomed, in her long 
seclusion from society, to measure her 
ideas of right and wrong by any standard 
external to herself^ Hester saw — or seemed 
to see — that there lay a responsibility 
upon her, in reference to the clergyman, 
which she owed to no other, nor to the 
whole world besides. The links that united 
her to the rest of human kind — links of 
flowers, or silk, or gold, or whatever the 
material — had all been broken. Here 
was the iron link of mutual crime, which 
neither he nor she could break. Like all 
other ties, it brought along with it its 
obligations. 

Hester Prynne did not now occupy pre- 
cisely the same position in which we beheld 
her during the earlier periods of her igno- 
miny. Years had come and gone. Pearl 
was now seven years old. Her mother, 
with the scarlet letter on her breast, glit- 
tering in its fantastic embroidery, had long 
been a familiar object to the townspeople. 
As is apt to be the case when a person 
stands out in any prominence before the 
community, and, at the same time, inter- 
feres neither with public nor individual 



Another Vicn of Hester 285 

interests and convenience, a species of 
general regard had ultimately grown up 
in reference to Hester Prynne. It is to 
the credit of human nature, that, except 
where its selfishness is brought into play, 
it loves more readily than it hates. Hatred, 
by a gradual and quiet process, will even 
be transformed to love, unless the change 
be impeded by a continually new irritation 




of the original feeling of hostility. In this 
matter of Hester Prynne, there was neither 
irritation nor irksomeness. She never 
battled with the public, but submitted 
uncomplainingly to its worst usage ; she 
made no claim upon it, in requital for 
what she suffered ; she did not weigh upon 
its sympathies. Then, also, the blameless 
purity of her life, during all these years in 
which she had been set apart to infamy, 



286 The Scarlet Letter 

was reckoned largely in her favour. With 
nothing now to lose, in the sight of man- 
kind, and with no hope, and seemingly no 
wish, of gaining any thing, it could only be 
a genuine regard for virtue that had brought 
back the poor wanderer to its paths. 

It was perceived, too, that, while Hester 
never put forward even the humblest title 
to share in the world's privileges, — farther 
than to breathe the common air, and earn 
daily bread for little Pearl and herself by 
the faithful labour of her hands, — she was 
quick to acknowledge her sisterhood with 
the race of man, whenever benefits were 
to be conferred. None so ready as she to 
give of her little substance to every demand 
of poverty ; even though the bitter-hearted 
pauper threw back a gibe in requital of 
the food brought regularly to his door, or 
the garments wrought for him by the fin- 
gers that could have embroidered a mon- 
arch's robe. None so self-devoted as Hes- 
ter, when pestilence stalked through the 
town. In all seasons of calamity, indeed, 
whether general or of individuals, the out- 
cast of society at once found her place. She 
came, not as a guest, but as a rightful 
inmate, into the household that was dark- 
ened by trouble ; as if its gloomy twilight 



Another View of Hester 287 

were a medium in which she was entitled 
to hold intercourse with her fellow-creat- 
ures. There glimmered the embroidered 
letter, with comfort in its unearthly ray. 
Elsewhere the token of sin, it was the 
taper of the sick-chamber. It had even 
thrown its gleam, in the sufferer's hard 
extremity, across the verge of time. It 
had shown him where to set his foot, while 
the light of earth was fast becoming dim, 
and ere the light of futurity could reach 
him. In such emergencies, Hester's na- 
ture showed itself warm and rich ; a well- 
spring of human tenderness, unfailing to 
every real demand, and inexhaustible by 
the largest. Her breast, with its badge of 
shame, was but the softer pillow for the 
head that needed one. She was self-or- 
dained a Sister of Mercy ; or, we may 
rather say, the world's heavy hand had so 
ordained her, when neither the world nor 
she looked forward to this result. The 
letter was the symbol of her calling. Such 
helpfulness was found in her, — so much 
power to do, and power to sympathise, — 
that many people refused to interpret the 
scarlet A by its original signification. 
They said that it meant Able ; so strong was 
Hester Prynne, with a woman's strength. 



288 The Scarlet Letter 

It was only the darkened house that 
could contain her. When sunshine came 
again, she was not there. Her shadow had 
faded across the threshold. The helpful 
inmate had departed, without one back- 
ward glance to gather up the meed of grati- 
tude, if any were in the hearts of those 
whom she had served so zealously. Meet- 
ing them in the street, she never raised 
her head to receive their greeting. If 
they were resolute to accost her, she laid 
her finger on the scarlet letter, and passed 
on. This might be pride, but was so like 
humility, that it produced all the softening 
influence of the latter quality on the pub- 
lic mind. The public is despotic in its 
temper ; it is capable of denying common 
justice, when too strenuously demanded as 
a right ; but quite as frequently it awards 
more than justice, when the appeal is 
made, as despots love to have it made, en- 
tirely to its generosity. Interpreting Hes- 
ter Prynne's deportment as an appeal of 
this nature, society was inclined to show 
its former victim a more benign counte- 
nance than she cared to be favoured with, 
or, perchance, than she deserved. 

The rulers, and the wise and learned 
men of the community, were longer in ac- 



Anetker View of Hester 189 

kaowledging the influence of Hester's good 
qualities than the people. The prejudice;- 
which they shared in common with the lat- 
ter were fortified in themselves by an iron 
framework of reasoning, that made it a far 
tougher labour to expel them. Day by 
day, nevertheless, their sour and rigid 
wrinkles were relaxing into something 
which, in the due course of years, might 
grow to be an expression of almost benev^ 




olence. Thus it was with the men of rank, 
on whom their eminent position imposed 
the guardianship of the public morals. In- 
dividuals in private life, meanwhile, had 
quite forgiven Hester Prynne for her 
frailty ; nay, more, they had begun to look 
upon the scarlet letter as the token, not 
of that one sin, for which she had borne 
so long and dreary a penance, but of her 
many good deeds since. " Do you see that 
woman with the embroidered badge ,' " they 



•• 290 The Scarlet Letter 

ff 

would say to strangers. " It is our Hester, 
— the town's own Hester, — who is so kind 
to the poor, so helpful to the sick, so com- 
fortable to the afflicted ! '* Then, it is true, 
the propensity of human nature to tell the 
very worst of itself, when embodied in the 
person of another, would constrain them 
to whisper the black scandal of bygone 
years. It was none the less a fact, how- 
ever, that, in the eyes of the very men who 
spoke thus, the scarlet letter had the effect 
of the cross on a nun's bosom. It im- 
parted to the wearer a kind of sacredness, 
which enabled her to walk securely amid 
all peril. Had she fallen among thieves, 
it would have kept her safe. It was re- 
ported, and believed by many, that an In- 
dian had drawn his arrow against the badge, 
and that the missile struck it, but fell harm- 
less to the ground. 

The effect of the symbol — or rather, of 
the position in respect to society that was 
indicated by it — on the mind of Hester 
Prynne herself, was powerful and peculiar. 
All the light and graceful foliage of her 
character had been withered up by this 
red-hot brand, and had long ago fallen 
away, leaving a bare and harsh outline, 
which might have been repulsive, had she 



Another View of Hester 291 

possessed friends or companions to be re- 
pelled by it. Even the attractiveness of 
her person had undergone a similar change. 
It might be partly owing to the studied 
austerity of her dress, and partly to the 
lack of demonstration in her manners. It 
was a sad transformation, too, that her rich 
and luxuriant hair had either been cut off, 
or was so completely hidden by a cap, that 
not a shining lock of it ever once gushed 
into the sunshine. It was due in part to 
all these causes, but still more to some- 
thing else, that there seemed to be no 
longer any thing in Hester's face for Love 
to dwell upon ; nothing in Hester's form, 
though majestic and statue-like, that Pas- 
sion would ever dream of clasping in its 
embrace; nothing in Hester's bosom, to 
make it ever again the pillow of Affection. 
Some attribute had departed from her, the 
permanence of which had been essential to 
keep her a woman. Such is frequently the 
fate, and such the stern development, of 
the feminine character and person, when 
th^ woman has encountered, and lived 
through, an experience of peculiar severity. 
If she be all tenderness, she jvill die. If 
she survive, the tenderness will either be 
crushed out of her, or — and the outward 



292 



The Scarlet Letter 



semblance is the same — crushed so deeply 
into her heart that it can never show itself 
more. The latter is perhaps the truest 
theory. She who has once been woman, 
and ceased to be so, might at any moment ' 
become a woman 
again, if there were 
only the magic touch 
to effect the trans- 
figuration. We shall 
see whether Hester 
Prynne were ever af- 
terwards so touched, 
k and so transfigured. 
Much of the marble 
coldness of Hester's 
impression was to be 
attributed to the cir- 
cumstance, that her 
life had turned, in a 
great measure, from 
passion and feeling, to 
thought. Standing 
alone in the world, — 
alone, as to any dependence on society, 
and with little Pearl to be guided and pro- 
tected, — alone, and hopeless of retrieving 
her position, even had she not scorned to 
consider it desirable, — she cast away the 




Another View of Hester i()% 

fragments of a broken chain. The world's 
law was no law for her mind. It was an 
age in which the human intellect, newly 
emancipated, had taken a more active and 
a wider range than for many centuries be- 
fore. Men of the sword had overthrown 
nobles and kings. Men bolder than these 
had overthrown and rearranged — not actu- 
ally, but within the sphere of theory, which 
was their most real abode — the whole sys- 
tem of ancient prejudice, wherewith was 
linked much of ancient principle. Hester 
Prynne imbibed this spirit. She assumed 
a freedom of speculation, then common 
enough on the other side of the Atlantic, 
but which our forefathers, had they known 
it, would have held to be a deadlier crime 
than that stigmatised by the scarlet letter. 
In her lonesome cottage, by the sea-shore, 
thoughts visited her, such as dared to en- 
ter no other dwelling in New England ; 
shadowy guests, that would have been as 
perilous as demons to their entertainer, 
could they have been seen so much as 
knocking at her door. 

It is remarkable, that persons who spec- 
ulate the most boldly often conform with 
the most perfect quietude to the external 
regulations of society. The thought suf- 



294 ^^^ Scarlet Letter 

fices them, without investing itself in the 
flesh and blood of action. So it seemed 
to be with Hester. Yet, had little Pearl 
never come to her from the spiritual world, 
it might have been far otherwise. Then, 
she might have come down to us in his- 
tory, hand in hand with Ann Hutchinson, 
as the foundress of a religious sect. She 
might, in one of her phases, have been a 
prophetess. She might, and not improb- 
ably would, have suffered death from the 
stern tribunals of the period, for attempt- 
ing to undermine the foundations of the 
Puritan establishment. But, in the educa- 
tion of her child, the mother's enthusiasm 
of thought had something to wreak itself 
upon. Providence, in the person of this 
little girl, had assigned to Hester's charge 
the germ and blossom of womanhood, to be 
cherished and developed amid a host of 
difficulties. Every thing was against her. 
The world was hostile. The child's own 
nature had something wrong in it, which 
continually betokened that she had been 
born amiss, — the effluence of her mother's 
lawless passion, — and often impelled Hes- 
ter to ask, in bitterness of heart, whether 
it were for ill or good that the poor little 
creature had been born at all. 



Another View of Hester 295 

Indeed, the same dark question often 
rose into her mind, with reference to the 
whole race of womanhood. Was existence 
worth accepting, even to the happiest 
among them ? As concerned her own in- 
dividual existence, she had long ago de- 
cided in the negative, and dismissed the 
point as settled. A tendency to speculation, 
though it may keep woman quiet, as it does 
man, yet makes her sad. She discerns, it 
may be, such a hopeless task before her. 
As a first step, the whole system of society 
is to be torn down, and built up anew. 
Then, the very nature of the opposite sex^ 
or its long hereditary habit, which has be- 
come like nature, is to be essentially modi- 
fied, before woman can be allowed to as- 
sume what seems a fair and suitable posi- 
tion. Finally, all other difficulties being 
obviated, woman cannot take advantage of 
these preliminary reforms, until she her- 
self shall have undergone a still mightier 
change ; in which, perhaps, the ethereal 
essence, wherein she has her truest life, 
will be found to have evaporated. A 
woman never overcomes these problems 
by any exercise of thought. They are not 
to be solved, or only in one way. If her 
heart chance to come uppermost, they 



296 The Scarlet Letter 

vanish. Thus, Hester Prynne, whose 
heart had lost its regular and healthy throb, 
wandered without a clew in the dark laby- 
rinth of mind ; now turned aside by an in- 
surmountable precipice ; now starting back 
from a deep chasm. There was wild and 
ghastly scenery all around her, and a home 
and 'comfort nowhere. At times, a fearful 
doubt strove to possess her soul, whether 
it were not better to send Pearl at once to 
Heaven, and go herself to such futurity as 
Eternal Justice should provide. 

The scarlet letter had not done_Jts 
office. 

Now, however, her interview with the 
Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale, on the night 
of his vigil, had given her a new theme of 
reflection, and held up to her an object 
that appeared worthy of any exertion and 
sacrifice for its attainment. She had wit- ^ 

nessed the intense misery beneath which 
the minister struggled, or, to speak more 
accurately, had ceased to struggle. She 
saw that he stood on the verge of lunacy, 
if he had not already stepped across it. 
It was impossible to doubt, that, whatever 
painful efficacy there might be in the 
secret sting of remorse, a deadlier venom 
had been infused into it by the hand that 



Another View of Hester 297 

proffered relief. A secret enemy had been 
continually by his side, under the sem- 
blance of a friend and helper, and had 
availed himself of the opportunities thus 
afforded for tampering with the delicate 
springs of Mr. Dimmesdale*s nature. Hes- 
ter could not but ask herself, whether 
there had not originally been a defect of 
truth, courage, and loyalty, on her own 
part, in allowing the minister to be thrown 
into a position where so much evil was to 
be foreboded, and nothing auspicious to be 
hoped. Her only justification lay'in the 
fact, that she had been able to discern no 
method of rescuing him from a blacker ruin 
than had overwhelmed herself, except 
by acquiescing in Roger Chillingworth's 
scheme of disguise. Under that impulse, 
she had made her choice, and had chosen, 
as it now appeared, the more wretched 
alternative of the two. She determined to 
redeem her error, so far as it might yet be 
possible. Strengthened by years of hard 
and solemn trial, she felt herself no longer 
so inadequate to cope with Roger Chilling- 
worth as on that night, abased by sin, and 
half maddened by the ignominy that was 
still new, when they had talked together 
in the prison-chamber. She had climbed 



298 The Scarlet Letter 

her way, since then, to a higher point. 
The old man, on the other hand, had 
brought himself nearer to her level, or 
perhaps below it, by the revenge which he 
had stooped for. 

In fine, Hester Prynne resolved to meet 
her former husband, and do what might 
be in her power for the rescue of the vic- 




tim on whom he had so evidently set his 
gripe. The occasion was not long to seek. 
One afternoon, walking with Pearl in a 
retired part of the peninsula, she beheld 
the old physician, with a basket on one 
arm, and a strifF in the other hand, stoop- 
ing along the ground, in quest of roots and 
herbs to concoct his medicines withal. 



XIV 

HESTER AND THE PHYSICIAN 

HESTER bade little Pearl run down to 
the margin of the water, and play 
with the shells and tangled seaweed, until 
she should have talked awhile with yonder 
gatherer of herbs. So the child flew away 
like a bird, and, making bare her small 
white feet, went pattering along the moist 
margin of the sea. Here and there she 
came to a full stop, and peeped curiously 
into a pool, left by the retiring tide as a 
mirror for Pearl to see her face in. Forth 
peeped at her, out of the pool, with dark, 
glistening curls around her head, and 
an elf-smile in her eyes, the image of a 
little maid, whom Pearl, having no other 
playmate, invited to take her hand and run 
a race with her. But the visionary little 
maid, on her part, beckoned likewise, as if 
to say, — ** This is a better place ! Come 
thou into the pool! " And Pearl, stepping 
in, mid-leg deep, beheld her own white feet 
at the bottom ; while, out of a still lower 

299 



300 The Scarlet Letter 

depth, came the gleam of a kind of frag- 
mentary smile, floating to and fro in the 
agitated water. 

Meanwhile, her mother had accosted the 
physician. 

" I would speak a word with you," said 
she, — "a word that concerns us much." 



v-'^ -^ - 




"Aha! And is it Mistress Hester that 
has a word for old Roger Chillingworth.'" 
answered he, raising himself from his 
stooping posture. " With all my heart ! 
Why, Mistress, I hear good tidings of you 
on all hands ! No longer ago than yester- 
eve, a magistrate, a wise and godly man, was 
discoursing of your affairs, Mistress Hes- 
ter, and whispered me that there had been 



Hester and the Physician 30 1 

question concerning you in the council. 
It was debated whether or no, with safety 
to the common weal, yonder scarlet letter 
might be taken off your bosom. On my 
life, Hester, I made my entreaty to the 
worshipful magistrate that it might be done 
forthwith ! " 

" It lies not in the pleasure of the magis- 
trates to take off this badge,** calmly 
replied Hester. " Were I worthy to be 
quit of it, it would fall away of its own 
nature, or be transformed into something 
that should speak a different purp)ort." 

'* Nay, then, wear it, if it suit you bet- 
ter,** rejoined he. ** A woman must needs 
follow her own fancy, touching the adorn- 
ment of her person. The letter is gayly 
embroidered, and shows right bravely on 
your bosom ! *' 

All this while, Hester had been looking 
steadily at the old man, and was shocked, 
as well as wonder-smitten, to discern what 
a change had been wrought upon him 
within the past seven years. It was not 
so much that he had grown older ; for 
though the traces of advancing life were 
visible, he bore his age well, and seemed 
to retain a wiry vigour and alertness. But 
the former aspect of an intellectual and 



302 The Scarlet Letter 

studious man, calm and quiet, which was 
what she best remembered in him, had 
altogether vanished, and been succeeded 
by an eager, searching, almost fierce, yet 
carefully guarded look.y It seemed to 
be his wish and purpose to mask this 
expression with a smile ; but the latter 
played him false, and flickered over his 
visage so derisively, that the spectator 
could see his blackness all the better for 
it. Ever and anon, too, there came a glare 
of red light out of his eyes ; as if the old 
man's soul were on fire, and kept on 
smouldering duskily within his breast, 
until, by some casual puff of passion, it 
was blown into a momentary flame. This 
he repressed as speedily as possible, and 
strove to look as if nothing of the kind 
had happened. 

In a word, old Roger Chillingworth was 
a striking evidence of man's faculty of 
transforming himself into a devil, if he 
will only, for a reasonable space of time, 
undertake a devil's office. This unhappy 
person had effected such a transformation 
by devoting himself, for seven years, to 
the constant analysis of a heart full of 
torture, and deriving his enjoyment thence, 
and adding fuel to those fiery tortures 
which he analysed and gloated nver. 



Hester and the Physician 303 

The scarlet letter burned on Hester 
Prynne's bosom. Here was another ruin, 
the responsibility of which came partly 
home to her. 

'* What see you in my face," asked the 
physician, "that you look at it so ear- 
nestly ? " 

** Something that would make me weep, 
if there were any tears bitter enough for 
it," answered she. "But let it pass! It 
is of yonder miserable man that I would 
speak." 

" And what of him } " cried Roger Chil- 
lingworth eagerly, as if he loved the topic, 
and were glad of an opportunity to dis- 
cuss it with the only person of whom he 
could make a confidant. " Not to hide 
the truth. Mistress Hester, my thoughts 
happen just now to be busy with the gen- 
tleman. So speak freely ; and I will make 
answer." 

"When we last spake together," said 
Hester, " now seven years ago, it was your 
pleasure to extort a promise of secrecy, as 
touching the former relation betwixt your- 
self and me. As the life and good fame of 
yonder man were in your hands, there 
seemed no choice to me, save to be silent, 
in accordance with your behest. Yet it 



304 The Scarlet Letter 

was not without heavy tnisgiviags that I 
thus bound myself ; for, having cast off all 
duty towards other human beings, there 
remained a duty towards him ; and some- 
thing whispered me that I was betraying 
it, in pledging myself to keep your counsel. 
Since that day, no man is so near to him 
as you You tread behmd his every foot- 
step You are beside him, sleeping and 



waking. You search his thoughts. You 
burrow and rankle in his heart! Your 
clutch is on his life, and you cause him to 
die daily a living death ; and still he knows 
you not. In permitting this, I have surely 
acted a false part by the only man to whom 
the power was left me to be true ! " 

" What choice had you ? " asked Roger 
Chillingworth. "My finger, pointed at 
this man, would have hurled him from his 



Hester and the Physician 305 

pulpit into a dungeon, — thence, peradven- 
ture, to the gallows ! " 

** It had been better so ! *' said Hester 
Prynne. 

" What evil have I done the man ? " 
asked Roger Chillingworth again. " I tell 
thee, Hester Prynne, the richest fee that 
ever physician earned from, monarch could 
not have bought such care as I have wasted 
on this miserable priest ! But for my aid, 
his life would have burned away in tor- 
ments, within the first two years after the 
perpetration of his crime and thine. For, 
Hester, his spirit lacked the strength that 
could have borne up, as thine has, beneath 
a burden like thy scarlet letter. O, I 
could reveal a goodly secret ! But enough ! 
What art can do, I have exhausted on him. 
That he now breathes, and creeps about 
on earth, is owing all to me ! ** 

"Better he had died at once!" said 
Hester Prynne. 

"Yea, woman, thou sayest truly ! " cried 
old Roger Chillingworth, letting the lurid 
fire of his heart blaze out before her eyes. 
** Better had he died at once ! Never did 
mortal suffer what this man has suffered. 
And all, all, in the sight of his worst en- 
emy ! He has been conscious of me. He 



3o6 The Scarlet Letter 

has felt an influence dwelling always upon 
him like a cqrse. He knew, by some 
spiritual sense, — for the Creator never 
made another being so sensitive as this, — 
he knew that no friendly hand was pulling 
at his heart-strings, and that an eye was 
looking curiously into him, which sought 
only evil, and found it. But he knew not 
that the eye and hand were mine ! With 
the superstition common to his brother- 
hood, he fancied himself given over to a 
fiend, to be tortured with frightful dreams, 
and desperate thoughts, the sting of re- 
morse, and despair of pardon ; as a fore- 
taste of what awaits him beyond the grave. 
But it was the constant shadow of my 
presence ! — the closest propinquity of the 
man whom he had most vilely wronged ! 
— and who had grown to exist only by 
this perpetual poison of the direst revenge ! 
Yea, indeed ! — he did not err ! — there 
was a fiend at his elbow ! A mortal man, 
with once a human heart, has become a 
fiend for his especial torment ! " 

The unfortunate physician, while utter- 
ing these words, lifted his hands with a 
look of horror, as if he had beheld some 
frightful shape, which he could not recog- 
nise, usurping the place of his own image 



tiestef and the Physician 307 

ih a glass. It was one of those moments 
— which sometimes occur only at the in- 
terval of years — when a man's moral 
aspect is faithfully revealed to his mind's 
eye. Not improbably, he had never be- 
fore viewed himself as he did now. _, 

** Hast thou not tortured him enough ? " 
said Hester, noticing the old man's look. 
" Has he not paid thee all ! " 

** No ! — no ! — He has but increased the 
debt ! ") answered the physician ; and, as^J 
he proceeded, his manner lost its fiercer 
characteristics, and subsided into gloom. 
"Dost thou remember me, Hester, as I • 
was nine years agone } Even then, I was 
in the autumn of my days, nor was it the 
early autumn. But all my life had been 
made up of earnest, studious, thoughtful, 
quiet years, bestowed faithfully for the in- 
crease of mine own knowledge, and faith- 
fully, too, though this latter object was but 
casual to the other, — faithfully for the 
advancement of human welfare. No life 
had been more peaceful and innocent than 
mine ; few lives so rich with benefits con- 
ferred. Dost thou remember me.^ Was 
I not, though you might deem me cold, 
nevertheless a man thoughtful for others, 
craving little for himself, — kind, true, just. 




368 The Scarlet Lettef 

and of constant, if not warm afiections \ 
Was I not all this ? " 

"All this, and more," said Hester. 

"And what am I 
now ? " demanded he, 
looking into her face, 
and permitting the 
whole evil within him 
to be written on his 
features. " I have al- 
ready told thee what 
I am! A fiend! 
Who made me so ? " 
"It was myself!" 
cried Hester, shuddering. " It was I, not 
less than he. Why hast thou not avenged 
thyself on me.'" 

" I have left thee to the scarlet letter," 
replied Roger Chilling worth. "If that 
have not avenged me, I can do no more ! " 
He laid his finger on it, with a smile, 
" It has avenged thee 1 " answered Hes- 
ter Prynne. 

"I judged no less," said the physician. 
"And now, what wouldst thou with me 
touching this man ? " 

" I must reveal the secret," answered 
Hester, firmly. " He must discern thee in 
thy true character. What may be the 



Hester and the Physician 309 

result, I know not. But this long debt of 
confidence, due from me to him, whose . ^ 
bane and ruin I have been, shall at length 
be paid. So far as concerns the overthrow 
or preservation of his fair fame and his ^ 
earthly state, and perchance his life, he is 
in thy hands. Nor do I, — whom the scar- 
let letter has disciplined to truth, though 
it be the truth of red-hot iron, entering 
into the soul, — nor do I perceive such 
advantage in his living any longer a life of 
ghastly emptiness, that I shall stoop to 
implore thy mercy. Do with him as thou 
wilt ! There is no good for him, — no good 
for me, — no good for thee ! There is no 
good for little Pearl ! There is no path to 
guide us out of this dismal maze ! " 

" Woman, I could wellnigh pity thee ! " 
said Roger Chillingworth, unable to re- 
strain a thrill of admiration too ; for there 
was a quality almost majestic in the de- 
spair which she expressed. ** Thou hadst 
great elements. Peradventure, hadst thou 
met earlier with a better love than mine, 
this evil had not been. I pity thee, for 
the good that has been wasted in thy 
nature ! '' 

" And I thee," answered Hester Prynne, 
"for the hatred that has transformed a 



310 The Scarlet Letter 

wise and just man to a fiend ! Wilt thou 
yet purge it out of thee, and be once nrore 
human ? If not for his sake, then doubly 
for thine own ! Forgive, and leave his 
further retribution to the Power that claims 
it ! I said, but now, that there could be 
no good event for him, or thee, or me, 
who are here wandering together in this 
gloomy maze of evil, and stumbling, at 
every step, over the guilt wherewith we 
have strewn our path. It is not so ! There 
might be good for thee, and thee alone, 
since thou hast been deeply wronged, and 
hast it at thy will to pardon. Wilt thou 
give up that only privilege ? Wilt thou 
reject that priceless benefit ? " 

*' Peace, Hester, peace ! " replied the old 
man, with gloomy sternness. ^"It is not 
granted me to pardon. I have no such 
power as thou tellest me of. My old faith, 
long forgotten, comes back to me, and ex- 
plains all that we do, and all we suffer. By 
thy first step awry, thou didst plant the 
germ of evil ; but since that moment, it has 
all been a dark necessity. Ye that have 
wronged me are not sinful, save in a kind 
of typical illusion ; neither am I fiend-like, 
who have snatched a fiend's office from 
his hands. It is our fate. Let the black 



Hester and the Physician 311 

flower blossom as it may ! / Now go thy 
ways, and deal as thou wilt with yonder 
man." 

He waved his hand, and betook himself 
again to his employment of gathering 
herbs. 



XV 

HESTER AND PEARL 

SO Roger Chillingworth — a deformed 
old figure, with a face that haunted 
men's memories longer than they liked — 
took leave of Hester Prynne, and went 
stooping away along the earth. He 
gathered here and there an herb, or 
grubbed up a root, and put it into the 
basket on his arm. His grey beard almost 
touched the ground, as he crept onward. 
Hester gazed after him a little while, look- 
ing with a half-fantastic curiosity to see 
whether the tender grass of early spring 
would not be blighted beneath him, and 
show the wavering track of his footsteps, 
sere and brown, across its cheerful verdure. 
She wondered what sort of herbs they 
were, which the old man was so sedulous 
to gather. Would not the earth, quickened 
to an evil purpose by the sympathy of his 
eye, greet him with poisonous shrubs, of 
species hitherto unknown, that would start 
up under his fingers ? Or might it suffice 
312 



i 




Hester and Pearl 313 

him, that every wholesome growth should 
be converted into something deleterious 
and malignant at his touch ? Did the sun, 
which shone so brightly everywhere else, 
really fall upon him ? Or was there, as it 
rather seemed, a circle of ominous shadow 
moving along with his deformity, whichever 
way he turned himself ? And whither was 
he now going ? Would he not suddenly 
sink into the earth, leaving a barren and 
blasted spot, where, in due course of time, 
would be seen deadly nightshade, dogwood, 
henbane, and whatever else of vegetable 
wickedness the climate could produce, all 
flourishing with hideous luxuriance? Or 
would he spread bat's wings and flee away, 
looking so much the uglier, the higher he 
rose towards heaven ? 

"Be it sin or no," said Hester Prynne 
bitterly, as she still gazed after him, "I 
hate the man ! " 

She upbraided herself for the sentiment, 
but could not overcome or lessen it. At- 
tempting to do so, she thought of those 
long-past days, in a distant land, when he 
used to emerge at eventide from the seclu- 
sion of his study, and sit down in the fire- 
light of their home, and in the light of her 
nuptial smile. He needed to bask himself 



314 2^^^ Scarlet Letter 

in that smile, he said, in order that the 
chill of so many lonely hours among his 
books might be taken off the scholar's 
heart. Such scenes had once appeared 
not otherwise than happy, but now, as 
viewed through the dismal medium of her 
subsequent life, they classed themselves 
among her ugliest remembrances. She 
marvelled how such scenes could have 
been ! She marvelled how she could ever 
have been wrought upon to marry him ! 
She deemed it her crime most to be re- 
pented of, that she had ever endured, and 
reciprocated, the lukewarm grasp of his 
hand, and had suffered the smile of her 
lips and eyes to mingle and melt into his 
own. And it seemed a fouler offence com- 
mitted by Roger Chillingworth, than any 
which had since been done him, that, in 
the time when her heart knew no better, 
he had persuaded her to fancy herself 
happy by his side. 

" Yes, I hate him ! " repeated Hester, 
more bitterly than before. " He betrayed 
me ! He has done me worse wrong than 
I did him ! " 

Let men tremble to win the hand of 
woman, unless they win along with it the ut- 
most passion of her heart ! Else it may be 



Hester and Pearl 315 

their miserable fortune, as it was Roger 
Chillingworth's, when some mightier touch 
than their own may have awakened all her 
sensibilities, to be reproached even for the 
calm content, the marble image of happi- 
ness, which they will have imposed upon 
her as the warm reality. But Hester ought 
long ago to have done with this injustice. 
What did it betoken ? Had seven long 
years, under the torture of the scarlet 
letter, inflicted so much of misery, and 
wrought out no repentance ? 

The emotions of that brief space, while 
she stood gazing after the crooked figure 
of old Roger Chillingworth, threw a dark 
light on Hester's state of mind, revealing 
much that she might not otherwise have 
acknowledged to herself. 

He being gone, she summoned back her 
child. 

"Pearl! Little Pearl ! Where are you.?" 

Pearl, whose activity of spirit never 
flagged, had been at no loss for amuse- 
ment while her mother talked with the old 
gatherer of herbs. At first, as already told, 
she had flirted fancifully with her own 
image in a pool of water, beckoning the 
phantom forth, and — as it declined to 
venture — seeking a passage for herself 



3i6 The Scarlet Letter 

into its sphere of impalpable earth and un- 
attainable sky. Soon finding, however, 
that either she or the image was unreal, 
she turned elsewhere for better pastime. 
She made little boats out of birch-bark, 
and freighted them with snail-shells, and 
sent out more ventures on the mighty deep 
than any merchant in New England ; but 
the larger part of them foundered near the 
shore. She seized a live horseshoe by the 
tail, and made prize of several five-fingers, 
and laid out a jelly-fish to melt in the warm 
sun. Then she took up the white foam, 
that streaked the line of the advancing 
tide, and threw it upon the breeze, scam- 
pering after it with winged footsteps, to 
catch the great snow-flakes ere they fell. 
Perceiving a flock of beach-birds, that fed 
and fluttered along the shore, the naughty 
child picked up her apron full of pebbles, 
and, creeping from rock to rock after these 
small sea-fowl, displayed remarkable dex- 
terity in pelting them. One little grey 
bird, with a white breast. Pearl was almost 
sure, had been hit by a pebble, and flut- 
tered away with a broken wing. But then 
the elf-child sighed, and gave up her sport ; 
because it grieved her to have done harm 
to a little being that was as wild as the 
sea-breeze, or as wild as Pearl herself. 



Hester and Pearl 317 

Her final employment was to gather sea- 
weed, of various kinds, and make herself a 
scarf, or mantle, and a head-dress, and thus 
assume the aspect of a little mermaid. She 
inherited her mother's gift for devising 
drapery and costume. As the last touch 
to her mermaid's garb, Pearl took some eel- 
grass, and imitated, as best she could, on 
her own bosom, the decoration with which 
she was so familiar on her mother's. A 
letter, — the letter A, — but freshly green, 
instead of scarlet ! The child bent her 
chin upon her breast, and contemplated 
this device with strange interest ; even as 
if the one only thing for which she had 
been sent into the world was to make out 
its hidden import. 

" 1 wonder if mother will ask me what 
it means ! " thought Pearl. 

Just then, she heard her mother's voice, 
and, flitting along as lightly as one of the 
little sea-brrds, appeared before Hester 
Prynne, dancing, laughing, and pointing 
her finger to the ornament upon her bosom. 

"My little Pearl," said Hester, after a 
moment's silence, "the green letter, and 
on thy childish bosom, has no purport. 
But dost thou know, my child, what this 
letter means which thy mother is doomed 
to wear.?" 






3i8 The Scarlet Letter 

"Yes, mother," said the child. "It is 
the great letter A. Thou hast taught it 
me in the horn-book." 

Hester looked steadily into her little 
face ; but, though there was that singular 
expression which she had so often remarked 
in her black eyes, she could not satisfy 
herself whether Pearl really attached any 
meaning to the symbol. She felt a morbid 
desire to ascertain the point. 

" Dost thou know, child, wherefore thy 
mother wears this letter } " 

"Truly do I!" answered Pearl, looking 
brightly into her mother's face. " It is for 
the same reason that the minister keeps his 
hand over his heart ! " 

" And what reason is that } " asked Hes- 
ter, half smiling at the absurd incongruity 
of the child's observation ; but, on second 
thoughts, turning pale. "What has the 
letter to do with any heart, save mine } " 

" Nay, mother, I have told all I know," 
said Pearl, more seriously than she was 
wont to speak. "Ask yonder old man 
whom thou hast been talking with ! It 
may be he can tell. But in good earnest 
now, mother dear, what does this scarlet 
letter mean } — and why dost thou wear it 
on thy bosom } — and why does the minis- 
ter keep his hand over his heart } " 



Hester and Pearl 319 

She took her mother's hand in both her 
own, and gazed into her eyes with an ear- 
nestness that was seldom seen in her wild 
and capricious character. The thought 
occurred to Hester, that the child might 
really be seeking to approach her with 
childlike confidence, and doing what she 
could, and as intelligently as she knew 
how, to establish a meeting-point of sym- 
pathy. It showed Pearl in an unwonted 
aspect. Heretofore, the mother, while 
loving her child with the intensity of a sole 
affection, had schooled herself to hope for 
little other return than the waywardness 
of an April breeze ; which spends its time 
in airy sport, and has its gusts of inexpli- 
cable passion, and is petulant in its best of 
moods, and chills oftener than caresses 
you, when you take it to your bosom ; in 
requital of which misdemeanours, it will 
sometimes, of its own vague purpose, kiss 
your cheek with a kind of doubtful tender- 
ness, and play gently with your hair, and 
then begone about its other idle business, 
leaving a dreamy pleasure at your heart. 
And this, moreover, was a mother's esti- 
mate of the child's disposition. Any other 
observer might have seen few but unami- 
able traits, and have given them a far 



320 The Scarlet Letter 

darker colouring. But now the idea came 
strongly into Hester's mind, that Pearl, 
with her remarkable precocity and acute- 
ness, might already have approached the 
age when she could be made a friend, and 
intrusted with as much of her mother's 
sorrows as could be imparted, without 
irreverence either to the parent or the 
child. In the little chaos of Pearl's char- 
acter, there might be seen emerging — 
and could have been, from the very first — 
the steadfast principles of an unflinching 
courage, — an uncontrollable will, — a 
sturdy pride, which might be disciplined 
into self-respect, — -and a bitter scorn of 
many things, which, when examined, might 
be found to have the taint of falsehood 
in them. She possessed affections, too, 
though hitherto acrid and disagreeable, as 
are the richest flavours of unripe fruit. 
With all these sterling attributes, thought 
Hester, the evil which she inherited from 
her mother must be great indeed, if a 
noble woman do not grow out of this elfish 
child. 

Pearl's inevitable tendency to hover 
about the enigma of the scarlet letter 
seemed an innate quality of her being. 
From the earliest epoch of her conscious 



■■•*■ 



Hester and Pearl 321 

life, she had entered upon this as her ap- 
pointed mission. Hester had often fan- 
cied that Providence had a design of 
justice and retribution, in endowing the 
child with this marked propensity ; but 
never, until now, had she bethought her- 
self to ask, whether, linked with that de- 
sign, there might not likewise be a purpose 
of mercy and beneficence. If little Pearl 
were entertained with faith and trust, as a 
spirit-messenger no less than an earthly 
child, might it not be her errand to soothe 
away the sorrow that lay cold in her 
mother's heart, and converted it into a 
tomb ? — and to help her to overcome the 
passion, once so wild, and even yet neither 
dead nor asleep,. but only imprisoned within 
the same tomb-like heart ? 

Such were some of the thoughts that 
now stirred in Hester's mind, with as much 
vivacity of impression as if they had 
actually been whispered into her ear. 
And there was little Pearl, all this while, 
holding her mother's hand in both her 
own, and turning her face upward, while 
she put these searching questions, once, 
and again, and still a third time. 

** What does the letter mean, mother ? 
— and why dost thou wear it ? — and why 



322 The Scarlet Letter 

does the minister keep his hand over his 
heart?" 

"What shall I say ?*' thought Hester to 
herself. — "No! If this be the price of 
the child's sympathy, I cannot pay it ! " 

Then she spoke aloud. 

"Silly Pearl," said she, "what questions 
are these } There are many things in this 
world that a child must not ask about. 
What know I of the minister's heart ? 
And as for the scarlet letter, I wear it for 
the sake of its gold thread ! " 

In all the seven bygone years, Hester 
Prynne had never before been false to the 
symbol on her bosom. It may be that it 
was the talisman of a stern and severe, but 
yet a guardian spirit, who now forsook 
her; as recognising that, in spite of his 
strict watch over her heart, some new evil 
had crept into it, or some old one had 
never been expelled. As for little Pearl, 
the earnestness soon passed out of her face. 

But the child did not see fit to let the 
matter drop. Two or three times, as her 
mother and she went homeward, and as 
often at supper-time, and while Hester 
was putting her to bed, and once after she 
seemed to be fairly asleep. Pearl looked 
up, with mischief gleaming in her black 
eyes. 



Hester and Pearl 323 

"Mother," said she, "what does the 
scarlet letter mean ? " 

And the next morning, the first indica- 
tion the child gave of being awake was by 
popping up her head from the pillow, and 
making that other inquiry, which she had 
so unaccountably connected with her in- 
vestigations about the scarlet letter : — 

" Mother ! — Mother ! — Why does the 
minister keep his hand over his heart ? " 

"Hold thy tongue, naughty child!" 
answered her mother, with an asperity that 
she had never permitted to herself before. 
" Do not tease me ; else I shall shut thee 
into the dark closet ! " 



XVI 

A FOREST WALK 

HESTER PRYNNE remained con- 
stant in her resolve to make known 
to Mr. Dimmesdale, at whatever risk of 
present pain or ulterior consequences, the 
true character of the man who had crept 
into his intimacy. For several days, how- 
ever, she vainly sought an opportunity of 
addressing him in some of the meditative 
walks which she knew him to be in the 
habit of taking, along the shores of the 
peninsula, or on the wooded hills of the 
neighbouring country. There would have 
been no scandal, indeed, nor peril to the 
holy whiteness of the clergyman's good 
fame, had she visited him in his own 
study ; where many a penitent, ere now, 
had confessed sins of perhaps as deep a 
die as the one betokened by the scarlet 
letter. But, partly that she dreaded the 
secret or undisguised interference of old 
Roger Chillingworth, and partly that her 
conscious heart imputed suspicion wherej 



A Forest Walk 



32s 



none could have been felt, and partly that 
both the minister and she would need the 
whole wide world to breathe in, while they 
talked together, — for all these reasons, 
Hester never thought 
of meeting him in any 
narrower privacy than 
beneath the open sky. 

At last, while attend- 
ing in a sick-chamber, 
whither the Reverend 
Mr. Dimmesdale had '^ 
been summoned to make 
a prayer, she learnt that 
he had gone, the day 1 
before, to visit the | 
Apostle Eliot, among his 
Indian converts. He 
would probably return, 
by a certain hour, in the 
afternoon of the morrow. 
Betimes, therefore, the 
next day, Hester took 
little Pearl, — who was 
necessarily the com- 
panion of all her mother's expeditions, 
however inconvenient her presence, — and 
set forth. 

The road, after the two wayfarers had 




326 The Scarlet Letter 

crossed from the peninsula to the main- 
land, was no other than a footpath. It 
straggled onward into the mystery of the 
primeval forest. This hemmed it in so 
narrowly, and stood so black and dense on 
either side, and disclosed such imperfect 
glimpses of the sky above, that, to Hester's 
mind, it imaged not amiss the moral wil- 
derness in which she had so long been 
wandering. The day was chill and som- 
bre. Overhead was a grey expanse of 
cloud, slightly stirred, however, by a 
breeze ; so that a gleam of flickering sun- 
shine might now and then be seen at its 
solitary play along the path. This fitting 
cheerfulness was always at the farther 
extremity of some long vista through the 
forest. The sportive sunlight — feebly 
sportive, at best, in the predominant pen- 
siveness of the day and scene — withdrew 
itself as they came nigh, and left the 
spots where it had danced the drearier, 
because they had hoped to find them 
bright. 

"Mother," said little Pearl, "the sun- 
shine does not love you. It runs away and 
hides itself, because it is afraid of something 
on your bosom. Now, see ! There it is, 
playing, a good way off. Stand you here, 



A Forest Walk 327 

and let me run and catch it. I am but a 
child. It will not flee from me ; for I wear 
nothing on my bosom yet ! " 

" Nor ever will, my child, I hope," said 
Hester. 

"And why not, mother?" asked Pearl, 
stopping short, just at the beginning of her 
race. "Will not it come of its own accord, 
when I am a woman grown ? " 

" Run away, child,*' answered her mother, 
" and catch the sunshine ! It will soon be 
gone." 

Pearl set forth, at a great pace, and, as 
Hester smiled to perceive, did actually 
catch the sunshine, and stood laughing in 
the midst of it, all brightened by its splen- 
dour, and scintillating with the vivacity 
excited by rapid motion. The light lin- 
gered about the lonely child, as if glad of 
such a playmate, until her mother had 
drawn almost nigh enough to step into the 
magic circle too. 

" It will go now ! " said Pearl, shaking 
her head. 

" See ! " answered Hester, smiling. 
"Now I can stretch out my hand, and 
grasp some of it." 

As she attempted to do so, the sun- 
shine vanished; or, to judge from the 



328 The Scarlet Letter 

bright expression that was dancing on 
Pearl's features, her mother could have 
fancied that the child had absorbed it into 
herself, and would give it forth again, with 
a gleam about tier path, as they should 
plunge into some gloomier shade. There 
was no other attribute that so much im- 
pressed her with a sense of new and 
untransmitted vigour in Pearl's nature, as 
this never-failing vivacity of spirits ; she 
had not the disease of sadness, which al- 
most all children, in these latter days, 
inherit, with the scrofula, from the troubles 
of their ancestors. Perhaps this too was 
a disease, and but the reflex of the wild en- 
ergy with which Hester had fought against 
her sorrows, before Pearl's birth. It was 
certainly a doubtful charm, imparting a 
hard, metallic lustre to the child's character. 
She wanted — what some people want 
throughout life — a grief that should 
deeply touch her, and thus humanise and 
ynake her capable of sympathy. But there 
was time enough yet for little Pearl ! 

" Gome, my child ! " said Hester, look- 
ing about her from the spot where Pearl 
had stood still in the sunshine. " We will 
sit down a little way within the wood, and 
rest ourselves." 




A Forest Walk 329 

" I am not aweary, mother," replied the 
little girl. " But you may sit down, if you 
will tell me a story meanwhile.*' 

" A story, child ! " said Hester. " And 
abJDut what } " 

" O, a story about the Black Man ! " an- 
swered Pearl, taking hold of her mother's 
gown, and looking up, half earnestly, half 
mischievously, into her face. " How he 
haunts this forest, and 
carries a book with 
him, — a big, heavy 
book, with iron clasps ; 
and how this ugly Black Man offers his 
book and an iron pen to every body that 
meets him here among the trees ; and they 
are to write their names with their own 
blood. And then he sets his mark on their 
bosoms ! Didst thou ever meet the Black 
Man, mother } " 

"And who told you this story. Pearl.?" 
asked her mother, recognising a common 
superstition of the period. 

" It was the old dame in the chimney- 
comer, at the house where you watched 
last night," said the child. **But she fan- 
cied me asleep while she was talking of it. 
She said that a thousand and a thousand 
people had met him here, and had written 



330 The Scarlet Letter 

in his book, and have his mark on them. 
And that ugly-tempered lady, old Mistress 
Hibbins, was one. And, mother, the old 
dame said that this scarlet letter was the 
Black Man's mark on thee, and that it 
glows like a red flame when thou meetest 
him at midnight, here in the dark wood. 
Is it true, mother ? And dost thou go to 
meet him in the night-time?" 

"Didst thou ever awake, and find thy 
mother gone ? " asked Hester. 

" Not that I remember," said the child. 
" If thou fearest to leave me in our cottage, 
thou mightest take me along with thee. I 
would very gladly go ! But, mother, tell 
me now ! Is there such a Black Man } 
And didst thou ever meet him } And is 
this his mark ? " 

" Wilt thou let me be at peace, if I once 
tell thee ? " asked her mother. 

" Yes, if thou tellest me all," answered 
Pearl. 

"Once in my life I met the Black Man ! " 
said her mother. " This scarlet letter is his 
mark ! " 

Thus conversing, they entered sufficiently 
deep into the wood to secure themselves 
from the observation of any casual passen- 
ger along the forest-track. Here they sat 



A Forest Walk 331 

down on a luxuriant heap of moss; which, 
at some epoch of the preceding century, 
had been a gigantic pine, with its roots and 
trunk in the darksome shade, and its head 
aloft in the up[>cr atmosphere. It was a 
little dell where they had seated themselves, 
with a leaf-strewn bank rising gently on 
either side, and a brook flowing through 
the midst, over a bed of fallen and drowned 
leaves. The trees impending over it had 




flung down great branches, from time to 
time, which choked up the current, and com- 
pelled it to form eddies and black depths at 
some points ; while, in its swifter and live- 
lier passages, there appeared a channel-way 
of pebbles, and brown, sparkling sand. Let- 
ting the eyes follow along the course of the 
stream, they could catch the reflected light 
from its water, at some short distance within 
the forest, but soon lost all traces of it amid 
the bewilderment i^f tree-trunks and under- 



332 The Scarlet Letter 

brush, and here and there a huge rock, 
covered over with grey lichens. All these 
giant trees and boulders of granite seemed 
intent on making a mystery of the course 
of this small brook ; fearing, perhaps, that, 
with its never-ceasing loquacity, it should 
whisper tales out of the heart of the old 
forest whence it flowed, or mirror its reve- 
lations on the smooth surface of a pool. 
Continually, indeed, as it stole onward, the 
streamlet kept up a babble, kind, quiet, 
soothing, but melancholy, like the voice of 
a young child that was spending its infancy 
without playfulness, and knew not how to be 
merry among sad acquaintance and events 
of sombre hue. 

** O brook ! O foolish and tiresome little 
brook ! " cried Pearl, after listening awhile 
to its talk. " Why art thou so sad ? Pluck 
up a spirit, and do not be all the time sigh- 
ing and murmuring ! '* 

But the brook, in the course of its little 
lifetime among the forest-trees, had gone 
through so solemn an experience that it 
could not help talking about it, and seemed 
to have nothing else to say. Pearl resem- 
bled the brook, inasmuch as the current of 
her life gushed from a well-spring as mys- 
terious, and had flowed through scenes 



Jl Forest Walk 333 

sliadowed as heavily with gloom. But, 
unlike the little stream, she danced and 
sparkled, and prattled airily along her 
course. 

"What does this sad little brook say, 
mother ?" inquired she. 

"If thou hadst a sorrow of thine own, 
the brook might tell thee of it,'* answered 
her mother, " even as it is telling me of 
mine ! But now, Pearl, I hear a footstep 
along the path, and the noise of one put- 
ting aside the branches. I would have 
thee betake thyself to play, and leave me 
to speak with him that comes yonder." 

" Is it the Black Man ? " asked Pearl. 

" Wilt thou go and play, child } " re- 
peated her mother. " But do not stray 
far into the wood. And take heed that 
thou come at my first call." 

"Yes, mother," answered Pearl. "But, 
if it be the Black Man, wilt thou not let 
me stay a moment, and look at him, with 
his big book under his arm } " 

"Go, silly child !" said her mother, im- 
patiently. " It is no Black Man ! Thou 
canst see him now through the trees. It 
is the minister ! " 

"And so it is ! " said the child. "And, 
mother, he has his hand over his heart ! 



334 ^'^^ Scarlet Lcttef 

Is it because, when the minister wrote his 
name in the book, the Black Man set his 
mark in that place ? But why does he not 
wear it outside his bosom, as thou dost, 
mother ? ** 

" Go now, child, and thou shalt tease me 
as thou wilt another time," cried Hester 
Prynne. "But do not stray far. Keep 
where thou canst hear the babble of the 
brook." 

The child went singing away, following 
up the current of the brook, and striving 
to mingle a more lightsome cadence with 
its melancholy voice. But the little stream 
would not be comforted, and still kept tell- 
ing its unintelligible secret of some very 
mournful mystery that had happened — 
or making a prophetic lamentation about 
something that was yet to happen — within 
the verge of the dismal forest. So Pearl, 
who had enough of shadow in her own little 
life, chose to break ofif all acquaintance 
with this repining brook. She set herself, 
therefore, to gathering violets and wood- 
anemones, and some scarlet columbines 
that she found growing in the crevices of 
a high rock. 

When her elf-child had departed, Hester 
Prynne made a step or two towards the 



A Forest Walk 335 

track that led through the forest, but still 
remained under the deep shadow of the 
trees. She beheld the minister advancing 
along the path, entirely alone, and leaning 
on a staff which he had cut by the way- 
side. He looked haggard and feeble, and 
betrayed a nerveless despondency in his 
air, which had never so remarkably char- 
acterised him in his walks about the settle- 
ment, nor in any other situation where he 




deemed himself liable to notice. Here it 
was wofully visible, in this intense seclu- 
sion of the forest, which of itself would 
have been a heavy trial to the spirits. 
There was a listlessness in his gait ; as 
if he saw no reason for taking one step 
farther, nor felt any desire to do so, but 
would have been glad, could he be glad 
of any thing, to fling himself down at the 
root of the nearest tree, and lie there 
passive for evermore. The leaves might 



336 



The Scarlet Letter 



bestrew him, and the soil gradually accu- 
mulate and form a little hillock over his 
frame, no matter whether there were life 
in it or no. Death was too definite an 
object to be wished for, or avoided. 

To Hester's eye, the Reverend Mr. 
Dimmesdale exhibited no symptom of pos- 
itive and vivacious suffering, except that, 
as little Pearl had remarked, he kept his 
hand over his heart. 



XVII 

THE PASTOR AND HIS PARISHIONER 

SLOWLY as the minister walked, he had 
almost gone by, before Hester Prynne 
could gather voice enough to attract his 
observation. At length, she succeeded. 

" Arthur Dimmesdale ! " she said, faintly 
at first ; then louder, but hoarsely. ** Arthur 
Dimmesdale ! " 

" Who speaks ? " answered the minister. 

Gathering himself quickly up, he stood 
more erect, like a man taken by surprise 
in a mood to which he was reluctant to 
have witnesses. Throwing his eyes anx- 
iously in the direction of the voice, he 
indistinctly beheld a form under the trees, 
clad in garments so sombre, and so little 
relieved from the grey twilight into which 
the clouded sky and the heavy foliage had 
darkened the noontide, that he knew not 
whether it were a woman or a shadow. It 
may be, that his pathway through life was 
haunted thus, by a spectre that had stolen 
out from among his thoughts. 

337 



338 



The Scarlet Letter 



He made a step nigher, and discovered 
the scarlet letter. 

"Hester! Hester Prynne!" said he. "Is 
it thou ? Art thou in life .' " 




"Even so!" she answered. "In such 
life as has been mine these seven years 
past ! And thou, Arthur Dim me sdale, dost 
thou yet live ?" 



The Pastor and His Parishioner 339 

It was no wonder that they thus ques- 
tioned one another's actual and bodily 
existence, and even doubted of their own. 
So strangely did they meet, in the dim 
wood, that it was like the first encounter, 
in the world beyond the grave, of two spirits 
who had been intimately connected in 
their former life, but now stood coldly 
shuddering, in mutual dread ; as not yet 
familiar with their state, nor wonted to 
the companionship of disembodied beings. 
Each a ghost, and awe-stricken at the 
other ghost ! They were awe-stricken like- 
wise at themselves ; because the crisis 
flung back to them their consciousness, 
and revealed to each heart its history and 
experience, as life never does, except at 
such breathless epochs. The soul beheld 
its features in the mirror of the passing 
moment. It was with fear, and tremu- 
lously, and, as it were, by a slow, reluctant 
necessity, that Arthur Dimmesdale put 
forth his hand, chill as death, and touched 
the chill hand of Hester Prynne. The 
grasp, cold as it was, took away what was 
dreariest in the interview. They now felt 
themselves, at least, inhabitants of the 
same sphere. 

Without a word more spoken, — neither 



34° Tke Scarlet Letter 

he nor she assuming the guidance, but with 
an unexpressed consent, — they ghded back 
into the shadow of the woods, whence Hes- 
ter had emerged, and sat down on the heap 
of moss where she and Pearl had before 
been sitting. When they found voice to 
speak, it was, at first, only to utter re- 
marks and inquiries such as any two ac- 
quaintance might have made, about the 
gloomy sky, the threatening storm, and. 




next, the health of each. Thus they went 
onward, not boldly, but step by step, into 
the themes that were brooding deepest in 
their hearts. So long estranged by fate 
and circumstances, they needed something 
slight and casual to run before, and throw 
open the doors of intercourse, so that their 
real thoughts might be led across the 
threshold. 



The Pastor and His Parishioner 341 

After a while, the minister fixed his 
eyes on Hester Prynne's. 

" Hester," said he, " hast thou found 
peace ? " 

She smiled drearily, looking down upon 
her bosom. 

" Hast thou ? " she asked. 

" None ! — nothing but despair ! " he an- 
swered. "What else could I look for, 
being what I am, and leading such a life 
as mine } Were I an atheist, — a man de- 
void of conscience, — a wretch with coarse 
and brutal instincts, — I might have found 
peace, long ere now. Nay, I never should 
have lost it ! But, as matters stand with 
my soul, whatever of good capacity there 
originally was in me, all of God's gifts 
that were the choicest have become the 
ministers of spiritual torment. Hester, I 
am most miserable ! " 

"The people reverence thee," said Hes- 
ter. " And surely thou workest good 
among them ! Doth this bring thee no 
comfort } " 

" More misery, Hester ! — only the more 
misery ! " answered the clergyman, with 
a bitter smile. " As concerns the good 
which I may appear to do, I have no faith 
in it. It must needs be a delusion. What 



342 The Scarlet Letter 

can a ruined soul, like mine, effect towards 
the redemption of other souls ? — or a pol- 
luted soul, towards their purification ? And 
as for the people's reverence, would that it 
were turned to scorn and hatred ! Canst 
thou deem it, Hester, a consolation, that 
I must stand up in my pulpit, and meet 
so many eyes turned upward to my face, 
as if the light of heaven were beaming 
from it ! — must see my flock hungry for 
the truth, and listening to my words as if 
a tongue of Pentecost were speaking ! — 
and then look inward, and discern the 
black reality of what they idolise ? I have 
laughed, in bitterness and agony of heart, 
at the contrast between what I seem and 
what I am ! And Satan laughs at it ! " 

"You wrong yourself in this," said 
Hester, gently. " You have deeply and 
sorely repented. Your sin is left behind 
you, in the days long past. Your present 
life is not less holy, in very truth, than it 
seems in people's eyes. Is there no reality 
in the penitence thus sealed and witnessed 
by good works } And wherefore should it 
not bring you peace ."^^ 

" No, Hester, no ! " replied the clergy- 
man. " There is no substance in it I It 
is cold and dead, and can do nothing for 



The Pastor and His Parishioner 343 

me ! Of penance I have had enough ! Of 
penitence there has been none ! Else, I 
should long ago have thrown off these 
garments of mock holiness, and have 
shown myself to mankind as they will see 
me at the judgment-seat. (^ Happy are you, ^\ 
Hester, that wear the scarlet letter openly 
upon your bosom ! Mine burns in secret ! 
Thou little knowest what a relief it is, 
after the torment of a seven years' cheat, 
to look into an eye that recognises me for 
what I am ! ^ Had I one friend, — or were j 
it my worst enemy! — to whom, when 
sickened with the praises of all other men, 
I could daily betake myself, and be known 
as the vilest of all sinners, methinks my 
soul might keep itself alive thereby. Even 
thus much of truth would save me ! But, 
now, it is all falsehood ! — all emptiness ! 
— all death!" 

Hester Prynne looked into his face, but 
hesitated to speak. Yet, uttering his long- 
restrained emotions so vehemently as he 
did, his words here offered her the very 
point of circumstances in which to inter- 
pose what she canie to say. She conquered 
her fears, and spoke. 

" Such a friend as thou hast even now 
wished for," said she, " with whom to weep 



344 "^^ Scarlet Letter 

over thy sin, thou hast in me, the partner 
of it ! " — Again she hesitated, but brought 
out the words with an effort. — ** Thou 
hast long had such an enemy, and dwellest 
with him under the same roof ! " 

The minister started to his feet, gasping 
for breath, and clutching at his heart as if 
he would have torn it out of his bosom. 

** Ha ! What sayest thou ? " cried he. 
** An enemy ! And under mine own roof ! 
What mean you ? " 

Hester Prynne was now fully sensible of 
the deep injury for which she was respon- 
sible to this unhappy man, in permitting 
him to lie for so many years, or, indeed, 
for a single moment, at the mercy of one, 
whose purposes could not be other than 
malevolent. The very contiguity of his 
enemy, beneath whatever mask the latter 
might conceal himself, was enough to dis- 
turb the magnetic sphere of a being so 
sensitive as Arthur Dimmesdale. There 
had been a period when Hester was less 
alive to this consideration ; or, perhaps, in 
the misanthropy of her own trouble, she 
left the minister to bear what she might 
picture to herself as a more tolerable 
doom. But of late, since the night of his 
vigil, all her sympathies towards him had 



The Pastor and His Parishioner 345 

been both softened and invigourated. She 
now read his heart more accurately. She 
doubted not, that the continual presence 
of Roger Chillingworth, — the secret poison 
of his malignity, infecting all the air about 
him, — and his authorised interference, as 
a physician, with the minister's physical 
and spiritual infirmities, — that these bad 
opportunities had been turned to a cruel 
purpose. By means of them, the sufferer's 
conscience had been kept in an irritated 
state, the tendency of which was, not to 
cure by wholesome pain, but to disorganise 
and corrupt his spiritual being. Its result, 
on earth, could hardly fail to be insanity, 
and hereafter, that eternal alienation from 
the Good and True, of which madness is 
perhaps the earthly type. 

Such was the ruin to which she had 
brought the man, once, — nay, why should 
we not speak it } — still so passionately 
loved ! Hester felt that the sacrifice of 
the clergyman's good name, and death 
itself, as she had already told Roger Chil- 
lingworth, would have been infinitely pref- 
erable to the alternative which she had 
taken upon herself to choose. And now, 
rather than have had this grievous wrong 
to confess, she would gladly have lain 



346 The Scarlet Letter 

down on the forest-leaves, and died there, 
at Arthur Dimmesdale's feet. 

"O Arthur/* cried she, "forgive me! 
In all things else, I have striven to be 
true ! Truth was the one virtue which I 
might have held fast, and did hold fast 
through all extremity ; save when thy 
good, — thy life, — thy fame, — were put 
in question ! Then I consented to a de- 
ception. But a lie is never good, even 
though death threaten on the other side ! 
Dost thou not see what I would say? 
That old man ! — the physician ! — he 
whom they call Roger Chillingworth ! — 
he was my husband ! " 

The minister looked at her, for an in- 
stant, with all that violence of passion, 
which — intermixed, in more shapes than 
one, with his higher, purer, softer qualities 
— was, in fact, the portion of him which 
the Devil claimed, and through which he 
sought to win the rest. Never was there 
a blacker or a fiercer frown, than Hester 
now encountered. For the brief space 
that it lasted, it was a dark transfiguration. 
But his character had been so much en- 
feebled by suffering, that even its lower 
energies were incapable of more than a 
temporary struggle. He sank down on 



The Pastor and His Parishioner 347 

the ground, and buried his face in his 
hands. 

" I might have known it ! " murmured 
he. " I did know it ! Was not the secret 
told me in the natural recoil of my heart, 
at the first sight of him, and as often 
as I have seen him since .' Why did 
I not understand ? O Hester Prynne, 
thou little, little knowest all the horror of 
this thing ! And the shame ! — the in- 
delicacy ! — the horrible ugliness of this 
exposure of a sick and 
guilty heart to the 
very eye that would 
gloat overit! Woman, 
woman, thou art ac 
countable for this' I 
cannot forgive thee'" 

"Thoushalt forgive 
me ! " cried Hester, 
flinging herself on the 
fallen leaves beside 
him. " Let God pun 
ish .' Thou shalt for 
give ! " 

With sudden and desperate tenderness, 
she threw her arms around him, and pressed 
his head against her bosom ; little caring 
though his cheek rested on the scarlet 




348 The Scarlet Letter 

letter. He would have released himself, 
but strove in vain to do so. Hester would 
not set him free, lest he should look her 
sternly in the face. All the world had 
frowned on her, — for seven long years had 
it frowned upon this lonely woman, — and 
still she bore it all, nor ever once turned 
away her firm, sad eyes. Heaven, likewise, 
had frowned upon her, and she had not 
died. But the frown of this pale, weak, 
sinful, and sorrow-stricken man was what 
Hester could not bear, and live ! 

**Wilt thou yet forgive me?" she re- 
peated, over and over again. ** Wilt thou 
not frown } Wilt thou forgive ? *' 

** I do forgive you, Hester,*' replied the 
minister, at length, with a deep utterance 
out of an abyss of sadness, but no anger. 
** I freely forgive you now. May God for- 
give us both ! We are not, Hester, the 
worst sinners in the world. There is one 
worse than even the polluted priest ! That 
old man's revenge has been blacker than 
my sin. He has violated, in cold blood, 
the sanctity of a human heart. Thou and 
I, Hester, never did so ! '* 

" Never, never ! " whispered she. ** What 
we did had a consecration of its own. We 
felt it so ! We said so to each other ! Hast 
thou forgotten it } " 



The Pastor and His Parishioner 349 

"Hush, Hester!*' said Arthur Dimmes- 
dale, rising from the ground. *' No ; I have 
not forgotten ! *' 

They sat down again, side by side, and 
hand clasped in hand, on the mossy trunk 
of the fallen tree. Life had never brought 
them a gloomier hour; it was the point 
whither their pathway had so long been 
tending, and darkening ever, as it stole 
along ; — and yet it inclosed a charm that 
made them linger upon it, and claim an- 
other, and another, and, after all, another 
moment. The forest was obscure around 
them, and creaked with a blast that was 
passing through it. The boughs were toss- 
ing heavily above their heads ; while one 
solemn old tree groaned dolefully to an- 
other, as if telling the sad story of the pair^ 
that sat beneath, or constrained to forebode ■^ 
evil to come. j» 

And yet they lingered. How dreary 
looked the forest-track that led backward 
to the settlement, where Hester Prynne 
must take up again the burden of her 
ignominy, and the minister the hollow 
mockery of his good name ! So they lin- 
gered an instant longer. No golden light 
had ever been so precious as the gloom of 
this dark forest. Here, seen only by his 



350 The Scarlet Letter 

eyes, the scarlet letter need not bum into 
the bosom of the fallen woman ! Here, 
seen only by her eyes, Arthur Dimmesdale, 
false to God and man, might be, for one 
moment, true ! 

He started at a thought that suddenly 
occurred to him. 

" Hester," cried he, " here is a new hor- 
ror ! Roger Chillingworth knows your pur- 
pose to reveal his true character. Will he 
continue, then, to keep our secret ? What 
will now be the course of his revenge ? " 

"There is a strange secrecy in his na- 
ture/* replied Hester, thoughtfully; "and 
it has grown upon him by the hidden prac- 
tices of his revenge. I deem it not likely 
that he will betray the secret. He will 
doubtless seek other means of satiating his 
dark passion." 

" And I ! — how am I to live longer, 
breathing the same air with this deadly 
enemy.?" exclaimed Arthur Dimmesdale, 
shrinking within himself, and pressing his 
hand nervously against his heart, — a ges- 
ture that had grown involuntary with him. 
" Think for me, Hester ! Thou art strong. 
Resolve for me ! " 

" Thou must dwell no longer with this 
man," said Hester, slowly and firmly. 



The Pastor and His Parishioner 351 

" Thy heart must be no longer under his 
evil eye ! '* 

" It were far worse than death ! ** replied 
the minister. ** But how to avoid it ? 
What choice remains to me ? Shall I lie 
down again on these withered leaves, 
where I cast myself when thou didst tell 
me what he was ? Must I sink down there, 
and die at once?** 

"Alas, what a ruin has befallen thee ! ** 
said Hester, with the tears gushing into 
her eyes. ** Wilt thou die for very weak- 
ness ? There is no other cause ! " 

"The judgment of God is on me," an- ; 
swered the conscience-stricken priest. " It 
is too mighty for me to struggle with ! ** 

" Heaven would show mercy," rejoined 
Hester, " hadst thou but the strength to 
take advantage of it." , r^^ 

" Be thou strong for me ! " answered he. 
"Advise me what to do." 

" Is the world then so narrow ? " ex- 
claimed Hester Prynne, fixing her deep 
eyes on the minister's, and instinctively 
exercising a magnetic power over a spirit 
so shattered and subdued, that it could 
hardly hold itself erect. " Doth the uni- 
verse lie within the compass of yonder 
town, which only a little time ago was but 



352 The Scarlet Letter 

a leaf-strewn desert, as lonely as this 
around us? Whither leads yonder forest- 
track? Backward to the settlement, thou 
sayest ! Yes ; but onward, too I Deeper 
it goes, and deeper, into the wilderness, 
less plainly to be seen at every step ; un- 
til, some few miles hence, the yellow 




leaves will show no vestige of the white 
man's tread. There thou art free I So 
brief a journey would bring thee from a 
world where thou hast been most wretched, 
to one where thou mayest still be happy I 
Is there not shade enough in all this 
boundless forest to hide thy heart from the 
gaze of Roger Chillingworth ? " 

" Yes, Hester ; but only under the fallen 
leaves ! " replied the minister, with a sad 
smile. 

" Then there is the broad pathway of the 
sea ! " continued Hester. " It brought 
thee hither. If thou so choose, it will 
bear thee back again. In our native land. 



The Pastor and His Parishioner 353 

whether in some remote rural village or in 
vast London, — or, surely, in Germany, in 
France, in pleasant Italy, — thou wouldst 
be beyond his power and knowledge ! 
And what hast thou to do with all these 
iron men, and their opinions ? They 
have kept thy better part in bondage too 
long already ! '* 

" It cannot be ! *' answered the minister, 
listening as if he were called upon to 
realise a dream. ** I am powerless to go. 
Wretched and sinful as I am, I have had 
no other thought than to drag on my 
earthly existence in the sphere where 
Providence hath placed me. Lost as my 
own soul is, I would still do what I may 
for other human souls ! I dare not quit 
my post, though an unfaithful sentinel, 
whose sure reward is death and dishonour, 
when his dreary watch shall come to an 
end ! " 

"Thou art crushed under this seven 
years' weight of misery," replied Hester, 
fervently resolved to buoy him up with 
her own energy. "But thou shalt leave 
it all behind thee ! It shall not cumber 
thy steps, as thou treadest along the forest- 
path ; neither shalt thou freight the ship 
with it, if thou prefer to cross the sea. 



354 ^^^ Scarlet Letter 

Leave this wreck and ruin here where it 
hath happened ! Meddle no more with it ! 
Begin all anew ! Hast thou exhausted 
possibility in the failure of this one trial ? 
Not so ! The future is yet full of trial 
and success. There is happiness to be 
enjoyed ! There is good to be done ! Ex- 
change this false life of thine for a true 
one. Be, if thy spirit summon thee to 
such a mission, the teacher and apostle of 
the red men. Or, — as is more thy nature, 
— be a scholar and a sage among the wisest 
and the most renowned of the cultivated 
world. Preach ! Write ! Act ! Do any 
thing, save to lie down and die ! Give up 
this name of Arthur Dimmesdale,and make 
thyself another, and a high one, such as 
thou canst wear without fear or shame. 
Why shouldst thou tarry so much as one 
other day in the torments that have so 
gnawed into thy life ! — that have made 
thee feeble to will and to do! — that will 
leave thee powerless even to repent ! Up, 
and away ! " 

"O Hester! " cried Arthur Dimmesdale, 
in whose eyes a fitful light, kindled by her 
enthusiasm, flashed up and died away, 
" thou tellest of running a race to a man 
whose knees are tottering beneath him ! I 



The Pastor and His Parishioner 355 

must die here. There is not the strength 
or courage left me to venture into the 
wide, strange, difficult world, alone ! " 

It was the last expression of the de- 
spondency of a broken spirit. He lacked 
energy to grasp the better fortune that 
seemed within his reach. 

He repeated the word. 

" Alone, Hester ! " 

" Thou shalt not go alone ! ** answered 
she, in a deep whisper. 

Then, all was spoken ! 



XVIII 

A FLOOD OF SUNSHINE 

ARTHUR DIMMESDALE gazed into 
Hester's face with a look in which 
hope and joy shone out, indeed, but with 
fear betwixt them, and a kind of horror 
at her boldness, who had spoken what he 
vaguely hinted at, but dared not speak. 

But Hester Prynne, with a mind of 
native courage and activity, and for so 
long a period not merely estranged, but 
outlawed, from society, had habituated her- 
self to such latitude of speculation as was 
altogether foreign to the clergyman. She 
had wandered, without rule or guidance, 
in a moral wilderness ; as vast, as intricate 
and shadowy, as the untamed forest, amid 
the gloom of which they were now hold- 
ing a colloquy that was to decide their 
fate. Her intellect and heart had their 
home, as it were, in desert places, where 
she roamed as freely as the wild Indian in 
his woods. For years past she had looked 
from this estranged point of view at hu- 
356 



A Flood of Sunshine 357 

man institutions, and whatever priests or 
legislators had established ; criticising all 
with hardly more reverence than the Indian 
would feel for the clerical band, the judicial 
robe, the pillory, the gallows, the fireside, 
or the church. The tendency of her fate 
and fortunes had been to set her free. 
The scarlet letter was her passport into 
regions where other women dared not 
tread. Shame, Despair, Solitude ! These 
had been her teachers, — stern and wild 
ones, — and they had made her strong, but 
taught her much amiss. 

The minister, on the other hand, had 
never gone through an experience cal- 
culated to lead him beyond the scope of 
generally received laws ; although, in a 
single instance, he had so fearfully trans- 
gressed one of the most sacred of them. 
But this had been a sin of passion, not of 
principle, nor even purpose. Since that 
wretched epoch, he had watched, with 
morbid zeal and minuteness, not his acts, 
— for those it was easy to arrange, — but 
each breath of emotion, and his every 
thought. At the head of the social sys- 
tem, as the clergymen of that day stood, 
he was only the more trammelled by its 
regulations, its principles, and even its 



35^ The Scarlet Letter 

prejudices. As a priest, the framework 
of his order inevitably hemmed him in. 
As a man who had once sinned, but who 
kept his conscience all alive and painfully 
sensitive by the fretting of an unhealed 
wound, he might have been supposed safer 
within the line of virtue, than if he had 
never sinned at all. 

Thus, we seem to see that, as regarded 
Hester Prynne, the whole seven years of 
outlaw and ignominy had been little other 
than a preparation for this very hour. But 
Arthur Dimmesdale ! Were such a man 
once more to fall, what plea could be urged 
in extenuation of his crime } None ; un- 
less it avail him somewhat, that he was 
broken down by long and exquisite suffer- 
ing ; that his mind was darkened and con- 
fused by the very remorse which harrowed 
it ; that, between fleeing as an avowed 
criminal, and remaining as a hypocrite, 
conscience might find it hard to strike the 
balance; that it was human to avoid the 
peril of death and infamy, and the in- 
scrutable machinations of an enemy ; that, 
finally, to this poor pilgrim, on his dreary 
and desert path, faint, sick, miserable, 
there appeared a glimpse of human affec- 
tion and sympathy, a new life, and a true 



A Flood of Sunshine 359 

one, in exchange for the heavy doom which 
he was now expiating. And be the stern 
and sad truth spoken, that the breach 
which guilt has once made into the human 
soul is never, in this mortal state, repaired. 
It may be watched and guarded ; so that 
the enemy shall not force his way again 
into the citadal, and might even, in his 
subsequent assaults, select some other 
avenue, in preference to that where he 
had formerly succeeded. But there is still 
the ruined wall, and, near it, the stealthy 
tread of the foe that would win over again 
his unforgotten triumph. 

The struggle, if there were one, need 
not be described. Let it suffice, that the 
clergyman resolved to flee, and not alone. 

"If, in all these past seven years,'* 
thought he, " I could recall one instant of 
peace or hope, I would yet endure, for the 
sake of that earnest of Heaven's mercy. 
But now, — since I am irrevocably doomed, 
— wherefore should I not snatch the solace 
allowed to the condemned culprit before 
his execution } Or, if this be the path to 
a better life, as Hester would persuade me, 
I surely give up no fairer prospect by pur- 
suing it ! Neither can I any longer live 
without her companionship ; so powerful 



360 The Scarlet Letter 

is she to sustain, — so tender to soothe! 
O Thou to whom I dare not lift mine 
eyes, wilt Thou yet pardon me ! " 

"Thou wilt go ! " said Hester calmly, as 
he met her glance. 

The decision once made, a glow of 
strange enjoyment threw its flickering 
brightness over the trouble of his breast. 
It was the exhilarating effect — upon a 
prisoner just escaped from the dungeon of 
his own heart — of breathing the wild, 
free atmosphere of an unredeemed, un- 
christianised, lawless region. His spirit 
rose, as it were, with a bound, and attained 
a nearer prospect of the sky, than through- 
out all the misery which had kept him 
grovelling on the earth. Of a deeply relig- 
ious temperament, there was inevitably a 
tinge of the devotional in his mood. 

"Do I feel joy again .^" cried he, won- 
dering at himself. " Methought the germ 
of it was dead in me ! O Hester, thou art 
my better angel! I seem to have flung 
myself — sick, sin-stained, and sorrow- 
blackened — down upon these forest-leaves, 
and to have risen up all made anew, and 
with new powers to glorify Him that hath 
been merciful ! This is already the bet- 
ter life ! Why did we not find it sooner ? " 



A Flood of Sunshine 361 

"Let us not look back," answered Hes- 
ter Prynne. *' The past is gone ! Where- 
fore should we linger upon it now ? See ! 
With this symbol, I undo it all, and make 
it as it had never been ! " 
t So speaking, she undid the clasp that 
fastened the scarlet letter, and, taking it 
from her bosom, threw it to a distance 
among the withered leaves.lr The mystic 
token alighted on the hither verge of the 
stream. With a hand's breadth farther 
flight it would have fallen into the water, 
and have given the little brook another 
woe to carry onward, besides the unintel- 
ligible tale which it still kept murmuring 
about. But there lay the embroidered let- 
ter, glittering like a lost jewel, which some 
ill-fated wanderer might pick up, and 
thenceforth be haunted by strange phan- 
toms of guilt, sinkings of the heart, and 
unaccountable misfortune. 
^The stigma gone, Hester heaved a long, 
deep sigh, in which the burden of shame 
and anguish departed from her spirit. O 
exquisite relief ! She had not known the 
weight, until she felt the freedom ! By 
another impulse, she took off the formal 
cap that confined her hair ; and down it 
fell upon her shoulders, dark and rich, with 



362 



The Scarlet Letter 



at once a shadow and a light in its abun- 
dance, and imparting the charm of softness 
to her features. There played around her 
mouth, and beamed out of her eyes, a 
radiant and tender smile, that seemed 
gushing from the very heart of woman- 
hood A crimson flush was glowing on 
her cheek, that had 
been long so pale. 
Her sex, her youth, 
and the whole rich- 
ness of her beauty, 
came back from 
what men call the 
irrevocable past, and 
clustered them- 
selves, with her 
maiden hope, and a 
happiness before un- 
known within the 
magic circle of this 
hour. And, as if the gloom of the earth 
and sky had been but the effluence of 
these two mortal hearts, it vanished with 
their sorrow. All at once, as with a sud- 
den smile of heaven, forth burst the sun- 
shine, pouring a very flood into the obscure 
forest, gladdening each green leaf, trans- 
muting the yellow fallen ones to gold, and 




A Flood of Sunshine 363 

gleaming adown the grey trunks of the 
solemn treesj The objects that had made 
a shadow hitnerto, embodied the brightness 
now. The course of the little brook might 
be traced by its merry gleam afar into the 
wood's heart of mystery, which had become 
a mystery of joy. 

• Such was the sympathy of Nature — 
that wild, heathen Nature of the forest, 
never subjugated by human law, nor illu- 
mined by higher truth — with the bliss of 
these two spirits ! Love, whether newly ^v 
born, or aroused from a deathlike slumber, 
must always create a sunshine, filling the 
heart so full of radiance, that it overflows 
upon the outward world. Had the forest 
still kept its gloom, it would have been 
bright in Hester's eyes, and bright in 
Arthur Dimmesdale*s ! 

Hester looked at him with the thrill of 
another joy. 

" Thou must know Pearl ! '* said she. 
" Our little Pearl ! Thou hast seen her, 
— yes, I know it ! — but thou wilt see her 
now with other eyes. She is a strange 
child ! I hardly coniprehend her ! But 
thou wilt love her dearly, as I do, and wilt 
advise me how to deal with her." 

" Dost thou think the child will be glad 



364 The Scarlet Letter 

to know me ? " asked the minister, some- 
what uneasily. " I have long shrunk from 
children, because they often show a dis- 
trust, — a backwardness to be familiar 
with me. I have even been afraid of lit- 
tle Pearl ! " 

" Ah, that was sad ! " answered the 
mother. "But she will love thee dearly, 
and thou her. She is not far off. I will 
caliber! Pearl! Pearl!" 

" I see the child,'* observed the minis- 
ter. " Yonder she is, standing in a streak 
of sunshine, a good way off, on the other 
side of the brook. So thou thinkest the 
child will love me } " 

f Hester smiled, and again called to Pearl, 
wlio was visible, at some distance, as the 
'minister had described her, like a bright- 
apparelled vision, in a sunbeam, which fell 
down upon her through an arch of boughs. 
The ray quivered to and fro, making her 
figure dim or distinct, — now like a real 
child, now like a child's spirit, — as the 
splendour went and came again.) She heard 
her mother's voice, and approached slowly 
through the forest. 

Pearl had not found the hour pass weari- 
somely, while her mother sat talking with 
the clergyman. The great black forest — ^ 



A Flood of Sunshine 365 

stern as it showed itself to those who 
brought the guilt and troubles of the world 
into its bosom — became the playmate of 
the lonely infant, as well as it knew how. 
Sombre as it was, it put on the kindest of 
its moods to welcome her. It offered her 
the partridge-berries, the growth of the 
preceding autumn, but ripening only in the 
spring, and now red as drops of blood upon 
the withered leaves. These Pearl gathered, 
and was pleased with their wild flavour. The 
small denizens of the wilderness hardly took 
pains to move out of her path. A par- 
tridge, indeed, with a brood of ten behind 
her, ran forward threateningly, but soon 
repented of her fierceness, and clucked to 
her young ones not to be afraid. A pigeon, 
alone on a low branch, allowed Pearl to 
come beneath, and uttered a sound as much 
of greeting as alarm. A squirrel, from the 
lofty depths of his domestic tree, chattered 
either in anger or merriment, — for a squir- 
rel is such a choleric and humorous little 
personage that it is hard to distinguish 
between his moods, — so he chattered at 
the child, and flung down a nut upon her 
head. It was a last year's nut, and already 
gnawed by his sharp tooth. A fox, startled 
from his sleep by her light footstep on 



366 The Scarlet Letter 

the leaves, looked inquisitively at Pearl, as 
doubting whether it were better to steal 
off, or renew his nap on the same spot. A 
wolf, it is said, — but here the tale has 
surely laosed into the improbable, — came 




up, and smelt of Pearl's robe, and offered 
his savage head to be patted by her hand. 
The truth seems to be, however, that the 
mother-forest, and these wild things which 
it nourished, all recognised a kindred wild- 
ness in the human child. 

And she was gentler here than in the 
grassy-margined streets of the settlement, 
or in her mother's cottage. The flowers 
appeared to know it ; and one and another 
whispered, as she passed, " Adorn thyself 
with me, thou beautiful child, adorn thyself 
with me!" — and, to please them. Pearl 
gathered the violets, and anemones, and 



A Flood of Sunshine 367 

columbines, and some twigs of the freshest 
green, which the old trees held down before 
her eyes. With these she decorated her 
hair, and her young waist, and became a 
nymph-child, or an infant dryad, or what- 
ever else was in closest sympathy with the 
antique wood. In such guise had Pearl 
adorned herself, when she heard her moth- 
er's voice, and came slowly back. 
Slowly ; for she saw the clergyman ! 



THE CHILD AT THE BROOK-SIDE 

" 'T^'HOU wilt love her dearly," repeated 
X Hester Frynne, as she and the 
minister sat watching little Peail " Dost 
thou not think her beautiful ? And see 
with what natural skill she has made those 
simple flowers adorn her ! 
Had she gathered pearls, 
and diamonds, and rubies, 
in the wood, they could 
not have become her bet- 
ter. She is a splendid 
I child I But I know whose 
brow she has ! " 

" Dost thou know, Hes- 
ter," said Arthur Dim- 
mesdale, with an unquiet smile, "that 
this dear child, tripping about always at 
thy side, hath caused me many an alarm ? 
Methought — O Hester, what a thought 
is that, and how terrible to dread it ! — 
that my own features were partly repeated 
in her face, and so strikingly that the 
368 




The Child at the Brook-Side 369 

world might see them ! But she is mostly 
thine ! " 

" No, no ! Not mostly ! ** answered the 
mother with a tender smile. "A little 
longer, and thou needest not to be afraid 
to trace whose child she is. But how 
strangely beautiful she looks, with those 
wild flowers in her hair ! It is as if one 
of the fairies, whom we left in our dear 
old England, had decked her out to meet 



us." 



It was with a feeling which neither of 
them had ever before experienced, that 
they sat and watched Pearl's slow advance. 
In her was visible the tie that united 
them. She had been offered to the world, 
these seven years past, as the living hiero- 
glyphic, in which was revealed the secret 
they so darkly sought to hide, — all written 
in this symbol, — all plainly manifest, — 
had there been a prophet or magician 
skilled to read the character of flame ! 
And Pearl was the oneness of their being. 
Be the foregone evil what it might, how 
could they doubt that their earthly lives 
and future destinies were conjoined, when 
they beheld at once the material union, 
and the spiritual idea, in whom they met, 
and were to dwell immortally together? 



370 The Scarlet Letter 

Thoughts like these — and perhaps other 
thoughts, which they did not acknowledge 
or define — threw an awe about the child, 
as she came onward. 

" Let her see nothing strange — no pas- 
sion nor eagerness — in thy way of ac- 
costing her," whispered Hester. ** Our 
Pearl is a fitful and fantastic little elf, 
sometimes. Especially, she is seldom tol- 
erant of emotion, when she does not fully 
comprehend the why and wherefore. But 
the child has strong affections ! She loves 
me, and will love thee ! " 

" Thou canst not think," said the min- 
ister, glancing aside at Hester Prynne, 
" how my heart dreads this interview, and 
yearns for it ! But, in truth, as I already 
told thee, children are not readily won 
to be familiar with me. They will not 
climb my knee, nor prattle in my ear, nor 
answer to my smile ; but stand apart, and 
eye me strangely. Even little babes, when 
I take them in my arms, weep bitterly. 
Yet Pearl, twice in her little lifetime, hath 
been kind to me ! The first time, — thou 
knowest it well ! The last was when thou 
ledst her with thee to the house of yonder 
stern old Governor." 

"And thou didst plead so bravely in 



The Child at the brook-Side 371 

her behalf and mine ! " answered the 
mother. " I remember it ; and so shall 
little Pearl. Fear nothing ! She may be 
strange and shy at first, but will soon learn 
to love thee ! " 

By this time Pearl had reached the 
margin of the brook, and stood on the 
farther side, gazing silently at Hester and 
the clergyman, who still sat together on 
the mossy tree-trunk, waiting to receive 
her. Just where she had paused the brook 
chanced to form a pool, so smooth and 
quiet that it reflected a perfect image of 
her little figure, with all the brilliant pic- 
turesqueness of her beauty, in its adorn- 
ment of flowers and wreathed foliage, but 
more refined and spiritualised than the 
reality. This image, so nearly identical 
with the living Pearl, seemed to communi- 
cate somewhat of its own shadowy and 
intangible quality to the child herself. It 
was strange, the way in which Pearl stood; 
looking so steadfastly at them through the 
dim medium of the forest-gloom ; herself, 
meanwhile, all glorified with a raj^ of sun- 
shine, that was attracted thitherward as 
by a certain sympathy. In the brook 
beneath stood another child, — another 
and the same, — with likewise its ray of 



372 The Scarlet Letter 

golden light. Hester felt herself, in some 
indistinct and tantalising manner, es- 
tranged from Pearl ; as if the child, in 
her lonely ramble through the forest, had 
strayed out of the sphere in which she 
and her mother dwelt together, and was 
now vainly seeking to return to it. 

There was both truth and error in the 
impression ; the child and mother were 
estranged, but through Hester's fault, not 
Pearl's. Since the latter rambled from 
her side, another inmate had been ad- 
mitted within the circle of the mother's 
feelings, and so modified the aspect of them 
all, that Pearl, the returning wanderer, 
could not find her wonted place, and hardly 
knew where she was. 

" I have a strange fancy," observed the 
sensitive minister, " that this brook is the 
boundary between two worlds, and that thou 
canst never meet thy Pearl again. Or is she 
an elfish spirit, who, as the legends of our 
childhood taught us, is forbidden to cross 
a running stream } Pray hasten her ; for 
this delay has already imparted a tremor 
to my nerves." 

" Come, dearest child ! " said Hester 
encouragingly, and stretching out both 
her arms. " How slow thou art ! When 



The Child at the Brook-Side 373 

hast thou been so sluggish before now ? 
Here is a friend of mine, who must be thy 
friend also. Thou wilt have twice as much 
love, henceforward, as thy mother alone 
could give thee ! Leap across the brook 
and come to us. Thou canst leap like a 
yoimgdeer !" 

Pearl, without re- 
sponding in any man- 
ner to these honey- 
sweet expressions, 
remained on the other 
sideof the brook. Now 
she fixed her bright, 
wild eyes on her 
mother, now on the 
minister, and now in- 
cluded them both in 
the same glance ; as 
if to detect and ea 
plain to herself the 
relation which they 
bore to one another. 
For some unaccountable reason, as Arthur 
Dimmesdale felt the child's eyes upon 
himself, his hand — with that gesture so 
habitual as to have become involuntary — 
stole over his heart. At length, assuming 
a singular air of authority, Pearl stretched 




374 '^^^ Scarlet Letter 

out her hand, with the small forefinger 
extended, and pointing evidently towards 
her mother's breast. And beneath, in the 
mirror of the brook, there was the flower- 
girdled and sunny image of little Pearl, 
pointing her small forefinger too. 

"Thou strange child, why dost thou not 
come to me ? " exclaimed Hester. 

Pearl still pointed with her forefinger; 
and a frown gathered on her brow; the 
more impressive from the childish, the 
almost baby-like aspect of the features that 
conveyed it. As her mother still kept 
beckoning to her, and arraying her face 
in a holiday suit of unaccustomed smiles, 
the child stamped her foot with a yet more 
imperious look and gesture. In the brook, 
again, was the fantastic beauty of the im- 
age, with its reflected frown, its pointed 
finger, and imperious gesture, giving em- 
phasis to the aspect of little Pearl. 

" Hasten, Pearl ; or I shall be angry with 
thee ! *' cried Hester Prynne, who, however 
inured to such behaviour on the elf-child's 
part at other seasons, was naturally anxious 
for a more seemly deportment now. ** Leap 
across the brook, naughty child, and run 
hither ! Else I must come to thee ! " 

But Pearl, not a whit startled at her 



The Child at the Brook-Side 375 

mother's threats, any more than mollified 
by her entreaties, now suddenly burst into 
a fit of passion, gesticulating violently, and 
throwing her small figure into the most ex- 
travagant contortions. She accompanied 
this wild outbreak with piercing shrieks, 
which the woods reverberated on all sides ; 
so that, alone as she was in her childish and 
unreasonable wrath, it seemed as if a hidden 
multitude were lending her their sympathy 
and encouragement. Seen in the brook, 
once more, was the shadowy wrath of 
Pearl's image, crowned and girdled with 
flowers, but stamping its foot, wildly ges- 
ticulating, and, in the midst of all, still 
pointing its small forefinger at Hester's 
bosom ! 

"I see what ails the child," whispered 
Hester to the clergyman, and turning pale 
in spite of a strong effort to conceal her 
trouble and annoyance. " Children will not 
abide any, the slightest, change in the 
accustomed aspect of things that are daily 
before their eyes. Pearl misses something 
which she has always seen me wear ! " 

" I pray you," answered the minister, " if 
thou hast any means of pacifying the child, 
do it forthwith ! Save it were the cankered 
wrath of an old witch, like Mistress Hib- 



376 The Scarlet Letter 

bins,'* added he, attempting to smile, " I 
know nothing that I would not sooner 
encounter than this passion in a child. In 
Pearl's young beauty, as in the wrinkled 
witch, ft has a preternatural effect. Pacify 
her, if thou lovest me ! " 

Hester turned again towards Pearl, with 
a crimson blush upon her cheek, a conscious 
glance aside at the clergyman, and then a 
heavy sigh ; while, even before she had 
time to speak, the blush yielded to a deadly 
pallor. 

" Pearl/* said she, sadly, " look down at 
thy feet ! There ! — before thee ! — on the 
hither side of the brook ! " 

The child turned her eyes to the point 
indicated ; and there lay the scarlet letter, 
so close upon the margin of the stream, 
that the gold embroidery was reflected 
in it. 

** Bring it hither ! " said Hester. 

"Come thou and take it up! " answered 
Pearl. 

" Was ever such a child ! " observed 
Hester aside to the minister. "O, I have 
much to tell thee about her. But, in very 
truth, she is right as regards this hateful 
token. I must bear its torture yet a little 
longer, — only a few days longer, — until 



The Child at the Brook-Side 37; 

we shall have left this region, and look 
back hither as to a land which we have 
dreamed of. The forest cannot hide it ! 
The mid-ocean shall take it from my hand, 
and swallow it up for ever ! " 

With these words, she advanced to the 




margin of the brook, took up the scarlet 
letter, and fastened it again into her bosom. 
Hopefully, but a moment ago, as Hester 
had spoken of drowning it in the deep sea, 
there was a sense of inevitable doom upon 
her, as she thus received back this deadly 



3/8 The Scarlet Letter 

symbol from the hand of fate. She had 
flung it into infinite space! — she had drawn 
an hour's free breath ! — and here again was 
the scarlet misery, glittering on the old 
spot! So it ever is, whether thus typified 
or no, that an evil deed invests itself with 
the character of doom. Hester next gath- 
ered up the heavy tresses of her hair, and 
confined them beneath her cap. ■ As if 
there were a withering spell in the sad 
letter, her beauty, the warmth and rich- 
ness of her womanhood, departed, like fad- 
ing sunshine; and a grey shadow seemed 
to fall across her. 

When the dreary change was wrought, 
she extended her hand to Pearl. 

" Dost thou know 
thy mother now, 
child?" asked she, re- 
proachfully, but with 
asubduedtone. "Wilt 
^thou come across the 
[ brook, and own thy 
/ mother, now that she 
f has her shame upon 
.- •vma^^^^ ' 'icf, — now that she 

V ^f^K^-' is sad?" 

"Yes; now I will!" answered the child) 
bounding across the brook, and clasping 




The Child at the Brook-Side 379 

Hester in her arms. " Now thou art my 
mother indeed ! And I am thy little 
Pearl ! " 

In a mood of tenderness that was not 
usual with her, she drew down her mother's 
head, and kissed her brow and both her 
cheeks. But then — by a kind of neces- 
sity that always impelled this child to alloy 
whatever comfort she might chance to 
give with a throb of anguish — Pearl put 
up her mouth, and kissed the scarlet letter 
too! 

" That was not kind ! " said Hester. 
" When thou hast shown me a little love, 
thou mockest me ! " 

" Why doth the minister sit yonder } ** 
asked Pearl. 

"He waits to welcome thee," replied 
her mother. '* Come thou, and entreat his 
blessing ! He loves thee, my little Pearl, 
and loves thy mother too. Wilt thou not 
love him ? Come ! he longs to greet 
thee ! " 

" Doth he love us ? " said Pearl, looking 
up with acute intelligence into her mother's 
face. " Will he go back with us, hand in 
hand, we three together, into the town ? " 

" Not now, dear child," answered Hester. 
" But in days to come he will walk hand in 



380 The Scarlet Letter 

hand with us. We will have a home and 
fireside of our own ; and thou shalt sit 
upon his knee ; and he will teach thee many 
things, and love thee dearly. Thou wilt 
love him ; wilt thou not } *' 

"And will he always keep his hand over 
his heart } " inquired Pearl. 

" Foolish child, what a question is that ! *' 
exclaimed her mother. ** Come and ask his 
blessing ! " 

But, whether influenced by the jealousy 
that seems instinctive with every petted 
child towards a dangerous rival, or from 
whatever caprice of her freakish nature, 
Pearl would show no favour to the clergy- 
man. It was only by an exertion of force 
that her mother brought her up to him, 
hanging back, and manifesting her reluc- 
tance by odd grimaces ; of which, ever since 
her babyhood, she had possessed a singular 
variety, and could transform her mobile 
physiognomy into a series of different as- 
pects, with a new mischief in them, each 
and all. The minister — painfully embar- 
rassed, but hoping that a kiss might prove 
a talisman to admit him into the child's 
kindlier regards — bent forward, and im- 
pressed one on her brow. Hereupon, Pearl 
broke away from her mother, and, running 



The Child at the Brook- Side 381 

to the brook, stooped over it, and bathed 
her forehead, until the unweleome kiss was 
quite washed off, and diffused through a 
long lapse of the gliding water. She then 
remained apart, silcndy watching Hester 
and the clergyman ; while they talked to- 
gether, and made such arrangements as 
were suggested by their new position, and 
the purposes soon to be fulfilled. 

And now this fateful interview had come 
to a close. The dell was to be left a soli- 
tude among its dark, old trees, which, with 
their multitudinous tongues, would whisper 
long of what had passed there, and no 
mortal be the wiser. And the melancholy 
brook would add this other tale to the mys- 
tery with which its little heart was already 
overburdened, and whereof it still kept up 
a murmuring babble, with not a whit more 
cheerfulness of tone than for ages hereto- 
fore. 



XX 

THE MINISTER IN A MAZE 

AS the minister departed, in advance of 
Hester Prynne and little Pearl, he 
threw a backward glance ; half expecting 
that he should discover only some faintly 
traced features or outline of the mother and 
the child, slowly fading into the twilight of 
the woods. So great a vicissitude in his 
life could not at once be received as real. 
But there was Hester, clad in her grey robe, 
still standing beside the tree-trunk, which 
some blast had overthrown a long antiquity 
ago, and which time had ever since been 
covering with moss, so that these two fated 
ones, with earth's heaviest burden on them, 
might there sit down together, and find a 
single hour's rest and solace. And there 
was Pearl, too, lightly dancing from the 
margin of the brook, — now that the intru- 
sive third person was gone, — and taking 
her old place by her mother's side. So the 
minister had not fallen asleep, and dreamed ! 
In order to free his mind from this in' 
382 



The Minister in a Maze 383 

distinctness and duplicity of impression, 
which vexed it with a strange disquietude, 
he recalled and more thoroughly defined 
the plans which Hester and himself had 
sketched for their departure. It had been 
determined between them, that the Old 
World, with its crowds and cities, offered 
them a more eligible shelter and conceal- 
ment than the wilds of New England, or 
all America, with its alternatives of an In- 
dian wigwam, or the few settlements of Euro- 
peans, scattered thinly along the seaboard. 
Not to speak of the clergyman's health, so 
inadequate to sustain the hardships of a 
forest life, his native gifts, his 'culture, and 
his entire development would secure him 
a home only in the midst of civilisation and 
refinement ; the higher the state, the more 
delicately adapted to it the man. In fur- 
therance of this choice, it so happened that f 
a ship lay in the harbour; one of those ) 
questionable cruisers, frequent at that day, 
which, without being absolutely outlaws of 
the deep, yet roamed over its surface with 
a remarkable irresponsibility of character. 
This vessel had recently arrived from the 
Spanish Main, and, within three days' time, 
would sail for Bristol. Hester Prynne — 
whose vocation, as a self-enlisted Sister of 



r 



384 



The Scarlet Letter 



Charity, had brought her acquainted with 
the captain and crew — could take upon 
hurself to secure the passage of two indi- 
viduals and a child, with all the secrecy 
which circumstances rendered more than 
desirable. 

The minister had inquired of Hester, 
with no little interest, the precise time at 




which the vessel might be expected to 
depart. It would probably be on the fourth 
day from the present. "That is most fort- 
unate ! " he had then said to himself. 
Now, why the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale 
considered it so very fortunate, we hesitate 
:o reveal. Nevertheless, — to hold nothing 
(jack from the rea<Ier, — it was because, on 
the third day from the present, he was (q 



The Minister in a Maze 385 

preach the Election Sermon ; and, as such 
an occasion formed an honourable epoch in 
the life of a New England clergyman, he 
could not have chanced upon a more suit- 
able mode and time of terminating his pro- 
fessional career. " At least, they shall say 
of me," thought this exemplary man, "that 
I leave no public duty unperformed, nor ill 
performed ! ** Sad, indeed, that an intro- 
spection so profound and acute as this poor 
minister's should be so miserably deceived ! 
We have had, and may still have, worse 
things to tell of him ; but none, we appre- 
hend, so pitiably weak ; no evidence, at 
once so slight and irrefragable, of a subtle 
disease, that had long since begun to eat 
into the real substance of his character. 
No man, for any considerable period, can 
wear one face to himself, and another to 
the multitude, without finally getting be- 
wildered as to which may be the true. 

The excitement of Mr. Dimmesdale's 
feelings, as he returned from his interview 
with Hester, lent him unaccustomed physi- 
cal energy, and hurried him townward at a 
rapid pace. The pathway among the woods 
seemed wilder, more uncouth with its rude 
natural obstacles, and less trodden by the 
foot of man, than he remembered it on his 



386 The Scarlet Letter 

outward journey. But he leaped across 
the plashy places, thrust himself through 
the clinging underbrush, climbed the as- 
cent, plunged into the hollow, and over- 
came, in short, all the difficulties of the 
track, with an unweariable activity that as- 
* tonished him. He could not but recall how 
feebly, and with what frequent pauses for 
breath, he had toiled over the same ground 
only two days before. As he drew near 
the town, he took an impression of change 
from the series of familiar objects that pre- 
sented themselves. It seemed not yester- 
day, not one, nor two, but many days, or 
even years ago, since he had quitted them. 
There, indeed, was each former trace of 
the street, as he remembered it, and all 
the peculiarities of the houses, with the 
due multitude of gable-peaks, and a weath- 
ercock at every point where his memory 
suggested one. Not the less, however, 
came this importunately obtrusive sense 
of change. The same was true as regarded 
the acquaintances whom he met, and all the 
well-known shapes of human life, about the 
little town. They looked neither older nor 
younger, now ; the beards of the aged were 
no whiter, nor could the creeping babe of 
yesterday walk on his feet to-day ; it was 



The Minister in a Maze 387 

impossible to describe in what respect 
they differed from the individuals on 
whom he had so recently bestowed a 
parting glance ; and yet the minister's 
deepest sense seemed to inform him of 
their mutability. A similar impression 
struck him most remarkably, as he passed 
under the walls of his own church. The 
edifice had so very strange, and yet so 
familiar, an aspect, that Mr. Dimmesdale's 
mind vibrated between two ideas ; either 
that he had seen it only in a dream hith- 
erto, or that he was merely dreaming about 
it now. 

This phenomenon, in the various shapes 
which it assumed, indicated no external 
change, but so sudden and important a 
change in the spectator of the familiar 
scene, that the intervening space of a sin- 
gle day had operated on his consciousness 
like the lapse of years. The minister's 
own will, and Hester's will, and the fate 
that grew between them, had wrought this 
transformation. It was the same town as 
heretofore ; but the same minister returned 
not from the forest. He might have said 
to the friends who greeted him, — ** I am 
not the man for whom you take me ! I left 
him yonder in the forest, withdrawn into ^ 



388 The Scarlet Letter 

secret dell, by a mossy tree-trunk, and near 
a melancholy brook ! Go, seek your minis- 
ter, and see if his emaciated figure, his thin 
cheek, his white, heavy, pain-wrinkled brow, 
be not flung down there like a cast-off gar- 
ment ! " His friends, no doubt, would still 
have insisted with him, — " Thou art thy- 
self the man ! " — but the error would have 
been their own, not his. 

Before Mr. Dimmesdale reached home, 
his inner man gave him other evidences 
of a revolution in the sphere of thought 
and feeling. In truth, nothing short of a 
total change of dynasty and moral code, in 
that interior kingdom, was adequate to 
account for the impulses now communi- 
cated to the unfortunate and startled min- 
ister. At every step he was incited to do 
some strange, wild, wicked thing or other, 
with a sense that it would be at once invol- 
untary and intentional ; in spite of him- 
self, yet growing out of a profounder self 
than that which opposed the impulse. For 
Instance, he met one of his own deacons. 
The good old man addressed him with the 
paternal affection and patriarchal privilege, 
which his venerable age, his upright and 
holy character, and his station in the 
Church, entitled him to use; and, coi\- 



The Minister in a Maze 389 

joined with this, the deep, almost worship- 
ping respect, which the minister's profes- 
sional and private claims alike demanded. 
Never was there a more beautiful example 
of how the majesty of age and wisdom may 
comport with the obeisance and respect 




enjoined upon it, as from a lower social 
rank and inferior order of endowment, 
towards a higher. Now, during a conver- 
sation of some two or three moments be- 
tween the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale and 
this excellent and hoary-bearded deacon, it 



390 The Scarlet Letter 

was only by the most careful self-control 
that the former could refrain from uttering 
certain blasphemous suggestions that rose 
into his mind, respecting the communion- 
supper. He absolutely trembled and turned 
pale as ashes, lest his tongue should wag 
itself, in utterance of these horrible mat- 
ters, and plead his own consent for so 
doing, without his having fairly given it/ 
And, even with this terror in his heart, he 
could hardly avoid laughing to imagine 
how the sanctified old patriarchal deacon 
would have been petrified by his minister's 
impiety ! 

Again, another incident of the same 
nature. Hurrying along the street, the 
Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale encountered 
the eldest female member of his church ; a 
most pious and exemplary old dame ; poor, 
widowed, lonely, and with a heart as full of 
reminiscences about her dead husband 
and children, and her dead friends of long 
ago, as a burial-ground is full of storied 
grave-stones. Yet all this, which would 
else have been such heavy sorrow, was 
made almost a solemn joy to her devout 
old soul by religious consolations and the 
truths of Scripture, wherewith she had fed 
herself continually for more than thirty 



The Minister in a Maze 391 

years. And, since Mr. Dimmesdale had 
taken her in charge, the good grandam's 
chief earthly comfort — which, unless it 
had been likewise a heavenly comfort, 
could have been none at all — was to meet 
her pastor, whether casually, or of set pur- 
pose, and be refreshed with a word of 
warm, fragrant, heaven-breathing Gospel 
truth from his beloved lips into her dulled, 
but rapturously attentive ear. But, on this 
occasion, up to the moment of putting his 
lips to the old woman's ear, Mr. Dimmes- 
dale, as the great enemy of souls would 
have it, could recall no text of Scripture, 
nor aught else, except a brief, pithy, and, 
as it then appeared to him, unanswerable 
argument against the immortality of the 
human soul. The instilment thereof into 
her mind would probably have caused this 
aged sister to drop down dead, at once, as 
by the effect of an intensely poisonous 
infusion. What he really did whisper, the 
minister could never afterwards recollect. 
There was, perhaps, a fortunate disorder 
in his utterance, which failed to impart 
any distinct idea to the good widow's 
comprehension, or which Providence inter- 
preted after a method of its own. Assur- 
edly, as the minister looked back, he be- 



392 The Scarlet Letter 

held an expression of divine gratitude and 
ecstasy that seemed like the shine of the 
celestial city on her face, so wrinkled and 
ashy pale. * 

Again, a third instance. After parting 
from the old church-member, he met the 
youngest sister of them all. It was a 
maiden newly won — and won by the Rev- 
erend Mr. Dimmesdale's own sermon, on 
the Sabbath after his vigil — to bart'er the 
transitory pleasures of the world for the 
heavenly hope, that was to assume brighter 
substance as life grew dark around her, 
and which would gild the utter gloom with 
final glory. She was fair and pure as a 
lily that had bloomed in Paradise. The 
minister knew well that he was himself 
enshrined within the stainless sanctity of 
her heart, which hung its snowy curtains 
about his image, imparting to religion the 
warmth of love, and to love a religious 
purity. Satan, that afternoon, had surely 
led the poor young girl away from her 
mother's side, and thrown her into the 
pathway of this sorely tempted, or — shall 
we not rather say } — this lost and desper- 
ate man. As she drew nigh, the arch- 
fiend whispered him to condense into small 
compass and drop into her tender bosom a 



The Minister in a Maze 393 

germ of evil that would be sure to blossom 
darkly soon, and bear black fruit betimes. 
Such was his sense of power over this vir- 
gin soul, trusting him as she did, that the 
minister felt potent to blight all the field 
of innocence with but one wicked look, 
and develop all its opposite with but a 
word. So — with a mightier struggle than 
he had yet sustained — he held his Geneva 
cloak before his face, and hurried onward, 
making no sign of recognition, and leaving 
the young sister to digest his rudeness as 
she might. She ransacked her fconscience, 

— which was full of harmless little mat- 
ters, like her pocket or her work-bag, — 
and took herself to task, poor thing, for 
a thousand imaginary faults ; and went 
about her household duties with swollen 
eyelids the next morning. 

Before the minister had time to cele- 
brate his victory over this last temptation, 
he was conscious of another impulse, more 
ludicrous, and almost as horrible. It was, 

— we blush to tell it, — it was to stop 
short in the road, and teach some very 
wicked words to a knot of little Puritan 
children who were playing there, and had but 
just begun to talk. Denying himself this 
freak, as unworthy of his cloth, he met a 



394 "^fi^ Scarlet Letter 

drunken seaman, one of the ship's crew 
from the Spanish Main. And, here, since 
he had so valiantly forborne all other wick- 
edness, poor Mr. Dimmesdale longed, at 
least, to shake hands with the tarry black- 
guard, and recreate himself with a few 
improper jests, such as dissolute sailors 
so abound with, and a volley of good, 
round, solid, satisfac- 
tory, and heaven-defy- 
ing oaths ! It was 
not so much a better 
principle, as partly bis 
natural good taste, 
and St ill more his buck- 
M''^'l ramed habit of clerical 
k£^^ decorum, that carried 
him safely through 
the latter crisis. 
" What is it that haunts and tempts me 
thus?" cried the minister to himself, at 
length, pausing in the street, and striking 
his hand against his forehead. "Am I 
mad .' or am I given over utterly to the 
fiend ? Did I make a contract with him in 
the forest, and sign it with my blood? 
And does he now summon me to its fulfil- 
ment, by suggesting the performance of 
every wickedness which his most foul 
imagination can conceive? " 




The Minister in a Maze 395 

At the moment when the Reverend Mr. 
Dimmesdale thus communed with himself, 
and struck his forehead with his hand, old 
Mistress Hibbins, the reputed witch-lady, 
is said to have been passing by. She 
made a very grand appearance ; having on 
a high head-dress, a rich gown of velvet, 
and a ruff done up with the famous yellow 
starch, of which Ann Turner, her especial 
friend, had taught her the secret, before 
this last good lady had been hanged for Sir 
Thomas Overbury's murder. Whether 
the witch had read the minister's thoughts, 
or no, she came to a full stop, looked 
shrewdly into his face, smiled craftily, and 
— though little given to converse with 
clergymen — began a conversation. 

" So, reverend Sir, you have made a 
visit into the forest," observed the witch- 
lady, nodding her high head-dress at him. 
" The next time, I pray you to allow me 
only a fair warning, and I shall be proud 
to bear you company. Without taking 
overmuch upon myself, my good word will 
go far towards gaining any strange gentle- 
man a fair reception from yonder potentate 
you wot of ! " 

"I profess, Madam," answered the 
clergyman, with a grave obeisance, such as 



39^ The Scarlet Letter 

the lady's rank demanded, and his own 
good-breeding made imperative, — "I pro- 
fess, on my conscience and character, that 
I am utterly bewildered as touching the 
purport of your words ! I went not into 
the forest to seek a potentate ; neither do 
I, at any future time, design a visit thither, 
with a view to gaining the favour of such 
personage. My one sufficient object was to 
greet that pious friend of mine, the Apostle 
Eliot, and rejoice with him over the many 
precious souls he hath won from heathen- 
dom ! " 

*'Ha, ha, ha!" cackled the old witch- 
lady, still nodding her high head-dress at 
the minister. "Well, well, we must needs 
talk thus in the daytime ! You carry it off 
like an old hand \ But at midnight, and in 
the forest, we shall have other talk to- 
gether ! " 

She passed on with her aged stateliness, 
but often turning back her head and smil- 
ing at him, like one willing to recognise a 
secret intimacy of connection. 

" Have I then sold myself," thought the 
minister, " to the fiend whom, if men say 
true, this yellow-starched and velveted old 
hag has chosen for her prince and master! " 

The wretched minister ! He had made 



The Minister in a Maze 397 

a bargain very like it ! Tempted by a 
dream of happiness, he had yielded him- 
self with deliberate choice, as he had never 
done before, to what he knew was deadly 
sin. And the infectious poison of that sin 
had been thus rapidly diffused throughout 
his moral system. It had stupefied all 
blessed impulses, and awakened into vivid 
life the whole brotherhood of bad ones. 
Scorn, bitterness, unprovoked malignity, 
gratuitous desire of ill, ridicule of what- 
ever was good and holy, all awoke, to 
tempt, even while they frightened him. 
And his encounter with old Mistress Hib- 
bins, if it were a real incident, did but 
show his sympathy and, fellowship with 
wicked mortals and the world of perverted 
spirits. 

He had by this time reached his dwell- 
ing, on the (ti\^^^ of the burial-ground, and, 
hastening up the stairs, took refuge in his 
study. The minister was glad to have 
reached this shelter, without first betray- 
ing himself to the world by any of those 
strange and wicked eccentricities to which 
he had been continually impelled while 
passing through the streets. He entered 
the accustomed room, and looked around 
him on its books, its windows, its fireplace, 



398 The Scarlet Letter 

and the tapestried comfort of the walls, 
with the same perception of strangeness 
that had haunted him throughout his walk 
from the forest-dell into the town, and 
thitherward. Here he had studied and 
written ; here, gone through fast and vigil^ 
and come forth half alive ; here, striven 
to pray ; here, borne a hundred thousand 
agonies ! There was the Bible, in its rich 
old Hebrew, with Moses and the Prophets 
speaking to him, and God's voice through 
all ! There, on the table, with the inky 
pen beside it, was an unfinished sermon, 
with a sentence broken in the midst, where 
his thoughts had ceased to gush out upon 
the page two days before. He knew that 
it was himself, the thin and white-cheeked 
minister, who had done and suffered these 
things, and written thus far into the Elec- 
tion Sermon ! But he seemed to stand 
apart, and eye this former self with scorn- 
ful, pitying, but half -envious curiosity. 
That self was gone ! Another man had 
returned out of the forest ; a wiser one ; 
with a knowledge of hidden mysteries 
which the simplicity of the former never 
could have reached. A bitter kind of 
knowledge that ! 

While occupied with these reflections, 



The Minister in a Maze 399 

a knock came at the door of the study, and 
the minister said, " Come in ! " — not 
wholly devoid of an idea that he might 
behold an evil spirit. And so he did ! It 
was old Roger Chillingworth that entered. 
The minister stood, white and speechless, 
with one hand on the Hebrew Scriptures, 
and the other spread upon his breast. 

"Welcome home, reverend Sir!" said 
the physician. " And how found you that 
godly man, the Apostle Eliot } But me- 
thinks, dear Sir, you look pale ; as if the 
travel through the wilderness had been too 
sore for you. Will not my aid be requisite 
to put you in heart and strength to preach 
your Election Sermon } " 

"Nay, I think not so," rejoined the 
Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale. ** My jour- 
ney, and the sight of the holy Apostle 
yonder, and the free air which I have 
breathed, have done me good, after so 
long confinement in my study. I think 
to need no more of your drugs, my kind 
physician, good though they be, and admin- 
istered by a friendly hand." 

All this time, Roger Chillingworth was 
looking at the minister with the grave and 
intent regard of a physician towards his 
patient. But, in spite of this outward 



400 The Scarlet Letter 

show, the latter was almost convinced of 
the old man's knowledge, or, at least, his 
confident suspicion, with respect to his 
own interview with Hester Prynne. The 
physician knew, then, that, in the minis- 
ter's regard, he was no longer a trusted 
friend, but his bitterest enemy. So much 
being known, it would appear natural that 
a part of it should be expressed. It is sin- 
gular, however, how long a time often 
passes before words embody things ; and 
with what security two persons, who 
choose to avoid a certain subject, may 
approach its very verge, and retire without 
disturbing it. Thus, the minister felt no 
apprehension that Roger Chillingworth 
would touch, in express words, upon the 
real position which they sustained towards 
one another. Yet did the physician, in 
his dark way, creep frightfully near the 
secret. 

"Were it not better,'* said he, "that you 
use my poor skill to-night } Verily, dear 
Sir, we must take pains to make you 
strong and vigorous for this occasion of 
the Election discourse. The people look 
for great things from you ; apprehending 
that another year may come about, and 
find their pastor gone." 



The Minister in a Maze 401 

"Yea, to another world," replied the 
minister, with pious resignation. ** Heaven 
grant it be a better one ; for, in good sooth, 
I hardly think to tarry with my flock 
through the flitting seasons of another 
year ! But, touching your medicine, kind 
Sir, in my present frame of body I need 
it not." 

"I joy to hear it," answered the physi- 
cian. ** It may be that my remedies, so 
Ibng administered in vain, begin now to 
take due effect. Happy man were I, and 
well deserving of New England's grati- 
tude, cduld I achieve this cure ! " 

"I thank you from my heart, most 
watchful friend," said the Reverend Mr. 
Dimmesdale, with a solemn smile. "I 
thank you, and can but requite your good 
deeds with my prayers." 

" A good man's prayers are golden rec- 
ompense!" rejoined old Roger Chilling- 
worth, as he took his leave. " Yea, they 
are the current gold coin of the New Jeru- 
salem, with the King's own mint-mark on 
them ! " 

Left alone, the minister summoned a 
servant of the house, and requested food, 
which, being set before him, he ate with 
ravenous appetite. Then, flinging the 



402 The Scarlet Letter 

already written pages of the Election Ser- 
mon into the fire, he forthwith began 
another, which he wrote with such an 
impulsive flow of thought and emotion, 
that he fancied himself inspired ; and only 
wondered that Heaven should see fit to 
transmit the grand and solemn music of 
its oracles through so foul an organ-pipe 
as he. However, leaving that mystery to 
solve itself, or go unsolved for ever, he 
drove his task onward, with earnest haste 
and ecstasy. Thus the night fled away, 
as if it were a winged steed, and he career- 
ing on it ; morning came, and peeped blush- 
ing through the curtains ; and at last sun- 
rise threw a golden beam into the study, 
and laid it right across the minister's bedaz- 
zled eyes. There he was, with the pen still 
between his fingers, and a vast, immeasur- 
able tract of written space behind him ! 



THE NEW ENGLAND HOLIDAY 

BETIMES in the morning of the day 
on which the new Governor was to 
receive his office at the hands of the 
people, Hester Prynne and little Pearl 
came into the market-place. It was al- 
ready thronged with the 
craftsmen and other ple- 
beian inhabitants of the 
town, in considerable num- 
bers; among whom, like- 
wise, were many rough 
figures, whose attire of 
deer-skins marked them as 
belonging to some of the 
forest settlements, which 
surrounded the little metropolis of the 
colony. 

On this public holiday, as on all other 
occasions, for seven years past, Hester 
was clad in a garment of coarse grey 
cloth. Not more by its hue than by some 
indescribable peculiarity in its fashion, it 




404 



The Scarlet Letter 



had the effect of making her fade person- 
ally out of sight and outline ; while, again, 
the scarlet letter brought her back from 
this twilight indistinctness, and revealed 
her under the mora! aspect of its own illu- 
mination. Her face, so long familiar to 
the townspeople, showed the marble 
quietude which they were accustomed to 
behold there. It was like a mask ; or 
rather, like the frozen 
calmness of a dead 
woman's features ; 
owing this dreary re- 
semblance to the fact 
that Hester was actu- 
ally dead, in respect to 
any claim of sympathy, 
and had departed out 
of the world with which she still seemed 
to mingle. 

It might be, on this one day, that there 
was an expression unseen before, nor, in- 
deed, vivid enough to be detected now ; 
unless some p ret ern at u rally gifted observer 
should have first read the heart, and have 
afterwards sought a corresponding develop- 
ment in the countenance and mien. Such 
a spiritual seer might have conceived, that, 
after sustaining the gaze of the multitude 




The New England Holiday 405 

through seven miserable years as a neces- 
sity, a penance, and something which it 
was a stern religion to endure, she now, 
for one last time more, encountered it 
freely and voluntarily, in order to convert 
what had so long been agony into a kind 
of triumph. " Look your last on the scar- 
let letter and its wearer!'* — the people's 
victim and life-long bond-slave, as they 
fancied her, might say to them. " Yet a 
little while, and she will be beyond your 
reach ! A few hours longer, and the deep, 
mysterious ocean will quench and hide for 
ever the symbol which ye have caused to 
burn upon her bosom ! '* Nor were it an 
inconsistency too improbable to be assigned 
to human nature, should we suppose a feel- 
ing of regret in Hester's mind, at the mo- 
ment when she was about to win her free- 
dom from the pain which had been thus 
deeply incorporated with her being. Might 
there not be an irresistible desire to quaff 
a last, long, breathless draught of the cup 
of wormwood and aloes, with which nearly 
all her years of womanhood had been per- 
petually flavoured ? The wine of life, 
henceforth to be presented to her lips, 
must be indeed rich, delicious, and exhil- 
arating, in its chased and golden beaker ; 



4o6 The Scarlet Letter 

or else leave an inevitable and weary lan- 
guor, after the lees ot bitterness where- 
with she had been drugged, as with a cor- 
dial of intensest potency. 

Pearl was decked out with airy gayety. 
It would have been impossible to guess 
that this bright and sunny apparition owed 
its existence to the shape of gloomy grey ; 
or that a fancy, at once so gorgeous and so 
delicate as must have been requisite to 
contrive the child's apparel, was the same 
that had achieved a task perhaps more dif- 
ficult, in imparting so distinct a peculiarity 
to Hester's simple robe. The dress, so 
proper was it to little Pearl, seemed an 
effluence, or inevitable development and 
outward manifestation of her character, no 
more to be separated from her than the 
many-hued brilliancy from a butterfly's 
wing, or the painted glory from the leaf of 
a bright flower. As with these, so with 
the child ; her garb was all of one idea 
with her nature. On this eventful day, 
moreover, there was a certain singular 
inquietude and excitement in her mood, 
resembling nothing so much as the shim- 
mer of a diamond, that sparkles and flashes 
with the varied throbbings of the breast 
on which it is displayed. Children have 



The New England Holiday 407 

always a sympathy in the agitations of 
those connected with them ; always, es- 
pecially, a sense of any trouble or impend- 
ing revolution, of whatever kind, in domes- 
tic circumstances ; and therefore Pearl, 
who was the gem on her mother's unquiet 
bosom, betrayed, by the very dance of her 
spirits, the emotions which none could 
detect in the marble passiveness of Hes- 
ter's brow. 

This effervescence made her flit with a 
bird-like movement, rather than walk by 
her mother's side. She broke continually 
into shouts of a wild, inarticulate, and 
sometimes piercing music. When they 
reached the market-place, she became still 
more restless, on perceiving the stir and 
bustle that enlivened the spot ; for it was 
usually more like the broad and lonesome 
green before a village meeting-house, than 
the centre of a town's business. 

" Why, what is this, mother } " cried 
she. " Wherefore have all the people left 
their work to-day } Is it a play-day for 
the whole world } See, there is the black- 
smith ! He has washed his sooty face, and 
put on his Sabbath-day clothes, and looks 
as if he would gladly be merry, if any kind 
body would only teach him how ! And 



4o8 



The Scarlet Letteif 



there is Master Brackett, the old jailer, 
nodding and smiling at me. Why does he 
do so, mother?" 

" He remembers thee a little babe, my 
child," answered Hester. 

"He should not nod and smile at me, 
for all that, — the black, grim, ugly-eyed 
old man! "said Pearl. "He may nod at 
thee if he will ; for thou art clad in grey. 



.Ti%«-^-ir^-^ 



and wearest the scarlet letter. But see, 
mother, how many faces of strange peo- 
ple, and Indians among them, and sailors ! 
What have they all come to do here in the 
market-place .' " 

" They wait to see the procession [ass," 
said Hester. " For the Governor and the 
magistrates are to go by, and the min- 
isters, and all the great people and good 
people, with the music, and the soldiers 
marching before them." 



The New England Holiday 409 

"And will the minister be there?'* 
asked Pearl. " And will he hold out both 
his hands to me, as when thou ledst me to 
him from the brook-side ? " 

" He will be there, child," answered her 
mother. " But he will not greet thee 
to-day ; nor must thou greet him.** 

" What a strange, sad man is he ! '* said 
the child, as if speaking partly to herself. 
"In the dark night-time he calls us to 
him, and holds thy hand and mine, as 
when we stood with him on the scaffold 
yonder! And in the deep forest, where 
only the old trees can hear, and the strip 
of sky see it, he talks with thee, sitting 
on a heap of moss ! And he kisses my 
forehead, too, so that the little brook would 
hardly wash it off ! But here in the sunny 
day, and among all the people, he knows 
us not ; nor must we know him ! A 
strange, sad man is he, with his hand 
always over his heart ! '* 

" Be quiet, Pearl ! Thou understandest 
not these things,** said her mother. 
" Think not now of the minister, but 
look about thee, and see how cheery is 
every body's face to-day. The children 
have come from their schools, and the 
grown people from their workshops and 



4IO The Scarlet Letter 

their fields, on purpose to be happy. For, 
to-day, a new man is beginning to rule over 
them ; and so — as has been the custom 
of mankind ever since a nation was first 
gathered — they make merry and rejoice ; 
as if a good and golden year were at length 
to pass over the poor old world ! " 

It was as Hester said, in regard to the 
unwonted jollity that brightened the faces 
of the people. Into this festal season of 
the year — as it already was, and continued 
to be during the greater part of two cen- 
turies — the Puritans compressed what- 
ever mirth and public joy they deemed 
allowable to human infirmity; thereby so 
far dispelling the customary cloud, that, 
for the space of a single holiday, they 
appeared scarcely more grave than most 
other communities at a period of general 
affliction. 

But we perhaps exaggerate the grey or 
sable tinge, which undoubtedly character- 
ised the mood and manners of the age. 
The persons now in the market-place of 
Boston had not been born to an inherit- 
ance of Puritanic gloom. They were 
native Englishmen, whose fathers had 
lived in the sunny richness of the Eliza- 
bethan epoch ; a time when the life of 



The New England Holiday 411 

England, viewed as one great mass, would 
appear to have been as stately, magnificent, 
and joyous, as the world has ever wit- 
nessed. Had they followed their heredi- 
tary taste, the New England settlers would 
have illustrated all events of public im- 
portance by bonfires, banquets, pagean- 
tries, and processions. Nor would it have 
been impracticable, in the observance of 
majestic ceremonies, to combine mirthful 
recreation with solemnity, and give, as it 
were, a grotesque and brilliant embroidery 
to the great robe of state, which a nation, 
at such festivals, puts on. There was 
some shadow of an attempt of this kind 
in the mode of celebrating the day on 
which the political year of the colony 
commenced. The dim reflection of a re- 
membered splendour, a colourless and 
manifold diluted repetition of what they 
had beheld in proud old London, — we 
will not say at a royal coronation, but at 
a Lord Mayor's show, — might be traced 
in the customs which our forefathers in- 
stituted, with reference to the annual in- 
stallation of magistrates. The fathers and 
founders of the commonwealth — the states- 
man, the priest, and the soldier — deemed 
it a duty then to assume the outward state 



412 The Scarlet Letter 

and majesty, which, in accordance with 
antique style, was looked upon as the 
proper garb of public or social eminence. 
All came forth, to move in procession be- 
fore the people's eye, and thus impart a 
needed dignity to the simple framework 
of a government so newly constructed. 

Then, too, the people were counte- 
nanced, if not encouraged, in relaxing the 
severe and close application to their vari- 
ous modes of rugged industry, which, at 
all other times, seemed of the same piece 
and material with their religion. Here, it 
is true, were none of the appliances which 
popular merriment would so readily have 
found in the England of Elizabeth's time, 
or that of James ; — no rude shows of a 
theatrical kind ; no minstrel with his harp 
and legendary ballad, nor gleeman, with an 
ape dancing to his music ; no juggler, with 
his tricks of mimic witchcraft ; no Merry 
Andrew, to stir up the multitude with jests, 
perhaps hundreds of years old, but still 
effective, by their appeals to the very 
broadest sources of mirthful sympathy. 
All such professors of the several branches 
of jocularity would have been sternly re- 
pressed, not only by the rigid discipline of 
law, but by the general sentiment which 



The Neiu England Holiday 413 

gives law its vitality. • Not the less, how- 
ever, the great, honest face of the people 
smiled, grimly, perhaps, but widely too. 
Nor were sports wanting, such as the 
colonists had witnessed, and shared in, 
long ago, at the country fairs and on the 
village-greens of England ; and which it was 
thought well to keep alive on this new 
soil, for the sake of the courage and man- 
liness that were essential in them. Wres- 
tling-matches, in the differing fashions of 
Cornwall and Devonshire, were seen here 
and there about the market-place ; in one 
corner, there was a friendly bout at quar- 
terstaff ; and — what attracted most inter- 
est of all — on the platform of the pillory, 
already so noted in our pages, two masters 
of defence were commencing an exhibition 
with the buckler and broadsword. But, 
much to the disappointment of the crowd, 
this latter business was broken off by the 
interposition of the town beadle, who had 
no idea of permitting the majesty of the 
law to be violated by such an abuse of one 
of its consecrated places. 

It may not be too much to affirm, on the 
whole, (the people being then in the first 
stages of joyless deportment, and the off- 
spring of sires who had known how to be 



414 



The Scarlet Letter 



merry, in their day,) that they would com- 
pare favourably, in point of holiday keeping, 
with their descendants, even at so long an 
interval as ourselves. Their immediate 
posterity, the generation next to the early 
emigrants, wore the blackest shade of Puri- 
tanism, and so darkened the national visage 
with it, that all the subsequent years have 
not sufficed to clear it up. We have yet 
to learn again the for^^otten art of gayety. 




The picture of human life in the market- 
place, though its general tint was the sad 
{^rey, brown, or black of the English emi- 
grants, was yet enlivened by some diversity 
of hue. A party of Indians — in their 
savage finery of curiously embroidered 
deer-skin robes, wampum-belts, red and 
yellow ochre, and feathers, and armed with 
the bow and arrow and stone-headed spear 
— stood apart, with countenances of inflex- 



The New England Holiday 415 

ible gravity, beyond what even the Puritan 
aspect could attain. Nor, wild as were 
these painted barbarians, were they the 
wildest feature of the scene. This distinc- 
tion could more justly be claimed by some 
mariners, — a part of the crew of the ves- 
sel from the Spanish Main, — who had 
come ashore to see the humours of Elec- 
tion Day. They were rough-looking des- 
peradoes, with sun-blackened faces, and 
an immensity of beard ; their wide, short 
trousers were confined about the waist by 
belts, often clasped with a rough plate of 
gold, and sustaining always a long knife, 
and, in some instances, a sword. From 
beneath their broad-brimmed hats of palm- 
leaf, gleamed eyes which, even in good 
nature and merriment, had a kind of 
animal ferocity. Th^y transgressed, with- 
out fear or scruple, the rules of behaviour 
that were binding on all others ; smoking 
tobacco under the beadle's very nose, 
although each whiff would have cost a 
townsman a shilling; and quaffing, at their 
pleasure, draughts of wine or aqua-vitae 
from pocket-flasks, which they freely ten- 
dered to the gaping crowd around them. 
It remarkably characterised the incom- 
plete morality of the age, rigid as we call 



c< 



4i6 The Scarlet Letter 

it, that a license was allowed the seafaring 
class, not merely for their freaks on shore, 
but for far more desperate deeds on their 
proper element. The sailor of that day 
would go near to be arraigned as a pirate 
in our own. There could be little doubt, 
for instance, that this very ship's crew, 
though no unfavourable specimens of the 
nautical brotherhood, had been guilty, as 




we should phrase it, of depredations on 
the Spanish commerce, such as would have 
perilled all their necks in a modern court 
of justice. 

But the sea, in those old times, heaved, 
swelled, and foamed very much at its own 
will, or subject only to the tempestuous 
wind, with hardly any attempts at regula- 
tion by human law. The buccaneer on the 



The New England Holiday 417 

wave might relinquish his calling, and be- 
come at once, if he chose, a man of 
probity and piety on land ; nor, even in 
the full career of his reckless life, was he 
regarded as a personage with whom it was 
disreputable to traffic, or casually associate. 
Thus, the Puritan elders, in their black 
cloaks, starched bands, and steeple-crowned 
hats, smiled not unbenignantly at the 
clamour and rude deportment of these 
jolly seafaring men ; and it excited neither 
surprise nor animadversion when so repu- 
table a citizen as old Roger Chillingworth, 
the physician, was seen to enter the market- 
place, in close and familiar talk with the 
commander of the questionable vessel. 

The latter was by far the most showy 
and gallant figure, so far as apparel went, 
anywhere to be seen among the multitude. 
He wore a profusion of ribbons on his gar- 
ment, and gold lace on his hat, which was 
also encircled by a gold chain, and sur- 
mounted with a feather. There was a 
sword at his side, and a sword-cut on his 
forehead, which, by the arrangement of 
his hair, he seemed anxious rather to dis- 
play than hide. A landsman could hardly 
have worn this garb and shown this face, 
and worn and shown them both with such 



41 8 The Scarlet Letter 

a galliard air, without undergoing stem 
question before a magistrate, and probably 
incurring fine or imprisonment, or perhaps 
an exhibition in the stocks. As regarded 
the shipmaster, however, all was looked 
upon as pertaining to the character, as to 
a fish his glistening scales. 
. After parting from the physician, the 
commander of the Bristol ship strolled 
idly through the market-place ; until, hap- 
pening to approach the spot where Hester 
Prynne was standing, he appeared to recog- 
nise, and did not hesitate to address her. 
As was usually the case wherever Hester 
stood, a small, vacant area — a sort of 
magic circle — had formed itself about her, 
into which, though the people were elbow- 
ing one another at a little distance, none 
ventured, or felt disposed to intrude. It 
was a forcible type of the moral solitude in 
which the scarlet letter enveloped its fated 
wearer ; partly by her own reserve, and 
partly by the instinctive, though no longer 
so unkindly, withdrawal of her fellow-creat- 
ures. Now, if never before, it answered 
a good purpose, by enabling Hester and 
the seaman to speak together without risk 
of being overheard ; and so changed was 
Hester Prynne's repute before the public. 



The New England Holiday 419 

that the matron in town most eminent for 
rigid morality could not have held such 
intercourse with less result of scandal than 
herself. 

"So, mistress," said the mariner,"! 
must bid the steward make ready one more 
berth than you bargained for ! No fear of 
scurvy or ship-fever, this voyage ! What 
with the ship's surgeon and this other 
doctor, our only danger will be from drug 
or pill ; more by token, as there is a lot of 
apothecary's stuff aboard, which I traded 
for with a Spanish vessel." 

"What mean you?'* inquired Hester, 
startled more than she permitted to ap- 
pear. " Have you another passenger } " 

"Why, know you not," cried the ship- 
master, "that this physician here — Chil- 
lingworth, he calls himself — is minded to 
try my cabin-fare with you } Ay, ay, you 
must have known it ; for he tells me he is 
of yoiy party, and a close friend to the 
gentleman you spoke of, — he that is in 
peril from these sour old Puritan rulers ! " 

"They know each other well, indeed," 
replied Hester, with a mien of calmness, 
though in the utmost consternation. 
"They have long dwelt together," 

Nothing further passed between the 



420 The Scarlet Letter 

mariner and Hester Prynne. But, at that 
instant, she beheld old Roger Chilling- 
worth himself, standing in the remotest 
corner of the market-place, and smiling on 
her ; a smile which — across the wide and 
bustling square, and through all the talk 
and laughter, and various thoughts, moods, 
and interests of the crowd — conveyed 
secret and fearful meaning. 



THE PROCESSION 

BEFORE Hester Pryane could call to- 
gether her thoughts, and consider 
what was practicable to be done in this 
new and startling as- 
pect of affairs, the sound 
of military music was 
heard approaching along 
a contiguous street. It 
denoted the advance of 
the procession of mag- 
istrates and citizens, on 
its way towards the 
meeting-house ; where, in 
compliance withacustom 
thus early established, 
and ever since observed, 
the Reverend Mr. Dim- 
mesdale was to deliver 
an Election Sermon. 

Soon the head of the 
procession showed it- 
self, with a slow and stately march, turii- 




422 The Scarlet Letter 

ing a corner, and making its way across 
the market-place. First came the music. 
It comprised a variety of instruments, per- 
haps imperfectly adapteJ to one another, 
and played with no great skill, but yet 
attaining the great object for which the 
harmony of drum and clarion addresses 
itself to the multitude, — that of imparting 
a higher and more heroic air to the scene 
of life that passes before the eye. Little 
Pearl at first clapped her hands, but then 
lost, for an instant, the restless agitation 
that had kept her in a continual efferves- 
cence throughout the morning ; she gazed 
silently, and seemed to be borne upward, 
like a floating sea-bird, on the long heaves 
and swells of sound. But she was brought 
back to her former mood by the shimmer 
of the sunshine on the weapons and bright 
armour of the military company, which fol- 
lowed after the music, and formed the hon- 
orary escort of the procession. This body 
of soldiery — which still sustains a corpo- 
rate existence, and marches down from past 
ages with an ancient and honourable fame 
— was composed of no mercenary materi- 
als. Its ranks were filled with gentlemen, 
who felt the stirrings of martial impulse, 
and sought to establish a kind of College 



The Procession 423 

of Arms, where, as in an association of 
Knights Templars, they might learn the 
science, and, so far as peaceful exercise 
would teach them, the practices of war. 
The high estimation then placed upon the 
military character might be seen in the 
lofty port of each individual member of 
the company. Some of them, indeed, by 
their services in the Low Countries and 
on other fields of European warfare, had 




fairly won their title to assume the name 
and pomp of soldiership. The entire array, 
moreover, clad in burnished steel, and with 
plumage nodding over their bright morions, 
had a brilliancy of effect which no modem 
display can aspire to equal. 

And yet the men of civil eminence, 
who came immediately behind the military 
escort, were better worth a thoughtful ob- 
server's eye. Even in outward demeanour 



424 The Scarlet Letter 

they showed a stamp of majesty that made 
the warrior's haughty stride look vulgar, if 
not absurd. It was an age when what we 
call talent had far less consideration than 
now, but the massive materials which pro- 
duce stability and dignity of character a 
great deal more. The people possessed, 
by hereditary right, the quality of rever- 
ence ; which, in their descendants, if it 
survive at all, exists in smaller proportion, 
and with a vastly diminished force in the 
selection and estimate of public men. The 
change may be for good or ill, and is partly, 
perhaps, for both. In that old day, the 
English settler on these rude shores, — 
having left king, nobles, and all degrees of 
awful rank behind, while still the faculty 
and necessity of reverence were strong in 
him, — bestowed it on the white hair and 
venerable brow of age ; on long-tried integ- 
rity ; on solid wisdom and sad-coloured 
experience ; on endowments of that grave 
and weighty order, which gives the idea of 
permanence, and comes under the general 
definition of respectability. These primi- 
tive statesmen, therefore, — Bradstreet, 
Endicott, Dudley, Bellingham, and their 
compeers, — who were elevated to power 
by the early choice of the people, seem to 



The Procession 425 

have been not often brilliant, but distin- 
guished by a ponderous sobriety, rather 
than activity of intellect. They had forti- 
tude and self-reliance, and, in time of diffi- 
culty or peril, stood up for the welfare of 
the state like a line of cliffs against a 
tempestuous tide. The traits of character 
here indicated were well represented in 
the square cast of countenance and large 
physical development of the new colonial 
magistrates. So far as a demeanour of nat- 
ural authority was concerned, the mother 
country need not have been ashamed to 
see these foremost men of an actual de- 
mocracy adopted into the house of Peers, 
or made the Privy Council of the sov- 
ereign. 

Next in order to the magistrates came 
the young and eminently distinguished 
divine, from whose lips the religious dis- 
course of the anniversary was expected. 
His was the profession, at that era, in 
which intellectual ability displayed itself 
far more than in political life ; for — leav- 
ing a higher motive out of the question — 
it offered inducements powerful enough, 
in the almost worshipping respect of the 
community, to win the most aspiring 
ambition into its service. Even political 



426 



The Scarlet Letter 



power — as in the case of Increase Mather 
— was within the grasp of a successful 
priest. 

It was the observation of those who 
beheld him now, that never, since Mr, 
Dimmesdale first set his foot on the New 
England shore, had hi.- exhibited such 




energy as was seen in the gait and air with 
which he kept his pace in the procession. 
There was no feebleness of step, as at 
other times ; his frame was not bent ; nor 
did his hand rest ominously upon his 
heart. Yet, if the clergyman were rightly 
viewed, his strength seemed not of the 



The Procession 427 

body. It might be spiritual, and imparted 
to him by angelic ministrations. It might 
be the exhilaration of that potent cordial, 
which is distilled only in the furnace-glow 
of earnest and long-continued thought. 
Or, perchance, his sensitive temperament 
was invigorated by the loud and piercing 
music, that swelled heavenward, and up- 
lifted him on its ascending wave. Never- 
theless, so abstracted was his look, it 
might be questioned whether Mr. Dimmes- 
dale even heard the music. There was 
his body, moving onward, and with an un- 
accustomed force. But where was his 
mind } Far and deep in its own region, 
busying itself, with preternatural activity, 
to marshal a procession of stately thoughts 
that were soon to issue thence ; and so he 
saw nothing, heard nothing, knew nothing, 
of what was around him ; but the spiritual 
element took up the feeble frame, and car- 
ried it along, unconscious of the burden, 
and converting it to spirit like itself. Men 
of uncommon intellect, who have grown 
morbid, possess this occasional power of 
mighty effort, into which they throw the 
life of many days, and then are lifeless for 
as many more. 

Hester Prynne, gazing steadfastly at the 



428 The Scarlet Letter 

clergyman, felt a dreary influence come 
over her, but wherefore or whence she 
knew not ; unless that he seemed so re- 
mote from her own sphere, and utterly 
beyond her reach. One glance of recog- 
nition, she had imagined, must needs pass 
between them. She thought of the dim 
forest, with its little dell of solitude, and 
love, and anguish, and the mossy tree- 
trunk, where, sitting hand in hand, they 
had mingled their sad and passionate talk 
with the melancholy murmur of the brook. 
• How deeply had they known each other 
then ! And was this the man ? She 
hardly knew him now ! He, moving 
proudly past, enveloped, as it were, in the 
rich music, with the procession of majestic 
and venerable fathers ; he, so unattainable 
in his worldly position, and still more so 
in that far vista of his un sympathising 
thoughts, through which she now beheld 
him ! Her spirit sank with the idea that 
all must have been a delusion, and that, 
vividly as she had dreamed it, there could 
be no real bond betwixt the clergyman and 
herself. And thus much of woman was 
there in Hester, that she could scarcely 
forgive him, — least of all now, when the 
heavy footstep of their approaching Fate 



The Procession 429 

might be heard, nearer, nearer, nearer ! — 
for being able so completely to withdraw 
himself from their mutual world ; while 
she groped darkly, and stretched forth her 
cold hands, and found him not. 

Pearl either saw and responded to her 
mother's feelings, or herself felt the re- 
moteness and intangibility that had fallen 
around the minister. While the proces- 
sion passed, the child was uneasy, fluttering 
up and down, like a bird on the point of 
taking flight. When the whole had gone 
by, she looked up into Hester's face. 

" Mother," said she, " was that the same 
minister that kissed me by the brook } " 

"Hold thy peace, dear little Pearl!" 
whispered her mother. "We must not 
always talk in the market-place of what 
happens to us in the forest." 

" I could not be sure that it was he ; so 
strange he looked," continued the child. 
" Else I would have run to him, and bid 
him kiss me now, before all the people ; 
even as he did yonder among the dark old 
trees. What would the minister have 
said, mother } Would he have clapped his 
hand over his heart, and scowled on me, 
and bid me begone } " 

" What should he say, Pearl," answered 



430 The Scarlet Letter 

Hester, " save that it was no time to kiss, 
and that kisses are not to be given in the 
market-place ? Well for thee, foolish child, 
that thou didst not speak to him ! " 

Another shade of the same sentiment, in 
reference to Mr. Dimmesdale, was ex- 
pressed by a person whose eccentricities — 
or insanity, as we should term it — led her 
to do what few of the townspeople would 
have ventured on ; to begin a conversation 
with the wearer of the scarlet letter, in 
public. It was Mistress Hibbins, who, 
arrayed in great magnificence, with a triple 
ruff, a broidered stomacher, a gown of rich 
velvet, and a gold-headed cane, had come 
forth to see the procession. As this 
ancient lady had the renown (which sub- 
sequently cost her no less a price than her 
life) of being a principal actor in all the 
works of necromancy that were continually 
going forward, the crowd gave way before 
her, and seemed to fear the touch of her 
garments, as if it carried the plague among 
its gorgeous folds. Seen in conjunction 
with Hester Prynne, — kindly as so many 
now felt towards the latter, — the dread 
inspired by Mistress Hibbins was doubled, 
and caused a general movement from that 
part of the market-place in which the two 
women stood. 



The Procession 431 

"Now, what mortal imagination could 
conceive it ! " whispered the old lady con- 
fidentially to Hester. " Yonder divine 
man ! That saint on earth, as the people 
uphold him to be, and as — I must needs 
say — he really looks ! Who, now, that 
saw him pass in the procession, would 
think how little while it is since he 
went forth out of his study, — chewing a 
Hebrew text of Scripture in his mouth, I 
warrant, — to take an airing in the forest ! 
Aha ! we know what that means, Hester 
Prynne ! But, truly, forsooth, I find it 
hard to believe him the same man. Many 
a church-member saw I, walking behind 
the music, that has danced in the same 
measure with me, when Somebody was 
fiddler, and, it might be, an Indian powwow 
or a Lapland wizard changing hands with 
us ! That is but a trifle, when a woman 
knows the world. But this minister ! 
Couldst thou surely tell, Hester, whether 
he was the same man that encountered 
thee on the forest-path ! " 

"Madam, I know not of what you 
speak," answered Hester Prynne, feeling 
Mistress Hibbins to be of infirm mind ; 
yet strangely startled and awe-stricken by 
the confidence with which she affirmed 



432 The Scarlet Letter 

a personal connection between so many 
persons (herself among them) and the Evil 
One. " It is not for me to talk lightly of 
a learned and pious minister of the Word, 
like the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale 1 " 

"Fie, woman, fie!" cried the old lady, 
shaking her finger at Hester. " Dost thou 




think I have been to the forest so many 
times, and have yet no skill to judge who 
else has been there .* Yea ; though no 
leaf of the wild garlands, which they wore 
while they danced, be left in their hair I I 
know thee, Hester ; for I behold the token. 
We may all see it in the sunshine ; and it 
glows like a red flame in the dark. Thou 



The Procession 433 

wearest it openly ; so there need be no 
question about that. But this minister! 
Let me tell thee in thine ear ! When the 
Black Man sees one of his own servants, 
signed and sealed, so shy of owning to the 
bond as is the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale, 
he hath a way of ordering matters so that 
the mark shall be disclosed in open day- 
light to the eyes of all the world ! What 
is it that the minister seeks to hide, with 
his hand always over his heart ? Ha, Hes- 
ter Prynne ! " 

** What is it, good Mistress Hibbins ? '* 
eagerly asked little Pearl. "Hast thou 
seen it .^" 

"No matter, darling!" responded Mis- 
tress Hibbins, making Pearl a profound 
reverence. " Thou thyself wilt see it, one 
time or another. They say, child, thou 
art of the lineage of the Prince of the Air ! 
Wilt thou ride with me, some fine night, 
to see thy father } Then thou shalt know 
wherefore the minister keeps his hand over 
his heart ! " 

Laughing so shrilly that all the market- 
place could hear her, the weird old gentle- 
woman took her departure. 

By this time the preliminary prayer had 
been offered in the meeting-house, and the 



434 ^^^^ Scarlet Letter 

accents of the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale 
were heard commencing his discourse. An 
irresistible feeling kept Hester near the 
spot. As the sacred edifice was too much 
thronged to admit another auditor, she 
took up her position close beside the scaf- 
fold of the pillory. It was in sufficient 
proximity to bring the whole sermon to 
her ears, in the shape of an indistinct, but 
varied, murmur and flow of the minister's 
very peculiar voice. 

This vocal organ was in itself a rich en- 
dowment ; insomuch that a listener, com- 
prehending nothing of the language in 
which the preacher spoke, might still have 
been swayed to and fro by the mere tone 
and cadence. Like all other music, it 
breathed passion and pathos, and emotions 
high or tender, in a tongue native to the 
human heart, wherever educated. Muffled 
as the sound was by its passage through 
the church-walls, Hester Prynne listened 
with such intentness, and sympathised so 
intimately, that the sermon had throughout 
a meaning for her, entirely apart from its 
indistinguishable words. These, perhaps, 
if more distinctly heard, might have been 
only a grosser medium, and have clogged 
the spiritual sense. Now she caught the 



The Procession 435 

low undertone, as of the wind sinking 
down to repose itself ; then ascended with 
it, as it rose through progressive gradations 
of sweetness and power, until its volume 
seemed to envelop her with an atmosphere 
of awe and solemn grandeur. And yet, 
majestic as the voice sometimes became, 
there was for ever in it an essential char- 
acter of plaintiveness. A loud or low ex- 
pression of anguish, — the whisper, or the 
shriek, as it might be conceived, of suffer- 
ing humanity, that touched a sensibility in 
every bosom ! At times this deep strain 
of pathos was all that could be heard, and 
scarcely heard, sighing amid a desolate 
silence. But even when the minister's 
voice grew high and commanding, — when 
it gushed irrepressibly upward, — when it 
assumed its utmost breadth and power, so 
overfilling the church as to burst its way 
through the solid walls, and diffuse itself in 
the open air, — still, if the auditor listened 
intently, and for the purpose, he could de- 
tect the same cry of pain. What was it } 
The complaint of a human heart, sorrow- 
laden, perchance guilty, telling its secret, 
whether of guilt or sorrow, to the great 
heart of mankind ; beseeching its sym- 
pathy or forgiveness, — at every moment. 



436 The Scarlet Letter 

— in each accent, — and never in vain ! 
It was this profound and continual under- 
tone that gave the clergyman his most ap- 
propriate power. 

During all this time Hester stood, statue- 
like, at the foot of the scaffold. If the 
minister's voice had not kept her there, 
there would nevertheless have been an in- 
evitable magnetism in that spot, whence 
she dated the first hour of her life of igno- 
miny. There was a sense within her, — 
too ill-defined to be made a thought, but 
weighing heavily on her mind, — that her 
whole orb of life, both before and after, 
was connected with this spot, as with the 
one point that gave it unity. 

Little Pearl, meanwhile, had quitted her 
mother's side, and was playing at her own 
will about the market-place. She made 
the sombre crowd cheerful by her erratic 
and glistening ray ; even as a bird of bright 
plumage illuminates a whole tree of dusky 
foliage by darting to and fro, half seen and 
half concealed, amid the twilight of the 
clustering leaves. She had an undulating, 
but, oftentimes, a sharp and irregular 
movement. It indicated the restless vivac- 
ity of her spirit, which to-day was doubly 
indefatigable in its tiptoe dance, because 



The Procession 437 

it was played upon and vibrated with her 
mother's disquietude. Whenever Pearl 
saw any thing to excite her ever active 
and wandering curiosity, she flew thither- 
ward, and, as we might say, seized upon 
that man or thing as her own property, so 
far as she desired it ; but without yielding 
the minutest degree of control over her 
motions in requital. The Puritans looked 
on, and, if they smiled, were none the less 
inclined to pronounce the child a demon 
offspring, from the indescribable charm of 
beauty and eccentricity that shone through 
her little figure, and sparkled with its 
activity. She ran and looked the wild 
Indian in the face ; and he grew conscious 
of a nature wilder than his own. Thence, 
with native audacity, but still with a re- 
serve as characteristic, she flew into the 
midst of a group of mariners, the swarthy 
cheeked wild men of the ocean, as the In- 
dians were of the land ; and they gazed 
wonderingly and admiringly at Pearl, as if 
a flake of the sea-foam had taken the shape 
of a little maid, and were gifted with a soul 
of the sea-fire, that flashes beneath the prow 
in the night-time. 

One of these seafaring men — the ship- 
master, indeed, who had spoken to Hester 



43^ The Scarlet Letter 

Prynne — was so smitten with Pearl's as- 
pect, that he attempted to lay hands upon 
her, with purpose to snatch a kiss. Find- 
ing it as impossible to touch her as to catch 
a humming-bird in the air, he took from his 
hat the gold chain that was twisted about 
it, and threw it to the child. Pearl imme- 
diately twined it around her neck and waist, 
with such happy skill, that, once seen there, 
it became a part of her, and it was difficult 
to imagine her without it. 

" Thy mother is yonder woman with the 
scarlet letter," said the seaman. "Wilt 
thou carry her a message from me ? " 

*' If the message pleases me I will," an- 
swered Pearl. 

"Then tell her," rejoined he, "that I 
spake again with the black-a-visaged, 
hump-shouldered old doctor, and he en- 
gages to bring his friend, the gentleman 
she wots of, aboard with him. So let thy 
mother take no thought, save for herself 
and thee. Wilt thou tell her this, thou 
witch-baby } " 

" Mistress Hibbins says my father is the 
Prince of the Air ! " cried Pearl, with her 
naughty smile. " If thou callest me that 
ill name, I shall tell him of thee ; and he 
will chase thy ship with a tempest I " 



The Procession 439 

Pursuing a zigzag course across the 
market-place, the child returned to her 
mother, and communicated what the mari- 
ner had said. Hester's strong, calm, stead- 
fastly enduring spirit almost sank, at last, 
on beholding this dark and grim counte- 
nance of an inevitable doom, which — at 
the moment when a passage seemed to 
open for the minister and herself out of 
their labyrinth of misery — showed itself, 
with an unrelenting smile, right in the 
midst of their path. 

With her mind harassed by the terrible 
perplexity in which the .shipmaster's intel- 
ligence involved her, she was also sub- 
jected to another trial. There were many 
people present, from the country round 
about, who had often heard of the scarlet 
letter, and to whom it had been made terrific 
by a hundred false or exaggerated rumours, 
but who had never beheld it with their 
own bodily eyes. These, after exhausting 
other modes of amusement, now thronged 
about Hester Prynne with rude and boor- 
ish intrusiveness. Unscrupulous as it 
was, however, it could not bring them 
nearer than a circuit of several yards. At 
that distance they accordingly stood, fixed 
there by the centrifugal force of the 



44^ T^f^^ Scarlet Letter 

repugnance which the mystic symbol in- 
spired. The whole gang of sailors, like- 
wise, observing the press of spectators, 
and learning the purport of the scarlet 
letter, came and thrust their sunburnt 
and desperado-looking faces into the ring. 
Even the Indians were affected by a sort 
of cold shadow of the white man's curios- 
ity, and, gliding through the crowd, fas- 
tened their snake-like black eyes on 
Hester's bosom ; conceiving, perhaps, that 
the wearer of this brilliantly embroidered 
badge must needs be a personage of high 
dignity among her people. Lastly, the 
inhabitants of the town (their own interest 
in this worn-out subject languidly reviving 
itself, by sympathy with what they saw 
others feel) lounged idly to the same quar- 
ter, and tormented Hester Prynne, perhaps 
more than all the rest, with their cool, well- 
acquainted gaze at her familiar shame. 
Hester saw and recognised the self-same 
faces of that group of matrons, who had 
awaited her forthcoming from the prison- 
door, seven years ago ; all save one, the 
youngest and only compassionate among 
them, whose burial-robe she had since 
made. At the final hour, when she was 
so soon to fling aside the burning letter, 



The Procession 441 

it had strangely become the centre of more 
remark and excitement, and was thus made 
to sear her breast more painfully, than at 
any time since the first day she put it on. 

While Hester stood in that magic circle 
of ignominy, where the cunning cruelty 
of her sentence seemed to have fixed her 
for ever, the admirable preacher was look- 
ing down from the sacred pulpit upon an 
audience, whose very inmost spirits had 
yielded to his control. The sainted min- 
ister in the church ! The woman of the 
scarlet letter in the market-place ! What 
imagination would have been irreverent 
enough to surmise that the same scorching 
stigma was on them both? 



XXIII 

THE REVELATION OF THE SCARLET 

LETTER 

THE eloquent voice, on which the souls 
of the listening audience had been 
borne aloft, as on the swelling waves of 
the sea, at length came to a pause. There 
was a momentary silence, profound as 
what should follow the utterance of oracles. 
Then ensued a murmur and half-hushed 
tumult ; as if the auditors, released from 
the high spell that had transported them 
into the region of another's mind, were re- 
turning into themselves, with all their awe 
and wonder still heavy on them. In a 
moment more, the crowd began to gush 
forth from the doors of the church. Now 
that there was an end, they needed other 
breath, more fit to support the gross and 
earthly life into which they relapsed, than 
that atmosphere which the preacher had 
converted into words of flame, and had 
burdened with the rich fragrance of his 
thought. 
442 



The Revelation 443 

In the open air their rapture broke into 
speech. The street and the market-place 
absolutely babbled, from side to side, with 
applauses of the minister. His hearers 
could not rest until they had told one 
another of what each knew better than 
he could tell or hear. According to their 
united testimony, never had man spoken^ / 
in so wise, so high, and so holy a spirit, 
as he that spake this day ; nor had inspi- 
ration ever breathed through mortal lips 
more evidently than it did through his. 
Its influence could be seen, as it were, 
descending upon him, and possessing him, 
and continually lifting him out of the 
written discourse that lay before him, and 
filling him with ideas that must have been 
as marvellous to himself as to his audience. 
His subject, it appeared, had been the 
relation between the Deity and the com- 
munities of mankind, with a special ref- 
erence to the New England which they 
were here planting in the wilderness. 
And, as he drew towards the close, a spirit 
as of prophecy had come upon him, con- 
straining him to its purpose as mightily 
as the old prophets of Israel were con- 
strained ; only with this difference, that, 
whereas the Jewish seers had denounced 



444 '^^^^ Scarlet Letter 

judgments and ruin on their country, it 
was his mission to foretell a high and 
glorious destiny for the newly gathered 
people of the Lord. But, throughout it all, 
and through the whole discourse, there 
had been a certain deep, sad undertone of 
pathos, which could not be interpreted 
otherwise than as the natural regret of one 
soon to pass away. Yes; their minister 
whom they so loved — and who so loved 
them all, that he could not depart heaven- 
ward without a sigh — had the foreboding 
of untimely death upon him, and would 
soon leave them in their tears ! This idea 
of his transitory stay on earth gave the 
last emphasis to the effect which the 
preacher had produced ; it was as if an 
angel, in his passage to the skies, had 
shaken his bright wings over the people 
for an instant, — at once a shadow and a 
splendour, — and had shed down a shower 
of golden truths upon them. 

Thus, there had come to the Reverend 
Mr. Dimmcsdale — as to most men, in 
their various spheres, though seldom recog- 
nised until they see it far behind them — 
an epoch of life more brilliant and full of 
triumph than any previous one, or than 
any which could hereafter be. He stood. 



-.♦j.'f 



The Revelation 445 

at this moment, on the very proudest 
eminence of superiority, to which the 
gifts of intellect, rich lore, prevailing elo- 
quence, and a reputation of whitest sanc- 
tity, could exalt a clergyman in New 
England's earliest days, when the profes- 
sional character was of itself a lofty ped- 
estal. Such was the position which the 
minister occupied, as he bowed his head 
forward on the cushions of the pulpit, at 
the close of his Election Sermon. Mean- 
while, Hester Prynne was standing beside 
the scaffold of the pillory, with the scarlet 
letter still burning on her breast ! 

Now was heard again the clangour of 
the music, and the measured tramp of the 
military escort, issuing from the church- 
door. The procession was to be mar- 
shalled thence to the town-hall, where a 
solemn banquet would complete the cere- 
monies of the day. 

Once more, therefore, the train of ven- 
erable and majestic fathers was seen mov- 
ing through a broad pathway of the people, 
who drew back reverently, on either side, 
as the Governor and magistrates, the old 
and wise men, the holy ministers, and all 
that were eminent and renowned, advanced 
into the midst of them. When they were 



446 The Scarlet Letter 

fairly in the market-place, their presence • 
was greeted by a shout. This — though 
doubtless it might acquire additional force 
and volume from the childlike loyalty which 
the age awarded to its rulers — was felt 
to be an irrepressible outburst of the 
enthusiasm kindled in the auditors by that 
high strain of eloquence which was yet 
reverberating in their ears. Each felt the 
impulse in himself, and, in the same 
breath, caught it from his neighbour. 
Within the church, it had hardly been 
kept down ; beneath the sky, it pealed 
upward to the zenith. There were human 
beings enough, and enough of highly 
wrought and symphonious feeling, to pro- 
duce that more impressive sound than the 
organ-tones of the blast, or the thunder, 
or the roar of the sea ; even that mighty 
swell of many voices, blended into one 
great voice by the universal impulse which 
makes likewise one vast heart out of the 
many. Never, from the soil of New Eng- 
land, had gone up such a shout ! Never, 
on New England soil, had stood the man 
so honoured by his mortal brethren as the 
preacher ! 

How fared it with him then } Were 
there net the brilliant particles of a halo in 



The Revelation 447 

the air about his head? So etherealised 
by spirit as he was, and so apotheosised 
by worshipping admirers, did his footsteps 
in the procession really tread upon the 
dust of earth ? 

As the ranks of military men and civil 
fathers moved onward, all eyes were turned 
towards the point where the minister was 
seen to approach among them. The shout 
died into a murmur, as one portion of the 
crowd after another obtained a glimpse of 
him. How feeble and pale he looked amid 
all his triumph ! The energy — or say, 
rather, the inspiration which had held him 
up, until he should have delivered the 
sacred message that brought its own 
strength along with it from heaven — was 
withdrawn, now that it had so faithfully 
performed its office. The glow, which 
they had just before beheld burning on his 
cheek, was extinguished, like a flame that 
sinks down hopelessly among the late- 
decaying embers. It seemed hardly the 
face of a man alive, with such a deathlike 
hue ; it was hardly a man with life in him, 
that tottered on his path so nervelessly, 
yet tottered, and did not fall ! 

One of his clerical brethren, — it was 
the venerable John Wilson, — observing 



44^ The Scarlet Letter 

the state in which Mr. Dimmesdale was 
left by the retiring wave of intellect and 
sensibility, stepped forward hastily to offer 
his support. The minister tremulously, but 
decidedly, repelled the old man's arm. He 
still walked onward, if that movement could 
be so described, which rather resembled 
the wavering effort of an infant, with its 
mother's arms in view, outstretched to 
tempt him forward. And now, almost 
imperceptible as were the latter steps of 
his progress, he had come opposite the 
well-remembered and weather-darkened 
scaffold, where, long since, with all that 
dreary lapse of time between, Hester 
Prynne had encountered the world's igno- 
minious stare. There stood Hester, hold- 
ing little Pearl by the hand ! And there 
was the scarlet letter on her breast ! The 
minister here made a pause ; although the 
music still played the stately and rejoicing 
march to which the procession moved. It 
summoned him onward, — onward to the 
festival ! — but here he made a pause. 

Bellingham, for the last few moments, 
had kept an anxious eye upon him. He 
now left his own place in the procession, 
and advanced to give assistance; judging 
from Mr. Dimmesdale's aspect that he 



The Revelation 449 

must otherwise inevitably fall. But there 
was something in the latter's expression 
that warned back the magistrate, although 
a man not readily obeying the vague inti- 
mations that pass from one spirit to 
another. The crowd, meanwhile, looked 
on with awe and wonder. This earthly 
faint ness was, in their view, only another 
phase of the minister's celestial strength ; 
nor would it have seemed a miracle too 
high to be wrought for one so holy, had 
he ascended before their eyes, waxing dim- 
mer and brighter, and fading at last into 
the light of heaven ! 

He turned towards the scaffold, and 
stretched forth his arms. 

"Hester,** said he, "come hither! 
Come, my little Pearl! '* 

It was a ghastly look with which he re- 
garded them ; but there was something at 
once tender and strangely triumphant in it. 
The child, with the bird-like motion which 
was one of her characteristics, flew to him, 
and clasped her arms about his knees. 
Hester Prynne — slowly, as if impelled by 
inevitable fate, and against her strongest 
will — likewise drew near, but paused 
before she reached him. At this instant 
old Roger Chillingworth thrust himself 



450 The Scarlet Letter 

through the crowd, — or, perhaps, so dark, 
disturbed, and evil was his look, he rose up 
out of some nether region, — to snatch 
back his victim from what he sought to 
do ! Be that as it might, the old man 
rushed forward and caught the minister by 
the arm. 

" Madman, hold ! What is your pur- 
pose ? " whispered he. " Wave back that 
woman ! Cast off this child ! All shall 
be well ! Do not blacken your fame, and 
perish in dishonour ! I can yet save you ! 
Would you bring infamy on your sacred 
profession } " 

" Ha, tempter ! Methinks thou art too 
late ! *' answered the minister, encountering 
his eye, fearfully, but firmly. "Thy power 
is not what it was ! With God's help, I 
shall escape thee now ! " 

He again extended his hand to the woman 
of the scarlet letter. 

" Hester Prynne,** cried he, with a pierc- 
ing earnestness, ** in the name of Him, so 
terrible and so merciful, who gives me 
grace, at this last moment, to do what — 
for my own heavy sin and miserable agony 
— I withheld myself from doing seven years 
ago, come hither now, and twine thy 
strength about me ! Thy strength, Hcs- 



The Revelation 451 

ter ; but let it be guided by the will which 
God hath granted me ! This wretched and 
wronged old man is opposing it with all 
his might ! — with all his own might and 
the fiend's! Come, Hester, come! Sup- 
port me up yonder scaffold ! " 

The crowd was in a tumult. The men 
of rank and dignity, who stood more im- 
mediately around the clergyman, were so 
taken by surprise, and so perplexed as to 
the purport of what they saw, — unable to 
receive the explanj^tion which most readily 
presented itself, or to imagine any other, 
— that they remained silent and inactive 
spectators of the judgment which Provi- 
dence seemed about to work. They be- 
held the minister, leaning on Hester's 
shoulder and supported by her arm around 
him, approach the scaffold, and ascend its 
steps ; while still the little hand of the sin- 
born child was clasped in his. Old Roger 
Chillingworth followed, as one intimately 
connected with the drama of guilt and sor- 
row in which they had all been actors, and 
well entitled, therefore, to be present at its 
closing scene. 

** Hadst thou sought the whole earth 
over," said he, looking darkly at the cler- 
gyman, ** there was no one place so secret, 



452 The Scarlet Letter 

— no high place nor lowly place, where 
thou couldst have escaped mC; — save on 
this very scaffold ! '* 

"Thanks be to Him who hath led me 
hither ! '* answered the minister. 

Yet he trembled, and turned to Hester 
with an expression of doubt and anxiety in 
his eyes, not the less evidently betrayed, 
that there was a feeble smile upon his lips. 

" Is not this better," murmured he, 
"than what we dreamed of in the forest?" 

" I know not ! I know not ! " she hur- 
riedly replied. " Better } Yea ; so we 
may both die, and little Pearl die with 
us!" 

" For thee and Pearl, be it as God shall 
order," said the minister ; ** and God is 
merciful ! Let me now do the will which 
he hath made plain before my sight. For, 
Hester, I am a dying man. So let me 
make haste to take my shame upon me." 

Partly supported by Hester Prynne, and 
holding one hand of little Pearl's, the Rev- 
erend Mr. Dimmesdale turned to the 
dignified and venerable rulers ; to the 
holy ministers, who were his brethren ; to 
the people, whose great heart was thor- 
oughly appalled, yet overflowing with tear- 
ful sympathy, as knowing that some deep 



The Revelation 453 

life-matter — which, if full of sin, was full 
of anguish and repentance likewise — was 
now to be laid open to them. The sun, 
but little past its meridian, shone down 
upon the clergyman, and gave a distinctness 
to his figure, as he stood out from all the 
earth to put in his plea of guilty at the bar 
of Eternal Justice. 

" People of New England ! *' cried he, 
with a voice that rose over them, high, 
solemn, and majestic, — yet had always a 
tremor through it, and sometimes a shriek, 
struggling up out of a fathomless depth of 
remorse and woe, — " ye, that have loved 
me ! — ye, that have deemed me holy ! — 
behold me here, the one sinner of the 
world ! At last ! — at last ! — I stand upon 
the spot where, seven years since, I should 
have stood ; here, with this woman, whose 
arm, more than the little strength where- 
with I have crept hitherward, sustains me, 
at this dreadful moment, from grovelling 
down upon my face ! Lo, the scarlet let- 
ter which Hester wears ! Ye have all 
shuddered at it ! Wherever her walk hath 
been, — wherever, so miserably burdened, 
she may have hoped to find repose^ — it 
hath cast a lurid gleam of awe and horrible 
repugnance round about her. But there 



454 ^^^ Scarlet Letter 

stood one in the midst of you, at whose 
brand of sin and infamy ye have not shud- 
dered ! " 

It seemed, at this point, as if the min- 
ister must leave the remainder of his secret 
undisclosed. But he fought back the 
bodily weakness, — and, still more, the 
faintness of heart, — that was striving for 
the mastery with him. He threw oflF all 
assistance, and stepped passionately for- 
ward a pace before the woman and the 
child. 

"It was on him ! " he continued, with a 
kind of fierceness ; so determined was he 
to speak out the whole. " God's eye 
beheld it ! The angels were for ever point- 
ing at it ! The Devil knew it well, and 
fretted it continually with the touch of his 
burning finger ! But he hid it cunningly 
from men, and walked among you with the 
mien of a spirit, mournful, because so pure 
in a sinful world ! — and sad, because 
he missed his heavenly kindred! Now, 
at the death-hour, he stands up before 
you ! He bids you look again at Hester's 
scarlet letter ! He tells you, that, with all 
its mysterious horror, it is but the shadow 
of what he bears on his own breast, and 
that even this, his own red stigma, is no 



The Revelation 455 

more than the type of what has seared his 
inmost heart ! Stand any here that ques- 
tion God's judgment on a sinner? Behold! 
Behold a dreadful witness of it ! " 

With a convulsive motion he tore away 
the ministerial band from before his breast. 
It was revealed! Bu± it were irreverent 
to describe that revelation. For an instant 
the gaze of the horror-stricken multitude 
was concentred on the ghastly miracle; 
while the minister stood with a flush of 
triumph in his face, as one who, in the 
crisis of acutest pain, had won a victory. 
Then, down he sank upon the scafiFold ! 
Hester partly raised him, and supported 
his head against her bosom. Old Roger 
Chillingworth knelt down beside him, with 
a blank, dull countenance, out of which 
the life seemed to have departed. 

"Thou hast escaped me ! *' he repeated 
more than once. "Thou hast escaped 
me!" 

" May God forgive thee ! " said the min- 
ister. " Thou, too, hast deeply sinned ! " 

He withdrew his dying eyes from the 
old man, and fixed them on the woman 
and the child. 

" My little Pearl," said he feebly, — and 
there was a sweet and gentle smile over 



4S6 The Scarlet Letter 

his face, as of a spirit sinking into deep 
repose; nay, now that the burden was 
removed, it seemed almost as if he would 
be sportive with the child, — " dear little 
Pearl, wilt thou kiss me now ? Thou 
wouldst not yonder, in the forest ! But 
now thou wilt ? " i 

Pearl kissed his lips. A spell was 
broken. The great scene of grief, in 
which the wild infant bore a part, had de- 
veloped all her sympathies ; and as her 
tears fell upon her father's cheek, they 
were the pledge that she would grow up 
amid human joy and sorrow, nor for ever 
do battle with the world, but be a woman 
in it. Towards her mother, too, • Pearl's 
errand as a messenger of anguish was all 
fulfilled. 

'* Hester," said the clergyman, " fare- 
well ! " 

" Shall we not meet again } " whispered 
she, bending her face down close to his. 
"Shall we not spend our immortal life 
together } Surely, surely, we have ran- 
somed one another, with all this woe! 
Thou lookest far into eternity, with those 
bright dying eyes ! Then tell me what 
thou seest } '* 

** Hush, Hester, hush ! " said he, with 



The Revelation 457 

tremulous solemnity. " The law we broke! 
— the sin here so awfully revealed ! — let 
these alone be in thy thoughts ! I fear ! 
I fear ! It may be, that, when we forgot 
our God, — when we violated our reverence 
each for the other's soul, — it was thence- 
forth vain to hope that we could meet 
hereafter, in an everlasting and pure re- 
union. God knows ; and He is merciful ! 
He hath proved his mercy, most of all, in 
my afflictions. By giving me this burning 
torture to bear upon my breast! By send- 
ing yonder dark and terrible old man, to 
keep the torture always at red-heat ! By 
bringing me hither, to die this death of 
triumphant ignominy before the people! 
Had either of these agonies been wanting, 
I had been lost for ever ! Praised be his 
name ! His will be done I Farewell ! " 

That final word came forth with the min- 
ister's expiring breath. The multitude, 
silent till then, broke out in a strange, 
deep voice of awe and wonder, which could 
not as yet find utterance, save in this mur- 
mur that rolled so heavily after the de- 
parted spirit. 



XXIV 

CONCLUSION 

AFTER many days, when time suf- 
ficed for the people to arrange their 
thoughts in reference to the foregoing 
scene, there was more than one account of 
what had been witnessed on the scaffold. 
Most of the spectators testified to hav- 
ing seen, on the breast of the unhappy 
minister, a scarlet letter — the very 
semblance of that worn by Hester Prynne 
— imprinted in the flesh. As regarded its 
origin, there were various explanations, all 
of which must necessarily have been con- 
jectural. Some affirmed that the Rever- 
end Mr. Dimmesdale, on the very day 
when Hester Prynne first wore her igno- 
minious badge, had begun a course of pen- 
ance, — which he afterwards, in so many 
futile methods, followed out, — by inflict- 
ing a hideous torture on himself. Others 
contended that the stigma had not been 
produced until a long time subsequent, 
when old Roger Chillingworth, being a 
458 



Conclusion 459 

potent necromancer, had caused it to ap- 
pear, through the agency of magic and 
poisonous drugs. Others, again, — and 
those best able to appreciate the minis- 
ter's peculiar sensibility, and the wonder- 
ful operation of his spirit upon the body, — 
whispered their belief, that the awful sym- 
bol was the effect of the ever active tooth 
of remorse, gnawing from the inmost heart 
outwardly, and at last manifesting Heaven's 
dreadful judgment by the visible presence 
of the letter. The reader may choose 
among these theories. We have thrown 
all the light we could acquire upon the 
portent, and would gladly, now that it has 
done its office, erase its deep print out of 
our own brain ; where long meditation has 
fixed it in very undesirable distinctness. 

It is singular, nevertheless, that certain 
persons, who were spectators of the whole 
scene, and professed never once to have 
removed their eyes from the Reverend Mr, 
Dimmesdale, denied that there was any 
mark whatever on his breast, more than on 
a new-born infant's. Neither, by their 
report, had his dying words acknowledged, 
nor even remotely implied, any, the slight- 
est connection, on his part, with the guilt 
for which Hester Prynne had so long worn 



460 The Scarlet Letter 

the scarlet letter. According to these 
highly respectable witnesses, the minister, 
conscious that he was dying, — conscious, 
also, that the reverence of the multitude 
placed him already among saints and 
angels, — had desired, by yielding up his 
breath in the arms of that fallen woman, 
to express to the world how utterly nuga- 
tory is the choicest of man's own righteous- 
ness. After exhausting life in his efiForts 
for mankind's spiritual good, he had made 
the manner of his death a parable, in order 
to impress on his admirers the mighty and 
mournful lesson, that, in the view of Infi- 
nite Purity, we are sinners all alike. It 
was to teach them, that the holiest among 
us has but attained so far above his fellows 
as to discern more clearly the Mercy which 
looks down, and repudiate more utterly the 
phantom of human merit, which would 
look aspiringly upward. Without disput- 
ing a truth so momentous, we must be 
allowed to consider this version of Mr. 
Dimmesdale's story as only an instance of 
that stubborn fidelity with which a man's 
friends — and especially a clergyman's — 
will sometimes uphold his character ; when 
proofs, clear as the mid-day sunshine on 
the scarlet letter, establish him a false and 
sin-stained creature of the dust. 



? 



Conclusion 461 

The authority which we have chiefly fol- 
lowed — a manuscript of old date, drawn 
up from the verbal testimony of individu- 
als, some of whom had known Hester 
Prynne, while others had heard the tale 
from contemporary witnesses — fully con- 
firms the view taken in the foregoing 
pages. Among many morals which press 
upon us from the poor minister's miserable 
experience, we put only this into a sen- 
tence : — *' Be true ! Be true ! Be true ! 
Show freely to the world, if not your worst, 
yet some trait whereby the worst may be 
inferred! " 

Nothing was more remarkable than the 
change which took place, almost immedi- 
ately after Mr. Dimmesdale's death, in the 
appearance and demeanour of the old man 
known as Roger Chillingworth. All his 
strength and energy — all his vital and 
intellectual force — seemed at once to 
desert him ; insomuch that he positively 
withered up, shrivelled away, and almost 
vanished from mortal sight, like an up- 
rooted weed that lies wilting in the sun. 
This unhappy man had made the very 
principle of his life to consist in the pur- 
suit and systematic exercise of revenge ; 
and when, by its completest triumph and 



462 The Scarlet Letter 

consummation, that evil principle was left 
with no further material to support it, — 
when, in short, there was no more devil's 
work on earth for him to do, it only re- 
mained for the unhumanized mortal to 
betake himself whither his Master would 
find him tasks enough, and pay him his 
wages duly. But, to all these shadowy 
beings, so long our near acquaintances, — 
as well Roger Chillingworth as his com- 
panions, — we would fain be merciful. It 
is a curious subject of observation and 
inquiry, whether hatred and love be not 
the same thing at bottom. Each, in its 
utmost development, supposes a high de- 
gree of intimacy and heart-knowledge ; 
each renders one individual dependent for 
the food of his affections and spiritual life 
upon another; each leaves the passionate 
lover, or the no less passionate hater, for- 
lorn and desolate by the withdrawal of his 
object. Philosophically considered, there- 
fore, the two passions seem essentially the 
same, except that one happens to be seen 
in a celestial radiance, and the other in a 
dusky and lurid glow. In the spiritual 
world, the old physician and the minister 
— mutual victims as they have been — 
may, unawares, have found their earthly 



Conclusion 463 

stock of hatred and antipathy transmuted 
into golden love. 

Leaving this discussion apart, we have 
a matter of business to communicate to 
the reader. At old Roger Chillingworth's 
decease (which took place within the year), 
and by his last will and testament, of 
which Governor Bellinghani and the Rev- 
erend Mr. Wilson were executors, he be- 
queathed a very considerable amount of 
property, both here and in England, to lit- 
tle Pearl, the daughter of Hester Prynne. 

So Pearl — the elf-child, — the demon 
oifspring, as some people, up to that 
epoch, persisted in considering her — be- 
came the richest heiress of her day, in 
the New World. Not improbably, this cir- 
cumstance wrought a very material change 
in the public estimation ; and, had the 
mother and child remained here, little 
Pearl, at a marriageable period of life, 
might have mingled her wild blood with 
the lineage of the devoutest Puritan 
among them all. But, in no long time 
after the physician's death, the wearer of 
the scarlet letter disappeared, and Pearl 
along with her. For many years, though 
a vague report would now and then find 
its way across the sea, — like a shapeless 



464 The Scarlet Letter 

piece of driftwood tost ashore, with the 
initials of a name upon it, — yet no tidings 
of them unquestionably authentic were re- 
ceived. The story of the scarlet letter 
grew into a legend. Its spell, however, 
was still potent, and kept the scaffold 
awful where the poor minister had died, 
and likewise the cottage by the sea-shore, 
where Hester Prynne had dwelt. Near 
this latter spot, one afternoon, some chil- 
dren were at play, when they beheld a tall 
woman, in a grey robe, approach the cot- 
tage-door. In all those years it had never 
once been opened ; but either she unlocked 
it, or the decaying wood and iron yielded 
to her hand, or she glided shadow-like 
through these impediments, — and, at all 
events, went in. 

On the threshold she paused, — turned 
partly round, — for, perchance, the idea 
of entering, all alone, and all so changed, 
the home of so intense a former life, was 
more dreary and desolate than even she 
could bear. But her hesitation was only 
for an instant, though long enough to di?^ 
play a scarlet letter on her breast. 

And Hester Prynne had returned, and 
taken up her long-forsaken shame. But 
where was little Pearl ? If still alive, she 



Conclusion 465 

must now have been in the flush and bloom 
of early womanhood. None knew — nor 
ever learned, with the fulness of perfect 
certainty — whether the elf-child had gone 
thus untimely to a maiden grave ; or 
whether her wild, rich nature had been 
softened and subdued, and made capable 
of a woman's gentle happiness. But, 
through the remainder of Hester's life, 
there were indications that the recluse of 
the scarlet letter was the object of love 
and interest with some inhabitant of an- 
other land. Letters came, with armorial 
seals upon them, though of bearings un- 
known to English heraldry. In the cot- 
tage there were articles of comfort and 
luxury, such as Hester never cared to 
use, but which only wealth could have 
purchased, and affection have imagined 
for her. There were trifles, too, little 
ornaments, beautiful tokens of a continual 
remembrance, that must have been wrought 
by delicate fingers, at the impulse of a 
fond heart. And, once, Hester was seen 
embroidering a baby-garment, with such 
a lavish richness of golden fancy as would 
have raised a public tumult, had any infant, 
thus apparelled, been shovvn to our sober* 
liued community. 



466 The Scarlet Letter 

In fine, the gossips of that day believed, 
— and Mr. Surveyor Pue, who made in- 
vestigations a century later, believed, — 
and one of his recent successors in office, 
moreover, faithfully believes, — that Pearl 
was not only alive, but married, and happy, 
and mindful of her mother ; and that she 
would most joyfully have entertained that 
sad and lonely mother at her fireside. 

But there was a more real life for Hes- 
ter Prynne, here, in New England, than 
in that unknown region where Pearl had 
found a home. Here had been her sin ; 
here, her sorrow ; and here was yet to be 
her penitence. She had returned, there- 
fore, and resumed, — of her own free will, 
for not the sternest magistrate of that iron 
period would have imposed it, — resumed 
the symbol of which we have related so 
dark a tale. Never afterwards did it quit 
her bosom. But, in the lapse of the toil- 
some, thoughtful, and self-devoted years 
that made up Hester's life, the scarlet 
letter ceased to be a stigma which at- 
tracted the world's scorn and bitterness, 
and became a type of something to be 
sorrowed over, and looked upon with awe, 
yet with reverence too. And, as Hester 
Prynne had no selfish ends, nor lived in 



Coficlusion j^6'j 

any measure for her own profit and enjoy- 
ment, people brought all their sorrows and 
perplexities, and besought her counsel, as 
one who had herself gone through a 
mighty trouble. Women, more especially, 
— in the continually recurring trials of 
wounded, wasted, wronged, misplaced, or 
erring and sinful passion, — or with the 
dreary burden of a heart unyielded, be- 
cause unvalued and unsought, — came to 
Hester's cottage, demandmg why they 
were so wretched, and what the remedy! 
Hester comforted and counselled them, as 
best she might. .She assured them, too, 
of her firm belief, that, at some brighter 
period, when the world should have grown 
ripe for it, in Heaven's own time, a new 
truth would be revealed, in order to estab- 
lish the whole relation between man and 
woman on a surer ground of mutual happi- 
ness. Earlier in life, Hester had vainly 
imagined that she herself might be the 
destined prophetess, but had long since 
recognised the impossibility that any mis- 
sion of divine and mysterious truth should 
be confided to a woman stained with sin, 
bowed down with shame, or even burdened 
with a life-long sorrow. The angel and 
apostle of the coming revelation must be 



468 The Scarlet Letter 

a woman, indeed, but lofty, pure, and beau- 
tiful ; and wise, moreover, not through 
dusky grief, but the ethereal medium of 
joy ; and showing how sacred love should 
make us happy, by the truest test of a 
life successful to such an end ! 

So said Hester Prynne, and glanced her 
sad eyes downward at the scarlet letter. 
And, after many, many years, a new 
grave was delved, near an old and sunken 
one, in that burial-ground beside which 
King's Chapel has since been built. It 
was near that old and sunken grave, yet 
with a space between, as if the <}ust of the 
two sleepers had no right to mingle. Yet 
one tombstone served for both. All around, 
there were monuments carved with armo- 
rial bearings ; and on this simple slab of 
slate — as the curious investigator may still 
discern, and perplex himself with the pur- 
port — there appeared the semblance of an 
engraved escutcheon. It bore a device, a 
herald's wording of which might serve for 
a motto and brief description of our now 
concluded legend ; so sombre is it, and 
relieved only by one ever-glowing point of 
light gloomier than the shadow : — 

" On a field, sable, the letter A, gules," 



..J 



I 



t 



.■>'rt: 



^rt*. 



