x^3 





(2(arn?U Hniaetatty SItbrary 

JIttfara. S?«m %orb 



BOUGHT WITH THE INCOME^OF THE 

SAGE ENDOWMENT FUND 

■ THE GIFT Of 

'■ henrW.sage 

1891 



Cornell University Library 
PS 2386.M53 



Some personal letters of Herman Melville 




3 1924 022 066 900 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF 

HERMAN MELVILLE 

AND 

A BIBLIOGRAPHY 




Cornell University 
Library 



The original of tiiis book is in 
tine Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924022066900 



MM', ,;'.!,iM:,^,.;;,,'i,,i:^a:p^-:-'' 



, - 111, * '1|nl| I 
I ^ 



'l 



Xi 




^yic^t'^vi ^apU{c 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS 

OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

AND 

A BIBLIOGRAPHY 

BY 
MEADE MINNIGERODE 




EDMOND BYRNE HACKETT: 

THE BRICK ROW BOOK SHOP, INC. 

NEW YORK NEW HAVEN PRINCETON 

I92Z 

W 

y\ OORNtUL 
llNIVi(Rf»ri Y 

t I i^ b A i< V 






h ^V^-«&ArO 



Copyright, 1922, by 
The Brick Row Book Shop, Inc. 



First Printing 

November, 1922 

1500 Copies 



.1 I u^niyc 

V 1 t ' ' I'l u 

, Y : : . . I 



^1^ 



u 



TO 
WILLIAM LYON PHELPS 



" . . . Herman Melville is undoubtedly an 
original thinker, and boldly and unreservedly 
expresses his opinions, often in a way that irre- 
sistibly startles and enchains the interest of the 
reader. He possesses amazing powers of expres- 
sion; he can be terse, copious, eloquent, brilliant, 
imaginative, poetical, satirical, pathetic, at will. 
He is never stupid, never dull ; but alas I he is 
often mystical and unintelligible, not from any 
inability to express himself, for his writing is 
pure, manly English, and a child can always 
understand what he says — but the ablest critic 
cannot always tell what he really means. . . . 

"Such is Herman Melville! A man of whom 
America has reason to be proud, with all his. 
faults ; and, if he does not eventually rank as one 
of her greatest giants in literature, it will not be 
owing to any lack of innate genius, but solely to 
his own incorrigible perversion of his rare and 
lofty gifts." 

Dublin University Magazine. 



[ vii ] 



HERMAN MELVILLE 

Born, 6 Pearl Street, New York City, 
August I, 1819. 

Died, 104 East 26th Street, New York City, 
September 28, 1891. 

"Call me Ishmael. Some years ago — 
never mind how long precisely — having lit- 
tle or no money in my purse, and nothing 
particular to interest me on shore, I thought 
I would sail about a little, and see the watery 
part of the world. It is a way I have of 
driving off the spleen, and regulating the 
circulation. ..." 

Moby-Dick. 



[ ix ] 



CONTENTS 

Part I 

Some Personal Letters 

Introduction to the Letters .... 3 

L A Man's Work 7 

II. Typee and Omoo 10 

III. An Unpublished Review 30 

IV. Emerson . . .^ 32 

V. Mardi 35 

VI. Redburn 44 

^VIL Hawthorne 53 

VIII. Arrowhead 57 

IX. An Unpublished Manuscript .... 77 

Part II 
Bibliography 

Introduction to the Bibliography ... 95 

I. Typee 101 

II. Omoo 125 

III. Mardi, and a Voyage Thither . . . 134 

IV. Redburn 140 

V. White- Jacket 152 

"^VI. Moby-Dick, or the Whale .... 157 

" VII. Pierre, or the Ambiffuities .... 161 

VIII. Israel Potter 164 

[xi ] 



CONTENTS 



IX. The Piazza Tales 171 

X. The Confidence-Man, his Masquerade . 174 

XI. Battle-Pieces 177 

XII. Clarel 180 

XIII. John Marr and other Sailors . . . . 183 

XIV. Timoleon 185 

XV. Billy Budd (unpublished.) .... 187 

XVI. Lectures 188 

XVII. Contributions to magazines, etc. . . . 191 



ILLUSTRATIONS 

Herman Melville (from a hitherto unknown en- 
graving) Frontispiece 

Facsimile of a letter from Melville to Evert 

Duyckinck Facing page 42 

Title-page of the first English edition of Mel- 
ville's Narrative of a Four Months' Residence 
among the Natives of a Valley of the Marquesas 
Islands ; or, A Peep at Polynesian Life. Facing page 96 



[xii ] 



PART I 
SOME PERSONAL LETTERS 



INTRODUCTION 

FAME has returned to Herman Melville after 
seventy years. 

Mr. Masefield has spoken. Mr. Weaver has 
written. First edition copies of Melville's works 
have been removed from the dusty limbo of un- 
considered counters and placed in aristocratic 
company upon the high-priced shelves of biblio- 
philes. Soon, in the land of his birth, it will be 
possible to mention his name in public gatherings 
without explanatory identification. 

These things may possibly compensate his spirit 
for forty years of neglect during his lifetime, 
followed by thirty years of oblivion after his 
death. In the meantime, the same country that 
ignored him, living — the same native city that for- 
got that he had not yet died, until it discovered 
that he had — ^will now tardily honor him with 
widespread curiosity. 

In this volume are offered — many of them, it 
is believed, for the first time — a score of letters 
written by Herman Melville between the years 
1 846-1 860, that is to say during the most pro- 
ductive years of his life, and the period which 
saw the writing of his disastrous Pierre. The let- 
[ 3 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

ters were written to his close friend, Evert Duyck- 
inck, editor of The Literary World (1847- 
1853) in New York City, and are to be found 
in the Duyckinck Collection of Manuscripts in the 
New York Public Library. They contain refer- 
ences to Melville's own books, autobiographical 
data of absorbing interest, comments on literary 
personalities of the day, and occasionally a de- 
scriptive passage of great beauty. 

Whatever the final estimate of Melville as a 
writer, whatever the ultimate judgment passed 
upon him as a mystic, an eccentric, a recluse, and 
a wilfully perverted genius — the author of Mardi 
and Moby-Dick, the perpetrator of Pierre — in 

/ these letters, at least, one finds an utterly different 
Melville. A cheerful, whimsical Melville; a 

i lover of company, and of the good things of life ; 
a gay, ironical fellow, aiming his witty shafts at 
the gods; a turbulent enfant terrible at times, with 

I his impudent personal pen, and yet a sensitive 
soul, recoiling from criticism and abuse; a hot- 

i headed proclaimer of truth ; a vivid, warm- 
hearted, gentle, friendly, impulsive personality; 
and for several years a patient sufferer from a 

'great infirmity. 

After reading the letters from Arrowhead, 
who would not wish that he might have made a 
way through the New England snowdrifts to 
Melville's door, to share the comfort of his fire 
and the warmth of his welcome, — a pathetically 
[4 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

eager welcome, one almost suspects, — feed his 
horse and visit his cow, and furnish some inter- 
est, however inadequate, to his evening of en- 
forced idleness caused by that twilight of his eyes 
of which he speaks. . . . 

The original orthography, etc., of the letters 
has been preserved throughout. 

M. M. 
May 2, 1922. 



[ 5 ] 



A MAN'S WORK 

THE letter given below, while of later date 
than some which follow in this volume, is 
placed first in the collection for the reason that it 
furnishes a striking revelation of Melville's atti- 
tude towards a man's work, and of the world's 
appreciation of that work. 

In the light of Melville's subsequent career as 
an author, the first paragraph is amazingly pro- 
phetic, although in his case the "steam of adula- 
tion" did not begin to rise until some thirty years 
after the sexton had completed his task. It is 
interesting to note the transition of Melville's 
thought from the general to the particular in this 
paragraph. 

The letter was written from Boston, on April 
5, 1849, a few days before the publication of 
Mardi. Melville was not quite thirty at the time, 
and had achieved a very considerable success with 
his first two books, Typee and Omoo. 

In view of the fact that certain critics in the 
past have ventured to put forward the theory that 
Melville's mind became impaired, in explanation 
[ 7 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

of the obscurities encountered in some of his later 
work, the paragraph concerning insanity is of 
special interest. The Mr. Hoffman referred to 
was one of the editors of The Literary World. 

"Dear Duyckinck . . . All ambitious 
authors should have ghosts capable of revis- 
iting the world, to snuff up the steam of adu- 
lation, which begins to rise strengthening as 
the Sexton throws his last shovelfuU on him 
— Down goes his body and up flies his 
name. . . . 

"Poor Hoffman . . . This going mad of 
a friend or acquaintance comes straight 
home to every man who feels his soul in him, 
which but few men do. For in all of us 
lodges the same fuel to light the same fire. 
And he who has never felt, momentarily, 
what madness is has but a mouthful of 
brains. What sort of sensation permanent 
madness is may be very well imagined just 
as we imagine how we felt when we were 
infants, tho' we can not recall it. In both 
conditions we are irresponsible and riot like 
gods without fear of fate — It is the climax 
of a wild night of revelry when the blood 
has been transmuted into brandy — But if we 
prate much of this, why we shall be illus- 
trating our own proposition. . . . 

"Would that a man could do something 
[ 8 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

and then say It is finished — ^not that one 
thing only, but all others — that he has 
reached his uttermost and can never exceed 
it. But live and push — tho' we put one leg 
forward ten miles is no reason the other 
must lag behind — no, that must again dis- 
tance the other — and so we go till we get 
cramp and die. . . . 

H. Melville." 



[ 9 ] 



II 

TYPEE AND OMOO 



IN January, 1841, when he was twenty-one 
years old, Melville shipped before the mast 
— his second venture of this nature — aboard the 
whaler Acushnet, out of New Bedford. A vessel 
of 359 tons, owned by Bradford Fuller and Com- 
pany, commanded by Captain Pease. 

Of her condition six months later Melville 
writes in the opening paragraph of Typee: 

"Six months at sea 1 Yes, reader, as I 
live, six months out of sight of land; cruising 
after the sperm-whale beneath the scorching 
sun of the Line, and tossed on the billows of 
the wide-rolling Pacific — the slcy above, the 
sea around, and nothing else! Weeks and 
weeks ago our fresh provisions were all ex- 
hausted. There is not a sweet potatoe left; 
not a single yam. Those glorious bunches of 
banannas which once decorated our stern and 
quarter-deck, have, alas, disappeared! and 
the delicious oranges which hung suspended 
[ 10 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

from our tops and stays — ^they, too, are 
gone! Yes, they are all departed and there 
is nothing left us but salt-horse and sea- 
biscuit." 

Again, in a later chapter, he writes: 

"The usage on board of her was tyrannical; 
the sick had been inhumanly neglected; the 
provisions had been doled out in scanty al- 
lowance; and her cruises were unreasonably 
protracted. The captain was the author of 
these abuses; it was in vain to think that he 
would either remedy them, or alter his con- 
duct, which was arbitrary and violent in the 
extreme. His prompt reply to all complaints 
and remonstrances was — the butt end of a 
handspike, so convincingly administered as 
effectually to silence the aggrieved party." 

A few days after the ship arrived in Nukuheva 
Bay, in the Marquesas, Melville deserted, to- 
gether with a shipmate, Toby. After incredible 
adventures and hardships, they found themselves 
prisoner-guests of the cannibal natives of the Val- 
ley of Typee, Toby succeeded in escaping after a 
brief sojourn, but Melville remained for four 
months in the Valley, where he seems to have 
enjoyed a number of highly entertaining experi- 
ences as the guest of Kory-Kory and Tinor, and 
the fascinating Fayaway. In fact, in Typee, Mel- 
[ 11 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

vllle did as the Typees do, except that he refused 
to be tattooed and avoided being devoured. 

He was finally rescued, in a spirited running 
fight, by an Australian whaler which he calls the 
Julia; a sweet ship which he describes as follows 
in Omoo: 

"On approaching, she turned out to be a 
small, slatternly looking craft, her hull and 
spars a dingy black, rigging all slack and 
bleached nearly white, and everything denot- 
ing an ill state of affairs aboard. . . . 
"She was a small barque of a beautiful 
model, something more than two hundred 
tons, Yankee-built and very old. Fitted for 
a privateer out of a New England port dur- 
ing the war of 1812, she had been captured 
at sea by a British cruiser, and, after seeing 
all sorts of service, was at last employed as 
a government packet in the Australian seas. 
Being condemned, however, about two years 
previous, she was purchased at auction by a 
house in Sydney, who, after some slight re- 
pairs, dispatched her on the present voyage. 
"Notwithstanding the repairs, she was 
still in a miserable plight. The lower masts 
were said to be unsound; the standing rig- 
ging was much worn; and, in some places, 
even the bulwarks were quite rotten. Still, 
she was tolerably tight, and but little more 
[ 12 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

than the ordinary pumping of a morning 
served to keep her free." 

A capital ship for an ocean trip, in other words I 
Melville continues, with his bland realism : 

"... Concerning the cockroaches, there 
was an extraordinary phenomenon, for which 
none of us could ever account. 

"Every night they had a jubilee. The 
first symptom was an unusual clustering and 
humming among the swarms lining the 
beams overhead, and the inside of the sleep- 
ing-places. This was succeeded by a prodi- 
gious coming and going on the part of those 
living out of sight. Presently they all came 
forth; the larger sort racing over the chests 
and planks ; winged monsters darting to and 
fro in the air; and the small fry buzzing in 
heaps almost in a state of fusion," 

There are also some observations concerning 
rats. In Tahiti the entire crew mutinied and went 
ashore, where the Julia left them. 

In 1845, Melville wrote an account of his ex- 
periences in the Marquesas in Typee, published 
in 1846. This was followed in 1847 by Otnoo, 
continuing the story after his escape from the 
cannibal valley. The books made a sensation in 
more ways than one. The publishers of Typee 
made much of: 

[ 13 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

"... cannibal banquets . . . savage wood- 
lands guarded by horrible idols, heathenish 
rites, and human sacrifices." 

The missionaries made much of certain other 
features of the tales; reviewers emptied inkwells 
over them; Melville was the main topic of con- 
versation in every gathering and around every 
dinner table. And a great many people refused 
to believe one word of Typee. 

One does not need to be the author of a dis- 
credited true story to appreciate Melville's annoy- 
ance, and the consequent delight manifest in the 
following letter, written on July 3, 1846, from 
Lansingburg : 

"There was a spice of civil scepticism in 
your manner, my dear Sir, when we were 
conversing together the other day about 
'Typee' — ^what will the politely incredulous 
Mr. Duyckinck now say to the true Toby's 
having turned up in Buffalo, and written a 
letter to the Commercial Advertiser of that 
place, vouching for the truth of all that part 
(which has been considered the most extraor- 
dinary part) of the narrative, where he is 
made to figure. 

"Give ear then, oh ye of little faith — espe- 
cially thou man of the Evangelist — and hear 
what Toby has to say for himself. — 

"Seriously, my dear Sir, this resurrection 
[ 14 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

of Toby from the dead — this strange bring- 
ing together of two such places as Typee and 
Buffalo, is really very curious. — It can not 
but settle the question of the book's genuine- 
ness. The article in the C. A. with the letter 
of Toby can not possibly be gainsaid in any 
conceivable way — therefore I think they 
\_erased2 it ought to be pushed into circu- 
lation. I doubt not but that many papers 
will copy it — Mr. Duyckinck might say a 
word or two on the subject which would tell. 
— The paper I allude to is of the ist inst. 

"I have written Toby a letter and expect to 
see him soon and hear the sequel of the book 
I have written (How strangely that sounds 1 ) 

"Bye the bye, since people have always 
manifested so much concern for 'poor Toby,' 
what do you think of writing an account of 
what befell him in escaping from the island 
— should the adventure prove to be of suffi- 
cient interest? — I should value your opinion 
very highly on this subject. 

"I began with the intention of tracing a 
short note — I have come near writing a long 
letter. 

"Believe me, my dear Sir, 

Very truly yours, 

Herman Melville. 

n* *l* T* n* ^ 

[ 15 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

"P. S. No. 2. Possibly the letter of Toby 
might by some silly ones be regarded as a 
hoax — to set you right on that point, altho' 
I only saw the letter last night for the first — 
I will tell you that it alludes to things that no 
human being could have heaird of except 
Toby. Besides the Editor seems to have seen 
him." 

This letter refers of course to the reappear- 
ance of Melville's shipmate Toby, Richard 
Tobias Greene, whose letter to the Buffalo Com- 
mercial Advertiser, together with the Editor's 
comment, are given below. The word mortarkee 
in Typee signifies "good!" 

"How strangely things turn up I 
"One of the most curious and entertain- 
ing books published last season was a work 
entitled 'T3^ee, a residence in the Marque- 
sas.' We read it with great interest, but the 
impression it left on the mind was that the 
incidents and mode of life it described were 
too extraordinary, and too much at variance 
with what is known of savage life, to be true, 
and that like the fabled Atlantis or the trav- 
els of Gaudentio di Lucca though without 
their philosophical pretension, it was the off- 
spring of a lively inventive fancy, rather 
than a veritable narrative of facts. This 
impression, we believe, was very general. 
[ 16 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

The readers of Typee therefore can imagine, 
and will share, our surprise, at hearing that 
here in Buffalo, is a credible witness of the 
truth of some of the most extraordinary inci- 
dents narrated in the book. Toby, the com- 
panion of Mr. Melville in the flight from 
the whale ship and whom in his book he sup- 
poses to be dead, is now living in this city, 
following the business of a house and sign 
painter. His father is a respectable farmer 
in the town of Darien, Genesee Co. We 
received from Toby this morning the sub- 
joined communication. His verbal state- 
ments correspond in all essential particulars 
with those made by Mr. Melville respecting 
their joint adventures and from the assur- 
ances we have received in regard to Toby's 
character, we have no reason to doubt his 
word. His turning up here is a strange veri- 
fication of a very strange and as has been 
hitherto deemed an almost incredible book: 

" 'To the Editor of the Buffalo Commer- 
cial Advertiser: 

" 'In the New York Evangelist I chanced 
to see a notice of a new publication in two 
parts called "Typee, a residence in the Mar- 
quesas" by Herman Melville. In the book 
he speaks of his comrade in misfortune 
"Toby" who left him so mysteriously and 
whom he supposed had been killed by the 
[ 17 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Happar natives. The Evangelist speaks 
rather disparagingly of the book as being 
too romantic to be true, and as being too 
severe on the missionaries. But to my ob- 
ject: I am the true and veritable "Toby" yet 
living, and I am happy to testify to the en- 
tire accuracy of the work so long as I was 
with Melville, who makes me figure so 
largely in it. I have not heard of Melville, 
or "Tommo," since I left him on the Island, 
and likewise supposed him to be dead; and 
not knowing where a letter would find him, 
and being anxious to know where he is, and 
to tell him my "yarn" and compare "log" 
books, I have concluded to ask you to insert 
this notice, and inform him of my yet being 
alive and to ask you to request New York, 
Albany, and Boston papers to publish this 
notice so that it may reach him. My true 
name is Richard Greene, and I have the scar 
on my head which I received from the Hap- 
par spear and which came near killing me. 
I left Melville and fell in with an Irishman 
who had resided on the island for some time 
and who assisted me in returning to the ship, 
and who faithfully promised me to go and 
bring Melville to our ship next day, which 
he never did, his only object being money. I 
gave him five dollars to get me on board, but 
could not return to Melville. I sailed to New 
[ 18 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

) 

Zealand and thence home; and I request 
Melville to send me his address if this should 
chance to meet his eye. "Mortarkee" was 
the word I used when I heard of his being 
alive. 

Toby.' " 

Melville's letter also contains probably the first 
reference to a projected sequel to Typee, which 
was shortly after incorporated in the Revised 
Edition. 

2 

On July 28, 1846, Melville wrote as follows: 

"You remember you said something about 
anticipating the piracy that might be perpe- 
trated on the 'Sequel,' by publishing an ex- 
tract or two from it — which you said you 
would attend to— I meant to speak to you 
again about it, but forgot to do so. . . .1 
take this to be a matter of some little 
moment. 

"The Revised (Expurgated? — Odious 
word!) Edition of 'Typee' ought to be duly 
announced — and as the matter (in one re- 
spect) is a little delicate, I am happy that the 
literary tact of Mr. Duyckinck will be ex- 
erted on the occasion. . . . 

Very faithfully yours 

Herman Melville." 
[ 19 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

The Revised Edition appeared in due course, 
and Melville's suggestion that what was really 
intended was an Expurgated Edition was amply 
corroborated. Under cover of a revision, involv- 
ing the omission of the Appendix and the addi- 
tion of "The Story of Toby," some drastic 
changes were made in the text, which are noticed 
in full in Part II of this volume. One need here 
pnly examine a few of them to appreciate Mel- 
ville's disgust at the enforced alterations in his 
manuscript. 

The first set of expurgations have to do with 
Melville's references to missionaries. This is 
undoubtedly the delicate matter of which he 
speaks in his letter. Melville disliked mission- 
aries, and did not hesitate to state the fact, to- 
gether with his reasons. 

In the Preface to the original edition he says: 

"There are a few passages in the ensuing 
chapters which may be thought to bear 
rather hard upon a reverend order of men, 
the account of whose proceedings in different 
quarters of the globe — transmitted to us 
through their own hands — very generally, 
and often very deservedly, receives high 
commendation. Such passages will be 
found, however, to be based upon facts ad- 
mitting of no contradiction, and which have 
come immediately under the writer's cogni- 
[ 20 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

sance. The conclusions deduced from these 
facts are unavoidable, and in stating them 
the author has been influenced by no feeling 
of animosity, either to the individuals them- 
selves or to that glorious cause which has 
not always been served by the proceedings 
of some of its advocates." 

Elsewhere in the original text he writes : 

" . . . As a religious solemnity, however, it 
had not at all corresponded with the horri- 
ble description of Polynesian worship which 
we have received in some published narra- 
tives, and especially in those accounts of the 
evangelized islands with which the mission- 
aries have favored us. Did not the sacred 
character of these persons render the purity 
of their intentions unquestionable, I should 
certainly be led to suppose that they had 
exaggerated the evils of Paganism, in order 
to enhance the merit of their own disinter- 
ested labors." 

And again, speaking of the natives: 

"Better will It be for them for ever to re- 
main the happy and innocent heathens and 
barbarians that they now are, than, like 
the wretched Inhabitants of the Sandwich 
Islands, to enjoy the mere name of Chris- 
[21 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

tians without experiencing any of the vital 
operations of true religion whilst, at the 
same time, they are made the victims of the 
worst vices and evils of civilization." 

Moreover, in the original text, this passage is 
to be found : 

"An intrepid missionary, undaunted by the 
ill-success that had attended all previous en- 
deavors to conciliate the savages, and believ- 
ing much in the efficacy of female influence, 
introduced among them his young and beau- 
tiful wife, the first white woman who had 
ever visited their shores. The islanders at 
first gazed in mute admiration at so unusual 
a prodigy, and seemed inclined to regard it 
as some new divinity. But after a short time, 
becoming familiar with its charming aspect, 
and jealous of the folds which encircled its 
form, they sought to pierce the sacred veil of 
calico in which it was enshrined, and in the 
gratification of their curiosity so far over- 
stepped the limits of good breeding as deeply 
to offend the lady's sense of decorum. Her 
sex once ascertained, their idolatry was 
changed into contempt. . . . To the horror 
of her affectionate spouse, she was stripped 
of her garments, and given to understand 
that she could no longer carry on her deceits 
with impunity. The gentle dame was not 
[ 22 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

sufficiently evangelized to endure this, and, 
fearful of further improprieties, she forced 
her husband to relinquish his undertaking. 



To say nothing of: 

"Look at Honolulu, the metropolis of the 
Sandwich Islands! — A community of disin- 
terested merchants, and devoted self-exiled 
heralds of the Cross, located on the very 
spot that twenty years ago was defiled by the 
presence of idolatry. What a subject for an 
eloquent Bible-meeting orator! Nor has 
such an opportunity for a display of mis- 
sionary rhetoric been allowed to pass by 
unimproved ! 

"But when these philanthropists send us 
such glowing accounts of one half of their 
labors, why does their modesty restrain them 
from publishing the other half of the good 
they have wrought? — Not until I visited 
Honolulu was I aware of the fact that the 
small remnant of the natives had been civi- 
lized into draught horses, and evangelized 
into beasts of burden. But so it is. They 
have been literally broken into the traces, 
and are harnessed to the vehicles of their 
spiritual instructors like so many dumb 
brutes ! 

[ 23 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

"Among a multitude of similar exhibitions 
that I saw, I shall never forget a robust, 
red-faced, and very lady-like personage, a 
missionary's spouse, who day after day for 
months took her regular airings in a little 
go-cart drawn by two of the islanders. ..." 

And also the following: 

"The republican missionaries of Oahu cause 
to be gazetted in the Court Journal, pub- 
lished at Honolulu, the most trivial move- 
ments of 'his gracious majesty' King Kam- 
mehammaha III., and 'their highnesses the 
princes of the blood royal.' — And who is his 
'gracious majesty,' and what the quality of 
this 'blood royal?' — His 'gracious majesty' 
is a fat, lazy-looking blockhead, with as little 
character as power. He has lost the noble 
traits of the barbarian, without acquiring the 
redeeming graces of a civilized being; and, 
although a member of the Hawaiian Tem- 
perance Society, is a most inveterate dram- 
drinker." 

These statements aroused a tempest of denials 
and invective aimed at Melville, who, in the 
words of one reviewer, was "a prejudiced, incom- 
petent, and truthless witness," and were all omit- 
ted from the Revised Edition. 

The second set of expurgations must have 
[ 24 1 



•^ 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

annoyed Melville still more, for they were made 
obligatory by the shocked sensibilities of the day. 
In referring to the missionaries Melville had in- 
jured the feelings of a group of individuals who 
promptly retorted that he was a liar; in these 
other passages he had offended the sense of pro- 
priety of the community which promptly assailed 
him with blue pencils. 

On the very first page it became necessary to 
delete the following no doubt extremely insulting 
passage : 

"Oh! ye state-room sailors, who make so 
much ado about a fourteen-days' passage 
across the Atlantic; who so pathetically re- 
late the privations and hardships of the sea, 
where, after a day of breakfasting, lunching, 
dining off five courses, chatting, playing 
whist, and drinking champaign-punch, it was 
your hard lot to be shut up in little cabinets 
of mahogany and maple, and sleep for ten 
hours, with nothing to disturb you but 'those 
good-for-nothing tars, shouting and tramping 
overhead' — ^what would ye say to our six 
months out of sight of land?" 

After describing how the Marquesan girls had 
swum out to the ship and clambered aboard, the 
following paragraph was going just a little bit 

too far! 

[ 25 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

"What a sight for us bachelor sailors! how- 
avoid so dire a temptation? For who could 
think of tumbling these artless creatures 
overboard, when they had swam miles to 
welcome us?" 

In a description of the young Marquesan girls 
in swimming, the words "and revealing their 
naked forms to the waist" were apparently 
deemed entirely too graphic. 

The passage which tells how Melville was 
massaged once a day with aka was robbed of the 
following illuminating sentence: 

"... and most refreshing and agreeable 
are the juices of the aka, when applied to 
one's limbs by the soft palms of sweet 
nymphs, whose bright eyes are beaming upon 
you with kindness. ..." 

In relating a canoe trip with Fayaway, Melville 
was not allowed to state that they were "on the 
very best terms possible with one another," and 
the following remarks on dancing were forthwith 
obliterated : 

"In good sooth, they so sway their floating 
forms, arch their necks, toss aloft their 
naked arms, and glide, and swim, and whirl, 
that it was almost too much for a quiet, 
soberminded, modest young man like my- 
self." 

[ 26 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

The words "To be sure, there were old Mar- 
heyo and Tinor, who seemed to live together 
quite sociably, but for all that, I had sometimes 
observed a comical-looking old gentleman dressed 
in a suit of shabby tattooing, who appeared to be 
equally at home," are all that remain in the Re- 
vised Edition of the original passage which reads 
entertainingly : 

"To be sure, there were old Marheyo and 
Tinor, who seemed to have a sort of nuptial 
understanding with one another, but for all 
that, I had sometimes observed a comical- 
looking old gentleman dressed in a suit of 
shabby tattooing, who had the audacity to 
take various liberties with the lady, and that 
too in the very presence of the old warrior 
her husband, who looked on, as good-na- 
turedly as if nothing was happening." 

In the account of his final escape Melville said 
originally that he parted from Fayaway, who was 
"sobbing indignantly" — a word which, in the 
Revised Edition, was prudently changed to "con- 
vulsively." 

And the following pleasant and "characteristic 
anecdote of the Queen of Nukuheva" was hur- 
riedly banished from the text : 

"... The ship's company . . . soon ar- 
rested her Majesty's attention. She singled 

[ 27 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

out from their number an old salt, whose 
bare arms and feet, and exposed breast were 
covered with as many inscriptions in India 
ink as the lid of an Egyptian sarcophagus. 
Notwithstanding all the . . . remonstrances 
of the French officers, she immediately ap- 
proached the man, and . . . gazed with 
admiration at the bright blue and vermilion 
pricking . . . picture their consternation, 
when all at once the royal lady, eager to dis- 
play the hieroglyphics on her own sweet 
form, bent forward for a moment, and turn- 
ing sharply round, threw up the skirts of her 
mantle. ..." 



One of the earliest references to Omoo 
found in a letter dated December 8, 1846. 

"My dear Mr. Duyckinck 

"I arrived in town last evening from the 
East. As I hinted to you some time ago I 
have a new book in M.S. — Relying much 
upon your literary judgement I am very de- 
sirous of getting your opinion of it -and (if 
you feel disposed to favor me so far) to 
receive your hints. — I address you now not as 
being in any way connected with Messrs. 
W[iley} and Plutnam] but presume to do 
so confidentially as a friend. 
[ 28 ] 



IS 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

"In passing through town some ten days 
since I left the M.S. with a particular lady 
acquaintance of mine; at whose house I in- 
tend calling this evening to obtain it. The 
lady resides up town. On my way down I 
will stop at your residence with the M.S. and 
will be very much pleased to see you — if not 
otherwise engaged — I will call, say at 8j^. 

"With sincere regard 

Believe me, my dear Sir, 
Very truly yours, 

Herman Melville." 



[ 29 ] 



Ill 

AN UNPUBLISHED REVIEW 

MELVILLE published a number of book 
reviews in The Literary World, notably 
of Cooper's Sea Lions, Hawthorne's Scarlet Let- 
ter, Parkman's Oregon Trail, and a new edition 
of Cooper's Red Rover. The articles are un- 
signed, and it is more than probable that other 
reviews by Melville appear in that magazine 
which can not now be identified. 

The following letter, which shows Melville in 
one of his irrepressible moods, was received 
November ii, 1848, and contains a review which, 
needless to say, was never published. 

"What the deuce does it mean? Here's a 
book positively turned wrong side out, the 
title page on the cover, an index to the whole 
in more ways than one . . . 

{Description of subject matter) 

"You have been horribly imposed upon, 

my dear Sir. The book is no book, but a 

compact bundle of wrapping paper. And as 

for Mr. Hart, pen and ink should instantly 

[ 30 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

be taken away from that impossible ( ?) 
man, upon the same principle that pistols are 
withdrawn from the wight bent on suicide. 

"Prayers should be offered up for him 
among the congregations, and Thanksgiving 
Day postponed until long after his 'book' is 
pubhshed. What great national sin have we' 
committed to deserve this infliction. 

"Seriously, Mr. Duyckinck, on my bended 
knees, and with tears in my eyes, deliver me 
from writing aught upon this crucifying 
Romance of Yachting. 

"What has Mr. Hart done that I should 
publicly devour him? I bear that hapless 
man no malice. Then why smite him ? And 
as for glossing over his book with a few com- 
monplaces — that I can not do. The book 
deserves to be burnt in a fire of asafetida, 
and by the hand that wrote it. 

"Seriously again . . . the book is an abor- 
tion, the mere trunk of a book, minus head, 
arm or leg. Take it back, I beseech, and get 
some one to cart it back to the author. 

Yours sincerely, 

H. M." 



[ 31 ] 



IV 
EMERSON 

THE following letter, written March 3, 1849, 
refers to previous correspondence concern- 
ing Emerson, and gives Melville's impressions of 
him after hearing him lecture. The reference to 
the great whale is significant. And, whatever his 
subsequent tendencies may have been, at this time, 
certainly, Melville does not appear to have been 
a partisan of unintelligibility. 

"Nay, I do not oscillate in Emerson's 
rainbow, but prefer rather to hang myself in 
mine own halter than swing in any other 
man's swing. Yet I think Emerson is more 
than a brilliant fellow. Be his stuff begged, 
borrowed, or stolen, or of his own domestic 
manufacture he is an uncommon man. 

"Swear he is a humbug — then is he no un- 
common humbug. Lay it down that had not 
Sir Thomas Browne lived, Emerson would 
not have mystified — I will answer that had 
not Old Zach's father begot him. Old Zach 
would never have been the hero of Palo 
[ 32 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Alto. The truth is that we are all sons, 
grandsons, or nephews or great-nephews of 
those who go before us. No one is his own 
sire. 

"I was very agreeably disappointed in Mr. 
Emerson. I had heard of him as full of 
transcendentalism, myths and oracular gib- 
berish ... to my surprise, I found him 
quite intelligible, tho' to say truth, they told 
me that that night he was unusually plain. 

"Now, there is a something about every 
man elevated above mediocrity, which is for 
the most part instantly perceptible. This I 
see in Mr. Emerson. And, frankly, for the 
sake of the argument, let us call him a fool — 
then had I rather be a fool than a wise man. 

"I love all men who dive. Any fish can 
swim near the surface, but it takes a great 
whale to go down stairs five miles or more; 
and if he don't attain the bottom, why, all 
the lead in Galena can't fashion the plummit 
that will. I'm not talking of Mr. Emerson 
now, but of the whole corps of thought- 
divers that have been diving and coming up 
again with blood-shot eyes since the world 
began. 

"I could readily see in Emerson, notwith- 
standing his merit, a gaping flaw. It was, 
the insinuation that had he lived in those 
days when the world was made, he might 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

have offered some valuable suggestions. 
These men are all cracked right across the 
brow. And never will the pullers-down be 
rkhle to cope with the builders-up. . . . Butl 
/ enough of this Plato who talks thro' his J 
/ nose. . . . ^ 

"You complain that Emerson tho' a deni- 
zen of the land of gingerbread, is above 
munching a plain cake in company of jolly 
fellows, and swigging (?) off his ale like you 
and me. Ah, my dear Sir, that's his misfor- 
tune, not his fault. His belly, Sir, is in his 
chest, and his brains descend down into his 
neck, and offer an obstacle to a draughtful of 
ale or a mouthful of cake. . . . Goodbye. 

H. M." 



[ 34 ] 



MARDI 

ON April 14, 1849, Melville published 
Mardi, his third book. In the Preface he 
says of it: 

"Not long ago, having published two narra- 
tives of voyages in the Pacific, which, in 
many quarters, were received with incredu- 
lity, the thought occurred to me, of indeed 
writing a romance of Polynesian adventure, 
and publishing it as such ; to see whether the 
fiction might not, possibly, be received for a 
verity : in some degree the reverse of my pre- 
vious experience." 

One encounters in this book such personages 
as the Chondropterygii, Little King Peepi, Don- 
jalolo, Babbalanja, "those scamps" the Plujii, 
"that jolly old Lord" BoraboUa. One visits the 
Island of Juam, "that jolly Island" Mondoldo, 
the Lake of Yammo, the Catacombs, Pimminee, 
Dominora, Porpheero, the Land of Warwicks or 
King-makers, and Hooloomooloo. With Taji, 
one sits down to dinner with five-and-twenty kings. 
[ 35 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

One discusses the hereafters of Fish, and what 
manner of men the Tapparians were, and Mol- 
lusca, Kings, Toad-stools, and other matters. 

The book is full of marvels and portents, his- 
tory, zoology, adventure, and philosophy. Per- 
haps much of it is allegory, on the other hand 
perhaps nearly all of it Is burlesque. 

"... most ancient of all, was a hiero- 
glyphical Elegy on the Dumps, consisting of 
one thousand and one lines. . . . Then there 
were plenty of rare old ballads: — Kin^ 
Kroko, and the Fisher Girl. . . . And brave 
old chronicles . . . The whole pedigree of 
the King of Kandidee, with that of his 
famous horse, Znorto. . . . And Tarantula 
books : — Sour milk for the young, by a dairy- 
man. . . . And poetical productions : — Son- 
net on the last breath of an Ephemera; The 
Gad-fly, and other poems . . . and scarce 
old memoirs . . . The Life of old Philo, 
the Philanthropist, in one chapter. . . . And 
books by Chiefs and Nobles : — on the proper 
manner of saluting a bosom friend . . . A 
Canto on a cough caught by my consort . . . 
"And theological works : — Pudding for the 
Pious . . . Pickles for the Persecuted. And 
long and tedious romances . . . The King 
and the Cook, or the Cook and the King. 
And books of voyages . . . Franko: its 
[ 36 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Kitiff, Court and Tadpoles. . . . And pam- 
phlets by retired warriors: — Three receipts 
for bottling new arack; To brown bread 
fruit without burning. ..." 

A great deal of it is rollicking nonsense. Not 
a little of it is poetry, both in prose and verse — 

"Fish, Fish, we are fish with red gills: 
Naught disturbs us, our blood is at zero : 
We are buoyant because of our bags, 
Being many, each fish is a hero. 
We care not what it is, this life 
That we follow, this phantom unknown: 
To swim, it's exceedingly pleasant — 
So swim away, making a foam. . . . 

"We fish, we fish, we merrily swim. 
We care not for friend, nor for foe: 
Our fins are stout. 
Our tails are out. 
As through the seas we go ..." 

and the following, which seems to be the only 
direct reference in Melville's writings to the Cali- 
fornia gold rush — 

"Now, northward coasting along Kolumbo's 
Western shore . . . and where we landed 
not . . . and after many, many days, we 
spied prow after prow, before the wind all 

[ 37 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

northward bound : sails widespread, and pad- 
dles plying: scaring the fish from before 
them. 

"... But as they sped, with frantic glee, 
in one long chorus thus they sang: — 

"We rovers bold, 
To the land of gold, 
Over bowling billows are gliding: 
Eager to toil, 
For the golden spoil, 
And every hardship biding. 
See 1 See ! 

Before our prow's resistless dashes. 
The gold-fish fly in golden flashes! 
'Neath a sun of gold. 
We rovers bold. 

On the golden land are gaining; 
And every night, 
We steer aright. 
By golden stars unwaning ! 
All fires burn a golden glare: 
No locks so bright as golden hair! 
AH orange groves have golden gushings : 
All mornings dawn with golden flushings I 
In a shower of gold, say fables old, , 
A maiden was won by the god of gold. . . . 

"... Lo, a vision ... A vast and silent 

bay, belted by silent villages ... a thou- 

t 38 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

sand paths, marked with footprints, all in- 
land leading, none village-ward; and strown 
with traces, as of a flying host. On: over 
forest — hill, and dale — and lol the golden 
region! After the glittering spoil, by 
strange river-margins, and beneath impend- 
ing cliffs, thousands delve in quicksands; and, 
sudden, sink in graves of their own making: 
with gold dust mingling their own ashes. 

"With many camels, a sleek stranger 
comes — pauses before the shining heaps, and 
shows his treasures: yams and bread-fruit. 
'Give, give,' the famished hunters cry — 'a 
thousand shekels for a yam I — a prince's ran- 
som for a meal!' . . . Then he who toiled 
not, dug not, slaved not, straight loads his 
caravans with gold; regains the beach, and 
swift embarks for home. 'Honie, home!' 
the hunters cry, with bursting eyes. 'With 
this bright gold, could we but join our wait- 
ing wives, who wring their hands on distant 
shores, all then were well. But we can not 
fly; our prows lie rotting on the beach. Ah ! 
home! thou only happiness! — better thy sil- 
ver earnings than all these golden findings. 
Oh, bitter end to all our hopes — ^we die in 
golden graves.' " 

From beginning to end, Mardi is gloriously 

[39 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

insane. One persists in the belief that Melville 
enjoyed every line of it, even in his most abstruse 
passages. In the midst of much superlative praise 
the book was, of course, viciously attacked. 
Blackwood's Magazine was sadly disgusted "on 
a perusal of a rubbishing rhapsody entitled 
Mardi." The Dublin University Magazine 
found it "one of the saddest, most melancholy, 
most deplorable and humiliating perversions of 
genius" in the language. 

What was the effect of such criticism on Mel- 
ville, the first directed primarily at his writing, is 
very clearly shown in the following letter, the 
first portion of which appears elsewhere in this 
volume under Redburn. It is a peculiarly signifi- 
cant and pathetic Melville document, sensitive and 
disillusioned, written from London, on December 
14, 1849, while he was seeking to dispose of the 
manuscript of JVhite-Jacket, and secure some 
advance from his London publisher with which 
to pay his pressing debts. 

Speaking of a writer in need of money, Mel- 
ville says: 

"... and when he attempts anything 
higher, God help him and save him ! for it is 
not with a hollow purse as with a hollow 
baloon — for a hollow purse makes the poet 
sink — witness 'Mardi.' . . . 

"What a madness and anguish it is, that 
[ 40 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

an author can never — under no conceivable 
circumstances — be at all frank with his rea:d- 
ers. Could I, for one, be frank, with them, 
how would they cease their railing — those at 
least who have railed. 

"In a little notice of the 'Oregon Trail' 
I once said something 'critical' about another 
man's book — I shall never do it again. 
Hereafter I shall no more stab at a book (in 
print, I mean) than I would stab at a man. 
I am but a poor mortal, and I admit that I 
learn by experience and not by divine intui- 
tion. Had I not written and published 
'Mardi' in all likelihood I would not be as 
wise as I am now, or may be. For that thing 
was stabbed at (I do not say through) and 
therefore I am the wiser for it. . . . 

H. Melville." 

This is a very humble Melville, although there 
is a fine lift of the chin in that " . . . I do not 
say through." In the next letter, February 2, 
1850, he is' back again with his old ironical pen. 
The letter. Incidentally, is a not unworthy sample 
of what is rapidly becoming a lost art: 

"My dear Duyckinck — Tho' somewhat 

unusual for a donor I must beg to apologise 

for making you the accompanying present of 

'Mardi.' But no one who knows your li- 

[ 41 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

brary can doubt that such a choice conserva- 
tory of exotics and other rare things in litera- 
ture, after being long enjoyed by yourself, 
must to a late posterity be preserved intact 
by your descendants. How natural then — 
tho' vain — in your friend to desire a place in 
it for a plant, which tho' now unblown (em- 
blematically, the leaves, you perceive, are 
uncut) may possibly — by some miracle, that 
is — flower like the aloe, a hundred years 
hence — or not flower at all, which is more 
likely by far, for some aloes never flower. 

"Again: (as the divines say) political re- 
publics should be the asylum for the perse- 
cuted of all nations; so, if 'Mardi' be 
admitted to your shelves, your bibliographi- 
cal Republic of Letters may find some con- 
tentment in the thought that it has afforded 
refuge to a book which almost everjrwhere 
else has been driven forth like a wild, mystic 
Mormon into shelterless exile. 

"The leaves, I repeat, are uncut — let them 
remain so — and let me supplementarily hint 
that a bit of old parchment (from some old 
Arabic M.S.S. on Astrology) tied around 
each volume, and sealed on the back with a 
Sphynx and never to be broken till the aloe 
flowers — would not be an unsuitable device 
for the bookbinding of 'Mardi.' 

"That book is a sort of dose, if you please, 
[ 42 ] 



0i/u^ ^ Ou>u^ . /fn 



^ 



^^ ^J|. /Jh^^^nu^i^', -"%- ^-^^ ^^ -^^-^ ^^^ 

^^M^ /K^c^ U^^^Ue^V ^yu^^^r^wo^ , <J^^-^ '"^^^ /»*-t-t^ 

Facsimile of a Letter from Melville to Evert Duyckinck 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

tho' in the present case charitably admin- 
istered in three parts instead of two. . . . 

Truly yours, 

H. Melville." 

The reference in the last paragraph Is to the 
London three-volume edition, the American edi- 
tion having been in two volumes. The letter, 
written nearly a year after the publication of the 
book, bears unmistakable evidence of its failure. 
But the hundred years have nearly passed, per- 
haps the aloe will yet in time flower! 



[ 43 ] 



VI 
REDBURN 

IN June, 1837, when he was not quite eighteen, 
Melville shipped before the mast in New 
York, aboard of the Highlander, of which he 
says in Redburn: 

"... you must know that the Highlander 
was not a Liverpool liner, or packet-ship, 
plying in connection with a sisterhood of 
packets, at stated intervals, between the two 
ports. No: she was only what is called a 
regular trader to Liverpool; sailing upon no 
fixed days, and acting very much as she 
pleased, being bound by no obligations of 
any kind; though in all her voyages, ever 
having New York or Liverpool for her des- 
tination. Merchant vessels which are neither 
liners nor regular traders, among sailors 
come under the general head of transient 
ships, which implies that they are here today, 
and somewhere else tomorrow, like MuUins's 
dog. . . . 

"He \^the fiffureheadj was a gallant six- 
[ 44 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

footer of a Highlander 'in full fig,' with 
bright tartans, bare knees, barred leggings, 
and blue bonnet, and the most vermilion of 
cheeks. He was game to his wooden mar- 
row, and stood up to it through thick and 
thin ; one foot a little advanced, and his right 
arm stretched forward, daring on the waves. 
In a gale of wind it was glorious to watch 
him standing at his post like a hero, and 
plunging up and down the watery Highlands 
and Lowlands, as the ship went foaming on 
her way. ..." 

Melville himself went aboard with a gray 
shooting-jacket with "fine long skirts, stout horn 
buttons, and plenty of pockets," and the clothes 
which he had brought from home, including his 
"best pair of pantaloons ... a very conspicuous 
and remarkable looking pair." 

"I had had them made to order by our vil- 
lage tailor," he says. "Now this old tailor 
had shown me the pattern after which he 
intended to make my pantaloons; but I im- 
proved upon it, and bade him have a slit on 
the outside of each leg, at the foot, to button 
up with a row of six brass bell buttons; for 
a grown-up cousin of mine who was a great 
sportsman, used to wear a beautiful pair of 
pantaloons, made precisely in that way. . . . 
"The sailors made a great deal of fun of 
[45 1 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

them . . . showing very plainly that they 
had no idea that my pantaloons were a very 
genteel pair, made in the height of the 
sporting fashion, and copied from my cous- 
in's, who was a young man of fortune and 
drove a Tilbury." 

He wore, moreover, his Sunday boots, which 
fitted him to a charm. They were, it seems : 

"... a beautiful pair of boots. But all 
this only unfitted them the more for sea- 
service; as I soon discovered. They had 
very high heels, which were all the time trip- 
ping me in the rigging . . . and the salt 
water made them shrink in such a manner 
that they pinched me terribly about the in- 
step. . . . The legs were quite long, coming 
a good way up towards my knees, and the 
edges were mounted with red morocco. The 
sailors used to call them my 'gaff-topsail- 
boots.' " 

These articles Melville supplemented, to the 
extent of two dollars and forty-nine cents, with 
"a red woollen shirt near Catherine Market, a 
tarpaulin hat, which I got at an out-door stand 
near Peck Slip, a belt and a jack-knife, and two 
or three trifles." One of his last acts ashore 
was to try on the shirt, "to see what sort of a 
looking sailor I was going to make," after which 
[ 46 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

he took a pair of scissors and "went to cutting 
my hair, which was very long." One would cheer- 
fully give a complete first edition of Melville for 
a picture of him thus "in full fig," pantaloons, 
topboots and all! 

On August 1 8, 1849, Melville published Red- 
burn, in which he gives a detailed account of that 
voyage to Liverpool and back, and of his experi- 
ences in the forecastle, and among the "booble 
alleys" of Liverpool. The book is dedicated to 
his younger brother, Thomas Melville, "now a 
sailor on a voyage to China," who subsequently 
became captain of the clipper-ship Meteor. 

Among the most striking features of the book 
are Melville's descriptions of his shipmates. The 
sinister Jackson, who — 

"... was as yellow as gamboge, had no 
more whiskers on his cheek than I have on 
my elbows. His hair had fallen out, and left 
him very bald, except in the nape of his neck, 
and just behind the ears, where it was stuck 
over with short little tufts, and looked like 
a worn-out shoe brush. His nose had broken 
down in the middle, and he squinted with one 
eye, and did not look very straight out of 
the other. He dressed a good deal like a 
Bowery boy; for he despised the ordinary 
sailor rig; wearing a pair of great overall 
blue trousers, fastened with suspenders, and 
[ 47 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

three red woolen shirts, one over the other 
. . . and he had a large white wool hat, 
with a broad rolling brim. . . . He might 
have seen thirty, or perhaps fifty years. . . . 
Nothing was left of this Jackson but the foul 
lees and dregs of a man; he was thin as a 
shadow; nothing but skin and bones. ..." 

The black cook, Mr. Thompson, "a serious old 
fellow, much given to metaphysics, and used to 
talk about original sin." The steward, a hand- 
some, dandy mulatto, who had once been a barber 
in West Broadway and went by the name of 
Lavender. He sported an uncommon head of 
frizzled hair, which he kept — 

"... well perfumed with Cologne water. 
. . . His clothes, being mostly cast-off suits 
of the Captain of a London liner . . . were 
all in the height of the exploded fashions, 
and of every kind of color and cut. He had 
claret colored suits, and snuff colored suits, 
and red velvet vests, and buff and brimstone 
pantaloons. . . . He was a sentimental sort 
of darky, and read the 'Three Spaniards,' 
and 'Charlotte Temple,' and carried a lock 
of frizzled hair in his vest pocket, which he 
frequently volunteered to show to people, 
with his handkerchief to his eyes." 
[ 48 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

The sailor, Max, with his lugubrious library con- 
sisting of an account of Shipwrecks and Disasters 
at Sea, and a large black volume with Delirium 
Tremens in great gilt letters on the back. And 
Jack Blunt, "a curious looking fellow . . . and 
a little given to looking at sea-life romantically" — 

"... singing songs about susceptible mer- 
maids who fell in love with handsome young 
oyster boys and gallant fishermen. And he 
had . . . another incomprehensible story 
about a sort of fairy sea-queen who used to 
be dunning a sea captain all the time for his 
autograph to boil in some eel soup, for a spell 
against the scurvy. . . . 

"And he frequently related his interviews 
in Liverpool with a fortune-teller, an old 
negro woman by the name of De Squak . . . 
and how she had two black cats, with re- 
markably green eyes, and night caps on their 
heads, solemnly seated on a claw-footed 
table near the old goblin, when she felt his 
pulse, to tell what was going to befall him." 

This Blunt was a devotee of "Trafalgar Oil for 
restoring the hair," supplemented by applications 
of "Balm of Paradise, or the Elixir of the Battle 
of Copenhaguen." He was also the possessor of 
the Bonaparte Dream Book, purporting to be — 

"... the self-same system by aid of which 
[ 49 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Napoleon Bonaparte had risen in the world 
from being a corporal to an emperor. . . . 
Every morning before taking his pills and 
applying his hair oils, he [jB/mw/] would steal 
out of his bunk before the rest of the watch 
were awake, take out his pamphlet and a bit 
of chalk . . . and begin scratching his oily 
head to remember his fugitive dreams. . . ." 

Of Redburn, Mr. Masefield has said : 

"The book I love best of his is one very 
difficult to come by. . . . It is the romance 
of his own boyhood. I mean Redburn. Any 
number of good pens will praise the known 
books . . . perhaps Redburn will have fewer 
praises, so here goes for Redburn, a boy's 
book about running away to sea. ..." 

It is interesting to turn back from this to that 
letter of Melville's, the conclusion of which has 
already been quoted in this volume under Mardi. 
As explained in that section, the letter was writ- 
ten from abroad, in December, 1849, at a time 
when Melville was in considerable financial 
trouble. 

He had sailed on October 11, 1849, ^^om New 

York aboard the packet Southampton. The 

reference in the letter to the cutting off of his 

"travelling tail," has to do with the abandoning 

[ 50 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

from lack of funds of a projected journey to Con- 
stantinople, Greece, and Egypt, which he was to 
have undertaken with two fellow passengers, Mr. 
Adler, a German scholar, and Mr. Taylor, a 
cousin of James Bayard Taylor. Owing to the 
confused state of the copyright question in Eng- 
land of which he complains, Melville found it 
necessary to remain in London for the purpose of 
placing the manuscript of JVhite-Jacket, content- 
ing himself with a flying trip to Paris, Brussels, 
Cologne, and Coblentz, which he made during the 
interval between the two dates given in the fol- 
lowing letter — a letter which gives a graphic im- 
pression of the conditions under which Redhurn 
was written, and of Melville's own estimate of 
that work: 

"Paris, Dec. 2, 1849. 
"My dear Mr. Duyckinck . . . 

"The other evening I went to see Rachel 
— and having taken my place in the 'que' 
(how the devil do you spell it?) or tail — and 
having waited there for full an hour — upon 
at last arriving at the ticket-box the woman 
then closed her little wicket in my face — and 
so the 'tail' was cut off. 

"Now my travelling 'tail' has been cut off 
in like manner, by the confounded state of 
the copyright question in England. . . . 
[51 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

"London, Dec. 14, '49. 

"My dear Duyckinck — I meant to send 
this to you by a Havre packet — ^but learn- 
ing more about her did not. . . . 

"I did not see your say about the book 
'Redburn,' which to my surprise (somewhat) 
seems to have been favorably received. I 
am glad of it, for it puts money into an 
empty purse. But I hope I shall never write 
such a book again. 

"Tho' when a poor devil writes with duns 
all around him, and looking over the back of 
his chair, and perching on his pen, and danc- 
ing in his ink-stand — like the devils about 
St. Anthony — ^what can you expect of that 
poor devil ? What but a beggarly 'Redburn.' 

"But we that write and print have all our 
books predestinated — and for me, I shall 
write such things as the Great Publisher of 
mankind ordained ages before he published 
The World. . . . 

H. Melville." 



[52 ] 



VII 
HAWTHORNE 

IN 1850, Melville and Hawthorne both took 
up their residence in the Berkshires. Melville 
settled in the Pittsfield farm which he christened 
Arrowhead, Hawthorne at Lenox in, as he says, 
"the very ugliest little bit of an old red farm- 
house you ever saw." Melville was thirty-one 
years old, Hawthorne fifteen years older. The 
two men became distant neighbors, and, one is 
supposed to believe, close friends. 

Mr. Weaver, in his Herman Melville, Mariner 
and Mystic, quotes a number of letters from Mel- 
ville to Hawthorne, in which one is tempted to 
remark that Melville ventures to treat Hawthorne 
as an equal. 

"I should have a paper-mill established at 
one end of the house," he says once, "and so 
have an extra riband for foolscap rolling in 
upon my desk, and upon that endless riband 
I should write a thousand — a million — a bil- 
lion thoughts, all under the form of a letter 
to you. The divine magnet is on you, and 
[ 53 1 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

my magnet responds. Which is the bigger? 
A foolish question — they are one. 

H." 

Again in a postscript he says to Hawthorne 
that : 

"This 'all' feeling. . . . You must often 
have felt it, lying on the grass on a warm 
summer's day. Your legs seem to send out 
shoots into the earth. Your hair feels like 
leaves upon your head ! This is the all feel- 
ing. . . . You must not fail to admire my 
discretion in paying the postage on this let- 
ter." 

It seems unlikely, however, that Hawthorne 
ever experienced any such pagan sensations. In 
another letter Melville presumes to suggest to 
Hawthorne that: 

"... I shall roll down to you, my good 
fellow, seeing we — that is, you and I — must 
hit upon some little bit of vagabondage be- 
fore autumn comes. Greylock — ^we must go 
and vagabondise there. ..." 

This to the man whose acquaintances "formed 
but a tiny arc in the great circle of his compre- 
hension," who "was worshipped, idolised, can- 
onised." One can not rid oneself of the 
impression that Melville was forever slapping 
[ 54 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Hawthorne on the back, to the unaccustomed sur- 
prise and private displeasure of the latter. One 
suspects that the jocular Melville shared the error 
of those who — 

"... seeing his [Hawthorne's} congenial 
aspect towards their little round of habits 
and beliefs . . . would leap to the conclu- 
sion that he was no more and no less than 
one of themselves. . . ." 

In other words, one wonders, when all was 
said and done, whether Melville did not take a 
mile of Hawthorne's friendship for every inch 
vouchsafed. 

It is interesting to turn from these speculations 
to the following letter, written by Melville in 
February, 1851, in which he voices his private 
impressions of his august neighbor, and suggests 
a salutary addition to his "plump sphericality" : 

Pittsfield, Wednesday, 185 1. 
"My dear Duyckinck . . . After a long 
procrastination I went down to see Mr. 
Hawthorne a couple of weeks ago. I found 
him, of course, buried in snow; and the de- 
lightful scenery about him all wrapped up 
and tucked away under a napkin as it were. 
He was to have made me a day's visit, and 
I had promised myself much pleasure in get- 
ting him up in my snug room here, and dis- 
[ 55 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

cussing the universe with a bottle of brandy 
and cigars. But he has not been able to 
come, owing to sickness in his family — or 
else he's up to the lips in the Universe again. 

"By the way, I have recently read his 
'Twice Told Tales' (I hadn't read but a few 
of them before). I think they far exceed 
the 'Mosses.' They are, I fancy, an earlier 
vintage from his vine. Some of those 
sketches are wonderfully subtle. Their 
deeper meanings are worthy of a Brahmin. 
Still there is something lacking — a good deal 
lacking to the plump sphericality of the man. 
What is that? He doesn't patronise the 
butcher — he needs roast-beef, done rare. 

"Nevertheless, for one, I regard Haw- 
thorne (in his books) as evincing a quality 
of genius immensely loftier, and more pro- 
found, too, than any other American has 
shown hitherto in the printed form. Irving 
is a grasshopper to him — putting the souls 
of the two men together, I mean. But I 
must close. . . . 

Truly yours, 

H. Melville." 



[ 56 ] 



VIII 

ARROWHEAD 

1850-1851 



IN the fall of 1850 Melville installed himself 
in the farmhouse which he had purchased near 
Pittsfield, Massachusetts, on Holmes Road, and 
which he christened Arrowhead. In the Piazza 
Tales, published in 1856, Melville thus describes 
the house: 

"When I removed into the country it was to 
occupy an old-fashioned farm house . . . 
the country round about was such a picture. 
. . . The circle of the stars cut by the circle 
of the mountains. At least so it looks from 
the house, though once upon the mountains, 
no circle of them can you see. Had the site 
been chosen five rods off this charmed circle 
would not have been. 

"The house is old. Seventy years since, 

from the heart of the Hearth Stone Hill, 

they quarried the Kaaba or Holy Stone, to 

which, each Thanksgiving, the social pilgrim 

[ 57 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

used to come. So long ago that in digging 
for the foundation, the workmen used both 
spade and axe fighting the Troglodytes of 
those subterranean parts — sturdy roots of 
a sturdy wood, encamped upon what is now 
a long landslide of sleeping meadow, sloping 
away from my poppy bed. Of that knit 
wood, but one survivor stands — an elm, 
lonely through steadfastness. 
^ "Whoever built the house, he builded bet- 
ter than he knew, or else Orion in the zenith 
flashed down his Dwnocles' sword to him 
some starry night and said 'Build there.' 
For how, otherwise, could it have entered 
the builder's mind that, upon the clearing 
being made, such a purple prospect would be 
his? Nothing less than Greylock, with all 
his hills about him, like Charlemagne among 
his peers. . , ." 

Upon this house, for the sake of Greylock, 
Melville built a piazza to the north, of which he 
says: 

"But, even in December, this Northern 
I piazza does not repel — nipping cold and 
gusty though it be, and the North wind, like 
any miller, bolting by the snow in finest flour 
— for then, once more, with frosted beard, I 
pace the sleety deck, weathering Cape Horn. 
[ 58 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

"In Summer, too, Canute-like, sitting here, 
one is often reminded of the sea. For not 
only do long ground-swells roll the slant- 
ing grain, and little wavelets of the grass rip- 
ple over upon the low piazza, as their beach, 
and the blown down of dandelions is wafted 
like the spray, and the purple of the moun- 
tains is just the purple of the billows, and a 
still August noon broods over the deep 
meadows, as a calm upon the Line; but the 
vastness and the lonesomeness are so oceanic, 
and the silence and the sameness, too, that 
the first peep of a strange house, rising be- 
yond the trees, is for all the world like 
spying, on the Barbary coast, an unknown 
sail." 

The house was built in 1780 by Captain David 
Eush, and has a chimney twelve feet square, so 
one learns in Mr. Weaver's Herman Melville; 
the old kitchen fireplace being large enough to 
accommodate a four-foot log. Of this chimney 
Melville wrote in / and My Chimney, (Putnam's 
Monthly Magazine, March, 1856) : 

"... here I keep mysterious cordials of a 
choice, mysterious flavor, made so by the 
constant maturing and subtle ripening of the 
chimney's gentle heat, distilled through that 
warm mass of masonry. Better for wines it 
[ 59 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

is than voyages to the Indies; my chimney 
itself is a tropic. A chair by my chimney in 
a November day is as good for an invalid 
as a long season spent in Cuba. Often I 
think how grapes might ripen against my 
chimney. How my wife's geraniums bud 
there! But in December. Her eggs too — 
can't keep them near the chimney on account 
of haltching. Ah, a warm heart has my 
chimney. . . ." 

In Mr. Weaver's book, again, one finds a quo- 
tation from the Pittsfield reminiscences of 
Colonel Richard Lathers, who was one of Mel- 
ville's nearest neighbors, and who gives this, 
pleasant picture of Arrowhead: 

"I visited him often in his well-stocked li- 
brary, where I listened with intense pleasure 
to his highly individual views of society and 
politics. He always provided a bountiful 
supply of good cider — the product of his. 
own orchard — and of tobacco, in the virtues 
of which he was a firm believer. Indeed, 
he prided himself on the inscription painted 
over his capacious fire-place : 'I and my chim- 
ney smoke together,' an inscription I have 
seen strikingly verified more than once when 
the atmosphere Was heavy and the wind was 
east." 

[ 60 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

In this house, and in this environment, Melville 
wrote Moby-Dick and Pierre. 

Moby-Dick, undoubtedly Melville's master- 
piece — the book of which Mr. Masefield says 
that "in that wild, beautiful romance Melville 
seems to have spoken the very secret of the sea, 
and to have drawn into his tale all the magic, 
all the sadness, all the ^vild joy of many waters. 
It stands quite alone ; quite unlike any other book 
known to me. It strikes a note which no other sea 
writer has ever struck" — was written in 1850- 
185 1, and published in 1851. 

The book is a compendium of all of Melville's 
literary tendencies. It contains allegory, natural 
history, philosophy, rhapsody, oratory, character 
study, and humor. It presents one of the most 
vivid and detailed studies of the whale and of its 
capture in the language ; of — 

"... all the Leviathans of note," and also 
"a rabble of uncertain, fugitive, half-fabu- 
lous whales. . . . The Bottle-Nose Whale; 
the Junk Whale; the Pudding-Headed 



Whale 

Whale 
Whale 
Whale 
Whale 



the Cape Whale; the Leading 
the Cannon Whale; the Scragg 

the Coppered Whale ; the Elephant 
the Iceberg Whale; the Quog 

the Blue Whale. ..." 



It concerns itself with "the fiery hunt" for 
[ 61 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Moby-Dick, the Great White Whale, of whom 
Melville says that: 

"... it was not so much his uncommon 
bulk that so much distinguished him from 
other sperm whales, but ... a peculiar, 
snow-white wrinkled forehead, and a high, 
pyramidical white hump. These were his 
prominent features ; the tokens whereby, even 
in the limitless, uncharted seas, he revealed 
his identity, at a long distance, to those who 
knew him. 

"The rest of his body was so streaked, 
and spotted, and marbled with the same 
shrouded hue, that, in the end, he had gained 
his distinctive appellation of the White 
Whale; a name, indeed, literally justified by 
his vivid aspect, when seen gliding at high 
noon through a dark blue sea, leaving a 
milky-way wake of creamy foam, all span- 
gled with golden gleamings. 

"Nor was it his unwonted magnitude, nor 
his remarkable hue, nor yet his deformed 
lower jaw, that so much invested the whale 
with natural terror, as that unexampled, in- 
telligent malignity which ... he had over 
and over again evinced in his assaults. More 
than all, his treacherous retreats struck 
more of dismay than perhaps aught else. 
For, when swimming before his exulting pur- 
[ 62 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

suers, with every apparent symptom of 
alarm, he had several times been known to 
turn round suddenly, and, bearing down 
upon them, either stave their boats to splin- 
ters, or drive them back in consternation to 
their ship. . . . Such seemed the White 
Whale's infernal aforethought of ferocity, 
that every dismembering or death that he 
caused was not wholly regarded as having 
been inflicted by an unintelligent agent. ..." 

It concludes with the three-day conflict between 
Moby-Dick and the crew of the Pequod, during 
which — 

"Suddenly the waters around them slowly 
swelled in broad circles; then quickly up- 
heaved, as if sideways sliding from a sub- 
merged berg of ice, swiftly rising to the sur- 
face. A low rumbling sound was heard, a 
subterraneous hum; and then all held their 
breaths; as bedraggled with trailing ropes, 
and harpoons, and lances, a vast form shot 
lengthwise, but obliquely from the sea. 
Shrouded in a thin drooping veil of mist, it 
hovered for a moment in the rainbowed air; 
and then fell swamping back into the deep. 
Crushed thirty feet upwards, the waters 
flashed for an instant like heaps of foun- 
tains, then brokenly sank in a shower of 
flakes, leaving the circling surface creamed 
[ 63 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

like new milk round the marble trunk of 
the whale. ..." 

until finally — 

"From the ship's bows, nearly all the sea- 
men now hung inactive ... all their en- 
chanted eyes intent upon the whale, which 
from side to side strangely vibrating his pre- 
destinating head, sent a broad band of over- 
spreading semicircular foam before him as 
he rushed. Retribution, swift vengeance, 
eternal malice were in his whole aspect, and 
spite of all that man could do, the solid white 
buttress of his forehead smote the ship's 
starboard bow, till men and timbers reeled. 
. . . Through the breach, they heard the 
waters pour, as mountain torrents down a 
flume. ..." 

This disaster was based on the actual fate 
which overtook the whaler Essex, out of Nan- 
tucket, in 1 8 19. 

These extracts may serve to give a glimpse of 
the scope and nature of this gigantic work, which 
The Literary World described as "an intellectual 
chowder of romance, philosophy, natural history, 
fine writing, bad sayings;" and of which the Dub- 
lin University Magazine said that "it is quite as 
eccentric and monstrously extravagant in many of 
its incidents as even Mardi. . . ." 
[ 64 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Pierre was written during the summer of 1851, 
and published in 1852. The book contains much 
autobiographical material concerning Melville's 
childhood, and then develops into a sinister story 
of incest, murder, and suicide. Mr. Weaver says 
that "in Pierre, Melville coiled down into the 
night of his soul, to write an anatomy of despair." 
The London Men of the Time condemned it as 
"an unhealthy, mystic romance;" The Literary 
World, edited by the friendly Duyckinck, found 
nothing better to say of it than that it must be 
received "as an eccentricity of the imagination. 
The most unmoral moral of the story, if it has 
any moral at all, seems to be the impracticability 
of virtue. . . . It is alone intelligible as an unin- 
telligibility." 

The book was of course a disastrous failure ; it 
brought forth a more vicious hurricane of abuse 
than had ever before been directed against Mel- 
ville; it has in many quarters been set down as 
the chief reason for the almost total extinction, 
subsequently, of Melville's light in the world of 
letters. 



And yet at the very time when his mind must 
have been full of the thoughts and moods which 
found expression in' Moby-Dick, and, more par- 
ticularly, in Pierre, Melville was writing the sim- 
ple, charming, humorous, impulsive letters which 
[ 65 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

follow. And those few, patient paragraphs, 
from which one learns of his infirmity — not that 
"infirmity of jocularity" to which he refers once 
elsewhere, but the infirmity of failing eyesight. 
The first of these letters (|/not written actually 
from Arrowhead, but from Broadhall, the old 
home of his uncle, Major Thomas Melville, to 
which the latter had brought his French wife, 
Frangoise Raymonde Eulogie Marie des Douleurs 
Lame Fleury, and where he resided with his sec- 
ond wife, Mary Anna Augusta Hobard, until his 
departure, in 1837, for Galena, Illinois. Mel- 
ville, as a boy, had often visited his uncle Thomas 
in the house which, at the time this letter was 
written, had been converted into a hotel. 

"Banian Hall, August 16, 1850. 

"I call it Banian Hall, my dear Duyckinck, 
because it seems the old original Hall of this 
neighborhood — besides, it is a wide-spread- 
ing house, and the various outhouses seem 
shoots from it, that have taken root all 
round. 

"I write you this from the garret-way, 
located at that little embrasure of a window 
(you must remember it) which commands 
so noble a view of Saddleback. My desk is 
an old one, an old thing of my uncle the 
Major's, which for twelve years back has 
been packed away in the corn-loft over the 
[ 66 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

carriage house. Upon dragging It out to 
daylight, I found that it was covered with 
the marks of fowls-^quite white with them 
— eggs had been laid in it — think, of that ! Is 
it not typical of those other eggs that authors 
may be said to lay in their desks, especially 
those with pigeon-holes? 

"Day before yesterday — Wednesday — I 
received your letter of the 13th, also 
Mathews', and was delighted and softened 
by both. . . . 

"Twelve more beautiful babies than you 
sent me in that wicker cradle by Express I 
have never seen. Uncommon intelligence 
was in their aspect, and they seem full of 
animation and hilarity. I have no doubt, if 
they were let alone a while, they would all 
grow to be demijohns. In a word, my dear 
Fellow, they were but too well thought of 
you, because so much more than I deserved. 

"Let me now tell you how that precious 
basket was carried in state to the farm, 
something like the Flitch of bacon. A gen- 
tleman and a lady arrived here as boarders 
yesterday morning. In the afternoon in four 
carriages a party of us went to Lebanon. 
Returning, we stopped at the Express office 
in the village; and then, with the basket 
borne before me at my feet, I drove off full 
speed followed by the whole galloping pro- 
[ 67 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

cession. Today, at dinner, we cracked the 
champagne, and our full glass (all around 
the table) was Mr. Duyckinck and Mr. 
Mathews. 

"But the cigars! The Oriental looking 
box! and the Antilles smell of them! And 
the four different thrones and denominations 
of bundles, all harmonizing together like the 
Iroquois. Had there been two more bun- 
dles I should have called them the Six Na- 
tions. . . . 

"If it is a fair day I shall drive to Haw- 
thorne's tomorrow and deliver his parcels. 

Goodbye 

, H. Melville." 

There is something generous about the broad 
generality of the date of the next, and subsequent, 
letters. 

"Sunday evening 1850. 
"My dear Duyckinck ... It has been a 
most glowing and Byzantine day — the heav- 
ens reflecting the hues of the October apples 
in the orchard — ^nay, the heavens themselves 
looking so ripe and ruddy, that it must be 
harvest-home with the angels, and Charles' 
Wain be heaped high as Saddleback with 
Autumn's sheaves. You should see the 
[ 68 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

maples — ^you should see the young perennial 
pines — the red blazings of the one contrast- 
ing with the painted green of the others, and 
the wide flushings of the autumn an harmo- 
nizing [ J. I tell you that sunrises and 

sunsets grow side by side in these woods, and 
momentarily moult in the falling leaves. . . . 

Truly yours 

H. Melville." 

The next letter, received on December 12, 
1850, contains the first reference to Melville's 
€yes. The original letter, while a very long one, 
is literally scrawled unevenly across the paper, 
misspelled, and in parts almost illegible. It is, 
however, an invaluable document of the condi- 
tions under which Moby-Dick was written. 

Friday evening 

Pittsfield. 

"My dear Duyckinck . . . Before I go 

further let me say here that I am writing 

this by candle light — an uncommon thing 

-with me — and therefore my writing won't be 

very legible, because I am keeping one eye 

shut and wink at the paper with the other. 

"If you expect a letter from a man who 

lives in the country you must make up your 

mind to receive an egotistical one — for he 

[ 69 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

has no gossip nor news of any kind, unless 
the neighbor's cow has calved or the hen laid 
a silver egg. . . . 

"I have a sort of sea-feeling here in the 
country, now that the ground is all covered 
with snow. I look out of my window in the 
morning when I rise as I would out of a port- 
hole of a ship in the Atlantic. My room 
seems a ship's cabin; and at nights when I 
wake up and hear the wind shrieking, I 
almost fancy there is too much sail on the 
house, and I had better go on the roof and 
rig in the chimney. 

"Do you want to know how I pass my 
time ? I rise at ei^t — thereabouts — and go 
to my barn — say good morning to the horse 
and give him his breakfast. (It goes to my 
heart to give him a cold one, but it can't 
be helped.) Then, pay a visit to my cow — 
cut up a pumpkin or two for her, and stand 
by to see her eat it — for it's a pleasant sight 
to see a cow move her jaws — she does it so 
mildly and with such a sanctity. 

"My own breakfast over, I go to my work- 
room and light my fire — then spread my 
M.S.S. on the table — take one business squint 
at it, and fall to with a will. At 2-1/2 P. M. 
I hear a preconcerted knock at my door, 
which (by request) continues till I rise and 
go to the door, which seems to wean me ef- 
[ 70 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

f ectively from my writing, however interested 
I may be. 

"My friends the horse and cow then de- 
mand their dinner — and I go and give it 
them. My own dinner over, I rig my sleigh 
and with my mittens and rubbers start off for 
the village — and if it be a 'Literary World' 
day, great is the satisfaction thereof. 

"My evenings I spend in a sort of mes- 
meric state in my room — not being able to 
read — only now and then skimming over 
some large-printed book. 

"Can you send me about fifty fast-writing 
youths, with an easy style and not averse to 
polishing their letters ( ?) . If you can I wish 
you would, because since I have been here I 
have planned about that number of future 
works and can't find enough time to think 
about them separately. 

"But I don't know but a book in a man's 
brain is better off than a book bound in calf 
— at any rate it is safer from criticism. And 
taking a book off the brain, is akin to the 
ticklish and dangerous business of taking an 
old painting off a panel — you have to scrape 
off the whole brain in order to get at it with 
due safety — and even then the painting may 
not be worth the trouble. . . . 

H. Melville." 
[ 71 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

In the next letter, received on February 14, 
185 1, Melville takes a spirited flier at publicity. 

"Pittsfield, Wednesday, 1851. 
"My dear Duyckinck 

" 'A dash of salt spray' ! — ^Where am I 
to get salt spray here in inland Pittsfield? I 
shall have to import it from foreign parts. 
All I now have to do with salt is when I salt 
my horse and cow — not salt them down, I 
don't mean that (tho' indeed I have before 
now dined on 'salt-horse') but when I give 
them their weekly salt, by way of seasoning 
all their week's meals in one prospective 
lump. 

"How shall a man go about refusing a 
man? Best be roundabout, or plump on the 
mark? — I can not write the thing you want. 
I am in the humor to lend a hand to a friend 
if I can; but I am not in the humor to write 
the kind of thing you need — and I am not in 
the humor to write for Holden's Magazine. 
If I were to go on to give you all my reasons 
you would pronounce me a bore so I will not 
do that. You must be content to believe that 
I have reasons, or else I would not refuse so 
small a thing. 

"As for the Daguerriotype (I spell the 
word right from your sheet) that's what I 
can not send you, because I have none. And 
[ 72 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

if I had, I would not send it for such a pur- 
pose, even to you — Pshaw I you cry — and so 
cry I. — 'This is intensified vanity, not true 
modesty or anything of that sortl' — Again I 
say so too. But if it be so, how can I help 
it. The fact is, almost everybody is having 
his 'mug' engraved nowadays, so that this 
test of distinction is getting to be reversed; 
and therefore, to see one's 'mug' in a maga- 
zine, is presumptive evidence that he's a 
nobody. So being as vain a man as ever 
lived, and feeling that my illustrious name is 
famous throughout the world — I respectfully 
decline being oblivionated by a Dagreutype 
(what a devil of an unspellable word ! ) . . . . 

Truly yours 

H. Melville." 

The next brief extract contains the most sig- 
nificant paragraph in the entire series. 

"Pittsfield, Wednesday, 1851 
"My dear Duyckinck . . . The spring be- 
gins to open upon Pittsfield but slowly. I 
only wish that I had more day-time to spend 
out in the day; but like an owl I steal about 
by twilight, owing to the twilight of my 
eyes. . . . 

H. Melville." 
[ 73 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

In the next letter, received on November 9, 
1 85 1, Melville refers to the disaster to the whale- 
ship Ann Alexander, of New Bedford, rammed 
and sunk by a whale on August 20, 185 1, and a 
full account of which appeared in The Literary 
World. The allusion to Norman de Wardt is 
probably in connection with an incident of whale 
fishery with which Melville was not familiar dur- 
ing the writing of Moby-Dick. 

"Pittsfield, Friday afternoon. 

"Dear Duyckinck — Your letter received 
last night had a sort of stunning effect on me. 
For some days past being engaged in the 

woods with axe, wedge, and [ ], the 

Whale had almost completely slipped me for 
the time (and I was the merrier for it) when 
Crash! comes Moby-Dick himself (as you 
justly say) and reminds me of what I have 
been about for part of the last year or two. 
It is really and truly a surprising coincidence, 
to say the least. I make no doubt it is Moby- 
Dick himself, for there is no account of his 
capture after the sad fate of the Pequod 
about fourteen years ago — 

"Ye Gods! What a Commentator is this 
Ann Alexander whale. What he has to say 
is short and pithy but very much to the 
point. I wonder if my evil art has raised this 
monster. 

[ 74 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

"The Behring Strait disaster too, and the 
cording (?) along the New Foundland coast 
of those scores and scores of fishermen, and 
the inland gales on the Lakes. Verily the 
pot boileth inside and out. And woe unto us, 
we but live in the days that have been. Yet 
even then they found time to be jolly. 

"Why didn't you send me that inestimable 
item of 'Norman de Wardt' before? Oh, 
had I but had that pie to cut into 1 But that 
and many other fine things doubtless are 
omitted. All one can do is to pick up what 
chip he can lying round him. They have no 
Vatican (as you have) in Pittsfield here. 

"For us here, winter is coming. The hills 
and the noses begin to look blue, and the 
trees have stripped themselves for the De- 
cember tussle. I have had my dressing gown 
patched up, and got some wood in the wood- 
house, and — by the way — ^have in full blast 
our great dining-room fireplace, which swal- 
lows down cords of wood as a whale does 
boats. . . . 

H. Melville." 

Aside from the intimate glimpses of Melville 
afforded by these letters, the most significant fea- 
ture of them is the repeated reference to his fail- 
ing eyesight. He is obliged to shut one eye and 

[ 75 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

wink with the other when, in a rare instance, he 
writes by candlelight. He can not read in the 
evening, except occasionally to skim over a large- 
printed book. Owl-like, he must steal about in 
the twilight. 

In August, 1 85 1, Melville was thirty-two. He 
had, up to that time — that is, since 1846 — writ- 
ten seven books. From 1851 until his death in 
1 89 1 he wrote only eight more, four of which 
were volumes of verse, and one of which remains 
unpublished. His first published book after 
Pierre in 1852 was Israel Potter in 1855. From 
the completion of Pierre in 1851 until the writing 
of Israel Potter, some time in 1854, with the 
exception of a few magazine articles, Melville 
apparently wrote nothing. 

In December, 1850, he complained that he had 
not enough time to devote to the "fifty" works 
which he had in mind. Is the adverse criticism 
heaped upon Pierre the real cause of his silence 
during the next few years? 

Or had the twilight of his eyes deepened? 

The eyes which Mrs. Hawthorne objected to 
because they were neither large nor deep. Not 
keen eyes, either, and quite undistinguished. The 
eyes that sometimes had an indrawn, dim look. 

Tired eyes? 

[ 76 ] 



IX 
AN UNPUBLISHED MANUSCRIPT 

IN 1859, so one learns from Mr. Weaver's 
Herman Melville, Mrs. Melville wrote to her 
mother, Mrs. Lemuel Shaw, that^— 

"Herman has taken to writing poetry. You 
need not tell anyone, for you know how such 
things get around." 

This statement obviously refers to the manu- 
script mentioned In the letters reproduced below. 
That it was not made in a disparaging sense is 
evident from the correspondence. 

As to the manuscript itself, since it can not be 
that of Battle-Pieces, published In 1866, the con- 
tents of which deal with the Civil War, it is more 
than likely that it is that of Clarel, finally pub- 
lished in 1876, at the expense of Melville's uncle. 
This seems all the more probable when one takes 
into consideration the fact that Clarel is the re- 
sult of Melville's voyage to the Holy Land in 
1856, and that the present manuscript was appar- 
ently written during the years Immediately fol- 
lowing his return. 

[ 77 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

In the first two letters reference is made to 
Melville's brother Allan, and to his proposed 
voyage around the Horn aboard the clipper 
Meteor, commanded by his younger brother, 
Thomas. The Meteor, a vessel of 1063 tons, was 
built in 1852 by Briggs Brothers, of South Boston, 
and owned by Curtis and Peabody, of Boston. 
Her record trip was in 1855, Boston to San 
Francisco in 108 days. In the second letter Mel- 
ville speaks of proceeding to Manila, but he 
actually left the Meteor in San Francisco and re- 
turned in October aboard the Carter to Panama, 
and thence aboard the North Star to New York, 

"Pittsfield, May 21st, i860, 
"Dear Duyckinck: If you have met Allan 
lately he has perhaps informed you that in a 
few days I go with my brother Tom a voy- 
age round Cape Horn, It was only deter- 
mined upon a short time since; and I am at 
present busy, as you may imagine, in getting 
ready for a somewhat long absence, and like- 
wise in preparing for type certain M,S,S, 

"Now may I with propriety ask of you, 
conditionally, a favor? Will you, upon the 
arrival of the M,S,S, in New York — that 
is, in the course of two weeks, or less — look 
over them and if they seem of a sort that you 
care to be any way concerned with, advise 
with Allan as to a publisher, and form of 
[ 78 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

volume,. etc. And, since I can hardly sum- 
mon the impudence to ask you in the midst 
of better avocations, to go over the proof- 
sheets; and there appears to be no one, in 
fact, to attend to that matter but the printer 
— will you at least see that the printer's 
proof reader is a careful and competent 
hand ? — 

"In short, may I, without seeming too 
confident, ask you, as a veteran and expert 
in these matters, and as an old acquaintance, 
to lend something of an overseeing eye to the 
launching of this craft — the committing of it 
to the elements? 

"Remember me with kindest regards to 
your brother, and answer me as soon as you 
can; and whether you say yea or nay. Be- 
lieve me. 

Sincerely yours, 

H. Melville." 

"Boston, May 29th, i860. 
On board ship 'Meteor' 

"My dear Duyckinck: I am glad that the 
postponement of the ship's day of sailing 
gives me a chance to answer your letter, re- 
ceived. In reply to mine, on the eve of my 
leaving Pittsfield. It was a very welcome 
one — quite a wind from the fields of old 
times. 

[ 79 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

"My wife will send you the parcel in the 
course of a week or so — there remaining 
something to be finished in copying the 
M.S.S. 

"As my wife has interested herself a good 
deal in this matter, and in fact seems to 
know more about it than I do — at least about 
the merits of the performance — I must 
therefore refer you to her, in case of any 
exigency requiring information further thaa 
you are now in possession of. 

"If your brother George is not better em- 
ployed, I hope he will associate himself with 
you in looking over my scribblings. 

"That is enough in the egotistic way. 
Now for something else. 

"I anticipate as much pleasure as, at the 
age of forty, one temperately can, on the 
voyage I am going. I go under very happy 
auspices so far as ship and captain is con- 
cerned. A noble ship and a nobler captain — 
and he my brother. We have the breadth of 
those tropics before us, to sail over twice, 
and shall round the world. Our first port is 
San Francisco, which we shall probably make 
in no days from Boston. Thence we go to 
Manila — and thence, I hardly know where 
— I wish devoutly you were going along. I 
think it would agree with you. The prime 
requisite for enjoyment on sea voyages, for 
[ 80 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

passengers, is ist health — 2nd good-nature. 
Both first-rate things, but not universally to 
be found. — At sea a fellow comes out. Salt 
water is like wine, in that respect. 

"I have a good lot of books with me — 
such as they are — plenty of old periodicals — 
lazy reading for lazy latitudes — 

"Here I am called away, and must close. 
Goodbye to you 
and God bless you. 

H. Melville." 

The next three letters, written after Melville 
had sailed, are from Mrs. Melville — Elizabeth 
Shaw, the daughter of Lemuel Shaw of Boston, 
one-time Chief Justice of the Commonwealth of 
Massachusetts, whom Melville married in 1847. 

"Pittsfield, June i, i860. 
"Mr. Duycinck, 

My dear Sir, — 

"On Monday or Tuesday of next week I 
shall forward to you by Express, the manu- 
script of which Herman wrote you, and with 
this I enclose a copy of the memoranda which 
he jotted down for Allan, according to his 
request. 

"To this also should have been added an 
item which Herman omitted in his haste, and 
that is, that the book should be plainly bound 
[ 81 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

— that is, not over-gilt, and to 'blue and 
gold' I know he has a decided aversion. He 
may have mentioned it in his letters to you 
from Boston. . . . 

Yours etc., 

E. S. Melville." 

Mrs. Melville does not ever seem to have mas- 
tered the correct spelling of Mr. Duyckinck's 
name. As to Melville's taste in binding, it is an 
irony that his Battle-Pieces should have been 
bound in an atrocious shade of blue, lettered in 
gold! 

Mrs. Melville's copy of the memoranda to 
Allan, dated May 22, i860, is given below. In 
them Melville does not seem to have had any 
doubts concerning the publication of the manu- 
script. 

"Memoranda for Allan 

Concerning the publication of my verses. 

"i. Don't stand on terms much with the pub- 
lisher — half-profits after expenses are paid 
will content me — not that I expect much 
profits — ^but that will be a fair nominal ar- 
rangement. They should also give me i 
doz. copies of the book. 
"2. Don't have the Harpers. I should like 
[ 82 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

the Appletons or Scribner. But Duycinck's 

advice will be good here. 

"3. The sooner the thing is printed and 

published the better. The 'season' will make 

little or no difference, I fancy, in this case. 

"4. After printing don't let the book hang 

back — but publish and have done. 

"5. For God's sake don't have By the 

Author of 'Typee,' 'Piddledee,' etc., on the 

title-page. 

"6. Let the title-page be simply 

Poems 

by 

Herman Melville. 

"7. Don't have any clap-trap announce- 
ments — and 'sensation' puffs — nor any ex- 
tracts published previous to publication of 
the book. Have a decent publisher, in short. 
"8. Don't take any measures, or make in- 
quiries as to expediency of an English edi- 
tion simultaneous with the American — as in 
case of 'Confidence Man.' 
"9. In the M.S.S, each piece is on a page 
by itself, however small the piece. This was 
done merely for convenience in the final clas- 
sification, and should be no guide for the 
printer. Of course in printing two or more 
pieces will sometimes appear on the same 
[ 83 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

page — according to length of pieces etc. You 
understand. 

"id. The poems are divided into books as 
you will see, but the divisions are not called 
books — they are only numbered. Thus it is 
in the M.S.S. and should be the same in 
print. There should be a page with the num- 
ber between every division, 
"ii. Anything not perfectly plain in the 
M.S.S. can be referred to Lizzie, also have 
the M.S.S. returned to her after printing. 
"i2. Lizzie should by all means see the 
printed sheets before being bound, in order 
to detect any gross errors consequent upon 
misconstruing the M.S.S. 
"These are the thoughts which hurriedly 
occur to me at this moment. Pardon the 
abruptness of their expression but time Is 
precious — of all human events, perhaps the 
publication of a first volume of verses is the 
most Insignificant ; but though a matter of no 
moment to the world, it Is still of some con- 
cern to the author — as these Mem. show. 
Pray, therefore, don't laugh at my Mem. but 
give heed to them, and so oblige 

Your brother 

Herman." 

The hint of dissatisfaction with Harpers In this 
list of Melville "Don'ts" is Interesting. And yet 

[ 84 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

it was Harpers who published Battle-Pieces in 
1 866. To be sure the title-page of that book does 
aiot say By the Author of "Typee," "Piddledee," 
«tc.! 

The last two letters from Mrs. Melville com- 
plete the story of the unpublished manuscript. 

"Pittsfield, June 4th, i860. 
"Mr. Duycinck, 

My dear Sir, 

"I send you the manuscript and hope the 
printers will find no difficulty in reading it, 
though it has been (the greater part of it) 
necessarily copied in much haste. If any- 
thing in It should be obscure, please enclose 
the page to me and I will compare it with the 
original draught. 

"In making up the table of 'contents,' I 
am not sure that I have always used capitals 
in the right place. Will you have the kind- 
ness to overlook it, and right It, if wrong. 

"In the printed book, the titles of the 
-verses are all In capitals, I believe, so of 
course the printer will arrange that, and I 
see that In the manuscript they are some- 
times underscored which is accidental. 

"One question more occurs to me about 

titles, which is this — When the first line is 

quoted at the heading (as on page iii) 

-what punctuation should be used about It? 

[ 85 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Quotation marks and period, or with what- 
ever punctuation immediately follows in the 
verse? With this the contents should also 
correspond. 

"I am sorry to trouble you about these 
little matters, Mr. Duycinck, but Herman 
was obliged to leave much in an unfinished 
state, and I should feel much easier, as I 
know he would, if you would overlook the 
sheets for these little inaccuracies. 

"When you have read the manuscript I 
should be very glad to have your opinion of 
it, as a whole, and you need not be afraid to 
say exactly what you think — I am the more 
desirous of this, because as yet, no one has 
seen the sheets, excepting two of Herman's 
sisters, who are now with me — and Iwant to 
know how they would strike an unprejudiced 
person. If your brother also would add his 
impressions, so much the better. . . . 

Yours etc. 

E. S. Melville." 

"Arrowhead, June 23d. i860. 
"My dear Mr. Duycinck, 

"I received yours of the 19th yesterday, 
and hasten to thank you for your kind en- 
deavors about the manuscript, regretting 
that its course does not run smoothly thus 
[ 86 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

far. For myself, I am willing to wait pa- 
tiently for the result, so that the publication 
Is eventually accomplished — and do not con- 
sider its rejection by the publishers as any 
test of its merit in a literary point of view — 
well knowing, as Herman does also, that 
poetry is a comparatively uncalled for article 
in the public market. 

"I suppose that if John Milton were to 
offer 'Paradise Lost' to the Harpers tomor- 
row, it would be promptly rejected as 'un- 
suitable,' not to say denounced as dull. 

"I think Infinitely more of yours and your 
brother's opinion of it, and feel more confi- 
dence In its worth, since it has been looked at 
by persons of judgment and taste than ever 
before — it has been such a profound secret 
between Herman and myself for so long that 
I rejoice to have my own prejudice in its 
favor confirmed by someone in whose appre- 
ciation we can feel confidence — for I do not 
believe you would speak favorably of It, un- 
less you could do so sincerely, so for that 
your letter gives me great satisfaction. 

"The name of one publishing firm in New 
York occurs to me who might possibly take 
a personal interest in the matter — that of 
'Derby and Jackson' the first named being 
a brother-in-law of 'Toby' of Typee memory, 
if he Is the same that I think he is, 'C. L. 
[ 87 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Derby,' former 'Actuary of Cosmopolitan 
Art Association' — I do not know of what 
standing the firm may be, but I merely offer 
the hint, in case 'Rudd and Carleton' should 
decline to publish. 

"I feel that you and Allan will do every- 
thing that is suitable and proper about it and 
am deeply sensible of your kindly efforts to 
further its success — indeed I feel that it is in 
better hands than even with Herman's own 
management for he might be disheartened at 
the outset by its rejection and perhaps with- 
old it altogether, which would be a great dis- 
appointment to me. 

"I am prepared to be very patient in any 
delay that may ensue, even when the book 
shall have been accepted for publication — 
bearing in mind the 'midsummer stagnation 
of trade' — 'season' — and all that — though 
I shall count on your promised report of 
progress in good time. . . . 

Yours truly, 

E. S. Melville." 

Melville himself, referring to his poetry, says 
the following, in a letter to his brother Thomas 
(the sea captain with whom he made the voyage 
in i860), quoted by Mr. Weaver: 

[ 88 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

"Pittsfield, May 25th, 1862. 

"My dear boy: (or, if that appears dis- 
respectful) 

My dear Captain : . . . 
"... Since I have quoted poetry above, 
It puts me in mind of my own doggerel. You 
will be pleased to learn that I have disposed 
of a lot of it at a great bargain. In fact, a 
trunk-maker took the whole lot off my hands 
at ten cents the pound. So, when you buy a 
new trunk again, just peep at the lining and 
perhaps you may be rewarded by some 
glorious stanza staring you in the face and 
claiming admiration. If you were not such a 
devil of a ways off, I would send you a trunk, 
by way of presentation-copy. 

"I can't help thinking what a luckless chap 
you were that voyage you had a poetaster 
with you. You remember the romantic 
moonlight night, when the conceited donkey 
repeated to you about three cables' length of 
his verses. But you bore it like a hero. I 
can't in fact recall one single wince. To be 
sure, you went to bed immediately upon the 
conclusion of the entertainment; but this 
much I am sure of, whatever were your suf- 
ferings, you never gave them utterance. . . . 

Always your affectionate brother, 

Herman." 

[ 89 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

This characteristic sample of what Melville 
calls elsewhere his "infirmity of jocularity" is evi- 
dently a reference to himself during the San 
Francisco voyage, and to the verses contained in 
the manuscript which he had just completed at 
that time. 



In closing this series of Melville letters it is not 
thought out of place to reproduce some extracts 
from his verse, taken from "The Stone Fleet, an 
old sailor's lament, December, 1861," published 
in Battle-Pieces. The poem refers to the sinking 
of a fleet of old whalers loaded with stone at the 
entrance to Charleston harbor during the Civil 
War. 

"I have a feeling for those ships. 
Each worn and ancient one, 
With great blufE bows, and broad in the 

beam: 
Ay, it was unkindly done. 

But so they serve the Obsolete — 

Even so, Stone Fleet! 

"You'll say I'm doting; do but think 
I scudded round the Horn in one — 
The Tenedos, a glorious 
Good old craft as ever run — 
Sunk (how all unmeet!) 
With the Old Stone Fleet. 
[ 90 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

"An India ship of fame was she, 
Spices and shawls and fans she bore; 
A whaler when her wrinkles came — 
Turned off! till, spent and poor. 

Her bones were sold (escheat) ! 
Ah I Stone Fleet. 

***** 

"To scuttle them — a pirate deed — 
Sack them, and dismast; 
They sunk so slow, they died so hard. 
But gurgling dropped at last. 

Their ghosts in gales repeat 

Woe's us, Stone Fleet!" 



[ 91 ] 



PART II 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 



INTRODUCTION 

MANY lives, many bibliographies, of Mel- 
ville will be written. 

The present Bibliography is but a small effort 
towards a wider acquaintance with Melville's 
books. It presents no claims to completeness, no 
pretensions of infallibility. It is merely a pre- 
liminary statement intended to invite, if not call 
down, a fuller discussion. If, by reason of its 
very deficiencies, it succeeds in stimulating a more 
active research, it will largely have accomplished 
its purpose. 

Besides magazine articles, book reviews, and 
other fugitive writings, fourteen books constitute 
the sum of Melville's published work. Of these, 
seven were published between the years 1 846 and 
1853, seven between the years 1853 and 1891. 
Melville was twenty-six when his first, seventy- 
two when his last, books were published. At the 
time of his death he had just completed another 
novel, Billy Budd, which remains unpublished, 
along with an accumulation of verse. 

During the first period of seven years, Melville 
published Typee, in 1 846 ; Omoo, in 1 847 ; Mardi 
and Redburn, in 1849; White-Jacket, in 1850; 
[ 95 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Moby-Dick, in 1851; and Pierre, in 1852. Dur- 
ing the second period of thirty-eight years, Mel- 
ville published Israel Potter, in 1855 ; The Piazza 
Tales, in 1856; The Confidence Man, in 1857; 
Battle-Pieces, nine years later, in 1866; Clarel, 
ten years later, in 1876 ; John Marr, twelve years 
later, in 1888; and Timoleon, in 1891; the last 
four being volumes of verse. 

To the collector, and bibliographer, of Mel- 
ville, the year 1853 marks not only the close of 
his series of great novels, and the dawn of that 
long half-light of unpopularity superinduced by 
the appearance of the disastrous Pierre; it marks 
also the occasion of a physical disaster which ren- 
ders the books published by him in America prior 
to that date even more scarce today than would 
normally have been the case. 

At one o'clock on the afternoon of Saturday, 
December 10, 1853, the establishment of Mel- 
ville's publishers. Harper Brothers, on Franklin 
Square and Cliff Street, was completely destroyed 
by fire, supposed to have originated in the throw- 
ing by a plumber of a lighted taper into a bucket 
of camphene, mistaken by him for water. 

The event is reported as follows in the New 
York Tribune for Monday, December 12, 1853: 



[ 96 ] 



NARRATIVE 



OF A 



FOUR MONTHS' EESIDENCE 



AMONG THE NATIVES OF A VALLEY OP 



THE MARQUESAS ISLANDS; 



OR, 



A PEEP AT POLYNjESIAN LIFE. 



Bt HERMAN MELVILLE. 



LONDON: 

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET. 

1846. 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

"Destructive Conflagration. 

Harpers' Establishment in Ruins. 

Sixteen Buildings Consumed. 

Loss of $1,600,000. 

"The most alarming fire that has visited 
our city since the terrific conflagration of 
1845 occurred on Saturday afternoon in 
Cliff and Pearl Streets and Franklin Square, 
and within a few hours the immense Book 
Publishing House of Messrs. Harper and 
Brothers together with other buildings were 
a mass of smouldering ruins. ..." 

The Harpers' loss was estimated at $1,400,000; 
$400,000 in buildings, the remainder in presses, 
type, etc. The buildings fronting on Cliff Street 
were entirely destroyed; three other buildings at 
the corner of Cliff and Ferry Streets escaped any 
damage whatever. 

It has been sometimes stated that the plates of 
Melville's books were destroyed in this fire. This 
is not the case. An editorial in the same issue of 
the Tribune says : 

"The Great Fire. 

"A more signal calamity has never fallen 
upon a private business house than the ter- 
rible conflagration of Saturday, by which the 
extensive publishing establishment of Messrs. 
[ 97 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Harper and Brothers was, within the short 
space of two hours, converted into a heap of 
smouldering ruins. The fire was terrific in 
its rapidity. . . . 

"The vast property on Franklin Square 
and Cliff Street, we understand, amounted to 
nearly $2,000,000, including the buildings, 
printing apparatus, stereotype plates and the 
large stock of publications issued by Harper 
and Brothers. Of this, the stereotype plates, 
which were kept in underground vaults, are 
all which have escaped destruction. 

"The destruction of important works of 
literature ... is extensive and disastrous 
in the extreme. . . . These are all swept 
away before the relentless element. The 
plates, however, are preserved. ..." 

The statement is confirmed by other papers, 
and by The Literary World. But the question of 
the preservation of the plates is relatively unim- 
portant at present. The collector will be more 
interested in the fate of the stock of Melville 
books stored at Harpers' at the time of the fire. 

From Mr. Weaver's Herman Melville one 
learns that the following copies of Melville's 
books were destroyed in the fire: Typee, 185; 
Omoo, 276; Mardi, 491; Redburn, 296; White- 
Jacket, 292 ; Moby-Dick, 297 ; Pierre, 494. One 
is struck at once by the preponderance of copies 
[ 98 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

of Mardi and Pierre in stock, these being Mel- 
ville's two least successful works. 

From the same source one learns that the fol- 
lowing copies were saved: Mardi, lo; Moby- 
Dick, 60; Pierre, no. 

The first editions involved in the fire seem to 
have been those of Mardi (1849), fVhite-Jacket 
{iS 50), Moby-Dick {1851), znd Pierre (1852). 
Of these, Pierre was an utter failure, and pre- 
sumably achieved only a very small sale before the 
fire, which makes of it unquestionably the scarcest 
first edition of those published prior to 1853. 
Collectors are reminded, however, that copies of 
Pierre sold in England were not printed in Lon- 
don, but the sheets were imported from America 
and issued in a different binding with an English 
cancel title. 

The next in point of scarcity, of the books pub- 
lished in America prior to 1853, is undoubtedly 
Typee in its original form, without the Sequel and 
with the Appendix; it having been superseded in a 
few months by a revised, and heavily expurgated, 
edition. A close third must be Mardi. 

Of the books published after 1853, the two 
most scarce are John Marr and Timoleon, they 
having been published privately and in limited edi- 
tions of 25 copies each. The next in point of 
scarcity is Clarel. 

An attempt has been made in this Bibliography 
to give a description of all Melville first editions, 
[ 99 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

both American and English, together with a brief 
historical note, and also as full a list as possible of 
subsequent reprintlngs, although the latter is of 
necessity only tentative, owing to the conflicting in- 
formation available, and owing to the scarcity of 
the books themselves, which renders them difficult 
of examination in unaltered form. This is particu- 
larly true of the various issues of Typee, Omoo, 
and Israel Potter. A list is also included of the 
lectures delivered by Melville, and of his maga- 
zine and kindred contributions, some of which, it 
is believed, have escaped attention heretofore. 

The compiler of this Bibliography will welcome 
all corrections and additional information which 
its appearance may evoke. He also wishes to ex- 
press his thanks for their courtesy and coopera- 
tion to Harper and Brothers ; Putnam's ; the Lon- 
don publishing houses of Murray, and Routledge ; 
the authorities of the Library of Congress, the 
Library of the British Museum, the New York 
Public Library and the Yale University Library; 
and to Mr. Byrne Hackett and Mr. John C. C. 
Fletcher of the Brick Row Book Shop, Inc. 

Frequent references have been made to Mr. 
Weaver's Herman Melville, Mariner and Mystic, 
and to Mr. Sadleir's Excursions in Victorian Bib- 
liography. 

M. M. 
May 5, 1922. 

[ 100 ] 



TYPEE 
New York, 1846 

TYPEE : / A Peep at Polynesian Life. / Dur- 
ing a / Four Months' Residence / in / A 
Valley of the Marquesas / with notices of the 
French occupation of Tahiti and / the provisional 
cession of the Sandwich / Islands to Lord Pau- 
let. / By Herman Melville. / Part L / New 
York: / Wiley and Putnam. / London: / John 
Murray, Albemarle Street / 1846. 

Collation. i2mo, pp. xv +325. Consisting of 
half-title = Wiley & Putnam's / library of / Amer- 
ican Books. / Typee : / A Peep at Polynesian 
Life. / Part I., bearing on reverse a page of 
"Recently Published by Wiley and Putnam"; 
blank page not included in the pagination, bear- 
ing on reverse a map of the Marquesas Islands; 
title-page ; reverse, note of date of entry = 1 846, 
and at bottom imprint = R. Craighead's Power 
Press, / 112 Fulton Street., and = T. B. Smith, 
Stereotyper / 216 William Street.; dedication = 
To / Lemuel Shaw, / Chief Justice of the Com- 
monwealth of Massachusetts, / this little work is 
[ 101 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

gratefully inscribed by / The Author., reverse 
blank; preface, pp. [vli]-lx, reverse blank; con- 
tents, pp. [xi]-xv, reverse blank; text, pp. [ij 
(heading Residence in the Marquesas) to i66, 
marked End of Part I. Half-titlej same as Part 
I, except states Part II, bearing on reverse a page 
of "Now Publishing by Wiley and Putnam," 
dated March 1846; title-page, same as Part I 
except states Part II, reverse same as Part I. 
These half-title and title-pages not Included in 
the pagination. Text, pp. [167] (heading Resi- 
dence in the Marquesas) to 320; followed by Ap- 
pendix, pp. [32i]-325, marked The End, reverse 
blank; followed by pp. [v]-viii of publishers' 
announcements. 

The book is bound in blue muslin stamped on 
both covers with same conventional design. On 
back In gold = Library / of / American / Books / 
Typee / Herman / Melville / Wiley & Putnam. 

The published price was $1.00; paper, 75 cents. 

Words Hawaii, Hawaiian, etc., seem to be 
spelled without second a throughout. 

The paper parts were bound In yellow paper. 
On front cover, In black. In double frame = "Sun- 
dry citizens of this good land, meaning well, and 
hoping well. / prompted by a certain something in 
their nature, have trained them- / selves to do 
service in various Essays, Poems, Histories, and 
books of I Art, Fancy, and Truth." / Address of 
the American Copyright Club. / Wiley and Put- 
[ 102 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

nam's / Library of American Books. / No. XIII. , 
(XIV.) / Typee: / A / Residence in the Mar-, 
quesas. / By Herman Melville. / In Two Parts — / 
Part I. (II.) / New York and London, / Wileyl 
and Putnam, i6i Broadway = 6 Waterloo Placcj 
/ Price, Thirty-seven and a half cents. 

Inside front cover, yellow, announcement of 
Wiley and Putnam's Library of American Books, 
continued on inside rear cover, yellow. Outside 
rear cover, announcement of Wiley and Putnam's 
Library of New Books. On Back = Typee. Part 
I. (II.), printed from top to bottom. 



MELVILLE'S MARQUESAS ISLANDS 

London, 1846 

Narrative / of a / Four Months' Residence / 
among the natives of a valley of / The Marque- 
sas Islands; / or, / A Peep At Polynesian Life. / 
By Herman Melville. / London : / John Murray, 
Albemarle Street. / 1846. 

Collation. Post 8vo, pp. xvi + 285. Consist- 
ing of half-title. The Marquesas Islands; / or, / 
A Peep at Polynesian Life., reverse blank; title- 
page, reverse bears at bottom imprint = London : 
Printed by William Clowes and Sons, Stamford 
Street. ; dedication = To / Lemuel Shaw^ / Chief 
Justice of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, / 
this little work is affectionately inscribed / By the 
[ 103 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Author., reverse blank. {Note, the American 
edition says "gratefully inscribed.") Preface, pp. 
[vii]-ix, reverse blank; contents, pp. [xi]-xvi; 
blank page not included in pagination, reverse of 
which bears map of Marquesas Islands; text, pp. 
[ij (headed = A/ Residence in the Marquesas.) 
to 278; half-title. Appendix, reverse blank, in- 
cluded in pagination; text, pp. [28i]-285, reverse 
of which bears imprint = London : / Printed by 
William Clowes & Sons, / Stamford Street.; 
followed by one page, dated March, 1846, an- 
nouncing Mr. Murray's Select List of Works in 
General Literature, reverse of which bears a list 
of Periodicals published by Mr. Murray, fol- 
lowed by pp. [3]-i4 of Mr. Murray's List of 
Books; followed by two pages (15-16) of Mr. 
Murray's Home and Colonial Library. Page 16, 
at bottom, bears imprint = Bradbury and Evans, 
Printers, Whitefriars. 

The book is bound in red cloth, stamped with 
conventional design showing Murray's Colonial 
& Home Library and monogram M in a circle on 
both covers. On back, in gold, Colonial / and / 
Home Library / Vol. / XV / Melville's / Mar- 
quesas / Islands / Murray. Yellow end papers. 

The published price was six shillings. The 
book was also issued in two parts in Murray's 
Home and Colonial Library, presumably in the 
same form as Omoo, q.v. The price was two 
shillings each. 

[ 104 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

The words Hawaii, Hawaiian and Hawalians 
seem to be spelled without the second a through- 
out. 

The manuscript of Typee was written in 1845, 
and bought in London, in December, 1845, by 
John Murray, who purchased the English rights 
to print 1000 copies for one hundred pounds. 
The, tale appeared first in two parts in Murray's 
Home and Colonial Library, Part I, February 26, 
1846; Part II, April i, 1846. Four thousand 
copies of the first edition of the book were printed. 

The American rights were purchased by Wiley 
and Putnam, after John Murray had agreed to 
publish the book in England, so that to the Lon- 
don house of John Murray belongs the credit of 
having first recognized Melville. The tale ap- 
peared in book form in 1846 simultaneously in 
New York and London, being one of the first 
works to be published in this manner. 

The Sequel, containing The Story of Toby, was 
written in July, 1 846, and incorporated in the Re- 
vised Edition published in the same year. Ex- 
tracts from the Sequel were also published prior 
to appearance in book form. In England, John 
Murray paid an additional fifty pounds for the 
Sequel, which was first printed as a small pamphlet 
in an edition of 1250 copies, and subsequently in- 
corporated in the book. 

[ 105 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

In 1849 Harper Brothers took over the publi- 
cation of Typee, they having become Melville's 
publishers in 1847 with Omoo. 

From Mr. Weaver's Herman Melville one 
learns that up to January i, 1849, 6392 copies of 
Typee had been sold in America, netting Melville 
$655.91; and in England, up to April 29, 1851, 
7437 copies, netting $708.40. 

The book contains an account of Melville's 
own experiences in the Marquesas Islands, dur- 
ing a voyage on which he shipped before the mast 
on the whaler Acushnet which sailed from New 
Bedford in January, 1841. The Sequel contains 
the story of the escape from the Valley of Typee 
of his shipmate, Toby. 

The book was translated into several foreign 
languages, including German (Leipsic, 1846) and 
Dutch (Haarlem, 1847). 

The publishers advertised Typee as: 

"A new work of novel and romantic in- 
terest. It abounds with personal adventure, 
cannibal banquets, groves of cocoanut, coral 
reefs, tattooed chiefs and bamboo temples; 
sunny valleys, planted with bread-fruit trees, 
carved canoes dancing on the flashing blue 
waters, savage woodlands guarded by hor- 
rible idols, heathenish rites, and human sac- 
rifices." 

[ 106 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Some of the contemporary press notices are 
given below. 

New York Mirror. Chateaubriand's Atala is 
of no softer or more romantic tone — Anachafsis 
scarce presents us with images more classically 
exquisite. The style has a careless elegance 
which suits admirably with the luxurious tropical 
tone of the narrative, and we cannot read the 
book without suspecting the author to be at least 
as well acquainted with the London club-houses 
as with the forecastle of a merchant-man. 

Morning News. Typee is a happy hit, which- 
ever way you look at it — whether as travels, 
romance, poetry or humor. It has a sufficiency 
of all these to be one of the most agreable, read- 
able books of the day. The peculiarity of the 
book, to us, is the familiar and town -life of the 
author among a race of naked savages. He goes 
down every day from his hut to a lounging shed 
of the chiefs . . . as if he were walking from the 
Astor House to the saloons of the Racket Club. 

Anti-Slavery Standard. The whole narrative 
[is] more entertaining, not so much for the style 
as the facts, than Robinson Crusoe. We can 
honestly say of this book that it is curiously 
charming, and charmingly Instructive. 

London Times. Mr. Murray's Library does 
not furnish us with a more interesting book than 
this, hardly with a cleverer. It is full of the cap- 
tivating matter upon which the general reader 
[ 107 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

battens, and is endued with freshness and origi- 
nality, to an extent that cannot fail to exhilarate 
the most enervated and blase of circulating library 
loungers. Enviable Herman! A happier dog it 
is impossible to imagine than Herman in the 
Typee Valley. To describe a day's existence 
would be to tell of the promised joys of the 
Mahomedan's paradise. . . . It is introduced to 
the English public as authentic, which we by no 
means think it to be. We have called Mr. Mel- 
ville a common sailor; but he is a very uncommon 
common sailor, even for America, whose mariners 
are better educated than our own. His reading 
has been extensive . . . his style throughout is 
rather that of an educated literary man than of a 
poor outcast working seaman on board of a South 
Sea whaler. 

London Spectator. A book of great curiosity, 
and striking in style of composition. . . . Had 
this work been put forward as the production of 
an English common sailor, we should have had 
some doubts of its authenticity in the absence of 
distinct proof. But in the United States it is dif- 
ferent. There social opinion does not invest any 
employment with discredit; and it seems custom- 
ary with young men of respectability to serve 
as common seamen, either as a probationership 
to the navy or as a mode of seeing life. Cooper 
and Dana are examples of this practice. 
[ 108 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Revised Edition. 

A few months after the original publication of 
Typee in book form a Revised Edition was is- 
sued, in America, from which the Appendix was 
omitted, to which a Sequel was added, and the 
text of which was considerably altered and cen- 
sored. In England, the Sequel was added, with- 
out other changes, to the second printing of looo 
copies in 1846. The Revised American Edition 
was also issued in parts. 

The alterations in text between the original 
and revised 1846 editions are given below. 

1846 Revised, Preface, p. 10, after last para- 
graph but one, lacks the following : 

"There are a few passages in the ensuing 
chapters which may be thought to bear 
rather hard upon a reverend order of men, 
the account of whose proceedings in different 
quarters of the globe — transmitted to us 
through their own hands — ^very generally, 
and often very deservedly, receives high 
commendation. Such passages will be found, 
however, to be based upon facts admitting of 
no contradiction, and which have come im- 
mediately under the writer's cognisance. 
The conclusions deduced from these facts 
are unavoidable, and In stating them the 
author has been influenced by no feeling of 
animosity, either to the Individuals them- 
[ 109 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

selves or to that glorious cause which has 
not always been served by the proceedings of 
some of its advocates. 

"The great interest with which the impor- 
tant events lately occurring at the Sandwich, 
Marquesas, and Society Islands, have been 
regarded in America and England, and in- 
deed throughout the world, will, he trusts, 
justify a few otherwise unwarrantable digres- 
sions." 

1846 Revised, Contents, lacks the following 
headings : 

Chapter I := The Marquesas — ^Adventure of a 
Missionary's Wife among the Savages — Charac- 
teristic Anecdote of the Queen of Nukuheva. 

Whole of Chapter III in the original edition 
is omitted in the revised edition; consisting of 
following headings = Some account of the late 
operations of the French at the Marquesas — Pru- 
dent conduct of the Admiral — Sensation produced 
by the arrival of the strangers — The first horse 
seen by the islanders — Reflections — Miserable 
subterfuge of the French — Digression concerning 
Tahiti — Seizure of the island by the Admiral — 
Spirited conduct of an English lady. There are 
consequently 33 chapters in the revised edition 
and 34 in the original. 

Chapter III = Invasion of their valley by Por- 
[ 110 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

ter — Reflections — Glen of Tior — Interview be-, 
tween the old King and the French Admiral. 

Chapter XVI = Their enjoyments compared 
with those of more enlightened communities — 
Comparative wickedness of civilised and unen- 
lightened people. 

Chapter XXIII = Inaccuracy of certain pub- 
lished accounts of the islands — ^A Reason — Neg- 
lected state of heathenism in the valley. 

Chapter XXV = Allusion to His Hawaiian 
Majesty — ^A warning — Some ideas with regard to 
the civilisation of the islands — Reference to the 
present state of the Hawaiians — Story of a Mis- 
sionary's wife — Fashionable equipages at Oahu — 
Reflections. 

Besides the differences in text called for by the 
changes in contents noted above, the following 
alterations occur. {Note. The page reference 
is to the revised edition.) 

p. I, after the words "Nothing left us but salt- 
horse and sea-biscuit" the original edition says: 

"Oh! ye state-room sailors, who make so 
much ado about a fourteen-days' passage 
across the Atlantic; who so pathetically re- 
late the privations and hardships of the sea, 
where, after a day of breakfasting, lunching, 
dining off five courses, chatting, playing 
whist, and drinking champaign-punch, it was 
your hard lot to be shut up in little cabinets 
[ 111 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

of mahogany and maple, and sleep for ten 
hours, with nothing to disturb you but those 
good-for-nothing tars, shouting and tramp- 
ing over head — what would ye say to our 
six months out of sight of land?" 

p. 4, after the words "all that we know about 
them is from a few general narratives," the origi- 
nal edition comments on Porter's Journal of the 
Cruise of the U. S. Frigate Essex, in the Pacific, 
during the late war, and on Stewart's A visit to 
the South Seas while chaplain of the American 
sloop of war Vincennes. 

p. 4, last six lines, beginning "Indeed there is no 
cluster . . ."do not appear in original edition, 
p. 12, last line, after the words "at full length 
upon the boats," the original edition says: 

"What a sight for us bachelor sailors! how 
avoid so dire a temptation? For who could 
think of tumbling these artless creatures 
overboard, when they had swam miles to 
welcome us?" 

p. 13, after the words "every species of riot and 
debauchery," the original edition says: 

"Not the feeblest barrier was interposed be- 
tween the unholy passions of the crew and 
their unlimited gratification." 

p. 14, first line is lacking in the original edition. 

[ 112 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

p. 1 8, second paragraph reads as follows in the 
original edition: 

"I may here state, and on my faith as an 
honest man, that though more than three 
years have elapsed since I left this same 
identical vessel, she still continues in the 
Pacific, and but a few days since I saw her 
reported in the papers as having touched at 
the Sandwich Islands previous to going on 
the coast of Japan." 

p. 21, after the second paragraph, the original 
edition says: 

"I shall never forget the observation of one 
of our crew as we were passing slowly by the 
entrance of this bay in our way to Nukuheva. 
As we stood gazing over the side at the ver- 
dant headlands, Ned, pointing with his hand 
in the direction of the Treacherous Valley, 
exclaimed 'There — there's Typee. Oh, the 
bloody cannibals, what a meal they'd make 
of us if we were to take it into our heads to 
land! but they say they don't like sailor's 
flesh, it's too salt. I say, maty, how should 
you like to be shoved ashore there, eh?' I 
little thought, as I shuddered at the question, 
that in the space of a few weeks I should 
actually be a captive in that self same valley." 
[ 113 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

p. 43, fourth line from bottom, "in such a place 
as this," reads "in such an infernal place as this," 
in the original edition. 

pp. 98-99, "I felt somewhat embarrassed by the 
presence of the female portion of the company, 
but nevertheless removed my frock, and washed 
myself down to my waist in the stream," in the 
original edition reads : 

"Somewhat embarrassed by the presence of 
the female portion of the company, and feel- 
ing my cheeks burning with bashful timidity, 
I formed a primitive basin by joining my 
hands together, and cooled my blushes in the 
water it contained; then removing my frock, 
bent over and washed myself down to my 
waist in the stream." 

p. 99, after the words, "the young girls springing 
buoyantly into the air," the original edition says 
"and revealing their naked forms to the waist." 
p. 126, after the words "which in their language 
is denominated aka," the original edition says: 

"and most refreshing and agreeable are the 
juices of the aka, when applied to one's 
limbs by the soft palms of sweet nymphs, 
whose bright eyes are beaming upon you with 
kindness; and" 

p. 143, the words "In this frame of mind," read 

[ 114 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

in the original edition, "In the altered frame of 
mind to which I have referred." 
p. 153, after the words "[gamJboUing in pur- 
suit," the original edition says : 

"But I was ever partial to what is termed in 
the 'Young Men's Own Book' — 'the society 
of virtuous and intelligent young ladies' ; and 
in the absence of the mermaids, the amuse- 
ment became dull and insipid." 

p. 154, after the words "Fayaway and I reclined 
in the stern of the canoe," the original edition says 
"on the very best terms possible with one an- 
other"; 

p. 179, after the words "their very eyes, seem to 
dance in their heads," the original edition says: 

"In good sooth, they so sway their floating 
-forms, arch their necks, toss aloft their 
naked arms, and glide, and swim, and whirl, 
that it was almost too much for a quiet, 
soberminded, modest young man like my- 
self." 

p. 179, after the words "when- they plume them- 
selves for the dance," the original edition says 
"they look like a band of olive colored Sylphides 
on the point of taking wing." 
p. 200, first paragraph, continues in the original 
edition as follows: 

[ 115 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

"As a religious solemnity, however, it had 
not at all corresponded with the horrible de- 
scriptions of Polynesian worship which we 
have received in some published narratives, 
and especially in those accounts of the evan- 
gelised islands with which the missionaries 
have favored us. Did not the sacred charac- 
ter of these persons render the purity of their 
intentions unquestionable, I should certainly 
be led to suppose that they had exaggerated 
the evils of Paganism, in order to enhance 
the merit of their own disinterested labors." 

p. 200, the words "Yet, notwithstanding all I ob- 
served on this occasion," in the original edition 
read "For my own part." 

p. 211, after the words "shocked at Kory-Kory's 
impiety," the original edition says: 

"This anecdote speaks for itself. When one 
of the inferior order of natives could show 
such contempt for a venerable and decrepit 
God of the Groves, what the state of religion 
must be among the people in general is easily 
to be imagined. In truth I regard the Ty- 
pees as a back-slidden generation. They 
are sunk in religious sloth, and require a 
spiritual revival. A long prosperity of 
bread-fruit and cocoanuts has rendered them 
remiss in the performance of their higher 
[ 116 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

obligations. The wood-rot malady is spread- 
ing among the idols — the fruit upon their 
altars is becoming oppressive — the temples 
themselves need re-thatching — the tattooed 
clergy are altogether too light-hearted and 
lazy — and their flocks are going astray." 

Note. The above is the "Inference" called 
for in the chapter heading, and the latter should 
have been removed in the revised edition, 
p. 214, after the words "I had been wonderfully 
pleased," the original edition says: 

"I had observed that even the little inter- 
course Europeans had carried on with the 
Nukuheva natives had not failed to leave its 
traces amongst them. One of the most 
dreadful curses under which humanity labors 
had commencedits havocks, and betrayed, as 
it ever does among the South Sea islanders, 
the most aggravated symptoms. From this, 
as from all other foreign inflictions, the yet 
uncontaminated tenants of the Typee Valley 
were wholly exempt ; and long may they con- 
tinue so. Better will it be for them for ever 
to remain the happy and innocent heathens 
and barbarians that they now are, than, like 
the wretched inhabitants of the Sandwich 
Islands, to enjoy the mere name of Chris- 
tians without experiencing any of the vital 
operations of true religion, whilst, at the 
[ 117 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

same time, they are made the victims of the 
worst vices and evils of civilisation." 

p. 216, after the words "creatures to be lost in 
that country," there is in the original edition 
an asterisk referring to a footnote concerning 
sources. There also follow further references in 
the text of the original edition to European testi- 
mony concerning the beauty of the islanders, 
p. 218, after the words "induce respect and obe- 
dience," the original edition has a paragraph con- 
cerning the civil institutions of the Marquesas, 
p. 220, the words "All hail, therefore, MehevI, 
King over all the Typees I and long life and pros- 
perity to his tropical majesty! But to be sober 
again after this loyal burst," read as follows In 
the original edition: 

"All hail, therefore, MehevI, King of the 
Cannibal Valley, and long life and prosperity 
to his Typeean majesty 1 May Heaven for 
many a year preserve him, the uncompromis- 
ing foe of Nukuheva and the French, if a 
hostile attitude will secure his lovely domain 
from the remorseless inflictions of South Sea 
civilisation." 

These words follow several paragraphs In the 
original edition attacking the "republican mis- 
sionaries of Oahu" for referring to the Hawaiian 
chieftain as "his gracious majesty" (i.e., the ma- 
[ 118 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

terial removed from the revised edition when the 
chapter heading "An allusion to his Hawaiian 
Majesty" was removed). 

p. 220, the words "To be sure, there were old 
Marheyo and Tinor, who seemed to live together 
quite socially, but for all that I had sometimes 
observed a comical-looking old gentleman dressed 
in a suit of shabby tattooing, who appeared to be 
equally at home," read as follows in the original 
edition : 

"To be sure, there were old Marheyo and 
Tinor, who seemed to have a sort of nuptial 
understanding with one another; but for all 
that, I had sometimes observed a comical- 
looking old gentleman dressed in a suit of 
shabby tattooing, who had the audacity to 
take various liberties with the lady, and that 
too in the very presence of the old warrior 
her husband, who looked on, as good- 
naturedly as if nothing was happening." 

p. 221, after the words "the little fellow had no 
triangle on his face," the original edition says 
" — ^but on second thoughts, tattooing is not he- 
reditary." 

p 221, after the words "was decidedly in her 
good graces," the original edition says: 

"I sometimes beheld both him and the chief 
making love at the same time. Is it possible, 

[ 119 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

thought I, that the valliant warrior can con- 
sent to give up a corner in the thing he 
loves?" 

p. 222, after the words "with any of their num- 
ber," the original edition says "Married women, 
to be sure ! — I knew better than to offend them." 
p. 222, after the words "disposition of the male 
population," the original edition says: 

"Where else, indeed, could such a practice 
exist, even for a single day? — Imagine a 
revolution brought about in a Turkish se- 
raglio, and the harem rendered the abode of 
bearded men, or conceive some beautiful 
women in our own country running distracted 
at the sight of her numerous lovers murder- 
ing one another before her eyes, out of jeal- 
ousy for the unequal distribution of her 
favors! — Heaven defend us from such a 
state of things! — ^We are scarcely amiable 
and forbearing enough to submit to it." 

p. 223, after the words "than is usually the case 
with barbarous people," the original edition says : 

"A baneful promiscuous intercourse of the 
sexes is hereby avoided, and virtue, without 
being clamorously invoked, is, as it were, un- 
consciously practised." 

The above is followed in the original edition by a 
paragraph on the marriage tie in Tahiti. 

[ 120 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

p. 223, the words "But, notwithstanding its exist- 
ence among them," in the original edition read 
"Notwithstanding the existence of wedlock among 
the Typees." 

p. 223, after the words "bread-fruit-leaf they 
usually wore in the rear," the original edition has 
two paragraphs concerning population, 
p. 227, in the original edition the words "There 
seemed to be no rogues of any kind in Typee" do 
not occur. The original edition chapter begins 
instead with a paragraph and a half concerning 
standards of conduct in Typee — "unparalleled, I 
will venture to assert, in the most select, refined, 
and pious associations of mortals in Christen- 
dom." 

p. 228, the first paragraph reads as follows in the 
original edition: 

"So much for the respect in which 'personal 
property' Is held In Typee ; how secure an In- 
vestment of 'real property' may be, I cannot 
take upon me to say. Whether the land of 
the valley was the joint property of its in- 
habitants, or whether it was parcelled out 
among a certain number of landed proprie- 
tors who allowed everybody to 'squat' and 
'poach' as much as he or she pleased, I never 
could ascertain. At any rate, musty parch- 
ments and title deeds there were none on the 
Island; and I am half Inclined to believe that 
[ 121 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

its inhabitants hold their broad valleys in 
fee simple from Nature herself; to have and 
to hold, as long as grass grows and water 
runs; or until their French visitors, by sum- 
mary mode of conveyancing, shall appropri- 
ate them to their own benefit and behoof." 

p. 229, after the words "wealth of the people of 
Typee," the original edition has two paragraphs 
concerning the social condition of the Typees. 
p. 229, the words "They lived in great harmony 
with each other," in the original edition read 
"They showed this spirit of unanimity in every 
action of life : everything was done in concert and 
good fellowship." 

p. 238, the words "There were some curious look- 
ing dogs in the Valley," in the original edition 
read: 

"I think I must enlighten the reader a little 
about the natural history of the valley. 

"Whence in the name of Count Buff on 
and Baron Cuvier, came those dogs that I 
saw in Typee?" 

p. 239, the words "monstrous imps that tor- 
mented some of the olden saints 1", in the original 
edition read "monstrous imps that torment some 
of Tenier's saints!" 

p. 256, the original edition has an additional 
paragraph concerning Hawaiian dialects. 
[ 122 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

p. 266, in the original edition the words "to con- 
ceal every trace of it," are followed by three 
paragraphs concerning cannibalism and in par- 
ticular Captain Cook's big toe. The words "But 
to my story" do not appear in the original edition, 
p. 283, the words "pronounced one expressive 
English word I had taught him — Home," in the 
original edition read "pronounced the only two 
English words I had taught him — Home and 
Mother." 

p. 286, the words "sobbing convulsively," in the 
original edition read "sobbing indignantly." 
p. 286, the words "in doing which he would fain 
have taken hold of me," in the original edition 
read "with a rapid gesture which was equivalent 
to a Deed of Gift." 



The title-page of the Revised Edition reads : 

Typee : / A peep at Polynesian life. / During 
a/ Four Months' Residence / in / A Valley 
of the Marquesas; / The revised edition, 
with a sequel. / By Herman Melville. / Part 
I. / New York: / Wiley and Putnam. / Lon- 
don: / John Murray, Albemarle Street / 
1846. 

The title-page of the 1 849 edition, the first pub- 
lished by Harpers, reads: 

[ 123 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Typee : / A Peep at Polynesian Life, / dur- 
' ing a / Four Months' Residence / in / A 
Valley of the Marquesas; / the revised edi- 
tion, with a sequel. / By Herman Melville. / 
New York: / Harper & Brothers, Pub- 
lishers. / London: John Murray. / 1849. 

The Revised Edition contains an additional 
'Preface to the Revised Edition." 



The Revised Edition was reprinted in the fol- 
lowing years: 

New York: Wiley and Putnam, 1847; Har- 
pers, 1849 (new copyright, printed from origi- 
nal plates); 1850; 1855; 1857; 1865; 1871; 
1876; Arthur Stedman, Ed., 1892; 1896; W. 
Clark Russell, Ed., 1904; Ernest Rhys, Ed., 
1907; W. Clark Russell, Ed., 191 1; A. L. Ster- 
ling, Ed., 1920; Ernest Rhys, Ed., 1921. 

Boston: Arthur Stedman, Ed., 1900; 19 10; 
1919; W. P. Trent, Ed., 1902. 

London: John Murray, 1847 (1000 copies); 
1848 (1000 copies); 1850; 1855 (75° copies); 
1861; 1866; 1877 (500 copies); 1893 (1000 
copies) ; Routledge, 1855 (6000 copies) ; 1910; 
H. S. Salt, Ed., 1892; 1898, 1899; W. P. Trent, 
Ed., 1903; W. Clark Russell, Ed., 1904; 19 10; 
Ernest Rhys, Ed., 1907; 1921. 

[ 124 ] 



II 

OMOO 

New York, 1847 

Omoo: I A Narrative of Adventures / in the / 
South Seas. / By Herman Melville, / author of 
"Typee." / New York: / Harper & Brothers, 
Publishers. / London: John Mitrray / 1847. 

Note. Lines in italics are printed red. 

Collation. i2mo, xv + [i7]-389. Consisting 
of half-title = Omoo. in red, reverse blank; fol- 
lowed by blank page pasted in, reverse of which 
bears map of South Seas and explanatory note, 
included in pagination; title-page; reverse, note 
of date of entry = one thousand eight hundred 
and forty-seven; dedication = To / Herman 
Gansevoort, / of Gansevoort, Saratoga County, 
New York, / This Work / Is cordially inscribed / 
by his nephew, / The Author, (last line is not 
centered) ; reverse blank; preface, pp. [ix]-xii; 
contents, pp. [xiii]-xv, reverse blank; introduc- 
tion (headed = Adventures in the South Seas.), 
p. [17]; text, pp. 18-389. Reverse of p. 389 is 
blank and is followed by pp. [xv]-xxiii of pub- 
[ 125 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Ushers' notices for Typee, Revised Edition. Re- 
verse of p. xxiii is blank, followed by pp. [1J-16 
of Harpers' "Valuable New Publications." 

{Note. Bottom p. 196 = End of Part I. P. 
197 = Part II.) 

The published price was as follows: 

In the Harper Catalog for 1847 the book was 
advertised: "Muslin $1.25, paper $1.00." In 
1849 Harper advertised: "In two parts 50 cents 
each, or complete in muslin gilt $1.25." 

The following typographical errors noted : 

p. X, last line, last word, period lacking. 

p. 43, heading, Hannmaanoo should be Han- 
namanoo. 

p. 61, heading, period lacking. 

p. 130, heading, second word, broken N. 

p. 147, last line, last word, hyphen lacking. 

p. 330, last line, last word, period lacking. 

The book is bound in muslin stamped on both 
covers with same conventional design of flowers, 
etc., and bears in center of front cover two sail- 
ing vessels and a rowboat at sea, in gold. On 
back in gold = Omoo. / Melville. / New- York. / 
Harper & Brothers., and a conventional design of 
flowers, etc., in gold. 

As to the color of the binding, the book was 
reprinted four times in the same year. In the 
Gansevoort-Lansing collection in the New York 
Public Library, there are two copies of Omoo 
identical in every respect except as follows: One, 
[ 126 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

bound in blue watered muslin and the other bound 
in black pockmarked cloth, with mottled end 
papers. The red type in the latter is of a lighter 
shade than that used in the former. As the red 
type of the third printing is similar to that of the 
black bound edition, it is advanced tentatively that 
the blue watered muslin binding is that of the first 
printing, and the black pockmarked binding that 
of the second printing. 

The third printing is identical with the first ex- 
cept that the title-page bears the words Third Edi- 
tion, after "author of . . ."; the reverse of p. 
xxiii in the rear bears a notice of Harpers' new 
catalogue dated January, 1847; *^he gold ships 
are missing from the cover of the binding, which 
is in black stamped muslin ; and the following ad- 
ditional errors noted: 

p. 84, fifth 1. from bottom, last word, one quo- 
tation mark lacking. 

p. 260, heading, period lacking. 

p. 265, tenth 1. from bottom, fourth word 
partly obliterated. 

p. 265, eleventh 1. from bottom, second and 
third words partly obliterated. 

p. 265, twelfth line from bottom, h obliterated 
in "the." 

p. 265, signature, M, broken. 

The title-pages of the fourth and fifth printings 
bear the words Fourth Edition, and Fifth Edi- 
tion, respectively. 

[ 127 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Paper parts, 2 volumes, i2mo, bound in yel- 
low paper. On front cover, in black, in double 
frame, at top left-hand corner = Part I. (Part 
II.); at top right-hand corner = 50 cents. Be- 
low = Omoo : / A Narrative of Adventures / in 
the / South Seas. / By Herman Melville, / author 
of "Typee." / Complete in Two Parts. / New 
York: / Harper & Brothers, Publishers. / Lon- 
don: John Murray. / 1847. Inside front and 
rear covers white and blank. Rear cover (Part 
I), announcement of "Works of Sterling Value," 
(Part II), "Valuable Sterling Productions." On 
back = Omoo, Part I. (II.), printed from top to 
bottom. 



OMOO 

London, 1847 

Omoo: / a / Narrative of Adventures / in 
the / South Seas ; / being a sequel to / The "Resi- 
dence in the Marquesas Islands." / By Herman 
Melville, / author of "Typee." / London: / John 
Murray, Albemarle Street: / 1847. 

Collation. Post 8vo, pp. xiii + 321. Consist- 
ing of blank page, reverse of which bears map of 
the South Seas and explanatory note; title-page, 
reverse of which bears at bottom imprint = Lon- 
don: / Spottiswood and Shaw, / New-street- 
[ 128 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 



Square.; dedication, same as New York edition 
except all lines are centered; reverse blank; pref- 
ace, pp. [vii]-ix, dated New York, January 28, 
1847, reverse blank; contents, pp. [xi]-xiii, re- 
verse blank; text, pp. [ij (headed Adventures 
in the South Seas) to 155, bottom of which is 
marked = End of Part I., and 157 (headed = 
Part II) to 321, reverse of which bears imprint 
same as reverse of title-page. There follow pp. 
[i]-4 of announcements of "Mr. Murray's Home 
and Colonial Library," one item of which on p. 4 
is "The Marquesas, by Hermann (!) Melville." 
There follow pp. 5-16 of "Mr. Murray's List of 
Books"; bottom of p. 16 bears imprint = Brad- 
bury and Evans, printers, Whitefrlars. 

The book is bound in red cloth, stamped with 
conventional design. On back in gold: Adven- 
tures in the South Seas — Murray. Yellow end 
papers. 

The published price was six shillings, and in 
parts, half a crown. 

The paper parts did not contain the map. 

Bound in greenish paper. On front cover. In 
black, in double frame, in top left-hand corner. 
No. XLIII (XLIV) ; below = Cheap Literature 
for all Classes. / Murray's / Home and Colonial 
Library. / Omoo: / or / Adventures In The 
South Seas. / Part I. (II.) / London: / John 
Murray, Albemarle Street. / Price Half-a-Crown. 
[ 129 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

/ W. Clowes and Sons, Stamford Street. Inside 
front cover bears list of "New Editions of 
Standard Works." On back = Melville's South 
Seas. — Part I. (II.) printed from bottom to top. 

The manuscript of Otnoo was written in 1846, 
and the tale was published in March, 1847. In 
England, John Murray paid one hundred and 
fifty pounds for the copyright. Together with 
Typee, Omoo was one of the earliest works to be 
published simultaneously in New York and Lon- 
don. The first English edition consisted of 4000 
copies. 

The following extracts from Omoo, "The 
French priests pay their respects," and "A dinner 
party in Imeeo" appeared in The Literary World, 
April 24, 1847. 

The book contains an account of Melville's 
own experiences in the South Sea Islands, after his 
rescue from the Valley of Typee by an Australian 
whaler, in 1842. 

The book was translated Into German (Leipsic, 
1847). 

The publishers advertised Omoo as follows : 

"This work forms the true sequel and coun- 
terpart of the author's popular production — 
Typee. The adventures in the present 
volume embrace both sea and land. The 
Nautical incidents of the book are extremely 
[ 130 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

interesting, and the Rambles and Excursions 
on the Islands of Tahiti and Imeeo, most 
romantic and extraordinary. With respect 
to Typee, Ontoo is the reverse of the medal: 
as the former work presents the only account 
ever given of the state of nature in which the 
Polynesians are originally found, so the lat- 
ter production will exhibit them as affected 
by a prolonged intercourse with foreigners." 

Some of the contemporary press notices are 
given below. 

Douglas Jerrold's Magazine. A stirring nar- 
rative of very pleasant reading. It possesses 
much of the charm that has made Robinson Cru- 
soe immortal. 

New York Express. We scarcely remember 
anything that has emanated from the press, in all 
respects so perfectly fresh, racy, and charming, as 
Omoo. Like so many gems in one setting, its 
most pleasant and amusing chapters sparkle upon 
us . . . these sketches are not unworthy of Gil 
Bias or Don Quixote. 

Noah's Times. This is really a delightful 
book, in which one may find food for laughter 
and sterling information into the bargain. . . . 
There are portions of the work, infinitely superior 
to anything of the kind we ever before read. 

Albany Spectator. The reputation which 
Typee procured for its author will be rendered 
[ 131 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Still more illustrious by Omoo He is the 

great painter of natural life, and relates sea 
stories with naturalness and great effect. 

Columbian Magazine. We give the place of 
the honor to the most popular of the recent issues 
of the press. The author of Typee, Mr. Her- 
man Melville, has shared, to a certain extent, the 
good fortune of Mr. Stephens and Lord Byron — 
that of going to bed at night an unknown per- 
sonage and finding himself famous when he got up 
the next morning. Typee has been read, we sup- 
pose, by every man, woman, and child in the 
Union, who undertakes to keep pace at all with 
the march of the current literature; and its fame 
has gone abroad also to lands beyond the sea. 

Some of the notices, however, were not so 
friendly. The Eclectic Review, for instance, had 
an article which opens : 

"In noticing Mr. Melville's book our ob- 
ject is to show that his statements respecting 
the Protestant Mission in Tahiti are perver- 
sions of the truth, that he is guilty of delib- 
erate and elaborate misrepresentations, and 
. . . that he is a prejudiced, incompetent, 
and truthless witness. ..." 

The book was reprinted in the following years : 

New York: Harpers, 1847 (four reprintings) ; 

1855; 1863; 1868; Arthur Stedman, Ed., 1892 

[ 132 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

(new copyright); 1896; H. Clark Russell, Ed., 
1904; 191 1 ; Ernest Rhys, Ed., 1908, 1921. 

Boston: Arthur Stedman, Ed., 1900; 19 10; 
1919. 

London: John Murray, 1848 (1000 copies); 
1849; 1850; 1861 (1000 copies); 1866; 1877 
(500 copies) ; 1893 (1000 copies); Routledge, 
1855 (6000 copies) ; i9io;H. S. Salt, Ed., 1892; 
1893; H. Clark Russell, Ed., 1904; 191 1; Ernest 
Rhys, Ed., 1908; 1921, 



[ 133 ] 



Ill 

MARDI 

New York, 1849 
2 vols. 

Volume I. 

MardI : / and / A Voyage Thither. / By Her- 
man Melville. / In two volumes. / Vol. I. / New 
York: / Harper & Brothers, Publishers, / 82 
Cliff Street. / 1849. 

Collation. i2mo, pp. xii + [13J-365. Con- 
sisting of title-page; reverse bears note of date 
of entry = one thousand eight hundred and forty- 
nine ; dedication = Dedicated / to / my Brother, / 
Allan Melville.; reverse blank; preface dated 
New York, January, 1849, reverse blank; half- 
title = Mardi, reverse blank; contents Volume I, 
pp. [ix]-xii; text, pp. [r3]-365, of which reverse 
is blank and bears at bottom = End of Vol. I. 

Volume II. 

Same title-page as Volume I, except states Vol- 
ume II. 

[ 134 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Collation. i2mo, pp. xii + [9]-387. Con- 
sisting of title-page, note of entry date on reverse; 
half-title = Mardi, reverse blank; contents Vol- 
ume II, pp. [ix]-xii; text, pp. [9]-387, which is 
marked The End, and reverse of which is blank. 
There follow pp. [i]-8 of Harper announce- 
ments. 

Both volumes are bound in dark brown muslin 
stamped on both covers with same conventional 
design showing publishers' monogram in center in 
a circle. On back in gold = Mardi / And / A 
Voyage / Thither. / I. (II.) / Publishers' symbol. 
Yellow end papers. 

The published price was $1.75. There was 
also a paper edition at $1.50. 



MARDI 

London, 1849 
3 vols. 

Volume I. 

Mardi: / and / A Voyage Thither. / By Her- 
man Melville. / Author of "Typee," and 
"Omoo." / In Three Volumes. / Vol. I. / Lon- 
don : / Richard Bentley, New Burlington Street. / 

1849- 
Note. Words in italics are printed in red. 

Collation. Post 8vo, pp. x -f 336. Consist- 

[ 135 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

ing of title-page, bearing on reverse, imprint = 
London: / Printed by Schulze and Co,, 13, Po- 
land Street. ; dedication = Dedicated / to / My 
Brother / Allan Melville., reverse blank; con- 
tents of the First Volume, pp. [v]-x; text, pp. [i] 
(heading = Mardi: / and / A Voyage Thither.) 
to 336, bottom of which says End of Vol. I., and 
bears imprint = London : / Printed by Schulze 
and Co., 13, Poland Street. 

Volume n. 
Same title-page as Vol. L, except says Vol. IL 
Collation. Post 8vo, pp. x + 335. Consist- 
ing of half-title = Mardi. / Vol. IL, reverse 
blank; title-page, reverse same as Vol. I; contents 
of the Second Volume, pp. [v]-x; text, pp. [i] 
(same heading as Vol. L) to 335, bottom of 
which says End of Vol. IL, and bears imprint = 
London: / Printed by Schulze and Co., 13, Poland 
Street. Reverse of p. 335 is blank. 

Volume III. 

Same title-page as Vol. I, except says Vol. III. 

Collation. Post 8vo, pp. viii + 348. Consist- 
ing of half-title = Mardi. / Vol. III., reverse 
blank; title-page, reverse same as Vol. I; contents 
of the Third Volume, pp. [v]-viii; text, pp. [i] 
(same heading as Vol. I) to 348, bottom of which 
says The End, and bears imprint = London : / 
Printed by Schulze and Co., 13, Poland Street. 
[ 136 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

The book is bound in pale green cloth stamped 
on both covers with same conventional design. 
On back in gold = Mardi, / and a / Voyage / 
Thither / H. Melville / Vol. I. (II. III.) / Lon- 
don / Bentley. All three volumes have end papers 
colored blue and white with a design of small 
circles enclosing flowers. On the inside front and 
rear covers of all three volumes this design forms 
a frame for a publishers' notice printed on the 
end paper. On the inside front covers this notice 
is for Established Works of General Interest. / 
History and Biography. ; on the inside rear covers 
for the same, Voyages and Travels. The bottom 
of each notice reads London: Richard Bentley, / 
Publisher in Ordinary to Her Majesty. 

The published price was 3 1 shillings and 6d. 

The following typographical errors are noted: 

Vol. I., p. 161, heading, XIPHIUS, X and S 
wrong font. 

p. 223, 1. 5, 1 missing in look. 

Vol. II., p. 3, numeral missing. 

p. 109, numeral given is 113. 

p. 294, numeral, broken 4. 

p. 334, fifth line from bottom, quotation marks 
lacking before Let. 

Vol. III., p. 315, numeral, broken 5. 

The tale appeared on March 16, 1849, in Lon- 
don (1000 copies), and on April 14, 1849, in 

[ 137 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

New York. It was the first Melville book pub- 
lished in England by Bentley. 

Mr. Weaver, in his Herman Melville, states 
that up to February 22, 1850, 2154 copies were 
sold. 

The following extracts from Mardi, "Taji sits 
down to dinner with five-and-twenty kings," and 
"Sharks and other sea fellows," appeared in The 
Literary World, the former on April 7, 1849, t^e 
latter on June 16, 1849. 

Some contemporary press notices of Mardi are 
given below. 

Revue des Deux Mondes, Paris (translated) . 
A work such as was never heard of before. . . . 
Mardi is the modern political world. This part 
is the most piquant of the book. The colossal 
machine invented by Mr. Melville might be com- 
pared to the American Panorama now placarded 
on the walls of London in these terms: 

"Gigantic original American Panorama, now 
on exhibition in the great American Hall ; the 
prodigious moving Panorama of the Gulf of 
Mexico, the Falls of St. Anthony, and of the 
Mississippi, covering an extent of canvass 
four miles long, and representing more than 
4000 miles of scenery." 

London Literary Gazette. Mardi has posed us. 
It has struck our head like one of those blows 
[ 138 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

which set every thing dancing and glancing before 
your eyes like splintered sun's rays. The pages 
are brilliant; the adventures superb. 

Democratic Review. A sort of retina picture, 
or inverted view of the world, under the name 
of Mardi. Typee and Omoo are to this work as 
a seven-by-nine sketch of a sylvan lake with a 
lone hunter, or a boy fishing, compared with the 
cartoons of Raphael. 

London Examiner. Charles Lamb might have 
imagined such a party as Mr. Melville imagines 
at Plato's table. 

The book was also severely criticised: 

Black-wood's Magazine. Sadly were we dis- 
gusted on a per^^lisal of a rubbishing rhapsody V 
entitled Mardi, and a Voyage Thither. . . . Why, 
what trash is this? — mingled, too, with attempts 
at a Rabelaisian vein, and with strainings at 
smartness, the style of the whole being affected, 
pedantic, and wearisome exceedingly. . . . Mr. 
Melville has evidently written his unintelligible 
novel to try the public's patience. 

Dublin University Magazine. It is, in our es- 
timation, one of the saddest, most melancholy, 
most deplorable, and humiliating perversions of 
genius of a high order in the English language. 

The book was reprinted in the following years : 
New York: Harpers, 1855; 1864. 

[ 139 ] 



IV 

REDBURN 

New York, 1 849 

Redburn: / His First Voyage. / Being the 
Sailor-boy Confessions and Remin- / iscences of 
the Son-of-a-Gentleman, in / the Merchant Serv- 
ice. / By Herman Melville, / author of "Typee," 
"Omoo," and "Mardi." / New York: / Harper 
& Brothers, Publishers, / 82 Cliff Street. / 1849. 

Collation. i2mo, pp. xi + 13-390. Consist- 
ing of title-page, reverse bears note of date of 
entry one thousand eight hundred and forty-nine ; 
dedication =To / My younger brother, / Thomas 
Melville, / now a sailor on a voyage to China, / 
this Volume is Inscribed. {Note, the "To" is 
not centered), reverse blank; contents, pp. [v]- 
xi, reverse blank; text, pp. [13J-390. There fol- 
low 4 pp. of Harper announcements, of which 
the first three are of Typee, Mardi, and Omoo; 
followed by pp. [ij-ii of Harper "Book List 
of the present season" dated October, 1849, the 
first item of which is Redburn. Reverse of p. 11 
is numbered 14 and is a continuation of the book 
[ 140 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

list. There follow pp. [iJ-2 of Harper "Stand- 
ard Illustrated Works." 

The book is bound in brown muslin, stamped 
on both covers with same conventional design en- 
closing publishers' monogram in center in a circle. 
On back in gold = Redburn. / Melville / New 
York / Harper & Brothers. Yellow end papers. 

The published price was $i.oo, and in paper 
75 cents. 

The following typographical errors noted: 

p. 45, third 1. from bottom, quotation marks 
omitted after second word. 

p. 53, 1. 5, Narrows, broken N. 

p. 127, 1. 12, last word, hyphen lacking. 

p. 152, chapter heading, furnituer should be 
furniture. 

p. 279, last line, last word, period lacking. 

p. 290, seventh 1. from bottom, Seutonius, 
should be Suetonius. 

p. 380, 1. 16, last word, period lacking. 

p. 383, 1. 21, quotation marks at beginning of 
line should not appear. 



[ 141 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

RED BURN 

London, 1849 
2 vols. 

Volume I. 

Redburn: / His First Voyage. / Being / The 
Confessions of a Sailor-Boy. / By Herman Mel- 
ville, / author of "Typee," "Mardi," &c. / In 
Two Volumes. / Vol. I. / London: / Richard 
Bentley, New Burlington-Street. / 1849. 

Collation. Post 8vo, pp. viii + 316. Consist- 
ing of title-page, reverse blank; dedication = 
To / my younger brother, / Thomas Melville, / 
now a sailor on a voyage to China, / this volume 
is inscribed., reverse blank; Contents, pp [v]-viii; 
text, pp. [i]-3i6. 

Volume IL 

Same title-page as Vol. I, except says Vol. IL 
Collation. Post 8vo, pp. viii + 314. Consist- 
ing of half-title, Redburn: / His First Voyage. / 
Vol. II. ; reverse bears imprint at bottom = Lon- 
don : / R. Clay, Printer, Bread Street Hill. ; title- 
page, reverse blank; contents, pp. [v]-viii; text^ 
pp. [i J-314, which bears imprint at bottom = R. 
Clay, Printer, Bread Street Hill. 

The two volumes are bound in dark blue cloth, 
[ 142 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Stamped with conventional design. White end 
papers with blue pattern, bearing publishers' an- 
nouncements. The published price was i guinea. 

The manuscript of Redburn was written in 
New York during the summer of 1849. The tale 
appeared on August 18, 1849, in New York, and 
on September 29, 1849, i" London (750 copies). 

Mr. Weaver, in his Herman Melville, states 
that up to February 22, 1850, 401 1 copies were 
sold. 

The following extracts from Redburn, "Red- 
burn contemplates making a social call on the 
Captain," and "A Living Corpse," appeared in 
The Literary World, on November 10, 1849. 

The book was translated into German 
(Grimma, 1850). 

Some of the contemporary press notices of 
Redburn are given below. 

Albion. Ships and the sea, and those who plow 
it, with their belongings on shore — these subjects 
are identified with Herman Melville's name, for 
he has most unquestionably made them his own. 
No writer, not even Marryat himself, has ob- 
served them more closely or pictured them more 
impressively. 

Boston Post. The book is intensely interest- 
ing. The great charm of the work is its realness. 
It seems to be fact word for word. The tale is 
told simply and without the least pretension; and 
[ 143 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

yet within its bounds are flashes of genuine humor, 
strokes of pure pathos, and real and original 
characters. 

Noah's Times. The book is in the old vein. It 
is written for the million, and the million will 
doubtless be delighted with its racy descriptions 
of the life of a young sailor. 

Philadelphia North American. Herman Mel- 
ville is one of the few who has made a distinct 
mark on the literature of his time. 

The book was also criticised, as in the follow- 
ing notice: 

Dublin University Magazine. It contains some 
clever chapters, but very much of the matter, 
especially that portion relative to the adventures 
of the young sailor in Liverpool, London, etc., is 
outrageously improbable, and cannot be read with 
either pleasure or profit. This abortive work 
. . . neither obtained nor deserved much suc- 
cess. . . . 

The book was reprinted in the following years : 
New York: Harpers, 1850; 1855; 1863. 
London: Bentley, 1853. 



[ 144 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

REDBURN 

OR THE 

SCHOOLMASTER OF A MORNING 

In closing the subject of Redburn, the attention 
of the reader is invited to a curious volume, de- 
scribed below. 

Redburn: / or the / Schoolmaster of a Morn- 
ing. / New York: / Wm. M. Christie, No. 2, 
Astor House. / M DCCC XLV. 

Collation. i2mo, 71 pp. Consisting of title- 
page, bearing on reverse note of date of entry, 
1 844, and at bottom imprint = H. Ludwig, 
Printer, / Nos. 70 and 72, Vesey-St. ; half-title. 
The Announcement., reverse blank; text. Canto 
I> PP- [5]-i6; half-title. The Arrival., reverse 
blank; texlt, Canto II, pp. [I9J-34; half-title, 
The School., reverse blank; text, Canto III, pp. 
[373-48; half-title. The Denouement., reverse 
blank; text. Canto IV, pp. [51J-71. Reverse of 
p. 71 blank. All half-titles are included in the 
pagination, and each page, including the blank 
pages, is enclosed in a frame showing small ro- 
settes at the four corners. 

The book is bound in yellow glazed boards, 
and bears on back Redburn, in black type on paper 
label pasted on, printed from bottom to top. This 
binding may have been put on by Mr. Stuart when 
the book came into his possession. (See below.) 
[ 145 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

This volume is to be found in the New York 
Public Library, in the room devoted to the Stuart 
collection. In April, 1922, it bore on the title- 
page, in pencil, a note made by the cataloguer 
By / Herman Melville. On the same date, among 
the Herman Melville cards in the general card 
catalog there appeared a card covering this vol- 
ume and giving Herman Melville as the author. 
It is estimated that the cataloguing of this volume 
was done fully twenty years ago. It is an inter- 
esting, and at the same time mortifying, example 
of the public neglect of Herman Melville, that 
this card attributing this volume of verse to him 
should have remained unquestioned during all 
those years; more especially since, if a genuine 
Melville, this volume would be his first published 
book and consequently of considerable interest to 
biographers. 

The book is mentioned in several catalogs, in- 
cluding that of the British Museum, but always 
anonymously. It is supposed that the cataloguer 
who made the notation on the title-page looked 
up Redburn, and found Melville given as the 
author, the reference being of course to the novel. 

There are several features of this poem, how- 
ever, which, if only from the standpoint of coin- 
cidence, give it an added and quite unusual interest. 

The hero of the poem, and the hero of Mel- 
ville's novel, are both called Redburn. 

The poem was published in 1845, copyright 
[ 146 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

1844. Melville was discharged from the Navy, 
at the close of his White-Jacket voyage, in Bos- 
ton, October, 1844, that is to say, after his visit 
to Typee. (See below.) 
The poem states: 

Canto I, p. 5. 

"Close where Tioga's hill-side fires 
Smoke, dull, above Owego's spires, 

■P T* ^ ^ 1- 

Its front a district school house rears. 

*!* jp f^ g^ j|c 

P- 13- 

"How, on the morrow would arrive 
From great Manhatta's teeming hive 

T" "1" '(■ "t" "1* 

A pedagogue of likely parts. ..." 

In other words, Redburn in the poem is a 
schoolmaster. While it is not known that Mel- 
ville ever taught school in Tioga County, even 
temporarily as a substitute, nevertheless he did 
teach school in New York State between the years 
1 837-1 840, after his return from Liverpool on 
the voyage described subsequently (1849) •" his 
novel Redburn. 

The poem continues: 

[ 147 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 
p. 15. 

"She, conscious that she knew the truth, 
That the new teacher was a youth 
On the wide world an orphan thrown 
To meet its buffetings alone, 

p. 16. 

And for his service he would share 
In turn the farmer's homely fare 
With some small pay beside. ..." 

At the time when he taught school Melville's 
father was dead, and he had already met the buf- 
fetings of the wide world during his voyage to 
Liverpool. Also during his career as a school- 
teacher it is known that Melville received a very 
small stipend, and boarded with the neighboring 
farmers in rotation. 

The poem continues : 

Canto II, p. 24. 

"All forward pressed, eager to see 
What sort of teacher it might be — 
And when, as stopp'd the coach, a bound 
Brought the schoolmaster to the ground, 
A murmur of surprise went round. 
'Twas no old wretch, whose sullen looks 
Told but of punishment and books — 
[ 148 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

But a fair youth, whose eye of blue 
The light of anger never knew. 



Canto III, p. 47. 

"The damsels smiling, thought the swain 
Well might adorn the suitor train. 
And lightly laughed at punishment 
When beau and pedagogue were blent ; 



p. 48. 



And the glad urchins, with sly wink, 
Curled a contemptuous lip to think 
How much a teacher should be feared 
Whose chin scarce darken'd with a beard. 



Redburn of the poem, therefore, was a very 
young man, of prepossessing appearance. Mel- 
ville taught school between the ages of eighteen 
and twenty, and is known to have been of a strik- 
ing appearance. 

The poem continues: 

Canto IV, p. 52- 

"He [Redburn] dreamed — and thoughts of 
other days 
Came o'er his soul like sunny rays. 

***** 
[ 149 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 
P-53- 

And now his vision seem'd to change, 
And all was beautifully strange. 
Far as the eye could reach, was spread 
A vale, fit for the fairies' tread; 
Upon its arbours grew such fruit 
The fairies' dainty taste might suit. 
And every leaf and every flower 
Might deck a fairy's nuptial bower. 
Through the bright valley flow'd a stream, 
Where, 'twixt the trees, the sun would gleam 
And kiss the wave in laughing play. 
Though jealous leaves would often stray 
To keep him from the foam away." 

It is difficult not to turn at once to Melville's 
descriptions of the Valley of Typee, in the Re- 
vised Edition, where he says : 

pp. 46-47. "From the spot where I lay 
... I looked straight down into the bosom 
of a valley, which swept away in long wavy 
undulations to the blue waters in the dis- 
tance. . . . Everywhere below me . . . the 
surface of the vale presented a mass of foli- 
age, spread with such rich profusion, that it 
was impossible to determine of what descrip- 
tion of trees it consisted. 

"But perhaps there was nothing about the 
scenery I beheld more impressive than those 
[ 150 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

silent cascades, whose slender threads of 
water . . . were lost amidst the rich herbage 
of the valley. 

"Over all the landscape there reigned the 
most hushed repose, which I almost feared 
to break, lest, like the enchanted gardens in 
the fairy tale, a single syllable might dis- 
solve the spell." 

p. 57. "So glorious a valley — such for- 
ests of bread-fruit trees — such groves of 
cocoa-nut — such wildernesses of guava 
bushes !" 

p. 67. "That magnificent vale. ..." 

p. 68. "We followed the course of the 
stream. ..." 

p. 69. "We descried a number of trees 
. . . which bear a most delicious fruit. ..." 

Fortunately for the peace of mind of the 
reader, the remainder of the poem Redburn is 
free from apparent allusions to the author of the 
novel Redburn. 



[ 151 ] 



WHITE-JACKET 

New York, 1850 

White- Jacket; / or / The World In a Man-Of- 
War. / By Herman Melville, / author of 
"Typee," "Omoo," "Mardi," and "Redburn." / 
New York: / Harper & Brothers, Publishers, / 
82 Cliff Street. / London: Richard Bentley. / 
1850. 

Collation. lamo, pp. vii + [9J-465. Consist- 
ing of title-page, reverse bears note of date of 
entry, one thousand eight hundred and fifty; quo- 
tation from Fuller's "Good Sea-Captain," reverse 
bears author's note, dated New York, March, 
1 850; contents, pp. [v]-vii, reverse of which is 
blank; text, pp. [9J (headed White-Jacket) to 
462; pp. [463]-465 contain unnumbered chapter 
entitled The End, not included in Contents. Re- 
verse of p. 465 is blank. There follow six un- 
numbered pages of publishers' announcements, 
the first four of which are of Redburn, Mardi, 
Omoo, and Typee. 

The book is bound in brown cloth, stamped 
[ 152 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

with same conventional design on both covers, 
bearing the words Harper and Brothers New 
York in center. On back, in gold, White-Jacket. 
/ Melville. / New York. / Harper & Brothers. 
Yellow end papers. 

The published price was $1.25. 

The book was also issued in two parts bound 
in paper. 

Part I. 

Collation. i2mo, pp. vii + [9]-240. Con- 
sisting of title-page, reverse bears note of date 
of entry, one thousand eight hundred and fifty; 
author's note, dated New York, March, 1850, 
reverse bears quotation from Fuller's "Good Sea- 
Captain"; contents (both parts), pp. [v]-vii, 
reverse of which is blank; text, pp. [93-240. 

Part II. 

Collation. i2mo, pp. [241J-465, consisting 
only of text. Reverse p. 465 blank, followed by 
14 pages of publishers' announcements, first four 
of which are of Redburn, Mardi, Omoo, and 
Typee. 

The parts are bound in yellow paper. On 
front cover, in double frame, in black, top left- 
hand corner, Part I. (II.), top right-hand corner, 
50 cents. In center White- Jacket ; / or / The 
World In A Man-Of-War. / By Herman Mel- 
[ 153 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

ville, / author of "Typee," "Omoo," "Mardi," 
and "Redburn." / Complete in Two Parts. / New 
York: / Harper & Brothers, Publishers, / 82 
Cliff Street. / 1850. Inside front and rear covers 
blank. Rear cover, Part I, announcement of 
"Book List for the present season. May 1850," 
Part II, "New Books." The published price was 
50 cents each part. 



WHITE-JACKET 

London, 1850 
2 vols. 

(From "Excursions in Victorian Bibliography," 
Sadleir.) 

White-Jacket: Or The World in a Man of 
War. By Herman Melville. London: Richard 
Bentley, New Burlington Street, 1850. 2 vols. 
Ex. Cr. 8vo (4^x7^). 

Vol. I, pp. vi + 322. 

Vol. II, pp. iv + 315 + [i]. 

No half-titles. Pale blue cloth, gilt, blocked 
in blind. Yellow end papers, printed with pub- 
lishers' advertisements. Vol. I, pp. iii and iv, 
contain a preface dated October, 1849, ^"d dif- 
ferent in content from the note on p. iv of the 
American edition dated March, 1850. 
[ 154 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

The published price was 21 shillings. 

The manuscript was written in New York City 
during the summer of 1849. I" November of 
that year Melville went to London to dispose of 
it. Richard Bentley offered two hundred pounds 
for the English rights to print 1000 copies. The 
manuscript was refused by Murray, Colbour, and 
Moxon. Finally, in December, Bentley confirmed 
his previous offer, and accepted the manuscript 
for publication at the end of March, 1850 (1000 
copies). The American edition is subsequent to 
the English. 

The following extract, "A shore emperor on 
board a man of war," appeared in The Literary 
World, March 9, 1850. 

The book contains an account of Melville's own 
experiences subsequent to those related in Omoo, 
as a sailor aboard the United States Frigate 
United States, from which he received his dis- 
charge in Boston, in October, 1844. 

Of this book the Dublin University Magazine 
said: 

"This is, in our opinion, his very best 
work. . . . Take it all in all, White-Jacket is 
an astonishing production, and contains much 
writing of the highest order." 

[ 155 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

The book was reprinted In the following years : 

New York: Harper, 1855; Arthur Stedman, 
Ed., 1892; 1896. 

Boston: Arthur Stedman, Ed., 1900; 19 10; 
1919. 

London: 1855; 1892; 1893; 1901. 



[ 156 ] 



VI 

MOBY-DICK 

New York, 185 1 

Moby-Dick; / or, / The Whale. / By / Her- 
man Melville, / author of / "Typee," "Omoo," 
"Redburn," "Mardi," "White-Jacket." / New 
York: / Harper & Brothers, Publishers. / Lon- 
don: Richard Bentley. / 1851. 

Collation. i2mo, pp. xxiii + 634. Consisting 
of title-page, reverse bears note of date of entry, 
1851 ; dedication = In Token / of my admiration 
for his genius, / This Book Is Inscribed / to / 
Nathaniel Hawthorne., reverse blank; Contents, 
pp. [v]-vi; half-title, Moby-Dick; / or, / The 
Whale., reverse bears note headed Etymology; 
p. [ix]. Etymology, reverse bears note headed 
Extracts; pp. [xi]-xxiii. Extracts, reverse of p. 
xxiii blank; text, pp. [i 3-634; followed by page 
containing Epilogue, reverse of which is blank; 
followed by six pages of publishers' announce- 
ments. The book is bound in pale blue cloth, 
stamped with conventional design. Orange end 
papers. 

[ 157 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

The American edition contains thirty-five pas- 
sages omitted from the English edition. 
The published price was $1.50. 



THE WHALE 

London, 1851 
3 vols. 

(From "Excursions in Victorian Bibliography," 
Sadleir.) 

The Whale. By Herman Melville, author 
of "Typee," "Omoo," "Redburn," "Mardi," 
"White-Jacket." (Quotation from Paradise 
Lost.) London: Richard Bentley, New Burling- 
ton Street. 1851. 3 vols. Ex. Cr. 8vo (4%x 

Vol. I, pp. viii -f 312. 

Vol. II, pp. iv + 303 + [r]- 

Vol. Ill, pp. iv + 328. 

Vol. I only has half-title, on which the story is 
described as The Whale or Moby-Dick. 

Quarter cream cloth blocked in gold; bright 
blue embossed cloth sides, blocked in blind. Pale 
yellow end papers. 

The published price was 31 shillings and 6 
pence. 

[ 158 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

The manuscript was written at Arrowhead, 
Massachusetts, in 1 850-1 851. The tale was pub- 
lished in October, 1851. In England Richard 
Bentley agreed to pay one hundred and fifty 
pounds for the first 1000 copies, and half profits 
thereafter. The American edition is subsequent 
to the English (500 copies). 

The following extract, "The Town-Ho's 
Story," appeared in Harper's New Monthly 
Magazine, October, 1851. 

Extracts from press notices are given below. 

Dublin University Magazine. It is quite as 
eccentric and monstrously extravagant in many of 
its incidents as even Mardi; but it is, nevertheless, 
a very valuable book, on account of the unpar- 
alleled mass of information it contains on the 
subject of the history and capture of the great 
and terrible cachalot or sperm-whale. 

Literary World. Moby-Dick may be pro- 
nounced a most remarkable sea-dish — an intel- 
lectual chowder of romance, philosophy, natural 
history, fine writing, good feeling, bad sayings — 
but over which, in spite of all uncertainties, and 
in spite of the author himself, predominates his 
keen perceptive faculties, exhibited in vivid nar- 
ration. 

The book was reprinted in the following years : 
New York: Harper, 1863^ Arthur Stedman, 
[ 159 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Ed., 1892; 1896. Another edition, 1892; 1899; 
Ernest Rhys, Ed., 1907; 192 1. Dodd Mead, 
1922. 

Boston: Arthur Stedman, Ed., 1900; 19 10; 
1919. 

London: Bentley, 1^53; L. Becke, Ed., 1901; 
Ernest Rhys, Ed., 1907; 192 1. Another edition, 
1912; Violet Maynell, Ed., 1920; 1921. 



[ 160 ] 



VII 

PIERRE 

New York, 1852 

Pierre; / or, / The Ambiguities. / By / Her- 
man Melville. / New York: / Harper & Brothers, 
Publishers / 329 & 331 Pearl Street, / Franklin 
Square. / 1852. 

Collation. i2mo, pp. viii + 495. Consisting 
of title-page, reverse bears note of date of entry, 
1852; dedication To / Greylock's Most Excellent 
Majesty, etc., reverse blank; table of contents, 
pp. [v]-viii; text, pp. [iJ-495, reverse of which 
is blank. 

The book is bound in grey cloth, stamped with 
conventional design. Grey end papers. 

The published price was, cloth $1.25', paper 
$1.00. 

PIERRE 
London, 1852 

Copies issued in England consist of the Ameri- 
can sheets, with a cancel title = Pierre : Or The 
[ 161 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Ambiguities. By Herman Melville. London: 
Sampson Low Son and Co., 47 Ludgate Hill. 
1852. Bound in blue embossed cloth, stamped 
with conventional design. Yellow end papers. 
The price was 8 shillings and 6 pence. 

The manuscript was written at Arrowhead, 
Massachusetts, in 1851. The tale was published 
in November, 1852. 

The book contains much autobiographical ma- 
terial concerning Melville's childhood, and sup- 
posed depictions of his parents. 

Extracts from contemporary press notices are 
given below. 

London Men of the Time. An unhealthy, mys- 
tic romance. ... A decided failure. . . . 

London Athenaeum. It is one of the most dif- 
fuse doses of transcendentalism offered for a long 
time to the public. . . . That many readers will 
not follow "the moody ways of Pierre" is, in our 
apprehension, not amongst the ambiguities of the 
age. The present chaotic performance has noth- 
ing American about it, except that it reminds us 
of a prairie in print, wanting the flowers and 
freshness of the savannahs, but almost equally 
puzzling to find a way through it. 

Literary World. The object of the author, 
perhaps, has been, not to delineate life and char- 
[ 162 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

acter as they are or may possibly be, but as they 
are not and cannot be. We must receive the book, 
then, as an eccentricity of the imagination. 

The most unmoral moral of the story, if it has 
any moral at all, seems to be the impracticability 
of virtue. . . . 

In commenting upon the vagueness of the book, 
the uncertainty of its aim, the indefiniteness of its 
characters, and want of distinctness in its pictures, 
we are perhaps only proclaiming ourselves as the 
discoverers of a literary mare's nest, this vague- 
ness, as the title of the "Ambiguities" seems to 
indicate, having been possibly intended by the 
author, and the work meant as a problem of im- 
possible solution, to set critics and readers a wool- 
gathering. It is alone intelligible as an unin- 
telligibility. 

The book was reprinted by Harper, in 1 855. 



[ 163 ] 



VIII 

ISRAEL POTTER 

New York, 1855 

Israel Potter: / His Fifty Years of Exile. / 
By / Herman Melville, / author of "Typee," 
"Oraoo," etc. / New York: / G. P. Putnam & Co., 
10 Park Place. / 1855. 

Collation. i2mo, 276 pp. Consisting of title- 
page; reverse, note of date of entry = 1855, and 
at bottom imprint = Printed and stereotyped by 
Blllin and Brother, 20 North William St., N. Y. ; 
dedication, pp. [3J-5, headed To / His High- 
ness / the / Bunker Hill Monument., dated June 
17, 1854; reverse p. 5 blank; contents, pp. [7]-8; 
text, pp. [9] (headed Israel Potter: / Fifty 
Years of Exile) to 276. 

The book was bound in green cloth, stamped 
on both covers with border, and identical conven- 
tional design in center enclosing publishers' mono- 
gram. On back in gold = Fifty / Years / Exile / 
Melville. / Putnam. Yellow end papers. 

The published price was 75 cents. 

Typographical errors noted: 
[ 164 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

p. 137, 1. 17, Tristam should be Tristram. 

p. 276, heading, period should be colon. 

The book was reprinted twice in the same year. 

The second printing is identical with the first, 
except that binding is red, and following addi- 
tional typographical errors noted: 

p. 113, 1. I, third word, broken y. 

p. 116, 1. 3, fifth word, t obliterated. 

p. 116, 1. 4, fifth word, t obliterated. 

p. 119, second line from bottom, seventh word, 
i missing. 

p. 188, heading, colon broken. 

p. 201, 1. I, last word, hyphen lacking. 

The third printing is identical with the sec- 
ond, except that the binding is brown; the title- 
page bears the words Third Edition after "author 
of . . . " ; and following additional typographical 
errors noted: 

p. 122, heading, period should be colon. 

p. 183, heading, period lacking. 

p. 275, last line, last word, e lacking. 

The book was issued in 1865 in Philadelphia 
under the title of: 

THE REFUGEE 

The Refugee. / By / Herman Melville. / 
Author of "Typee," "Omoo," "The Two Cap- 
tains," "The Man of / the World," etc., etc. / 
[ 165 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

"Written with a life-like power. We advise no one 
to take up 'The Refugee' / until he has the leisure 
to finish it; for when he has once dipped into its 
fasci- / nating and adventurous pages, he will not 
be disposed to leave them until he has / reached 
the very last." / "This is really a delightful book, 
in which one may find food for laughter and / ster- 
ling information into the bargain. It is written 
in a pleasant off-hand style, / such as will be en- 
joyed by everybody. There are portions of the 
work, infinitely / superior to anything of the kind 
we ever before read." / Philadelphia: / T. B. 
Peterson & Brothers, / 306 Chestnut Street. 

Collation. 8vo. Title-page, bearing on re- 
verse note of date of entry = 1865 ; and text, pp. 
19 (heading = The Refugee. / By Herman Mel- 
ville.) to 286. There is no dedication, and no 
table of contents as in Putnam edition. 

The book is bound in black pressed cloth, with 
double border and conventional design In center 
showing publishers' name on both covers. On 
back = The / Refugee (in black in a gold panel 
stamp) / (In gold) Melville. / Publishers' sym- 
bol / T. B. Peterson & Brothers. The whole 
enclosed In a gold frame. 

The same typographical errors as in the third 
printing of the Putnam edition noted, except that 
the missing « on p. 275 of that edition is corrected 
in this one (p. 285) . None of the errors in page 
headings of the Putnam edition occur, as the page 
[ 166 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

heading for the 1865 edition is The Refugee 
throughout. 

The published price was, cloth $1.75, paper 
$1.50. 

A copy of The Refugee, formerly the property 
of Melville's cousin, Mrs. Lansing, bears a note 
in pencil on the title-page to the effect that the 
publishers of The Refugee "assumed the right" 
to publish it after the expiration of the copyright, 
and the edition has often been referred to subse- 
quently as a pirated edition. This is not the case, 
however, as the plates were sold by Putnam to 
Peterson during the panic of 1857. At the time 
of the sale the plates were valued at $218.66, the 
book was out of print, and there was no sheet 
stock. 

An undated clipping from the New York 
World, pasted in the copy mentioned ^bove, voices 
Melville's legitimate objection, not to the publi- 
cation of the book by Peterson, but to its publi- 
cation under a changed title, as follows: 

"A Protest from Herman Melville 

"To the Editor of the World 
"Sir: Permit me through your columns to 
make a disavowal. T. B. Peterson and 
Brothers, of Philadelphia, include in a late 
list of their publications 'The Refugee' by 
Herman Melville. 

"I have never written any work by that title. 
[ 167 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

In connection with that title Peterson Broth- 
ers employ my name without authority, and 
not withstanding a remonstrance conveyed to 
them long ago. 

Herman Melville." 

The matter is again referred to In a letter from 
Melville to Mr. James Billson, reprinted in the 
London Nation and Athenaeum for August 13, 
1 92 1, as follows: 

"April 7th, 1888 
New York, 104 East 26th Street. 
"My dear Sir . . . As for the 'Two Cap- 
tains' and 'Man of the World,' they are 
books of the air — and I know of none such. 
The names appear, though, on the title- 
page of a book of mine — 'Israel Potter' — 
which was republished by a Philadelphia 
house some time ago, under the unwarrant- 
ably altered title of 'The Refugee.' A letter 
to the publisher arrested the publication." 



[ 168 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

ISRAEL POTTER 

London, 1855 

(From "Excursions in Fictotian Bibliography," 
Sadleir.) 

Israel Potter: His Fifty Years of Exile. By 
Herman Melville, author of "Typee," "Omoo," 
etc. London: G. Routledge and Co., Farring- 
ton Street. 1855. i Vol. F, cap, 8vo (4x65^). 
Pp. 174. Bright yellow paper wrappers printed 
in black. The outside back wrapper is occupied 
by publishers' advertisements. Also issued simul- 
taneously in cloth. 

The published price was i shilling. 

The tale was published in April, 1855, ^7 Put- 
nam, having previously appeared serially in Put- 
nam's Monthly Magazine, July, 1854-March, 

1855- 

The book is based on the Life and Remarkable 
Adventures of Israel R. Potter, 1824, purporting 
to be the true story of a soldier in the American 
Revolution, captured by the British at the Battle 
of Bunker Hill. Melville's book contains what 
are considered able sketches of George III, Dr. 
Franklin, Paul Jones, Ethan Allen, and the fight 
between the Bonhomme Richard and the Serapis. 

Extracts from contemporary press notices are 
given below. 

[ 169 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Hartford Republican. The descriptions with 
which it abounds are among the finest in the 
language. Such splendid writing rarely issues 
from the press. 

London Athenaeum. Mr. Melville's books 
have been, from the outset of his career, some- 
what singular, and this is not the least so of the 
company. . . . Mr. Melville tries for power, and 
command, but he becomes wilder and wilder, and 
more and more turgid in each successive book. 

The book was reprinted in the following years : 
New York: Putnam, 1855 (reprinted twice), 
London: Murray, 1861. 

Philadelphia: T. B. Peterson, 1865 (from 
original plates, with title of The Refugee). 



[ 170 ] 



IX 

THE PIAZZA-TALES 

New York, 1856 

The / Piazza Tales. / By / Herman Melville, / 
author of "Typee," "Omoo," etc, etc., etc. / New 
York; / Dix & Edwards, 321 Broadway. / Lon- 
don: Sampson Low, Son & Co. / 1856. 

Collation. i2mo, pp. [iv]+43i. Consist- 
ing of title-page, reverse bears note of date of 
entry, 1856, and imprint = Miller & Holman, / 
Printers & Stereotypers, N. Y. ; contents, reverse 
blank; text, pp. [iJ-29, The Piazza, reverse 
blank; [31]-! 07, Bartleby, reverse blank; [109]- 
270, Benito Cereno; [27i]-285, The Lightning- 
Rod Man, reverse blank; [287J-399, The 
Encantadas, reverse blank; [401] -431, The Bell- 
Tower, reverse blank; followed by 7 pages of 
publishers' announcements. 

The book is bound in pale blue cloth, stamped 
on both covers with same conventional design 
showing publishers' monogram in an oval of corn- 
stalks; on back, in gold, enclosed in same de- 
sign = The / Piazza / Tales / Melville., and at 
[ 171 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

bottom = DIx Edwards & Co. While some copies 
of the first edition have blue end papers, that 
owned by Mr. Evert Duyckinck (see Part One 
of this work) has yellow end papers, and it is 
reasonable to assume that his copy would have 
been among the first issued. 

The published price was $i.oo. 

While the book was advertised in England at 9 
shillings, and noticed by English reviewers, it is 
doubtful whether it was ever issued in England. 

The book, published in 1856, contains a col- 
lection of short tales. The first of these. The 
Piazza, gives an account of Melville's farmhouse 
at Arrowhead, Massachusetts; the other five had 
already appeared in Putnam's Monthly Magazine 
as follows: 

Bartleby, the Scrivener, November-December, 

1853- 

The Encantadas, March-May, 1854. 

The Lightning-Rod Man, August, 1854. 

The Bell Tower, August, 1855. 

Benito Cereno, October-December, 1855. 

The London Atlas mentioned the book as fol- 
lows: 

"Who that remembers those charming works 

of Mr. Melville, Typee and Omoo, will not 

be glad of an opportunity of meeting him on 

[ 172 1 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

his Piazza, while he recites the delightful 
stories which are contained in the volume be- 
fore us?" 

The book was never reprinted. 



[ 173 ] 



THE CONFIDENCE-MAN 

New York, 1857 

The / Confidence-Man: / His Masquerade. / 
By / Herman Melville, / author of "Piazza 
Tales," "Omoo," "Typee," etc., etc. / New 
York: / Dix, Edwards & Co., 321 Broadway. / 

1857. 

Collation. i2mo, pp. [vi] + 394. Consisting 
of title-page; reverse, note of date of entry = 
1857, and at bottom imprint of Miller & Hol- 
man, / Printers and Stereotypers, N. Y. ; contents, 
pp. [iii]-vi (all lines centered and no page refer- 
ences given); text, pp. [ij (headed The Confi- 
dence-Man: / His Masquerade.) to 394. 

The book is bound in green cloth, stamped on 
both covers with border, and conventional design 
in center. On back in gold = The / Confidence / 
Man / Melville / Dix, Edwards & Co. 

The published price was $1.00. 



[ 174 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

THE CONFIDENCE-MAN 

London, 1857 

(From "Excursions in Victorian Bibliography," 
Sadleir.) 

The Confidence-Man: His Masquerade By 
Herman Melville, author of "The Piazza Tales," 
"Omoo," "Typee," etc., etc. Authorised Edi- 
tion. London: Longman, Brown, Green, Long- 
mans and Roberts. 1857. i Vol. F, cap. 8vo 
(4j4x6^). Pp. vi + 354. No half-title. 
Publishers' catalogue, 24 pp., dated September, 
1855, bound in at end. Yellow-brown cloth, gilt, 
blocked in blind. Brick-red end papers, partially 
printed with publishers' advertisements. 

The published price was 5 shillings. 

The tale was published in April, 1857. The 
action takes place aboard a Mississippi river boat, 
and it would seem to have been the author's in- 
tention to write a sequel. 

Some contemporary press notices of the book 
are ^ven below. 

Westminster Review. It required close knowl- 
edge of the world, and of the Yankee world, to 
write such a book, and make the satire acute and 
telling and the scenes not too improbable for the 
faith given to fiction. Perhaps the moral is, the 
[ 175 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

gullibility of the great Republic when taken on 
its own tack. . . . Few Americans write so pow- 
erfully as Mr. Melville, or in better English; 
and we shall look forward with pleasure to his 
promised continuation of the Masquerade. The 
first part is a remarkable work, and will add to 
his reputation. 

London Leader. The charm of the book is 
owing to its originality and to its constant flow of 
descriptions, character sketching, and dialogue, 
deeply toned and skilfully contrasted. 

London Saturday Review. There is one point 
on which we must speak a serious word to Mr. 
Melville before parting with him. He is too 
clever a man to be a profane one; and yet his 
occasional irreverent use of Scripture phrases in 
such a book as the one before us gives a disagree- 
able impression. We hope he will not in future 
mar his wit and blunt the edge of his satire by 
such instances of bad taste. 

The book was never reprinted. 



[ 176 ] 



XI 

BATTLE-PIECES 
New York, 1866 

Battle-Pieces / and / Aspects of the War. / 
By / Herman Melville. / New York: / Harper 
& Brothers, Publishers, / Franklin Square. / 1866. 

Collation. i2mo, pp. x + [i i]-272. Consist- 
ing of title-page ; reverse, note of date of entry = 
one thousand eight "hnndred" and sixty-six; dedi- 
cation = The Battle-Pieces / in this volume are 
dedicated / to the memory of the / Three Hundred 
Thousand / who in the war / for the maintenance 
of the Union / fell devotedly / under the flag of 
their fathers; reverse blank; author's note, be- 
ginning "With few exceptions, the Pieces in this 
volume originated in an impulse imparted by the 
fall of Richmond . . ."; reverse blank; contents, 
listing 71 poems, pp. [vii]-x; poem. The Portent 
(1859), "ot included in contents, p. [irj; re- 
verse blank; text, pp. [13J-162; half-title = 
Verses / Inscriptive and Memorial; reverse blank; 
text, pp. [i65]-[i83]; reverse blank; half-title 
= The Scout toward Aldie; reverse blank; text, 
[ 177 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

pp. [187] -2 25; reverse blank; half-tide = Lee in 
the Capitol; reverse blank; text, pp. [229J-237; 
reverse blank; half-title = A Meditation, (etc.); 
reverse blank; text, pp. [241 J-243 ; reverse blank; 
half-title = Notes; reverse blank; text, pp. [247]- 
255; reverse blank; half-title = Supplement ; re- 
verse blank; text, pp. [259J-272. All half-titles 
are included in the pagination. Throughout the 
book the page on which a poem begins is not num- 
bered. The longest poem included is The Scout 
toward Ald'te, 39 pp. The at one time well-known 
Sheridan at Cedar Creek is on pp. 116-117. 

The book is bound in blue cloth, bearing pub- 
lishers' monogram in a circle in center of both 
covers. On back in gold = Battle / Pieces. / 
Melville. / Ornament / Harpers. Brown end 
papers. 

The published price was $1.75. 

The book was not issued in England. 

This volume of verse was published in 1866. 
Melville states that "with few exceptions, the 
Pieces in this volume originated in an impulse 
imparted by the fall of Richmond. ..." 

The volume opens with The Portent (1859), 
not included in the table of contents, and given in 
full below: 

"Hanging from the beam, 
Slowly swaying (such the law), 
[ 178 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Gaunt the shadow on your green, 

Shenandoah ! 

The cut is on the crown 

(Lo, John Brown), 

And the stabs shall heal no more. 

"Hidden in the cap 
Is the anguish none can draw; 
So your future veils its face, 
Shenandoah I 

But the streaming beard is shown 
(Weird John Brown), 
The meteor of the war." 

Of the poems included in this volume, the fol- 
lowing had already appeared in magazines: 

"The March to the Sea," Harper's New 
Monthly Magazine, February, 1866. 

"The Cumberland," Harper's New Monthly 
Magazine, March, 1866. 

"Chattanooga," Harper's New Monthly Mag- 
azine, June, 1866. 

"Gettysburg: July, 1863," Harper's New 
Monthly Magazine, July, 1866. 

The book was never reprinted. 



[ 179 ] 



XII 

CLAREL 

New York, 1876 
2 vols. 

Volume I. 

Clarel / a poem / and / pilgrimage in the Holy 
Land. / By / Herman Melville / in four parts / 
I. Jerusalem III. Mar Saba / II. The Wilder- 
ness IV. Bethlehem / Vol. I / New York / G. P. 
Putnam's Sons / No. 182 Fifth Avenue / 1876. 

Collation. i6mo, pp. 300. .Consisting of title- 
page, reverse bears copyright note, 1876; dedica- 
tion, reverse blank, pasted in, not included in 
pagination = By / a spontaneous act, / not very 
long ago, / my kinsman, the late / Peter Ganse- 
voort, / of Albany, N. Y., / In a personal inter- 
view provided for the publica- / tion of this poem, 
known to him by report, / as existing in manu- 
script. / Justly and affectionately the printed book 
is / Inscribed With His Name.; contents, 3 pp., 
of which the second and third are numbered ii 
and iii, though actually they are 4 and 5 ; reverse 
[ 180 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

of p. iii bears author's note; text, Part I, pp. [7]- 
152; half-title = Part II. / the Wilderness, re- 
verse blank, included in pagination; text, Part 
II, pp. [15SJ-300. 

Volume II. 

Title-page same as Volume I, except says 
Vol. II. 

Collation. i6mo, pp. iv+ [301J-571. Con- 
sisting of title-page, reverse bears copyright note, 
1876; contents, pp. [iii]-iv; half-title, Part III. / 
Mar Saba., included in pagination, p. [301 J, re- 
verse blank; text. Part III, pp. [3033-436 ; half- 
title, Part IV. / Bethlehem., included in 
pagination, reverse blank; text. Part IV, pp. 
[439]-57i, reverse of which is blank. 

Each volume is bound in brick-red cloth, 
stamped in gold on front cover only with emblem 
of palm leaves, crosses, crowns and star. On 
back, in gold, Clarel / a / Pilgrimage / in the / 
Holy Land / Melville /I. (II.) / Putnam. 
Chocolate end papers. 

The published price was $3.00. 

The book was not issued in England. 

These two volumes of verse were published in 
July, 1876, at the expense of Melville's uncle, 
Hon. Peter Gansevoort. The manuscript had 
been in existence for some time. 
[ 181 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

The poem was inspired by Melville's journey 
to the Holy Land, in 1856. 

The poem was never reprinted. 



[ 182 ] 



XIII 

JOHN MARK 

New York, 1888 

John Marr / and other sailors / (these two 
lines not centered) With some sea-pieces / deco- 
ration I New- York / The De Vinne Press / 1888. 

Collation. i6mo, 4 unnumbered pages + pp. 
103. Consisting of Title-page, reverse of which 
bears imprint = Copyright, 1888, by / Theo. L. 
De Vinne & Co.; Table of Contents, reverse 
blank; "Inscription epistolary to W. C. R.," etc., 
PP- [i]-7> reverse of which is blank; half-title, 
John Marr / and other Sailors., reverse blank; 
text, pp. 11-23, reverse of which is blank; hal^- 
title. Bridegroom Dick, reverse blank; text, pp. 
27-50; half-title, Tom Deadlight, reverse blank; 
text, pp. 53-56; half-title. Jack Roy, reverse 
blank; text, pp. 59-61, reverse of which is blank; 
half-title, Sea-Pieces, reverse blank; text, pp. 65- 
76; half-title. The Aeohan Harp / at the Surf 
Inn., reverse blank; text, pp. 79-81, reverse of 
which is blank; half-title. Minor Sea-Pieces., re- 
verse blank; text, pp. 85-97, reverse of which is 
[ 183 1 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

blank; half-title, Pebbles, reverse blank; text, pp. 
1 01-103, reverse of which is blank. All half-titles 
included in pagination. 

The book is bound in yellow paper. On front 
cover, in black = (upper left-hand corner) 25 
copies (underlined). Remainder of cover as fol- 
lows = John Marr decoration / decoration And 
Other Sailors / With some sea-pieces / decora- 
tion I New-York / The De Vinne Press / 1888. 
Other covers blank. 

The volume contains 19 poems. The edition 
was privately printed, and limited to 25 copies. 
The initials of the Inscription Epistolary stand for 
W. Clark Russell. 

The Princeton University Press is about to 
issue this volume of verse, under the title of John 
Marr and other poems, edited by Mr. Henry 
Chapin. 



[ 184 ] 



XIV 

TIMOLEON 
New York, 1891 

Timoleon / etc. / Decoration / New York / 
The Caxton Press / 1891. 

Collation. i6mo, pp. vi + [7J-70. Consist- 
ing of Title-page, reverse of which bears im- 
print = Copyright, 1891, by / The Caxton Press; 
dedication = To / my countryman / Elihu Ved- 
der, reverse blank; Table of Contents, pp. [v]-vi; 
text, pp. [7J-I5, reverse of which is blank; half- 
title. After the Pleasure Party., reverse bears 
verse headed Lines Traced under an image of 
amor threatening; text, pp. 19-45, reverse of 
which is blank; half-title. Fruit of travel long ago ; 
text, pp. [483-70; followed by blank leaf. All 
half-titles included in pagination. 

The book is bound in buff paper. On front 
cover in black = Timoleon / etc. / decoration / 
New York / The Caxton Press / 1891. Other 
covers blank. 

The volume contains 43 poems. The edition 
was privately printed and limited to 25 copies. In 
[ 185 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

the following poem, quoted from this volume, 
Melville seems to have summed up his concep- 
tion of Art: 

"In placid hours well pleased we dream 
Of many a brave unbodied scheme, 
But form to lend, pulsed life create, 
What unlike things must meet and mate ; 
A flame to melt — a wind to freeze ; 
Sad patience — ^joyous energies; 
Humility — ^yet pride and scorn ; 
Instinct and study ; love and hate ; 
Audacity — reverence. These must mate, 
And fuse with Jacob's mystic heart. 
To wrestle with the angel — Art." 



[ 186 ] 



XV 

BILLY BUDD 

(Unpublished) 

Besides ten prose pieces and a body of verse, 
there still exists in manuscript form a novel, Billy 
Budd, the manuscript of which was completed a 
short time before Melville's death. 

The novel is based on the character of Jack 
Chase, the captain of the maintop who figures in 
White-Jacket, and is dedicated to him, as fol- 
lows (quoted from Mr. Weaver's Herman Mel- 
ville) : 

"To Jack Chase, Englishman, wherever that 
great heart may now be, Here on earth or 
harboured in Paradise, Captain in the war- 
ship in the year 1843, In the U. S. Frigate 
United States." 



[ 187 ] 



XVI 
LECTURES 

Between 1857 and i860, Melville sought ta 
increase his income by turning to the lecture plat- 
form. J. E. A. Smith says of him that "he did 
not take very kindly to the lecture platform, but 
had large and well pleased audiences." 

Melville himself, in a letter to George Duyck- 
inck, (Duyckinck collection. New York Public 
Library) says: 

"... if they will pay expenses, and give 
a reasonable fee, I am ready to lecture in 
Labrador, or on the Isle of Desolation off 
Patagonia. 

"Bear with mine infirmity of jocularity. 

)> 

Mr. Weaver, in his Herman Melville, states, 
that Melville had two subjects on which he lec- 
tured, South Seas and Statuary in Rome. He lists 
the following occasions on which Melville lec- 
tured, together with the fee received, described 
by J. E. A. Smith as "the liberal pay" which lec- 
turers received at that period. 
[ 188 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 





1857-1858 




November 


24, Concord, Mass., 


$ 30.00 


December 


2, Boston, 


40.00 


(1 


10, Montreal, 


50.00 


II 


30, New Haven, Conn., 


50.00 


January 


5, Auburn, N. Y., 


40.00 


It 


7, Ithaca, N. Y., 


50.00 


<( 


10, Cleveland, 


50.00 


« 


22, Clarksville, 


75.00 


? 


Chillicothe, 0., 


40.00 


? 


Cincinnati, 


50.00 


February 


10, Charleston, Mass., 


20.00 


II 


23, Rochester, N. Y., 


50.00 


? 


New Bedford, Mass., 


50.00 




$595.00 




Travelling expenses, 
1858-1859 


221.30 




$373-70 






December 


6, Yonkers, N. Y., 


$ 30.00 


11 


14, Pittsfield, Mass., 


50,00 


January 


31, Boston, 


50.00 


February 


7, New York, 


55.00 


II 


8, Baltimore, 


100.00 


II 


24, Chicago, 


50.00 


II 


25, Milwaukee, 


50.00 


II 


28, Rockford, 111., 
[ 189 ] 


50.00 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

March 2, Quincy, 111., 23.50 

" 16, Lynn, Mass. (2), 60.00 



[ 190 ] 



$518.50 



1859-1860 

November 7, Flushing, L. I., $ 30.00 

February 14, Danvers, Mass., 25.00 

" 21, Cambridge, Mass., 55-00 

$110.00 



XVII 
CONTRIBUTIONS TO MAGAZINES, ETC. 

Fragments from a writing desk, The Demo- 
cratic Press and Lansingburgh Advertiser, May 
4, May i8, 1837. 

Omoo, extracts, "The French priests pay their 
respects," and "A dinner party in Imeeo," Liter- 
ary World, April 24, 1847. 

Review, Parkman's Oregon Trail, Literary 
World, March 31, 1849. 

Review, Cooper's Sea Lions, Literary World, 
April 28, 1849. Melville is also known to have 
written an article on a new edition of Cooper's 
Red Rover. 

Mardi, extracts, "Taji sits down to dinner with 
five-and-twenty kings," Literary World, April 7, 
1849. "Sharks and other sea fellows," Literary 
World, June 16, 1849. 

Redburn, extracts, "Redburn contemplates 
making a social call on the captain," and "A liv- 
ing corpse," Literary World, November 10, 
1849. 

White-Jacket, extract, "A shore emperor on 
[ 191 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

board a man of war," Literary World, March 9, 
1850. 

Review, Hawthorne's Scarlet Letter, Literary 
World, March 30, 1850. 

{Note. Besides the reviews already mentioned, 
there are undoubtedly others by Melville In the 
Literary World, but as they were unsigned they 
can not now be identified with certainty.) 

Hawthorne and his mosses, by a Virginian 
spending a July in Vermont, Literary World, 
August 17, August 24, 1850. 

Moby-Dick, extract, "The Town-Ho's story," 
Harper's New Monthly Magazine, October, 
1851. 

Article, James Fenimore Cooper, in W. C. 
Bryant's A memorial to James Fenimore Cooper.^ 
New York, 1852. 

Our young authors, Putnam's Monthly Maga- 
zine, February, 1853. 

Bartleby the Scrivener, a story of Wall Street, 
Putnam's Monthly Magazine, November-Decem- 
ber, 1853. 

Cock-a-doodle-doo 1 or the crowing of the cock 
of Benentano, Harper's New Monthly Magazine, 
December, 1853. 

The Encantadas or Enchanted Isles, by Salva- 
tor R. Tarnmoor, Putnam's Monthly Magazine, 
March-May, 1854. 

The lightning-rod man, Putnam's Monthly- 
Magazine, August, 1854. 

[ 192 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Poor man's pudding and rich man's crumbs, 
'Harper's New Monthly Magazine, June, 1854. 

Happy failure, a story of the river Hudson, 
Harper's New Monthly Magazine, July, 1854. 

Israel Potter, his fifty years' exile, Putnam's 
Monthly Magazine, July, 1854-March, 1855. 

The fiddler, Putnam's Monthly Magazine, Sep- 
tember, 1854. 

Paradise of Bachelors and Tartarus of Maids, 
Harper's New Monthly Magazine, April, 1855. 

The bell-tower, Putnam's Monthly Magazine, 
August, 1855. 

Benito Cereno, Putnam's Monthly Magazine, 
October-December, 1855. 

Jimmy Rose, Harper's New Monthly Maga- 
zine, November, 1855. 

The 'Gees, Harper's New Monthly Magazine, 
March, 1856. 

I and My Chimney, Putnam's Monthly Maga- 
zine, March, 1856. 

The apple-tree table, or original spiritual mani- 
festations, Putnam's Monthly Magazine, May, 
1856. 

Poem, The March to the sea, Harper's New 
Monthly Magazine, February, 1866. 

Poem, The Cumberland, Harper's New 
Monthly Magazine, March, 1866. 

Poem, Philip, Harper's New Monthly Maga- 
zine, April, 1866. 

[ 193 ] 



SOME PERSONAL LETTERS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

Poem, Chattanooga, Harper's New Monthly 
Magazine, June, 1866. 

Poem, Gettysburg, July, 1863, Harper's New 
Monthly Magazine, July, 1866. 

Article, Major Thomas Melville, in J. E. A, 
Smith's The History of Pittsfield, Pittsfield, 1876. 

The Princeton University Press is about to 
issue a volume, edited by Mr. Henry Chapin, 
entitled The Apple-Tree Table and other 
sketches. The volume will rank as a Melville 
first edition, and will contain the following 
sketches selected from those mentioned above, and 
never before published in book form : The Apple- 
Tree Table; Hawthorne and his Mosses; Jimmy 
Rose; I and my chimney; Paradise of Bachelors 
and the Tartarus of Maids; Cock-a-doodle-doo; 
The Fiddler ; Poor man's pudding and rich man's 
crumbs ; The Happy Failure ; The 'Gees. 



[ 194 ] 



STANDARD EDITION OF THE PROSE 
WORKS OF HERMAN MELVILLE 

It is interesting to note, at the time of the 
appearance of this volume, that Constable and 
Company, of London, are in process of publish- 
ing the first standard collected edition of Mel- 
ville's prose works. 

It is significant that just as a London publisher 
was the first to accept for publication a manu- 
script by the American Melville, so now another 
London publisher is preparing this first and defini- 
tive collected edition. 

The edition will be limited to 750 sets for Eng- 
land and America, upon the completion of which 
the type will be distributed. Each set, in 12 vol- 
umes, will contain t)ie following titles: Typee, 
Omoo, Mardi (2 vols.), Redburn, White-Jacket, 
Moby-Dick (2 vols.), Pierre, The Piazza-Tales, 
Israel Potter, The Confidence-Man. 



[ 195 ] 

+ 



