
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



Essays, Criddsms, and Reviews. 



The Sunilriwer edition isUmtted to one thousand numlten^d 
»iid registered eopii«e; of which this is 



Sm^floMir Eihtioa 



THE WORKS 

OSCAR ' WILDE 



rSSAYS. CRITICISMS 
AND REVIEWS 

IU.U»TllATt£> 



WCi GO. 



ILLUSTRATIONS. 

PAOB 

Oioar Wilde FnmiUpieee 

Oscar Wilde in 1880 9tt 

OMsr WUde, .aSsthetio Period, 1884 ... 199 
Ofloar Wilde in 1899 ...... 956 



A FASCINATING BOOK. 

Mr. Alan Cole'e carefully edited tranfilation of 
M. Lef^bure's ^'History of Embroidery and Lace^' 
(H. Qrevel and Co.) is one of the meet faaeinating 
books that has appeared on this delightful subject 
M. Lef^bnre is one of the administrators of the 
Hns£e des Arts D^coratifs at Paris, besides being 
a lace manufacturer; and his work has not merely 
an important historical value^ but as a handbook 
of technical instruction it will be found of the 
greatest service by all needlewomen. Indeed, as 
the translator himself points out, M. Lef^bure's 
book suggests the question whether it is not rather 
by the needle and the bobbin, than by the brush, 
the graver, or the chisel, that the influence of 
woman should assert itself in the arts. In Europe, 
at any rate, woman is sovereign in the domain of 
art needlework, and few men would care to dis- 
pute with her the right of using those delicate 
implements so intimately associated with the dex- 
terity of her nimble and slender fingers; nor is 
1 



2 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

there any reason why the productions of embroid- 
ery should not, as Mr. Alan Cole suggests, be 
placed on the same level with those of painting, en- 
graving, and sculpture, though there must always 
be a great difference between those purely decora- 
tive arts that glorify their own material and the 
more imaginative arts in which the material is, 
as it were, annihilated, and absorbed into the crea- 
tion of a new form. In the beautifying of mod- 
em houses it certainly must be admitted — ^indeed^ 
it should be more generally recognised than it is — 
that rich embroidery on hangings and curtains, 
portieres, couches, and the like, produces a far 
more decorative and far more artistic effect than 
can be gained from our somewhat wearisome Eng- 
lish practice of covering the walls with pictures 
and engravings; and the almost complete disap- 
pearance of embroidery from* dress has robbed 
modem costume of one of the chief dements of 
grace and fancy. 

Thaty however^ a great improvement has taken 
place in English embroidery during the last ten 
or fifteen years cannot> I think, be denied. It is 
shown not merely in the work of individual artists, 
such as Mn. Holiday, Miss May Morris^ and oth- 
ers, but also in the admirable productions of the 



A FASCINATING BOOK. 3 

South Kensington School of Embroidery (the best 
— indeed, the only really good — school that Soutli 
Kensington has produced) . It is pleasant to note, 
on turning over the leaves of M. Lef^bure's book, 
that in this we are merely carrying out certain old 
traditions of Early English art In the seventh 
century, St Bthelreda, first abbess of the Monas- 
tery of Ely, made an offering to St Cuthbert of 
a sacred ornament she had worked with gold and 
precious stones, and the cope and maniple of St 
Cuthbert, which are preserved at Durham, are 
considered to be specimens of opus Anglicantim. 
In the year 800 the Bishop of Durham allotted 
the income of a farm of two hundred acres for 
life to an embroideress named Eanswitha, in con- 
sideration of her keeping in repair the vestments 
of the clergy in his diocese. The battle standard 
of King Alfred was embroidered by Danish prin- 
cesses; and the Anglo-Saxon Oudric gave Alcuid 
a piece of land on condition that she instructed hia 
daughter in needlework. Queen Matilda be- 
queathed to the Abbey of the Holy Trinity at 
Caen a tonic embroidered at Winchester by Hie 
wife of <nie Alderet; and when William presented 
himself to the English nobles, after the Battle 
of Hastings, he wore a mantie covered with Anglo- 



4 THE WBITINQS OP OSCAB WILDE. 

Saxon embroiderieB, whidi is jfrohablj, M. Lef£- 
bnre Boggerts, the same aa that mentioiied in the 
inventoiy of the Bayeux Cathedral, where, after 
the entry rdating to the broderie A telle (repre- 
senting the conquest of England), two mantles 
are described— one of King William, ''all of gold, 
powdered with crosses and blossoms of gold, and 
edged along the lower border with an orphrey of 
figures.'' The most splendid example of the opus 
Anglicanum now in existence is, of course, the 
Syon cope at the South Kensington Museum ; but 
English work seems to have been celebrated all 
over the Continent Pope Innocent IV so ad- 
mired the splendid vestments worn by the English 
clergy in 1246, that he ordered similar articles 
from Cistercian monasteries in England. St Dun- 
Stan, the artistic English monk, was known as a 
designer for embroideries; and the stole of St 
Thomas k Becket is still preserved in the cathe- 
dral at Sens, and shows us the interlaced scroll 
forms used by Anglo-Saxon MS. illuminators. 

How far this modem artistic revival of rich and 
delicate embroidery will bear fruit depends, of 
course, almost entirely on the energy and atudy 
tiiat women are ready to devote to it; but I tiiink 
that it must be admitted that all our decorative 



A FASCINATING BOOK 6 

arts in Europe at present have, at least, this ele- 
ment of strength — ^that they are in immediate re- 
lationship with the decorative arts of Asia. Wher- 
ever we find in European history a rovival of deco- 
rative art, it has, I fancy, nearly always been dne 
to Oriental influence and contact with Oriental 
nations. Our own keenly intellectual art haa mora 
than once been ready to sacrifice real decorative 
beauty either to imitative presentaticm or to ideal 
motive It has taken upon itself the burden of 
expression, and has sought to interpret the secrets 
of tiiougfat and passion. In its marvdlous truth 
of presentation it hsB found its strength, and yet 
its weakness is there also. It is never wiib im- 
punity that an art seeks to mirror Ufa If Truth 
has her revenge upon those who do not follow her, 
she is often pitiless to her worshippers. In By- 
zantium the two arts met — Qreek art with its in- 
tellectual sense of form, and its quick sympathy 
with humanity; Oriental art, wiih its gorgeous 
materialism, its frank rejection of imitation, it» 
wonderful secrets of craft and colour, its splendid 
textures, its rare metals and jewels, its marvellous 
and priceless traditions. They had, indeed, met 
before, but in Byzantium they were married; and 
the sacred tree of the Persians, tiie palm of Zoro- 



6 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

aster, was embroidered on the hem of the garments 
of the Western world. Even the Iconoclasts, the 
Philistines of theological history, who, in one of 
those strange ontborsts of rage against Beantj thai 
seem to occirr only amongst European nations, rose 
up against the wonder and magnificence of the 
new art, merely served to distribute its secrets more 
widely; and in the Liber Pontificaiis, written in 
687 by Athanasius, the librarian, we read of an in- 
flux into Home of gorgeous embroideries, the work 
of men who had arrived from C!onstantinople and 
from Oreece. The triumph of the Mussulman 
gave the decorative art of Europe a new departure 
— ^that very principle of Iheir religion that forbade 
the actual representation of any object in* nature 
being of the greatest artistic service to them, 
though it was not, of course, strictly carried out 
Hie Saracens introduced into Sicily the art of 
weaving silken and golden fabrics; and from Sicily 
the manuf acturo of fine stufb spread to the North 
of Italy, and became localised in Genoa, Florence, 
Venice, and other towns. A still greater art move- 
ment took place in Spain under the Moors and 
Saracens, who brought over workmen from Persia 
to make beautiful things for them. M. Lef^buro 
tells us of Persian embroidery penetrating as far 



A FASCINATING BOOK. 7 

as Andalusia*; and Almeria, like Palermo^ had its 
Hotel des Tiraz, which rivalled tiie H6M des Tiraz 
at Bagdad, Uraz being the gaieric name for orna- 
mental tissues and costumes made with them. 
Spangles (those pretty little discs of gold, silver, 
or polished steel, nsed in certain embroidery for 
dainty glinting effects) were a Saracenic inven- 
tion; and Arabic letters often took the place of 
letters in the Soman characters for use in inscrip- 
tions npon embroidered robes and Middle Age 
tapestries, their decorative value being so much 
greater. The book of crafts by Etienne Boileau, 
provost of the merchants in 1258-1268, contains a 
curious enumeration of the different craft-guilds 
of Paris, among which we find "the tapiciers, or 
makers of the tapis sarrasinois (or Saracen cloths), 
who say that their craft is for the service only of 
churches, or great men like kings and counts"; 
and, indeed, even in our own day, nearly all our 
words descriptive of decorative textures and deco- 
rative methods point to an Oriental origin. What 
the inroada of the Mohammedans did for Sicily 
and Spain, the return of the Crusaders did for the 
other countries of Europe. The nobles who left 
for Palestine clad in armour, came back in the 
rich stuffs of the Ea»t; and their costumes, pouches 



8 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

(aumSnUres sarrasinoises), and caparisons excit- 
ed the admiration of the needleworkers of the 
West. Mathew Paris says that at the sacking of 
Antiochy in 1098^ gold, silver, and priceless cos- 
tumes were so equally distributed among the Cru- 
saders that many who the night before were fam- 
ishing and imploring relief, suddenly found ihem« 
selves overwhelmed with wealtli; and Robert de 
Clair tells us of the wonderful ffites that followed 
the capture of Constantinople. The thirteenth 
centuiy, as M. Lef^bure points out, was conspicu- 
ous for an increased demand in the West for em- 
broidery. Many Crusaders made offerings to 
churches of plunder from Palestine; and St 
Louis, on his return from the first Crusad^ of- 
fered thanks at St. Denis to God for mercies be- 
stowed on him during his six years' absence and 
travel, and presented some richly embroidered 
stufEs to be used on great occasions as coverings 
to the reliquaries containing the relics of holy 
martyrs. European embroidery, having thus be- 
come possessed of new materials and wonderful 
methods, developed on its own intellectual and im- 
itative lines, inclining, as it went on, to the purely 
pictorial, and seeking to rival painting, and to 
produce landscapes and figure subjects with elabo- 



A FASCINATING BOOK. 9 

rate perspective and subtle aerial effects. A fresh 
Oriental influence, however, came through the 
Dutch and the Portuguese, and the famous Com^ 
pagnie des Chrandes Indes; and M. Lef ibure gives 
an illustration of a door-hanging now in the Gluny 
Museum, where we find the French fleurs-de-lis 
intermixed with Indian omamen4^ The hangings 
of Madame de Maintenon's room at Fontainebleau, 
which were embroidered at St Cyr, represent Chi- 
nese scenery upon a jonquil-yellow ground. 

Clothes were sent out ready cut to the East to 
be embroidered, «nd many of the delightful coats 
of the period of Louis XV and Louis XVI owe 
their dainty decoration to the needles of Chinese 
artists. In our own day the influence of the East 
is strongly marked. Persia has sent us her car- 
pets for patterns, and Cashmere her lovdy shawls, 
and India her dainly muslins finely worked with 
gold thread palmates, and stitched over with iri- 
descent beetles' wings. We are beginning now to 
dye by Oriental methods, and the silk robes of 
China and Japan have taught us new wonders of 
colour combination, and new subtleties of delicate 
design. Whether we have yet learned to make a 
wise use of what we have acquired is less certain. 
If books produce an effect^ this book of M. Lef£- 



10 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

bure should certainly make us study with still 
deeper interest the whole question of embroidery, 
and by those who already work with their needles 
it will be found full of most fertile suggestion 
and most admirable advice. 

Even to read of the marvellous works of em- 
broidery that were fashioned in bygone ages is 
pleasant. Time has kept a few fragments of 
Greek embroidery of the fourth century b.c. for 
us. One is figured in M. Lef^bure's book — a chain- 
stitch embroidery of yellow flax upon a mulberry- 
coloured worsted material, with graceful spirals 
and palmetto patterns; and another, a tapestried 
cloth powdered with ducks, was reproduced in The 
Woman^s World some months ago for an* article 
by Mr. Alan Cole. Now and then we find in ihe 
tomb of some dead Egyptian a piece of delic&te 
work. In the treasuiy at Batisbon is preserved a 
specimen of Byzantine embroidery, on which the 
Emperor Constantine is depicted riding on a white 
palfiney, and receiving homage from the East and 
West Metz has a red silk cope wrought with great 
eagles, the gift of Charlemagne, and Bayeux the 
needle-wrought epic of Queen Matilda. But where 
is the great crocus-coloured robe that was wrought 
for Athena^ and on which the gods fought against 



A FASCINATING BOOK. 11 

the giants? Where is the huge velariuin that Nero 
stretched across the Colosseum at Bome^ on which 
was represented the starry sky, and Apollo driving 
a chariot drawn by steeds? How one would like 
to see the curious table napkins wrought for Helio- 
gabalus, on which were displayed all the dainties 
and viands that could be wanted for a feast; or 
the mortuary-doth of King Chilperic^ with its 
three hundred golden bees; or the fantastic robes 
that excited the indignation of the Bishop of Pon- 
tns, and were embroidered with '^ons, panthers, 
beans, dogs, forests, rocks, hunters — all, in fact, 
that painters can copy from nature.^' Charles of 
Orleans had a coat, <m the sleeves of which were 
embroidered the verses of a song, b^inning, ''Mad- 
ame, je rais font joyeux,'' the musical accompani- 
ment of the words being wrought in gold thread, 
and each note (of square shape in those days) 
formed with four pearls. The room prepared in 
the palace at Bheims for the use of Queen Joan 
of Burgundy was decorated with 'thirteen him- 
dred and twenty-one pofegauts (parrots) made 
in broidery and blazoned with the King's arms, 
and five hundred and sizly-one butterflies, idiose 
wings wero similarly ornamented with the Queen's 
arms — the whole worked in fine gold/' Catherine 



12 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAB WILDK 

de MediciA had a mourning-bed made for her '^of 
black velvet embroidered with pearls and powdered 
with creeoentB and suna.'^ Its cnrtaina were of 
damask, 'Vith leafy wreaths and garlands figured 
upon a gold and silver ground, and fringed along 
tiie edges with broideries of pearls/' and it stood 
in a room hung with rows of the Queen's devices 
in cut black velvet on doth of silver. Louis XIV 
had gold-embroidered caryatidea fifteen feet high 
in his apartment The state bed of Sobieski, King 
of Poland, was made of Smyrna gold brocade em* 
broidered in turquoises and pearls, with verses 
from the Koran; its supports were of silver-gilt^ 
beautifully chased and profusely set with enam- 
elled and jewelled medallions. He had taken it 
from the Turkish camp before Vienna, and the 
standard of Mahomd; had stood tmder it The 
Duchess de la Fert£ wore a dress of reddish«brown 
velvet, the skirt of which, adjusted in graceful 
folds, was hdd up by big butterflies made of Dres- 
den china; the front was a tablier of clotii of sil- 
ver, upon whidi was onbroidered an orchestra of 
musidans arranged in a pyramidal group, con- 
sisting of a series of six ranks of performers, with 
musical instruments wrought in raised needlework. 



A FASCINATING BOOK. 13 

''Into the night go one and all/' as Mr. Henley 
flingB in his charming ''Ballade of Dead Actors." 

Many of the facts related about the embroider- 
ers' guilds by M. Lef ibure are also extremely inter- 
esting. Etienne Boilean^ in his book of crafts^ to 
which I have already alluded, tells us that a mem« 
ber of the guild was prohibited from using gold 
of less value than "eight sous (about 68.) the 
skein; he was bound to use the best silk, and never 
to mix thread with silk, because that made the 
work false and bad." The test or trial piece pre- 
scribed for a worker who was the son of a master 
embroiderer was "a single figure^ a sixth of the 
natural size, to be shaded in gold"; whilst one 
not the son of a master was required to produce 
^'a complete incident witli many figures." The book 
of craftB also mentions "cutters-out, and stendl- 
lers, and illuminators" amongst those employed in 
the industry of embroidery. In 1551 the Parisian 
Corporation of Embroiderers issued a notice that 
"for the future the colouring in representations of 
nude figures and faces should be done in three 
or four gradations of carnation-dyed silk, and not, 
as formerly, in white silks." During the fifteenth 
century every household of any position retained 
the services of an embroiderer by the year. The 



14 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAE WILDK 

preparation of colours also, whether for painttBg 
or for dyeing thraads and textile f abries,wafi a mat- 
ter which^ M. Lef^bure points out, received dose 
attention from **>» iu-tist» of the Middle Agea 
Many underl ?>'» to obtain the more 

famous recip tied, sobsequeatly add- 

ing to and 00 aa experience dictated. 

Nor were gn a mraJring and supply- 

ing designs . Baphael made de* 

signs fop Fn mcher for Louis XV; 

and in the Amotw uuiiectaon at Vienna is a superb 
set of sacerdotal robes from designs by the broth- 
ers Van Eyek and their pupils. Early in the six- 
teenth century books of embroidery designs were 
produced, and their success was so great that in 
a few years French, German, Italian, Flemish, and 
English publishers spread broadcast books of design 
made by their best engravers. In the same cen- 
tury, in order to give the designers opportonity 
of stud3ring directly from nature, Jean Bobin 
opened a garden with conservatories, in which he 
cultivated strange varieties of plants, then but lit- 
tle known in our latitudes. The rich brocades and 
brocadelles of the time are characterised by the 
introduction of large flowery patterns, with pome- 
granates and other fruits with fine foliage. 



A FASCINATING BOOK 16 

The seoond part of M. Lef ^bure's book is devot- 
ed to the hktory of lace^ and though some may 
not find it qnite aa interesting as the earlier por- 
tion^ it will more than repay pemsal; and those 
who atill work in this delicate and fanciful art will 
find many valuable suggestions in it> as well as a 
large number of exceedingly beautiful designs. 
Compared to embroidery, lace seems comparatively 
modem. M. Lefibure and Mr. Alan Cole tell us 
that there is no reliable or documentary evidence 
to prove the existence of lace before the fifteenth 
century. Of course, in the East, light tissues, such 
as gauzes, muslins, and nets, were made at very 
early times^ and were used as veils and scarfs, af- 
ter the manner of subsequent laces, and women en- 
riched them with some sort of anbroidery, or vs/- 
ried the openness of them by here and there draw- 
ing out threads. The threads of fringes seem also 
to have been plaited and knotted together, and the 
borders of one of the many fashions of Boman 
toga were of open reticulated weaving. The Egyp- 
tian Museum at the Louvre has a curious network 
embellished with glass beads ; and the monk Regi- 
nald, who took part in opening the tomb of St 
Cuthbert at Durham in the twelfth century, writes 
that the sainfs shroud had a fringe of linen threads 



16 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

an inch long, sunnotinied by a border, 'Vorked 
upon the threads/' with representatioiiA of birdfl 
and pairs of beasts, there being between each such 
pair a branching tree, a surviyal of the palm of 
Zoroaster, to which I have before alluded. Our 
authors, however, do not in these examples recog- 
nise lace, the production of which involves more 
refined and artistic methods^ and postulates a com- 
bination of skill and varied execution carried to a 
higher d^ee of perfection. Lace, as we know it^ 
seems to have had its origin in the habit of em- 
broidering linen. White embroidery on linen has> 
M. Lefibure remarks, a cold and monotonous as* 
pect; that with coloured threads is brighter and 
gayer in effect, but is apt to fade in frequent wash- 
ing; but white embroidery relieved by open spaces 
in, or shapes cut from, the linen ground, is pos- 
sessed of an entirely new charm ; and from a sense 
of this the birth may be traced of an art in the re- 
sult of which happy contrasts are effected between 
ornamental details of dose texture and others of 
openwork. 

Soon, also, was suggested the idea that, instead 
of laboriously wiUidrawing threads from stout 
linen, it would be more convenient to introduce a 
needle-made pattern into an open net-work ground. 



A FASCINATING BOOK. 17 

which was called a l€uns. Of this kind of ^nbroid- 
ery many specimens are extant The Clnny 
Museum possesses a linen cap said to have belonged 
to Charles V; and an alb of linen drawn-thread 
work, supposed to have been made by Anne of 
Bohemia (1527), is preserved in the cathedral at 
Prague. Catherine de Medicis had a bed draped 
with squares of riseuil, or lads, and it is recorded 
that '^he girls and servants of her household con- 
sumed much time in making squares of reseuU/* 
Tlie interesting pattem-bookB for open-ground 
embroidery, of which the first was published in 
1527 by Pierre Quinty, of Cologne, supply us with 
the means of tracing the stages in the transition 
from white thread embroidery to needle-point lace. 
We meet in them with a style of needlework which 
differs from the embroidery in not being wrought 
upon a stuff foundation. It is, in fact, true lace, 
done, as it were, ''in the air," both ground and 
pattern being entirely produced by the lace-maker. 
The elaborate use of lace in costume was, of 
course, largely stimulated by the fashion of wear- 
ing ruffs, and their companion cuffs or sleeves. 
Catheorine de Medicis induced one Federic Yinciolo 
to come from Italy and make ruffs and gadrooned 
collars, the fashion of which he started in France; 



18 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

and Henry III wn» so piinctdlious over his ruffs 
that he would iron and goffer his cnffs and collars 
himself rather than see thdr pleats limp and out 
of shape. Hie pattern-hooks also gave 9 great 
impulse to the art. M. Lef^bnre mentiona German 
books with patterns of eagles^ heraldic emblems, 
hunting scenes, and plants and leaves belonging 
to Northern y^;etation; and Italian books, in 
which the motifs consist of oleander blossoms, and 
elegant wreaths and scrolls^ landscapes with myth- 
ological scenes, and hunting episodes, less realistic 
than the Northern ones, and in which appear 
fauns, and nymphs, and amorini, shooting arrows. 
With regard to these patterns, M. Lef ibure notices 
a curious fact. The oldest painting in which lace 
is depicted is that of a lady by Carpaccio, who died 
about 1523. The cuffs of the kdy are edged with 
a narrow lace, the pattern of which reappears in 
Vedllio's "Corona,*' a book not published until 
1691. This particular pattern was, therefore, in 
use at least eighty years before it got into circula- 
tion with other published patterns. 

It was not, however, till the seventeenth century 
that lace acquired a really independent character 
and individuality, and M. Duplessis states that the 



A FASCINATING BOOK. 19 

production of the more noteworthy of early laces 
owes more to the influence of men than to that of 
women. The reign of Louis XIY witnessed the 
production of the most stately needle-point laces, 
the transformation of Venetian point> and the 
growth of Poinis t^AUngon, ffArgentan, de BruX' 
elles, and ffAngleierre. 

The King, aided by Colbert, determined to make 
France the centre, if possible, for lace manu- 
facture, sending for this purpose both to Venice 
and to Flanders for workers. The studio of the 
Gk>belins supplied designs. The dandies had their 
huge rabatos, or bands falling from beneath the 
chin over the breast, and great prelates, like Boe- 
suet and Fenelon, wore their wonderful albs and 
rochets. It is related of a collar made at Venice 
for Louis XIV that the lace-workers, being 
imable to find sufficiently fine horsehair, employed 
some of their own hairs instead, in order to secure 
that marvellous delicacy of work which they aimed 
at producing. 

In the eighteentii century, Venice, finding that 
laces of lighter texture were sought after, set h^- 
self to make rose-point; and at the Court of Louis 
XV the choice of lace was regulated by still more 



20 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

elaborate etiquette. The Bevolution, however, 
rained many of the manufacturers. Alengon smv 
yived^ and Napoleon encouraged it, and endeav- 
onred to renew the old rales about the necessity of 
wearing point-lace at Court receptions. A won- 
derful piece of lace, powdered over with devices 
of bees, and costing 40,000 francs, was ordered. 
It was begun for the Empress Josephine, but in 
the course of its making her escutcheons were re- 
placed by those of Marie Louise. 

M. Lef £bure concludes his interesting history by 
stating very clearly his attitude towards machine- 
made lace. ^'It would be an obvious loss to art,^ 
he says, ^'should the making of lace by hand be* 
come extinct, for machinery, as skilfully devised 
as possible, cannot do what the hand does. It can 
give us the results of processes, not the creations 
of artistic handicraft. Art is absent where formal 
calculation pretends to supersede emotion ; it is ab* 
sent where no trace can be detected of intelligence 
guiding handicraft, whose hesitancies even possess 
peculiar charm. Cheapness is never commendable 
in respect of things which are not absolute necessi- 
ties; it lowers artistic standard.^' These are ad- 
mirable remarks, and with them we take leave of 
this fascinating book, with its delightful illustra- 



A FASCINATING BOOK. 



21 



tioDS^ itB charming anecdotes, its excellent advice. 
Mr. Alan Cole deserves fhe thanks of all who are 
interested in art for bringing this book before the 
public in so attractive and so inexpensive a form. 



A NOTE ON SOME MODERN POETS. 

*^£ I were king/' says Mr. Henley, in one of his 
most modest rondeanfi, 

^'Art should aspire, yet ugliness be dear; 
Beauty, the shaft, should speed with wit for 

feather; 
And love, sweet love, should never fall to sere. 
If I were king/* 

And these lines contain, if not the best criticiam 
of his own work, certainly a very complete state- 
ment of his aim and motive as a poet Hia little 
^'Book of Verse*' (David Nutt) reveals to us an 
artist who is seeking to find new methods of ez- 
pression, and who haa not merely a delicate sense 
of beauty and a brilliant, fantastic wit, but a real 
passion also for what is horrible, ugly, or gro- 
tesque. No doubt, everything that is worthy of 
existence is worthy also of art — at least, one would 
like to think so — ^but while echo or mirror can re* 
peat for us a beautiful thing, to artistically render 
88 



24 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

a tbing that is ugly requires the most exquisite 
alchemy of form, the most subtle magic of trans* 
formation. To me there is more of the cry of 
Marsyas than of the singing of Apollo in the 
earlier poems of Mr. Henley's volume^ the 
'Rhymes and Rhythms in Hospital/' as he calk 
them. But it is impossible to deny their power. 
Some of them are like bright^ vivid pastels; others 
like diarcoal drawings^ with dull blacks and 
murky whites ; others like etchings with deeply bit- 
ten lines^ and abrupt contrasts, and clever colour* 
suggestions. In f act, they are like anything and 
everything, except perfected poems— that they cer- 
tainly are not. They are still in the twilight They 
are preludes, experiments, inspired jottings in a 
note*book and should be heralded by a design of 
^'Genius Making Sketches." Rhyme gives aichi* 
tecture as well as melody to verse; it gives tiiat 
delightful sense of limitation which in all the arts 
is so pleasurable, and is, indeed, one of the secrets 
of perfection ; it will whisper, as a French critic 
has said, 'Hhings unexpected and diarming, liiingB 
with strange and remote relations to each other," 
and bind them together in indissoluble bonds of 
beauty; and in his constant rejection of rhyme, 
Mr. Henley seems to me to have abdicated half his 



NOTE ON SOME MODERN POETS. 26 

power. He is a roi en exit, who has thrown away 
some of the strings of his lute; a poet who has 
forgotten the fairest part of his kingdom. 

However^ all woric criticises itself. Here is one 
of Mr. Henley's inspired jottings. According to 
the temperament of the reader, it will serve either 
as a model or aa the reverse: — 

''As with varnish red and glistening 
Dripped his hair ; his feet were rigid ; 
Baised, he settled stifSy sideways. 
Yon oonld see the hnrts were spinal. 

''He had fallen from an engine, 
And been dragged across the metals. 
It was hopeless, and they knew it, 
So thqr covered him and left him. 

"As he lay, by fits half sentient^ 
Inartioalately moaning. 
With his stockinged feet protruded 
Sharp and awkward from the blankets, 

"To his bed there came a woman ; 
Stood and looked, and sighed a little. 
And departed without speaking. 
As himself a few hours after. 



26 THE WRITINGS OF OSCABWILDK 

^T, was told she was his sweetheart 
They were on the eve of marriage. 
She was quiet as a statue, 
But her lip was gray and writhen/' 

In this poem, the rhythm and the music, sudi as 
it is, are obvious — ^perhaps a little too obvious. In 
the following I see nothing but ingeniously printed 
prose. It is a description — and a very accurate 
one — of a scene in a hospital ward. Tie medical 
students are supposed to be crowding round the 
doctor. What I quote is only a fragment, but the 
poem itself is a fragment: — 

''So shows the ring 
Seen, from behind, round a conjuror 
Doing his pitch in the street. 
High shoulders, low shoulders, broad shoulders, 

narrow ones, 
Bound, square, and angular, serry and shove; 
While from within a voice, 
Gravely and weightily fluent, 
Sounds ; and then ceases ; and suddenly 
(Look at the stress of the shoulders I) 
Out of a quiver of silence. 
Over the hiss of the spray. 



NOTE ON SOME MODEBN POETS. 27 

Comes a low cry, and the Bound 

Of breath quick intaken through teeth 

Clenched in resolve. And the master 

Breaks horn the crowd, and goes, 

Wiping his hands, 

To the next bed, with his pupils 

Flocking and whispering behind him. 

''Now one can see. 
Case Number Onct 

Sits (rather pale) ix^th his bedclothes 
Stripped up, and showing his foot 
(Alas, for God's image!) 
Swaddled in wet white lint 
Brilliantly hideous with red." 

Thtephile Gautier once said that Flauberf s style 
was meant to be read, and his own style to be 
looked at. Mr. Henlqr's unrhymed rhythms form 
very dainty designs, from a typographical point of 
view. From the point of view of literature, tiiey 
are a series of vivid, concentrated impressions, with 
a keen grip of fact, a terrible actuality, and an al- 
most masterly power of picturesque presentation. 
But the poetic form — ^what of that? 



28 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

Well> let U8 pass to the later poems^ to the ron- 
dels and rondeans^ the sonnets and qnatorzains, 
the echoes and the ballades. How brilliant and 
f aneif nl this is I The Toyoknni colour-print thai 
suggested it could not be more delightfuL It seems 
io have kept all the wilful fantastic charm of the 
original: — 

'^as I a Samurai renowned, 

Two-sworded, fierce, immense of bow? 
A histrion, angular, and profound? 

A priest? a porter? — Child, although 
I have forgotten clean, I know 

That in the shade of Fujisan, 
What time the cherry-orchards blow, 

I loved you once in old Japan. 

''As here you loiter, flowing-gowned 

And hugely sashed, with pins a-row 
Your quaint head as with flamelets crowned. 

Demure, inviting— even so, 
When merry maids in Miyako 

To feel the sweet o* the year began. 
And green gardens to overflow, 

I loved you once in old Japan. 



NOTE ON SOME MODERN POETS. 29 

^Clear shine the hills; the rice-fields round 

Two cranes are circling; sleepy and slow^ 
A blue canal the lake's blue bonnd 

Breaks at the bamboo bridge ; and, lo I 
Touched with the sundown's spirit and glow, 

I see you turn, with flirted fan. 
Against the plum-tree's bloomy snow • • . 

I loved you once in old Japan. 

'*Envoy. 

''Dear, 'twas a dozen lives ago; 
But that I was a lucky man 
The Toyokuni here will show; 
I loved you — once — in old Japan !" 

This rondel, too— how light it is, and grace- 
ful!— 

'nVe'll to the woods and gather may. 
Fresh from the footprints of the rain; 
Well to the woods, at every vein 
To drink the spirit of tiie day. 

'The winds of spring are out at play. 
The needs of spring in heart and brain. 
We'll to the woods and gather may 
Freeh from the footprints of the rain. 



30 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAK WILDE. 

'The world's too near her end, you say? 
Hark to the blackbird's mad refrain 1 
It waits for her, the vast Inane? 
Then, girls, to help her on the way. 
We'll to the woods and gather may." 

There are fine verses, also, scattered through 
this little book; some of them very strong, as — 

''Out of the night that covers me, 
Black as the pit from pole to pole, 
I thank whatever gods may be 
For my unconquerable soul. 

'It matters not how strait the gate. 

How charged with punishments the scroll, 
I am the master of my fate; 
I am the captain of my soul." 

Others with a true touch of romance, afr— 

"Or ever the knightly years were gone 

With the old world to the grave, 
I was a King in Babylon, 
And you were a Christian slave." 



NOTE ON SOME MODEBN POETS. 31 

'And here and there we come across such f elici- 
tons phrases 



''In the sand 
The gold prow-grifBn claws a hold/' 
Or— 

'The spires 
Shine and are changed.'' 

And many other graceful or fanciful lines, even 
*'the green sky's minor thirds" being perfectly 
right in its place, and a very refreshing bit of 
affectation in a volume where there is so much that 
is natural. 

However, Mr. Henley is not to be judged by 
samples. Indeed, the most attractive thing in the 
book is no single poem that is in it, but the strong 
humane personality that stands behind both flaw- 
less and faulty work alike, and looks out through 
many masks, some of them beautiful, and aome 
grotesque, and not a few misshapen. In the case 
of most of our modem poets, when we have 
analysed them down to an adjective, we can go no 
further, or we care to go no further; but with this 
book it is different Through these reeds and 
pipes blow the very breath of life. It seems as if 



32 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAE WILDE. 

one could put one's hand upon the singer's heart 
and count its pulsations. Tliere is something 
wholesome^ virile^ and sane about the man's souL 
Anybody can be reasonable, but to be sane is not 
common; and sane poets are as rare as blue lilies, 
though they may not be quite so delightful. 

''Let the great winds their worst and wildest blow, 
Or the gold weather round us mellow slow ; 
We have fulfilled ourselves, and we can dare. 
And we can conquer, though we may not share. 
In the rich quiet of the afterglow. 
What is to come," 

is the concluding stanza of the last rondeau — 
indeed, of the last poem in the collection, and the 
high, serene temper displayed in these lines serves 
at once as keynote and keystone to the book. The 
very lightness and slightness of so much of the 
work, its careless moods and casual fancies, seem 
to suggest a nature that is not primarily interested 
in art— a nature, like Sordello's, passionatdy 
enamoured of life, and to which lyre and lute are 
things of less importance. From this mere joy of 
living, this frank delight in experience for its own 
sake, this lofty indifference; and momentary unre- 



NOTE ON SOME MODERN POETS. 33 

gretted ardoim^ come all the faults and all the 
beauties of the volume. But there is this difference 
between them — ^the faults are deliberate and the 
result of much study; the beauties have the air of 
fascinating impromptus. Mr. Henley's healthy, if 
sometimes misapplied, confidence in the myriad 
suggestions of life gives him his charm. He is 
made to sing -along the highways, not to sit down 
and write. If he took himself more seriously^ his 
work would become trivial. 

Mr. William Sharp takes himself very seriously, 
and has written a preface to his '^Romantic Bal- 
lads and Poems of Phantasy^' (Walter Scott), 
which is, on the whole, the most interesting part 
of his volume. We are all, it seems, far too cultured 
and lack robustness. There are those amongst us, 
says Mr. Sharp, who would prefer a dexterously 
turned tridet to such apparently uncouth measures 
as **Thomas the Rhymer/' or the ballad of "Clerk 
Saunders," and who 'Vould rather listen to the 
drawing-room music of the Yillanelle than to the 
wild harp-playing by the mill-dams o' Binnorie, or 
the sough of the night wind o'er drumly Allan 
water.'' Such an expression as ''the drawing-room 
music of the Yillanelle" is not very happy, and I 



34 THE WEITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

cannot imagine anyone with the emalkrt preten- 
fiions to culture preferring a dezteroualy turned 
triolet to a fine imaginative ballad, as it is only the 
Philistine who ever dreams of comparing works of 
art that are absolutely different in motive, in 
treatment, and in form. If English Poetry is in 
danger — and, according to Mr. Sharp, the poor 
nymph is in a very critical state — ^what she has to 
fear is not the fascination of dainty metre or deli- 
cate form, but the predominance of the intellectual 
spirit over the spirit of beauty. Lord Tennyson 
dethroned Wordsworth as a literary influence, and 
later on Mr. Swinburne filled all the mountain 
valleys with echoes of his own song. The influence 
to-day is that of Mr. Browning. And as for the 
triolets, and the rondel?, and the careful study of 
metrical subtleties, these things are merely the 
signs of a desire for perfection in small things^ 
and of the recognition* of poetry as: an art. They 
have had certainly one good result — ^they have 
made our minor poets readable, and have not left 
us entirely at the mercy of geniuses. 

But, says Mr. Sharp, everyone is far too lit- 
erary ; even Bossetti is too literary. What we want 
is simplicity and directness of utterance; these 
should be the dominant characteristics of poetry. 



NOTE ON SOME MODEBN POETS. 35 

Well^ is that quite so oertain? Are simplicity aod 
directness of utterance absolute essentials for 
poetry? I think not Tley may be admirable for 
the drama> admirable for all those imitative forms 
of literature that claim to mirror life in its ex- 
ternals and its accidents^ admirable for quiet nar- 
rative, admirable in their place; but their place is 
not eveiywhere. Poetry has many modes of music; 
she does not blow through one pipe alona Direct- 
ness of utterance is good, but so is the subtle re- 
casting of thou^t into a new and delightful form. 
Simplicity is good, but complexity, mystery, 
strangeness^ symbolism, obscurity even, these have 
their value. Indeed, properly speaking, there is 
no such thing as Style; there are merely styles, 
tiiat is alL 

One cannot hdp feeling also that everything 
that Mr. Sharp says in his preface was said at the 
beginning of the century by Wordsworth, only 
where Wordsworth called us back to nature, Mr. 
Sharp invites us to woo romance. Bomance, he 
tells us, is ''in the air." A new romantic move- 
ment is imminent '1 anticipate,'' he says, 'that 
many of our poets, especially those of the youngest 
generatira^ will shortly turn towards the ballad 



36 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAK WILDE. 

as a poetic vehide, and tliat the next year or two 
will see much romantie poetry.'' 

The ballad I Well, Mr. Andrew Lang, some 
months ago, signed the death-warrant of the bal- 
lade, and — though I hope that in this respect Mr. 
Lang resembles the Queen in "Alice in Wonder- 
land," whose bloodthirsty orders were by general 
consent never carried into execution- — ^it must be 
admitted that the number of ballades given to us 
by some of our poets was, perhaps, a little ex- 
cessive. But the ballad? *^Sir Patrick Spens," 
"Clerk Saunders," "Thomas the Rhymer"— are 
these to be our archetypes, our models, the sources 
of our inspiration? They are certainly great im- 
aginative poems. In Chatterton's "Ballad of 
Charity," Coleridge's *TEthyme of the Ancient • 
Mariner," the "La Belle Dame sans Merci" of 
Eeats, the "Sister Helen" of Rossetti, we can see 
what marvellous works of art the spirit of old ro- 
mance may fashion. But to preach a spirit is one 
thmg, to propose a form is another. It is true that 
Mr. Sharp warns the rising generation against 
imitation. A ballad, he reminds them, does not 
necessarily denote a poem in quatrains and in 
antique language. But his own poems, as I think 
will be seen later on, are, in their way, warnings 



NOTE ON SOME MODERN POETS. 37 

and show the danger of suggesting any definite 
^'poetic vehicle.*' And further, are simplicity and 
directness of utterance really the dominant char- 
acteristics of these old imaginative ballads that 
Mr. Sharp so enthusiastically, and, in some par- 
ticulars, so wisely praises ? It does not seem to me 
to be so. We are always apt to think that the 
voices which sang at the dawn of poetry were 
simpler, frefiher, and more natural than ours, and 
that the world which the early poets looked at, 
and through which they walked, had a kind of 
poetical quality of its own, and could pass, almost 
without changing, into song. The snow lies thick 
now upon Olympus, and its scarped sides are bleak 
and barren, but once, we fancy, the white feet of 
the Muses brushed the dew from the anemones in 
the morning, and at evening came Apollo to sing to 
the shepherds in the vale. But in this we are merely 
lending to other ages what we desire, or think we 
desire, for our own. Our historical sense is at 
fault. ^ Every century that produces poetry is, so 
far, an artificial century, and the work that seems 
to us the most natural and simple product of its 
time is probably the result of the most deliberate 
and self-conscious effort. For Nature is always 



38 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

behind the age. It takes a great artist to be 
thoroughly modern. 

Let us torn to the poema^ which have really only 
the preface to blame for their somewhat late ap- 
pearance. The best is undoubtedly "T^e Weird of 
Michael Scott>" and these stanzas are a fair ex- 
ample of its power: — 

''Then Michael Scott laughed long and loud: 
'Whan shone the mune ahint yon doud 

I speered the towers that saw my birth — 
Lang^ lang, sail wait my cauld grey shroud^ 

Lang cauld and weet my bed o' earth 1' 

"But as by Stair he rode full speed 
His horse began to pant and bleed; 

'Win hame^ win hame, my bonnie mare. 
Win hame if thou wouldst rest and feed. 
Win hame, we're nigh the House of Stair I' 

"But, with a shrill heart-bursten yell. 
The white horse stumbled, plunged, and fell. 

And loud a summoning voice arose, 
Is't White-Horse Death that rides frae Hdl, 
Or Michael Scott that hereby goes?* 



NOTE ON SOME MODERN POETS. 39 

^ 'Ah, Lord of Stair, I ken ye wed ! 
Avaxint, or I your saul sail steals 

An' send ye howling through the wood 
A wild man-wolf — aye, ye maun reel 

An' cry upon your Holy Eood I' '' 

There is a good deal of vigour, no doubt> in 
these lines; but one cannot help asking whether 
this is to be the common tongue of the future 
Benaissance of Bomance. Are we all to talk Scotch 
and to speak of the moon as the '%une/' and the 
soul as the ''saul*'? I hope not. And yet if this 
Benaissance is to be a vital, living thing, it must 
have its linguistic side. Just as the spiritual de- 
velopment of music, and the artistic development 
of paintings have always been accompanied, if not 
occasioned, by the discovery of some new instru- 
ment or some fresh medium, so^ in the case of any 
important literary movement, half of its strength 
resides in it» language. If it does not bring with 
it a rich and novel mode of expression^ it is doomed 
either to sterility or to imitation. Dialect, 
archaisms, and the like, will not do. Take, for 
instance, another poem of Mr. Shaorp's^ a poem 
which he calk 'TPhe Deith-Tidtf ' :— 



40 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

^'The weet saut wind is blawing 
Upon the mifiiy shore; 
As, like a stormy gnawing^ 
The deid go streaming o'er : — 
The wan drown'd deid sail wildly 

Frae out each dmmly wave : 
Ifs and for the weary sea 
And for a qniet grave/' 

This is simply a very clever pcistiche, nothing 
more, and our language is not likely to be per- 
manently enriched by such wordd aa ^^weei,** 
"saut," *T)lawing/' and *'snawing/' Even ''dmm- 
ly/' an adjective of which Mr. Sharp ia so fond 
that he uses it both in prose and verse, seems to me 
to be hardly an adequate basia for a new romantic 
movement. 

However, Mr. Sharp does not always write in 
dialect '"Ite Song of Allan" can be read with- 
out any difficulty, and 'Thantasy" can be read 
with pleasure. They are both very charming poema 
in their way, and none the less charming because 
the cadences of the one recall '^Sister Helen," and 
the motive of the other reminds us of "La Belle 
Dame sana Merci." But those who wish to thor- 
oughly enjoy Mr. Sharp's poems should not read 



NOTE ON SOME MODERN POETS. 41 

his preface; jtifit as those who approve of the pre- 
face should avoid reading the poems. I cannot 
help saying that I think the preface a great mis- 
take. The work that follows it is quite inadequate 
and there seems little use in heralding a dawn that 
rose long ago^ and proclaiming a Benaissanoe 
whose first-fruits, if we are to judge them by any 
high standard of perfection, are of so ordinary a 
character. 

Miss Mary Robinson has also written a preface 
to her little volume — ^"Poems, Ballads, and a Gar- 
den Play*' (T. Fisher TTnwin) — ^but the preface is 
not very serious and does not propose any drastic 
change or any immediate revolution in English 
literature. Miss Robinson's poems have always the 
charm of delicate music and graceful expression; 
but they are, perhaps, weakest where they try to 
be stroi^, and certainly least satisfying where 
they seek to satisfy. Her fanciful flower-crowned 
Muse, with her tripping steps and pretty, wilful 
ways, should not write Antiphons to the Unknow- 
able, or try to grapple with abstract intellectual 
problems. Hers is not the hand to unveil mys- 
teries, nor hens the strength for the solving of 
secrets. She should never leave her garden, and as 



42 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAK WILDE. 

for her wandering out into the desert to ask the 
Sphinx questionfi, that should be sternly forbid- 
den to her. Durer's '^elencolia," that seryes as 
the frontispiece to thiB dainty book, looks sadly 
out of place. Her seat is with the sibyls, not with 
the nymphs. What has she to do with shepherd- 
esses piping about Darwinian and '^The Eternal 
Mind''? 

However, if the ''Songs of tiie Inner life'' axe 
not very successful, the ''Spring Songs" are de- 
lightful. They follow each other like wind-blown 
petals, and make one feel how much more charm- 
ing flower is than fruity apple-blosscMn than apple. 
There are some artistic temperamenta that should 
never come to maturity, that should always remain 
in the region of promise, and that should dread 
autumn with its harvesting more than winter with 
its frosts. Such seems to me the temperament 
that this volume reveals. The first poem of the 
second series, "La Belle au Bois Dormant^" is 
worth all the more serious and thoughtful work, 
and has far more chance of being remembered. 
It is not always to high aim and lofty ambition 
that the prize is given. If Daphne had gone to 
meet Apollo, she would never have known what 
laurels are. 



NOTE ON SOME MODERN POETS. 43 

From these fascinating spring lyrics and idylls 
we pass to the romantic ballads. One artistic f ao 
tdty Miss Bobinson certainly possesses — ^the f ac- 
nlty of imitation. There is an element of imita- 
tion in all the arts; it is to be found in literature 
as much as in painting, and the danger of valuing 
it too little is almost as great as the danger of* 
setting too hi^ a value upon it. To catch, by 
dainty mimicry^ the very mood and mann^ of 
antique work and yet to retain that touch of 
modem passion without which the old form would 
be dull and empty; to win from long-silent lips 
some faint echo of their music, and to add to it a 
music of one's own; to take the mode and fashion 
of a bygone age, and to experiment with it, and 
search curiously for its possibilities; there is a 
pleasure in all this. It is a kind of literary acting, 
and has something of the charm of the art of the 
stage-player. And how well, on the whole. Miss 
Bobinson does it I Here is the opening of the 
ballad of Budel: 

'There was in all the world of France 
No singer half so sweet : 
The first note of his viol brought 
A crowd into the street. 



44 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

'^e stepped as voung^ and bright, and glad 

As Angel Gabriel. 
And only when we heard him sing 
Our eyes forgot Budel. 

^'And as he sat in Avignon, 

With princes at their wine. 
In all that lusty company 
Was none so fresh and fine. 

'*His kirtle's of the Arras-blue, 
His cap of pearls and green ; 
His golden curls fall tumbling round 
The fairest face IVe seen." 

How Gautier would have liked this from the 
same poem I — 

'^ew the timbers of sandal*wood. 

And planks of ivory ; 
Sear up the shining masts of gold. 
And let us put to sea. 

''Sew the sails with a silken thread 
That all are silken too; 
Sew them with scarlet pomegranates 
Upon a sheet of blue. 



NOTE ON SOME MODERN POETS. 45 

''Big the ship with a rope of gold 

And let us put to sea. 
And now^ good-bye to good Marseilles^ 
And hey for Tripoli r 

The ballad of the Duke of Oueldres' wedding is 
very clever : — 

*' '0 welcome, Mary Harcourt, 
Thrice welcome, lady mine; 
There's not a knight in all the world 
Shall be as true ae thine. 

'' There's venison in the aumbry, Maiy, 
There's claret in the vat; 
Come in, and breakfast in the hall 
Where once my mother sat I' 

''0 red, red is the wine that flows. 
And sweet the minstrel's play. 
But white is Mary Harcourt 
Upon her wedding-day. 

''0 many are the wedding guests 

That sit on either side; 
But pale below her crimson flowers 
And homesick is the bride." 



i6 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

Miss Robinson's critical sense is at once too 
sound and too subtle to allow her to think that 
any great Benaissanoe of Romance will necessarily 
follow from the adoption of the ballad-form in 
poetry; but her woric in this siyle is very pretty 
and charming, and 'T3ie Tower of SL Maur/* 
which tells of the father who built up his little son 
in the wall of his casUe in order that the founda- 
tions should stand sure, is admirable in its way. 
The few touches of archaism in language tiiat she 
introduces are quite sufScient for their purpose, 
and though she fully appreciates the importance 
of the Celtic spirit in literature;, she does not con- 
sider it necessary to talk of 'Tblawing** and **8naw- 
ing.'* As for the garden play, "Our Lady of the 
Broken Heart,'' as it is called, the bright^ bird- 
like snatches of song that break in here and there 
— ^as the singing does in 'Tippa Passes" — form a 
very welcome relief to the somewhat ordinary 
movement of the blank verse and suggests to us 
again where Miss Robinson's real power lies. Not 
a poet in the true creative sense^ she is still a very 
perfect artist in poetry, using language as one 
might use a very precious material, and producing 
her best work by the rejection of the great tiiemes 
and large intellectual motives that belong to fuUer 



NOTE ON SOME MODERN POETS. 47 

and richer song. When she eesaya such themes^ 
she certainly fails. Her instrument is the reed, 
not the lyre. Only those should sing of Death 
whose song is stronger than Death is. 



The collected poemfi of the author of **John 
Halifax^ Gentleman'' (Macmillan and Co.), have 
a pathetic interest as the artistic record of a very 
gracious and comely life. They bring ns back to 
the days when Philip Bonrke Marston was yonng 
— ^^Thilip, my King," as she called him in the 
pretty poem of that name; to the days of the Great 
Exhibition, with the nniversal piping about 
peace; to those later terrible Crimean days, when 
Alma and Balaclava were words on the lips of 
our poets; and to days when Leonora was consid- 
ered a yery romantic name. 

^^Jeonora, Leonora, 
How the word rolls — Leoncra. 
Lion-like in full-mouthed sound, 
Marching o'er the metric ground, 
Wi& a tawny tread sublime. 
So your name moyes, Leonora, 
Down my desert rhyme." 



o 



48 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

Mrs. Craik'B best poems are, on the whole^ those 
that are written in blank yerse; and these^ though 
not prosaic^ remind one that prose was her tme 
medium of expression. But some of the rhymed 
poems have considerable merit. These may serve 
as examples of Mrs. Craik's siyle : — 

''A SKETCH. 

''Dost thou thus love me, thou all beloved. 
In whose large store the very meanest coin 
Would out-buy my whole wealth ? Yet here thou 

comest 
Like a kind heiress from her purple and down 
Uprising, who for pity cannot sleep, 
But goes forth to the stranger at her gate— 
The beggared stranger at her beauteous gate — 
And clothes and feeds; scarce blest till she has 

blest. 

''But dost thou love me, thou pure of hearty 
Whose very looks are prayers? What couldst 

thou see 
In this forsaken pool by the yew-wood's side. 
To sit down at its bank, and dip thy hand. 
Saying, 'It is so clear I' — ^and lo I ere long. 
Its blackness caught the shimmer of thy wingSi 



NOTE ON SOME MODERN POETS. 49 

Its slimes slid downward from thy stainless palm^ 
Its depths grew still, that there thy form might 
rise/' 

'THE NOVICE. 

''It is near morning. Ere the next night fall 
I shall be made the bride of heaven. Then home 
To my still marriage-chamber I shall come. 

And spouseless, childless, watch the slow years 
crawl. 

''These lips will never meet a softer touch 
Than the stone crucifix I kiss ; no child 
Will clasp this neck. Ah, virgin-mother mild, 
Thy painted bliss will mock me overmuch. 

"This is tiie last time I shall twist the hair 

My mother's hand wreathed, till in dust she 

lay: 
The name, her name given on my baptism day. 
This is the last time I shall ever bear. 

"0 weary world, heavy life, farewell I 
like a tired child that creeps into the dark 
To sob itself asleep, where none will mark, — 
So creep I to my silent convent cell. 



50 THE WHITING3 OF OSCAH WILDE, 




'^Friendp, lovers whom I loved not, kindly heirts 
Who grieve that I ebould enter this efcill door, 
Grieve not Closing behind me evennore, 
Me from all ' ' II joj, it parts." 



The volum 
thoughtful n 
may eeem so 
pleasant to n 
ered rose-lea^ 



he moods of a m^e^i and 
Longh many things in it 
aehioned, it is still very 
I faint perfume of with* 



SOME LITEBARY NOTES. 

In a recent article on English poetesses^ I yen- 
tnred to suggest that our women of letters ahould 
turn their attention scHnewhat more to prose, and 
somewhat less to poetry. Women seem to me to 
possess just what our literature wants — e light 
touchy a delicate hand^ a graceful mode of treat- 
ment^ and an xmstudied felidiy of phrase. We 
want someone who will do for our prose what Mme. 
de S^vign^ did for the prose of France. Oeorge 
Eliot's style was far too cumbrous, and Charlotte 
Bronte's too exaggerated. However^ one must not 
forget that amongst the women of England tiiere 
haye been some charming letter-writers^ and cer- 
tainly no book can be more delightful reading than 
Mrs. Boss's '^Three Generations of Englishwo- 
men" (John Murray), which has recently ap- 
peared. Hie three Englishwomen whose memoirs 
and correspondence Mrs. Boss has so admirably 
edited are Mrs. John Taylor^ Mrs. Sarah Austin, 
and Lady Duff Gordon, all of them lemaikaUe 
61 



52 THE WHITINGS OP OSCAB WILDE. 

personalities^ and two of them women of brilliant 
wit and Europetm reputation. Mrs. Taylor be- 
longed to that great Norwich family about whom 
the Duke of Sussex remarked that tiiey reversed 
the ordinary saying that it takes nine tailors to 
make a man, and was for many years one of the 
most distingaished figures in the famous society of 
her native town. Her only daughter married John 
Austin, the great authority on jurisprudence, and 
her saion in Paris was the centre of the intelleot 
and culture of her day. Lucie Duff Gordon, the 
only child of John and Sarah Austin, inherited the 
talents of her parents. A beauty, a femme d^ esprit, 
a traveller, and clever writer, she charmed and fas- 
cinated her age, and her premature death in Egypt 
was really a loss to our literature. It is to her 
daughter that we owe this delightful volume of 
memoirs. 

Pirst we are introduced to Mrs. Boss's great- 
grandmother, Mrs. Taylor, who was called by her 
intimate friends the 'Madame Boland of Nor- 
wich,'' from her likeness to the portraits of the 
handsome and unfortunate Prenchwoman. We 
hear of her darning her boy's grey worsted stock- 
ings while holding her own with Southey and 
Brougham, and dancing round the Tree of Liberty 



SOME LITEEABY NOTES. 63 

with Dr. Parr when the news of the fall of the 
Bastille was first known. Amongst her friendfi 
were Sir James Mackintosh, the most popular man 
of the day, to whom Mme. de Stael wrote: '7/ n'y 
i pas de sodiU sans vous/* ^'Ceat ires ennuyeux 
de diner earn vous; la sodeU ne va pas quand vous 
n'iiee pas W*, Sir James Smith, the botanist; 
Crabb Bobinson ; the Gnmeys ; Mrs. Barbauld ; Dr. 
Aldenon and his diarming daughter^ Amelia 
Opie; and many other well-known people. Her 
letters are extremely sensible and thonghtful. 
'Nothing at present/' she says in one of them, 
''suits, my taste so well as Susan's Latin lessons, 
and her philosophical old master. When we get to 
Cicero's discussions on the nature of the soul, or 
Virgil's fine descriptions, my mind is filled up. 
Life is either a dull round of eating, drinking, and 
sleeping, or a spark of ethereal fire just kindled. 
.... The character of girls must depend 
upon their reading as much as upon the company 
they keep. Besides the intrinsic pleasure to be de- 
rived from solid knowledge, a woman ought to con- 
sider it as her best resource against poverty." This 
is a somewhat caustic aphorism : ''A romantic wo- 
man is a troublesome friend, as she expects you to 
be as imprudent as herself and is mortified at what 



64 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAR WILDK 

she calls coldness and insensibilUy.'' And this is 
admirable: 'The art of life is not to estrange one- 
self from society, and yet not to pay too dear for 
if This, too, is good: ''Vaniiy, like curiosity, is 
wanted as a stimulus to exertion; indolence would 
certainly get the better of us if it were not for 
these two powerful principles''; and there is a 
keen touch of hxmiour in the following: ''Nothing 
is so gratifying as the idea that virtue and phil- 
anthropy are beooming fashionable/' Dr. James 
Martineau, in a letter to Mrs. Boss, gives us a 
pleasant picture of the old lady returning from 
market '^weighted by her huge basket, with the 
shank of a leg of mutton thrust out to betray its 
contents^'' and talking divinely about philosophy, 
poets, politics, and every intellectual topic of the 
day. She was a woman of admirable good sense, 
a type of Boman matron, and quite as careful as 
were the Boman matrons to keep up tiie purify of 
her native tongue. 

Mrs. Taylor, however, was more or less limited 
to Norwich. Mrs. Austin was for the world. In 
London, Paris, and Germany, she ruled and dom- 
inated sociefy, loved by everyone who knew her. 
She is "My best and my brightest' to Lord Jef- 
frey; 'T)ear, fair, and wise,'' to Sydney Smith; 



SOME LITEBAEY NOTES. 65 

'Tly great all/' to Sir James Stephen; "Sunlight 
throng waste weltering chaos" to Thomas Carlyle 
(while he needed her aid) ; "La petite mere du 
genre humain*' to Michael Chevalier; ^^Liebes Miit- 
terlein'^ to John Stuart Mill; and "My own Pro- 
fessoiess" to Charles Buller, to whom she taught 
German^ as well as to the sons of Mr. James Mill. 
Jeremy Bentham^ when on his deathbed^ gave her 
a ring with his portrait and some of his hair let 
in behind. "There, my dear," he said, "it is the 
only ring I ever gave a woman.'* She corresponded 
with Ouizot, Barthelemy de St. Hilaire, the Orotes, 
Dr. Whewell, the Master of Trinity, Nassau 
Senior, the Buchesse d'Orl^ans, Victor Cousin, 
and many other distinguished people. Her trans- 
lation of Bankers "History of the Popes" 18 ad- 
miraUe; indeed, all her literary work was thor- 
oughly well done, and her edition of her husband's 
'Trovince of Jurisprudence" deserves the very 
highest praise. Two people more unlike than her- 
self and her husband it would have been difficult to 
find. He was habitually grave and despondent; 
she was brilliantly handsome, fond of society, in 
which she shone^ and "with an almost superabund- 
ance of Clergy and animal spirits," Mrs. Boss tells 
us. She married him because she thought him 



56 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAE WILDE. 

perf ect^ but he never produced the work of which 
he wafi worthy^ and of which she knew him to be 
worthy. Her estimate of him in the preface to 
the ^'Jurisprudence^' is wonderfully striking and 
simple : ''He was never eangoine. He was intol- 
erant of any imperfection. He was always under 
the control of severe love of truth. He lived and 
died a poor man.'' She was terribly disappointed in 
him, but she loved him. Some years after his 
death, she wrote to M. Guizot: — 

^'In the intervals of my studies of his works I 
read his letters to me — forty-five years of loveAeU 
ters — ^the last as tender and as passionate as the 
first And how full of noble sentiments. The 
midday of our lives was clouded and stormy, full 
of cares and disappointments; but the sunset was 
bright and serene — as bright as the morning, and 
more serene. Now it is night with me, and must 
remain so till the dawn of another day. I am 
always alone — ^that is, / live with him.** 

The most interesting letters in the book are cer- 
tainly those to M. Guizot, wifli whom she main- 
tained the closest intellectual friendship ; but there 
is hardly one of them that does not contain some- 
thing clever, or thoughtful, or witty, while those 



SOME LITEEAEY NOTES. 67 

addiesBed to her^ in torn^ are yery iniereetmg. 
Carlyle writes her letters full of lamentations, the 
wail of a Titan in pain^ superbly exaggerated for 
literary effect: 

'^teratoie, one's sole craft and staff of lif e^ lies 
broken in abeyance; what room for music amid 
the braying of innumerable jackasses, the howling 
of innumerable hysenas whetting the tooth to eat 
them up I Alas for it I It is a sick, disjointed 
time; neither shall we ever mend it; at best, let 
us hope to mend ourselves. I declare I sometimes 
think of throwing down the pen altogether as a 
worthless weapon, and leading out a colony of 
these poor, starving drudges to the waste places 
of their old Mother Earth, where for sweat of 
their brow bread wUl rise for them ; it were, per- 
haps, the worthiest service that at this moment 
could be rendered our old world to throw open 
for it the doors of the new. Thither must they 
come at last; bursts of eloquence will do nothing; 
men are starving, and will try many things before 
they die. But poor I— ac& Cfottl I am no Hen- 
gist or Alaric; only a writer of articles in bad 
proae. Stick to thy last, Tutor; the pen is not 



58 THE WRITINGS OP OSCAB WILDE. 

worthless; it is omnipotent to those who haTo 
Faith.'' 

Henri Beyle (Stendhal)^ the greats I am often 
tempted to think the greatest of French novdists^ 
writes her a charming letter abont nuances, ^t 
seems to me^'' he says^ '^tiiat^ e3roept when they read 
Shakespeare^ Byron^ or Sterne^ no Englishman 
nnderstande nuances; we adore them. A fool says 
to a woman, T. love yon' ; the words mean nothing. 
He might as well say, 'OUi Batachor'; it is tiie 
nuance which giyes force to the meaning." In 
1839 Mrs. Anstin writes to Victor Consin: 'T, 
have seen yonng Gladstone, a distinguished Tory, 
who wants to re-establish education based on the 
Church in quite a Catholic form"; and we find her 
corresponding with Mr. Gladetone on the sub- 
ject of education, '^f yon are atrong enough to 
provide motives and checks," she says to him, ^on 
may do two blessed acts — ^reform your clergy and 
teach yonr people. Ab it is, how few of them 
conceive what it is to teach a people I" Mr. Glad- 
stone replies at great length, and in many letters^ 
from which we may quote this passage: 

^7on are for pressing and urging the people to 
their profit against their inclinations: so am I. 



SOME LITEEABY NOTES. 59 

Yon set little yalne upon all merely technical in- 
Btmction, upon all that fails to touch the inner 
nature of man : so do I. And here I find ground 
of union broad and deep-laid. 

'^ut I more than doubt whether your idea, 
namely, that of raising man to social su£Qciency 
and morality, can be accomplished, except through 
the ancient religion of Christ; or whether the 
principles of eclecticism are legitimately applicable 
to the Oospel; or whether, if we find ourselves 
in a state of incapacity to work through the 
Church, we can remedy the defect by the adoption 
of principles contrary to hers. 

'^ut, indeed, I am most unfit to pursue the 
subject; private circumstances of no commcm in- 
terest are upon me, as I have become very recently 
engaged to Miss Catharine Olynne, and I hope 
your recollection will enable you in some degree 
to excuse me.^' 

Lord Jeffrey has a very curious and suggestive 
letter on popular education, in which he denies, 
or at least doubts, the effect of this education on 
morals. He, however, supports it on the ground 
'^at it will increase the ^joyment of individu- 
als,'^ which is certainly a very sensible claim. 



60 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

Humboldt writes to her about an old Indian lan- 
guage which waa preserved by a parrot, the tribe 
who spoke it having been exterminated, and about 
"young Darwin/' who had just published his first 
book. Here are some extracts from her own let- 
ters: 

^T. heard from Lord Lansdowne two or three 
days ago. I think he is ce que nous avons ds 
mitux. He wants only the energy that great am- 
bition gives. He says, *We shall have a Parlia- 
ment of railway kings.' What can be worse than 
that ? — ^the deification of money by a whole people. 
As Lord Brougham says, we have no right to give 
ourselves Pharisaical aire. I must give you a story 
sent to me. Mrs. Hudson, the railway queen, was 
shown a bust of Marcus Aurelius at Lord West- 
minster's, on which she said, 'I suppose that is not 
the present marquia.' To gouter this, you must 
know that the extreme vulgar (hackney coachmen, 
etc.) in England pronounce ^marquis' very like 



''Dec. nth.— Went to Savign/s. Nobody 
there but W. Grimm and his wife, and a few men. 
Grimm told me that he had received two volumes 



SOME LITERABY NOTES. 61 

of Norw^ian f aiiy tales^ and that they were de- 
lightfuL Ttdking of them, I said, TTour children 
appear to be the happiest in the world; they live 
in the midst of fairy tales/ 'Ah/ said he, T must 
tell you about that. When we were at Gottingen, 
somebody spoke to my little son about his father's 
Mahrchen. He had read them, but never thought 
about their being mine. He came running to me, 
and said, with an offended air, 'Tather, they say 
you wrote those fairy tales; surely you never in- 
vented such silly rubbish.'^ He thought it below 
my dignily.' '' 

^'Savigny told a Volksmahrchen: 

"St Ansehn was grown old and infirm, and lay 
on the ground among thorns and thistles. Der 
Uebe Oott said to him, TTou are very badly lodged 
there; why donH you build yourself a house?' be- 
fore I take the trouble,* said Anselm, *I should 
like to know how long I have to live.' 'About 
thirty years,' said Der Uebe Oott. 'Oh, for so short 
a time,' replied he, 'if s not worth while,' and 
turned himself round among the thistles. 

"Dr. Pranck told me a story of which I had 
never heard before. Voltaire had, for some reason 
or other, taken a grudge against the prophet Ha- 



62 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

bakknky and affected to find in him things he never 
wrote. Somebody took the Bible and began to 
demonstrate to him that he was mistaken. 'C'est 
igal/ he said^ impatiently^ 'HdbdkJcuk itaii capable 
detoutt" 

"October 30, 1853. 

''I am not in love with the tendencies of our 
modem novelists. There is abundance of talent, 
but writing a pretty, graceful, touching, yet pleas- 
ing story is the last thing our writers nowadays 
think of; their novels are partly pamphlets on 
political or social questions, like 'Sybil,' or 'Alton 
Lock,' or *Mary Barton,' or TJncle Tom'; or they 
are the most minute and painful dissections of 
the least agreeable and beautiful parts of our nsr 
ture, like those of Miss Bronte — 'Jane Eyre' and 
'Villette'; or they are a kind of martyrology, like 
Mrs. Marsh's 'Emilia Wyndham,' which makes you 
almost doubt whether any torments the heroine 
would have earned by being naughty could exceed 
those she incurred by her virtue. 

'TVhere, oh, where is the charming, humane, 
gentle spirit that dictated 'The Vicar of Wake- 
field' — ^the spirit which Goethe so justly calls 
versohnend (reconciling), with all the weaknesses 



SOME LITEEAEY NOTES. 63 

and woes of humanity? Have you read Hiadc- 
eray's *Eemond'? It is a corioiw and very suc- 
cessful attempt to imitate the style of our old nov- 
elists. Whidi of Mrs. Gore's novels are trans- 
lated ? They are very clever, lively, worldly, bitter, 
disagreeable, and entertaining. Miss Aiisten'&^ 
are they translated? They are not new, and are 
Dutch paintings of every-day people — very clever, 
very true, very unsesthetic, but amusing. I have 
not seen ^uth/ by Mrs. Oaskell. I hear it much 
admired and blamed. It is one of the many proofs 
of the desire women have now to friser question- 
able topics, and to poser insoluble moral problems. 
Geoige Sand has turned their heads in that di- 
rection. I think a few broad scenes or hearty jokes 
d la Fielding were very harmless in comparison. 
They confounded nothing. . . . The 'Heir of Bed- 
diffe* I have not read. I am not worthy of super- 
human flights of virtue— in a novd. I want to 
see how people act and suffer who are as good-for- 
nothing as I am mysdf . Then I have the sinful 
pretension to be amused, whereas all our novdists 
want to reform us, and to show us what a hideous 
place this world is : ma foi, je ne h sais que trop, 
without their hdp. 
'fThe 'Head of the Family* has some merits. 



64 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

But there is too much affliction^ and misery, and 
frenzy. The heroine is one of those creatures, now 
so common (in novels), who remind me of a poor 
bird tied to a stake (as was once the crud sport 
of boys) to be 'shyed' at (i. «., pelted) till it died ; 
only our gentle lady writers at the end of all untie 
the poor, battered bird, and assure us that it is 
never the worse for all the blows it has bad — nay, 
the better — and that now, with its broken wings 
and torn feathers, and bruised body, it is going 
to be quite happy. No, fair ladies, you know that 
it is not BO-^esigned, if you please, but make me 
no shams of happiness out of such wrecks/' 

In politics, Mrs. Austin was a philosophical 
Tory. Badicalism she detested, and she and most 
of her friends seem to have regarded it as mori- 
bimd. '^The Badical party is evidently effete,'' she 
writes to M. Victor Cousin; ''the probable leader 
of the Tory party is Mr. Gladstone.'' 'Tie people 
must be instructed, must be guided, must be, in 
short, governed," she writes elsewhere; and in a 
letter to Dr. Whewell she says: ^'The state of 
things in France fills me with the deepest aimety 
on one point, the point on which the permanency 
of our institutions and our salvation as a nation 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 65 

turn. Are our higher classes able to keep the lead 
of the rest? If they are> we are safe; if not, I 
agree with my poor, dear Charles BuUer— our turn 
must come. Now Cambridge and Oxford must 
really look to this.'' The belief in the power of 
the universities to stem the current of democracy 
is charming. She grew to r^ard Carlyle as ^'one 
of the dissolvents of the age — as mischievous as 
his extravagances will let him be"; speaks of 
Kingsley and Maurice aa ^^pemicious" ; and talks 
of John Stuart Mill as a ^^demagogue." She was 
no doctrinaire. ^^One ounce of education demand* 
ed is worth a poimd imposed. It is no use to give 
the meat before you give the himger." She was 
delighted at a letter of St. Hilaire's, in which he 
said, '^e have a system and no results ; you have 
results and no system." Yet she had a deep sym- 
pathy with the wants of the people. She was 
horrified at something Babbage told her of the 
population of some of the manufacturing towna, 
who are worked out before they attain to thirty 
years of age. '^But I am persuaded the remedy 
will not oome from the people/' she add^. Many 
of her letters are concerned with the question of 
the higher education of women. She discusses 
Buckle's lecture on 'The Influence of Women 



66 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

upon the Progress of Knowledge/' admits to M. 
Ouizot that woman's intellectual life is largely col- 
oured by the emotions^ but adds: '^One is not 
precisely a fool because one's opinions are greatly 
influenced by one's affections. The opinions of 
men are often influenced by worse things." Dr. 
Whewell consults her about lecturing women on 
Plato^ being slightly afraid lest people should 
think it ridiculous; Comte writes her elaborate 
letters on the relation of women to progress; and 
Mr. Gladstone promises that Mrs. Gladstone will 
carry out at Hawarden the suggestions contained 
in one of her pamphlets. She was always very 
practical, and never lost her admiration for plain 
sewing. 

All through the book we come across interest- 
ing and amusing things. She gets St. Hilaire to 
order a large, sensible bonnet for her in Paris, 
which was at once christened the ''Aristotelian/' 
and was supposed to be the only useful bonnet in 
England. Grote has to leave Paris alter the coup 
(Vital, he tells her, because he cannot bear to see 
the establishment of a Greek lyrant. Alfred de 
Vigny, Macaiday, John Stirling, Southey, Alexis 
de Tocqueville, Hallam, and Jean Jacques Ampere 
all contribute to these pleasant pages. She j 



SOME LITERARY NOTES. 67 

to have ingpired the wannest feelings of friend- 
ship in those who knew her. Guizot writes to 
her: ^^adame de Stael used to say that the best 
thing in the world was a serious Frenchman. I 
tarn the compliment^ and say that the best thing 
in the world is an affectionate Englishman. How 
much more an Englishwoman? Given equal quali- 
ties, a woman is always more charming than a 



Lucie Austin, afterwards Lady Duff Gordon, 
was bom in 1821. Her chief playfellow was John 
Stuart Mill, and Jeremy Baitham's garden was 
her playground. She was a lovely, romantic child, 
who was always wanting the flowers to talk to her, 
and used to invent the most wonderful stories 
about animals, of whom she was passionately fond. 
In 1834 Mrs. Austin decided on leaving England, 
and Sydney Smith wrote his immortal letter to 
the little girl: 

Tjucie, Lucie, my dear child, don^t tear your 
frock; tearing frocks is not of itself a proof of 
genius. But write as your mother writes, act as 
your mother acts: be frank, loyal, affectionate, 
simple, honest, and then integrity or laceration 



68 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAE WILDE. 

of frock is of little import And, Lucie, dear 
child^ mind your axifhmetic. You know in the 
first sum of yours I ever saw there was a mistake. 
You had carried two (as a cab is licensed to do), 
and you ought, dear Lucie^ to have carried but 
one. Is this a trifle? What would life be with- 
out arithmetic but a scene of horrors? You are 
going to Boulogne, the city of debts, peopled by 
men who have never understood arithmetic. By 
the time you return I shall probably have received 
my first paralytic stroke, and shall have lost all 
recollection of you. Therefore, I now give you 
my parting advice— don*t marry anybody who has 
not a tolerable understanding, and a thousand a 
year. And God bless you, dear child.'* 

At Boulogne she sat next Heine at table d'hote. 
'^e heard me speak German to my mother, and 
soon began to speak to me, and then said : ^When 
yon go back to England, you can tell your friends 
that you have seen Heinrich Heine.' I replied, 
'And who is Heinrich Heine ?* He laughed heart- 
ily, and took no offence at my ignorance; and we 
used to lounge on the end of the pier together^ 
where he told me stories in which fish, mermaids, 
water-sprites, and a very funny old French fiddler^ 



SOME LITERARY NOTES. 69 

with a poodle> were mixed up in the meet fanciful 
maimer^ sometimes humoroud, and very often pa- 
thetic^ especially when the water-sprites brought 
him greetings from the *Nord See/ He was so 
kind to me^ and so sarcastic to every one else/' 
Twenty years afterwards the little girl whose 
^^raune Augen'' Heine had celebrated in hia 
charming poem, '*Wenn ich an deinem Hause/' 
used to go and see the dying poet in Paris. ''It 
does one good/' he said to her, ''to see a woman 
who does not carry about a broken heart, to be 
mended by all sorts of men, like the women here, 
who do not see that a total want of heart is their 
real failing/' On another oocasion he said to 
her: "I have now made peace with the whole 
world, and at last also with Ood, who sends thee 
to me as a beautiful angel of death. I shall cer- 
tainly soon die." Lady Duff Gordon said to him : 
'Toor poet, do you still retain such splendid illu- 
sions, that you transform a travelling English- 
woman into Azrael ? That used not to be the case, 
for you always disliked us/' He answered: "Yes, 
I do not know what possessed me to dislike the 
English. It was only petulance. I never hated 
them; indeed, I never knew them. I was only 
once in England, but knew no one; and found 



f 



W THE WBITINGS OP OSCAB WILDE. 

London very dreary, and the people and the streets 
odious. But England haa revenged herself well; 
she has sent me two excellent frienda — ^thysdf and 
Milnes^ that good Milnes.'' 

There are delightful lettere from Di<^ Doyle 
here^ with the most amusing drawings, one of the 
present Sir Bobert Peel as he made his maiden 
speech in the House being excellent; and the vari- 
ous descriptions of Hassan's performances are ex- 
tremely amusing. Hassan was a black boy, who 
had been turned away by his master because he 
was going blind, and was found by Lady Duff 
Gordon one night sitting on her doorstep. She 
took care of him, and had him cured, and he seems 
to have been a constant source of delight to every 
one. On one occasion, when Prince Louis Napo* 
leon (the late Emperor of the French) came in 
unexpectedly, he gravely said : ^fPlease, my IsAj, 
I ran out and bought two-pennyworth of sprats 
for the Prince, and for the honour of the house.** 
Here is an amusing letter from Mrs. Norton : 

^'My dbab Luoib : We have never thanked you 
for the red pots, which no early Chriatian should 
be without, and which add that finishing stroke to 
the splendour of our demesne, which was supposed 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 71 

to depend on a roc's egg in less intelligent times. 
We have now a warm Pampeian appearance, and 
the constant contemplation of these classical ob- 
jects favour the beaniy of the facial line; for what 
can be deduced from the great fact, apparent in 
all the states of antiquity, that gtraighi noses were 
the ancient custom, but the logical assumption that 
the constant habit of turning up the nose at un- 
sightly objects — such as the National Gallery and 
other offaisive and obtrusive things — has produced 
the modem divergence from the true and proper 
line of profile? I rejoice to think that we our- 
selves are exempt. I attribute this to our love 
of Fompeian Pots (on account of the beauty and 
distinction of this Fof s shape I spell it with a big 
P), which has kept us straight in a world of crook- 
edness. The pursuit of profiles under difficulties 
— how much more rare than a pursuit of knowl- 
edge! Talk of setting good examples before our 
children I Bah I let us set good Pompeian Pots be- 
fore our children, and when they grow up they 
will not depart from them.'' 

Lady Duff Gordon's '^Letters from the Cape," 
and her brilliant translation of '^The Amber 
Witch/' are, of course, well known* The latter 



72 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

book was, with Lady WUde^s translation of "Sido- 
nia the Sorceress/' my favourite romantic reading 
when a boy. Her letters from Egypt are wonder- 
fully viyid and pictnresque. Here is an interest- 
ing bit of art criticism : 

'^Shereef Toosuf langhed heartily over a print 
in an illustrated paper from a picture of Hilton's 
^Eebekah at the Well/ with the old *Vakeer of 
Sidi Ibraheem (Abraham's chief servant) kned- 
ing before the girl he was sent to fetch^ like an 
old fool, without his turban, and Bebekah and 
the other girls in queer fancy dresses, and the 
camels with snouts like pigs. 'If the painter oould 
not go into Sena to see how the Arab really looks/ 
said Sheykh Yoosuf, 'why did he not paint a well 
in England, with girls like English peasants? At 
least it would have looked natural to Ikiglish peo- 
ple, and the Vakeel would not seem so like a 
madman if he had taken off a hat.' I cordially 
agree with Yoosuf s art criticism. Fancy pictures 
of Eastern things are hopelessly absurd." 

Mrs. Boss has certainly produced a most fas- 
cinating volume, and her book is one of the books 
of the season. It is edited with taxst and judg* 
rnent. 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 73 

^'Caroline" (Bichard Beatley & Son), by Lady 
LindBay, is oertaiidy Lady Lindsay's best work. It 
IB written in a very clever modem style, and is as 
full of esprit and wit as it is of subtle psychologi- 
cal insist. Caroline is an heiress, who, coming 
downstaiiB at a Continental hotel, falls into the 
arms of a charming, penniless yoxmg man. The 
hero of the novel is the young man's friend. Lord 
Lezamont, who makes the ^'great renunciation," 
aad succeeds in being fine without being priggish, 
and Quixotic without being ridiculous. Miss 
Ffoulkes, the elderly spinster, is a capital char- 
acter, and, indeed, the whole book is cleverly writ- 
ten. It has also the advantage of being in only 
one volume. The influence of Mudie on literature, 
the baneful influence of the circulating library, is 
clearly on the wane. The gain to literature is 
incalculable. English novels were becoming very 
tedious with their three volumes of padding — at 
least, the second volume was always padding — and 
extremely indigestible. A reckless punster once 
remarked to me, apropos of English novels, that 
'^e proof of the padding is in the eating," and 
certainly English fiction has been veiy heavy — 
heavy with the best intentions. Lady Lindsay's 



74 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAE WILDE. 

book ifi a sign that better things axe in store for 
ns. She is brief and bright 

What are the best books to give as Christmas 
presents to good girls who are always pretty, or 
to pretty girls who are occasionally good? People 
are so fond of giving away what they do not want 
themselves, that charity is largely on the increase. 
But with this kind of charity I have not mnch 
sympathy. If one gives away a book, it should be 
a charming book — so charming, that one regrets 
having given it, and would not take it back. Look- 
ing over the Christmas books sent to me by various 
publishers, I find that these are the best and the 
most pleasing: ^Gleanings from the Oraphic/' 
by Randolph Caldicott (George Boutledge ft 
Sons), a most fascinating volume full of sketches 
that have real wit and humour of line, and are 
not simply dependent on what the French call the 
Ugende, the literary explanation; ''Meg's Friend*' 
(Blackie & Sons), by Alice Corkran, one of our 
most delicate and graceful prose-writers in the 
sphere of fiction, and one whose work has the rare 
artistic qualities of refinement and simplicity; 
"Under False Colours" (Blackie & Sons), by Sa- 
rah Dowdney, an excellent story; 'TlTie Fiaher- 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 75 

man's Daughter'' (Hatchards), by Florence Mont- 
gomery, the anthor of ''Miflunderstood/' a tale 
with real chann of idea and treatment; '^nder a 
Clond'* (Hatdiard6), by the author of 'TThe Atel- 
ier dn Lys,'' and qnite worthy of its author; 'The 
Third Miss St Qnentin" (Hatchards), by Mrs. 
Molesworth^ and ^A Christmas Pos/' (Macmillan 
ft Co.), from the same fascinating pen, and with 
delightful illustrations by Walter Crane. Miss 
Bosa Mulholland's ^'Oiannetta" (Blackie & Sons) 
and Miss Agnes Qibeme's ''Balph Hardcastle's 
Will'' (Haichards) are also admirable books for 
presents, and the bound volume of '^Ataknta" has 
much that is delightful both in art and in litera- 
ture. 

The prettiest, indeed the most beautiful, book, 
from an artistic point of view, is undoubtedly Mr. 
Walter Crane's '^Flora's Feast" (Cassell & Co.). 
It is an imaginative Masque of Flowers, and as 
lovely in colour as it is exquisite in design. It 
shows us the whole pomp and pageant of the year : 
the Snowdrops like white-crested knights, the lit- 
tle naked Crocus kneeling to catch the sunlight 
in his golden chalice, the Daffodils blowing their 
trumpets like young hunters, the Anemones with 
their wind-blown raiment, the green-kirtled Marsh- 



76 THE WEITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

marigolds^ and the '^dyHBEmocks all silyer-white/' 
tripping over the meadows like Arcadian milk- 
maids^ Buttercupe are here, and the white-plmned 
Thorn in spiky armour^ and the Crown-imperial 
borne in stately procession^ and red*bannered Tu- 
lips^ and Hyacinths with their spring belLs, and 
Giaucer's Daisy — 

^^'small and sweet, 

Si donee est la Marguerite.'' 

Gorgeous Peonies, and Columbines ^'that drew the 
car of Venus/' and the Bose with her lover, and 
the stately white-vestured Lilies, and wide-staring 
Ox-eyes, and scarlet Poppies pass before ns. There 
are Primroses and Corncockles, Chrysanthemnms 
in robes of rich brocade, Sunflowers and tall Holly- 
hocks, and pale Christmas Boses. The designs for 
the Daffodils, the wild Boses, the Convolvulvi, and 
the Hollyhocks are admirable, and would be beau* 
tiful in embroidery or in any precious material. 
Indeed, anyone who wishes to find beautiful de- 
signs cannot do better than get the book. It is, 
in its way, a little masterpiece, and its grace and 
fancy, and beauty of line and colour, cannot be 
over-estimated. The Greeks gave hnman form 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 77 

to wood and stream, and aaw Natnre best in Naiad 
or in Diyad* Mr. Crane, with something of Qoihic 
fantasy^ haa canght the Gre^ feeling, the love 
of personification, the passion for representing 
things nnder the conditions of the human form. 
The flowers are to him so many knights and lar 
dies, page-boys or shepherd-boys, divine nymphs 
or simple girls, and in their fair bodies or fencifol 
raiment one can see the flower's very form and 
absohite essence, so that one loves their artifitic 
troth no less than their artistic beauty. Tliis 
book contains some of the best work Mr. Crane 
has ever done. His art is never so snccessfnl as 
when it is entirely remote from life. The slightest 
touch of actuality seems to kill it. It lives, or 
should live, in a world of its own fashioning. It 
18 decorative in its complete subordination of fact 
to beauty of effect, in the grandeur of its curves 
and lines, in its entirely imaginative treatment. 
Almost every page of this book gives a suggestion 
for some ridi tapestry, some fine screen, some 
painted cassane, some carving in wood or ivory. 

From Messrs. Hildesheimer and Faulkner I 
have received a large collection of Christmas cards 
and illustrated books. One of the latter, an Sdi- 



78 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAE WILDE. 

tion de luxe of Sheridan's '^Here's to the Maiden 
of Bafihful Fifteen,** is very deverly illustrated 
by Miss Alice Havers and Mr. Ernest Wilson. It 
seems to me, however, that there is a danger of 
modem illnstration becoming too pictorial. What 
we need is good book ornament^ decorative orna- 
ment that will go with type and printing, and 
give to each page v harmony and nniiy of effect. 
Merely dotting a page with reprodnctions of water- 
colour drawings will not do. It is true that Japa« 
nese art, which is essentially decorative, is pictorial 
also. But the Japanese have the meet wonderful 
delicacy of touch, and with a science so subtle that 
it gives the effect of exquisite aoddenl^ they can 
by mere placing make an undecorated space deco- 
rative. There is also an intimate connection be- 
tween their art and their handwriting or printed 
characters. They both go together, and show the 
same feeling for form and line. Our aim should 
be to discover some mode of illustration that will 
harmonise with the shapes of our lettens. At pres- 
ent there is a discord between our pictorial illus- 
trations and our unpictorial type. The former 
are too essentially imitative in character, and often 
disturb a page instead of decorating it. How- 
ever, I suppose we must r^ard most of these 



SOME LITEBARY NOTES. 79 

Christmas books as merely books of pictures^ with 
a running accompaniment of explanatory text As 
the text, as a role, consists of poetry, this is put- 
ting the poet in a very subordinate position; but 
the poetry in the books of Um kind is not^ as a 

rule, of a very hi£^ order of excellence. 
• • • • • 

^The various collectors of Irish folk-lore/' says 
Mr. W. B. Yeats in his charming little book 
**Pairy and Folk TJes of the Irish Peasantry*' 
(Walter Scott), *1iave, from our point of view, 
one great merit, and, from* the point of view of 
others, one great faaili They have made their 
work literature rather than science, and told us 
of the Irish peasantry rather than of the primi- 
tive history of mankind, or whatever else the f olk- 
lorists are on the gad after. To be considered 
scientists they should have tabulated all their tales 
in forms like grocers' bills — ^item the fairy king, 
item the fairy queen. Instead of this they have 
caught the very voice of the people, the very pulse 
of life, each giving what was most noticed in his 
day, Croker and Lover, full of the ideas of the 
harum-scarum Irish gentility, saw everything hu« 
mourised. The impulse of the Irish literature of 
iheir time came from a.class tKat did not — ^mainly 



80 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAE WILDE. 

for political reasons — ^take the populace seriously, 
and imagined the country as a liTimoiirisfs Arcar 
dia; of its passion, its gloom, its tragedy, they 
knew nothing. What they did was not wholly 
false; they merely magnified an irresponsible type, 
found oftenest among boatmen, carmen, and gen* 
tlemen's servants, into the type of a whole na- 
tion, and created a stage Irishman. The writings 
of Torty-eight and the Famine, combined, burst 
their bubble. Their work had the dash as well 
as the shallowness of an ascendant and idle class; 
and, in Croker^ is touched eyerywhere with beauty, 
a gentle Arcadian beauty. Carleton, a peasant 
bom, has in many of his stories, more especially 
in his ghost stories, a much more serious way 
with him, for all his humour. K^medy, an old 
bookseller in Dublin, who seems to have had some* 
thing of genuine belief in the fairies, comes next 
in time. He has far less literary faculty, but is 
wonderfully accurate, giving often the very words 
in which the stories were told. But the best book 
since Croker is Lady Wilde's 'Ancient Legends.' 
The humour has all given way to pathos and ten- 
derness. We have here the innermost heart of 
the Celt in the moments he has grown to love 
through years of persecution, when, cushioning 



SOME LITERABY NOTES. 81 

himaelf about with dreams^ and hearing faiiy songs 
in the twilight^ he ponders on the soul and on the 
dead. Here is the Celt^ only it is the Celt dream- 
ing/* 

Lifa> a Tolnme of very moderate dimensions, and 
of extremely moderate price, Mr. Yeats has col* 
lected together the most characteristic of onr Irish 
folklore stories, grouping them together according 
to subject First come the 'Trooping Fkdries." 
The peasants say that these are fallen angels who 
were not good enough to be saved, nor bad enough 
to be lost; but the Irish antiquarians see in them 
the gods of Pagan Ireland, who, when no longer 
worshipped or fed with offerings, dwindled away 
in the popular imagination, and are now only a 
few spans in height Their chief occupations are 
feasting, fighting, making love, and playing the 
most beautiful music. They have only one indus- 
trious person among them, the Leprachaun (the 
Little Shoemaker). It is his duty to repair their 
shoes when they wear them out with dancing. Mr. 
Yeats tdls us that near the village of Ballisodare 
is an old woman who lived among them for seven 
years. When she came home she had no toes; she 
had danced them all off. On May Eve, every 



82 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

seventh year^ they fight for the harvest^ for the 
best ears of grain belong to them. An old man 
informed Mr. Teats that he saw them fight once^ 
and that they tore the thatch off a house. Had 
any one else been near they wonld merely have 
seen a great wind whirling everything into the 
air as it passed. When the wind drives the leaves 
and straws before it^ that is the fairies^ and the 
peasants take off their hats and say ''God bless 
them/' When they are gay, they sing. Many of 
the most beantiful tunes of Ireland are only their 
music caught up by eavesdroppers. No prudent 
peasant would hum 'Tie Pretty Girl Milking the 
Cow*' near a fairy rath, for they are jealous, and 
do not like to hear their songs in clumsy mortal 
life. Blake once saw a fairy's funeral. But this^ 
as Mr. Teats points out, must have been an Eng- 
lish fairy, for the Irish fairies 'never die; they 
are immortal. 

Then come the ^'Solitary Fairies"; amc^gst 
them we find the little Leprachwun mentioned 
above. He has grown very rich, as he possesses 
all the treasure crocks buried in war time. In 
the early part of this century, according to Croker, 
they used to show in Tipperary a little shoe for- 
gotten by the fairy shoemaker. Thai there are 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 83 

two laiher diarepntable little fairies— the Cluri- 
cmin, who gets intoxicated in gentlemen's cellars, 
and ^The Bed Man,^ who plays unkind practical 
jokes. The FeoT'Oofia (Man of Hunger) is an 
emaciated phantom who goes through the land in 
time of famine^ hogging an alms, and bringing 
good hick to the giver. The Water^heerie is own 
brother to the Englidi Jack-oMantem. TheLeon^ 
hmm 8hee (Fairy Mistress) se^s the love of mor- 
tals. If they refuse, she must be their slave; if 
fhey consenl^ they are hers, and can only escape 
fay finding another to take their placa The fairy 
lives on their life, and they waste away. Death is 
no escape from her. She is the Gaelic Muse, for 
she gives inspiration to those she persecutes. The 
Gadic poets die young, for she is restless, and will 
not let them remain long on eartL The Pooha is 
essentially an animal spirit, and some have consid« 
ered him the forefather of Shakespeare's 'Tuck." 
He lives on solitary mountains, and among old 
rains ^grown monstrous with much solitude," and 
is of the race of the nightmare. He has many 
shapes — is now a hois^ now a goat, now an eagle. 
Like all spirits, he is only half in the world of 
form. The Banshee does not caro mudi for our 
democratic levelling tendencies; she only loves old 



84 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

families^ and despises the parvenu or the fumveau 
riche. When' more than one Banshee is present^ 
and they wail and sing in chorus^ it is for the 
death of some holy or great one. An omen that 
sometimes accompanies the Banshee is an immense 
black coach, moimted by a cofiin, and drawn by 
headless hoisee driven by a Dulldhan. A Dullahan 
is the most terrible thing in the world. In 1807 
two of the sentries stationed outside St. James's 
Park saw one climbing the railings, and died of 
fright Mr. Yeats suggests that they are possibly 
descended from that Irish giant who swam across 
the Channel with his head in his teeth. 

Then come the stories of ghosts, of saints and 
priests, and of giants. The ghosts live in a state 
intermediary between this world and the next. 
They are held there by some earthly longing or af- 
fection, or aome duty unfulfilled, or anger against 
the living; they are those who are too good for 
hell and too bad for heaven. Sometimes they take 
the form of insects, especially that of butterflies. 
The author of **The Parochial Survey of Ireland*' 
heard a woman say to a child, who was chasing a 
butterfly, '*How do you know it is not the soul of 
your grandfather ?*' On November Eve they axe 
abroad, and dance with the fairies. As for tiie 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 85 

BaintB and priests, there axe no marlTTS in the 
stories. That ancient chronicler^ Oiraldns Cam- 
brensis^ taunted the Archbishop of Cashel because 
no one in Ireland had received the crown of mar- 
tyrdom. **Our people may be barbarous/' the pro- 
late answered, **but they have never lifted their 
hands against God's saints; but now that a peo- 
ple have come amongst ns who know how to make 
them'' (it was just after the English invasion) 
^Ve shall have mariyrs plentifully.'' The giants 
were the old Pagan heroes of Ireland, who grew 
bigger and bigger, just as the gods grew smaller 
and smaller. The fact is, they did not wait for 
offerings; fli^ took them in et armis. 

Some of the prettiest stories are those that dus- 
ter round Tir-ndn^g. This is the Country of the 
Young;, ''for age and death have not found it, 
neither tears nor loud laughter have gone near it" 
One man has g<me there and returned. The bard 
Oisen — who wandered away on a white horse, mov- 
ing on the surface of the foam with his fairy 
Nianihr-lived there 300 years, and then returned 
in search of his comrades. The moment his foot 
touched the earth his 300 years fell on him, and 
he was bowed double, and his beard swept the 
ground. He described his sojourn in the Land of 



86 THE WBITINGS OP OSCAE WILDE. 

Yonth to Si Patrick before he died. Since then^ 
according to Mr. Yeats/'many have seen it in many 
places ; some in the depths of lakes, and have heard 
rising therefrom a vague sound of bells; more have 
seen it far off on the horizon, as they peered out 
from the western cliffs. Not three years ago a 
fisherman imagined that he saw if 

Mr. Yeats has certainly done his work very well. 
He has shown great critical capacity in his selec- 
tion of the stories, and his litUe introductions are 
charmingly written. It is delightful to come 
across a collection of purely imaginative work, and 
Mr. Yeats has a very quick instinct in finding 
out the best and most beautiful things in Irish 
folklore. I am also glad to see that he has not 
confined himself entirely to prose, but has included 
Allingham's lovely poem on the fairies: 

'TJp the airy mountain, 

Down the rushy gleu. 
We dare not go a-hunting 

For fear of little men; 
Wee folk, good folk. 

Trooping altogether; 
Green jacket, red cap. 

And white owl's feather. 



SOME LITEBARY NOTES. 

''Down along the rocky shore 

Some make their home; 
They live <m crispy pancakes 

Of yellow tide-foam ; 
Some in the reeds 

Of the black mountain lake^ 
With frogs for their watch-dogs 

All night awake. 

''High on the hiU-top 

The old king sits^ 
He is now so old and grey 

He's nigh lost his wits. 
With a bridge of white mist 

Colmnkill he crosses^ 
On his stately journeys 

From Slieveleagae to Bosses; 
Or going up with mnsic^ 

On cold starry nights^ 
To sup with the Queen 

Of the gay Northern Lights/' 



87 



All lovers of fairy tales and folklore should get 
this little book. 'The Homed Woman/' "The 
Prieaf 8 Soul/' and "Tdg O'Kane,*' are really mar- 
▼ellous in their way; and, indeed^ there is hardly 



88 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

a single story that is not worth reading and think- 
ing over. 

The wittiest writer in France at present is a 
woman. That deyer^ that spirituelle grande dame, 
who has adopted the pseudonym of ^'Oyp/' has in 
her own country no rival. Her wit, her delicate 
and delightful esprit, her fascinating modernity, 
and her light, happy touch, give her a unique po- 
sition in that literary movement whidi has taken 
for its object the reproduction of contemporary 
life. Such books as ''Autour du Manage/' "Au- 
tour du Divorce/' and '^Le Petit Bob/' are, in their 
way, little playful masterpieces, and the only work 
in England that we could compare with them is 
Violet Fane's ''Edwin and Angelina Papers." To 
the same brilliant pen which gave us these wise and 
witty studies of modem life we owe now a more 
serious, more elaborate production. ''Helen Dav« 
cnant" (Chapman & Hall) is as earnestly wrought 
out as it is cleverly conceived. If it haa a fault, 
it is that it is too full of matter. Out of the 
same material a more economical writer would 
have made two novels and half a docen psycho- 
logical studies for publication in American maga- 
zines. Thackeray once met Bishop Wilberforce 



SOME UTEBABY NOTES. 89 

at dinner at Dean Stanley's, and, after listening 
to the eloquent prelate's extraordinary flow and 
fond of stories, remarked to his neighbour, ^ 
oould not afford to spend at that rate." Violet 
Fane is certainly lavishly extravagant of incident, 
plot, and character. But we must not quarrel 
with richness of subject-matter at a time wh^i 
tenuiiy of purpose and meagreness of motive seem 
to be becoming the dominant notes of oontempo- 
raiy fiction. The side issues of the story are so 
complex that it is di£Scult, almost impossible, to 
describe the plot in any adequate manner. The in- 
terest centres round a yoimg girl, Helen Davenant 
by name, who contracts a private and clandestine 
marriage with one of those mysterious and fascin- 
ating foreign noblemen who are becoming so in- 
valuable to writers of fiction^ either in narrative 
or dramatic form. Shortly after the marriage her 
husband is arrested for a terrible murder commit- 
ted some years before in Bussia, under the evil 
influence of occult magic and mesmerism. The 
crime was done in a hypnotic state, and, as de* 
scribed by Violet Fane, seems much more prob- 
able than the actual hypnotic experiments record- 
ed in scientific publications. This is the supreme 
advantage that fiction possesses over fact It can 



90 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

make fhings artigticallj probable; can call for im- 
aginative and realistic credence; can, by force of 
mere style, compel ns to believe. Tlie ordinary 
novelists, by keeping close to the ordinary inci- 
dents of commonplace life, seem to me to abdicate 
half their power. Bomance, at any rate, welcomes 
what is wonderful ; the temper of wonder is part 
of her own secret; she loves what is strange and 
cnrions. But besides the marvels of occultism and 
hypnotism there are many other things in ''Helen 
Davenant" that are worthy of study. Violet Fane 
writes an admirable style. The opening chapter 
of the book, with its terrible poignant tragedy, is 
most powerfully written, and I cannot help won- 
dering that the clever authoress cared to abandon, 
even for a moment, the superb psydiological op- 
portunity that this chapter affords. The touches 
of nature, the vivid sketches of high lif^ the 
subtle renderings of the phases and fancies of so- 
ciety, are also admirably done. "Helen Davenant" 
is certainly clever, and shows that Violet Fane 
can write prose that is as good as her verse, and can 
look at life not merely from the point of view 
of the poet, but also from the standpoint of the 
philosopher, the keen observer, the fine social critic. 
To be a fine social critic is no small thing, and 



SOME LITEBAEY NOTES. 91 

to be able to incorporate in a work of fiction the 
results of ench careful obserration is to achieve 
what is out of the reach of many. The difficnlly 
nnder which fhe novelistB of our day labour seems 
to me to be this: if they do not go into society, 
their books are unreadable; and if they do go into 
society, they have no time left for writing. How- 
ever, Violet Fane has solved the problem. 

'^The chronicles which I am about to present to 
the reader are not the result of any conscious 
effort of the imagination. They are, as the title- 
page indicates, records of dreams occurring at in- 
tervals during the last ten years, and transcribed, 
pretty nearly in the order of their occurrence, from 
my diary. Written down as soon as possible after 
awaking from the slumber during which they pre- 
sented themselves, these narratives, necessarily im- 
studied in style, and wanting in elegance of dic- 
tion^ have at least the merit of fresh and vivid 
colour; for they were committed to paper at a mo- 
ment when the effect and impress of each succes- 
sive vision were strong and forceful on the 
mind. • • • 

'*The most remarkable features of the experi- 
ences I am about to record are the methodical con- 



92 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

secntiveness of their sequenceB, and ihe intelligent 
purpose disclosed alike in the events witnessed and 
in the words heard or read. ... I know of no 
parallel to this phenomenon^ unless in the pages 
of Bnlwer Lytton's romance entitled The Pil- 
grims of the Bhine/ in which is related the story 
of a German student endowed with so marvellous 
a faculty of dreaming that for him the normal 
conditiona of sleeping and waking became re- 
versed; his true life was that which he lived in 
his slumbers^ and his hours of wakefulness ap- 
peared to him as so many uneventful and inactive 
intervals of arrest, occurring in an existence of 
intense and vivid interest which was wholly passed 
in the hypnotic state. . . . 

'^During the whole period covered by these 
dreams I have been buaily and almost continuously 
engrossed with scientific and literary pursuits, de- 
manding accurate judgment and complete self-pos- 
session and rectitude of mind. At ilie time when 
many of the most vivid and remarkable visions 
occurred, I was following my course as a student 
at the Paris Faculty of Medicine, preparing for 
examinations, daily visiting hospital wards as 
dresser, and attending lectures. Later, when I 
had taken my degree, I was engaged in the duties 



SOME LITERARY NOTES. 93 

of my profesdon and in writing for the press on 
adentific eaiqects. Neither had I ever taken 
opium, haschiflh, or other dream-producing agent. 
A cap of tea or coffee represents the extent of my 
indulgences in this direction. I mention these 
details in order to guard against inferences which 
might otherwise be drawn as to the genesis of 
my faculty. 

^Tt may, perhaps, be worthy of notice that by 
far the larger number of the dreams set down 
in this volume occurred towards dawn; sometimes, 
even, after sunrise, during a ^second sleep.' A 
condition of fasting, united possibly with some 
subtle magnetic or other atmospheric state, seems, 
therefore, to be that most open to impressions of 
the kind.'' 

This 18 the account given by the late Dr. Anna 
Eingsford of the genesis of her remarkable vol- 
ume, **Dreams and Dream-Stories" (George Red- 
way) ; and certainly some of the stories, especially 
those entitled "'Steepside," 'TBeyond the Sunset," 
and ^*The Village of Seers," are well worth read- 
ing, 13iough not intrinsically finer, either in mo- 
tive or idea, than the general run of magazine sto- 
ries. No one who had the privil^e of knowing 



94 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

Mrs. Kingsf ord, who waa one of the brilliant wom- 
en of our day^ can doubt for a single momeot that 
these tales came to her in the way she describes; 
but to me the result is just a little disappointing. 
Perhaps^ however^ I expect too much. There is 
no reason whatsoever why the imagination should 
be finer in hours of dreaming than it is in hours 
of waking. Mrs. Kingsford quotes a letter writ- 
ten by Jamblichus to Agathocles^ in which he says : 
'^The soul has a two-fold life, a lower and a higher. 
In sleep the soul is liberated from the constraint 
of the body^ and enters^ as an emancipated being, 
on its divine life of intelligence. The nobler part 
of the mind is thus united by abstraction to higher 
natures, and becomes a participant in the wisdom 
and foreknowledge of the gods. . . . The 
night-time of the body is the daytime of the soul.'' 
But the great masterpieces of literature and the 
great secrets of wisdom have not been communi- 
cated in this way; and even in Coleridge's case, 
though '^ubla Ehan^' is wonderful, it is not more 
wonderful, while it is certainly less complete^ than 
*Tlie Ancient Mariner.'* 

As for the dreams themselves, which occupy the 
first portion of the book, their value, of course, 
depends chiefly on the value of the truths or pre- 



SOME LITERABY NOTES. 96 

dictioiis which they are suppoeed to impart I 
must oonfess that most modem mysticism seems to 
me to be simply a method of imparting useless 
knowledge in a form that no one can understand. 
All^goiy^ parable, and vision have their high artis- 
tic nses, bnt their philosophical and scientific nses 
are very small. However, here is one of Mrs. 
Kingsf ord's dreams. It has a pleasant qnaintness 
about it: — 

^HE WONDERFUL SPECTACLES. 

^ was walking alone on the sea-shore. The day 
was singularly dear and simny. Inland lay the 
most beautiful landscape ever seen; and far off 
were ranges of tall hills, the highest peaks of 
which were white with glittering snows. Along 
the sands by the sea came towards me a man ac- 
coutred as a postman. He gave me a letter. It 
was from you. It ran thus : — 

^ ? have got hold of the earliest and most pre- 
cious book extant. It was written before the world 
began. The text is easy enough to read; but the 
notes, which are very copious and numerous, are 
in such minute and obscure characters that I can- 
not make them out I want you to get for me the 



96 THE WRITINGS OP OSCAR WILDE. 

spectacles which Swedenhorg used to wear; not the 
smaller pair — those he gave to Hans Christian 
Andersen — ^but the large pair, and these seem to 
have got mislaid. I think they are Spinoza's make. 
You Imow, he was an optical-glass maker by pro- 
fession^ and the best we ever had. See if you can 
get them for me.* 

'^When I looked np after reading this letter I 
saw the postman hastening away across the sands, 
and I cried out to him, 'Stop ! how am I to send 
the answer ? Will you not wait for it?' 

''He looked round, stopped, and came back to 
me. 

" 1 have the answer here,* he said, tapping his 
letterbag, 'and I shall deliver it immediately/ 

" 'How can you have the answer before I have 
written it?* I asked. 'You are making a mistake.* 

" 'No,* he said. In the city from which I come 
the replies are all written at the office, and sent 
out with the letters themselves. Your reply is in 
my bag.* 

" 'Let me see it,* I said. He tock another letter 
from his wallet, and gave it to me. I opened it, 
and read, in my own handwriting, this answer, ad- 
dressed to you : — 

''"ITie spectacles you want can be bought in 




Osiat Wilde in iS3o. 
Page 96 



'. r ihirl; 1h v ■■■' ■■' ' 



I ., 






SOME LITEBAEY NOTES. 97 

London; but you will not be able to use them at 
once, for they have not been worn for many years, 
and they sadly want cleaning. This you will not 
be able to do yourself in London, because it is too 
dark there to see well, and because your fingers are 
not small enough to clean them properly. Bring 
them here to me, and I will do it for you.' 

'? gave this letter back to the postman. He 
smiled and nodded at me; and then I perceived, 
to my astonishment, that he wore a camelVhair 
tunic round his waist. I had been on the point of 
addressing him — I know not why — as Hermes. 
But I now saw that he must be John the Baptist; 
and in my fright at having spoken to so great a 
Saint I awoke.'' 

Mr. Maitland, who edits the present volume, and 
who was joint-author with Mrs. Kingaford of tliat 
curious book, "The Perfect Way," states in a foot- 
note that in the present instance the dreamer knew 
nothing of Spinoza at the time, and was quite un- 
aware that he was an optician ; and the interpreta- 
tion of the dream, as given by him, is that the 
spectacles in question were intended to represent 
Mrs. Kingsford's remarkable faculty of intuitional 
and interpretative perception. For a spiritual mes- 



98 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

BSLge fraught with such meaning, the mere form of 
this dream seems to me somewhat ignoble, and I 
cannot say that I like the blending of the postman 
with St. John the Baptist. However, from a psy- 
chological point of view, these dreams are interest- 
ing, and Mrs. Kingsford's book is undoubtedly a 
valuable addition to the literature of the mysticism 
of the nineteenth century. 

'*The Romance of a Shop** (T. Fisher XJnwin), 
by Miss Amy Levy, is a more mundane book, and 
deals with the adventures of some yoimg ladies 
who open a photographic studio in Baker Street, to 
the horror of some of their fashionable relatives. It 
is so brightly and pleasantly written that the sud- 
den introduction of a tragedy into it seems violent 
and unnecessary. It lacks the true tragic temper, 
and without this temper in literature all misfor- 
tunes and miseries seem somewhat mean and ordi- 
nary. With this exception the book is admirably 
done, and the style is clever and full of quick ob- 
servation. Observation is perhaps the most valuable 
faculty for a writer of fiction. When novelists re- 
flect and moralise, they are, as a rule, dull. But 
to observe life with keen vision and quick intellect, 
to catch its many modes of expression, to seize 



SOME LITERABY NOTES. 99 

upon the subtlety^ or satire^ or dramatic qualify of 
its situations, and to render life for ns with some 
spirit of distinction and fine selection — this, I 
fancy, should be the aim of the modem realistic 
novelist It would be, perhaps, too much to say 
that Miss Levy has distinction; this is the rarest 
quality in modem literature, though not only a 
few of its masters are modem; but she has many 
other qualitieB which are admirable. 

""Faithful and Unfaithful'' (Macmillan and 
Co.) is a powerful but not very pleasing novel. 
However, the object of most modem fiction is not 
to give pleasure to the artistic instinct, but rather 
to vividly portray life for us, to draw attention to 
social anomalies and social forms of injustice. 
Many of our novelists are really pamphleteers, re- 
formers masquerading as story-tellers, earnest so- 
ciologists seddng to mend as well as to mirror life. 
The heroine, or raiSier martyr, of Miss Margaret 
Lee's stoiy is a very noble and graciously Puritanic 
American girl, who is married at the age of 
eighteen to a man whom she insists on regarding 
as a hero. Her husband cannot live in the high 
rarefied atmosphere of idealism with which she 
surroonds him; her firm and fearless faith in him 



100 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

becomes a factor in his degradation, '^ou are too 
good for me^'' lie says to her in a finely conceived 
scene at the end of the book; ^Ve have not an idea, 
an inclination^ or a passion in common. I'm side 
and tired of seeming to live np to a standard that 
is entirely beyond my reach and my desire. We 
make each other miserable I I can't pull you down 
and for ten years you have been exhausting youJ^ 
self in vain efforts to raise me to your level. The 
thing must end !" He asks her to divorce him^ but 
she refuses. He then abandons her, and availing 
himself of those curious facilities for breaking the 
marriage-tie that prevail in the United States, suc- 
ceeds in divorcing her without her consent, and 
without her knowledge. The book is certainly 
characteristic of an age so practical and so literary 
as ours, an age in which all social reforms have 
been preceded and have been largdy influenced by 
fiction. ^'Faithful and Unfaithful" seems to point 
to some coming change in the marriage laws of 
America. 



Miss Nesbit has already made herself a name as 
a writer of graceful and charming verse, and 
though her last volume, 'Tlieaves of Life" (Long- 



SOME LITERABY NOTES. 101 

mam, Qreen^ and Co.)> does not show any distinct 
adyance on her former work, it still fully main- 
tains the high standard already achieved, and jus- 
tifies the reputation of the author. There are 
some wonderfully pretty poems in it, poems full of 
quick touches of fancy, and of pleasant ripples of 
rhyme; and here and there a poignant note of pas- 
sion flashes across the song, as a scarlet thread 
flashes through ihe shuttle-race of a loom, giving a 
new value to the delicate tints, and bringing the 
scheme of colour to a higher and more perfect key. 
In Miss Nesbifs earlier volume, the ^^jays and 
L^gends,^' as it was called, there was an attempt 
to give poetic form to humanitarian dreams and 
fiocialiatic aspirations; but the poems that dealt 
with these subjects were, on the whole, the least 
successful of the collection; and with the quick, 
critical instinct of an artist. Miss Nesbit seems to 
have recognised this. In the present volume, at 
any rate, such poems are rare, and these few fe- 
licitous verses give us the poet's defence: 

''A singer sings of rights and wrongs. 
Of world's ideals vast and bright, 

And feels the impotence of songs 
To scourge the wrong or help the right; 



102 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

And only wriiheB to feel how vain 
Are songs as weapons for liis fight; 

And so he turns to love again^ 
And sings of love for heart's delight. 

'Tor heart's delight the singers hind 

The wreath of roses ronnd the head. 
And will not loose it lest they find 

Time victor, and the roses dead, 
^an can but sing of what he knowa— 

I saw the roses fresh and red V 
And so they sing the deathless rose. 

With withered roses garlanded. 

''And some within their bosom hide 

Their rose of love still fresh and fair. 
And walk in silence, satisfied 

To keep its folded fragrance rare. 
And some — ^who bear a flag unfurled — 

Wreathe with their rose the flag they bear. 
And sing their banner for the world, 

And for their heart the roses ihere. 

'Tet thus much choice in singing is; 

We sing the good, the true, the jwst, 
Passionate duty turned to bliss. 

And honour growing out of trust. 



SOME LITEEAEY NOTES. 103 

Freedom we sing, and would not lose 
Her lightest footprint in lifers dust 

We sing of her because we dioose. 
We sing of love because we musf 

Certainly Miss Nesbit is at her best when she 
sings of love and nature. Here she is close to her 
subject, and her temperament gives colour and 
form to the various dramatic moods that are either 
suggested by Nature herself or brought to Nature 
for interpretation. This, for instance, is very sweet 
and graceful : — 

''When all the skies with snow were grey. 

And all the earth with snow was white, 
I wandered down a still wood way. 

And there I met my heart's delight 
Slow moving through the silent wood. 
The spirit of its iolitude : 

The brown birds and the lichened tree 

Seemed less a part of it than she. 

''Where pheasants' feet and rabbits' feet 
Had marked the snow with traces small, 

I saw the footprints of my sweet — 
Tlie sweetest woodland thing of all. 



104 THE WEITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

With Christinas roses in her hand^ 
One heart-beafs space I saw her stand ; 

And then I let her pass^ and stood 

Lone in an empty world of wood. 

''And though by that same path I've passed 
Down that same woodland ereiy day. 

That meeting was the first and last^ 
And she is hopelessly away. 

I wonder was she really there — 

Her hands, and eye^, and lips, and hair? 
Or was it but my dreaming sent 
Her image down the way I went? 

'^mpty the woods are where we met — 

They will be empty in the spring; 
The cowslip and the violet 

Will die without her gathering. 
But dare I dream one radiant day 
Red rose-wreathed she will pass this way 

Across the glad and honoured grass; 

And then — I will not let her pass/* 

And this Dedication, with its tender silver-grey 
notes of colour, is charming: — 



SOME LITERARY NOTES. 105 

*^ any meadow where your feet may tread^ 
In any garland that your Ioyg may wear, 
May be the flower whose hidden fragrance shed 
Wakes some old hope or numbs some old des- 
pair. 
And makes life's grief not quite so hard to bear 
And makes life's joy more poignant and more dear 
Because of some delight dead many a year. 

^Or in some cottage garden there may be 

The flower whose scent is memory for you ; 
The sturdy southern-wood, the frail sweet-pea. 
Bring back the swallow's cheep, the pigeon's 

coo. 
And youth, and hope, and all the dreams ihey 
knew, 
The evening star, the hedges grey with mist. 
The silent pordi where Love's flrst kiss was 
kissed. 

*'So in my garden may you chance to flnd 
Or royal rose or quiet meadow flower. 
Whose scent may be with some dear dream en- 
twined. 
And give you back the ghost of some sweet 

hour. 
As lilies fragrant from an August shower. 



106 THE WBITINGS OP OSCAR WILDE. 

Or airs of June that over bean-fields blow. 
Bring back the sweetness of my long ago/' 

All through the volmne we find the same dex- 
terous refining of old themes^ which is indeed the 
best thing that our lesser singers can give ns^ and a 
thing always delightful. There is no garden so 
well tilled but it can bear another blossom^ and 
though the subject-matter of Miss Nesbifs book 
is as the subject-matter of almost all books of 
poetry, she can certainly lend a new grace and a 
subtle sweetness to almost everytibing she writes 
on. 

'The Wanderings of Oisin, and other Poems'* 
(Kegan, Paul, Trench & Co.) is from the clever 
pen of Mr. W. B. Yeats, whose charming anthology 
of Irish fairy-tales I had occasion to notice in a 
recent number of 'The Woman's World.*' It is, I 
believe, the first volume of poems that Mr. Yeats 
has published, and it is certainly full of promise. 
It must be admitted that many of the poems are 
too fragmentary, too incomplete. They read like 
stray scenes out of unfinished plays, like things 
only half remembered, or, at best, but dimly seen. 
But the architectonic power of construction, the 
power to build up and make perfect a harmonious 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 107 

whole, is nearly always the latest, as it certainly 
is the highest, developmoit of the artistic tempera- 
ment. It is somewhat nnf air to expect it in early 
work. One qualily Mr. Yeats has in a marked de- 
gree, a qnalily that is not common in the work of 
onr minor poets, and is therefore all the more wel- 
come to ns — ^I mean the romantic temper. He is 
essentially Celtic, and his verse, at its best, is 
Celtic also. Strongly influenced by Keats, he seems 
to study how to 'load every rift with ore,^* yet is 
more fascinated by the beauty of words than by 
the beauty of metrical music. The spirit that 
dominates the whole book is perhaps more valuable 
than any individual poem or particular passage; 
but this from ^rThe Wanderings of Oisin'' is worth 
quoting. It describes the ride to the Island of 
Forgetfulness : — 

''And the ears of the horse went sinking away in 
the hollow light, 
For^ as drift from a sailor slow drowning the 
gleams of the world and the sun. 
Ceased on our hands and faces, on hazel and oak 
leaf, the light. 
And the stars were blotted above us, and the 
whole of the world was one; 



108 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

*^1I the horse gave a whinny; for cumbrous with 
stems of ilie hazel and oak. 
Of hollies, and hazels, and oak-trees, a valley 
was sloping away 
From his hoofs in tiie heavy grasses, with mon- 
strous slumbering folk. 
Their mighty and naked and gleaming bodies 
heaped loose where iliey lay. 

'^ore comely than man may make ihem, inlaid 
with silver and gold. 
Were arrow and shield and war-axe, arrow and 
spear and blade. 
And dew-blanched horns, in whose hollowa a 
child of three years old 
Could sleep on a coudi of rushes, round and 
about them laid.'^ 

And this, which deals with the old legend of 
the city lying under Hie waters of a lake, is strange 
and interesting: — 

^The Maker of the stars and worlda 
Sat underneath the market cross. 
And the old men were walking, walking. 
And little boys played pitch-and-ioss. 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 109 

^ The prope/ said He^ 'of stars and worlds 

Are prayers of patient men and good/ 
Tbe boys, the women, and old men, 
L]0tffliing, upon their shadows stood. 



**A grey professor passing cried, 
'How few the mind's intemperance rule ! 
What shallow ilioiights about deep things I 
The world grows old and plays the fool/ 

'The mayor came, leaning his left ear — 
There was some talking of the poor — 
And to himself cried, 'Communist I' 
And hurried to the guardhouse door. 

"The bishop came with open book. 
Whispering alcmg the sunny path ; 
There was some talking of man's Qod, 
His Qod of stupor and of wratiL 

*The bishop murmured, 'Atheist! 
How sinfully the wicked scoff I' 
And sent the old men on their way. 
And drove the boys and women off. 



110 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

**Tbe jdaoe was empty now of people; 

A cock came by upon hiB toes; 
An old horse looked across the f enos^ 
And robbed along the rail his nose. 

^rrhe Maker of the stars and worlds 

To His own house did Him betak^ 
And on that city dropped a tear. 
And now that city is a lake/' 

Mr. Yeats has a great deal of inventiony and 
some of the poema in his book, such as 'Posada," 
"Jealousy/' and 'The Island of Statues/' are very 
finely conceived. It is impossible to doubt> after 
reading his present volume, that he will some day 
give us work of hi^ import Up to this he has 
been merely trying the strings of his instrument^ 
running over the keys. 

Lady Munster's '"Dorinda" (Hurst and Blade- 
ett) is an exceedingly clever noveL The heroine 
is a sort of well-bom Becky Sharp, only much 
more beautiful than Becky, or at least than Thack- 
eray's portraits of her, which, however, have always 
seemed to me rather ill-natured. I feel sure that 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. Ill 

Mrs. Bawdon Crawley was extremely pretty, and 
I have never understood how it was that Thack* 
eray oould caricature with his pencil so fascinat- 
ing a creation of his pen. In the first diapter of 
Lady Mnnster'e novd we find Dorinda at a fash- 
ionable school, and the sketches of the three old 
ladies who preside over the select seminary are 
very amusing. Dorinda is not very popular, and 
grave suspicions rest upon her of having stolen a 
cheque. This is a startling dibut for a heroine, 
and I was a little afraid at first that Dorinda, after 
undergoing endless humiliations, would be proved 
innocent in the last chapter. It was quite a relief 
to find that Dorinda was gmlty. In fact, Dorinda 
is a kleptomaniac ; that is to say, she is a member 
of the upper classes, who spends her time in col- 
lecting works of art that do not belong to her. 
This, however, is only one of her accomplishments, 
and it does not occupy any important place in the 
story till the last volume is reached. Here we find 
Dorinda married to a Styrian Prince, and living 
in the luxury for which she had always longed. 
Unfortunately, while staying in the house of a 
friend she is detected stealing some rare enamels. 
Her punishment, as described by Lady Munster, is 
extremely severe; and when she finally commits 



112 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

suicide, maddened by the imprisonment to which 
her husband had subjected her, it is diflBcult not 
to feel a good deal of pity for her. Lady Munster 
writes a very clever, bright s^le, and has a won- 
derful faculty of drawing in a few sentences the 
most life-like portraits of social types and social 
exceptions. Sir Jasper Broke and his sister, the 
Duke and Duchess of Cheviotdale, Lord and Lady 
Olenalmond, and Lord Baltimore, are all admir- 
ably drawn. The **novel of high life,** as it used 
to be called, has of late years fallen into disrepute. 
Instead of duchesses in Mayfair, we have philan* 
thropic young ladies in Whitechapel ; and the fash- 
ionable and brilliant young dandies, in whom Dis- 
raeli and Bulwer Lytton took such delight, have 
been entirely wiped out as heroes of Action by 
hard-working curates in the East End. The aim 
of most of our modem novelists seems to be, not 
to write good novels, but to write novels that will 
do good ; and I am afraid that they are under the 
impression that fashionable life is not an edifying 
subject. They wish to reform the morals, rather 
than to portray the manners of their age. They 
have made the novel the mode of propaganda. It 
is possible, however, that ''Dorinda** points to some 
coming change, and certainly it would be a pitj 



80ME LITEEABY NOTES. 113 

if the Mufie of Fiction confined her attention en- 
tirely to the East End. 

The four remarkable women whom Mrs. Walford 
has chosen as the subjects of her 'Tour Biog- 
raphies from Blackwood" (William Blackwood 
and Sons) are Jane Taylor^ Elizabeth Fry, Han- 
nah More, and Mary Somerville. Perhaps it is too 
much to say that Jane Taylor is remarkable. In 
her day she was said to have been 'Imown to four 
continents,^ and Sir Walter Scott described her as 
^among the first women of her time"; but no one 
now cares to read ''Essays in Rhyme/* or 'TDis- 
play/' though the latter is really a very clever novel 
and fuU of capital things. Elizabeth Fry is, of 
course, one of the great personalities of this cen- 
tury, at any rate in the particular sphere to which 
she devoted herself, and ranks with the many un- 
canonised saints whom the world has loved, aud 
whose memory is sweet. Mrs. Walford gives a most 
interesting account of her. We see her first a gay, 
laughing, flaxen-haired girl, "mightily addicted to 
fun,*' pleased to be finely dressed and sent to the 
opera to see the "Prince,** and be seen by him; 
pleased to exhibit her pretty figure in a becoming 
scarlet riding-habit, and to be looked at with ob- 



114 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

vioufl homage by the young officers quartered hard 
by, as she rode along the Norfolk lanes; ''diasi- 
pated'' by simply hearing iheir band play in the 
square, and made giddy by the veriest trifle : ''an 
idle, flirting, worldly girl,*' to use her own words. 
Then came the eventful day when ''in purple boots 
laced with scarlet" she went to hear William Sav- 
ery preach at the Meeting House. This was the 
turning-point of her life, her psychological mo- 
ment, as the phrase goes. After it came the era 
of "thees" and "thous,** of the drab gown and the 
beaver hat, of the visits to Newgate and the con- 
vict ships, of the work of rescuing the outcast and 
seeking the lost Mrs. Walford quotes the follow- 
ing interesting account of the famous interview 
with Queen Charlotte at the Mansion House: — 

"Inside the Egyptian Hall there was a subject 
for Hayter — ^the diminutive stature of the Queen, 
covered with diamonds, and her countenance light- 
ed up with the kindest benevolence; Mrs. Fry, her 
simple Quaker's dress adding to the height of her 
figure — though a little flushed — preserving her 
wonted calmness of look and manner; several of 
the bishops standing near; the platform crowded 
with waving feathers, jewels, and orders; the hall 



SOME LITEBARY NOTES. 116 

lined with spectators, gaily and nobly dad, and 
the centre filled with hundreds of children, brought 
there from their different schools to be examined. 
A mnrmnr of applause ran through the assem- 
blage as the Queen took Mrs. Fry by the hand. The 
murmur was followed by a clap and a shout, which 
was taken up by the multitudes without till it 
died away in the distanca'^ 

Those who regard Hannah More as a prim 
maiden lady of the conventional type, with a 
pious and literary turn of mind, will be obliged to 
change their views should they read Mrs. Walford's 
admirable sketch of the authoress of ^Tercy.^' 
Hannah More was a brilliant wit, a femme d'esprit 
passionately fond of society, and loved by society 
in returiL When the serious-minded little coun- 
try girl, who at the age of eight had covered a 
whole quire of paper with letters seeking to reform 
imaginary depraved characters, and with return 
epistles full of contrition and promises of amend- 
ment, paid her first visit to London, she became 
at once the intimate friend of Johnson, Burke, Sir 
Joshua Beynolds, Oarrick and most of the di^ 
languished people of the day, delighting them by 
her charm, and grace, and wit ^1 dined at the 



116 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

Adelphi yesterday/' she writes in one of her let- 
ters. ^'Oarrick was the very soul of the company, 
and I never saw Johnson in more perfect good- 
humonr. After all had risen to go we stood ronnd 
them for above an hour, laughing, in defiance of 
every rule of decorum and Chesterfield* I believe 
we should never have thought of sitting down, nor 
of parting, had not an impertinent watdmian been 
saucily vociferating. Johnson outstaid them all, 
and sat with me for half-an-hour/' The following 
is from her sister's pen: — 

''On Tuesday evening we drank tea at Sir 
Joshua's with Dr. Johnson. Hannah is certainly 
a great favourite. She wss placed next him, and 
they had the entire conversation to themselves. 
They were both in remarkably high spirits, and it 
was certainly her lucky night; I never heard her 
say so many good things. The old genius was as 
jocular as the young one was pleasant Tou would 
have imagined we were at some comedy had yon 
heard our peals of laughter. They certainly tried 
which could 'pepper the highest,' and it is not clear 
to me that the lexicographer was really the highest 
seasoner." 

Hannah More was certainly, as Mrs. Walford 



SOME LITERABY NOTES. 117 

SAjs, **flie fSted and caxeseed idol of society/' The 
theatie at Bristol vaunted, ''Boast we not a 
More?'' and the learned cits at Oxford inscribed 
their acknowledgment of her authority. Horace 
Walpole sat on the doorstep— or threatened to do 
so— till she promised to go down to Strawberry 
Hill; Foster quoted her; Mrs. Thrale twined her 
arms about her; Wilberforce consulted her and em- 
ployed her. When ''The Estimate of the Beligion 
of the Fashionable World" was published anony- 
mously, "Ant Morus/aut Angelus/' exclaimed the 
Bishop of London, before he had read six pages. 
Of hear village stories and ballads two million copies 
were sold during the first year. "Coelebs in Search 
of a Wife" ran into thirty editions. Mrs. Barbauld 
writes to tell her about ''a good and sensible wo- 
man" of her acquaintance, who^ on being asked 
how she contrived to divert herself in the country, 
replied, "I have my spinning-wheel and my Han- 
nah More. When I have spun one pound of flax 
I put on another, and when I have finished my 
book I begin it again. I want no other amuse* 
ment/* How incredible it all soimds ! No wonder 
that Mrs. Walford exclaims, "No other amuse- 
ment I Good heavens ! Breathes there a man, wo- 
man, or child with soul so quiescent nowadays as 



118 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

to be satisfied with reels of flax and yards of Han- 
mSi More ? Qive us Hannah's company, but not — 
not her writings 1'^ It is only fair to say that Mrck 
Waif ord has thoronghly carried out the views she 
expresses in this paasage, for she gives ua nothing 
of Hannah Mere's grandiloquent literary produo- 
tionsy and yet succeeds in making us know her 
thoroughly. The whole book is well written, but 
the biography of Hannah More is a wonderfully 
brilliant sketchy and deserves great praise. 

Miss Mabel Wotton has invented a new form of 
picture-gallery. Feeling that the visible aspect of 
men and women can be expressed in literature no 
less than through the medium of line and colour, 
she has collected together a series of '^ord-Por- 
traits of Famous Writers'* (Richard Bentley and 
Son), extending from Geoffrey Chaucer to Mrs. 
Henry Wood. It is a far cry from the author 
of the ''Canterbury Tales" to the authoress of ''Eaat 
Lynne"; but, as a beauty, at any rate, Mrs. Wood 
deserved to be described, and we hear of the pure 
oval of her face, of her perfect mouth, her ''dazz- 
ling complexion," and the extraordinary youth by 
which "she kept to the last the freshness of a 
young girl." Many of the "f amoua writers" seem 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 119 

to Iiave been veiy ugly. Thomson, the poet, was 
of a dull countenance^ and a gross^ unanimated, 
uninviting appearance; Bichardfion looked like a 
plump white mouse in a wig.'' Pope is described 
in the Onardian, in 1713^ as a lively little creature^ 
with long arms and legs; a spider is no ill emblem 
of him; he has been taken at a distance for a 
small windmiU/' Charles Eingsley appears as 
''rather tall, very angular, surprisingly awkward, 
with thin staggering legs, a hatchet-face adorned 
with scraggy grey whiskers, a faculty for falling 
into the most ungainly attitudes, and making the 
most hideous contortions of visage and name; with 
a rough provincial accent and an uncouth way of 
speaking, which would be set down for absurd 
caricature on the boards of a comic theatre." 
Lamb is described by Carlyle as 'the leanest of 
mankind; tiny blade breeches, buttoned to the 
knee-cap and no further, surmounting spindle legs 
also in black, face and head fineish, black, bony, 
lean, and of a Jew type rather" ; and Talfourd says 
that the best portrait of him is his own description 
of Braham — ^''a compound of the Jew, the gentie- 
man, and the angel." William Ooodwin was 
"short and stout, his clothes loosely and carelessly 
put on^ and usually old and worn; his hands were 



120 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

generally in his pockets. He had a remarkably 
large bald head and a weak voice, seeming gener- 
ally half asleep when he walked and even wh6n he 
talked/' Lord Charlemont spoke of David Hnme 
aa more like a ^'turtle-eating alderman" than ''a 
refined philosopher/' Mary Bnssell Mitford was 
ill-natnredly described by L. E. L. aa '^Sancho 
Panza in petticoats''; and as for poor Rogers, who 
was somewhat cadaverous, the descriptions given 
of him are quite dreadful. Lord Dudley once 
asked him, ''Why, now that he could afford it, he 
did not set up a hearse?" And it is said that 
Sydney Smith gave him mortal offence by recom- 
mending him "when he sat for his portrait to be 
drawn saying hia prayers^ with his face hidden in 
his hands," christened him the "Death Dandy," 
and wrote underneath a picture of him, "Painted 
in his lifetime." We must console ourselves — if 
not with Mr. Hardy's statement that'^ideal physical 
beauiy is incompatible with mental development, 
and a full recognition of the evil of things" — 
at least with the pictures of those who had some 
comeliness, and grace, and charm. Dr. Qrosait 
says of a miniature of Edmund Spenser, "It ia an 
exquisitely beautiful face; the brow is ample, the 
lips thin but mobile, the eyes a greyish-blue, the 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 121 

hair and beard a golden red (as of 'red monie' of 
flie ballads) or goldenly-chestnui, the nose with 
semi-traiusparent nostrils and keen, the chin firm- 
poisedy the expression refined and delicate." Alto- 
gether just such a ''presentment" of the Poet of 
Beauty as one would have imagined. Antony Wood 
describes Sir Bichard Lovelace as beings at the 
age of sixteen^ "the most amiable and beautiful 
person that ever eye beheld." Nor need we wonder 
at this when we remember the portrait of Love- 
lace that hangs at Dulwich College. Barry Corn- 
wall, described himself by S. C. Hall as "a de- 
cidedly rather pretty little fellow/' said of Eeats: 
"His countenance lives in my mind as one of 
singular beauty and brightness; it had an ezprea- 
sion as if he had been looking on some glorious 
sight." Chatterton and Byron were splendidly 
handsome, and beauty of a high spiritual order 
may be claimed both for Milton and Shellqr> 
though an industrious gentleman lately wrote a 
book in two volumes apparently for the purpose of 
proving that the latter of these two poets had a 
snub nose. Hazlitt once said that "A man's life 
may be a lie to himself and others, and yet a pic- 
ture painted of him by a great artist would prob- 
ably stamp his character." Few of the word- 



122 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

portraits in MiaB Wotton's book can be said 

to have been drawn by a great artist, but 

tiiey are all interesting, and Miss Wot- 

ton has certainly shown a wonderful amount 

of industry in collecting her references and in 

grouping them. It is not a book to be read through 

from b^[inning to end, but it is a delightful book 

to glance at, and by its means one can raise the 

ghosts of the dead, at least as well as the Psychical 

Society can. 

m m m m ^ 

'^n modem life," said Matthew Arnold once, 
''you cannot well enter a monastery; but you can 
enter the Wordsworth Society." I fear that this 
will sound to many a somewhat uninviting descrip- 
tion of this admirable and useful body, whose 
papers and productions have been recently pub- 
lished by Professor Enight, under the title of 
'^Wordsworthiana" (Macmillan and Co.). 'Tlain 
Uving and high thinking" are not popular ideals. 
Most people prefer to live in luxury, and to think 
with the majority. However, there is really noth- 
ing in the essays and addresses of the Wordsworth 
Society that need cause the public any unnecessary 
alarm ; and it is gratifying to note that, although 
the society is still in the first flush of enthusiasm. 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 123 

it has not yet iosiflted upon our admiring Words- 
worth's inferior work. It praises what is worthy 
of praise, reverences what should be reverencedy 
and explains what does not require explanation. 
One paper is quite delightful; it is from the pen 
of Mr. Bawnsley, and deals with such reminiscences 
of Wordsworth as still linger among the peasantry 
of Westmoreland. Mr. Rawnsley grew up, he tells 
us, in the immediate vicinity of the present Poet- 
Laureate's old home in Lincolnshire^ and had been 
struck by the swiftness with which, 

''As year by year the labourer tills 

His wonted glebe, or lops the glades," 

the memories of the poet of the Somersby Wold 
had ''faded from off the circle of the lulls'' — ^had, 
indeed^ been astonished to note how little real in- 
terest was taken in him or his fame, and how sel- 
dom his works were met with in the houses of the 
rich or poor in the very neighbourhood. Accord- 
ingly, when he came to reside in the Lake Coimtry, 
he endeavoured to find out what of Wordsworth's 
memory among the men of the Dales still lingered 
on — ^how far he was still a moving presence among 
them — how far his works had made their way into 



124 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDH. 

the oottagee and farmlioiiaes of the valleys. He 
also tried to discover how far the race of West- 
moreland and Cumberland fann-folk — ^the 'Mat- 
thews" and flie 'Michaels" of the poet, as described 
by him — were real or fancy pictures, or how far 
the characters of the Dalesmen had been altered in 
any remarkable manner by tourist influences dar- 
ing the thirty-two yeaits that have passed since the 
Lake poet waa laid to rest. 

With regard to the latter point, it will be re- 
membered that Mr. Buskin, writing in 1876, said 
that *'the Border peasantry, painted with absolute 
fidelity by Scott and Wordsworth," are as hitherto, 
a scarcely injured race; that in his fields at Conis- 
ton he had men who might have fought with 
Henry V at Agincourt without being distinguish- 
ed from any of his knights; that he could take 
his tradesmen's word for a thousand pounds, and 
need never latch his garden gate; and that he did 
not fear molestation, in wood or on moor, for his 
girl guests. Mr. Bawnsley, however, found that a 
certain beauty had vanished which the simple re- 
tirement of the old valley days fifty years ago gave 
to the men among whom Wordsworth lived. *TTie 
strangers," he says, **with their gifts of gold, their 
vulgarity, and their requirements, have much to 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 126 

answer for/' As for their impreesioiis of Words- 
worth, to imderstand them one mnst understand 
the yemacnlar of the Lake District ''What was 
Mr. Wordsworth like in pereonaJ appearance?" said 
Mr. Bawnsley once to an old retainer, who still 
lives not far from Rydal Mount. ''He was a ngly- 
faaced maif, and a mean liver/' was the answer; 
but all that was really meant was that he was a 
man of marked features, and led a very simple life 
in matters of food and raiment Another old 
man, who believed that Wordsworth "got most of 
his poetry out of Hartley,'' spoke of the poef s wife 
as ''a very onpleasant woman, very onpleasant in- 
deed. A close-fisted woman, thaf s what she was." 
This, however, seems to have been merely a tribute 
to Mrs. Wordsworth's admirable housekeeping 
qualities. 

The first person interviewed by Mr. Bawnsley 
was an old lady who had been once in service at 
Bydal Mount, and was, in 1870, a lodging-house 
keeper at Orasmere. She was not a very imagina- 
tive person, as may be gathered from the following 
anecdote: — ^Mr. Bawnsley's sister came in from a 

late evening walk, and said, "Oh, Mrs. D 1 

have you seen the wonderful sunset?" Hie good 
lady turned sharply round, and, drawing herself 



126 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

tx> her full height^ as if morially offended, an- 
swered: ^^No, mias; Tm a tidy cook, I know, and 
they say a decentiah body for a landlady, but I 
don't know anything about sunsets, and them sort 
of things; they've never been in my line" Her 
reminiscenoe of Wordsworth was as worthy of trar 
dition as it was explanatory, from her point of 
view, of the method in which Wordsworth com- 
posed, and was helped in his labours by his aithu- 
elastic sister. **Well, you know," she said, *^r. 
Wordsworth went humming and booing about, and 
she — ^Miss Dorothy — ^kept close behind him, and 
she picked up the bits as he let 'em fall, and tak' 
'em doon, and put 'em together on paper for him. 
And you may be very well sure as how she didn't 
understand nor make sense out of 'em; and I 
doubt that he didn't know much about them either 
himself; but, howiwer, there's a great many folk 
as do, I daresay." Of Wordsworth's habit of talk- 
ing to himself, and composing aloud, we hear a 
great deal. '^Was Mr. Wordsworth a sociable 
man?" asked Mr. Rawnsley of a Bydal farmer. 
'TVudsworth, for a' he had no pride, nor nowt,'* 
was the answer, 'Vas a man who was quite one to 
hissel, ye kna. He was not a man as folks could 
crack wi', nor not a man as could crack wi' folks. 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 127 

But there was another thing as kep' folk off: he 
had a ter^Ie girt deep voioe^ and ye might see his 
face agaan for long enoff. I've knoan folks — vil- 
lage lads and lasses — coming over by old road 
above, which runs from Orasmere to Bydal, flayt 
a'most to death there by wishing-gaate, to hear the 
girt voice a-groanin' and mutterin' and thnnderin' 
of a still evening. And he had a way of standin' 
quite still, by the rock there in the path under 
Bydal, and folks could hear sounds like a wild 
beast coming from the rocks, and children were 
scared fit to be dead, a'mosf 

Wordsworth's description of himself constantly 
recurs to one: — 

"And who is he with modest looks. 
And clad in sober russet gown? 

He murmurs by the running brooks, 
A music sweeter than their own ; 

He is retired as noontide dew. 
Or fountain in a noonday grove." 

But the corroboration oomes in strange guise. Mr. 
Bawnsley asked one of the Dalesmen about Words- 
worth's dress and habits. This was the reply: — 
''Wudsworth wore a Jem Crow ; never seed him in 



128 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

a boxer in my life; a Jem Crow and an old blue 
cloak was his rig; and as for his habits, he had 
none; never knew him with a pot in his hand, or 
a pipe in his mouth. But he was a great skater, 
for all that— none better in these parts. Why, he 
could cut his own name upon the ice, could Mr. 
Wudsworth.*' Skating seems to have been Words- 
worth's one form of amusement. He was ''over 
feckless with his hands''— could not drive or ride 
— 'Tiadn't a bit of fish in him, and was no moun- 
taineer." But he oould skate. The rapture of the 
time when, as a boy, on Esthwaite^s frozen lake, he 
had 

" ^wheeled about, 

Proud and exulting, like an imtired horse. 
That cares not for his home, and, shod with steel. 
Had hissed along the polished ice," 

was continued, Mr. Bawnsley tells us, into man- 
hood's later day; and Mr. Bawnsley found many 
proofs that the skill the poet had gained, when 

'^Not seldom from the uproar he retired 
Into a silent bay, or sportively 
Glanced sideway, leaving the tumultuous throng. 
To cut across the reflex of a star," 

was of such a kind as to astonish the natives 



SOME LITERARY NOTES. 129 

among whom he dwelt The recollection of a fall 
he once had, when his skate canght on a stone, 
still lingers in the district. A boy had been sent 
to sweep the snow from the White Moss Tarn for 
him. ''Did Mr. Wudfiworth gie ye owt?' he was 
asked, when he returned from his labour. '*Na; 
but I seed him tumble, though,'' was the answer. 
"He was a ter'ble girt skater, was Wudsworth, 
now,'' says one of Mr. Rawnsle/s informants; **he 
would put (me hand in his breast (he wore a frill 
shirt in them days), and t'other hand in his waist- 
band, same as shepherds does to keep their hands 
warm; and he would stand up straight, and swing 
away grandly." 

Of his poetry they did not think much, and 
whatever was good in it they ascribe to his wife, 
his sister, and Hartley Coleridge. He wrote poetry, 
they said, '^because he couldn't help it — ^because it 
was his hobby" — ^f or sheer love, and not for money. 
They could not understand his doing work "for 
nowt," and held his occupation in somewhat light 
esteem because it did not bring in "a deal o' brass 
to the pocket." *T)id you ever read his poetry, or 
see any books about in the farmhouses?" asked 
Mr. Rawnsley. The answer was curious: — "Ay, 
ay, time or two ; but you're well aware that there's 



130 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

poetry and poetry. There's poetry with a little 
bit pleasant in it, and poetry such as a man can 
laugh at or the children nnderstand^ and some as 
takes a deal of mastery to find out whaf s said, 
and a deal of Wudsworth was this sort^ you know. 
Ton could tell from the man's face his poetry 
would never have no laugh in it. His poetry was 
quite different work from little Hartley. Hartley 
would go running along beside the brooks and 
make his, and go in the fust open door, and write 
what he had got upon paper. But Wudsworth's 
poetry was real hard stuff, and bided a deal of 
making, and he'd keep it in his head for long 
enough. Eh, but ifs queer, mon, different ways 
folks has of making poetry now. Not but what 
Mr. Wudsworth didn't stand very high, and was 
a well-spoken man enough." The best criticinn on 
Wordsworth that Mr. Rawnsley heard was this: 
''He was an open-air man, and a great critic of 
trees." 

. There are many useful and well-written essays 
in Professor Ejiight's volume, but Mr. Bawnsley's 
is far the most interesting of all. It gives us a 
graphic picture of the poet as he appeared in out- 
ward semblance and manner to those about whom 
he wrote. 



SOME UTEBAEY NOTES. 131 

'Tiffary MyW (Bemington and Co.) is Mrs. 
Edmondses first attempt at writing fiction. Mrs. 
Edmonds is well known as an authority on modem 
Greek literature^ and her style has often a yery 
pleasant literary fiavour^ though in her dialogues 
she has not as yet quite grasped the difference be- 
tween la langue parlee and la langue Scrite. Her 
heroine is a sort of Nausicaa from Girton^ who 
develops into the Pallas Athena of a provincial 
school. She has her love-romance^ like her Ho- 
meric prototype^ and her Odysseus returns to her 
at the close of the book. It is a nice story. 

Lady Dilke's ''Art in the Modem State'* (Chap- 
man & Hall) is a book that cannot fail to deeply 
interest everyone who cares either for art or for 
history. The ''modem Stated' which gives its title 
to the book is that political and social organisa- 
tion of our day that comes to us from the France 
of Bichelieu and Colbert^ and is the direct out^ 
come of the "Grand Siicle," the true greatness of 
which century^ as Lady Dilke points o\A, consists 
not in its vain wars^ and formal stage and stilted 
eloquence^ and pompous palaces^ but in Ihe f ormar 
Hod. and woi^ing out of the political and social 
system of which these things were the first fraits. 



132 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

To the question that naturally rises on one's lips, 
^'How can one dwell on the art of the seventeenth 
century? — ^it has no charm/' Lady Dilke answers 
that this art presents in its organisation^ from the 
point of view of social polity, problems of the 
highest intellectual interest. Throughout all its 
phases — ^to quote her own words — ^^'the life of 
France wears, during the seventeenth century^ a 
political aspect. The explanation of all changes in 
the social system^ in letters, in the arts, in fashions 
even, has to be sought in the necessities of the po- 
litical position; and the seeming caprices of taste 
take their rise from the same causes which went to 
determine the making of a treaty or the promulga^ 
tion of an edict. This seems all the stranger be- 
cause, in times preceding, letters and the arts, at 
least, appeared to flourish in conditions as far re- 
moved from the action of statecraft as if Ihey had 
been a growth of fairyland. In the Middle Ages 
they were devoted to a virgin image of Virtue; 
they framed, in the shade of the sanctuary, an 
ideal shining with the beauty bom of self-renun- 
ciation, of resignation to self-enforced conditions 
of moral and physical suffering. By the queenly 
Venus of the Renaissance they were consecrated 
to the joys of life, and the world saw Ihat through 



SOME UTEEABY NOTES. 133 

their perfect use men might renew their strength^ 
and behold virtue and beauty with clear eyes. It 
was, however, reserved for the rulers of France in 
the seventeenth century fully to realise the political 
functions of letters and the arts in the modem 
States and their immense importance in connection 
with the prosperify of a commercial nation.'' 

The whole subject is certainly extremely fas- 
cinating. The Benaissance had for its object the 
development of great personalities. The perfect 
freedom of the temperament in matters of art, the 
perfect freedom of the intellect in intellectual mat- 
ters, the fuD development of the individual, were 
tiie things it aimed at* As we study its history we 
find it full of great anarchies. It solved no po- 
litical or social problems; it did not seek to solve 
them. The ideal of the "Grand Sitele," and of 
Bichelieu, in whom the forces of that great age 
were incarnate, was differ^it. The ideas of citizen- 
ship, of the building up of a great nation, of the 
centralisation of forces, of collective action, of 
ethic unily of purpose, came before the world. It 
was inevitable that they should have done bo, and 
Lady Dilke, with her keen historic sense and her 
wonderful power of grouping facts, has told us the 



134 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

stoiy of their Btmggle and tii^ victory. Her book 
is, from every point of view> a most remarkable 
work. Her style is almost French in its deameas^ 
its sobriety^ its fine and^ at times, ascetic sim- 
plicity. The whole gnmnd-plan and inteUectnal 
conception is admirable. 

It is, of conrse, easy to see how much Art lost 
by having a new miasion forced npon her. The 
creation of a formal tradition npon classical lines 
is never without its danger^ and it is sad to find 
tiie provincial towns of France, once so varied and 
individual in artistic expression, writing to Paris 
for designs and advice. And yet, through Colberts 
great centralising scheme of State supervision and 
State aid, France was the one country in Europe, 
and has remained the one country in Europei, 
where the arts are not divorced from industry. The 
Academy of Painting and Sculpture and the 
School of Architecture were not, to quote Lady 
Dilke's words, called into being in order that 
Boyal palaces should be raised surpassing all 
others in magnificence: — ^'^i&vrebache and the 
Savonnerie were not established only that such 
palaces should be furnished more sumptuously 
Ihan those of an Eastern fairy-tale. Colbert did 
not care chiefiy to inquire, when organising art ad- 



SOME LITEBARY NOTES. 135 

minigtratioii^ what were the institutions best fitted 
to foster the proper interests of art; he asked, in 
the first place, what would most contribute to swell 
the national importance. Even, so, in surrounding 
the King with the treasures of luxury, his object 
was twofold — ^their possession should, indeed, illus- 
trate the Crown, but should also be a unique source 
of advantage to the people. Olassworkers were 
brought from Venice, and lacemakers from Flan- 
ders, tiiat they might yield to France the secrets 
of their skill. Palaces and public buildings were 
to afford conmiissions for French artists, and a 
means of technical and artistic education for all 
those employed upon them. The Boyal collec- 
tions were but a further instrument in educating 
the taste and increasing the knowledge of the 
working classes. The costly factories of the Sa- 
vonnerie and the Gobelins were practical schools, in 
which every detail of every branch of all those 
industries which contribute to the furnishing and 
decoration of houses was brought to perfection; 
whilst a band of chosen apprentices were trained 
in the adjoining schools. To Colbert is due the 
honour of having foreseen not only that the inter- 
ests of the modem State were inseparably bound 
up with those of industry, but also that the in- 



136 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

terests of indnstiy could not> without prejudice^ 
be divorced from art/' 

Mr. Bret Harte has never written anything finer 
than ^'Cressy" (Macmillan & Co.). It is (me of 
his most brilliant and masterly productions, and 
will take rank with the best of his Calif omian sto- 
ries. Hawthorne recreated for us the America 
of the past with the incomparable grace of a very 
perfect artist, but Mr. Bret Harte's emphasised 
modernity has, in its own sphere, won equal, or 
almost equal, triumphs. Wit, pathos, humour, 
realism, exaggeration, and romance, are in this 
marvellous story all blended together, and out of 
tiie very clash and chaos of these things comes life 
itself. And what a curious life it is, half civilised 
and half barbarous, naive and corrupt, chivalrous 
and commonplace, real and improbable! Cressy 
herself is the most tantalising of heroines. She 
is always eluding one's grasp. It is difficult to 
say whether she sacrifices herself on the altar of 
romance, or is merely a girl with an extraordinary 
sense of humour. She is intangible, and the more 
we know of her the more incomprehensible she 
becomes. It is pleasant to come across a heroine 
who is not identified with any great cause, and rep- 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 137 

resents no important principle, but is simply a 
wonderful nymph from American backwoods^ who 
has in her something of Artemis, and not a little 
of Aphrodite. 

It is always a pleasure to come across an Ameri- 
can poet who is not national^ and who tries to 
give expression to the literature that he loves rath- 
er than to the land in which he lives. The Mnses 
care so little for geography ! Mr. Bichard Day's 
'Toems*' (Gassell & Co., New York) have nothing 
distinctively American about them. Here and 
tiiere in his verse one comes across a flower that 
does not bloom in our meadows, a bird to which 
our woodlands have never listened. But the spirit 
that animates the verse is simple and human, and 
there is hardly a poem in the volume that English 
lips might not have uttered. '^Sounds of the Tem- 
ple'^ has much in it that is interesting in metre 
as well as in matter: 

'Then sighed a poet from his soul : 

The clouds are blown across the stars, 
And chill have grown my lattice bars ; 
I cannot keep my vigil whole 
By the lone candle of my soul. 



188 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

'' This reed had once devoutest tongue^ 
And sang as if to its small throat 
Ood listened for a perfect note; 
As diarily this lyre was atmng: 
God's praise is slow and has no tongue.' " 

But the best poenr is nndoabtedly the '^ymn to 
the Mountain" : 

'Within the hollow of thy hand— 
This wooded dell half np the height, 
Where streams take breath midway in flights- 
Here let me stand. 

^ere warbles not a lowland bird^ • 
Here are no babbling tongues of men; 
Thy rivers rustling liirough the glen 
Alone are heard. 

''Above^ no pinion cleaves its way. 
Save when the eaglets wing, as now^ 
With sweep imperial shades Ihy brow^ 
Beetling and grey. 

''What thoughts are thine, majestic peak? 
And moods that were not bom to diime 
With poef s ineffectual rhyme 
And numbers weak? 



SOME LITERARY If OTES. 139 

'^Tlie green earth spreads thy gaze before. 
And the unfailing skies are brought 
WithiB the level of thy thought 
There is no more. 

'The stars salute thy nigged crown 
With syllables of twinkling fire; 
Like choral burst from distant choir. 
Their psalm rolls down. 

''And I within this temple niche, 

Like statue set where prophets talk. 
Catch strains they murmur as they walk, 
And I am rich.'' 

Miss Ella Curtis's "A Game of Chance*' (Hurst 
& Blackett) is certainly the best novel that this 
clever young writer has as yet produced. If it 
has a fault, it is that it is crowded with too much 
incident, and often surrenders the study of char- 
acter to the development of plot. Indeed, it has 
many plots, each of which, in more economical 
hands, would have served as the basis of a com- 
plete story. We have as the central incident the 
career of a clever lady's maid, who personifies her 
mistress^ and is welcomed by Sir John Erskine^ aa 



140 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

Engliflh country gentleman^ aa the widow of. his 
dead son. The real hnaband of the adventoreBa 
tracks his wife to England and claims her. She 
pretends that he is insane^ and has him removed. 
Then he tries to murder her, and when she recov- 
ers she finds her beauty gone and her secret dis- 
covered. There is quite enough' seDsatioi> here 
to interest even the jaded ciiy man^ who is said 
to have grown quite critical of late on tiie subject 
of what is really a ttirilling plot. But Miss Curtis 
is not satisfied. The lady's maid has an eztronely 
handsome brother^ who is a wonderful musician, 
and has a divine tenor voice. With him the stately 
Lady Judith falls wildly in love^ and this part 
of the story is treated with a great deal of subtlety 
and clever analysis. However^ Lady Judith does 
not marry her rustic Orpheus^ so the social convert 
ances axe undisturbed. The romance of the Sector 
of the parish^ who falls in love with a charming 
school teacher^ is a good deal overshadowed by 
Lady Judith's story, but it is pleasantly told. A 
more important episode is the marriage between 
the daughter of the Tory squire and the Badical 
candidate for tiie borough. They separate on their 
wedding day, and are not reconciled till the third 
volume. No one could say that Miss Curtis's book 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 141 

is duIL In fact, her sfyle is very bright and amus- 
ing. It is impossible, perhaps, not to be a* litUe 
bewildered by the amount of characters, and by 
the crowded incidents^; but, on the whole, the 
scheme of the construction is dear, and certainly 
the decoration is admirable. 



Miss Caroline Fitzgerald's volume of poems, 
'^enetia Victrix'' (Macmillan ft Co.), is dedicated 
to Mr. Bobert Browning, and in the poem that 
gives its title to the book it is not difficult to see 
traces of Mr. Browning's influence. 'Tenetia Vio- 
trix" is a powerful psychological study of a man's 
soul, a vivid presentation of a terrible, flery-col- 
oured moment in a marred and incomplete life. 
It is sometimes complex antT intricate inr expres- 
sion, but then the subject itself is intricate and 
complex. Plastic simplicity of outline may ren- 
der for us the visible aspects of life; it is differeiit 
when we come to deal with those secrets which 
self-consciousness alone contains, and which self- 
consciousness itself can but half reveal* Actioai 
takes place in the sunlight, but the soul works in 
the dark. 

There is something curiously interesting in the 



142 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

marked tendency of modem poetry ta become ob- 
flcnre. Many critics^ writing with their eyes fixed 
on the masterpieces of past literature^ have as- 
cribed this tendency to wilfulness and to affectar 
tion. Its origin is rather to be found in the com- 
plexity of the new problems^ and in the fact that 
self-consciousness is not yet adequate to explain 
the contents of the Ego. In Mr. Browning's po* 
ems^ ae in life itself which has suggested^ or rather 
necessitated^ the new method, thought seems to 
proceed not on logical lines, but on lines of pas- 
sion. The unity of the individual is being ex- 
pressed through its inconsistencies and its con- 
tradictions. In a strange twilight man is seeking 
for himself, and when he has found his own image 
he cannot understand it. Objective forms of art, 
such as sculpture and the drama, sufficed once for 
the perfect presentation of life; they can no longer 
so suffice. 

The central motive of Miss Caroline Fitzgerald's 
psychological poem is the study of a man who 
to do a noble action wrecks his own soul, sells it 
to evil, and to the spirit of eril. Many martyrs 
have for a great cause sacrificed their physical 
life; the sacrifice of the spiritual life has a more 
poignant and a more tragic note. The story is 



SOME LITEBAEY NOTES. 143 

supposed to be told by a French doctor, sitting at 
his window in Paris one evening: 

'TEIow far off Venice seems to-night ! How dim 
The still-remembered sunsets, with the rim 
Of gold round the stone haloes, where they stand, 
Those carven saints, and look towards the land, 
Bight westward, perched on high, with palm in 

hand. 
Completing the peaked church-front. Oh, how 

dear 
And dark against the evening spl^dour ! Steer 
Between the graveyard island and the quay. 
Where north-winds dash the spray on Venice; see 
The rosy light behind dark dome and tower. 
Or gaunt smoke-laden chimney; mark the power 
Of Nature's gentleness, in use or fall 
Of interlinked beauty, to recall 
Earth's majesty in desecration's place, 
Lending yon grimy pile that dream-like face 
Of evening beauty ; note yon rugged doud. 
Bed-rimmed and heavy, drooping like a shroud 
Over Murano in the dying day. 
I see it now as then — so far away I" 

The face of a boy in the street catches his eye. 
He seems to see in it eome likeness to a dead 



144 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

friend. He begins to thinks and at laat lemem- 
beis a hospital waxd in Venice: 

'''Twas an April day. 
The year Napoleon's troops took Venice— «y 
The twenty-fifth of April. All alone. 
Walking the ward, I heard a sick man moan^ 
In tones so piteons, as his heart wonld break: 
Tjost, lost, and lost again — ^f or Venice* sake I' 
I turned. There lay a man, no longer yoiong. 
Wasted with fever. I had marked, none hung 
About his bed, as friends, with tenderness. 
And when the priest went by, he spared to bless. 
Glancing perplexed — ^perhaps mere sullenness. 
I stopped and questioned: 'What is lost, my 

friend?* 
^y soul is lost, and now draws near the end. 
My soul is surely lost. Send me no priest! 
They sing and solemnise the marriage feast 
Of man's salvation in the house of love. 
And I in Hell, and (xod in Heaven above. 
And Venice safe and fair on earth between — 
No love of mine — ^mere service — for my Queen.' " 

He was a seaman, and the tale he tells the doctor 
before he dies is strange and not a little terrible. 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 145 

Wild rage against a foster-brother who had bit- 
terly wronged him^ and who was one of the ten 
rulers over Venice, drives him to make a mad 
oath Ihat on the day when he does anything for 
his country's good he will give his soul to Satan. 
That night he sails for Dalmatia, and as he is 
keeping the watch, he sees. a phantom boat with 
seven fiends sailing to Venice : 

^T. heard the fiends' shrill cry: Tor Venice* good! 
Bival thine ancient foe in gratitude, 
Then come and make thy home with us in hell !' 
I knew it must be so. I knew the spell 
Of Satan on my soul. I felt the power 
Granted by God to serve Him one last hour. 
Then fall for ever as the curse had wrought. 
I climbed aloft. My brain had grown one thought, 
One hope, one purpose. And I heard the hiss 
Of raging disappointment, loth to miss 
Its prey — ^I heard the lapping of the fiame, 
"Hiat through the blanched figures went and came^ 
Darting in frenzy to the Devil's yell. 
I set that cross on high, and cried : ^To hell 
My soul for ever, and my deed to (Jod I 
Once Venice guarded safe, let this vile clod 
Drift where fate wilL* 



146 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAE WILDE. 

And then (tiie hideouB laugh 
Of fiends in full possession, keen to qnaff 
The wine of one new soni not weak with tears. 
Pealing like ruinous thunder in mine ears) 
I fell, and heard no more. The pale day broke 
Through lazar-windows, when once more I woke, 
Bemembering I might no more dare to pray." 



The idea of the story is extremely powerful, and 
**Venetia Victrix" is certainly the best poem in the 
volume — ^better than "Ophelion," which is vague, 
and than "A Friar's Story,'' which is pretty but 
ordinary. It shows that we have in Miss Fitz- 
gerald a new singer of considerable ability and 
vigour of mind, and it serves to remind us of the 
splendid dramatic possibilities extant in life, which 
are ready for poetry, and unsuitable for the stage. 
What is really dramatic is not necessarily that 
which is fitting for presentation in a theatre. The 
theatre is an accident of the dramatic form. It 
Is not essential to it We have been deluded by 
the name of action. To think is to act 

Of the shorter poems collected her^ this '^Hymn 
to Persephone" is, perhaps, the best: 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 147 

''Oh, fill my cup, Persephone, 
With dim red wine of Spring, 
And drop therein a faded leaf 
Plncked from the autumn's bearded sheaf. 
Whence, dread one, I may quaff to thee 
While all the woodlands ring. 

''Oh, fill my heart, Persephone, 
With thine immortal pain. 
That lingers round the willow bowers 
In memories of old happy hours, 
When thou didst wander fair and free • 

O'er Enna's blooming plain. 

"Oh, fill my soul, Persephone, 
With music all thine own ! 
Teach me some song thy childhood knew. 
Lisped in the meadows' morning dew, 
Or chant on this high windy lea 
Thy godhead's ceaseless moan.'' 

But this 'Venetian Song" also has a good deal 
of charm: 

'^Leaning between carved stone and stone, 
As glossy birds peer from a nest 
Scooped in the crumbling trunk where rest 
Their freckled eggs, I pause alone 



148 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

And linger in the light awhile. 
Waiting for joy to come to me — 

Only the dawn beyond yon isle, 
Only the sunlight on, the 



^T. gaze — ^then turn and ply my loom. 
Or broider blossoms dose beside; 
The morning world lies warm and wide. 
But here is dim, cool, silent gloom. 
Gold crust and crimson velvet pil^ 

And not one face to smile on me — 
Only the dawn beyond yon isle^ 
Only the sunlight on the sea. 

^Over the world the splendours break 
Of morning light aud noontide glow. 
And when the broad red sun sinks low. 
And in the wave long shadows shake. 

Youths, maidens, glad with song and wile. 

Glide and are gone, and leave with me 
Only the dawn beyond yon isle, 
Only the sunlight on the sea." 

'^Darwinism and Politics** (Swan, Sonnenschein 
& Co.), by Mr. David Bitchie, of Jesus College, 
Oxford, contains some very interesting speculations 



SOME LITEBABT NOTES. 149 

on the position and the future of women in the 
modem State. The one objection to the equality 
of the sexes that he considers deserves serious at- 
tention is that made by Sir James Stephen in 
his clever attack on John Stuart Mill. Sir James 
Stephen points out (in '^Liberty, Equality^ Fra- 
ternity/' p. 237) that women may suffer more 
than they have done, if plunged into a nominally 
equal but really unequal contest in the already 
over-crowded labour market. Mr. Bitchie answers 
that, while the conclusion usually drawn from this 
argument is a sentimental reaction in favour of 
the old family ideal, as, for instance, in Mr. Be- 
sanfs books, there is another alternative, and that 
is the resettling of the labour question. ^The ele- 
vation of the status of women and the regulation 
of the conditions of labour are ultimately,'^ he 
says, '^separable questions. On the baas of in- 
dividualism, I cannot see how it is possible to an- 
swer the objections of Sir James Stephen." Mr. 
Herbert Spencer, in his ''Sociology,'' expresses his 
fear that women, if admitted now to political life, 
might do mischief by introducing the ethics of tiie 
family into the State. 'TJnder the ethics of the 
family the greatest benefits must be given where 
the merits are smallest; tmder the ethics of the 



160 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

State the benefits must be proportioiied to the mer- 
its/' In answer to tiu% Mr. Bitdiie asks ^diether 
in any society we have ever seen people so get 
benefits in proportion to their merits, and pro- 
tests against Mr. Spencer's separation of the eth- 
ics of the family from those of the State. If 
something is right in a family, it is difficult to 
see why it is, therefore, without any further reap 
son, wrong in the State. If the participation of 
women in politics means that as a good family edu- 
cates all its members, so must a good State, what 
better issue could there be? The family ideal of 
the State may be difficult of attainment, but as an 
ideal it is better than the polioeman theory. It 
would mean the moralisation of politics. The cul- 
tivation of separate sorts of virtues and separate 
ideals of duty in men and women has led to the 
whole social fabric being weaker and imhealthier 
than it need be. As for the objection that in 
countries where it is considered necessary to have 
compulsory military service for all men, it would 
be unjust and inexpedient that women should have 
a voice in political matters, Mr. Ritchie meets it^ 
or tries to meet it, by proposing that all women 
physically fitted for such purpose should be com- 
pelled to undergo training as nurses, and should 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 151 

be liable to be called upon to aene as nurses in 
time of war. This trainings he remarks, ^Vould 
be more useful to them and to the commimity in 
time of peace than his military training ia to the 
peasant or artisan.^' Mr. Bitchie's little book is 
extremely suggestive^ and full of valuable ideas 
for the philosophic student of sociology. 

Mr. Alan Cole's lecture on 'Irish Lace/' deliv- 
ered recently before the Society of Arts, contains 
some extremely useful suggestions aa to the best 
method of securing an immediate connection be* 
tween the art schools of a country and the coun- 
try's ordinary manufactures. In 1883, Mr. Cole 
was deputed by the Department of Science and 
Art to lecture at Cork and at Limerick <mi the 
subject of lace-making, and to give a' history of 
its rise and development in other countries, as well 
as a review of the many kinds of ornamental pat- 
terns used from the sixteenth century to modem 
times. In order to make these lectures of practi- 
cal value, Mr. Cole placed iypical specimens of 
Irish lace beside Italian, Flemish, and French 
laces, which seem to be the prototypes of the lace 
of Ireland. The public interest was immediately 
aroused. Some of the newspapers stoutly jnain- 



152 THE WHITINGS OP OSCAB WILDE. 

tained that the ornament and patterna of Irish 
laoe were of such a national character that it was 
wrong to asperse them on that score. Others took 
a different view^ and came to the conclusion that 
Irish lace conld be vastly improved in all respects 
if some systematic action could be taken to induce 
the lace-makers to work from more intelligently 
composed patterns than those in general use. There 
was a concensus of opinion that the workmanship 
of Irish laces was good, and that it could be ap- 
plied to better materials than those ordinarily 
used, and that its methods were suited to render 
a greater variety of patterns than those usually 
attempted. 

These and other circumstances seem to have 
prompted the promoters of the Cork Exhibition to 
further efforts in the cause of lace-making. To- 
wards the close of the year 1883 they made fresh 
representations to the Oovemment, and inquired 
what forms of State assistance could be given. A 
number of convents in the neighbourhood of Cork 
were engaged in giving instruction to children un- 
der their care in laoe and crochet-making. At 
aome, rooms were allotted for the use of grown-up 
workers, who made laces under the supervision 
of the nuns. These convents obviously were cen- 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 153 

treB where experimentB in reform could be tried. 
The oonyents, however^ lacked instruction in Ihe 
designing of patterns for laces. An excellent 
School of Art was at work at Oork^ but the stu- 
dents there had not been instructed in special de- 
signing for lace. If the convents, with their work- 
Tooms, could be brought into relation with this 
School of Arty it seemed possible that something 
of a serious character might be done to benefit 
lace-makers, and also to open up a new field in 
ornamental design for the students at the School 
of Art The rules of the Department of Science 
and Art were found to be adapted to aid in meet- 
ing such wants as those sketched out by the pro- 
moters at Cork. As the nuns in the different lace- 
making convents had not been able to attend in 
Cork to hear Mr. Cole^e lectures, they asked that 
he should visit them and repeat them at the con- 
vents. This Mr. Cole did early in 1884, the mas- 
ters of the local sdiools of art accompanying him 
on his visits. Negotiations were forthwith opened 
for connecting the convents with the art schools. 
By the end of 1885 some six or seven different 
lace-making convents had placed themselves in 
connection with Schools of Art at Cork and Water- 
ford. These convents were attended not only by 



164 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

the nim% but by outside pupils also; and, at iiie re- 
quest of the convents^ Mr. Cole has visited them 
twice a year, lecturing and giving advice upon de- 
signs for laoe. The ooroposition of new patterns 
for lace was attempted, and old patterns which had 
degenerated were revised and redrawn for the use 
of the workers connected with the convents. There 
are now twelve convents, Mr. Cole tells ns, where 
instmction in drawing and in the composition of 
patterns is given, and some of the students have 
won some of the higher prizes offered by the De- 
partment of Science and Art for designing lace 
patterns. 

The Cork School of Art then acquired a collec- 
tion of finely patterned old laces, selections from 
which are freely circulated through the different 
convents connected with that school. They have 
also the privilege of borrowing similar specimens 
of old lace from the South Kensington Museum. 
So successful has been the system of education 
pursued by Mr. Brennan, the head master of the 
Cork School of Art, that two female students of 
his school last year gained the gold and Ri'Iver med- 
als for their designs for laces and crochets at 
the national competition which annually takes 
place in London between all the Schools of Art in 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 165 

the TTnited Kingdom. As for the many lace-mak- 
ers who were not connected either with the con- 
vents or with the art schools^ in order to assist 
them a committee of ladies and gentlemen inter- 
ested in Irish lace-making raised suhscriptions, 
and offered prizes to be competed for by designers 
generally. The best designs were then* placed out 
with lace-makers, and carried into execution. It 
is, of course^ often said that the proper person 
to make the design is the lace-maker. Mr. Coles, 
however, points ont that from the sixteenth cen- 
tury forward the patterns for ornamental laces 
have always been designed by decorative artists 
having knowledge of the composition of ornament, 
and of the materials for which they were called 
upon to design. Lace pattern books were published 
in considerable quantity in Italy, France, and Ger- 
many during the sixteenth and seventeentii centu- 
ries, and from these the lace-makers worked. Many 
lace-makers would, no doubt, derive benefit from 
practice in drawing, in discriminating between 
well and badly shaped forms. But the skill they 
are primarily required to show and to develop is 
one of fine fingers in reproducing beautiful forms 
in threads. The conception, arrangement, and 
drawing of beautiful forms for a design have to be 



166 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

undertaken by decorative artists acquainted with 
the limitations of those materials and methods 
which the ultimate expression of the design in- 
volves. 

This lovely Irish art of lace-making is very 
much indebted to Mr. Cole, who has really recre- 
ated it, given it new life, and shown it the true 
artistic lines on which to progress. Hardly £20,000 
a year is spent by England npon Irish laces, and 
almost all of this goes upon the cheaper and com- 
moner kinds. And yet, as Mr. Cole points ont, 
it is possible to produce Irish laces of as high artis- 
tic quality as almost any foreign laces. The Queen, 
Lady Londonderry, Lady Dorothy Nevill, Mrs. Al- 
fred Morrison, and others, have done much to en- 
courage the Irish workers, and it rests largely 
with the ladies of England whether this beautiful 
art lives or dies. The real good of a piece of lace, 
says Mr. Buskin, is ^'that it should show, first, that 
the designer of it had a pretty fancy; next, that 
the maker of it had fine fingers; lastiy, that the 
wearer of it has worthiness or dignity enough to 
obtain what is difficult to obtain, and common 
sense enough not to wear it on all occasions.'' 

«The High-Caste Hindu Woman" (Qeorge Bell 



SOME LITERABY NOTES. 167 

ft Soub) is an interesting book. It is from the 
pen of the Pnndita Bamabai Saxasvati, and the 
introduction is written by Miss Bachel Bodley^ 
M.D., the Dean of the Woman's Medical College 
of Pennsylvania. The story of the parentage of 
this learned lady is very cnrions. A certain Hindu^ 
being on a religions pilgrimage with his family^ 
which consisted of his wife and two danghters^ one 
nine and the other seven years of age, stopped in 
a town to rest for a day or two. One morning, 
the Hindn was batiiing in the sacred river Qoda- 
vari^ near the town, when he saw a fine-looking 
man coming there to bathe, also. After the abln- 
tion and the morning prayers were over, the father 
inquired of the stranger who he was and whence 
he cama On learning his caste, and dan, and 
dwelling place, and also that he was a widower, he 
offered him his little daughter of nine in mar- 
riage. All UiingB were settled in an hour or so; 
next day the marriage was concluded, and the lit- 
tle girl placed in the possession of the stranger, 
who took her nearly nine hundred miles away 
from her home and gave her into the charge of 
his mother. The stranger was the learned Ananta 
Shastri, a Brahman pundit, who had very advanced 
views on the subject of woman's education, and he 



158 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

determined that he would teach hia girl-wife San- 
skrity and give her the intellectual ctdture that 
had been always denied to women in India. Their 
daughter was the Pnndita Ramahai^ who^ after the 
death of her parents, trayelled all over India advo- 
cating the cause of female education^ and to whom 
seems to be due the first suggestion for the estab- 
lishment of the profession of women doctors. In 
1866, Miss Mary Carpenter made a short tour in 
India for the purpose of finding out some way 
by which women's condition in that country might 
be improved. She at once discovered that the chief 
means by which the desired end could be accom- 
plished was by furnishing women teachers for the 
Hindu Zenanas. She suggested that the British 
Government should establish normal schools for 
training women teachers, and that scholarships 
should be awarded to girls in order to prolong 
their school-going period, and to assist indigent 
women who would otherwise be unable to pursue 
their studies. In response to Miss Carpenter's ap- 
peal, upon her return to England, the English 
Government founded several schools for women 
in India, and a few ^^ary Carpenter Scholar- 
ships" were endowed by benevolent persons. These 
schools were open to women of every caste; but 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 159 

while they have imdonbtedly beea of use, they have 
not realised the hopes of their founders, chiefly 
through the impossibiliiy of keeping caste rules in 
them. Bamabai, in a very eloquent chapter, pro- 
posed to solve the problem in a different way. Her 
suggestion is that houses should be opened for 
the young and high-caste child-widows, where they 
can take shelter without the fear of losing their 
caste, or of being disturbed in their religious be- 
lief, and where they may have entire freedom of 
action as regards caste rules. The whole account 
given by the Pundita of the life of the high-caste 
Hindoo lady is full of suggestion for the social 
reformer and the student of progress, and her 
book, which is wonderfully well written, is likely 
to produce a radical change in the educational 

schemes that at present prevail in India. 
« « « « « 

A writer in the Quarterly Review for January, 
1874, says: "No literary event since the war has 
excited anything like such a sensation in Paris as 
the publication of the Lettres d une Inconnue. 
Even politics become a secondary consideration for 
the hour, and academicians or deputies of oppo- 
site parties might be seen eagerly accosting each 
other in the Chamber or the street to imagine who 



160 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

this fascinating and perplexing 'unknown' coiil 1 
be. The statement in the Bevtte des Deux Mondes 
that she was an Englishwoman, moving in bril- 
liant society, was not supported by evidence; and 
M. Blanchard, the painter, from whom the pub- 
lisher received the manuscripts, died most provok- 
ingly at the very commencement of the enquiry, 
and made no sign. Some intimate friends of 
Merim6e, rendered incredulous by wounded self- 
love at not having been admitted to his confidence, 
insisted that there was no secret to tell; their 
hypothesis being that the Incannue was a myth, 
and the letters a romance, in which some petty 
detaila of actual life had been interwoven to keep 
up the mystification.^' But an artist like Merim^ 
would not have left his work in so unformed a 
state, so defaced by repetitiona, or with such a 
want of proportion between the parts. The It^ 
connue was undoubtedly a real person, and her let- 
ters in answer to those of Merim6e have just been 
published by Messrs. Macmillan under the title of 
"An Author's Love.'' 

Her letters? Well, they are such letters as she 
might have written, '^y the tideless sea at Cannes 
on a summer day," says their anonymous author, 
'1 had fallen asleep, and the splashing of the 



SOME LITERARY NOTES. 161 

waves upon tiie shore liad doubtless made me 
dream. When I awoke, the yeHow-paper-covered 
volumes of Prosper Merim^s Letters d une In- 
connue lay beside me; I had been reading the 
book before I fell asleep, but the answers — ^had 
they ever been written, or had I only dreamed?'* 
The invention of tilie love letters of a curious 
and unknown personality, the heroine of one of the 
great literary flirtations of our age, was a clever 
idea, and certainly the author has carried out his 
scheme with wonderful success; with such success, 
indeed, that it is said that one of our statesmen, 
whose name occurs more than once in the volume, 
was for a moment completely taken in by what 
is really a jeu^d'esprit, the first serious joke per- 
petrated by Messrs. Macmillan in their publishing 
capacity. Perhaps it is too much to call it a joke. 
It is a fine, delicate piece of fiction, an imagina- 
tive attempt to complete a real romance As we 
had the letters of the academic Romeo, it was 
obviously right that we should pretend we had tie 
answers of the clever and somewhat mondaine 
Juliet Or is it Juliet herself, in her little Paris 
boudoir, looking over these two volumes with a 
sad, cynical smile? Well, to be put into fiction 
is always a tribute to one's reality. 



162 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

As for extracts from these fajscinating forger- 
ies^ the letters should be read in conjunction with 
those of Merimde himself. It is difficult to judge 
of them by samples. We find the Inconnue first 
in London, probably in 1840. 

'Tattle/' she writes, ''can you imagine the storm 
of indignation you aroused in me by your remark 
that your feelings for me were those suitable for 
a fourteen-year-old niece. Merd. Anything less 
like a respectable uncle than yourself I cannot 
well imagine. The rSle would never suit you, be- 
lieve me, so do not try it 

"Now in return for your story of the phleg- 
matic musician animal who called forth such 
stormy devotion in a female breast, and who, him- 
self cold and indifferent, was loved to the extent 
of a watery grave being sought by his inamorata 
as solace for his indifference, let me ask the ques- 
tion why the women who torment men with their 
imcertain tempers, drive them wild with jealousy, 
laugh contemptuously at their humble entreaties, 
and fiing their money to the winds, have twice the 
hold upon their affections that the patient, long- 
suffering, domestic, frugal Oriseldas have, whose 
existences are one long penance of unsuccessful 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 163 

efforts to please? Answer this comprehensively^ 
and you will have solved a riddle which has puz- 
zled women since Eve asked questions in Parar 
dise/* 

Later on she writes: '^^y should all natures 
he alike? It would make the old saws useless if 
they were^ and deprive us of one of the truest of 
them all, TTariety is the salt of life.* How terribly 
monotonous it would be if all the flowers were 
roses, every woman a queen, and each man a phil- 
osopher! My private opinion is that it takes at 
least six men such as one meets every day to make 
one really valuable one. I like so many men for 
one particular quality which they possess, and so 
few men for all. Comprenez vousf In another 
place: '^Is it not a trifle dangerous, this experi- 
ment we are trying of a friendship in pen, ink, and 
paper? A letter I What thing on earth more 
dangerous to conflde in? Written at blood-heat, 
it may reach its destination when the recipient's 
mental thermometer counts zero, and the burning 
words and thrilling sentences turn to ice and be 
congealed as they are read. A letter ! The most 
uncertain tilling in a world of uncertainties, the 
best or the worst thing devised by mortals.'' Again : 



164 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

**Siirdy it was for yon, men cher, that the deecrip- 
tioD given of a friend of mine waa originally in- 
tended. He ia a trifle cynical, this friend, and 
decidedly pessimistic, and of him it was reported* 
that he never believed in anything until he saw 
it, and then he was convinced that it was an opti- 
cal illusion. The accuracy of the description 
struck me.'' They seem to have loved each other 
best when they were parted. 

^I think I cannot bear it much longer, thia in- 
cessant quarrelling when we meet, and your un- 
kindness during tiie short time that you are with 
me. Why not let it all end? It would be better 
for both of us. I do not love you less when I 
write these words; if you could know the sadness 
which they echo in my heart you would believe 
this. No; I think I love you more, but I cannot 
understand you. Aa you have often said, our 
natures must be very different, entirely different; 
if so, what is this curious bond between them? To 
me you seem possessed with some strange reck- 
lessness and morbid melancholy which utterly 
spoils your life, and in return you never see me 
without overwhelming me with reproaches, if not 
for one thing, for another. I tell you I cannot, 



SOME LITBBABY NOTES. 165 

will not, bear it longer. If you love me^ then in 
God's name cease tormenting me as well as your- 
self with these wretched doubts, and questionings, 
'and complaints. I have been ill, seriously ill, and 
there is nothing to account for my illness save the 
misery of this apparently hopeless state of things 
existing between us. Tou have made me weep 
bitter tears of alternate self-reproach and indigna- 
tion, and finally of complete miserable bewilder- 
ment as to this unhappy condition of affairs. Be* 
lieve me, tears like these are not good to mingle 
with love; they are too bitter, too scorching; ikej 
blister love's wings and fall too heavily on love's 
heart I feel worn out with a dreary sort of 
hopelessness; if you know a cure for pain like 
this, send it to me quickly.'' 

Yet in the very next letter she says to him, 
'^Although I said good-bye to you less than an 
hour ago, I cannot refrain from writing to tell you 
tiiat a happy calm which seems to penetrate my 
whole being seems also to have wiped out all re- 
membrance of the misery and unhappiness whioh 
has overwhelmed me lately. Why cannot it always 
be so, or would life, perhaps, be then too blessed, 
too wholly happy for it to be life? I know tiiat 



166 THE WRITINGS OP OSCAB WILDE. 

yon are free to-night; will yon not write to me, 
that the first words my eyes fall npon to-morrow 
shall prove that to-day has not been a dream? 
YeSy write to me/' The letter that immediately 
follows is one of six words only: 'liet me dream 
— ^let me dream/' 

In the following there are interesting tenches 
of actuality : 

'^d yon ever try a cnp of tea (Ae national 
beverage, by the way) at an English railway sta- 
tion? If you have not, I would advise yon, as a 
friend, to continue to abstain ! The names of the 
American drinks are rather against them; the 
straws are, I think, about the best part of than. 
Yon do not tell me what you think of Mr. Disraeli. 
I once met him at a ball at the Duke of Suther- 
land's, in the long picture gallery of Stafford 
House. I was walking with Lord Shrewsbury, 
and without a word of warning he stopped and in- 
troduced him, mentioning with reckless mendacity 
that I had read every book he had written, and 
admired them all; then he coolly walked off and 
left me standing face to face with the great states- 
man. He talked to me for some time, and I 
studied him carefully. I should say he was a man 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 167 

with one steady aim; endless patience, untiring 
perseverance, iron concentration; marking out one 
strai^t line before him, so unbending, that, despite 
themselyes, men stand aside as it is drawn straight- 
ly and steadily on. A man who belieyes Ihat de- 
termination brings strength, strength brings en- 
durance, and endurance brings success. You know 
how often in his novels he speaks of the influence 
of women, socially, morally, and politically, yet 
his manner was the least interested or deferential 
in talking that I have ever met with in a man 
of his class. He certainly thought this particular 
woman of singularly small account, or else the 
brusque and tactless allusion to his books may, 
perhaps, have annoyed him as it did me; but what- 
ever the cause, when he promptly left me at the 
first approach of a mutual acquaintance, I felt 
distinctly snubbed. Of the two men, Mr. Glad- 
stone was infinitely more agreeable in his manner; 
he left one with the pleasant feeling of measuring 
a little higher in cubic inches than one did be- 
fore, than which I know no more delightful sen- 
sation. A Paris, bientot. 

Elsewhere we find deverly written descriptione 
of life in Italy, in Algiers, at Hombourg, at 



168 THE WHITINGS OP OSCAR WILDE, 

French boexding-housee ; stories about Napoleon 
III, Ouizoty Prince Gtortschakoff, Montalembert, 
and others; political speculations, literary criti- 
cisms, and witty social scandal; and everywhere 
a keen sense of humour, a wonderful power of ob- 
servation. As reconstructed in these letters, the 
Inconnue seems to have been not imlike Merimfe 
himself. She had the same restless, unyielding, 
independent character. Each desired to analyse 
Ae other. Each, being a critic, was better fitted 
for friendship than for love. **We are so differ- 
ent,^' said Merimde once to her, '^hat we can hard- 
ly understand each other.'' But it was because 
they were so alike that each remained a mystery 
to the other. Tet they ultimately attained to a 
high attitude of loyal and faithful friendship, and 
from a purely literary point of view these fictitious 
letters give the finishing touch to the strange ro- 
mance that so stirred Paris fifteen years ago. 
Perhaps the real letters will be published some 
day. When they are, how interesting to oompare 
them! 

'The Bird-Bride," by Graham R. Tbmson 
(Longmans, Green & Co.), is a collection of ro- 
mantic ballads, delicate sonnets, and metrical stud- 



SOME LITEEABY NOTES. 169 

ics in foreign fanciful forms. The poem that gives 
its title to the book is tiie lament of an Eskimo 
hunter oyer the loss of his wife and children. 

''Years agone, on the flat^ white strand, 

I won my sweet sea-girl ; 
Wrapped in my coat of the snow-white f ur, 
I watched the wild birds settle and stir. 

The grey gulls gather and whirl. 

''One, the greatest of all the flock. 

Perched on an ice-floe bare. 
Called and cried as h^ heart were broke. 
And straight tiiey were changed, that fleet bird- 
folk,' 
To women yoimg and fair. 

"Swift I sprang from my hiding-place 

And held the fairest fast; 
I held her fast, the sweet, strange thing: 
Her comrades skirled, but they all took wing. 
And smote me as they passed. 

'1 bore her safe to my warm snow house; 

Pull sweetly there she smiled; 
And yet whenever the shrill winds blew. 
She would beat her long white arms anew, 

And her eyes glanced quick and wild. 



170 THE WBITINGS OP OSCAB WILDE. 

^ut I took her to wif e^ and clothed her warm 
With skins of the gleaming seal ; 
Her wandering glances sank to rest 
When she held a babe to her fair warm breast. 
And she loved me dear and leal. 



'Together we tracked the fox and the seal, 

And at her behest I swore 
That bird and beast my bow might slay 
For meat and for raiment, day by day. 
But never a grey gull more.** 

Famine comes upon the land, and the hunter, 
forgetting his oath, slays four seagulls for food. 
The bird-wife '^shrills out in a woeful cry," and 
taking the plumage of tiie dead birds, she makes 
wings for her children and for herself, and fliea 
away with them. 

** 'Babes of mine, of the wild winds kin. 

Feather ye quick, nor stay. 
Oh, oho I but the wild winds blow t 
Babes of mine, it is time to go : 

Up, dear hearts, and away V 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 171 

''And lo ! the grey plumes covered them all ; 

Shoulder and breast and brow. 
I felt the wind of their whirling flight: 
Was it sea or sky ? was it day or mfjbt? 

It is always night-time now. 

''Dear, will you never relent, come back? 

I loved you long and true. 
winged white wife, and our diildren three. 
Of Ihe wild wind's kin though you surely be. 

Are ye not of my kin too? 

"Ay, ye once were mine, and, till I forget, 

Ye are mine for ever and aye. 
Mine, wherever your wild wings go. 
While shrill winds whistle across the snow 

And the skies are blear and grey.'' 

Some powerful and strong ballads follow, many 
of which, such as "The Cruel Priest," "The Deid 
Folks' Ferry," and "Marchen," are in that curi- 
ous combination of Scotch and Border dialect so 
much affected now by our mode^^ poets. Certain- 
ly dialect is dramatic. It is a vivid method of 
recreating a past that never existed. It is some- 
thing between '*A Betum to Nature" and "A Be- 



172 THE WBITINGS OP OSCAB WILDE. 

turn to the Glossary/' It is so artificial that it is 
really nwive. From the point of view of mere 
musiCy much may be said for it Wonderful di- 
minutives lend new notes of tenderness to the song. 
There are possibilities of fresh rhymes^ and in 
search for a fresh rhyme poets may be excused 
if they wander from the broad high-road of clas- 
sical utterance into devious byways and less trod- 
den paths. Sometimes one is tempted to look on 
dialect as expressing simply the pathos of provin- 
cialisms^ but there is more in it than mere mis- 
pronunciations. With the revival of an antique 
form often comes the revival of an antique spirit. 
Through limitations that are sometimes uncouth, 
and always narrow, comes Tragedy herself; and 
though she may stammer in her utterance, and 
deck herself in cast-off weeds and trammelling rai- 
ment, still we must hold ourselves in readiness 
to accept her, so rare are her visits to us now, 
so rare her presence in an age that demands a 
happy ending from every play, and that sees in 
the theatre merely a source of amusement. 'Hie 
form, too, of the ballad — ^how perfect it is in its 
dramatic unity I It is so perfect that we must 
forgive it its dialect, if it happens to speak in that 
strange tongue. 



SOME LITERABY NOTES. 178 

^Hibea by cam' the bride's company 

With torches burning bright; 
^ak' up^ tak' up your bonny bride 

A' in the mirk midnight P 

''Oh, wan, wan was the bridegroom's f ace. 

And wan, wan waa the bride^ 
But day-cauld was the young mesa-priest 
That stood them two besidel 



''Saying 'Bax me out your hand. Sir Knight^ 
And wod her with this ring:' 
And the deid bride's hand it was so cauld 
As ony earthly thing. 

"The priest he touched that lady's hand. 

And nerer a word he said ; 
The priest he touched that lady's hand. 
And his ain was wet and red I 

"The priest he lifted his ain right hand. 
And the red blood dripped and fell. 
Says, 'I loved ye, lady, and ye loyed me; 
Sae I took your life mysel'.' 



174 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

"Oh ! red, red was the dawn o' day. 

And tall was tiie gallows-tree: 
The Southland lord to his ain has fled. 
And the mess-priest's hangit hie I'' 

Of the sonnets, this to Herodotus is worth 
quoting: 

'Tar-travelled coaster of the midland seas. 

What marvels did those curious eyes behold ! 

Winged snakes, and carven labyrinths of old ; 
The emerald column raised to Heraldes; 
King Perseus' shrine upon the Chemmian leas ; 

Four-footed fishes, decked with gems and gold ; 

But thou didst leave some secrets yet untold. 
And veiled the dread Osirian mysteries. 

'^ut now the golden asphodels among 

Thy footsteps fare, and to the lordly dead 
Thou tellest all the stories left unsaid 

Of secret rites and runes forgotten long. 
Of that dark folk who ate the Lotus-bread 

And sang the melancholy Linus-song." 

Mrs. Tomson has certainly a very refined sense 
of form. Her verse, especially in the series enti- 



SOME LITEBABY NOTES. 



175 



tied ''New Words to Old Tunes," has grace and 
distinctiGn. Some of the shorter poems are, to 
use a phrase made classical by Mr. Pater, 'little 
carved ivories of speech.'' She is one of onr most 
artistic workers in poetiy, and treats language as 
a fine material. 



LITEBABY AND OTHER NOTES. 

Qlie Princess Christian's translation of ''The 
Memoirs of Wilhebnine^ Margravine of Bayreuth" 
(David Stott), is a most fascinating and delight- 
ful book. The Margravine and her brother, Fred- 
erick the Qreaty were^ as the Princess herself points 
ont in an admirably written inixoduction, ''ampng 
the first of those questioning minds that strove 
after spiritual freedom'* in the last century. 'Tbey 
had studied/' says the Princess, ''the English 
philosophers^ Newton, Locke, and Shaftesbury, and 
were roused to enthusiasm by the writings of Vol- 
taire and Bousseau. Their whole lives bore the 
impress of the influence of French thought on the 
burning questions of the day. In the eighteenth 
century began that great struggle of philosophy 
against tyranny and worn-out abuses which cul- 
minated in the French Bevolution. The noblest 
mindB were engaged in the struggle, and, like most 
reformers, they pushed their conclusions to ex- 
tremes, and too often lost sight of the need of a 
177 



178 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

due proportion in things. Tlie Margravine^s influ- 
ence on the intellectaal development of her ootin- 
try is untold. She formed at Bayrenth a centre 
of culture and learning which had before been 
undreamt of in Qermany." 

The historical value of these '^Memoirs'' is, of 
course^ well known. Carlyle speaks of them as be- 
ing '% far the best authority^ on the early life 
of Frederick the Qreat But considered merely aa 
the autobiography of a clever and charming wom- 
an^ they are no less interesting, and even those who 
care nothing for eighteenth-century politics, and 
look upon history itself as an unattractive form of 
fiction, cannot fail to be fascinated by the Mar- 
gravine's wit, vivacity, and humour, by her keen 
powers of observation, and by her brilliant and 
assertive egotism. Not that her life was by any 
means a happy one. Her father, to quote the Prin- 
cess Christian, '^ruled his family with the same 
harsh despotism with which he ruled his country, 
taking pleasure in making his power fdt by all 
in the most galling manner,'' and the Margravine 
and her brother '^had much to suffer, not only 
from his ungovernable temper, but also from the 
real privations to which they were subjected.'' 
Indeed, the picture the Margravine gives of the 



LITEBABY AND OTHER NOTES. 179 

King is quite extraordinajy. *'He despised all 
leaming/' she writes, '^and wished me to occupy 
myself with nothing but needlework and household 
duties or details. Had he found me writing or 
reading, he would probably have whipped me. He 
considered music a capital offence, and maintained 
that every one should devote himsdf to one object: 
men to the militaiy service, and women to their 
household duties. Science and the arts he counted 
among the seven deadly sins.'' Sometimes he took 
to religion, ''and then,'' says the Margravine, '^we 
lived like Trappists, to the great grief of my 
brother and myself. Every afternoon the King 
preached a sermon, to which we had to listen as 
attentively as if it proceeded from an Apostle. 
My brother and I were often seized with sudi 
an intense sense of the ridiculous, that we burst 
out laughing, upon which an apostolic curse was 
poured out on our heads, which we had to accept 
with a show of humility and penitence." Econ- 
omy and soldiers were his only topics of conver- 
sation; his chief social amusement was to make his 
guests intoxicated; and as for his temper, the ac- 
counts the Margravine gives of it would be almost 
incredible if they w^e not amply corroborated 
from other sources. Suetonius has written of the 



180 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

strange madness that comes on kings, but eren 
in his melodramatic chronicles tiiere is hardly any- 
thing that rivals what the Margravine has to tell 
vs. Here is one of her pictures of family life at 
a Boyal Court in the last century, and it is not 
by any means the worst scene she describes: 

^On one occasion, when his temper was more 
than usually bad, he told the Queen that he had 
received letters from Anspach, in whidi the Mar- 
grave announced his arrival in Berlin for the be- 
^[inning of May. He was coming there for the 
purpose of marrying my sister, and one of his 
Ministers would arrive previously with the be- 
trothal ring. My father asked my sister whether 
she were pleased with the prospect, and how she 
would arrange her household. Now, my sister had 
always made a point of telling him whatever came 
into her head, even the greatest home-truths, and 
he had never taken her outspokenness amiss. On 
this occasion, therefore, relying on former experi- 
ence, she answered him as follows : 'Wh^ I have 
a house of my own. I shall take care to have a 
well appointed dinner table, better than yours is; 
and if I have children of my own, I shall not 
plague them as you do yours, and force them to 



MTEBABY AND OTHER NOTES. 181 

eat things they thoroug^y dislike.' ^What is amiss 
with my dinner table ?* the King enquired^ getting 
very red in the face. Ton ask what is the matter 
with it?* my sister replied, ^here is not enough 
on it for ns to eat> and what there is is cabbage 
and carrots, which we detest' Her first answer 
had already angered my father, but now he gave 
vent to his fory. But instead of punishing my 
sister, he poured it all on my mother, my brother, 
and myself. To begin with, he threw a plate at 
my brother's head, who would have been struck 
had he not got out of the way; a second one he 
threw at me, which I also happily escaped; then 
torrents of abuse followed thase first signs of hos- 
tility. He reproached the Queen with having 
brought up her children so badly. ?ou will curse 
your mother,' he said to my brother, 'for having 
made you such a good-for-nothing creature.' • • • 
As my brother and I passed near him to leave the 
room he hit out at us with his crutdu Happily, 
we escaped the blow, for it would certainly have 
struck us down, and we at last escaped without 
harm." 

Yet, as the Princess Christian remarks, '^despite 
the almost cruel treatment Wilhelmine received 



182 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

from her father^ it is noticeable that throughoat 
her Ifemoira' she speaks of him with the greatest 
affection. She makes constant reference to hia 
'good hearty' and that hia faults Vere more those 
of temper ihan of nature.' Nor could all Ihe mia- 
ery and wretchedness of her home life dull the 
brightness of her intellect What would have made 
others morbid made her satirical. Instead of weep- 
ing over her own personal tragedies, she laugfaa 
at the general comedy of life. Here, for instance^ 
is her description of Peter the Qreat and his wife, 
who arrived at Berlin in 1718: 

''The Czarina was small, broad, and brown*look- 
ing, without the slightest dignity or appearance. 
You had only to look at her to detect her low ori- 
gin. She might have passed for a Gterman actress, 
she had decked herself out in such a manner. Her 
dress had been bought second-hand, and was 
trimmed with some dirty-looking silver embroid- 
ery; the bodice was covered with precious stones, 
arranged in such a manner as to represent the 
double eagle. She wore a dozen Orders, and round 
the bottom of her dress hung quantities of relics 
and pictures of saints, which rattled when she 
walked, and reminded one of a smartly harnessed 



LITEEABY AND OTHEB NOTES. 183 

mule. The Orders^ too, made a great noise^ knock- 
ing against each other. 

'The Czar^ on the other hand, was tall and 
well grown^ with a handsome face; but his expres- 
sion was coarse^ and impressed one with fear. He 
wore a simple sailor's dress. His wife, who spoke 
German very badly^ called her Court jester to her 
aid. and spoke Russian with her. This poor crea- 
ture was a Princess Gallitzin^ who had been obliged 
to undertake this sorry office to save her life^ as 
she had been mixed up in a conspiracy against 
the Czar^ and had twice been flogged with the 
knout I 

''The following day the Czar visited aU the 
sights of Berlin^ amongst others the very curious 
collection of coins and antiques. Amongst these 
last named was a statue representing a heathen 
god. It was anything but attractivCy but was the 
most valuable in the collection. The Czar admired 
it very much, and insisted on the Czarina kissing 
it On her refusing, he said to her, in bad Ger- 
man, that she should lose her head if she did not 
at once obey him. Being terrified at the Czax^s 
anger, she immediately complied without the least 
hesitation. The Czar asked the King to give him 
this and other statues, a request which he could 



184 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

not refuse. The same thing happened aboat a 
cupboard, inlaid with amber. It waa the only one 
of its kind, and had cost King Frederick I an 
enormous sum, and the consternation was general 
(m its having to be sent to Petersburg. 

'This barbarous Court happily left after two 
days. The Queen rushed at once to Monbijou, 
which she found in a state resembling tiiat of the 
fall of Jerusalem. I never saw such a sight 
Everything was destroyed, so that the Queen was 
obliged to rebuild the whole house." 

Nor are the Margravine's descriptiona of her re- 
ception as a bride in the principality of Bayrentii 
less amusing. Hof was the first town she came 
to, and a deputation of nobles was waiting theije 
to welcome her. This is her accoxmt of them : 

'Their faces would have frightened little diil- 
dren, and, to add to their beauty, they had ar- 
ranged their hair to resemble the wigs 13iat were 
then in fashion. Their dresses clearly denoted the 
antiquity of their families, as they were composed 
of heirlooms, and were cut accordingly, so that 
most of them did not fit In spite of their cos- 
tumes being the 'Court Dresses,' the gold and sil* 
ver trimmings were so black that you had* a difll- 



LITERABY AND OTHER NOTES. 185 

ctlij in making out of wliat thev were made. The 
manneiB of these nobles suited their faces and 
their clothes. They might have passed for peas- 
ants. I could scarcely restrain my laughter when 
I first beheld these strange figures. I spoke to 
each in tnm^ but none of them xmderstood what I 
said^ and their replies sounded to me like Hebrew, 
because the dialect of the Empire is quite differ- 
ent from that spoken in Brandenburg. 

'The clergy also presented themselves. These 
were totally different creatures. Boimd their necks 
they wore great ruffs, which resembled washing- 
baskets. They spoke very slowly, so that I might 
be able to understand them better. They said the 
most foolish things^ and it was only with much 
difficulty that I was able to prevent myself from 
laughing. At last I got rid of all these people, 
and we sat down to dinner. I tried my best to 
converse with those at table, but it was useless. 
At last I touched on agricultural topics, and then 
they began to thaw. I waa at once informed of 
all their different farmsteads and herds of cattle. 
An almost interesting discussion took place as to 
whether the oxen in the upper pert of the country 
were fatter than those in the lowlands. 

'1 was told that, as the next day was Sunday, 



186 THE WBITINQS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

I must spend it at Hof, and listen to a sennon. 
Never before had I heard sudi a sermon I The 
clergyman began by giving ns an accoant of all 
the marriages that had taken place from Adam's 
time to that of Noah. We were spared no detail^ 
so that the g^tlemen all laughed and tiie poor lar 
dies blushed. The dinner went off as on tiie piev- 
ious day. In the afternoon all the ladies came 
to pay me their respects. Oracions heavens! what 
ladies^ too I They were all as ugly as the gentle- 
men, and their head-dresses were so corions tiiat 
swaUows might have built iheir nests in them I" 

As for Bayrenthy and its pretty Conrt> the pic- 
ture she gives of it is exceedingly cnrions. Her 
father-in-law, the reigning Margrave, was a nar- 
row-minded mediocrity, whose conversation "re- 
sembled that of a sermon read aloud for the pur- 
pose of sending the listener to sleep/' and who had 
only two topics, 'Telemachus, and Amelot de la 
Houssaye's 'Boman History/** The Ministers, 
from Baron von Stein, who always said ''yes" to 
everything, to Baron von Voit, who always said 
''no,'* were not by any means an intellectual set 
of men. ^'Their chief amusement,*' says the Mar- 
gravine, "was drinking from morning till nighty 



LITERABY AND OTHEB NOTES. 187 

and horses and cattle were all they talked about" 
The palace itself was shabby^ decayed, and dirty. 
^T, was like a lamb among wolves/' cries the poor 
Margravine; ^T, was settled in a strange country, 
at a Court which more resembled a peasant's farm, 
surrounded by coarse, bad, dangerous, and tire* 
some people/* 

Yet her esprit never deserted her. She is al- 
ways clever, witiy, and entertaining. Her stories 
about the endless squabbles over precedence are ex- 
tremely amusing. Tlie society of her day cared 
very little for good manners, knew, indeed, very 
little about them, but all questions of etiquette 
were of vital importance, and the Margravine her- 
self, though she .saw the shallowness of the whole 
system, was far too proud not to assert her rights 
when circumstances demanded it, as the descrip- 
tion she gives of her visit to the Empress of (Ger- 
many shows very clearly. When this meeting was 
first proposed the Margravine declined positively 
to entertain the idea. 'There was no precedent,'* 
she writes, ''of a Icing's daughter and an Empress 
having met, and I did not know to what rights I 
ought to lay claim." Finally, however, she is in- 
duced to consent, but she lays down three condi- 
tions for her reception: 



188 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

^1 desired, first of all, that the Empress's Court 
should reoeiye me at the foot of the stairs; sec- 
ondly, that she should meet me at the door of her 
bedroom; and tiiirdly, that she should offer me an 
armchair to sit (m. 

'^They disputed all day over tiie conditions I 
had made. The first two were granted me, but all 
that oould be obtained with respect to the tiiird 
was that the Empress would use quite a small aim- 
chair, whilst she gave me a chair. 

^^ext day I saw this Boyal personage. I own 
that had I been in her place I would have made 
all the rules of etiquette and ceremony the excuse 
for not being obliged to appear. Hie Empress 
was small and stout, round as a ball, very ugly, 
and without dignity or manner. Her mind corre- 
sponded to her body. She was terribly bigoted, 
and spent her whole day praying. The old and 
ugly are generally the Almighty's portion. She 
received me trembling all over, and was so upset 
that she oould not say a word. 

^' After some silence I b^an the oonverBation 
in French. She answered me in her Austrian dia- 
lect that she could not speak that language, and 
begged I would speak in Oerman. The conyersa- 
tion did not last long, for the Austrian and low 



LITERABY AND OTHEB NOTES. 189 

Saxon tongues are so different from each other 
that to those acquainted with only one the other is 
unintelligible. ThiB is what happened to ns. A 
third person would have laughed at our misunder- 
standings^ for we caught only a word here and 
there^ and had to guess the rest. The poor Em- 
press was such a slave to etiquette that she would 
have thought it high treason had she spoken to me 
in a foreign language, though she understood 
French quite welL" 

Many other extracts might be given from this 
delightful book^ but from the few that have been 
selected some idea can be formed of the vivacity 
and picturesqueness of the Margravine's style. As 
for her character^ it is very well summed up by 
the Princess Christian^ who^ while admitting that 
she often appears almost heartless and inconsider- 
ate, yet claims that> ''taken as a whole, she stands 
out in marked prominence among the most gifted 
women of the eighteenth century, not only by her 
mental powers, but by her goodness of heart, her 
self-sacrificing devotion, and true friendship/* An 
interesting sequel to her ''Memoirs" would be her 
correspondence with Voltaire, and it is to be hoped 
that we may shortly see a translation of these let- 



190 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

ten from the same accomplished pen to wliich we 
owe the present volnme. 

^^omen's Voices'' (Walter Scott) is an anthol- 
ogy of the most diaracteristic poems by Bnglinh, 
Scotch^ and Irish women, selected and arranged 
by Mrs. William Sharp. '"The idea of making this 
anthology/' says Mrs. Sharp, in her preface^ ^aroee 
primarily from ihe conviction that our women 
poets had never been collectively represented with 
anything like adequate justice; that the works of 
many are not so widely known as they deserve to 
be; and that at least some fine fugitive poetry 
conld be thus rescued from oblivion"; and Mrs. 
Sharp proceeds to daim that ''the selections will 
further emphasise the value of wom^i's work in 
poetry for those who are already well acquainted 
with English literature, and that they tHU con- 
vince many it is as possible to form an anthology 
of 'pure poetry' from the writings of women as 
from those of men." It is somewhat difficult to 
define what "pure poetry" really is, but the collec- 
tion is certainly extremely interesting, extending, 
as it does, over nearly three centuries of our litera- 
ture. It opens with 'TRevenge," a poem by "the 
learned, virtuous, and truly noble ladi^" Elizabeth 



LITEBAEY AND OTHEB NOTES. 191 

Carew, who published a 'Tragedie of Mariam, the 
Faire Qneene of Jewry/' in 1613, from which 
'^erenge'' is taken. Then come some pretty verses 
by Margaret, Duchess of Newcastle, who produced 
a volume of poems in 1673. They are supposed 
to be sung by a sea goddess, and their fantastic 
charm and the graceful wilfulness of their fancy 
are well worthy of note, as these first stanzas show : 

'If y cabinets are oyster-shells. 
In which I keep my Orient pearls; 
And modest coral I do wear, 
Which bluahes when it touches air. 

''On silvery waves I sit and sing, 
And then the fish lie listening; 
Then resting on a rocky stone, 
I comb my hair with fishes' bone; 

''The whilst Apollo with his beams 
Doth dry my hair from soaking streams, 
His light doth glaze the water's face 
And make the sea my looking-glass." 

Then follow '^Friendship's Mystery," by ''The 
Matchless Orinda," Mrs. Katharine Philips; a 



192 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

"Song/' by Mrs. Aphra Bdm, ttie firet English- 
woman who adopted literature as a profession; and 
the Countess of Winchelsea's 'Nocturnal Reverie.*' 
Wordsworth once said that, with the exception of 
this poem and Pope's 'Windsor Forest/' the po- 
etry of the period intervening between '^Paradise 
Lost" and ^The Seasons" does not contain a single 
new image of external Nature^ and though the 
statement is hardly accurate^ as it leaves Oay en- 
tirely out of account^ it must be admitted that the 
simple naturalism of Lady Winchelsea's descrip- 
tion is extremely remarkable. Passing on through 
Mrs. Sharp's collection, we come across poems by 
Lady Grisell Baillie; by Jean Adame^ a poor serv- 
ing-maid in a Scotch manse, who died in the 
Greenock Workhouse; by Isobel Pagan^ an Ayr- 
shire *1ucky/' who kept an alehouse, sold whisky 
without a license, and sang her own songs as a 
means of subsistence; by Mrs. Tlirale, Dr. John- 
son's friend ; by Mrs. Hunter, the wife of the great 
anatomist; by the worthy Mrs. Barbauld; and by 
the excellent Mrs. Hannah More. Here are Miss 
Anna Seward, called by her admirers 'The Swan 
of Lichfidd/' who was so angry with Dr. Darwin 
for plagiarising some of her verses; Lady Anne 
Barnard, whose *'Auld Robin Gray" was described 




Uscar Wilde, ^Esthetic Period, 1884. 
Page 1»3 



J »' »:•• \ i' 



M . 












LITEBABY AND OTHEB NOTES. 193 

by Sir Walter Scott as "worth all the dialogues 
Corydon and Phyllis have together spoken from 
the days of Theocritus downwards" ; Jean Glover, 
a Scottish weaver's daughter, who married a stroll- 
ing player, and became the best actor and singer 
of the troupe; Joanna Baillie, whose tedious drar 
mas thrilled our grandfathers ; Mrs. Tighe, whose 
'^Psyche*' was very mudi admired by Keats in his 
youthful days; Frances Kemble, Mrs. Siddons* 
niece; poor L. E. L., whom* Disraeli described as 
"the personification of Brompton, pink satin dress, 
white satin shoes, red cheeks, snub nose, and her 
hair d la Sappho'^ ; the two beautiful sisters, Lady 
DufiFerin and Mrs. Norton; Emily Bronte, whose 
poems axe instinct with tragic power, and quite 
terrible in their bitter intensity of passion, the 
fierce fire of feeling seeming almost to consume the 
raiment of form; Eliza Cook, a kindly, vulgar 
writer; George Eliot, whose poetry is too abstract, 
and lacks all rhythmical life; Mrs. Carlyle, who 
wrote much better poetry than her husband, 
thongh this is hardly high praise ; and Mrs. Brown- 
ing, the first really great poetess in our literature. 
Nor are contemporary writers forgotten. Chris* 
tina Bossetta, some of whose poems are quite price- 
less in their beauty; Mrs. Augusta Webster, Mrs. 



194 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

Hamilton Eing^ Miss Mary Bobinaon, Mn. Craik ; 
Jean Ingelow, whose sonnet on ^'A Chess-King'' 
is like an exquisitely carved gem; Mrs. Pfdffer; 
Miss May Frobyn, a poetess with the true lyrical 
impulse of song, whose work is as delicate as it 
is delightful ; Mrs. Nesbit, a very pure and perfect 
artist; Miss Rosa Mulholland, Miss Elatharine Ty- 
nan^ Lady Charlotte Elliot^ and many other wdl- 
known writers, are duly and adequately represent- 
ed. On the whole, Mrs. Sharp's collection is very 
pleasant reading indeed, and the extracts given 
from the works of living poetesses are extremely 
remarkable, not merely for their absolute artistie 
exceUenee, but also for the light they throw upon 
the spirit of modem cultura 

It is not, however, by any means a complete 
anthology. Dame Juliana Bemers is possibly too 
antiquated in style to be suitable to a modem audi- 
ence. But where is Anne Askew, who wrote a 
ballad in Newgate; and where is Queen Elizabeth, 
whose "most sweet and sententious ditty" on Mary 
Stuart is so highly praised by Puttenham as an 
example of '^Exargasia," or The Gorgeous in lit- 
erature? Why is the Countess of Pembroke ex- 
cluded ? Sidney's sister should surely have a place 
in any anthology of English verse. Where is Sid- 



MTEBABY AND OTHEB NOTES. 196 

ne/s niece, Lady Mary Wroth, to whom Ben Jon- 
son dedicated the ''Alchemist'? Where is "the 
noble ladie Diana PrimroBe/' who wrote "A Chain 
of Pearl, or a memorial of ihe peerless grace and 
heroic virtues of Qneen Elizabeth, of glorious 
memory"? Where is Mary Morpeth, the friend 
and admirer of Drummond of Hawthomden? 
Where is tiie Princess Elizabeth, daughter of 
James I; and where is Anne Eilligrew, maid of 
honour to the Duchess of York ? The Mardiioness 
of Wharton, whose poems were praised by Waller; 
Lady Chudleigh, whose lines banning — 

'^ife and servant are the sam^ 
But only differ in the name/' 

are very curious and interesting; Bachaal Lady 
Bussell, Constantia Orierson, Mary Barber^ Lsetitia 
PiUdngton; Eliza Haywood, whom Pope honoured 
by a place in the '^unciad"; Lady Luxborough, 
Lord Bolingbroke's half-sister; Lady Mary Wort- 
ley Montagu; Lady Temple, whose poems were 
printed by Horace Walpole; Perdita, whose lines 
on the snowdrop are very pathetic; the beautiful 
Duchess of Devonshire, of whom Gibbon said that 
"she was made for something better than a Duch- 



196 THE WRITINGS OP OSCAB WILDE. 

eas"; Mrs. Batcliffe, Mrs. Chapone, and Amelia 
Opie, all deserve a place on historical, if not on 
artistic grounds. In fact, the space given by Mrs. 
Sharp to modem and living poetesses is somewhat 
disproportionate^ and I am sure that those on 
whose brows the laurels are still green would not 
grudge a little room to those the green of whose 
laurels is withered and the music of whose lyres 
is mute. 

One of the most powerful and pathetic novels 
that have recently appeared is "A Village Trag- 
edf (Bentley & Son), by Margaret L. Woods. 
To find any parallel to this lurid little story one 
must go to Dostoieffski, or to Guy de Maupassant. 
Not that Mrs. Woods can be said to have taken 
either of these two great masters of fiction as her 
model, but there i» something in her work that 
recalls their method ; she has not a little of their 
fierce intensity, their terrible concentration, their 
passionless yet poignant objectivity; like them, she 
seems to allow life to suggest its own mode of pre- 
sentation; and, like them, she recognises that a 
frank acceptance of the facts of life is the true 
basis of all modem imitative art The scene of 
Mrs. Woods' story lies in one of the villages near 



LITEBAEY AND OTHER NOTES. 197 

Oxford; the characterB are very few in number, 
and the plot is extremely simple. It ie a romance 
of modem Arcadia — a tale of the love of a farm 
labourer for a girl who, though slightly above him 
in social station and education, is yet herself also 
a servant on a farm. True Arcadians they are, 
both of them, and their ignorance and isolation 
only serve to intensify the tragedy that gives the 
story its title. It is the fashion nowadays to label 
literature, so, no doubt, Mrs. Woods' novel will 
be spoken of as ^^realistic" Its realism, however, 
is the realism of the artist, not of the reporter; 
its tact of treatment, subtlety of perception, and 
fine distinction of style, make it rather a poem 
than a procis-vefial; and though it lays bare to us 
the mere misery of life, it suggests something of 
life's mystery also. Very deUcate, too, is the hand- 
ling of external Nature There are no formal 
guide-book descriptions of scenery, nor anything 
of what Byron petulantly called ^'twaddling about 
trees," but we seem to breathe the* atmosphere bf 
the country, to catch the exquisite scent of the 
beanfields, so familiar to all who have ever wan- 
dered through the Oxfordshire lanes in June; to 
bear the birds singing in the thicket, and the sheep- 
bells tinkling from the hill. Characterisation, that 



198 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

enemy of literary form^ is such an essential part 
of the method of the modem writer of fiction, that 
Nature haa almost beoome to the noydiat what 
light and shade are to the painter — ^the one penni^ 
nent element of style; and if the power of "A Vil- 
lage Tragedy^' be due to its portrayal of human 
life, no small portion of its charm comes from its 
Theocritean setting. 

It is, however, not merely in fiction and in poetry 
that the women of this century are making their 
mark. Their appearance amongst the prominent 
speakers at the Church Congress, some wedca ago, 
was in itself a very remaricable proof of the grow* 
ing influence of women's opinions on all mattere 
connected with the elevation of our national life, 
and the amelioration of our social conditions. 
When the Bishops left the platform to their wives, 
it may be said that a new era began, and the 
change will, no doubt, be productive of much good. 
The Apostolic dictum that women should not be 
suffered to teach, is no longer applicable to a 
society such as ours, with its soUdarity of inter- 
ests, its recognition of natural righta, and its 
imiversal education, however suitable it may have 
been to the Greek cities under Roman rule. Noth- 



LITEBABY AND OTHEE NOTES. 199 

ing in the United States struck me more than the 
fact that the remarkable intellectual progress of 
that country is very largely due to the efforts of 
American women, who edit many of the most pow- 
erful magazines and newspapers, take part in the 
discussion of every question of public interest, and 
exercise an important influence upon the growth 
and tendencies of literature and art. Indeed, the 
women of America are the one class in the com- 
munity that enjoys that leisure which is so neces- 
sary for culture. The men are, sb a rule, so ab- 
sorbed in business that the task of bringing some 
element of form into the chaos of daily life is left 
almost entirely to the opposite sex, and an eminent 
Bostonian once assured me that in the twentieth 
century the whole culture of his country would 
be in petticoats. By that time, however, it is 
probable that the dress of the two sexes will be 
assimilated, as similarity of costume always follows 
similarity of pursuits. 

In a recent article in La France, M. Sarcey puts 
this point very well. The furiher we advance, he 
says, the more apparent does it become that women 
are to take their share as bread-winners in the 
world. The task is no longer monopolised by the 



200 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

men, and will, perhaps^ be equally shared by the 
fiexea in another hundred years. It will be necea- 
sary, howeyer, for women to invent a suitable 008- 
tume^ as their present style of dress is quite inap- 
propriate to any kind of mechanical labour, and 
must be radically changed before they can com- 
pete with men upon their own ground. As to the 
question of desirability, M. Sarcey refuses to speak. 
'? shall not see the end of this revolution,'' he 
remarks, ^and I am glad of if But, as is pointed 
out in a very sensible article in the Daily News, 
there is no doubt that M. Sarcey has reason and 
common sense on his side with regard to the abso- 
lute unsuitability of ordinary feminine attire to 
any sort of handicraft, or even to any occupation 
which necessitates a daily walk to business and 
back again in all kinds of weather. Women's dress 
can easily be modified and adapted to any exi* 
gencies of this kind; but most women refuse to 
modify or adapt it. They must follow the fashion, 
whether it be convenient or the reverse. And, after 
all, what is a fashion? From the artistic point 
of view, it is usually a form of ugliness so intol* 
erable that we have to alter it every six montiia. 
From the point of view of science it not infre- 
quently violates every law of health, every princi- 



LITEBABY AND OTHER NOTES. 201 

pie of hygiene. While from the point of view 
of simple ease and comfort^ it is not too much 
to say that, with the exception of M. Felix's 
charming teagowns, and a few English tailor-made 
costumes, there is not a single form of really 
fashionable dress that can be worn without a cer- 
tain amount of absolute misery to the wearer. The 
contortion of the feet of the Chinese beauty, said 
Dr. Naftel, at the last International Medical Con- 
gress^ held at Washington, is no more barbarous or 
unnatural than the panoply of the femme da 
monde. 

And yet how sensible is the dress of the London 
milkwoman, of the Irish or Scotch fishwife, of the 
North-Country factory girl ! An attempt waa made 
recently to prevent the pit women from working, 
on the grotmd that their costume was unsuited 
to their sex ; but it is really only the idle elates 
who dress badly. Wherever physical labour of 
any kind is required, the costume used is, as a 
rule, absolutely right, for labour necessitates free- 
dom, and without freedom there is no such thing 
as beauty in dress at all. In fact, the beauty of 
dress depends on the beauty of the human figure, 
and whatever limits, constrains, and mutilates ia 



202 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

OBsentially ngly^ though the eyes of many are bo 
blinded by costcMn that they do not notice the ugli- 
ness till it has become nnf ashionable. 

What women's dress will be in the fntore it is 
difficult to say. The writer of the Daily News 
article is of opinion that skirts will always be worn 
as distinctive of the sez^ and it is obvions that 
men's dress, in its present ccmdition, is not by any 
means an example of a perfectly rational oostmne. 
It is more than probable, however, that the dress 
of the twentieth century will anphasise distinc- 
tions of occupation, not distinctions of sex. 

It is hardly too much to say that by the death of 
the author of ''John Halifax, Gentleman," our 
literature has sustained a heavy loss. Mrs. Craik 
was one of the finest of our women writers, and 
though her art had always what Keats called '^a 
palpable intention upon one," still its imagina- 
tive qualities were of no mean order. There is 
hardly one of her books that has not some distinc- 
tion of style; there is certainly not one of them 
that does not show an ardent love of all that is 
beautiful and good in life. The good she, perhaps, 
loved somewhat more than the beautiful, but her* 



LITEBAEY AND OTHEB NOTES. 203 

heart had room -for both. Her first novel appeared 
in 1849^ the year of the publication of Charlotte 
Bronte's ''Jane Eyre** and Mrs. Gaskell's ''Ruth/' 
and her last work was done for the magazine which 
I have the honour to edit She wa^ very much in- 
terested in the scheme for the foundation of "The 
Woman's World/' suggested its title, and prom- 
ised to be one of its warmest supporters. One arti- 
cle from her pen is already in proof, and will 
appear next month ; and in a letter I received from 
her, a few days before she died, she told me that 
she had almost finished a second, to be called "Be- 
tween Schooldays and Marriage." Few women 
have enjoyed a greater popularity than Mrs. Craik, 
or have better deserved it. It is sometimes said 
that John Halifax is not a real man, but only a 
woman's ideal of a man. Well, let us be grateful 
for such ideals. No one can read the story of 
which J(^ Halifax is the hero without being the 
better for it Mrs. Craik will live long in the 
affectionate memory of all who knew her, and one 
of her novels, at any rate, will always have a high 
and honourable place in English fiction. Indeed, 
for simple narrative power, some of the chapters 
of "John Halifax, OenUeman/' are almost un- 
equalled in our prose literature. 



204 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

The news of the death of Lady Braasqr has been 
aLso received by the English people with every ex« 
pression of sornyw and sympathy. Though her 
books were not remarkable for any perfection of 
literary style, they had the charm of brightness^ 
vivacity, and unconventionality. They revealed a 
fascinating personality, and their touches of do- 
mesticity made them classics in many an English 
household. In all modem movements Lady Braa- 
sey took a keen interest She gained a firsi-claas 
certificate in the South Kensington School of 
Cookery, scullery department and all ; was one of 
the most energetic members of the St John's Am- 
bulance Association, many branches of which she 
succeeded in founding; and, whether at Norman- 
hurst or in Park Lane, always managed to devote 
some portion of her day to useful and practical 
work. It is sad to have to chronide in the first 
number of 'The Woman's World** the death of two 

of the most r^narkable Englishwomen of our day. 
• • • • • 

Lady Bellairs' ''Gossips with Girls and Maidens" 
(William Blackwood ft Sons) contains some very 
interesting essays., and a quite extraordinary 
amount of useful information on all matters con- 
nected with the mental and physical training of 



UTERABY AND OTHER NOTES. 205 

women. It is very di£5ciilt to give good advice 
without being irritatiiigy and almost impossible to 
be at once didactic and delightful; bnt Lady Bd- 
lairs manages very cleverly to steer a middle oonise 
between the CSharybdis of dnhiess and Scylla of 
flippancy. There is a pleasing ifUimiti about her 
style, and almost everything that she says has both 
good sense and good hnmonr to recommend it 
Nor does she confine herself to those broad general- 
isations on moralsy which are so easy to make, so 
difficult to apply. Indeed^ she seems to have a 
wholesome contempt for the cheap severity of ab- 
stract ethioB, enters into the most minnte details 
for the guidance of conduct, and draws out elabo- 
rate lists of what girls should avoid, and what they 
should cultivate. 
Here are some specimens of ''What to Avoid'^ : 

''A loud, weak, affected, whining, harsh, or shrill 
tone of voice. 

''Extravagances in conversation — such phrases 
as 'Awfully this,' 'Beastly that,' lioads of time,' 
*Don't you know,' liate^ for 'dislike,' etc. 

"Sudden exclamations of annoyance, surprise, 
and joy— often dangerously approaching to female 
swearing* — as 'Bother I' 'Oracious I' 'How jolly I' 



206 THE WRITINGS OP OSCAR WILDE. 

'^Yawning when listening to anyone. 

'Talking on family matters^ even to yonr hoeom 
friends. 

^'Attempting any vocal or instrumental i»eoe of 
music that you cannot execute with ease. 

"Crossing your letters. 

''Making a shorty sharp nod with the head, in- 
tended to do duty as a bow. 

"All nonsense in the shape of belief in dreams, 
omens, presentiments, ghosts, spiritualism, palmis- 
try, etc. 

"Entertaining wild flights of the imagination, 
or empty idealistic aspirations.'' 

I am afraid that I have a good deal of sympathy 
with what are called "empty idealistic aspira- 
tions''; and "wild flights of imagination" are so 
extremely rare in the ninete^th century that they 
seem to me deserving rather of praise than of 
censure. The exclamation, "Bother," also, though 
certainly lacking in beauty, might, I think, be 
permitted under circumstances of extreme aggrava- 
tion, such as, for instance, the rejection of a man- 
uscript by the editor of a magazine; but in all 
other respects the list seems to be quite excellent. 
As for '*What to Cultivate," nothing oould be bet- 
ter than the following: 



LITBEABY AND OTHEB NOTES. 207 

^'An unaffected^ low, distinct^ sUver-toned voice. 

'^The art of pleasing those around yon^ and 
seeming pleased with them and all they may do for 
yon. 

'The charm of making litUe sacrifices qnite nat- 
urally^ as if of no account to yourself. 

''The habit of making allowances for the opin« 
ions, feelings, or prejudices of others. 

"An erect carriage— that is, a sound body. 

"A good memory for faces, and facts connected 
with them — thus avoiding giving offence through 
not recognising or bowing to people, or saying 
to them what had best been left unpaid. 

"The art of listening without impatience to 
proey talkers, and smiling at the twice-told tale or 
joke.'* 

I cannot help thinking that the last aphorism 
aims at too high a standard. There is always a 
certain amount of danger in any attempt to culti- 
vate impossible virtues. However, it is only fair 
to add that Lady Bellairs recognises the importance 
of self-development quite as much as the impor- 
tance of self-denial; and there is a great deal of 
sound sense in everything that she says about the 
gradual growth and formation of character. In- 



208 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDK 

deed, thoee who have not read Aristotle upon this 
point might with advantage read Lady Bellairs. 

Miss Constance Naden's little volume, ''A Mod- 
em Apostle, and other Poems'' (Eegan, Paul, 
Trench & Co.), shows both caltore and courage 
— culture in its use of language, courage in its ae* 
lection of subject-matter. Hie modem apoatle of 
whom Miss Naden sings is a young clergyman who 
preaches Pantheistic Socialism in the Free Church 
of some provincial manufacturing town, converts 
everybody, except the woman whom he loves, and 
is killed in a street riot. The story is exceedingly 
powerful, but seems more suitable for prose than 
for verse. It is right that a poet should be full 
of the spirit of his age, but the external forma 
of modem life are hardly, as yet, expressive of 
that spirit They are truths of fact, not troths 
of the imagination, and though they may give 
the poet an opportunity for realism, tiiey often 
rob the poem of the reality that is so essential to 
it Art, however, is a matter of result, not of 
theory, and if the fmit is pleasant we should not 
quarrel about the tree. Miss Naden's work is 
distinguished by rich imagery, fine colour, and 
sweet music, and these are things for which we 



LITERARY AND OTHEB NOTES. 209 

should be grateful, wherever we find them. In 
point of mere technical sJdll^ her longer poems are 
the best ; but some of the shorter poems are very 
fascinating. This^ for instance, is pretty: 

^^The copyist group was gathered round 
A time-worn fresco, world-renowned. 
Whose central glory once had been 
The face of Christ, the Nazarene. 

''And every copyist of the crowd. 
With his own soul that face endowed, 
Gtentle, severe, majestic, mean; 
But which was Christ, the Nazarene? 

''Then one who watched them made complaint, 
And marvelled, saying, 'Wherefore paint 
rai ye be sure your eyes have seen 
The face of Christ, the Nazarene P " 

And this sonnet is full of suggestion : 

"The wine-flushed monarch slept, but in his ear 
An angel breathed — 'Bepent, or dioose the 

flame 
Quendiless.' In dread lie woke, but not in 
shame. 
Deep musing — 'Sin I love, yet hell I fear/ 



210 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

''Wherefore he left his feasts and minions dear. 
And jufitly ruled, and died a saint in name. 
Bnt when his hasting spirit heavenward came, 
A stem voice cried — ^'O Sonll what dost thou 
hereP 

*' TLiove I foreswore, and wine, and kept my vow 
To live a just and joyless life, and now 

I crave reward.' The voice came like a kndl — 
'Fool 1 dost thou hope to find again thy mirth. 
And those foul joys thou didst renounce on earth ? 

Yea, enter in I My heaven shall be ihy hell/ '* 

Miss Constance Naden deserves a high place 
among our living poetesses, and this, as Mrs. Sharp 
has shown lately in her volume, entitled ''Women's 
Voices," is no mean distinction. 

Phyllis Browne's "Life of Mrs. Somerville" 
(Gassell & Co.) forms part of a very interesting 
little series, called "The World's Workers"— a col- 
lection of short biographies catholic enough to in- 
clude personalities so widely different as Turner 
and Bichard Cobden, Handel and Sir Titus Salt, 
Bobert Stephenson and Florence Nightingale, and 
yet possessing a certain definite aim. As a matfae- 



LITEBAEY AND OTHEB NOTES. 211 

matician and a scieniigt; the translator and popn- 
lariser of Laplace's La Mecanique Cileste, and the 
author of an important book on physical geogra^ 
phy, Mrs. Somerville is, of conrse, well known. 
The scientific bodies of Europe covered her witii 
hononis; her bust stands in the hall of the Boyal 
Society^ and one of the Women's Colleges at Ox- 
ford bears her name. Tet^ considered simply in 
the light of a wife and a mother, she is no less 
admirable; and those who consider that stupidity 
is the proper basis for the domestic virtues, and 
that intellectual women must of necessity be help- 
less with their hands, cannot do better tiian read 
Phyllis Browne's pleasant little book, in which 
they will find that the greatest woman mathemati- 
cian of any age was a clever needlewoman, a good 
housekeeper, and a most skilful cook. Indeed, 
Mrs. Somerville seems to have been quite renowned 
for her cookery. The discoverers of the Nortii- 
West Passage christened an island "Somerville," 
not as a tribute to the distinguished mathemati- 
cian, but as a recognition of the excellenoe of some 
orange marmalade which the distinguished mathe- 
matician had prepared with her own hands and 
presented to the ships before they left England; 
and to the fact that she was able to make currant 



212 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

jelly at a very critical moment she owed the afFec* 
tion of some of her husband's relatives, who up 
to that time had been rather prejudiced againrt 
her on the ground that she was merely an unprac- 
tical Blue-fitocking. 

Nor did her scientific knowledge ever warp or 
dull the tenderness and humanity of her natore. 
For birds and animals she had always a great 
love. We hear of her as a littie girl watching with 
eager eyes the swallows as they built their nests 
in summer or prepared for their flight in the au- 
tumn; and when snow was on the ground she used 
to open the windows to let the robins hop in and 
pick crumbs on the breakfast table. On one oc- 
casion she went with her father on a tour in the 
Highlands^ and found on her return that a pet 
goldfinch, which had been left in the charge of 
the servants, had been neglected by them and had 
died of starvation. She was almost heart-broken 
at the event, and in writing her 'Tlecollections'* 
seventy years after, she mentioned it, and said that 
Bs she wrote she felt deep pain. Her chief pet 
in her old age was a mountain sparrow, which used 
to perch on her arm and go to sleep there while 
she was writing. One day the sparrow fell into 
the water- jug and was drowned, to the great grief 



LITERARY AND OTHER NOTES. 213 

of its mistress, who could hardly be consoled for 
its lossy though later on we hear of a beautiful 
paroquet taking the place of le mcineau d^TJmnie, 
and becoming Mrs. Somerville^s coufitant compan- 
ion. She was also very energetic, Phyllis Browne 
teDs us, in trying to get a law passed in the Italian 
Parliament for the protection of animals, and said 
once, with reference to this subject: '^e English 
cannot boast of humanity so long as our sportsmen 
find pleasure in shooting down tame pigeons as 
they fly, terrified, out of a cage*' — a remark with 
which I entirely agree. Mr. Herberts bill for the 
protection of land birds gave her immense pleas- 
ure, though, to quote her own words, she was 
^'grieved to find that ^the lark, which at heaven's 
gate sings,^ is thought imworthy of man's protec- 
tion''; and she took a great fancy to a gentleman 
who, on being told of the number of singing birds 
that are eaten in Italy — ^nightingales, goldfinches, 
and robins — exclaimed, in horror: *^What! rob- 
ins — our houfiehold birds I I would as soon eat a 
child!" Indeed, she believed to some extent in 
the immortality of animals, on the ground that, if 
animals have no future, it would seem a^ if some 
were created for uncompensated misery — ^an idea 
which does not seem to me to be either extravagant 



214 THE WRITINGS OP OSCAB WILDE. 

or fantastic, tiiangh it mtust be admitted that the 
optimiam on which it is baaed receiTea abeolutely 
no anpport from science. 

On the whole, Phyllis Browne's book ia very 
pleasant reading. Its only fault is that it is far 
too shorty and this is a fanlt ao rare in modem 
literature that it almost amounts to a distinction. 
However, Phyllis Browne has managed to crowd 
into the narrow limits at her disposal a great many 
interesting anecdotes. The picture she gives of 
Mrs. Somerville working away at her tranalatioii 
of Laplace in the same room with her children ia 
very charming, and reminds one of what ia told 
of George Sand; there is an amusing account of 
Mra. Somerville's visit to the widow of the young 
Pretender, the Countess of Albany, who, after 
talking wilh her for some time, exclaimed : ''So 
you don't speak Italian I You must have had a 
very bad education I'' And this story about the 
Waverley Novels may possibly be new to some of 
my readers: 

^A very amusing circumstance in connection 
with Mrs. Somerville's acquaintance with Sir Wal- 
ter arose out of the childish inquisitiveneaa of 
Woronzow Greig, Mrs. Somerville^s little boy. 



LITERABY AND OTHER NOTES. 215 

'T)tirmg the time Mrs. Somerville was visitiiig 
Abbotsford^ the Waverley Navels were appearing, 
and were creating a great sensation; jet even 
Scott's intimate friends did not know that he was 
the author; he enjoyed keeping the affair a mys- 
tery. Bnt little Woronzow discovered what he was 
about One day, when Mrs. Somerville was talk- 
ing about a novel that had just been published, 
Woronzow said : *I knew all these stories long ago, 
for Mr. Scott writes on the dinner-table; when he 
has finished, he puts the green cloth with the pa- 
pers in a comer of the dining-room, and when 
he goes out, Charlie Scott and I read the stories.' '' 

Phyllis Browne remarks that this incident shows 
^'that persons who want to keep a secret ought to 
be very careful when children are about" ; but the 
story seems to me to be far too dianning to re- 
quire any moral of the kind. 

Bound up in the same volume is a life of Miss 
Mary Carpenter, also written by Phyllis Browne. 
Miss Carpenter does not seem to me to have the 
charm and fascination of Mrs. Somerville. There 
is always something about her that is formal, lim- 
ited, and precise. When she was about two yeans 



216 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

old bhe insifited on being called ^'Doctor Carpen- 
ter'' in the nursery; at the age of twelTe she is 
described by a friend as a sedate little girl> who 
always ^poke like a book; and before she entered 
on her edncational schemes she wrote down a sol- 
emn dedication of herself to the service of human- 
ity. However, she was one of the practical, hard- 
working saints of the nineteenth century, and it 
is, no doubts quite right that the saints should 
take themselves very seriously. It is only fair, 
also, to remember that her work of rescue and 
reformation wa^ carried on under great difficul- 
ties. Here, for instance, is the picture Miss Cobbe 
gives us of one of the Bristol nij^t schoob: 

'*It was a wonderful spectacle to see Mary Car- 
penter sitting patiently before the large school gal- 
lery in St Jane's Back, teaching, singing, and 
praying with the wild street boys, in spite of end- 
less interruptions caused by such proceedings as 
shooting marbles at any object behind her, whist- 
ling, stamping, fighting, shrieking out ^Amen' in 
the middle of a prayer, and sometimes rising 011 
masse, and tearing, like a troop of bisons in hob- 
nailed shoes, down from the gallery, round tlie 
great school-room^ and down the stairs, and into 



LITERARY AND OTHER NOTES. 217 

the street. Tlieee irrepressible outbreaks she bore 
with infinite good-humour.^' 

Her own account is somewhat pleasanler, and 
shows that ^'the troop of bisons in hob-nailed 
shoes'' were not always so barbarous: 

*T. had taken to my class on the preceding we^ 
some specimens of fems^ neatly gummed on white 
paper. . . . This time I took a piece of coal^ehale^ 
with impressions of ferns, to show them. I told 
each to examine the specimen and tell me what he 

thought it was. W gave so bright a smile 

that I saw he knew; none of the others could tdl; 
he said they were ferns, like what I showed them 
last week, but he thought they were chiseled on 
the stone. Their surprise and pleasure were great 
when I explained the matter to them. 

**The history of Joseph. They all found a diffi- 
culty in realising that this had actually occurred. 
One asked if Egypt existed now, and if people lived 
in it. When I told them that buildings now stood 
which had been erected about the time of Joseph, 
one said that was impossible, as they must have 
fallen down ere this. I showed them the form of 
a pyramid, and they were satisfied. One ashed if 
all books were true. 



218 THE WRITINGS OP OSCAB WILDE. 

''The story of Macbeth impressed them very 
much. Thqr knew the name of Shakespeare^ haT- 
ing seen it over a public-house. 

'^A boy defined conscience as 'a thing a gentle- 
man hasn't got who^ when a boy finds his pnrse 
and gives it back to him^ doesn't give the boy six- 
pence.' 

''Another boy was asked, after a Sunday eveoii^ 
lecture on 'Thankfulness,' what pleasure he en- 
joyed most in the course of a year. He replied, 
candidly, 'Cock-fightin', Ma'am; there's a pit up 
by the "Black Boy" as is worth anythink in 
Brissel.'" 

There is something a little pathetic in the at- 
tempt to civilise the rough street boy by means 
of the refining infiuence of ferns and fossils, and 
it IB di£5cult not to help feeling that Miss Carpen- 
ter rather over-estimated the value of elementary 
education. The poor are not to be fed upon facte. 
Even Shakespeare and the Pyramids are not suffi- 
cient; nor is there much use in giving them the 
resulte of culture, unless we also give them thoee 
conditions under which culture can be realised. 
In these cold, crowded cities of the North, the 
proper basis for morals, using the word in ite wide 



LITEEABY AND OTHER NOTES. 219 

HeUenic signification^ is to be found in architec- 
tnre^ not in books. 

Stilly it would be ungenerous not to reoognise 
that Mary Carpenter gave to the children of the 
poor not merely her learnings but her love. In 
early life^ her biographer tells us, she had longed 
for the happiness of being a wife and a mother; 
but later she became content that her affection 
could be freely given to all who needed it» and the 
verse in the prophedee, '1 have given thee diil- 
dren whom thou hast not borne/' seemed to her to 
indicate what was to be her true mission. In- 
deed, she rather inclined to Bacon's opinion, thai 
unmarried people do the best public work. ''It is 
quite striking/' she says in one of her letters^ 'to 
observe how much the useful power and influence 
of woman has developed of late years. Unattached 
ladies, such as widows and unmarried women, have 
quite ample work to do in the world for the good 
of others to absorb all their powers. Wives and 
mothers have a very noble work given them by 
God, and want no more." The whole passage is 
extremely interesting, and the phrase "unattached 
ladies" is quite delightful, and reminds one of 
Charles Lamb. 



220 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDK 

'^smay's Children" (MacmUlaii ft Co.) is by the 
clever authoreae of that wonderful little story, 
'^PlitteTB, Tatters, and the Counsellor/' a story 
which delighted the realists by its truth, fascin- 
ated Mr. Buskin by its beauty, and remains to 
the present day the most perfect picture of street 
arab life in all English prose fiction. The scene 
of the novel is laid in the south of Ireland, and 
the plot is extremely dramatic and ingenious. God- 
frey Mauleverer, a reckless young Irishman, runs 
away with Ismay Darcy, a pretty, penniless gov- 
erness, and is privately married to her in Scotland. 
Some time after the birth of her third diild, Ismay 
died, and her husband, who has never made his 
marriage public, nor taken any pains to establish 
the legitimacy of his children, is drowned while 
yachting off the coast of France. The care of 
TsmaVs children then devolves on an old aunt. 
Miss Juliet Darcy, who brings them back to Ire- 
land to claim their inheritance for them. But a 
sudden stroke of paralysis deprives her of her mem- 
ory, and she forgets the name of the little Scotch 
village in which Isma/s informal marriage took 
place. So Tighe O'Malley holds Barrettstown, and 
Isma/s children live in an old mill close to the 
great park of which they are the rightful heirs. 



LITERAEY AND OTHER NOTES. 221 

The boy, who is called Godfrey, after his father, 
ifi a fascinating study, with his swarthy foreign 
beauty, his fierce moods of love and hate, his pas- 
sionate pride, and his passionate tenderness. The 
account of his midnight ride to warn his enemy 
of an impending attack of Moonlighters is most 
powerful and spirited; and it is pleasant to meet 
in modem fiction a character that has all the fine 
inconsistencies of life, and is neither too fantastic 
an exception to be true, nor too ordinary a type 
to be common. Excellent also, in its direct sim- 
plicity of rendering, is the picture of Miss Juliet 
Darcy; and the scene in which, at the moment of 
her death, the old woman's memory returns to her 
is quite admirable, both in conception and in treat- 
ment. To me, however, the chief interest of the 
book lies in the little life-like sketches of Irish char- 
acter with which it abounds. Modem realistic art 
has not yet produced a Hamlet^ but at least it may 
claim to have studied Guildenstem and Rosen- 
crantz very closely ; and, for pure fidelity and tmth 
to nature, nothing could be better than the minor 
characters in 'Tfsma/s Children.** Here we have 
the kindly old priest who arranges all the mar- 
riages in his parish, and has a strong objection 
to people who insist on making long confessions; 



222 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

the important young carate> fresh from Maynooth, 
who gives himself more airs than a hishop^ and 
haa to be kept in order; the professi(mal beggars, 
with their devout faith, their grotesque humour, 
and their incorrigible laziness; the shrewd shop- 
keeper, who imports arms in flour barrds for the 
use of the Moonlighters, and, as soon as he has got 
rid of them, gives information of their where- 
abouts to the police; the young men who go out 
at night to be drilled by an Irish-American; the 
farmers with their wild land-hunger, bidding se- 
cretly against each other for every vacant field; 
the dispensary doctor, who is always r^pretting 
that he has not got a Trinity College degree; the 
plain girls, who want to go into convents; the 
pretty girls, who want to get married; and the 
shopkeepers' daughters, who want to be thought 
young ladies. There is a whole pell-mell of men 
and women, a complete panorama of provincial 
life, an absolutely faithful picture of the peasant 
in his own home. This note of realism in dealing 
with national types of character has always been 
a distinguishing characteristic of Iriah fiction, 
from the days of Miss Edgeworth down to our 
own days, and it is not difficult to see in 'Tsmay'a 
Children'' some traces of the influence of ^Castle 



LITEBABY AND OTHER NOTES. 

Backreni^ I fear, howeyer, that few people read 
Miss Edgewoiiti nowadays, though both Scott and 
Tonrgenieff acknowledged their indebtedness to 
her novels, and her style is always admirable in 
its clearness and precision. 

Miss Leffler-Amim's statement, in a lecture de- 
livered recently at St Saviour^s Hospital, that ''she 
had heard of instances where ladies were so de- 
termined not to exceed the fashionable measure- 
ment that they had actually held on to a cross-bar 
while their maids fastened the fifteen-inch cor- 
set,'' has excited a good deal of incredulity, but 
there is nothing really improbable in it From 
the sixteenth century to our own day there is hard- 
ly any form of torture that has not been inflicted 
on girls, and endured by women, in obedience to 
the dictates of an unreasonable and monstrous 
Fashion. ''In order to obtain a real Spanish figure/' 
says Montaigne, "what a Gehenna of suffering will 
not women endure, drawn in and compressed by 
great coches entering the fiesh; nay, sometimes 
they even die thereof I" *'A few days after my ar- 
rival at school," Mrs. Somerville tells us in her 
memoirs, "although perfectly straight and well 
made, I was enclosed in stifF stays, with a steel 



224 THE WRITINGS OP OSCAR WILDE. 

busk in front; while above my frock^ bands drew 
my shoulders back until the shoulder-bladeo met. 
Then a steel rod with a semi-circle^ which went 
under my chin, was clasped to the steel busk in 
my stays. In this constrained state I and most of 
the younger girls had to prepare our lessons^'; and 
in the Life of Miss Edgeworth we read that, being 
sent to a certain fashionable establishment, ''she 
imdenrent all the usual tortures of backboards, 
iron collars, and dumbs, and also (because she was 
a very tiny person) the unusual one of being hung 
by the neck to draw out the muscles and increase 
the growth," a signal failure in her case. Indeed, 
instances of absolute mutilation and misery are 
so common in the past that it is unnecessary to 
multiply them ; but it is really sad to think that 
in our own day a civilised woman can hang on to 
a cross-bar while her maid laces her waist into 
a fifteen-inch circle. To begin with, the waist is 
not a circle at all, but an oval ; nor can there be 
any greater error than to imagine that an unnatu- 
rally small waist gives an air of grace, or even of 
slightness, to the whole figure. Its effect, as a 
rule, is to simply exaggerate the width of the 
shoulders and the hips; and those whose figures 
possess that stateliness which is called stoutness by 



LITERABY AND OTHER NOTES. 225 

the vulgar, convert what is a quality into a defect 
by yielding to the silly edicts of Fashion on the 
subject of tight^lacing. The fashionable English 
waist^ also, is not merely far too small, and con- 
sequently quite out of proportion to the rest of the 
figure, but it is worn far too low down. I use the 
expression **wom" advisedly, for a waist nowa- 
days seems to be regarded as an article of apparel 
to be put on when and where one likes. A long 
waist always implies shortness of the lower limbs, 
and, from the artistic point of view, has the effect 
of diminishing the height; and I am glad to see 
that many of the most charming women in Paris 
are returning to the idea of the Directoire style 
of dress. This style is not by any means perfect^ 
but at least it has the merit of indicating the 
proper position of the waist. I feel quite sure 
that all Englishwomen of culture and position 
will set their faces against such stupid and dan- 
gerous practices as are related by Miss Leffler- 
Amim. Fashion's motto is, 11 faut souffrir pour 
etre belle; but the motto of art and of common 
sense is, II faut etre bete pour sauifrir. 

Talking of Fashion, a critic in the Pall Mall 
Oazette expresses his surprise that I should have 



226 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

allowed an illustratdon of a hat^ covered with 'Hhe 
bodies of dead birds/' to appear in the first num- 
ber of 'The Woman's World"; and as I have re- 
ceived many letters on the subject^ it is only right 
that I should state my exact position in the matter. 
Fashion is such an essential part of the mundus 
muUebris of our day, that it seems to me absolutdy 
necessary that its growth, devdopmait^ and phases 
should be duly chronicled; and the historical and 
practical value of such a record depends entirdy 
upon its perfect fidelity to fact Bendes, it is 
quite easy for the children of light to adapt al- 
most any fashionable form of dress to the require- 
ments of utility and the demands of good taste. 
The Sarah Bernhardt teagown^ for instance, fig- 
ured in the present issue, has many good points 
about it, and the gigantic dress-improver does not 
appear to me to be really essential to the mode; 
and though the Postilian costume of the fancy 
dress ball is absolutely detestable in its silliness and 
vulgarity, the so-called Late Georgian costume in 
the same plate is rather pleasing. I must, how- 
ever, protest against the idea that to chronicle the 
development of Fashion implies any approval of 
the particular forms that Fashion may adopt. 



LITERABT AND OTHER NOTES, 227 

Mrs. Craik's article on the condition of the Eng- 
lish stage will, I feel snre, be read with great in- 
terest bj all who are watdiing the deyelopment 
of dramatic art in this conntry. It was the last 
thing written by the author of ''J<^ Halif ax. 
Gentleman/' and reached me only a few days be- 
fore her lamented death. That the state of things 
is snch as Mrs. Craik describes, few will be in- 
clined to deny; though, for my own part, I must 
acknowledge that I see more Tulgarity than vice 
in the tendencies of the modem stage; nor do I 
think it possible to elevate dramatic art by limit- 
ing its subject-matter. On tui one liitirature 
quand on ltd inierdit la vfriti humaine. As far as 
the serious presentation of life is concerned, what 
we require is more imaginative treatment, greater 
freedom from theatric language and theatric con- 
vention. It may be questioned, also, whether the 
consistent reward of virtue and punishment of 
wickedness be really the healthiest ideal for an art 
that claima to mirror nature. However, it is im- 
possible not to recognise the fine feeling that actu- 
ates every line of Mrs. Craik's article; and though 
one may venture to disagree with the proposed 
method, one cannot but sympathise with the purity 



228 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

and delicacy of the thought, and the high nobility 
of the aim. 

The French Minister of Education^ M. Spiiller, 
haa paid Racine a yeiy graceful and appropriate 
compliment in naming after him the seccmd ool- 
ite that has been opened in Paris for the higher 
education of girls. Racine was one of the privi- 
l^ed few who were allowed to read the celebrated 
Traits de VEducaiion des Filles before it appeared 
in print; he was charged, along with Boileau, with 
the task of reyising the tetzt of the constitution 
and rules of Madame de Maintenon's great college ; 
it was for the Demoiselles de St. Cyr that he com- 
posed Athalie; and he devoted a great deal of his 
time to the education of his own children. Tbe 
Lycte Racine will, no doubt^ become as important 
an institution as the Lycte Fenelon, and the speech 
delivered by M. Spiiller on the occasion of its open- 
ing was ftdl of the happiest augury for the future. 
M. Spiiller dwelt at great length on the value of 
Goethe^s aphorism, that the test of a good wife is 
her capacity to take her husband's place, and to 
become a father to his children, and mentioned 
that the thing that struck him most in America 
was the wonderful Brooklyn Bridge, a superb Ti- 



LITEEABY AND OTHER NOTES. 229 

tanic structure, which was completed under the 
direction of the engineert wif e, the engineer him- 
self having died while the building of the bridge 
was in progress. "7Z me semble/' said M. Spiiller, 
"que la femme de Vinginieur du pont de Brooklyn 
A reaiisi la pensie de Ooethe, et que non seulement 
elle est devenue un pere pour see enfants, mais un 
autre pire pour Vosuvre admirable, vraiment 
unique, qui d immortaliee le nom qu'elle portrait 
avec eon mari/* M. SpiQler also laid great stress 
on the necessity of a thoroughly practical educa- 
tion, and was extremely severe on the **Blue-8tock- 
ings" of literature. '7i ne e'agit pas de former id 
des 'femmes savantes/ Les Jemmes saA)antes^ ont 
ete marquies pour jamais par un des plus grands 
gfnies de notre race d'une legere teinte de ridicule. 
Non, ce n'est pas des femmes savantes que nous 
voulons: ce sont tout simplement des femmes: des 
femmes dignes de ce pays de France, qui est la 
patrie du bons sens, de la mesure, et de la grdce; 
des femmes ayant le notion juste et le sens exquis 
du role qui doit leur appartenir dans la sodite 
modeme/' There is^ no doubt^ a great deal of 
truth in M. Spiiller's observations, but we must 
not mistake a caricature for the reality. After all, 
'TLes Prteienses Ridicules^' contrasted very favour- 



230 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

ably with the ordinary l^pe of womanhood of their 
day, not merely in France, but also in England; 
and an nncritical love of aonneta is preferable, on 
the whole, to coarseness, Yolgarity, and ignorance. 

I am glad to see that Miss Ramsay's brilliant 
snceess at Cambridge is not destined to remain an 
isolated instance of what women can do in intel- 
lectual competitions with men. At the Boyal XTni- 
versity in Ireland, the Literature Scholarahip, of 
£100 a year for five years, has been won by Miss 
Story, the daughter of a North of Ireland clergy- 
man. It is pleasant to be able to chronicle an 
item of Irish news that has nothing to do with the 
violence of party politics or party feeling, and that 
shows how worthy women are of that higher col- 
ture and education which has been so tardily and, 
in some instances, so grudgingly granted to them. 

The Empress of Japan has been ordering a 
whole wardrobe of fashionable dresses in Paris for 
her own use and the use of her ladies-in-waiting. 
The chrysanthemum (the imperial flower of 
Japan) has suggested the tints of most of the 
Empress's own gowns, and in accordance with tiie 
colour schemes of other flowers the rest of the cos- 



LITERARY AND OTHER NOTES. 231 

tumes have been designed. The same steamer, 
however* that carries out the masterpieces of M. 
Worth and M. Felix to the Land of the Rising 
Sim, ako brings to the Empress a letter of formal 
and respectful remonstrance from the English .Ra- 
tional Dress Society. I trust that, even if the 
Empress rejects the sensible arguments of this im- 
portant Society, her own artistic feeling may in- 
duce her to reconsider her resolution to abandon 
Eastern for Western costume. 

I hope that some of my readers will interest 
themselves in the Ministering Children's League, 
for which Mr. Walter Crane has done the beauti- 
ful and suggestive design of *T?he Young Knight.** 
The best way to make children good is to make 
them happy, and happiness seems to me an essen« 
tial part of Lady Meatfa's admirable scheme. 

Mme. Ristori's ''Etude et Souvenirs'* (Paul Ol- 
lendorff : Paris) is one of the most delightful books 
on the stage that have appeared since Lady Mar- 
tin's charming volume on the Shakespearean hero- 
ines. It is often said that actors leave nothing 
behind them but a barren name and a withered 
wreath ; that they subsist simply upon the applause 



232 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAE WILDE. 

of the moment; that they are ultimately doomed 
to the oblivion of old play-bills; and that their art^ 
in a word, dies with them, and shares their own 
mortality. '^Chippendale, the cabinet-maker/' aays 
the clever author of "Obiter Dicta," "is more po- 
tent than Garrick the actor. The vivacity of the 
latter no longer charmB (save in Boswell) ; the 
chairs of the former still render rest impossible in 
a hundred homes." This view, however, seems to 
me to be exaggerated. It rests on the assumption 
that acting is simply a mimetic art, and takes no 
account of its imaginative and intellectual basis. 
It is quite true, of course, that the personality of 
the player passes away, and with it that pleasure- 
giving power by virtue of which the art exists. 
Yet the artistic method of a great actor survives. 
It lives on in tradition, and becomes part of the 
science of a school. It has all the intellectual life 
of a principle. In England, at the present mo- 
ment, the influence of Oarrick on our actors is 
far stronger than that of Reynolds on our painters 
of portraits, and if we turn to France it is easy 
to discern the tradition of Talma, but where is 
the tradition of David? 

Mme. Histories memoirs, then, have not merely 
the charm that always attaches to the autobiog- 



LITEBABY AND OTHEB NOTES. 233 

raphy of a brilliant and beautiful woman^ but have 
also a definite and distinct artistic value. Her 
analysis of the character of Lady Macbeth^ for in- 
stance^ is full of psychological interest^ and shows 
us that the subtleties of Shakespearean criticisni 
are not necessarily confined to those who have 
views on weak endings and rhyming tags, but may 
also be suggested by the art of acting itself. The 
author of *'Obiter Dicta*' seeks to deny to actors 
all critical insight, and all literary appreciation. 
The actor, he tells us^ is arf s slave, not her child, 
and lives entirely outside literature, **with its 
words for ever on his lips, and none of its truths 
engraven on his heart." But this seems to me to 
be a harsh and reckless generalisation. Indeed, so 
far from agreeing with it, I would be inclined 
to say that the mere artistic process of acting, the 
translation of literature back again into life, and 
the presentation of thought under the conditions 
of action, is in itself a critical method of a very 
high order; nor do I think that a study of the 
careers of our great English actors will really sus- 
tain the charge of want of literary appreciation. 
It may be true that actors pass too quickly away 
from the form^ in order to get at the feeling that 
gives the form beauty and colour, and that, where 



234 THE WHITINGS OP OSCAR WILDE. 

the literary critic studies the language^ the actor 
looks simply for the life; and yet, how wdl the 
great actors have appreciated that marveUous nm« 
sic of words which in Shakespeare, at any raie^ 
is so vital an element of poetic power^ if, indeed, 
it be not equally so in the case of all who have any 
claim to be regarded as true poets, '^llie sensual 
life of verse/' says Eeats, in a dramatic critidam 
published in The Champion, '^springs warm from 
the lips of Eean, and to one learned in Shake- 
spearean hieroglyphics, learned in the spiritual 
portion of those lines to which Eean adds a sensual 
grandeur, his tongue must se^n to have robbed 
the Hybla bees and left them honeyless.'^ This 
particular feeling, of which Eeats speaks, is f amil* 
iar to all who have heard Salvini, Sarah Bern- 
hardt, Bistori, or any of the great artists of our 
day, and it is a feeling that one cannot, I think, 
gain by merely reading the passage to oneself. For 
my own part, I must confess that it was not until 
I heard Sarah Bernhardt in Phidre that I abao* 
lutely realised the sweetness of the music of Bat- 
cine. As for Mr. Birrell's statement that actors 
have the words of literature for ever on their lips, 
but none of its truths engraved on their hearts, 
all that one can say is that, if it be true, it is a 



LITEBAEY AND OTHEB NOTES. 235 

defect which actors share with the majorily of 
literary critics. 

The account Mme. Bistori gives of her own 
struggles^ voyages^ and adventures^ is very pleas- 
ant reading indeed. The child of poor actors^ she 
made her first appearance when she was three 
months old, being brought on in a hamper as a 
New Year's gift to a selfish old gentleman who 
would not forgive his daughter for having mar- 
ried for love. As, however, she began to cry long 
before the hamper was opened, the comedy became 
a farce, to the immense amusement of the public. 
She next appeared in a mediseval mdodrama, be- 
ing then three years of age, and was so terrified 
at the machinations of the villain that she ran 
away at the most critical moment. However, her 
stage fright seems to have soon disappeared, and 
we find her playing Silvio Pellico's Francesca da 
Rimim, at fifteen, and at eighteen making her 
dSbut as Marie Stuart At this time the natural- 
ism of the French method was gradually displac- 
ing the artificial elocution and academic poses of 
the Italian school of acting. Mme. Bistori seems 
to have tried to combine simplicity with style, and 
the passion of nature with the self-restraint of the 
artist ^J'ai votUu fondre les deux maniires/* she 



236 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

telh us^ *^car je sentais que iotUes choses elani sus- 
ceptibles de progres, Vart dramatique aussi iUUt 
appele A subir des transformatiowt/* The natural 
development, however^ of the Italian drama was 
almost arrested by the ridiculous censorship of 
plays then existing in each town under Austrian 
or Papal rule. The slightest allusion to the senti* 
ment of nationality, or the spirit of freedom, was 
prohibited. Even the word pairia was regarded as 
treasonable, and Mme. Bistori tells us an amusing 
story of the indignation of a censor who was asked 
to license a play in which a dumb man returns 
home after an absence of many years, and on his 
entrance upon the stage makes gestures expressive 
of his joy in seeing his native land once more. 
"Gestures of this kind/' said the censor, *'aie ob- 
viously of a very revolutionary tend^icy, and can- 
not possibly be allowed. The only gestures that 
I could think of permitting would be gestures ex- 
pressive of a dumb man's delight in scenery gen- 
erally." The stage directions were accordingly al- 
tered, and the word *Qandscape" substituted for 
**native land" ! Another censor was extremely se- 
vere on an unfortunate poet who had used the ex- 
pression "the beautiful Italian sky," and explained 
to him that "the beautiful Lombardo- Venetian 



LITERARY AND OTHER NOTES. 237 

sky'' was the proper ofiSdal expression to use. Poor 
Gregory^ in Borneo and Juliet, Had to be rediris- 
tenedy because Gr^ory is a name dear to the 
Popes; and the — 

"Here I have a pilot's thumb, 
Wrecked as homeward he did come/' 

of the first witch in Macbeth was ruthlessly struck 
out as containing an obvious allusion to the steers- 
man of St Peter's bark. Finally, bored and both- 
ered by the political and theological Dogberrys of 
the day, with their inane prejudices, their solemn 
stupidity, and their entire ignorance of the condi- 
tions necessary for the growth of sane and healthy 
art, Mme. Ristori made up her mind to leave the 
stage. She, however, was extremely anxious to 
appear once before a Parisian audience, Paris be- 
ing at that time the centre of dramatic activity, 
and after some consideration left Italy for France 
in the year 1855. There ahe seems to have been 
a great success, particularly in the part of Myrrha ; 
classical without being cold, artistic without being 
academic, she brought to the interpretation of the 
character of Alfieri's great heroine the colour ele- 
ment of passion, the form-element of style. Jules 



238 THE WHITINGS OP OSCAE WILDK ' 

Janin was loud in his praises, the Emperor begged 
Sistori to join the troupe of the ComMie Fraa- 
Saise, and Badiel, with the etrange, narroir jeal- 
ousy of her nature, trembled for her lauiela. Myr* 
rha was followed by Marie Stuart, and Marie Stu- 
art by Medea. In the latter part Mme. Bistori 
excited the greatest enthusiasm. Aiy Scheffer de- 
signed her costumes for her; and the Niobe that 
stands in the TT£f)zsi Gkdlery at Florence, suggested 
to Mme. Bistori her famous pose in the scene with 
the children. She would not consent^ however, to 
remain in France, and we find her subsequently 
playing in almost every coxmtry in the world from 
Eg3^t to Mexico, from Denmark to Honolulu. Her 
representations of classical plays seem to have been 
always immensely admired. When she played at 
Athens, the King o£Fered to arrange for a per- 
formance in the beautiful old theatre of Dionysoe, 
and during her tour in Portugal she produced 
Medea before the Uniyersity of Coimbra. Her de- 
scription of the latter engagement ia extremdy in- 
teresting. On her arrival at the TJniversiiy she 
was received by the entire body of the undergradu- 
ates^ who still wear a costume almost medisBval 
in character. Some of them came on the stage 
in the course of the play as the handmaidens of 



LITEBAEY AND OTHEB NOTES. 239 

Creusa, Iiiding their black beards beneatli heavy 
▼eils^ and aa soon aa fhey had finished their parts 
they took their places gravely among the audience, 
to Mme. Biatori's horror, still in their Oreek dress, 
but vnth their veils thrown back, and smoking 
long dgars. ^Ce n'est pas la premHre fois,** she 
says, *^que j'ai du empech$r, par un effort de vch 
lonte, la iragidie de se terminer en fwrce." Very 
interesting, also, is her account of the production 
of Montanelli's Camma, and she tells an amusing 
story of the arrest of the author by the French 
police on the diarge of murder, in consequence of 
a telegram she sent to him in which the words 
'Tbody of the victim'* occurred. Indeed, the whole 
book is full of cleverly written stories and admir- 
able criticisms on dramatic art I have quoted 
from the French version, which happens to be the 
one that lies before me, but whether in French or 
Italian, the book is one of the most fascinating 
autobiographies that has appeared for some time, 
even in an age like ours, whoi literary egotism has 
been brought to sndi an exquisite pitch of per- 
fection. 

"The New Purgatory, and otiier Poems'' (Fisher 
tJnwin), by Miss E. B. Chapman, is, in some re- 



240 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

spects^ a very remarkable little yoluma It used 
to be said that women were too poetical by nature 
to make great poets^ too receptive to be really cre»- 
tive, too well satisfied with mere feeling to seardi 
after the marble splendour of form. But we mugt 
not judge of woman's poetic power by her achieve- 
ments in days when education was denied to her, 
for where there is no faculty of expression no art 
is possible. Mrs. Browning, the first great Eng* 
lish poetess, was also an admirable scholar, though 
she may not have put the accents on her Gredc, 
and even in those poems that seem most remote 
from classical life, such as ''Aurora Leigh,'' for 
instance, it is not difficult to trace the fine liter- 
ary influence of a classical training. Since Mrs. 
Browning's time, education has become, not the 
privilege of a few women, but the inalienable in- 
heritance of all ; and, as a natural consequence of 
the increased faculty of expression thereby gained, 
the women-poets of our day hold a very high lit- 
erary position. Curiously enough, their poetry is, 
as a rule, more distinguished for strength than for 
beauty; they seem to love to grapple with the big 
intellectual problems of modem life ; science, phi- 
losophy, and metaphysics, form a large portion of 
their ordinary subject-matter ; they leave the trivi* 



LITEEABY AND OTHER NOTES. 241 

ality of triolets to men, and try to read the writ- 
ing on the wall, and to solve the last secret of the 
Sphinx. Hence, Bobert Browning, not Eeate, is 
their idol; "Sordello'' moves them more than the 
"Ode on a Grecian Urn*' ; and all Lord Tennyson's 
magic and music seems to them as nothing com- 
pared with the psychological subtleties of "The 
Bing and the Book,'' or the pregnant questions 
stirred in the dialogue between Blougram and 
Gigabids. Indeed, I remember hearing a charm- 
ing young Girtonian, forgetting for a moment the 
exquisite lyrics in 'Tippa Passes," and the superb 
blank verse of "Men and Women," state quite se- 
riously that the reason she admired the author of 
"Bed-cotton Night-cap Coimtry" was that he had 
headed a reaction against beauty in poetry ! 

Miss Cfhapman is probably one of Mr. Brown- 
ing's disciples. She does not imitate him^ but it 
is easy to discern his influence on her verse, and 
she has caught something of his fine, strange faith. 
Take, for instance, her poem, "A Strong-minded 
Woman": 

"See her? Oh, yes — Come this way — ^hush! this 
way. 
Here she is lying. 



248 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

Sweet — ^with the smile her face wore yesterday. 

As she lay dying. 
Calm, the mind-fever gone, and, praise God ! gone 

All the heart-himger; 
Looking the merest girl at forty-one — 

Yon guessed her younger? 
Well, she'd the flower-bloom that diildren hsTe, 

Was lithe and pliant, 
With eyes as innocent blue as they were brave, 

Besolved, defiant 
Yourself— you worship art I Well, at that shrine 

She bowed too lowly. 
Drank thirstily of beauty, as of wine, 

Proclaimed it holy. 
But could you follow her when, in a breath. 

She knelt to science. 
Vowing to truth true service to the death. 

And heart-reliance? 
Nay — ^then for you she underwent eclipse. 

Appeared as alien 

As once, before he prayed, those ivory lipe 

Seemed to Pygmalion. .'^"^ T^ 
« • e e e 

Hear from your heaven, my dear, my lost delij^^ 
You who were woman 



LITERARY AND OTHEB NOTES. 243 

To your heart's hearty and not more pure, more 
white. 

Than warmly himian. 
How shall I answer? How express, reveal 

Your true life-stoiy? 
How utter, if they cannot guess— not fed 

Your crowning glory? 
This way. Attend my words. The rich, we know. 

Do into heaven 
Enter but hardly ; to the poor, the low, 

God's kingdom given. 
Well, there^s another heaven — a heaven on earth — 

(Thafs love's fruition) 
Whereto a certain lack— a certain dearth — 

Gains best admission. 
Here, too, she was too ridi — ah^ GodI if less 

Love had been lent her I — 
Into the realm of human happiness 

These look— not enter.** 

Well, here we have, if not quite an echo, at least 
a reminiscence of the metre of 'The Grammarian's 
Funeral'*; and the peculiar blending together of 
Ijrrical and dramatic forms seems essentially, diar- 
acteristic of Mr. Browning's method. Yet there is 
a distinct personal note running all through the 



244 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDBL 

poem, and true originality is to be found ratiier in 
the use made of a model ihsn in the rejection of 
all models and masters. Dans Vart eomme dans la 
naiure on est ioujours fils de quelqu'un, and we 
should not quarrel with the reed if it whispers to 
us the music of the Ijre. A little child once asked 
me if it was the nightingale who taught the linnets 
how to sing. 

Miss Chapman's other poems contain a great 
deal that is interesting. The most ambitious is 
'TTie New Purgatory/' to which the book owes its 
title. It is a vision of a strange gard^i in which, 
cleansed and purified of all stain and shame, walk 
Judas of Cheriothy Nero the Lord of Rome, Ysabd 
the wife of Ahab, and others^ around wHose names 
cling terrible memories of horror^ or awful splen« 
dours of sin. The conception is fine;^ but the treat- 
ment is hardly adequate. There are, howe?ery 
some goody strong lines in it, and, indeed, almost 
all of Miss Chapman's poems are wor& reading, 
if not for their absolute beauty, at least for tiieir 
intellectual intention. 

Nothing is more interesting than to watch Ihe 
change and development of the art of novel-writing 
in this nineteenth century — ^HbiB so-called nine- 



LITERARY AND, OTHEB NOTES. 246 

teenth century/' as on impassioned young orator 
once termed it^ after a contemptuous diatribe 
against the evils of modem civilisation. In France 
they have had one great genius^ Balzac^ who invent- 
ed the modem method of looking at life; and one 
great artist^ Flaubert, who is the impeccable mas- 
ter of style; and to the influence of these two 
men we may trace almost all contemporary French 
fiction. But in England we have had no schools 
worth speaking of. The fiery torch lit by the 
Brontes has not been passed on to other hands; 
Dickens hae only infiuenced journalism; Thack- 
eray's delightful superficial philosophy, superb 
narrative power, and clever social satire have found 
no echoes ; nor has Trollope left any direct suc- 
cessors behind him — ^a fact which is not much to 
be regretted, however, as, admirable though Trol- 
lope undoubtedly is for rainy afternoons and ted- 
ious railway journeys, from the point of view of 
literature he is merely the perpetual curate of 
PudlingtOTi Parva. As for George Meredith, who 
could hope to reproduce him? His style is diaos 
illumined by brilliant fiashes of lightning. As a 
writer he has mastered everything, except lan- 
guage; as a novelist he can do everything, except 
tell a story; as an ajrtist he is everything, except 



246 THE WBITINGS OE OSCAR WILDK 

articulate. Too strange to be popular, too indiTid- 
ual to have imitators, the autlior of '^diaid Fev- 
erel^' stands absolutely alone. It is easy to diaarm 
criticism, but he has disarmed the disciple. He 
gives us his philosophy through the medium of wit, 
and is never so pathetic as virhen he is humorous. 
To turn truth into a paradox is not difScult, but 
George Meredith makes all his paradoxes truths, 
and no Theseus can thread his labyrinth, no (Edi* 
pus solve his secret 

Hovirever, it is only fair to acknowledge that 
there are some signs of a school springing up 
amongst us. This school is not native, nor does it 
seek to reproduce any English master. It may 
be described as the result of the realism of Paris 
filtered through the refining influence of Boston. 
Analysis, not action, is its aim ; it has more pqr* 
chology than passion, and it plays very deverly 
upon one string, and this is the oommonplaoe. 

As a reaction against this school, it is pleasant 
to come across a novel like Lady Augusta Nod's 
''Hithersea Mere^' (Macmillan & Co.). If thia 
story has any definite defect, it comes from its 
delicacy and lightness of treatment. An indui»- 
trious Bostonian would have made half a dozen 



LITERARY AND OTHER NOTES. 247 

novels out of it, and have had enough left for a 
seriaL Lady Augusta Nod is content to vivify 
her characters^ and does not care about vivisec- 
tion; she suggests rather than explains; and she 
does not seek to make life too obviously rational. 
Romance, picturesqueness, charm — ^these are the 
qualities of her book. As for its plot, it has so 
many plots that it is difScult to describe them. 
We have the story of Rhona Somerville, the daugh- 
ter of a great popular preacher, who tries to write 
her father's life, and^ on looking over his papers 
and early diaries, finds struggle where she expected 
calm, and doubt where she looked for faith, and 
is afraid to keep back the truth, and yet dares not 
publish it Rhona is quite charming; she is like 
a little flower that takes itself very seriously, and 
she shows us how thoroughly nice and natural a 
narrow-minded girl may be. Then we have the 
two brothers, John and Adrian Mowbray. John 
is the hard-working, vigorous clergyman, who is 
impatient of all theories, brings his faith to the 
test of action, not of intellect, lives what he be- 
lieves, and has no sympathy for those who waver 
or question — a thoroughly admirable, practical, 
and extremely irritating man. Adrian is the fas- 
cinating dilettanti, the philosophic doubter, a sort 



248 THE WBITINQS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

of romantic rationalist with a taste for art Of 
course^ Bhona marries the brother who needs con* 
version^ and their gradual influence on each other 
is indicated by a few subtle touches. Then we 
have the curious story of Olga^ Adrian Mowlnray's 
first love. She is a wonderful and mystical girl, 
like a little maiden out of the Sagas, with the 
blue eyes and fair hair of the North. An old 
Norwegian nurse is always at her side, a sort of 
Lapland witch, who teaches her how to see visions 
and to interpret dreams. Adrian mocks at this 
superstition, as he calls it, but as a consequence 
of disregarding it, Olga's only brother is drowned 
skating, and she never speaks to Adrian again. 
The whole story is told in the most suggestive 
way, the mere delicacy of the toudi making what 
is strange seem real. The most delightful char- 
acter in the whole book, however, is a girl called 
Hilary Marston, and hers, also, is the most tragic 
tale of all. Hilary is like a little woodland faun, 
half Greek and half gipsy ; she knows the note of 
every bird, and the haunt of every animal; she is 
terribly out of place in a drawing-room, but is on 
intimate terms with every young poacher in the 
district; squirrels come and sit on her shoulder, 
which is pretty, and she carries ferrets in her pock- 



LITERARY AND OTHER NOTES. 249 

ets, which is dreadful ; she never reads a book, and 
has not got a single accomplishment; bnt she is 
fascinating and fearless^ and wiser, in her own. 
way, than any pedant or bookworm. This poor 
little English Dryad falls passionately in love with 
a great^ blind, helpless hero, who regards her as a 
sort of pleasant tomboy; and her death is most 
touching and pathetic. Lady Augusta Noel has a 
charming and winning style, her descriptions of 
Nature are quite admirable, and her book is one 
of the most pleasantly written novels that has ap- 
peared this winter. 

Miss Alice Corkran's 'TIargery Morton's Girl- 
hood" (Blackie & Son) has the same lightness 
of touch and grace of treatment. Though osten- 
sibly meant for young people, it is a story that all 
can read with pleasure, for it is true without being 
harsh, and beautiful without being affected, and 
its rejection of the stronger and more violent pas- 
sions of life is artistic rather than ascetic. In a 
word, it is a little piece of true literature, as dainty 
as it is delicate, and as sweet as it is simple. Mar- 
gery Merton is brought up in Paris by an old 
maiden aunt, who has an elaborate theory of edu- 
cation, and strict ideas about discipline. Her sys- 



260 THE WBITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

tern 10 an excellent one^ being founded on the sci- 
ence of Darwin and the wisdom of Solomon, bat 
it comes to terrible grief when pat into practice; 
and finally she has to procure a governess, Madame 
B^yille, the widow of a great and unappreciated 
French painter. From her Margery gets her first 
feeling for art, and the diief interest of the book 
centres roimd a competiticm for an art scholar- 
ship, into which Margery and the other girls of 
the convent school enter. Margery selects Joan of 
Arc as her subject; and, rather to the horror of 
the good nuns, who think that the saint should 
have her golden aureole, and be as gorgeous and 
as ecclesiastical as bright paints and bad drawing 
can make her, the picture represents a common 
peasant girl, standing in an old orchard, and listen- 
ing in ignorant terror to the strange voices whis- 
pering in her ear. The scene in whidi she shows 
her sketch for the first time to the art master 
and the Mother Superior is very cleverly rendered 
indeed, and shows considerable dramatic power. 

Of course, a good deal of opposition takes place, 
but ultimately Margery has her own way, and, 
in spite of a wicked plot set on foot by a jealous 
competitor, who pervades the Mother Superior 
that the picture ia not Margery^s own work, she 



LITEEABY AND OTHBB NOTES. 261 

gucceeda in winning, the prize. The whole account 
of the gradual development of the conception in 
the girFs mind^ and the various attempts ahe makes 
to give her dream its perfect form, is extremely 
interesting, and, indeed, the book deserves a place 
among what Sir Qeorge Trevelyan has happily 
termed '^e art-literatore^' of onr day. Mr. Bns- 
kin in prose, and Mr. Browning in i)oetry, were 
the first who drew for ns the workings of the artist 
sonl, the first who led ns from the painting or 
statue to the hand that fashioned it, and the brain 
that gave it life. They seem to have made art 
more expressive for us, to have shown us a pas- 
sionate humaniiy lying behind line and colour. 
Theirs was the seed of this new literature, and 
theirs, too, is its flower; but it is pleaaant to note 
their influence on Mias Corkran's little story, in 
which the creation of a picture forms the dominant 
motif. 

Mrs. Pfeiffer^s '*Women and Work"* (Trubner & 
Co.) is a collection of most interesting, essays on 
the rdation to health and physical development 
of the higher education of girls, and the intellect- 
ual or more systematised effort of woman. Mrs. 
Pf eiffer, who writes a most admirable prose style. 



252 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

deals in succession with the sentimental difficnliyy 
with the economic problem, and with the argu- 
ments of physiologists. She boldly grapples with 
Professor Bomanes, whose recent artide in the 
Nineteenth Century, on the leading characters 
which mentally differentiate men and women, at- 
tracted 80 much attention, and produces some very 
valuable statistics from America^ where the influ- 
ence of education on health has been most care- 
fully studied. Her book is a most important con- 
tribution to the discussion of one of the great social 
problems of our day. The extended activity of 
women is now an accomplished fact; its results 
are on their trial; and Mrs. Pf eider's excellent 
essays sum up the situation very completely, and 
show the rational and scientific basis of the move- 
ment more clearly and more logically than any 
other treatise I have as yet seen. 

It is interesting to note that many of the most 
advanced modem ideas on tiie subject of the edu- 
cation of women are anticipated by Defoe in his 
wonderful ''Essay on Projects," where he proposes 
that a college for women should be erected in every 
county in England, and ten colleges of the kind 
in London. '1 have often thought of it/* he says. 



LITEBABY AND OTHER NOTES. 259 



^as one of the most barbarons ctuatoins in the world 
that we deny the advantages of learning to women. 
Their youth is spent to teach them to stitch and 
eew, or to make baubles. They are tanght to read^ 
indeed, and perhaps to write their names, or so, 
and that is the height of a woman's education. 
And I wonid but ask any who slight the sex for 
their understanding, 'What is a man (a gentle- 
man I mean) good for that is taught no more?' 
What has the woman done to forfeit the privilege 
of being taught? Shall we upbraid women with 
folly when it is only the error of this inhuman 
custom that hindered them being made wiser?" 
Defoe then proceeds to elaborate his scheme for 
the foundation of women's colleges, and enters into 
minute details about the architecture, the general 
curriculum, and the discipline. His suggestion 
that the penalty of death should be inflicted on 
any man who ventured to make a proposal of mar- 
riage to any of the girl students during term time 
possibly suggested the plot of Lord Tennyson's 
'Trincess," so its harshness may be excused, and 
in all other respects his ideas are admirable. I 
am glad to see that this curious litUe volume forms 
one of the National Library series. In its antici- 



254 THE WRITINGS OP OSCAR WILDE. 

patioiis of many of our most modem inventionB it 
showB how thorotighlj practical ell dreamers are^ 




I am sorry to see that Mrs. Pawcett deprecates 
flie engagement of I b of education as dress- 
makers and mjlliners^ and speaks of it as being 
detrimental to those who hare fewer ediscatioQal 
advantages. I myself woiJd like to see dressmak- 
ing regarded not merely as a leartjed profession, 
but as a Hue art To constmct a costtime that will 
be at once rational and beotttifal requires an ac- 
curate knowledge of the principles of proportion, 
a thorough acquaintance with the laws of healUi, 
a subtle sen^ of colour, and a quick appreciation 
of the proper use of materials, and the proper qual- 
ities of pattern and design. The health of a nation 
depends very largely on its mode of dress ; the ar- 
tistic feeling of a nation should find expression in 
its costume quite as much as in its architecture; 
and just as the upholstering tradesman has had to 
give place to the decorative artist, so the ordinary 
milliner, with her lack of taste and lack of knowl- 
edge, her foolish fashions and her feeble inven- 
tions, will have to make way for the scientific and 
artistic dress designer. Indeed, so far from it 
being wise to discourage women of education from 



LITERARY AND OTHER NOTES. 255 

taking up the profession of dressmakers^ it is ex- 
actly women of education who axe needed^ and I 
am glad to see in the new technical college for 
women at Bedford^ millinery and dressmaking are 
to be taught as part of the ordinary curriculum. 
There has also been a Society of Lady Dressmak- 
ers started in London, for the purpose of teaching 
educated girls and women, and the Scientific Dress 
Association is, I hear, doing very good work in the 
same direction. 

I have received some very beautiful specimens 
of Christmas books from Messrs. Grifiith & Par- 
ran. 'Treasures of Art and Song,*^ edited by 
Robert Ellice Mack, is a real edition de luxe of 
pretty poems and pretty pictures; and '^Through 
the Tear'' is a wonderfully artistic calendar. 

Messrs. Hildesheimer ft Faulkner have also sent 
me '^Rhymes and Roses," illustrated by Ernest 
Wilson and St. Clair Simmons; "Cape Town 
Dicky/* a child's book, with some very lovely pic- 
tures by Miss Alice Havers; a wonderful edition 
of *'The Deserted Village," illustrated by Mr. 
Charles Gregory and Mr. Hines; and some really 
charming Chrietmas cards, those by iMiss Alice 






I .!' ; - ■■'ICC p'^Ma^k-*' thn.i #i ! . . ■ 
:; ■■ ■• "• .'• ■ V iilioiit *>n:'d-K imt tij i: ' 

? ■ ■ ' 1. '.-yc wi^'Hiut poftry. Tl' • 

. . . ' . . .-vi»l {n U^ -x ])«>{> itar VI .. 

■ •.• .r..i''f :.) t'la* I iirii'ii^lv ..•: 

'•. ■ . "■ ■ li'i.'v Ml.< 0:0' r : 1 '- 

-. . -,' v i^.- ;, ,.^ in'- Tf -T" ■ .: 

'.:■■:.. ^T•• .- !'i\^s^':- '^ 



■ ■. ' 1 ■■ .V'. ' .%■ 



>,.;•! 



LITERARY AND OTHER NOTES. 257 

cleanliness and economy necessary for good cook- 
ing. 

The Popular Ballad Concert Society has been re- 
organised under the name of the Popular Musical 
Union. Its object will be to train the working 
classes thoroughly in the enjoyment and perform- 
ance of music> and to provide the inhabitants of 
the crowded districts of the East-End with con- 
certs and oratorios^ to be performed^ aa f ar as pos- 
sible^ by trained members of the working classes; 
and^ though money is urgently required^ it is pro- 
posed to make the society to a certain degree self- 
supporting, by giving something in the form of 
high-claas concerts in return for subscriptions and 
donations. The whole scheme is an excellent one, 
and I hope that the readers of '^The Woman's 
World*' will give it their valuable support Mrs. 
Ernest Hart ia the secretary^ and the treasurer is 
the Rev. S. Bamett. 

'Canute the Great" (George Bell & Sons), hy 
Michael Field, is in many respects a really re- 
markable work of art Its tragic element is to be 
found in life, not in death; in the hero's psydio- 
logical development, not in his moral declension or 



258 THE WBITINQS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

in any physical calamity; and the authw has bor- 
rowed from modem science the idea that in the 
evolutionary struggle for existence the true tragedy 
may be that of the survivor. Canute, the rough 
generous Viking, finds himself alienated from his 
gods, his forefathers, his very dreams. With cen* 
turies of Pagan blood in his veins, he sets himself 
to the task of becoming a great Christian governor 
and lawgiver to men ; and yet he is fully conscious 
that, while he has abandoned the noUe impulses 
of his race, he still retains that which in his nature 
is most fierce or fearful. It is not by faith that 
he reaches after the new culture. The beautiful 
Christian woman whom he has made queen of 
his life and lands teaches him no mercy, and knows 
nothing of forgiveness. It is sin and not suffering 
that purifies him — ^mere sin itself. *TBe not afraid,'* 
he says in the last great scene of the play : 

''Be not afraid ; 
I have learnt this, sin is a mighty bond 
'Twixt Ood and man. Love that has ne'er for> 

given 
Is virgin and untender ; spousal passion 
Becomes acquainted with life's vilest things 
Transmutes them, and exalts. Oh^ wonderful. 



LITERABY IND OTHER NOTES. 269 

This touch of pardon, — all the shame cast out; 
The heart a-ripple with the gaiety. 
Tie leaping consciousness that Heaven knows all^ 
And yet esteems us royal. Think of it — 
The joy, the hope r 

This strange and powerful conception is worked 
out in a manner as strong as it is subtle; and, in- 
deed, almost every character in the play seems to 
suggest some new psychological problem. The 
mere handling of the verse is essentially character- 
istic of our modem introspective method, as it 
presents to us, not thought in its perfected form, 
but the involutions of thought seeking for expres- 
sion. We seem to witness the very workings of 
the mind, and to watch the passion struggling for 
utterance. In plays of this kind (plays that are 
meant to be read, not to be acted) it must be 
admitted that we often miss that narrative and 
descriptive element which in the epic is so great 
a charm, and, indeed, may be said to be almost 
essential to the perfect literary presentation of any 
story. This element the Greeks managed to retain 
by tiie introduction of chorus and messenger; but 
we seem to have been unable to invent any sub- 
stitute for it. That there is here a distinct loss 



260 THE WBITINGS OF OSGAB WILDB. 

cannot^ I think, be denied. Here is someUung 
harsh, abrupt, and inartistic in such a atage-direo- 
tion as ^Canute stran^es Edric, flings hia body 
into the stream, and gazes (mV* It striloea no 
dramatic note, it conveja no picture, it is meagre 
and inadequate. If acted, it might be fine; bnt 
as read, it is unimpressiye. However, there is no 
form of art that has not got its limitations^ and 
thon^ it is sad to see the action of a play rele- 
gated to a formal footnote^ still tiiere ia nndonbt- 
edly a certain gain in psychological analysis and 
psychological concentration. 

It is a far cry from the Enntiinga Saga to Bos- 
setti's note-book, bnt Michad Udd passes from 
one to the other without any loss of power. In- 
deed, most readers will probably prefer *Tlie Cfnp 
of Water," which is the second play in tiiis volmne, 
to the earlier historical drama. It is more purely 
poetical ; and if it has less power, it has certainly 
more beauty. Bossetti conceived the idea of a 
story in which a young king falls paarionaidy in 
love with a little peasant girl who gives Um a cup 
of water, and is by her beloved in turn, but being 
betrothed to a noble lady, he yields her in marriage 
to his friend, on condition that once a jrear— <ni 
the anniversary of their meeting — she bring him 



MTEEABY AND OTHER NOTES. 861 

a cup of water. The girl dies in childbirth, leav- 
ing a daughter who grows into her mother's per- 
fect likeness, and comes to meet the king when 
he is hunting. Just, however, as he is about to 
take the cup from her hand, a second figure, in 
her exact likeness, but dressed in peasant's clothes, 
steps to her side, looks in the king's face, and 
kifises him on the moutii. He falls forward on 
his horse's neck, and is lifted up dead. Michael 
Field has struck out the supernatural element so 
characteristic of Boesetti's genius, and in some 
other respects modified for dramatic purposes ma- 
terial Rossetti left unused. The result is a poem 
of exquisite and pathetic graca Cara, the peaaant 
girl, is a creation as delicate as it is delightful, 
and it deserves to rank beside the Faun of '^Callir- 
hoe. As for the young king who loses all the 
happiness of his life through one noble moment 
of unselfishness, and who recogniBcs as he stands 
over Cara's dead body that 

" women are not chattels. 

To deal with as one's generosity 
May prompt or straiten. • • ." 

and that .. ^wemufitleam 

To drink life's pleasures if we would be pure," 



262 THE WHITINGS OP OSCAB WILDK 

he is one of the most romantic figures in all mod* 
em dramatic work. Looked at from a purely tedi- 
nical point of view, Michael Field's verse is some- 
times lacking in music, and has no sustained 
grandeur of movement; but it is extremely drar- 
matic, and its method is admirably suited to ex- 
press those swift touches of nature and sudden 
flashes of thought which are Michael Fidd's dis- 
tinguishing qualities. As for the moral contained 
in these plays, work that has the rich vitality of 
life has always something of life's mystery also; 
it cannot be narrowed down to a formal creed, 
nor summed up in a platitude; it has many an- 
swers, and more than one secret. 

Miss Frances Martin's "^fe of EUzabeQi Gil- 
bert" (Macmillan & Co.) is an extremely inter- 
esting book. Elizabeth Gilbert was bom at a time 
when, as her biographer reminds us, kindly and 
intelligent men and women could gravely implore 
the Almighiy to ''take away" a child merdy be- 
cause it was blind; when they could argue that to 
teach the blind to read, or to attempt to teach them 
to work, was to fly in the face of Providence; and 
her whole life was given to the endeavour to over- 
come this prejudice and superstition; to show that 



LITERARY AND OTHER NOTES. 263 

blindness, though a great privation, is not neces- 
sarily a disqualification, and that blind m^ and 
women can learn, labour, and fulfil all the duties 
of life. Before her day all that the blind were 
taught was to commit texts from the Bible to mem- 
ory. She saw that they could learn handicrafts, 
and be made industrious and self-supporting. She 
began with a small cellar in Holbum, at the rent 
of eighteen pence a week, but before her death she 
could point to large and well appointed workshops 
in almost every city of England where blind men 
and women are employed, where tools have heen 
invented by or modified for them, and where agen- 
cies have been established for the sale of their 
work. The whole story of her life is full of pathos 
and of beauty. She was not bom blind, but lost 
her sight through an attack of scarlet fever when 
she was three years old. For a long time she could 
not realise her position, and we hear of the little 
child making earnest appeals to be taken ''out of 
the dark room/' or to have a candle lighted ; and 
once she whispered to her father, 'If I am a very 
good little girl, may I see my doll to-morrow?*' 
However, all memory of vision seems to have faded 
from her before she left the sick-room, though, 
taught by those around her, she soon began to take 



264 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAE WILDE. 

an imaginary interest in colour^ and a very real 
one in form and texture. An old nnrae is still 
alive who remembers making a pink fxodk for her 
when she was a child, her delight at its being pink, 
and her pleasure in stroking down the fcdds; and 
when in 1836 the young Princess Victoria visited 
Oxford with her mother, Bessie^ as she was always 
caUed, came running home;^ ezdaiming: ^Oh, 
mamma» I have seen the Dudess of Eent^ and she 
had on a brown silk dress.'' Her youthful ad- 
miration of Wordsworth was chiefly based npoa 
his love of flowers, but also cm personal knowl- 
edge. When she was about ten years old^ Words- 
worth went to Oxford to receive the hcmorary de- 
gree of D.C.L. from the University. He stayed 
with Dr. Oilbert, then Principal of Brasenose;, and 
won Bessie's heart the flrst day Iqr telling at the 
dinner table how he had almost leapt off the coaeh 
in Bagley Wood to gather the bine veronica. But 
she had a better reason for remembering that visits 
One day she was in the drawing-room alone, and 
Wordsworth entered. For a mommt he stood si- 
lent before the blind child, the little sensitive fiu^ 
with its wondering, enquiring look, turned towaxda 
him. Then he gravely said: ^adam, I h<^ 



LITERABY AND OTHEB NOTES. 265 

I do not disturb yotu'' She never forgot that 
'^adam'^ — grave^ solemn, ahnost reverentiaL 

As for the great practical work of her life, the 
amelioration of the condition of the blind. Miss 
Martin gives a wonderful account of her noble 
efforts and her noble success ; and the volume con* 
tains a great many interesting letters from emi- 
nent people, of which the following characteristic 
note from Mr. Buskin is not the least interesting: 

Denmark Hill, 2nd September, 1871. 

Madam : I am obliged by your letter, and I 
deeply sympathise with the objects of the institu- 
tion over which you preside. But one of my main 
principles of work is that every one must do their 
best, and spend all in their own work, and mine 
is with a much lower race of sufferers than you 
plead for — ^with those who 'have eyes and see 
not.' I am. Madam, your faithful servant, 

J. Buskin. 

Miss Martin is a most sympathetic biographer, 
and her book should be read by all who care to 
know the history of one of the most remarkable 
women of our century. 



266 THE WBITINGS OP OSCAE WILDE. 

"Oursdves and (hir Neighbors'' (Ward & Dow- 
ney) is a pleasant Tolmne of social essays from, 
the pen of one of the most graceful and attractiTe 
of all American poetesses, Mrs. Louise Chandler 
Monlton. Mrs. Moolton, who has a very light lit- 
erary touch, discusses every important modon 
problem — ^from Society rosebuds and old bachelors, 
down to the latest fashions in bonnets and in Bon- 
nets. The best chapter in the book is that enti- 
tled ^rrhe Gospel of Good Gowns,'' whidi contains 
some very excellent remarks on the ettiics of dress. 
Mrs. Moulton sums up her position in the follow- 
ing passage: 

^rrhe desire to please is a natural characteristic 
of unspoiled womaidiood. ^f I lived in the woods, 
I should dress for the trees,' said a woman widely 
known for taste and for culture. Every woman's 
dress should be, and if she has any ideality will 
be, an expression of herself. . . . The true gospel 
of dress is that of fitness and taste. Pictures are 
painted, and music is written, and flowers are 
fostered, that life may be made beautiful. Let 
women delight our eyes like pictures, be harmoni- 
ous as music, and fragrant as flowers, that they 
also may fulfil their mission of grace and of 



LITEEABY AND OTHEB NOTES. 267 

beauty. By companionship with beautiful thoughts 
shall their tastes be so formed that their toilets 
will never be out of harmony with their mieans or 
their position. They will be clothed ahnost as un- 
consciously as the lilies of the field; but each one 
will be herself^ and there will be no more uni* 
formily in iheir attire than in their faces/' 

The modem Dryad who is ready to "dress for 
the trees'' seems to me a charming type; but I 
hardly think that Mrs. Moulton is right when she 
says that the woman of the future will be clothed 
"almost as unconsciously as the lilies of the field." 
Possibly, however, she merely means to emphasise 
the distinction between dressing and dressing-up, 
a distinction which is often forgotten. 

''Warring Angels" (J. Fisher TJnwin) is a very 
sad and suggestive story. It contains no impossible 
heroine and no improbable hero, but is simply a 
faithful transcript from life, a truthful picture 
of men and women as they are. Darwin could 
not have enjoyed it, as it does not end happily. 
There is, at least, no distribution of cakes and ale 
in the last chapter. But then, scientific people 
are not always the best judges of literature. They 



268 THE WHITINGS OP OSCAB WILDE. 

seem to think that the sole aim of art should be 
to amuse, and had they been consulted on the sub- 
ject would have banished Melpomene fnxn Par- 
nassus. It may be admitted, howerer, that not a 
litUe of our modem art is somewhat harsh and 
painfid. Our Castaly is very salt with tears, and 
we have bound the brows of the Muses with cy- 
press and with yew. We are often told that we 
are a shallow age, yet we have certainly the sad- 
dest literature of all the ages, for we have made 
Truth and not Beauty the aim of art, and seem to 
value imitation more than imagination. This ten- 
dency is, of course, more marked in fiction than it 
is in poetry. Beauty of form is always in itself 
a source of joy; the mere technique of verse has 
an imaginative and spiritual element; and life 
must, to a certain d^ree, be transfigured before 
it can find its expression in music. But ordinary 
fiction, rejecting the beauty of form in order to 
realise the facts of life, seems often to lack the 
vital element of delight, to miss that pleasure- 
giving power in virtue of which the arts exist 
It would not, however, be fair to regard ''Warring 
Angels'' as simply a specimen of literary pho- 
tography. It has a marked distinction of style, a 
definite grace and simplicity of manner. There is 



LITEEABY AND OTHER NOTES. 269 

nothing crude in it, ihongh it is to a certain de- 
gree inexperienced; nothing violent, though it is 
often strong. The story it has to tell has heen 
frequently told before, bnt the treatment makes it 
new; and Lady Flower, for whose white soul the 
angels of good and evil are at war, is admirably 
conceived, and admirably drawn. 

*'A Song of Jubilee, and other Poems'' '(^egan, 
Paul, Trench & Co.) contains some pretty, pictur- 
esque verses. Its author is Mrs. De Courcy Laf- 
fan, who, under the name of Mrs. Leith Adams, 
is well known as a novelist and story writer. The 
** Jubilee Ode*' is quite as good as most of the Jubi- 
lee Odes have been, and some of the short poems 
are graceful. This from 'The First Butterfly*' is 
pretty: 

"0 little bird without a song ! I love 
Thy silent presence, floating in the light — 
A living, perfect thing, when scarcely yet 
The snow-white blossom crawls along the wall. 
And not a daisy shows its star-like head 
Amid the grass.'' 

Miss Bella Duffy's 'TLife of Madame de Stael" 
forms part of that admirable ^^Eminent Women 



270 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

Series^'' which is bo well edited by Mr. John H. 
Ingram. There is nothing absolutely new in Ifias 
Duffy's book, but this was not to be expected. Un- 
published correspondence, that ddight of the eag^ 
biographer, is not to be had in the case of Madame 
de Stael, the De Broglie family having either de- 
stroyed or snccessfully concealed all the papers 
which might have revealed any facts not already 
in the possession of ihe world. Upon the other 
hand, the book has the excellent quality of con- 
densation, and gives ns in less than two hundred 
pages a very good picture of Madame de Stael and 
her day. Miss Duffy's criticism of "Corinne'* is 
worth quoting: 

'"Corinne' is a classic of which everybody is 
bound to speak with respect The enormous ad- 
miration which it exacted at the time of its ap- 
pearance may seem somewhat strange in this year 
of grace; but then it must be remembered that 
Italy was not the over-written country it has since 
become. Besides this, Madame de Stael was the 
most conspicuous personage of her day. Except 
Chateaubriand, she had nobody to dispute with 
her the palm of literary glory in France. Her 
exile, her literary circle, her courageous opinions. 



LITERARY AND OTHER NOTES. 271 

had kept the eyes of Europe fixed on her for years, 
so that any work from her pen was stue to excite 
the liveliest curiosiiy. 

"'Corinne^ is a sort of glorified guide-book, 
with some of the qualities of a good novel. It is 
very long-winded, but the appetite of the ag^ was 
robust in that respect, and the highly strung emo- 
tions of the hero and heroine could not shock a 
taste which had been formed by the Sorrows of 
Werther. It is extremely moral, deeply sentimen- 
tal, and of a deadly earnestness — ^three character- 
istics which' could not fail to reconmiend it to a 
dreary and ponderous generation, the most defi- 
cient in taste that ever trod the earth. 

'^ut it is artistic in the sense that the interest 
is concentrated from first to last on the central 
figure, and the drama, such as it is, unfolds itself 
naturally from its starting point, which is the 
contrast between the characters of Oswald and 
Corinne." 

The '^dreary and ponderous generation, the most 
deficient in taste that ever trod the earth,'' seems 
to me a somewhat exaggerated mode of expres- 
sion, but ''glorified guide-book" is a not trnfelici- 
tous description of the novel that once thrilled 



21 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

Ei3 "Ope. Mi&s DuflEy mms up her opinion of Mad- 
am ! de 9ta^l as a writer in the foUowiog paasage: 



^^er mind was etroEg of grasp and wide In 
rang fatigued it She could 

strike » alternately briUiant, 

exha lut she could not link 

them as to form an orgamc 

whole, liings eeparately, and 

tried 1 rarily, and it is gener- 

ally my idea of hers from 

its 01 lotigbtg are like pearls 

of I , or carelessly strung 

together, f design. On closing 

one of her books the reader is left with no con- 
tinuous impression. He has been dazzled and de- 
lighted^ enlightened also by flashes; but the hori- 
zons disclosed have vanished again^ and the out- 
look is enriched by no new vistas. 

'Then shQ was deficient in the higher qualities 
of the imagination. She could analyse^ but not 
characterise; construct, but not create. She could 
take one defect like selfishness, or one passion like 
love, and display its workings; or she could de- 
scribe a whole character, like Napoleon's, with 
marvellous penetration; but she could not make 



LITEBABY AND OTHER NOTES. 273 

her personages talk^ or act like human beings. She 
lacked pathos, and had no sense of humour. In 
short, hers was a mind endowed with enormous 
powers of comprehension, and an amazing rich- 
ness of ideas, but deficient in perception of beauty, 
in poetry, and in true originality. She was a great 
social personage, but her influence on literature 
was not destined to be lasting, because, in spite 
of foreseeing too much, she had not the true pro- 
phetic sense of proportion, and confused the things 
of the present with those of the future— the acci- 
dental with the enduring." 

I cannot but think that in this passage Miss 
Duffy rather underrates Madame de StaeFs influ- 
ence on the literature of the nineteenth century. 
It is true that she gave our literature no new form, 
but she was one of those who gave it a new spirit^ 
and the romantic movement owes her no small 
debt. However, a biography should be read for 
its pictures more than for its criticisms, and Miss 
Duffy shows a remarkable narrative power, and 
tells with a good deal of esprit the wonderful ad- 
ventures of the brilliant woman whom Heine 
termed ''a whirlwind in petticoats.'' 



274 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

Mr. Harcourt's reprint of John Evelyn's *Tife 
of Mrs. Oodolphin" (Sampson, Low & Co.) k a 
welcome addition to the list of charming library 
books. Mr. Harconrfs grandfather, the Arch- 
bishop of York, himself John Evelyn's great-great- 
grandson, inherited the mannscript from hia dis- 
tinguished ancestor, and in 1847 entrusted it for 
publication to Samuel Wilberforce, then Bishop 
of Oxford. As the book has been for a long time 
out of print, this new edition is sure to awake 
fresh interest in the life of the noble and virtoous 
lady whom John Evelyn so much admired. Mar- 
garet Godolphin was one of the Queen's Maids of 
Honour at the Court of Charles II, and was dis- 
tinguished for the delicate purity of her nature, 
as well as for her high intellectual attainm^its. 
Some of the extracts Evelyn gives from her Diary 
seem to show an austere, formal, almost ascetic 
spirit; but it was inevitable that a nature so re- 
fined as hers should have turned in horror from 
such ideals of life as were presented by men like 
Buckingham and Rochester, like Etheridge, Eilli* 
grew, and Sedley, like the King himself, to whom 
she could scarcely bring herself to speak. After 
her marriage she seems to have become ha{q)ier 
and brighter, and her early death makes her a 



LITERARY AND OTHER NOTES.. 275 

pathetic and interesting figure in the history of 
the time. Evelyn can see no fault in her^ and his 
life of her is the most wonderful of all panegyrics. 

Amongst the Maids-of-Honour mentioned by 
John Evelyn is Frances Jennings, the elder sister 
of the great Duchess of Marlborough. Miss Jen* 
nings, who was one of the most beautiful women 
of her day, married first Sir G^rge Hamilton, 
brother of the author of the ^^emoires de Oram- 
mont,'' and afterwards Richard Talbot^ who was 
made Duke of Tjrrconnel by James II. William's 
successful occupation of Ireland, where her bus- 
band was Lord Deputy, reduced her to poverty and 
obscurity, and she was probably the first Peeress 
who ever took to millinery as a livelihood. She 
had a dressmaker's shop in the Strand, and, not 
wishing to be detected, sat in a white mask and 
a white dress, and was known by the name of the 
''White Widow.'' 

I was reminded of the Duchess when I read 
Miss Emily Faithfull's admirable article in Oalig- 
nani on '^Ladies as Shopkeepers." ^The most dar- 
ing innovation in England at this moment," says 
Miss Faithfull, ''is the lady shopkeeper. At pres- 



276 THE WBITINGS OP OSCAB WILDE. 

ent but few people have had the courage to brave 
the cnrrait of social prejudice. We draw such 
fine distinctions between the wholesale and retail 
traders that our cotton spinners, calico makers, 
and general merchants seem to think that they 
belong to a totally different sphere, from which 
they look down on the lady who has had snflScient 
brains, capital, and courage to opoi a shop. But 
the old world moves faster than it did in former 
days, and before the end of the nineteenth century 
it is probable that a gentlewoman will be recog- 
nised in spite of her having entered on commer* 
cial pursuits, especially as we are growing accus- 
tomed to see scions of our noblest families on our 
Stock Exchange and in tea merdiants' houses ; one 
Peer of the realm is now doing an extensive busi- 
ness in coals, and another is a cab proprietor." 
Miss Faithfull then proceeds to give a most inter- 
esting account of the London dairy opened by the 
Hon. Mrs. Maberley, of Madame Isabel's millinery 
establishment, and of the wonderful work done 
by Miss Charlotte Robinson, who has recently been 
appointed Decorator to the Queen. ''About three 
years ago,'' Miss Faithfull tells us> Miss Bobinson 
came to Manchester, and opened a shop in King 
Street, and, regardless of that bugbear which ter- 



MTEBABY AND OTHER NOTES, 277 

rifies most women — ^the loss of social status — she 
put up her own name over the door^ and without 
the least self-assertion quietly entered into com- 
petition with the sterner sex. The result has been 
eminently satisfactory. This year Miss Bobinson 
has exhibited at Saltaire and at Manchester, and 
next year she proposes to exhibit at Glasgow, and, 
possibly, at Brussels. At first she had some diffi- 
culty in making people understand that her work 
is really commercial, not charitable; she feds that, 
nntil a healthy public opinion is created, women 
will pose as '^destitute ladies,^' and never take a 
dignified position in any calling they adopt. Gen- 
tlemen who earn Iheir own living are not spoken 
of BB ''destitute,^' and we must banish this idea 
in connection with ladies who are engaged in an 
equally honourable manner. Miss Faithfull con- 
cludes her most valuable article as follows : ^^The 
more highly educated our women of business are, 
the better for themselves, their work, and the 
whole community. Many of the professions to 
which ladies have hitherto turned are overcrowd- 
ed, and when once the fear of losing social position 
is boldly disregarded, it will be found that com- 
mercial life offers a variety of more or less lucra- 
tive employments to ladies of birth and capital. 



278 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAK WILDE. 

who find it more congenial to their tastes and re- 
quirements to invest their money and spend their 
energies in a business whidi yields a fair return 
rather than sit at liome content with a scanty pit- 
tance/* 

I myself entirely agree with Miss Faithfully 
though I feel that there is s(»nething to be said in 
favour of the view put forward by Lady Shrews- 
bury in the present number of ^The Woman's 
World/' and a great deal to be said in favour 
of Mrs. Joyce's scheme for emigration. Mr. Wal- 
ter Besant^ if we are to judge from his last novel, 
is of Lady Shrewsbury's way of thinking. 

I hope that some of my readers will be interested 
in Miss Beatrice Crane's little poem, ''Blush- 
rofies," for which her father, Mr. Walter Crane, 
has done so lovely and graceful a design. Mrs. 
Simon, of Birkdale Park, Southport, tells me that 
she offered a prize last term at her school for the 
best sonnet on any work of art The poems were 
sent to Professor Dowden, who awarded the prize 
to the youthful authoress of the following sonnet 
on Mr. Watts's picture of "Hope" : 



LITEBAEY AND OTHER NOTES, 279 

'''HOPE.' 
"She sits with drooping form and fair bent head, 
Low-bent to hear the faintly sounding strain 
That thrills her with the sweet uncertain pain 
Of timid trust and restful tears unshed. 
Around she feels vast spaces. Awe and dread 
Encompass her. And the dark doubt she fain 
Would banish; sees the shuddering fear remain 
And ever presses near with stealthy tread. 
But not for ever will the misty space 
Close down upon her meekly patient eyes. 
The steady lights within them soon will ope 
Their heavy lids, and then the sweet fair face, 
Uplifted in a sudden glad surprise^ 
Will find the bright reward which comes to Hope." 

I, myself, am rather inclined to prefer this son- 
net on Mr. Watts's 'Tsyche.^ The sixth line is 
deficient; but, in spite of the faulty technique, 
there is a great deal that is suggestive in it: 

"TSYCHE.* 

^^Unfathomable boimdless mystery, 
Last work of the Creator, deathless, vast, 
Soul— essence moulded of a changeful past ; 
Thou art the offspring of Eternity; 



280 THE WBITINQS OP OSCAB WILDE. 

Breath of his bieatli, by his vitality 
Engendered, in his image cast^ 
Part of the Natnre-eong whereof the last 
Chord sotmdeth never in the harmony. 
Tsyche' I Thy form is shadowed o'er with pain 
Bom of intfflisest longing, and the rain 
Of a world's weeping lieth like a sea 
Of silent sotmdlees sorrow in thine eyes. 
Yet grief is not eternal, for clouds rise 
From ont the ocean everlastingly/' 

I have to thank Mr. William Bnssell for kindly 
allowing me to reproduce Dante Gabriel Bossetti's 
drawing of the authoress of '^Ooblin Market"; 
and thanks are also due to Mr. Lafayette^ of Dub- 
lin, for the use of his photograph of H. B. H. the 
Princess of Wales in her Academic Bobes as Doe- 
tor of Music, which served as our frontispiece last 
month; and to Messrs. Hills and Saunders, of 
Oxford, and Mr. Lord and Mr. Blanchard, of Cam- 
bridge, for a similar courtesy in the case of the 

artide on ''Greek Plays at the Universities.'' 
• • • • # 

The Princess Emily Buete of Oman and Zanzi- 
bar, whose efforts to introduce women doctors into 
the East are so well known, has just published a 



LITEBAEY AND OTHEB NOTES. 281 

mopt inierestmg account of her life, under the 
title of '^Memoirs of an Arabian Princeee** (Ward 
& Downey). The Princess is Ihe daughter of the 
celebrated Sejid Said, Iman of Meaket and Sultan 
of Zanzibar, and her long residence in Germany 
has giv^i her the opportunity of comparing East- 
ern with Western civilisation. She writes in a 
very simple and unaffected manner, and though 
she has many grievances against her brother, the 
present Sultan (who seems never to have forgiven 
her for her conversion to Christianily, and her 
marriage with a German subject), she has too 
much tact, esprit, and good humour to trouble her 
readers with any dreary record of family quarrels 
and domestic differences. Her book throws a great 
deal of light on the question of the position of 
women in the East, and shows that much of what 
has been written on this subject is quite inaccu- 
rate. One of the most curious passages is that in 
which the Princess gives an account of her mother : 

'^y mother was a Circassian by birth, who in 
early youth had been torn away from her home. 
Her father had been a farmer, and she had always 
lived peacefully with her parents and her little 
brother and sister. War broke out suddenly, and 



282 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

the coTDrntry was oyemm by marauding bands. On 
their approach, the family fled into an under- 
ground place, as my mother called it — she prob- 
ably meant a cellar, which is not known in Zanzi- 
bar. Their place of refuge was, however, invaded 
by a merciless horde, the parents were slain, and 
the children carried off by three mounted Amanta. 
'^She came into my father's poaseasion when 
quite a child, probably at the tender age of aeren 
or eight years, as she cast her first tooth in onr 
house. She was at once adopted as playmate by 
two of my sisters, her own age, wifli whom she 
was educated and brought up. Together with 
them she learnt to read, which raised her a good 
deal above her equals, who, as a rule, became mem- 
bers of onr family at the age of sixteen or eighteen 
years, or older still, when they had outgrown what- 
ever taste they might once have had for schooling. 
She could scarcely be called pretty*; but she was 
tall and shapely, had black eyes, and hair down 
to her knees. Of a very gentle disposition, her 
greatest pleasure consisted in assisting other peo- 
ple, in looking after and nursing any sick person 
in the house; and I well remember her going about 
with her books from one patient to another, read- 
ing prayers to them. 



LITERABY AND OTHER NOTES. 283 

''She was in great favour with my father, who 
never refused her anything, though she interceded 
mostly for others; and when she came to see him 
he always rose to meet her half way — a distinction 
he conferred but very rarely. She was as kind 
and pious as she was modest, and in all her deal* 
ings frank and open. She had another daughter 
besides myself, who had died quite young. Her 
mental powers were not great, but she was very 
clever at needlework. She had always been a ten- 
der and loving mother to me, but this did not 
hinder her from punishing me severely when she 
deemed it necessary. 

'fShe had many friends at Bet-il-Mtoni^ which 
is rarely to be met with in an Arab harem. She 
had the most unshaken and firmest trust in Qod. 
When I was about five years old I remember a fire 
breaking out in the stables close by, one night 
while my father was at his city residence. A false 
alarm spread over the house that we, too, were 
in imminent danger, upon which the good woman 
hastened to take me on her arm, and her big kuran 
(we pronounce the word thus) on tiiie other, and 
hurried into the open air. On the rest of her 
possessions she set no value in this hour of dan- 
ger.^' 



284 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

Here is a description of Schesade, Uie Snltanfs 
second legitimate wife: 

''She was a Persian Princess of entrancing 
beauty, and of inordinate extravagance. Her little 
retinne was oompoeed of one hundred and fifty 
cavaliers, all Persians, who lived on the ground 
floor; with than she hunted and rode in the lm>ad 
day — rather contrary to Arab notions. The Per- 
sian women are subjected to quite a Spartan train- 
ing in bodily ezerdse; they enjoy great liberty, 
much more so than Arab women, but they are also 
more rude in' mind and action. 

''Schesade is said to have carried her eztrava^ 
gant style of life beyond bounds; her dresMi, cat 
always after the Persian fashion, were literally 
covered with embroideries of pearls. A great many 
of these were picked up nearly every morning by 
the servants in her rooms, where she had dropped 
them from her garments, but the Princess would 
never take any of these precious jewds back again. 
She did not only drain my father's exdiequer most 
wantonly, but violated many of our sacred laws; 
in fact, she had only married him for his high 
station and weaUh, and had loved some one else 
all the time. Such a state of things could, of 



LITESABY AND OTHEB NOTES. 286 

course^ only end in a divorce; fortunately, ISdie- 
sade had no children of her own. There ia a ru- 
mour still current among vb that beautiful Scho- 
sade was observed, some years after this event, 
when my father carried on war in Persia, and 
had the good fortune of taking the fortress of Ben- 
der Abb&s on the Persian Oulf , heading her troops, 
and taking aim at the members of our family 
herself/^ 

Another of the remarkable women mentioned by 
the Princess was her step-mother, Azze-bint-Zef, 
who seems to have completely ruled the Sultan, 
and to have settled all questions of home and for- 
eign policy; while her great-aunt^ the Princess 
Asche, was regent of the empire during the Sul- 
tanas minority, and was the heroine of the siege 
of Mesket Of her the Princess gives the follow- 
ing account: 

'Thressed in man's clothes, she inapected the 
outposts herself at nighty she watched and encour- 
aged the soldiers in all exposed places, and was 
saved several times only by the speed of her horse 
in unforeseen attacks. One night she rode out, 
oppressed with care, having just received infor- 



286 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAB WILDK 

mation that the eiueinj was about to attempt an 
entrance into the city by meana of bribery that 
nighty and with intent to maasacie all; and now 
Ab went to convince herself of the loyalty of her 
troops. Very cautiously ahe rode up to a guard, 
requesting to speak to the 'Akid' (the oflBcer in 
charge)^ and did all in her power to eeduoe him 
from his duty by great offers of reward on the 
part of the besi^ers. The indignation of the 
brave man^ however, completely allayed her f ean 
as to the fidelily of the troops, but the experi- 
ment nearly cost her her own life. The soldiers 
were about to massacre the supposed spy on the 
spot, and it required all her presence of mind to 
make good her escape. 

*The situation grew, however, to be very criti- 
cal at Mesket Famine at last broke out> and the 
people were well-nigh distracted, as no assistance 
or relief could be expected from without. It was, 
therefore, decided to attempt a last sortie, in order 
to die at least with glory. There was just suffi- 
cient powder left for one more attack, but there 
was no more lead for either guns or muskets. In 
this emergency the regent ordered iron nails and 
pebbles to be used in place of balls. The guns 
were loaded with all the old iron and brass that 



LITERABY AND OTHER NOTES. 287 

cotdd be collected, and she opened her treasury 
to have bnllets m&de of her own silver dollars. 
Every nerve was strained, and the sally succeeded 
beyond all hop& The enemy was completely taken 
by snrprise, and fled in all directions, leaving 
more than half their men dead and wounded on the 
field. Mesket was saved, and, delivered out of her 
deep distress, the brave woman knelt down on the 
battle-field and thanked Ood in fervent prayer. 

"From that time her (Jovemment was a peace- 
ful one, and she ruled so wisely that she was able 
to transfer to her nephew, my father, an empire so 
unimpaired as to place him in a position to extend 
the empire by the conquest of Zanzibar. It is 
to my great-aimt, therefore, that we owe;^ and not 
to an inconsiderable degree, the acquisition of this 
second empire. 

"She, too, was an Eastern woman I^' 

All through her book the Princess protests 
against the idea that Oriental women are degraded 
or oppressed, and in the following passage she 
points out how difficult it is for f ordgners to get 
any real information on the subject: 

**The education of the children is left entirely 
to the mother, whether she be legitimate wife or 



288 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

purchased slave, and it constitatee her chief hap- 
piness. Some fashionable mothers in Enrope shift 
this dnty on to the nurse, and, by and by, on 
the governess, and are quite satisfied with looking 
up their children, or receiving their visits, once 
a day. In France the child is sent to be nursed 
in the country, and left to the care of strangers. 
An Arab mother, on the other hand, looks con- 
tinually after her children. She watches and 
nurses them with the greatest affection, and never 
leaves them as long as they may stand in need of 
her motherly care, for which she is rewarded by the 
fondest filial love. 

"If foreigners had more frequent opportuni- 
ties to observe the cheerfulness, the eraberance of 
spirits even, of Eastern women, they would soon 
and more easily be convinced of the untruth of 
all those stories afloat about the degraded, op- 
pressed, and listless state of their life. It is 
impossible to gain a true insight into the actual 
domesticity in a few moments' visit; and the con- 
versation carried on on those formal occasions 
hardly deserves that name; there is barely more 
than the exchange of a few commonplace iremarks 
— and it is questionable if even these have been 
correctly interpreted. 



LITERABY AND OTHER NOTES. 289 

'^Notwithstanding his innate hospitality, the 
Arab has the greatest possible objection to having 
his home pried into by those of another land and 
creed. Whenever, therefore, a European lady 
called on us, the enormoufi circumference of her 
hoops (which were the fashion then, and took up 
the entire width of the stairs) was the first thing 
to strike us dumb with wonder; after which, the 
very meagre conversation generally confined itself 
on both sides to the mysteries of different cos- 
tumes; and the lady retired as wise as she was 
when she came, after having been sprinkled over 
with attar of roses, and being the richer for some 
parting presents. It is true she had entered a 
harem; she had seen the much pitied Oriental 
ladies (though only through their veils) ; she had 
with her own eyes seen our dresses, our jewellery, 
the nimbleness with which we sat down on the 
floor — and that was all. She could not boast of 
having seen more than any other foreign lady who 
had called before her. She is conducted upstairs 
and downstairs, and is watched all the time. Bare- 
ly she sees more than the reception-room, and 
more rarely still can she guess or find out who the 
veiled lady is with whom she conversed. In short, 
she has had no opportunity whatsoever of learu- 



290 THE WHITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

ing anything of domeBtic life, or the position of 
Eafitem women-** 

No one who is interested in the social position of 
women in the East should fail to read these pleas- 
antly written memoirs. The Princess is herself a 
woman of high caltnre, and the story of her life 
is as instmctiye as history and as fascinating as 
fiction, 

Mrs. Oliphanfs 'takers of Venice" (Macmil- 
Ian ft Go.) is an admirable literary pendant to 
the same writer's charming book on Florence, 
though there is a wide difference between the beau- 
tiful Tuscan city and the sea-city of the Adriatic. 
Florence, as Mrs. Oliphant points out, is a dty 
full of memories of the great figures of the past. 
The traveller cannot pass along her streets with- 
out treading in the very traces of Dante, without 
stepping on soil made memorable by footprints 
never to be effaced. The greatness of the sur- 
roundings, the palaces, churches, and frowning 
mediaeval castles in the midst of the city, are all 
thrown into the background by the greatness, the 
individuality, the living power and vigour of the 
men who are their originators, and, at the same 
time, their inspiring soul. But when we turn 



LITEBABY AND OTHEB NOTES. 291 

to Venice, the eflfect is very different W© do 
not think of the makers of that marvellous city, 
but rather of what they made. The idealised im- 
age of Venice herself meets ns everywhere. The 
mother is not overshadowed by the too great glory 
of aiiy of her sons. In her records the city is 
everything — ^the republic, the worshipped ideal of 
A community in which every man for the com- 
mon glory seems to have been willing to sink his 
own. We know that Dante stood within, the red 
walls of the arsenal, and saw the galleys making 
and mending, and the pitch flaming up to heaven ; 
Petrarch came to visit the great Mistress of the 
Sea, taking refuge there, "in this city, true home 
of the human race/' from trouble, war, and pesti- 
lence outside; and Byron, with his facile enthusi- 
asms and fervent eloquence, made his home for 
a time in one of the stately, decaying palaces ; but 
with these exceptions, no great poet has ever asso- 
ciated himself with the life of Venice. She had 
architects, sculptors, and painters, but no singer 
of her own. The arts through which she gave her 
message to the world were visible and imitative. 
Mrs. Oliphant, in her bright, picturesque style, 
tells the story of Venice pleasantly and well. Her 
account of the two Bellinis is especially charming; 



Zn THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

and {he chaptere on TiUnn and Tintoreft are ad- 
mirably written* She concludes her interesting 
and nsefnl history witJi the following words, which 
are well worthy of quotation, though I must con- 
fess that tha ^'alieiL modemisins'' trouble me not a 
UtUe: 

**The critics of recent days have had much to 
iay as to the deterioration of Venice in her new 
activity* and the introduction of alien modern- 
isms, in the ahape of steamboats and other new 
indnEtrial a^nts^ into her canals and lagoons. 
But in this adoption of every new demerit of 
pDwer^ Venice is only proring herself the moefc 
faithful representative of the vigorous republic of 
old. Whatever prejudice or angry love may say, 
we cannot doubt that the Michiela, the Dandolos, 
the Poscari, the great rulers who formed Venice, 
had steamboats existed in their day, serving their 
purpose better than their barges and peati, would 
have adapted them without hesitation, without a 
thought of what any critics might say. The won- 
derful new impulse which has made Italy a great 
power has justly put strength and life before those 
old traditions of beauty, which made her not only 
th^ Sroman country' of Europe, but a sort of 



UTEEAEY AND OTHER NOTES. 298 

odalisque trading upon her charms, rather than 
the nnrsing mother of a noble and independent na- 
tion. That in her recoil from that somewhat 
degrading portion she may here and there have 
proved too regardless of the claims of antLqnity, 
we need not attempt to deny; the new spring of 
life in her is too gennine and great to keep her 
entirely free from this evident danger. But it is 
strange that anyone who loves Italy, and sincerely 
rejoices in her amazing resurrection, should fail 
to recognise how venial is this fault" 

Miss Mabel Bobinson's last novel, 'The Flan of 
Campaign'* (Vizetelly & Co.), is a very powerful 
study of modem political Ufa As a concession 
to humanity, each of the politicians is made to 
fall in love, and the charm of their various ro- 
mances fully atones for the soundness of the au- 
thor's theory of rent Miss Bobinson dissects, de- 
scribes, and discourses with keen scientific insight 
and minute observation. Her style, though some- 
what lacking in grace, is, at its best, simple and 
strong. Bichard Talbot and Elinor Fetherston 
are admiraUy conceived and admirably drawn, and 
the whole account of the murder of Lord Boeglass 
is most dramatic. 



»94 THE WBITINQS OF OSCAB WILDE. 

"A Year in Eden*' (T. Fisher Unwin), by Har- 
riet Waters Preston^ is a chzonide of New Eng- 
land life^ and is full of the elaborate subtlety of 
the American school of fiction. The Eden in ques- 
tion is the little village of Pierpcmt, and the Ere 
of this provincial paradise is a beautiful girl called 
Monza Middleton, a fascinating^ fearless creature, 
who brings ruin and misery on all who love her. 
Miss Preston writes an admirahle prose sfyle, and 
the minor characters in the book are wonderfully 
life-like and true. 

''The Englishwoman's Yeax-Bock^' (Hatdiaids) 
contains a really extraordinary amount of useful 
information on every subject connected with wom- 
an's work. In the census taken in 1831 (six years 
before the Queen ascended the Throne), no occu- 
pation whatever was specified as appertaining to 
women, except that of domestic service; but in the 
census of 1881 the number of occupations men- 
tioned as followed by women is upwards of three 
hundred and thirty. The most popular occupa- 
tions seem to be those of domestic service, scho<d 
teaching, and dressmaking; tiie lowest numbers on 
the lists are those of bankers, gardeners, and per- 
sons engaged in scientific pursuits. Besides these. 



UTEBARY AND OTHEB NOTES. 296 

the *nrear-Book" makes mention of stock-broking 
and eonyeyancing as professions that women are 
beginning to adopt The historical acconnt of the 
literary work done by Englishwomen in this cen- 
tury, as given in the ^TTear-Book/' is curiously 
inadequate, and the list of women's magazines is 
not complete, but in all other respects the publi- 
cation seems a most useful and excellent one. 

Wordsworth, in one of his interesting letters 
to Lady Beaumont, says that it is '^an awful truth 
tiiat there neither is nor can be any genuine en- 
joyment of poetry among nineteen out of twenty 
of those persons who live or wish to live in the 
broad light of the world — ^among those who either 
axe, or are striving to make themselves, people of 
consideration in society," adding that the mission 
of poetry is '% console the afiUeted; to add sun- 
shine to daylight by making the happy happier; 
to teach the young and the gracious of every age 
to see, to think, and fed, and, therefore, to become 
more actively and securely virtuous.'* I am, how- 
ever, rather disposed to think that the age in which 
we live is one that has a very genxdne enjoyment 
of poetry, though we may no longer agree with 
Wordsworth's ideas on the subject of the poet's 




2n THE WRITINGS OF OSCAR WILDE. 

proper miseion ; imd it is interesting to note tliat 
thig enjoyment manifests itself by creation even 
more than by criticiflm. To realise the popularity 
of the great poets, one shonld turn to the minor 
poets and see whom tiiey follow, what master they 
select^ whose music they echo. At present there 
seems to be a reaction in favour of Lord Tmiiiy- 
son, if we are to judge by *1lache1, and other 
Poema*^ (Cornish Brothers), which is a rather 
remarkable little volume in its way. The poem 
that gives its title to the book is full of strong 
lines and good images; and, in spite of its Teimy* 
son i an echoes, thore is something attractive in such 
>^rse6 as the following; 

''Day by day along the Orient faintly glows the 

tender dawn ; 
Day by day the pearly dewdrops tremble on the 
upland la^Bm: 

''Day by day the star of morning pales before the 

coming ray. 
And the first faint streak of radiance brightens 
to the perfect day. 

"Day by day the rosebud gathers to itself, fron^ 
^rth and sky, 




LITERARY AND OTHER NOTES. 297 

Fragrant stores and ampler beauty, lovelier fonn 
and deeper dye: 

*T)ay by day a richer crimson mantles in its glow- 
ing breast — 
Every golden hour conferring some sweet grace 
that crowns the rest 

^'And thou canst not tell the moment when the 

day ascends her throne. 
When the morning star hath vanished, and th« 
rose is fully blown. 

''So each day fidfils its purpose, calm, unresting, 
strongs and sure, 
Moving onward to completion, dbth' the work of 
God endure. 

''How unlike man's toil and hurry I how unlike the 

noise, the strife^ 
All the pain of incompleteness, all the weariness 
of Ufel 

"Yet look upward and take courage. He who leads 

the golden hours. 
Feeds the birds> and clothes the lily, made tfaeie 
human hearts of ours ; 



298 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE, 

''Knows thdr need, and will supply it, mamift fall- 
ing day by day, 
Bread from heaven, and food of angels, all along 
the desert way/* 

The Secretary of the International Technical 
College at Bedford has issued a most interesting 
prospectus of the aims and objects of the Institu- 
tion. The College sterns to be chiefly intended 
for ladies who have completed their ordinary 
conrae of English studies, and it will be divided 
into two departments, Educational and Industrial. 
In the latter, classes will be held for various de 
rative and technical arts, and for wood-carving, 
etching, and photography, as well as i^ck-nursing, 
dressmaking, cookery, physiology, poultry-rearing, 
and the cultivation of fioweis. Tbe curriculum 
certainly embraces a wonderful amount of sub- 
jects, and I have no doubt that the College will 
supply a real want 

The Ladies' Employment Society has been so 
successful that it has moved' to new premises in 
Park Street^ Grosvenor Square, where there axe 
iome veiy pretty and useful thinga for sale. The 



LITERABY AND OTHER NOTES. 299 

children's smocks are quite eharming, and seem 
very inexpensive. The subscription to the Society 
is one guinea a year^ and a commission of five per 
cent, is charged on each thing sold. 



Miss May Morris, whose exquisite needlework 
is well known, has just completed a pair of ctuv 
tains for a house in Boston. They are amongst 
the most perfect specimens of modem embroidery 
that I have seen, and are from Miss Morris's own 
design. I am glad to hear that Miss Morris has 
determined to give lessons in embroidery. She has 
a thorough knowledge of the art, her sense of 
beauty is as rare as it is refined^ and her power of 
design is quite remarkable. 

Mrs. Jopling's life classes for ladies have been 
such a success that a similar class has been started 
in Chelsea by Mr. Clegg Wilkinson at the Car- 
lyle Studios, King's Road. Mr. Wilkinson (who 
is a very brilliant young painter) is strongly of 
opinion that life should be studied from life it- 
self, and not from that abstract presentation of 
life which we find in Greek marbles — a position 
which I have always held veiy strongly myself. 



300 THE WRITINGS OF OSCAB WILDE. 



The portrait of Mrs. Craik that appeared in 
the January nnmbep of 'T3ie Woman's Wc^ld** 
was talcen from a photograph by Mr. Buchanan 
WdlaatoD^ of Chislehizrst^ who most kindly al- 
lowed US to reproduce it. 



• 




f 


_:> Wr^^V^ 


p^ 


■<* y '^*^ 








Jr 


$& 'i&L 


^"^"^^ P^^^ 



