Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 




• • • • 



3068R 




THE PROFESSOR; 

% We. 



THE PEOFESSOE, 



% iiaU. 



BY 



CUREEE BELL, 

▲UTBOm OF "JAKX ETBI,'' " IBIBLXT " ** YILLJTTB," &C. 



IN TW,0 VOLUMES. 

VOL. I. 



LONDON: 

SMITH, ELDER & CO., 65, CORNHILL. 



1857. 



[The right qf Tramlatian is reserved,'] 



^^f- ^' 'ftf.- 




PREFACE. 



This little book was writteix" before either "Jane 
Eyre" or " Shirley," . -and yet no indulgence 
can be solicited for it, op. the plea of a first 
attempt A first attempt 4t certainly was not, 
as the pen which wrote it had been previously 
worn a good deal in a practice of some years. 
I had not indeed published anything before I 
commenced "The Professor," but in many a 
crude efibrt, destroyed almost as soon as com- 
posed, I had got over any such taste as I 
might once have had for ornamented and 
redundant composition, and come to prefer what 
was plain and homely. At the same time I 



Vl PREFACE. 

had adopted a sot of principles on the subject 
of incident; &c.; such, as would be generally 
approved in theory, but the result of which, 
when carried out into i)ractico, often procures 
for an author more suqjrise than pleasure. 

I said to myself that my hero should work his 
way through life as I had seen real living men 
work theirs — that he sliould never get a sliilling 
he had not earned — that no sudden turns should 
lift him in a moment to wealth and high station; 
that whatever small competency he might gain, 
should be won by the sweat of his brow; that, 
before he could find so much as an arbour to sit 
down in, he should master at least lialf the ascent 
of "the Hill of Difficulty;" that he should not 
even marry a beautiful girl or a lady of rank. 
As Adam's son he should share Adam's doom, 
and drain throughout life a mixed and moderate 
cup of enjoyment. 

In the sequel, however, I found that publishers 
in general scarcely approved of tliis system, but 



PBEFACE. Yll 

would have liked something more imaginative 
and poetical — something more consonant with a 
highly wrought fancy, with a taste for pathos^ 
with sentiments more tender, elevated, unworldly. 
Indeed until an author has tried to dispose of 
a manuscript of this kind, he can never know 
what stores of romance and sensibility lie hidden 
in breasts he would not have suspected of casket- 
ing such treasures. Men in business are usually 
thought to prefer the real ; on trial the idea will 
be often found fallacious : a passionate preference 
for the wild, wonderful, and thrilling— the strange, 
startling, and harrowing-agitates divers souls 
that show a calm and sober surface. 

Such being the case, the reader will com- 
prehend that to have reached him in the form 
of a printed book, this brief narrative must 
have gone through some struggles — which 
indeed it has. And after all, its worst struggle 
and strongest ordeal is yet to come; but it 
takes comfort — subdues fear — ^leans on the staff 



• •• 



TIU FBEFAOE. 

of a moderate expectation — and mutters under 
its breath; while lifting its eye to that of the 
public^ 

*<He that it low need fear no &!!/' 

CuBBEB Bell. 

The foregoing preface was written by my wife 
with a view to the publication of " The 
Professor,** shortly after the appearance of 
'* Shirley.'' Being dissuaded from her intention, 
the authoress made some use of the materials 
in a subsequent work — " Villette." As, however, 
these two stories are in most respects unlike, it 
haB been represented to me that I ought not to 
withhold "The Professor" from the public. I 
have therefore consented to its publication. 



A. B. NiCHOLLS. 



Haworth Parsonage, 
September 22nd, 1856. 



THE PROFESSOE. 



CHAPTER I. 



INTKODUCTORY. 



The other day, in looking over my papers, I found 
in my desk the following copy of a letter, sent by 
me a year since to an old school acquaintance : — 

" Dear Charles, 

" I think when you and I were at Eton 
together, we were neither of us what could be 
called popular characters: you were a sarcastic, 
observant, shrewd, cold-blooded creature; my 
own portrait I will not attempt to draw, but I 

VOL. L B 



2 THE PROFESSOn. 

cannot recollect that it was a strikingly attractive 
one — can you? What animal magnetism drew 
thee and mo together I know not; certainly I 
never experienced anything of the Pylades and 
Orestes sentiment for you^ and I have reason to 
believe that you, on your part, were equally free 
from all romantic regard to me. Still, out of 
school hours, we walked and talked continually 
together; when the theme of conversation was 
our companions or our masters we understood 
each other, and when I recurred to some sentiment 
of affection, some vague love of an excellent or 
beautiful object, whether in animate or inanimate 
nature, your sardonic coldness did not move me. 
I felt myself superior to that check then as I do 
now, 

" It is a long time since I wrote to you, and 
a still longer time since I saw you. Chancing to 
take up a newspaper of your county the other 
day, my eye fell upon your name. I began to 
think of old times ; to run over the events which 



THE PBOFESSOB. «J 

have transpired since we separated; and I sat 
down and commenced this letter. What you 
have been doing I know not ; but you shall hear, 
if you choose to listen^ how the world has wagged 
with me. 

" First, after leaving Eton, I had an interview 
with my maternal imcles. Lord Tynedale and the 
Hon. John Seacombe. They asked me if I would 
enter the Church, and my uncle the nobleman 
offered me the living of Seacombe, which is in 
his gift, if I would; then my other imcle, Mr. 
Seacombe, hinted that when I became rector 
of Seacombe-cum-Scaife, I might perhaps be 
allowed to take, as mistress of my house and head 
of my parish, one of my six cousins, his daughters, 
all of whom I greatly dislike. 

" I declined both the Church and matrimony. 
A good clergyman is a good thing, but I should 
have made a very bad one. As to the wife — oh 
how like a night-mare is the thought of bping 
bound fot life to one of my cousins ! No doubt 



4 THE FB0FE8S0IL 

they are accomplished and pretty; but not an 
accomplishment^ not a charm of theirs^ touches a 
chord in my bosom. To think of passing the 
winter evenings by the parlour fire-side of Sea- 
combe Rectory alone with one of them — for 
instance^ the large and well-modelled statue^ 
Sarah — no; I should be a bad husband^ under 
such circumstances^ as well as a bad clergjonan. 

" When I had declined my uncles' ofiers they 
asked me ' what I intended to do.' I said I 
should reflect. They reminded me that I had no 
fortune^ and no expectation of any^ and^ after a 
considerable pause^ Lord Tyhedale demanded 
sternly^ ' Whether I had thoughts of following 
my father's steps and engaging in trade?' Now^ 
I had had no thoughts of the sort I do not think 
that my turn of mind qualifies me to make a good 
tradesman; my taste^ my ambition does not lie 
that way ; but such was the scorn expressed in 
Lord Tynedale's countenance as he pronounced 
the word trade — such the contemptuous sarcasm of 



THE PBOFESSOB. 5 

his tone — ^that I was instantly decided. My father 
was but a name to me^ yet that name I did not 
like to hear mentioned with a sn6er to my very 
face. I answered then^ with haste and warmth, 
* I cannot do better than follow in my father's 
steps; yes, I will be a tradesman.' My uncles 
did not remonstrate; they and I parted with 
mutual disgust- In reviewing this transaction I 
find that I was quite right to shake off the burden 
of Tynedale's patronage, but a fool to offer my 
shoulders instantly for the reception of another 
burden — one whioh might be more intolerable, 
and which certainly was yet untried. 

** I wrote instantly to Edward — you know 
Edward — ^my only brother, ten years my senior, 
married to a rich millowner's daughter, and now 
possessor of the mill and business which was my 
father's before he failed. You are aware that 
my father — once reckoned a Croesus of wealth — 
became bankrupt a short time previous to his 
death, and that my mother lived in destitution for 



6 THE PROFESSOIU 

Home BIX months after him, unhelped by her 
aristocratical brothers^ whom she had mortally 
offended by her union with Crimsworth, the 

shire manufacturer. At the end of the six 

months she brought me into the world, and then 
herself left it without, I should think, much regret, 
as it contained little hope or comfort for her. 

" My father's relations took charge of Edward, 
as they did of me, till I was nine years old. At 
that period it chanced that the representation of 
an important borough in our county fell vacant ; 
Mr. Seacombe stood for it My uncle Crimsworth, 
an astute, mercantile man, took the opportunity of 
writing a fierce letter to the candidate, stating 
that if he and Lord Tynedale did not consent to 
do something towards the support of their sister's 
orphan children he would expose their relentless 
and malignant conduct towards that sister, and do 
his best to turn the circumstances against Mr. 
Seacombe's election. That gentleman and Lord 
T. knew well enough that the Crimsworths were 



THE PROFESSOR. 7 

an unscrupulous and determined race ; they knew 
also that thej had influence in the borough of 

X ; and, making a virtue of necessity, they 

consented to defray the expenses of my education^ 
I was sent to Eton, where I remained ten years, 
during which space of time Edward and I never 
met. He, when he grew up, entered into trade, 
and pursued his calling with such diligence, 
ability, and success, that now, in his thirtieth year, 
he was fast making a fortune. Of this I was 
apprised by the occasional short letters I received 
from him, some three or four times a year ; which 
said letters never concluded without some expres- 
sion of determined enmity against the house of 
Seacombe, and some reproach to me for living, as 
he said, on the bounty of that house. At first, 
while still in boyhood, I could not understand 
why, as I had no parents, I should not be indebted 
to my uncles Tynedale and Seacombe for my 
education ; but as I grew up, and heard by degrees 
of the persevering hostility, the hatred till death 




8 THE FBOFESSOB. 

evinced by them against my father— of the suffer- 
ings of my mother — of all the wrongs, in short, of 
oiir house — ^then did I conceive shame of the 
dependence in which I lived, and form a reso- 
lution no more to take bread from hands which 
had refused to minister to the necessities of my 
dying mother. It was by these feelings I was 
influenced when I refused the Rectory of Sear 
combe, and the union with one of my patrician 
cousins. 

'^ An irreparable breach thus being effected 
between my uncles and myself, I wrote to 
Edward; told him what had occurred, and 
informed him of my intention to follow his steps 
and be a tradesman. I asked, moreover, if he 
could give me employment His answer expressed 
no approbation of my conduct, but he said I 

might come down to shire, if I liked, and he 

would * see what could be done in the way of 
furnishing me with work.' I repressed all — 
even mental comment on his note — packed my 



THE FBOFESSOB. 9 

trunk and carpet-bag, and started for the North 
directly. 

** After two days' travelling (railroads were not 
then in existence) !• arrived, one wet October 
afternoon, in the town of X — — . I had always 
understood that Edward lived in this town, but 
on inquiry I found that it was only Mr, Crims- 
worth's miU and warehouse which were situated 
in the smoky atmosphere of Bigben Close; his 
residence lay four miles out, in the country, 

" It was late in the evening when I alighted at 
the gates of the habitation designated to me as 
my brother's. As I advanced up the avenue, I 
could see through the shades of twilight, and the 
dark gloomy mists which deepened those shades, 
that the house was large, and the grounds sur- 
rounding it sufficiently spacious. I paused a 
moment on the lawn in front, and leaning my 
back against a tall tree which rose in the centre, 
I gazed with interest on the exterior of Crimsworth 
Hall. 



A 



10 THE FB0FE8S0B. 

*' ' Edward i» rich,' thought I to myself. * I 
believed him to bo doing well — but I did not 
know he was master of a mansion like this.' 
Cutting short all marvelling, speculation, conjec- 
ture, &c., I advanced to the front door and rang. 
A man-servant opened it — I announced myself — 
he relieved mo of my wet cloak and carpet-bag, 
and ushered me into a room furnished as a 
library, where there was a bright fire, and candles 
burning on the table; he informed me that his 

master was not yet returned from X market, 

but that he would certainly be at home in the 
course of half an hour. 

^^ Being left to myself, I took the stuffed easy 
chair, covered with red morocco, which stood by 
the fireside, and while my eyes watched the 
flames dart from the glowing coals, and the 
cinders fall at intervals on the hearth, my mind 
busied itself in conjectures concerning the meeting 
about to take place. Amidst much that was 
doubtful in the subject of these conjectures, there 



' THE PBOFESSOB. 11 

was one thing tolerably certain — I was in no 
danger of encountering severe disappointment; 
firom this, the moderation of my expectations 
guaranteed me. I anticipated no overflowings of 
fraternal tenderness ; Edward's letters had always 
been such as to prevent the engendering or 
harbouring of delusions of this sort Still, as I 
sat awaiting his arrival, I felt eager — ^very eager — 
I cannot tell you why; my hand, so utterly a 
stranger to the grasp of a kindred hand, clenched 
itself to repress the tremor with which impatience 
would fain have shaken it. 

^' I thought of my uncles ; and as I was engaged 
in wondering whether Edward's indifference would 
equal the cold disdain I had always experienced 
from them, I heard the avenue gates open : wheels 
approached the house; Mr. Crimsworth was 
arrived ; and after the lapse of some minutes, and 
a brief dialogue between himself and his servant in 
the hall, his tread drew near the library door — that 
tread alone announced the master of the house. 



/ 



12 THE PBOFESSOB. * 

" I still retained some confused recollection of 
Edward as he was ten years ago — a tall, wiry, raw 
youth ; nowy as I rose from my seat and turned 
towards the library door, I saw a fine-looking and 
powerftd man, light-complexioned, well-made, and 
of athletic proportions; the first glance made me 
aware of an air of promptitude and sharpness, 
shown as well in his movements as in his port, his 
eye, and the general expression of his face. He 
greeted me with brevity, and, in the moment of 
shaking hands, scanned me from head to foot ; he 
took his seat in the morocco-covered arm-chair, 
and motioned me to another seat 

** ' I expected you would have called at the 
counting-house in the Close,' said he; and his 
voice, I noticed, had an abrupt accent, probably 
habitual to him; he spoke also with a guttural 
northern tone, which sounded harsh in my ears, 
accustomed to the silvery utterance of the South. 

"*The landlord of the inn, where the coach 
stopped, directed me here,' said L ' I doubted at 



THE PB0FE8S0B. 13 

first the accuracy of his information, not being 
aware that jou had such a residence as this.' 

"*0h, it is all right 1' he replied, 'only I was 
kept half an hour behind time, waiting for you — 
that is alL I thought you must be coming by the 
eight o'clock coach.' 

'^ I expressed regret that he had had to wait ; 
he made no answer, but stirred the fire, as if to 
coyer a movement of impatience ; then he scanned 
me again. 

" I fblt an inward satisfaction that I had not, in 
the first moment of meeting, betrayed any warmth, 
any enthusiasm ; that I had saluted this man with 
a quiet and steady phlegm. 

"'Have you quite broken with Tynedale and 
Seacombe?' he asked hastily. 

" * I do not think I shall have any fiirther com- 
munication with them; my refusal of their pro- 
posals will, I fancy, operate as a barrier against all 
future intercourse.' 

w c Why,' said he, * I may as well . remind you 




14 THE FB0FE8S0IL 

at the very outset of our connection^ that ** no man 
can serve two masters." Acquaintance with Lord 
Tjnodale will be incompatible with assistance 
from me.' There was a kind of gratuitous menace 
in his eye as be looked at me in finishing this 
observation. 

*^ Feeling no disposition to reply to him^ I 
contented myself with an inward speculation on 
the difierences which exist in the constitution of 
men's minds. I do not know what inference Mr. 
Orimswortb drew from my sUenc^whether he 
considered it a symptom of contumacity or an 
evidence of my being cowed by his peremptory 
manner. After a long and hard stare at me, he 
rose sharply from his seat 

" * To-morrow,' said he, * I shall call your 
attention to some other points; but now it is 
supper time, and Mrs. Crimsworth is probably 
waiting; will you come?' 

" He strode from the room, and I followed. In 
crossing the hall, I wondered what Mrs. Crims- 



THE FROFESSOK. 15 

worth might be. * Is she,' thought I, * as alien 
to what I like as Tynedale, Seacombe, the Misses 
Seacombe — as the affectionate relative now striding 
before me ? or is she better than these ? Shall I, 
in conversing with her, feel free to show some- 
thing of my real nature ; or ' Further con- 
jectures were arrested by my* entrance into the 
dining-room. 

« A lamp, burning under a shade of ground- 
glass, showed a handsome apartment, wainscoted 
with oak; supper was laid on the table; by the 
fire-place, standing as if waiting our entrance, 
appeared a lady; she was young, tall, and well 
shaped ; her dress was handsome and fashionable : 
so much my first glance sufficed to ascertain. A 
gay salutation passed between her and Mr. Crims- 
worth; she chid him, half playfully, half poutingly, 
for being late; her voice (I always take voices 
into the account in judguig of character) was 
lively — it indicated, I thought, good animal spirits. 
Mr. Crimsworth soon checked her animated scold- 



16 THE PROFESSOR. 

ing with a kiss — a kiss that still told of the 
bridegroom (they had not yet been married a 
year); she took her seat at the supper-table in 
first-rate spirits. Perceiving me^ she begged my 
pardon for not noticing me before^ and then shook 
hands with me^ as ladies do when a flow of good- 
humour disposes them to be cheerful to all^ even 
the most indifferent of their acquaintance. It was 
now further obvious to me that she had a good 
complexion and features sufficiently marked but 
agreeable ; her hair was red— quite red. She and 
Edward talked much^ always in a vein of playful 
contention; she was vexed^ or pretended to be 
vexed^ that he had that day driven a vicious horse 
in the gig^ and he made light of her fears. Some- 
times she appealed to me. 

" * Now, Mr. William, isn't it absurd in Edward 
to talk so ? He says he will drive Jack, and no 
other horse, and the brute has thrown liun twice 

already.' 

" She spoke with a kind of lisp, not disagreeable. 



THE PKOFESSOR. 17 

but childish. I soon saw also that there was a 
more than girlish — ^a somewhat infantine expression 
in her by no means small features ; this lisp and 
expression were, I have no doubt, a charm in 
Edward's eyes, and would be so to those of most 
men, but they were not to mine. I sought her 
eye, desirous to read there the intelligence which 
I could not discern in her face or hear in her 
conversation; it was merry, rather small; by 
turns I saw vivacity, vanity, coquetry, look out 
through its irid, but I watched in vain for a glimpse 
of soul. I am no Oriental ; white necks, carmine 
lips and cheeks, clusters of bright curls, do not 
suffice for me without that Promethean sp^rk 
which will live after the roses and lilies are faded, 
the burnished hair grown grey. In sunshine, in 
prosperity, the flowers are very well; but how 
many wet days are there in life — November 
seasons of disaster, when a man's hearth and 
home would be cold indeed, without the clear, 
cheering gleam of intellect. 

VOL. L G 



18 TEE PBOFESSOB. 

" Having perused the fair page of Mrs. Crims- 
wortb's fiEice^ a deep^ involuntary sigh announced 
my disappointment; she took it as a homage to 
her beauty, and Edward, who was evidently proud 
of his rich and handsome young wife, threw on me 
a glance-^half ridicule, half ire. 

" I turned from them both, and gazing wearily 
round the room, I saw two pictures set in the oak 
panelling— one on each side the mantel-piece. 
Ceasing to take part in the bantering conversation 
that flowed on between Mr. and Mrs. Crimsworth, 
I bent my thoughts to the examination of these 
pictures. They were portraits — a lady and a gen- 
tleman, both costumed in the fasliion of twenty 
years ago. The gentleman was in the shade. I 
could not see him well. The lady had the benefit 
of a full beam from the softly shaded lamp. I 
presently recognised her ; I had seen this picture 
before, in childhood ; it was my mother ; that and 
the companion picture being the only heir-looms 
saved out of the sale of my father's property. 



THE PBOFESSOB. 19 

^' The face, I remembered, had pleased me as a 
boy, but then I did not understand it; now I 
knew how rare that class of face is in the world, 
and I appreciated keenly its thoughtftd, yet gentle 
expression. The serious grey eye possessed for me 
a strong charm, as did certain lines in the features 
indicative of most true and tender feeling. I was 
sorry it was only a picture. 

" I soon left Mr. and Mrs. Crimsworth to 
themselves; a servant conducted me to my bed- 
room; in closing my chamber-door, I shut out all 
intruders — ^you, Charles, as well as the rest 

" Good bye for the present, 

" William Cbimswobth." 



To this letter I never got an answer ; before my 
old friend received it, he had accepted a Govern- 
ment appointment in one of the colonies, and was 
already on his way to the scene of his official 
labours. What has become of him since, I know 
not. 



20 THE ntOFESSOB. 

The leisure time I have at command^ and which 
I intended to employ for his private benefitj I shall 
now dedicate to that of the public at large. My 
narrative is not exciting^ and above all^ not mar- 
vellous; but it may interest some individuals^ 
whoy having toiled in the same vocation as myself^ 
will find in my experience frequent reflections of 
their own. The above letter will serve as intro- 
duction. I now proceed. 



THE PB0FE8S0B. 21 



CHAPTER IL 



A FINE October morning succeeded to the foggn 
evening that had witnessed my first introductioy 
to Crimsworth HalL I was early up and walking 
in the large park-like meadow surrounding the 
house. The autumn snin^ rising oyer the 

shire hills, disclosed a pleasant country; 

woods brown and mellow varied the fields 
fi'om which the harvest had been lately carried ; 
a river, gliding between the woods, caught on 
its surface the somewhat cold gleam of the 
October sun and sky; at firequent intervals along 
the banks of the river, tall, cylindrical chimneys, 
almost like slender, round towers, indicated the 
factories which the trees half concealed; 'here 



22 THE FB07I880B. 

and there mansions^ similar to Crimsworth Hall^ 
occupied agreeable sites on the hUl-side; the 
country wore^ on the whole^ a cheerAil^ active^ 
fertile looL Steam^ trade^ machinery had long 
banished from it all romance and seclusion. At 
a distance of five miles^ a valley^ opening 
between the low hills^ held in its cups the great 
town of X A dense^ permanent vapour 

brooded over this locality — there lay Edward's 
*' Concern.*' 

I forced my eye to scrutinize this prospect^ 
I forced my mind to dwell on it for a iime, and 
when I foimd that it communicated no pleasurable 
emotion to my heart — ^that it stirred in me none 
of the hopes a man ought to feel^ when he sees 
laid before him the scene of his life's career — I 
said to myself^ '^ William^ you are a rebel against 
circumstances; you are a fool^ and know not what 
you want ; you have chosen trade and you shall 
be a tradesman. Look I" 'J. continued mentally — 
^^Look at the sooty smoke in that hollow^ and 



THE PBOFESSOB. 23 

know that there is your post! There you 
cannot dream^ you cannot speculate and 
theorize — ^there you shall out and workl" 

Thus self-schooled, I returned to the house. 
My brother was in the breakfast-room. I met 
him collectedly — I could not meet him cheerfully; 
he was standing on the rug, his back to the 
fire — ^how much did I read in the expression 
of his eye as my glance encountered his, when I 
advanced to bid him good morning ; how much 
that was contradictory to my nature I He said 
''Good morning" abruptly and nodded, and then 
he snatched, rather than took, a newspaper from 
the table, and began to read it with the air of 
a master who seizes a pretext to escape the bore 
of conyeraing with an UBderling. It was weU 
I had taken a resolution to endure for a time, or 
his manner would have gone far to render 
insupportable the disgust I had just been 
endeavouring to subdue. I looked at him: I 
measured his robust frame and powerful 



24 THE PB07ES80IU 

proportions; I saw my own reflection in the 
mirror over the mantel-piece; I amused myself 
with comparing the two pictures. In face 
I resembled him^ though I was not so hand- 
some; my features were less regular; I had a 
darker eye, and a broader brow — ^in form I was 
greatly inferior — thinner^ slighter^ not so tall. 
As an animal, Edward excelled me far; should 
he prove as paramount in mind as in person I 
must be his slave — ^for I must expect from him no 
lion-like generosity to one weaker than himself; 
his cold, avaricious eye, his stem, forbidding 
manner tpld me he would not spare. Had I then 
force of mind to cope with him? I did not know ; 
I had never been tried. 

Mrs. Crimsworth's entrance diverted my 
thoughts for a moment She looked well, dressed 
in white, her face and her attire shining in 
morning and bridal freshness* I addressed her 
with the degree of ease her last night's careless 
gaiety seemed to warrant, but she replied with 



THE FBOFESSOB. 25 

coolness and restraint: her husband had tutored 
her ; she was not to be too familiar with his clerk.* 

As soon as breakfast was over Mr. Crimsworth 
intimated to me that they were bringing the gig 
round to the door, an4 that in five minutes he 
should expect me to be ready to go down with 

him to X . I did not keep him waiting; we 

were soon dashing at a rapid rate, along the road. 
The horse he drove was the same vicious animi^ 
about which Mrs. Crimsworth had expressed her 
fears the night before. Once or twice Jack 
seemed disposed to turn restive, but a vigorous 
and determined application of the whip £com the 
mtfaless hand of his master soon compelled him 
to submission, and Edward's dilated nostril ex- 
pressed his triumph in the result of the contest ; 
he scarcely spoke to me during the whole of the 
brief drive, only opening his lips at intervals to 
damn his horse. 

X was all stir and bustle when we entered it; 

we left the clean streets where there were dwelling- 



26 THE PB0FES60B. 

houses and shops^ churches^ and public buildings ; 
we left all these^ and turned down to a region of 
mills and warehouses ; thence we passed through 
two massive gates into a great paved jard^ and 
we were in Bigben Close^ and the mill was before 
us^ vomiting soot from its long chimney^ and 
quivering through its thick brick walls with the 
commotion of its iron bowels. Workpeople were 
passing to and fro; a waggon was being laden 
with pieces. Mr. Crimsworth looked from side 
to side, and seemed at one glance to comprehend 
all that was going on; he alighted, and leaving 
his horse and gig to the care of a man who 
hastened to take the reins from his hand, he bid 
me follow him to the counting-house. We entered 
it; a very different place from the parlours of 
Crimsworth Hall — a place for business, with a 
bare, planked floor, a safe, two high desks and 
stools, and some chairs. A person was seated at 
one of the desks, who took off his square cap 
when Mr. Crimsworth entered, and in an instant 



THIS PBOFESSOB. 27 

was again absorbed in his occupation cl writing 
or calctdating — I know not whicL 

Mr, Crimsworth, having removed his mack- 
intosh, sat down by the fire. I remained standing 
near the hearth ; he said presently — 

" Steighton, you may leave the room ; I have 
some business to transact with this gentleman. 
Come back when you hear the belL" 

The individual at the desk rose and departed, 
closing the door as he went out Mr. Crimsworth 
stirred the fire, then folded his arms, and sat a 
moment thinking, his lips compressed, his brow 
knit I had nothing to do but to watch him — 
how well his features were cut I what a handsome 
man he was I Whence, then, came that air of 
contraction — ^that narrow and hard aspect on his 
forehead, in all his lineaments? 

Turning to me he began abruptly :-^ 

" You are come down to shire to learn to 

be a tradesman?" 

'* Yes, I am.** 



28 THE PBOFESSOR. 

'^ Have you made up your mind on the point ? 
Let me know that at once." 
« Yes.'' 

*' Well, I am not bound to help you, but I have 
a place here vacant, if you are qualified for it 
I will take you on trial What can you do ? Do 
you know anything besides that useless trash of 
college learning — Greek, Latin, and so forth ?" 

'^ I have studied mathematics.'' 

'* Stuff 1 I dare say you have." 

'* I can read and write French and German." 

'^ Hum I" He reflected a moment, then open* 
ing a drawer in a desk near him took out a letter^ 
and gave it to me. 

'^ Can you read that?" he asked. 

It was a German commercial letter ; I trans- 
lated it ; I could not tell whether he was gratified 
or not — ^his countenance remained fixed. 

" It is well," he said, after a pause, " that you 
are acquainted with somethbg useful, something 
that may enable you to earn your board and 



THE PBOFESSOB. 29 

lodging: since you know French and Gennan^ 
I will take you as second clerk to manage the 
foreign correspondence of the house. I shall give 
you a good salary — 90i, a year — and now,** he 
continued, raising his voice, '^hear once for all 
what I have to say about our relationship, and 
all that sort of humbug! I must have no 
nonsense on that point; it would never suit me. 
I shall excuse you nothing on the plea of being 
my brother ; if I find you stupid, negligent, dissi- 
pated, idle, or possessed of any faults detrimental 
to the interests of the house, I shall dismiss you 
as I would any other clerk. Ninety pounds a 
year are good wages, and I expect to have 
the fall value of my money out of you; 
remember, too, that things are on a practical 
footing in my establishment — ^business-like habits, 
feelings, and ideas, suit me best. Do you under- 
stand?" 

** Partly," I replied. " I suppose you mean 
that 1 am to do my work for my wages ; not to 



30 THE FROFESSOB. 

expect favour from yoa^ and not to depend on yon 
for any help but what I earn; that soits me 
exactly^ and on these terms I will consent to be 
your clerk." 

I turned on my heel^ and walked to the 
window; this time I did not consult his face to 
learn his opinion : what it was I do not know^ nor 
did I then care. After a silence of some minutes 
he recommenced : — 

^^ You perhaps expect to be accommodated with 
apartments at Crimsworth Hall^ and to go and 
come with me in the gig. I wish you^ however^ 
to be aware that such an arrangement would be 
quite inconvenient to me. I like to have the seat 
in my gig at Uberty for any gentleman whom for 
business reasons I may wish to take down to the 
hall for a night or so. Tou will seek out lodgings 
inX ." 

Quitting the window^ I walked back to the 
hearth. 

^^ Of course I shaU seek out lodgings in 



THE FBOFESSOB. 31 



-," I answered. ** It would not suit me 



either to lodge at Crimsworth HalL" 

My tone was quiet I always speak quietly. 
Yet Mr. CriDMworth's blue eye became incensed ; 
lie took his revenge rather oddly. Turning to 
me he said bluntly — 

'* You are poor enough, I suppose ; how do 
you expect to live till your quarter's salary 
becomes due?*' 

*' I shall get on," said L 

" How do you expect to live?" he repeated in 
a louder voice. 

** As I can, Mr. OrimswortL" 

" Get into debt at your peril 1 that's all," he 
answered. ^ '* For aught I know you may have 
extravagant aristocratic habits ; if you have, drop 
them; I tolerate nothing of the sort here, and I 
will never give you a shilling extra, whatever 
liabilities you may incur — ^mind that." 

'* Yes, Mr. Crimsworth, you will find I have a 
good memory." 



32 THE PBOFESSOB. 

I said no more. I did not think the time was 
come for much parley. I had an instinctive 
feeling that it would be folly to let one's temper 
effervesce often with such a man as Edward. I 
said to myself, " I will place my cup under thU 
continual dropping ; it shall stand there still and 
steady; when full, it will run over of itself — 
meantime patience. Two tilings are certain. I 
am capable of performing the work Mr. Crims- 
worth has set me; I can earn my wages con- 
scientiously, and those wages are sufficient to 
enable me to live. As to the fact of my brother 
assuming towards me the bearing of a proud, 
harsh master, tlie fault is his, not mine ; and shall 
his injustice, his bad feeling, turn me at once aside 
from the path I have chosen ? No ; at least, ere 
I deviate, I will advance far enough to see 
whither my career tends. As yet I am only 
pressing in at the entrance — a strait gate enough ; 
it ought to have a good terminus.** While I 
thus reasoned, Mr. Crims worth rang a bell; his 



THE PROFESSOK. 33 

first clerk, the individual dismissed previously to 
our conference, re-entered. 

'' Mr. Steighton," said he, " show Mr. William 
the letters from Voss, Brothers, and give him 
English copies of the answers:' he will translate 
them." 

Mr. Steighton, a man of about thirty-five, with 
a face at once sly and heavy, hastened to execute 
this order ; he laid the letters on the desk, and I 
wa3 soon seated at it, and engaged in rendering 
the English answers into German. A sentiment 
of keen pleasure accompanied this first effort to 
earn my own living — a sentiment neither poisoned 
nor weakened by the presence of the taskmaster, 
who stood and watched me for some time as I 
wrote. I thought he was trying to read my 
character, but I felt as secure against his scrutiny 
as if I had had on a casque with the visor down — 
or rather I showed him my countenance with the 
confidence that one would show an unlearned 
man a letter written in Greek; he might see 

VOL. I. D 



34 THE FBOFESSOB. 

lineS; and trace characters^ but he could make 
nothing of them ; my nature was not his nature^ 
md its signs were to him like the words of an 
unknown tongue. Ere long he turned away 
abruptly, as if baffled, and left the counting- 
house ; he returned to it but twice in the course 
of that day ; each time he mixed and swallowed 
a glass of brandy and water, the materials for 
making which he extracted from a cupboard on 
one side of the fireplace ; having glanced at my 
translations — ^he could read both French and 
German — he went out again in silence. 



THE FROFESSOB. 35 



CHAPTER III. 



I SEBYED Edward as his second clerk faithfully, 
punctually, diligently. What was given me to do 
I had the power and the determination to do well. 
Mr. Crimsworth watched sharply for defects, but 
found none; he set Timothy Steighton, his 
favourite and head man, to watch also. Tim 
was baffled; I was as exact as himself, and 
quicker. Mr. Crimsworth made inquiries as to 
how I lived, whether I got into debt — ^no, my 
accounts with my landlady were always straight 
I had hired small lodgings, which I contrived to 
pay for out of a slender fimd — the accumulated 
savings of my Eton pocket-money; for as it had 
ever been abhorrent to my nature to ask 
pecuniary assistance, I had early acquired habits 



36 THE FBOFESSOB. 

of self-denying economy; husbanding my monthly 
allowance with anxious care, in order to obviate 
the danger of being forced, in some moment 
of future exigency, to beg additional aid. I 
remember many called me miser at the time, 
and I used to couple the reproach with this 
consolation — ^better to be misunderstood now than 
repulsed hereafter. At this day I had my reward; 
I had had it before, when on parting with my 
irritated uncles one of them threw down on the 
table before me a £5 note, which I was able to 
leave there, saying that my travelling expenses 
were already provided for. Mr. Crimsworth 
employed Tim to find out whether my landlady 
had any complaint to make on the score of my 
morals; she answered that she believed I was 
a very religious man, and asked Tim, in her turn, 
if he thought I had any intention of going into 
the Church some day ; for, she said, she had had 
young curates to lodge in her house who were 
nothing equal to me for steadiness and quietness. 



THE FBOFESSOB. 37 

Tim was '*a religious man" himself; indeed, he 
was " a joined Methodist," which did not (be it 
understood) prevent him from being at the same 
time an engrained rascal, and he came away 
much posed at hearing this account of my piety. 
Having imparted it to Mr. Crimsworth, that 
gentleman, who himself frequented no place of 
worship, and owned no God but Mammon, turned 
the information into a weapon of attack against 
the equability of my temper. He commenced a 
series of covert sneers, of which I did not at first 
perceive the drift, till my landlady happened to 
relate the conversation she had had with Mr. 
Steighton; this enlightened me; afterwards I 
came to the counting-house prepared, and managed 
to receive the millowner's blasphemous sarcasms, 
when next levelled at me, on a buckler of 
impenetrable indifference. Ere long he tired of 
wasting his ammunition on a statue, but he did 
not throw away the shafts — ^he only kept them 
quiet in his quiver. 



38 THE FBOFESSOB. 

Once daring my clerkship I had an invitation 
to Crimsworth Hall ; it was on the occasion of a 
large party given in honour of the master's 
birthday; he had always been accustomed to 
invite his clerks on similar anniversaries^ and 
could not well pass me over; I was, however, 
kept strictly in the background. Mrs. Crims- 
worth, elegantly dressed in satin and lace, 
blooming in youth and health, vouchsafed me 
no more notice than was expressed by a distant 
move; Crimsworth, of course, never spoke to 
me; I was introduced to none of the band of 
young ladies, who, enveloped in silvery clouds 
of white gauze and muslin, sat in array against 
me on the opposite side of a long and large room; 
in fact I was fairly isolated, and could but 
contemplate the shining ones from afar, and when 
weary of such a dazzling scene, turn for a change 
to the consideration of the carpet pattern. Mr. 
Crimsworth, standing on the rug, his elbow 
supported by the marble mantcil-piece, and about 



THH FBOFESSOR. 39 

him a group of very pretty girls, with whom he 
conversed gaily — Mr. Crimsworth, thus placed, 
glanced at me; I looked weary, solitary, kept 
down like some desolate tutor or governess; he 
was satisfied. 

Dancing began; I should have liked well 
enough to be introduced to some pleasing and 
intelligent girl, and to have freedom and oppor- 
tunity to show that I could both feel and 
communicate the pleasure of social intercourse — 
that I was not, in short, a block, or a piece of 
furniture, but an acting, thinking, sentient man. 
Many smiling faces and gracefiil figures glided 
past me, but the smiles were lavished on other 
eyes, the figures sustained by other hands than 
mine. I turned away tantalized, left the dancers, 
and wandered into the oak-panelled dining-room. 
* No fibre of sympathy united me to any living 
thing in this house; I looked for and found my 
mother's picture. I took a wax taper from a 
stand, and held it up. I gazed long, earnestly; 



40 THE PBOFESSOIU 

mj heart grew to the image. My mother, I 
perceived, had bequeathed to me much of her 
features and countenance— her forehead, her eyes, 
her complexion. No regular beauty pleases 
egotistical human beings so much as a softened 
and refined likeness of themselves; for this 
reason, fathers regard with complacency the 
lineaments of their daughters' faces, where fre- 
quently their own similitude is found flatteringly 
associated with softness of hue and delicacy of 
outline. I was just wondering how that picture, 
to me so interesting, would strike an impartial 
spectator, when a voice close behind me pro- 
nounced the words — 

^^ Humph! there's some sense in that face." 
I turned; at my elbow stood a tall man, young, 
though probably five or six years older than I — 
in other respects of an appearance the opposite 
to common-place; though just now, as I am not 
disposed to paint his portrait in detail, the reader 
must be content with the silhouette I have just 



THE FBOFESSOB. 41 

thrown off; it was all I myself saw of him for 
the moment : I did not investigate the colour of 
his eyebrows, nor of his eyes either; I saw 
his stature, and the outline of his shape ; I saw, 
too, his fastidious-looking retroussd nose; these 
observations, few in number, and general in 
character (the last excepted), sufficed, for they 
enabled me to recognise him. 

" Good evening, Mr. Hunsden," muttered I '• 
with a bow, and then, like a shy noodle as I was, 
I began moving away — and why? Simply because 
Mr. Hunsden was a manufacturer and a millowner, 
and I was only a clerk, and my instinct propelled 
me from my superior. I had frequently seen 
Hunsden in Bigben Close, where he came almost 
weekly to transact business with Mr. Crimsworth, 
but I had never spoken to him, nor he to me, and 
I owed him a sort of involuntary grudge, because 
he had more than once been the tacit witness of 
insults offered by Edward to me. I had the 
conviction that he could only regard me as 



42 THE FBOFESSOR* 

a poor-spirited slave^ wherefore I now went 
about to shun his fpresence and eschew his 
conversation. 

"Where are you going?" asked he, as I edged 
off sideways. I had already noticed that Mr. 
Hunsden indulged in abrupt forms of speech, 
and I perversely said to myself — 

" He thinks he may speak as he likes to a poor 
clerk; but my mood is not perhaps so supple as 
he deems it, and his rough freedom pleases me 
not at all." 

I made some slight reply, rather indifferent 
than courteous; and continued to move away. 
Ho coolly planted himself in my path. 

" Stay here awhile," said he : " it is so hot 
in the dancing room; besides you don't dance; 
you have not had a partner to-night" 

He was right, and as he spoke neither his look, 
tone, nor manner, displeased me; my amouv' 
propre was propitiated ; he had not addressed me 
out of condescension, but because, having repaired 



THE FBOFESSOB. 43 

to the cool dining room for refreshment, he now 
wanted some one to talk to, bj way of temporary 
amnsement. I hate to be condescended to, but 
I like well enough to oblige : I stayed. 

** That is a good picture," he continued, 
recurring to the portrait. 

'^Do you consider the face pretty?" I asked. 

" Pretty ! no — ^how can it be pretty with sunk 
eyes and hollow cheeks? but it is peculiar; it • 
seems to think. You could have a talk with that 
woman, if she were alive, on other subjects than 
dress, visiting, and compliments." 

I agreed with him — ^but did not say so. He 
went on. 

**Not that I admire a head of that sort; it 
wants character and force ; there 's too much of 
the sen-si-tive (so he articulated it, curling his 
lip at the same time) in that mouth; besides 
there is Aristocrat written on the brow and 
defined in the figure ; I hate your aristocrats." 

"You think then, Mr. Hunsden, that patrician 



44 THE FBOFESSOB. 

descent may be read in a distinctiye cast of form 
and features?" 

'^Patrician descent be hanged! Who doubts 
that your lordlings may have their ^distinctive 
cast of form and features' as much as we 

shire tradesmen have ours? But which is 

the best? Not theirs assuredly. As to their 
women, it is a little different: they cultivate 
beauty from childhood upwards, and may by 
care and training attain to a certain degree of 
excellence in that point, just like the oriental 
odalisques. Yet even this superiority is doubt- 
ful. Compare the figure in that frame with 
Mrs. Edward Crimsworth — ^which is the finer 
animal?" 

I replied quietly : *^ Compare yourself and Mr. 
Edward Crimsworth, Mr. Hunsden." 

" Oh, Crimsworth is better filled up than I am, 
I know; besides he has a straight nose, arched 
eyebrows, and all that; but these advantages — ^if 
they are advantages — ^he did not inherit from his 



THE PBOFESSOB« 45 

mother, the patrician, but from his father, old 
Crimsworth, who, my father says, was as veritable 

a shire blue-dyer as ever put indigo in a vat ; 

yet withal the handsomest man in the three Ridings. 
It is you, William, who are the aristocrat of your 
family, and you are not as fine a fellow as your 
plebeian brother by a long chalk.** 

There was something in Mr. Hunsden's point- 
blank mode of speech which rather pleased me 
than otherwise, because it set me at my ease. I 
continued the conversation with a degree of 
interest 

** How do you happen to know that I am Mr. 
Crimsworth's brother ? I thought you and every- 
body else looked upon me only in the light of a 
poor clerL** 

" Well, and so we do ; and what are you but a 
poor clerk ? You do Crimsworth's work, and he 
gives you wages — shabby wages they are, too." 

I was silent Hunsden's language now bordered 
on the impertinent, still his manner did not offend 



46 THE FBOFESSOB. 

me in tlie least — ^it only piqued my curiosity; I 
wanted him to go on^ which he did in a little 
while. • 

" This world is an absurd one," said he. 

'' Why so, Mr. Hunsden ?** 

" I wonder you should ask : you are yourself 
a strong proof of the absurdity I allude to." 

I was determined he should explain himself of 
his own accord, without my pressing him so 
to do — so I resumed my silence. 

" Is it your intention to become a tradesman ?" 
he inquired presently. 

^^It was my serious intention three months 
ago." 

"Humph! the more fool you — you look like 
a tradesman I What a practical business-like 
face you have I" 

"My face is as the Lord made it, Mr. 
Hunsden." 

"The Lord never made either your face or 
head for X . What good can your bumps 



THE PROFESSOR. 47 

of ideality, comparison, self-esteem, conscien- 
tiousness, do you here ? But if you like Bigben 
Close, stay there; it's your own affair, not 
mine." 

*^ Perhaps I have no choice." 

" Well I care nought about it — ^it will make 
little difference to me what you do or where 
you go; but I'm cool now — I want to dance 
again ; and I see such a fine girl sitting in the 
comer of the sofa there by her mamma; see if 
I don't get her for a partner in a jiffy ! There 's 
Waddy — Sam Waddy making up to her; won't 
I cut him out?" 

And Mr. Hunsden strode away. I watched 
him through the open folding-doors; he outstripped 
Waddy, applied for the hand of the fine girl, 
and led her off triumphant She was a tall, 
well-made, full-formed, dashingly-dressed young 
woman, much in the style of Mrs. E. Crims- 
worth ; Hunsden whirled her through the waltz 
with spirit; he kept at her side during the 



48 THE PBOFESSOIU 

remainder of the evening, and I read in her 
animated and gratified countenance that he 
succeeded in making himself perfectly agreeable. 
The mamma too (a stout person in a turban — Mrs 
Lupton by name) looked well pleased ; prophetic 
visions probably flattered her inward eye. The 
Hunsdcns were of an old stem ; and scornful as 
Yorkc (such was my late interlocutor's name) 
professed to be of the advantages of birth^ in 
his secret heart ho well knew and fully 
appreciated the distinction his ancient^ if not 
high lineage conferred on him in a mushroom- 
place like X , concerning whose inhabitants 

it was proverbially said, that not one in a 
thousand knew his own grandfather. Moreover 
the Hunsdens, once rich, were still independent ; 
and report affirmed that Yorke bade fair, by his 
success in business, to restore to pristine prosperity 
the partially decayed fortunes of his house. 
These circumstances considered, Mrs. Lupton's 
broad face might well wear a smile of com- 



THE FBOFESSOR. 49 

placency as she contemplated the heir of Hunsden 
Wood occupied in paying assiduous court to 
her darling Sarah Martha. I^ however^ whose 
observations being less anxious, were likely to 
be more accurate, soon saw that the grounds 
for maternal self-congratulation were slight 
indeed; the gentleman appeared to me much 
more desirous of making, than susceptible of 
receiving an impression. I know not what it 
was in Mr. Hunsden that, as I watched him 
(I had nothing better to do), suggested to me, 
every now and then, the idea of a foreigner. 
In form and features he might be pronounced 
English, though even there one caught a dash 
of something Gallic; but he had no English 
shyness: he had learnt somewhere, somehow, 
the art of setting himself quite at his ease, and 
of allowing no insular timidity to intervene as 
a barrier between him and his convenience, or 
pleasure. Refinement he did not affect, yet 
vulgar he could not be called; he was not odd — 

VOL. r. E 



60 THB PR0FES80IU 

no qui/i — ^yct ho resembled no one else I had ever 
soon before; his general bearing intimated com- 
pletOj sovereign satisfaction with himself^ yet^ 
at times, an indescribable shade passed like an 
eclipse over his coimtenance^ and seemed to me 
like the sign of a sudden and strong inward 
doiibt of himself^ his words and actions— an 
energetic discontent at his life or his social 
position, his future prospects or his mental 
attainments — I know not wliich; perhaps after 
all it might only be a bilious caprice. 



THE FROFESSOB. 51 



CHAPTER IV. 



No man likes to acknowledge that he has 
made a mistake in the choice of his profession^ 
and every man, worthy of the name, will row 
long against wind and tide before he allows 
himself to cry out "I am bafiSedl" and submits 
to be floated passively back to land. From 
the first week of my residence in X— - I felt 
my occupation irksome. The thing itself — 
the work of copying and translating business- 
letters — ^was a dry and tedious task enough, but 
had that been all, I should long have borne with 
the nuisance; I am not of an impatient nature, 
and influenced by the double desire of getting 
my living and justifying to myself and others 
the resolution I had taken to become a tradesman, 



52 THE FB0FE8S0IU 

I should have endured in silence the rust and 
cramp of my best faculties; I should not have 
whispered, even inwardly, that I longed for 
liberty; I should have pent in every sigh by 
which my heart might have ventured to intimate 
its distress under the closeness, smoke, monotony 
and joyless tumult of Bigben Close, and its 
panting desire for freer and fresher scenes; I 
should have set up the image of Duty, the fetish 
of Perseverance, in my small bed-room at Mrs. 
King's lodgings, and they two should have been 
my household gods, from which my darling, my 
cherished-in-secret. Imagination, the tender and 
the mighty, should never, either by softness or 
strength, have severed me. But this was not 
all ; the antipathy which had sprung up between 
myself and my employer striking deeper root 
and spreading denser shade daily, excluded me 
from every glimpse of the sunshine of life; and 
I began to feel like a plant growing in humid 
darkness out of the slimy walls of a well. 



THE FKOFESSOB. 53 

Antipathy is the only word which can express 
the feeling Edward Crimsworth had for me — a 
feeling, in a great measure, involuntary, and 
which was liable to be excited by every, the 
most trifling movement, look, or word of mine. 
My southern accent annoyed him; the degree 
of education evinced in my language irritated 
him; my punctuality, industry, and accuracy, 
fixed his dislike, and gave it the high flavour 
and poignant relish of envy; he feared that I 
too should one day make a successful tradesman. 
Had I been in anything inferior to him, he would 
not have hated me so thoroughly, but I knew 
all that he knew, and, what was worse, he 
suspected that I kept the padlock of silence on 
mental wealth in which he was no sharer. If 
he could have once placed me in a ridiculous 
or mortifying position, he would have forgiven me 
much, but I was guarded by three faculties — 
Caution, Tact, Observation; and prowling and 
prying as was Edward's malignity, it could 



54 THE PBOFESSOIU 

never baffle the lynx-eyes of these, my natural 
sentinels. Day by day did his malice watch mj 
tact, hoping it would sleep, and prepared to 
steal snake-like on its slumber, but tact, if it 
be genuine, never sleeps. 

I had received my first quarter's wages and 
was returning to my lodgings, possessed heart 
and soul with the pleasant feeling that the 
master who had paid me grudged every penny 
of that hard-earned pittance— (I had long ceased 
to regard Mr. Crimsworth as my brother — ^he 
was a hard, grinding master ; he wished to be 
an inexorable tyrant: that was all). Thoughts, 
not varied but strong, occupied my mind; two 
voices spoke within me; again and again they 
uttered the same monotonous phrases. One 
said: ** William, your life is intolerable." The 
other : " What can you do to alter it?** I walked 
fast, for it was a cold, frosty night in January ; 
as I approached my lodgings, I turned from a 
general view of my a£Pairs to the particular 



THE PROFESSOR. 55 

speculation as to whether my fire would be out ; 
looking towards the .window of my sitting-room, 
I saw no cheering red gleam. 

^'That slut of a servant has neglected it as 
usual," said I, '^ and I shall see nothing but pale 
ashes if I go in ; it is a fine starlight night — I 
will walk a little farther." 

It was a fine night, and the streets were dry 

and even clean for X ; there was a crescent 

curve of moonlight to be seen by the parish 
church tower, and hundreds of stars shone 
keenly bright in all quarters of the sky. 

Unconsciously I steered my course towards 
the country; I had got into Grove-street and 
began to feel the pleasure of seeing dim trees 
at the extremity, round a suburban house, when 
a person leaning over the iron gate of one of 
the small gardens which front the neat dwelling- 
houses in this street, addressed me as I was 
hurrying with quick stride past 

" What the deuce is the hurry ? Just so must 



56 THE FBOrESSOB. 

Lot have left Sodom^ when he expected fire 
to pour down upon it^ out of horning hrass 
clouds.*' 

I stopped shorty and looked towards the speaker. 
I smelt the fragrance^ and saw the red spark of a 
cigar ; the dusk outline of a man^ too^ hent towards 
me over the wicket 

''You see I am meditating in the field at 
eventide^" continued this shade. ''God knows 
it 's cool work I especially as instead of Rebecca 
on a camePs hump^ with bracelets on her arms 
and a ring in her nose^ Fate sends me only a 
counting-house clerks in a grey tweed wrapper.'' 

The voice was familiar to me— -its second 
utterance enabled me to seize the speaker's 
identity. 

" Mr. Hunsden I good evening." 

"Good evening, indeed I yes, but you would 
have passed me without recognition if I had 
not been so civil as to speak first ** 

" I did not know you." 



THB PROFESSOB. 57 

^^ A famous excuse I You ought to have known 
me ; I knew you^ though you were going ahead 
like a steam-engine. Are the police after you ?" 

" It would n't be worth their while ; I 'm not 
of consequence enough to attract them." 

''Alas, poor shepherd I Alack and well-a-dayl 
What a theme for regret, and how down in the 
mouth you must be, judging from the sound 
of your voice I But since youVe not running 
from the police, from whom are you running ? 
the devil?'' 

''On the contrary, I am going post to him." 

" That is well — ^you 're just in luck : this is 
Tuesday evening; there are scores of market gigs 
and carts returning to Dinneford to-night; and he, 
or some of his, have a seat in all regularly; so, 
if you 11 step in and sit half-an-hour in my 
bachelor's parlour, you may catch him as he 
passes without much trouble. I think though 

you'd better let him alone to-night, hell have 
so many customers to serve; Tuesday is his 



58 THE FBOFESSOR. 

busy day in X and Dinneford ; come in, at all 

events." 

lie swung the wicket open as he spoke. 

" Do you really wish me to go in ?" I asked. 

" As you please — I 'm alone ; your company for 
an hour or two would be agreeable to me; but, 
if you don't choose to favour me so far, 1 11 not 
press the point I hate to bore any one." 

It suited me to accept the invitation as it suited 
Hunsdcn to give it. I passed through the gate, 
and followed him to the front door, which he 
opened; thence we traversed a passage, and 
entered his parlour; the door being shut, ho 
pointed mo to an arm-chair by the hearth ; I sat 
down, and glanced round me. 

It was a comfortable room, at once snug and 
handsome; the bright grate was filled with a 

genuine shire fire, red, clear, and generous, 

no penurious south-of-England embers happed in 
the comer of a grate. On the table a shaded lamp 
diffused around a soft, pleasant, and equal light; 



THB FBOFESSOB. 59 

the famitore was almost luxurious for a young 
bachelor^ comprising a couch and two very easy 
chairs; bookshelves filled the recesses on each 
side of the mantel-piece; they were well-furnished, 
and arranged with perfect order. The neatness 
of the room suited my taste ; I hate irregular and 
slovenly habits. From what I saw, I concluded 
that Hunsden's ideas on that point corresponded 
with my own. While he removed from the centre- 
table to the side-board a few pamphlets and 
periodicals, I ran my eye along the shelves of the 
book-case nearest me. French and German work^ 
predominated, the old French dramatists, sundry 
modern authors, Thiers, Villemain, Paul de Eock, 
George Sand, Eugene Sue; in German — Goethe, 
Schiller, Zschokke, Jean Paul Richter ; in English 
there were works on Political Economy. I exam- 
ined no further, for Mr. Hunsden himself recalled 
my attention. 

" You shall have something,** said he, " for you 
ought to feel disposed for refreshment after 



60 THE PBOFESSOB. 

walking nobody knows how far on such a Cana- 
dian night as this; but it shall not be brandy 
and water, and it shall not be a bottle of port, 
nor ditto of sherry. I keep no such poison. 
I have Rhein-wein for my own drinking, and you 
may choose between that and coffee." 

Here again Hunsden suited me : if there was 

one generally received practice I abhorred more 

than another, it was the habitual imbibing of 

spirits and strong wines. I had, however, no 

fancy for his acid German nectar, but I liked 

coffee, so I responded — 

" Give me some coffee, Mr. Hunsden." 

I perceived my answer pleased him; he had 

doubtless expected to see a chilling effect produced 

by his steady announcement that he would give 

me neither wine nor spirits; he just shot one 

searching glance at my face to ascertain whether 

my cordiality was genuine or a mere feint of 

politeness. I smiled, because I quite understood 

him; and, while I honoured his conscientious 



THE FBOFESSOB* 61 

firmness^ I was amused at his mistrust ; he seemed 
satisfied^ rang the bell^ and ordered coffee^ which 
was presently brought; for himself, a bunch of 
grapes and half a pint of something sour sufficed* 
My coffee was excellent; I told him so, and 
expressed the shuddering pity with which his 
anchorite, fare inspired me. He did not answer, 
and I scarcely think heard my remark. At that 
moment one of those momentary eclipses I before 
alluded to had come oy^ his face, extinguishing 
his smile, and replacing, by an abstracted and 
alienated look, the customarily shrewd, bantering 
glance of his eye. I employed the interval of 
silence in a rapid scrutiny of his physiognomy. I 
had never observed him closely before; and, as 
my sight is very short, I had gathered only a 
vague, general idea of his appearance ; I was 
surprised now, on examination, to perceive how 
small, and even feminine, were his lineaments ; his 
tall figure, long and dark locks, his voice and 
general bearing, had impressed me with the notion 



62 THB FBOFESSOB. 

of something powerful and massive ; not at all — 
mj own features were cast in a harsher and 
squarer mould than his. I discerned that there 
would be contrasts between his inward and out- 
ward man; contentions^ too; for I suspected his 
soul had more of will and ambition than his body 
had of fibre and muscle. Perhaps, in these 
incompatibilities of the ''physique^ with the 
^* morale,^ lay the secret of that fitful gloom ; he 
would but could not, and. the athletic mind scowled 
scorn on its more fragile companion. As to his 
good looks, I should have liked to have a 
woman's opinion on that subject; it seemed to 
me that his face might produce the same efiect on 
a ladj that a very piquant and interesting, though 
scarcely pretty, female face would on a man. I 
have mentioned his .dark locks — they were brushed 
sideways above a white and sufficiently expansive 
forehead ; his cheek had a rather hectic freshness ; 
his features might have done well on canvas, 
but indifierently in marble : they were plastic ; 



THE FROFESSOB. 63 

character had set a stamp upon each ; expression 
re-cast them at her pleasure^ and strange meta- 
morphoses she wrought^ giving him now the mien 
of a morose bull^ and anon that of an arch and 
mischievons girl; more frequently^ the two 
semblances were blent, and a queer, composite 
ooantenance they made. 

Starting from his silent fit, be began : — 

** William ! what a fool you are to live in those 
dismal lodgings of Mrs. King's, when you might 
take rooms here in Grove Street, and have a 
garden like me ! " 

** I should be too far from the mill." 

**What of that? It would do you good to 
walk there and back two or three times a day; 
besides, are you such a fossil that you never wish 
to see a flower or a green leaf?" 

** I am no fossil." 

** What are you then? You sit at that desk in 
Crimsworth's counting-house day by day and week 
by week, scraping with a pen on paper, just like 



64 THE FBOFESSOB. 

an automaton; you never get up ; you never say 
you are tired ; you never ask for a holiday ; you 
never take change or relaxation ; you give way to 
no excess of an evening ; you neither keep wild 
company^ nor indulge in strong drink.'* 

** Do you, Mr. Hunsden ?^ 

^^ Don't think to pose me with short questions ; 
your case and mine are diametrically different, and 
it is nonsense attempting to draw a parallel. I 
say, that when a man endures patiently what 
ought to be unendurable, he is a fossil." 

*' Whence do you acquire the knowledge of my 
patience?" 

*' Why, man, do you suppose you are a mystery ? 
The other night you seemed surprised at my 
knowing to what family you belonged; now you 
find subject for wonderment in my calling you 
patient What do you think I do with my eyes 
and ears? I 've been in your counting-house 
more than once when Crimsworth has treated you 
like a dog; called for a book, for instance, and 



THE PROFESSOB. 65 

when you gave him the wrong one, or what he chose 
to consider the wrong one^ flung it back abnost in 
your face ; desired you to shut or open the door as 
if you had been his flunkey ; to say nothing of 
your position at the party about a month ago, 
where you had neither place nor partner, but 
hovered about like a poor, shabby hanger-on ; and 
how patient you were under each and all of these 
circumstances ! " 

" Well, Mr. Hunsden, what then ? " 
"I can hardly tell you what then; the con- 
clusion to be drawn as to your character depends 
upon the nature of the motives which guide your 
conduct ; if you are patient because you expect to 
make something eventually out of Crimsworth, 
notwithstanding his tyranny, or perhaps by means 
of it, you are what the world calls an interested 
and mercenary, but may be a very wise fellow ; 
if you are patient because you think it a duty 
to meet insult with submission, you are an 
essential sap, and in no shape the man for my 
VOL. I. ' y 



66 THE PB0?E8S0B. 

money ; if you are patient because your nature is 
phlegmatic, flat, inexcitable, and that you cannot 
get up to the pitch of resistance, why, God made 
you to be crushed; and lie down by all means, 
and lie flat, and let Juggernaut ride well over 
you." 

Mr. Hunsden's eloquence was not, it will be 
perceived, of the smooth and oily order. As he 
spoke, he pleased me ill I seemed to recognise 
in him one of those characters who, sensitive 
enough themselves, are selfishly relentless towards 
the sensitiveness of others. Moreover, though he 
was neither like Crimsworth nor Lord Tynedale, 
yet he was acrid, and, I suspected, overbearing in 
his way: there was a tone of despotism in the 
urgency of the very reproaches by which he 
aimed at goading the oppressed into rebellion 
against the oppressor. Looking at him still more 
fixedly than I had yet done, I saw written in his 
eye and mien a resolution to arrogate to himself 
a freedom so unlimited, that it might often trench 



THE PBOFESSOB. 67 

on the just liberty of his neighboars. I rapidly 
ran over these thoughts^ and then I laughed a 
low and inyolimtary langh^ moved thereto by a 
slight, inward revelation of the inconsistency of 
man. It was as I thought : Hunsden had expected 
me to take with calm his incorrect and offensive 
surmises^ his bitter and haughty taunts; and 
himself was chafed by a laugh^ scarce louder than 
a whisper. 

His brow darkened^ his thin nostril dilated a 
little. 

** Yes," he began, " I told you that you were 
an aristocrat, and who but an aristocrat would 
laugh such a laugh as that, and look such a look ? 
A laugh frigidly jeering ; a look lazily mutinous ; 
gentlemanlike irony, patrician resentment. What 
a nobleman you would have made, William 
CrimsworthI You are cut out for one; pity 
Fortune has baulked Nature ! Look at the features, 
figure, even to the hands — distinction all over — 
ugly distinction! Now, if you'd only an estate 



68 THE PBOFESSOB. 

and a mansion, and a park, and a title, how you 
could play the exclusive, maintain the rights of 
your class, train your tenantry in habits of respect 
to the peerage, oppose at every step the advancing 
power of the people, support your rotten order, 
and be ready for its sake to wade knee-deep in 
churls' blood ; as it is, you 've no power ; you can 
do nothing ; you 're wrecked and stranded on the 
shores of commerce; forced into collision with 
practical men, with whom you cannot cope, for 
you HI never be a tradesman.^ 

The first part of Hunsden's speech moved me 
not at all, or, if it did, it was only to wonder 
at the perversion into which prejudice had twisted 
his judgment of my character ; the concluding 
sentence, however, not only moved, but shook 
me ; the blow it gave was a severe one, because 
Truth wielded the weapon. If I smiled now, it 
was only in disdain of myself. 

Hunsden saw his advantage ; he followed it up. 
" You '11 make nothing by trade," continued he ; 



THB PROFESSOB. 69 

" nothing more than the crust of dry bread and 
the draught of fair water on which you now live ; 
your only chance of getting a competency lies in 
marrying a rich widow, or running away with an 
heiress.** 

** I leave such shifts to be put in practice by 
those who devise them,** said I, rising. 

** And even that is hopeless,** he went on coolly. 
^^What widow would have you? Much less, 
what heiress ? You *re not bold and venturesome 
enough for the one, nor handsome and fascinating 
enough for the other. You think perhaps you look 
intelligent and polished; carry your intellect and 
refinement to market, and tell me in a private note 
what price is bid for them." 

Mr. Hunsden had taken his tone for the night ; 
the string he struck was out of tune, he would 
finger no other. Averse to discord, of which I had 
enough every day and all day long, I concluded, 
at last, that silence and solitude were preferable to 
jarring converse ; I bade him good-night 



70 THE FBOFEBSOB. 

" What ! Are you goings lad ? Well, good- 
night : you 11 find the door." And he sat still in 
front of the fire^ while I left the room and the 
house* I had got a good way on my return to my 
lodgings before I foimd out that I was walking y6ry 
£ut, and breathing very hard, and that my nails 
were almost stuck into the palms of my clenched 
bands, and that my teeth were set £ut; on making 
this discovery, I relaxed both my pace, fists, and 
jaws, but I could not so soon cause the regrets 
rushing rapidly through my mind to slacken their 
tide. Why did I make myself a tradesman? 
Why did I enter Hunsden's house this evening ? 
Why, at dawn to-morrow, must]^I repair to Crims- 
worth's mill? All that night did I ask myself 
these questions, and all that night fiercely demanded 
of my soul an answer. I got no sleep ; my head 
burned, my feet froze; at last the factory bells 
rang, and I sprang from my bed with other slaves. 



THB PBOFBSSOB. 71 



CHAPTER V. 



Thebb is a climax to every thing, to every state of 
feeling as well as to every position in life. I 
tamed this truism over in my mind as, in the 
frosty dawn of a January morning, I hurried down 
the steep and now icy street which descended from 
Mrs. King's to the Close. The factory work- 
people had preceded me by nearly an hour, and 
the mill was all lighted up and in full operation 
when I reached it I repaired to my post in the 
counting-house as usual ; the fire there, but just 
lit, as yet only smoked; Steighton was not yet 
arrived. I shut the door and sat down at the 
desk; my hands, recently washed in half-frozen 
water, were still numb ; I could not write till they 



72 THE PB0FE8S0IL 

had regained vitality, so I went on thinking, and 
still the theme of my thooghts was ** the climax." 
Self-dissatis£EU^tion troubled exceedingly the cur- 
rent of my meditations. 

" Come, William Crimsworth," said my con- 
science, or whatever it is that within ourselves 
takes ourselves to task — ''Come, get a clear 
notion of what you would have, or what you 
would not have. You talk of a climax ; pray has 
your endurance reached its climax? It is not 
four months old. What a fine resolute fellow 
you imagined yourself to be when you told Tyne- 
dale you would tread in your father's steps, and a 
pretty treading you are likely to .make of it I 

How well you like X 1 Just at this moment 

how redolent of pleasant associations are its 
streets, its shops, its warehouses, its factories! 
How the prospect of this day cheers you 1 Letter- 
copying till noon, solitary dinner at your lodgings, 
letter-copying till evening, solitude; for you 
neither find pleasure in Brown's, nor Smith's, nor 



THE PBOFESSOB. 73 

Nicholl's, nor Eccle's company; and as to 
Honsden^ you fancied there was pleasure to be 
derived from his society — ^hel he! how did you 
like the taste you had of him last night ? was it 
sweet? Tet he is a talented, an original-minded 
man, and even he does not like you ; your self- 
respect defies you to like him ; he has always seen 
you to disadvantage; he always will see you to 
disadvantage; your positions are unequal, and 
were they on the same level your minds could not 
assimilate ; never hope, then, to gather the honey 
of friendship out of that thorn-guarded plant 
Hollo, CrimsworthI where are your thoughts 
tending ? You leave the recollection of Hunsden 
as a bee would a rock, as a bird a desert ; and 
your • aspirations spread eager wings towards a 
land of visions where, now in advancing day-light, 

— in X daylight — you dare to dream of 

congeniality, repose, union. Those three you will 
never meet in this world ; they are angels. The 
souls of just men made perfect may encounter 



74 THE PBOnSSOB. 

them in heayen, but jour soul will never be made 
perfect Eight o'clock strikes! jour hands are 
thawed^ get to work I ** 

" Work ? why should I work ?** said I sullenly : 
'^I cannot please though I toil like a slaye.** 
** Work, work I** reiterated the inward voice. 
*^ I may work, it will do no good,'' I growled; 
but nevertheless I drew out a packet of letters 
and commenced my task — task thankless and 
bitter as that of the Israelite crawling over the 
sun-baked fields of Egypt in search of straw and 
stubble wherewith to accomplish his tale of bricks. 

About ten o'clock I heard Mr. Crimsworth's 
gig turn into the yard, and in a minute or two he 
entered the counting-house. It was his custom to 
glance his eye at Steighton and myself, to hang 
up his Mackintosh, stand a minute with his back 
to the fire, and then walk out To-day he did 
not deviate from his usual habits ; the only differ- 
ence was that when he looked at me, his brow, 
instead of being merely hard, was surly ; his eye. 



75 

instead of bemgodd, was fierce. He studied me a 

mmate or tvo longer tlian usual, but went out in 

siknoe. 

Twelve o*clock arrived; the beD rang for a 

suspension of labour; the woriL-people went off to 

their dinners; Steighton, too^ departed, desiring 
me to lock the connting-house door, and take the 

key with me. I was lying np a bundle of papers, 

and putting them in their place, preparatory to 

closing my desk, when Crimsworth re-appeared at 

the door, and entering closed it behind him. 

^ You 11 stay here a minute," said he in a deep 
brutal voice, while his nostrils distended and his 
eye shot a spark of sinister fire. 

Alone with Edward I remembered our rela- 
tionship, and remembering that, forgot the 
difference of position ; I put away deference and 
careful forms of speech ; I answered with simple 
brevity. 

** It is time to go home," I said, turning the 
key in my desk. 



76 THX PBOnSfiOB. 

** You 11 8tay here I" he reiterated. " And take 
your hand o£f that key I leave it in the lock I" 

** Why ?** asked I. " What cause is there for 
changing my usual plans ?" 

" Do as I order,** was the answer, " and no 
questions ! You are my servant, obey me I What 

have you been about ?** he was going on in 

the same breath, when an abrupt pause announced 
that rage had for the moment got the better of 
articulation. 

*' You may look, if you wish to know," I 
replied. '^ There is the open desk, there are the 
papers." 

^ Confound your insolence I What have you 
been about?" 

** Your work, and have done it welL" 

"Hypocrite and twaddler I Smooth-faced, 
snivelling greasehomi" (thb last term is, I believe, 

purely shire, and alludes to the horn of black 

rancid whale-oil, usually to be seen suspended to 
cart-wheels, and employed for greasing the same.) 



THE PBorssaoB. 77 

" Come^ Edward Crimsworth, enough of this. 
It is time you and I wound up accounts. I have 
now given your service three months' trial, and I 
find it the most nauseous slavery under the sun. 
Seek another derk. I stay no longer." 

" What I do you dare to give me notice ? Stop 
at least for your wages." He took down the 
heavy gig whip hanging beside his Mackintosh. 

I permitted myself to laugh with a degree of 
scorn I took no pains to temper or hide. His fury 
boiled up, and when he had sworn half-a-dozen 
vulgar, impious oaths, without, however, ven- 
turing to lift the whip, he continued. 

" I 've found you out and know you thoroughly; 
you mean, whining lickspittle 1 What have you 

been saying all over X about me ? Answer 

me that !" 

" You ? I have neither inclination nor tempta- 
tion to talk about you." 

" You lie 1 It is your practice to talk about 
me ; it is your constant habit to make public com- 



78 THE PB0FES80B. 

plaint of the treatment you receive at my hands. 
You have gone and told it &r and near that I give 
you low wages and knock you about like a dog. 
I wish you were a dog I I 'd set-to this minute and 
never stir &om the spot till I 'd cut every strip of 
flesh from your bones with this whip.** 

He flourished his tooL The end of the lash just 
touched my forehead* A warm excited thrill ran 
through my veins^ my blood seemed to give a 
bound, and then raced fast and hot along its 
channels. I got up nimbly, came rotmd to where 
he stood and &ced him. 

" Down with your whip P said I, *^ and explain 
this instant what you mean.^ 

'* Sirrah! to whom are you speaking?" 

" To you. There is no one else present, 
I think. You say I have been calumniating 
you — complaining of your low wages and bad 
treatment Give your grounds for these asser- 



tions." 



Crimsworth had no dignity, and when I sternly 



THE FBOFESSOB. 79 

demanded an explanation^ lie gave one in a loud^ 
scolding voice. 

'^ Grounds I you sludl have them ; and turn to 
the light that I may see your brazen face blush 
blacky when you hear yourself proved to be a liar 
and a hypocrite. At a public meeting in the 
Town-hall yesterday, I had the pleasure of hear- 
ing myself insulted by the speaker opposed to me 
in the question under discussion, by allusions to 
my private affairs ; by cant about monsters 
without natural affection, family despots, and such 
trash ; and when I rose to answer, I was met by 
a shout from the filthy mob, where the mention of 
your name enabled me at once to detect the 
quarter in which this base attack had origmatei 
When I looked round, I saw that treacherous 
villain, Hunsden, acting as fugleman. I detected 
you in close conversation with Hunsden at my 
house a month ago, and I know that you were 
at Hunsden's rooms last night Deny it if you 
dare." 



80 THE FB0FE8S0B* 

^'Oh^ I shall not deny it! And if Hnnsden 
hounded on the people to hiss jou^ he did quite 
right You deserve popular execration; for a 
worse man, a harder master, a more brutal brother 
than you are has seldom existed." 

^^ Sirrah I sirrah I" reiterated Crimsworth ; and 
to complete his apostrophe, he cracked the whip 
straight over my head* 

A minute sufficed to wrest it from him, break 
it in two pieces, and throw it under the grate. 
He made a headlong rush at me which I evaded, 
and said — 

" Touch me and 1 11 have you up before the 
nearest magistrate." 

Men like Crimsworth, if firmly and cabnly 
resisted, always abate something of their exorbi- 
tant insolence; he had no mind to be brought 

before a magistrate, and I suppose he saw I meant 

■ 

what I said. After an odd and long stare at me, 
at once bull-like and amazed, he seemed to 
bethink himself that, after all, his money gave 



THE PBOFESSOB. 81 

him sufficient saperiority over a beggar like me, 
and that he had in his hands a surer and more 
dignified mode of revenge than the somewhat 
hazardous one of personal chastisement. 

** Take your hat,** said he. ** Take what 
belongs to you^ and go out at that door; get away 
to your parish^ you pauper: beg, steal, starve, 
get transported, do what you like; but at 
your peril venture again into my sight 1 If 
ever I hear of your setting foot on an inch 
of ground belonging to me, 1 11 hire a man to 
ane you." 

*' It is not likely you 11 have the chance ; once 
ofi* your premises, what temptation can I have to 
return to them? I leave a prison, I leave a 
tyrant ; I leave what is worse than the worst that 
can lie before me, so no fear of my coming 
back." 

" Go, or 1 11 make you I" exclaimed Crimsworth. 

I walked deliberately to my desk, took out such of 
its contents as were my own property, put them in 

VOIi. I. G 



82 TnE FBOFESSOB. 

my pockety locked the desk, and placed the key on 
the top. 

** What are you abstracting from that desk?" 
demanded the millowner, ^^ Leave all behind in 
its place, or 1 11 send for a policeman to search 
von." 

^* Look sharp about it, then," said I, and I took 
down my hat, drew on my gloves, and walked 
leisurely out of the counting-house — walked out 
of it to enter it no more. 

I recollect that when the mill-bell rang thei 
dinner hour, before Mr. Crimsworth entered, and 
tlio scene above related took place, I had had 
rather a sharp appetite, and had been waiting 
somewhat impatiently to hear the signal of feeding 
time. I forgot it now, however; the images of 
potatoes and roast mutton were effaced from my 
mhid by the stir and tumult which the transaction 
of the last half hour had there excited. I only 
thought of walking, that the action of my muscles 
might harmonize with the action of my nerves ; 



THE PBOFESSOB. 83 

and walk I did^ fast and &x. How could I do 
otherwise? A load was lifted oflF my heart; I 
felt light and liberated. I had got away from 
Bigben Close without a breach of resolution; 
without injury to my self-respect I had not 
forced circumstances, circumstances had freed me. 
Life was again open to me; no longer was its 
horizon limited by the high, black wall surround- 
ing Crimsworth's mill. Two hours had elapsed 
before my sensations had so far subsided as to 
leave me calm enough to remark for what wider 
and clearer boundaries I had exchanged that sooty 
girdle. When I did look up, lo I straight before 
me lay Grovetown, a village of villas about five 

miles out of X . The short winter day, as I 

perceived jfrom the far-declined sun, was already 
approaching its close; a chill frost-mist was 

rising from the river on which X stands and 

along whose banks the road I had taken lay ; it 
dimmed the earth, but did not obscure the clear, 
icy blue of the January sky. There was a great 



84 THE FBOFESSOB. 

stillness near and far; the time of the day favotured 
tranquillity^ as the people were all employed 
within doors, the hour of evening release &om the 
factories not being yet arrived ; a sound of full- 
flowing water alone pervaded the air, for the river 
was deep and abundant, swelled by the melting 
of a late snow. I stood awhile, leaning over 
a wall; and looking down at the current, I 
watched the rapid rush of its waves. I desired 
memory to take a clear and permanent impression 
of the scene, and treasture it for fiitture years. 
Grovetown church clock struck four ; looking up, 
I beheld the last of that day's sun, glinting red 
through the leafless boughs of some very old oak 
trees surrounding the church — ^its light coloured 
and characterized the picture as I wished. I paused 
yet a moment, till the sweet, slow sound of the 
bell had quite died out of the air ; then ear, eye 
and feeling satisfied, I quitted the wall and once 
more turned my face towards X . 



THE PBOFESSOR. 85 



CHAPTER VI. 

I BE-ENiERED the town a hungry man ; the dinner 
I had forgotten recurred seductively to my recol- 
lection; and it was with a quick step and sharp 
appetite I ascended the narrow street leading to 
my lodgings. It was dark when I opened the 
front door and walked into the house. I wondered 
how my fire would be ; the night was cold, and I 
shuddered at the prospect of a grate ftdl of 
sparkless cinders. To my joyful surprise, I found, 
on entering my sitting-room, a good fire and a 
clean hearth. I had hardly noticed this pheno- 
menon, when I became aware of another subject 
for wonderment; the chair I usually occupied 
near the hearth was already filled ; a person sat 
there with his arms folded on his chest, and his 



S6 THE FKOFEBSOB* 

legs stretched out on the rug. Short-sighted as I 
am, doubtiul as was the gleam of the firelight, a 
moment's examination enabled me to recognise in 
this person my acquaintance, Mr. Hunsden. I 
could not of course be much pleased to see him, 
considering the manner in which I had parted 
from him the night before, and as I walked to the 
hearth, stirred the fire, and said cooUjr, ''Good 
evening,^ my demeanour evinced as little cordiality 
as I felt; yet I wondered in my own mind what 
had brought him there; and I wondered, also, 
what motives had induced him to interfere so 
actively between me and Edward ; it was to him, 
it appeared, that I owed my welcome dismissal ; 
still I could not bring myself to ask him questions, 
to show any eagerness of curiosity; if he chose 
to explain, he might, but the explanation should 
be a perfectly voluntary one on his part; I 
thought he was entering upon it 

''You owe me a debt of gratitude,** were his 
first words. 



THB FBOfXSSOB. 87 

^Do l?^ said I; ^I hope it is not a large one, 
for I am mach too poor to charge myself with 
heayy liabilities of any kind*" 

^ Thai declare joorself bankrupt at once, for 
this liability is a ton weight at least When I 
came in I found your fire out, and I had it lit 
again, and made that sulky drab of a servant stay 
and blow at it with the bellows till it had burnt 
up properly; now, say * Thank you V^ 

^Not till I have had something to eat; I can 
thank nobody while I am so famished." 

I rang the bell and ordered tea and some cold 
meat 

^^Cold meat!" exclaimed Hunsden, as the 
servant closed the door, ^^what a glutton you 
are, mant Meat with teal you 11 die of eating 
too much," 

^No, Mr. Hunsden, I shall not" I felt a 
necessity for contradicting him; I was irritated 
with hunger, and irritated at seeing him there, and 
irritated at the continued roughness of his manner. 



88 THE FBOFESSOB. 

'^It is over-eating that makes you so ill 
tempered,'' said he. 

*^How do you know?" I demanded. "It is 
like you to give a pragmatical opinion without 
being acquainted with any of the circumstances 
of the case ; I have had no dinner.'' 

What I said was petulant and snappish enough, 
and Hunsden only replied by looking in my face 
and laughing. 

" Poor thing I" he whined, after a pause. " It 
has had no dinner, has it? What ! I suppose its 
master would not let it come home. Did Crims- 
worth order you to fast by way of ptmishment, 
WilUam?" 

**No, Mr. Hunsden." Fortunately, at this 
sulky juncture, tea was brought in, and I fell to 
uppn some bread and butter and cold beef 
directly. Having cleared a plateful, I became so 
far humanized as to intimate to Mr. Hunsden 
"that he need not sit there staring, but might 
come to the table and do as I did, if he liked." 



THE PBOFESSOB. 89 

^^But I don't like in the least," said he, and 
therewith he sommoned the servant by a fresh 
pull of the bell-rope, and intimated a desire to 
have a glass of toast-and-water. ** And some 
more coal," he added; *'Mr. Crimsworth shall 
keep a good fire while I stay." 

His orders being executed, he wheeled his chair 
round to the table, so as to be opposite me. 

*^ Well," he proceeded. ** You are out of work, 
I suppose." 

" Yes," said I ; and not disposed to show the 
satisfaction I felt on this point, I, yielding to the 
whim of the moment, took up the subject as 
though I considered myself aggrieved rather than 
benefited by what had been done. ** Yes — thanks 
to you, I am. Crimsworth turned me ofi* at a 
minute's notice, owing to some interference of 
yours at a public meeting, I understand." 

** Ah 1 What I he mentioned that? He observed 
me signalling the lads, did he? What had he to 
say about his friend Hunsden — anything sweet?*? 



90 THE PBOFSSSOB. 

** He called you a treacherous villain." 
**0h, he hardly knows me yet I I'm one of 
those shy people who don't come out all at once, 
and he is only just beginning to make my 
acquaintance, but hell find I've some good 
qualities — excellent ones I The Hunsdens were 
always unrivalled at tracking a rascal; a down- 
right, dishonourable villain is their natural prey — 
they could not keep off him wherever they met 
him ; you used the word pragmatical just now — 
that word is the property of our family; it has 
been appUed to us from generation to generation ; 
we have fine noses for abuses; we scent a 
scoundrel a mile off; we are reformers bom, 
radical reformers; and it was impossible for me 
to live in the same town with Crimsworth, to 
come into weekly contact with him, to witness 
some of his conduct to you (for whom personally 
I care nothing ; I only consider the brutal injustice 
with which he violated your natural claim to 
equality) — ^I say it was impossible for me to be 



THB PBOFESSOB. 91 

thus situated aad not feel the angel or the demon 
of my race at work within me. I followed my 
instinct^ opposed a tyrant^ and broke a chain.'' 

Now this speech interested me much^ both 
because it brought out Hunsden's character^ and 
because it explained his motives ; it interested me 
so much that I forgot to reply to it^ and sat 
silent, pondering over a throng of ideas it had 
suggested. 

** Are you grateful to me?" he asked, presently. 

In fact I was grateful, or almost so, and I 
believe I half liked him at the moment, notwith- 
standing his proviso that what he had done was 
not out of regard for me. But human nature is 
perverse. Impossible to answer his blunt question 
in the affirmative, so I disclaimed all tendency to 
gratitude, and advised him if he expected any 
reward for his championship to look for it in a 
better world, as he was not likely to meet with it 
hera In reply he termed me '*a dry-hearted 
aristocratic scamp," whereupon I again charged 



92 THE FBOFESSOB. 

him with having taken the bread out of mj 
moutL 

" Your bread was dirty, man I" cried Hunsden 
— *^ dirty and unwholesome I It came through the 
hands of a tyrant, for I tell you Orimsworth is a 
tyrant, — a tyrant to his work-people, a tyrant to 
his clerks, and will some day be a tyrant to his 
wife.^ 

** Nonsense I bread is bread, and a salary is 
a salary. I've lost mine, and through your 
means." 

** There's sense in what you say, after all," 
rejoined Hunsden. " I must say I am rather 
agreeably surprised to hear you make so practical 
an observation as that last I had imagined now, 
from my previous observation of your character, 
that the sentimental delight you would have taken 
in your newly regained liberty would, for a while 
at least, have effaced all ideas of forethought and 
prudence. I think better of you for looking 
steadily to the needfuL" 



THE PBOFESSOB. 93 

^^ Looking steadily to the needftil ! How can I 
do otherwise? I must live^ and to live I must 
have what you call ^the needful/ which I can 
only get by working. I repeat it, you have taken 
my work from me." 

" What do you mean to do ?" pursued Hunsden 
coolly. " You have influential relations ; I 
suppose they'll soon provide you with another 
place." 

^^ Influential relations ? Who ? I should like to 
know their nalnes." 
" The Seacombes." 
" Stuff* 1 I have cut them." 
Hunsden looked at me incredulously. 
" I have," said I, " and that definitively." 
" You must mean they have cut you, William." 
" As you please. They offered me their 
patronage on condition of my entering the Church ; 
I declined both the terms and the recompense; 
I withdrew from my cold uncles, and preferred ' 
throwing myself into my elder brother's arms. 



94 THE PBOrSSSOB. 

from whose affectionate embrace I am now torn 
by the cruel intermeddlmg of a stranger-of your- 
self, in short" 

I could not repress a half-smile as I said this ; 
a similar demi-manifestation of feeling appeared at 
the same moment on Hunsden's lips. 

** Oh, I see l** said he, looking into my eyes, 
and it was evident he did see right down into my 
heart Having sat a minute or two with his chin 
resting on his hand, diligently occupied in the 
continued perusal of my countenaftice, he went 
on: — 

" Seriously, have you then nothing to expect 
from the Seacombes?" 

*^ Yes, rejection and repulsion. Why do you 
ask me twice? How can hands, stained with 
the ink of a counting-house, soiled with the 
grease of a wool-warehouse, ever again be 
permitted to come into contact with aristocratic 
palms?" ' 

"There would be a difficulty, no doubt; still 



<( 



cc 



THE PBOFESSOR. 95 

you are such a complete Seax:ombe in appearance, 
feature^ language^ almost manner, I wonder they 
should disown you." 

" They have disowned me ; so talk no more 
about it," 

" Do you regret it, William ?" 

« No." 
Why not, lad?" 

Because they are not people with whom I 
could ever have had any sympathy." 
I say you are one of them." 
That merely proves that you know nothing at 
all about it ; I am my mother's son, but not my 
uncle's nephew." 

" Still — one of your imcles is a lord, though 
rather an obscure and not a very wealthy one, 
and the other a right honourable: you should 
consider worldly interest." 

" Nonsense, Mr. Hunsden. You know or may 
know that even had I desired to be submissive to 
my uncles, I could not have stooped with a good 



f< 



cc 



96 THE FBOFESSOB. 

enough grace ever to have won their favour. I 
should have sacrificed my own comfort and not 
have gained their patronage in return." 

"Very likely — so you calculated your wisest 
plan was to follow your own devices at once ?" 

" Exactly. I must follow my own devices — I 
must till the day of my death; because I can 
neither comprehend, adopt, nor work out those of 
other people." 

Hunsden yawned. "Well," said he, "in all 
this, I see but one thing clearly — that is, that the 
whole affair is no business of mine." He stretched 
himself and again yawned. " I wonder what time 
it is," he went on ; "I have an appointment for 
seven o'clock." 

" Three quarters past six by my watch." 

" Well, then I '11 go." He got up. " You '11 
not meddle with trade again?" said he, leaning 
his elbow on the mantel-piece. 

"No; I think not" 

" You would be a fool if you did. Probably, 



THB PROFESSOB. 97 

after all, you '11 think better of your uncles' pro- 
posal and go into the Church ?" 

"A singular regeneration must take place in 
my whole inner and outer man before I do that. 
A good clergyman is one of the best of men." 

" Indeed ! Do you think so ? " interrupted 
Hunsden, scoffingly. 

"I do, and no mistake. But I have not the 
peculiar points which go to make a good clergy- 
man ; and rather than adopt a profession for which 
I have no vocation, I would endure extremities of 
hardship from poverty." 

**You're a mighty diiScult customer to suit 
You won't be a tradesman or a parson; you 
can't be a lawyer, or a doctor, or a gentleman, 
because you've no money. I'd recommend you 
to travel." 

" What ! without money ?" 

"You must travel in search of money, man. 
You can speak French — with a vile English 
accent, no doubt — still, you can speak it Go on 

VOL. I. H 



98 THE PROFESSOR. 

to the Continent^ and see what will turn up 
for you there." 

" God knows I should like to go P exclaimed I 
with involuntary ardour. 

"Go: what the deuce hinders you?" You 
may get to Brussels, for instance, for five or six 
pounds, if you know how to manage with 
economy." 

" Necessity would teach me if I didn't" 

" Go, then, and let your wits make a way for 
you when you get there. I know Brussels almost 

as well as I know X , and I am sure it would 

suit such a one as you better than London." 

" But occupation, Mr. Hunsden I I must go 
where occupation is to bo had ; and how could 
I get recommendation, or introduction, or employ- 
ment at Brussels ? " 

" There speaks the organ of caution. You hate 
to advance a step before you know every inch of 
the way. You haven't a shoot of paper and a pen 
and ink?" 



THE PR0FE6S0B. 99 

^^ I hope so/' and I prodaced writmg materials 
with alacrity; for I guessed what he was going 
to do. He sat down^ wrote a few lines^ foldied, 
sealed^ and addressed a letter^ and held it out 
to me. 

"There, Prudence, there's a pioneer to hew 
down the first rough difficulties of your path. I 
know well enough, lad, you are not one of those 
who will run their neck into a noose without 
seeing how they are to get it out again, and 
you 're right there. A reckless man is my aver- 
sion, and nothing should ever persuade me to 
meddle with the concerns of such a one. Those 
who are reckless for themselves are generally ten 
times more so for their friends." 

"This is a letter of introduction, I suppose?" 
said I, taking the epistle, 

" Yes. With that in your pocket you will 
run no risk of finding yourself in a state of 
absolute destitution, which, I know, you will 
regard as a degradation — so should I, for that 



100 TEE PROFESSOR. 

matter. The person, to whom you will present 
it, generally has two or three respectable places 
depending upon his recommendation." 

*' That will just suit me," said I. 

*' Well, and where 's your gratitude?" de- 
manded Mr. Hunsden ; ** don't you know how to 
say* Thank you'?" 

"IVe fifteen pounds and a watch, which my 
godmother, whom I never saw, gave me eighteen 
years ago," was my rather irrelevant answer; and 
I further avowed myself a happy man, and pro- 
fessed that I did not envy any being in Chris- 
tendom. 

" And your gratitude?" 

" I shall be off presently, Mr. Hunsden — to- 
morrow if all be well : 1 11 not stay a day longer 
in X than I am obliged." 

"Very good — ^but it will be decent to make 
due acknowledgment for the assistance you have 
received ; be quick I It is just going to strike 
seven : I 'm waiting to be thanked." 



THB PBOFESSOB. 101 

*^ Just stand out of the way, will you, Mr. 
Hunsden: I want a key there is on the comer 
of the mantel-piece. I'll pack my portmanteau 
before I go to bed.** 

The house-clock struck seven. 

" The lad is a heathen," said Hunsden, and 
taking his hat &om a sideboard, he left the room 
laughing to himsel£ I had half an inclination to 

follow him : I really intended to leave X the 

next morning, and should certainly not have 
another opportunity of bidding him good-bye. 
The front door banged to» 

" Let him go," said I, *^ we shall meet again 
some day." 



102 THE PBOFESSOB. 



CHAPTER VII. 



Readeb^ perhaps you were never in Belgium? 
Haply you don't know the physiognomy of the 
country? You have not its lineaments defined 
upon your memory as I have them on mine ? 

Three — ^nay four — pictures line the four-walled 
cell where are stored for me the records of the 
past Firsts Eton. All in that picture is in far 
perspective^ receding^ diminutive; but freshly 
coloured, green, dewy, with a spring sky, piled 
with glittering yet showery clouds ; for my child- 
hood was not all sunshine — ^it had its overcast, its 

cold, its stormy hours. Second, X , huge, 

dingy; the canvas cracked and smoked; a yellow 
sky, sooty clouds ; no sun, no azure ; the verdure 



THE PROFESSOH. 103 

of the suburbs blighted and sullied — a very dreary- 
scene. 

Third, Belgium; and I will pause before this 
landscape. As to the fourth, a curtain covers it, 
which I may hereafter withdraw, or may not, as 
suits my convenience and capacity. At any rate, 
for the present it must bang undisturbed. 
Belgium! name unromantic and unpoetic, yet 
name that whenever uttered has in my ear a 
sound, in my heart an echo, such as no other 
assemblage of syllables, however sweet or classic, 
can produce. Belgium I I repeat the word, now 
as I sit alone near midnight It stirs my world of 
the past like a summons to resurrection; the 
graves imclose, the dead are raised; thoughts, 
feelings, memories that slept, are seen by me 
ascending from the clods — haloed most of them — 
but while I gaze on their vapoury forms, and 
strive to ascertain definitely their outline, the 
sound which wakened them dies, and they sink, 
each and all, like a light wreath of mist, absorbed 



104 THE PBOFESSOB. 

in the mouldy recalled to ums^ re-sealed in monu- 
ments. Farewell luminous phantoms I 

This is Belgium, reader. Look ! don't call the 
picture a flat or a dull one — it was neither flat 
nor dull to me when I first beheld it When I left 
Ostend on a mild February morning, and found 
myself on the road to Brussels, nothing could look 
vapid to me. My sense of enjoyment possessed 
an edge whetted to the finest, untouched, keen, 
exquisite. I was young; I had good health; 
pleasure and I had never met ; no indulgence of 
hers had enervated or sated one faculty of my 
nature. Liberty I clasped in my arms for the 
first time, and the influence of her smile and 
embrace revived my life like the sun and the 
west wind. Yes, at that epoch I felt like a 
morning traveller who doubts not that from the 
hill he is ascending he shall behold a glorious 
sunrise; what if the track be strait, steep, and 
stony ? he sees it not ; his eyes are fixed on that 
summit, fiushed already, fiushed and gilded, and 



THE FROFESSOB. 105 

having gained it he is certain of the scene beyond. 
He knows that, the sun will face him^ that his 
chariot is even now coming over the eastern 
horizon^ and that the herald breeze he feels on 
his cheek is opening for the god's career a clear^ 
vast path of azure^ amidst clouds soft as pearl and 
warm as flame. DiflSculty and toil were to be my 
lot, but sustained by energy, drawn on by hopes 
as bright as vague, I deemed such a lot no hard- 
ship. I mounted now the hill in shade; there 
were pebbles, inequalities, briars in my path, but 
T^J ©yes were fixed on the crimson peak above ; 
my imagination was with the refiilgent firmament 
beyond, and I thought nothing of the stones 
turning under my feet, or of the thorns scratching 
my face and hands. 

I gazed often, and always with delight, firom 
the window of the diligence (these, be it remem- 
bered, were not the days of trains and railroads). 
Well ! and what did I see ? I will tell you faith- 
fully. Green, reedy swamps; fields fertile but flat. 



106 THE FBOFESSOB. 

cultivated in patches that made them look like 
magnified kitchen-gardens; belts of cut trees, 
formal as pollard willows, skurting the horizon; 
narrow canals^ gliding slow by the road-side; 
painted Flemish farm-houses; some very dirty 
hovels ; a grey, dead sky ; wet road, wet fields, wet 
house-tops: not a beautiful, scarcely a picturesque 
object met my eye along the whole route; yet to 
me, all was beautiful, all was more than pic- 
turesque. It continued fair so long as daylight 
lasted, though the moisture of many preceding 
damp days had sodden the whole country; as 
it grew dark, however, the rain re-commenced, 
and it was through streaming and starless 
darkness my eye caught the first gleam of the 
lights of Brussels. I saw little of the city but its 
lights that night Having alighted from the dili- 
gence, a fiacre conveyed me to the Hotel de 

where I had been advised by a fellow traveller 
to put up ; having eaten a traveller's supper, I 
retired to bed, and slept a traveller's sleep. 



THE PBOFESSOK. 107 

Next morning I awoke from prolonged and 
sound repose with the impression that I was yet 

in X y and perceiving it to be broad daylight 

I started up, imagining that I had overslept 
myself and should be behind time at the counting- 
house. The momentary and painful sense of 
restraint vanished before the revived and reviving 
consciousness of freedom, as, throwing back the 
white curtains of my bed, I looked forth into a 
wide, lofty foreign chamber; how diiOFerent from 
the small and dingy, though not uncomfortable 
apartment, I had occupied for a night or two 
at a respectable inn in London, while waiting for 
the sailing of the packet I Yet far be it from me 
to profane the memory of that little dingy room I 
It, too, is dear to my soul ; for there, as I lay in 
quiet and darkness, I first heard the great bell 
of St Paul's telling London it was midnight, 
and well do I recall the deep, deliberate tones, 
so full charged with colossal phlegm and force. 
From the smalls narrow window of that room. 



108 THE FBOFESSOB. 

I first saw the dome^ looming through a London 
mist I suppose the sensations, stirred by those 
first sounds, first sights, are felt but once; 
treasure them, Memory; seal them in urns, and 
keep them in safe niches I Well — I rose. 
Travellers talk of the apartments in foreign 
dwellings being bare and uncomfortable; I 
thought my chamber looked stately and cheer- 
fuL It had such large windows — croisdea that 
opened like doors, with such broad, clear panes 
of glass; such a great looking-glass stood on 
my dressing-table — such a fine mirror glittered 
over the mantel-piece — the painted floor looked 
so clean and glossy; when I had dressed and 
was descending the stairs, the broad marble 
steps almost awed me, and so did the lofty hall 
into which they conducted. On the first landing 
I met a Flemish housen^dd : she had wooden 
shoes, a short red petticoat, a printed cotton 
bed-gown, her face was broad, her physiognomy 
eminently stupid; when I spoke to her in 



THE PROFESSOB. 109 

French, she answered me in Flemish, with an 
air the reverse of civil, yet I thought her 
charming; if she was not pretty or polite, she 
was, I conceived, very picturesque; she reminded 
me of the female figures in certain Dutch 
paintings I had seen in other years at Seacombe 
HalL 

I repaired to the public room ; that, too, was 
very large and very lofty, and warmed by a 
stove ; the floor was black, and the stove was 
black, and most of the ftimiture was black ; 
yet I never experienced a freer sense of exhilara- 
tion than when I sat down at a very long, black 
table (covered, however, in part by a white 
cloth), and, having ordered breakfast, began 
to pour out my coflee from a little black coffee- 
pot. The stove might be dismal-looking to some 
eyes, not to mine, but it was indisputably very 
warm, and there were two gentlemen seated by 
it talking in French; impossible to follow their 
rapid utterance, or comprehend much of the 



110 THE PBOFESSOB. 

purport of what they said — ^yet French, in the 
mouths of Frenchmen, or Belgians (I was not 
then sensible of the horrors of the Belgian 
accent), was as music to my ears. One of these 
gentlemen presently discerned me to be an 
Englishmaii-no doubt from the fe^hion in which 
I addressed the waiter; for I would persist in 
speaking French in my execrable South-of- 
England style, though the man understood 
English* The gentleman, after looking towards 
me once or twice, politely accosted me in very 
good English; I remember I wished to God 
that I could speak French as well; his fluency 
and correct pronunciation impressed me for the 
first time with a due notion of the cosmopolitan 
character of the capital I was in ; it was my first 
experience of that skill in living languages I 
afterwards found to be so general in Brussels. 

I lingered over mj breakfast as long as I could ; 
while it was there on the table, and while that 
stranger continued talking to me, I was a free. 



THE FBOFESSOR. Ill 

independent traveller ; but at last the things were 
removed, the two gentlemen left the room; sud- 
denly the illusion ceased, reality and business 
came back. I, a bondsman just released from the 
yoke, freed for one week from twenty-one years of 
constraint, must, of necessity, resume the fetters of 
dependency. Hardly had I tasted the delight of 
being without a master when duty issued her stem 
mandate: "Go forth and seek another service." 
I never linger over a painful and necessary task ; I 
never take pleasure before business, it is not in my 
nature to do so; impossible to enjoy a leisurely 
walk over the city, though I perceived the morning 
was very fine, until I had first presented Mr. 
Hunsden's letter of introduction, and got fairly on 
to the track of a new situation. Wrenching my 
mind from liberty and delight, I seized my hat, 
and forced my reluctant body out of the Hotel 

de into the foreign street 

It was a fine day, but I would not look at the 
blue sky or at the stately houses round me ; my 



112 THE PBQFESSOB. 

mind was bent on one thing, finding out "Mr. 
Brown, Numero — , Rue Royale,'* for so my letter 
was addressed. By dint of inquiry I succeeded ; 
I stood at last at the desired door, knocked, asked 
for Mr. Brown, and was admitted. 

Being shown into a small breakfast-room, I 
found myself in the presence of an elderly gentle- 
man — very grave, businesslike, and respectable- 
looking. I presented Mr. Hunsden's letter; he 
received me very civilly. After a little desultory 
conversation he asked me if there was anything in 
which his advice or experience could be of use. 
I said, " Yes," and then proceeded to tell him that 
I was not a gentleman of fortune, travelling for 
pleasure, but an ex-counting-house clerk, who 
wanted employment of some kind, and that imme- 
diately too. He replied that as a friend of Mr. 
Hunsden's he would be willing to assist me as well 
as he could. After some meditation he named a 
place in a mercantile house at Li6ge, and another 
in a bookseller's shop at Louvain. 



THE FAOFESSOB. 113 

" Clerk and shopman I" murmured I to mysel£ 
" No.** I shook my head. I had tried the high 
stool; I hated it; I believed there were other 
occupations that would suit me better ; besides I 
did not wish to leave Brussels. 

" I know of no place in Brussels," answered 
Mr. Brown, " unless indeed you were disposed to 
turn your attention to teaching. I am acquainted 
with the director of a large establishment who is 
in want of a professor of English and Latin.'' 

I thought two minutes, then I seized the idea 
eagerly. 

The very thing, sir !" said L 
But," asked he, " do you understand French 
well enough to teach Belgian boys English ?" 

Fortunately I could answer this question in the 
affirmative; having studied French under a 
Frenchman, I could speak the language intel- 
ligibly though not fluently. I could also read it 
well, and write it decently. 

" Then," pursued Mr. Brown, '' I think I can 

VOL. I. I 



a 



€f 



114 THE FBOFESSOB. 

promise you the place^ for Monsieur Pelet^will 
not refuse a professor recommended hj me^ but 
come here again at five o'clock this afternoon^ and 
I will introduce you to him.** 

The word " professor'' struck me. ** I am not 
a professor^" said L 

" Oh," returned Mr. Brown, " professor, here 
in Belgium, means a teacher, that is alL" 

My conscience thus quieted, I thanked Mr. 
Brown, and, for the present, withdrew. This time 
I stepped out into the street with a relieved heart ; 
the task I had imposed on myself for that day was 
executed. I might now take some hours of holi- 
day. I felt free to look up. For the first time I 
remarked the sparkling clearness of the air, the 
deep blue of the sky, the gay clean aspect of the 
white-washed or painted houses; I saw what a 
fine street was the Rue Royale, and, walking 
leisurely along its broad pavement, I continued to 
survey its stately hotels, till the palisades, the 
gates, and trees of the park appearing in sight. 



THE PROFESSOB. 115 

oflFered to my eye a new attraction, I remember, 
before entering the park, I stood awhile to con- 
template the statue of General Belliard, and then 
I advanced to the top of the great staircase just 
beyond, and I looked down into a narrow back 
street, which I afterwards learnt was called the 
Rue dlsabelle. I well recollect that my eye 
rested on the green door of a rather large house 
opposite, where, on a brass plate, was inscribed, 
" Pensionnat de Demoiselles," Pensionnat ! The 
word excited an uneasy sensation in my mind ; it 
seemed to speak of restraint Some of the 
demoiselles, extemats no doubt, were at that 
moment issuing from the door — I looked for a 
pretty face amongst them, but their close, little 
French bonnets hid their features; in a moment 
they were gone. 

I had traversed a good deal of Brussels before 
five o'clock arrived, but punctually as that hour 
struck I was again in the Rue Royale. Re- 
admitted to Mr. Brown's breakfast-room, I found 



116 THE PE0FES80B. 

him^ as before^ seated at the table, and he was not 
alone — a gentleman stood by the hearth. Two 
words of introduction designated him as my future 
master. '* M. Pelet, Mr. Crimsworth; Mr. Crims- 
worth, M* Felet'' A bow on each side finished 
the ceremony. I don't know what sort of a bow 
I made ; an ordinary one, I sup{)Ose, for I was in 
a tranquil, common-place frame of mind; I felt 
none of the agitation which had troubled my first 
intenriew with Edward Crimsworth. M. Pelet's 
bow was extremely polite, yet not theatrical, 
scarcely French ; he and I were presently seated 
opposite to each other. In a pleasing voice, low, 
and, out of consideration to my foreign ears, very 
distinct and deliberate, M. Pelet intimated that he 
had just been receiving from "le respectable 
M. Brown," an account of my attainments and 
character, which relieved him from all scruple as 
to the propriety of engaging me as professor of 
Engliwh and Latin in his establishment; never- 
theless, for form's sake, he would put a few 



THE FBOFESSOB. 117 

questions to test my powers. He did^ and 
expressed in flattering terms his satisfaction at my 
answers. The subject of salary next came on ; it 
was fixed at one thousand francs per annum^ 
besides board and lodging. " And in addition/' 
suggested M. Pelet, " as there will be some hours 
in each day during which your services will not 
be required in my establishment^ you may^ in 
time^ obtain employment in other seminaries, and 
thus turn your vacant moments to profitable 
account" 

I thought this very kind, and indeed I found 
afterwards that the terms on which M. Pelet had 
engaged me were really liberal for Brussels; 
instruction being extremely cheap there on account 
of the number of teachers. It was further 
arranged that I should be installed in my new 
post the very next day, after which M. Pelet and 
I parted. 

Well, and what was he like? and what were 
my impressions concerning him ? He was a man 



118 THE PBOFESSOB. 

of about forty years of age, of middle size, and 
rather emaciated figure; his face was pale, his 
cheeks were sunk, and his eyes hollow; his 
features were pleasing and regular, they had a 
French turn (for M. Pelet was no Fleming, but 
a Frenchman both by birth and parentage), yet 
the degree of harshness inseparable from Gallic 
lineaments was, in his case, softened by a mild blue 
eye, and a melancholy, almost suflFering, expression 
of countenance; his physiognomy was ^'fine et 
spirituelle.'' I use two French words because 
they define better than any English terms the 
species of intelligence with which his features 
were imbued. He was altogether an interesting 
and prepossessing personage. I wondered only at 
the utter absence of all the ordinary characteristics 
of his profession, and almost feared he could not 
be stem and resolute enough for a schoolmaster. 
Externally at least M. Pelet presented an absolute 
contrast to my late master, Edward Crimsworth. 
Influenced by the impression I had received of 



THE PB0FE8S0IU 119 

his gentleness, I was a good deal surprised when, on 
arriving the next day at my new employer's house, 
and being admitted to a first view of what was to 
be the sphere of my future labours, namely the 
large, lofty, and well lighted school-rooms, I 
beheld a numerous assemblage of pupils, boys of 
course, whose collective appearance showed all 
the signs of a full, flourishing, and well disciplined 
seminary. As I traversed the classes in company 
with M. Pelet, a profound silence reigned on all 
sides, and if by chance a murmur or a whisper 
arose, one glance from the pensive eye of this 
most gentle pedagogue stilled it instantly. It was 
astonishing, I thought, how so mild a check could 
prove so eflectuaL When I had perambulated 
the length and breadth of the classes, M. Pelet 
turned and said to me— ' 

" Would you object to taking the boys as they 
are, and testing their proficiency in English ?'* 

The proposal was unexpected. I had thought I 
should have been allowed at least a day to prepare, 



120 TEE FBOFESJSOB. 

but it is a bad omen to commence anj career by 
hesitation^ so I just stepped to the professor's desk 
near which we stood, and faced the circle of my 
pupils. I took a moment to collect my thoughts, 
and likewise to frame in French the sentence by 
which I proposed to open business. I made it as 
short as possible : — 

** Messieurs, prenez vos livres de lecture.** 
^^ Anglais ou Frangais, monsieur?** demanded 
a thick set, moon-faced young Flamand in a blouse. 
The answer was fortunately easy : — 
"Anglais." 

I determined to give myself as little trouble as 
possible in this lesson; it would not do yet to 
trust my unpractised tongue with the delivery of 
explanations ; my accent and idiom would be too 
open to the criticisms of the young gentlemen 
before me, relative to whom I felt already it would 
be necessary at once to take up an advantageous 
position, and I proceeded to employ means accord- 
ingly. 



THE PBOFESSOB. 121 

" Gommencez 1** cried I, when they had all 
produced theh: books. The moon-faced youth 
(by name Jules Yanderkelkov, as I afterwards 
learnt) took the first sentence. The ^^livre da 
lecture** was the "Vicar of Wakefield," muek 
used in foreign schools because it is supposed to 
contain prime samples of conversational English ; 
it might, howeyer, have been a Runic scroll (ot 
any resemblance the words, as enunciated by 
Jules, bore to the language in ordinary use 
amongst the natives of Great Britain. My God I 
how he did snuffle, snortj and wheeze! All he 
said was said in his throat and nose, for it is 
thus the Flamands speak, but I heard him to 
the end of his paragraph without profiering a 
word of correction, whereat he looked vastly 
self-complacent, convinced, no doubt, that he 
had acquitted himself like a real bom and 
bred " Anglais." In the same unmoved silence 
I listened to a dozen in rotation, and when 
the twelfth had concluded with splutter, 



122 THE PBOriflSOB. 

Iiiflg^ and mamble^ I solemnlj laid down the 
booL 

*^ ArrStez I** said L There was a pause^ during 
which I regarded them all with a steady and some- 
what stem gaze ; a dog^ if stared at hard enough 
and long enough^ will show symptoms of embar- 
rassment; and so at length did mj bench of 
Belgians. Perceiving that some of the faces belore 
me were beginning to lodL sullen^ and others 
ashamed, I slowly joined my hands, and ejaculated 
in a deep " voix de poitrine*'— 

*' Comme c'est afireux I** 

They looked at each other, pouted, coloured, 
swung their heels ; they were not pleased, I saw, 
but they were impressed, and in the way I wished 
them to be. Having thus taken them down a peg 
in their self-conceit, the next step was to raise 
myself in their estimation ; not a very easy thing, 
considering that I hardly dared to speak for fear 
of betraying my own deficiencies. 

^Ecoutez, messieurs r said I, and I endea- 



THl PBOFE08OB* 123 

roared to throw into my accents the compaftsionate 
tone of a superior beings who^ touched by the 
extremity of the helplessness, which at first only 
excited his scorn, deigns at length to bestow aid« 
I then began at the very beginning of the '* Vicar 
of Wakefield,*' and read, in a slow, distinct Toice^ 
some twenty pages, they all the while sitting mute 
and listening with fixed attention ; by the time I 
had done nearly an hour had elapsed. I then 
rose and said :— 

'^ C*est aases poor aujourdliui, messieurs ; domain 
nous recommenferons, et j'esp^e que tout ira ' 
bien.^ 

With this oracular sentence I bowed, and in 
company with M. Pelet quitted the school-room. 

'' C'est bien I c'est tr6s bien I ^ said my principal 
as we entered his parlour* ^' Je vols quo Monsieur 
a de Tadresse ; cela me plait, car, dans Tinstruction^ 
Tadresse fait tout autant que le savoir.'* 

From the parlour M. Pelet conducted me to my 
apartment, my ** chambre,'' as Monsieur said with 



124 THE FBOFESSOB. 

a certain air of complacencj. It was a very small 
room^ with an excessively small bed^ but M. Pelet 
gave me to understand that I was to occupy it 
quite alone, which was of course a great comfort 
Tet, though so limited in dimensions, it had two 
windows. Light not being taxed in Belgium, the 
people never grudge its admission into their 
houses; just here, however, this observation is 
not very apropos, iox one of these windows was 
boarded up; the open window looked into the 
boys* playground. I glanced at the other, as 
wondering what aspect it would present if disen- 
cumbered of the boards. M. Pelet read, I suppose, 
the expression of my eye ; he explained: — 

** La fenStre ferm^ donne sur un jardin appar- 
tenant k un pensionnat de demoiselles," said he, 
** et les convenances exigent — enfin, vous com- 
prenez — n'est-ce pas, monsieur?'' 

*' Oui, oui," was my reply, and I looked of 
course quite satisfied; but when M. Pelet had 
retired and closed the door after him, the first 



THE PR0FES80B. 125 

thing I did was to scratinize closely the nailed 
boards^ hoping to find some chink or crevice 
which I might enlarge^ and so get a peep at the 
consecrated ground. My researches were vain, 
for the boards were well joined and strongly 
nailed. It is astonishing how disappointed I felt 
I thought it would have been so pleasant to have 
looked out upon a garden planted with flowers 
and treeSf so amusing to have watched the 
demoiselles at their play ; to have studied female 
character in a variety of phases, myself the while 
sheltered from view by a modest muslin curtain, 
whereas, owing doubtless to the absurd scruples of 
some old duenna of a directress, I had now only 
the option of looking at a bare, gravelled court, 
with an enormous " pas de g^ant'* in the middle 
and the monotonous walls and windows of a boy's 
school-house round. Not only then, but many a 
time after, especially in moments of weariness and 
low spirits, did I look with dissatisfied eyes on that 
most tantalizing board, longing to tear it away 



126 TEE FBOFESSOB. 

and get a glimpse of the green region which I 
imagined to lie beyond* I knew a tree grew close 
up to the window, for though there were as yet 
no leaves to rustle I often heard at night the 
tapping of branches against the panes. In the 
day-time, when I listened attentively, I could hear, 
even through the boards, the voices of the 
demoiselles in their hours of recreation, and, to 
speak the honest truth, my sentimental reflections 
were occasionally a trifle disarranged by the not 
quite silvery, in fact the too often brazen sounds, 
which, rising from the unseen paradise below, 
penetrated clamorously into my solitude. Not to 
mince matters, it really seemed to me a doubtful 
case whether the lungs of Mdlla Renter's girls or 
those of M. Pelet's boys were the strongest, and 
when it came to shrieking the girls indisputably 
beat the boys hollow. I forgot to say, by-the-by, 
that Renter was the name of the old lady who had 
had my window boarded up. I say old, for such 
I, of course, concluded her to be, judging from her 



THE PBOFESSOB. 127 

cautious, chaperon-like proceedings; besides, nobody 
ever spoke of her as young. I remember I was 
very much amused when I first heard her Christian 
name; it was Zoraide — Mademoiselle Zoraide 
Renter. But the continental nations do allow 
themselves vagaries in the choice of names, such 
as we sober English never run into. I think, 
indeed, we have too limited a list to choose from. 

Meantime my path was gradually growing 
smooth before me. I, in a few weeks, conquered 
the teasing difEiculties inseparable from the com- 
mencement of almost every career. Ere long I 
had acquired as much facility in speaking French 
as set me at my ease with my pupils, and as I 
had encountered them on a right footing at the 
very beginning, and continued tenaciously to 
retain the advantage I had early gained, they 
never attempted mutiny, which circumstance, all 
who are in any degree acquainted with the 
ongoings of Belgian schools, and who know the 
relation in which professors and pupils too 



128 THB PROFESSOB. 

frequently stand towards each other in those 
establishments^ will consider an important and 
tmcommon one. Before concluding this chapter 
I will say a word on the system I pursued with 
regard to my classes : my experience may possibly 
be of use to others. 

It did not require very keen observation to 
detect the character of the youth of Brabant^ 
but it needed a certain degree of tact to adopt 
one's measures to their capacity. Their intellec- 
tual faculties were generally weak, their animal 
propensities strong; thus there was at once an 
impotence and a kind of inert force in their 
natures ; they were dull, but they were also 
singularly stubborn, heavy as lead and, like lead, 
most difficult to move. Such being the case, it 
would have been truly absurd to exact from them 
much in the way of mental exertion ; having short 
memories, dense intelligence, feeble reflective 
powers, they recoiled with repugnance from any 
occupation that demanded close study or deep 



THE PBOFESSOB. 129 

thought Had the abhorred effort been extorted 
from them by injudicious and arbitrary measures 
on the part of the Professor, they would have 
resisted as obstinately, as clamorously, as desperate 
swine; and though not brave singly, they were 
relentless acting en masse, 

I understood that before my arrival in M. 
Pelet's establishment, the combined insubordination 
of the pupils had effected the dismissal of more 
than one English master. It was necessary then 
to exact only the most moderate application from 
natures so little qualified to apply — to assist, in 
every practicable way, understandings so opaque 
and contracted — to be ever gentle, considerate, 
yielding even, to a certain point, with dispositions 
so irrationally perverse ; but, having reached that 
culminating point of indulgence, you must fix 
your foot, plant it, root it in rock — ^become immu- 
table as the towers of Ste. Gudule ; for a step — 
but half a step further, and you would plunge 
headlong into the gulf of imbecility ; there lodged, 

VOL. I. K 



130 THS FBOFESSOB. 

you would speedily receive proofs of Flemish 
gratitude and magnanimity in showers of Brabant 
saliva and handfols of Low-Country mud. Tou 
might smooth to the utmost the path of learnings 
remove every pebble from the track; but then 
you must finally insist with decision on the pupil 
taking your arm and allowing himself to be led 
quietly along the prepared road. When I had 
brought down my lesson to the lowest level of my 
dullest pupil's capacity — when I had shown myself 
the mildest, the most tolerant of masters — a word 
of impertinence, a movement of disobedience, 
changed me at once into a despot I ofiered then 
but one alternative — submission and acknowledg- 
ment of error, or ignominious expulsion. This 
system answered, and my influence, by degrees, 
became established on a firm basis. " The boy is 
father to the man," it is said; and so I often 
thought when I looked at my boys and remembered 
the political history of their ancestors. Pelet's 
school was merely an epitome ofthe Belgian nation. 



THB PBOFfiSSOB. 131 



CHAPTER VIII. 



And Pelet himself? How did I continue to like 
him? Oh, extremely welll Nothing could be 
more smooth, gentlemanlike, and even friendly, 
than his demeanour to me. I had to endure from 
him neither cold neglect, irritating interference, 
nor pretentious assumption of superiority. I fear, 
however, two poor, hard-worked Belgian ushers in 
the establishment could not have said as much; 
to them the director's manner was invariably dry, 
stem, and cool. I believe he perceived once or 
twice that I was a little shocked at the difference 
he made between them and me, and accounted for 
it by saying, with a quiet, sarcastic smile— 
" Ce ne sont que des Flamands — allez I" 



132 THE FBOFESSOB. 

And then ho took his cigar gently from his lips 
and spat on the painted floor of the room in which 
we were sitting. Flamands certainly they were, 
and both had the true Flamand physiognomy, 
where intellectual inferiority is marked in lines 
none can mistake ; still they were men, and, in 
the main, honest men ; and I could not see why 
their being aboriginals of the flat, dull soil should 
serve as a pretext for treating them with perpetual 
severity and contempt This idea of injustice 
somewhat poisoned the pleasure I might otherwise 
have derived from Pelet's soft, affable manner to 
myself. Certainly it was agreeable, when the 
day's work was over, to find in one's employer an 
intelligent and cheerful companion ; and if }ie was 
sometimes a little sarcastic and sometimes a little 
too insinuating, and if I did discover that his mild- 
ness was more a matter of appearance than of 
reality — if I did pccasionally suspect the existence 
of flint or steel under an external covering of 
velvet — still we are none of us perfect ; and weary 



THE PBOFESSOB. 133 

a5 I was of the atmosphere of brutality and 

insolence in which I had constantly lived at X , 

I had no inclination now, on casting anchor in 
calmer regions, to institute at once a prying search 
after defects that were scrupulously withdrawn 
and careftdly veiled from my view. I was willing 
to take Pelet for what he seemed — ^to believe him 
benevolent and friendly until some untoward event 
should prove him otherwise. He was not married^ 
and I soon perceived he had all a Frenchman's, 
all a Parisian's notions about matrimony and 
women. I suspected a degree of laxity in his 
code of morals, there was something so cold and 
blasS in his tone whenever he alluded to what he 
called, *^le beau sexe;" but he was too gentle- 
manlike to intrude topics I did not invite, and as 
he was really intelligent and really fond of intel- 
lectual subjects of discourse, he and I always 
found enough to talk about, without seeking 
themes in the mire. I hated his fashion of men^ 
tioning love; I abhorred, fix)m my soul, mere 



134 THE FBOFESSOB. 

licentiotusnefls. He felt the difference of our 
notions^ and^ by mutual consent^ we kept off 
ground debateable. 

Pelet's house was kept and his kitchen managed 
hj his mother^ a real old Frenchwoman ; she had 
been handsome— -at least she told me so, and I 
strove to believe her; she was now ugly, as only 
continental old women can be; perhaps, though, 
her style of dress made her look uglier than she 
really was. In-doors she would go about without 
cap, her gray hair strangely dishevelled; then, 
when at home, she seldom wore a gown — only a 
shabby cotton camisole ; shoes, too, were strangers 
to her feet, and in lieu of them she sported roomy 
slippers, trodden down at the heels. On the other 
hand, whenever it was her pleasure to appear 
abroad, as on Sundays and fSlte-days, she would 
put on some very brilliant-coloured dress, usually 
of thin texture, a silk bonnet with a wreath of 
flowers, and a very fine shawl. She was not, in 
the main, an ill-natured old woman, but an 



THE PBOFESSOi. 135 

incessant and most indiscreet talker; she kept 
chiefly in and about the kitchen^ and seemed rather 
to avoid her son's august presence ; of him^ indeed^ 
she evidently stood in awe. When he reproved 
her, his reproofs were bitter and unsparing ; but 
he seldom gave himself that trouble. 

Madame Pelet had her own society, her own 
circle of chosen visitors, whom, however, I seldom 
saw, as she generally entertained them in what 
she called her *^ cabinet", a small den of a 
place adjoining the kitchen, and descending into 
it by one or two steps. On these steps, by the 
by, I have not unfrequently seen Madame P^let 
seated with a trencher on her knee, engaged in 
the threefold employment of eating her dinner, 
gossipmg with her favourite servant, the house- 
maid, and scolding her antagonist, the cook; 
she never dined, and seldom indeed took any 
meal with her son, and as to showing her face at 
the boys' table, that was quite out of the question. 
These details will sound very odd in English 



136 tAe fbofessob. 

earS; but Belgium is not England, and its ways 
are not our ways. 

Madame Pelet's habits of life, then, being 
taken into consideration, I was a good deal 
surprised when,»one Thursday evening (Thursday 
was always a half-holiday), as I was sitting all 
alone in my apartment, correcting a huge pile 
of English and Latin exercises, a servant tapped 
at the door, and, on its being opened, presented 
Madame Pelet's compliments and she would be 
happy to see me to take my " gouter" (a meal 
which answers to our English " tea") with her in 
the dining-room. 

**Plait-il? said I — for I thought I must have 
misimdenjtood, the message and invitation were 
^ unusual; the same words were repeated. I 
accepted, of course^ and as I descended the stairs, 
I wondered what whim had entered the old lady's 
brain ; her son was out — gone to pass the evening 
at the salle of the Grrande Harmonie or some 
other club of which he was a member. Just 



THE PBOFESSOB. 137 

as I laid my hand on the handle of the dining- 
room door^ a queer idea glanced across, my 
mind. 

" Surely she 's not going to make love to me," 

said I. " I Ve heard of old Frenchwomen doing 

odd things in that line ; and the goAter ? They 

, generally begin such affairs with eating and 

drinking, I believe." 

There was a fearful dismay in this suggestion 
of my excited imagination, and if I had allowed 
myself time to dwell upon it, I should no doubt 
have cut there and then, rushed back to my 
chamber, and bolted myself in ; but whenever a 
danger or a horror is veiled with uncertainty, 
the primary wish of the mind is to ascertain 
first thfi naked truth, reserving the expedient of 
flight for the moment when its dread anticipa- 
tion shall be realized. I turned the door-handle, 
and in an instant had crossed the fatal threshold, 
closed the door behind me, and stood in the 
presence of Madame Pelet. 



138 THE PBOFESSOB. 

Gracious heavens! The first view of her 
seemed to confirm my worst apprehensions. 
There she sat, dressed out in a light green 
muslin gown, on her head a lace cap with 
flourishing red roses in the frill ; her table was 
carefully spread — ^there were fruit, cakes, and 
cofiee, with a bottle of something, I did not know 
what Already the cold sweat started on my 
brow, already I glanced back over my shoulder 
at the closed door, when, to my unspeakable 
relief, my eye, wandering wildly in the direction 
of the stove, rested upon a second figure, seated 
in a large fauteuil beside it This was a woman 
too, and moreover an old woman, and as fat and 
as rubicimd as Madame Pelet was meagre 
and yellow; her attire was likewise very fine, 
and spring flowers of different hues circled in 
a bright wreath the crown of her violet-coloured 
velvet bonnet 

I had only time to make these general observa- 
tions when Madame Pelet, coming forward with 



THE FBOFESSOB. 139 

what she intended should be a graceful and 

elastic step^ thus accosted me. 

'^Monsieur is indeed most obliging to quit 

his books^ his studies^ at the request of an 

insignificant person like me — will Monsieur 

complete his kindness by allowing me to present 

him to my dear friend Madame Renter^ who 

resides in the neighbouring house — the young 

ladies* school." 

'^Ahl" thought I, ''I knew she was old," 
and I bowed and took my seat ; Madame Renter 
placed herself at the table opposite to me. 

'^ How do you like Belgium, monsieur?" asked 
she in an accent of the broadest Bruxellois. I 
could now well distinguish the difference between 
the fine and pure Parisian utterance of M. Pelet, 
for instance, and the guttural enunciation of the 
Flamands. I answered politely, and then won- 
dered how so coarse and clumsy an old woman as 
the one before me, should be at the head of a 
ladies' seminary which I had always heard spoken 



140 THE FBOFESSOB. 

of in terms of high commcndatioiL In txath 
there was something to wonder at Madame Renter 
looked more like a joyous, free-living old Flemish 
fermi^re, or oven a maitresse d'anberge, than a 
staid, grave, rigid directrice de pensionnat In 
general the Continental, or at least the Belgian 
old women permit themselves a license of manners^ 
speech, and aspect, such as our venerable grand- 
dames would recoil from as absolutely disreputable, 
and Madame Router's jolly face bore evidence that 
she was no exception to the rule of her coimtry ; 
there was a twinkle and leer in her left eye ; her 
right she kept habitually half shut, which I 
thought very odd indeed. After several vam 
attempts to comprehend the motives of these two 
droll old creatures for inviting me to join them at 
their goAter, I, at last, fairly gave it up, and 
resigning myself to inevitable mystification, I sat 
and looked first at one, then at the other, taking 
care meantime to do justice to the confitures, 
cakes, and cofiee, with which they amply supplied 



THE PBOFESSOB. 141 

me. They^ too^ ate^ and that with no delicate 
appetite^ and having demolished a large portion of 
the solids^ they proposed a ** petit verre." I 
declined — not so Mesdames Pelet and Renter; 
each mixed herself what I thought rather a stiff 
tumbler of punchy and placing it on a stand near 
the stove^ they drew up their chairs to that con- 
venience, and invited me to do the same; I 
obeyed, and being seated fairly between them, I 
was thus addressed jGbrst by Madame Pelet, then 
by Madame Renter. 

** We will now speak of business," said Madame 
Pelet, and she went on to make an elaborate 
speech, which, being interpreted, was to the effect 
that she had asked for the pleasure of my com- 
pany that evening in order to give her friend 
Madame Renter an opportunity of broaching an 
important proposal which might turn out greatly 
to my advantage. 

" Pourvu que vous soyez sage," said Madame 
Renter, " et i vrai dire, vous en avez bien Fair. 



142 THE PBOFESSOB. 

Take one drop of the punch (or ponche, as she 
pronounced it) ; it is an agreeable and wholesome 
beverage after a full meal." 

I bowed^ but again declined it iShe went 
on: — 

" I feel," said she, after a solemn sip—** I feel 
profoundly the importance of the conmiission with 
which my dear daughter has entrusted me, for 
you are aware, monsieur, that it is my daughter 
who directs the establishment in the next house?" 

" Ah I I thought it was yourself, madame." 
Though, indeed, at that moment, I recollected 
that it was called Mademoiselle, not Madame 
Keuter's pcnsionnat 

" 1 1 oh no I I manage the house and look 
after the servants, as my friend Madame Pelet 
does for Monsieur her son — ^nothing more. Ah I 
you thought I gave lessons in class — did you?" 

And she laughed, loud and long, as though the 
idea tickled her fancy amazingly. 

** Madame is in tlio wrong to laugli," I observed, 



THE PBOFESSOB. 143 

" if she does not give lessons, I am sure it is not 
because she cannot," and I whipped out a white 
pocket-handkerchief aad wafted it, with a French 
grace, past my nose, bowing at the same time. 

^^ Quel charmant jeune homme I" murmured 
Madame Pelet in a low voice. Madame Renter, 
being less sentimental, as she was Flamand and 
not French, only laughed again. 

" You are a dangerous person I fear," said she ; 
" if you can forge compliments at that rate Zoraide 
will positively be afraid of you, but if you are 
good, I will keep your secret, and not tell her 
how well you caa flatter. Now, listen what sort 
of a proposal she makes to you. She has heard 
that you are an excellent professor, and as she 
wishes to get the very best masters for her school 
(car Zoraide fait tout comme une reine, c'est une 
veritable maitresse-femme), she has commissioned 
me to step over this afternoon, and sound Madame 
Pelet as to the possibility of engaging you. 
Zoraide is a wary general; she never advances 



144 THE PBOFESSOB* 

without first examining well her ground. I don't 
think she would be pleased if she knew I had 
already disclosed her intentions to you; she did 
not order me to go so far, but I thought there 
would be no harm in letting you into the secret, 
and Madame Pelet was of the same opinion. 
Take care, however, you don't betray either of us 
to Zoraide — to my daughter, I mean ; she is so 
discreet and circumspect herself, she cannot 
understand that one should find a pleasure in 
gossiping a little " 

" C'est absolument comme mon fils!" cried 
Madame Pelet. 

" All the world is so changed .since our girl- 
hood I" rejoined the other: ^* young people have 
such old heads now. But to return, monsieur. 
Madame Pelet will mention the subject of your 
giving lessons in my daughter's establishment to 
her son, and he will speak to you; aud then, 
to-morrow, you will step over to our house, and 
ask to see my daughter, and you will introduce 



THE PROFESSOR. 145 

the subject as if the first intimation of it had 
reached you from M. Pelet himself, and be sure 
you never mention my name, for I would not 
displease Zoraide on any account. 

*^ Bien! bien!" interrupted I — for all this chatter 
and circumlocution began to bore me very much ; 
*^ I will consult M. Pelet, and the thing shall be 
settled as you desire. Good evening, mesdames — 
I am infinitely obliged to you." 

" Comment! vous vous en allez dfejd?" exclaimed 
Madame Pelet 

" Prenez encore quelquechose, monsieur ; tme 
pomme cuite, des biscuits, encore ime tasse de 
caf^?" 

" Merci, merci, madame — au revoir." And I 
backed at last out of the apartment. 

Having regained my own room, I set myself to 
turn over in my mind the incident of the evening. 
It seemed a queer afiair altogether, and queerly 
managed ; the two old women had made quite a 
little intricate mess of it; still I found that the 

VOL. I. L 



146 THE PBOFESSOB. 

uppermost feeling in mj mind on the subject was 
one of satisfaction. In the first place it would be 
a change to give lessons in another seminary^ and 
then to teach young ladies would be an occupa^ 
tion so interesting — ^to be admitted at all into a 
ladies' boardingnschool would be an incident so 
new in my life. Besides^ thought I^ as I glanced 
at the boarded window^ '^ I shall now at last see 
the mysterious garden: I shall gaze both on the 
angels and their Eden.'' 



THE PB0FES80B. 147 



CHAPTER IX. 



M. Pelet could not of course object to the 
proposal made by Mdlle. Reuter ; permission 
to accept such additional employment, should it 
offer, having formed an article of the terms on 
which he had engaged me. It was, therefore, 
arranged in the course of next day that I should 
be at liberty to give lessons in Mdlle, Renter's 
establishment four afternoons in every week. 

When evening came I prepared to step over in 
order to seek a conference with Mademoiselle her- 
self on the subject ; I had not had time to pay the 
visit before, having been all day closely occupied 
in class. I remember very well that before 
quitting my chamber, I held a brief debate with 



148 THE nOTEBSOlL. 

myself as to whether I should change my ordinary 
attire for something smarter. At last I concluded 
it would be a waste of labour. ^^ Doubtless,^ 
thought I, *^ she is some stiff old maid, for though 
the daughter of Madame Renter, she may well 
number upwards of forty winters ; besides, if it 
were otherwise, if she be both young and pretty, 
I am not handsome, and no dressing can make me 
so, therefore 1 11 go as I am.'' And off I started, 
cursorily glancing sideways as I passed the toilet- 
table, surmounted by a looking-glass; a thin 
irr^ular face I saw, with sunk, dark eyes under 
a large, square forehead, complexion destitute of 
bloom or attraction ; something young but not 
youthful, no object to win a lady's love, no butt for 
the shafts of Cupid. 

I was soon at the entrance of the Pensionnat, 
in a moment I had pulled the bell; in another 
moment the door was opened, and within appeared 
a passage paved alternately with black and white 
marble; the walls were painted in imitation of 



THE PROFESSOB. 149 

marble also; and at the far end opened a glass 
door^ through which I saw shrubs and a grass- 
plat^ looking pleasant in the sunshine of the mild 
Bpring evening — for it was now the middle of 
April. 

This then was my first glimpse of the garden ; 
but I had not time to look long, the portress^ after 
having answered in the affimatiye my question 
as to whether her mistress was at home, opened 
the folding-doors of a room to the left, and having 
ushered me in, closed them behind me. I found 
myself in a salon with a very well painted, highly 
varnished floor; chairs and sofas covered with 
white draperies, a green porcelain stove, walls 
hung with pictures in gilt frames, a gilt pendule, 
and other ornaments on the mantel-piece, a large 
lustre pendent from the centre of the ceiling, 
mirrors, consoles, muslin curtains, and a handsome 
centre table completed the inventory of furniture. 
All looked extremely clean and glittering, but the 
general eflFect would have been somewhat chilling 



150 THE PBOFE880B. 

bad not a second large pair of folding-doors^ 
standing wide open, and disclosing another and 
smaller salon, more snngly famished, offered some 
relief to the eye* This room was carpeted, and 
therein was a piano, a couch, a chiffonniire— above 
all, it contained a lotty window with a crimson 
curtain, which, being undrawn, afforded another 
glimpse of the garden, through the large, clear 
panes, round which some leaves of ivy, some 
tendrils of vine were trained. 

^^ Monsieur Creemsvort, n'est ce pas?" said a 
voice behind me; and, starting involuntarily, I 
turned* I had been so taken up with the con- 
templation of the pretty little salon that I had not 
...ie^J *e e..™«. .f . p»». i«. .he H^ 
room. It was, however, Mdlle* Renter who now 
addressed me, and stood close beside me; and 
when I had bowed with instantaneously recovered 
aang froid — for I am not easily embarrassed — I 
commenced the conversation by remarking on the 
pleasant aspect of her little cabinet, and the 



THB FBOEESSOB. 151 

advantage she had over M. Pelet in possessing a 
garden. 

" Yes," she said, " she often thought so ; *' and 
added, " it is my garden, monsieur, which makes 
me retain thb house, otherwise I should probably 
have removed to larger and more conmiodious 
premises long since $ but you see I could not take 
my garden with me, and I should scarcely jSnd 
one so large and pleasant anywhere else in town." 

I approved her judgment 

" But you have not seen it yet,** said she, rising ; 
'' come to the window and take a better view/' 
I followed her; she opened the sash, and leaning 
out, I saw in full the enclosed demesne which had 
hitherto been to me an unknown region. It was a 
long, not very broad strip of oultured ground, 
with an alley bordered by enormous old fruit 
trees down the middle ; there was a sort of lawn, 
a parterre of rose-trees, some flower-borders, and, 
on the far side, a thickly planted copse of lilacs, 
laburnums, and acacias. It looked pleasant, to me 



152 THE FBOFEBSOB. 

— very pleasant^ so long a time had elapsed since 
I bad seen a garden of any sort But it was not 
only on Mddle. Renter's garden that my eyes 
dwelt; when I had taken a view of her well- 
trimmed beds and budding shrubberies, I allowed 
my glance to come back to herself, nor did I 
hastily withdraw it 

I had thought to see a tall, meagre, yellow, 
conventual image in black, with a close white cap, 
bandaged under the chin like a nun's head-gear ; 
whereas, there stood by me a little and roundly 
formed woman, who might indeed be older than I, 
but was stiU young ; she could not, I thought, be 
more than six or seven and twenty ; she was as 
fair as a fair Englishwoman; she had no cap; 
her hair was nut-brown, and she wore it in 
curls ; pretty her features were not, nor very soft, 
nor very regular, but neither were they in any 
degree plain, and I already saw cause to deem them 
expressive. What was their predominant cast? 
Was it sagacity ? — sense? Yes, I thought so; but 



THE PROFESSOB. 153 

I could scarcely as yet be sure. I discovered, 
however, that there was a certain serenity of eye, 
and freshness of complexion, most pleasing to 
behold. The colour on her cheek was like the 
bloom on a good apple, which is as sound at the 
core as it is red on the rind. 

Mdlle. Renter and I entered upon business. 
She said she was not absolutely certain of the 
wisdom of the step she was about to take, because 
I was so young, and parents might possibly object 
to a professor like me for their daughters : '^ But 
it is often well to act on one's own judgment," 
said she, " and to lead parents, rather than be led 
by them. The fitness of a professor is not a matter 
of age ; and, from what I have heard, and from 
what I observe myself, I would much rather trust 
you than M. Ledru, the music-master, who is 
a married man of near fifty." 

I remarked that I hoped she would find me 
worthy of her good opinion ; that, if I knew 
myself, I was incapable of betraying any con- 



154 THE PB0FE8S0B. 

fidence reposed in me. ^'Du reste," said slie^ 
''the suryeillance will be strictly attended to." 
And then she proceeded to discuss the subject of 
terms. She was very cautious, quite on her 
guard; she did not absolutely bargain, but she 
warily sounded me to find out what my expecta^ 
tions might be ; and when she could not get me 
to name a sum, she reasoned and reasoned with a 
fluent yet quiet circumlocution of speech, and at 
last nailed me down to five hundred francs per 
annum — ^not too much, but I agreed. Before the 
negotiation was completed, it began to grow a 
little dusk. I did not hasten it, for I liked well 
enough to sit and hear her talk; I was amused 
with the sort of business talent she displayed. 
Edward could not have shown himself more 
practical, though he might have evinced more 
coarseness and urgency; and then she had so 
many reasons, so many explanations; and, after 
all, she succeeded in proving herself quite dis- 
interested and even liberal At last she concluded. 



THE FB0FE8S0B. 165 

she could saj no more, becanBe, as I acquiesced in 
all things, there was no fiirther ground for the 
exercise of her parts of speech* I was obliged 
to rise. I would rather have sat a little longer ; 
what had I to return to but my small, empty 
room? And my eyes had a pleasure in looking 
at Mdlle. Renter, especially now, when the twilight 
softened her features a little, and, in the doubtfol 
dusk, I could &ncy her forehead as open as it was 
really elevated, her mouth touched with turns of 
sweetness as well as defined in lines of sense. When 
I rose to go, I held out my hand, on purpose, though 
I knew it was contrary to the etiquette of foreign 
habits ; she smiled and said — 

'' Ah I c^est comme tons les Anglais ; " but gave 
me her hand very kindly. 

"It is the privilege of my country, Made- 
moiselle,'' said I ; '^ and, remember, I shall always 
claim it'' 

She laughed a little, quite good naturedly, 
and with the sort of tranquillity obvious in all she 



156 THE PBOFESSOB. 



did — a tranquillit J which soothed and suited me 
singularly, at least I thought so that evening* 
Brussels seemed a yery pleasant place to me when 
I got out again into the street, and it appeared as 
if some cheerful, eventful, upward-tending career 
were even then opening to me, on that self*same 
mild, still April night So impressionable a 
being is man^ or at least such a man as I was 
in those days. 



THIS FBOFSSSOB. 157 



CHAPTER X. 

Next day the morning hours seemed to pass 
very slowly at M. Pelet's ; I wanted the 
afternoon to come that I might go again to the 
neighbouring pensionnat and give my first lesson 
within its pleasant precincts ; for pleasant they 
appeared to me. At noon the hour of recreation 
arrived; at one o'clock we had lunch; this got 
on the time, and at last St Gudule's deep bell, 
tolling slowly two, marked the moment for which 
I had been waiting. 

At the foot of the narrow back-stairs that 
descended from my room, I met M. Pelet. 

" Conmie vous avez I'air rayoimant I " said he. ' 
"Je ne vous ai jamais vu aussi gai que s'est-il 
done pass^ ? "' 



158 THE PBOFBSSOB. 

'^ Apparemment que j^aime les changements^'' 
replied L 

"Ah! je comprends — c'est cela — soyez sage 
seulement Vous fetes bien jeune — ^trop jeone pour 
le rfile que vous allez jouer; U faut prendre 
garde — savez-vous ? ^ 

" Mais quel danger j a-t-il ? " 

" Je n'en sais rien — ^ne tous laissez pas aller 
k de vivos impressions — voili tout" 

I laughed; a sentiment of exquisite pleasure 
played over my nerves at the thought that " vives 
impressions" were likely to be created ; it was the 
deadness^ the sameness of life's daily ongoings 
that had hitherto been my bane ; my blouse-clad 
Olives in the boy's seminary never stirred in me 
any "vives impressions," except it might be 
occasionally some of anger. I broke from 
M. Pelet, and as I strode down the passage he 
followed me with one of his laughs — a very 
French, rakish, mocking sound. 

Again I stood at the neighbouring door, and 



Tnio nofZBBon. Iff 9 

soon was re-admitted into tho cboerful passage 
with its cloari dove^coIouTi imitation marblo walls. 
I followed the portress, and descending a step, and 
making a tanii I found myself in a sort of 
corridor; a side-door openedi Mdlle. Ueutor's 
little figure, as graceful as it was plump, appeared. 
I could now see her dress in full daylight f a neat, 
simple mousseline-laine gown fitted her compact, 
round shape to perfection— delicate little collar 
and manchettos of lace, trim Parisian brodequins 
showed her neck, wrists, and feet, te complete 
advantage; but liow grave was her face as she 
came suddenly u|M)n me I Solicitude and business 
were in her eye^ — on her forehead; she looked 
almost stem, iter ^^bon jour, monsieur,** was 
quite polite, but so orderly, mo common-phtce ; it 
spread directly a cool, damp towel over my 
** vivos impressions." The servant tunied bock 
when her mistress appeared, and I walked slowly 
along the corridor, side by side with Mdlle. 
lleuter. 



160 THE PBOFESSOR. 

" Monsieur will give a lesson in the first class 
to-day," said she; "dictation or reading will 
perhaps be the best thing to begin with, for tho$e 
are the easiest forms of communicating instruction 
in a foreign language ; and, at the first, a master 
naturally feels a little unsettled." 

She was quite right, as I had found from 
experience ; it only remained for me to acquiesce. 
We proceeded now in silence. The corridor 
terminated in a hall, large, lofty, and square; a 
glass door on one side showed within a long, 
narrow refectory, with tables, an armoire, and 
two lamps; it was empty; large glass doors, in 
front, opened on the play-ground and garden ; a 
broad staircase ascended spirally on the opposite 
side ; the remaining wall showed a pair of great 
folding-doors, now closed, and admitting, doubtless, 
to the classes. 

Mdlle. Renter turned her eye laterally on me, 
to ascertain, probably, whether I was collected 
enough to be ushered into her sanctum sanctorum. 



THB FBOTESSOB. 161 

I suppose she judged me to be in a tolerable state 

of self-goyernment, for she opened the door^ and 

I followed her through. A rustling sound of 

uprising greeted our entrance ; without looking to 

the right or left, I walked straight up the lane 

between two sets of benches and desks, and took 

possession of the empty chair and isolated desk 

raised on an estrade of one step high, so as to 

command one division; the other division being 

under the surveillance of a maitresse, similarly 

elevated. At the back of the estrade, and attached 

to a moveable partition dividing this school-room 

from another beyond, was a large tableau of wood 

painted black and varnished; a thick crayon of 

white chalk lay on my desk for the convenience of 

elucidating any grammatical or verbal obscurity 

which might occur in my lessons by writing it 

upon the tableau, a wet sponge appeared beside 

the chalk to enable me to efface the marks when 

they had served the purpose intended. 

I carefully and deliberately made these obser- 

VOL. I. M 



162 THE FBOFESSOB. 

vations before allowing myself to take one glance 
at the benches before me; having handled the 
crayon^ looked back at the tableau, fingered the 
sponge in order to ascertain that it was in a right 
state of moisture, I foimd myself cool enough to 
admit of looking calmly up and gazing deliberately 
round me. 

And first I observed that Mdlle. Renter had 
already glided away, she was nowhere visible ; a 
mattresse or teacher, the one who occupied the 
corresponding estrade to my own, alone remained 
to keep guard over me; she was a little in the 
shade, and, with my short sight, I could only see 
that she was of a thin, bony figure, and rather 
tallowy complexion, and that her attitude, as she 
sat, partook equally of Hstlessness and affectation. 
More obvious, more prominent, shone on by the 
full light of the large window, were the occupants 
of the benches just before me, of whom some were 
girls of fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, some young 
women from eighteen (as it appeared to me) up to 



THE PROFESSOR. 163 

twenty; the most modest attire^ the simplest 
fashion of wearing the hair, were apparent in all, 
and good features, ruddy, blooming complexions, 
large and brilliant eyes, forms full, even to solidity, 
seemed to abound* I did not bear the first view 
like a stoic; I was dazzled, my eyes fell, and in a 
Yoice somewhat too low I murmured — 

** Prenez vos cahiers de dictfe, mesdemoiselles." 
Not so had I bid the boys at Felet's take their 
reading-books. A rustle followed, and an opening 
of desks ; behind the lifted lids which momentarily 
screened the heads bent down to search for 
exercise-books, I heard tittering and whispers. 

" Eulalie, je suis prfite i p&mer de rire,* observed 
one. 

« Comme il a rougi en parlant I'* 
** Oui, c'est un veritable blanc-bec." 
" Tais-toi, Hortense — ^il nous ^coute.'* 
And now the lids sank and the heads re- 
appeared; I had marked three, the whisperers, 
and I did not scruple to take a very steady look 



164 THE PB0FBS80B. 

at them as they emerged from their temporary 
eclipse. It is astonishing what ease and courage 
their little phrases of flippancy had given me; 
the idea by which I had been awed was that 
the youthful beings before me^ with their dark 
nun-like robes and softly braided hair, were a 
kind of half-angels. The light titter, the giddy 

■ 

whisper, had already in some measure relieved 
my mind of that fond and oppressive fancy. 

The three I allude to were just in front, within 
half a yard of my estrade, and were among the 
most womanly-looking present Their names I 
knew afterwards, and may as well mention now ; 
they were Eulalie, Hortense, Caroline. Eulalie 
was tall, and very finely shaped : she was fisiir, 
and her features were those of a Low-country 
Madonna; many a "figure de vierge" have I 
seen in Dutch pictures, exactly resembling hers ; 
there were no angles in her shape or in her £ace, 
all was curve and roundness — neither thought, 
sentiment, nor passion, disturbed by line or flush 



THB fbo;essoiu 165 

the equality of her pale, clear skin ; her noble 
bust heaved with her regular, breathing, her eyes 
moved a little — ^by these evidences of life alone, 
could I have distinguished her fcom some large 
handsome figure, moulded in Jvax:. Hortense was 
of middle size and stout, her form was ungraceful, 
her face striking, more alive and brilUant than 
Eulalie's, her hair was dark brown, her com- 
plexion richly coloured; there were frolic and 
mischief in her eye: consistency and good sense 
she might possess, but none of her featui^ 
betokened those qualities. 

Caroline was little, though evidently full 
grown; raven-black hair, very dark eyes, abso- 
lutely regular features, with a colourless olive 
complexion, clear as to the face and sallow 
about the neck, formed in her that assemblage 
of points whose union many persons regard as 
the perfection of beauty. How, with the tintless 
pallor of her skin and the classic straightness 
of her lineaments, she managed to look sensual, I 



166 TEE PBOFESSOB. 

don't know. I think her lips and eyes contrived 
the affair between them, and the result left no 
uncertainty on the beholder's mind. She was 
sensual now, and in ten years' time she would be 
coarse — promise plain was written in her face of 
much future folly. 

If I looked at these girls with little scruple, 
they looked at me with still less. Eulalie raised 
her unmoved eye to mine, and seemed to expect, 
passively but securely, an- impromptu tribute to 
her majestic charms. Hortense regarded me 
boldly and giggled at the same time, while she 
said with an air of impudent freedom — 

^^ Dictez-nous quelquechose de facile pour 
commenger, monsieur." 

• Caroline shook her loose ringlets of abundant 
but somewhat coarse hair over her rolling black 
eyes ; parting her lips, as ftdl as those of a hot- 
blooded Maroon, she showed her well-set teeth 
sparkling between them, and treated me at the 
same time to a smile ^' de sa fafon." Beautiful as 



THE PROFESSOR. 167 

Pauline Borghese, she looked at the moment 
scarcely purer than Lucrece de Borgia. Caroline 
was of noble family. I heard her lady-mother's 
character afterwards, and then I ceased to 
wonder at the precocious accomplishments of the 
daughter. Thes0 three, I at once saw, deemed 
themselves the queens of thie school, and con- 
ceived that by their splendour they threw all the 
rest into the shade. In less than five minutes 
they had thus revealed to me their characters, 
and in less than five minutes I had buckled on 
a breast-plate of steely indifference, and let down 
a visor of impassible austerity. 

- Take your pens and commence writing," said 
I, in as dry and trite a voice as if I had been 
addressing only Jules Vanderkelkov and Co. 

The dict^e now commenced. My three belles 
interrupted me perpetually with little, silly 
questions and uncalled-for remarks, to some of 
which I made no answer, and to others, replied 
very quietly and briefly. 



168 THE PBOFESSOIU 

^^ Comment dit-on point et yirgule en Anglais, 
monsieur?" 

*' Semi-colon, mademoiselle,** 

" Semi-coliong ? Ah comme c'est drdle I ** 

(giggle-) 

^^ J'ai one si mauvaise plume — impossible 

d'dcrirel" 

^^ Mais, monsieur—je ne sais pas suirr^-^vous 
allez si vite.*' 

*^ Je n'ai rien compris, moi I** 

Here a general murmur arose, and the 
teacher, opening her lips for the first time, 
ejaculated — 

" Silence, mesdemoiselles !" 

No silence followed — on the contrary, the three 
ladies in front began to talk more loudly. 

'' C'est si difficUe, T Anglais I" 

" Je d^teste la dictfe." 

" Quel ennui d'^crire quelquechose que Ton ne 
comprend pas!" 

Some of those behind laughed : a degree of 



THE FBOFESSOB. 169 

confiiaion began to pervade the class; it was 
necessary to take prompt measures. 

*^Domiez-moi votre cahier,'* said I to Eolalie 
in an abrupt tone; and bending over, I took it 
before she had time to give it 

*' Et vous, mademoiselle — donnez-moi le vdtre," 
continued I^ niore mildly^ addressing a little pale, 
plain-looking girl who sat in the first row of Uxe 
other divisiouj and whom I had remarked as being 
at once the ugliest and the most attentive in the 
room; she rose up, walked over to me, and 
delivered her book with a grave, modest curtsey. 
I glanced over the two dictations; Eulalie's was 
slurred, blotted, and fiill of silly mistakes — Sylvie's 
(such was the name of the ugly little girl) was 
dearly written, it contained no error against sense, 
and but few faults of orthography. I coolly read 
aloud both exercises, marking the faults— then I 
looked at Eulalie : 

** C'est honteux I" said I, and I deliberately tore 
her dictation in four parts, and presented her with 



170 THE FB0FE880B. 

the fragments. I returned Sjlvie her book with a 
«mae, saying- 

** C'est bien — je suis content de vous.** 

Sylvie looked calmlj pleased^ ^ulalie swelled 
like an incensed turkey, but the mutiny was 
quelled : the conceited coquetry and futile flirtation 
of the first bench were exchanged for a taciturn 
sullenness, much more convenient to me, and the 
rest of my lesson passed without interruption. 

A bell clangmg out in the yard announced the 
moment for the cessation of school labours. I 
heard our own bell at the same time, and that of 
a certain public college immediately after. Order 
dissolved instantly; up started every pupil, I 
hastened to seize my hat, bow to the maitresse^ 
and quit the room before the tide of extemats 
should pour from the inner class, where I knew 
near a hundred were prisoned, and whose rising 
tumult I already heard. 

I had scarcely crossed the hall and gained the 
corridor, when Mdlle. Renter came again upon me. 



THE PBOFESSOB. 171 

*' Step in here a moment,'' said she, and she held 
open the door of the side-room from whence she 
had issued on mj arrival; it was a saUe-CHfnanger^ 
as appeared from the beanfet and the armoire 
vitrte, filled with glass and china, which formed 
part of its furniture. Ere she had closed the door 
on me and herself, the corridor was already filled 
with day-pupils, tearing down their cloaks, 
bonnets, and cabas from the wooden pegs on which 
they were suspended; the shrill voice of a 
maitresse was heard at intervals vainly endea- 
vouring to enforce some sort of ordisr ; vainly, 
I say : discipline there was none in these rough 
ranks, and yet this was considered one of the best 
conducted schools in Brussels. 

**Well, you have given your first lesson," 
began Mdlle. Renter in the most calm, equable 
voice, as though quite unconscious of the chaos 
from which we were separated only by a single 
wall. 

*' Were you satisfied with your pupils, or did 



172 THE PBOFESSOB. 

any circumstance in their conduct give you cause 
for complaint? Conceal nothing from me, repose 
in me entire confidence." 

Happily, I felt in myself complete power to 
manage my pupils without aid ; the enchantment, 
the golden haze which had dazzled my perspicuily 
at first, had bben a good deal dissipated. I cannot 
say I was chagrined or downcast by the contrast 
which the reality of a pensionnat de demoiselles 
presented to my vague ideal of the same com^ 
munity; I was only enlightened and amused; 
consequently, I felt in no disposition to complain 
to Mdlle. Renter, and I received her considerate 
invitation to confidence with a smile. 

''A thousand thanks, mademoiselle, all has 
gone very smoothly.** 

She looked more than doubtful. 

*'Et les trois demoiselles du premier banc?*' 
said she. 

" Ah 1 tout va au mieux 1" was my answer, and 
Mdlle. Renter ceased to question me; but her 



THE PBOVESSOB. 173 

eye — ^not large, not brilliant, not melting, or 
kindling, but astute, penetrating, practical, showed 
she was even with me; it let out a momentary 
gleam, which said plainly, ^^Be as close as you 
like, I am not dependent on your candour ; what 
you would conceal I already know." 

By a transition so quiet as to be scarcely per- 
ceptible, the directress's manner changed; the 
anxious, business-air passed from her face, and 
she began chatting about the weather and the 
town, and asking in neighbourly wise after M« 
and Madame Pelet. I answered all her little 
questions; she prolonged her talk, I went on 
following its many little windings; she sat so 
long, said so much, varied so often the topics 
of discourse, that it was not diflGicult to perceive 
she had a particular aim in thus detaining me. 
Her mere words could have afforded no clue to 
this aim, but her countenance aided; while her 
lips uttered only affable commonplaces, her eyes 
reverted continually to my face. Her glances were 



174 THE PBOFESSOB. 

not given in full, but out of the comers, so quietly, 

« 

80 Stealthily, yet I think I lost not one. I watched 
her as keenly as she watched me; I perceived 
soon that she was feeling after my real character; 
she was searching for salient points, and weak 
points, and eccentric points; she was applying 
now this test, now that, hoping in the end to find 
some chink, some niche, where she could put in 
her little firm foot and stand upon my neck — 
mistress of my nature. Do not mistake me, 
reader, it was no amorous influence she wished 
to gain — at that time it was only the power of 
the politician to which she aspired; I was now 
installed as a professor in her establishment, and 
she wanted to know where her mind was 
superior to mine — ^by what feeling or opinion 
she could lead me. 

I enjoyed the game much, and did not hasten 
its conclusion ; sometimes I gave her hopes, 
beginning a sentence rather weakly, when her 
shrewd eye would light up — she thought she had 



THE PBOFESSOB. 175 

me ; having led her a litde way, I delighted to 
turn round and finish with sound, hard sense, 
whereat her countenance would falL At last a 
servant entered to announce dinner; the conflict 
being thus necessarily terminated, we parted 
without having gained any advantage on either 
side : Mdlle Renter had not even given, me an 
opportunity of attacking her with feeling, and 
I had managed to baffle her little schemes of 
craft It was a regular drawn battle. I again 
held out my hand when I left the room, she gave 
me hers; it was a small and white hand but 
how cooll I met her eye too in ftdl — obliging 
her to give me a straightforward look; this 
last test went against me: it left her as 
it found her — moderate, temperate, tranquil ; 
me it disappointed. 

"I am growing wiser," thought I, as I walked 
back to M. Pelet's. " Look at this little woman ; 
is she like the women of novelists and romancers ? 
To read of female character as depicted in Poetry, 



176 THE PBOTESSOB. 

and Fiction^ one would think it was made np of 
sentiment^ either for good or bad — ^here is a 
specimen, and a most sensible and respectable 
specimen, too, whose staple ingredient is abstract 
reason. No Tallejrrand was ever more passionless 
than Zoralde Renter I" So I thought then; I 
found afterwards that blunt susceptibilities are 
very consistent with strong propensities. 



THE FBOFESSOB. 177 



CHAPTER XL 

I HAD indeed had a very long talk with the 
crafty little politician, and on regaining my 
quarters, I found that dinner was half over. To 
be late at meals was against a standing rule of 
the establishment, and, had it been one of the 
Flemish ushers who thus entered after the 
removal of the soup and the commencement of 
the first course, M. Pelet would probably have 
greeted him with a public rebuke, and would 
certainly have mulcted him both of soup and fish ; 
as it was, that polite though partial gentleman 
only shook his head, and as I took my place, 
unrolled my napkin, and said my heretical grace 
to myself, he civilly despatched a servant to 
the kitchen^ to bring me a plate of ^' puree aux 
VOL. I, N 



178 THE PB0FE8S0IU 

carrottes" (for this was a maigre-day) and before 
sending away the first course, reserved for me 
a p>rtion of the stock-fish of which it consisted. 
Dinner being over, the boys rushed out for their 
evening play ; Kint and Vandam (the two ushers) 
of course followed them. Poor fellows I if they 
bad not looked so very heavy, so very soulless, so 
very indifierent to all things in heaven above or 
in the earth beneath, I could have pitied them 
greatly for the obligation they were under to 
trail after those rough lads everywhere and at 
all times ; even as it was, I felt disposed to scout 
myself as a privileged prig when I turned to 
ascend to my cliamber, sure to find there, if not 
enjoyment, at least liberty ; but this evening (as 
]jad often hai)pened before) I was to bo still 
further distinguished. 

"Eh lien mauvais sujetl" said tlie voice of 
M. Pelet behind me, as I set my foot on the first 
step of the stair. " Oil allez-vous ? Venez k la 
salle-a manger, que je vous gronde un peu." 



THE PBOFESSOB. 179 

'^ I beg pardon, monsieur,^ said I, as I followed 
him to his private sitting-room, ** for having 
returned so late— -it was not mj fault? 

** That is just what I want to know," rejoined 
M. Pelet, as he ushered me into the comfortable 
parlour with a good wood-fire-*-for the stove had 
now been removed for the Beasoiu Having rung 
the bell he ordered ^^ Coffee for two," and presently 
he and I were seated, almost in English comfort, 
one on each side of the hearth, a little round 
table between us with a coffee-pot, a sugar- 
basin, and two large white china cups. While 
M. Pelet employed himself in choosing a cigar 
from a box, my thoughts reverted to the two 
outcast ushers, whose voices I could hear 
even now crying hoarsely for order in the play- 
ground. 

« C'est une grande responsabilit^, que la sur- 
veillance," observed I. 

"Plait-il?" ditM. Pelet 

I remarked that I thought Messieurs Vandam 



180 THE PBOFESSOB. 

and Kint must sometimes be a little (atigaed with 
their labours. 

** Des b^tes de somme^— des b^tes de sommey" 
murmured scomftill j the director. Meantime I 
offered him his cup of coffee. 

*^ Servez-Yous, mon garqon/' said he blandlj, 
when I had put a couple of huge lumps of con- 
tinental sugar into his cup. ^^ And now tell me 
why you stayed so long at Mdlle. Renter's. I 
know that lessons conclude^ in her establishment 
as in mine^ at four o'clock^ and when you returned 
it was past five." 

Mdlle. wished to speak with me^ monsieur.** 
Indeed I on what subject ? if one may ask.** 
Mademoiselle talked about nothings monsieur.** 
A fertile topic I And did she discourse 
thereon in the school-room, before the pupils?** 

" No ; like you, monsieur, she asked me to 
walk into her parlour.'* 

*' And Madame Renter — the old duenna — ^my 
mother's gossip, was there, of course ?" 



(( 



fC 



(( 



C( 



THE FBOFESSOB. 181 

** No, monsieur ; I had the honour of being 
quite alone with Mademoiselle." 

"C'est joli — cela," observed M. Pelet, and he 
smiled and looked into the fire. 

"Honi soit qui mal y pense," murmured I 
significantlj. 

^* Je connais un pen ma petite voisine — voyez- 
vous." 

^^ In that case Monsieur will be able to aid me 
in finding out what was Mademoiselle's reason for 
making me sit before her sofa, one mortal hour, 
listening to the most copious and fluent dissertation 
on the merest frivolities." 

She was sounding your character." 

I thought so, monsieur." 

Did she find out your weak point ?" 

^* What is my weak point ?" 

" Why the sentimental Any woman, sinking 
her shaft deep enough, will at last reach a 
fathomless spring of sensibility in thy breast, 
Crimsworth." 



t€ 



a 



€( 



182 THE PBOnSSOB. 

I felt the blood stir about my heart and rise 
warm to my cheek. 

" Some women mighty monsieur.** 

" Is Mdlle. Reuter of the number? Come, 
speak frankly^ mon fils; elle est encore jeune, 
plus ag^e que toi peut^tre^ mais juste assez pour 
unir la tendrei^se d'une petite maman k Famonr 
d'une Spouse d^vou^e ; n'est-ce pas que cela t'irait 
sup^rieurement ? " 

" No, monsieur; I should like my wife to be 
my wife, and not half my mother.** 

" She is then a little too old for you ?** 

*^ No, monsieur, not a day too old if she suited 
me in other things.** 

" In what does she not suit you, William ? She 
is personally agreeable, is she not?** 

" Very ; her hair and complexion are just what 
I admire, and her turn of form, though quite 
Belgian, is full of grace.** 

" Bravo 1 and her face ? her features ? How 
do you like them ?** 



THE PROFESSOIL 183 

" A little harsh, especially her mouth." 

" Ah, yes I her mouth," said M. Pelet, and he 
chuckled inwardly. "There is character about 
her mouth — firmness — ^but she has a very pleasant 
smile; don't you think so?" 

'' Rather crafty." 

" Trtfe, but that expression of craft is owing 
to her eyebrows; have you remarked her eye- 
brows?" 

I answered that I had not 

" You have not seen her looking down then?" 
said he. 

« No." 

"It is a treat, notwithstanding. Observe her 
when she has some knitting, or some other 
woman's work in hand, and sits the image of 
peace, calmly intent on her needles and her silk, 
some discussion meantime going on around her, in 
the course of which peculiarities of character are 
being developed, or important interests canvassed ; 
she takes no part in it; her humble, feminine 



184 THE FROFESSOB. 

mind is wholly with her knitting; none of her 
features move; she neither presumes to smile 
approval^ nor frown disapprobation; her little 
hands assiduously ply their unpretending task ; if 
she can only get this purse finished^ or this bonnet- 
grec completed^ it is enough for her. If gentle- 
men approach her chair^ a deeper quiescence^ a 
meeker modesty settles on her features^ and 
clothes her general mien ; observe then her eye- 
brows^ et dites-moi s'il n'y a pas du chat dans Fun 
et du renard dans Tautre.'* 

" I will take careful notice the first oppor- 
tunity," said I. 

" And then," continued M. Pelet, " the eyelid 
will flicker, the light-coloured lashes be lifted 
a second, and a blue eye, glancing out from under 
the screen, will take its brief, sly, searching 
survey, and retreat again." 

I smiled, and so did Felet, and after a few 
minutes' silence I asked : — 

" Will she ever marry, do you think?" 



THE PBOFESSOIL 185 

"Marry I Will birds pair?,' Of course it is 
both her intention and resolution to marry when 
she finds a suitable match^ and no one is better 
aware than herself of the sort of impression she is 
capable of producing; no one likes better to 
captivate in a quiet way. I am mistaken if she 
will not yet leave the print of her stealing steps 
on thy heart, Crimsworth," 

" Of her steps ? Confound it, no 1 My heart 
is not a plank to be walked on." 

" But the soft touch of a patte de velours will 
do it no harm?" 

" She offers me no patte de velours ; she is all 
form and reserve with me." 

" That to begin with ; let respect be the 
foundation, affection the first floor, love the 
superstructure ; Mdlle. Renter is a skilful 
architect" 

*^ And interest, M. Pelet — interest Will not 
Mademoiselle consider that point?" 

" Yes, yes, no doubt ; it will be the cement 



186 THE FBOFESSOB. 

between every stone. And now we have discussed 
the directress^ what of the pupils? N^j-a-^ril pas 
de belles dtudes parmi ces jeiines t6tes ?^ 

^^ Studies of character ? Yes ; curious ones, at 
least, I imagine ; but one cannot divine much from 
a first interview.** 

*^ Ah, jou affect discretion ; but tell me now, 
were jou not a little abashed before those blooming 
young creatures ? " 

'^ At first, yes ; but I rallied and got through 
with all due sang froid." 

" I don't believe you." 

" It is true notwithstanding. At first I thought 
them angels, but they did not leave me long under 
that delusion ; three of the eldest and handsomest 
undertook the task of setting me right, and they 
managed so cleverly that in five minutes I knew 
them, at least, for what they were — three arrant 
coquettes." 

" Je les connais I" exclaimed M. Pelet " EUes 
sont toryours au premier rang k I'eglise et k la 



€C 



i€ 



THB PROFESSOIU 187 

promenade ; one blonde superbe^ une jolie eBpiigle, 
une belle brune." 
Exactly." 

Lovely creatures all of them — heads for 
artists; what a group they would make^ taken 
together I Eulalie (I know their names)^ with 
h^ smooth^ braided hair^ and calm^ ivory brow. 
Hortense^ with her rich chestnut locks so 
luxuriantly knotted^ plaited^ twisted^ as if she did 
not know how to dispose of all their abundance/ 
with her vermillion lips^ damask cheeky and 
roguish laughing eye. And Caroline de Bl^mont I 
Ah there is beauty I beauty in perfection. What 
a cloud of sable curls about the face of a houri I 
What fascinating lips I What glorious black 
eyes I Your Byron would have worshipped her, 
and you — ^you cold frigid islander I — you played 
the austere^ the insensible in the presence of an 
Aphrodite so exquisite ? " 

I might have laughed at the director's enthu- 
siasm had I believed it real, but there was some- 



188 THE PROFEBSOIU 

thing In his tone which indicated got-up raptures* 
I felt he was only aflTecting fervour in order to put 
me off my guards to induce me to come out 
in return^ so I scarcely even smiled. He went 
on: — 

^* Confess^ William^ do not the mere good looks 
of Zoraide Renter appear dowdyish and common- 
place compared with the splendid charms of some 
of her pupils?" 

The question discomposed me^ but I now felt 
plainly that my principal was endeavouring (for 
reasons best known to himself — at that time I 
could not fathom them) to excite ideas and wishes 
in my mind alien to what was right and honour- 
able. The iniquity of the Instigation proved its 
antidote^ and when he further added : — 

" Each of those three beautiful girls will have 
a handsome fortune ; and with a little address^ a 
gentlemanlike, intelligent young fellow like you 
might make himself master of the hand, heart, 
and purse of any one of the trio." 



THE FBOFESSOIU 189 

I replied by a look and an interrogative, 
" Monsieur?** wliich startied him. 

He laughed a forced laugh, affirmed that he 
had onlj been joking, and demanded whether I 
could possibly have thought him in earnest* Just 
then the bell rang; the play-hour was over; it 
was an evening on wliich M, Pelet was accustomed 
to read passages from the drama and the belles 
lettres to his pupils. He did not wait for my 
answer, but rising left the room, humming as he 
went some gay strain of Stranger's. 



190 THE PR0FE8S0B. 



CHAPTER XIL 



Dailt^ as I continued my attendance at the semi- 
nary of Mdlle. Renter^ did I find fresh occasions 
to compare the ideal with the real What had I 
known of female character previously to my 
arrival at Brussels? Precious little. And what 
was my notion of it ? Something vague, slight, 
gauzy, glittering; now when I came in contact 
with it I found it to be a palpable substance 
enough; very hard too sometimes, and often 
heavy ; there was metal in it, both lead and iron. 

Let the idealists, the dreamers about earthly 
angels and human flowers, just look here while I 
oj)en my portfolio and show them a sketch or two, 
pencilled after nature. I took these sketches in 



THE PBOFESSOIU 191 

the second-class school-room of Mdlle. Renter's 
establishment^ where about a hundred specimens of 
the genus " jeune fille '* collected together, offered 
a fertile variety of subject A miscellaneous 
assortment they were, differing both in caate 
and country ; as I sat on my estrade and glanced 
over the long range of desks, I had under my 
eye French, English, Belgians, Austrians, and 
Prussians. The majority belonged to the claas 
bourgeois ; but there were many comtesses, there 
were the daughters of two generals and of several 
colonels, captains, and Government employes; 
these ladies sat side by side with young females 
destined to be demoiselles de magasins, and with 
some Flamandes, genuine aborigines of the coun- 
try. In dress all were nearly similar, and in 
manners there was small difference; exceptions 
there were to the general rule, but the majority 
gave the tone to the establishment, and that tone 
was rough, boisterous, marked by a point-blank 
disregard of all forbearance towards each other 



192 THE FROFEBSOB. 

or their teachers; an eager pursuit by each 
individual of her own interest and convenience; 
and a coarse indifference to the interest and 
convenience of every one else. Most of them 
could lie with audacity when it appeared advan- 
tageous to do so. All understood the art of 
speaking fair when a point was to be gained^ and 
could with consummate skill and at a moment's 
notice turn the cold shoulder the instant civility 
ceased to be profitable. Very little open quarrel- 
ling ever took place amongst them; but back- 
biting and tale-bearing were universal Close 
friendships were forbidden by the rules of the 
school^ and no one girl seemed to cultivate more 
regard for another than was just necessary to 
secure a companion when solitude would have 
been irksome. They were each and all supposed 
to have been reared in utter unconsciousness of 
vice. The precautions used to keep them 
ignorant^ if not innocent^ were innumerable. 
How was it^ then, that scarcely one of those 



THB FBOFESSOB. 193 

girls haying attained the age of fourteen could 
look a man in the face with modestj and 
propriety? An air of bold^ impudent flirtation, 
or a loose, silly leer, was sure to answer the 
most ordinary glance from a masculine eye., I 
know nothing of the arcana of the Roman 
Catholic religion, and I am not a bigot in 
matters of theology, but I suspect the root of 
this precocious impurity, so obvious, so general 
in Popish countries, is to be found in the dis- 
cipline, if not the doctrines of the Church of 
Rome. I record what I have seen : these girls 
belonged to what are called the respectable 
ranks of society; they had all been carefully 
brought up, yet was the mass of them mentally 
depraved. So much for the general view : now 
for one or two selected specimens. 

The first picture is a foil length of Aurelia 
Koslow, a German firaulein, or rather a half- 
breed between German and Russian. She is 
eighteen years of age, and has been sent to 

VOL. I. 



194 THE FBOFESSOB. 

Brussels to finish her education ; she is of middle 
size^ stiffly made^ body long^ legs short, bust much 
developed but not compactly moulded, waist 
disproportionately compressed by an inhumanly 
braced corset, dress carefully arranged, large feet 
tortured into small bottines, head small, hair 
smoothed, braided, oiled, and gummed to per- 
fection ; very low forehead, very diminutive and 
vindictive gray eyes, somewhat Tartar features, 
rather flat nose, rather high-cheek bones, yet the 
ensemble not positively ugly; tolerably good com- 
plexion. So much for person. As to mind 
deplorably ignorant and ill-informed ; incapable of 
writing or speaking correctly even German, her 
native tongue, a dunce in French, and her 
atteiii[)t8 at learning English a mere farce, yet she 
has been at school twelve years ; but as she inva- 
riably gets her exercises, of every description, 
done by a fellow pupil, and reads her lessons off 
a book concealed in her lap, it is not wonderful 
that her progress has been so snail-like. I do not 



THE PROFESSOR. 195 

know what Aurelia's daily habits of life are, 
because I have not the opportunity of observing 
her at all times ; but from what I see of the state 
of her desk, books and papers, I should say she is 
slovenly and even dirty ; her outward dress, as I 
have said, is well attended to, but in passing 
behind her bench, I have remarked that her neck 
is gray for want of washing, and her hair, so glossy 
with gum and grease, is not such as one feels 
tempted to pass the hand over, much less to run 
the fingers through. Aurelia's conduct in class, 
at least when I am present, is something extraor- 
dinary, considered as an index of girlish innocence. 
The moment I enter the room, she nudges her 
next neighbour and indulges in a half-suppressed 
laugh. As I take my seat on the estrade, she 
fixes her eye on me ; she seems resolved to attract, 
and, if possible, monopolize my notice : to this end 
she launches at me all sorts of looks, languishing, 
provoking, leering, laughing. As I am found 
quite proof against this sort of artillery — for we 



196 THE FBOFESSOB. 

scorn what^ unasked^ is lavishly offered — she has 
recourse to the expedient of making noises ; some- 
times she sighSj sometimes groans^ sometimes utters 
inarticulate sounds^ for which language has no 
name. If, in walking up the school-room, I pass 
near her, she puts out her foot that it maj touch 
mine ; if I do not happen to observe the manoeuvre, 
and my boot comes in contact with her brodequin, 
she affects to fall into convulsions of suppressed 
laughter; if I notice the snare and avoid it, she 
expresses her mortification in sullen muttering, 
where I hear myself abused in bad French, 
pronounced with an intolerable low German 
accent 

Not far from Mdlle. Koslow sits another young 
lady by name Ad&le Dronsart : this is a Belgian, 
rather low of stature, in form heavy, with broad 
waist, short neck and limbs, good red and white 
complexion, features well chiselled and regular, 
well-cut eyes of a clear brown colour, light brown 
hair, good teeth, age not much above fifteen, but 



THE PBOFESSOB. 197 

as full-grown as a stout young Englishwoman of 
twenty. This portrait gives the idea of a some- 
what dumpy but good-looking damsel, does it not? 
Well, when I looked along the row of young 
heads, my eye generally stopped at this of Ad&le's ; 
her gaze was ever waiting for mine, and it fre- 
quently succeeded in arresting it She was an 
unnatural-looking being — so young, fresh, bloom- 
i^gy y^^ so Gorgon-like. Suspicion, sullen ill- 
temper were on her forehead, vicious propensities 
in her eye, envy and panther-like deceit about her 
moutL In general she sat very still ; her massive 
shape looked as if it could not bend much, nor did 
her large head — so broad at the base, so narrow 
towards the top — seem made to turn readily on 
her short neck. She had but two varieties of 
expression ; the prevalent one a forbidding, dissa- 
tisfied scowl, varied sometimes by a most pernicious 
and perfidious smile. She was shunned by her 
fellow-pupils, for, bad as many of them were, few 
were as bad as she. 



198 THE PB0FE8S0B. 

Aurelia and Adile were in the first division of 
the second class ; the second division was headed 
by a pensionnaire named Juanna Trista. This girl 
was of mixed Belgian and Spanish origin; her 
Flemish mother was dead^ her Catalonian father 

was a merchant, residing in the Isles, where 

Juanna had been bom and whence she was sent 
to Europe to be educated. I wonder that any one, 
looking at that girl's head and countenance, would 
have received her under their roof. She had 
precisely the same shape of skull as Pope 
Alexander the Sixth ; her organs of benevolence, 
veneration, conscientiousness, adhesiveness, were 
singularly small, those bf self-esteem, firmness, 
destructiveness, combativeness, preposterously 
large; her head sloped up in the penthouse 
shape, was contracted about the forehead, and 
prominent behind ; she had rather good, though 
large and marked features; her temperament 
was fibrous and bilious, her complexion 
pale and dark, hair and eyes black, form 



THE FROFESSOB. 199 

angular and rigid but .proportionate^ age 
fifteen. 

Juanna was not very thin but she had a gaunt 
visage, and her " regard" was fierce and hungry ; 
narrow as was her brow, it presented space 
enough for the legible graving of two words, 
Mutiny and Hate; in some one of her other 
lineaments — I think the eye— cowardice had also 
its distinct cipher. Mdlle. Trista thought fit to 
trouble my first lessons with a coarse, work-day 
sort of turbulence; she made noises with her 
mouth like a horse, she ejected her saliva, she 
uttered brutal expressions ; behind and below her 
were seated a band of very vulgar, inferior-looking 
Flamandes, including two or three examples of 
that deformity of person, and imbecility of 
intellect, whose frequency in the Low Countries 
would seem to fiirnish proof that the climate is 
such as to induce degeneracy of the human mind 
and body ; these, I soon found, were completely 
under her influence, and with their aid she got 



200 THE FBOrESSOlU 

up and sostained a swinish tmnnlt^ which I was 
constrained at last to quell by ordering her and 
two of her tools to rise from their seats^ and^ 
having kept them standing five minutes, turning 
Ihem bodily out of the school-room : the accom- 
plices into a large place adjoining called the 
grande salle ; the principal into a cabinet, of which 
I closed the door and pocketed the key. This 
judgment I executed in the presence of Mdlle. 
Renter, who looked much aghast at beholding so 
decided a proceeding — ^the most severe that had 
ever been ventured on in her establishment. 
Her look of affright I answered with one of 
composure, and finally with a smile which perhaps 
flattered and certainly soothed her. Juanna 
Trista remained in Europe long enough to repay, 
by malevolence and ingratitude, all who had 
ever done her a good turn, and she then went 

to join her father in the Isles, exidting in the 

thought that she should there have slaves, whom, 
as she said, she could kick and strike at will. 



THB PBOFESSOB. 201 

These three pictures are from the life. I 
possess others^ as marked and as little agreeable, 
but I will spare my reader the exhibition of 

them. 

Doubtless it will be thought that I ought now^ 
by way of contrast, to show something charming *, 
some gentle virgin head, circled with a halo, some 
sweet personification of innocence, clasping the 
dove of peace to her bosom. No ; I saw nothing 
of the sort, and therefore cannot portray it 
The pupil in the school possessing the happiest 
disposition was a young girl from the country, 
Louise Path ; she was sufficiently benevolent and 
obliging, but not well taught, nor well mannered ; 
moreover, the plague-spot of dissimulation was in 
her also ; honour and principle were unknown to 
her, she had scarcely heard their names. The 
least exceptionable pupil was the poor little Sylvie 
I have mentioned once before. Sylvie was gentle 
in manners, intelligent in mind; she was even 
sincere, as far as her religion would permit her to 



202 Tss nonaaojL 

be so, but bcr pby sical organization was defective ; 
weak bealtb stunted her growth and chilled her 
spirits, and then, destined as she was for the 
cloister, her whole soul was warped to a con- 
ventual bias, and in the tame, trained subjection 
of her manner, one read that she had already 
prepared herself for her fixture course of life, by- 
giving up her independence of thought and action 
into the hands of some despotic confessor. She 
permitted herself no original opinion, no preference 
of companion or employment ; in everything she 
was guided by another. With a pale, passive, 
automaton air, she went about all day long doing 
what she was bid ; never what she liked, or what, 
irom innate conviction, she thought it right to do. 
The poor little future religieuse had been early 
taught to make the dictates of her own reason 
and conscience quite subordinate to the will of her 
spiritual director. She was the model pupil of 
Mdlle. lieuter's establislunent ; pale, blighted 
image, where life lingered feebly, but whence 



THE PBOFESSOB. 203 

the soul had been conjured by Romish wizard- 
craft I 

A few English pupils there were in this school^, 
and these might be divided into two classes. 
1st, The continental English — -the daughters 
chiefly of broken adventurers whom debt or 
dishonour had driven from their own country. 
These poor girls had never known the advantages 
of settled homes, decorous example, or honest 
Protestant education ; resident a few months now 
in one Catholic school, now in another, as their 
parents wandered from land to land— from France 
to Germany, from Germany to Belgium — they 
had picked up some scanty instruction, many bad 
habits, losing every notion even of the first 
elements of religion and morals, and acquiring an 
imbecile indifierence to every sentiment that can 
elevate humanity; they were distinguishable by 
an habitual look of sullen dejection, the result 
of crushed self-respect and constant brow- 
beating from their Popish fellow-pupils, who 



204 THB FBOFESSOB. 

hated them as English, and scorned them as 
heretics. 

The second class were British English. Of 
these I did not encounter half a dozen during the 
whole time of my attendance at the seminary; 
their characteristics were clean but careless dress, 
ill-arranged hair (compared with the tight and 
trim foreigners^, erect carriage, flexible figures, 
white and taper hands, features more irregular, 
but also more intellectual than those of the 
Belgians, grave and modest countenances, a 
general air of native propriety and decency; by 
this last circumstance alone I could at a glance 
distinguish the daughter of Albion and nursling of 
Protestantism from the foster-child of Rome, the 
protigde of Jesuitry : proud, too, was the aspect 
of these British girls ; at once envied and ridiculed 
by their continental associates, they warded off 
insult with austere civility, and met hate with mute 
disdain ; they eschewed company-keeping, and in 
the midst of ntmibers seemed to dwell isolated. 



THE FBOFESSOB. 205 

The teachers presiding over this mixed multi- 
tude were three in number, all French — their 
names Mdlles. Z^phjrine, P^lagie, and Suzette , 
the two last were common-place personages 
enough; their look was ordinary, their manner 
was ordinary, their temper was ordinary, their 
thoughts, feelings, and views were all ordinary — 
were I to write a chapter on the subject I could 
not elucidate it fiirther. Z^phyrine was somewhat 
more distinguished in appearance and deportment 
than P^lagie and Suzette, but in character a 
genuine Parisian coquette, perfidious, mercenary, 
and dry-hearted. A fourth maitresse I sometimes 
saw who seemed to come daily to teach needle- 
work, or netting, or lace-mending, or some such 
flimsy art, but of her I never had more than a 
passing glimpse, as she sat in the carr^, with her 
frames and some dozen of the elder pupils about 
her, consequently I had no opportunity of studying 
her character, or even of observing her person 
much ; the latter, I remarked, had a very girlish 



206 THE FR0FE6S0B. 

air for a maltresse^ otherwise it was not striking ; 
of character I should think she possessed but 
little, as her pupils seemed constantly " en revolte*' 
against her authority. She did not reside in the 
house ; her name, I think, was Mdlle. HenrL 

Amidst this assemblage of all that was insignifi- 
cant and defective, much that was vicious and 
repulsive (by that last epithet many would have 
described the two or three stiff, silent, decently 
behaved, ill-dressed British girls), the sensible, 
sagacious, affable directress shone like a steady 
star over a marsh full of Jack-oManthorns ; 
profoimdly aware of her superiority, she derived 
an inward bliss from that consciousness which 
sustained her under all the care and responsibility 
inseparable from her position ; it kept her temper 
calm, her brow smooth, her manner tranquil. 
She liked — as who would not ? — on entering the 
school-room, to feel that her sole presence sufficed 
to diffuse that order and quiet which all the 
remonstrances, and even commands, of her under- 



THE PBOFESSOR. 207 

lings frequently failed to enforce; she liked to 
stand in comparison^ or rather contrast, with those 
who surrounded her, and to know that in personal 
as well as mental advantages, she bore awaj 
the undisputed palm of preference — (the three 
teachers were all plain.) Her pupils she managed 
with such indulgence and address, taking always 
on herself the office of recompenser and eulogist, 
and abandoning to her subalterns every invidious 
task of blame and punishment, that they all 
regarded her with deference, if not with aflFection ; 
her teachers did not love her, but they submitted 
because they were her inferiors in everything; 
the various masters who attended her school were 
each and all in some way or other under her 
influence: over one she had acquired power by 
her skilful management of his bad temper ; over 
another by little attentions to his petty caprices ; a 
third she had subdued by flattery ; a fourth — a 
timid man — she kept in awe by a sort of austere 
decision of mien; me, she still watched, still tried 



208 THE FB0FE8801L 

hj the most ingenioofl tests — she roved round me^ 
baffledi yet perseyering ; I believe she thought I 
was like a smooth and bare precipice^ which 
offered neither juttmg stone nor tree-root| nor tuft 
of grass to aid the climber. Now she flattered 
with exquisite tact^ now she moralizedi now she 
tried how far I was accessible to mercenary 
motives^ then she disported on the brink of 
affectation — ^knowing that some men are won by 
weakness — anoui she talked excellent sense^ aware 
that others have the folly to admire judgment I 
found it at once pleasant and easy to evade all these 
efforts ; it was sweet, when she thought me nearly 
won, to turn round and to smile in her very eyes, 
half scornfully, and then to witness her scarcely 
veiled, though mute mortification* Still she per- 
severed, and at last, I am bound to confess it, her 
finger, essaying, proving every atom of the casket, 
touched its secret spring, and for a moment the 
lid sprung open ; she laid her hand on the jewel 
within ; whether she stole and broke it, or whether 



^ 



THE PROFESSOR. 209 

the lid shut again with a snap on her fingers, read 
on, and you shall know. 

It happened that I came one day to give a 
lesson when I was indisposed ; I had a bad cold 
and a cough ; two hours' incessant talking left me 
very hoarse and tired; as I quitted the school- 
room, and was passing along the corridor, I met 
Mdlle. Renter; she remarked, with an anxious 
air, that I looked very pale and tired. ** Yes," I 
said, " I was fatigued ; " and then, with in.creased 
interest, she rejoined, " You shall not go away till 
you have had some refreshment." She persuaded 
me to step into the parlour, and was very kind 
and gentle while I stayed. The next day she was 
kinder still ; she came herself into the class to see 
that the windows were closed, and that there was 
no draught; she exhorted me with friendly 
earnestness not to over-exert myself; when I 
went away, she gave me her hand unasked, and 
I could not but mark, by a respectful and gentle 
pressure, that I was sensible of the favour, and 

VOL. I. p 



210 THE FBOFESSOB. 

grateful for it My modest demonstration kindled 
a little merry smile on her countenance ; I thought 
her almost charming. During the remainder of 
the evening, my mind was full of impatience for 
the afternoon of the next day to arrive, that I 
nught see her again. 

I was not disappointed, for she sat in the class 
during the whole of my subsequent lesson, and 
often looked at me almost with affection. At four 
o'clock she accompanied me out of the school-room, 
asking with solicitude after my health, then 
scolding me sweetly because I spoke too loud and 
gave myself too much trouble; I stopped at the 
glass-door which led into the garden, to hear her 
lecture to the end ; the door was open, it was a 
very fine day, and while I listened to the soothing 
reprimand, I looked at the sunshine and flowers, 
and felt very happy. The day-scholars began to 
pour from the school-rooms into the passage. 

" Will you go into the garden a minute or 
two," asked she, " till they are gone?" 



THE PROPESSOB. 211 

I descended the steps without answering, but 
I looked back as much as to say — 

" You will come with me ?" 

In another minute I and the directress were 
walking side by side down the alley bordered with 
fruit-trees, whose white blossoms were then in full 
blow as well as their tender green loaves. ^ The 
sky was blue, the air still, the May afternoon was 
fuU of brightness and fragrance. Released from ' 
the stifling class, surrounded with flowers and 
foliage, with a pleasing, smiling, affable woman at 
my side — ^how did I feel ? Why, very enviably. 
It seemed as if the romantic visions my imagi- 
nation had suggested of this garden, while it was 
yet hidden from me by the jealous boards, were 
more than realized ; and, when a turn in the alley 
shut out the view of the house, and some tall 
shrubs excluded M. Pelet's mansion, and screened 
us momentarUy from the other houses, rising 
amphitheatre-like round this green spot, I gave 
my arm to Mdlle. Renter, and led her to a garden- 



212 THE FB0FE8S0B. 

' cliair^ nestled under some lilacs near* She sat 
down ; I took my place at her side. She went on 
talking to me with that ease which communicates 
ease^ and^ as I listened^ a revelation dawned in my 
mind that I was on the brink of falling in love. 
The dinner-bell rang^ both at her house and M. 
Pelet's ; we, were obliged to part; I detained her 
a moment as she was moving away. 

" I want something," said I. 

" What?" asked Zoraide naively. 

" Only a flower." 

" Gather it then — or two, or twenty, if you like." 

" No— one will do — but you must gather it, 
and give it to me." 

" What a caprice I " she exclaimed, but she 
raised herself on her tip-toes, and, plucking a 
beautiful branch of lilac, offered it to me with 
grace. I took it, and went away, satisfied for the 
present, and hopeful for the future. 

Certainly that May day was a lovely one, and 
it closed in a moonlight night of summer warmth 



THE FROFESSOIL 213 

and serenity. I remember this well ; for, having 
sat up late that evening, correcting devoirs, and 
feeling weary and a little oppressed with the 
closeness of my small room, I opened the often- 
mentioned boarded window, whose boards, how- 
ever, I had persuaded old Madame Pelet to have 
removed since I had filled the post of professor in 
the pensionnat de demoiselles, as, from that time, 
it was no longer " inconvenient " for me to over- 
look my own pupils at their sports. I sat down 
in the window-seat, rested my arm on the sill, 
and leaned out: above me was the clear-obscure 
of a cloudless night sky — splendid moonlight sub- 
dued the tremulous sparkle of the stars — ^below lay 
the garden, varied with silvery lustre and deep 
shade, and all fresh with dew — a grateful perfume 
exhaled from the closed blossoms of the fruit- 
trees — ^not a leaf stirred, the night was breezoless. 
My window looked directly down upon a certain 
walk of Mdlle. Renter's garden, called " Tall^e 
d^fendue," so named because the pupils were 



214 TEE FB0FE8S0B. 

forbidden to enter it on account of its prox- 
imity to the boys' school It was here that 
the h'lacs and laburnums grew especially thick; 
this was the most sheltered nook in the enclosure^ 
its shrubs screened the garden-chair where 
•that afternoon I had sat with the young 
directress. I need not say that my thoughts were 
chiefly with her as I leaned from the lattice^ 
and let my eye roam^ now over the walks and 
borders of the garden, now along the many 
windowed front of the house which rose white 
beyond the masses of foliage. I wondered in what 
part of the building was situated her apartment ; 
and a single light, shining through the persiennes 
of one croisiie, seemed to direct me to it. 

** She watches late/' thought I, " for it must be 
now near midnight. She is a fascinating little 
woman," I continued in voiceless soliloquy ; " her 
image forms a pleasant picture in memory; I 
know she is not what the world calls pretty — no 
matter, there is harmony in her aspect, and I 



THE FB0FES60B. 215 

like it ; her brown hair, her blue eye, the fresh- 
ness of her cheek, the whiteness of her neck, all 
suit my taste. Then I respect her talent; the 
idea of marrying a doll or a fool was always 
abhorrent to me: I know that a pretty doll, a 
fair fool, might do well enough for the honey- 
moon ; but when passion cooled, how dreadful to 
find a lump of wax and wood laid in my bosom, a 
half idiot clasped in my arms, and to remember 

that I had made of this my equal — nay, my idol — 

* 

to know that I must pass the rest of my dreary 
life with a creature incapable of understanding 
what I said, of appreciating what I thought, or of 
sympathising with what I felt 1 ^^ Now, Zoraide 
Renter," thought I, ^^ has tact, * caractfere,' judg- 
ment, discretion ; has she heart ? What a good, 
simple little smile played about her lips when she 
gave me the branch of lilacs I I have thought 
her crafty, dissembling, interested sometimes, it is 
true ; but may not much that looks like cunning 
and dissimulation in her conduct be only the 



216 THE FBOFESSOB. 

efforts made by a bland temper to traverse 
quietly perplexing difficalties* And as to interest, 
she wishes to make her way in the world, no 
doubt, and who can blame her? Even if she 
be truly deficient in sound principle, is it not 
rather her misfortune than her fault? She has 
been brought up a Catholic : had she been bom 
an Englishwoman, and reared a Protestant, might 
she not have added straight integrity to all her 
other excellences ? Supposing she were to marry 
an English and Protestant husband, would she 
not, rational, sensible as she is, quickly acknow- 
ledge the superiority of right over expediency, 
honesty over policy ? It would be worth a man's 
while to try the experiment; to-morrow I will 
renew my observations. She knows that I watch 
her: how calm she is under scrutiny 1 it seems 
rather to gratify than annoy her.^ Here a strain 
of music stole in upon my monologue, and 
suspended it ; it was a bugle, very skilfully 
played, in the neighbourhood of the park, I 



THE FROFESSOB. 217 

thought, or on- the Plaxse Royale. So sweet were 
the tones, so subdumg their effect at that hour, in 
the midst of silence and under the quiet reign of 
moonlight, I ceased to think, that I might listen 
more intently. The strain retreated, its sound 
waxed fainter and was soon gone; my ear pre- 
pared to repose on the absolute hush of midnight 
once more. No. What murmur was that which, 
low, and yet near and approaching nearer, frus- 
trated the expectation of total silence? It was 
some one conversing — ^yes, evidently, an audible 
though subdued voice spoke in the garden im- 
mediately below me. Another answered: the 
first voice was that of a man, tl^e second that of a 
woman; and a man and a woman I saw coming 
slowly down the alley. Their forms were at first 
in shade, I could but discern a dusk outline of 
each, but a ray of moonlight met them at the 
termination of the walk, when they were under 
my very nose, and revealed very plainly, very 
unequivocally, Mdlle. Zoralde Renter, arm-in- 



218 THE PBOFESSOB. 

arm, or hand-in-hand (I forget which) with my 
principal, confidant, and counsellor, M* Fran9oi8 
' Pelet And M. Pelet was saying — 

" A qaand done le jour des noces, ma bien- 
aim^e ?" 

And Mdlle. Renter answered — 

^^Mais, Fran9ois, tu sais bien qu'il me serait 
impossible de me marier avant les vacances*'' 

"June, July, August, a whole quarter I'' 
exclaimed the director, "How can I wait so 
long ? — I who am ready, even now, to expire at 
your feet with impatience I " 

"Ah I if you die, the whole affair will be 
settled without any trouble about notaries and 
contracts ; I shall only have to order a slight 
mourning dress, which will be much sooner 
prepared than the nuptial trousseau." 

" Cruel Zoraide ; you laugh at the distress of 
one who loves you so devotedly as I do: my 
torment is your sport ; you scruple not to stretch 
my soul on the rack of jealousy ; for, deny it as 



THE FBOFESSOB. 219 

you will, I am certain you have cast encouraging 
glances on that school-boy, Crimsworth; he has 
presumed to fall in love, which he dared not 
have done unless you had given him room to 
hope." 

" What do you say, Fran9ois ? Do you say 
Crimsworth is in love with me ?" 

" Over head and ears." 

"Has he told you so?" 

"No— but I see it in his face: he blushes 
whenever your name is mentioned." 

A little laugh of exulting coquetry announced 
Mdlle. Renter's gratification at this piece of 
intelligence (which was a lie, by-the-bye — I had 
never been so far gone as that, after all). M. 
Pelet proceeded to ask what she intended to do 
with me, intimating pretty plainly, and riot very 
gallantly, that it was nonsense for her to think of 
taking such a "blanc-bec" as a husband, since 
she must be at least ten years older than I (was 
she then thirty-two? I should not have thought 



220 THE FB0FE660B. 

it). I heard her disclain anj intentions on the 
subject — the director, however, still pressed her 
to give a definite answer. 

** Fran9oi8,'' said she, "you are jealous," 
and still she laughed; then, as if suddenly 
recollecting that this coquetry was not consistent 
with the character for modest dignity she wished 
to establish, she proceeded, in a demure voice: 
** Truly, my dear Fran9ois, I will not deny 
that this young Englishman may have made some 
attempts to ingratiate himself with me; but, so 
fax from giving him any encouragement, I have 
always treated him with as much reserve as it 
was possible to combine with civility; affianced 
afl I am to you, I would give no man false hopes ; 
believe me, dear friend." 

Still Pelet uttered murmurs of distrust — so 
I judged, at least, from her reply. 

" What folly I How <!buld I prefer an unknown 
foreigner to you ? And then — ^not to flatter your 
vanity — Crimsworth could not bear comparison 



THE PROFESSOB. 221 

with you either physically or mentally; he is 
not a handsome man at all ; some may call him 
gentleman-like and intelligent-looking, but for 

my part ^ 

The rest of the sentence was lost in the distance, 
as the pair, rising from the chair in which they 
' had been seated, moved away. I waited their 
return, but soon the opening and shutting of a 
door informed me that they had re-entered the 
house ; I listened a little longer, all was perfectly 
still; I listened more than an hour — at last I 
heard M. Pelet come in and ascend to his 
chamber. Glancing once more towards the long 
front of the garden-house, I perceived that its 
solitary light was at length extinguished; so, for 
a time, was my faith in love and friendship. I 
went to bed, but something feverish and fiery 
had got into my veins which prevented me from 
sleeping much that night -r 



222 THE PBOFESSOB. 



CHAPTER XIIL 



Next morning I rose with the dawn^ and having 
dressed myself and stood half-an-hour^ my elbow 
leaning on the chest of drawers^ considering what 
means I should adopt to restore my spirits, fagged 
with sleeplessness, to their ordinary tone — for I had 
no intention of getting up a scene with M. Pelet, 
reproaching him with perfidy, sending him a 
challenge, or performing other gambadoes of the 
sort — I hit at last on the expedient of walking out 
in the cool of the morning to a neighbouring 
establishment of baths, and treating myself to a 
bracing plunge. The remedy produced the desired 
effect I came back at seven o'clock steadied and 
invigorated, and was able to greet M . Pelet, when 



THE PROFESSOR, 223 

he entered to breakfast, with an unchanged and 
tranquil countenance; even a cordial oflPering of 
the hand and the flattering appellation of " mon 
fils," pronounced in that caressing tone with which 
Monsieur had, of late days especially, been accus- 
tomed to address me, did not elicit any external 
sign of the feeling which, though subdued, still 
glowed at my heart. Not that I nursed vengeance 
—no ; but the sense of insult and treachery lived 
in me like a kindling, though as yet smothered 
coal. God knows I am not by nature vindictive ; 
I would not hurt a man because I can no longer 
trust or like him ; but neither my reason nor feel- 
ings are of the vacillating order — they are not of 
that sand-like sort where impressions, if soon 
made, are as soon effaced. Once convinced that 
my friend's disposition is incompatible with my 
own, once assured that he is indelibly stained with 
certain defects obnoxious- to my principles, and I 
dissolve the conection. I did so with Edward. 
As to Pelet, the discovery was yet new ; should I 



224 THB PB0FE6S0B. 

act thus with him ? It was the question I placed 
before my mind as I stirred my cnp of coffee with 
a half-pistolet (we never had spoons), Pelet mean* 
time l>eing seated opposite, his pallid face looking 
as knowing and more haggard than usual, his blue 
eyo turned, now sternly on his boys and ushers, 
and now graciously on me. 

*^ Circumstances must guide me,'' said I ; and 
meeting Pelet's false glance and insinuating smile, 
I tliankcd heaven that I had last night opened my 
window and read by the light of a full moon the 
true meaning of that guileful countenance. I felt 
half liis master, because the reality of his nature 
was now known to mo; smile and flatter as he 
would, I saw his soul lurk behind his smile, and 
heard in every one of his smooth phrases a voice 
inter]:)reting tlieir treacherous import 

But Zoraido Reutcr ? Of course her defection 
had cut me to the quick ? That sting must have 
gone too deep for any consolations of philosophy 
to be available in curing its smart ? Not at alL 



THE FB07ESS0B. 225 

The night fever over, I looked about for balm to 
that wound also, and found •some nearer borne 
than at GKlead. Reason was my physician; she 
began by proving that the prize I had missed was 
of little value : she admitted that, physically, 
Zoraide might have suited me, but acffirmed that 
our souls were not* in harmony, and that discord 
must have resulted from the union of her mind 
with mine. She then insisted on the suppression 
of all repining, and commanded me rather to rejoice 
that I had escaped a snare. Her medicament did 
me good. I felt its strengthening eflfect when I 
met the directress the next day; its stringent 
operation on the nerves suflfered no trembling, no 
faltering ; it enabled me to face her with firmness, 
to pass her with ease. She had held out her hand 
to me — ^that I did not choose to see. She had 
greeted me with a charming smile — ^it fell on my 
heart like light on stone. I passed on to the 
estrade, she followed me ; her eye, fastened on my 
face, demanded of every feature the meaning of 

VOL. L Q 



226 THE PROFESSOR. 

my changed and careless manner. **I will give 
her an answer^'* thought I ; and^ meeting her gaze 
fully arresting, fixing her glance, I shot into her 
eyes, from my own, a look, where there was no 
respect, no love, no tenderness, no gallantry; 
where the strictest analysis could detect nothing 
but scorn, hardihood, irony. I made her bear it, 
and feel it ; her steady countenance did not change, 
but her colour rose, and she approached me as if 
fascinated. She stepped on to the estrade, a^d 
stood close by my side ; she had nothing to say. I 
would not relieve her embarrassment, and negli- 
gently turned over the leaves of a book. 

"I hope you feel quite recovered to-day," at 
last she said, in a low tone. 

" And I, mademoiselle, hope that you took no 
cold last night in consequence of your late walk in 
the garden.** 

Quick enough of comprehension, she under- 
stood me directly; her face became a little 
blanched — a very little — but no muscle in her 



THE PROFESSOB. 227 

rather marked features moved; and^ calm and 
self-possessed^ she retired from the estrade^ taking 
her seat quietly at a little distance^ and occupying 
herself with netting a purse. I proceeded to give 
my lesson ; it was a " Composition/' i ^, I dictated 
certain general questions, of which the pupils 
were to compose the answers from memory, access 
to books being forbidden. While Mdlle. Eulalie, 
Hortense, Caroline, &c., were pondering over the 
string of rather abstruse grammatical interroga- 
tories I had propounded, I was at liberty to 
employ the vacant half hour in further observing 
the directress herself. The green silk purse was 
progressing fast in her hands ; her eyes were bent 
upon it ; her attitude, as she sat netting within two 
yards of me, was still yet guarded ; in her whole 
person were expressed, at once, and with equal 
clearness, vigilance, and repose — a rare union! 
Looking at her, I was forced, as I had often been 
before, to offer her good sense, her wondrous self- 
control, the tribute of involuntary admiration. 



228 THE PBOFESSOB. 

She had felt that I had withdrawn from her my 
esteem; she had seen contempt and coldness in 
T^y ^7^9 an<l to her, who coveted the approbation 
of all aromid her, who thirsted after miiversal 
good opinion, sach discovery must have been 
an acute wound. I had witnessed its effect in the 
momentary pallor of her cheek — cheek unused to 
▼ary; yet how quickly, by dint of self-control, 
had she recovered her composure I With what 
quiet dignity she now sat, almost at my side, 
sustained by her sound and vigorous sense; no 
trembling in her somewhat lengthened, though 
shrewd upper lip, no coward shame on her austere 
forehead. 

"There is metal there," I said, as I gazed. 
" Would that there were fire also, living ardour 
to make the steel glow — then I could love her." 

Presently I discovered that she knew I was 
watching her, for she stirred not, she lifted not 
her crafty eyelid; she had glanced down from 
her netting to her small foot, peeping from the 



THE PROFESSOB. 229 

soft folds of her purple merino gown ; thence her 
eye reverted to her hand, ivory white, with a 
hright garnet ring on the forefinger, and a light 
frill of lace round the wrist; with a scarcely 
perceptible movement she turned her head, causing 
her nut-brown curls to wave gracefully. In these 
slight signs I read that the wish of her heart, the 
design of her brain, was to lure back the game 
she had scared. A little incident gave her the 
opportunity of addressing me again. 

While all was silence in the class — silence, but 
for the rustling of copy-books and the travelling 
of pens over their pages — a leaf of the large folding- 
door, opening from the hall, unclosed, admitting 
a pupil who, after making a hasty obeisance, 
ensconced herself with some appearance of trepi- 
dation, probably occasioned by her entering so 
late, in a vacant seat at the desk nearest the 
door. Being seated, she proceeded, still with an 
air of hurry and embarrassment, to open her 
cabas, to take out her books; and, while I was 



230 THB PB0FE8S0B. 

waiting for her to look up, in order to make out 
her identity — for, short-sighted as I was, I had 
not recognised her at her entrance — Mdlle. Renter, 
leaving her chair, approached the estrade. 

'^ Monsieur Creemsvort,'' said she, in a whisper ; 
for when the school-rooms were silent, the directress 
always moved with velvet tread, and spoke in the 
most subdued key, enforcing order and stillness 
folly as much by example as precept ; ** Monsieur 
Creemsvort, that young person, who has just 
entered, wishes to have the advantage of taking 
lessons with you in English ; she is not a pupil of 
the house ; she is, indeed, in one sense, a teacher, 
for she gives instruction in lace-mending, and in 
little varieties of ornamental needle-worL She 
very properly proposes to qualify herself for a 
higher department of education, and has asked 
permission to attend your lessons, in order to 
perfect her knowledge of English, in which 
language she has, I believe, already made some 
progress ; of course it is my wish to aid her in an 



THE PBOFESSOB. 231 

eflfort so praiseworthy; you will permit her then 
to benefit by your instruction — ^n'est ce pas, 
monsieur?" And Mdlle. Renter's eyes were 
raised to mine with a look at once naive, benign, 
and beseeching. 

I replied, ** Of course,** very laconically, almost 
abruptly. 

** Another word," she said, with softness; " Mdlle. 
Henri has not received a regular education ; 
perhaps her natural talents are not of the highest 
order : but I can assure you of the excellence of 
her intentions, and even of the amiability of her 
disposition. Monsieur will then, I am sure, have 
the goodness to be considerate with her at first, 
and not expose her backwardness, her inevitable 
deficiencies, before the young ladies, who, in a 
sense, are her pupils. Will Monsieur Creems- 
vort favour me by attending to this hint?" I 
nodded. She continued with subdued earnestness — 
" Pardon me, monsieur, if I venture to add that 
what I have just said is of importance to the poor 



232 THE FB0FE8S0B. 

girl; she already experiences great dijBScaltj in 
impressing these giddy young things with a due 
degree of deference for her authority^ and should 
that dijBSculiy be increased by new discoveries of 
her incapacity, she might find her position in my 
establishment too painful to be retained; a cir- 
cumstance I should much regret for her sake^ as 
she can ill afford to lose the profits of her 
occupation here." 

Mdlle. Renter possessed marvellous tact; but 
tact the most exquisite, unsupported by sincerity, 
will sometimes fail of its effect; thus, on this 
occasion, the longer she preached about the 
necessity of being indulgent to the governess- 
pupil, the more impatient I felt as I listened* 
I discerned so clearly that while her professed 
motive was a wish to aid the dull, though well- 
meaning Mdlle. Henri, her real one was no other 
than a design to impress n^e with an idea of her 
own exalted goodness and tender considerateness ; 
so having again hastily nodded assent to her 



THE PBOFESSOB. 233 

remarks^ I obviated their renewal by suddenly 
demanding the compositions^ in a sharp accent, 
and stepping £rom the estrade, I proceeded to 
collect them. As I passed the governess-pupil, I 
said to her — 

** You have come in too late to receive a lesson 
to-day ; try to be more punctual next time." 

I was behind her, and Qould not relEul in her 
face the effect of my not very civil speech. 
Probably I should not have troubled myself to do 
so, had I been full in front; but I observed that 
she immediately began to slip her books into her 
cabas again; and, presently, after I had returned 
to the estrade, while I was arranging the mass of 
compositions, I heatd the folding-door again open 
and close; and, on looking up, I perceived her 
place vacant I thought to myself, ** She will 
consider her first attempt at taking a lesson in 
English something of a failure f and I wondered 
whether she had departed in the sulks, or whether 
stupidity had induced her to take my words too 



234 THE FB0FES80B. 

literally^ or, finally, whether my irritable tone had 
wounded her feelings. The last notion I dismissed 
almost as soon as I had conceived it, for not 
having seen any appearance of sensitiveness in 
any human face since my arrival in Belgium, I 
had begun to regard it almost as a fabulous 
quality. Whether her physiognomy announced it I 
could not tell, for her speedy exit had allowed me 
no time to ascertain the circumstance. I had, 
indeed, on two or three previous occasions, caught 
a passing view of her (as I believe has been 
mentioned before); but I had never stopped to 
scrutinize either her face or person, and had but 
the most vague idea of her general appearance. 
Just as I had finished rolling up the compositions, 
the four o'clock bell rang; with my accustomed 
aleitoess in obeying that signal, I grasped my hat 
and evacuated the premises. 



THE PROFESSOR. 235 



CHAPTER XIV. 



If I was punctaal in quitting Mdlle. Renter's 
domicile, I was at least equally punctual in 
arriving there; I came the next day at five 
minutes before two, and on reaching the school- 
room door, before I opened it, I heard a rapid, 
gabbling sound, which warned me that the ** pri^ 
du midi'' was not yet concluded. I waited the 
termination thereof; it would have been impious 
to intrude my heretical presence during its 
progress. How the repeater of the prayer did 
cackle and splutter! I never before or since 
heard language enounced with such steam-engine 
haste. ** Notre pire qui 6tes au cieP went off 
like a shot; then followed an address to Marie, 



236 THE PBOFESSOB. 

*' yi^ge c^leste^ reine des anges^ maison d'or^ tour 
(I'lyoireP and then an invocation to the saint of 
the day; and then down they all sat, and the 
solemn (?) rite was over; and I entered, flinging 
the door wide and striding in fast, as it was my 
wont to do now ; for I had foond that in entering 
with aplomb, and mounting the estrade with 
emphasis, consisted the grand secret of ensuring 
immediate silence. The folding-doors between 
the two classes, opened for the prayer, were 
instantly closed ; a maitresse, work-box in hand, 
took her seat at her appropriate desk ; the pupils 
sat still with their pens and books before them; 
my three beauties in the van, now well-humbled 
by a demeanour of consistent coolness, sat erect 
with their hands folded quietly on their knees; 
they had given up giggling and' whispering to 
each other, and no longer ventured to utter pert 
speeches in my presence ; they now only talked to 
me occasionally with their eyes, by means of 
which organs they could still, however, say very 



THE PBOFESSOB. 237 

audax^Ious and coquettish things. Had affection, 
goodness, modesty, real talent, ever employed 
those bright orbs as interpreters, I do not think 
I could have refrained from giving a kind and 
encouraging, perhaps an ardent reply now and 
then ; but as it was, I found pleasure in answering 
the glance of vanity with the gaze of stoicism. 
Youthful, fair, brflliant, as were many of my 
pupils, I can truly say that in me they never saw 
any other bearing than such as an austere, though 
just guardian, might have observed towards them. 
If any doubt the accuracy of this assertion, as 
inferring more conscientious self-denial or Scipio- 
like self-control than they feel disposed to give me 
credit for, let them take into consideration the 
following circumstances, wliicli, while detracting 
from my merit, justify my veracity. 

Know, O incredulous reader 1 that a master 
stands in a somewhat different relation towards a 
pretty, light-headed, probably ignorant girl, to 
that occupied by a partner at a ball, or a gallant 



238 THE PBOrZSSOB. 

on the promenade. A professor does not meet his 
pupil to see her dressed in satin and muslin, with 
hair perfumed and curled, neck scarcely shaded 
bj aerial lace, round white arms circled with 
bracelets, feet dressed for the gliding dance. It 
is not his business to whirl her through the waltz, 
to feed her with compliments, to heighten her 
beauty by the flush of gratified vanity. Neither 
does he encounter her on the smooth-rolled, tree- 
shaded Boulevard, in the green and sunny park, 
whither she repairs clad in her becoming walking 
dress, her scarf thrown with grace over her 
shoulders, her little bonnet scarcely screening her 
curls, the red rose under its brim adding a new 
tint to the softer rose on her cheek ; her face and 
eyes, too, illumined with smiles, perhaps as 
transient as the sunshine of the gala-day, but also 
quite as brilliant ; it is not his office to walk by 
her side, to listen to her lively chat, to carry her 
parasol, scarcely larger than a broad green leaf, 
to lead in a ribbon her Blenheim spaniel or Italian 



THE PBOFESSOB. 239 

greyhound. No ; he finds her in the school-room, 
plainly dressed, with books before her. Owing to 
her education or her nature books are to her a 
nuisance, and she opens them with aversion, yet 
her teacher must instil into her mind the contents 
of these books ; that mind resists the admission of 
grave information, it recoils, it grows restive, 
sullen tempers are shown, disfiguring frowns spoil 
the synunetry of the face, sometimes coarse 
gestures banish grace from the deportment, while 
muttered expressions, redolent of native and 
ineradicable vulgarity, desecrate the sweetness of 
the voice. Where the temperament is serene 
though the intellect be sluggish, an unconquerable 
dullness opposes every effort to instruct. Where 
there is cunning but not energy, dissimulation, 
falsehood, a thousand schemes and tricks are put 
in play to evade the necessity of application; in 
short, to the tutor, female youth, female charms 
are like tapestry hangings, of which the wrong 
side is continually turned towards him ; and even 



240 THE PR0FES80B. 

when he sees the smooth, neat, external surface 
he so well knows what knots, long stitches, and 
jagged ends are behind that he has scarce a 
temptation to admire too fondly the seemly forms 
and bright colours exposed to general view. 

Our likings are regulated by our circumstances. 
The artist prefers a hilly country because it is 
picturesque ; the engineer a flat one because it is 
convenient; the man of pleasure likes what he 
calls " a fine woman** — she suits him ; the fashion- 
able young gentleman admires the fashionable 
young lady — she is* of his kind ; the toil-worn, 
fagged, probably irritable tutor, blind almost to 
beauty, insensible to airs and graces, glories chiefly 
in certain mental qualities; application, love of 
knowledge, natural capacity, docility, truthfulness, 
gratefulness, are the charms that attract his notice 
and win. his regard. These he seeks, but seldom 
meets ; these, if by chance he finds, he would fain 
retain for ever, and when separation deprives him 
of them he feels as if some ruthless hand had 



THE PROFESSOR. 241 

snatched from him his only ewe-lamb. Such 
being the case^ and the case it is^ my readers will 
agree with me that there was nothing either very 
meritorious or very marvellous in the integrity 
and moderation of my conduct at Mdlle. Renter's 
pensionnat de demoiselles. 

My first business this afternoon consisted in 
reading the list of places for the month, determined 
by tlie relative correctness of the compositions 
given the preceding day. The list was headed, 
as usual, by the name of Sylvie, that plain, quiet 
little girl I have described before as being at once 
the best and ugliest pupil in the establishment; 
the second place had fallen to the lot of a certain 
L^onie Ledru, a diminutive, sharp-featured, and 
parchment-skinned creature of quick wits, frail 
conscience, and indurated feelings; a lawyer-like 
thing, of whom I used to say that, had she been a 
boy, she would have made a model of an imprin- 
cipled, clever attorney. Then came Eulalie, the 
proud beauty, the Juno of the school, whom six 

VOL. I. B 



242 THE FBOFESSOB. 

long years of drilling in the simple grammar of 
the English language had compelled^ despite the 
stiff phlegm of her intellect, to acquire a mechan- 
ical acquaintance with most of its rules. No 

# 

smile, no trace of pleasure or satisfaction appeared 
in Sylvie's nun-like and passive face as she heard 
her name read first I always felt saddened by 
the sight of that poor girl's absolute quiescence on 
all occasions, and it was my custom to look at her, 
to address her, as seldom as possible ; her extreme 
docility, her assiduous perseverance, would have 
recommended her warmly to my good opinion; 
her modesty, her intelligence, would have induced 
me to feel most kindly — most affectionately towards 
her, notwithstanding the almost ghastly plainness 
of her features, the disproportion of her form, the 
corpse-like lack of animation in her countenance, 
had I not been aware that every friendly word, 
every kindly action, would be reported by her to 
her confessor, and by him misinterpreted and 
poisoned. Once I laid my hand on her head, in 



THE FROFESSOB. 243 

token of approbation ; I thought Sylvie was going 
to smile, her dim eye almost kindled; but, 
presently, she shrunk from me; I was a man 
and a heretic; she, poor child! a destined 
nun and devoted Catholic: thus a fourfold 
wall of separation divided her mind from mine. 
A pert smirk, and a hard glance of triumph, 
was Lome's method of testifying her gratifi- 
cation; Eulalie looked sullen and envioud — 
she had hoped to be first Hortense and 
Caroline exchanged a reckless grimace on 
hearing their names read out somewhere near 
the bottom of the list ; the brand of mental 
inferiority was considered by them as no dis- 
grace, their hopes for the fiiture being based 
solely on their personal attractions. 

This affair arranged, the regular lesson followed. 
During a brief interval, employed by the pupils 
in ruling their books, my eye, ranging carelessly 
over the benches, observed, for the first time, that 
the farthest seat in the farthest row — a seat usually 



244 THE PBOFEBSOB. 

vacant — ^was again filled by the new scholar, the 
Mdlle. Henri so ostentatiously recommended to 
me by the directress. To-day I had on my 
spectacles ; her appearance, therefore, was clear to 
me at the first glance ; I had not to puzzle over it 
She looked young; yet, had I been required to 
name her exact age, \ should have been somewhat 
nonplussed; the slightness of her figure might 
have suited seventeen; a certain anxious and 
pre-occupied expression of face seemed the indicar- 
tion of riper years. She was dressed, like all the 
rest, in a dark stuff gown and a white collar ; her 
features were dissimilar to any there, not so 
rounded, more defined, yet scarcely regular. The 
shape of her head too was different, the superior 
part more developed, the base considerably less. 
I felt assured, at first sight, that she was not a 
Belgian; her complexion, her countenance, her 
lineaments, her figure, were aU distinct from 
theirs, and, evidently, the type of another race — 
of a race less gifted with fullness of fiesh and 



THE FBOFESSOB. 245 

plenitude of blood ; less jocund, material, unthink- 
ing. When I first cast my eyes on her, she sat 
looking fixedly down, her chin resting on her 
hand, and she did not change her attitude till I 
commenced the lesson. None of the Belgian girls 
would have retained one position, and that a 
reflective one, for the same length of time. Yet, 
having intimated that her appearance was peculiar, 
as being unlike that of her Flemish companions, 
I have little more to say respecting it; I can 
pronoimce no encomiums on her beauty, for she 
was not beautiful; nor offer condolence on her 
plainness, for neither was she plain; a care- 
worn character of forehead, and a corresponding 
moulding of the mouth, struck me with a senti- 
ment resembling surprise, but these traits would 
probably have passed unnoticed by any less 
crotchetty observer. 

Now, reader, though I have spent a page and 
a half in describing Mdlle. Henri, I know well 
enough that I have left on your mind's eye no 



246 THE FB0FE8S0IL 

distinct picture of her; I have not painted her 
complexion^ nor her ejes^ nor her hair, nor even 
drawn the outline of her shape. Tou cannot tell 
whether her nose was aquiline or retroussd, 
whether her chin was long or short, her face 
square or oval; nor could I the first day, and 
it is not my intention to communicate to you at 
once a knowledge I myself gained hy little and 
little. 

I gave a short exercise which they all wrote 
down. I saw the new pupil was puzzled at first 
with the novelty of the form and language ; once 
or twice she looked at me with a sort of painful 
solicitude, as not comprehending at all what I 
meant ; then she was not ready when the others 
were, she could not write her phrases so fast as 
they did ; I would not help her, I went on relent- 
less. She looked at me ; her eye said most plainly, 
*' I cannot follow you.** I disregarded the appeal, 
and, carelessly leaning back in my chair, glancing 
from time to time with a nonchalant air out of the 



THE PROFESSOK. 247 

window, I dictated a little faster. On looking 
towards her again, I perceived her face clouded 
with embarrassment, but she was still writing on 
most diligently; I paused a few seconds; she 
employed the interval in hurriedly re-perusing 
what she had written, and shame and discomfiture 
were apparent in her countenance ; she evidently 
found she had made great nonsense of it. In ten 
minutes more the dictation was complete, and, 
having allowed a brief space in which to correct 
it, I took their books; it was with a reluctant 
hand Mdlle. Henri gave up hers, but, having 
once yielded it to my possession, she com- 
posed her anxious face, as if, for the present, she 
had resolved to dismiss regret, and had made up 
her mind to be thought imprecedentedly stupid. 
Glancing over her exercise, I found that several 
lines had been omitted, but what was written 
contained very few faults; I instantly inscribed 
" Bon " at the bottom of the page, and returned 
it to her; she smiled, at first incredulously. 



248 THE PBOFEBSOB. 

then as if re-assured, but did not lift her 
eyes; she could look at me^ it seemed, when 
perplexed and bewildered, but not when gratified; 
I thought that scarcely fair. 



THE PBOFESSOR. 249 



CHAPTER XV. 

Some time elapsed before I again gave a lesson 
in the jBrst class; the holiday of Whitsuntide 
occupied three days^ and on the fourth it was the 
turn of the second division to receive my 
instructions. As I made the transit of the coiri, 
I observed^ as usual^ the band of sewers sur- 
rounding Mdlle, Henri; there were only about 
a dozen of them^ but they made as much noise 
as might have suflBced for fifty 5 they seemed very 
little under her control; three or four at once 
assailed her with importunate requirements; she 
looked harassed^ she demanded silence^ but in 
vain. She saw me^ and I read in her eye pain 
that a stranger should witness the insubordination 



250 THS PBOFESSOB. 

of her papOs; she seeoied to entreat order — her 
prayers were useless; then I remarked that she 
compressed her lips and contracted her brow ; and 
her countenance^ if I read it correctly, saidr— '^ I 
hare done my best; I seem to merit blame 
notwithstanding; blame me then who wilL" I 
passed on; as I closed the school-room door, I 
heard her say, suddenly and sharply, addressing 
(me of the eldest and most torbnlent of the lot — 

^ Am^lie Mtillenberg, ask me no question, and 
request of me no assistance, for a week to come ; 
during that space of time I will neither speak to 
you nor help you.** 

The words were uttered with emphasis— nay, 
with yehemence — and a comparative silence fol- 
lowed ; whether the calm was permanent, I know 
not; two doors now closed between me and the 
carr^ 

Next day was appropriated to the first class ; on 
my arrival, I found the directress seated, as usual, 
in a chair between the two estrades, and before 



THB PR0FE8S0B. 251 

her was standing Mdlle. Henri, in an attitude 
(as it seomod to me) of somewhat reluctant 
attention* The directress was knitting and talking 
at the same time. Amidst the hum of a large 
school-room, it was easy so to speak in the ear of 
one person, as to be heard by that person alone^ 
and it was thus MdUe. Renter parleyed with her 
teacher. The face of the latter was a little 
flushed, not a little troubled ; there was vexation 
in it, whence resulting I know not, for the 
directress looked very placid indeed; she could 
not be scolding in such gentle whispers, and 
with so equable a mien; no, it was presently 
proved that her discourse had been of the most 
friendly tendency, for I heard the closing words-r 
*^ C'est asscz, ma bonne amie; k present jo ne 
veux pas vous retonir davantage.'' 

Without reply, Mdlle. Henri turned away; 
dissatisfaction was plainly evinced in her face, 
and a smile, slight and brief, but bitter, distrustful, 
and, I thought, scornful, curled her lip as she took 



252 THE PBOFESSOB* 

her place in the chiss; it was a secret, involimtary 
smile, which lasted but a second; an air of 
depression succeeded, chased away presently by 
one of attention and interest, when I gave the 
word for all the pupils to take their reading-books. 
In g^ieral I hated the reading-lesson, it was such 
a tortore to the ear to listen to their uncouth 
mouthing of my native tongue, and no effort of 
example or precept on my part ever seemed to 
effect the slightest improvement in their accent. 
To-day, each in her appropriate key, Usped, 
stuttered, mumbled, and jabbered as usual ; about 
fifteen had racked me in turn, and my auricular 
nerve was expecting with resignation the discords 
of the sixteenth, when a full, though low voice, 
read out, in clear correct English — 

** On his way to Perth, the king was met by a 
Highland woman, calling herself a prophetess ; she 
stood at the side of the ferry by which he was 
about to travel to the north, and cried with a loud 
voice, ' My lord the king, if you pass this water 



THE PBOFESSOIL 253 

you will never return again alive P" — {Vide the 
history of Scotland.) 

I looked up in amazement; the voice was a 
voice of Albion ; the accent was pure and silvery ; 
it only wanted firmness^ and assurance^ to be 
the counterpart of what any well educated lady 
in Essex or Middlesex might have enoimced, 
yet the speaker or reader was no other than 
Mdlle. Henri, in whose grave, joyless face I saw 
no mark of consciousness that she had performed 
any extraordinary feat. No one else evinced 
surprise either. Mdlle Renter knitted away 
assiduously; I was aware, however, that at the 
conclusion of the paragraph, she had lifted her 
eyelid and honoured me with a glance sideways ; 
she did not know the full excellency of the teacher's 
style of reading, but she perceived that her accent 
was not that of the others, and wanted to discover 
what I thought; I masked my visage with 
indiflference, and ordered the next girl to 
proceed. 



254 THE PROFESSOR. 

When the lesson was over^ I took advantage 
of the confusion caused bj breaking up, to ap- 
proach Mdlle. Henri ; she was standing near the 
window and retired as I advanced; she thought 
I wanted to look out, and did not imagine that 
I conld have anything to saj to her. I took her 
ezerdse-book out of her hand ; as I turned over 
the leaves I addressed her : — 

^^You have had lessons in English before?" 
I asked. 

" No, su-.'' 

"No I you read it well; you have been in 
England?" 

" Oh no I" with some animation. 

"You have been in English families?'* 

Still in the answer was " No." Here my eye, 
resting on the fly-leaf of the book, saw written, 
" Frances Evans Henri." 

" Your name?" I asked. 

"Yes, sir." 

My interrogations were cut short; I heard a 



THE PROFESSOR. 255 

little rustling behind me, and close at my back 
was the directress, professing to be examining 
the interior of a desk. 

"Mademoiselle," said she, looking up and 
addressing the teacher, " will you have the good- 
ness to go and stand in the corridor, while 
the young ladies are putting on their things, 
and try to keep some order." 

Mdlle. Henri obeyed. 

*^ What splendid weather ! " observed the 
directress cheerfully, glancing at the same time 
from the window. I assented and was with- 
drawing. "What of your new pupil, 
monsieur?" continued she, following my retreat- 
ing steps. "Is she likely to make progress in 
English?" 

" Indeed I can hardly judge. She possesses a 
pretty good accent ; of her real knowledge of the 
language I have as yet had no opportunity of 
forming aa opinion." 

" And her natural capacity, monsieur ? I have 



256 THE PBOFESSOIU 

had my fears aboat that : can you relieve me by 
an assurance at least of its average power ?^ 

" I see no reason to doubt its average power, 
mademoiselle, but really I scarcely know her, 
and have not had time to study the calibre 
of her capacity. I wish you a very good after- 
noon." 

She still pursued me. " You will observe, 
monsieur, and tell me what you think ; I coidd so 
much better rely on your opinion than on my own; 
women cannot judge of these things as men can, 
and, excuse my pertinacity, monsieur, but it is 
natural I should feel interested about this poor 
little girl (pauvre petite); she has scarcely any 
relations, her own efforts are all she has to look to, 
her acquirements must be her sole fortune; her 
present position has once been mine, or nearly so ; 
it is then but natural I should sympathize with 
her ; and sometimes, when I see the di£Scidty she 
has in managing pupils, I feel quite chagrined. 
I doubt not she does her best, her intentions are 



THE PROFESSOR. 257 

excellent ; but, monsieur, she wants tact and firm- 
ness. I have talked to her on the subject, but I 
am not fluent, and probably did not express myself 
with clearness ; she never appears to comprehend 
me. Now, would you occasionally, when you see 
an opportunity, slip in a word of advice to her on 
the subject; men have so much more influence 
than women have — they argue so much more 
logically than we do ; and you, monsieur, in par- 
ticular, have so paramount a power of making 
yourself obeyed ; a word of advice from you could 
not but do her good ; even if she were sullen and 
headstrong (which I hope she is not) she would 
scarcely refuse to listen to you ; for my own part, 
I can truly say that I never attend one of your 
lessons without deriving benefit from witnessing 
your management of the pupils. The other 
masters are a constant source of anxiety to me ; 
they cannot impress the young ladies with senti- 
ments of respect, nor restrain the levity natural to 
youth : in you, monsieur, I feel the most absolute 
VOL. I. s 



258 THE PBOFESSOIU 

confidence; try then to put this poor child into 
tlie way of controlling our giddy, high-spirited 
Brabantoises. But, monsieur, I would add one 
word more ; don't alarm her aniour propre ; be- 
ware of inflicting a wound there. I roluctantlj 
admit that in that particidar she is blameably — 
some would say ridiculously — susceptible. I fear 
I have touched this sore point inadvertently, and 
she cannot get over it" 

During the greater part of this harangue my 
hand was on the lock of the outer door ; I now 
turned it. 

" Au revoir, mademoiselle," said I, and I escaped. 
I saw the directress's stock of words was yet far 
from exhausted. She looked after mo, she would 
fain have detained me longer. Her manner 
towards me had been altered ever since I had 
begun to treat her with hardness and indifference: 
she ahnost cringed to me on every occasion ; she 
consulted my countenance incessantly, and beset 
mo with innumerable little oflScious attentions. 



THE PROFESSOR. 259 

Servility creates despotism. This slavish homagfe, 
instead of softening my heart, only pampered 
whatever was stern and exacting in its mood. 
The very circumstance of her hovering round me 
like a fascinated bird, seemed to transform me into 
a rigid pillar of stone ; her flatteries irritated my 
scorn, her blandishments confirmed my reserve. 
At times I wondered what she meant by giving 
herself such trouble to win me, when the more 
profitable Pelet was already in her nets, and when 
too she was aware that I possessed her secret, for 
I had not scrupled to tell her as much : but the 
fact is that as it was her nature to doubt the reality 
and undervalue the worth of modesty, affection, 
disinterestedness — to regard these qualities as 
foibles of character — so it was equally her tendency 
to [consider pride, hardness, selfishness, as proofs 
of strength. She would trample on the neck of 
humility, she would • kneel at the feet of disdain ; 
she would meet tenderness with secret contempt, 
indifference she would woo with ceaseless assidui- 



260 THE PBOFESSOB. 

ties. Benevolence, devotedness, enthusiasm, were 
her antipathies ; for dissimulation and self-interest 
she had a preference — they were real wisdom in 
her eyes ; moral and physical degradation, mental 
and bodily inferiority, she regarded with indul- 
gence ; they were foils capable of being turned to 
good account as set-offs for^her own endowments. 
To violence, injustice, tyranny, she succumbed 
' — they were her natural masters; Bhe had no 
propensity to hate, no impulse to resist them; 
the indignation their behests awake in some 
hearts was unknown in hers. From all this it 
resulted that the false and selfish called her wise, 
the vulgar and debased termed her charitable^ 
the insolent and unjust dubbed her amiable, the 
conscientious and benevolent generally at first 
accepted as valid her claim to be considered one 
of themselves; but ere long the plating of pre- 
tension wore off*, the real mateiial appeared 
below, and they laid her aside as a deception. 



THB PBOFESSOR. 261 



CHAPTER XVL 



In the course of another fortnight I had seen 
sufficient of Frances Evans Henri, to enable me to 
form a more definite opinion of her character. I 
found her possessed in a somewhat remarkable 
degree of at least two good points, viz., per- 
severance and a sense of duty ; I foimd she was 
really capable of applying to study, of contending 
with difficulties. At first I ofiered her the same 
help which I had always foimd it necessary to 
confer on the others ; I began with unloosing for 
her each knotty point, but I soon discovered that 
such help was regarded by my new pupil as 
degrading; she recoiled from it with a certain 
proud impatience. Hereupon I appointed her 

ft 

long lessons, and left her to solve alone any 



262 THE PBOnSSOIL 

perplexities they might present She set to the 
task with serious ardour^ and having qoicklj 
accomplished one labour^ eagerlj demanded more. 
So much for her perseverance ; as to her sense of 
datj^ it evinced itself thus: she liked to learn, 
but hated to teach; her progress as a pupil 
depended upon herself, and I saw that on herself 
she could calculate with certainty; her success as 
a teacher rested partly, perhaps chiefly, upon the 
will of others ; it cost her a most painful effort 
to enter into conflict with this foreign will, to 
endeavour to bend it into subjection to her own ; 
for in what regarded people in general the action 
of her will was impeded by many scruples; it 
was as unembarrassed as strong where her own 
affiiirs were concerned, and to it she could at any 
time subject her inclination, if that inclination 
went counter to her convictions of right; yet 
when called upon to wrestle with the propensities, 
the habits, the faults of others, of children 
especially, who are deaf to reason, and, for the 



THE PBOFESSOR. 263 

most part, insensate to persuasion, her will some- 
times almost refused to act; then came in the 
sense of duty and forced the reluctant will into 
operation. A wasteful expense of energy and 
labour was frequently the consequence; Frances 
toiled for and with her pupils like a drudge, but it 
was long ere her conscientious exertions were 
rewarded by anything like docility on their part, 
because they saw that they had power over her, 
inasmuch as by resisting her painful attempts to 
convince, persuade, control — ^by forcing her to the 
employment of coercive measures — ^they could 
inflict upon her exquisite suffering. Human beings 
— ^buman children especially — seldom deny them- 
selves the pleasure of exercising a power which they 
are conscious of possessing, even though that power 
consist only in a capacity to make others wretched; 
a pupil whose sensations are duller than those of 
his instructor, while his nerves are tougher and 
his bodily strength perhaps greater, has an 
immense advantage over that instructor, and he 



264 THE PROFESSOR. 

will generally use it relendessly, because the very 
young, very healthy, very thoughtless, know 
neither how to sympathize nor how to spare. 
Frances, I fear, suffered much ; a continual weight 
seemed to oppress her spirits ; I have said she did 
not live in the house, and whether in her own 
abode, wherever that might be, she wore the 
same pre-occupied, unsmiling, sorrowfully resolved 
air that always shaded her features tmder the roof 
of Mdlle. Renter, I could not telL 

One day I gave, as a devoir, the trite little 
anecdote of Alfred tending cakes in the herdsman's 
hut, to be related with ampUfications. A singular 
affair most of the pupils made of it ; brevity was 
what they had chiefly studied ; the majority of the 
narratives were perfectly unintelligible; those of 
Sylvie and L6onie Ledru alone pretended to any- 
thing like sense dnd connection. Eulalie, indeed, 
had hit upon a clever expedient for at once 
ensuring accuracy and saving trouble; she had 
obtained access somehow to an abridged history 



THE PROFESSOR. 265 

of England^ and had copied the anecdote out 
fair, I wrote on the margin of her production 
'^ Stupid and deceitful," and then tore it down the 
middle. 

Last inilie pile of single-leaved devoirs, I found 
one of several sheets, neatly written out and 
stitched together ; I knew the hand, and scarcely 
needed the evidence of the signature, "Frances 
Evans Henri," to confirm my conjecture as to the 
writer^s identity. 

Night was my usual time for correcting devoirs, 
tod my own room the usual scene of such task — 
task most onerous hitherto ; and it seemed strange 
to me to feel rising within me an incipient sense of 
interest, as I snufied the candle and addressed 
myself to the perusal of the poor teacher's 
manuscript 

" Now," thought I, « I shall see a glimpse of 
what she really is; I shall get an idea of the 
nature and extent of her powers ; not that she can 
be expected to express herself well in a foreign 



266 THE PBOFESSOIL 

tongue, but still, if she has any mind, here will be 
a reflection of it** 

The narratiTe commenced hj a description of 
a Saxon peasant's hot, litiiated within the confines 
of a great, leafless, winter forest ; it represented 
an evening in December; flakes of snow were 
idling, and the herdsman foretold a heavy storm ; 
be summoned his wife to aid him in collecting 
their flock, roaming far away on the pastoral 
banks of the Thone ; he warns her that it will 
be late ere they return* The good woman is 
reluctant to quit her occupation of baking cakes 
for the evening meal; but acknowledging the 
primary imi)ortance of securing the herds and 
flocks, she puts on her sheep-skin mantle; and, 
addressing a stranger who rests half-reclined on 
a bed of rushes nea^ the hearth, bids him mind 
the bread till her return* 

'* Take care, young man,** she continues, " that 
you fasten the door well after us ; and, above all, 
open to none in our absence ; whatever sound you 



THE FBOFESSOR. 267 

hear^ stir not, and look not out The night will 
soon fall; this forest is most wild and lonely; 
strange noises are often heard therein after snnset ; 
wolves haunt these glades, and Danish warriors 
infest the countrj; worse things are talked of; 
you might chance to hear, as it were, a child cry, 
and on opening the door to afford it succour, a 
great black bull, or a shadowy goblin dog, might 
rush over the threshold) or, more awful still, if 
something flapped, as with wings, against the lattice, 
and then a raven or a white dove flew in and 
settled on the hearth, such a visitor would be 
a sure sign of misfortune to the house; there- 
fore, heed my advice, and lift the latchet for 
nothing." 

Her husband calls her away, both depart. The 
stranger, left alone, listens awhile to the muffled 
snow-wind, the remote, swollen sound of the 
river, and then he speaks. 

** It is Christmas Eve,** says he, " I mark the 
date; here I sit alone on a rude couch of rushes. 



268 THE PBOFESSOB« 

sheltered by the thatch of a herdsman's hat ; I, 
whose, mheritance was a kingdom^ owe mj night^s 
harbourage to a poor serf; my throne is usurped^ 
my crown presses the brow of an invader ; I have 
no friends; my troops wander broken in &e 
hills of Wales ; reckless robbers spoil my country i 
my subjects lie prostrate, their breasts crushed by 
the heel of the brutal Dane. Fate — ^thou hast done 
thy worst, and now thou standest before me resting 
thy hand on thy blunted blade. Ay ; I see thine 
eye confront mine and demand why I still live, 
why I still hope. Pagan demon, I credit not 
thine omnipotence, and so cannot succumb to thy 
power. My God, whose Son, as on this night, 
took on Ilim the form of man, and for man 
vouchsafed to suffer and bleed, controls thy hand, 
and without His behest thou canst not strike a 
stroke. My God is sinless, eternal, all-wiie — ^in 
Him is my trust; and though stripped and crushed 
by thee — though naked, desolate, void of 
resource— I do not despair, I cannot despair : were 



THE PBOFESSOR. 269 

the lance of Guthrum now wet with my blood, 
I should not despair. I watch, I toil, I hope, 
I pray ; Jehovah, in his own time, will aid." 

I need not continue the quotation ; the whole 
devoir was in the same strain. There were errors 
of orthography, there were foreign idioms, there 
were some faults of construction, there were verbs 
irregular transformed into verbs regular ; it was 
mostly made up, as the above example shows, of 
short and somewhat rude sentences, and the style 
stood in great need of polish and sustained dignity'; 
yet such as it was, I had hitherto seen nothing like 
it in the course of my professoral experience. 
The girl's mind had conceived a picture of the 
hut, of the two peasants, of the crownless king ; 
she had imagined the wintry forest, she had 
recalled the old Saxon ghost legends, she had 
appreciated Alfred's courage under calamity, she 
had remembered his Christian education, and had 
shown him, with the rooted confidence of those 
primitive days, relying on the scriptural Jehovah 



270 THE PBOFESSOB. 

for aid against the mythological Destioj* This 
she had done without a hint from me : I had given 
the subject^ but not said a word about the manner 
of treating it 

'^ I will find^ or make^ an opportunity of speaking 
to her^" I said to myself as I rolled the devoir np ; 
'^ I will learn what she has of English in her 
besides the name of Frances Evans; she is no 
novice in the language^ that is evident^ yet she 
told me she had neither been in England^ nor 
taken lessons in English, nor lived in English 

families." 

In the course of my next lesson, I made a report 
of the other devoirs, dealing out praise and blame 
in very small retail parcels, according to my custom, 
for there was no use in blaming severely, and high 
encomiums were rarely merited. I said nothing of 
Mdlle. Henri's exercise, and, spectacles on nose, I 
endeavoured to decipher in her countenance her 
sentiments at the omission. I wanted to find out 
whether in her existed a consciousness of her own 



THE PROFESSOR. 271 

talents. " If she thinks she did a clever thing 
m composing that devoir, she will now look 
mortified," thought I. Grave as usual, almost 
sombre, was her face; as usual her eyes were 
fastened on the cahier open before her ; there was 
something, I thought, of expectation in her attitude 
as I concluded a brief review of the last devoir, 
and when, casting it &om me and rubbing mj 
haiids, I bade them take their grammars, some 
slight change did pass over her air and mien, 
as though she now relinquished a faint prospect 
of pleasant excitement; she had been waiting 
for something to be discussed in which she had 
a degree of interest; the discussion was not 
to come on, so expectation sank back, shrunk 
and sad, but attention, promptly filling up the 
void, repaired in a moment the transient collapse 
of feature ; still, I felt, rather than saw, during 
the whole course of the lesson, that a hope 
had been wrenched from her, and that if she did 
not show distress, it was because she would not 



272 THE PROFESSOB. 

^ At four o'clock^ when the bell rang and the 

room was in immediate tumult^ instead of taking 

my hat and starting from the estrade^ I sat still a 

moment I looked at Frances^ she was putting 

her books into her cabas; having fastened the 

button^ she raised her head ; encountering my eye, 

she made a quiet, respectful obeisance, as bidding 

good afternoon, and was turning to depart : — 

'^ Come here," said I, lifting my finger at the 

« 
same time. She hesitated; she could not hear 

the words amidst the uproar now pervading both 

school-rooms ; I repeated the sign ; she approached, 

again she paused, within half a yard of the 

estrade, and looked shy, and still doubtful whether 

she had mistaken my meaning. 

'* Step up," I said, speaking with decision. It 

is the only way of dealing with diffident, easily 

embarrassed characters, and with some slight 

manual aid I presently got her placed jlist where 

I wanted her to be, that is, between my desk and 

the window, where she was screened from the 



% 



THE PBOFESSOB. 273 

rush of the second division^ and where no one 
could sneak behind her to listen. 

^^ Take a seat^" I said^ placing a tabouret ; and 
I made her sit down. I knew what I was doing 
would be considered a very strange thing, and, 
what was more, I did not care. Frances knew it 
also, and, I fear, by an appearance of agitation and 
trembling, that she cared much. I drew from my 
pocket the rolled-up devoir. 

" This is yours, I suppose ?" said I, addressing 
her in English, for I now felt sure she could speak 
English. 

"Yes," she answered distinctly; and as I 
unrolled it and laid it out flat on the desk before 
her with my hand upon it, and a pencil in that 
hand, I saw her moved, and, as it were, kindled ; 
her depression beamed as a cloud might behind 
which the sun is burning. 

" This devoir has numerous faults," said I. " It 
will take you some years of carefiil stu4y before 
you are in a condition to write English with 

VOL. I. T 



274 THE FBOFBSSOB. 

absolute correctness* Attend; I will point oat 
some principal defects.'* And I went through it 
carefull75 noting every error, and demonstrating 
why they were errors, and how the words or 
phrases ought to have been written. In the 
course of this sobering process she became calm. 
I now went on : — 

**As to the substance of your devoir, Mdlle. 
Henri, it has surprised me; I perused it with 
pleasure, because I saw in it some proofs of taste 
and fancy. Taste and fancy are not the highest 
gifts of the human mind, but such as they are 
you possess them — not probably in a paramount 
degree, but in a degree beyond what the majority 
can boast You may then take courage ; cultivate 
the faculties that God and nature have bestowed 
on you, and do not fear in any crisis of suffering, 
under any pressure of injustice, to derive free and 
full consolation from the consciousness of their 
strength and rarity.'' 

"Strength and rarity!" I repeated to myself; 



THE PROFESSOB. . 275 

**ay, the words are probably true," for on 
looking up, I saw the sun had dissevered its 
screening cloud, her countenance was transfigured, 
a smile shone in her eyes — a smile almost 
triumphant ; it seemed to say — 

" I am glad you have been forced to discover 
so much of my nature ; you need not so carefully 
moderate your language. Do you think I am 
myself a stranger to myself? What you tell me 
in terms so qualified, I have known fully from a 
child." 

She did say this as plainly as a frank and 
flashing glance could, but in a moment the glow 
of her complexion, the radiance of her aspect had 
subsided ; if strongly conscious of her talents, she 
was equally conscious of her harassing defects, 
and the remembrance of these, obliterated for a 
single second, now reviving with sudden force, at 
once subdued the too vivid characters in which 
her sense of her powers had been expressed. So 
quick was the revulsion of feeling, I had not time 



276 THE PBOFEfiSOB. 

* 

to check her triumph by reproof; ere I could 
contract my brows to a frown she had become 
serious^ and ahnost moumful-looking. 

''Thank yoo^ sir^" said she, rising; there was 
gratitude both in her voice and in the look with 
which she accompanied it It was time indeed 
for our conference to terminate^ for, when I 
glanced around, behold all the boarders (the day- 
scholaiv had departed) were congregated within a 
yard or two of my desk, and stood staring with 
eyes and mouths wide open ; the three mattresses 
formed a whispering knot in one comer, and, close 
at my elbow, was the directress, sitting on a low 
c.hair, calmly clipping the tassels of her finished 
purse. 



THE PBOFEBSOB. 277 



CHAPTER XVIL 

After all I had profited but imperfectly by the 
opportunity I had so boldly achieved of speaking 
to Mdlle. Henri ; it was my intention to ask her 
how she came to be possessed of two English 
baptismal names^ Frances and Evans, in addition 
to her French surname^ also whence she derived 
her good accent I had forgotten both points, or, 
rather^ our colloquy had been so brief that I had 
not had time to bring them forward; moreover, 
I had not half tested her powers of speaking 
English; all I had drawn from her in that language 
were the words ^^Yes,** and "Thank you, sir." 
« No matter," I reflected. " What ha* been left 
incomplete now, shall be finished another day." 
Nor did I fail to keep the promise thus made to 



278 THE FB0FE8S0B. 

* 

myself. It was difficult to get even a few words 
of particular conversation with one pupil among 
so many; but, according to the old proverb^ 
" Where there is a will, there is a way;** and 
again and again I managed to find an opportunity 
for exchanging a few words with Mdlle. Henri^ 
regardless that envy stared and detraction whis- 
pered whenever I approached her. 

^' Your book an instant** Such was the mode in 
which I often began these brief dialogues; the 
time was always just at the conclusion of the 
lesson; and motioning to her to rise, I installed 
myself in her place, allowing her to stand deferen- 
tially at^ny side ; for I esteemed.it wise and right 
in her case to enforce strictly all forms ordinarily 
in use between master and papil ; the rather 
because I perceived that in proportion as my 
manner grew austere and magisterial, hers became 
easy and self-possessed — ^an odd contradiction, 
doubtless, to the ordinary effect in such cases ; but 
so it was. 



THE PBOFESSOB. 279 

" A pencil," said I, holding out my hand without 
looking at her. (I am now about to sketch a brief 
report, of the first of those conferences.) She 
gave me one, and while I underlined some 
errors in a grammatical exercise she had written, I 
observed — 

" You are not a native of Belgium?" 

'' No." 

"Nor of France?" 

*' No." 

" Where then is your birth-place ?" 

*^ I was born at Geneva." 

" You don't call Frances and Evans Swiss names, 
I presume?" 

" No, sir ; they are English names." 

" Just so ; and is it the custom of the Genevese 
to give their children English appellatives ?" 

" Non, monsieur ; mais — ^ 

" Speak English, if you please." 

« Mais—" 

" English—" 



280 THE FB0FE8S0IU 

" But — ^ (slowly and with embarrassment) — 
" my parents were not all the two Genevese.** 

'^ Say both, instead of ' all the two/ made- 
moiselle.'' 

^' Not both Swiss : my mother was English." 

" Ah I and of English extraction ? " 

** Yes — ^her ancestors were all English." 

''And your father?" 

*' He was Swiss." 

" What besides ? What was his profession ? " 

*' Ecclesiastic — pastor — he had a church." 

" Since your mother is an Englishwoman, 
why do you not speak English with more 
facility?" 

" Maman est morte, il y a dix ans." 

" And you do homage to her memory by for- 
getting her language. Have the goodness to put 
French out of your mind so long as I converse 
with you — keep to English." 

" O'est si difficile, monsieur, quand on n'en a 
plus r habitude." 



THE PBOFESSOB. 281 

^^You had the habitude fonnerl75 I sup- 
pose? Now answer me in your mother- 
tongue." 

^^ Yes^ sir, I spoke the English more than the 
French when I was a child." 

" Why do you not speak it now ?" 

*^ Because I have no English friends." 

" You live with your father, I suppose?" 

" My father is dead." 

" You have brothers and sisters ? " 

'' Not one." 

** Do you live alone ? " 

" No— I have an aunt — ^ma tante Julienne." 

« Your father's sister ? " 

" Justement, monsieur." 
Is that English ? " 
No— but I forget—" 

" For which, mademoiselle, if you were a child 
I should certainly devise some slight pimishment ; 
at your age — ^you must be two or three and 
twenty, I should think ? " 



(€ 



tc 



282 TEE PBOFESSOB. 

*' Pas encore^ monsieur — on un mois j'aurai dix- 
nouf ans.'' 

'' Woll^ ninetocn is a mature age^ and, having 
attained it^ you ought to be so solicitous for jour 
own improvement^ that it should not be needful 
for a master to remind you twice of the 
expediency of your speaking English whenever 
practicable.'' 

To this wise speech I received no answer ; and, 
when I looked up, my pupil was smiling to her- 
self a much-meaning, though not very gay smile ; 
it seemed to say " He talks of he knows not what: " 
it said tliis so plainly, that I determined to request 
information on the point concerning which my 
ignorance seemed to be thus tacitly affirmed. 

" Are you solicitous for your own improve- 
ment?" 

" Rather." 

" How do you prove it, mademoiselle ? " 

An odd question, and bluntly put ; it excited a 
second smile. 



THE FROFESSOB. 283 

" Why, monsieur, I am not inattentive — am I ? 
I learn my lessons well — ^" 

" Oh, a child can do that ! and what more do 
you do?" 

" What more can I do ? " 

" Oh, certainly, not much ; but you are a 
teacher, are you not, as well as a pupil ?" 

" Yes.'' 

*^ You teach lace-mending ? " 

« Yes." 

" A dull, stupid occupation; do you like it?" 

" No — it is tedious." 

"Why do you pursue it? Why do you not 
rather teach history, geography, grammar, even 
arithmetic?" 

*^ Is Monsieur certain that I am myself 
thoroughly acquainted with these studies?" 

*^ I don't know ; you ought to be at your 
age." 

" But I never was at school, monsieur — ^" 

"Indeed! What then were your friends — 



284 THE PB0FES80B. 

what WBB your aunt about? She is very much to 
blame," 

'^No^ monsieur^ no— my aunt is good — she is 
not to blame — she does what she can ; she lodges 
and nourishes me" (I report Mdlle. Henri's phrases 
literallyi and it was thus she translated from the 
French). ^^She is not rich; she has only an 
annuity of twelve hundred francs^ and it would be 
impossible for her to send me to school" 

" Rather/' thought I to myself on hearing this, 
but I continued, in the dogmatical tone I had 
adopted : — 

" It is sad^ however, that you should be brought 
up in ignorance of the most ordinary branches of 
education; had you known something of history 
and grammar you might, by degrees, have relin- 
quished your lace-mending drudgery, and risen in 
the world." 

" It is what I mean to do." 

'* How ? By a knowledge of English alone ? 
That will not suffice; no respectable family will 



u 



u 



THE PEOFESSOB. 285 

receive a governess whose- whole stock of know- 
ledge consists in a familiarity with one foreign 
language." 

Monsieur, I know other things." 
Yes, yes, you can work with Berlin wools, 
and embroider handkerchiefs and collars — that 
will do little for you." 

Mdlle. Henri's lips were unclosed to answer, 
but she checked herself, as thinking the discussion 
had been sufficiently pursued, and remained silent 

" Speak," I continued impatiently ; « I never 
like the appearance of acquiescence when the 
reality is not there, and you had a contradiction at 
your tongue's end." 

" Monsieur, I have had many lessons both in 
grammar, history, geography, and arithmetic. 
I have gone through a course of each study." 

" Bravo I but how did you manage it, since 
your aunt could not afford to send you to school?" 

" By lace-mending ; by the thing Monsieur 
despises so much." 



286 THE PBOTESSOB. 

« Truly I And now, mademoiselle, it will be 
a good exercise for you to explain to me in 
English how such a result was produced by such 
means.'' 

" Monsieur, I begged my aunt to hare me 
taught lace-mending soon after we came to 
Brussels, because I knew it was a metier, a trade 
which was easily learnt, and by which I cotild 
cam some money very soon. I learnt it in a few 
days, and I quickly got work, for all the Brussels 
ladies have old lace — very precious — ^which must 
be mended all the times it is washed. I earned 
money a little, and tliis money I gave for lessons 
in the studies I have mentioned ; some of it I spent 
in buying books, English books especially; soon 
I shall try to find a place of governess, or school- 
teacher, when I can write and speak English well ; 
but it will be difficult, because those who know I 
have been a lace-mender will despise me, as the 
pupils here despise me. Pourtant j'ai mon projet,** 
she added in a lower tone. 



THE PEOPESSOK. 287 

"What is it?" 

" I will go and live in England ; I will teach 
French there." 

The words were pronounced emphatically. She 
said " England" as you might suppose an Israelite 
of Moses' days would have said Canaan. 

" Have you a wish to see England ?" 

" Yes, and an intention." 

And here a voice, the voice of the directress, 
interposed : — 

" Mademoiselle Henri, je crois qu'il va pleuvoir ; 
vous feriez bien, ma bonne amie, de retoumer chez 
vous tout de suite."" 

In silence, without a word of thanks for this 
officious warning, Mdlle. Henri collected her 
books; she moved to me re^pectfully, endeavoured 
to move to her superior, though the endeavour 
was almost a failure, for her head seemed as if it 
would not bend, and thus departed. 

Where there is one grain of perseverance or 
wilfulness in the composition, trifling obstacles are 



288 THE PBOFESSOIU 

ever known rather to stimulate than discourage. 
Mdllc. lieuter might as well have spared herself 
the trouble of giving that intimation about the 
weatlicr (by-the-by her prediction was falsified 
by the event — it did not rain that evening). 
At the close of the next lesson I was again 
at Mdlle. Henri's desk. Thus did I accost 
her: — 

^* What is your idea of England^ mademoiselle ? 
Why do you wish to go tliere ?" 

Accustomed by this time to the calculated 
abru])tneHH of my manner^ it no longer discomposed 
or Hurprised her^ and she answered with only so 
mucli of hesitation {is was rendered inevitable by 
the (liiliculty she exi)erienced in im])roviHing the 
translation of lier thoughts from French to 
English. 

*' England is something unique^ as I have 
heard and read ; my idea of it is vague^ and 
I want to go there to render my idea clear, 
definite." 



THE PBOFESSOIU 289 

" Ham ! How much of England do you sup- 
pose you could see if you went there in the 
capaxjity of a teacher? A strange notion you 
must have of getting a clear and definite idea of a 
country I All you could see of Great Britain 
would be the interior of a school, or at most of one 
or two private dwellings. ** 

" It would be an English school ; they would be 
English dwellings." 

" Indisputably ; but what then ? What would 
be the value of observations made on a scale so 
narrow?" 

" Monsieur, might not one learn something by 
analogy? An — ^^hantillon — a — a sample often 
serves to give an idea of the whole; besides, 
narrow and wide are words comparative, are 
they not? All my life would perhaps seem 
narrow in your eyes — all the life of a — that little 
animal subterranean — ^une taupe — comment dit- 
on?" 

" Mole." 

VOL. L U 



290 JHE PBOFESSOIU 

" Yes — a mole, which lives underground^ would 
seem narrow even to me, 

" Well, mademoiselle — what then? Proceed.** 
" Mais, monsieur, vous me comprenez.** 
^^Not in the least; have the goodness to 
explain,'' 

" Why, monsieur, it is just so. In Switzerland 
I liave done but little, learnt but little, and seen 
but little ; my life there was in a circle ; I walked 
the same round every day ; I could not get out of 
it; had I rested — remained there even till my 
death, I should never have enlarged it, because I 
am poor and not skilful, I have not great acquire- 
ments; when I was quite tired of this round, I 
begged my aunt to go to Brussels ; my existence 
Js no larger here, because I am no richer or 
higher; I walk in as narrow a limit, but the 
scene is changed; it would change again if 
I went to England. I knew something of the 
bourgeois of Geneva, now I know something 
of the bourgeois of Brussels; if I went to 



THE PROFESSOK. 291 

London, I should' know something of' the 
bourgeois of London. Can you make any 
sense out of what I say, monsieur, or is it all 
obscure?" 

"I see, I see — now let us advert to another 
subject; you propose to devote your life to 
teaching, and you are a most unsuccessful teacher; 
you cannot keep your pupils in order.^ 

A flush of painful confusion was the result of 
this harsh remark ; she bent her head to the desk, 
but soon raising it, replied — 

"Monsieur, I am not a skilful teacher, it is 
true, but practice improves; besides, I work 
under difficulties; here I only teach sewing, 
I can show no power in sewing, no supe- 
riority — it is a subordinate art; then I have 
no associates in this house, I am isolated; 
I am too a heretic, which deprives me of 
influence." 

"And in England you would be a foreigner; 
that too would deprive you of influence. 



292 THE PROFESSOR. 

would effectually separate you from all ronnd 
you; In England you would have as few- 
connections, as little importance as you have 
here." 

^'But I should be learning something; for the 
rest, there are probably difficulties for such as I 
everywhere, and if I must contend, and perhaps 
.be conquered, I would rather submit to English 
pride than to Flemish coarseness; besides, mon- 
sieur .'* 

She stopped — ^not evidently from any di£Ei- 
culty in finding words to express herself, but 
because discretion seemed to say, "You have 
said enough." 

" Finish your phrase," I urged. 

" Besides, monsieur, I long to live once more 
among Protestants; they are more honest than 
Catholics; a Romish school is a building with 
porous walls, a hollow floor, a false ceiling ; every 
room in this house, monsieur, has eye-holes 
and ear-holes, and what the house is, the 



THE PBOFESSOB. 293 

inhabitants are, very treacherous; they all 
think it lawful to tell lies; they all call it 
politeness to profess friendship where they feel 
hatred." 

"All?" said I; "you mean the pupils — the 
mere children— inexperienced, giddy things, who 
have not learnt to distinguish the difference 
between right and wrong?" 

" On the contrary, monsieur — the children are 
the most sincere; they have not yet had time to 
become accomplished in duplicity; they will tell 
lies, but they do it inartificially, and you know 
they are lying ; but the grown-up people are very 
false; they deceive strangers, they deceive each 
other ." 

A servant here entered : — 

"Mdlle, Henri — Mdlle. Renter vous prie de 
vouloir bien conduire la petite de Dorlodot chez 
elle, elle vous attend dans le cabinet de Rosalie la 
portiire — c'est que sa bonne n'est pas venue la 
chercher — voyez-vous," 



294 THE PB0FES80B. 

" Eh bien I est-ce que je buIb sa bonne — ^moi ?** 
demanded Mdlle. Henri^ then Bmilmg, with that 
game bitter^ derisive smile I had seen on her 
lips once before, she hastily rose and made her 
exit 



END OP VOL. I. 



London t Printed by Smitu, Eli^ku & Co., Little Green AilKmr Coort, £.0. 



Just published, in Two Volumes^ Post Svo, with a Portrait of 
Miss BrontS and a View of Haworth Church and Par" 
sonage. Price 24^., chth, 

THE SECOND EDITION OF 

THE LIFE OE CHARLOTTE BRONTE, 

AUTHOR OF 

"jane eyre," "shirley," "villette," &c. 
By Mrs. GASKELL, 

AUTHOR OF 

"MARY BARTON," "RUTH," "NORTH AND SOUTH." 



" It is rarely that we find a portrait of literary character 
with such a remarkable setting, and as rare to find an author 
whose works are so popular, so vivid, and distinctive, and 
whose personal history was so utterly unknown. A sister 
authoress, gifted herself with superior powers, has described 
with true woman's sympathy and eagerness the whole course 
of the life which is now closed for ever. We regard the record 
as a monument of courage and endurance, of suffering and 
triumph. . ' . . . All the secrets of the literary work- 
manship of the authoress of * Jane Eyre' are unfolded in the 
course of this extraordinary narrative." — Times, 

. " Mrs. Gaskell has done her work well. Her narrative is 
simple, direct, intelligible, unaffected. She dwells on her 
friend's character with womanly tact, thorough understand- 
ing, and delicate sisterly tenderness. The extracts from the 
letters are excellently selected, and they are remarkable 
letters — as the letters of the most remarkable woman of the 
age could not fail to be. Many parts of the book cannot be 

read without deep, even painful emotion; still it is a life 

always womanly." — Fraser^s Magazine, 

"The story of a woman's life, unfolded in this book, is 
calculated to make the old feel young and the young old. 

... By all this book will be read with interest 

Mrs. Gaskell has produced one of the best biographies of a 
woman by a woman which we can recall to mind." — AthcMBum, 



^'Thoronf^hly well and artistically hai the work beeo 
accomplished ; an informing method presides over the whole ; 
there is no feebleness or redundancy; every drcumttance 
has a direct bearing on the main object of painting, vigorously 
and accurately, a real picture of the woman as she was.** — 
Daily Newit, 

^ The profound pathos, the tragic interest of this book, lies 
in the terrible Htruggle that life was to a woman endowed with 
Charlotte Bronte's conscientiousness, affection for her fkmily, 
and literary ambition, and continually curbed and thrown 
back by physical wretchedness. Its moral is, the unconquer- 
able strength of genius and goodness/' — Spectator, 

''Mrs. Gaskcll's 'Life of Charlotte BrontS' hat placed her 
on a level with the best biographers of any country. It is a 

truthful and beautiful work No one can read it without 

feeling strengthened and purified." — Globe, 

** If any one wishes to see how a woman possessed of the 
highest intellectual power can disregard every temptation 
wiiich intellect throws in the way of women — how generonaly 
and nobly a human being can live under the pressure of 
accumulated misfortunes — the record is at hand in the life of 
Charlotte Bronte;." — Saturday lieinew. 

"We have before us the life of a truly great and noble 
woman, written by one who has sufficient moral sympathy to 
underntand her character, and sufHcient intelle<!tiial insight 
to appreciate her genius. Such a work cannot fail to be of 
the de(;pe8t interest ; and it has a special interest for female 
readers," — EayrumiiHi, 

" These volumes supply ample information respecting the 
author of * Jane FJyre. The life itself possijsscs a tearful 
interest, that deepens as it advances towards its close : it is 
singularly touching, and sinks into the heart of the reader.** — 
Literary Gazette. 

" We can be sincere in the praise of this book, and have 
been ofUm touched by the tone of loving sympathy in which 
it is written." — Examiner. 

" The wliole strange and pathetic story of the Bronte^ family 
is faithfully told in Mrs. (jraskeirs memoir. She docs her friend 
Charlotte 15ronte full justice."— CVi7m7. 



LONDON : BMITU, ELDER & Co., 65, CORNIDLL. 



i 




