Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


xihX5'^^'^ 


HARVARD 

COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 


;ib. 


SHIRLEY. 


%,  ®al«. 


By   CUEREB   bell, 

AUTEOR    OF    "JAI^B    EYKB,"    **  VILLBTTB,"     "THE    PROFESSOB," 


ETC.   ETC. 


A    NEW    EDITION. 


LONDON: 
SMITH,  ELDER  AND   CO.,   15  WATERLOO   PLACE. 

1873. 


HARVARD 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


( 


7  t'») 


^0> 


CONTENTS. 


PAQfl 

L— -Lbvitical        •          •          •          .          •  1 

n.— Thb  WAOQoim      .          •          .      *•          .  13 

lEL — ^Mb  Yoekb       •           •           •           <           (  27 

IVw— Mb  Yoekb  (continued)     •  «  •  ,35 

V«r— Hollow's  Cottage.    •           •          «        *  ^  45 

YL— COBIOLANT78                .               •               ,              .               «  59 

TIL— Thb  Cubatbs  at  Tba                      «  77 
VnL— Noah  ahd  Mosbb            •          •          •          .101 

PL— BbT  A  RM  ATWB      •               •               »            .«      .         •  116 

X — Old  Maidb            .           •          <           •  136 

XL — ^FlBLDHBAD       •               •              «               •              «  152 

Zn. — Shiblet  and  Cabolinb              .           •           ,  168 

XnL — ^FUBTHBB  COHXTTNICATIONB  ON  BUSINESS         •  188 

JLLV  .^Shiblet  siteKS  to  bb  sated  bt  Wobkb  •  212 

XV.— Mb  Donne*8  Exodus       •          •          •          •  224 

XVX— Whitsuntidb            •           .           .           .  237 

XVn.— Thb  Sghool-Fbast          ....  247 

JLYUJL— Which  thb  Gentebl  Bbadeb  is  recomxbnded 

to  skip*  low  Persons  being  herb  intbo- 

DUCED         .            •            •            •            •  262 

XDCv— A  ScMMBR  Night           •          •          •          •  273 

XX— To-MoBBow              •          •          •          .     '  288 

XXL— Mbs  Fbtob           a          •                     •          •  299 

^Xlf. — ^TWO  LlYES       •              •              •             •             •  815 
JLJLLlL-^Aa  BVENING  OUT               •             •             .             .824 

Xjuy. — ^Thb  Yallbt  or  thb  Shadow  of  Death  343 

XXYw^Tbi  Wbst  Wind  Blows     •          ,          ,  SdO 


IV  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTEB  ^Mtn 

XXVI.— Old  Copy-Bookb              .                      .           .  867 

XXVn. — ^Thb  Fisst  Blttb-Stockiito             •           •  S8A 

XXVUL—PHiEBB 405 

XXIX. — ^Louis  MooRB              .•          •           .           •  425 

4 

XXX. — BUSHEDGB,  A  COKFESSIONAL          .               .               •  432 

XXXI. — ^Unclb  and  Nibcb     .    -      .«           •           •  446 

XXxil. — Thb  Schoolboy  and  thb  Wood-Ntkph        •  461 

XXXm.— Mabtin's  Taotios     ....  472 
Xxxiv. — Casb   of   Dohbstio   Fbbsecution. — Rbhabk- 
ABLB  Instai^ob  of-Pious  Febseyerancb  in 

THB  Dischabgb  OF  Belioious  Duties         .  482 
XXXV.— Wherein  Mattbbs  hake  somb  Pboobbss.  but 

NOT  MUCH                   ....  489 

XXXVL— Written  in  thb  Sohoolboom   .           •           .  •  fiOl 

XXXVIL— Thb  Winding-up       ....  521 


8  HI  B  LEY. 


CHAPTER    I. 

LEVITICAL. 


Of  late  years,  an  abundant  shower  of  curates  has  fallen  upon 
the  north  of  England :  they  lie  very  thick  on  the  hills ;  every 
jparish  has  one  or  more  of  them ;  they  are  yoimg  enough  to 
be  very  active,  and  ought  to  be  doing  a  great  deal  of  good. 
But  not  of  late  years  are  we  about  to  speak ;  we  are  going 
back  to  the  beginning  of  this  century :  late  years — ^present 
years  are  dusty,  sun-burnt,  hot,  arid ;  we  will  evade  the  noon, 
forget  it  in  siesta,  pass  the  mM-day  in  slumber,  and  dream  of 
dawn. 

If  you  think,  from  this  prelude,  that  anything  like  a 
romance  is  preparing  for  you,  reader,  you  never  were  more- 
mistaken.  Do  you  anticipate  sentiment,  and  poetry,  and 
reverie  ?  Do  you  expect  passion,  and  stimulus,  and  melodrama  ? 
Calm  your  expectations ;  reduce  them  to  a  lowly  standard. 
Somethmg  real,  cool,  and  solid,  lies  before  you;  something 
unromantic  as  Monday  morning,  when  all  who  have  work 
wake  with  the  consciousness  that  they  must  rise  and  betake 
themselves  thereto.  It  is  not  positively  affirmed  that  you 
shall  not  have  a  taste  of  the  exciting,  perhaps  towards  the 
middle  and  close  of  the  meal,  but  it  is  resolved  that  the  first 
dish  set  upon  the  table  shall  be  one  that  a  Catholic — ay,  even 
an  Anglo-Catholic — might  eat  on  Good  Friday  in  Passion 
Week :  it  shall  be  cold  lentils  and  vinegar  without  oil ;  it  shall 
be  unleavened  bread  with  bitter  herbs,  and  no  roast  lamb. 

Of  late  years,  I  say,  an  abundant  shower  of  curates  has 
fEdlen  upon  the  north  of  England ;  but  in  eighteen-hundred- 
eleven-twelve  that  affluent  rain  had  not  descended:  curates 
were  scarce  then :  there  was  no  Pastoral  Aid — ^no  Additional 
Curates'  Society  to  stretch  a  helping  hand  to  worn-out  old 
lectors  and  incumbents,  and  give  them  the  wherewithal  to  pay 
a  vigorous  young  colleague  &om  Oxford  or  Cambridge.  The 
present  successors  of  the  apostles,  disciples  of  Dr  Pusey  and 


Z  SHIKLET. 

tools  of  the  Propaganda,  were  at  that  time  being  Hatclied  undex 
cradle-blankets,  or  undergoing  regeneration  by  nursery-baptism 
in  wasb-hand-basins.  You  could  not  have  guessed  by  looking 
at  any  one  of  them  that  the  Italian-ironed  double  fiills  of  its 
net-cap  surrounded  the  brows  of  a  pre-ordained,  specially 
sanctified  successor  of  St  Paul,  St  Peter,  or  St  John ;  nor 
could  you  have  foreseen  in  the  folds  of  its  long  night-gown  the 
white  surplice  in  which  it  was  hereafter  cruelly  to  exercise  the 
souls  of  its  parishioners,  and  strangely  to  nonplus  its  old- 
fashioned  vicar  by  flourishing  aloft  in  a  pulpit  ike  shirt-like 
raiment  which  had  never  before  waved  higher  than  the  read- 
ing-desk. 

Yet  even  in  those  days  of  scarcity  there  were  curates  :  the 
precious  plant  was  rare,  but  it  might  be  found.  A  certain 
favoured  district  in  the  West  Riding  of  Yorkshire  could  boast 
thr^e  rods  of  Aaron  blossoming  within  a  circuit  of  twenty  miles. 
You  shall  see  them,  reader.  Step  into  this  neat  garden-house 
on  the  skirts  of  Whinbury,  walk  forward  into  the  little  par- 
lour— ^there  they  are  at^  diiiner.  Allow  me  to  introduce  them 
to  you : — Mr  Donne,  curate  of  Whinbury ;  Mr  Malone,  curate 
of  Briarfield ;  Mr  Sweeting,  curate  of  Nunnely.  These  are 
Mr  Donne^s  lodgings,  being  the  habitation  of  one  John  Gale,  a 
small  clothier.  Mr  Donne  has  kindly  invited  his  brethren  to 
regale  with  him.  You  and  I  will  join  the  party,  see  what  is  to 
be  seen,  and  hear  what  is  to  be  heard.  At  present,  however, 
they  are  only  eating  ;  and  while  they  eat  we  will  talk  aside. 

These  gentlemen  are  in  the  bloom  of  youth ;  they  possess 
all  the  activity  of  that  interesting  age — an  activity  wluch  their 
moping  old  vicars  would  fain  turn  into  the  chaimel  of  their 
pastoral  duties,  oft;en  expressing  a  wish  to  see  it  expended  in  a 
diligent  superintendence  of  the  schools,  and  in  frequent  visits 
to  the  sick  of  their  respective  parishes.  But  the  youthful 
Levites  feel  this  to  be  dull  work  ;  they  prefer  lavishmg  their 
energies  on  a  course  of  proceeding,  which,  though  to  other  eyes 
it  appear  more  heavy  vnih.  ennui,  more  cursed  with  monotony, 
than  the  toil  of  the  weaver  at  his  loom,  seems  to  yield  them 
an  xmfailing  supply  of  enjoyment  and  occupation^ 

I  aUude  to  a  rushing  backwards  and  forwards,  amongst 
themselves,  to  and  from  their  respective  lodgings  :  not  a  round 
•»— but  a  triangle  of  visits,  which  they  keep  up  all  the  year 
through,  in  winter,  spring,  summer,  and  autumn.  Season  and 
weather  make  no  diflerence  ;  with  imintelligible  zeal  they  dare 
snow  and  haiL|  wind  and  rain,  mire  and  dust,  to  go  and  dine. 


'levttical.  8 

or  drink  tea,  or  sup  with  each  other.  What  attracts  them,  it 
would  be  difficult  to  say.  It  is  not  friendship  ;  for  whenever 
they  meet  they  quarrel.  It  is  not  religion  ;  the  thing  is  never 
named  amongst  them :  theology  they  may  discuss  occasionally, 
but  piety — ^never.  It  is  not  the  love  of  eating  and  drinking ; 
each  might  have  as  good  a  joint  and  pudding,  tea  as  potent, 
and  toast  as  succulent,  at  his  own  lodgings,  as  is  served  to  him 
at  his  brother's.  Mrs  Gale,  Mrs  Hogg,  and  Mrs  Whipp^ 
their  respective  landladies — affirm  that  "  it  is  just  for  nought 
else  but  to  give  folk  trouble."  By  "  folk,"  the  good  ladies  of 
course  mean  themselves  ;  for  indeed  they  are  kept  in  a  con- 
tinual "  fry  "  by  this  system  of  mutual  invasion. 

Mr  Donne  and  his  guests,  as  I  have  said,  are  at  dinner ; 
Mrs  Gale  waits  on  them,  but  a  spark  of  the  hot  kitchen  fire  is 
in  her  eye.  She  considers  that  the  privilege  of  invfting  a 
friend  to  a  meal  occasionally,  without  additional  charge  (a 
privilege  included  in  the  terms  on  which  she  lets  her  lodgings), 
has  been  quite  sufficiently  exercised  of  late.  The  present 
week  is  yet  but  at  Thursday,  and  on  Monday,  Mr  Malone,  the 
curate  of  Briarfield,  came  to  breakfast  and  stayed  dinner ;  on 
Tuesday,  Mr  Malone  and  Mr  Sweeting  of  Nunnely,  came  to 
tea,  remained  to  supper,  occupied  the  spare  bed,  and  favoured 
her  with  their  company  to  breakfast  on  Wednesday  morning ; 
now,  on  Thursday,  they  are  both  here  at  dinner,  and  she  is 
ahnost  certain  they  will  stay  all  night.  "  C'en  est  trop,"  she 
would  say,  if  she  could  speak  Frendi. 

Mr  Sweeting  is  mincing  the  slice  of  roast-beef  on  his  plate^ 
and  complaining  that  it  is  very  tough ;  Mr  Donne  says  the 
beer  is  flat.  Ay  1  that  is  the  worst  of  it :  if  they  would  only 
be  civil,  Mrs  Gale  wouldn't  mind  it  so  much  ;  if  they  would 
only  seem  satisfied  with  what  they  get,  she  wouldn't  care,  but 
^' these  young  parsons  is  so  high  and  so  scornful,  they  set 
everybody  breath  their  *fit:'  they  treat  her  with  less  than 
civility,  just  because  she  doesn't  keep  a  servant,  but  does  the 
work  of  the  house  herself,  as  her  mother  did  afore  her :  then 
they  are  always  speaking  against  Yorkshire  ways  and  York- 
Bhire  folk,"  and  by  that  very  token  Mrs  Gale  does  not  believe 
<me  of  them  to  be  a  real  gentleman,  or  come  of  gentle  kin.  '^  The 
old  parsons  is  worth  die  whole  limip  of  college  lads ;  they 
know  what  belangs  to  good  manners,  and  is  kind  to  high  and 
low." 

"  More  bread  I"  cries  Mr  Malone,  in  a  tone  which,  though 
proloDged  but  to  utter  two  syllables,  proclaims  him  at  onoe  a 


Z  SHIKLET. 

tools  of  the  Propaganda,  were  at  that  time  being  hatched  under 
cradle-blankets,  or  undergoing  regeneration  by  nursery-baptism 
in  wash-hand-basins.  You  could  not  have  guessed  by  looking 
at  any  one  of  them  that  the  Italian-ironed  double  fiills  of  its 
net-cap  surrounded  the  brows  of  a  pre-ordained,  specially 
fianctified  successor  of  St  Paul,  St  Peter,  or  St  Jolm  ;  nor 
could  you  have  foreseen  in  the  folds  of  its  long  night-gown  the 
white  surplice  in  which  it  was  hereafter  cruelly  to  exercise  the 
souls  of  its  parishioners,  and  strangely  to  nonplus  its  old- 
fashioned  vicar  by  flourishing  aloft  in  a  pulpit  the  shirt-like 
raiment  which  had  never  before  waved  higher  than  the  read- 
ing-desk. 

Yet  even  in  those  days  of  scarcity  there  were  ciu'ates  :  the 
precious  plant  was  rare,  but  it  might  be  found.  A  certain 
favoured  district  in  the  West  Riding  of  Yorkshire  could  boast 
thr^e  rods  of  Aaron  blossoming  within  a  circuit  of  twenty  miles. 
You  shall  see  them,  reader.  Step  into  this  neat  garden-house 
on  the  skirts  of  Wliinbury,  walk  forward  into  the  litjtle  par- 
lour— ^there  they  are  A\  dinner.  Allow  me  to  introduce  them 
to  yon  : — Mr  Donne,  curate  of  Whinbury;  Mr  Malone,  curate 
of  Briarfield ;  Mr  Sweeting,  curate  of  Nunnely.  These  are 
Mr  Donne^s  lodgings,  being  the  habitation  of  one  John  Gale,  a 
small  clothier.  Mr  Donne  has  kindly  invited  his  brethren  to 
regale  with  him.  You  and  I  will  join  the  party,  see  what  is  to 
be  seen,  and  hear  what  is  to  be  heard.  At  present,  however, 
they  are  only  eating  ;  and  while  they  eat  we  will  talk  aside. 

These  gentlemen  are  in  the  bloom  of  youth ;  they  possess 
all  the  activity  of  that  interesting  age — ^an  activity  wluch  their 
moping  old  vicars  would  fain  turn  into  the  chaimel  of  their 
pastoral  duties,  often  expressing  a  wish  to  see  it  expended  in  a 
diligent  superintendence  of  the  schools,  and  in  frequent  visits 
to  the* sick  of  their  respective  parishes.  But  the  youthful 
Levites  feel  this  to  be  dull  work  ;  they  prefer  lavishing  their 
energies  on  a  course  of  proceeding,  which,  though  to  other  eyes 
it  appear  more  heavy  with  ennui,  more  cursed  with  monotony, 
than  the  toil  of  the  weaver  at  his  loom,  seems  to  yield  thena 
an  unfailing  supply  of  enjojnaaent  and  occupation^ 

I  aUiide  to  a  rushing  backwards  and  forwards,  amongst 
themselves,  to  and  from  their  respective  lodgings  :  not  a  round 
■»— but  a  triangle  of  visits,  which  they  keep  up  all  the  year 
through,  in  winter,  spring,  summer,  and  autumn.  Season  and 
weather  make  no  difierence  :  with  unintelligible  zeal  they  dare 
flnow  and  hail,  wind  and  rain,  mire  and  dust,  to  go  and  diae, 


LEVITIGAL,  S 

or  drink  tea,  or  sup  with  each  other.  What  attracts  them,  it 
would  be  difficult  to  say.  It  is  not  friendship  ;  for  whenever 
they  meet  they  quarrel.  It  is  not  religion  ;  the  thing  is  never 
named  amongst  them :  theology  they  may  discuss  occasionally, 
but  piety — ^never.  It  is  not  the  love  of  eating  and  drinking ; 
each  might  have  as  good  a  joint  and  pudding,  tea  as  potent, 
and  toast  as  succulent,  at  his  own  lodgings,  as  is  served  to  him 
at  his  brother's.  Mrs  Grale,  Mrs  Hogg,  and  Mrs  Whipp— 
their  respective  landladies — affirm  that  "  it  is  just  for  nought 
else  but  to  give  folk  trouble."  By  "  folk,"  the  good  ladies  of 
course  mean  themselves  5  for  indeed  they  are  kept  in  a  con- 
tinual "  fiy  "  by  this  system  of  mutual  invasion. 

Mr  Donne  and  his  guests,  as  I  have  said,  are  at  dinner ; 
Mrs  Gale  waits  on  them,  but  a  spark  of  the  hot  kitchen  fire  is 
in  her  eye.  She  considers  that  the  privilege  of  invfting  a 
Mend  to  a  meal  occasionally,  without  additional  charge  (a 
privilege  included  in  the  terms  on  which  she  lets  her  lodgings), 
has  been  quite  sufficiently  exercised  of  late.  The  present 
week  is  yet  but  at  Thursday,  and  on  Monday,  Mr  Malone,  the 
curate  of  Briarfield,  came  to  breakfast  and  stayed  dinner ;  on 
Tuesday,  Mr  Malone  and  Mr  Sweeting  of  Nunnely,  came  to 
tea,  remained  to  supper,  occupied  the  spare  bed,  and  favoured 
her  with  their  company  to  breakfast  on  Wednesday  morning  ; 
now,  on  Thursday,  they  are  both  here  at  dinner,  and  she  is 
almost  certain  they  will  stay  all  night.  "  C'en  est  trop,"  she 
would  say,  if  she  could  speak  French. 

Mr  Sweeting  is  mincing  the  slice  of  roast-beef  on  his  plate; 
and  complaining  that  it  is  very  tough ;  Mr  Donne  says  the 
beer  is  flat.  Ay  1  that  is  the  worst  of  it :  if  they  would  only 
be  civil,  Mrs  Gale  wouldn't  mind  it  so  much  ;  if  they  would 
only  seem  satisfied  with  what  they  get,  she  wouldn't  care,  but 
^' these  young  parsons  is  so  high  and  so  scornful,  they  set 
everybody  beneath  their  *fit:'  they  treat  her  with  less  than 
civility,  just  because  she  doesn't  keep  a  servant,  but  does  the 
work  of  the  house  herself,  as  her  mother  did  afore  her :  then 
they  are  always  speaking  against  Yorkshire  ways  and  York- 
shire folk,"  and  by  that  very  token  Mrs  Gale  does  not  believe 
one  of  them  to  be  a  real  gentleman,  or  come  of  gentle  kin.  '^  The 
old  parsons  is  worth  &e  whole  liunp  of  college  lads ;  they 
know  what  belangs  to  good  manners,  and  is  kind  to  high  and 
low." 

** More  bread!"  cries  Mr  Malone,  in  a  tone  which,  though 
prolonged  but  to  titter  two  syllables,  proclaims  him  at  onoe  a 


6  •  8HIBLET* 

being  the  native  of  a  conquered  land.  He  menaced  rebellion 
in  the  name  of  his  "  counthry)"  vented  bitter  hatred  against 
English  rule ;  they  spoke  of  rags,  beggary,  and  pestilence. 
The  little  parlour  was  in  an  uproar;  you  would  have  thought 
a  duel  must  follow  such  virulent  abuse ;  it  seemed  a  wonder 
that  Mr  and  Mrs  Gale  did  not  take  alarm  at  the  noise,  and 
send  for  a  constable  to  keep  the  peace.  But  they  were  accus- 
tomed to  such  demonstrations ;  they  well  knew  that  the  curates 
never  dined  or  took  tea  together  without  a  little  exercise  of 
the  sort,  and  were  quite  easy  as  to  consequences;  knowing 
that  these  clerical  quarrels  were  as  harmless  as  they  were 
noi«y ;  that  they  resulted  in  nothing;  and  that,  on  whatever 
terms  the  curates  miffht  part  to-niffht,  thev  would  be  sure  to 
meet  the  best  Mends  in  the  w}d  t3-morrow  morning. 

As  the  worthy  ,pair  were  sitting  by  their  kitchen  fire, 
listening  to  the  repeated  and  sonorous  contact  of  Malone's 
fist  with  the  mahogany  plane  of  the  parlour  table,  and  to  the 
consequent  start  and  jingle  of  decanters  and  glasses  following 
each  assault,  to  the  mocking  laughter  of  the  allied  English 
disputants,  and  the  stuttering  declamation  of  the  isolated 
Hibernian, — as  they  thus  sat,  a  foot  was  heard  on  the  outer 
door-step,  and  the  knocker  quivered  to  a  sharp  appeal.     * 

Mr  Gale  went  and  opened. 

"  Whom  have  you  up-stairs  in  the  parlour?"  asked  a  voice; 
a  rather  remarkable  voice,  nasal  in  tone,  abrupt  in  utterance. 

"  Oh  I  Mr  Helstone,  ialTyou,  sir?  I  could  hardly  see  you 
for  the  darkness ;  it  is  so  soon  dark  now.  Will  you  walk 
in,  sir?" 

"  I  want  to  know  first  whether  it  is  worth  my  while  walking 
in.    Whom  have  you  up-stairs  ?  " 

"  The  curates,  sir ! " 

"What!  all  of  them  I" 

"  Yes,  sir." 

"  Been  dining  here?" 

"  Yes,  sir." 

"  That  wiU  do." 

With  these  words  a  person  entered — a  middle-aged  man,  in 
black.  He  walked  straight  across  the  kitchen  to  an  inner 
door,  opened  it,  inclined  his  head  forward,  and  stood  listening. 
There  was  something  to  listen  to,  for  the  noise  above  was  just 
then  louder  than  ever. 

"Hey!"  he  ejaculated  to  himself;  then  turning  to  Mr 
Gale—"  Have  you  often  this  sort  of  work  ?  " 


LEVITIGAL.  7 

Mr  Gale  had  been  a  clmrcliwardeii,  and  was  indulgent  to 
the  clergy. 

"  They're  young,  you  know,  sir — ^they  're  young,"  said  he, 
deprecatingly. 

"  Young  1  They  want  caning.  Bad  boys — ^bad  boys !  and 
if  you  were  a  Dissenter,  John  Gale,  instead  of  being  a  good 
Churclunan,  they'd  do  the  like — ^they'd  expose  themselves: 
but  m ^" 

By  way  of  finish  to  this  sentence,  he  passed  through  the 
inner  door,  drew  it  afber  him,  and  moimted  the  stair.  Again 
he  listened  a  few  minutes  when  he  arrived  at  the  upper  room. 
Making  entrance  without  warning,  he  stood  before  the  curates. 

And  they  were  silent ;  they  were  transfixed ;  and  so  was 
the  invader.  He — a  personage  short  of  stature,  but  straight 
of  port,  and  bearing  on  broad  shoulders  a  haWk's  head,  beak, 
and  eye,  the  whole  surmounted  by  a  Rehoboam,  or  shovel-hat, 
which  he  did  not  seem  to  think  it  necessary  to  lift  or  remove 
before  the  presence  in  which  he  then  stood — he  folded  his 
anns  on  his  chest  and  surveyed  his  young  Mends — ^if  friends 
they  were — ^much  at  his  leisure. 

"Whatl"  he  began,  delivering  his  words  in  a  voice  no 
longer  nasal,  but  deep — more  than  deep — a  voice  made  pur- 
posely hollow  and  cavernous ;  "  What !  has  the  miracle  of 
Pentecost  been  renewed?  Have  the  cloven  tongues  come 
down  again  ?  Where  are  they  ?  The  soimd  filled  the  whole 
house  just  now.  I  heard  the  Hirenteen  languages  in  fall 
action  :^arthians,  and  Medes,  and  Elamites,  the  dwellers  in 
Mesopotamia,  and  in  Judea,  and  Cappadocia,  in  Pontus  and 
Asia,  Phrygia  and  Pamphylia,  in  Egypt  and  in  the  parts  of 
Libya  about  Gyrene,  strangers  of  Eome,  Jews  and  proselytes, 
Cretes  and  Arabians ;  every  one  of  these  must  have  had  its 
representative  in  this  room  two  minutes  since." 

"I  beg  your  pardon,  Mr  Helstone,"  began  Mr  Donne; 
"  take  a  seat,  pray,  sir.     Have  a  glass  of  wine  ?" 

His  civilities  received  no  answer :  the  falcon  in  the  black 
coat  proceeded : — 

"  What  do  I  talk  about  the  gift  of  tongues  ?  Gift,  indeed ! 
I  odstook  the  chapter,  and  book,  and  testament :  Gospel  for 
law,  Acts  for  Genesis,  the  city  of  Jerusalem  for  the  plain  of 
Shinar.  It  was  no  gift,  but  the  confusion  of  tongues  which 
has  gabbled  me  deaf  as  a  post.  You,  apostles  ?  What ! 
jou  three?  Certainly  not:  three  presumptuous  Babylonish 
masons — ^neither  more  nor  less !" 


8  SmRLET. 

"I  assure  you,  sir,  we  were  only  having  a  little  chat 
togflher  over  a  glass  of  wine  after  a  friendly  dinner :  settling 
the  Dissenters!" 

"  Oh  1  settling  the  Dissenters — ^were  you  ?  Was  Malone 
settling  the  Dissenters  ?  It  sounded  to  me  much  more  like 
settling  his  co-apostles.  You  were  quarrelling  together; 
making  almost  as  much  noise — you  three  alone — ^as  Moses 
Barraclough,  the  preaching  tailor,  and  all  his  hearers,  are 
making  in  the  Methodist  chapel  down  yonder,  where  they  are 
in  the  thick  of  a  revival.  I  know  whose  fault  it  is — ^it  is 
yours,  Malone." 

"Mine!  sir?" 

"  Yours,  sir.  Donne  and  Sweeting  were  quiet  before  you 
came,  and  would  be  quiet  if  you  were  gone.  I  wish  when  you 
crossed  the  Channel  you  had  left  your  Irish  habits  behind  you. 
Dublin  student  ways  won't  do  here:  the  proceedings  which 
might  pass  imnoticed  in  a  wild  bog  and  mountain  district  in 
Connaught  will,  in  a  decent  English  parish,  bring  disgrace  on 
those  who  indulge  in  them,  and,  what  is  far  worse,  on  the  sacred 
institution  of  which  they  are  merely  the  humble  appendages." 

There  was  a  certain  dignity  in  the  little  elderly  gentleman's 
manner  of  rebuking  these  youths ;  though  it  was  not,  perhaps, 
quite  the  dignity  most  appropriate  to  the  occasion.  Mr  Hel- 
stone — standing  straight  as  a  ramrod — ^looking  keen  as  a  kite, 
presented,  despite  his  clerical  hat,  black  coat,  and  gaiters,  more 
the  air  of  a  veteran  officer  chiding  his  subalterns^  than  of  a 
venerable  priest  exhorting  his  sons  in  the  faith.  Gospd  mild- 
ness — apostolic  benignity,  never  seemed  to  have  breathed  theit 
influence  over  that  keen  brown  visage  ;  but  firmness  had 
fixed  the  features,  and  sagacity  had  carved  her  own  lines 
about  them. 

"I  met  Supplehough,"  he  continued,  "plodding  through 
the  mud  this  wet  night,  going  to  preach  at  Milldean  opposi- 
tion shop.  As  I  told  you,  I  heard  Barraclough  bellowing  in 
the  midst  of  a  conventicle  like  a  possessed  bull ;  and  I  find 
ycni,  gentlemen,  tarrying  over  your  half  pint  of  muddy  port- 
wine,  and  scolding  like  angry  old  women.  No  wonder  Sup- 
plehough  should  have  dipped  sixteen  adult  converts  in  a  day 
*— which  he  did  a  fortnight  since;  no  wonder  Barraclough, 
scamp  and  hj^pocrite  as  he  is,  should  attract  all  the  weaver- 
girls  in  their  fiowers  and  ribbons,  to  witness  how  much  harder 
are  his  knuckles  than  the  wooden  brim  of  his  tub ;  as  little 
wonder  that  1/014,  when  you  are  left  to  yourselves,  without  your 


LEVITICAL.  9 

lectors — myself,  and  Hall,,  and  Bonltbj — to  back  you,  should 
too  often  perform  the  holy  service  of  our  church  to  bare  walls, 
and  read  your  bit  of  a  dry  discourse  to  the  clerk,  and  the 
organist,  and  the  beadle.  But  enough  of  the  subject:  I  came 
to  see  Malone — ^I  have  an  errand  unto  thee,  O  captain!** 

"What  is  it?"  inquired  Malone,  discontentedly;  "there  can 
be  no  funeral  to  take  at  this  time  of  day." 

"  Have  you  any  arms  about  you?'* 

<^  Arms,  sir? — jeSf  and  legs:*'  and  he  advanced  the  mighty 
members. 

^  Bah!  weapons,  I  mean." 

"I  have  the  pistols  you  gave  me  yourself;  I  never  part 
with  them  :  I  .lay  them  ready  cocked  on  a  chair  by  my  bed- 
dde  at  night.     I  have  my  blackthorn." 

"  Very  good.     Will  you  go  to  Hollow's-mill?** 

"  What  is  stirring  at  Hollow*s-mill?  ** 

"Nothing  as  y^t,  nor  perhaps  will  be;  but  Moore  is  alone 
there:  he  has  sent  all  the  workmen  he  can  trust  to  Stilbor*; 
there  are  only  two  women  left  about  the  place.  It  would  be  a 
nice  opportunity  for  any  of  his  well-wishers  to  pay  him  a 
*  visit,  if  they  knew  how  straight  the  path  was  made  before 
them." 

"I  am  none  of  his  well-wishers,  sir  :  I  don't  care  for 
him." 

"  Soh!  Malone,  you  are  afraid.** 

"  You  know  me  better  Ihan  that.  If  I  reaUy  thought  there 
was  a  chance  of  a  row,  I  would  go :  but  Moore  is  a  strange, 
shy  man,  whom  I  never  pretend  to  understand ;  and  for  ^e 
sake  of  his  sweet  company  only,  I  would  not  stir  a  step." 

"  But  there  is  a  chance  of  a  row  ;  if  a  positive  riot  does  not 
take  place— of  which,  indeed,  I  see  no  signs — ^yet  it  is  im- 
hkdy  this  night  will  pass  quite  tranquilly.  You  know  Moore 
has  resolved  to  have  the  new  maphinery,  and  he  expects  two 
waggon  loads  of  frames  and  shears  from  Stilbro*  this  evening. 
Soott,  the  overlooker,  and  a  few  picked  men,  are  gone  to  fetch 
them." 

"  They  will  bring  them  in  safely  and  quietly  enough,  sir." 

"Moore  says  so,  and  affirms  he  wants  nobody:  some  one, 
iwweTer,  he  must  have,  if  it  were  only  to  bear  evidence  in 
cue  anything  should  happen.  I  call  mm  very  careless.  He 
ctB  in  &e  counting-house  with  the  shutters  unclosed ;  he  goes 
oat  here  and  there  after  dark,  wanders  right  up  the  hollow, 
d9wii  Fieldhead-lane,  among  the  plantations,  just  as  if  he 


10  SHIRLEr* 

were  the  darling  of  the  neighbourhood,  or — -being,  as  he  is, 
its  detestation — bore  a  'charmed  life'  as  they  say  in  tale- 
books.  He  takes  no  warning  from  the  fate  of  Pearson,  nor 
from  that  of  Armitage^-shot,  one  in  his  own  house  and  the 
other  on  the  moor." 

"  But  he  should  take  warning,  sir,  and  use  precautions  too," 
interposed  Mr  Sweeting ;  and  I  think  he  would  if  he  heard 
what  I  heard  the  other  day." 

"  What  did  you  hear,  Davy?" 

"  You  kn(^w  Mike  Hartley,  sir?  " 

"  The  Antinomian  weaver.     Yes." 

"  When  Mike  has  been  drinking  for  a  few  weeks  together, 
he  generally  winds  up  by  a  visit  to  Nunnely  vicarage,  to  tell 
Mr  Hall  a  piece  of  his  mind  about  his  sermons,  to  denoimce 
the  horrible  tendency  of  his  doctrine  of  works,  and  warn  him 
that  he  and  all  his  hearers  are  sitting  in  outer  darkness." 

"  Well — ^that  has  nothing  to  do  with  Moore." 

''  Besides  being  an  Antinomian,  he  is  a  violent  Jacobin  and 
leveller,  sir." 

"I  know.  When  he  is  very  drunk,  his  mind  is  always 
running  on  regicide.  Mike  is  not  tmacquainted  with  history, 
and  it  is  rich  to  hear  him  going  over  the  list  of  tyrants  of 
whom,  as  he  says,  '  the  revenger  of  blood  has  obtained  satis- 
faction.' The  fellow  exults  strangely  in  murder  done  on 
crowned  heads,  or  on  any  head  for  political  reasons.  I  have 
already  heard  it  hinted  that  he  seem«  to  hkve  a  queer  hanker- 
ing after  Moore :  is  that  what  you  allude  to.  Sweeting?  " 

"  You  use  the  proper  term,  sir.  Mr  Hall  thinks*  Mike  has 
no  personal  hatred  of  Moore ;  Mike  says  he  even  likes  to  talk 
to  him,  and  run  after  him,  but  he  has  a  hankering  that  Moore 
should  be  made  an  example  of :  he  was  extolling  him  to  Mr 
Hall  the  other  day  as  the  mill-owner  with  the  most  brains  in 
Yorkshire,  and  for  that  reason  he  affirms  Moore  should  be 
chosen  as  a  sacrifice,  an  oblation  of  a  sweet  savour.  Is  Mike 
Hartley  in  his  right  mind,  do  you  think,  sir?"  inquired 
Sweeting,  simply. 

"  Can't  tell,  Davy*,  he  may  be  crazed  or  he  may  be  only 
crafty — or,  perhaps,  a  little  of  both." 

"  He  talks  of  seeing  visions,  sir." 

"Ayl  He  is  a  very  Ezekiel  or  Daniel  for  visions.  He 
came  just  when  I  was  going  to  bed,  last  Friday  night,  to  de- 
scribe one  that  had  been  revealed  to  him  in  Nunnely  Park  that 
very  afternoon.' 


LEVITICAL.  11 

"Tell  it,  sir— wbat  was  it?"  urged  Sweeting. 

"Davy,  thou  hast  an  enormous  organ  of  Wonder  in  thy 
erammn ;  Malone,  you  see,  has  none ;  neither  murders  nor 
yiflions  interest  him:  see  what  a  big  vacant  Saph  he  looks  at 
this  moment." 

«  Saph !     Who  was  Saph,  sir  ? " 

"  I  thought  you  would  not  know :  you.  may  find  it  out :  it 
is  hiblical.  I  know  nothing  more  of  him  than  his  name  and 
race ;  hut  from  a  boy  upwards,  I  have  always  attached  a  per- 
sonality to  Saph.  Depend  on  it  he  was  honest,  heavy,  and 
luckless ;  he  met  his  end  at  Gob,  by  the  hand  of  Sibbechai." 

"  But  the  vision,  sir?" 

"  Davy ,•  thou  shalt  hear.  Donne  is  biting  his  nails,  and 
Malone  yawning;  so  I  will  tell  it  but  to  thee.  Mike  is  out  of 
work,  like  many  others,  unfortunately ;  Mr  Grame,  Sir  Philip 
Niumely's  steward,  gave  him  a  job  about  the  priory:  accord- 
ing to  his  accoimt,  Mike  was  busy  hedging  rather  late  in  the 
afternoon,  but  before  dark,  when  he  heard  what  he  thought 
▼as  a  band  at  a  distance,  bugles,  fifes,  and  the  sound  of  a 
trumpet;  it  came  from  the  forest,  and  he  wondered  that  there 
should  be  music  there.  He  looked  up :  all  amongst  the  trees 
he  saw  moving  objects,  red,  hke  poppies,  or  white,  like  May- 
blossom;  the  wood  wasrfdllof  them,  they  poured  out  andfiUed 
the  park.  He  then  perceived  they  were  soldiers — thousands 
and  tens  of  thousands ;  but  they  made  no  more  noise  than  a 
swarm  of  midges  on  a  summer  evening.  They  formed  in  order, 
he  aflirmed,  and  marched,  regiment  after  regiment,  across  the 
park;  he  followed  them  to  Nunnely  Common;  the  music  still 
played  soft  and  distant.  On  the  common  he  watched  them  go 
through  a  number  of  evolutions,  a  man  clothed  in  scarlet  stood 
in  the  centre  and  directed  them ;  they  extended,  he  declared, 
over  fifty  acres;  they  were  in  sight  half  an  hour;  then  they 
niarched  away  quite  silently:  the  whole  time  he  heard  neither, 
voice  nor  tread — ^nothing  but  the  faint  music  playing  a 'Solemn 
maicL" 

"  Where  did  they  go,  sir?" 

** Towards  Biiaxfield.  Mike  followed  them;  they  seemed 
passing  Fieldhead,  when  a  column  of  smoke,  such  as  might  be 
Tomited  by  a  park  of  artillery,  spread  noiseless  over  the  fields, 
the  road,  tJie  common,  and  rolled,  he  said,  blue  and  dim,  to  his 
▼cry  feet.  As  it  cleared  away  he  looked  again  for  the  soldiers, 
but  they  were  vanished ;  he  saw  them  np  more.  Mike,  like  a 
vise  Daniel  as  he  is,  not  only  rehearsed  the  vision,  but  gave 


Z  SHIKLET. 

tools  of  the  Propaganda,  were  at  that  time  being  hatched  under 
cradle-blankets,  or  undergoing  regeneration  by  nursery-baptism 
in  wash-hand-basins.  You  could  not  have  guessed  by  looking 
at  any  one  of  them  that  the  Italian-ironed  double  Mils  of  its 
net-cap  surroimded  the  brows  of  a  pre-ordained,  specially 
sanctified  successor  of  St  Paul,  St  Peter,  or  St  John ;  nor 
could  you  have  foreseen  in  the  folds  of  its  long  night-gown  the 
white  surplice  in  which  it  was  hereafter  cruelly  to  exercise  the 
souls  of  its  parishioners,  and  strangely  to  nonplus  its  old- 
fashioned  vicar  by  flourishing  aloft  in  a  pulpit  the  shirt-like 
raiment  which  had  never  before  waved  higher  than  the  read- 
ing-desk. 

Yet  even  in  those  days  of  scarcity  there  were  curates :  the 
precious  plant  was  rare,  but  it  might  be  found.  A  certain 
favoured  district  in  the  West  Riding  of  Yorkshire  could  boast 
thr^e  rods  of  Aaron  blossoming  within  a  circuit  of  twenty  miles. 
You  shall  see  them,  reader.  Step  into  this  neat  garden-house 
on  the  skirts  of  Whinbury,  walk  forward  into  the  little  par- 
lour— there  they  are  at^  dinner.  AUow  me  to  introduce  Aem 
to  you  : — Mr  Donne,  curate  of  Whinbury;  Mr  Malone,  curate 
of  Briarfield ;  Mr  Sweeting,  curate  of  Nimnely.  These  are 
Mr  Donne's  lodgings,  being  the  habitation  of  one  John  Grale,  a 
small  clothier.  Mr  Donne  has  kindly  invited  his  brethren  to 
regale  with  him.  You  and  I  will  join  the  party,  see  what  is  to 
be  seen,  and  hear  what  is  to  be  heard.  At  present,  however, 
they  are  only  eating  ;  and  while  they  eat  we  will  talk  aside. 

These  gentlemen  are  in  the  bloom  of  youth ;  they  possess 
all  the  activity  of  that  interesting  age — ^an  activity  which  their 
moping  old  vicars  would  fain  turn  into  the  chaimel  of  their 
pastoral  duties,  oft^en  expressing  a  wish  to  see  it  expended  in  a 
diligent  superintendence  of  the  schools,  and  in  frequent  visits 
to  the  sick  of  their  respective  parishes.  But  the  youthful 
Levites  feel  this  to  be  dull  work  ;  they  prefer  lavishing  their 
energies  on  a  course  of  proceeding,  which,  though  to  other  eyes 
it  appear  more  heavy  with  ennui,  more  cursed  with  monotony, 
than  the  toil  of  the  weaver  at  his  loom,  seems  to  yield  them 
an  unfailing  supply  of  enjoyment  and  occupation^ 

I  allude  to  a  rushing  backwards  and  forwards,  amongst 
themselves,  to  and  from  their  respective  lodgings :  not  a  round 
■^— but  a  triangle  of  visits,  which  they  keep  up  all  the  year 
through,  in  winter,  spring,  summer,  and  autumn-  Season  and 
weather  make  no  difference ;  vdth  unintelligible  zeal  they  dare 
snow  and  hail,  wind  and  rain,  mire  and  dust,  to  go  and  dine. 


'LEvrncAL.  8 

or  drink  tea,  or  sup  with  each  other.  What  attracts  them,  it 
would  be  difficult  to  say.  It  is  not  friendship  ;  for  whenever 
tliej  meet  they  quarrel.  It  is  not  religion  ;  the  thing  is  never 
named  amongst  them :  theology  they  may  discuss  occasionally, 
but  piety — never.  It  is  not  the  love  of  eating  and  drinking ; 
each  might  have  as  good  a  joint  and  pudding,  tea  as  potent, 
and  toast  as  succulent,  at  his  own  lodgings,  as  is  served  to  him 
at  his  brother's.  Mrs  Gale,  Mrs  Hogg,  and  Mrs  Whipp^ 
their  respective  landladies — affirm  that  "  it  is  just  for  nought 
else  but  to  give  folk  trouble."  By  "  folk,"  the  good  ladies  of 
course  mean  themselves ;  for  indeed  they  are  kept  in  a  con- 
tinual "  fiy  "  by  this  system  of  mutual  invasion. 

Mr  Donne  and  his  guests,  as  I  have  said,  are  at  dinner ; 
Mrs  Gale  waits  on  them,  but  a  spark  of  the  hot  kitchen  fire  is 
in  her  eye.  She  considers  that  the  privilege  of  invffcing  a 
friend  to  a  meal  occasionally,  without  additional  charge  (a 
privilege  included  in  the  terms  on  which  she  lets  her  lodgings), 
has  been  quite  sufficiently  exercised  of  late.  The  present 
week  is  yet  but  at  Thursday,  and  on  Monday,  Mr  Malone,  the 
curate  of  Briarfield,  came  to  breakfast  and  stayed  dinner ;  on 
Tuesday,  Mr  Malone  and  Mr  Sweeting  of  Nimnely,  came  to 
tea,  remained  to  supper,  occupied  the  spare  bed,  and  favoured 
her  with  their  company  to  breakfast  on  Wednesday  morning  ; 
now,  on  Thursday,  they  are  both  here  at  dinner,  and  she  is 
almost  certain  they  will  stay  all  night.  "  C'en  est  trop,"  she 
would  say,  if  she  could  speak  French. 

Mr  Sweeting  is  mincing  the  slice  of  roast-beef  on  his  plate, 
and  complaining  that  it  is  very  tough ;  Mr  Donne  says  the 
beer  is  flat.  Ay  I  that  is  the  worst  of  it :  if  they  would  only 
be  civil,  Mrs  Grale  wouldn't  mind  it  so  much  ;  if  they  would 
only  seem  satisfied  with  what  they  get,  she  wouldn't  care,  but 
^  these  young  parsons  is  so  high  and  so  scornful,  they  set 
everybody  beneath  their  *  fit :'  they  treat  her  with  less  than 
civility,  just  because  she  doesn't  keep  a  servant,  but  does  the 
work  of  the  house  herself,  as  her  mother  did  afore  her :  then 
they  are  always  speaking  against  Yorkshire  ways  and  York- 
shire folk,"  and  by  that  very  token  Mrs  Grale  does  not  believe 
one  of  them  to  be  a  real  gentleman,  or  come  of  gentle  kin.  "  The 
old  parsons  is  worth  ^e  whole  lump  of  college  lads ;  they 
know  what  belangs  to  good  manners,  and  is  kind  to  high  and 
low." 

**  More  bread  1 "  cries  Mr  Malone,  in  a  tone  which,  though 
prolonged  but  to  utter  two  syllables,  proclaims  him  at  onoe  a 


14  SHIBLET. 

own  parishioners  ;    they    all  knew  him.      He  sighed,  and 
passed  on. 

The  high  road  was  now  to  be  quitted,  as  the  remaining 
distance  to  Hollow's-mill,  might  be  considerably  reduced  by  a 
short  cut  across  fields.  These  fields  were  level  and  mono- 
tonous ;  Malone  took  a  direct  course  through  them,  jumping 
hedge  and  waU.  He  passed  but  one  building  here,  and  that 
seemed  large  and  haU-like,  though  irregular  :  you  could  see  a 
high  gable,  then  a  long  front,  then  a  low  gable,  then  a  thick, 
lofty  stack  of  chimneys  ;  there  were  some  trees  behind  it.  It 
was  dark  ;  not  a  candle  shone  from  any  window  ;  it  was  abso- 
lutely still :  the  rain  running  jfrom  the  eaves,  and  the  rather 
wild,  but  very  low  whistle  of  the  wind  round  the  chimneys  and 
through  the  boughs,  were  the  sole  sounds  in  its  neighbourhood. 

This  building  passed,  the  fields,  hitherto  flat,  declined  in  a 
rapid  descent :  evidently  a  vale  lay  below,  through  which  you 
could  hear  the  water  run.  One  light  glimimered  in  the  depth : 
for  that  beacon  Malone  steered. 

He  came  to  a  little  white  house — you  could  see  it  was  white 
even  through  this  dense  darkness — and  knocked  at  the  door. 
A  fresh-faced  servant  opened  it ;  by  the  candle  she  held  was 
revealed  a  narrow  passage,  terminating  in  a  narrow  stair. 
Two  doors  covered  with  crimson  baize,  a  strip  of  crimson 
carpet  down  the  steps,  contrasted  with  light-coloured  walls  and 
white  floor,  made  the  little  interior  look  clean  and  fresh, 

"  Mr  Moore  is  at  home,  I  suppose  ?" 

"  Yes,  sir,  but  he  is  not  in." 

"  Not  in  1    Where  is  he  then  ? " 

"  At  the  mill — ^in  the  coimting-house." 

Here  one  of  the  crimson  doors  opened. 

"  Are  the  waggons  come,  Sarah?"  asked  a  female  voice, 
and  a  female  head  at  the  same  time  was  apparent.  It  might 
not  be  the  head  of  a  goddess — indeed  a  screw  of  curl-paper 
on  each  side  the  temples  quite  forbade  that  supposition — ^but 
neither  was  it  the  head  of  a  Gorgon  ;  yet  Malone  seemed  to 
take  it  in  the  latter  light.  Big  |s  he  was,  he  shrank  bashfully 
back  into  the  rain  at  the  view  ihereof ;  and  saying,  "I'll  go  to 
him,"  hurried  in  seeming  trepidation  down  a  short  lane,  across 
an  obscure  yard,  towards  a  huge  black  mill. 

The  work-hours  were  over  ;  the  "hands"  were  gone ;  the 
machinery  was  at  rest ;  the  mill  shut  up.  Malone  walked 
round  it;  somewhere  in  its  great  sooty  flank  he  found  another 
chink  of  light ;  he  knocked  at  another  door,  using  for  the 


THE  WAGOONS.  15 

purpoee  the  thick  end  6f  his  shillelagh,  with  which  he  beat  a 
roosiiig  tattoo.     A  key  turned  ;  the  door  unclosed. 

"  Is  it  Joe  Scott  ?    What  news  of  the  waggons,  Joe  ?  " 

"No— it's  myself.     Mr  Helstone  would  send  me." 

"  Oh  *  Mr  Malone."  The  voice  in  uttering  this  name  had 
the  slightest  possible  cadence'  of  disappointment.  After  a 
moment^s  pause,  it  continued,  politely,  but  a  little  formally  : — * 

"  I  beg  you  will  come  in,  Mr  Maione.  I  regret  extremely 
Mr  Helstone  should  have  thought  it  necessary  to  trouble  you 
80  far ;  there  was  no  necessity : — ^I  told  him  so  ; — and  on  such 
a  night — ^but  walk  forwards." 

l^brough  a  dark  apartment,  of  aspect  undistinguishable, 
Malone  followed  the  speaker  into  a  light  and  bright  room  within : 
very  light  and  bright  indeed  it  seemed  to  eyes  which,  for  the  last 
hour,  had  been  striving  to  penetrate  the  double  darkness  of  night 
and  fog;  but  except  for  its  excellent  fire,  and  for  a  lamp  of  ele- 
gant design  and*  vivid  lustre  burning  on  a  table,  it  was  a  very 
plain  place.  The  boarded  floor  was  carpetless  ;  the  three  or 
four  stiff-backed  green-painted  chairs  seemed  once  to  have  fur- 
nished the  kitchen  of  some  farm-house ;  a  desk  of  strong,  solid 
formation,  the  table  aforesaid,  and  some  framed  sheets  on  the 
stone-coloured  walls,  bearing  plans  for  building,  for  gardening, 
designs  of  machinery,  &c.,  completed  the  furniture  of  the  place. 

Plain  as  it  was,  it  seemed  to  satisfy  Malone  ;  who,  when  he 
had  removed  and  hung  up  his  wet  surtout  and  hat,  drew  one  of 
the  rheumatic-looking  chairs  to  the  hearth,  and  set  his  knees 
almost  within  the  bars  of  the  red  grate. 

"  Comfortable  quarters  you  have  here,  Mr  Moore  ;  and  all 
anng  to  yourself." 

"  Yes  ;  but  my  sister  would  be  glad  to  see  you,  if  you  would 
prefer  stepping  into  the  house." 

"  Oh,  no  I  the  ladies  are  best  alone.  I  never  was  a  lady's  man. 
You  don't  mistake  me  for  my  friend  Sweeting,  do  you,  Mr 
Moore?*' 

"  Sweeting ! — ^which  of  them  is  that  ?  The  gentleman  in  the 
chocolate  over-coat,  or  the  little  gentleman  ?  " 

"  The  littie  one ; — ^he  of  Nunnely ;  the  cavalier  of  the  Misses 
Sykes,  with  the  whole  six  of  whom  he  is  in  love,  ha  I  ha  1" 

"  Better  be  generally  in  love  with  all  than  specially  with  one, 
I  should  think,  in  that  quarter." 

*'  But  he  18  specially  in  love  with  one  besides,  for  when  I  and 
Donne  urged  him  to  make  a  choice  amongst  the  fair  bevy,  he 
aamod — ^which  do  you  think  7^ 


16  SHIRLET. 

With  a  queer,  quiet  smile,  Mr  Moore  replied,  "Dora,  of 
course^  or  Harriet." 

"  Ha !  ha !  you  Ve  an  excellent  guess ;  but  what  made  you 
hit  on  those  two  ?" 

'*  Because  they  are  the  tallest,  the  handsomest;  and  Dora^  at 
least,  is  the  stoutest;  and  as  your  friend  Mr  Sweeting  is  but  a 
little,  slight  'figure,  I  concluded  that,  according  to  a  frequent 
rule  in  such  cases,  he  preferred  his  contrast." 

''  You  are  right ;  Dora  it  is  :  but  he  has  no  chance,  has  be, 
Moore?" 

"  What  has  Mr  Sweeting,  besides  his  curacy  ?" 

This  question  seemed  to  tickle  Malone  amazingly ;  he  laughed 
for  ftdl  three  minutes  before  he  answered  it. 

"  What  has  Sweeting  ?  Why  David  has  his  harp,  or  flute, 
which  comes  to  the  same  thing.  He  has  a  sort  of  pinchbeck 
watch;  ditto,  ring;  ditto,  eye-glass:  that's  what  he  has." 

"  How  would  he  propose  to  keep  Miss  Sykes  in  gowns  only  ?  " 

'<  Ha  1  ha  I  Excellent  I  I  '11  ask  hup.  that  next  time  I  see  him. 
I'll  roast  him  for  his  presumption:  but  no  doubt  he  expects  old 
Christopher  Sykes  would  do  something  handsome.  He  is  rich, 
is  he  not  ?    They  live  in  a  large  house." 

"  Sykes  carries  on  an  extensive  concern." 

"  Therefore  he  must  be  wealthy,  eh  ?  " 

"  Therefore  he  must  have  plenty  to  do  with  his  wealth;  and 
in  these  times  would  be  about  as  Hkely  to  think  of  drawins 
money  from  the  business  to  give  dowri^  to  his  daughters  as! 
should  be  to  dream  of  puUmg  down  the  cottage  there,  and  con- 
structing on  its  ruins  a  house  as  large  as  Fieldhead." 

"  Do 'you  know  what  I  heard,  Moore,  the  other  day  ?" 

'^  No  :  perhaps  that  I  was  about  to  effect  some  such  change. 
Your  Briarfield  gossips  are  capable  of  saying  that  or  silHer 
things." 

"  That  you  were  going  to  take  Fieldhead  on  a  lease — ^I  thought 
it  looked  *a  dismal  place,  by-the-by,  to-night,  as  I  passed  it — 
^d  that  it  was  your  intention  to  settle  a  Miss  Sykes  there  as 
mistress  ;  to  be  married,  in  short,  ha  I  ha  I  Now,  which  is  it? 
Dora — ^I  am  sure :  you  said  she  was  the  handsomest." 

"  I  wonder  how  often  it  has  been  settled  that  I  was  to  be 
married  since  I  Came  to  Briarfield  I  They  have  assigned  me 
every  marriageable  single  woman  by  turns  in  the  district.  Now 
it  was  the  two  Misses  Wynns — first  the  dark,  then  the  light 
one.  Now  the  red-haired  Miss  Armitage,  then  the  mature 
Ann  Pearson ;  at  present  you  throw  on  my  shoulders  all  the 


V 


TEE  WAQOONS.  17 

tribe  of  the  l^ses  Sjkes.  On  what  grounds  this  gossip  rests, 
Grod  Imows.  I  visit  nowhere — ^I  seek  female  society  about  as 
assiduously  as  you  do,  Mr  Malone.  If  ever  I  go  to  Whin- 
bury,  it  is  only  to  give  Sykes  or  Pearson  a  call  in  theii 
counting-house ;  where  our  discussions  run  on  other  topics  than 
matrimony,  and  our  thoughts  are  occupied  with  other  things 
than  courtships,  establishments,  dowries :  the  cloth  we  can't 
■ell,  the  hands  we  can't  employ,  the  mills  we  can't  run,  the 
perverse  course  of  events  generally,  which  we  cannot  alter,  fill 
our  hearts,  I  take  it,  pretty  well  at  present,  to  the  tolerably 
complete  exclusion  of  such  figments  as  love-making,  &c." 

"  I  go  along  with  you  completely,  Moore.  If  there  is  one  notion 
I  hate  more  than  another,  it  is  that  of  marriage :  I  mean  mar- 
riage in  the  vxdgar  weak  sense,  as  a  mere  matter  of  sentiment ; 
two  b^garly  fools  agreeing  to  imite  their  indigence  by  some 
fantastic  tie  of  feeling — humbug  1  .  But  an  advantageous  con- 
nection, such  as  can  be  formed  in  consonance  with  dignity  of 
views,  and  permanency  of  solid  interests,  is  not  so  bad — eh?" 
"  No,"  responded  Moore,  in  an  absent  manner  ;  the  subject 
teemed  to  have  no  interest  for  him :  he  did  not  pursue  it. 
Afier  sitting  for  some  time  gazing  at  the  fire  with  a  pre- 
occupied air,  he  suddenly  turned  his  head. 
"  Hark  1"  said  he :  "  did  you  hear  wheels  ?" 
Rising,  he  went  to  the  window,  opened  it,  and  listened.    He 
•oon  closed  it.     "  It  is  only  the  sound  of  the  wind  rising,"  he 
remarked,  "  and  the  rivulet  a  little  swollen,  rushing  down  the 
hollow.  I  expected  those  waggons  at  six ;  it  is  near  nine  now." 
"  Seriously,  do  you  suppose  that  the  putting  up  of  this  new 
machinery  will  bring  you  into  danger?"   iiiquired  Malone. 
**  Helstone  seems  to  think  it  will." 

"  I  only  wish  the  machines — the  frames  were  safe  here,  and 
lodged  within  the  walls  of  this  mill.  Once  put  up,  I  defy 
the  framebreakers  :  let  them  only  pay  me  a  visit,  and  take  the 
consequences  ;  my  mill  is  my  castle." 

"  Ctee  despises  such  low  scoundrels,"  observed  Malone,  in 
a  profirand  vein  of  reflection.     "  I  almost  wish  a  party  would 
call  upon  you  to-night ;  but  the  road  seemed  extremely  quiet 
as  I  came  along :  I  saw  nothing  astir." 
"  You  came  by  the  Redhouse  ?'* 
"Yes." 

**  There  would  be  nothing  on  that  road :  it  is  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Sdlbro*  the  risk  lies." 
^  And  joa  think  there  is  risk  ?** 


^ 


I 


18  SHIRLEY. 

"  What  these  fellows  have  done  to  others,  they  may  do  to  me. 
There  is  only  this  difference  :  most  of  the  manttfacturers  seem 
paralyzed  when  they  are  attacked.  Sykes,  for  instance,  when 
his  dressing-shop  was  set  on  fire  and  burned  to  the  groiuid, 
when  the  cloth  was  torn  from  his  tenters  and  left  in  shreds  in 
thfe  field,  took  no  steps  to  discover  or  punish  the  miscreants  : 
he  gave  up  as  tamely  as  a  rabbit  under  the  jaws  of  a  ferret. 
Now  I,  if  I  know  myself,  should  stand  by  my  trade,  my  mill, 
and  my  machinery." 

"  Helstone  says  these  three  are  your  gods ;  that  the  *  Orders 
in  Council'  are  with  yoii  another  name  for  the  seven  deadly 
sins ;  that  Castlereagh  is  your  Antichrist,  and  the  w«r-party  his 
legions." 

•"  Yes;  I  abhor  all  these  things  because  they  ruin  me:  they 
stand  in  my  way:  I  cannot  get  on.  I  cannot  execute  my 
plans  because  of  them :  I  see  myself  baffled  at  every  turn  by 
their  untoward  effects." 

"  But  you  are  rich  and  thriving,  Moore?" 

"  1  am  very  rich  in  cloth  I  cannot  sell:  you  shoidd  step  into 

my  warehouse  yonder,  and  observe  how  it  is  piled  to  the  roof 

with  pieces.     Roakes  and  Pearson  are  in  the  same  condition  : 

America,  used  tq  be  their  market,  but  the  Orders  in  Council 

'  have  cut  that  off"." 

Malone  did  not  seem  prepared  to  carry  on  briskly  a  con- 
versation of  this  sort ;  he  began  to  knock  the  heels  of  his  boots 
together,  and  to  yawn. 

"  And  then  to  think,"  continued  Mr  Moore,  who  seemed  too 
much  taken  up  with  the  current  of  his  own  thoughts  to  note 
the  sjnnptoms  of  his  guest's  ennui, — "  to  think  that  these 
ridiculous  gossips  of  Whinbury  and  Briarfield  will  keep  pester- 
ing one  about  being  married !  As  if  there  was  nothing  to  be 
done  in  life  but  to  '  pay  attention,'  as  they  say,  to  some  youn^ 
lady,  and  then  to  go  to  church  with  her,*  and  then  to  start  on 
a  bridal  tour,  and  then  to  run  through  a  round  of  visits,  and 
then,  I  suppose,  to  be  *  having  a  family.' — Oh,  que  le  diable 
emporte!" — He  broke  off"  the  aspiration  into  which  he  was 
launching  with  a  certain  energy,  and  added,  more  caknly — 
"  I  believe  women  talk  and  thmk  only  of  these  things,  and 
they  naturally  fancy  men's  minds  similarly  occupied." 

"  Of  course — of  course,"  assented  Malone  ;  "but  nevermind 
them."  And  he  whistled,  looked  impatiently  roimd,  and 
seemed  to  feel  a  great  want  of  something.  This  time  Moore 
naught,  and,  it  appeared,  comprehended  his  demonstrations. 


THE  WAGOOHS.  19 

"Mr  MaJone,"  said  he,  "you  must  require  refreshment 
after  your  wet  walk :  I  forget  hospitality." 

"  Not  at  all,"  rejoined  Malone ;  but  he  looked  as  if  the 
right  nail  was  at  last  hit  on  the  head,  nevertheless.  Moore 
rose  and  opened  a  cupboard. 

"  It  is  my  fancy,"  said  he,  "  to  have  every  convenience 
within  myself,  and  not  to  be  dependent  on  the  feminity  in  the 
cottage  yonder  for  every  mouthful  I  eat  or  every  drop  I  drink. 
I  often  spend  the  evening  and  sup  here  alone,  and  sleep  with 
Joe  Scott  in  the  mill.  Sometimes  I  am  my  own  watchman  ; 
I  require  little  sleep,  and  it  pleases  me  on  a  fine  night  to 
wander  for  an  hour  or  two  with  my  musket  about  the  hollow.. 
Mr  Malone,  can  you  cook  a  mutton-chop  ?  " 

"  Try  me :  I  Ve  done  k  hundreds  of  times  at  coUege." 

"  There 's  a  dishful,  then,  and  there 's  the  gridiron.  Turn 
them  quickly;  you  know  the  secret  of  keeping  the  jtdces  in?" 

"  Never  fear  me — ^you  shall  see.  Hand  a  knife  and  fork, 
please." 

The  curate  turned  up  his  coat-cuffs,  and  applied  himself  to  the 
cookery  with  vigour.  The  manufacturer  placed  on  the  table, 
plates,  a  loaf  of  bread,  a  black  bottle,  and  two  tumblers.  He 
then  produced  a  small  copper  kettle — stiU  from  the  sam^  well- 
stored  recess,  his  -cupboard — filled  it  with  water  from  a  large 
stone  jar  in  a  comer,  set  it  on  the  fire  beside  the  hissing  gridiron, 
got  lemons,  sugar,  and  a  small  china  punch-bowl ;  but  while 
he  was  brewing  the  punch,  a  tap  at  the  door  called  him  away. 

"Is  it  you,  Sarah?" 

"  Yes,  sir.     Will  you  come  to  supper,  please,  sir  ?  " 

"  No  ;  I  shall  not  be  in  to-night:  I  shall  sleep  in  the  mill. 
So  lock  the  doors,  and  teU  your  mistress  to  go  to  bed."  He 
returned. 

"  You  have  your  household  in  proper  order,"  observed 
Malone  approvingly,  as,  with  his  fine  face  ruddy  as  the  embers 
over  which  he  bent,  he  assiduously  turned  the  mutton-chops. 
"  You  are  not  imder  petticoat-government,  like  poor  Sweeting; 
a  man — ^whew ! — ^how  the  fat  spits ! — it  has  burnt  my  hand- 
destined  to  be  ruled  by  women.  Now  you  and  I,  Moore- 
there  's  a  fine  brown  one  for  you,  and  full  of  gravy — ^you  and 
I  will  have  no  gray  mares  in  our  stables  when  we  marry." 

"  1  don^t  know — I  never  think  about  it :  if  the  gray  tnare  is 
handsome  and  tractable,  why  not?" 

"  The  chops  are  done :  is  the  punch  brewed?" 

^  There  is  a  glassful ;  taste  it.    When  Joe  Scott  and  his 


y 


20  SHIRLET. 

millions  return  tliej  shall  have  a  share  of  this,  provided  they 
bring  home  the  firsunes  intact." 

l^one  waxed  very  exultant  over  the  supper :  he  laughed 
aloud  at  trifles ;  made  bad  jolsies  and  applauded  them  himself ; 
and,  in  short,  grew  unmeaningly  noisy.  His  host,  on  the 
contrary,  remained  quiet  as  before.  It  is  time,  reader,  that 
you  should  have  some  idea  of  the  appearance  of  this  same 
host :  I  must  endeavour  to  sketch  him  as  he  sits  at  table. 

He  is  what  you  would  probably  call,  at  first  view,  rather  a 
strange-looking  man;  for  he  is  thm,  dark,  sallow;  very  foreign 
of  aspect,  with  shadowy  hair  carelessly  streaking  his  forehead: 
it  appears  that  he  spends  but  little  time  at  his  toilette,  or  he 
would  arrange  it  with  more  taste.  He  seems  imconscious  that 
his  features  are  fine,  that  they  have  a  southern  symmetry,  clear- 
ness, regularity  in  their  chiseling ;  nor  does  a  spectator  become 
aware  of  this  advantage  till  he  has  examined  him  well,  for  an 
anxious  countenance,  and  a  hollow,  somewhat  haggard,  outline 
of  face  disturb  the  idea  of  beauty  with  one  of  care.  His  eyes 
are  large,  and  grave,  and  gray;  their  expression  is  intent  and 
meditative,  rather  searching  than  soft,  rather  thoughtful  than 
genial.  When  he  parts  his  lips  in  a  smile,  his  physio^omy  is 
agreeable — ^not  that  it  is  frank  or  cheerful  even  then,  but  you 
feel  the  influence  of  a  certain  sedate  charm,  suggestive,  whedier 
truly  or  delusively,  of  a  considerate,  perhaps  a  kind  nature ;  of 
feelmgs  that  may  wear  well  at  home ;  patient,  forbearing, 
possibly  faithful  feelings.  He  is  still  yoimg — ^not  more  than 
thirty;  his  stature  is  tall,  his  figure  slender.  His  manner  of 
speakhig  displeases  :  he  has  an  outlandish  accent,  which, 
notwithstanding  a  studied  carelessness  of  pronunciation  and 
diction,. grates  on  a  British,  and  especially  on  a  Yorkshire  ear. 

Mr  Moore,  indeed,  was  but  half  a  Briton,  and  scarcely  that. 
He  came  of  a  foreign  ancestry  by  the  mother^s  side,  and  was 
himgelf  bom  and  partly  reared  on  a  foreign  soil.  A  hybrid  in 
nature,  it  is  probable  he  had  a  hybrid's  feeling  on  many  points — 
patriotism  for  one;  it  is  likely  that  he  was  unapt  to  attach 
himself  to  parties,  to  sects,  even  to  climes  and  customs ;  it  is  not 
impossible  that  he  had  a  tendency  to  isolate  his  individual  per- 
son from  any  commiunity  amidst  which  his  lot  might  temporarily 
happen  to  be  thrown,  and  that  he  felt  it  to  be  his  best  wisdom 
to  push  the  interests  of  Robert  G^rai^  Moore,  to  the  exclusion 
of  philanthropic  consideration  for  general  interests:  with  which 
he  r^arded  the  said  Gerard  Moore  as  in  a  great  measure  dis* 
QOQOepted.    Trade  wa»  Mr  Moore's  hereditary  caOing:  tlMj 


THE  WAQOOKI.  21 

GMnids  of  Antwerp  had  been  mercliants  for  two  centuries  back. 
Once  they  had  b^n  wealthy  merchants;  but  the  uncertamties, 
the  involyements  of  business  had  come  upon  them ;  disastrous 
speculations  had  loosened  by  degrees  the  foundations  of  their 
credit;  the  house  had  stood  on  a  tottering  base  for  a  dozen 
years;  and  at  last,  in  the  shock  of  the  French  Bevolutiony  it 
had  rushed  down  a  total  ruin.  In  its  fall  was  involved  the 
English  an^  Yorkshire  firm  of  Moore,  closely  connected  with 
the  Antwerp  house ;  and  of  which  one  of  the  partners,  resident 
in  Antwerp,  Robert  Moore,  had  married  Hortense  Gerard,  with 
the  prospect  of  his  bride  inheriting  her  father  Constantino 
G^rud's  share  in  the  business.  She  inherited,  as  we  have  seen, 
but  his  share  in  the  liabilities  of  the  £rm ;  and  these  liabilities, 
though  duly  set  aside  by  a  composition  with  creditors,  some 
said  her  son  Eobert  accepted,  in  his  turn,  as  a  legacy ;  and 
that  he  aspired  one  day  to  discharge  them,  and  to  rebuild  the 
fidlen  house  of  Gr^rard  and  Moore  on  a  scale  at  least  equal  to 
its  former  greatness.  It  was  even  supposed  that  he  took  by- 
past  circumstances  much  to  heart ;  and  if  a  childhood  passed 
at  the  side  of  a  saturnine  moCher,  under  foreboding  of  coming 
eril,  and  a  manhood  drenched  and  blighted  by  the  pitiless 
descent  of  the  storm,  could  painfully  impress  the  mind,  hia 
probably  was  impressed  in  no  golden  characters. 

If,  however,  he  had  a  great  end  of  restoration  in  view,  it  was 
not  in  his  power  to  employ  great  means  for  its  attamment ;  he 
was  obliged  to  be  content  with  the  day  of  small  things.  When 
he  came  to  Yorkshire,  he — whose  ancestors  had  owned  ware- 
houses in  this  seaport,  and  factories  in  that  inland  town,  had 
possessed  their  town-house  and  their  country-seat — saw  no 
way  open  to  him  but  to  rent  a  cloth^mill,  in  an  out-of-the-way 
nook  of  an  out-of-the-way  district ;  to  take  a  cottage  adjoining 
it  for  his  residence,  and  to  add  to  his  possessions,  as  pasture  for 
his  horse,  and  space  for  his  cloth-tenters,  a  few  acres  of  the 
iteep  rugged  land  that  lined  the  hollow  through  which  his 
mill-stream  brawled.  All  this  he  held  at  a  somewhat  high  rent 
(for  these  war  times  were  hard,  and  everything  was  dear),  of  the 
trustees  of  the  Fieldhead  estate,  then  the  property  of  a  minor. 

At  the  time  this  history  commences,  Robert  Moore  had  lived 
bat  two  years  in  the  district ;  during  which  period  he  had  at 
least  proved  himself  possessed  of  the  quality  of  activity.  Tho 
dingy  cottage  was  converted  into  a  neat,  tasteful  residence.  Of 
put  of  the  rough  land  he  had  made  garden-grcimd,  which  he 
coMvated  with  singular,  even  with   Flemish,  exactness  and 


22  SHIBLET.     ' 

care. .  As  to  tlie  imill,  which  was  an  old  structure,  and  fitted 
up  with  old  machinery,  now  become  inefficient  and  out  of  date, 
he  had  from  the  first  evinced  the  strongest  contempt  fi^r  all  its 
arrangements  and  appointments :  his  aim  had  been  to  effect  a 
radical  reform,  which  he  had  executed  as  fast  as  his  very  limited 
capital  would  aUow ;  aiid  the'  narrowness  of  that  capital,  and 
consequent  check  on  his  progress,  was  a  restraint  which  galled 
his.sfirit  sorely.  Moore  crer  wanted  to  push  on :  "  Forward" 
was  the  device  stamped  upon  his  soul ;  but  poverty  curbed 
him :  sometimes  (figurativdy)  he  foamed  at  the  mouth  when 
the  reins  were  drawn  veiy  tight. 

In  this  state  of  feeling,  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that  he  would 
deliberate  much  as  to  whether  his  advance  was  or  was  not  pre- 
judicial to  others.  Not  being  a  native,  nor  for  any  length  of  time 
a  resident  of  the  neighbourhood,  he  did  not  sufficiently  care 
when  the  new  inventions  threw  the  old  work-people'  out  of 
employ :  he  never  asked  himself  where  those  to  whom  he  no 
longer  paid  weekly  wages  found  daily  bread;  and  in  this 
negligence  he  only  resembled  thousands  besides,  on  whom  the 
starving  poor  of  Yorkshire  seemed  to  have  a  closer  claim. 

The  period  of  which  I  write  was  an  overshadowed  one  in 
British  history,  and  especially  in  the  history  of  the  northern 
provinces.  War  was  then  at  its  height.  Europe  was  all  in- 
volved therein.  England,  if  not  weary,  was  worn  with  long 
resistance  :  yes,  and  half  her  people  were  weary  too,  and  cried 
out  for  peace  on  any  terms.  National  honour  was  become  a 
mere  empty  name,  of  no  value  in  the  eyes  of  many,  because 
their  sight  was  dim  with  famine ;  and  for  a  morsel  of  meat 
they  would  have  sold  their  birthright. 

The  "  Orders  in  Council,"  provoked  by  Napoleon's  Milan 
and  Berlin  decrees,  and  forbidding  neutral  powers  to  trade 
with  France,  had,  by  offending  America,  cut  off  the.principal 
market  of  the  Yorkshire  woollen  trade,  and  brought  it  con- 
sequently to  the  verge  of  ruin.  Minor  foreign  markets  were 
glutted,  and  would  receive  no  more :  the  Brazils,  Portugal, 
Sicily,  were  all  overstocked  by  nearly  two  years'  consiunption. 
At  this  crisis,  certain  inventions  in  machinery  were  introduced 
into  the  staple  manufactures  of  the  north,  which,  greatly  re- 
ducing the  number  of  hands  necessary  to  be  employed,  direw 
thousands  out  of  work,  and  left  them  without  legitimate  means 
of  sustaining  Hfe.  A  bad  harvest  supervp.iied.  Distress 
reached  its  climax.  Endurance,  overgoaded,  stretched  the 
hand  of  fraternity  to  sedition.     The  throes  of  a  sort  of  moral 


THE  WAGQONS.'  23 

eardiqnake  were  felt  heaving  tinder  the  hills  of  the  northern 
counties.     Bnt,  as  is  usual  in  such  cases,  nobody  took  much 
notice.     When  a  food-riot  broke  out  in  a  manufacturing  town, 
when  a  gig-mill  was  burnt  to  the  ground,  or  a  manufacturer's 
house  was  attached,  the  furniture  thrown  into  the  streets,  and 
the  femily  forced  to  flee  for  their  Hves,  some  local  measures 
were  or  were  not  taken  by  the  local  magistracy;  a  ringleader 
Was  detected,  or  more  frequently  suffered  to  elude  detection ; 
newspaper  paragraphs  were  written  on  the  subject,  and  there 
the  thing  stopped.     As  to  the  sufferers,  whose  sole  inheritance 
was  labour,  and  who  had  lost  that  inheritance — ^who,  could  not 
get  work,  and  consequently  could  not  get  wages,  and  conse- 
quently could  not  get  bread — ^they  were  left  to  suffer  on ;  per- 
haps inevitably  left :  it  would  not  do  to  stop  the  progress  of 
invention,  to  damage  science  by  discouraging  its  improvements ; 
the  war  could  not  be  terminated,  efficient  relief  could  not  be 
raised :  there  was  no  help  then  ;  so  the  unemployed  underwent 
their  destiny — ate  the  bread  and  drank  the  waters  of  affliction. 
Misery  generates  hate :  these  sufferers  hated  the  machines 
which  they  believed  took  their  bread  from  them :  they  hated 
the  buildings  which  contained  those  machines  ;  they  hated  the 
zzumufetcturers  who  owned  those  buildings.     In  the  parish  of 
Briarfield,  with  which  we  have  at  present  to  do,  HoUow's-mill 
was  the  place  held  most  abominable ;  Gerard  Moore,  in  his 
double  character  of  semi-foreigner  and  thorough-going  pro- 
gressist, the  man  most  abominated.     And  it  perhaps  rather 
•greed  with  Moore's  temperament  than  otherwise  to  be  gene- 
rally hated ;  especially  when  he  believed  the  thing  for  which 
he  was  hated  a  right  and  an  expedient  thing  ;  and  it  was  with 
a  sense  of  warlike  excitement  he,  on  this  night,  sat  in  his  count- 
ing-house  waiting  the  arrival  of  his  frame-laden  waggons. 
Malone's  coming  and  company  were,  it  naay  be,  most  unwel- 
come to  him  :  he  would  have  preferred  sitting  alone  ;  for  he 
liked  a  silent,  sombre,  unsafe  solitude :  his  watchman's  musket 
would  have  been  company  enough  for  him ;  the  full-flowing 
beck  in  the  den  would  have  delivered  continuously  the  dis- 
course most  genial  to  his  ear. 

With  the  queerest  look  in  the  world,  had  the  manufacturer 
for  some  ten  minutes  been  watching  the  Irish  curate,  as  the 
latter  made  free  with  the  punch  ;  when  suddenly  that  steady 
gray  eye  changed,  as  if  another  vision  came  between  it  and 
Maloiie.     Moore  raised  his  hand. 


24  SHIKLET* 

<<  Chut  1**  he  said,  in  his  French  fashion,  as  Malone  made  a 
noise  with  his  glass.  He  listened  a  moment,  then  rose,  put 
his  hat  on,  and  went  out  at  the  counting-house  door. 

The  night  was  still,  dark,  'and  stagnant ;  the  water  yet 
rushed  on  full  and  fast :  its  flow  almost  seemed  a  flood  in  the 
utter  silence.  Moore's  ear,  however,  caught  anotlier  sound — 
very. distant,  but  yet  dissimilar — broken  and  rugged :  in  short, 
a  soimd  of  heavy  wheels  crunching  a  stony  road.  He  returned 
to  the  counting-house  and  lit  a  lantern,  with  which  he  walked 
down  the  mill-yard,  and  proceeded  to  open  the  gates.  The 
big  waggons  were  coming  on ;  the  dray-horses'  huge  hoo& 
were  heard  splashing  in  the  mud  and  water.  Moore  hailed 
them. 

"Hey,  Joe  Scott!     Is  all  right  ?" 

Probably  Joe  Scott  was  yet  at  too  great  a  distance  to  hear 
the  inquiry;  he  did  not  answer  it. 

"  Is  all  right,  I  say?"  again  asked  Moore  when  the  elephant- 
like  leader's  nose  almost  touched  his. 

Some  one  jumped  out  from  the  foremost  waggon  into  the 
road;  a  voice  cried  aloud,  "Ay,  ay,  divil,  all's  raightl  We've 
smashed  'em." 

And  there  was  a  run.  The  waggons  stood  still :  they  were 
now  deserted. 

"  Joe  Scott ! "  No  Joe  Scott  answered.  "  Murgatroyd  ! 
Pighillsl  Sykesl"  No  reply.  Mr  Moore  lifted  his  lantern, 
and  looked  into  the  vehicles  ;  there  was  neither  man  nor 
machinery:  they  were  empty  and  abandoned. 

Now  Mr  Moore  loved  his  machinery :  he  had  risked  the 
last  of  his  capital  on  the  purchase  of  these  frames  and  shears 
which  to-night  had  been  expected;  speculations  most  important 
to  his  interests  depended  on  the  tesiilts  to  be  wroughi  by  them: 
where  were  they? 

The  words  "  we 've  smashed  'em  I"  rung  in  his  ears.  How 
did  the  catastrophe  aflfect  him?  By  the  light  of  the  lantern 
he  held,  were  his  features  visible,  relaxing  to  a  singular  smile: 
the  smile  the  man  of  determined  spirit  wears  when  he  reaches 
a  juncture  in  his  life  where  this  determined  spirit  is  to  feel  a 
demand  on  its  strength  :  when  the  strain  is  to  be  made,  and 
the  faculty  must  bear  or  break.  Yet  he  remained  silent,  and 
even  motionless ;  for  at  the  instant  he  neither  knew  what  to 
say  nor  what  to  do.  He  placed  the  lantern  on  the  ground, 
and  stood  with  his  arms  folded,  gazing  down  and  reflecting. 

An  impatient  trampling  of  one  of  the  horse's  made  him  pre- 


THE  WA000N8.  25 

Bently  look  up ;  his  eye  in  the  moment  caught  the  gleam  of 
something  white  attached  to  a  part  of  the  harness.  Examined 
by  the  light  of  the  lantern,  this  proved  to  be  a  folded  paper — 
a  billet  It  bore  no  address  without ;  within  was  the  super- 
scription : — 
«  To  the  Divil  of  HoUow's-miln." 

We  will  not  copy  the  rest  of  the  orthography,  which  was 
very  peculiar,  but  translate  it  into  legible  English.  It  ran 
thus :—  • 

"  Your  hellish  machinery  is  shivered  to  smash  on  Stilbro' 
Moor,  and  your  men  are  lying  bound  hand  and  foot  in  a  ditch 
by  the  roadside.  Take  this  as  a  warning  from  men  that  are 
starving,  and  have  starving  wives  and  children  to  go  home  to 
when  they  have  done  this  deed.  If  you  get  new  machines,  or 
if  you  otherwise  go  on  as  you  have  done,  you  shall  hear  from 
tis  again.     Beware!" 

"Hear  from  you  again?  Yes  ;  I'll  hear  from  you  again, 
and  you  shall  hear  from  me.  I  '11  speak  to  you  directly  :  on 
Stilbro*  Moor  you  shall  hear  from  me  in  a  moment." 

Having  led  the  waggons  within  the  gates,  he  hastened  to- 
wards the  cottage.  Opening  the  door,  he  spoke  a  few  words 
qaickly  but  quietly  to  two  females  who  ran  to  meet  him  in  the 
passage.  He  calmed  the  seeming  alarm  of  one  by  a  brief 
palliative  accotmt  of  what  had  taken  place  ;  to  the  other  he 
said,  **  Gro  into  the  mill,  Sarah — ^there  is  the  key — and  ring 
the  mill-bell  as  loud  as  you  can  :  afterwards  you  will  get 
another  lantern  and  help  me  to  light  up  the  front." 

Returning  to  his  horses,  he  unharnessed,  fed,  and  stabled  I 
them  with  equal  *  speed  and  care,  pausing  occasionally,  while 
80  occupied,  as  if  to  listen  for  the  mill-bell.      It  clanged  out  /: 
presently,  with  irregular  but  loud  and  alarming  din:  the  hur-x 
ried  agitated  peal  seemed  more  urgent  than  if  the  summons  \^ 
had  been  steadily  given  by  a  practised  hand.     On  that  still 
night,  at  that  unusual  hour,  it  was  heard  a  long  way  round: 
the  guests  in  the  kitchen  of  the  Redhouse  were  startled  by 
the  clangour ;    and,  declaring  that  "  there  must  be  summat 
more  nor  common  to  do  at  Hollow's-miln,"  they  called  for 
lanterns,  and  hurried  to  the  spot  in  a  body.     And  scarcely 
had  they  thronged  into  the  yard  with  their  gleaming  lights, 
when  the  tramp  of  horses  was  heard,  and  a  little  man  in  a 
ahovel  hat,  sitting  erect  on  the  back  of  a  shaggy  pony,  "  rode 
lightly  iii|"  followed  by  an  aide-de-camp  mounted  on  a  larger 


26  shuclet. 

Mr  Moore,  meantiine,  after  stabling  his  dray-horses,  liad 
saddled  his  hackney ;  and,  with  the  aid  of  Sarah,  the  servant, 
lit  up  his  mill  ;  whose  wide  and  long  front  now  glared  one 
great  illumination,  throwing  a  sufficient  light  on  the  yard  to 
obviate  all  fear  of  confusion  arising  from  obscurity.  Already 
a  deep  hum  of  voices  became  audible.  Mr  Malone  had  at 
length  issued  from  the  counting-house,  previously  taking  the 
precaution  to  dip  his  head  and  face  in  the  stone  water-jar;  and 
this  precaution,  together  with  the  sudden  alarm,  had  nearly 
rested  to  him  the  possession  of  those  senses  which  the  puni 
had  partially  scattered.  He  stood  with  his  hat  on  the  back  of 
his  head,  and  his  shillelagh  grasped  in  his  dexter  fist,  answer- 
ing much  at  random  the  questions  of  the  newly-arrived  party 
from  the  Redhouse.  Mr  Moore  now  appeared,  and  was  imme- 
diately confronted  by  the  shovel  hat  and  the  shaggy  pony. 

"  Well,  Moore,  what  is  your  business  with  us  ?  I  thought 
you  would  want  us  to-night :  me  and  the  hetman  here  (patting 
his  pony's  neck),  and  Tom  and  his  charger.  When  I  heard 
your  null-bell,  I  could  sit  still  no  longer,  so  I  left  Boultby  to 
finish  his  supper  alone :  but  where  is  the  enemy?  I  do  not 
see  a  mask  or  a  smutted  i^ce  present ;  and  there  is  not  a  pane 
of  glass  broken  in  your  windows.  Have  you  had  an  attack, 
or  do  you  expect  one?" 

"  Oh,  not  at  all  I  I  have  neither  had  one  nor  expect  one," 
answered  Moore,  coolly.  "  I  only  ordered  the  bell  to  be  rung 
because  I  want  two  or  three  neighbours  to  stay  here  in  the 
HoUow  while  I  and  a  couple  or  so  more  go  over  to  Stilbro' 
Moor." 

"  To  Stilbro'  Moor !    What  to  do?    To  meet  the  waggons  ?" 

"  The  waggons  are  come  home  an  hour  ago." 

"  Then  all 's  right.     What  more  would  you  have  ?" 

"  They  came  home  empty ;  and  Joe  Scott  and  Company  are 
left  on  the  moor,  and  so  are  the  frames.     Read  that  scrawl." 

Mr  Helstone  received  and  perused  the  document  of  which 
the  contents  have  before  been  given. 

"  Hum !  They  Ve  only  served  you  as  they  serve  others. 
But,  however,  the  poor  fellows  in  the  ditch  will  be  expecting 
help  with  some  impatience :  this  is  a  wet  night  for  such  a 
berth.  I  and  Tom  will  go  with  you ;  Malone  may  stay  behind 
and  take  care  of  the  mill :  what  is  the  matter  with  him  ?  His 
eyes  seem  starting  out  of  his  head." 

"  He  has  been  eating  a  mutton-chop." 

'' Indeed  I     Peter  Augustus,  be  on  your  guard.     Eat  no 


MR  TOBKE.  27 

mare  mutton-chopis  to-night.  You  axe  left  here  in  command 
of  these  premises  :  an  honourable  post  I" 

"Is  anybody  to  stay  with  me  ?" 

"  As  many  of  the  present  assemblage  as  choose.  My  lads, 
how  many  of  you  will  remain  here,  and  how  many  will  go  a 
little  way  with  me  and  Mr  Moore  on  the  Stilbro'-road,  to  meet 
some  men  who  have  been  waylaid  and  assaulted  by  frame- 
breakers?" 

The  small  number  of  three  volunteered  to  go;  the  rest  pre- 
ferred staying  behind.  As  Mr  Moore  mounted  his  horse,  the 
Rector  asked  him  in  a  low  voice  whether  he  had  locked  up  the 
mutton-chops,  so  that  Peter  Augustus  could  not  get  at  them  ? 
The  manufiacturer  nodded  an  affirmative,  and  the  rescue-party 
set  out. 


CHAPTER    m. 

UR  TORKE. 


Cheerfulness,  it  wotdd  appear,  is  a  matter  which  depends 
fully  as  much  on  the  state  of  things  within,  as  on  the  state  of 
things  without  and  aroimd  us.  I  make  this  trite  remark, 
because  I  happen  to  know  that  Messrs  Helstone  and  Moore 
trotted  forth  from  the  mill-yard  gates,  at  the  head  of. their 
very  small  company,  in  the  best  possible  spirits.  When  a  ray 
from  a  lantern  (the  three  pedestrians  of  the  party  carried  each 
one)  fell  on  Mr  Moore's  face,  you  could  see  an  unusual,  because 
a  lively,  spark  dancing  in  his  eyes,  and  a  new-found  vivacity 
mantHng  on  his  dark  physiognomy ;  and  when  the  Rector's 
visage  was  illiuninated,  lus  hard  features  were  revealed  s!3 
agrin  and  ashine  with  glee.  Yet  a  drizzling  night,  a  somewhat 
perilous  expedition,  you  would  think  were  not  circuinstances 
calculated  to  enliven  those  exposed  to  the  wet  and  engaged'  in 
the  adventure.  If  any  member  or  members  of  the  crew  who 
had  been  at  work  on  Stilbro'  Moor  had  caught  a  view  of  this 
party,  they  would  have  had  great  pleasure  in  shooting  either 
of  the  leaders  from  behind  a  wall :  and  the  leaders  knew 
this ;  and,  the  fact  is,  being  both  men  of  steelly  nervea  and 
steady-beating  hearts,  were  elate  with  the  knowledge. 

I  am  aware,  reader,  and  you  need  not  remind  me,  that  it  is 
a  dreadful  thing  for  a  parson  to  be  warlike:  I  am  aware  that 


28  SHIRLBT. 

he  sHould  be  a  man  of  peace.  I  have  some  hint  outline  of  an 
idea  of  what  a  clergyman's  mission  is  amongst  mankind,  and 
I  remember  distinctly  whose  servant  he  is  ;  whose  message  he 
delivers,  whose  example  he  should  follow ;  yet,  with  all  this, 
if  you  are  a  parson-hater,  you  need  not  expect  me  to  go  along 
with  you  every  step  of  your  dismal,  downward-tending,  un- 
christian road ;  you  need  not  expect  me  to  join  in  your  deep 
anathemas,  at  once  so  narrow  and  so  sweeping — in  your 
poisonous  rancour,  so  intense  and  so  absurd,  against  '^  the 
cloth  ;"  to  lift  up  my  eyes  and  hands  with  a  Supplehough,  or 
to  inflate  my  lungs  with  a  Barraclough,  in  horror  and  denim-r 
ciation  of  the  diabolical  rector  of  BriailBeld. 

He  was  not  diabolical  at  all.  The  evil  simply  w;as — ^he 
had  missed  his  vocation  :  he  should  have  been  a  soldier,  and 
circumstances  had  made  him  a  priest.  For  the  rest,  he  was 
a  conscientious,  hard-headed,  hard-handed,  brave,  stem,  im- 
placable, faithful  little  man :  a  man  almost  without  sympathy, 
ungentle,  prejudiced,  and  rigid :  but  a  man  true  to  principle- 
honourable,  sagacious,  and  sincere.  It  seems  to  me,  readerj 
that  you  cannot  always  cut  out  men  to  fit  their  profession, 
and  liiat  you  ought  not  to  curse  them  because  that  profession 
sometimes  hangs  on  them  ungracefoUy :  nor  wiU  I  curse 
Helstone,  clerical  Cossack  as  he  was.  Yet  he  wca  ctirsed,  and 
by  many  of  his  own  parishioners,  as  by  others  he  was  adored: 
ymich  is  the  frequent  fate  of  men  who  show  partiality  in 
friendship  and  bitterness  in  enmity  ;  who  are  equally  attached 
to  principles  and  adherent  to  prejudices. 

Helstone  and  Moore,  being  both  in  excellent  spirits,  and 
united  for  the  present  in  one  cause,  you  would  expect  that,  as 
they  rode  side  by  side,  they  would  converse  amicably.  Oh, 
no  I  These  two  men,  of  hard  bilious  natures  both,  rarely 
oame  into  contact  but  they  chafed  each  other's  moods.  Their 
frequent  bone  of  contention  was  the  war.  Helstone  was  a 
'high  Tory  (there  were  Tories  in  those  days),  and  Moore  was 
a  bitter  Whig — a  Whig,  at  least,  as  far  as  opposition  to  the 
war-party  was  concerned  :  that  being  the  question  which 
affected  his  own  interest;  and  only  on  that  question  did  he 
profess  any  British  politics  at  all.  He  hked  to  infuriate 
Helstone  by  declaring  his  belief  in  the  invincibility  of  Bona- 
parte ;  by  taunting  England  and  Europe  with  the  impotence  of 
their  efforts  to  withstand  him ;  and  by  coolly  advancing  the 
opinion  that  it  was  as  well  to  yield  to  him  soon  as  late,  since 
he  must  in  the  end  crush  every  antagonist,  and  reign  supreine, 


BOt  TQRKE.  29 

Helstone  could  not  bear  these  sentiments:  it  was  only  on 
the  oonsideiataon  of  Moore  being  a  sort  of  outcast  and  alien, 
and  baying  bnt  half  measure  of  British  blood  to  temper  tbe 
foreign  gall  which  corroded  his  veins,  that  he  brought  himself 
to  listen  to  them  without  indulging  the  wish  he  felt  to  cane 
the  speaker.  Another  thing,  too,  somewhat  allayed  his  dis- 
gost ;  namely,  a  fellow-^ling  for  the  dogged  tone  with  which 
these  opinions  were  asserted,  and  a  respect  for  the  consistency 
of  Moore's  crabbed  contumacy. 

As  the  party  turned  into  the  Stilbro'  road,  they  met  what 
Httle  wind  there  was  ;  the  rain  dashed  in  their  faces.  Moore 
had  been  fretting  his  companion  previously,  and  now,  braced 
up  by  the  raw  breeze,  and  perhaps  irritated  by  the  sharp 
dnzzle,  he  began  to  goad  him. 

"Does  your  Peninsular  news  please  you  still?"  he  asked. 

"  What  do  you  mean?  "  was  the  surly  demand  of  the  Rector. 

"I  mean  have  you  still  Mth  in  that  Baal  of  a  Lord 
Weffington?" 

"  And  what  do  you  mean  now  ?  " 

"  Do  you  still  believe  that  this  wooden-faced  and  pebble- 
hearted  idol  of  England  has  power  to  send  fire  down  from  ^ 
heaven  to  consume  the  French  holocaust  you  want  to  offer  up  ?  " 

"  I  believe  Wellington  will  flog  Bonaparte's  marshals  into 
the  sea,  the  day  it  pleases  him  to  lift  his  arm." 

"  But,  my  dear  sir,  you  can't  be  serious  in  what  you  say. 
Bonaparte's  marshals  are  great  men,  who  act  imder  the 
gniduice  of  an  omnipotent  master-spirit ;  your  Wellington  is 
the  most  hiundrum  of  common-place  martinets,  whose  slow 
mechamcal  movements  are  further  cramped  by  an  ignorant 
home-government."    * 

"Wellington  is  the  soul  of  England.  Wellington  is  the" 
light  champion  of  a  good  cause;  the  fit  representative  of  a 
Dowerful,  a  resolute,  a  sensible,  and  an  honest  nation." 

"Your  good  cause,  as  &r  as  I  understand  it,  is  simply  the 
Rstoration  of  that  filthy,  feeble  Ferdinand,  to  a  throne  which  he 
diflgraced;  your  fit  representative  of  an  honest  people  is  a  dull- 
ynHed  drover,  acting  for  a  duller-witted  farmer ;  and  against 
these  are  arrayed  victorious  supremacy  and  invincible  genius." 

"  Against  legitimacy  is  arrayed  usurpation  ;  against  modest, 
nni^minded,  righteous,  and  braVe  resistance  to  encroach- 
ment, IS  arrayed  boastfdl,  .double-tongued,  selfish,  and 
tnacherouB  ambition  to  possess.     Grod  defend  the  right  t* 

^  God  often  defends  ioe  powerfuL"  > 


so  SHIRLET. 

"  What!  I  suppose  the  handM  of  Israelites  standing  diy- 
shod  on  the  Asiatic  side  of  the  Eed  Sea,  was  more  power^ 
than  the  host  of  the  Egyptians  drawn  up  on  the  African  side  ? 
Were  they  more  numerous  ?  Were  they  better  appointed  ? 
Were  they  more  mighty,  in  a  word — eh?  Don't  speak,  or. 
you  '11  tell  a  lie,  Moore  ;  you  know  you  will.  They  were  a 
poor  over-wrought  band  of  bondsmen.  Tyrants  had  oppressed 
them  through  four  himdred  years  ;  a  feeble  mixture  of  women 
and  children  diluted  their  thin  ranks ;  their  masters,  who 
roared  to  foUow  them  through  the  divided  flood,  were  a  set  of 
pampered  Ethiops,  about  as  strong  and  brutal  as  the  lions  of 
Libya.  They  were  armed,  horsed,  and  charioted,  the  poor 
Hebrew  wanderers  were  afoot ;  few  of  them,  it  is  likely,  had 
better  weapons  than  their  shepherds'  crooks,  or  their  masons' 
building-tools ;  their  meek  and  mighty  leader  himself  had 
only  his  rod.  But  bethink  you,  Robert  Moore,  right  was  with 
them  ;  the  God  of  battles  was  on  their  side.  Crime  and  the 
lost  archangel  generalled  the  ranks  of  Pharaoh,  and  which 
triumphed  ?  We  know  that  well :  *  The  Lord  saved  Israel 
that  day  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Egyptians,  and  Israel  saw  the 
Egyptians  dead  upon  the  sea-shore  ; '  yea,  '  the  depths  covered 
them,  they  sank  to  the  bottom  as  a  stone.'  The  right  hand  of 
the  Lord  became  glorious  in  power ;  the  right  hand  of  the 
Lord  dashed  in  pieces  the  enemy  I" 

"  You  are  all  right ;  only  you  forget  the  true  parallel : 
France  is  Israel,  and  Napoleon  is  Moses.  Europe,  with  her 
old  over-gorged  empires  and  roften  dynasties,  is  corrupt 
Egypt ;  gallant  France  is  the  Twelve  Tribes,  and  her  fresh 
and  vigorous  Usurper  the  Shepherd  of  Horeb." 

"  I  scorn  to  answer  you." 

Moore  accordingly  answered  l^mself ;  at  least  he  subjoined 
to  what  he  had  just  said  an  additional  observation  in  a  lower 
voice. 

"  Oh,  in  Italy  he  was  as  great  as  any  Moses  1  He  was  the 
right  thing  there ;  flt  to  head  and  organize  measures  for  the 
regeneration  of  nations.  It  puzzles  me  to  this  day  how  the 
conqueror  of  Lodi  should  have  condescended  to  become  an 
emperor,  a  vulgar,  a  stupid  humbug ;  and  still  more  how  a 
people,  who  had  once  called  themselves  republicans,  should 
have  sunk  again  to  the.  grade  of  mere  slaves.  I  despise 
France  I  If  England  had  gone  as  far  on  the  march  of 
civilization  as  Fiance  did,  she  would  hardly  have  retreated 
co:i^.amele8sly.** 


MR  TOBKE.  81 

^  Yoa  don't  mean  to  say  that  besotted  imperial  France  is 
any  worse  than  bloody  republican  France?"  demanded 
Helstone,  fiercely. 

"  I  mean  to  say  nothing :  but  I  can  think  what  I  please, 
yon  know,  Mr  Helstone,  both  about  France  and  England ; 
and  about  revolutions,  and  regicides,  and  restorations  in 
general ;  and  about  the  divine  right  of  kings,  which  you  often 
stickle  for  in  your  sermons,  and  the  duty  of  non-resistance, 
and  the  sanity  of  war,  and " 

Mr  Moore's  sentence  was  here  cut  short  by  the  rapid  rolling 
np  of  a  gig,  and  its  sudden  stoppage  in  the  middle  of  the  road; 
both  he  and  the  Rector  had  been  too  much  occupied  with  their 
discourse  to  notice  its  approach  till  it  was  close  upon  them. 

"  Nah,  maister,  did  th'  waggons  hit  home?"  demanded  a 
roioe  from  the  vehicle. 

«  Can  that  be  Joe  Scott?" 

"  Ay,  ay  I"  returned  another  voice  ;  for  the  gig  contained 
two  persons,  as  was  seen  by  the  glimmer  of  its  lamp  :  the  men 
^th  the  litems  had  now  fallen  into  the  rear,  or  rather,  the 
equestrians  of  the  rescue-party  had  outridden  the  pedestrians. 
**  Ay,  Mr  Moore,  it 's  Joe  Scott.  I  'm  bringing  him  back  to 
you  in  a  bonny  pickle.  I  fand  him  on  the  top  of  the  moor 
yonder,  him  and  three  others.  What  will  you  give  me  for 
restoring  him  to  you ?" 

"  Why,  my  thanks,  I  believe ;  for  I  could  better  have 
afforded  to  lose  a  better  mar>^.  That  is  you,  I  suppose,  Mr* 
Yorke,  by  your  voice  ?" 

"  Ay,  lad,  it 's  me.  I  was  coming  home  from  Stilbro' 
market,  and  just  as  I  got  to  the  middle  of  the  moor,  and  was 
whipping  on  as  swift  as  the  wind  (for  these,  they  say,  are  not 
safe  times,  thanks  to  a  bad  government !)  I  heard  a  groan.  I 
jmlled  up :  some  would  have  whipt  on  faster ;  but  I  Ve  naught 
to  fear,  that  I  know  of.  I  don't  beHeve  there 's  a  lad  in  these 
parts  would  harm  me  :  at  least  I  'd  give  them  as  good  as  I  got 
if  they  offered  to  do  it.  I  said,  *  Is  there  aught  wrong'  any- 
where?'— *  'Deed  is  there,'  somebody  says,  speaking  out  of  the 
ground,  like.  *  What's  to  do?  be  sharp,  and  teU  me,'  I 
ordered. — ^  Nobbut  four  on  us  ligging  in  a  ditch,'  says  Joe,  as 
quiet  as  could  be.  I  teU'd  'em,  more  shame  to  'em,  and  bid 
them  get  up  and  move  on,  or  I  'd  lend  them  a  lick  of  the  gig- 
whip  ;  for  my  notion  was,  they  were  all  fresh. — *  We  'd  ha'  done 
that  an  hour  sin' ;  but  we  're  teed  wi'  a  bit  o'  band,'  says  Joe. 
So  in  a  while  I  got  down  and  loosed  'em  wi'  my  penknife  *  and 


32  SHIRLST. 

Scott  would  ride  wi'  me,  to  tell  me  all  how  Jt  happened ;  and 
t'  others  are  coming  on  as  fast  as  their  feet  wiU  bnng  them.'* 

"  Well,  I  am  greatly  obliged  to  you,  Mr  Yorke." 

"  Are  you,  my  lad  ?  you  know  you  're  not.  However,  here 
are  the  rest  approaching.  And  here,  by  the  Lord !  is  another 
set  with  lights  in  their  pitchers,  like  the  army  of  Gideon ;  and 
as  weVe  th'  parson  wi'  us — ^good  evening,  Mr  Helstone — 
we'sedo." 

Mr  Helstone  returned  the  salutation  of  the  individual  in 
the  gig  very  stiffly  indeed.     That  individual  proceeded  :— 

"  We  're  eleven  strong  men,  and  there 's  both  horses  and 
chariots  amang  us.  If  we  could  only  fall  in  wi'  some  of  these 
starved  ragamuffins  of  frame-breakers,  we  could  win  a  grand 
victory ;  we  could  iv'ry  one  be  a  Wellington — that  would 
pleai^e  ye,  Mr  Helstone ;  and  sich  paragraphs  as  we  could 
contrive  for  t'  papers !  Briarfield  suld  be  famous  :  but  we  'se 
hev  a  column  and  a  half  i'  th'  StUbro*  Courierower  this  job,  as 
it  is,  I  daresay  :  I  'se  expect  no  less." 

"  And  I  'U  promise  you  no  less,  Mr  Yorke,  for  I  '11  write 
the  article  myself,"  returned  the  Rector. 

"  To  be  sure !  sartainly  I  And  mind  ye  recommend  weel 
that  them  'at  brake  t'  bits  o'  frames,  and  teed  Joe  Scott's  legs 
wi'  band,  suld  be  hung  without  benefit  o'  clergy.  It's  a 
hanging  matter,  or  suld  be  ;  no  doubt  o'  that." 

"If  I  judged  them,  I'd  give  them  short  shrift!"  cried 
Moore  ;  "  but  I  mean  to  let  them  quite  alone  this  bout,  to  give 
them  rope  enough,  certain  that  in  tlie  end  they  will  hang 
themselves." 

"  Let  them  alone,  will  ye,  Moore  ?  Do  you  promise  that  ?  " 
*  "  Promise  ?  No.  All  I  mean  to  say  is,  I  shall  give  myself 
no  particular  trouble  to  catch  them ;  but  if  one  falls  in  my 
way " 

"  You  'U  snap  him  up,  of  course :  only  you  would  rather 
they  would  do  something  worse  than  merely  stop  a  waggon 
before  you  reckon  with  them.  Well,  we  *U  say  no  more  on 
the  subject  at  present.  Here  we  are  at  my  door,  gentlemen, 
and  I  hope  you  and  the  men  will  step  in :  you  will  none  of 
you  be  the  worse  of  a  little  refreshment." 

Moore  and  Helstone  opposed  this  proposition  as  imneces* 
sary ;  it  was,  however,  pressed  on  them  so  comteously,  and 
the  night,  besides,  was  so  inclement,  and  the  gleam  from  the 
muslin-curtained  windows  of  the  house  before  which  they  had 
halted,  looking  so  inviting,  that  at  length  they  yielded.    Mr. 


MB  YOREE.  38 


I 


Torkey  after  having  alighted  from  his  gig,  which  he  lefl  in 
charge  of  a  man  who  issued  from  an  outbuilding  on  his 
arriyaly  led  the  way  in. 

It  will  have  been  remarked  that  Mr  Yorke  varied  a  little  in 
his  phraseology ;  now  he  spoke  broad  Yorkshire,  and  anon  he 
expressed  himself  in  very  pure  English.  His  manner  seemed 
liable  to  equal  alternations ;  he  could  be  polite  and  affable, 
and  he  could  be  blunt  and  rough.  His  station  then  you  could 
not  easily  determine  by  his  speech  or  demeanour ;  perhaps 
the  appearance  of  his  residence  may  decide  it. 

The  men  he  recommended  to  take  the  kitchen  way,  paying 
that  he  would  "  see  them  served  wi'  summat  to  taste  presently." 
The  gentlemen  were  ushered  in  at  the  front  entrance.  They 
found  themselves  in  a  matted  hall,  lined  almost  to  the 
ceiling  with  pictures;  through  this  they  were  conducted  to  a 
large  parlour,  with  a  magnificent  fire  in  the  grate ;  the  most 
cheerful  of  rooms  it  appeared  as  a  whole,  and  when  you  came 
to  examine  details,  the  enlivening  efiect  was  not  diminished. 
There  was  no  splendour,  but  there  w^s  taste  everywhere, — 
mrasual  taste, — the  taste,  you  would. have  said,  of  a  travelled 
man,  a  scholar,  and  a  gentleman.  A  series  of  Italian  views 
decked  the  walls  ;  each  of  these  was  a  specimen  of  true  art ;  a 
ooimoisseur  had  selected  them :  they  were  genuine  and  valuable. 
Even  by  candlelight,  the  bright  clear  skies,  the  soft  distances, 
Mrith  blue  air  quivering  between  the  eye  and  the  hills,  the  fresh 
tmts,  and  well  massed  lights  and  shadows,  charmed  the  view. 
The  subjects  were  all  pastoral,  the  scenes  were  all  sunny.  There 
was  a  guitar  and  some  music  on  a  sofa ;  there  were  cameos, 
beautif^  miniatures ;  a  set  of  Grecian-looking  vases  on  the 
mantelpiece ;  there  were  books  well  arranged  in  two  elegant 
bookcases. 

Mr  Yorke  bade  his  guests  be  seated ;  he  then  rang  for 
wine ;  to  the  servant  who  brought  it  he  gave  hospitable  orders 
for  the  refreshment  of  the  men  in  the  kitchen.  .  The  Rector 
remained  ■  standing ;  he  seemed  not  to  like  his  quarters  ;  he 
would  not  touch  the  wine  his  host  ofiered  him. 

"  E'en  as  you  will,"  remarked  Mr  Yorke.  "  I  reckon  you 'A 
thinking  of  Eastern  customs,  Mr  Helstone,  and  you  'U  not  eat 
nor*  drink  imder  my  roof,  feared  we  sidd  be  forced  to  be 
friends;  but  I'm  'not  so  particular  or  superstitious.  You 
might  sup  the  contents  of  that  decanter,  and  you  might 
give  me  a  bottle  of  the  best  in  your  own  cellar,  and  I'd 
hold  myself  free  to  oppose  you  at  every  turn  still, — ^in  every 

3 


84  HUIULKZ. 

Testay-meetiiig  and  justice-meetmg  where  we  encoimtered 
one  another.*' 

"  It  is  just  what  I  should  expect  of  you,  Mr  Yorke.** 

"Does  it  agree  wi*  ye  now,  Mr  Helstone,  to  be  riding  oat 
after  rioters,  of  a  wet  night,  at  your  age  ?" 

"  It  always  agrees  with  me  to  be  doing  my  duty ;  and  in 
this  case  my  duty  is  a  thorough  pleasure.  To  hunt  down 
vermin  is  a  noble  occupation, — ^fit  for  an  archbishop." 

"Fit  for  ye,  at  ony  rate:  but  where 's  t'  curate?  He's 
happen  gone  to  visit  some  poor  body  in  a  sick  gird,  or  he 's 
happen  hunting  down  vermin  in  another  direction." 

"  He  is  doing  garrison-duty  at  HoUow's-miU." 

"You  left  him  a  sup  o'  wine,  I  hope,  Bob"  (turning  to  Mr 
Moore),  "  to  keep  his  courage  up?" 

He  did  not  pause  for  an  answer,  but  continued,  quickly — 
still  addressing  Moore,  who  had  thrown  himself  into  an  old- 
fashioned  chair  by  the  fireside, — "  Move  it,  Robert !  Get  up,  my 
lad  I  That  place  is  mine.  Take  the  sofa,  or  three  other  chairs, 
if  you  will,  but  not  this;  it  belangs  to  me,  and  nob'dy  else." 

"Why  are  you  so  particular  to  that  chair,  Mr  Yorke?" 
asked  Moore,  lazily  vacating  the -place,  in  obedience  to  orders. 

"  My  father  war  afore  me,  and  that 's  all  t'  answer  I  sail  gie 
thee ;  and  it 's  as  good  a  reason  as  Mr  Helstone  can  give  fox 
the  main  feck  o*  his  notions." 

"  Moore,  are  you  ready  to  go  ?  "  inqidred  the  Rector. 

"  Nay;  Robert's  not  ready;  or  rather,  I'm  not  ready  to  part 
wi'  him:  he's  an  ill  lad,  and  wants  correcting." 

"  Why,  sir  ?    What  have  I  done  ?  " 

"  Made  thyself  enemies  on  every  hand." 

"  What  do  I  care  for  that  ?  What  difference  does  it  make 
to  me  whether  your  Yorkshire  louts  hate  me  or  like  me  ?  " 

"  Ay,  there  it  is.  The  lad  is  a  mak'  of  an  alien  amang  us : 
his  father  would  never  have  talked  i'  that  way.  Go  back  to 
Antwerp,  where  you  were  bom  and  bred,  mauvaise  t^tel" 

"Mauvaise  t^te  vous-m^me;  je  ne  fais  que  mon  devoir: 
quant  k  vos  lourdauds  de  paysans,  je  m'en  moquel " 

"  En  revanche,  mon  gar9on,  nos  lourdauds  de  paysans  se 
moqueront  de  toi;  sois,  en  certain,"  replied  Yorke,  speaking 
with  nearly  as  pure  a  French  accent  as  Gerard  Moore. 

"  C'est  bon!  c'est  bon!  £t  puisque  cela  m'est  ^gal,  que  mes 
amis  ne  s'en  inqui^tent  pas." 

"  Tes  amis!    Oi!i  sont-ils,  tes  amis  ?  " 

"  Je  .fais  ^cho,  oh  sont-ils  ?  et  je  suis  fort  aise  que  V^o 


MB  TOBKE.  85 

leol  J  iSpond.  Au  diable  les  amis!  Je  me  souviens  encore 
dn  moment  oil  mon  p^re  et  mes  oncles  G6rard  appell^rent 
aatonr  d'enx  lenrs  amis,  et  Dieu  salt  si  les  amis  se  sont  em- 
press^ d^accourir  k  leur  secoursi  Tenez,  M.  Yorke,  ce  mot, 
ami,  m^irrite  trop ;  ne  m'en  parlez  plus." 

"  Comme  tu  voudras." 

And  here  Mr  Yorke  held  his  peace;  and  while  he  sits  lean- 
ing hack  in  his  three-cornered,  carved  oak  chair,  I  will  snsJboh 
mj  opportunity  to  sketch  the  portrait  of  this  French-speaking 
Yorkshire  gentleman. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

MB  TOBEE   (continued) 


A  YoBCSHiBE  gentleman  he  was,  par  excellence,  in  every  point. 
About  fifty-five  years  old,  but  looking  at  first  sight  still  older, 
for  his  hair  was  silver  white.  His  forehead  was  broad,  not 
Iiigh;  his  face  firesh  and  hale;  the  harshness  of  the  north  was 
seen  in  his  features,  as  it  was  heard  in  his  voice ;  every  trait 
was  thoroughly  English,  not  a  Norman  line  anywhere ;  it  was 
an  inelegant,  unclassic,  unaristocratic  mould  of  visage.  Fine 
people  would  perhaps  have  called  it  vulgar;  sensible  people 
would  have  termed  it  characteristic;  shrewd  people  would  have 
delighted  in  it  for  the  pith,  sagacity,  intelligence — the  rude, 
yet  real  originality  marked  in  every  hneament,  latent  in  eveiy 
fiurow.  But  it  was  an  indocile,  a  scornful,  and  a  sarcastic  face ; 
tlie  face  of  a  man  difficult  to  lead,  and  impossible  to  drive.  His 
stature  was  rather  tall,  and  he  was  well-made  and  wiry,  and 
had  a  stately  integrity  of  port;  there  was  not  a  suspicion  of  the 
clown  about  him  anywhere. 

I  did  not  find  it  easy  to  sketch  Mr  Yorkers  person,  but  it  is 
more  difiicult  to  indicate  his  mind.  If  you  expect  to  be  treated 
to  a  Perfection,  reader,  or  even  to  a  benevolent,  philanthropic 
old  gentleman  in  him,  you  are  mistaken.  He  has  spoken  with 
lome  sense,  and  with  some  good  feeling,  to  Mr  Moore;  but  you 
are  not  thence  to  conclude  that  he  always  spoke  and  thought 
justly  and  kindly.  . 

Mr  Yorke,  in  the  first  place,  was  without  the  organ  of  Vene- 
tatbn — a  great  want,  and  which  throws  a  man  wrong  on  eveiy 
poiDt  where  veneratioii  is  required.    Secondly,  he  was  without 


86 

the  organ  of  Comparison — a  deficieney  which  strips  a  num  o€ 
sympathy;  and,  thirdly,  he  had  too  little  of  the  organs  of 
Benevolence  aiid  Ideality,  which  took  the  glory  and  softness 
from  his  nature,  and  for  him  diminished  those  divine  qualities 
throughout  the  universe. 

The  want  of  veneration  made  him  intolerant  to  those  above 
him :  kings  and  nobles  and  priest?,  dynasties  and  parliaments 
and  establishments,  with  all  their  doings,  most  of  their  enact- 
ments, their  forms,  their  rights,  their  claims,  were  to  him  an 
abomination — all  rubbish ;  he  found  no  i^se  or  pleasure  in  them, 
and  believed  it  would  be  sjlear  gain,  and  no  damage  to  the 
world,  if  its  high  places  were  razed,  and  their  occupants  crushed 
in  the  fall.  The  want  of  veneration,  too,  made  him  dead  at 
heart  to  the  electric  delight  of  admiring  what  is  admirable ;  it 
dried  up  a  thousand  pure  sources  of  enjoyment;  it  withered  a 
thousand  vivid  pleasures.  He  was  not  irreligious,  though  a 
member  of  no  sect;  but  his  religion  could  not  be  that  of  one 
who  knows  how  to  venerate.  He  believed  in  Grod  and  heaven; 
but  his  God  and  heaven  were  those  of  a  man  in  whom  awe, 
imagination,  and  tenderness  lack. 

The  weakness  of  his  powers  of  comparison  made  him  incon« 
sistent;  while  he  professed  some  excdlent  general  doctrines  of 
mutual  toleration  and  forbearance,  he  cherished  towards  cer- 
tain classes  a  bigoted  antipathy:  he  spoke  of  "parsons"  and 
all  who  belonged  to  parsonsj  of  "  lords  "  and  the  appendages  of 
lords,  with  a  harshness,  sometimes  an  insolence,  as  imjust  as 
it  was  insufferable.  He  could  not  place  himself  in  the  position 
of  those  he  vituperated;  he  could  not  compare  their  errors 
with  their  temptations,  their  defects  with  their  disadvantages; 
he  could  not  realize  the  effect  of  such  and  such  circumstances 
on  himself  similarly  situated,  and  he  would  often  express  the 
most  ferocious  and  tjrrannical  wishes  regarding  those  who  had 
acted,  as  he  thought,  ferociously  and  tyrannically.  To  judge 
by  his  threats,  he  wpuld  have  employed  arbitrary,  even  cruel, 
means  to  advance  the  cause  of  freedom  and  equali^.  Equality 
— yes,  Mr  Yorke  talked  about  equality,  but  at  heart  he  was  a 
proud  man :  very  friendly  to  his  workpeople,  very  good  to  all 
who  were  l^eneath  him,  and  submitted  quietly  to  he  beneath 
him,  but  haughty  as  Beelzebub  to  whomsoever  the  world 
deemed  (for  he  deemed  no  man)  his  superior.  Revolt  was  in 
his  blood :  he  could  not  bear  control ;  his  father,  his  grand- 
father before  him,  could  not  bear  it,  and  hifi  children  after  him 
never  could. 


MS  TOBIE.  87 

The  want  of  general  benevolence  made  him  yery  impatient 
of  imbecility,  and  of  all  faults  which  grated  on  his  strongs 
shrewd  nature  :  it  left  no  check  to  his  cutting  sarcasm.  As  he 
was  not  mercifiii],  he  would  sometimes  wound  and  wound  again, 
without  noticing  how  much  he  hurt,  or  caring  how  deep  he 
throBt. 

As  to  the  paucity  of  ideality  in  his  mind,  that  can  scarcely 
be  called  a  faidt :  a  fine  ear  for  music,  a  correct  eye  for  colour 
and  form,  left  him  the  quality  of  taste  ;  and  who  cares  for  ima- 
gination ?  Wbo  does  not  think  it  a  rather  dangerous,  sense- 
less attribute-— «kin  to  weakness — perhaps  partaking  of  frenzy 
—a  disease  rather  than  a  gift  of  the  mind  ? 

Probably  aU  think  it  so,  but  those  who  possess— or  fancy 
they  possess — ^it.  To  hear  them  speak,  you  would  believe  that 
their  hearts  would  be  cold  if  that  elixir  did  not  flow  about 
tiiem ;  that  their  eyes  would  be  dim  if  that  ilame  did  not 
lefine  their  vision  ;  that  they  would  be  lonely  if  this  strange 
companion  abandoned  them.  You  would  suppose  that  it  im- 
parted some  glad  hope  to  spring,  some  fine  charm  to  summer, 
some  tranquil  joy  to  autumn,  some  consolation  to  winter,  which 
jou  do  not  feel.  An  illusion,  of  course ;  but  the  fanatics 
cHng  to  their  dream,  and  would  not  give  it  for  gold. 

As  Mr  Yorke  did  not  possess  poetic  imagination  himself, 
he  considered  it  a  most  superfluous  quality  in  others.  Painters 
and  musicians  he  could  tolerate,  and  even  encourage,  because 
he  could  relish  the  results  of  their  art ;  be  could  see  the  charm 
of  a  fine  picture,  and  feel  the  pleasure  of  good  music  ;  but  a 
quiet  poet — ^whatever  force  struggled.  Whatever  fire  glowed,  in 
his  breast-^if  he  could  not  have  played  the  man  in  the  count- 
ing-house, or  th6  tradesman  in  the  Piece  Hall,  might  have  lived 
despised,  and  died  scorned,  under  the  eyes  of  Hiram  Yorke. 

And  as  there  are  many  Hiram  Yorkes  in  the  .world,  it  is 
well  that  the  true  poet,  quietly  externally  though  he  may  be, 
has  often  a  truculent  spirit  under  his  placidity,  and  is  full  of 
shrewdness  in  his  meekness,  and  can  measure  the  whole  stature 
of  those  who  look  down  on  him,  and  correctly  ascertain  the 
weight  and  value  of  the, pursuits  they, disdain  him  for  not 
having  followed.  It  is  happy  that  he  can  have  his  own  bliss, 
his  own  society  with  his  great  friend  and  goddess,  Nature, 
({uite  independent  of  those  who  find  little  pleasure  in  him,  and 
m  whom  he  finds  no  pleasure  at  all.  It  is  just,  that  while  the 
world  and  circumstances  often  turn  a  dark,  cold  side  to  him— 
ind  properly,  too,  because  he  first  turns  a  dark,  cold,  oarelese 


88'  SEIfiLCT. 

side  to  them — ^he  should  be  able  to  maintain  a  festal  brightness 
and  cherishing  glow  in  his  bosom,  which  makes  all  bright  and 
genial  for  him ;  while  strangers,  perhaps,  deem  his  existence 
a  Polar  winter  never  gladdened  by  a  sun.  The  true  poet  is 
not  one  whit  to  be  pitied ;  and  he  is  apt  to  laugh  in  his  sleeve, 
when  any  misguided  sympathizer  whines  over  his  wrongs. 
Even  when  utilitarians  sit  in  judgment  on  him,  and  pronounce 
him  and  his  art  useless,  he  hears  the  sentence  with  sueh  a 
hard  derision,  such  a  broad,  deep,  comprehensive,  and  merci- 
less contempt  of  the  unhappy  Pharisees  who  pronounce  it,  that 
he  is  rather  to  be  chidden  than  condoled  with.  These,  how- 
ever, are  not  Mr  Yorke's  reflections  ;  and  it  is  with  Mr  Yorke 
we  have  at  present  to  do. 

I  have  told  you  some  of  his  faults,  reader ;  as  to  his  good 
points,  he  was  one  of  the  most  honourable  and  capable  men  in 
Yorkshire  :  even  those  who  disliked  him  were  forced  to  respect 
him.  He  was  much  beloved  by  the  poor,  because  he  was 
thoroughly  kind  and  very  fatherly  to  them.  To  his  workmen 
he  was  considerate  and  cordial :  when  he  dismissed  them  from 
an  occupation,  he  would  try  to  set  them  on  to  something  else ; 
or,  if  that  was  impossible,  help  them  to  remove  with  their 
families  to  a  district  where  work  might  possibly  be  had.  It 
must  also  be  remarked  that  if,  as  sometimes  chanced,  any  indi- 
vidual amongst  his  "hands"  showed  signs  of  insubordination, 
Yorke — ^who,  like  many  who  abhor  being  controlled,  knew  how 
to  control  with  vigour — had  the  secret  of  crushing  rebellion 
in  the  germ,  of  eradicating  it  like  a  bad  weed,  so  that  it  never 
spread  or  developed  within  the  sphere  of  his  authority.  Such 
being  ^e  happy  state  of  his  own  affairs,  he  felt  himself  at 
liberty  to  speatwith  the  utmost  severity  of  those  who  were 
differently  situated:  to  ascribe  whatever. was  unpleasant  in 
their  position  entirely  to  their  own  fault,  to  sever  himself  from 
the  masters,  and  advocate  freely  the  cause  of  the  operatives. 

Mr  Yorke's  family  was  the  first  and  oldest  in  die  district ; 
aad  he,  though  not  the  wealthiest,  was  one  of  the  most  influ- 
ential men.  His  education  had  been  good ;  in  his  yx>uth, 
before  the  Ff  ench  Revolution,  he  had  travelled  on  the  •con- 
tinent :  he  was  an  adept  in  the  French  and  Italian  languages. 
During  a  two  years'  sojourn  in  Italy,  he  had  collected  many 
good  paintings  and  tasteful  rarities,  with  which  his  residence 
was  now  adorned.  His  manners,  when  he  liked,  were  those 
of  a  finished  gentleman  of  the  old  school ;  his  conversation, 
when  he  was  disposed  to  please,  was  singularly  interestiiig  and 


MR  TOBKS.  89 

original ;  and  if  lie  tisually  expressed  himself  in  the  Yorkshire 
dialect,  it  was  because  he  chose  to  do  so,  preferring  his  native 
Doric  to  a  more  refined  vocabulary.  "  A  Yorkshire  burr,"  he 
affinnedy  '<was  as  much  better  than  a  Cockney's  lisp,  as  a 
bolPs  bellow  than  a  ratton's  squeak." 

Mr  Yorke  knew  every  one,  and  was  known  by  every  one 
for  miles  round ;  yet  his  intimate  acquaintances  were  very  few. 
Himself  thoroughly  original,  he  had  no  taste  for  what  was 
ordinary :  a  racy,  rough  character,  high  or  low,  ever  found 
atsceptance  with  him ;  a  refined,  insipid  personage,  however 
exalted  in  station,  was  his  aversion.  He  would  spend  an  hour 
any  time  in  talking  freely  with  a  shrewd  workman  of  his  own, 
cr  with  some  queer,  sagacious  old  woman  amongst  his  cottagers, 
Then  he  would  have  grudged  a  moment  to  a  common-place 
&e  gentleman,  or  to  the  most  fashionable  and  elegant,  if 
fidvolous,  lady.  His  preferences  on  these  points  he  carried  to 
aa  extreme,  forgetting  that  there  may  be  amiable  and  even 
■Imirable  characters  amongst  tliose  who  cannot  be  original, 
let  he  made  exceptions  to  his  own  rule  :  there  was  a  certain 
order  of  mind,  plain,  ingenuous,  neglecting  refinement,  almost 
^oid  of  intellectuality,  and  quite  incapable  of  appreciating 
▼hat  was  intellectual  in  him ;  but  which,  at  the  same  time, 
tever  felt  disgust  at  his  rudeness,  was  not  easily  wounded  by 
iis  sarcasm,  did  not  closely  analyze  his  sa3dngs,  doings,  or 
pinions ;  with  which*  he  was  peculiarly  at  ease,  and,  conse- 
quently, which  he  peculiarly  preferred.  He  was  lord  amongst 
roch  characters.  They,  while  submitting  implicitly  to  his 
influence,  never  acknowledged,  because  they  never  reflected 
on,  his  superiority ;  they  were  quite  tractable,  therefore,  with- 
out nmning  the  smallest  danger  of  being  servile ;  and  their 
imthinking,  easy,  artless  insensibility  was  as  acceptable,  because 
M  convenient,  to  Mr  Yorke,  as  that  df  the  chair  he  sat  on,  or 
of  the  £oor  he  trod. 

It  will  have  been  observed  that  he  was  not  quite  uncordial 
with  Mr  Moore ;  he  had  two  or  three  reasons  for  entertaining 
a  faint  partiality  to  that  gentleman.  It  may  sound  odd,  but 
the  first  of  these  was  that  Moore  spoke  English  with  a  foreign, 
and  French  with  a  perfectly  pure  accent ;  and  that  his  dark,  thin 
&oe,  with  its  fine  though  rather  wasted  lines,  had  a  most  anti- 
British  and*  anti- Yorkshire  look.  These  points  seem  frivolous, 
nnlikely  to  influence  a  character  like  Yorke's ;  but,  the  fact 
Ut  they  recalled  old,  perhaps  pleasurable  associations :  they 
Wwight  back  his  travelling,  his  youthful  days.     He  had  seeiii 


40  shiblet/ 

amidst  Italian  cities  anch  scenes,  faces  like  Mooze^s ;  he  had 
heard,  in  Parisian  cafes  and  theatres,  voices  like  his  ;  he  was 
young  then^  and  when  he  looked  at  and  listened  to  die  alien, 
he  seemed  yonng  again. 

Secondly,  he  had  known  Moore's  father,  and  had  had  deal- 
ings with  him :  that  was  a  more  substantial,  though  by  no 
means  a  more  agreeable  tio ;  for,  as  his  firm  had  been  con- 
nected with  Moore's  in  business,  it  had  also,  in  some  measure, 
been  implicated  in  its  losses. 

Thirdly, 'he  had  found  Eobert  himself  a  sharp  man  of  busi- 
ness. He  saw  reason  to  anticipate  that  he  would  in  the  end 
by  one  means  or  another,  make  money ;  and  he  respected  boil 
his  resolution  and  acilteness  ;  perhaps,  also,  his  hardness.  L 
fourth  circumstance  which  d;rew  them  together  was  that  d 
Mr  Yorke  being  one  of  the  guardians  of  the  minor  on  whoa 
estate  HoUow's-mill  was  situated  ;  consequently  Moore,  in  tlB 
course  of  his  alterations  and  improvements,  had  frequent  occa- 
sion  to  consult  him. 

As  to  the  other  guest  now  present  in  Mr  Yorke's  parlou^ 
Mr  Helstone,  between  him  and  his  host  there  existed  a  doublb 
antipathy  :  the  antipathy  of  nature  and  that  of  circumstances 
The  free-thinker  hated  the  formalist :  the  lover  of  libert"' 
detested  the  disciplinarian :  besides,  it  was  said  that  in  formei 
years  they  had  been  rival  suitors  of  the  same  lady. 

Mr  Yorke,  as  a  general  rule,  was,  when  young,  noted  for  his 
preference  of  sprightly  and  dashing  womoi :  a  showy  shape 
and  air,  a  lively  wit,  a  ready  tongue,  chiefly  seemed  to  attract 
him.  He  never,  however,  proposed  to  any  of  these  brilliant 
belles,  whose  society  he  sought ;  and  all  at  once  he  seriously 
fell  in  love  withj  and  eagerly  wooed  a  girl  who  presented  a 
complete  contrast  to  those  he  had  hitherto  noticed :  a  girl  with 
the  face  of  a  Madonna ;  a  girl  of  living  marble ;  stillness  per- 
sonified. No  matter  that,  when  he  spoke  to  her,  she  only 
answered  him  in  monosyllables ;  no  matter  that  his  sighs 
seemed  unheard,  that  his  .glances  were  unretumed^  that  she 
never  responded  to  his  opinions,  rarely  smiled  at  his  jests, 
paid  him  no  respect  and  no  attention;  no  matter  that  she 
seemed  the  opposite  of  everything  feminine  he  had  ever,  in  his 
whole  life,  been  known  to  admire :  for  him  Mary  Cave  was 
perfect,  because  somehow,  for  some  reason — ^no  doubt  he  had 
a  reason — ^he  loved  her. 

Mr  Helstone,  at  that  time  curate  of  Briarfield,  loved  Maiy 
too;  or,  at  any  rate,  he  fancied^her.   Several  others  admixed  her. 


MB  TORSE.  41 

for  she  was  beautiful  as  a  monumental  angel;  but  the  clergy- 
man was  preferred  for  his  office's  sake:  that  office  probably 
inyesting  him  with  some  of  the  illusion  necessary  to  allure  to 
the  commission  of  matrimony,  and  which  Miss  Cave  did  not 
£nd  in  any  of  the  young  wool-staplers,  her  other  adorers. 
Mr  Helstone  neither  Had,  nor  professed  to  have,  Mr  Torke's 
absorbing  passion  for  her :  he  had  none  of  the  humble  reve- 
rence whidi  seemed  to  subdue  most  of  her  suitors;  he  saw 
her  more  as  she  really  was  than  the  rest  did ;  he  was,  conse- 
quently, more  master  of  her  and  himself.  She  accepted  him 
at  the  first  offer,  and  they  were  married.  . 

Nature  nerer  intended  Mr  Helstone  to  make  a  very  good 
husband,  especially  to  a  quiet  wife.  He  thought,  so  long  as  a 
woman  was  silent,  nothing  ailed  her;  and  she  wanted  nothing. 
If  she  did  not  complain  of  solitude,  solitude,  however  continued, 
touldnot  be  irksome  to  her.  K  she  did  not  talk  and  put  herself 
forward,  express  a  partiality  for  this,  an  aversion  to  that,  she 
had  no  partialities  or  aversions,  and  it  was  useless  to  consult 
her  tastes.  He  made  no  pretence  of  comprehei^ding  women, 
or  comparing  them  with  men :  they  were  a  different,  probably 
a  very  inferior  order  of  existence;  a  wife  could  not  be  her 
husbimd^s  companion,  much  less  his  confidant,  much  less  his 
stay.  His'mfe,  after  a  year  or  two,  was  of  no  great  importance 
to  him  in  any  shape;  and  when  she  one  day,  as  he  thought, 
suddenly — ^for  he  had  scarcely  noticed  her  decline — but,  as 
others  tiiought,  gradually,  took  her  leave  of  him  and  of  life, 
and  there  was  only  a  still  beautiful-featured  mould  of  clay 
lefl,  cold  and  white,  in  the  conjugal  couch,  he  felt  his  bereave- 
ment— ^who  shall  say  how  little  ?  Yet,  perhaps,  more  than  he 
seemed  to  feel  it;  idr  he  was  not  a  man  from  whom  grief  easily 
wrong  tears. 

His  dry-eyed  and  sober  mourning  scandalized  an  old  house- 
keeper, and  likewise  a  female  attendant,  who  had  waited  upon 
Idrs  Helstone  in  her  sickness:  and  who,  perhaps,  had  had 
opportunities  of  learning  more  of  the  deceased  lady's  nature, 
of  her  capacity  for  feeling  and  loving,  than  her  husband  knew: 
they  gossiped  together  over  the  corpse,  related  anecdotes,  with 
embdlishments  of  her  lingering  decline,  and  its  real  or  sup- 
posed cause;  in  short,  they  worked  each  other  up  to  some 
indignation  against  the  austere  little  man,  who  sat  examining 
papers  in  an  adjoining  room,  tmconscious  of  what  opprobrium 
he  was  the  object. 

Mn  Helstone  was  hardly  under  the  sod  when  rumours  hefpsi 


48  SHIBLET. 

to  be  rife  in  the  neigbbourhood  that  she  Had  died  of  a  broken 
heart ;  these  magnified  quickly  into  reports  of  hard  usage,  and, 
finally,  details  of  harsh  treatment  on  the  part  of  her  husband: 
reports  grossly  imtrue,  but  not  the  less  eagerly  received  on 
that  accoimt.  Mr  Yorke  heard  them,  partly  believed  them. 
Already,  of  course,  he  had  no  friendly  feeling  to  his  successful 
rival;  though  himself  a  married  man  now,  and  tmited  to  a 
woman  who  seemed  a  complete  contrast  to  Mary  Cave  in  all 
respects,  he  could  not  forget  the  great  disappointment  of  his 
life ;  and  when  he  heard  that  what  would  have  been^o  precious 
to  him  had  been  neglected,  perhaps  abused  by  another,  he 
conceived  for  that  other  a  rooted  and  bitter  animosity. 

Of  the  nature  and  strength  of  this  animosity,  Mr  Helstone 
was  but  half  aware :  he  neither  knew  how  much  Yorke  had 
loved  Mary  Cave,  what  he  had  felt  on  losing  her,  nor  was  he 
conscious  of  the  calumnies  concerning  his  treatment  of  her, 
familiar  to  every  ear  in  the  neighbourhood  but  his  own.  He 
believed  political  and  religious  differences./alone  separated  him 
and  Mr  Yorke ;  had  he  known  how  the  case  really  stood,  he 
would  hardly  have  been  induced  by  any  persuasion  to  cross 
his  former  rival's  threshold. 


Mr  Yorke  did  not  resume  his  lecture  of  Bobert  Moore ;  the 
conversation  erelong  recommenced  in  a  more  general  form, 
though  still  in  a  somewhat  disputative  tone.  The  unquiet 
state  of  the  coimtry,  the  various  depredations  lately  committed 
on  mill-property  in  the  district,  supplied  abundant  matter  for 
disagreement;  especially  as  each  of  the  three  gentlemen  pre- 
sent differed  more  or  less  in  his  views  on  these  subjects.  Mr 
Helstone  thought  the  masters  aggrieved,  the  workpeople  im- 
reasonable :  he  condemned  sweepingly  the  wide-spread  spirit  of 
disaffection  against  constituted  authorities,  the  growing  indis- 
position to  bear  with  patience  evils  he  regarded  as  inevitable; 
the  cxires  he  prescribed  were  vigorous  government  interference, 
strict  magisterial  vigilance ;  when  necessary,  prompt  military 
coercion. 

Mr  Yorke  wished  to  know  whether  this  interference,  vigil- 
ance aqd  coercion  would  feed  those  who  were  hungry,  give 
work  to  those  who  wanted  work,  and  whom  no  man  would 
hire.  He  scouted  the  idea  of  inevitable  evils ;  he  said  public 
patience  was  a  camel,  on  whose  back  the  last  atom  that  could 
be  borne  had  already  been  laid,  and  that  resistance  was  now  a 
duty:  the  wide-spread  spirit  of  disaffection  against  constituted 


MB  TORKE.  48 

authorities  he  regarded  as  the  most  promising  sign  of  the 
times ;  the  masters,  he  allowed,  were  truly  aggrieved,  but  their 
main  grievances  had  been  heaped  on  them  by  a  "  corrupt,  base, 
and  bloody"  government  (these  were  Mr  Yorke's  epithets). 
Madmen  like  Pitt,  demons  like  Castlereagh,  mischievous  idiots 
like  Perceval,  were  the  tyrants,  the  curses  of  the  country,  the 
destroyers  of  her  trade.  It  was  their  infatuated  perseverance 
in  an  nnjnstifiable,  a  hopeless,  a  ruinous  war,  which  had 
brought  ihe  nation  to  its  present  pass.  It  w^s  their  mon- 
strously oppressive  taxation,  it  was  the  infamous  "  Orders  in 
Council'' — the  originators  of  which  deserved  impeachment  and 
the  scaffold,  if  ever  public  men  did — ^that  hung  a  millstone 
about  England's  neck. 

"  But  where  was  the  use  of  talking  ?  "  he  demanded — "  What 
chance  was  there  of  reason  being  heard  in  a  land  that  was 
king-ridden,  priest-ridden,  peer-ridden — ^where  a  lunatic  was 
the  nominal  monarch,  an  unprincipled  debauchee'  the  real 
ruler;  where  such  an  insult  to  common  sense  as  hereditary 
legislators  was  tolerated — where  such  a  humbug  as  a  bench  of 
bishops — ^such  an  arrogant  abuse  as  a  pampered,  persecuting 
established  Church  was  endured  and  venerated — ^where  a 
standing  army  wa^  maintained,  and  a  host  of  lazy  parsons  and 
their  pauper  families  were  kept  on  the  fat  of  the  land  ?  " 

Mr  Helstone,  rising  up  and  putting  on  his  shovel-hat,  ob- 
served in  reply,  "  That  in  the  course  of  his  life  he  had  met 
with  two  or  three  instances  where  sentiments  of  this  sort  had 
been  very  bravely  maintained  so  long  as  health,  strength,  and 
worldly  prosperity  had  been  the  allies  of  him  who  professed 
them ;  but  there  dime  a  time,"  he  said,  "  to  all  men,  *  when 
the  keepers  of  the  house  shoidd  tremble ;  when  they  should  be 
afraid  o£  that  which  is  high,  and  fear  should  be  in  the  way  ; ' 
and  that  time  was  the  test  of  the  advocate  of  anarchy  and 
rebellion,  the  enemy  of  religion  and  order.  Ere  now,"  he 
affirmed,  "  he  had  been  called  upon  to  read  those  prayers  our 
Church  has  provided  for  the  ^ckj  by  the  miserable  dying-bed 
of  one  of  her  most  rancorous  foes;  he  had  seen  such  a  one 
itricken  with  remorse,  solicitous  to  discover  a  place  for  repent- 
ance, and  unable  to  find  any,  though  he  sought  it  careftdly 
with  tears.  He  must  forewarn  Mr  Yorke,  that  blasphemy 
against  God  and  the  king  was  a  deadly  sin,  and  that  there  was 
wch  a  thing  as  *  judgment  to  come.' " 

Mr  Yorke  "  believed  fully  that  there  was  such  a  thing  as 
lodgment  to  come.     1£  it  were  otherwise,  it  would  be  difficult 


44  8HIBLET. 

to  imagine  how  all  the  scoundrels  who  seemed  triumphant  in 
this  world,  who  broke  innocent  hearts  with  impunity,  abused 
unmerited  privileges,  were  a  scandal  to  honourable  callmgs, 
took  the  bread  out  of  the  mouths  of  the  poor,  browbeat  the 
humble,  and  truckled  meanly  to  the  rich  and  proud — ^were  to 
be  properly  paid  off,  in  such  coin  as  they  had  earned.  But," 
he  added,  "whenever  he  got  low-spirited  about  such  like 
goings-en,  and  their  seeming  success  in  this  mucky  lump  of  a 
planet,  he  just  reached  down  t'  owd  book  "  (pointing  to  a  great 
Bible  in  the  bookcase),  "  opened  it  like  at  a  chance,  and  he  was 
sure  to  light  of  a  verse  blazing  wi'  a  blue  brimstone  low  that 
set  all  straight.  He  knew,"  he  said,  "  where  some  folk  war 
boimd  for,  just  as  weel  as  if  an  angel  wi'  great  white  wings  had 
come  in  ower  t'  door-stone  and  told  him." 

"  Sir,"  said  Mr  Helstone,  collecting  all  his  dignity,  "  Sir — 
the  great  knowledge  of  man  is  to  know  himself,  and  the  bourne 
whither  his  own  steps  tend." 

"  Ay,  ay  I  you  'U  recollect,  Mr  Helstone,  that  Ignorance  -was 
carried  away  ftom  the  very  gates  of  heaven,  borne  through  the 
air,  and  thmst  in  at  a  door  in  the  side  of  the  hill  which  led 
down  to  hell." 

"  Nor  have  I  forgotten,  Mr  Yorke,  that  Vain-Confidence,  not 
seeing  the  way  before  him,  fell  into  a  deep  pit,  which  was  on 
purpose  there  made  by  the  prince  of  the  grounds,  to  catch  vain- 
glorious fools  withal,  and  was  dashed  to  pieces  with  his  fall." 

"  Now,"  interposed  Mr  Moore,  who  had  hitherto  sat  a  silent 
but  amused  spectator  of  this  wordy  combat,  and  whose  indif- 
ference to  the  party  politics  of  the  day,  as  well  as  to  the  gossip 
of  the  neighbourhood,  made  him  an  impartial,  if  apathetic, 
judge  of  ihe  merits  of  such  an  encounter — "  you  have  both 
sufficiently  black-balled  each  other,  and  proved  how  cordially 
you  detest  each  other,  and  how  wicked  you  think  each  other. 
For  my  part,  my  hate  is  still  running  in  such  a  strotig  current 
against  the  fellows  who  have  broken  my  frames,  that  I  have 
none  to  spare  for  my  private  acquaintance,  and  still  less  for 
such  a  vague  thing  as  a  sect-  or  a  government :  but  really, 
gentlemen,  you  both  seem  very  bad,  by  your  own  showing ; 
worse  than  ever  I  suspected  you  to  be.  I  dare  not  stay  all  night 
with  a  rebel  and  blasphemer,  like  you,  Yorke ;  and  I  hardly 
dare  ride  home  with  a  cruel  and  tyrannical  ecclesiastic,  like 
Mr  Helstone." 

"  I  am  going,  however,  Mr  Moore,"  said  the  Rector  stemlj  : 
<*  come  with  me  or  not,  as  you  please," 


hollow's  cottage.  45 

**  Nay,  He  shall  not  have  the'  choice — ^he  sJudl  go  with  you," 
responded  Yorke.  '^  It 's  midnight,  and  past ;  and  I  '11  have 
noVdy  staying  up  i'  my  house  any  longer.     Ye  mim  all  go." 

He  rang  the  bell. ' 

"  Deb,"  said  he  to  the  servant  who  answered  it,  "  clear  them 
folk  out  o'  t'  kitchen,  and  lock  t'  doors,  and  be  off  to  bed. 
Here  is  your  way,  gentlemen,"  he  continued  to  his  guests  ;  and, 
lighting  them  through  the  passage,  he  fairly  put  them  out  at 
his  front-door.  ^ 

They  met  their  party  hurrying  out  pell-mell  by  the  back 
way ;  their  horses  stood  at  the  gate  ;  they  mounted,  and  rode 
off — Moore  laughing  at  their  abrupt  dismissal,  Helstone  deeply 
indignant  thereat. 


CHAPTER  V. 

hollow's  cottage. 


Moore's  good  spirits  were  still  with  him  when  he  rose  next 
morning.  He  and  Joe  Scott  had  both  spent  the  night  in  the 
mill,  availing  themselves  of  certain  sleeping  accommodations 
producible  from  recesses  in  the  front  and  back  counting-houses  : 
the  master,  always  an  early  riser,  was  up  somewhat  sooner  even 
than  usnal ;  he  awoke  his  man  by  singing  a  French  song  as 
he  made  his  toilet. 

"  Ye  're  not  custen  dahm,  then,  maister  ?"  cried  Joe. 

"Not  a  stiver,  mon  gar9on — ^which  means,  my  lad: — ^get 
np,  and  we  '11  take  a  turn  through  the  mill  before  the  hands 
come  in,  and  I  '11  explain  my  future  plans.  We  '11  have  the 
machinery  yet,  Joseph  ;  you  never  heard  of  Bruce,  perhaps  ?" 

"And  th'  arrand  (spider)?  Yes,  but  I  hev :  I  Ve  read  th* 
hirtoiy  o'  Scotland,  and  happen  knaw  as  mich  on't  as  ye  ;  and 
I  miderstand  ye  to  mean  to  say  ye  '11  persevere." 

«Ido." 

"Is  there  mony  o'  your  mak'  i'  your  coimtry?"  inquired 
^08,  as  he  folded  up  his  temporary  bed,  and  put  it  away. 

"  In  my  country !    Which  is  my  country  ?" 

"  Why,  France— isn't  it  ?" 

"  Not  it,  indeed !  The  circumstance  of  the  French  having 
leized  Antwerp,  where  I  was  born,  does  not  make  me  a  French- 

in." 

"HoUandytlien?'' 


46  SHIBLET. 

^  I  am  not  a  Dutchman :  now  70U  are  confounding  Antwerp 
wilih  Amsterdam." 

«  Flanders  ?" 

^'I  scorn  the  insinuation,  Joe !  I,  a  Flamandl  H^ve  I  a 
Flemish  fsuce  7 — ^the  clumsy  nose  standing  out — the  mean  fore- 
head falling  back — ^the  pale  blue  eyes  '  k  fleur  de  t^te  ?  *  ,  Am 
I  all  body  and  no  legs,  like  a  Flamand  ?  But  you  don^t  know 
what  they  are  like — those  Netherlanders.  Joe,  I'm  an  Anver- 
sois :  my  mother  was  an  Anversoise,  though  she  came  of 
French  lineage,  which  is  the  reason  1  speak  French." 

"But  your  father  war  Yorkshire,  which  maks  ye  a  bit 
Yorkshire  too  ;  and  onybody  may  see  ye  're  akin  to  us,  ye  're 
80  keen  o'  making  brass,  and  getting  forrards." 

"  Joe,  you  're  an  impudent  dog ;  but  I  've  always  been 
accustomed  to  a  boorish  sort  of  insolence  from  my  youth  up : 
the  *  classe  ouvri^re' — that  is,  the  working  people  in  Belgium 
— ^bear  themselves  blnitally  towards  their  employers  ;  and  by 
brutally,  Joe,  I  mean  IrutaleTnent — which,  perhaps,  when 
properly  translated,  should  be  roughly.^^ 

"  We  aUus  speak  our  ndnds  i'  this  country ;  and  them  young 
parsons  and  grand  folk  fro'  London  is  shocked  at  wer  '  mdviUtyy 
and  we  like  weel  enough  to  gi'e  'em  summat  to  be  shocked  at, 
'cause  it 's  sport  to  us  to  watch  'em  turn  up  the  whites  o'  their 
een,  and  spreed  out  their  bits  o'  hands,  like  as  they  're  flayed 
wi'  bogards,  and  then  to  hear  'em  say,  nipping  off  their  words 
short,  like — *  Dear  !  dear  I   Whet  seveges !   How  very  corse  I' " 

"  You  are  savages,  Joe ;  you  don't  suppose  you  're  civilized, 
do  you?" 

"  Middling,  middling,  maister.  I  reckon  'at  us  manufactur- 
ing lads  i'  th'  north  is  a  deal  more  intelligent,  and  knaws  a 
deal  more  nor  th'  farming  folk  i'  th'  south.  Trade  sharpens 
wer  wits  ;  and  them  that 's  mechanics,  like  me,  is  forced  to 
think.  Ye  know,  what  wi'  looking  after  machinery  and  sich 
like,  I  've  getten  into  that  way  that  when  I  see  an  effect,  I 
look  straight  out  for  a  cause,  and  I  oft  lig  hold  on't  to  purpose  ; 
and  then  I  like  reading,  and  I  'm  curious  to  knaw  what  them 
that  reckons  to  govern  us  aims  to  do  for  us  and  wi'  us :  and 
there 's  many  'cuter  nor  me  ;  there 's  many  a  one  amang  them 
greasy  chaps  'at  smelk  o'  oil,  and  amang  them  dyers  wi'  blue 
and  black  skins,  that  has  a  long  head,  and  that  can  teU  what 
a  fooil  of  a  law  is,  as  well  as  ye  or  old  Yorke,  and  a  deal 
better  nor  soft  uns  like  Christopher  Sykes  o'  Whinbury,  and 
greet  hectoring  nowts  like  yond'  Irish  Peter,  Hel^tone's  curate." 


HOLLOVS  COTTAGE.  47 

"Tou  tlimk  yourself  a  clever  fellow,  I  know,  Scott." 

**  Ay  I  I  'm  fairish ;  I  can  tell  cheese  fro'  chalk,  and  I  'm 
rany  wed  aware  that  I  Ve  improved  sich  opportunities  as  I 
iiave  had,  a  deal  better  nor  some  'at  reckons  to  be  aboon  me ; 
but  there 's  thousands  i'  Yorkshire  that 's  as  good  as  'me,  and 
a  two-three  that's  better." 

"  You  're  a  great  man — you  're  a  sublime  fellow  ;  but  you're 
a  prig,  a  conceited  noodle  with  it  all,  Joe !  You  need  not  to 
think  that  because  you've  picked  up  a  little  knowledge  oi 
practical  mathematics,  and  because  you  have  foimd  some  scant* 
Hng  of  the  elements  of  chemistry  at  the  bottom  of  a  dyeing 
vat,  that  therefore  you  're  a  neglected  man  of  science  ;  and, you 
ne^  not  to  suppose  that  because  the  course  of  trade  does  not 
always  run  smooth,  and  you,  and  such  as  you,  are  sometimes 
short  of  work  and  of  bread,  that  therefore  your  class  are  martjrrs, 
and  that  the  whole  form  of  government  under  which  you  live 
is  wrong.  And,  moreover,  you  need  not  for  a  moment  to 
iosinuate  that  the  virtues  have  taken  refuge  in  cottages  and 
wholly  abandoned  slated  houses.  Let  me  tell  you,  I  particu- 
larly abominate  that  sort  of  trash,  because  I  know  so  wdl 
that  human  nature  is  human  nature  everywhere,  whether  under 
tile  or  thatch,  and  that  in  every  specimen  of  human  nature 
that  breathes,  vice  and  virtue  are  ever  foimd  blended,  in  smaller 
or  greater  proportions,  and  that  the  proportion  is  not  deter- 
mined by  station.  I  have  seen  villains  who  were  rich,  and  I 
have  seen  villains  who  were  poor,  and  I  have  seen  villains  who 
were  neither  rich  nor  poor,  but  who  had  realized  Agar's  wish, 
and^ved  in  £axc  and  modest  competency.  The  clock  is  going 
to  strike  six :  away  with  you,  Joe,  and  ring  the  mill  belL" 

It  was  now  the  middle  of  the  mopth  of  February ;  by  six 
o'clock,  therefore,  dawn  was  just  beginning  to  steal  on  night, 
to  penetrate  with  a  pale  ray  its  brovm  obscurity,  and  give  a 
demi-translucence  to  its  opaque  shadows.  Pale  enough  that 
nj  was  on  this  particular  morning ;  no  colour  tinged  l^e  east, 
DO  flush  warmed  it.  To  see  what  a  heavy  lid  day  slowly  lifted, 
what  a  wan  glance  she  flung  along  the  hills,  you  would  have 
thought  the  sun's  fire  quenched  in  last  night's  floods.  The 
breaUi  of  this  morning  was  chill  as  its  aspect ;  a  raw  wind 
itirred  the  mass  of  night-cloud,  and  showed,  as  it  slowly  rose 
—leaving  a  colourless,  silver>gleaming  ring  aU  round  the 
horizoD-^not  blue  sky,  but  a  stratiun  of  paler  vapour  beyond. 
It  had  ceased  to  rain,  but  the  earth  was  sodden,  and  the  poolfi 
Had  rivulets  were  full. 


48  SUIKLKY. 

The  mill-windows  were  alight,  the  bell  still  rung  loud,  and 
now  the  little  children  came  running  in,  in  too  great  a  hurry, 
let  us  hope,  to  feel  very  much  nipped  by  the  inclement  air; 
and,  indeed,  by  contrast,  perhaps  the  morning  appeared  rather 
favourable  to  them  than  otherwise ;  for  they  had  oflen  come 
to  their  work  that  winter  through  snow-storms,  through  heavy 
rain,  through  hard  frost. 

Mr  Moore  stood  at  the  entrance  to  watch  them  pass :  he 
counted  them  as  they  went  by;  to  those  who  came  rather  late 
he  said  a  word  of  reprimand,  which  was  a  little  more  sharply 
repeated  by  Joe  Scott  when  the  lingerers  reached  the  v^ork- 
rooms.  .Neither  master  nor  overlooker  spoke  savagely ;  they 
were  not  savage  men  either  of  them,  though  it  appeared  both 
were  rigid,  for  they  fined  a  delinquent  who  came  considerably 
too  late:  Mr  Moore  made  him  pay  his  penny  down  ere  he 
entered,  and  informed  him  that  the  next  repetition  of  the 
fault  would  cost  him  twopence. 

Eules,  no  doubt,  are  necessary  in  such  cases,  and  coarse 
and  cruel  masters  will  make  coarse  and  cruel  rules,  which,  at 
the  time  we  treat  of-  at  least,  they  used  sometimes  to  enforce 
tyrannically;  but,  though  I  describe  imperfect  characters 
(every  character  in  this  book  will  be  found  to  be  more  or  less 
imperfect,  my  pen  refusing  to  draw  anything  in  the  model 
line),  I  have  not  imdertaken  to  handle  degraded  or  utterly 
infamous  ones.  Child-torturers,  slave  masters  and  drivers,  I 
consign  to  the  hands  of  jailers ;  the  novelist  may  be  excused 
from  suUying  his  page  with  the  record  of  their  deeds. 

Instead,  then,  of  harrowing  up  my  reader's  soul,  and  delight- 
ing his  organ  of  Wonder,  with  effective  descriptions  of  stripes 
and  scourgings,  I  am  happy  to  be  able  to  inform  him  that 
neither  Mr  Moore  nor  his  overlooker  ever  struck  a  child  in 
their  mill.  Joe  had,  indeed,  once  very  severely  flogged  a  son 
of  his  own  for  telling  a  lie  and  persisting  in  it;  but,  like  his 
employer,  he  was  too  phlegmatic,  too  calm^  as  well  as  too 
reasonable  a  man,  to  make  corporeal  chastisement  other  than 
the  exception  to  his  treatment  of  the  young. 

Mr  Moore  haunted  his  mill,  his  miU-yard,  his  dye-house, 
and  his  warehouse,  till  the  sickly  dawn  strengthened  into  day. 
The  sun  even  rose, — at  least  a  white  disk,  clear,  tintless,  and 
almost  chill-looking,  as  ice, — ^peeped  over  the  dark  crest  of  a 
hill,  changed  to  silver  the  livid  edge  of  the  cloud  above  it, 
and  looked  solemnly  down  the  whole  length  of  the  den,  or 
narrow  dale,  to  whose  strait  boimds  we  are  at  present  limited. 


qpllow'b  cottage.  49 

It  wsw  eight  o'clock;  the  mill  lights  were  all  e^inguished; 
the  signal  was  given  for  breakfast;  the  children,  released  for 
half  an  hour  from  toil,  betrook  themselves  to  the  little  tin  cans 
which  held  their  coffee,  and  to  the  small  baskets  which  con- 
tained their  allowance  of  bread.  Let  us  hope  they  have  enough 
to  eat ;  it  would  be  a  pity  were  it  otherwise. 

And  now,  at  last,  Mr  Moore  quitted  the  mill-yard,  and  beni 
his  steps  to  his  dwelling-house.  It  "v^as  only  a  short  distance 
&om  the  factory,  but  the  hedge  and  high  bank  on  each  side 
of  the  lane  which  conducted  to  it  seemed  to  give  it  something 
of  the  appearance  and  feeling  of  seclusion.  It  was  a  small, 
white-washed  place,  with  a  green  porch  over  the  door ;  scanty 
brown  stalks  showed  in  the  garden  soil  near  this  porch,  and 
likewise  beneath  the  windows, — stalks  budless  and  flowerless 
How,  but  giving  dim  prediction  of  trained  and  blooming  creepers 
for  Eummer  days.  A  grass  plat  and  borders  fronted  the 
cottage ;  the  borders  presented  only  black  mould  yet,  except 
where,  in  sheltered  nooks,  the  first  shoots  of  snowdrop  or 
crocus  peeped,  green  as  emerald,  &om  the  earth.  The  spring 
was  late ;  it  had  been  a  severe  and  prolonged  winter ;  the  last 
deep  snow  had  but  just  disappeared  before  yesterday's  rains ; 
on  the  hills,  indeed,  white  renmants  of  it  yet  gleamed,  flecking 
the  hollows  and  crowning  the  peaks :  the  lawn  was  not  verdant, 
bnt  bleached,  as  was  the  grass  on  the  bank,  and  under  the 
hedge  in  the  lane.  Three  trees,  gracefully  grouped,  rose  beside 
the  cottage ;  they  were  not  lofty,  but  having  no  rivals  near, 
they  looked  well  and  imposing  where  they  grew.  Such  was 
Mr  Moore's  home ;  a  snug  nest  for  content  and  contemplation, 
but  one  within  which  the  wings  of  action  and  ambition  could 
Dot  long  lie  folded. 

Its  air  of  modest  comfort  seemed  to  possess  no  particular 
attraction  for  its  owner;  instead  of  entering  the  house  alionce, 
be  fetched  a  spade  from  a  little  shed,  and  began  to  work  in  the 
garden*     f^or  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  he  dug  on  uninter- 
rupted: at  length,  however,  a  window  opened,  and. a  female 
Toice  called  to  him : — 
"  Eh,  bien  I     Tu  ne  d^je^es  pas  ce  matin  ?" 
The  answer,  and  the  rest  of  the  conversation,  was  in  French ; 
hut,  as  this  is  an  English  book,  I  shall  translate  it  into  English. 
^  Is  breakfast  ready,  Hortense  ?  " 
"Certainly;  it  has  been  ready  half  an  hour." 
**  Then  I  am  ready,  too :  I  have  a  canine  hunger." 
He  threw  down  his  spade  and  entered  the  bouse :  the  narrow 

4 


hollow's  cottage.  51 

such  as  to  adapt  him  for  trade,  perhaps,  too,  his  natural  bent; 
not  inclining  him  to  mercantile  pursuits,  he  had,  when  the  blight 
of  hereditary  prospects  rendered  it  necessary  for  him 'to  push 
his  own  fortune,  adopted  the  very  arduous  and  very  modest 
career  of  a  teacher ;  he  had  been  usher  in  a  school,  and  was  said 
now  to  be  tutor  in  a  private  family.  Hortense,  when  she  men- 
tioned  Louis,  described  bim  as  having  what  she  caUed  "des 
moyens,"  but  as  being  too  backward  and  quiet :  her  praise  of 
Robert  was  in  a  different  strain,  less  qualified;  she  was  very 
pnmd  of  him ;  she  regarded  him  as  the  greatest  man  in  Europe ; 
all  he  said  and  did  was  remarkable  in  her  eyes,  and  she  expected 
others  to  behold  him  from  the  same  point  of  view ;  nothing  could 
he  more  irrational,  monstrous,  and  infamous,  than  opposition 
from  any  quarter  to  Robert,  unless  it  were  opposition  to  herself. 

Accordmgly,  as  soon  as  the  said  Robert  was  seated  at  the 
breakfast  table,  and  she  had  helped  him  to  a  portion  of  stewed 
pears,  and  cut  him  a  good-sized  Belgian  tar^ine,  she  began  to 
pour  out  a  flood  of  amazement  and  horror  at  the  transaction  of 
last  night,  the  destruction  of  the  frames. 

"Quelle  id^e!  to  destroy  them.  Quelle  action  honteuse! 
On  voyait  bien  que  les  ouvriers  de  ce  pays  6taient  k  la  fois 
betes  et  m^hants.  G'etait  absolument  domme  les  domestiques 
Anglais,  les  servantes  surtout :  rien  d^insupportable  comma 
cette  Sara,  par  exeinple !" 

"  She  looks  clean  and  industrious,"  Mr  Moore  remarked. 

"Looks !  I  don't  know  how  she  looks ;  and  I  do  not  say  that 
the  is  altogether  dirty  or  idle :  mais  elle  est  d'une  insolence  I 
She  disputed  with  me  a  quarter  of  an  hour  yesterday  about  the 
cooking  of  the  beef;  she  said  I  boiled  it  to  rags,  that  English 
people  would  never  be  able  to  eat  such  a  dish  as  our  bouilli, 
that  the  bouillon  was  no  better  than  greasy  warm  water,  and 
as  to  the  choucroute,  she  affirms  she  cannot  toucb  it !  That 
barrel  we  have  in  the  cellar — delightftdly  prepared  by  my  own 
hands — she  termed  a  tub  of  hog-wash,  which  means  food  for 
pigs.  I  am  Harassed  with  the  girl,  and  yet  I  cannot  part  with 
her  lest  I  sbould  get  a  worse.  You  ^re  in  the  same  position 
with  your  workmen, — pauvre  cher  frfere !" 

"  I  am  afraid  you  are  not  very  happy  in  England,  Hortense." 

"  It  is  my  duty  to  be  happy  where  you  are,  brother;  but 
otherwise,  there  are  certainly  a  thousand  things  which  make 
oe  regret  our  native  town.  All  the  world  here  appears  to  me 
ill-bred  (mal-elev6).  I  find  my  habits  considered  ridiculous: 
if  a  girl  out  of  your  mill  chances  to  come  into  the  kitchen  and 


52  SHIBLET. 

find  me  in  my  j  upon  and  camisole  preparing  dinner  (for  you 
know  I  cannot  trust  Sarah  to  cook  a  single  dish),  she  sneers. 
If  I  accept  an  invitation  out  to  tea,  which  1  have  done  once  or 
twice,  I  perceive  I  am  put  quite  into  the  background;  I  have 
not  that  attention  paid  me  which  decidedly  is  my  due.  Of 
what  an  excellent  family  are  the  G^rards,  as  we  know,  and 
the  Moores  also  I  They  have  a  right  to  claim  a  certain  respect, 
and  tc3  feel  wounded  when  it  is  withheld  from  them.  In  Ant- 
werp, I  was  always  treated  with  distinction;  here,  one  would 
think  that  when  I  open  my  lips  in  company,  I  speak  EngHsh 
with  a  ridiculous  accent,  whereas  I  am  quite  assured  that  I 
pronounce  it  perfectly." 

"  Hortense,  in  Antwerp  we  were  known  rich ;  in  England 
we  were  never  known  but  poor." 

»  "  Precisely,  and  thus  mercenary  are  mankind.  Again,  dear 
brother,  last  Simday,  if  you  recollect,  was  very  wet;  accord- 
ingly, I  went  to  church  in  my  neat  black  sabots,  objects  one 
would  not  indeed  wear  in  a  fashionable  city ;  but  which  in  the 
country  I  have  ever  been  accustomed  to  use  for  walking  in 
dirty  roads.  Believe  me,  as  I  paced  up  the  aisle,  composed 
and  tranquil,  as  I  am  always,  four  ladies,  ai^d  as  many  gentle- 
men, laughed  and  hid  their  faces  behind  their  prayer-books." 

"  Well,  well  I  don't  put  on  the  sabots  again.  I  told  you 
before  I  thought  they  were  not  quite  the  thing  for  this 
coimtry." 

"  But,  brother,  they  are  not  common  sabots,  such  as  the 
peasantry  wear.  I  tell  you,  they  are  sabots  noirs,  tr^s  propres, 
tr^s  convenables.  At  Mons  and  Leuze — cities  not  very  far 
removed  from  the  elegant  capital  of  Brussels — ^it  is  very  seldom 
that  the  respectable  people  wear  anything  else  for  walking  in 
winter.  Let  any  one  try  to  wade  the  mud  of  the  Flemish 
chauss^es  in  a  paar,  of  Paris  brodequins,  on  m'en  dirait  des 
npuvelles  1" 

"  Never  mind  Mons  and  Leuze,  and  the  Flemish  chauss^; 
do  at  Eome  as  the  Eomans  do ;  and  as  to  the  camisole  and 
jupon,  I  am  not  quite  sure  about  them  either.  .1  never  see 
an  English  lady  dressed  in  such  garments.  Ask  Caroline 
Helstone." 

"  CarolinQ  !  I  ask  Caroline?  /consult  her  about  my  dress? 
It  is  she  who  on  all  points  shoidd  consult  me;  she  is  a  child." 

"  She  is  eighteen,  or  at  the  least  seventeen ;  old  enough  to 
know  all  about  gowns,  petticoats,  and  chaussures." 

*^  Do  not  spoil  Caroline,  I  entreat  you,  brother;    do  not 


hollow's  cottage.  53 

make  her  of  more  consequence  than  she  ought  to  be.  At  pre- 
sent she  is  modest  and  unassuming:  let  ^s  keep  her  so." 

"  With  all  my  heart.     Is  she  coming  this  morning  ?  " 

^  She  will  come  at  ten,  as  usual,  to  take  her  French  lesson." 

**  You  don't  find  that  she  sneers  at  you,  do  you  ?" 

^  She  does  not,  she  appreciates  me  better  than  any  one  else 
here;  but  then  she  has  more  intimate  opportunities  of  know- 
ing me:  she  sees  that  I  have  education,  intelligence,  manner, 
principles ;  all,  in  short,  which  belongs  to  a  person  well  born 
and  well  bred." 

"  Are  you  at  all  fond  of  her  ?"  * 

"  For  fond — ^I  cannot  say :  I  am  not  one  who  is  prone  to 
take  violent  fancies,  and,  consequently,  my  friendship  is  the 
more  to  be  depended  on.  I  have  a  regard  for  her  as  my  rela- 
tive; her  position  also  inspires  interest,  and  her  conduct  as  my 
pupil  has  hitherto  been  such  as  rather  to  enhance  than  diminish 
the  attachment  that  springs  irom  other  causes." 

"  She  behaves  pretty  well  at  lessons  ?  " 

"  To  me  she  behaves  very  well ;  but  you  are  conscious, 
brother,  that  I  have  a  manner  calculated  to  repel  over-fandli- 
arity,  to  win  esteem,  and  to  command  reapect.  Yet,  possessed 
of  penetration,  I  perceive  clearly  that  Caroline  is  not  perfect; 
tliat  there  is  much  to  be  desired  in  her." 

'*  Give  me  a  last  cup  of  coffee,  and  while  I  am  drinking  it 
UDTue  me  vtrith  an  account  of  her  faults." 

"  Dear  brother,  I  am  happy  to  see  you  eat  your  breakfast 
with  relish,  after  the  fatiguing  night  you  have  passed.  CsCro- 
line,  then,  is  defective ;  but,  with  my  forming  hand  and  almost 
motherly  care,  she  may  improve.  There  is  about  her  an  occa- 
sional something — a  reserve,  I  think — ^which  I  do  not  quite 
like,  because  it  is  not  sufficiently  girlish  and  submissive ;  and 
there  are  glimpses  of  an  unsettled  hurry  in  her  nature,  which 
pot  me  out.  Yet  she  is  usually  most  tranquil,  too  dejected 
and  thoughtful  indeed  sometimes.  In  time,  I  doubt  not,  I  shall 
make  her  uniformly  sedate  and  decorous,  without  being  unac- 
countably pensive.     I  ever  disapprove  what  is  not  intelligible." 

"  I  don't  understand  •your  account  in  the  least ;  what  do  you 
mean  by  *  U^asettled  hurries,'  for  instance  ?  " 

"  An  example  will,  perhaps,  be  the  most  satisfactory  expla- 
nation. I  sometimes,  you  are  aware,  make  her  read  French 
poetry  by  way  of  practice  in  pronunciation.  She  has,  in  the 
coarse  of  her  lessons,  gone  through  much  of  Corneille  and 
Sacine,  in  a  very  steady,  sober  spiiit,  such  as  I  approval* 


54  SHIBLET. 

Occasionally  sbe  showed,  indeed,  a  degree  of  languor  in  the 
perusal  of  those  esteemed  authors,  partaking  rather  of  apatiij 
than  sobriety,  and  apathy  is  what  I  cannot  tolerate  in  those 
who  have  the  benefit  of  my  instructions ;  besides,  one  should 
not  be  apathetic  in  studying  standard  works.  The  other  day 
I  put  into  her  hands  a  volume  of  short  fugitive  pieces.  I  sent 
her  to  the  window  to  learn  one  by  heart,  and  when  I  looked 
up  I  saw  her  turning  the  leaveg  over  impatiently,  and  curling 
her  lip,  absolutely  with  scorn,  as  she  surveyed  the  litttle  poems 
cursorily.  I  chid  her^  'Ma  cousine,'  said  she,  'tout  celft 
m'ennuie  k  la  mort.'  I  told  her  this  was  improper  language. — 
'Dieu!'  she  exclaimed.  'II  n'y  a  done  pas  deux  lignes  de 
poesie  dans  toute  la  litt^rature  ^an9aise  ? '  I  inquired  what 
she  meant.  She  begged  my  pardon  with  proper  submisflion. 
Erelong  she  was  still;  I  saw  her  sn^ling  to  herself  over  the 
book;  she  began  to  learn  assiduously.  In  half  an  hour  she 
came  and  stood  before  me,  presented  the  volume,  folded  her 
hands,  as  I  always  require  her  to  do,  and  commenced  the  repe* 
tition  of  that  short  thing  by  Gh^nier,  '  La  Jeune  Captive.'  If 
you  had  heard  the  manner  in  which  she  went  through  this, 
and  in  which  she  uttered  a  few  incoherent  comments  when  she 
had  done,  you  would  have  known  w&t  I  meant  by  the  phxase 
*  unsettled  hurry.'  One  would  have  thought  Gh^nier  was  more 
moving  than  all  Hacine  and  all  Gomeille.  You,  brother,  who 
have  so  much  sagacity,  will  discern  that  this  disproportionate 
preference  argues  an  ill-regulated  mind;  but  she  is  fortunate 
in  a  preceptress.  I  will  give  her  a  system,  a  method  of  thought, 
a  set  of  opinions ;  I  will  give  her  the  perfect  control  and  goidiuice 
of  he;r  feelings." 

"  Be  sure  you  do,  Hortense:  h^e  she  comes.  That  waa  her 
shadow  passed  the  window,  I  believe." 

«  Ahl  truly.  She  is  too  early — half  an  hour  before  her  time. 
— ^My  child,  what  brings  you  here  before  I  have  breakfasted  ?" 

This  question  was  addressed  to  an  individual  who  now  entered 
the  room,  a  young  girl,  wrapped  in  a  winter  mantle,  ihe  &]da 
of  .which  were  gaSiered  with  some  grace  round  an  apparentiiy 
slender  figure. 

"  I  came  in  haste  to  see  how  you  were,  Hortense,  and  how 
Bobert  was,  too.  I  was  sure  you  would  be  both  grieved  by 
what  happened  last  night.  I  did  not  hear  till  this  momiog: 
my  unde  told  me  at  breakfast." 

*'  Ahl  it  is  unspeakable.  You  sympathize  with  ua  ?  Tour 
uncle  sympathizes  with  us  ?  " 


hollow's  oottage.  55 

**  My  nnde  is  very  angry ;  but  lie  was  with  Robert,  I  believe : 
waa  lie  not  ?     Did  he  not  go  with  you  to  Stilbro'  Moor  ?  " 

^' Yes:  we  set  out  in  very  martial  style,  Caroline:  but  the 
prisoners  we  went  to  rescue  met  us  half-way.'' 

"  Of  course,  nobody  was  hurt  ?  " 

"  Why,  no;  only  Joe  Scott's  wrists  were  a  little  galled  with 
being  pinioned  too  tightly  behind  his  back." 

"  You  were  not  there  ?  You  were  not  with  the  waggons 
when  they  were  attacked  ?  " 

^  No:  one  seldom  has  the  fortune  to  be  present  at  occurrences 
at  which  one  would  particularly  wish  to  assist.'^ 

^  Where  are  you  goino^this  morning  ?  I  saw  Murgatrpyd 
saddling  your  horse  in  the  yard." 

"  To  Whinbury:  it  is  market  day."  n 

<<  Mr  Yorke  is  going  too :  I  met  lum  in  his  gig.  Come  home 
with  him." 

"Why?" 

"  Two  are  better  than  one,  and  nobody  dislikes  Mr  Yorke  ; 
at  least,  poor  people  do  not  dislike  him." 

"  Theriefore  he  would  be  a  protection  to  me,  who  am  hated  ?  " 

"  Who  are  mismvderstood:^  that,  probably,  is  the  word.  Shall 
you  be  late  ? — ^Will  he  be  late,  cousin  Hortense  ?  " 

"It  is  too  probable:  he  has  ofben  much  business  to  transact 
at  Whinbury.    Have  you  brought  your  exercise-book,  child  ?  " 

"  Yes.    What  time  will  you  return,  Robert  ?  " 

"I  generally  return  at  seven.  Do  you  wish  me  to  be  at 
home  earlier?" 

"  Try  rather  to  be  back  by  six.  It  is  not  absolutely  dark 
at  six  now  ;  but  by  seven  daylight  is  quite  gone." 

"And  what  danger  is  to  be  apprdiended,  Caroline,  when 
daylight  is  gone  ?  What  peril  do  you  conceive  comes  as  the 
companion  of  darkness,  for  me  ?" 

"I  am  not  sure  that  I  can  define  my  fears  ;  but  we  all  have 
t  certain  anxiety  at  present  about  our  friends.  My  uncle 
calls  these  times  dangerous :  he  says,  too,  that  mill-owners  are 
unpopular." 

"And  I  one  of  the  most  unpopular?  Is  not  that  the  fact? 
Ton  are  reluctant  to  speak  out  plainly,  but  at  heart  you  think 
toe  liable  to  Pearson's  fate,  who  was  shot  at — ^not,  indeed, 
from  behind  a  hedge,  but  in  his  own  house,  through  his  stair- 
cue-window,  as  he  was  going  to  bed." 

"Anne  Pearson  show^  me  the  bullet  in  the  chamber-door," 
imarked  Caroline,  gravely,  as  she  folded  her  mantici  and 


56  SHIBLIT. 

arranged  it  and  her  muff  on  a  side-table.  "  You  know,"  she 
continued, "  there  is  a  hedge  all  the  way  along  the  road  from 
here  to  Whinbury,  and  there  are  the  Fieldhead  plantations  to 
pass  ;  but  you  will  be  back  by  six— or  before  ?" 

"  Certainly  he  will,"  affirmed  Hortense.  "  And  now,  my 
child,  prepare  your  lessons  for  repetition,  while  I  put  the  peas 
to  soak  for  the  puree  at  dinner." 

With  this  direction,  she  left  the  room. 

"  You  suspect  I  have  many  enemies,  then,  Caroline,"  said 
Mr  Moore  ;  "  and,  doubtless,  ypu  know  me  to  be  destitute  of 
friends?" 

"  Not  destitute,  Robert.  There  is  your  sister,  your  brother 
Louis — whom  I  have  never  seen — ^there  is  Mr  Yorke,  and 
there  is  my  uncle  ;  besides,  of  course,  many  more." 

Robert  smiled.  "You  would  be  puzzled  to  name  your 
'  many  more,' "  said  he.  "  But  show  me  your  exercise-book. 
What  extreme  pains  you  take  with  the  writing  I  My  sister, 
I  suppose,  exacts  this  care :  she  wants  to  form  you  in  aU  things 
after  the  model  of  a  Flemish  school-girl.  What  life  are  you 
destined  for,  Caroline  ?  What  will  you  do  with  your  French, 
drawing,  and  other  accomplishments  when  they  are  acquired  ?" 

"  You  may  well  say,  when  they  are  acquired ;  for,  as  you 
are  aware,  till  Hortense  began  to  teach  me,  I  knew  precious 
little.  As  to  the  life  I  am  destined  for,  I  cannot  tell:  I 
suppose,  to  keep  my  uncle's  house,  till — "  she  hesitated. 

"TiUwhat?     TiUhedies?" 

"  No.  How  harsh  to  say  that !  I  never  think  of  his  dying : 
he  is  only  fifty-five.  But  till — in  short,  till  events  offer  other 
occupations  for  me." 

"  A  remarkably  vague  prospect  1  Are  you  content  with  it  ?  " 

"  I  used  to  be,  formerly.  Children,  you  know,  have  little 
reflection,  or  rather  their  reflections  run  on  ideal  themes.  There 
are  moments  now  when  I  am  not  quite  satisfied." 

"Why?" 

"  I  am  making  no  money — earning  nothing." 

"  You  come  to  the  point,  Lina  ;  you  too,  then,  wish  to  make 
money?" 

"  I  do  :  I  should  like  an  occupation ;  and  if  I  were  a  boy, 
it  would  not  be  so  difficult  to  find  one.  I  see  such  sm  easy, 
pleasant  way  of  learning  a  business,  and  making  my  way  in 
Hfe." 

"  Gro  on :  let  us  hear  what  way." 

**  I  could  be  apprenticed  to  your  trade-r— the  cloth-trade :  I 


hollow's  cottage,  67 

oonld  learn  it  of  jon,  as  we  are  distant  relations.  I  would  do 
the  countiiig-liouse  work,  keep  the  books,  and  write  the  letters, 
while  you  went  to  market.  I  know  yoU  greatly  desire  to  be 
rich,  in  order  to  pay  your  father's  debts  ;  perhaps  I  could  help 
you  to  get  rich." 
"  Help  me  ?  You  should  think  of  yourself." 
"  I  do  think  of  myself ;  but  must  one  for  ever  think  only  of 
oneaelf?"    ' 

"Of  whom  else  do  I  think?  Of  whom  else  dare  I  think? 
The  poor  ought  to  have  no  large  sympalhies  ;  it  is  their  duty 
to  be  narrow."  • 

"No,  Robert ^" 

"  Yes,  Caroline.  Poverty  is  necessarily  selfish,  contracted, 
grovelling,  anxious.  Now  and  then  a  poor  man's  heart,  when 
certain  beams  and  dews  visit  it,  may  swell  like  the  budding 
vegetation  in  yonder  garden  on  this  spring-day,  may  feel  ripe 
to  evolve  in  foliage — perhaps  blossom ;  but  he  must  not  en- 
courage the  pleasant  impulse ;  he  must  invoke  Prudence  to 
check  it,  with  that  frosty  breath  of  hers,  which  is  as  nipping 
as  any  north  wind." 
"  No  cottage  would  be  happy  then." 
"When  I  speak  of  poverty,  I  do  not  so  much  mean  the 
natural,  habitual  poverty  of  the  working-man,  as  the  embar- 
rassed penury  of  the  man  in  debt ;  my  grub-worm  is  always 
a  straitened,  struggling,  care-worn  tradesman." 

"Cherish  hope,  not  anxiety.  Certain  ideas  have  become 
too  fixed  in  your  mind.  It  may  be  presimiptuous  to  say  it, 
but  I  have  the  impression  that  there  is  something  wrong  in 
yonr  notions  of  t^e  best  means  of  attaining  happiness ;  as 

there  is  in ^"     Second  hesitation. 

"  I  am  all  ear,  Caroline." 

"  In — (courage !  let  me  speak  the  trvith) — ^in  your  manner 
-^mind,  I  say  only  manner — to  these  Yorkshire  workpeople." 
"  You  have  often  wanted  to  teU  me  that,  have  you  not  ? " 
"Yes ;  often — very  often." 

"  The  faults  of  my  manner  are,  I  think,  only  negative.  I 
am  not  proud :  what  has  a  man  in  my  position  to  be  proud 
of?    I  am  only  taciturn,  phlegmatic,  and  joyless." 

"  As  if  your  living  cloth-dressers  were  all  machines  like 

your  frames  and  shears  :  in  your  own  house  you  seem  different." 

"  To  those  of  my  own  house  I  am  no  alien,  which  I  am  to 

these  English  clowns.     I  might  act  the  benevolent  with  them, 

Wt  arting  is  not  my  forte.    1  find  them  irrational,  perverse  j 


58  SHIBLET. 

they  hinder  me  when  I  long  to  hurry  forward.    In  treating 
them  justly,  I  fulfil  my  whole  duty  towards  them." 

"  You  don't  expect  them  to  love  you,  of  course  ?" 

"  Nor  wish  it." 

"  Ah  I"  said  the  monitress,  shaking  her  head,  and  heaving 
a  deep  sigh.     With  this  ejaculation,  indicative  that  she  per 
ceived  a  screw  to  be  loose  somewhere,  but  that  it  was  out  of 
her  reach  to  set  it  right,  she  bent  over  her  grammar,  and 
86ught  the  n4e  and  exercise  for  the  day. 

''  I  suppose  I  am  not  an  afiectioi^Late  man,  Caroline ;  the 
attachment  of  a  very  few  suffices  me." 

"  If  you  please,  Robert,  wiU  you  mend  me  a  pen  or  two 
before  you  go?" 

"  First,  let  me  rule  your  book,  for  you  always  contrive  to 
draw  the  lines  aslant.  .  .  .  There  now.  .  .  .  And 
now  for  the  pens  :  you  like  a  fine  ono,  I  think?" 

'^  Such  as  you  generally  make  for  me  and  Hortense ;  not 
your  own  broad  points." 

"  If  I  were  of  Louis's  calling,  I  might  stay  at  home  and 
dedicate  this  morning  to  you  and  your  studies  ;  whereas  I 
must  spend  it  in  Sykes'  wool-warehouse." 

"  You  wiU  be  making  money." 

"  More  likely  losing  it." 

As  he  finished  mending  the  pens,  a  horse,  saddled  and 
bridled,  was  brought  up  to  the  garden-gate. 

"  There,  Fred,  is  ready  for  me  ;  I  must  go.  I  '11  take  one  look 
to  see  what  the  spring  has  done  in  the  south  border,  too,  firat." 

He  qmrted  the  room,  and  went  out  into  the  garden-ground 
behind  the  mill.  A  sweet  fiinge  of  young  verdure  and  opening 
flowers — snowdrop,  crocus,  even  primrose — ^bloomed  in  the  sun- 
shine imder  the  hot  waU.  of  the  factory.  Moore  plucked  here 
and  there  a  blossom  and  leaf,  till  he  had  collected  a  little 
bouquet ;  he  returned  to  the  parlour,  pilfered  a  thread  of  silk 
from  his  sister's  work-basket,  tied  the  flowers,  and  laid  them 
on  Caroline's  desk. 

"  Now,  good-morning." 

<<  Thank  you,  Eobert :  it  is  pretty ;  it  looks,  as  it  lies  there, 
like  sparkles  of  sunshine  and  blue  sky :  good-morning." 

He  went  to  the  door — stopped— opened  his  lips  as  if  to 
speak — said  nothing,  and  moved  on.  He  passed  tiirough  the 
wicket,  and  moimted  his  horse :  in  a  second,  he  had  flung 
himself  from  the  saddle  again,  transferred  the  reins  to  Muiga* 
troyd,  and  re-entered  the  cott£^e. 


COBIOLAHUS.  59 

**  I  iargot  my  gloves/^  he  said,  appearing  to  take  something 
from  the  side-table;  then,  as  an  impromptu  thought,  he 
remarked,  ^'  You  have  no  l^indifig  engagement  at  home  perhapsi 
Caroline?" 

"  I  never  have :  some  children's  socks,  which  Mrs  Eamsden 
has  ordered,  to  knit  for  the  Jew's  basket ;  but  thej  wiU  keep." 

**  Jew's  basket  be  —  sold !  Never  was  utensil  better 
named.  Anything  more  Jewish  than  it — its  contents,  and 
their  prices— cannot  be  conceived :  but  I  see  something,  a  very 
tiny  curl,  at  the  'comers  of  your  Up,  which  tells  me  tiiat  you 
know  its  merits  as  well  as  I  do.  Forget  the  Jew's  basket, 
then,  and  spend  the  day  here  as  a  change.  Tour  uncle  won't 
break  his  heart  at  your  absence  ?  " 

She  smiled.     "  No." 

^*  The  old  Cossack  I  I  daresay  not,"  muttered  Moore.  '^  Then 
stay  and  dine  with  Hortense  ;  she  wiU  be  glad  of  your  com- 
pany; I  shall  return  in  good  time.  We  will  have  a  little 
reading  in  the  evening :  the  moon  rises  at  half-past  eight,  and  I 
will  walk  up  to  the  Rectory  with  you  at  nine.  Do  you  agree  ?  " 

She  nodded  her  head ;  and  her  eyes  lit  up. 

Moore  lingered  yet  two  minutes :  he  bent  over  Caroline's 
desk  and  glanced  at  her  grammar,  he  fingered  her  pen,  he 
lifted  her  bouquet  and  played  with  it ;  his  horse  stamped  im- 
patient ;  Fred;  Murgatroyd  hemmed  and  coughed  at  the  gate, 
as  if  he  wondered  what  in  the  world  his  master  was  doing. 
"  Good-morning,"  again  ssiid  Moore,  and  finally  vanished. 

Hortense,  coming  in  ten  mirftites  after,  found,  to  her  sur- 
prise^ that  Caroline  had  not  yet  commenced  her  exercise. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

CORIOLANUS. 


Maoeiiqisellb  Moobe  had  that  morning  a  somewhat  absent* 
ounded  pnpiL  Caroline  forgot,  again  and  again,  the  explana- 
tions w&(&  were  given  to  her ;  however,  she  stQl  bore  with 
onclooded  mood  the  chidings  her  inattention  brought  upon 
Her.  Sitting  in  the  sunshine,  near  the  window,  she  seemed  to 
feodve  with  its  warmth  a  kind  influence,  which  made  her 
both  happy  and  good.  Thus  disposed,  she  looked  her  bestf 
SQd  her  b^t  was  a  pleasing  vision. 


80  SHIBLBT. 

To  her  bad  not  been  denied  the  gift  of  beauty ;  it  was  not 
absolutely  necessary  to  know  ber  in  order  to  like  ber :  sbe  iraa 
fair  eno^h  to  please,  even  at  the  first  view.  Her  shape  s^ted 
her  age;  it  was  girlish,  light,  and  pliant;  eyery  curye  was 
neat,  eyery  limb  proportionate :  her  face  was  expressiye  and 
gentle ;  her  eyes  were  handsome,  and  gifted  at  times  with  a 
winning  beam  that  stole  into  the  heart,  with  a  language  that 
spoke  soMy  to  the  affections.  Her  mouth  was  yety  pretty  ; 
she  had  a  delicate  skin,  and  a  fine  flow  of  brown  haor,  which 
she  knew  how  to  arrange  with  taste ;  curls  became  her,  and 
she  possessed  them  in  picturesque  profusion.  Her  style  of 
dress  announced  taste,  in  the  wearer;  yery  imobtrusiye  in 
fashion,  far  from  costly  in  material,  but  suitable  in  colour  to 
the  fair  complexion  with  which  it  contrasted,  and  in  make  to 
the  slight  form  which  it  draped.  Her  present  winter  garb  was 
of  merino,  the  same  Boft  shade  of  brown  as  her  hair ;  the  little 
collar  round  her  neck  lay  oyer  a  pink  ribbon,  and  was  &8tened 
with  a  pink  knot :  she  wore  no  other  decoration. 

So  much  for  Caroline  Hclstone^s  appearance;  as  to  her 
character  or  intellect,  if  she  had  any,  they  must  speak  for 
themselyes  in  due  time. 

Her  connections  are  soon  explained.  She  was  the  child  of 
parents  separated  soon  after  her  birth,  in  consequence  of  dis- 
agreement of  disposition.  Her  mother  was  the  half-sister  of  Mr 
Moore's  father ;  thus — ^though  there  was  nq  mixture  of  blood 
• — she  was,  in  a  distant  sense,  the  cousin  of  Robert,  Louis,  and 
Hortense.  Her  father  was  the  brother  of  Mr  Helstone — ^a  man 
of  the  character  friends  desire  not  to  recall,  after  death  has  once 
settled  all  earthly  accounts.  He  had  rendered  his  wife  un- 
happy :  the  reports  which  were  known  to  be  true  concerning 
him,  had  giyen  an  air  of  probability  to  those  which  were  j&lsely 
circulated  respecting  his  better-principled  brother.  Caroline 
had  neyer  known  her  mother,  ^s  she  was  taken  from  her  in 
infancy,  and  had  not  since  seen  her ;  her  father  died  compara- 
tiyely  young,  and  her  imcle,  the  Rector,  had  for  some  years  been 
her  sole  guardian.  He  was  not,  as  we  are  aware,  muc^  adapted, 
either  by  nature  or  habits,  to  haye  the.  charge  of  a  young  girl : 
he  had  taken  little  trouble  about  her  education ;  probably,  he 
would  have  taken  none  if  she,  finding  herself  neglected,  had  not 
grown  anxious  on  her  own  account,  and  asked,  eyery  now  and 
then,  for  a  little  attention,  and  for  the  means  of  acquiring  such 
amount  of  knowledge  as  could  not  be  dispensed  with.  Still, 
she  bad  a  depressing  feeling  that  she  w$is  inferior,  that  her 


COSIOLAXlJd.  61 

atlAinments  were  fewer  than  were  tisually  possessed  by  girls  of 
her  age  and  station  ;  and  very  glad  was  she  to  avail  herself  of 
the  kind  offer  made  by  her  cousin  Hortense,  soon  after  the 
aniv^  of  the  latter  at  Hollow*8-mill,  to  teaeh  her  French  and 
fine  needlework.  Mdlle  Moore,  for  her  part,  delighted  in  the 
task,  because  it  gave  her  importance ;  she  liked  to  lord  it  a 
Htde  over  a  docile  yet  quick  pupil.  She  took  Caroline  pre- 
cisely at  her  own  estimate,  as  an  irregularly-taught,  even  igno- 
rant girl ;  and  when  she  found  that  she  made  rapid  and  eager 
progress,  it  was  to.no  talent,  no  application  in  the  scholar,  she 
ascribed  the  improvement,  but  entirely  to  her  own  superior 
method  of  teaching ;  when  she  found  that  Caroline,  uni^killed 
in  routine,  had  a  knowledge  of  her  own — desultory  but  varied, 
the  discovery  caused  her  no  surprise,  for  she  Still  imagined  that 
from  her  conversation  had  the  girl  unawares  gleaned  these  trea- 
sures :  she  thought  it  even  when  forced  to  feel  that  her  pujpil 
knew  much  on  subjects  whereof  she  knew  little  :  the  idea  was 
not  logical,  but  Hortense  had  perfect  faith  in  it. 

Mademoiselle,  who  prided  herself  on  possessing  "  un  esprit 
positif,"  and  on  entertaining  a  decided  preference  for  dry  stupes, 
kept  her  young  cousin  to  the  same  as  closely  a^  she  could.  She 
worked  her  tmrelentingly  at  the  grammar  of  the  French  lan- 
guage, assigoing  her,  as  the  most  improving  exercise  she  coidd 
devise,  interminable  "analyses  logiques."  -  These  "analyses" 
were  by  no  means  a  source  of  particular  pleasure  to  Caroline ; 
she  thought  she  could  have  learned  French  just  as  well  with- 
out them,  and  grudged  excessively  the  time  spent  in  pondering 
over  "propositions,  principales,  et  incidents  ;"  in  deciding  the 
"incidente  determinative,"  and  the  "incidente  applicative ;"  in 
examining  whether  the  proposition  was  "  pleine,"  "  elliptique," 
or  ^implicite."  Sometimes  she  lost  herself  in  the  maze,  and 
when  80  lost,  she  would,  now  and  then  (while  Hortense  was 
rmnmaging  her  drawers  up-stairs, — an  unaccountable  occupa- 
tion in  which  she  spent  a  large  portion  of  each  day,  arranging, 
disarranging,  rearranging  and  counter-arranging)— carry  her 
hook  to  Bobert  in  the  counting-house,  and  get  the  rough  place 
made  smooth  by  his  aid.  Mr  Moore  possessed  a  clear,  tranqxdl 
hrain  of  his  own ;  almost  as  soon  as  he  looked  at  Caroline's 
little  difficulties  they  seemed  to  dissolve  beneath  his  eye :  in 
two  minutes  he  would  explain,  all — in  two  words  give  the  key 
to  the  puzzle.  She  thought  if  Hortense  could  only  teach  like 
bim,  how  much  faster  she  might  learn !  Repaying  him  by  an 
admiring  and  grateful  smile,  rather  shed  at  his  feet  than  lifted 


62  SHQtLET. 

to  his  face,  she  would  leave  tlie  mill  reluctantly  to  go  back  to  the 
cottage,  and  then,  while  she  completed  the  exercise,  or  worked 
out  the  stun  (for  MdUe  Moore  taught  her  arithmetic,  too),  she 
would  wish  nature  had  made  her  a  boy  instead  of  a  girl,  that  she 
might  ask  Robert  to  let  her  be  his  clerk,  and  sit  with  him  in  the 
counting-house,  instead  of  sitting  with  Hortense  in  the  parlour. 

Occasionally — ^but  this  happened  very  rarely — she  ^ent  the 
evening  at  Hollow's  cottage.  Sometimes  during  these  visits, 
Moore  was  away,  attending  a  market ;  sometimes  he  waa  gone 
to  Mr  Yorke's ;  often  he  was  engaged  with  a  male  visitor  in 
another  room  ;  but  sometimes,  too,  he»was  at  home,  disengaged, 
free  to  talk  with  Caroline.  When  this  was  the  case,  the  evening 
hours  passed  on  wings  of  light ;  they  were  gone  before  they 
were  cotmted.  ^  There  was  no  room  in  England  so  pleasant  as 
'that  sinaU  parlour  when  the  three  cousins  occupied  it.  Hor- 
tense, when  she  was  not  teaching,  or  scolding,  or  cooking,  was 
far  from  iU-humoured ;  it  was  her  custom  to  relax  towards 
evening,  and  to  be  kind  to  her  young  English  kinswoman. 
There  was  a  means,  too,  of  rendering  her  delightful,  by  inducing 
her  to  take  her  guitar  and  sing  and  play ;  she  then  became 
quite  good-natured ;  and  as  she  played  with  skill,  and  had  a 
weU-toned  voice,  it  was  not  disagreeable  to  listen  to  her :  it 
would  have  been  absolutely  agreeable,  except  that  her  formal 
and  self-important  character  modulated  her  strains,  as  it  im- 
pressed her  manners  and  moulded  her  coimtenance. 

Mr  Moore,  released  from  the  business-yoke,  was,  if  not 
lively  himself,  a  willing  spectator  of  Caroline's  liveliness^  a 
complacent  listener  to  her  talk,  a  ready  respondent  to  ber 
questions.  He  was  something  agreeable  to  sit  near,  to  hover 
round,  to  address  and  look  at.  Sometimes  he  was  better  than 
this, — almost  animated,  quite  gentle  and  fiiendly. 

The  drawback  was,  that  by  the  next  morning  he  was  sure 
to  be  frozen  up  again  ;  and  however  much  h^  seemed,  in  his 
quiet  way,  to  enjoy  these  social  evenings,  he  rarely  contrived 
their  recurrence.  This  circumstance  puzzled  the  inexperienced 
head  of  his  cousin.  "  If  I  had  a  means  of  happiness  at  my 
command,"  she  thought,  "  I  would  employ  that  means  often  ; 
I  would  keep  it  bright  with  use,  and  not  let  it  lie  for  weeks 
aside,  till  it  gets  rusty." 

Yet  she  was  careful  not  to  put  in  practice  her  own  theory. 

Much  as  she  liked  an  evening  visit  to  the  cottage,  she  never 

-aid  one  unasked.     Oflen,  indeed,  when  pressed  by  Hortense 

tnne)  she  would  refuse,  because  Robert  did  not  second,  or 


OOBIOLAKUS.  68 

but  sHghtlj  seconded  the  request.  This  morning  was  the  first 
time  he  had  ever,  of  his  own  unprompted  will,  given  her  an 
invitation ;  and  then  he  had  spoken  so  kindly,  that  in  hearing 
him  she  had  received  a  sense  of  happiness  sufficient  to  keep 
her  glad  for  the  whole  day. 

The  morning  passed  as  usual.  Mademoiselle,  ever  breath- 
lessly busy,  spent  it  in  bustling  from  kitchen  to  parlour — ^now 
scolding  Sarah,  now  looking  over  Caroline's  exercise  or  hear- 
ing her  repetition-lesson.  However  faultlessly  these  tasks 
were  achieved,  she  never  commended :  it  was  a  maxim  with 
her  that  praise  is  inconsistent  with  a  teacher's  dignity,  and 
that  blame,  in  more  or  less  unqualified  measure,  is  indispensa-  - 
ble  to  it.  She  thought  incessant  reprimand,  severe  or  slight, 
quite  necessary  to  the  maintenance  of  her  authority  ;  and  if 
no  possible  error  was  to  be  found  in  the  lesson,  it  was  the 
pupil's  carriage,  or  air,  or  dress,  or  mien,  which  required  cor- 
rection. 

The  usual  afiray  took  place  about  the  dinner,  which  meal, 
when  Sarah  at  last  brought  it  into  the  room,  she  almost  fiung 
upon  the  table,  with  a  look  that  expressed  quite  plainly — "I 
never  dished  such  stuff*  i'  my  life  afore  ;  it's  not  fit  for  dogs." 
Notwithstanding  Sarah's  scorn,  it  was  a  savoury  repast  enough. 
The  soup  was  a  sort  of  pur^e  of  dried  peas,  which  Mademoiselle 
had  prepared  amidst  bitter  lamentations  that  in  this  desolate 
country  of  England  no  haricot  beans  were  to  be  had.  Then 
came  a  dish  of  meat< — ^nature  unknown,  but  supposed  to  be 
miscellaneous — singularly  chopped  up  with  crumbs  of  bread, 
Masoned  uniquely  though  not  impleasantly,  and  baked  in  a 
mould ;  a  queer,  but  by  no  means  unpalatable  dish.  Greens, 
oddly  bruised,  formed  the  accompanying  vegetable ;  and  a 
p&te  of.  fruit,  conserved  after  a  receipt  devised  by  Madame 
Gerard  Moore's  "  grand'mdre,"  and  from  the  taste  of  which  it 
appeared  probable  that  '^m^lasse"  had  been  substituted  for 
sugar,  completed  the  dinner. 

Caroline  had  no  objection  to  this  Belgian  cookeiy :  indeed, 
the  rather  liked  it  for  a  change,  and  it  was  well  she  did  so,  for 
Had  she  evinced  any  disrelish  thereof,  such  manifestation  would 
have  injured  her  in  Mademoiselle's  good  graces  for  ever ;  a 
positive  crime  might  have  been  more  easUy  pardoned  than  a 
symptom  of  distaste  for  the  foreign  comestibles. 

Soon  after  dinner  Caroline  coaxed  her  governess-cousin  up- 
stairs to  dress :  this  manoeuvre  required  management.  To 
We  hinted  that  the  jupon,  camisole,  and  curl-papers  were 


64  SHIRLEr. 

odious  objects,  or  indeed  other  than  quite  tneritoricnid  points, 
would  have  been  a  felony.  Any  premature  attempt  to  urge 
their  disappearance  was  therefore  unwise,  and  would  be  likely 
to  issue  in  the  persevering  wear  of  them  during  the  whole  day. 
Carefully  avoiding  rocks  and  quicksands,  however,  the  pupil, 
on  pretence  of  requiring  a  change  of  scene,  contrived  to  get  the 
teacher  aloft,  and,  once  in  the  bed-room,  she  persuaded  her 
that  it  was  not  worth  while  returning  thither,  and  that  she 
might  as  well  make  her  toilette  now  ;  and  while  Mademoiselle 
delivered  a  solemn  homily  on  her  o^vn  surpassing  merit  in  dis- 
regarding all  frivolities  of  fashion,  Caroline  denuded  her  of  the 
camisole,  invested  her  with  a  decent  gown,  arranged  her  collar, 
hair,  &c.,  and  made  her  quite  presentable.  But  Hortense 
would  put  the  finishing  touches  herself,  and  these  finishing 
touches  consisted  in  a  thick  handkerchief  tied  round  the  throat, 
and  a  large,  servant-like  black  apron,  which  spoiled  eveiy- 
thing.  On  no  accoimt  wo]ild  Mademoiselle  have  appeared  in 
her  own  house  without  the  thick  handkerchief  and  the  volu- 
minous apron  :  the  first  was  a  positive  matter  of  morality — it 
was  quite  improper  not  to  wear  a  fichu ;  the  second  was  the 
ensign  of  a  good  housewife — she  appeared  to  think  that  by 
means  of  it  she  somehow  effected  a  large  saving  in  her  brother's 
income.  She  had,  with  her  own  hands,  made  and  presented  to 
Caroline  similar  equipments ;  and  the  only  serious  quarrel 
they  had  ever  had,  and  which  still  left  a  soreness  in  the  elder 
cousin's  soul,  had  arisen  from  the  refiisal  of  the  younger  one 
to  accept  of  and  profit  by  these  elegant  presents. 

"  I  wear  a  high  dress  and  a  coUar,"  said  Caroline,  "  and  I 
should  feel  suffocated  with  a  handkerchief  in  addition ;  and  my 
short  aprons  do  quite  as  well  as  that  very  long  one :  I  would 
rather  make  no  change." 

Yet  Hortense,  by  dint  of  perseverance,  would  probably  have 
compelled  her  to  make  a.  change,  had  not  Mr  Moore  chanced 
to  overhear  a  dispute  on  the  sulDJect,  and  decided  that  Caro- 
line's little  aprons  would  suffice,  and  that,  in  his  opinion,  as 
she  was  still  but  a  child,  she  might  for  the  present  dispense 
with  the  fichu,  especially  as  her  curls  were  long,  and[  almost 
touched  her  shoulders. 

There  was  no  appeal  against  Robert's  opinion,  therefore  his 
sister  was  compelled  to  yield ;  but  she  disapproved  entirely  of 
the  piquant  neatness  of  Caroline's  costume,  and  the  ladylike 
grace  of  her  appearance :  something  more  solid  and  homelyi 
she  would  have  considered  *'  beaucoup  plus  conyeoable.'' 


OOBIOLANUS.  65 

Tha  afternoon  iras  devoted  to  sewing.  Mademoiselle,  like 
anost Belgian  ladies,  was  specially  skilful  with  her  needle.  She  by 
no  means  thoiight  it  waste  of  time  to  devote  unnumbered  hours 
to  fine  embroidery,  sight-destroying  lace-work,  marvellous  net- 
ting and  knitting,  and,  above  all,  to  most  elaborate  stocking- 
mending.  She  woxdd  give  a  day  to  the  mending  of  two  holes 
in  a  stocking  any  time,  and  think  her  '^  mission  ^  nobly  Ail- 
filled  when  she  had  accomplished  it.  It  was  another  of  Caro- 
line's troubles  to  be  condenmed  to  learn  this  foreign  style  of 
darning,  which  was  done  stitch  by  stitch,  so  as  exactly  to  imitate 
the  fabric  of  the  stocking  itself ;  a  wearifu*  process,  but  consi- 
dered by  Hortense  Gr^raxd,  and  by  her  ancestresses  before  her 
for  long  generations  back,  as  one  of  the  first '' duties  of  woman.'' 
Shehersdf  had  had  a  needle,  cotton,  and  afearftdly  torn  stocking 
put  into  her  hand  while  she  yet  wore  a  child's  cq^f  on  her  little 
black  head:  her  *'  hauts  faits"  in  the  darning  line  had  been 
exhibited  to  company  ere  she  was  six  years  old,  and  when  she 
first  discovered  that  Caroline  was  profoundly  ignorant  of  this 
most  essential  of  attainments,  she  could  have  wept  with  pity 
over  her  miserably  neglected  youth. 

No  time  did  she  lose  in  seeking  up  a  hopeliess  pair  of  hose, 
of  which  the  heels  were  entirely  gone,  and  in  setting  the  igno- 
rant English  girl  to  repair  the  deficiency:  this  task  had  been 
commenced  two  years  ago,  and  Caroline  had  the  stockings  in 
her  work-bag  yet.  She  did  a  few  rows  every  day,  by  way  of 
penance  for  the  expiation  of  her  sins:  they  were  a  grievous 
burden  to  her ;  she  would  much  have  liked  to  put  them  in  the 
fire;  and  once  Mr  Moore,  who  had  observed  her  sitting  and 
sighing  over  them,  had  proposed  a  private  incremation  in  the 
eomitmg-house,  but  to  this  proposal  Caroline  knew  it  would 
We  been  impolitic  to  accede — ^the  result  could  only  be  a  fresh 
pair  of  hose,  probably  in  worse  condition:  she  adhered,  there- 
fore, to  the  ills  she  knew. 

All  the  aflemoon  the  two  ladies  sat  and  sewed,  till  the  eyes 

and  fingers,  and  even  the  spirits  of  one  of  them  were  weary. 

The  sky  since  dinner  had  darkened ;  it  had  begun  to  rain  again, 

to  poor  fast;  secret  fears  began  to  steal  on  Caroline  that  Kobert 

would  be  persuaded  by  Mr  Sykes  or  Mr  Yorke  to  remain  at 

WhinbiUT'  till  it  cleared,  and  of  that  there  appeared  no  present 

chance.    Five  o'clock  struck,  and  time  stole  on ;  stiQ  the  clouds 

streamed:  a  sighing  wind  whispered  in  the  roof-trees  of  tht 

cottage;  day  seemed  already  closing;  the  parlour-fue  shed  on 

the  dear  hearth  a  glow  ruddy  as  at  twilight. 

5 


^  It  wDl  not  be  hix  tiU  tbe  nuxm  rises,"  pEononnoed  Made- 
moiselle Mooie ;  "^  ctHiseqnen^y  I  feel  asffoied  that  xnj  brother 
wiU  not  Tetam  till  then:  indeed,  I  should  be  sony  if  He  did 
We  will  have  coSee :  it  would  be  Tun  to  wait  for  him." 

^  I  am  tired — maj  I  leare  mj  work  now,  consia  ?** 

'^  Yon  may,  sinoe  it  grows  too  dark  to  see  to  do  it  welL 
Fold  it  np;  put  it  carefbllj  in  jour  bag;  then  st^  into  the 
kitchen,  and  desire  Sarah  to  bring  in  the  goiiter,  or  tea,  as  jou 
caUit." 

^  Bnt  it  Has  not  yet  struck  six:  be  maj  still  come." 

'*  He  will  not,  I  tell  yon.  I  can  calcnlate  bis  movements. 
I  understand  my  brother." 

Suspense  is  irksome,  disappointment  bitter.  All  the  world 
bas,  some  time  or  other,  felt  that  Caroline,  obedient  to  orders, 
passed  into  the  kitchen.  Sarah  was  making  a  dress  for  berself 
at  the  table. 

^^  You  are  to  bring  in  cofifee,"  ssdd  the  young  lady,  in  a  spirit- 
less tone;  and  then  she  leaned  ber  arm  and  head  against  the 
kitchen  mantelpieoe,  and  hung  listlessly  over  the  fire. 

'^  How  low  you  seem,  miss !  But  it 's  all  because  your 
cousin  ke^s  you  so  dose  to  work.     It 's  a  shame !" 

**  Nothing  of  the  kind,  Sarab,"  was  the  brief  reply. 

"  Ob !  but  I  know  it  is.  You  're  fit  to  cry  just  this  minute, 
for  nothing  else  but  because  you  Ve  sat  still  the  wbole  day. 
It  would  make  a  kitten  dull  to  be  mewed  up  so." 

"  Sarah,  does  your  master  often  come  home  early  from  mar- 
ket when  it  is  wet?" 

''  Never,  hardly;  but  just  to-day,  for  some  reason,  be  haa 
made  a  difference." 

"  What  do  you  mean?" 

'<  He  is  come:  I  am  certain  I  saw Murgatroyd  lead  bis  borse 
into  the  yard  by  the  back-way,  wben  I  went  to  get  some  water 
at  tbe  pump  five  minutes  since.  He  was  in  the  counting-bouse 
with  Joe  Scott,  I  believe." 

"  You  are  mistaken." 

"  Wbat  should  I  be  mistaken  for  ?  I  know  his  horse  surely?^ 

"  But  you  did  not  see  himself?" 

**  1  heard  him  speak,  though.  He  was  saying  something  to 
Joe  Scott  abont  having  settled  all  concerning  ways  and  means, 
and  that  there  would  be  a  new  set  of  frames  in  the  mil]  before 
another  week  passed ;  and  that  this  time  he  would  get  four 
■•^^Idiers  from  Stilbro*  barracks  to  guard  the  waggon." 
Sarah,  are  you  making  a  gown  ?  '* 


OOBIOLANUfl.  67 

^Tes:  18  it  a  handsome  one  ?  " 

**  Beautifhl  I  Gret  the  coffee  ready.  I^  finish  cutting  out 
that  sleeve  for  you;  and  1^11  give  you  some  trimming  for  it.  I 
have  some  narrow  satin  ribbon  of  a  colour  that  will  just  match 

"  You  're  very  kind,  miss." 

'^  Be  quick,  there 's  a  good  girl;  but  first  put  your  master's 
shoes  on  the  hearth :  he  vdll  take  his  boots  off  when  he  comes 
in.    I  hear  him — ^he  is  coming." 
"  Miss  !  you  're  cutting  the  stuff  wrong." 
"  So  I  am;  but  it  is  oiJy  a  snip:  there  is  no  harm  done." 
The  kitchen-door  opened;  Mr  Moore  entered,  very  wet  and 
cold.    Caroline  half  turned  from  her  dressmaking  occupation, 
bat  renewed  it  for  a  moment,  as  if  to  gam  a  minute's  time  for 
some  purpose.  Bent  over  the  dress,  her  face  was  hidden ;  there 
was  an  attempt  to  settle  her  features  and  veil  their  expression, 
which  MLed:  when  she  at  last  met  Mr  Moore,  her  countenance 
beamed. 

"We  had  ceased  to  expect  you:  they  asserted  you  would 
not  come,"  she  said. 

"But  I  promised  to  return  soon:  you  expected  me,  I  sup- 
pose?" 

"No,  Bobert:  I  dared  not  when- it  rained  so  fiust.  And  you 
are  wet  and  chilled— change  everything:  if  you  took  cold,  I 
should — we  should  blame  ourselves  in  some  measure." 

"I  am  not  wet  through:  my  riding-coat  is  water-proof. 
Dry  shoes  are  all  I  require. — There  ....  the  fire  is 
pleasant  after  facing  the  cold  wind  and  rain  for  a  few  miles." 
He  stood  on  the  kitchen-hearth ;  Caroline  stood  beside  him. 
Mr  Moore,  while  ei^oying  the  genial  glow,  kept  his  eyes  directed 
towards  the  glittering  brasses  on  the  shelf  above.  Chancing 
for  an  instant  to  look  down,  his  glance  rested  on  an  uplifted 
&oe,  flushed,  smiling,  happy,  shaded  with  silky  curls,  lit  with 
fine  eyes.  Sarah  was  gone  into  the^ parlour  with  the  tray:  a 
lecture  from  her  mistress  detained  her  there.  Moore  placed 
hia  hand  a  moment  on  his  young  cousin's  shoulder,  stooped, 
lod  left  a  kiss  on  her  forehead. 

"  Oh  1 "  said  she,  as  if  the  action  had  unsealed  her  lips,  '^  I 
was  miserable  when  I  thought  you  would  not  come :  I  am 
Ahoost  too  happy  now.  Are  you  happy,  fiobert  ?  Do  you  like 
to  come  home  ?  " 
^I  think  I  do;  to-night,  at  least." 


C8  SHIRLET 

^  Are  yoa  certain  jou  are  not  fretting  about  jour  frames, 
and  jonr  business,  and  the  war  ?  ** 

"  Not  just  now." 

''  Are  you  positire  jon  don  t  feel  Hollow's  cottage  too  small 
fi>r  yon,  and  narrow  and  dismal  ?  " 

"  At  this  moment,  no." 

^'  Can  you  affirm  that  yon  are  not  bitter  at  heart  because  rich 
and  great  people  forget  you  ?  " 

''  No  more  questions.  Tou  are  mistaken  if  you  think  I  am 
anxious  to  curry  &Your  with  rich  and  great  people.  I  only 
want  means — a  position — ^a  career." 

''  Which  your  own  talent  and  goodness  shall  win  you.  You 
were  made  to  be  great — you  shall  be  great." 

''  I  wonder  now,  if  you  spoke  honestly  out  of  your  heart, 
what  receipt  you  would  give  mc  for  acquiring  this  same  great- 
ness ;  but  I  ^ow  it — better  than  you  know  it  yourself.  Would 
it  be  efficacious?  would  it  work?  Yes — ^poverty,  miseiy, 
bankruptcy.     Oh!  life  is  not  what  you  think  it,  Linal " 

•  "  But  you  are  what  I  think  you." 
"  I  am  not." 

•  "  You  are  better,  then  ?" 
"  Far  worse." 

^'  No ;  far  better.     I  know  you  are  good." 

"  How  do  you  know  it  ?  " 

"  You  look  80 ;  and  I  feel  you  are  so." 

"  Where  do  you  feel  it  ?  " 

"  In  my  heart."  • 

"  Ah !  you  judge  me  with  your  heart,  Lina :  you  should  judge 
me  wiCh  your  head." 

"  I  do ;  and  then  I  am  quite  proud  of  you.  Robert,  you 
cannot  tell  all  my  thoughts  about  you." 

Mr  Moore's  dark  face  mustered  colour;  his  lips  smiled,  and 
yet  were  compressed;  his  eyes  laughed,  and  yet  he  resolutely 
knit  his  brow. 

*'  Think  meanly  of  me,  Lina,"  said  he.  ''  Men,  in  general, 
are  a  sort  of  scum,  very  different  to  anything  of  which  you  have 
aa  idea  ;  I  make  no  pretension  to  be  better  than  my  fellows.'' 

"  If  you  did,  I  should  not  esteem  you  so  much ;  it  is  because 
you  are  modest  that  I  have  such  confidence  in  your  merit" 

"  Are  you  flattering  me?"  he  demanded,  turning  sharply  upon 
her.,  and  searching  her  face  with  an  eye  of  acute  peneti^tion." 

^Noj"  she  said,  softlyi  laughing  at  his  sudden  quicknesa 


OORIOLANUS.  69 

She  seemed  to  think  it  mmecessary  to  proffer  any  eager  dis- 
avowal of  the  charge.  •  • 

"  You  don't  care  whether  I  think  you  flatter  me  or  not  ?  " 

"No.'' 

"  You  are  so  secure  of  your  own  intentions  ?  ^ 

"  I  suppose  so." 

'<  What  are  they,  Caroline  ?  *' 

"  Only  to  ease  my  mind  by  expressing  for  once  part  of  what 
I  think ;  and  then  to  make  you  better  satisfied  witib  yourself." 

"  By  assuring  me  that  my  kinswoman  is  my  sincere  Mend  ?" 

"Just  so;  I  am  your  sincere  friend,  Robert." 

"  And  I  am — ^what  chance  and  change  shatll  make  me,  Lina." 

"  Not  my  enemy,  however  ?  " 

The  answer  was  cut  short  by  Sarah  and  her  mistress  entering 
the  kitchen  together  in  some  commotion.  They  had  been 
improving  the  time  which  Mr  Moore  and  Miss  Helstone  had 
spent  in  dialogue  by  a  short  dispute  on  the  subject  of  "  cafi^  au 
lait,''  whicb  Sarah  said  was  the  queerest  mess  she  ever  saw, 
and  a  waste  of  Grod's  good  gifts,  as  it  was  *'  the  nature  of  coffee 
to  be  boiled  in  water; "  and  which  Mademoiselle  affirmed  to 
be  "  mi  breuvage  royal,"  a  thousand  times  too  good  for  the  mean 
person  who  objected  to  it. 

The  former  occupants  of  the  kitchen  now  withdrew  into  the 
parlour.  Before  Hortense  followed  them  thither,  Caroline  had 
only  time  again  to  question,  "  Not  my  enemy,  Robert  ?"  And 
Moore,  quaker-like,  had  replied  with  another  query,  "  Could  I 
be  ?"  and  then,  seating  himself  at  the  table,  had  settled  Caro- 
line at  his  side. 

Caroline  scarcely  heard  Mademoiselle^s  explosion  of  wrath 
when  she  rejoined  them;  the  long  declamation  about  the  "  con- 
duite  indigne  de  cette  m^chante  creature,"  sounded  in  her  ear 
as  confusedly  as  the  agitated  rattling  of  the  china.  Robert 
langhed  a  little  at  it,  in  very  subdued  sort,  and  then,  politely 
and  calmly  entreating  his  sister  to  be  tranquil,  assured  her  that 
if  it  would  yield  her  any  satisfaction,  she  should  have  her  choice 
of  an  attendant  amongst  all  the  girls  in  his  mill ;  only  he  feared 
they  would  scarcely  suit  her,  as  tliey  were,  most  of  them,  he 
was  informed,  completely  ignorant  of  household  work :  and  pert 
and  self-willed  as  Sarah  was,  she  was,  perhapisi,  no  worse  tiian 
the  majority  of  the  women  of  her  class. 

Mademoiselle  admitted  the  truth  of  this  conjecture :  accord* 
ing  to  her,  ^'  ces  paysannes  Anglaises  ^talent  tout  insupport- 
ablcs."    What  would  she  not  give  for  some  '*  bonne  cuisini^ 


X 


70  ,  SHIBI^T. 

Anversoise,''  with  the  high  cap,  short  petticoat,  and  decent 
sabots  proper  to  her  class  :  something  better,  indeed,  than  an 
insolent  coquette  in  a  flounced  gown,  and  absolutely  without 
cap  I  (for  Sarah,  it  appears,  did  not  partake  the  opinion  of  St 
Paul,  that  "  it  is  a  shame  for  a  woman  to  go  with  her  head  un- 
covered;" but,  holding  rather  a  contrary  doctrine,  resolutely 
refused  to  imprison  in  linen  or  muslin  the  plentifril  tresses  of 
her  yellow  hair,  which  it  was  her  wont  to  fasten  up  smartly 
with  a  comb  behind,  and  on  Sundays  to  wear  curled  in  front.) 

"  Shall  I  try  and  get  you  an  Antwerp  girl  ?  "  asked  Mr  Moore, 
who — stem  in  pubHc — was  on  the  whole  very  kind  in  private. 

"  Merci  du  cadeau  I"  was  the  answer.  "  An  Antwerp  girl 
would  not  stay  here  ten  days,  sneered  at  as  she  would  be  by  all 
the  young  coquines  in  your  factory;"  then  softening,  "  You 
are  very  good,  dear  brotier — excuse  my  petulance — ^but  truly, 
my  domestic  trials  are  severe,  yet  they  are  probably  my 
destiny;  for  I  recollect  that  our  revered  mother  experienced 
similar  sufferings,  though  she  had  the  choice  of  all  the  best 
servants  in  Antwerp ;  domestics  are  in  all  countries  a  spoiled 
and  imruly  set," 

Mr  Moore  had  also  certain  reminiscences  about  the  trials  of 
his  revered  mother.  A  good  mother  she  had  been  to  him,  and 
he  honoured  her  memory,  but  he  recollected  that  she  kept  a 
hot  kitchen  of  it  in  Antwerp,  just  as  his  faithful  sister  did  here 
ia  England.  Thus,  therefore,  he  let  the  subject  drop,  and  when 
the  coffee-service  was  removed,  proceeded  to  console  Hortense 
by  fetching  her  music-book  and  guitar ;  and,  having  arranged 
the  ribbon  of  the  instrument  round  her  neck  with  a  quiet 
fraternal  kindness  he  knew  to  be  all-powerM  in  soothing  her 
most  ruffled  moods,  he  asked  her  to  give  him  some  of  their 
mother's  favourite  songs. 

Nothing  refines  like  affection.  Family  jarring  vulgarizes — 
family  union  elevates.  Hortense,  pleased  with  her  brother,  and 
grateful  to  him,  looked,  as  she  touched  her  guitar,  almost  grace- 
falj  almost  handsome;  her'every-day  fretful  look  was  gone  for 
a  moment,  and  was  replaced  by  a  "  sourire  plein  de  bont^.** 
She  sang  the  songs  he  asked  for,  with  feeling;  they  reminded 
her  of  a  parent  to  whom  she  had  been  truly  attached;  they 
reminded  her  of  her  yoxmg  days.  She  observed,  too,  that 
Caroline  listened  with  na'ive  interest;  this  augmented  her 
good-humour ;  and  the  exclamation  at  the  close  of  the  song, 
^  I  wish  I  could  sing  and  play  like  Hortense  1"  achieved  the 
busineflBi  and  rendered  her  charming  for  the  evening. 


COBIOLANUS.  71 

It  is  tme,  a  little  lecture  to  Caroline  followed,  on  tihe  yanity 
of  taishing,  and  the  duty  of  trying,  ''  As  Rome/'  it  was  sug- 
gestedy  *^  liad  not  been  built  in  a  day,  so  neither  had  Made- 
moiselle Gerard  Moore's  education  been  completed  in  a  week, 
or  b J  merely  wishmg  to  be  clever.  It  was  effort  that  had  accom- 
plished that  great  work :  she  was  ever  remarkable  for  her 
perseverance,  for  her  industry;  her  masters  had  remarked 
that  it  was  as  delightful  as  it  was  uncommon  to  find  so  much 
talent  united  with  so  much  solidity,  and  so  on."  Once  on  the 
theme  of  her  own  merits,  Mademoiselle  was  fluent. 

Cradled  at  last  in  blissful  self-complacency,  she  took  her 
knitting,  and  sat  down  tranquil.  Drawn  curtains,  a  clear  fire, 
a  sofUy  shining  lamp,  gave  now  to  the  little  parlour  its  befit — 
its  evening  chaorm.  It  is  probable  that  the  three  there  present 
felt  this  c^arm:  they  all  looked  happy. 

''What  shall  we  do  now,  Caroline?"  asked  Mr  Moore^ 
letuming  to  his  seat  beside  his  cousin. 

''What  shall  we  do,  Bobert?"  repeated  she  playfully. 
"  You  decide." 

"Not  play  at  chess?" 

"No." 

"  Nor  draughts,  nor  backgammon?" 

"  No-— no ;  we  both  hate  silent  games  that  only  keep  one's 
hands  employed,  don't  we?" 

"  I  believe  we  do;  then,  shall  we  talk  scandal ?" 

"  About  whom  ?  Are  we  sufficiei;^tly  interested  in  anybody 
to  take  a  pleasure'  in  pulling  their  character  to  pieces  ?" 

"  A  question  that  comes  to  the  point.  For  my  part — un- 
amiable  as  it  sounds — I  must  say,  no." 

"  And  I,  too.  But  it  is  strange — ^though  we  want  no  third 
— ^fourth,  I  mean  (she  hastily  and  with  contrition  glanced  at 
Hortense),  living,  person  among  us — so  selfish  we  are  in  our 
happiness — though  we  don't  want  to  think  of  the  present  exist- 
ing world,  it  woiild  be  pleasant  to  go  back  to  the  past;  to  hear 
people  that  have  slept  for  generations  in  graves  that  are  perhaps 
no  longer  graves  now,  but  gardens  and  fields,  speak  to  us  and 
tell  us  their  thoughts,  and  impart  their  ideas." 

'^Who  shall  be  the  speaker?  What  language  shall  he 
utter?    French?" 

"Tour  French  forefathers  don't  speak  so  sweetly,'  nor  so 
solemnly,  nor  so  impressively  as  your  English  ancestors, 
Bobert  To-night  you  shall  be  entirely  English :  yofa  shall 
fsftd  an  English  book." 


72  8HIBLET. 

"AnoldEngUshbook?" 

''  Yes,  an  old  English  book,  one  that  you  like ;  and  I  'wiU 
choose  a  part  of  it  that  is  toned  quite  in  harmony  with  some' 
thing  in  you.  It  shall  waken  your  nature,  fill  your  mind 
with  music  :  it  shall  pass  like  a  skilful  hand  over  your  heart, 
and  make  its  strings  sound.  Tour  heart  is  a  l3rre,  Robert ; 
but  the  lot  of  your  life  has  not  been  a  minstrel  to  sweep  it, 
and  it  is  often  silent.  Let  glorious  William  come  near  and 
touch  it :  you  will  see  how  he  will  draw  the  English  power 
and  melody  out  of  its  chords." 

"  I  must  read  Shakspeare  ?" 

"  You  must  have  his  spirit  before  you ;  you  must  hear  his 
voice  with  your  mind's  ear ;  you  must  take  some  of  his  soul 
into  yours." 

"  With  a  view  to  making  me  better ;  is  it  to  operate  like  a 
sermon?" 

"  It  is  to  stir  you ;  to  give  you  new  sensations.  It  is  to 
make  you  feel  your  life  strongly,  not  only  your  virtues,  but 
your  vicious,  perverse  points." 

"Dieul  que  dit-elle?"  cried  HortenSe,  who  hitherto  had 
been  counting  stitches  in  her  knitting,  and  had  not  much 
attended  to  what  was  said,  but  whose  ear  these  two  strong 
words  caught  with  a  tweak. 

"  Never  mind  her,  sister :  let  her  talk ;  now  just  let  her 
say  anything  she  pleases  to-night.  She  likes  to  come  down 
hard  upon  your  brother  sometimes  ;  it  amuses  me,  so  let  her 
alone." 

Caroline,  who,  mounted  on  a  chair,  had  been  rummagiDg 
the  book-case,  returned  with  a  book. 

"Here's  Shakspeare,"  she  said,  "and  there's  Coriolanus. 
Now,  read,  and  discover  by  the  feelings  the  reading  will  give 
you  at  once  how  low  and  how  high  you  are." 

"  Come  th^,  sit  near  me,  and  correct  when  I  mispronounce." 

"  I  am  to  be  the  teacher  then,  and  you  my  pupil  ?" 

"  Ainsi,  soit-il!" 

"And  Shakspeare  is  our  science,  since  we  are  going  to 
siudy?" 

"  It  appears  so." 

"  And  you  are  not  going  to  be  French,  and  sceptical,  and 
sneering  ?     You  are  not  going  to  think  it  a  sign  of  wisdom  to 
refuse  to  admire?" 
'   "  I  don't  know." 
N,      « If  you  do,  Roberti  111  take  Shakspeare  away ;  and  I'll 


OOBIOLAKUS.  78 

# 

flhrivel  up  within  myself,  and  put  on  my  bonnet  and  go 
home." 
"  Sit  down;  here  I  begin." 

"  One  minute,  if  you  please,  brother,"  interrupted  Made- 
moiselle, "  when  the  gentleman  of  a  family  reads,  the  ladies 
should  always  sew.  Caroline,  dear  child,  take  your  embroi- 
dery ;  you  may  get  three  sprigs  done  to-night." 

Caroline  looked  dismayed.  "  I  can't  see  by  lamp-light ; 
my  eyes  are  tired,  and  I  can't  do  two  things  well  at  once.  If 
I  sew,  I  cannot  listen ;  if  I  listen,  I  cannot  sew." 

"Fi,  done!  Quel  enfantillage I "  began  Hortense.  Mr 
Moore,  as  usual,  suavely  interposed. 

"Permit  her  to  neglect  the  embroidery  for  this  evening. 
I  wish  her  whole  attention  to  be  fixed  on  my  accent,  and  to 
ensure  this,  she  must  follow  the  reading  with  her  eyes ;  she 
must  look  at  the  book." 

He  placed  it  between  them,  reposed  his  arm  on  the  back  of 
CaroHne^s  chair,  and  thus  began  to  read. 

The  very  first  scene  in  "  Coriolanus "  came  with  smart 
relish  to  his  intellectual  palate,  and  still  as  he  read  he  warmed. 
He  delivered  the  haughty  speech  of  Caius  Marcius  to  the 
starving  citizens  with  unction ;  he  did  not  say  he  thought  his 
irrational  pride  right,  but  he  seemed  to  feel  it  so.  Caroline 
looked  up  at  him  with  a  singular  smile. 

"  There's  a  vicious  point  hit  already,"  she  said;  "  you  sym- 
pathize with  that  proud  patrician  who  does  not  sympathize 
with  his  famished  fellow-men,  and  insults  them :  there,  go  on." 
He  proceeded.  The  warlike  portions  did  not  rouse  him  much ; 
he  said  all  that  was  out  of  date,  or  should  be :  the  spirit  dis- 
played was  barbarous,  yet  the  encounter  single-handed  between 
Maraus  and  Tullus  Aufidius,  he  delighted  in.  As  he  ad- 
vanced, he  forgot  to  criticise ;  it  was  evident  he  appreciated 
the  power,  the  truth  of  each  portion;  and,  stepping  out  of  the 
narrow  line  of  private  prejudices,  began  to  revel  in  the  large 
picture  of  human  nature,  to  feel  the  reality  stamped  upon  the 
characters  who  were  speaking  from  that  page  before  him. 

He  did  not  read  the  comic  scenes  well,  and  Caroline,  taking 
the  book  out  of  his  hand,  read  these  parts  for  him.  From  her 
he  seemed  to  enjoy  them,  and  indeed  she  gave  them  with  a 
spirit  no  one  could  have  expected  of  her,  with  a  pithy  expres- 
sion with  which  she  seemed  gifled  on  the  spot,  and  for  that 
brief  moment  only.  It  may  be  be  remarked,  in  passing,  that 
the  general  character  of  her  conversation  that  evening,  whether 


74  SHIRLET. 

serious  or  spriglitily,  grave  or  gay,  was  as  of  something  un^ 
taught,  unstudied,  intuitiye,  fitM;  when  once  gone,  no  more 
to  be  reproduced  as  it  had  been,  than  the  glancing  ray  of  the 
meteor,  than  the  tints  of  the  dew-gem,  than  the  colour  or  form 
of  the  sun-set  x^loud,  than  the  fleeting  and  glittering  ripple 
varying  the  flow  of  a  rivulet. 

Coriolanus  in  glory ;  Coriolanus  in  disaster ;  Coriolanus 
banished,  followed  like  giant-shades  one  after  the  other.  Be- 
fore the  vision  of  the  banished  man,  Moore's  spirit  seemed  to 
pause.  He  stood  on  the  hearth  of  Aufidius's  hall,  &cing  the 
image  of  greatness  fallen,  but  greater  than  ever  in  that  low 
estate.  He  saw  "  the  grim  appearance,"  the  dark  fiwe  "  bear- 
ing command  in  it,"  '^  the  noble  vessel  with  its  tackle  torn " 
With  the  revenge  of  Caius  Marcius,  Moore  perfectly  sympa- 
thized; he  was  not  scandalized  by  it;  and  again  Caroline 
whispered,  "  There  I  see  another  glimpse  of  brodierhood  in 
error." 

The  march  on  Bome,  the  mother's  supplication,  the  long 
resistance,  the  final  yielding  of  bad  passions  to  good,  which 
ever  must  be  the  case  in  a  nature  worthy  the  epithet  of  noble, 
the  rage  of  Aufidius  at  what  he  considered  his  fdiys  weakness, 
the  death  of  Coriolanus,  the  final  sorrow  of  his  great  enemj; 
all  scenes  made  of  condensed  truth  and  strength,  came  on  in 
succession,  and  carried  with  them  in  their  deep,  fast  flow,  the 
heart  and  mind  of  reader  and  listener. 

"  Now,  have  you  felt  Shakspeare?"  asked  Caroline,  some 
ten  minutes  after  her  cousin  had  closed  the  book. 

«  I  think  so." 

"  And  have  you  felt  anything  in  Coriolanus  like  you  ?" 

"  Perhaps  I  have." 

"  Was  he  not  feulty  as  well  as  great  ? " 

Moore  nodded.  "And  what  was  his  fault?  What  made 
him  hated  by  the  citizens  ?  What  caused  him  to  be  banished 
by  his  countrymen  ?  " 

"  What  do  you  think  it  was  ?" 

"  I  ask  again — 

<  Whether  was  it  pride, 
Which  out  of  daily  fortnne  eyer  taints 
The  happ7  man?  whether  defect  of  judgment^ 
To  fail  in  the  disposing  of  those  chances 
Which  he  was  lord  of  ?  or  whether  natore, 
Not  to  he  other  than  one  thing ;  not  moving 
From  the  casque  to  the  cushion,  hut  commanding  peaoe 
Bren  with  the  same  austerity  and  garb 
As  he  oontroltod  the  war ?'" 


CORIOLANUS.    ,  76 

"  Well,  answer  yourself,  Sphynx." 

"  It  was  a  spice  of  all :  and  you  must  not  ber  proud  to  your 
workpeople ;  you  must  not  neglect  chances  of  soothing  them, 
and  you  must  not  be  of  an  inflexible  nature,  uttering  a  request 
as  austerely  as  if  it  were  a  command.'' 

"  That  is  the  moral  you  tack  to  the  play.  What  puts  such 
notions  into  your  head  ?  " 

."  A  wish  for  jovi  good,  a  care  for  your  safety,  dear  Eobert, 
and  a  fear  caused  by  many  things  which  I  have  heard  lately, 
that  you  will  come  to  harm." 
"  Who  tells  you  these  things  ?  " 

"  I  hear  my  uncle  talk  about  you :  he  praises  your  hard  spirit, 
your  determined  cast  of  mind,  your  scorn  of  low  enemies,  your 
resolution  not  *  to  truckle  to  the  mob,'  as  he  says." 
".And  would  you  have  me  truckle  to  them  ?" 
"  No,  not  for  the  world:  I  never  wish  you  to  lower  your- 
self; but  somehow,  I  cannot  help  thinking  it  imjust  to  include 
all  poor  working  people  under  the  genersd  and  insulting  name 
of  *  the  mob/  and  continually  to  thmk  of  them  and  treat  them 
haughtily." 

^^  You  are  a  little  democrat,  Caroline :  if  your  imcle  knew, 
what  would  he  say  ? " 

'^  I  rarely  talk  to  my  imde,  as  you  know,  and  never  about 
such  things :  he  thinks  everything  but  sewing .  and  cooking 
above  women's  comprehension,  and  out  of  their  line." 

*^  And  do  you  fancy  you  comprehend  the  subjects  on  which 
youadyise  me?" 

^<  As  far  as  they  concern  you,  I  comprehend  them.  I  know 
it  would  be  better  for  you  to  be  loved  by  jonr  workpeople  than 
to  be  hated  by  them,  and  I  am  sure  that  kindness  is  more 
likely  to  win  their  regard  than  pride.  If  you  were  proud  and 
cold  to  me  and  Hortense,  should  we  love  you  ?  When  you  are 
cold  to  me,  as  you  are  sometimes,  can  I  venture  to  be  affec- 
tionate in  return  ?" 

"Now,  lina,  I've  had  my  lesson  both  in  languages  and 
€thic8,  with  a  touch  on  politics  ;  it  is  your  turn.  Hortense 
tells  me  you  were  much  taken  by  a  little  piece  of  poetry  you 
kamed  tibe  other  day,  a  piece  by  poor  Ajidr6  Chlnier — ^  La 
Jeune  Captive ;'  do  you  remember  it  still?" 
« I  think  so." 

**  Bepeat  it,  then.     Take  your  time  and  mind  your  accent : 
^ipedally  let  us  have  no  English  u's." 
Gaxoluiei  b^ginsiDg  in  a  low,  rather  tremulous  voice,  but 


76  SHIRLEY. 

galiiing  courage  as  she  proceeded,  repeated  the  sweet  verses  of 
Ch^nier  ;  the  last  three  stanzas  she  rehearsed  well. 

'*  Mon  beau  voyage  encore  est  si  loin  de  sa  fin  ! 
Je  pars,  et  des  ormeaux  qui  bordent  le  ehemin 

J'ai  pass^  le  premiers  k  peine. 
An  banquet  de  la  yie  k  peine  commence, 
Un  instant  seolebient  mes  l^vres  ont  press^ 
La  coupe  en  mes  mains  encore  pleine. 

<•  .Te  ne  suis  qu'an  printemps— je  venx  voir  la  moisson ; 
Et  comme  le  soleil,  de  saison  en  saison, 

Je  yeux  acheyer  mon  ann^e. 
Brillante  sur  ma  tige,  et  Phonneur  du  jardin 
Je  n'ai  vu  luire  encore  que  les  feux  du  matin, 

Je  yeux  acheyer  ma  joum^  I " 

Moore  listened  at  first  with  his  eyes  cast  down,  but  soon  he 
furtively  raised  them :  leaning  back  in  his  chair,  he  could 
watch  Caroline  without  her  perceiving  where  his  gaze  was 
fixed.  Her  cheek  had  a  colour,  her  eyes  a  light,  her  coun- 
tenance an  expression,  this  evening,  which  would  have  made 
even  plain  features  striking ;  but  there  was  not  the  grievouB 
defect  of  plainness  to  pardon  in  her  case.  The  sunshine  was 
not  shed  on  rough  barrenness ;  it  fell  on  soil  bloom.  Each 
lineament  was  turned  with  grace  ;  the  whole  aspect  was  pleas- 
ing. At  the  present  moment — animated,  interested,  touched — 
she  might  be  called  beautiful.  Such  a  face  was  calculated  to 
awaken  not  only  the  calm  sentiment  of  esteem,  the  distant  one 
of  admiration ;  but  some  feeling  more  tender,  genial,  intimate : 
friendship,  perhaps — affection,  interest.  When  she  had  finished, 
she  turned  to  Moore,  and  met  his  eye. 

"Is  that  pretty  well  repeated?"  she  inquired,  smiling  like 
any  happy,  docile  child. 

"  I  really  don't  know." 

"  Why  don't  you  know  ?     Have  you  not  listened  ?" 

"  Yes — and  looked.     You  are  fond  of  poetry,  Lina  ?" 

"  When  I  meet  with  real  poetry,  I  cannot  rest  till  I  have 
learned  it  by  heart,  and  so  made  it  partly  mine." 

Mr  Moore  now  sat  silent  for  several  minutes.  It  struck 
nine  o'clock :  Sarah  entered,  and  said  that  Mr  Helstone  s 
servant  was  come  for  Miss  Caroline. 

"  Then  the  evening  is  gone  already,"  she  observed ;  "  and 
It  will  be  long,  I  suppose,  before  I  pass  another  here." 

Hortense  had  been  for  some  time  nodding  over  her  knitting; 
fallen  into  a  doze  now,  she  made  no  response  to  the  remark. 

"  You  would  have  no  objection  to  come  here  oflener  of  an 
evening  ?"  inquired  Kobert,  as  he  took  her  folded  mantle  from 


THE  CURATES  AT  TKA.  77 

die  nde-taoxe,  where  it  still  lay,  and  carefully  wrapped  it  round 
her. 

'^  I  like  to  come  here ;  but  I  have  no  desire  to  be  intrusive. 
I  am  not  hinting  to  be  asked  :  you  must  imderstand  that.'^ 

**  Oh  1  I  imderstand  thee,  child.  You  sometimes  lecture  me 
for  wishing  to  be  rich,  Lina ;  but  if  I  were  rich,  you  should 
liye  here  ^ways :  at  any  rate,  you  should  live  with  me  wher- 
ever my  habitation  might  be.^* 

"  That  would  be  pleasant ;  and  if  you  were  poor — ever  so 
poor — ^it  would  still  be  pleasant.     Good-night,  Kobert." 
"I  promised  to  walk  with  you  up  to  the  Rectory." 
*'  I  know  you  did ;  but  I  thought  you  had  forgotten,  and  I 
hardly  knew  how  to  remind  you,  though  I  wished  to  do  it.    But 
would  you  like  to  go  ?     It  is  a  cold  night ;  and,  as  Fanny  is 
come,  ^ere  is  no  necessity — " 
"  Here  is  your  muflf — don^t  wake  Hortense — come." 
The  half-mile  to  the  Rectory  was  soon  traversed.     They 
parted  in  the  garden  without  kiss,  scarcely  with  a  pressure 
of  hands :  yet  Robert  sent  his  cousin  in  excited  and  joyously 
troubled.     He  had  been  singularly  kind  to  her  that  day :  not 
b  phrase,  compliment,  profession  ;  but  in  manner,  in  look,  and 
in  soft  and  friendly  tones. 

For  himself,  he  came  home  grave,  almost  morose.  As  he 
stood  leaning  on  his  own  yard-gate,  musing  in  the  watery  moon- 
light, all  alone — the  hushed,  dark. mill  before  him,  the  hiU- 
environed  hollow  round — he  exclaimed,  abruptly : — 

"This  won't  do!  There's  weakness — there's  downright 
ruin  in-  all  this.  However,"  he  added,  dropping  his  voice, 
"the  frenzy  is  quite  temporary.  I  know  it  very  weU. :  I  have 
had  it  before.    It  wiU  be  gone  to-morrow." 


CHAPTER  Vn. 

THE   CURATES  AT   TEA. 


Caboune  Helstone  was  just  eighteen  years  old ;  and  at  eighteen 
the  tme  narrative  of  life  is  yet  to  be  commenced.  Before  that 
time,  we  sit  listening  to  a  tale,  a  marvellous  fiction ;  delightful 
lometimes,  and  sad  sometimes  ;  almost  always  unreal.  Before 
that  time,  our  world  is  heroic ;  its  inhabitants  half-divine  or 
semi-demon ;  its  scenes  are  dream-scenes :  darker  woods-  and 


78  sdntLET.  :^ 

stranger  liiUs ;  brighter  skies,  more  dangerous  waters ;  sweeter 
flowers,  more  tempting  fruits  ;  wider  plains,  drearier  deserts, 
sunnier  fields  than  are  found  in  nature,  overspread  our  enchanted 
globe.  What  a  moon  we  gaze  on  before  that  time !  How  the 
trembling  of  our  hearts  at  her  aspect  bears  witness  to  it  mmtter- 
able  beauty  I  As  to  our  sun,  it  is  a  burning  heaven — ^the  world 
of  gods. 

At  that  time — at  eighteen,  drawing  near  the  confines  of  illu- 
sive, void  dreams,  Elfrland  lies  behind  us,  the  shores  of  Realitj 
rise  in  front.  These  shores  are  yet  distant :  they  look  so  blue, 
soft,  gentle,  we  long  to  reach  them.  In  sunshine  we  see  a 
greenness  beneath  the  azure,  as  of  spring  meadows  ;  we  catch 
glimpses  of  silver  lines,  and  imagine  the  roll  of  living  waters. 
Could  we  but  reach  this  land,  we  think  to  himger  and  thirst  no 
more ;  whereas  many  a  wilderness,  and  often  the  flood  of  Death, 
or  some  stream  of  sorrow  as  cold  and  almost  as  Idack  as  Death, 
is  to  be  crossed  ere  true  bliss  can  be  tasted.  Every  joy  that 
life  gives  must  be  earned  ere  it  is  secured ;  and  how  nardly 
earned,  those  only  know  who  have  wrestled  for  great  prizes. 
The  heart's  blood  must  gem  with  red  beads  the  brow  of  the 
combatant,  before  the  wreath  of  victory  rustles  over  it. 

At  eighteen,  we  are  not  aware  of  this.  Hope,  when  she  smiles 
on  us,  and  promises  happiness^to-morrow,  is  implicitly  believed; 
— ^Love,  when  he  comes  wandering  like  a  lost  angel  to  our  door, 
is  at  otice  admitted,  welcomed,  embraced :  his  quiver  is  not  seen ; 
if  his  arrows  penetrate,  their  wound  is  like  a  thnll  of  new  life: 
there  are  no  fears  of  poison,  none  of  the  barb  which  no  leech's 
hand  can  extract:  that  perilous  passion — an  agony  ever  in  some 
of  its  phases ;  with  many,  an  agony  throughout — ^is  believed  to 
be  an  unqualified  good :  in  short,  at  eighteen,  the  school  of  Ex- 
perience is  to  be  entered,  and  her  humbling,  crushing,  grinding, 
but  yet  purifying  and  invigorating  lessons  are  yet  to  be  learnt. 

Alas,  Experience  I  No  other  mentor  has  so- wasted  and  frx>zen 
a  face  as  yours  :  none  wears  a  robe  so  black,  none  bears  a  rod 
so  heavy,  none  with  hand  so  inexorable  draws  the  novice  so 
sternly  to  his  task,  and  forces  him  with  authority  so  resistless 
to  its  acquirement  It  is  by  your  instructions  alone  that  man 
or  woman  can  ever  find  a  s^e  trietck  through  life's  wilds:  with- 
out it,  how  they  stumble,  how  they  stray  I  On  what  forbidden 
grounds  do  they  intrude,  down  what  dread  declivities  are  they 
hurled  I 

Caroline,  having  been  convoyed  home  by  Robert,  had  no  wish 
4o  pass  what  remained  of  the  evening  with  her  unde:  the  room 


IBE  CURATES  AT  TEA*  79 

m  ifhack  he  sat  i?as  very  sacred  groimd  to  her ;  she  seldom 
introded  on  it,  and  to-night  she  kept  aloof  till  the  bell  rang  for 
prayen.  Part  of  the  evening  church  service  was  the  form  of 
worship  observed  in  Mr  Helstone's  household :  he  read  it  in 
his  nsoal  nasal  voice,  clear,  loud,  and  monotonous.  The  rite 
cnrer,  his  niece,  according  to  her  wont,  stepped  up  to  him. 

"  Good-night,  imcle." 

^^Heyl  YouVe  been  gadding  abroad  all  day — ^visitingy 
diomg  out,  and  what  not  I" 

"  Ctaly  at  the  cottage." 

"  And  have  you  learnt  your  lessons  ?" 

"Yes." 

<<  And  made  a  shirt?" 

"  Only  part  of  bne." 

"  WeU,  that  wiU  do :  erfick  to  the  needle — ^leam  shirt-making 
and  gown-making,  and  pie-crust-making,  and  you  '11  be  a  clever 
woman  some  day.  Go  to  bed  now :  I  'm  busy  with  a  pamphlet 
here." 

Presently  the  niece  was  enclosed  in  her  small  bed-room;  the 
door  bolted,  her  white  dressing-gown  assumed,  her  long  hair 
loosened  and  falling  thick,  soft,  and  wavy  to  her  waist ;  and  as, 
resting  from  the  task  of  combing  it  out,  she  leaned  her  cheek 
on  her  hand  and  fixed  her  eyes  on  the  carpet,  before  her  rose,  and 
close  around  her  drew,  the  visions  we  see  at  eighteen  years. 

Her  thoughts  wer^  speaking  with  her  :  speaking  pleasantly, 
as  it  seemed,  for  she  smiled  as  she  listened.  She  looked  pretty, 
meditating  thus :  but  a  brighter  thing  than  she  was  in  that  apart- 
ment— the  spirit  of  youth^  Hope.  According  to  this  flattering 
pn^fibet,  she  was  to  know  disappointment,  to  feel  chill  no  more : 
ibe  had  entered  on  the  dawn  of  a  summer  day — no  false  dawn, 
imt  the  true  spring  of  morning — and  her  sun  would  quickly 
rile.  Impossible  for  her  now  to  suspect  that  she  was  the  sport 
of  delusion :  her  expectations  seemed  warranted,  the  founda- 
tion on  which  they  rested  appeared  solid. 

"  When  people  love,  the  next  step  is  they  marry,"  was  her 
V]gmnent.  '^  Now,  I  love  Bobert,  and  I  feel  sure  that  Robert 
IflTes  me :  I  have  thought  so  many  a  time  before ;  to-day  I  felt 
it  When  I  looked  up  at  him  after  repeating  Ch^nierV  poem, 
^  ejes  (what  handsome  eyes  he  has  I)  sent  the  truth  through 
mj  heart.  Sometimes  I  am  afraid  to  ispeak  to  him,  lest  I  should 
be  too  frank,  lest  I  should  seem  forward :  for  I  have  more 
^  once  regretted  bitterly,  overflowing,  superfluous  wordci, 
ud  &a]«d  I  had  said  more  than  he  exuected  me  to  say,  and 


80  SHUULET. 

that  he  would  disapprove  what  he  might  deem  my  indiscretaon; 
now,  to-night,  I  co^d  have  ventured  to  express  any  thought, 
he  was  so  indulgent.  How  kind  he  was,  as  we  walked  up  the 
lane !  He  does  not  flatter  or  say  foolish  things ;  his  love- 
making  (friendship,  I  mean  :  of  course  I  don't  yet  account  him 
my  lover,  but  I  hopQ  he  will  be  so  some  day)  is  not  like  what 
we  read  of  in  books — it  is  far  better — original,  quiet,  manly, 
sincere.  I  do  like  him  :  I  would  be  an  excellent  wife  to  him 
if  he  did  marry  me  :  I  would  tell  him  of  his  faults  (for  he  has 
a  few  faults),  but  I  would  study  his  comfort,  and  cherish  him, 
and  do  my  best  to  make  him  happy. .  Now,  I  am  sure  he  will 
not  be  cold  to-morrow  :  I  feel  almost  certain  that  to-morrow 
evening  he  will  either  come  here,  or  ask  me  to  go  there." 

She  recommenced  combing  her  hair,  long  as  a  mermaid's; 
turning  her  head,  as  she  arranged  it,  she  saw  hbr  own  face  and 
form  in  the  glass.  Such  reflections  are  soberizing  to  plain 
people :  their  own  eyes  are  not  enchanted  with  the  image ;  they 
are  confident  then  that  the  eyes  of  others  can  see  in  it  no  fasci- 
nation; but  the  fair  must  naturally  draw  other  conclusions: 
the  .picture  is  charming,  and  must  charm.  Caroline  saw  a  shape, 
a  head,  that  daguerreotyped  in  that  attitude  and  with  that  ex- 
pression, would  have  been  lovely :  she  could  not  choose  but 
derive  from  the  spectacle  conflrmation  to  her  hopes:  it  was 
then  in  imdiminished  gladness  she  sought  her  couch. 

^d  in  undiminished  gladness  she  rose  the  next  day:  as  she 
entered  her  uncle's  breakfast-room,  and  with  soft  cheerfulness 
wished  him  good-morning,  even  that  little  man  of  bronze  him- 
self thought,  for  an  instant,  his  niece  was  growing  "  a  fine  girl." 
Generally  she  was  quiet  and  timid  with  him:  very  docile,  but 
not  commimicative ;  this  morning,  however,  she  found  many 
things  to  say.  Slight  topics  alone  might  be  discussed  between 
them ;  for  with  a  woman — a  girl — IMr  Helstone  would  touch 
on  no  other.  She  had  taken  an  early  walk  in  the  garden,  and 
she  told  him  what  flowers  were  beginning  to  spring  there;  she 
inquired  when  the  gardener  was  to  come  and  trim  the  borders: 
she  informed  him  that  pertain  starlings  were  beginning  to  build 
their  nests  in  the  church-tower  (Briarfield  church  was  close  to 
Briarfield  rectory) ;  she  wondered  the  tolling  of  the  bells  in 
the  belfry  did  not  scare  them. 

IVir  Helstone  opined  that  "  they  were  like  other  fools  who  had 
just  paired;  insensible  to  inconvenience  just  for  the  moment." 
Caroline,  made  perhaps  a  little  too  courageous  by  her  tempo- 
rary good  spirits,  here  hazarded  a  remark  of  a  kind  she  had 


THE   CURATfiS  AT  TEA.  81 

never  before  ventured  to  make  on  observations  dropped  by  her 
revered  relative. 

"  Uncle,"  said  she,  "  whenever  you  speak  of  marriage,  you 
speak  of  it  scornfully:  do  you  think  people  shouldn't  marry?*' 

"  It  is  decidedly  the  wisest  plan  to  remain  single,  especially 
for  women." 

"  Are  all  marriages  unhappy  ?  " 

"  Millions  of  marriages  are  unhappy :  if  everybody  confessed 
the  truth,  perhaps  all  are  more  or  less  so." 

"  You  are  always  vexed  when  you  are  asked  to  come  and 
marry  a  couple — why  ?" 

"  Because  one  does  not  like  to  act  as  accessory  to  the  com- 
mission of  a  piece  of  pure  folly." 

Mr  Helstone  spoke  so  readily,  he  seemed  rather  glad  of  the 
opportunity  to  give  his  niece  a  piece  of  his  mind  on  this  point. 
Emboldened  by  the  impunity  which  had  hitherto  attended  her 
questions,  she  went  a  little  further: — 

"But  why,"  said  she,*"  should  it  be  pure  folly?  If  two 
people  like  each  other,  why  shouldn't  they  consent  to  live 
together  ?  " 

"  They  tire  of  each  other — ^they  tire  of  each  other  in  a  month. 
A  yokefellow  is  not  a  companion ;  he  or  she  is  a  fellow-sufferer." 

It  was  by  no  means  naive  simplicity  which  inspired  Caroline's 
next  remark :  it  was  a  sense  of  antipathy  to  such  opinions,  and 
of  displeasure  at  him  who  held  them. 

"  One  would  think  you  had  never  been  married,  uncle :  one 
would  think  you  were  an  old  bachelor." 

"  Practically,  I  am  so." 

"  But  you  have  been  married.  Wliy  were  you  so  inconsis- 
tent as  to  marry  ?  " 

"  Every  man  is  mad  once  or  twice  in  his  life." 

"  So  you  tired  of  my  aunt,  and  my  aunt  of  you,  and  you 
were  miserable  together  ?  " 

Mr  Helstone  pushed  out  his  cjmical  lip,  wrinkled  his  brown 
forehead,  and  gave  an  inarticulate  grunt. 

"  Did  she  not  suit  you  ?  Was  she  not  good-tempered  ?  Did 
you  not  get  used  to  her  ?   Were  you  not  sorry  when  she  died  ?  " 

"  Caroline,"  said  Mr  Helstone,  bringing  his  hand  slowly  down 
to  within  an  inch  or  two  of  the  table,  and  then  smiting  it  sud- 
denly on  the  mahogany,  "  understand  this :  it  is  vulgar  and 
pueiile  to  confound  generals  with  particulars :  in  every  case, 
tkere  is  the  rule,  and  there  are  the  exceptions.     Your  ques- 

6 


S2  SHIBLET. 

tioii3  are  stupid  and  babyish.    King  the  bell,  if  yoa  kare  done 
breakfast." 

The  break&£t  was  taken  away,  and  that  meal  over,  it  wu 
the  general  custom  of  uncle  and  niece  to  separate,  and  not  to 
meet  again  till  dinner ;  but  to-day  the  niece,  instead  of  quitting 
the  room,  went  to  the  window-seat,  and  sat  down  there.  Mr 
Helstone  looked  round  uneasily  once  or  twice,  as  if  he  wished 
her  away,  but  she  was  gazing  from  the  window,  and  did  not 
seem  to  mind  him ;  so  he  continued  the  perusal  of  his  morning 
paper — a.  particularly  interesting  one  it  chanced  to  be,  as  new 
movements  had  just  taken  place  in  the  Peninsula,  and  certain 
columns  of  the  journal  were  rich  in  long  despatches  fix)ni  Greneral 
Lord  Wellington.  He  little  knew,  meantime,  what  thoughts 
were  busy  in  his  niece^s  mind — ^thoughts  the  conversation  of 
the  past  half-hoiur  had  revived,  but  not  generated;  tumultuous 
were  they  now,  as  disturbed  bees  in  a  hive,  but  it  was  years 
since  they  had  first  made  their  cells  in  her  brain. 

She  was  reviewing  his  character,  his  disposition,  repeating 
Ms  sentiments  on  marriage.  Many  a  time  had  ste  reviewed 
them  before,  and  soimded  the  gulf  between  her  own  mind  and 
his ;  and  then,  on  the  other  side  of  the  wide  and  deep  chasm, 
she  had  seen,  and  she  now  saw,  another  figure  standing  beside 
her  uncle's — a  strange  shape;  dim,  sinister,  scarcely  earthly: 
the  half-remembered  image  of  her  own  father,  James  Helstone, 
Matthewson  Helstone's  brother. 

Bimiours  had  reached  her  ear  of  what  that  father's  character 
was ;  old  servants  had  dropped  hints':  she  knew,  too,  that  he 
was  not  a  good  man,  and  that  he  was  never  kind  to  her.  Slie 
recollected — a  dark  recollection  it  was — some  weeks  that  she 
had  spent  with  him  in  a  great  town  somewhere,  when  she  had 
had  no  maid  to  dress  her  or  take  care  of  her;  when  she  had 
been  shut  up,  day  and  night,  in  a  high  garret-room,  without 
a  carpet,  with  a  bare  uncurtained  bed,  and  scarcely  any.  other 
furniture;  when  he  went  out  early  every  morning,  and  often 
forgot  to  return  and  give  her  her  dinner  during  the  day,  and 
at  night,  when  he  came  back,  was  like  a  madman,  furious, 
terrible ;  or — still  more,  painful — like  an  idiot,  imbecile,  sense- 
less. She  knew  she  had  fallen  ill  in  this  place,  and  that  one 
night  when  she  was  very  sick,  he  had  come  raving  into  the 
room,  and  said  he  would  kiU  her,  for  she  was  a  burden  to 
him ;  her  screams  had  brought  aid,  and  &om  the  moment  she 
was  then  rescued  fix)m  him  she  had  never  seen  him,  except  as 
a  dead  man  in  his  coffin. 


TBK  CUBATfiS  AT  TEA*  88 

• 

That  was  her  &tber:  also  she  had  a  mother;  though  Mr 
Helstone  never  spoke  to  her  of  that  mother;  though  she  could 
not  remember  having  seen  her:  but  that  she  was  alive  she 
knew.  This  mother  was  then  the  dronkard^s  wife:  what  had 
their  marriage  been?  Caroline,  turning  from  the  lattice  whence 
Rhe  had  been  watching  the  starlings  (though  without  seeing 
them),  in  a  low  voice,  and  with  a  sad  bitter  tone,  thus  broke 
the  silence  of  the  room: — 

"  You  term  marriage  miserable,  I  suppose,  from  what  you 
saw  of  mj  father  and  mother's.  If  my  mother  suffered  what  I 
suffered  when  I  was  with  papa,  she  must  have  had  a  dreadfrd 
fife." 

Mr  Helstone,  thus  addressed,  wheeled  about  in  his  chair,  and 
looked  over  his  spectacles  at  his  niece:  he  was  taken  aback. 

Her  father  and  mother  1  What  had  put  it  into  her  head  to 
mention  her  father  and  mother,  of  whom  he  had  never,  during 
the  twelve  years  she  had  lived  with  him,  spoken  to  her?  That 
the  thoughts  were  self-matured;  that  she  had  any  recollections 
or  speculalions  about  her  parents,  he  could  not  fancy. 

'*  Your  father  and  mother  ?  Who  has  been  talking  to  you 
about  them?" 

*^  Nobody;  but  I  remember  something  of  what  papa  was, 
and  I  pity  mamma.     Where  is  she  ?  " 

This  "  Where  is  she  ?"  had  been  on  Caroline's  lips  hxmdreds 
of  times  before ;  but  till  now  she  had  never  uttered  it. 

"I  hardly  know,"  returned  Mr  Helstone;  "  I  was  little 
acquainted  with  her.  I  have  not  heard  from  her  for  years  : 
but  wherever  she  is,  she  thinks  nothing  of  you;  she  never 
inqoires  about  you;  I  have  reason  to  believe  ,she  does  not 
wish  to  see. you.  Come,  it  is  school-time:  you  go  to  your 
ocmain  at  ten,  don't  you?     The  clock  has  struck."  . 

Perhaps  Caroline  would  have  said  more;  but  Fanny  coming 
in,  informed  her  master  that  the  churchwardens  wanted  to 
speak  to  him  in  the  vestry.  He  hastened  to  join  them,  and  his 
niece  presently  set  out  for  the  cottage. 

The  road  from  the  Eectory  to  HoUoVs-mill  inclined  down- 
wards; she  ran,  therefore,  almost  all  the  way.  Exercise,  the. 
fresh  air,  the  thought  of  seeing  Robert,  at  least  of  being  on 
his  premises,  in  his  vicinage,  revived  her*  somewhat  depressed 
spirits  quickly.  Arriving  in  sight  of  the  white  house,  and 
vithin  hearing  of  the  thundering  mill  and  its  rushing  water* 
cooiaei  the  first  thing  she  saw  was  Moore  at  his  garden-gate. 
There  he  stood;  in  his  belted  Holland  Uouse,  a  light  cap 


84  SmRLET. 

covering  his  head,  which  undress  costume  suited  him :  he  was 
looking  down  the  lane,  not  in  the  direction  of  his  cousin  i 
approach.  '  She  stopped,  withdrawing  a  little  behind  a  willow, 
and  studied  his  appearance. 

"  He  has  not  his' peer,"  she  thought;  "he  is  as  handsome 
as  he  is  intelligent.  What  a  keen  eye  he  has !  What  clearly 
cut,  spirited  features — thin  and  serious,  but  graceful  1  I  do  like 
his  face — I  do  like  his  aspect — ^I  do  like  him  so  much  I  Better 
than  any  of  those  shufiling  curates,  for  instance — ^better  than 
anybody :  bonnie  Robert ! " 

She  sought  "  bonnie  Robert's  "  presence  speedily.  For  his 
*part,  when  she  challenged  his  sight,  I  believe  he  would  have 
passed  from  before  her  eyes  like  a  phantom,  if  he  could ;  but 
being  a  tall  fact,  and  no  fiction,  he  was  obliged  to  stand  the 
greeting.  He  made  it  brief :  it  was  cousin-like,  brother-like, 
friend-Hke,  anything  but  lover-like.  The  nameless  charm  of 
last  night  had  left  his  manner :  he  was  no  longer  the  same  man; 
or,  at  any  rate,  the  same  heart  did  not  beat  in  his  breast. 
Rude  disappointment !  sharp  cross  I  At  first  the  eager  girl 
would  not  believe  in  the  change,  though  she  saw  and  felt  it. 
It  was  difl[icult  to  withdraw  her  hand  from  his,  till  he  had 
bestowed  at  least  something  like  a  kind  pressure ;  it  was  diflScdt 
to  turn  her  eyes  from  his  eyes,  till  his  looks  had  expressed 
something  more  and  fonder  than  that  cool  welcome. 

A  lover  masculine  so  disappointed  can  speak  and  urge 
explanation;  a  lover  feminine  can  say  nothing;  if  she  did,  the 
result  would  be  shame  and  anguish,  inward  remorse  for  self- 
treachery.  Nature  would  brand  such  demonstration  as  a 
rebellion  against  her  instincts,  and  would  vindictively  repay 
it  afterwards  by  the  thunderbolt  of  self-contempt  smitmg  sud- 
denly in  secret.  Take  the  matter  as  you  find  it:  ask  no 
questions ;  utter  no  remonstrances :  it  is  your  best  wisdom. 
You  expected  bread,  and  you  have  got  a  stone;  break  your 
teeth  on  it,  and  don't  shriek  because  the  nerves  are  martyr- 
ized: do  not  doubt  that  your  mental  stomach — ^if  you. have 
such  a  thing — is  strong  as  an  ostrich's — ^the  stone  will  digest. 
You  held  out  your  hand  for  an  egg,  and  fate  put  into  it  a 
scorpion.  Show  no  consternation:  close  your  fingers  firmly 
upon  the  gift ;  let  it  sting  through  your  palm.  Never  mind : 
in  time,  after  your  hand  and  arm  have  swelled  and  quivered 
long  with  torture,  the  squeezed  scorpion  will  die,  and  you 
will  have  learned  the  great  lesson  how  to  endure  without  a 
Bobr    For  the  whole  remnant  of  your  life,  if  you  survive  the 


THE  CURATES  AT  TEA.  85> 

• 

teat — some,  it  is  said,  die  under  it — ^you  will  be  stronger, 
Triser,  less  sensitive.  This  you  axe  not  aware  of,  perhaps,  at 
the  lime,  and  so  cannot  borrow  courage  of  that  hope.  Nature, 
however,  as  has  been  intimated,  is  an  excellent  friend  in  such 
cases  ;  sealing  the  lips,  interdicting  utterance,  commanding  a 
placid  dissimulation :  a  dissimulation  often  wearing  an  easy 
and  gay  mien  at  first,  settling  down  to  sorrow  and  paleness  in 
time,  then  passing  away,  and  leaving  a  convenient  stoicism, 
not  the  less  fortifying  because  it  is  half-bitter. 

Half-bitter  1  Is  that  wrong?  No — ^it  should  be  bitter: 
bitterness  is  strength — ^it  is  a  tonic.  Sweet  mild  force  fol- 
lowing acute  suffering,  you  find  nowhere :  to  talk  of  it  is 
delusion.  There  may  be  apathetic  exhaustion  afler  the  rack ; 
if  energy  remains,  it  will  be  rather  a  dangerous  energy — 
deadly  when  confronted  with  injustice. 

Who  has  read  the  ballad  of  "Puir  Mary  Lee?" — that  old 
Scotch  ballad,  written  I  know  not  in  what  generation  nor  by 
what  hand.  Mary  had  been  ill  used — ^probably  in  being* 
made  to  beUeve  that  truth  which  was  falsehood:  she  is  not 
complaining,  but  she  is  sitting  alone  in  the  snow-storm,  and 
you  hear  her  thoughts.  They  are  not  the  thoughts  of  a 
model-heroine  under  her  circumstances,  but  they  are  those  of 
a  deeply-feeling,  strongly-resentful  peasant-girl.  Anguish 
has  dnven  her  from  the  ingle-nook  of  home,  to  the  white- 
shrouded  and  icy  hiUs :  crouched  imder  the  "  cauld  drift,"  she 
recalls  every  image  of  horror, — "the  yellow-wymed  ask," 
"  the  hairy  adder,"  "  the  auld  moon-bowing  tyke,"  "  the 
ghaist  at  e'en,"  "  the  sour  bullister,"  "  the  nulk  on  the  taed's 
back :  ^  she  hates  these,  but  "  waur  she  hates  Kobin-a-Ree  I" 

•*  Oh  I  ance  I  lived  happily  "by  yon  honny  bum — 
The  warld  was  in  love  wi'  me ; 
Bat  now  I  maon  sit  'neath  the  cauld  drift  and  mourn, 
And  curse  black  &obin-a-Bee ! 

**  Then  whudder  awa*  thou  bitter  biting  blast. 
And  sough  through  the  scrunty  tree, 
And  smoor  me  up  in  the  snaw  fu'  fast, 
And  ne'er  let  the  sun  me  see  I 

**  Oh,  never  melt  awa'  thou  wreath  o'  snaw, 
That  *8  sae  kind  in  graving  me ; 
But  hide  me  frac  the  scorn  and  guffaw 
O'  villains  like  Robin  -a-Ree ! "     ' 

But  what  has  been  said  in  the  last  page  or  two  is  not 
germane  to  Caroline  Helstone's  feelings,  or  to  the  state  of 
things  between  her  and  Bobert  Moore.  Bobert  had  done  her 
00  wrong :  be  had  told  ber  no  lie;  it  was  she  that  was  to 


blame,  if  any  one  was:  wliat  bitterness  ber  mind  distilled 
sbould  and  would  be  poured  on  ber  own  bead.  Sbe  had 
loY^  without  being  asked  to  love, — ^a  natural,  sometimes  an 
inevitable  cbance,  but  big  with  misery. 

Eobert,  indeed,  bad  sometimes  seemed  to  be  fond  of  ber— 
but  wby  ?  Because  sbe  bad  made  berself  so  pleasing  to  him, 
be  could*  not,  in  spite  of  all  bis  efforts,  belp  testifying  a  state 
of  feeling  bis  judgment  did  not  approve,  nor  bis  will  sanction. 
He  was  about  to  withdraw  decidedly  from  intimate  communi- 
cation with  ber,  because  be  did  not  choose  to  bave  bis  afiec- 
tions  inextricably  entangled,  nor  to  be  drawn,  despite  bis  reason, 
into  a  n:iarriage  be  bdieved  imprudent.  Now,  wbat  was  she 
to  do  ? — ^to  give  way  to  ber  feelings,  or  to  yanquisb  them  ? 
To  pursue  birn,  oi  to  turn  upon  berself?  If  sbe  is  weak,  she 
will  try  the  fb*st  expedient, — ^will  lose  bis  esteem  and  win  his 
aversion :  if  sbe  bas  sense,  she  will  be  ber  own  governor,  and 
resolve  to  subdue  and  bring  under  guidance  the  disturbed 
realm  of  ber  emotions.  She  will  determine  to  look  on  life 
ste^Ulily,  as  it  is  ;  to  begin  to  learn  its  severe  truths  seriously, 
and  to  study  its  knotty  problems  closelyj  conscientiously. 

It  appeared  sbe  bad  a  little  sense,  for  sbe  qxdtted  Bobeit 
quietly,  without  complaint  or  question — ^without  the  alteration 
of  a  muscle  or  the  sbedding  of  a  tear — betook  berself  to  her 
studies  under  Hortense  as  usual,  and  at  dinner-time  went  home 
without  lingering. 

Wben  sbe  bad  dined,  and  found  berself  in  the  Bectory 
drawing-room  alone,  having  left  ber  uncle  over  bis  temperate 
glass  of  port  wine,  the  difficulty  tbat  occurred  to  and  embar- 
rassed ber,  was — ^**  How  am  I  to  get  througb  this  day  ?" 

Last  night  sbe  bad  boped  it  would  be  spent  as  yesterday 
was, — ^tbat  the  evening  would  be  again  passed  with  Happiness 
and  Eobert :  sbe  bad  learned  ber  mistake  this  morning,  and 
yet  she  could  not  settle  down,  convinced  that  no  chance  would 
occur  to  recall  ber  to  Hollow's  cottage,  or  to  bring  Moore  again 
into  ber  society. 

He  bad  walked  up  after  tea,  more  than  once,  to  pass  an  hour 
with  her  uncle :  the  door-bell  bad  rung,  bis  voice  bad  been 
beard  in  the  passage  just  at  twiligbt,  when  sbe  little  expected 
sucb  a  pleasure ;  and  this  bad  bappened  twice  after  be  had 
treated  ber  with  peculiar  reserve ;  and,thougb  be  rarely  talked 
to  her  in  ber  imcle's  presence,  be  bad  looked  at  ber  rdentingly, 
as  be  sat  opposite  ber  work-table  during  bis  stay :  the  few 
words  be  bad  spoken  to  ber  were  comforting ;  bis  n^i^Tippy  on 


THE  CITRATES  AT  TEA.  87 

Vidding  her  good-nigbt  was  genial.  Now,  he  might  come  tius 
evening,  said  False  Hope :  she  almost  knew  it  was  False  Hope 
which  breathed  the  whisper,  and  yet  she  listened. 

She  tried  to  read — her  thoughts  wandered  ;  she  tried  to  sew 
—every  stitch  she  put  in  was  an  ennui,  the  occupation  was 
insufferably  tedious ;  she  opened  her  desk,  and  attempted  to 
write  a  French  composition — she  wrote  nothing  but  mistakes. 
Suddenly  the  door-bell  sharply  rang — ^her  heart  leaped— 
she  sprang  to  the  drawing-room  door,  opened  it  softly,  peeped 
through  the  apexture:  Fanny  was  admitting  a  visitor — ^a 
gentleman — ^a  tall  man — just  the  height  of  Robert  For  one 
second  she  thought  it  was  Robert — ^for  one  second  she  exulted ; 
but  the  voice  asking  for  Mr  Helstone  undeceived  her :  that 
voice  was  an  Irish  voice,  consequently  not  Moore's  but  the 
curate's — Malone's.  He  was  ushered  into  the  dining-room, 
where,  doubtless,  he  speedily  helped  his  Rector  to-  empty  the 
diicanters. 

It  was  a  fact  to  be  noted,  that  at  whatever  house  in  Briar- 
field,  Whinbury,  or  Nunnely,  one  curate  dropped  in  to  a  meal 
— dinner  or  tea,  as  the  case  might  be — ^another  presently 
followed ;  often  two  more.     Not  that  they  gave  each  other 
the  rendezvous,  but  they  were  usually  all  on  the  run  at  the 
same  time ;  and  when  Doime,  for  instance,  sought  Malone  at 
liis  lodgings  and  found  him  not,  he  inquired  whither  he  had 
posted,  and  having  learned  of  the  landlady  his  destination, 
hastened  with  all  speed  after  Tn'm  :  the  same  causes  operated 
in  the  same  way  with  Sweeting.     Thus  it  chanced  on  that 
afternoon  that  Caroline's  ears  were  three  times  tortured  with 
the  ringing  of  the  bell,  and  the  advent  of  undesired  guests  :  for 
Bonne  followed  Malone,  and  Sweeting  followed  Donne ;  and 
more  wine  was  ordered  up  from  the  cellar  into  the  dining-room 
(for  though  old  Helstone  chid  the  inferior  priesthood  when  he 
found  them  "  carousing,"  as  he  called  it,  in  their  own  tents,  yet 
at  his  hierarchical  table  he  ever  liked  to  treat  them  to  a  glass 
of  his  best),  and  through  the  closed  doors  Caroline  heard  their 
bojiah  laughter, -and  the  vacant  cackle  of  their  voices.     Her 
fear  was  lest  they  should  stay  to  tea ;  for  she  had  no  pleasure 
in  TwaTring  tea  for  that  particular  trio.     What  distinctions 
people  draw  !     These  three  were  men — ^young  men — educated 
men,  like  Moore :  yet,  for  her,  how  great  the  difference  1 
Their  society  was  a  bore — his  a  delight. 

Not  only  was  she  destined  to  be  &,voured  with  their  clerical 
OQmpanjy  but  Fortune  was  at  this  moment  bringing  her  four 


88  8HIBLET. 

other  guests — ^lady-guests,  all  packed  in  a  pony-phbeton  now 
rolling  somewhat  heavily  along  the  road  from  Whinbuiy:  an 
elderly  lady,  and  three  of  her  buxom  daughters,  were  coming 
to  see  her  "  in  a  friendly  way,"  as  the  custom  of  that  neigh- 
bourhood was.  Yes,  a  fourth  time  the  bell  clanged :  Fanny 
brought  the  present  announcement  to  the  drawing-room — 

"  Mrs  Sykes  and  the  three  Misses  Sykes." 

When  Caroline  was  going  to  receive  company,  her  habit  was 
to  wring  her  hands  very  nervously,  tq  flush  a  little,  and  come 
forward  hurriedly  yet  hesitatingly,  wishing  herself  meantime 
at  Jericho.  She  was,  at  such  crises,  sadly  deficient  in  finished 
manner,  though  she  had  once  been  at  school  a  year.  Accord- 
ingly,  on  this  occasion,  her  small  white  hands  sadly  maltreated 
each  other,  while  she  stood  up,  waiting  the  entrance  of  Mrs 
Sykes. 

In  stalked  that  lady,  a  tall  bilious  gentlewoman,  who  made 
an  ample  and  not  altogther  insincere  profession  of  piety,  and 
was  greatly  given  to  hospitality  towards  the  clergy ;  in  sailed 
her  three  daughters,  a  showy  trio,  being  all  three  well  grown, 
and  more  or  less  handsome. 

In  English  country  ladies  there  is  this  point  to  be  remarked. 
Whether  yoimg  or  old,  pretty  or  plain,  dull  or  sprightly,  they 
aU  (or  almost  all)  have  a  certain  expression  stamped  on  their 
features,  which  seems  to  say,  "  I  know — I  do  not  boast  of  it — 
but  I  know  that  I  am  the  standard  pf  what  is  proper;  let  every 
one  therefore  whom  I  approach,  or  who  approaches  me,  keep 
a  sharp  look-out,  for  wherein  they  differ  from  me — ^be  the  same 
in  dress,  manner,  opinion,  principle,  or  practice — ^therein  they 
are  wrong." 

Mrs  and  Misses  Sykes,  far  from  being  exceptions  to  this  ob- 
servation, were  pointed  illustrations  of  its  truth.  Miss  Mary 
— a,  well-looked,  well-meant,  and,  on  the  whole,  well-disposi- 
tioned  girl — wore  her  complacency  with  some  state,  though 
without  harshness ;  Miss  Harriet — a,  beauty — carried  it  more 
overbearingly :  she  looked  high  and  cold ;  Miss  Hannah,  who 
■was  conceited,  dashing,  pushing,  flourished  hers  consciously 
and  openly ;  the  mother  evinced  it  with  the  gravity  proper  to 
her  age  and  religious  fame. 

The  reception  was  got  through  somehow.  Caroline  "  was 
glad  to  see  them  "  (an  unmitigated  fib),  hoped  they  were  well, 
hoped  Mrs  Sykes's  cough  was  better  (Mrs  Sykes  had  had  a 
cough  for  the  last  twenty  years),  hoped  the  Misses  Sykes  had 
left  their  sisters  at  home  well ;  to  which  inquiry,  the  Mifisee 


THE  CURATEd  AT  TEA.  89 

Sykes,  sittang  on  three  chairs  opposite  the  music-stool,  whereon 
Caroline  had  undesignedly  come  to  anchor,  after  wavering  for 
some  seconds  between  it  and  a  large  arm-chair,  into  which  she 
at  length  recollected  she  ought  to  induct  Mrs  Sjkes :  and  in- 
deed that  lady  saved  her  the  trouble  by  depositing  herself 
therein ;  the  Misses  Sykes  replied  to  Caroline  J)y  one  simul- 
taneous bow,  very  majestic  and  mighty  awful.  A  pause  fol- 
lowed: this  bow  was  of  a  character  to  ensure  silence  for  the 
next  five  minutes,  and  it  did.  Mrs  Sykes  then  inquired  after 
Mr  Helstone,  and  whether  he  had  had  any  return  of  rheuma- 
tism, and  whether  preaching  twice  on  a,  Sunday  fatigued  him, 
and  if  he  was  capable  of  taking  a  full  service  now :  and  on 
being  assured  he  was,  she  and  all  her  daughters,  combining 
in  chorus,  expressed  tiieir  opinion  that  he  was  "  a  wonderfiJ 
man  of  his  years." 

Pause  second. 

Miss  Mary,  getting  up  the  steam  in  her  turn,  asked  whether 
Caroline  had  attended  the  Bible  Society  meeting  which  had 
been  held  at  Nunnely  last  Thursday  night:  the  negative 
answer  which  truth  compelled  Caroline  to  utter — ^for  last 
Tharsday  evening  she  had  been  sitting  at  home,  reading 
a  novel  which  Robert  had  lent  her — elicited  a  simultaneous 
expression  of  surprise  &om  the  lips  of  the  four  ladies. 

"  We  were  all  there,"  said  Miss  Mary ;  "  mamma  and  all  of 
08;  we  even  persuaded  papa  to  go:  Hannah  would  insist  upon 
it;  but  he  fell  asleep  while  Mr  Langweilig,  the  German  Mora- 
vian minister,  was  speaking :  I  felt  quite  ashamed,  he  nodded  so." ' 

"And  there  .was  Dr  Broadbent,"  cried  Hannah,  "such  a 
beautiftd  speakex !  You  couldn't  expect  it  of  him,  for  he  is 
almost  a  vulgar-looking  man." 

"  But  such  a  dear  man,"  interrupted  Mary. 

"And  such  a  good  man,  sUch  a  useftil  man,"  added  her 
mother. 

"  Only  like  a  butcher  in  appearance,"  interposed  the  fair 
proud  Harriet.  "  I  couldn't  bear  to  look  at  him:  I  listened 
with  my  eyes  shut." 

Miss  Helstone  felt  her  ignorance  and  incompetency;  not 
having  seen  Dr  Broadbent,  she  could  not  give  her  opinion. 
Panse  third  came  on.  During  its  continuance,  Caroline  was 
feeling  at  her  heart's  core  what'a  dreaming  fool  she  was; 
what  an  unpractical  life  she  led ;  how  little  fitness  there  was 
in  her  for  ordinary  intercourse  with  the  ordinary  world.  She 
«B8  feeling  how  exclusively  she  had  attached  herself  to  the 


90  SHIBLBr^ 

white  cottage  in  the  Hollow;  how  in  the  existence  of  one 
inmate  of  that  cottage  she  had  pent  all  her  imiverse:  she  was 
sensible  that  this  would  not  do;  and  that  some  day  she  would 
be  forced  to  make  an  alteration:  it  could  not  be  said  that  she 
exactly  wished  to  resemble  the  ladies  before  her,  but  she 
wished  to  become  superior  to  her  present  self,  so  as  to  feel 
less  scared  by  their  dignity. 

The  sole  means  she  found  of  reviving  the  flagging  discourse^ 
was  by  asking  them  if  they  would  all  stay  to  tea;  and  a  cruel 
struggle  it  cost  her  to  perform  this  piece  of  civiHty.     Mrs 

Sykes  had  begun — "  We  are  much  obliged  to  you,  but " 

when  in  came  Fanny  once  more. 

*^  The  gentlemen  will  stay  the  evening,  ma'am,"  was  the 
message  she  brought  from  Mr  Helstone. 

"What  gentlemen  have  you?"  now  inquired  Mrs  Sykes. 
Their  names  were  specified ;  she  ^and  her  daughters  inter- 
changed glances:  the  curates  were  not  to  them  what  they 
were  to  Caroline.  Mr  Sweeting  was  quite  a  &vourite  with 
them;  even  Mr  Malone  rather  so,  because  he  was  a  clergy- 
man. "  Keally,  since  you  have  company  already,  I  think  we 
will  stay,"  rcQiarked  Mrs  Sykes.  "We  shall  be  quite  a 
pleasant  little  party:  I  always  like  to  meet  the  clergy." 

And  now  Caroline  had  to  usher  them  up-stairs,  to  help 
them  to  unshawl,  smooth  their  hair,  and  make  themselves 
smart;  to  re-conduct  them  to  the  drawing-room,  to  distribute 
amongst  them  books  of  eugravings,  or  odd  things  purchased 
from  the  Jew-basket:  she  was  obliged  to  be  a  purchaser, 
though  she  was  but  a  slack  contributor:  and  if  she  had 
possessed  plenty  of  money,  she  would  rather,  when  it  was 
brought  to  the  Bectory — ^an  awful  incubus! — ^have  purchased 
the  whole  stock,  than  contributed  a  single  pincushion. 

It  ought  perhaps  to  be  explained  in  passing,  for  the  benefit 
of  those  who  are  not  "  au  fait "  to  the  mysteries  of  the  "  Jew- 
basket"  and  "Missionary-basket,"  that  these  "meubles"  are 
willow-repositories,  of  the  capacity  of  a  good-sized  £unily 
dothes-basket,  dedicated  to  the  purpose  of  conveying  from 
house  to  house  a  monster  collection  of  pincushions,  needle- 
books,  card-racks,  work-bags,  articles  of  in&nt  "Vtrear,  &c.  &c. 
&c.,  made  by  the  willing  or  reluctant  hands  of  the  Christian 
ladies  of  a  parish,  and  sold  per  force  to  the  heathenish  gentle- 
men thereof,  at  prices  unblushingly  exorbitant.  The  proceeds 
of  such  compulsory  sales  are  applied  to  the  conversioii  of  the 
Jew8|  the  seeking  up  of  the  ten  TniBsing  tribes,  or  to  the 


THE  OURATES  AT  TE'A.  91 

regeneration  of  the  interesting  colonred  population  of  the 
globe.  Each  lady-contributor  takes  it  in  her  turn  to  keep 
Qie  basket  a  month,  to  sew  for  it,  and  to  foist  off  its  contents 
on  a  shrinking  male  public.  An  exciting  time  it  is  when 
that  tnm  comes  round:  some  active-minded  women,  with  a 
good  trading-spirit,  like  it,  and  enjoy  exceedingly  the  fun  of 
making  hard-handed  worsted-spinners  cash  up,  to  the  tune 
of  four  or  ^yb  hundred  per  cent,  above  cost  price,  for  articles 
quite  useless  to  them ;  other — feebler  souls  object  to  it,  and 
would  rather  see  the  prince  of  darkness  himself  at  their  door 
any  morning,  than  that  phantom-basket,  brought  with  "  Mrs 
Rouse's  compliments,  and  please,  ina'am,  she  says  it's  your 
turn  now." 

Miss  Helstone's  duties  of  hostess  performed,  more  anxiously 
than  cheerily,  she  betook  herself  to  the  kitchen,  to  hold  a 
brief  privy-council  with  Fanny  and  EHza  about  the  tea. 

"What  a  lot  on  'eml"  cried  Eliza,  who  was  cook.  "And 
I  put  off  the  baking  to-day  because  I  thought  there  would  be 
bread  plenty  to  fit  while  morning:  we  shall  never  have  enow." 

"Are  there  any  tea-cakes?"  asked  the  young  mistress. 

"  Only  three  and  a  loaf.  I  wish  these  fine  fblk  would  stay 
at  home  till  they  're  asked :  and  I  want  to  finish  trimming 
my  hat"  (bonnet  she  meant).  ' 

"  Then,"  suggested  Caroline,  to  whom  the  importance  of 
the  emergency  gave  a  certain  energy,  "Fanny  must  run 
down  to  Briarfield  and  buy  some  muffins  and  crumpets,  and 
some  biscuits :  and  don't  be  cross,  Eliza,  we  can't  help  it  now." 

"And  which  tea-things  are  we  to  have?" 

"Oh,  the  best,  I  suppose:  I'll  get  out  the  silver  service,*' 
and  she  ran  up-stairs  to  the  plate-closet,  and  presently  brought 
down  tea-pot,  cream-ewer,  and  sugar-basin. 

"  And  mun  we  have  th'  urn  ?  " 

"  Yes  ;  and  now  get  it  ready  as  quickly  as  you  can,  for  the 
tooner  we  have  tea  over,  the  sooner  they  will  go — at  least,  I 
hope  80.  Heigho  I  I  wish  they  were  gone,"  she  sighed  as  she 
returned  to  the  drawing-room.  "  Still,"  she  thought,  as  she 
paused  at  the  door  ere  opening  it,  "  if  Bobert  would  but  come 
even  now  how  bright  all  would  be  I  How  comparatively  easy 
the  task  of  amusing  these  people,  if  he  were  present  I  There 
would  be  an  interest  in  hearing  him  talk  (though  he  never 
sajs  much  in  company)  and  in  talking  in  his  presence :  there 
can  be  no  interest  in  hearing  any  of  tibem,  or  in  speaking  to 
tfaem.    Haw  they  will  gabble  when  the  curates  conie  in,  and 


92  SHIRLEY. 

how  weary  I  shall  grow  with  listening  to  them  I.  But  I  suppoee 
I  am  a  selfish  fool :  these  are  very  respectable  gentlefolks ;  I 
ought  no  doubt  to  be  proud  of  their  countenance  :  I  don't  say 
they  are  not  as  good  as  I  am — ^far  from  it — ^but  they  are 
different  from  me." 

She  went  in. 

Yorkshire  people,  in  those  days,  took  their  tea  round  the 
table  ;  sitting  well  into  it,  with  their  knees  duly  introduced 
under  the  mahogany.  It  was  essential  to  have  a  multitude  of 
plates  of  bread  and  butter,  varied  in  sorts  and  plentiful  in 
quantity  :  it  was  thought  proper,  too,  that  on  the  centre-plate 
should  stand  a  glass  dish  of  marmalade ;  among  the  viands 
was  expected  to  be  found  a  small  assortment  of  cheesecakes 
and  tarts  :  if  there  was  also  a  plate  of  thin  slices  of  pink  ham 
garnished  with  green  parsley,  so  much  the  better. 

Eliza,  the  Rector's  cook,  fortunately  knew  her  business  as 
provider :  she  had .  been  put  out  of  humour  a  little  at  first, 
when  the  invaders  came  so  unexpectedly  in  such  strength; 
but  it  appeared  that  she  regained  her  cheerfulness  with  action, 
for  in  due  time  the  tea  was  spread  forth  in  handsome  style ; 
and  neither  ham,  tarts,  nor  marmalade  were  wanting  among 
its  accompaniments. 

The  curates,  summoned  to  this  bounteous  repast,  entered 
joyous  ;  but  at  once,  on  seeing  the  ladies,  of  whose  presence 
they  had  not  been  forewarned,  they  came  to  a  stand  in  the  door- 
way. MalouQ  headed  the  party ;  he  stopped  short  and  fell 
back,  almost  capsizing  Donne,  who  was  behind  him.  Donne, 
staggering  three  paces  in  retreat,,  sent  little  Sweeting  into  the 
arms  of  old  Helstone,  who  brought  up  the  rear.  There  was 
some  expostvdation,  some  tittering :  Malone  was  desired  to 
mind  what  he  was  about,  and  urged  to  push  forward ;  which 
at  last  he  did,  though  .colouring  to  the  top  of  his  peaked  fore- 
head a  bluish  purple.  Helstone,  advancing,  set  the  shy  curates 
aside,  welcomed  all  his  fair  guests,  shook  hands  and  passed  a 
jest  with  each,  and  seated  himself  snugly  between  the  lovely 
Harriet  and  the  dashing  Hannah  ;  Miss  Mary  he  requested  to 
move  to  the  seat  opposite  to  him,  that  he  might  see  her  if  he 
couldn't  be  near  her.  Perfectly  easy  and  gallant,  in  his  way, 
were  his  manners  always  to  young  ladies  ;  and  most  popular 
was  he  amongst  them  :  yet,  at  heart,  he  neither  respected  nor 
liked  the  sex,  and  such  of  them  as  circumstances  had  brought 
into  intimate  relation  with  him  had  ever  feared  rather  than 
loyed  him. 


THE  CITRATES  AT  TEA.  9B 

The  citrates  were  left  to  shift  for  themselves.  Sweeting, 
who  was  the  least  embarrassed  of  the  three,  took  refuge  beside 
Mrs.  Sykes  ;  who,  he  knew,  was  almost  as  fond  of  him  as  if  he 
had  been  her  son.  Donne,  after  making  his  general  bow  with 
a  grace  all  his  own,  and  saying  in  a  high  pragmatical  voice, 
"How  d'ye  do,  Miss  Helstone?"  dropped  into  a  seat  at 
CaroUne's  elbow  :  to  her  unmitigated  annoyance,  for  she  had 
a  peculiar  antipathy  to  Donne,  on  account  of  his  stultified  and 
nnmovable  self-conceit,  and  his  incurable  narrowness  of  mind. 
Malone,  grinning  most  unmeaningly,  inducted  himself  into  the 
corresponding  seat  on  the  other  side  :  sh.e  was  thus  blessed  in 
a  pair  of  supporters  ;  neither  of  whom,  she  knew,  would  be  of 
any  mortal  use,  whether  for  keeping  up  the  conversation, 
handing  cups,  circulating  the  muffins,  or  even  Lifting  the  plate 
from  the  slop-basin.  Little  Sweeting,  small  and  boyish  as  he 
va?,  would  have  been  worth  twenty  of  them. 

Malone,  though  a  ceaseless  talker  when  there  were  only  men 
present,  was  usually  tongue-tied  in  the  presence  of  ladies  : 
three  phrases,  however,  he  had  ready  cut  and^  dried,  which  he 
never  failed  to  produce : — 

Istly. — ^**Have  you  had  a  walk  to-day,  Miss  Helstone  ?" 

2ndly. — ^*  HavQ  you  seen  your  cousin,  Moore,  lately  ?  " 

3rdly. — ^**  Does  your  class  at  the  Sunday-school  keep  up  its 
number?" 

These  three  questions  being  put  and  responded  to,  between 
Caroline  and  Malone  reigned  silence. 

With  Donne  it  was  otherwise  :  he  was  troublesome,  exas- 
perating. He  had  a  stock  of  small-talk  on  hand,  at  once  thp 
most  trite  and  perverse  that  can  well  be  imagined  :  abuse  of 
the  people  of  Briarfield  ;  of  the  natives  of  Yorkshire  generally ; 
complaints  of  the  want  of  high  society  ;  of  the  backward 
state  of  civilization  in  these  districts  ;  murmurings  against  the 
disrespectful  conduct  of  the  lower  orders  in  the  north  toward 
their  betters ;  siUy  ridicule  of  the  manner  of  living  in  these 
parts, — the  want  of  style,  the  absence  of  elegance,  as  if  he, 
Donne,  had  been  accustomed  to  very  great  doings  indeed  :  an 
insinuation  which  his  somewhat  underbred  manner  and  aspect 
&iled  to  bear  out.  These  strictures  he  seemed  to  think  must 
laise  him  in  the  estimation  of  Miss  Helstone,  or  of  any  other 
lady  who  heard  him  ;  whereas  with  her,  at  least,  they  brought 
him  to  a  level  below  contempt :  though  sometimes,  indeed, 
they  incensed  her  ;  for,  a  Yorkshire  girl  herself,  she  hated  to 
keur  Yorkshire  abused  by  such  a  pitiful  prater ;  and  when 


94  8HIBLET. 

brought  up  to  a  certain  pitch,  she  would  turn  and  say  Bomie- 
thing  of  which  neither  the  matted'  nor  the  manner  recom- 
mended her  to  Mr.  Donne's  good-will.  She  would  tell  liim  it 
was  no  proof  of  refinement  to  be  ever  scolding  others  for  vul- 
garity ;  and  no  sign  of  a  good  pastor  to  be  eternally  censunng 
his  fiock.  She  would  ^.sk  him  what  he  had  entered  the  church 
for,  since  he  complained  there  were  only  cottages  to  visit,  and 
poor  people  to  preach  to  ? — ^whether  he  had  been  ordained  to 
the  ministry  merely  to  wear  soft  clothing  and  sit  in  kings^ 
houses  ?  These  questions  were  considered  by  all  the  curates 
as,  to  the  last  degree,  audacious  and  impious. 

Tea  was  a  long  time  in  progress  :  all  the  guests  gabbled  as 
their  hostess  had  expected. they  would.  Mr  Helstone,  being 
in  excellent  spirits, — when,  indeed,  was  he  ever  otherwise  in 
society,  attractive  female  society  ? — ^it  being  only  with  the  one 
lady  of  his  own  family  that  he  maintained  a  grim  taciturnity, 
— ^kept  up  a  brilliant  flow  of  easy  prattle  with  his  right-hand 
and  left-hand  neighbours,  and  even  with  his  vis-a-visj  Miss 
Mary :  though  as  Mary  was  the  most  sensible,  the  least  coquet- 
tish of  the  three,  to  her  the  elderly  widower  was  the  least 
attentive.  At  heart,  he  could  not  abide  sense  in  women:  he 
liked  to  see  them  as  silly,  as  light-headed,  as  vain,  as  open  to 
ridicule  as  possible ;  because  they  were  then  in  reality  what 
he  held  them  to  be,  and  wished  them  to  be, — ^inferior:  toys  to 
play  with,  to  amuse  a  vacant  hour  and  to  be  thrown  away. 

Hannah  was  his  favourite.  Harriet,  though  beautiful,  ego- 
tistical, and  self-satisfied,  was  not  quite  weak  enough  for  hun: 
she  had  some  genuine  self-respect  amidst  much  false  pride,  and 
if  she  did  not  talk  like  an  oracle,  neither  would  she  babble  like 
one  crazy:  she  would  not  permit  herself  to  be  treated  qidte  as 
a  doll,  a  child,  a  plaything:  she  expected  to  be  bent  to  like  a 
queen. 

Hannah,  on  the  contrary,  demanded  no  respect;  only  flattery: 
if  her  admirers  only  told  her  that  she  was  an  angel,  she  would 
let  them  treat  her  like. an  idiot.  So  very  credulous  and  frivo- 
lous was  she ;  so  very  silly  did  she  become  when  besieged  with 
attention,  flattered  and  admired  to  the  proper  degree,  that  there 
were  moments  when  Helstone  actually  felt  tempted  to  commit 
matrimony  a  second  time,  and  to  try  the  experiment  of  taking 
her  for  his  second  helpmeet:  but,  fortunately,  the  salutaiy 
recollection  of  the  ennuis  of  his  first  marriage,  the  impression 
still  left  on  him  of  the  weight  of  the  millstone  he  had  once  worn 
round  his  neck,  the  fixity  of  his  feelings  respectiDg  the  ioBufier* 


TUB  OOBATIS  AT  TIA.  96 

able  eyils  of  conjugal  existence,  operated  as  a  check  to  his 
tenderness,  suppressed  the  sigh  heaving  his  old  iron  lungs,  and 
restrained  him  from  whispering  to  Hannah  proposals  it  would 
have  been  high  fun  and  great  satisfaction  to  her  to  hear. 

It  is  probable  she  woidd  have  married  him  if  he  had  asked 
her;  her  parents  woxdd  have  quite  approved  the  match :  to  them 
his  fiffy-five  years,  his  bejid-leather  heart,  could  have  presented 
no  obstacles  ;  and,  as  he  was  a  rector,  hdd  an  excellent  living, 
occupied  a  good  house,  and  was  supposed  even  to  have  private 
property  (though  in  that  the  world  was  mistaken:  every  penny 
of  the  bfiOOL  inherited  by  him  from  his  father  had  been 
devoted  to  the  building  and  endowing  of  a  new  church  at  his 
native  village  in  Lancashire— for  he  could  show  a  lordly 
munificence  when  he  pleased,  and  if  the  end  was  to  his  liking, 
never  hesitated  about  making  a  grand  sacrifice  to  attain  it), — 
her  parents,  I  say,  would  have  delivered  Hannah  over  to  his 
lovingkindness  and  his  tender  mercies  without  one  scruple; 
and  tbe  second  Mrs  Helstone,  inversiog  the  natural  order  of 
insect  existence,  would  have  fluttered  through  the  honejrmoon 
a  bright,  admired  butterfly,  and  crawled  the  rest  of  her  days 
a  soidid,  trampled  worm. 

Little  Mr  Sweeting,  seated  between  Mrs  Sykes  and  Miss 
Maiy,  both  of  whom  were  very  kind  to  him,  and  having  a  dish 
(^  tarts  before  him,  and  marmalade  and  crumpet  upon  his 
plate,  looked  and  felt  more  content  than  any  monardi.  He- 
was  fond  of  all  the  Misses  Sykes:  they  were  aU  fond  of  him: 
he  thought  them  magnificent  girls,  qidte  proper  to  mate  with 
one  of  his  inches.  K  he  had  a  cause  of  regret  at  this  blissful 
moment,  it  was  that  Miss  Dora  happened  to  be  absent;  Dora 
being  the  one  whom  he  secretly  hoped  one  day  to  call  Mrs  David 
Sweeting,  with  whom  he  dreamt  of  taking  stately  walks,  leading 
her  like  an  empress  through  the  village  of  Nunnely:  and  an 
empress  she  would  have  been,  if  size  could  make  an  empress. 
She  was  vast,  ponderous:  seen  from  behind,  she  had  the  air 
of  a  very  stout  lady  of  forty;  but  withal  she  possessed  a  good 
face,  and  no  unkindly  character. 

The  meal  at  last  drew  to  a  close  :  it  would  have  been  over 
long  ago,  if  Mr  Donne  had  not  persisted  in  sitting  with  his  cup 
lialf  full  of  cold  tea  before  him,  long  after  the  rest  had  finished 
tnd  after  he  himself  had  discussed  such  allowance  of  viands 
as  he  felt  competent  to  swallow — ^long,  indeed,  after  signs  of 
impatience  had  been  manifested  all  round  the  board:  till 
chiiizs  were  pushed  back;  till  the  talk  flagged;  till  silence 


96  SHIRLEr. 

fell.  Vainly  did  Caroline  inquire  repeatedly  if  he  »would  havft 
another  cup ;  if  he  would  take  a  little  hot  tea,  as  that  must  be 
cold,  &c. :  he  would  neither  drink  it  nor  leave  it.  He  seemed 
to  think  that  this  isolated  position  of  his  gave  him  somehow 
a  certain  importance :  that  it  was  dignified  and  stately  to  be 
the  last ;  that  it  was  grand  to  keep  all  the  others  waiting.  So 
long  did  he  linger,  that  the  very  urn  died:  it  ceased  to  hiss. 
At  length,  however,  the  old  Rector  himself,  who  had  hitherto 
been  too  pleasantly  engaged  with  Hannah  to  care  for  the  delaj, 
got  impatient. 

"  For  whom  are  we  waiting  ?  "  he  asked. 

"For  me,  I  believe,"  returned  Donne,  complacently;  ap- 
pearing to  think  it  much  to  his  credit  that  a  party  should  thus 
be  kept  dependent  on  his  movements. 

"  Tut ! "  cried  Helstone :  then  standing  up,  "  Let  us  rdturn 
thanks,"  said  he :  which  he  did  forthwitib,  and  all  quitted  the 
table.  Donne,  nothing  abashed,  still  sat  ten  minutes  quite 
alone,  whereupon  Mr  Helstone  rang  the  bell  for  the  things  to 
be  removed ;  the  curate  at  length  saw  himself  forced  to  empty 
his  cup,  and  to  relinquish  the  role  which,  he  thought,  had  given 
him  such  a  felicitous  distinction,  drawn  upon  him  such  flat- 
tering general  notice. 

And  now,  in  the  natural  course  of  events  (Caroline,  know- 
ing how  it  would  be,  had  opened  the  piano,  and  produced 
music-books  in  readiness)  music  was  asked  for.  This  was  Mr 
Sweeting^s  chance  for  showing  off:  he  was  eager  to  commence; 
he  undertook,  therefore,  the  Arduous  task  of  persuading  the 
yoimg  ladies  to  favour  the  company  with  an  air — a  song.  Con 
amore,  he  went  through  the  whole  business  of  begging,  praj- 
ing,  resisting  excuses,  explaining  away  difficulties,  and  at  last 
succeeded  in  persuading  Miss  Harriet  to  allow  herself  to  be 
led  to  the  instrument.  Then  out  came  the  pieces  of  his  flute, 
(he  always  carried  them  in  his  pocket,  as  unfailingly  as  he 
carried  lus  handkerchief).  They  were  screwed  and  arranged; 
Malone  and  Donne  meantime  herding  together,  and  sneering 
at  him,  which  the  little  man,  glaQcing  over  his  shoulder,  saw, 
but  did  not  heed  at  all:  he  was  persuaded  their  sarcasm  all 
arose  from  envy;  they  could  not  accompany  the  ladies  as  he 
could ;  he  was  about  to  enjoy  a  triumph  over  them. 

The  triumph  began.  Msdone,  much  chagrined  at  hearing 
him  pipe  up  in  most  superior  style,  determined  to  earn  distinc- 
tion, too,  if  possible,  and  all  at  once  assuming  the  character  of 
a  swain  (which  character  he  had  endeavoiired  to  enact  once 


THE  CURATES  AT   TEA.  97 

or  twice  before,  but  in  wliieh  he  had  not  hitherto  met  with  the 
lucoess  he  doubtless  opined  his  merits  deserved),  approached 
a  SO&  on  which  Miss  Helstone  was  seated,  and  depositing  his 
great  Irish  frame  near  her,  tried  his  hand  (or  rather  tongue) 
at  a  fine  speech  or  two,  accompanied  by  grins  the  m'ost  extra- 
ordinary and  incomprehensible.  In  the  course  of  his  efforts 
to  render  himself  agreeable,  he  contrived  to  possess  himself  of 
the  two  long  sofa  cushions  and  a  square  one;  with  which, 
after  rolling  .them  about  for  some  time  with  strange  gestures, 
he  managed  to  erect  a  sort  of  barrier  between  himself  and  the 
object  of  his  attentions.  Caroline,  quite  willing  that  they  should 
be  sundered,  soon  devised  an  excuse  for  stepping  over  to  the 
opposite  side  of  the  room,  and  taking  up  a  position  beside 
Mrs  Sykes ;  of  which  good  lady  she  entreated  some  instruction 
in  a  new  stitch  in  ornamental  knitting,  a  favour  readily  granted ; 
and  thus  Peter  Augustus  was  thrown  out. 

Very  sullenly  did  his  countenance  lower  when  he  saw  him- 
«elf  abandoned, — left  entirely  to  his  own  resources,  on  a  large 
to&,  with  the  charge  of  three  small  cushions  on  his  hands. 
The  feet  was,  he  felt  disposed  seriously  to  cultivate  acquaint- 
inoe  with  Miss  Helstoile ;  because  he  thought,  in  common  with 
Others,  that  her  uncle  possessed  money,  and  concluded,  that 
lince  he  had  no  children,  he  would  probably  leave  it  to  his 
niece.  Gerard  Moore  was  better  instructed  on  this  point :  he 
had  seen  the  neat  church  that  owed  its  origin  to  the  Eector's 
zeal  and  cash,  and  more  than  once,  in  his  inmost  soul,  had 
cursed  an  expensive  caprice  whibh  crossed  his  wishes. 

The  evening  seemed  long  to  one  person  in  that  room.  Caro- 
line at  intervals  dropped  her  knitting  on  her  lap,  and  gave 
herself  up  to  a  sort  of  brain-lethargy — closing  her  eyes  and 
depressing  her  head — caused  by  what  seemed  to  her  the  un- 
meaning hum  around  her:  the  inharmonious,  tasteless  ruttlc 
of  the  piano  keys,  the  squeaking  and  gasping  notes  of  the  flute, 
the  laughter  and  mirth  of  her  imcle,  and  Hannah,  and  Mary, 
she  could  not  tell  whence  originating,  for  she  heard  notliiug 
comic  or  glee^  in  their  discourse ;  and  more  than  all,  by  tlie 
interminable  gossip  of  Mrs  Sykes  murmured  close  at  her  ear; 
Ifossip  which  rang  the  changes  on  four  subjects:  h(;r  own 
health  and  that  of  the  various  members  of  her  family;  the 
^liasionary  and  Jew  baskets  and  their  contents ;  the  late  meet- 
tog  at  Nunnely,  and  one  which  was  expected  to  come  oil  next 
^eek  at  Whinbury. 

Tired  at  length  to  exhaustion,  she  embraced  the  qpporiu* 

7 


98  SHIBLET 

nity  of  Mr  Sweeting  coming  up  to  speak  to  Mrs  Sjkes,  to  slip 
quietly  out  of  the  apartment,  and  seek  a  moment's  respite  in 
solitude.  She  repaired  to  the  dining-room,  where  the  clear 
but  now  low  remnant  of  a  fire  still  burnt  in  the  grate.  The 
place  was  empty  and  quiet,  glasses  and  decanters  were  cleared 
from  the  table,  the  chairs  were  put  back  in  their  places,  all 
was  orderly.  Caroline  sank  into  her  imcle's  large  easy  chair, 
half  shut  her  eyes,  and  rested  herself — crested  at  leiast  her 
limbs,  her  senaes,  her  hearing,  her  vision-weary  with  listea- 
ing  to  nothing,  and  gazing  on  yacancy.  As  to  her  mind,  that 
fiew  directly  to  the  Hollow :  it  stood  on  the  threshold  of  the 
parlour  there,  then  it  passed  to  the  counting-house,  and  won- 
dered which  spot  was  blessed  by  the  presence  of  Eobert.  It 
so  happened  that  neither  locality  had  that  honour;  for  Bobert 
was  hdif  a  mile  away  from  both,  and  much  nearer  to  Caroline 
tha::  her  deadened  spirit  suspected:  he  was  at  this  moment 
Crossing  the  churchyard,  approaching  the  Bectory  garden-gate: 
not,  howeyer,  coming  to  see  his  cousin,  but  int^t  solely  on 
communicating  a  brief  piece  of  intelligence  to  the  Hector. 

Tes,  Caroline;  you  hear  the  wire  of  the  bell  yibrate:  it 
ringi§  again  for  the  fii%h  time  this  afternoon:  you  start,  and 
you  are  certain  now  that  this  must  be  him  of  whom  yon 
dream.  \  Why  you  are  so  certain  you  cannot  explain  to  your- 
self, bu^  you  know  it.  You  lean  forward,  listening  eagerly  as 
Fanny  oj^ns  the  door:  right!  that  is  the  yoice — ^low — ^with 
the  slight  foreign  accent,  but  so  sweet,  as  you  fancy:  you  half 
rise:  '^ Fanhy  will  teU  him  Mr  Helstone  is  with  company,  and 
then  he  will  go  away."  Oh!  she  cannot  let  him  go:  in  spite 
of  herself — ^in  spite  of  her  reason  she  walks  half  across  the 
room ;  she  stands  ready  to  dart  out  in  case  the  step  should 
retreat:  but  he  enters  the  passage.  ''  Since  your  master  is 
engaged,'*  he  says, ''  just  show  me  into  the  dining-room;  bring 
me  pen  and  ink :  I  vWill  write  a  short  note  and  leaye  it  for  him.^ 

Now,  haying  caught  these  words,  and  hearing  him  adyance, 
Caroline,  if  there  was  a  door  within  the  dining-room,  would 
glide  through  it  and  disappear.  I^he  feels  caught,  hemmed  in; 
she  dreads  her  unexpected  presence  may  annoy  him.  A  second 
since,  she  would  haye  flpwn  to  him;  tiiat  second  passed,  she 
would  flee  from  him.  She  cannot;  there  is  no  way  of  escape: 
the  dining-room  has  but  one  door,  through  which  now  enters 
her  cousin.  The  look  of  troubled  surprise  she  expected  to 
see  in  his  face  has  appeared  there,  has  shocked  her,  and  is 
gone.    She  has  stammered  a  sort  of  apology:-* 


THE  GUBATES  AT  TEA.  99 

**  I  only  left  the  drawing-room  a  minute  for  a  little  quiet.** 
There  was  something  so  diffident  and  downcast  in  the  air 
and  tone  with  which  she  said  this,  any  one  might  perceive 
that  some  saddening  change  had  lately  passed  over  her  pros- 
pectSy  and  that  the  faculty  of  cheerful  self-possession  had  left 
her.  Mr  Moore,  probably,  remembered  how  she  had  formerly 
been  accustomed  to  meet  him  with  gentle  ardour  and  hopeful 
confidence ;  he  must  have  seen  how  the  check  of  this  morning 
had  operated:  here  was  an  opportunity  for  canying  out  his 
new  system  with  ejffect,  if  he  chose  to  improve  it.  Perhaps 
he  found  it  easier  to  practise  that  system  in  broad  daylight,  in 
his  mill-3rard,  amidst l)usy  occupations,  than  in  a  quiet  parlour, 
disengaged,  at  the  hour  of  eventide.  Fanny  lit  the  candles, 
which  before  had  stood  imlit  on  the  table,  brought  writing 
materials,  and  left  the  room :  Caroline  was  about  to  follow  her. 
Moore,  to  act  consistently,  should  have  let  her  go ;  whereas  he 
stood  in  the  doorway,  and,  holding  out  his  hand,  gently  kept 
her  back:  he  did  not  ask  her  to  stay,  but  he  would  not  let 
her  go. 

''  Shall  I  tell  my  imcle  you  are  here  ?  **  asked  she,  still  in 
the  same  subdued  voice. 

"No:  I  can  say  to  you  all  I  had  to  say  to  him.     You  will 
be  my  messenger  ?  " 
"  Yes,  Eobert." 

"  Then  you  may  just  inform  him  that  I  have  got  a  clue  to 
the  identity  of  one^  at  least,  of  the  men  who  broke  my  frames ; 
that  he  belongs  to  the  saqie  gang  who  attacked  Sykes  and 
Pearson^s  dressing-shop ;  and  that  I  hope  to  have  him  in  cus- 
tody to-morrow.     You  can  remember  tiiat  ?  " 

"Oh!  yes.'*     These  two  monosyllables  were  uttered  in  a 
sadder  tone  than  ever;  and,  as  she  said  them,  she  shook  her 
bead  slightly,  and  sighed.     "  Will  you  prosecute  him  ?  " 
"  Doubtless.** 
"  No,  Robert.** 
"  And  why  no,  Caroline  ?  ** 

"  Because  it  will  set  all  the  neighbourhood  against  you  more 
than  ever.** 

"  That  is  no  reason  why  I  should  not  do  my  duty,  and  defend 
mjr  property.  This  fellow  is  a  great  scoimdrel,  and  ought  to 
be  incapacitated  from  perpetrating  further  mischief." 

"  But  his  accomplices  ymU.  take  revenge  on  you. '  You  do  not 
know  how  the  people  of  this  coimtry  bear  malice :  it  is  the 
boiat  of  some  of  them  that  they  can  keep  a  stone  in  their  pocket 


100  SHIRLET. 

seven  years,  turn  it  at  tlie  end  of  that  time,  keep  it  seven  yeaw 
longer,  and  hurl  it  and  hit  their  niark  *  at  last.' " 

Moore  laughed. 

"  A  most  pithy  vaunt,"  said  he;  "  one  that  redounds  vastly 
to  the  credit  of  your  dear  Yorkshire  friends.  But  don't  fear 
for  me,  Lina :  I  am  on  my  guard  against  these  lamb-like  com- 
patriots of  yours :  don't  make  yourself  uneasy  about  me." 

"  How  can  I  help  it  ?  You  are  my  cousin.  If  anything 
happened — ^"  she  stopped. 

"  Nothing  will  happen,  Lina.  To  speak  in  your  own  lan- 
guage, there  is  a  Providence  above  all — ^is  there  not  ?  " 

"  Yes,  dear  Eobert.     May  He  guard  you ! " 

"  And  if  prayers  have  efficacy,  yours  will  benefit  me:  you 
pray  for  me  sometimes  ?  " 

"  Not  sometimes,  Robert :  you,  and  Louis,  and  Hortense  are 
always  remembered."  • 

,  "  So  I  have  often  imagined :  it  has  occurred  to  me,  when, 
weary  and  vexed,  I  have  myself  gone  to  bed  like  a  heathen, 
that  another  had  asked  forgiveness  for  my  day,  and  safety  for 
my  night.  I  don't  suppose  such  vicarial  piety  wiU  avail  much ; 
but  the  petitions  come  out  of  a  sincere  breast,  from  innocent 
lips:  they  should  be  acceptable  as  Abel's  offering;  and  doubt- 
less would  be,  if  the  object  deserved  them." 

"  Annihilate  that  doubt:  it  is  groundless." 

"  When  a  man  has  been  brought  up  only  to  make  money, 
and  live^  to  make  it,  and  for  nothing  else,  and  scarcely  breathes 
any  other  air  than  that  of  mills  and  markets,  it  seems  odd  to 
utter  his  name  in  a  prayer,  or  to  mix  his  idea  with  anjrthing 
divine ;  and  very  strange  it  seems,  that  a  good,  pure  heart 
should  take  him  in  and  harbour  him,  as  if  he  had  any  claim 
to  that  sort  of  nest.  If  I  could  guide  that  benignant  heart,  I 
believe  I  should  counsel  it  to .  exclude  one  who  does  not  pro- 
felSs  to  have  any  higher  aim  in  life  than  that  of  patching  up 
his  broken  fortune,  and  wiping  clean  from  his  bourgeois 
scutcheon  the  foul  stain  of  bankruptcy." 

The  hint,  though  conveyed  thus  tenderly  and  modestly  (as 
Caroline  thought),  was  felt  keenly  and  co^iprehended  clearly. 

"  Indeed,  I  only  think — or  I  mil  only  think — of  you  as  my 
cousin,"  was  the  quick  answer.  "  I  am  beginning  to  imder- 
stand  things  better  than  I  did,  Robert,  when  you  first  came 
to  England :  better  than  I  did,  a  week — a  day  ago.  I  know 
it  is  your  duty  to  try  to  get  on,  and  that  it  won't  do  for  you 
to  be  romantic ;  but  in  future  you  must  cot  misunderstand  me> 


NOAH  AKD   MOSES.  101 

if  I  seem  friendly.  You  misunderstood  me  this  morning,  did 
you  not?" 

"  What  made  you  think  so  ?  " 

"  Your  look — your  manner." 

"  But  look  at  me  now — ^" 

"  Oh !  you  are  different  now:  at  present,  I  dare  speak  to  you." 

"  Yet  I  am  the  same,  except  that  I  have  left  the  tradesman 
behind  me  in  the  Hollow :  your  kinsman  alone  staiids  before 
you." 

"  My  cousin,  Robert;  not  Mr  Moore."  • 

"  Not  a  bit  of  Mr  Moore.     Caroline — ^* 

Here  the  company  was  heard  rising  in  the  other  room ;  the 
door  was  opened;  the  pony-carriage  was  ordered;  shawls  and 
bonnets  were  demanded;  Mr  Helstone  called  for  .his  niece. 

"  I  must  go,  Robert," 

"  Yes,  you  must  go,  or  they  will  come  in,  and  find  us  here; 
and  I,  rather  than  meet  all  that  host  in  the  passage,  will  take 
my  departure  through  the  window :  luckily,  it  opens  like  a 
door.  One  minute  only — ^put  down  the  candle  an  instant — 
good-night  I  I  kiss  you  because  we  are  cousins;  and,  being 
cousins— one — ^two— three  kisses  are  allowable.  Caroline, 
good-night  I" 


CHAPTER    Vni. 

NOAH  AND  HOSES. 


The  next  day,  Moore  had  risen  before  the  sim,  and  had  taken 
a  ride  to  Whinbury  and  back  ere  his  sister  had  made  the 
caff^  au  lait,  or  cut  the  tartines  for  his  breakfast.  What 
bosiness  he  transacted  there,  he  kept  to  himself.  Hortense 
asked  no  questions :  it  was  not  her  wont  to  comment  on  his 
moTements,  nor  his  to  render  an  account  of  them.  The  secrets 
of  business-— complicated  and  often  dismal  mysteries— were 
boned  in  his  breast,  and  never  came  out  of  their  sepulchre,  save 
now  and  then  to  scare  Joe  Scott,  or  give  a  start  to  some  foreign 
correspondent:  indeed  a  general  habit  of  reserve  on  whatever 
vas  important  seemed  bred  in  his  mercantile  blood. 

Breakfast  over,  he  went  to  his  counting-house.  Henry, 
Joe  Scott's  boy,  brought  in  the  letters  and  the  daily  papers; 
Hoore  seated  liiiuself  at  his  desk,  broke  the  seals  of  the  docu- 


102  SHIBLET. 

mentSy  and  gknced  them  over.  They  were  aU  short,  but  set 
— ^it  seemed — sweet;  probably  rather  sour  on  the  eontrary, 
for  as  Moore  laid  down  the  last,  his  nostrils  emitted  a  derisive 
and  defiant  snu^;  and,  though  he  burst  into  no  soliloquy,  there 
was  a  glance  in  his  eye  which  seemed  to  invoke  die  devil, 
and  lay  charges  on  him  to  sweep  the  whole  concern  to 
Gehenna.  However,  having  chosen  a  pen  and  stripped  away 
the  feathered  top  in  a  brief  spasm  of  finger-fury— oidy  finger- 
fury,  his  face  was  placid — ^he  dashed  off  a  batch  of  answers, 
sealed  them,  and  then  went  out  and  walked  through  the  mill: 
on  coming  back,  he  sat  down  to  read  his  newspaper. 

The  contents  seemed  not  absorbingly  interesting;  he  more 
than  once  laid  it  across  his  knee,  folded  his  arms,  and  gazed 
into  the  fire ;  he  occasionally  turned  his  head  towards  the 
window:  he  looked  at  intervals  at  his  watch:  in  short,  his 
mind  appeared  pre-occupied.  Perhaps  he  was  thinking  of  the 
beauty  of  the  weather — ^for  it  was  a  fine  and  mild  morning  for 
the  season — ^and  vdshing  to  be  out  in  the  fields  enjoying  it. 
The  door  of  his  coimting-house  stood  wide  open,  ^e  breeze 
and  sunshine  entered  freely;  but  the  first  visitant  brought 
no  spring  perfimie  on  its  wings,  only  an  occasional  sulphur- 
puff  from  the  soot-thick  column  of  smoke  rushing  sable  from 
the  gaimt  mill-chimney. 

A  dark  blue  apparition  (that  of  Joe  Scott,  fresh  from  a 
dyeing  vat)  appe^^  momentarily  at  the  open  door,  uttered 
the  words  "  He 's  comed,  sir,"  and  vanished. 

Mr  Moore  raised  not  his  eyes  from  the  paper.  A  large 
man,  broad-shouldered  and  massive-limbed,  clad  in  fustian 
garments  and  grey-worsted  stockings,  entered,  who  was  re« 
ceived  with  a  nod,  and  desired  to  take  a  seat;  which  he  did, 
making  the  remark — as  he  removed  his  hat  (a  very  bad  one), 
stowed  it  away  under  his  chair,  and  wiped  his  forehead  mth 
a  spotted  cotton  handkerchief  extracted  from  the  hat-crown 
— iii&t  it  was  "  raight  dahn  warm  for  Febeweny."  Mr 
Moore  assented:  at  least  he  uttered  some  slight  sound,  which, 
though  inarticulate,  might  pass  for  an  assent.  The  visitor 
now  carefully  deposited  in  tlie  comer  beside  him  an  official- 
looking  staff  which  he  bore  in  his  hand;  this  done,  he 
whistled,  probably  by  way  of  appearing  at  his  ease. 

**  You  have  what  is  necessary,  I  suppose,"  said  Mr  Moore. 

"Ay I  ay!  all's  right." 

He  renewed  his  whistling,  Mr  Moore  hia  xeading:  the 
paper  apparently  had  become  more  interesting.    Fi^sentlyi 


NOAH  AND  mOSES.  108 

however,  he  turned  to  his  cupboard,  which  was  within  reach 
of  his  long  arm,  opened  it  without  rising,  took  out  a  black 
bottle — the  same  he  had  produced  for  Malone's  benefit — a 
tumbler,  and  a  jug,  placed  them  on  the  table,  and  said  to  his 
guest, — 

"  Help  yourself;  there 's  water  in  that  jar  in  the  come^." 

<<  I  dunnut  knaw  that  there  ^s  mich  need,  for  all  a  body  is 
diy "  (thirsty)  "  in  a  morning,"  said  the  ^tian  gentleman^ 
lising  and  doing  as  requested. 

"  Will  you  tai'  naught  yourseln,  Mr  Moore?"  he  inquired, 
as  with  skilled  hand  he  mixed  a  portion,  and  having  tested  it 
b^  a  deep  draught,  sank  back  satisfied  and  bland  in  his  seat. 
Moore — chary  of  words — ^replied  by  a  negative  movement 
and  murmur. 

"  Yah  'd  as  good,"  continued  his  visitor ;  "  it  'uld  set  ye  up, 
wald  a  sup  o'  this  stujQT.  Uncommon  good  Hollands  1  ye  get 
it  M  furrin'  parts,  I  'se  think  ?  " 

"Ay  I" 

"  Tak'  my  advice,  and  try  a  glass  on 't ;  them  lads  'at  's 
coming  '11  keep  ye  talking,  nob'dy  knows  how  long :  ye  'U 
need  propping."         ^ 

"  Have  you  seen  Mr  Sykes  this  morning  ?"  inquired  Moore. 

"  I  seed  him  a  hauf  an  hour — ^nay — ^happen  a  quarter  of  an 
hour  sm',  just  afore  I  set  off:  he  said  he  ^imed  to  come  here, 
and  I  sudn't  wonder  but  ye  '11  have  old  Helstone  too ;  I  see'd 
'em  saddling  his  little  nag  as  I  passed  at  back  o'  t'  Bectory." 

The  speaker  was  a  true  prophet,  for  the  trot  of  a  little 
nag's  hoofs  were,  five  minutes  after,  heard  in  the  yard ;  it 
stopped,  and  a  well-known  nasal  voice  cried  alOud — "  Boy " 
(probably  addressing  Harry  Scott,  who  usually. hung  about 
the  premises  from  nine  a.m.  to  five  p.m.),  '^  take  my  horse  and 
lead  him  into  the  stable." 

Helstone  came  in  marching  nimbly  and  erect^  looking 
browner,  keener,  and  livelier  than  usual. 

"  BeautiAil  morning,  Moore :  how  do,  my  boy  ?  Ha ! 
Whom  have  we  here?"  (turning  to  the  personage  with  the 
staff.)  SugdenI  What  I  you  're  going  to  work  directly? 
On  my  word,  you  lose  no  time :  but  I  come  to  ask  explana- 
tions: your  message  was  delivered  to  me;  are  you  sure  you 
are  on  the  right  scent  ?  How  do  you  mean  to  set  about  the 
business  ?     Have  you  got  a  warrant  ?  " 

"Sugdenhafi." 

**  Then  you  are  going  to  seek  him  now  ?  I  'U  accompany  you.*^ 


10-i  SHIBLET. 

"  You  will  be  spared  that  trouble,  sir;  be  is  coming  to  seek 
me.     I  'm  just  now  sitting  in  state,  waiting  his  arrivaL" 

"  And  who  is  it  ?     One  of  my  parishioners  ?" 

Joe  Scott  had  entered  imobserved;  he  now  stood,  a  most 
sinister  phantom,  half  his  person  being  dyed  of  jhe  deepest 
tint  of  indigo,  leaning  on  the  desk.  His  master's  answer  to 
the  Rector's  question  was  a  smile;  Joe  took  the  word;  putting 
on  a  quiet  but  pawky  look,  he  said,— 

"  It's  a  friend  of  yours,  Mr  Helstone  ;  a  gentleman  you  often 
speak  of." 

"  Indeed !    His  name,  Joe  ? — You  look  well  this  morning.'' 

"  Only  the  Rev.  Moses  Barraclough  :  t'  tub  orator  you  cill 
him  sometimes,  I  think." 

"  Ah ! "  said  the  Rector,  taking  out  his  snuff-box,  and  adnu- 
nistering  to  himself  a  very  long  pinch — ^**Ah!  couldn't  have 
supposed  it.  Why,  the  pious  man  never  was  a  workman  ol 
yours,  Moore  ?     He 's  a  tailor  by  trade." 

"  And  so  much  the  worse  grudge  I  owe  him,  for  interfering, 
and  setting  my  discarded  men  against  me." 

"  And  Moses  was  actually  present  at  the  battle  of  Stilbro' 
Moor  ?     He  went  there — wooden  leg  and  all  ?" 

"Ay,  sir,"  said  Joe  ;  "he  went  there  on  horseback,  that  his 
leg  mightn't  be  noticed  :  he  was  the  captain  and  wore  a  mask ; 
the  rest  only  had  their  faces  blacked." 

"And  how  was  he  found  out ?" 

"  I  '11  tell  you,  sir,"  said  Joe  :  "  t'  maister  's  not  so  fond  of 
talking ;  I  've  no  objections.  He  courted  Sarah,  Mr  Moore's 
sarvant  lass,  and  so  it  seems  she  would  have  nothing  to.  say  to 
him  ;  she  either  didn't  like  his  wooden  leg,  or  she'd  some  notion 
about  his  being  a  hypocrite.  Happen  (for  women  is  queer 
hands — ^we  may  say  that  amang  werseln  when  there's  none  of 
'em  nigh)  she  'd  have  encouraged  him,  in  spite  of  his  leg  and 
•  his  deceit — just  to  pass  timft  like  ;  I  've  known  some  on  'em  do 
as  mich,  and  some  o'  t'  bonniest  and  mimmest-looking  too— -ay! 
I  've  seen  clean,  trim  young  things,  that  looked  as  denty  and 
pure  as  daisies,  and  wi'  time  a  body  fun'  'em  out  to  be  nowt  but 
stinging,  venomed  nettles." 

"  Joe 's  a  sensible  feUow,"  interjected  Helstone. 

**  Howsiver,  Sarah  had  another  string  to  her  bow  :  Fred 
Murgatroyd,  one  of  our  lads,  is  for  her,  and  as  women  judg:^ 
men  by  their  faces — ^and  Fred  has  a  middling  face,  while  Mosts 
is  none  so  handsome,  as  we  all  knaw — thelass  took  on  wi' Fred. 
A  two-three  months  sin',  Murgatroyd  and  Moses  chanot'd  to 


KOAH  AND  MOSES.  105 

meet  one  Sunday  night ;  they  *d  both  come  lurking  about  these 
premises  wi'  the  notion  of  counselling  Sarah  to  tak'  a  bit  of  a 
walk  wi'  them  ;  they  fell  out,  had  a  tussle,  and  Fred  was 
worsted :  for  he  *s  young  and  small,  and  Barraclough,  for  all 
he  has  only  one  leg,  is  almost  as  strong  as  Sugden  there  ;  in- 
deed, anybody  that  hears  him  roaring  at  a  revival  or  a  love- 
feast,  may  be  sure  he 's  no  weakling." 

"Joe,  you're  insupportable,"  here  broke  in  Mr  Moore.  "  You 
spin  out  your  explanation  as  Moses  spins  out  his  sermons.  The 
long  and  short  of  it  is,  Murgatroyd  was  jealous  of  Barraclough ; 
and  last  night,  as  he  an4  a  friend  took  shelter  in  a  barn  fi-om  a 
shower,  they  heard  and  saw  Moses  conferring  with  some  asso- 
ciates within.  From  their  discourse,  it  was  plain  he  had  been 
the  leader,  not  only  at  Stilbro*  Moor,  but  in  the  attack  on  Sykes's 
property :  morever  they  planned  a  deputation  to  wait  on  me 
this  morning,  which  the  tailor  is  to  head,  and  which,  in  the 
most  religious  and  peaceful  spirit,  is  to  entreat  me  to  put  the 
accursed  thing  out  of  my  tent.  I  rode  over  to  Whinbury  this 
morning,  got  a  constable  and  a  warrant,  and  I  am  now  waiting 
to  give  my  fiiend  the  reception  he  deserves  ;  here,  meantime, 
comes  Sykes  :  Mr  Helstone,  you  must  spirit  him  up  ;  he  feels 
timid  at  the  thoughts  of  prosecuting." 

A  gig  was  heard  to  roll  into  the  yard :  Mr  Sykes  entered  ; 
a  tall  stout  man  of  about  fifty,  comely  of  feature,  but  feeble  of 
physiognomy :  he  looked  anxious. 

"  Have  they  been  ?  Are  they  gone  ?  Have  you  got  him  ? 
Is  it  over  ?  "  he  asked. 

"Not  yet,"  returned  Moore  with  phlegm.  "  We  are  waiting 
for  them." 

"  They  '11  not  come ;  it 's  near  noon :  better  give  it  up  ;  it 
will  excite  bad  feeling — ^make  a  stir — cause  perhaps  fatal  con- 
sequences." 

**  You  need  not  appear,"  said  Moore.  "I  shall  meet  them  in 
the  yard  when  they  come  ;  you  can  stay  here." 

"  But  my  name  must  be  seen  in  the  law  proceedings :  a  wife 
and  family, Mr  Moore — a  wife  and  family  make  a  man  cautious." 
Moore  looked  disgusted.  "  Give  way,  if  you  please,"  said  he ; 
"leave  me  to  myself;'  I  have  no  objection  to  act  alone  :  only 
be  assured  you  will  not  find  safety  in  submission ;  your  partner, 
Pearson, gave  way,  and  conceded,  and  forbore — ^well,  that  did  not 
prevent  them  from  attempting  to  shoot  him  in  his  own  house." 

"  My  dear  sir,  take  a  little  wine  and  wafer,"  recommended 
Mr  Helstone.    The  wine  and  water  was  Holland&  and  water,  as 


102  SHIRLET. 

ments,  and  gknced  them  over.  They  were  all  short,  but  XM>t 
— ^it  seemed — sweet;  probably  rather  sour  on  the  contrary, 
for  as  Moore  laid  down  the  last,  his  nostrils  emitted  a  derisive 
and  defiant  snuff;  and,  though  he  burst  into  no  soliloquy,  there 
was  a  glance  in  his  eye  which  seemed  to  invoke  &e  devil, 
and  lay  charges  on  him  to  sweep  the  whole  concern  to 
Grehenna.  However,  having  chosen  a  pen  and  stripped  away 
the  feathered  top  in  a  brief  spasm  of  finger-fury— only  finger- 
ftiry,  his  face  was  placid — ^he  dashed  off  a  batch  of  answers, 
sealed  them,  and  then  went  out  and  walked  through  the  miU: 
on  coming  back,  he  sat  down  to  read  his  newspaper. 

The  contents  seemed  not  absorbingly  interesting;  he  more 
than  once  laid  it  across  his  knee,  folded  his  arms,  and  gazed 
into  the  fire ;  he  occasionaUy  turned  his  head  towards  the 
window :  he  looked  at  intervals  at  his  watch :  in  short,  his 
mind  appeared  pre-occupied.  Perhaps  he  was  thinking  of  the 
beauty  of  the  weather — for  it  was  a  fine  and  mild  morning  for 
the  season — ^and  wishing  to  be  out  in  the  fields  enjoying  it. 
The  door  of  his  counting-house  stood  wide  open,  die  breeze 
and  simshine  entered  freely;  but  the  first  visitant  brought 
no  spring  perfimie  on  its  wings,  only  an  occasional  sulphur- 
puff  firom  ilie  soot-thick  column  of  smoke  rushing  sable  firom 
the  gaimt  mill-chinmey. 

A  dark  blue  apparition  (that  of  Joe  Scott,  firesh  from  a 
dyeing  vat)  appeared  momentarily  at  the  open  door,  uttered 
the  words  "  He 's  comed,  sir,"  and  vanished. 

Mr  Moore  raised  not  his  eyes  from  the  paper.  A  large 
man,  broad-shouldered  and  massive-limbed,  clad  in  fustian 
garments  and  grey-worsted  stockings,  entered,  who  was  re- 
ceived with  a  nod,  and  desired  to  take  a  seat;  which  he  did, 
making  the  remark — as  he  removed  his  hat  (a  very  bad  one), 
stowed  it  away  tmder  his  chair,  and  wiped  his  forehead  wi^ 
a  spotted  cotton  handkerchief  extracted  from  the  hat-crown 
— liiat  it  was  "  ndght  dahn  warm  for  Febewerry."  Mr 
Moore  assented:  at  least  he  uttered  some  slight  sound,  whicb, 
though  inarticulate,  might  pass  for  an  assent.  The  visitor 
now  carefully  deposited  in  iJie  comer  beside  him  an  official- 
looking  staff  which  he  bore  in  his  hand ;  this  done,  he 
whistled,  probably  by  way  of  appearing  at  his  ease. 

"  You  have  what  is  necessary,  I  suppose,"  said  Mr  Moore. 

"Ayl  ay!  aU's  right." 

He  renewed  his  whistling,  Mr  Moore  his  xeading :  the 
paper  apparently  had  become  more  interesting.    Pxisentl/, 


NOAH  AND  MOSES.  108 

however,  he  turned  to  his  cupboard,  which  was  within  reach 
of  his  long  arm,  opened  it  without  rising,  took  out  a  black 
bottle — the  same  he  had  produced  for  Malone^s  benefit — a 
tumbler,  and  a  jug,  placed  them  on  the  table,  and  said  to  his 
guest, — 

"  Help  yourself;  there 's  water  in  that  jar  in  the  cornei^." 

"  I  dunnut  knaw  that  there 's  mich  need,  for  all  a  body  is 
dry "  (thirsty)  "  in  a  morning,"  said  the  ftistian  gentleman, 
rising  and  doing  as  requested. 

"Will  you  tsJc'  naught  yourseln,  Mr  Moore?"  he  inquired, 
as  with  skilled  hand  he  mixed  a  portion,  and  having  tested  it 
by  a  deep  draught,  sank  back  satisfied  and  bland  in  his  seat. 
Moore— chary  of  words — ^replied  by  a  negative  movement 
and  murmur. 

"  Yah  'd  as  good,"  continued  his  visitor ;  "  it  'uld  set  ye  up, 
wald  a  sup  o'  this  stuff.  Uncommon  good  Hollands !  ye  get 
it  fix)'  fiirnn'  parts,  I'se  think  ?" 

"Ay  I" 

"  Tak'  my  advice,  and  try  a  glass  on 't ;  them  lads  *at  's 
coming  'U  keep  ye  talking,  nob'dy  knows  how  long :  ye  'U 
need  propping."         ^ 

"  Have  you  seen  Mr  Sykes  this  morning?"  inquired  Moore. 

"  I  seed  him  a  hauf  an  hour — ^nay — ^happen  a  quarter  of  an 
hour  sin',  just  afore  I  set  off:  he  said  he  ^imed  to  come  here, 
and  I  sudn't  wonder  but  ye  '11  have  old  Helstone  too  ;  I  see'd 
'em  saddling  his  little  nag  as  I  passed  at  back  o'  t'  Bectory." 

The  speaker  was  a  true  prophet,  for  the  trot  of  a  Httle 
nag's  hoofs  were,  five  minutes  after,  heard  in  the  yard;  it 
stopped,  and  a  well-known  nasal  voice  cried  altoud — "  Boy " 
(probably  addressing  Harry  Scott,  who  usually  hung  about 
the  premises  from  nine  a.m.  to  five  p.m.),  "  take  my  horse  and 
lead  him  into  the  stable." 

Helstone  came  in  marching  nimbly  and  erect^  looking 
browner,  keener,  and  livelier  than  usual. 

*^ Beautiful  morning,  Moore:  how  do,  my  boy?  Hal 
Whom  have  we  here  ? "  (turning  to  the  personage  with  the 
staff.)  Sugden!  What!  you  're  going  to  work  directly? 
On  my  word,  you  lose  no  time:  but  I  come  to  ask  explana- 
tions: your  message  was  delivered  to  me;  are  you  sure  you 
are  on  the  right  scent  ?  How  do  you  mean  to  set  about  the 
business  ?     Have  you  got  a  warrant  ?  " 

"Sugden  has." 

**  Then  jou  are  going  to  seek  him  now  ?  1 11  accompany  yoxu*^ 


104  SmRLET. 

» 

"  You  will  be  spared  that  trouble,  sir;  he  is  coining  to  seek 
me.     I  'm  just  now  sitting  in  state,  waiting  his  arrival-'' 

"  And  who  is  it  ?     One  of  my  parishioners  ?" 

Joe  Scott  had  entered  unobserved;  he  now  stood,  a  most 
sinister  phantom,  half  his  person  being  dyed  of  ithe  deepest 
tint  of  indigo,  leaning  on  the  desk.  His  master^s  answer  to 
the  Rector's  question  Was  a  smile;  Joe  took  the  word;  putting 
on  a  quiet  but  pawky  look,  he  said, — 

"  It's  a  friend  of  yours,  Mr  Helstone  ;  a  gentleman  you  oftai 
speak  of." 

"  Indeed  I    His  name,  Joe  ? — You  look  well  this  moming."* 

"  Only  the  Rev.  Moses  Barraclough  :  t'  tub  orator  you  ciU 
him  sometimes,  I  think." 

"  Ah  I "  said  the  Rector,  taking  out  his  snuff-box,  and  adnd- 
nistering  to  himself  a  very  long  pinch — "Ah  I  couldn't  have 
supposed  it.  Why,  the  pious  man  never  was  a  workman  ol 
yours,  Moore  ?     He 's  a  tailor  by  trade." 

"And  so  much  the  worse  grudge  I  owe  him, for  interfering, 
and  setting  my  discarded  men  against  me." 

"  And  Moses  was  actually  present  at  the  battle  of  Stilbro' 
Moor  ?     He  went  there — wooden  leg  and  all  ?" 

"  Ay,  sir,"  said  Joe  ;  "  he  went  there  on  horseback,  that  his 
leg  mightn't  be  noticed  :  he  was  the  captain  and  wore  a  mask; 
the  rest  only  had  their  faces  blacked." 

"And  how  was  he  found  out ?" 

"  I  '11  tell  you,  sir,"  said  Joe  :  "  t'  maister  's  not  so  fond  of 
talking  ;  I  've  no  objections.  He  courted  Sarah,  Mr  Moore's 
sarvant  lass,  and  so  it  seems  she  would  have  nothing  to  say  to 
him  ;  she  either  didn't  like  his  wooden  leg,  or  she'd  some  notion 
about  his  being  a  hypocrite.  Happen  (for  women  is  queer 
hands — ^we  may  say  that  amang  wersein  when  there's  none  of 
'em  nigh)  she  'd  have  encouraged  him,  in  spite  of  his  leg  and 
his  deceit — just  to  pass  timft  like  ;  I  've  known  some  on  'em  do 
as  mich,  and  some  o'  t'  bonniest  and  mimmest-looking  too — ay! 
I  've  seen  clean,  trim  young  things,  that  looked  as  denty  and 
pure  as  daisies,  and  wi'  time  a  body  fun'  'em  out  to  be  nowt  but 
stinging,  venomed  nettles." 

"  Joe 's  a  sensible  feUow,"  interjected  Helstone. 

**  Howsiver,  Sarah  had  another  string  to  her  bow  :  Fred 
Murgatroyd,  one  of  our  lads,  is  for  her,  and  as  women  jitdg^ 
men  by  their  faces — and  Fred  has  a  middling  face,  while  Most-s 
is  none  so  handsome,  as  we  all  knaw — the  lass  took  on  wi'  Fred. 
A  two-three  months  sin',  Murgatroyd  and  Moses  chanofd  to 


KOAH  Am)  MOSES. 

meet  one  Sunday  night ;  they  'd  both  come  lurking  about  these 
premises  wi'  the  notion  of  counselling  Sarah  to  tak'  a  bit  of  a 
walk  wi'  them  ;  they  fell  out,  had  a  tussle,  and  Fred  was 
worsted :  for  he 's  young  and  small,  and  Barraclough,  for  all 
he  has  only  one  leg,  is  almost  as  strong  as  Sugden  there  ;  in- 
deed, anybody  that  hears  him  roaring  at  a  revival  or  a  love- 
feast,  may  be  sure  he 's  no  weakling." 

"  Joe,  you're  insupportable,"  here  broke  in  Mr  Moore.  "  You 
spin  out  your  explanation  as  Moses  spins  out  his  sermons.  The 
long  and  short  of  it  is,  Murgatroyd  was  jealous  of  Barraclough ; 
and  last  night,  as  he  an4  sl  friend  took  shelter  in  a  barn  from  a 
shower,  they  heard  and  saw  Moses  conferring  with  some  asso- 
ciates within.  From  their  discourse,  it  was  plain  he  had  been 
the  leader,  not  only  at  Stilbro'  Moor,  but  in  the  attack  on  Sykes's 
property :  morever  they  planned  a  deputation  to  wait  on  me 
this  morning,  which  the  tailor  is  to  head,  and  which,  in  the 
most  religious  and  peaceful  spirit,  is  to  entreat  me  to  put  the 
accm^d  thing  out  of  my  tent.  I  rode  over  to  Whinbury  this 
morning,  got  a  constable  and  a  warrant,  and  I  am  now  waiting 
to  give  my  fnend  the  reception  he  deserves  ;  here,  meantime, 
comes  Sykes  :  Mr  Helstone,  you  must  spirit  him  up  j  he  feels 
timid  at  the  thoughts  of  prosecuting." 

A  gig  was  heard  to  roll  into  the  yard :  Mr  Sykes  entered  ; 
a  tall  stout  man  of  about  fifty,  comely  of  feature,  but  feeble  of 
physiognomy  :  he  looked  anxious. 

"  Have  they  been  ?  Are  they  gone  ?  Have  you  got  him  ? 
Is  it  over?"  he  asked. 

"Not  yet,"  returned  Moore  with  phlegm.  "  We  are  waiting 
for  them." 

"  They  '11  not  come ;  it 's  near  noon :  better  give  it  up  ;  it 
^  excite  bad  feeling — ^make  a  stir — cause  perhaps  fatal  con- 
sequences." 

**  Tau  need  not  appear,"  said  Moore.  "  I  shall  meet  them  in 
the  yard  when  they  come  ;  you  can  stay  here." 

"  But  my  name  must  be  seen  in  the  law  proceedings :  a  wife 
and  family, Mr  Moore — ^a  wife  and  family  make  a  man  cautious." 

Moore  looked  disgusted.  "  Give  way,  if  you  please,"  said  he ; 
"leave  me  to  myself;'  I  have  no  objection  to  act  alone  :  only 
^  assured  you  will  not  find  safety  in  submission ;  your  partner, 
Pearson,  gave  way,  and  conceded,  and  forbore — ^well,  that  did  not 
prevent  them  from  attempting  to  shoot  him  in  his  own  house." 

"  My  dear  sir,  take  a  little  wine  and  water,"  recommended 
Mr  HclstoDe.    The  wine  and  water  was  Hollands  and  water,  as 


^i^  SHnUUBT. 

Mr  Sykes  discovered  when  he  had  compounded  and  swallowed 
a  brimming  tumbler  thereof:  it  transfigured  him  in  two  minutes, 
brought  the  colour  back  to  his  face,  and  made  him  at  least  toord' 
valiant.  He  now  announced  that  he  hoped  he  was  above  being 
trampled  on  by  the  common  people  ;  he  was  determined  to  en- 
dure the  insolence  of  the  workmg-cla§ses  no  longer ;  he  had 
considered  of  it  and  made  up  his  mind  to  go  all  lengths ;  if 
money  and  spirit  could  put  down  these  rioters,  they  shoidd  be 
put  down ;  Mr  Moore  might  do  as  he  liked,  but  he — Christie 
Sykes — ^would  spend  his  last  penny  in  law  before  he  would  be 
beaten  :  he  'd  settle  them,  or  he  'd  see. 

"  Take  another  glass,"  urged  Moore. 

Mr  Sykes  didn't  mind  if  he  did  ;  this  was  a  cold  morning 
(Sugden  had  found  it  a  warm  one) ;  it  was  necessary  to  be 
earful  at  this  season  of  the  year — ^it  was  proper  to  take  some- 
thing to  keep  the  damp  out;  he  had  a  Httle  cough  already 
(here  he  coughed  in  attestation  of  the  fact) ;  something  of  this 
sort  (lifting  the  black  bottle)  was  excellent,  taken  medicinallj 
(he  poured  the  physic  into  his  tumbler) ;  he  didn't  make  a 
practice  of  drinking  spirits  in  a  morning,  but  occasionally  it 
really  was  prudent  to  take  precautions. 

"  Quite  prudent,  and  take  them  by  all  means," 'urged  the 
host. 

Mr  Sykes  now  addressed  Mr  Helstone,  who  stood  on  the 
hearth,  his  shovd-hat  on  his  head,  watching  him  significantiy 
with  his  'Httle,  keen  eyes. 

"  You,  sir,  as  a  clergyman,"  said  he,  "  may  feel  it  disagree- 
able to  be  present  amidst  scenes  of  hurry  and  flurry,  and,  I  may 
say,  peril:  I  dare  say  your  nerves  won't  stand  it;  you're  a  man 
of  peace,  sir,  but  we  manufacturers,  living  in  the  world,  and 
always  in  turmoil,  get  quite  belligerent.  Really,  there 's  an 
ardour  excited  by  the  thoughts  of  danger  that  makes  my  heart 
pant.  When  Mrs  Sykes  is  afraid  of  the  house  Ijeing  attacked 
and  broke  open — as  she  is  every  night — ^I  get  quite  excited. 
I  couldn't  describe  to  you,  sir,  my  feelings :  really,  if  anybody 
was  to  come — ^thieves  or  anything — ^I  believe  I  should  enjoy  it, 
such  is  my  spirit." 

The  hardest  of  laughs,  though  brief  and  low,  and  by  no 
means  insulting,  was  the  response  of  the  Hector.  Moore  would 
have  pressed  upon  the  heroic  mill-owner  a  third  tumbler,  but 
the  clergyman,  who  neveir  transgressed,  nor  would  suffer  others 
in  his  presence  to  transgress  the  boimds  of  decorumi  checked 
him. 


HOAR  AKD  MOSES.  10^ 

^  Enough  is  as  good  as  a  feast,  is  it  not,  Mr  Sykes  ?  "  he 
said,  and  Mr  Sjkes  assented;  and  then  sat  and  watched  Joe 
Scott  remove  the  bottle  at  a  sign  firom  Helstone,  with  a  self- 
satisfied  simper  on  his  lips,  and  a  regretM  glisten  in  his  eye* 
Moore  looked  as  if  he  should  have  liked  to  fool  him  to  the  top 
of  his  bent.  What  wonld  a  certain  joimg  kinswoman  of  his 
have  said  could  she  have  seen  her  dear,  good,  great  Robert — 
her  Coiiolanus — just  now  ?  Would  she  have  acknowledged  in 
that  mischievous,  sardonic  visage  the  same  face  to  which  she 
had  looked  up  with  such  love,  which  had  bent  over  her  with 
such  gentleness  last  night  ?  Was  that  the  man  who  had  spent 
so  quiet  an  evening  with  his  sister  and  his  cousin — so  suave  to 
one,  so  tender  to  the  other — reading  Shakspeare  and  listening 
to  Ch^er? 

Yes,  it  was  the  same  man,  only  seen  on  a  di^erent  side;  a 

side  Caroline  had  not  yet  fairly  beheld,  though  perhaps  she 

had  enough  sagacity  faintly  to  suspect  its  existence.     Well, 

Caroline  had,  doubtless,  her  defective  side  too :  she  was  human, 

she  must,  then,  have  been  very  imperfect,  and  had  she  seen 

Moore  on  his  very  worst  side,  she  would  probably  have  said 

this  to  herself  and  excused  him.     Love  can  excuse  anything 

except  Meanness ;   but  Meanness  kills  Love,  cripples  even 

Natural  Affecticm:  without  Esteem,  True  Love  cannot  exist. 

Moore  with  all  his  faults  might  be  esteemed;  for  he  had  no 

moral  scrofula  in  his  mind,  no  hopeless  polluting  taint,  such, 

for  instance,  as  that  of  falsehood;  neither  was  he  the  slave  of 

his  appetites;  the  active  life  to  which  he  had  been  bom  and 

bred  had  given  him  something  else  to  do  than  to  join  the  ^tile 

chase  of  the  pleasure-hunter:  he  wad  a  man  undegraded,  the 

disciple  of  Reason,  not  the  votary  of  Sense.     The  same  might 

be  said  of  old  Helstone ;  neither  of  these  two  would  look,  think, 

or  speak  a  lie;  for  neither  of  them  had  the  wrietched  black 

bottle,  which  had  just  been  put  away,  any  charms ;  both  might 

boast  a  valid  claim  to  the  proud  title  of  '<  lord  of  the  creation," 

for  no  animal  vice  was  lord  of  them :  they  looked  and  were 

finperior  beings  to  poor  Sykes. 

A  sort  of  gathering  and  trampling  sound  was  heard  in  the 
jaid,  and  then  a  pause.  Moore  walked  to  the  window,  Hel* 
ctone  followed;  both  stood  on  one  side,  the  tall  junior  behind 
the  under-sized  senior,  looking  forth  carefully,  so  that  they 
might  not  be  visible  from  without;  their  sole  comment  on  what 
wy  saw  was  a  cynical  smile  flashed  into  each  other's  stem  eyes. 
A  flourishing  oratorical  cough  was  now  heard,  followed  by 


108  SHIRLEY. 

the  interjection,  "  Whisht ! "  designed,  as  it  seemed,  to  still  the 
hum  of  several  voices.  Moore  opened  his  casement  an  inch  or 
two  to  admit  sound  more  freely. 

"  Joseph  Scott,"  began  a  snuffling  voice^— Scott  was  standing 
sentinel  at  the  counting-house  door — "  might  we  inquire  if 
your  master  be  .within,  and  is  to  be  spoken  to  ?  " 

"  He's  within,  ay ! "  said  Joe,  nonchalantly. 

"Would  you,  then,  if  you  please"  (emphasis  on  "you,"), 
"  have  the  goodness  to  tell  him  that  twelve  gentlemen  wants  to 
see  him." 

"  He  'd  happen  to  ax  what  for,"  suggested  Joe.  "  I  mught 
as  weel  tell  him  that  at  t*  same  time." 

"  For  a  purpose,"  was  the  answer.     Joe  entered. 

"  Please,  sir,  there 's  twelve  gentlemen  wants  to  see  ye,  *  for 
a  purpose,' " 

"  Good,  Joe ;  I'm  their  man    Sugden,  come  when  I  whistle." 

Moore  went  out,  chuckling  drily.  He  advanced  into  the 
yard,  one  hand  in  his  pocket,  the  other  in  his  waistcoat,  his 
cap  brim  over  his  eye-s,  shading  in  some  measure  their  deep 
dancing  ray  of  scorn.  Twelve  men  waited  in  the  yard,  some 
in  their  shirt-sleeves,  some  in  blue  aprons :  two  figured  con- 
spicuously in  the  van  of  the  party.  One,  a  little  dapper  strut- 
ting man,  with  a  tumed-up  nose;  the  other,  a  broad-shouldered 
fellow,  distinguished  no  less  by  his  demure  face  and  cat-Hke, 
trustless  eyes,  than  by  a  wooden  leg  and  stout  crutch :  there 
was  a  kind  of  leer  about  his  lips,  he  seemed  laughing  in  his 
sleeve  at  some  person  or  thing,  his  whole  air  was  anything  but 
that  of  a  true  man. 

"  Good  morning,  Mr  Barraclough,"  said  Moore  debonairly, 
for  him. 

"Peace  be  unto  you!"  was  the  answer:  Mr  Barraclough 
entirely  closing  his  naturally  half-shut  eyes  as  he  delivered  it. 

"  I'm  obliged  to  you:  peace  is  an  excellent  thing;  there's 
nothing  I  more  wish  for  myself ;  but  that  is  not  all  you  have 
to  say  to  me,  I  suppose?  I  imagine  peace  is  not  your 
purpose?" 

"  As  to  oui'  purpose,"  began  Barraclough, "  it's  one  that  may 
sound  strange,  and  perhaps  foolish  to  ears  like  yours,  for  the 
childer  of  this  world  is  wiser  in  their  generation  than  the 
childer  of  light." 

"  To  the  point,  if  you  please,  and  let  me  hear  what  it  is." 

"  Ye'se  hear,  sir;  if  I  cannot  get  it  oiF,  there's  eleven  behint 
can  help  me.    It  is  a  grand  purpose,  and"  (changing  bis  voicf* 


NOAH  AUD  M03£.S.  100 

• 

fifom  a  balf-sneer  to  a  whine)  "  it's  the  Looard'a  own  purpose, 
and  that 's  better," 

"  Do  you  want  a  subscription  to  a  new  Ranter's  chapel,  Mr 
Barraclough  ?  Unless  your  errand  be  something  of  that  sort, 
I  cannot  see  what  you  have  to  do  with  it." 

"  I  hadnH  that  duty  on  my  mind,  sir ;  but  as  Providence  has 
led  ye  to  mention  the  subject,  I  '11  make  it  T  my  way  to  tak'  ony 
trifle  ye  ma^  have  to  spare ;  the  smallest  contribution  will  be 
acceptable." 

With  that  he  •  doffed  his  hat,  and  held  it  out  as  a  begging- 
box;  a  brazen  grin  at  the  same  time  crossing  his  countenance. 
"  If  I  gave  you  sixpence,  you  would  drink  it." 
Barraclough  upliiled  the  palms  of  his  hands  and  the  whites 
of  his  eyes,  evincing  in  the  gesture  a  mere  burlesque   of 
hypocrisy. 

"  You  seem  a  fine  fellow,"  said  Moore,  quite  coolly  and  drily ; 
**  you  don't  care  for  showing  me  that  you  are  a  double-dyed 
hypocrite,  that  your  trade  is  fraud:  you  expect  indeed  to  make 
me  laugh  at  the  cleverness  with  which  you  play  your  coarsely 
farcical  part,  while  at  the  same  time  you  think  you  are  deceiv- 
ing the  men  behind  you." 

Moses^  countenance  lowered;  he  saw  he  had  gone  too  far: 
he  was  going  to  answer,  when  the  second  leader,  impatient  of 
being  hitherto  kept  in  ihe  background,  stepped  forward.  This 
man  did  not  look  like  a  traitor,  though  he  had  an  exceedingly 
self-confident  and  conceited  air. 

"  Mr  Moore,"  commenced  he,  speaking  also  in  his  throat 
and  nose,  and  enimciating  each  word  very  slowly,  as  if  with 
a  view  to  giving  his  audience  time  to  appreciate  fully  the  un- 
common degance  of  the  phraseology;  "  it  might,  perhaps, 
justly  be  said  that  reason  rather  than  peace  is  our  purpose. 
We  come,  in  the  first  place,  to  request  you  to  hear  reason,  and 
should  you  refuse,  it  is  my  duty  to  warn  ycm,  in  very  decided 
tenns,  that  measures  will  be  had  resort  to"  (he  meant  recourse), 
**  which  will  probably  terminate  in — in  bringing  i/ou  to  a  sense 
of  theimwisdom,  of  the — the  foolishness,  which  seems  to  guide 
and  guard  your  perceedings  as  a  tradesman  in  this  m0.nufactur- 

ing  part  of  the  coimtry.     Hem  I sir,  I. would 

1^  to  allude  that  as  a  furriner,  coming  from  a  distant  coast, 
anodier  quarter  and  hemisphere  of  this  globe,  thrown,  as  I  may 
«ay,  a  perfect  outcast  on  these  shores — the  cliffs  of  Albion — 
you  have  not  that  understanding  of  huz  and  wer  ways  which 
ought  conduce  to  the  benefit  of  the  working-classes.     If,  to 


110  SHIBLET. 

cbme  at  once  to  particulars,  you  'd  consider  to  give  up  this  here 
miln,  and  go  without  further  protractions  straight  home  to 
where  you  belong,  it  'ud  happen  be  as  welL  I  can  see  nauglit 
ageean  such  a  plan.  What  hev  ye  to  say  tull't,  lads?" 
turning  round  to  the  other  members  of  the  deputation,  wbo 
responded  imanimously,  "  Hear,  hear ! " 

"  Brayvo,  Noah  o'  Tim's  ! "  murmured  Joe  Scott,  who  stood 
behind  Mr  Moore.  "  Moses  '11  niver  beat  that — ^Cliffe  o' 
Albion,  and  t'  other  hemisphere  I  my  certy  I  Did  ye  come 
fro'  th'  Antarctic  Zone,  maister  ?     Moses  is  dished.*' 

Moses, however,  refused  to  be  dished;  he  thought  he  would 
try  again.  Casting  a  somewhat  ireful  glance  at  '^  Noah  o' 
Tim's,"  he  launched  out  in  his  turn :  and  now  he  spoke  in  a 
serious  tone,  relinquishing  the  sarcasm  which  he  found  had 
not  answered. 

"jOr  iver  you  set  up  the  pole  o'  your  tent  amang  us,  Mr 
Moore,  we  lived  i'  peace  and  quietness ;  yea,  I  may  say,  in 
all  loving-kindness.  I  am  not  myself  an  aged  person,  as  yet, 
but  I  can  remember  as  far  back  as  maybe  some  twenty  year, 
when  hand-labour  were  encouraged  and  respected,  and  no 
mischief-maker  had  ventured  to  introduce  these  here  machines, 
which  is  so  pernicious.  Now,  I  'm  not  a  cloth-dresser  myself, 
but  by  trade  a  tailor;  howsiver,  my  heart  is  of  a  softish  natnr': 
I  'm  a  very  feeling  man,  and  when  I  see  my  brethren  oppressed 
like  my  great  namesake  of  old,  I  stand  up  for  'em  ;  for  which 
intent,  I  this  day  speak  with  you  face  to  face,  and  advises  you 
to  part  wi'  your  infernal  machinery,  and  tak'  on  more  hands." 

"  What  if  I  don't  follow  your  advice,  Mr.  Barradough  ?" 

"  The  Looard  pardon  you  I  The  Looard  soflen  your  heart, 
sir!" 

"  Are  you  in  connection  with  the  Wesleyans  now,  Mr 
Barraclough?" 

"  Praise  God  1    Bless  His  Name  1    I  'm  a  joined  Methody  1" 

"  Which  in  no  respect  prevents' you  from  being  at  .the  same 
time  a  drunkard  and  a  swindler.  I  saw  you  one  night  a  week 
ago  laid  dead-drunk  by  the  roadside,  as  I  returned  from 
Stilbro'  market;  and  while  you  preach  peace,  you  make  it 
the  business  of  your  life  to  stir  up  dissension.  You  no  more 
sympathize  with  the  poor  who  are  in  distress,  than  you  sym- 
pathize with  me  :  you  incite  them  to  outrage  for  bad  purposes 
of  your  own ;  so  does  the  individual  called  Noah  o'  'Km's. 
Yon  two  are  restless,  meddling,  impudent  scoundrels,  whose 
chief  motive-principle  is  a  selfish  ambition,  as  dangerous  as  it 


HOAH  Ain>  HOSES.  Ill 

is  puerile.     The  persons  beHnd  you  are  some  of  them  honest 
though  misguided  men;  but  you  two  I  count  altogether  bad." 
Barraclough  was  going  to  speak. 

"  Silence  I  You  have  had  your  say,  and  now  I  will  have 
mine.  As  to  being  dictated  to  by  you,  or  any  Jack,  Jem, 
or  Jonathan  on  earth,  I  shall  not  suffer  it  for  a  moment. 
You  desire  me  to  quit  the  country:  you  request  me  to  part 
with  my  machinery;  in  case  I  refuse,  you  threaten  me.  I  do 
refuse — ^point-blarJi  I  Here  I  stay;  and  by  this  mill  I  stand; 
and  into  it  will  I  convey  the  best  machinery  inventors  can 
furnish.  What  will  you  do  ?  The  utmost  you  can  do — and 
this  you  •rill  never  dare  to  do — ^is  to  bum  down  my  mill, 
destroy  its  contents,  and  shoot  me.  What  then?  Suppose 
that  building  was  a  ruin  and  I  was  a  corpse,  what  then  ? — 
you  lads  behind  these  two  scamps,  would  that  stop  invention 
or  exhaust  science  ? — ^Not  for  the  fraction  of  a  second  of  time  1 
Another  and  better  gig-miU  would  rise  on  the  ruins  of  this, 
and  perhaps  a  more  enterprising  owner  come  in  my  place. 
Hear  me ! — ^I 11  make  my  cloth  as  I  please,  and  according  to 
the  best  lights  I  have.  Li  its  manufacture  I  will  employ  what 
means  I  choose.  Whoever,  after  hearing  this,  shall  dare  to 
interfere  with  me,  may  just  take  the  consequences.  An  example 
shall  prove  I  'm  in  earnest." 

He  whistled  shrill  and  loud.  Sugden,  his  staff  and  warrant, 
came  on  to  the  scene. 

Moore  turned  sharply  to  Barraclough :  "  You  were  at 
StilbroV  said  he ;  "I  have  proof  of  that.  .  You  were  on  the 
moor, — you  wore  a  mask, — ^you  knocked  down  one  of  my 
men  with  your  own  hand, — ^you  I  a  preacher  of  the  Grospel ! 
Sogden,  arrest  him  1" 

Hoses  was  captured.  There  was  a  cry  and  a  rush  to  rescue, 
but  the  right  hand  which  all  this  while  had  lain  hidden  in 
Moore's  breast,  reappearing,  held  out  a  pistol. 

"  Both  barrels  are  loaded,"  said  he.  '^  I  'm  quite  determined! 
— keep  off  1" 

Stepping  backwards,  facing  the  foe  as  he  went,  he  guarded 
^  prey  to  the  coimting-house.  He  ordered  Joe  Scott  to  pass 
in  urith  Sugden  and  the  prisoner,  and  to  bc^lt  the  door  inside. 
For  himself,  he  walked  backwards  and  forwards  along  the  front 
of  the  mill,  looking  meditatively  on  the  ground,  his  hand 
iuioging  carelessly  by  his  side,  but  still  holding  the  pistoL 
The  eleven  remaining  deputies  watched  him  some  time,  talk- 


112  SHIRLEY. 

ing  under  their  breath  to  eacli  other:  at  length  one  of  them 
approached.  This  man  looked  very  different  from  either  of 
the  two  who  had  previously  spoken:  he  was  hard-favoured, 
but  modest,  and  manlyrlooking. 

"  I  Ve  not  much  faith  i'  Moses  Barraclough,"  said  he,  "  and 
I  would  speak  a  word  to  you  myseln,  Mr  Moore.  It 's  out  o* 
no  ill-will  that  I  am  here,  for  my  part;  it's  just  to  mak'  a 
effort 'to  get  things  straightened,  for  they^re  sorely  a  crooked. 
Ye  see  we  're  ill  off — ^varry  ill  off :  wer  families  is  poor  and 
pined.  We're  thrown  out  o'  work  wi' these  frames :  we  can 
get  nought  to  do :  we  can  earn  nought.  What  is  to  be  done  ? 
Mun  we  say,  wisht !  and  lig  us  down  and  dee  ?  Nay :  I  've 
no  grand  words  at  my  tongue's  end,  Mr  Moore,  but  I  feel  that 
it  would  be  a  low  principle  for  a  reasonable  man  to  starve  to 
death  like  a  dumb  creatur'  :-^I  will  n't  do 't.  I  'm  not  for 
shedding  blood :  I  'd  neither  kill  a  man  nor  hurt  a  man ;  and 
I  'm  not  for  pulling  down  mills  and  breaking  machines :  for, 
as  ye  say,  that  way  o'  going  6n  '11  niver  stop  invention ;  but 
I  '11  talk — 1  '11  mak'  as  big  a  din  as  ever  I  can.  Invention  may 
be  all  right,  but  I  know  it  isn't  right  for  poor  folks  to  starve. 
Them  that  governs  mun  find  a  way  to  help  us :  they  mun  mak' 
fresh  orderations.  Ye  '11  say  that 's  hard  to  do : — so  mich  louder 
mun  we  shout  out  then,  for  so  much  slacker  will  t'  Parlia- 
ment-men be  to  set  on  to  a  tough  job." 

"  Worry  the  Parliament-men  as  much  as  you  please,"  said 
Moore ;  "  but  to  worry  the  mill-owners  is  absurd ;  and  I,  for 
one,  won't  stand  it." 

"  Ye 're  a  l-aight  hard'un!"  returned  the  workman.  "  Will 
n't  ye  gie^'us  a  bit  o'  time  ? — Will  n't  ye  consent  to  mak'  your 
changes  rather  more  slowly  ?  " 

"  Am  I  the  whole  body  of  clothiers  in  Yorkshire  ?  Answer 
me  thatl" 

"  Ye  're  yourseln." 

"  And  only  myself ;  and  if  I  stopped  by  the  way  an  instant, 
while  others  are  rushing  on,  I  should  be  trodden  down.  If  I 
did  as  you  wish  me  to  do,  I  should  be  bankrupt  in  a  montli  • 
and  would  my  bankruptcy  put  br^ad  into  your  hungry  chil- 
dren's mouths?  William  Farren,  neither  to  your  dictation, 
nor  to  that  of  any  other,  will  I  submit.  Talk  to  me  no  more 
about  machinery ;  1  will  have  my  own  way.  I  shall  get  new 
frames  in  to-morrow : — ^If  you  broke  these,  I  would  still  get 
more.     Ill  never  give  w." 


irOAH  AND  MOSES.  113 

Here  the  mill-bell  rang  twelve  o'clock  :  it  was  the  dinner 
hour,  Moore  abruptly  turned  from  the  deputation  and  re- 
entered his  counting-house. 

His  last  words  had  left  a  bad,  harsh  impression:  he,  at 
least,  had  "  failed  in  the  disposing  of  a  chance  he  was  lord 
of."  By  speaking  kindly  to  William  Farren — who  was  a  very 
honest  man,  without  envy  or  hatred  of  those  more  happily 
circmnstanced  than  himself ;  thinking  it  no  hardship  and  no 
injustice  to  be  forced  to  live  by  labour ;  disposed  to  be  honour- 
ably content  if  he  could  but  get  work  to  do— Moore  might 
have  made  a  friend.  It  seemed  wonderful  how  he  could  turn  i 
^m  such  a  man  without  a  conciliatory  or  a  S3anpathizing 
expression.  The  poor  fellow's  face  looked  haggard  with  want: 
he  had  the  aspect  of  a  man  who  had  not  known  what  it  was 
to  live  in  contort  and  plenty  for  weeks,  perhaps  months  past; 
and  yet  there  was  no  ferocity,  no  malignity  in  his  countenance : 
it  was  worn,  dejected,  austere,  but  still  patient.  How  coidd 
Moore  leave  him  thus,  with  the  words  "  I  '11  never  give  in," 
and  not  a  whisper  of  good-will,  or  hope,  or  aid  ? 

Farren,  as  he  went  home  to  his  cottage — once,  in  better 
times,  a  decent,  clean,  pleasant  place,  but  now,  thoiigh  still 
clean,  very  dreary,  because  so  poor — asked  himself  this  ques- 
tion. He  concluded  that  the  foreign  mill-owner  was  a  selfish, 
an  unfeeling,  and,  he  thought,  too,  a  foolish  man.  It  appeared 
to  him  that  emigration,  had  he  only  the  means  to  emigrate, 
would  be  preferable  to  service  imder  such  a  master.  He  felt 
much  cast  down — almost  hopeless. 

On  his  entrance,  his  wife  served  out,  in  orderly  sort,  such 
dinner  as  she  had  to  give  him  an^  the  bairns :  it  was  only 
porridge,  and  too  little  of  that.  Some  of  the  younger  children 
asked  for  more  when  they  had  done  their  portion — an  appli- 
cation which  disturbed  William  much  :  while  his  wife  quieted 
them  as  well  as  she  could,  he  left  his  seat  and  went  to  the 
door.  He  whistled  a  cheery  stave,  which  did  not,  however, 
pzcvent  a  broad  drop  or  two  (much  more  like  the  "  first  of  a 
thnnder-shower"  than  those  which  oozed  from  the  wound  of 
the  gladiator)  from  gathering  on  the  lids  ofhis  grey  eyes,  and 
plashing  thence  to  the  threshold.  He  cleared  his  vision  with 
his  sleeve,  and  the  melting  mood  over,  a  very  stern  one 
iMowed, 

He  still  stood  brooding  in  silence,  when  a  gentleman  in 
black  came  up— a  clergyman,  it  might  be  seen  at  once ;  but 
Oeitber  Helstone,  nor  Malone,  nor  Donne,  nor  Sweeting.     He 

8 


114  SHIBI 

might  be  forty  years  old ;  he  was  plain-looking^  .dark-com- 
plexioned, and  already  rather  grey-haired.  He  stooped  a 
little  in  walking.  His  countenance,  as  he  came  on,  wore  an 
abstracted  and  somewhat  doleful  air ;  but,  in  approaching 
Farren,  he  looked  up,  and  then  a  hearty  expression  illuminated 
the  pre-occupied,  serious  face. 

"  Is  it  you,  William  ?    How  are  you  ?  **  he  asked. 

"Middling,  Mr.  Hall :  how  are  ye?  Will  ye  step  in  and 
rest  ye?"  , 

Mr.  HaU,  whose  name  the  reader  has  seen  mentioned  before, 
(and  w;ho,  indeed,  was  vicar  of  Nunnely,  of  which  parish 
Farren  was  a  native,  and  from  whence  he  had  removed  but 
three  years  ago  to  reside  in  Briarfield,  for  the  convenience  of 
being  near  Hollow's-miU,  where  he  had  obtained  work)  entered 
the  cottage,  and,  having  greeted  the  good  wife  and  the  chil- 
dren, sat  down.  He  proceeded  to  talk  very  cheerfully  about 
the  length  of  time  that  had  elapsed  since  the  family  quitted  hii 
parish,  the  changes  which  had  occurred  since ;  he  ans^wered 
questions  touching  his  sister  Margaret,  who  was  inquired  after 
with  much  interest ;  he  asked  questions  in  his  turn,  and  at 
last,  glancing  hastily  a^id  anxiously  round  through  his  spec- 
tacles (he  wore  spectacles,  for  he  was  short-sighted)  at  the  bare 
room,  and  at  the  meagre  and  wan  faces  of  the  circle  about 
him — for  the  children  had  come  round  his  knee,  and  the  fother 
and  mother  stood  before  him — ^he.  said,  abruptly, — 

"  And  how  are  you  all  ?     How  do  you  get  on  ?  " 

Mr.  Hall,  be  it  remarked,  though  an  accomplished  scholar, 
not  only  spoke  with  a  strong  northern  accent,  but,  on  occasion, 
used  freely  north-coimtry  expressions. 

"  We  get  on  poorly,"  said  William  :  we  're  all  out  of  work. 
I  Ve  selled  most  o'  t'  household  stuff,  as  ye  may  see  ;  and  what 
weVe  to  do  next,  God  knows." 

"  Has  Mr  Moore  turned  you  off?" 

"  He  has  turned  us  off ;  and  I  Ve  sich  an  opinion  of  him 
now,  that  I  think,  if  he'd  tak'  me  on  again  to-morxow,  I 
wouldn't  work  for  him." 

"  It  is  not  like  you  to  say  so,  William." 

"  I  know  it  isn't;  but  I 'm  getting  different  to  mysel':  I  feel 
I  am  changing.  I  wadn't  heed,  if  t'  bairns  and  t^  wife  had 
enough  to  live  on ;  but  they're  pinched — ^they  're  pined ^ 

"  Well,  my  lad,  and  so  are  you  ;  I  see  you  are.  These  are 
grievous  times  ;  I  see  suffering  wherever  I  turn.  Williaxn,  ail 
down ;  Grace,  sit  down  ;  let  us  talk  it  over." 


NOAH  Ain>  MOSES.  115 

And  in  order  the  better  to  talk  it  over,  Mr  Hall  lifted  the 
least  of  the  children  on  to  his  knee,  and  placed  his  hand  on  the 
head  of  the  next  least ;  but  when  the  small  things  began  to 
chatter  to  him,  he  bid  them  "  Whisht ! "  and,  fixing  his  eyes 
on  the  grate,  he  regarded  the  handful  of  embers  which  burnt 
there  very  gravely. 

"  Sad  times !"  he  said,  "  and  they  last  long.  It  is  the  will 
of  God :  His  wiU  be  done !  but  He  tries  us  to  the  utmost." 

Again  he  reflected. 

"YouVe  no  money,  William,  and  youVe  nothing  you 
could  sell  to  raise  a  small  sum  ?" 

"No ;  I've  seUed  t'  chest  o'  drawers,  and  t*  clock,  and  t'  bit 
of  a  mahogany  stand,  and  t'  wife's  bonny  tea-tray  and  set  o' 
cheeney  'at  she  brought  for  a  portion  when  we  were  wed." 

"And  if  somebody  lent  you  a  pound  or  twoj  could  you 
make  any  good  use  of  it  ?  Could  you  get  into  a  new  way  of 
doing  something  ?  " 

Farren  did  not  answer ;  but  his  wife  said  quickly,  '*^Ay,  I  'm 
sure  he  could,  sir ;  he 's  a  very  contriving  chap,  is  our  William. 
If  he'd  two  or  three  pounds,  he  could  begin  selling  stuff.** 

"Could  you,  WilHam?" 

"Please  God,"  returned  William,  deliberately,  "I  could 
buy  groceries,  and  bits  o'  tapes,  and  thread,  and  what  I 
thought  would  sell,  and  I  could  begin  hawking  at  first." 

"And  you  know,  sir,"  interposed  Grace,  "you're  sure 
WilHam  would  neither  drink,  nor  idle,  nor  waste  in  any  way. 
He's  my  husband,  and  I  shouldn't  praise  him;  but  I  mil 
say,  there 's  not  a  soberer,  honester  man  i'  England  nor  he  is." 

"  Well,  I  '11  speak  to  one  or  two  friends,  and  I  think  I  can 
promise  to  let  him  have  £5  in  a  day  or  two :  as  a  loan,  ye 
nund,  not  a  giil:  he  must  pay  it  back." 

"  I  understand,  sir:  I'm  quite  agreeable  to  that." 

"Meantime,  there's  a  few  shillings  for  you,  Grace,  just  to 
keep  the  pot  boiling  till  custom  comes.  Now,  bairns,  stand 
ttp  in  a  row  and  say  your  catechism,  while  your  mother  goes 
wd  buys  some  dinner:  for  you  've  not  had  much  to-day,  I '11 
be  bound.     You  begin,  Ben.     What  is  your  name?" 

Mr  Hall  stayed  till  Grace  came  back;  then  he  hastily  took 
hid  leave,  shaking  hands  wit|^  both  Farren  and  his  wife :  just 
at  the  door,  He  said  to  them  a  few  brief  but  very  earnest 
vords  of  religious  consolation  and  exhortation:  with  a  mutual 
"God  bless  you,  sir  1"  ^'  Grod  bless  you,  my  Mends  I"  they 
Kpanted. 


116  BHIBLKT. 

CHAPTER  EX. 

>       BRIAKMAINS. 

Messrs  Helstone  and  Stkes  began  to  be  extremely  jocose 
and  congratidatory  with  Mr  Moore  when  he  returned  to  them 
after  dismissing  the  deputation;  he  was  so  quiet,  howerer, 
under  their  compliments  upon  his  firmness,  &c.,  and  wore  a 
countenance  so  like  a  still,  dark  day,  equally  beamless  and 
breezeless,  that  the  Sector,  after  glancing  shrewdly  into  his 
eyes,  buttoned  up  his  felicitations  with  his  coat,  and  said  to 
Sykes,  whose  senses  were  not  acute  enough  to  enable  him  to 
discover  unassisted  wheve  his  presence  and  conversation  were 
a  nuisance : — 

"  Come,  sir ;  your  road  and  mine  lie  partly  together :  had 
we  not  better  bear  each  other  company  ?  We  '11  bid  Moore 
good-morning,  and  leave  him  to  the  happy  fancies  he  seems 
disposed  to  indulge." 

"  And  where  is  Sugden?**  demanded  Moore,  looking  up. 

"Ah,  ha!"  cried  Helstcme.  "IVe  not  been  quite  idle 
while  you  were  busy.  I've  been  helping  you  a  little:  I 
flatter  myself,  not  injudiciously.  I  thought  it  better  not  to 
lose  time ;  so,  while  you  were  parleying  with  that  down- 
looking  gentleman — Farren,  I  think  his  name  is, — I  opened 
this  back  window,  shouted  to  Murgatroyd,  who  was  in  the 
stable,  to  bring  Mr  Sykes's  gig  round ;  then  I  smuggled 
Sugden  and  brother  Moses — ^wooden  leg  and  all — ^through  the 
aperture,  and  saw  them  moamt  the  gig  (always  with  our  good 
friend  Sykes'  permission,  of  course).  Sugden  took  the  reins 
— he  drives  like  Jehu,  and  in  another  quarter  of  an  hour, 
Barraclough  will  be  safe  in  Stilbro'  jail." 

"  Very  good  :  thank  you,"  said  Moore, "  and  good-morning, 
gentlemen,"  he  added,  and  so  politely  conducted  them  to  the 
door  and  saw  them  clear  of  his  premises. 

He  was  a  taciturn,  serious  man  the  rest  of  the  day:  he  did 
not  even  bandy  a  repartee  with  Joe  Scott;  who,  for  his  part, 
said  to  his  master  only  just  what  was  absolutely  necessary  to 
the  progress  of  business,  but  looked  at  him  a  good  deal  out 
of  the  comers  of  his  eyes,  frequently  came  to  poke  the  count- 
ing-house fire  for  him,  and  once,  as  he  was  locking  up  for  the 
day  (the  mill  was  then  working  short  time,  owing  to  the 
slackness  of  trade),  observed  that  it  was  a  grand  evenixigt 


BRIARMAINS.  117 

luid  he  "  could  wish  Mr  Moore  to  take  a  bit  of  a  walk  up 
th*  Hollow;  it  would  do  him  good." 

At  this  recommendation,  Mr  Moore  burst  into  a  short 
kugh|  and  ailer  demanding  qf  Joe  what  all  this  soHcitude 
meant,  and  whether  he  took  him  for  a  woman  or  a  child, 
seized  the  keys  from  his  hand,  and  shoved  him  by  the 
Bhoulders  out  of  his  presence.  He  called  him  back,  however, 
ere  he  had  reached  the  yard-gate. 

"  Joe,  do  you  know  those  Farrens  ?  They  are  not  well  oflT, 
I  suppose?" 

"  They  cannot  be  well  off,  sir,  when  they  Ve  not  had  work 
as  a  three  month.  Ye'd  see  yoursel*  'at  William's  sorely 
changed, — ^fair  pared :  they  Ve  selled  most  o'  t'  stuff  out  o' 
tb'  house." 

"  He  was  not  a  bad  workman  ?" 

"  Ye  never  had  a  better,  sir,  sin'  ye  began  trade." 

"And  decent  people — ^the  whole  family  ?" 

"  Niver   dacenter :  th'  wife's  a  raight  cant  body,  and  as 

clean 1   ye  mught  eat  your  porridge  off  th'  house  floor : . 

tHey  're  sorely  comed  down.  I  wish  William  could  get  a  job 
u  gardener  or  summat  i'  that  way ;  he  understands  garden- 
ing weel.  He  once  lived  wi'  a  Scotchman  that  tached  him 
the  mysteries  o'  that  craft,  as  they  say." 

**  Now,  then,  you  can  go,  Joe ;  you  need  not  stand  there 
staring  at  me." 

"  YeVe  no  orders  to  give,  sir?" 

"  None,  but  for  you  to  take  yourself  off." 

Which  Joe  did  accordingly. 

Spring  evenings  are  often  cold  and  raw,  and  though  this 
had  been  a  fine  day,  warm  even  in  the  morning  and  meridian 
«nnshine,  the  air  chilled  at  sunset,  the  ground  crisped,  and 
ere  dusk  a  hoar  frost  was  insidiously  stealing  over  growing 
grass  and  unfolding  bud.  It  whitened  the  pavement  in  front 
of  Briarmains  (Mr  Yorke's  residence),  and  made  silent  havoc 
among  the  tender  plants  in  his  garden,  and  on  the  mossy 
level  of  his  lawn.  As  to  that  great  tree,  strong-trimked  and 
broad-armed,  which  guarded  the  gable  nearest  the  road,  it 
8eemed  to  defy  a  spring-night  frost  to  harm  its  still  bare 
boughs ;  and  so  did  the  leafless  grove  of  walnut-trees  rising 
tall  behind  the  house. 

In  the  dusk  of  the  moonless  if  starry  night,  lights  from 
windows  shoue  vividfy:  this  was  no  daik  or  lonely  scenei 


tiS  SHIBLET. 

nor  even  a  silent  one.  Briarmains  stood  near  the  highway; 
it  was  rather  an  old  place,  and  had  been  built  ere  that  high- 
way was  cut,  and  when  a  lane  winding  up  througli  fields  was 
the  only  path  conducting  to  it.  Biiarfield  lay  scarce  a  mile 
off ;  its  hum  was  heard,  its  glare  distinctly  seen.  Briar- 
chapel,  a  large,  new,  raw,  Wesleyan  place  of  worship,  rose 
but  a  hundred  yards  distant ;  and,  as  there  was  even  now  a 
prayer-meeting  being  held  within  its  walls,  the  illumination 
of  its  windows  cast  a  bright  reflection  on  the  road,  while  a 
hymn  of  a  most  extraordinary  description,  sucb  as  a  very 
Quaker  might  feel  himself  moved  by  the  spirit  to  dance  to, 
roused  cheerily  aU  the  echoes  of  the  vicinage.  The  words 
were  distinctly  audible  by  snatches :  here  is  a  quotation  or 
two'  from  different  strains  ;  for  the  singers  passed  jauntily 
from  hymn  to  h3rmn  and  from  tune  to  tune,  with  an  ease  and 
buoyancy  all  their  own. 

**  Oh !  who  can  explain 

This  struggle  for  life, 
This  travail  and  pain, 

This  trembling  and  strife? 
Plague,  earthquake,  and  feumne. 

And  tumult  and  war, 
The  wonderful  coming 

Of  Jesus  declare ! 

"  For  every  fight 

Is  dreadful  and  loud,— 
The  warrior's  delight 

Is  slaughter  and  blood ; 
His  foes  overturning. 

Till  all  shall  expire, — 
And  this  is  with  burning. 

And  fuel,  and  fire!" 

Here  followed  an  interval  of  clamorous  prayer,  accompanied 
by  fearful  groans.  A  shout  of  "  I've  found  liberty! "  "  Dead 
o'  Bill's  has  ftm'  liberty! "  nmg  from  the  chapel,  and  out  all 
the  assembly  broke  again. 

"What  a  mercy  is  this  I 

What  a  heaven  of  bliss ! 
How  unspeakably  happy  am  1 1 
.  Gather'd  into  tiie  fold. 

With  thy  people  enroU*d, 
With  thy  people  to  live  and  to  die! 

**  Oh,  the  goodness  of  God 

In  employing  a  clod 
His  tribute  of  glory  to  raise ; 

His  standard  to  bear. 

And  with  triumph  declare 
His  unspeakable  riches  of  grace  t 


■BIABXAIHS.  119 

*■  Oh,  the  fathomless  love^ 

That  has  deigned  to  approve 
And  prosper  the  work  of  my  hands ; 

With  my  pastoral  crook, 

I  went  over  the  brook, 
And  behold  I  am  spread  into  bandf  I 

**  Who,  I  ask  In  amaze. 

Hath  begotten  me  these? 
And  inquire  from  what  quarter  th^  camei 

My  ftdl  heart  it  replies. 

They  are  bom  from  the  sMes, 
And  gives  glory  to  God  and  the  Lamb  I " 

The  stanza  whicli  followed  this,  after  another  and  longer 
inteiT^num  of  shouts,  yells,  ejaculations,  frantic  cries,  agonized 
groansi  seemed  to  cap  the  climaz  of  noise  and  zeaL 

"  Sleeping  on  the  brink  of  sin, 

Tophet  gaped  to  take  us  in ; 
Mercy  to  our  rescue  flew, — 

Broke  the  snare,  and  brought  us  throii|^ 

**  Here,  as  in  a  lion's  den, 

UndevouT'd  we  still  remain ; 
Pass  secure  the  watery  flood. 

Hanging  on  the  arm  of  God. 

••Here^ 

(Terrible,  most  distracting  to  the  ear  was  the  strained  shout 
in  which  the  last  stanza  was  given). 

**  Here  we  raise  our  voices  higher,  • 

Shout  in  the  refiner's  fire ; 
Clap  our  hands  amidst  the  flame, 

Glory  gif  e  to  Jesus'  name  I " 

The  roof  of  the  chapel  did  not  fly  off;  which  speaks  volumes 
in  praise  of  its  solid  slating. 

But  if  Briar-K^apel  seemed  alive,  so  also  did  Briarmains : 
though  certainly  the  mansion  appeared  to  enjoy  a  quieter  phase 
of  existence  than  the  temple;  some  of  its  windows  too  were 
ft-f^w:  the  lower  casements  opened  upon  the  lawn,  curtains 
concealed  the  interior,  and  partly  obscured  the  ray  of  the  can- 
^  which  lit  it,  but  they  did  not  entirely  muffle  the  sound  of 
Toice  and  laughter.  We  are  privileged  to  enter  that  frontnloor, 
^  to  penetrate  to  the  domestic  sanctum. 

It  is  not  the  presence  of  company  which  -makes  Mr.  Yorkers 
Imitation  lively,  for  there  is  none  within  it  save  his  own 
^unily,  and  they  are  assembled  in  that  farthest  room  to  the 
light,  the  back  parlour. 

This  is  the  usual  sitting-room  of  an  evening.  Those  win« 
^knri  would  be  seen  by  daylights  to  be  of  bxilliantly-c 


J 


120  SHUULET. 

glass — ^purple  and  amber  the  predominant  hues,  gHttering 
round  a  gravely  tinted  medallion  in  the  centre  of  each,  repre- 
senting the  suave  head  of  William  Shakespeare,  and  the  serene 
one  of  John  Milton.  Some  Canadian  views  hang  on  the  walls 
— green  forest  and  blue  water  scenery — and  in  the  midst  of 
them  blazes  a  night-eruption  of  Vesuvius ;  very  ardently  it 
glows,  contrasted  with  the  cool  foam  and  azure  of  cataracts, 
and  the  dusky  depths  of  woods. 

The  fire  iUimiinating  this  room,  reader,  is  such  as,  if  you  be 
a  southern,  you  do  not  oflen  see  burning  on  the  hearth  of  a 
private  apartment ;  it  is  a  clear,  hot,  coal  fire,  heaped  high  in 
the  ample  chinmey.  Mr  Yorke  tviU  have  such  fires  even  in 
warm  summer  weather:  he  sits  beside  it  with  a  book  in  his 
hand,  a  little  round  stand  at  his  elbow  supporting  a  candle — 
but  he  is  not  reading,  he  is  watching  his  children.  Opposite 
to  him  sits  his  lady — a  personage  whom  I  might  describe 
minutely,  but  I  feel  no  vocation  to  the  t^k.  I  see  her,  though, 
very  plainly  before  me :  a  large  woman  of  the  gravest  aspect, 
care  on  her  front  and  on  her  shoulders — ^but  not  overwhelming, 
inevitable  care — ^rather  the  sort  of  voluntary,  exemplary  cloud 
and  burden  people  ever  carry  who  deem  it  their  duty  to  be 
gloomy.  Ah,  well-a-day  I  Mrs  Yorke  had  that  notion,  and 
grave  as  Saturn  she  was,  morning,  noon,  and  night ;  and  hard 
things  she  thought  of  any  imhappy  wight — especially  of  the 
female  sex — who  dared  in  her  presence  to  show  the  light  of  a 
gay  heart  on  a  sunny  countenance.  In  her  estimation,  to  be 
mirthfiil  was  to  be  profane;  to  be  cheerful  was  to  be  firivolons: 
she  drew  no  distinctions.  Yet  she  was  a  very  good  wife,  a 
.very  careful  mother,  looked  after  her  children  imceasingly, 
was  sincerely  attached  to  her  husband ;  only,  the  worst  of  it 
was,  if  she  could  have  had  her  will,  she  would  not  have  per- 
mitted him  to  have  any  friend  in  the  world  beside  herself:  all 
his  relations  were  insupportable  to  her,  and  she  kept  them  at 
arm^s  length. 

Mr  Yorke  and  she  agreed  perfectly  well;  yet  he  was 
naturally  a  social,  hospitable  man — ^an  advocate  for  family 
unity — and  in  his  youth,  as  has  been  said,  he  liked  none  but 
lively,  cheerful  women.  Why  he  chose  her — ^how  they  con- 
trived to  suit  each  other,  is  a  problem  puzzling  enough,  but 
which  might  soon  be  solved  if  one  had  time  to  go  into  the 
analysis  of  the  case.  ,  Suffice  it  here  to  say,  that  Yorke  had  a 
shadowy  as  well  as  a  sunny  side  to  his  character,  and  that  hia 
shadowy  side  found  sympathy  and  affinity  in  the  whole  of  hia 


BRIABMAINS  121 

• 

uife*s  aniformly  overcast  nature.  For  the  rest,  she  was  a 
fitrong-minded  woman ;  never  said  a  weak  or  a  trite  thing ;  took 
stem,  democratic  views  of  society,  and  rather  cynical  ones  of 
human  nature;  considered  herself  perfect  and  safe,  and  the 
rest  of  the  world  all  wrong.  Her  main  fault  was  a  brooding, 
eternal,  immitigable  suspicion  of  all  men,  things,  creeds,  and 
parties:  this  suspicion  was  a  mist  before  her  eyes,  a  false  guide 
in  her  path,  wherever  she  looked,  wherever  she  turned. 

It  may  be  supposed  that  the  children  of  such  a  pair  were 
not  likely  to  turn  out  quite  ordinary,  common -place  beings ; 
and  they  were  not.  You  see  six  of  them,  reader :  the  youngest 
is  a  baby  on  the  mother^s  knee ;  it  is  all  her  own  yet — ^and  that 
one  she  has  not  yet  begun  to  doubt,  suspect,  condemn ;  it  de- 
rives its  sustenance  from  her,  it  hangs  on  her,  it  clings  to  her, 
it  loves  her  above  everything  else  in  the  world:  she  is  sure  of 
that,  because,  as  it  lives  by  her,  it  cannot  be  otherwise,  there- 
fore she  loves  it. 

The  two  next  are  girls.  Rose  and  Jessy ;  they  are  both  now 
at  their  father^s  knee;  they  seldom  go  near  their  mother,  ex- 
cept when  obliged  to  do  so.     Rose,  the  elder,  is  twelve  years 
old;  shQ  is  like  her  father — ^the  most  like  him  of  the  whole 
group — but  it  is  a  granite  head  copied  in  ivory;  all  is  softened 
in  colour  and  line.     Yorke  himself  has  a  harsh  face;   his 
daughter's  is  not  harsh,  neither  is  it  quite  pretty ;  it  is  simple 
—childlike  in  feature ;  the  roimd  cheeks  bloom :  as  to  the 
grey  eyes,  they  are  otherwise  than  childlike — a  serious  soul 
lights  them — a  young  soul  yet,  but  it  will  mature,  if  the  body 
lives;  and  neither  father  nor  mother  have  a  spirit  to  compare 
vith  it.    Partaking  of  the  essence  of  each,  it  will  one  day  be 
l)€tter   than    either — ^stronger,   much  purer,  more  aspiring. 
Rose  is  a  still  sometimes,  a  stubborn  girl  now;  her  mother 
wants  to  make  of  her  such  a  woman  as  she  is  herself — a  woman 
of  dark  and 'dreary  duties — and  Rose  has  a  mind  fulT-set, 
thick-Bown  with  the  germs  of  ideas  her  mother  never  knew. 
It  is  agony  to  her  often  to  have  these  ideas  trampled  on  and 
repressed.     She  has  never  rebelled  yet;  but  if  hard  driven, 
iHe  will  rebel  one  day,  and  then  it  will  be  once  for  all.     Rose 
loves  her  father:  her  father  does  nat  rule  her  with  a  rod  of 
iron;  he  is  good  to  her.     He  sometimes  fears  she  will  not  live, 
so  bright  are  the  sparks  of  intelligence  which,  at  moments, 
^^  from  her  glance,  and  gleam  in  her  language.     This  idea 
©akes  him  often  sadly  tender  to  her. 
He  has  no  idea  that  little  Jessy  will  die  young,  she  is  so  gay 


122    i  SHIRLEY. 

and  chattering,  arch — original  even  now:  passionate  "wfaeii 
provoked,  but  most  affectionate  if  caressed;  by  turns  gentle 
and  rattling ;  exacting  yet  generous ;  fearless — of  her  mother, 
for  instance,  whose  irrationally  hard  and  strict  rule  she  has 
often  defied — yet  reliant  on  any  who  will  help  her.  Jessy, 
with  her  little  piquant  face,  engaging  prattle,  and  winning 
ways,  is  made  to  be  a  pet;  and  her  father's  pet  she  accord- 
ingly is.  It  is  odd  that  the  doll  should  resemble  her  mother 
feature  by  feature,  as  Rose  resembles  her  father,  and  yet  the 
physiognomy — ^how  different !    ' 

Mr  Yorke,  if  a  magic  mirror  were  now  held  before  you, 
and  if  therein  were  shown  you  your  two  daughters  as  they  will 
be  twenty  years  from  this  night,  what  would  you  think  ?  The 
magic  mirror  is  here :  you  shall  learn  their  destinies — and  first 
that  of  your  little  life,  Jessy. 

Do  you  know  this  place  ?  No,  you  never  saw  it ;  but  you 
recognise  the  nature  of  these  trees,  this  foliage: — ^the  cypress, 
the  willow,  the  yew.  Stone  crosses  like  these  are  not  unfami- 
liar to  you,  nor  are  these  dim  garlands  of  everlasting  flowers. 
Here  is  the  place ;  green  sod  and  a  grey  marble  headstone — 
Jessy  sleeps  below.  She  lived  through  an  April  day;  much 
loved  was  she,  much  loving.  She  often,  in  her  brief  Hfe,  shed 
tears,  she  had  frequent  sorrows ;  she  smiled  between,  gladden- 
ing whatever  saw  her  Her  death  was  tranquil  and  happy  in 
Rose's  guardian  arms,  for  Rose  had  been  her  stay  and  defence 
through  many  trials :  the  dying  and  the  watching  English  girls 
were  at  that  hour  alone  in  a  foreign  country,  and  lie  soil  of 
that  country  gave  Jessy  a  grave. 

Now,  behold  Rose,  two  years  later.  The  crosses  and  gar- 
lands looked  strange,  but  the  hills  and  woods  of  this  landscape 
look  still  stranger.  This,  indeed,  is  far  from  England ;  re- 
mote must  be  the  shores  which  wear  that  wild,  luxuriant 
aspect.  This  is  some  virgin  solitude  :  unknown  birds  flutter 
round  the  skirts  of  that  forest ;  no  European  river  this,  on 
whose  banks  Rose  sits  thinking.  The  little  qidet  Yorkshire 
girl  is  a  lonely  emigrant  in  some  region  of  the  southern  hemi- 
sphere.   WiU  she  ever  come  back  ? 

The  three  eldest  of  the  family  are  all  boys  :  Matthew,  Mark, 
and  Martin.  They  are  seated  together  in  that  comer,  engaged 
in  some  game.  Observe  their  three  heads  :  much  alike  at  a 
first  glance ;  at  a  second,  different ;  at  a  third,  contrasted. 
Dark-haired,  dark-eyed,  red-cheeked,  are  the  whole  trio; 
small  English  features  they  all  possess ;  all  own  a  blended 


BKTARMATW8.  128 

Ksemblance  to  sire  and  mother,  and  yet  a  distinctive  pliysi- 
ognomj,  mark  of  a  separate  character,  belongs  to  each. 

I  shall  not  say  much  about  Matthew,  the  first-bom  of  the 
house ;  though  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  gazing  at  him  long, 
and  conjecturing  what  qualities  that  visage  hides  or  indicates. 
He  is  no  plain-looking  boy :  that  jet-black  hair,  white  brow, 
high-coloured  cheek,  those  quick,  dark  eyes,  are  good  points 
in  their  way.  How  is  it  that,  look  as  long  as  you  will,  there 
is  but  one  object  in  the  room,  and  that  the  most  sinister,  to 
which  Matthew's  face  seems  to  bear  an  affinity,  and  of  which, 
ever  and  anon,  it  reminds  you  strangely — the  eruption  of 
Vesuvius.  Flame  and  shadow  seem  the  component  parts  of 
that  lad's  soid :  no  daylight  in  it,  and  no  sunshine,  and  no 
pure,  cool  moonbeam  ever  shone  there.  He  has  an  English 
frame,  but,  apparently,  not  an  English* mind  :  you  would  say, 
an  Italian  stiletto  in  a  sheath  of  British  workmanship.  He  is 
crossed  in  the  game — ^look  at  his  scowl.  Mr  Yorke  sees  it, 
and  what  does  he  say  ?  In  a  low  voice,  he  pleads  :  ^'  Mark 
and  Martin,  don't  anger  your  brother."  And  this  is  ever  the 
tone  adopted  by  both  parents.  Theoretically,  they  decry  par- 
tiality ;  no  lights  of  primogeniture  are  to  be  allowed  in  that 
house ;  but  IVIatthew  is  never  to  be  vexed,  never  to  be  opposed : 
they  avert  piovocation  from  him  as  assiduously  as  they  would 
avot  fire  from  a  barrel  of  gunpowder.  "  Concede,  conciliate/' 
is  their  motto  wherever  he  is  concerned.  The  republicans  are 
fiBt  making  a  tyrant  of  their'  own  flesh  and  blood.  This  the 
yoonger  scions  know  and  feel,  and  at  heart  they  all  rebel 
against  the  injustice :  they  cannot  read  their  parents'  motives ; 
they  only  see  the  difference  of  treatment.  The  dragon's  teeth 
are  abeady  sown  amongst  Mr  Yorke's  young  olive-branches  : 
discord  will  one  day  be  the  harvest. 

Mark  id  a  bonnie-looking  boy,  the  most  regular-featured  of 
the  family  ;  he  is  exceedingly  calm  ;  his  smile  is  shrewd  ;  he 
can  say  the  driest,  most  cutting  things  in  the  quietest  of  tones. 
Despite  his  tranquillity,  a  somewhat  heavy  brow  speaks  temper, 
and  reminds  yon  that  the  smoothest  waters  are  not  always  the 
safest.  Besides,  he  is  too  still,  unmoved,  phlegmatic,  to  be 
happy.  life  will  never  have  much  joy  in  it  for  Mark :  by 
the  time  he  is  five-and-twenty,  he  will  wonder  why  people 
ever  laugh,  and  think  all  fools  who  seem  merry.  Poet^  will 
not  exist  for  Mark,  either  in  literature  or  in  life  ;  its  best 
ifSasions  will  sound  to.  him  mere  rant  and  jargon :  enthusiasm 
will  be  hiB  aversion  and  contempt.  Mark  will  have  no  youth: 


124  SHIBLEY. 

while  he  looks  juvenile  and  blooming,  he  will  be  already 
middle-aged  in  mind.  His  body  is  now  fourteen  years  of  age, 
but  his  soul  is  already  thirty. 

Martin,  the  youngest  of  the  three,  owns  another  nature. 
Life  may,  or  may  not,  be  brief  for  him  ;  but  it  wiU  certainly 
be  brilliant :  he  will  pass  through  all  its  illusions,  half  believe 
in  them,  wholly  enjoy  them,  then  outlive  them.  That  boy  ia 
not  handsome — ^not  so  handsome  as  either  of  his  brothers  :  he 
is  plain ;  there  is  a  husk  upon  him,  a  dry  shell,  and  he  wiU 
wear  it  till  he  is  near  twenty  ;  then  he  will  put  it  off :  about 
that  period,  he  will  make  himself  handsome.  He  will  wear 
uncouth  manners  till  that  age,  perhaps  homely  garments  ;  but 
the  chrysalis  will  retain  the  power  of  transfiguring  itself  into 
the  butterfly,  and  such  transfiguration  will,  in  due  season, 
take  place.  For  a  space  he  will  be  vain,  probably  a  downright 
puppy,  eager  for  pleasure  and  desirous  of  admiration  ;  athirst, 
too,  for  knowledge.  He  will  want  all  that  the  world  can  give 
him,  both  of  enjoyment  and  lore  ;  he  will,  perhaps,  take  deep 
draughts  at  each  fount.  That  thirst  satisfied — what  next  ?  I 
know  not.  Martin  might  be  a  remarkable  man :  whether  he 
will  or  not,  the  seer  is  powerless  to  predict :  on  that  subject, 
there  has  been  no  open  vision. 

Take  Mr  Yorke's  family  in  the  aggregate,  there  is  as  much 
mental  power  in  those  six  young  heads,  as  much  originality, 
as  much  activity  and  vigour  of  brain,  as— divided  amongst  half 
a  dozen  common-place  broods — would  give  to  each  rather  more 
than  an  average  amount  of  sense  and  capacity.  Mr  Yorke 
knows  this,  and  is  proud  of  his  xace.  Yorkshire  has  such 
families  here  and  there  amongst  her  hills  and  wolds — ^peculiar, 
racy,  vigorous;,  of  good  blood  and  strong  brain;  turbulent 
somewhat  in  the  pride  of  their  strength,  and  intractable  in  the 
force  of  their  native  powers ;  wanting  polish,  wanting  considera- 
tion, wanting  docility,  but  sound,  spirited,  and  true-bred  as 
the  eagle  on  the  cliff  or  the  steed  in  the  steppe. 

A  low  tap  is  heard-jat  the  parlour  door ;  the  boys  have  been 
making  such  a  noise  over  their  game,  and  little  Jessy,  besides, 
has  been  singing  so  sweet  a  Scotch  song  to  her  fa£ber — who 
delights  in  Scotch  and  Italian  songs,  and  has  taught  his 
musical  little  daughter  some  of  the  best — ^that  the  ring  at  the 
outer  door  was  not  observed. 

"  Come  in,"  says  Mrs  Yorke,  in  that  conscientiously  con- 
strained and  solemnized  voice  of  hersj  which  ever  modulates 
itself  to  a  funereal  dreariness  of  tone,  though  the  subject  it  if) 


BRIARMAINS.  125 

exercised  upon  be  but  to  give  orders  for  the  making  of  a  pud- 
ding in  the  kitchen,  to  bid  the  boys  hang  up  their  caps  in  the 
hall,  or  to  call  the  girls  to  their  sewing:  "  Come  in! "  And 
in  came  Robert  Moore. 

Moore's  habitual  gravity,  as  well  as  his  abstemiousness  (for 
the  case  of  spirit-decanters  is  never  ordered  up  when  he  pays 
an  evening  visit),  has  so  far  recommended  him  to  Mrs  Yorke, 
that  she  has  not  yet  made  him  the  subject  of  private  animad- 
versions with  her  husband :  she  has  not  yet  found  out  that  he 
is  hampered  by  a  secret  intrigue  which  prevents  him  from 
marrying,  or  that  he  is  a  wolf  in  sheep's  clothing ;  discoveries 
which  she  made  at  an  early  date  afler  marriage  concerning 
most  of  her  husband^s  bachelor  fiiendsf  and  excluded  them 
from  her  board  accordingly ;  which  part  of  her  conduct,  indeed, 
might  be  said  to  have  its  just  and  sensible,  as  well  as  its  harsh 
side. 

"  Well,  is  it  you  ?  "  she  says  to  Mr  Moore,  as  he  comes  up 
to  her  and  gives  his  hand.  "  What  are  you  roving  about  at 
this  time  of  night  for  ?     You  should  be  at  home." 

^'  Can  a  single  man  be  said  to  have  a  home,  madam  ?  "  he 
ftsks. 

"  Pooh ! "  says  Mrs  Yorke,  who  despises  conventional  smooth- 
ness quite  as  much  as  her  husband  doe^  and  practises  it  as 
little,  and  whose  plain  speaking,  on  all  occasions,  is  carried  to 
a  point  calculated,  sometimes,  to  awaken  admiration,  but  oftener 
alarm — "  Pooh  !  you  need  not  talk  nonsense  to  me  ;  a  single 
man  can  have  a  home  if  he  likes.  Pray,  does  not  your  sister 
make  a  home  for  you  ?  " 

"Not  she,"  joined  in  Mr  Yorke.  "  Hortense  is  an.  honest 
lass;  but  when  I  was  Robert's  age,  I  had  five  or  six  sisters, 
all  as  decent  and  proper  as  she  is  ;  but  you  see,  Hesther,  for 
all  that,  it  did  not  hinder  me  from  looking  out  for  a  wife." 

"And  sorely  he  has  repented  marrying  me,"  added  Mrs 
Yorke,  who  liked  occasionally  to  crack  a  dry  jest  against 
matrimony,  even  though  it  should  be  at  her  own  expense. 
"  He  has  repented  it  in  sackcloth  and  ashes,  Robert  Moore,  as 
you  may  well  believe  when  you  see  his  punishment"  (here  she 
pointed  to  her  children).  "  Who  would  burden  themselves  with 
such  a  set  of  great,  rough  lads  as  those,  if  they  could  help  it  ? 
It  is  not  only  bringing  them  into  the  world,  though  that  is  bad 
enough,  but  they  are  all  to  feed,  to  clothe,  to  rear,  to  settle  in 
life.  Young  sir,  when  you  feel  tempted  to  marry,  think  of  our 
feor  woDB  and  two  daughters,  and  look  twice  befbre  you  leap.** 


126  SBIBUCT* 

'^  I  am  not  tempted  now,  at  any  rate:  I  think  these  are  not 
times  for  marrying  or  giving  in  marriage.*' 

A  lugubrious  sentiment  of  this  sort  was  sure  to  obtain  Mrs 
Yorkers  approbation:  she  nodded  and  groaned  acquiescence; 
but  in  a  minute  she  said: — 

•*  I  make  little  account  of  the  wisdom  of  Ji  Solomon  of  your 
age ;  it  will  be  upset  by  the  first  fancy  that  crosses  you.  Mean- 
time, sit  down,  sir:  you  can  talk, I  suppose,  as  well  sitting  as 
standing  ?  *' 

This  was  her  way  of  inviting  her  guest  to  take  a  chair;  he 
had  no  sooner  obeyed  her,  than  little  Jessy  jumped  from  her 
father^s  knee,  and  ran  into  Mr  Moore^s  arms,  which  were  very 
promptly  held  out  to  receive  her. 

"You  talk  of  marrying  him,"  said  she  to  her  mother, 
quite  indignantly,  as  she  was  lifted  lightly  to  his  knee, 
"and  he  is  married  now,  or  as  good:  he  promised  that  I 
should  be  his  wife  last  summer,  the  first  time  he  saw  me 
in  my  new  white  fi'ock  and  blue  sash.  Didn't  he,  father?" 
(These  children  were  not  accustomed  to  say  papa  and  mamma; 
their  mother  would  allow  no  such  "  namby-pamby.") 

"  Ay,  my  little  lassie,  he  promised  ;  I  'U  bear  witness.  But 
make  him  say  it  over  again  now,  Jessy :  such  as  he  are  onlj 
false  loons." 

"  He  is  not  false :  he  is  too  bonnie  to  be  false,"  said  Jessy, 
looking  up  to  her  tall  sweetheart  with  the  fullest  confidence 
in  his  faith. 

"Bonnie!"  cried  Mr  Yorke ;  "that's  the  reason  that  he 
should  be,  and  proof  that  he  is — a,  scoundreL" 

"  But  he  looks  too  sorrowful  to  be  felse,"  here  interposed 
a  quiet  voice  from  behind  the  father's  chair.  "  If  he  were 
always  laughing,  I  should  think  he  forgot  promises  soon,  but 
Mr  Moore  never  laughs." 

"  Your  sentimental  buck  is  the  greatest  cheat  of  all,  Rose," 
remarked  Mr  Yorke. 

"  He 's  not  sentimental,"  said  Rose. 

Mr  Moore  turned  to  her  with  a  little  surprise,  smiling  at 
the  same  time. 

"  How  do  you  know  I  am  not  sentimental,  Rose  ?' 

"  Because  I  heard  a  lady  say  .you  were  not." 

"Voil4,  qui  devient  int^ressantl"  exclaimed  Mr  Yorke, 
hitching  his  chair  nearer  the  fire.  "  A  lady  I  That  hafl 
quite  a  romantic  twang :  we  must  guess  who  it  is.  Rosy, 
whisper  the  name  low  to  your  father :  don't  let  him  hear." 


BBIABMAIHS.  127 

^Bose,  don't  be  too  forward  to  talk,'  here  intemipted 
Mrs  Yorke,  in  her  usual  kill-joy  fashion ;  "  nor  Jessy  either : 
it  becomes  all  children,  especially  girls,  to  be  silent  in  the 
presence  of  their  elders." 

"Why  have  ve  tongues,  then?"  asked  Jessy^  pertly; 
¥rhile  Rose  only  looked  at  her  mother  with  an  expression 
that  seemed  to  say,  she  should  take  that  maxim  in,  and  think 
it  over  at  her  leisure.  After  two  minutes'  grave  delibera- 
tion, she  asked, — 
"  And  why  especially  girls,  mother  ?  " 
'^  Firstly,  because  I  say  so :  and,  secondly,  because  dish 
cretion  and  reserve  is  a  girFs  best  wisdom." 

"My  dear  madam,"  observed  Moore,  "what  you  say  is 
excellent :  it  reminds  me,  indeed,  of  my  dear  sister's  obser- 
vations ;  but  really  it  is  not  applicable  to  these  little  ones. 
Let  Rose  and  Jessy  talk  to  me  freely,  or  my  chief  pleasure  in 
coming  here  is  gone.     I  like  their  prattle  :  it  does  me  good." 

"Does  it  not?"  asked  Jessy.  "More  good  than  if  the 
roQgh  lads  came  round  you :  you  call  them  rough,  mother, 
yourself." 

"  Yes,  mignonne,  a  thousand  times  more  good :  I  have 
rough  lads  enough  about  me  all  day  long,  poulet." 

"  There  are  plenty  of  people,"  continued  she,  "  who  take 
notice  of  the  boys :  all  my  uncles  and  aimts  seem  to  think 
their  nephews  better  than  their  nieces  ;  and  when  gentlemen 
come  here  to  dine,  it  is  always  Matthew,  and  Mark,  and 
Martin,  that  are  talked  to,  and  never  Rose  and  me.  Mr 
Moore  is  cfwr  fiiend,  and  we  '11  keep  him :  but  mind.  Rose, 
he 's  not  so  much  your  friend  as  he  is  mine :  he  is  my  ^^•' 
ticular  acquamtance ;  remember  that  I "  And  she  held  up 
her  small  hand  with  an  admonitory  gesture. 

Rose  was  quite  accustomed  to  be  admonished  by  that  small 
hand;  her  will  daily  bent  itself  to  that  of  the  impetuous 
little  Jessy :  she  was  guided— overruled  by  Jessy  in  a 
thousand  things.  On  all  occasions  of  show  and  pleasure, 
Jessy  took  the  lead,  and  Rose  fell  quietly  into  the  back- 
ground ;  whereas,  when  the  disagreeables  of  life — ^its  work 
ind  privations  were  in  question,  Rose  instinctively  took  upon 
her,  in  addition  to  her  own  share,  what  she  could  of  her 
sister's.  Jessy  had  already  settled  it  in  her  mind  that  she, 
when  she  was  old  enough,  was  to  be  married;  Rose,  she 
decided,  must  be  an  old  maid,  to  live  with  her,  look  after  her 
chUdreOy  keep  her  house.    This  state  of  things  is  not  uncommon 


128  SHIBLET. 

between  two  sisters,  wtere  one  is  plain  and  the  other  pretty; 
but  in  this  case,  if  there  was  a  diSerence  in  external  appear- 
ance, Eose  had  the  advantage :  her  face  was  more  regular- 
featured  than  that  of  the  piquant  little  Jessy.  Jessy,  however, 
was  destined  to  possess,  along  with  sprightly  intelligence  and 
vivacious  feeling,  the  gift  of  fascination,  the  power  to  charm 
when,  where,  and  whom  she  would.  Eose  was  to  have  a  fine, 
generous  soul,  a  noble  intellect  profoundly  cultivated,  a  heart 
as  true  as  steel,  but  the  manner  to  attract  was  not  to  be  hers. 

"  Now,  Eose,  tell  me  the  name  of  this  lady  who  denied  that 
I  was  sentimental,"  urged  Mr  Moore. 

Eose  had  no  idea  of  tantalization,  or  she  would  have  held 
him  a  while  in  doubt;  she  answered  briefly:— 

"  I  can't :  I  don't  know  her  name." 

"  Describe  her  to  me :  what  was  she  like  ?  Where  did  you 
see  her  ?  " 

"  When  Jessy  and  I  went  to  spend  the  day  at  Whinbury 
with  Kate  and  Susan  Pearson,  who  were  just  come  home  from 
school,  there  was  a  party  at  Mrs  Pearson's,  and  some  grown-up 
ladies  were  sitting  in  a  comer  of  the  drawing-room  talking 
about  you." 

"  Did  you  know  none  of  them  ?" 

"  Hannah,  and  Harriet,  and  Dora,  and  Mary  Sykes." 

"  Good.     Were  they  abusing  me,  Eosy  ?  " 

"  Some  of  them  were  :  they  called  you  a  misanthrope :  I 
remember  the  word — ^I  looked  for  it  in  the  dictionary  when  I 
came  home :  it  means  a,  man-hater." 

"Wh^t  besides?" 

"  Hannah  Sykes  said  you  were  a  solemn  puppy." 

" Better  1"  cried  Mr  Yorke,  laughing.  "Oh!  excellent! 
Hannah — that's  the  one  with  the  red  hair:  a  fine  girl,  but 
half-witted." 

"  She  has  wit  eAOugh  for  me,  it  appears,"  said  Moore.  "A 
solemn  puppy,  indeed !     Well,  Eose,  go  on." 

"  Miss  Pearson  said  she  believed  there  was  a  good  deal  of 
affectation  about  you,  and  that  with  your  dark  hair  and  pale 
face,  you  looked  to  her  like  some  sort  of  a  sentimental  noodle." 

Again  Mr  Yorke  laughed :  Mrs  Yorke  even  joined  in  this 
time.  "  You  see  in  what  esteem  you  are  held  behind  your 
back,"  said  she ;  "  yet  I  believe  that  Miss  Pearson  would  like 
to  catch  you:  she  set  her  cap  at  you  when  you  first  came  into 
the  country,  old  as  she  is." 

"  And  who  contradicted  her,  Eosy  ?"  inquired  Mooret 


BRUBMAIKS.  129 

*'  A  lady  whom  I  don't  know,  because  she  never  visits  here, 
though  I  see  her  every  Sunday  at  church ;  she  sits  in  the  pew 
near  the  pulpit.  I  generally  look  at  her,  instead  of  looking  at 
my  prayer-book ;  for  she  is  like  a  picture  in  our  dining-room, 
that  woman  with  the  dove  in  her  hand :  at  least  she  has  eyes 
like  it,  and  a  nose  too,  a  straight  nose,  that  makes  all  her  face 
look,  somehow,  what  I  call  clear." 

**  And  you  don't  know  her ! "  exclaimed  Jeesy,  in  a  tone  of 
exceeding  surprise.  "  That's  so  like  Rose.  Mr  Moore,  I  oflen 
wonder  in  what  sort  of  a  world  my  sister  lives ;  I  am  sure  she 
does  not  live  all  her  time  in  this :  one  is  continually  finding 
out  that  she  is  quite  ignorant  of  some  little  matter  which  every- 
body else  knows.  To  think  of  her  going  solemnly  to  church 
every  Sunday,  and  looking  all  service-time  at  one  p^trticular 
person,  and  never  so  miuch  as  asking  that  person's  name  1  She 
means  Caroline  Helstone,  the  Rector's  niece:  I  remember  all 
about  it.  Miss  Helstone  was  quite  angry  with  Anne  Pearson: 
she  said,  'Robert  Moore  is  neither  affected  nor  sentimental; 
you  mistake  his  character  utterly,  or  rather  not  one  of  you  here 
faiows  anjrthing  about  it.'  -  Now,  shall  I  tell  you  what  she  is 
like?  I  can  tell  what  people  «re  like,  and  how  they  are 
dressed,  better  than  Rose  can." 

"  Let  us  hear." 

"She  is  nice;  she  is  fair;  she  has  a  pretty  white  slender 
throat;  she  has  long  curls,  not  stiff  ones,  they  hang  loose  and 
soft,  their  colour  is  brown  but  not  dark ;  she  speaks  quietly, 
with  a  clear  tone;  she  never  makes  a  bustle  in  moving;  she 
often  wears  a  grey  silk  dress;  she  is  neat  all  over:  her  gowns, 
«nd  her  shoes,  and  her  gloves  always  fit  her.  She  is  what  I 
call  a  lady,  and  when  I  am  as  tall  as  she  is,  I  mean  to  be 
hke  her.  Shall  I  suit  you  if  I  am  ?  Will  you  really  marry 
me?" 

Moore  stroked  Jessy's  hair:  for  a  minute  he  seemed  as  if  he 
Would  draw  her  nearer  to  him,  but  instead  he  put  her  a  little 
&rtheroff. 

"  Oh  I  you  won't  have  me  ?    You  push  me  away." 

"  Why,  Jessy,  you  care  nothing  about  me:  you  never  come 
to  see  me  now  at  the  Hollow." 

"  Because  you  don't  ask  me." 

Hereupon,  Mr  Moore  gave  both  the  little  girls  an  invitation 
to  pay  hun  a  visit  next  day,  promising  that,  as  he  was  going  to 
Mbro'  in  the  morning,  he  would  buy  them  each  a  present,  of 
what  nature  he  would  not  then  declare,  but  they  must  oome 

9 


i;iO  SHIKLET. 

and  see.     Jessy  was  about  to  reply,  when  one  of  the  boys 
unexpectedly  broke  in. 

"I  know  that  Miss  Helstone  you  have  all  been  palavering 
about:  she 's  an  ugly  girl.  I  hate  her!  I  hate  all  womenites. 
I  wonder  what  they  were  made  for.". 

"Martin!"  said  his  father — for  Martin  it  was — ^the  lad 
only  answered  by  turning  his  cynical  young  face,  half-arch, 
half-truculent,  towards  the  paternal  chair.  "  Martin,  my  lad, 
thou  *rt  a  swaggering  whelp,  now ;  thou  wilt  some  day  be  an 
outrageous  puppy :  but  stick  to  those  sentiments  of  thine.  See, 
I'll  write  down  the  words  now  i'  my  pocket-book."  (The 
senior  took  out  a  morocco-covered  book,  and  deliberatelj 
wrote  therein).  "  Ten  years  hence,  Martin,  if  thou  and  I  be 
both  alive  at  that  day,  I  'U  remind  thee  of  tliat  speech." 

."I'll  say  the  same  then:  I  mean  always  to  hate  women; 
they're  such  dolls:  they  do  nothing  but  dress  themselves 
finely,  and  go  swimming  about  to  be  admired.  I'll  never 
marry:  I'll  be  a  bachelor." 

"  Stick  to  it!  stick  to  it!  Hesther"  (addressing  his  wife),  "I 
was  like  him  when  I  was  his  age,  a  regular  misogamist;  and, 
behold!  by  the  time  I  was  three-and-twenty — ^being  then  % 
tourist  in  France  and  Italy,  and  the  Lord  knows  where! — 
I  curled  my  hair  every  night  before  I  went  to  bed,  and 
wore  a  ring  i'  my  ear,  and  would  have  worn  one  i'  my  noee 
if  it  had  been  the  fashion — ^and  all  that  I  might  make 
mysel'  pleasing  and  charming  to  the  ladies.  Martin  will  do 
the  like." 

"  WiU  I  ?  Never  I  I  've  more  sense.  What  a  Qruj  you 
were,  father  I  As  to  dressing,  I  make  this  vow :  I  '11  never 
dress  more  finely  than  as  you  see  me  at  present.  Mr  Moore, 
I'm  clad  in  blue  cloth  from  top  to  toe,  and  they  laugh  at  me, 
and  call  me  sailor  at  the  grammar-school.  I  laugh  louder  at 
them,  and  say  they  are  all  magpies  and  parrots,  with  their 
coats  one  colour,  and.  their  waistcoats  another,  and  their 
trousers  a  third.  I'll  always  wear  blue  cloth,  and  nothing 
but  blue  cloth:  it  is  beneath  a  human  being's  dignity  to  dress 
himself  in  particoloured  garments." 

.  "  Ten  years  hence,  Martin,  no  tailor's  shop  will  have  choice 
of  colours  varied  enough  for  thy  exacting  taste ;  Ao  perfumer's 
stores  essences  exquisite  enough  for  thy  fastidious  senses." 

Martin  looked  disdain,  but  vouchsafed  no  further  reply. 
Meantime  Mark,  who  for  some  minutes  had  been  rummaging 
amongst  a  pile  of  books  on  a  side-table^  took  the  word.     He 


BSIABICAINB.  131 

qxAe  fa  .  peculiarly  slow,  quie;  voice,  and  with  an  expression 

of  still  irony  in  his  face  not  easy  to  describe. 

"  Mr  Moore,"  said  he,  "  you  think  perhaps  it  was  a  com- 
pliment on  Miss  Caroline  Helstone's  part  to  say  you  were  not 
BentimentaL  I  thought  you  appeared  confused  when  my 
sisters  told  you  the  words,  as  if  you  felt  flattered:  you  tumea 
red,  just  like  a  certain  vain  little  lad  at  our  school,  who 
always  thinks  proper  to  blush  when  he  gets  a  rise  in  the  class. 
For  your  benefit,  Mr  Moore,  I've  been  looking  up  the  word 
'  sentimental '  in  the  dictionary,  and  I  find  it  to  mean  '  tinctured 
with  sentiment.'  On  examining  further,  *  sentiment '  is  ex- 
plained to  be,  thought,  idea,  notion.  A  sentimental  man,  then, 
is  one  who  has  thoughts,  ideas,  notions ;  an  unsentimental  num 
is  one  destitute  of  thought,  idea,  or  notion." 

And  Mark  stopped:  he  did  not  smile,  he  did  not  look  round 
for  admiration:  he  had  said  his  say,  and  was  silent. 

"  Ma  foi  I  mon  ami,"  observed  Mr  Moore  to  Yorke ;  "  ce 
soQt  vraiment  des  enfants  terribles,  que  les  v6tres ! " 

Rose,  who  had  been  listening  attentively  to  Mark's  speech, 
replied  to  him: — 

"  There  are  different  kinds  of  thoughts,  ideas,  and  notions," 
laid  she,  '^  good  and  bad:  sentimental  must  refer  to  the  bad, 
or  Miss  Helstone  must  have  taken  it  in  that  sense,  for  she  was 
not  blaming  Mr  Moore ;  she  was  defending  him." 

'^  That 's  my  kind  little  advocate  I "  said  MoorC)  taking  Rose's 
liaud. 

"  She  was  defending  him,"  repeated  Bose,  '<  as  I  should  have 
done  had  I  been  in  her  place,  for  the  other  ladies  seemed  to 
«peak  spitefully." 

** Ladies  always  do  speak  spitefully,"  observed  Martin;  ^'it 
is  the  nature  of  womenites  to  be  spiteful." 
Matthew  now,  for  the  first  time,  opened  his  lips : — 
"  What  a  fool  Martin  is,  to  be  always  gabbling  about  what 
^  does  not  understand." 

"  It  is  my  privilege,  as  a  freeman,  to  gabble  on  whatever 
subject  I  like,"  responded  Martin. 

"  You  use  it,  or  rather  abuse  it,  to  such  an  extent,"  rejoined  the 
dder  brother,  *f  that  you  prove  you  ought  to  have  been  a  slave." 
"A slave  1  a  slave !  That  to  a  Yorke,  and  from  a  Yorke  1 
This  fellow,"  he  added,  standing  up  at  the  table,  and  pointing 
jcfoss  it  to  Matthew — ^^  this  fellow  forgets,  what  every  cottier 
mBriariield  knows,  that  all  bom  of  our  house  have  that  arched 


BRURMAINS.  188 

^**  May  I  speak  a  word  with  you  ?  "  and  vas  followed  by  In'ri^ 
from  the  room.     Their  brief  conference  took  place  in  the  halL 

"  Have  you  employment  for  a  good  workman  ?  "  asked  Moore. 

*^  A  nonsense  question  in  these  times,  when  you  know  that 
eveiy  master  has  many  good  workmen  to  whom  he  cannot  giye 
ftdl  employment." 

"  You  must  oblige  me  by  taking  on  this  man,  if  possible." 

''  My  lad,  I  can  take  on  no  more  hands  to  oblige  aU  England,^' 

"  It  does  not  signiiy;  I  must  find  him  a  place  somewhere." 

"Who  is  he?" 

«  Traiiam  Farren." 

**  I  know  William ;  a  right-down  honest  man  is  William." 

"  He  has  been  out  of  work  three  months  ;  he  has  a  large 
fiumly:  we  are  sure  they  cannot  live  without  wages:  he  was 
one  of  a  deputation  of  cloth-dressers  who  came  to  me  this 
morning  to  complain  and  threaten.'  William  did  not  threaten: 
he  only  asked  me  to  give  them  rather  more  time — ^to  make 
my  changes  more  slowly.  You  know  I  cannot  do  that: 
straitened  on  all  sides  as  I  am,  I  have  nothing  for  it  but  to 
pnsh  on.  I  thought  it  would  be  idle  to  palaver  long  with 
them.  I  sent  them  away,  after  arresting  a  rascal  amongst 
them,  whom  I  hope  to  transport — a  fellow  who  preaches  at  the 
chapel  yonder  sometimes." 

"  Not  Moses  Barraclough  ?  " 

«  Yes." 

"  Ah !  you  Ve  arrested  him?  Good!  Then  out  of  a  scoundrel 
yon  're  going  to  make  a  martyr :  you  Ve  done  a  wise  thing." 

"I've  done  a  right  thing.  Well,  the  short  and  the  long  of 
it  18,  I'm  determined  to  get  Farren  a  place,  and  I  reckon  on 
you  to  give  him  one." 

"  This  is  cool,  however  1 "  exclaimed  Mr  Yorke.  "  What 
right  have  you  to  reckon  on  me  to  provide  for  your  dismissed 
workmen?  What  do  I  know  about  your  Farrens  and  your 
Williams?  I've  heard  he's  an  honest  man;  but  am  I  to 
support  all  the  honest  men  in  Yorkshire  ?  You  may  say  that 
woold  be  no  great  charge  to  undertake;  but  great  or  little, 
H  none  of  it." 

"  Come,  Mr  Yorke,  what  can  you  find  for  him  to  do  ?  " 

"/find!  You  11  make  me  use  language  I'm  not  accustomed 
to  use.    I  wish  you  would  go  home — here  is  the  door — set  off." 

Moore  sat  down  on  one  of  the  hall  chairs. 

"  You  can't  give  him  work  in  your  mill — good — ^but  you  have 
Und;  find  him  9ome  occupation  on  your  land,  Mr  Yorke  " 


1S4 

^Bob,  Ithotightyoticai^nolihiiigaboatonr 'loTodax^BSft^ 
paysans: '  I  don't  understand  this  change.** 

''  I  do:  the  fellow  spoke  to  me  nothing  but  tmth  and  seoBe. 
I  answered  him  just  as  roughly  as  I  did  the  rest,  who  jabbered 
mere  gibberish.  I  couldn't  make  distinctions  there  and  then: 
his  appearance  told  what  he  had  gone  through  lately,  clearer 
than  his  words:  but  where  is  the  use  of  explaining  ?  Let  bim 
have  work.'* 

''  Let  him  have  it  yourself.  If  you  are  so  yery  muoh  in 
earnest,  strain  a  point." 

'^  If  there  was  a  point  left  in  my  affairs  to  strain,  I  woiild 
strain  it  till  it  cracked  again ;  but  I  received  letters  this  moining 
which  show  me  pretty  nearly  where  I  stand,  and  it  is  not  fu 
off  the  end  of  the  plauik.     My  foreign  market,  at  any  rate,  is 
gorged.    If  there  is  no  change — ^if  fliere  dawns  no  prospect  of 
peace — ^if  the  Orders  in  Ck>uncil  are  not,  at  least,  suspended^ 
80  as  to  open  our  way  in  the  West — ^I  do  not  know  where  I  am 
to  turn.    I  see  no  more  light  than  if  I  were  sealed  in  a  rock; 
80  that  for  me  to  pretend  to  offer  a  man  a  liveliliood  would  be 
to  do  a  dishonest  thing." 

*^  Come,  let  us  take  a  turn  on  the  front:  it  is  a  starlight 
night,"  said  Mr  Yorke. 

They  passed  out,  closing  the  front-door  after  theitiy  and,  side 
by  side,  paced  the  frost-white  pavement  to  and  fro. 

"  Settle  about  Farren  at  once,"  urged  Mr  Moore.  "  You 
have  large  fruit-gardens  at  Yorke  Mills :  he  is  a  good  gardener : 
give  him  work  there." 

"  Well  so  be  it.  I'll  send  for  him  to-morrow,  and  well  see. 
And  now,  my  lad,  you're  concerned  about  the  condition  of  your 
affairs?" 

"  Yes:  a  second  failure — ^which  I  may  delay,  but  which,  at 
ihis  moment,  I  see  no  way  finally  to  avert — ^would  blight  the 
name  of  Moore  completely ;  and  you  are  aware  I  had  fine  inten- 
tions of  paying  off  every  debt,  and  r^-estabHshing  the  old  fizza 
on  its  former  basis." 

"  You  want  capital — that's  all  you  want." 

''  Yes ;  but  you  might  as  well  say  that  breath  is  all  a  dead 
man  wants  to  live."  ^ 

.'  "  I  know — ^I  know  capital  is  not  to  be  had  for  the  asking  ; 
and  if  you  were  a  married  man,  and  had  a  family,  like  me,  I 
should  think  your  case  pretty  nigh  desperate;  but  the  youn^ 
and  unencumbered  have  chances  peculiar  to  themselves.  I 
hear  gossip  now  and  then  about  your  being  on  the  eve  of 


BRIABICAIKS.  185 

marriage  with  this  miss  and  that;  but  I  suppose  it  is  none  of 
ittrae?" 

**  You  may  well  suppose  that:  I  think  I  am  not  in  a  position 
to  be  dreaming  of  oaarriage.  Marriage  I  I  cannot  bear  the 
word :  it  sounds  so  silly  and  Utopian.  I  have  settled  it  decidedly 
that  marriage  and  love  are  superfluities,  intended  only  for  the 
xioh,  who  live  at  ease,  and  have  no  need  to  take  thought  for 
the  morrow;  or  desperations,  the  last  and  reckless  joy  of  the 
deeply  wretched,  who  never  hope  to  rise  out  of  the  slough  of 
their  utter  poverty." 

"  I  Bhoold  not  think  so  if  I  were  circumstanced  as  you  are : 
I  should  think  I  could  very  likely  get  a  wife  with  a  few  thou- 
sands, who  would  suit  both  me  and  my  affairs." 

"  I  wonder  where  ?  " 

"  Would  you  try,  if  you  had  a  chance  ?  " 

"  I  don't  know:  it  depends  on — ^in  short  it  depends  on  many 
things." 

"  Would  you  take  an  old  Woman  ?  " 

^  I  *d  rather  break  stones  on  the  road." 

"  So  would  I.     Would  you  take  an  ugly  one  ?  " 

'' Bah!  I  hate  ugliness  and  delight  in  beauty:  my  eyes  and 
heart,  Yorke,  take  pleasure  in  a  sweet,  young,  fair  face,  as  they 
are  repelled  by  a  grim,  rugged,  meagre  one:  soft  delicate  lines 
and  hues  please— harsh  ones  prejudice  me.  I  won't  have  an 
ugly  wife." 

"  Not  if  she  were  rich  ?  " 

"  Not  if  she  were  dressed  in  gems.  I  could  not  love — ^I 
oonld  not  fancy — ^I  could  not  endure  her.  My  taste  must-have 
BatUfaction,  or  disgust  would  break  out  in  despotism-— or  worse 
—freeze  to  utter  iciness." 

"  What,  Bob,  if  you  married  an  honest,  good-natured,  and 
wealthy  lass,  though  a  little  hard-favoured,  couldn't  you  put  up 
with  the  high  cheek-bones,  the  rather  wide  mouth,  and  reddish 
liair?" 

"  1 11  never  try,  I  tell  you.  Grace  at  least  I  tuill  have,  and 
youth  and  symmetry — yes,  and  what  I  call  beauty." 

"And  poverty,  and  a  nursery  full  of  bairns  you  can  neither 
clothe  nor  feed,  and  very  soon  an  anxious  faded  mother— and 
then  bankruptcy,  discredit — a  life- long  struggle." 

"  Let  me  alone,  Yorke." 

"  If  you  are  romantic,  Robert,  and  especially  if  you  are 
iheady  in  love,  it  is  of  no  use  talking." 


136  '    SHIBLEr. 

"  I  am  not  romantic.  I  am  stript  of  romance  as  bare  as  the 
wliite  tenters  in  that  field  are  of  cloth." 

"  Always  use  such  figures  of  speech,  lad ;  I  can  understand 
them  :  and  there  is  no  love-afiair  to  disturb  your  judgment?" 

"  I  thought  I  had  said  enough  on  that  subject  before.  Love 
forme?     Stuff!" 

"  Well,  then ;  if  you  are  sound  both  in  heart  and  head, 
there  is  no  reason  why  you  should  not  profit  by  a  good  chance 
if  it  offers  :  therefore,  wait  and  see." 

"  You  are  quite  oracular,  Yorke." 

"  I  think  I  am  a  bit  T  that  line.  I  promise  ye  naught  and 
I  advise  ye  naught ;  but  I  bid  ye  keep  your  heart  up,  and  be 
guided  by  circumstances." 

''  My  namesake  the  physicis^i's  almanack  coiild  not  speak 
more  guardedly." 

"  In  the  meantime,  I  care  naught  about  ye,  Robert  Moore : 
ye  are  nothing  akin  to  me  or  mine,  and  whether  ye  lose  or  find 
a  fortune  it  mak^s  no  difference  to  me.  Go  home,  now  :  it  has 
stricken  ten.   Miss  Hortense  will  be  wondering  where  ye  are." 


CHAPTER  X. 

OLD  ICAIDS. 

Time  wore  on,  and  spring  matured.  The  surface  of  England 
began  to  look  pleasant :  her  fields  grew  green,  her  hills  Igresh, 
her  gardens  blooming  ;  but  at  heart  she  was  no  better :  stiil 
her  poor  were  wretched,  still  their  employers  were  harassed : 
commerce,  in  some  of  its  branches,  seemed  threatened  with 
paralysis,  for  the  war  continued ;  England^s  blood  was  shed 
and  her  wealth  lavished :  all,  it  seemed,  to  attain  most  inade- 
quate ends.  Some  tidings  there  were  indeed  occasionallj  of 
successes  in  the  Peninsula,  but  these  came  in  slowly ;  long 
intervals  occurred  between,  in  which  no  note  was  heard  but 
the  insolent  self-felicitations  of  Bonaparte  on  his  continued 
triumphs.  Those  who  suffered  from  the  results  of  the  war 
felt  this  tedious,  and — as  they  thought — ^hopeless,  straggle 
against  what  their  fears  or  their  interests  taught  them  to  r^aid 
as  an  invincible  power,  most  insufferable :  they  demanded 
peace  on  any  terms  :  men  like  Yorke  and  Moore — and  Ihere 


OLD  ICAIDS.  1S7 

were  thoiuands  whom  the  war  placed  where  it  placed  them, 
ibuddering  on  the  verge  of  bankruptcy — ^insisted  on  peace 
with  the  energy  of  deaperation. 

They  held  meetings ;  they  made  speeches ;  they  got  up 
petitions  to  extort  this  boon :  on  what  terms  it  was  made  they 
cared  not. 

All  men,  taken  singly,  are  more  or  less  selfish  ;  and  taken 
in  bodies  they  are  intensely  so.     The  British  merchant  is  no 
exception  to  this  rule :   the  mercantile  classes  illustrate  it 
striloiigly.     These  classes  certainly  think  too  exclusively  of 
making  money :  they  are  too  oblivious  of  every  national  con- 
sideration but  that  of  extending  England's  (t.e.  their  own) 
commerce.      Chivalrous  feeling,   disinterestedness,   pride  in 
honour,  is  too  dead  in  their  hearts.     A  land  ruled  by  them 
alone  would  too  often  make  ignominious  submission — ^not  at 
all  from  the  motives  Christ  teaches,  but  rather  from  those 
Mammon  instils.     Dusing  the  late  war,  the  tradesmen  of 
England  would  have  endured  buffets  from  the  French  on  the 
ngbt  cheek  and  on  the  left ;  their  cloak  they  would  have  given 
to  Napoleon,  and  then  have  politely  offered  him  their  coat  also, 
nor  would  they  have  withheld  their  waistcoat  if  urged :  they 
would  have  prayed  permission  only  to  retain  their  one  other 
gannent,  for  the  sake  of  the  purse  in  its  pocket.     Not  one 
spark  of  spirit,  not  one  symptom  of  resistance  would  they 
bare  shown  till  the  hand  of  the  Corsican  bandit  had  grasped 
that  beloved  purse ;  then,  perhaps,  transfigured  at  once  into 
British  bull-dogs,  they  would  have  sprung  at  the  robber's 
throat,  and  there  they  would  have  fastened,  and  there  hung — 
inveterate,  insatiable,  till  the  treasure  had  been  restored. 
Tradesmen,  when  they  speak  against  war,  always  profess  to 
hate  it  because  it  is  a  bloody  and  barbarous  proceeding  :  you 
would  think,  to  hear  them  talk,  that  they  are  peculiarly  civi- 
lized—especially gentle  and  kindly  of  disposition  to  their 
fellow-men.   This  is  not  the  case.   Many  of  them  are  extremely 
narrow  and  cold-hearted,  have  no  good  feeling  for  any  class 
but  their  own,  are  distant — even  hostile  to  all  others ;  call 
^bem  useless ;  seem  to  question  their  right  to  exist ;  seem  to 
grudge  them  the  very  air  they  breathe,  and  to  think  the 
circumstance  of  their  eating,  drinking,  and  living  in  decent 
houses,  quite  imjustifiable.     They  do  not  know  what  others 
do  ia  the  way  of  helping,  pleaSing,  or  teaching^  their  race ; 
tbey  will  not  trouble  themselves  to  inqidre ;  whoever  is  not 
^  trade  is  accused  of  eating  the  bread  of  idleness,  of  passing 


186  SHKLET. 

A  useless  existence.     Long  may  it  be  ere  England  really 
becomes  a  nation  of  shopkeepers !  ' 

We  have  already  said  that  Moore  was  no  self-sacrificing 
patriot,  and  we  have  also  explained  what  circumstances  ren- 
dered him  specially  prone  to  confine  his  attention  and  efforts 
to  the  ftirtherance  of  his  individual  interest;  accordingly, 
when  he  felt  himself  urged  a  second  time  to  the  brink  of 
ruin,  none  struggled  harder  than  he  against  the  influences 
which  would  have  thrust  him  over.     What  he  cxmld  do  to- 
wards stirring  agitation  in  the  north  against  the  war,  he  did, 
and  he  instigated  others  whose  money  and  connections  gave 
them  more  power  than  he.  possessed.     Sometimes,  by  flashes, 
he  felt  there  was  little  reason  in  the  demands  Hs  party  made 
on  Grovemment :  when  he  heard  of  all  Europe  threatened  bj 
Bonaparte,  and  of  all  Europe  arming  to  resist  him  :  ti^hen  he 
saw  Eussia  menaced,  and  beheld  Kussia  rising,  incensed  and 
stem,  to  defend  her  frozen  soH,  her  wild  provinces  of  serfe, 
her  dark  native  despotism,  from  the  tread,  the  yoke,  the 
tyranny  of  a  foreign  victor,  he  knew  that  England,  a  free 
realm,  could  not  ilven  depute  her  sons  to  make  concessions 
and  propose  terms  to  the  unjust,  grasping  French  leader. 
When  news  came  from  time  to  time  of  the  movements  of  that 
HAN  then  representing  England  in  the  Fehinsula;    of  his 
advance  from  success  to  success — ^that  advance  so  deliberate 
but  so  Tmswerving,  so  circumspect  but  so  certain,  so  "  tmhast- 
ing"  but  so  "unresting;"  when  he  read  Lord  Wellington's 
own  despatches  in  the  columns  of  the  newspapers,  documents 
written  by  Modesty  to  the  dictation  of  Truth — ^Moore  con- 
fessed at  heart  that  a  power  was  with  the  troops  of  Britain, 
of  that  vigilant,  enduring,  genuine,  unostentatious  sort,  which 
must  win  victory  to  the  side  it  led,  in  the  end.     In  the  end ! 
but  that  end,  he  thought,  was  yet  far  off ;  and  meantime  he, 
Moore,  as  an  individual,  would  be  crushed,  his  hopes  ground 
to  dust :  it  was  himself  he  had  to  care  for,  his  hopes  he  had 
to  pursue,  and  he  would  fulfil  his  destiny. 

He  fulfilled  it  so  vigorously,  that  ere  long  he  came  to  a 
decisive  rupture  with  his  old  Tory  friend  the  Rector.  They 
quarrelled  at  a  public  meeting,  and  afterwards  exchanged 
some  pungent  letters  in  the  newspapers!  Mr  Helstone 
denounced  Moore  as  a  Jacobin,  ceased  to  see  him,  would  not 
even  speak  Jp  him  when  they  met :  he  intimated  also  to  his 
niece,  very  distinctly,  that  her  communications  with  Hollow's 
cottage  must  for  the  present  cease;  she  must  give  up  taking 


OLD  MAIDS.  189 

French  lessons.  The  language,  he  obseired,  was  a  bad  and 
frivolous  one  at  the  best,  and  most  of  the  works  it  boasted 
were  had  and  frivolous,  highly  injurious  in  their  tendency  to 
weak  female  minds.  He  wondered  (he  remarked  parentheti- 
cally) what  noodle  first  made  it  the  fashion  to  teach  women 
Trench :  nothing  was  more  improper  for  them ;  it  was  like 
feeding  a  rickety  child  on  chalk  and  water-gruel ;  Caroline 
must  give  it  up,  and  give  up  her  cousins  too :  they  were 
dangerous  people. 

Mr  Helstone  quite  expected  opposition  to  this  order :   he 
expected  tears.      Seldom  did  he  trouble  himself  about  Caro- 
line's movements,  but  a  vague  idea  possessed  him  that  she 
was  fond  of  going  to  Hollow's  cottage  :  also  he  suspected  that 
she  liked  Robert  Moore's  occasional  presence  at  the  Rectory. 
The  Cossack  Lad  perceived  that  whereas  if  Malone  stepped 
in  of  an  evening  to  make  himself  sociable  and  charming,  by 
pinching  the  ears  of  an  aged  black*  cat,  which  usually  shared 
•with  Miss  Helstone's  feet  the  accommodation  of  her  footstool, 
or  by  borrowing  a  fowlingpiece^  and  banging  away  at  a  tool- 
shed  door  in  the  garden  while  enough  of  daylight  remained 
to  show  that  conspicuous  mark — ^keeping  the  passage  and 
atting-room  doors  meantime  uncomfortably  open,  for  the  con- 
Tenience  of  running  in  and  out  to  announce  his  failures  and 
accesses  with  noisy  brusquerie — ^he  had  observed  that  under 
such  entertaining  circumstances,  Caroline  had  a  trick  of  disap- 
pearing, tripping  noiselessly  up-stairs,  and  remaining  invisible 
till  called  down  to  supper.     On  the  other  hand,  when  Robert 
Moore  was  the  guest,  though  he  elicited  no  vivacities  from 
the  cat,  did  nothing  to  it,  indeed,  beyond  occasionally  coaxing 
it  from  the  stool  to  his  knee,  and  there  letting  it  purr,  climb 
to  Ms  shoulder  and  rub  its  head  against  his  cheek ;  though 
liere  was  no  ear-splitting  cracking  off  of  firearms,  no  diffusion 
of  sulphurous  gunpowder  perfume,  no  noise,  no  boasting  during 
his  stay,  that  still  Caroline  sat  in  the  room,  and  seemed  to 
find  wondrous  content  in  the  stitching  of  Jew-basket  pin- 
wwhionfi,  and  the  knitting  of  Missionary-basket  socks. 

She  was  very  quiet,  and  Roberl  paid  her  little  attention, 
scarcely  ever  addressing  his  discourse  to  her ;  but  Mr  Helstone, 
not  being  one  of  those  elderly  gentlemen  who  are  easily  blinded, 
^  the  contrary,  finding  himself  on  all  occasions  extremely 
^^awake,  had  watched  them  when  they  bade  each  other 
good-night:  he  had  just  seen  their  eyes  meet  once— only  once. 
Some  natures  would  have  taken  pleasure  in  the  glance  then 


140  SHIBLET. 

surprised,  because  there  was  no  harm  and  some  delight  in  it 
It  was  hj  no  means  a  glance  of  mutual  intelligence,  for  mutual 
love-secrets  existed  not  between  them :  there  was  nothing  then 
of  craft  and  concealment  to  offend;  only  Mr  Moore's  eyes, 
looking  into  Caroline's,  felt  they  were  clear  and  gentle,  and 
Caroline's  eyes  encountering  Mr  Moore's  confessed  they  were 
-manly  and  searching :  each  acknowledged  the  charm  in  his  or 
her  own  way.  Moore  smiled  slightly,  and  Caroline  coloured 
as  slightly.  Mr  Helstone  could,  on  the  spot,  have  rated  them 
both  :  they  annoyed  him  ;  why  ? — impossible  to  say.  If  you 
had  asked  him  what  Moore  merited  at  that  moment,  he  would 
have  said  "  a  horsewhip  ; "  if  you  had  inquired  into  Caroline's 
deserts,  he  would  have  adjudged  her  a  box  on  the  ear ;  if  you 
had  further  demanded  the  reason  of  such  chastisements,  he 
would  have  stormed  against  flirtation  and  love-making,  and 
vowed  he  would  have  no  such  folly  going. on  under  his  roof. 

These  private.considerations,  combined  with  political  reasons, 
fixed  his  resolution  of  separating  the  cousins.  He  announced 
his  will  to  Caroline  one  evening,  as  she  was  sitting  at  work 
near  the  drawing-room  window  :  her  face  was  tum^  towards 
him,  and  the  light  fell  full  upon  it.  It  had  struck  him  a  few 
minutes  before  that  she  was  looking  paler  and  quieter  than  she 
used  to  look ;  it  had  not  escaped  him  either  that  Bobert 
Moore's  name  had  never,  for  some  three  weeks  past,  dropped 
from  her  lips ;  nor  during  the  same  space  of  time  had  that 
personage  made  his  appearance  at  the  Rectory.  Some  sus- 
picion of  clandestine  meetings  haunted  his  mind  ;  having  but 
an  indifferent  opinion  of  women,  he  always  suspected  them  .* 
he  thought  they  needed  constant  watching.  It  was  in  a  tone 
drily  significant  he-  desired  her  tp  cease  her  daily  visits  to  the 
Hollow ;  he  expected  .a  start,  a  look  of  deprecation  :  the  start 
he  saw,  but  it  was  a  very  slight  one  ;  no  look  whatever  was 
directed  to  him. 

"  Do  you  hear  me  ?"  he  asked. 

"  Yes,  uncle." 

"  Of  course,  you  mean  to  attend  to  what  I  say." 

"  Yes,  certainly." 

"  And  there  must  be  no  letter-scribbling  to  your  couBin 
Hortense  :  no  intercourse  whatever.  I  do  not  approve  of  the 
principles  of  the  family ;  they  are  Jacobinical." 

"  Very  well,"  said  Caroline  quietly.  She  acquiesced  then: 
there  was  no  vexed  flushing  of  the  face,  no  gafiiering  tears : 
the  shadowy  thoughtfulnesp  which  had  covered  bey  feaJfcure? 


OLD  MAti>S.  141 

ere   Mr  Helstone  spoke    remained  undisturbed :    slie  was 
obedient. 

Yea,  perfectly  ;  because  the  mandate  coincided  with  her  own 
previous  judgment ;  because  it  was  no^  become  pain  to  her  to 
go  to  Hollow's  cottage  ;  nothing  met  her  there  but  disappoint- 
ment: hope  and  love  had  quitted  that  little  tenement,  for 
Ro]>ert  seemed  to  have  deseited  its  precincts.  Whenever  she 
asked  after  him — ^which  she  very  seldom  did,  since  the  mere 
utterance  of  his  name  made  her  face  grow  hot — ^the  answer 
wax,  he  was  from  home,  or  he  was  quite  taken  up  with  'busi- 
ness :  Hortense  feared  he  was  killing  himself  by  application  : 
he  scarcelj  ever  took  a  meal  in  the  house  ;  he  lived  in  the 
counting-house. 

At  church  only  Caroline  had  the  chance  of  seeing  him,  and 
there  she  rarely  looked  at  him  :  it  was  both  too  much  pain  and 
too  much  pleasure  to  look :  it  excited  too  much  emotion ;  and 
that  it  was  all  wasted  emotion,  she  had  learned  well  to  com- 
prehend. 

Once,  on  a  dark,  wet  Sunday,  when  there  were  few  people 
al  church,  and  when  especially  certain  ladies  were  absent,  of 
whose  observant  faculties  and  tomahawk  tongues  Caroline 
itood  in  awe,  she  had  allowed  her  eye  to  seek  Eobert's  pew, 
and  to  rest  a  while  on  its  occupant.  He  was  there  alone: 
iloTtense  had  been  kept  at  home  by  prudent  considerations 
relative  to  the  rain  and  a  new  spring  "  chapeau."  During  the 
sermon,  he  sat  with  folded  arms  and  eyes  cast  down,  looking 
▼ery  sad  and  abstracted.  When  depressed,  the  very  hue  of 
his  face  seemed  more  dusk  than  when  he  smiled,  and  to-day 
cheek  and  forehead  wore  their  most  tintless  and  sober  olive. 
By  instinct  Caroline  knew,  as  she  examined  that  clouded 
countenance,  that  his  thoughts  were  running  in  no  familiar  or 
kindly  channel ;  that  they  were  far  away,  not  merely  from  her, 
hut  from  all  which  she  could  comprehend,  or  in  which  she  could 
sympathize.  Nothing  that  they  had  ever  talked  of  together 
was  now  in  his  mind:  he  was  wrapt  from  her  by  interests  and 
itsponsibilities  in  which  it  was  deemed  such  as  she  could  have 
no  part 

Caroline  meditated  in  her  own  way  on  the  subject;  specu- 
lated on  his  feelings,  on  his  life,  on  his  fears,  on  his  fate ;  mused 
over  the  mystery  of"  business,"  tried  to  comprehend  more  about 
it  than  had  ever  been  told  her — to  understand  its  perplexities, 
habilities,  duties,  exactions ;  endeavoured  to  realize  the  state 
of  mind  of  a  "man  of  business,"  to  enter  into  it,  feel  what  he 


142 


SHIRLEY. 


^ould  feei,  aspire  to  what  he  wotJd  aspire.  Her  earnest  wish 
was  to  see  things  as  they  were,  and  not  to  be  romantic.  Bj  dint 
of  effort  she  contrived  to  get  a  glimpse  of  the  light  of  trath  here 
and  there,  and  hoped  that  scant  ray  might  suffice  to  guide  her. 

"Different,  indeed,"  she  concluded,  "is  Robert's  mental 
condition  to  mine:  I  think  only  of  him;  he  has  no  roona,  no 
leisure  to  think  of  me.  The  feeling  called  love  is  and  Has  been 
for  two  years  the  predominant  emotion  of  my  heart ;  always 
there,  always  awake,  always  astir:  quite  other  feelings  absorb 
his  reflections,  and  govern  his  faculties.  He  is  rising  now, 
going  to  leave  the  church,  for  service  is  over.  Will  he  turn 
his  head  towards  this  pew  ? — ^no — ^not  once — he  has  not  one 
look  for  me:  that  is  hard:  a  kind  glance  would  have  made  me 
happy  till  to-morrow;  I  have  not  got  it;  he  would  not  ^ve  it; 
he  is  gone.  Strange  that  grief  should  now  almost  choke  me, 
because  another  human  being's  eye  has  failed  to  greet  mine.'* 
"  That  Sunday  evening,  Mr  Malone  coming,  as  usual,  to  pass 
it  with  his  Rector,  Caroline  withdrew  after  tea  to  her  chamber. 
Fanny,  knowing  her  habits,  had  lit  her  a  cheerful  little  fire,  as 
the  weather  was  so  gusty  and  dull.  Closeted  there,  silent  and 
solitary,  what  could  she  do  but  think  ?  She  noiselessly  paced 
to  and  fro  the  carpeted  floor;  her  head  drooped,  her  bands 
folded:  it  was  irksome  to  sit:  the  current  of  reflection  ran 
rapidly  through  her  mind :  to-night  she  was  mutely  excited. 

Mute  was  the  room, — ^mute  the  house.  The  double-door  of 
the  study  muffled  the  voices  of  the  gentlemen:  the  servants 
were  quiet  in  the  kitchen,  engaged  with  books  their  yoimg 
mistress  had  lent  them ;  books  which  she  had  told  them  were 
"  fit  for  Simday  reading."  And  she  herself  had  another  of  the 
,  same  sort  open  on  the  table,  but  she  could  not  read  it:  its  theo- 
logy was  incomprehensible  to  her,  and  her  own  nund  was  too 
busy,  teeming,  wandering,  to  listen  to  the  language  of  another 
mind. 

'Then,  too,  her  imagination  was  full  of  pictures:  images  of 
Moore;  scenes  where  he  and  she  had  been  together;  winter 
fireside  sketches ;  a  glowing  landscape  of  a  hot  sunmier  after- 
noon passed  with  him  in  the  bosom  of  Nunnely  wood:  divine 
vignettes  of  mild  spring  or  mellow  autumn  moments,  when 
she  had  sat  at  his  side  in  Hollow's  copse,  listening  to  the  call 
of  the  May  cuckoo,  or  sharing  the  September  treasure  of  nuts 
and  ripe  blackberries — a.  vdld  dessert  which  it  was  hex  morn- 
ing's pleasure  to  collect  in  a  little  basket,  and  cover  with  green 
leaves  and  fresh  blossoms,  and  her  aftemoon^s  delight  to  ad« 


OLD  MAIDS.  14S 

minister  to  Moore,  berry  by  berry,  and  nut  by  nut,  like  a  bird 
feeding  its  fledgling. 

Robert's  features  and  form  were  with  her  ;  the  sound  of  his 
Toice  was  quite  distinct  in  her  ear ;  his  few  caresses  seemed 
renewed.  But  these  joys  being  hollow,  were,  erelong,  crushed 
in:  the  pictures  faded,  the  voice  failed,  the  visionary  clasp 
melted  chill  from  her  hand,  and  where  the  warm  seal  of 
lips  had  made '  impress  on  her  forehead,  it  felt  now  as  if  a 
deety  rain  drop  had  fallen.  She  returned  from  an  enchanted 
region  to  the  real  world  :  for  Nimnely  wood  in  June,  she  saw 
her  narrow  chamber ;  for  the  songs  of  birds  in  aUeysi  she 
heard  the  rain  on  her  casement ;  for  the  sigh  of  the  south 
wind,  came  the  sob  of  the  moumiul  east ;  and  for  Moore's 
manly  companionship,  she  hald  the  thin  illusion  of  her  own 
dim  shadow  on  the  wall.  Tfciming  from  the  pale  phantom 
which  reflected  herself  in  its  outline,  and  her  reverie  in  the 
drooped  attitude  of  its  dim  head  and  colourless  tresses,  she 
Mt  do\m — ^inaction  would  suit  the  frame  of  mind  into  which 
she  was  now  declining — she  said  to  herself: — 

"  I  have  to  live,  perhaps,  till  seventy  years.  As  far  as  I 
know,  I  have  good  health  :  half  a  centuiy  of  existence  may 
lie  before  me.  How  am  I  to  oecupy  it  ?  What  am  I  to  do 
to  fill  the  interval  of  time  which  spreads  between  me  and  the 
grave?" 
She  reflected. 

"  I  shall  not  be  married,  it  appears,"  she  continued.  "  I 
suppose,  as  Robert  does  not  care  for  me,  I  shall  never  have  a 
husband  to  love,  nor  little  children  to  take  care  of.  Till 
lately  I  had  reckoned  securely  on  the  duties  and  affections  of 
wife  and  mother  to  occupy  my  existence.  I  considered, 
wmehow,  as  a  matter  of  course,  that  I  was  growing  up  to  the 
ordinary  destiny,  and  never  troubled  myself  to  seek  any 
other;  but  now,  I  perceive  plainly,  I  may  have  been  mis- 
taken. Probably  I  shall  be  an  old  maid.  I  shall  live  to  see 
Robert  married  to  some  one  else,  some  rich  lady:  I  shall 
never  marry.  What  was  I  created  for,  I  wonder  ?  Where  is 
mv  phice  in  the  world  ?" 
She  mused  again. 

"  Ah  I  I  see,"  she  pursued  presently ;  "  that  is  the  question 
which  most  old  maids  are  puzzled  to  solve :  other  people 
wive  it  for  them  by  sajring,  *  Your  place  is  to  do  good  to 
pAcrs,  to  be  helpful  whenever  help  is  wanted.'  That  is  right 
in  Bome  measure,  and  a  very  convenient  doctrine  for  the  people 


144  SHIRLETi 

who  hold  it ;  but  I  petoeive  that  certain  6ct8  of  humaa  beings 
are  very  apt  to  maintain  that  other  sets  should  give  up  their 
lives  to  them  and  their  service,  and  then  thej  requite  them 
bj  praise:  thej  call  them  devoted  and  virtuous.  Is  this 
enough  ?  Is  it  to  live  ?  Is  there  not  a  terrible  hoUowness, 
mockery,  want,  craving,  in  that  existence  which  is  given  away 
to  others,  for  want  of  something  of  your  own  to  bestow  it  on  ? 
I  suspect  there  is.  Does  virtue  lie  in  abnegation  of  self?  I 
do  not  believe  it.  Undue  humility  makes  tyranny  ;  weak 
concession  creates  selfishness.  The  Romish  religion  especially 
teaches  renunciation  of  self,  submission  to  others,  and  nowhere 
are  foimd  so  many  grasping  t3rrants  as  in  the  ranks  of  the 
Eomish  priesthood.  Each  human  being  has  his  share  of  rights. 
I  suspect  it  would  conduce  to  the  happiness  and  welfare  of  all, 
if  each  knew  his  allotment,  and  held  to  it  as  tenaciously  as  the 
maxtjT  to  his  creed.  Queer  thoughts  these,  that  surge  in  my 
mind  :-  are  they  right  thoughts  ?    I  am  not  certain. 

"  Well,  life  is  short  at  Sie  best :  seventy  years,  they  say, 
pass  like  a  vapour,  like  a  dream  when  one  awaketh;  and 
every  path  trod  by  hiunan  feet  ter&iinates  in  one  bourne — 
the  grave :  the  little  chink  in  the  surface  of  this  great  globe 
— ^the  furrow  where  the  mighty  husbandman  with  the  scythe 
deposits  the  seed  he  has  shaken  from  the  ripe  stem ;  and 
there  it  falls,  ddbays,  and  thence  it  springs  again,  when  the 
world  has  rolled  round  a  few  times  more.  So  much  for  the 
body :  the  soul  meaiitime  wings  its  long  flight  upward ,  folds 
its  wings  on  the  brink  of  the  sea  of  Are  and  glass,  and  gazing 
down  through  the  burning  clearness,  finds  there  mirrored  the 
vision  of  Qie  Christian's  triple  Godhead :  the  Sovereign 
Father;  the  Mediating  Son;  the  Creator  Spirit.  Such  words, 
at  least,  have  been  chosen  to  express  what  is  inexpressible: 
to  describe  what  baffles  description.  The  soul's  real  here- 
afler,  who  shall  guess  ?" 

Her  fire  was  decayed  to  its  last  cinder ;  Malone  had  de- 
parted ;  and  now  the  study  bell  rang  for  prayers. 

The  next  day  Caroline  had  to  spend  altogether  alone,  her 
uncle  being  gone  to  dine  with  his  friend  Dr  Boultby,  vicar  of 
Whinbury.  The  whole  time  she  was  talking  inwardly  in  the 
same  strain :  looking  forwards,  asking  what  she  was  to  do 
with  life.  Fanny,  as  she  passed  in  and  out  of  the  room  occa- 
sionally, intent  on  housemaid  errands,  perceived  that  her 
young  mistress  sat  very  still.  She  was  always  in  the  same 
place,  always  bent  industriously  over  a  piece  of  work:  she  did 


OLD  MAIM.  145 

not  lift  her  liead  to  speak  to  Fanny,  as  her  custom  was;  and 
when  the  latter  remarked  that  the  day  was  fine,  and  she  ought 
to  take  a  walk,  she  only  said — ''  Ili  is  cold." 

"You  are  very  diligent  at  that  sewing,  Miss  Caroline,** 
continued  the  girl,  approaching  her  little  table. 

"  I  am  tired  of  it,  Fanny." 

"  Then  why  do  you  go  on  with  it  ?  Put  it  down:  read,  or 
do  something  to  amuse  you." 

"It  is  solitary  in  this^house,  Fanny:  don't  you  think  so  ? " 

"  I  don't  find  it  so,  miss.  Me  and  Eliza  are  company  for 
one  another;  but  you  are  quite  too  still — ^you  should  visit 
more.  Now,  be  persuaded;  go  up-stairs  and  dress  yourself 
smart,  and  go  and  take  tea,  in  a  friendly  way,  with  Miss  Mann 
or  Miss  Ainley:  I  am  certain  either  of  those  ladies  would  be 
delighted  to  see  you." 

*<But  their  houses  are  dismal:  they  are  both  old  maids.  I 
am  certain  old  maids  are  a  very  unhappy  race." 

"Not  they,  miss:  they  can't  be  unhappy;  they  take  such 
care  of  themselves.     They  are  all  selfish." 

"Miss  Ainley  is  not  selfish,  Fanny:  she  is  always  doing 
good.  How  devotedly  kind  she  was  to  her  stepmother,  as  long 
as  the  old  lady  lived;  and  now  when  she  is  quite  alone  in  the 
world,  without  brother  or  sister,  or  any  one  to  care  for  her, 
how  diaritable  she  is  to  the  poor,  as  far  as  her  means  per- 
mit! Still  nobody  thinks  much  of  her,  or  has  pleasure  in  going 
to  see  her:  and  how  gentlemen  always  sneer  at  her  I  " 

"  They  shouldn't,  miss ;  I  believe  she  is  a  good  woman : 
hat  gentleihen  think  only  of  ladies'  looks." 

"  1 11  go  and  see  her,"  exclaimed  Caroline,  starting  up :  "  and 
if  the  asks  me  to  stay  to  tea,  I  '11  stay.  How  wrong  it  is  to 
D€glect  people  because  they  are  not  pretty,  and  young,  and 
meny  I  And  I  will  certainly  call  to  see  Miss  Mann,  too: 
she  may  not  be  amiable;  but  what  has  made  her  unamiable? 
What  has  life  been  to  her  ?" 

Fanny  helped  Miss  Helstope  tq  put  away  her  work,  and 
afterwards  assisted  her  to  dress. 

"  TouH  not  be  an  old  maid.  Miss  Caroline,"  she  said,  as 
she  tied  the  sash  of  her  brown-silk  frock,  having  previously 
smoothed  her  soft,  full,  and  shining  curls ;  ^^  there  are  no  signs 
i^an  old  maid  about  you."  '  •    * 

Caroline  looked  at  the  little  mirror  before  her,  and  she 
thought  there  were  some  signs.  She  could  see  that  she  was 
aitmd  within  the  last  month ;  that  the  hues  of  her  complexion 

10 


i4€  SHIRLET. 

.were  paler,  her  eyes  changed — a  wan  shade  seemed  to'  dide 
them,  her  countenance  was  dejected:  she  was  not,  in  ^ort,  so 
pretty  or  so  fresh  as  she  used  to  be.  She  distantly  hinted  this 
lo  Fanny,  from  whom  she  got  no  direct  answer,  only  a  remark 
that  people  did  vary  in  their  looks ;  but  that  at  her  age  a  httle 
falling  away  signified  nothing,-^— she  would  soon  come  round 
again,  and  be  plumper  and  rosier  than  ever.  Having  giyeQ 
this  assurance,  Fanny  showed  singular  zeal  in  wrapping  her 
lip  in  warm  shawls  and  handkerchiefs,  till  Caroline,  nearly 
smothered  with  the  weight,  was  fain  to  resist  fother  additions. 

She  paid  her  visits:  first  to  Miss  Mann,  for  this  was  the 
most  difi^cult  point:  Misa  Mann  was  certainly  not  quite  a 
lovable  person.  Till  now,  Caroline  had  always  imheaitatinglj 
declared  she  disliked  her,  and  more  than  once  she  had  joined  her 
cousin  Bobert  in  laughing  at  some  of  her  peculiarities.  Moore 
was  not  habitually  given  to  sarcasm,  especially  on  anything 
humbler  or  weaker  than  himself ;  but  he  had  onoe  or  twice 
happened  to  be*in  the  room  when  Miss  Mann  had  made  a  call 
on  his  sister,  and  after  listening  to  her  conversation  and  viewing 
her  features  for  a  time,  he  had  gone  out  into  the  garden  where 
}ua  little  cousin  was  tending  some  of  his  favourite  flowers,  and 
while  standing  near  and  watching  her,  he  had  amused  himself 
with.comparinff  fair  youth — delicate  and  attractive — ^with 
8hriYeUed  eld,  livid  and  loveless,  and  in  jestingly  repeating  to 
a  smiling  girl  the  vinegar  discourse  of  a  cankered  old  maid. 
Once  on  such  an  occasion,  Caroline  had  said  to  him,  looking  up 
ftom  the  luxuriant  creeper  she  was  binding  to  its  frame,— 

"  Ah  I  Robert,  you  do  not  like  old  maids.  I,  too,  should  come 
under  the  lash  of  your  sarcasm,  if  .1  were  an  old  maid.^* 

^'*You  an  old  maid  I "  he  had  replied.  ''  A  piquant  notion 
suggested  by  lips  of  that  tint  and  form.  I  can  fancy  yon, 
though,  at  forty,  quietly  dressed,  pale  and  sunk,  but  stil)  with 
that  straight  nose,  white  forehead,  and  those  soft  eyes.  I  sup* 
pose,  too,  you  will  keep  your  voice,  which  has  another  *  timbre ' 
than  that  hard,  deep  organ  of  Miss  Mann's.  Courage,  Gary  t 
^-^ven  at  fifty  you  will  not  be  repulsive." 

''  Miss'Mann  did  not  make  herself,  or  tune  her  voice,  Bobert.** 

''  Nature  made  her  in  the  mood  in  which  she  makes  her 
briar^  and  thorns ;  whereas  for  the  creation  of  some  women, 
she  reserves  the  May  morning  hours,  when  with  light  and  dew 
she  woos  the  primrose  from  the  turf,  and  the  lily  from  the 
wood-moss.'* 


OLD  KAIBS.  147 

Ushered  into  Miss  Mann's  little  parlour,  Caroline  found  her, 
as  she  always  found  her,  surrounded  by  perfect  neatness,  clean- 
liness, and  comfort ;  (after  all,  is  it  not  a  virtue  in  old  maids 
that  solitude  rarely  makes  them  negligent  or  disorderly  ?)  no 
dust  on  her  polished  furniture,  none  on  her  carpet,  fresh 
flowers  in  the  vase  on  her  table,  a  bright  fire  in  the  grate. 
She  herself  sat  primly  and  somewhat  grimly-tidy  in  a  cushioned 
rocldng-chair,  her  hands  busied  with  some  knitting:  this  was 
her  favourite  work,  as  it  required  the  least  exertion.  '  She 
scarcely  rose  as  Caroline  entered ;  to  avoid  excitement  was  one 
of  Miss  Mann's  aims  in  life :  she  had  been  composing  herself 
ever  since  she  came  down  in  the  morning,  and  had  just 
attained  a  certain  lethargic  state  of  tranquillity  when  the 
visitor's  knock  at  the  door  startled  her,  and  undid  her  day's 
work.  She  was  scarcely  pleased,  therefore,  to  see  Miss  Hel- 
Btone:  she  received  her  with  reserve,  bade  her  be  seated  with 
austerity,  and  when  she  got  her  placed  opposite,  she  fixed  her 
with  her  eye. 

This  was  no  ordinary  doom — ^to  be  fixed  with  Miss  Mann's 
eye.  Robert  Moore  had  imdergone  it  once,  and  had  never 
forgotten  the  circumstance. 

He  considered  it  quite  equal  to  anything  Medusa  could  do: 
he  professed  to  doubt  whether,  since  that  infliction,  his  flesh 
had  been  quite  .what  it  was  before — ^whether  there  was  mt 
something  stony  in  its  texture.  The  gaze  had  had  such  an 
eflfect  on  him  as  to  drive  him  promptly  from  the  apartment 
and  house;  it  had  even  sent  him  straightway  up  to  the  Rec- 
tory, where  he  had  appeared  in  Caroline's  presence  with  a  very 
queer  face,  and  amazed  her  by  demanding  a  cousinly  salute 
on  the  spot,  to  rectify  a  damage  that  had  been  done  hiin. 

Certainly  Miss  Mann  had  a  formidable  eye  for  one  of  the 
softer  sex:  it  was  prominent,  and  showed  a  great  deal  of  the 
white,  and  looked  as  steadily,  as  unwinkingly,  at  you  as  if  it 
were  a  steel  ball  soldered  in  her  head ;  and  when,  while  look- 
ing, she  &gan  to  talk  in  an  indescribably  dry  monotonous 
tone — a  tone  without  vibration  or  inflection — ^you  felt  as  if  a 
graven  image  of  some  bad  spirit  were  addressing  you-  But 
it  was  all  a  figment  of  fancy,  a  matter  of  stuface.  JM^ss  Mann's 
goblin-grimness  scarcely  went  deeper  than  the  angel-sweetness 
of  hundreds  of  beauties.  She  was  a  perfectly  honest,  con- 
scientious woman,  who  had  performed  duties  in  her  day  from 
whose  severe  anguish  many  a  human  Peri,  gazelle-eyed,  silken- 
ttuaedi  and  silver-tongued,  would  have  shrunk  appalled:  she 
I 

1 


148  smuLET. 

had  passed  alone  through  prdtracted  scenes  of  suffenng,  excN 
cised  rigid  self-denial,  made  large  sacrifices  of  time,  moneyi 
health,  for  those  who  had  repaid  her  only  by  ingratitude,  and 
now  her  main — almost  her  sole— rfault  was,  that  she  was 
censorious. 

Censorious  she  certainly  was.  Caroline  had  not  sat  five 
minutes  ere  her  hostess,  still  keeping  her  under  the  spell  of 
that  dread  and  Gorgon  gaze,  began  flaying  alive  certain  of  the 
families  in  the  neighbourhood.  She  went  to  work  at  this 
business  in  a  singularly  cool,  deliberate  manner,  like  some 
surgeon  practising  with  his  scalpel  on  a  lifeless  subject:  she 
made  few  distinctions;  she  allowed  scarcely  any  one  to  be 
good;  she  dissected  impartially  almost  all  her  acquaintance. 
If  her  auditress  ventured  now  and  then  to  put  in  a  palliative 
word,  she  set  it  aside  with  a  certain  disdain.  Still,  though 
thus  pitiless  in  moral  anatomy,  she  was  no  scandal-monger: 
she  never  disseminated  really  malignant  or  dangerous  reports: 
it  was  not  her  heart  so  much  as  her  temper  that  was  wrong. 

Caroline  made  this  discovery  for  the  first  time  to-day;  and^ 
moved  thereby  to  regret  divers  unjust  judgments  she  had 
more  than  once  passed  on  the  crabbed  old  maid,  she  began  to 
talk  to  her  softly,  not  in  sympathizing  words,  but  with  a  sym- 
pathizing voice.  The  loneliness  of  her  condition  struck  her 
visitor  in  a  new  light ;  as  did  also  the  character  of  her  ugliness 
. — SL  bloodless  pallor  of  complexion,  and  deeply  worn  Imes  of 
feature.  The  girl  pitied  the  solitaty  and  afflicted  woman;  her 
looks  told  what  she  felt:  a  sweet  countenance  is  never  so  sweeJ 
as  when  the  moved  heart  animates  it  with  compassionate  ten- 
derness. Miss  Mann,  seeing  such  a  countenance  raised  to  her, 
was  touched  in  her  titrn :  she  acknowledged  her  sense  of  the 
interest  thus  unexpectedly  shown  in  her,  who  usually  met 
with  only  coldness  and  ridicule,  by  replying  to  her  candidly. 
Commvmicative  on  her  own  afiairs  she  usually  was  not,  be- 
cause no  one  cared  to  listen  to  her ;  but  to-day  she  became  80, 
and  her  confidant  shed  tears  as  she  heard  her  speak :  for  she 
told  of  cruel,  slow-wasting,  obstinate  sufferings.  Well  might 
she  be  corpse-like;  well  might  she  look  grim,  and  never 
smile ;  well  might  she  wish  to  avoid  excitement,  to  gain  and 
retain  composure  1  Caroline,  when  she  knew  all,  acknow- 
ledged that  Miss  Mann  was  rather  to  be  admired  for  fortitude 
thali  blamed  for  moroseness.  Eeader!  when  you  behold  an 
aspect  for  whose  constant  gloom  and  frown  you  cannot  account, 
whose  unvarying  cloud  exasperates  you  by  its  apparent  caufle- 


OLD  MAIDS.   •  149 

tennesa,  be  sure  that  there  is  a  canker  somewhere,  and  a  canker 
not  tihe  less  deeply  corroding  because  concealed. 

Miss  Mann  felt  that  she  was  understood  partly,  and  wished 
to  be  understood  ftirther  ;  for  however  old,  plain,  humble,  deso- 
late, afflicted  we  may  be,  so  long  as  our  hearts  preserve  the 
feeblest  spark  of  life,  they  preserve  also,  shivering  near  that  pale 
ember,  a  starved,  ghostly  longing  for  appreciation  and  affection. 
To  this  extenuated  spectre,  perhaps,  a  crumb  is  not  thrown  once 
a  year ;  but  when  ahungered  and  athirst  to  famine — ^when  all 
Inimanity  has  forgotten  the  dying  tenant  of  a  decaying  house- 
Dime  Mercy  remembers  the  mourner,  and  a  shower  of  manna 
Ms  for  lips  that  earthly  nutriment  is  to  pass  no  more.  Biblical 
promises, heard  first  in  health,  but  then  unheeded,  come  whisper^ 
ing  to  the  couch  of  sickness :  it  is  felt  that  a  pitying  God  watches 
irhat  all  mankind  have  forsaken ;  the  tender  compassion  of  Jesus 
is  recalled  and  relied  on :  the  faded  eye,  gazing  beyond  Time, 
sees  a  Home,  a  Friend,  a  Refiige  in  Eternity. 

Miss  Mann,  drawn  on  by  the  still  attention  of  her  listener, 
proceeded  to  allude  to  circumstances  in  her  past'  life.  She  spoke 
like  one  who  tells  the  truth — simply,  and  with  a  certain  reserve : 
die  did  not  boast,  nor  did  she  exaggerate.  Caroline  found  that 
the  old  maid  had  been  a  most  devoted  daughter  and  sister,  an 
imwearied  watcher  by  lingering  deathbeds ;  that  to  prolonged 
and  tmrelaxing  attendance  on  the  sick,  the  malady  that  now 
poisoned  her  own  life  owed  its  origin ;  that  to  one  wretched 
relative  she  had  been  a  support  and  succour  in  the  depths  of 
self-earned  degradation,  and  that  it  was  still  her  hand  which 
kept  him  from  utter  destitution.  Miss  Helstone  stayed  the 
whole  evening,  omitting  to  pay  her  other  intended  visit ;  and 
wheashe  left  Miss  Mann,  it  was  with  the  determination  to  try 
in  future  to  excuse  her  faults,  never  again  to  make  light  of  her 
pwjliarities  or  to  laugh  at  her  plainness  ;  and,  above  all  things, 
not  to  neglect  her,  but  to  come  once  a  week,  and  to  offer  her, 
^m  one  human  heart  at  least,  the  homage  of  affection  and 
'aspect:  she  felt  she  could  now  sincerely  gi^  her  a  small 
tribute  of  each  feeling. 

Cait)line,  on  her  return,  told  Fanny  she  was  very  glad  she 
had  gone  out,  as  she  felt  much  better  for  the  visit.  The  next 
^7  she  failed  not  to  seek  Miss  Ainley.  This  lady  was  in 
'^siTower  circumstances  than  Miss  Mann,  and  her  dwelling  was 
QJore  homble :  it  was,  however,  if  possible,  yet  more  exquisitely 
J^*an ;  though  the  decayed  ^gentlewoman  could  not  afford  to 
***P  ft  fler?ant,  but  waited  .on  herself,   and  had  only  the 


150  SHIRLET. 

occasional  assistance  of  a  little  girl  wbo  lived  in  a  cottage 
near. 

Not  only  was  Miss  Ainley  poorer,  but  she  was  even  plainer 
than  the  other  old  maid.  In  her  first  youth  she  must  have  been 
ugly ;  now,  at  the  age  of  fifty,  she  was  v&ry  ugly.  At  first  sight, 
all  but  peculiarly  well-discipHned  minds  were  apt  to  turn  fit)m 
her  with  annoyance:  to  cbnceive  against  her  a  prejudice,  simplj 
on  the  ground  of  her  omattractive  look.  Then  she  Was  prim  in 
dress  and  manner:  she  looked,  spoke,  and  moved  the  complete 
old  maid. 

Her  welcome  to  Caroline  was  formal,  even  in  its  kindness— 
for  it  was  kind ;  but  Miss  Helstone  excused  this.  She  knew 
something  of  the  benevolence  of  the  heart  which  beat  under 
that  starched  kerchief ;  all  the  neighbourhood — ^at  least  all  the 
female  neighbourhood — ^knew  something  of  it :  no  one  spoke 
against  Miss  Ainley  except  lively  young  gentlemen,  and  incon- 
siderate old  ones,  who  declared  her  hideous. 

Caroline  was  soon  at  home  in  that  tiny  parlour;  a  kind  hand 
took  from  her  her  shawl  and  bonnet,  and  installed  her  in  the 
most  comfortable  seat  near  the  fire.  The  young  and  the  anti- 
quated woman  were  presently  deep  in  kindly  conversation,  and 
soon  Caroline  became  aware  of  the  power  a  most  serene,  unsel- 
fish, and  benignant  mind  could  exercise  over  those  to  whom  it 
was  developed.  She  talked  never  of  herself-^always  of  others. 
Their  faults  she  passed  over;  her  theme  was  their  wants,  which 
she  sought  to  supply ;  their  sufferings,  which  she  longed  to 
alleviate.  She  was  religious — a  professor  of  religion — ^what 
some  would  call  "  a  saint,"  and  she  referred  to  religion  often 
in  sanctioned  phrase — ^in  phrase  which  those  who  possess  a  per- 
ception of  the  ridiculous,  without  owning  the  power  of  exactly 
testing  and  truly  judging  character,  would  certainly  have 
esteemed  a  proper  subject  for  satire — a  matter  for  mimicry 
and  laughter.  They  would  have  been  hugely  mistaken  for 
their  pains.  Sincerity  is  never  ludicrous;  it  is  always  respect- 
able. Whether  truth — ^be  it  religious  or  moral  truth — speak 
eloquently  and  in  well-chosen  language  or  not,  its  voice  should 
be  heard  with  reverence.  Let  those  who  cannot  nicely,  and 
with  certainty,  discern  the  difference  between  the  tones  of 
hypocrisy  and  those  of  sincerity,  never  presume  to  laugh  at  all, 
lest  they  should  have  the  miserable  misfortune  to  laugh  in 
the  wrong  place,  and  commit  impiety  when  they  think  they  ar<» 
achieving  wit. 

Not  from  Miss  Ainley's  own  lips  did  Caroline  hear  of  her 


((LD  MAIDS.  ^i^i 

good  works ;  but  she  knew  much  of  them  nevertheless!  her 
beneficence  was  the  familiar  topic  of  the  poor  in  Briarfiel<L 
They  were  not  works  of  almsgiving:  the  old  msdd  was  too 
poor  to  give  much,  though  she  straitened  herself  to  privation 
that  she  might  contribute  her  mite  when  needful :  ^ey  were 
the  works  of  a  Sister  of  Charity,  far  more  difficult  tcf  perform 
than  those  of  a  Lady  Bountil^.  She  would  watch  by  any 
sick-bed :  she  seemed  to  fear  no  disease ;  she  would  nurse  the 
poorest  whom  none  else  would  nurse:  she  was  serene, humble, 
kind,  and  equable  through  everjihing. 

Eor  this  goodness  she  got  but  little  reward  in  this  Hfe. 
Many  of  the  poor  became  so  accustomed  to  her  services  that 
they  hardly  thanked  her  for  them:  the  rich  heard  them  misn* 
tioned  with  wonder,  but  "W-ere  silent,  fix)m  a  sense  of  shame  at 
the  difference  between  her  sacrifices  and  their  own.  Many 
ladies,  however,  respected  her  deeply:  they  could  not  help  it ; 
ooe  gentleman-— one  only — gave  her  his  friendship  and  per- 
fect confidence:  this  was  Mr  Hall,  the  vicar  of  Nunnely.  He 
said,  and  said  truly,  that  her  life  came  nearer  the  life  of 
Christ,  than  that  of  any.  other  human  being  he  had  ever  met 
with.  You  must  not  think,  reader,  that  in  sketching  Miss 
Ainley's  character,  I  depict  a  figment  of  imagination — ^no; — 
we  seeik  the  originals  of  such  portraits  in  real  life  only. 

Miss  Helstone  studied  well  the  mind  and  heart  now  re- 
vealed to  her.  She  found  no  high  intellect  to  admire :  the 
old  maid  was  merely  sensible ;  but  she  discovered  so  much 
goodness,  so  much  usefulness,  so  much  mildness,  patience, 
trath,  that  she  bent  her  own  mind  before  Miss  Ainley^s  in 
reverence.  What  was  her  love  of  nature,  what  was  her  sense 
of  beauty,  what  were  her  more  varied  and  fervent  emotions, 
what  was  her  deeper  power  of  thought,  what  her  wider 
capacity  to  comprehend,  compared  to  the  practical  excellence 
of  this  good  woman  ?  Momently,  they  seemed  only  beautiM 
fozms  of  selfish  delight ;  mentally,  she  trod  them  under  foot. 

It  is  true,  she  still  felt  with  pain  that  the  life  which  made 
Miss  Ainley  happy  could  not  make  her  happy :  pure  and 
active  as  it  was,  in  her  heart  she  deemed  it  deeply  dreary 
because  it  was  so  loveless— to  her  ideas,  so  forlorn.  Yet, 
doabtlessi  she  reflected,  it  needed  only  habit  to  make  it  prac'* 
ticable  and  agre^eable  to  any  one :  it  was  despicable,  she  felt, 
to  pine  sentimentally,  to  cherish  secret  griefs,  vain  memories ; 
to  be  inert)  to>  waste  youth  in  aching  languor,  to  grow  old 
(Icing  nothing. 


152  SHIBI.ET. 

« 

<'  I  will  bestir  myself,"  was  her  resolution, ''  and  try  to  be 

UTise  if  I  cannot  be  good." 

She  proceeded  to  make  inquiry  of  Miss  Ainley,  if  she  conld 
help  her  in  anything.  Miss  Ainley,  glad  of  an  assistant,  told 
her  that  she  t^ould,  and  indicated  some  poor  families  in  Briar- 
field  that  it  was  desirable  she  should  visit ;  giving  her  like- 
wise, at  her  farther  request,  some  work  to  do  for  certain  poor 
women  who  had  many  children,  and  who  were  unskill^in 
using  the  needle  for  themselves. 

Caroline  went  home,  laid  her  plans,  and  took  a  resolve  not 
to  swerve  from  them.  She  allotted  a  certain  portion  of  her 
time  for  her  various  studies,  and  a  certain  portion  for  doing 
anything  Miss  Ainley  might  direct  her  to  do  ;  the  remainder 
was  to  be  spent  in  exercise  ;  not  a  moment  was  to  be  left  for 
the  indulgence  of  such^  fevered  thoughts  as  had  poisoned  last 
Sunday-  evening. 

To  do  her  justice,  she  executed  her  plans  conscientiously, 
perseveringly.  It  was  very  hard  work  at  first — ^it  was  even 
hard  work  to  the  end,  but  it  helped  her  to  stem  and  keep 
down  anguish :  it  forced  her  to  be  employed ;  it  forbade  her 
to  brood  ;  and  gleams  of  satisfaction  chequered  her  grey  life 
here  and  there  when  she  found  she  had  done  good,  imparted 
pleasure,  or  allayed  suffering. 

Yet  I  must  speak  truth ;  these  efforts  brought  her  neither 
health  of  body  nor  continued  peace  of  mind :  with  them  aU,  she 
wasted,  grew  more  joyless  and  more  wan ;  with  them  all,  her 
memory  kept  harping  on  the  name  of  Bobert  Moore:  an  elegy 
over  the  past  still  nmg  constantly  in  her  ear ;  a  fimereal  inward 
cry  haunted  and  harassed  her :  the  heaviness  of  a  broken  spirit, 
and  of  pining  and  palsying  faculties,  settled  slow  on  her  buoyant 
youth.  Winter  seemed  conquering  her  spring:  the  mind*s  soil 
and  its  treasures  were  freezing  gradually  to  barren  stagnation. 


CHAPTER  XL 


FIELDHEAD. 


Yet  Caroline  refused  tamely  to  succumb :  she  had  natave 
strength  in  her  girl's  heart,  and  she  used  it.  Men  and  women 
never  struggle  so  hard  as  when  they  struggle  alone,  without 
witness,  counsellor,  or  confidant;  unencouragedytinadviaed^aDd 
unpitiecL 


HSLDBSAD.  15S 

MiM  Hdstone  was  in  this  position.  Her  sufferings  were  her 
only  spur ;  and  being  very  rei  and  sharp,  they  roused  her  spirit 
keenly.  Bent  on  victory  over  a  mortal  pain,  she  did  her  best 
to  quell  it.  Never  had  she  been  seen  so  busy,  so  studious,  and, 
above  all,  so  active.  She  took  walks  in  all  weathers — long  walks 
in  solitary  jdirections.  Day  by  day  she  came  back  in  the  evening, 
pale  and  wearied-looking,  yet  seemingly  not  fatigued ;  for  still, 
as  soon  as  she  had  tiirown  off  her  bonnet  and  shawl,  she  would, 
instead  of  resting,  begin  to  pace  her  apartment:  sometimes  she 
yroxM  not  sit  down  tiU  she  was  literally  faint.  She  said  she 
did  this  to  tire  herself  well,  that  she  might  sleep  soundly  at 
night.  But  if  that  was  her  aim  it  was  imattained,  for  at  night, 
when  others  slumbered,  she  was  tossing  on  her  pillow,  or  sitting 
at  the  foot  of  her  couch  in  the  darkness,  forgetful,  apparently, 
of  the  necessity  of  seeking  repose.  Often,  imhappy  girl !  she 
wag  crying — crying  in  a  sort  of  intolerable  despair ;  which, 
when  it  mshed  over  her,  smote  down  her  strength,  and  reduced 
her  to  childlike  helplessness. 

When  thus  prostrate,  temptations  besieged  her  :  weak  sug- 
gestions whispered  in  her  weary  heart  to  write  to  Robert,  and 
say  that  she  was  unhappy  because  she  was  forbidden  to  see  him 
and  Hortense,  and  that  she  feared  he  would  withdraw  his 
fiiendship  (not  love)  from  her,  and  forget  her  entirely,  and 
begging  him  to  remember  her,  and  sometimes  to  write  to  her. 
One  or  two  such  letters  she  actually  indited,  but  she  never 
Bent  them  :  shame  and  good  sense  forbade. 

At  last  the  life  she  led  reached  the  point  when  it  seemed  she 
could  bear  it  no  longer;  that  she  must  seek  and  find  a  change 
somehow,  or  her  heart  and  head*  would  fail  under  the  pressure 
which  strained  them.  She  longed  to  leave  Briarfield,  to  go  to 
some  very  distant  place.  She  longed  for  something  else  :  the 
deep,  secret,  anxious  yearning  to  discover  and  know  her  motiier 
strengthened  daily;  but  witii  tiie  desire  was  coupled  a  doubt,  a 
dread — ^if  she  knew  her,  could  she  love  her  ?  There  was  cause 
for  hesitation,'  for  apprehension  on  this  point:  never  in  her  life 
hA  she  heard  that  mother  praised  :  whoever  mentioned  her, 
mentioned  her  coolly.  Her  xmcle  seemed  to  regard  his  sister- 
m-law  with  a  sort  of  tacit  antipathy ;  an  old  servant,  who  had 
lived  with  Mrs  ^James  Helstone  for  a  short  time  after  her 
niarriage,  whenever  she  referred  to  her  former  mistress,  spoke 
with  chilling  reserve:  sometimes  she  called  her  "queer,"  some- 
times she  said  she  did  not  understand  her.  These  expressions 
were  ioe  to  the  daughter's  heart ;  they  suggested  the  conclusion 


154  SHnuuiT. 

that  it  was  perhaps  better  never  to  know  her  parent,  than  to 
know  her  and  not  like  her. 

But  one  project  could  she  frame  whose  execution  seemed 

likely  to  bring  her  a  hope  of  relief ;  it  was  to  take  a  situation, 

,  to  be  a  governess — she  could  do  nothing  else.    A  little  inddest 

brought  her  to  the  point,  when  she  found  courage  to  break  her 

design  to  her  uncle. 

Her  long  and  late  walks  lay  always,  as  has  been  said,  on 
lonely  roads  ;  but  in  whatever  direction  she  had  rambled, 
whether  along  the  drear  skirts  of  Stilbro'  Moor,  or  over  the 
sunny  stretch  of  Nunnely  Common,  her  homeward  path  was 
still  so  contrived  as  to  lead  her  near  the  Hollow-  She  rarely 
descended  the  den,  but  she  visited  ks  brink  at  twilight  almost 
as  regularly  as  the  stars  rose  over  the  hill-crests.  Her  resting- 
place  was  at  a  certain  stile  under  a  certain  old  thorn :  thenoe 
she  could  look  down  on  the  cottage,  the  mill,  the  dewy  garden- 
ground,  the  still,  deep  dam ;  thence  was  visible  the  well-known 
counting-house  window,  from  whpse  panes  at  a  fixed  hour  shot, 
suddenly  bright,  the  ray  of  the  well-known  lamp.  Her  errand 
was  to  watch  for  this  ray :  her  reward  to  catch  it,  sometimes 
sparkling  bright  in  clear  air,  sometimes  shimmering  dim 
through  mist,  and  anon  flashing  broken  between  slant  Imes  of 
rain — ^for  she  came  in  all  weathers. 

There  were  nights  when  it  failed  to  appear  :  she  knew  then 
that  Robert  was  from  home,  and  went  away  doubly  sad ;  whereas 
its  kindling  rendered  her  elate,  as  though  she  saw  in  it  the 
promise  of  some  indefinite  hope.  If,  while  she  gazed,  a  shadow 
bent  between  the  light  and  lattice,  her  heart  leaped — that  eclipse 
was  Robert:  she  had  seen  him.  She  would  return  home  com- 
forted, carrying  in  her  mind  a  clearer  vision  of  his  aspect,  a 
distincter  recollection  of  his  voice,' his  smile,  his  bearing;  and, 
blent  with  these  impressions,  was  often  a  sweet  persuasion  that, 
if  she  could  get  near  him,  his  heart  might  welcome  her  presence 
yet :  that  at  this  moment  he  might  be  willing  to  extend  his 
hand  and  draw  her  to  him,  and  shelter  her  at  his  side  as  he  used 
to"  do.  That  night,  though  she  might  weep  as  usual,  she  would 
fancy  her  tears  less  scalding  ;  the  pillow  they  watered  seemed 
a  little  softer ;  the  temples  pressed  to  that  pillow  ached  less. 

The  shortest  path  from  the  Hollow  to  the  Rectory  wound  near 
a  certain  mansion,  the  same  under  whose  lone  walls  Malone 
passed  on  that  night-journey  mentioned  in  an  early  chapter  of 
this  work — the  old  and  tenantless  dwelling  yclept  Fieldhead. 
Tenantless  by  the  proprietor  it  had  beom  for  ten  years,  but  it 


HELDHEAD.  '15& 

wag  no  rain :  Mr  Yorke  had  seen  it  kept  in  good  repair,  and 
an  eld  gardener  and  his  wife  had  lived  in  it,  cultivated  the 
grounds,  and  maintained  the  house  in  habitable  condition. 

If  Fieldhead  had  few  other  merits  as  a  building,  it  might  at 
least  be  termed  picturesque:  its  irregular  architecture,  and  the 
grey  and  mossy  colouring  communicated  by  time,  gave  it  a  just 
claun  to  this  epithet.  The  old  latticed  windows,  the  stone  porch, 
the  walls,  the  roof,  the  chimney-stacks,  were  rich  in  crayon 
touches  and  sepia  lights  and  shades.  The  trees  behind  were 
fine,  bold,  and  spreading ;  the  cedar  on  the  lawn  in  front  was 
grand,  and  the  granite  urns  on  the  garden  wall,  the  fretted 
arch  of  the  gateway,  were,  for  an  sirtist,  as  the  very  desire 
of  the  eye. 

One  mild  May  evening,  Caroline  parsing  near  about  moon- 
rise,  and  feeling,  though  weary,  unwilling  yet  to  go  home,  where 
there  was  only  the  bed  of  thorns  and  the  night  of  grief  to  anti- 
cipate, ^at  down  on  the  mossy  groimd  near  the  gate,  and  gazed 
through  towards  cedar  and  mansion.  It  was  a  stiU  night — calm, 
dewy,  cloudless  :  the  gables,  turned  to  th^  west,  reflected  the 
clear  amber  of  the  horizon  they  faced  ;  the  oaks  behind  were 
black;  the  cedar  was  blacker;  under  its  dense,  raven  boughs  a 
glimpse  of  sky  opened  gravely  blue  :  it  was  foil  of  the  moon, 
which  looked  solemnly  and  mildly  down  on  Caroline  from 
beneath  that  sombre  canopy. 

She  felt  this  night  and  prospect  mournfully  lovely.  She 
wisfied  she  could  be  happy:  she  wished  she  could  know  inward 
peace :  she  wondered  Providence  had  no  pity  on  her,  and 
would  not  help  or  console  her.  KecoUections  of  happy  trysts 
of  lovers,  commemorated  in  old  ballads,  returned  on  her  mind: 
she  thought  such  tryst  in  such  scene  would  be  blissfol.  Where 
now  was  Robert?  she  asked:  not  at  the  Hollow:  she  had 
watched  for  his  lamp  long,  and  had  not  seen  it.  She  ques- 
tioned within  herself  whether  she  and  Moore  .were  ev^  destined 
to  meet  and  speak  again.  Suddenly  the  door  within  the  stone 
porch  of  the  Hall  opened,  and  two  men  came  out;  one  elderly 
and  white-headed,  the  other  yoimg,  dark-haired,  and  tall. 
They  passed  across  the  lawn,  out  through  a  portal  in  the 
garden  wall:  Caroline  saw  them  cross  the  road,  pass  the  stile, 
descend  the  fields ;  she  saw  them  disappear.  Robert  Moore 
bad  passed  before  her  with  his  friend  Mr  Yorke:  neither  had 
Been  her. 

The  apparition  had  been  transient — scarce  seen  ere  gone; 
but  its  electrio  passage  left  her  veins  kindled,  her  soul  insor- 


FDSLDHEAD.  157 

ft  all?  that's  the  puzzle.  She  has  her  meals,  her  liberty,  a 
good  house  to  live  in,  and  good  clothes  to  wear,  as  usual:  a 
while  since  that  suj£ced  to  keep  her  handsome  and  cheery, 
and  there  she  sits  now  a  poor,  little,  pale,  puling  chit  enough. 
Provoking!  Then  comes  the  question,  what  is  to  be  done? 
I  suppose  I  must  send  for  advice.  WiU  you  have  a  doctor, 
child?" 

"  No,  uncle ;  I  don't  want  one :  a  doctor  could  do  me  no  good. 
I  merely  want  change  of  air  and  scene." 

"  Well,  if  that  be  the  caprice,  it  shall  be  gratified.  You 
shall  go  to  a  watering-place.  J.  don^t  mind  the  expense :  Fanny 
shall  accompany  you." 

"  But,  uncle,  some  day  I  must  do  something  for  myself ;  I 
have  no  fortune.     I  had  better  begin  now." 

"While  I  live,  you  shall  not  turn  out  as  a  governess, 
Garolme.   I  will  not  have  it  said  that  my  niece  is  a  governess." 

"  But  the  later  in  life  one .  makes  a  change  of  that  sort, 
unde,  the  more  difficult  and  painful  it  is.  I  should  wish  to 
get  accustomed  to  the  yoke  before  any  habits  of  ease  and 
independence  are  formed." 

" I  beg  you  will  not  harass  me,  Caroline.  I.  mean  to  pro- 
vide for  you.  I  have  always  meant  to  provide  for  you :  I 
will  purchase  an  annuity.  Bless  me ;  I  am  but  fifty-five ; 
my  health  and  constitution  are  excellent :  there  is  plenty  of 
time  to  save  and  take  measures.  Don^t  make  yourself*  anxious 
lespecting  the  future  :  is  that  what  frets  you?" 

"  No,  uncle  ;  but  I  long  for  a  change." 

He  laughed.  "  There  speaks  the  woman !"  cried  he,  "  the 
▼eiy  woman!  A  change!  a  change!  Always  fantastical 
and  whimsical  ?    Well,  it  ^s  in  her  sex." 

"  But  it  is  not  fantasy  and  whim,  uncle." 

"What  is  it  then?" 

"Necessity,  I  think.  I  feel  weaker  than  formerly;  I  be- 
Keve  I  should  have  more  to  do." 

'^Admirable!  .She  feels  weak,  and  therefore  she  should 
be  Bet  to  hard  labour — *  clair  comme  le  jour ' — ^as  Moore — 
confound  Moore !  Tou  shall  go  to  Cliff-bridge ;  and  there 
we  two  guineas  to  buy  a  new  frock.  Come,  Cary,  never 
fear :  we  11  find  balm  in  Gilead." 

"  Unde,  I  wish  you  were  less  generous,  and  more " 

« More  what?" 

Sympathizing  was  the  word  on  Caroline's  lips,  but  it  wan 
QOt  uttered :  she  checked  herself  in  time :  her  uncle  would 


158  SHIBLET. 

indeed  have  laughed  if  that  namby-pamby  word  had  escaped 
her.     Finding  her  silent,  he  said, — 

"  The  fact  is,  you  don't  know  precisely  what  you  want." 

"  Only  to  be  a  governess." 

"  Pooh  !  mere  nonsense  1  I  '11  not  hear  of  govemessing 
Don't  mention  it  again.  It  is  rather  too  feminine  a  fancy. 
I  have  finished  breakfast,  ring  the  bell :  put  all  crotchets  out 
of  your  head,  and  run  away  and  amuse  yourself." 

"What  with?  My  doll?"  asked  Caroline  to  herself  as 
she  quitted  the  room. 

A  week  or  two  passed  ;  her  bodily  and  mental  health 
neither  grew  -worse  nor  better.  She  was  now  precisely  in 
that  state,  when,  if  her  constitution  had  contains!  the  seeds 
of  consumption,  decline,  or  slow  fever,  those  diseases  would 
have  been  rapidly  developed,  and  would  soon  have  carried 
her  quietly  from  the  world.  People  never  die  of  love  or  grief 
alone ;  though  some  die  of  inherent  maladies,  which  the  tortures 
of  those  passions  prematurely  force  into  destructive  action. 
The  sound  by  natiie  undergo  these  tortures,  and  are  racted, 
shaken,  shattered :  their  beauty  and  bloom  perish,  but  life 
remains  untouched.  They  are  brought  to  a  certain  point  of 
dilapidation  ;  they  are  reduced  to  pallor,  debility,  and  emacia- 
tion. People  think,  as  they  see  then^  gliding  languidly  about, 
that  they  will  soon  withdraw  to  sick-beds,  perish  there,  and 
cease  from  among  the  healthy  and  happy.  This  does  not 
happen  :  they  live  on  ;  and  though  tney  cannot  regain  youtli 
and  gaiety,  they  may  regain  strength  and  serenity.  The 
blossom  which  title  March  wind  nips,  but  fails  to  sweep  away, 
may  survive  to  hang 'a  withered  apple  on  the  tree  late  into 
autumn :  having  braved  the  last  frosts  of  spring,  it  may  also 
brave  the  fbrst  of  winter. 

Every  one  noticed  the  change  in  Miss  Helstone's  appear- 
ance, and  most  people  said  she  was  going  to  die.  She  never 
thought  so  herself :  she  felt  in  no  dying  case ;  she  had 
neither  pain  nor  sickness.  Her  appetite  was  diminished; 
she  knew  the  reason :.  it  was  because  she  wept  so  much  at 
night.  Her  strength  was  lessened ;  she  could  account  for  it ; 
sleep  was  coy  and  hard  to  be  won ;  dreams  were  distressing 
and  baleful.  In  the  far  future  she  still  seemed  to  anticipate 
a  time  When  this  passage  of  misery  should  be  got  over,  and 
when  she  should  once  more  be  cahn,  though  perhaps  never 
again  happy. 

Meanwhile  her  xiziole  uzged  her  to  visit  [  to  comply  irith 


fISUDHEAD.  159 

die  frequent  invitations  of  their  acquaintance:  this  she  evaded 
doing ;  she  eonld  not  be  cheerful  in  company :  she  felt  she 
was  observed  there  with  more  curiosity  than  S3anpathy.  Old 
ladies  were  always  offering  her  their  advice,  recommending 
this  or  that  nostrum ;  yoimg  ladies  looked  at  her  in  a  way 
she  understood,  ;Hid  from  which  she  shrank.  Their  eyes 
said  they  knew  she  had  been  ^'disappointed,"  as  custom 
phrases  it:  by  whom,  they  were  not  certain. 

Commonplace  yoimg  ladies  can  be  quite  as  hard  as  common- 
place young  gentlemen — quite  as  worldly  and  selfish.  Those 
who  sofTer  should  always  avoid  them ;  grief  and  calamity  they 
despise:  they  seem  to  regard  them  as  the  judgments  of  Grod  on 
the  lowly.  With  them,  to  "  love  "  is  merely  to  contrive  a 
ficheme  for  achieving  a  good  match:  to  be  ".  disappointed"  is 
to  have  their  scheme  seen  through  and  frustrated.  They  think 
the  feelings  and  projects  of  others  on  the  subject  of  love  similar 
to  their  ov?n,  and  judge  them  accordingly. 

All  this  Caroline  knew,  partly  by  instinct,  partly  by  obser- 
vation: she  regulated  her  conduct  by  her  knowledge,  keeping 
her  pale  face  and  wasted  figure  as  much  out  of  sight  as  she 
conld.  Living  thus  in  complete  seclusion,  she  ceased  to  receive 
intelligence  of  the  little  transactions  of  the  neighbourhood. 

One  morning  her  uncle  came  into  the  parlour,  where  she  sat 
eadeavoaring  to  find  some  pleasure  in  painting  a  little  group  of 
wild  flowers,  gathered  under  a  hedge  at  the  top  of  the  Hollow 
fields,  and  said  to  her  in  his  abrupt  manner: — 

"  Come,  child,  you  are  always  stooping  over  palette,  or  book, 
or  sampler :  leave  that  tinting  work.  By-the-by,  do  you  put 
your  pencil  to  your  lips  when  you  paint  ?  " 

"  Sometimes,  imcle,  when  I  forget." 

*'  Then  it  is  that  which  is  poisoning  you.  The  paints  are 
deleterious,  child:  there  is  white  lead,  and  red  lead,  and  verdi- 
gris, and  gamboge,  and  twenty  other  poisons  in  those  colour 
cakes.  Lock  them  up  1  lock  them  up  1  Get  your  bonnet  on: 
I  want  you  to  make  a  call  with  me." 

"  With  ym,  uncle  ?  " 

This  question  was  asked  in  a  tone  of  surprise.  She  was  not 
aecnstomed  to  make  calls  with  her  uncle:  she  never  rode  or 
walked  out  with  him  on  any  occasion.        ^ 

" Quick  1  quick  1  I  am  always  busy,  you  know:  I  have  no 
time  to  lose." 

She  hurriedly  gathered  up  her  materials,  asking-  meantime, 
where  they  were  going. 


FIJELDHEAD.  161 

became  litis  hall  towards  its  ceiling ;  carved  stags*  heads, 
with  real  antlers,  looked  down  grotesquely  from  the  walls. 
This  was  neither  a  grand  nor  a  comfortable  house :  within  ^ 
without  it  was  antique,  rambling,  and  incommodious.  A  pro- 
perty of  a  thousand  a  year  belonged  to  it;  which  property  had 
descended,  for  lack  of  male  heirs,  on  a  female.  There  were 
mercantile  families  in  the  district  boasting  twice  the  income, 
but  the  Keeldars,  by  virtue  of  their  antiquity,  and  their  dis- 
tinction of  lords  of  the  manor,  took  the  precedence  of  all. 

Mr  and  Miss  Helstone  were  ushered  into  a  parlour :  of 
course,  as  was  to  be  expected  in  .such  a  gothic  old  barrack, 
this  parlour  was  lined  with  oak :  fine  dark,  glossy  panels 
compassed  the  walls  gloomily  and  grandly.  Very  hand- 
some, reader,  these  shining,  brown  panels  are :  very  mellow 
m  colouring  and  tasteful  in  effect,  but — if  you  know  what  a 
**  Spring-clean"  is — ^very  execrable  and  inhuman.  Who- 
ever, having  the  bowels  of  humanity,  has  seen  servants 
scmbbing  at  these  polished  wooden  walls  with  bees-waxed 
cloths  on  a  warm  May  day,  must  allow  that  they  are 
"tolerable  and  not  to  be  endured;"  and  I  cannot  but  secretly 
applaud  the  benevolent  barbarian  who  had  painted  another 
tad  larger  apartment  of  Fieldhead — the  drawing-room  to  wit, 
formerly  also  an  oak-room— of  a  delicate  pinky  white ;  there- 
by earning  for  himself  the  character  of  a  Hun,  but  mightily 
enhancing  the  cheerMness  of  that  portion  of  his  abode,  and 
saving  future  housemaids  a  world  of  toil. 

The  brown-panelled  parlour  was  famished  all  in  old  style, 
and  with  real  old  furniture.  On  each  side  of  the  high 
mantelpiece  stood  two  antique  chairs  of  oak,  solid  as  sylvan 
thrones,  and  in  one  of  these  sat  a  lady.  But  if  this  were  Miss 
Reeldar,  she  must  have  come  of  age  at  least  some  twenty 
years  ago :  she  was  of  matronly  form,  and  though  she  wore 
no  cap,  and  possessed  hair  of  quite  an  undimmed  auburn, 
snading  small  and  naturally  young-looking  features,  she  had 
no  youthful  aspect,  nor  apparently  the  wish  to  assume  it. 
You  could  have  wished  her  attire  of  a  newer  fashion :  in  a 
well-cut,  weU-made  gown,  hers  would  have  been  no  uncomely 
presence.  It  puzzled  you  to  guess  why  a  garment  of  hand- 
some materials  should  be  arranged  in  such  scanty  folds,  and 
deviaed  after  such  an  obsolete  mdde  :  you  felt  disposed  to  set 
down  the  wearer  as  somewhat  eccentric  at  once. 

This  lady  received  the  visitors  with  a  mixture  of  ceremony 
«Qd  diffidfisice  quite  English :   no  middle-aged  matron   who 


162  flHIBLST. 

was  not  an  Englishwoman  could  erinoe  preoifldy  lihe  aame 
manner  ;  a  manner  so  nncertain  of  herself,  of  her  own  merits, 
of  her  power  to  please  ;  and  yet  so  anxious  to  be  proper,  and 
if  possible,  rather  agreeable  than  otherwise.  In  the  piescaxt 
instance,  however,  more  embarrassment  was  shown  than  is 
usual  even  with  diffident  Englishwomen :  Miss  Helstone  felt 
this,  sympathized  with  the  stranger,  and  knowing  by  ex* 
perience  what  was  good  for  the  timid,  took  a  seat  qcdetLy 
near  her,  and  began  to  talk  to  her  with  a  gentle  ease,  com* 
municated  for  the  moment  by  the  presence  of  one  less  self- 
possessed  than  herself. 

She  and  this  lady  would,  if  alone,  have  at  once  got  on 
extremely  well  together.  The  lady  had  the  clearest  voice 
imaginable :  infinitely  softer  and  more  tuneful  than  coultl 
have  been  reasonably  e^^ected  from  forty  years,  and  a  form 
decidedly  inclined  to  emboppoint.  This  voice  Caroline  liked ; 
it  atoned  for  the  formal,  if  correct,  accent  and  language  :  the 
lady  would  soon  have  discovered  she  liked  it  and  her,  and  in 
ten  minutes  they  would  have  been  Mends.  But  Mr  Helstone 
stood  on  the  rug  looking  at  them  both ;  looking  especially 
at  the  strange  lady  with  his  sarcastic,  keen  eye,  that  clearly 
expressed  impatience  of  her  chilly  ceremony,  and  annoyance 
at  her  want  of  aplomb.  His  hard  gaze  and  rasping  voice 
discomfited  the  lady  more  and  more ;  she  tried,  however,  to 
get  up  little  speeches  about  the  weather,  the  aspect  of  the 
country,  &c.,  but  the  impracticable  Mr  Helstone  presently 
found  himself  somewhat  deaf :  whatever  she  said,  he  affected 
not  to  hear  distinctly,  and  she  was  obliged  to  go  over  each 
elaborately  constructed  nothing  twice.  The  effort  soon  became 
too  much  for  her;  she  was  just  rising  in  a  perplexed  flutter, 
nervously  murmuring  that  she  knew  not  what  detained  Misi 
Keeldar — that  she  would  go  and  look  for  her,  when  Misa 
Keeldar  saved  her  the  trouble  by  appearing  :  it  was  to  be 
presumed  at  least  that  she  who  now  came  in  through  a  glass- 
door  from  the  garden  owned  that  name. 

There  is  real  grace  in  ease  of  manner,  and  so  old  Helstone 
felt  when  an  erect,  slight  girl  walked  up  to  him,  retaining 
with  her  left  hand  her  little  silk  apron  full  of  flowers,  and, 
giving  him  her  right  hand,  said  pleasantly: — 

"  I  knew  you  would  come  to  see  me,  though  you  do  think 
Mr  Yorke  has  made  me  a  Jacobin.     Grood-moming.'' 

"But  we'll  not  have  you  a  Jacobin,"  returned  he.  ''No, 
Miss  Shirley,  they  shall  not  steal  the  flower  of  my  parish 


FUCLDHBAD.  168 

Aam  me:  now  that  jou  are  amongst  us,  you  shall  be  my 
pupil  in  politics  and  reHgion  :  I  '11  teach  you  sound  doctrine 
on  both  points." 

"  Mrs  Pryor  has  anticipated  you  "  she  replied,  turning  to 
the  elder  lady.  "Mrs  Pryor,  you  know, 'was  my  governess, 
and  is  still  my  friend  ;  and  of  all  the  high  and  rigid  Tories, 
she  is  queen ;  of  aU  the  stanch  ehurchwpmen,  she  is  chief. 
I  have  been  well  drilled  both  in  theology  and  history,  I  assure 
you,  Mr  Helstone." 

The  Rector  immediately  bowed  very  low  to  Mrs  Pryor, 
and  expressed  himself  obliged  to  her. 

The  ex-governess  disclaimed  skill  either  in  political  or  re- 
ligious controversy,  explained  that  she  thought  such  matters 
little  adapted  for  female  minds,  but  avowed  herself  in  general 
terms  the  advocate  of  order  and  loyalty,  and,  of  course,  tirdy 
attached  to  the  Establishment.  She  added,  she  was  ever, 
averse  to  change  under  any  circumstances ;  and  something 
soareely  audible  about  the  extreme  danger  of  being  too  ready 
to  take  up  new  ideas,  closed  her  sentence. 

^^  Miss  Keeldar  thinks  as  you  think,  I  hope,  madam.'' 

"  Difference  of  age  and  difference  of  temperament  occasion 
^ifierence  of  sentiment,"  was  the  reply.  "  It  can  scarcely  be 
expected  that  the  eager  and  young  shoidd  hold  the  opinions 
of  the  oool  and  middle-aged." 

**  Oh !  oh !  we  are  independent :  we  think  for  ourselves  !*' 
cried  Mr  Helstone.  "  We  are  a  little  Jacobin,  for  anything  I 
know :  a  little  free-thinker,  in  good  earnest.  Let  us  have  a 
oonfissBion  of  faith  on  the  spot." 

And  he  took  the  heiresses  two  hands — causing  her  to  let 
fiU  hep  whole  cargo  of  flowers — and  seated  her  by  him  on 
theaofii. 

^'  Say  yoiir  creed,"  he  ordered* 

'<  The  Apostle's  creed  ?" 

"Yes." 

6he  f  aid  it  like  a  child. 

" Now  for  St  Athanasius's :  that 's  the  test  I" 

<*  Let  me  gather  up  my  flowers  :  here  is  Tartar  coming,  he 
•  vill  tread  upon  than." 

Tartar  was  a  rather  large,  strong,  and  fierce-looking  dog, 
"very  ugly,  being  of  a  breed  between  mastiff  and  bull-dog, 
vbo  at  this  moment  entered  through  the  glass  door,  and 
postiag  dbeetly  to  the  rug,  snuffed  the  fresh  flowers  scattered 
there.    He  seemed  to  aoom  them  as  food;   but  probably 


I6d  SBIBLST. 

(ihinking  their  velvety  petals  miglit  be  convenient  as  litter, 
he  was  turning  round  preparatory  to  depositing  his  tawny 
biilk  upon  them,  when  Miss  Helstone  and  Miss  Keeldar 
simultaneously  stooped  to  the  rescue. 

"  Thank  you,"  said  l^hfe  heiress,  as  she  again  held  out  her 
little  apron  for  Caroline  to  heap  the  blossoms  into'  it.  "la 
this  your  daughter,  Mr  Helstone  ?  "  she  asked. 

"  My  niece,  Caroline." 

Miss  Keeldar  shook  hands  with  her,  and  then  looked  at 
her.     Caroline  also  looked  at  her  hostess. 

Shirley  Keeldar  (she  had  no  Christian  name  but  Shirley : 
her  parents,  who  had  wished  to  have  a  son,  finding  that,  after 
eight  years  of  marriage.  Providence  had  granted  ihem  only 
a  daughter,  bestowed  on  her  the  same  masculine  family  cog- 
nomen they  would  have  bestowed  on  a  boy,  if  with  a  boy 
they  had  been  blessed) — Shirley  Keeldar  was  no  ugly  heiress: 
she  was  agreeable  to  the  eye.  Her  height  and  shape  were  not 
unlike  Miss  Ilelstone's  :  perhaps  in  stature  she  might  have  the 
advantage  by  an  inch  or  two  ;  she  was  gracefully  made,  and 
her  face,  too,  possessed  a  charm  as  well  described  by  the  word 
grace  as  any  other.  It  was  pale  naturally,  but  intelligent,  and 
of  varied  expression.  She  was  not  a  blonde,  like  Caroline : 
clear  and  dark  were-  the  characteristics  of  her  aspect  as  to 
colour  :  her  face  and  brow  were  clear,  her  eyes  of  the  darkest 
grey :  no  green  lights  in  them, — transparent,  pure,  neutral 
grey :  and  her  hair  of  the  darkest  brown.  Her  features  were 
distinguished  ;  by  which  I- do  not  mean  that  they  were  high, 
bony,  and  Roman,  being  indeed  rather  small  and  slightly 
marked  than  otherwise  ;  but  only  that  they  were,  to  use  a 
few  French  words,  "fins,  gracieux,  spirituels:"  mobile  they 
were  and  speaking ;  but  their  changes  were  not  to  be  under- 
stood, nor  their  language  interpreted  all  at  once.  She  examined 
Caroline  seriously,  inclining  her  head  a  little  to  one  side,  with 
a  thoughtful  air. 

"  You  see  she  is  only  a  feeble  chick,"  observed  Mr 
Helstone. 

"  She  looks  young — ^younger  than  I.  How  old  are  you?" 
she  inquired,  in  a  manner  that  would  have  been  patronizing 
if  it  had  not  been  extremely  solemn  and  simple. 

"  Eighteen  years  and  six  months." 

**  And  I  am  twenty-one." 

She  said  no  more ;  she  had  now  placed  her  flowen  on  the 
table,  and  was  busied  in  arranging  ^em. 


nSLDHXAD.  165 

^And  St.  Athanasius's  creed?"  urged  the  Bector;  '^you 
believe  it  all — don't  you  ?" 

"  I  can't  remember  it  quite  all.     I  will  give  you  a  nosegay, 
Mr  Helstone,  when  I  have  given  your  niece  one." 

She  had  selected  a  little  bouquet  of  one  brilliant  and  two  or 
three  delicate  flowers,  relieved  by  a  spray  of  dark  verdure: 
■he  tied  it  with  silk  from  her  work-box,  and  placed  it  on 
Caroline's  lap;  and  then  she  put  her  hands  behind  her,  and 
stood  bending  slightly  towards  her  guest,  still  regarding  her,  in 
the  attitude  and  with  something  of  the  aspect  of  a  grave  but 
gallant  little  cavalier.  This  temporary  expression  of  face  was 
aided  by  the  style  in  which  she  wore  her  hair,  parted  on  one 
Uanple,  and  brushed  in  a  glossy  sweep  above  the  forehead, 
vrhence  it  fell  in  curls  that  looked  natural,  so  free  were  their 
wavy  undulations. 
"  Are  you  tired  'with  your  walk  ?"  she  inquired. 
'*  No— not  in  the  least;  it  is  but  a  short  distance — ^but  a 
mile." 

**■  You  look  pale.  Is  she  always  so  pale  ?"  she  asked,  turning 
to  the  Bector. 
"  She  used  to  be  as  rosy  as  the  reddest  of  your  flowers." 
"  Why  is  she  altered  ?    What  has  made  her  pale  ?    Has 
she  been  ill?"   . 
"  She  tells  me  she  wants  a  change." 

"  She  ought  to  have  one  :  you  ought  to  give  her  one  :  you 
should  send  her  to  the  seacoast." 

"  I  will,  ere  summer  is  over.  Meantime,  I  intend  her  to 
make  acquaintance  with  you,  if  you  have  no  objection." 

"I  am  sure  Miss  Keeldar  will  have  no  objection,"  here 
observed  Mrs  Pryor.  "  I  think  I  may  take  it  upon  me  to  say 
that  Miss  Helstone's  frequent  presence  at  Fieldhead  will  be 
esteemed  a  &your." 

'*  You  speak  my  sentiments  precisely,  ma'am,"  said  Shirley, 
**  and  I  thank  you  for  anticipating  me.  Let  me  tell  you,"  she 
continued,  turning  again  to  Carohne,  ^*  that  you  also  ought  to 
thank  my  governess  ;  it  is  not  every  one  she  would  wekome 
as  she  has  welcomed  you :  you  are  distinguished  more  than 
you  think.  This  morning,  as  soon  as  you  are  gone,  1  -shaU 
aflk  Mrs  Pryor's  opinion  of  you.  I  am  apt  to  rely  on  her 
judgment  of  character,  for  hitherto  I  have  found  it  wondrous 
accurate.  Already  I  foresee  a  favourable  answer  to  my 
iuquiries :  do  I  not  guess  rightly,  Mrs  Pryor  ?" 
'^Hy  dear— you  said  but  now  you  would  ask  my  opinion 


166  smsLsr, 

when  Miss  Helstone  was  gone ;  I  am  somxsely  likely^  to  gite  it 

in  her  presence." 

"  No — and  perhaps  it  will  be  long  enough  before  I  obtain 
it.  1  am  sometimes  sadly  tantalized,  Mr  Helstone,  by  Mn 
Pryor's  extreme  caution :  her  judgments  ought  to  be  correct 
when  they  come,  for  they  are  often  as  tardy  of  delivery  as  t 
lord  chanceHor^s :  on  some  people^s  characters  I  oannot  get 
hereto  pronoimce  sentence,  entreat  as  I  may." 

Mrs  Pryor  here  smiled. 
•    "  Yes,"  said  her  pupil,  "  I  know  what  that  smile  means : 
vou  are  thinking  of  my  gentleman-tenant.     Do  you  know  Mr 
Moore  of  the  Hollow  ?"  she  asked  Mr  Helstone. 

"  Ay  1  ay  1  your  tenant — so  he  is  :  you  haye  seen  a  good 
^eal  of  him,  no  doubt,  since  you  came  ?" 

"  I  have  been  obliged  to  see  him :  there  was  business  to 
transact.  Business  1  EeaUy  the  word  makes  me  oonficions  I 
am  indeed  no  longer  a  girl,  but  quite  a  woman  and  Bomething 
more.  I  am  an  esquire :  Shirley  Keeldar,  Esquire,  ought  to 
be  my  style  and  title.  They  gave  me  a  man's  name ;  I  hold 
a  man's  position  :  it  is  enough  to  inspire  me  with  a  touch  of 
manhood ,  and  when  I  see  such  people  as  that  stately  Anglo* 
Belgian — ^that  Gerard  Moore  before  me,  gravely  talking  to  me 
of  business,  really  I  feel  quite  gentlemanlike.  You  must  choose 
me  for  your  churchwarden,  Mr  Helstone,  the  next  time  you 
elect  new  ones :  they  ought  to  make  me  a  magistrate  and  a 
captain  of  yeomanry  :  Tony  Lumpkin's  mother  was  a  colonel, 
and  his  aimt  a  justice  of  the  peace — why  shouldn't  I  be  ?" 

"  With  all  my  heart.  If  you  choose  to  get  up  a  requisition 
on  the  subject,!  promise  to  head  the  list  of  signatures  wth my 
name.     But  you  were  speaking  of  Moore  ?" 

"  Ah !  yes.  I  find  it  a  little  diflGlcult  to  understand  Mr 
Moore — to  know  what  to  think  of  him :  whether  to  like  him 
or  not.  He  seems  a  tenant  of  whom  any  proprietor  might  be 
proud — and  proud  of  him  1  am,  in  that  sense — but  as  a  neigi* 
hour,  what  is  he?  Again  and  again  I  have  entreated  Mff 
Pryor  to  say  what  she  thinks  of  him,  but  she  still  evades 
returning  a  direct  answer.  I  hope  you  will  be  less  oracular, 
Mr  Helstone,  and  pronovmce  at  once  ;  do  you  like  him?" 

"  Not  at  all,  just  now:  his  name  is  entirely  blotted  from  mj 
good  books." 

«  What  is  the  matter  ?     What  has  he  done  ?  " 

'<  My  imcle  and  he  disagree  on  politics,"  interposed  the  low 
voioe  of  Caroline.    She  had  better  not  havB  spoken  just  Aes: 


JIELDHEAD.  167 

haring  scarcely  joined  in  the  conversation  before,  it  was  not 
apropos  to  do  it  now:  she  felt  this,  with  nervous  acuteness  as 
soon  as  she  had  spoken,  and  coloured  to  the  eyes. 

"What  are  Moore's  politics?"  inquired  Shirley. 

"Those  of  a  tradesman,"  returned  the  Rector;  "narrow, 
selfish,  and  unpatriotic.  The  man  is  etemaUy  writing  and 
speaking  against  the  continuance  of  the  war:  I  have  no  patience 
with  him." 

"  The  war  hurts  his  trade.  I  remember  he  remarked  that 
only  yesterday.   But  what  other  objection  have  you  to  him?" 

"  That  is  enough." 

"  He  looks  the  gentleman,  in  my  sense  of  the  term,"  pursued 
Shirley,  '^  and  it  pleases  me  to  think  he  is  such." 

Caroline  rent  the  Tyrian  petals  of  the  one  brilliant  flower 
in  her  bouquet,  and  answered  in  distinct  tones — "  Decidedly  he 
is.^  Shirley,  hearing  this  courageous  affirmation,  flashed  an 
arch,  searclung  glance  at  the  speaker  from  her  deep,  expressive 
eyea. 

"  Ton  are  his  friend,  at  any  rate,"  she  said;  "  you  defend 
him  in  his  absence." 

"  I  am  both  his  friend  and  his  relative,"  was  the  prompt 
reply.     "  Bobert  Moore  is  my  cousin." 

"  Oh,  then,  you  can  teU  me  all  about  him.  Just  give  me  a 
sketch  of  Ms  character." 

Insuperable  embarrassment  seized  Caroline  when  this  de- 
inaad  was  made :  she  could  not,  and  did  not  attempt  to  comply 
with  it.  Her  silence  was  immediately  covered  by  Mrs  Pryor, 
who  proceeded  to  address  sundry  questions  to  Mr  Helstone 
regarding  a  family  or  two  in  the  neighbourhood,  with  whose 
connections  in  the  south  she  said  she  was  acauainted.  Shirley 
soon  withdrew  her  gaze  from  Miss  Helstone^s  face.  She  did 
not  renew  her  interrogations,  but  returning  to  her  flowers,  pro- 
ceeded to  choose  a  nosegay  for  the  Eector.  .  She  presented  it 
to  him  as  he  took  leave,  and  received  the  homage  of  a  salute 
on  tiie  hand  in  return. 

"  Be  sure  you  wear  it  for  my  sake,"  said  she. 

**  Next  my  heart,  of  course,"  responded  Helstone.  "  Mrs 
Piyor,  take  care  of  this  iuture  magistrate,  this  churchwarden 
in  perspective,  this  captain  of  yeomanry,  this  young  squire  of 
Bnarfield,  in  a  word:  don^t  let  him  exert  himself  too  much: 
<ion^  let  him  break  his  neck  in  hunting :  especially,  let  him  mind 
how  he  rides  down  that  dangerous  hill  near  the  Hollow." 

"I  like  a  descent,"   said    Shirley — "I  like  to  clear  it 


168  SHIRLET. 

rapidly;  and  especially  I  like  that  romantic  Hollow,  with  aU 
my  lieart." 

"  Komantic — vnth  a  mill  in  it  ?  " 

''  Eomantic  with  a  mill  in  it.  The  old  mill  and  the  wlute 
cottage  are  each  admirable  in  its  way." 

"  And  the  counting-house,  Mr  Keeldar  ?  " 

"The  counting-house  is  better  than  my  bloom-coloured 
drawing-room:  I  adore  the  counting-house." 

"  And  the  trade?  The  cloth — ^the  greasy  wool — ^the  pol- 
luting dyeing-vats  ?  " 

"  The  trade  is  to  be  thoroughly  respected." 

"  And  the  tradesman  is  a  hero  ?     Good! " 

*^  I  am  glad  to  hear  you  say  so :  I  thought  the  tradesman 
looked  heroic." 

Mischief,  spirit,  and  glee  sparkled  all  over  her  face  as  she 
thus  bandied  words  with  the  old  Cossack,  who  almost  equally 
enjoyed  the  tilt. 

"  Captain  Keeldar,  you  have  no  mercantile  blood  in  your 
veins :  why  are  you  so  fond  of  trade  ?  " 

'^  Because  I  am  a  mill-owner,  of  course.  Half  my  inoome 
comes  from  the  works  in  that  Hollow." 

"  Don*t  enter  into  partnership,  that 's  all." 

"  You've  put  it  into  my  head  1  you  Ve  put  it  into  my  head!" 
she  exclaimed,  with  a  joyous  laugh.  '^  It  will  never  get  out: 
thank  you."  And  waving  her  hand,  white  as  a  lily  and  £ne 
as  a  fairy's,  she  vanished  within  the  porch,  while  Uie  Bector 
and.  his  niece  passed  out  through  the  arched  gateway. 


CHAPTER  XIL 

SHIRLET  AND  CAROLINE. 


Shirlet  showed  she  had  been  sincere  in  sajdng  she  should  be 
glad  of  Caroline's  society,  by  frequently  seeking  it:  and,  indeed, 
if  she  had  not  sought  it,  she  would  not  have  bad  it ;  for  Miss 
Helstone  was  slow  to  make  fresh  acquaintance.  She  was  always 
held  back  by  the  idea  that  people  could  not  want  her, — ^that 
she  could  not  amuse  them  ;  and  a  brilliant,  happy^  youthful 
creature,  like  the  heiress  of  Fieldhead,  seemed  to  her  too 
completely  independent  of  society  so  uninteresting  as  heiBj 
ever  to  find  it  really  welcome. 


BHIBLET  AND  GAROLIN£.  169 

Shirley  might  be  brilliant,  and  probably  happy  likewise,  but 
&o  one  is  independent  of  genial  society;  and  though  in  about  a 
month  she  had  made  the  acquaintance  of  most  of  the  &milies 
round,  and  was  on  quite  free  and  easy  terms  with  all  the  Misses 
Sykes,  and  all  the  Misses  Pearson,  and  the  two  superlative 
Misses  Wynne  of  Walden  Hall ;  yet,  it  appeared,  she  found  none 
amongst  ^em  very  genial:  she  fraternized  with  none  of  them, 
to  use  her  own  words.  If  she  had  had  the  bliss  to  be  really 
Shirley  Keeldar,  Esq.,  Lord  of  the  Manor  of  Briarfield,  there 
was  not  a  single  fair  one  in  this  and  the  two  neighbouring 
parishes,  wbom  she  should  have  felt  disposed  to  request  to 
become  Mrs  Keeldar,  lady  of  the  manor.  This  declaration  she 
made  to  Mrs  Pryor,  who  received  it  very  quietly,  as  she  did 
most  of  her  pupil's  off-hand  speeches,  responding, — 

'*  My  dear,  do  not  allow  that  habit  of  alluding  to  yourself  as 
a  gentleman  to  be  confirmed :  it  is  a  strange  one.  Those  who 
do  not  know  you,  hearing  you  speak  thus,  would  think  you 
affected  noasculine  manners." 

Shirley  never  laughed  at  her  former  governess :  even  the 
little  formalities  and  harmless  peculiarities  of  that  lady  were 
respectable  in  her  eyes :  had  it  been  otherwise,  she  would  have 
proved  herself  a  weak  character  at  once :  for  it  is  only  the  weak 
who  make  a  butt  of  quiet  worth ;  therefore  sbe  took  her  remon- 
strance in  silence.  She  stood  quietly  near  the  window,  looking 
at  the  grand  cedar  on  her  lawn,  watching  a  bird  on  one  of  its 
lower  boughs.  Presently  she  began  to  chirrup  to  the  bird :  soon 
her  chirrup  grew  clearer ;  erelong  she  was  whistling ;  the  whistle 
stmck  into  a  tune,  and  very  sweetly  and  deMy  it  was  executed. 
"  My  dear ! "  expostulated  Mrs  Pryor. 
"Was  I  whistling?"  said  Shirley;  "I  forgot.  I  beg  your 
pardon,  ma'am.  I  had  resolved  to  take  care  not.  to  whistle 
before  yoxL" 

"  But,  Miss  Keeldar,  where  did  you  learn  to  whistle  ?    You 
most  have  got  the  habit  since  you  came  down  into  Yorkshire. 
I  never  knew  you  guilty  of  it  before." 
"  Oh !  I  learned  to  whistle  a  long  while  ago." 
"Who  taught  you?" 

"  No  one :  I  took  it  up  by  listening,  and  I  had  laid  it  down 

igain;  but  lately,  yesterday  evening,  as  I  was  coming  up  our 

lane,  I  heard  a  gentleman  whistling  that  very  tune  in  the  field 

QQ  the  other  side  of  the  hedge,  and  that  reminded  me." 

"What  gentleman  was  it  ?" 

''We  have  only  one  gentleman  in  this  region,  ma*amj  and 


170  SHIBLET. 

that  is  Mr  Moore ;  at  least  he  is  the  only  gentlemaxi  who  w  not 
grey-haired:  my  two  venerable  favourites,  Mr  Hektone  and 
Mr  Yorke,  it  is  true,  are  fine  old  beaux;  infinitely  better  than 
any  of  the  stupid  young  ones." 

Mrs  Pryor  was  silent. 

"  You  do  not  like  Mr  Helstone,  ma^am  ?" 

"  My  dear,  Mr  Helstone's  office  secur^  him  from  criticism.'' 

'^  You  generally  contrive  to  leave  tne  room  when  he  is 
announced." 

"  Do  you  walk  oiit  this  morning,  my  dear  ?" 

'^  Yes,  I  shall  go  to  the  Bectory,  and  seek  and  find  Caroline 
Helstone,  and  make  her  take  some  exercise:  she  shall  have  a 
breezy  walk  over  Nunnely  Common." 

"  If  you  go  in  that  direction,  my  dear,  have  the  goodness  to 
remind  Miss  Helstone  to  wrap  up  well,  as  there  is  a  &esh  wind, 
and  she  appears  to  me  to  require  care." 

"  You  shall  be  minutely  obeyed,  Mrs.  Pryor:  meantime, 
will  you  not  accompany  us  yourself?  " 

"  No,  my  love;  I  should  be  a  restraint  upon  you:  I  am 
stout,  and  cannot  walk  so  quickly  as  you  would  wi^  to  do." 

Shirley  easily  persuaded  Caroline  to  go  with  her:  and  when 
they  were  fairly  out  on  the  quiet  road,  traversing  the  exten- 
sive and  solitary  sweep  of  Nimnely  Common,  she  as  easilj 
drew  her  into  conversation.  The  first  feelings  of  diffidence 
overcome,  Caroline  soon  felt  glad  to  talk  with  Miss  Keeldar. 
The  very  first  interchange  of  slight  observations  sufficed  to 
give  each  an  idea  of  what  the  other  was.  Shirley  said  she 
liked  the  green  sweep  of  the  common  turf,  and,  better  still, 
the  heath  on  its  ridges,  for  the  heath  reminded  her  of  moors: 
she  had  seen  moors  when  she  was  travelling  on  the  borders 
near  Scotland.  She  remembered  particularly  a  district 
traversed  one  long  aflemoon,  on  a  sultry  but  sunless  day  in 
simimer  :  they  journeyed  from  noon  till  sunset,  over  what 
seemed  a  boundless  waste  of  deep  heath,  and  nothing  had  they 
seen  but  wild  sheep ;  nothing  heaxd  but  the  cries  of  wild  bird& 

"  I  know  how  the  heath  would  look  on  such  a  day,"  said 
Caroline;  "  purple-black:  a  deeper  shade  of  the  sky-tint,  and 
that  would  be  Uvid." 

"  Yes — quite  livid,  with  brassy  edges  to  the  clouds,  and 
here  and  ijiere  a  white  gleam,  more  ghastly  than  the  loiid 
tinge,  which,  as  you  looked  at  it,  you  momentarily  expected 
would  kindle  into  blinding  lightning." 

"  Did  it  thunder  ?  " 


SHIBLET  AKD  CAROLINE.  171 

^  It  muttered  distant  peals,  but  the  storm  did  not  break  till 
evening,  after  we  had  reached  our  inn:  that  inn  being  an 
isolated  house  at  the  foot  of  a  range  of  mountains." 

"  Did  you  watch  the  clouds  come  down  over  the  mountains  ?  " 

**I  did:  I  stood  at  the  window  an  hour  watching  them. 
The  hills  seemed  rolled  in  a  sullen  mist,  and  when  die  rain 
fell  in  whitening  sheets,  suddenly  they  were  blotted  from  die 
prospect:  they  were  washed  from  the  world." 

^^  I  hare  seen  such  storms  in  hilly  districts  in  Torkshii^; 
and  at  their  riotous  climax,  while  the  sky  was  all  cataract, 
the  earth  all  flood,  I  have  remembered  the  Deluge." 

"  It  ifi  singularly  reviving  after  suoh  hurricanes  to  feel  calm 
return,  and  from  the  opening  clouds  to  receive  a  consolatory 
gleam,  softly  testifying  that  the  sun  is  not  quenched." 

''Miss  Keeldar,  just  stand  still  now,  and  look  down  at 
Nunnely  dale  and  wood." 

They  both  halted  on  the  green' brow  of  the  Goolimon:  they 
looked  down  on  the  deep  valley  robed  in  May  raiment :  on 
varied  meads,  some  pearled  with  daisies,  and  some  golden 
with  king-cups:  to-day  all  this  young  verdure  smiled  clear 
in  sunlight ;  transparent  emerald  and  amber  gleams  played 
over  it.  On  Nmmwood — the  sole  renmant  of  antique  British 
forest  in  a  region  whose  lowlands  were  once  all  sylvan  chase, 
as  its  highlands  were  breast-deep  heather — slept  the  shadow  of 
a  cloud;  the  distant  hills  were  dappled,  the  horizon  was  shaded 
and  tinted  like  mother-of-pearl;  silvery  blues,  soft  purples, 
evanescent  greens  and  rose-shades,  all  melting  into  fleeces 
of  white  cloud,  pure  as  azury  snow,  allured  the  eye  as  with  a 
remote  glimpse  of  heaven's  foimdations.  The  air  blowing  on 
the  brow  was  fresh,  and  sweet,  and  bracing. 

''Our  England  is  a  bonni&  island,"  said  Shirley^  ^and 
Yorkshire  is  one  pf  her  bonniest  nooks." 

"  You  are  a  Yorkshire  girl  too  ?  " 

"  I  am — ^Yorkshire  in  blood  and  birth.  Five  generations 
of  my  race  sleep  imder  the  aisles  of  Briarfield  Church:  I  drew 
my  first  breath  in  the  old  black  hall  behind  us." 

Hereupon  Caroline  presented  her  hand,  which  was  accord* 
ingly  taken  and  shaken.     "  We  are  compatriots,"  said  she. 

"  Yes,"  agreed  Shirley,  with  a  grave  nod. 

"  And  that,"  asked  Miss  Keeldar,  poiifting  to  the  forest*— 
<*  that  is  NunnwQod  ?  " 

"  It  is." 

**  Were  you  ever  there  ?  •* 


172  SHIRLS7. 

*'  Many  a  time." 

**  La  the  heart  of  it  ?  " 

"  Yes." 

"  What  is  it  like  ?  " 

''  It  is  like  an  encampment  of  forest  sons  of  Anak.  The 
trees  are  huge  and  old.  When  you  stand  at  their  roots,  the 
summits  seem  in  another  region:  the  trunks  remain  still  and 
firm  as  pillars,  while  the  boughs  sway  to  every  breeze.  In 
the  deepest  calm  their  leaves  are  never  quite  hushed,  and  in 
high  wind  a  flood  rushes — a  sea  thimders  above  you." 

"  Was  it  not  one  of  liobin  Hood's  haunts  ?  " 

"  Yes,  and  there  are  mementos  of  him  still  existing.  To 
penetrate  into  Nunnwood,  Miss  Keeldar,  is  to  go  far  back  into 
the  dim  days  of  eld.  Can  you  see  a  break  in  the  forest,  about 
the  centre  ?  " 

"  Yes,  distinctly." 

"  That  break  is  a  dell;  a  deep,  hollow  cup,  lined  with  turf 
as  green  and  short  as  the  sod  of  this  Common:  the  very  oldest 
of  the  trees,  gnarled  mighty  oaks,  crowd  about  the  biiilk  of 
this  dell:  in  the  bottom  lie  the  ruins  of  a  mmnery." 

"  We  will  go — you  and  I  alone,  Caroline — ^to  that  wood, 
early  some  fine  summer  morning,  and  spend  a  long  day  there. 
We  can  take  pencils  and  sketch-books,  and  any  interesting 
reading-book  we  like ;  and  of  course  we  shall  take  something 
to  eat.  I  have  two  little  baskets,  in  which  Mrs  Gill,  my  house- 
keeper, might  pack  our  provisions,  and  we  could  each  carry 
our  own.     It  would  not  tire  you  too  much  to  walk  so  iar  ?  " 

"  Oh,  no ;  especially  if  we  rested  the  whole  day  in  the  wood, 
and  I  know  all  the  pleasantest  spots :  I  know  where  we  could 
get  nuts  in  nutting  time;  I  know  where  wild  strawberries 
abound;  I  know  certain  lonely,  quite  imtrodden  glades,  car- 
peted with  strange  mosses,  some  yellow  as  if  gilded,  some  a 
sober  grey,  some  gem-green.  I  know  groups  of  trees  that 
ravish  the  eye  with  their  perfect,  picture-like  effects :  rude  oak, 
delicate  birch,  glossy  beech,  clustered  in  contrast;  and  ash 
trees  stately  as  Saul,  standing  isolated,  and  superannuated 
wood-giants  clad  in  bright  shrouds  of  ivy.  Miss  Keeldar,  I 
could  guide  you." 

"  You  would  be  dull  with  me  alone  ?  " 

^'I  should  not.  I  think  we  should  suit:  and  what  third 
person  is  there  whose  presence  would  not  spoil  our  pleasure  ?* 

''  Indeed,  I  know  of  none  about  our  own  ages — ^no  lady  at 
least,  and  as  to  gentlemen- 


SHIRLEY  AND  CAROLINE.  173 

"  An  excursion  becomes  quite  a  different  thing  when  there 
are  gentlemen  of  the  party,"  interrupted  Caroline. 

"  I  agree  with  you— quite  a  different  thing  to  what  we  were 
proposing." 

"  We  were  going  simply  to  see  the  old  trees,  the  old  ruins ; 
to  pass  a  day  in  old  times,  surrounded  by  olden  silence,  and 
above  all  hy  quietude." 

"  You  are  right ;  and  the  presence  of  gentlemen  dispels  the 
last  charm,  I  think.  '  If  they  are  of  the  wrong  sort,  like  your 
Malones,  and  your  young  Sykes,  and  Wynnes,  irritation  takes 
the  place  of  serenity.  If  they  are  of  the  right  sort,  there  is  still 
a  change — ^I  can  hardly  tell  what  change,  one  easy  to  feel, 
difficult  to  describe." 

"  We  forget  Nature,  imprimis." 

"  And  then  Nature  forgets  us  ;  covers  her  vast  calm  brow 
with  a  dim  veil,  conceals  her  face,  and  withdraws  the  peaceful 
joy  with  which,  if  we  had  been  content  to  worship  her  only, 
she  would  have  filled  our  hearts." 

"  What  does  she  give  us  instead  ?  " 

"  More  elation  and  more  anxiety :  an  excitement  that  steals 
the  hours  away  fast,  and  a  trouble  that  ruffles  their  course." 

"  Our  power  of  being  happy  lies  a  good  deal  in  ourselves,  I 
believe,"  remarked  Caroline  sagely.  "  I  have  gone  to  Nunn- 
wood  with  a  large  party,  all  the  curates  and  some  other  gentry 
of  these  parts,  together  with  sundry  ladies;  and  I  found  the 
affair  insufferably  tedious  and  absurd :  and  I  have  gone  quite 
alone,  or  accompanied  but  by  Fanny,  who  sat  in  the  woodman's 
hut  and  sewed,  or  talked  to  the  goodwife,  while  I  roamed  about 
and  made  sketches,  or  read ;  and  I  have  enjoyed  much^  happi- 
ness of  a  quiet  kind  all  day  long.  But  that  was  when  I  was 
young — ^two  years  ago." 

"Did  you  ever  go  with  your  cousin,  Robert  Moore  ?  " 

"Yes;  once." 

"What  sort  of  a  companion  is  he  on  these  occasions  ?  ^ 

"A  cousin,  you  know,  is  different  to  a  stranger." 

"I  am  aware  of  that;  but  cousins,  if  they  are  stupid,  are 
•till  more  insupportable  than  strangers,  because  you  cannot  so 
easily  keep  them  at  a  distance.  But  your  cousin  is  not  stupid  ?  " 

"No;  but—" 

"Well?" 

"If  the  company  of  fools  irritates,  as  you  say,  the  society 
rfotevcr  men  leaves  its  own  peculiar  pain  also.  Where  the 
j^oodneM  or  talent  of  your  friend  is  beyond  and  above  all  doubts 


174  SSIBLBT. 

jeixt  own  wortiMneMto  be  his^ssociate  often  becomei  a  matter 
of  question." 

"  OhI  there  I  cannot  follow  you:  that  crotchet  is  not  one  I 
should  choose  to  entertain  for  an  instant.  I  consider  myself  not 
unworthy  to  be  the  associate  of  the  best  of  them — of  gentlemen, 
I  mean  s  though  that  is  saying  a  great  deal.  Where  they  are 
good,  they  are  very  good,  I  believe.  Your  uncle,  by-thc-by, 
is  not  a  bad  specimen  of  the  elderly  gentleman:  I  am  alwajs 
glad  to  see  his  brown,  keen,  sensible  old  face,  either  in  my  own 
house  or  any  other.  Are  you  fond  of  him  ?  Is  he  land  tn 
you  ?    Now  speak  the  truUi." 

"  He^  has  brought  me  up  from  childhood,  I  doubt  not,  pre* 
cisely  as  he  would  have  brought  up  his  own  daughter,  if  he  had 
had  one  ;  and  that  is  kindness ;  but  I  am  not  fond  of  him :  1 
would  rather  be  out  of  his  presence  than  in  it." 

*^  Strange !  when  he  has  the  art  of  making  himself  so 
agreeable." 

"  Yes,  in  company ;  but  he  is  stem  and  silent  at  home.  As 
he  puts  away  his  cane  and  shovel-hat  in  the  Rectory-hall,  so 
he  locks  his  liveliness  in  his  book-case  and  study-desk :  the 
knitted  brow  and  brief  word  for  the  fire-side  ;  the  smile,  the 
jest,  the  witty  sally,  for  society." 

"  Is  he  tyrannical  ?  " 

"  Not  in  the  least :  he  is  neither  tyrannieal  nor  hypocrideal: 
he  is  simply  a  man  who  is  rather  liberal  than  good-natnred, 
rather  briUiant  than  genial,  rather  scrupulously  eqnitable 
than  truly  just, — ^if  you  can  understand  such  super&ie  dis- 
tinctions?" 

'^  Oh  I  yes  :  good-nature  implies  indulgence,  which  he  hu 
not;  geniality,  warmth  of  heart,  which  he  does  not  own ;  and 
genuine  justice  is  the  offspring  of  sympathy  and  considerateness, 
of  which,  I  can  well  conceive,  my  bronzed  old  friend  is  quite 
innocent." 

''  I  often  wonder,  Shirley,  whether  most  men  reiemble  mj 
uncle  in  their  domestic  relations ;  whether  it  is  necessary  to  be 
new  and  unfamiliar  to  them,  in  order  to  seem  agreeable  or 
estimable  in  their  eyes  ;  and  whether  it  is  impossible  to  theif 
natures  to  retain  a  constant  interest  and  affection  for  those  thej 
see  every  day." 

"  I  don't  know :  I  can't  clear  up  your  doubts.  I  ponder  over 
similar  ones  myself  sometimes.  But,  to  tell  you  a  secret,  if 
I  were  convinced  that  they  are  necessarily  and  muTenally 
different  from  us — ^fickle,  soon  petrifying,  uns3niipailhifiBg«-<'I 


SHIRLET  AKD  CAROLINE.  175 

would  neyer  marry.  I  should  not  like  to  find  out  that  what  I 
loved  did  not  love  me,  that  it  was  weary  of  me,  and  that  what- 
ever eSoTi  I  might  make  to  please  would  hereafter  be  worse 
than  useless,  since  it  was  inevitably  in  its  nature  to  change  and 
become  indifferent.  That  discovery  once  made,  what  should  I 
long  for  ?  To  go  away — ^to  remove  from  a  presence  where  my 
Bodety  gave  no  pleasure.*' 
"  But  you  could  not,  if  you  were  married." 
"  No,  I  could  not, — ^there  it  is.  I  could  n^ver  be  my  own 
mistress  more.  A  terrible  thought  1 — ^it  suffocates  me!  Nothing 
irka  me  like  the  idea  of  being  a  burden  and  a  bore, — ^an  in- 
evitable burden, — a  ceaseless  bore!  Now,  when  I  feel  my 
company  superfluous,  I  can  comfortably  fold  my  independence 
round  me  like  a  mantle,  and  drop  my  pride  Hke  a  veil,  and 
withdraw  to  solitude.     If  married,  that  could  not  be." 

"I  wonder  we  don't  all  make  up  our  minds  to  remain  single," 
said  Caroline  :  "we  should  if  we  listened  to  the  wisdom  of 
experience.  My  uncle  always  speaks  of  marriage  as  a  burden ; 
and  I  believe  whenever  he  hears  of  a  man  being  married,  he 
invariably  regards  him  as  a  fool,  or,  at  any  rate,  as  doing  a 
foolish  thing." 

'*  But,  Caroline,  men  are  not  all  like  your  uncle:  surely  not 
— ^I  hope  not." 
She  paused  and  mused. 

^*  I  suppose  we  each  find  an  exception  in  the  one  we  love, 
till  we  are  married,"  suggested  Caroline.  v-^ 

"  I  suppose  BO :  and  this  ei^ception  we  believe  to  Ibe  of  sterling 
mateiialB ;  we  fancy  it  like  oiurselves  ;  we  imagine  a  sense  of 
harmony.  We  think  his  voice  gives  the  softest,  truest  promise 
of  a  heart  that  will  never  harden  against  us :  we  read  in  his 
eyes  that  faithful  feeling — affection.  I  don't  think  we  shoidd 
trust  to  what  they  call  passion  at  aU,  Caroline.  I  believe  it  is 
a  mere  fire  of  dry  sticks,  blazing  up  and  vanishing :  but  we 
watch  him,  and  see  him  kind  to  animals,  to  little  children,  to 
poor  people.  He  is  kind  to  us  likewise — good— considerate : 
be  does  not  flatter  women,  but  he  is  patient  with  them,  and  he 
seems  to  be  easy  in  their  presence,  and  to  find  their  company 
geniaL  He  likes  them  not  only  for  vain  and  selfish  reasons, 
but  as  we  like  him — because  we  like  him.  Then  we  observe 
that  he  is  just — ^that  he  always  speaks  the  truth — ^that  he  is 
conscientious.  We  feel  joy  and  peace  when  he  comes  into  a 
loom :  we  feel  sadness  and  trouble  when  he  leaves  it.  We 
bow  that  this  man  has  been  a  kind  son,  that  he  is  a  kind 


176  SHIRLET. 

brotiher:  will  any  one  dare  to  tell  me  that  be  will  not  be  a  kind 
husband  ?" 

"  My  uncle  would  affirm  it  unhesitatingly.  '  He  will  be  sick 
of  you  in  a  month,*  he  would  say." 

"  Mrs  Pryor  would  seriously  intimate  the  same." 

"  Mrs  Yorke  and  Miss  Mann  would  darkly  suggest  ditto.'* 

"  If  they  are  true  oracles,  it  is  good  never  to  fall  in  love." 

"  Very  good,  if  you  can  avoid  it." 

"  I  choose  to  doubt  their  truthV* 

"  I  am  afraid  that  proves  you  are  already  caught." 

"  Not  I :  but  if  I  were,  do  you  know  what  soothsayera  I 
would  consult  ?  " 

"  Let  me  hear." 

"Neither  man  nor  woman,  elderly  nor  young: — ^the  little 
Irish  beggar  that  comes  barefoot  to  my  door ;  the  monse  that 
steals  out  of  the  cranny  in  the  wainscot ;  the  bird  that  in  ^rost 
and  snow  pecks  at  my  window  for  a  crumb ;  the  dog  that 
licks  my  hand  and  sits  beside  my  knee." 

"  Did  you  ever  see  any  one  who  was  kind  to  such  things  ?" 

"Did  you  ever  see  any  one  whom  such  things  seemed 
instinctively  to  follow,  like,  rely  on  ?  "    . 

"  We  have  a  black  cat  and  an  old  dog  at  the  Rectory.  I 
know  somebody  to  whose  knee  that  black  cat  loves  to  climb  ,* 
against  whose  shoulder  and  cheek  it  likes  to  purr.  The  old 
dog  always  comes  out  of  his  kennel  and  wags  bis  tail,  and 
whines  affectionately  when  somebody  passes." 

"  And  what  does  that  somebody  do  ?" 

"  He  quietly  strokes  the  cat,  and  lets  her  sit  while  be  con- 
veniently can,  and  when  he  must  disturb  her  by  rising,  he 
puts  her  softly  down,  and  never  flings  her  from  bim  roughly; 
be  always  whistles  to  the  dog  and  gives  him  a  caress." 

"  Does  he  ?     It  is  not  Robert  ?  " 

"  But  it  is  Robert." 

"Handsome  fellow!"  said  Shirley,  with  enthusiasm:  her 
eyes  sparkled. 

"  Is  he  not  handsome  ?  Has  he  not  fine  eyes  and  well-cat 
features,  and  a  clear,  princely  forehead?" 

"  He  has  all  that,  Caroline.  Bless  him !  he  is  both  graceful 
and  good." 

"  I  was  sure  you  would  see  that  he  was :  when  I  first 
looked  at  your  face  I  knew  you  would." 

"  I  was  well  inclined  to  him  before  1  saw  bim.  I  bleed 
bim  when  I  did  see  him :  I  admire  him  now.    There  is  cbann 


f 
SHIRLEY  AND  CAliOLlNE.  177 

in  beauty  for  itself^  Caroline  ;  when  it  is  blent  with  goodnes8| 
there  is  a  powerful  charm." 

«  When  mind  is  added,  Shirley  ?  " 

"Who  can  resist  it?" 

"  Remember  my  uncle,  Mesdames  Pryor,  Yorke,  and  Mann.** 

"  Kemember  the  croaking  of  the  frogs  of  Egypt !  He  is 
a  noble  being.  I  tell  you  when  they  are  good,  they  are  the 
lords  of  the  creation, — they  are  the  sons  of  God.  Moulded 
in  their  Maker's  image,  the  minutest  spark  of  His  spirit  lifts 
them  almost  above  mortality.  Indisputably,  a  great,  good, 
handsome  man  is  the  first  of  created  things." 

"Above  us?" 

"  I  would  scorn  to  contend  for  empire  with  him, — ^I  would 
8com  it.  Shall  my  left  hand  dispute  for  precedence  with  my 
right? — shall  my  heart  quarrel  with  my.  pulse? — shall  my 
veins  be  jealous  of  the  blood  which  fills  them  ?" 

"Men  and  women,  husbands  and  wives  quarrel  horribly, 
Shirley." 

"  Poor  things  I — ^poor,  fallen,  degenerate  things !  God  made 
them  for  another  lot — for  other  feelings." 

"  But  are  we  men's  equals,  or  are  we  not  ?" 

"  Nothing  ever  charms  me  more  than  when  I  meet  my  supe- 
rior—one who  makes  me  sincerely  feel  that  he  is  my  superior," 

"  Did  you  ever  meet  him  ?" 

"  I  should  be  glad  to  see  him  any  day :  the  higher  above 
me,  60  much  the  better:  it  degrades  to  stoop — it  is  glorious 
to  look  up.  What  fi:ets  tne  is,  that  when  1  try  to  esteem,  I 
am  baffled:  when  religiously  inclined,  there  are  but  false 
gods  to  adore.    I  disdain  to  be  a  Pagan." 

"Miss  Keeldar,  will  you  come  in?  "We  are  here  at  the 
Bectory  gates." 

"  Not  to-day ;  but  to-morrow  I  shall  fetch  you  to  spend 
the  evening  with  me.  Caroline  Helstone^ — if  you  really  are 
what  at  present  to  me  you  seem — you  and  I  will  suit.  I 
have  never  in  my  whole  life  been  able  to  talk  to  a  yormg 
lady  as  I  have  talked  to  you  this  morning.  Eass  me — ^and 
good-bye," 

Mrs  Pryor  seemed  as  well-disposed  to  cultivate  Caroline's 
acqiiaintaTice  as  Shirley.  She,  who  went  nowhere  else,  called 
on  an  early  day  at  the  Rectory.  She  came  in  the  afternoon, 
when  the  Bector  happened  to  be  out.  It  was  rather  a  close 
day ;  the  heat  of  the  weather  had  flushed  her,  and  she  seemed 

12 


178  SHIBLEr. 

fluttered,  too,  by  the  circumstance  of  entering  a  strange  house; 
for  it  appeared  her  habits  were  most  retiring  and  secluded. 
When  Miss  Helstone  went  to  her  in  the  dining-room,  she  found 
her  seated  on  the  sofa,  trembling,  fanning  herself  with  her 
handkerchief,  and  seeming  to  contend  with  a  nenrous  discom- 
posure that  threatened  to  become  hysterical. 

Caroline  marvelled  somewhat  at  this  unusual  want  of  self- 
command  in  a  lady  of  her  years,  and  also  at  the  lack  of  real 
strength  in  one  who  appeared  almost  robust :  for  Mrs  Pryor 
hastened  to  allege  the  fatigue  of  her  walk,  the  heat  of  the  son, 
&c.,  as  reasons  for  her  temporary  indisposition  ;  and  still  as, 
with  more  hurry  than  coherence,  she  again  and  again  enume- 
rated these  causes  of  exhaustion,  Caroline  gently  sought  to 
relieve  her  by  opening  her  shawl  and  removing  her  bonnet. 
Attentions  of  this  sort,  Mrs  Pryor  would  not  have  accepted 
from  every  one  :  in  general,  she  recoiled  from  touch  or  close 
approach,  with  a  mixture  of  embarrassment  and  coldness  far 
from  flattering  to  those  who  offered  her  aid :  to  Miss  Helstone^s 
little  light  hand,  however,  she  yielded  tractably,  and  seemed 
soothed  by  its  contact.  In  a  few  minutes  she  ceased  to  tremble, 
and  grew  quiet  and  tranquil. 

Her  usual  manner  being  resumed,  she  proceeded  to  talk  of 
ordinary  topics.  In  a  miscellaneous  company,  Mrs  Pryor 
rarely  opened  her  lips  ;  or,  if  obliged  to  speak,  she  spoke  imder 
restraint,  and  consequently  not  well ;  in  dialogue,  she  was  a 
good  converser  :  her  language,  always  a  little  formal,  was  well 
chosen ;  her  sentiments  were  just ;  her  information  waa  varied 
and  correct.  Caroline  felt  it  pleasant  to  listen  to  her:  more 
pleasant  than  she  could  have  anticipated. 

'  On  the  wall  opposite  the  sofa  where  they  sat,  hung  three 
pictures:  the  centre  one,  above  the  mantelpiece,  that  of  a  lady; 
the  two  others,  male  portraits. 

"  That  is  a  beautiful  face,"  said  Mrs  Pryor,  interrupting  a 
brief  pause  which  had  followed  half  an  hour's  animated  con- 
versation: "  the  features  may  be  termed  perfect;  no  statuary'i 
chisel  could  improve  them :  it  is  a  portrait  from  the  life,  I 
presume  ?" 

"  It  is  a  portrait  of  Mrs  Helstone." 

"  Of  Mrs  Matthewson  Helstone  ?     Of  your  uncle's  wife?" 

"  It  is,  and  is  said  to  be  a  good  likeness  :  before  her 
marriage,  she  was  accounted  the  beauty  of  the  district." 

"  I  should  say  she  merited  the  distinction  :  what  accuracy 
In  all  the  lineaments!    It  is,  however,  a  passive  faoe:  the 


SHIBLET  AND  CABOUNS.  179 

onginal  could  not  have  been,  what  is  generally  tenned,  'a 
woman  of  spirit.*" 

"  I  believe  she  was  a  remarkably  still,  silent  person." 

"  One  would  scarcely  have  expected,  my  dear,  that  your 
unde's  choice  should  have  fallen  on  a  partner  of  that  descrip- 
tion.    Is  he  not  fond  of  being  amused  by  lively  chat  ?" 

"  In  company  he  is  ;  but  he  always  says  he  could  never  do 
with  a  talking  wife  :  he  must  have  quiet  at  home.  You  go 
out  to  gossip,  he  aj£rms ;  you  come  home  to  read  and  reflect." 

<<  Mrs  Matthewson  lived  but  a  few  years  after  her  marriage, 
I  think  I  have  heard?" 

"  About  five  years." 

"Well,  my  dear,"  pursued  Mrs  Pryor,  rising  to  go,  "I 
trust  it  is  understood  that  ypu  will  frequently  come  to  Meld- 
head :  I  hope  you  will.  You  must  feel  lonely  here,  having 
no  female  relative  in  the  house :  you  must  necessarily  pass 
much  of  your  time  in  solitude." 

"  I  am  inured  to  it :  I  have  grown  up  by  myself.  May  I 
arrange  your  shawl  for  you  ?" 

Mrs  I^or  submitted  to  be  assisted. 

"  Should  you  chance  to  require  help  in  your  studies,"  she 
said,  "  you  may  comimand  me." 

Caroline  expressed  her  sense  of  such  kindness. 

"  I  hope  to  have  frequent  conversations  with  you.  I  should 
wish  to  be  of  use  to  you." 

Again  Miss  Helstone  returned  thanks.  She  thought  what 
a  kind  heart  was  hidden  under  her  visitor's  seeming  chilliness. 
Observing  that  Mrs  Pryor  again  glanced  with  an  air  of 
interest  towards  the  portraits,  as  she  walked  down  the  room, 
Caroline  casually  explained  : — 

'<  The  likeness  that  hangs  near  the  window,  you  will  see,  is 
my  uncle,  taken  twenty  years  ago  ;  the  other,  to  the  left  of 
the  mantelpiece,  is  his  brother  James,  my  father." 

"  They  resemble  each  other  in  some  measure,"  said  Mrs. 
Pryor ;  "  yet  a  difference  of  character  may  be  traced  in  the 
different  mould  of  the  brow  and  mouth." 

"What  difference?"  inquired  Caroline,  accompanying 
her  to  the  door.  "  James  Helstone — that  is,  my  father — ^is 
generally  considered  the  best-looking  of  the  two :  strangers, 
I  remark,  always  exclaim, '  What  a  handsome  man  1 '  Do  you 
think  lus  picture  handsome,  Mrs  Pryor  ?" 

"  It  is  much  softer  or  finer  featured  than  that  of  your 
tnclc" 


180  smsLfiY. 

"  But  where  or  what  is  the  difference  of  character  to  which 
you  alluded  ?     Tell  me :  I  wish  to  see  if  you  guess  right." 

"  My  dear,  your  uncle  is  a  man  of  principle:  his  forehead 
and  his  lips  are  firm,  and  his  eye  is  steady."    - 

"  Well,  and  the  other  ?  Do  not  be  afraid  of  offending  me: 
I  always  like  the  truth." 

"  Do  you  like  the  truth  ?  It  is  well  for  you:  adliere  to  that 
preference — ^never  swerve  thence.  The  otJier,  my  dear,  if  he 
had  been  living  now,  would  probably  have  furnished  Httlc 
support  to  his  daughter.  It  is,  however,  a  graced  head — 
taken  in  youth,  I  should  think.  My  dear"  (turning  abruptly), 
"  you  acknowledge  an  inestimate  value  in  principle  ?  " 

"  I  am  sure  no  character  can  have  true  worth  without  it." 

"  You  feel  what  you  say  ?  You  have  considered  the  subject  ?  " 

"  Often.    Circumstances  early  forced  it  upon  my  attention." 

'^  The  lesson  was  not  lost,  then,  though  it  came  so  prema- 
turely. I  suppose  the  soil  is  not  light  nor  stony,  otherwise 
seed  falling  in  that  season  never  would  have  borne  fruit.  Mj 
dear,  do  not  stand  in  the  air  of  the  door,  you  will  take  cold: 
good  afternoon." 

Miss  Helstone^s  new  acquaintance  soon  became,  of  value  to 
her :  their  society  was  acknowledged  a  privilege.  She  found 
she  would  have  been  in  error  indeed  to  have  let  slip  this 
chance  of  reKef — ^to  have  neglected  to  avail  herself  of  this 
happy  change  :  a  turn  was  thereby  given  to  her  thoughts ;  a 
new  channel  was  opened  for  them,  which,  diverting  a  few  of 
them  at  least  from  the  one  direction  in  which  all  had  hitherto 
tended,  abated  the  impetuosity  of  their  rush,  and  lessened  the 
force  of  their  pressure  on  one  womnlown  point. 

Soon  she  was  content  to  spend  whole  days  at  Fieldhead, 
doing  by  turns  whatever  Shirley  or  Mrs  Pryor  wished  her  to 
do:  and  now  ope  would  claim  her,  now  ^he  othei^.  Nothing 
could  be  less  demonstrative  than  the  friendship  of  the  elder 
lady ;  but  also  nothing  could  be  more  vigilant,  assiduous, 
untiring.  I  have  intimated  that  she  was  a  peculiar  personage; 
and  in  nothing  was  her  peculiarity  more  shown  than  in  ihe 
nature  of  the  interest  she  evinced  for  Caroline.  She  watched 
all  her  movements:  she  seemed  as  if  she  would  have  guarded 
all  her  steps :  it  gave  her  pleasure  to  be  applied  to  by  Miss 
Helstone  for  advice  and  assistance;  she  yielded  her  aid,  when 
asked,  with  such  quiet  yet  obvious  enjojonent,  that  Caroline 
erelong  took  delight  in  depending  on  her. 

Shirley  Keeld^'s  complete  docility  with  Mis  Pryor  had  at 


SHIRLET  AND  CAROLINE.  181 

int  soiprised  Miss  Helstone,  and  not  less 'the  fact  of  tlie 
reserved  ex-govemess  being  so  much  at  home  and  at  ease  in 
the  residence  of  her  young  pupil,  where  she  filled  with  such 
quiet  independency  a  very  dependent  post ;  but  she  soon 
found  that  it  needed  but  to  know  both  ladies  to  comprehend 
fhUy  the  enigma.  Every  one,  it  seemed  to  her,  must  like, 
must  love,  must  prize  Mrs  Pryor  when  they  knew  her.  No 
matter  that  she  perseveringly  wore  old-fashioned  gowns ;  that 
ber  speech  was  formal,  and  her  manner  cool;  that  she  had 
twenty  little  ways  such  as  nobody  else  had — she  was  still  such 
a  stay,  such  a  counsellor,  so  truthful,  so  kind  in  her  way,  that, 
in  Caroline's  idea,  none  once  accustomed  to  her  presence,  could 
easily  afford  to  dispense  with  it. 

As  to  dependency  or  humiliation,  Caroline  did  not  feel  it 
in  her  intercourse  with  Shirley,  and  why  should  Mrs  Pryor  ? 
The  heiress  was  rich — ^very  rich — compared  with  her  new 
fiiend:  one  possessed  a  clear  thousand  a  year — the  other  not 
a  penny;  and  yet  there  was  a  safe  sense  of  equality  experienced 
in  her  society,  never  known  in  that  of  the  ordinary  Briarfield 
and  Whinbury  gentry. 

The  reason  was,  Shirley's  head  ran  on  other  things  than 
money  and  position. «  She  was  glad  to  be  independent  as  to 
propCTty :  by  fits  she  was  even  elated  at  the  notion*  of  being 
lady  of  the  manor,  and  having  tenants  and  an  estate :  she 
was  especially  tickled  with  an  agreeable  complacency  when 
reminded  of  "  all  that  property  "  down  in  the  Hollow,  "  com- 
prising an  excellent  cloth-mill,  dyehouse,  warehouse,  together 
with  the  messuage,  gardens,  and  outbuildings,  termed  HoUow's 
cottage;"  but  her  exultation  being  quite  *  undisguised  was 
sisgolarly  inoffensive ;  and,  for  her  serious  thoughts,  they 
tended  elsewhere.  To  admire  the  great,  reverence  the  good, 
and  be  joyous  with  the  genial,  was  very  much  the  bent  of 
Shirley's  soul:  she  mused  therefore  on  the  means  of  following 
this  bent  far  oftener  than  she  pondered  on  her  social  supe- 
riority. 

In  Caroline,  Miss  Keeldar  had  first  taken  an  interest  be- 
cause she  was  quiet,  retiring,  looked  delicate,  and  seemed  as 
if  she  needed  some  one  to  take  care  of  her.  Her  predilection 
increased  greatly  when  she  discovered  that  her  own  way  of 
thinking  and  talking  was  xmderstood  and  responded  to  by 
this  new  acquaintance.  She  had  hardly  expected  it.  Miss 
Helstone,  she  fancied,  had  too  pretty  a  face,  manners  and 
▼oioc  too  soft,  to  be  anything  out  of  the  common  way  in  mind 


182  SHIBLET. 

and  attainments ;  and  she  very  much  wondered  to  see  tbe 
gentle  features  light  up  archly  to  the  reveille  of  a  diy  sally 
or  two  risked  by  herself;  and  more  did  she  wonder  to  dis- 
cover the  self-won  knowledge  treasured,  and  the  Tmtanghf 
speculations  working  in  that  girlish,  curl-veiled  head.  Caro- 
line's instinct  of  taste,  too,  was  like  her  own:  such  books  as 
Miss  Keeldar  had  read  with  the  most  pleasure,  were  Miss 
Helstone's  delight  also.  They  held  many  aversions  too  in 
common,  and  could  have  the  comfort  of  laughing  together 
over  works  of  false  sentimentality  and  pompous  pretension. 

Few,  Shirley  conceived,  men  or  women  have  die  right  taste 
in  poetry:  the  right  sense  for  discriminating  between  what  is 
real  and  what  is  false.  She  had  again  and  again  heard  very 
clever  people  pronounce  this  or  that  passage,  in  this  or  that 
versifier,  altogether  admirable,  which,  when  she  read,  her  sool 
refused  to  acknowledge  as  anything  but  cant,  flourish,  and 
tinsel,  or  at  the  best,  elaborate  wordiness;  curious,  clever, 
learned  perhaps ;  haply  even  tinged  with  the  fascinating  hues 
of  fancy,  but,*  God  knows,  as  different  fix)m  real  poetry  as  the 
gorgeous  and  massy  vase  of  mosaic  is  from  the  little  cup  of  pure 
metal ;  or,  to  give  the  reader  a  choice  of  similes,  as  the  milliner's 
artificial  wreath  is  from  the  fresh-gathered  lily  of  the  field. 

Caroline,  she  found,  felt  the  value  of  the  true  ore,  and  knew 
the  deception  of  the  fiashy  dross.  The  minds  of  the  two  girls 
being  toned  in  harmony,"  often  chimed  very  sweetly  together. 

One  evening,  they  chanced  to  be  alone  in  the  oak-parlour. 
They  had  passed  a  long  wet  day  together  without  ennui;  it 
was  iiow  on  the  edge  of  dark ;  candles  were  not  yet  brought 
in;  both,  as  twilight  deepened,  grew  meditative  and  silent.  A 
western  wind  roared  high  roxmd  the  hall,  driving  wild  clouds 
and  stormy  rain  up  from  the  far-remote  ocean :  all  was  tempest 
outside  the  antique  lattices,  all  deep  peace  within.  Shirley 
sat  at  the  window,  watching  the  rack  in  heaven,  the  mist  on 
earth,  listening  to  certain  notes  of  the  gale  that  plained  like 
restless  spirits — ^notes  which,  had  she  not  been  so  youi^,  gay, 
and  healthy,  would  have  swept  her  trembling  nerves  like  some 
omen,  some  anticipatory  dirge:  in  this  her  prime  of  existence 
and  bloom  of  beauty,  they  but  subdued  vivacity  to  pensiveness. 
Snatches  of  sweet  ballads  haunted  her  ear;  now  and  then  she 
sang  a  stanza:  her  accents  obeyed  the  fitful  impulse  of  thp 
wind ;  they  swelled  as  its  gusts  rushed  on,  and  died  as  they 
wandered  away.  Caroline,  withdrawn  to  the  farthest  and 
darkest  end  of  the  room^  her  figure  just  discernible  by  the  mhj 


SEOBLET  AHD  CAROLINE.  18S 

shine  of  the  flameless  fire,  was  pacing  to  and  fro,  mnnnuriug 
to  herself  iGragments  of  well-remembered  poetry.  She  spoke 
▼eiy  Idw,  but  Shirley  heard  her ;  and  while  singing  softly,  she 
listened.     This  was  the  strain:—- 

"  Obscnrest  night  involved  the  sky, 

llie  Atlantic  billows  roar'd. 
When  such  a  destined  wretch  as  I, 

Washed  headlong  firom  on  board. 
Of  friends,  of  hope,  of  all  bereft. 
His  floating  home  for  ever  left." 

# 

Here  the  fragment  stopped;  because  Shirley's  song,  erewhile 
somewhat  full  and  thrilling,  had  become  delicately  faint'. 

"  Gro  on,"  said  she. 

"  Then  you  go  on,  too.  I  was  only  repeating  '  The  Cast* 
away.* " 

'^  I  know :  if  you  can  remember  it  all,  say  it  all." 

And  as  it  was  nearly  dark,  .and,  after  all.  Miss  Keeldar  was 
Qo  formidable  auditor,  Caroline  went  through  it.  She  went 
through  it  as  she  should  have  gone  through  it.  The  wild  sea, 
the  drowning  mariner,  the  reluctant  ship  swept  on  in  the  storm, 
you  heard  were  realized  by  her ;  and  more  vividly  was  realized 
the  heart  of  the  poet,  who  did  not  weep  for  "The  Cast- 
away," but  who,  in  an  hour  of  tearless  anguish,  traced  a 
semblance  to  his  own  God-abandoned  misery  in  the  fate  of 
that  man-forsaken  sailor,  and  cried  from  the  depths  where  he 
itnjggled:— 

^Ko  voice  divine  the  stonn  allayed, 

!N'o  light  propitious  shone. 
When,  snatch'd  from  all  effectual  aid, 

We  perish'd — each  alone  I 
But  I— beneath  a  rougher  sea. 
And  whehn'd  in  deeper  gulfs  than  he." 

'^  I  hope  William  Cowper  is  safe  and  calm  in  heaven  now,** 
■ud  Caroline. 

*^Do  yon  pity  what  he  suffered  on  earth  ?  "  asked  Mi68 
Keeldar. 

"  Pity  him,  Shirley  ?  What  can  I  do  else  ?  He  was  nearly 
broken-hearted  when  he  wrote  that  poem,  and  it  almost  breaks 
one*»  heart  to  read  it.  But  he  fotmd  relief  in  writing  it — I 
know  he  did ;  and  that  gift  of  poetry — ^the  most  divine  bestowed 
on  man — was,  I  believe,  granted  to  allay  emotions  when  their 
itrength  threatens  harm.  It  seems  to  me,  Shirley,  that  nobody 
ihonld  write  poetry  to  exhibit  intellect  or  attainment.  Who 
circs  for  that  sort  of  poetry  ?    Who  cares  for  learning—- who 


184  SHIRLEY. 

cares  for  fine  words  in  poetry?  And  who  does  not  care  for  feeHng 
— real  feeling — however  simply,  even  rudely  expressed  ?  " 

"  It  seems  you  care  for  it,  at  all  events :  and  certainly,  in 
hearing  that  poem,  one  discovers  that  Cowper  was  under  an 
impulse  strong  as  that  of  the  wind  which  drove  the  ship — an 
impulse  which,  while  it  would  not  suffer  him  to  stop  to  add 
ornament  to  a  single  stanza,  filled  him  with  force  to  achieve 
the  whole  with  consummate  perfection.  You  managed  to  recite 
it  with  a  steady  voice,  Caroline :  I  wonder  thereat." 

"  Cowper's  hand  did  not  tremble  in  writing  the  lines :  why 
should  my  voice  falter  in  repeating  them?  Depend  on  it, 
Shirley,  no  tear  blistered  the  manuscript  of  '  The  Castaway,* 
I  hear  in  it  no  sob  of  sorrow,  only  the  cry  of  despair;  but, 
that  cry  uttered,  I  believe  the  deadly  spasm  passed  from  his 
heart ;  that  he  wept  abundantly,  and  was  comibrted." 

Shirley  resumed  her  bailad  minstrelsy.  Stopping  short,  she 
remarked  erelong : — 

"  One  could  have  loved  Cowper,  if  it  were  only  for  the  sake 
of  having  the  privilege  of  comforting  him." 

"  You  never  would  have  loved  Cowper,"  rejoined  Caroline, 
promptly :  "  he  was  not  made  to  be  loved  by  woman." 

"What  do  you  mean?" 

"  What  I  say.  I  know  there  is  a  kind  of  natures  in  the 
world — and  very  noble,  elevated  natures,  too— whom  love 
never  comes  near.  You  might  have  sought  Cowper  with  the 
intention  of  loving  him ;  and  you  would  have  looked  at  him, 
pitied  him,  and  left  him :  forced  away  by  a  sense  of  the  im- 
possible, the  incongruous,  as  the  crew  were  borne  from  their 
drowning  comrade  by  *  the  furious  blast.' " 

"  You  may  be  right.     Who  told  you  this  ?" 

"And  what  I  say  of  Cowper,  I  should  say  of  Rousseau. 
Was  Rousseau  ever  loved  ?  He  loved  passionately ;  but  was 
his  passion  ever  returned?  I  am  certain,  never.  And  if 
there  were  any  female  Covrpers  and  Rousseaus,  I  should  assert 
the  same  of  them." 

"  AVho  told  you  this,  I  ask  ?    Did  Moore  ?" 

"  Why  should  anybody  have  told  me  ?  Have  I  not  an 
instinct  ?  Can  I  not  divine  by  analogy  ?  Moore  never  talkecl 
to  me  either  about  Cowper,  or  Rousseau,  or  love.  The  voice 
we  hear  in  solitude  told  me  all  I  know  on  these  subjects." 

"Do  you  like  characters  of  the  Rousseau  order,  Caroline?'* 

"Not  at  all,  as  a  whole.  I  sympathize  intensely  with 
certain  qualities  they  possess :  certain  divine  sparks  in  thev 


SHISLET  AND  CABOLINE.  185 

natiiTe  dazzle  my  eyes,  and  make  my  soul  glow.  Then,  again, 
[  Boom  them.  They  are  made  of  clay  and  gold.  The  refuse 
md  the  ore  make  a  mass  of  weakness :  taken  altogether,  I  feel 
them  imnatnral,  tmhealthy,  repulsive." 

"  I  dare  say  I  should  be  more  tolerant  of  a  Rousseau  than 
jrou  would,  Gary:  submissive  and  contemplative  yourself,  you 
like  the  stem  and  the  practical.  By-the-way,  you  must  miss 
that*Ck>tisrn  Eobert  of  yours  very  much,  now  that  you  and  he 
never  meet." 
"  I  do.** 

"  And  he  must  miss  you?" 
"  That  he  does  not." 

"  I  cannot  imagine,"  pursued  Shirley,  who  had  lately  got  a 
habit  of  introducing  Moore^s  name  into  the  conversation,  even 
when  it  seemed  to  have  no  business  there, — "  I  cannot  imagine 
but  that  he  was  fond  of  you,  since  he  took  so  much  notice  of 
jou,  talked  to  you,  and  taught  you  so  much." 

"  He  never  was  fond  of  me :  he  never  professed  to  be  fond  of 
me.     He  took  pains  to  prove  that  he  only  just  tolerated  me." 

Caroline,  determined  not  to  err  on  the  flattering  side  in 
estimating  her  cousin's  regard  for  her,  always  now  habitually 
thought  of  it  and  mentioned  it  in  the  most  scanty  measure. 
She  had  her  own  reasons  for  being  less  sanguine  than  ever  in 
hopeful  views  of  the  future:  less  indulgent  to  pleasurable 
retrospections  of  the  past. 

"  Of  course,  then,"  observed  Miss  Keeldar,  "  you  only  just 
tolerated  him,  in  return  ?" 

"  Shirley,  men  and  women  are.  so  different :  they  are  in 
snch  a  different  position.  Women  have  so  few  things  to 
think  about — ^men  so  many :  you  may  have  a  friendship  for 
a  man,  while  he  is  almost  indifferent  to  you.  Much  of  what 
cheers  your  life  may  be  dependent  on  him,  while  not  a 
feeling  or  interest  of  moment  in  his  eyes  may  have  reference 
to  yon.  Robert  used  to  be  in  the  habit  of  going  to  London, 
sometimes  for  a  week  or  a  fortnight  together ;  well,  while 
he  was  away,  I  found  his  absence  a  void :  there  was  some- 
thing wanting ;  Briarfield  was  duller.  Of  course,  I  had  my 
Tisoal  ocqupations ;  still  I  missed  him.  As  I  sat  by  myself 
in  the  evenings,  I  used  to  feel  a  strange  certainty  of  conviction 
I  cannot  describe :  that  if  a  magician  or  a  genius  had,  at 
that  moment,  offered  me  Prince  Ali's  tube  (you  remember  it 
m  the  Arabian  Nights  ?),  and  if,  with  its  aid,  I  had  been 
«>nabled  to  take  a  view  of  Robert— to  see  where  he  was,  how 


SHIRLET  AND  CAROLINE.  187 

**  I  don*t  know — ^yes,  I  do :  it  was  my  doing,  not  his. 
Everything  of  that  sort  always  was  my  doing.  He  was 
going  from  home,  to  London,  as  usual ;  and  the  night  before 
he  went,  I  had  found  in  his  sister's  workbox  a  lock  of  black 
hair — a  short,  roimd  curl:  Hortense  told  me  it  was  her 
brother's  and  a  keepsake.  He  was  sitting  near  the  table  ;  I 
looked  at  his  head — he  has  plenty  of  hair ;  on  the  temples 
were  many  such  round  curls.  I  thought  he  could  spare  me 
one:  I  knew  I  should  like  to  have  it,  and  I  asked  for  it. 
He  said,  ofn  condition  that  he  might  have  his  choice  of  a  tress 
from  my  liead  ;  so  he  got  one  of  my  long  locks  of  hair,  and 
I  got  one  of  his  short  ones.  I  keep  his,  but,  I  dare  say,  he 
has  lost  mine.  It  was  my  doing,  and  one  of  those  silly 
deeds  it  distresses  the  heart  and  sets  the  face  on  fire  to  think 
of:  one  of  those  small  but  sharp  recollections  that  return, 
lacerating  your  self-respect  like  tiny  penknives,  and  forcing 
from  your  lips,  as  you  sit  alone,  sudden,  insane-sounding 
interjections." 

"Caroline!" 

"  I  do  think  myself  a  fool,  Shirley,  in  some  respects  :  I  (fo 
despise  mysel£  But  I  said  I  would  not  make  you  my  con- 
fessor ;  for  you  cannot  reciprocate  foible  for  foible :  you  are 
not  weak.  How  steadily  you  watch  me  now!  turn  aside 
your  clear,  strong,  she-eagle  eye :  it  is  an  insult  to  fix  it  on 
me  thus." 

**  What  a  study  of  character  you  are  I  Weak,  certainly ;  but 
not  in  the  sense  you  think. — Come  in !" 

This  was  said  in  answer  to  a  tap  at  the  door.  Miss  Keeldar 
happened  to  be  near  it  at  the  moment,  Caroline  at  the  other 
end  of  the  room :  she  saw  a  note  put  into  Shirley's  hands,  and 
heard  the  words — 

**  Prom  Mr  Moore,  ma'am." 

**  Bring  candles,"  said  Miss^  Keeldar. 

Caroline  sat  expectant. 

*^  A  communication  on  business,"  said  the  heiress;  but  when 
candles  were  brought,  she  neither  opened  nor  read  it.  The 
Bector'fl  Fanny  was  presently  annoimced,  and  the  Rector's 
uieoe  went  home. 


188  SHIBLET. 


CHAPTER  Xin. 

FUKTHER  COMMUNICATIONS  ON  BUSINESa. 

In  Shirley^s  nature  prevailed  at  timea  an  easy  indolence:  iSiere 
were  periods  when  she  took  delight  in  perfect  vacancy  of  hand 
and  eye — ^moments  when  her  thoughts,  her  simple  existence, 
the  fact  of  the  world  being  around — and  heaven  above  her, 
seemed  to  yield  her  such  fulness  of  happiness,  that  she  did  not 
need  to  lift  a  finger  to  increase  the  joy.  Often,  after  an  active 
morning,  she  would  spend  a  sunny  addemoon  in  lying  stirless 
on  the  turf,  at  the  foot  of  some  tree  of  friendly  umbrage :  do 
society  did  she  need  but  that  of  Caroline,  and  it  sufficed  if  she 
were  within  call;  no  spectacle  did  she  ask  but  that  of  the  deep 
blue  sky,  and  such  cloudlets  as  sailed  afar  and  alofb  across  its 
span ;  no  sound  but  that  of  the  bec^s  hum,  the  leaTs  whisper. 
Her  sole  book  in  such  hours  was  the  dim  chronicle  of  memoiy, 
or  the  sibyl  page  o^  anticipation;  from  her  young  eyes  fell  on 
each  volume  a  glorious  l^ght  to  read  by ;  round  her  lips  at 
moments  played  a  smile  which  revealed  glimpses  of  the  tde  or 
prophecy:  it  was  not  sad,  not  dark.  Fate  had  been  benign  to 
the  blissful  dreamer,  and  promised  to  favour  her  yet  again.  Jn 
her  past  were  sweet  passages ;  in  her  future  rosy  hopes. 

Yet  one  day  when  Caroline  drew  near  to  rouse  her,  thinking 
she  had  lain  long  enough,  behold,  as  she  looked  down,  Shirle/s 
cheek  was  wet  as  if  with  dew :  those  fine  eyes  of  hers  shone 
humid  and  brimming. 

"  Shirley,  why  do  you  cry  ?"  asked  Caroline,  involuntarily 
laying  stress  on  you. 

Miss  Keeldar  smiled,  and  turned  her  picturesque  head 
towards  the  questioner.  ''  Because  it  pleases  me  mightily  to 
cry,"  she  said;  "my  heart  is  both  sad  and  glad:  but  why, yoa 
good,  patient  child — ^why  do  you  not  bear  me  company?  I 
only  weep  tears,  delightfiil  and  soon  wiped  away :  you  migli 
weep  gall,  if  you  choose." 

"  Why  should  I  weep  gall  ?" 

"  Mateless,  solitary  bird  1"  was  the  only  answer. 

"And  are  not  you,  too,  mateless,  Shirley?" 

"At  heart— no." 

"  Oh !  who  nestles  there,  Shirley  ?" 

But  Shirley  only  laughed  gaily  at  this  question,  nnd  alfirtly 
started  up. 


COMMUNICAllOltS  CN  BUSINESS.  189 

"I  have  dreamed,"  she  said:  "a  mere  day-dream;  certainly 
bright,  probably  baseless  1" 

Miss  Helstone  was  by  this  time  free  enough  from  illusions  : 
she  took  a  sufficiently  grave  view  of  the  foture,  and  fancied 
she  knew  pretty  well  how  her  own  destiny  and  that  of  some 
pthers  we^  teading.  Yet  old  associations  retained  their 
influence  over  her,  and  it  was  these,  and  the  power  of  habit, 
vhich  still  frequently  drew  her  of  an  evening  to  the  field-stile 
and  the  old  thorn  overlooking  the  Hollow, 

One  night,  the  night  aHer  the  incident  of  the  note,  she  had 
been  at  her  usual  post,  watching  for  her  beacon — ^watching 
vainly;  that  evening  no  lamp  was  lit.  She  waited  till  the 
rising  of  certain  constellations  warned  her  of  lateness,  and 
signed  her  away.  In  passing  Fieldhead,  on  her  return,  its 
moonlight  beauty  p,ttracted  her  glance,  and  stayed  her  step  an 
instant.  Tree  and  hall  rose  peacefid  under  the  night  sky  and 
clear  fall  orb ;  pearly  paleness  gilded  the  building ;  mellow 
brown  gloonoi  bosomed  it  round ;  shadows  of  deep  green  brooded 
aboTe  its  oak-wreathed  roof.  The  broad  pavement  in  front 
shone  pale  also;  it  gleamed  as  if  some  spell  had  transformed 
the  dark  granite  to  glistering  Parian:  on  tiie  silvery  space  slept 
two  sable  shadows,  thrown  sharply  defined  from  two  human 
figures.  These  figures  when  first  seen  were  motionless  and 
mute;  presently^ they  moved  in  harmonious  step,  and  spoke 
low  in  harmonious  key.  Earnest  was  the  gaze  that  scrutinized 
them  as  they  emerged  from  behind  the  trunk  of  the  cedar. 
"  Is  it  Mrs  Pryor  and  Shirley  ? " 

Certainly  it  is  Shirley.  Who  else  has  a  shape  so  lithe,  and 
proud,  and  graceful  ?  And  her  face,  too,  is  visible:  her  coun- 
tenance careless  and  pensive,  and  musing  and  mirthful,  and 
mocking  and  tender.  Not  fearing  the  dew,  she  has  not  covered 
her  head ;  her  curls  are  free :  they  veil  her  neck  and  caress  her 
shoulder  with  their  tendril  rings.  An  ornament  of  gold  gleams 
through  the  half-closed  folds  of  the  scarf  she  has  wrapped  across 
her  bust,  and  a  large  bright  gem  glitters  on  the  white  hand 
which  confines  it.     Yes,  that  is  Shirley. 

Her  companion  then  is,  of  course,  Mrs  Pryor  ? 

Yes,  if  Mrs  Pryor  owns  six  feet  of  stature,  and  if  she  has 
changed  her  decent  widow's  weeds  for  masculine  disguise.  The 
^re  walking  at  Miss  Keeldar's  side  is  a  man — a  tall,  young, 
lately  man — ^it  is  her  tenant,  Bobert  Moore. 

The  pair  speak  softly,  their  words  are  not  distinguishable: 


190  SHIRLET. 

to  remain  a  moment  to  gaze  is  not  to  be  an  eavesdiopper;  and 
as  the  moon  shines  so  clearlj  and  their  countenances  are  so 
distinctly  apparent,  who  can  resist  the  attraction  of  sudi 
interest  ?     Caroline  it  seems  cannot,  for  she  lingers. 

There  was  a  time  when,  on  summer  nights,  Moore  had  been 
wont  to  walk  with  his  cousin,  as  he  was  now  walking  with  the 
heiress.  Often  had  she  gone  up  the  Hollow  with  lum.  after 
sunset,  to  scent  the  freshness  of  the  earth,  where  a  growth  of 
fragrant  herbage  carpeted  a  certain  narrow  terrace,  edging, 
deep  ravine,  from  whose  rifted  gloom  was  heard  a  sound  like 
the  spirit  of  the  lonely  watercourse,  moaning  amongst  its  wet 
stones,  and  between  its  weedy  banks,  and  under  its  dark  bower 
of  alders. 

"  But  I  used  to  be  closer  to  him,"  thought  Caroline:  "he 
felt  no  obligation  to  treat  me  with  homage;  I  needed  only 
kindness.  He  used  to  hold  my  hand :  he  does  not  toucli  hers. 
And  yet  Shirley  is  not  proud  where  she  loves.  There  is  no 
haughtiness  in  her  aspect  now,  only  a  little  in  her  port ;  what 
is  natural  to  and  inseparable  from  her :  'what  she  retains  in  her 
most  careless  as  in  her  most  guarded  moments.  Bobert  miist 
think  as  I  think,  that  he  is  at  this  instant  looking  down  on  a< 
fine  face  ;  and  he  must  think  it  with  a  man^s  brain,  not  with 
mine.  She  has  such  generous,  yet  soft  fire  in  her  eyes.  She 
smiles — ^what  makes  her  smile  so  sweet  ?  I  saw  that  Bobert 
felt  its  beauty,  and  he  must  have  felt  it  with  his  man's  heart, 
not  with  my  dim  woman's  perceptions.  They  look  to  me  like 
two  great  happy  spirits:  yonder  silvered  pavement  reminds  me 
of  that  white  shore  we  believe  to  be  beyond  the  death-fiood : 
they  have  reached  it,  they  walk  there  united.  And  what  am 
I — standing  here  in  shadow,  shrinking  into  concealment,  my 
mind  darker  than  my  hiding-place  ?  I  am  one  of  this  world, 
no  spirit — a  poor,  doomed  mortal,  who  asks,  in  ignorance  and 
hopdessness,  wherefore  she  was  bom,  to  what  end  she  hves; 
whose  mind  for  ever  runs  on  the  question,  how  she  shall  at  last 
encounter,  and  by  whom  be  sustained  through  death  ? 

"  This  is  the  worst  passage  I  have  come  to  yet:  still  I  was 
quite  prepared  for  it.  I  gave  Bobert  up,  and  gave  him  up  to 
Shirley,  die  first  day  I  heard  she  was  come:  the  first  moment 
I  saw  her — ^rich,  youthful,  and  lovely.  She  has  him  now:  he 
is  her  lover ;  she  is  his  darling :  she  will  be  far  more  hii 
darling  yet  when  they  are  married:  the  more  Bobert  knows  of 
Shirley,  the  more  his  soul  will  cleave  to  her.  They  will  both 
be  happy,  and  I  do  not  grudge  them  their  bliss;  but  I  groan 


COUMUinCATIONS  ON  BUSINESS.  191 

under  xnj  own  miseiy:  some  of  my  suffering  is  very  aoUte. 
Traly,  I  ought  not  to  have  been  bom :  they  should  hliT6 
smothered  me  at  the  first  cry." 

Here>  Shirley  stepping  aside  to  gather  a  dewy  flower,  she 
and  her  companion  turned  into  a  path  that  lay  nearer  the  j;ate: 
some  of  their  oonversation  became  audible.  Caroline  would 
not  stay  to  listen:  she  passed  away  noiselessly,  and  the  moon- 
light Mssed  the  wall  which  her  shadow  had  dimmed.  The 
leader  is  privileged  to  remain,  and  try  what  he  can  make  of 
the  discourse. 

"  I  cannot  conceive  why  Nature  did  not  give  you  a  bull- 
dog's head,  for  you  have  aU  a  bulldog^s  tenacity,"  said. Shirley. 
"Not  a  flattering  idea:  am  I  so  ignoble?" 
"  And  something  also  you  have  of  the  same  animal's  silent 
ways  of  going  about  its  work :  you  give  no  warning ;  you  come 
nauelesfily  behind,  seize  fast,  and  hold  on." 

"  ThiA  ia  guess-work ;  you  have  witnessed  no  such  feat  on 
my  part:  in  your  presence  I  have  been  no  bull-dog." 

"Your  very  silence  indicates  your  race.  How  little  you 
talk  in  general,  yet  how  deeply  you  scheme  I  You  are  fiw- 
fleeing;  you  are  calculating." 

"  1  know  the  ways  of  these  people.  I  have  gathered  infor*- 
mation  of  their  intentions.  My  note  last  night  informed  you 
that  Barxaclough's  trial  had  ended  in  his  conviction  and 
sentence  to  transportation:  his  associates  will  plot  vengeance: 
I  shall  lay  my  plans  so  as  to  counteract,  or,  at  least,  be  pre- 
pared for  theirs';  that  is  all.  Having  now  given  you  as  clear 
an  explanation  as  I  can,  am  I  to  understand  that  for  what  I 
propose  doing  I  have  your  approbation  ?  " 

"  1  shall  stand  by  you  so  long  as  you  remain  on  the  defen- 
sive.   Yes." 

"  Good  I  Without  any  aid — even  opposed  or  disapproved 
by  you — ^I  believe  I  shotdd  have  acted  precisely  as  I  now 
intend  to  act;  but  in  another  spirit.  I  now  feel  satisfied.  On 
the  whole,  I  relish  the  position." 

"I  dare  say  you  do;  that  is  evident:  you  relish  the  work 
which  lies  before  you  still  better  than  you  would  relish  the 
execution  of  a  government  order  for  s^rmy-cloth." 
"  I  certainly  feel  it  congenial." 

"  So  would  old  Helstone.     It  is  true'  there  is  a  shade  of 
difference  in  your  motives:  many  shades,  perhaps.     ShaU  I 
qjtak  to  Mr  Helstone  ?    I  will,  if  you  like." 
^Aei  as  you  please:  your  judgment.  Miss  Keeldar^  irill 


de  you  accurately.  I  could  rely  on  it  myself,  in  a  more 
dificult  crisis ;  but  I  should  inform  you,  Mr  Helstone  is  some- 
wliat  prejudiced  against  me  at  present." 

"  I  am  aware,  I  have  heard  all  about  your  differenoei: 
depend  upon  it  they  mil  melt  away:  he  cannot  resist  ^ 
temptation  of  an  alliance  imder  present  circumstances.'* 

"  I  should  be  glad  to  have  him:  he  is  of  true  metaL" 

"  I  think  so  also." 

'^  An  old  blade,  and  rasted  somewhat ;  but  the  edge  and 
temper  still  excellent." 

"  Well,  you  shall  have  him,  Mr  Moore;  that  is,  if  I  can 
win  him." 

"  Whom  can  you  not  win  ?" 

"  Perhaps  not  the  Rector;  but  I  will  make  the  effort" 

**  Effort  I     He  will  yield  for  a  word — &  smile." 

'*  By  no  means.  It  will  cost  me  several  cups  of  tea,  some 
toast  and  cake,  and  an  ample  measure  of  remonstrances,  ex- 
postulations, and  persuasions.     It  grows  rather  chilL" 

"I  perceive  you  shiver.  Am  I  acting  wrongly  to  detain 
you  here  ?  Yet  it  is  so  calm :  I  even  feel  it  warm ;  and 
society  such  as  yours  is  a  pleasure  to  me  so  rare. — ^If  you  were 
wrapped  in  a  thicker  shawl " 

''I  might  stay  longer,  and  forget  how  late  it  is,  which 
would  chagrin  Mrs  Pryor.  We  keep  early  and  regular  hours 
at  Fieldhead,  Mr  Moore;  and  so,  I  am  sure,  does  your  sister 
at  the  cottage." 

'^  Yes ;  but  Hortense  and  I  have  an  imderstanding  the 
most  convenient  in  the  world,  that  we  shall  each  do  as  we 
please." 

"How  do  you  please  to  do?" 

''  Three  nights  in  the  week  I  sleep  in  the  mill :  but  I  require 
little  rest ;  and  when  it  is  moonlight  and  mild,  I  often  haunt 
the  Hollow  till  daybreak." 

"  When  I  was  a  very  little  girl,  Mr  Moore,  my  nurse  used 
to  tell  me  tales  of  fairies  being  seen  in  that  Hollow.  That  \na 
before  my  father  built  the  mill,  when  it  was  a  perfectly  solitary 
ravine :  you  will  be  falUng  under  enchantment." 

"I  fear  it  is  done,"  said  Moore,  in  a  low  voice. 

"But  there  are -worse  things  than  fairios  to  be  guarded 
against,"  pursued  Miss  Keeldar. 

"  Things  more  perilous,"  he  subjoined. 

"  Far  more  so  For  instance,  how  would  you  like  to  meet 
Hiohael  Hartleyi  that  mad  Calvinisi  and  Jacobin  wearer? 


COHHUKICATIONS  ON  BUSINESS.  193 

Thev  say  he  is  addicted  to  poacliing,  and  oflen  goes  abroad 
ai  mght  -with  his  gun." 

''I  have  ah'eadj  had  the  luck  to  meet  him.  We  held  a  long 
argument  together  one  night.  A  strange  little  incident  it  was: 
I  liked  it," 

** Liked  it?    I  admire  your  taste  I     Michael  is  not  sane 
Where  did  you  meet  him  ?" 

^'  In  the  deepest,  shadiest  spot  in  the  glen,  where  the  water 
runs  low,  under  brushwood.  -We  sat  down  near  that  plank 
bridge.  It  was  moonlight,  but  clouded,  and  very  windy.  We 
had  a  talk." 

"OnpoUtics?" 

"And  religion.  I  think  the  moon  was  at  the  full,  and 
Michael  was  as  near  crazed  as  possible :  he  uttered  strange 
blasphemy  in  his  Antinomian  fashion." 

<<  Excuse  me,  but  I  think  you  must  have  been  nearly  as 
mad  as  he,  to  sit  listening  to  him." 

'*  There  is  a  wildvinterest  in  his  'ravings.  The  man  would 
be  half  a  poet,  if  he  were  not  whoUy  a  maniac ;  and  perhaps  a 
prophet,  if  he  were  not  a  profligate.  He  solemnly  informed 
me  that  heU  was  foreordained  my  inevitable  portion ;  that  he 
read  the  mark  of  the  beast  on  my  brow;  that  I  had  been  an 
outcast  from  the  beginning.  God^s  vengeance,  he  said,  was 
preparing  for  me,  and  affirmed  that  in  a  vision  of  the  night 
he  had  beheld  the  manner  and  the  instrument  of  my  doom.  I 
wanted  to  know  further,  but  he  left  me  with  these  words, 
*  The  end. is  not  yet.' " 

"  Have  you  ever  seen  him  since  ?  ** 

"About  a  month  afterwards,  in  returning  from  market,  I 
encountered  him  and  Moses  Barraclough  boSi  in  an  advanced 
stage  of  inebriation :  they  were  praying  in  frantic  sort  at  the 
roadside.  They  accosted  me  as  Satan,  bid  me  avaunt,  and 
clamoured  to  be  delivered  from  temptation.  Again,  but  a 
few  days  ago,  Michael  took  the  trouble  of  appearing  at  the 
counting-house  door,  hatless,  in  his  shirt-sleeves, — ^his  coat 
and  castor  having  been  detained  at  the  public-house  in  pledge ; 
he  delivered  himself  of  the  comfortable  message  that  he  could 
wish  Mr  Moore  to  set  his  house  in  order,  as  his  soul  was 
likely  shortly  to  be  required  of  him."   ♦  • 

^  Do  you  make  light  of  these  things  ?  " 

"  The  poor  man  had  been  drinking  for  weeks,  and  was  in  a 
state  bordering  on  delirium  tremens.^ 

^  18  • 


194  SHIBLET. 

"  Wliat  then  ?  He  is  the  more  likely  to  attempt  the  ftilfil^ 
ment  of  his  .own  prophecies." 

^'  It  would  not  do  to  permit  incidents  of  this  sort  to  affect 
one's  nerves." 

"  Mr  Moore,  go  home  1 " 

"So  soon?" 

"  Pass  straight  down  the  fields,  not  romid  by  the  lane  and 
plantations." 

*  It  is  early  yet." 

^  It  is  late:  for  my  part  I  am  going  in.  Will  you  promise 
me  not  to  wander  in  the  Hollow  to-night  ?  " 

"  If  you  wish  it." 

'^I  do  wish  it.  May  I  ask  whether  you  consider  life 
valueless?" 

"  By  no  means :  on  the  contrary,  of  late  I  regard  my  life  as 
invaluable." 

"Of  late?" 

"  Existence  is  neither  aimless  nor  hopeless  to  me  now-;  and 
it  was  both  three  months  ago.  I  was  then  drowning,  and 
rather  wished  the  operation  over.  All  at  once  a  hand  was 
stretched  to  me, — such  a  delicate  hand,  I  scarcely  dared  trust 
it: — its  strength,  however,  has  rescued  me  from  ruin«" 

"  Are  you  re^y  rescued  ?  " 

"  For  the  time :  your  assistance  has  given  me  another 
chance." 

"  Live  to  make  the  best  of  it.  Don't  o£^  yourself  as  i 
target  to  Michael  Hartley,  and  good-night !" 

Miss  Helstone  was  under  a  promise  to  spend  the  evening 
of  the  next  day  at  Fieldhead:  she  kept  her  promise.  Some 
gloomy  hours  had  she  spent  in  the  interval.  Most  of  the 
time  had  been  passed  shut > up  in  her  own  apartment;  only 
issuing  &om  it,  indeed,  to  join  her  uncle  at  meals,  and  antici- 
pating inquiries  from  Fanny  by  telling  her  that  she  was  busy 
altering  a  dress,  and  preferred  sewing  up-stairs,  to  avoid 
interruption. 

She  did  sew:  she  plied  her  needle  continuously,  ceaselessly; 
but  her  brain. worked  faster  than  her  fingers.'  Again,  and 
more  intensely  than  ever,  she  desired  a  fixed  occupation, — no 
matter  how  onerous,  how  irksome.  Her  uncle  must  be  once 
more  entreated,  but  first  she  would  consult  Mrs  Pryor.  Her 
head  laboured  to  frame  projects  as  diligently  as  her  hands  to 
plait  and  stitch  the  thin  texture  of  the  muslin  summer  dietf 


OOmCUMICATIOKS  ON  BUSINESS.  196 

Spread  on  the  little  white  couch  at  the  foot  of  which  she  iat. 
Now  and  then,  while  thus  doubly  occupied,  a  tear  would  fill 
her  ejes  and  fall  on  her  busy  hands;  but  this  sign  of  emo- 
tion was  rare,  and  quickly  effaced :  the  sharp  pang  passed, 
ih&  dimness  cleared  £rom  her  vision ;  she  would  re-thread  her 
needle,  re-arrange  tuck  and  trimming,  and  work  on. 

Late  in  the  afternoon  she  dressed  herself:  she  reached 
Fieldhead,  and  appeared  in  'the  oak  parlour  just  as  tea  was 
brought  in.     Shirley  asked  her  why  she  came  so  late. 

"  Becatuse  I  have  been  making  my  dress,"  said  she.  '^  These 
fine  sunny  days  began  to  make  me  ashamed  of  my  winter 
merino  ;  so  I  have  ^bished  up  a  lighter  garment." 

"Li  which  you  look  as  I  like  to  see  you,"  said  Shirley. 
"  Tou  are  a  lady-like  little  person,  Caroline :  is  she  not,  Mrs 
Pryor?" 

Mrs  Pryor  never  paid  compliments,  and  seldom  indulged  in 
remarks,  favourable  or  otherwise,  on  personal  appearance. 
On  the  present'  occasion  she  only  swept  Caroline's  curls  from 
ber  cheek  as  she  took  a  seat  near  her,  caressed  the  oval  out- 
line, and  observed, — 

''You  get  somewhat  thin,  my  love,  and  somewhat  pale. 
Do  you  sleep  well  ?  Your  eyes  have  a  languid  look ; "  and 
she  gazed  at  her  anxiously. 

"  I  sometimes  dream  melancholy  dreams,"  answered  Caro- 
line; "  and  if  I  lie  awake  for  an  hour  or  two  in  the  night,  I 
am  continually  thinking  of  the  Bectory  as  a  dreary  old  place. 
You  know  it  is  very  near  the  churchyard  :  the  back  part  of 
the  house  is  extremely  ancient,  and  it  is  said  that  the  out- 
kitchens  there  were  once  enclosed  in  the  churchyard,  and 
that  there  are  graves  under  them.  I  rather  long  to  leave  the 
Rectory." 

"  My  dear !     You  are  surely  not  superstitious  ?  " 

"  No,  Mrs  Pryor ;  but  I  thiiJk  I  grow  what  is  called  nervous. 
I  Bee  things  under  a  darker  aspect  than  I  used  to  do.  I  have 
fears  I  never  used  to  have — not  of  ghosts,  but  of  omens  and 
disastrous  events  ;  and  I  have  an  inexpressible  weight  on  my 
mind  which  I  would  give  the  world  to  shake  off,  and  I  cannot 
doit." 

•  "  Strange !"  cried  Shirley.  "  I  never  feel  so."  Mrs  Pryor 
nid  nothing. 

"  Fine  weather,  pleasant  days,  pleasant  scenes  are  powerless 
to  give  me  pleasure,"  continued  Caroline.  "  Calm  evenings  are 
not  eahn  to  me :  moonlighti  which  I  used  to  think  mild,  now 


196  8uiKU£r4 

onlj  looks  momnM.  Is  this  weakness  of  mind,  Mrs  Pryor, 
or  what  is  it  ?  I  cannot  help  it :  I  oflen  struggle  agaioat  it : 
1  reason :  but  reason  and  effort  make  no  difference.** 

"  You  should  take  more  exercise,"  said  Mrs  Pryor. 

''  Exercise !  I  exercise  sufficiently :  I  exercise  till  I  am 
ready  to  drop." 

"  My  dear,  you  should  go  from  home." 

"  Mrs  Pryor,  I  should  like  to  go  from  home,  but  not  on 
any  purposeless  excursion  or  visit.  I  wish  to  be  a  goTemesi 
as  you  have  been.  It  would  oblige  me  greatly  if  you  would 
speak  to  my  uncle  on  the  subject." 

"Nonsense!"  broke  in  Shirley.  "What  an  ideal  Be  a 
governess!  Better  be  a  slave  at  once.  Where  is  th? 
necessity  of  it  ?  Why  should  you  dream  of  such  a  painiul 
step  ?  " 

"  My  dear,"  said  Mrs  Pryor,  "  you  are  very  young  to  be 
a  governess^  and  not  sufficiently  robust:  the  duties  a  governess 
tmdertakes  are  oft^n  severe."  • 

"  And  I  believe  I  want  severe  duties  to  occupy  me.'* 

"  Occupy  you ! "  cried  Shirley.  "  When  are  you  idle  ?  I 
never  saw  a  more  industrious  girl  than  you :  you  are  alwayi 
at  work.  Come,"  she  continued, — "  come  and  sit  by  my  side, 
and  take  some  tea  to  refresh  you.  You  doi;'t  care  much  for 
my  friendship,  then,  that  you  wish  to  leave  me  ?  " 

"  Indeed,  I  do,  Shirley:  and  I  don't  wish  to  leave  you.  I 
shall  never  find  another  friend  so  dear." 

At  which  words  Miss  Keeldar  put  her  hand  into  Caroline's 
with  an  impulsively  affectionate  movement,  which  was  well 
seconded  by  the  expression  of  her  face. 

"  If  you  think  so,  you  had  better  make  much  of  me,"  she 
said,  "  and  not  run  away  from  me.  I  hate  to  part  with  those 
to  whom  I  am  become  attatched.  Mrs  Pryor  t3iere  sometimes 
talks  of  leaving  me,  and  says  I  might  make  a  more  advan- 
tageous connection  than  herself.  I  should  as  soon  think  of 
exchanging  an  old-fashioned  mother  for  something  modish  aod 
stylish.  As  for  you — ^why  I  began  to  flatter  myself  we  were 
thoroughly  friends ;  that  you  liked  Shirley  almost  as  well  as 
Shirley  likes  you:  and  she  docs  not  stint  her  regard." 

"I  cfo  like  Shirley:  I  like  her  more  and  more  every  day; 
but  that  does  not  make  me  strong  or  happy." 

"  And  would  it'  make  you  strong  or  happy  to  go  and  live  as 
a  dependant  amongst  utter  strangers  ?  It  would  not;  and  the 
experiment  must  not  be  tried.  I  tell  you  it  would  fail:  it  is  not 


COMMUNICATIOKS  ON  BUSINESS.  197 

in  jour  nature  to  bear  the  desolate  life  governesses  generally 
kad:  jou  would  fall  ill:  I  won't  hear  of  it." 

And  Miss  Keeldar  paused,  having  uttered  this  prohibition 
Teiy  decidedly.  Soon  she  recommenced,  still  looking  some- 
what "  courrouc^e :" — 

"  Why,  it  is  my  daily  pleasure  now  to  look  out  for  the  little 
cottage  bonnet  and  the  silk  scarf  glancing  through  the  trees  in 
the  lane,  and  to  know  that  my  quiet,  shrewd,  thoughtful  com- 
panion and  monitress  is  coming  back  to  me :  that  I  shall  have 
her  sitting  in  the  room  to  look  at,  to  talk  to,  or  to  let  alone, 
as  she  and  I  please.  This  may  be  a  selfish  sort  of  language — 
I  know  it  is ;  but  it  is  the  language  which  naturally  rises  to 
my  lips;  therefore  I  utter  it." 

"  I  would  write  to  you,  Shirley." 

"And  what  are  letters  ?  Only  a  sort  of  pis-aller.  Drink 
wme  tea,  Caroline:  eat  something — ^you  eat  nothing;  laugh 
and  be  cheerfxd,  and  stay  at  home." 

Miss  Helstone  shook  her  head  and  sighed.  She  felt  what 
difficult  she  would  have  to  persuade  any  one  to  assist  or  sanc- 
tion her  in  making  that  change  in  her  life  which  she  believed 
desirable.  Might  she  only  follow  her  own  judgment,  she  thought 
she  should  be  able  to  find,  perhaps  a  harsh,  but  an  efiectual 
cnre  for  her  sufferings.  But  this  judgment,  foimded  on  cir- 
cumstances she  could  fully  explain  to  n6ne,  least  of  all  to 
Shirley,  seemed,  in  all  eyes  but  her  own,  incomprehensible  and 
^Qtastic,  and  was  opposed  accordingly. 

There  really  was  no  present  pecimiary  need  for  her  to  leave 
a  comfortable  home  and  ''take  a  situation;"  and  there  was 
every  probability  that  her  uncle  might  in  some  way  perma- 
nently provide  for  her.  So  her  friends  thought,  and,  as  far 
as  their  lights  enabled  them  to  see,  they  reasoned  correctly: 
hut  of  Caroline's  strange  sufferings,  which  she  desired  so  eagerly 
to  orercome  or  escape,  they  had  no  idea, — of  her  racked  nights 
and  dismaLdays,  no  suspicion.  It  was  at  once  impossible  and 
hopeless  to  explain:  to  wait  and  endure  was  her  only  plan, 
^ny  that  want  food  and  clothing  have  cheerier  lives  and 
hrighter  prospects  than  she  had;  many,  harassed  by  poverty, 
v%  in  a  strait  less  afflictive. 

"Now,  is  your  mind  quieted?"  inquired  Shirley.  "Will 
JOU  consent  to  stay  at  home  ?  " 

"I  shall  not  leave  it  against  the  approbation  of  my  friends," 
*8fi  the  reply;  "but  J  think  in  time  they  will  be  obliged  to 
think  aeldo'' 


198  ABiBLBT. 

Dtuing  this  conyersation  Mrs  Pryor  looked  fiur  from  easrr. 
Her  extreme  habitual  reserve  would  rarely  permit  her  to  talk 
freely,  or  to  interrogate  others  closely.  She  could  think  a 
multitude  of  questions  she  never  ventured  to  put;  give  adyioe 
in  her  mind  which  her  tongue  never  delivered.  Had  she  been 
alone  with  Caroline,  she  might  possibly  have  said  something 
to  the  point:  Miss  Keeldar's  presence,  accustomed  as  sheivas 
to  it,  sealed  her  lips.  Now,  as  on  a  thousand  other  occasions, 
inexplicable  nervous  scruples  kept  her  back  from  interfering. 
She  merely  showed  her  concern  for  Miss  Helstone  in  on  indirect 
way,  by  asking  her  if  the  fire  made  her  too  warm,  placing  a 
screen  between  her  chair  and  the  hearth,  closing  a  window 
whence  she  imagined  a  draught  proceeded,  and  often  and  Test^ 
lessly  glancing  at  her.     Shirley  resume^., — 

^^  Having  destroyed  your  plan,"  she  said,  '^  which  I  hope  I 
have  done,  I  shall  construct  a  new  one  of  my  own.  £very 
summer  I  make  an  excursion.  This  season  I  propose  spending 
two  months  either  at  the  Scotch  lochs  or  the  English  lakes: 
that  is,  I  shall  go  there,  provided  yon  consent  to  accompany 
me :  if  you  refuse,  I  shall  not  stir  a  foot.'' 

"  You  are  very  good,  Shirley," 

"  I  would  be  very  good  if  you  would  let  me  :  I  have  eveiy 
disposition  to  be  good.  It  is  my  misfortune  and  habit,  I 
know,  to  think  of  myself  paramount  to  aQybody  else  :  bnt 
who  is  not  like  me  in  that  respect  ?  However,  when  Captain 
Keeldar  is  made  comfortable,  accommodated  with  all  he  ^wants, 
including  a  sensible  genial  comrade,  it  gives  him  a  thorough 
pleasure  to  devote  his  spare  efforts  to  making  that  comrade 
happy.  And  should  we  not  be  happy,  Caroline,  in  the  High* 
lands.  We  will  go  to  the  Highlands.  We  will,  if  you  can 
bear  a  sea-voyage,  go  to  the  Isles, — ^the  Hebrides,  the  {Zet- 
land, the  Orkney  Islands.  Would  you  not  like  that  ?  I  see 
you  would :  Mrs  Pryor,  I  call  you  to  witness ;  her  &ce  is  aU 
sunshine  at  the  bore  mention  of  it." 

"  I  should  like  it  much,"  returned  Caroline ;  to  whom,  indeed, 
die  notion  of  such  a  tour  was  not  only  pleasant,  but  gloriously 
reviving.     Shirley  rubbed  her  hands. 

''  Come,  I  can  bestow  a  benefit,"  she  exclaimed.  <*  I  can 
.  do  a  good  deed  with  my  cash.  My  thousand  a  year  is  not 
merely  a  matter  of  dirty  bank-notes  and  jaundiced  guineas 
(let  me  speak  respectftdly  of  both  though,  for  I  adore  them) ; 
but,  it  may  be,  health  to  the  drooping,  strength  to  the  weak, 
consolation  to  the  sad.    I  was  determined  to  make  something 


COMMUNICATIONS  ON  BUSINESS.  199 

of  it  better  than  a  fine  old  house  to  live  in,  than  satin  gowns 
to  wear ;  better  than  deference  irom  acquaintance,  and  homage 
from  the  poor.  Here  is  to  begin.  This  summer — Caroline, 
Mrs  Pryor,  and  I  go  out  into  the  North  Atlantic,  beyond  the 
Shetland — perhaps  to  the  Fajroe  Isles.  We  will  see  peals  in. 
Suderoe,  and,  doubtless,  mermaids  in  Stromoe.  Caroline  is 
laughing,  Mrs  Pijor :  /  made  her  laugh ;  /  have  done  her  good.** 

"I  shall  like  to  go,  Shirley,"  again  said  Miss  Helstone. 
"I  long  to  hear  the  sound  of  waves — ocean-waves,  and  to 
Bee  them  as  I  have  imagined  them  in  dreams,  like  tossing 
banks  of  green  light,  strewed  with  vanishing  and  re-appearing 
irreaths  of  foam,  whiter  than  lilies.  I  shall  delight  to  pass 
the  shores  of  those  lone  rock-islets  where  the  sea-birds  Hve 
and  breed  unmolested.  We  shaU  be  on  the  track  of  the  old 
Scandinavians— of  the  Norsemeti :  we  shall  almost  see  the 
shores  of  Norway.  This  is  a  very  vague  delight  that  I  feel, 
communicated  by  your  proposal,  but  it  is  a  delight." 

"  Will  you  think  of  Fitful-Head  now,  when  you  lie  awake  at 
nig^t ;  of  gulls  shrieking  round  it,  and  waves  tumbling  in  upon 
it,  rather  than  of  the  graves  under  the  Kectory  back-kitchen?  " 

"  I  will  try ;  and  instead  of  musing  about  remnants  of 
throodsy  and  fragments  of  coffins,  and  human  bones  and 
moQld,  I  will  fancy  seals  lying  in  the  sunshine  on  solitary 
shores,  where  neither  fisherman  ncnr  hunter  ever  come :  of 
lock-crevices  full  of  pearly  eggs  bedded  in  sea-weed ;  of  un- 
Kared  birds  covering  white  sands  in  happy  flocks."  . 

"  And  what  will  become  of  that  inexpressible  weight  you 
«id  you  had  on  your  mind  ?" 

"  1  will  try  to  forget  it  in  speculation  on  the  sway  of  the 

whole  Qreat  Deep  above  a  herd  of  whales^rushing  through 

the  livid  and  Hquid  thtmder  down  from  the  frozen  zone.:  a 

hundred  of  them,  perhaps,  wallowing,  flashings  rolling  in*  the 

wake  of'  a  patriarch  buU,  huge  enough  to  have  been  spawned 

heibrethe  Mood :  sudh  a  creature  as  poor  Smart  had  in  his 

ttiod  when  h^  said, — 

'  Strong  against  tides,  the  enormons  whale 
Emerges  as  he  goes.'  '* 

^  I  hope  our  bark  will  meet  with  no  such  shoal,  or  herd,  as 
you  term  it,  Caroline:  (I. suppose  you  fancy  the  sea-anam- 
njoths  pasturing  about  the  bases  of  the  /.everlasting  hiUs,' 
derouring  strange  provender. in  the  vast  valleys  through^ and 
^Mve  yMojol  sea-biilows  roll).  I  should  not  like  to  be  cap* 
^>ed  by  the  patnareh  bulL** 


200  SHIRLET. 

**  I  suppose  you  expect  to  see  mermaids,  Sliirley  ?" 

'^  One  of  them  at  any  rate :  I  do  not  bargain  for  less :  and  she 
is  to  appear  in  some  sucli  fashion  as  this.  I  am  to  be  talking 
by  myself  on  deck,  rather  late  of  an  August  eyening,  watching 
and  being  watched  by  a  fiill  harvest-moon :  something  is  to 
rise  white  on  the  surface  of  the  sea,  over  which  ihat  moon 
mounts  silent,  and  hangs  glorious :  the  object  glitters  and 
sinks.  It  rises  again.  I  think  I  hear  it  cry  with  an  articulate 
voice  :  .1  call  you  up  from  the  cabin :  I  show  you  an  image,  fsdr 
as  alabaster,  emei^ging  from  the  dim  wave.  We  both  see  the 
long  hair,  the  lifted  and  foam-white  arm,  the  oval  mirror 
brilliant  as  a  star.  It  glides  nearer  :  a  himian  face  is  plainly 
visible ;  a  face  in  the  style  of  yours,  whose  straight,  pure  '* 
(excuse  the  word,  it  is  appropriate), — "  whose  straight,  pure 
lineaments,  paleness  does  not  disfigure.  It  looks  at  us,  bnt 
not  with  your  eyes.  I  see  a  preternatural  lure  in  its  wilj 
glance  :  it  beckons.  Were  we  men,  we  shoidd  spring  at  the 
sign,  the  cold  billow  would  be  dared  for  the  sake  of  the  colder 
enchantress  ;  being  women,  we  stand  safe,  though  not  dread- 
less.  She  comprehends  our  unmoved  gaze  ;  she  feels  herself 
powerless ;  anger  crosses  her  front ;  she  cannot  charm,  bnt 
she  will  appal  us  :  she  rises  high,  and  glides  all  revealed,  on 
the  dark  waveridge.  Temptress-terror!  monstrous  likeness 
of  ourselves  !  Are  you  not  glad,  Caroline,  when  at  last,  and 
with  a  wild  shriek,  she  dives  ?*' 

'^But,  Shirley,  she  is  not  like  us:  we  are  neither  temp- 
iresses,  nor  terrbrs,  nor  monsters." 

'^  Some  of  our  kind,  it  is  said,  are  all  three.  There  are 
men  who  ascribe  to  '  woman,'  in  general,  such  attributes.'' 

"My  dears,"  here  interrupted  Mrs  Pryor,  "does  it  not 
ftrike  you  that  your  conversation  for  the  last  ten  minutes  has 
been  rather  fanciful  ?  " 

"  But  there  is  no  harm  in  our  fancies ;  is  there,  ma'am  ?" 

"  We  are  aware  that  mermaids  do  not  exist :  why  speak  of 
them  as  if  they  did  ?  How  can  you  find  interest  in  speaking 
of  a  nonentity?" 

"  I  don't  know,"  said  Shirley. 

"  My  dear,  I  think  there  is  an  arrival.  I  heard  a  step  in 
the  lane,  while  you  were  talking  ;  and  is  not  that  the  garden- 
gate  which  creiis?" 

Shirley  stepped  to  the  window. 

"  Yes,  there  is  some  one,"  said  she,  turning  quietly  away ; 
and,  as  she  resumed  her  seat,  a  sensitive  flush  aninuited  her 


COMMCMICATIONS  ON  BUSINESS.  201 

free,  while  a  trembling  ray  at  once  kindled  and  softened  her 
eje.  She  raised  her  hand  to  her  chin,  cast  her  gaze  down, 
and  seemed  to  think  as  she  waited. 

The  servant  announced  Mr  Moore,  and  Shirley  turned 
round  when  Mr  Moore  appeared  at  the  door.  His  figure 
seemed  Tery  tall  as  he  enteied,  and  stood  in  contrast  with  the 
three  ladies,  none  of  whom  could  boast  a  stature  much  beyond 
the  average.  He  was  looking  well,  better  than  he  had  been 
knowi)  to  look  for  the  past  twelve  months  :  a  sort  of  renewed 
youth  glowed  in  his  eye  and  colour,  and  an  invigorated  hope 
and  settled  purpose  sustained  his  bearing :  firmness  his  counte- 
nance still  indicated,  but  not  austerity :  it  looked  as  cheerful 
as  it  was  earnest. 

.  *'  I  am  just  returned  from  Stilbro',''  he  said  to  Miss  Keeldar, 
as  he  greeted  her;  ''  and  I  thought  I  would  call  to  impart  to 
yoa  the  result  of  my  mission." 

**  You  did  right  not  to  keep  me  in  suspense,**  she  said ; 
"  and  your  visit  is  well-timed.      Sit  down :  we  have  not 
finished  tea.     Are  you  English  enough  to  relish  tea ;  or  do 
jou  fidthftdly  adhere  to  coffee  ?'* 
Moore  accepted  tea. 

^'  I  am  learning  to  be  a  naturalized  Englishman,"  said  he ; 
*'my  foreign  habits  are  leaving  me  one  by  one." 

And  now  he  paid  his  respects  to  Mrs  Pryor,  and  paid  them 
well,  with  a  grave  modesty  that  became  his  age,  compared 
with  hers.   Then  he  looked  at  Caroline — ^not,  however,  for  the 
first  time — his  glance  had  fallen  upon  her  before  :  he  bent 
towards  her  as  she  sat,  gave  her  his  hand,'  and  asked  her  how 
she  was.     The  light  from  the  window  did  not  fall  upon  Miss 
Hdstone,  her  back  was  turned  towards  it :  a  quiet  though 
nther  low  reply,  a  still  demeanour,  and  the  friendly  protection 
of  early  twilight,  kept  out  of  view  each  traitorous  symptom. 
NoDe  could  affirm  that  she  had  trembled  or  blushed,  that  her 
heart  had  quaked,  or  her  nerves  thrilled:  none  could  prove 
emotion:   a  greeting  showing  less  efiusion  was  never  inter- 
changed.    Moore  took  the  empty  chair  near  her,  opposite 
Miss  Keeldar.     He  had  placed  himself  well :  his  neighbour, 
screened  by  the  very  closeness  of  his  vicinage  from  his 
Kmtiny,  and  sheltered  further  by  the  dusk  which  deepened 
each  moment, •soon  regained,  not  merely  seeming,  but  real 
mastery  of  the  feelings  which  had  started  into  insurrection 
•t  the  first  announcement  of  his  name. 
Be  addressed  his  cooversatioTi  to  Miss  Keeldar* 


202  HHISUT. 

"  I  went  to  the  barracks/'  he  said,  '^and  had  an  intemew 
with  Colonel  Kyde:  he  approved  my  plans,  and  promised 
the  aid  I  wanted :  indeed,  he  offered  a  more  numerous  force 
than  I  require — ^half  a  dozen  will  suj£ce.  I  don't  intend  to 
be  swamped  by  red-coats :  they  are  needed  for  appearance 
rather  than  anything  else :  my  main  reliance  is  on  my  own 
civilians.".  * 

"  And  on  their  Captain,"  interposed  Shirley. 

'^What,  Captain  Keeldar?"  inquired  Moore,  slightly 
smiling,  and  not  lifting  his  eyes :  the  tone  of  raillery  in  which 
he  said  this  was  very  respectful  and  suppressed. 

^'  No,"  returned  Shirley,  answering  tiie  ^mile ;  ''  Captain 
Gr^rard  Moore,  who  trusts  much  to  th^  prowess  of  bis  own 
right  arm,  I  believe." 

'^Furnished  with  his  counting-house  ruler,"  added  Moore. 
Eesuming  his  usual  gravity,  he  went  on:  "I  received  by  this 
evening's  post  a  note  from  the  Home- Secretary  in  answer  to 
mine  :  it  appears  they  are  imeasy  at  the  state  of  matters  here 
in  the  north  ;  they  especially  condemn  the  supineness  and 
pusillanimity  of  the  mill-owners ;  they  say,  as  I  have  always 
said,  that  inaction,  under  present  circumstances,  is  criminal, 
and  that  cowardice  is  cruelty,  since  both  can  only  encourage 
disorder,  and  lead  finally  to  sanguinary  outbreaJu.  There  is 
the  note :  I  brought  it  for  your  perusal;  and  there  is  a  batch 
of  newspapers,  containing  further  accounts  of  proceedings  in 
Nottingham,  Manchester,  and  elsewhere." 

He  produced  letters  and  journals,  and  laid  them  before  Miss 
Keeldar.  While  she  perused  them,  he  took  his  tea  quietly; 
but,  though  his  tongue  was  still,  his  observant  faculties  seemed 
by  no  means  off  du^.  Mrs  Pryor,  sitting  in  the  background, 
did  not  come  within  <the  range  of  his  glance,  but  the  two 
younger  ladies  had  the  full  benefit  >thereof. 

•  Miss  Ktoldar,  placied  directly  opposite,  was  seen  without 
effort :  she  wa^  the  object  his  eyes,  when  lifi;ed,  naturally  met 
first;  and,  as  what  remained  of  daylight — the  gilding  of  the 
Yieat — was  upon  her,  her  shape  rose  in  relief  from  &e  dark 
panelling  behind.  Shirley's  clear  cheek  was  tinted  yet  with 
the  colour  which  had  risen  into  it  a  few  minutes  since:  the 

« 

dark  lashes  of  her  eyes  looking  down  as  she  read,  the  dusk  yet 
ddicate  line  of  her  eyebrows,  the  almost  sable  gloss  of  ner 
curls,  made  her  heightened  complexion  look  fine  as  the  bloom 
of  a  red  wild-fiower,  by  contrast.  There  was  natund  grace  in 
her  attitude,  and  there  was  artistic  effect  in  the  ample  and 


GOUUUNIGATIOini  OH  BUSINESS.  203 

shining  folds  of  her  silk  dress — an  attire  simply  fashioned, 
but  almost  splendid  from  the  shifting  brightness  of  its  dye, 
warp  and  woof  being  of  tints  deep  and  changing  as  the  hue  on 
a  pheasant's  neck.  A  glancing  bracelet  on  her  arm  produced 
Ae  contrast  of  gold  and  ivory :  there  was  something  brilliant 
in  the  whole  picture.  It  is  to  be  supposed  that  Moore  thought 
80,  as  his  eye  dwelt  long  on  it,  but  he  seldom  permitted  his 
feelings  or  his  opinions  to  exhibit  themselves  in  his  face :  his 
temperament  boasted  a  certain  amount  of  phlegm,  and  he  pre- 
fened  an  lomdemonstrative,  not  ungentle,  but  serious  aspect,  to 
toy  other. 

He  conid  not,  by  looking  straight  before  him,  see  Caroline, 
as  she  was  close  at  his  side;  it  was  necessary,  therefore,  to 
manoeuvre  a  little  to  get  her  well  within  the  range  of  his  obser- 
vation :  he  leaned  back  in  his  chair,  and  looked  down  on  her. 
In  Miss  Hdstone,  neither  he  nor  any  one  else  could  discover 
brilliancy.  Sitting  in  the  shade,  without  flowers  or  ornaments, 
ber  attire  the  modest  muslin  dress,  colourless  but  for  its  narrow 
stripe  of  pale  azure,  her  complexion  xmflushed,  unexcited,  the 
very  brownness  of  her  hair  and  eyes  invisible  by  this  faint 
light,  she  was,  compared  with  the  heiress,  as  a  graceful  pencil- 
sketch  compared  with  a  vivid  painting.  Since  Robert  had 
seen  her  last,  a  great  change  had  been  wrought  in  her;  whether 
be  perceived  it,  might  not  be  ascertained:  he  said  nothing  to 
that  efiect. 

**How  is  Hortense  ?"  asked  Caroline,  softly. 

"  Very  well;  but  she  complains  of  being  tmemployed  ;  she 
miases  you." 

"TeU  her  that  1  miss  her,  and  that  I  write  and  read  i 
portion  of  French  every  day." 

**  She  will  ask  if  you  sent  your  love :  she  is  always  particular 
on  that  point.     You  know  she  likes  attention.*' 

"  My  best  love — ^my  very  best ;  and  say  to  her,  that  when- 
ever she  has  time  to  write  me  a  little  note,  I  shall  be  glad  to 
hear  from  her." 

"  What  if  I  forget  ?  I  am  not  the  surest  messenger  of 
compliments.*^ 

"  No,  don^t  forget,  Robert :  it  is  no  compliment — ^it  is  in 
good  earnest." 

"And  must  therefore  be  delivered  punctually  ?" 

"If  you  please." 

"  Hortense  will  be  ready  to  shed  tears.  She  is  tender-hearted 
on  the  subject  of  her  pupil;  yet  she  reproaches  you  sometimes 


204  smRLET.  ,' 

for  obeying  your  uncle's  injunctions  too  literally.     Affection, 
like  love,  will  be  unjust  now  and  then." 

And  Caroline  made  no  answer  to  this  observation;  for  indeed 
her  heart  was  troubled,  and  to  her  eyes  she  would  have  raised 
her  handkerchief,  if  she  had  dared.  If  she  had  dared,  too,  she 
would  have  declared  how  the  very  flowers  in  the  garden  of 
Hollow's  cottage  were  dear  to  her ;  how  the  little  parlour  of 
that  house  was  her  earthly  paradise;  how  she  longed  to  return 
to  it,  as  much  almost  as  the  First  Woman,  in  her  exile,  must 
have  longed  to  revisit  Eden.  Not  daring,  however,  to  say 
these  things,  she  held  her  peace :  she  sat  quiet  at  Kobert s 
side,  waiting  for  him  to  say  something  more.  It  was  long 
since  this  proximity  had  been  hers — ^long  since  his  voice  had 
addressed  her:  could  she,  with  any  show  of  probability,  even 
of  possibility,  have  imagined  that  the  meeting  gave  him 
pleasure,  to  her  it  would  have  given  deep  bliss.  Yet,  even  in 
doubt  that  it  pleased — in  dread  that  it  might  annoy  him— 
she  received  the  boon  of  the  meeting  as  an  imprisoned  bird 
would  the  admission  of  sunshine  to  its  cage  :  it  was  of  no  use 
arguing — contending  against  the  sense  of  present  happiness : 
to  be  near  Robert  was  to  be  revived. 

Miss  Keeldar  laid  down  the  papers. 
»     '^  And  are  you  glad  or  sad  for  all  these  menacing  tidings?*' 
she  inquired  of  her  tenant. 

"Not  precisely  either;  but  I  certainly  am  instructed.  I 
see  that  our  only  plan  is  to  be  firm.  I  see  that  efficient  pre* 
paration  and  a  resolute  attitude  are  the  best  means  of  ayerdng 
bloodshed." 

•  He  then  inquired  if  she  had  observed  some  particular 
paragraph,  to  which  she  replied  in  the  negative,  and  he  rose 
to  show  it  to  her :  he  continued  the  conversation  standing 
before  her.  From  the  tenor  of  what  he  said,  it  appeared 
evident  that  they  both  apprehended  distui^bances  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Briarfield,  tiiough  in  what  form  they  expected 
them  to  break  out  was  not  specified.  Neither  Caroline  nor 
Mrs  Pry  or  asked  questions:  the  subject  did  not  appear  to  be 
regarded  as  one  ripe  for  free  discussion ;  therefi>re  the  lady 
and  her  tenant  were  suffered  to  keep  details  to  themselves, 
unimportuned  by  the  curiosity  of  their  listeners. 

Miss  Keeldar,  in  speaking  to  Mr  Moore,  took  a  fbne  at 
once  animated  and  dignified,  confidential  and  self-respecting. 
When,  however,  the  candles  were  brought  in,  and  the  fire  was 
stirred  up,  and  the  fulness  of  light  thus  produced  rendered  the 


OOHHtTKICAflOI^S  0!^  BUSINESS.  205 

e^^ression  of  her  countenance  legible,  you  could  see  that' she 
was  all  interest,  life,  and  earnestness  :  there  was  nothing 
coquettish  in  her  demeanour:  whatever  she  felt  forMoore,  she 
felt  it  seriously.  And  serious,  too,  were  his  feelings,  and 
settled  were  his  views,  apparently ;  for  he  made  no  petty  effort 
to  attract,  dazzle,  or  impress.  He  contrived,  notwithstanding, 
to  command  a  little ;  because  the  deeper  voice,  however 
mildly  modulated,  the  somewhat  harder  mind,  now  and  then, 
though  involuntarily  and  unintentionally,  bore  down  by  some 
peremptory  phrase  or  tone  the  mellow  accents  and  susceptible, 
if  high,  nature  of  Shirley.  Miss  Keeldar  looked  happy  in 
conversing  with  him,  and  her  joy  seemed  twofold, — a  joy  of 
the  past  and  present,  of  memory  and  of  hope. 

What  I  have  just  said  are  Caroline's  ideas  of  the  pair:  she 
felt  what  has  just  been  described.  In  thus  feeling,  she  tried 
not  to  suffer;  but  suffered  sharply,  nevertheless.  She  suffered, 
indeed,  miserably:  a  few  minutes  before,  her  famished  heart 
had  tasted  a  drop  and  Anmib  of  nourishment  that,  if  freely 
given,  would  have  brought  back  abundance  of  life  where  life 
wasfuling;  but  the  generous  feast  was  snatched  from  her, 
spread  before  another,  and  she  remained  but  a  bystander  at 
the  banquet. 

The  clock  struck  nine:  it  was  Caroline's  time  for  going 
home:  she  gathered  nip  her  work,  put  the  embroidery,  the 
scissors,  the  thimble  into  her  bag :  she  bade  Mrs  Pryor  a  quiet 
good-night,  receiving  from  that  lady  a  warmer  pressure  of  the 
hand  than  usual:  she  stepped  up  to  Miss  Keeldar. 
"Good-night,  Shirley!" 

Shirley  started  up.     "What I — so  soon?     Are  you  going 
already?" 
"  It  is  past  nine." 

"  I  never  heard  the  clock.  You  will  come  again  to-morrow , 
•nd  you  will  be  happy  tp-night,  will  you  not?  Remember  our 
plans." 
"  Yes,"  said  Caroline ;  "  I  have  not  forgotten." 
Her  mind  misgave  her  that  neither  those  plans  nor  any 
other  could  permanently  restore  her  mental  tranquillity.  She 
tamed  to  Eobert,  who  stood  close  behind  her:  as  he  looked 
up,  the  light  of  the  candles  on  the  mantelpiece  fell  full  on  her 
face:  allits  paleness,  all  its  change,  all  its  forlorn  meaning 
were  clearly  revealed.  Robert  had  good  eyes,  and  might 
have  seen  it,  if  he 'would:  whether  ho  did  see  it,  nothing 
iodicated. 


206  SHIBLET. 

<*  Good-niglit!"  she  said,  shaking  like  a  leaf,  offering  her 
thin  hand  hastily,  anxious  to  part  &om  him  qnicklj. 

''  You  are  going  home  ?"  he  asked,  not  touching  her  hancL 

"  Yes." 

"  Is  Fanny  come  for  you." 

«  Yes." 

"  I  may  as  weU  accompany  you  a  step  of  the  way:  not  up 
to  the  Rectory,  though,  lest  my  old  friend,  Helstone,  shoiud 
shoot  me  from  the  window." 

He  laughed  and  took  his  hat.  Caroline  spoke  of  un* 
necessary  trouble:  he  told  her  to  put  on  her  bonnet  and 
shawl.  She  was  quickly  ready,  and  they  were  soon,  both  in 
the  open  air.  Moore  drew  her  hand  under  his  arm,  just  in 
his  old  manner, — ^that  manner  which  she  ever  felt  to  be  80 
kind. 

"  You  may  run  on,  Fanny,"  he  daid  to  the  housemaid!  "we 
shall  overtake  you:"  and  when  the  girl  had  got^a  little  in 
advance,  he  enclosed  Caroline's  hand  in  his,  and  said  he  vfsis 
glad  to  find  she  was  a  familiar  guest  at  Fieldhead:  he  hoped 
her  intimacy  with  Miss  Keeldar  would  continue;  such  society 
would  be  both  pleasant  and  improving. 

Caroline  replied  that  she  liked  Shirley. 

'^  And  there  is  no  doubt  the  liking  is  mutual,"  said  Moore: 
'^  if  she  professes  friendship,  be  certain  she  is  sincere:  she 
cannot  feign;  she  scorns  hypocrisy.  And,  Caroline,  are  we 
n^ver  to  see  you  at  Hollow's  cottage  again  ?  " 

"  I  suppose  not,  imless  my  uncle  should  change  his  mind.** 

"  Are  you  much  alone  now  ?  " 

'^  Yes;  a  good  deal.  I  have  little  pleasure  in  any  society 
but  Miss  Keeldar's." 

"  Have  you  been  quite  well  lately  ?  " 

«  Quite." 

"  You  must  take  care  of  yourself.  Be  sure  not  to  neglect 
exercise.  Do  you  know  I  fancied  you  somewhat  altered; — » 
little  fallen  away,  and  pale.     Is  your  imcle  kind  to  you  ?  " 

"  Yes ;  he  is  just  as  he  always  is." 

^'  Not  too  tender,  that  is  to  say ;  not  too  protective  and  atten- 
tive.     Aiid  what  ails  you,  then  ? — ^tell  me,  Lina." 

"  Nothing,  Eobert  ?  "  but  her  voice  faltered, 

<'  That  is  to  say,  nothing  that  you  will  teU  me:  I  am  not  to 
be  taken  into  confidence.  Separation  is  then  quite  to  estrange 
us,  is  it  ?  " 

'*  I  do  not  know:  sometimes  I  almost  fear  it  is." 


COMMUNICATIONS  ON  BUSINESS.  207 

**  But  it  ouglit  not  to  have  that  effect.     *  Should  auld  ac- 
quaintance be  forgot,  and  days  o'  lang  syne?'" 
"  Robert,  I  don't  forget. " 

"It is  two  months,  I  should  think,  Caroline,  since  you  were 
at  the  cottage.'* 
"  Since  I  was  witkin  it — ^yes." 
"  HsLve  you  ever  passed  fiiat  way  in  your  walk  ?" 
'*  I  have  come  to  the  top  of  the  fields  sometimes  of  an  evening, 
and  looked  down.    Once  I  saw  Hortense  in  the  garden  watering 
her  flowers,  and  I  know  at  what  time  you  light  your  lamp  in 
the  counting-house:  I  have  waited  for  it  to  shine  out  now  and 
then;  and  I  have  seen  you  bend  between  it  and  the  window: 
I  knew  it  was  you — ^I  could  almost  trace  the  outline  of  your 
form." 

"  I  wonder  I  never  encountered  you:  I  occasionally  walk  to 
the  top  of  the  Hollow's  fields  after  sunset." 

"I  know  you  do:  I  had  almost  spoken  to  you  one  night, 
you  passed  so  near  me." 

"  Did  I  ?    I  passed  near  you,  and  did  not  see  you!     Was  I 
alone?" 
"  I  saw  you  twice,  and  neither  time  were  you  alone." 
"  Who  was  my  companion  ?  Probably  notlung  but  Joe  Scott, 
or  my  own  shadow  by  moonlight." 

"No;  neither  Joe  Scott  nor  your  shadow,  Robert.  The 
first  time  you  were  with  Mr  Yorke ;  and  the  second  time  what 
you  call  your  shadow  was  a  shape  with  a  white  forehead  and 
dark  curls,  and  a  sparkling  necklace  round  its  neck ;  but  I 
only  just  got  a  glimpse  of  you  and  that  fairy  shadow:  I  did 
not  wait  to  hear  you  converse." 

"  It  appears  you  walk  invisible.  I  noticed  a  ring  on  your 
hand  this  evening;  can  it  be  the  ring  of  Gyges  ?  Henceforth, 
when  sitting  in  the  counting-house  by  myself,  perhaps  at  dead 
of  night,  I  shall  permit  myself  to  imagine  that  Caroline  may 
be  leaning  over  my  shoulder  reading  with  me  from  the  same 
book,  or  sitting  at  my  side  engaged  in  her  own  particular  task, 
and  now  and  then  raising  her  unseen  eyes  to  my  face  to  read 
there  my  thoughts." 

"  You  need  fear  no  such  infliction:  I  do  not  come  near  you: 
I  only  stand  afar  off,  watching  what  may  become  of  you." 

"  When  I  walk  out  along  the  hedgerows  in  the  evening  after 
the  mill  is  shut— or  at  night,  wh6n  I  take  the  watchman's 
place — ^I  shall  fancy  the  flutter  of  every  little  bird  over  its 
oest,  the  rustle  of  every  leaf,  a  movement  made  by  you;  tree- 


SOS  8HISLBT.  I 

shadows  will  take  your  shape ;  in  the  white  sprays  of  hawtkinii 
I  shall  imagine  glimpses  of  you.     Lina,  you  will  haunt  ue." 

"  I  will  never  be  where  you  would  not  wish  me  to  be,  tor 
see  nor  hear  what  you  would  wish  unseen  and  imheard.'' 

*'  I  shall  see  you  in  my  very  mill  in  broad  daylight:  indeedf 
I  have  seen  you  there  once.  But  a  week  ago,  I  was  staoding 
at  the  top  of  one  of  my  long  rooms,  girls  were  working  at  tLe 
other  end,  and  amongst  half  a  dozen  of  them,  moving  to  and 
fro,  I  seemed  to  see  a  figure  resembling  yours.  It  was  some 
effect  of  doubtful  Hght  or  shade,  or  of  dazzling  sunbeam.  1 
walked  up  to  this  group;  what  I  sought  had  glided  away:  1 
found  myself  between  two  buxom  lasses  in  pinafores.'* 

''  I  shall  not  follow  you  into  your  mill,  Eobert,  unless  yoa 
call  me  there." 

'^  Nor  is  that  the  only  occasion  on  which  imagination  has 
played  me  a  trick.  One  night,  when  I  came  home  late  from 
market,  I  walked  into  the  cottage  parlour  thinking  to  £nd  Hor- 
teose ;  but  instead  of  her,  I  thought  I  found  you.  There  "wai 
no  candle  in  the  room:  my  sister  had  taken  the  light  up-stairs 
with  her ;  the  window-blind  was  not  drawn;  and  broad  moon- 
beams poured  through  the  panes:  there  you  were,  lina,  at 
the  casement,  shrinking  a  little  to  one  side  in  an  attitude  not 
unusual  with  you.  You  were  dressed  in  white,  as  I  have  seen 
you  dressed  at  an  evening  party.  For  half  a  second,  your 
fresh,  living  face  seemed  turned  towards  me,  looking  at  me;  for 
half  a  second,  my  idea  was  to  go  and  take  your  hand,  to  chide 
you  for  your  long  absence,  and  welcome  your  present  visit. 
Two  steps  forward  broke  the  spell:  the  drapery  of  the  dress 
changed  outline ;  the  tints  of  the  complexion  dissolved,  and 
were  formless:  positively,  as  I  reached  the  spot,  there  was 
nothing  lefl  but  the  sweep  of  a  white  muslin  curtain,  and  a 
balsam  plant  in  a  flower-pot,  covered  with  a  flush  of  bloom— 
*  sic  transit,'  et  cetera." 

'^  It  was  not  my  wraith,  then  ?     I  almost  thought  it  was."^ 

*'No;  only  gauze,  crockery,  and  pink  blossom:  a  sample  of 
earthly  illusions." 

'^  I  wonder  you  have  time  for  such  illusions,  occupied  ai 
your  mind  must  be." 

'^  So  do  I.  But  I  find  in  myself,  Lina,  two  natures ;  one  for 
the  world  aiid  business,  and  one  for  home  and  leisure.  Gerard 
Moore  is  a  hard  dog,  brought  up  to  mill  and  market :  the  person 
you  call  your  cousin  Robert  is  sometimes  a  dreamer,  wlio  lirea 
elsewhere  than  in  Cloth-hall  and  counting-house." 


OOMHUMIOATIONS  ON  BUSINESS.  209 

**•  Yomr  two  natures  agree  with  yon:  I  think  yon  are  look* 
g  in  good  spirits  and  health  :  you  have  quite  lost  that 
irasaed'air  which  it  often  pained  one  to  see  in  your  face  a 
w  months  ago.** 

"  Do  you  observe  that  ?  Certainly,  I  am  disentangled  of 
ime  difficulties :  I  have  got  clear  of  some  shoals,  and  have 
tore  sear-room.*' 

"  Andy  with  a  fair  wind,  you  may  now  hope  to  make  a 
rosperons  voyage  ?  " 

"  I  may  hope  it — ^yes — ^but  hope  is  deceptive:  there  is  no 
dntrolling  wind  or  wave:  gusts  and  swells  perpetually  trouble 
le  mariner's  course;  he  dace  not  dismiss  from  his  mind  the 
Kpectation  of  tempest." 

'^  But  yon  are  ready  for  a  breeze — you  are  a  good  seaman-— 
Q  able  conmiander:  you  are  a  skilful  pilot,  Robert;  you  will 
reather  the  storm." 

*'  My  kinswoman  always  thinks  the  best  of  me,  but  I  will 
ake  her  words  for  a  propitious  omen;  I  will  consider  that  in 
neeting  her  to-night,  I  have  met  with  one  of  those  birds 
vhose  appearance  is  to  the  sailor  the  harbinger  of  good-luck." 

**  A  poor  harbinger  of  good-luck  is  she  who  can  do  nothing 
-^who  has  no  power.  I  feel  my  incapacity:  it  is  of  no  use 
laying  I  have  ^e  will  to  serve  you,  when  I  cahnot  prove  it; 
fet  I  have  that  will.  I  wish  you  success  ;  I  wish  you  high 
ibrtune  and  true  happiness." 

"  When  did  you  ever  wish  me  anjrthing  else  ?  What  is 
Fanny  waiting  for — ^I  told  her  to  walk  on  ?  Oh !  we  have 
reached  the  chturchyard :  then,  we  are  to  part  here,  I  sup- 
pose :  we  might  have  sat  a  few  minutes  in  the  church-porch, 
if  the  girl  had  not  been  with  us.  It  is  so  fine  a  night,  so 
lommer-mild  and  still,  I  have  no  particular  wish  to  return  yet 
to  the  Hollow." 
*^But  we  cannot  sit  in  the  porch  now,  Robert." 
Caroline  said  this  because  Moore  was  turning  her  round 
towards  it. 

^^ Perhaps  not,  but  tell  Fanny  to  go  in;  say  we  are  ooming*. 
a  few  minutes  will  make  no  difference." 
The  church-clock  struck  ten. 
^  My  unde  will  be  coming  out  to  take  his  usual  sentinel 

Yoond,  and  he  always  surveys  the  church  and  churchyard." 
^'  And  if  he  does  ?    If  it  were  not  for  Fanny,  who  knows 

we  are  here,  I  should  find  pleasure  in  dodging  and  eluding 

kirn.    We  could  be  under  the  east  window  when  he  is  at  the 

14 


810  SHIBLBT. 

poroh;  as  he  came  round  to  the  nortih  side,  ive  could  wheel  ofl 
to  the  south;  we  might  at  a  pinch  hide  behind  some  of  the 
monuments:  that  tall  erection  of  the  Wyimes  would  scieen  ni 
completely." 

"Robert,  what  good  spirits  you  hare  I  Go— gol"  added 
Caroline  hastily,  "  I  hear  the  front  door  " 

"  I  don't  want  to  go ;  on  the  contrary,  I  want  to  stay." 

"You  know  my  imcle  will  be  terribly  angry:  he  finrbade 
me  to  see  you  because  you  are  a  Jacobin." 

"  A  queer  Jacobin  I " 

"  Go,  Robert,  he  is  coming;  I  hear  him  cough." 

"  Diable !  It  is  strange — ^what  a  pertinacious  wish  I  fN*l 
to  stay  1" 

"  You  remember  what  he  did  to  Fanny's ^  began  Carcn 

line,' and  stopped  abruptly  short.  Sweetheart  was  the  won 
that  ought  to  have  followed,  but  she  could  not  utter  it;  i 
seemed  calculated  to  suggest  ideas  she  had  no  intention  t( 
suggest;  ideas  deludve  and  disturbing.  Moore  was  le^ 
scrupulous;  "Fanny's  sweetheart?"  he  said  at  once.  *^H< 
gave  him  a  shower-bath  under  the  pump— did  he  not  ?  He  \ 
do  as  much  for  me,  I  daresay,  with  pleasure.  I  should  likj 
to  provoke  the  old  Turk — ^not  however  against  you:  but  h 
would  make  a  distinction  between  a  cousin  and  a  lover,  woul^ 
he  not?" 

"  Oh  I  he  would  not  think  of  you  in  that  way,  of  course  not 
his  quarrel  with  you  is  entireiy  political ;  yet  I  should  nn 
like  the  breach  to  be  widened,  and  he  is  so  testy.  Here  hi 
is  at  the  garden-gate — for  your  own  sake  and  mine,  Robert,  go! 

The  beseeching  words  were  aided  by  a  beseeching  gestur 
and  a  more  beseeching  look.  Moore  covered  her  claspt.^ 
hands  an  instant  with  his,  answered  her  upward  by  a  down 
ward  gaze,  said  "  Grood-night !"  and  went. 

Caroline  was  in  a  moment  at  the  kitchen-door  behiLi 
Fanny ;  the  shadow  of  the  shovel-hat  at  that  very  instar 
fell  on  a  moonlit  tomb  ;  the  Rector  emerged,  erect  as  a  can( 
from  his  garden,  and  proceeded  in  slow  march,  his  banj 
behind  him,  down  the  cemetery.  Moore  was  almost  canght' 
he  had  to  "  dodge  "  afler  all,  to  coast  round  the  church,  an 
finally  to  bend  his  tall  form  behind  the  Wynnes'  ambidoQ 
monument  There  he  was  forced  to  hide  full  ten  minuted 
kneeling  with  one  knee  on  the  turf,  his  hat  off,  his  curls  bi 
to  the  dew,  his  dark  eye  shining,  and  his  lips  parted 
inward  laughter  at  his  position ;  for  the  Rector  xneanti 


COmcUKICATIONS  ON  BUSINESS.  211 

od  GOoUy  star-gazing,  and  taking  snuff  within  three  feet 
him. 

It  happened,  however,  that  Mr  Helstone  had  no  suspicion 
latever  on  his  mind ;  for  being  usually  but  vaguely  informed 
his  niece's  movements,  not  thinking  it  worth  while  to  follow 
;m  doselj,  he  was  not  aware  that  she  had  been  out  at  all 
&t  day,  and  imagined  her  then  occupied  with  book  or  work 
her  chamber:  where,  indeed,  she  was  by  this  time  ;  though 
(t  absorbed  in  the  tranquil  employment  he  ascribed  to  her, 
It  standing  at  her  window  with  fast-throbbing  heart,  peeping 
oionaly  from  behind  the  blind,  watching  fbr  her  uncle  to 
Henter  and  her  cousin  to  escape ;  and  at  last  she  was  gratified ; 
it  heard  Mr  Helstone  come  in;  she  saw  Eobert  stride  the 
mbs  and  vault  the  waU;  she  then  went  down  to  prayers. 
Hien  she  returned  to  her  chamber,  it  was  to  meet  the 
temoiy  of  Robert.  Slumber's  visitation  was  long  averted: 
3Dg  she  sat  at  her  lattice,  long  gazed  down  on  the  old  garden 
iMi  older  church,  on  the  tombs  laid  out  all  grey  and  calm, 
(fid  clear  in  moonlight.  She  followed  the  steps  of  the  night, 
m  its  pathway  of  stars,  far  into  the  ''  wee  sma'  hours  ayont 
ibe  twal':^  she  was  with  Moore,  in  spirit,  the  whole  time: 
die  was  at  his  side :  she  heard  his  voice  :  she  gave  her  hand 
into  his  hand;  it  rested  warm  in  his  fingers.  When  the 
cbnrch-clock  struck,  when  any  other  sound  stirred,  when  a 
tittle  mouse  familiar  to  her  chamber,  an  intruder  for  which 
the  would  never  permit  Fanny  to  lay  a  trap,  came  rattling 
amongst  the  links  of  her  locket  chain,  her.  one  ring,  and 
another  trinket  or  two,  on  the  toilette-table,  to  nibble  a  bit 
of  biscnit  laid  ready  for  it,  she  looked  up,  recalled  momen- 
^y  to  the  reaL  Then  she  said  half  aloud,  as  if  deprecating 
tbe  accusation  of  some  tmseen  and  unheard  monitor, — 

'^  I  am  not  cherishing  love  dreams :   I  am  only  thinking 
KQfie  I  cannot  sleep ;  of  course,  I  know  he  will  marry 

urley." 

With  retoming  silence,  with  the  lull  of  the  chime,  and  the 

of  her  sxnall  imtamed  and  imknown  prot^g^,  she  still 

the  dream,  nestling  to  the  vision's  side, — listening 

coovening  with  it.    It  paled  at  last:  as  dawn  approached, 

Betting  stars  and  breaking  day  dimmed  the  creation  of 

the  wakened  song  of  birds  hushed  her  whispers. 

tale  foil  of  £Lre,  quick  with  interest,  borne  away  by  the 

wind,  became  a  vague  murmur.     The  shape  that^ 

ia  a  moosibeami  lived,  had  a  pulse,  had  movement,  wore 


21*2  smsLKT. 

health's  glow  and  yonth's  freshness,  turned  cold  and  ghoililj 
grey,  confronted  with  the  red  of  sunrise.  It  wasted.  She 
was  left  solitary  at  last :  she  crept  to  her  couch,  chill  and 
dejected. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

SHIRLET  SEEKS  TO  BE  SAVED  B7  WOBKS. 

"  Op  course,  I  know  he  will  marry  Shirley,"  were  her  firrt 
words  when  she  rose  in  the  morning.  ''  And  he  ought  to 
marry  her :  she  can  help  him,"  she  added  firmly.  "  But  I 
shall  be  forgotten  when  they  are  married,"  was  the  cruel 
succeeding  thought.  ''  Oh !  I  shall  be  wholly  forgotten  I  And 
what — what  shall  I  do  when  Robert  is  taken  quite  ^m  me? 
Where  shall  I  turn  ?  My  Robert !  I  wish  I  could  justly  call 
him  mine :  but  I  am  poverty  and  incapacity ;  Shirley  is 
wealth  and  power :  and  she  is  beauty  too,  and  love — I  cannot 
deny  it.  This  is  no  sordid  suit:  she  loves  him — not  ^tb 
inferior  feelings  :  she  loves,  or  vjUL  love,,  as  he  must  feel  proud 
to  be  loved.  Not  a  valid  objection  can  be  made.  Let  them 
be  married  then :  but  afterwards  I  shall  be  nothing  to  him. 
As  for  being  his  sister,  and  all  that  stuff,  I  despise  it.  I  will 
either  be  all  or  nothing  to  a  man  like  Robert :  no  feeble 
shuffling,  or  false  cant,  is  endurable.  Once  let  that  pair  be 
united,  and  I  will  certainly  leave  them.  As  for  lingering 
about,  playing  the  hypocrite,  and  pretending  to  calm  senti- 
ments of  friendship,  when  my  soul  will  be  wrung  with  other 
feelings,  I  shall  not  descend  to  such  degradation.  As  little 
could  I  fill  the  place  of  their  mutual  friend  as  that  of  their 
deadly  foe  :  as  little  could  I  stand  between  them  as  trample  j 
over  them.  Robert  is  a  first-rate  man — ^in  my  eyes :  I  torj 
loved,  do  love,  and  must  love  him.  I  would  be  his  wife,  if  I 
could ;  as  I  cannot,  I  must  go  where  I  shall  never  see  him. 
There  is  but  one  altemative«^to  cleave  to  him  as  if  I  were  a 
part  of  him,  or  to  be  sundered  from  him  wide  as  the  two  pokl 
of  a  sphere.  Sunder  me  then.  Providence.  Part  us  speedilj. 
Some  such  aspirations  as  these  were  again  working  in  htf 
mind  late  in  the  afternoon,  when  the  apparition  of  one  of 
personages  haunting  her  thoughts  passed  the  parlour  windoWJ 
Miss  Keeldar  sauntered  slowly  by:  her  gait,  her  couDtenani 
wearing  that  mixture  of  wistfulness  and  carelessness  whii 


8KS1B  TO  B^  SAVED  BT  W0BK8.  218 

^len  quiescent,  was  the  wonted  cast  of  her  look,  and  character 
of  her  bearing.  When  animated,  the  carelessness  quite 
ranishedy  the  wistAiLiess  became  blent  with  a  genial  gaietji 
seasoning  the  laugh,  the  smile,  the  glance,  with  an  imique 
Savour  of  sentiment,  so  that  mirth  from  her  never  resembled 
**the  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot." 

"  What  do  you  mean  hj  not  coming  to  see  me  this  after- 
QOOD,  as  you  promised?"  was  her  address  to  Caroline  as  she 
mtered  the  room. 

•*I  was  not  in  the  humour,"  replied  Miss  Helstone,  very  truly. 

Shirley  had  already  fixed  on  her  a  penetrating  eye. 

"No,"  she  said;  "I  see  you  are  not  in  the  humour  for 
loring  me  :  you  aie  in  one  of  your  sunless,  inclement  mo9ds, 
when  one  feels  a  fellow-crei^ture's  presence  is  not  welcome  to 
you.    You  have  such  moods  :  are  you  aware  of  it?" 

"  Do  you  mean  to  stay  long,  Shirley  ?  " 

'^  Yes  :  I  am  come  to  have  my  tea,  and  must  have  it  before 
I  go.  I  shall  take  the  liberty  then  of  removing  my  bonnet, 
without  being  asked." 

And  this  ^e  did,  and  then  stood  on  the  rug  with  her  hands 
behind  her. 

**  A  pretty  expression  you  have  in  your  countenance,"  she 
went  on,  still  gazing  keenly,  though  not  inimically,  rather 
indeed  pityingly  at  Caroline.  ,  "  Wonderfully  self-supported 
jou  look,  you  solitude-seeking,  wounded  deer.  Axe  you 
afraid  Shirley  will  worry  you,  if  she  discovers  that  you  are 
hurt,  and  that  you  bleed  ? " 

"  I  never  do  fear  Shirley." 

"But  sometimes  you  dislike  her:  often  you  avoid  her. 
Shirley  can  feel  when  she  is.  slighted  and  shunned.  K  you 
had  not  walked  home  in'the  company  you  did  last  night,  you 
would  have  been  a  different  girl  to-day.  What  time  did  you 
reach  the  Eectory  ?" 

"By  ten." 

"  Humph  1  You  took  three-quarters  of  an  hour  to  walk  a 
nule.    Was  it  you,  or  Moore,  who  lingered  so  ?" 

"  Shirley,  you  talk  nonsense." 

"  He  talked  nonsense — ^that  I  doubt  not ;  or  he  looked  it, 
which  is  a  thousand  times  worse :  I  see  the  reflection  of  his 
eyes  on  your  forehead  at  this  moment.  I  feel  disposed  to  call 
lum  out,  if  I  could  only  get  a  trustworthy  second :  I  feel 
desperately  irritated :  I  felt  so  last  night,  and  have  felt  it  all 
diy.* 


214  smnLET. 

"  Toil  don^t  ask  me  wliy,  she  proceeded,  after  a  pause, 
**  you  little,  silent,  over-modest  thing  ;  and  you  don't  deserve 
that  I  should  pour  out  my  secrets  into  your  lap  without  an 
itivitation.  Upon  my  word,  I  could  have  found  it  in  my  heart 
to  have  dogged  Moore  yesterday  evening  with  dire  intent :  I 
have  pistols,  and  can  use  them." 

"  Stuff,  Shirley  I  Which  would  you  have  shot — ^me  or 
Robert?" 

"  Neither,  perhaps — ^perhaps  myself — more  likely  a_  bat  or 
a  tree-bough.  He  is  a  puppy — ^your  cousin :  a  quiet,  serious, 
sensible,  judicious,  ambitious  puppy.  ^I  see  him  standing 
before  me,  talking  his  half-stem,  haJf-gentle  talk,  bearing  mr 
down  (as  I  am  very  conscious  he  does)  with  his  fixity  or 
purpose,  &c» ;  and  then ^I  have  no  patience  with  him  V 

Miss  Keeldar  started  off  on  a  rapid  walk  through  the  room, 
repeating  energetically  that  she  had  no  patience  with  men  in 
general,  and  with  her  tenant  in  particular. 

"  You  are  mistaken,"  urged  Caroline,  in  some  anxiety : 
"Robert  is  no  puppy  or  male  flirt ;  I  can  vouch  for  that," 

**  Tou  vouch  for  it  1  Do  you  think  I  'U  take  your  word  on 
the  subject  ?  There  is  no  one's  testimony  I  woiild  not  credi: 
sooner  than  yours.  To  advance  Moore's  fortune,  you  vroulii 
cut  off  your  right  hand."   . 

"  But  not  tell  lies  ;  and  if  I  speak  the  truth,  I  must  assure 
yoti  that  he  was  just  civil  to  me  last  night — that  was  alL" 

"  I  never  asked  what  he  was — ^I  can  guess  :  I  saw  him  from 
the  window  take  your  hand  in  his  long  fingers,  just  as  he  went 
out  at  my  gate." 

^  **  Th^ris  nothing.  I  am  not  a  stranger,  you  know ;  1  am 
ajn  old  acquaintance  j  and  his  cousin." 

'  '^I  feel  indignant;  and  that  is  the  long  and  short  of  the 
matter,"  responded  Miss  Keeldar.  "All  my  comfort,"  she 
added  presently,  "  is  broken  up  by  his  manoeuvres.  He  keeps 
intruding  between  you  and  me :  without  him  we  should  be 
good  'Mends ;  but  that  six  leet  of  puppyhood  makes  a 
perpetually  recurring  eclipse  of  our  friendship.  Again  and 
again  he  crosses  and  obscures  the  disk  I  want  always  to  see 
clear :  ever  and  anon  he  renders  me  to  you  a  mere  bore  and 
nuisance." 

"  No,  Shirley  ;  no." 

"  He  does.  You  did  not  want  my  society  this  afternoon* 
and  I  feel  it  hard  :  you  are  nafurally  somewhat  reserved,  bat 
I  am  a  social  personage,  who  cannot  live  alone.     If  we  werf 


SEEKS  TO  BE  SATED  BY  WORKS.  215 

bat  left  unmolested,  I  have  that  regard  £>r  you  that  I  could 
bear-  you  in  my  presence  for  ever,  and  not  for  the  fraction  of 
a  second  do  I  ever  wish  to  be  rid  of  you.  You  cannot  say  as 
much  respecting  me." 

**  Shirley,  I  can  say  anything  you  wish :  Shirley,  I  like  you." 
"  You  will  wish  me  at  Jericho  to-morrow,  Lina." 
*'  I  shall  not.  I  am  every  day  growing  more  accustomed 
to — iandec  of  you.  You  know  I  am  too  English  to  get  up  a 
vehement  £iendship  all  at  once ;  but  you  are  so  mu<^  better 
than  common — you  are  so- different  to  everyday  yoimg  ladies 
— I  esteem  you — ^I  value  you :  you  are  never  a  burden  to  me 
— never.    Do  you  believe  what  I  say  ?" 

"Partly,"  replied  Miss  Keeldar,  smiling  rather  incredu- 
lously ;  "  but  you  are ,  a  peculiar  personage :  quiet  as  you 
look,  there  is  bott^  a  force  and  a  depth  somewhere  within,  not 
easily  reached  or  appreciated:  then  you  certainly  are  not 
happy." 

"  And  unhappy  people  are  rarely  good — ^is  that  what  you 
mean?" 

"  Not  at  all :  I  mean  rather  that  unhappy  people  are  often 
preoccupied,  and  not  in  the  mood  for  discoursing  with  com- 
panions of  my  nature.  Moreover,  there  is  a  sort  of  imhap- 
pmess  which  not  only  depresses,  but  corrodes — ^and  that,  I 
fear,  is  your  portion.  Will  pity  do  you  any  good,  Lina  ?  If 
it  will,  take  some  from  Shirley :  she  offers  largely,  and  warrants 
the  article  genuine." 

"  Shirley,  I  never  had  a  sister — ^you  never  had  a  sister  j  but 
it  flashes  on  me  at  this  moment  how  sisters  feel  towards  each 
odier.  Affection  twined  with  their  life,  which  no  shocks 
^f  feeling  can  nproot,  which  Uttle  qtmrrds  only  trample  an 
instant  that  it  may  spring  more  freshly  when  the  pressure  is 
removed;  affection  that  no  passion  can  ultimately  outrival, 
with  which  even  love  itself  cannot  do  more  than  compete  in 
ibioe  and  truth.  Love  hurts  us  so,  Shirley :  it  is  so  torment- 
ing, 80  lacking,  and  it  bums  away  our  strength  with  its  flame ; 
in  affection  is  no  pain  and  no  Are,  only  sustenance  and  balm. 
I  am  supported  and  soothed  when  you — that  is,  you  only — are 
near,  Shirley.    Do  you  believe  me  now?" 

^*I  am  aiways  easy  of  belief  when  the  creed  pleases  me. 
We  really  are  friends  then,  Lina,  in  spite  of  the  black  eclipse  ?" 

**We  really  are,"  retomed  the  other,  drawing  Shirley 
Umords  her,  and  making  her  sit  down,  '^  chance  what  may." 

^Come,  tfaen^  we  will  talk  of  something  else  than  the 


SI6  SaiRLET* 

Troubler.**  But  at  this  moment  the  Bector  came  in,  and  tiie 
'^  something  else'*  of  which  Miss  Keeldar  was  about  to  talk 
was  not  again  alluded  to  till  the  moment  of  her  departure ; 
she  then  delayed  a  few  minutes  in  the  passage  to  say — 

"  Caroline,  I  wish  to  tell  you  that  I  have  a  great  weight 
on  my  mind  :  my  conscience  is  quite  imeasy,  as  if  I  had  com- 
mitted, or  was  going  to  commit,  a  crime.  It  is  not  mjprwats 
conscience,  you  must  understand,  but  my  landed-proprietor 
and  lord-of-the-manor  conscience.  I  have  got  into  the  dutch 
of  an  eagle  with  iron  talons.  I  have  fallen  under  a  stem 
influence,  which  I  scarcely  approve,  but  cannot  resist.  Some- 
thing will  be  done  erelong,  I  fear,  which  it  by  no  means 
pleases  me  to  think  of.  To  ease  my  mind,  and  to  prevent 
harm  as  far  as  I  can,  I  mean  to  enter  on  a  series  of  good 
works.  Don't  be  surprised,  therefore,  if  you  see  me  all  at 
once  turn  outrageously  charitable.  I  have  no  idea  how  to 
begin,  but  you  must  give  me  some  advice :  we  will  talk  more 
on  the  subject  to-morrow ;  and  just  ask  that  excellent  person, 
Miss  Ainley,  to  step  up  to  Fieldhead :  I  hkve  some  notion  of 
putting  myself  under  her  tuition — ^won't  she  have  a  precious 
pupil  ?  Drop  a  hint  to  her,  Lioa,  that,  though  a  well-meaning, 
I  am  rather  a  neglected,  character,  and  then  she  will  feel  less 
scandalized  at  my  ignorance  about  clothing  societies^  and  such 
things."  ' 

On  the  morrow,  Caroline,  found  Shirley  sittmg  gravely  at 
her  desk,  with  an  accoxmt-book,  a  bundle  of  bank-notes,  and  a 
weU-fllled  purse  before  her.  She  was  looking  mighty  serious, 
but  a  little  puzzled.  She  said  she  had  been  ^'  casting  an  eye** 
over  the  weekly  expenditure  in  housekeeping  at  the  Hall,  trying 
to  And  out  where  she  cotdd  retrench;  that  she  had  also  just 
given  audience  to  Mrs  Gill,  the  cook,  and  had  sent  that  person 
away  with  a  notion  that  her  (Shirley^s)  brain  was  certainly 
crazed.  "  I  have  lectured  her  on  the  duty  of  being  careful," 
said  she,  "  in  a  way  quite  new  to  her.  So  eloquent  was  I  on 
the  text  of  economy,  that  I  surprised  myself;  ibr,  you  see,  it 
is  altogether  a  fresh  idea:  I  never  thought,  much  less  spoke, 
on  the  subject  till  lately.  But  it  is  all  theory;  for  when  I 
came  to  the  practical  part  I  could  retrench  nothing.  I  had 
not  firmness  to  take  off  a  single  pound  of  butter,  or  to  prose- 
cute to  any  clear  result  an  inquest  into  the  destiny  of  either 
dripping,  lard,  bread,  cold  meat,  or  other  kitchen  perquisite 
whatever.  I  know  we  never  get  up  illuminations  at  Fieldhead, 
but  I  could  not  ask  the  meaning  of  simdry  quite  unaccountable 


8IIES  TO  BB  gAYSD  BT  WOBKS.  217 

poimdfl  of  candles;  we  do  not  wash  for  the  parish,  yet  I  viewed 
in  silence  items  of  soap  and  bleaching  powder  calculated  to 
satisfy  the  solicitude  of  the  most  anxious  inquirer  afler  o\ir 
position  in  reference  to  those  articles :  carnivorous  I  am  not, 
nor  is  Mrs  Piry'or,  nor  is  Mrs  GiU  herself,  yet  I  only  hemmed 
and  opened  my  eyes  a  little  wide  when  I  saw  butchers'  bills 
whose  figure  seemed  to  prove  that  fact — falsehood,  I  mean. 
Caroline,  you  may  laugh  at  me,  but  you  can't  change  me.  I 
am  a  poltroon  on  certain  points — ^I  feel  it.  There  is  a  base 
alloy  of  moral  cowardice  in  my  composition.  I  blushed  and 
hung  my  head  before  Mrs  GiU,  when  she  ought  to  have  been 
faltering  confessions  to  me.  I  found  it  impossible  to  get  up 
the  spirit  even  to  hint,  much  less  to  prove,  to  her  that  she  was 
a  cheat.   I  have  no  calm  dignity — ^no  true  courage  about  me." 

"  Shirley,  what  fit  of  self-injustice  is  this*?  My  uncle,  who 
is  not  given  to  speak  well  of  women,  says  there  are  not  ten 
thousand  men  in  England  as  genuinely  fearless  as  you." 

^  I  am  fearless,  physically :  I  am  never  nervous  about  danger. 
I  was  not  startled  fi*om  self-possession  when  Mr  Wynne's  great 
red  bull  rose  with  a  bellow  before  my  face,  as  I  was  crossing 
the  cowslip*lea  alone,  stooped  his  begrimed,  sullen  head,  and 
made  a  run  at  me ;  but  I  was  afraid  of  seeing  Mrs  Gill  brought 
to  shame  and  confiision  of  face.  You  have  twice^ — ten  times 
my  strength  of  mind  on  certain  subjects,  Caroline :  you,  whom 
no  persuasions  can  induce  to  pass  a  bull,  however  quiet  he 
looks,  would  have  firmly  shown  my  housekeeper  she  had  done 
wrong;  then  you  would  have  gently  and  wisely  admonished 
her;  and  at  last,  I  daresay,  provided  she  had  seemed  penitent, 
you  would  have  very  sweetly  forgiven  her.  Of  this  conduct 
I  am  incapable.  However,  in  spite  of  exaggerated  imposition, 
I  still  find  we  live  within  our  means :  I  have  money  in  hand, 
and  I  really  must  do  some  good^  with  it.  The  Briarfield  poor 
are  badly  off:  they  must  be  helped.  What  ought  I  to  do,  think 
you,  lina  ?     Had  I  not  better  distribute  the  cash  at  once  ?  " 

"No,  indeed,  Shirley:  you  will  not  manage  properly.  I 
have  often  noticed  that  your  only  notion  of  charity  is  to  give 
shillings  and  half-crowns  in  a  careless,  fireehanded  sort  of  way, 
which  is  liable  to  continual  abuse.  You  must  have  a  prime 
nufflster,  or  you  will  get  yourself  into  a  series  of  scrapes.  You 
•Qggested  Miss  Ainley  yourself:  to  Miss  Ainley  I  will  apply; 
«  sad,  meantime,  promise  to  keep  quiet,  and  not  begin  throwing 
away  your  money.  What  a  great  deal  you  have,  Shirley  1— 
yoa  must  feel  veiy  rich  with  all  that  ?  " 


SEEKS  TO  BJ&  SAVED  BT  WORKS.  219 

You  drop  yottr  Kds ;  but  I  sdw  a  kindled  spark.  However,  it 
is  not  yet  come  to  fighting.  What  I  want  to  do  is  to  preverU 
mischief.  I  cannot  forget,  either  day  or  night,  that  these 
embittered  feelings  of  the  poor  against  the  rich  have  been 
generated  in  buffering:  they  would  neither  hate  nor  envy  us 
if  they  did  not  deem  us  so  much  happier  than  themselves.  To 
allay  this  suffdHng,  and  thereby  lessen  this  hate,  let  me,  out 
of  my  abundance"'  giv^  abundantly :  and  that  the  donation  may 
go  farther^  let  it  be  made  wisely.  To  that  intent,  we  must 
introduce  some  clear,  calm,  practical  sense  into  our  councils^ 
so  go,  and  fetch  Miss  Ainley." 

"Without  another  word,  Caroline  put  on  her  bonnet  and 
departed.  It  may,  perhlips,  appear  strange  that  neither  she 
nor  Shirley  thought  of  cohsulting  Mrs  Fryor  on  their  scheme; 
bnt  they  were  wise  in  abstaining.  To  have  cohsulted  her— 
and  this  they  knew  by  iiistinct — ^would  only  haVe  been  to 
involve  her  in  painful  embarrassment.  She  was  far  better 
informed,  better  read^  a  deeper  thinker  then  MisS  Ainley,  but 
of  administrative  energy,  of  executive  activity,  she  had  none. 
She  ^ould  subscribe  her  bwn  modest  mite  to  a  charitable 
object  willingly, — secret  almsgiving  suited  her;  but  in  publi^ 
plans,  on  a  large  scale,  she  could  take  no  part :  as  to  originating 
them,  that  was  out  of  the  question.  This  Shirley  knew,  and 
therefore  she  did  not  trouble  Mrs  Pryor  by  xmavailing  con-* 
ferences,  which  could  only  remind  her  of  her  own  deficiencieSj 
and  do  no  good. 

It  was  a  bright  day  for  Miss  Ainley,  when  she  was  siunmoned 
to  Fieldhead  to  deliberate  on  projects  so  congenial  to  her; 
when  she  was  seated  with  all  honour  and  deference  at  a  table 
with  paper,  pen,  ink  and — ^what  was  best  of  all — cash  before 
her,  and  requested  to  draw  up  a  regular  plan  for  administering 
relief  to  the  destitute  poor  of  Briarfield.  She,  who  knew  them 
all,  had  studied  their  wants,  had  again  and  again  felt  in  what 
way  they  might  best  be  succoured,  could  the  means  of  succour 
only  be  found,  was  folly  competent  to  the  imdertaking,  and  a 
meek  exultation  gladdened  her  kind  heart  as  she  felt  herself 
ahle  to  answer  clearly  and  promptly  the  eager  questions  put 
by  the  two  young  girls ;  as  she  showed  them  in  her  answers 
how  much  and  what  serviceable  knowledge  she  had  acquired 
of  the  condition  of  her  fellow-creatures  round  her. 

Shirley  placed  at  her  disposal  £300,  and  at  sight  of  the 
money  Miss  Ainley's  eyes  filled  with  joyful  tears;  for  she 


220  SHDCLBT. 

already  saw  the  hungry  fed,  the  naked  clothed,  the  sick  com* 
forted  thereby.  She  quickly  drew  up  a  simple,  sensible  plan 
for  its  expenditure ;  and  she  assured  them  brighter  times  would 
now  come  round,  for  she  doubted  not  the  lady  of  Fieldhead*8 
example  would  be  followed  by  others :  she  should  try  to  get 
additional  subscriptions,  and  to  form  a  fund ;  but  first  she  must 
consult  the  clergy:  yes,  on  that  point,  she  was  peremptory: 
Mr  Helstone,  Dr  Boultby,  Mr  Hall,  must  be  consulted — (for  not 
only  must  Briarfield  be  relieved,  but  Whinbury  and  Nunnely) 
— it  would,  she  averred,  be  presumption  in  her  to  take  a  single 
step  unauthorized  by  them. 

The  clergy  were  sacred  beings  in  Miss  Ainley's  eyes:  no 
matter  what  might  be  the  insigioficance  of  the  individual,  his 
station  made  him  holy.  The  very  curates — ^who,  in  their  trivial 
arrogance,  were  hardly  worthy  to  tie.  her  patten-strings,  or 
carry  her  cotton  umbrella,  or  check  woollen-shawl — she,  in 
her  pure,  sincere  enthusiasm,  looked  upon  as  sucking  saints. 
No  matter  how  clearly  their  little  vices  and  enormous  absur^ 
dities  were  pointed  out  to  her,  she  could  not  see  them :  she  was 
blind  to  ecclesiastical  defects:  the  white  surplice  covered  a 
multitude  of  sins. 

Shirley,  knowing  this  harmless  infatuation  on  the  part  of 
her  recently  chosen  prime  minister,  stipulated  expressly  that 
the  curates  were  to  have  no  voice  in  the  disposal  of  the  money; 
that  their  meddling  fingers  were  not  to  be  inserted  into  tlie 
pie.  The  rectors,  of  course,  must  be  paramount,  and  they 
might  be  trusted :  they  had  some  experience,  some  sagacity, 
and  Mr  Hall,  at  least,  had  sjrmpathy  and  loving-kindness  for 
his  fellow-men ;  but  as  for  die  youth  under  them,  they  must 
be  set  aside,  kept  down,  and  taught  that  subordination  and 
silence  best  became  their  years  and  capacity. 

It  was  with  some  horror  Miss  Ainley  heard  this  language : 
Caroline,  however,  interposing  with  a  mild  word  or  two  in 
praise  of  Mr  Sweeting,  calmed  her  again.  Sweeting  was, 
indeed,  her  own  favourite:  she  endeavoured  to  respect  Messrs 
lilalone  and  Donne ;  but  the  slices  of  sponge-cake,  &nd  glasses 
of  cowslip  or  primrose  wine,  she  had  at  difierent  times  admin- 
istered to  Sweeting,  when  he  came  to  see  her  in  her  little  cottage, 
^ere  ever  offered  witlwsentiments  of  truly  motherly  regard.  The 
0a>me  innocuous  collation  she  had  once  presented  to  Malone; 
l^ut  that  personage  evinced  such  open  scorn  of  the  offeringi 
glxe  had  never  ventured  to  renew  it.     To  Dozme  she  alwajs 


rnXB  TO  BE  SAVSD  BT  W0BE8.  221 

seired  the  treat,  and  was  liappy  to  see  his  approbation  of  it 
prored  beyond  a  doubt,  by  the  fact  of  his  usually  eating  two 
pieces  of  cake,  and  putting  a  third  in  his  pocket. 

Indefatigable  in  her  exertions  where  good  was  to  be  done. 
Miss  Ainley  would  immediately  have  set  out  on  a  walk  of  ten 
miles  round  to  the  three  rectors,  in  order  to  show  her  plan, 
and  humbly  solicit  their  approval :  but  Miss  Keeldar  inter- 
dicted this,  and  proposed  as  an  amendment,  to  collect  the 
clergy  in  a  small  select  reunion  that  evening  at  Fieldhead. 
Miss  Ainley  was  to  meet  them,  and  the  plan  was  to  be  dis- 
cussed in  full  privy  council. 

Shirley  managed  to  get  the  senior  priesthood  together 
accordingly ;  •  and  before  the  old  maid^s  arrival  she  had, 
further,  talked  all  the  gentlemen  into  the  most  charming  mood 
imaginable.  She  herself  had  taken  in  hand  Dr.  Boultby  and 
Mr  EEelstone.  The  first  was  a  stubborn  old  Welshman,  hot, 
opinionated,  and  obstinate,  but  withal  a  man'  who  did  a  great 
deal  of  good,  though  not  without  making  some  noise  about  it: 
the  latter,  we  know.  She  had  rather  a  friendly  feeling  for 
both;  especially  for  old  Helstone;  and  it  cost  her  no  trouble 
to  be  quite  delightful  to  them.  She  took  them  round  the 
garden ;  she  gathered  them  flowers  ;  she  was  like  a  kind 
daughter  to  them.  Mr  Hall  she  lefl  to  Caroline — or  rather, 
it  was  to  Caroline's  care  Mr  Hall  consigned  himself. 

He  generally  sought  Caroline  in  every  party  where  she  and 
he  happened  to  be.  He  was  not  in  general  a  lady's  man, 
though  all  ladies  liked  him:  something  of  a  book-worm  he 
was,  near-sighted,  spectacled,  now  and  then  abstracted.  To 
old  ladies  he  was  kind  as  a  son.  To  men  of  every  occupation 
and  grade  he  was  acceptable:  the  truth,  simplicity,  frankness 
of  his  manners,  the  nobleness  of  his  integrity,  the  reality  and 
elevation  of  his  piety,  won  him  friends  in  every  grade :  his 
poor  clerk  and  sexton  delighted  in  him  ;  the  noble  patron  of 
his  living  esteemed  him  highly.  It  was  only  with  young, 
handsome,  fashionable,  and  stylish  ladies  he  felt  a  little  shy : 
being  himself  a  plain  man — ^plain  in  aspect,  plain  in  manners, 
plain  in  speech — he  seemed  to  fear  their  dash,  elegance,  and 
airs.  Bat  Miss  Helstone  had  neither  dash  nor  airs,  and  her 
native  elegance  was  of  a  very  quiet  order— quiet  as  the  beauty 
of  a  ground-loving  hedge-flower.  He  was  a  fluent,  cheerful, 
ac^reeable  talker.  Caroline  could  talk,  too,  in  a  tite-a-teU: 
she  liked  Mr  Hall  to  come  and  take  the  seat  next  her  in  a 
party,  and  thus  qecure  her  from  Peter  Augustus  Malone, 


222  SHIBLET.     . 

Joseph  Donne,  or  John  Sjkes;  and  Mr  Hall  never  &iled  to 
avail  himself  of  this  privilege  when  he  possibly  could.  Such 
preference  shown  by  a  single  gentleman  to  a  single  lady  would 
certainly,  in  ordinary  cases,  have  set  in  motion  the  tongaes  uf 
the  gossips;  but  Cyril  Hall  was  forty-five  years  old,  slightly 
bald,  and  slightly  grey,  and  nobody  ever  said  or  thought  he 
was  likely  to  be  married  to  Miss  Helstone.  Nor  did  he  think 
so  himsdf:  he  was  wedded  already  to  his  books 'and  his 
parish :  his  kind  sister  Margaret,  spectacled  and  learned  like 
himself,  made  him  happy  in  his  single  state;  he  considered  it 
too  late  to  change.  Besides,  he  had  known  Choline  as  a 
pretty  little  girl :  she  had  sat  on  his  knee  many  a  time;  he 
had  bought  her  toys  and  given  her  books;  he  {elt  that  her 
friendship  for  him  was  mixed  with  a  sort  of  filial  respect ;  he 
could  not  have  brought  himself  to  attempt  to  give  another 
colour  to  her  sentiments,  and  his  serene  mind  could  glass  a 
fair  image  without  feeling  its  depths  troubled  by  the  reflection. 

When  Miss  Ainley  arrived,  she  was'  made  kindly  welcome 
by  every  one :  Mrs  Pryor  and  Margaret  Hall  made  room  for 
her  on  the  sofa  between  them ;  and  when  the  three  were  seated, 
they  formed  a  trio  which  the  gay  and  thoughtless  would  have 
scorned,  indeed,  as  quite  worthless  and  unattractive-^a  middle- 
aged  widow  and  two  plain  spectacled  old  maids — yet  which 
had  its  own  quiet  value,  as  many  a  sufieiing  and  fiiendless 
human  being  knew. 

Shirley  opened  the  business  and  showed  the  plan,. 

'<  I  know  the  hand  which  drew  up  that,^'  said  Mr  Hall, 
glancing  at  Miss  Ainley,  and  smiling  benignantly :  Ids  appro- 
bation was  won  at  once.  Boultby  heard  and  deliberated  with 
bent  brow  and  protruded  under  lip :  his  consent  he  considered 
too  weighty  to  be  given  in  a  hurry.  Helstone  glanced  sharply 
round  with  an  alert,  suspicious  expression,  as  if  he  apprehended 
that  female  craflwas  at  work,  and  that  something  in  petticoats 
was  somehow  trying  underhand  to  acquire  too  much  influ- 
ence, and  make  itself  of  too  much  importance.  Shirley  caught 
and  comprehended  the  expression : — 

*^  This  scheme  is  nothing,"  said  she,  carelessly ;  '^  it  is  only 
an  outline — a  mere  suggestion;  you,  gentlemen,  are  requested 
to  draw  up  rules  of  your  own.? 

And  she  directly  fetched  her  writing-case,  smiling  queerly 
to  herself  as  she  bent  over  the  table  where  it  stood :  she 
produced  a  sheet  of  paper,  a  new  pen,  drew  an  arm-chair  to 
the  table,  and  presenting  her  hand  to  old  Helstone,  begged 


8KEKS  TO  BB  SAVED  BT  WOBKfl.  288 

pennission  to  instal  him  in  it.  For  a  minute  lie  was  a  littJa 
iti£r,aad  stood  wrinkling  his  copper-coloured  forehead  strangelj. 
At  last  he  mattered : — 

"  WeU — ^you  are  neither  my  wife  nor  my  daughter,  so  1 11 
be  led  for  once ;  but  mind — ^I  know  I  am  led :  your  little 
female  manoeuvres  don't  blind  me." 

"Oil I"  said  Shirley,  dipping  the  pen  in  the  ink,  and 
putting  it  into  his  hand,  "you  must  regard  me  as  Captain 
Keeldar  to-day.  This  is  quite  a  gentleman's  affair — yours 
and  mine  entirely,  Doctor"  (so  she  had  dubbed  the  Bector). 
"  The  ladies  there  are  only  to  be  our  aides-de-camp,  and  at  their 
peiil  ihey  speak,  till  we  have  settled  the  whole  business." 

He  smiled  a  little  grimly,  and  began  to  write.     He  soon 
interrupted  himself  to  ask  questions,  and  consult  his  brethren, 
disdainfully  lifting  his  glance  over  the  curly  heads  of  the  two 
girls,  and  the  demure  caps  of  the  elder  ladies,  to  meet  the 
winking  glasses  and  grey  pates  of  the  priests.     In  the  dis- 
cussion which  ensued,  all  three  gentlemen,  to  their  infinite 
credit,  showed  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  poor  of  their 
parishes, — ^an  even  minute  knowledge  of  their  separate  wants. 
Each  rector  knew  where  clothiag  was  needed,  where  Ibod 
would  be  most  acceptable,  where  money  could  be  bestowed 
with  a  probability  of  it  being  judiciously  laid  out.     Where- 
erer  their  memories  fell  short.  Miss  Ainley  or  Miss  Hall,  if 
applied  to,  could  help  them  out;  but  both  ladies  took  care  not 
to  speak  unless  spoken  to.     Neither  of  them  wanted  to  be 
foremost,  but  each  sincerely  desired  to  be  useful,  and  usei^ 
the  clergy  consented  to  make  them :  with  which  boon  thej 
were  content. 

Shirley  stood  behind  the  rectors,  leaning  over  their  shoulders 
now  and  then  to  gjUuice  at  the  rules  drawn  up,  and  the  list  of 
cases  making  out,  listening  to  all  they  said,  and  still  at  intervals 
smiling  her  queer  smile — a  smile  not  ill-natured,  but  signifi- 
oant :  too  significant  to  be  generally  thought  amiable.  Men 
rarely  like  such  of  their  fdlows  as  read  their  inward  nature 
too  dearly  and  truly.  It  is  good  for  women,  especially,  to  be 
endowed  with  a  soft  blindness:  to  have  mild,  dim  eyes,  that 
never  penetrate  below  the  surface  of  things — ^tjiat  take  all  for 
what  it  seems :  thousands,  knowing  this,  keep  their  eyelids 
drooped,  on  system ;  but  the  most  downcast  glance  has  its 
loophole,  through  which  it  can,  on  occasion,  take  its  sentinel-  ^ 
survey  of  life.  I  remember  once  seeing  a  pair  •  of  blue  eyes, 
tliat  were  usually  thought  sleepy,  secretly  on  the  alert,  and  I 


224  SHIBLET. 

knew  hj  their  expression— <an  expression  wHich  chilled  my 
blood,  it  was  in  that  quarter  so  wondrously  unexpected — 
that  for  years  they  had  been  accustomed  to  silent  sonl-^reading. 
The  world  called  the  owner  of  these  blue  eyes  "  bonne  petite 
femme"  (she  was  not  an  Englishwoman)  :  I  learned  her  nature 
afterwards — ^got  it  off  by  heart — studied  it  in  its  farthest, 
most  hidden  recesses — she  was  the  finest,  deepest,  subtlest 
schemer  in  Europe. 

When  all  was  at  length  settled  to  IVGss  Keeldar^s  mind,  and 
the  clergy  had  entered  so  ftdly  into  the  spirit  of  her  plans  as 
to  head  the  subscription-list  with  their  signatures  for  £50 
each,  she  ordered  supper  to  be  served ;  having  previously 
directed  Mrs  Gill  to  exercise  her  utmost  skill  in  the  prepara- 
tion of  this  repast.  Mr  Hall  was  no  bon-vivant;  he  was 
naturally  an  abstemious  man,  indifferent  to  luxury ;  but 
Boultby  andHelstone  both  liked  good  cookery;  the  recherche 
supper  consequently  put  them  into  excellent  humour :  they 
did  justice  to  it,  though  in  a  gentlemanly  way — ^not  in  the 
mode  Mr  Donne  would  have  done,  had  h»  been  present.  A 
glass  of  fine  wine  was  likewise  tasted,  with  discerning  though 
moi^  decorous  relish.  Captain  Keeldar  was  complimented  on 
his  taste ;  the  compliment  charmed  him  :  it  had  been  his  aim 
to  gratify  and  satisfy  his  priestly  guests:  he  had  succeeded 
and  was  radiant  with  glee. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

MR    DONNE^S    EXODUS. 


The  next  day  Shirley  expressed  to  Caroline  how  delighted 
she  felt  that  the  little  party  had  gone  off  so  well. 

'/ 1  rather  like  to  entertain  a  circle  of  gentlemen,"  said 
she :  "  it  is  amusing  to  observe  how  they  enjoy  a  judiciously 
concocted  repast.  For  ourselves,  you  see,  these  choice  wines 
and  these  scientific  dishes  are  of  no  importance  to  us;  but 
gentlemen  seem  to  retain  something  of  the  naivete  of  children 
about  food,  and  one  likes  to  please  them:  that  is,  when  they 
show  the  becoming,  decent  self-government  of  our  admirable 
Teotors.  I  watch  Moore  sometimes,  to  try  and  discover  how 
ne  can  be  pleased;   but  he  has  not  that  child's  simplicity 


MB  DONKEYS  £XODUS.  225 

l2>oat  Mm.    Did  you  ever  find  out  his  accessible  point,  Caro- 
line?    You  have  seen  more  of  him  than  I." 

"  It  is  not,  at  any  rate,  that  of  my  uncle  and  Dr  Boultby," 
returned  Caroline,  smiling.  She  always  felt  a  sort  of  shy 
pleasure  in  following  Miss  Keeldar's  lead  repecting  the  dis- 
SQSsion  of  her  cousin's  character:  left  to  herself,  she  would 
never  have  touched  on  the  subject;  but  when  invited,  the 
temptation  of  talking  about  him  of  whom  she  was  ever  thinking 
was  irresistible.  "  But,"  she  added, "  I  really  don't  know  what 
it  is ;  for  I  never  watched  Robert  in  my  life  but  my  scrutiny 
was  presently  baffled  by  finding  he  was  watching  me." 

"There  it  isl"  exclaimed  Shirley:  "you  can't  fiLX  your 
eyes  on  him  but  his  presently  flash  on  you.  He. is  never  off 
lu5  guard :  he  won't  give  you  an  advantage :  even  when  he 
does  not  look  at  you,  his  thoughts  seem  to  be  busy  amongst 
your  own  thoughts,  tracing  your  words  and  actions  to  their 
Krarce,  contemplating  your  motives  at  his  ease.  Oh  I  I 
know  that  sort  of  character,  or  something  in  the  same  style : 
it  is  one  that  piques  me  singularly — how  does  it  affect  you  ?  " 

This  question  was  a  specimen  of  one  of  Shirley's  sharp, 
ludden  turns  :  Caroline  used  to  be  fluttered  by  them  at  fir3t, 
but  she  had  now  got  into  the  way  of  parrying  these  hokne- 
tkrusts  like  a  little  quakeress. 

"  Pique  you  ?    In  what  way  does  it  pique  you  ?"  she  said. 

"Here  he  comes!"  suddenly  exclaimed  Shirley,  breaking 
off,  starting  up  and  running  to  the  window.  "  Here  comes  a 
diversiou.  I  never  told  you  of  a  superb  conquest  I  have 
made  lately— made  at  those  parties  to  which  I  can  never 
persuade  you  to  accompany  me ;  and  the  thing  has  been  done 
without  effort  or  intention  on  my  part :  that  I  aver.  There 
18  the  'bell — ^and,  by  all  that 's  delicious !  there  are  two  of 
theoL  Do  they  never  himt,  then,  except  in  couples?  You 
may  have  one,  Lina,  and  you  may  take  your  choice :  I  hope 
I  am  generous  enough.     Listen  to  Tartar  I " 

The  black-muzzled,  tawny  dog,*  a  glimpse  of  which  was 
nen  in  the  chapter  which  first  introduced  its  mistress  to  the 
nader,  here  gave  tongue  in  the  hall,  amidst  whose  hollow 
ipace  the  deep  bark  resounded  formidably.  A  growl,  more 
tenible  than  the  bark — ^menacing  as  mistered  thunder — 
•Qooeeded. 

** Listen !**  again  cried  Shirley,  laughing.  "You  would 
tlunk  that  the  prelude  to  a  bloody  onslaught :  they  will  be 
frightened :  they  don't  know  old  Tartar  as  I  do :  they  aie 

\ 


226  SHIBLET. 

not  aware  his  nproars  are  all  sound  and  fbiji  signii^ruig 
nothing." 

Some  bustle  was  heard.  "  Down,  sir  1 — down !"  exclaimed 
a  high-toned,  imperious  voice,  and  then  came  a  crack  of  a 
cane  or  whip.  Immediately  Ihere  was  a  yell — a  sciittei — a 
run — a  positive  tumult. 

«  OhI  Malone  I  Malone !" 

"  Down  1  down  I  down  I"  cried  the  high  voice. 

"  He  really  is  worrying  them  I"  exclaomed  Shirley.  "Hiey 
have  struck  him:  a  blow  is  what  he  is  not  used  to,  and  will 
not  take." 

Out  she  ran,  a  gentleman  was  fleeing  up  the  oak  staircase, 
making  for  refdge  in  the  gallery  or  chambers  in  hot  haste; 
another  was  backing  fast  to  the  stair-foot,  wildly  flourishing  a 
knotty  stick,  at  the  same  time  reiterating,  "  Down  I  down ! 
down !"  while  the  tawny  dog  bayed,  bellowed,  howled  at  lum, 
and  a  group  of  servants  came  bundling  &om  the  kitchen. 
The  dog  made  a.  spring:  the  second  gentleman  turned  tail 
and  rushed  ailer  his  conarade :  the  flrst  was  already  safe  in  a 
bed-room :  he  held  the  door  against  his  fellow; — ^nothing  so 
merciless  as  terror; — ^but  the  other  fugitive,  struggled  hard: 
the  door  was  about  to  yield  to  his  strength. 

'^  Gentlemen,"  was  uttered  in  Miss  Keddar^s  silvery  but 
vibrating  tones, ''  spare  my  locks,  if  you  please.  Calm  your- 
selves ! — come  down  I  Look  at  Tartar, — he  won't  harm  a  cat"* 

She  was  caressing  the  said  Tartar :  he  lay  crouched  at 
her  feet,  his  fore-paws  stretched  out,  his  tail  still  in  threateniag 
agitation,  his  nostrils  snorting,  his  bulldog  eyes  coi^ous  of  a 
duU  fire.  He  was  an  honest,  phlegmatic,  stupid,  but  stub- 
born canine  character:  he  loved  his  mistress,  and  John — the 
man  who  fed  him, — but  was  mostly  indiflerent  to  the  rest  of 
the  world :  quiet  enough  he  was,  xmless  struck  or  threatened 
with  a  stick,  and  that  put  a  demon  into  him  at  once. 

"Mr  Malone,  how  do  you  do!"  continued  Shirley,  lifting 
up  her  mirth-lit  face  to  tibe  gallery.  "  That  is  not  the  way 
to  the  oak-parlour:  that  is  Mrs  Pryor's  apartment.  Bequest 
your  friend  Mr  Donne  to  evacuate :  I  shall  have  the  greateit 
pleasure  in  receiving  him  in  a  lower  room." 

"Ha!  ha!"  cried  Malone,  in  hollow  laughter,  quitting 
the  door,  and  leaning  over  the  massive  balustrade.  "  Beally 
that  animal  alarmed  Donne.  He  is  a  little  timid,"  he  pro- 
ceeded, stiflening  himself,  and  walking  trimly  to  the  stairhnd* 
**  I  thought  it  better  to  fi^Uow,  in  order  to  reassure  him.** 


MB  Domne's  £2a)Dus.  227 

"It  Appears  you  did:  well,  come  down,  if  you  please. 
Jolm"  (tunung  to  iter  man-servant), "  go  up-stairs  and  liberate 
Mr  Doi)]pe.     Take  care,  Mr  Malone,  the  stairs  are  sHppery." 

In  ti^th  they  were ;  being  of  polished  oak.  The  caution 
came  a  little  late  for  Malone :  he  had  slipped  already  in  his 
stately  descent,  and  was  only  saved  from  falling  by  a  clutch 
at  the  banisters,  which  made  the  whole  structure  creak  again. 
Tartar  seemed  to  think  the  visitor^s  descent  effected  with 
unwarranted  ^lat,  and  accordingly  he  growled  once  more. 
Malone,  however,  was  no  coward  :  the  spring  of  the  dog  had 
taken  iiim  by  surprise  ;  but  he  passed  him  now  in  suppressed 
fuiy  jrather  than  fear :  if  a  look  could  have  strangled  Tartar, 
he  would  hav^  breathed  no  more.  Forgetting  politeness,  in 
his  sullen  rage,  Malone  pushed  into  the  parlour  before  Miss 
Keeldar.  He  glanced  at  Miss  Helstone ;  he  could  scarcely 
bring  himself  to  bend  to  her.  He  glared  on  both  the  ladies : 
he  looked  -as  if,  had  either  of  them  been  his  wife,  he  would 
have  ma^  a  glorious  husband  at  the  moment:  in  each  hand 
he  seemed  as  if  he. would  have  liked  to  clutch  one  and  gripe 
her  to  death. 

Hoiwever,  Shirley  took  pity:  she  ceased  to  laugh ;  and  Caro- 
line was  too  true  a  lady  to  smile  even  at  any  one  under  mprtf- 
fication.  Tartar  was  dismissed;  Peter  Augustus  was  soothed: 
for  Shirley  had  looks  and  tones  that  might  soothe  a  very  bull: 
he  had  sense  tp  feel  that,  since  he  could  not  challenge  the 
owner  of  the  dog,  he  had  better  be  civil ;  and  civil  he  tried  to 
be;  and  his  attempts  being  well  received,  he  grew  presently 
very  civil  and  quite  himself  again.  He  had  come,  indeed,  for 
the  express  purpose^  of  making  himself  charming  and  fascina- 
ting: rough  portents  had  met  him  on  his  first  admission  to 
Fieldhead;  b^t  that  passage  got  over,  charming  and  fascinating 
he  resolved^ to  be.  Like  March,  having  come  in  like  a  Hon, 
he  purposed  to  go  out  like  a  lamb. 

For  the  sake  of  air,  as  it  appeared,  or  perhaps  for  that  of 
ready  exit  in  case  of  some  new  emergency  arising,  he  took  his 
Beat — not  on  the  sofa,  where  Miss  Keeldar  offered  him  enthro- 
nization,  nor  yet  near  the  fireside,  to  which  Caroline,  by  a 
fnendly  sign,  gently  invited  him, — ^but  on  a  chair  close  to  the 
door.  Being  no  longer  sullen  or  furious,  he  grew,  after  his 
£ubion,  constrained  and  embarrassed.  He  talked  to  the  ladies 
by  fits  and  starts,  choosing  for  topics  whatever  was  most 
iotensdy  cox^monplace:  he  sighed  deeply,  significantly,  at  the 
doee  of  eveiy  sentence ;  he  sighed  m  each  pause ;  he  aighod 


828  SHIBLET. 

ere  he  opened  Hs  mouth.  At  last^  finding  it  deniabfo  to  add 
ease  to  his  other  charms,  he  drew  forth  to  aid  him  an  am^ 
silk  pocket-handkerchief.  This  was  to  be  the  graoefiil  toy  with 
which  his  imoccupied  hands  were  to  tri£e.  He  went  to  work 
with  a  certain  energy:  he  folded  the  red  and  yellow  square 
cornerwise;  he  whipped  it  open  with  a  wafl:  again  he  folded 
it  in  narrower  compass :  he  made  of  it  a  handsome  band.  To 
what  purpose  would  he  proceed  to  apply  the  ligature  ?  Would 
he  wrap  it  about  his  throat— his  head  ?  Should  it  be  a  com- 
forter or  a  turban  ?  Neither.  Peter  Augustus  had  an  inventiye 
— an  original  genius :  he  was  about  to  show  the  ladies  graces 
of  action  possessing  at  least  the  charm  of  novelty.  He  sat  od 
the  chair  with  his  athletic  Irish  legs  crossed,  and  these  legs, 
in  that  attitude,  he  circled  with  the  bandana  and  bound  fiimlj 
together.  It  was  evident  he  felt  this  device  to  be  woxih  an 
encore:  he  repeated  it  more  than  once.  The  second  perfbmi- 
ance  sent  Shirley  to  the  window  to  laugh  her  silent  but  irre- 
pressible laugh  unseen:  it  turned  Caroline's  head  aside,  that 
her  long  curls  might  screen  the  smile  mantling  on  her  featnres. 
Miss  Helstone,  indeed^  was  amused  by  more  than  one  point  in 
Peter's  demeanour:  she.  was  edified  at  the  complete  though 
abrupt  diversion  of  his  homage  from  herself  to  the  heiress:  die 
£5,000  he  supposed  her  likely  one  day  to  inherit,  were  not  to 
be  weighed  in  the  balance  against  Miss  Keeldai^s  estate  and 
hall.  He  took  no  pains  to  conceal  his  calculations  and  tactics: 
he  pretended  to  no  gradual  change  of  views :  he  wheeled  about 
at  once:  the  pursuit  of  the  lesser  fortune  was  openly  relin- 
quished for  that  of  the  greater.  On  what  grounds  he  expected 
to  succeed  in  his  chase,  himself  best  knew:  certainly  not  by 
skilful  management. 

From  the  length  of  time  that  elapsed,  it  appeared  that  John 
had  some  difficulty  in  persuading  Mr  Donne  to  descend.  At 
length,  however,  that  gentleman  appeared :  nor,  as  he  presented 
himself  at  the  oak-parlour  door,  did  he  seem  in  the  slightest 
degree  ashamed  or  confused — ^not  a  whit.  Donne,  indeed,  was 
of  that  coldly  phlegmatic,  immovably  complacent,  densely  self- 
gatisfied  nature  which  is  insensible  to  shame.  He  had  never 
blushed  in  his  life:  no  humiliation  could  abash  him:  his  nerves 
i^vere  not  capable  of  sensation  enough  to  stir  his  life,  and  make 
colour  mount  to  his  cheek :  he  had  no  fire  in  his  blood,  and 
xio  modesty  in  his  soul:  he  was  a  frontless,  arrogant,  decoroaa 
0lip  of  the  commonplace;  conceited,  inane,  insipid:  andthia 
•*«ntleman  had  a  notion  of  wooing  ACss  Keeldar!  He  knew  no 


VR  DOKM£^S  EXODUS.  2S9 

more,  however,  how  to  set  about  the  business  than  if  he  had 
been  an  image  carved  in  wood:  he  had,  no  idea  of  a  taste  to  be 
pleased,  a  heart  to  be  reached  in  pourtship:  his  notion  was, 
when  he  should  have  formally  yisited  her  a  few  times,  to  write 
a  letter  proposing  marriage;  then  he  calculated  she  would 
accept  him  for  love  of  his  office,  then  they  would  be  married, 
then  he  should  be  master  of  Fiddhead,  and  he  should  live  very 
comfortably,  have  servants  at  his  command,  eat  and  drink  of 
the  best,  and  be  a  great  man.  You  would  not  have  suspected 
his  intentions  when  he  addressed  his  intended  bride  in  an  im- 
pertinent, injured  tone: — 

"  A  very  dangerous  dog  that,  Miss  Keeldar.  I  wonder  you 
should  keep  sudbi  an  animal." 

"Do  you,  Mr  Donne?  Perhaps  you  will  wonder  more 
when  I  tell  you  I  am  very  fond  of  him." 

"  I  should  say  you  are  not  serious  in  the  assertion.  Can't 
&ncy  a  lady  fond  of  that  brute — ^'tis  so  ugly — a  mere  carter's 
dog — ^pray  hang  him." 

"  Hang  what  I  am  fond  of?" 

"And  purchase  in  his  stead  some  sweetly  pooty  pug  or 
poodle :  something  appropriate  to  the  fair  sex :  ladies  gene- 
rally like  lap-dogs." 

"  Perhaps  I  am  an  exception." 

"Oh!  you  can't  be,  you  know.  All  ladies  are  alike  in 
those  matters :  that  is  universally  allowed." 

"  Tartar  fidghtened  you  terribly,  Mr  Donne.  I  hope  you 
won't  take  any  harm." 

^'  That  I  shall,  no  doubt.  He  gave  me  a  turn  I  shall  not 
won  forget.  When  I  sor  him  "  (such  was  Mr  Donne's  pronun- 
ciation) "  about  to  spring,  I  thought  I  should  have  fainted." 

**  Perhaps  you  did  faint  in  the  bed-room — ^you  were  a  long 
time  there?" 

"No ;  I  bore  up  that  I  might  hold  the  door  fast :  I  was 
determined  not  to  let  any  one  enter:  I  thought  I  would  keep  a 
barrier  between  me  and  the  enemy." 

"But  what  if  your  Mend  Mr  Malone  had  been  worried?" 

"  Malone  must  take  care  of  himself.  Your  man  persuaded 
me  to  come  out  at  last  by  saying  the  dog  was  chained  up  in 
his  kennel :  if  I  had  not  been  assured  of  this,  I  would  have 
remained  all  day  in  the  chamber.  But  what  is  that? 
1  declare  the  man  has  told  a  falsehood  1     The  dog  is  there  I" 

And  indeed  Tartar  walked  past  the  glass-door  opening  to 
the  garden,  stiff,  tawny,  and  black -muzzled  as  ever.     He  still 


1180  SHUtLET. 

seemed  in  bad  hmnour;  lie  was  growling 'again,  ahd^  whistling 
a  half-strangled  whistle,  being  an  inhentiance  firoih  the  bulldog 
nde  of  his  ancestry. 

"  There  are  other  visitors  coming,"  observed  Shirley,  with 
that  provoking  coolness  which  the  owners  of  formidable-look- 
ing dogs  are  apt  to  show  while  their  animals  are  a&  bristle 
and  bay.  Tartar  sprang  down  the  pavement  towsurds  the 
gate,  bdlowing  "  avec  explosion."  His  mistress  qnielify  opened 
the  glass-door,  and  stepped  out  chirruping  to  ti&u  Hii 
bellow  was  already  silenced,  and  he  was  lifting  up  bis  huge, 
blunt,  stupid  head  to  the  new  callers  to  be  patted. 

"What — Tartar,  Tartar!"  said  a  cheery,  rather  boyish 
voice :  "  don't  you  know  us  ?     Grood-moming,  old  -boy  I" 

And  little  Mr  Sweeting,  whose  conscious  good-nature  made 
him  comparatively  fearless  of  man,  woman,  child]  or  brute, 
came  through  the  gate,  caressing  the  guardian. '.  His  vicar, 
Mr  Hall,  followed:  he  had  no  fear  of  Tartar  either^  and  Tartar 
had  no  ill-will  to  him  :  he  snuffed  both  the  gentlemen  round, 
and  then,  as  if  concluding  that  they  were  harmless,  and  might 
be  allowed  to  pass,  he  withdrew  to  the  sunny '^nt  of  the 
hall,  leaving  the  archway  ftee.  Mr  Sweeting  followed,  and 
would  have  played  with  him,  but  Tartar  took  no  notice  of  his 
caresses :  it  was  only  his  mistress's  hand  whose  touph  gave 
him  pleasure ;  to  all  others  he  showed  himself  obstinately 
insensible. 

'  Shirley  advanced  to  meet  Messrs  Hall  and  Sweeting,  shak- 
ing hands  with  them  cordially :  they  were  come  to  tell  her  of 
certain  successes  they  had  achieved  that  morning  in  applica- 
tions for  subscriptions  to  the  fund.  Mr  Hall's  eyes  beamed 
benignantly  through  his  spectacles:  his  plain  tace  looked 
positively  handsome  with  goodness,  and  when  Caroline,  seeing 
who  was  come,  ran  out  to  meet  him,  and  put  both  her  hands 
into  his,  he  gazed  down  on  her  with  a  gentle,  serene,  affec- 
tionate expression,  that  gave  him  the  aspect  of  a  .smiling 
Melancthon. 

Instead  of  re-entering  the  house,  they  strayed  through  the 
garden,  the  ladies  walking  one  on  each  side  of  Mr  HalL  It 
was  a  breezy  sunny  day;  the  air  freshened  the  girls'  cheeks, 
and  gracefully  dishevelled  their  ringlets :  both  of  them  looked 
pretty,— one,  gay :  Mr  HaU  spoke  oftenest  to  his  brilliant 
companion,  looked  most  frequently  at  the  quiet  one.  Miss 
Keeldar  gathered  handfiils  of  the  profusely  blooming  flowers, 
whose  perfume  filled  the  enclosure ;  she  gave  some  to  Garoliiie, 


ME  DOKNE^S  EXODUS.  231 

feffing^li^  to  bfibose  a  nosegay  for  Mr  Hall;  and  with  her  lap 
fillieid  with  deHcate  and  spleindid  blossoms,  Caroline  sat  down 
on  the  steps  of  a  sununer-hoiise :  the  Vicar .  stood  near  her, 
leaning  on  his  cane. 

Shirley,  who  could  not  be  inhospitable,  now  called  out  the 
neglected  pair  in  the  oak-parlour :  she  convoyed  Donne  past 
his  dread  enemy  Tartar,  who,  with  his  nose  on  his  fore-paws, 
lay  snoring  under  the  meridian  sun.  Donne  was  not  grateful: 
he  nerer  wcis  grateM  for  kindness  and  attention  ;  but  he  was 
glad  of  the  safeguard.  Miss  Keeldar,  desirous  of  being 
impartial,  offered  the  curates  flowers:  they  accepted  them 
with  native  awkwardness.  Malone  seemed  specially  at  a  loss, 
when  a  bouquet  filled  one  hand,  while  his  shillelagh  occupied 
the  other.  Donne's  "  Thank  you  I"  was  rich  to  hear : .  it  was 
the  most  fatuous  and  arrogant  of  sounds,  implying  that  he 
considered  this  offering  an  homage  to  his  merits,  and  an  attempt 
on  the  x>art  of  the  heiress  to  ingratiate  herself  into  his  price- 
fess  affections.  Sweeting  alone  received  the  posy  like  a  smart, 
sensible,  little  man,  as  he  was;  putting  it  gallantly  and  nattily 
bto  his  button-hole.    »    . '    . 

As  a  reward  for  his  good  manners,  Miss  Keeldar  beckoning 
Um  apart,  gave  him  some  commission,  which  made  his  eyes 
sparkle  with  glee.  Away  he  flew,  round  by  the  court-yard  to 
iie  kitchen :  no  need  to  give  him  directions  ;  he  was  always 
It  home  everywhere.  Erelong .  he  re-appeared,  carrying  a 
round  table,  which  he  placed  under  tSie  cedar;  then  he 
collected  six  garden-chairs  from  various  nooks  and  bowers  in 
the  grounds,  and  placed  them  in  a  circle.  The  parlour-maid^- 
Wsa  Keeldaf  kept  no  footman— came  out,  bearing  a  napkin- 
coveted  tray.  Sweeting^s  nimble  fingers  aided  in  disposing 
glasses,  plates,  knives  and  forks :  he  assisted  her  too  in  setting 
forth  a  neat  luncheon,  consisting  of  cold  chicken,  ham,  and 
tarts. 

This  sort  of  impromptu 'regale,  it  was  Shirley's  delight *to 
offer  any  chance  guests ;  and  nothing  pleased  her  better  than 
to  have  an  alert,  obliging  little  friend,  like  Sweeting,  to  run 
about  her  hand,  cheerily  receive  and  briskly  execute  her 
hospitable  hints.  David  and  she  were  on  the  best  terms  in 
the  world ;  and  his  devotion  to  the  heiress  was  quite  disin- 
terested, since  it  prejudiced  in  nothing  his  faithful  allegiance 
to  the  magnificent  Dora  Sykes. 

The  repast  turned  out  a  very  merry  one.  Donne  and 
Ualone,  indeed,  contributed  but  little  to  its  vivacity,  the  chief 


232  SHIKLET. 

part  they  played  in  it  being  what  concerned  the  knife,  foik, 
and  wine-glass ;  but  where  four  such  natures  as  Mr  Hall, 
David  Sweeting,  Shirley,  and  Caroline,  were  assembled  in 
health  and.  amity,  on  a  green  lawn,  imdei*  a  sunny  sky,  amidst 
a  wilderness. of  flowers,  there  could  not  be  imgemal  dulness. 

In  the  course  of  conversation,  Mr  Hall  reminded  the  ladies 
that  Whitsimtide  was  approaching,  when  the  grand  United 
Sunday-School  tea-drinking  and  procession  of  the  three  parishes 
of  Briarfield,  Whinbury,  and  Nunnely  were  to  take  place. 
Caroline  he  knew  would  be  at  her  post  as  teacher,  he  siud, 
and  he  hoped  Miss  Keeldar  would  not  be  wanting  :  he  hoped 
she  would  make  her  first  public  appearance  amongst  them  at 
that  time.  Shirley  was  not  the  person  to  miss  an  occasion  d 
this  sort :  she  liked  festive  excitement,  a  gathering  of  happi- 
ness, a  concentration  and  combination  of  pleasant  details,  i 
throng  of  glad  faces,  a  muster  of  elated  hearts :  she  told  Mr 
Hall  they  might  coimt  on  her  with  security:  she  did  not  knov 
what  she  would  have  to  do,  but  they  might  dispose  of  her  at 
they  pleased. 

"  And,"  said  Caroline,  "  you  will  promise  to  come  to  m; 
table,  and  to  sit  near  me,  Mr.  Hall?" 

"  I  shall  not  fidl,  Deo  volente,"  said  he.  "  I  have  occnpid 
the  place  on  her  right  hand  at  these  monster  tea-drinkings  fc 
the  last  six  years,"  he  proceeded,  turning .  to  Miss  Keeldar 
"  They  made  her  a  Sunday-school  teacher  when  she  was  a 
little  girl  of  twelve :  she  is  not  particularly  self-confident  by 
nature,  as  you  may  have  observed ;  and  the  first  time  she  had 
to  '  take  a  tray,^  as  the  phrase  is,  and  make  tea  in  public, 
there  was  some  piteous  trembling  and  flushing.  I  observed 
the  speechless  panic,  the  cups  shaking  in  the  little  hand,  and 
the  overflowing  teapot  filled  too  full  from  the  um.  I  came  to 
her  aid,  took  a  seat  near  her,  managed  the  um  and  the  slop- 
.  basin,  and  in  fact  made  the  tea  for  her  like  any  old  woman." 

"  I  was  very  grateM  to  you,"  interposed  Caroline. 

"You  were :  you  told  me  so  with  an  earnest  sincerity  that 
repaid  me  well ;  inasmuch  as  it  was  not  like  the  majority  of 
little  ladies  of  twelve,  whom  you  may  help  and  caress  for  ever 
without  their  evincing  any  quicker  seiise  of  the  kindness  done 
and  meant  than  if  they  were  made  of  wax  and  wood,  instead 
of  flesh  and  nerves.  She  kept  close  to  me.  Miss  Keeldar,  the 
rest  of  the  evening,  walking  vdth  me  over  the  grounds  where 
the  children  were  playing ;  she  followed  me  into  the  vestiy 
when  all  were  sunmioned  into  church :  she  would|  I  believe, 


Itft  DOKKE'S  EX0DU8.  288 

have  motmted  with  me  to  the  ptdpit,  had  I  not  taken  the 
prerioiis  precaution  of  conducting  her  to  the  Rectory-pew." 

''  And  he  has  been  my  friend  ever  since/*  said  Caroline. 

''  And  always  sat  at  her  table,  near  her  tray,  and  handed 
the  caps, — ^that  is  the  extent  of  my  services.  The  next 
thing  I  do  for  her  will  be  to  marry  her  some  day  to  some 
curate  or  null-owner :  but  mind,  Caroline,  I  shaJl  inquire 
about  the  bridegroom's  character,  and  if  he  is  not  a  gentle- 
man likely  to  render  happy  the  little  girl  who  walked  with 
me  hand  in  hand  over  Ntumely  Common,  I  will  not  officiate: 
80  take  care." 

'^  The  caution  is  useless :  I  am  not  going  to  be  married. 
I  shall  live  single  like  your  sister  Margaret,  Mr  Hall." 

"Very  well — ^you  might  do  worse — Margaret  is  not  un- 
happy: she  has  her  books  for  a  pleasure,  and  her  brother 
for  a  care,  and  is  content.  If  ever  you  want  a  home  ;  if  the 
day  should  come  when  Briarfield  Rectory  is  yours  no  longer, 
come  to  Nunnely  Vicarage.  Should  the  old  maid  aQd  bachelor 
be  still  living,  they  will  make  you  tenderly  welcome." 

"There  are  your  flowers.  Now,"  said  Caroline,  who  had 
kept  the  nosegay  she  had  selected  for  him  till  this  momenty 
"you  don*t  care  for  a  bouquet,  but  you  must  give  it  to 
Margaret:-  only — ^to  be  sentimental  for  once — ^keep  that 
little  foiget-me-not,  which  is  a  wild-flower  I  gathered  from 
the  grass ;  and — to  be  still  more  sentimental — ^let  me  take 
two  or  three  of  the  blue  blossoms  and  put  them  in  my 
Muvenir." 

And  she  took  out  a  small  book  with  enamelled  cover  and 
silver  dasp,  wherein,  having  opened  it,  she  inserted  the 
flowers,  writing  round  them  in  pencil — "  To  be  kept  for  the 
Bake  of  the  Rev.  Cyril  Hall,  my  friend.     May  —  18—." 

The  Rev.  Cyril  Hall,  on  his  part  also,  placed  a  sprig  in 
»fe(y  between  the  leaves  of  a  pocket  Testament :  he  only 
wrote  on  the  margin — ^**  Caroline." 

"  Now,"  said  he,  smiling,  '<  I  trust  we  are  romantic  enough. 
^ffiss  Keeldar,"  he  continued  (the  curates,  by-the-by,  during 
this  conversation,  were  too^much  occupied  with  their  own  jokes 
to  notice  what  passed  at  tJie  other  end  of  the  table),  "  I  hope 
joa  are  laughing  at  this  trait  of  '  exaltation^  in  the  old  grey- 
lieaded  Vicar ;  but,  the  fact  is,  I  am  so  used  to  comply  with 
the  requests  of  this  young  friend  of  yours,  I  don't  know  how 
to  refuge  her  when  she  t^Us  me  to  do  anything.    You  would 


&34  SHIBLET. 

say  it  is  not  mncli  in  my  way  to  traffic  witli  flowers  and 
forget-me-nots:  but,  you  see,  when  requested  to  be  senti- 
mental, I  am  obedient." 

"  He  is  naturally  rather  sentimental,"  remarked  Caroline ; 
"  Margaret  told  me  so,  and  I  know  what  pleases  him,'* 

"  That  you  should  be  good  and  happy  ?  Yes  ;  that  is  one 
of  .my  greatest  pleasures.  May  God  long  preserve  to  you 
the  blessings  of  peace  and  innocence  I  By  which  pliiase,  I 
mean  comparative  innocence ;  for  in  His  sight,  I  am  well 
aware,  ncme  are  pure.  What,  to  our  human  perceptioiis,  looks 
spotless  as  we  fancy  angels,  is  to  Him  but  frailty,  needing  the 
blood  of  His  Son  to  cleanse,  and  the  strength  of  His  Spirit  to 
sustain.  Let  us  each  and  all  cherish  humility — ^I,  as  you,  mj 
young  friends  ;  and  we  may  well  do  it  when  we  look  into  our 
own  hearts,  and  see  there  temptations,  inconsistencies,  pro- 
pensities, even  we  blush  to  recognise.  And  it  is  not  youtii, 
nor  good  looks,  nor  grace,  nor  any  gentle  outside  chann 
which  makes  either  beauty  or  goodness  in  God's  eyes-  Young 
ladies,  when  your  mirror  or  men's  tongues  flatter  you,  remember 
that,  in  the  sight  of* her  Maker,  Mary  Ann  Ainley — a  woman 
whom  neither  glass  nor  Hps  have  ever  panegyrized— is  faim 
and  better  than  either  of  you.  She  is,  indeed,"  he  added, 
after  a  pause — "  she  is,  indeed.  You  young  things — ^wrapt 
up  in  yourselves  and  in  earthy  hopes — scarcely  live  as  Christ 
lived:  perhaps  you  cannot  do  it  yet,  while  existence  is  so 
sweet  and  earth  so  smiling  to  you ;  it  would  be  too  much  to 
expect:  she,  with  meek  heart  and  due  reverence,  treads  dose 
in  her  Eedeemer's  steps." 

Here  the  harsh  voice  of  Donne  broke  in  on  the  mild  tones 
of  Mr  Hall  :— 

"Ahem!"  he  began,  clearing  his  throat  evidently  for  a 
speech  of  some  importance.  "  Ahem  ?  Miss  Keeldar,  your 
attention  an  instant,  if  you  please." 

"Well,"  said  Shirley,  nonchalantly.  "What  is  it?  I 
listen :  all  of  me  is  ear  that  is  not  eye." 

"  I  hope  part  of  you  is  hand  also,"  returned  Doime,  in  his 
vidgarly  presiunptuous  and  familiar  style,  "  and  part  purse: 
it  is  to  the  handand  purse  I  propose  to  appeal.  I  came  here 
this  morning  with  a  view  to  beg  of  you " 

"  You  should  have  gone  to  Mrs  Gill:  she  is  my  almoner." 

"To  beg  of  you  a  subscription  to  a  school.  I  and  Dr 
Boultby  intend  to  erect  one  in  the  hamlet  of  Ecclefigg  which 


MR  DOSm'S  EXODUS.  285 

is  under  our  Ticltrage  of  Whinbury.  The  Baptists  have  got 
possession  of  it :  they  have  a  chapel  there,  and  we  want  to 
dispute  the  ground." 

'^  Btit  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  Ecclefigg :  I  possess  no 
property  there." 

"What  does  that  signify?  You're  a  Chnrchwoman, 
ain't  yon?" 

"  Admirable  creature! "  mnttered  Shirley,  under  her  breath : 
'*  exquisite  address  :  fine  style !  What  raptures  he  excites  in 
me  1"  then,  aloud,  "  I  am  a  Ghurchwoman,  certainly." 

"Then  you  can't  refiise  to  contribute  in  this  case.  The 
population  of  Ecclefigg  are  a  parcel  of  brutes — ^we  want  to 
civiHze  them." 

"  Who  is  to  be  the  missionary  ?  " 

"Myielf,  probably." 

"  You  won't  foil  tiLrough  lack  of  sjnnpathy  with  your  flock." 

"  I  hope  not — ^I  expect  success  ;  but  we  must  have  money. 
There  is  the  paper- — pray  give  a  handsome  sum." 

When  asked  for  money,  Shirley  rarely  held  back.  She 
ptit  down  her  name  for  £5 :  after  the  £800  she  had  lately 
given,  and  the  many  smaller  sums  she  was  giving  constantly, 
itwaa  as  much  as  she  could  at  present  afford.  Doime  looked 
at  it,  declared  the  subscription  "  shabby,"  and  clamorously 
demanded  more.  Miss  Keeldar  flushed  up  with  some  indig- 
nation and  more  astonishment. 

"  At  present,  I  shall  give  no  more,"  said  she. 

"Not  give  more!  Why,  I  expected  you  to  head  the  list 
with  a.  cool  hundred.  With  your  property,  you  should  never 
put  down  a  signature  for  less." 

She  was  silent. 

"  In  the  south,"  went  on  Donne,  "  a  lady  with  a  thousand 
a  year  woidd  be  ashamed  to  give  five  pounds  for  a  public 
object*" 

Shirley,  so  rarely  haughty,  looked  so  now.  Her  slight 
frame  became  nerved  ;  her  distinguished  face  quickened  with 
•com. 

"Strange    remarks!"    said    she:    '^most    inconsiderate! 
Reproach  in  return  for  bounty  is  misplaced." 
"  Bounty !     Do  you  call  five  pounds  bounty  ?  " 

**  I  do :  and  bounty  which,  had  I  not  given  it  to  Dr 
Booltby's  intended  school,  of  the  erection  of  which  I  approve, 
and  in  no  sort  to  his  curate,  who  seems  ill-advised  in  his 
QM&aer  of  applying  for— or  rather  extorting  subscriptiozis, — 


286  SHIRLET. 

bounty,  I  repeat,  whicli,  but  for  this  considerationy  I  ohonld 
instantly  reclaim." 

Donne  was  thick-skinned:  he  did  not  feel  all  or  half  that 
the  tone,  air,  glance  of  the  speaker  expressed :  he  knew  not 
on  what  ground  he  stood. 

"  Wretched  place — ^this  Yorkshire,"  he  went  on.  **  I  could 
never  have  formed  an  idear  of  the  country  had  I  not  seen  it; 
and  the  people — ^rich  and  poor — ^what  a  set !  How  corse  and 
uncultivated !     They  would  be  scouted  in  the  south." 

Shirley  leaned  forwards  on  the  table,  her  nostrils  dilating 
a  little,  her  taper  fingers  interlaced  and  compressing  each 
other  hard. 

'^  The  rich,"  pursued  the  in£a,tuated  and  imconscious  Donne, 
"  are  a  parcel  of  misers — ^never  living  as  persons  with  their 
incomes  ought  to  live  :  you  scarsley" — (you  must  excuse  Mr 
Donne*s  pronunciation,  reader ;  it  was  very  choice  ;  he  con- 
sidered it  genteel,  and  prided  himself  on  his  southern  accent ; 
northern  ears  received  with  singular  sensations  his  ixttezance 
of  certain  words)  ;  "  you  scarsley  ever  see  a  fam'ly  where  a 
propa  carriage  or  a  reg^la  butla  is  kep  ;  and  as  to  the  poor — 
just  look  at  them  when  they  come  crowding  about  the  church- 
doors  on  the  occasion  of  a  marriage  or  a  funeral,  dattenng 
in  clogs ;  the  men  in  their  shirt-sleeves  and  wool^combers* 
aprons,  the  women  in  mob-caps  and  bed-gowns.  They  posi- 
tively deserve  that  one  should  turn  a  mad  cow  ii)  amongst  tiiem 
to  rout  their  rabble-ranks — ^he !  he !    What  fun  it  would  be!" 

"There, — ^you  have  reached  the  climax,"  said  Shirley, 
quietly.  "You  have  reached  the  climax,"  she  repeated, 
turning  her  glowing  glance  towards  him.  "  You  cannot  go 
beyond  it,  and,"  she  added  with  emphasis,  "you  shaU  not, 
in  my  house." 

Up  she  rose:  nobody  could  control  her  now,  for  she  was 
exasperajbed ;  straight  she  walked  to  her  garden-gates,  wide 
she  flung  them  open. 

"  Walk  through,"  she  said  austerely,  "  and  pretty  quickly, 
and  set  foot  on  this  pavement  no  more." 

Donne  was  astoimded.  He  had  thought  all  the  time  he 
was  showiiig  himself  off  to  high  advantage,  as  a  lofty-sooled 
person  of  the  first  "ton;"  he  imagined  he  was  producing  a 
crushing  impression.  Had  he  not  expressed  disdiun  of  every- 
thing in  Yorkshire?  What  more  conclusive  proof  could  be 
given  that  he  was  better  than  anything  there?     And  yet 

^re  was  he  about  to  be  turned  like  a  dog  out  oiT  a  Torkamre 


WHITSUNTIDE.  287 

« 

prden!  Where,  under  such  circumstances,  was  the  ''concate- 
oation  accordingly?;' 

"  Sid  me  of  you  insljantly — ^instantly  1 "  reiterated  Shirley, 
18  he  lingered. 

"  Madam — a  clergyman !     Turn  out  a  clerg3rman  ?  ** 

"  Off  1  Were  you  an  archbishop :  you  have  proved  yourself 
DO  gentleman,  and  must  go.     Quick  I  " 

She  was  quite  resolved:  there  was  no  trifling  with  her: 
besides,  Tartar  was  again  rising;  he  perceived  S3rmptoms  of 
a  commotion :  he  manifested  a  disposition  to  join  in ;  there 
was  evidently  nothing  for  it  but  to  go,  and  Donne  made  his 
Exodus ;  the  heiress  sweeping  him  a  deep  curtsy  as  she  closed 
the  gates  on  him. 

"  How  dare  the  pompoms  priest  abuse  his  flock  ?  How  dare 
the  lisping  cockney  revile  Yorkshire  ?  "  -was  her  sole  observa- 
don  on  the  circimistance,  as  she  returned  to  the  table. 

Erelong,  the  little  party  broke  up  :  Miss  Keeldar^s  ruffled 
and  darkened  brow,  curled  lip,  and  incensed  eye,  gave  no 
invitation  to  further  social  enjoyment. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

WHITSUNTIDE. 


The  fund  prospered.  By  dint  of  Miss  Keeldar^s  example,  the 
three  rectors'  vigorous  exertions,  and  the  efficient  though 
qoiet  aid  of  their  spinster  and  spectacled  lieutenants,  Mary 
Ann  Ainley  and  Margaret  Hall,  a  handsome  sum  was  raised; 
ind  this  being  judiciously  managed,  served  for  the  present 
greatly  to  alleviate  the  distress  of  the  imemployed  poor. 
The  neighbourhood  seemed  to  grow  calmer:  for  a  fortnight 
past  no  cloth  had  been  destroyed ;  no  outrage  on  mill  or 
maosiQn  had  been  committed  in  the  three  parishes.  Shirley 
was  sanguine  that  the  evil  she  wished  to  avert  was  almost 
escaped;  that  the  threatened  storm  was  passing  over:  with  the 
tpproach  of  summer  she  felt  certain  that  trade  would  improve 
-*it  always  did;  and  then  this  weary  war  could  not  last  for 
e^^:  peace  must  return  one  day:  with  peace  what  an  impulse 
voqU  be  given  to  commerce ! 

Such  was  the  usual  tenor  of  her  observations  to  her  tenant, 
Ginid  Moorei  whenever  she  met  him  where  they  could  con- 


238  SHIBUET* 

verse,  and  Moore  would  listen  very  quietly — ^too  qtdetlj  to 
satisfy  her.     She  would  then  by  her  impatient  glance  demand 
something  more  from  him — some  explanation,   or   at  least 
some  additional  remark.      Smiling  in  his  way,  with  that 
expression  which  gave  a  remarkable  cast  of  sweetness  to  hia 
mouth,  while  his  brow  remained  grave,  he  would  answer 
to  the  effect,  that  himself,  too,  trusted  in  the  finite  nature  of 
the  war ;   that  it  was  indeed  on  that  ground  the  anchor  of 
his  hopes  was  fixed :  thereon  his  speculations  depended.   "  For 
you  are  aware,"  he  would  continue,  "  that  I  now  work  Hol- 
low's mill  entirely  on  speculation :  I  sell  nothing ;  there  is 
no  market  for  my  goods.     I  manufacture  for  a  fiiture  day: 
I  make  myself  ready  to  take  advantage  of  the  first  opening 
that  shall  occur.     Three  months  ago  this  was  impossible  to 
me;    I   had  exhausted   both   credit   and  capital:    you  well 
know  who  came  to  my  rescue;  from  what  hand  I  received 
the  loan  which  saved  me.     It  is  on  the  strength  of  that  loan 
I  am  enabled  to  continue  the  bold  game  which,  a  while  sine**, 
I  feared  I  should  never  play  more.     Total  ruin  I  know  will 
follow  loss,  and  I  am  aware  that  gain  is  doubtful ;  but  I  am 
quite  cheerful:  so  long  as  I  can  be  active,  so  long  as  I  can 
strive,  so  long,   in  short,  as  my  hands  are  not  tied,  it  i^ 
impossible  for  me  to  be  depressed.     One  year,  nay,  but  six 
months  of  the  reign  of  the  olive,  and  I  am  safe;  fi>r,  as  you 
say,  peace  will  give  an  impulse  to  commerce.     In  this  you 
are  right;  but  as  to  the  restored  tranquillity  of  the  neigh- 
bourhood— as  to  the  permanent  good  effect  of  your  charitable 
fund — ^I  doubt.     Eleemosynary  relief  never  yet  tranquillized 
the  working-classes — it  never  made  them  grateftil;  it  is  not 
in  human  nature  that  it  should.     I  suppose,  were  all  things 
ordered  aright,  they  ought  not  to  be  in  a  position  to  need  that 
humiliating  relief;  and  this  they  feel:  we  should  feel  it  were 
we  so  placed.     Besides,  to  whom  should  they  be  gratefiii? 
To  you — ^to  the  clergy  perhaps,  but  not  to  us  mill-ownera. 
They  hate  us  worse  than  ever.    Then,  the  disaffected  here  are 
in  correspondence  with  the  disaffected  elsewhere:  Nottingham 
is  one  of  their  head-quarters,  Manchester  another,  Birmingham 
a  third.     The  subalterns  receive  orders  from  their  chiefs ; 
they  are  in  a  good  state  of  discipline:    no  blow  is  struck 
without  mature  deliberation.     In  sultry  weather,  you  have 
seen  the  sky  threaten  thunder  day  by  day,  and  yet  night  afler 
night  the  clouds  have  cleared,  and  the  sun  has  set  quietly;  but 
the  danger  was  not  gone,  it  was  only  delayed:  the  long- 


WHiTSuiniDE.  289 

tihreateDing  storm  is  sure  to  break  at  last.  There  is  analogy 
between  the  moral  and  physical  atmosphere.'* 

"Well,  Mr  Moore"  (so  these  conferences  always  ended), 
^  take  care  of  yourself.  If  you  think  that  I  have  ever  done 
you  any  good,  reward  me  by  promising  to  take  care  of  your- 
self.'* 

" I  do:  I  will  take  close  and  watchful  care.  I  wish  to  live, 
not  to  die:  the  future  opens  like  Eden  before  me;  and  stiU, 
when  I  look  deep  into  the  shades  of  my  paradise,  I  see  a  vision, 
that  I  like  better  than  seraph  or  cherub,  glide  across  remote 
vistas." 

"  Do  you  ?    Pray,  what  vision  ?  " 

"Isee—— " 

The  nmd  came  bustling  in  with  the  tea-things. 

The  early  part  of  that  May,  as  we  have  seen,  was  ^q^  the 
middle  was  wet;  but  in  the  last  week,,  at  change  of  moon,  it 
cleared  again.  A  fresh  wind  swept  off  the  silver- white,  decjpr 
piled  rain-clouds,  bearing  them,  mass  on  mass,  to  the  eastern 
horizon;  on  whose  verge  they  dwindled, and  behind  whose  rim 
they  disappeared,  leaving  the  vault  behind  all  pure  blue  space, 
ready  for  the  reign  of  the  summer  sun.  That  sim  rose  broad 
on  Whitsuntide:  the  gathering  of  the  schools  was  signalized 
bj  splendid  weather. 

Whit-Tuesday  was  the  great  day,  in  preparation  for  which 
the  two  large  schoolrooms  of  Briaj^eld,  built  by  the  present 
rector,  chiefly  at  his  own  expense,  were  cleaned  out,  white* 
washed,  repainted,  and  decorated  with  flowers  and  evergreens 
— some  from  the  fiectory-garden,  two  cart-loads  from  Field- 
head,  and  a  wheelbarrowful  from  the  more  stingy  domain  of 
De  Walden,  the  residence  of  Mr  Wynne.  In  these  schoolrooms 
twenty  tables,  each  calculated  to  acconunodate  twenty  guests, 
were  laid  out,  surrounded  with  benches,  and  covered  with  white 
cloths:  above  them  were  suspended  at  least  some  twenty  cages, 
containing  as  many  canaries,  according  to  a  fancy  of  the  distrioti 
specially  cherished  by  Mr  Helstone's^  clerk,  who  delighted  in 
the  piercing  song  of  these  birds,  and  knew  that  amidst  con- 
fusion of  tongues  they  always  caroled  loudest*  These  tables, 
be  it  understood,  were  not  spread  for  the  twelve  hundred 
acholars,  to  be  assembled  from  the  three  parishes,  but  only  for 
the  patrons  and  teachers  of  the  schools :  the  children's  feast 
was  to  be  spread  in  the  open  air.  At  one  o'clock  the  troops 
were  to  come  in;  at  two  ihey  were  to  be  marshalled;  tiU  four 
^y  were  to  parade  the  parish ;  then  came  the  feast,  and 


240  8HIBLE7. 

afterwards  the  meeting,  with  music  and  speechifying  in  the : 
church'.  r 

Why  Briarfield  was  chosen  for  the  point  of  rendezvous — the  i 
scene  of  the  flSte — should  be  explained.  It  was  not  because  it 
was  the  largest  or  most  populous  parish — ^Whinbury  fer  outdid 
it  in  that  respect ;  nor  because  it  was  the  oldest — antique  a5 
were  the  hoary  Church  and  Rectory,  Nunnely's  low-roofed 
Temple  and  mossy  Parsonage,  buried  both  in  coeval  oaks,  out- 
standing sentinels  of  Nunwood,  were  older  still:  it  was  simply 
'because  Mr  Helstone  willed  it  so,  and  Mr  Helstone's  will  was 
stronger  than  that  of  Boultby  or  Hall;  the  former  could  no:. 
the  latter  would  not,  dispute  a  point  of  precedence  with  their 
resolute  and  imperious  brother:  they  let  him  lead  and  rule. 

This  notable  anniversary  had  always  hitherto  been  a  tiying 
day  tp  Caroline  Helstone,  because  it  dragged  her  perforce  into 
public,  compelling  her  to  face  all  that  was  wealthy,  respect- 
able, influential  in  the  neighbourhood;  in  whose  presence,  but 
for  the  kind  countenance  of  Mr  Hall,  she  would  have  appeared 
unsupported.  Obliged  to  be  conspicuous ;  obliged  to  walk  at 
the  head  of  her  regiment,  as  the  Rector^s  niece,  and  first  teacher 
of  the  first  class;  obliged  to  make  tea  at  the  first  table  for  a 
mixed  multitude  of  ladies  and  gentlemen;  and  to  do  all  this 
without  the  countenance  of  mother,  aunt,  or  other  chaperon — 
she,  meantime,  being  a  nervous  person,  who  mortally  feared 
publicity — it  will  be  comprehended  that,  under  these  circum* 
stances,  she  trembled  at  the  approach-of  Whitsuntide. 

'  But  this  year  Shirley  was  to  be  with  her,  and  that  cliangted 
the  aspect  of  the  trial  singularly^ — ^it  changed  it  utterly:  it  was 
a  trial  no  longer — ^it  was  almost  an  enjoyment.  Miss  Keeldar 
was  better  in  her  single  self  than  a  host  of  ordinary  fiiends. 
Quite  seW-possessed,  and  always  spirited  and  easy;  conscious 
of  her  social  importance,  yet  never  presuming  upon  it,  it  would 
be  enough  to  give  one  courage  only  to  look  at  her.  The  onlj 
fear  was,  lest  the  heiress  should  not  be  pimctual  to  tryst :  she 
often  had  a  careless  way  of  lingering  behind  time,  and  Caroline 
knew  her  uncle  would  not  wait  a  second  for  any  one:  at  the 
moment  of  the  church-dock  tolling  two,  the  bells  would  clash 
out  and  the  march  begin.  She  must  look  after  Shirley,  then, 
in  this  matter,  or  her  expected  companion  would  fail  her. 

Whit-Tuesday  saw  her  rise  almost  with  the  sun«  She,  Fanny, 
and  Eliza  were  busy  the  whole  morning  arranging  the  Bectoiy* 
parlours  in  first-rate  company  order,  and  setting  out  a  collation 
of  cooling  refreshments — ^wine,  firait,  cakeS"— on  the  dining- 


WHITSUNTIDE.  241 

Dom  pJideboatd.  Then  she  had  to  dress  in  her  freshest  and 
lirestf.  attire  of  white  muslin ;  the  perfect  fineness  of  the  day 
od  tlLe  solemnity  of  the  occasion  warranted,  and  even  exacted, 
nch  iEostmne.  Her  new  sash — a.  birthday-present  from  Mar- 
;aretj(&all,  which  she  had  reason  to  believe  Cyril  himself  had 
)ough't,  and  in  return  for  which  she  had  indeed  given  him  a 
}el  of  cambric-bands  in  a  handsome  case — was  tied  by  the 
iexterous  fingers  of  Fanny,  who  took  no  little  pleasure  in 
uraying  her  fair  young  mistress  for  the  occasion ;  her  simple 
bonnet  had  been  trimmed  to  correspond  with  her  sash ;  her 
pretty  but  inexpensive  scarf  of  white  crape  suited  her  dress. 
When  ready,  she  formed  a  picture,  not  bright  enough  to  dazzle, 
but  fidr  enough  to  interest ;  not  brilliantly  striking,  but  very 
delicately  pleasing;  a  picture  in  which  sweetness  of  tint, 
purity  of  air,  and  grace  of  mien,  atoned  for  the  absence  of  rich 
colouring  and  magnificent  contour.  What  her  brown  eye  and 
clear  forehead  showed  of  her  mind,  was  in  keeping  with  her 
dress  and  face — ^modest,  gentle,  and,  though  pensive,  harmo- 
nious. It  appeared  that  neither  lamb  nor  dove  need  fear  her, 
but  would  wdcome  rather,  in  her  look  of  simplicity  and  soft- 
ness, a  sympathy  with  their  own  natures,  or  with  the  natures 
we  ascribe  to  them. 

After  all,  she  was  an  imperfect,  faulty  human  being  :  fair 
enough  of  form,  hue,  and  array ;  but,  as  Cyril  Hall  said,  neither 
80  good  nor  so  great  as  the  withered  Miss  Ainley,  now  putting 
on  her  best  black  gown  and  Quaker-drab  shawl  and  bonnet 
in  her  own  narrow  cottage-chamber. 

Away  Caroline  went,  across  some  very  sequestered  fields 
and  through  some  quite  hidden  lanes,  to  Fieldhead.  She 
glided  quickly  under  the  green  hedges  and  across  the  greener 
leas.  There  was  no  dust — ^no  moisture— to  soil  the  hem  of 
her  stainless  garment,  or  to  damp  her  slender  sandal :  after 
the  late  rains  all  was  clean,  and  under  the  present  glowing 
Bon  all  was  dry :  she  walked  fearlessly,  then,  on  daisy  and 
tnrf,  and  through  thick  plantations ;  she  reached  Fieldhead 
and  penetrated  to  Miss  Keeldar^s  dressing-room. 

It  was  well  she  had  come,  or  Shirley  would  have  been  too 
late.  Instead  of  making  ready  with  all  speed,  she  lay  stretched 
on  a  couch,  absorbed  in  reading  :  Mrs  Pryor  stood  near, 
vainly  urging  her  to  rise  and  dress.  Caroline  wasted  no 
words:  she  immediately  took  the  book  from  her,  and,  with 
her  own  hands,  commenced  the  business  of  disrobing  and  re-> 
lohing  her.     Shirley,  indolent  irith  the  heat,  and  gay  with 

16 


242  8HIBLEY. 

her  youth  and  pleasurable  nature,  wanted  to  talk,  lan^p,  vd 
linger ;  but  Caroline,  intent  on  being  in  time,  perseve 
dressing  her  as  &st  as  fingers  could  fasten  strings  or  lice* 
pins.     At  length,  as  she  united  a  final  row  of  hooks  ancj^a. 
she  found  leisure  to  chide  her,  saying,  she  was  very 
to  be  so  unpunctual;  that  she  looked  even  now  the  piotore  , 
incorrigible  carelessness :  and  so  Shirley  did — but  a  y&Jy  lovej 
picture  of  that  tiresome  quality. 

She  presented  quite  a  contrast  to  Caroline:  there  wj^  style 
every  fold  of  her  dress  and  every  line  of  her  figui]4:  the 
silk  suited  her  better  than  a  simpler  costume ;  the  dee\ 
embroidered  scarf  became  her:  she  wore  it  neglijgently, 
gracefiilly;  the  wreath  on  her  bonnet  crowned  her  well:  Jfi 
attention  to  fashion,  the  tasteful  appliance  of  ornament  iDiiach 
portion  of  her  dress,  were  quite  in  place  with  her:  all  this 
suited  her,  like  the  frank  light  in  her  eyes,  the  rallying  smile 
about  her  lips,  like  her  shaft-straight  carriage  and  lightsome 
step.  Caroline  took  her  hand  when  she  was  dressed,  hurried 
her  down-stairs,  out  of  doors,  and  thus  they  sped  through  tlie 
fields,  laughing  as  they  went,  and  looking  very  much  like  a 
snow-white  dove  and  gem-tinted  bird-of-paradise  joined  in 
social  flight. 

Thanks  to  Miss  Helstone's  promptitude,  they  arrived  in  good 
time.  While  yet  trees  hid  the  diurch,  they  heard  the  bell 
tolling  a  measured  but  urgent  summons  for  all  to  assemUe; 
the  trooping  in  of  numbers,  the  trampling  of  ma:ny  stqjs, 
and  murmuring  of  many  voices  were  likewise  audiMe.  From 
a  rising-ground  they  presently  saw,  on  the  Whiribury-road, 
the  Whinbury-school  approaching:  it  numbered  fire  hundred 
souls.  The  Rector  and  Curate,  Boultby  and  Donne,  headed  it: 
the  former,  looming  large  in  full  canonicals,  walking  as  became 
a  beneficed  priest,  under  the  canopy  of  a  shovel-hat,  with  the 
dignity  of  an  ample  corporation,  the  embellishment  of  the 
squarest  and  vastest  of  black  coats,  and  the  support  of  the 
stoutest  of  gold-headed  canes.  As  the  Doctor  walked,  lie  now 
and  then  sHghtly  flourished  his  cane,  and  inclined  his  shovel- 
hat  with  a  dogmatical  wag  towards  his  aide-de-camp.  TbU 
aide-de-camp — Donne,  to  wit — narrow  as  the  line  of  his  shape 
was  compared  to  the  broad  bulk  of  his  principal,  contrived, 
notwithstanding,  to  look  every  inch  a  curate:  all  about  bim 
was  pragmatical  and  self-complacent,  from  his  tuxned-up  nose 
and  elevated  chin  to  his  clerical  black  gaiters,'  his  somewhit 
short,  strapless  trousers,  and  his  square-toed  sHioes. 


I 


wBrrsmmDE.  248 


/i 


Is'^Walk  on,  Mr  Donne!    You  have  undergone  scrutiny.    You 
you  look  well — ^whether  the  white  and  purple  figures 

you  from  yonder  hill  think  so,  is  another  question. 

ese  figures  come  running  down  when  the  regiment  has 

hed  by:  the  churchyard  is  full  of  children  and  teachers, 

in  their  very  best  holiday  attire:  and— distressed  as  is  the 

TJiBtrict,  bad  as  are  the  times — it  is  wonderful  to  see  how 

/espectably — ^how  handsomely  even— they  have  Contrived  to 

lothe  themselves.      That  British  love  of  decency  will  work 

lies:  the  poverty  which  reduces  an  Irish  girl  to  Tags  is 

tent  to  rob  the  English  girl  of  the  neat  wardrobe  she 

ows  necessary  to  her  self-respect.     Besides,  the  lady  of  the 

or — that  Shirley,  now  gazing  with  pleasure  on  this  well- 

Pressed  and  happy-looking  crowd — ^has  really  done  them  good: 

lier  seasonable  bounty  consoled  many  a«poor  family  against  the 

eoming  hoHday,  and  supplied  many  a  child  with  a  new  firock 

or  bonnet  for  the  occasion ;  she  knows  it,  and  is  elate  with  the 

consciousness:  glad  that  her  money,  example,  and  influence 

We  reaUy — substantially — benefited  those  around  her.     She 

cannot  be  charitable  like  li^ss  Ainley — it  is  not  in  her  natiu^: 

it  rdieves  her  to  feel  that  there  is  another  way  of  being 

cbaritable,  practicable  for  other  characters,  and  under  other 

circumstances. 

Caroline,  toa,  is  pleased;  for  she  also  has  done  good  in  her 

wnaH  way;  robbed  herself  of  more  than  one  dress,  ribbon,  or 

collar  she  could  ill  spare,  to  aid  in  fitting  out  the  scholars  of 

Her  class;  and  as  she  could  not  give  money,  she  has  followed 

Miss  Ainley's  example,  in  giving  her  time  and  her  industry  to 

Kw  for  the  children. 

Not  only  is  the  churchyard  full,  but  the  Rectory-garden  is 

•  also  thronged:  pairs  and  parties  of  ladies  and  gentlemen  are 

«en  walking  amongst  the  waving  lilacs  and  laburnums.     The 

honsealso  is  occupied:  at  the  wide-open  parlour-windows,  gay 

gnmps  are  standing.    These  are  the  patrons  and  teachers,  who 

>re  to  swell  the  procession.     In  the  parson^s  croft,  behind  the 

H^ctory,  are  Ae  musicians  of  the  three  parish  bands,  with 

th^  instruments.     Fanny  and  Eliza,  in  the  smartest  of  capa 

and  gowns,  and  the  whitest  of  aprons,  move  amongst  them, 

•erving  out  quarts  of  ale;  whereof  a  stock  was  brewed  very 

'wmd  and  strong  some  weeks  since,  by  the  Rector's  orders, 

■ndnndcr  has  special  superintendence.     Whatever  he  had' a 

^TOd  in,  must  be  managed  handsomely:  "  shabby  doings,"  of 

^7 ^'BS^ption,  were  not  endured  under  his  sanction:  from 


244  SHiRLEr. 

the  erection  of  a  public  building,  a  church,  school,  or  court- 
house, to  the  cooking  of  a  dinner,  he  still  advocated  the 
lordly,  liberal,  and  effective.  Miss  Keeldar  was  like  him  in 
this  respect,  and  they  mutually  approved  each  other's  arrange- 
ments. 

Caroline  and  Shirley  were  soon  in  the  midst  of  the  com- 
pany; the  former  met  them  very  easily  for  her :  instead  of 
sitting  down  in  a  retired  comer,  or  stealing  away  to  her  own 
room  till  the  procession  should  be  marshalled,  according  to 
her  wont,  she  moved  through  the  three  parlours,  conversed 
and  smiled,  absolutely  spoke  once  or  twice  ere  she  was  spoken 
to,  and,  in  short,  seemed  a  new  creature.  It  was  Shirley's 
presence  which  thus  transformed  her :  the  view  of  Miss  Keel- 
dar's  air  and  manner  did  her  a  world  of  good.  Shirley  had 
no  fear  of  her  kind;  no  tendency  to  shrink  from,  to  avoid  it 
All  human  beings,  men,  women,  or  children,  whom  low  breed- 
ing or  coarse  presimiption  did  not  render  positively  offensive, 
were  welcome  enough  to  her:  some  much  more  so  tSian  others, 
of  course ;  but,  generally  speaking,  tUl  a  man  had  indisputa- 
bly proved  himself  bad  and  a  nuisance,  Shirley  was  willing 
to  think  him  good  and  an  acquisition,  and  to  treat  him  accord- 
ingly. This  disposition  made  her  a  general  favourite^  for  it 
robbed  her  very  raillery  of  its  sting,  and  gave  her  serious  or 
smiling  conversation  a  happy  charm:  nor  did  it  diminish  the 
value  of  her  intimate  friendship,  which  was  a  distinct  thing 
from  this  social  benevolence,  depending,  indeed,  on  quite  a 
different  part  of  her  character.  Miss  Helstone  was  the  choice 
of  her  affection  and  intellect ;  the  Misses  Pearson,  Sykes, 
Wynne,  &c.,  &c.,  only  the  profiters  by  her  good-nature  and 
vivacity. 

Donne  happened  to  come  into  the  drawing-room  while 
Shirley,  sitting  on  the  sofa,  formed  the  centre  of  a  tolerably 
wide  circle.  She  had  already  forgotten  her  exasperation 
against  him,  and  she  bowed  and  smiled  good-humouredly. 
The  disposition  of  the  man  was  then  seen.  He  knew  neither 
how  to  decline  the  advance  with  dignity,  as  one  'whose  just 
pride  has  been  wounded,  nor  how  to  meet  it  with  frankness, 
as  one  who  is  glad  to  forget  and  forgive ;  his  punishment  had 
impressed  him  with  no  sense  of  shame,  and  he  did  not  expe- 
rience that  feeling  on  encoimtering  his  chastiser :  he  was  not 
vigorous  enough  in  evil  to  be  actively  malignant — ^he  merely 
passed  by  sheepishly  with  a  rated,  scowling  look.  Nothing 
could  ever  again  reconcile  him  to  his  enemy;  while  no  passion 


WHITSUNTIDE.  245 

of  resentment,  for  even  sharper  and  more  ignominious  inflic* 
dons,  could  his  lymphatic  nature  know. 

"  He  was  not  worth  a  scene  I "  said  Shirley  to  Caroline. 
"  What  a  fool  I  was  I  To  revenge  on  poor  Donne  his  silly 
spite  at  Yorkshixei  is  something  like  crushing  a  gnat  for 
attacking  the  hide  of  a  rhinoceros.  Had  I  been  a  gentleman, 
1  beheve  I  should  have  helped  him  off  the  premises  by  dint 
of  physical  force:  I  am  glad  now  I  only  employed  the  moral 
weapon.  But  he  must  come  near  me  no  more :  I  don^t  like 
liim:  he  irritates  me:  there  is  not  even  amusement  to  be  had 
out  of  him:  Malone  is  better  sport." 

It  seemed  as  if  Malone  wished  to  justify  the  preference; 

for  the  words  were  scarcely  out  of  the  spe^ker^s  mouth,  when 

Peter  Augustus  came  up,  all  in  '^  grande  tenue,"  gloved  and 

icented,  with  his  hair  oiled  and  brushed  to  perfection,  and 

bearing  in  one  hand  a  huge  bunch  of  cabbage-roses,  five  or 

nx  in  full  blow :    these  he  presented  to  the  heiress  with  a 

{race  to  which  the  most  cunning  pencil  could  do  but  defec« 

tive  justice.     And  who,   aHer  this,   could  dare  to  say  that 

Peter  was  not  a  lady's  man  ?    He  had  gathered  and  he  had 

^Ten  flowers :  .he  had  offered  a  sentimental — a  poetic  tribute 

at  the  shrine  of  Love  or  Mammon.      Hercules  holding  the 

distaff  was  but  a  faint  type  of  Peter  bearing  the  roses.     He 

must  have  thought  this  himself,  for  he  seemed  amazed  at 

vbat  he  had  done  :   he  backed  without  a  word ;  he  was  going 

away  with   a  husky  chuckle   of  self-felicitation ;    then   he 

bethought  himself  to  stop  and  turn,  to  ascertain  by  ocular 

testimony  that  he  really  had  presented  a  bouquet :  yes — ^there 

were  the  six  red  cabbages  on  the  purple  satin  lap,  a  very  white 

band,  with  some  gold  rings  on  the  fingers,  slightly  holding 

them  together,  and  streaming  ringlets,  half  hiding  a  laughing 

&ce,  drooped  over  them :   only  half-hi6mg :   Peter  saw  the 

laugh — ^it  was  unmistakeable — ^he  was  made  a  joke  of — ^his 

gallantry,  his  chivalry  were  the  subject  of  a  jest  for  a  petti- 

coat-^for  two  petticoats — ^Miss  Helstone  too   was   smiling. 

Moreover,  he  felt  he  was  seen  through,  and  Peter  grew  black 

as  a  thunder-cloud.     When  Shirley  looked  up,  a  fell  eye  was 

&atened  on  her:  Malone,  at  least,  had  energy  enough  in  hate: 

■he  saw  it  in  his  glance. 

"  Peter  is  worth  a  scene,  and  shall  have  it,  if  he  likes,  one 
day,"  she  whispered  to  her  friend. 

And  npw — solemn  and  sombre  as  to  their  colour,  though 
Uwd  e&ofkgh  ap  to  their  laces — appeared  at  the  dining-room 


246  SHIBIiEY. 

door  the  three  rectors:  they  liad  Mtherto  been  busy  in  the 
churcli,  and  were  now  coming  to  take  sonae  little  refineshment 
for  the  body,  ere  the  march  commenced.  The  large  morocco- 
covered  easy  chair  had  been  left  vacant  for  Dr  Boxiltby;  ha 
was  put  into  it,  and  Caroline,  obeying  the  instigatiions  of 
Shirley,  who  told  her  now  was  the  time  to  play  the  hostess, 
hastened  to  hand  to  her  uncle's  vast,  reveml,  and,  on  the 
whole,  worthy  friend,  a  glass  of  wine  and  a  plate  of  macarocnt. 
Boultby's  churchwardens,  patrons  of  the  Simday-school  both, 
as  he  insisted  on  their  being,  were  already  beside  him ;  Mrs 
Sykes  and  the  other  ladies  of  his  congregation  were  on  his  right 
hand  and  on  his  left,  expressing  their  hopes  that  he  was  not 
fatigued,  their  fears  that  the  day  would  be  too  warm  for  him. 
Mrs  Boiiltby,  who  held  an  opinion  that  when  her  lord  dropped 
asleep  after  a  good  dinner  hiis  face  becam/e  aa  the  &ce  of  an 
angel,  was  bending  over  him,  tenderly  wiping  some  perspiradon, 
real  or  imaginary,  from  his  brow:  Boultby,,in  short,  vras  id 
his  glory,  and  in  a  roimd  sound  '' voix  de  poitrine/'  he  rumbled 
out  thanks  for  attentions,  and  assurances  of  hi&  tolerable  health. 
Of  Caroline  he  took  no  manner  of  notice  as  she  came  near, 
save  to  accept  what  she  offered;  he  did  not  see  her,  he  never 
did  see  her :  he  hardly  knew  that  such  a  person  existed*  He  saw 
the  macaroons,  however,  and  being  fond  of  sweets,  possessed 
himself  of  a  small  handful  thereof.  The  wine,  Mrs  Boultby 
insisted  on  mingling  with  hot  water,  and  qualifying  with  sugar 
and  nutmeg. 

Mr  Hall  stood  near  an  open  window,  breathing. the  fresh  air 
and  Bcent  of  flowers,  and  talking  like  a  brother  to  Miss  Ainley. 
To  him  Caroline  turned  her  attention  with  pleasure.  '^  What 
should  she  bring  him  ?  He  must  not  h^p  himself— -he  must 
be  served  by  her ; "  and  she  provided  h&rself  with  a  HttLe  salver, 
that  she  might  offer  him  variety.  Margid%t  Hall  joined  them; 
so  did  MissKeeldar;  thefour  ladles  stood  round  their  £&vourite 
p^istor:  they  also  had  an  idea  that  they  looked  on  the  face  of 
an  earthly  angel:  Cyril  Hall  was  iheix  pope,  in&llible  to  them 
as  Dr  Thomas  Boultby  to  his  admirers, ;  A  throng,  too,  ^ck>sed 
the  Rector  of  Briarfield:  twenty  or  more,  pressed  rounid  him; 
and  no  parson  was  ever  mope  potent  in  a  circle  than  old  Hel- 
stone.  The  curates  herding  together  after  their  mianner,  made 
a  constellation  of  three  lesser  planets:  divers  young  ladies 
watched  them  afar  off,  but  ventured  not  nigh. 

Mr  Helstone  produced  his  watch.  *<  Ten  minu^  to  two,** 
he  announced  aloud.    «  Time  for  all  to  fall,  into  line.    Gome." 


THE  SGHOOL-FXAST.  247 

He  seized  bis  shovel-hat  and  marched  away;  all  rose  and 
followed  en  masse. 

The  tweli^e  hundred  children  were  drawn  up  in  three  bodies 
of  W  liTmdrea  souls  each :  in  the  rear  of  each  regiment  w«. 
stationed  a  band;  between  every  twenty  there  was  an  interval, 
wherein  Helstone  posted  the  teachers  in  pairs :  to  «the  van  of 
the  armies  he^oned:- 

"  Grace  Boultby  and  Mary  Sykes  lead  out  Whinbury." 

*'  Margaret  HaU  and  Maiy  Ann  Ainley  conduct  Nunnely." 

<<  Caroline  Helstone  and  Shirley  Keeldar  head  Briarfield." 

01.^^  he  gave  command:!- 

"Mr  Donne  to  Whmbury;  Mr  Sweeting  to  Nunnely;  Mi> 
Malone  to  Briarfield." 

And  these  gentlemen  stepped  up  before  the  lady-generals. 

The  rectors  passed  to  the  full  front — ^the  parish  clerks  fell 
to  the  extreme  rear;  Helstone  lifted  his  shovel-hat;  in  an 
instant  out  clashed  the  eight  bells  in  the  tower,  loud  swelled 
the  sounding  bands,  flute  spoke  and  clarion  answered,  deep 
rolled  the  drums,  and  away  they  marched. 

The  broad  white  road  unrolled  before  the  long  procession, 
the  sun  and  sky  surveyed  it  cloudless,  the  wind  tossed  the 
tree-boughs  above  it,  and  the  twelve  hundred  children,  and  one 
hundred  aiid  forty  adults,  of  which  it  was  composed,  trpd  on 
in  time  and  tune,  with  gay  faces  and  glad  hearts.  It  was  a 
joyous  scene,  and  a  scene  to  do  good:  it  was  a  day  of  happi- 
ness for  rich  and  poor:  the  work,  first  of  God,  and  then  of  itke 
clergy.  Let  England^s  priests  have  their  due :  they  are  a  faulty 
set  in  some,  respects,  being  only  of  common  flesii  and  blood, 
like  US  all j  but  the  land  would /be  badly  off  without  them: 
Britain  would  miss  her  church,  if  that  church  feU.  God  save 
itl    God  also  reform  iti 


CHAPTER  XVIL 

THE  SCHOOL-FEAST. 


Not  on  combat  bent,  nor  of  foemen  in  search,  was  this  priest* 
led  and  woman-officered  company:  yet  their  music  played 
martial  tones^  and — ^to  judge  by  the  eyes. and  carriage  of  some, 
Miw  Keeldar^  for  instance — ^tbese  sounds  awoke,  if  not  a  mar- 


248  8HIBLET. 

tial,  yet  a  longing  spirit.     Old  Helstone,  taming  by  chance, 
looked  into  her  face,  and  he  laughed,  and  she  laogh^  at  him. 

"There  is  no  battle  in  prospect j"  he  said;  "our  country 
does  not  want  us  to  fight  for  it:  no  foe  or  tyrant  is  questiomng 
or  threatening  our  liberty:  there  is  nothing  to  be  done:  we 
are  only  taking  a  walk.  Keep  your  hand  on  the  reins,  captain, 
and  slack  the  fire  of  that  spirit:  it  is  not  wanted;  the  inore*8 
the  pity." 

"  Take  your  own  advice,  Doctor,"  was  Shirley's  response. 
To  Caroline,  she  murmued,  "  I  *11  borrow  of  imagination  what 
reality  will  not  give  me.  We  are  not  soldiers — ^bloodshed  is 
not  my  desire ;  or  if  we  are,  we  are  soldiers  of  the  Cross.  Time 
hais  rolled  back  some  hundreds  of  years,  and  we  are  bound  on 
a  pilgrimage  to  Palestine.  But  no, — ^that  is  too  visionaiy.  I 
need  a  sterner  dream :  we  are  Lowlanders  of  Scotland,  following 
.*&  covenanting  captain  up  into  the  hills  to  hold  a  meeting  out 
of  the  reach  of  persecuting  troopers.  We  know  that  battle  may 
follow  prayer;  and,  as  we  believe  that  in  the  worst  issue  of 
battle,  heaven  must  be  our  reward,  we  are  ready  and  willing 
to  redden  the  peat-moss  with  our  blood.  That  music  stirs  my 
soul;  it  wakens  all  my  life ;  it  makes  my  heart  beat:  not  widi 
its  temperate  daily  pulse,  but  with  a  new,  thrilling  vigour.  I 
almost  long  for  danger;  for  a  faith— ^  land— or,  at  least,  a 
lover  to  defend." 

"  Look,  Shirley! "  interrupted  Caroline.  "  What  is  that  red 
speck  above  Stilbro'  Brow  ?  You  have  keener  sight  than  I ; 
just  turn  your  eagle  eye  to  it." 

Miss  Keeldar  looked.  "  I  see,"  she  said  :  then  added,  pre- 
sently, "  there  is  a  line  of  red.  They  are  soldiers — cavalry 
soldiers,"  she  subjoined  quickly:  "they  ride  fast:  there  are 
six  of  them :  they  will  pass  us :  no — they  have  turned  off  to 
the  right:  they  saw  our  procession,  and  avoid  it  by  making  a 
circuit.     Where  are  they  going  ?  " 

"  Perhaps  they  are  oidy  exercising  their  horses." 

"  Perhaps  so.    We  see  them  no  more  now." 

Mr  Helstone  here  spoke. 

"  We  shall  pass  through  Royd-lane,  to  reach  Nunnely  Com- 
mon by  a  short  cut,"  said  he. 

And  into  the  straits  of  Royd-lane  they  accordingly  defiled 
It  was  very  narrow, — so  narrow  that  only  two  could  walk 
abreast  without  falling  into  the  ditch  which  ran  along  each 
side.  They  had  gained  the  middle  of  it,  when  excitement 
became  obvious  in  the  clerical  commanders :  Boultby's  spec* 


THE  SCHOOL-FEAST.  249 

tedef  and  Helstone's  Eehoboam  were  agitated:  the  curatefl 
nudged  each  other:  Mr  Hall  turned  to  the  ladled  and  smiled. 

"  What  is  the  matter  ?  "  was  the  demand. 

He  pointed  with  his  staff  to  the  end  of  the  lane  before  them. 
Lo  and  behold  I  another, — ^an  opposition  processidh  was  there 
entering,  headed  also  by  men  in  black,  and  followed  also,  as 
they  could  now  hear,  by  music. 

"  Is  it  our  double ?"  asked  Shirley:  " our  manifold  wraith  ? 
Here  is  a  card  turned  up." 

"  If  you  wanted  a  battle,  you  are  likely  to  get  one, — at  least 
of  looks,"  whispered  Caroline,  laughing. 

'*  They  shall  not  pass  us  1"  cried  the  curates,  unanimously: 
"  we  11  not  give  way  I " 

"Giye  way  I"  retorted  Helstone,  sternly,  turning  round; 
**  who  talks  of  giving  way  ?  You,  boys,  mind  what  you  are 
about:  the  ladies,  I  know,  will  be  finn;  I  can  trust  them. 
There  is  not  a  churchwoman  here  but  will  stand  her  ground 
against  these  folks,  for  the  honour  of  the  Establishment.  What 
does  Miss  Keeldar  say  ?  " 

"She  asks  what  is  it?" 

'^  The  Dissenting  and  Methodist  schools,  the  Baptists,  Inde- 
pendents, and  Wesleyans,  joined  in  unholy  alliance,  and  turn- 
ing purposely  into  this  lane  with  the  intention  of  obstructing 
our  march  and  driving  us  back." 

''Bad  manners  I"  said  Shirley  ;  '^  and  I  hate  bad  manners. 
Of  course,  they  must  have  a  lesson." 

"A  lesson  in  politeness,"  suggested  Mr  Hall,  who  was  ever 
for  peace:  "  not  an  example  of  rudeness." 

Old  Helstone  moved  on.  Quickening  his  step,  he  marched 
Bome  yards  in  advance  of  his  company.  He  had  nearly  reached 
the  other  sable  leaders,  when  he  who  appeared  to  act  as  the 
hostile  commander-in-chief — 3,  large,  greasy  man,  with  black 
liair  combed  flat  on  his  forehead— called  a  halt.  The  pro- 
ceadon  paused :  he  drew  forth  a  hymn-bOok,  gave  out  a  verse, 
set  a  time,  and  they  all  struck  up  the  most  dolorous  of  canticles. 

Helstone  signed  to  his  bands:  they  clashed  out  with  all  the 
power  of  brass.  He  desired  them  to  play  ''  Rule,  Britannia," 
ind  ordered  the  children  to  join  in  vocally,  which  they  did 
with  enthusiastic  spirit.  The  enemy  was  sung  and  stormed 
down;  his  psalm  quelled:  as  far  as  noise  went,  he  was 
conquered. 

''Now,  follow  mel"  exclaimed  Helstone;  "not  at  a  run, 
Imi  at  a  firm,  smart  pace.    Be  steady,  every  child  and  woman 


250  8HIBLET. 

of  70u:-*-keep  together: — hold  on  by  each  other*8  akiiti,  if  | 
necessary." 

And  he  strode  on  with  such  a  determined  and  deliberate 
gait,  and  was,  besides,  so  well  seconded  by  his  scholars  and 
teadiers — ^who  did  exactly  as  he  told  them,  neither  nmniBg 
nor  faltering,  but  marching  with  cool,  solid-  impetus ;  the 
curates,  too,  being  compelled  to  do  the  same,  as  they  weie 
between  two  fires, — ^Helstone  and  Miss  Keeldar,  both  of  whom 
watched  any  deviation  with  Ijmx-eyed  yigilance,  and  wen; 
ready,  the  one  with  his  cane,  the  odier  with  her  parasol,  to 
rehire  the  slightest  breach  of  orders,  the  least  independeoi 
or  irregular  demonstration, — ^that  the  body  of  Dissenters  were 
first  amazed,  then  alarmed,  then  borne  down  and  pressed  back, 
and  at  last  forced  to  turn  tail  and-leave  the  outlet  from  Boyd- 
lane  free.  Boultby  suffered  in  the  onslaught,  but  Helstone 
and  Malone,  between  them,  held  him  up,  and  brought  bim 
through  the  business,  whole  in  limb,  though  sorely  Irifid  in 
wind. 

The  fet  Dissenter  who  had  given  out  the  hynm  was  left 
sitting  in  the  ditch.  He  was  a  spirit-merchant  by  trade,  a 
leader  of  the  Nonconformists,  and,  it  was  said,  drank  more 
water  in  that  one  afternoon  than  he  had  swallowed  for  a 
twelvemonth  before.  Mr  Hall  had  taken  care  of  Caroline, 
and  Caroline  of  him:  he  and  Miss  Ainley  Qiade  their  own 
quiet  comments  to  each  other  afterwards  on  the  incident. 
Miss  Keeldar  and  Mr  Helstone  shook  hands  heartily  wbes 
they  had  fairly  goi  the  whole  party  through  the  lane.  The 
curates  began  to  exult,  but  Mr  Helstone  presently  put  the 
curb  on  their  innocent  spirits  :  he  remarked  that  they  never 
had  sense  to  know  what  to  say,  and  had  better  hold  their 
tongues;  and  he  reminded  them  that  the  business  was  none 
of  their  managiog. 

About  half-past  three  the  procession  turned  back,  and  at 
four  once  more  regained  the  starting-place.  Long  lines  of 
benches  were  arranged  in  the  close-shorn  fields  round  the 
school :  there  the  children  were  seated,  and  huge  baskets, 
covered  up  with  white  cloths,  and  great  smoking  tin  vessels 
were  brought  out.  Ere  the  distribution  of  good  things  com* 
menced,  a  brief  grace  was  pronounced  by  Mr  Hall,  and  sung 
by  the  children:  their  young  voices  sotmded  melodious,  even 
touching,  in  the  open  air.  Large  currant  bims,  and.  hot,  well- 
Bweetened  tea,  were  then  administered  in  the  proper  spirit  of 
Hberality:  no  stinting  was  permitted  on  this  day,  at  least;  the 


THE  SGBO(»i-rEAST.  21^1 

role  for  each  child's  allowance  being  that  it  'vt^  as  to  have  about 
twice  as  much  as  it  could  possibly  eat,  thus  leaving  a  resenre 
to  be  carried  home  for  such  as  age,  sickness,  or  other  impedi- 
menty  prevented  from  coming  to  the  feast.  Bims  and  beer 
circulated)  meantime,  amongst  the  musicians  and  church- 
sincers :  afterwards  the  benches  were  removed,  and  they  were 
kftVunbend  their  spirits  in  Ucensed  play. 

A  bell  summoned  the  teachers,  patrons,  and  patronesses  to 
ihe  schoolroom;  Miss  Keeldar,  Miss  Helstone,  and  many  other 
J«lie8  we«  dx^T  there,  glancing  over  the'  arrangement  of 
thdr  separate  trays  and  tables.  Most  of  the  female  servants 
of  the  neighbourhood,  together  with  the  clerks^  the  singers^ 
and  the  musicians'  wives,  had  been  pressed  into  the  service  of 
the  day  as  waiters :  each  vied  with  the  other  in  smartness 
and  daintiness  of  dress,  and  many  handsome  forms  were  seen 
amongst  the  younger  ones.  About  half  a  score  were  cutting 
bread  and  butter;  another  half-score  supplying  hot  watery 
brought  from  the  coppers  of  the  Rector's  kitchen.  The  pro- 
fusion of  flowers  and  evergreens  decorating  the  white  walls, 
the  diow  of  silver  teapots  and  bright  porcelain  on  the  tables, 
the  active  figures,  blithe  faces,  gay  dresses  flitting  about 
eveiywhere,  formed  altogether  a  refreshing  and  lively  spectacle* 
Everybody  talked,  not  very  loudly,  but  merrily,  and  the 
eanazy  birds  sang  shrill  in  their  high-hung  cages. 

Oafdine,  as  the  Bector's  niece,  took  her  place  at  one  of  the 
three  first  tables  ;  Mrs  Boultby  and  Margaret  Hall  officiated 
at  the  others.  At  these  tables  the  61ite  of  the  company  were 
to  be  entertained  ;  strict  rules  of  equality  not  being  more  in 
fashion  at  Briarfield  than  elsewhere.  Miss  Helstone  removed 
her  bonnet  and  scarf,  that  she  might  be  less  oppressed  with 
the  heat ;  her  long  curls,  falling  on  her  neck,  served  almost 
in  place  of  a  veil,  and  for  the  rest,  her  muslin  dress  was 
&8hioiied  modestly  as  a  nim's  robe,  enabling  her  thus  to 
dispense  with  the  encumbrance  of  a  shawl. 

The  room  was  filling  :  Mr  Hall  had  taken  his  post  beside 
Canoline,  who  now,  as  she  re-arranged  the  cups  and  spoons 
before  her,  whispered  to  him  in  a  low  voice  remarks  on  the 
erents  of  ^e  day.  He  looked  a  little  grave  about  what  had 
taken  place  in  Royd-lane,  and  she  tried  to  smile  him  out  of 
bis  seiiousness.  Miss  Keeldar  sat  near;  for  a  wonder,  neither 
laughing  nbr  talking;  on  the  contrary,  very  still,  and  gazing 
round  her  vigilantly  :  she  seemed  afraid  lest  some  intruder 
diould  take  a  seat  she  apparently  wished  to  reserve  next  her 


S58  SHIBLET. 

own:  ever  uid  anon  Bhe  spread  hex  satin  dress  over  an  ttndti 
portion  of  the  bench,  or  laid  ber  gloves  or  her  embroiderei 
handkerchief  upon  it.  Caroline  noticed  this  manj^e  at  last 
and  asked  her  what  fiiiend  she  expected.  Shirley  bent  towardi 
her,  almost  touched  her  ear  with  her  rosy  lii»,  and  vrhisperea 
with  a  mosical  softness  that  often  characterized  her  tones, 
when  what  she  said  tended  eren  remotely  to  stir  some  sweet 
secret  source  of  feeling  in  her  heart : — 

"  I  expect  Mr  Moore :  I  saw  him  last  night,  and  I  made 
him  promise  to  come  with  hia  sister,  and  to  sit  at  our  table  : 
he  won't  fail  me,  I  feel  certain,  but  I  apprehend  his  coming' 
too  late,  and  being  separated-  {rata  ns.  Here  is  a  freslk  batch 
arriving  ;  eveiy  place  will  be  taken :  provoking !" 

In  fact  Mr  Wynne  the  magistrate,  his  wife,  hia  son,  and  hia 
two  daughters,  now  entered  in  high  state.  They  were  Briar- 
field  gentry :  of  course  their  place  was  at  the  first  table,  and 
being  conducted  thither,  they  filled  np  the  whole  remaining 
space.  For  Miss  Keeldar's  comfort,  Mr  Sam  Wynne  inducted 
himself  into  the  very  vaeancy  she  had  kept  for  Moore,  planting 
himself  solidly  on  her  gown,  her  gloves,  and  her  handkerchief. 
Hr  Sam  was  one  of  theobjects  ofher  aversion;  and  the  more 
80  because  he  showed  serioos  symptoms  of  an  aim  at  her 
hand.     The  old  gentleman,  too,  had  pnbliclr  declared  tliat  the 


THE  SCHOOL^FEAST.  258 

fbward-looking  face  under  it;  she  knew  that  "  robe  de  sole 

noire ;''  she  knew  even  that  "schal  gris  de  lin ;"  she  knew,  in 

short;  Hortense  Moore,  and  she  wanted  to  jump  up  and  run  to 

her  and  kiss  her — to  give  her  one  embrace  for  her  own  sake, 

and  two  for  her  brother's.     She  half  rose,  indeed,  with  a 

smothered  exclamation,  and  perhaps — for  the  impulse  was 

Tery  strong — she  would  have  run  across  the  room,  and  actually 

saluted  her,  but  a  hand  replaced  her  in  her  seat,  and  a  voice 

behind  her  whispered : — 

"  Wait  till  after  tea,  Lina,  and  then  I'll  bring  her  to  you." 

And  when  she  caiUd  look  up  she  did,  and  there  was  Robert 

himself  close  behind,  smiling  at  her  eagerness,  looking  better 

than  she  had  ever  seen  him  look — ^looking,  indeed,  to  her 

partial  eyes,  so  very  handsome,  that  she  dared  not  trust  herself 

to  hazard  a  second  glance ;  for  his  image  struck  on  her  vision 

vith  painful  brightness,  and  pictured  itself  on  her  memory  as 

▼ividly  as  if  there  daguerreotyped  by  a  pencil  of  keen  lightning. 

He  moved  on,  and  spoke  to  Miss  Eeeldar.    Shirley,  irritated 

by  some  unwelcome  attentions  from  Sam  Wynne,  and  by  the 

&ct  of  that  gentleman  being  still  seated  on  her  gloves  and 

handkerchief — and  probably,  also,  by  Moore's  want  of  punc- 

toaiity — ^was  by  no  means  in  good  humour.    She  first  shrugged 

her  shoulder  at  him,  and  then  she  said  a  bitter  word  or  two 

about  his  '^  insupportable  tardiness."  Moore  neither  apologized 

nor  retorted:  he  stood  near  her  quietly,  as  if  waiting  to  see 

whether  she  would  recover  her  temper;  which  she  did  in  little 

more  than  three  minutes,  indicating  the  change  by  offering  him 

her  hand.     Moore  took  it  with  a  smile,  half-corrective,  half- 

gratefol:  the  slightest  possible  shake  of  the  head  delicately 

marked  the  former  quality ;  it  is  probable  a  gentle  pressure 

indicated  the  latter. 

**  Tou  may  sit  where  you  can,  now,  Mr  Moore,"  said  Shirley, 
also  smiling:  you  see  there  is  not  an  inch  of  room  for  you 
here;  but  I  discern  plenty  of  space  at  Mrs  Boultby's  table, 
between  Miss  Armitage  and  Miss  Birtwhistle;  go:  John  Sykes. 
will  be  your  vis-^vis,  and  you  will  sit  with  your  back  towards 
ns." 

Moore,  however,  preferred  lingering  about  where  he  was: 
he  now  and  then  took  a  turn  down  the  long  room,  pausing  in 
his  walk  to  interchange  greetings  with  other  gentlemen  in  his 
own  placeless  predicament ;  but  still  he  came  back  to  the 
■lAgnet,  Shirley,  bringing  with  him,  each  time  he  returned, 
obBenrfttions  it  was  necessary  to  whisper  in  her  ear. 


254  6HIRLST. 

Meautime,  poor  Sam  Wynne  looked  fiir  from  oomfbrtebte: 
liis  fair  neighbour,  judging  from  her  morements,  appeared  in 
a  mood  the  most  unquiet  and  unaccommodating:  she  would 
not  sit  still  two  seconds:  she  was  hot;  she  &nned  herself; 
complained  of  want  of  air  and  space.  She  remarked,  that,  in 
her  opinion,  when  people  had  finished  their  tea  they  ought  to 
leave  the  tables,  and  announced  distinctly  that  she  expected  to 
faint  if  the  present  state  of  things  continued.  Mr  Sam  offered 
to  accompany  her  into  the  open  air;  just  the  way  to  give  her 
her  death  of  cold,  she  alleged:  in  short,  his  post  became 
untenable;  and  having  ^swallowed  his  quantum  of  tea,  he 
judged  it  expedient  to  evacuate. 

Moore  should  have  been  at  hand,  whereas  he  was  qtiite  at 
the  other  extremity  of  the  room,  deep  in  conference  with 
Christopher  Sykes.  A  large  corn-factor,  Timothy  Ramsden, 
Esq.,  happened  to  be  nearer,  and  feeling  himself  tired  of  stand- 
ing, he  advanced  to  fill  the  vacant  seat.  Shirley's  expedienti 
did  not  fail  her:  a  sweep  of  her  scarf  upset  her  teacup,  its 
contents  were  shared  between  the  bench  and  her  own  satin 
dress.  Of  course,  it  became  necessary  to  call  a  waiter  to 
remedy  the  mischief :  Mr  Ramsden,  a  stout,  pufFjr  gentleman, 
as  large  in  person  as  he  was  in  property,  held  aloof  from  the 
consequent  commotion.  Shirley,  usually  almost  culpably 
indifferent  to  slight  accidents  affecting  dress,  &c.,  now  made  a 
commotion  that  might  have  become  the  most  delicate  and 
nervous  of  her  sex ;  Mr  Ramsden  opened  his  mouth,  withdrew 
slowly,  and,  as  Miss  Keeldar  again  intimated  her  intention  to 
''  give  way"  and  swoon  on  the  spot,  he  turned  on  his  heel,  and 
beat  a  heavy  retreat. 

Moore  at  last  returned:  calmly  survejdng  the  bustle,  and 
somewhat  quizzically  scanning  Shirley's  enigmatical-looking 
coimtenance,  he  remarked,  that,  in  truth  this  was  the  hottest 
end  of  the  room ;  that  he  found  a  climate  there  calculated  to 
agree  with  none  but  cool  temperaments  like  his  own;  and, 
putting  the  waiters,  the  napkins,  the  satin  robe,  the  whole 
turmoil,  in  short,  to  one  side,  he  installed  himself  wheire 
destiny  evidently  decreed  he  should  sit.  Shirley  subsided; 
her  features  altered  their  lines:  the  raised  knit  brow  and 
inexplicable  curve  of  the  mouth  became  straight  again:  wilful- 
ness and  roguery  gave  place  to  other  expressions;  and  all  the 
angular  movements  with  which  she  had  vexed  the  soul  of  Sam 
Wynne  were  conjured  to  rest  as  by  a  charm.  Still,  no  gnunous 
glance  was  cast  on  Moore:  on  the  contrary,  he  was  aocumd  of 


THS  SCHOOL-FEAST*  255 

f 

I 

giving  ber  a  woUd  of  trouble,  and  roundly  charged  mth  being 
die  cause  of  depriving  her  of  the  esteem  of  Mr  Kamsden,  and 
the  invaluable  friendship  of  Mr.  Samuel  Wjmne. 

"  Wouldn't  have  offended  either  gentleman,  for  the  world,** 
«he  averred:  "^I  have  always  been  accustomed  to  treat  botii 
with  the  most  respectM  consideration,  and  there,  owing  to 
you,  how  they  have  been  used !  I  shall  not  be  happy  till  I 
have  made  it  up :  I  never  am  happy  till  I  am  friends  with  my 
neighbours;  so  to-morrow  I  must  make  a  pilgrimage  to  Boyd 
corn-mill,  soothe  the  miller,  and  praise  the  grain ;  and  next 
day  I  must  call  atDeWalden — ^where  I  hate  to  go— and  carry 
in  my  reticule  half  an  oat-cake  to  give  to  Mr  Sam's  &YOurite 
pointers.'' 

^  You  know  the  surest  path  to  the  heart  of  each  swain,  I 
doubt  not,"  said  Moore  quietly.  He  looked  very  content  to 
have  at  last  secured  his  present  place ;  but  he  made  no  fine 
speech  expressive  of  gratification,  and  offered  no  apology  for 
^he  trouble  he  had  given.  His  phlegm  became  him  wonder- 
folly:  it  made  him  look  handsomer,  he  was  so  composed:  it 
made  his  vicinage  pleasant,  it  was  so  peace-restoring.  You 
would  not  have  thought,  to  look  at  him,  that  he  was  a  poor, 
struggling  man  seated  beside  a  rich  woman;  the  calm  of 
equality  stilled  his  aspect:  perhaps  that  calm,  too,  reigned  in 
his  soul.  Now  and  tiien,  from  the  way  in  which  he  looked 
down  on  Miss  Keeldar  as  he  addressed  her,  you  would  have 
fimde^his  station  towered  above  hers  as  much  as  his  stature 
did.  Almost  stem  lights  sometimes  crossed  his  brow  and 
gleamed'in  his  eyes:  their  conversation  had  become  animated, 
though  it  was  confined  to  a  low  key;  she  was  urging  him  with 
questions— evidentiy,  he  refiised  to  her  curiosity  all  the  grati- 
fication it  demanded.  She  sought  his  eye  once  with  hers: 
jou  ready  in  its  soft  yet  eager  expression,  that  it  solicited 
clearer  replies.  Moore  smiled  pleasantly,  but  his  lips  con- 
tinued sealed.  Then  she  was  piqued  and  turned  away,  but  he 
recalled  her  attention  in  two  minutes :  he  seemed  making 
promises,  which  he  soothed  her  into  accepting,  in  lieu  of 
information. 

It  appeared  that  the  htot  of  the  room  did  not  suit  Miss 
Helstone:  she  grew  paler  and  paler  as  the  process  of  tea- 
oiaking  was  protracted.  The  moment  thanks  were  returned, 
ihe  q[idtted  me  table,  and  hastened  to  follow  her  cousin 
HoiteDse,  who,  with  Miss  Mann,  had  already  sought  the  open 
cr.    Eobert  Moore  had  risen  when  she  did — ^perhaps  he  meant 


256  SHIBLET* 

to  speak  to  her ;  but  there  was  yet  a  parting  ivord  to  exchange 
with  Lliss  Keeldar,  and  while  it  was  being  uttered,  Caroline 
had  vanished. 

Hortense  received  her  former  pupil  with  a  demeanour  of 
more  dignity  than  warmth :  she  had  been  seriously  offended 
by  Mr.  Helstone^s  proceedings,  and  had  aU  along  considered 
Caroline  to  blame,  in  obeying  her  uncle  too  litersdly. 

"  You  are  a  very  great  stranger,"  she  said,  austerely,  as 
her  pupil  held  and  pressed  her  hand.  The  pupil  knew  her 
too  well  to  remonstrate  or  complain  of  coldness ;  she  let  the 
punctilious  whim  pass,  sure  that  her  natural  honte  (I  use  this 
French  word,  because  it  expresses  just  what  I  mean;  neither 
goodness  nor  good  nature,  but  something  between  the  two) 
would  presently  get  the  upper-hand.  It  did :  Hortense  had 
no  sooner  examined  her  face  well,  and  observed  the  change  its 
somewhat  wasted  features  betrayed,  than  her  mien  softened. 
Kissing  her  on  both  cheeks,  she  asked  anxiously  afler  her 
health:  Caroline  answered  gaily.  It  would,  however,  have 
been  her  lot  to  undergo  a  long  cross-examination,  followed 
by  an  endless  lecture  on  this  head,  had  not  Miss  Mann  called 
off  the  attention  of  the  questioner,  by  requesting  to  be  con- 
ducted home.  The  poor  invalid  was  already  fatigued:  her 
weariness  made  her  cross — ^too  cross  almost  to  speak  to  Caro- 
line ;  and  besides,  that  young  person's  white  dress  and  lively 
look  were  displeasing  in  the  eyes  of  Miss  Mann:  the  every- 
day garb  of  brown  stuff  or  grey  gingham,  and  the  everyday 
air  of  melancholy,  suited  the  solitary  spinster  better:  she  would 
hardly  know  her  young  friend  to-night,  and  quitted  her  with  a 
cool  nod.  Hortense  having  promised  to  accompany  her  homei 
they  departed  together. 

Caroline  now  looked  round  for  Shirley.  She  saw  t;he  rain- 
bow scarf  and  purple  dress  in  the  centre  of  a  throng  of  ladies, 
all  well  known  to  herself,  but  all  of  the  order  whom  she  syste- 
matically avoided  whenever  avoidance  was  possible.  Shyer  at 
some  moments  than  at  others,  she  felt  just  now  no  courage  at 
all  to  join  this  company:  she  could  not,  however,  stand  sJone 
where  all  others  went  in  pairs  or  parties,  so  she  approached  a 
group  of  her  own  scholars,  great  girls,  or  rather  young  women, 
who  were  standing  watching  some  hundreds  of  the  younger 
children  playing  at  blind-man's-buff. 

Miss  Helstone  knew  these  girls  liked  her,  yet  she  was  shy 
even  with  them  out  of  school:  they  were  not  more  in  awe 'A 
her  than  she  of  them :  she  drew  near  them  now,  rather  to 


TBE  SCHOOL-FCAST.  257 

find  protecrion  in  their  company  than  to  patronize  them  with 
her  presence.  By  some  instinct  they  knew  her  weakness,  and 
with  natural  politeness  they  respected  it.  Her  knowledge 
commanded  their  esteem  when  she  taught  them ;  her  gentle- 
ness attracted  their  regard ;  and  because  she  was  what  they 
considered  wise  and  good  when  on  duty  they  kindly  over- 
looked her  evident  timidity  when  off:  they  did  not  take 
advantage  of  it.  Peasant  girls  as  they  were,  they  had  too  much 
of  her  own  English  sensibility  to  be  guilty  of  the  coarse  error: 
they  stood  round  her  still,  civil,  friendly,  receiving  her  slight 
smiles,  and  rather  hurried  efforts  to  converse,  with  a  good 
feeling  and  good  breeding:  the  last  quality  being  the  result  of 
the  first,  which  soon  set  her  at  her  ease. 

Mr  Sam  Wynne  coming  up  with  great  haste,  to  insist  on 
the  elder  girls  joining  in  the  game  as  well  as  the  younger  ones, 
Caroline  was  again  left  alone.  .She  was  meditating  a  quiet 
retreat  to  the  house,  when  Shirley,  perceiving  from  afar  her 
isolation,  hastened  to  her  side.- 

"Let  us  go  to  the  top  of  the  fields,''  she  said:  "I  know 
you  don't  like  crowds,  Caroliiie." 

"But  it  will  t)e  depriving  you  of  a  pleasure,  Shirley,  to 
take  you  frota  all  these  fine  people,  who  court  your  society  so 
assiduously,  and  to  whom  you  can,  without  art  or  effort,  make 
yourself  so  pleasant." 

"  Not  quite  without  effort:  I  am  already  tired  of  the  exer- 
tion:  it  is  but  insipid,  barren  work,  talking  and  laughing 
with  the  good  gentlefolks  of  Briarfield.     I  have  been  looking 
out  for  your  white  dress  for  the  last  ten  minutes  :  I  like  to 
watch  those  I  love  in  a  crowd,  and  to  compare  them  with 
others :  I  have  thus  compared  you.     You  resemble  none  of 
the  rest,  Lina:  there  are  some  prettier  faces  than  yours  here  ; 
you  are  not  a  model-beauty  like  Harriet  Sykes,  for  instance ; 
heside  her,  your  person  appears  almost  insignificant;  but  you 
look  agreeable — you  look  reflective — ^you  look  what  I  call 
interesting." 
"  Hush,  Shirley !    You  flatter  me." 
"  I  don't  wonder  that  your  scholars  like  you." 
''Nonsense,  Shirley:  talk  of  something  else." 
"We  will  talk  of  Moore,  then,  and  we  will  watch  him:  I 
lee  him  even  now." 

"Where?"  And  a^  Caroline  asked  the  question,  she 
looked  not  over  the  fields,  but  into  Miss  Keeldar's  eyes,  as 
was  her  wont  whenever  Shirley  mentioned  any  object  she 

17 


258  SHIRLET. 

descried  afar.  Her  friend  had  quicker  vision  than  heiBelf; 
and  Caroline -seemed  to  think  that  the  secret  of  her  eagle 
acuteness  might  be  read  in  her  dark  grey  irids :  or  rather, 
perhaps,  she  only  songht  guidance  by  the  direction,  of  those 
discriminating  and  brilliant  spheres. 

*^  There  is  Moore,"  said  Shirley,  pointing  right  across  the 
wide  field  where  a  thousand  children  were  playing,  aad  now 
nearly  a  thousand  adult  spectators  walking  about.  '*  Theie 
-^can  you  miss  the  tall  stature  and  straight  port?  He  Jookt 
amidst  the  set  that  surround  him  like  Eliab  amongst  humbler 
shepherds — ^like  Saul  in  a  war-coimcil:  and  a  war-council  it 
ifi,  £f  I  am  not  mistaken." 

"  Why  so,  Shirley  ? "  asked  Caroline,  whose  eye  liad  at 
last  caught  t)ie  object  it  sought.  <'  Robert  is  just  now  qpeak- 
ing  to  my  uncle,  and  they  are  shaking  hands;  they  are  then 
reconciled." 

'<  Eeconciled  not  without  good  reason,  depend  on  it :  makiTig 
common  cause  against  some  common  foe.  And  why,  think  you, 
are  Messrs  Wynne  and  Sykes,  and  Armitage  and  Bamsden, 
gathered  in  such  a  close  circle  ronnd  them?  And  why  is 
Malone  beckoned  to  join  them  ?  Where  ?ie  is  summoned,  be 
«ure  a  strong  arm  is  needed." 

Shirley,  as  she  watched,  grew  restless:  her  eyes  flashed. 

'^  They  won^t  trust  me,"  she  said:  "  that  is  iJways  the  way 
when  it  comes  to  the  point." 

"What  about?" 

«  Cannot  you  feel  ?  There  is  some  mystery  afloat :  some 
event  is  expected ;  some  preparation  is  to  be  made,  I  am 
certain:  I  saw  it  all  in  Mr  Moore's  manner  this  evening:  he 
was  excited,  yet  hard." 

"  Hard  to  you,  Shirley  I " 

"  Yes,  to  me.  He  often  is  hard  to  me.  We  seldom  con- 
verse t6te-iir-t^te,  but  I  am  made  to  feel  that  the  basis  of  hia 
character  is  not  of  dder  down." 

"  Yet  he  seemed  to  talk  to  you  softly." 

"  Did  he  not?  Very  gentle  tones  and  quiet  manner;  yet 
the  man  is  peremptory  and  secret:  his  secresy  vexes  me." 

"  Yes — ^Robei;t  is  secret." 

"  Which  he  has  scarcely  a  right  to  be  widi  me;  especially 
as  he  commenced  by  giving  me  his  confidence.  Having  done 
nothing  to  forfeit  that  confidence,  it  ought  not  to  be  with- 
drawn: but  I  suppose  I  am  not  considered  iroii-souled  enoagh 
to  be  trusted  in  a  crisis." 


THE  SCHOOL^FEAST.  S^ 

^He  iearSi  probably,  to  occasion  you  uneasiness." 
**  An  tumecessaiy  precaution :  I  am  of  elastic  materials, 
not  soon  crushed ;  he  ought  to  know  that :  but  the  man  is 
proud:  he  has  his  faults,  say  what  you  will,  Lina.  Observe 
How  engaged  that  group  appear :  they  do  not  know  we  are 
watching  tiiem." 

"  If  we  keep  on  the  alert,  Shirley,  we  shall  perhaps  find 
the  due  to  their  secret." 

"  There  will  be  some  unusual  movements  ^eloag-^erhaps 
to-morrow — possibly  to-night.  But  my  eyes  and  ears  are 
wide  open:  Mr  Moore,  you  shall  be  under  surveillanoei  -  Be 
yoa  vigilant  also,  Lina." 

"I  will:  Bobert  is  going,  I  saw  him  turn — I  bdieve  he 
notioed  xa — they  are  shaking  hands." 

^Shaking  hands,  with  emphasis,"  added  Shirley;  ^'as  if 
tbey  were  ratifying  some  solemn  league  and  coveiaant." 

Ihey  saw  Bob^  quit  the  group,  pass  throng  a  gate,  and 
dia^pear. 
^'  And  he  has  not  bid  us  good-bye,"  murmured  Carolineb 
Scarcely  had  the  words  escaped  her  lips,  when  she  tried 
by  a  smile  to  deny  the  confession  of  disaj^intment  they 
fleaned  to  imply.  An  imbidden  sufiiision  for  one  moment 
both  softened  and  Imghtened  her  eyes. 

"  Ohy  that  is  soon  remedied  1 "  exd^bned  Shirlq^.     "  We  '11 
moke  him  bid  us  good-bye." 
"  Make  him  1    That  is  not  the  same  thiog,^'  was  the  answer. 
^It  ^aU  be  Ihe  same  thing." 
"  But  he  is  gone:  you  can't  overtake  him.** 
"  I  know  a  shorter  way  than  that  he  has  taken :  we  will 
intocept  him." 
*'  But,  Shirley,  I  would  rather  not  go." 
Garoline  said  this  as  Miss  Eeeldar  aea^sed  her  aim,  and 
honied  her  down  the  fields.    It  was  vain  to  contend :  nothing 
w  so  wilfiil  as  Shirley,  when  she  took  a  whim  into  hex 
head:  Garc^ine  found  herself  out  of  dght  of  the  crowd  almost 
bcfim  At  was  aware,  and  ushered  into  a  narrow  shady  spot, 
€Bihow»«d  al>ove  with  hawthorns,  and  enamelled  under  foot 
with  daisiss.    She  took  no  notice  of  the  evening  sun  chequering 
the  turf,  nor  was  she  sensible  of  the  pure  incense  exhaling  at 
^  hoar  firom  tree  and  plant ;  she  only  heard  the  wicket 
<^«Qing  at  one  end,  and  knew  Robert  was  approaching.     The 
«ig  spnys  of  the  hawthorns,  shooting  dat  before  them, 
Mmd  as  a  sereen ;  they  saw  him  before  he  obsared  them. 


260  8HIBLET. 

At  a  glance  Caroline  perceived  that  bis  social  Ulaiity  t<nLS 
gone:  he  had  left  it  behind  him  in  the  joy-echoing  field* 
round  the  school;  what  remained  now  was  his  dark,  quiets 
business  countenance.  As  Shirley  had  said,  a  certain  hard- 
ness characterized  his  air,  while  his  eye  was  excited,  bat 
austere.  So  much  the  worse-timed  was  the  present  freak  of 
Shirley's :  if  he  had  looked  disposed  for  holiday  mirth,  it 
would  not  have  mattered  much,  but  now 

"  I  told  you  not  to  come,"  said  Caroline,  somewhat  bitterly, 
to  her  friend.  She  seemed  truly  perturbed:  to  be  intruded 
on  Bobert  thus,  against  her  will  and  his  expectation,  and 
when  he  evidently  would  rather  not  be  delayed,  keenly 
annoyed  her.  It  did  not  annoy  Miss  Keeldar  in  the  least : 
she  stepped  forward  and  faced  her  tenant,  barring  his  way  :— 

"  You  omitted  to  bid  us  good-bye,"  she  said. 

"  Omitted  to  bid  you  good-bye !  Where  did  you  come  from? 
Are  ybu  fairies  ?  I  left  two  like  you,  one  in  purple  and  one 
in  white,  standing  at  the  top  of  a  bank,  four  fields  off,  but  a 
minute  ago." 

"  You  left  us  there  and  find  us  here.  We  have  been 
watching  you ;  and  shall  watch  you  still :  yon  must  be 
questioned  one  day,  but  not  now:  at  present,  all  you  haTe 
to  do  is  to  say  good-night,  and  then  pass." 

Moore  glanced  from  one  to  the  other,  without  xmbending 
his  aspect.  "  Days  of  fSte  have  their  privileges,  and  so  have 
days  of  hazard,"  observed  he,  gravely. 

"  Come — don't  moralize :  say  good  night,  and  pass,"  uiged 
Shirley. 

"  Must  I  say  good-night  to  you,  Miss  Keeldar  ?" 

"  Yes,  and  to  Caroline  likewise.  It  is  nothing  new,  I  hope: 
you  have  bid  us  both  good-night  before." 

He  took  her  hand,  held  it  in  one  of  his,  and  covered  it  with 
the  other :  he  looked  down  at  her  gravely,  kindly,  yet  com- 
mandingly.  The  heiress  could  not  make  tins  man  her  subject: 
in  his  gaze  on  her  bright  face  there  was  no  serviUty,  haidly 
homage ;  but  there  was  interest  and  affection,  heightened 
by  another  feeHng:  something  in  his  tone  when  he  spoke, 
as  well  as  in  his  words,  marked  that  last  sentiment  to  be 
gratitude. 

"  Your  debtor  bids  you  good-night  I— May  you  rest  safely 
and  serenely  till  morning  I"  ^ 

"  And  you,  Mr  Moore, — ^what  are  yoa  going  to  do  ?  Whit 
have  you  been  saying  to  Mr  Helstone,  with  whom  I  saw  yon 


THE  SGHOOL-raAST.  261 

Rhake  Bands?     Wliy  did  all  those  gentlemen  gather  round 
you?    Put  awaj  reserve  for  once:  be  fr&nk.  with  me." 

**  Who  can  resist  you  ?  I  will  be  frank :  to-morrow,  if 
there  is  anything  to  relate,  you  shall  hear  it." 

**  Just  now,"  pleaded  Shirley:  "  don't  procrastinate." 

'^  But  I  could  only  tell  half  a  tale ;  and  my  time  is  limited, 
— I  have  not  a  moment  to  spare:  hereafter  I  will  make 
amends  for  delay  by  candour." 

^'  But  axe  you  going  home  ?" 

"  Yes." 

"  Not  to  leave  it  any  more  to-night  ?" 

"  Certainly  not.     At  present,  farewell  to  both  of  you ! " 

He  would  have  taken  Caroline's  hand  and  joined  it  in  the 
same  dasp  in  "^hich  he  held  Shirley's,  but  somehow  it  was  not 
teady  for  him;  she  had  withdrawn  a  few  steps  apart:  her 
answer  to  Moore's  adieu  was  only  a  slight  bend  of  the  head, 
and  a  gentle,  serious  smile.*  He  sought  no  more  cordial 
token:  again  he  said  *' Farewell  I"  and  quitted  them  both. 

"There! — ^it  is  over!"  said  Shirley,  when  he  was  gone. 
'^We  have  made  him  bid  us  good-night,  and  yet  not  lost 
ground  in  his  esteem,  I  think,  Cary." 

'*  I  hope  not,"  was  the  brief  reply. 

"I  consider  you  very  timid  and  imdemonstrative,"  re- 
marked Miss  Keeldar.  "  Why  did  you  not  give  Moore  your 
band  when  he  o£fered  you  his  ?  He  is  your  cousin:  you  like 
ban.    Are  you  ashamed  to  let  him  perceive  your  affection?" 

^  He  perceives  all  of  it  that  interests  him :  no  need  to  make 
a  display  of  feeling." 

"  You  are  laconic :  you  would  be  stoical  if  you  couM.  Is 
]o?e,  in  your  eyes,  a  crime,  Caroline  ?  " 

^  Love,  a  crime  1  No,  Shirley : — ^love  is  a  divine  virtue ; 
but  why  drag  that  word  into  the  conversation  ?  it  is  singularly 
iirelevant!" 

^  Good !"  pronounced  Shirley. 

The  two  girls  paced  the  green  lane  in  silence.  Caroline 
fiist  resumed. 

''  Obtrusiveness  is  a  crime ;  forwardness  is  a  crime ;  and 
both  disgust:  but  love ! — ^no  purest  angel  need  blush  to  lovel 
And  when  I  see  or  hear  either  man  or  woman  couple  shame 
with  love,  I  know  their  minds  are  coarse,  their  associations 
debased.  Many  who  think  themselves  refined  ladies  and 
gentlemen,  and  on  whose  lips  the  word  '  vulgarity'  is  for 
ever  hovering,    cannot  mention  '  iQve '   without  betraying 


Hbtar  own  innate  Mid  imbecile  degradation:  it  ib  a  low  fediag 

in  their  estiiiiation,  oonneeted  only  with  low  ideas  for  them." 
''  Tou  describe  three-fbnrthfl  of  the  world,  Caroline.'' 
"  They  are  cold — ^they  are  cowardly — t^ej  are  rtopid  on 

the  subject,  Shirley?    They  nerer  loved — ^tiiey  never  were 

lored  1" 

'*  Thon  art  right,  Lina !  And  in  their  dense  ignorance  thej 

blaspheme  living  £re,  seraph-brought  £ram  a  divine  altar." 
'^  They  confound  it  with  sparks  mounting  from  Tophet  !** 
The  sudden  and  joyous  clash  of  bells  here  stopped  the 

dialogue  by  summoning  all  to  the  dhnioh. 


CHAPTER  XVHL 


WtilCH  THE  GENTEEli    BEADEB    IS    BECOMMEKDED    TO    SUP,    LOW 

PERSONS  BEING  HEBE  INTBODUCE0. 

Tbe  evening  was  still  and  warm;  close  and  8iiltr|r  H  even 
promised  to  become.  Round  the  descendmg  son  ^le  elondi 
glowed  purple:  summer  tints,  rather  Indian  than  English, 
sufiused  the  horizon,  and  cast  rosy  reflections  on  hill-side, 
house-firont,  tree-bole ;  on  winding  road,,  and  nndnlotiiig 
pasture-ground.  The  two  girls  came  down  from  the  BMs 
slowly:  by  the  time  they  reached  the  churchyard  the  beth 
were  hushed;  the  multitudes  were  gathered  into  the  church: 
the  whole  scene  was  solitary. 

"  How  pleasant  and  calm  it  is ! "  said  Caroline. 

''And  how  hot  it  will  be  in  the  church!**  responded 
Shirley;  '^and  what  a  dreary  long  speech  Dr  Bouhby  will 
make !  and  how  the  curates  will  hammer  over  their  prepared 
orations  I     For  my  part,  I  would  rather  not  enter." 

"  But  my  uncle  will  be  angry,  if  he  observes  our  absence.'' 

''I  will  bear  the  brunt  of  his  wrath:  he  will  not  devour 
me.  I  shall  be  sorry  to  miss  his  pungent  speech.  I  know 
it  will  be  all  sense  fbr  the  Church,  and  all  oaustiotty  hi 
Schism:  he  '11  not  foiget  the  battle  of  Royd-lane.  I  diidl  be 
"sorry  also  to  deprive  you  of  Mr  Hall's  sincere  friendly  homily, 
with  all  its  racy  Torkshireisms;  but  here  I  must  stay.  The 
grey  church  and  greyer  tombs  look  divine  with  this  erimflon 
gleam  on  them.  Nature  is  now  at  her  evening  prayers :  she 
y  kneeling  before  those  red  hills.    I  see  her  prostrate  on  the 


j 

L6W  PERSONS  nrrHODucED.         263 

« 

;reat  steps  of  her  altar,  praying  for  a  fair  night  for  mariners 
it  sea,  for  trayellers  in  deserts,  for  lambs  on  jnoors,  and 
infiedged  birds  in  woods.  Caroline,  I  see  her  I  and  I  will  tell 
rou  what  she  is  like:  she  is  like  what  Eve  was  when  she  and 
iLdakn  stood  alone  on  earth." 

**  And  that  is  not  Milton's  Eve,  Shirley." 
''Milton's  Eve!  Milton's  Eve  I  I  repeat.  No,  by  the 
pure  Mother  of  Grod,  she  is  not!  Gary,  we  are  alone:  we 
may  speak  what  we  think.  Milton  was  great;  but  was  he 
good?  His  brain  was  right ;  how  was  his  heart?  He  saw 
heaven:  he  looked  down  on  hell.  He  saw  Satan,  and  Sin 
his  daughter,  and  Death  their  horrible  offspring.  Angels 
aenried  before  him  their  battalions:  the  long  Imes  of  adaman- 
tine shields  flashed  back  on  his  blind  eyebsSls  the  unutterable 
splendoor  of  heaven.  Devils  gathered  their  legions  in  his 
sight:  their  dim,  discrowned,  and  tarnished  armies  passed 
rank  and  file  before  him.  Milton  tried  to  see  the  first  woman; 
but,  Gary,  he  saw  her  not." 
"  You  are  bold  to  say  so,  Shirley." 

*^Not  more  bold  than  faithful.  It  was  his  cook  that  he 
saw;  or  it  was  Mrs  Gill,  as  I  have  seen  her,  making  custards, 
in  the  heat  of  summer,  in  the  cool  dairy,  with  rose-trees  and 
nasCtutiujns  about  the  latticed  window,  preparing  a  cold  colla- 
tion fi)r  the  rectors, — preserves,  and  <  dulcet  creams' — ^puzsded 
'what  choice  to  choose  for  dehcaoy  best;  what  order  so 
contrived  as  not  to  mix  tastes,  not  well-joined,  inelegant;  but 
bring  taste  afier  taste,  upheld  with  kindliest  change.' " 
"  All  very  well  too,  Shirley." 

*'  I  would  beg  to  remind  him  that  the  first  men  of  the 
earth  were  Titans,  and  that  Eve  was  their  mother :  fi*om  her 

iprang  Saturn,  Hyperion,  Oceanus;  she  bore  Prometheus ^ 

*•  Fagan  that  you  are !  what  does  that  signify?" 
"  I  say,  there  were  giants  on  the  earth  in  those  days : 
friants  that  strove  to  scale  heaven.  The  first  woman's  breast 
that  heaved  with  life  on  this  world  yielded  the  daring  which 
ccmld  contend  with  Omnipotence :  the  strength  which  oould 
bear  a  thousand  years  of  bondage, — the  vitality  which  oould 
hid  that  vulture  death  through  uncounted  ages, — ^the  unex« 
hausted  life  and  uncorrupted  excellence,  sisters  to  immor* 
tality,  which,  afto  millenniums  of  crimes,  struggles,  and  woes, 
could  conoeive  and  bring  forth  a  Messiah.  The  first  woman 
was  heaven-bom :  vast  was  the  heart  Vhence  gushed  the 


264  SHIBLET. 

well-spring  of  the  blood  of  nations ;  and  grand  the  undegene- 
rate  head  where  rested  the  consort-crown  of  creation.'' 

'^  She  coveted  an  apple,  and  was  cheated  bj  a  snake:  but 
you  have  got  such  a  hash  of  Scripture  and  mythology  into 
your  head  that  there  is  no  making  any  sense  of  you.  You 
have  not  yet  told  me  what  you  saw  kneSing  on  those  hills." 

"  I  saw — ^I  now  see — a  woman-Titan:  her  robe  of  blue  air 
.  spreads  to  the  outskirts  of  the  heath,  where  yonder  flock  is 
grazing  ;  a  veil  white  as  an  avalanche  sweeps  &om  her,  head 
tQ  her  feet,  and  arabesques  of  lightning  flame  on  its  borders. 
Under  her  breast  I  see  her  zone,  purple  like  that  horizon: 
through  its  blush  shines  the  star  of  evening.  Her  steady 
eyes  I  cannot  picture;  they  are  clear — ^they  are  deep  as  lakes 
—they  are  lifted  and  foil  of  worship — ^they  tremble  with  the 
softness  of  love  and  the  lustre  of  prayer.  Her  forehead  has 
the  expanse  of  a  cloud,  and  is  paler  than  the  early  moon, 
risen  long  before  dark  gathers  :  she  reclines  her  bosom  on  the 
ridge  of  Stilbro'  Moor  ;  her  mighty  hands  are  joined  beneath 
it.  So  kneeling,  face  to  face  she  speaks  witii  God«  That 
Eve  is  Jehovah's  daughter,  as  Adam  was  his  son." 

"  She  is  very  vague  and  visionary  I  Come,  Shirley,  we 
ought  to  go  into  church." 

^'  Caroline,  I  will  not:  I  will  stay  out  here  with  my  mother 
Eve,  in  these  days  called  Nature.  I  love  her — ^undying, 
mighty  being!  Heaven  may  have  faded  from  her  brow  when 
she  fell  in  paradise ;  but  all  that  is  glorious  ou  earth  shines 
there  still.  She  is  taking  me  to  her  bosom,  and  showing  me 
her  heart.  Hush,  Carolme!  you  will  see  her  and  fed  as  I  do, 
if  we  are  both  silent." 

'^I  will  humour  your  whim;  but  you  will  b^gin  talking 
again,  ere  ten  minutes  are  over." 

Miss  Keeldar,  on  whom  the  soft  excitement  of  the  warm 
summer  evening  seemed  working  with  unwonted  power,  leaned 
against  an  upright  headstone:  she  flxed  her  eyes  on  the  deep- 
burning  west,  and  sank  into  a  pleasurable  trance.  Caroline, 
going  a  little  apart,  paced  to  and  fro  beneath  the  Bectoiy 
garden-wall,  dreaming,  too,  in  her  way.  Shirley  had  men- 
tioned the  word  "  mother:"  that  word  stiggested  to  Caroline's 
imagination  not  the  mighty  and  mystical  parent  of  Shirley's 
visions,  but  a  gentle  hmnan  form — ^the  form  she  ascribed  to 
her  own  mother;  unknown,  unloved,  but  not  unlonged-for. 

*^  Oh,  that  the  day  would  come  when  she  would  remember 


LOW  FSBSONS  INTBODUGED.  265 

ber  child  I     Oh,  that  I  might  know  her,  and  knowing,  loTe 

Such  was  her  aspiration. 

The  longing  of  her  childhood  filled  her  soul  again.  The 
desire  which  many  a  night  had  kept  her  awake  in  her  crib, 
and  which  fear  of  its  fallacy  had  of  late  years  almost  extin- 
gnished,  relit  suddenly,  and  gloiyed  warm  in  her  heart :  that 
her  mother  might  come  some  happy  day,  and  send  for  her  to 
her  presence — ^look  upon  her  fondly  with  loving  ejea^  and  say 
to  her  tenderly,  in  a  sweet  voice: — 

"  Caroline,  my  child,  I  have  a  home  for  you:  you  shall  live 
with  me.  All  die  love  you  have  needed,  and  not  tasted,  from 
infimcy,  I  have  saved  for  you  carefully.  Come!  it  shall 
cherish  you  now." 

A  noise  on  the  road  roused  Caroline  from  her  filial  hopes, 
and  Shirley  from  her  Titan  visions.  They  listened,  and  heard 
the  tramp  of  horses :  they  looked,  and  saw  a  glitter  through 
the  trees :  they  caught  through  the  fi>liage  glimpses  of  martial 
scarlet;  helm  shone,  plume  waved.  Silent  and  orderly,  six 
floldiers  rode  sofUy  by. 

*'  The  same  we  saw  this  afternoon,"  whispered  Shirley : 
"  they  have  been  halting  somewhere  till  now.  They  wish  to 
be  as  little  noticed  as  possible,  and  are  seeking  their  rendezvous 
at  this  qidet  hour,  while  the  people  are  at  church.  Did  I  not 
«ay  we  should  see  tmusual  things  erelong?" 

Scarcely  were  sight  and  soimd  of  the  soldiers  lost,  when 
another  and  somewhat  different  disturbance  broke  the  night- 
h„A-a  child's  impatient  sci^m.  They  looked :  a  man 
issued  frt>m  the  church,  carrymg  in  his  arms  an  infant— a 
robost,  ruddy  little  boy,  of  some  two  years  old — ^roaring  with 
ftU  the  power  of  his  lungs  ;  he  had  probably  just  awaked 
from  a  church-sleep:  two  little  girls,  of  nine  and  ten  followed. 
The  influence  of  the  fresh  air,  and  the  attraction  of  some 
flowers  gathered  from  a  grave,  soon  quieted  the  child;  the 
loan  sat  down  with  him,  dandling  him  on  his  knee  as  tenderly 
as  any  woman ;  the  two  little  girls  took  their  places  one  on 
each  side. 

"  Good-evening,  William,"  said  Shirley,  after  due  scrutiny 
of  the  man.  He  had. seen  her  before,  and  apparently  was 
w^ting  to  be  recognised ;  he  now  took  off  his  hat,  and 
grinned  a  smile  of  pleasure.  He  was  a  rough-headed,  hard 
featured  personage,  not  old,  but  very  weather-beaten;  his 
ittiiB  was  decent  and  clean,  that  of  bis  children  singularly 


866  SHIBLET. 

neat;   it  was  our  old  friend,  Farren.     The  young  ladioB 
approached  him. 

'^  You  are  not  going  into  the  church  ?*'  he  inquired,  gazing 
al  them  complacentlj,  yet  with  a  mixture  of  bashfrdnees  in 
his  look  :  a  sentiment  not  by  any  means  the  result  of  awe  of 
their  station,  but  only  of  appreciation  of  their  elegance  and 
youth.  Before  gentlemen--such  as  Moore  or  Hebtone,  for 
instance — ^Williazn  was  often  a  little  dogged ;  with  proud  or 
insolent  ladies,  too,  he  was  quite  unmanageable,  somelames 
very  resentful ;  but  he  was  most  sensible  of,  most  tractable 
to,  good-humour  and  civiiLly.  His  nature — a  stubborn  one — 
was  repelled  by  inflexibility  in  other  natures ;  for  which  reason, 
he  had  never  been  able  to  like  his  former  master,  Moore ;  and, 
imconscious  of  that  gentleman's  good  opinion  of  himself,  and 
of  the  service  he  had  secretly  rendered  him  in  recommending 
him  as  gardener  to  Mr.  Yorke,  and  by  this  means  to  other 
families  in  the  neighbourhood,  he  oontumed  to  harbour  a 
grudge  against  his  austerity.  Latterly,  he  had  often  worked 
at  Fieldhead  ;  Miss  Keeldar*s  frank,  hospitable  manners  were 
perfectly  charming  to  him.  Caroline  he  had  known  from  her 
childhood  :  unconsciously,  she  was  his  ideal  of  a  lady.  Her 
gentle  mien,  .step,  gestures,  her  grace  of  person  and  attire, 
moved  some  artist-fibres  about  his  peasant  heart :  he  had  a 
pleasure  in  looking  at  her,  as  he  had  in  examining  rare  flowers, 
or  in  seeing  pleasant  landscapes.  Both  the  ladies  Uked  William : 
it  was  their  delight  to  lend  him  books,  to  give  him  plants ;  and 
they  preferred  his  conversation  far  before  that  of  many  coarse, 
hard,  pretentious  people,  immeasurably  higher  in  station. 

**  Who  was  shaking,  William,  when  you  came  out?**  asked 
Shirley. 

*<  A  gentleman  ye  set  a  deal  of  store  on.  Miss  Shirley — 
Mr  Donne." 

.   «  You  look  knowing,  -William.     How  did  you  find  out  mj 
r^ard  for  Mr  Donne  ? " 

'^-  Ay,  Miss  Shirley,  there 's  a  gleg  light  i'  your  een  some- 
times  which  betra3rs  you.  You  look  raight  down  scornful 
sometimes,  when  Mr  Donne  is  by." 

*<  Do  you  like  him  yourself,  William?" 

''  Me  ?  I  hn  stalled  o*  t'  curates,  and  so  is  t'  wife:  thej  Ve 
no  manners ;  they  tsSk  to  poor  folk  fair  as  if  they  thought  they 
were  beneath  them.  They  're  alius  magnifying  their  office : 
it  is  a  pity  but  their  office  could  magnify  tiiem;  but  it  does 
nought  o'  t'  soart.     I  fair  hate  pride." 


LOW  PEfiSONS  DTTBODUCED.  267 

**  Bnt  you  are  proud  in  your  own  way  yourself,**  interpoaed 
Caroline :  "  you  are  what  you  call  house-proud;  you  like  to 
haye  everything  handsome  about  you :  sometimes  you  look 
as  if  you  were  almost  too  proud  to  take  your  wages.  When 
you  were  out  of  work,  you  were  too  proud  to  get  anything  on 
eredit ;  but  for  your  children,  I  believe  you  would  rather 
have  starved  than  gone  to  the  shops  without  money ;  and 
when  I  wanted  to  give  you  something,  what  a  difficulty  I  had 
in  making  you  ^e  it  I" 

'^  It  is  putly  true.  Miss  Caroline:  ony  day  I'd  rather  give 
than  take,  especially  firom  sich  as  ye.     Look  at  t'  difference 
between  us :  ye  're  a  little,  young,  slender  lass,  and  I  'm  a 
great  strong  man:  I  'm  rather  more  nor  twice  your  age.     It  is 
not  my  part  then,  I  think,  to  tak'  fro'  ye — ^to  be  imder  obliga- 
tions (as  they  say)  to  ye;  and  that  day  ye  came  to  our  house, 
and  called  me  to  t'  door,  and  offered  me  five  shillings,  which 
I  doubt  ye  could  ill  spare, — ^for  ye  've  no  fortin',  I  know,— 
that  day  I  war  fair  a  rebel — a  radical — ^an  insurrectionist ; 
and  ye  made  me  so.     I  thought  it  shameful  that,  willing  and 
able  as  I  was  to  work,  I  suld  be  i'  such  a  condition  that  a 
yvang  cratur  about  the  age  o'  my  own  eldest  lass  suld  think 
it  needful  to  come  and  omr  me  her  bit  o'  brass." 
"  I  suppose  you  were  angry  with  me,  William  ?" 
<<  I  almost  was,  in  a  way;  but  I  forgave  ye  varry  soon:  ye 
Beant  well.     Ay,  /  am  proud,  and  so  are  ye;  bui  your  pride 
and  mine  is  f  raight  mak' — ^what  we  call  i'  Yorkshire,  clean 
piide — such  as  Mr  Malone  and  Mr  Donne  knows  nought 
aboat:  theirs  is  mucky  pride.    Now,  I  shall  teach  my  lasses 
to  be  as  proud  as  Miss  Shirley  there,  and  my  lads  to  be  as 
proud  as  myseln ;  but  I  dare  ony  o'  em  to  be  like  t'  curates :  I'd 
liok  little  Michael,  if  I  seed  him  show  any  signs  o'  that  feeling." 
"  What  is  the  difference,  WiUiam  ?" 
"  Ye  know  t'  difference  wed  enow,  but  ye  want  me  to  get  a 
gate  o'  talking. '    Mr  Malone  and  Mr  Donne  is  almost  too 
proud  to  do  aught  for  theirsel'n  ;  we  are  almost  too  proud  to 
let  anybody  do  aught  for  us.     T'  curates  can  hardly  bide  to 
speak  a  civU  word  to  them  they  think  beneath  them ;  toe  can 
liardly  bide  to  tak'  an  imcivil  word  fro'  them  that  thinks 
A^emsel'n  aboon  us." 

"Now,  William,  be  humble  enough  to  tell  me  truly  how 
you  are  getting  on  in  the  world  ?    Are  you  well  off?" 

**  Miss  Shirley — ^I  am  varry  well  off.     Since  I  got  into  t* 
gardening  line,  wi'  Mr  Yorke's   help,  and  since  Mr  Hall 


268  SHIBLET. 

(another  o'  t^  raight  sort)  helped  my  wife  to  set  up  a  bit  cyf  a 
shop,  I  Ve  nought  to  complain  of.  My  family  has  plenty  to 
eat  and  plenty  to  wear:  my  pride  makes  me  find  means  to 
save  an  odd  pound  now  and  then  against  rainy  days ;  for  I 
think  I'd  die  afore  I'd  come  to  t'  parish:  and  me  and  mine 
is  content;  but  th'  neighbours  is  poor  yet:  I  see  a  great  deal 
of  distress." 

''And,  consequently,  there  is  still  discontent,  I  suppofie?"* 
inquired  Miss  Keeldar. 

"  Consequently — ^ye  say  right — consequently.  In  course, 
starving  folk  cannot  be  satisfied  or  settled  folk.  The  country 's 
not  in  a  safe  condition; — ^I  '11  say  so  mich  I" 

"  But  what  can  be  done  ?  What  more  can  I  do,  for 
instance  V" 

"  Do  ? — jQ  can  do  naught  mich,  poor  young  lass  1  Ye  Ve 
gi'en  your  brass :  ye  've  done  welL  K  ye  could  transport  your 
tenant,  Mr  Moore,  to  Botany  Bay,  ye'd  happen  do  better. 
Folks  hate  him." 

"  William,  for  shame!"  exclaimed  Caroline,  warmly.  "If 
folks  do  hate  him,  it  is  to  their  disgrace,  not  his.  Mr  Moore 
himself  hates  nobody ;  he  only '  wants  to  do  his  duly,  and 
maintain  his  rights :  you  are  wrong  to  talk  so  1 " 

''  I  talk  as  I  think.  He  has  a  cold,  unfeeling  heart,  yond' 
Moore. 

"  But,"  interposed  Shirley,  "  supposing  Moore  was  driven 
from  the  country,  and  his  mill  rasped  to  the  ground,  would 
people  have  more  work  ?" 

'^  They  'd  have  less.  I  know  that,  and  they  know  that ; 
and  there  is  many  an  honest  lad  driven  desperate  by  the 
certaiAty  that  whichever  way  he  turns,  he  cannot  better  him- 
self, and  there  is  dishonest  men  plenty  to  guide  them  to  the 
devil:  scoundrels  that  reckons  to  be  the  '  people's  fiiends,'  and 
that  knows  naught  about  the  people,  and  is  as  insinoere  as 
Lucifer.  I've  lived  aboon  forty  year  in  the  world,  and  I 
believe  that '  the  people'  will  never  have  any  true  fiiends  but 
theirsel'n,  and  them  two  or  three  good  folk  i'  different  stations, 
that  is  friends  to  all  the  world.  Human  natur,'  taking  iti'  th' 
lump,  is  naught  but  selfishness.  It  is  but  excessive  few;  it  i« 
but  just  an  exception  here  and  there,  now  and  then,  sich  m 
ye  two  young  'uns  and  me,  that  being  in  a  different  sphere, 
can  imderstand  t'  one  t'  other,  and  be  Mends  wi'out  slavish- 
ness  o'  one  hand,  or  pride  o'  t'  other.  Them  that  reckons  to 
be  friends  to  a  lower  class  than  their  own  fro^  political  motivei 


LOW  PERSONS  INTRODUCED.  269 

is  never  to  be  trusted :  they  always  try  to  make  their  inferiors 
tools.  For  my  own  part,  I  will  neither  be  patronized  nor 
misled  for  no  man's  pleasure.  I  've  had  overtures  made  to  me 
lately  that  I  saw  were  treacherous,  and  I  flung  'em  back  i'  the 
faces  o'  them  that  offered  'em." 

"  You  won't  tell  us  what  overtures?" 
"  1  will  not :  it  would  do  no  good ;  it  would  mak'  no  differ- 
ence: them  they  concerned  can  look  after  theirsel'n." 

"  Ay,  we'se  look  after  wersel'n,"  said  another  voice.  Joe 
Scott  had  sauntered  forth  from  the  church  to  get  a  breath  of 
fresh  air,  and  there  he  stood. 

"  m  warrant  ye,  Joe,"  observed  William,  smiling. 
"And  I'll  warrant  my  maister,"  was  the  answer.     "  Young 
ladies,"  continued  Joe,  assuming  a  lordly  air,  "  ye  'd  better  go 
into  th'  house." 

"  I  wonder  what  for  ?"  inqidred  Shirley,  to  whom  the  over- 
looker's somewhat  pragmatical  manners  were  familiar,  and  who 
was  often  at  war  with  him ;  for  Joe,  holding  supercilious 
tfaeoiies  about  women  in  general,  resented  greatly,  in  his 
secret  soul,  the  fact  of  his  master  and  his  master's  mill  being, 
in  a  manner,  under  petticoat  government,  and  had  felt  as 
wonnwood  and  gall,  certain  business-visits  of  the  heiress  to 
the  Hollow's  counting-house. 

"  Because  there  is  naught  agate  that  fits  women  to  be  con- 
samed  in." 

« Indeed!  There  is  prayer  and  preaching  agate  in  that 
church  ;  are  we  not  concerned  in  that  ?  '* 

"  Ye  have  been  present  neither  at  the  prayer  nor  preach- 
ing, ma'am,  if  I  have  observed  aright.  What  I  alluded  to 
was  politics :  William  Farren,  here,  was  touching  on  that 
subject,  if  I'm  not  mistiEt'en." 

*  Well,  what  then  ?  Politics  are  our  habitual  study,  Joe. 
Do  you  know  I  see  a  newspaper  every  day,  and  two  of  a 
Simday?" 

"I  should  think  you'll  read  the  marriages,  probably.  Miss, 
sod  the  murders,  and  the  accidents,  and  sich  like  ?  " 

"I  read  the  leading  articles,  Joe,  and  the  foreign  intelli- 
gence, and  I  look  over  the  market  prices:  in  short,  I  readjust 
what  gentlemen  read." 

Joe  looked  as  if  he  thought  this  talk  was  like  the  chattering 
of  a  pie.     He  replied  to  it  by  a  disdainftil  silence. 
**  Joei"  comtiniied  Miss  Keeldar,  "  I  never  yet  could  ascer* 


270  SHiRLEr. 

tein  properly,  whether  you  are  a  Whig  or  a  Tory:  pniy  which 
party  has  the  honour  of  your  alliance  ?  " 

"It  is  ra3rther  difficult  to  explain  where  you  are  sure  not 
to  be  understood/' was  Joe's  haughty  response;  "but,  as  to 
being  a  Tory,  I  'd  as  soon  be  an  old  woman,  or  a  young  one, 
which  is  a  more  flimsier  article  stilL  It  is  the  Tories  that 
carries  on  the  war  and  ruins  trade ;  and,  if  I  be  of  any  partj 
— ^though  political  parties  is  all  nonsense — I  'm  of  that  whi(^ 
is  most  favourable  to  peace,  and,  by  consequence,  to  the 
mercantile  interests  of  this  here  land." 

"  So  am  I,  Joe,"  replied  Shirley,  who  had  rather  a  pleamre 
in  teasing  the  overlooker,  by  persisting  in  talking  on  subjects 
with  which  he  opined  she — as  a  woman — had  no  right  to 
meddle :  '^  partly,  at  least.  I  have  rather  a  leaning  to  the 
agricultural  interest,  too ;  as  good  reason  is,  seeing  that  I  don't 
desire  England  to  be  imder  fiie  feet  of  France,  and  that  if  a 
share  of  my  income  comes  from  Hollow's-mill,  a  larger  shaie 
eomes  from  the  landed  estate  around  it.  It  would  not  do  to 
take  any  measures  injurious  to  the  £a,rmers,  Joe,  I  think?" 

"The  d^ws  at  this  hour  is  unwholesome  for  females," 
observed  Joe. 

"  J£  you  make  that  remark  out  of  interest  in  me,  I  Kafe 
merely  to  assure  you  that  I  am  impervious  to  cold.  I  should 
not  minH  taking  my  turn  to  watch  the  mill  one  of  fiiese 
summer  nights,  armed  with  your  musket,  Joe.** 

Joe  Scott's  chin  was  always  rather  prominent;:  he  poked  it 
out,  at  this  speech,  some  inches  farther  than  usual. 

"  But — ^to  go  back  to  my  sheep,"  she  proceeded—"  dothiei 
and  min-owiTer  as  I  am,  besides  farmed,  I  cannot  get  out  of 
my  head  a  certain  idea  that  we  manufacturers  and  persons  of 
business  are  sometimes  a  little — a  very  UtUe  selfish  and  shoH- 
flighted  in  our  views,  and  rather  too  regardless  of  human 
suffering,  rather  heartiess  in  our  pursuit  of  gain:  don^t  yw 
agree  with  me,  Joe  ?  " . 

"  I  cannot  argue,  where  I  cannot  be  comprehended,"  was 
again  the  answer. 

"  Man  of  mystery  1  Your  master  wiU  argue  with  me  sotne 
times,  Joe :  he  is  not  so  stiff  as  you  are." 

" May  be  not:  we've  all  our  own  ways." 

'^  JoQ,  do  you  seriously  think  all  the  wisdom  in  the  world  is 
lodged  in  male  skulls?" 

**  I  ihink  l^at  women  are  a  kittle  and  a  fioward  gmsnr 


LOW  FEBSONS  INTBODUCED.  271 

tioD;  and  I^ve  a  great  respect  for  the  doctrines  delivered  in 
the  second  chapter  of  St  Paul's  first  Epistle  to  Timothy/' 
"  What  doctrines,  Joe  ?  " 

"  Let  the  woman  learn  in  silence,  with  aU  subjection.  I 
suffer  not  a  woman  to  teach,  nor  to  usurp  authority  over  the 
man;  but  to  be  in  silence.  For  ^dam  was  first  formed,  then 
Eve." 

''What  has  that  to  do  with  the  business?"  interjected 
Shirley:  "  that  smacks  of  rights  of  primogeniture.  I  '11  bring 
it  up  to  Mr  Torke  the  first  tiime  he  invdghs  against  those 
rights." 

**  And,"  continued  Joe  Scott,  ''  Adam  was  not  deceived ; 
but  the  woman,  being  deceived,  was  in  the  transgression." 

^  More  shame  to  Adam  to  sin  with  his  eyes  openl"  cried 
MiaeKeeldar.  ''To  confess  the  honest  truth,  Joe,  I  never 
was  easy  in  my  mind  concerning  that  chapter:  it  puzzles  me." 
"It  is  very  plain,  miss:  he  that  runs  may  read." 
"He  inay  x«ad  it  in  his  own  fiei^on,"  remarked  Caroline, 
DOW  joining  in  ihe  dialogue  for  the  first  time.  "  Tou  allow 
the  light  of  private  judgmoit,  I  suppose,  Joe  ?" 

"My  certy,  that  I  do  I    I  allow  and  claim  it  fi»r  every  line 
of  the  idly  Book." 
"  Women  may  exercise  it  as  well  a§  men  ?" 
"  Nay :  women  is  to  take  their  husbands*  opinion,  both  in 
politics  and  religion:  it's  wholesomest  for  them." 
"  Oh  1  oh  1"  exclaimed  both  ^lirley  and  Caroline. 
"  To  be  sure;  no  doubt  on*t,"  persisted  the  stubborn  over- 
looker. 

"  Consider  yourself  groaned  down,  and  cried  shame  over, 
for  such  a  stupid  observation,"  said  Miss  Keeldar.  "Yon 
might  as  well  say,  men  are  to  take  the  opinions  of  their  priests 
withofot  examination.  Of  what  value  .would  a  religion  «o 
adopted  be  ?  It  would  be  mere  blind,  besotted  superstition." 
"And  what  is  pour  reading.  Miss  Heistone,  o*  diese  words 
o' St  Paul's?" 

"Hem!  I — I  account  for  them  in  this  way:  he  wrote 
that  chapter  for  a  partieular  congregation  of  CSinstians,  under 
pecoiiar  circumstances ;  and  beades,  I  dare  say,*  if  I  could 
read  the  original  Qreei:,  I  should  find  that  many  of  the  words 
have  been  wrongly  translated,  perhaps  ndsc^rehended  alto- 
gether. It  would  be  possible,  I  doubt  not,  with  a  little 
ingenuity,  to  give  the  passage  quite  a  contrary  turn :  to  make 
it  say,  *  Let  Sie  woman  speak  out  whenever  she  sees  fit  to 


272  SHIBLET. 

make  an  objection  ; ' — ^  it  is  permitted  to  a  WCttnan  to  teach 
and  to  exercise  authority  as  much  as  may  be.  Man,  mean- 
time, cannot  do  better  than  hold  his  peace,'  and  so  on." 

« That  wiUn't  wash,  Miss." 

**  I  dare  say  it  will.  My  notions  are  dyed  in  faster  colours 
than  yours,  Joe.  Mr  Scott,  you  are  a  thoroughly  dogmatical 
person,  and  always  were:  I  like  William  better  than  you." 

"Joe  is  well  enough  in  his  own  house,"  said  Shirley:  "I 
have  seen  him  as  quiet  as  a  lamb  at  home.  There  is  not  a 
better  nor  a  kinder  husband  in  Briarfield.  He  does  not  dog- 
matize to  his  wife." 

"  My  wife  is  a  hard-working,  plain  woman :  tim&  and 
trouble  has  ta'en  all  th^  conceit  out  of  her;  but  that  is  not 
the  case  with  you,  young  misses.  And  then  you  reckon  to 
have  so  much  knowledge;  andi'  my  thoughts  it*s  only  super- 
ficial sort  o'  vanities  you  're  acquainted  with.  I  can  tdl — 
happen  a  year  sin' — one  day  Miss  Caroline  coming  into  our 
cotmting-house  when  I  war  packing  up  summut  behind  t' 
great  desk,  and  she  didn't  see  me,  and  she  brought  a  slate  wi' 
a  sirni  on  it  to  t'  maister:  it  were  only  a  bit  of  a  sum  in 
practice,  iJiat  our  Harry  would  have  settled  i'  two  minutes. 
She  couldn't  do  it;  Mr  M<5ore  had  to  show  her  how;  and 
when  he  did  show  her,  she  couldn't  imderstand  him." 

"Nonsense,  Joe!" 

"  Nay,  it 's  no  nonsense  :  and  Miss  Shirley,  there,  reckona 
to  hearken  to  t'  maister  when  he 's  talking  ower  trade,  so 
attentive  like,  as  if  she  followed  him  word  for  word,  and  all 
war  as  clear  as  a  lady's  looking-glass  to  her  een ;  and  all  t* 
while  she 's  peeping  and  peeping  out  o'  t'  window  to  see  if  f 
mare  stands  quiet;  and,  then  looking  at  a  bit  of  a  splash  on 
her  riding-skirt ;  and  then  glancing  glegly  round  at  wer 
cotmting-house  cobwebs  and  dust,  and  thinking  what  mucky 
folk  we  are,  and  what  a  grand  ride  she  '11  have  just  i'  now 
ower  Nunnely-common.  She  hears  no  more  o'  Mr  Moore's 
talk  nor  if  he  spake  Hebrew." 

"  Joe,  you  are  a  real  slanderer.  I  wotdd  give  you  youp 
answer,  only  the  people  are  coming  out  of  church:  we  must 
leave  you.  Man  of  prejudice,  good-bye:  William,  good-bye. 
Children,  come  up  to  Fieldhead  to-morrow,  and  you  shall 
choose  what  you  like  best  out  of  Mrs  Gill's  store-room." 


A  BUXMB^inaHT,  278 


lUXMB^: 


QHAPTEB  XIX. 

A    SUMUEB    NIGHT. 

rHB  Hour  was  now  that  of  dusk.    A  clear  air  favoured  the 
riTidling  of  the  stars. 

"There  will  be  just  light  enough  to  show  me  the  way 
borne,"  said  Miss  Keeldar,  as  she  prepared  to  take  leave  of 
Caroline  at  the  Bectory  garden-door. 

"  You  must  not  go  alone,  Shirley.  Fanny  shall  accompany 
yoxL" 

"  That  she  shall  not.     Of  what  need  I  be  afraid  in  my  own 
parish?     I  would  walk  from  Fieldhead  to  the  church  any 
fine  midsummer  night,  three  hours  later  than  this,  for  the 
mere  pleasure  of  seeing  the  stars,  and  the  chance  of  meeting 
afeiry.'* 
^  But  just  wait  till  the  crowd  is  cleared  away." 
"  Agreed.     There  are  the  five  Misses  Armitage  streaming 
by.    Here  comes  Mrs  Sykes's  phaeton,  Mr  Wynne's  close 
carriage,  Mrs  Birtwhistle's  car :  I  don't  wish  to  go  through 
the  ceremony  of  bidding  them  all  good-bye,  so  we  will  step 
into  the  garden  and  take  shelter  amongst  the  labumiuns  for 
in  instant." 

The  rectors,  their  curates  and  their  churchwardens,  now 
issued  from  the  church-porch.  There  was  a  great  confabula- 
tion, shaking  of  hands,  congratulation  on  speeches,  recom- 
mendation to  be  careful  of  the  night  air,  &c.  By  degrees  the 
throng  dispersed;  the  carriages  drove  off.  Miss  Eeddar  was 
jurt  emerging  from  her  flowery  refuge,  when  Mr  Helstone 
entered  the  garden  and  met  her. 

"  Oh  I  I  want  you  1 "  he  said :  "  I  was  afraid  you  were  already 
gone.     Caroline,  come  herel " 

Caroline  came,  expecting,  as  Shirley  did,  a  lecture  on  not 
having  been  visible  at  church.  Other  subjects,  however,  occu- 
pied tihe  Sector's  mind. 

"  I  shall  not  sleep  at  home  to-night,"  he  continued.  "  I 
have  just  met  with  an  old  friend,  and  promised  to  accompany 
him.  I  shall  return  probably  about  noon  to-morrow.  Thomas, 
the  clerk,  is  engaged,  and  I  cannot  get  him  to  sleep  in  the  house, 

aa  I  usually  do  when  I  am  absent  for  a  night;  now ^ 

^  Now,**  interrupted  Shirley,  ^*  you  want  me  as  a  gentleman 
— Ae  first  gentleman  in  Briarfieldi  in  short,  to  supply  your 

18 


S74  SHIQLBTr 


place,  be  master  of  the  Rectory,  and  guardian  of  your  nieoe 
and  maids  wHle  you  are  away  ?  " 

"  Exactly,  captain :  I  thought  the  post  would  suit  you.  Will 
you  favour  Caroline  so  far  as  to  be  her  guest  for  one  night  ? 
Will  you  stay  here  instead  of  going  back  to  Fieldhead  ?  " 

"  And  what  will  Mrs  Pryor  do?     She  expects  me  home." 

"I  will  send  her  word.  Come,  make  up  your  mind  to  rtaj. 
It  grows  late;  the  dew  falls  heavily:  you  and  Caroline  will 
etijoy  each  over's  society,  I  doubt  not." 

"  1  promise  you  then  to  stay  with  Caroline,"  repli^  Shirley. 
"  As  you  say,  we  shall  enjoy  each  other^s  society :  we  will  not 
be  separated  to-night.  Now,  rejoin  your  old  friend,  and  fear 
nothmg  for  us," 

'<  If  there  should  chance  to  be  any  disturbance  in  the  night, 
captain!— if  you  should  hear  the  picking  of  a  lock,  the  cutting 
out  of  a  pane  of  glass,  a  stealthy  tread  of  steps  ^bout  the  house 
(and  I  need  not  fear  to  tell  you,  who  bear  a  weU-tenupered, 
mettlesome  heart  under  your  girPs  ribbon-sash,  that  such  little 
incidents  are  very  possible  in  the  present  time),  what  would 
you  do?*' 

"  Don't  know-^faint,  perhaps — ^&11  down,  and  have  to  he 
picked  up  again.  But,  Doctor,  if  you  assign  me  the  post  of 
hcmour,  you  must  give  me  arms.  What  wea  pon^are  there  in 
your  stronghold  ?  " 

"  You  could  not  wield  a  sword  ?  " 

''  No ;  I  could  manage  the  carving-knife  better." 

''  You  will  find  a  good  one  in  the  dining-room  sideboard:  a 
lady's  knife,  light  to  handle,  and  as  sharp-pointed  as  a  poniard." 

"  It  will  suit  Caroline;  but  you  must  give  me  a  brace  of 
pistols:  I  know  you  have  pistols." 

^'  I  have  two  pairs ;  one  pair  I  can  place  at  your  disposaL 
You  will  find  them  suspended  over  the  mantelpiece  of  my  study 
in  cloth  cases." 

"  Loaded  ?  " 

''  Yes,  but  not  on  the  cock.  Cock  them  before  you  go  to  bed. 
It  is  pa3dng  you  a  great  compliment,  captain,  to  lend  you 
these:  were  you  one  of  the  awkward  squad  you  should  not 
have  them." 

'^  I  will  take  care.  You  need  delay  no  longer,  Mr  Helstone: 
you  may  go  now.  He  is  gracious  to  me  to  lend  me  his 
pistols,"  she  remarked,  as  the  Eector  passed  out  at  the  garden- 
pjte.  '^  But  come,  Lma,"  she  continued ;  '^  let  iis  go  in  and 
OAve  0om^  8U|^>er:  I  was  too  much  vexed  at  tea  with  the  vki* 


A   SUMMER  NIGHT.  275 

wge  of  Mr  Sam  Wynne  to  be  able  to  eat,  and  now  I  am  really 
lungiy.'' 

Entering  the  house,  *they  repaired  to  the  darkened  dining- 
oom,  through  the  open  windows  of  which  apartment  stdie  the 
vening  air,  bearing  the  perfume  of  flowers  from  the  garden, 
he  very  distant  sound  of  far-retreating  steps  from  the  road,  and 
I  soft  vague  murmur,  whose  origin  Caroline  explained  by  the 
remark,  uttered  as  she  stood  listening  at  the  casement: 

"  Shirley,  I  hear  the  beck  in  the  Hollow.^ 

Then  she  rung  the  bell,  asked  for  a  candle  and  some  bread 
md  milk — ^Miss  Keeldar^s  usual  supper  and  her  own.  Fanny, 
when  she  brought  in  the  tray,  would  haye  closad  the  windows 
md  the  shutters,  but  wa«  requested  to  desist  for  the  present: 
die  twilight  was  too  calm,  its  breath  too  balmy  to  be  yet 
deluded.  They  took  their  meal  in  sUenee :  Caroline  rose  once, 
to  remove  to  the  window-siU  a  glass  of  flowers  which  stood  on 
the  aida-board;  the  exhalation  from  the  blossoms  being  some- 
what too  powerful  for  the  sultry  room:  in  returning,  she  half 
opened  a  drawer,  and  took  from  it  something  that  glittered 
clear  and  keen  in  her  hand. 

"You  assigned  this  to  me,  then,  Shirley — did  you?  It  is 
bright,  keen-edged,  finely-tapered:  it  is  dangerous-looking, 
I  nerer  yet  felt  the  impulse  which  could  move  me  to  direct 
this  against  a  felloT^-creature.  It  is  difficidt  to  fancy  what 
circumstances  could  nerve  my  arm  to  strike  home  with  this 
kmg  knife."  , 

"I  should  hate  to  do  it,''  replied  Shirley;  ''but  I  think  I 
ooold  do  it,  if  goaded  by  certain  exigencies  which  I  can  ima- 
gine.** And  Miss  Keeldar  quietly  sipped  her  glass  of  new  milk, 
looking  somewhat  thoughtful,  and  a  Httle  pale :  though,  indeed, 
when  did  she  not  look  pale  ?     She  was  never  florid.  ' 

T\m  milk  sipped  and  the  bread,  eaten,  Fanny  was  again 
summoned:  she  and  Eliza  were  recommended  to  go  to  bed, 
which  they  were  quite  willing  to  do,  being  weary  of  the  day's 
exertioDS,  of  much  cutting  of  currant-buns,  and  filling  of  urns 
and  teapots,  and  running  backwards  and  forwards  with  trays. 
Erelong  the  maid's  chamber-door  was  heard  to  close ;  Caroline 
took  a  candle,  and  went  quietly  all  over  the  house,  seeing  that 
every  window  was  fast  and  every  door  barred.  She  did  not 
<?(ai  evade  the  haunted  back-kitchen,  nor  the  vault-like  cellars. 
Th«se  visited,  she  returned. 

^  There  is  neither  spirit  nor  flesh  in  the  house  at  present,** 
^  Midy  "  which  should  not  be  there.     It  is  now  near  eleven 


276  8HIBLET. 

o'clock,  fully  bed-time,  yet  I  would  rather  sit  tip  a  little  longer, 
if  you  do  not  object,  Shirley.  Here,"  she  continued,  "  I  have 
brought  the  brace  of  pistols  from  my  uncle's  study:  you  may 
examine  them  at  your  leisure.*' 

She  placed  them  on  the  table  before  her  friend. 

"  Why  would  you  rather  sit  up  longer  ?  "  asked  Miss  Keeldar, 
taking  up  the  firearms,  examining  them,  and  again  laying  them 
down. 

<*  Because  I  have  a  strange,  excited  feeling  in  my  heart." 

«  So  have  I." 

<'  Is  this  state  of  sleeplessness  and  restlessness  caused  by 
something  eleclSKcal  in  the  air,  I  wonder  ?  " 

"  No :  tiie  sky  is  clear,  the  stars  numberless :  it  is  a  fine  night.'* 

"  But  very  still.  I  hear  the  water  fret  over  its  stony  b«i  in 
Hollow's  Copse  as  distinctly  as  if  it  ran  below  the  churchyard 
wall." 

"  I  am  glad  it  is  so  still  a  night:  a  moaning  wind  or  rushing 
rain  would  vex  me  to  fever  just  now." 

«  Why,  Shirley  ?  " 

"  Because  it  would  baffle  my  efforts  to  listen."  ' 

"  Do  you  listen  towards  the  Hollow  ?  " 

*'  Yes ;  it  is  the  only  quarter  whence  we  can  hear  a  sound 
just  now." 

"'  The  only  one,  Shirley." 

They  both  sat  near  the  window,  and  both  leaned  their  arms 
on  the  sill,  and  both  inclined  their  heads  towards  the  open 
lattice.  They  saw  each  other's  young  faces  by  the  starlight, 
and  that  dim,  June  twilight  which  does  not  wholly  fade  from 
the  west  till  dawn  begins  to  break  in  the  east. 

"  Mr  Helstone  thinks  we  have  no  idea  which  way  he  is 
gone,"  murmured  Miss  Keeldar,  "  nor  on  what  errand,  nor 
with  what  expectations,  nor  how  prepared;  but  I  guess  much 
— do  not  you?" 

"  I  guess  something." 

"  All  those  gentlemen — ^your  cousin  Moore  included — ^think 
that  you  and  I  are  now  asleep  in  our  beds,  rmconscious." 

^'  Caring  nothing  about  them — ^hoping  and  fearing  nothing 
for  them,"  added  Caroline. 

Both  kept  silence  for  iull  half  an  hour.  The  night  was 
isilent,  too  ;  only  the  church-clock  measured  its  course  by 
quarters.  Some  words  were  interchanged  about  the  chill  of 
the  air :  they  wrapped  their  scarves  closer  round  them,  resumed 
their  bonnets  which  they  had  removed|  and  again  watched* 


A  SUlfUER  NIGHT.  277 

Towards  midniglit  the  teasing,  monotonous  bark  of  the 
touse-dog  distiirbed  the  quietude  of  their  vigil.  Caroline 
ose,  and  made  her  way  noiselessly  through  the  dark  passages 
9  the  kitchen,  intending  to  appease  him  with  a  piece  of  bread: 
he  succeeded.  On  returning  to  the  dining-room,  she  found 
k  all  dark,  Miss  Keeldar  having  extinguished  the  candle:  the 
ratline  of  her  shape  was  visible  near  the  stiU  open  window, 
eaning  out.  Miss  Helstone  asked  no  questions:  she  stole 
0  her  side.  The  dog  recommenced  barking  ftiriously;  sud- 
ienly  lie  stopped,  and  seemed  to  listen.  The  occupants  of  the 
lining-room  listened  too,  and  not  merely  now  to  the  flow  oi' 
he  mill-stream:  there  was  a  nearer,  though  a  muffled  sound 
)a  the  road  below  the  churchyard;  a  measured,  beating, 
ipproaching  sound;  a  dull  tramp  of  marching  feet. 

It  drew  near.  Those  who  listened,  by  degrees  comprehended 
its  extent.  It  was  not  the  tread  of  two,  nor  of  a  dozen,  nor 
of  a  score  of  men:  it  was  the  tread  of  hundreds.  They  could 
see  nothing:  the  high  shrubs  of  the  garden  formed  a  leafy 
Bcreen  between  them  and  the  road.  To  hear,  however,  was 
not  enough ;  and  this  they  felt  as  the  troop  trod  forwards,  and 
Kerned  actually  passing  the  Bectory.  They  felt  it  more  when 
a  hmnan  voice — ^though  that  voice  spoke  but  one  word — ^broke 
the  hush  of  the  night. 
"Halt!" 

A  halt  followed:  the  march  was  arrested.     Then  came  a 
low  conference,  of  which  no  word  was  distinguishable  from 
the  dining-room. 
"  We  must  hear  this,"  said  Shirley. 

She  turned,  took  her  pistols  from  the  table,  silently  passed 
out  throngh  the  middle  window  of  the  dining-room,  which 
was,  in  factj  a  glass  door,  stole  down  the  walk  to  the  garden- 
wall,  and  stood  listening  imder  the  lilacs.  Caroline  would  not 
have  quitted  the  house  had  she  been  alone,  but  where  Shirley 
weat  she  would  go.  She  glanced  at  the  weapon  on  the  side- 
hoaid,  but  left  it  behind  her,  and  presently  stood  at  her  friend's 
wde.  They  dared  not  look  over  the  wall,  for  fear  of  being 
K^:  ihey  were  obliged  to  crouch  behind  it:  they  heard  these 
words: — 

'*  It  looks  a  rambling  old  building.    Who  lives  in  it  besides 
^e  damned  parson ?'* 
**  Only  three  women :  his  niece  and  two  servants.** 
"Do  you  know  where  they  sleep  ?*' 
**  The  lasses  behind:  the  niece  in  a  front  room.*'  , 


278  saiBLBT. 

"AndHelstone?" 

"  Yonder  is  his  chamber.  He  uses  burning  a  light;  but  I 
■ee  none  now." 

"  Where  would  you  get  in  ?  " 

"  If  I  were  ordered  to  do  his  job— ^nd  he  desarres  it — ^I  'd 
try  youd'  long  window:  it  opens  to  the  dining-room:  I  could 
grope  my  way  ujf-stairs,  and  I  know  his  chamber." 

^'  How  would  you  manage  about  the  women  folk  ?  ^ 

'^  Let  'em  alone,  except  they  shrieked,  and  then  I'd  soon 
quieten  'em.  I  could  wish  to  find  the  old  chap  asleep:  if  be 
waked)  he  'd  be  dangerous." 

"Has  he  arms?" 

"  Fire>arm9,  alius, — and  alius  leadened." 

"Then  you're  a  fool  to  stop  us  here;  a  shot  would  give  tlw 
alarm:  Moore  would  be  on  us  before  we  could  turn  round. 
We  should  miss  our  main  object." 

"  You  might  go  on,  I  tell  you.     I'd  engage  Helstone  alone. " 

A  pause.  One  of  the  party  dropped  some  weapon  which  I 
rang  on  the  stone  causeway:  at  this  sound  the  Eectory  dog 
barked  again  furiously — ^fiercely. 

"  That  spoils  all  I"  said  the  voice;  "he'll  awake:  a  noise 
like  that  might  rouse  the  dead.  You  did  not  say  there  was  a 
dog.     Danm  you  !     Forward  1" 

Forward  they  went, — tramp,  tramp, — ^with  mustering  mani- 
fold, slow-filing  tread.     They  were  gone. 

Shirley  stood  erect;  looked  over  the  wall,  along  the  road. 

"  Not  a  soul  remains,"  she  said. 

She  stood  and  mused.  "  Thank  Grodl"  was  the  next  obser- 
vation. 

Caroline  repeated  the  ejaculation,  not  in  so  steady  a  tone: 
she  was  trembling  much ;  her  heart  was  beating  fast  and  thick: 
her  face  was  cold ;  her  forehead  damp. 

"  Thank  God  for  us ! "  she  reiterated ;  "  but  what  will  happen  \ 
elsewhere  ?    They  have  passed  us  by  that  they  may  make  sun 
of  others." 

"  They  have  done  well,"  returned  Shirley  with  composure  r 
"  the  others  will  defend  themselves, — ^they  can  do  it, — tikey  are 
prepared  for  them:  with  us  it  is  otherwise.  My  finger  was  on 
the  trigger  of  this  pistol.-  I  was  quite  ready  to  give  that  man, 
if  he  had  entered,  such  a  greeting  as  he  little  calculated  on; 
but  behind  him  followed  three  hundred:  I  had  neither  three 
hundred  hands  nor  three  hundred  weapons.  I  could  not  have 
eflfectually  protected  either  you,  myself,  or  the  two  poor  women 


A  SUMXEB  nOHT.  fi99 

Jeep  tinder  that  roof;  therefore  I  again  eamestiiy  thank  God 
r  iDsnlt  and  peril  escaped." 

Af^er  a  second  panse,  she  oc»itinaed:  ^  Wliat  is  it  my  duty 
od  wisdom  to  do  next  ?  Not  to  stay  here  inaotiye,  i  am  glad 
>  aay^  but  of  course  to  walk  over  to  the  HoUow." 
"  To  the  Hollow,  Shirley  ?  " 
"To  the  HoUow.    Will  you  go  witii  me?" 
"  Wliere  those  men  are  gone  ?  " 

"  They  hare  taken  the  highway:  we  should  not  eneounter 
hem:  ihe  road  over  the  fields  is  as  safe,  silent,  and  solitary  as 
;  path  tluoagh  the  air  would  be.     Will  you  go  ?  *' 

'*  Yea/*  was  .the  answer,  given  mechanically,  not  beeatise  the 
ipeakff  wished,  or  was  prepared  to  go;  or,  indeed,  was  other- 
vise  than  soared  at  tiie  prospect  ef  going,  but  because  tiie  f^ 
ihti  could  not  abandcm  Shirley. 

"  Then  we  must  fasten  up  these  windowv,  and  leave  all  as 
secure  as  we  can  behind  us.  Do  you  know  what  we  are  goi^ 
fcr,Cary?" 
"Yes — no— because  you  wish  it."  ^^ 

*^  Is  that  all  ?    And  are  you  so  obedient  to  a  mere  CK^oe 
of  mine  ?     What  a  docile  wife  you  would  make  to  a  «tem 
liusband.     The  moon's  face  is  not  whiter  than  yours  at  this 
moment;  and  the  aspen  at  the  gate  does  not  tremble  more 
tittu  jour  busy  fingers ;  and  so  tractable  and  terror-^strack, 
and  dismayed  and  devoted,  you  would  follow  me  into  the  tMck 
of  real  danger  I  Gary,  let  me  give  your  fidelity  a  motive:  we 
•re  going  fbr  Moore's  sake;  to  see  if  we  can  be  of  use  to  himt 
to  make  an  e£Ebrt  to  warn  him  of  what  is  coming." 

"To be  smrel    I  am  a  blind,  weak  fool,  and  you  are  acute 
ud  sensible,  Sbirley  I    I  will  go  with  youl    I  will  ^adiy  go 
lithyoul" 
"  I  do  not  doubt  it.     You  would  die  blindly  and  me^ly  foe 
bat  you  would  intelligently  and  gladly  die  for  Moore :  but 
tnith  there  is  no  question  ci  deal^  to«night,-^we  run  no 
kitalL'' 

Ctiolitae  rapidly  closed  shutter  and  lattice.  '^  Do  not  fear 
1  shall  not  have  breath  to  run  as  fast  as  you  can  possibly 
Shirley.     Take  my  hand:  let  us  go  straight  across  the 

^But  you  cannot  climb  walls  ?  " 
"TcKni^tlcan." 

^'loaaie  afiraid  of  hedges,  and  the  beck  whidi  we  shall  be 
^toaross?" 


S80  8HIBLET. 

"  I  can  cross  it." 

They  started:  they  ran.  Many  a  wall  checked  but  did  oof 
baffle  iSiem.  Shirley  was  surefooted  and  agile :  she  could  spring 
like  a  deer  when  she  chose.  Caroline,  more  timidy  and  leaa 
dexterous,  feU  once  or  twice,  and  bruised  herself;  bat  she  rose 
again  directly,  saying  she  was  not  hurt.  A  quickset  hedge 
bounded  the  last  field:  they  lost  time  in  seeking  a  gap  in  it: 
the  aperture,  when  found,  was  narrow,  but  they  worked  their 
way  through:  the  long  hair,  the  tender  skin,  the  silks  and 
the  muslins  suffered;  but  what  was  chiefly  regretted  was  the 
impediment  this  difficulty  had  caused  to  speed.  On  the  other 
side  they  met  the  beck,  flowing  deep  in  a  rough  bed:  at  this 
point  a  narrow  plank  formed  the  only  bridge  across  it.  Shirley 
had  trodden  the  plank  successfully  and  fearlessly  many  a  time 
before :  Caroline  had  never  yet  dared  to  risk  the  transit. 

"  I  will  carry  you  across,"  said  Miss  Keeldar:  "  you  are 
light,  and  I  am  not  weak:  let  me  try." 

'^  If  I  fall  in,  you  may  fish  me  out,"  was  the  answcFi  as  a 
grateful  squeeze  compressed  her  hand.  Caroline,  without 
pausing,  trod  forward  on  the  trembling  plank  as  if  it  were  a 
continuation  of  the  firm  turf:  Shirley,  who  followed,  did  not 
cross  it  more  resolutely  or  safely.  In  their  present  humouTi 
on  their  present  errand,  a  strong  and  foaming  channel  would 
have  been  a  barrier  to  neither.  At  the  moment  they  were 
above  the  control  either  of  fire  or  water:  all  Stilbro'  Moor, 
alight  and  alow  with  bonfires,  would  not  have  stopped  them, 
nor  would  Calder  or  Aire  thrmdering  in  flood.  Yet  one  sound 
made  them  pause.  Scarce  had  they  set  foot  on  the  solid 
opposite  bank,  when  a  shot  split  the  air  firom  the  north.  One 
second  lapsed.  Further  off,  burst  a  like  note  in  the  south. 
Within  the  space  of  three  minutes,  similar  signals  boomed  in 
the  east  and  west. 

'^  I  thought  we  were  dead  at  the  first  explosion,"  observed 
Shirley,  drawing  a  long  breath.  "  I  felt  myself  hit  in  the 
temples,  and  I  concluded  your  heart  was  pierced ;  but  the  re- 
iterated voice  was  an  explanation :  those  are  signals — it  is  their 
way — ^the  attack  must  be  near.  We  should  have  had  wings: 
our  feet  have  not  borne  us  swiMy  enough." 

A  portion  of  the  copse  was  now  to  clear :  when  they  emerged 
from  it,  the  mill  lay  just-  below  them:  they  could  look  dovn 
upon  the  buildings,  the  yard;  they  could  see  the  road  beyond. 
And  the  first  glance  in  that  direction  told  Shirley  she  vu 
right  in  her  conjecture:  they  were  already  too  late  to  gire 


A  S^aiMER  MIGHT.  S81 

vmiing:  it  bad  taken  more  time  than  they  calculated  on  to 
oYercome  the  various  obstacles  which  embarrassed  the  short 
eat  across  the  fields. 

The  road,  which  should  have  been  white,  was  dark  with  a 
moving  mass:  the  rioters  were  assembled  in  front  of  the  closed 
yard  gates,  and  a  single  figure  stood  within,  apparently  addres- 
sing ^em:  the  mill  itself  was  perfectly  black  and  stiU;  there 
was  neither  life,  light,  nor  motion  around  it. 

"  Surely  he  is  prepared:  surely  that  is  not  Moore  meeting 
them  alone  ?  "  whispered  Shirley. 
"  It  is — ^we  must  go  to  him  1  I  mil  go  to  him." 
"  ITuMt  you  will  not." 

**  Why  did  I  come,  then  ?  I  came  only  for  him.  I  shall 
j(rinhim." 

"  Fortunately,  it  is  out  of  your  power:  there  is  no  entrance 
to  the  yard." 

*'  There  is  a  small  entrance  at  the  back,  besides  the  gates 
in  front:  it  opens  by  a  secret  method  which  I  know — I  will 
try  it." 
"  Not  with  my  leave." 

Miss  Keeldar  clasped  her  round  the  waist  with  both  arms 
and  held  her  back.     "  Not  one  step  shall  you  stir,"  she  went 
on  authoritatively.     "  At  this  moment,  Moore  would  be  both 
shocked  and  embarrassed,  if  he  saw  either  you  or  me.     Men 
nerer  want  women  near  tiem  in  time  of  real  danger." 
"  I  woxdd  not  trouble — I  would  help  him,"  was  the  reply. 
"  How  ?     By  inspiring  him  with  heroism  ?    Pooh  I     These 
are  not  the  days  of  chivalry :  it  is  not  a  tilt  at  a  tournament  we 
are  going  to  behold,  but  a  struggle  about  money,  and  food, 
•ndlife." 
''  It  is  natural  that  I  should  be  at  his  side." 
<<  Ab  queen  of  his  heart  ?     His  mill  is  his  lady-love,  Cary ! 
Backed  by  his  facto!ry  and  his  frames,  he  has  all  the  encourage- 
ment he  wants  or  can  know.    It  is  not  for  love  or  beauty,  but 
for  ledger  and  broadcloth,  he  is   going  to  break  a  spear. 
Don't  be  sentimental;  Robert  is  not  so." 
"I  could  help  him — ^I  mil  seek  him." 
"  Off  then — ^I  let  you  go— seek  Moore :  you'll  not  find  him." 
She  loosened  her  hold.   Caroline  sped  like  levelled  shaft  from 
bent  bow;  after  her  rang  a  jesting,  gibing  laugh.    '<  Look  well 
there  is  no  mistake  1"  was  the  warning  given. 
But  there  was  a  mistake.    Miss  Helstone  paused,  hesitated, 


272  SHIBLET. 

make  an  objection  ; ' — ^  it  is  permitted  to  a  WCrtnan  to  teacb 
and  to  exercise  authority  as  much  as  may  be.  Man,  mean- 
time, cannot  do  better  than  hold  his  peace/  and  ao  on/' 

*  That  wiUn't  wash,  Miss.'' 

"  I  dare  say  it  will.  My  notions  are  dyed  in  faster  colours 
than  yours,  Joe.  Mr  Scott,  you  are  a  thoroughly  dogmatical 
person,  and  always  were:  I  like  William  better  than  you." 

"Joe  is  well  enough  in  his  own  house,"  said  Shirley:  **1 
have  seen  him  as  quiet  as  a  lamb  at  home.  There  is  not  a 
better  nor  a  kinder  husband  in  Briarfield.  He  does  not  dog- 
matize to  his  wife.'' 

"  My  wife  is  a  hard-working,  plain  woman  :  time  and 
trouble  has  ta'en  all  the^  conceit  out  of  her;  but  that  is  not 
the  case  with  you,  young  misses.  And  then  you  reckon  to 
have  so  much  knowledge;  audi'  my  thoughts  it's  only  super- 
ficial sort  o'  vanities  you  're  acquainted  with.  I  can  teli — 
happen  a  year  sin'— one  day  Miss  Caroline  coming  into  cm 
coimting-house  when  I  war  packing  up  summat  behind  t' 
great  desk,  and  she  didn't  see  me,  and  she  brought  a  slate  wi' 
a  sum  on  it  to  t'  maister:  it  were  only  a  bit  of  a  sum  in 
practice,  that  our  Harry  would  have  settled  i'  two  minutes. 
She  couldn't  do  it;  Mr  M(9ore  had  to  show  her  how;  and 
when  he  did  show  her,  she  couldn't  understand  him.'* 

"Nonsense,  Joel" 

"  Nay,  it 's  no  nonsense :  and  Miss  Shirley,  there,  reckons 
to  hearken  to  t'  maister  when  he 's  talking  ower  trade,  so 
attentive  like,  as  if  she  followed  him  word  for  word,  and  all 
war  as  clear  as  a  lady's  looking-glass  to  her  een;  and  all  t* 
while  she 's  peeping  and  peeping  out  o'  t'  window  to  see  if  t' 
mare  stands  quiet;  and  then  lookiiig  at  a  bit  of  a  splash  on 
her  riding-skirt ;  and  then  glancing  glegly  round  at  wer 
coimting-house  cobwebs  and  dust,  and  Slinking  what  muckj 
folk  we  are,  and  what  a  grand  ride  she  'U  have  just  i'  now 
ower  Nunnely^common.  She  hears  no  more  o'  Mr  Moore's 
talk  nor  if  he  spake  Hebrew." 

"  Joe,  you  are  a  real  slanderer.  I  would  give  you  yonr 
answer,  only  the  people  are  coming  out  of  church :  we  must 
leave  you.  Man  of  prejudice,  good-bye:  William,  good-bye. 
Children,  come  up  to  Fieldhead  to-morrow,  and  you  shall 
choose  what  you  like  best  out  of  Mrs  Gill's  store-room." 


A  auMME^moHT.  27S 


imcME^: 


qHAPTEB  xrx. 

A    SUMMER    NIGHT. 

Td  hxmr  was  now  that  of  dusk.    A  clear  air  fayoured  the 
kindling  of  the  stars. 

"There  will  be  just  light  enough  to  show  me  the  way 
home,"  said  Miss  Keeldar,  as  she  prepared  to  take  leave  of 
Caroline  at  the  Rectory  garden-door. 

"  You  must  not  go  alone,  Shirley.  Fanny  shall  accompany 
you." 

^  That  she  shall  not.     Of  what  need  I  be  afraid  in  my  own 
parish?    I  would  walk  from  Fieldhead  to  the  church  any 
fine  midsummer  night,  three  hours  later  than  this,  for  the 
mere  pleasure  of  seeing  the  stars,  and  the  chance  of  meeting 
a  fairy." 
^  But  just  wait  till  the  crowd  is  cleared  away.** 
"  Agreed.     There  are  the  five  Misses  Armitage  streaming 
by.    Here  comes  Mrs  Sykes's  phaeton,  Mr  Wynne's  close 
carriage,  Mrs  Birtwhistle's  car :  I  don't  wish  to  go  through 
the  ceremony  of  bidding  them  all  good-bye,  so  we  will  step 
into  the  garden  and  take  shelter  amongst  the  laburnums  for 
an  instant." 

The  rectors,  their  curates  and  their  churchwardens,  now 
usned  fix>m  the  church-porch.  There  was  a  great  confabula- 
tion, shaking  of  hands,  congratulation  on  speeches,  recom- 
mendation to  be  careful  of  the  night  air,  &c.  By  degrees  the 
throng  dispersed ;  the  carriages  drove  off.  Miss  Keddar  was 
jnst  emerging  from  her  flowery  refiige,  when  Mr  Helstone 
entered  the  garden  and  met  her. 

"  Oh  I  I  want  you ! "  he  said :  "  I  was  afraid  you  were  already 
gone.    Caroline,  come  here! " 

Caroline  came,  expecting,  as  Shirley  did,  a  lecture  on  not 
baring  been  visible  at  church.  Other  subjects,  however,  occu- 
pied tibe  Sector's  mind. 

"  I  shall  not  sleep  at  home  to-night,"  he  continued.  "  I 
have  just  met  with  an  old  friend,  and  promised  to  accompany 
him.  I  shall  return  probably  about  noon  to-morrow.  Thomas, 
the  derk,  is  engaged,  and  I  cannot  get  him  to  sleep  in  the  house, 

M I  usoally  do  when  I  am  absent  for  a  night;  now ^ 

**  Now/'  interrupted  Shirley,  *^  you  want  me  as  a  gentleman 
--the  first  gentleman  in  Briarfield,  in  short,  to  supply  your 

18 


274  am^xTr 

place,  be  master  of  the  Rectory,  and  guardian  of  your  niece 
and  maids  wMle  you  are  away  ?  " 

"  Exactly,  captain :  I  thought  the  post  would  suit  yoxu  Will 
you  favour  Caroline  so  far  as  to  be  her  guest  for  one  night? 
Will  you  stay  here  instead  of  going  back  to  Fieldhead  ?  ** 

<'  And  what  will  Mrs  Pryor  do?     She  expects  me  home." 

''I  will  send  her  word.  Come,  make  up  your  mind  to  ataj. 
It  grows  late;  the  dew  laUs  heavily:  you  and  CaroUne  w^ 
efijoy  each  other's  society,  I  doubt  not." 

"  t  promise  you  then  to  stay  with  Caroline,"  replied  Shirley* 
"  As  you  say,  we  shall  enjoy  each  other's  society :  we  will  not 
be  separated  to-night.  Now,  rejoin  your  old  friend,  and  fbr 
nothing  for  us." 

'^  If  there  should  chi^uce  to  be  any  disturbance  in  the  night, 
oaptaini — ^if  you  should  hear  the  picking  of  a  lock,  the  catdDg 
out  pf  a  pane  of  glass,  a  stealthy  tread  of  steps  about  the  house 
(and  I  need  not  fear  to  tell  you,  who  bear  a  weU-tempered, 
mettlesome  heart  under  your  girPs  ribbon-sash,  that  sooh  little 
incidents  are  very  possible  in  the  present  time),  what  would 
you  do?" 

«  Don't  know-«-faint,  perhaps — ^fall  down,  and  have  to  be 
picked  up  again.  But,  Doctor,  if  you  assign  nde  the  post  of 
honour,  you  must  give  me  arms.  What  wea  pon^are  there  in 
your  stronghold  ?  " 

"  You  could  not  wield  a  sword  ?  " 

"  No ;  I  could  manage  the  carving-knife  better." 

"  You  will  find  a  good  one  in  the  dining-room  sideboard:  a 
lady's  knife,  light  to  handle,  and  as  sharp-pointed  as  a  poniard." 

"  It  will  suit  Caroline;  but  you  must  give  me  a  brace  of 
pistols:  I  know  you  have  pistols." 

"  I  have  two  pairs ;  one  pair  I  can  place  at  your  disposaL 
You  will  find  them  suspended  over  the  mantelpiece  of  jdj  sbadj 
in  cloth  cases." 

«  Loaded  ?  " 

''  Yes,  but  not  on  the  cock.  Cock  them  before  you  go  to  bed. 
It  is  paying  you  a  great  compliment,  captain,  to  lend  yen 
these:  were  you  one  of  the  awkward  squad  you  should  not 
have  them." 

"  I  will  take  care.  You  need  delay  no  longer,  Mr  Helstone; 
you  may  go  now.  He  is  gracious  to  me  to  lend  me  his 
pistols,"  she  remarked,  as  the  Eector  passed  out  at  the  garden- 
gaJte.  '*  But  come,  Lina,"  she  continued  ;  ''  let  us  go  in  and 
have  som^  sui^)er:  I  was  too  much  vexed  at  tea  wit^  the  vki- 


A   SUMMER  NIGHT.  275 

• 

uige  of  Mr  Sam  Wynne  to  be  able  to  eat,  and  now  I  am  really 
iungry." 

Entering  the  bouse,  \hey  repaired  to  the  darkened  dining- 
t)om,  through  the  open  windows  of  which  apartment  stdie  the 
rvening  air,  bearing  the  perfume  of  flowers  from  the  garden, 
he  very  distanli  sound  of  far-retreating  steps  from  the  road,  and 
i  soft  yague  murmur,  whose  origin  Caroline  explained  by  the 
pemark,  uttered  as  she  stood  listening  at  the  casement: 

"  Shirley,  I  hear  the  beck  in  the  Hollow." 

Then  she  rung  the  bell,  asked  for  a  candle  and  some  bj'ead 
md  milk — ^Miss  Keeldar's  usual  supper  and  her  own.  Fanny, 
when  she  brought  in  the  tray,  would  have  clostd  the  windows 
Bod  the  ehutters,  but  was  requested  to  desist  for  the  present: 
the  twilight  was  too  calm,  its  breath  too  balmy  to  be  yet 
grJuded.  They  took  their  meal  in  silence :  Caroline  rose  once, 
to  remoye  to  the  window-sill  a  glass  of  flowers  which  stood  on 
the  side-board;  the  exhalation  &om  the  blossoms  being  some- 
what too  powerful  for  the  sultry  room:  in  returning,  she  half 
opened  a  drawer,  and  took  £:om  it  something  that  glittered 
clear  and  keen  in  her  hand. 

"  You  assigned  this  to  me,  then,  Shirley — did  you  ?  It  is 
bright,  keen-edged,  finely-tapered:  it  is  dangerous-looking, 
1  never  yet  felt  the  impulse  which  could  move  me  to  direct 
this  against  a  felloi/^-creature.  It  is  difficult  to  fancy  what 
circomstancea  could  nerve  my  arm  to  strike  home  with  this 
loDg  knife.*'  , 

"I  should  hate  to  do  it,"  replied  Shirley;  "but  I  think  I 
ooold  do  it,  if  goaded  by  certain  exigencies  which  I  can  ima- 
gine.'* And  Miss  Keeldar  quietly  sipped  her  glass  of  new  milk, 
looking  somewhat  thoughtful,  and  a  little  pale :  though,  indeed, 
when  did  she  not  look  pale  ?     She  was  never  florid.  * 

Th%  milk  sipped  and  the  bread,  eaten,  Fanny  was  again 
ronunoned:  she  and  EUza  were  recommended  to  go  to  bed, 
which  they  were  quite  willing  to  do,  being  weary  of  the  day's 
aationB,  of  much  cutting  of  currant-buns,  and  filling  of  urns 
and  te^ota,  and  running  backwards  and  forwards  with  trays. 
Erelong  the  maid's  chamber-door  was  heard  to  close;  Caroline 
took  a  candle,  and  went  quietly  all  over  the  house,  seeing  that 
ereiy  window  was  fast  and  eyery  door  barred.  She  did  not 
<9ea  evade  the  haunted  back-kitchen,  nor  the  yault-like  cellars. 

These  visited,  she  returned. 
^  There  is  neither  spirit  nor  flesh  in  the  house  at  present,** 

^  Mid,  "  which  should  not  be  there.    It  is  now  near  eleven 


276  SHIBLET. 

o^clock,  fully  bed-tune,  yet  I  would  rather  sit  up  a  little  longer, 
if  you  do  not  object,  Shirley.  Here,"  she  continued,  **  I  have 
brought  the  brace  of  pistols  from  my  uncle's  study:  you  may 
examine  them  at  your  leisure.'* 

She  placed  them  on  the  table  before  her  Mend. 

"  Why  would  you  rather  sit  up  longer  ?  "  asked  Miss  Keddar, 
taking  up  the  firearms,  examining  them,  and  again  laying  them 
down. 

<<  Because  I  have  a  strange,  excited  feeling  in  my  heart.** 

«  So  have  I." 

"  Is  this  state  of  sleeplessness  and  restlessness  caused  by 
something  elect!^ical  in  the  air,  I  wonder  ?  " 

^  No :  tike  sky  is  dear,  the  stars  numberless :  it  is  a  fine  uight^ 

"  But  very  still.  I  hear  the  water  firet  over  its  stony  bed  in 
Hollow's  Copse  as  distinctly  as  if  it  ran  below  the  churchyard 
waU." 

*'  I  am  glad  it  is  so  still  a  night:  a  moaning  wind  or  rushing 
rain  would  vex  me  to  fever  just  now." 

"  Why,  Shirley  ?  " 

"  Because  it  would  baffle  my  efforts  to  listen."  ' 

"  Do  you  listen  towards  the  Hollow  ?  " 

'^  Yes ;  it  is  the  only  quarter  whence  we  can  hear  a  sound 
just  now." 

"'  The  only  one,  Shirley." 

They  both  sat  near  the  window,  and  both  leaned  their  arms 
on  the  sill,  and  both  inclined  their  heads  towards  the  open 
lattice.  They  saw  each  other's  young  faces  by  the  starlight, 
and  that  dim,  June  twilight  which  does  not  wholly  fade  from 
the  west  till  dawn  begins  to  break  in  the  east. 

'^  Mr  Helstone  thinks  we  have  no  idea  which  way  he  b 
gone,"  murmured  Miss  Keeldar,  "  nor  on  what  errand,  nor 
with  what  expectations,  nor  how  prepared;  but  I  guess  aiach 
— do  not  you?" 

"  I  guess  something." 

"  All  those  gentlemen — ^your  cousin  Moore  included — ^think 
that  you  and  I  are  now  asleep  in  our  beds,  unconscious." 

^^  Caring  nothing  about  them — hoping  and  fearing  nothing 
fi)r  them,"  added  Caroline. 

Both  kept  silence  fi)r  frdl  half  an  hoiur.  The  night  was 
idlent,  too  ;  only  the  church-clock  measured  its  course  by 
quarters.  Some  words  were  interchanged  about  the  chill  of 
the  air :  they  wrapped  their  scarves  closer  round  them,  resuned 
their  bonnets  which  they  had  removed|  and  again  watched. 


A  SUlfUER  NIOHT.  277 

Towards  midniglit  the  teasing,  monotonous  bark  of  the 
louse^og  disturbed  the  quietude  of  their  vigil.  Caroline 
'ose,  and  made  her  way  noiselessly  through  the  dark  passages 
o  the  kitchen,  intendii^  to  appease  him  with  a  piece  of  bread : 
ihe  succeeded.  On  returning  to  the  dining-room,  she  found 
t  all  dark,  Miss  Keeldar  having  extinguished  the  candle:  the 
mtline  of  her  shape  was  visible  near  the  still  open  window, 
eaniug  out.  Miss  Helstone  asked  no  questions:  she  stole 
lo  her  side.  The  dog  recommenced  barking  furiously;  sud- 
lenly  he  stopped,  and  seemed  to  listen.  The  occupants  of  the 
lining-room  listened  too,  and  not  merely  now  to  the  flow  of' 
Lhe  ndll-fitream :  there  was  a  nearer,  though  a  muffled  sound 
>n  die  road  below  the  churchyard;  a  measured,  beating, 
ikpproaching  soimd;  a  dull  tramp  of  marching  feet. 

It  drew  near.  Those  who  list^ed,  by  degrees  comprehended 
its  extent.  It  was  not  the  tread  of  two,  nor  of  a  dozen,  nor 
of  a  score  of  men :  it  was  the  tread  of  hundreds.  They  could 
tee  nothing:  the  high  shrubs  of  the  garden  formed  a  leafy 
screen  between  them  and  the  road.  To  hear,  however,  was 
not  enough;  and  this  they  felt  as  the  troop  trod  forwards,  and 
teemed  actually  passing  the  Bectory.  They  felt  it  more  when 
a  human  voice — ^though  that  voice  spoke  but  one  word — ^broke 
the  hush  of  the  night. 
"Haiti" 

A  halt  followed:   the  march  was  arrested.     Then  came  a 
low  confo^nce,  of  which  no  word  was  distinguishable  from 
the  dining-room. 
"  We  must  hear  this,"  said  Shirley. 

She  turned,  took  her  pistols  from  the  table,  silently  passed 
out  through  the  middle  window  of  the  dining-room,  which 
was,  in  foct,  a  glass  door,  stole  down  the  walk  to  the  garden- 
vall,  and  stood  listening  imder  the  lilacs.  Caroline  would  not 
hare  quitted  the  house  had  she  been  alone,  but  where  Shirley 
went  she  would  go.  She  glanced  at  the  weapon  on  the  side- 
hoard,  but  left  it  behind  her,  and  presently  stood  at  her  friend's 
ode.  They  dared  not  look  over  the  wall,  for  fear  of  being 
Ken:  they  were  obliged  to  crouch  behind  it:  they  heard  these 
words: — 

"  It  looks  a  rambling  old  building.     Who  lives  in  it  besides 
the  damned  parson  ?  " 
*'Only  thpee  women:  his  niece  and  two  servants.** 
**Do  you  know  where  they  sleep  ?" 
**  The  lasses  behind:  the  niece  in  a  front  room."  , 


280  8HIBLET. 

"  I  can  cross  it." 

They  started:  they  ran.  Many  a  wall  checked  but  did  not 
baffle  them.  Shirley  was  surefooted  and  agile :  she  conld  Bpring 
like  a  deer  when  she  chose.  Caroline,  more  timid,  and  lea 
dexterous,  fell  once  or  twice,  and  bruised  herself;  but  she  rose 
again  directly,  saying  she  was  not  hurt.  A  quickset  hedge 
bounded  the  last  field:  they  lost  time  in  seeking  a  gap  in  it: 
the  aperture,  when  found,  was  narrow,  but  they  worked  their 
way  through:  the  long  hair,  the  tender  skin,  the  sOks  and 
the  muslins  suffered;  but  what  was  chiefly  regretted  was  tbe 
impediment  this  difficulty  had  caused  to  speed.  On  the  other 
side  they  met  the  beck,  flowing  deep  in  a  rough  bed:  at  this 
point  a  narrow  plank  formed  the  only  bridge  across  it.  Shirky 
had  trodden  the  plank  successiully  and  fearlessly  many  a  time 
before:  Caroline  had  never  yet  dared  to  risk  the  transit. 

"  I  will  carry  you  across,"  said  Miss  Keeldar:  "  you  are 
light,  and  I  am  not  weak:  let  me  try." 

"  If  I  fall  in,  you  may  fish  me  out,"  was  the  answer,  as  a 
grateful  squeeze  compressed  her  hand.  Caroline,  widiont 
pausing,  trod  forward  on  the  trembling  plank  as  if  it  were  a 
continuation  of  the  firm  turf:  Shirley,  who  followed,  did  not 
cross  it  more  resolutely  or  safely.  In  their  present  humour, 
on  their  present  errand,  a  strong  and  foaming  channel  would 
have  been  a  barrier  to  neither.  At  the  moment  they  were 
above  the  control  either  of  fire  or  water:  all  Stilbro'  Moor, 
alight  and  alow  with  bonfires,  would  not  have  stopped  them, 
nor  would  Calder  or  Aire  thundering  in  flood.  Yet  one  sound 
made  them  pause.  Scarce  had  they  set  foot  on  the  solid 
opposite  bank,  when  a  shot  split  the  air  from  the  north.  One 
second  lapsed.  Further  off,  burst  a  like  note  in  the  south. 
Within  the  space  of  three  minutes,  similar  signals  boomed  is 
the  east  and  west. 

**  I  thought  we  were  dead  at  the  first  explosion,"  observed 
Shirley,  drawing  a  long  breath.  "  I  felt  myself  hit  in  the 
temples,  and  I  concluded  your  heart  was  pierced;  but  the  re- 
iterated voice  was  an  explanation:  those  are  signals — ^it  is  their 
way — ^the  attack  must  be  near.  "We  should  have  had  wings: 
our  feet  have  not  borne  us  swiftly  enough." 

A  portion  of  the  copse  was  now  to  clear :  when  they  emerged 
from  it,  the  mill  lay  just,  below  them:  they  could  look  down 
upon  the  buildings,  the  yard;  they  could  see  the  road  beyond. 
And  the  first  glance  in  that  direction  told  Shirley  she  vu 
rigl^t  in  her  conjecture:  they  were  already  too  lite  to  ghre 


A  S^aOfEB  KIOHT.  281 

WBnung:  it  liad  taken  more  time  than  they  calculated  on  to 
OTezxsome  the  yarions  obstacles  which  embarrassed  the  short 
cut  across  the  fields. 

The  road,  which  should  have  been  white,  was  dark  with  a 
moving  mass:  the  rioters  were  assembled  in  front  of  the  closed 
jard  gates,  and  a  single  figure  stood  within,  apparently  addres- 
sing them:  the  mill  itself  was  perfectly  black  and  still;  there 
was  neither  life,  light,  nor  motion  around  it. 

*'  Sorely  he  is  prepared:  surely  that  is  not  Moore  meeting 
them  alone  ?  "  whispered  Shirley. 

"  It  28 — we  must  go  to  him  I  I  tmU  go  to  him." 

"  That  yon  will  not." 

"  Why  did  I  come,  then  ?  I  came  only  for  him.  I  shall 
join  him." 

'*  Fortunately,  it  is  out  of  your  power:  there  is  no  entrance 
to  the  yard." 

''  There  is  a  small  entrance  at  the  back,  besides  the  gates 
in  front:  it  opens  by  a  secret  method  which  I  know — ^I  will 
tiyit." 

"  Not  with  my  leave." 

Miss  Keeldar  clasped  her  round  the  waist  with  both  arms 
and  held  her  back.  "  Not  one  step  shall  you  stir,"  she  went 
on  authoritatively.  "  At  this  moment,  Moore  would  be  both 
shocked  and  embarrassed,  if  he  saw  either  you  or  me.  Men 
never  want  women  near  Ihem  in  time  of  real  danger." 

"  I  would  not  trouble — I  would  help  him,"  was  the  reply. 

"  How  ?  By  inspiring  him  with  heroism  ?  Pooh !  These 
are  not  the  days  of  chiv^ry :  it  is  not  a  tilt  at  a  tournament  we 
are  going  to  behold,  but  a  struggle  about  money,  and  food, 
and  life." 

"  It  is  natural  that  I  should  be  at  his  side." 

**  As  queen  of  his  heart  ?  His  mill  is  his  lady-love,  Cary ! 
Backed  by  his  facto!ry  and  his  frames,  he  has  aU  the  encourage* 
znent  he  wants  or  can  know.  It  is  not  for  love  or  beauty,  but 
for  ledger  and  broadcloth,  he  is  going  to  break  a  spear. 
Tkfti\  be  sentimental;  Robert  is  not  so." 

^  I  could  help  him — I  will  seek  him." 

"  Off  then — ^I  let  you  go— seek  Moore :  you  'U  not  find  him." 
She  loosened  her  hold.   Caroline  sped  like  levelled  shaft  frt>m 
bent  bow;  after  her  rang  a  jesting,  gibing  laugh.    "  Look  well 
there  is  no  mistake !"  was  the  warning  given. 

Bat  there  was  a  mistake.    Miss  Helstone  paused,  hesitated, 


290  '  smBLET. 

waved  hair  into  curls,  by  twining  it  round  her  fingers.  Sb^ 
took  up  the  theme  again  fiye  minutes  after,  as  Caroline  &stened 
her  dress  and  clasped  her  girdle.  * 

"  If  men  could  see  us  as  we  really  are,  they  would  be  a  littZe 
amazed ;  but  the  cleverest,  the  acutest  men  are  often  mider  an 
illusion  about  women :  they  do  not  read  them  in  a  true  li^c : 
they  nusapprehend  them,  both  for  good  and  evil:  their  good 
woman  is  a  queer  thing,  half  doU,  half  angel;  thdr  \)qA 
woman  almost  always  a  fiend.  Then  to  hear  them  Ml  into 
ecstasies  with  each  other's  creations,  worshipping  the  heroine 
of  such  a  poem— novel— drama,  thinking  it  fine— divine! 
Fine  and  divine  it  may  be,  but  often  quite  artificial — ^fidse  as 
the  rose  in  my  best  bonnet  there.  If  I  spoke  all  I  think  cm 
this  point;  if  I  gav«  my  real  opinion  of  some  first-rate  female 
characters  in  first-rate  works,  where  should  I  be?  Dead 
under  a  cairn  of  avenging  stones  in  half  an  hour." 

^*  Shirley,  you  chatter  so,  I  can*t  fasten  you :  be  still.  And 
after  all,  authors'  heroines  are  almost  as  good  as  authoress'^ 
heroes." 

"  Not  at  aH:  womeii  read  men  more  truly  than  men  read 
Women.  I  '11  prove  that  in  a  magazine  paper  some  day  whes 
I've  time;  only  it  will  never  be  inserted:  it  will  be  '  declined 
with  thtoks,'  and  left  for  me  at  the  publisher's." 

"  To  be  sure:  you  could  not  write  cleverly  enough ;  yoa 
don't  know  enough ;  you  are  not  learned,  Shirley." 

"  God  knows,  X  ca^'t  contradict  J^u,  Gary:  I^m  as  ignorant 
as  a  stone.  There  *s  one  comfort,  lipwever^  you  are  not  much 
better."  * 

They  descended  tp  breakfast.      '  ^ 

"  I  wonder  how  Mrs  Pryor  and .  Hortense  Moore  have 
passed  the  night,"  said  Caroline,  as  she  made  the  coffee. 
*'  Selfish  being  tiiat  I  am !  I  never  thought  of  either  of 
them  till  just  now:  they  will  have  lieard  all  the  tiunalt^ 
Fieldhead  and  the  Cottage  are  so  near;  and  Hortense  is 
timid  in  such  matters :  so  no  doubt  is  Mirs  Pryor." 

**  Take  my  word  for  it,  Lina,  Moore  vdll  have  contrived  to 
get  his  sister  out  of  the  way:  she  went  home  with  Miss 
Slann;  he  will  have  quartered  her  thdre  for  the  night.  A^ 
to  Mrs  Pryor,  I  own  I  am  uneasy  about  her;. "but  in  another 
half-hour  we  will  be  with  her." 

By  this  time  the  news  of  what  had  happened  at  the  Hollow 
was  spread  all  over  the  neighbourhood.  Fanny,  who  had  been 
to  Fieldhead  to  fetch  the  nulk,  returned  in  panting  haste,  with 


TCVMOfiSOW.  291 

tidings  tbat  theria  had  been  a  battle  in  the  night  at  Mr  Moore's 
mill,  and  that  some  said  twenty  men  were  killed.  Eliza, 
during  Fanny's  absence,  had  been  apprised  by  the  butcher's 
boy  that  the  Mill  was  burnt  to  the  ground.  Both  women 
rushed  into  the  parlour  to  announce  these  terrible  facts  to  the 
ladies,  terminating  their  clear  and  accurate  narrative  by  the 
assertion  that  they  were  sure  master  must  have  been  in  it  all. 
he  and  Thomas,  the  clerk,  they  were  confident,  must  have 
gone  last  night  to  join  Mr  Moore  and  the  soldiers :  Mr  Malone, 
too,  had  not  been  heard  of  at  his  lodgings  since  yesterday 
afternoon;  and  Joe  Scott's  wife  and  family  were  in  the  greatest 
distress,  wondering  what  had  become  of  their  head. 

Scarcely  was  this  information  "imparted  when  a  knock  at 
the  kitchen-door  announced  the  ^eldhead  errand-boy,  arrived 
in  hot  haste,  bearing  a  billet  from  Mrs  Pry  or.  It  was  hurriedly 
written,  and  urged  Miss  Keeldar  to  return  directly,  as  the 
neighbourhood  and  the  house  seemed  likely  to  be  all  in  con- 
fnsion,  and  orders  would  have  to  be  given  which  the  mistress 
of  the  hall  alone  could  regulate.  In  a  postscript  it  was  entreated 
that  Miss  Helstone  might  nai  be  left  alone  at  the  Rectory: 
she  had  better,  it  was  suggested,  accompany  Miss  Keeldar. 

"  There  are  not  two  opi^^^ns  on  that  head,"  said  Shirley,  as 
she  tied  on  her  own  bonnet,  and  then  ran  to  fetch  Caroline's. 

"  But  what  will  Fanny  and  Eliza  do  ?  And  if  my  uncle 
returns?" 

"  Your  uncle  will  not  return  yet ;  he  has  other  fish  to  fry ; 
he  will  be  galloping  backwards  and  forwards  from  Briai-field 
to  Stilbro'  ^  day,  rousing  the  magistrates  in  the  court-house, 
and  the  officers  at  the  barracks ;  and  Fanny  and  Eliza  can 
have  in  Joe  Scott's  and  the  clert's  wives  to  bear  them  company. 
Besides,  of  course,  there  is  no  real  danger  to  be  apprehended 
now:  weeks  will  elapse  before  the  rioters  can  again  rally,  or 
plan  any  other  attempt ;  and  I  am  much  mistaken  if  Moore 
and  Mr  Helstone  will  not  take  advantage  of  last  night's  out- 
break to  quell  them  altogether :  they  will  frighten  the  authorities 
of  Stilbro'  into  energetic  measures.  I  only  hope  they  will  not 
\>Q  too  severe — ^not  pursue  the  discomfited  too  relentlessly." 

"Robert  will  not  be  cruel:  we  saw  that  last  night,"  said 
Caroline. 

"But  he  will  be  hard,"  retorted   Shirley;  "and   so  will 
your  unde." 
As  they  Lurried  along  the  meadow  and  plantation-path  to ' 


292  smBUET. 

Fieldhead,  they  saw  the  distant  highway  already  alive  nKh 
an  unwonted  flow  of  equestrians  and  pedestrians,  tenidiiig  in 
the  direction  of  the  usually  solitary  Hollow.  On  icaching 
the  hall,  they  found  the  back-yard  gates  open,  and  the  court 
and  kitchen  seemed  crowded  with  excited  milk-fetchers^- 
men,  women,  and  children,  whom  Mrs  Gill,  the  housekeeper, 
appeared  vainly  persuading  to  take  their  milk-cans  and  depazt 
(It  is,  or  was,  by-the-by;  the  custom  in  the  north  of  England 
for  the  cottagers  on  a  country  squire's  estate  to  receive  their 
supplies  of  milk  and  butter  from  the  dairy  of  the  Manor- 
House,  on  whose  pai^tures  a  herd  of  milch  kine  was  usually 
fed  for  the  convenience  of  the  neighbourhood.  Miss  Keeldar 
owned  such  a  herd — all  deep-dewlapped.  Craven  cows,  reared 
on  the  sweet  herbage  and  clear  waters  of  bonnie  Airedale;  and 
very  proud  she  was  of  their  sleek  aspect  and  high  conditi<HL) 
Seeing  now  the  state  of  matters,  and  that  it  was  desirable  to 
effect  a  clearance  of  the  premises,  Shirley  stepped  in  amongst 
the  gossiping  groups.  She  bade  them  good-morning  with  a 
certain  frank,  tranquil  ease — the  natural  characteristic  of  her 
manner  when  she  addressed  numbers ;  especially  if  those 
numbers  belonged  to  the  working-class :  she  was  cooler 
amongst  her  equals,  and  rather  proud  to  those  above  her. 
She  then  asked  them  if  they  had  all  got  their  milk  measured 
cut,  and  understanding  that  they  had,  she  further  observed 
that  she  "  wondered  what  they  were  waiting  for,  then." 

"  We  're  just  talking  a  bit  over  this  battle  there  has  been 
at  your  mill.  Mistress,"  replied  a  man. 

"Talking  a  bit!  Just  like  you  I"  said  Shirley.  "It  is 
a  queer  thing  all  the  world  is  so  fond  of  talking  over  events: 
you  talk  if  anybody  dies  suddenly ;  you  talk  if  a  fire  breaks 
out ;  you  talk  if  a  mill-owner  fails ;  you  tcdk  if  he 's  murdered. 
What  good  does  your  talking  do  ?" 

There  is  nothing  the  lower  orders  like  better  than  a  htUe 
downright  good-humoured  rating.  Flattery  they  soom  very 
much :  honest  abuse  they  enjoy.  They  call  it  speaking 
plainly,  and  take  a  sincere  delight  in  being  the  objects  thereof 
The  homely  harshness  of  Miss  Keeldar's  salutation  won  her 
the  ear  of  the  whole  throng  in  a  second. 

"  We  're  no  war  nor  some  'at  is  aboon  usf  are  we  ?"  asked 
a  man,  smiling. 

"  Nor  a  whit  better:  you  that  should  be  models  of  indnstiy 
are  just  as  gossip-loving  as  the  idle.     Fine,  rich  people  that 


TO*1IOIIBOW.  MS 

have  nofdung  to  do,  may  be  partly  excused  for  trifling  their 
time  away :  you  who  have  to  earn  yoiu:  bread  with  the  sweat 
of  your  brow  are  quite  inexcu9able." 

'^  That 's  queer,  Mistress  :  suld  we  never  have  a  holiday 
because  we  work  hard  ?  " 

"iV««r"  was  the  prompt  answer;  "imless,"  added  the 
<  mistress'  with  a  smile  that  half-belied  the  severity  of  her 
speech,  "  unless  you  knew  how  to  make  a  better  use  of  it 
than  to  get  togetner  over  rum  and  tea,  if  you  are  women-^ 
or  over  beer  and  pipes,  if  you  are  men,  and  talk  scandal  at 
your  neighbours'  expense.  Come,  friends,  she  added,  changing 
at  once  from  bluntness  to  courtesy, "  Oblige  me  by  taking  your 
cans  and  going  home.  I  expect  several  persons  to  call  to-day, 
and  it  will  be  inconvenient  to  have  the  avenues  to  the  house 
crowded." 

Yorkshire  people  are  as  yielding  to  persuasion  as  they  are 
stobbom  against  compulsion :  the  yard  was  clear  in  five  minutes. 
"  Thank  you,  and  good-bye  to  you,  friends,"  said  Shirley, 
as  slie  closed  the  gates  on  a  quiet  court. 

Now,  let  me  hear  the  most  refined  of  Cockneys  presume  to 
find  fault  with  Yorkshire  manners!  Taken  as  they  ought  to 
be,  the  majority  of  the  lads  and  lasses  of  the  West-Eiding  are 
gentlemen  and  ladies,  every  inch  of  them:  it  is  only  against 
the  weak  affectation  and  futile  pomposity  of  a  would-be  aris- 
tocrat they  turn  mutinous. 

Entering  by  the  back-way,  the  young  ladies  passed  through 
the  kitchen  (or  house,  as  tiie  inner  kitchen  is  called)  to  the 
halL  Mrs  Pryor  came  running  down  the  oak  staircase  to 
meet  them.  She  was  all  unnerved:  her  naturally  sanguine 
oomplexion  was  pale  ;  her  usually  placid,  though  timid,  blue 
eye  was  vrandering,  unsettled,  alarmed.  She  did  not,  how- 
ever, break  out  into  any  exclamations,  or  hurried  narrative 
of  what  had  happened.  Her  predominant  feeling  had  been  in 
the  course  of  the  night,  and  was  now  this  morning,  a  sense  of 
diflsadsfiiction  with  herself  that  she  could  not  feel  firmer, 
eooler,  more  equal  to  the  demands  of  the  occasion. 

"  You  are  aware,"  she  began  with  a  trembling  voice,  and 
jret  the  most  conscientious  anxiety  to  avoid  exaggeration  in 
what  she  was  about  to  say, — ^^^that  a  body  of  rioters  has 
attacked  Mr  Moore*s  mill  to-night:  we  heard  the  firing  ly^d 
confusion  very  plainly  here:  we  none  of  us  slept:  it  was  a 
lad  night:  the  house  has  been  in  great  bustle  all  the  morning 
with  people  coming  and  going:  die  servants  have  applied  to 


,J^%^  SHIRLEY. 

me  for  orders  and  directions,  which  I  really  did  not 
warranted  .in  giving.     Mr  Moore  has,  I  believe,  sent  np  foi 
refreshments  for  the   soldiers    and  others  en^Biged  m 
defence;  for  some  conveniences  also  for  the  wounded.  Icool^i 
not  imdertake  the  responsibility  of  giving  orders  or  takiiij| 
measures.     I  fear  delay  may  have  been  injurious  in  soi 
instances;  but  this  is  not  my  house:  you  were  absent,  m] 
dear  Miss  Keeldar — what  could  I  do?" 

"Were  no  refreshments  sent?"  asked  Shirley,  while  her^ 
countenance,  hitherto  so  clear,  propitious,  and  quiet,  eva 
while  she  was  rating  the  milk-fetchers,  suddenly  turned  dark  I 
and  warm.  ' 

"  I  think  not,  my  dear." 

"And  nothing  for  the  wounded?  no  linen — no  wine—Bo 
bedding?" 

"  I  think  not.  I  cannot  tell  what  Mrs  Gill  4id:  but  it 
seemed  impossible  to  me,  at  the  moment,  to  venture  to  dispose 
of  your  property  by  sending  supplies  to  soldiers-^provisions 
for  a  company  of  soldiers  soimds  formidable :  how  many  therf 
are  I  did  not  ask ;  but  I  could  not  think  of  aUo|ving  ^em  to 
pillage  the  house,  as  it  were.  I  intended  to  do  what  vis 
right ;  yet  I  did  not  see  the  case  quite  clearly,  I  own." 

"It  lies  in  a  nutshell,  notwithstanding.  These  soldiers 
have  risked  their  lives  in  defence  of  my  properly — I  suppose 
they  have  a  right  to  my  gratitude :  the  wounded  are  our 
fellow-creatures — ^I  suppose  we  should  aid  them.     Mrs  Gill!' 

She  turned,  and  called  in  a  voice  more  dear  than  soft.  It 
nmg  through  the  thick  oak  of  the  hall  and  kitchen  doon 
more  effectually  than  a  beU's  summons.  Mrs  Gill,  who  was 
deep  in  bread-making,  came  with  hands  and  apron  in  culinary 
case,  not  having  dared  to  stop  to  rub  the  dough  from  the  one, 
or  to  shake  the  flour  from  the  other.  Her  mistress  had  never 
called  a  servj^t  in  that  voice,  save  once  before,  and  that  was 
;^hen  she" had  seen  from  the  window  Tartar  in  full  tug  with 
two  carriers*  dogs,  each  of  them  a  match  for  him  in  size,  if  not 
in  courage,  and  their  masters  standing,  by,  encoujagiDg  their 
animals,  while  hers  was  unbefriended:  then,  indeed,  she  had 
summoned  John  as  if  the  Pay  of  Judgment  were  at  lund: 
nor  had  she  waited  for  the  said  John's  coming,  but  had  wallced 
out  into  the  lane  bonnetless  ;  and  after  informing  the  carriers 
that  she  held  them  far  less  of  men  than  the  three  brutes  whirl- 
'n(jr  and  worrying  in  the  dust  before  them,  had  put  her  hands 
id  the  thick  neck  of  the  largest  of  the  curs  and  g^ven  her 


TO-MOBBOW.  295 

pfhole  sti^gth  to  the  essay  of  cbokiiig  it  from  Tartarus  torn 
ind  bleeding  eye,  just  above  and  below  which  organ  the 
rengefiil  fangs  were  inserted.  Five  or  six  men  were  presently 
>n  the  spot  119  help  her,  but  she  never  thanked  one  of  them: 
*  They  might  have  come  before,  if  their  will  had  been  good," 
she  said.  She  had  not  a  word  for  anybody  duiing  the  rest  of 
the  day;  but  saJb  near  the  hall  fLre  till  evening  watching  and 
tending  Tartar,  who  lay  all  gory,  stiff,  and  swelled,  on  a  mat 
at  her  feet.  She.  wept  furtively  over  him  sometimes,  and 
murmuied  the  softest  words  of  pity  and  endearment,  in  tones 
whose  music  the  old,  scarred,  canine  warrior  acknowledged  by 
licking  her  hand  or  Wr  sandal  alternately  with  his  own  red 
wounds.  As  to  John,  his*  lady  turned  a  cold  shoulder  on  him 
for  a  week  afterwards. 

Mrs  Gill,  remembering  this  littie  episode,  came  '^  aU  of  a 
tremble/'  as  she  .said  herself.  In  a  firm,  brief  voibe.  Miss 
Keeldar  proceeded  to  put  questions  and  give  orders.  That  at 
such  a  time  Fieldhead  should  have  evinced  the  inhospitality 
qf  a  miser's  hovel,  stung  her  haughty  spirit  to  the  quick ;  and 
the  revolt  of  its  pride  was  seen  in  the  heaving  of  her  heart; 
stirred  stormily  under  the  lace  and  sUk  which  veiled  it. 
"  I^ow  long  is  it  since  that  message  came  from  the  mill  ?  " 
''Not  an  hour  yet,  ma'am,"  answered  the  housekeeper, 
Boothing^y. 

"NoU  an  hourl  You  might  almost  as  well  have  said  not 
a  day.  They  wiU  have  ^pHed  elsewhere  by  this  time.  Send 
a  man  instantiy  down  to  teU  them  that  everything  this  house 
contains  js  at  Mr  Moore's,  Mr  Helstone's,.  and  the  soldiers' 
service.     Do  that  first  I" 

While  iike  order  was  being  executed,  Shirley  moved  away 
from  her  M^nds,  and  stood  at  the  hall-window,  silent,  unap- 
proachable. ^When  Mrs  Gill  came  back,  she  turned :  the 
purple  flush  i^^ch  painful  excitement  kindles  on  a  pale  cheek, 
glowed  on  hers:  the  spark  which  displeasure  lights  in  a  dark 
eye  fired  her  glance. 

"Let  the  contents  of  the  larder  and  the  wine-cellar  be 
brought  up,  put  into  the  hay-carts,  and  driven  down  to  the 
HoUow.  If  there  does  not  happen  to  be  much  bread  or  much 
meat  in  the  house,  go  to  the  butcher  and  baker,  and  desire 
them  to  senct' whattJiey  have:  but  I  will  see  for  myself." 
She  moved  off. 

*'  All  will  be  right  soon :  she  wiU  get  over  it  in  an  hour," 
vbispered  Carolixie  to  Mrs  Pry  or.      ''  Go  up-stairs,   dear 


S96  SHIBLET. 

madam/*  she  added,  affectionately,  '^  and  try  to  be  as  cdbfc 
and  easy  as  you  can.  The  truth  is,  Shirley  will  blame  her- 
self more  than  you  before  the  day  is  over." 

By  dint  of  a  few  more  gentle  assurances  and  pemiasions, 
Miss  Helstone  contrived  to  soothe  the  agitated  lady.  Havii^ 
accompanied  h^r  to  her  apartment,  and  promised  to  rejoin  her 
there  when  things  were  settled,  Caroline  left  her  to  see,  as  she 
said,  "  if  she  could  be  useful."  She  presently  found  tliat  she 
could  be  very  useftd;  for  the  retinue  of  servants  at  Fieldhead 
was  by  no  means  numerous,  and  just  now  their  mistress  found 
plenty  of  occupation  for  all  the  hands  at  her  command,  and 
for  her  own  also.  The  delicate  good-nature  and  dexterous 
activity  which  Caroline  brought  to  the  aid  of  the  housekeeper 
and  maids, — ^all  somewhat  scared  by  their  lady's  unwonted 
mood — did  a  world  of  good  at  once :  it  helped  the  assistanti 
and  appeased  the  directress.  A  chance  glance  and  smile  from 
Carolme  moved  Shirley  to  an  answering  smile  directly.  The 
former  was  carrying  a  W  basket  up^thecellar^rtaL 

''This  is  a  shame  1"  ci^ied  Shirley,  running  to  her.  ''It 
will  strain  your  arm." 

She  took  it  from  her,  and  herself  bore  it  out  into  the  yani 
The  cloud  of  temper  was  dispelled  when  she  came  back;  the 
flash  in  her  eye  was  melted;  the  shade  on  her  ferdiead 
vanished:  she  resumed  her  usual  cheerfiil  and  cordial  manner 
to  those  about  her,  tempering  her  revived  spirits  with  a  little 
of  the  softness  of  shame  at  her  previous  unjust  anger. 

She  was  still  superintending  the  lading  of  the  cart,  when  a 
gentleman  entered  the  yard  and  approached  her  ere  she  wai 
aware  of  his  presence. 

"I  hope  I  see  Miss  Keeldar  well  this  morning?"  he  said, 
examining  with  rather  significant  scrutiny  her  still  flashed  fiice. 

She  gave  him  a  look,  and  then  again  bent  to  her  employ* 
ment,  witholit  reply.  A  pleasant  enough  smile  played  od 
her  lips,  but  she  hid  it.  The  gentleman  repeated  his  saluta- 
tion, stpoping,  that  it  might  reach  her  ear  with  more  fadlitj. 

"  Well  enough,  if  she  be  good  enough,"  was  the  answer; 
"  and  so  is  Mr  Moore  too,  I  dare  say.  To  speak  truth,  I  am 
not  anxious  about  him ;  some  slight  mischance  would  be  onlj 
his  just  due:  his  conduct  has  been — ^we  will  say  strange, yj^ 
now,  till  we  have  time  to  characterize  it  by  a  more  exact 
epithet.     Meantime,  may  I  ask  what  brings  him  here?" 

"  Mr  Helstone  and  I  have  just  received  your  message,  that 
everything  at  Fieldhead  was  at  our  service.    We  judged,  bj 


TO-MOBBOW.  2197 

tlie  tmUmited  wording  of  the  gracious  intimationi  that  you 
would  be  giving  yourself  too  mucli  trouble:  I  perceive,  our 
conjecture  was  correct.  We  are  not  a  regiment,  remember: 
only  about  balf  a  dozen  soldiers,  and  as  many  civilians. 
Allow  me  to  retrench  something  from  these  too  abundant 
supplies.'^ 

Mis»  Keeldar  blushed,  while  she  laughed  at  her  own  over* 
eager  generosity,  and  most  disproportionate  calculation& 
Moore  laughed  too — ^very  quietly,  though ;  and  as  quietly^ 
he  ordered  basket  after  basket  to  be  taken  from  the  cart,  and 
remanded  vessel  after  vessel  to  the  cellar. 

"The  Beetor  must  hear  of  this,"  he  said:  "he  will  make 
a  good  story  of  it.  What  an  excellent  army  contractor  Miss 
Keeldar  would  have  beenl"  again  he  laughed,  adding — "  It  is 
precisely  as  I  conjectured." 

"  Ton  ought  to  be  thankful,"  said  Shirley,  "  and  not  mock 
me.  What  could  I  do  ?  How  could  I  gauge  your  appetites, 
or  number  your  band  ?  For  aught  I  knew,  there  might  have 
been  fifty  of  you  at  least  to  victual.  You  told  me  nothing; 
tad  then,  an  application  to  provision  soldiers  naturally  suggests 
large  ideas." 

"  It  appears  so,"  remarked  Moore,  levelling  another  of  his 
keen,  quiet  glances  at  the  discomfited  Shirley.     "  Now,"  he 
continued,  addressing  the  carter,  "  I  think  you  may  take  what 
remains  to  the  Hollow.     Your  load  will  be  somewhat  lighter ' 
than  the  one  Miss  Keeldar  destined  you  to  carry." 

As  the  vehicle  rumbled  out  of  the  yard,  Shirley,  rallying 
her  spirits,  demanded  what  had  become  of  the  wounded. 

"  There  was  not  a  single  man  hurt  on  our  side,"  was  the 
inswer. 

"  You  were  hurt  yourself,  on  the  temples,"  interposed  a 
qnick,  low  voice — ^that  of  Caroline,  who,  having  wiUidrawn 
within  the  shade  of  the  door,  and  behind  the  laige  person  of 
Mrs  Gill,  had  till  now  escaped  Moore's  notice:  when  she  spoke, 
his  eye  searched  the  obscurity  of  her  retreat 
"  Are  you  much  hurt  ?"  she  inquired. 
"  As  you  might  scratch  your  finger  with  a  needle  in  sewing." 
"  loft  your  hair,  and  let  us  see." 

He  took  his  hat  ofif,  and  did  as  he  was  bid,  disclosing  only 
a  narrow  slip  of  court-plaster.     Caroline  indicated,  by  a  slight 
ounrement  of  the  head,  that  she  was  satisfied,  and  disappeared 
within  the  dear  obscure  of  the  interior. 
"  How  did  she  know  I  was  hurt  ?  "  asked  Moore* 


99S  SHIStLET. 

''  By  rumour,  no  doubt.  But  it  is  too^ood  in  her  to  trouble 
herself  about  you.  For  my  part,  it.  wasjof  your  victams  I  waa 
thinking  when  I  inquired  after  the  wqunded:  what  damage 
have  your  opponents  sustained?"  / 

^^  One  of  the  rioters,  or  victims,  as  y(^  call  them,  w;as  killed, 
and  six  were  htut." 

"  What  have  you  done  with  them  ?V. 

"  What  you  will  perfectly  approve.  Medical  sdd  was  pro- 
cured immediately;  and  as  soon  as  we  can  get  a  couple  of 
covered  waggons,  and  some  clean  straw,  they  will  be  removed 
to  StUbro'." 

'^  Str^w !  you  must  have  beds  and  1;)edding.  I  will  send  mj 
waggon  directly,  properly  furnished ;  ^nd  Mr  Yorke,  I  am  sure, 
will  send  his." 

"You  guess  correctly:  he  has  volunteered  already;  and 
Mrs  Yorke — ^who,  like  you,  seems  disposejd  to  regard  the 
rioters  as  martyrs,  and  me,  and  especially  ^  Hektone,  a£ 
murderers — ^is  at  this  moment,  I  believe,  most  assiduously 
engaged  in  fitting  it  up  with  feather-beds,  pillows,  bolsters, 
blankets,  &c.  The  victms  lack  no  attent^n$ — ^I  promise  you. 
Mr  Hall — ^your  favourite  parson — ^has  been  witi  them  ever 
since  six  o'clock,  exhorting  them,  praying  with  them,  and  even 
waiting  on  them  Hke  any  nurse;  and  Caroline's  good  friend, 
Miss  Ainley,  that  very  plain  old  maid,  sent  in  a  stock  of  lint 
and  linen,  something  in  the  proportion  of  another  ladys 
allowance  of  beef  and  wine." 

"  That  will  do.     Where  is  your  sister  ?  " 

"  Well  cared  for.  I  had  her  securely  domiciled  with  Miss 
Mann.  This  very  morning,  the  two  set  oilt  for  Wonn^rood 
Wells  (a  noted  watering-place),  and  will  stay  there  some  weeks." 

"  So  Mr  Helstone  domiciled  me  at  the  Bectory !  Mighty 
clever  you  gentlemen  think  you  are  I  I  make  you  heartily 
welcome  to  ^e  idea,  and  hope  its  savour,  as  you  chew  the  cud 
of  reflection  upon  it,  gives  you  pleasure.  Acute  and  astute, 
why  are  yon  not  also  omniscient?  How  is  it  that  eveoti 
transpire,  under  yoiu:  very  noses,  of  which  you  have  no  ffu* 
picion  ?  It  should  be  so,,  otherwise  the  exquisite  gratification 
of  out-manoeuvring  you  would  be  imknown.  Ah  1  fiieud,  you 
may  search  my  countenance,  but  you  cannot  read  it" 

Moore,  indeed,  Ipoked  as  if  he  could  not. 

"  You  think  iqe  a  dangerous  specimen  of  my  sex.  Dou^ 
you,  now?" 

"A  peculiar  one,  at  least." 


MBS  PBTOB,  S99 


"  But  Caroline:— is  the  pecTiliar  ?"  , 

*' In  her  way— yes/ 

"  Her  way  I  '  What  is  her  way?" 

"  You  know  hex  as  well  as  I  do.** 

"  And  knowing,  her  I  assert  that  she  is  neither  eooentric  x^ 
difficult  of  control!  is  she  V  " 

«  That  depends  1 ""      ' 

"  However,  there  is  nothing  masculine  about  her?^\ 

"  Why  lay  such  emphasis  on  herf  Do  you  consider  her  a 
contrast,  in  that  respect,  to  yourself?" 

"  You  do,  no  doubt:  but  that  does  not  signify.  Caroline  is 
ndther  masculine,  nor  of  what  they  call  the  spirited  order  of 
women."  ^ 

"  I  have  seen  her  flash  out." 

"  So  have  I — ^but  not  with  manly  fire:  it  was  a  short,  vivid, 
trembling  glow,  that  shot  up,  shone,  vanished ^\ 

"And  left  her  scared  at  her  own  daring.  You  describe 
others  besides  Caroline." 

'*  The  point  I  wish  to  establish  is,  that  Miss  Helstone,  though 
gentle,  tractable,  and  candid  enough,  is  still  perfectly  capable 
of  defyiiig  even  Mr  Moore's  penetration." 

"Whijt  have  you  and  she  been  doing?"  asked  Moore, 
mddenly. 

"  Have  you  had  any  breakfast?" 

"  What  is  your  mutual  mystery  ?  " 

"If  you. are  hungry,  Mra  GUI  will  give  you  something  to 
eat  here.  Step  into  the  oak^parlpur,  and  ring  the  bell — ^you 
will  be  served  as  if  at  an  inn;  or,  if  you  like  better,  go  back 
to  the  HoUow." 

"The  alternative  is  not  open  to  me:  I  must  go  back. 
Ck)od  morning:  the  first  leisure  I  have,  I  will  see  you  again." 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

MBS  FBTOB. 


While  Shirley  was  talking  with  Moore,  Caroline  rejoined 
Mrs  Pryor  up-stairs.  She  found  that  lady  deeply  depressed. 
She  would  not  say  that  Miss  Keeldar^s  hastiness  had  hurt  her 
feelings ;  but  it  was  evident  an  inward  wound  galled  her.  To 
aiij  bat  a  congenial  nature,  she  would  have  seemed  insensible 


300  smBLsr. 

• 

to  the  qtiiet,  tender  attentions  by  which  Miss  Helstone  sotig^ 
to  impart  solace;  but  Caroline  knew  that,  unmoved  or  sligMj 
moved  as  she  looked,  she  felt,  valued,  and  was  healed  by  &eiiL 

^<  I  am  deficient  in  self-confidence  and  decision,**  she  said  at 
last.  ''  I  always  have  been  deficient  in  those  qualities:  yet  I 
think  Miss  Keeldar  should  have  known  my  oharacter  well 
.^enough  by  this  time,  to  be  aware  that  I  always  feel  an  even 
pain&l  solicitude  to  do  right,  to  act  for  the  best.  The  unusual 
nature  of  the  demand  on  my  judgment  puzzled  me,  especiallj 
following  the  alarms  of  the  night.  I  could  not  venture  to  act 
promptly  for  aliother:  but  I  trust  no  serious  harm  will  result 
from  my  lapse  of  firmness." 

A  gentle  knock  was  here  heard  at  the  door:  it  was  half- 
opened. 

"  Caroline,  come  here,"  said  a  low  voice. 

Miss  Helstone  went  out:  there  stood  Shirley  in  the  gaUeiy, 
looking  contrite,  ashamed,  sorry  as  any  repentant  child! 

"  How  is  Mrs  Pryor  ?"  she  asked. 

"  Bather  out  of  spirits,"  said  Caroline. 

"  I  have  behaved  very  shamefully,  very  ungenerously,  very 
ongratefuUy  to  her,"  said  Shirley.  "  How  insolent  in  me  to 
turn  on  her  thus,  for  what  after  all  was  no  fault,  only  an  excess 
of  conscientioiisn^s  on  W  part.  But  t  regret  iny  error  most 
sincerely :  tell  her  so,  and  ask  if  she  will  forgive  me.'** 

Caroline  discharged  the  errand  with  heartfelt  pleasure. 
Mrs  Pryor  rose,  came  to  the  door :  she  did  not  like  scenes ; 
she  dreaded  them  as  all  timid  people  do :  she  said  falteringly— 

"  Come  in,  my  dear." 

Shirley  did  come  in  with  some  impetuosity :  she  threw  her 
arms  round  her  governess,  and  while  she  kissed  her  heartilyi 
she  said — 

"  You  know  you  must  forgive  me,  Mrs  Pryor.  I  could  not 
get  on  at  all  if  there  was  a  misunderstanding  between  joo 
and  me." 

"  I  have  nothing  to  forgive,"  was  the  reply.  "  We  will  pass 
it  over  now  if  you  please.  The  final  result  of  the  incident  is, 
that  it  proves  more  plainly  than  ever  how  unequal  I  am  to 
certain  crises." 

And  that  was  the  painful  feeling  which  would  remain  on 
Mrs  Pryor"s  mind :  no  effort  of  Shirley's  or  Caroline's  could 
efface  it  thence:  she  could  forgive  her  offendixig  pupil,  not  her 
innocent  self. 

Miss  Keeldar,  doomed  to  be  in  constant  request  duzing  the 


UBS  PRTOB,  SOI 

moniing^  was  presentlj  summoned  down-sfcairs  again.  The 
Rector  called  first :  a  lively  welcome  and  livelier  reprimand 
were  at  liis  service ;  he  expected  both,  and,  being  in  high 
spirits,  took  them  in  equally  good  part. 

In  the  course  of  his  brief  visit,  he  quite  forgot  to  ask  after 
his  niece :  the  riot,  the  rioters,  the  mill,  the  magistrates,  the 
heiress,  absorbed  all  his  thoughts  to  the  exclusion  of  family 
ties.  He  alluded  to  the  part  himself  and  curate  had  taken  iu 
the  defence  of  the  Hollow. 

"The  vials  of  pharisaical  wrath  will  be  emptied  on  our 

heads,  for  our  share  in  this  business,''  he  said  ;  ^^  but  I  def> 

every  calumniator.    I  was  there  only  to  support  the  law,  to 

play  my  part  as  a  man  and  a  Briton  ;  which  characters  I 

deem  quite  compatible  with  those  of  the  priest  and  Levite,  in 

their  highest  sense.     Your  tenant,  Moore,"  he  went  on,  -"  has 

won  my  approbation.    A  cooler  commander  I  would  not  wish 

to  see,  nor  a  more  determined.     Besides,'  the  man  has  shown 

sound  judgment  and  good  sense  ;   first,  in  being  thoroughly 

prepared  for  the  event  which  has  taken  place,  and  subsequently, 

when  his  wdl-concerted  plans  had  secured  him  success,  in 

blowing  how  to  use  without  abusing  his  victory.     Some  of 

the  magistrates  are  now  well  frightened,  and,  like  all  cowards, 

show  a  tendency  to  be  cruel ;   Moore  restrains  them  witli 

admirable  prudence.     He  has  hitherto  been  very  unpopular 

in  the  neighbourhood  ;   but,  mark  my  words,  the  tide  of 

opinion  will  now  take  a  turn  in  his  favour :  people  will  find 

oat  that  they  have  not  appreciated  him,  and  will  hasten  to 

remedy  their  error  ;  and  he,  when  he  perceives  the  public 

disposed  to  acknowledge  his  merits,  will  show  a  more  gracious 

mien  than  that  with  which  he  has  hitherto  favoured  us."  < 

Mr  Helstone  was  about  to  add-  to  this  speech  some  half- 
jesting,  half-serious  warnings  to  Miss  Keeldar,  on  the  subject 
of  her  rumoured  partiality  for  her  talented  tenant,  when  a 
ring  at  the  door,  announcing  another  caller,  checked  his 
nulleiy ;  and  as  that  other  caller  appeared  in  the  form  of  a 
white-haired,  elderly  gentleman,  with  a  rather  truculent 
countenance  and  disdainful  eye — ^in  short,  our  old  acquaint- 
ance, and  the  Rector's  old  enemy,  Mr  Yorke — the  priest  and 
I^te  seized  his  hat,  and  -with  ^e  briefest  of  adieux  to  Miss 
Keeldar^  and  the  sternest  of  nods  to  her  guest,  took  an  abrupt 
leave. 

Mr  Yorke  was  in  no  mild  mood,  and  in  no  measured  terms 
did  he  express  his  opinion  on  the  transaction  of  the  night : 


802  SHZBLsr. 

Moore,  the  magistrates,  lihe  soldiers,  the  mob-leaders,  each 
and  all  came  in  for  a  share  of  his  invectives ';  but  he  reserved 
his  strongest  epithets — ^and  real  racy  Yorkshire  Doric  adjec- 
tives they  were — ^for  the  benefit  of  the  fighting  parsons,  the 
''  sanguinary,  demoniac**  rector  and  curate.  According  to  Mm, 
the  cup  of  ecclesiastical  guilt  was  now  full  indeed. 

"  The  Church,"  he  said,  "  was  in  a  bonnie  pickle  now :  it 
was  time  it  came  down  when  parsons  took  to  swaggering 
amang  soldiers,  blazing  away  wi'  bidlet  and,  gunpowder , 
taking  the  lives  of  far  honester  men  than  themselves.** 

"What  would  Moore  have  done,  if  nobody  had  helped 
him?**  asked  Shirley. 

"  Drunk  as  he  'd  brewed— eaten  as  he  *d  baked." 

"  Which  means,  you  would  have  left  him  by  himself  to 
face  that  mob.  Good.  He  has  plenty  of  courage  ;  but  the 
greatest  amount  of  gallantry  that  ever  garrisoned  one  human 
breast  could  scarce  avail  against  two  hundred.** 

"  He  had  the  soldiers  ;  those  poor  slaves  who  hire  out  their 
own  blood  and  spill  othej:  folks*  for  money.** 

"  You  abuse  soldiers  almost  as  much  as  you  abuse  clergy- 
men. All  who  wear  red  coats  are  national  rei^e  in  your 
eyes,  and  all  who  wear  black  are  national  swindlers.  Mr 
Moore,  according  to  you,  did  wrong  to  get  military  aid,  and 
he  did  still  worse  to  accept  of  any  other  aid.  Your  way  of 
talking  amounts  to  this : — ^he  should  have  abandoned  his  mill 
and  his  life  to  the  rage  of  a  set  of  misguided  madmen,  and 
Mr  Helstone  and  every  other  gentleman  in  the  parish  should 
have  looked  on,  and  seen  the  building  razed  and  its  owner 
slaughtered,  and  never  stirred  a  finger  to  save  either." 

"  If  Moore  had  behaved  to  his  men  from  the  beginning  as 
a  master  ought  to  behave,  they  never  would  have  entertained 
their  present  feelings  towards  him.'* 

"Easy  for  you  to  talk,**  exclaimed  Miss  Keeldar,  who  was 
beginning  to  wax  warm  in  her  tenant's  cause :  "  you,  whose 
family  have  lived  at  Briarmains  for  six  generations,  to  whose 
person  tlie  people  have  been  accustomed  for  fifty  years,  who 
know  all  their  ways,  prejudices,  and  preferences.  Easy,  indeed, 
for  you  to  act  so  as  to  avoid  ofiending  them;  but  Mr  Moore 
Game  a  stranger  into  the  district :  he  came  here  poor  and 
friendless,  with  nothing  but  his  own  energies  to  back  him ; 
nothing  but  his  honour,  his  talent,  and  his  industry  to  make 
is  way  for  him.     A  monstrous  crime  indeed  that,  under  such 

cumstances,  he  could  not  popularize  his  naturally  grave, 


MBg  PRTOB.  808 

quiet  manners,  all^&t  once:  could  not  be  jocular,  and  free,  and 
cordial  with  a  strange  peasantry,  as  you  are  witii  your  fellow- 
townsmen  I  Anf  unpardonable  transgression,  that  when  he 
introduced  impi^ovements  he  did  not  go  about  the  business  in 
qmte  the  most  politic  way  ;  did  not  graduate  his  changes  as 
delicately  as  a  rich'  capitalist  might  have  done !  For  errors 
of  this  sort  is  he  to  be  the  victim  of  mob-outrage  ?  Is  he  to 
be  denied  everi  the  privilege  of  defending  himself?  Are  those 
who  have  the  hearts  of  men  in  tibeir  breasts  (and  Mr  Helstone-— 
say  what  you  will  of  him — has  such  a  heart)  to  be  reviled  like 
malefactors  because  they  stand  by  him — ^because  they  venture 
to  espouse  iitie  cause  of  one  against  two  hundred  ?" 

"  Come— ^-come  now — ^be  cool,*'  said  Mr  Yorke^  smiling  at 
the  earnestness  with  which  Shirley  multiplied  her  rapid 
questions.' 

"Cool!  Must  I  listen  coolly  to  downright' nonsense — ^to 
dangerous  nonsense  ?  No.  I  like  you  very  well,  Mr  Yorke, 
as  you  know ;  but  I  thoroughly  dislike  some  of  jaur  prin- 
ciples. '  All  that  cant— excuse  me,  but  I  repeat  tiie  word— ^ 
all  that  ccmt  about  soldiers  and  parsons  is  most  offensive  in 
my  ea^.  All  ridiculous,  irrational  crying  up  of  one  class, 
whether  the  same  be  aristocrat  or  democrat — all  howling 
down  of  anotjier  class,  whether  clerical  or  military — aU 
exacting  injustice  to  individuals,  whether  monarch  or  mendi- 
cant— ^is  reaUy  sickening  to  me :  all  arra3ring  of  ranks  against 
ranks,  aU  party  hatreds,  all  tyrannies  disguised  as  liberties,  I 
reject  and  wash  my  hands  of.  Tou  think  you  are  a  philan- 
thropist ;  you  thxDk  you  are  an  advocate  of  liberty ;  but  I 
will  tell  you  this — ^Mr  Hall,  the  parson  of  Nimnely,  is  a 
better  friend  both  of  man  and  freedom,  than  Hiram  yorke, 
the  Reformer  of  Briarfield.'*  ^ 

From  a  man,  Mr  Yorke  would  not  have  borne  this  language 
very  patiently,  nor  would  he  have  endured  it  from  some 
women:  but  he  accounted  Shirley  both  honest  and  pretty, 
ami  her  pkin-spokeii  ire  amused  him :  besides  he  took  a  secret 
pleasure  in  hearing  her  defend  her  tenant,  for  we  have  already 
intimated' he  had  Robert  Moore's  interest  very  much  at  heart: 
moreover,  if  he  wished  to  avenge  himself  for  her  severity,  he 
knew  the  means  lay  in  his  power:  a  word,  he  believed,  would 
suffice  to  tame  and  silence  her,  to  cover  her  frank  forehead 
with  the  rosy  shadow  of  shame,  and  veil  the  glow  of  her  eye 
under  dofwn-drooped  lid  and  lash. 

**  What  more  hast  thou  to  say  ?  *'  he  inquired,  as  she  paused. 


rJ^^^  SHIRLEY. 

me  for  orders  and  directions,  which  I  xeaHlj  did  not  fed 
warranted. in  giving.  Mr  Moore  has,  I  believe,  sent  up  for 
refreshments  for  the  soldiers  and  others  engaged  in  the 
defence;  for  some  conveniences  also  for  the  wounded.  I  ooijld 
not  imdertake  the  responsibility  of  giving  orders  or  taking 
measures.  I  fear  delaj  may  have  been  injurious .  in  some 
instances;  but  this  is  not  my  house:  you  were  absent,  mj 
dear  Miss  Keeldar-7-what  could  I  do?" 

"Were  no  refreshments  sent?"  asked  Shirley,  while  her 
countenance,  hitherto  so  clear,  propitious,  and  quiet,  even 
while  she  was  rating  the  milk-fetchers,  suddenly  tamed  dark 
and  warm. 

"  I  think  not,  my  dear." 

"And  nothing  for  the  wounded?  no  linen — no  wine— iio 
bedding?" 

"I  think  not.  I  cannot  tell  what  Mrs  Gill  did:  but  it 
seemed  impossible  to  me,  at  the  moment,  to  venture  to  dispose 
of  your  property  by  sending  supplies  to  soldiers — ^provisions 
for  a  company  of  soldiers  soimds  formidable :  how  many  there 
are  I  did  not  ask ;  but  I  could  not  think  of  allq^/dng  Uiem  to 
pillage  the  house,  as  it  were.  I  intended  to  do  what  vas 
right;  yet  I  did  not  see  the  case  quite  clearly,  I  own." 

"It  lies  in  a  nutshell,  notwithstanding.  These  soldiers 
have  risked  their  lives  in  defence  of  my  property — I  suppose 
they  have  a  right  to  my  gratitude :  the  wounded  are  our 
fellow-creatures — ^I  suppose  we  should  aid  them.   .MrsGilll" 

She  turned,  and  called  in  a  voice  more  clear  thian  soft.  It 
rung  through  the  thick  oak  of  the  hall  and  kitchen  doon 
more  effectually  than  a  bell's  sunmions.  Mrs  Gill,  who  was 
deep  in  bread-making,  came  with  hands  and  apron  in  culinaiy 
case,  not  having  dar^  to  stop  to  rub  the  do;ugh  from  the  one, 
or  to  shake  the  flour  from  the  other.  Her  mistress  had  never 
called  a  sery^t  in  that  voice,  save  once  before,  and  that  was 
jSfhen  she"had  seen  from  the  window  Tartar  in  full  tug  with 
two  carriers'  dogs,  each  of  them  a  match  for  him  in  size,  if  not 
in  courage,  and  their  masters  standing,  by,  encouxaging  their 
animals,  while  hers  was  unbefriended:  then,  indeed,  she  had 
summoned  John  as  if  the  I)ay  of  Judgment  were  at  hand: 
nor  had  she  waited  for  the  said  John's  coming,  but  had  walked 
out  into  the  lane  bonnetless  ;  and  after  informing  the  carriers 
that  she  held  them  far  less  of  men  than  the  three  brutes  whirl- 
ing and  worrying  in  the  dust  before  them,  had'put  hier  hands 
-\d  the  thick  neck  of  the  largest  of  the  curs  and  given  Her 


ti^i 


TO-XOBROW.  295 

whole  sti^Dgih  to  the  essay  of  choking  it  from  Tartar's  torn 
and  blee^g  eye,  just  above  and  below  which  organ  the 
vengeM  fangs  were  inserted.  Five  or  six  men  were  presently 
on  ^e  spot  tp  help  her,  but  she  never  thanked  one  of  them: 
"  They  might  ;have  come  before,  if  their  will  had  been  good," 
she  said.  She  had  not  a  word  for  anybody  during  the  rest  of 
the  day;  but  sat  near  the  hall  fire  till  evening  watching  and 
tending  Tartar,  who  lay  all  gory,  stiff,  and  swelled,  on  a  mat 
at  her  feet.  She,  wept  furtively  over  him  sometimes,  and 
murmured  the  softest  words  of  pity  and  endearment,  in  tones 
whose  music  the  old,  scarred,  canine  warrior  acknowledged  by 
lickizig  her  hand  or  h^r  sandal  alternately  with  his  own  red 
wounds.  As  to  John,  hi&  lady  turned  a  cold  shoulder  on  him 
for  a  week  afterwards. 

Mrs  Gill,  remembering  this  little  episode,  came  '^  all  of  a 
tremble,**  as  she  .said  herself.  In  a  firm,  brief  yoi'ce.  Miss 
Keeldar  proceeded  to  put  questions  and  give  orders.  That  at 
such  a  time  Fieldhead  should  have  ievinced  the  inhospitality 

a  miser's  hovel,  stung  her  haughty  spirit  to  the  quick ;  and 

e  revolt  of  its  pride  was  seen  in  the  heaving  of  her  heart; 
stirrpd  stormily  under  the  lace  and  silk  which  veiled  it. 

"  How  long  is  it  since  that  message  came  from  the  mill  ?" 

"Not  an  hour  yet,  ma'am,"  answered  the  housekeeper, 
soothingjly. 

"Noti  an  hour  I  You  might  almost  as  well  have  said  not 
a  day.  They  will  have  applied  elsewhere  by  this  time.  Send 
a  man  instantly  down  to  tell  them  that  everything  this  house 
contains  |s  at  Mr  Moore's,  Mr  Helstone's,  and  tiie  soldiers' 
service.     Do  that  first ! " 

While  the  order  was  being  executed,  Shirley  moved  away 
from  her  fri^ds,  and  stood  at  the  hall-window,  silent,  xmap- 
proachable.  .When  Mrs  Gill  came  back,  she  turned :  the 
purple  flush  i^ich  painful  excitement  kindles  on  a  pale  cheek, 
glowed  on  hers:  the  spark  which  displeasure  lights  in  a  dark 
eye  fired  her  glance. 

"Let  the  contents  of  the  larder  and  the  wine-cellar  be 
brought  up,  put  into  the  hay-carts,  and  driven  dpwn  to  the 
Hollow.  If  Uiere  does  not  happen  to  be  much  bread  or  much 
meat  in  the  house,  go  to  the  butcher  and  baker,  and  desire 
them  to  send'  what  they  have :  but  I  will  see  for  myself." 

She  moved  off. 

"  All  will  be  right  (^ oon :  she  will  get  over  it  in  an  hour," 
vbispered  Caroline  to  Mrs  Fryor.      ^'  Go  up-stairs,   dear 


396  8HIBLET. 

madam/*  she  added,  affectionately,  "  and  tty  to  be  as  cabn 
and  easy  as  you  can.  The  truth  is,  Shirley  will  blame  her- 
self more  than  you  iDefore  the  day  is  over." 

By  dint  of  a  few  more  gentle  assurances  and  penmadoiu, 
Miss  Helstone  contrived  to  soothe  the  agitated  lady.  Having 
accompanied  her  to  her  apartment,  and  promised  to  rejoin  her 
there  when  things  were  settled,  Caroline  left  her  to  see,  as  she 
said,  "  if  she  could  be  useful."  She  presently  found  liat  she 
could  be  very  useful ;  for  the  retinue  of  servants  at  Fieldhead 
was  by  no  means  numerous,  and  just  now  their  mistress  found 
plenty  of  occupation  for  all  the  hands  at  her  command,  and 
for  her  own  also.  The  delicate  good-nature  and  dexterous 
activity  which  Caroline  brought  to  the  aid  of  the  housekeeper 
and  maids, — all  somewhat  scared  by  their  lady's  unwonted 
mood — did  a  world  of  good  at  once:  it  helped  the  assistants 
and  appeased  the  directress.  A  chance  glance  and  smile  from 
Caroline  moved  Shirley  to  an  answering  smile  directly.  The 
former  was  carrying  a  heavy  basket  up  the  cellar-stairs. 

''This  is  a  shame  1"  cried  Shirley,  running  to  her.  ^B 
will  strain  your  arm." 

She  took  it  from  her,  and  herself  bore  it  out  into  the  janL 
The  cloud  of  temper  was  dispelled  when  she  came  back;  the 
flash  in  her  eye  was  melted;  the  shade  on  her  ftrebead 
vanished:  she  resumed  her  usual  cheerftd  and  cordial  manner 
to  those  about  her,  tempering  her  revived  spirits  with  a  little 
of  the  softness  of  shame  at  her  previous  unjust  anger. 

She  was  sti^l  superintending  the  lading  of  the  cart,  when  a 
gentleman  entered  the  yard  and  approached  her  ere  she  wai 
aware  of  his  presence. 

"I  hope  I  see  Miss  Keeldar  well  this  morning?"  he  said, 
examining  with  rather  significant  scrutiny  her  still  flushed  face. 

She  gave  him  a  look,  and  then  again  bent  to  her  employ* 
ment,  withotit  reply.  A  pleasant  enough  smile  played  on 
her  lips,  but  she  hid  it.  The  gentleman  repeated  his  saluta- 
tion, stpoping,  that  it  might  reach  her  ear  with  more  facility. 

"  Well  enough,  if  she  be  good  enough,"  was  the  answer; 
**  and  so  is  Mr  Moore  too,  I  dare  say.  To  speak  truth,  I  am 
not  anxious  about  him;  some  slight  mischance  would  be  only 
his  just  due:  his  conduct  has  been — ^we  will  say  strong  just 
now,  till  we  have  time  to  characterize  it  by  a  more  exact 
epithet.     Meantime,  may  I  ask  what  brings  him  here?" 

"  Mr  Helstone  and  I  have  just  received  your  message,  that 
eveiyihing  at  Fieldhead  was  at  our  service.    We  judlged,  by 


TO-MOBBOW.  St97 

the  unlimited  woiding  of  the  gracious  intimation,  that  jou 
would  be  giving  yourself  too  much  trouble :  I  perceive,  our 
conjecture  was  correct.  We  are  not  a  regiment,  remember: 
only  about  half  a  dozen  soldiers,  and  as  many  civilians. 
Allow  me  to  retrench  something  from  these  too  abundant 
supplies." 

Mis»  Keeldar  blushed,  while  she  laughed  at  her  own  over* 
eager  generosity,  and  most  disproportionate  calculations. 
Moore  laughed  too— very  quietly,  though ;  and  as  quietly, 
be  ordered  basket  after  basket  to  be  taken  from  the  cart,  and 
remanded  vessel  after  vessel  to  the  cellar. 

''The  Sector  must  hear  of  this,"  he  said:  ''he  will  make 
a  good  story  of  it.  What  an  excellent  army  contractor  Miss 
Keeldar  would  have  been!"  again  he  laughed,  adding — ^"  It  is 
precisely  as  I  conjectured.'* 

"  You  ought  to  be  thankful,"  said  Shirley,  "  and  not  mock 
me.  What  could  I  do  ?  How  could  I  gauge  your  appetites, 
or  number  your  band  ?  For  aught  I  knew,  there  might  have 
been  fifty  of  you  at  least  to  victual.  You  told  me  nothing; 
and  then,  an  application  to  provision  soldiers  naturally  suggests 
large  ideas." 

"  It  appears  so,"  remarked  Moore,  levelling  another  of  his 
keen,  quiet  glances  at  the  discomfited  Shirley.  "  Now,"  he 
continued,  addressing  the  carter,  "  I  think  you  may  take  what 
remains  to  the  Hollow.  Your  load  will  be  somewhat  lighter 
than  the  one  Miss  Keeldar  destined  you  to  carry." 

As  the  vehicle  rumbled  out  of  iSie  yard,  Shirley,  rallying 
her  spirits,  demanded  what  had  become  of  the  wounded. 

"  There  was  not  a  single  man  hurt  on  our  side,"  was  the 
answer. 

"You  were  hurt  yourself,  on  the  temples,"  interposed  a 
quick,  low  voice — ^that  of  Caroline,  who,  having  witiidrawn 
irithin  the  shade  of  the  door,  and  behind  the  large  person  of 
Mrs  Gill,  had  till  now  escaped  Moore's  notice:  when  she  spoke, 
his  eye  searched  the  obscurity  of  her  retreat. 

"  Are  you  much  hurt?"  she  inquired. 

"  As  you  might  scratch  your  finger  with  a  needle  in  sewing." 

"  Lift  your  hair,  and  let  us  see." 

He  took  his  hat  off,  and  did  as  he  was  bid,  disclosing  only 
a  narrow  slip  of  court-plaster.  Caroline  indicated,  by  a  slight 
cnovement  of  the  head,  that  she  was  satisfied,  and  disappeaxed 
idthin  the  clear  obscure  of  the  interior. 

'*  How  did  she  know  I  was  hurt  ?"  asked  Moore* 


S98  SHIBLET. 

'<  By  rumour,  no  doubt.  But  it  is  too  £ood  in  her  to  trouble 
herself  about  you*  For  my  part,  it  wa^jof  your  victims  I  wa« 
thinking  when  I  inquired  after  the  wqunded:  what  damage 
have  your  opponents  sustained?"  / 

^*  One  of  the  rioters,  or  victims,  as  yoja  call  them,  was  killed, 
and  six  were  hurt." 

"  Wbat  have  you  done  with  them  ?^V 

"  What  you  will  perfectly  approve.  Medical  aid  was  pro- 
cured immediately;  and  as  soon  as  we  can  get  a  conpkof 
covered  waggons,  and  some  clean  straw,  they  "roll  be  removed 
to  StHbro'." 

'^  Str^w !  you  must  have  beds  and  l;>edding.  I  will  send  my 
waggon  directly,  properly  furnished ;  ^nd  Mr  Yorke,  I  am  sure, 
will  send  his." 

"You  guess  correctly:  he  has  volunteered  already;  and 
Mrs  Yorke — ^who,  like  you,  seems  disposeid  to  regard  the 
rioters  as  martyrs,  and  me,  and  especially  l^r  Helstone,  as 
murderers — ^is  at  this  moment,  I  believe,  most  assidaooslj 
engaged  in  fitting  it  up  vnth  feather-beds,  pillows,  bolsters, 
blankets,  <&c.  The  victims  lack  no  attention^ — ^I  promise  joo. 
Mr  Hall — ^your  favourite  parson — ^has  been  witi  them  ever 
since  six  o'clock,  exhorting  them,  praying  with  them,  and  even 
waiting  on  them  like  any  nurse ;  and  Caroline's  good  fiiend, 
Miss  Ainley,  that  very  plain  old  maid,  sent  in  a  stock  of  lint 
and  linen,  something  in  the  proportion  of  another  lad/s 
allowance  of  beef  and  wine." 

"  That  wiU  do.     Where  is  your  sister  ?  " 

"  Well  cared  for.  I  had  her  secprely  domiciled  with  Miss 
Mann.  This  very  morning,  the  two  set  out  for  Wormwood 
Wells  (a  noted  watering-place),  and  will  stay  there  some  weeks." 

"  So  Mr  Helstone  domiciled  me  at  the  Rectory !  Mighty 
clever  you  gentlemen  think  you  are  I  I  make  you  heartily 
welcome  to  the  idea,  and  hope  its  savour,  as  you  diew  the  cud 
of  reflection  upon  it,  gives  you  pleasure.  Acute  and  astate, 
why  are  you  not  also  omniscient?  How  is  it  that  ereoti 
transpire,  under  your  very  noses,  of  which  you  have  no  «w- 
picion  ?  It  should  be  so,,  otherwise  the  exquisite  gratification 
of  out-manoeuvring  you  would  be  tmknown.  Ah  1  fiiend,  yoo 
znay  search  my  countenance,  but  you  cannot  read  it" 

Moore,  indeed,  Ipoked  as  if  he  could  not. 

"  You  think  rx^e  a  dangerous  specimen  of  my  sex.  Don't 
you,  now?" 

"A  peculiar  one,  at  least." 


1 


MBS  PBTOB,  299 

"But  Caroliner— is  she  peculiar?"  , 

"  In  her  way: — ^yes." 

"  Her  way !  -  What  is  her  way  ?" 

"  You  know  hex  as  well  as  I  do." 

''  And  knowing,  her  I  assert  that  she  is  neither  eccentric  nor 
difficult  of  controf^  is  she?" 

"  That  depends  ^ ^"      ' 

"  However,  there  is  nothing  mascidine  about  her?^\ 

"  Why  lay  such  emphasis  on  her?  Do  you  consider  her  a 
contrast,  in  that  respect,  to  yourself?" 

'*  Tou  do,  no  douot:  but  that  does  not  signify.  Caroline  is 
neither  masculine,  nor  of  what  they  call  the  spirited  order  of 
women."  ^ 

"  I  have  seen  her  flash  out." 

"  So  have  I — ^but  not  with  manly  fire:  it  was  a  short,  vivid, 
trembling  glow,  that  shot  up,  shone,  vanished " 

"And  left  her  scajed  at  her  own  daring.  You  describe 
others  besides  Caroline." 

"  The  point  I  wish  to  establish  is,  that  Miss  Helstone,  though 
gentle,  tractable,  and  candid  enough,  is  still  perfectly  capable 
of  defyii\g  even  Mr  Moore's  penetration." 

"Whjjt  have  you  and,  she  been  doing?"  asked  Moore, 
taddenly. 

"  Have  you  had  any  breakfast?" 

"  What  is  your  mutual  mystery  ?  " 

"If  you  are  hungry,  MraGiJl  wiU  give  you  something  to 
eat  here.  Step  into  the  oak-parlpur,  and  ring  the  bell — ^you 
will  be  served  as  if^ at  an  inn;  or,  if  you  like  better,  go  back 
to  the  Hollow." 

"The  alternative  is  not  open  to  me:  I  miist  go  back. 
Good  morning:  the  first  leisure  I  have,  I  will  see  you  again." 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

MBS  FBTOB. 


While  Shirley  was  talking  with  Moore,  Caroline  rejoined 
Mtb  Pryor  up-stairs.  She  found  that  lady  deeply  depressed. 
She  would  not  say  that  Miss  Keeldar's  hastiness  had  hurt  her 
feelings ;  but  it  was  evident  an  inward  wound  galled  her.  To 
any  bat  a  congenial  nature,  she  would  have  seemed  insensible 


300  BtaHLBY. 

to  the  quiet,  tender  attentions  by  which  Miss  Helstone  soog^ 
to  impuii  solace ;  but  Caroline  knew  that,  unmoved  or  slightly 
moved  as  she  looked,  she  felt,  valued,  and  was  healed  by^em. 

^'  I  am  deficient  in  self-confidence  and  decision,"  she  said  at 
last.  ''  I  always  have  been  deficient  in  those  qualities:  yet  I 
think  Miss  Eeeldar  should  have  known  my  character  well 
yenough  by  this  time,  to  be  aware  that  I  always  feel  an  even 
painfiil  solicitude  to  do  right,  to  act  for  the  best.  The  unusual 
nature  of  the  demand  on  my  judgment  puzzled  me,  especially 
following  the  alarms  of  the  night.  I  could  not  venture  to  act 
promptly  for  another:  but  I  trust  no  serious  harm  will  result 
from  my  lapse  of  fimmess." 

A  gentle  knock  was  here  heard  at  the  door:  it  was  half- 
opened. 

'^  Caroline,  come  here,"  said  a  low  voice. 

Miss  Helstone  went  out:  there  stood  Shirley  in  the  gallery, 
looking  contrite,  ashamed,  sorry  as  any  repentant  child. 

"  How  is  Mrs  Pryor  ?"  she  asked. 

"  Rather  out  of  spirits,"  said  Caroline. 

"  I  have  behaved  very  shamefully,  very  ungenerously,  very 
ungratefully  to  her,"  said  Shirley.  "  How  insolent  in  me  to 
turn  on  her  thus,  for  what  after  all  was  no  fault,  only  an  excess 
of  conscientiouJsness  on  lier  part.  But  I  regret  my  error  most 
sincerely :  tell  her  so,  and  ask  if  she  will  forgive  me.*^ 

Caroline  discharged  the  errand  with  heartfelt  pleasure. 
Mrs  Pryor  rose,  came  to  the  door :  she  did  not  like  scenes ; 
she  dreaded  them  as  all  timid  people  do:  she  said  falteringly — 

"  Come  in,  my  dear." 

Shirley  did  come  in  with  some  impetuosity  :  she  threw  her 
arms  round  her  governess,  and  while  she  kissed  her  heartily, 
she  said — 

**  You  know  you  must  forgive  me,  Mrs  Pryor.  I  could  not 
get  on  at  all  if  there  was  a  misunderstanding  between  you 
and  me." 

"  I  have  nothing  to  forgive,"  was  the  reply.  "  We  will  pass 
it  over  now  if  you  please.  The  final  result  of  the  incident  is, 
that  it  proves  more  plainly  than  ever  how  unequal  I  am  to 
certain  crises." 

And  that  was  the  painful  feeling  which  tcould  remain  on 
Mrs  E^oriB  mind :  no  effort  of  Shirlejr's  or  Caroline's  could 
efface  it  thence:  she  could  forgive  her  offending  pupil,  not  her 
innocent  self. 

Miss  Keeldar,  doomed  to  be  in  constant  request  dmJng  the 


UBS  PRTOB.  SOI 

mornings  was  presently  summoned  down-sfcairs  again.  The 
Rector  called  first :  a  lively  welcome  and  livelier  reprimand 
were  at  Ids  service ;  he  expected  both,  and,  being  in  high 
spirits,  took  them  in  equally  good  part. 

In  liie  course  of  his  brief  visit,  he  quite  forgot  to  ask  after 
his  niece :  the  riot,  the  rioters,  the  mill,  the  magistrates,  the 
heiress,  absorbed  all  his  thoughts  to  the  exclusion  of  family 
ties.  He  alluded  to  the  part  himself  and  curate  had  taken  iu 
the  defence  of  the  Hollow. 

"  The  vials  of  pharisaical  wrath  will  be  emptied  on  our 
heads,  for  our  share  in  this  business,"  he  said  ;  '^  but  I  def^ 
every  calumniator.    I  was  there  only  to  support  the  law,  to 
play  my  part  as  a  man  and  a  Briton  ;  which  characters  I 
deem  quite  compatible  with  those  of  the  priest  and  Levite,  in 
their  lughest  sense.     Your  tenant,  Moore,"  he  went  on,  "  has 
won  my  approbation.    A  cooler  commander  I  would  not  wish 
to  see,  nor  a  more  determined.     Besides/  the  man  has  shown 
sound  judgment  and  good  sense  ;   first,  in  being  thoroughly 
prepared  for  the  event  which  has  taiken  place,  and  subaequently , 
when  his  well-concerted  plans  had  secured  him  success,  in 
knowing  how  to  use  without  abusing  his  victory.     Some  of 
the  magistrates  are  now  well  frightened,  and,  like  all  cowards, 
show  a  tendency  to  be  cruel ;   Moore  restrains  them  with 
admirable  prudence.     He  has  hitherto  been  very  unpopular 
in  the  neighbourhood  ;   but,  mark  my  words,  the  tide  of 
opinion  will  now  take  a  turn  in  his  favour :  people  will  find 
out  that  they  have  not  appreciated  him,  and  will  hasten  to 
remedy  their  error  ;  and  he,  when  he  perceives  the  public 
disposed  to  acknowledge  his  merits,  will  show  a  more  gracious 
mien  than  that  with  which  he  has  hitherto  favoured  us."  < 

Mr  Helstone  was  about  to  add-  to  this  speech  some  half- 
jesting,  half-serious  warnings  to  Miss  Keeldar,  on  the  subject 
of  her  rumoured  partiality  for  her  talented  tenant,  when  a 
ring  at  the  door,  announcing  another  caller,  checked  his 
raillery ;  and  as  that  other  caller  appeared  in  the  form  of  a 
white-haired,  elderly  gentleman,  with  a  rather  truculent 
countenance  and  disdainful  eye — ^in  short,  our  old  acquaint- 
ance, and  the  Rector's  old  enemy,  Mr  Yorke — the  priest  and 
levite  seized  his  hat,  and  with  iJie  briefest  of  adieux  to  Miss 
Keeldar,  and  the  sternest  of  nods  to  her  guest,  took  an  abrupt 
leave. 

Mr  Yorke  was  in  no  mild  mood,  and  in  no  measured  terms 
^  he  express  hb  opinion  on  the  transaction  of  the  night ; 


802  SBOLKT. 

Moore,  the  magistrates,  the  tioldiers,  the  molHleaders,  eftcL 
and  all  came  in  for  a  share  of  his  invectives ';  but  he  reserved 
his  strongest  epithets — ^and  real  racy  Yorkshire  Doric  adjec- 
tives they  were — ^for  the  benefit  of  the  fighting  parsons,  the 
''  sanguinary,  demoniac''  rector  and  curate.  According  to  him, 
the  cup  of  ecclesiastical  guilt  was  now  full  indeed. 

"  The  Church,"  he  said,  "  was  in  a  bonnie  pickle  now :  it 
was  time  it  came  down  when  parsons  took  to  swaggeiing 
amang  soldiers,  blazing  away  wi'  bullet  and '  gunpowder, 
taking  the  lives  of  far  honester  men  than  themselves.** 

"What  would  Moore  have  done,  if  nobody  had  helped 
him?*'  asked  Shirley. 

"  Drunk  as  he  'd  brewed^-eaten  as  he  'd  baked.** 

"  Which  means,  you  would  have  left  him  by  himself  to 
face  that  mob.  Gk>od.  He  has  plenty  of  courage  ;  but  the 
greatest  amount  of  gallantry  that  ever  garrisoned  one  human 
breast  could  scarce  avail  against  two  hundred." 

"  He  had  the  soldiers  ;  those  poor  slaves  who  hire  out  their 
own  blood  and  spill  other  folks'  for  money." 

"  You  abuse  soldiers  almost  as  much  as  you  abuse  clergy- 
men. All  who  wear  red  coats  are  national  refiise  in  yonr 
eyes,  and  all  who  wear  black  are  national  swindlers.  Mr 
Moore,  according  to  you,  did  wrong  to  get  military  aid,  and 
he  did  still  worse  to  accept  of  any  other  aid.  Your  way  of 
talking  amounts  to  this : — ^he  should  have  abandoned  his  mill 
and  his  life  to  the  rage  of  a  set  of  misguided  madmen,  and 
Mr  Helstone  and  every  other  gentleman  in  the  parish  should 
have  looked  on,  and  seen  the  building  razed  and  its  owner 
slaughtered,  and  never  stirred  a  finger  to  save  either." 

"  If  Moore  had  behaved  to  his  men  from  the  beginning  as 
a  master  ought  to  behave,  they  never  would  have  entertained 
their  present  feelings  towards  him." 

''Easy  for  you  to  talk,"  exclaimed  Miss  Keeldar,  who  was 
beginning  to  wax  warm  in  her  tenant's  cause:  "you,  whose 
family  have  lived  at  Briarmains  for  six  generations,  to  whose 
person  Uie  people  have  been  accustomed  for  fifty  years,  who 
know  all  their  ways,  prejudices,  and  preferences.  Easy,  indeed, 
for  you  to  act  so  as  to  avoid  ofiending  them ;  but  Mr  Moore 
came  a  stranger  into  the  district:  he  came  here  poor  and 
friendless,  with  nothing  but  his  own  energies  to  back  him ; 
nothing  but  his  honour,  his  talent,  and  his  industry  to  make 
his  way  for  him.  A  monstrous  crime  indeed  that,  und^  snch 
oiTcumstances,  he  could  not  popularize  his  naturally  grave, 


MBS  PBTOB.  803 

quiet  manners,  all-'at  once:  could  not  be  Jocular,  and  free,  and 
ooidial  with  a  strange  peasantry,  as  you  are  -with  your  fbllow- 
townsmen!  Az<  unpardonable  transgression,  that  when  he 
introduced  improvements  he  did  not  go  about  the  business  in 
qmte  the  most  politic  way ;  did  not  graduate  his  changes  as 
delicately  as  a  rich'  capitalist  might  have  done !  For  errors 
of  this  sort  is  he  to  be  the  victim  of  mob-outrage  ?  Is  he  to 
be  denied  even(  the  privilege  of  defending  himself?  Are  those 
who  have  the  hearts  of  men  in  their  breasts  (and  Mr  Helstone— 
say  what  you  will  of  him — ^has  such  a  heart)  to  be  reviled  like 
malefactors  because  they  stand  by  him — ^because  they  venture 
to  espouBe  the  cause  of  one  against  two  hundred  ?" 

"  Come— come  now — ^be  cool,"  said  Mr  Yorkoy  smiling  at 
the  eameirtxiess  with  which  Shirley  multiplied  her  rapid 
questions.' 

^^Goolt  Must  I  listen  coolly  to  downright' nonsense — to 
dangerous  nonsense  ?  No.  I  like  you  very  well,  Mr  Yorke, 
as  you  know ;  but  I  thoroughly  dislike  some  of  your  prin- 
ciples. '  All  that  cant— excuse  me,  but  I  repeat  the  word- 
all  that  cant  about  soldiers  and  parsons  is  most  ofiensive  in 
my  esaa.  All  ridiculous,  irrational  crying  up  of  one  class, 
wheth^  the  same  be  aristocrat  or  democrat — all  howling 
down  of  another  class,  whether  clerical  or  military — all 
exacting  injustice  to  individuals,  whether  monarch  or  mendi- 
cant— is  really  sickening  to  me :  all  arraying  of  ranks  against 
ranks,  aU  party  hatreds,  all  tjrrannies  disguised  as  liberties,  I 
reject  and  wash  my  hands  of.  Tou  think  you  are  a  philan- 
thropist ;  you  think  you  are  an  advocate  of  liberty ;  but  I 
will  tell  you  this — ^Mr  Hall,  the  parson  of  Nunnely,  is  a 
better  friend  both  of  man  and  freedom,  than  £[iram  yorke, 
the  Reformer  of  Briarfield.*'  ^ 

From  a  man,  Mr  Yorke  would  not  have  borne  this  language 
very  patiently,  nor  would  he  have  endured  it  from  some 
women;  but  he  accounted  Shirley  both  honest  and  pretty, 
and  her  plain-spoken  ire  amused  him  :  besides  he  took  a  secret 
pleasure  in  hearing  her  defend  her  tenant,  for  we  have  already 
intidiated'he  had  Robert  Moore's  interest  very  much  at  heart: 
moreover,  if  he  wished  to  avenge  himself  for  her  severity,  he 
knew  the  means  lay  in  his  power:  a  word,  he  believed,  would 
Bnffioe  to  tame  and  silence  her,  to  cover  her  frank  forehead 
with  the  rosy  shadow  of  shame,  and  veil  the  glow  of  her  eye 
under  down-drooped  lid  and  lash. 
^  What  more  hast  thou  to  say  ?  "  he  inquired,  as  she  paused. 


tSU^  SEIRLST. 


V>l-k.. 


me  for  orders  and  directions,  which  I  xeaJly  did  not  fed 
warranted  ,in  giving.  Mr  Moore  has,  I  believe,  sent  up  for 
refreshments  £)r  the  soldiers  and  others  engaged  in  the 
defence;  for  some  conveniences  also  for  the  wounded.  I  could 
not  undertake  the  responsibility  of  giving  orders  or  taking 
measures.  I  fear  delay  may  have  been  injurious  in  some 
instances;  but  this  is  not  my  house:  you  were  absent,  my 
dear  Miss  Keeldar — what  could  I  do?" 

"Were  no  refreshments  sent?"  asked  Shirley,  while  her 
countenance,  hitherto  so  clear,  propitious,  and  quiet,  even 
while  she  was  rating  the  milk-fetchers,  suddenly  toimed  dark 
and  warm. 

"  I  think  not,  my  dear.*'  ,> 

"And  nothing  for  the  woimded?  no  linen — no  wine— no 
bedding?" 

"I  think  not.  I  cannot  tell  what  Mrs  Gill  jiid:  but  it 
seemed  impossible  to  me,  at  the  moment,  to  venture  to  dispose 
of  your  property  by  sending  supplies  to  soldiers— provisions 
for  a  company  of  soldiers  sounds  formidable:  how  many  there 
are  I  did  not  ask ;  but  I  could  not  think  of  allowing  tibem  to 
pillage  the  house,  as  it  were.  I  intended  to  do  what  wbs 
right;  yet  I  did  not  see  the  case  quite  clearly,  I  own." 

"It  lies  in  a  nutshell,  notwithstanding.  These  soldien 
have  risked  their  lives  in  defence  of  my  propeiiy — ^I  suppose 
they  have  a  right  to  my  gratitude :  the  wounded  are  our 
fellow-creatures — ^I  suppose  we  should  aid  them.     Mrs" Gill'" 

She  turned,  and  called  in  a  voice  more  clear  than  soft  It 
rung  through  the  thick  oak  of  the  hall  and  kitchen  doors 
more  effectually  than  a  bell's  summons,  Mrs  Gill,  who  was 
deep  in  bread-making,  came  with. hands  and  apron  in  cnlinaij 
case,  not  having  dared  to  stop  to  rub  the  doiagh  from,  the  one, 
or  to  shake  the  £our  from  the  other.  Her  mistress  had  never 
called  a  serv^t  in  that  voice,  save  once  before,  and  that  was 
^^hen  she" had  seen  from  the  window  Tartar  in  full  tug  with 
two  carriers*  dogs,  each  of  them  a  match  for  him  in  size,  if  not 
in  courage,  and  their  masters  standi;^. by,  encouxaging  their 
animals,  while  hers  was  unbe£riended:  then,  indeed,  she  had 
summoned  John  as  if  the  I)ay  of  Judgment  were  at  hand: 
nor  had  she  waited  for  the  said  John's  comings  but  had  walked 
out  into  the  lane  bonnetless  ;  and  after  informing  the  carzieis 
that  she  held  them  far  less  of  men  than  the  three  brutes  whirl- 
ing and  worrying  in  the  dust  before  them,  had  put  her  hands 
roimd  the  thick  neck  of  the  largest  of  the  curs  and  given  her 


TO-MORBOW.  295 

whole  sti^ngih  to  the  essay  of  choking  it  from  Tartarus  torn 
and  blee^P^g  eye,  just  above  and  below  which  organ  the 
Tengefiil  fangs  were  inserted.  Five  or  six  men  were  presently 
on  &e  spot  to  help  her,  but  she  never  thanked  one  of  them: 
"  They  might  have  come  before,  if  their  will  had  been  good," 
she  said.  She  ^ad  not  a  word  for  anybody  during  the  rest  of 
the  day;  but  sat  near  the  hall  £b:e  tiU  evening  watching  and 
tending  Tartar,  who  lay  all  gory,  stiff,  and  swelled,  on  a  mat 
at  her  feet.  She,  wept  furtively  over  him  sometimes,  and 
murmured  the  softest  words  of  pily  and  endearment,  in  tones 
whose  music  the  old,  scarred,  canine  warrior  acknowledged  by 
licking  her  hand  or  h^r  sandal  alternately  with  his  own  red 
wounds.  As  to  John,  his*  lady  turned  a  cold  shoulder  on  him 
for  a  week  afterwards. 

Mrs  Gill,  remembering  this  Httle  episode,  came  '^  all  of  a 
tremble,"  as  she  .said  herself.  In  a  firm,  brief  voibe.  Miss 
Keeldar  proceeded  to  put  questions  and  give  orders.  That  at 
such  a  time  Fieldhead  should  have  evinced  the  inhospitality 
c(f  a  miser's  hovel,  stung  her  haughty  spirit  to  the  quick ;  and 
tlie  revolt  of  its  pride  was  seen  in  the  heaving  of  her  heart; 
stilled  stormily  under  the  lace  and  silk  which  veiled  it. 
"  ^ow  long  is  it  since  that  message  came  from  the  null  ?" 
"Not  an  hour  yet,  ma'am,"  answered  the  housekeeper, 
soothinglLy. 

"Notj-an  hour  I  You  might  almost  as  well  have  said  not 
a  day.  They  wiU  have  applied  elsewhere  by  this  time.  Send 
a  man  instantly  down  to  tell  them  that  everything  this  house 
contains  |s  at  Mr  Moore's,  Mr  Helstone's,  and  Sie  soldiers' 
service.     Do  that  first!" 

While  the  order  wafj  being  executed,  Shirley  moved  away 
from  her  fri^ds,  and  stood  at  the  hall-window,  silent,  xmap- 
proachable.  ^^When  Mrs  Gill  came  back,  she  turned :  the 
purple  flush  iif^ch  painful  excitement  kindles  on  a  pale  cheek, 
glowed  on  hers :  the  spark  which  displeasure  lights  in  a  dark 
eye  fired  her  glance. 

"Let  the  cofitents  of  the  larder  and  the  wine-cellar  be 
brought  up,  put  into  the  hay-carts,  and  driven  dpwn  to  the 
Hollow.  If  diere  does  not  happen  to  be  much  bread  or  much 
meat  in  the  house,  go  to  the  butcher  and  baker,  and  desire 
them  to  send' what  they  have:  but  I  will  see  for  myself." 
She  moved  off. 

"  All  will  be  right  ^oon  :  she  will  get  over  it  in  an  hour," 
whispered  Caroline  to  Mrs  Pryor.      "Go  up-stairs,   dear 


296  8HIBLET. 

madam/*  slie  added,  afPectionatelj, ''  and  try  to  be  as  calfli 
and  easy  as  you  can.  The  truth  is,  Shirley  will  blame  her- 
self more  than  you  before  the  day  is  over." 

By  dint  of  a  few  more  gentle  assurances  and  persuasions, 
Miss  Helstone  contrived  to  soothe  the  agitated  lady.  HaTing 
accompanied  her  to  her  apartment,  and  promised  to  rejoin  her 
there  when  things  were  settled,  Caroline  left  her  to  see,  as  she 
said,  "  if  she  could  be  useful."  She  presently  found  tiiat  die 
could  be  very  usefiil ;  for  the  retinue  of  servants  at  Fieldhead 
was  by  no  means  numerous,  and  just  now  their  mistress  found 
plenty  of  occupation  for  all  the  hands  at  her  command,  and 
for  her  own  also.  The  delicate  good-nature  and  dexterous 
activity  which  CaroUne  brought  to  the  aid  of  the  housekeeper 
and  maids, — ^aU  somewhat  scared  by  their  lady's  unwonted 
mood — did  a  world  of  good  at  once :  it  helped  the  assistants 
and  appeased  the  dii-ectress.  A  chance  glance  and  smile  fiom 
CaroHne  moved  Shirley  to  an  answering  smile  directly.  The 
former  was  carrymg  a  heavy  basket  up  the  cellar^tairs. 

"This  is  a  shame  1"  cried  Shirley,  running  to  her.  "It 
will  strain  your  arm." 

She  took  it  from  her,  and  herself  bore  it  out  into  the  yard. 
The  cloud  of  temper  was  dispelled  when  she  came  back;  the 
flash  in  her  eye  was  melted;  the  shade  on  her  ferdiead 
vanished:  she  resumed  her  usual  cheerful  and  cordial  manner 
to  those  about  her,  tempering  her  revived  spirits  witih  a  little 
of  the  softness  of  shame  at  her  previous  imjust  anger. 

She  was  stiU  superintending  the  lading  of  the  cart,  when  a 
gentleman  entered  the  yard  and  approached  her  ere  she  was 
aware  of  his  presence. 

"I  hope  I  see  Miss  Keeldar  well  this  morning?"  he  said, 
examining  with  rather  significant  scrutiny  her  stiU  fluBhed  &ce. 

She  gave  him  a  look,  and  then  again  bent  to  her  employ-* 
ment,  without  reply.  A  pleasant  enough  smile  played  on 
her  lips,  but  she  hid  it.  The  gentleman  repeated  his  saluta- 
tion, st(;K)ping,  that  it  might  reach  her  ear  with  more  fecilit^. 

"  Well  enough,  if  she  be  good  enough,"  was  the  answer; 
"  and  so  is  Mr  Moore  too,  I  dare  say.  To  speak  truth,  I  am 
not  anxious  about  him ;  some  slight  mischance  would  be  only 
his  just  due :  his  conduct  has  been — ^we  will  say  strangej  just 
now,  tm  we  have  time  to  characterize  it  by  a  more  exact 
epithet.     Meantime,  may  I  ask  what  brings  him  here?" 

"  Mr  Helstone  and  I  have  just  received  your  message,  that 
everything  at  Fieldhead  was  at  our  service.    We  judlged^  by 


TO-MOBBOW.  St97 

the  tmlimited  wording  of  the  gracious  intimation,  that  you 
would  be  giving  yourself  too  much  trouble:  I  perceive,  our 
conjecture  was  correct.  We  are  not  a  regiment,  remember: 
only  about  half  a  dozen  soldiers,  and  as  many  civilians. 
Allow  me  to  retrench  something  from  these  too  abundant 
supplies." 

Miss  Keeldar  blushed,  while  she  laughed  at  her  own  over* 
eager  generosity,  and  most  disproportionate  calculations. 
Moore  laughed  too— very  quietly,  though ;  and  as  quietly^ 
he  ordered  basket  after  basket  to  be  taken  from  the  cart,  and 
remanded  vessel  after  vessel  to  the  cellar. 

''The  Bector  must  hear  of  this,"  he  said:  "he  will  make 
a  good  story  of  it.  What  an  excellent  army  contractor  Miss 
Keeldar  would  have  beenl"  again  he  laughed,  adding — ^^  It  is 
precisely  as  I  conjectured." 

''  You  ought  to  be  thankful,"  said  Shirley, ''  and  not  mock 
me.  What  could  I  do  ?  How  could  I  gauge  your  appetites, 
or  number  your  band  ?  For  aught  I  knew,  there  might  have 
been  fifty  of  you  at  least  to  victual.  You  told  me  nothing; 
and  then,  an  application  to  provision  soldiers  naturally  suggests 
large  ideas." 

"  It  appears  so,"  remarked  Moore,  levelling  another  of  his 
keen,  quiet  glances  at  the  discomfited  Shirley.     "  Now,"  he 
continued,  addressing  the  carter, ''  I  think  you  may  take  what 
remains  to  the  Hollow.     Your  load  will  be  somewhat  lighter ' 
than  the  one  Miss  Keeldar  destined  you  to  carry." 

As  the  vehicle  rumbled  out  of  the  yard,  Shirley,  rallying 
her  spirits,  demanded  what  had  become  of  the  wounded. 

''  There  was  not  a  single  man  hurt  on  our  side,"  was  the 
answer. 

"  You  were  hurt  yourself,  on  the  temples,"  interposed  a 
!^ck,  low  voice — ^that  of  Caroline,  who,  having  wi&drawn 
within  the  shade  of  the  door,  and  behind  the  laige  person  of 
Mrs  Gill,  had  till  now  escaped  Moore's  notice:  when  she  spoke, 
his  eye  searched  the  obscurity  of  her  retreat 
"  Are  you  much  hurt?"  she  inquired. 
^  As  you  might  scratch  your  finger  with  a  needle  in  sewing." 
"  lift  your  hair,  and  let  us  see." 

He  took  his  hat  off,  and  did  as  he  was  bid,  disclosing  only 
a  narrow  slip  of  court-plaster.     Caroline  indicated,  by  a  slight 
movement  of  the  head,  that  she  was  satisfied,  and  disappeared 
within  the  clear  obscure  of  the  interior. 
**  How  did  she  know  I  was  hurt  ?"  asked  Moore* 


/ 


99S  SBIBLET. 

''  By  rumour,  no  doubt.  But  it  is  too  ^ood  in  her  to  trouble 
herself  about  you.  For  my  part,  it  wa%-of  your  victims  I  was 
thinking  when  I  inquired  afler  the  wounded:  what  damage 
have  your  opponents  sustained?"  ^f 

"  One  of  the  rioters,  or  victims,  as  yqjci  call  them,  was  killed, 
and  six  were  hurt." 

"  What  have  you  done  with  them  ?]'. 

"  What  you  will  perfectly  approve.  Medical  aid  was  pro- 
cured immediately;  and  as  soon  as  we  can  get  a  caapUd 
covered  waggons,  and  some  clean  straw,  they  "wtOU.  be  removed 
to  StHbro'." 

'^  Str^w !  you  must  have  beds  and  1;)edding.  I  will  send  my 
waggon  directly,  properly  itiimished ;  i^nd  Mr  Yorke,  I  am  sure, 
will  send  his." 

"You  guess  correctly:  he  has  volunteered  already;  and 
Mrs  Yorke — ^who,  like  you,  seems  disposed  to  regard  the 
rioters  as  martyrs,  and  me,  and  especially  "i/^  Helstone,  as 
murderers — ^is  at  this  moment,  I  believe,  most  assiduously 
engaged  in  fitting  it  up  with  feather-beds,  pillows,  bolsters, 
blankets,  &c.  The  victims  lack  no  attention^ — ^I  promise  yofu. 
Mr  Hall — ^your  favourite  parson — ^has  been  with  them  ever 
since  six  o^clock,  exhortmg  them,  praying  with  them,  and  even 
waiting  on  them  like  any  nurse ;  and  Caroline's  good  friend, 
Miss  Ainley,  that  veryi  plain  old  maid,  sent  in  a  stock  of  lint 
and  linen,  something  in  the  proportion  of  another  ladys 
allowance  of  beef  and  wine." 

"  That  will  do.     Where  is  yoiu:  sister  ?  " 

"  Well  cared  for.  I  had  her  securely  domiciled  with  Miss 
Mann.  This  very  morning,  the  two  set  out  for  Wormwood 
Wells  (a  noted  watering-place),  and  will  stay  there  some  weeks." 

"  So  Mr  Helstone  domiciled  me  at  the  Rectory !  Migbty 
clever  you  gentlemen  think  you  are  I  I  make  you  heartily 
welcome  to  the  idea,  and  hope  its  savour,  as  you  chew  the  cud 
of  reflection  upon  it,  gives  you  pleasure.  Acute  and  astate, 
why  are  you  not  also  omniscient?  How  is  it  that  events 
transpire,  imder  your  very  noses,  of  which  you  have  no  ms- 
picion  ?  It  should  be  so,^  otherwise  the  exquisite  gratification 
of  out-manoeuvring  you  would  be  unknown.  Ah  1  friend,  you 
znay  search  my  countenance,  but  you  cannot  read  it." 

Moore,  indeed,  Ipoked  as  if  he  could  not. 

"  You  think  n^  a  dangerous  specimen  of  my  sex.  DonV 
you,  now?" 

^A  peculiar  one,  at  least." 


MBS  PRTOB,  299 

"But  Caroline^is  she  peciiliar?"  , 

"In  her  way; — ^yes." 

"  Her  way !  -  What  Is  her  way?" 

"  You  know  her  as  well  as  I  do." 

"  And  knowing,her  I  assert  that  she  is  neither  eooentric  x^ 
difficiilt  of  controlj^  is  she  ?  " 

"That  depends.' 1 '' 

"  However,  there  is  nothing  masculine  about  her?^\ 

"  Why  lay  such  emphasis  on  her?  Do  you  consider  her  a 
contrast,  in  that  respect,  to  yourself?" 

"  You  do,  no  donht:  but  that  does  not  signify.  Caroline  is 
neither  masculine,  nor  of  what  they  call  the  spirited  order  of 
women." 

"  I  have  seen  her  flash  out." 

"  So  have  I — ^but  liot  with  manly  fire:  it  was  a  short,  vivid, 
trembling  glow,  that  shot  up,  shone,  vanished ^ 

"And  left  her  sc^ed  at  her  own  daring.  You  describe 
others  besides  Caroline." 

"  The  point  I  wish  to  establish  is,  that  Miss  Helstone,  though 
gentle,  t9:actable,  and  candid  enough,  is  still  perfectly  capable 
of  defying  even  Mr  Moore^s  penetration." 

"What  have  ypu  and. she  been  doing?"  asked  Moore, 
raddenly. 

"  Have  you  had  any  breakfast  ?" 

"  What  is  your  mutual  mystery  ?  " 

"If  you  are  hungry,  Mra  Gill  will  give  you  something  to 
eat  here.  Step  into  the  oak-parlpur,  and  ring  the  bell — ^you 
will  be  served  as  if  at  an  inn;  or,  if  you  like  better,  go  back 
totheHoUow." 

"The  alternative  .is  not  open  to  me:  I  must  go  back. 
Good  morning:  the  first  leisure  I  have,  I  will  see  you  again." 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

MBS  PBTOB. 


While  Shirley  was  talking  with  Moore,  Caroline  rejoined 
Mrs  Pryor  up-stairs.  She  found  that  lady  deeply  depressed. 
She  would  not  say  that  Miss  Keeldar's  hastiness  had  hurt  her 
ieeHngs ;  but  ib  was  evident  an  inward  wound  gaUed  her.  To 
any  but  a  congenial  nature,  she  would  have  seemed  insensible 


.y 


300  sflmLET. 

• 

to  the  quiet,  tender  attentions  by  which  Miss  Helstone  soQgjht 
to  impart  solace;  but  Caroline  knew  that,  unmoved  or  sligMj 
moved  as  she  looked,  she  felt,  valued,  and  was  healed  bj  tkem. 

^'  I  am  deficient  in  self-confidence  and  decision,**  she  said  at 
last.  ''  I  always  have  been  deficient  in  those  qualities:  yet  I 
think  Miss  Keeldar  should  have  known  my  character  well 
enough  by  this  time,  to  be  aware  that  I  always  feel  an  even 
painM  solicitude  to  do  right,  to  act  for  the  best.  The  xmusual 
nature  of  the  demand  on  my  judgment  puzzled  me,  especially 
following  the  alarms  of  the  night.  I  could  not  venture  to  act 
promptly  for  another:  but  I  trust  no  serious  harm  will  result 
from  my  lapse  of  firmness." 

A  gentle  knock  was  here  heard  at  the  door:  it  was  half- 
opened. 

"  Caroline,  come  here,"  said  a  low  voice. 

Miss  Helstone  went  out:  there  stood  Shirley  in  the  galleiy, 
looking  contrite,  ashamed,  sorry  as  any  repentant  chUd. 

"  How  is  Mrs  Pryor  ?"  she  asked. 

"  Rather  out  of  spirits,"  said  CiEiroline. 

"  I  have  behaved  very  shamefully,  very  imgenerously,  very 
ungratefully  to  her,"  said  Shirley.  "How  insolent  in  me  to 
turn  on  her  tihus,  for  what  after  all  was  no  fault,  only  an  excess 
of  conscientiousness  on  ier  part.  But  I  regret  my  error  most 
sincerely :  tell  her  so,  and  ask  if  she  will  forgive  me.'^ 

Caroline  discharged  the  errand  with  heartfelt  pleasure. 
Mrs  Pryor  rose,  came  to  the  door :  she  did  not  like  scenes ; 
she  dreaded  them  as  all  timid  people  do:  she  said  fidteringly-^ 

"  Come  in,  my  dear." 

Shirley  did  come  in  with  some  impetuosity :  she  threw  her 
arms  round  her  governess,  and  while  she  kissed  her  heartily, 
she  said — 

**  You  know  you  mvAt  forgive  me,  Mrs  Pryor.  I  could  not 
get  on  at  all  if  there  was  a  misunderstanding  between  you 
and  me." 

"  I  have  nothing  to  forgive,"  was  the  reply.  "  We  will  paa 
it  over  now  if  you  please.  The  final  result  of  the  incident  is, 
that  it  proves  more  plainly  than  ever  how  unequal  I  am  to 
certain  crises." 

And  that  was  the  painful  feeling  which  xocfM  remain  os 
Mrs  Fryer's  mind :  no  effort  of  Slurley*s  or  Caroline's  could 
efface  it  thence:  she  could  forgive  her  offending  pupil,  not  her 
innocent  self. 

Miss  Keeldar,  doomed  to  be  in  constant  request  during  the 


UBS  PBTOB.  801 

mondng;,  was  presently  summoned  down-stairs  again.  The 
Bector  called  first :  a  lively  welcome  and  livelier  reprimand 
were  at  his  service ;  he  expected  both,  and,  being  in  high 
spirits,  took  them  in  equally  good  part. 

In  tiie  course  of  his  brief  visit,  he  quite  forgot  to  ask  after 
his  niece :  the  riot,  the  rioters,  the  mill,  the  magistrates,  the 
heiress,  absorbed  all  his  thoughts  to  the  exclusion  of  family 
ties.  He  alluded  to  the  part  himself  and  curate  had  taken  in 
the  defence  of  the  Hollow. 

"The  vials  of  pharisaical  wrath  will  be  emptied  on  our 
heads,  for  our  share  in  this  business,"  he  said  ;  ^'  but  I  def^ 
every  calunmiator,    I  was  there  only  to  support  the  law,  to 
play  my  part  as  a  man  and  a  Briton  ;  which  characters  I 
deem  quite  compatible  with  those  of  the  priest  and  Levite,  in 
their  highest  sense.     Your  tenant,  Moore,"  he  went  on,  "  has 
won  my  approbation.     A  cooler  commander  I  would  not  wish 
to  see,  nor  a  more  determined.     Besides,'  the  man  has  shown 
sound  judgment  and  good  sense  ;   first,  in  being  thoroughly 
prepared  for  the  event  which  has  taken  place,  and  subsequently, 
when  his  wdl-concerted  plans  had  secured  him  success,  in 
knowing  how  to  use  without  abusing  his  victory.     Some  of 
the  magistrates  are  now  well  frightened,  and,  like  all  cowards, 
show  a  tendency  to  be  cruel ;   Moore  restrains  them  with 
admirable  prudence.     He  has  hitherto  been  very  unpopular 
in  the  neighbourhood  ;   but,  mark  my  words,  the  tide  of 
opinion  will  now  take  a  turn  in  his  favour :  people  will  find 
out  that  they  have  not  appreciated  him,  and  will  hasten  to 
remedy  their  error  ;  and  he,  when  he  perceives  the  public 
disposed  to  acknowledge  his  merits,  will  show  a  more  gracious 
mien  than  that  with  which  he  has  hitherto  favoured  us."  < 

Mr  Helstone  was  about  to  add-  to  this  speech  some  half- 
jesting,  half-serious  warnings  to  Miss  Keeldar,  on  the  subject 
of  her  rumoured  partiality  for  her  talented  tenant,  when  a 
ring  at  the  door,  announcing  another  caller,  checked  his 
niilleiy ;  and  as  that  other  caller  appeared  in  the  fonn  of  a 
white-haired,  elderiy  gentleman,  with  a  rather  truculent 
comitenance  and  disdainful  eye — ^in  short,  our  old  acquaint- 
ance, and  the  Rector's  old  enemy,  Mr  Yorke — the  priest  and 
Levite  seized  his  hat,  and  ^vith  iJie  briefest  of  adieux  to  Miss 
Eeddar,  and  the  sternest  of  nods  to  her  guest,  took  an  abrupt 
leave. 

Mr  Yorke  was  in  no  mild  mood,  and  in  no  measured  terms 
did  he  express  his  opinion  on  the  transaction  of  the  night ; 


802  SHOLKT. 

Moore,  the  magistrates,  the  fioldiers,  the  mob-leaders,  each 
and  all  came  in  for  a  share  of  his  invectives )  but  he  reserved 
his  strongest  epithets — ^and  real  racy  Yorkshire  Doric  adjec- 
tives they  were — ^for  the  benefit  of  the  fighting  parsons,  the 
''  sanguinary,  demoniac"  rector  and  curate.  According  to  him, 
the  cup  of  ecclesiastical  guilt  was  now  full  indeed. 

"  The  Church,"  he  said,  "  was  in  a  bonnie  pickle  now :  it 
was  time  it  came  down  when  parsons  took  to  swaggering 
amang  soldiers,  blazing  away  wi'  bullet  and.  gunpowder, 
taking  the  Hves  of  far  honester  men  than  themselves." 

"What  would  Moore  have  done,  if  nobody  had  helped 
him?"  asked  Shirley. 

"  Drunk  as  he  'd  brewed^-eaten  as  he  'd  baked.'* 

"  Which  means,  you  would  have  left  him  by  himself  to 
face  that  mob.  Good.  He  has  plenty  of  courage  ;  but  the 
greatest  amount  of  gallantry  that  ever  garrisoned  one  human 
breast  could  scarce  avail  against  two  hundred." 

"  He  had  the  soldiers  ;  those  poor  slaves  who  hire  out  their 
own  blood  and  spiU  other  folks*  for  money." 

"  You  abuse  soldiers  almost  as  much  as  you  abuse  clergy- 
men. All  who  wear  red  coats  are  national  refuse  in  your 
eyes,  and  all  who  wear  black  are  national  swindlers.  Mr 
Moore,  according  to  you,  did  wrong  to  get  military  aid,  and 
he  did  still  worse  to  accept  of  any  other  aid.  Your  way  of 
talking  amounts  to  this : — ^he  should  have  abandoned  his  mill 
and  his  life  to  the  rage  of  a  set  of  misguided  madmen,  and 
Mr  Helstone  and  every  other  gentleman  in  the  parish  should 
have  looked  on,  and  seen  the  building  razed  and  its  owner 
slaughtered,  and  never  stirred  a  finger  to  save  either." 

"  K  Moore  had  behaved  to  his  men  from  the  beginning  as 
a  master  ought  to  behave,  they  never  would  have  entertained 
their  present  feelings  towards  him." 

"Easy  for  you  to  talk,"  exclaimed  Miss  Keeldar,  who  was 
beginning  to  wax  warm  in  her  tenant's  cause :  "  you,  whose 
family  have  lived  at  Briarmains  for  six  generations,  to  whose 
person  tlie  people  have  been  accustomed  for  fifty  years,  who 
know  all  their  ways,  prejudices,  and  preferences.  Easy,  indeed, 
for  you  to  act  so  as  to  avoid  ofiending  them ;  but  Mr  Moore 
came  a  stranger  into  the  district :  he  came  here  poor  and 
friendless,  with  nothing  but  his  own  energies  to  back  him ; 
nothing  but  his  honour,  his  talent,  and  his  industry  to  make 
his  way  for  him.  A  monstrous  crime  indeed  that,  linder  tfoch 
-^Tcmnstances,  he  could  not  popularize  his  naturally  grave, 


MBft  PBTOIL  808 

quiet  mannera,  all- -at  once:  could  not  be  jocular,  and  free,  and 
oordial  with  a  strange  peasantry,  as  you  are  with  your  fellow- 
townsmen  !  An  unpardonable  transgression,  that  when  he 
introduced  im^ovements  he  did  not  go  about  the  business  in 
quite  the  most  politic  way ;  did  not  graduate  his  changes  as 
delicately  as  a  rich  capitalist  might  have  done !  For  errors 
of  this  sort  is  he  to  be  the  victim  of  mob-outrage  ?  Is  he  to 
be  denied  eveiii  the  privilege  of  defending  himself?  Are  those 
who  have  the  hearts  of  men  in  their  breasts  (and  Mr  Helstone — 
say  what  you  will  of  him — ^has  such  a  heart)  to  be  reviled  like 
malefactors  because  they  stand  by  him — ^because  they  venture 
to  espouBe  ihe  cause  of  one  against  two  hundred  ?" 

"  Come— Msome  now — ^be  cool,"  said  Mr  Yorke^  smiling  at 
the  earnestness  with  which  Shirley  multiplied  her  rapid 
questions.' 

*'Cool!  Must  I  listen  coolly  to  downright' nonsense — ^to 
dangerous  nonsense  ?  No.  I  fike  you  very  well,  Mr  Yorke, 
as  you  know ;  but  I  thoroughly  dislike  some  of  your  prin- 
ciples. 'All  that  cant — excuse  me,  but  I  repeat  ^e  word— ^ 
all  that  cant  about  soldiers  and  parsons  is  most  ofiensive  in 
my  esuta.  All  ridiculous,  irrational  cr3dng  up  of  one  class, 
whether  the  same  be  aristocrat  or  democrat — all  howling 
down  of  anotjier  class,  whether  clerical  or  military — aU 
exacting  injustice  to  individuals,  whether  monarch  or  mendi- 
cant— ^is  really  sickening  to  me:  all  arraying  of  ranks  against 
ranks,  all  party  hatreds,  all  tjrrannies  disguised  as  liberties,  I 
reject  and  wash  my  hands  of.  Tou  think  you  are  a  philan- 
thropist ;  you  think  you  are  an  advocate  of  liberty ;  but  I 
will  tell  you  this — ^Mr  Hall,  the  parson  of  Nunnely,  is  a 
better  friend  both  of.  man  and  freedom,  than  Hiram  yorke, 
the  Reformer  of  Briarfield.*'  ^ 

From  a  man,  Mr  Yorke  would  not  have  borne  this  language 
veiy  patiently,  nor  would  he  have  endured  it  from  some 
women;  but  he  accounted  Shirley  both  honest  and  pretty, 
and  her  plain-spoken  ire  amused  him :  besides  he  took  a  secret 
pleasure  in  hearing  her  defend  her  tenant,  for  we  have  already 
intimated' he  had  Robert  Moore's  interest  very  much  at  heart: 
moreover,  if  he  wished  to  avenge  himself  for  her  severity,  he 
knew  the  means  lay  in  his  power:  a  word,  he  believed,  would 
suffice  to  tame  and  silence  her,  to  cover  her  frank  forehead 
with  the  rosy  shadow  of  shame,  and  veil  the  glow  of  her  eye 
under  down-drooped  lid  and  lash. 
^  What  more  hast  thou  to  say  V  "  he  inquired,  as  she  paused. 


rj^9^  8HIRL£Y« 

me  for  orders  and  directions,  which  I  Teally  did  not  feel 
warranted  .in  giving.  Mr  Moore  has,  I  believe,  sent  op  for 
refreshments  for  the  soldiers  and  others  engaged  in  the 
defence;  for  some  conveniences  also  for  the  wounded.  I  could 
not  imdertake  the  responsibility  of  giving  orders  or  talking 
measures.  I  fear  delay  may  have  been  injurious  in  some 
instances;  but  this  is  not  my  house:  you  were  absent,  my 
dear  Miss  Keeldar — what  could  I  do?" 

"Were  no  refreshments  sent?"  asked  Shirley,  wUle  her 
countenance,  hitherto  so  clear,  propitious,  and  quiet,  even 
while  she  was  rating  the  milk-fetchers,  suddenly  tamed  dark 
and  warm. 

"  I  think  not,  my  dear."  .^ 

"And  nothing  for  the  woimded?  no  linen — no  wine — no 
bedding?" 

"I  think  not.  I  cannot  tell  what  Mrs  Gill  j^d:  but  it 
seemed  impossible  to  me,  at  the  moment,  to  venture  to  dispose 
of  your  property  by  sending  supplies  to  soldienh— provisioDS 
for  a  company  of  soldiers  soimds  formidable:  how,  many  there 
are  I  did  not  ask ;  but  I  could  not  think  of  allowing  ^em  to 
pillage  the  house,  as  it  were.  I  intended  to  do  what  was 
right;  yet  I  did  not  see  the  case  quite  clearly,  I  own." 

"It  lies  in  a  nutshell,  notwithstanding.  These  soldiers 
have  risked  their  lives  in  defence  of  my  propeiiy — ^I  suppose 
they  have  a  right  to  my  gratitude :  the  woimded  are  oar 
fellow-creatures — ^I  suppose  we  should  aid  theni.     Mrs* Gill!" 

She  turned,  and  called  in  a  voice  more  clear  than  soft.  It 
rung  through  the  thick  oak  of  the  hall  and  kitchen  doon 
more  effectually  than  a  beU^s  summons,  Mrs  Gill,  who  was 
deep  in  bread-making,  came  with  hands  and  apron  in  culinazy 
case,  not  having  dared  to  stop  to  rub  the  doiigh  from  the  one, 
or  to  shake  the  flour  from  the  other.  Her  mistress  had  never 
called  a  servant  in  that  voice,  save  once  before,  and  that  was 
;^hen  she"  had  seen  fix>m  the  window  Tartar  in  full  tug  with 
two  carriers*  dogs,  each  of  them  a  match  for  him  in  size,  if  not 
in  courage,  and  their  masters  standing,  by,  encouraging  their 
animals,  while  hers  was  unbefriended:  then,  indeed ,  she  had 
summoned  John  as  if  the  I}a,j  of  Judgment  were  at  hand: 
nor  had  she  waited  for  the  said  John's  coming,  but  had  walked 
out  into  the  lane  bonnetless ;  and  after  informing  the  carriers 
that  she  held  them  far  less  of  men  than  the  three  brutes  whirl- 
ing and  worrying  in  the  dust  before  them,  had  put  her  hands 
'^)und  the  thick  neck  of  the  largest  of  the  curs  and  given  her 


TO-MORBOW.  295 

whole  sti^gtb  to  the  essay  of  choking  it  from  Tartarus  torn 
and  bleeding  eye,  just  above  and  below  which  organ  the 
rei^efol  fangs  were  inserted.  Five  or  six  men  were  presenflj 
on  the  S£ot  ip  help  her,  but  she  never  thanked  one  of  them: 
"  They  might  have  come  before,  if  their  will  had  been  good," 
she  said.  She  had  not  a  word  for  anybody  during  the  rest  of 
the  day;  but  sai[  near  the  hall  fire  till  evening  watching  and 
tending  Tartar,  who  lay  all  gory,  stiff,  and  swelled,  on  a  mat 
at  her  feet.  She,  wept  furtively  over  him  sometimes,  and 
murmured  the  softest  words  of  -pity  and  endearment,  in  tones 
whose  music  the  old,  scarred,  canine  warrior  acknowledged  by 
licking  her  hand  or  her  sandal  alternately  with  his  own  red 
wounds.  As  to  John,  his*  lady  turned  a  cold  shoulder  on  him 
for  a  week  afterwards. 

Mrs  Gill,  remembering  this  little  episode,  came  '^  all  of  a 
tremble,"  as  she  said  herself.  In  a  firm,  brief  voibe.  Miss 
Keeldar  proceeded  to  put  questions  and  give  orders.  That  at 
such  a  time  Fieldhead  should  have  evinced  the  inhospitalitv 
f.  noser's  hovel,  stung  her  haughly  spirit  to  the  quici ;  anl 
tne  revolt  of  its  pride  was  seen  in  the  heaving  of  her  heart; 
stirzed  stormily  under  the  lace  and  silk  which  veiled  it. 

''!How  long  is  it  since  that  message  came  from  the  mill?" 

"Not  an  hour  yet,  ma^am,"  answered  the  housekeeper, 
soothingjly. 

"Not!  an  hour!  You  might  almost  as  well  have  said  not 
a  day.  They  will  have  applied  elsewhere  by  this  time.  Send 
a  man  instantly  down  to  tell  them  that  everjrthing  this  house 
contains  |s  at  Mr  Moore^s,  Mr  Helstone^s,  and  tiie  soldiers* 
service.     Do  that  first  1" 

While  til^e  order  was  being  executed,  Shirley  moved  away 
from  her  m|nds,  and  stood  at  the  hall-window,  silent,  imap- 
proachable.  ,  When  Mrs  Gill  came  back,  she  turned :  the 
purple  flush  w^ch  painful  excitement  kindles  on  a  pale  cheek, 
gbwed  on  hers:  the  spark  which  displeasure  lights  in  a  dark 
eje  fixed  her  glance. 

"Let  the  contents  of  the  larder  and  the  wine-cellar  be 
brought  up,  put  into  the  hay-carts,  and  driven  down  to  the 
Hollow.  If  tiiere  does  not  happen  to  be  much  bread  or  much 
meat  in  the  house,  go  to  the  butcher  and  baker,  and  desire 
them  to  senj' what  they  have:  but  I  will  see  for  myself." 

She  moved  off. 

"  AH  will  be  right  soon  :  she  will  get  over  it  in  an  hour," 
whispecei  Caroline  to  Mrs  Fry  or.      "  Go  up-stairs,   dear 


296  8HmL£T. 

madam/*  she  added,  affectionately,  "  and  try  to  be  aa  calm 
and  easy  as  you  can.  The  truth  is,  Shirley  will  blame  her- 
self more  than  you  "before  the  day  is  over." 

By  dint  of  a  few  more  gentle  assurances  and  peratmsians, 
Miss  Helstone  contrived,  to  soothe  the  agitated  lady.  Having 
accompanied  her  to  her  apartment,  and  promised  to  rejoin  her 
there  when  things  were  settled,  Caroline  left  her  to  see,  as  sh* 
said,  "  if  she  could  be  useful."  She  presently  found  that  she 
could  be  very  useful ;  for  the  retinue  of  servants  at  Fieldhead 
was  by  no  means  numerous,  and  just  now  their  mistress  found 
plenty  of  occupation  for  all  the  hands  at  her  command,  and 
for  her  own  also.  The  delicate  good-nature  and  dexteroua 
activity  which  Caroline  brought  to  the  aid  of  the  housekeeper 
and  maids, — ^all  somewhat  scared  by  their  lady's  unwonted 
mood — did  a  world  of  good  at  once :  it  helped  the  assistants 
and  appeased  the  dii*ectress.  A  chance  glance  and  smile  from 
Caroline  moved  Shirley  to  an  answering  smile  directly.  The 
former  was  carrying  a  heavy  basket  up  the  ceUarnstairs. 

"This  is  a  shame!"  cried  Shirley,  running  to  her.  "B 
wiU  strain  your  arm." 

She  took  it  from  her,  and  herself  bore  it  out  into  the  yard 
The  cloud  of  temper  was  dispelled  when  she  came  back;  the 
flash  in  her  eye  was  melted;  the  shade  on  her  forehead 
vanished:  she  resumed  her  usual  cheerftd.  and  cordial  manser 
to  those  about  her,  tempering  her  revived  spirits  witih  a  little 
of  the  softness  of  shame  at  her  previous  unjust  anger. 

She  was  stip  superintending  the  lading  of  the  cart,  when  a 
gentleman  entered  the  yard  and  approached  her  ere  she  wtf 
aware  of  his  presence. 

"I  hope  I  see  Miss  Keeldar  well  this  morning?"  he  said, 
examining  with  rather  significant  scrutiny  her  still  flushed  face. 

She  gave  him  a  look,  and  then  again  bent  to  her  employ- 
ment, withotit  reply.  A  pleasant  enough  smile  played  on 
her  lips,  but  she  hid  it.  The  gentleman  repeated  his  saluta- 
tion, stooping,  that  it  might  reach  her  ear  with  more  fadlitj. 

"  Well  enough,  if  she  be  good  enough,"  was  the  answer; 
'^  and  so  is  Mr  Moore  too,  I  dare  say.  To  speak  truth,  I  am 
not  anxious  about  him;  some  slight  mischance  would  be  only 
his  just  due:  his  conduct  has  been — ^we  will  say  strange,  jost 
now,  tiU  we  have  time  to  characterize  it  by  a  more  exact 
epithet.     Meantime,  may  I  ask  what  brings  him  here?" 

'^  Mr  Helstone  and  I  have  just  received  your  message,  that 
Tthing  at  Fieldhead  was  at  our  service.    We  judged,  bj 


TO-MQBSOW.  897 

the  tmlimited  wording  of  the  gracious  intimation,  that  you 
would  be  giving  yourself  too  much  trouble :  I  perceive,  our 
conjecture  was  correct.  We  are  not  a  regiment,  remember: 
only  about  half  a  dozen  soldiers,  and  as  many  civilians. 
Allow  me  to  retrench  something  from  these  too  abundant 
supplies." 

Misa  Keeldar  blushed,  while  she  laughed  at  her  own  over- 
eager  generosity,  and  most  disproportionate  calculations. 
Moore  laughed  too — ^very  quietly,  though ;  and  as  quietly, 
he  ordered  basket  after  basket  to  be  taken  &om  the  cart,  and 
remanded  vessel  after  vessel  to  the  cellar. 

'*  The  Beetor  must  hear  of  this,"  he  said:  "  he  will  make 
a  good  story  of  it.  What  an  excellent  army  contractor  Miss 
Keeldar  would  have  been!"  again  he  laughed,  adding — ^^  It  is 
precisely  as  I  conjectured." 

''  You  ought  to  be  thankful,"  said  Shirley,  *'  and  not  mock 
me.  What  could  I  do  ?  How  could  I  gauge  your  appetites, 
or  number  your  band  ?  For  aught  I  knew,  there  might  have 
been  fifty  of  you  at  least  to  victual.  You  told  me  nothing; 
and  then,  an  application  to  provision  soldiers  naturally  suggests 
large  ideas." 

'^  It  appears  so,"  remarked  Moore,  levelling  another  of  his 
keen,  quiet  glances  at  the  discomfited  Shirley.  '^  Now,"  he 
continued,  addressing  the  carter,  '^  I  think  you  may  take  what 
remains  to  the  Hollow.  Your  load  will  be  somewhat  lighter 
than  the  one  Miss  Keeldar  destined  you  to  carry." 

Ab  the  vehicle  rumbled  out  of  the  yard,  Shirley,  rallying 
her  spirits,  demanded  what  had  become  of  the  wounded. 

''  There  was  not  a  single  man  hurt  on  our  side,"  was  the 
Boswer. 

''You  were  hurt  yourself,  on  the  temples,"  interposed  a 
^ck,  low  voice — ^that  of  Caroline,  who,  having  wi&drawn 
ndthin  the  shade  of  the  door,  and  behind  the  laige  person  of 
Mrs  Gill,  had  till  now  escaped  Moore's  notice:  when  she  spoke, 
his  eye  searched  the  obscurity  of  her  retreat. 
"  Are  you  much  hurt?"  she  inquired. 
<<  As  you  might  scratch  your  finger  with  a  needle  in  sewing." 
"  lift  your  hair,  and  let  us  see." 

He  took  his  hat  off,  and  did  as  he  was  bid,  disclosing  only 
a  xuuTow  slip  of  court-plaster.     Caroline  indicated,  by  a  slight 
moTement  of  the  head,  that  she  was  satisfied,  and  disappeared 
within  the  clear  obscure  of  the  interior. 
**  How  did  she  know  I  was  hurt  ?  "  asked  Moore* 


SA8  SEIBLET. 

^'  By  rumour^  no  doubt.  But  it  is  too  £ood  in  her  to  troal>I 
herself  about  you.  For  my  part,  it  was -of  yourTdctims  I  "wra 
thinkiag  when  I  inquired  ailer  the  wqunded:  what  dama^ 
have  your  opponents  sustained  ?"  ,' 

"  One  of  die  rioters,  or  victims,  as  yc^  call  them,  was  killed 
and  six  were  hurt." 

"  What  have  you  done  with  them  ?". 

"  What  you  will  perfectly  approve.  Medical  aid  was  pro 
cured  inmiediately;  and  as  soon  as  we  can  get  a  couple  o 
covered  waggons,  and  some  clean  straw^  they  will  be  removed 
to  StUbro'." 

"  Str^w !  you  must  have  beds  and  bedding.  I  will  send  my 
waggon  directly,  properly  furnished ;  and  Mr  Yorke,  I  am  sore, 
will  send  his." 

"You  guess  correctly:  he  has  volunteered  already;  and 
Mrs  Yorke — ^who,  like  you,  seems  disposejd  to  regard  the 
rioters  as  martyrs,  and  me,  and  especially  Ii$r  Helstone,  as 
murderers — ^is  at  this  moment,  I  believe,  most  assiduously 
engaged  in  fitting  it  up  with  feather-beds,  pillows,  bolsters, 
blankets,  &c.     The  victims  lack  no  attentions — ^I  promise  you. 
Mr  Hall — ^your  favourite  parson — ^has  been  with  them  erer 
since  six  o^clock,  exhorting  them,  praying  with  them,  and  eren 
waiting  on  them  Hke  any  nurse;  and  Caroline's  good  fnend. 
Miss  Ainley,  that  very  plain  old  maid,  sent  in  a  stock  of  Unt 
and  linen,  something  in  the  proportion  of  another  hdf» 
allowance  of  beef  and  wine." 

"  That  will  do.     Where  is  your  sister  ?  " 

"  Well  cared  for.  I  had  her  secprely  domiciled  with  Miss 
Mann.  This  very  mondng,  the  two  set  out  for  Wormwood 
Wells  (a  noted  watering-place),  and  will  stay  there  some  weeks." 

"  So  Mr  Helstone  domiciled  me  at  the  Sectoiy  I    Mightj 
clever  you  gentlemen  think  you  are  I    I  make  you  heardij 
welcome  to  &e  idea,  and  hope  its  savour,  as  you  diew  the  cad 
of  reflection  upon  it,  gives  you  pleasure.    Acute  and  astute, 
why  are  yon  not  also  omniscient?     How  is  it  that  erentf 
transpire,  under  your  very  noses,  of  which  you  have  no  m- 
picion  ?    It  should  be  so,  otherwise  the  exquisite  gistifcstioo 
^jf  out-manoBUvring  you  would  be  unknown.    Ah  I  fiieod,  joQ 
,^gfXj  search  my  countenance,  but  you  cannot  read  it** 
^^  Moore,  indeed,  Ipoked  as  if  he  could  not. 

"  You  think  me  a  dangerous  specimen  of  my  kx.   W\ 
I,  now?" 

^A  peculiar  one,  at  least" 


MBS  PRTOR,  299 

"  But  Carolina — is  she  peculiar?"  , 

"  In  her  way: — ^yes." 

"  Her  way !  '  What  2S  her  way?" 

"  You  know  bejc  as  well  as  I  do." 

"  And  knowing,  her  I  assert  that  she  is  neither  eccentric  x^ 
difficult  of  contror^  is  she?" 

"  That  depends!  -^ "" 

"  However,  there  is  nothing  masculine  about  her?^\ 

"  Why  lay  such  emphasis  on  her?  Do  you  consider  her  a 
contrast,  in  that  respect,  to  yourself?" 

"  You  do,  no  do^^)t:  but  that  does  not  signify.  Caroline  is 
neither  masculine,  nor  of  what  they  call  the  spirited  order  of 
women." 

"  I  have  seen  her  flash  out." 

"  So  have  I — ^but  not  with  manly  fire:  it  was  a  short,  vivid, 
trembling  glow,  that  shot  up,  shone,  vanished " 

"And  left  her  sc^ed  at  her  own  daring.  You  describe 
others  besides  Caroline." 

"  The  point  I  wish  to  establish  is,  that  Miss  Helstone,  though 
gentle,  tractable,  and  candid  enough,  is  still  perfectly  capable 
of  defyii^  even  Mr  Mooi:e^s  penetration." 

"What  have  you  and, she  been  doing?"  asked  Moore, 
suddenly. 

"  Have  you  had  any  breakfast  ?" 

"  What  is  your, mutual  mystery  ?" 

"If  you, are  hiingry,  MrsiGill  will  give  you  something  to 
eat  here.  Step  into  the  oak-parlpur,  and  ring  the  bell — ^you 
will  be  served  as  if  at  an  inn;  or,  if  you  like  better,  go  back 
to  the  HoUow," 

"  The  alternative  is  not  open  to  me:  I  must  go  back. 
Good  morning:  the  first  leisure  I  have,  I  will  see  you  again." 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

MBS  PBTOR. 


While  Shirley  was  talking  with  Moore,  Caroline  rejoined 
Mrs  Pryor  up-stairs.  She  found  that  lady  deeply  depressed. 
She  would  not  say  that  Miss  Keeldar's  hastiness  had  hurt  her 
feelings;  but  it  was  eVident  an  inward  wound  galled  her.  To 
snj  bat  a  congenial  nature,  she  would  have  seemed  insensible 


300  sflmLET. 

to  the  quiet,  tender  attentions  bj  which.  Miss  Helstone  soDglit 
to  impart  solace;  but  Caroline  knew  that,  unmoved  or  slightly 
moved  as  she  looked,  she  felt,  valued,  and  was  healed  by  &em. 

^'  I  am  deficient  in  self-confidence  and  decision,"  she  said  at 
last.  "  I  always  have  been  deficient  in  those  qualities:  yet  I 
thjjdk  Miss  Eeeldar  should  have  known  my  character  wdl 
. 'enough  by  this  time,  to  be  aware  that  I  always  feel  an  even 
painM  solicitude  to  do  right,  to  act  for  the  best.  The  unusual 
nature  of  the  demand  on  my  judgment  puzzled  me,  especially 
following  the  alarms  of  the  night.  I  could  not  venture  to  act 
promptly  for  another:  but  I  trust  no  serious  harm  will  result 
from  my  lapse  of  fimmess." 

A  gentle  knock  was  here  heard  at  the  door:  it  was  half- 
opened. 

"  Caroline,  come  here,"  said  a  low  voice. 

Miss  Helstone  went  out:  there  stood  Shirley  in  the  gallery, 
looking  contrite,  ashamed,  sorry  as  any  repentant  child. 

"  How  is  Mrs  Pryor  ?"  she  asked. 

"  Rather  out  of  spirits,"  said  Caroline. 

"  I  have  behaved  very  shameftilly,  very  ungenerously,  very 
ungratefully  to  her,"  said  Shirley.  "  How  insolent  in  me  to 
turn  on  her  thus,  for  what  afi;er  all  was  no  fault,  only  an  excess 
of  conscientiousness  on  ier  part.  But  I  regret  my  eiror  most 
sincerely :  tell  her  so,  and  ask  if  she  will  forgive  me.*^ 

Caroline  discharged  the  errand  with  heartfelt  pleasure. 
Mrs  Pryor  rose,  came  to  the  door :  she  did  not  like  scenes ; 
she  dreaded  them  as  all  timid  people  do:  she  said  falteringly — 

"  Come  in,  my  dear." 

Shirley  did  come  in  with  some  impetuosity :  she  threw  her 
arms  round  her  governess,  and  while  she  kissed  her  heartily, 
she  said — 

**  You  know  you  must  forgive  me,  Mrs  Pryor.  I  could  not 
get  on  at  all  if  there  was  a  misunderstanding  between  yon 
and  me." 

"  I  have  nothing  to  forgive,"  was  the  reply.  "  We  will  paa 
it  over  now  if  you  please.  The  final  resiilt  of  the  incident  is, 
tbat  it  proves  more  plainly  than  ever  how  unequal  I  am  to 
pertain  crises." 

And  that  was  the  painful  feeling  which  would  remain  on 
^^rs  Pryor's  mind :  no  effort  of  Shirley's  or  Caroline's  could 
^jPface  it  thence:  she  could  forgive  her  offending  pupil,  not  her 
jjjjiocent  self. 

^"''\  Keeldar,  doomed  to  be  in  constant  request  duriog  tlM 


I 


UBS  HtTOB.  801 

mornings  was  presently  summoned  down-stairs  again.  The 
Rector  called  first :  a  lively  welcome  and  livelier  reprimand 
were  at  his  service ;  he  expected  both,  and,  being  in  high 
spirits,  took  them  in  equally  good  part. 

In  ihe  course  of  his  brief  visit,  he  quite  forgot  to  ask  after 
his  niece  :  the  riot,  the  rioters,  the  mill,  the  magistrates,  the 
heiress,  absorbed  all  his  thoughts  to  the  exclusion  of  family 
ties.  He  alluded  to  the  part  himself  and  curate  had  taken  iu 
the  defence  of  the  Hollow. 

"The  vials  of  pharisaical  wrath  will  be  emptied  on  our 
heads,  for  our  share  in  this  business,"  he  said  ;  "  but  I  defy 
every  calumniator.    I  was  there  only  to  support  the  law,  to 
play  my  part  as  a  man  and  a  Briton  ;  which  characters  I 
deem  quite  compatible  with  those  of  the  priest  and  Levite,  in 
their  lughest  sense.     Your  tenant,  Moore,"  he  went  on,  "  has 
won  my  approbation.     A  cooler  commander  I  would  not  wish 
to  see,  nor  a  more  determined.    Besides,'  the  man  has  shown 
sound  judgment  and  good  sense  ;   first,  in  being  thoroughly 
prepared  for  the  event  which  has  taken  place,  and  subsequently, 
when  his  well-concerted  plans  had  sectured  him  success,  in 
blowing  how  to  use  without  abusing  his  victory.     Some  of 
the  magistrates  are  now  well  frightened,  and,  like  all  cowards, 
show  a  tendency  to  be  cruel ;   Moore  restrains  them  witli 
admirable  prudence.     He  has  hitherto  been  very  unpopular 
in  the  neighbourhood  ;  but,  mark  my  words,  the  tide  of 
opinion  will  now  take  a  turn  in  his  favour :  people  will  find 
out  that  they  have  not  appreciated  him,  and  will  hasten  to 
remedy  their  error  ;  and  he,  when  he  perceives  the  public 
disposed  to  acknowledge  his  merits,  will  show  a  more  gracious 
mien  than  that  with  which  he  has  hitherto  favoured  us."  < 

Mr  Helstone  was  about  to  add*  to  this  speech  some  half- 
jestmg,  half-serious  warnings  to  Miss  Keeldar,  on  the  subject 
of  her  rumoured  partiality  for  her  talented  tenant,  when  a 
nng  at  the  door,  announcing  another  caller,  checked  his 
ntillery ;  and  as  that  other  caller  appeared  in  the  form  of  a 
white-haired,  elderly  gentleman,  with  a  rather  truculent 
countenance  and  disdainful  eye — ^in  short,  our  old  acquaint- 
ance, and  the  Rector's  old  enemy,  Mr  Yorke — the  priest  and 
I^te  seized  his  hat,  and  with  tibe  briefest  of  adieux  to  Miss 
Keeldar,  and  the  sternest  of  nods  to  her  guest,  took  an  abrupt 
leave. 

Mr  Yorke  was  in  no  mild  mood,  and  in  no  measured  termn 
ti  he  express  his  opinion  on  the  transaction  of  the  night ; 


802  SH2HLKT. 

Moore,  the  magistrates,  tihe  soldiers,  ihe  mob-leaders,  each 
and  all  came  in  for  a  share  of  his  invectives ';  but  he  reserved 
hiis  strongest  epithets — ^and  real  racy  Yorkshire  Doric  adjec- 
tives they  were — ^for  the  benefit  of  the  fighting  parsons,  the 
''  sanguinary,  demoniac^'  rector  and  curate.  According  to  him, 
the  cup  of  ecclesiastical  guilt  was  now  full  indeed. 

"  The  Church,"  he  said,  "  was  in  a  bonnie  pickle  now :  it 
was  time  it  came  down  when  parsons  took  to  swaggering 
amang  soldiers,  blazing  away  wi'  bullet  and  '  gunpowder, 
taking  the  lives  of  far  honester  men  than  themselves." 

"What  would  Moore  have  done,  if  nobody  had  helped 
him?"  asked  Shirley. 

"  Drunk  as  he  'd  brewed — eaten  as  he  'd  baked.'* 

"  Which  means,  you  would  have  left  him  by  himself  to 
face  that  mob.  Good.  He  has  plenty  of  courage  ;  but  the 
greatest  amount  of  gallantry  that  ever  garrisoned  one  human 
breast  could  scarce  avail  against  two  hundred." 

"  He  had  the  soldiers  ;  those  poor  slaves  who  hire  out  thtir 
own  blood  and  spill  other  folks'  for  money." 

"  You  abuse  soldiers  almost  as  much  as  you  abuse  clergy- 
men. All  who  wear  red  coats  are  national  refuse  in  your 
eyes,  and  all  who  wear  black  are  national  swindlers.  Mr 
Moore,  according  to  you,  did  wrong  to  get  military  aid,  and 
he  did  stiU  worse  to  accept  of  any  other  aid.  Your  way  of 
talking  amounts  to  this : — ^he  should  have  abandoned  his  mill 
and  his  life  to  the  rage  of  a  set  of  misguided  madmen,  and 
Mr  Helstone  and  every  other  gentleman  in  the  parish  should 
have  looked  on,  and  seen  the  building  razed  and  its  owner 
slaughtered,  and  never  stirred  a  finger  to  save  either." 

"  K  Moore  had  behaved  to  his  men  from  the  beginning  as 
a  master  ought  to  behave,  they  never  would  have  entertained 
their  present  feelings  towards  him." 

"Easy  for  you  to  talk,"  exclaimed  Miss  Keeldar,  who  was 
beginning  to  wax  warm  in  her  tenant's  cause:  "  you,  whose 
family  have  lived  at  Briarmains  for  six  generations,  to  whose 
person  tlie  people  have  been  accustomed  for  fifty  years,  who 
know  all  their  ways,  prejudices,  and  preferences.  Easy,  indeed, 
for  you  to  act  so  as  to  avoid  ofiending  them ;  but  Mr  Moore 
came  a  stranger  into  the  district:  he  came  here  poor  and 
friendless,  with  nothing  but  his  own  energies  to  back  him ; 
nothing  but  his  honour,  his  talent,  and  his  industry  to  make 
his  way  for  him.  A  monstrous  crime  indeed  that,  under  stich 
instances,  he  could  not  populariaEe  his  naturally  grave, 


MBa  PBTOIL  803 

qmet  manners,  all  at  once:  could  not  be  jocular,  and  free,  and 
cordial  with  a  strange  peasantry,  as  you  are  with  your  fbllow- 
townsmen !  An'  unpaj^onable  transgression,  that  when  he 
introduced  improvements  he  did  not  go  about  the  business  in 
quite  the  most  politic  way ;  did  not  graduate  his  changes  as 
delicately  as  a  rich  capitalist  might  have  done !  For  errors 
of  this  sort  is  he  to  be  the  victim  of  mob-outrage  ?  Is  he  to 
be  denied  evert  the  privilege  of  defending  himself?  Are  those 
who  have  the  hearts  of  men  in  their  breasts  (and  Mr  Helstone-^ 
say  what  yon  will  of  him — ^has  such  a  heart)  to  be  reviled  like 
tnalefactbrs  because  they  stand  by  him — ^because  they  venture 
to  esponlBe  the  cause  of  one  against  two  htmdred  ?" 

"  Come-*<5ome  now — be  cool,"  said  Mr  Yorke,  smiling  at 
the  eamegtness  with  which  Shirley  multiplied  her  rapid 
qiiestions. 

"  Cool)  Must  I  listen  coolly  to  downright'  nonsense — ^to 
dangerous  nonsense  ?  No.  I  Hke  you  very  well,  Mr  Yorke, 
as  you  know ;  but  I  thoroughly  dislike  some  of  your  prin- 
ciples. 'All  that  cant— excuse  me,  but  I  repeat  ^e  word— ^ 
all  that  cant  about  soldiers  and  parsons  is  most  offensive  in 
my  eatB.  All  ridiculous,  irrational  cr3dng  up  of  one  class, 
whether  the  same  be  aristocrat  or  democrat — all  howling 
down  of  another  class,  whether  clerical  or  military — all 
exacting  injustice  to  ind[i3nduals,  whether  monarch  or  mendi- 
cant— ^is  really  sickening  to  me :  all  arraying  of  ranks  against 
ranks,  all  party  hatreds,  all  tyrannies  disguised  as  liberties,  I 
reject  and  wash  my  hands  of.  You  think  you  are  a  philan- 
thropist ;  you  think  you  are  an  advocate  of  liberty ;  but  I 
will  teR  you  this — ^Mr  Hall,  the  parson  of  Ntmnely,  is  a 
better  Mend  both  of.  man  and  freedom,  than  Hiram  yorke, 
the  Reformer  of  Briarfield."  ^ 

From  a  man,  Mr  Yorke  would  not  have  borne  this  language 
veiy  patiently,  nor  would  he  have  endured  it  from  some 
women;  but  he  accounted  Shirley  both  honest  and  pretty, 
ftnd  her  plain-spoken  ire  amused  him :  besides  he  took  a  secret 
pleasure  in  hearing  her  defend  her  tenant,  for  we  have  already 
intimated' he  had  Robert  Moore's  interest  very  much  at  heart: 
moreover,  if  he  wished  to  avenge  himself  for  her  severity,  he 
knew  the  means  lay  in  his  power:  a  word,  he  believed,  would 
&n£ioe  to  tame  and  silence  her,  to  cover  her  frank  forehead 
with  the  rosy  shadow  of  shame,  and  veil  the  glow  of  her  eye 
under  down-drooped  lid  and  lash. 
^  What  more  hast  thou  to  say  ?  "  he  inquire,  as  she  paused. 


(»^^4  SHIBLET. 

me  for  orders  and  directions,  which  I  really  did  not  feel 
warranted  ,in  giving.  Mr  Moore  has,  I  believe,  sent  up  for 
refreshments  for  the  soldiers  and  others  engaged  in  ibe 
defence;  for  some  conveniences  also  for  the  wounded.  locrald 
not  imdertake  the  responsibility  of  giving  orders  or  taJdng 
measures.  I  fear  delay  may  have  been  injurious. in  some 
instances;  but  this  is  not  my  house:  you  were  absent,  my 
dear  Miss  Keeldar — what  could  I  do?" 

"Were  no  refreshments  sent?"  asked  Shirley,  while  her 
countenance,  hitherto  so  clear,  propitious,  .and  quiet,  even 
while  she  was  rating  the  milk-fetchers,  suddenly  tamed  dark 
and  warm. 

"  I  think  not,  my  dear." 

"And  nothing  for  the  wounded?  no  linen — no  wine — no 
bedding?" 

"I  think  not.  I  cannot  tell  what  Mrs  Gill  fiid:  but  it 
seemed  impossible  to  me,  at  the  moment,  to  venture  to  dispose 
of  your  property  by  sending  supplies  to  soldiers-^provisioDS 
for  a  company  of  soldiers  sounds  formidable:  how,  many  there 
are  I  did  not  ask ;  but  I  could  not  think  of  allowing  &em  to 
pillage  the  house,  as  it  were.  I  intended  to  do  what  was 
right;  yet  I  did  not  see  the  case  quite  clearly,  I  own." 

"It  lies  in  a  nutshell,  notwifiistanding.  These  soldiers 
have  risked  their  lives  in  defence  of  my  propei:ty — I  suppoea 
they  have  a  right  to  my  gratitude:  the  wounded  are  our 
fellow-creatures — ^I  suppose  we  should  aid  them.     Mrs* Gill  I'' 

She  turned,  and  called  in  a  voice  more  clear  than  soft.  It 
rung  through  the  thick  oak  of  the  hall  and  kitchen  doon 
more  effectually  than  a  bell's  summons.  Mrs  GiU,  who  wm 
deep  in  bread-making,  came  with  hands  and  apron  in  culinary 
case,  not  having  dared  to  stop  to  rub  the  do;ugh  from  the  one, 
or  to  shake  the  flour  from  the  other.  Her  mistress  had  never 
called  a  serv^t  in  that  voice,  save  once  before,  and  that  wu 
;^hen  she'  had  seen  from  the  window  Tartar  in  full  tog  with 
two  carriers'  dogs,  each  of  them  a  match  for  him  in  size,  if  not 
in  courage,  and  their  masters  standi^,  by,  encouraging  their 
animals,  while  hers  was  imbefriended:  then,  indeed,  she  had 
summoned  John  as  if  the  I^ay  of  Judgment  were  at  hand: 
nor  had  she  waited  for  the  said  John's  coming,  but  had  walked 
out  into  the  lane  bonnetless ;  and  after  informing  the  carrieis 
that  she  held  them  far  less  of  men  than  the  three  brutes  whirl- 
ing and  worrying  in  the  dust  before  them,  had  put  her  handi 
round  the  thick  neck  of  the  largest  of  the  curs  and  given  her 


TO-MORBOW.  295 

"wliole  sti^gth  to  the  essay  of  choking  it  from  Tartarus  torn 
and  blee^fng  eye,  just  above  and  below  which  organ  the 
vengeftd  fangs  were  inserted.  Five  or  six  men  were  presently 
on  the  spot  Ip  help  her,  but  she  never  thanked  one  of  them: 
"  They  might  have  come  before,  if  their  will  had  been  good," 
she  said.  She  ^ad  not  a  word  for  anybody  during  the  rest  of 
the  day;  but  sa^  near  the  hall  fire  till  evening  watching  and 
tending  Tartar,  who  lay  all  gory,  stiff,  and  swelled,  on  a  mat 
at  her  feet.  She,  wept  furtively  over  him  sometimes,  and 
mummred  the  softest  words  of  pity  and  endearment,  in  tones 
whose  music  the  old;scaxred,  0^4  warrior  acknowledged  by 
licking  her  hand  or  hav  sandal  alternately  with  his  own  red 
wounds.  As  to  John,  his»lady  turned  a  cold  shoulder  on  him 
for  a  week  afterwards. 

Mrs  Gill,  remembering  this  little  episode,  came  '^  all  of  a 
tremble,"  as  she  said  herself.  In  a  firm,  brief  yoi'ee.  Miss 
Keeldax  proceeded  to  put  questions  and  give  orders.  That  at 
such  a  time  Fieldhead  should  have  evinced  the  inhospitality 
of  a  miser^s  hovel,  stung  her  haughty  spirit  to  the  quick ;  and 
tne  revolt  of  its  pride  was  seen  in  the  heaving  of  her  heart; 
stirred  stormily  under  the  lace  and  silk  which  veiled  it. 
"  !How  long  is  it  since  that  message  came  from  the  mill  ?" 
"Not  an  hour  yet,  ma'am>"  answered  the  housekeeper, 
wothingjly. 

"Not;  an  hour!  You  might  almost  as  well  have  said  not 
a  day.  They  will  have  applied  elsewhere  by  this  time.  Send 
a  man  instantly  down  to  tell  them  that  everything  this  house 
contains  is  at  Mr  Moore's,  Mr  Helstone's,  and  the  soldiers' 
service.     Do  that  first  I" 

While  til^e  order  was  being  executed,  Shirley  moved  away 
from  her  Mfnds,  and  stood  at  the  hall-window,  silent,  unap- 
proachable. ^  When  Mrs  Gill  came  back,  she  turned :  the 
purple  flush  iiffiich  painful  excitement  kindles  on  a  pale  cheek, 
glowed  on  hers:  the  spark  which  displeasure  lights  in  a  dark 
eye  fired  her  glance. 

"Let  the  contents  of  the  larder  and  the  wine-cellar  be 
brought  up,  put  into  the  hay-carts,  and  driven  down  to  the 
Hollow.  If  there  does  not  happen  to  be  much  bread  or  much 
meat  in  the  house,  go  to  the  butcher  and  baker,  and  desire 
them  to  send' what  they  have:  but  I  will  see  for  myseK" 
She  moved  ofiT. 

"  AU  will  be  right  ^oon  :  she  will  get  over  it  in  an  hour," 
wbiBpered  Caroline  to  Mrs  Pryor.      "Go  up-stairs,  dear 


296  SHIELIIY. 

madam/'  she  added,  affectionately,  "  and  try  to  be  as  calm 
and  easy  as  you  can.  The  truth  is,  Shirley  will  blame  her- 
self more  than  you  before  the  day  is  over." 

By  dint  of  a  few  more  gentle  assurances  and  persnadons, 
Miss  Helstone  contrived  to  soothe  the  agitated  lady.  Having 
accompanied  h^r  to  her  apartment,  and  promised  to  rejoin  her 
there  when  things  were  settled,  Caroline  left  her  to  see,  as  she 
said,  "  if  she  could  be  useful."  She  presently  foimd  tiiat  she 
could  be  very  useful ;  for  the  retinue  of  servants  at  Fieldhead 
was  by  no  means  numerous,  and  just  now  their  mistress  found 
plenty  of  occupation  for  all  the  hands  at  her  command,  and 
for  her  own  also.  The  delicate  good-nature  and  dexterous 
activity  which  Caroline  brought  to  the  aid  of  the  housekeeper 
and  maids, — ^all  somewhat  scared  by  their  lady's  unwonted 
mood — did  a  world  of  good  at  once:  it  helped  the  assistants 
and  appeased  the  directress.  A  chance  glance  and  smile  from 
Caroline  moved  Shirley  to  an  answering  smile  directly.  The 
former  was  carrjdng  a  heavy  basket  up  the  cellar-staiw. 

''This  is  a  shame  1"  cried  Shirley,  running  to  her.  ''B 
will  strain  your  arm." 

She  took  it  from  her,  and  herself  bore  it  out  into  the  yard 
The  cloud  of  temper  was  dispelled  when  she  came  back;  the 
flash  in  her  eye  was  melted;  the  shade  on  her  £)r(^ead 
vanished:  she  resumed  her  usual  cheerful  and  cordial  manner 
to  those  about  her,  tempering  her  revived  spirits  with  a  little 
of  the  softness  of  shame  at  her  previom  unjust  anger. 

She  was  still  superintending  the  lading  of  the  cart,  when  a 
gentleman  entered  the  yard  and  approached  her  ere  she  wai 
aware  of  his  presence. 

''I  hope  i  see  Miss  Keeldar  well  this  morning?**  he  said, 
examining  with  rather  significant  scrutiny  her  still  flushed  face. 

She  gave  him  a  look,  and  then  again  bent  to  her  employ* 
ment,  withotit  reply.  A  pleasant  enough  smile  played  on 
her  lips,  but  she  hid  it.  The  gentleman  repeated  his  saluta- 
tion, stpoping,  that  it  might  reach  her  ear  with  more  facility. 

"  Well  enough,  if  she  be  good  enough,"  was  the  answer; 
''  and  so  is  Mr  Moore  too,  I  dare  say.  To  speak  truth,  I  am 
not  anxious  about  him;  some  slight  mischance  would  be  onlj 
his  just  due :  his  conduct  has  been — ^we  will  say  strong  just 
now,  till  we  have  time  to  characterize  it  by  a  more  exact 
epithet.     Meantime,  may  I  ask  what  brings  him  here?" 

"  Mr  Helstone  and  I  have  just  received  your  message,  that 
everything  at  Fieldhead  was  at  our  servioe.    We  judged,  by 


TO-MQBBOW.  297 

the  unlimited  wording  of  the  gracious  intimation,  that  you 
would  be  giving  yourself  too  much  trouble :  I  perceive,  our 
conjecture  was  correct.  We  are  not  a  regiment,  remember: 
only  about  half  a  dozen  soldiers,  and  as  many  civilians. 
Allow  me  to  retrench  something  from  these  too  abundant 
supplies." 

Miss  Keeldar  blushed,  while  she  laughed  at  her  own  over* 
eager  generosity,  and  most  disproportionate  calculations. 
Moore  laughed  too— very  quietly,  though ;  and  as  quietly, 
he  ordered  basket  after  basket  to  be  taken  from  the  cart,  and 
remanded  vessel  after  vessel  to  the  cellar. 

'^  The  Bector  must  hear  of  this,"  he  said:  "he  will  make 
a  good  story  of  it.  What  an  excellent  army  contractor  Miss 
Kfteldar  would  have  been!"  again  he  laughed,  adding — ^^  It  is 
precisely  as  I  conjectured." 

*'  You  ought  to  be  thankfrd,"  said  Shirley,  "  and  not  mock 
me.  What  could  I  do  ?  How  could  I  gauge  your  appetites, 
or  number  your  band  ?  For  aught  I  knew,  there  might  have 
been  fifty  of  you  at  least  to  victual.  You  told  me  nothing; 
and  then,  an  application  to  provision  soldiers  naturally  suggests 
large  ideas." 

"  It  appears  so,"  remarked  Moore,  levelling  another  of  his 
keen,  quiet  glances  at  the  discomfited  Shirley.  "  Now,"  he 
continued,  addressing  the  carter,  "  I  think  you  may  take  what 
remains  to  the  Hollow.  Your  load  will  be  somewhat  lighter 
than  the  one  Miss  Keeldar  destined  you  to  carry." 

As  the  vehicle  rumbled  out  of  the  yard,  Shirley,  rallying 
her  spirits,  demanded  what  had  become  of  the  wounded. 

*^  There  was  not  a  single  man  hurt  on  our  side,"  was  the 
aittwer. 

"You  were  hurt  yourself,  on  the  temples,"  interposed  a 
qcdck,  low  voice — ^that  of  Caroline,  who,  having  witiidrawn 
"vithin  the  shade  of  the  door,  and  behind  the  laige  person  of 
Mrs  Gill,  had  till  now  escaped  Moore's  notice:  when  she  spoke, 
his  eye  searched  the  obscurity  of  her  retreat 
"  Are  you  much  hiut?"  she  inquired. 
"  As  you  might  scratch  your  finger  with  a  needle  in  sewing." 
"  Lift  your  hair,  and  let  us  see." 

He  took  his  hat  o£P,  and  did  as  he  was  bid,  disclosing  only 
a  narrow  slip  of  court-plaster.     Caroline  indicated,  by  a  slight 
movement  of  the  head,  that  she  was  satisfied,  and  disappeared 
within  the  dear  obscure  of  the  interior. 
^  How  did  she  know  I  was  hurt  ?  "  asked  Moore* 


S98  SHIBLET. 

**  By  rumour,  no  doubt.  But  it  Ls  too  good  in  lier  to  trouble 
herself  about  you.  For  my  part,  it  was  -of  your  victims  I  wan 
thinMng  when  I  inquired  aLr  the  WQunded:  what  damag« 
have  your  opponents  sustained?"  ,' 

^^  One  of  the  rioters,  or  victims,  as  yoju  call  them,  was  Idlled, 
and  six  were  hurt." 

"  What  have  you  done  with  them  ?!V 

"  What  you  will  perfectly  approve.  Medical  aid  was  po- 
cured  immediately;  and  as  soon  as  we  can  get  a  couple  of 
covered  waggons,  and  some  clean  straw^  they  will  be  removed 
to  StHbro'." 

"  Str^w !  you  must  have  beds  and  l^edding.  I  will  send  mj 
waggon  directly,  properly  ftirnished ;  and  Mr  Yorke,  I  am  sure, 
will  send  his." 

"You  guess  correctly:  he  has  volunteered  already;  and 
Mrs  Yorke — ^who,  like  you,  seems  disposeid  to  regard  the 
rioters  as  martyrs,  and  me,  and  especially  Mr  Helstone,  su 
murderers-is  at  this  moment,  I  believ^  most  assiduo^j 
engaged  in  fitting  it  up  with  feather-hed^,  piUows,  bolstei/, 
blankets,  &c.  The  victims  lack  no  attention? — ^I  promise  you. 
Mr  Hall — ^your  favourite  parson — ^has  been  witi  them  ever 
since  six  o'clock,  exhorting  them,  praying  with  them^  and  even 
waiting  on  them  like  any  nurse;  and  iparoline's  good  friend^ 
Miss  Ainley,  that  ver^  plain  old  maid,  sent  in  a  stock  of  lint 
and  linen,  something  in  the  proportion  of  another  ladys 
allowance  of  beef  and  wine." 

"  That  wiU  do.     Where  is  your  sister  ?" 

"  Well  cared  for.  I  had  her  secjirely  domiciled  with  Mia 
Mann.  This  very  morning,  the  two  set  out  for  Wormwood 
Wells  (a  noted  watering-place),  and  will  stay  there  some  weeks." 

"  So  Mr  Helstone  domiciled  me  at  the  Bectory !  Mighty 
clever  you  gentlemen  think  you  are !  I  make  you  heartilj 
welcome  to  die  idea,  and  hope  its  savour,  as  you  chew  the  cud 
of  reflection  upon  it,  gives  you  pleasure.  Acute  and  astute, 
why  are  you  not  also  omniscient?  How  is  it  that  event! 
transpire,  under  your  very  noses,  of  which  you  have  no  sus- 
picion ?  It  should  be  so,,  otherwise  the  exquisite  gratification 
of  out-manoeuvring  you  would  be  imknown.  Ah  1  fiiend,  yon 
may  search  my  countenance,  but  you  cannot  read  it." 

Moore,  indeed,  Ipoked  as  if  he  could  not. 

"  You  think  n^e  a  dangerous  specimen  of  my  sex.  Don^ 
you,  now?" 

"A  peculiar  one,  at  least." 


MBS  PBTOR,  899 

''But  Oaroliner— is  she  peculiar?"  , 

*'  In  her  wajr^yes." 

"  Her  way  I  -  What  Is  her  way  ?" 

"  You  know  her  as  well  as  I  do." 

"  And  knowing,  her  I  assert  that  she  is  neither  eccentric  nor 
difficult  of  contror^  is  she?" 

«  That  depends'- '' 

"  However,  there  is  nothing  masculine  about  her?" 

"  Why  lay  such  emphasis  on  herf  Do  you  consider  her  a 
contrast,  in  that  resjpect,  to  yourself?" 

"  You  do,  no  doubt:  but  that  does  not  signify.  Caroline  is 
neither  masculine,  nor  of  what  they  call  the  spirited  order  of 
women." 

"  I  have  seen  her  flash  out." 

"  So  have  I — ^but  not  with  manly  fire:  it  was  a  short,  vivid, 
trembling  glow,  that  shot  up,  shone,  vanished ^" 

"And  left  her  scajed  at  her  own  daring.  You  describe 
others  besides  Caroline." 

"  The  point  I  wish  to  establish  is,  that  Miss  Helstone,  though 
gentle,  tractable,  and  candid  enough,  is  still  perfectly  capable 
of  defyii^g  even  Mr  Moore^s  penetration." 

"Whi^t  have  you  and,. she  been  doing?"  asked  Moore, 
niddenly. 

"  Have  you  had  any  breakfast  ?" 

"  What  is  your.mutual  mystery  ?  " 

"If  you  are  hiingry,  Mrs  GUI  will  give  you  something  to 
eat  here.  Step  into  the  oakrparlpur,  and  ring  the  bell — ^you 
will  be  served  as  if  at  an  inn;  or,  if  you  like  better,  go  back 
to  the  Hollow." 

"The  alternative  is  not  open  to  me:  I  must  go  back. 
Good  morning:  the  first  leisure  I  have,  I  will  see  you  again." 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

MBS  PBTOB. 


While  Shirley  was  talking  with  Moore,  Caroline  y^oined 
Mrs  Pryor  up-stairs^  She  found  that  lady  deeply  depressed. 
She  would  not  say  that  Miss  Keeldar's  hastiness  had  hurt  her 
feelings ;  but  it  was  evident  an  inward  wound  galled  her.  To 
any  but  a  congenial  nature,  she  would  have  seemed  insensible 


300  StDRLET. 

to  the  quiet,  tender  attentions  by  which  Miss  Helstone  soti^ 
to  impart  solace;  but  Caroline  knew  that, unmoyed  or  slightly 
moved  as  she  looked,  she  felt,  valued,  and  was  healed  bjtkem. 

"  I  am  deficient  in  self-confidence  and  decision,"  she  said  at 
last.  ''  I  always  have  been  deficient  in  those  qualities:  yet  I 
think  Miss  Eeeldar  should  have  known  my  character  well 
enough  by  this  time,  to  be  aware  that  I  always  feel  an  even 
painM  solicitude  to  do  right,  to  act  for  the  best.  The  xmusoal 
nature  of  the  demand  on  my  judgment  puzzled  me,  especiallj 
following  the  alarms  of  the  night.  I  could  not  venture  to  act 
promptly  for  aliother:  but  I  trust  no  serious  harm  will  result 
from  my  lapse  of  firmness." 

A  gentle  knock  was  here  heard  at  the  door:  it  was  half- 
opened. 

"  Caroline,  come  here,"  said  a  low  voice. 

Miss  Helstone  went  out:  there  stood  Shirley  in  the  gallexy, 
looking  contrite,  ashamed,  sorry  as  any  repentant  child. 

"  How  is  Mrs  Pryor  ?"  she  asked. 

"  Rather  out  of  spirits,"  said  CiEtroline. 

"  I  have  behaved  very  shameftdly,  very  ungenerously,  very 
ungratefully  to  her,"  said  Shirley.  "  How  insolent  in  me  to 
turn  on  her  thus,  for  what  afler  all  was  no  fault,  only  an  excess 
of  conscientiousness  on  lier  part.  But  t  regret  my  error  most 
sincerely :  teU  her  so,  and  ask  if  she  will  forgive  me.'^ 

Caroline  discharged  the  errand  with  heartfelt  pleasiue. 
Mrs  Pryor  rose,  came  to  the  door :  she  did  not  like  scenes ; 
she  dreaded  them  as  all  timid  people  do:  she  said  fisJteringly— 

"  Come  in,  my  dear." 

Shirley  did  come  in  with  some  impetuosity :  she  threw  her 
arms  round  her  governess,  and  while  she  kissed  her  heartily, 
she  said — 

"  You  know  you  m/ust  forgive  me,  Mrs  Pryor.  I  could  not 
get  on  at  all  if  there  was  a  misimderstanding  between  you 
and  me." 

"  I  have  nothing  to  forgive,"  was  the  reply.  "  We  will  pass 
it  over  now  if  you  please.  The  final  result  of  the  incident  is, 
that  it  proves  more  plainly  than  ever  how  imequal  I  am  to 
certain  crises." 

And  that  was  the  painful  feeling  which  would  remain  on 
Mrs  PryoriB  mind :  no  effort  of  Shirley's  or  Caroline's  could 
efface  it  thence:  she  could  forgive  her  offending  pupil,  not  her 
innocent  self. 

Miss  Keeldar,  doomed  to  be  in  constant  request  dming  die 


MBS  PBTOB.  SOI 

mornings  was  presently  summoned  down-sfcairs  again.  The 
Rector xudled  first:  a  lively  welcome  and  livelier  reprimand 
were  at  his  service ;  he  expected  both,  and,  being  in  high 
spirits,  took  them  in  equally  good  part. 

In  tie  course  of  his  brief  visit,  he  quite  forgot  to  ask  after 
his  niece :  the  riot,  the  rioters,  the  mill,  the  magistrates,  the 
heiress,  absorbed  all  his  thoughts  to  the  exclusion  of  family 
ties.  He  alluded  to  the  part  himself  and  curate  had  taken  iu 
the  defence  of  the  Hollow. 

''The  vials  of  pharisaical  wrath  will  be  emptied  on  our 
heads,  for  our  share  in  this  business,"  he  said  ;  *'  but  I  def^ 
every  calumniator.     I  was  there  only  to  support  the  law,  to 
play  my  part  as  a  man  and  a  Briton  ;  which  characters  I 
deem  quite  compatible  with  those  of  the  priest  and  Levite,  in 
their  lughest  sense.     Your  tenant,  Moore,"  he  went  on,  "  has 
won  my  approbation.     A  cooler  commander  I  would  not  wish 
to  see,  nor  a  more  determined.     Besides,"  the  man  has  shown 
sound  judgment  and  good  sense  ;   first,  in  being  thoroughly 
prepared  for  the  event  which  has  taken  place,  and  subsequently, 
when  his  well-concerted  plans  had  secured  him  success,  in 
knowing  how  to  use  without  abusing  his  victory.     Some  of 
the  magistrates  are  now  well  frightened,  and,  like  all  cowards, 
show  a  tendency  to  be  cruel ;   Moore  restrains  them  with 
admirable  prudence.     He  has  hitherto  been  very  unpopular 
in  the  neighbourhood  ;   but,  mark  my  words,  the  tide  of 
opinion  will  now  take  a  turn  in  his  favour :  people  will  find 
out  that  they  have  not  appreciated  him,  and  will  hasten  to 
remedy  their  error  ;  and  he,  when  he  perceives  the  public 
disposed  to  acknowledge  his  merits,  will  show  a  more  gracious 
mien  than  that  with  which  he  has  hitherto  favoured  us."  < 

Mr  Helstone  was  about  to  add*  to  this  speech  some  half- 
jesting,  half-serious  warnings  to  Miss  Keeldar,  on  the  subject 
of  her  rumoured  partiality  for  her  talented  tenant,  when  a 
ring  at  the  door,  announcing  another  caller,  checked  his 
raillery ;  and  as  that  other  caller  appeared  in  the  form  of  a 
white-haired,  elderly  gentleman,  with  a  rather  truculent 
countenance  and  disdainful  eye — ^in  short,  our  old  acquaint- 
ance, and  the  Rector's  old  enemy,  Mr  Yorke — the  priest  and 
Levite  seized  his  hat,  and  ^vith  llie  briefest  of  adieux  to  Miss 
Keeldar,  and  the  sternest  of  nods  to  her  guest,  took  an  abrupt 
leave. 

Mr  Yorke  was  in  no  mild  mood,  and  in  no  measured  terms 
did  he  express  hb  opinion  aa  the  transaction  of  the  night ; 


802  SHiRLEr. 

Moore,  the  magistrates,  the  fioldiers,  the  inoMeaden,  each 
and  all  came  in  for  a  share  of  his  invectives ';  but  he  reserved 
his  strongest  epithets — ^and  real  racy  Yorkshire  Doric  adjec- 
tives they  were — ^for  the  benefit  of  the  fighting  parsons,  the 
'*  sanguinary,  demoniac''  rector  and  curate.  According  to  him, 
the  cup  of  ecclesiastical  guilt  was  now  full  indeed. 

"  The  Church,"  he  said, ''  was  in  a  bonnie  picHe  now :  it 
was  time  it  came  down  when  parsons  took  to'  swaggering 
amang  soldiers,  blazing  away  wi'  bullet  and  '  gunpowder, 
taking  the  lives  of  far  honester  men  than  themselves." 

"What  would  Moore  have  done,  if  nobody  had  helped 
him?"  asked  Shirley. 

"  Drunk  as  he  'd  brewed— eaten  as  he  'd  baked.** 

"  Which  means,  you  would  have  left  him  by  himself  to 
face  that  mob.  Good.  He  has  plenty  of  courage  ;  but  tihe 
greatest  amount  of  gallantry  that  ever  garrisoned  one  human 
breast  could  scarce  avail  against  two  homdred." 

"  He  had  the  soldiers  ;  liose  poor  slaves  who  hire  out  their 
own  blood  and  spill  other  folks'  for  money." 

"  You  abuse  soldiers  almost  as  much  as  yoii  abuse  clergy- 
men. All  who  wear  red  coats  are  national  refuse  in  your 
eyes,  and  all  who  wear  black  are  national  swindlers.  Mr 
Moore,  according  to  you,  did  wrong  to  get  military  aid,  and 
he  did  still  worse  to  accept  of  any  other  aid.  Your  way  of 
talking  amounts  to  this : — ^he  should  have  abandoned  his  mill 
and  his  life  to  the  rage  of  a  set  of  misguided  madmen,  and 
Mr  Helstone  and  every  other  gentleman  in  the  parish  should 
have  looked  on,  and  seen  the  building  razed  and  its  owner 
slaughtered,  and  never  stirred  a  finger  to  save  either." 

"  If  Moore  had  behaved  to  his  men  from  the  beginning  as 
a  master  ought  to  behave,  they  never  would  have  entertained 
their  present  feelings  towards  him." 

"Easy  for  you  to  talk,"  exclaimed  Miss  Keeldar,  who  waa 
beginning  to  wax  warm  in  her  tenant's  cause:  "  you,  whose 
family  have  lived  at  Briarmains  for  six  generations,  to  whose 
person  tlie  people  have  been  accustomed  for  fifty  years,  who 
know  all  their  ways,  prejudices,  and  preferences.  Easy,  indeed, 
for  you  to  act  so  as  to  avoid  offending  them ;  but  Mr  Moore 
came  a  stranger  into  the  district:  he  came  here  poor  and 
friendless,  with  nothing  but  his  own  energies  to  back  him ; 
nothing  but  his  honour,  his  talent,  and  his  industry  to  make 
his  way  for  him.  A  monstrous  crime  indeed  that,  under  such 
"ircmnstances,  he  could  not  popularize  his  naturally  grave, 


MBS  PBTOB.  803 

pdet  manners,  all- at  once:  could  not  be  jocular,  and  free,  and 
aordial  with  a  strange  peasantry,  as  you  are  witii  your  fellow- 
townflmenl  Asi  unpardonable  transgression,  that  when  he 
introduced  ini{>rovements  he  did  not  go  about  the  business  in 
quite  the  most  politic  way  ;  did  not  graduate  his  changes  as 
delicately  as  a  rich  capitalist  might  have  done  I  For  errors 
of  this  sort  is  he  to  be  the  victim  of  mob-outrage  ?  Is  he  to 
be  denied  even'  the  privilege  of  defending  himself?  Are  those 
who  have  the  hearts  of  men  in  their  breasts  (and  Mr  Helstone — 
say  what  you  will  of  him — ^has  such  a  heart)  to  be  reviled  like 
malefactors  because  they  stand  by  him — ^because  they  venture 
to  espouse  the  cause  of  one  against  two  hundred  ?" 

"  Come— K5ome  now — ^be  cool,'*  said  Mr  Yorke,  smiling  at 
the  earnestness  with  which  Shirley  multiplied  her  rapid 
questions.' 

"Cool!  Must  I  listen  coolly  to  downright'  nonsense — ^to 
dangerous  nonsense  ?  No.  I  like  you  very  well,  Mr  Yorke, 
as  you  know ;  but  I  thoroughly  dislike  some  of  your  prin- 
ciples. '  All  that  cant— excuse  me,  but  I  repeat  the  word- 
all  that  cant  about  soldiers  and  parsons  is  most  offensive  in 
my  eiutfi.  All  ridicidous,  irrational  crying  up  of  one  class, 
whether  the  same  be  aristocrat  or  democrat — all  howling 
down  of  anotjier  class,  whether  clerical  or  military — all 
exacting  injustice  to  individuals,  whether  monarch  or  mendi- 
cant— ^is  really  sickening  to  me:  all  arraying  of  ranks  against 
ranks,  all  party  hatreds,  all  tyrannies  disguised  as  liberties,  I 
reject  and  wash  my  hands  of.  Tou  think  you  are  a  philan- 
tlffopist ;  you  think  you  are  an  advocate  of  liberty ;  but  I 
will  tell  you  this — ^Mr  Hall,  the  parson  of  Nunnely,  is  a 
better  friend  both  of.  man  and  freedom,  than  Hiram  yorke, 
the  Reformer  of  Briarfield."  ^ 

From  a  man,  Mr  Yorke  would  not  have  borne  this  language 
veiy  patiently,  nor  would  he  have  endured  it  from  some 
women ;  but  he  accoxmted  Shirley  both  honest  and  pretty, 
and  her  plain-spoken  ire  amused  him  :  besides  he  took  a  secret 
pleasure  in  heaiing  her  defend  her  tenant,  for  we  have  already 
intimated' he  had  Robert  Moore's  interest  very  much  at  heart: 
moreover,  if  he  wished  to  avenge  himself  for  her  severity,  he 
knew  the  means  lay  in  his  power:  a  word,  he  believed,  would 
>tiifioe  to  tame  and  silence  her,  to  cover  her  frank  forehead 
with  the  rosy  shadow  of  shame,  and  veil  the  glow  of  her  eye 
under  down-drooped  lid  and  lash. 
*^  What  more  hast  thou  to  say  ?  "  he  inquired,  as  she  paused. 


t^%^  SHIRLEY. 

me  for  orders  and  directions,  which  I  really  did  nai  fed 
warranted, in  giving.  Mr  Moore  has,  I  believe,  sent  up  for 
refreshments  for  the  soldiers  and  others  engaged  in  the 
defence;  for  some  conveniences  also  for  the  wounded.  I  oould 
not  undertake  the  responsibility  of  giving  orders  or  taking 
measures.  I  fear  delay  may  have  been  injurious  in  some 
instances;  but  this  is  not  my  house:  you  were  absent,  my 
dear  Miss  Keeldar-r-what  could  I  do?" 

"Were  no  refreshments  sent?"  asked  Shirley,  while  her 
countenance,  hitherto  so  clear,  propitious,  and  quiet,  even 
while  she  was  rating  the  milk-ietchers,  suddenly  tamed  dtfk 
and  warm. 

"  I  think  not,  my  dear." 

"And  nothing  for  ihe  wounded?  no  linen — no  wine — no 
bedding?" 

"I  think  not.  I  cannot  tell  what  Mrs  Gill  fJid:  but  it 
seemed  impossible  to  me,  at  the  moment,  to  ventoie  to  dispose 
of  your  property  by  sending  supplies  to  soldiers-^provisions 
for  a  company  of  soldiers  sounds  formidable:  how  many  there 
are  I  did  not  ask ;  but  I  could  not  think  of  allowing  tikem  to 
pillage  the  house,  as  it  were.  I  intended  to  do  what  was 
right;  yet  I  did  not  see  the  case  quite  clearly,  I  own." 

"It  lies  in  a  nutshell,  notwi&standing.  These  soldiers 
have  risked  their  lives  in  defence  of  my  propeiiy — I  suppose 
they  have  a  right  to  my  gratitude:  the  wounded  are  our 
fellow-creatures — ^I  suppose  we  should  aid  them.   .  Mrs"  Gill !" 

She  turned,  and  called  in  a  voice  more  clear  tbian  sofi.  It 
rung  through  the  thick  oak  of  the  hall  and  kitchen  doon 
more  effectually  than  a  bell's  summons.  Mrs  Gill,  who  was 
deep  in  bread-making,  came  with  hands  and  apron  in  colinaij 
case,  not  having  dared  to  stop  to  rub  the  do^igh  from  the  one, 
or  to  shake  the  flour  from  the  other.  Her  mistress  had  never 
called  a  serv^t  in  that  voice,  save  once  before,  and  that  was 
;^hen  she"had  seen  from  the  window  Tartar  in  full  tug  with 
two  carriers'  dogs,  each  of  them  a  match  for  him  in  size,  if  not 
in  courage,  and  their  masters  standing,  by,  encoivaging  their 
animals,  while  hers  was  unbeMended:  then,  indeed,  she  had 
summoned  John  as  if  the  I^ay  of  Judgment  were  at  hand: 
nor  had  she  waited  for  the  said  John's  coming,  but  had  walked 
out  into  the  lane  bonnetless  ;  and  after  informing  the  carriers 
that  she  held  them  far  less  of  men  than  the  three  brutes  whirl- 
ing and  worrying  in  the  dust  before  them,  had  put  her  hands 
round  the  thick  neck  of  the  largest  of  the  curs  and  given  her 


TO-MOBBOW.  295 

irhole  sti^giih  to  l^e  essay  of  chokiiig  it  from  Tartarus  torn 
uad  bleeding  eye,  just  aboye  and  below  which  organ  the 
rengeftd  fangs  were  inserted.  Five  or  six  men  were  presently 
on  the  spot  to  help  her,  but  she  never  thanked  one  of  them: 
"  They  might  have  come  before,  if  their  will  had  been  good," 
she  said.  She  )\std  not  a  word  for  anybody  during  the  rest  of 
the  day;  but  sat  near  the  hall  fire  till  evening  watching  and 
tending  Tartar,  who  lay  all  gory,  stiff,  and  swelled,  on  a  mat 
at  her  feet.  She,  wept  furtively  over  him  sometimes,  and 
murmured  the  softest  words  of  pity  and  endearment,  in  tones 
whose  music  the  old,  scarred,  canine  warrior  acknowledged  by 
licking  her  hand  or  he^x  sandal  alternately  with  his  own  red 
wounds.  As  to  John,  hisi  lady  turned  a  cold  shoulder  on  him 
for  a  week  afterwards. 

Mrs  Gill,  remembering  this  little  episode,  came  '^  all  of  a 
tremble,"  as  she  said  herself.  In  a  firm,  brief  voiTce,  Miss 
Keddar  proceeded  to  put  questions  and  give  orders.  That  at 
such  a  time  Fieldhead  should  have  evinced  the  inhospitality 
0^  a  miser^s  hovel,  stimg  her  haughty  spirit  to  the  quick ;  and 
the  revolt  of  its  pride  was  seen  in  the  heaving  of  her  heart; 
stirred  stormily  under  the  lace  and  silk  which  veiled  it. 
**How  long  is  it  since  that  message  came  from  the  mill?" 
"Not  an  hour  yet,  ma^am,"  answered  the  housekeeper, 
soothingly. 

"Notzan  hour  I  You  might  almost  as  well  have  said  not 
a  day.  They  will  have  applied  elsewhere  by  this  time.  Send 
a  man  instantly  down  to  tell  them  that  everything  this  house 
contains  |s  at  Mr  Moore's,  Mr  Helstone's,  and  Sie  soldiers' 
service.    Do  that  first  1" 

While  tii^e  order  was  being  executed,  Shirley  moved  away 
&Qm  her  fii^ds,  and  stood  at  the  hall-window,  silent,  imap- 
proachable.  ^When  Mrs  Gill  came  back,  she  turned :  the 
purple  flush 'w^ch  painful  excitement  kindles  on  a  pale  cheek, 
gbwed  on  hers:  the  spark  which  displeasure  lights  in  a  dark 
eye  fired  her  glance. 

"Let  the  contents  of  the  larder  and  the  wine-cellar  be 
brought  up,  put  into  the  hay-carts,  and  driven  down  to  the 
Hollow.  If  &ere  does  not  happen  to  be  much  bread  or  much 
meat  in  the  house,  go  to  the  butcher  and  baker,  and  desire 
them  to  send  what  they  have:  but  I  will  see  for  myself." 
She  moved  off. 

"  AU  will  be  right  ^oon :  she  will  get  over  it  in  an  hour," 
vHspeied  Carolite  to  Mrs  Pryor.      ^'  Go  up-stairs,   dear 


296  8HiaL£T. 

madam,"  she  added,  affectionately,  "  and  try  to  be  as 

and  easy  as  you  can.     The  truth  is,  Shirley  will  blame  her* 

self  more  than  you  "before  the  day  is  over." 

By  dint  of  a  few  more  gentle  assurances  and  pennudaDSy 
Miss  Helstone  contrived  to  soothe  the  agitated  lady.  HaTiiig 
accompanied  h^r  to  her  apartment,  and  promised  to  rejoin  her 
there  when  things  were  settled,  Caroline  left  her  to  see,  as  she 
said,  "  if  she  could  be  useful."  She  presently  foimd  that  she 
could  be  very  useftd ;  for  the  retinue  of  servants  at  Fieldhead 
was  by  no  means  numerous,  and  just  now  their  mistress  found 
plenty  of  occupation  for  all  the  hands  at  her  command,  and 
for  her  own  also.  The  delicate  good-nature  and  dexterous 
activity  which  Caroline  brought  to  the  aid  of  the  housekeeper 
and  maids, — all  somewhat  scared  by  their  lady's  unwonted 
mood — did  a  world  of  good  at  once:  it  helped  the  assistants 
and  appeased  the  diiectress.  A  chance  glance  and  smile  from 
Caroline  moved  Shirley  to  an  answering  smile  directly.  The 
former  was  carrying  a  heavy  basket  up  the  cellar-stairs. 

"This  is  a  shame!"  cried  Shirley,  running  to  her.  "It 
will  strain  your  arm." 

She  took  it  from  her,  and  herself  bore  it  out  into  tlie  yard 
The  cloud  of  temper  was  dispelled  when  she  came  back;  ^e 
flash  in  her  eye  was  melted;  the  shade  on  her  forehead 
vanished:  she  resumed  her  usual  cheerftil  and  cordial  manner 
to  those  about  her,  tempering  her  revived  spirits  wiih  a  little 
of  the  softness  of  shame  at  her  previous  unjust  anger. 

She  was  stiU  superintending  the  lading  of  the  cart,  when  a 
gentleman  entered  the  yard  and  approached  her  ere  she  mi 
aware  of  his  presence. 

"I  hope  I  see  Miss  Keeldar  well  this  morning?"  he  said, 
examining  with  rather  significant  scrutiny  her  still  flushed  fiice. 

She  gave  him  a  look,  and  then  again  bent  to  her  employ- 
ment, withotit  reply.  A  pleasant  enough  smile  played  on 
her  lips,  but  she  hid  it.  The  gentleman  repeated  his  saluta- 
tion, stpoping,  that  it  might  reach  her  ear  with  more  fadlitj. 

"  WeU  enot^h,  if  she  be  good  enough,"  was  the  answer; 
"  and  so  is  Mr  Moore  too,  I  dare  say.  To  speak  truth,  I  am 
not  anxious  about  him;  some  slight  mischance  would  be  onlj 
his  just  due:  his  conduct  has  been — ^we  will  say  8£ran^0,  jiut 
now,  tiU  we  have  time  to  characterize  it  by  a  more  exact 
epithet.     Meantime,  may  I  ask  what  brings  him  here?" 

"  Mr  Helstone  and  I  have  just  received  your  message,  that 
everything  at  Fieldhead  was  at  our  service.    We  judged,  bj 


TO-MQBSOW.  297 

the  unHmited  wording  of  the  gracious  intimation,  that  you 
wotdd  be  giving  yourself  too  much  trouble:  I  perceive,  our 
conjecture  was  correct.  We  are  not  a  regiment,  remember: 
only  about  half  a  dozen  soldiers,  and  as  many  civilians. 
Allow  me  to  retrench  something  from  these  too  abundant 
supplies.** 

Miss  Eeeldar  blushed,  while  she  laughed  at  her  own  over* 
eager  generosity,  and  most  disproportionate  calculations. 
Moore  laughed  too — ^very  quietly,  though ;  and  as  quietly, 
he  ordered  basket  after  basket  to  be  taken  from  the  cart,  and 
remanded  vessel  after  vessel  to  the  cellar. 

''The  Keetor  must  hear  of  this,''  he  said:  "he  will  make 
a  good  story  of  it.  What  an  excellent  army  contractor  Miss 
Keeldar  would  have  been!"  again  he  laughed,  adding — ^^  It  is 
precisely  as  I  conjectured." 

"  Tou  ought  to  be  thankful,"  said  Shirley,  "  and  not  mock 
me.  What  coiild  I  do  ?  How  could  I  gauge  your  appetites, 
or  number  yotur  band  ?  For  aught  I  knew,  there  might  have 
been  fifty  of  you  at  least  to  victual.  You  told  me  nothing; 
and  then,  an  application  to  provision  soldiers  naturally  suggests 
large  ideas." 

"  It  appears  so,"  remarked  Moore,  levelling  another  of  his 
keen,  quiet  glances  at  the  discomfited  Shirley.  ''  Now,"  he 
continued,  addressing  the  carter,  "  I  think  you  may  take  what 
remains  to  the  Hollow.  Your  load  will  be  somewhat  lighter 
than  the  one  Miss  Keeldar  destined  you  to  carry." 

As  the  vehicle  rumbled  out  of  the  yard,  Shirley,  rallying 
her  spirits,  demanded  what  had  become  of  the  wounded. 

^  There  was  not  a  single  man  hurt  on  our  side,"  was  the 
asgwer. 

*'  You  were  hurt  yourself,  on  the  temples,"  interposed  a 
quick,  low  voice — ^that  of  Caroline,  who,  having  wi&drawn 
within  the  shade  of  the  door,  and  behind  the  large  person  of 
Mrs  Gill,  had  till  now  escaped  Moore's  notice:  when  she  spoke, 
bis  eye  searched  the  obscurity  of  her  retreat. 

**  Are  you  much  hurt?"  she  inquired. 

«  As  you  might  scratch  your  finger  with  a  needle  in  sewing." 

"  lift  your  hair,  and  let  us  see." 

He  took  his  hat  off,  and  did  as  he  was  bid,  disclosing  only 
a  narrow  slip  of  court-plaster.  Caroline  indicated,  by  a  slight 
movement  of  the  head,  that  she  was  satisfied,  and  disappeared 
within  the  dear  obscure  of  the  interior. 

^  How  did  she  know  I  was  hurt  ?"  asked  Moore* 


/ 


^8  SHIBLET. 

'<  By  rumour,  no  doubt.  But  it  is  too  good  in  her  to  troubk 
herself  about  you.  For  my  part,  it  waaof  your  victims  I  was 
thinking  when  I  inquired  ailer  the  wqunded:  what  damage 
have  your  opponents  sustained  ?  "  , ' 

^'  One  of  the  rioters,  or  victims,  as  y(^  call  them,  was  Idlled, 
and  six  were  hurt." 

"  What  have  you  done  with  them?!*, 

"  What  you  will  perfectly  approve.  Medical  aid  was  pro- 
cured immediately;  and  as  soon  as  we  can  get  a  coupkof 
covered  waggons,  and  some  clean  straw,  they  will  be  removed 
toStilbro'." 

"  Str^w !  you  must  have  beds  and  1;>edding.  I  will  send  mj 
waggon  directly,  properly  furnished ;  ^nd  Mr  Yorke,  I  am  sure, 
will  send  his." 

"You  guess  correctly:  he  has  volunteered  already;  and 
Mrs  Yorke — ^who,  like  you,  seems  disposeii  to  regard  the 
rioters  as  martyrs,  and  me,  and  especially  ^t  Helstone,  as 
murderers — ^is  at  this  moment,  I  believe,  most  assidaouslj 
engaged  in  fitting  it  up  with  feather>beds,  pillows,  bolsters, 
blankets,  &c.  The  victims  lack  no  attention? — ^I  promise  you» 
Mr  Hall — ^your  favourite  parson — ^has  been  with  them  ever 
since  six  o'clock,  exhorting  them,  praying  with  them,  and  even 
waiting  on  them  like  any  nurse ;  and  Caroline's  good  Mend, 
Miss  Ainley,  that  ver^  plain  old  maid,  sent  in  a  stock  of  lint 
and  linen,  something  in  the  proportion  of  another  lady's 
allowance  of  beef  and  wine." 

» 

"  That  will  do.     Where  is  your  sister  ?  " 

"  Well  cared  for.  I  had  her  secjirely  domiciled  with  Miss 
Mann.  This  very  morning,  the  two  set  out  for  Wormwood 
Wells  (a  noted  watering-place),  and  wiU  stay  there  some  weeks." 

"  So  Mr  Helstone  domiciled  me  at  the  £ectory !  Mighty 
clever  you  gentlemen  think  you  are  I  I  make  you  heartily 
welcome  to  tiie  idea,  and  hope  its  savour,  as  you  chew  the  cad 
of  reflection  upon  it,  gives  you  pleasure.  Acute  and  astute, 
why  are  you  not  also  omniscient?  How  is  it  that  eventf 
transpire,  under  your  very  noses,  of  which  you  have  no  soar 
picion  ?  It  should  be  so,^  otherwise  the  exquisite  gratification 
of  out-manoeuvring  you  would  be  unknown.  Ah  I  firiend,  you 
may  search  my  countenance,  but  you  cannot  read  it." 

Moore,  indeed,  Ipoked  as  if  he  could  not. 

"  You  think  i^e  a  dangerous  specimen  of  my  sex  Don^ 
you,  now?" 

^'A  peculiar  one,  at  least." 


\ 


MBS  PBTOR,  299 

" But  Caroline^is  she  peculiar?"  , 

"  In  her  wayr-^yes." 

"  Her  way !  -  What  is  her  way  ?" 

"  You  know  hej:  as  well  as  I  do." 

''  And  knowing,  her  I  assert  that  she  is  neither  eccentric  nor 
difficult  of  control';  is  she?" 

"  That  depends! "" 

"  However,  there  is  nothing  masculine  about  herf^\ 

"  Why  lay  such  emphasis  on  her?  Do  you  consider  her  a 
contrast,  in  that  respect,  to  yourself?" 

"  You  do,  no  doubt:  but  that  does  not  signify.  Caroline  is 
neither  masculine,  nor  of  what  they  call  the  spirited  order  of 
women."  , 

"  I  have  seen  her  flash  out." 

"  So  have  I — ^but  not  with  manly  fire:  it  was  a  short,  vivid, 
trembling  glow,  that  shot  up,  shone,  vanished ^" 

"And  left  her  scared  at  her  own  daring.  You  describe 
others  besides  Caroline." 

"  The  point  I  wish  to  establish  is,  that  Miss  Helstone,  though 
gentle,  tm^table,  and  candid  enough,  is  still  perfectly  capable 
of  defying  even  Mr  Moore's  penetration." 

^*What  have  ypu  and, she  been  doing?"  asked  Moore, 
suddenly. 

"  Have  you  had  any  breakfast?" 

"  What  is  your  mutual  mystery  ?  " 

"If  you. are  hungry,  Mra  Gill  will  give  you  something  to 
eat  here.  Step  into  the  oak-parlour,  and  ring  the  beU — ^you 
will  be  served  as  if^ at  an  inn;  or,  if  you  like  better,  go  back 
to  the  Hollow." 

"The  alternative  is  not  open  to  me:  I  must  go  back. 
Good  morning:  the  first  leisure  I  have,  I  will  see  you  again." 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

UBS  PBTOB. 


While  Shirley  was  talking  with  Moore,  Caroline  rejoined 
Mrs  Pryor  up-stairs^  She  found  that  lady  deeply  depressed. 
She  would  not  say  that  Miss  Keeldar's  hastiness  had  hurt  her 
feelings;  but  it  was  evident  an  inward  wound  galled  her.  To 
any  bat  a  congenial  nature,  she  would  have  seemed  insensible 


300  saatLsr. 

• 

to  the  quiety  tender  attentions  bj  which.  Miss  Helstone  soog^ 
to  impiut  solace;  but  Caroline  knew  that, unmoved  or  sliglUlj 
moved  as  she  looked,  she  felt,  valued,  and  was  healed  by  them. 

'^  I  am  deficient  in  self-confidence  and  decision,"  she  said  at 
last.  ''  I  always  have  been  deficient  in  those  qualities:  y^  I 
think  Miss  Keeldar  shoidd  have  known  my  character  well 
enough  by  this  time,  to  be  aware  that  I  always  feel  an  eren 
pain&  solicitude  to  do  right,  to  act  for  the  best.  The  unusiud 
nature  of  the  demand  on  my  judgment  puzzled  me,  especially 
following  the  alarms  of  the  night.  I  could  not  venture  to  act 
promptly  for  another:  but  I  trust  no  serious  harm  will  result 
from  my  lapse  of  firmness." 

A  gentle  knock  was  here  heard  at  the  door:  it  was  half- 
opened. 

"  Caroline,  come  here,"  said  a  low  voice. 

Miss  Helstone  went  out:  there  stood  Shirley  in  the  gallexy, 
looking  contrite,  ashamed,  sorry  as  any  repentant  child. 

"  How  is  Mrs  Pryor  ?"  she  asked. 

"  Rather  out  of  spirits,"  said  CiEux>line. 

"  I  have  behaved  very  shamefully,  very  ungenerously,  very 
ungratefully  to  her,"  said  Shirley.  "  How  insolent  in  me  to 
turn  on  her  thus,  for  what  after  all  was  no  fault,  only  an  excess 
of  conscientiousness  on  ^er  part.  But  t  regret  my  error  most 
sincerely :  tell  her  so,  and  ask  if  she  will  forgive  me.'^ 

Caroline  discharged  the  errand  with  heartfelt  pleasttre. 
Mrs  Pryor  rose,  came  to  the  door :  she  did  not  like  scenes ; 
she  dreaded  them  as  all  timid  people  do:  she  said  ^dteringly— 

"  Come  in,  my  dear." 

Shirley  did  come  in  with  some  impetuosity  :  she  threw  her 
arms  round  her  governess,  and  while  she  kissed  her  heartilji 
she  said — 

"  You  know  you  must  forgive  me,  Mrs  Pryor.  I  could  not 
get  on  at  all  if  there  was  a  misimderstanding  between  jou 
and  me." 

"  I  have  nothing  to  forgive,"  was  the  reply.  "  We  will  pass 
it  over  now  if  you  please.  The  final  result  of  the  incident  is, 
that  it  proves  more  plainly  than  ever  how  unequal  I  am  to 
certain  crises." 

And  that  was  the  painM  feeling  which  would  remain  on 
Mrs  Fryer's  mind :  no  effort  of  Shirley's  or  Caroline's  could 
efface  it  thence:  she  could  forgive  her  offendizig  pupil,  not  her 
innocent  self. 

Miss  Keeldar,  doomed  to  be  in  constant  request  during  ihe 


MRS  PBTOB.  SOI 

mornings  was  presently  summoned  down-stairs  again.  The 
Rector  called  first :  a  lively  welcome  and  livelier  reprimand 
were  at  his  service ;  he  expected  both,  and,  being  in  high 
spirits,  took  them  in  equally  good  part. 

In  the  course  of  his  brief  visit,  he  quite  forgot  to  ask  after 
his  niece :  the  riot,  the  rioters,  the  null,  the  magistrates,  the 
heiress,  absorbed  all  his  thoughts  to  the  exclusion  of  family 
ties.  He  alluded  to  the  part  himself  and  curate  had  taken  iu 
the  defence  of  the  Hollow. 

"The  vials  of  pharisaical  wrath  will  be  emptied  on  our 
heads,  for  our  share  in  this  business,''  he  said  ;  "  but  I  def^ 
every  calumniator,     I  was  there  only  to  support  the  law,  to 
play  my  part  as  a  man  and  a  Briton  ;  which  characters  I 
deem  quite  compatible  with  those  of  the  priest  and  Levite,  in 
their  highest  sense.     Your  tenant,  Moore,"  he  went  on,  "  has 
won  my  approbation.     A  cooler  commander  I  would  not  wish 
to  see,  nor  a  more  determined.     Besides,*  the  man  has  shown 
sound  judgment  and  good  sense  ;   first,  in  being  thoroughly 
prepared  for  the  event  which  has  taken  place,  and  subsequently, 
when  his  well-concerted  plans  had  secured  him  success,  in 
knowing  how  to  use  without  abusing  his  victory.     Some  of 
the  magistrates  are  now  well  frightened,  and,  like  all  cowards, 
show  a  tendency  to  be  cruel ;   Moore  restrains  them  with 
admirable  prudence.     He  has  hitherto  been  very  impopular 
in  the  neighbourhood  ;   but,  mark  my  words,  the  tide  of 
opinion  will  now  take  a  turn  in  his  favour :  people  will  find 
out  that  they  have  not  appreciated  him,  and  will  hasten  to 
remedy  their  error  ;  and  he,  when  he  perceives  the  public 
disposed  to  acknowledge  his  merits,  will  show  a  more  gracious 
mien  than  that  with  which  he  has  hitherto  favoured  us."  < 

Mr  Helstone  was  about  to  add-  to  this  speech  some  half- 
jesting,  half-serious  warnings  to  Miss  Keeldar,  on  the  subject 
of  her  rumoured  partiality  for  her  talented  tenant,  when  a 
ring  at  the  door,  announcing  another  caller,  checked  his 
raillery ;  and  as  that  other  caller  appeared  in  the  form  of  a 
white-haired,  elderly  gentleman,  with  a  rather  truculent 
countenance  and  disdainful  eye — ^in  short,  our  old  acquaint- 
ance, and  the  Rector's  old  enemy,  Mr  Yorke — the  priest  and 
Levite  seized  his  hat,  and  with  the  briefest  of  adieux  to  Miss 
Keeldar,  and  the  sternest  of  nods  to  her  guest,  took  an  abrupt 
leave. 

Mr  Yorke  was  in  no  mild  mood,  and  in  no  measured  terms 
did  he  express  his  opinion  an  the  transaction  of  the  night ; 


802  SBLBSJcr. 

Moore,  the  magistrates,  the  soldiers,  the  mob-IeaderB,  each 
and  all  came  in  for  a  share  of  his  inyectives ';  but  he  reservecl 
his  strongest  epithets — ^and  real  racy  Yorkshire  Doric  adjec- 
tives they  were — ^for  the  benefit  of  the  fighting  parsons,  the 
"  sanguinary,  demoniac"  rector  and  curate.  According  to  him, 
the  cup  of  ecclesiastical  guilt  was  now  full  indeed. 

"  The  Church,"  he  said,  "  was  in  a  bonnie  pickle  now :  it 
was  time  it  came  down  when  parsons  took  to  swaggering 
amang  soldiers,  blazing  away  wi'  bullet  and  gunpowder, 
taking  the  Hves  of  far  honester  men  than  themselves.'* 

"What  would  Moore  have  done,  if  nobody  had  helped 
him?"  asked  Shirley. 

"  Drunk  as  he  'd  brewed — eaten  as  he  'd  baked.** 

"  Which  means,  you  would  have  left  him  by  himself  to 
face  that  mob.  Good.  He  has  plenty  of  courage  ;  but  the 
greatest  amount  of  gallantry  that  ever  garrisoned  one  human 
breast  could  scarce  avail  against  two  himdred." 

"  He  had  the  soldiers  ;  those  poor  slaves  who  hire  out  their 
own  blood  and  spill  other  folks'  for  money." 

"  You  abuse  soldiers  almost  as  much  as  you  abuse  clergy- 
men. All  who  wear  red  coats  are  national  refiise  in  your 
eyes,  and  all  who  wear  black  are  national  swindlers.  Mr 
Moore,  according  to  you,  did  wrong  to  get  military  wd,  and 
he  did  still  worse  to  accept  of  any  other  aid.  Your  way  of 
talking  amounts  to  this : — ^he  should  have  abandoned  his  mill 
and  his  life  to  the  rage  of  a  set  of  misguided  madmen,  and 
Mr  Helstone  and  every  other  gentleman  in  the  parish  should 
have  looked  on,  and  seen  the  building  razed  and  its  owner 
slaughtered,  and  never  stirred  a  finger  to  save  either." 

"  K  Moore  had  behaved  to  his  men  from  the  begiiming  as 
a  master  ought  to  behave,  they  never  would  have  entertained 
their  present  feelings  towards  him." 

"Easy  for  you  to  talk,"  exclaimed  Miss  Keeldar,  who  was 
beginning  to  wax  warm  in  her  tenant's  cause :  "  you,  whose 
family  have  lived  at  Briarmains  for  six  generations,  to  whose 
person  tlie  people  have  been  accustomed  for  fifty  years,  who 
know  all  their  ways,  prejudices,  and  preferences.  Easy,  indeed, 
for  you  to  act  so  as  to  avoid  offending  them;  but  Mr  Moore 
came  a  stranger  into  the  district:  he  came  here  poor  and 
friendless,  with  nothing  but  his  own  energies  to  badk  him ; 
nothing  but  his  honour,  his  talent,  and  his  industry  to  make 
bis  way  for  him.  A  monstrous  crime  indeed  that,  under  such 
QiTCumstances,  he  could  not  popularize  his  naturally  grave^ 


UBB  PBTOS.  803 

quiet  manners,  aU-'at  once:  could  not  be  jocular,  and  free,  and 
oordial  with  a  strange  peasantry,  as  you  are  wit^  your  fellow- 
townsmen  1  Ad'  unpaoxionable  transgression,  that  when  he 
introduced  improvements  he  did  not  go  about  the  business  in 
quite  the  most  politic  way ;  did  not  graduate  his  changes  as 
delicately  as  a  rich  capitalist  might  have  done  I  For  errors 
of  this  sort  is  he  to  be  the  victim  of  mob-outrage  ?  Is  he  to 
be  denied  even  the  privilege  of  defending  himself?  Are  those 
who  have  the  hearts  of  men  in  their  breasts  (and  Mr  Helstone— 
say  what  yon  will  of  him — ^has  such  a  heart)  to  be  reviled  like 
malefactors  because  they  stand  by  him — ^becaiuse  they  venture 
to  espouBe  tbe  cause  of  one  against  two  hundred  ?" 

"  Come-^come  now — ^be  cool,"  said  Mr  Yorke,  smiling  at 
the  eamecrtaiess  with  which  Shirley  multiplied  her  rapid 
questions. 

''Coolt  Must  I  listen  coolly  to  downright' nonsense — ^to 
dangerous  nonsense  ?  No.  I  like  you  very  well,  Mr  Yorke, 
as  you  know ;  but  I  thoroughly  dislike  some  of  your  prin- 
ciples. 'All  that  cant— excuse  me,  but  I  repeat  tiie  woi^— 
all  that  cant  about  soldiers  and  parsons  is  most  ofiensive  in 
my  eats.  All  ridiculous,  irrational  cr3dng  up  of  one  class, 
whether  the  same  be  aristocrat  or  democrat — all  howling 
down  of  another  class,  whether  clerical  or  military — all 
exacting  injustice  to  individuals,  whether  monarch  or  mendi- 
cant— ^is  really  sickening  to  me :  all  arraying  of  ranks  against 
ranks,  all  party  hatreds,  all  tyrannies  disguised  as  liberties,  I 
reject  and  wash  my  hands  of.  Tou  think  you  are  a  philan- 
Uu'opist ;  you  think  you  are  an  advocate  of  liberty ;  but  I 
will  tell  you  this — Mr  HaU,  the  parson  of  Nxumely,  is  a 
better  Mend  both  of  man  and  fre^om,  than  Hiram  yorke, 
the  Reformer  of  Briarfield."  ^ 

From  a  man,  Mr  Yorke  would  not  have  borne  this  language 
very  patiently,  nor  would  he  have  endured  it  from  some 
women;  but  he  accounted  Shirley  both  honest  and  pretty, 
and  her  plain-spoken  ire  amused  him :  besides  he  took  a  secret 
pleasure  in  hearing  her  defend  her  tenant,  for  we  have  already 
intimated' he  had  Robert  Moore's  interest  very  much  at  heart: 
mopeov6r,  if  he  wished  to  avenge  himself  for  her  severity,  he 
knew  the  means  lay  in  his  power:  a  word,  he  believed,  would 
Roffioe  to  tame  and  silence  her,  to  cover  her  frank  forehead 
with  the  rosy  shadow  of  shame,  and  veil  the  glow  of  her  eye 
under  down-drooped  lid  and  lash. 

^  What  more  hast  thou  to  say  ?  "  he  inquired,  as  she  paused. 


804  SBSBLKT. 

• 

rather  it  appeared  to  take  breath,  than  beoatise  her  subject  or 
her  zeal  was  exhausted. 

<<  Say,  Mr  Torke  1"  was  the  answer,  the  speaker  meantime 
walking  fast  from  wall  to  wall  of  the  oak-parlour.  '*  Say  ? 
I  have  a  great  deal  to  say,  if  I  could  get  it  oUt  in  lucid  order, 
which  I  never  can  do.  I  have  to  say  that  your  views,  and 
those  of  most  extreme  politician^,  are  such  as  none  but  mea 
in  an  irresponsible  position  can  advocate ;  that  they  are  purely 
opposition  views,  meant  only  to  be  talked  about,  and  never 
intended  to  be  acted  on.  Make  you  prime  minister  of  England 
to-morrow,  and  you  would  have  to  absuidon  them.  You  abase 
Moore  for  defending  his  mill :  had  you  been  in  Moore's  place 
you  could  not  with  honour  or  sense  have  acted  otherwise  than 
he  acted.  You  abuse  Mr  Helstone  for  everything  he  does  : 
Mr  Helstone  has  hi^  faults :  he  sometimes  does  wrong,  but 
oflener  right.  Were  you  ordained  vicar  of  Briarfield,  yoa 
would  find  it  no  easy  task  to  sustain  all  the  active  schemes 
for  the  benefit  of  the  parish  planned  and  persevered  in  bj 
your  predecessor.  I  wonder  people  cannot  judge  more  fairlj 
of  each  other  and  themselves.  When  I  hear  Messrs  Malone 
and  Donne  chatter  about  the  authority  of  the  Church,  the 
dignity  and  claims  of  the .  priesthood,  the  deference  due  to 
them  as  clergymen  ;  when  I  hear  the  outbreaks  of  their  small 
spite  against  Dissenters ;  when  I  witness  their  silly  narrow 
jealousies  and  assumptions  ;  when  their  palaver  about  forms, 
and  traditions,  and  superstitions,  is  sounding  in  my  ear ;  when 
I  behold  their  insolent  carriage  to  the  poor,  their  oflen  base 
servility  to  the  rich,  I  think  the  Establidbment  is  indeed  in  a 
poor  way,  and  both  she  and  her  sons  appear  in  the  utmost 
need  of  reformation.  Turning  away  distressed  from  minster- 
tower  and  village-spire — ay,  as  distressed  as  a  churchwarden 
who  feels  the  exigence  of  whitewash,  and  has  not  wherewithal 
to  purchase  lime — ^I  recall  your  senseless  sarcasms  on  the  *  ht 
bishops,'  the  '  pampered  parsons,' '  old  mother  church,*  &c.  I 
remember  your  strictures  on  all  who  differ  from  you,  jora 
sweeping  condemnation  of  classes  and  individiiab,  widiont 
the  slightest  aUowance  made  for  circumstances  or  temptations: 
and  then,  Mr  Yorke,  doubt  clutches  my  inmost  heart  as  to 
whether  men  exist  clement,  reasonable,  and  just  enougl^  to  be 
intrusted  with  the  task  of  reform.  I  don't  believe  you  are  of 
the  number." 

^  You  have  an  ill  opinion  of  me,  Miss  Shirley:  you  neftf 
told  me  80  much  of  your  mind  before." 


M&s  pRiroE.  805 

"  I  never  had  afi  opening ;  but  I  have  sat  on  Jessy's  stool  by 
your  diair  in  the  back-parlour  at  Briarmains,  for  evenings 
together,  listening  excitedly  to  your  talk,  half-admiring  what 
you  said,  and  half-rebelling  against  it.  I  think  you  a  fine  old 
Yorkshireman,  sir:  I  am  proud  to  have  been  born  in  the  same 
county  and  parish  as  yourself — ^truthful,  upright,  independent 
you  are,  as  a  rock  based  below  seas ;  but  also  you  are  harsh, 
rude,  narrow,  and  merciless." 

"  Not  to  the  poor,  lass — ^nor  to  the  meek  of  the  earth — only 
to  the  proud  and  high-^minded." 

"  And  what  right  have  you,  sir,  to  make  such  distinctions  ? 
A  prouder — a  higher-minded  man  than  yourself  does  not 
exist.  You  find  it  easy  to  speak  comfortably  to  your  inferiors 
— you  are  too  haughty,  too  ambitious,  too  jealous-to  be  civil 
to  those  above  you.  But  you  are  all  alike.  Helstone  also  is 
proud  and  prejudiced.  Moore,  though  juster  and  more  con- 
siderate than  either  you  or  the  Eector,  is  still  haughty,  stem, 
and,  in  a  public  sense,  selfish.  It  is  well  there  are  such 
men  as  Mr  Hall  to  be  foimd  occasionally:  men  pf  large  and 
kind  hearts,  who  can  love  their  whole  race,  who  can  forgive 
others  for  being  richer,  more  prosperous,  or  more  powerful 
than  they  are.  3uch  men  may  have  less  originality,  less  force 
of  character  than  you,  but  they  are  better  friends  to  mankind.** 

"  And  when  is  it  to  be  ?  "  said  Mr  Yorke,  now  rising. 

"When  is  what  to  be?" 

«  The  wedding." 

"  Whose  wedding  ?  " 

"  Only  that  of  Robert  Gerard  Moore,  Esq.  of  Hollow's 
Cottage,  with  Miss  Keeldar,  daughter  and  heiress  of  the  late 
Charles  Cave  Keeldar  of  Fieldhead  Hall." 

Shirley  gazed  at  the  questioner  with  rising  colour;  but  the 
light  in  her  eye  was  not  faltering:  it  shone  steadily — ^yes — it 
burned  deeply. 

"That  is  your  revenge,"  she  said,  slowly:  then  added; 
"  Would  it  be  a  bad  match,  unworthy  of  the  late  Charles  Cave 
Eeeldar's  representative  ?  " 

"My  lass,  Moore  is  a  gentleman:  his  blood  is  pure  and 
ancient  as  mine  or  thine." 

"  And  we  too  set  store  by  ancient  blood  ?  We  have  family 
pride,  though  one  of  us  at  least  is  a  I^epublican  ?  " 

Yorke  bowed  as  he  stood  before  her.  His  lips  were  mute, 
bat  his  eye  confessed  the  impeachment.  Yies — he  had  fiunily 
pride — ^you  saw  it  in  his  whole  bearing. 

20 


804  SBSBLKT. 

• 

rather  it  appeared  to  take  breath,  than  because  her  subject  or 
her  zeal  was  exhausted. 

"  Say,  Mr  Yorke !"  was  the  answer,  the  speaker  meantime 
walking  fast  from  wall  to  wall  of  the  oak-parlour.  "  Saj  ? 
I  have  a  great  deal  to  say,  if  I  could  get  it  oUt  in  lucid  order, 
which  I  never  can  do.  I  have  to  say  that  your  views,  and 
those  of  most  extreme  politician^,  are  such  as  none  but  men 
in  an  irresponsible  position  can  advocate ;  that  they  are  purelj 
opposition  views,  meant  only  to  be  talked  about,  and  never 
intended  to  be  acted  on.  Ma^e  you  prime  minister  of  England 
to-morrow,  and  you  would  have  to  abajidon  them.  Tou  abiue 
Moore  for  defending  his  mill :  had  you  been  in  Moore's  place 

Sou  could  not  with  honour  or  sense  have  acted  otherwise  than 
e  acted.  You  abuse  Mr  Helstone  for  everything  he  does : 
Mr  Helstone  has  hi^  faults :  he  sometimes  does  wronff,  but 
oftener  right.  Were  you  ordained  vicar  of  Briarfield,  yon 
would  find  it  no  easy  task  to  sustain  all  the  active  schemes 
for  the  benefit  of  the  parish  planned  and  persevered  in  bj 
your  predecessor.  I  wonder  people  cannot  judge  more  fairlj 
of  each  other  and  themselves.  When  I  hear  Messrs  Malone 
and  Donne  chatter  about  the  authority  of  the  Church,  the 
dignity  and  claims  of  the .  priesthood,  the  deference  due  to 
them  as  clerg3rmen  ;  when  I  hear  the  outbreaks  of  their  small 
spite  against  Dissenters ;  when  I  witness  their  silly  narrow 
jealousies  and  assumptions  ;  when  their  palaver  about  forms, 
and  traditions,  and  superstitions,  is  sounding  in  my  ear ;  when 
I  behold  their  insolent  carriage  to  the  poor,  their  oflen  base 
servility  to  the  rich,  I  think  the  Establi^ment  is  indeed  in  a 
poor  way,  and  both  she  and  her  sons  appear  in  the  utmost 
need  of  reformation.  Turning  away  distressed  from  minster- 
tower  and  village>spire — ay,  as  distressed  as  a  churchwardea 
who  feels  the  exigence  of  whitewash,  and  has  not  wherewithal 
to  purchase  lime — ^I  recall  your  senseless  sarcasms  on  the  '&t 
bishops,*  the  '  pampered  parsons,*  '  old  mother  church,*  &c  I 
remember  your  strictures  on  all  who  differ  from  you,  your 
sweeping  condenmation  of  classes  and  individuals,  withoat 
the  slightest  allowance  made  for  circumstances  or  temptations; 
and  then,  Mr  Yorke,  doubt  clutches  my  inmost  heart  as  to 
whether  men  exist  clement,  reasonable,  and  just  enongl^  to  be 
intrusted  with  the  task  of  reform.  I  don*t  believe  you  are  of 
the  number.** 

''  You  have  an  ill  opinion  of  me.  Miss  Shirley:  you  nerer 
told  me  so  much  of  your  mind  before,*' 


MfiS  PRYOE.  805 

**  1  never  tacl  a&  opening ;  but  I  have  sat  on  Jessy's  stool  by 
your  diair  in  the  back-parlour  at  Briarmains,  for  eveningsr 
togetheTi  listening  excitedly  to  your  talk,  half-admiring  what 
you  saidy  and  half-rebelling  against  it.  I  think  you  a  fine  old 
Yorkshireman,  «ir:  I  am  proud  to  have  been  born  in  the  same 
county  and  parish  as  yourself — ^truthful,  upright,  independent 
you  are,  as  a  rbck  based  below  seas ;  but  also  you  are  harsh, 
rude,  narrow,  and  merciless." 

**  Not  to  the  poor,  lass — ^nor  to  the  meek  of  the  earth — only 
to  the  proud  and  high-^minded." 

*<  And  what  right  have  you,  sir,  to  make  such  distinctions  ? 
A  prouder — a  higher-minded  man  than  yourself  does  not 
exist.  You  find  it  easy  to  speak  comfortably  to  your  inferiors 
— you  are  too  haughty,  too  ambitious,  too  jealous-to  be  civil 
to  those  above  you.  But  you  are  all  alike.  Helstone  also  is 
proud  and  prejudiced.  Moore,  though  juster  and  more  con- 
siderate than  either  you  or  the  Hector,  is  still  haughty,  stem, 
and,  in  a  public  sense,  selfish.  It  is  well  there  are  such 
men  as  Mr  Hall  to  be  found  occasionally:  men  pf  large  and 
kind  hearts,  who  can  love  their  whole  race,  who  can  forgive- 
others  for  being  richer,  more  prosperous,  or  more  powerful 
than  they  are.  @uch  men  may  have  less  originality,  less  force 
of  character  than  you,  but  they  are  better  friends  to  mankind." 

"  And  when  is  it  to  be  ?  "  said  Mr  Yorke,  now  rising. 

"  When  is  what  to  be  ?  " 

«  The  wedding." 

** Whose  wedding?" 

"  Only  that  of  Robert  Gerard  Moore,  Esq.  of  Hollow's 
Cottage,  with  Miss  Keeldar,  daughter  and  heiress  of  the  late 
Charles  Cave  Keeldar  of  Fieldhead  Hall." 

Shirley  gazed  at  the  questioner  with  rising  colour;  but  the 
light  in  her  eye  was  not  faltering:  it  shone  steadily — ^yes — it 
bomed  deeply. 

^That  is  your  revenge,"  she  said,  slowly:  then  added; 
*^  Would  it  be  a  bad  match,  unworthy  of  the  late  Charles  Cave 
Keeldar's  representative  ?  " 

'*My  lass,  Moore  is  a  gentleman:  his  blood  is  pure  and 
ancient  as  mine  or  thine." 

"  And  we  too  set  store  by  ancient  blood  ?  We  have  family 
pride,  though  one  of  us  at  least  is  a  I^epublican  ?  " 

Yorke  bowed  as  he  stood  before  her.     His  lips  were  mute, 

but  his  eye  confessed  the  impeachment.    Yies — ^he  had  fiunily 

pride— you  saw  it  in  his  whole  bearing. 

20 


806  .  SHmLET. 

**  Moore  is  a  gentleman,"  echoed  Shirley,  lifting  her  head 
with  glad  grace.  She  checked  herself — ^words  seemed  crowding 
to  her  tongue,  she  would  not  give  them  utterance;  bather 
look  spoke  much  at  the  moment :  what — ^Yorke  tried  to  read, 
but  could  not — ^the  language  was  there — '■ — ^visible,  but  untrans- 
latable— a  poem — a  fervid  lyric  in  an  unknown  tongue.  It 
was  not  a  plain  story,  however — ^no  simple  gush  of  feeling- 
no  ordinary  love-confession — ^that  was  obvious ;  it  was  some- 
thing other,  deeper,  more  intricate  than  he  guessed  at:  he  felt 
his  revenge  had  not  struck  home ;  he  felt  that  Shirley  triumphed 
-^she  hdd  him  at  fault,  baffled,  puzzled;  she  enjoyed  the 
moment — not  he. 

"  And  if  Moore  is  a  gentleman,  you  can  be  only  a  lady, 
therefore ^ 

**  Therefore  there  would  be  no  inequality  in  our  union  ?" 

«  None." 

"  Thank  you  for  your  approbation.  Will  you  give  me  away 
when  I  relinquish  the  name  of  Keeldar  for  that  of  Moore  ?" 

Mr  Yorke,  instead  of  replying,  gazed  at  her  much  puzzled. 
He  could  not  divine  what  her  look  signified;  wheUier  she 
spoke  in  earnest  or  in  jest:  there  was  purpose  and  feeling, 
banter  and  scoff  playing,  mingled,  on  her  mobile  lineaments. 

"  I  don't  understand  thee,"  he  said,  turning  away. 

She  laughed:  "  Take  courage,  sir;  you  are  not  singular  in 
your  ignorance:  but  I  suppose  if  Moore  understands  me  that 
will  do— will  it  not  ?  " 

"  Moore  may  settle  his  own  matters  henceforward  for  me; 
I  '11  neither  meddle  nor  make  with  them  ftirther." 

A  new  thought  crossed  her:  her  countenance  changed 
magically:  with  a  sudden  darkening  of  the  eye,  and  austere 
fixing  of  the  features,  she  demanded, — 

"  Have  you  been  asked  to  interfere  ?  Are  you  questionisg 
me  as  another's  proxy  ?  " 

"  The  Lord  save  us  I  Whoever  weds  thee  must  look  abont 
him  1  Keep  all  your  questions  for  Robert;  I'll  answer  no 
more  on  'em.     Grood-day,  lassie  I " 

The  day  being  fine,  or  at  least  fair — for  soft  clouds  curtained 
the  sun,  and  a  dim  but  not  chill  or  waterish  haze  slept  bine 
on  the  hills — Caroline,  while  Shirley  was  engaged  with  her 
callers,  had  persuaded  Mrs  Pryor  to  assume  her  bonnet  and 
simimQr  shawl,  and  to  take  a  walk  with  her  up  towards  the 
narrow  end  of  the  Hollow. 


MRS  FBTOB.  307 

Here,  tHe  opposing  sides  of  the  glen  approaching  each  other, 
md  becoming  clothed  with  brushwood  and  stunted  oaks, 
(brmed  a  wooded '  ravine ;  at  the  bottom  of  which  ran  the 
mill-stream,  in  broken  unquiet  course,  struggling  with  many 
rtones,  chafing  against  rugged  banks,  fretting  with  gnarled 
tree-roots,  foaming,  ffurgling,  battling  as  it  went.  Here,  when 
you  had  wandered  half  a  mile  from  the  mill,  you  found  a  sense 
jf  deep  solitude :  found  it  in  the  shade  of  unmolested  trees ; 
received  it  in  the  singing  of  many  birds,  for  which  that  shade 
made  a  home.  This  was  no  trodden  way :  the  freshness  of  the 
vroodflowers  attested  that  foot  of  man  seldom  pressed  them: 
the  abounding  wild-roses  looked  as  if  they  budded,  bloomed, 
and  faded  under  the  watch  of  solitude,  as  in  a  sultan's  harem. 
Here  you  saw  the  sweet  azure  of  blue-bells,  and  recognised  in 
pearl-white  blossoms,  spangling  the  grass,  an  hiunble  type  of 
some  star-lit  spot  in  space. 

Mrs  Pryor  like^  a  quiet  walk:  she  ever  shunned  highroads, 
and  sought  byways  and  lonely  lanes  :  one  companion  she 
preferred  to  total  solitude,  for  in  solitude  she  was  nervous :  a 
vague  fear  of  annoying  encounters  broke  the  enjoyment  of 
quite  londy  rambles  ;  but  she  feared  nothing  with  Caroline : 
when  once  she  got  away  from  human  habitatipns,  and  entered 
the  still  demesne  of  Nature,  accompanied  by  this  one  youth- 
fol  Mend,  a  propitious  change  seemed  to  steal  over  her  mind 
and  beam  in  her  countenance.  When  with  Caroline — and 
Caroline  only — ^her  heart,  you  would  have  said,  shook  off  a 
burden,  her  brow  put  aside  a  veil,  her  spirits  too  escaped  from 
a  restr^t;  with  her  she  was  cheerful;  with  her,  at  times, 
she  was  tender :  to  her  she  would  impart  her  knowledge,  reveal 
glimpses  of  her  experience,  give  her  opportunities  for  guessing 
what  life  she  had  lived,  what  cultivation  her  mind  had  received, 
of  what  calibre  was  her  intelligence,  how  and  where  her  feel- 
ings were  vulnerable. 

To-day,  for  instance,  as  £hey  walked  along,  Mrs  Pryor 
talked  to  her  companion  about  the  various  birds  8i^giIfg  in 
the  trees,  discriminated  their  species,  and  said  something 
about  their  habits  and  peculiarities.  English  natural  history 
seemed  femiliar  to  her.  All  the  wild  flowers  round  their 
path  were  recognised  by  her:  tiny  plants  springing  near 
itones  and  peeping  out  of  chinks  in  old  walls — ^plants  such  as 
Caroline  had  scarcely  noticed  before — ^received  a  name  and 
aa  intimation  of  their  properties:  it  appeared  that  she  had 
minutely  studied  the  botany  of  English  fields  and  woods. 


808  SHIRLET. 

Having  reached  the  head  of  the  ravine,  they  eat  down  tog^iker 
on  a  ledge  of  grey  and  mossy  rock  jutting  from  the  base  of  a 
steep  green  hiU,  which  towered  above  them:  she  looked  round 
her,  and  spoke  of  the  neighbourhood  as  she  had  once  before 
seen  it  long  ago.  She  alluded  to  its  changes,  and  compared 
its  aspect  with  that  of  other  parts  of  England;  revealing  in 
quiet,  unconscious  touches  of  description,  a  sense  of  the  pic* 
turesque,  an  appreciation  of  the  beautiiul  or  commonplace, 
a  power  of  comparing  the  wild  with  the  cultured,  the  grand 
with  the  tame,  that  gave  to  her  discourse  a  graphic  chann  as 
pleasant  as  it  was  unpretending. 

The  sort  of  reverent  pleasure  with  which  Caroline  listened 
—so  sincere,  so  quiet,  yet  so  evident,  stirred  the  elder  lady's 
faculties  to  gentle  animation.      Earely,  probably,  had  she, 
with  her  chill,  repellent  outside — ^her  diffident  mien  and  incom- 
mvinicative  habits,  known  what  it  was  to  excite  in  one  whom 
she  herself  could  love,  feelings  of  earnest  affection  and  admir- 
ing esteem.     DelightM,  doubtless,  was  the  consciousness  that 
a  young  girl  towards  whom  it  seemed— judging  by  the  moved 
expression  of  her  eyes  and  features — ^her  heart  turned  with 
almost  a  fond  impulse,  looked  up  to  her  as  an  instructor,  and 
clung  to  her  as  a  friend.     With  a  somewhat  more  marked 
accent  of  interest  than  she  often  permitted  herself  to  use,  she 
said,  as  she  bent  towards  her  youthful  companion,  and  put 
aside  from  her  forehead  a  pale  brown  curl  which  had  strayed 
from  the  confining  comb — 

"  I  do  hope  this  sweet  air  blowing  from  the  hill  will  do 
you  good,  my  dear  Caroline:  I  wish  I  could  see  something 
more  of  colour  in  these  cheeks — ^but  perhaps  you  were  never 
florid  ?  " 

"  I  had  red  cheeks  once,"  returned  Miss  Helstone,  smiling. 
"  I  remember  a  year — two  years  ago,  when  I  used  to  look  in 
the  glass,  I  saw  a  different  face  there  to  what  I  see  now — 
rounder  and  rosier.  But  when  we  are  young,"  added  the 
girl  of  eighteen,  ^'  our  minds  are  careless  and  our  lives 
easy." 

"  Do  you  "—continued  Mrs  Pryor,  mastering  by  an  effort 
that  tyrant  timidity  which  made  it  difficult  for  her,  even 
under  present  circumstances,  to  attempt  the  scrutiny  of 
another's  heart — "  Do  you,  at  your  age,  fret  yourself  with 
cares  for  the  future  ?  Believe  me,  you  had  better  not:  let  tlie 
morrow  take  thought  for  the  things  of  itself." 

"  True,  dear  madam:  it  is  not  over  the  future  I  pine-     Tha 


.MBS  PRYOR.  S^^^ 

eril  of  tihe  day  is  sometimes  oppressive — too  oppressive,  anJ^® 
long  to  escape  it."  ^  '^^^ 

"  That  is — ^the  evil  of  the  day — that  is — ^your  uncle  perha^y® 
is  not — ^you  find  it  difficult  to  understand — he  does  not  app/^^ 
date—"  ^^nd 

IMfrs  Piyor  could  not  complete  her  broken  sentences :    _ 
could  not  manage  to  put  the  question  whether  Mr  Helstcf^®^ 
was  too  harsh  with  his  niece,  but  Caroline  comprehended.    '^^ 
"Oh,  that  is  nothing,"  she  replied;  " my  uncle  and  I  g?V^> 
on  very  well:  we  never  quarrel — ^I  don't  call  him  harsh — ^h^ 
never  scolds  me.     Sometimes  I  wish  somebody  in  the  world^, 
loved  me;  but  I  cannot  say  that  I  particularly  wish  him  to  ^ 
have  more  affection  for  me  than  he  has.     As  a  child,  I  should 
perhaps  have  felt  the  want  of  attention,  only  the  servants  were, 
very  kind  to  me ;  but  when  people  are  long  indifferent  to  us, 
"we  grow  indifferent  to  their  indifference.     It  is  my  uncle's 
way  not  to  care  for  women  and  girls — ^unless  they  be  ladies 
that  he  meets  in  company:  he  could  not  alter,  and  I  have  no* 
wish  that  he  should  alter,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned.     I  believe 
it  would  merely  annoy  and  frighten  me  were  he  to  be  affec- 
tionate towards  me  now.     But  you  know,  Mrs  Pryor,  it  is 
scarcely  living  to  measure  time  as  I  do  at  the  Rectory.     The 
hours  pass,  and  I  get  them  over  somehow,  but  I  do  not  live.    ^I 
endure  existence,  but  I  rarely  enjoy  it.     Since  Miss  Keeldar 
and  you  came,  I  have  been — ^I  was  going  to  say — ^happier,  but 
that  would  be  untrue."     She  paused. 

"  How,  untrue  ?  You  are  fond  of  Miss  Keeldar,  are  you 
not,  my  dear?" 

"  Very  fond  of  Shirley:  I  both  like  and  admire  her:  but  I 
am  painfully  circumstanced :  for  a  reason  I  cannot  explain, 
I  want  to  go  away  from  this  place,  and  to  forget  it." 

"  You  told  me  before  you  wished  to  be  a  governess ;  but, 
my  dear,  if  you  remember,  I  did  not  encourage  the  idea*  I 
have  been  a  governess  myself  great  part  of  my  life.  In  Miss 
Keeldar's  acquaintance,  I  esteem  myself  most  fortunate:  her 
talents  and  her  really  sweet  disposition  have  rendered  my 
office  easy  to  me;  but  when  I  was  young,  before  I  married, 

my  trials  were  severe,  poignant.     I  should  not  like  a . 

I  should  not  like  you  to  endure  similar  ones.  It  was  my  lot 
to  enter  a  family  of  considerable  pretensions  to  good  birth  and 
mental  superiority,  and  the  members  of  which  also  believed 
that  *on  them  was  perceptible'  an  u^nal  endowment  of  the 
^Christifin  grapes;'  that  aU  their  hearts  were  regenerate,  and 


/ 


80« 

0  SHIBLET* 

Har         .  .      . 

Q^eir  spirits  in  a  peculiar  state  of  disciplioe.     I  was  early 

g^^en  to  understand,   that  '  as  I  was^  not  their  equal/  so  I 
lieifild  io*  expect   *  to  have  their  sympathy.*     It  was  in  no 
seei^  concealed  from  me  that  I  was  held  a   '  burden  and  a 
its  Jtraint  in  society.'     The  gentlemen,  I  found^  regarded  me 
qui^  *  tabooed  woman,'  to  whom  *  jthey  were  interdicted  from 
tuj^nting  the  usual  privileges  of  tl^e  sex,'  and  yet  who  'an- 
a>>yed  tihiem  by  frequently  crossing  their  path.'     The  liidies  too 
•^ade  it  plain  that  they  thought  me  '  a  bore.'     The  servants,  it 
^as  signified,  '  detested  me:'  why^  I  could  never  clearly  com- 
prehend.    My  pupils,  I  was  told,  *  however  much  they  miglit 
love  me,  and  hoW  deep  soever  the  interest  I  might  take  in 
them,  could  not  be  my  friends.'     It  was  intimated,  that  I 
must  '  live  alone,  and  never  transgress  the  invisit>le  but  rigid 
line  which   established  the  difference  between  me  and  my 
employers.'     My  life  in  this  house  was  sedentary,  solitary, 
constrained,  joyless,  toilsome.     The  dreadful  cru^iiiig  of  t£e 
animal  spirits,  the  ever  prevailing  sense  of  friendlessness  and 
homelessness  consequent  on  this  state  of  things,  began  erelong 
to  produce  mortal  effects  on  my  constitution — \  sickened. 
The  lady  of  the  house  told  me  coolly  I  was  the  victim  of 
'wounded  vanity.'     She  hinted,  that  if  I  did  Hot  make  an 
effort  to  quell  my  *  ungodly  discontent,'  to  cease  '  murmuring 
against  God's  appointment,'  and  to  cultivate  the  profound 
humility  befitting  my  station,  my  mind  would  very  likely  *  go 
to  pieces '  on  the  rock  that  wrecked  most  of  my  sisterhood— 
morbid  self-esteem ;   and  that  I  should  die  an  inmate  of  a 
lunatic  asylum.  [^ 

''  I  said  nothing  to  Mrs  Hardman;  it  would  have  been  use- 
less :  but  to  her  eldest  daughter  I  one  day  dropped  a  few 
observations,  which  were  afiswered  thus : — 

"  There  were  hardships,  she  allowed,  in  the  position  of  a 
governess:  'doubtless  they  had  their  trials:  but,'  she  averred, 
with  a  manner  it  makes  me  smile  now  to  recaU — '  but  it  must 
be  so.  She  (Miss  H.)  had  neither  view,  hope,  nor  wisih  to 
see  these  things  remedied;  for,  in  the  inherent  constitutioQ 
of  English  habits,  feelings  and  prejudices,  there  was  no  possi- 
bility that  they  should  be,  Grovemesses,'  she  observed,  *  mnst 
ever  be  kept  in  a  sort  of  isolation:  it  is  the  only  means  of 
maintaining  that  distance*which  the  reserve  of  English  manners 
and  the  decorum  of  English  families  exact.' 

"  I  remember  I  sighed  as  Miss  Hardman  quitted  my  bed- 
side: she  caught  the  soimd,  and  turning,  said  seveiely^— 


MBS  PBT<»U  811 

"  *  I  fear,  JfcGss  Grey,  you  have  inherited  ia  fullest  measure 
the  worst  sin  of  our  fallen  nature — the  sin  of  pride.  You  are 
proud,  and  therefore  you  are  ungrateful  too.  Mamma  pays 
yovL  a  handsome  salary ;  and,  if  you  had  average  sense,  you 
would  thankfully  put  up  with  much  that  is  fatiguing  to  do  and 
irksome  to  bear,  since  it  is  so  well  made  worth  your  while.' 

"  Miss  Hardman,  my  love,  was  a  very  strong-minded 
young  lady,  of  most  distinguished  talents  :  the  aristocracy  are 
decidedly  a  very  superior  class,  you  know — ^both  physically, 
and  morally,  and  mentally — as  a  high  Tory  I  acknowledga 
that — ^I  coiild  not  describe  the  dignity  of  her  voice  and  mien 
as  sHe  addressed  me  thus :  still,  I  fear,  she  was  selfish,  my 
dear.  I  would  never  ymh.  to  speak  ill  of  my  superior  hi 
rank ;  but  I  think  she  was  a  little  selfish. 

"  I  remember,"  continued  Mrs  Pryor,  after  a  pause, 
"  another  of  Miss  H.'8  observations,  which  she  would  utter 
with  quite  a  grand  air.  *  We,'  she  would  say, — '  We  need 
the  imprudences,  exi^avagances,  mistakes,  and  crimes  of  a 
certain  number  of  fathers  to  sow  the  seed  from  which  we 
reap  the  harvest  of  governesses.  The  daughters  of  trades- 
people, however  well  educated,  must  necessarily  be  underbred, 
and  as  such  imfit  to  be  inmates  of  cub  dwellings,  or  guardians 
of  OUB  children's  minds  and  persons.  We  shall  ever  prefer  to 
place  those  about  oub  oflFspring,  who  have  been  born  and  bred 
with  somewhat  of  the  same  refinement  as  oubselves.'  " 

'^Miss  Hardman  must  have  thought  herself  something 
better  than  her  fellow-creatures,  ma'am,  since  she  held  that 
their  calamities,  and  even  crimes,  were  necessary  to  minister 
to  her  convenience.  You  say  she  was  religious :  her  religion 
must  have  been  that  of  the  Pharisee,  who  thanked  God  that 
lie  was  not  as  other  men  are,  nor  even  as  that  publican." 

"My  dear,  we  will  not  discuss  the  point:  I  should- be  the 
last  person  to  wish  to  instil  into  your  mind  any  feeling  of 
dissatisfaction  with  your  lot  bx  life,  or  any  sentiment  of  envy 
or  insubordination  towards  your  superiors.  Implicit  submis- 
sion to  authorities,  scrupulous  deference  to  our  betters  (under 
which  term  I,  of  course,  include  the  highCT  classes  of  society) 
are,  in  my  opinion,  indispensable  to  the  wellbeing  of  every 
cooununity.  All  I,  mean  to  say,  my  dear,  is,  that  you  had 
better  not  attempt 'to  be  a  governess,  as  the  duties  of  the 
position  would  be  too  severe  for  your  constitution.  Not  one 
word  of  disrespect  would  I  breathe  towards  either  Mrs  or  Miss 
Hardman;  only,  recalling  my  own  experience,  I  cannot  but 


812  8HIBLET. 

fed  that,  were  you  to  fall  under  auspices  such  as  thdzs,  joq 
would  contend  a  while  courageously  with  your  doom:  then 
you  would  pine  and  grow  too  weak  for  your  work:  you  would 
come  home — if  you  still  had  a  home — broken  down.  Those 
languishing  years  would  follow,  of  which  none  but  the  invalid 
and  her  immediate  firiends  feel  the  heart-sickness  and  know 
the  burden:  consumption  or  decline  would  close  the  chapter. 
Such  is  the  history  of  many  a  life:  I  would  not  have  it  youn. 
My  dear,  we  will  now  walk  about  a  little,  if  you  please." 

They  both  rose  and  slowly  paced  a  green  natural  terrace 
bordering  the  chasm. 

"My  dear,"  erelong  again  began  Mrs  Pryor,  a  sort  of 
timid,  embarrassed  abruptness  marking  her  manner  as  she 
spoke,  "the  young,  especially  those  to  whom  nature  has 
been  favourable — often — frequently — anticipate — ^look  forward 
to — ^to  marriage  as  the  end,  the  goal  of  their  hopes." 

And  she  stopped.  Caroline  came  to  her  relief  with  promp- 
titude, showing  a  great  deal  more  self-possession  and  courage 
than  herself  on  the  formidable  topic  now  broached. 

"  They  do ;  and  naturally,"  she  replied,  with  a  calm  emphasis 
that  startled  Mrs  Pryor.  "  They  look  forward  to  marriage 
with  some  one  they  love  as  the  brightest, — ^the  only  bright 
destiny  that  can  await  them.     Are  they  wrong  ?" 

"  Oh,  my  dear  I"  exclaimed  Mrs  Pryor,  clasping  her  hands: 
aitd  again  she  paused.  Caroline  turned  a  searching,  an  eager 
eye  on  the  face  of  her  friend:  that  face  was  much  agitated. 
"  My  dear,"  she  murmured,  « life  is  an  iUusion." 

"But  not  love!  Love  is  real:  the  most  real,  the  most 
lasting, — ^the  sweetest  and  yet  the  bitterest  thing  we  know." 

"  My  dear — ^it  is  very  bitter.  It  is  said  to  be  strong- 
strong  as  death !  Most  of  the  cheats  of  existence  are  strong. 
As  to  their  sweetness — ^nothing  is  so  transitory :  its  date  is 
a  moment, — the  twinkling  of  an  eye :  the  sting  remains  for 
ever:  it  may  perish  with  the  dawn  of  eternity ,  but  it  tortures 
through  time  into  its  deepest  night." 

"  Yes,  it  tortures  through  time,"  agreed  Caroline,  "  except 
when  it  is  mutual  love." 

"  Mutual  love  I  My  dear,  romances  are  pernicious.  You 
do  not  read  them,  I  hope  ?  " 

**  Sometimes — ^whenever  I  can  get  them,  indeed ;  but 
romance-writers  might  know  nothing  of  love,  judging  by  the 
way  in  which  they  treat  of  it." 

•<  Nothing  wbfitever^  my   dearl"   assented   Mrs  Piyor. 


MBS  PBTOK.  313 

logerly;  ''nor  of  marriage;  and  the  false  pictures  they  give 
>f  those  subjects  cannot  be  too  strongly  condemned.  They 
ure  not  like  reality:  they  show  you  only  the  green  tempting 
nirface  of  the  noiarsh,  and  give  not  one  faithiiil  or  truth^ 
iiint  of  the  slough  underneath." 

"  But  it  is  not  always  slough,"  objected  Caroline :  "  there 
Are  happy  marriages.  Where  aSection  is  reciprocal  and  sincere, 
euid  minds  are  haxmonious,  marriage  must  be  happy." 

"  It  is  never  wholly  happy.  Two  people  can  never  literally 
be  as  one:  there  is,  perhaps,  a  possibility  of  content  under 
peculiar  circumstances,  such  as  are  seldom  combined ;  but  it 
is  as  well  not  to  run  the  risk:  you  may  make  fatal  mistakes. 
Be  satisfied,  my  dear:  let  all  the  single  be  satisfied  with  their 
freedom." 

^^  You  echo  my  uncle's  words  I "  exclaimed  Caroline,  in  a 
tone  of  dismay :  ''  you  speak  like  Mrs  Yorke,  in  her  most 
gloomy  moments  : — like  Miss  Mann,  when  she  is  most  sourly 
and  hypochondriacaUy  disposed.     This  is  terrible  I" 

"  No,  it  is  only  true.  Oh,  child  1  you  have  only  lived  the 
pleasant  morning  time  of  life :  the  hot,  weary  noon,  the  sad 
evening,  the  sunless  night,  are  yet  to  come  for  you!  Mr 
Eelstone,  you  sayj  talks  as  I  talk;  and  I  wonder  how  Mrs 
Matthewson  Helstone  would  have  talked  had  she  been  living. 
She  died  1   she  died  I " 

''And,  alas!  my  own  niother  and  father "  exclaimed 

Caroline,  struck  by  a  sombre  recollection. 

"What  of  them?" 

"  Did  I  never  tell  you  that  they  were  separated  ?  " 

"I  have  heard  it." 

"  They  must  then  have  been  very  miserable." 

"You  see  2i31  facts  go  to  prove  what  I  say." 

"In  this  case  there  ought  to  be  no  such  thing  as  marriage." 

"There  ought,  my  dear,  were  it  only  to  prove  that  this 
life  ia  a  mere  state  of  probation,  wherein  neither  rest  nor 
recompense  is  to  be  vouchsafed." 

"  But  your  own  marriage,  Mrs  Pryor  ?  " 

Mrs  Ftyor  shrunk  and  shuddered  as  if  a  rude  finger  had 
pressed  a  naked  nerve:  Caroline  felt  she  had  touched  what 
would  not  bear  the  slightest  contact. 

"  My  marriage  was  unhappy,"  said  the  lady,  summoning 
ooonge  at  last;  "  but  yet ^^  she  hesitated. 

"  But  yet,"  suggested  Caroline,  "  not  immitigably  wretched?" 

^  Not  in  iX$  results,  at  least.    No,"  she  added,  in  a  sofier 


814  SHIKLET. 

tone;  "  Grod  mingles  something  of  the  balm  of  mercy  even  in 
vials  of  the  most  corrosive  woe.  He  can  so  turn  events,  that 
from  the  very  same  blind,  rash  act  whence  sprang  the  curse 
of  half  our  life,  may  flow  the  blessing  of  the  remainder.  Then, 
I  am  of  a  peculiar  disposition,  I  own  that:  far  from  fiunk, 
without  address,  in  some  points  eccentric  I  ought  never  to 
have  married :  mine  is  not  the  nature  easily  to  find  a  duplicate, 
or  likely  to  assimilate  with  a  contrast.  I  wa^  quite  aware  of 
my  own  ineligibility;  and  if  I  had  not  been  so  miserable  as  a 
governess,  I  never  should  have  married ;  and  then ^ 

Caroline's  eyes  asked  her  to  proceed :  they  entreated  her 
to  break  the  thick  cloud  of  despair,  which  her  previous  words 
had  seemed  to  spread  over  life. 

"  And  then,  my  dear,  Mr ,  that  is,  the  gentleman  I 

married,  was,  perhaps,  rather  an  exceptional  than  an  average 
character.  I  hope,  at  least,  the  experience  of  few  liaa  beea 
such  as  mine  was,  or  that  few  have  felt  their  sufferings  as  I 
felt  mine.  They  nearly  shook  my  mind:  relief  was  s6  hope- 
less, redress  so  unattainable :  but,  my  dear,  I  do  not  wish  to 
dishearten,  I  only  wish  to  warn  ^ou,  and  to  prove  that  the 
single  should  not  be  too  anxious  to  change  their  state,  as  they 
may  change  for  the  worse." 

"  Thank  you,  my  dear  madam,  I  quite  understand  your 
kind  intentions ;  but  there  is  no  fear  of  my  falling  into  the 
error  to  which  you  allude.  I,  at  least,  have  no  thoughts  of 
marriage,  and,  for  that  reason,  I  want  to  make  myself  a  posi- 
tion by  some  other  means." 

"  My  dear,  listen  to  me.  On  wilat  I  am  going  to  say,  I 
have  carefully  deliberated ;  having,  indeed,  revolved  the  sub- 
ject in  my  thoughts  ever  since  you  first  mentioned  your  wish 
to  obtain  a  situation.  You  know  I  at  present  reside  with 
Miss  Keeldar  in  the  capacity  of  compahion:  should  she  marry 
(and  that  she  toUl  marry  erelong,  many  circumstances  induce 
me  to  conclude),  I  shall  cease  to  be  necessary  to  her  in  that 
capacity.  I  must  tell  you  that  I  possess  a  small  indepen* 
dency,  arising  partly  from  my  own  savings,  and  partly  from 
a  legacy  left  me  some  years  since;  whenever  I  leave  Field- 
head,  I  shall  take  a  house  of  my  own:  I  could  not  endure  to 
live  in  solitude:  I  have  no  relations  whom  I  care  to  invite 
to  close  intimacy ;  for,  as  you  must  have  observed,  and  as  I 
have  already  avowed,  my  habits  and  tastes  have  their  peculi- 
arities: to  you,  my  dear,  I  need  not  say  I  am  attached;  with 
you  I  am  happier  than  I  have  ever  been  with  any  living 


V        TWO  LIVES.  815 

iiiing  •*  (this  was  said  with  marked  emphasis).  "  Your  society 
[  should  esteem  a  very  dear  privilege — an  inestimable  privilege, 
%  comfort,  a  blessing.  You  shall  come  to  me  then.  Carolinei 
io  you  refuse  me  ?  I  hope  you  can  love  me  ?  " 
And  with  these  two  abrupt  questions  she  stopped. 
"  Indeed^  I  do  love  you,"  was  the  reply.  "  I  should  like  to 
dve  with  you:  but  you  are  too  kind." 

"All  I  have,"  went  on  Mrs  Pryor,  " I  would  leave  to  you: 
you  should  be  provided  for,  but  never  again  say  I  am  too  kmcL 
You  pierce  my  heart,  child  1 " 

"  But,   my   dear   madam — this  generosity — I  have  no 

daim ^ 

"  Hush  I  you  must  not  talk  about  it:  there  are  some  things 
we  cannot  bear  to  hear.  Oh  I  it  is  late  to  begin,  but  I  may 
yet  live  a  few  years :  I  can  never  wipe  out  the  past,  but 
perhaps  a  brief  space  in  the  future  may  yet  be  mine  I " 

Mrs  Pryor  seemed  deeply  agitated:  large  tears  trembled  in 
her  eyes  and  rolled  down  her  cheeks.     Caroline  kissed  her,  in 
her  gentle  caressing  way,  saying  soflly — 
"  I  love  you  dearly.*    Don't  cry." 

But  the  lady's  whole  frame  seemed  shaken:  she  sat  down, 
bent  her  head  to  her  knee,  and  wept  aloud.  Nothing  could 
console  her  till  the  inward  storm  had  had  its  way.  At  last 
the  agony  subsided  of  itself. 

"Poor  thing!"  she  murmured,  returning  Caroline's  kiss: 
"  poor  lonely  lamb  !  But  come,"  she  added  abruptly;  "  come, 
we  must  go  home." 

For  a  short  distance  Mrs  Pryor  walked  very  fast:  by 
degrees,  however,  she  calmed  down  to  her  wonted  manner, 
fell  into  her  usual  characteristic  pace — a  peculiar  one,  like  all 
her  movements — and  by  the  time  they  reached  Fieldhead, 
she  had  re-entered  into  herself :  the  outside  was,  as  usual| 
still  and  shy. 


CHAPTER  XXn. 

TWd  LIVES. 


Oklt  half  of  Moore's  activity  and  resolution  had  been  seen 
k  his  defence  of  the  mill:  he  showed  the  other  half  (and  a 
^Ue  half  it  was)  in  the  indefatigable,  the  relentless  assi- 
duity with  which  he  pursued  the  leaders  of  the  riot.    The 


816  SHIBLET* 

mob,  ihe  mere  followers,  he  let  alone:  perhaps  an  innate 
sense  of  justice  told  him  that  men  misled  by  false  oomiae!, 
goaded  by  privations,  are  not  fit  objects  of  vengeance,  and 
tiiat  he  who  would  visit  an  even  violent  act  on  the  bent 
head  of  suffering,  is  a  tyrant,  not  a  judge.  At  all  events, 
though  he  knew  many  of  the  number,  having  recognised  them 
during  the  latter  part  of  the^ttack  when  day  began  to  dawn, 
he  let  them  daily  pass  him  on  street  and  road  without  notice 
or  threat. 

The  leaders  he  did  not  know.  They  were  strangers:  emis- 
saries from  the  large  towns.  Most  of  these  were  not  members 
of  the  operative  class :  they  were  chiefly  "  downdraughts," 
bankrupts,  men  always  in  debt  and  oflei^fin  drink — ^men  who 
had  nothing  to  lose,  and  much — ^in  the  way  of  character,  cash, 
and  cleanliness — ^to  gain.  These  persons  Moore  hunted  like 
any  sleuth-hoimd ;  and  well  he  liked  the  occupation:  its  excite- 
ment was  of  a  kind  pleasant  to  his  nature:  he  liked  it  better 
than  making  cloth. 

His  horse  must  have  hated  these  times,  for  it  was  ridden 
both  hard  and  often :  he  almost  lived  on  the  road,  and  the 
fresh  air  was  as  welcome  to  his  lungs  as  the  polioeman^s  quest 
to  his  mood :  he  preferred  it  to  the  steam  of  dye-houses.  The 
magistrates  of  the  district  must  have  dreaded  him:  they  were 
slow,  timid  men;  he  liked  both  to  frighten  and  to  rouse  them. 
He  liked  to  force  them  to  betray  a  .certain  fear,  which  made 
them  alike  falter  in  resolve  and  recoil  in  action — ^the  fear, 
simply,  of  assassination.  This,  indeed,  was  the  dread  which 
had  hitherto  hampered  every  manufacturer  and  almost  evexy 
public  man  in  the  district.  Helstone  alone  had  ever  repelled 
it.  The  old  Cossack  knew  well  he  might  be  shot:  he  knew 
there  was  risk ;  but  such  a  death  had  for  his  nerves  no 
terrors:  it  w;ould  have  been  his  chosen — ^might  he  have  had 
a  choice. 

Moore  likewise  knew  his  danger:  the  result  was  an 
imquenchable  scorn  of  the  quarter  whence  such  danger  was 
to  be  apprehended.  The  consciousness  that  he  hunted  assassins 
was  the  spur  in  his  high-mettled  temper's  fiank.  As  for  fear, 
he  was  too  proud — too  hard-natured — (if  you  will)— too 
phlegmatic  a  man  to  fear.  Many  a  time  he  rode  belated  over 
'moors,  moonlit  or  moonless  as  the  case  might  be,  with  feelings 
far  more  elate,  faculties  far  better  refreshed,  than  when  safety 
and  stagnation  environed  him  in  the  counting-house.  Four 
W88  the  number  of  the  leaders  to  be  accounted  fpr :  two,  in  th^ 


TWO  Lnrss.  817 

Oouitie  of  a  forfcnight,  were  brought  to  bay  heftr  Stilbix)*;  tb^. 
renuuning  two  it  was  necessary  to  seek  further  off:  their 
haunts  were  supposed  to.  lie  near  Birmingham. 

Meantime,  the  clothier  did  not  neglect  his  battered  mill: 
its  reparation  was  esteemed  a  light  task  ;  carpenters'  and 
glaziers'  work  alone  being  needed.  The  rioters  not  having 
succeeded  in  ejecting  an  entrance,  his  grim,  metal  darlings— 
the  machines — ^had  escaped*  damage. 

Whether,  during  this  busy  life — ^whether,  while  stern  justice 
and  exacting  business  claimed  his  energies  and  harassed  his 
thoughts — ^he  now  and  then  gave  one  moment,  dedicated  one 
effort,  to  keep  alive  gentler  fires  than  those  which  smoulder 
in  the  fane  of  Nemesis,  it  was  not  easy  to  discover.     He  seldom 
went  near  Fieldhead ;  if  he  did,  his  visits  were  brief:  if  he 
called  at  the  Rectdry,  it  was  only  to  hold  conferences  with 
the  Eector  in  his  study.     He  maintained  his  rigid  course  very 
steadily.      Meantime,   the    history   of   the    year   continued 
troubled:  there  was  no  lull  in  the  tempest  of  war;  her  long 
burricane  still  swept  the  Continent.      There  was   not  the 
faintest  sign  of  serene  weather:  no  opening  amid  ^^the  clouds 
of  battle-dust  and  smoke;"  no  fall  of  pure  dews  genial  to  the 
olive;  no  cessation  of  the  red  rain  which  nourishes  the  bale- 
ful and  glorious  laurel.     Meantime,  Kuin  had  her  sappers 
and  miners  at  work  under  Moore's  feet,  and  whether  he  rode 
or  walked — whether  he    only    crossed  his   counting-house 
Wrth,  or  galloped  over  sullen  Rushedge — ^he  was  aware  of  a 
hollow  echo,  and  felt  the  ground  shake  to  his  tread. 

While  the  summer  thus  passed  with  Moore,  how  did  it 
lapse  with  Shirley  and  Caroline?  Let  us  first  visit  the 
beiress.  How  does  she  look  ?  Like  a  love-lorn  maiden,  pale 
and  pining  for  a  neglectful  swain  ?  Does  she  sit  the  day  long 
bent  over  some  sedentary  task  ?  Has  she  for  ever  a  book  in 
ber  hand,  or  sewing  on  her  knee,  and  eyes  only  for  that,  and 
words  for  nothing,  and  thoughts  unspoken  ? 

By  no  means.  Shirley  is  all  right.  If  her  wistful  cast  of 
physiognomy  is  not  gone,  no  more  is  her  careless  smile.  She 
keeps  her  dark  old  manor-house  light  and  bright  with  her 
cheery  presence:  the  gallery,  and  the  low-ceiled  chambers 
that  open  into  it,  have  learned  lively  echoes  firom  her  voice: 
the  dim  entrance-hall,  with  its  one  window,  has  grown 
pleasantly  accustomed  to  the  frequent  rustle  of  a  silk  dress,  an 
Its  wearer  sweeps  across  from  room  to  room,  now  carrying 
flowers  to  the  barbarous  peach-bloom  salon,  now  entering  the 


818  SHIBUET. 

dining-room  to  open  its  casements  and  let  in  Ae  soeol  of 

mignonette  and  sweetbriar,  anon  bringing  plants  &om  tlie 
staircase-window  to  place  in  the  snn  at  the  open  porch-door. 
She  takes  her  sewing  occasionally:  but,  by  some  fatality^ 
she  is  doomed  never  to  sit  steadily  at  it  for  above  five  minutes 
at  a  time :  her  thimble  is  scarcely  fitted  on,  her  needle  scarce 
threaded,  when  a  sudden  thought  calls  her  up-st^:  perhaps 
she  goes  to  seek  some  just-then-remembered  old  ivoiy-backed 
needle-book,  or  older  china-topped  workbox,  quite  nnneeded, 
but  which  seems  at  the  moment  indispensable;  perhaps  to 
arrange  her  hair,  or  a  drawer  which  she  recollects  to  hayc 
seen  that  morning  in  a  state  of  curious  confusion;  perhaps 
only  to  take  a  peep  from  a  particular  window  at  a  paxticDlar 
view,  whence  Briarfield  Church  and  Rectory  are  visible, 
pleasantly  bowered  in  trees.  She  has  scarcely  returned,  and 
again  taken  up  the  slip  of  cambric,  or  square  of  half-wrought 
canvass,  when  Tartar's  bold  scrape  and  strangled  whistle  are 
heard  at  the  porch-door,  and  she  must  run  to  open  it  for  him; 
it  is  a  hot  day ;  he  comes  in  panting ;  she  must  convoy  him 
to  the  kitchen,  and  see  with  her  own  eyes  that  his  water-bowl 
is  replenished.  Through  the  open  kitchen-door  the  court  is 
visible,  all  sunny  and  gay,  and  peopled  with  turkeys  and  their 
poults,  peahens  and  their  chicks,  pearl-flecked  Guinea  fowls, 
and  a  bright  variety  of  pure  white,  and  purple-necked,  and 
blue  and  cinnamon-plumed  pigeons.  Irresistible  spectacle  to 
Shirley!  She  runs  to  the  pantry  for  a  roll,  and  she  stands 
on  the  door-step  scattering  crumbs:  aroimd  her  throng  her 
eager,  plump,  happy,  feathered  vassals.  John  is .  about  the 
stables,  and  John  must  be  talked  to,  and  her  mare  looked  at. 
She  is  still  petting  and  patting  it,  when  the  cows  come  in  to 
be  milked:  this  is  important;  Shirley  must  stay  and  take  a 
review  of  them  all.  There  are  perhaps  some  little  calves, 
some  littie  new-yeaned  lambs — it  may  be  twins,  whose 
mothers  have  rejected  them :  Miss  Keeldar  must  be  introduced 
to  them  by  John — must  permit  herself  the  treat  of  feeding 
them  with  her  own  hand,  under  the  direction  of  her  carefui 
foreman.  Meantime,  John  moots  doubtful  questions  about 
the  farming  of  certain  "crofts,"  and  **ings,"  and  "hohns/ 
and  his  mistress  is  necessitated  to  fetch  her  garden-hat— » 
gipsy-straw — and  accompany  him,  over  stile  and  along  hedge- 
row, to  hear  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  agricultursS  matter 
oh  the  spot,  and  with  the  said  "  crofts,"  "  ings,"  and  "  holms* 
under  her  eye.     Bright  aft;ernooii  thus  wears  into  soft  evening; 


TWO  LtVSS.  819 

ivd  she  comes  home  to  a  late  tea,  and  after  tea  she  never 

Afler  tea  Shirley  reads,  and  she  is  just  about  as  tenacious 
>f  h^r  book  as  she  is"  lax  of  her  needle.  Her  study  is  the 
rag,  her  seat  a  foot-stool,  or  perhaps  only  the  carpet  at  Mrs 
Pryor's  feet — ^there  she  always  learned  her  lessons  when  a 
iihild,  and  old  habits  have  a  strong  power  over  her.  The 
tawny  and  lion-like  bulk  of  Tartar  is  ever  stretched  beside 
her ;  his  negro  muzzle  laid  on  his  fore  paws,  straight,  strong, 
and  shapely  as  the  limbs  of  an  Alpine  wolf.  One  hand  of 
the  mistress  generally  reposes  en  the  loving  serTs  rude  head, 
because  if  she  takes  it  away  he  groans  and  is  discontented. 
Shirley's  mind  is  given  to  her  book;  she  lifts  not  her  eyes; 
she  neither  stirs  nor  speaks ;  unless,  indeed,  it  be  to  return 
a  brief  respectful  answer  to  Mrs  Pryor,  who  addresses  depre- 
catory phrases  to  her  now  and  then. 

"  My  dear,  you  had  better  not  have  that  great  dog  so  near 
you:  he  is  crushing  the  border  of  your  dress." 

"  Oh,  it  is  only  muslin:  I  can  put  a  clean  one  on  to-morrow." 
**  My  dear,'  I  wish  you  could  acquire  the  habit  of  sitting  to 
a  table  when  you  read." 

"I  will  try,  ma'am,  some  time;  but  it  is  so  comfortable  to 
do  as  one  has  always  been  accustomed  to  do." 

**  My  dear,  let  me  beg  of  you  to  put  that  book  down :  you 

are  trying  your  eyes  by  the  doubtful  firelight." 

"No,  ma'am,  not  at  all:  my  eyes  are  never  tired." 

At  last,  however,  a  pale  light  falls  on  the  page  from  the 

window:  she  looks,  the  moon  is  up;  she  cIqscs  the  volume, 

rises,  and  walks  through  the  room.    Her  book  has  perhaps 

been  a  good  one;  it  has  refreshed,  refilled,  rewarmed  her 

heart;  it  has  set  her  brain  astir,  furnished  her  mind  with 

pictures.      The  still  parlour,  the  clean  hearth,  the  window 

opening  on  the  twilight  sky,  and  showing  its  "  sweet  regent," 

new  (hroned  and  glorious,  suf^ce  to  make  earth  an  Eden,  life 

a  poein,  for  Shirley.     A  still,  deep,  inborn  delight  glowfe  in 

her  yoiing  veins ;  unmingled — untroubled ;  not  to  be  reached 

or  ravished  by  himian  agency,  because  by  no  human  agency 

bestowed:  the  pure  gift  of  God  to  His  creature,  the  free  dower 

of  Nature  to  her  child.     This  joy  gives  her  experience  of  a 

genii-life.    Buoyant,  by  green  steps,  by  glad  hills,  all  verdure 

and  light,  she  reaches  a  station  scarcely  lower  than  that 

whence  angels  looked  down  on  the  dreamer  of  Beth-el,  and 

her  eye  seeks,  and  her  soul  possessesi  the  vision  of  life  as  she 


wishes  it.  No-^not  as  she  wishes  it;  she  has  not  time  to 
wish:  the  swift  glory  spreads  out,  sweeping  and  IdndliDg, 
and  multiplies  its  splendours  faster  than  Thought  can  effect 
Ids  combinations,  faster  than  Aspiration  can  utter  her  long- 
ings. Shirley  says  nothing  while  the  trance  is  upon  her— 
she  is  quite  mute;  but  if  Mrs  Pryor  speaks  to  her  now,  she 
goes  out  quietly,  and  continues  her  walk  up-stairs  in  the  dim 
gallery.  ,     ^ 

If  Shirley  were  not  an  indolent,  a  reckless,  an  ignorast 
being,  she  would  take  a  pen  at  such  moments;  or  at  least 
while  the  recollection  of  such  moments  was  yet  firesh  on  her 
spirit:  she  would  seize,  she  would  fix  the  apparition,  tell  the 
vision  revealed.  Had  she  a  little  more  of  the  organ  of  acqui- 
sitiveness in  her  head — a  little  more  of  the  love  of  property 
in  her  nature,  she  would  take  a  good-sized  sheet  of  paper  anid 
vmte  plainly  out,  in  her  own  queer  but  clear  and  legible 
hand,  the  story  that  has  been  narrated,  the  song  that  has  been 
sung  to  her,  and  thus  possess  what  she  was  enabled  to  create. 
But  indolent  she  is,  reckless  she  is,  and  most  ignorant,  for  she 
does  not  know  her  dreams  are  rare — ^her  feelings  peculiar: 
she  does  not  know,  has  never  knovm,  and  will  die  without 
knowing,  the  full  value  of  that  spring  whose  bright  fresh 
bubblii^  in  her  heart  keeps  it  greien. 

Shirley  takes  life  easily :  is  not  that  fact  written  in  her 
eye  ?  In  her  good  tempered  moments,  is  it  not  as  full  of  lazj 
softness  as  in  her  brief  fits  of  anger  it  is  fulgent  with  quick- 
jQashing  fire?  Her  nature. is  in  her  eye :  so  long  as  she  is 
calm,  indolence,  indulgence,  humour,  and  tenderness  possess 
that  large  grey  sphere :  incense  her, — a  red  ray  pierces  the 
dew, — ^it  quickens  instantly  to  flame. 

Ere  the  month  of  July  was  passed,  Miss  Keeldar  would 
probably  have  started  vrith  Caroline  on  that  northern  tour  they 
had  planned  ;  but  just  at  that  epoch  an  invasion  befell  Field- 
head  :  a  genteel  foraging  party  besieged  Shirley  in  her  castle, 
and  compelled  her  to  surrender  at  discretion.  An  uncle,  an 
aimt,  and  two  cousins  from  the  south,  a  Mr,  Mrs,  and  two 

Misses  Sympson,  of  Sympson  Grove, shire,  came  down 

upon  her  in  staie.  The  laws  of  hospitality  obliged  her  to 
give  in,  which  she  did  with  a  facility  which  somewhat  sur- 
prised Caroline,  who  knew  her  to  be  prompt  in  action  and 
fertile  in  expedient,  where  a  victory  was  to  be  gained  for  her 
will.  Miss  Helstone  even  asked  her  how  it  was  she  submitted 
80  zeadily? — she  answered,  old  feelings  had  their  power  * 


TWO  LIVK8.  '       821 

be  had  passed  two  years  of  her  early  youtli  at  Sympson 
irove. 
*'  How  did  she  like  her  relatives  ?" 

She  had  nothing  in  common  with  them,  she  replied :  little 
Earry  Sympson,  indeed,  the  sole  son  of  the  family,  was  very 
mlike  his  sisters,  and  of  him  she  had  formerly  been  fond  ; 
but  he  was  not  coming  to  Yorkshire  :  at  least,  not  yet. 

The  next  Sunday  the  Fieldhead  pew  in  Briarfield  church 
appeared  peopled  with  a  prim,  trim,  fidgety,  elderly  gentleman, 
who  shift^  his  spectacles  and  changed  his  position  every  three 
minutes  ;  a  patient,  placid-looking  elderly  lady,  in  brown  satin, 
and  two  pattern  yoimg  ladies,  in  pattern  attire,  with  pattern 
deportment.  Shirley  had  the  air  of  a  black  swan,  or  a  white 
crow,  in  the  midst  of  this  party ;  and  very  forlorn  was  her 
aspect.  Having  brought  her  into  respectable  society,  we  will 
leave  her  there  a  while,  and  look  after  Miss  Helstone. 

Separated  from  Miss  Keeldar  for  the  present,  as  she  could 
not  seek  her  in  the  midst  of  her  fine  relatives ;  scared  away 
from  Fieldhead  by  the  visiting  commotion  which  the  new 
arrivals  occasioned  in  the  neighbourhood,  Caroline  was  limited 
once  more  to  the  grey  Eectory  ;  the  solitary  morning  walk  in 
remote  bjrpaths  ;  the  lAig,  lonely  afternoon  sitting  in  a  quiet 
parlour  which  the  sun  forsook  at  noon,  or  in  the  garden  alcove 
where  it  shone  bright,  yet  sad,  on  the  ripening  red  currants 
trained  over  the  trellis,  and  on  the  fair  monthly  roses  entwined 
between,  and  through  "them  fell  chequered  on  Caroline  sitting 
in  her  white  summer  dress,  still  as  a  garden  statue.     There 
she  read  old  books,  taken  from  her  uncle's  library  f  the  Greek 
and  Latin  were  of  no  use  to  her  ;  and  its  collection  of  light 
literature  was  chiefly  contained  on  a  shelf  which  had  belonged 
to  her  aunt  Mary :  some  venerable  Lady's  Magazines,  that 
had  once  performed  a  sea-voyage  with  their  owner,  and  under- 
gone a  storm,  and  whose  pages  were  stained  with  salt  water  ; 
acme  mad  Methodist  Magazines,  full  of  miracles  and  appari- 
tions, of  preternatural  warnings,  ominous  dreams,  and  frenzied 
fanaticism  ;  the  equally  mad  I^etters  of  Mrs  Elizabeth  Howe 
from  the  Dead  to  the  Living  ;  a  few  old  English  Classics  : — 
from  these  faded  flowers  Caroline  had  in  her  childhood  extracted 
the  honey, — they  were  tasteless  to  her  now.   By  way  of  change, 
and  also  of  doing  good,  she  would  sew :  make  garments  for  the 
poor,  according  to  good  Miss  Ainley's  direction.     Sometimes, 
as  she  felt  and  saw  her  tears  fall  slowly  on  her  work,  she  would 
wonder  how  the  excellent  woman  who  had  cut  it  oiit  and 

21 


822  SHDtLET. 

arranged  it  for  her,  managed  to  be  so  equably  seroie  in  her 

solitude. 

"  I  never  find  Miss  Ainley  oppressed  with  despondency,  or 
lost  m  grief,"  she  thought ;  "  yet  her  cottage  is  a  stall,  dim 
little  place,  and  she  is  without  a  bright  hope  or  near  fiiend  in 
the  world.  I  remember,  though,  she  told  me  once,  she  had 
tutored  her  thoughts  to  tend  upwards  to  Heaven.  She  allo^ 
there  was,  and  ever  had  been,  little  enjoyment  in  this  world 
for  her,  and  she  looks,  I  suppose,  to  the  bliss  of  the  world 
to  come.  So  do  nuns — ^with  their  close  cell,  their  iron  lamp, 
their  robe  strait  as  a  shroud,  their  bed  narrow  as  a  coffin. 
She  says,  often,  she  has  no  fear  of  death — ^no  dread  of  the 
grave :  no  more,  doubtless,  had  St  Simeon  Stylites,  lifted  up 
terrible  on  his  wild  column  in  the  wilderness :  no  more  has 
the  Hindoo  votary  stretched  on  his  couch  of  iron  spikes. 
Both  these  having  violated  nature,  their  natural  likings  and 
antipathies  are  reversed  :  they  grow  altogether  morbid.  I  do 
fear  death  as  yet,  but  I  believe  it  is  because  I  am  yoosg: 
poor  Miss  Ainley  would  cling  closer  to  life,  if  life  had  more 
charms  for  her.  God  surely  did  not  create  us,  and  canse  lu 
to  live,  with  the  sole  end  of  wishing  ahvays  to  die.  I  beliere, 
in  my  heart,  we  were  intended  to  pnze  life  and  enjoy  it,  to 
long  as  we  retain  it.  Existence  never  was  originally  meant 
to  be  that  useless,  blank,  pale,  slow-trailing  thing  it  often 
becomes  to  many,  and  is  becoming  to  me,  among  the  rest. 

"Nobody,"  she  went  on — ^** nobody  in  particular  is  to 
b|^me,  that  I  can  see,  for  the  state  in  which  things  are :  and 
I  cannot  tell,  however  much  I  puzzle  over  it,  how  they  are  to 
be  altered  for  the  better ;  but  I  feel  there  is  something  wrong 
somewhere.  I  believe  single  women  should  have  more  to  do- 
better  chances  of  interesting  and  profitable  occupation  than 
they  possess  now.  And  when  I  speak  thus,  I  have  no 
impression  that  I  displease  Grod  by  my  wotds ;  that  1  am 
either  impious  or  impatient,  irreligious  or  sacrilegious.  My 
consolation  is,  indeed,  that  God  hears  many  a  groan,  and 
compassionates'  much  grief  which  man  stops  his  ears  against, 
or  frowns  on  with  impotent  contempt.  I  say  impoterU,  for  I 
observe  that  to  such  grievances  as  soci^  cannot  readily  cure, 
it  usually  forbids  utterance,  on  pain  of  its  scorn :  this  soon 
being  only  a  sort  of  tinselled  cloak  to  its  deformed  weakness. 
People  hate  to  be  reminded  of  ills  they  are  imable  or  unwil- 
ling to  remedy :  such  reminder,  in  forcing  on  them  a  rosss  of 
their  own  incapacity,  or  a  more  painful  sense  of  an  oUigatioo 


TWO  UVES.  838 

V>  make  some  unpleasant  effort,  troubles  their  ease  and  shakes 
their  self-complacencj.     Old  maids,  like  the  houseless  and 
unemployed  poor,  should  not  ask  for  a  place  and  an  occupation 
in  the  world :  the  demand  disturbs  tibe  happy  and  rich :  it 
disturbs  parents.    Look  at  the  numerous  families  of  girls  in 
this   neighbourhood:  the  Armitages,  the  Birtwhistles,   the 
Sykes.     The  brothers  of  these  girls  are  eyery  one  in  business 
or  in  professions ;  they  have  something  to  do :  their  sisters 
have  no  earthly  Employment,  but  household  work  and  sew- 
ing ;  no  earthly  pleasure,  but  an  unprofitable  visiting ;  and 
no  hope,  in  all  their  life  to  come,  of  anything  better.     This 
stagnant  state  of  things  makes  them  decline  in  health :  they 
are  never  well;  and  their  minds  and  views  shrink  to  wondrous 
narrowness.     The  irreat  wish — ^the  sole  aim  of  every  one  of 
them  is  to  be  mailed,  but  the  majority  wiU  never  many : 
UH,y  ^  die  as  they  now  live.    Thei  sieme.  they  plot.^y 
dress  to  ensnare  husbands.     The  gentlemen  turn  them  into 
ridicule :  they  dont  want  them ;  they  hold  them  very  cheap  : 
they  say — ^I  have  heard  them  say  it  with  sneering  laughs 
many,  a  time — ^the  matrimonial  market  is  overstocked.  Fathers 
say  so  likewise,  and  are  angry  with  their  daughters  when  they 
observe  their  mancsuvres :  they  order  them  to  stay  at  home. 
What  do  they  expect  them  to  do  at  home  ?    If  you  ask, — ^they 
would  answer,  sew  and  cook.     They  expect  them  to  do  this, 
and  this  only,  contentedly,  regularly,  uncomplainingly  all  their 
lives  long,  as  if  they  had  no  germs  of  faculties  for  anything 
else  :  a  doctrine  as  reasonable  to  hold,  as  it  would  be  that  the 
fathers  have  no  faculties  but  for  eating  what  their  daughters 
cook,  or  for  wearing  what  they  sew.     Gould  men  live  so 
themselves  ?    Would  they  not  be  very  weary  ?    And,  when 
there  came  no  relief  to  their  weariness,  but  only  reproaches 
at  its  slightest  manifestation,  would  not  their  weariness  ferment 
ia  time  to  frenzy?    Lucretia,  spinning  at  midnight  in  the 
midst  of  her  maidens,  and  Solomon's  virtuous  woman,  are 
often  quoted  as  patterns  of  what '  the  sex'  (as  they  say)  ought 
to  bQ.    I  don't  know:  Lucretia,  I  daresay,  was  a  most  worthy 
sort  of  person,  much  like  my  cousin  Hortense  Moore;  but  she 
kept  her  seivants  up  very  late.     I  should  not  have  liked  to  be 
amongst  the  number  of  the  maidens.     Hortense  would  just 
work  me  and  Sarah  in  that  fashion,  if  she  could,  and  neither 
of  us  would  bear  it.     The  '  virtuous  woman,'  again,  had  her 
boqsehold  up  in  the  very  middle  of  the  night;  she '  got  break- 


824  iHlBLET. 

fast  over*  (as  Mrs  Sjkes  says)  before  one  o'clock  A.if. ;  \^ 
she  had  something  more  to  do  than  spin  and  give  out  pordon:i: 
she  was  a  manufacturer — she  made  fine  linen  and  sold  it:  she 
was  an  agriculturist — she  bought  estates  and  planted  vineyards. 
TJiat  woman  was  a  manager:  she  was  what  the  matrons  here- 
abouts call  *  a  clever  woman.'  On  the  whole,  I  like  her  a 
good  deal  better  than  Lucretia ;  but  I  don't  believe  either 
Mr  Armitage  or  Mr  Sykes  could  have  got  the  advantage  of 
her  in  a  bargain :  yet,  I  like  her.  *  Strength  and  honour 
were  her  clothing  :  the  heart  of  her  husband  safely  trusted  in 
her.  She  opened  her  mouth  with  wisdom  ;  in  her  tongue 
was  the  law  of  kindness  :  her  children  rose  up  and  called  her 
blessed ;  her  husband  also  praised  her.'  King  of  Israe]  ] 
your  model  of  a  woman  is  a  worthy  model !  But  are  we,  in 
these  days,  brought  up  to  be  like  her  ?  Men  of  YorksMre ! 
do  your  daughters  reach  this  royal  standard  ?  Can  they  reach 
it  ?  Can  you  help  them  to  reach  it  ?  Can  you  give  them  a 
field  in  which  their  faculties  may  be  exercised  and  grow? 
Men  of  England  1  look  at  your  poor  girls,  many  of  them  fading 
around  you,  dropping  off  in  consumption  or  decline ;  or,  what 
is  worse,  degenerating  to  sour  old  maids, — envious,  backbiting, 
wretched,  because  life  is  a  desert  to  them  ;  or,  what  is  worst 
of  all,  reduced  to  strive,  by  scarce  modest  coquetry  and 
debasing  artifice,  to  gain  that  position  and  consideration  by 
marriage,  which  to  celibacy  is  denied.  Fathers !  cannot  you 
alter  these  things  ?  Perhaps  not  all  at  once ;  but  consider 
tiie  matter  well  when  it  is  brought  before  you,  receive  it  as  a 
theme  worthy  of  thought:  do  not  dismiss  it  with  an  idle  jest 
or  an  unmanly  insult.  You  would  wish  to  be  proud  of  your 
daughters  and  not  to  blush  for  then! — ^then  seek  for  them  an 
interest  and  an  occupation  which  shall  raise  them  above  the 
flirt,  the  manoeuvrer,  the  mischief-making  tale-bearer.  Keep 
your  girls'  minds  narrow  and  fettered — ^they  will  still  be  t 
plague  and  a  care,  sometimes  a  disgrace  to  you :  caltivatr 
them — ^give  them  scope  and  work — ^they  will  be  your  gayest 
companions  in  health;  your  tenderest  nurses  in  sickness; 
your  most  faithful  prop  in  age.** 


^^J'"-.- 


AN  lYEMINO  OUT.  825 

CHAPTER  XXni. 

AN  EVENING  OUT. 

Dice  fine  Bummer  day  that  Caroline  had  spent  entirely  alone 
[her  nncle  being  at  Whinbury),  and  whose  long,  bright,  noise- 
less, breezeless,  cloudless  hours  (how  many  they  seemed  Since 
lunrise  I )  had  been  to  her  as  desolate  as  if  they  had  gone  over 
her  head  in  the  shadowless  and  trackless  wastes  of  Zahara, 
instead  of  in  the  blooming  garden  of  an  English  home,  she 
was  sitting  in  the  alcove, — ^her  task  of  work  on  her  knee,  her 
fingers  assiduously  plying  the  needle,  her  eyes  following  and 
regulating  their  movemijnts,  her  brain  working  restlessly, — 
when  Fanny  came  to  the  door,  looked  round  over  the  lawn  and 
borders,  and  not  seeing  her  whom  she  sought,  called  out, — 
"Miss  Caroline!" 

A  low  voice  answered — "Fanny!"     It  issued  from  the 
alcove,  and  thither  Fanny  hastened — a  note  in  her  hand,  which 
flhe  ddivered  to  fingers  that  hardly  seemed  to  have  nerve  to 
hold  it.    Miss  Helstone  did  not  ask  whence  it  came,  and  she  did 
not  look  at  it:  she  let  it  drop  amongst  the  folds  of  her  work. 
"  Joe  Scotf  s  son,  Harry,  brought  it,"  said  Fanny. 
The  girl  was  no  enchantress,  and  knew  no  magic-spell,  yet 
what  she  said  took  almost  magical  effect  on  her  young  mistress : 
the  lifted  her  head  with  the  quick  motion  of  revived  sensation ; 
she  shot — ^not  a  languid,  but  a  life-like,  questioning  glance  at 
Fanny. 
"  Harry  Scott !     Who  sent  him  ?  " 
"  He  came  from  the  Hollow." 

The  dropped  note  was  snatched  up  eagerly — ^the  seal  was 
broken:  it  was  read  in  two  seconds.  An  affectionate  billet 
&om  Hortense,  informing  her  young  cousin  that  she  was 
retnmed  from  Wormwood  Wells ;  that  she  was  alone  to-day, 
as  Robert  was  gone  to  Whinbury  market;  that  nothing  woidd 
give  her  greater  -pleasure  than  to  have  Caroline's  company  to 
tea;  and — ^the  good  lady  added — she  was  sure  such  a  change 
would  be  most  acceptable  and  beneficial  to  Caroline,  who  must 
be  sadly  at  a  loss  both  for  safe  guidance  and  improving  society 
nace  the  misunderstanding  between  Robert  and  Mr  Helstone 
bad  occasioned  a  separation  from  her  "  meilleure  amie,  Hor- 
tense Gerard  Moore."  In  a  postscript,  she  was  urged  to  put 
oa  her  bonnet  and  run  down  directly. 
Caroline  did  not  need  the  injunction:  glad  was  she  to  lay 


9S6  flBIBLSV. 

by  the  child's  brown  holhmd  slip  she  was  triniming 
far  the  Jew's  basket,  to  hasten  up-stairs,  coyer  her  curls  with 
her  straw  bonnet,  and  throw  round  her  shoulders  the  black 
silk  scarf,  whose  simple  drapery  suited  as  well  her  shape  as  its 
dark  hue  set  off  the  purity  of  her  dress  and  the  faimess  of 
her  face;  glad  was  she  to  escape  for  a  few  hours  the  solitude, 
the  sadness,  the  nightmare  of  her  life;  glad  to  run  down  the 
green  lane  sloping  to  the  Hollow,  to  scent  the  fragrance  of 
hedge-flowers  sweeter  than  the  perfome  of  moss-rose  or  lily. 
True,  she  knew  Bobert  was  not  at  the  cottage;  but  it  was 
delight  to  go  where  he  had  lately  been:  so  long,  so  totallr 
separated  firom  him,  merely  to  see  his  home,  to  enter  the  room 
where  he  had  that  momiog  sat,  felt  like  a  reunion.  As  snch 
it  revived  her ;  and  then  Illusion  was  again  following  her  in  Peri- 
mask  :  the  soft  agitation  of  wings  caressed  her  cheek,  and  the 
air,  breathing  from  the  blue  summer  sky,  bore  a  voice  which 
whispered — "  Bobert  may  come  home  while  you  are  in  his 
house;  and  then,  at  least,  you  may  look  in  his  face — at  least 
you  may  give  him  your  hand:  perhaps,  for  a  minute,  yon  mxj 
sit  beside  him/' 

''Silence!"  was  her  austere  response:  but  she  loved  the 
comforter  and  the  consolation. 

Miss  Moore  probably  caught  from  the  window  the  gleam 
and  flutter  of  Caroline's  white  attire  through  the  branchj 
garden-shrubs,  for  she  advanced  frt>m  the  cottage-porch  to 
meet  her.  Straight,  unbending,  phlegmatic  as  usual,  she  came 
on:  no  haste  or  ecstacy  was  ever  permitted  to  disorder  the 
dignity  of  Tier  movements;  but  she  smiled,  well  pleased  to 
mark  the  delight  of  her  pupil,  to  feel  her  kiss,  and  the  gentle, 
genial  strain  of  her  embrace.  She  led  her  tenderly  in— half 
deceived  and  wholly  flattered.  Half  deceived!  had  it  not 
been  so,  she  would  in  all  probability  have  put  her  to  the 
wicket,  and  shut  her  out.  Had  she  known  clearly  to  whose 
account  the  chief  share  of  this  child-like  joy  was  to  be  placed, 
Hortense  would  most  likely  have  felt  both  shocked  and  in- 
censed. Sisters  do  not  like  yoimg  ladies  to  fall  in  Icve  with 
their  brothers:  it  seems,  if  not  presumptuous,  silly,  weak,  a 
delusion,  an  absurd  mistake.  They  do  not  love  these  gentle- 
men— whatever  sisterly  afiection  they  may  cherish  towaida 
them — ^and  that  others  should,  repels  them  with  a  sense  of 
crude  romance.  The  first  movement,  in  short,  excited  by  sach 
discovery  (as  with  many  parents  on  finding  their  children  to 
hfi  in  love),  is  one  of  mixed  iinpatience  and  contempt  Besaop 


M  ETIlilBirG  OUT.  327 

f  they  be  rational  people— Qprrects  the  false  feeling  in 
dme ;  but  if  they  be  irrational,  it  is  neyer  corrected,  and  the 
daughter  or  sist^-in-law  is  disHked  to  the  end. 

*'  You  wonld  expect  to  find  me  alone,  from  what  I  said  in 
my  note,"  observed  Miss  Moore,  as  she  conducted  Caroline. 
towards  tlie  parlour;  ^'  but  it  was  written  this  morning:  since 
dinner,  company  has  come  in.*' 

And,  opening  th^  door,  she  made  visible  an  ample  spread  of 
crunson  skirts  overflowing  the  elbow-chair  at  the  fireside,  and 
above  them,  presiding  with  dignity,  a  cap  more  awM  than  a 
crown.  That  cap  had  never  come  to  the  cottage  imder  a  bon- 
net: no,  it  had  been  brought,  in  a  vast  bag,  or  rather  a 
middle-razed  balloon  of  black  silk,  held  wide  with  whalebone. 
The  screed,  or  frill  of  the  cap,  stood  a  quarter  of  a  yard  broad 
round  the  face  of  the  wearer:  the  ribbon,  flourishmg  in  pnfls 
and  bows  about  the  head,  was  of  the  sort  called  love-ribbon: 
there  was  a  good  deal  of  it, — I  may  say,  a  very  great  deal. 
Mrs  Yorke  wore  the  cap— it  became  her:  she  wore  the  gown 
also— it  suited  her  no  less. 

That  great  lady  was  come  in  a  friendly  way  to  take  tea 
witih  Miss  Moore^  It  was  almost  as  great  and  as  rare  a  favour 
as  if  the  Queen  were  to  go  uninvited  to  share  pot-luck  with 
one  of  her  subjects:  a  higher  mark  of  distinction  i^he  could 
not  show, — she  who,  in  general,  scorned  visiting  and  tea-drink- 
ing, and  held  cheap,  and  stigmatized  as  '^  gossips,"  every  maid 
and  matron  of  the  vicinage. 

There  was  no  mistake,  however;  Miss  Moore  was  a  favour- 
ite  with  her :  she  had  evinoed  the  feet  more  than  once ;,  evinced 
it  by  stoppmg  to  speak  to  her  in  the  churchyard  on  Sundays ; 
by  inviting  her,  ahnost  hospitably,  to  come  to  Briarmains; 
evinced  it  to-day  by  the  grand  condescension  of  a  personal 
visit.  Her  reasons  for  the  preference,  as  assigned  by  herself, 
vera,  that  Miss  Moore  was  a  woman  of  steady  deportment, 
without  the  least  levity  of  conversation  or  carriage ;  also,  that, 
being  a  foreigner^  she  must  feel  the  want  of  a  friend  to  c'ounte- 
tenance  her.  She  might  have  added,  that  her  plain  aspect, 
homely  precise  dress,  and  phlegmatic  unattractive  manner 
were  to  her,  so  many  additional  recommendations.  It  is  cer-- 
tarn,  at  least,  that  ladies  remarkable  for  the  opposite  qualities 
of  beauty,  lively  bearing,  and  elegant  taste  in  attire,  were  not 
often  favoured  with  her  approbation.  Whatever  gentlemen  are 
apt  to  admire  in  women,  Mrs  Yorke  condemned;  and  what 
they  overlook  or  despise,  she  patronized. 


328  sHisLEr. 

Caroline  advanced  vO  the  mighty  matron  vdth  some  senae  of 
diffidence :  she  knew  little  of  Mrs  Yorke ;  and,  as  a  parBon« 
niece  was  doubtM  what  sort  of  a  reception  she  might  get. 
She  got  a  very  cool  one,  and  was  glad  to  hide  her  discomfiture 
by  turning  away  to  take  off  her  bonnet.  Nor,  upon  atdng 
down,  was  she  displeased  to  be  immediately  accosted  by  a 
little  personage  in  a  blue  frock  and  sash,  who  started  up  like 
some  fairy  from  the  side  of  the  great  darnels  chair,  where  she 
had  been  sitting  on  a  foot-stool,  screened  fix)m  view  by  the 
folds  of  the  wide  red  gown,  and  running  to  Miss  Helstone,  unce- 
remoniously threw  her  arms  round  her  neck  and  denumded  a 
kiss. 

•*  My  mother  is  not  civil  to  you,"  said  the  petitioner,  as  sk 
received  a;id  repaid  a  smiling  salute ;  '^  and  Rose,  there,  takes 
no  notice  of  you :  it  is  their  way.  If,  instead  of  you,  a  white 
angel,  with  a  crown  of  stars,  had  come  into  the  room,  mother 
would  nod  stiffly,  and  Rose  never  lift  her  head  at  all ;  but  I  will 
be  your  friend :  I  have  always  liked  you ! " 

"  Jessie,  curb  that  tongue  of  yours,  and  repress  your  forward- 
ness 1 "  said  Mrs  Yorke. 

"  But,  mother,  you  are  so  frozen ! "  expostulated  Jessie. 
"  Miss  Helstone  has  never  done  you  any  harm :  why  can't  you 
be  kind  to  her  ?  You  sit  so  stiff,  and  look  so  cold,  and  speak 
so  dry — what  for  ?  That's  just  tiie  fashion  in  which  you  treat 
Miss  Shirley  Keeldar,  and  every  other  young  lady  who  comes 

to  our  house.     And  Rose,  there,  is  such  an  aut —  aut 1 

have  forgotten  the  word,  but.  it  means  a  machine  in  the  shape 
of  a  human  being.  However,  between  you,  you  will  driTC 
every  soul  away  from  Briarmains — Martin  often  says  so ! " 

"  I  am  an  automaton  ?  Good  1  Let  me  alone  then,"  said 
Rose,  speaking  from  a  corner  where  she  was  sitting  on  the 
carpet  at  the  foot  of  a  bookcase,  with  a  volume  spread  open  on 
her  knee.  "  Miss  Helstone — how  do  you  do  ? "  she  added, 
directing  a  brief  glance  to  the  person  addressed,  and  then  again 
casting  down  her  grey,  remarkable  eyes  on  the  book,  and 
returning  to  the  study  of  its  pages. 

Caroline  stole  a  quiet  gaze  towards  her,  dwelling  on  her 
yoimg,  absorbed  countenance,  and  observing  a  certain  imcon- 
scious  movement  of  the  mouth  as  she  read — a  movement  Ml 
'of  character.  Caroline  had  tact,  and  she  had  fine  instinct: 
she  felt  that  Rose  Yorke  was  a  peculiar  child— one  of  the 
unique  ;  she  knew  how  to  treat  her.  Approaching  quietly, 
she  knelt  on  the  carpet  at  her  side,  and  looked  over  her  Utde 


AN  EVJBMINO  OUT.  829 


shoulder  at  her  book.    It  was  a  romance xf  Mrs  Radcliffe^ 
"  The  ItaUan." 

Caroline  read  on  with  her,  making  no  remark :  presently 
Rose  showed  her  the  attention  of  asking,  ere  she  turned  a  leaf-* 

"  Are  you  ready  ?  " 

Caroline  only  nodded. 

"  Do  you  like  it  ?  '\ inquired  Bose,  erelong. 

"  Long  since,  when  I  read  it  as  a  child,  I  was  wonderfolly 
taken  with  it." 

"Why?" 

"  It  seemed  to  open  with  such  promise — such  foreboding  of 
a  most  strange  tale  to  be  unfolded.*' 

"  And  in  reading  it,  you  feel  as  if  you  were  far  away  from 
England — ^really  in  Italy — ^under  another  sort  of  sky — that 
blue  sky  of  the  south  which  travellers  describe." 

"  You  are  sensible  of  that,  Kose  ?  " 

''  It  makes  me  long  to  travel,*  Miss  Helstone." 

".When  you  are  a  woman,  perhaps,  you  may  be  able  to 
gratify  your  wish." 

"  I  mean  to  make  a  way  to  do  so,  if  one  is  not  made  for  me. 
I  cannot  Uve  always  in  Briarfield.  The  vhole  world  is  not 
very  large  compared  with  creation :  I  must  see  the  outside  of 
OTir  own  round  planet  at  least." 

"  How  much  of  its  outside  ?  " 

"  First  this  hemisphere  where  we  live;  then  the  other.  I 
am  resolved  that  my  life  shall  be  a  life :  not  a  black  trance 
like  the  toad's,  buried  in  marble ;  nor  a  long,  slow  death  like 
yours  in  Briarfield  Rectory." 

"  Like  mine  1     What  can  you  mean,  child  ?  " 

"  Might  you  not  as  well  be  tediously  dying,  as  for  ever  shut 
up  in  that  glebe-house — a  place  that,  when  I  pass  it,  always 
itaninds  me  of  a  windowed  grave  ?  I  never  see  any  movement 
about  the  door :  I  never  hear  a  sound  from  the  wall :  I  be- 
lieve smoke  never  issues  from  the  chimneys.  What  do  you 
do  there?" 

"  I  sew,  I  read,  I  learn  lessons." 

"  Are  you  happy  ?  " 

**  Should  I  be  happier  wandering  alone  in  strange  countrieSi 
as  you  wish  to  do  ?  " 

"  Much  happier,  even  if  you  did .  nothing  but  bander. 
Remember,  however,  that  I  shall  have  an  object  in  view: 
but  if  you  only  went  on  and  on,  like  some  enchanted  lady  in 
a  fiuiy  tale,  you  might  be  happier  than  now.     In  a  day's 


880  SHIRLET. 

wandering,  you  would  pass  many  a  hill,  wood,  and  watereoonef 
each  perpetually  altering  in  aspect  as  the  sun  shone  out  or  was 
overcast ;  as  tibe  weather  was  wet  or  fair,  dark  or  bright 
Nothing  changes  in  Briarfield  Rectory :  the  plaster  of  th6 
parlour-ceilings,  the  'pauper  on  the  walls,  the  curtains,  carpets, 
chairs,  are  still  the  samel." 

^Ms  change  necessary  to  happiness  ?  *l 

«Yes." 

"  Is  it  synonymous  with  it  ?  " 

''  I  don't  know;  but  I  feel  monotony  and  death  to  be  almost 
tiie  same." 

Here  Jessie  spoke. 

'^  Isn^t  she  mad  ?  "  she  asked. 

"  But,  Kose,"  pursued  Caroline,  "  I  fear  a  wanderer's  life, 
for  me  at  least,  would  end  like  that  tale  you  are  reading — ^in 
disappointment,  vanity,  and  vexation  of  spirit." 

"  Does  « the  Italian '  so  end  ?  " 

"  I  thought  so  when  I  read  it." 

''  Better  to  try  all  things  and  find  all  empty,  than  to  try 
nothing  and  leave  your  life  a  blank.  To  do  this  is  to  commit 
the  sin  of  him  who  buried  his  talent  in  a  napkin — despicable 
sluggard  1 " 

"  Kose,"  observed  Mrs  Yorke,  "  solid  satisfaction  is  only  to 
be  realized  by  doing  one's  duty." 

''  Eight,  mother  1  And  if  my  Master  has  given  me  ten 
talents,  my  duty  is  to  trade  with  them,  and  make  them  t^n 
talents  more.  Not  in  the  dust  of  household  drawers  shall 
the  coin  be  interred.  I  wiU  not  deposit  it  in  a  broken-spouted 
tea-pot,  and  shut  it  up  in  a  china-closet  among  t^a-things. 
I  will  not  commit  it  to  your  work-table  to  be  smotihered  in 
piles  of  woollen  hose.  I  will  not  prison  it  in  the  linen-press 
to  find  shrouds  among  the  sheets:  and  least  of  all,  mother" — 
(she  got  up  from  the  floor) — "  least  of  all  will  I  hide  it  in  a  tureen 
of  cold  potatoes,  to  be  ranged  with  bread,  butter,  pastry,  and 
ham  on  the  shelves  of  the  larder." 

She  stopped — then  went  on: — 

"  Mother,  the  Lord  who  gave  each  of  us  our  talents  will 
come  home  some  day,  and  will  demand  from  all  an  account. 
The  tea-pot,  the  old  stocking-foot,  the  linen  rag,  the  wiUow- 
pattem  tureen,  will  yield  up  their  barren  deposit  in  many  a 
house:  suffer  your  daughters,  at  least,  to  put  their  money  to 
the  exchangers,  that  ^ej  may  be  enabled  at  the  Master's 
coining  to  pay  him  his  own  with  usury," 


AN  EVENING  OUT*  331 

^  Rose,  did  70a  bring  yonr  sampler  wiih  you,  as  I  told  yen?** 
**  Yes,  mother." 

*^  Sit  down,  and  do  a  line  of  marking." 
Hose  sat  down  promptly,  and  wrought  according  to  orders, 
^fber  a  busy  pause  of  ten  minutes,  her  mother  asked — 
"  Do  you  think  yourself  oppressed  now  ?     A  victim  ?  " 
"  No,  mother." 

**  Yet,  as  far  as  I  understood  your  tirade,  it  was  a  protest 
jigainst  aU  womanly  and  domestic  employment." 

'*  You  misunderstood  it,  mother.  I  should  be  sorry  not 
to  learn  to  sew :  you  do  right  to  teach  me,  and  to  make  me 
work." 

^  Even  to  the  mending  of  your  brother's  stockings  and  the 
making  of  sheets  ?  " 
"Yes." 

**  Where  is  the  use  of  ranting  and  spouting  about  it,  then  ?  " 
"  Am  I  to  do  nothing  but  tiiat  ?  I  will  do  that,  and  then 
I  will  do  more.  Now,  mother,  I  have  said  my  say.  I  am 
twelve  years  old  at  present,  and  not  tiU  I  am  sixteen  will  I 
speak  again  about  talents :  for  four  years,  I  bind  myself  an 
indnstrious  apprentice  to  all  you  can  teach  me." 

"  You  see  what  my  daughters  are,  Miss  Helstone,"  observed 
Mrs  Yorke:  "how  precociously  wise  in  their  own  conceits! 
*  I  would  rather  this — ^I  prefer  that ; '  such  is  Jessie's  cuckoo- 
8ong:  while  Rose  utters  the  bolder  cry,  *I  mil,  and  I  will 
not/'" 

"I  render  a  reason,  mother:  besides,  if  my  cry  is  bold,  it 
is  only  heard  once  in  a  twelvemonth.  About  each  birthday, 
the  spirit  moves  me  to  deliver  one  oracle  respecting  my  own 
instruction  and  management:  I  utter  it  and  leave  it;  it  is  for 
you,  mother,  to  listen  or  not." 

"  I  would  advise  all  young  ladies,"  pursued  Mrs  Yorke, 
**  to  study  the  characters  of  such  children  as  they  chance  to 
meet  with  before  they  marry,  and  have  any  of  their  own;  to 
consider  well  how  they  would  like  the  responsibility  of  guid- 
ing the  oareless,  the  labour  of  persuading  the  stubborn,  the 
constant  burden  and  task  of  training  the  best." 

"  But  with  love  it  need  not  be  so  very  diflScult,"  interposed 
Caroline.  "  Mothers  love  their  children  most  dearly — almost 
better  than  they  love  themselves." 

"Fine  talk!    Very  sentimental!      There  is  the  rough, 
practical  part  of  life  yet  .to  come  for  you,  young  Miss  !" 
"  Buti  Mrs  Yorke,  if  I  take  a  little  baby  into  my  anna*- 


3S2  SHOtLET. 

any  poor  woman^s  infant  for  instance, — ^I  feel  that  I  love  that 
helpless  thing  quite  peculiarly,  though  I  am  not  its  mother. 
I  could  do  almost  anything  for  it  willingly,  if  it  were  deHvered 
over  entirely  to  my  care — ^if  it  were  quite  dependent  otl  me,'' 

"  You  feel!  Yes !  yes !  I  daresay,  now :  you  are  led  a 
great  deal  by  your  feelings ^  and.  you  think  yourself  a  very 
sensitive,  refined  personage,  no  doubt.  Are  you  aware  that, 
with  all  these  romantic  ideas,  ypu  have  managed  to  tram 
yuur  features  into  an  habitually  lackadaisical  expression,  better 
suited  to  a  novel-heroine  than  to  a  woman  who  is  to  make  her 
way  in  the  real  world,  by  dint  of  common  sense?" 

"  No;  I  am  not  at  all  aware  of  that,  Mrs  Yorke." 

''  Look  in  the  glass  just  behind  you.  Compare  the  &ce  you 
see  there  with  that  of  any  early-rising,  hard-working  milk- 
maid." 

*'  My  face  is  a  pale  one,  but  it  is  not  sentimental,  and  most 
milkmaids,  however  red  and  robust  they  may  be,  are  more 
stupid  and  less  practically  fitted  to  make  their  way  in  the 
world  than  I  am.  I  think  more  and  more  correctly  than 
milkmaids  in  general  do;  consequently,  where  they  would 
oflen,  for  want  of  reflection,  act  weakly,  I,  by  dint  of  reflec- 
tion, should  act  judiciously." 

"  Oh,  no!  you  would  be  influenced  by  your  feelings.  You 
Would  be  guided  by  impulse." 

"  Of  course,  I  should  often  be  influenced  by  my  feelings: 
they  were  given  me  to  that  end.  Whom  my  feelings  teach 
me  to  love,  I  mtist  and  shall  love;  and  I  hope,  if  ever  I  hare 
a  iiusband  and  children,  my  feelings  will  induce  me  to  lore 
them.  I  hope,  in  that  case,  all  my  impulses  will  be  strong  in 
compelling  me  to  love." 

Caroline  had  a  pleasure  in  saying  this  with  emphasis :  she 
had  a  pleasure  in  daring  to  say  it  in  Mrs  Yorkers  presence. 
She  did  not  care  what  unjust  sarcasm  might  be  hurled  at  her 
in  reply :  she  flushed,  not  with  anger,  but  excitement,  when 
the  imgenial  matron  answered,  coolly, — 

"  Don't  waste  your  dramatic  effects.  That  was  well  said, 
— ^it  was  quite  fine ;  but  it  is  lost  on  two  women — ^an  old  wife 
and  an  old  maid:  l^ere  should  have  been  a  disengaged  gentle- 
man present.  Is  Mr  Robert  nowhere  hid  behind  the  curtains, 
do  you  think.  Miss  Moore  ?" 

Hortense,  who  during  the  chief  part  of  the  conversation  had 
been  in  the  kitchen  superintending  the  preparations  for  tea, 
did  not  yet  quite  comprehend  the  drift  of  the  discourse.   She 


AN  EV3ENIN0  OUT.  333 

answered,  with  a  puzzled  air,  that  Robert  was  at  Whinbuiy. 
Mrs  Yorke  laughed  her  own  peculiar  short  laugh. 

"  Straightforward  Miss  Moore ! "  said  she,  patronizingly. 
"  It  is  like  you  to  understand  my  question  so  literally,  and 
answer  it  so  simply.  Your  mind  comprehends  nothing  oi 
intrigue.  Strange  things  might  go  on  around  you  without 
your  being  the  wiser :  you  are  not  of  the  class  the  world  calls 
sharp-witted." 

These  eqtdvocal  compliments  did  not  seem  to  please 
Hortense.  She  drew  herself  up,  puckered  her  black  eye- 
brows, but  still  looked  puzzled. 

"  I  have  ever  been  noted  for  sagacity  and  discernment  fj*om 
childhood,"  she  returned:  for,  indeed,  on  the  possession  of 
these  qualities,  she  peculiarly  piqued  herself. 

"  You  never  plotted  to  win  a  husband,  I  '11  be  bound," 
pursued  Mrs  Yorke ;  "  and  you  have  not  the  benefit  of  previous 
experience  to  aid  you  in  discovering  when  others  plot." 

CaroUne  felt  this  kind  language  where  the  benevolent 
speaker  intended  she  should  feel  it— in  her  very  heart.  She 
could  not  even  parry  the  shafts  :  she  was  defenceless  for  the 
present:  to  answer  would  have  been  to  avow  that  the  cap 
fitted.  Mrs  Yorke,  looking  at  her  as  she  sat  with  troubled 
downcast  eyes,  and  cheek  burning  painfully,  and  figure 
expressing  in  its  bent  attitude  and  unconscious  tremor  all  the 
humiliation  and  chagrin  she  experienced,  felt  the  sufferer  was 
fiur  game.  The  strange  woman  had  a  natural  antipathy  to  a 
shrinking,  sensitive  character — a  nervous  temperament :  nor 
was  a  pretty,  delicate,  and  youthful  face  a  passport  to  her 
affections.  It  was  seldom  she  met  with  all  these  obnoxious 
qualities  combined  in  one  individual:  still  more  seldom  she 
found  that  individual  at  her  mercy,  under  circumstances  in 
which -she  could  crush  her  well.  She  happened,  this  afler- 
noon,  to  be  specially  bilious  and  morose :  as  much  disposed 
to  gore  as  any  vicious  "  mother  of  the-  herd :"  lowering  her 
large  head,  she  made  a  new  charge. 

**  Your  cousin  Hortense  is  an  excellent  sister.  Miss  Helstone: 
such  ladies  as  come  to  try  their  life's  luck  here,  at  Hollow's 
cottage,  may,  by  a  very  little  clever  female  artifice,  cajole  the 
mistress  of  the  house,  and  have  the  game  all  in  their  own  hands. 
You  are  fond  of  your  cousin's  society,  I  dare  say,  Miss  ? " 
"Of  which  cousin's?" 
"  Oh,  of  the  lady's,  of  coursed 
*^  Hortense  is,  and  always  has  been,  most  kind  to  me."         < 


884  smBLET. 

«  Every  sister,  with  an  eligible  single  brother,  is  considerad 
most  kind  by  her  spinster  fiiends.*' 

"  Mrs.  Yorke,"  said  Caroline,  lifting  her  eyes  slowly,  their 
blue  orbs  at  the  same  time  clearing  from  trouble,  and  shining 
steady  and  full,  while  the  glow  of  shame  left  her  cheek,  and 
its  hue  turned  pale  and  settled:  ^'  Mrs  Yorke,  may  I  ask  what 
you  mean  ?  " 

"  To  give  you  a  lesson  on  the  cultivation  of  rectitade :  to 
disgust  you  with  craft  and  false  sentiment/* 

"  Do  I  need  this  lesson  ?" 

"  Most  young  ladies  of  the  present  day  need  it.  You  are 
quite  a  modem  young  lady — ^morbid,  delicate,  professing  to 
like  retirement;  which  implies,  I  suppose,  that  you  find  little 
worthy  of  your  sympathies  in  the  ordinary  world.  The  ordi- 
nary world — every-day,  honest  folks — ^are  better  than  yon 
think  them :  much  better  than  any  bookish,  romancing  chit  of 
a  girl  can  be,  who  hardly  ever  puts  her  nose  over  her  uncle, 
the  parson's,  garden-wall." 

"Consequently,  of  whom  you  know  nothing.  Excuse  me, 
— ^indeed,  it  does  not  matter  whether  you  excuse  me  or  not— 
you  have  attacked  me  without  provocation :  I  shall  defend 
myself  without  apology.  Of  my  relations  with  my  two 
cousins,  you  are  ignorant:  in  a  fit  of  ill-humour  you  have 
attempted  to  poison  them  by  gratuitous  insinuations,  which 
are  far  more  crafty  and  false  than  anything  with  which  yon 
can  justly  charge  me.  That  I  happen  to  be  pale,  and  some- 
times to  look  difiident,  is  no  business  of  yours.  That  I  am 
fond  of  books,  and  indisposed  for  common  gossip,  is  stall  less 
your  business.  That  I  am  a  '  romancing  chit  of  a  girl,'  is  a 
mere  conjecture  on  your  part:  I  never  romanced  to  you,  nor 
to  anybody  you  know.  That  I  am  the  parson's  niece  is  not  a 
crime,  though  you  may  be  narrow-minded  enough  to  think  it 
so.  You  dislike  me :  you  have  no  just  reason  for  dislikipg 
me ;  therefore  keep  the  expression  of  your  aversion  to  your- 
self. If  at  any  time,  in  future,  you  evince  it  annoyingly,  I 
sliall  answer  even  less  scrupulously  than  I  have  done  now." 

She  ceased,  and  sat  in  white  and  stUl  excitement  She 
had  spoken  in  the  clearest  of  tones,  neither  fast  nor  loud;  but 
her  silver  accents  thrilled  the  ear.  The  speed  of  the  coirent 
in  her  veins  was  just  then  as  swift  as  it  was  viewless. 

Mrs  Yorke  was  not  irritated  at  the  reproof,  worded  with  a 
severity  so  simple,  dictated  by  a  pride  so  quiet.  Tttroiitg 
ooolly  to  Miss  Moore',  she  said,  nodding  her  cap  approvingly-^ 


AN  llTENINa  OUT.  885 

''  She  has  spirit  in  her,  after  all.  Always  speak  as  honestly 
as  you  have  done  just  now,"  she  continued,  ^'  and  you  '11  do.'* 
*^  I  repel  a  recommendation  so  ofifbusive,"  was  the  answer, 
delivered  in  the  same  pure  key,  with  the  same  clear  look. 
^^  I  reject  counsel  poisoned  by  insinuation.  It  is  my  right  to 
speak  as  I  think  proper:  nothing  binds  me  to  converse  as  you 
dictate.  So  far  £rom  always  speaking  as  I  have  done  just 
nowy  I  shall  never  address  any  one  in  a  tone  so  stem,  or  in 
language  so  harsh,  unless  in  answer  to  unprovoked  insult." 

''Mother,  you  have  found  your  match,"  pronounced  little 
Jessie,  whom  the  scene  appeared  greatly  to  edify.  Eose  had 
heard  the  whole  with  an  xmmoved  face.     She  now  said, — 

''No:  Miss  Helstone  is  not  my  mother's  match — for  she 
allows  herself  to  be  vexed :  my  mother  would  wear  her  out  in 
a  few  weeks.  Shirley  Keeldar  manages  better.  Mother,  you 
have  never  hurt  Miss  Keeldar's  feelings  yet.  She  wears  armour 
under  her  silk  dress  that  you  cannot  penetrate." 

Mrs  Yorke  often  complained  that  her  children  were  muti- 
nous. It  was  strange,  that  with  all  her  strictness,  with  all  her 
"  strong-mindedness,"  she  could  gain  no  command  over  them : 
a  look  firom  their  fatibier  had  more  influence  with  them  than  a 
lecture  from  her. 

Miss  Moore — ^to  whom  the  position  of  witness  to  an  altera 
cation  in  which  she  took  no  part  was  highly^ispleasing,  as 
being  an  unimportant  secondary  post — ^now,  rsdlying  her 
dignity,  prepared  to  utter  a  discourse  which  was  to  prove  both 
parties  in  the  wrong,  and  to  make  it  clear  to  each  disputant 
that  she  had  reason  to  be  ashamed  of  herself,  and  ought  to 
flabmit  humbly  to  the  superior  sense  of  the  individual  then 
addressing  her.  Fortunately  for  her  audience,  she  had  not 
barangaed  above  ten  minutes,  when  Sarah's  entrance  with  the 
tea-tray  called  her  attention,  first,  to  the  fac$  of  that  damsel 
having  a  gilt  comb  in  her  hair,  and  a  red  necklace  round  her 
throat,  and  secondly,  and  subsequently  to  a  pointed  remon- 
strance, to  the  duty  of  making  tea.  After  the  meal,  Eose 
restored  her  to  good  humour  by  bringing  her  guitar  and  ask- 
ing for  a  song,  and  afterwards  engaging  her  in  an  intelligent 
and  sharp  cross-examination  about  guitar-playing  and  music 
in  general. 

Jessie,  meantime,  directed  her  assiduities  to  Caroline. 
Sitting  on  a  stool  at  her  feet,  she  talked  to  her,  first  about 
religion  and  then  about  politics.  Jessie  was  accustomed  at 
home  to  drink  in  a  great  deal  of  what  her  &ther  said  on  these 


836  .  8HIBUST% 

subjects,  and  afterwards  in  company  to  retail,  with  mote  wit 
and  fluency  than  consistency  or    discretion,  his  opimoni, 
antipathies,  and  preferences.     She  rated  Caroline  soundly  for 
being  a  member  of  the  Established  Church,  and  for  having  an 
uncle  a  clergyman.     She  informed  her  that  she  lived  on  the 
country,  and  ought  to  work  for  her  living  honestly,  instead  of 
passing  a  useless  life,  and  eating  the  bread  of  idleness  in  the 
shape  of  tithes.     Thence  Jessie  passed  to  a  review  of  the 
Ministry  at  that  time  in  office,  and  a  consideration  of  its 
deserts.     She  made  familiar  mention  of  the  names  of  Lord 
Castlereagh  and  Mr  Perceval.     Each  of  these  personages  she 
adorned  with  a  character  that  might  have  separately  suited 
Moloch  and  Belial.      She  denounced  the  war  as  wholesale 
murder,  and  Lord  Wellington  as  a  "  hired  butcher." 

Her  auditress  listened  with  exceeding  edification.  Jessie 
had  something  of  the  genius  of  htunbur  in  her  nature :  it  was 
inexpressibly  comic  to  hear  her  repeating  her  sire's  denuncia- 
tions in  her  nervous  northern  Doric ;  as  hearty  a  little  Jacobin 
as  ever  pent  a  free  mutinous  spirit  in  a  muslin  frock  and  sash. 
Not  malignant  by  nature,  her  language  was  not  so  bitter  as  it 
was  racy,  and  the  expressive  Httle  face  gave  a  piquancy  to 
every  phrase  which  held  a  beholder^s  interest  captive. 

Caroline  chid  her  when  she  abused  Lord  Wellington ;  hut 
she  listened  delighted  to  a  subsequent  tirade  against  die  Prince 
Regent.  Jessie  quickly  read  in  the  sparkle  of  her  hearer's  eye, 
and  the  laughter  hovering  round  her  lips,  that  at  last  she  had 
hit  on  a  topic  that  pleased.  Many  a  time  had  she  beard  the 
fat  ^  Adonis  of  fifly'  discussed  at  her  father's  breakfast-tahle, 
and  she  now  gave  Mr  Yorke's  comments  on  the  theme- 
genuine  as  uttered  by  his  Yorkshire  lips. 

But,  Jessie,  I  will  write  about  you  no  more.  This  is  an 
autumn  evening,  wet  and  wild.  There  is  only  one  cloud  is 
the  sky;  but  it  curtains  it  from  pole  to  pole.  The  wind 
cannot  rest:  it  hurries  sobbing  over  hills  of  sullen  outlinef 
colourless  with  twilight  and  mist.  Rain  has  beat  all  day  on 
that  church  tower:  it  rises  dark  from  the  stony  enclosure  oC 
its  graveyard:  the  nettles,  the  long  grass,  and  the  tombs  all 
drip  with  wet.  This  evening  reminds  me  too  forcibly  o| 
another  evening  some  years  ago :  a  howling,  rainy  automa 
evening  too— when  certain  who  had  that  day  performed  i 
pilgrimage  to  a  grave  new-made  in  a  heretic  cemetery,  sat  n 
a  wood-fire  on  the  heatth  of  a  foreign  dwelling.  They  w 
merry  and  social,  but  they  each  knew  that  a  gap,  never  to 


AN  EVEMINO  OUT.  837 

filled^  liAcl  been  made  in  their  circle.  They  knew  they  had 
lost  something  whose  absence  conld  never  be  quite  atoned  for 
BO  long  as  they  lived:  and  they  knew  that  heavy  falling  rain 
was  soaking' into  the  wet  earth  which  covered  their  lost  darling; 
and  that  the  sad,  sighing  gale  was  monrning  above  her  buried 
head.  The  fire  warmed  them ;  Life  and  Friendship  yet  blessed 
them;  but  Jessie  lay  cold,  coffined,  solitary — only  the  sod 
screening  her  from  the  storm.  « 

Mrs  Yorke  folded  up  her  knitting,  cut  short  the  music- 
lesson  and  the  lecture  on  politics,  and  concluded  her  visit  to 
the  cottage,  at  an  hour  early  enough  to  ensure  her  return  to 
Briarmains  before  the  blush  of  sunset  should  quite  have  faded 
in  heaven,  or  the  path  up  the  fields  have  become  thoroughly 
moist  with  evening  dew. 

The  lady  and  her  daughters  being  gone,  Caroline  felt  that 
she  also  ought  to  resume  her  scarf,  kiss  her  cousin's  cheek,  ^ 
and  trip  away  homeward.  If  she  lingered  much  later,  dusk 
would  draw  on,  and  Fanny  would  be  put  to  the  trouble  of 
coming  to  fetch  her :  it  was  both  baking  and  ironing  day  at 
the  Rectory,  she  remembered — ^Fanny  would  be  busy.  Still, 
she  could  not  quit  her  seat  at  the  little  parlour-window.  From 
no  point  of  view  could  the  West  look  so  lovely  as  from  that 
lattice  with  the  garland  of  jessamine  round  it,  whose  white 
stars  and  green  leaves  seemed  now  but  grey  pencil  outlines^ 
graceful  in  form,  but  colourless  in  tint — against  the  gold 
incarnadined  of  a  summer  evening — against  the  fire-tinged 
blue  of  an  August  sky,  at  eight  o'clock  p.m. 

Caroline  looked  at  the  wicket-gate,  beside  which  hoUy-oaks 
spired  up  tall ;  she  looked  at  the  close  hedge  of  privet  and 
latirel  fencing  in  the  garden ;  her  eyes  longed  to  see  some- 
thing more  than  the  shrubs,  before  they  turned  from  that 
limited  prospect :  they  longed  to  see  a  human  figure,  of  a 
certain  mould  and  height,  pass  the  hedge  and  enter  the  gate. 
A  hmnan  figure  she  at  last  saw — ^nay,  two:  Frederick  Murga- 
troyd  went  by,  carrying  a  pail  of  water ;  Joe  Scott  followed, 
dangling  on  his  forefinger  the  keys  of  the  mill.  They  were 
going  to  lock  up  mill  and  stables  for  the  night,  and  then 
betake  themselves  home. 
"  So  must  I,"  thought  Caroline,  as  she  half  rose  and  sighed. 
"  This  is  all  folly — heart-breaking  folly,"  she  added.  "  In 
the  first  place,  though  I  8];iould  stay  till  dark,  there  will  be  no 
anival ;  because  I  feel  i^  my  heart,  Fate  has  written  it  down 

22 


888  SHIBLBT. 

in  to-day's  page  of  her  eternal  book,  that  I  am  not  to  hive 
the  pleasure  I  long  for.  In  the  second  place,  if  he  stepped  in 
this  moment,  my  presence  here  would  be  a  chagrin  to  him, 
and  the  consciousness  that  it  must  be  so  would  turn  half  xnj 
blood  to  ice.  His  hand  would,  perhaps,  be  loose  and  dull,  if 
I  put  mine  into  it :  his  eye  woiid  be  clouded  if  I  sought  it3 
beam.  I  should  look  up  for  that  kindling,  something  I  have 
seen  in  past  days,  when  my  face,  or  my  language,  or  my  dis- 
position had  at  some  happy  moment  pleased  him — I  should 
discover  only  darkness.     I  had  better  go  home.*' 

She  took  her  boimet  firom  the  table  where  it  lay,  and  was 
just  i^tening  the  ribbon,  when  Hortense,  directing  her  atten- 
tion to  a  splendid  bouquet  of  flowers  in  a  glass  on  the  same 
table,  mentioned  that  Miss  Keeldar  had  sent  them  that  morning 
from  Fieldhead  ;  and  went  on  to  conunent  on  the  guests  that 
lady  was  at  present  entertaining,  on  the  bustling  life  she  had 
lately  been  leading ;  adding  divers  conjectures  that  she  did 
not  very  well  like  it,  and  much  wonderment  that  a  person 
who  was  so  fond  of  her  own  way^as  the  heiress,  did  not  find 
some  means  of  sooner  getting  rid  of  this  cortege  of  relatives. 

/'  But  they  say  she  actually  will  not  let  Mr  Sympson  and 
his  family  go,"  she  added :  ''  they  wanted  much  to  return  to 
the  south  last  week,  to  be  ready  for  the  reception  of  the  only 
son,  who  is  expected  home  from  a  tour.  She  insists  that  her 
cousin  Henry  shall  come  and  join  his  friends  here  in  Yorkshire. 
I  daresay  she  partly  does  it  to  oblige  Robert  and  myself." 

"  How  to  oblige  Robert  and  you  ?  "  inquired  Caroline. 

"  Why,  my  (Sdldy  you  are  duU.  Don't  you  know — ^yon 
must  often  have  heard ^ 

''  Please,  ma'am,"  said  Sarah,  opening  the  door,  '^  the  pre- 
serves that  you  told  me  to  boil  in  treacle — the  congflters,  u 
you  call  them — ^is  all  burnt  to  the  pan." 

''  Les  confitures  I  EUes  sont  brQl^  ?  Ah,  quelle  n^li- 
gence  coupablel     Goquine  de  cuisini^re — fille  insupportable!" 

And  Mademoiselle,  hastily  taking  from  a  drawer  a  large 
linen  apron,  and  tying  it  over  her  black  apron,  rushed  ''  ^per- 
due" into  the  kitdien,  whence — to  speak  truth— exhaled  an 
odour  of  calcined  sweets  rather  strong  than  savoury. 

The  mistress  and  maid  had  been  in  fall  feud  the  whole  da j) 
on  ihe  subject  of  preserving  certain  black  cherries,  hard  sb 
marbles,  sour  as  sloes.  Sarah  held  that  sugar  was  the  onlj 
Qfthodox  condiment  to  be  used  in  that  process ;  Mademoiselle 
nmfntained — md  proved  it  by  ihe  practice  and  ezperienoe  of 


AK  EVENING  OUT.  389 

her  mother,  grandmother,  and  great-grandmother — that 
treacle,  *'  m61asse,"  was  infinitely  preferable.  She  had  com- 
mitted an  imprudence  in  leaving  Sarah  in  charge  of  the  pre- 
serving-pan, for  her  want  of  sympathy  in  the  nature  of  its 
contents  had  induced  a  degree  of  carelessness  in  watching  their 
confection,  whereof  the  result  was — dark  and  cindery  ruin. 
Hubbub  followed:  high  upbraiding,  and  sobs  rather  loud  than 
deep  or  real. 

Caroline,  once  more  turning  to  the  little  mirror,  was  shading 
her  ringlets  from  her  cheek  to  smooth  them  under  her  cottage 
boni^et,  certain  that  it  would  not  only  be  useless  but  unpleasant 
to  stay  longer ;  when,  on  the  sudden  opening  of  the  back- 
door, there  fell  an  abrupt  calm  in  the  kitchen :  the  tongues 
were  checked,  pulled  up  as  with  bit  and  bridle.  "  Wias  it — 
was  it — ^Robert  ?"  He  often — almost  always-^-entered  by  the 
kitchen-way  on  his  return  from  market.  No :  it  was  only 
Joe  Scott,  who,  having  hemmed  significantly  thrice— every 
hem  being  meant  as  a  lofly  rebuke  to  the  squabbling  woman- 
kind— said, — 
"  Now,  I  thowt  I  heerd  a  crack  ?" 
None  answered. 

"  And,"  he  continued,  pragmatically, "  as  t'  maister's  corned, 
and  as  he  '11  enter  through  this  hoyle,  I  considered  it  desirable 
to  step  in  and  let  ye  know.  A  household  o'  women  is  niwer 
fit  to  be  comed  on  wi  'out  warning.  Here  he  is :  walk  forrard, 
sir.  They  war  playing  up  queerly,  but  I  think  I've  quieted  'em." 
Another  person — ^it  was  now  audible — entered.  Joe  Scott 
proceeded  with  his  rebukes. 

"  What  d'  ye  mean  by  being  all  i'  darkness  ?  Sarah,  thou 
quean,  canst  t'  not  light  a  candle  ?  It  war  sundown  an  hour 
syne.  He  'U  brak'  his  shins  agean  some  o'  yer  pots,  and  tables, 
and  stuff.  Tak'  tent  o'  this  baking-bowl,  sir ;  they  've  set  it 
i*  yer  way,  fair  as  if  they  did  it  i'  malice." 

To  Joe's  observations  succeeded  a  confused  sort  of  pause, 
which  Caroline,  though  she  was  listening  with  both  her  ears, 
could  not  imderstand.  It  was  very  brief :  a  cry  broke  it — ^a 
sound  of  surprise,  followed  by  the  sound  of  a  kiss :  ejaculations, 
but  half  articulate,  succeeded. 

"Mon.Dieul  mon  Dieul  Est-ce  que  je  m'y  attendais?" 
were  the  words  chiefly  to  be  distinguished. 

"Et  tu  te  portes  toujours  bien,  bonne  sceur?"  inquired 
another  voice — ^Robert's,  certainly. 
Caroline  was  puzzled.     Obeying  an  impulse,  the  vrisdom  of 


840  SHIBLKT. 

which  she  had  not  time  to  question,  she  escaped  fi!om  the  fitUe 
parlour,  by  way  of  leaving  the  coast  clear,  and  running  up- 
stairs took  up  a  position  at  the  head  of  the  banisters,  whence 
she  could  make  further  observations  ere  presenting  herself. 
It  was  considerably  past  sunset  now:  dusk  filled  the  passage^ 
yet  not  such  deep  dusk  but  that  she  could  presently  see 
Robert  and  Hortense  traverse  it. 

'  '<  Caroline  !  Caroline  ! "  called  Hortense,  a  moment  after* 
wards,  "  venez  voir  mon  frere !" 

"  Strange  1 "  commented  Miss  Helstone,  "  passing  strange ! 
What  does  this  unwonted  excitement  about  such  an  everj^y 
occurrence  as  a  return  from  market  portend  ?  She  has  not 
lost  her  senses,  has  she  ?  Surely  the  burnt  treacle  has  not 
crazed  her?" 

She  descended  in  a  subdued  flutter :  yet  more  was  she 
fluttered  when  Hortense  seized  her  hand  at  the  parlour-door, 
and  leading  her  to  Robert,  who  stood  in  bodily  presence,  tall 
and  dark  against  the  one  window,  presented  her  with  a  miztitre 
of  agitation  and  formality,  as  though  they  had  been  utter 
strangers,  and  this  was  their  first  mutual  introduction. 

Increasing  puzzle  !  He  bowed  rather  awkwardly,  and 
turning  from  her  with  a  stranger's  embarrassment,  he  met  the 
doubtful  light  from  a  window :  it  fell  on  his  face,  and  the 
enigma  of  the  dream  (a  dream  it  seemed)  was  at  its  height : 
she  saw  a  visage  like  and  unlike, — Robert,  and  no  Robert 

"What  is  the  matter?"  said  Caroline.  "Is  my  sight 
wrong  ?     Is  it  my  cousin  ?  " 

"  Certainly,  it  is  your  cousin,"  asserted  Hortense. 

Then  who  was  this  now  coming  through  the  passage, — now 
entering  the  room?  Caroline,  looking  round,  met  a  new 
Robert, — the  real  Robert,  as  she  felt  at  once. 

"Well,"  said  he,  smiling  at  her  questioning,  astonished 
face,  "  which  is  which  ?" 

"  Ah  !  this  is  yow.'"  was  the  answer. 

He  laughed.  "  I  believe  it  is  me:  and  do  you  know  whoAe 
is  ?     You  never  saw  him  before ;  but  you  have  heard  of  him." 

She  had  gathered  her  senses  now. 

"  It  can  be  only  one  person :  your  brother,  since  it  is  bo 
like  you :  my  other  cousin,  Louis." 

"  Clever  little  (Edipus ! — ^you  would  have  baffled  the 
Sphynx  !  —  but  now,  see  us  together.  Change  places 
Change  again,  to  confUse  her,  Louis. — Which  is  the  old  lore 
now,  Lina  ?  " 


AN  EVEKINO  OUT.  841 

•'As  if  it  were  possible  to  make  a  mistake  when  you 
speak  I  You  should  have  told  Hortense  to  ask.  But  you  are 
not  so  much  alike:  it  is  only  your  height,  your  figure,  and 
complexion  that  are  so  similar." 

"And  I  am  Eobert,  am  I  not?"  asked  the  new  comer, 
making  a  first  effort  to  overcome  what  seemed  his  natural 
shyness. 

Caroline  shook  her  head  gently.  A  soft,  expressive  ray 
from  her  eye  beamed  on  the  real  Eobert :  it  said  much. 

She  was  not  permitted  to  quit  her  cousins  soon :  Eobert 

himself  was  peremptory  in  obliging   her  to  remain.     Glad, 

simple,  and  affable  in  her  demeanour  (glad  for  this  night,  at 

least),  in  light,  bright  spirits  for  the  time,  she  was  too  pleasant 

an  addition  to  the  cottage  circle  to  be  willingly  parted  with 

by  any  of  them.    Louis  seemed  naturally  rather  a  grave,  still, 

retiring  man,  but  the  Caroline  of  this  evening,  which  was  not 

(as  you  know,  reader)  the  Caroline  of  every  day,  thawed  his 

reserve,  and  cheered  his  gravity  soou.     He  sat  near  her,  ?,nd 

talked  to  her.     She  already  knew  his  vocation  was  that  of 

tuition;   she  learned  now  he  had  for  some  years  been  the 

tutor  of  Mr  Sympson's  son ;  that  he  had  been  travelling  with 

him,  and  had  accompanied  him  to  the  north.     She  inquired  if 

he  liked  his  post,  but  got  a  look  in  reply  which  did  not  invite 

or  license  further  question.     The  look  woke  Caroline's  ready 

sympathy :  she  thought  it  a  very  sad  expression  to  pass  oyer 

80  sensible  a  face  as  Louis's :  for  he  had  a.  sensible  face, — 

though  not  handsome,  she  considered,  when  seen  near  Eobert's. 

She  tamed  to  make  the  comparison.     Eobert  was  leaning 

against  the  wall,  a  little  behind  her,  turning  over  the  leaves 

of  a  book  of  engravings,  and  probably  listening,  at  the  same 

time,  to  the  dialogue  between  her  and  Louis. 

"How  could  I  think  them  alike?"  she  asked  herself :  "I 
see  now  it  is  Hortense,  Louis  resembles,  not  Eobert.'* 

And  this  was  in  part  true :  he  had  the  shortej*  nose  and 
longer  upper-lip  of  his  sister,  rather  than  the  fine  traits  of  his 
br^^er:  he  had  her  mould  of  mouth  and  chin — all  less  decisive, 
accurate,  and  clear  than  those  of  the  young  mill-ovraer.  -  His 
air,  though  deliberate  and  reflective,  could  scarcely  be  called 
prompt  and  acute.  You  felt,  in  sitting  near  and  looking  up 
at  him,  that  a  slower  and  probably  a  more  benignant  nature 
than  that  of  the  elder  Moore  shed  calm  on  your  impressions. 

Robert — ^perhaps  aware  that  Caroline's  glance  had  wandered 
towards  and  dwelt  upon  him,  though  he  had  neither  met  nor 


342  SHIBLET. 

answered  it — put  down  the  book  of  engravings,  and  approach* 
ing,  took  a  seat  at  her  side.  She  resumed  her  conversation 
with  Louis,^  but,  while  she  talked  to  him,  her  thoughts  were 
elsewhere :  her  heart  beat  on  the  side  from  which  her  fece 
was  half-averted.  She  acknowledged  a  steady,  manlj,  kindly 
air  in  Louis ;  but  she  bent  before  the  secret  power  of  Bobert. 
To  be  so  near  him — though  he  was  silent — though  he  did  not 
touch  so  much  as  her  scarf-fringe,  or  the  white  hem  of  her 
dress — affected  her  like  a  spell.  Had  she  been  obliged  to 
speak  to  him  only,  it  would  have  quelled — ^but,  at  liberty  to 
address  another,  it  excited  her.  Her  discourse  flowed  freely; 
it  was  gay,  playful,  eloquent.  The  indulgent  look  and  placid 
manner  of  her  auditor  encouraged  her  to  ease ;  the  sober 
pleasure  expressed  by  his  smile  £'ew  out  all  that  was  brilliant 
in  her  nature.  She  felt  that  this  evening  she  appeared  to 
advantage,  and,  as  Kobert  was  a  spectator,  the  conscioosness 
contented  her :  had  he  been  called  away,  collapse  would  at 
once  have  succeeded  stimulus. 

But  her  enjoyment  was  not  long  to  shine  ftdl-orbed:  a  clond 
soon  crossed  it. 

Hortense,  who  for  some  time  liad  been  on  the  move  ordering 
supper,  and  was  now  clearing  the  little  table  of  some  books,  &c., 
to  make  room  for  the  tray,  called  Robert's  attention  to  the  glass 
of  flowers,  the  carmine,  and  snow,  and  gold  of  whose  petadfl 
looked  radiant  indeed  by  candlelight. 

"  They  came  from  Fieldhead,"  she  said,  "  intended  as  a 
gift  to  you,* no  doubt:  we  know  who  is  the  &vourite  there — 
not  I,  I  *m  sure." 

It  was  a  wdnder  to  hear  Hortense  jest;  a  sign  that  her 
spirits  were  at  high-water  mark  indeed. 

"  We  are  to  imderstarid,  then,  that  Eobert  is  the  favourite  ?" 
observed  Louis.  •  « 

"  Mon  cher,"  replied  Hortense,  "  Robert— c'est  tout  ce 
qu'il  y  a  de  plus  pr^ieux  au  monde:  k  cdt^  de  lui,  le  reste 
du  genre  humain  n'est  que  du  rebut.  N'ai-je  pas  raison,  mon 
enfant?"  she  added,  appealing  to  Caroline. 

Caroline  was  obliged  to  reply,  "Yes" — and  her  beacon 
was  quenched:  her  star  withdrew  as  she  spoke. 

"  Et  toi,  Robert  ?  "  inquired  Louis. 

**  When  you  shall  have  an  opportunity,  ask  herself,"  was  the 
quiet  answer.  Whether  he  reddened  or  paled  Caroline  did  nol 
examine :  she  discovered  it  was  late,  and  she  must  go  Lome. 
Home  she  would  go:  not  even  Robert  could  detaia  her  now. 


YAIXBT  OF  THE  SEADOW   OF  DEATH.         348 

CHAPTER  XXIV 

THE  VALLEY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH. 

The  fatare  sometimes  seems  to  sob  a  low  warning  of  th6 
erents  it  is  bringing  ns,  like  some  gathering  though  yet 
remote  stoim,  which,  in  tones  of  the  wind,  in  flushings  of  the 
finnam^t,  in  clouds  strangely  torn,  announces  a  blast  strong 
to  strew  the  sea  with  wrecks ;  or  commissioned  to  bring  in 
fog  the  yellow  taint  of  pestilence,  covering  white  Western 
isles  with  the  poisoned  exhalations  of  the  East,  dimming  the 
lattices  of  English  homes  with  the  breath  of  Indian  plague. 
At  other  times  this  Future  bursts  suddenly,  as  if  a  rock  had 
rent,  and  in  it  a  grave  had  opened,  whence  issues  the  body 
of  one  that  slept.  Ere  you  are  aware  you  stand  face  to  face 
with  a  shrouded  and  untiiought-of  Calamity — a  new  Lazarus. 
Caroline  Helstone  went  home  from  Hollow's  cottage  in  good 
health,  as  she  imagined.  On  waking  the  next  morning  she 
felt  oppressed  with  unwonted  languor :  at  breakfast,  at  each 
meal  of  the  following  day,  she  missed  all  sense  of  appetite: 
palatable  food  was  as  ashes  and  sawdust  to  her. 

"Am  I  ill?"  she  asked,,  and  looked  at  herself  in  the  glass. 
Her  eyea  were  bright,  their  pupils  dilated,  her  cheeks  seemed 
rosier  and  faller  than  usual.  "  I  look  well ;  why  can  I  nqt  eat?" 
She  Mt  a  pulse  beat  fast  in  her  temples:  she  felt,  too,  her 
brain  in  strange  activity :  her  spirits  were  raised ;  hundreds 
of  bu^  and  broken,  but- brilliant  thoughts  engaged  her  mind: 
a  glow  rested  on  them,  such  as  tinged  her  complexion. 

Now  followed  a  hot,  parched,  thirsty,  restless  night.  To- 
wards morning  one  terrible  dream  seized  her  like  a  tiger :  when 
she  woke,  she  felt  and  knew  she  was  ilL 

How  she  had  caught  the  fever  (fever  it  was),  she  could  not 
tdl  Probably  in  her  late  walk  home,  some  sweet,  poisoned 
breeze,  redolent  of  honey-dew  and  miasma,  had  passed  into 
her  lungs  and  veins,  and  finding  there  already  a*fever  of 
mental  excitement,  and  a  languor  of  long  conflict  and  habitual 
Badness,  had  fanned  the  spark  of  flame,  and  left  a  well-lit  fire 
behind  it. 

It  seemed,  however,  but  *&  gentle  fire:  after  two  hot  days 
and  worried  nights,  there  was  no  violence  in  the  symptoms, 
and  neither  her  tmcle,  nor  Fanny,  nor  the  doctor,  nor  Miss 
Keeldar,  when  she  called,  had  any  fear  for  her :  a  few  days 
wonid  restore  her,  every  one  believed. 


344  SHIRLET. 

The  few  days  passed,  and — though  it  was  stiU  thought  it 
could  not  long  delay — ^the  revival  had  not  begun.  Mrs  Pryor, 
who  had  visited  her  daily — ^being  present  in  her  chamber  ofne 
morning  when  she  had  been  ill  a  fortnight — ^watched  her  very 
narrowly  for  some  minutes  :  she  took  her  hand,  and  placed 
her  finger  on  her  wrist;  then,  quietly  leaving  the  chamber, 
she  went  to  Mr  Helstone^s  study.  With  him  she  remained 
closeted  a  long  time — ^half  the  morning.  On  returning  to  her 
sick  young  friend,  she  laid  aside  shawl  and  bonnet:  she  stood 
a  while  at  the  bedside,  one  hand  placed  in  the  other,  gently 
rocking  herself  to  and  £:o,  in  an  attitude  and  with  a  movement 
habitual  to  her.     At  last,  she  said — 

"  I  have  sent  Fanny  to  Fieldhead  to  fetch  a  few  things  for 
me,  such  as  I  shall  want  during  a  short  stay  here  :  it  is  my 
wish  to  remain  with  you  till  you  are  better.  Your  uncfc 
kindly  permits  my  attendance:  will  it  to  yourself  be  accept- 
able, Caroline  ?  " 

''  I  am  sorry  you  should  take  such  needless  trouble.  I  do 
not  feel  very  ill,  but  I  cannot  refuse  resolutely:  it  will  be  such 
comfort  to  know  you  are  in  the  house,  to  see  you  sometunes 
in  the  room ;  but  don't  confine  yourself  on  my  account,  dear 
Mrs  Pryor.     Fanny  nurses  me  very  well." 

Mrs  Pryor — ^bending  over  the  pale  littfe  sufferer — ^was  now 
smoothing  the  hair  under  her  cap,  and  gently  raising  her 
pillow.  As  she  performed  these  dfiices,  Caroline,  snuling, 
Ufled  her  face  to  kiss  her. 

"  Are  y6u  fi:ee  from  pain?  Are  you  tolerably  at  ease?" 
was  inquired  in  a  low,  earnest  voice,  as  the  self-elected  Taa» 
yielded  to  the  cslj^ss,    ' 

*'  I  think  I  am  almost  happy." 

"  You  wish  to  drink  ?    Your  lips  are  parched." 

She  held  a  glass  filled  with  some  cooling  beverage  to  ha 
mouth. 

"  Have  you  eaten  anything  to  day,  Caroline  ?  " 

"  I  cannot  eat." 

"  But  soon  your  appetite  will  return:  it  must  return:  that 
is,  I  pray  God  it  may  I " 

In  laymg  her  again  on  the  couch,  she  encircl^  her  in  her 
arms ;  and  while  so  domg,  by  u  movement  whioh  seemed 
scarcely  voluntary,  she  drew  her  to  her  heart,  and  held  her 
close  gathered  an  instant. 

"  I  shall  hardly  wish  to  get  well,  that  I  may  keep  yoQ 
always/'  said  Caroline. 


TALUT  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.  845 

Mn  Pryor  did  not  smile  at  this  speech:  over  her  features 
an  a  tremor,  which  for  some  minutes  she  was  absorbed  in 
repressing. 

"  You  are  more  used  to  Fanny  than  to  me,"  she  remarked, 
2relong«  <'  I  should  think  my  attendance  must  seem  strange, 
officious  ?  " 

^'  No:  quite  natural,  and  very  soothing.  You  must  have 
been  accustomed  to  wait  on  sick  people,  ma*am.  You  move 
about  the  room  so  softly,  and  you  speak  so  quietly,  and  touch 
me  so  gently." 

*<  I  am  dexterous  in  nothing,  my  dear.  You  will  often  find 
me  awkward,  but  never  negligent." 

N^ligent,  indeed,  she  was  not.     From  that  hour,  Fanny 

and  Eliza  became  ciphers  in  the  sick-room  :  Mrs  Pryor  made 

it  her  domain:  she  performed  all  its  duties;  she  lived  in  it 

day  and  night.     The  patient  remonstrated — faintly,  however, 

from  the  first,  and  not  at  all  erelong :   loneliness  and  gloom 

were  now  banished  from  her  bedside ;  protection  and  solace 

sat  there  instead.     She  and  her  nurse  coalesced  in  wondrous 

union.      Caroline  was  usually  pained  to  require  or  receive 

much  attendance  :  Mrs  Pryor,  under  ordinary  circumstances, 

bad  neither  the  habit  nor  the  art  of  performing  little  offices  of 

sendee;  but  all  now  passed  with  such  ease — so  naturally,  that 

the  patient  was  as  willing  to  be  cherished  as  the  nxirse  was 

bent  on  cherishing:  no  sign  of  weariness  in  the  latter  ever 

reminded  the  former  that  she  ought  to  be  anxious.     There 

vas,  in  fact,  no  veiy  hard  duty  to  perform ;  but  a  hireling 

might  have  found  it  hard. 

With  all  this  care,  it  seemed  strange  the  sick  girl  did  not 
get  well;  yet  such  was  the  case:  she  washed  like  any  snow- 
wreath  in  thaw;  she  faded  like  any  flower  in  drought.  Miss 
Keeldar,  on  whose  thoughts  danger  or  death  seldom  intruded, 
liad  at  first  entertained  no  fears  at  all  for  her  friend;  but 
•eeiug  her  change  and  sink  from  time  to  time  when  she  paid 
her  visits,  alarm  clutched  her  heart.  She  went  to  Mr  Helstpne 
sod  expressed  herself  with  so  much  energy,  that  that  gentle- 
man was  at  last  obliged,  however  unwillingly,  to  admit  the 
idea  that  his  niece  was  ill  of  something  more  than  a  migraine; 
And  when  Mrs  Pryor  came  and  quietly  demanded  a  physician, 
he  said  she  might  send  for  two  if  she  liked.  One  came,  but 
that  one  was  an  oracle:  he  delivered  a  dark  saying  of  which 
the  future  was  to  solve  the  mystery,  wrote  some  prescriptions, 
gtve  some  directions — ^the  whole  with  an  air  of  crushing 


846  smBLETi 

authority-— pocketed  his  fee,  and  went.    Probably,  he  knew 
well  enough  he  could  do  no  good;  but  didn't  like  to  say  sa 

Still,  no  rumour  of  serious  illness  got  wind  in  the  neigb- 
bourhood.  At  Hollow's-cottage  it  was  thought  that  Caroline 
had  only  a  severe  cold,  she  having  written  a  note  to  Hoitense 
to  that  effect;  and  Mademoiselle  contented  herself  with  sending 
two  pots  of  currant  jam,  a  receipt  for  a  tisane,  and  a  note  of 
advice. 

Mrs  Yorke  being  told  that  a  physician  had  been  sunmKHied, 
sneered  at  the  hypochondriac  fancies  of  the  rich  and  idle, 
who,  she  said,  have  nothing  but  themselves  to  think  ahoot, 
must  needs  send  for  a  doctor  if  only  so  much  as  their  littk 
finger  ached. 

The  "  rich  and  idle,"  represented  in  the  person  of  Caroline, 
were  meantime  falling  fEist  into  a  condition  of  prostration, 
whose  quickly  consimunated  debility  puzzled  all  who  wit- 
nessed it,  except  one ;  for  that  one  alone  reflected  how  liabk 
is  the  imdermined  structure  to  sink  in  sudden  rain. 

Sick  people  o^^en  have  &ncies  inscrutable  to  ordinaiy 
attendants,  and  Caroline  had  one  which  even  her  tender  nurse 
could  not  at  first  explain.  On  a  certain  day  in  the  week,  at 
a  certain  hour,  she  would — whether  worse  or  better— entreat 
to  be  taken  up  and  dressed,  and  suffered  to  sit  in  her  chair 
near  the  window.  This  station  she  would  retain  till  noon 
was  past:  whatever  degree  of  exhaustion  or  debility  her  wan 
aspect  betrayed,  she  still  softly  put  off  all  persuasion  to  seek 
repose  until  the  church-clock  had  duly  tolled  mid-day:  the 
twelve  strokes  sounded,  she  grew  docile,  and  would  meeklj 
lie  down.  Eetumed  to  the  couch,  she  usually  buried  her 
face  deep  in  the  pillow,  and  drew  the  coverlets  dose  round 
her,  as  if  to  shut  out  the  world  and  sun,  of  which  she  waa 
tired:  more  than  once,  as  she  thus  lay,  a  slight  convulsion 
shook  the  sick-bed,  and  a  faint  sob  broke  the  silence  round  it 
These  things  were  not  unnoted  by  Mrs  Pryor. 

One  Tuesday  morning,  as  usual,  she  had  asked  leave  to 
rise,  and  now  she  sat  wrapped  in  her  white  dressing-gown, 
leaning  forward  in  the  easy-chair,  gazing  steadily  and  patiently 
from  &e  lattice.  Mrs  Pryor  was  seated  a  little  behind,  knit- 
ting as  it  seemed,  but,  in  truth;  watching  her.  A  change 
crossed  her  pale  mournful  brow,  animating  its  languor ;  a 
light  shot  into  her  faded  eyes,  reviving  their  lustre;  she  half 
rose  and  looked  earnestly  out.  Mrs  Pryor,  drawing  softly 
near,  glanced  over  her  shoulder.     Flt>m    this  vnndow  was 


VALLEY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         847 

riflible  the  cburchyard,  beyond  it  the  road,  and  there,  riding 
iharply  by,  appeared  a  horseman.  The  figure  was  not  yet 
oo  remote  for  recognition:  Mrs  Pryor  had  long  sight;  she 
knew  Mr  Moore.  Just  as  an  intercepting  rising  ground  con- 
cealed him  from  view,  the  clock  struck  twelve. 
"  May  I  lie  down  again?"  asked  Caroline. 
Her  ntirse  assisted  her  to  bed:  having  laid  her  down  and 
drawn  the  ctirtain,  she  stood  listening  near.  The  little  couch 
trembled,  the  suppressed  sob  stirred  the  air.  A  contraction 
as  of  anguish  altered  Mrs  Pryor's  features ;  she  wrung  her 
bands ;  half  a  groan  escaped  her  lips.  She  now  remembered 
that  Tuesday  was  Whinbury  market-day:  Mr  Moore  must 
always  pass  the  Rectory  on  his  way  thither,  just  ere  noon  of 
that  day. 

Caroline  wore  continually  round  her  neck  a  slender  braid 

of  silk,  attached  to  which  was  some  trinket.     Mrs  Pryor  had 

seen  the  bit  of  gold  glisten;  but  had  not  yet  obtained  a  fair 

view  of  it.     B[er  patient  never  parted  with  it:  when  dressed 

it  was  hidden  in  her  bosom ;  as  she  lay  in  bed  she  always 

held  it  in  her  hand.     That  Tuesday  afternoon  the  transient 

doze — more  like  lethargy  than   sleep — which   sometimes 

abridged  the  long  days,  had  stolen  over  her:  the  weather  was 

hot:  while  turning  in  febrile  restlessness,  she  had  pushed  the 

csoverlets  a  little  aside ;   Mrs  Pryor  bent  to  replace  them; 

the  small,  wasted  hand  Ijring  nerveless  on  the   sick  girPs 

breast,  clasped  as  usual  her  jealously-guarded  treasure :  Uiose 

fingers  whose  attenuation  it  gave  pain  to  see,  were  now  relaxed 

in  sleep:  Mrs  Pryor  gently  disengaged  the  braid,  drawing  out 

a  tmy  locket — a  slight  thing  it  was,  such  as  it  suited  her 

small  purse  to  purchase:  under  its  crystal  face  appeared  a 

corl  of  black  hair — ^too  short  and  crisp  to  have  been  severed 

from  a  female  head. 

Some  agitated  movement  occasioned  a  twitch  of  the  silken 
chain:  the  sleeper  started  and  woke.  Her  thoughts  were 
usually  now  somewhat  scattered  on  waking ;  her  look  gene- 
rally wandering.  Half-rising,  as  if  in  terror,  she  exclaimed: 
'* Don't  take  it  from  me,  Robert!  Don't!  It  is  my  l^st 
comfort — let  me  keep  it.  I  never  tell  any  one  whose  hair  it 
i§— I  never  show  it." 

Mrs  Pryor  had  already  disappeared  behind  the  curtain: 
redining  £ir  back  in  a  deep  arm-chair  by  the  bedside,  she 
was  withdrawn  from  view.  Caroline  looked  abroad  into  the 
cbsmber:  she  thought  it  empty.    As  her  stray  ideas  returned 


888  SHDUCT. 

in  to-daj*8  page  of  her  eternal  book,  that  I  am  not  to  havft 
the  pleasure  I  long  for.  In  the  second  place,  if  he  stepped  in 
this  moment,  my  presence  here  would  be  a  chagrin  to  him, 
and  the  consciousness  that  it  must  be  so  would  turn  half  my 
blood  to  ice.  His  hand  would,  perhaps,  be  loose  and  chill,  if 
I  put  mine  into  it :  his  eye  woiSd  be  clouded  if  I  sought  its 
beam.  I  should  look  up  for  that  kindling,  something  I  have 
seen  in  past  days,  when  my  face,  or  my  language,  or  my  dis- 
position had  at  some  happy  moment  pleased  him — I  should 
discover  only  darkness.     I  had  better  go  home.'' 

She  took  her  bonnet  from  the  table  where  it  lay,  and  vas 
just  ^tening  the  ribbon,  when  Hortense,  directing  her  atten- 
tion to  a  splendid  bouquet  of  flowers  in  a  glass  on  the  same 
table,  mentioned  that  Miss  Keeldar  had  sent  them  that  morning 
from  Fieldhead  ;  and  went  on  to  comment  on  the  guests  that 
lady  was  at  present  entertaining,  on  the  bustling  life  she  had 
lately  been  leading ;  adding  divers  conjectures  that  she  did 
not  very  well  like  it,  and  much  wonderment  that  a  person 
who  was  so  fond  of  her  own  wayias  the  heiress,  did  not  find 
some  means  of  sooner  getting  rid  of  this  cortege  of  relatives. 

/'  But  they  say  she  actually  will  not  let  Mr  Sympson  and 
his  family  go,"  she  added :  "  they  wanted  much  to  return  to 
the  south  last  week,  to  be  ready  for  the  reception  of  the  onlj 
son,  who  is  expected  home  from  a  tour.  She  insists  that  her 
cousin  Henry  shall  come  and  join  his  friends  here  in  Yorkshire. 
I  daresay  she  partly  does  it  to  oblige  Robert  and  myself.'' 

"  How  to  oblige  Robert  and.  you  ?"  inquired  Caroline. 

"Why,  my  child,  you  are  dull.  Don't  you  know — ^you 
must  often  have  heard ^" 

"  Please,  ma'am,"  said  Sarah,  opening  the  door,  "  the  pre- 
serves that  you  told  me  to  boil  in  treacle — the  congfiters,  as 
you  call  them — ^is  all  burnt  to  the  pan." 

"  Les  confitures  I  EUes  sont  brdl^es  ?  Ah,  quelle  n^li- 
gence  coupablel     Goquine  de  cuisini^re — flUe  insupportable  r* 

And  Mademoiselle,  hastily  taking  from  a  drawer  a  large 
linen  apron,  and  tying  it  over  her  black  apron,  rushed  *'  ^per- 
due" into  the  kitchen,  whence — ^to  speak  truth-— exhaled  an 
odour  of  calcined  sweets  rather  stsong  than  savoury. 

The  mistress  and  maid  had  been  in  full  feud  the  whole  daj) 
on  the  subject  of  preserving  certain  black  cherries^  hard  as 
marbles,  sour  as  sloes.  Sarah  held  that  sugar  was  the  only 
orthodox  condiment  to  be  used  in  that  process  ;  MademoiseUe 

aintained — and  proved  it  by  the  practice  and  experience  of 


AN  EVENING  OUT.  889 

her  mother,  grandmother,  and  great-grandmother— that 
treacle,  "  milasse,"  was  infinitely  preferable.  She  had  com- 
mitted an  imprudence  in  leaving  Sarah  in  charge  of  the  pre- 
serving-pan, for  her  want  of  sympathy  in  the  nature  of  its 
contents  had  induced  a  degree  of  carelessness  in  watching  their 
confection,  whereof  the  result  was — dark  and  cindery  ruin. 
Hubbub  followed:  high  upbraiding,  and  sobs  rather  loud  than 
deep  or  real. 

Caroline,  once  more  turning  to  the  little  mirror,  was  shading 
her  ringlets  irom  her  cheek  to  smooth  them  imder  her  cottage 
boni^et,  certain  that  it  would  not  only  be  useless  but  unpleasant 
to  stay  longer ;  when,  on  the  sudden  opening  of  the  back- 
door, there  fell  an  abrupt  calm  in  the  kitchen :  the  tongues 
were  checked,  pulled  up  as  with  bit  and  bridle.  "  Was  it — 
was  it — ^Robert  ?  "  He  often — ^almost  always— entered  by  the 
kitchen-way  on  his  return  from  market.  No :  it  was  only 
Joe  Scott,  who,  having  hemmed  significantly  thrice— -every 
hem  being  meant  as  a  lofly  rebuke  to  the  squabbling  woman- 
kind— said, — 
"  Now,  I  thowt  I  heerd  a  crack  ?" 
None  answered. 

"  And,"  he  continued,  pragmatically, "  as  t'  maister's  comed, 
and  as  he  '11  enter  through  this  hoyle,  I  considered  it  desirable 
to  step  in  and  let  ye  know.  A  household  o'  women  is  niwer 
fit  to  be  comed  on  wi  'out  warning.  Here  he  is :  walk  forrard, 
sir.  They  war  pla3ring  up  queerly,  but  I  think  I  Ve  quieted  'em." 
Another  person — ^it  was  now  audible— entered.  Joe  Scott 
proceeded  with  his  rebukes. 

"  What  d'  ye  mean  by  being  all  i'  darkness  ?  Sarah,  thou 
quean,  canst  t'  not  light  a  candle  ?  It  war  sundown  an  hour 
Byne.  He  'U  brak'  his  shins  agean  some  o'  yer  pots,  and  tables, 
and  stuff.  Tak'  tent  o'  this  baking-bowl,  sir ;  they  Ve  set  it 
i'  yer  way,  fair  as  if  they  did  it  i'  malice." 

To  Joe's  observations  iucceeded  a  confused  sort  of  pause, 
which  Caroline,  though  she  was  listening  with  both  her  ears, 
could  not  imderstand.  It  was  very  brief :  a  cry  broke  it — ^a 
sound  of  surprise,  followed  by  the  sound  of  a  kiss :  ejaculations, 
but  half  articulate,  succeeded. 

"MonDieuI  mon  Dieu!  Est-ce  que  je  m'y  attendais?" 
were  the  words  chiefly  to  be  distinguished. 

"Et  tu  te  portes  toujours  bien,  bonne  soeur?"  inquired 
another  voice — Robert's,  certainly. 
Caroline  was  puzzled.     Obeying  an  impulse,  the  wisdom  of 


888  SHDUCT. 

in  to-daj's  page  of  her  eternal  book,  that  I  am  not  to  ban 
the  pleasure  I  long  for.  In  the  second  place,  if  he  stepped  in 
this  moment,  my  presence  here  would  be  a  chagrin  to  him^ 
and  the  consciousness  that  it  must  be  so  would  turn  half  mj 
blood  to  ice.  His  hand  would,  perhaps,  be  loose  and  chill,  if 
I  put  mine  into  it :  his  eye  woiid  be  clouded  if  I  sought  ita 
beam.  I  should  look  up  for  that  kindling,  something  I  have 
seen  in  past  days,  when  my  face,  or  my  language,  or  my  dis- 
position had  at  some  happy  moment  pleased  him — I  should 
discover  only  darkness.     I  had  better  go  home." 

She  took  her  bonnet  from  the  table  where  it  lay,  and  Tiraa 
just  ^stening  the  ribbon,  when  Hortense,  directing  her  atten- 
tion to  a  splendid  bouquet  of  flowers  in  a  glass  on  the  same 
table,  mentioned  that  Miss  Keeldar  had  sent  them  that  morning 
from  Fieldhead  ;  and  went  on  to  comment  on  the  gaests  that 
lady  was  at  present  entertaining,  on  the  bustling  life  she  had 
lately  been  leading ;  adding  divers  conjectures  that  she  did 
not  very  well  like  it,  and  much  wonderment  that  a  penon 
who  was  so  fond  of  her  own  way^is  the  heiress,  did  not  £nd 
some  means  of  sooner  getting  rid  of  this  cortege  of  relatives. 

/'  But  they  say  she  actually  wiU  not  let  Mr  Sympson  and 
his  family  go,"  she  added :  "  they  wanted  much  to  return  to 
the  south  last  week,  to  be  ready  for  the  reception  of  the  only 
son,  who  is  expected  home  from  a  tour.  She  insists  that  her 
cousin  Henry  shall  come  and  join  his  friends  here  in  Yorkshire. 
I  daresay  she  partly  does  it  to  oblige  Eobert  and  myself." 

"  How  to  oblige  Robert  and  you  ?  "  inquired  Caroline. 

"Why,  my  child,  you  are  dull.  Don't  you  know — ^you 
must  oflen  have  heard " 

"  Please,  ma'am,"  said  Sarah,  opening  the  door,  "  the  pre- 
serves that  you  told  me  to  boil  in  treacle — the  congfiters,  as 
you  call  them — ^is  all  burnt  to  the  pan." 

"  Les  confitures  I  Elles  sont  brM6es  ?  Ah,  quelle  n^li- 
gence  coupablel     Coquine  de  cuisini^re — fiUe  insupportable  P 

And  Mademoiselle,  hastily  taking  from  a  drawer  a  large 
linen  apron,  and  tying  it  over  her  black  apron,  rushed  "  ^per« 
due"  into  the  kitchen,  whence — ^to  speak  truth — exhaled  an 
odour  of  calcined  sweets  rather  stsong  than  savoury. 

The  mistress  and  maid  had  been  in  full  feud  the  whole  dajt 
on  the  subject  of  preserving  certain  black  cherries^  hard  as 
marbles,  sour  as  sloes.     Sarah  held  that  sugar  was  the  only 
orthodox  condiment  to  be  used  in  that  process  ;  Mademobelle  ^ 
maintained — and  proved  it  by  the  practice  and  experienoe  of 


AN  EYENINO  ODT.  889 

her  mother,  grandmother,  and  great-grandmother— that 
treacle,  "  melasse,"  was  infinitely  preferable.  She  had  com* 
mitted  an  imprudence  in  leaving  Sarah  in  charge  of  the  pre- 
serving-pan, for  her  want  of  sympathy  in  the  nature  of  its 
contents  had  induced  a  degree  of  carelessness  in  watching  their 
confection,  whereof  the  result  was— dark  and  cindery  ruin. 
Ilubbub  followed:  high  upbraiding,  and  sobs  rather  loud  than 
deep  or  real. 

Caroline,  once  more  turning  to  the  little  mirror,  was  shading 
her  ringlets  from  her  cheek  to  smooth  them  under  her  cottage 
boQi^et,  certain  that  it  would  not  only  be  useless  but  unpleasant 
to  stay  longer ;  when,  on  the  sudden  opening  of  the  back- 
door, there  fell  an  abrupt  calm  in  the  kitchen :  the  tongues 
were  checked,  pulled  up  as  with  bit  and  bridle.     "  "Was  it — 
was  it — ^Robert  ?  "     He  often — almost  always-^-entered  by  the 
kitchen-way  on  his  return  from  market.     No :  it  was  only 
Joe  Scott,  who,  having  hemmed  significantly  thrice-— every 
hem  bdng  meant  as  a  lofty  rebuke  to  the  squabbling  woman- 
kind— said, — 
"  Now,  I  thowt  I  heerd  a  crack  ?" 
None  answered. 

"  And,"  he  continued,  pragmatically, "  as  t'  maister's  comed, 
and  as  he  'U  enter  through  this  hoyle,  I  considered  it  desirable 
to  step  in  and  let  ye  know.  A  household  o'  women  is  niwer 
fit  to  be  comed  on  wi  *out  warning. .  Here  he  is :  walk  forrard, 
sir.  They  war  playing  up  queerly,  but  I  think  I  Ve  quieted  'em." 
Another  person — ^it  was  now  audible — entered.  Joe  Scott 
proceeded  with  his  rebukes. 

"  What  d'  ye  mean  by  being  all  i'  darkness  ?  Sarah,  thou 
quean,  canst  t*  not  light  a  candle  ?  It  war  sundown  an  hour 
syne.  He  '11  brak'  his  shins  agean  some  o'  yer  pots,  and  tables, 
and  stuff.  Tak'  tent  o'  this  baking-bowl,  sir ;  they  Ve  set  it 
i'  yer  way,  fair  as  if  they  did  it  i'  malice." 

To  Joe's  observations  iucceeded  a  confused  sort  of  pause, 
whidi  Caroline,  though  she  was  listening  with  both  her  ears, 
could  not  understand.  It  was  very  brief :  a  cry  broke  it — a 
sound  of  surprise,  followed  by  the  sound  of  a  kiss :  ejaculations, 
but  half  articulate,  succeeded. 

"Mon.Dieu!  mon  Dieul  Est-ce  que  je  m'y  attendais?" 
were  the  words  chiefly  to  be  distinguished. 

"Et  tu  te  portes  toujours  bien,  bonne  soeur?"  inquired 
another  voice — Robert's,  certainly. 
Caroline  was  puzzled.     Obeying  an  impulse,  the  wisdom  of 


888  SHIBLET. 

in  to-day*s  page  of  her  eternal  book,  that  I  am  not  to  have 
the  pleasure  I  long  for.  In  the  second  place,  if  he  stuped  in 
this  moment,  my  presence  here  would  be  a  chagrin  to  him, 
and  the  consciousness  that  it  must  be  so  would  turn  half  mj 
blood  to  ice.  His  hand  would,  perhaps,  be  loose  and  chill,  if 
I  put  mine  into  it :  his  eye  would  be  clouded  if  I  sought  its 
beam.  I  should  look  up  for  that  kindling,  something  I  have 
seen  in  past  days,  when  my  face,  or  my  language,  or  my  dis- 
position had  at  some  happy  moment  pleased  him — ^I  should 
discover  only  darkness.     I  had  better  go  home." 

She  took  her  bonnet  from  the  table  where  it  lay,  and  was 
just  ^stening  the  ribbon,  when  Hortense,  directing  her  atten> 
ticn  to  a  splendid  bouquet  of  flowers  in  a  glass  on  the  same 
table,  mentioned  that  Miss  Keeldar  had  sent  them  that  momizig 
from  Fieldhead  ;  and  went  on  to  comment  on  the  guests  that 
lady  was  at  present  entertaining,  on  the  bustling  life  she  bad 
lately  been  leading ;  adding  divers  conjectures  that  she  did 
not  very  well  like  it,  and  much  wonderment  that  a  person 
who  was  so  fond  of  her  own  way^s  the  heiress,  did  not  find 
some  means  of  sooner  getting  rid  of  this  cortege  of  lelatiTes. 

, "  But  they  say  she  actually  will  not  let  Mr  Sympson  and 
his  family  go,"  she  added :  "  they  wanted  much  to  return  to 
the  south  last  week,  to  be  ready  for  the  reception  of  the  only 
son,  who  is  expected  home  from  a  tour.  She  insists  that  her 
cousin  Henry  shall  come  and  join  his  friends  here  in  Yorkshire. 
I  daresay  she  partly  does  it  to  oblige  Robert  and  myself." 

"  How  to  oblige  Robert  and  you  ?"  inquired  Caroline. 

"Why,  my  child,  you  are  dull.  Don't  you  know — jm 
must  often  have  heard ^" 

"  Please,  ma'am,"  said  Sarah,  opening  the  door,  "  the  pre- 
serves that  you  told  me  to  boil  in  treacle — the  congfiters,  as 
you  call  them — ^is  all  burnt  to  the  pan." 

"  Les  confitures  !  EUes  sont  brM^es  ?  Ah,  quelle  negli- 
gence coupablel     Coquine  de  cuisini^re — ^fiUe  insupportable!" 

And  Mademoiselle,  hastily  taking  &om  a  drawer  a  large 
linen  apron,  and  tying  it  over  her  black  apron,  rushed  ''  ^per- 
due"  into  the  kitchen,  whence — ^to  speak  truth—- exhaled  an 
odour  of  calcined  sweets  rather  st];ong  than  savoury. 

The  mistress  and  maid  had  been  in  fuU  feud  the  whole  dajf 
on  the  subject  of  preserving  certain  black  chenieS)  hard  as 
marbles,  sour  as  sloes.  Sarah  held  that  eugar  was  the  only 
orthodox  condiment  to  be  used  in  that  process  ;  Mademoiselle 
maintained — and  proved  it  by  the  practice  and  experienoe  of 


AN  EVENINO  OUT.  889 

ber  mother,  grandmother,  and  great-grandmotheF— that 
treacle,  "  m^lasse,"  was  infinitely  preferable.  She  had  com- 
mitted an  imprudence  in  leaving  Sarah  in  charge  of  the  pre- 
serving-pan, for  her  want  of  sympathy  in  the  nature  of  its 
contents  had  induced  a  degree  of  carelessness  in  watching  their 
confection,  whereof  the  result  was — dark  and  cindery  ruin. 
Hubbub  followed :  high  upbraiding,  and  sobs  rather  loud  than 
deep  or  real. 

Caroline,  once  more  turning  to  the  little  mirror,  was  shading 
her  ringlets  from  her  cheek  to  smooth  them  imder  her  cottage 
bonnet,  certain  that  it  would  not  only  be  useless  but  unpleasant 
to  stay  longer ;  when,  on  the  sudden  opening  of  the  back- 
door, there  fell  an  abrupt  calm  in  the  kitchen :  the  tongues 
were  checked,  pulled  up  as  with  bit  and  bridle.  "  "Was  it — 
was  it — ^Robert  ?"  He  often — ^almost  always-^-entered  by  the 
kitchen-way  on  his  return  from  market.  No :  it  was  only 
Joe  Scott,  who,  having  hemmed  significantly  thrice-— every 
hem  being  meant  as  a  lofty  rebuke  to  the  squabbling  woman- 
kind— said, — 
"  Now,  I  thowt  I  heerd  a  crack  ?" 
None  answered. 

"  And,"  he  continued,  pragmatically, "  as  t'  maister's  comed, 
and  as  he  11  enter  through  this  hoyle,  I  considered  it  desirable 
to  step  in  and  let  ye  know.  A  household  o'  women  is  niwer 
fit  to  be  comed  on  wi  'out  warning.  Here  he  is :  walk  forrard, 
sir.  They  war  playing  up  queerly ,  but  I  think  I  Ve  quieted  'em.'* 
Another  person — ^it  was  now  audible — entered.  Joe  Scott 
proceeded  with  his  rebukes. 

"  What  d'  ye  mean  by  being  all  i'  darkness  ?  Sarah,  thou 
quean,  canst  t*  not  light  a  candle  ?  It  war  sundown  an  hour 
syne.  He  'H  brak'  his  shins  agean  some  o'  yer  pots,  and  tables, 
and  stuff.  Tak'  tent  o'  this  baking-bowl,  sir ;  they  Ve  set  it 
i'  yer  way,  fair  as  if  they  did  it  i'  malice." 

To  Joe's  observations  iucceeded  a  confused  sort  of  pause, 
which  Caroline,  though  she  was  listening  with  both  her  ears, 
could  not  imderstand.  It  was  very  brief :  a  cry  broke  it — a 
sound  of  surprise,  followed  by  the  soimd  of  a  kiss :  ejaculations, 
but  half  articulate,  succeeded. 

"MonDieuI  mon  Dieul  Est-ce  que  je  m'y  attendais?" 
were  the  words  chiefly  to  be  distinguished. 

"Et  tu  te  portes  toujours  bien,  bonne  soeur?"  inquired 
another  voice — Robert's,  certainly. 
Caroline  was  puzzled.     Obeying  an  impulse,  the  wisdom  of 


MO  SHIBUCT. 

which  she  had  not  time  to  question,  she  escaped  from  the  Hide 
parlour,  by  way  of  leaving  the  coast  clear,  and  running  up* 
stairs  took  up  a  position  at  the  head  of  the  banisters,  whence 
she  could  make  further  observations  ere  presenting  herself. 
It  was  considerably  past  sunset  now:  dusk  filled  the  passage, 
yet  not  such  deep  dusk  but  that  she  could  presently  see 
Kobert  and  Hortense  traverse  it. 
'  "  Caroline  !  Caroline  ! "  called  Hortense,  a  moment  after- 
wards, "  venez  voir  mon  frere  1" 

"  Strange  1"  commented  Miss  Helstone,  "  passing  strange! 
What  does  this  imwonted  excitement  about  such  an  everyoaj 
occurrence  as  a  return  from  market  portend  ?  She  has  not 
lost  her  senses,  has  she  ?  Surely  the  burnt  treacle  has  not 
crazed  her?" 

She  descended  in  a  subdued  flutter :  yet  more  was  she 
fluttered  when  Hortense  seized  her  hand  at  the  parlour-door, 
and  leading  her  to  Robert,  who  stood  in  bodily  presence,  tall 
and  dark  against  the  one  window,  presented  her  with  a  mixttA« 
of  agitation  and  formality,  as  though  they  had  been  utter 
strangers,  and  this  was  their  flrst  mutual  introduction. 

Increasing  puzzle  !  He  bowed  rather  awkwardly,  and 
turning  from  her  with  a  stranger's  embarrassment,  he  met  the 
doubt^  light  from  a  window :  it  fell  on  his  face,  and  the 
enigma  of  the  dream  (a  dream  it  seemed)  was  at  its  height : 
she  saw  a  visage  like  and  unlike, — Robert,  and  no  Robert. 

"What  is  the  matter?"  said  Caroline.  "Is  my  sight 
wrong?     Is  it  my  cousin?" 

"  Certainly,  it  is  your  cousin,"  asserted  Hortense. 

Then  who  was  this  now  coming  through  the  passage, — ^now 
entering  the  room?  Caroline,  looking  round,  met  a  new 
Robert, — the  real  Robert,  as  she  felt  at  once. 

"Well,"  said  he,  smiling  at  her  questioning,  astonished 
face,  "  which  is  which  ?" 

"  Ah  !  this  is  ^ow/"  was  the  answer. 

He  laughed.  "  I  believe  it  is  me:  and  do  you  know  who^ 
is  ?     You  never  saw  him  before ;  but  you  have  heard  of  him." 

She  had  gathered  her  senses  now. 

"  It  can  be  only  one  person :  your  brother,  since  it  is  80 
like  you :  my  other  cousin,  Louis." 

"  Clever  little  (Edipus ! — ^you  would  have  baffled  the 
Sphynx  !  —  but  now,  see  us  together.  Change  placet. 
Change  again,  to  confuse  her,  Louis. — Which  is  the  old  low 
now,  Lina?" 


AN  EYENIKO  OUT.  841 

"As  if  it  were  possible  to  make  a  mistake  when  you 
speak  I  You  should  have  told  Hortense  to  ask.  But  you  are 
not  80  much  alike:  it  is  only  your  height,  your  figure,  and 
complexion  that  are  so  similar." 

"And  I  am  Robert,  am  I  not?"  asked  the  new  comer, 
making  a  first  effort  to  overcome  what  seemed  his  natural 
shyness. 

Caroline  shook  her  head  gently.  A  soft,  expressive  ray 
from  her  eye  beamed  on  the  real  Robert :  it  said  much. 

She  was  not  permitted  to  quit  her  cousins  soon :  Robert 
himself  was  peremptory  in  obliging  her  to  remain.  Glad, 
simple,  and  affable  in  her  demeanour  (glad  for  this  night,  at 
least),  in  light,  bright  spirits  for  the  time,  she  was  too  pleasant 
an  addition  to  the  cottage  circle  to  be  willingly  parted  with 
by  any  of  them.  Louis  seemed  naturally  rather  a  grave,  still, 
retiring  man,  but  the  Caroline  of  this  evening,  which  was  not 
(as  you  know,  reader)  the  Caroline  of  every  day,  thawed  his 
reserve,  and  cheered  his  gravity  soon.  He  sat  near  her,  gind 
talked  to  her.  She  already  knew  his  vocation  was  that  of 
tuition;  she  learned  now  he  had  for  some  years  been  the 
tutor  of  Mr  Sympson's  son ;  that  he  had  been  travelling  with 
him,  and  had  accompanied  him  to  the  north.  She  inquired  if 
he  liked  his  post,  but  got  a  look  in  reply  which  did  not  invite 
or  license  further  question.  The  look  woke  Caroline's  ready 
sympathy :  she  thought  it  a  very  sad  expression  to  pass  oyer 
80  sensible  a  face  as  Louis's :  for  he  had  sl,  sensible  face, — 
though  not  handsome,  she  considered,  when  seen  near  Robert's. 
She  turned  to  make  the  comparison.  Robert  was  leaning 
against  the  wall,  a  little  behind  her,  turning  over  the  leaves 
of  a  book  of  engravings,  and  probably  listening,  at  the  same 
time,  to  the  dialogue  between  her  and  Louis. 

"How  could  I  think  them  alike?"  she  asked  herself :  "I 
see  now  it  is  Hortense,  Louis  resembles,  not  Robert." 

And  this  was  in  part  true :  he  had  the  shorter  nose  and 
longer  npper-lip  of  his  sister,  rather  than  the  fine  traits  of  his 
brother:  he  had  her  mould  of  mouth  and  chin — ^all  less  decisive, 
accurate,  and  clear  than  those  of  the  young  mill-owner.  .  His 
air,  though  deliberate  and  reflective,  could  scarcely  be  called 
prompt  and  acute.  You  felt,  in  sitting  near  and  looking  up 
at  him,  that  a  slower  and  probably  a  more  benignanl  nature 
than  that  of  the  elder  Moore  shed  calm  on  your  impressions. 

Robert — ^perhaps  aware  that  Caroline's  glance  had  wandered 
towards  and  dwelt  upon  him,  though  he  had  neither  met  nor 


342  smKLET. 

answered  it — put  down  the  book  of  engravings,  and  approach- 
ing, took  a  seat  at  her  side.  She  resumed  her  conversatioii 
with  Louis,*  but,  while  she  talked  to  him,  her  thoughts  were 
elsewhere :  her  heart  beat  on  the  side  from,  which  her  face 
was  half-averted.  She  acknowledged  a  steady,  manlj,  kmdlj 
air  in  Louis ;  but  she  bent  before  the  secret  powier  of  Bobeit. 
To  be  so  near  him — though  he  was  silent — ^t^ough  he  did  not 
touch  so  much  as  her  scarf-fringe,  or  the  white  hem  of  her 
dress — affected  her  like  a  spell.  Had  she  been  obliged  to 
speak  to  him  only^  it  would  have  quelled — ^but,  at  libaty  to 
address  another,  it  excited  her.  Her  discourse  flowed  freely: 
it  was  gay,  playful,  eloquent.  The  indulgent  look  and  placid 
manner  of  her  auditor  encouraged  her  to  ease ;  the  sober 
pleasure  expressed  by  his  smile  £ew  out  all  that  was  brilliant 
in  her  nature.  She  felt  that  this  evening  she  appeared  to 
advantage,  and,  as  Robert  was  a  spectator,  the  consciousness 
contented  her :  had  he  been  called  away,  collapse  would  at 
once  have  succeeded  stimulus. 

But  her  enjoyment  was  not  long  to  shine  frdl-orbed:  a  cloud 
soon  crossed  it. 

Hortense,  who  for  some  time  had  been  on  the  move  ordering 
supper,  and  was  now  clearing  the  little  table  of  some  books,  &c., 
to  make  room  for  the  tray,  called  Robert's  attention  to  the  glass 
of  flowers,  the  carmine,  and  snow,  and  gold  of  whose  petals 
looked  radiant  indeed  by  candlelight. 

"  They  came  from  Fieldhead,"  she  said,  "  intended  as  a 
gift  to  you,* no  doubt:  we  know  who  is  the  &ivourite  there — 
not  I,  I  'm  sure." 

It  was  a  wdnder  to  hear  Hortense  jest;  a  sign  that  her 
spirits  were  at  high-water  mark  indeed. 

'^  We  are  to  imderstand,  then,  that  Robert  is  the  favourite  ?^ 
observed  Louis.  •  ^ 

"  Mon  cher,"  replied  Hortense,  "  Robert— c*est  tout  ce 
qu'il  y  a  de  plus  pr^ieux  au  monde:  k  cdt^  de  lui,  le  reste 
du  genre  humain  n'est  que  du  rebut.  N'ai-je  pas  raison,moo 
enfant?"  she  added,  appealing  to  Caroline. 

Caroline  was  obliged  to  reply,  "Yes" — and  her  beacon 
was  quenched:  her  star  withdrew  as  she  spoke. 

"  Et  toi,  Robert  ?  "  inquired  Louis. 

**  When  you  shall  have  an  opportunity,  ask  herself,"  was  the 
quiet  answer.  Whether  he  reddened  or  paled  Caroline  did  noi 
-examine :  she  discovered  it  was  late,  and  she  must  go  home. 

<>me  she  would  go:  not  even  Robert  could  detain  her  now. 


▼ALLEY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         M8 

CHAPTER  XXIV 

THE  VALLEY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH. 

The  fature  sometiines  seems  to  sob  a  low  warning  of  th6 
erents  it  is  bringing  us,  like  some  gathering  tbough  yet 
remote  stoim,  which,  in  tones  of  l^e  wind,  in  flushings  of  the 
firmament,  in  douds  strangely  torn,  annoimces  a  blast  strong 
to  strew  the  sea  with  wrecks ;  or  commissioned  to  bring  in 
fog  the  yellow  taint  of  pestilence,  covering  white  Western 
isles  with  the  poisoned  exhalations  of  the  East,  dimming  the 
lattices  of  English  homes  with  the  breath  of  Indian  plague. 
At  other  times  this  Future  bursts  suddenly,  as  if  a  rock  had 
rent,  and  in  it  a  grave  had  opened,  whence  issues  the  body 
of  one  that  slept.  Ere  you  are  aware  you  stand  face  to  face 
with  a  shrouded  and  unUiought-of  Calamity — ^a  new  Lazarus. 
Caroline  Helstone  went  home  from  Hollow's  cottage  in  good 
health,  as  she  imagined.  On  waking  the  next  morning  she 
felt  oppressed  with  unwonted  languor:  at  breakfast,  at  each 
meal  of  the  following  day,  she  missed  all  sense  of  appetite: 
palatable  food  was  as  ashes  and  sawdust  to  her. 

"Am  I  ill?"  she  asked,,  and  looked  at  herself  in  the  glass. 
Her  eyes  were  bright,  their  pupils  dilated,  her  cheeks  seemed 
rosier  and  filler  than  usual.  "  I  look  weU ;  why  can  I  nctt  eat? '' 
She  £dt  a  pulse  beat  fast  in  her  temples:  she  felt,  too,  her 
brain  in  strange  activity :  her  spirits  were  raised ;  hundreds 
of  bu^y  and  broken,  but- brilliant  thoughts  engaged  her  mind: 
a  glow  rested  on  them,  such  as  tinged  her  complexion. 

Now  followed  a  hot,  parched,  thirsty,  restless  night.  To- 
wards morning  one  terrible  dream  seized  her  like  a  tiger :  when 
she  woke,  she  felt  and  knew  she  was  ill. 

How  she  had  caught  the  fever  (fever  it  was),  she  could  not 
telL  Probably  in  her  late  walk  home,  some  sweet,  poisoned 
breeze,  redolent  of  honey-dew  and  miasma,  had  passed  into 
her  lungs  and  veins,  and  finding  there  -  already  a  *fever  of 
mental  excitement,  and  a  languor  of  long  conflict  and  habitual 
sadness,  had  fanned  the  spark  of  flame,  and  lefl;  a  well-lit  fire 
behind  it. 

It  seemed,  however,  but  "a  gentle  fire:  after  two  hot  days 
and  worried  nights,  there  was  no  violence  in  the  symptoms, 
and  neither  her  uncle,  nor  Fanny,  nor  the  doctor,  nor  Miss 
Keeldar,  when  she  called,  had  any  fear  for  her :  a  few  days 
would  restore  her,  every  one  believed. 


844  8HIRLET. 

The  few  days  passed,  and — though  it  was  still  thought  it 
could  not  long  delay — ^the  revival  had  not  begun.  Mrs  Prywr, 
who  had  visited  her  daily — ^being  present  in  her  chamber  one 
morning  when  she  had  been  ill  a  fortnight — ^watched  her  very 
narrowly  for  some  minutes  :  she  took  her  hand,  and  placed 
her  finger  on  her  wrist ;  then,  quietly  leaving  the  chamber, 
she  went  to  Mr  Helstone^s  study.  With  him  she  remained 
closeted  a  long  time — ^half  the  morning.  On  returning  to  ber 
sick  young  friend,  she  laid  aside  shawl  and  bonnet:  she  stood 
a  while  at  the  bedside,  one  hand  placed  in  the  other,  gently 
rocking  herself  to  and  &o,  in  an  attitude  and  with  a  movement 
habitual  to  her.     At  last  she  said — 

"  I  have  sent  Fanny  to  Fieldhead  to  fetch  a  few  things  for 
me,  such  as  I  shall  want  during  a  short  stay  here :  it  is  my 
wish  to  remain  with  you  till  you  are  better.  Your  imde 
kindly  permits  my  attendance:  will  it  to  yourself  be  accept- 
able, Caroline  ?  " 

''  I  am  sorry  you  should  take  such  needless  trouble.  I  do 
not  feel  very  iU,  but  I  cannot  reiuse  resolutely:  it  will  be  such 
comfort  to  know  you  are  in  the  house,  to  see  you  sometimes 
in  the  room ;  but  don^t  confine  yourself  on  my  accoimt,  dear 
Mrs  Pryor.     Fanny  nurses  me  very  well." 

Mrs  Pryor — ^bending  over  the  pale  littfe  sufferer — ^wa«  now 
smoothing  the  hair  under  her  cap,  and  gently  raising  her 
pillow.  As  she  performed  these  difices,  Caroline,  smiling^ 
lifted  her  face  to  kiss  her. 

"  Are  y6u  free  from  pain  ?  Are  you  tolerably  at  ease  ? " 
was  inquired  in  a  low,  earnest  voice,  as  the  self-elected  nurse 
yielded  to  the  cai^s.    ' 

"  I  think  I  am  almost  happy." 

"  You  wish  to  drink  ?     Your  lips  are  parched." 

She  held  a  glass  filled  with  some  cooling  beverage  to  hei 
mouth. 

"  Have  you  eaten  anything  to  day,  Caroline  ?  " 

"  I  cannot  eat." 

''  But  soon  your  appetite  will  return:  it  must  return:  that 
is,  I  pray  God  it  may  1 " 

In  laying  her  again  on  the  couch,  she  encircled  her  in  her 
arms ;  and  while  so  doing,  by  U  movement  which  seemed 
scarcely  .voluntary,  she  drew  her  to  her  heart,  and  held  her 
close  gathered  an  instant. 

"  I  shall  hardly  wish  to  get  well,  that  I  may  keep  you 
always,"  said  Caroline. 


TALLET  OF  TBE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         845 

Mn  Fryor  did  not  smile  at  this  speech:  over  her  features 
tan  a  tremor,  which  for  some  minutes  she  was  absorbed  in 
repressing. 

**  You  are  more  used  to  Fanny  than  to  me,"  she  remarked, 
erelong.  '<  I  should  think  my  attendance  must  seem  strange, 
officious  ?  " 

"  No:  quite  natural,  and  .very  soothing.  You  must  have 
been  accustomed  to  wait  on  sick  people,  ma'am.  You  move 
about  the  room  so  soilly,  and  you  speak  so  quietly,  and  touch 
me  so  gently." 

'^  I  am  dexterous  in  nothing,  my  dear.  You  will  often  find 
me  awkward,  but  never  negligent." 

Negligent,  indeed,  she  was  not.     From  that  hour,  Fanny 

and  Eliza  became  ciphers  in  the  sick-room  :  Mrs  Pryor  made 

it  her  domain :  she  performed  all  its  duties ;  she  lived  in  it 

day  and  night.     The  patient  remonstrated — faintly,  however, 

from  the  first,  and  not  at  all  erelong :   loneliness  and  gloom 

were  now  banished  from  her  bedside ;  protection  and  solace 

sat  there  instead.     She  and  her  nurse  coalesced  in  wondrous 

union.      Caroline  was  usually  pained  to  require  or  receive 

much  attendance  :  Mrs  Pryor,  under  ordinary  circumstances, 

had  neither  the  habit  nor  the  art  of  performing  little  offices  ojf 

service ;  but  all  now  passed  with  such  ease — so  naturally,  that 

the  patient  was  as  willing  to  be  cherished  as  the  nurse  was 

bent  on  cherishing:  no  sign  of  weariness  in  the  latter  ever 

reminded  the  former  that  she  ought  to  be  anxious.     There 

was,  in  fact,  no  very  hard  duty  to  perform ;  but  a  hireling 

might  have  found  it  hard. 

With  all  this  care,  it  seemed  strange  the  sick  girl  did  not 
get  well;  yet  such  was  the  case:  she  was^d  like  any  snow- 
wreath  in  thaw;  she  faded  like  any  flower  in  drought.     Miss 
Keeldar,  on  whose  thoughts  danger  or  death  seldom  intruded, 
liad  at  first  entertained  no  fears  at  all  for  her  friend;  but 
fleeing  her  change  and  sink  from  time  to  time  when  she  paid 
her  visits,  alarm  clutched  her  heart.   She  went  to  Mr  Helstpne 
and  expressed  herself  with  so  much  energy,  that  that  gentle- 
man was  at  last  obliged,  however  unwillingly,  to  admit  the 
idea  that  his  niece  was  ill  of  something  more  than  a  migraine; 
«nd  when  Mrs  Pryor  came  and  quietly  demanded  a  physician, 
he  said  she  might  send  for  two  if  she  liked.     One  came,  but 
that  one  was  an  oracle:  he  delivered  a  dark  sa3dng  of  which 
the  future  was  to  solve  the  mystery,  wrote  some  prescriptions, 
gave  some  directions — ^the  whole  with  an  air  of  crushing 


846  SIEIBI.ET. 

authority— pocketed  bis  fee,  and  went.  Probably^  he  knew 
well  enough  he  could  do  no  good ;  but  didn't  like  to  say  sa 

Still,  no  rumour  of  serious  illness  got  wind  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood.  At  Hollow's-cottage  it  was  thought  that  Garolioe 
had  only  a  severe  cold,  she  having  written  a  note  to  Hortense 
to  that  effect;  and  Mademoiselle  contented  herself  with  sending 
two  pots  of  currant  jam,  a  receipt  for  a  tisane,  and  a  note  d 
advice. 

Mrs  Yorke  being  told  that  a  physician  had  been  summoned, 
sneered  at  the  hypochondriac  fancies  of  the  rich  and  idle, 
who,  she  said,  have  nothing  but  themselves  to  think  about, 
must  needs  send  for  a  doctor  if  only  so  much  as  their  little 
finger  ached. 

The  "  rich  and  idle,*'  represented  in  the  person  of  Caroline, 
were  meantime  falling  fast  into  a  condition  of  prostralioQ, 
whose  quickly  consunmiated  debility  puzzled  all  who  'wit- 
nessed it,  except  one;  for  that  one  aJone  reflected  how  liabk 
is  the  imdermined  structure  to  sink  in  sudden  rain. 

Sick  people  often  have  £uicies  inscrutable  to  ordinAiy 
attendants,  and  Caroline  had  one  which  even  her  tender  muse 
could  not  at  first  explain.  On  a  certain  day  in  the  week,  ai 
a  certain  hour,  she  would — whether  worse  or  better— entreat 
to  be  taken  up  and  dressed,  and  sufiered  to  sit  in  her  chair 
near  the  window.  This  station  she  would  retain  till  noon 
was  past:  whatever  degree  of  exhaustion  or  debility  her  wan 
aspect  betrayed,  she  still  softly  put  off  all  persuasion  to  seek 
repose  imtil  the  church-clock  had  duly  tolled  mid-day:  the 
twelve  strokes  sounded,  she  grew  docile,  and  would  meekl/ 
lie  down.  Betumed  to  the  couch,  she  usually  buried  her 
face  deep  in  the  piQow,  and  drew  the  coverlets  dose  round 
her,  as  if  to  shut  out  the  world  and  sun,  of  which  she  ivai 
tired:  more  than  once,  as  she  thus  lay,  a  slight  convulsion 
shook  the  sick-bed,  and  a  faint  sob  broke  the  sUence  ronnd  it 
These  things  were  not  unnoted  by  Mrs  Pryor. 

One  Tuesday  morning,  as  usual,  she  had  asked  leave  to 
rise,  and  now  she  sat  wrafpped  in  her  white  dressing-gown, 
leaning  forward  in  the  easy-chair,  gazing  steadily  and  patiently 
from  the  lattice.  Mrs  Pryor  was  seated  a  little  behind,  but- 
ting as  it  seemed,  but,  in  truth ^  watching  her.  A  change 
crossed  her  pale  mournful  brow,  animating  its  languor;  & 
light  shot  into  her  faded  ejes,  reviving  their  lustre;  she  hatf 
rose  and  looked  earnestly  out.  Mrs  Pryor,  drawing  Boftij 
near,  glanced  over  her  shoulder.    From   this  window  wos 


VALLEY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         347 

risible  the  chnrchyard,  beyond  it  the  road,  and  there,  riding 
shaxply  by,  appeared  a  horseman.  The  figtire  was  not  yet 
too  remote  for  recognition :  Mrs  Pryor  had  long  sight ;  she 
knew  Mr  Moore.  Just  as  an  intercepting  rising  ground  con- 
cealed him  from  view,  the  clock  struck  twelve. 
"  Miay  I  lie  down  again?"  asked  Caroline. 
Her  nurse  assisted  her  to  bed:  having  laid  her  down  and 
drawn  the  curtain,  she  stood  listening  near.  The  little  couch 
trembled,  the  suppressed  sob  stirred  the  air.  A  contraction 
as  of  anguish  altered  Mrs  Pryor's  features ;  she  wrung  her 
hands ;  half  a  groan  escaped  her  lips.  She  now  remembered 
that  Tuesday  was  Whinbury  market-day:  Mr  Moore  must 
always  pass  the  Rectory  on  his  way  thither,  just  ere  noon  of 
that  day. 

Caroline  wore  continually  round  her  neck  a  slender  braid 

of  silk,  attached  to  which  was  some  trinket.     Mrs  Pryor  had 

seen  the  bit  of  gold  glisten ;  but  had  not  yet  obtained  a  fair 

view  of  it.     I^er  patient  never  parted  with  it:  when  dressed 

it  was  hidden  in  her  bosom ;  as  she  lay  in  bed  she  always 

held  it  in  her  hand.     That  Tuesday  afternoon  the  transient 

doze — more  like  lethargy  than   sleep — which   sometimes 

abridged  the  long  days,  had  stolen  6ver  her:  the  weather  was 

hot:  while  turning  in  febrile  restlessness,  she  had  pushed  the 

coverlets  a  little  aside;   Mrs  Pryor  bent  to  replace  them; 

the  small,  wasted  hand  lying  nerveless  on  the   sick  girPs 

breast,  clasped  as  usual  her  jealously-guarded  treasure:  Siose 

fingers  whose  attenuation  it  gave  pain  to  see,  were  now  relaxed 

in  sleep :  Mrs  Pryor  gently  disengaged  the  braid,  drawing  out 

a  tiny  locket — a  slight  thing  it  was,  such  as  it  suited  her 

small  purse  to  purchase:  imder  its  crystal  face  appeared  a 

cnil  of  black  hair — ^too  short  and  crisp  to  have  been  severed 

from  a  female  head. 

Some  agitated  movement  occasioned  a  twitch  of  the  silken 
cham:  the  sleeper  started  and  woke.  Her  thoughts  were 
usually  now  somewhat  scattered  on  waking;  her  look  gene- 
rally wandering.  Half-rising,  as  if  in  terror,  she  exclaimed: 
**  Don't  take  it  from  me,  Robert !  Don't  1  It  is  my  lost 
comfort— let  me  keep  it.  I  never  tell  any  one  whose  hair  it 
is— I  never  show  it." 

Mrs  Pryor  had  already  disappeared  behind  the  curtain: 
reclining  far  back  in  a  deep  arm-chair  by  the  bedside,  she 
was  withdrawn  from  view.  Caroline  looked  abroad  into  the 
chamber:  she  thought  it  empty.    As  her  stray  ideas  returned 


848  sHiRLEr. 

slowly,  eacli  folding  its  weak  wings  on  tHe  luind^s  sad  ahoK, 
like  birds  exhausted, — ^beholding  void,  and  perceiyiDg  aknoe 
round  her,  she  believed  herself  alone.  Collected,  she  was  not 
yet:  perhaps  healthy  self-possession  and  self-control  were  tr 
be  hers  no  more;  perhaps  that  world  the  strong  and  pros- 
perous live  in  had  already  rolled  from  beneath  her  feet  for 
ever:  so,  at  least,  it  often  seemed  to  herself.  In  healdi,  she 
had  never  been  accustomed  to  think  aloud ;  but  now  words 
escaped  her  lips  unawares. 

'^  Oh  I  I  should  see  him  once  more  before  all  is  over : 
Heaven  might  favour  me  thus  far  I "  she  cried.  "  God  grant 
me  a  little  comfort  before  I  die  1 "  was  her  humble  petition. 

"  But  he  will  not  know  I  am  ill  till  I  am  gone;  and  he  will 
come  when  they  have  laid  me  out,  and  I  am  senseless,  cold, 
and  stiff. 

"What  can  my  departed  soul  feel  then?  Can  it  see  or 
know  what  happens  to  the  clay  ?  Can  spirits,  through  anv 
medium,  communicate  with  living  flesh?.  Can  the  dead  at 
all  revisit  those  they  leave  ?  Can  they  come  in  the  elements? 
Will  wind,  water,  fire,  lend  me  a  path  to  Moore  ? 

"Is  it  for  nothing  the  wind  sounds  almost  articulately 
sometimes — sings  as  I  have  lately  heard  it  sing  at  night — or 
passes  the  casement  sobbing,  as  if  for  sorrow  to  come  ?  Does 
nothing,  then,  haunt  it — ^nothing  inspire  it  ? 

"Why,  it  suggested  to  me  words  one  night:  it  poured  a 
strain  which  I  could  have  written  down,  only  I  was  appalled, 
and  dared  not  rise  to  seek  pencil  and  paper  by  the  dim  watcb- 
Hght 

"What  is  that  electricity  they  speak  of,  whose  changes 
make  us  well  or  ill;  whose  lack  or  excess  blasts;  whose  even 
balance  revives?  What  are  all  those  influences  that  are 
about  us  in  the  atmosphere,  that  keep  playing  over  our  nerres 
like  fingers  on  stringed  instruments,  and  call  forth .  now  a 
sweet  note,  and  now  a  wail — now  an  exultant  swell,  and, 
anon,  the  saddest  cadence  ? 

"  Where  is  the  other  world?  In  what  will  another  life 
consist  ?  Why  do  I  ask  ?  Have  I  not  cause  to  think  th&t 
the  hour  is  hasting  but  too  fast  when  the  veil  must  be  rent 
for  me?  Do  I  not  know  the  Grand  Mystery  is  likely  to 
burst  prematurely  on  me  ?  Great  Spirit !  in  whose  goodness 
I  confide ;  whom,  as  my  Father,  I  have  petitioned  night  and 
•noming  from  early  infancy,  help  the  weak  creation  of  thy 
''^ !     Sustain  me  through  the  ordeal  I  dread  and  must 


VALLEY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         849 

indergo !   Give  me  strength  1   Give  me  patience !   Give  me — 
[>h  1     ffive  me  faith  ! " 

She  fell  back  on  her  pillow.  Mrs  Pryor  found  means  to 
Bieal  quietly  from  the  room :  she  re-entered  it  soon  after, 
apparently  as  composed  as  if  she  had  really  not  overheard 
this  strange  soliloquy. 

The  next  day  several  callers  came.  It  had  become  known 
that  Miss  Helstone  was  worse.  Mr  Hall  and  his  sister 
Margaret  arrived :  both,  after  they  had  been  in  the  sick-^room, 
quitted  it  in  tears ;  they  had  fonnd  the  patient  more  altered 
than  they  expected.  Hortense  Moore  came.  Caroline  seemed 
stimulated  by  her  presence  :  she  assured  her,  smiling,  she  was 
not  dangerously  ill;  she  talked  to  her  in  a  low  voice,  but 
cheerfully :  during  her  stay,  excitement  kept  up  the  flush  of 
her  complexion  :  she  looked  better. 

"How  is  Mr  Robert  ?"  asked  Mrs  Pryor,  as  Hortense  was 
preparing  to  take  leave. 
"  He  was  very  well  when  he  left.** 
"  Left'l  Is  he  gone  from  home  ?  ** 

It  was  then  explained  that  some  police  intelligence  about 
the  rioters  of  whom  he  was  in  pursuit,  had,  that  morning, 
called  him  away  to  Birmingham,  and  probably  a  fortnight 
might  elapse  ere  he  returned. 
"He  is  not  aware  that  Miss  Helstone  is  very  ill  ?** 
"  Ohl  no.  He  thought,  like  me,  that  she  had  only  a  bad 
cold.** 

After  this  visit,  Mrs  Pryor  took  care  not  to  approach 
Caroline's  couch  for  above  an  hour :  she  heard  her  weep,  and 
dared  not  look  on  her  tears. 

Afi  evening  closed  in,  she  brought  her  some  tea.  Caroline, 
opening  her  eyes  from  a  moment's  slumber,  viewed  her  nurse 
with  an  unrecognising  glance. 

*'  I  smelt  the  honeysuckles  in  the  glen  this  summer-morning/* 
she  said,  "  as  I  stood  at  the  counting-house  window.'* 

Strange  words  like  these  from  pallid  lips  pierce  a  loving 
listener's  heart  more  poignantly  than  steel.  They  sound 
romantic,  perhaps,  in  books  :  in  real  life,  they  are  harrowing. 
"  My  darling,  do  you  know  me  ?"  said  Mrs  Pryor. 
''  I  went  in  to  call  Bobert  to  breakfast :  I  have  been  with 
him  in  the  garden :  he  asked  me  to  go :  a  heavy  dew  has 
refreshed  the  flowers  :  the  peaches  are  ripening.'* 

^'Ify  darling  !  my  darling  ! "  again  and  again  repeated  the 
nnrse. 


850  8HIBLEY. 

"  I  thought  it  was  daylight — ^long  after  sunrise :  it  looks 
dark — ^is  the  moon  now  set  ?  '* 

That  moon,  lately  risen,  was  gazing  full  and  mild  npos 
her :  floating  in  deep  hlne  space,  it  watched  her  nnclonded. 

*'  Then  it  is  not  morning  ?  I  am  not  at  the  cottage  ?  Who 
is  this  ? — ^I  see  a  shape  at  my  hedside." 

"  It  is  myself — it  is  your  fiiend — ^yonr  nurse — ^your . 

Lean  your,  head  on  my  shoulder :  collect  yourself.**  (In  ft 
lower  tone.)  "  Oh  God,  take  pity  I  Give  her  life,  and  m 
strength  I     Send  me  courage — ^teach  me  words ! " 

Some  minutes  passed  in  silence.  The  patient  lay  mute 
and  passive  in  the  trembling  arms— on  the  throbbing  bosom 
of  the  nurse. 

"I  am  better  now,"  whispered  Caroline,  at  last,  "much 
better — I  feel  where  I  am  :  this  is  Mrs  Pryor  near  ine:  I  was 
dreaming — I  talk  when  I  wake  up  from  dreams :  people  often  do 
in  illness.  How  fast  your  heart  beats,  ma'am  1  Do  not  be  afraid." 

"  It  is  not  fear,  child ;  only  a  little  anadety,  which  will 
pass.  I  have  brought  you  some  tea,  Gary;  your  uncle  made 
it  himself..  You  kaow  he  says  he  can  maJke  a  better  cup  of 
tea  than  any  housewife  can.  Taste  it.  He  is  concerned  to 
hear  that  you  eat  so  little :  he  would  be  glad  if  you  bad  i 
better  appetite." 

"  I  am  thirsty:  let  me  drink." 

She  drank  eagerly. 

"  What  o'clock  is  it,  ma'am  ?"  she  asked. 

"  Past  nine." 

"Not  later?  Oh  I  I  have  yet  a  bug  night  before  me: 
but  the  tea  has  made  me  strong:  I  will  sit  up." 

Mrs  Pryor  raised  her,  and  arranged  her  pillows. 

"  Thank  Heaven !  I  am  not  always  equally  miserable,  and 
ill,  and  hopeless.  The  afternoon  has  been  bad  since  Hortenst' 
went:  perhaps  the  evening  may  be  better.  It  is  a  £ne  night, 
I  think  ?     The  moon  shines  clear." 

"  Very  fine :  a  perfect  summer  night.  The  old  church- 
tower  gleams  white  almost  as  silver." 

"  And  does  the  churchyard  look  peaceful  ?" 

''  Yes,  and  the  garden  also :  dew  glistens  on  the  foliage.** 

*'  Can  you  see  many  long  weeds  and  nettles  amongst  tie 
g;raye8;  or  do  they  look  turfy  and  flowery  ?" 

^^I  see  closed  daisy-heads,  gleaming  like  pearls  on  fiomf 
mounds.  Thomas  has  mown  down  the  dock-leaves  and  rao^ 
grass,. and  cleared  all  away.** 


TALLBT  OF  THB  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.        851 

'*  I  always  like  that  to  be  done  :  it  soothes  one's  mind  to 
see  the  place  in  order :  and,  I  dare  say,  within  the  chnrch 
JQst  now  that  moonlight  shines  as  softly  as  in  my  room.  It 
will  fall  through  the  east  window  fall  on  the  Heist  one  monu- 
ment. When  I  close  my  eyes  I  seem  to  see  poor  papa's 
epitaph  in  black  letters  on  the  white  marble.  There  is  plenty 
of  room  for  other  inflcriptions  nndemeath." 

"William  Farren  came  to  look  after  your  flowers  this 
moTning:  he  was  afraid,  now  you  cannot  tend  them  yourself, 
they  would  be  neglected.  He  has  taken  two  of  your  favourite 
plants  home  to  nurse  for  you." 

"  K  I  were  to  make  a  will,  I  would  leave  William  all  my 
plants ;  Shirley  my  trinkets — except  one,  which  must  not  be 
taken  off  my  neck ;  and  you,  ma'am,  my  books."  (After  a 
pause.)     "  Mrs  Pryor,  I  feel  a  longing  wish  for  something." 

"  For  what,  Caroline  ?  " 

"  You  know  I  always  delight  to  hear  you  sing :  sing  me 
a  hymn  just  now:  sing  that  hymn  which  begins, — 

*'  *  Oar  God,  oar  help  in  ages  past, — 
Oar  hope  for  yetira  to  come ; 
Oar  shelter  A:om  the  stormy  blast ; 
Oar  refage,  haven,  home ! ' " 

Mrs  Pryor  at  once  complied. 

No  wonder  Caroline  liked  to  hear  her  sing :  her  voice*,  even  in 
speaking,  was  sweet  and  silver  clear  ;  in  song,  it  was  almost 
divine:  neither  flute  nor  dulcimer  has  tones  so  pure.  But  the 
tone  was  secondary  compared  to  the  expression  which  trembled 
through :  a  tender  vibration  from  a  feeling  heart. 

The  servants  in  the  kitchen,  hearing  the  strain,  stole  to 
the  stair-foot  to  listen :  even  old  Helstone,  as  he  walked  in 
the  garden,  pondering  over  the  unaccountable  and  feeble 
fistore  of  women,  stood  still  amongst  his  borders  to  catch  the 
mournful  melody  more  distinctly.  Why  it  reminded  him  of 
his  foigotten  de^  wife,  he  could  not  tell ;  nor  why  it  made 
him  more  concerned  than  he  had  hitherto  been  for  Caroline's 
fading  girlhood.  He  was  glad  to  recollect  that  he  had  pronoised 
to  pay  Wynne,  the  magistrate,  a  visit  that  evening.  Low 
gpirits  and  gloomy  thoughts  were- very  much  his  aversion: 
when  they  attacked  him  he  usually  found  means  to  make 
them  march  in  double-quick  time.  The  hymn  followed  him 
f!\intlv  as  he  crossed  the  fields :  he  hastened  his  customary 
•"ii  up  p:«ce,  that  he  might  get  beyond  its  reach. 


352  SHIBLET. 

**  Thy  word  oommandfi  onr  flesh  to  diist,— 
'  Return,  ye  sons  of  men ; ' 
All  nations  ro&e  from  earth  at  first, 
And  torn  to  earth  again. 

'*  A  thousand  ages  in  thy  sight 
Are  like  an  eyening  gone ; 
Short  as  the  watch  that  ends  the  night 
Before  the  rising  snn. 

**  Time,  like  an  ever-rolling  stream. 
Bears  all  its  sons  away ; 
The^  fly,  forgotten,  as  a  dream 
Dies  at  the  opening  day. 

"  Like  flowery  fields,  the  nations  stand. 
Fresh  in  the  morning  light ; 
The  flowers  heneath  the  mower's  hand 
Lie  withering  ere  't  is  night. 

"  Oar  God,  onr  help  in  ages  past, — 
Oar  hope  foi*  years  to  come  ; 
Be  thoa  oar  guard  while  troubles  last, — 
O  Father,  be  our  home  1 " 

"Now  sing  a  song— a  Scottish  song/*  suggested  Caroline 
when  the  hymn  was  over, — **  *  Ye  banks  and  braes  o'  bonny 
Boon.*" 

Again  Mrs  Pryor  obeyed,  or  essayed  to  obey.  At  the  close 
of  the  first  stanza  she  stopped  :  she  could  get  no  further :  her 
full  heart  flowed  over. 

**  You  are  weeping  at  the  pathos  of  the  air :  come  here,  and 
I  will  comfort  you,"  said  Caroline,  in  a  pitying  accent.  Mrs 
Pryor  came  :  she  sat  down  on  the  edge  of  her  patient's  bed, 
and  allowed  the  wasted  arms  to  encircle  her. 

**  You  often  soothe  me,  let  me  soothe  you,**  murmured  the 
young  girl,  kissing  her  check.  ^'  I  hope,**  she  added,  ^'itis 
not  for  me  you  weep.'* 

No  answer  followed. 

**  Do  you  think  I  shall  not  get  better  ?  I  do  not  feel  r^ 
ill — only  weak.*' 

**  But  your  mind,  Caroline:  your  mind  is  crushed;  you 
heart  is  almost  broken :  you  have  been  so  neglected,  so  re- 
pulsed, left  so  desolate.** 

*'  I  believe  grief  is,  and  always  has  been,  my  worst  aihnent. 
I  sometimes  think,  if  an  abundant  gush  of  happiness  came  on 
me,  I  could  revive  yet.'* 

**  Do  you  wish  to  live  ?  ** 

**  I  have  no  object  in  life.** 

•'  You  love  me,  Caroline  ?  '* 

**  Very  much, — very  truly, — inexpressibly  sometimes :  just 
'^^el  as  if  I  could  almost  grow  to  your  heart.*' 


TALLET  OP  THS  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         868 

^I  will  return  directiiy,  dear,"  remarked  Mrs  Pryor,  as  slie 
aid  Caroline  down. 

Quittong  her,  she  glided  to  the  door,  sofUy  turned  the  key 
in  the  lock,  ascertained  that  it  was  fast,  and  came  back.  She 
bent  over  her.  She  threw  back  the  curtain  to  admit  the 
moonlight  more  freely.     She  gazed  intently  on  her  face. 

"  Then,  if  you  love  mfe,**  said  she,  speaking  quickly,  with 
an  altered  voice:  "if  you  feel  as  if — ^to  use  your  own  words 
— you  could  *  grow  to  my  heart,'  it  will  be  neither  shock  nor 
pain  for  you  to  know  that  that  heart  is  the  source  whence  yours 
was  filled;  that  from  my  veins  issued  the  tide  which  flows  in 
fours;  that  you  are  mine — ^my  daughter — ^my  own  child." 

"MrsPryqr 1'' 

"My  own  child  1" 

"  That  is — ^that  means — ^you  have  adopted  me  ?" 

"  It  means  that,  if  I  have  given  you  nothing  else,  I  at  least 

gave  you  life  ;  that  I  bore  you — nursed  you  ;  that  I  am  your 

true  mother:  no  other  woman  can  claim  the  title — it  is  mineJ** 

"  But  Mrs  James  Helstone — ^but  my  father's  wife  whom  I 

do  not  remember  ever  to  have  seen,  she  is  my  mother  ?" 

"She  is  your  mother:  James  Helstone  Was  my  husband. 
I  say  you  are  mine.  I  have  proved  it.  I  thought  perhaps 
you  were  all  his,  which  would  have  been  a  cruel  dispensation 
for  me:  I  find  it  is  not  so.  God  permitted  me  to  be  the  parent 
of  my  child's  mind :  it  belongs  to  me:  it  is  my  property — 
my  right.  These  features  are  James's  own.  He  had  a  fine 
iace  when  he  was  young,  and  not  altered  by  error.  Papa,  my 
darling,  gave  you  your  blue  eyes  and  soft  brown  hair:  he 
gave  you  the  oval  of  your  face  and  the  regularity  of  your 
lineaments:  the  outside  he  conferred;  but. the  heart  and  the 
brain  are  mine:  the  germs  are  from  me,  and  they  are  improved, 
they  are  developed  to  excellence.  I  esteem  and  approve  my 
child  as  highly  as  I  do  most  fondly  love  her.*^ 
"  Is  what  I  hear  true  ?  Is  it  no  dre^n  ?  " 
"  I  wish  it  were  as  true  that  the  substance  and  colour  of 
health  were  restored  to  your  cheek." 

^  My  own  mother  I  is  she  one  I  can  be  so  fond  of  as  I  can 
of  you  ?  People  generally  did  not  like  her,  so  I  have  been 
given  to  understand." 

"  They  told  you  that  ?  Well,  your  mother  now  tells  you, 
that,  not  having  the  gift  to  please  people  generally,  for  tiieir 
approbation  she  does  not  care :  her  thoughts  are  centred  in 
her  child :  does  that  child  welcome  or  reject  her  ?" 

23 


M4  8HIRLET. 

The  few  days  passed,  and — though  it  was  still  thought  it 
could  not  long  delay — ^the  revival  had  not  begun.  Mrs  Pryor, 
who  had  visited  her  daily — ^being  present  in  her  chamber  one 
morning  when  she  had  been  ill  a  fortnight — ^watched  her  very 
narrowly  for  some  minutes  :  she  took  her  hand,  and  placed 
her  finger  on  her  wrist ;  then,  quietly  leaving  the  chiunber, 
she  went  to  Mr  Helstone^s  study.  With  him  she  xemuned 
closeted  a  long  time — ^half  the  morning.  On  returning  to  her 
sick  young  friend,  she  laid  aside  shawl  and  boimet:  she  stood 
a  while  at  the  bedside,  one  hand  placed  in  the  other,  gently 
rocking  herself  to  and  fi:o,  in  an  attitude  and  with  a  movement 
habitual  to  her.    At  last,  she  said — 

'^  I  have  sent  Fanny  to  Fieldhead  to  fetch  a  few  things  for 
me,  such  as  I  shall  want  during  a  short  stay  here :  it  is  my 
wish  to  remain  with  you  till  you  are  better.  Your  imdc 
kindly  permits  my  attendance:  will  it  to  yourself  be  accept- 
able, Caroline  ?  " 

'^  I  am  sorry  you  shoidd  take  such  needless  trouble.  I  do 
not  feel  very  ill,  but  I  cannot  refuse  resolutely:  it  will  be  sucli 
comfort  to  know  you  are  in  the  house,  to  see  you  sometimes 
in  the  room ;  but  don't  confine  yourself  on  my  account,  dear 
Mrs  Pryor.     Fanny  nurses  me  very  well." 

Mrs  Pryor — ^bending  over  the  pale  littfe  sufferer — ^was  now 
smoothing  the  hair  under  her  cap,  and  gently  raising  her 
pillow.  As  she  performed  these  offices,  Caroline,  smiling, 
lifted  her  face  to  kiss  her. 

"  Are  y6u  free  from  pain?  Are  you  tolerably  at  ease?" 
was  inquired  in  a  low,  earnest  voice,  as  the  self-elected  mxr» 
yielded  to  the  cai^sss.    ' 

''  I  think  I  am  almost  happy." 

"  You  wish  to  drink  ?    Your  lips  are  parched." 

She  held  a  glass  filled  with  some  cooling  beverage  to  hei 
mouth. 

"  Have  you  eaten  anything  to  day,  Caroline  ?  " 

"  I  cannot  eat." 

'^  But  soon  your  appetite  will  return:  it  must  return:  tbst 
is,  I  pray  God  it  may ! " 

In  laying  her  again  on  the  couch,  she  encircled  her  in  her 
arms ;  and  while  so  doing,  by  ^  movement  whidi  seemed 
scarcely  voluntary,  she  drew  her  to  her  heart,  and  held  her 
close  gathered  an  instant. 

"  I  shall  hardly  wish  to  get  well,  that  I  may  keep  yoa 
always,"  said  Caroline. 


TALLBT  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         845 

MxB  Fryor  did  not  smile  at  this  speech :  over  her  features 
ran  a  tremor,  whicli  for  some  minutes  she  was  absorbed  in 
repressing. 

"  You  are  more  used  to  Fanny  than  to  me,"  she  remarked, 
erelong.  "  I  should  think  my  attendance  must  seem  strange, 
officious  ?  " 

"  No:  quite  natural,  and  .very  soothing.  You  must  have 
been  accustomed  to  wait  on  sick  people,  ma^am.  You  move 
about  the  room  so  softly,  and  you  speak  so  quietly,  and  touch 
me  so  gently." 

"  I  am  dexterous  in  nothing,  my  dear.  You  will  often  find 
me  awkward,  but  never  negligent." 

Negligent,  indeed,  she  was  not.     From  that  hour,  Fanny 

and  Eliza  became  ciphers  in  the  sick>room  :  Mrs  Pryor  made 

it  her  domain:  she  performed  all  its  duties;  she  lived  in  it 

day  and  night.     The  patient  remonstrated — faintly,  however, 

from  the  first,  and  not  at  all  erelong :   loneliness  and  gloom 

were  now  banished  from  her  bedside ;  protection  and  solace 

sat  there  instead.     She  and  her  nurse  coalesced  in  wondrous 

imion.      Caroline  was  usually  pained  to  require  or  receive 

much  attendance  :  Mrs  Pryor,  under  ordinary  circumstances, 

had  neither  the  habit  nor  the  art  of  performing  little  offices  of 

service;  but  all  now  passed  with  such  ease — so  naturally,  that 

the  patient  was  as  willing  to  be  cherished  as  the  nurse  was 

bent  on  cherishing:  no  sign  of  weariness  in  the  latter  ever 

leminded  the  former  that  she  ought  to  be  anxious.     There 

was,  in  fact,  no  very  hard  duty  to  perform ;  but  a  hireling 

might  have  found  it  hard. 

With  all  this  care,  it  seemed  strange  the  sick  girl  did  not 
get  well;  yet  such  was  the  case:  she  washed  like  any  snow- 
wreath  in  thaw;  she  faded  like  any  flower  in  drought.  Miss 
Keeldar,  on  whose  thoughts  danger  or  death  seldom  intruded, 
had  at  first  entertained  no  fears  at  all  for  her  friend;  but 
seeing  her  change  and  sink  from  time  to  time  when  she  paid 
her  visits,  alarm  clutched  her  heart.  She  went  to  Mr  Helstone 
ind  expressed  herself  with  so  much  energy,  that  that  gentle- 
man was  at  last  obliged,  however  unwillingly,  to  admit  the 
idea  that  his  niece  was  ill  of  something  more  than  a  migraine; 
uid  when  Mrs  Pryor  came  and  quietly  demanded  a  physician, 
be  said  she  might  send  for  two  if  she  liked.  One  came,  but 
that  one  was  an  oracle:  he  delivered  a  dark  saying  of  which 
the  future  was  to  solve  the  mystery,  wrote  some  prescriptions, 
gftTe  some  directions — ^the  whole  with  an  air  of  crushing 


846  smBiiET. 

authority— pocketed  his  fee,  and  went.  Frobablj,  he  knew 
well  enough  he  could  do  no  good;  but  didn't  like  to  saj  aa 

Still,  no  rumour  of  serious  illness  got  wind  in  the  ndgh* 
bourhood.  At  Hollow's-cottage  it  was  thought  that  Caroline 
had  only  a  severe  cold,  she  having  written  a  note  to  Hoitense 
to  that  effect;  and  Mademoiselle  contented  herself  with  sending 
two  pots  of  currant  jam,  a  receipt  for  a  tisane,  and  a  note  of 
advice. 

Mrs  Yorke  being  told  that  a  physician  had  been  smmnoned, 
sneered  at  the  hypochondriac  fancies  of  the  rich  and  idle, 
who,  she  said,  have  nothing  but  themselves  to  think  about, 
must  needs  send  for  a  doctor  if  only  so  much  as  their  little 
finger  ached. 

The  '*  rich  and  idle,*'  represented  in  the  person  of  Caroline, 
were  meantime  falling  fast  into  a  condition  of  prostrationf 
whose  quickly  consunmiated  debility  puzzled  all  who  wit- 
nessed it,  except  one ;  for  that  one  aJone  reflected  how  liable 
is  the  imdermined  structure  to  sink  in  sudden  rain. 

Sick  people  often  have  &,ncies  inscrutable  to  ordinaiy 
attendants,  and  Caroline  had  one  which  even  her  tender  nurse 
could  not  at  first  explain.  On  a  certain  day  in  the  week,  at 
a  certain  hour,  she  would — whether  worse  or  better — entreat 
to  be  taken  up  and  dressed,  and  suflered  to  sit  in  her  chair 
near  the  window.  This  station  she  would  retain  till  noon 
was  past:  whatever  degree  of  exhaustion  or  debility  her  wan 
aspect  betrayed,  she  still  softly  put  off  all  persuasion  to  seek 
repose  until  the  church-clock  had  duly  toUed  mid-day:  the 
twelve  strokes  sounded,  she  grew  docQe,  and  would  meekly 
lie  down.  Betumed  to  the  couch,  she  usually  buried  her 
face  deep  in  the  pillow,  and  drew  the  coverlets  dose  round 
her,  as  if  to  shut  out  the  world  and  sim,  of  which  she  wai 
tired:  more  than  once,  as  she  thus  lay,  a  slight  convulsion 
shook  the  sick-bed,  and  a  faint  sob  broke  the  sijence  round  it. 
These  things  were  not  unnoted  by  Mrs  Pryor. 

One  Tuesday  morning,  as  usual,  she  had  asked  leave  to 
rise,  and  now  she  sat  wrapped  in  her  white  dressing-gown, 
leaning  forward  in  the  easy-chair,  gazing  steadily  and  patiently 
from  the  lattice.  Mrs  Pryor  was  seated  a  little  behind,  knit- 
ting as  it  seemed,  but,  in  truth^  watching  her.  A  change 
crossed  her  pale  mournful  brow,  animating  its  languor;  a 
light  shot  into  her  faded  eyes,  reviving  their  lustre;  she  half 
rose  and  looked  earnestly  out.  Mrs  Pryor,  drawing  softly 
^eaTy  glanced  over  her  shoulder.    From   this  window  wu 


VALLEY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         847 

visible  the  churchyard,  beyond  it  the  road,  and  there,  riding 
sharply  by,  appeared  a  horseman.  The  figure  was  not  yet 
too  remote  for  recognition:  Mrs  Pryor  had  long  sight;  she 
knew  Mr  Moore.  Just  as  an  intercepting  rising  ground  con- 
cealed him  from  view,  the  clock  struck  twelve. 
"  May  I  lie  down  again?"  asked  Caroline. 
Her  nurse  assisted  her  to  bed:  having  laid  her  down  and 
drawn  the  curtain,  she  stood  listening  near.  The  little  couch 
trembled,  the  suppressed  sob  stirred  the  air.  A  contraction 
as  of  anguish  altered  Mrs  Pryor's  features ;  she  wrung  her 
hands ;  half  a  groan  escaped  her  lips.  She  now  remembered 
that  Tuesday  was  Whinbury  market-day:  Mr  Moore  must 
always  pass  the  Rectory  on  his  way  thither,  just  ere  noon  of 
that  day. 

Caroline  wore  continually  round  her  neck  a  slender  braid 
of  silk,  attached  to  which  was  some  trinket.  Mrs  Pryor  had 
seen  the  bit  of  gold  glisten ;  but  had  not  yet  obtained  a  fair 
view  of  it.  B[er  patient  never  parted  with  it:  when  dressed 
it  was  hidden  in  her  bosom;  as  she  lay  in  bed  she  always 
held  it  in  her  hand.  That  Tuesday  afternoon  the  transient 
doze — more  like  lethargy  than  sleep  —  which  sometimes 
abridged  the  long  days,  had  stolen  over  her:  the  weather  was 
hot:  while  turning  in  febrile  restlessness,  she  had  pushed  the 
coverlets  a  little  aside ;  Mrs  Pryor  bent  to  replace  them ; 
the  small,  wasted  hand  lying  nerveless  on  the  sick  girl's 
breast,  clasped  as  usual  her  je^ously-guarded  treasure:  &ose 
fingers  whose  attenuation  it  gave  pain  to  see,  were  now  relaxed 
in  sleep:  Mrs  Pryor  gently  disengaged  the  braid,  drawing  out 
a  tiny  locket — a  slight  thing  it  was,  such  as  it  suited  her 
small  purse  to  purchase:  under  its  crystal  face  appeared  a 
cnri  of  black  hair — ^too  short  and  crisp  to  have  been  severed 
from  a  female  head. 

Some  agitated  movement  occasioned  a  twitch  of  the  silken 
chain:  the  sleeper  started  and  woke.  Her  thoughts  were 
usually  now  somewhat  scattered  on  waking ;  her  look  gene- 
rally wandering.     Half-rising,  as  if  in  terror,  she  exclaimed: 

^* Don't  take  it  from  me,  Robert  1  Don't!  It  is  my  lost 
comfort — let  me  keep  it.  I  never  tell  any  one  whose  hair  it 
is— I  never  show  it." 

Mrs  Pryor  had  already  disappeared  behind  the  curtain: 
raduung  fiir  back  in  a  deep  arm-chair  by  the  bedside,  she 
was  withdrawn  fi:t>m  view.  Caxoline  looked  abroad  into  the 
chamber:  she  thought  it  empty.    As  her  stray  ideas  returned 


848  SHiBLEir. 

slowly,  eacli  folding  its  weak  wings  on  the  mind's  sad  shore, 
like  birds  exhausted, — ^beholding  void,  and  jiemeiyiDg  ffllenoe 
round  her,  she  believed  herself  alone.  Collected,  she  was  not 
yet:  perhaps  healthy  self-possession  and  self-control  were  tc 
be  hers  no  more;  perhaps  that  world  the  strong  and  pros- 
perous live  in  had  already  rolled  from  beneath  her  feet  for 
ever:  so,  at  least,  it  often  seemed  to  herself.  Inheal&,  she 
had  never  been  accustomed  to  think  aloud ;  but  now  woidi 
escaped  her  lips  imawares. 

"  Oh  I  I  should  see  him  once  more  before  all  is  over : 
Heaven  might  favour  me  thus  far  I "  she  cried.  "  God  grant 
me  a  little  comfort  before  I  die ! "  was  her  humble  petition. 

"  But  he  will  not  know  I  am  ill  tiU  I  am  gone;  and  he  will 
come  when  they  have  laid  me  out,  and  I  am  senseless,  cold, 
and  stiff. 

"  What  can  my  departed  soul  feel  then?  Can  it  see  or 
know  what  happens  to  the  clay  ?  Can  spirits,  through  any 
medium,  communicate  with  living  flesh  ? .  Can  the  dead  at 
all  revisit  those  they  leave  ?  Can  they  come  in  the  elements? 
Will  wind,  water,  fire,  lend  me  a  path  to  Moore  ? 

"Is  it  for  nothing  the  wind  sounds  ahnost  articulately 
sometimes — sings  as  I  have  lately  heard  it  sing  at  night — or 
passes  the  casement  sobbing,  as  if  for  sorrow  to  come  ?  Does 
nothing,  then,  haunt  it — nothing  inspire  it  ? 

"Why,  it  suggested  to  me  words  one  night:  it  poured  t 
strain  which  I  could  have  written  down,  only  I  was  appalled, 
and  dared  not  rise  to  seek  pencil  and  paper  by  the  dim  watch- 
Hght. 

"What  is  that  electricity  they  speak  of,  whose  changes 
make  us  well  or  ill ;  whose  lack  or  excess  blasts ;  whose  even 
balance  revives?  What  are  all  those  influences  that  are 
about  us  in  the  atmosphere,  that  keep  plajdng  over  our  nerves 
like  fingers  on  stringed  instruments,  and  call  forth .  now  a 
sweet  note,  and  now  a  wail — now  an  exultant  swell,  and^ 
anon,  the  saddest  cadence  ? 

"  Where  is  the  other  world?  In  what  will  another  life 
consist  ?  Why  do  I  ask  ?  Have  I  not  cause  to  think  that 
the  hour  is  hasting  but  too  fast  when  the  veil  must  be  rent 
for  me?  Do  I  not  know  the  Grand  Mystery  is  likely  to 
burst  prematurely  on  me  ?  Great  Spirit !  in  whose  goodness 
I  confide  ;  whom,  as  my  Father,  I  have  petitioned  night  and 
morning  from  early  infancy,  help  the  weak  creation  of  thy 

mds !     Sustain  me  through  the  ordeal  I  dread  and  must 


VALLBT  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         849 

indergo  I   Give  me  strength  1   Give  me  patience  1   Give  me — 
)h  !     ffive  me  vajtr  I  *' 

She  fell  back  on  her  pillow.  Mrs  Pryor  fonnd  means  to 
steal  quietly  from  the  room :  she  re-entered  it  soon  after, 
ftpparently  as  composed  as  if  she  had  really  not  overheard 
this  strange  sohloquy. 

The  next  day  several  callers  came.  It  had  become  known 
that  Miss  Helstone  was  worse.  Mr  Hall  and  his  sister 
Margaret  arrived :  both,  after  they  had  been  in  the  sick-^room, 
quitted  it  in  tears ;  they  had  found  the  patient  more  altered 
than  they  expected.  Hortense  Moore  came.  Caroline  seemed 
stimnlated  by  her  presence  :  she  assured  her,  smiling,  she  was 
not  dangerously  ill;  she  talked  to  her  in  a  low  voice,  but 
cheerfully :  during  her  stay,  excitement  kept  up  the  flush  of 
her  complexion :  she  looked  better. 

"How  is  Mr  Robert  ?"  asked  Mrs  Pryor,  as  Hortense  was 
preparing  to  take  leave. 

**  He  was  very  well  when  he  left." 
•*  Left'l  Is  he  gone  from  home  ?** 

It  was  then  explained  that  some  police  intelligence  about 
the  rioters  of  whom  he  was  in  pursuit,  had,  that  morning, 
called  him  away  to  Bumingham,  and  probably  a  fortnight 
might  elapse  ere  he  returned.  ' 

"  He  is  not  aware  that  Miss  Helstone  is  very  ill  ?  " 
*^  Oh !  no.    He  thought,  like  me,  that  she  had  only  a  bad 
cold." 

After  this  visit,  Mrs  Pryor  took  care  not  to  approach 
Caroline's  couch  for  above  an  hour :  she  heard  her  weep,  and 
dared  not  look  on  her  tears. 

Afi  evening  closed  in,  she  brought  her  some  tea.  Caroline, 
opening  her  eyes  from  a  moment's  slumber,  viewed  her  nurse 
with  an  unrecognising  glance. 

**  1  smelt  the  honeysuckles  in  the  glen  this  summer-morning," 
she  said,  **  as  I  stood  at  the  counting-house  window." 

Strange  words  like  these  from  pallid  lips  pierce  a  loving 
listener's  heart  more  poignantly  than  steel.  They  sound 
romantic,  perhaps,  in  books  :  in  real  life,  they  are  harrowing. 
"  My  darling,  do  you  know  me  ?"  said  Mrs  Pryor. 
''  I  went  in  to  call  Kobert  to  breakfast :  I  have  been  with 
iiim  in  the  garden :  he  asked  me  to  go :  a  heavy  dew  has 
refreshed  the  flowers  :  the  peaches  are  ripening." 

'<*My  darling  t  my  darling ! "  again  and  again  repealed  the 
nurse. 


850  8HIRLXY. 

**  I  thought  it  was  daylight — ^long  after  snnrise :  it  looks 
dark — ^is  the  moon  now  set  ?  " 

That  moon,  lately  risen,  was  gazing .  fall  and  mild  upon 
her :  floating  in  deep  hlue  space,  it  watched  her  nncloaded. 

"  Then  it  is  not  morning  ?  I  am  not  at  the  cottage  ?   Who 
is  this  ? — ^I  see  a  shape  at  my  hedside." 

"  It  is  myself — ^it  is  your  friend — ^yonr  nurse — ^your . 

Lean  your  head  on  my  shoulder :  collect  yourself.*'  (In  a 
lower  tone.)  "Oh  God,  take  pity  I  Give  her  life,  and  me 
strength  I     Send  me  courage — teach  me  words !  *' 

Some  minutes  passed  in  silence.  The  patient  lay  mute 
and  passive  in  the  trembling  arms— on  the  throbbing  bosom 
of  the  nurse. 

"I  am  better  now,"  whispered  Caroline,  at  last,  "mudb 
better — ^I  feel  where  I  am  :  this  is  Mrs  Pryor  near  me:  I  was 
dreaming — I  talk  when  I  wake  up  from  dreams :  people  often  do 
in  illness.  How  fast  your  heart  beats,  ma'am  I  Donotbea£raid.*' 

"  It  is  not  fear,  child ;  only  a  little  anxiety,  which  will 
pass.  I  have  brought  you  some  tea,  Gary;  your  uncle  made 
it  himself.  You  know  he  says  he  can  make  a  better  cup  of 
tea  than  any  housewife  can.  Taste  it.  He  is  concerned  to 
hear  that  you  eat  so  little :  he  would  be  glad  if  you  had  t 
better  appetite." 

"  I  am  thirsty:  let  me  drink.'* 

She  drank  eagerly. 

"  What  o'clock  is  it,  ma'am  ?"  she  asked. 

"  Past  nine." 

"  Not  later  ?  Oh  I  I  have  yet  a  long  night  before  me : 
but  the  tea  has  made  me  strong:  I  will  sit  up." 

Mrs  Pryor  raised  her,  and  arranged  her  pUlows. 
'    "  Thank  Heaven  I    I  am  not  always  equally  miserable,  and 
ill,  and  hopeless.     The  afternoon  has  been  bad  since  Hortenst 
went:  perhaps  the  evening  may  be  better.     It  is  a  fine  night, 
I  think  ?     The  moon  shines  clear." 

"  Very  fine :  a  perfect  summer  night.  The  old  church- 
tower  gleams  white  almost  as  silver." 

"  And  does  the  churchyard  look  peaceful  ?" 

"  Yes,  and  the  garden  also:  dew  glistens  on  the  foliage.** 

*'  Can  you  see  many  long  weeds  and  nettles  amongst  the 
graves;  or  do  they  look  turfy  and  flowery  ?" 

^^I  see  closed  daisy-heads,  gleaming  like  pearls  on  sois^ 
mounds.  Thomas  has  mown  down  the  dock-leaves  and  rank 
grassy.and  cleared  all  away.** 


YALLBY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         851 

"  I  always  like  that  to  be  done  :  it  soothes  one's  mind  to 
see  the  place  in  order:  and,  I  dare  say,  within  the  chnrch 
JQst  now  that  moonlight  shines  as  sofUy  as  in  my  room.  It 
tdll  fall  through  the  east  window  full  on  the  Helstone  monu- 
ment. When  I  close  my  eyes  I  seem  to  see  poor  papa's 
epitaph  in  black  letters  on  the  white  marble.  There  is  plenty 
of  room  for  other  infioriptions  underneath.'' 

"William  Farren  came  to  look  after  your  flowers  this 
moraing:  he  was  afraid,  now  you  cannot  tend  them  yourself, 
they  would  be  neglected.  He  has  taken  two  of  your,  favourite 
plants  home  to  nurse  for  you." 

"  K  I  were  to  make  a  will,  I  would  leave  "William  all  my 
plants ;  Shirley  my  trinkets — except  one,  which  must  not  be 
taken  off  my  neck ;  and  you,  ma'am,  my  books."  (After  a 
pause.)     "  Mrs  Pryor,  I  feel  a  longing  wish  for  something." 

"For  what,  Caroline?" 

"  You  know  I  always  delight  to  hear  you  sing :  sing  me 
a  hymn  just  now:  sing  that  hymn  which  begins, — 

**  *  Oar  God,  our  help  in  ages  past, — 
Oar  hope  for  jetora  to  come ; 
Our  shelter  from  the  stormy  blast ; 
Oar  refage,  haven,  home  I '  '* 

Mis  Pryor  at  once  complied. 

No  wonder  Caroline  liked  to  hear  her  sing :  her  voice*,  even  in 
speaking,  was  sweet  and  silver  clear  ;  in  song,  it  was  almost 
divine:  neither  flute  nor  dulcimer  has  tones  so  pure.  But  the 
tone  was  secondary  compared  to  the  expression  which  trembled 
through :  a  tender  vibration  from  a  feeling  heart. 

The  servants  in  the  kitchen,  hearing  the  strain,  stole  to 
the  Btair-foot  to  listen :  even  old  Helstone,  as  he  walked  in 
the  garden,  pondering  over  the  unaccountable  and  feeble 
nature  of  women,  stood  still  amongst  his  borders  to  catch  the 
mournful  melody  more  distinctly.  Why  it  reminded  him  of 
his  forgotten  dead  wife,  he  could  not  tell ;  nor  why  it  made 
him  more  concerned  than  he  had  hitherto  been  for  Caroline's 
£Miing  girlhood.  He  was  glad  to  recollect  that  he  had  promised 
to  pay  Wynne,  the  magistrate,  a  visit  that  evening.  Low 
spirits  and  gloomy  thoughts  were- very  much  his  aversion: 
when  they  attacked  him  he  usually  found  means  to  make 
them  mai^ch  in  double-quick  time.  The  hynm  followed  him 
faintl7  as  he  crossed  the  fields :  he  hastened  his  customary 
-Imp  pjcf,  thjit  he  might  get  beyond  its  reach. 


352  SHIBLEYr 

M  Thy  word  commands  onr  flesh  to  dust,— 
*  Betnm,  ye  sons  of  men ;  * 
All  nations  ro^e  from  earth  at  first, 
And  turn  to  earth  again. 

**  A  thousand  ages  in  thy  sight 
Are  like  an  evening  gone ; 
Short  as  the  watch  that  ends  the  night 
Before  the  rising  son. 

'*  Time,  like  an  ever-rolling  stream, 
Bears  all  its  sons  away ; 
They  fly,  forgotten,  as  a  dream 
Dies  at  the  opening  day. 

"  Like  flowery  fields,  the  nations  stand, 
Fresh  in  the  morning  light ; 
The  flowers  beneath  the  mower's  hand 
Lie  withering  ere  't  is  night. 

"  Oar  God,  oar  help  in  ages  past, — 
Oar  hope  for  years  to  come  ; 
Be  thou  our  guard  while  troubles  last,-- 
O  Father,  be  our  home  i " 

"Now  sing  a  song — a  Scottish  song,"  suggested  CaroKne 
when  the  hymn  was  over, — "  *  Ye  banks  and  braes  o*  bonny 
Boon/  *' 

Again  Mrs  Pryor  obeyed,  or  essayed  to  obey.  At  the  close 
of  the  first  stanza  she  stopped  :  she  could  get  no  further :  her 
full  heart  flowed  over. 

'*  You  are  weeping  at  the  pathos  of  the  air :  come  here,  and 
I  will  comfort  you,"  said  Caroline,  in  a  pitying  accent.  Mrs 
Pryor  came  :  she  sat  down  on  the  edge  of  her  patient's  bed, 
and  allowed  the  wasted  arms  to  encircle  her. 

**  You  often  soothe  me,  let  me  soothe  you,"  murmured  the 
young  girl,  kissing  her  check.  **  I  hope,"  she  added,  "it  is 
not  for  me  you  weep." 

No  answer  followed. 

"  Do  you  think  I  shall  not  get  better  ?  I  do  not  feel  very 
ill — only  weak." 

**  But  your  mind,  Caroline  :  your  mind  is  crushed ;  yon 
heart  is  almost  broken :  you  have  been  so  neglected,  so  re- 
pulsed, left  so  desolate." 

**  I  believe  grief  is,  and  always  has  been,  my  worst  ailment. 
I  sometimes  think,  if  an  abundant  gush  of  happiness  came  on 
me,  I  could  revive  yet." 

**  Do  you  wish  to  live  ?  " 

**  I  have  no  object  in  life." 

••  You  love  me,  Caroline  ?  " 

"Very  much, — very  truly, — inexpressibly  sometimes:  just 
ow  I  feel  as  if  I  could  almost  grow  to  your  heart." 


TALLET  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         868 

^I  will  return  directly,  dear/'  remarked  Mrs  Pryor,  as  she 
^d  Caroline  down. 

Quitting  her,  she  glided  to  tlie  door,  sofUy  turned  the  key 
n  the  lock,  ascertained  that  it  was  fast,  and  came  back.  She 
bent  oyer  her.  She  threw  back  the  curtain  to  admit  the 
moonlight  more  freely.     She  gazed  intently  on  her  face. 

"  Then,  if  you  love  me,''  said  she,  speaking  quickly,  with 
on  altered  voice :  "  if  you  feel  as  if — to  use  your  own  words 
— you  could  *  grow  to  my  heart,'  it  will  be  neither  shock  nor 
pain  for  you  to  know  that  that  heart  is  the  source  whence  yours 
was  filled;  that  from  my  veins  issued  the  tide  which  flows  in 
yours;  that  you  are  mine — ^my  daughter — ^my  own  child." 

"MrsPryor 1'' 

"My  own  child  I" 

"  That  is — that  means — ^you  have  adopted  me  ?" 

"  It  means  that,  if  I  have  given  you  nothing  else,  I  at  least 

gave  you  life  ;  that  I  bore  you — nursed  you  ;  that  I  am  your 

true  mother:  no  other  woman  can  claim  the  title — it  is  mineJ'* 

''  But  Mrs  James  Helstone — ^but  my  father's  wife  whom  I 

do  not  remember  ever  to  have  seen,  she  is  my  mother  ?" 

"She  is  your  mother:  James  Helstone  Was  mj/  husband. 
I  say  you  are  mine.  I  have  proved  it.  I  thought  perhaps 
you  were  all  his,  which  would  have  been  a  cruel  dispensation 
for  me:  I  find  it  is  not  so.  God  permitted  me  to  be  the  parent 
of  my  child's  mind :  it  belongs  to  me :  it  is  my  property — 
my  right.  These  features  are  James's  own.  He  had  a  fine 
&ce  when  he  was  young,  and  not  altered  by  error.  Papa,  my 
darling,  gave  you  your  blue  eyes  and  sofl  brown  hair:  he 
gave  you  the  oval  of  your  face  and  the  regularity  of  your 
lineaments:  the  outside  he  conferred;  but. the  heart  and  the 
brain  are  mine:  the  germs  are  from  me,  and  they  are  improved, 
they  are  developed  to  excellence.  I  esteem  and  approve  my 
child  as  highly  as  I  do  most  fondly  love  her." 
" Is  what  I  hear  true  ?  Is  it  no  dreatn ?" 
"  I  wish  it  were  as  true  that  the  substance  and  colour  of 
liealth  were  restored  to  your  cheek.'^ 

'*  My  own  mother  I  is  she  one  I  can  be  so  fond  of  as  I  can 
of  you  ?  People  generally  did  not  like  her,  so  I  have  been 
given  to  understand." 

"  They  told  you  that  ?  Well,  your  mother  now  tells  you, 
that,  not  having  the  gift  to  please  people  generally,  for  their 
approbation  she  does  not  care :  her  thoughts  are  centred  in 
her  child :  does  that  child  welcome  or  reject  her  ?^ 

23 


d44  SHIRLET. 

The  few  days  passed,  and — ^though  it  was  still  thouglit  it 
could  not  long  delay — ^the  revival  Jiad  not  began.  Mrs  Pryor, 
who  had  visited  her  daily — ^being  present  in  her  chamber  one 
morning  when  she  had  been  ill  a  fortnight — ^watched  her  yerj 
narrowly  for  some  minutes  :  she  took  her  hand,  and  placed 
her  finger  on  her  wrist ;  then,  quietly  leaving  the  chiUDber, 
she  went  to  Mr  Helstone^s  study.  With  him  she  remained 
closeted  a  long  time — ^haJf  the  morning.  On  returning  to  her 
sick  young  friend,  she  laid  aside  shawl  and  bonnet:  she  stood 
a  while  at  the  bedside,  one  hand  placed  in  the  other,  gently 
rocking  herself  to  and  &o,  in  an  attitude  and  with  a  movement 
habitual  to  her.     At  last,  she  said — 

"  I  have  sent  Fanny  to  Fieldhead  to  fetch  a  few  things  for 
me,  such  as  I  shall  want  during  a  short  stay  here :  it  is  mj 
wish  to  remain  with  you  till  you  are  better.  Your  uncle 
kindly  permits  my  attendance:  will  it  to  yourself  be  accept- 
able, Caroline  ?  " 

"  I  am  sorry  you  should  take  such  needless  trouble.  I  do 
not  feel  very  ill,  but  I  cannot  refuse  resolutely:  it  wiU  be  such 
comfort  to  know  you  are  in  the  house,  to  see  you  sometimes 
in  the  room ;  but  don't  confine  yourself  on  my  account,  dear 
Mrs  Pryor.     Fanny  nurses  me  very  well." 

Mrs  Pryor — ^bending  over  the  pale  littfe  sufferer — ^was  now 
smoothing  the  hair  under  her  cap,  and  gently  raising  ber 
pillow.  As  she  performed  these  offices,  Caroline,  snuling, 
lifted  her  face  to  kiss  her. 

"  Are  y6u  free  from  pain?  Are  you  tolerably  at  ease?" 
was  inquired  in  a  low,  earnest  voice,  as  the  self-elected  nurse 
yielded  to  the  cai^sa.    ' 

"  I  think  I  am  almost  happy." 

"  You  wish  tp  drink  ?     Your  lips  are  parched." 

She  held  a  glass  filled  with  some  cooling  beverage  to  hei 
mouth. 

"  Have  you  eaten  anjrthing  to  day,  Caroline  ?  " 

"  I  cannot  eat." 

'*  But  soon  your  appetite  will  return:  it  must  return;  that 
is,  I  pray  God  it  may  1 " 

In  laying  her  again  on  the  couch,  she  encircled  hsr  in  her 
arms ;  and  while  so  doing,  by  u  movement  whidli  seemed 
scarcely  volimtary,  she  drew  her  to  her  heart,  and  held  ber 
close  gathered  an  instant. 

<'  I  shall  hardly  wish  to  get  well,  that  I  may  keep  you 

^ays,"  said  Caroline. 


TALUET  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         S45 

Mrs  Pryor  did  not  smile  at  this  speech:  over  her  features 
ran  a  tremor,  which  for  some  minutes  she  was  absorbed  in 
x^ressing. 

"  You  are  more  used  to  Fanny  than  to  me,"  she  remarked, 
erelong.  <'  I  should  think  my  attendance  must  seem  strange, 
officious  ?  " 

"  No:  quite  natural,  and  yery  soothing.  You  must  have 
been  accustomed  to  wait  on  sick  people,  ma'am.  You  move 
about  the  room  so  sofUy,  and  you  q>eak  so  quietly,  and  touch 
me  so  gently." 

"  I  am  dexterous  in  nothing,  my  dear.  You  will  often  find 
me  awkward,  but  never  negligent." 

Negligent,  indeed,  she  was  not.  From  that  hour,  Fanny 
and  Eliza  became  ciphers  in  the  sick-room  :  Mrs  Pryor  made 
it  her  domain :  she  performed  all  its  duties ;  she  lived  in  it 
day  and  night.  The  patient  remonstrated — faintly,  however, 
from  the  first,  and  not  at  all  erelong :  loneliness  and  gloom 
were  now  banished  from  her  bedside ;  protection  and  solace 
sat  there  instead.  She  and  her  nurse  coalesced  in  wondrous 
union.  Caroline  was  usually  pained  to  require  or  receive 
much  attendance  :  Mrs  Pryor,  imder  ordinary  circumstances, 
had  neither  the  habit  nor  the  art  of  performing  little  offices  of 
service ;  but  all  now  passed  with  such  ease — so  naturally,  that 
the  patient  was  as  willing  to  be  cherished  as  the  nurse  was 
bent  on  cherishing:  no  sign  of  weariness  in  the  latter  ever 
reminded  the  former  that  she  ought  to  be  anxious.  There 
was,  in  fact,  no  very  hard  duty  to  perform  ;  but  a  hireling 
might  have  found  it  hard. 

With  all  this  care,  it  seemed  strange  the  sick  girl  did  not 
get  well ;  yet  such  was  the  case :  she  washed  like  any  snow- 
wreath  in  thaw;  she  faded  like  any  flower  in  drought.  Miss 
Keeldar,  on  whose  thoughts  danger  or  death  seldom  intruded, 
had  at  first  entertained  no  fears  at  all  for  her  friend;  but 
seeing  her  change  and  sink  from  time  to  time  when  she  paid 
her  visits,  alarm  clutched  her  heart.  She  went  to  Mr  Helstone 
and  expressed  herself  with  so  much  energy,  that  that  gentle- 
man was  at  last  obliged,  however  unwillingly,  to  admit  the 
idea  that  his  niece  was  ill  of  something  more  than  a  migraine; 
ttnd  when  Mrs  Pryor  came  and  quietly  demanded  a  physician, 
he  said  she  might  send  for  two  if  she  liked.  One  came,  but 
that  one  was  an  oracle:  he  delivered  a  dark  sa3dng  of  which 
the  fiiture  was  to  solve  the  mystery,  wrote  some  prescriptions, 
gave  some  directions — ^the  whole  with  an  air  of  crushing 


846  SHDOiET. 

authority-— pocketed  his  fee,  and  went.    Probably,  be  knew 
well  enough  he  could  do  no  good;  but  didn't  like  to  say  aa 

Still,  no  rumour  of  serious  illness  got  wind  in  the  neigh- 
bouriiood.  At  Hollow's-cottage  it  was  thought  that  Caroline 
had  only  a  severe  cold,  she  having  written  a  note  to  Hoiteose 
to  that  effect;  and  Mademoiselle  contented  herself  with  sending 
two  pots  of  currant  jam,  a  receipt  for  a  tisane,  and  a  note  of 
advice. 

Mrs  Yorke  being  told  that  a  physician  had  been  sunumxied^ 
sneered  at  the  hypochondriac  fancies  of  the  rich  and  idle, 
who,  she  said,  have  nothing  but  themselves  to  think  about, 
must  needs  send  for  a  doctor  if  only  so  much  as  their  little 
finger  ached. 

The  "  rich  and  idle,"  represented  in  the  person  of  Caroline, 
were  meantime  falling  fatst  into  a  condition  of  prostration, 
whose  quickly  consummated  debility  puzzled  all  who  wit- 
nessed it,  except  one ;  for  that  one  alone  reflected  how  liable 
is  the  undermined  structure  to  sink  in  sudden  ruin. 

Sick  people  often  have  &ncies  inscrutable  to  ordinaiy 
attendants,  and  Caroline  had  one  which  even  her  tender  nurse 
could  not  at  first  explain.  On  a  certain  day  in  the  wecJc,  at 
a  certain  hour,  she  would — ^whether  worse  or  better — entreat 
to  be  taken  up  and  dressed,  and  suffered  to  sit  in  her  ch&ii 
near  the  window.  This  station  she  would  retain  tUl  noo& 
was  past :  whatever  degree  of  exhaustion  or  debility  her  wan 
aspect  betrayed,  she  still  soflly  put  off  all  persuasion  to  seek 
repose  imtil  the  church-clock  had  duly  tolled  mid-day :  the 
twelve  strokes  sounded,  she  grew  docile,  and  would  meekly 
lie  down.  Returned  to  the  couch,  she  usually  buried  her 
face  deep  in  the  pillow,  and  drew  the  coverlets  dose  round 
her,  as  if  to  shut  out  the  world  and  sun,  of  which  she  wai 
tired:  more  than  once,  as  she  thus  lay,  a  slight  convulsion 
shook  the  sick-bed,  and  a  faint  sob  broke  the  silence  round  it. 
These  things  were  not  unnoted  by  Mrs  Pryor. 

One  Tuesday  morning,  as  usual,  she  had  asked  leave  to 
rise,  and  now  she  sat  wrapped  in  her  white  dressing-gown, 
leaning  forward  in  the  easy-chair,  gazing  steadily  and  patiently 
from  tiie  lattice.  Mrs  Pryor  was  seated  a  little  behind,  knit- 
ting as  it  seemed,  but,  in  truthj  watching  her.  A  change 
crossed  her  pale  mournful  brow,  animating  its  languor ;  a 
light  shot  into  her  faded  eyes,  reviving  their  lustre;  she  half 
rose  and  looked  earnestly  out.  Mrs  Pryor,  drawing  softly 
'^OTf  glanced  over  her  shoulder.    From   this  window  wad 


VALLEY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         847 

visible  the  chtircliyard,  beyond  it  the  road,  and  there,  riding 
sharply  by,  appeared  a  horseman.  The  figure  was  not  yet 
too  remote  for  recognition:  Mrs  Pryor  had  long  sight;  she 
knew  Mr  Moore.  Just  as  an  intercepting  rising  ground  con- 
eealed  him  from  view,  the  clock  struck  twelve. 
"  May  I  lie  down  again?"  asked  Caroline. 
Her  nurse  assisted  her  to  bed:  having  laid  her  down  and 
dravm  the  curtain,  she  stood  listening  near.  The  little  couch 
trembled,  the  suppressed  sob  stirred  the  air.  A  contraction 
as  of  anguish  altered  Mrs  Pryor*s  features ;  she  wrung  her 
hands ;  half  a  groan  escaped  her  lips.  She  now  remembered 
that  Tuesday  was  Whinbury  market-day:  Mr  Moore  must 
always  pass  the  Bectory  on  his  way  thither,  just  ere  noon  of 
that  day. 

Caroline  wore  continually  roimd  her  neck  a  slender  braid 

of  silk,  attached  to  which  was  some  trinket.     Mrs  Pryor  had 

seen  the  bit  of  gold  glisten ;  but  had  not  yet  obtained  a  fair 

view  of  it.     B[er  patient  never  parted  with  it:  when  dressed 

it  was  hidden  in  her  bosom;  as  she  lay  in  bed  she  always 

held  it  in  her  hand.     That  Tuesday  afternoon  the  transient 

doze — more  like  lethargy  than   sleep — which   sometimes 

abridged  the  long  days,  had  stolen  6ver  her:  the  weather  was 

hot:  while  turning  in  febrile  restlessness,  she  had  pushed  the 

coverlets  a  little  aside;   Mrs  Pryor  bent  to  replace  them; 

the  small,  wasted  hand  lying  nerveless  on  the   sick  girl's 

breast,  clasped  as  usual  her  jealously-guarded  treasure:  those 

fingers  whose  attenuation  it  gave  pain  to  see,  were  now  relaxed 

in  sleep:  Mrs  Pryor  gently  disengaged  the  braid,  drawing  out 

a  tmy  locket — ^a  slight  thing  it  was,  such  as  it  suited  her 

small  purse  to  purchase:  under  its  crystal  face  appeared  a 

cQri  of  black  hair — ^too  short  and  ciisp  to  have  been  severed 

from  a  female  head. 

Some  agitated  movement  occasioned  a  twitch  of  the  silken 
chain:  the  sleeper  started  and  woke.  Her  thoughts  were 
usually  now  somewhat  scattered  on  waking;  her  look  gene- 
nUj  wandering.  Half-rising,  as  if  in  terror,  she  exclaimed: 
'* Don't  take  it  from  me,  Robert!  Don't!  It  is  my  l^st 
comfort — let  me  keep  it.  I  never  tell  any  one  whose  hair  it 
it— I  never  show  it." 

Mrs  Pryor  had  already  disappeared  behind  the  curtain: 
rwlimng  far  back  in  a  deep  arm-chair  by  the  bedside,  she 
vas  withdrawn  from  view.  Caroline  looked  abroad  into  the 
chamber;  she  thought  it  empty.    As  her  stray  ideas  returned 


848  sHiBLEir. 

slowly,  eacli  folding  its  weak  wings  on  tlie  mind's  sad  shore, 
like  birds  exhausted, — ^beholding  void,  and  perceivisg  alenoe 
round  her,  she  beKeved  herself  alone.  Collected,  she  was  not 
yet:  perhaps  healthy  self-possession  and  self-control  were  tr 
be  hers  no  more;  perhaps  that  world  the  strong  and  pros- 
perous live  in  had  already  rolled  from  beneath  her  feet  for 
ever:  so,  at  least,  it  often  seemed  to  herself.  In  health,  she 
had  never  been  accustomed  to  think  aloud ;  but  now  woidi 
escaped  her  lips  unawares. 

"  Oh !  I  should  see  him  once  more  before  all  is  over : 
Heaven  might  favour  me  thus  far !"  she  cried.  "God  grant 
me  a  little  comfort  before  I  die ! "  was  her  humble  petition. 

"  But  he  will  not  know  I  am  ill  till  I  am  gone;  and  he  will 
come  when  they  have  laid  me  out,  and  I  am  senseless,  cold, 
and  stiff. 

"  What  can  my  departed  soul  feel  then?  Can  it  see  or 
know  what  happens  to  the  clay  ?  Can  spirits,  through  any 
medium,  communicate  with  living  flesh  ? .  Can  the  dead  at 
all  revisit  those  they  leave  ?  Can  they  cofae  in  the  elements? 
Will  wind,  water,  fire,  lend  me  a  path  to  Moore  ? 

"Is  it  for  nothing  the  wind  sounds  almost  articulatdjr 
sometimes — sings  as  I  have  lately  heard  it  sing  at  night — or 
passes  the  casement  sobbing,  as  if  for  sorrow  to  come  ?  Does 
nothing,  then,  haunt  it — nothing  inspire  it  ? 

"  Wliy,  it  suggested  to  me  words  one  night:  it  poured  a 
strain  which  I  could  have  written  down,  only  I  was  appalled, 
and  dared  not  rise  to  seek  pencil  and  paper  by  the  dim  watcb- 
light. 

"What  is  that  electricity  they  speak  of,  whose  changei 
make  us  well  or  ill ;  whose  lack  or  excess  blasts ;  whose  even 
balance  revives?  What  are  all  those  influences  that  are 
about  us  in  the  atmosphere,  that  keep  playing  over  our  nerves 
like  fingers  on  stringed  instrumf^nts,  and  call  forth .  now  a 
sweet  note,  and  now  a  wail — now  an  exultant  swell,  and, 
anon,  the  saddest  cadence  ? 

"  Where  is  the  other  world?  In  what  will  anodier  life 
consist  ?  Why  do  I  ask  ?  Have  I  not  cause  to  think  that 
the  hour  is  hasting  but  too  fast  when  the  veil  must  be  rent 
for  me?  Do  I  not  know  the  Grand  Mystery  is  likely  to 
burst  prematurely  on  me  ?  Great  Spirit  I  in  whose  goodness 
I  confide ;  whom,  as  my  Father,  I  have  petitioned  night  and 
•coming  from  early  infancy,  help  the  weak  creation  of  thy 
is !     Sustain  me  through  the  ordeal  I  dread  and  must 


VALLEY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.  849 

undergo  I   Give  me  strength !   Give  me  patience !   C^ive  me — 
oh  1     give  mevAJTR ! " 

She  fell  back  on  her  pillow.  Mrs  Pryor  found  means  to 
steal  quietly  from  tiiie  room :  she  re-entered  it  soon  after, 
apparently  as  composed  as  if  she  had  really  not  overheard 
this  strange  soliloquy. 

The  next  day  several  callers  came.  It  had  become  known 
that  Miss  Helstone  was  worse.  Mr  Hall  and  his  sister 
Margaret  arrived :  both,  after  they  had  been  in  the  sick-^room, 
quitted  it  in  tears ;  they  had  found  the  patient  more  altered 
than  they  expected.  Hortense  Moore  came.  Caroline  seemed 
stimalated  by  her  presence  :  she  assured  her,  smiling,  she  was 
not  dangerously  ill;  she  talked  to  her  in  a  low  voice,  but 
cheerfully :  during  her  stay,  excitement  kept  up  the  flush  of 
her  complexion :  she  looked  better. 

"How  is  Mr  Robert  ?"  asked  Mrs  Pryor,  as  Hortense  was 
preparing  to  take  leave. 

**  He  was  very  well  when  he  left." 
"  Left'l  Is  he  gone  from  home  ?  " 

It  was  then  explained  that  some  police  intelligence  about 
ibe  rioters  of  whom  he  was  in  pursuit,  had,  that  morning, 
called  him  away  to  Birmingham,  and  probably  a  fortnight 
might  elapse  ere  he  returned.  ' 
''  He  is  not  aware  that  Miss  Helstone  is  very  ill  ?  *' 
'*  Ohl  no.  He  thought,  like  me,  that  she  had  only  a  bad 
cold/' 

After  this  visit,  Mrs  Pryor  took  care  not  to  approach 
Caroline's  couch  for  above  an  hour :  she  heard  her  weep,  and 
dared  not  look  on  her  tears. 

AlA  evening  closed  in,  she  brought  her  some  tea.  Caroline, 
opening  her  eyes  from  a  moment's  slumber,  viewed  her  nurse 
with  an  unrecognising  glance. 

**  I  smelt  the  honeysuckles  in  the  glen  this  summer-morning," 
she  said,  ^*  as  I  stood  at  the  counting-house  window." 

Strange  words  Hke  these  from  pallid  lips  pierce  a  loving 
listener's  heart  more  poignantly  than  steel.  They  sound 
romantic,  perhaps,  in  books  :  in  real  life,  they  are  harrowing. 
"  My  darling,  do  you  know  me  ?"  said  Mrs  Pryor. 
"  I  went  in  to  call  Bobert  to  breakfast :  I  have  been  with 
liim  in  the  garden :  he  asked  me  to  go :  a  heavy  dew  has 
refreshed  the  flowers  :  the  peaches  are  ripening." 

''IVfy  darling  !  my  darling  ! "  again  and  again  repealed  the 
Qorse. 


860  gHIBLXY. 

**  I  thought  it  was  daylight — ^long  after  sunrise :  it  h(ks 
dark — ^is  the  moon  now  set  ?  " 

That  moon,  lately  risen,  was  gazing  fall  and  mild  npon 
her :  floating  in  deep  blue  space,  it  watched  her  nnclonded. 

'^  Then  it  is  not  morning  ?  I  am  not  at  the  cottage  ?  Who 
is  this  ? — I  see  a  shape  at  my  bedside." 

"  It  is  myself — ^it  is  your  friend — ^your  nurse — your . 

Lean  your,  head  on  my  shoulder :  collect  yourself/*  (In  a 
lower  tone.)  "Oh  Grod,  take  pity  I  Give  her  life,  and  me 
strength  1     Send  me  courage — ^teach  me  words ! " 

Some  minutes  passed  in  silence.  The  patient  lay  mute 
and  passive  in  the  trembling  arms— on  the  throbbing  bosom 
of  the  nurse. 

"I  am  better  now,"  whispered  Caroline,  at  last,  "much 
better — I  feel  where  I  am  :  this  is  Mrs  Pryor  near  m^:  I  was 
dreaming — I  talk  when  I  wake  up  from  dreams :  people  often  do 
in  illness.  How  fast  your  heart  beats,  ma'am !  Do  not  be  afiraid.** 

"  It  is  not  fear,  child ;  only  a  little  anxiety,  which  will 
pass.  I  have  brought  you  some  tea,  Gary;  your  uncle  made 
it  himself.  You  know  he  says  he  can  make  a  better  cup  of 
tea  than  any  housewife  can.  Taste  it.  He  is  concerned  to 
hear  that  you  eat  so  little :  he  would  be  glad  if  you  had  a 
better  appetite." 

"  I  am  thirsty:  let  me  drink." 

She  drank  eagerly. 

"  What  o'clock  is  it,  ma'am  ?"  she  asked. 

"  Past  nine." 

"  Not  later  ?  Oh  I  I  have  yet  a  long  night  before  me : 
but  the  tea  has  made  me  strong :  I  will  sit  up." 

Mrs  Pryor  raised  her,  and  arranged  her  pillows. 
'    "  Thank  Heaven  I    I  am  not  always  equally  miserable,  and 
ill,  and  hopeless.     The  afternoon  has  been  bad  since  Hortensf 
went:  perhaps  the  evening  may  be  better.     It  is  a  fine  nigbt, 
I  think  ?     The  moon  shines  clear." 

"  Very  fine :  a  perfect  summer  night.  The  old  church- 
tower  gleams  white  almost  as  silver." 

"  And  does  the  churchyard  look  peaceful  ?" 

*^  Yes,  and  the  garden  also:  dew  glistens  on  the  foliage." 

**  Can  you  see  many  long  weeds  and  nettles  amongst  tlie 
^^^^▼es;  or  do  they  look  turfy  and  flowery  ?" 
^    **1  see  closed  daisy-heads,  gleaming  like  pearls  on  fiomp 
^^ocmds.     Thomas  has  mown  down  the  dock-leaves  and  rank 
^^ii0S,.and  cleared  all  away.** 


YALLBT  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         851 

"  I  always  like  that  to  be  done :  it  soothes  one's  mind  to 
see  the  place  in  order :  and,  I  dare  say,  within  the  church 
jnst  now  that  moonlight  shines  as  softly  as  in  my  room.  It 
will  fall  through  the  east  window  full  on  the  Helstone  monu- 
ment. When  I  close  my  eyes  I  seem  to  see  poor  papa's 
epitaph  in  black  letters  on  the  white  marble.  There  is  plenty 
of  room  for  other  iiiBcriptions  underneath.'* 

"William  Farren  came  to  look  after  your  flowers  this 
morning:  he  was  afraid,  now  you  cannot  tend  them  yourself, 
they  would  be  neglected.  He  has  taken  two  of  your  favourite 
plmits  home  to  nurse  for  you." 

"  If  I  were  to  make  a  will,  I  would  leave  William  all  my 
plants ;  Shirley  my  trinkets— except  one,  which  must  not  be 
taken  oflf  my  neck;  and  you,  ma^am,  my  books."  (After  a 
pause.)     "  Mrs  Pryor,  I  feel  a  longing  wish  for  something." 

"  For  what,  Caroline  ?" 

**  You  know  I  always  delight  to  hear  you  sing :  sing  me 
A  hynm  just  now:  sing  that  hymn  which  begins, — 

**  *  Oar  God,  oar  help  in  ages  past, — 
Oar  hope  for  yeam  to  come ; 
Oar  shelter  from  the  stormy  blast ; 
Oar  refage,  haven,  home !  * " 

Mrs  Pryor  at  once  complied. 

No  wonder  Caroline  liked  to  hear  her  sing :  her  voice*,  even  in 
speaking,  was  sweet  and  silver  clear  ;  in  song,  it  was  almost 
divine:  neither  flute  nor  dulcimer  has  tones  so  pure.  But  the 
tone  was  secondary  compared  to  the  expression  which  trembled 
through :  a  tender  vibration  from  a  feeling  heart. 

The  servants  in  the  kitchen,  hearing  the  strain,  stole  to 
the  stair-foot  to  listen :  even  old  Helstone,  as  he  walked  in 
the  garden,  pondering  over  the  unaccountable  and  feeble 
nature  of  women,  stood  still  amongst  his  borders  to  catch  the 
mournful  melody  more  distinctly.  Why  it  reminded  him  of 
his  forgotten  dead  wife,  he  could  not  tell ;  nor  why  it  made 
him  more  concerned  than  he  had  hitherto  been  for  Caroline's 
fiiding  girlhood.  He  was  glad  to  recollect  that  he  had  promised 
to  pay  Wynne,  the  magistrate,  a  visit  that  evening.  Low 
spirits  and  gloomy  thoughts  were- very  much  his  aversion: 
when  they  attacked  him  he  usually  found  means  to  make 
them  march  in  double-quick  time.  The  hjmn  followed  him 
faintlv  as  he  crossed  the  fields :  he  hastened  his  customary 
>lrnp  pitce,  thfit  he  might  get  beyond  its  reach. 


••  Thy  word  oommandB  onr  flesh  to  dust,— 
*  Betnm,  ye  sons  of  men ; ' 
All  nations  Toke  from  earth  at  first, 
And  tnm  to  earth  again* 

**  A  thousand  ages  in  thy  sight 
Are  like  an  evening  gone ; 
Short  as  the  watch  that  ends  the  night 
Before  the  rising  son. 

**  Time,  like  an  ever-rolling  stream. 
Bears  all  its  sons  away ; 
They  fly,  forgotten,  as  a  dream 
Dies  at  the  opening  day* 

"  Like  flowery  fields,  the  nations  stand. 
Fresh  in  the  morning  light ; 
The  flowers  beneath  the  mower's  hand 
Lie  withering  ere  *t  is  night. 

"  Oar  God,  oar  help  in  ages  past, — 
Oar  hope  for  years  to  come ; 
Be  thon  onr  gnard  while  troubles  last, — 
O  Father,  be  oar  home  1 " 

*' Now  sing  a  song — a  Scottish  song,**  suggested  CaroHi^^ 
when  the  hymn  was  over, — "  *  Ye  banks  and  braes  o*  bonKft.y 
Doon.*'* 

Again  Mrs  Pryor  obeyed,  or  essayed  to  obey.  At  the  dos^ 
of  the  first  stanza  she  stopped  :  she  could  get  no  further :  hetz* 
full  heart  flowed  over. 

*'  You  are  weeping  at  the  pathos  of  the  air :  oome  here,  and 
I  will  comfort  you,"  said  Caroline,  in  a  pitying  accent.    Mrs 
Pryor  came  :  she  sat  down  on  the  edge  of  her  patient's  hed., 
and  allowed  the  wasted  arms  to  encircle  her. 

^*  You  often  soothe  me,  let  me  soothe  you,'*  murmured  the 
young  girl,  kissing  her  check.  "  I  hope,**  she  added,  "it  is 
not  for  me  you  weep.'* 

No  answer  followed. 

**  Do  you  think  I  shall  not  get  better  ?     I  do  not  feel  very 
ill — only  weak.** 

**  But  your  mind,  Caroline:  your  mind  is  crushed  ;pn 
heart  is  almost  broken :  you  have  been  so  neglected,  so  re- 
pulsed, left  so  desolate.*' 

**  I  believe  grief  is,  and  always  has  been,  my  worst  ailmeot. 
^  sometimes  think,  if  an  abundant  gush  of  happiness  came  on 
^e,  I  could  revive  yet." 

**  Do  you  virish  to  live  ?  " 

**  I  have  no  object  in  life." 

••  You  love  me,  Caroline  ?  " 

"Very  much, — very  truly, — ^inexpressibly  sometimes .'jD*^ 
^8  if  I  could  almost  grow  to  your  heart." 


VALLEY  Of   THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         868 

^I  will  return  directly,  dear/'  remarked  Mrs  Prjor,  as  slie 
aid  Caroline  down. 

Quitting  her,  she  glided  to  the  door,  sofbly  turned  the  key 
n  the  lock,  ascertained  that  it  was  fast,  and  came  back.  She 
dent  over  her.  She  threw  back  the  curtain  to  admit  the 
noonlight  more  freely.     She  gazed  intently  on  her  face. 

**  Then,  if  you  love  me,"  said  she,  speaking  quickly,  with 
in  altered  voice:  "if  you  feel  as  if — to  use  your  own  words 
— ^you  could  *  grow  to  my  heart,'  it  will  be  neither  shock  nor 
pain  for  you  to  know  that  that  heart  is  the  source  whence  yours 
was  filled :  that  from  my  veins  issued  the  tide  which  flows  in 
yours;  that  you  are  mine — ^my  daughter — ^my  own  child.*' 

"MrsPrygr 1'' 

"My  own  child  I" 

"  That  is — ^that  means — ^you  have  adopted  me  ?" 

"  It  means  that,  if  I  have  given  you  nothing  else,  I  at  least 

gave  you  life  ;  that  I  bore  you — nursed  you  ;  that  I  am  your 

true  mother :  no  other  woman  can  claim  the  title — ^it  is  mme." 

"  But  Mrs  James  Helstone — ^but  my  father's  wife  whom  I 

do  not  remember  ever  to  have  seen,  she  is  my  mother  ?" 

"She  is  your  mother:  James  Helstone  Was  my  husband. 
I  say  you  are  mine,  I  have  proved  it.  I  thought  perhaps 
you  were  all  his,  which  would  have  been  a  cruel  dispensation 
for  me:  I  find  it  is  not  so.  God  permitted  me  to  be  the  parent 
of  my  child's  mind :  it  belongs  to  me:  it  is  my  property — 
my  rigJU.  These  features  are  James's  own.  He  had  a  fine 
&ce  when  he  was  young,  and  not  altered  by  error.  Papa,  my 
darling,  gave  you  your  blue  eyes  and  soft  brown  hair:  he 
gave  you  the  oval  of  your  face  and  the  regularity  of  your 
lineaments:  the  outside  he  conferred;  but. the  heart  and  the 
brain  are  mine:  the  germs  are  from  me,  and  they  are  improved, 
they  are  developed  to  excellence.  I  esteem  and  approve  my 
chiJd  as  highly  as  I  do  most  fondly  love  her." 
" Is  what  I  hear  true ?  Is  it  no  drei^ ?" 
'^  I  wish  it  were  as  true  that  the  substance  and  colour  of 
health  were  restored  to  your  cheek." 

"  My  own  mother  I  is  she  one  I  can  be  so  fond  of  as  I  can 
of  you  ?  People  generally  did  not  like  her,  so  I  have  been 
given  to  understand." 

"  They  told  you  that  ?  Well,  your  mother  now  tells  you, 
that,  not  having  the  gift  to  please  people  generally,  for  thdr 
approbation  she  does  not  care :  her  thoughts  are  centred  in 
her  child :  does  that  child  welcome  or  reject  her  V^ 

23 


944  SHIRLET. 

The  few  days  passed,  and — though  it  was  still  thought  it 
could  not  long  delay — ^the  revival  Jiad  not  begun.  Mrs  Pryor, 
who  had  visited  her  daily— being  present  in  her  chamber  one 
morning  when  she  had  been  ill  a  fortnight — ^watched  her  very 
narrowly  for  some  minutes  :  she  took  her  hand,  and  placed 
her  finger  on  her  wrist ;  then,  quietly  leaving  the  chamber, 
she  went  to  Mr  Helstone^s  study.  With  him  she  remained 
closeted  a  long  time — ^half  the  morning.  On  returning  to  her 
sick  young  friend,  she  laid  aside  shawl  and  bonnet:  Bhe  stood 
a  while  at  the  bedside,  one  hand  placed  in  the  other,  gently 
rocking  herself  to  and  fro,  in  an  attitude  and  with  a  movement 
habitual  to  her.    At  last,  she  said — 

'^  I  have  sent  Fanny  to  Fieldhead  to  fetch  a  few  things  for 
me,  such  as  I  shall  want  during  a  short  stay  here :  it  is  my 
wish  to  remain  with  you  till  you  are  better.  Your  uncle 
kindly  permits  my  attendance:  will  it  to  yourself  be  accept- 
able, Caroline  ?  " 

''  I  am  sorry  you  should  take  such  needless  trouble.  I  dc 
not  feel  very  ill,  but  I  cannot  reiuse  resolutely:  it  will  be  snch 
comfort  to  know  you  are  in  the  house,  to  see  you  sometimes 
in  the  room ;  but  don't  confine  yourself  on  my  account,  dear 
Mrs  Pryor.     Fanny  nurses  me  very  well." 

Mrs  Pryor — ^bending  over  the  pale  littfe  sufferer — ^was  now 
smoothing  the  hair  under  her  cap,  and  gently  raising  her 
pillow.  As  she  performed  these  offices,  Caroline,  snuling) 
lifi;ed  her  face  to  kiss  her. 

"Are  y6u  free  from  pain?  Are  you  tolerably  at  ease?" 
was  inquired  in  a  low,  earnest  voice,  as  the  self-elected  nurse 
yielded  to  the  cai^BSs.    ' 

"  I  think  I  am  almost  happy." 

"  You  wish  tp  drink  ?    Your  lips  are  parched." 

She  held  a  glass  filled  with  some  cooling  beverage  to  her 
mouth. 

"  Have  you  eaten  anything  to  day,  Caroline  ?  " 

"  I  cannot  eat." 

"  But  soon  your  appetite  will  return:  it  must  return:  that 
is,  I  pray  God  it  may  I " 

In  laying  her  again  on  the  couch,  she  encircled  h«r  in  her 
arms ;  and  while  so  doing,  by  U  movement  which  seemed 
scarcely  .volimtary,  she  drew  her  to  her  heart,  and  held  her 
close  gathered  an  instant. 

"  I  shall  hardly  wish  to  get  well,  that  I  may  keep  yw 
always,"  said  Caroline. 


TILLET  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         845 

Mn  Fryor  did  not  smile  at  this  speech:  over  her  features 
ran  a  tremor,  which  for  some  minutes  she  was  absorbed  in 
repressing. 

"  You  are  more  used  to  Fanny  than  to  me,^'  she  remarked, 
erelong.  '*  I  should  think  my  attendance  must  seem  strange, 
officioujs  ?  " 

"  No:  quite  natural,  and  .very  soothing.  You  must  h^ve 
been  accustomed  to  wait  on  sick  people,  ma'am.  You  move 
about  the  room  so  soflly,  and  you  speak  so  quietly,  and  touch 
me  so  gently." 

"  I  am  dexterous  in  nothing,  my  dear.  You  will  often  find 
me  awkward,  but  never  negligent." 

N^ligent,  indeed,  she  was  not.  From  that  hour,  Fanny 
and  Eliza  became  ciphers  in  the  sick-room  :  Mrs  Fryor  made 
it  her  domain:  she  performed  all  its  duties;  she  lived  in  it 
day  and  night.  The  patient  remonstrated — faintly,  however, 
from  the  first,  and  not  at  all  erelong :  loneliness  and  gloom 
were  now  banished  from  her  bedside ;  protection  and  solace 
fiat  there  instead.  She  and  her  nurse  coalesced  in  wondrous 
imion.  Caroline  was  usually  pained  to  require  or  receive 
much  attendance  :  Mrs  Fryor,  imder  ordinary  circumstances, 
had  neither  the  habit  nor  the  art  of  performing  little  offices  of 
service;  but  all  now  passed  with  such  ease — so  naturally,  that 
the  patient  was  as  wilHng  to  be  cherished  as  the  nurse  was 
bent  on  cherishing:  no  sign  of  weariness  in  the  latter  ever 
reminded  the  former  that  she  ought  to  be  anxious.  There 
vas,  in  fact,  no  veir  hard  duty  to  perform  ;  but  a  hireling 
might  have  found  it  hard. 

With  all  this  care,  it  seemed  strange  the  sick  girl  did  not 
get  well;  yet  such  was  the  case:  she  washed  like  any  snow- 
wreath  in  thaw;  she  faded  like  any  flower  in  drought.  Miss 
Keeldar,  on  whose  thoughts  danger  or  death  seldom  intruded, 
had  at  first  entertained  no  fears  at  all  for  her  friend;  but 
seeing  her  change  and  sink  from  time  to  time  when  she  paid 
her  visits,  alarm  clutched  her  heart.  She  went  to  Mr  Helstpne 
and  expressed  herself  with  so  much  energy,  that  that  gentle- 
man was  at  last  obliged,  however  unwillingly,  to  admit  the 
idea  that  his  niece  was  ill  of  something  more  than  a  migraine; 
and  when  Mrs  Fryor  came  and  quietly  demanded  a  physician, 
he  said  she  might  send  for  two  if  she  liked.  One  came,  but 
that  one  was  an  oracle:  he  delivered  a  dark  saying  of  which 
the  fiitare  was  to  solve  the  mystery,  wrote  some  prescriptions, 
give  some  directions — ^the  whole  with  an  air  of  crushing 


S88  SHIBLBT. 

in  to-day's  page  of  her  eternal  book,  that  I  am  not  to  have 
the  pleasure  I  long  for.  In  the  second  place,  if  he  stepped  in 
this  moment,  my  presence  here  would  be  a  chagrin  to  Imn, 
and  the  consciousness  that  it  must  be  so  would  turn  half  mj 
blood  to  ice.  His  hand  would,  perhaps,  be  loose  and  chill,  if 
I  put  mine  into  it :  his  eye  would  be  clouded  if  I  sought  its 
beam.  I  should  look  up  for  that  kindling,  something  I  have 
seen  in  past  days,  when  my  face,  or  my  language,  or  my  dis- 
position had  at  some  happy  moment  pleased  him — I  should 
discover  only  darkness.     I  had  better  go  home." 

She  took  her  bomiet  £:om  the  table  where  it  lay,  and  was 
just  fastening  the  ribbon,  when  Hortense,  directing  her  atten- 
tion to  a  splendid  bouquet  of  flowers  in  a  glass  on  the  same 
table,  mentioned  that  Miss  Keeldar  had  sent  them  that  morning 
from  Fieldhead  ;  and  went  on  to  comment  on  the  gnests  that 
lady  was  at  present  entertaining,  on  the  bustliog  life  she  had 
lately  been  leading ;  adding  divers  conjectures  that  she  did 
not  very  well  like  it,  and  much  wonderment  that  a  person 
who  was  so  fond  of  her  own  wayias  the  heiress,  did  not  £nd 
some  means  of  sooner  getting  rid  of  this  cortege  of  relatives. 

, "  But  they  say  she  actually  wiU  not  let  Mr  Sympson  and 
his  family  go,"  she  added :  "  they  wanted  much  to  return  to 
the  south  last  week,  to  be  ready  for  the  reception  of  the  only 
son,  who  is  expected  home  from  a  tour.  She  insists  that  her 
cousin  Henry  shall  come  and  join  his  friends  here  in  Yorkshire. 
I  daresay  she  partly  does  it  to  oblige  Kobert  and  myself.^' 

"  How  to  oblige  Eobert  and  you  ?"  inquired  Caroline. 

"Why,  my  child,  you  are  dull.  Don't  you  know — ^you 
must  often  have  heard "    . 

"  Please,  ma'am,"  said  Sarah,  opening  the  door,  "  the  pre- 
serves that  you  told  me  to  boil  in  treacle — the  congfiters,  u 
you  call  them — ^is  all  burnt  to  the  pan." 

"  Les  confitures  I  Elles  sont  brM^es  ?  Ah,  quelle  n^li- 
gence  coupablel     Coquine  de  cuisini^re — ^fille  insupportable!" 

Aad  Mademoiselle,  hastily  taking  from  a  drawer  a  large 
linen  apron,  and  tying  it  over  her  black  apron,  rushed  "  ^per- 
due" into  the  kitchen,  whence — ^to  speak  truth-— exhaled  an 
odour  of  calcined  sweets  rather  strong  than  savoury. 

The  mistress  and  maid  had  been  in  full  feud  the  whole  day, 

on  the  subject  of  preserving  certain  black  cherries^  hard  as 

marbles,  sour  as  sloes.     Sarah  held  that  sugar  was  the  only 

"^odox  condiment  to  be  used  in  that  process  ;  Mademcuselle 

'ntained — and  proved  it  by  the  practice  and  experience  o{ 


AN  EYENIKO  OUT.  889 

hex  mother,  grandmother,  and  great-grandmother— that 
treacle,  "  m^lasse,"  was  infinitely  preferable.  She  had  com- 
mitted an  imprudence  in  leaving  Sarah  in  charge  of  the  pre- 
serving-pan, for  her  want  of  sympathy  in  the  nature  of  its 
contents  had  induced  a  degree  of  carelessness  in  watching  their 
confection,  whereof  the  result  was— dark  and  cindery  ruin. 
Hubbub  followed:  high  upbraiding,  and  sobs  rather  loud  than 
deep  or  real. 

Caroline,  once  more  turning  to  the  little  mirror,  was  shading 
her  ringlets  from  her  cheek  to  smooth  them  under  her  cottage 
bou^^et,  certain  that  it  would  not  only  be  useless  but  unpleasant 
to  stay  longer ;  when,  on  the  sudden  opening  of  the  back- 
door, there  fell  an  abrupt  calm  in  the  kitchen :  the  tongues 
were  checked,  pulled  up  as  with  bit  and  bridle.  "  Wias  it — 
was  it — ^Robert  ?  "  He  often — almost  always-^-entered  by  the 
kitchen-way  on  his  return  from  market.  No :  it  was  only 
Joe  Scott,  who,  having  hemmed  significantly  thrice — every 
hem  being  meant  as  a  lofty  rebuke  to  the  squabbling  woman- 
kind— said, — 
"  Now,  I  thowt  I  heerd  a  crack  ?" 
None  answered. 

"  And,"  he  continued,  pragmatically, "  as  t*  maister's  corned, 
and  as  he  '11  enter  through  this  hoyle,  I  coTisidered  it  desirable 
to  step  in  and  let  ye  know.  A  household  o'  women  is  niwer 
fit  to  be  corned  on  wi  'out  warning.  Here  he  is :  walk  forrard, 
sir.  They  war  playing  up  queerly,  but  I  think  I  Ve  quieted  'em." 
Another  person — ^it  was  now  audible — entered.  Joe  Scott 
proceeded  with  his  rebukes. 

"  What  d'  ye  mean  by  being  all  i'  darkness  ?  Sarah,  thou 
quean,  canst  t'  not  light  a  candle  ?  It  war  sundown  an  hour 
ejne.  He  'U  brak'  his  shins  agean  some  o'  yer  pots,  and  tables, 
and  stuff.  Tak'  tent  o'  this  baking-bowl,  sir ;  they  've  set  it 
r  yer  way,  fair  as  if  they  did  it  i'  malice." 

To  Joe's  observations  iucceeded  a  confused  sort  of  pause, 
which  Caroline,  though  she  was  listening  with  both  her  ears, 
could  not  imderstand.  It  was  very  brief :  a  cry  broke  it — ^a 
sound  of  surprise,  followed  by  the  soimd  of  a  kiss :  ejaculations, 
hut  half  articulate,  succeeded. 

"Mon.DieuI  mon  Dieul  Est-ce  que  je  m'y  attendais ? " 
were  the  words  chiefly  to  be  distinguished. 

"Et  tu  te  portes  toujours  bien,  bonne  soeur?"  inquired 
another  voice — Robert's,  certainly. 
Caroline  was  puzzled.     Obeying  an  impulse,  the  wisdom  of 


840  SHIRLEY. 

which  she  had  not  time  to  question,  she  escaped  from  the  litiile 
parlour,  by  way  of  leaving  the  coast  clear,  and  running  up- 
stairs took  up  a  position  at  the  head  of  the  banisters,  whence 
she  could  make  further  observations  ere  presenting  herself. 
It  was  considerably  past  sunset  now:  dusk  filled  the  passage, 
yet  not  such  deep  dusk  but  that  she  could  presently  see 
Robert  and  Hortense  traverse  it. 

"  "  Caroline  !  Caroline  ! "  called  Hortense,  a  moment  after- 
wards, «  venez  voir  mon  fr^re  1 " 

"  Strange  1"  commented  Miss  Helstone,  "  passing  strange! 
What  does  this  unwonted  excitement  about  such  an  everyday 
occurrence  as  a  return  from  market  portend  ?  She  has  not 
lost  her  senses,  has  she  ?  Surely  the  burnt  treacle  has  not 
crazed  her?" 

She  descended  in  a  subdued  flutter :  yet  more  was  she 
fluttered  when  Hortense  seized  her  hand  at  the  parlour-door, 
and  leading  her  to  Robert,  who  stood  in  bodily  presence,  tall 
and  dark  against  the  one  window,  presented  her  with  a  mixtifre 
of  agitation  and  formality,  as  though  they  had  been  utter 
strangers,  and  this  was  their  first  mutual  introduction. 

Increasing  puzzle  I  He  bowed  rather  awkwardly,  and 
turning  from  her  with  a  stranger^s  embarrassment,  he  met  the 
doubtfiil  light  firom  a  window :  it  fell  on  his  face,  and  the 
enigma  of  the  dream  (a  dream  it  seemed)  was  at  its  height : 
she  saw  a  visage  like  and  unlike, — Robert,  and  no  Robert. 

"What  is  the  matter?"  said  Caroline.  "Is  my  sight 
wrong  ?     Is  it  my  cousin  ?  " 

"  Certainly,  it  is  your  cousin,"  asserted  Hortense. 

Then  who  was  this  now  coming  through  the  passage, — ^now 
entering  the  room?  Caroline,  looking  round,  met  a  new 
Robert, — the  real  Robert,  as  she  felt  at  once. 

"Well,"  said  he,  smiling  at  her  questioning,  astonished 
face,  "  which  is  which  ?", 

"  Ah  !  this  is  youP^  was  the  answer. 

He  laughed.  "  I  believe  it  is  me:  and  do  you  know  whoA« 
is  ?     You  never  saw  him  before ;  but  you  have  heard  of  him." 

She  had  gathered  her  senses  now. 

"  It  can  be  only  one  person :  your  brother,  since  it  is  so 
like  you :  my  other  cousin,  Louis." 

"  Clever    little   (Edipus ! — ^you  would    have    baffled  the 
Sphynx  !  —  but    now,    see    us    together.     Change    places. 
Change  again,  to  confuse  her,  Louis. — Which  is  the  pld  low 
Lina?" 


AN  EVENINO  OUT.   '  841 

**A8  if  it  were  possible  to  make  a  mistake  when  you 
speak  I  You  should  have  told  Hortense  to  ask.  But  you  are 
not  so  much  alike:  it  is  only  your  height,  your  figure,  and 
complexion  that  are  so  similar." 

"And  I  am  Robert,  am  I  not?"  asked  the  new  comer, 
making  a  first  effort  to  overcome  what  seemed  his  natural 
shyness. 

Caroline  shook  her  head  gently.  A  soft,  expressive  ray 
from  her  eye  beamed  on  the  real  Robert:  it  said  much. 

She  was  not  permitted  to  quit  her  cousins  soon :  Robert 
himself  was  peremptory  in  obliging  her  to  remain.  Glad, 
simple,  and  affable  in  her  demeanour  (glad  for  this  night,  at 
least),  in  light,  bright  spirits  for  the  time,  she  was  too  pleasant 
an  addition  to  the  cottage  circle  to  be  willingly  parted  with 
by  any  of  them.  Louis  seemed  naturally  rather  a  grave,  still, 
retiring  man,  but  the  Caroline  of  this  evening,  which  was  not 
(as  you  know,  reader)  the  Caroline  of  every  day,  thawed  his 
reserve,  and  cheered  his  gravity  soon.  He  sat  near  her,  ^nd 
talked  to  her.  She  already  knew  his  vocation  was  that  of 
tuition;  she  learned  now  he  had  for  some  years  been  the 
tutor  of  Mr  Sympson's  son ;  that  he  had  been  travelling  with 
him,  and  had  accompanied  him  to  the  north.  She  inquired  if 
he  liked  his  post,  but  got  a  look  in  reply  which  did  not  invite 
or  license  further  question.  The  look  woke  Caroline's  ready 
sympathy :  she  thought  it  a  very  sad  expression  to  pass  oyer 
80  sensible  a  face  as  Louis's :  for  he  had  a.  sensible  face,— 
though  not  handsome,  she  considered,  when  seen  near  Robert's. 
She  tamed  to  make  the  comparison.  Robert  was  leaning 
against  the  wall,  a  little  behind  her,  turning  over  the  leaves 
of  a  book  of  engravings,  and  probably  listening,  at  the  same 
time,  to  the  dialogue  between  her  and  Louis. 

"How  could  I  think  them  alike?"  she  asked  herself :  "I 
see  now  it  is  Hortense,  Louis  resembles,  not  Robert." 

Aad  this  was  in  part  true :  he  had  the  shorter  nose  and 
longer  upper-lip  of  his  sister,  rather  than  the  fine  traits  of  hia 
brother:  he  had  her  mould  of  mouth  and  chin — all  less  decisive, 
accurate,  and  clear  than  those  of  the  young  mill-owner.  .  His 
air,  though  deliberate  and  reflective,  could  scarcely  be  called 
prompt  and  acute.  You  felt,  in  sitting  near  and  looking  up 
at  him,  that  a  slower  and  probably  a  more  benignant  nature 
than  that  of  the  elder  Moore  shed  calm  on  your  impressions. 

Robert — ^perhaps  aware  that  Caroline's  glance  had  wandered 
towards  and  dwelt  upon  him,  though  he  had  neither  met  nor 


842  smsLET. 

answered  it — ^put  down  the  book  of  engrayings,  and  spproadi- 
ing,  took  a  seat  at  her  side.  She  resumed  her  conversation 
with  Louis,*  but,  while  she  talked  to  him,  her  thoughts  were 
elsewhere :  her  heart  beat  on  the  side  from  which  her  face 
was  half-averted.  She  acknowledged  a  steady,  manly,  kindly 
air  in  Louis ;  but  she  bent  before  the  secret  power  of  Bobert. 
To  be  so  near  him — though  he  was  silent — ijiough  he  did  not 
touch  so  much  as  her  scarf-iringe,  or  the  white  hem  of  her 
dress — affected  her  like  a  spell.  Had  she  been  obliged  to 
speak  to  him  only^  it  would  have  quelled — ^but,  at  liberty  to 
address  another,  it  excited  her.  Her  discourse  flowed  freely: 
it  was  gay,  playful,  eloquent.  The  indulgent  look  and  placid 
manner  of  her  auditor  encouraged  her  to  ease ;  the  sober 
pleasure  expressed  by  his  smile  drew  out  all  that  was  brilliant 
in  her  nature.  She  felt  that  this  evening  she  appeared  to 
advantage,  and,  as  Robert  was  a  spectator,  the  consciousness 
contented  her :  had  he  been  called  away,  collapse  would  at 
once  have  succeeded  stimulus. 

But  her  enjoyment  was  not  long  to  shine  full-orbed:  a  cloud 
soon  crossed  it. 

Hortense,  who  for  some  time  had  been  on  the  move  ordering 
supper,  and  was  now  clearing  the  little  table  of  some  books,  &c., 
to  make  room  for  the  tray,  called  Robert's  attention  to  the  glass 
of  flowers,  the  carmine,  and  snow,  and  gold  of  whose  petals 
looked  radiant  indeed  by  candlelight. 

"  They  came  from  Fieldhead,"  she  said,  "  intended  as  a 
gift  to  you,* no  doubt:  we  know  who  is  the  £Givourite  there — 
not  I,  I  'm  sure." 

It  was  a  wonder  to  hear  Hortense  jest;  a  sign  that  her 
spirits  were  at  high-water  mark  indeed. 

"  We  are  to  understand,  then,  that  Robert  is  the  favourite  ?" 
observed  Louis.  •  «. 

"  Mon  cher,"  replied  Hortense,  "  Robert— c'est  tout  ce 
qu'il  y  a  de  plus  prdcieux  au  monde:  k  cdt^  de  lui,  le  reste 
du  genre  humain  n'est  que  du  rebut.  N*ai-je  pas  raison,  mon 
enfant?"  she  added,  appealing  to  Caroline. 

Caroline  was  obliged  to  reply,  "Yes" — ^and  her  beacon 
was  quenched:  her  star  withdrew  as  she  spoke. 

"  Et  toi,  Robert  ?  "  inquired  Louis. 

"  When  you  shall  have  an  opportunity,  ask  herself,"  was  the 
quiet  answer.  Whether  he  reddened  or  paled  Caroline  did  not 
examine:  she  discovered  it  was  late,  and  she  must  go  home. 
Home  she  would  go:  not  even  Robert  could  detain  her  now. 


TALLBT  OF  THE  SHAMW  OP  SIA1H.         348 

CHAPTEE  XXIV 

THE  VALLEY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH. 

The  fature  sometimes  seems  to  sob  a  low  warning  of  th6 
erents  it  is  bringing  us,  like  some  gathering  though  yet 
remote  storm,  which,  in  tones  of  the  wind,  in  flushings  of  the 
firmament,  in  clouds  strangely  torn,  annoimces  a  blast  strong 
to  strew  the  sea  with  wrecks ;  or  commissioned  to  bring  in 
fog  the  yellow  taint  of  pestilence,  covering  white  Western 
isles  with  the  poisoned  exhalations  of  the  East,  dimming  the 
lattices  of  English  homes  with  the  breath  of  Indian  plague. 
At  other  times  this  Future  bursts  suddenly,  as  if  a  rock  had 
lent,  and  in  it  a  grave  had  opened,  whence  issues  the  body 
of  one  that  slept.  Ere  you  are  aware  you  stand  face  to  face 
with  a  shrouded  and  untliought-of  Calamity — ^a  new  Lazarus. 

Caroline  Helstone  went  home  &om  Hollow's  cottage  in  good 
health,  as  she  imagined.  On  waking  the  next  morning  she 
felt  oppressed  with  unwonted  languor :  at  breakfast,  at  each 
meal  of  the  following  day,  she  missed  all  sense  of  appetite: 
palatable  food  was  as  ashes  and  sawdust  to  her. 

"Am  I  ill?"  she  asked,,  and  looked  at  herself  in  the  glass. 
Her  eyes  were  bright,  their  pupils  dilated,  her  cheeks  seemed 
rosier  and  fuller  than  usual.    <'  I  look  well ;  why  can  I  nqt  eat?  " 

She  ^t  a  pulse  beat  fast  in  her  temples:  she  felt,  too,  her 
brain  in  strange  activity :  her  spirits  were  raised ;  hundreds 
of  buiiy  and  broken,  but- brilliant  thoughts  engaged  her  mind: 
a  glow  rested  on  them,  such  as  tinged  her  complexion. 

Now  followed  a  hot,  parched,  thirsty,  restless  night.  To- 
wards morning  one  terrible  dream  seized  her  like  a  tiger :  when 
she  woke,  she  felt  and  knew  she  was  ill. 

How  she  had  caught  the  fever  (fever  it  was),  she  could  not 
tell.  Probably  in  her  late  walk  home,  some  sweet,  poisoned 
breeze,  redolent  of  honey-dew  and  miasma,  had  passed  into 
her  lungs  and  veins,  and  finding  there  -  already  a  *fever  of 
mental  excitement,  and  a  languor  of  long  conflict  and  habitual 
sadness,  had  fanned  the  spark  of  flame,  and  left  a  well-lit  fire 
behind  it. 

It  seemed,  however,  but  let  gentle  fire:  after  two  hot  days 
and  worried  nights,  there  was  no  violence  in  the  sjrmptoms, 
and  neither  her  imcle,  nor  Fanny,  nor  the  doctor,  nor  Miss 
Keekkr,  when  she  called,  had  any  fear  for  her :  a  few  days 
would  restore  her,  every  one  believed. 


d44  8HIRLET. 

The  few  days  passed,  and — though  it  was  still  thought  it 
could  not  long  delay — ^the  revival  had  not  begun.  Mrs  Pryor, 
who  had  visited  her  daily — ^being  present  in  her  chamber  one 
morning  when  she  had  been  ill  a  fortnight — ^watched  her  very 
narrowly  for  some  minutes  :  she  took  her  hand,  and  placed 
her  finger  on  her  wrist ;  then,  quietly  leaving  ihe  chiunber, 
she  went  to  Mr  Helstone^s  study.  With  him  she  remained 
closeted  a  long  time— half  the  morning.  On  retumisg  to  her 
sick  young  friend,  she  laid  aside  shawl  and  bonnet:  she  stood 
a  while  at  the  bedside,  one  hand  placed  in  the  otiher,  gently 
rocking  herself  to  and  ^o,  in  an  attitude  and  with  a  movement 
habitual  to  her.    At  last,  she  said — 

*^  I  have  sent  Fanny  to  Eieldhead  to  fetch  a  few  things  for 
me,  such  as  I  shall  want  during  a  short  stay  here  :  it  is  my 
wish  to  remain  with  you  till  you  are  better.  Your  uncle 
kindly  permits  my  attendance :  will  it  to  yourself  be  accept- 
able, Caroline  ?  " 

"  I  am  sorry  you  should  take  such  needless  trouble.  I  do 
not  feel  very  ill,  but  I  cannot  refuse  resolutely:  it  will  be  such 
comfort  to  know  you  are  in  the  house,  to  see  you  sometimes 
in  the  room ;  but  don't  confine  yourself  on  my  account,  dear 
Mrs  Pryor.     Fanny  nurses  me  very  well." 

Mrs  Pryor — ^bending  over  the  pale  littfe  sufferer — ^was  now 
smoothing  the  hair  under  her  cap,  and  gently  raising  her 
pillow.  As  she  performed  these  offices,  Caroline,  snulmg, 
lifted  her  face  to  kiss  her. 

"  Are  y6u  free  from  pain?  Are  you  tolerably  at  ease?" 
was  inquired  in  a  low,  earnest  voice,  as  the  self-elected  nurse 
yielded  to  the  cai^pss.    ' 

"  I  think  I  am  almost  happy." 

"  You  wish  to  drink  ?    Your  lips  are  parched." 

She  held  a  glass  filled  with  some  cooling  beverage  to  hei 
mouth. 

"  Have  you  eaten  anything  to  day,  Caroline  ?  " 

"  I  caimot  eat." 

"  But  soon  your  appetite  will  return:  it  must  return :  that 
is,  I  pray  God  it  may ! " 

In  laying  her  again  on  the  couch,  she  encircled  her  in  her 
arms ;  and  while  so  doing,  by  ti  movement  which  seemed 
scarcely  .voluntary,  she  drew  her  to  her  heart,  and  held  her 
close  gathered  an  instant. 

^'  I  shall  hardly  wish  to  get  well,  that  I  may  keep  yoQ 
always,"  said  Caroline. 


TALLET  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         845 

Mn  Fryor  did  not  smile  at  this  speecli:  over  her  features 
ran  a  tremor,  whicH  for  some  minutes  she  was  absorbed  in 
repressing. 

**  You  are  more  used  to  Fanny  than  to  me,"  she  remarked, 
erelong.  "  I  should  think  my  attendance  must  seem  strange, 
officious  ?  ** 

''  No:  quite  natural,  and  .very  soothing.  You  must  h^ve 
been  accustomed  to  wait  on  sick  people,  ma^am.  You  move 
about  the  room  so  softly,  and  you  spesik  so  quietly,  and  touch 
me  so  gently." 

"  I  am  dexterous  in  nothing,  my  dear.  You  will  often  find 
me  awkward,  but  never  negligent." 

N^ligent,  indeed,  she  was  not.  From  that  hour,  Fanny 
and  Eliza  became  ciphers  in  the  sick-room  :  Mrs  Pryor  made 
it  her  domain:  she  performed  all  its  duties;  she  lived  in  it 
day  and  night.  The  patient  remonstrated — faintly,  however, 
from  the  first,  and  not  at  all  erelong :  loneliness  and  gloom 
were  now  banished  from  her  bedside ;  protection  and  solace 
sat  there  instead.  She  and  her  nurse  coalesced  in  wondrous 
union.  Caroline  was  usually  pained  to  require  or  receive 
much  attendance  :  Mrs  Pryor,  under  ordinary  circumstances, 
had  neither  the  habit  nor  the  art  of  performing  little  offices  of 
service;  but  all  now  passed  with  such  ease — so  naturally,  that 
the  patient  was  as  willing  to  be  cherished  as  the  nurse  was 
bent  on  cherishing:  no  sign  of  weariness  in  the  latter  ever 
reminded  the  former  that  she  ought  to  be  anxious.  There 
was,  in  fact,  no  very  hard  duty  to  perform ;  but  a  hireling 
might  have  found  it  hard. 

With  aU  this  care,  it  seemed  strange  the  sick  girl  did  not 
get  well;  yet  such  was  the  case:  she  wasted  like  any  snow- 
wreath  in  thaw ;  she  faded  like  any  iiower  in  drought.  Miss 
Keeldar,  on  whose  thoughts  danger  or  death  seldom  intruded, 
liad  at  first  entertained  no  fears  at  all  for  her  friend;  but 
seeing  her  change  and  sink  from  time  to  time  when  she  paid 
her  visits,  alarm  clutched  her  heart.  She  went  to  Mr  Helstpne 
and  expressed  herself  with  so  much  energy,  that  that  gentle- 
man was  at  last  obliged,  however  umviUingly,  to  admit  the 
idea  that  his  niece  was  ill  of  something  more  than  a  migraine; 
sod  when  Mrs  Pryor  came  and  quietly  demanded  a  physician, 
he  said  she  might  send  for  two  if  she  liked.  One  came,  but 
that  one  was  an  oracle:  he  delivered  a  dark  sa3dng  of  which 
the  future  was  to  solve  the  mystery,  wrote  some  prescriptions, 
give  some  directions — ^the  whole  with  an  air  of  crushing 


846  smssuEr. 

authority-^pocketed  his  fee,  and  went.    Probablj,  be  knew 
well  enough  he  could  do  no  good;  but  didn^t  like  to  Bay  aa 

StiU,  no  rumour  of  serious  iUness  got  wind  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood.  At  Hollow's-cottage  it  was  thought  that  Gaioline 
had  only  a  severe  cold,  she  having  written  a  note  to  Hottenw 
to  that  effect;  and  Mademoiselle  contented  herself  with  sending 
two  pots  of  currant  jam,  a  receipt  for  a  tisane,  and  a  note  of 
advice. 

Mrs  Yorke  being  told  that  a  physician  had  been  summoned, 
sneered  at  the  hypochondriac  fancies  of  the  rich  and  idle, 
who,  she  said,  have  nothing  but  themselves  to  think  about, 
must  needs  send  for  a  doctor  if  only  so  much  as  their  little 
finger  ached. 

The  "  rich  and  idle,"  represented  in  the  person  of  Caroline, 
were  meantime  falling  ^t  into  a  condition  of  prostration, 
whose  quickly  consunmoiated  debility  puzzled  all  who  "wit- 
nessed it,  except  one;  for  that  one  aJone  reflected  how  liable 
is  the  imdermined  structure  to  sink  in  sudden  ruin. 

Sick  people  often  have  fancies  inscrutable  to  ordinaiy 
attendants,  and  Caroline  had  one  which  even  her  tender  nnise 
could  not  at  first  explain.  On  a  certain  day  in  the  week,  at 
a  certain  hour,  she  would — whether  worse  or  better — entreat 
to  be  taken  up  and  dressed,  and  suffered  to  sit  in  her  chair 
near  the  window.  This  station  she  would  retain  till  noon 
was  past:  whatever  degree  of  exhaustion  or  debility  her  wan 
aspect  betrayed,  she  still  soflly  put  off  all  persuasion  to  seek 
repose  imtil  the  church-clock  had  duly  tolled  mid-day:  the 
twelve  strokes  sounded,  she  grew  docUe,  and  would  meekly 
lie  down.  Returned  to  the  couch,  she  usually  buried  her 
face  deep  in  the  pillow,  and  drew  the  coverlets  dose  round 
her,  as  if  to  shut  out  the  world  and  sun,  of  which  she  was 
tired:  more  than  once,  as  she  thus  lay,  a  slight  convulsion 
shook  the  sick-bed,  and  a  faint  sob  broke  the  silence  round  it 
These  things  were  not  unnoted  by  Mrs  Pryor. 

One  Tuesday  morning,  as  usual,  she  had  asked  leave  to 
rise,  and  now  she  sat  wrapped  in  her  white  dre88ing'*gown> 
leaning  forward  in  the  easy-chair,  gazing  steadily  and  patiently 
from  tiie  lattice.  Mrs  Pryor  was  seated  a  little  behind,  knit- 
ting as  it  seemed,  but,  in  truth^  watching  her.  A  change 
crossed  her  pale  mournfiil  brow,  animating  its  languor;  a 
light  shot  into  her  faded  eyes,  reviving  their  lustre;  she  half 
rose  and  looked  earnestly  out.  Mrs  Pryor,  drawing  softly 
near,  glanced  over  her  shoulder.    Ftom   this  window  was 


▼ALLEY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         847 

visible  the  churchyard,  beyond  it  the  road,  and  there,  riding 
sharply  by,  appeared  a  horseman.  The  figure  was  not  yet 
too  remote  for  recognition:  Mrs  Pryor  had  long  sight;  she 
knew  Mr  Moore.  Just  as  an  intercepting  rising  ground  con- 
cealed him  from  view,  the  clock  struck  twelve. 
"  May  I  lie  down  again  ?"  asked  Caroline. 
Her  nurse  assisted  her  to  bed:  having  laid  her  down  and 
drawn  the  curtain,  she  stood  listening  near.  The  little  couch 
trembled,  the  suppressed  sob  stirred  the  air.  A  contraction 
OS  of  anguish  altered  Mrs  Pryor's  features ;  she  wrung  her 
hands ;  half  a  groan  escaped  her  lips.  She  now  remembered 
that  Tuesday  was  Whinbury  market-day:  Mr  Moore  must 
always  pass  the  Rectory  on  his  way  thither,  just  ere  noon  of 
that  day. 

Caroline  wore  continually  round  her  neck  a  slender  braid 
of  silk,  attached  to  which  was  some  trinket.  Mrs  Pryor  had 
seen  the  bit  of  gold  glisten ;  but  had  not  yet  obtained  a  fair 
view  of  it.  B[er  patient  never  parted  with  it:  when  dressed 
it  was  hidden  in  her  bosom;  as  she  lay  in  bed  she  always 
held  it  in  her  hand.  That  Tuesday  affcemoon  the  transient 
doie — more  like  lethargy  than  sleep — which  sometimes 
abridged  the  long  days,  had  stolen  over  her:  the  weather  was 
Hot:  while  turning  in  febrile  restlessness,  she  had  pushed  the 
coverlets  a  little  aside;  Mrs  Pryor  bent  to  replace  them; 
the  small,  wasted  hand  lying  nerveless  on  the  sick  girPs 
breast,  clasped  as  usual  her  jealously-guarded  treasure:  &ose 
fingers  whose  attenuation  it  gave  pain  to  see,  were  now  relaxed 
in  sleep :  Mrs  Pryor  gently  disengaged  the  braid,  drawing  out 
a  tiny  locket — a  slight  thing  it  was,  such  as  it  suited  her 
small  purse  to  purchase:  under  its  crystal  face  appeared  a 
curl  of  black  hair — ^too  short  and  crisp  to  have  been  severed 
from  a  female  head. 

Some  agitated  movement  occasioned  a  twitch  of  the  silken 
chain:  the  sleeper  started  and  woke.  Her  thoughts  were 
mually  now  somewhat  scattered  on  waking ;  her  look  gene- 
rally wandering.  Half-rising,  as  if  in  terror,  she  exclaimed: 
**  Don't  take  it  from  me,  Robert !  Don't !  It  is  my  last 
comfort — ^let  me  keep  it.  I  never  tell  any  one  whose  hair  it 
ii— I  never  show  it." 

Mrs  Pryor  had  already  disappeared  behind  the  curtain: 
Inclining  far  back  in  a  deep  arm-chair  by  the  bedside,  she 
was  withdrawn  from  view.  Caroline  looked  abroad  into  the 
chamber;  she  thought  it  empty.    As  her  stray  ideas  returned 


VALLST  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.  849 


indergo  t  Give  me  strength !   Give  me  patience  1   Give 
)h  1    (live  m^FAiTH ! " 

She  fell  back  on  her  pillow.  Mrs  Pryor  found  means  to 
steal  quietly  from  the  room :  she  re-entered  it  soon  after, 
ftpparently  as  composed  as  if  she  had  really  not  overheard 
this  strange  soliloquy. 

The  next  day  several  callers  came.  It  had  become  known 
that  Miss  Helstone  was  worse.  Mr  Hall  and  his  sister 
Margaret  arrived :  both,  after  they  had  been  in  the  sxck-^room, 
quitted  it  in  tears ;  they  had  found  the  patient  more  altered 
than  they  expected.  Hortense  Moore  came.  Caroline  seemed 
stimulated  by  her  presence  :  she  assured  her,  smiling,  she  was 
not  dangerously  ill;  she  talked  to  her  in  a  low  voice,  but 
cheerfully :  during  her  stay,  excitement  kept  up  the  flush  of 
her  complexion :  she  looked  better. 

*'How  is  Mr  Robert  ?"  asked  Mrs  Pryor,  as  Hortense  was 
preparing  to  take  leave. 

"  He  was  very  well  when  he  left." 

"  Left'!  Is  he  gone  from  home  ?  " 

It  was  then  explained  that  some  police  intelligence  about 
the  rioters  of  whom  he  was  in  pursuit,  had,  that  morning, 
called  him  away  to  Birmingham,  and  probably  a  fortnight 
might  elapse  ere  he  returned.  - 

''  He  is  not  aware  that  Miss  Helstone  is  very  ill  ?  " 

«  Oh !  no.  He  thought,  like  me,  that  she  had  only  a  bad 
cold." 

After  this  visit,  Mrs  Pryor  took  care  not  to  approach 
Caroline's  couch  for  above  an  hour :  she  heard  her  weep,  and 
dared  not  look  on  her  tears. 

Aft  evening  closed  in,  she  brought  her  some  tea.  Caroline, 
opening  her  eyes  from  a  moment's  slumber,  viewed  her  nurse 
with  an  unrecognising  glance. 

**  I  smelt  the  honeysuckles  in  the  glen  this  summer-morning," 
she  said,  **  as  I  stood  at  the  counting-house  window." 

Strange  words  Hke  these  from  pallid  lips  pierce  a  loving 
listener's  heart  more  poignantly  than  steel.  They  sound 
romantic,  perhaps,  in  books  :  in  real  life,  they  are  harrowing. 

"  My  darling,  do  you  know  me  ?"  said  Mrs  Pryor. 

**  I  went  in  to  call  Robert  to  breakfast :  I  have  been  with 
lum  in  the  garden :  he  asked  me  to  go :  a  heavy  dew  has 
refreshed  the  flowers  :  the  peaches  are  ripening." 

"llify  darling  !  my  darling  ! "  again  and  again  repeated  the 
oorse. 


860  SHIBLBY. 

*^  I  thought  it  was  daylight — ^long  after  sunrise :  it  looks 
dark — ^is  the  moon  now  set  ?  '* 

That  moon,  lately  risen,  was  gazing .  fall  and  mild  upon 
her :  floating  in  deep,  blue  space,  it  watched  her  nnclouded. 

"  Then  it  is  not  morning  ?  I  am  not  at  the  cottage  ?  ^o 
is  this  ? — I  see  a  shape  at  my  bedside.*' 

"  It  is  myself — ^it  is  your  friend — ^your  nurse — ^your . 

Lean  your,  head  on  my  shoulder :  collect  yourself."  (In  & 
lower  tone.)  "  Oh  God,  take  pity  I  Give  her  life,  and  m 
strength  I     Send  me  courage — ^teach  me  words ! " 

Some  minutes  passed  in  silence.  The  patient  lay  mute 
and  passive  in  the  trembling  arms— on  the  throbbing  bosom 
of  the  nurse. 

"I  am  better  now,"  whispered  Caroline,  at  last,  "much 
better — ^I  feel  where  I  am  :  this  is  Mrs  Pryor  near  mu:  I  was 
dreaming — I  talk  when  I  wake  up  from  dreams :  people  often  do 
in  illness.  How  fast  your  heart  beats,  ma'am!  Do  not  be  afraid." 

"It  is  not  fear,  child ;  only  a  little  anxiety,  which  will 
pass.  I  have  brought  you  some  tea,  Gary;  your  imcle  made 
it  himself.  Y'ou  know  he  says  he  can  make  a  better  cup  of 
tea  vthan  any  housewife  can.  Taste  it.  He  is  concerned  to 
hear  that  you  eat  so  little :  he  would  be  glad  if  you  had  a 
better  appetite." 

"  I  am  thirsty:  let  me  drink." 

She  drank  eagerly. 

"  What  o'clock  is  it,  ma*am  ?  "  she  asked. 

"  Past  nine." 

"  Not  later  ?  Oh  I  I  have  yet  a  long  night  before  me  • 
but  the  tea  has  made  me  strong:  I  will  sit  up." 

Mrs  Pryor  raised  her,  and  arranged  her  pillows. 

"  Thank  Heaven  1  I  am  not  always  equally  miserable,  and 
ill,  and  hopeless.  The  afternoon  has  been  t»ad  since  Hortens*' 
went:  perhaps  the  evening  may  be  better.  It  is  a  fine  nigH 
I  think  ?     The  moon  shines  clear." 

"  Very  fine :  a  perfect  summer  night.  The  old  church- 
tower  gleams  white  almost  as  silver." 

"  And  does  the  churchyard  look  peaceful  ?" 

"  Yes,  and  the  garden  also :  dew  glistens  on  the  foliage.** 

*'  Can  you  see  many  long  weeds  and  nettles  amongst  tie 
graves;  or  do  they  look  turfy  and  flowery  ?" 

^^I  see  closed  daisy-heads,  gleaming  like  pearls  on  Boaf 
mounds.  Thomas  has  mown  down  the  dock-leaves  and  rank 
grass,. and  cleared  all  away." 


TALLBY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         851 

''  I  always  like  that  to  be  done :  it  soothes  one's  mind  to 
see  the  place  in  order :  and,  I  dare .  say,  within  the  chnrch 
jnst  now  that  moonlight  shines  as  softly  as  in  my  room.  It 
will  fall  through  the  east  window  full  on  the  Heist  one  monu- 
ment. When  I  close  my  eyes  I  seem  to  see  poor  papa's 
epitaph,  in  black  letters  on  the  white  marble.  There  is  plenty 
of  room  for  other  iascriptions  underneath." 

"William  Farren  came  to  look  after  your  flowers  this 
moraiiig:  he  was  afraid,  now  you  cannot  tend  them  yourself, 
they  would  be  neglected.  He  has  taken  two  of  your  favourite 
plants  home  to  nurse  for  you." 

"  If  I  were  to  make  a  will,  I  would  leave  William  all  my 
plants ;  Shirley  my  trinkets^-except  one,  which  must  not  be 
taken  off  my  neck ;  and  you,  ma'am,  my  books."  (After  a 
pause.)     "  Mrs  Pryor,  I  feel  a  longing  wish  for  something." 

"For  what,  CaroKne?" 

"  You  know  I  always  delight  to  hear  you  sing :  sing  me 
A  hymn  just  now:  sing  that  hymn  which  begins, — 

"  *  Our  God,  our  help  in  ages  past, — 
Our  hope  for  yetors  to  come ; 
Our  shelter  A:om  the  stormy  blast ; 
Our  refuge,  haven,  home ! ' " 

Mrs  Pryor  at  once  complied. 

No  wonder  Caroline  liked  to  hear  her  sing :  her  voice',  even  in 
speaking,  was  sweet  and  silver  clear ;  in  song,  it  was  almost 
divine:  neither  flute  nor  dulcimer  has  tones  so  pure.  But  the 
Cone  was  secondary  compared  to  the  expression  which  trembled 
through :  a  tender  vibration  from  a  feeling  heart. 

The  servants  in  the  kitchen,  hearing  the  strain,  stole  to 
the  stair-foot  to  listen :  even  old  Helstone,  as  he  walked  in 
the  garden,  pondering  over  the  unaccountable  and  feeble 
nature  of  women,  stood  still  amongst  his  borders  to  catch  the 
mournful  melody  more  distioctly.  Why  it  reminded  him  of 
his  forgotten  dead  wife,  he  could  not  tell ;  nor  why  it  made 
him  more  concerned  than  he  had  hitherto  l3een  for  Caroline's 
ftding  girlhood.  He  was  glad  to  recollect  that  he  had  promised 
to  pay  Wynne,  the  magistrate,  a  visit  that  evening.  Low 
ipirits  and  gloomy  thoughts  were- very  much  his  aversion: 
when  they  attacked  him  he  usually  found  means  to  make 
them  march  in  double-quick  time.  The  hymn  followed  him 
faintlv  as  he  crossed  the  flelds :  he  hastened  his  customary 
^li  up  puce,  ihsit  he  might  get  beyond  its  reach. 


352  SHIBIiETr 

'*  Thy  word  oommands  onr  flesh  to  dust,— 
*  Betnm,  ye  sons  of  men  ; ' 
All  nations  role  from  earth  at  first, 
And  tarn  to  earth  again* 

**  A  thousand  ages  in  thy  sight 
Are  like  an  evening  gone ; 
Short  as  the  watch  that  ends  the  nighfc 
Before  the  rising  son. 

**  Time,  like  an  ever-rolling  stream, 
Bears  all  its  sons  away ; 
They  fly,  forgotten,  as  a  dream 
Dies  at  the  opening  day. 

"  Like  flowery  fields,  the  nations  stand. 
Fresh  in  the  morning  light ; 
The  flowers  beneath  the  mower's  hand 
Lie  withering  ere  't  is  night. 

"  Oar  God,  oar  help  in  ages  past, — 
Oar  hope  foi^  years  to  come  ; 
Be  thoa  oar  gnard  while  troables  last,— 
0  Father,  be  oar  home  1 " 

''Now  sing  a  song— a  Scottish  song/*  suggested  Caroline 
when  the  hymn  was  over, — "  *  Ye  banks  and  braes  o'  bonny 
Doon.y' 

Again  Mrs  Pryor  obeyed,  or  essayed  to  obey.  At  the  close 
of  the  first  stanza  she  stopped  :  she  conld  get  no  further :  her 
full  heart  flowed  over. 

*'  You  are  weeping  at  the  pathos  of  the  air :  come  here,  and 
I  will  comfort  you,"  said  Caroline,  in  a  pitying  accent.  Mrs 
Pryor  came  :  she  sat  down  on  the  edge  of  her  patient's  bed, 
and  allowed  the  wasted  arms  to  encircle  her. 

"You  often  soothe  me,  let  me  soothe  you,"  murmured  the 
young  girl,  kissing  her  check.  "  I  hope,"  she  added,  "it  is 
not  for  me  you  weep." 

No  answer  followed. 

"  Do  you  think  I  shall  not  get  better  ?  I  do  not  feel  very 
ill — only  weak." 

"  But  your  mind,  Caroline  :  your  mind  is  crushed ;  yon 
heart  is  almost  broken :  you  have  been  so  neglected,  so  re- 
pulsed, left  so  desolate." 

"  I  believe  grief  is,  and  always  has  been,  my  worst  ailment. 
I  sometimes  think,  if  an  abundant  gush  of  happiness  came  on 
me,  I  could  revive  yet." 

"  Do  you  wish  to  live  ?  " 

"  I  have  no  object  in  life." 

•*  You  love  me,  Caroline  ?  " 

"  Very  much, — very  truly, — ^inexpressibly  sometimes :  just 
now  I  feel  as  if  I  could  almost  grow  to  your  heart.*' 


TALLET  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         868 

''I  will  return  directlj,  dear/*  remarked  Mrs  Pryor,  as  she 
iud  Caroline  down. 

Quitting  lier,  she  glided  to  the  door,  sofbly  turned  the  key 
n  the  lock,  ascertained  that  it  was  fast,  and  came  back.  She 
5ent  over  her.  She  threw  back  the  curtain  to  admit  the 
noonlight  more  freely.     She  gazed  intently  on  her  face. 

"  Then,  if  you  love  me,''  said  she,  speaking  quickly,  with 
m  altered  voice:  "if  you  feel  as  if — to  use  your  own  words 
— ^you  cotdd  *  grow  to  my  heart,'  it  will  be  neither  shock  nor 
pain  for  you  to  know  that  that  heart  is  the  source  whence  yours 
was  filled:  that  from  my  veins  issued  the  tide  which  flows  in 
yowra;  that  you  are  mine — ^my  daughter — ^my  own  child." 

"MrsPiyor !*' 

"My  own  child  I" 

"  That  is — ^that  means — ^you  have  adopted  me  ?" 

"  It  means  that,  if  I  have  given  you  nothing  else,  I  at  least 

gave  you  life  ;  that  I  bore  you — nursed  you  ;  that  I  am  your 

true  mother:  no  other  woman  can  claim  the  title — it  is  mineJ** 

"  But  Mrs  James  Helstone — ^but  my  father's  wife  whom  I 

do  not  remember  ever  to  have  seen,  she  is  my  mother  ?" 

"  She  is  your  mother:  James  Helstone  Was  my  husband. 
I  say  you  are  mine,  I  have  proved  it.  I  thought  perhaps 
you  were  all  his,  which  would  have  been  a  cruel  dispensation 
for  me:  I  find  it  is  not  so.  God  permitted  me  to  be  the  parent 
of  my  child's  mind :  it  belongs  to  me :  it  is  my  property — 
my  right.  These  features  are  James's  own.  He  had  a  fine 
&ce  when  he  was  young,  and  not  altered  by  error.  Papa,  my 
darling,  gave  you  your  blue  eyes  and  soil  brown  hair:  he 
gave  you  the  oval  of  your  face  and  the  regularity  of  your 
lineaments:  the  outside  he  conferred;  but. the  heart  and  the 
brain  are  mine:  the  germs  are  from  me,  and  they  are  improved, 
they  are  developed  to  excellence.  I  esteem  and  approve  my 
child  as  highly  as  I  do  most  fondly  love  her.'^ 
" Is  what  I  hear  true  ?  Is  it  no  dreahi ?" 
"  I  wish  it  were  as  true  that  the  substance  and  colour  of 
health  were  restored  to  your  cheek.** 

"  My  own  mother  I  is  she  one  I  can  be  so  fond  of  as  I  can 
of  you  ?  People  generally  did  not  like  her,  so  I  have  been 
given  to  understand." 

"  They  told  you  that  ?  Well,  your  mother  now  tells  you, 
that,  not  having  the  gift  to  please  people  generally,  for  their 
approbation  she  does  not  care :  her  thoughts  are  centred  in 
her  child :  does  that  child  welcome  or  reject  her  ?" 

23 


344  8HIRZJET. 

The  few  days  passed,  and — though  it  was  still  thonglit  it 
could  not  long  delay — ^the  revival  had  not  begun.  Mrs  Piyw, 
who  had  visited  her  daily — ^being  present  in  her  chamber  one 
morning  when  she  had  been  ill  a  fortnight — ^watched  her  very 
narrowly  for  some  minutes  :  she  took  her  hand,  and  placed 
her  finger  on  her  wrist ;  then,  quietly  leaving  the  chamber, 
she  went  to  Mr  Helstone^s  study.  With  him  she  remainfid 
closeted  a  long  time — ^half  the  morning.  On  returning  to  her 
sick  young  friend,  she  laid  aside  shawl  and  boimet:  she  stood 
a  while  at  the  bedside,  one  hand  placed  in  the  otlier,  gently 
rocking  herself  to  and  &o,  in  an  attitude  and  with  a  movement 
habitual  to  her.     At  last  she  said — 

"  I  have  sent  Fanny  to  Fieldhead  to  fetch  a  few  things  for 
me,  such  as  I  shall  want  during  a  short  stay  here :  it  is  my 
wish  to  remain  with  you  till  you  are  better.  Your  imcle 
kindly  permits  my  attendance:  will  it  to  yourself  be  accept* 
able,  Caroline  ?  " 

"  I  am  sorry  you  should  take  such  needless  trouble.  I  do 
not  feel  very  ill,  but  I  cannot  refuse  resolutely:  it  will  be  such 
comfort  to  know  you  are  in  the  house,  to  see  you  sometimes 
in  the  room;  but  don't  confine  yourself  on  my  account,  dear 
Mrs  Pryor.     Fanny  nurses  me  very  well." 

Mrs  Pryor — ^bending  over  the  pale  littfe  sufferer — ^was  now 
smoothing  the  hair  under  her  cap,  and  gently  raising  her 
pillow!  As  she  performed  these  offices,  Caroline,  smiling, 
lifted  her  face  to  kiss  her. 

"  Are  y6u  free  from  pain  ?  Are  you  tolerably  at  ease  ? " 
was  inquired  in  a  low,  earnest  voice,  as  the  self-elected  nurse 
yielded  to  the  cai^iBss.    ' 

''  I  think  I  am  almost  happy." 

"  You  wish  to  drink  ?     Your  lips  are  parched." 

She  held  a  glass  filled  with  some  cooling  beverage  to  her 
mouth. 

"  Have  you  eaten  anything  to  day,  Caroline  ?  " 

"  I  cannot  eat." 

'^  But  soon  your  appetite  will  return:  it  must  return:  that 
is,  I  pray  God  it  may  1 " 

In  laying  her  again  on  the  couch,  she  encircled  h«r  in  her 
arms ;  and  while  so  doing,  by  ti  movement  whidi  seemed 
scarcely  voluntary,  she  drew  her  to  her  heart,  and  held  her 
close  gathered  an  instant. 

"  I  shall  hardly  wish  to  get  well,  that  I  may  keep  yon 
always,"  said  Caroline. 


TALUET  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         S45 

Mn  Pryor  did  not  smile  at  this  speech :  over  her  features 
ran  a  tremor^  which  for  some  minutes  she  was  absorbed  in 
lepressing. 

"  You  are  more  used  to  Fanny  than  to  me,"  she  remarked, 
erelong.  "  I  should  think  my  attendance  must  seem  strange, 
officious  ?  " 

"  No:  quite  natural,  and  .very  soothing.  You  must  have 
been  accustomed  to  wait  on  sick  people,  ma'am.  You  move 
about  the  room  so  softly,  and  you  speak  so  quietly,  and  touch 
me  so  gently." 

"  I  am  dexterous  in  nothing,  my  dear.  You  will  often  find 
me  awkwardy  but  never  negligent." 

N^ligent,  indeed,  she  was  not.  From  that  hour,  Fanny 
and  Eli2a  became  ciphers  in  the  sick-room  :  Mrs  Pryor  made 
it  her  domain :  she  performed  all  its  duties ;  she  lived  in  it 
day  and  night.  The  patient  remonstrated — faintly,  however, 
from  the  first,  and  not  at  all  erelong :  loneliness  and  gloom 
were  now  banished  from  her  bedside ;  protection  and  solace 
sat  there  instead.  She  and  her  nurse  coalesced  in  wondrous 
union.  Caroline  was  usually  pained  to  require  or  receive 
much  attendance  :  Mrs  Pryor,  imder  ordinary  circumstances, 
had  neither  the  habit  nor  the  art  of  performing  little  offices  of 
sendee ;  but  all  now  passed  with  such  ease — so  naturally,  that 
the  patient  was  as  willing  to  be  cherished  as  the  nurse  was 
bent  on  cherishing:  no  sign  of  weariness  in  the  latter  ever 
reminded  the  former  that  she  ought  to  be  anxious.  There 
was,  in  fact,  no  very  hard  duty  to  perform ;  but  a  hireling 
might  have  foimd  it  hard. 

With  all  this  care,  it  seemed  strange  the  sick  girl  did  not 
get  well;  yet  such  was  the  case:  she  washed  like  any  snow- 
wreath  in  thaw;  she  faded  like  any  fiower  in  drought.  Miss 
Keeldar,  on  whose  thoughts  danger  or  death  seldom  intruded, 
had  at  first  entertained  no  fears  at  all  for  her  friend;  but 
seeing  her  change  and  sink  from  time  to  time  when  she  paid 
her  visits,  alarm  clutched  her  heart.  She  went  to  Mr  Helstpne 
and  expressed  herself  with  so  much  energy,  that  that  gentle- 
man was  at  last  obliged,  however  unwillingly,  to  admit  the 
idea  that  his  niece  was  ill  of  something  more  than  a  migraine; 
«nd  when  Mrs  Pryor  came  and  quietly  demanded  a  physician, 
he  said  she  might  send  for  two  if  she  liked.  One  came,  but 
that  one  was  an  oracle:  he  delivered  a  dark  sa3dng  of  which 
the  iuture  was  to  solve  the  mystery,  wrote  some  prescriptions, 
gave  some  directions — ^the  whole  with  an  air  of  crushing 


846  SHtRIiET. 

authority-— pocketed  his  fee,  and  went.    Probablj,  he  knew 
well  enough  he  could  do  no  good;  but  didn't  like  to  nj  aa 

StiU,  no  rumour  of  serious  illness  got  wind  in  the  ndgh- 
bourhood.  At  Hollow's-cottage  it  was  thought  that  Gazolke 
had  only  a  severe  cold,  she  haying  written  a  note  to  Hxatenm 
to  that  effect;  and  Mademoiselle  contented  herself  with  aendisg 
two  pots  of  currant  jam,  a  receipt  for  a  tisane,  and  a  note  of 
advice. 

Mrs  Torke  being  told  that  a  physician  had  been  summoned, 
sneered  at  the  hypochondriac  fancies  of  the  rich  and  idle, 
who,  she  said,  have  nothing  but  themselves  to  think  aboat, 
must  needs  send  for  a  doctor  if  only  so  much  as  their  Httle 
finger  ached. 

The  "  rich  and  idle,''  represented  in  the  person  of  Caroline, 
were  meantime  falling  fast  into  a  condition  of  prostration, 
whose  quickly  consummated  debility  puzzled  all  who  wit- 
nessed it,  except  one ;  for  that  one  alone  reflected  how  liftbk 
is  the  undermined  structure  to  sink  in  sudden  rain. 

Sick  people  often  have  ^ncies  inscrutable  to  ordinaiy 
attendants,  and  Caroline  had  one  which  even  her  tender  nurse 
could  not  at  first  explain.  On  a  certain  day  in  the  weAf  Bt 
a  certain  hour,  she  would — ^whether  worse  or  better — entreat 
to  be  taken  up  and  dressed,  and  suffered  to  sit  in  her  chair 
near  the  window.  This  station  she  would  retain  till  noon 
was  past:  whatever  degree  of  exhaustion  or  debility  her  wan 
aspect  betrayed,  she  stUl  softly  put  off  all  persuasion  to  seek 
repose  until  the  church-clock  had  duly  tolled  mid-day:  the 
twelve  strokes  sounded,  she  grew  docile,  and  would  meekly 
lie  down.  Eetumed  to  the  couch,  she  usually  buried  her 
face  deep  in  the  piUow,  and  drew  the  coverlets  close  round 
her,  as  if  to  shut  out  the  world  and  sun,  of  which  Ae  was 
tired:  more  than  once,  as  she  thus  lay,  a  slight  convulsion 
shook  the  sick-bed,  and  a  faint  sob  broke  the  silence  round  it 
These  things  were  not  unnoted  by  Mrs  Pryor. 

One  Tuesday  morning,  as  usual,  she  had  asked  leave  to 
rise,  and  now  she  sat  wraipped  in  her  white  dressing-gown, 
leaning  forward  in  the  easy-chair,  gazing  steadily  and  patiently 
from  ^e  lattice.  Mrs  Pryor  was  seated  a  little  behind,  knit- 
ting as  it  seemed,  but,  in  truthj  watching  her.  A  change 
crossed  her  pale  mournful  brow,  animating  its  languor;  a 
light  shot  into  her  faded  eyes,  reviving  their  lustre;  she  half 
rose  and  looked  earnestly  out.  Mrs  Pryor,  drawing  softly 
neari  glanced  over  her  shoulder.    From   this  window  waa 


VALLEY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         847 

visible  the  chnrcbyard,  beyond  it  the  road,  and  there,  riding 
sharply  by,  appeared  a  horseman.  The  figure  was  not  yet 
too  remote  for  recognition:  Mrs  Pry  or  had  long  sight;  she 
knew  Mr  Moore.  Just  as  an  intercepting  rising  ground  con- 
cealed him  from  view,  the  clock  struck  twelve. 
"  May  I  lie  down  again?"  asked  Caroline. 
Her  nurse  assisted  her  to  bed:  having  laid  her  down  and 
drawn  the  curtain,  she  stood  listening  near.  The  little  couch 
trembled,  the  suppressed  sob  stirred  the  air.  A  contraction 
as  of  anguish  altered  Mrs  Pryor's  features ;  she  wrung  her 
hands ;  half  a  groan  escaped  her  lips.  She  now  remembered 
that  Tuesday  was  Whinbury  market-day:  Mr  Moore  must 
always  pass  the  Rectoiy  on  his  way  thither,  just  ere  noon  of 
that  day. 

Caroline  wore  continually  round  her  neck  a  slender  braid 

of  silk,  attached  to  which  was  some  trinket.     Mrs  Pryor  had 

seen  the  bit  of  gold  glisten ;  but  had  not  yet  obtained  a  fair 

view  of  it     B[er  patient  never  parted  with  it:  when  dressed 

it  was  hidden  in  her  bosom;  as  she  lay  in  bed  she  always 

held  it  in  her  hand.     That  Tuesday  afternoon  the  transient 

doae — more   like  lethargy  than   sleep  —  which   sometimes 

abridged  the  long  days,  had  stolen  6ver  her:  the  weather  was 

hot:  while  turning  in  febrile  restlessness,  she  had  pushed  the 

coverlets  a  little  aside;   Mrs  Pryor  bent  to  replace  them; 

the  small,  wasted  hand  lying  nerveless  on  the   sick  girl's 

breast,  clasped  as  usual  her  jealously-guarded  treasure :  ^ose 

fingers  whose  attenuation  it  gave  pain  to  see,  were  now  relaxed 

ia  sleep  r  Mrs  Piyor  gently  disengaged  the  braid,  drawing  out 

a  liny  locket — ^a  slight  thing  it  was,  such  as  it  suited  her 

small  purse  to  purchase:  imder  its  crystal  face  appea^red  a 

curl  of  black  hair — ^too  short  and  crisp  to  have  been  severed 

from  a  female  head. 

Some  agitated  movement  occasioned  a  twitch  of  the  silken 
chain:  the  sleeper  started  and  woke.  Her  thoughts  were 
iisually  now  somewhat  scattered  on  waking ;  her  look  gene- 
rally wandering.  Half-rising,  as  if  in  terror,  she  exclaimed : 
** Don't  take  it  from  me,  KobertI  Don't!  It  is  my  l^st 
comfort — let  me  keep  it.  I  never  tell  any  one  whose  hair  it 
ij — I  never  show  it." 

Mrs  Pryor  had  already  disappeared  behind  the  curtain: 
reclining  far  back  in  a  deep  arm-chair  by  the  bedside,  she 
was  witi^drawn  from  view.  Caroline  looked  abroad  into  the 
cfaiinber:  she  thought  it  empty.    As  her  stray  ideas  returned 


S88  SHIBLET. 

in  to-day's  page  of  her  eternal  book,  that  I  am  not  to  hxn 
the  pleasure  I  long  for.  In  the  second  place,  if  he  stepped  in 
this  moment,  my  presence  here  would  be  a  chagrin  to  him, 
and  the  consciousness  that  it  must  be  so  would  turn  half  my 
blood  to  ice.  His  hand  would,  perhaps,  be  loose  and  chill,  if 
I  put  mine  into  it :  his  eye  woiSd  be  clouded  if  I  sought  its 
beam.  I  should  look  up  for  that  kindling,  something  I  have 
seen  in  past  days,  when  my  face,  or  my  language,  or  my  dis- 
position had  at  some  happy  moment  pleased  him — I  should 
discover  only  darkness.     I  had  better  go  home." 

She  took  her  bonnet  from  the  table  where  it  lay,  and  was 
just  i^tening  the  ribbon,  when  Hortense,  directing  her  atten- 
tion to  a  splendid  bouquet  of  flowers  in  a  glass  on  the  same 
table,  mentioned  that  Miss  Keeldar  had  sent  them  that  morning 
from  Fieldhead  ;  and  went  on  to  comment  on  the  guests  that 
lady  was  at  present  entertaining,  on  the  bustling  life  she  had 
lately  been  leading ;  adding  divers  conjectures  that  she  did 
not  very  well  like  it,  and  much  wonderment  that  a  person 
who  was  so  fond  of  her  own  way^as  the  heiress,  did  not  find 
some  means  of  sooner  getting  rid  of  this  cortege  of  relatives. 

. "  But  they  say  she  actually  will  not  let  Mr  Sympson  and 
his  family  go,"  she  added :  "  they  wanted  much  to  return  to 
the  south  last  week,  to  be  ready  for  the  reception  of  the  only 
son,  who  is  expected  home  from  a  tour.  She  insists  that  her 
cousin  Henry  shall  come  and  join  his  friends  here  in  YorksHire. 
I  daresay  she  partly  does  it  to  oblige  Robert  and  myself." 

"  How  to  oblige  Robert  and  you?"  inquired  Caroline. 

"Why,  my  child,  you  are  dull.  Don't  you  know — ^you 
must  often  have  heard ^" 

"  Please,  ma'am,"  said  Sarah,  opening  the  door, ''  the  pre- 
serves that  you  told  me  to  boil  in  treacle — the  congfiters,  a 
you  call  them — ^is  all  burnt  to  the  pan." 

"  Les  confitures  !  EUes  sont  brM^es  ?  Ah,  quelle  n^li- 
gence  coupablel     Coqidne  de  cuisini^re — fiUe  insupportable!" 

And  Mademoiselle,  hastily  taking  from  a  drawer  a  large 
linen  apron,  and  tying  it  over  her  black  apron,  rushed  ^'  ^per- 
due" into  the  kitchen,  whence — ^to  speak  truth— exhaled  an 
odour  of  calcined  sweets  rather  stsong  than  savoury. 

The  mistress  and  maid  had  been  in  full  feud  the  whole  day^ 
on  the  subject  of  preserving  certain  black  chezries,  hard  ai 
marbles,  sour  as  sloes.  Sarah  held  that  sugar  was  the  only 
orthodox  condiment  to  be  used  in  that  process  ;  MademoiseUe 
maintained — and  proved  it  by  the  practice  and  experience  of 


AK  EVENING  OUT.  889 

her  mother,  grandmother,  and  great-grandmother — that 
treacle,  "  m^lasse,"  was  infinitely  preferable.  She  had  com- 
mitted an  imprudence  in  leaving  Sarah  in  charge  of  the  pre- 
serving-pan, for  her  want  of  sympathy  in  the  nature  of  its 
contents  had  induced  a  degree  of  carelessness  in  watching  their 
confection,  whereof  the  result  was — dark  and  cindery  ruin. 
Hubbub  followed :  high  upbraiding,  and  sobs  rather  loud  than 
deep  or  real. 

Caroline,  once  more  turning  to  the  little  mirror,  was  shading 
her  ringlets  from  her  cheek  to  smooth  them  under  her  cottage 
bon^^et,  certain  that  it  would  not  only  be  useless  but  unpleasant 
to  stay  longer ;  when,  on  the  sudden  opening  of  the  back- 
door, there  fell  an  abrupt  calm  in  the  kitchen :  the  tongues 
were  checked,  pulled  up  as  with  bit  and  bridle.  "  Was  it — 
was  it — ^Robert  ?  "  He  often — ^almost  always-^-entered  by  the 
kitchen-way  on  his  return  from  market.  No :  it  was  only 
Joe  Scott,  who,  having  hemmed  significantly  thrice— every 
hem  being  meant  as  a  lofby  rebuke  to  the  squabbling  woman- 
kind— said, — 

"  Now,  I  thowt  I  heerd  a  crack  ?" 

None  answered. 

"  And,"  he  continued,  pragmatically, "  as  t'  maister's  corned, 
and  as  he  11  enter  through  this  hoyle,  I  considered  it  desirable 
to  step  in  and  let  ye  know.  A  household  o'  women  is  niwer 
fit  to  be  comed  on  wi  *out  warning.  Here  he  is :  walk  forrard, 
sir.  They  war  playing  up  queerly,  but  I  think  I  Ve  quieted  'em." 

Another  person — ^it  was  now  audible — entered.  Joe  Scott 
proceeded  with  his  rebukes. 

"  What  d'  ye  mean  by  being  all  T  darkness  ?  Sarah,  thou 
quean,  canst  t*  not  light  a  candle  ?  It  war  sundown  an  hour 
8yne.  He  '11  brak'  his  shins  agean  some  o'  yer  pots,  and  tables, 
and  stuff.  Tak'  tent  o'  this  baking-bowl,  sir ;  they  Ve  set  it 
i'  yer  way,  fair  as  if  they  did  it  i'  malice." 

To  Joe's  observations  succeeded  a  confused  sort  of  pause, 
which  Caroline,  though  she  was  listening  with  both  her  ears, 
could  not  imderstand.  It  was  very  brief :  a  cry  broke  it — a, 
sound  of  surprise,  followed  by  the  sound  of  a  kiss :  ejaculations, 
but  half  articulate,  succeeded. 

"Mon.Dieu!  mon  Dieul  Est-ce  que  je  m'y  attendais?" 
were  the  words  chiefly  to  be  distinguished. 

"Et  tu  te  portes  toujours  bien,  bonne  soeur?"  inquired 
another  voice — ^Robert's,  certainly. 

Caroline  was  puzzled.     Obeying  an  impulse,  the  wisdom  of 


MO  SHIRLEY. 

which  she  had  not  time  to  question,  she  escaped  from  the  litlk 
parlour,  by  way  of  leaving  the  coast  clear,  and  ronning  up- 
stairs took  up  a  position  at  the  head  of  the  banisters,  whence 
she  could  make  further  observations  ere  presenting  herself. 
It  was  considerably  past  sunset  now:  dusk  fiUed  the  passage, 
yet  not  such  deep  dusk  but  that  she  could  presently  see 
Eobert  and  Hortense  traverse  it. 

*  '^  Caroline  !  Caroline  !"  called  Hortense,  a  moment  after- 
wards, «  venez  voir  mon  fr^re ! " 

"  Strange!"  commented  Miss  Helstone,  "  passing  strange! 
What  does  this  unwonted  excitement  about  such  an  ever^y 
occurrence  as  a  return  from  market  portend  ?  She  has  not 
lost  her  senses,  has  she  ?  Surely  the  burnt  treacle  has  not 
crazed  her?" 

She  descended  in  a  subdued  flutter :  yet  more  was  she 
fluttered  when  Hortense  seized  her  hand  at  the  parlour-door, 
and  leading  her  to  Eobert,  who  stood  in  bodily  presence,  tall 
and  dark  against  the  one  window,  presented  her  with  a  mixture 
of  agitation  and  formality,  as  though  they  had  been  utter 
strangers,  and  this  was  their  flrst  mutual  introduction. 

Increasing  puzzle  !  He  bowed  rather  awkwardly,  and 
turning  from  her  with  a  stranger's  embarrassment,  he  met  the 
doubtfiil  light  from  a  window :  it  fell  on  his  face,  and  the 
enigma  of  the  dream  (a  dream  it  seemed)  was  at  its  height : 
she  saw  a  visage  like  and  unlike, — Robert,  and  no  Robert. 

"What  is  the  matter?"  said  Caroline.  "Is  my  sight 
wrong  ?     Is  it  my  cousin  ?  " 

"  Certainly,  it  is  your  cousin,"  asserted  Hortense. 

Then  who  was  this  now  coming  through  the  passage, — ^now 
entering  the  room?  Caroline,  looking  round,  met  a  new 
Robert, — the  real  Robert,  as  she  felt  at  once. 

"Well,"  said  he,  smiling  at  her  questioning,  astonished 
face,  "  which  is  which  ?" 

"  Ah  !  this  is  yow/"  was  the  answer. 

He  laughed.  "  I  believe  it  is  me:  and  do  you  know  yrholu 
18  ?    You  never  saw  him  before ;  but  you  have  heard  of  him." 

She  had  gathered  her  senses  now. 

"  It  can  be  only  one  person :  your  brother,  since  it  is  w 
like  you :  my  other  cousin,  Louis." 

"  Clever  little  CEdipus ! — ^you  would  have  baffled  the 
Sphynx  !  —  but  now,  see  us  together.  Change  places. 
Change  again,  to  confuse  her,  Louis. — Which  is  the  gld  love 
now,  Lina  ?  " 


J 


AK  EVENING  OUT.  '  841 

"As  if  it  were  possible  to  make  a  mistake  when  you 
speak !  You  should  have  told  Hortense  to  ask.  But  you  are 
not  80  much  alike:  it  is  only  your  height,  your  figure,  and 
complexion  that  are  so  similar." 

"And  I  am  Robert,  am  I  not?"  asked  the  new  comer, 
making  a  first  ejQTort  to  overcome  what  seemed  his  natural 
shyness. 

Caroline  shook  her  head  gently.  A  soft,  expressive  ray 
from  her  eye  beamed  on  the  real  Robert :  it  said  much. 

She  was  not  permitted  to  quit  her  cousins  soon :  Robert 
himself  was  peremptory  in  obliging  her  to  remain.  Glad, 
simple,  and  affable  in  her  demeanour  (glad  for  this  night,  at 
least),  in  light,  bright  spirits  for  the  time,  she  was  too  pleasant 
an  addition  to  the  cottage  circle  to  be  willingly  parted  with 
by  any  of  them.  Louis  seemed  naturally  rather  a  grave,  still, 
retiring  man,  but  the  Caroline  of  this  evening,  which  was  not 
(as  you  know,  reader)  the  Caroline  of  every  day,  thawed  his 
reserve,  and  cheered  his  gravity  soon.  He  sat  near  her,  pxid 
talked  to  her.  She  already  knew  his  vocation  was  that  of 
tuition;  she  learned  now  he  had  for  some  years  been  the 
tutor  of  Mr  Sympson's  son ;  that  he  had  been  travelling  with 
him,  and  had  accompanied  him  to  the  north.  She  inquired  if 
he  liked  his  post,  but  got  a  look  in  reply  which  did  not  invite 
or  license  further  question.  The  look  woke  Caroline's  ready 
Sjrmpathy :  she  thought  it  a  very  sad  expression  to  pass  oyer 
80  sensible  a  face  as  Louis's :  for  he  had  a.  sensible  face, — 
though  not  handsome,  she  considered,  when  seen  near  Robert's. 
She  tamed  to  make  the  comparison.  Robert  was  leaning 
against  the  wall,  a  little  behind  her,  turning  over  the  leaves 
of  a  book  of  engravings,  and  probably  listening,  at  the  same 
time,  to  the  dialogue  between  her  and  Louis. 

"How  could  I  think  them  alike?"  she  asked  herself:  "I 
see  now  it  is  Hortense,  Louis  resembles,  not  Robert." 

And  this  was  in  part  true :  he  had  the  shorter  nose  and 
longer  upper-lip  of  his  sister,  rather  than  the  fine  traits  of  his 
brother:  he  had  her  mould  of  mouth  and  chin — ^all  less  decisive, 
accurate,  and  clear  than  those  of  the  young  mill-owner.  .  His 
air,  though  deliberate  and  reflective,  could  scarcely  be  called 
prompt  and  acute.  You  felt,  in  sitting  near  and  looking  up 
at  him,  that  a  slower  and  probably  a  more  benignant  nature 
than  that  of  the  elder  Moore  shed  calm  on  your  impressions. 

Robert — ^perhaps  aware  that  Caroline's  glance  had  wandered 
towards  and  dwelt  upon  him,  though  he  had  neither  met  nor 


342  SHIRLET. 

answered  it — ^put  down  the  book  of  engravings,  and  approach^ 
ing,  took  a  seat  at  her  side.  She  resumed  her  conversation 
with  Louis,*  but,  while  she  talked  to  him,  her  thoughts  were 
elsewhere :  her  heart  beat  on  the  side  from  which  her  iace 
was  half-averted.  She  acknowledged  a  steady,  manlj,  kindly 
air  in  Louis ;  but  she  bent  before  the  secret  power  of  Robert. 
To  be  so  near  him — though  he  was  silent — though  lie  did  not 
touch  so  much  as  her  scarf-fringe,  or  the  white  hem  of  hex 
dress — affected  her  like  a  spell.  Had  she  been  obliged  to 
speak  to  him  onZy,  it  would  have  quelled — ^but,  at  liberty  to 
address  another,  it  excited  her.  Her  discourse  flowed  fredj: 
it  was  gay,  playful,  eloquent.  The  indulgent  look  and  placid 
manner  of  her  auditor  encouraged  her  to  ease ;  the  sober 
pleasure  expressed  by  his  smile  drew  out  all  that  was  brilliant 
in  her  nature.  She  felt  that  this  evening  she  appeared  to 
advantage,  and,  as  Kobert  was  a  spectator,  the  conBcioosness 
contented  her :  had  he  been  called  away,  collapse  would  at 
once  have  succeeded  stimulus. 

But  her  enjoyment  was  not  long  to  shine  ftdl-orbed:  a  cloud 
soon  crossed  it. 

Hortense,  who  for  some  time  had  been  on  the  move  ordering 
supper,  and  was  now  clearing  the  little  table  of  some  books,  &c., 
to  make  room  for  the  tray,  called  Eobert's  attention  to  the  ghs8 
of  flowers,  the  carmine,  and  snow,  and  gold  of  whose  petadJ 
looked  radiant  indeed  by  candlelight. 

"  They  came  from  Fieldhead,"  she  said,  "  intended  as  a 
gift  to  you,' no  doubt:  we  know  who  is  the  &.vourite  there— 
not  I,  I  *m  sure." 

It  was  a  wdnder  to  hear  Hortense  jest;  a  sign  that  her 
spirits  were  at  high-water  mark  indeed. 

^'  We  are  to  imderstand,  then,  that  Robert  is  the  favourite  ?** 
observed  Louis.  •  « 

"  Mod  cher,"  replied  Hortense,  "  Robert— e'est  tout  ce 
qu'il  y  a  de  plus  pr^ieux  au  monde:  k  cdt6  de  lui,  le  reste 
du  genre  humain  n*est  que  du  rebut.  N*ai-je  pas  raison,  moD 
enfant?"  she  added,  appealing  to  Caroline. 

Caroline  was  obliged  to  reply,  "Yes" — and  her  beacon 
was  quenched :  her  star  withdrew  as  she  spoke. 

"  Et  toi,  Robert  ?  "  inquired  Louis. 

**  When  you  shall  have  an  opportunity,  ask  herself,"  was  the 
quiet  answer.  Whether  he  reddened  or  paled  Caroline  did  not 
examine:  she  discovered  it  was  late,  and  she  must  go  home. 
■^ome  she  would  go:  not  even  Robert  could  detain  her  now- 


VALLBT  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DSATB.         Mi 

CHAPTER  XXIV 

THE  VALLEY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH. 

The  fdtnre  sometiines  seems  to  sob  a  low  warning  of  th6 
events  it  is  bringing  us,  like  some  gathering  thougb  yet 
remote  storm,  which,  in  tones  of  the  wind,  in  flushings  of  the 
fiimament,  in  clouds  strangely  torn,  announces  a  blast  strong 
to  strew  tlie  sea  with  wrecks ;  or  commissioned  to  bring  in 
fog  the  yellow  tamt  of  pestilence,  covering  white  Western 
isles  with,  the  poisoned  exhalations  of  the  East,  dimming  the 
lattices  of  English  homes  with  the  breath  of  Indian  plague. 
At  other  times  this  Future  bursts  suddenly,  as  if  a  rock  had 
rent,  and  in  it  a  grave  had  opened,  whence  issues  the  body 
of  one  that  slept.  Ere  you  are  aware  you  stand  face  to  face 
with  a  shrouded  and  imtiiought-of  Calamity — a  new  Lazarus. 
Caroline  Helstone  went  home  from  Hollow's  cottage  in  good 
health,  as  she  imagined.  On  waking  the  next  morning  she 
felt  oppressed  with  imwonted  languor :  at  breakfast,  at  each 
meal  at  the  following  day,  she  missed  all  sense  of  appetite: 
palatable  food  was  as  ashes  and  sawdust  to  her. 

<<  Am  I  ill?"  she  asked,. and  looked  at  herself  in  the  glass. 
Her  eyes  were  bright,  their  pupils  dilated,  her  cheeks  seemed 
rosier  and  fuller  than  usual.  "  I  look  well ;  why  can  I  nq,t  eat?  " 
She  felt  a  pulse  beat  fast  in  her  temples :  she  felt,  too,  her 
brain  in  strange  activity :  her  spirits  were  raised ;  hundreds 
of  bu^  and  broken,  but- brilliant  thoughts  engaged  her  mind: 
a  glow  rested  on  them,  such  as  tinged  her  complexion. 

Now  followed  a  hot,  parched,  thirsty,  restless  night.  To* 
wards  morning  one  terrible  dream  seized  her  like  a  tiger :  when 
she  woke,  she  felt  and  knew  she  was  ilL 

How  she  had  caught  the  fever  (fever  it  was),  she  could  not 
(ell.  Probably  in  her  late  walk  home,  some  sweet,  poisoned 
breeze,  redolent  of  honey-dew  and  miasma,  had  passed  into 
her  lungs  and  veins,  and  finding  there  -  already  a  *fever  of 
mental  excitement,  and  a  languor  of  long  conflict  and  habitual 
sadness,  had  fanned  the  spark  of  flame,  and  left  a  well-lit  fire 
behind  it. 

It  seemed,  however,  but  *&  gentle  fire :  after  two  hot  days 
and  worried  nights,  there  was  no  violence  in  the  symptoms, 
and  neither  her  imcle,  nor  Fanny,  nor  the  doctor,  nor  Miss 
Keekbr,  when  she  called,  had  any  fear  for  her :  a  few  days 
would  restore  her,  every  one  believed. 


944  8HIRLET. 

The  few  days  passed,  and — though  it  was  still  thooght  h 
could  not  long  delay — ^the  revival  had  not  begun.  Mrs  Pryor, 
who  had  visited  her  daily^ — ^being  present  in  her  chamber  one 
morning  when  she  had  been  ill  a  fortnight — ^watched  her  very 
narrowly  for  some  minutes  :  she  took  her  hand,  and  placed 
her  finger  on  her  wrist ;  then,  quietly  leaving  the  chamber, 
she  went  to  Mr  Helstone's  study.  With  him  she  remained 
closeted  a  long  time — ^half  the  morning.  On  retumixig  to  her 
sick  young  friend,  she  laid  aside  shawl  and  bonnet:  she  stood 
a  while  at  the  bedside,  one  hand  placed  in  the  other,  gently 
rocking  herself  to  and  &o,  in  an  attitude  and  with  a  movement 
habitual  to  her.     At  last,  she  said — 

"  I  have  sent  Fanny  to  Fieldhead  to  fetch  a  few  things  for 
me,  such  as  I  shall  want  during  a  short  stay  here :  it  is  znj 
wish  to  remain  with  you  till  you  are  better.  Your  uncle 
kindly  permits  my  attendance:  will  it  to  yourself  be  accept- 
able, Caroline?" 

"  I  am  sorry  you  should  take  such  needless  trouble.  I  do 
not  feel  very  ill,  but  I  cannot  refuse  resolutely:  it  will  be  sack 
comfort  to  know  you  are  in  the  house,  to  see  you  sometimes 
in  the  room ;  but  don't  confine  yourself  on  my  account,  dear 
Mrs  Pryor.     Fanny  nurses  me  very  well." 

Mrs  Pryor — ^bending  over  the  pale  little  sufferer — ^was  now 
smoothing  the  hair  under  her  cap,  and  gently  raising  hex 
pillow!  As  she  performed  these  Offices,  Caroline,  smiling, 
lifled  her  face  to  kiss  her. 

"  Are  y6u  free  from  pain?  Are  you  tolerably  at  ease?" 
was  inquired  in  a  low,  earnest  voice,  as  the  self-dected  nvx^ 
3delded  to  the  cai^BSs.    ' 

"  I  think  I  am  almost  happy." 

"  You  wish  tp  drink  ?    Your  lips  are  parched." 

She  held  a  glass  filled  with  some  cooling  beverage  to  bei 
mouth. 

"  Have  you  eaten  anything  to  day,  Caroline  ?  " 

"  I  cannot  eat." 

"  But  soon  your  appetite  will  return:  it  must  return:  th«< 
is,  I  pray  God  it  may  1 " 

In  laying  her  again  on  the  couch,  she  encircled  her  in  her 
arms ;  and  while  so  doing,  by  ti  movement  which  seemed 
scarcely  voluntary,  she  drew  her  to  her  heart,  and  held  ber 
close  gathered  an  instant. 

"  I  shall  hardly  wish  to  get  well,  that  I  may  keep  jou 
always,"  said  Caroline. 


TALLET  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         S45 

Mrs  Fryor  did  not  smile  at  this  speecli:  over  her  features 
ran  a  tremor,  which  for  some  minutes  she  was  absorbed  ia 
repressing. 

*'  You  are  more  used  to  Fanny  than  to  me,"  she  remarked, 
erelong.  "  I  should  think  my  attendance  must  seem  strange, 
officious  ?  " 

'*  No:  quite  natural,  and  .very  soothing.  You  must  h^ve 
been  accustomed  to  wait  on  sick  people,  ma'am.  You  move 
about  the  room  so  softly,  and  you  speak  so  quietly,  and  touch 
me  so  gently." 

"  I  am  dexterous  in  nothing,  my  dear.  You  will  often  find 
me  awkward,  but  never  negligent." 

Negligent,  indeed,  she  was  not.  From  that  hour,  Fanny 
and  Eliza  became  ciphers  in  the  sick-room  :  Mrs  Pryor  made 
it  her  domain :  she  performed  all  its  duties ;  she  lived  in  it 
day  and  night.  The  patient  remonstrated — ^faintly,  however, 
from  the  first,  and  not  at  all  erelong :  loneliness  and  gloom 
were  now  banished  from  her  bedside ;  protection  and  solace 
sat  there  instead.  She  and  her  nurse  coalesced  in  wondrous 
union.  Caroline  was  usually  pained  to  require  or  receive 
much  attendance  :  Mrs  Pryor,  imder  ordinary  circumstances, 
had  neither  the  habit  nor  the  art  of  performing  little  offices  of 
service;  but  all  now  passed  with  such  ease — so  naturally,  that 
the  patient  was  as  willing  to  be  cherished  as  the  nurse  was 
bent  on  cherishing:  no  sign  of  weariness  in  the  latter  ever 
reminded  the  former  that  she  ought  to  be  anxious.  There 
was,  in  fact,  no  very  hard  duty  to  perform ;  but  a  hireling 
might  have  found  it  hard. 

With  all  this  care,  it  seemed  strange  the  sick  girl  did  not 
get  well;  yet  such  was  the  case:  she  washed  like  any  snow- 
wreath  in  thaw ;  she  faded  like  any  fiower  in  drought.  Miss 
Keeldar,  on  whose  thoughts  danger  or  death  seldom  intruded, 
had  at  first  entertained  no  fears  at  all  for  her  friend;  but 
seeing  her  change  and  sink  from  time  to  time  when  she  paid 
her  visits,  alarm  clutched  her  heart.  She  went  to  Mr  Helstpne 
and  expressed  herself  with  so  much  energy,  that  that  gentle- 
man was  at  last  obliged,  however  unwillingly,  to  admit  the 
idea  that  his  niece  was  ill  of  something  more  than  a  migraine ; 
and  when  Mrs  Pryor  came  and  quietly  demanded  a  physician, 
he  said  she  might  send  for  two  if  she  liked.  One  came,  but 
that  one  was  an  oracle :  he  delivered  a  dark  saying  of  which 
the  future  was  to  solve  the  mystery,  wrote  some  prescriptions, 
gave  some  directions — ^the  whole  with  an  air  of  crushing 


846  SHIRLET. 

authority— -pocketed  his  fee,  and  went.     Probably^  he  knew 
well  enough  he  could  do  no  good;  but  didn't  like  to  say  sa 

Still,  no  rumour  of  serious  illness  got  wind  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood. At  Hollow*6-cottage  it  was  thought  that  Caroline 
had  only  a  severe  cold,  she  having  written  a  note  to  Hartense 
to  that  effect;  and  Mademoiselle  contented  herself  with  sending 
two  pots  of  currant  jam,  a  receipt  for  a  tisane,  and  a  note  of 
advice. 

Mrs  Yorke  being  told  that  a  physician  had  been  summonedi 
sneered  at  the  hypochondriac  fancies  of  the  rich  and  idl«, 
who,  she  said,  have  nothing  but  themselves  to  think  about, 
must  needs  send  for  a  doctor  if  only  so  much  as  their  little 
finger  ached. 

The  "  rich  and  idle,'*  represented  in  the  person  of  Caroline, 
were  meantime  falling  hst  into  a  condition  of  prostration^ 
whose  quickly  consummated  debility  puzzled  all  who  wit- 
nessed it,  except  one;  for  that  one  alone  reflected  how  liable 
is  the  undermined  structure  to  sink  in  sudden  ruin. 

Sick  people  often  have  &,ncies  inscrutable  to  ordinaiy 
attendants,  and  Caroline  had  one  which  even  her  tender  nuise 
could  not  at  first  explain.  On  a  certain  day  in  the  week,  at 
a  certain  hour,  she  would — whether  worse  or  better — entreat 
to  be  taken  up  and  dressed,  and  suffered  to  sit  in  her  chair 
near  the  window.  This  station  she  would  retain  till  noon 
was  past :  whatever  degree  of  exhaustion  or  debility  her  wan 
aspect  betrayed,  she  stSl  softly  put  off  all  persuasion  to  seek 
repose  imtil  the  church-clock  had  duly  tolled  mid-day:  the 
twelve  strokes  sounded,  she  grew  docile,  and  would  meekly 
lie  down.  Ketumed  to  the  couch,  she  usually  buried  her 
face  deep  in  the  pillow,  and  drew  the  coverlets  dose  roiuui 
her,  as  if  to  shut  out  the  world  and  sun,  of  which  she  wa« 
tired:  more  than  once,  as  she  thus  lay,  a  slight  convukion 
shook  the  sick-bed,  and  a  faint  sob  broke  the  silence  round  it. 
These  things  were  not  unnoted  by  Mrs  Pryor. 

One  Tuesday  morning,  as  usual,  she  had  asked  leave  to 
rise,  and  now  she  sat  wrapped  in  her  white  dressing-gown, 
leaning  forward  in  the  easy-chair,  gazing  steadily  and  patientlj 
from  the  lattice.  Mrs  Pryor  was  seated  a  little  behind,  knit- 
ting as  it  seemed,  but,  in  truth |  watching  her.  A  change 
crossed  her  pale  mournfiil  brow,  animating  its  languor;  a 
light  shot  into  her  faded  eyes,  reviving  their  lustre;  she  half 
rose  and  looked  earnestly  out.  Mrs  Pryor,  drawing  softly 
near,  glanced  over  her  shoulder.     From   this  window  vas 


VALLEY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         347 

visible  the  cHurcliyard,  beyond  it  the  road,  and  there,  riding 
sharply  by,  appeared  a  horseman.  The  figure  was  not  yet 
too  remote  for  recognition :  Mrs  Pryor  had  loDg  sight ;  she 
knew  Mr  Moore.  Just  as  an  intercepting  rising  ground  con- 
cealed him  from  view,  the  clock  struck  twelve. 
"  May  I  lie  down  again?"  asked  Caroline. 
Her  nurse  assisted  her  to  bed:  having  laid  her  down  and 
drawn  the  curtain,  she  stood  listening  near.  The  little  couch 
trembled,  the  suppressed  sob  stirred  the  air.  A  contraction 
as  of  anguish  altered  Mrs  Pryor's  features ;  she  wrung  her 
hands ;  half  a  groan  escaped  her  lips.  She  now  remembered 
that  Tuesday  was  Whinbury  market-day:  Mr  Moore  must 
always  pass  the  Eectory  on  his  way  thither,  just  ere  noon  of 
that  day. 

Caroline  wore  continually  round  her  neck  a  slender  braid 

of  silk,  attached  to  which  was  some  trinket.     Mrs  Pryor  had 

seen  the  bit  of  gold  glisten ;  but  had  not  yet  obtained  a  fair 

view  of  it.     B[er  patient  never  parted  with  it:  when  dressed 

it  vras  hidden  in  her  bosom;  as  she  lay  in  bed  she  always 

held  it  in  her  hand.     That  Tuesday  afternoon  the  transient 

doze — more  like  lethargy  than   sleep — which   sometimes 

abridged  the  long  days,  had  stolen  6ver  her:  the  weather  was 

hot:  while  turning  in  febrile  restlessness,  she  had  pushed  the 

coverlets  a  little  aside ;   Mrs  Pryor  bent  to  replace  them ; 

the  small,  wasted  hand  lying  nerveless  on  the   sick  girl's 

breast,  clasped  as  usual  her  jealously-guarded  treasure :  those 

fingers  whose  attenuation  it  gave  pain  to  see,  were  now  relaxed 

in  sleep :  Mrs  Pryor  gently  disengaged  the  braid,  drawing  out 

a  tiny  locket — ^a  slight  thing  it  was,  such  as  it  suited  her 

small  purse  to  purchase:  imder  its  crystal  face  appeared  a 

curl  of  black  hair — ^too  short  and  crisp  to  have  been  severed 

from  a  female  head. 

Some  agitated  movement  occasioned  a  twitch  of  the  silken 
chain:  the  sleeper  started  and  woke.  Her  thoughts  were 
usually  now  somewhat  scattered  on  waking;  her  look  gene- 
ndly  wandering.  Half-rising,  as  if  in  terror,  she  exclaimed: 
"  Don't  take  it  from  me,  Robert !  Don't  I  It  is  my  lost 
comfort — let  me  keep  it.  I  never  tell  any  one  whose  hair  it 
ii — I  never  show  it." 

Mrs  Pryor  had  already  disappeared  behind  the  curtain: 
reclining  &r  back  in  a  deep  arm-chair  by  the  bedside,  she 
was  withdrawn  from  view.  Caroline  looked  abroad  into  the 
chamber;  she  thought  it  empty.    As  her  stray  ideas  returned 


slowly,  eacli  folding  its  weak  wings  on  the  mind's  sad  shoie, 
like  birds  exhausted, — ^beholding  void,  and  pemeiYing  mlenoe 
round  her,  she  beHeved  herself  alone.  Collected,  she  was  not 
yet:  perhaps  healthy  self-possession  and  self-control  were  tr 
be  hers  no  more;  perhaps  that  world  the  strong  and  pitw- 
perous  live  in  had  already  rolled  from  beneath  her  feet  for 
ever:  so,  at  least,  it  often  seemed  to  herself.  In  health,  she 
had  never  been  accustomed  to  think  aloud ;  but  now  words 
escaped  her  lips  unawares. 

"  Oh  I  I  should  see  him  once  more  before  all  is  over : 
Heaven  might  favour  me  thus  far !"  she  cried.  **  God  grant 
me  a  little  comfort  before  I  die ! "  was  her  humble  petition. 
.  "  But  he  will  not  know  I  am  ill  till  I  am  gone;  and  he  wll 
come  when  they  have  laid  me  out,  and  I  am  senseless,  cold, 
and  stiff. 

"What  can  my  departed  soul  feel  then?  Can  it  see  or 
know  what  happens  to  the  clay  ?  Can  spirits,  through  any 
medium,  conmiunicate  with  living  flesh?.  Can  the  dead  at 
all  revisit  those  they  leave  ?  Can  they  co&ie  in  the  elements? 
Will  wind,  water,  fire,  lend  me  a  path  to  Moore  ? 

"Is  it  for  nothing  the  wind  sounds  almost  articulatelj 
sometimes — sings  as  I  have  lately  heard  it  sing  at  night — or 
passes  the  casement  sobbing,  as  if  for  sorrow  to  come  ?  Does 
nothing,  then,  haunt  it — ^nothing  inspire  it  ? 

"Why,  it  suggested  to  me  words  one  night:  it  poured  a 
strain  which  I  could  have  written  down,  only  I  was  appalled, 
and  dared  not  rise  to  seek  pencil  and  paper  by  the  dim  watch- 
light. 

"What  is  that  electricity  they  speak  of,  whose  changes 
make  us  well  or  ill ;  whose  lack  or  excess  blasts ;  whose  even 
balance  revives?  What  are  all  those  influences  that  are 
about  us  in  the  atmosphere,  that  keep  pla3ang  over  our  nerves 
like  fingers  on  stringed  instruments,  and  call  forth .  now  a 
sweet  note,  and  now  a  wail — now  an  exultant  swell,  and, 
anon,  the  saddest  cadence  ? 

"  Where  is  the  other  world?  In  what  will  another  life 
consist  ?  Why  do  I  ask  ?  Have  I  not  cause  to  think  that 
the  hour  is  hasting  but  too  fast  when  the  veil  must  be  rent 
for  me?  Do  I  not  know  the  Grand  Mystery  is  likely  to 
burst  prematurely  on  me  ?  Great  Spirit !  in  whose  goodness 
I  confide ;  whom,  as  my  Father,  I  have  petitioned  night  and 
morning  from  early  infancy,  help  the  weak  creation  of  thy 
hands !     Sustain  me  through  the  ordeal  I  dread  and  must 


VALLEY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.  849 

indergo  f   Give  me  strength  1   Give  me  patience !   (J-ive  me — 
)h  !     give  mevAJTRV* 

She  fell  back  on  her  pillow.  Mrs  Pryor  found  means  to 
iteal  quietly  from  the  room :  she  re-entered  it  soon  after, 
apparently  as  composed  as  if  she  had  really  not  overheard 
this  strange  soliloquy. 

The  next  day  several  callers  came.  It  had  become  known 
that  Miss  Helstone  was  worse.  Mr  Hall  and  his  sister 
Margaret  arrived :  both,  after  they  had  been  in  the  sick-room, 
quitted  it  in  tears ;  they  had  found  the  patient  more  altered 
than  they  expected.  Hortense  Moore  came.  Caroline  seemed 
stimulated  by  her  presence  :  she  assured  her,  smiling,  she  was 
not  dangerously  ill;  she  talked  to  her  in  a  low  voice,  but 
cheerfully :  during  her  stay,  excitement  kept  up  the  flush  of 
her  complexion :  she  looked  better. 

<^How  is  Mr  Robert  ?"  asked  Mrs  Pryor,  as  Hortense  was 
preparing  to  take  leave. 

"  He  was  very  well  when  he  left." 
"  Left'l  Is  he  gone  from  home  ?  " 

It  was  then  explained  that  some  police  intelligence  about 
the  rioters  of  whom  he  was  in  pursuit,  had,  that  morning, 
called  him  away  to  Bu*mingham,  and  probably  a  fortnight 
might  elapse  ere  he  returned.  - 

'*  He  is  not  aware  that  Miss  Helstone  is  very  ill  ?** 
**  Oh  I  no.    He  thought,  like  me,  that  she  had  only  a  bad 
cold." 

After  this  visit,  Mrs  Pryor  took  care  not  to  approach 
Caroline's  couch  for  above  an  hour :  she  heard  her  weep,  and 
dared  not  look  on  her  tears. 

Ad  eveni9g  closed  in,  she  brought  her  some  tea.  Caroline, 
opening  her  eyes  from  a  moment's  slumber,  viewed  her  nurse 
with  an  nnrecognising  glance. 

*'  I  smelt  the  honeysuckles  in  the  glen  this  summer-morning," 
she  said,  **  as  I  stood  at  the  counting-house  window." 

Strange  words  like  these  from  pallid  lips  pierce  a  loving 
listener's  heart  more  poignantly  than  steel.  They  sound 
romantic,  perhaps,  in  books  :  in  real  life,  they  are  harrowing. 
"  My  darling,  do  you  know  me  ?"  said  Mrs  Pryor. 
"  I  went  in  to  call  Robert  to  breakfast :  I  have  been  with 
him  in  the  garden :  he  asked  me  to  go :  a  heavy  dew  has 
refreshed  the  flowers  :  the  peaches  are  ripening." 

'^'Mj  darling  !  my  darling  ! "  again  and  again  repeated  the 
noTfie. 


850  8HIBLXY. 

**  I  thonght  it  was  daylight — ^long  after  sanrlse :  it  looks 
dark — ^is  the  moon  now  set  ?  " 

That  moon,  lately  risen,  was  gazing .  full  and  mild  upon 
her :  floating  in  deep  hlae  space,  it  watched  her  nnclonded. 

*'  Then  it  is  not  morning  ?  I  am  not  at  the  cottage  ?  Who 
is  this  ? — ^I  see  a  shape  at  my  hedside." 

"  It  is  myself — it  is  your  fiiend — ^yonr  nurse — ^your . 

Lean  your,  head  on  my  shoulder :  collect  yourself.*'  (In  & 
lower  tone.)  "  Oh  God,  take  pity  I  Give  her  life,  and  we 
strength  I     Send  me  courage — ^teach  me  words ! " 

Some  minutes  passed  in  silence.  The  patient  lay  mute 
and  passive  in  the  trembling  arms^-on  the  throbbing  bosom 
of  the  nurse. 

"I  am  better  now,"  whispered  Caroline,  at  last,  "much 
better — ^I  feel  where  I  am  :  this  is  Mrs  Pryor  near  inc :  I  was 
dreaming — I  talk  when  I  wake  up  from  dreams :  people  often  do 
in  illness.  How  fast  your  heart  beats,  ma'am  I  Donotbeafraid.*^ 

'^  It  is  not  fear,  child ;  only  a  little  an^ety,  which  will 
pass.  I  have  brought  you  some  tea,  Gary;  your  uncle  made 
it  himself.  T'ou  know  he  says  he  can  make  a  better  cup  of 
tea  than  any  housewife  can.  Taste  it.  He  is  concerned  to 
hear  that  you  eat  so  little :  he  would  be  glad  if  you  had  a 
better  appetite." 

"  I  am  thirsty:  let  me  drink." 

She  drank  eagerly. 

"  What  o'clock  is  it,  ma'am  ?"  she  asked. 

"  Past  nine." 

^^  Not  later  ?  Oh  I  I  have  yet  a  Long  night  before  me : 
but  the  tea  has  made  me  strong:  I  will  sit  up." 

Mrs  Pryor  raised  her,  and  arranged  her  pillows. 

"  Thank  Heaven  I  I  am  not  always  equally  miserable,  and 
ill,  and  hopeless.  The  afternoon  has  been  bad  since  Hortens-: 
went:  perhaps  the  evening  may  be  better.  It  is  a  fine  nighty 
I  think  ?     The  moon  shines  clear." 

"  Very  fine :  a  perfect  summer  night.  The  old  church- 
tower  gleams  white  almost  as  silver." 

"  And  does  the  churchyard  look  peaceful  ?" 

''  Yes,  and  the  garden  also :  dew  glistens  on  the  foliage." 

**  Can  you  see  many  long  weeds  and  nettles  amongst  tie 
graves;  or  do  they  look  turfy  and  flowery?" 

<<I  see  closed  daisy-heads,  gleaming  like  pearls  on  some 
mounds.  Thomas  has  mown  down  the  dock-leaves  and  rani: 
grassy.and  cleared  all  away.** 


yjUiLST  OF   THE   SHADOW   OF   DEATH.  851 

**  I  always  like  that  to  be  done  :  it  soothes  one's  mind  to 
see  the  place  in  order :  and,  I  dare  say,  within  the  church 
just  now  that  moonlight  shines  as  softly  as  in  my  room.  It 
will  fall  throngh  the  east  window  fall  on  the  Helstone  monu- 
ment. When  I  close  my  eyes  I  seem  to  see  poor  papa's 
epitaph  in  black  letters  on  the  white  marble.  There  is  plenty 
of  room  for  other  iniicriptions  underneath." 

"William  Farren  came  to  look  after  your  flowers  this 
morning:  he  was  afraid,  now  you  cannot  tend  them  yourself, 
they  would  be  neglected.  He  has  taken  two  of  your- favourite 
plants  home  to  nurse  for  you." 

"  K  I  were  to  make  a  will,  I  would  leave  William  all  my 
plants ;  Shirley  my  trinkets — except  one,  which  must  not  be 
taken  off  my  neck ;  and  you,  ma'am,  my  books."  (After  a 
pause.)    "  Mrs  Pryor,  I  feel  a  longing  wish  for  something." 

"For  what,  Caroline?" 

"  You  know  I  always  deUght  to  hear  you  sing :  sing  me 
a  hynm  just  now:  sing  that  hymn  which  begins, — 

**  *  Oar  God,  oar  help  in  ages  past, — 
Oar  hope  for  yea;rs  to  come ; 
Our  shelter  fbom  the  stormy  blast ; 
Our  refage,  haven,  home !  * " 

Mrs  Pryor  at  once  complied. 

No  wonder  Caroline  liked  to  hear  her  sing :  her  yoice",  even  in 
speaking,  was  sweet  and  silver  clear ;  in  song,  it  was  almost 
divine:  neither  flute  nor  dulcimer  has  tones  so  pure.  But  the 
tone  was  secondary  compared  to  the  expression  which  trembled 
through :  a  tender  vibration  from  a  feeling  heart. 

The  servants  in  the  kitchen,  hearing  the  strain,  stole  to 
the  stair-foot  to  listen :  even  old  Helstone,  as  he  walked  in 
the  garden,  pondering  over  the  unaccountable  and  feeble 
nature  of  women,  stood  still  amongst  his  borders  to  catch  the 
mournful  melody  more  distinctly.  Why  it  reminded  him  of 
his  forgotten  dead  wife,  he  could  not  tell ;  nor  why  it  made 
him  more  concerned  than  he  had  hitherto  been  for  Caroline*s 
£ftding  girlhood.  He  was  glad  to  recollect  that  he  had  promised 
to  pay  Wynne,  the  magistrate,  a  visit  that  evening.  Low 
spirits  and  gloomy  thoughts  were- very  much  his  aversion: 
when  they  attacked  him  he  usually  found  means  to  make 
them  march  in  double-quick  time.  The  hymn  followed  him 
faintlv  as  he  crossed  the  flelds :  he  hastened  his  cnstomaiy 
^Inip  p.iee,  thjit  he  might  get  beyond  its  reach. 


352  SHIBLET^ 

<•  Thy  word  oommands  onr  flesh  to  dust, — 
*  Betarn,  ye  sons  of  men ; ' 
All  nations  ro&e  from  earth  at  first. 
And  tnm  to  earth  again. 

**  A  thousand  ages  in  thy  sight 
Are  like  an  evening  gone ; 
Short  as  the  watch  that  ends  the  night 
Before  the  rising  snn. 

**  Time,  like  an  ever-rolling  stream. 
Bears  all  its  sons  away ; 
They  fly,  forgotten,  as  a  dream 
Dies  at  the  opening  day. 

"  Like  flowery  fields,  the  nations  stand, 
Fresh  in  the  morning  light ; 
The  flowers  beneath  the  mower's  hand 
Lie  withering  ere  't  is  night. 

"  Oar  God,  our  help  in  ages  past, — 
Onr  hope  fot  years  to  come ; 
Be  then  oar  guard  while  troubles  last, — 
O  Father,  be  our  home  1 " 

*' Now  sing  a  song — a  Scottish  song,*'  suggested  Oaiolioe 
when  the  hymn  was  over, — *'  *  Ye  hanks  and  hraes  o'  honnj 
Doon.'" 

Again  Mrs  Prjor  oheyed,  or  essayed  to  obey.  At  the  close 
of  the  first  stanza  she  stopped  :  she  could  get  no  farther :  her 
fall  heart  flowed  over. 

*'  You  are  weeping  at  the  pathos  of  the  air :  come  here,  and 
I  will  comfort  yon,"  said  Caroline,  in  a  pitying  accent.  Mrs 
Pryor  came  :  she  sat  down  on  the  edge  of  her  patient's  bed, 
and  allowed  the  wasted  arms  to  encircle  her. 

**  You  often  soothe  me,  let  me  soothe  you,"  murmared  the 
young  girl,  kissing  her  check.  '^  I  hope,"  she  added,  '*itis 
not  for  me  you  weep.'* 

No  answer  followed. 

**  Do  you  think  I  shall  not  get  better  ?  I  do  not  feel  rerj 
ill — only  weak." 

**  But  your  mind,  Caroline  :  your  mind  is  crushed ;  yon 
lieart  is  almost  broken :  you  have  been  so  neglected,  so  re- 
jpulsed,  left  so  desolate.*' 

'*  I  believe  grief  is,  and  always  has  been,  my  worst  ailment. 
^  sometimes  think,  if  an  abundant  gush  of  happiness  oame  on 
^^^e,  I  could  revive  yet.** 
^'^  "  Do  you  wish  to  live  ?  '* 

**  I  have  no  object  in  life.** 

•'  You  love  me,  Caroline  ?  " 

**  Very  much, — very  truly, — ^inexpressibly  sometimes :  just 
^^  o^  I  feel  as  if  I  could  almost  grow  to  your  heart.*' 


rjJLLBY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.  868 

^I  mil  return  directly,  dear/'  remarked  Mrs  Pryor,  as  slie 
aid  CaroHne  down. 

Quitting  her,  she  glided  to  the  door,  softly  turned  the  key 
in  the  lock,  ascertained  that  it  was  fast,  and  came  back.  She 
bent  over  her.  She  threw  back  the  curtain  to  admit  the 
moonlight  more  freely.     She  gazed  intently  on  her  face. 

"  Then,  if  you  love  me,"  said  she,  speaking  quickly,  with 
an  altered  voice:  "if  you  feel  as  if — ^to  use  your  own  words 
— you  could  *  grow  to  my  heart,*  it  wiU  be  neither  shock  nor 
pain  for  you  to  know  that  that  heart  is  the  source  whence  yours 
was  filled;  that  from  my  veins  issued  the  tide  which  flows  in 
yours;  that  you  are  mine — ^my  daughter — ^my  own  child." 

"MrsPrygr 1'^ 

"My  own  child!" 

"  That  is — ^that  means — ^you  have  adopted  me  ?" 

"  It  means  that,  if  I  have  given  you  nothing  else,  I  at  least 

gave  you  life  ;  that  I  bore  you — nursed  you  ;  that  I  am  your 

true  mother:  no  other  woman  can  claim  the  title — ^it  is  mtne." 

"  But  Mrs  James  Helstone — ^but  my  father^s  wife  whom  I 

do  not  remember  ever  to  have  seen,  she  is  my  mother  ?  " 

"She  is  your  mother:  James  Hektone  was  my  husband. 
I  say  you  are  mine.  I  have  proved  it.  I  thought  perhaps 
you  were  all  his,  which  would  have  been  a  cruel  dispensation 
for  me:  I  find  it  is  not  so.  God  permitted  me  to  be  the  parent 
of  my  child's  mind :  it  belongs  to  me :  it  is  my  property* — 
my  right.  These  features  are  James's  own.  He  had  a  fine 
fitce  when  he  was  young,  and  not  altered  by  error.  Papa,  my 
darling,  gave  you  your  blue  eyes  and  sofl  brown  hair:  he 
gave  you  the  oval  of  your  face  and  the  regularity  of  your 
lineaments:  the  outside  he  conferred;  but. the  heart  and  the 
brain  are  mine:  the  germs  are  from  me,  and  they  are  improved, 
they  are  developed  to  excellence.  I  esteem  and  approve  my 
child  as  highly  as  I  do  most  fondly  love  her." 
"  Is  what  I  hear  true ?  Is  it  no  dreahi ?" 
"  I  wish  it  were  as  true  that  the  substance  and  colour  of 
health  were  restored  to  your  cheek." 

^'  My  own  mother  I  is  she  one  I  can  be  so  fond  of  as  I  can 
of  you  ?  People  generally  did  not  like  her,  so  I  have  been 
given  to  tmderstand." 

"  They  told  you  that?  Well,  your  mother  now  tells  you, 
that,  not  having  the  gift  to  please  people  generally,  for  tibeir 
approbation  she  does  not  care :  her  thoughts  are  centred  in 
her  child :  does  that  child  welcome  or  reject  her  '^^ 

23 


844  SHIRLET. 

The  few  days  passed,  and — though  it  was  still  thought  il 
could  not  long  delay — ^the  revival  had  not  begun.  Mrs  Plryor, 
who  had  visited  her  daily — ^being  present  in  her  chamber  one 
morning  when  she  had  been  ill  a  fortnight — ^watched  ber  very 
narrowly  for  some  minutes :  she  took  her  hand,  and  placed 
her  finger  on  her  wrist;  then,  quietly  leaving  the  chamber, 
she  went  to  Mr  Helstone^s  study.  With  him  she  remained 
closeted  a  long  time — ^half  the  morning.  On  retumiDg  to  her 
sick  yoimg  friend,  she  laid  aside  shawl  and  bonnet:  she  stood 
a  while  at  the  bedside,  one  hand  placed  in  the  other,  gently 
rocking  herself  to  and  fro,  in  an  attitude  and  with  a  moraaoent 
habitual  to  her.     At  last,  she  said — 

"  I  have  sent  Fanny  to  Fieldhead  to  fetch  a  few  things  for 
me,  such  as  I  shall  want  during  a  short  stay  here :  it  is  my 
wish  to  remain  with  you  till  you  are  better.  Your  imcle 
kindly  permits  my  attendance:  will  it  to  yourself  be  accept- 
able, Caroline?" 

"  I  am  sorry  you  should  take  such  needless  trouble.  I  do 
not  feel  very  ill,  but  I  cannot  refuse  resolutely:  it  will  be  sack 
comfort  to  know  you  are  in  the  house,  to  see  you  sometimes 
in  the  room ;  but  don't  confine  yourself  on  my  account,  dear 
Mrs  Pryor.     Fanny  nurses  me  very  welL" 

Mrs  Pryor — ^bending  over  the  pale  littfe  sufferer — ^was  now 
smoothing  the  hair  under  her  cap,  and  gently  raising  her 
pillow.  As  she  performed  these  offices,  Caroline,  smiling, 
lifted  her  face  to  kiss  her. 

"  Are  y6u  free  from  pain  ?  Are  you  tolerably  at  ease  ? " 
was  inquired  in  a  low,  earnest  voice,  as  the  self-elected  nuisft 
3rielded  to  the  cai;iBSs.    ' 

"  I  think  I  am  almost  happy." 

"  You  wish  to  drink  ?     Your  lips  are  parched." 

She  held  a  glass  filled  with  some  cooling  beverage  to  hei 
mouth. 

"  Have  you  eaten  anything  to  day,  Caroline  ?  " 

"  I  cannot  eat." 

"  But  soon  your  appetite  will  return:  it  mfist  return:  thit 
is,  I  pray  God  it  may ! " 

In  layinp:  her  a^rain  on  the  couch,  she  encircled  her  in  her 
arms  ;  U  whil?  so  doing,  by  *  movement  which  «emed 
scarcely  .volimtary,  she  drew  her  to  her  heart,  and  held  her 
close  gathered  an  instant. 

'*  I  shall  hardly  wish  to  get  well,  that  I  may  keep  yoa 
always,"  said  Caroline. 


TALLET  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         S46 

Mn  Pryor  did  not  smile  at  tlus  speech ;  over  her  features 
ran  a  tremor,  which  for  some  minutes  she  was  absorbed  in 
repressing. 

"  Yon  are  more  used  to  Fanny  than  to  me,"  she  remarked, 
erelong.  "  I  should  think  my  attendance  must  seem  strange, 
officious  ?  " 

"  No:  quite  natural,  and  .very  soothing.  You  must  Imve 
been  accustomed  to  wait  on  sick  people,  ma'am.  You  move 
about  the  room  so  softiy,  and  you  ^eak  so  quietly,  and  touch 
me  so  gently." 

"  I  am  dexterous  in  nothing,  my  dear.  You  will  often  find 
me  awkward,  but  never  negligent." 

Negligent,  indeed,  she  was  not.  From  that  hour,  Fanny 
and  Eliza  became  ciphers  in  the  sick-room  :  Mrs  Pryor  made 
it  her  domain :  she  performed  all  its  duties ;  she  lived  in  it 
day  and  night.  The  patient  remonstrated — faintly,  however, 
from  the  first,  and  not  at  all  erelong :  loneliness  and  gloom 
were  now  banished  from  her  bedside ;  protection  and  solace 
sat  there  instead.  She  and  her  nurse  coalesced  in  wondrous 
union.  Caroline  was  usually  pained  to  require  or  receive 
much  attendance  :  Mrs  Pryor,  under  ordinary  circumstances, 
bad  neither  the  habit  nor  the  art  of  performing  little  offices  of 
service ;  but  all  now  passed  with  such  ease — so  naturally,  that 
the  patient  was  as  willing  to  be  cherished  as  the  nurse  was 
bent  on  cherishing:  no  sign  of  weariness  in  the  latter  ever 
reminded  the  former  that  she  ought  to  be  anxious.  There 
was,  in  fact,  no  very  hard  duty  to  perform ;  but  a  hireling 
might  have  foimd  it  hard. 

With  all  this  care,  it  seemed  strange  the  sick  girl  did  not 
get  well;  yet  such  was  the  case:  she  wasted  like  any  snow- 
wreath  in  thaw;  she  faded  like  any  ilower  in  drought.  Miss 
Keeldar,  on  whose  thoughts  danger  or  death  seldom  intruded, 
had  at  first  entertained  no  fears  at  all  for  her  friend;  but 
seeiiig  her  change  and  sink  from  time  to  time  when  she  paid 
her  visits,  alarm  clutched  her  heart.  She  went  to  Mr  Helstpne 
and  expressed  herself  with  so  much  energy,  that  that  gentle- 
man was  at  last  obliged,  however  unwillingly,  to  admit  the 
idea  that  his  niece  was  ill  of  something  more  than  a  migraine; 
and  when  Mrs  Pryor  came  and  quietly  demanded  a  physician, 
be  said  she  might  send  for  two  if  she  liked.  One  came,  but 
that  one  was  an  oracle:  he  delivered  a  dark  saying  of  which 
the  future  was  to  solve  the  mystery,  wrote  some  prescriptions, 
gave  some  directions — ^the  whole  with  an  air  of  crushing 


846  SHiBi«Er. 

authoiity-— pocketed  his  fee,  and  went.  Probably^  he  husw 
well  enough  he  could  do  no  good;  but  didn't  like  to  say  sa 

Still,  no  rumour  of  serious  illness  got  wind  in  the  neigli* 
bourhood.  At  Hollow's-cottage  it  was  thought  that  Caroline 
had  only  a  severe  cold,  she  having  written  a  note  to  Hortenaa 
to  that  effect;  and  Mademoiselle  contented  herself  with  sending 
two  pots  of  currant  jam,  a  receipt  for  a  tisane,  and  a  note  of 
advice. 

Mrs  Yorke  being  told  that  a  physician  had  been  summoned, 
sneered  at  the  hypochondriac  fancies  of  the  rich  and  idle, 
who,  she  said,  have  nothing  but  themselves  to  think  aboat, 
must  needs  send  for  a  doctor  if  only  so  much  as  their  little 
finger  ached. 

The  '^  rich  and  idle,^'  represented  in  the  person  of  Caroline, 
were  meantime  falling  fast  into  a  condition  of  prostration, 
whose  quickly  consunmmted  debility  puzzled  all  who  wit- 
nessed it,  except  one;  for  that  one  aJone  reflected  how  liable 
is  the  undermined  structure  to  sink  in  sudden  ruin. 

Sick  people  often  have  &ncies  inscrutable  to  oidinazy 
attendants,  and  Caroline  had  one  which  even  her  tender  nurse 
could  not  at  first  explain.  On  a  certain  day  in  the  week,  at 
a  certain  hour,  she  would — ^whether  worse  or  better — entreat 
to  be  taken  up  and  dressed,  and  suffered  to  sit  in  her  chair 
near  the  window.  This  station  she  would  retain  till  noon 
was  past:  whatever  degree  of  exhaustion  or  debility  her  wan 
aspect  betrayed,  she  still  soMy  put  off  all  persuasion  to  seek 
repose  until  the  church-clock  had  duly  tolled  mid-day:  the 
twelve  strokes  sounded,  she  grew  docile,  and  would  meekly 
lie  down.  Returned  to  the  couch,  she  usually  buried  her 
face  deep  in  the  pillow,  and  drew  the  coverlets  dose  round 
her,  as  if  to  shut  out  the  world  and  sun,  of  which  she  was 
tired:  more  than  once,  as  she  thus  lay,  a  slight  convulsion 
shook  the  sick-bed,  and  a  faint  sob  broke  the  silence  round  it 
These  things  were  not  unnoted  by  Mrs  Pryor. 

One  Tuesday  morning,  as  usual,  she  had  asked  leave  to 
rise,  and  now  she  sat  wrapped  in  her  white  dresaing-gown, 
leaning  forward  in  the  easy-chair,  gazing  steadily  and  patiently 
from  the  lattice.  Mrs  Pryor  was  seated  a  little  behind,  knit- 
ting as  it  seemed,  but,  in  truth)  watching  her.  A  change 
crossed  her  pale  mournful  brow,  animating  its  languor;  a 
light  shot  into  her  faded  eyes,  reviving  their  lustre;  she  half 
rose  and  looked  earnestly  out.  Mrs  Pryor,  drawing  aofUy 
near,  glanced  over  her  shoulder.     From   this  window  vas 


VALLET  OF  THS  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         847 

visible  the  churchyard,  beyond  it  the  road,  and  there,  riding 
sharply  by,  appeared  a  horseman.  The  figure  was  not  yet 
t(x>  remote  for  recognition:  Mrs  Pryor  had  long  sight;  she 
knew  Mr  Moore.  Just  as  an  intercepting  rising  ground  con* 
cealed  him  from  view,  the  clock  struck  twelve. 
**  May  I  lie  down  again  ?"  asked  Caroline. 
Her  nurse  assisted  her  to  bed:  having  laid  her  down  and 
drawn  the  curtain,  she  stood  listening  near.  The  little  couch 
trembled,  the  suppressed  sob  stirred  the  air.  A  contraction 
as  of  anguish  altered  Mrs  Pryor^s  features ;  she  wrung  her 
hands ;  half  a  groan  escaped  her  lips.  She  now  remembered 
that  Tuesday  was  Whinbuiy  market-day:  Mr  Moore  must 
always  pass  the  Rectory  on  his  way  thither,  just  ere  noon  of 
that  day. 

Caroline  wore  continually  round  her  neck  a  slender  braid 
of  silk,  attached  to  which  was  some  trinket.  Mrs  Pryor  had 
seen  the  bit  of  gold  glisten ;  but  had  not  yet  obtained  a  fair 
view  of  it.  I{er  patient  never  parted  with  it:  when  dressed 
it  was  hidden  in  her  bosom;  as  she  lay  in  bed  she  always 
held  it  in  her  hand.  That  Tuesday  afternoon  the  transient 
doze — more  like  lethargy  than  sleep  —  which  sometimes 
abridged  the  long  days,  had  stolen  6ver  her:  the  weather  was 
hot:  while  turning  in  febrile  restlessness,  she  had  pushed  the 
coverlets  a  little  aside;  Mrs  Pryor  bent  to  replace  them; 
the  small,  wasted  hand  lying  nerveless  on  the  sick  girl's 
breast,  clasped  as  usual  her  jealously-guarded  treasure:  Siose 
fingers  whose  attenuation  it  gave  pain  to  see,  were  now  relaxed 
in  sleep:  Mrs  Pryor  gently  disengaged  the  braid,  drawing  out 
a  tiny  locket — a  slight  ^ing  it  was,  such  as  it  suited  her 
small  purse  to  purchase:  imder  its  crystal  face  appeared  a 
curl  of  black  hair — ^too  short  and  crisp  to  have  been  severed 
from  a  female  head. 

Some  agitated  movement  occasioned  a  twitch  of  the  silken 
chain:  the  sleeper  started  and  woke.  Her  thoughts  were 
usually  now  somewhat  scattered  on  waking ;  her  look  gene- 
rally wandering.  Half-rising,  as  if  in  terror,  she  exclaimed: 
*'  Don't  take  it  from  me,  Robert !  Don't  I  It  is  my  l^st 
comfort — let  me  keep  it.  I  never  tell  any  one  whose  hair  it 
ii — ^I  never  show  it." 

Mrs  Pryor  had  already  disappeared  behind  the  curtain: 
roolining  far  back  in  a  deep  arm-chair  by  the  bedside,  she 
was  withdrawn  from  view.  Caroline  looked  abroad  into  the 
chamber:  aha  thought  it  empty.    As  her  stray  ideas  returned 


S48  sHiRLEr. 

slowly,  eacli  folding  its  weak  wings  on  the  mind's  sad  shore, 
like  birds  exhausted, — ^beholding  void,  and  perceiving  alence 
round  her,  she  believed  herself  alone.  Collected,  she  was  not 
yet:  perhaps  healthy  self-possession  and  self-control  were  tc 
be  hers  no  more;  perhaps  that  world  the  strong  and  pros- 
perous live  in  had  already  rolled  from  beneath  her  feet  for 
ever:  so,  at  least,  it  often  seemed  to  herself.  In  health,  she 
had  never  been  accustomed  to  think  aloud ;  but  now  wordi 
escaped  her  lips  imawares. 

"  Oh  I  I  should  see  him  once  more  before  all  is  over : 
Heaven  might  favour  me  thus  far !"  she  cried.  "€rod  grant 
me  a  little  comfort  before  I  die  I "  was  her  humble  petition. 

"  But  he  will  not  know  I  am  ill  till  I  am  gone ;  and  he  will 
come  when  they  have  laid  me  out,  and  I  am  senseless,  cold, 
and  stiff. 

"What  can  my  departed  soul  feel  then?  Can  it  see  or 
know  what  happens  to  the  clay  ?  Can  spirits,  through  any 
medium,  communicate  with  living  flesh?.  Can  the  dead  at 
all  revisit  those  they  leave  ?  Can  they  come  in  the  elements? 
Will  wind,  water,  fire,  lend  me  a  path  to  Moore  ? 

"Is  it  for  nothing  the  wind  sounds  almost  articulately 
sometimes — sings  as  I  have  lately  heard  it  sing  at  night— or 
passes  the  casement  sobbing,  as  if  for  sorrow  to  come  ?  Does 
nothing,  then,  haunt  it — ^nothing  inspire  it  ? 

"Why,  it  suggested  to  me  words  one  night:  it  poured  a 
strain  which  I  could  have  written  down,  only  I  was  appalled, 
and  dared  not  rise  to  seek  pencil  and  paper  by  the  dim  watch- 
light. 

"What  is  that  electricity  they  speak  of,  whose  changes 
make  us  well  or  ill ;  whose  lack  or  excess  blasts ;  whose  even 
balance  revives?  What  are  all  those  influences  that  are 
about  us  in  the  atmosphere,  that  keep  playing  over  our  nerves 
like  fingers  on  stringed  instruments,  and  call  forth .  now  a 
sweet  note,  and  now  a  wail — ^now  an  exultant  swell,  and, 
anon,  the  saddest  cadence  ? 

"  Where  is  the  other  world?  In  what  will  another  life 
consist  ?  Why  do  I  ask  ?  Have  I  not  cause  to  think  that 
the  hour  is  hasting  but  too  fast  when  the  veil  must  be  rent 
for  me?  Do  I  not  know  the  Grand  Mystery  is  likely  to 
burst  prematurely  on  me  ?  Great  Spirit  I  in  whose  goodness 
I  confide ;  whom,  as  my  Father,  I  have  petitioned  night  and 
morning  from  early  infancy,  help  the  weak  creation  of  thy 
hands !     Sustain  me  through  the  ordeal  J  dread  and  must 


VAIiLET  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         849 


mdergo  I   Give  me  strength  1   Give  me  patience !   Qive 
Dh  1     ffive  mevuTH \"    ' 

She  fell  back  on  her  pillow.  Mrs  Pryor  found  means  to 
steal  quietly  from  the  room :  she  re-entered  it  soon  after, 
apparently  as  composed  as  if  she  had  really  not  overheard 
this  strange  soliloquy. 

The  next  day  several  callers  came.  It  had  become  known 
that  Miss  Helstone  was  worse.  Mr  Hall  and  his  sister 
Margaret  arrived :  both,  after  they  had  been  in  the  sick-room, 
quitted  it  in  tears ;  they  had  found  the  patient  more  altered 
than  they  expected.  Hortense  Moore  came.  Caroline  seemed 
stimulated  by  her  presence  :  she  assured  her,  smiling,  she  was 
not  dangerously  ill;  she  talked  to  her  in  a  low  voice,  but 
cheerfully :  during  her  stay,  excitement  kept  up  the  flush  of 
her  complexion :  she  looked  better. 

''How  is  Mr  Bobert  ?"  asked  Mrs  Pryor,  as  Hortense  was 
preparing  to  take  leave. 

**  He  was  very  well  when  he  left.*' 
"  Left'l  Is  he  gone  &om  home  ?  " 

It  was  then  explained  that  some  police  intelligence  about 
the  rioters  of  whom  he  was  in  pursuit,  had,  that  morning, 
called  him  away  to  Birmingham,  and  probably  a  fortnight 
might  elapse  ere  he  returned.  - 

"  He  is  not  aware  that  Miss  Helstone  is  very  ill  ? '' 
*'  Ohl  no.     He  thought,  like  me,  that  she  had  only  a  bad 
cold." 

After  this  visit,  Mrs  Pryor  took  care  not  to  approach 
Caroline's  couch  for  above  an  hour :  she  heard  her  weep,  and 
dared  not  look  on  her  tears. 

Ad  evening  closed  in,  she  brought  her  some  tea.  Caroline, 
opening  her  eyes  from  a  moment's  slumber,  viewed  her  nurse 
with  an  unrecognising  glance. 

**  1  smelt  the  honeysuckles  in  the  glen  this  summer-morning," 
she  said,  **  as  I  stood  at  the  counting-house  window." 

Strange  words  like  these  from  pallid  lips  pierce  a  loving 
listener's  heart  more  poignantly  than  steel.  They  sound 
romantic,  perhaps,  in  books  :  in  real  life,  they  are  harrowing. 
"  My  darling,  do  you  know  me  ?"  said  Mrs  Pryor. 
''  I  went  in  to  call  Robert  to  breakfast :  I  have  been  with 
him  in  the  garden :  he  asked  me  to  go :  a  heavy  dew  has 
refreshed  the  flowers  :  the  peaches  are  ripening." 

''"My  dai'ling !  my  darling ! "  again  and  again  repealed  the 
DorBe. 


dSO  SHIRLEY. 

**  I  thonght  it  was  daylight — ^long  after  sunrise  :  it  loo^s 
dark — ^is  the  moon  now  set  ?  " 

That  moon,  lately  risen,  was  gazing  fall  and  mild  upon 
her :  floating  in  deep,  hlue  space,  it  watched  her  onclonded. 

"  Then  it  is  not  morning  ?  I  am  not  at  the  cottage  ?  Who 
is  this  ? — I  see  a  shape  at  my  bedside.'' 

"  It  is  myself — ^it  is  your  friend — ^your  nurse — ^your . 

Lean  your,  head  on  my  shoulder :  collect  yourself."  (In  a 
lower  tone.)  "Oh  God,  take  pity  I  Give  her  life,  and  me 
strength !     Send  me  courage — ^teach  me  words ! " 

Some  minutes  passed  in  silence.  The  patient  lay  mute 
and  passive  in  the  trembling  arms— on  the  throbbing  bosom 
of  the  nurse. 

"I  am  better  now,"  whispered  Caroline,  at  last,  "much 
better — I  feel  where  I  am  :  this  is  Mrs  Pryor  near  inc:  I  was 
dreaming — I  talk  when  I  wake  up  from  dreams :  people  often  do 
in  illness.  How  fast  your  heart  beats,  ma'am  I  Do  not  be  afraid." 

"It  is  not  fear,  child ;  only  a  little  anxiety,  which  will 
pass.  I  have  brought  you  some  tea,  Gary;  your  uncle  made 
it  himself..  Y^ou  know  he  says  he  can  make  a  better  cup  of 
tea  than  any  housewife  can.  Taste  it.  He  is  concerned  to 
hear  that  you  eat  so  little :  he  would  be  glad  if  you  had  a 
better  appetite." 

"  I  am  thirsty:  let  me  drink.'* 

She  drank  eagerly. 

"  What  o'clock  is  it,  ma*am  ?"  she  asked. 

"  Past  nine." 

"  Not  later  ?  Oh  I  I  have  yet  a  bug  night  before  me : 
but  the  tea  has  made  me  strong:  I  will  sit  up." 

Mrs  Pryor  raised  her,  and  arranged  her  pillows. 
'    "  Thank  Heaven  I    I  am  not  always  equally  miserable,  and 
ill,  and  hopeless.     The  afternoon  has  been  bad  since  Hortense 
went:  perhaps  the  evening  may  be  better.     It  is  a  fine  night, 
I  think  ?     The  moon  shines  clear." 

"  Very  fine :  a  perfect  summer  night.  The  old  churcli- 
tower  gleams  white  almost  as  stiver." 

"  And  does  the  churchyard  look  peaceful  ?" 

"  Yes,  and  the  garden  also:  dew  glistens  on  the  £:>liage.'* 

*'Can  you  see  many  long  weeds  and  nettles  amongst  tLe 
graves;  or  do  they  look  turfy  and  flowery  ?" 

<<I  see  closed  daisy-heads,  gleaming  like  pearls  on  som^ 
mounds.  Thomas  has  mown  down  the  dock-leaves  and  rank 
grassland  cleared  all  away.** 


YAIJiBT  OF   THE   SHABOW   OF   DEATH.  851 

**  I  always  like  that  to  be  done :  it  soothes  one's  mind  to 
see  the  place  in  order :  and,  I  dare  say,  within  the  chnrch 
jnst  now  that  moonlight  shines  as  softly  as  in  my  room.  It 
will  fall  throngh  the  east  window  fall  on  the  Heist  one  monu- 
ment. When  I  close  my  eyes  I  seem  to  see  poor  papa's 
epitaph  in  black  letters  on  the  white  marble.  There  is  plenty 
of  room  for  other  inscriptions  underneath." 

""William  Farren  came  to  look  after  your  flowers  this 
morning:  he  was  afraid,  now  you  cannot  tend  them  yourself, 
they  would  be  neglected.  He  has  taken  two  of  your,  favourite 
plants  home  to  nurse  for  you." 

"  If  I  were  to  make  a  will,  I  would  leave  William  all  my 
plants;  Shirley  my  trinkets — except  one,  which  must  not  be 
taken  off  my  neck ;  and  you,  ma'am,  my  books."  (After  a 
pause.)     "  Mrs  Pryor,  I  feel  a  longing  wish  for  something." 

"  For  what,  Caroline  ?  " 

'^  You  know  I  always  delight  to  hear  you  sing :  sing  me 
a  bynm  just  now:  sing  that  hymn  which  begins, — 

"  *  Our  God,  our  help  in  ages  past,— 
Our  hope  for  jetixs  to  come  5 
Our  shelter  Arom  the  stormy  blast ; 
Our  refuge,  haven,  home ! ' " 

Mrs  Pryor  at  once  complied. 

No  wonder  Caroline  liked  to  hear  her  sing :  her  voice*,  even  in 
speaking,  was  sweet  and  silver  clear  ;  in  song,  it  was  almost 
divine :  neither  flute  nor  dulcimer  has  tones  so  pure.  But  the 
tone  was  secondary  compared  to  the  expression  which  trembled 
through :  a  tender  vibration  from  a  feeling  heart. 

The  servants  in  the  kitchen,  hearing  the  strain,  stole  to 
the  stair-foot  to  listen :  even  old  Helstone,  as  he  walked  in 
the  garden,  pondering  over  the  unaccountable  and  feeble 
nature  of  women,  stood  still  amongst  his  borders  to  catch  the 
moumftd  melody  more  distinctly.  Why  it  reminded  him  of 
his  forgotten  dead  wife,  he  could  not  tell ;  nor  why  it  made 
him  more  concerned  than  he  had  hitherto  been  for  Caroline's 
fading  girlhood.  He  was  glad  to  recollect  that  he  had  promised 
to  pay  Wynne,  the  magistrate,  a  visit  that  evening.  Low 
spirits  and  gloomy  thoughts  were- very  much  his  aversion: 
when  they  attacked  him  he  usually  found  means  to  make 
them  march  in  double-quick  time.  The  hynm  followed  him 
faintlv  as  he  crossed  the  fields :  he  hastened  his  customary 
-Imp  p:iccs  thnt  he  might  get  beyond  its  reach. 


352  SHIBIiETr 

"  Thy  word  oommands  our  flesh  to  dast,-^ 
*  Hetnm,  ye  sons  of  men ; ' 
All  nations  rofee  from  earth  at  first, 
And  turn  to  earth  again. 

**  A  thousand  ages  in  thy  sight 
Are  like  an  evening  gone ; 
Short  as  the  watch  that  ends  the  night 
Before  the  rising  son. 

*'  Time,  like  an  ever-rolling  stream, 
Bears  all  its  sons  away ; 
They  fly,  forgotten,  as  a  dream 
Dies  at  the  opening  day. 

"  Like  flowery  fields,  the  nations  stand. 
Fresh  in  the  morning  light ; 
The  flowers  heneath  the  mower's  hand 
Lie  witheiing  ere  't  is  night. 

"  Onr  God,  oar  help  in  ages  past, — 
Our  hope  for  years  to  come  ; 
Be  thon  oar  gaard  while  troahles  last, — 
O  Father,  be  our  home  1 " 

**  Now  sing  a  song— a  Scottish  song,"  suggested  Garofine 
when  the  hymn  was  over, — "  *  Ye  banks  and  braes  o*  hounj 
Doon.'" 

Again  Mrs  Pryor  obeyed,  or  essayed  to  obey.  At  the  close 
of  the  first  stanza  she  stopped  :  she  conld  get  no  farther :  her 
fall  heart  flowed  over. 

**  You  are  weeping  at  the  pathos  of  the  air :  come  here,  and 
I  will  comfort  you,"  said  Caroline,  in  a  pitpng  accent.  Mrs 
Pryor  came  :  she  sat  down  on  the  edge  of  her  patient's  bed, 
and  allowed  the  wasted  arms  to  encircle  her. 

"  You  often  soothe  me,  let  me  soothe  you,"  murmored  the 
young  girl,  kissing  her  check.  "  I  hope,"  she  added,  "it  is 
not  for  me  you  weep." 

No  answer  followed. 

**  Do  you  think  I  shall  not  get  better  ?  I  do  not  feel  very 
ill — only  weak." 

**  But  your  mind,  Caroline  :  your  mind  is  crushed ;  you 
heart  is  almost  broken :  you  have  been  so  neglected,  so  re> 
pulsed,  left  so  desolate." 

*'  I  believe  grief  is,  and  always  has  been,  my  worst  ailment. 
I  sometimes  tlank,  if  an  abundant  gush  of  happiness  came  QQ 
me,  I  could  revive  yet." 

*'  Do  you  wish  to  live  ?  " 

**  I  have  no  object  in  life." 

••  You  love  me,  Caroline  ?  " 

**  Very  much, — very  truly, — ^inexpressibly  sometimes :  just 
now  I  feel  as  if  I  could  almost  grow  to  your  heart." 


VILLET  OF  THS  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         868 

"I  wiU  return  directly,  dear/'  remarked  Mrs  Pryor,  as  slie 
laid  Caroline  down. 

Quitting  her,  she  glided  to  the  door,  softly  turned  the  key 
in  the  lock,  ascertained  that  it  was  fast,  and  came  back.  She 
bent  over  her.  She  threw  back  the  curtain  to  admit  the 
moonlight  more  freely.     She  gazed  intently  on  her  face. 

"  Then,  if  you  love  me,'*  said  she,  speaking  quickly,  with 
an  altered  voice:  "if  you  feel  as  if — to  use  your  own  words 
— ^you  could  *  grow  to  my  heart,'  it  will  be  neither  shock  nor 
pain  for  you  to  know  that  that  heart  is  the  source  whence  yours 
was  filled;  that  from  my  veins  issued  the  tide  which  flows  in 
yours;  that  you  are  mine — ^my  daughter — ^my  own  child." 

"MrePryor 1'' 

"My  own  child  I" 

"  That  is — that  means — ^you  have  adopted  me  ?" 

"  It  means  that,  if  I  have  given  you  nothing  else,  I  at  least 

gave  you  life  ;  that  I  bore  you — nursed  you  ;  that  I  am  your 

true  mother:  no  other  woman  can  claim  the  title — it  is  mine" 

"  But  Mrs  James  Helstone — ^but  my  father's  wife  whom  I 

do  not  remember  ever  to  have  seen,  she  is  my  mother  ?" 

"She  is  your  mother:  James  Helstone  Was  mi/  husband. 
I  say  you  are  mine,  I  have  proved  it.  I  thought  perhaps 
you  were  all  his,  which  would  have  been  a  cruel  dispensation 
for  me:  I  find  it  is  not  so.  God  permitted  me  to  be  the  parent 
of  my  child's  mind  :  it  belongs  to  me :  it  is  my  property — 
my  rigJU.  These  features  are  James's  own.  He  had  a  fine 
fiice  when  he  was  young,  and  not  altered  by  error.  Papa,  my 
darling,  gave  you  your  blue  eyes  and  soft  brown  hair:  he 
gave  you  the  oval  of  your  face  and  the  regularity  of  your 
Uiieaments:  the  outside  he  conferred;  but. the  heart  and  the 
brain  are  mine:  the  germs  are  from  me,  and  they  are  improved, 
they  are  developed  to  excellence.  I  esteem  and  approve  my 
child  as  highly  as  I  do  most  fondly  love  her." 
"  Is  what  I  hear  true  ?  Is  it  no  dreahi ?" 
"  I  wish  it  were  as  true  that  the  substance  and  colour  of 
health  were  restored  to  your  cheek." 

"  My  own  mother  I  is  she  one  I  can  be  so  fond  of  as  I  can 
of  you?  People  generally  did  not  like  her,  so  I  have  been 
given  to  understand." 

"  They  told  you  that  ?  Well,  your  mother  now  tells  you, 
that,  not  having  the  gifl  to  please  people  generally,  for  their 
approbation  she  does  not  care :  her  thoughts  are  centred  in 
her  child :  does  that  child  welcome  or  reject  her  V ^ 

23 


864  BBOVSTm   . 

^  But  if  yon  (tre  my  mother,  tiie  world  is  all  changed  to 
me.     Surely  I  can  live — ^I  should  like  to  recover        " 

"  Yon  must  recover.  Yon  drew  life  and  strength  from  my 
breast  when  you  were  a  tiny,  fair  infant,  over  whose  bhie  eyei 
I  used  to  weep,  fearing  I  bdield  in  your  very  beauty  the  agn 
of  qualities  that  had  entered  my  heart  like  iron,  and  pierced 
through  my  soul  like  a  sword.  Daughter!  we  have  been  long 
parted :  I  return  now  to  cherish  you  again." 

She  held  her  to  her  bosom :  she  (Cradled  her  in  her  arms: 
she  rocked  her  soMy,  as  if  lulling  a  young  child  to  sleep. 

"  My  mothei?  I    My  own  mother  I  *' 

The  oflfspring  nestied  to  the  parent :  that  parent,  feehog 
the  endearment  and  hearing  the  appeal,  gathered  her  closer 
still.  She  covered  her  with  noiseless  kisses :  she  murmured 
love  over  her,  like  a  cushat  fostering  its  yoimg. 

There  was  sHence  in  the  room  for  a  long  while. 

"  Does  my  uncle  know  ?  " 

''  Your  uncle  knows :  I  told  him  when  I  first  came  to  stay 
with  you  here." 

''  Did  you  recognise  me  when  we  first  met  at  FieMhead?^ 

''How  could  it  be  otherwise?  Mr  and  Miss  Hdstone 
being  announced,  I  was  prepared  to  see  my  child." 

"  It  was  that  then  which  moved  you:  I  saw  you  disturbed." 

*'  You  saw,  nothing,  Caroline,  I  can  cover  my  feeliiigs. 
You  can  never  tell  what  an  age  of  strange  sensation  I  lived, 
during  the  two  minutes  that  elapsed  between  the  report  of 
your  name  and  your  entrance.  YovC  can  never  tell  how  jonr 
look,  mien,  carriage,  shook  me." 

"  Why  ?     Were  you  disappointed  ?  " 

''What  will  she  be  like?  I  had  asked  mydelf ;  and  whea 
I  saw  what  you  were  like,  I  could  have  drop^ied." 

"Mamma,  why?" 

"  I  trembled  in  your  presence.  I  said  I  will  never  own 
her;  she  shall  never  know  me." 

"  But  I  said  and  did  nothing  remarkable.  I  felt  a  little 
difiident  at  the  thought  of  an  introduction  to  strangers,  tiut 
was  all." 

i  "I  soon  saw  you  were  diffident;  that  was  the  first  thiog 
wHch  re-assured  me :  had  you  been  rustic,  clownish,  awkwardi 
I  should  have  been  content." 

**You  puzzle  me." 

*^I  had  reason  to  dread  a  fair  outside,  to  misirost  a  popoltf 


VAUiBT  OP  THB  SBO^OW  OF  DKATH.         855 

rearing,  to  shudder  before  distmctiony  grace,  and  courtesy, 
beauty  and  afl&bilityliad  come  in  my  way  when  I  was  recluse, 
lesolate,  young,  and  ignorant :  a  toil-worn  governess  perishing 
>r  uncheered  labour,  breaking  down  before  her  time.  These, 
[Caroline,  when  they  smiled  on  me,  I  mistook  for  angels !  I 
followed  them  home,  and  when  into  their  hands  I  had  given 
nithout  reserve  my  whole  chance  of  future  happiness,  it  was 
xiy  lot  to  witness  a  transfiguration  on  the  domestic  hearth :  to 
see  the  white  mask  lifted,  the  bright  disguise  put  away,  and 
[>pposite  me  sat  down  oh  God  1  I  heme  suffered  1" 
«She  sank  on  the  pillow. 

*'I  haoe  suffered  I  None  saw — ^none  knew:  there  was  no 
sympathy — ^no  redemption — no  redress !  * 
'*  Take  comfort,  mother:  it  is  over  now.** 
"  It  is  over,  and  not  fruitlessly.  I  tried  to  keep  the  word  of 
His  patience :  He  kept  me  in  the  daya  of  my  anguish.  I  was 
a&aid  with  terror — ^I  was  troubled:  through  great  tribulation 
He  brought  me  through  to  a  salvation  revealed  in  this  last 
time.    My  fear  had  torment — He  has  cast  it  out :  He  has  given 

me  in  its  stead  perfect  love.     .     .     .     But,  Caroline " 

Thus  she  invoked  her  daughter  after  a  pause. 
"  Mother  1" 

"  I  charge  you,  when  you  next  look  on  your  father's  monu- 
ment, to  respect  the  name  chiselled  there.    To  you  he  did  only 
good.    On  you  he  conferred  his  whole  treasure  of  beauties ; 
nor  added  to  them  one  dark  defect.   All  you  derived  from  him 
is  excellent.     You  owe  him  gratitude.     Leave,  between  him 
and  me,  the  settlement  of  our  mutual  account:  meddle  not: 
God  is  the  arbiter.     This  world's  laws  never  came  near  us — 
never !     They  were  powerless  as  a  rotten  bulrush  to  protect 
me  \ — impotent  as  idiot  babblings  to  restrain  him  I     As  you 
said,  it  is  all  over  now:  the  grave  lies  between  us.     There  he 
sleeps — in  that  church  1     To  his  dust  I  say  this  night,  what 
I  have  never  said  before,  '  James,  slumber  peacefully !     See  1 
your  terrible  debt  is  cancelled  1    Look !  I  wipe  out  the  long, 
black  account  with  my  own  hand !    James,  your  child  atones: 
this  living  likeness  of  you — ^this  thing  with  your  perfect 
features — this  one  good  gift  you  gave  me  has  nestled  affec- 
tionately to  my  heart,  and  tenderly  called  me  "'mother." 
Husband  I  rest  forgiven ! ' " 

^* Dearest  mother,  that  is  right!    Can  papa's  spirit  hear 
us?    Is  he  comforted  to  know  that  we  stUl  love  himV^ 
'*  I  said  nothing  of  love:  I  spoke  of  forgiveness*    Mind  the 


846  SHIBI«ET. 

authority— pocketed  his  fee,  and  went.     Probably,  be  knew 
well  enough  he  coidd  do  no  good;  but  didn't  like  to  say  sa 

Still,  no  rumour  of  serious  illness  got  wind  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood. At  Hollow's-cottage  it  was  thought  that  Garolme 
had  only  a  severe  cold,  she  haying  written  a  note  to  Horteiisu 
to  that  effect;  and  Mademoiselle  contented  herself  with  sending 
two  pots  of  currant  jam,  a  receipt  for  a  tisane,  and  a  note  of 
advice. 

Mrs  Yorke  being  told  that  a  physician  had  been  summoned^ 
sneered  at  the  hypochondriac  fancies  of  the  rich  and  idle, 
who,  she  said,  have  nothing  but  themselves  to  think  about, 
must  needs  send  for  a  doctor  if  only  so  much  as  their  litde 
finger  ached. 

The  "  rich  and  idle,"  represented  in  the  person  of  Cardine, 
were  meantime  falling  faist  into  a  condition  of  prostradon, 
whose  quickly  consummated  debility  puzzled  all  who  nvit- 
nessed  it,  except  one;  for  that  one  alone  reflected  how  liable 
is  the  undermined  structure  to  sink  in  sudden  ruin. 

Sick  people  often  have  Ancles  inscrutable  to  oidinaiy 
attendants,  and  Caroline  had  one  which  even  her  tender  nurse 
could  not  at  first  explain.  On  a  certain  day  in  the  week,  at 
a  certain  hour,  she  would — ^whether  worse  or  betteiv- entreat 
to  be  taken  up  and  dressed,  and  suffered  to  sit  in  her  chair 
near  the  window.  This  station  she  would  retain  till  nooo 
was  past:  whatever  degree  of  exhaustion  or  debility  her  wan 
aspect  betrayed,  she  still  softly  put  off  all  persuasion  to  seek 
repose  until  the  church-clock  had  duly  tolled  midniay:  the 
twelve  strokes  sounded,  she  grew  docile,  and  would  meekly 
lie  down.  Returned  to  the  couch,  she  usually  buried  her 
face  deep  in  the  pillow,  and  drew  the  coverlets  close  round 
her,  as  H*  to  shut  out  the  world  and  sun,  of  which  she  was 
tired:  more  than  once,  as  she  thus  lay,  a  slight  convulsion 
shook  the  sick-bed,  and  a  faint  sob  broke  the  silence  round  it. 
These  things  were  not  unnoted  by  Mrs  Pryor. 

One  Tuesday  morning,  as  usual,  she  had  asked  leave  to 
rise,  and  now  she  sat  wrapped  in  her  white  dressing-gown, 
leaning  forward  in  the  easy-chair,  gazing  steadily  and  patientij 
from  tiie  lattice.  Mrs  Pryor  was  seated  a  little  behind,  knit- 
ting as  it  seemed,  but,  in  truthj  watching  her.  A  change 
crossed  her  pale  mournful  brow,  animating  its  languor;  a 
light  shot  into  her  faded  eyes,  reviving  their  lustre;  she  half 
rose  and  looked  earnestly  out.  Mrs  Pryor,  drawing  sofUj 
near,  glanced  over  her  shoulder.    From   this  window  was 


VALLET  OF  THE  SEADOW  OF  DEATH.         84:7 

nsible  the  cliiirchyard,  beyond  it  the  road,  and  there,  riding 
sharply  by,  appeared  a  horseman.  The  figtire  was  not  yet 
too  remote  for  recognition:  Mrs  Pryor  had  long  sight;  she 
knew  Mr  Moore.  Just  as  an  intercepting  rising  ground  cou'- 
eealed  him  from  view,  the  clock  struck  twelve. 
"  May  I  lie  down  again  ?"  asked  Caroline. 
Her  nurse  assisted  her  to  bed:  having  laid  her  down  and 
drawn  the  curtain,  she  stood  listening  near.  The  Httle  couch 
trembled,  the  suppressed  sob  stirred  the  air.  A  contraction 
as  of  anguish  altered  Mrs  Pryor's  features ;  she  wrung  her 
hands ;  half  a  groan  escaped  her  Hps.  She  now  remembered 
that  Tuesday  was  Whinbury  market-Kiay:  Mr  Moore  must 
always  pass  the  Sectoiy  on  his  way  thither,  just  ere  noon  of 
that  day. 

Caroline  wore  continually  round  her  neck  a  slender  braid 

of  silk,  attached  to  which  was  some  trinket.     Mrs  Pryor  had 

seen  the  bit  of  gold  glisten ;  but  had  not  yet  obtained  a  fair 

view  of  it.     I{er  patient  never  parted  with  it:  when  dressed 

itTOs  Mdden  in  her  bosom;  as  she  lay  in  bed  she  always 

held  it  in  her  hand.     That  Tuesday  afternoon  the  transient 

doze — more  like  lethargy  than   sleep  —  which   sometimes 

abridged  the  long  days,  had  stolen  bver  her:  the  weather  was 

hot:  while  turning  in  febrile  restlessness,  she  had  pushed  the 

coverlets  a  little  aside;   Mrs  Pryor  bent  to  replace  them; 

the  small,  wasted  hand  lying  nerveless  on  the   sick  girPs 

breast,  clasped  as  usual  her  jealously-guarded  treasure :  tiiose 

fingers  whose  attenuation  it  gave  pain  to  see,  were  now  relaxed 

in  sleep:  Mrs  Pryor  gently  disengaged  the  braid,  drawing  out 

a  tiny  locket — sl  slight  thing  it  was,  such  as  it  suited  her 

snudl  purse  to  purchase:  under  its  crystal  face  appeared  a 

cnrl  of  black  hair — ^too  short  and  crisp  to  have  been  severed 

from  a  female  head. 

Some  agitated  movement  occasioned  a  twitch  of  the  silken 
chain:  the  sleeper  started  and  woke.  Her  thoughts  were 
usually  now  somewhat  scattered  on  waking ;  her  look  gene- 
rally wandering.  Half-rising,  as  if  in  terror,  she  exclaimed: 
"  Don't  take  it  irom  me,  Robert  1  Don't !  It  is  my  l^st 
comfort-— let  me  keep  it.  I  never  tell  any  one  whose  hair  it 
i»— I  never  show  it." 

Mrs  Pryor  had  already  disappeared  behind  the  curtain: 
redining  &r  back  in  a  deep  arm-K^hair  by  the  bedside,  she 
was  withdrawn  from  view.  Caroline  looked  abroad  into  the 
chamber:  she  thought  it  empty.    As  her  stray  ideas  returned 


846  ssnxLEY» 

slowly,  each  folding  its  weak  wings  on  the  mind's  sad  flhcxre, 
like  birds  exhausted, — ^beholding  void,  and  perneiviDg  siknoe 
round  her,  she  believed  herself  alone.  Collected,  she  was  not 
yet:  perhaps  healthy  self-possession  and  self-control  were  (r 
be  hers  no  more;  perhaps  that  world  the  strong  and  pros- 
perous live  in  had  already  rolled  from  beneath  her  feet  hr 
ever:  so,  at  least,  it  often  seemed  to  herself.  In  health,  she 
had  never  been  accustomed  to  think  aloud ;  but  now  words 
escaped  her  lips  unawares. 

"  Oh  I  I  should  see  hira  once  more  before  all  is  aver : 
Heaven  might  favour  me  thus  far !"  she  cried.  ''  Grod  grant 
me  a  little  comfort  before  I  die  I "  was  her  humble  petition. 

'^  But  he  will  not  know  I  am  ill  till  I  am  gone ;  and  he  will 
come  when  they  have  laid  me  out,  and  I  am  senseless,  cold, 
and  stiff. 

"What  can  my  departed  soul  feel  then?  Can  it  see  or 
know  what  happens  to  the  clay  ?  Can  spirits,  through  any 
medium,  conmiunicate  with  living  flesh?.  Can  the  dead  at 
all  revisit  those  they  leave  ?  Can  they  come  in  the  elements? 
Will  wind,  water,  fire,  lend  me  a  path  to  Moore  ? 

"Is  it  for  nothing  the  wind  sounds  almost  articulately 
sometimes — sings  as  I  have  lately  heard  it  sing  at  night — or 
passes  the  casement  sobbing,  as  if  for  sorrow  to  come  ?  Does 
nothing,  then,  haunt  it — ^nothing  inspire  it  ? 

"Why,  it  suggested  to  me  words  one  night:  it  poured  a 
strain  which  I  could  have  written  down,  only  I  was  appalled, 
and  dared  not  rise  to  seek  pencil  and  paper  by  the  dim  watch- 
Ught. 

"What  is  that  electricity  they  speak  of,  whose  changes 
make  us  well  or  ill ;  whose  lack  or  excess  blasts ;  whose  even 
balance  revives?  What  are  all  those  influences  that  are 
about  us  in  the  atmosphere,  that  keep  playing  over  our  nerves 
like  fingers  on  stringed  instruments,  and  call  forth. now  a 
sweet  note,  and  now  a  wail — now  an  exultant  swell,  and, 
anon,  the  saddest  cadence  ? 

"  Where  is  the  other  world?  In  what  will  another  life 
consist  ?  Why  do  I  ask  ?  Have  I  not  cause  to  think  that 
the  hour  is  hasting  but  too  fast  when  the  veil  must  be  rent 
for  me?  Do  I  not  know  the  Grand  Mystery  is  likely  to 
burst  prematurely  on  me  ?  Great  Spirit  I  in  whose  goodness 
I  confide ;  whom,  as  my  Father,  I  have  petitioned  night  and 
morning  from  early  infancy,  help  the  weak  creation  of  thy 
hands !     Sustain  me  through  the  ordeal  I  dread  and  must 


YALLBT  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         849 

ondergo  I  Give  me  strength  1   Give  me  patience !   Give  me—* 
oh  I    ffive  mevkrcR  I '' 

She  fell  back  on  her  pillow.  Mrs  Prjor  found  means  to 
steal  quietly  from  the  room :  she  re-entered  it  soon  after, 
apparently  as  composed  as  if  she  had  really  not  overheard 
this  strange  soliloquy. 

The  next  day  several  callers  came.  It  had  become  known 
that  Miss  Helstone  was  worse.  Mr  Hall  and  his  sister 
Margaret  arrived :  both,  after  they  had  been  in  the  sick-^room, 
quitted  it  in  tears ;  they  had  found  the  patient  more  altered 
than  they  expected.  Hortense  Moore  came.  Caroline  seemed 
stimulated  by  her  presence  :  she  assured  her,  smiling,  she  was 
not  dangerously  ill ;  she  talked  to  her  in  a  low  voice,  but 
cheerfully :  during  her  stay,  excitement  kept  up  the  flush  of 
her  complexion :  she  looked  better. 

'^How  is  Mr  Robert  ?"  asked  Mrs  Pryor,  as  Hortense  was 
preparing  to  take  leave. 
"  He  was  very  well  when  he  left." 
"  Left'l  Is  he  gone  from  home  ?  " 

It  was  then  explained  that  some  police  intelligence  about 
the  rioters  of  whom  he  was  in  pursuit,  had,  that  morning, 
called  him  away  to  Birmingham,  and  probably  a  fortnight 
might  elapse  ere  he  returned.  ' 
''He  is  not  aware  that  Miss  Helstone  is  very  ill  ?*' 
*'  Oh !  no.  He  thought,  like  me,  that  she  had  only  a  bad 
cold." 

After  this  visit,  Mrs  Pryor  took  care  not  to  approach 
Caroline's  couch  for  above  an  hour :  she  heard  her  weep,  and 
dared  not  look  on  her  tears. 

Ad  eveniiig  closed  in,  she  brought  her  some  tea.  Caroline, 
opening  her  eyes  from  a  moment's  slumber,  viewed  her  nurse 
with  an  unrecognising  glance. 

*^  I  smelt  the  honeysuckles  in  the  glen  this  summer-morning,'* 
she  said,  **  as  I  stood  at  the  counting-house  window.*' 

Strange  words  like  these  from  pallid  lips  pierce  a  loving 
listener's  heart  more  poignantly  than  steel.  They  sound 
romantic,  perhaps,  in  books  :  in  real  life,  they  are  harrowing. 
"  My  darling,  do  you  know  me  ?"  said  Mrs  Pryor. 
"  I  went  in  to  call  Robert  to  breakfast :  I  have  been  with 
him  in  the  garden :  he  asked  me  to  go :  a  heavy  dew  has 
refreshed  the  flowers  :  the  peaches  are  ripening." 

''"My  darling !  my  darling  ! "  again  and  again  repealed  the 
norse. 


860  SHIRLEY. 

"  I  thonght  it  was  daylight — ^long  after  sunrise :  it  looks 
dark — ^is  the  moon  now  set  ?  '* 

That  moon,  lately  risen,  was  gazing  full  and  mild  npon 
her :  floating  in  deep  blue  space,  it  watched  her  unclouded. 

"  Then  it  is  not  morning  ?  I  am  not  at  the  cottage  ?  Who 
is  this  ? — ^I  see  a  shape  at  my  bedside." 

"  It  is  myself — ^it  is  your  &iend — ^your  nurse — your . 

Lean  your,  head  on  my  shoulder :  collect  yourself."  (In  & 
lower  tone.)  "  Oh  God,  take  pity !  Give  her  life,  and  m 
strength  I     Send  me  courage — ^teach  me  words ! " 

Some  minutes  passed  in  silence.  The  patient  lay  mute 
and  passive  in  the  trembling  arms— on  the  throbbing  bosom 
of  the  nurse. 

"I  am  better  now,"  whispered  Caroline,  at  last,  "much 
better — I  feel  where  I  am  :  this  is  Mrs  Pryor  near  me:  I  was 
dreaming — I  talk  when  I  wake  up  from  dreams :  people  often  do 
in  illness.  How  fast  your.heart  beats,  ma'am  1  Do  not  be  afraid." 

^^  It  is  not  fear,  child ;  only  a  little  anxiety,  which  will 
pass.  I  have  brought  you  some  tea,  Gary;  your  tmcle  made 
it  himself..  Tou  know  he  says  he  can  make  a  better  cup  of 
tea  than  any  housewife  can.  Taste  it.  He  is  concerned  to 
hear  that  you  eat  so  little :  he  would  be  glad  if  you  had  t 
better  appetite." 

"  I  am  thirsty:  let  me  drink." 

She  drank  eagerly. 

"  What  o'clock  is  it,  ma'am  ?"  she  asked. 

"  Past  nine." 

"  Not  later  ?  Oh !  I  have  yet  a  long  night  before  me : 
but  the  tea  has  made  me  strong :  I  will  sit  up." 

Mrs  Pryor  raised  her,  and  arranged  her  pillows. 
'    "  Thank  Heaven  I   I  am  not  always  equally  miserable,  and 
ill,  and  hopeless.     The  aflemoon  has  been  i^ad  since  Hortense 
went:  perhaps  the  evening  may  be  better.     It  is  a  fine  night, 
I  think  ?     The  moon  shines  clear." 

"  Very  fine :  a  perfect  summer  night.  The  old  church- 
tower  gleams  white  almost  as  silver." 

"  And  does  the  churchyard  look  peaceful  ?" 

^'  Yes,  and  the  garden  also:  dew  glistens  on  the  foliage." 

*'  Can  you  see  many  long  weeds  and  nettles  amongst  tli£ 
grayes;  or  do  they  look  turfy  and  flowery  ?" 

^^I  see  closed  daisy-heads,  gleaming  like  pearls  on  sodp 
moicmds.  Thomas  has  mown  down  the  dock-leaves  and  rank 
grass,. and  cleared  all  away.** 


YALLST  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.        851 

''  I  always  like  that  to  be  done :  it  soothes  one's  mind  to 
see  the  place  in  order :  and,  I  dare  say,  within  the  church 
jnst  now  that  moonlight  shines  as  softly  as  in  my  room.  It 
will  fall  throngh  the  east  window  fall  on  the  Helstone  monu- 
ment. When  I  close  my  eyes  I  seem  to  see  poor  papa's 
epitaph  in  black  letters  on  the  white  marble.  There  is  plenty 
of  room  for  other  ioMriptions  underneath." 

"William  Farren  came  to  look  after  your  flowers  this 
morning:  he  was  airaid,  now  you  cannot  tend  them  yourself, 
they  would  be  neglected.  He  has  taken  two  of  your,  favourite 
plants  home  to  nurse  for  you." 

"  K  I  were  to  make  a  will,  I  would  leave  William  all  my 
plants ;  Shirley  my  trinkets— except  one,  which  must  not  be 
taken  off  my  neck ;  and  you,  ma'am,  my  books."  (After  a 
pause.)     "  Mrs  Pryor,  I  feel  a  longing  wish  for  something." 

"  For  what,  Caroline  ?  " 

"  You  know  I  always  delight  to  hear  you  sing :  sing  me 
&  hynm  just  now:  sing  that  hymn  which  begins, — 

*' '  Oar  God,  our  help  in  ages  past, — 
Oar  hope  for  yean  to  come  $ 
Our  shelter  ftom  the  stormy  blast ; 
Oar  refuge,  haven,  home ! ' " 

Mrs  Pryor  at  once  complied. 

No  wonder  Caroline  liked  to  hear  her  sing :  her  yoice*,  even  in 
speaking,  was  sweet  and  silver  clear ;  in  song,  it  was  almost 
divine :  neither  flute  nor  dulcimer  has  tones  so  pure.  But  the 
tone  was  secondary  compared  to  the  expression  which  trembled 
through :  a  tender  vibration  from  a  feeling  heart. 

The  servants  in  the  kitchen,  hearing  the  strain,  stole  to 
the  stair-foot  to  listen :  even  old  Helstone,  as  he  walked  in 
the  garden,  pondering  over  the  unaccountable  and  feeble 
nature  of  women,  stood  still  amongst  his  borders  to  catch  the 
mournful  melody  more  distinctly.  Why  it  reminded  him  of 
his  forgotten  dead  wife,  he  could  not  tell ;  nor  why  it  made 
him  more  concerned  than  he  had  hitherto  been  for  Caroline's 
CuUng  girlhood.  He  was  glad  to  recollect  that  he  had  promised 
to  pay  Wynne,  the  magistrate,  a  visit  that  evening.  Low 
spirits  and  gloomy  thoughts  were- very  much  his  aversion: 
when  they  attacked  him  he  usually  found  means  to  make 
them  march  in  double-quick  time.  The  hymn  followed  him 
faintiv  as  he  crossed  the  flelds :  he  hastened  his  customary 
-Imp  p:»ce,  thiit  he  might  get  beyond  its  reach. 


352  SHIBI^ET* 

**  Thy  word  oommands  onr  flesh  to  diist,— 
*  Betnm,  ye  sons  of  men ;  * 
All  nations  ro&e  from  earth  at  first, 
And  turn  to  earth  again. 

**  A  thousand  ages  in  thy  sight 
Are  like  an  evening  gone ; 
Short  as  the  watch  that  ends  the  night 
Before  the  rising  son. 

"  Time,  like  an  ever-rolling  stream, 
Bears  all  its  sons  away ; 
They  fly,  forgotten,  as  a  dream 
Dies  at  the  opening  day. 

"  Like  flowery  fields,  the  nations  stand. 
Fresh  in  the  morning  light ; 
The  flowers  heneath  the  mower's  hand 
Lie  withering  ere  't  is  night. 

"  Oar  God,  oar  help  in  ages  past, — 
Oar  hope  foi^  years  to  come  ; 
Be  thoa  our  guard  while  tronhles  last, — 
0  Father,  be  oar  home  1 " 

"Now  sing  a  song — a  Scottish  song,**  suggested  Carofine 
when  the  hymn  was  over, — "  *  Ye  banks  and  braes  o*  bonny 
Boon.**' 

Again  Mrs  Pryor  obeyed,  or  essayed  to  obey.  At  the  close 
of  the  first  stanza  she  stopped  :  she  conld  get  no  further :  lier 
full  heart  flowed  over. 

^*  You  are  weeping  at  the  pathos  of  the  air :  come  here,  and 
I  will  comfort  you,"  said  Caroline,  in  a  pitying  accent.  Mrs 
Pryor  came  :  she  sat  down  on  the  edge  of  her  patient's  bed, 
and  allowed  the  wasted  arms  to  encircle  her. 

**  You  often  soothe  me,  let  me  soothe  you,**  murmured  the 
young  girl,  kissing  her  check.  "  I  hope,**  she  added,  "it  is 
not  for  me  you  weep.'* 

No  answer  followed. 

"  Do  you  think  I  shall  not  get  better  ?  I  do  not  feel  very 
ill — only  weak.** 

**  But  your  mind,  Caroline  :  your  mind  is  crushed ;  you 
heart  is  almost  broken :  you  have  been  so  neglected,  so  re- 
pulsed, left  so  desolate." 

*'  I  believe  grief  is,  and  always  has  been,  my  worst  aihne&t. 
I  sometimes  think,  if  an  abundant  gush  of  happiness  came  os 
me,  I  could  revive  yet.'* 

**  Do  you  wish  to  live  ?  '* 

**  I  have  no  object  in  life.'* 

•'  You  love  me,  Caroline  ?  " 

**  Very  much, — very  truly, — inexpressibly  sometimes:  just 
now  I  feel  as  if  I  could  almost  grow  to  your  heart." 


YALLET  OF  THS  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         868 

^I  will  return  directly,  dear,"  remarked  Mrs  Pryor,  as  slie 
aid  Caroline  down. 

Quitting  her,  she  glided  to  the  door,  sofUy  turned  the  key 
A  the  lock,  ascertained  that  it  was  fast,  and  came  back.  She 
bent  over  her.  She  threw  back  the  curtain  to  admit  the 
moonlight  more  freely.     She  gazed  intently  on  her  face. 

"  Then,  if  you  love  me,'*  said  she,  speaking  quickly,  with 
an  altered  voice:  "if  you  feel  as  if — to  use  your  own  words 
— you  could  *  grow  to  my  heart,'  it  will  be  neither  shock  nor 
pain  for  you  to  know  that  that  heart  is  the  source  whence  yours 
was  filled;  that  from  my  veins  issued  the  tide  which  flows  in 
yours;  that  you  are  mine — ^my  daughter — ^my  own  child.** 

"BfrsPiyor 1*' 

"My  own  child  I*' 

"  That  is — ^that  means — ^you  have  adopted  me  ?** 

"  It  means  that,  if  I  have  given  you  nothing  else,  I  at  least 

gave  you  life  ;  that  I  bore  you — nursed  you  ;  that  I  am  your 

true  mother:  no  other  woman  can  claim  the  title — it  is  nuTia.** 

"  But  Mrs  James  Helstone — ^but  my  father's  wife  whom  I 

do  not  remember  ever  to  have  seen,  she  is  my  mother  ?** 

"  She  is  your  mother:  James  Helstone  Was  mi/  husband. 
I  say  you  are  mine,  I  have  proved  it.  I  thought  perhaps 
you  were  all  his,  which  would  have  been  a  cruel  dispensation 
for  me:  I  find  it  is  not  so.  God  permitted  me  to  be  the  parent 
of  my  child's  mind :  it  belongs  to  me :  it  is  my  property — 
my  right.  These  features  are  James's  own.  He  had  a  fine 
fiice  when  he  was  young,  and  not  altered  by  error.  Papa,  my 
darling,  gave  you  your  blue  eyes  and  soft  brown  hair:  he 
gave  you  the  oval  of  your  face  and  the  regularity  of  your 
lineaments:  the  outside  he  conferred;  but. the  heart  and  the 
brain  are  mine:  the  germs  are  from  me,  and  they  are  improved, 
they  are  developed  to  excellence.  I  esteem  and  approve  my 
cbiid  as  highly  as  I  do  most  fondly  love  her." 
"  Is  what  I  hear  true ?  Is  it  no  dreain ?*' 
"  I  wish  it  were  as  true  that  the  substance  and  colour  of 
liealth  were  restored  to  your  cheek.'* 

"  My  own  mother  I  is  she  one  I  can  be  so  fond  of  as  I  can 
of  you  ?  People  generally  did  not  like  her,  so  I  have  been 
given  to  understand.'* 

"  They  told  you  that  ?  Well,  your  mother  now  tells  you, 
that,  not  having  the  gift  to  please  people  generally,  for  ih&i 
approbation  she  does  not  care :  her  thoughts  are  centred  in 
her  child :  does  that  child  welcome  or  reject  her  'i^ 

23 


864  siUKikEr.  . 

^  But  if  yon  care  my  mother,  the  world  is  all  changed  to 
me.     Surely  I  can  live — ^I  should  like  to  recover       " 

"  Yon  must  recover.  You  drew  life  and  strength  from  my 
breast  when  you  were  a  tiny,  fair  infant,  over  whose  blue  eyei 
I  used  to  weep,  fearing  I  beJield  in  your  very  beauty  the  sigB 
of  qualities  that  had  entered  my  heart  like  iron,  and  pierced 
through  my  soul  like  a  sword.  Daughter  1  we  have  been  loi^ 
parted:  I  return  now  to  cherish  you  again." 

She  held  her  to  her  bosom :  she  cSradled  her  in  her  arms: 
she  rocked  her  sofUy,  as  if  lulling  a  young  child  to  sleep. 

"  My  mothe]^  I    My  own  mother  I  *' 

The  offspring  nestiied  to  the  parent :  that  parent,  feeling 
the  endearment  and  hearing  the  appeal,  gathered  her  cloor 
still.  She  covered  her  with  noiseless  kisses:  she  mHrmured 
love  over  her,  like  a  cushat  fostering  its  yoimg. 

There  was  silence  in  the  room  for  a  long  while. 

"  Does  my  uncle  know  ?  " 

"  Your  uncle  knows :  I  told  him  when  I  first  came  to  sUy 
with  you  here." 

"  Did  you  recognise  me  when  we  first  met  at  FieMhead?" 

<<How  could  it  be  otherwise?  Mr  and  Miss  Helstooe 
being  announced,  I  was  prepared  to  see  my  child." 

"  It  was  that  then  which  moved  you:  I  saw  you  distorbei" 

"  You  saw,  nothing,  Caroline,  I  can  cover  my  feelings. 
You  can  never  tell  what  an  age  of  strange  sensation  I  lived, 
during  the  two  minutes  that  elapsed  between  the  report  of 
your  name  and  your  entrance.  Yoif  can  never  tell  how  joat 
look,  mien,  carriage,  shook  me." 

"  Why  ?     Were  you  disappointed  ?  " 

"What  will  she  be  like?  I  had  asked  myself;  and  when 
I  saw  what  you  were  like,  I  could  have  dropjied." 

"Mamma,  why?" 

"I  trembled  in  your  presence.  I  said  I  will  never  cm 
her;  she  shall  never  know  me." 

"  But  I  said  and  did  nothing  remarkable.  I  felt  a  little 
diffident  at  the  thought  of  an  introduction  to  strangers,  thet 
was  all." 

<  "I  soon  saw  you  were  diffident;  that  was  the  first  thing 
wHch  re-assured  me :  had  you  been  rustic,  downish,  awkward, 
I  should  have  been  content." 

**You  puzzle  me." 

*^I  had  reason  to  dread  a  fair  outside,  to  miatmst  a  popaltf 


VALLIT  OV  THB  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         355 

bearing,  to  shudder  before  distinctioD,  grace,  and  courtesy. 
Beauty  and  affability  bad  come  in  my  way  when  I  was  recluse, 
desolate,  young,  and  ignorant:  a  toil-worn  governess  perishing 
of  Tmclieered  labour,  breaking  down  before  her  time.  These, 
Caroline,  when  they  smiled  on  me,  I  mistook  for  angels !  I 
followed  them  home,  and  when  into  their  hands  I  had  given 
without  reserve  my  whole  <shance  of  fiiture  happiness,  it  was 
my  lot  to  witness  a  transfiguration  on  the  domestic  hearth :  to 
see  the  white  mask  liiled,  the  bright  disguise  put  away,  and 

opposite  me  sat  down oh  God !    I  h<W€  suffered !" 

^he  sank  on  the  pillow. 

"  I  luwe  suffered!  None  saw — ^none  knew:  there  was  no 
sympathy — ^no  redemption — ^no  redress ! " 
''  Take  comfort,  mother:  it  is  over  now.** 
''  It  is  over,  and  not  fruitlessly.  I  tried  to  keep  the  word  oi 
His  patience :  He  kept  me  in  the  days  of  my  anguish.  I  was 
afraid  with  terror — ^I  was  troubled:  through  great  tribulation 
He  brought  me  through  to  a  salvation  revealed  in  this  last 
time.    My  fear  had  torment — He  has  cast  it  out :  He  has  given 

me  in  its  stead  perfect  love.     .     .     .     But,  Caroline *' 

Thus  she  invoked  her  daughter  after  a  pause. 
"  Mother  1'' 

''  I  charge  you,  when  you  next  look  on  your  father's  monu- 
ment, to  respect  the  name  chiselled  there.  To  you  he  did  only 
good.  On  you  he  conferred  his  whole  treasure  of  beauties ; 
nor  added  to  them  one  dark  defect.  All  you  derived  from  him 
is  excellent.  You  owe  him  gratitude.  Leave,  between  him 
and  me,  the  settlement  of  our  mutual  account:  meddle  not: 
God  is  the  arbiter.  This  world^s  laws  never  came  near  us — 
never !  They  were  powerless  as  a  rotten  bulrush  to  protect 
me ! — ^impot^t  as  idiot  babblings  to  restrain  him !  As  you 
aaid,  it  is  all  over  now:  the  grave  lies  between  us.  There  he 
sleeps — in  that  church !  To  his  dust  I  say  this  night,  what 
I  have  never  said  before,  *  James,  slumber  peacefully !  See  1 
you*  terrible  debt  is  cancelled  1  Look !  I  wipe  out  the  long, 
black  account  with  my  own  hand !  James,  your  child  atones: 
this  living  likeness  of  you — ^this  thing  with  your  perfect 
features — this  one  good  gift  you  gave  me  has  nestled  affec- 
tionately to  my  heart,  and  tenderly  called  me  "•mother." 
Husband!  restfoigivenl'** 

"Dearest  mother,  that  is  right!     Can  papa^s  spirit  hear 
us  ?    Is  he  comforted  to  know  t^t  we  still  love  him  V  ^ 
*'  I  said  nothing  of  love:  I  spoke  of  forgiveness.    Wnd  the 


846  SHiRLBr. 

slowly,  eacli  folding  its  weak  wings  on  the  niind^s  sad  shoie, 
like  birds  exhausted, — ^beholding  void,  and  perceiving  alenee 
round  her,  she  believed  herself  alone.  Collected,  she  was  not 
yet:  perhaps  healthy  self-possession  and  self-control  were  te 
be  hers  no  more;  perhaps  that  world  the  strong  and  pros- 
perous live  in  had  already  rolled  from  beneath  her  feet  for 
ever:  so,  at  least,  it  often  seemed  to  herself.  In  health,  she 
had  never  been  accustomed  to  think  aloud ;  but  now  wordi 
escaped  her  lips  unawares. 

"  Oh  I  I  should  see  him  once  more  before  all  is  over : 
Heaven  might  favour  me  thus  far ! "  she  cried.  "  Grod  grant 
me  a  little  comfort  before  I  die ! "  was  her  humble  petitioD. 

"  But  he  will  not  know  I  am  ill  till  I  am  gone ;  and  he  will 
come  when  they  have  laid  me  out,  and  I  am  senseless,  cold, 
and  stiff. 

"What  can  my  departed  soul  feel  then?  Can  it  see  or 
know  what  happens  to  the  clay  ?  Can  spirits,  through  anj 
medium,  communicate ' with  living  flesh?.  Can  the  dead  at 
all  revisit  those  they  leave?  Can  they  cofne  in  the  elements? 
Will  wind,  water,  fire,  lend  me  a  path  to  Moore  ? 

"Is  it  for  nothing  the  wind  sounds  almost  articulatelj 
sometimes — sings  as  I  have  lately  heard  it  sing  at  night — or 
passes  the  casement  sobbing,  as  if  for  sorrow  to  come  ?  Doea 
nothing,  then,  haunt  it — ^nothing  inspire  it  ? 

"Why,  it  suggested  to  me  words  one  night:  it  poured  a 
strain  which  I  could  have  written  down,  only  I  was  appalled, 
and  dared  not  rise  to  seek  pencil  and  paper  by  the  dim  watch- 
light. 

"What  is  that  electricity  they  speak  of,  whose  changes 
make  us  well  or  ill ;  whose  lack  or  excess  blasts ;  whose  even 
balance  revives?  What  are  all  those  influences  that  are 
about  us  in  the  atmosphere,  that  keep  playing  over  our  nerves 
like  fingers  on  stringed  instruments,  and  call  forth .  now  a 
sweet  note,  and  now  a  wail — ^now  an  exultant  swell,  and, 
anon,  the  saddest  cadence  ? 

"  Where  is  the  other  world?  In  what  will  another  life 
consist  ?  Why  do  I  ask  ?  Have  I  not  cause  to  think  that 
the  hour  is  hasting  but  too  fast  when  the  veil  must  be  rent 
for  me?  Do  I  not  know  the  Grand  Mystery  is  likely  to 
burst  prematurely  on  me  ?  Great  Spirit  I  in  whose  goodness 
I  confide ;  whom,  as  my  Father,  I  have  petitioned  night  and 
morning  from  early  infancy,  help  the  weak  creation  of  thj 
hands !     Sustain  me  through  the  ordeal  I  dread  and  must 


YALLET  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.  849 

undergo  I  Give  me  strength  1   Give  me  patience  1   Give  me — 
oh  !     give  me  faith  ! " 

She  fell  hack  on  her  pillow.  Mrs  Pryor  foand  means  to 
steal  qoietly  from  the  room :  she  re-entered  it  soon  after, 
apparently  as  composed  as  if  she  had  really  not  overheard 
this  strange  soliloquy. 

The  next  day  several  callers  came.  It  had  hecome  known 
that  Miss  Helstone  was  worse.  Mr  Hall  and  his  sister 
Margaret  arrived :  hoth,  after  they  had  heen  in  the  sick-^room, 
quitted  it  in  tears ;  they  had  found  the  patient  more  altered 
tiian  they  expected.  Hortense  Moore  came.  Caroline  seemed 
stimnlated  hy  her  presence  :  she  assured  her,  smiling,  she  was 
not  dangerously  ill ;  she  talked  to  her  in  a  low  voice,  hut 
cheerfully :  during  her  stay,  excitement  kept  up  the  flush  of 
her  complexion  :  she  looked  hotter. 

'^How  is  Mr  Bohert  ?'*  asked  Mrs  Pryor,  as  Hortense  was 
preparing  to  take  leave. 
"  He  was  very  well  when  he  left." 
'*  Left'l  Is  he  gone  from  home  ?  " 

It  was  then  explained  that  some  police  intelligence  ahout 
the  rioters  of  whom  he  was  in  pursuit,  had,  that  morning, 
called  him  away  to  Biimingham,  and  prohahly  a  fortnight 
might  elapse  ere  he  returned.  ' 
'*He  is  not  aware  that  Miss  Helstone  is  very  ill  ?" 
"  Ohl  no.  He  thought,  like  me,  that  she  had  only  a  had 
cold." 

After  this  visit,  Mrs  Pryor  took  care  not  to  approach 
Caroline's  couch  for  ahove  an  hour :  she  heard  her  weep,  and 
dared  not  look  on  her  tears. 

Ad  evening  closed  in,  she  hrought  her  some  tea.  Caroline, 
opening  her  eyes  from  a  moment's  slumher,  viewed  her  nurse 
with  an  unrecognising  glance. 

'^  I  smelt  the  honeysuckles  in  the  glen  this  summer-morning," 
she  said,  ^*  as  I  stood  at  the  counting-house  window." 

Strange  words  like  these  from  pallid  lips  pierce  a  loving 
listener's  heart  more  poignantly  than  steel.  They  sound 
romantic,  perhaps,  in  hooks  :  in  real  life,  they  are  harrowing. 
"  My  darling,  do  you  know  me  ?"  said  Mrs  Pryor. 
"  I  went  in  to  call  Bohert  to  hreakfast :  I  have  heen  with 
him  in  the  garden :  he  asked  me  to  go :  a  heavy  dew  has 
refreshed  the  flowers  :  the  peaches  are  ripening." 

''"l^fy  darling !  my  darling ! "  again  and  again  repealed  the 
norse. 


960  SHIRLEY. 

"  I  thongM  it  was  daylight — ^long  after  sunrise :  it  look? 
dark — ^is  the  moon  now  set  ?  " 

That  moon,  lately  risen,  was  gazing  fall  and  mild  upon 
her :  floating  in  deep  hlue  space,  it  watched  her  nndonded. 

"  Then  it  is  not  morning  ?  I  am  not  at  the  cottage  ?  Wlio 
is  this  ? — ^I  see  a  shape  at  my  hedside." 

**  It  is  myself — ^it  is  your  fdend — ^your  nurse — ^your . 

Lean  your,  head  on  my  shoulder :  collect  yourself.**  (In  a 
lower  tone.)  "  Oh  God,  take  pity  I  Give  her  life,  and  m 
strength  I     Send  me  courage — teach  me  words  I " 

Some  minutes  passed  in  silence.  The  patient  lay  mute 
and  passive  in  the  trembling  arms^-on  the  throbbing  bosom 
of  the  nurse. 

"I  am  better  now,"  whispered  Caroline,  at  last,  "much 
better — ^I  feel  where  I  am  :  this  is  Mrs  Pryor  near  me:  I  vas 
dreaming — I  talk  when  I  wake  up  from  dreams :  people  often  do 
in  illness.  How  fast  your  heart  beats,  ma'am  I  Do  not  be  afraid." 

"It  is  not  fear,  child ;  only  a  little  anxiety,  which  vill 
pass.  I  have  brought  you  some  tea,  Gary;  your  imcle  made 
it  himself..  Y'ou  know  he  says  he  can  make  a  better  cup  of 
tea  than  any  housewife  can.  Taste  it.  He  is  concerned  to 
hear  that  you  eat  so  little :  he  would  be  glad  if  you  bad  i 
better  appetite." 

"  I  am  thirsty:  let  me  drink." 

She  drank  eagerly. 

"  What  o'clock  is  it,  ma^am  ?"  she  asked. 

"  Past  nine." 

"  Not  later  ?  Oh !  I  have  yet  a  long  night  before  me : 
but  the  tea  has  made  me  strong :  I  will  sit  up." 

Mrs  Pryor  raised  her,  and  arranged  her  pillows. 
•    "  Thank  Heaven  I    I  am  not  always  equally  miserable,  an^l 
ill,  and  hopeless.     The  afternoon  has  been  bad  since  Hortens<^ 
went:  perhaps  the  evening  may  be  better.     It  is  a  fine  nigH 
I  think  ?     The  moon  shines  clear." 

"  Very  fine :  a  perfect  summer  night.  The  old  church- 
tower  gleams  white  almost  as  silver." 

"  And  does  the  churchyard  look  peaceftil  ?" 

"  Yes,  and  the  garden  also :  dew  glistens  on  the  foliage.** 

*'  Can  you  see  many  long  weeds  and  nettles  amongst  the 
graves;  or  do  they  look  turfy  and  flowery?" 

^^I  see  closed  daisy-heads,  gleanung  like  pearls  on  sod^ 
mofonds.  Thomas  has  mown  down  the  dock-leaves  and  ranl^ 
grass,  and  cleared  all  away.** 


VALLXT  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         851 

"  I  always  like  that  to  be  done :  it  soothes  one's  mind  to 
Bee  the  place  in  order :  and,  I  dare  say,  within  the  chnrch 
just  now  that  moonlight  shines  as  softly  as  in  my  room.  It 
will  fall  throngh  the  east  window  full  on  the  Heist  one  monu- 
ment. When  I  close  my  eyes  I  seem  to  see  poor  papa's 
epitaph  in  black  letters  on  the  white  marble.  There  is  plenty 
of  room  for  other  inflcriptions  underneath.'* 

"William  Farren  came  to  look  after  your  flowers  this 
monung:  he  was  afraid,  now  you  cannot  tend  them  yourself, 
they  would  be  neglected.  He  has  taken  two  of  your  favourite 
pl^ts  home  to  nurse  for  you." 

"  If  I  were  to  make  a  will,  I  would  leave  William  all  my 
plants ;  Shirley  my  trinkets-^xcept  one,  which  must  not  be 
taken  off  my  neck;  and  you,  ma'am,  my  books."  (After  a 
pause.)     "  Mrs  Pryor,  I  feel  a  longing  wish  for  something." 

"For  what,  Caroline?" 

"  You  know  I  always  delight  to  hear  you  sing :  sing  me 
a  hynm  just  now:  sing  that  hymn  which  begins, — 

"  *  Our  God,  our  help  in  ages  past, — 
Our  hope  for  years  to  come ; 
Our  shelter  Arom  the  stormy  blast ; 
Our  refuge,  haven,  home  I  * " 

Mrs  Pryor  at  once  complied. 

No  wonder  Caroline  liked  to  hear  her  sing :  her  voice*,  even  in 
speaking,  was  sweet  and  silver  clear  ;  in  song,  it  was  almost 
divine:  neither  flute  nor  dulcimer  has  tones  so  pure.  But  the 
tone  was  secondary  compared  to  the  expression  which  trembled 
through :  a  tender  vibration  from  a  feeling  heart. 

The  servants  in  the  kitchen,  hearing  the  strain,  stole  to 
the  stair-foot  to  listen :  even  old  Helstone,  as  he  walked  in 
the  garden,  pondering  over  the  unaccountable  and  feeble 
nature  of  women,  stood  still  amongst  his  borders  to  catch  the 
mournful  melody  more  distinctly.  Why  it  reminded  him  of 
his  forgotten  dead  wife,  he  could  not  tell ;  nor  why  it  made 
him  more  concerned  than  he  had  hitherto  l3een  for  Caroline's 
fading  girlhood*  He  was  glad  to  recollect  that  he  had  promised 
to  pay  Wynne,  the  magistrate,  a  visit  that  evening.  Low 
spirits  and  gloomy  thoughts  were- very  much  his  aversion: 
when  they  attacked  him  he  usually  found  means  to  make 
them  march  in  double-quick  time.  The  hynm  followed  him 
faintly  as  he  crossed  the  fields :  he  hastened  his  customaxy 
-liMip  puce,  that  he  might  get  beyond  its  reaoh. 


352  SHIBIiSTr 

'*  Thy  word  oommands  onr  flesh  to  dust,— 
*  Betnrn,  ye  sons  of  men  ; ' 
All  nations  ro&e  from  earth  at  ftrst, 
And  tnm  to  earth  again* 

**  A  thousand  ages  in  thy  sight 
Are  like  an  evening  gone ; 
Short  as  the  watch  that  ends  the  night 
Before  the  rising  sun. 

**  Time,  like  an  ever-rolling  stream, 
Bears  all  its  sons  away ; 
They  fly,  forgotten,  as  a  dream 
Dies  at  the  opening  day* 

"  Like  flowery  fields,  the  nations  stand. 
Fresh  in  the  morning  light ; 
The  flowers  beneath  the  mower's  hand 
Lie  withering  ere  't  is  night. 

"  Onr  God,  onr  help  in  ages  past, — 
Onr  hope  iot  years  to  come  ; 
Be  thou  our  guard  while  troubles  last,-- 
0  Father,  be  our  home  I " 

"Now  sing  a  song— a  Scottish  song,**  suggested  Caroline 
when  the  hymn  was  over, — "  *  Ye  banks  and  braes  o*  bonny 
Doon.'*' 

Again  Mrs  Pryor  obeyed,  or  essayed  to  obey.  At  the  close 
of  the  first  stanza  she  stopped  :  she  could  get  no  farther :  her 
full  heart  flowed  over. 

*'  You  are  weeping  at  the  pathos  of  the  air :  come  heio»  and 
I  will  comfort  you,"  said  Caroline,  in  a  pitying  accent.  Mrs 
Fryor  came  :  she  sat  down  on  the  edge  of  her  patient*8  bed, 
and  allowed  the  wasted  arms  to  encircle  her. 

"  You  often  soothe  me,  let  me  soothe  you,'*  murmured  the 
young  girl,  kissing  her  check.  **  I  hope,**  she  added,  "it  is 
not  for  me  you  weep.'* 

No  answer  followed. 

**  Do  you  think  I  shall  not  get  better  ?  I  do  not  feel  vfry 
ill — only  weak.** 

**  But  your  mind,  Caroline  :  your  mind  is  crushed  ;  yon 
heart  is  almost  broken :  you  have  been  so  neglected,  so  re- 
pulsed, left  so  desolate." 

'*  I  believe  grief  is,  and  always  has  been,  my  worst  ailment. 
I  sometimes  think,  if  an  abundant  gush  of  happiness  eame  <m 
me,  I  could  revive  yet.'* 

**  Do  you  wish  to  live  ?  " 

"  I  have  no  object  in  life." 

•'  You  love  me,  Caroline  ?  " 

**  Very  much, — very  truly, — inexpressibly  sometimes :  just 
now  I  feel  as  if  I  could  almost  grow  to  your  heart." 


TALLET  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         868 

^I  will  retarn  directly,  dear/'  remarked  Mrs  Pryor,  as  slie 
aid  Caroline  down. 

Qoitting  her,  she  glided  to  the  door,  softly  turned  the  key 
A  the  lock,  ascertained  that  it  was  fast,  and  came  back.  She 
bent  oyer  her.  She  threw  back  the  curtain  to  admit  the 
moonlight  more  freely.     She  gazed  intently  on  her  face. 

**  Then,  if  you  love  me,''  said  she,  speaking  quickly,  with 
an  altered  voice:  "if  you  feel  as  if — to  use  your  own  words 
— you  could  *  grow  to  my  heart,'  it  will  be  neither  shock  nor 
pain  for  you  to  know  that  tJiat  heart  is  the  source  whence  yours 
was  filled ;  that  from  my  veins  issued  the  tide  which  flows  in 
fours;  that  you  are  mine — ^my  daughter — ^my  own  child." 

"Mrs  Pryor 1'' 

"My  own  child  I" 

"  That  is — that  means — ^you  have  adopted  me  ?'* 

**  It  means  that,  if  I  have  given  you  nothing  else,  I  at  least 

gave  you  life  ;  that  I  bore  you — nursed  you  ;  that  I  am  your 

true  mother:  no  other  woman  can  claim  the  title — ^it  is  mine." 

"  But  Mrs  James  Helstone — ^but  my  father's  wife  whom  I 

do  not  remember  ever  to  have  seen,  she  is  my  mother  ?" 

"She  is  your  mother:  James  Helstone  was  my  husband. 
I  say  you  are  mine.  I  have  proved  it.  I  thought  perhaps 
yoa  were  all  his,  which  would  have  been  a  cruel  dispensation 
for  me:  I  find  it  is  not  so.  God  permitted  me  to  be  the  parent 
of  my  child's  mind :  it  belongs  to  me:  it  is  my  property — 
my  right.  These  features  are  James's  own.  He  had  a  fine 
face  when  he  was  young,  and  not  altered  by  error.  Papa,  my 
darling,  gave  you  your  blue  eyes  and  soft  brown  hair:  he 
gave  you  the  oval  of  your  face  and  the  regularity  of  your 
lineaments:  the  outside  he  conferred;  but. the  heart  and  the 
brain  are  mine:  the  germs  are  from  me^  and  they  are  improved, 
they  are  developed  to  excellence.  I  esteem  and  approve  my 
child  as  highly  as  I  do  most  fondly  love  her." 
"Is  what  I  hear  true?  Is  it  no  dreahi?" 
"  I  wish  it  were  as  true  that  the  substance  and  colour  of 
health  were  restored  to  your  cheek." 

"  My  own  mother  I  is  she  one  I  can  be  so  fond  of  as  I  can 
of  you  ?  People  generally  did  not  like  her,  so  I  have  been 
given  to  understand." 

"  They  told  you  that?  Well,  your  mother  now  tells  you, 
that,  not  having  the  gifl  to  please  people  generally,  for  tiiieir 
approbation  she  does  not  care :  her  thoughts  are  centred  in 
her  child :  does  that  child  welcome  or  reject  her  ?^ 

23 


854  SHIR&BT.    . 

**  But  if  yon  are  my  mother,  the  world  is  all  changed  to 

me.     Surely  I  can  live — ^I  should  like  to  recover ^ 

"  You  must  recover.  You  drew  life  and  strength  from  mj 
breast  when  you  were  a  tiny,  fair  infant,  over  whose  blue  eyw 
I  used  to  weep,  fearing  I  bdield  in  your  very  beauty  the  sign 
of  qualities  that  had  entered  my  heart  like  iron,  and  pierced 
through  my  soul  like  a  sword.  Daughter!  we  have  been  long 
parted:  I  return  now  to  cherish  you  again." 

She  held  her  to  her  bosom :  she  dradled  her  in  her  aimi: 
she  rocked  her  sofUy,  as  if  lulling  a  young  child  to  sleep. 

"  My  mother !    My  own  mother  1 " 

The  offspring  nested  to  the  parent :  that  parent,  feeling 
the  endearment  and  hearing  the  appeal,  gathered  her  closer 
stiU.  She  covered  her  with  noiseless  kisses:  she  murmTired 
love  over  her,  like  a  cushat  fostering  its  young. 

There  was  silence  in  the  room  for  a  long  while. 

"  Does  my  imcle  know  ?" 

**  Your  uncle  knows :  I  told  him  when  I  first  came  to  suj 
with  you  here." 

"  Did  you  recognise  me  when  we  first  met  at  Fieldheadr 

<'How  could  it  be  otherwise?  Mr  and  Miss  Hektooe 
being  annoimced,  I  was  prepared  to  see  my  child.** 

"  It  was  that  then  which  moved  you:  I  saw  you  disturbed.' 

**  You  saw,  nothing,  Caroline,  I  can  cover  my  feelings^ 
You  can  never  tell  what  an  age  of  strange  sensation  I  Hved, 
during  the  two  minutes  that  elapsed  between  the  report  of 
yotu*  name  and  your  entrance.  Yoif  can  never  tell  how  your 
look,  mien,  carriage,  shook  me." 

"  Why  ?     Were  you  disappointed  ?  " 

"  What  vdll  she  be  like?  I  had  asked  myself;  and  wbeo 
I  saw  what  you  were  like,  I  could  have  dropped." 

"  Mamma,  why  ?" 

"I  trembled  in  your  presence.  I  said  I  will  never  ow: 
her;  she  shall  never  know  me." 

*'But  I  said  and  did  nothing  remarkable.  I  felt  a  little 
diffident  at  the  thought  of  an  introduction  to  strangers,  dut 
was  all." 

I  "I  soon  saw  you  were  diffident;  that  was  the  first  thin^ 
which  re-assured  me :  had  you  been  rustic,  clownish,  awkward 
I  should  have  been  content." 

**You  puzzle  me." 

**  I  had  reason  to  dread  a  fair  outside,  to  mistrost  a  popoltf 


VALLIT  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         355 

bearing,  to  shudder  before  distinction,  grace,  and  courtesy. 
Beauty  and  affability  bad  come  in  my  way  when  I  was  recluse, 
desolate,  young,  and  ignorant:  a  toil-worn  governess  perishing 
of  uncheered  labour,  breaking  down  before  her  time.  These, 
Caroline,  when  they  smiled  on  me,  I  mistook  for  angels !  I 
foUowed  them  home,  and  when  into  their  hands  I  had  given 
without  reserve  my  whole  chance  of  future  happiness,  it  was 
my  lot  to  witness  a  transfiguration  on  the  domestic  hearth :  to 
see  the  white  mask  lifted,  the  bright  disguise  put  away,  and 
opposite  me  sat  down        oh  Grod !    I  have  suffered !" 

.She  sank  on  the  pillow. 

"I  have  suffered!  None  saw — ^none  knew:  there  was  no 
sympathy — ^no  redemption — ^no  redress  I " 

"  Take  comfort,  mother:  it  is  over  now." 

"  It  is  over,  and  not  fruitlessly.  I  tried  to  keep  the  word  of 
His  patience :  He  kept  me  in  the  days  of  my  anguish.  I  was 
afraid  with  terror — ^I  was  troubled:  through  great  tribulation 
He  brought  me  through  to  a  salvation  revealed  in  this  last 
time.  My  fear  had  torment — He  has  cast  it  out :  He  has  given 
me  in  its  stead  perfect  love.     .     .     .     But,  Caroline " 

Thus  she  invoked  her  daughter  after  a  p^use. 

"Mother!" 

"  I  charge  you,  when  you  next  look  on  your  father's  monu- 
ment, to  respect  the  name  chiselled  there.  To  you  he  did  only 
good.  On  you  he  conferred  his  whole  treasure  of  beauties ; 
nor  added  to  them  one  dark  defect.  All  you  derived  from  him 
is  excellent.  You  owe  him  gratitude.  Leave,  between  him 
and  me,  the  settlement  of  our  mutual  account:  meddle  not: 
God  is  the  arbiter.  This  world's  laws  never  came  near  us — 
never  I  They  were  powerless  as  a  rotten  bulrush  to  protect 
me ! — impotent  as  idiot  babblings  to  restrain  him  I  As  you 
said,  it  is  aU  over  now:  the  grave  lies  between  us.  There  he 
sleeps — in  that  church !  To  his  dust  I  say  this  night,  what 
I  have  never  said  before,  ^  James,  slumber  peacefully !  See  1 
your  terrible  debt  is  cancelled !  Look !  I  wipe  out  the  long, 
black  account  with  my  own  hand  I  James,  your  child  atones: 
this  living  likeness  of  you — this  thing  with  your  perfect 
features — this  one  good  giflyou  gave  me  has  nestled  affec- 
tionately to  my  heart,  and  tenderly  called  me  ''^mother." 
Husband!  rest  forgiven!'" 

"Dearest  mother,  that  is  right!  Can  papa's  spirit  hear 
lis  ?    Is  he  comforted  to  know  that  we  still  love  him  V "" 

*'  I  said  nothing  of  love:  I  spoke  of  forgiveness*    Mnd  the 


356  SUIKLET. 

froth,  child — ^I  said  nothing  of  love  I  On  ^th6  threshold  of 
tftemity,  should  he  be  there  to  see  me  enter,  will  I  mamtam 
that." 

"  Oh,  mother  1  you  must  have  suffered ! " 

"  Oh,  child !  the  human  heart  can  suffer.  It  can  hold  more 
tears  than  the  ocean  holds  waters.  We  never  know  hew  deep 
— how  wide  it  is,  till  misery  begins  to  imbind  her  clouds,  and 
fill  it  with  rushing  blackness." 

"  Mother,  forget." 

"  Forget  I "  she  said,  with  the  strangest  spectre  of  a  laugh. 
"  Th6  north  pole  will  rush  to  the  south,  and  the  headlands  of 
^fiurope  be  locked  into  the  bays  of  Australia  ere  I  forget.'* 

"  Hush,  mother !  rest ! — be  at  peace  1 " 

And  the  child  lulled  the  parent,  as  the  parent  had  erst  lulled 
the  child.  At  last  Mrs  Pryor  wept:  she  then  grew  calmer. 
She  resumed  those  tender  cares  agitation  had  for  a  moment 
suspended.  Replacing  her  daughter  on  the  couch,  she  smoothed 
the  pillow  and  spread  the  sheet.  The  soft  hair  whose  locks 
were  loosened,  she  rearranged,  the  damp  brow  she  refreshed 
with  a  cool,  fragrant  essence. 

"  Mamma,  let  them  Bring  a  candle,  that  I  may  see  you;  and 
tell  my  uncle  to  come  into  this  room  by-and-by:  I  want  to 
hear  him  say  that  I  am  your  daughter:  and,  mamma,  take 
your  supper  here  ;  don't  leave  me  for  one  minute  to-night.'' 

"Oh,  Caroline !  it  is  well  you  are  gentle.  You  will  say  to 
me  go,  and  I  shall  go ;  come,  and  I  shaU  come ;  do  this,  and  I 
shall  do  it.  You  inherit  a  certain  manner  as  well  as  certain 
features.  It  will  be  always  *  mamma'  prefacing  a  mandate: 
softly  spoken  though  from  you,  thank  Gtpdl  Well"  (she 
added,  under  her  breath),  "  he  spoke  softly  too,  once, — like  a 
flute  breathing  tenderness ;  and  then,  when  the  world  was  not 
by  to  listen,  discords  that  split  the  nerves  and  curdled  the 
blood — sounds  to  inspire  insanity." 

"  It  seemi/so  natural,  mamma,  to  ask  you  for  this  and  that. 
I  shall  want  nobody  but  you  to  be  near  me,  or  to  do  anjthini^ 
for  me ;  but  do  not  let  me  be  troublesome :  check  me,  if  I 
encroach/" 

"  You  must  not  depend  on  me  to  check  you:  you  must  keep 
guard  over  yourself.  I  have  little  moral  courage :  the  want  of 
it  is  my  bane.  It  is  that  which  has  made  me  an  unnatural 
parent — which  has  kept  me  apart  from  my  child  during  the 
ten  years  which  have  elapsed  since  my  husband's  death  left 
me  at  liberty  to  claim  her:  it  was  that  which*  first  unnerved 


TALLET  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DBATE.         d5t 

ly  arms  and  permitted  the  infant  I  might  have  retained  a 
hile  longer,  to  be  snatched  prematurely  &om  their  embrace." 
"  Hovy  mamma  ?  " 

"  I  let  you  go  as  a  babe,  because  you  were  pretty,  and  I 
iared  your. loveliness;  deeming  it  the  stamp  of  perversity. 
"hey  sent  me  your  portrait,  taken  at  eight  years  old ;  that 
ortrait  confirmed  my  fears.  Had  it  shown  me  a  sunburnt 
ttle  rostic — ^a  heavy,  blunt-featured,  commonplace  child — ^I 
bould  have  hastened  to  claim  you;  but  there,  imder  the  silver 
Aper,  I  saw  blooming  the  delicacy  of  an  aristocratic  fiower 
— *  little  lady '  was  written  on  every  trait.  I  had  too  recently 
rawled  £pom  imder  the  yoke  of  the  fine  gentleman— escaped, 
;alled,  crushed,  paralyzed,  dying — ^to  dare  to  encounter  his 
till  finer  and  most  fairy-like  representative.  My  sweet  little 
ady  overwhelmed  me  with  dismay:  her  air  of  native  elegance 
xoze  my  very  marrow.  In  my  experience  I  had  not  met  with 
Tuth,  modesty,  good  principle  as  ihe  concomitants  of  beauty. 
k.  form  so  straight  and  fine,  I  argued,  must  conceal  a  mind 
nrarped  and  crud.  I  had  littie  faitii  in  the  power  of  education 
to'  rectify  such  a  mind  ;  or  rather,  I  entirely  misdoubted  my 
own  ability  to  influence  it.  Caroline,  I  dared  not  undertake 
to  rear  you :  I  resolved  to  leave  you  in  your  uncle's  hands. 
Matthewson  Helstone  I  knew,  if  an  austere,  was  an  upright 
man.  He  and  all  the  world  thought  hardly  of  me  for  my 
strange,  unmotherly  resolve,  and  I  deserved  to  be  misjudged.'' 

"Mamma,  why  did  you  call  yourself  Mrs  Pryor?" 

'^It  was  a  name  in  my  mother's  family.  I  adopted  it  that 
1  might  live  immolested.  My  married  name  recalled  too 
vividly  my  married  life :  I  could  not  bear  it.  Besides,  threats 
were  uttered  of  forcing  me  to  return  to  bondage :  it  could  not 
he ;  rather  a  bier  for  a  bed — ^the  grave  for  a  home.  My  new 
name  sheltered  me :  I  resumed  under  its  screen  my  old  occu- 
pation of  teaching.  At  first,  it  scarcely  procured  me  the 
means  of  sustaining  life ;  but  how  savoury  was  hunger  when 
I  &8ted  in  peace  I  How  safe  seemed  the  darkness  and  chill 
ofanunldndled  hearth,  when  no  lurid  reflection  from,  terror 
crimsoned  its  desolation!  How  serene  was  solitude,  when  I 
feared  not  the  irruption  of  violence  and  vice  I" 

"  But,  mamma,  you  have  been  in  this  neighbourhood  before. 
How  did  it  happen,  that  when  you  re-appe^*ed  here  with  Miss 
Eeeldar,  you  were  not  recognised  ?  ** 

'*  I  only  paid  a  short  visit,  as  a  bride,  twenty  years  ago ; 
and  then  I  was  very  different  to  what  I  am  now — slender^ 


S48  SHiRLEr. 

slowly,  each  folding  its  weak  wings  on  the  mind*8  sad  shore, 
like  birds  exhausted, — ^beholding  void,  and  perneiviDg  silence 
round  her,  she  believed  herself  alone.  Collected,  she  was  not 
yet:  perhaps  healthy  self-possession  and  self-control  were  tr 
be  hers  no  more;  perhaps  that  world  the  strong  and  pros- 
perous live  in  had  already  rolled  from  beneath  her  feet  for 
ever:  so,  at  least,  it  often  seemed  to  herself.  In  health,  she 
had  never  been  accustomed  to  think  aloud ;  but  now  wordi 
escaped  her  lips  unawares. 

"  Oh  I  I  should  see  him  once  more  before  all  is  over : 
Heaven  might  favour  me  thus  far  I"  she  cried.  "GU)d  grant 
me  a  little  comfort  before  I  die  I "  was  her  humble  petition. 

"  But  he  will  not  know  I  am  ill  till  I  am  gone ;  and  he  will 
come  when  they  have  laid  me  out,  and  I  am  senseless,  cold, 
and  stiff. 

"What  can  my  departed  soul  feel  then?  Can  it  see  or 
know  what  happens  to  the  clay  ?  Can  spirits,  through  any 
medium,  communicate ' with  living  flesh?.  Can  the  dead  at 
all  revisit  those  they  leave  ?  Can  they  come  in  the  elements? 
Will  wind,  water,  fire,  lend  me  a  path  to  Moore  ? 

"Is  it  for  nothing  the  wind  sounds  almost  articulately 
sometimes — sings  as  I  have  lately  heard  it  sing  at  night — or 
passes  the  casement  sobbing,  as  if  for  sorrow  to  come  ?  Does 
nothing,  then,  haunt  it — ^nothing  inspire  it  ? 

"Why,  it  suggested  to  me  words  one  night:  it  poured  a 
strain  which  I  could  have  written  down,  only  I  was  appalled, 
and  dared  not  rise  to  seek  pencil  and  paper  by  the  dim  watch- 
Ught. 

"What  is  that  electricity  they  speak  of,  whose  changes 
make  us  well  or  ill;  whose  lack  or  excess  blasts;  whose  even 
balance  revives?  What  are  all  those  influences  that  are 
about  us  in  the  atmosphere,  that  keep  playing  over  our  nerves 
like  fingers  on  stringed  instruments,  and  call  forth .  now  a 
sweet  note,  and  now  a  wail — now  an  exultant  swell,  and, 
anon,  the  saddest  cadence  ? 

"  Where  is  the  other  world?  In  what  will  another  life 
consist  ?  Why  do  I  ask  ?  Have  I  not  cause  to  think  that 
the  hour  is  hasting  but  too  fast  when  the  veil  must  be  rent 
for  me?  Do  I  not  know  the  Grand  Mystery  is  likely  to 
burst  prematurely  on  me  ?  Great  Spirit  I  in  whose  goodness 
I  confide ;  whom,  as  my  Father,  I  have  petitioned  night  and 
morning  from  early  infancy,  help  the  weak  creation  of  thy 
hands !     Sustain  me  through  the  ordeal  I  dread  and  mu5t 


YALLBY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.  849 


undergo  I  Give  me  strength  1   Give  me  patience !   Give 
oh !    give  me  faith  ! " 

She  fell  back  on  her  pillow.  Mrs  Pryor  foond  means  to 
steal  quietly  from  the  room :  she  re-entered  it  soon  after, 
apparently  as  composed  as  if  she  had  really  not  OYerheard 
this  strange  soliloquy. 

The  next  day  several  callers  came.  It  had  become  known 
that  Miss  Helstone  was  worse.  Mr  Hall  and  his  sister 
Margaret  arrived :  both,  after  they  had  been  in  the  sick-^room, 
quitted  it  in  tears ;  they  had  found  the  patient  more  altered 
than  they  expected.  Hortense  Moore  came.  Caroline  seemed 
stimulated  by  her  presence  :  she  assured  her,  smiling,  she  was 
not  dangerously  ill;  she  talked  to  her  in  a  low  voice,  but 
cheerftilly :  during  her  stay,  excitement  kept  up  the  flush  of 
her  complexion :  she  looked  better. 

"How  is  Mr  Robert  ?"  asked  Mrs  Pryor,  as  Hortense  was 
preparing  to  take  leave. 

"  He  was  very  well  when  he  left." 

"  Left'l  Is  he  gone  from  home  ?  " 

It  was  then  explained  that  some  police  intelligence  about 
the  rioters  of  whom  he  was  in  pursuit,  had,  that  morning, 
called  him  away  to  Birmingham,  and  probably  a  fortnight 
might  elapse  ere  he  returned.  ' 

"He  is  not  aware  that  Miss  Helstone  is  very  ill  ?** 

"  Oh !  no.  He  thought,  like  me,  that  she  had  only  a  bad 
cold." 

After  this  visit,  Mrs  Pryor  took  care  not  to  approach 
Caroline's  couch  for  above  an  hour :  she  heard  her  weep,  and 
dared  not  look  on  her  tears. 

As  evenipg  closed  in,  she  brought  her  some  tea.  Caroline, 
opemng  her  eyes  from  a  moment's  slumber,  viewed  her  nurse 
with  an  unrecognising  glance. 

"  I  smelt  the  honeysuckles  in  the  glen  this  summer-morning," 
she  said,  **  as  I  stood  at  the  counting-house  window." 

Strange  words  like  these  from  pallid  lips  pierce  a  loving 
listener's  heart  more  poignantly  than  steel.  They  sound 
romantic,  perhaps,  in  books  :  in  real  life,  they  are  harrowing. 

"  My  darling,  do  you  know  me  ?"  said  Mrs  Pryor. 

"  I  went  in  to  call  Bobert  to  breakfast :  I  have  been  with 
him  in  the  garden :  he  asked  me  to  go :  a  heavy  dew  has 
refreshed  the  flowers  :  the  peaches  are  ripening." 

"l^fy  darling !  my  darling  ! "  again  and  again  repeated  the 


860  SHZBLBY. 

*^  I  thought  it  was  daylight — ^long  after  sunrise :  it  looli!i 
dark — ^is  the  moon  now  set  ?  " 

That  moon,  lately  risen,  was  gazing  full  and  mild  npon 
her :  floating  in  deep  hlae  space,  it  watched  her  nnclonded. 

"  Then  it  is  not  morning  ?  I  am  not  at  the  cottage  ?  ^o 
is  this  ? — I  see  a  shape  at  my  hedside." 

"  It  is  myself — ^itis  your  friend — ^your  nurse — your . 

Lean  your,  head  on  my  shoulder :  collect  yourself."  (In  a 
lower  tone.)  "Oh  God,  take  pity  I  Give  her  life,  and  m 
strength !     Send  me  courage — ^teach  me  words ! " 

Some  minutes  passed  in  silence.  The  patient  lay  mule 
and  passive  in  the  trembling  arms^-on  the  throbbing  bosom 
of  the  nurse. 

"I  am  better  now,"  whispered  Caroline,  at  last,  "mucB 
better — I  feel  where  I  am  :  this  is  Mrs  Pryor  near  inc :  I  was 
dreaming — I  talk  when  I  wake  up  from  dreams :  people  oflen  do 
in  illness.  How  fast  your  heart  beats,  ma^am!  Do  not  be  afraid." 

"  It  is  not  fear,  child ;  only  a  little  anxiety,  which  will 
pass.  I  have  brought  you  some  tea,  Gary;  your  uncle  made 
it  himself..  Y'ou  know  he  says  he  can  make  a  better  cup  of 
tea  than  any  housewife  can.  Taste  it.  He  is  concerned  to 
hear  that  you  eat  so  little :  he  would  be  glad  if  you  had  t 
better  appetite." 

"  I  am  thirsty:  let  me  drink." 

She  drank  eagerly. 

"  What  o'clock  is  it,  ma^am  ?"  she  asked. 

"  Past  nine." 

"  Not  later  ?  Oh !  I  have  yet  a  long  night  before  me : 
but  the  tea  has  made  me  strong:  I  will  sit  up."  I 

Mrs  Pryor  raised  her,  and  arranged  her  pQlows.  | 

*    "  Thank  Heaven  1    I  am  not  always  equally  miserable,  andi 
ill,  and  hopeless.     The  afternoon  has  been  bad  since  Horteiise| 
went:  perhaps  the  evening  may  be  better.     It  is  a  fine  nighf 
I  think  ?     The  moon  shines  clear." 

"  Very  fine :   a  perfect  summer  night.     The  old  churcl 
tower  gleams  white  almost  as  silver." 

"  And  does  the  churchyard  look  peaceful  ?" 

**  Yes,  and  the  garden  also:  dew  glistens  on  the  foliage.** 

**  Can  you  see  many  long  weeds  and  nettles  amongst  til 
graves;  or  do  they  look  turfy  and  flowery  ?" 

^^I  see  closed  daisy-heads,  gleaming  like  pearls  on 
moumds.    Thomas  has  mown  down  the  dock-leaves  and  tspI 
grass,  and  cleared  all  away." 


TALLBT  OF  THB  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.        851 

''  I  always  like  that  to  be  done :  it  soothes  one's  mind  to 
see  the  place  in  order :  and,  I  dare  say,  within  the  chnrch 
just  now  that  moonlight  shines  as  softly  as  in  my  room.  It 
will  fall  throngh  the  east  window  full  on  the  Helstone  monu- 
ment. When  I  close  my  eyes  I  seem  to  see  poor  papa's 
epitaph  in  black  letters  on  the  white  marble.  There  is  plenty 
of  room  for  other  imioriptions  underneath.'* 

"William  Farren  came  to  look  after  your  flowers  this 
morning:  he  was  afraid,  now  you  cannot  tend  them  yourself, 
they  would  be  neglected.  He  has  taken  two  of  your  favourite 
plants  home  to  nurse  for  you." 

"  If  I  were  to  make  a  will,  I  would  leave  William  all  my 
plants ;  Shirley  my  trinkets — except  one,  which  must  not  be 
taken  off  my  neck;  and  you,  ma*am,  my  books."  (After  a 
pause.)     "  Mrs  Pryor,  I  feel  a  longing  wish  for  something." 

"For  what,  Caroline?" 

"  You  know  I  always  delight  to  hear  you  sing :  sing  me 
a  hjmn  just  now:  sing  that  hymn  which  begins, — 

** '  Oar  God,  oar  help  in  ages  past, — 
Oar  hope  for  yeasrs  to  come ; 
Oar  shelter  ftrom  the  stormy  blast ; 
Oar  refage,  haven,  home ! ' " 

Mrs  Pryor  at  once  complied. 

No  wonder  Caroline  liked  to  hear  her  sing :  her  voice",  even  in 
speaking,  was  sweet  and  silver  clear  ;  in  song,  it  was  almost 
divine:  neither  flute  nor  dulcimer  has  tones  so  pure.  But  the 
tone  was  secondary  compared  to  the  expression  which  trembled 
throngh :  a  tender  vibration  from  a  feeling  heart. 

The  servants  in  the  kitchen,  hearing  the  strain,  stole  to 
the  Btsdr-foot  to  listen :  even  old  Helstone^  as  he  walked  in 
the  garden,  pondering  over  the  unaccountable  and  feeble 
nature  of  women,  stood  still  amongst  his  borders  to  catch  the 
mournful  melody  more  distinctly.  Why  it  reminded  him  of 
his  forgotten  dead  wife,  he  could  not  tell ;  nor  why  it  made 
him  more  concerned  than  he  had  hitherto  been  for  Caroline's 
fading  girlhood.  He  was  glad  to  recollect  that  he  had  promised 
to  pay  Wynne,  the  magistrate,  a  visit  that  evening.  Low 
spirits  and  gloomy  thoughts  were- very  much  his  aversion: 
when  they  attacked  him  he  usually  found  means  to  make 
them  march  in  double-quick  time.  The  hymn  followed  him 
f  lintlv  as  he  crossed  the  fields :  he  hastened  his  customary 
'Imp  p:»ce,  thjit  he  might  get  beyond  its  reach. 


352  SHIRIiET* 

**  Thy  word  commands  onr  flesh  to  dust,— 
*  Betnrn,  ye  sons  of  men  ; ' 
All  nations  role  from  earth  at  first, 
And  tnm  to  earth  again. 

**  A  thousand  ages  in  thy  sight 
Are  like  an  evening  gone ; 
Short  as  the  watch  that  ends  the  night 
Before  the  rising  snn. 

**  Time,  like  an  ever-rolling  stream, 
Bears  all  its  sons  away ; 
They  fly,  forgotten,  as  a  dream 
Dies  at  the  opening  day. 

"  Like  flowery  fields,  the  nations  stand. 
Fresh  in  the  morning  light ; 
The  flowers  beneath  the  mower's  hand 
Lie  withering  ere  't  is  night. 

"  Oar  God,  our  help  in  ages  past, — 
Oar  hope  for  years  to  come  ; 
Be  thon  onr  gnard  while  troubles  last,— 
0  Father,  be  our  home  I " 

^' Now  sing  a  song — a  Scottish  song,'*  suggested  CaioIin« 
when  the  hymn  was  over, — "  *  Ye  banks  and  braes  o*  bonny 
Doon.'/' 

Again  Mrs  Pryor  obeyed,  or  essayed  to  obey.  At  the  close 
of  the  first  stanza  she  stopped  :  she  could  get  no  farther :  her 
full  heart  flowed  over. 

*'  You  are  weeping  at  the  pathos  of  the  air :  come  here,  and 
I  will  comfort  you,"  said  Caroline,  in  a  pitying  accent.  Mrs 
Pryor  came  :  she  sat  down  on  the  edge  of  her  patient's  bed, 
and  allowed  the  wasted  arms  to  encircle  her. 

**  You  often  soothe  me,  let  me  soothe  you,"  murmured  the 
young  girl,  kissing  her  check.  **  I  hope,"  she  added,  "it  is 
not  for  me  you  weep." 

No  answer  followed. 

**  Do  you  think  I  shall  not  get  better  ?  I  do  not  feel  very 
ill — only  weak." 

**  But  your  mind,  Caroline:  your  mind  is  crushed;  you 
heart  is  almost  broken :  you  have  been  so  neglected,  so  re- 
pulsed, left  so  desolate." 

*'  I  believe  grief  is,  and  always  has  been,  my  worst  ailment. 
I  sometimes  think,  if  an  abundant  gush  of  happiness  came  on 
me,  I  could  revive  yet." 

**  Do  you  wish  to  live  ?  " 

**  I  have  no  object  in  life." 

••  You  love  me,  Caroline  ?  " 

"Very  much, — very  truly, — inexpressibly  sometimes:  jusl 
low  I  feel  as  if  I  could  almost  grow  to  your  heart." 


TALLET  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         868 

^I  will  return  directly,  dear,"  remarked  Mrs  Pryor,  as  slie 
laid  Caroline  down. 

Quitting  her,  she  gHded  to  the  door,  sofUy  turned  the  key 
in  the  lock,  ascertained  that  it  was  fast,  and  came  back.  She 
bent  over  her.  She  threw  back  the  curtain  to  admit  the 
moonlight  more  freely.     She  gazed  intently  on  her  face. 

"  Then,  if  you  love  me,"  said  she,  speaking  quickly,  with 
an  altered  voice :  "  if  you  feel  as  if — to  use  your  own  words 
— you  could  '  grow  to  my  heart,'  it  will  be  neither  shock  nor 
pain  for  you  to  know  that  that  heart  is  the  source  whence  yours 
was  filled;  that  from  my  veins  issued  the  tide  which  fiows  in 
ffours;  that  you  are  mine — ^my  daughter — ^my  own  child." 

"MrsPiygr 1'' 

"My  own  child  I" 

"  That  is — ^that  means — ^you  have  adopted  me  ?" 

"  It  means  that,  if  I  have  given  you  nothing  else,  I  at  least 

gave  you  life  ;  that  I  bore  you — niu-sed  you  ;  that  I  am  your 

true  mother:  no  other  woman  can  claim  the  title — ^it  is  mneJ^ 

"  But  Mrs  James  Helstone — ^but  my  father's  wife  whom  I 

do  not  remember  ever  to  have  seen,  she  is  my  mother?" 

"She  is  your  mother:  James  Helstone  Was  my  husband. 
I  say  you  are  mine.  I  have  proved  it.  I  thought  perhaps 
you  were  all  his,  which  would  have  been  a  cruel  dispensation 
for  me:  I  find  it  is  not  so.  God  permitted  me  to  be  the  parent 
of  my  child's  mind :  it  belongs  to  me:  it  is  my  property — 
my  tight.  These  features  are  James's  own.  He  had  a  fine 
fiice  when  he  was  young,  and  not  altered  by  error.  Papa,  my 
darling,  gave  you  your  blue  eyes  and  soft  brown  hair:  he 
gave  you  the  oval  of  your  face  and  the  regularity  of  your 
lineaments:  the  outside  Jie  conferred;  but. the  heart  and  the 
brain  are  mine:  the  germs  are  from  me,  and  they  are  improved, 
they  are  developed  to  excellence.  I  esteem  and  approve  my 
child  as  highly  as  I  do  most  fondly  love  her." 
"  Is  what  I  hear  true  ?  Is  it  no  dreahi  ?  " 
"  I  wish  it  were  as  true  that  the  substance  and  colour  of 
health  were  restored  to  your  cheek." 

"  My  own  mother  I  is  she  one  I  can  be  so  fond  of  as  I  can 
of  you  ?  People  generally  did  not  like  her,  so  I  have  been 
given  to  nnderstand." 

"  They  told  you  that  ?  Well,  your  mother  now  tells  you, 
that,  not  having  the  gift  to  please  people  generally,  for  tiieir 
approbation  she  does  not  care :  her  thoughts  are  centred  in 
her  child :  does  that  child  welcome  or  reject  her  'i^ 

23 


S54  SHIR&B7*    . 

^  But  if  yon  ixrt  my  moHier,  the  world  is  all  changed  to 
me.     Surely  I  can  live — ^I  should  like  to  recover——" 

"  You  must  recover.  You  drew  life  and  strength  from  mj 
breast  when  you  were  a  tiny,  fair  infant,  over  whose  blue  eye« 
I  used  to  weep,  fearing  I  belield  in  your  very  beauty  the  sigs 
of  qualities  that  had  entered  my  heart  like  iron,  and  pierced 
through  my  soul  like  a  sword.  Daughter!  we  have  been  long 
parted:  I  return  now  to  cherish  you  again." 

She  held  her  to  her  bosom :  she  dradled  her  in  her  amu: 
she  rocked  her  sofUy,  as  if  lulling  a  young  child  to  sleep. 

"  My  mother !     My  own  mother  I  ** 

The  offspring  nestied  to  the  parent :  that  parent,  feeling 
the  endearment  and  hearing  the  appeal,  gathered  her  closer 
still.  She  covered  her  with  noiseless  kisses:  she  murmnred 
love  over  ter,  like  a  cushat  fostering  its  young. 

There  was  silence  in  the  room  for  a  long  while. 

"  Does  my  uncle  know  ?" 

''  Your  uncle  knows :  I  told  him  when  I  first  came  to  stay 
with  you  here." 

^'  Did  you  recognise  me  when  we  first  met  at  FieMheadT 

''How  could  it  be  otherwise?  Mr  and  Miss  Helstone 
being  aiinoimced,  I  was  prepared  to  see  my  child." 

"  It  was  that  then  which  jnoved  you:  I  saw  you  disturbed." 

**  You  saw,  nothing,  Caroline,  I  can  cover  my  feeling!^ 
You  can  never  teU  what  an  age  of  strange  sensation  I  lived, 
during  the  two  minutes  that  elapsed  between  the  report  of 
your  name  and  your  entrance.  Yoif  can  never  tell  how  your 
look,  mien,  carriage,  shook  me." 

"  Why  ?     Were  you  disappointed  ?  " 

"  What  will  she  be  like  ?  I  had  asked  myself;  and  when 
I  saw  what  you  were  Uke,  I  could  have  dropped." 

"  Mamma,  why?" 

"  I  trembled  in  your  presence.  I  said  I  will  never  own 
her;  she  shall  never  know  me." 

''But  I  said  and  did  nothing  remarkable.  I  felt  a  little 
diffident  at  the  thought  of  an  introduction  to  strangerSi  that 
was  all." 

t  "I  soon  saw  you  were  diffident;  that  was  the  fii«t  thiog 
which  re-assured  me :  had  you  been  rustic,  clownish,  awkward, 
I  should  have  been  content." 

**You  puzzle  me." 

"  Z  had  reason  to  dread  a  fair  outside,  to  mistrost  a  popnltf 


YALUn   OF  THB  SDADOW  OF  DKATH.         855 

^earingy  to  shudder  before  distinction,  grace,  and  courtesy. 
Beauty  and  affability  had  come  in  my  way  when  I  was  recluse, 
lesolate,  young,  and  ignorant :  a  toil-worn  governess  perishing 
>f  ixnche^red  labour,  breaking  down  before  her  time.  These, 
Caroline,  when  they  smiled  on  me,  I  mistook  for  angels !  I 
followed  them  home,  and  when  into  their  hands  I  had  given 
without  reserve  my  whole  <shance  of  future  happiness,  it  was 
my  lot  to  witness  a  transfiguration  on  the  domestic  hearth :  to 
see  the  white  mask  lifted,  the  bright  disguise  put  away,  and 
opposite  me  sat  down— oh  Grod  1  I  have  suffered  I" 
iShe  sank  on  the  pillow. 

**  I  Jiave  suffered  I  None  saw — ^none  knew:  there  was  no 
sympathy — ^no  redemption — ^no  redress  t " 
**  Take  comfort,  mother:  It  is  over  now." 
^^  It  is  over,  and  not  fruitlessly.  I  tried  to  keep  the  word  of 
His  patience:  He  kept  me  in  the  days  of  my  anguish.  I  was 
afraid  with  terror — I  was  troubled:  through  great  tribulation 
He  brought  me  through  to  a  salvation  revealed  in  this  last 
time.     My  fear  had  torment — He  has  cast  it  out :  He  has  given 

me  in  its  stead  perfect  love.     .     .     .     But,  Caroline " 

Thus  she  invoked  her  daughter  after  a  pause. 
"Mother!*' 

"  I  charge  you,  when  you  next  look  on  your  father's  monu- 
ment, to  respect  the  name  chiselled  there.    To  you  he  did  only 
good.     On  you  he  conferred  his  whole  treasure  of  beauties; 
nor  added  to  them  one  dark  defect.   All  you  derived  from  him 
is  excellent.     You  owe  him  gratitude.     Leave,  between  him 
and  me,  the  settlement  of  our  mutual  account:  meddle  not: 
God  is  the  arbiter.     This  world's  laws  never  came  near  us — 
never  I     They  were  powerless  as  a  rotten  bulrush  to  protect 
me ! — ^impotent  as  idiot  babblings  to  restrain  him !    As  you 
said,  it  is  all  over  now:  the  grave  lies  between  us.     There  he 
sleeps — ^in  that  church !     To  his  dust  I  say  this  night,  what 
I  have  never  said  before,  '  James,  slumber  peacefully !     See  1 
your  terrible  debt  is  cancelled !    Look  I  I  wipe  out  the  long, 
black  account  with  my  own  hand !    James,  your  child  atones: 
this  living  likeness  of  you — ^this  thing  with  your  perfect 
features — this  one  good  gifl  you  gave  me  has  nestled  affec- 
tionately to  my  heart,  and  tenderly  called  me  ^''mother." 
Husband!  rest  forgiven!'" 

"Dearest  mother,  that  is  right!    Can  papa's  spirit  hear 
us?    Is  he  comforted  to  know  l£at  we  still  love  him  V** 
'*  I  said  nothing  of  love:  I  spoke  of  for^veness.    Mind  the 


356  8HIBLET, 

fiiith,  child — ^I  said  notlung  of  love  I  On  the  thieAold  of 
d;emity,  should  he  be  there  to  see  me  enter,  will  I  maintain 
that." 

"  Oh,  mother !  you  must  have  suffered  I " 

"  Oh,  child !  the  human  heart  can  suffer.  It  can  hold  more 
tears  than  the  ocean  holds  waters.  We  never  know  hew  deqp 
— how  wide  it  is,  till  misery  begins  to  unbind  her  clouds,  and 
fill  it  with  rushing  blackness." 

"  Mother,  forget." 

"  Forget  I "  she  said,  with  the  sti^angest  spectre  of  a  lauglt 
"  ThS  north  pole  will  rush  to  the  south,  and  the  headlands  of 
!fiurope  be  locked  into  the  bays  of  Australia  ere  I  forget*' 

"  Hush,  mother  1  rest ! — be  at  peace  1 " 

And  the  child  lulled  the  parent,  as  the  parent  had  erst  lulled 
the  child.  At  last  Mrs  Pry  or  wept:  she  then  grew  calmer. 
She  resumed  those  tender  cares  agitation  had  for  a  momeQt 
suspended.  Replacing  her  daughter  on  the  couch,  she  smoothtd 
the  pillow  and  spread  the  sheet.  The  soft  hair  whose  locks 
were  loosened,  she  rearranged,  the  damp  brow  she  refreshed 
with  a  cool,  fragrant  essence. 

"  Mamma,  let  them  Bring  a  candle,  that  I  may  see  you;  and 
tell  my  uncle  to  come  into  this  room  by-and-by:  I  want  to 
hear  him  say  that  I  am  your  daughter :  and,  mamma,  take 
your  supper  here  ;  don^t  leave  me  for  one  minute  to-night'* 

"Oh,  Caroline  I  it  is  well  you  are  gentle.  You  will  say  to 
me  go,  and  I  shall  go ;  come,  and  I  shall  come ;  do  this,  and  1 
shall  do  it.  You  inherit  a  certain  manner  as  well  as  certain 
features.  It  will  be  always  *  mamma'  prefacing  a  mandate: 
softly  spoken  though  from  you,  thank  GbodI  Well"  (she 
added,  under  her  breath),  "  he  spoke  softly  too,  once, — like  a 
flute  breathing  tenderness ;  and  then,  when  the  world  was  not 
by  to  listen,  discords  that  split  the  nerves  and  curdled  the 
blood — sounds  to  inspire  insanity." 

"  It  seem^  so  natural,  mamma,  to  ask  you  for  this  and  that, 
I  shall  want  nobody  but  you  to  be  near  me,  or  to  do  anythinjf 
for  me ;  but  do  not  let  me  be  troublesome :  check  me,  if  I 
encroach*" 

"  You  must  not  depend  on  me  to  check  you:  you  must  keep 
guard  over  yourself.  I  have  little  moral  courage :  the  want  of 
it  is  my  bane.  It  is  that  which  has  made  me  an  unnatural 
parent — which  has  kept  me  apart  from  my  child  during  the 
ten  years  which  have  elapsed  since  my  husband's  death  left 
me  at  liberty  to  claim  her;  it  was  that  which*  first  unnerved 


▼ALLET  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DKATE.         35t 

\y  arms  and  permitted  tHe  infant  I  might  have  retained  a 
rbile  longer,  to  be  snatched  prematorely  from  their  embrace." 
"How,  mamma?" 

"  I  let  you  go  as  a  babe,  because  you  were  pretty,  and  I 
sared  your. loveliness;  deeming  it  the  stamp  of  perversity. 
liey  sent  me  your  portrait,  taken  at  eight  years  old ;  that 
ortrait  confirmed  my  fears.    Had  it  shown  me  a  sunburnt 
ittle  rustic — a  heavy,  blunt-featiired,  commonplace  child — ^I 
hould  have  hastened  to  claim  you ;  but  there,  under  the  silver 
ttper,  I  saw  blooming  the  delicacy  of  an  aristocratic  fiower 
—'little  lady'  was  written  on  every  trait.     I  had  too  recently 
a^wled  £rom  under  the  yoke  of  the  fine  gentleman— escaped, 
(ailed,  crushed,  paralyzed,  dying — ^to  dare  to  encounter  his 
itill  finer  and  most  fairy-like  representative.     My  sweet  little 
ady  overwhelmed  me  with  dismay:  her  air  of  native  elegance 
froze  my  very  marrow.    In  my  experience  I  had  not  met  with 
trnth,  modesty,  good  principle  as  tiie  concomitants  of  beauty. 
A.  form  so  straight  and  fine,  I  argued,  must  conceal  a  mind 
warped  and  cruel.     I  had  little  faith  in  the  power  of  education 
to  rectify  such  a  mind  ;  or  rather,  I  entirely  misdoubted  my 
own  ability  to  influence  it.     Caroline,  I  dared  not  undertake 
to  rear  you :  I  resolved  to  leave  you  in  your  uncle's  hands. 
Matthewson  Helstone  I  knew,  if  an  austere,  was  an  upright 
man.    He  and  all  the  world  thought  hardly  of  me  for  my 
strange,  xmmotherly  resolve,  and  I  deserved  to  be  misjudged." 
"Mamma,  why  did  you  caU  yourself  Mrs  Pryor  ?" 
"It  was  a  name  in  my  mother's  family.    I  adopted  it  that 
1  might  live  unmolested.    My  married  name  recalled  too 
vividly  my  married  life :  I  could  not  bear  it.    Besides,  threats 
were  uttered  of  forcing  me  to  return  to  bondage :  it  could  not 
be ;  rather  a  bier  for  a  bed — the  grave  for  a  home.    My  new 
Dame  sheltered  me :  I  resumed  under  its  screen  my  old  occu- 
pation of  teaching.     At  first,  it  scarcely  procured  me  the 
means  of  sustaining  life  ;  but  how  savoury  was  hunger  when 
I  fasted  in  peace !    How  safe  seemed  the  darkness  and  chill 
of  an  unkindled  hearth,  when  no  lurid  reflection  from  terror 
crimsoned  its  desolation!    How  serene  was  solitude,  when  I 
feared  not  the  irruption  of  violence  and  vice  I" 

"  But,  manmia,  you  have  been  in  this  neighbourhood  before* 
How  did  it  happen,  that  when  you  re-appeared  here  with  Miss 
Kwldar,  you  were  not  recognised  ?  " 

^4  only  paid  a  short  visit,  as  a  bride,  twenty  years  ago; 
•»d  then  I  was  very  difierent  to  what  I  am  now — slender, 


848  SEiBLEr. 

slowly,  each  folding  its  weak  wings  on  the  mind's  sad  shoie, 
like  birds  exhausted, — ^beholding  void,  and  perceiving  silence 
round  her,  she  believed  herself  alone.  Collected,  she  was  not 
yet:  perhaps  healthy  self-possession  and  self-control  were  tr 
be  hers  no  more;  perhaps  that  world  the  strong  and  pros- 
perous live  in  had  already  rolled  from  beneath  her  feet  for 
ever:  so,  at  least,  it  often  seemed  to  herself.  In  health,  she 
had  never  been  accustomed  to  think  aloud;  but  now  wordj 
escaped  her  lips  unawares. 

"  Oh !  I  should  see  him  once  more  before  all  is  over : 
Heaven  might  favour  me  thus  far ! "  she  cried.  "  God  grant 
me  a  little  comfort  before  I  die  I "  was  her  humble  petition. 

"  But  he  will  not  know  I  am  ill  till  I  am  gone;  aad  he  will 
come  when  they  have  laid  me  out,  and  I  am  senseless,  cold, 
and  stiff. 

"What  can  my  departed  soul  feel  then?  Can  it  see  or 
know  what  happens  to  the  clay  ?  Can  spirits,  through  any 
medium,  communicate ' with  living  flesh?.  Can  the  dead  at 
all  revisit  those  they  leave  ?  Can  they  come  in  the  elements? 
Will  wind,  water,  fire,  lend  me  a  path  to  Moore  ? 

"Is  it  for  nothing  the  wind  sounds  almost  articulatelj 
sometimes — sings  as  I  have  lately  heard  it  sing  at  night — or 
passes  the  casement  sobbing,  as  if  for  sorrow  to  come  ?  Does 
nothing,  then,  haunt  it — ^nothing  inspire  it  ? 

"Why,  it  suggested  to  me  words  one  night:  it  poured  a 
strain  which  I  could  have  written  down,  only  I  was  appalled, 
and  dared  not  rise  to  seek  pencil  and  paper  by  the  dim  watch- 

"What  is  that  electricity  they  speak  of,  whose  changes 
make  us  well  or  ill ;  whose  lack  or  excess  blasts ;  whose  eren 
balance  revives?  What  are  all  those  influences  that  are 
about  us  in  the  atmosphere,  that  keep  playing  over  our  nerves 
like  fingers  on  stringed  instruments,  and  caU  forth. now  a 
sweet  note,  and  now  a  wail — now  an  exultant  swell,  and, 
anon,  the  saddest  cadence  ? 

"  Where  is  the  other  world?  In  what  will  another  life 
consist  ?  Why  do  I  ask  ?  Have  I  not  cause  to  think  that 
the  hour  is  hasting  but  too  fast  when  the  veil  must  be  rent 
for  me?  Do  I  not  know  the  Grand  Mystery  is  likely  to 
burst  prematurely  on  me  ?  Great  Spirit  I  in  whose  goodness 
I  confide ;  whom,  as  my  Father,  I  have  petitioned  night  and 
morning  from  early  infancy,  help  the  weak  creation  of  thy 
^ands !     Sustain  me  through  the  ordeal  I  dread  and  must 


VALLEY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.  849 

ondergo  I  Give  me  strength !   Give  me  patience !   Give  me—* 
oh  1    give  me  faith  1 " 

She  fell  back  on  her  pillow.  Mrs  Pryor  fonnd  means  to 
steal  quietly  from  the  room :  she  re-entered  it  soon  after, 
apparently  as  composed  as  if  she  had  really  not  overheard 
this  strange  soliloquy. 

The  next  day  several  callers  came.  It  had  become  known 
that  Miss  Helstone  was  worse.  Mr  Hall  and  his  sister 
Margaret  arrived :  both,  after  they  had  been  in  the  sick-^room, 
quitted  it  in  tears ;  they  had  fonnd  the  patient  more  altered 
than  they  expected.  Hortense  Moore  came.  Caroline  seemed 
Btimolated  by  her  presence  :  she  assured  her,  smiling,  she  was 
not  dangerously  ill;  she  talked  to  her  in  a  low  voice,  but 
cheeriuUy :  during  her  stay,  excitement  kept  up  the  flush  of 
her  complexion :  she  looked  better. 

'^How  is  Mr  Bobert  ?"  asked  Mrs  Pryor,  as  Hortense  was 
preparing  to  take  leave. 
"  He  was  very  well  when  he  left." 
"  Left'!  Is  he  gone  from  home  7  " 

It  was  then  explained  that  some  police  intelligence  about 
the  rioters  of  whom  he  was  in  pursuit,  had,  that  morning, 
called  him  away  to  Bu*mingham,  and  probably  a  fortnight 
might  elapse  ere  he  returned. 
''He  is  not  aware  that  Miss  Helstone  is  very  ill  ?" 
''  Ohl  no.  He  thought,  like  me,  that  she  had  only  a  bad 
cold." 

After  this  visit,  Mrs  Pryor  took  care  not  to  approach 
Caroline's  couch  for  above  an  hour :  she  heard  her  weep,  and 
dared  not  look  on  her  tears. 

Ad  eveniug  closed  in,  she  brought  her  some  tea.  Caroline, 
opening  her  eyes  from  a  moment's  slumber,  viewed  her  nurse 
with  an  unrecognising  glance. 

*'  I  smelt  the  honeysuckles  in  the  glen  this  summer-morning," 
she  said,  "  as  I  stood  at  the  counting-house  window." 

Strange  words  like  these  from  pallid  lips  pierce  a  loving 
listener's  heart  more  poignantly  than  steel.  They  sound 
romantic,  perhaps,  in  books  :  in  real  life,  they  are  harrowing. 
"  My  darling,  do  you  know  me  ?"  said  Mrs  Pryor. 
'^  I  went  in  to  call  Eobert  to  breakfast :  I  have  been  with 
liim  in  the  garden :  he  asked  me  to  go :  a  heavy  dew  has 
refreshed  the  flowers  :  the  peaches  are  ripening." 

''*My  darling !  my  darling  ! "  again  and  again  repeated  the 
norse. 


860  SHIBLET. 

*^  I  thonght  it  was  daylight — ^long  after  sunrise :  it  loob 
dark — ^is  the  moon  now  set  ?  " 

That  moon,  lately  risen,  was  gazing  fall  and  mild  upon 
her:  floating  in  deep  hlue  space,  it  watched  her  nnclonded. 

"  Then  it  is  not  morning  ?  I  am  not  at  the  cottage  ?  ^o 
is  this  ? — ^I  see  a  shape  at  my  hedside." 

"  It  is  myself — ^it  is  your  friend — ^yonr  nurse — ^your . 

Lean  your,  head  on  my  shoulder :  collect  yourself.*'  (In  a 
lower  tone.)  "  Oh  God,  take  pity  I  Give  her  life,  and  m 
strength  I     Send  me  courage — teach  me  words ! " 

Some  minutes  passed  in  silence.  The  patient  lay  mute 
and  passive  in  the  trembling  arms — on  the  throbbing  bosom 
of  the  nurse. 

"I  am  better  now,"  whispered  Caroline,  at  last,  "much 
better — I  feel  where  I  am :  this  is  Mrs  Pryor  near  ine:  I  was 
dreaming — I  talk  when  I  wake  up  from  dreams :  people  ofben  do 
in  illness.  How  fast  your  heart  beats,  ma'am  1  Do  not  be  afiraid." 

"  It  is  not  fear,  child ;  only  a  little  anxiety,  which  will 
pass.  I  have  brought  you  some  tea,  Gary;  your  uncle  made 
it  himself..  Tou  know  he  says  he  can  maJke  a  better  ci^  of 
tea  than  any  housewife  can.  Taste  it.  He  is  concerned  to 
hear  that  you  eat  so  Uttle :  he  would  be  glad  if  you  had  i 
better  appetite." 

"  I  am  thirsty:  let  me  drink." 

She  drank  eagerly. 

"  What  o'clock  is  it,  ma'am  ?"  she  asked. 

"  Past  nine." 

"  Not  later  ?  Oh  I  I  have  yet  a  long  night  before  me : 
but  the  tea  has  made  me  strong:  I  will  sit  up." 

Mrs  Pryor  raised  her,  and  arranged  her  pillows. 
'    "  ThaiA  Heaven !    I  am  not  always  equally  miserable,  and 
ill,  and  hopeless.     The  afternoon  has  been  bad  since  Hortens- 
went:  perhaps  the  evening  may  be  better.     It  is  a  fine  night, 
I  think  ?     The  moon  shines  clear." 

"  Very  fine :  a  perfect  summer  night.  The  old  church- 
tower  gleams  white  almost  as  silver." 

"  And  does  the  churchyard  look  peaceful  ?" 

''  Yes,  and  the  garden  also:  dew  glistens  on  the  foliage.** 

*'  Can  you  see  many  long  weeds  and  nettles  amongst  the 
graves;  or  do  they  look  turfy  and  flowery  ?" 

^^I  see  closed  daisy-heads,  gleaming  like  pearls  on  soosf 
moinnds.  Thomas  has  mown  down  the  dock-leaves  and  rank 
grassy.and  cleared  all  away." 


TAIiIiXT  OF   THE   SHADOW   OF   DEATH.  851 

'*  I  always  like  that  to  be  done  :  it  soothes  one's  mind  to 
see  the  place  in  order :  and,  I  dare  say,  within  the  church 
just  now  that  moonlight  shines  as  softly  as  in  my  room.  It 
will  fell  through  the  east  window  full  on  the  Helstone  monu- 
ment. When  I  close  my  eyes  I  seem  to  see  poor  papa's 
epitaph  in  black  letters  on  the  white  marble.  There  is  plenty 
of  room  for  other  inflcriptions  underneath." 

"William  Farren  came  to  look  after  your  flowers  this 
mormng:  he  was  afraid,  now  you  cannot  tend  them  yourself, 
they  would  be  neglected.  He  has  taken  two  of  your,  favourite 
plants  home  to  nurse  for  you." 

"  K  I  were  to  make  a  will,  I  would  leave  William  all  my 
plants ;  Shirley  my  trinkets — except  one,  which  must  not  be 
taken  oflp  my  neck;  and  you,  ma'am,  my  books."  (After  a 
pause.)     "  Mrs  Pryor,  I  feel  a  longing  wish  for  something." 

"For  what,  Caroline?" 

"  You  know  I  always  delight  to  hear  you  sing :  sing  me 
a  hynm  just  now:  sing  that  hymn  which  begins, — 

"  *  Oar  God,  our  help  in  ages  past,— 
Oar  hope  for  yetsrs  to  come ; 
Oar  shelter  ftom  the  stormy  blast ; 
Our  refuge,  haven,  home ! ' " 

Mrs  Pryor  at  once  complied. 

No  wonder  Caroline  liked  to  hear  her  sing :  her  voice*,  even  in 
speaking,  was  sweet  and  silver  clear  ;  in  song,  it  was  almost 
ivine:  neither  flute  nor  dulcimer  has  tones  so  pure.  But  the 
tone  was  secondary  compared  to  the  expression  which  trembled 
through :  a  tender  vibration  from  a  feeling  heart. 

The  servants  in  the  kitchen,  hearing  the  strain,  stole  to 
the  stair-foot  tp  listen :  even  old  Helstone,  as  he  walked  in 
the  garden,  pondering  over  the  unaccountable  and  feeble 
natore  of  women,  stood  still  amongst  his  borders  to  catch  the 
moumfiil  melody  more  distinctly.  Why  it  reminded  him  of 
his  forgotten  dead  wife,  he  cotdd  not  tell ;  nor  why  it  made 
him  more  concerned  than  he  had  hitherto  been  for  Caroline*s 
Elding  girlhood.  He  was  glad  to  recoUect  that  he  had  promised 
to  pay  Wynne,  the  magistrate,  a  visit  that  evening.  Low 
spirits  and  gloomy  thoughts  were- very  much  his  aversion: 
when  they  attacked  him  he  usually  found  means  to  make 
them  niarcli  in  double-quick  time.  The  hymn  followed  him 
faintlv  as  he  crossed  the  fields :  he  hastened  his  customary 
^luiip  p:iee,  thjit  he  might  get  beyond  its  reach. 


352  SHlBIiET* 

**  Thy  word  oommands  onr  flesh  to  dust,— 
*  Retnm,  ye  sons  of  men ;  * 
All  nations  ro&e  from  earth  at  fii^, 
And  torn  to  earth  again. 

**  A  thousand  ages  in  thy  sight 
Are  like  an  evening  gone ; 
Short  as  the  watch  that  ends  the  night 
Before  the  rising  son. 

**  Time,  like  an  ever-rolling  stream, 
Bears  all  its  sons  away ; 
They  fly,  forgotten,  as  a  dream 
Dies  at  the  opening  day. 

"  Like  flowery  fields,  the  nations  stand. 
Fresh  in  the  morning  light ; 
The  flowers  beneath  the  mower's  hand 
Lie  witheiing  ere  't  is  night. 

"  Oar  God,  our  help  in  ages  past, — 
Oar  hope  iot  years  to  come  ; 
Be  thoa  our  gaard  while  troubles  last,— 
0  Father,  be  onr  home  I " 

''Now  sing  a  song — a  Scottish  song,'*  saggested  Carofioe 
when  the  hymn  was  over, — "  *  Ye  banks  and  braes  o'  bonny 
Boon.'" 

Again  Mrs  Prjor  obeyed,  or  essayed  to  obey.  At  the  dose 
of  the  first  stanza  she  stopped  :  she  could  get  no  farther :  her 
fall  heart  flowed  over. 

**  You  are  weeping  at  the  pathos  of  the  air :  come  here,  and 
I  will  comfort  you,"  said  Caroline,  in  a  pitying  accent.  Mrs 
Pryor  came  :  she  sat  down  on  the  edge  of  her  patient's  bed, 
and  allowed  the  wasted  arms  to  encircle  her. 

**  You  often  soothe  me,  let  me  soothe  you,"  murmnred  the 
young  girl,  kissing  her  check.  *^  I  hope,"  she  added,  "it  is 
not  for  me  you  weep." 

No  answer  followed. 

**  Do  you  think  I  shall  not  get  better  ?  I  do  not  feel  vevj 
ill — only  weak." 

**  But  your  mind,  Caroline  :  your  mind  is  crushed ;  vou 
heart  is  almost  broken :  you  have  been  so  neglected,  so  re- 
pulsed, left  so  desolate." 

*'  I  believe  grief  is,  and  always  has  been,  my  worst  aihnent. 
I  sometimes  think,  if  an  abundant  gush  of  happiness  came  os 
me,  I  could  revive  yet." 

'*  Do  you  veish  to  live  ?  " 

**  I  have  no  object  in  life." 

•*  You  love  me,  Caroline  ?  " 

"  Very  much, — very  truly, — inexpressibly  sometimes :  just 

>w  I  feel  as  if  I  could  almost  grow  to  your  heart.'* 


TALLET  OF  THS  SHADOW  OF  DEATH.         858 

^  I  will  retorn  directlj,  dear,"  remarked  Mrs  Prjor,  as  slie 
laid  Caroline  down. 

Quitting  her,  she  glided  to  the  door,  sofUy  turned  the  key 
in  the  lock,  ascertained  that  it  was  fast,  and  came  back.  She 
bent  over  her.  She  threw  back  the  curtain  to  admit  the 
moonlight  more  freely.     She  gazed  intently  on  her  face. 

"  Then,  if  you  love  me,''  said  she,  speaking  qidckly,  with 
an  altered  voice :  "  if  you  feel  as  if — to  use  your  own  words 
— you  could  *  grow  to  my  heart,'  it  will  be  neither  shock  nor 
pain  for  you  to  know  that  that  heart  is  the  source  whence  yours 
was  filled:  that  from  my  veins  issued  the  tide  which  flows  in 
yours;  that  you  are  mine — ^my  daughter — ^my  own  child." 

"MrsPryor 1'' 

"My  own  child  I" 

"  That  is — ^that  means — ^you  have  adopted  me  ?" 

"  It  means  that,  if  I  have  given  you  nothing  else,  I  at  least 

gave  yon  life  ;  that  I  bore  you — nursed  you  ;  that  I  am  your 

true  mother:  no  other  woman  can  claim  the  title — it  is  mine.** 

'*  But  Mrs  James  Helstone — ^but  my  father's  wife  whom  I 

do  not  remember  ever  to  have  seen,  she  is  my  mother  ?" 

"She  is  your  mother:  James  Helstone  Was  my  husband. 
I  say  you  are  mine.  I  have  proved  it.  I  thought  perhaps 
you  were  all  his,  which  would  have  been  a  cruel  dispensation 
for  me:  I  find  it  is  not  so.  God  permitted  me  to  be  the  parent 
of  my  child's  mind :  it  belongs  to  me :  it  is  my  property — 
my  right.  These  features  are  James's  own.  He  had  a  fine 
&ce  when  he  was  young,  and  not  altered  by  error.  Papa,  my 
darling,  gave  you  your  blue  eyes  and  soft  brown  hair:  he 
gave  you  the  oval  of  your  face  and  the  regularity  of  your 
lineaments:  the  outside  he  conferred;  but  the  heart  and  the 
brain  are  mine:  the  germs  are  from  me,  and  they  are  improved, 
they  are  developed  to  excellence.  I  esteem  and  approve  my 
child  as  highly  as  I  do  most  fondly  love  her." 
" Is  what  I  hear  true ?  Is  it  no  drea^ ?" 
"  I  wish  it  were  as  true  that  the  substance  and  colour  of 
health  were  restored  to  your  cheek." 

"  My  own  mother  I  is  she  one  I  can  be  so  fond  of  as  I  can 
of  you  ?  People  generally  did  not  like  her,  so  I  have  been 
given  to  understand." 

"  They  told  you  that  ?  Well,  your  mother  now  tells  you, 
that,  not  having  the  gifl  to  please  people  generally,  for  their 
approbation  she  does  not  care :  her  thoughts  are  centred  in 
her  child :  does  that  child  welcome  or  reject  her  *i^ 

23 


S54  SUlHlkB7«    . 

^  But  if  yon  are  my  mother,  the  world  is  all  changed  to 
me.     Surely  I  can  live — ^I  should  like  to  recover        ** 

"  You  must  recover.  You  drew  life  and  strength  from  my 
breast  when  you  were  a  tiny,  fair  infant,  over  whose  blue  eyej 
I  used  to  weep,  fearing  I  beSield  in  your  very  beauty  the  sign 
of  qualities  that  had  entered  my  heart  like  iron,  and  perced 
through  my  soul  like  a  sword.  Daughter!  we  have  been  long 
parted:  I  return  now  to  cherish  you  again." 

She  held  her  to  her  bosom :  she  (Sradled  her  in  her  arms: 
she  rocked  her  soMy,  as  if  lulling  a  young  child  to  sleep. 

"  My  mothei^  1     My  own  mother  I" 

The  offspring  nesiled  to  the  parent :  that  parent,  feelmg 
the  endearment  and  hearing  the  appeal,  gatheied  her  closer 
still.  She  covered  her  with  noiseless  kisses:  she  murmnred 
love  over  ter,  like  a  cushat  fostering  its  young. 

There  was  silence  in  the  room  for  a  long  while. 

"  Does  my  uncle  know  ?" 

"  Your  uncle  knows  :  I  told  him  when  I  first  came  to  stay 
with  you  here." 

"  Did  you  recognise  me  when  we  first  met  at  Eieldhead?" 

''How  could  it  be  otherwise?  Mr  and  Miss  Helstone 
being  annoimced,  I  was  prepared  to  see  my  child." 

"  It  was  that  then  which  paoved  you:  I  saw  you  disturbed." 

**  You  saw,  nothing,  Caroline,  I  can  cover  my  feelings. 
You  can  never  tell  what  an  age  of  strange  sensation  I  lived, 
during  the  two  minutes  that  elapsed  between  the  report  of 
your  name  and  your  entrance.  YoiX  can  never  teU  how  your 
look,  mien,  carriage,  shook  me." 

"  Why  ?     Were  you  disappointed  ?  " 

''  What  will  she  be  like  ?  I  had  asked  mylelf ;  and  wbeo 
I  saw  what  you  were  like,  I  could  have  dropped." 

"  Mamma,  why  ?" 

''I  trembled  in  your  presence.  I  said  I  will  never  own 
her;  she  shall  never  know  me." 

^  But  I  said  and  did  nothing  remarkable.  I  felt  a  littlp 
difi^dent  at  the  thought  of  an  introduction  to  strangers,  ihit 
was  all." 

t  "I  soon  saw  you  were  diffident;  that  was  the  first  thing 
which  re-assured  me :  had  you  been  rustic,  clownish,  awkward, 
I  should  have  been  content." 

**You  pnzzle  me." 

**  I  had  reason  to  dread  a  fair  outside,  to  mistniat  a  pqpolir 


VALLBT  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DKATH.         355 

bearing,  to  shudder  before  distmction,  grace,  and  courtesy. 
Beauty  and  affability  had  come  in  my  way  when  I  was  recluse, 
desolate,  young,  and  ignorant:  a  toil-worn  governess  perishing 
of  uncheered  labour,  breaking  down  before  her  time.  These, 
Caroline,  when  they  smiled  on  me,  I  mistook  for  angels !  I 
followed  them  home,  and  when  into  their  hands  I  had  given 
without  reserve  my  whole  ohance  of  future  happiness,  it  was 
my  lot  to  witness  a  transfiguration  on  the  domestic  hearth :  to 
see  the  white  mask  lifled,  the  bright  disguise  put  away,  and 

opposite  me  sat  down oh  God  I    I  Aave  suffered !" 

^e  sank  on  the  pillow. 

''I  have  suffered!  None  saw — ^none  knew:  there  was  no 
sympathy — ^no  redemption — ^no  redress ! " 
"  Take  comfort,  mother:  it  is  over  now." 
''  It  is  over,  and  not  fruitlessly.  I  tried  to  keep  the  word  oi 
His  patience:  He  kept  me  in  the  days  of  my  anguish.  I  was 
afraid  -with  terror — ^I  was  troubled :  through  great  tribulation 
He  brought  me  through  to  a  salvation  revealed  in  this  last 
time.    My  fear  had  torment — He  has  cast  it  out :  He  has  given 

me  in  its  stead  perfect  love.     .     .     .     But,  Caroline " 

Thus  she  invoked  her  daughter  after  a  pause. 
"Mother!" 

"  I  charge  you,  when  you  next  look  on  your  father's  monu- 
ment, to  respect  the  name  chiselled  there.  To  you  he  did  only 
good.  On  you  he  conferred  his  whole  treasure  of  beauties ; 
nor  added  to  them  one  dark  defect.  All  you  derived  from  him 
is  excellent.  You  owe  him  gratitude.  Leave,  between  him 
and  me,  the  settlement  of  our  mutual  account:  meddle  not: 
God  is  the  arbiter.  This  world's  laws  never  came  near  us — 
never  I  They  were  powerless  as  a  rotten  bulrush  to  protect 
me ! — impotent  as  idiot  babblings  to  restrain  him !  As  you 
said,  it  is  all  over  now:  the  grave  lies  between  us.  There  he 
sleeps — in  that  church !  To  his  dust  I  say  this  night,  what 
I  have  never  said  before,  '  James,  slumber  peacefully !  See  I 
your  terrible  debt  is  cancelled  1  Look  I  I  wipe  out  the  long, 
black  account  with  my  own  hand  I  James,  your  child  atones: 
this  living  likeness  of  you — this  thing  with  your  perfect 
features — this  one  good  gift  you  gave  me  has  nestled  affec- 
tionately to  my  heart,  and  tenderly  called  me  "•mother." 
Husband!  rest  forgiven!'" 

"Dearest  mother,  that  is  right!    Can  papa's  spirit  hear 
us  ?    Is  he  comforted  to  know  that  we  still  love  him  V  " 
*'  I  said  Dothixig  of  love:  I  spoke  of  fori^veness.    Mind  the 


356  8HIIILET. 

fi-iith,  child — I  said  notliing  of  love  I  On  fte  threahoU  of 
d:emity,  should  he  be  there  to  see  me  enter,  will  I  maintain 
that." 

"  Oh,  mother  1  you  must  have  suffered !  *' 

"  Oh,  child  I  the  human  heart  cafi  suffer.  It  can  hold  more 
tears  than  the  ocean  holds  waters.  We  never  know  hew  deq) 
— how  wide  it  is,  till  misery  begins  to  unbind  her  clouds,  and 
fill  it  with  rushing  blackness." 

"  Mother,  forget." 

"  Forget  I  y  she  said,  with  the  sti'angest  spectre  of  a  laugh. 
"  Thfi  north  pole  will,  rush  to  the  south,  and  the  headlands  of 
[Europe  be  locked  into  the  bays  of  Australia  ere  I  forget." 

"  Hush,  mother  I  rest ! — be  at  peace  I " 

And  the  child  lulled  the  parent,  as  the  parent  had  erst  lulled 
the  child.  At  last  Mrs  Pryor  wept:  she  then  grew  calmer. 
She  resumed  those  tender  cares  agitation  had  for  a  moment 
suspended.  Replacing  her  daughter  on  the  couch,  she  smoodied 
the  pillow  and  spread  the  sheet.  The  soft  hair  whose  locks 
were  loosened,  she  rearranged,  the  damp  brow  she  refreshed 
with  a  cool,  fragrant  essence. 

"  Mamma,  let  them  Bring  a  candle,  that  I  may  see  you;  and 
tell  my  uncle  to  come  into  this  room  by-and-by:  I  want  to 
hear  him  say  that  I  am  your  daughter:  and,  mamma,  take 
your  supper  here  ;  don't  leave  me  for  one  minute  to-night." 

"Oh,  Caroline !  it  is  well  you  are  gentle.  You  will  say  to 
me  go,  and  I  shall  go ;  come,  and  I  shall  come ;  do  this,  and  I 
shall  do  it.  You  inherit  a  certain  manner  as  well  as  certain 
features.  It  will  be  always  *  mamma'  prefacing  a  mandate: 
softly  spoken  though  from  you,  thank  GbodI  Well"  (she 
added,  imder  her  breath),  "  he  spoke  softly  too,  once, — like  a 
flute  breathing  tenderness ;  and  then,  when  the  world  was  not 
by  to  listen,  discords  that  split  the  nerves  and  curdled  the 
blood — sounds  to  inspire  insanity." 

"  It  seem^so  natural,  mamma,  to  ask  you  for  this  and  that, 
I  shall  want  nobody  but  you  to  be  near  me,  or  to  do  anythinj^ 
for  me ;  but  do  not  let  me  be  troublesome :  check  me,  if  I 
encroach/" 

"  You  must  not  depend  on  me  to  check  you:  you  must  keep 
guard  over  yourself.  I  have  little  moral  courage :  the  want  of 
it  is  my  bane.  It  is  that  which  has  made  me  an  unnatural 
parent — which  has  kept  me  apart  from  my  child  during  the 
ten  years  which  have  elapsed  since  my  husband's  death  lefk 
me  at  liberty  to  claim  her :  it  was  that  which*  first  unnerved 


TALLET  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DXATE.         35t 

ny  arms  and  permitted  the  infant  I  might  have  retained  a 
rnile  longer,  to  be  snatched  prematurely  from  their  embrace." 

*'  HoWy  mamma  ?  " 

'*  I  let  you  go  as  a  babe,  because  you  were  pretty,  and  I 
eared  your  loveliness ;  deeming  it  the  stamp  of  perversity. 
rhey  sent  me  your  portrait,  taken  at  eight  years  old;  that 
xntrait  confirmed  my  fears.  Had  it  shown  me  a  sunburnt 
ittle  rustic — a  heavy,  blimt-featured,  commonplace  child — ^I 
ihould  have  hastened  to  claim  you;  but  there,  under  the  silver 
paper,  I  saw  blooming  the  delicacy  of  an  aristocratic  flower 
—•little  lady '  was  written  on  every  trait.  I  had  too  recently 
crawled  from,  imder  the  yoke  of  the  fine  gentleman— escaped, 
^lled,  crushed,  paralyzed,  dying — ^to  dare  to  encounter  his 
still  finer  and  most  fairy-like  representative.  My  sweet  little 
lady  overwhelmed  me  with  dismay:  her  air  of  native  elegance 
finoze  my  very  marrow.  In  my  experience  I  had  not  met  with 
truth,  modesty,  good  principle  as  £be  concomitants  of  beauty. 
A  form  so  straight  and  fine,  I  argued,  must  conceal  a  mind 
warped  and  crud.  I  had  littJe  faiSi  in  the  power  of  education 
to  rectify  such  a  mind  ;  or  rather,  I  entirely  misdoubted  my 
own  ability  to  influence  it.  Caroline,  I  dared  not  undertake 
to  rear  you :  I  resolved  to  leave  you  in  your  nucleus  hands. 
MatthewBon  Helstone  I  knew,  if  an  austere,  was  an  upright 
num.  He  and  all  the  world  thought  hardly  of  me  for  my 
strange,  unmotherly  resolve,  and  I  deserved  to  be  misjudged." 

"  Mamma,  why  did  you  call  yourself  Mrs  Pryor  ?" 

'^  It  was  a  name  in  my  mother's  family.  I  adopted  it  that 
I  might  live  immolested.  My  married  name  recalled  too 
vividly  my  married  life :  I  could  not  bear  it.  Besides,  threats 
were  uttered  of  forcing  me  to  return  to  bondage :  it  could  not 
be ;  rather  a  bier  for  a  bed — the  grave  for  a  home.  My  new 
name  sheltered  me :  I  resumed  under  its  screen  my  old  occu- 
pation of  teaching.  At  flrst,  it  scarcely  procured  me  the 
means  of  sustaining  life ;  but  how  savoury  was  hunger  when 
I  fasted  in  peace !  How  safe  seemed  the  darkness  and  chill 
of  an  unkindled  hearth,  when  no  lurid  reflection  from  terror 
crimsoned  its  desolation!  How  serene  was  solitude,  when  I 
feared  not  the  irruption  of  violence  and  vice !" 

"  But,  mamma,  you  have  been  in  this  neighbourhood  before. 
How  did  it  happen,  that  when  you  re-appeared  here  with  Miss 
Eeeldar,  you  were  not  recognised  ?  ** 

"I  only  paid  a  short  visit,  as  a  bride,  twenty  years  ago; 
and  then  I  was  very  diflerent  to  what  I  am  now — slendeTi 


858  SHIBLS7* 

almost  as  slender  as  my  daugHter  is  at  this  day :  my  com- 
plexion— ^my  very  features  are  changed ;  my  hair,  my  style 
of  dress— -everything  is  altered.  You  cannot  fancy  me  a  slim 
young  person,  attired  in  scanty  drapery  of  white  muslin,  with 
bare  arms,  bracelets  and  necldace  of  beads,  and  hair  disposed 
in  round  Grecian  curls  above  my  forehead  ?  " 

"  You  must,  indeed,  have  been  different.  Mamma,  I  heard 
tho  front  door  open:  if  it  is  my  uncle  coming  in,  just  ask  him 
to  step  up-stairs,  and  let  me  hear  his  assurance  that  I  am 
truly  awake  and  collected,  and  not  dreaming  or  delirious.*' 

The  £ector,  of  his  own  accord,  was  mounting  the  stairs; 
and  Mrs  Pryor  summoned  him  to  his  niece's  apartment. 

"  She 's  not  worse,  I  hope  ?"  he  inquired  hastily. 

"  I  think  her  better ;  she  is  disposed  to  converse — ^ 
seems  stronger." 

"  Good ! "  said  he,  brushing  quickly  into  the  room.  *'  Ha, 
Gary !  how  do  ?  Did  you  dnnk  my  cup  of  tea  ?  I  made  it 
for  you  just  as  I  like  it  myself." 

^'  I  drank  it  every  drop,  imcle:  it  did  me  good— it  hasmadfi 
me  quite  alive.  I  have  a  wish  for  company,  so  I  b^ged  Mrs 
Pryor  to  caU  you  in." 

The  respected  ecclesiastic  looked  pleased,  and  yet  embar- 
rassed. He  was  willin?  enous^h  to  bestow  his  company  on  hs 
sick  Diece  for  ten  minutes,  since  it  was  her  whim  to  ^0.  it ; 
but  what  means  to  employ  for  her  entertainment,  he  knew 
not :  he  hemmed — ^he  fidgeted. 

"  You  '11  be  up  in  a  trice,"  he  observed,  by  way  of  sayinz 
something.  "The  little  weakness  will  soon  pass  off;  and 
then  you  must  drink  port-wine— a  pipe,  if  you  can— and  eat 
game  and  oysters :  I  '11  get  them  for  you,  if  they  axe  to  be 
had  anywhere.  Bless  me!  we'll  make  you  as  stroi:^  as 
Samson  before  we  Ve  done  with  you." 

^'  Who  is  that  lady,  uncle,  standing  beside  you  at  the  bed* 
foot?" 

^'Grood  God!*^  he  ejaculated*  *' She's  not  wanderiog— 15 
she,  ma'am?" 

Mrs  Pryor  smiled. 

"  I  am  wandering  in  a  pleasant  world,"  said  Caroline,  in  a 
soft,  happy  voice,  "  and  I  want  you  to  tell  me  whether  it  u 
real  or  visionary.  What  lady  is  that?  Give  her  a  name,  uncle?** 

"We  must  have  Dr  Hile  again,  ma'am,  or  betbsr  still, 
MacTurk  2  he 's  less  of  a  humbug.  Thomas  must  saddle  the 
x>nyy  and  go  for  him." 


VALLEY  OF  THE  SHADOW.  OF  DEATH.         S59 

^'No:  I  don't  want  a  doctor;  mamma  shall  be  my  gdIj 
physician.     Now,  do  you  understand,  uncle  ?" 

Mr  Helstone  pushed  up  his  spectacles  from  his  nose  to  his 

forehead,  handled  hi^  snuff-box,  and  administered  to  himself 

a  portion  of  the  contents.   Thus  fortified,  he  answered  briefly :— • 

"  I  see  daylight.     You  Ve  told  her  then,  ma'am  ?  " 

'^  And  is  it  trueV^  demanded  Caroline,  rising  on  her  pillow. 

*^  Is  she  reaUy  my  mother  ?" 

''  Ton  won't  cry,  or  make  any  scene,  or  imm  hysterical,  if 
I  answer  Yes?" 

"  Cry  ?  I  'd  cry  if  you  said  No.  It  would  be  terrible  to 
be  disappointed  now.  But  give  her  a  name:  how  do  you 
caUher?" 

''  I  call  this  stout  lady  in  a  quaint  black  dress,  who  looks 
young  enough  to  wear  much  smarter  raiment,  ii'  she  would— 
I  call  her  Agnes  Helstone:  she  married  my  brother  James, 
and  is  his  widow." 
"  And  my  mother  ?" 

"  What  a  little  sceptic  it  is  I  Look  at  her  small  face,  Mrs 
Pryor,  scarcely  larger  than  the  pabn  of  my  hand,  aHve  with 
acuteness  and  eagerness."  (To  Caroline). — "  She  had  the 
trouble  of  bringing  you  into  the  world  at  any  rate :  mind  you 
show  your  duty  to  her  by  quickly  getting  well,  and  repairing 
the  waste  of  these  cheeks.  Heigho  I  she  used  to  be  plump: 
what  fi(he  has  done  with  it  all,  I  can't,  for  the  life  of  me, 
divine." 

"  If  wishing  to  get  well  wiU  help  me,  I  shall  not  be  long 
sick.  This  morning,  I  had  no  reason  and  no  strength  to 
wish  it." 

Fanny  here  tapped  at  the  door,  and  said  that  supper  was 
ready. 

^^Uncle,  if  you  please,  you  may  send  me  a  little  bit  of 
rapper — ^anything  you  like,  from  your  own  plate.  That  is 
wiser  than  going  into  hysterics, — ^is  it  not?" 

^^It  is  spoken  like  a  sage,  Cary:  see  if  I  don't  cater  for 
yon  judiciously.  When  women  are  sensible — and,  abpve  all, 
intelligible— I  can  get  on  with  them.  It  is  only  the  vague, 
iuperfine  sensations,  and  extremely  wire-drawn  notions,  that 
pat  me  about.  Let  a  woman  ask  me  to  give  her  an  edible  or 
a  wearable*-be  the  same  a  roc's  egg  or  the  breastplate  of 
Aaron,  a  share  of  St  John's  locusts  and  honey  or  the  leathern 
giidle  about  his  loins-— I  can,  at  least,  understand  the  demand: 
bot  when  thej  pine  for  tibey  know  not  what— «ympathy-^ 


960  SHIBLEY. 

sentiment — some  of  these  indefinite  abstractions — I  canH  do  H: 
I  don't  know  it ;  I  haven't  got  it.     Madam,  accept  my  arm." 

Mrs  Pryor  signified  that  she  should  stay  -with  her  dangbter 
that  evening.  Helstone,  accordingly,  left  them  together.  He 
soon  returned,  bringing  a  plate  in  his  own  consecrated  hand. 

"  This  is  chicken,"  he  said ;  "  but  we  '11  have  partridge  to- 
morrow. Lift  her  up,  and  put  a  shawl  over  her.  Oa  mj 
word,  I  understand  nursing.  Now,  here  is  the  very  same 
little  silver  fork  you  used  when  you  first  came  to  the  Bectorj: 
that  strikes  me  as  being  what  you  may  call  a  happy  thou^t 
— ^a  delicate  attention.  Take  it,  Gary,  and  munch  away 
cleverly." 

Caroline  did  her  best.  Her  uncle  frowned  to  see  that  her 
powers  were  so  limited :  he  prophesied,  however,  great  things 
for  the  future ;  and  as  she  praised  the  morsel  he  had  brought, 
and  smiled  gratefully  in  "Lis  face,  he  stooped  over  her  pillow, 
kissed  her,  and  said,  with  a  broken,  rugged  accent, — 

"  Good-night,  baimie!     God  bless  thee  1" 

Caroline  enjoyed  such  peaceful  rest  that  night,  circled  by 
her  mother's  arms,  and  pillowed  on  her  breast,  that  she  foigot 
to  wish  for  any  other  stay ;  and  though  more  than  one  fevenish 
dream  came  to  her  in  slumber,  yet,  when  she  woke  up  pant- 
ing,  80  happy  and  contented  a  feeH^  »t»nied  ^th  reto% 
consciousness,  that  her  agitation  was  soothed  almost  fu  soon 
as  felt. 

As  to  the  mother,  she  spent  the  night  like  Jacob  at  PenieL 
Till  break  of  day,  she  wrestled  with  God  in  earnest  prayer. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

THE  WEST  WIKD  BLOWS. 


Not  always  do  those  who  dare  such  divine  conflict  prevail 
Night  after  night  the  sweat  of  agony  may  burst  dark  on  the 
forehead ;  the  supplicant  may  cry  for  mercy  with  that  sound- 
less voice  the  soul  utters  when  its  appeal  is  to  the  Invinble. 
"  Spare  my  beloved,"  it  may  implore;  "  Heal  my  life's  life. 
Bend  not  from  me  what  long  afiection  entwines  with  mj 
whole  nature.  God  of  heaven — ^bend — hear — be  clement!" 
And  .after  this  cry  and  strife,  the  sun  may  rise  and  see  him 
irorsted.     That  opening  mom,  which  used  to  salute  him  with 


THB  WEST  WIND  BLOWS.  «  361 

tlie  whisper  of  zephyrs,  the  carol  of  skylarks,  may  breathe,  as 
its  first  accents,  from  the  dear  Hps  which  colour  and  heat  have 
quitted, 

"  Oh !  I  have  had  a  suffering  night.  •  This  morning  I  am 
worse.  I  have  tried  to  rise.  I  cannot.  Dreams  I  am  unused 
to  have  troubled  me." 

Then  the  watcher  approaches  the  patient's  |)illow,  and  sees 
a  new  and  strange  moulding  of  the  familiar  features,  feels  at 
once  that  the  insufferable  moment  draws  nigh,  knows  that  it 
is  Grod's  will  his  idol  shall  be  broken,  and  bends  his  head,  and 
subdues  his  soul  to  the  sentence  he  cannot  a7«rt,  and  scarce 
can  bear. 

Happy  Mrs  Pryorl  She  was  still  praying,  unconscious 
that  die  summer  sun  himg  above  the  hills,  when  her  child 
softly  woke  in  her  arms.  No  piteous,  unconscious  moaning 
— sound  which  so  wastes  our  strength  that,  even  if  we  have 
sworn  to  be  firm,  a  rush  of  unconquerable  tears  sweeps  away 
the  oath — preceded  he>r  waking.  No  space  of  deaf  apathy 
followed.  The  "  first  words  spoken  were  not  those  of  one 
becoming  estranged  from  this  w^orld,  and  already  permitted  to 
stray  at  times  into  realms  foreign  to  the  living.  Caroline 
evidently  remembered  with  clearness  what  had  happened. 

<<  Mamma,  I  have  slept  so  well.  I  only  dreamed  and  woke 
twice." 

Mrsf  Piyor  rose  with  a  start,  that  her  daughter  might  not 
Bee  the  joyfiil  tears  called  into  her  eyes  by  that  affectionate 
word  ''  mamma,"  and  the  welcome  assurance  that  followed  it. 
For  many  days  the  mother  dared  rejoice  only  with  trem- 
bling. That  first  revival  seemed  like  tiie  flicker  of  a  dying 
lamp :  if  the  fiame  streamed  up  bright  one  moment,  the  next 
it  sank  dim  in  the  socket.  Exhaustion  followed  close  on 
excitement. 

There  was  always  a  touching  endeavour  to  appear  better, 
bat  too  often  ability  refiised  to  second  will;  too  often  the 
attempt  to  bear  up  failed:  the  effort  to  eat,  to  talk,  to  look 
cheerful,  was  unsuccessful.  Many  an  hour  passed,  during 
which  Mrs  Pryor  feared  that  the  chords  of  life  could  never 
more  be  strengthened,  though  the  time  of  their  breaking  might 
be  deferred. 

During  this  space  the  mother  and  daughter  seemed  left 
almost  ^one  in  the  neighbourhood.  It  was  the  close  of 
August:  the  weather  was  fine — ^that  is  to  say,  it  was  very  dry 
uid  very  dusfy,  for  an  .arid  wind  bad  been  blowing  from  the 


862  SHIBLE7. 

east  lihis  month  past:  yery  clondless,  too,  though  a  pale  hxK^ 
stationary  in  the  atmosphere,  seemed  to  rob  of  all  depth  of 
tone  the  blue  of  heaven,  of  all  freshness  the  verdure  of  earth, 
and  of  all  glow  the  light  of  day.  Almost  every  famify  in 
Briarfield  was  absent  on  an  excursion.  ISiiss  Keeldar  and  hat 
friends  were  at  the  sea-side;  so  were  Mrs  Yorkers  household. 
Mr  Hall  and  Louis  Moore,  between  whom  a  spontaneouB 
intimacy  seemed  to  have  arisen,  the  result,  probably,  of 
harmony  of  views  and  temperament,  were  gone  "  up  north" 
on  a  pedestrian  excursion  to  the  Lakes.  Even  Hort^ise,  who 
would  fain  have  stayed  at  home  and  aided  Mrs  Pryor  in  nursing 
Caroline,  had  been  so  earnestly  entreated  by  Miss  Mann  to 
accompany  her  once  more  to  Wormwood  Wells,  in  the  hope 
of  alleviatiDg  sufferings  greatly  aggravated  by  the  insalu- 
brious weather,  that  she  felt  obliged  to  comply;  indeed,  it 
was  not  in  her  nature  to  refuse  a  request  that  at  once  appealed 
to  her  goodness  of  heart,  and — by  a  confession  of  depen- 
dency— ^flattered  her  amour-propre.  As  for  Robert,  finom 
Birmingham  he  had  gone  on  to  London,  where  he  still 
sojourned. 

So  long  as  the  breath  of  Asiatic  deserts  parched  Caroline's 
lips  and  fevered  her  veins,  her  physical  convalescence  could 
not  keep  pace  with  her  returning  mental  tranquillity:  but 
there  came  a  day  when  the  wind  ceased  to  sob  at  the  eastern 
gable  of  the  Rectory,  and  at  the  oriel  window  of  the  church 
A  little  cloud  like  a  man's  hand  arose  in  the  west:  gusts  fiom 
the  same  quarter  drove  it  on  and  spread  it  wide;  wet  and 
tempest  prevailed  a  while.  When  that  was  over  the  sun 
broke  out  genially,  heaven  regained  its  azure,  and  earth  its 
green :  the  livid  cholera-tint  had  vanished  from  the  face  ot 
nature:  the  hills  rose  clear  round  the  horizon,  abflohred  from 
that  pale  malaria-haze. 

Caroline's  youth  could  now  be  of  some  avail  to  her,  and  so 
could  her  mother's  nurture:  both — crowned  by  God's  blessisg, 
sent  in  the  pure  west  wind  blowing  soft  as  fresh  through  the 
ever-open  chamber  lattice — rekindled  her  long-langmshing 
energies.  At  last  Mrs  Pryor  saw  that  it  was  permitted  to 
hope — a  genuine,  material  convalescence  had  commenced.  It 
was  not  merely  Caroline's  smile  which  was  brighter,  or  her 
spirits  which  were  cheered,  but  a  certain  look  had  passed  from 
her  face  and  eye — a  look  dread  and  indescribable,  but  which 
will  easily  be  recalled  by  those  who  have  watched  the  couch 
of  dangerous  disease.    Long  before  the  emaciated  outlines  of 


THE  WEST  WIND  BLOWS.  868 

her  aspect  began  to  fill,  or  its  departed  colour,  to  return^  a 
more  subtle  change  took  placer  all  grew  softer  and  warmer. 
Instead  of  a  marble  mask  and  glassy  eye,  Mrs  Pryor  saw  laid 
on  the  pillow  a  face  pale  and  wasted  enough,,  perhaps  more 
haggard  than  the  other  appearance,  but  less  awM ;  for  it  was 
a  sick,  living  girl — ^not  a  mere  white  mould,  or  rigid  piece  of 
statuaiy. 

Now,  too,  she  was  not  always  petitioning  to  drink.  The 
words  '^  I  am  so  thirsty,"  ceased  to  be  her  plaint.  Sometimes, 
when  slie  had  swallowed  a  morsel,  she  would  say  it  had 
revived  her:  all  descriptions  of  food  were  no  longer  equally 
distasteftd;  she  could  be  induced,  sometimes,  to  indicate  a 
preference.  With  what  trembling  pleasure  and  anxious  care 
did  not  her  nurse  prepare  what  was  selected!  How  she 
watched  her  as  she  partook  of  it !  • 

Nourishment  brought  strength.  She  could  sit  up.  Then 
she  longed  to  breathe  the  fresh  air,  to  revisit  her  flowers,  to 
see  how  the  fruit  had  ripened.  Her  uncle,  always  liberal, 
had  bought  a  garden-chair  for  her  express  use :  he  carried 
her  down  in  his  own  arms,  and  placed  her  in  it  himself,  and 
William  Farren  was  there  to  wheel  her  round  the  walks,  to 
show  her  what  he  had  done  amongst  her  plants,  to  take  her 
directions  for  fiirther  work. 

•  William  and  she  fotmd  plenty  to  talk  about:  they  had  a 
dozen  topics  in  common;  interesting  to  them,  unimportant  to 
the  rest  of  the  world.  They  took  a  similar  interest  in  animals, 
birds,  insects,  and  plants  :  they  held  similar  doctrines  about 
humanity  to  the  lower  creation ;  and  had  a  similar  turn  for 
minute  observation  on  points  of  natural  history.  The  nest  and 
proceedings  of  some  groxmd-bees,  which  had  burrowed  in  the 
turf  under  an  old  cherry-tree,  was  one  subject  of  interest:  the 
haunts  of  certain  hedge-sparrows,  and  the  welfare  of  certain 
pearly  ^gs  and  callow  fledglings,  another. 

Had  ^*  Chambers's  Journal "  existed  in  those  days,  it  would 
certainly  have  formed  Miss  Helstone's  and  Farren^s  favourite 
periodical.  She  would  have  subscribed  for  it ;  and  to  him 
each  number  would  duly  have  been  lent :  both  woidd  have 
put  implicit  &ith,  and  found  great  savour  in  its  marvellous 
anecdotes  of  animal  sagacity. 

This  is  a  digression;  but  it  suffices  to  explain  why  Caro- 
line would  have  no  other  hand  than  William's  to  guide  her 
chair,  and  why  his  society  and  conversation  sufficed  to  give 
interest  to  her  garden-airings. 


S64  SEIRLBT. 

Mrs  PrjOT,  walking  near,  wondered  liow  Her  daugbter  coqU 
be  80  much  at  ease  with  a  '/  man  of  the  people/*  She  ioxnA 
it  impossible  to  speak  to  him  otherwise  than  stifOly.  She  felt 
as  if  a  great  gulf  lay  between  her  caste  and  his ;  and  that  to 
cross  it,  or  meet  him  half-way,  would  be  to  degrade  herself. 
She  gently  a'sked  Caroline — 

"  Are  you  not  afraid,  my  deai',  to  converse  with  that  per- 
son so  unreservedly  ?  He  may  presume,  and  become  trofuble- 
somely  garrulous." 

"  William  presimae,  mamma  ?  You  don't  know  him.  He 
nevei^  presumes  :  he  is  altogether  too  proud  and  sensitive  to 
do  so.     William  has  very  fine  feelings." 

And  Mrs  Prior  smiled  sceptically  at  the  naive  notion  of 
that  rough-handed,  rough-headed,  ftistian-clad  clown  having 
"  fine  feelings." 

Farren,  for  his  part,  showed  Mrs  Pryor  only  a  very  sulky 
brow.  He  knew  when  he  was  misjudged,  and  was  apt  to  torn 
unmanageable  with  such  as  failed  to  give  him  his  due. 

The  evening  restored  Caroline  entirely  to  her  mother,  and 
Mrs  Pryor  liked  the  evening ;  for  then,  alone  with  her 
daughter,  no  human  shadow  came  between  her  and  what  she 
loved/  During  the  day,  she  would  have  her  stiff  demeanour 
and  cool  moments,  as  was  her  wont.  Between  her  and  Mr 
Helstone  a  very  respectful  but  most  rigidly  ceremonious  inter- 
course was  kept  up:  anything  like  familiarity  would  have 
bred  contempt  at  once  in  one  or  both  these  personages;  but 
by  dint  of  strict  civility  and  well  maintained  distance,  they 
got  on  very  smoothly. 

Towards  the  servants,  Mrs  Pryor's  bearing  was  not  uneour- 
teous,  but  shy,  freezing,  ungenial.  Perhaps  it  was  diffidence 
rather  than  pride  which  made  her  appear  so  haughty;  but, as 
was  to  be  expected,  Fanny  and  Eliza  failed  to  make  the  dis- 
tinction, and  she  was  unpopular  with  them  accordingly.  She 
felt  the  effect  produced :  it  rendered  her  at  times  dissatisfied 
with  herself  for  faults  she  could  not  lielp;  and  with  all  else, 
dejected,  chill,  and  taciturn. 

This  mood  changed  to  Caroline's  influence,  and  to  that 
influence  alone.  The  dependent  fondness  of  her  nursling,  the 
natural  affection  of  her  child,  came  over  her  suavely:  her 
frost  fell  away ;  her  rigidity  imbent :  she  grew  smiling  and 
pliant.  Not.  that  Caroline  made  any  wordy,  profession  of  lore 
—that  would  ill  have  suited  Mrs  Frjor:  she  would  have  read 
therein  the  proof  of  insincerity ;  but  she  bung  on  her  with 


THB  WEST  WIND  BLOWS.  365 

easy  dependence ;  she  confided  in  her  mth  fearless  reliance: 
these  things  contented  the  mother's  heart. 

She  liked  to  hear  her  daughter  say  ^'Mamml,  do  this.** 
'* Please,  mamma,  fetch  me  that."  "Mamma,  read  to  me." 
"  Sing  a  little,  mamma.** 

Nobody  else — ^not  one  living  thing — ^had  ever  so  claimed 
her  services,  so  looked  for  help  at  her  hand.  Other  people 
were  always  more  or  less  reserved  and  stiff  with  her,  as  she 
was  reserved  and  stiff  with  them ;  other  people  betrayed  con- 
scioiisness  of,  and  annoyance  at  her  weak  points :  Caroline  no 
more  showed  such  wounding  sagacity  or  reproachful  sensi- 
tiveness now,  than  she  had  done  when  a  suckling  of  three 
months  old. 

Yet  Caroline  could  find  fault.  Blind  to  the  constitutional 
defects  that  were  incurable,  she  had  her  eyes  wide  open  to  the 
acquired  habits  that  were  susceptible  of  remedy.  On  certain 
points  she  would  quite  artlessly  lecture  her  parent ;  and  that 
parent,  instead  of  being  hurt,  felt  a  sensation  of  pleasure  in 
discovering  that  the  girl  dared  lecture  her;  that  she  was  so 
much  at  home  with  her. 

'^  Mamma,  I  ^m  determined  you  shall  not  wear  that  old 
gown  any  more;  its  fashion  is  not  becoming :  it  is  too  strait 
in  the  skirt.  Yoil  shall  put  on  your  black  silk  every  after- 
noon ;  in  that  you  look  nice :  it  suits  you ;  and  you  shall 
have  a  black  satin  dress  for  Sundays — ^a  real  satin — ^not  a 
satinet  or  any  of  the  shams.  And,  mamma,  when  you  get 
the  new  one,  mind  you  must  wear  it." 

*'  My  dear,  I  thought  of  the  black  silk  serving  me  as  a  best 
dress  for  many  years  yet,  and  I  wished  to  buy  you  several 
things." 

"Nonsense,  mamma:  my  uncle  gives  me  cash  to  get  what 
I  want:  you  know  he  is  generous  enough;  and  I  have  set  my 
heart  on  seeing  you  in  a  black  satin.  Get  it  soon,  and  let  it 
he  made  by  a  dressmaker  of  my  recommending ;  let  me  choose 
the  pattern.  You  always  want  to  disguise  yourself  like  a 
grandmother:  you  would  persuade  one  that  you  are  old  and 
ugly, — ^not  at  all  I  On  the  contrary,  when  well  dressed  and 
cheerful,  you  are  very  comely  indeed.  Your  smile  is  so 
pleasant,  your  teeth  are  so  white,  your  hair  is  still  such  a 
pretty  light  colour.  And  then  you  speak  like  a  young  lady, 
with  subh  a  clear,  fine  tone,  and  you  sing  better  than  any 
young  lady  I  ever  heard.  Why  do  you  wear  such  dressen 
And  bonnets,  mamma,  such  as  nobody  else  ever  wears  ?  ** 


366  SHiBiJn'. 

'^  Does  it  annoy  you,  Caroline?" 

«  Very  mucli :  it  vexes  me  even.  People  say  yoa  aie 
miserly ;  and  yet  you  are  not,  for  you  give  liberally  to  the 
poor  and  to  religious  societies :  though  your  gifts  are  conveyed 
so  secretly  and  quietly,  that  they  are  known  to  few  except 
the  receivers.  But  I  will  be  your  maid  myself :  when  I  get 
a  little  stronger  I  will  set  to  work,  and  you  must  be  good, 
mamma,  and  do  as  I  bid  you." 

And  Caroline,  sitting  near  her  mother,  re-ananged  her 
muslin  handkerchief,  and  re-smoothed  her  hair. 

''  My  own  mamma,"  then  she  went  on,  as  if  pleasing  henelf 
with  the  thought  of  their  relationship,  '^  who  belongs  to  me, 
and  to  whom  I  belong !  I  am  a  rich  girl  now :  I  have  some- 
thing I  can  love  well,  and  not  be  afraid  of  loving.  Mamma,  who 
gave  you  this  little  brooch  ?    Let  me  unpin  it  and  look  atit."" 

Mrs  Pryor,  who  usually  shrank  from  meddling  fingers  and 
near  approach,  allowed  the  license  complacently. 

"  Did  papa  give  you  this,  mamma  ?" 

"  My  sister  gave  it  me — my  only  sister,  Cary.  Would  that 
your  aunt  Caroline  had  lived  to  see  her  niece ! " 

"  Have  you  nothing  of  papa's  ? — ^no  trinket,  no  gift  of  his  ?" 

"  I  have  one  thing." 

"That  you  prize?" 

"  That  I  prize." 

"  Valuable  and  pretty  ?" 

"  Invaluable  and  sweet  to  me." 

"  Show  it,  mamma.     Is  it  here  or  at  Fieldhead?** 

"It  is  talking  to  me  now,  leaning  on  me:  its  arms  are 
round  me." 

"  Ah,  mamma  1  you  mean  your  teasing  daughter,  who  will 
never  let  you  alone ;  who,  when  you  go  into  your  room,  cannot 
help  running  to  seek  for  you;  who  follows  you  up-stairs  and 
down,  like  a  dog." 

"  Whose  features  still  give  me  such  a  strange  thrill  some- 
times.    I  half  fear  your  fair  looks  yet,  child." 

"  Tou  don't;  you  can't.  Mamma,  I  am  sorry  papa  was  not 
good:  I  do  so  wish  he  had  been.  Wickedness  spoils  and 
poisons  all  pleasant  things :  it  kills  love.  If  you  and  I  thought 
each  other  wicked,  we  could  not  love  each  other,  could  we?" 

"  And  if  we  could  not  trust  each  other,  Cary?" 

"  How  miserable  we  should  be !  Mother,  before  I  knew 
you,  I  had  an  apprehension  that  you  were  not  good,  that  I 
could  not  esteem  you:  that  dread  damped  my  wish  to  see  you; 


OLD  GOFT-BOQKS.  367 

and  now  my  heart  is  elate  beoause  I  find  you  perfect,— 
almost;  kind,  clever,  nice.  Ycmr  sole  fault  is  that  you  are 
old-fashioned,  and  of  that  I  shall  cure  you.  Mamma,  put  your 
work  down:  read  to  me.  I  like  your  southern  accent:  it  is  so 
pure,  80  soft.  It  has  no  rugged  burr,  no  nasal  twang,  such 
as  almost  every  one's  voice  here  in  the  north  has.  My  uncle 
and  Mr  Hall  say  that  you  are  a  fine  reader,  mamma.  Mr 
Hall  said  he  never  heard  sftly  lady  read  with  such  propriety  of 
expression,  or  purity  of  accent." 

''  I  wish  I  could  reoiprocate  the  compliment,  Gary ;  but 
roally,  the  first  time  I  heard  your  truly  excellent  friend  read 
uiid  preach,  I  could  not  understand  his  broad,  northern  tongue." 

'^  Gould  you  understand  me,  mamma  ?  Did  I  seem  to  speak 
roughly?" 

*^  No:  I  almost  wished  you  had,  as  I  wished  you  had  looked 
unpolished.  Tour  father,  Garoline,  naturally  spoke  well ; 
quite  otherwise  than  your  worthy  uncle:  correctly,  gently, 
smoothly.    You  inherit  the  gifl." 

*^  Poor  papa  I  When  he  was  so  agreeable,  why  was  he  not 
good?" 

"  Why,  he  was  as  he  was — and,  happily,  of  that  you,  child, 
can  form  no  conception— I  cannot  teU:  it  is  a  deep  mysteiy. 
The  key  is  in  the  hands  of  his  Maker:  there  I  leave  it." 

"Msunma,  you  will  keep  stitching,  stitching  away:  put 
down  the  sewing ;  I  am  an  enemy  to  it.  It  cumbers  your  lap, 
and  I  want  it  for  my  head:  it  engages  your  eyes,  and  I  want 
them  for  a  book.     Here  is  your  favourite — Cowper." 

These  importunities  were  the  mother's  pleasure..  If  ever 
she  delayed  compliance,  it  was  only  to  hear  them  repeated,  and 
to  enjoy  her  chad's  soft,  half-playfiil,  half-petulant  urgency. 
And  then,  when  she  yielded,  Garoline  would  say,  archly, — 

^^  You  will  spoil  me,  mamma.  I  always  thought  I  should 
like  to  be  spoiled,  and  I  find  it  very  sweet." 

So  did  Mrs.  Pryor. 


CHAPTER   XXVI. 

OLD  COPT-BOOKS. 


Bt  4e  time  the  Fieldhead  party  returned  to  Briarfield,  Garo- 
line was  nearly  well.  Miss  Keeldar,  who  had  received  news 
by  post  of  her  Mend's  convalescence,  hardly  suffered  an  hour 


868  saiBLfiY. 

to  elapse  between  her  arrival  at  home  and  her  first  call  at  the 
Rectory. 

A  shower  of  rain  was  falling  gently,  yet  fast,  on  the  late 
flowers  and  russet  autumn  shrubs,  when  the  garden-wicket 
was  heard  to  swing  open,  and  Shirley's  well-known  form 
passed  the  window.  On  her  entrance,  her  feelings  were 
evinced  in  her  own  peculiar  fashion.  When  deeply  moved, 
by  serious  fears  or  joys,  she  was  not  garrulous.  The  strong 
emotion  was  rarely  suffered  to  influence  her  tongue ;  and  even 
her  eye  refused  it  more  than  a  furtive  and  fitful  conquest 
She  took  Caroline  in  her  arms,  gave  her  one  look,  one  kiss, 
then  said— 

"  You  are  better." 

And  a  minute  afler — "  I  see  you  are  safe  now,  but  tak« 
care.  God  grant  your  health  may  be  called  on  to  sustain  no 
more  shocks ! " 

She  proceeded  to  talk  fluently  about  the  journey.  In  the 
midst  of  vivacious  discourse,  her  eye  still  wandered  to  Caro- 
line :  there  spoke  in  its  light  a  deep  solicitude,  some  trouble, 
and  some  amaze. 

"  She  may  be  better,"  it  said;  "  but  how  weak  she  still  is! 
What  peril  she  has  come  through  ?  " 

Suddenly  her  glance  reverted  to  Mrs  Pryor :  it  pierced  lier 
through. 

"  When  will  my  governess  return  to  me  ?  "  she  asked. 

"  May  I  tell  her  all  ?  "  demanded  Caroline  of  her  motlier 
Leave  being  signified  by  a  gesture,  Shirley  was  presentlj 
enlightened  on  what  had  happened  in  her  absence. 

"  Very  good  1 "  was  the  cool  comment.  "  Very  good  I 
But  it  is  no  news  to  me."  I 

"  What !     Did  you  know  ?  "  I 

'^  I  guessed  long  since  the  whole  business.  I  have  heard 
somewhat  of  Mrs  Pryor's  history — ^not  from  herself,  but  from  j 
others.  With  every  detail  of  Mr  James  Helstone's  career  and 
character  I  was  acquainted :  an  aflernoon's  sitting  and  convcr 
sation  with  Miss  Mann  had  rendered  me  familiar  therewith:  altf 
he  is  one  of  Mrs  Yorke's  warning-examples— one  of  the  blood** 
red  lights  she  hangs  out  to  scare  young  ladies  from  matii" 
mony.  I  believe  I  should  have  been  sceptical  about  the  truik 
of  the  portrait  traced  by  such  fingers — ^both  these  ladies  take  a 
dark  pleasure  in  ofiering  to  view  the  dark  side  of  life — ^butl 
questioned  Mr  Yorke  on  the  subject,  and  he  said — ^  Shirley,, 
my  woman,  if  you  want  to  know  aught  about  yond*  Janwi 


OLD  COPT-BOOKS.  869 

Sdfltone,  I  can  only  say  he  was  a  man-tiger.  .  He  was  hand- 

»ome,  dissolute,  soft,  treacherous,  courteous,  cruel ^    Don't 

cry,  Gary ;  we  *11  say  no  more  about  it." 

"  I  am  not  crying,  Shirley ;  or  if  I  am,  it  is  nothing — go 
on:  you  are  no  friend  if  you  withhold  from  me  the  truth:  I 
hate  that  false  plan  of  disguising,  mutilating  the  truth." 

"Fortunately,  I  have  said  pretty  nearly  all  that  I  have  to 
say,  except  that  your  uncle  himself  confirmed  Mr  Yorke's 
words :  for  he  too  scorns  a  lie,  and  deals  in  none  of  those  con- 
ventional subterfuges  that  are  shabbier  than  lies." 

"  But  papa  is  dead :  they  should  let  him  alone  now." 

"  They  should — ^and  we  tvill  let  him  alone.  Cry  away, 
Gary,  it  will  do  you  good  :  it  is  wrong  to  check  natural  tears ; 
besides,  I  choose  to  please  myself  by  sharing  an  idea  that  at 
this  moment  beams  in  your  mother's  eye  while  she  looks  at 
you:  every  drop  blots  out  a  sin.  Weep — ^your  tears  have  the 
virtue  which  the  rivers  of  Damascus  lacked :  like  Jordan,  they 
can  cleanse  a  leprous  memory." 

"  Madam,"  she  continued,  addressing  Mrs  Pryor,  "  did 
you  think  I  could  be  daily  in  the  habit  of  seeing  you  and 
your  daughter  together — marking  your  marvellous  similarity 
in  many  points— observing,  pardon  me— your  irrepressible 
emotions  in  the  presence  and  still  more  in  the  absence  of  your 
child,  and  not  form  iaj  own  conjectures  ?  I  fonned  them,  and 
they  are  literally  correct.   I  shall  begin  to  think  myself  shrewd." 

"And  you  said  nothing?"  observed  Caroline,  who  soon 
regained  the  quiet  control  of  her  feelings. 

"  Nothing.  I  had  no  warrant  to  breathe  a  word  on  the  sub- 
ject. My  business  it  was  not :  I  abstained  from  making  it  such." 

"  You  guessed  so  deep  a  secret,  and  did  not  hint  that  you 
guessed  it?" 

"  Is  that  so  difficult  ?  " 

"  It  is  not  like  you." 

"  How  do  you  know  ?  " 

"  You  are  not  reserved.     You  are  frankly  communicative." 

"  I  may  be  communicative,  yet  know  where  to  stop.  In 
showing  my  treasure,  I  may  withhold  a  gem  or  two — a  curious 
unbought,  graven  stone — an  amulet,  of  whose  mystic  glitter  I 
rarely  permit  even  myself  a  glimpse.     Good-day." 

Caroline  thus  seemed  to  get  a  view  of  Shirley's  character 
under  a  novel  aspect.  Erelong,  the  prospect  was  renewed :  it 
opened  upon  her. 

No  sooner  had  she  regained  sufficient  strength  to  l)ear  a 

24 


870  SHmucT. 

change  of  scene — ^the  excitement  of  a  little  society — than  2&S 
Keeldar  sued  daily  for  her  presence  at  Fieldhead.  Whether 
Shirley  had  become  wearied  of  her  honoured  relatives  is  not 
known :  she  did  not  say  she  was ;  but  she  claimed  and 
retained  Caroline  with  an  eagerness  which  proved  that  an 
addition  to  that  worshipful  company  was  not  unwelcome. 

The  Sjmpsons  were  Church  people :  of  course,  the  Hector  a 
niece  was  received  by  them  with  courtesy.  Mr  Sympson 
proved  to  be  a  man  of  spotless  respectability,  worrying  temper, 
pious  principles,  and  worldly  views ;  his  lady  was  a  very  good 
woman,  patient,  kind,  well-bred.  She  had  been  brought  up 
on  a  narrow  system  of  views — starved  on  a  few  prejudices  : 
a  mere  handiul  of  bitter  herbs;  a  few  preferences,  soaked  till 
their  natural  flavour  was  extracted,  and  with  no  seasoning 
added  in  the  cooking  ;  some  excellent  prindples,  made  np 
in  a  stiff  raised-crust  of  bigotry,  difficult  to  digest:  &r  too 
submissive  was  she  to  complain  of  this  diet,  or  to  ask  for  a 
crumb  beyond  it. 

The  daughters  were  an  example  to  their  sex.  They  were 
tall,  with  a  Homan  nose  a-piece.  They  had  been  educated 
faultlessly.  All  they  did  was  well  done.  History,  and  the 
most  solid  books,  had  cultivated  their  minds.  Principles  and 
opinions  they  possessed  which  could  not  be  mended.  More 
exactly-regulated  lives,  feelings,  manners,  habits,  it  would 
have  been  difficult  to  find  anywhere.  They  knew  by  heart  a 
certain  young-ladies'-school-room  code  of  laws  on  language^ 
demeanour,  &c. ;  themselves  never  deviated  from  its  curiosi 
little  pragmatical  provisions ;  and  they  regarded  with  secret, 
whispered  horror,  all  deviations  in  others.  The  Abomination 
of  Desolation  was  no  mystery  to  them :  they  had  discovered 
that  unutterable  Thing  in  the  characteristic  others  call  Origin- 
ality. Quick  were  they  to  recognise  the  signs  of  this  evil;  and 
wherever  they  .saw  its  trace — ^whether  in  look,  word,  or  deed; 
whether  they  read  it  in  the  fresh,  vigorous  style  of  a  book, 
or  listened  to  it  in  interesting,  imhackneyed,  pure,  expres* 
sive  language — they  shuddered — ^they  recoiled:  danger  was 
above  their  heads — peril  about  their  steps.  What  was  this 
strange  thing  ?  Being  unintelligible,  it  must  be  bad.  Let  it 
be  denounced  and  chained  up. 

Henry  Sympson — the  only  son,  and  yoimgest  child  of  the 
family — ^was  a  boy  of  fifteen.  He  generally  kept  ilHth  hii 
tutor;  when  he  left  him,  he  sought  his  cousm  Shirley.  This 
boy  differed  from  his  sisters;  ho  was  little,  lame,  and  pale; 


OLD  COFy*BOOKS.  871 

Lis  large  eyes  shone  somewhat  languidly  in  a  wan  orbit:  they 
were,  indeed,  usually  rather  dim-^bnt  they  were  capable  oi 
illumination:  at  times,  they  could  not  only  shine,  but  blaze: 
inward  emotion  could  likemse  give  colour  to  his  cheek  and 
decision  to  his  crippled  movements.  Henry's  mother  loved 
him;  she  thought  his  peculiarities  were  a  mark  of  election: 
he  was  not  like  other  children,  she  allowed ;  she  believed  him 
regenerate — ^a  new  Samuel — called  of  God  from  his  birth:  he 
was  to  be  a  clergyman.  Mr  and  the  Misses  Sympson,  not 
understanding  the  youth,  let  him  much  alone.  Shirley  made 
him  her  pet;  and  he  made  Shirley  his  playmate. 

In  the  midst  of  this  family-circle— or  rather  outside  it- 
moved  the  tutor — ^the  satellite. 

Yes:  Louis  Moore  was  a  satellite  of  the  house  ofSjnnpson: 
connected,  yet  apart;  ever  attendant — ever  distant.  Each 
member  of  th&t  correct  family  treated  him  with  proper  dignity. 
The  father  was  austerely  civil,  sometimes  irritable ;  the  mother, 
being  a  kind  woman,  was  attentive,  but  formal;  tiie  daughters 
saw  in  him  an  abstraction,  not  a  man.  It  seemed,  by  their 
manner,  that  their  brother's  tutor  did  not  live  for  them.  They 
were  learned:  so  was  he— ^but  not  for  them.  They  were 
accomplished  : .  he  had  talents  too,  imperceptible  to^  their 
senses.  The  most  spirited  sketch  from  his  fingers  was  a 
blank  to  their  eyes;  the  most  original  observation  from  his 
lips  fell  unheard  on  their  ears.  Nothing  could  exceed  the 
propriety,  of  their  behaviour. 

I  should  have  said,  nothing  coidd  have  equalled  it ;  but  I 
remember  a  fact  which  strangely  astonished  Caroline  Helstone. 
It  was — ^to  discover  that  her  cousin  had  absolutely  no  sjrmpa- 
thizing  Mend  at  Fieldhead:  that  to  Miss  Keeldar  he  was  as 
mneh  a  mere  teacher,  as  little  a  gentleman,  as  little  a  man,  as 
to  the  estimable  Misses  Sympson. 

What  had  befallen  the  kind-hearted  Shirley  that  she  should 
be  so  indifferent  to  the  dreary  position  of  a  feUow-creature 
thus  isolated  under  her  roof?  She  was  not,  perhaps,  haughty 
to  him,  but  she  never  noticed  him :  she  let  him  alone.  He 
<!ame  and  went,  spoke  or  was  silent,  and  she  rarely  recognised 
jbis  existence. 

As  to  Louis  Moore  himself,  he  had  the  air  of  a  man  used 
to  this  life,  and  who  had  made  up  his  mind  to  bear  it  for  a 
time.  His  Acuities  seemed  waUed  up  in  him,  and  were 
tmmurmuring  in  their  captivity.  He  never  laughed;  he 
«eldom  smiled;  he  was  uncompl^ming.   He  fulfilled  the  round 


372  SHIRLET. 

of  his  duties  scrupulously.  His  pupil  loved  him;  he  asked 
nothing  more  than  civility  from  the  rest  of  the  world.  It 
even  appeared  that  he  would  accept  nothing  more:  in  that 
abode  at  least ;  for  when  his  cousin  Caroline  made  gentle 
overtures  of  friendship,  he  did  not  encourage  them ;  he  rather 
avoided  than  sought  her.  One  living  thing  alone,  besides 
his  pale,  crippled  scholar,  he  fondled  in  the  house,  and  that 
was  the  ruffianly  Tartar;  who,  sullen  and  impracticable  to 
others,  acquired  a  singular  partiality  for  him:  a  partiality  so 
marked  that  sometimes,  when  Moore,  sunmioned  to  a  meal, 
entered  the  room  and  sat  down  imwelcomed,  Tartar  would 
rise  from  his  lair  at  Shirley's  feet,  and  betake  himself  to  the 
taciturn  tutor.  Once — ^but  once — she  noticed  the  desertion; 
and  holding  out  her  white  hand,  and  speaking  softly,  tried  to 
coax  him  back.  Tartar  looked,  slavered,  and  sighed,  as  his 
manner  was,  but  yet  disregarded  the  invitation,  and  cooli^ 
settled  himself  on  his  haunches  at  Louis  Moore's  side.  That 
gentleman  drew  the  dog's  big,  black-muzzled  head  on  to  his 
knee,  patted  him,  and  smiled  one  little  smile  to  himself. 

An  acute  observer  might  have  remarked,  in  the  course  of 
the  same  evening,  that  after  Tartar  had  resumed  his  allegiance 
to  Shirley,  and  was  once  more  couched  near  her  foot-stool,  the 
audacious  tutor  by  one  word  and  gesture  fascinated  him  again. 
He  pricked  up  his  ears  at  the  word ;  he  started  erect  at  the 
gesture,  and  came,  with  head  lovingly  depressed,  to  receive 
the  expected  caress:  as  it  was  given,  the  significant  smik 
again  rippled  across  Moore's  quiet  face. 

"  Shirley,"  said  Caroline  one  day,  as  they  two  were  sitting 
alone  in  the  summer-house,  '^  did  you  know  thftt  my  cousin 
Louis  was  tutor  in  your  uncle's  family  before  the  Sympsons 
came  down  here?" 

Shirley's  reply  was  not  so  prompt  as  her  responses  usnallj 
were,  but  at  last  she  answered, — 

"  Yes, — of  course :  I  knew  it  well." 

"  I  thought  you  must  have  been  aware  of  the  circumstance." 

"WeUI  what  then?" 

'^It  puzzles  me  to  guess  how  it  chanced  that  you  nerer 
mentioned  it  to  me." 

"  Why  should  it  puzzle  you  ?" 

"  It  seems  odd.  I  cannot  account  for  it.  You  talk  a  great 
deal, — ^you  talk  freely.  How  was  that  circiunstanoe  nercr 
touched  on?" 


OLD  00PT-B00I8.  878 

^  Because  it  never  was/*  and  Shirley  laughed. 

"You  are  a  singular  being!"  observed  her  friend:  "I 
thought  I  knew  you  quite  well:  I  begin  to  find  myself  mis- 
taken. You  were  silent  as  the  grave  about  Mrs  Pryor;  and 
now,  again,  here  is  another  secret.  But  why  you  made  it  a 
secret  is  the  mystery  to  me." 

**  I  never  made  it  a  secret:  I  had  no  reason  for  so  doing. 
If  you  had  asked  mb  who  Henry's  tutor  was,  I  would  have 
told  you:  besides,  I  thought  you  knew.'* 

''  I  am  puzzled  about  more  things  than  one  in  this  matter: 
you  don't  like  poor  Louis, — ^why?  Are  you  impatient  at 
what  you  perhaps  consider  his  servile  position  ?  Do  you  wish 
that  Bobert's  brother  were  more  highly  placed  ?  " 

"Eobert's  brother,  indeed  I"  was  the  exclamation,  uttered 
in  a  tone  like  the  accents  of  scorn ;  and,  with  a  movement  of 
proud  impatience,  Shirley  snatched  a  rose  from  a  branch 
peeping  through  the  open  lattice. 

"Yes,"  repeated  Caroline,  with  mild  firmness;  "Robert's 
brother.  He  is  thus  closely  related  to  Gerard  Moore  of  the 
HoUow,  though  nature  has  not  given  him  features  so  hand- 
some, or  an  air  so  noble  as  his  kinsman ;  but  his  blood  is  as 
good,  and  he  is  as  much  a  gentleman,  were  he  free." 

"  Wise,  himible,  pious  Caroline !"  exclaimed  Shirley,  ironi- 
cally. ^'  Men  and  angels,  heslr  her !  We  should  not  despise 
plam  features,  nor  a  laborious  yet  honest  occupation,  should 
we?  Look  at  the  subject  of  your  panegjrric, — he  is  there  in 
the  garden,"  she  continued,  pointing  through  an  aperture  in 
the  clustering  creepers;  and  by  that  aperture  Louis  Moore 
was  visible,  coming  slowly  down  the  walk. 

"He  is  not  ugly,  Shurley,"  pleaded  Caroline;  "he  is  not 
ignoble ;  he  is  sad:  silence  seals  his  mind ;  but  I  beHeve  him  to 
be  intelligent,  and  be  certain,  if  he  had  not  something  very 
commendable  in  his  disposition,  Mr  Hall  would  never  seek  his 
society  as  he  does." 

Shirley  .laughed :  she  laughed  again ;  each  time  with  a 
slightly  sarcastic  sound.  "Well,  well,"  was  her  comment. 
"  On  the  plea  of  the  man  being  Cyril  Hall's  Mend  and  Robert 
Moore's  brother,  we  *11  just  tolerate  his  existence — won't  we, 
Cary  ?  You  believe  him  to  be  intelligent,  do  you  ?  Not 
quite  an  idiot — eh  ?  Something  commendable  in  his  dispo- 
sition 1  id  est,  not  an  absolute  ruffian.  Grood  1  Your  repre- 
sentations have  weight  with  me ;  and  to  prove  that  they  havei 
should  he  oome  this  way  I  will  speak  to  him." 


874  SHQOxr. 

He  approached  the  summer-house:  uuconscioas  that  it 
was  tenanted,  he  sat  down  on  the  step.  Tartar,  now  his 
customary  companion,  had  followed  him,  and  he  couched 
across  his  feet.     . 

"Old  boy  I"  said  Louis,  pulling  his  tawny  ear,  or  rather 
the  mutilated  remains  of  that  organ,  torn  and  chewed  in  a 
hundred  battles,  "  the  autumn  sun  shines  as  pleasantly  on  m 
as  on  the  fairest  and  richest.  This  garden  is  none  of  ours, 
but  we  enjoy  its  greenness  and  peri^mie,  don't  we?" 

He  sat  silent,  still  caressing  Tartar,  who  slobbered  with 
exceeding  affection.  A  faint  twittering  commenced  among 
the  trees  round:  something  fluttered  down  as  light  as  leaves: 
they  were  little  birds,  which  lighting  on  the  sward  st  ahy 
distance,  hopped  as  if  expectant. 

"The  small  brown  elves  actually  remember  that  I  fed 
them  the  other  day,''  again  soliloquized  Louis.  "  They  want 
some  more  biscuit :  to-day,  I  forgot  to  save  a  fragment 
Eag^  little  sprites,  I  have  not  a  crumb  for  you." 

He  put  his  hand  in  his  pocket  and  drew  it  out  empty. 

"A  want  easily  supplied,"  whispered  the  listening  Miss 
Keeldar. 

She  took  from  her  reticule  a  morsel  of  sweet-cake:  for  that 
repository  was  never  destitute  of  something  available  to  throw 
to  the  cMckens,  young  ducks,  or  sparrows;  she  crumbled  it, 
and  bending  over  his  shoulder,  put  the  crumbs  into  his  hand. 

"  There,"  said  she;  "  there  is  a  Providence  for  the  impro- 
vident." • 

"  This  September  afternoon  is  pleasant,"  observed  Louis 
Moore,  as — ^not  at  all  discomposed — ^he  calmly  cast  the  crombe 
on  to  the  grass. 

"Even  for  you?" 

"  As  pleasant  for  me  as  for  any  monarch." 

"  You  take  a  sort  of  harsh,  solitary  triumph  in  drawing 
pleasure  out  of  the  elements,  and  the  inanimate  and  lover 
animate  creation." 

"  Solitary,  but  not  harsh.  With  animals  I  feel  I  am  Adam'i 
son;  the  heir  of  him  to  whom  dominion  was  given  over  '  eveij 
living  thing  that  moveth  upon  the  earth.'  Tour  dog  likes 
and  follows  me ;  when  I  go  into  that  yard,  the  pigeons  from 
your  dove-cot  flutter  at  my  feet;  your  mare  in  the  si 
knows  me  a^  well  as  it  knows  you,  and  6b(&j8  me  better." 

"  And  my  roses  smell  sweet  to  you,  and|  my  trees  givn 
shade.** 


OLD  CXXFT-BOOKS.  876 

*^  And,"  contmued  Louis,  ^^  no  caprice  can  withdraw  these 
pleasures  from  me:  they  are  mine," 

He  walked  off:  Tartar  followed  him,  as  if  in  duty  and 
affection  bound,  and  Shirley  remained  standing  on  the  summer- 
house  step.  Caroline  saw  her  face  as  she  looked  ailer  the  rude 
tutor:  it  was  pale,  as  if  her  pride  bled  inwardly. 

"  You  see,"  remarked  Caroline,  apologetically,  "  his  feelings 
are  so  often  hurt,  it  makes  him  morose." 

"  You  see,"  retorted  Shirley,  with  ire,  "  he  is  a  topic  on 
which  you  and  I  shall  quarrel  if  we  discuss  it  often;  so  drop 
it  henceforward  and  for  ever." 

"  I  suppose  he  has  more  than  once  behaved  in  this  way," 
thought  Caroline  to  herself;  "and  that  renders  Shirley  so 
distant  to  him :  yet  I  wonder  she  cannot  make  allowance 
for  character  and  circimistances :  I  wonder  the  general 
modesty,  manliness,  sincerity  of  his  nature,  do  not  plead 
with  her  in  his  behalf.  She  is  not  often  so  inconsiderate — so 
irritable." 


The  verbdl  testimony  of  two  friends  of  Caroline's  to  her 
cousin's  character  augmented  her  favourable  opinion  of  him. 
William  Farren,  whose  cottage  he  had  visited  in  company 
with  Mr  Hall,  pronounced  him  a  "real  gentleman:"  there 
was  not  such  another  in  Briarfield  :  he^ — ^William — "  could 
do  aught  for  that  man.  And  then  to  see  how  t'  bairns  liked 
hhn,  and  how  t'  wife  took  to  him  first  minute  she  saw  him: 
he  never  went  into  a  house  but  t'  childer  wor  about  him 
directly  :  them  little  things  wor  like  as  if  they  'd  a  keener 
sense  nor  grown  up  folks  i'  finding  out  folk's  natures." 

Mr  Hall,  in  answer  to  a  question  of  Miss  Helstone's,  as  to 
what  he  thought  of  Louis  Moore,  relied  promptly,  that  he 
was  the  best  fdlow  he  had  met  with  since  he  left  Cambridge. 

"  But  he  is  so  grave,"  objected  Caroline. 

"  Grave  1  The  finest  company  in  the  world!  Full  of  odd, 
quiet,  out-of-the-way  humour.  Never  enjoyed  an  excursion 
80  much  in  my  life  as  the  one  I  took  with  him  to  the  Lakes. 
His  imderstanding  and  tastes  are  so  superior,  it  does  a  man 
good  to  be  within  their  influence  ;  and  as  to  his  temper  and 
nature,  I  call  them  fine." 

"At  Fieldhead  he  looks  gloomy,  and,  I  believe,  has  the 
character  of  being  misanthropical." 

"  Oh  I  I  fancy  he  is  rather  out  of  place  there — ^in  a  fiJse 
position.     The  Sympsons  are  most  estimable  people,  but  not 


376  SHQtLfiT. 

the  folks  to  comprehind  Mm  :  they  think  a  great  deal  about 
form  and  ceremony,  which  are  quite  out  of  Louis's  way." 

"  I  don't  think  Miss  Keeldar  likes  him." 

"  She  doesn't  know  him — she  doesn't  know  him;    other- 
wise, she  has  sense  enough  to  do  justice  to  his  merits." 

"  Well,  I  suppose  she  doesn't  know  him,"  mused  Caroline 
to  herself,  and  by  this  hjrpothesis  she  endeavoured  to  account 
for  what  seemed  else  unaccountable.  But  such  simple  solution 
of  the  difficulty  Was  not  left  her  long :  she  was  obliged  to  refuse 
Miss  Keeldar  even  this  negative  excuse  for  her  plt-ejudice. 

One  day  she  chanced  to  be  in  the  school-room  with  Heniy 
Sympson,  whose  amiable  and  affectionate  disposition  had 
quickly  recommended  him  to  her  regard.  The  boy  was  busied 
about  some  mechanical  contrivance :  his  lameness  made  him 
fond  of  sedentary  occupation :  he  began  to  ransack  his  tutor  s 
desk  for  a  piece  of  wax,  or  twine,  necessary  to  his  work- 
Moore  happened  to  be  absent.  Mr  Hall,  indeed,  had  called 
for  him  to  take  a  long  walk.  Henry  could  not  immediately 
find  the  object  of  his  search:  he  rummaged  compartment  after 
compartment ;  and,  at  last  opening  an  inner  drawer,  be  came 
upon — ^not  a  ball  of  cord,  or  a  liunp  of  bees'  wax^ — ^but  a  little 
bundle  of  small  marble-coloured  cahiers,  tied  with  tape. 
Henry  looked  at  them: — 

"  What  rubbish  Mr  Moore  stores  up  in  his  desk  1"  he  said: 
"  I  hope  he  won't  keep  my  old  exercises  so  carefully," 

"What  is  it?" 

"  Old  copy-books."    • 

He  threw  the  bundle  to  Caroline.  The  packet  looked  bo 
neat  externally,  her  curiosity  was  excited  to  see  its  contents. 

"  If  they  are  only  copy-books,  I  suppose  I  may  open  them?" 
.  "  Oh  !   yes  ;   quite  freely.     Mr  Moore's  desk  is  half  mine 
— for  he  lets  me  keep  all  sorts  of  things  in  it — ^and  I  give 
you  leave." 

On  scrutiny  they  proved  to  be  French  compositions,  written 
in  a  hand  peculiar  but  compact,  and  exquisitely  clean  and 
clear.  The  writing  was  recognisable :  she  scarcdy  needed 
the  further  evidence  of  the  name  signed  at  the  close  of  each 
theme,  to  tell  her  whose  they  were.   Yet  that  name  astonished 

her :  "  Shirley  Keeldar,  Sympson  Grove, shire"  (a  southern 

county),  and  a  date  four  years  back. 

She  tied  up  the  packet,  and  held  it  in  her  hand,  meditating 
over  it.  She  half  felt  as  if,  in  opening  it,  she  had  violated  a 
confidence. 


OLD  GOFT-BOOKS.  377 

"  They  are  Shirley's,  you  see,"  said  Henry,  carelessly. 
'^  Did  you  give  them  to  Mr  Moore  ?     She  wrote  them  with 
[tb  Pryor,  I  suppose  ?  " 

"  She  -wrote  ihem  in  my  school-room  at  Sympson  Grove, 
rhen  she  lived  with  us  there.     Mr  Moore  taught  her  French: 
',  is  his  native  language." 
"I  know     ....     Was  she  a  good  pupil,  Henry?" 
'^  She  was  a  wild,  laughing  thing,  but  pleasant  to  have  in 
he  room  :  she  made  lesson-time  charming.     She  learned  fast 
—you  could  hardly  tell  when  or  how.     French  was  nothing 
o  her:   she  spoke  it  quick — quick;  as  quick  as  Mr  Moore 
limself.*' 
"  Was  she  obedient  ?    Did  she  give  trouble  ?  " 
*^  She  gave  plenty  of  trouble  in  a  way :  she  was  giddy,  but 
[  liked  her,     I  'm  desperately  fond  of  Shirley." 

"  Desperately  fqnd — ^you  small  simpleton  1   You  don't  know 
what  you  say." 

"I  am  desperately  fond  of  her{  she  is  the  light  of  my  eyes: 
1 8ud  so  to  Mr  Moore  last  night."  . 
"  He  would  reprove  you  for  speaking  with  exaggeration." 
"He  didn't.     He  never  reproves  and  reproves,  as  girls' 
governesses  do.     He  was  reading,  and  he  only  smiled  into 
liia  book,  and  said  that  if  Miss  Keeldar  was  no  more  than  that, 
slie  was  less  than  he  took  her  to  be ;  for  I  was  but  a  dim-eyed, 
short-sighted  little  chap.     I  'm  afraid  I  am  a  poor  unfortunate, 
Miss  Caroline  Helstone.     I  am  a  cripple,  you  know." 

"Never  mind,  Henry,  you  are  a  very  nice  little  fellow; 
and  if  God  has  not  given  you  health  and  strength,  he  has 
given  you  a  good  disposition,  and  an  excellent  heart  and 
biain." 

^^I  shall  be  despised.  I  sometimes  think  both  Shirley  and 
joa  despise  me." 

^^Liaten^  Henry.  Generally,  I  don't  like  school-boys:  I 
hare  a  great  horror  of  them.  They  seem  to  me  little  ruffians, 
who  take  an  unnatural  delight  in  killing  and  tormenting  birds, 
uid  insects,  and  kittens,  and  whatever  is  weaker  than  them- 
; •elves;  but  you  are  so  different,  I  am  quite  fond  of  you. 
Ton  have  almost  as  much  sense  as  a  man  (far  more,  God  wot," 
i^e  muttered  to  herself,  "  than  many  men) ;  you  are  fond  of 
leading, 'and  you  can  talk  sensibly  about  what  you  read." 

'*  1  am  fond  of  reading.     I  know  I  have  sense,  and  I  know 
I  have  feeling." 
Hiss  Eeeldu*  here  entered. 


i 


378  SHIRLET. 

• 

"  Henry,"  she  said,  "  I  have  brought  your  lunch  here ;  I 
shall  prepare  it  for  you  myself." 

She  placed  on  the  table  a  glass  of  new  milk,  a  plate  oi 
something  which  looked  not  nnlike  leather,  and  a  utensil 
which  resembled  a  toasting-fork. 

"What  are  you  two  about,"  she  continued,  "ransackiag 
Mr  Moore's  desk  ?" 

"  Looking  at  your  old  copy-books,"  returned  Caroline. 

•*  My  old  copy-books  ?" 

"  French  exerdse-books.  Look  here  I  They  must  be  held 
precious:  they  are  kept  careftdly." 

She  showed  the  bundle.     Shu'ley  snatched  it  up: 

"  Did  not  know  one  was  in  existence,"  she  said.  **  I 
thought  the  whole  lot  had  long  since  lit  the  kitchen-fire,  or 
curled  the  maid's  hair  at  Sympson  Grove.  What  made  you 
keep  them,  Henry  ?  " 

"  It  is  not  my  doing:  I  should  not  have  thought  of  it:  it 
never  entered  my  head  to  suppose  copy-books  of  value.  At 
Moore  put  them  by  in  the  inner  drawer  of  his  desk:  perhaps, 
he  forgot  them." 

"  C'est  cela :  he  forgot  them,  no  doubt,"  echoed  Shirley. 
"  They  are  extremely  well  written,"  she  observed,  complacently. 

"  What  a  giddy  girl  you  were,  Shirley,  in  those  ^jsl  ^ 
remember  you  so  well :  a  slim,  light  creature  whom,  though 
you  were  so  tall,  T  could  lift  off  the  floor.  I  see  you  with 
your  long,  countless  curls  on  your  shoulders,  and  your  stream- 
ing sash.  You  used  to  make  Mr  Moore  lively,  that  is,  at  first: 
I  believe  you  grieved  him  after  a  while." 

Shirley  turned  the  closely-written  pages  and  said  nothing* 
Presently  she  observed,  "  That  was  written  one  winter  after- 
noon.    It  was  a  description  of  a  snow-scene." 

"  I  remember,"  said  Henry ;  "  Mr  Moore,  when  he  read  it, 
cried  *  Voilii  le  Fran9ais  gagn6 1'  He  said  it  was  well  doae. 
Afterwards,  you  made  him  draw,  in  sepia,  the  landscape  yoo 
described." 

"  You  have  not  forgotten  then,  Hal  ?" 

"  Not  at  all.  We  were  all  scolded  that  day  for  not  coming 
down  to  tea  when  called.  I  can  remember  my  tutor  sitting 
at  his  easel,  and  you  standing  behind  him,  holding  the  cai^e, 
and  watching  him  draw  the  snowy  cliff,  the  pine,  the  deer 
couched  under  it,  and  the  half-moon  hung  above." 

<<  Where  are  his  drawings,  Henry  ?  Caroline  should  06^ 
"hem." 


OLD  CX>PT-BOOKS.  879 

"  In  his  portfolio:  but  it  is  padlocked:  he  has  the  key." 
"  Ask  hiin  for  it  when  he  comes  in." 
''You  should  ask  him,  Shirley;  you  are  shy  of  him  now: 
you  are  grown  a  proud  lady  to  him,  I  notice  that." 

"  Shirley,  you  are  a  real  enigma,"  whispered  Caroline  in 
her  ear.  "  What  queer  discoveries  I  make  day  by  day  now  ! 
I,  who  thought  I  had  your  confidence.  Inexplicable  creature! 
even  this  boy  reproves  you." 

"  I  have  forgotten  *  Auld  Langsyne,'  you  see,  Harry,"  said 
Miss  Keeldar,  answering  young  Sympson,  and  not  heeding 
Caroline. 

"  Which  you  never  should  have  done.  You  don't  deserve 
to  be  a  man's  morning  star,  if  you  have  so  short  a  memory." 

''  A  man's  morning  star,  indeed !  and  by  '  a  man'  is  meant 
your  worshipful  self,  I  suppose  ?  Come,  iink  your  new  milk 
while  it  is  warm." 

The  yotmg  cripple  rose  and  limped  towards  the  fire ;  he  had 
left  his  crutch  near  the  mantel-piece. 

"  My  poor  lame  darling !"  murmured  Shirley,  in  her  softest 
voice,  aiding  him. 

"  Whether  do  you  like  me  or  Mr  Sam  Wynne  best,  Shirley  ?  " 
inquired  the  boy,  as  she  settled  him  in  an  arm-chair. 
"  Oh,  Harry  I  Sam  Wynne  is  my  aversion :  you  are  my  pet." 
"MeorMrMalone?" 
"  You  again,  a  thousand  times." 

"  Yet,  they  are  great  whiskered  fellows,  six  feet  high  each." 
"  Whereas,  as  long  as  you  live,  Harry,  you  will  never  be 
anything  more  than  a  little  pale  lameter." 
«  Yes,  I  know." 

"  You  need  not  be  sorrowful.     Have  I  not  often  told  you 
who  was  almost  as  little,  as  pale,  as  suffering  as  you,  and  yet 
potent  as  a  giant,  and  brave  as  a  lion  ?  " 
"Admiral  Horatio?" 

"  Admiral  Horatio,  Viscount  Nelson,  and  Duke  of  Bronti ; 
great  at  heart  as  a  Titan ;  gallant  and  heroic  as  all  the  woild 
and  age  of  chivalry;  leader  of  the  might  of  England;  com- 
mander of  her  strength  on  the  deep ;  hurler  of  her  thunder 
over  the  flood." 

"  A  great  man:  but  I  am  not  warlike,  Shirley:  and  yet  my 
mind  is  so  restless,  I  bum  day  and  night— for  what — ^I  can« 
hardly  teJl — to  be — ^to  do — to  suffer,  I  think." 

«  Harry,  it  is  your  mind,  which  is  stronger  and  older  than 
your  frame,  that  troubles  you.    It  is  a  captive.    It  lies  in 


OLD  COPT-BOOKS.  881 

''  It  accuses  them  of  crimes  intended  as  well  as  perpetrated, 
iir.  If  I  had  not  been  here,  they  would  have  treated  your 
x>rtfoIio  as  they  have  done  your  desk ;  but  I  told  them  it  was 
Midlocked.'' 

"  And  will  you  have  lunch  with  us  ? "  here  interposed 
^liirley,  addressing  Moore,  and  desirous,  as  it  seemed,  to  turn 
the  conversation. 

«  Certainly,  if  I  may." 

**  You  will  be  restricted  to  new  milk  and  Yorkshire  oat-cake." 
"  Va — pour  le  lait  frais ! "  said  Louis.     But  for  your  oat- 
cake  1 "  and  he  made  a  grimace. 

"  He  caimot  eat  it,"  said  Henry:  "  he  thinks  it  is  like  bran, 
raised  with  sour  yeast." 

**^  Gome,  then,  by  special  dispensation,  we  will  allow  him  a 
few  cracknels ;  but  nothing  less  homely." 

The  hostess  rang  the  bell  and  gave  her  frugal  orders,  which 
were  presently  executed.     She  herself  measured  out  the  milk, 
and  distributed  the  bread  round  the  cozy  circle  now  enclosing 
ihe  bright  little  school-room  fire.     She  then  took  the  post  of 
toaster-general ;  and  kneeling  on  the  rug,  fork  in  hand,  ful- 
filled her  office  with  dexterity.     Mr  Hall,  who  relished  any 
homely  innovation  on  ordinary  usages,  and  to  whom  the  husky 
oat-cake  was  from  custom  suave  as  manna — seemed  in  his 
best  spirits.      He  talked  and  laughed  gleefully — ^now  with 
Caroline,  whom  he  had  fixed  by  his  side,  now  with  Shirley, 
and  again  with  Louis  Moore:     And  Louis  met  him  in  con- 
genial spirit:  he  did  not  laugh  much,  but  he  uttered  in  the 
qiuetest  tone  the  wittiest  things.     Gravely  spoken  sentences, 
marked  by  unexpected  turns  and  a  quite  fresh  flavour  and 
poignancy,  fell  easily  from  his  lips.     He  proved  himself  to  be 
—what  Mr  Hall  had  said  he  was— excellent  company.    Caro- 
line marvelled  at  his  humour,  but  still  more  at  his  entire  self- 
possession.     Nobody  there  present  seemed  to  impose  on  him 
u  sensation  of  unpleasant  restraint :  nobody  seemed  a  bore — 
a  check — a  chill  to  him ;  and  yet  there  was  the  cool  and  lofty 
Miss  Keeldar  kneeling  before  the  fire,  almost  at  his  feet. 

But  Shirley  was  cool  and  lofky  no  longer — at  least  not  et 
this  moment.  She  appeared  unconscious  of  the  humility  of 
ber  present  position — or  if  conscious,  it  was  only  to  taste  a' 
charm  in  its  lowliness.  It  did  not  revolt  her  pride  that  tfie 
g;roap  to  whom  she  voluntarily  ofHciated  as  handmaid  should 
include  her  cousin's  tutor:  it  did  not  scare  her  that  while  she 
Wded  the  bread  and  milk  to  the  rest,  she  had  to  offer  it  to 


882  sHmLBT. 

Inm  also ;  and  Moore  took  his  portion  from  her  hand  as  cahnlj 
i\a  if  he  had  been  her  equal.  • 

"  You  are  overheated  now,"  he  said,  when  she  had  retained 
the  fork  for  some  time :  "  let  me  relieve  you." 

And  he  took  it  from  her  with  a  sort  of  qxuet  authority,  to 
which  she  submitted  passively — ^neither  resisting  him  nor 
thanking  him. 

"  I  should  like  to  see  your  pictures,  Louis,"  said  Caroline, 
when  the  sumptuous  luncheon  was  discussed.  "  Would  not 
you,  Mr  Hall  ?  " 

"  To  please  you,  I  should;  but,  for  my  own  part,  I  have 
cut  him  as  an  artist.  I  had  enough  of  lum  in  that  capacity 
in  Cumberland  and  Westmoreland.  Many  a  wetting  we  get 
amongst  the  mountains  because  he  would  persist  in  sitting  on 
a  camp-stool,  catching  effects  of  rain-clouds,  gathering  mists, 
fitful  sunbeams,  and  what  not." 

"  Here  is  the  portfolio,"  said  Henry,  bringing  it  in  one 
hand,  and  leaning  on  his  crutch  with  the  other. 

Louis  took  it,  but  he  still  sat  as  if  he  wanted  another  to 
speak.  It  seemed  as  if  he  would  not  open  it  unless  the 
proud  Shirley  deigned  to  show  herself  interested  in  the 
exhibition. 

"  He  makes  us  wait  to  whet  our  curiosity,"  she  said. 

"  You  understand  opening  it,"  observed  Louis,  giving  her 
the  key.     "  You  spoiled  the  lock  for  me  once — ^tiy  now." 

He  held  it:. she  evened  it;  and,  monopolizing  the  contents, 
had  the  first  view  of  every  sketch  herself.  She  enjoyed  the 
treat — if  treat  it  were — in  silence,  without  a  single  comment 
Moore  stood  behind  her  chair  and  looked  over  her  shoulder, 
and  when  she  had  done,  and  the  others  were  still  gazing,  be 
left  his  post  and  paced  through  the  room. 

A  carriage  was  heard  in  the  lane — ^the  gate-bell  rang: 
Shirley  started. 

^^  There  are  callers,"  she  said,  ^'  and  I  shall  be  summoned  to 
the  room.  A  pretty  figure — as  they  say — ^I  am  to  receive 
company :  I  and  Henry  have  been  in  the  garden  gathering 
fruit  half  the  morning.  Oh,  for  rest  imder  my  own  vine  and 
my  own  fig-tree!  Happy  is  the  slave-wife  of -the  Indian 
chief,  in  that  she  has  no  drawing-room  duty  to  perform,  bnt 
can  sit  at  ease  weaving  mats,  and  stringing  beads,  and  peace 
fiilly  flattening  her  picaninny^s  head  in  an  unmolested  coxntf 
of  her  wigwam.     I  *11  emigrate  to  the  western  woods.** 

Louis  Moore  laughed. 


