BERKELEY 

LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY  OF 
CALIFORNIA 


THE   WORKS   OF 
HERMAN    MELVILLE 


STANDARD   EDITION 

VOLUME 

VI 


WHITE  JACKET 

OR 

THE  WORLD  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR 


BY 

HERMAN   MELVILLE 


CONSTABLE   AND   COMPANY   LTD 

LONDON       •       BOMBAY       -       SYDNEY 

1922 


'  Conceive  him  now  in  a  man-of-war ;  with  his  letters  of 
mart,  well  armed,  victualled,  and  appointed,  and  see 
how  he  acquits  himself.' — FULLER'S  Good  Sea-Captain. 


Printed  in  Great  Britain  by  T.  and  A.  CONSTABLE  LTI>. 
at  the  Edinburgh  University  Press 


\^2Z 

^U^^^^^MkTN 


PREFACE 

TO   THE   FIRST   ENGLISH    EDITION 

THE  object  of  this  work  is  to  give  some  idea  of  the 
interior  life  in  a  man-of-war.  In  the  year  1843,  the 
author  shipped  as  a  common  sailor  on  board  of  a  United 
States  frigate,  then  lying  in  a  harbour  of  the  Pacific  Ocean. 
After  serving  on  board  of  this  frigate  for  more  than  a  year, 
he  was  discharged,  with  the  rest  of  the  crew,  upon  the 
vessel's  arrival  home.  His  man-of-war  experiences  and 
observations  have  been  incorporated  into  the  present 
volume. 

As  the  object  of  this  work  is  not  to  portray  the  particular 
man-of-war  in  which  the  author  sailed,  and  its  officers  and 
crew,  but,  by  illustrative  scenes,  to  paint  general  life  in 
the  Navy,  the  true  name  of  the  frigate  is  not  given.  Nor 
is  it  here  asserted  that  any  of  the  persons  introduced  in 
the  following  chapters  are  real  individuals.  Wherever 
statements  are  made  in  any  way  concerning  the  estab 
lished  laws  and  usages  of  the  Navy,  facts  have  been 
strictly  adhered  to.  Allusion  is  sometimes  made  to  events 
or  facts  in  the  past  history  of  Navies.  In  these  cases,  no 
statement  is  presented  unless  supported  by  the  best 
authorities.  For  the  hitherto  unrecorded  by-play  of 
circumstances  in  one  or  two  well-known  naval  actions 
referred  to,  the  writer  is  indebted  to  the  seamen  into 
whose  mouths  these  things  are  put. 


vi  WHITE  JACKET 

The  work  opens  at  the  frigate's  last  harbour  in  the 
Pacific,  just  previous  to  weighing  her  anchor  for  the 
homeward-bound  passage,  by  the  way  of  Cape  Horn. 

NEW  YORK,  October  1849. 


The  First  American  edition  contained  the  following  in 
the  place  of  Preface  : — 

NOTE 

In  the  year  1843  I  shipped  as  '  Ordinary  seaman  '  on 
board  of  a  United  States  frigate,  then  lying  in  a  harbour 
of  the  Pacific  Ocean.  After  remaining  in  this  frigate  for 
more  than  a  year,  I  was  discharged  from  the  service  upon 
the  vessel's  arrival  home.  My  man-of-war  experiences 
and  observations  are  incorporated  in  the  present  volume. 

NEW  YOKK,  March  1850. 


CONTENTS 

CHAP.  PAGK 

I.   THE  JACKET  ......  1 

•    II.    HOMEWARD   BOUND  ....  4 

'    III.    A    GLANCE    AT    THE    PRINCIPAL    DIVISIONS    INTO 

WHICH  A  MAN-OF-WAR'S  CREW  is  DIVIDED   .  6 

'  IV.   JACK  CHASE  ......  13 

V.   JACK  CHASE   ON   A  SPANISH   QUARTER-DECK         .  19 

VI.   THE  QUARTER-DECK  OFFICERS,  WARRANT  OFFICERS, 
AND  BERTH-DECK  UNDERLINGS  OF  A  MAN-OF- 
WAR  ;    WHERE  THEY  LIVE  IN  THE  SHIP  ;    HOW 
THEY     LIVE;       THEIR     SOCIAL     STANDING     ON 
SHIPBOARD  J      AND    WHAT    SORT     OF    GENTLE 
MEN  THEY  ARE  ....  23 

VII.   BREAKFAST,   DINNER,   AND   SUPPER  .  34 

VIE!.   SELVAGEE   CONTRASTED   WITH  MAD  JACK  .  38 

IX.   OF  THE   POCKETS   THAT  WERE   IN   THE  JACKET  .  43 

•      X.   FROM  POCKETS   TO  PICKPOCKETS         .  .  47 

XI.   THE  PURSUIT  OF  POETRY  UNDER  DIFFICULTIES  49 

XII.  THE  GOOD  OR  BAD  TEMPER  OF  MAN-OF-WAR'S 
MEN,  IN  A  GREAT  DEGREE,  ATTRIBUTABLE  TO 
THED3  PARTICULAR  STATIONS  AND  DUTIES 
ABOARD  SHIP  .....  55 

XIII.  A   MAN-OF-WAR   HERMIT   IN   A   MOB     .  .  Q2 

XIV.  A   DRAUGHT   IN   A   MAN-OF-WAR  .  .  QQ 
XV.   A   SALT-JUNK   CLUB   IN   A   MAN-OF-WAR,    WITH   A 

NOTICE   TO    QUIT  ....  71 

XVI.   GENERAL  TRAINING  IN   A   MAN-OF-WAR       .  SI 

vii 


viii  WHITE  JACKET 


CHAP. 


XVII.    AWAY  !       SECOND,        THIRD,         AND         FOURTH 

CUTTERS,    AWAY  !       .  .  .  .  .90 

XVIII.    A   MAN-OF-WAR   FULL   AS   A   NUT     .  94 

-      XIX.    THE   JACKET   ALOFT        ...  96 

XX.    HOW   THEY   SLEEP   IN    A   MAN-OF-WAR      .  .          100 

XXI.    ONE    REASON    WHY     MAN-OF-WAR'S    MEN    ARE,    . 

GENERALLY,    SHORT-LIVED  .  .  .          103 

XXH.    WASH-DAY    AND    HOUSE-CLEANING    IN   A  MAN- 
OF-WAR  ....  107 

XXIII.  THEATRICALS   IN   A   MAN-OF-WAR  .  .112 

XXIV.  INTRODUCTORY  TO   CAPE   HORN       .  .  .120 
XXV.   THE   DOG-DAYS   OFF   CAPE   HORN    .                           .125 

•  XXVI.    THE   PITCH   OF  THE   CAPE       .  130 

•  XXVII.    SOME      THOUGHTS     GROWING      OUT      OF     MAD 

JACK'S    COUNTERMANDING     HIS     SUPERIOR'S 
ORDER     . 

XXVIII.   EDGING   AWAY     .  •          144 

XXIX.   THE  NIGHT-WATCHES   .  .149 

XXX.    A  PEEP  THROUGH  A  PORT-HOLE   AT  THE    SUB 
TERRANEAN   PARTS   OF   A   MAN-OF-WAR  .          154 
XXXI.   THE   GUNNER   UNDER  HATCHES       .                          .158 
XXXII.    A   DISH   OF   DUNDERFUNK      .          .  ,             •          ;  •          163 

•  XXXIII.   A  FLOGGING          .  *  *  «  —  1^6 

•  XXXIV.    SOME   OF  THE   EVIL   EFFECTS   OF   FLOGGING     .          173 

XXXV.   FLOGGING  NOT  LAWFUL         ,  .178 

.    XXXVI.    FLOGGING   NOT   NECESSARY  .          184 

XXXVII.   SOME    SUPERIOR   OLD    'LONDON    DOCK'    FROM 

THE   WINE-COOLERS    OF  NEPTUNE         .  .          190 

XXXVIII.    THE  CHAPLAIN  AND  CHAPEL  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR         193 
XXXIX.   THE     FRIGATE     IN     HARBOUR — THE     BOATS — 
GRAND     STATE     RECEPTION     OF     THE     COM 
MODORE  ......        198 


CONTENTS  ix 

CHAP.  PAGK 

XL.   SOME  OF  THE  CEREMONIES  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR 

UNNECESSARY  AND   INJURIOUS               .             .  205 
XLI.   A   MAN-OF-WAR  LIBRARY        ....  207 
XLII.   KILLING    TIME    IN     A    MAN-OF-WAR    IN     HAR 
BOUR 210 

XLIII.    SMUGGLING  IN  A   MAN-OF-WAR       .  .  .  218 

'     XLIV.    A   KNAVE   IN    OFFICE   IN   A   MAN-OF-WAR  .  225 

'      XLV.    PUBLISHING  POETRY  IN   A   MAN-OF-WAR  .  238 

'  XLVI.  THE  COMMODORE  ON  THE  POOP,  AND  ONE  OF 
'  THE  PEOPLE  '  UNDER  THE  HANDS  OF  THE 

SURGEON .  240 

XLVH.    AN   AUCTION   IN   A   MAN-OF-WAR     .  .  .  246 

XLvm.  PURSER,  PURSER'S  STEWARD,  AND  POSTMASTER 

IN   A   MAN-OF-WAR  ....          254 

.  XLIX.  RUMOURS  OF  A  WAR,  AND  HOW  THEY  WERE 
RECEIVED  BY  THE  POPULATION  OF  THE 
NEVERSINK  ......  258 

•  L.   THE  BAY   OF  ALL  BEAUTIES  .  .  .         261 

•  LI.    ONE    OF    '  THE    PEOPLE  '    HAS    AN    AUDIENCE 

WITH   THE    COMMODORE   AND    THE    CAPTAIN 

ON  THE   QUARTER-DECK    ....         265 

'     LH.   SOMETHING  CONCERNING  MIDSHIPMEN   .  .         269 

'    LIII.   SEAFARING     PERSONS      PECULIARLY     SUBJECT 
TO     BEING     UNDER     THE     WEATHER  —  THE 
EFFECTS    OF     THIS     UPON     A     MAN-OF-WAR 
CAPTAIN  ......         277 

•    LIV.    '  THE  PEOPLE  '    ARE   GIVEN    '  LIBERTY  '              .         281 
LV.   MIDSHIPMEN   ENTERING  THE   NAVY  EARLY       .         288 
LVI.   A     SHORE     EMPEROR     ON     BOARD     A     MAN-OF- 
WAR          291 

LVII.   THE     EMPEROR    REVIEWS     '  THE     PEOPLE  '     AT 

QUARTERS          .  .  .  .  .  .         297 

6 


x  WHITE  JACKET 

CHAP.  PAGE 

•  LVIII.    A      QUARTER-DECK      OFFICER      BEFORE      THE 

MAST         . 300 

•    LIX.  A      MAN-OF-WAR     BUTTON      DIVIDES      TWO 

BROTHERS       .         .         .         .         .         .'•  303 

LX.  A  MAN-OF-WAR'S  MAN  SHOT  AT    .         .         .  307 

LXI.  THE  SURGEON  OF  THE  FLEET       .         .         »  310 

LXII.  A  CONSULTATION  OF  MAN-OF-WAR  SURGEONS  316 

LXIII.   THE   OPERATION               .             *             .             .             .  320 

LXIV.    MAN-OF-WAR  TROPHIES            ....  334 

LXV.    A   MAN-OF-WAR  RACE    .             .                           .             .  337 

•  LXVI.    FUN   IN    A   MAN-OF-WAR            ....  344 
4    LXVII.    WHITE   JACKET   ARRAIGNED    AT   THE    MAST        .  348 

LXVIII.    A       MAN-OF-WAR       FOUNTAIN,       AND       OTHER 

THINGS    .......  355 

LXIX.    PRAYERS   AT   THE   GUNS           .             .                           .  360 

LXX.    MONTHLY   MUSTER  ROUND    THE   CAPSTAN            .  366 

LXXI.    THE    GENEALOGY   OF   THE   ARTICLES    OF   WAR  .  372 
'    LXXII.    '  HEREIN  ARE  THE  GOOD  ORDINANCES  OF  THE 
SEA,     WHICH     WISE     MEN,     WHO     VOYAGED 
ROUND     THE     WORLD,     GAVE     TO     OUR     AN 
CESTORS,      AND      WHICH      CONSTITUTE      THE 

BOOKS  OF  THE  SCIENCE  OF  GOOD  CUSTOMS  '  375 

LXXIII.    NIGHT  AND  DAY  GAMBLING  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR  383 

LXXIV.   THE   MAIN-TOP  AT  NIGHT       »                                       .  389 

'  LXXV.  *  SINK,  BURN,  AND  DESTROY  '  .  .  399 

.  LXXVI.  THE  CHAINS  .  .  405 

LXXVII.  THE  HOSPITAL  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR  .  .  409 

LXXVIII.  DISMAL  TIMES  IN  THE  MESS  .  .  .  418 

LXXIX.  HOW  MAN-OF-WAR'S  MEN  DIE  AT  SEA  .         .  421 

LXXX.    THE   LAST   STITCH          .             .                                       .  425 
LXXXI.    HOW    THEY    BURY    A    MAN-OF-WAR'S   MAN   AT 

SEA                                                                              .             •  429 


CONTENTS  xi 

CHAP.  PAGE 

LXXXII.    WHAT     REMAINS    OF    A     MAN-OF-WAR'S    MAN 

AFTER  HIS   BURIAL  AT  SEA       .  .  .431 

LXXXIII.   A  MAN-OF-WAR  COLLEGE     ....  433 

LXXXIV.    MAN-OF-WAR   BARBERS           ....  439 

'   LXXXV.    THE   GREAT   MASSACRE   OF   THE   BEARDS           .  446 

'    LXXXVI.   THE   REBELS   BROUGHT  TO   THE   MAST  .             .  456 

LXXXVII.   OLD   USHANT  AT  THE   GANGWAY              .             .  459 

LXXXVIII.   FLOGGING  THROUGH  THE   FLEET              .            ...  465 

'    LXXXIX.   THE  SOCIAL  STATE  IN   A  MAN-OF-WAR              .  470 

XC.   THE  MANNING   OF  NAVIES               .             .             .  475 

'    XCI.   SMOKING-CLUB      IN      A      MAN-OF-WAR,      WITH 

SCENES  ON  THE  GUN-DECK  DRAWING  NEAR 

HOME                 ......  487 

•  XCII.   THE  LAST   OF  THE  JACKET              .             .             .  494 

•  XCIII    CABLE  AND  ANCHOR  ALL  CLEAR              .             .  499 

THE   END  502 


WHITE    JACKET 

CHAPTER  I 

THE  JACKET 

IT  was  not  a  very  white  jacket,  but  white  enough,  in  all 
conscience,  as  the  sequel  will  show. 

The  way  I  came  by  it  was  this. 

When  our  frigate  lay  in  Callao,  on  the  coast  of  Peru — 
her  last  harbour  in  the  Pacific — I  found  myself  without 
a  grego,  or  sailor's  surtout ;  and  as,  toward  the  end  of  a 
three  years'  cruise,  no  pea-jackets  could  be  had  from  the 
purser's  steward,  and  being  bound  for  Cape  Horn,  some 
sort  of  a  substitute  was  indispensable  ;  I  employed 
myself,  for  several  days,  in  manufacturing  an  outlandish 
garment  of  my  own  devising,  to  shelter  me  from  the 
boisterous  weather  we  were  so  soon  to  encounter. 

It  was  nothing  more  than  a  white  duck  frock,  or  rather 
shirt ;  which,  laying  on  deck,  I  folded  double  at  the 
bosom,  and  by  then  making  a  continuation  of  the  slit 
there,  opened  it  lengthwise — much  as  you  would  cut  a 
leaf  in  the  last  new  novel.  The  gash  being  made,  a  meta 
morphosis  took  place,  transcending  any  related  by  Ovid. 
For,  presto  !  the  shirt  was  a  coat ! — a  strange-looking 
coat,  to  be  sure  ;  of  a  Quakerish  amplitude  about  the 
skirts ;  with  an  infirm,  tumble-down  collar ;  and  a 
clumsy  fulness  about  the  wristbands  ;  and  white,  yea, 
white  as  a  shroud.  And  my  shroud  it  afterward  came 
very  near  proving,  as  he  who  reads  further  will  find. 

A 


2  WHITE  JACKET 

But,  bless  me,  my  friend,  what  sort  of  a  summer  jacket 
is  this,  in  which  to  weather  Cape  Horn  ?  A  very  tasty, 
and  beautiful  white  linen  garment  it  may  have  seemed  ; 
but  then,  people  almost  universally  sport  their  linen  next 
to  their  skin. 

Very  true  ;  and  that  thought  very  early  occurred  to 
me  ;  for  no  idea  had  I  of  scudding  round  Cape  Horn  in 
my  shirt ;  for  that  would  have  been  almost  scudding 
under  bare  poles  indeed. 

So,  with  many  odds  and  ends  of  patches — old  socks,  old 
trowser-legs,  and  the  like — I  bedarned  and  bequilted  the 
inside  of  my  jacket  till  it  became,  all  over,  stiff  and 
padded,  as  King  James's  cotton-stuffed  and  dagger-proof 
doublet ;  and  no  buckram  or  steel  hauberk  stood  up  more 
stoutly. 

So  far,  very  good  ;  but  pray,  tell  me,  White  Jacket, 
how  do  you  propose  keeping  out  the  rain  and  the  wet  in 
this  quilted  grego  of  yours  ?  You  don't  call  this  wad  of 
old  patches  a  mackintosh,  do  you  ? — You  don't  pretend 
to  say  that  worsted  is  water -proof  ? 

No,  my  dear  friend  ;  and  that  was  the  deuce  of  it. 
Water-proof  it  was  not,  no  more  than  a  sponge.  Indeed, 
with  such  recklessness  had  I  bequilted  my  jacket,  that  in 
a  rainstorm  I  became  a  universal  absorber  ;  swabbing 
bone-dry  the  very  bulwarks  I  leaned  against.  Of  a  damp 
day,  my  heartless  shipmates  even  used  to  stand  up  against 
me,  so  powerful  was  the  capillary  attraction  between  this 
luckless  jacket  of  mine  and  all  drops  of  moisture.  I 
dripped  like  a  turkey  a-roasting  ;  and  long  after  the  rain 
storms  were  over,  and  the  sun  showed  his  face,  I  still 
stalked  a  Scotch  mist ;  and  when  it  was  fair  weather  with 
others,  alas  !  it  was  foul  weather  with  me. 

Me  ?  Ah  me  !  Soaked  and  heavy,  what  a  burden  was 
that  jacket  to  carry  about,  especially  when  I  was  sent  up 
aloft ;  dragging  myself  up,  step  by  step,  as  if  I  were 


THE  JACKET  3 

weighing  the  anchor.  Small  time  then,  to  strip,  and  wring 
it  out  in  a  rain,  when  no  hanging  back  or  delay  was  per 
mitted.  No,  no  ;  up  you  go  :  fat  or  lean  :  Lambert  or 
Edson  :  never  mind  how  much  avoirdupois  you  might 
weigh.  And  thus,  in  my  own  proper  person,  did  many 
showers  of  rain  reascend  toward  the  skies,  in  accordance 
with  the  natural  laws. 

But  here  be  it  known,  that  I  had  been  terribly  disap 
pointed  in  carrying  out  my  original  plan  concerning  this 
jacket.  It  had  been  my  intention  to  make  it  thoroughly 
impervious,  by  giving  it  a  coating  of  paint.  But  bitter 
fate  ever  overtakes  us  unfortunates.  So  much  paint  had 
been  stolen  by  the  sailors,  in  daubing  their  overhaul 
trowsers  and  tarpaulins,  that  by  the  time  I — an  honest 
man — had  completed  my  quiltings,  the  paint-pots  were 
banned,  and  put  under  strict  lock  and  key. 

Said  old  Brush,  the  captain  of  the  paint-room — '  Look 
ye,  White  Jacket/  said  he,  '  ye  can't  have  any  paint.' 

Such,  then,  was  my  jacket  :  a  well-patched,  padded, 
and  porous  one  ;  and  in  a  dark  night,  gleaming  white,  as 
the  White  Lady  of  Avenel ! 


CHAPTER  II 

HOMEWARD  BOUND 

'  ALL  hands  up  anchor  !     Man  the  capstan  !  ' 
'  High  die  !   my  lads,  we  're  homeward  bound  !  ' 
Homeward  bound  ! — harmonious  sound  !     Were  you 
ever  homeward  bound  ? — No  ? — Quick  !   take  the  wings 
of  the  morning,  or  the  sails  of  a  ship,  and  fly  to  the  utter 
most  parts  of  the  earth.     There,  tarry  a  year  or  two  ;  and 
then  let  the  gruffest  of  boatswains,  his  lungs  all  goose- 
skin,  shout  forth  those  magical  words,  and  you  '11  swear 
'  the  harp  of  Orpheus  were  not  more  enchanting.' 

All  was  ready  ;  boats  hoisted  in,  stun' -sail  gear  rove, 
messenger  passed,  capstan-bars  in  their  places,  accom 
modation  ladder  below ;  and  in  glorious  spirits,  we  sat 
down  to  dinner.  In  the  ward-room,  the  lieutenants  were 
passing  round  their  oldest  port,  and  pledging  their  friends  ; 
in  the  steerage,  the  middies  were  busy  raising  loans  to 
liquidate  the  demands  of  their  laundress,  or  else — in  the 
Navy  phrase — preparing  to  pay  their  creditors  with  a 
flying  fore-topsail.  On  the  poop,  the  captain  was  looking 
to  windward  ;  and  in  his  grand,  inaccessible  cabin,  the 
high  and  mighty  commodore  sat  silent  and  stately,  as  the 
statue  of  Jupiter  in  Dodona. 

We  were  all  arrayed  in  our  best  and  our  bravest ;  like 
strips  of  blue  sky,  lay  the  pure  blue  collars  of  our  frocks 
upon  our  shoulders  ;  and  our  pumps  were" so  springy  and 
playful,  that  we  danced  up  and  down  as  we  dined. 

It  was  on  the  gun-deck  that  our  dinners  were  spread  ; 
all  along  between  the  guns  ;  and  there,  as  we  cross-legged 
sat,  you  would  have  thought  a  hundred  farmyards  and 


HOMEWARD  BOUND  5 

meadows  were  nigh.  Such  a  cackling  of  ducks,  chickens, 
and  ganders  ;  such  a  lowing  of  oxen,  and  bleating  of 
lambkins,  penned  up  here  and  there  along  the  deck,  to 
provide  sea  repasts  for  the  officers.  More  rural  than 
naval  were  the  sounds ;  continually  reminding  each 
mother's  son  of  the  old  paternal  homestead  in  the  green 
old  clime  ;  the  old  arching  elms  ;  the  hill  where  we 
gambolled  ;  and  down  by  the  barley  banks  of  the  stream 
where  we  bathed. 

'  All  hands  up  anchor  !  ' 

When  that  order  was  given,  how  we  sprang  to  the  bars, 
and  heaved  round  that  capstan  ;  every  man  a  Goliath, 
every  tendon  a  hawser  ! — round  and  round — round,  round 
it  spun  like  a  sphere,  keeping  time  with  our  feet  to  the 
time  of  the  fifer,  till  the  cable  was  straight  up  and  down, 
and  the  ship  with  her  nose  in  the  water. 

'  Heave  and  pall !   unship  your  bars,  and  make  sail !  ' 

It  was  done  : — bar-men,  nipper-men,  tierers,  veerers, 
idlers  and  all,  scrambled  up  the  ladder  to  the  braces  and 
halyards ;  while,  like  monkeys  in  palm-trees,  the  sail- 
loosers  ran  out  on  those  broad  boughs,  our  yards  ;  and 
down  fell  the  sails  like  white  clouds  from  the  ether — top 
sails,  top-gallants,  and  royals  ;  and  away  we  ran  with  the 
halyards,  till  every  sheet  was  distended. 

'  Once  more  to  the  bars  !  ' 

'  Heave,  my  hearties,  heave  hard  !  ' 

With  a  jerk  and  a  yerk,  we  broke  ground  ;  and  up  to 
our  bows  came  several  thousand  pounds  of  old  iron,  in 
the  shape  of  our  ponderous  anchor. 

Where  was  White  Jacket  then  ? 

White  Jacket  was  where  he  belonged.  It  was  White 
Jacket  that  loosed  that \main-royal,  so  far  up  aloft  there, 
it  looks  like  a  white  albatross*  wing.  It  was  White  Jacket 
that  was  taken  for  an  albatross  himself,  as  he  flew  out  on 
the  giddy  yard-arm  ! 

/ 


CHAPTER  III 

A   GLANCE   AT   THE    PRINCIPAL    DIVISIONS   INTO    WHICH   A 

MAN-OF-WAR'S  CREW  is  DIVIDED 

HAVING  just  designated  the  place  where  White  Jacket 
belonged,  it  must  needs  be  related  how  White  Jacket 
came  to  belong  there. 

Everyone  knows  that  in  merchantmen  the  seamen  are 
divided  into  watches — starboard  and  larboard — taking 
their  turn  at  the  ship's  duty  by  night.  This  plan  is 
followed  in  all  men-of-war.  But  in  all  m§n-of-w.ar, 
besides  this  division,  there  are  others,  rendered  indis 
pensable  from  the  great  number  of  men,  and  the  necessity 
of  precision  and  discipline.  Not  only  are  particular  bands 
assigned  to  the  three  tops,  but  in  getting  under  weigh,  or 
any  other  proceeding  requiring  all  hands,  particular 
men  of  these  bands  are  assigned  to  each  yard  of  the 
tops.  Thus,  when  the  order  is  given  to  loose  the 
main-royal,  White  Jacket  flies  to  obey  it ;  and  no  one 
but  he. 

And  not  only  are  particular  bands  stationed  on  the 
three  decks  of  the  ship  at  such  times,  but  particular  men 
of  those  bands  are  also  assigned  to  particular  duties. 
Also,  in  tacking  ship,  reefing  topsails,  or  '  coming  to,' 
every  man  of  a  frigate's  five-hundred-strong  knows  his 
own  special  place,  and  is  infallibly  found  there.  He  sees 
nothing  else,  attends  to  nothing  else,  and  will  stay  there 
till  grim  death  or  an  epaulet  orders  him  away.  Yet 
there  are  times  when,  through  the  negligence  of  the 
officers,  some  exceptions  are  found  to  this  rule.  A  rather 


DIVISIONS  OF  A  MAN-OF-WAR'S  CREW        7 


related  in  some  future  chapter. 


serious  circumstance  growing  out  of  such  a  case  will  be 

/r 

Were  it  not  for  these  regulations,  a  man-of-war's  crew    A 
would  be  nothing  but  a  mob,  more  ungovernable  stripping   ' 
the  canvas  in  a  gale  than  Lord  George  Gordon's  tearing 
down  the  lofty  house  of  Lord  Mansfield. 

But  this  is  not  all.  Besides  White  Jacket's  office  as 
looser  of  the  main-royal,  when  all  hands  were  called  to 
make  sail ;  and  besides  his  special  offices  in  tacking  ship, 
coming  to  anchor,  etc.,  he  permanently  belonged  to  the 
starboard  watch,  one  of  the  two  primary  grand  divisions 
of  the  ship's  company.  And  in  this  watch  he  was  a 
main-top  man,  that  is,  was  stationed  in  the  main-top, 
with  a  number  of  other  seamen,  always  in  readiness  to 
execute  any  orders  pertaining  to  the  mainmast,  from 
above  the  main-yard.  For,  including  the  main-yard,  and 
below  it  to  the  deck,  the  mainmast  belongs  to  another 
detachment. 

Now  the  fore,  main,  and  mizen-top  men  of  each  watch 
— starboard  and  larboard — are  at  sea  respectively  sub 
divided  into  quarter -watches,  which  regularly  relieve 
each  other  in  the  tops  to  which  they  may  belong  ;  while, 
collectively,  they  relieve  the  whole  larboard  watch  of 
topmen. 

Besides  these  Jiopmen,  who  are  always  made  up  of 
active  sailors,  there  are  sheet-anchor  men — old  veterans  ^  I 

jfff 

anchors,  and  all  the  sails  on  the  bowsprit  being  under 
their  care. 

They  are  an  old  weather-beaten  set,  culled  from  the 
most  experienced  seamen  on  board.  These  are  the 
fellows  that  sing  you  '  The  Bay  of  Biscay  Oh  !  '  and  '  Here 
a  sheer  hulk  lies  poor  Tom  Bowling  !  '  '  Cease,  rude  Boreas, 
blustering  railer  !  '  who,  when  ashore,  at  an  eating-house, 
call  for  a  bowl  of  tar  and  a  biscuit.  These  are  the  fellows 


all— whose  place  is   on  the  forecastle  ;    the  fore-yard, 


Jt 


8  WHITE  JACKET 

who  spin  interminable  yarns  about  Decatur,  Hull,  and 
Bainbridge  ;  and  carry  about  their  persons  bits  of  '  Old 
Ironsides,'  as  Catholics  do  the  wood  of  the  true  cross. 
These  are  the  fellows  that  some  officers  never  pretend  to 
damn,  however  much  they  may  anathematise  others. 
These  are  the  fellows  that  it  does  your  soul  good  to  look 
at — hearty  old  members  of  the  Old  Guard ;  grim  sea- 
grenadiers,  who,  in  tempest  time,  have  lost  many  a  tar 
paulin  overboard.  These  are  the  fellows  whose  society 
some  of  the  youngster  midshipmen  much  affect ;  from 
whom  they  learn  their  best  seamanship  ;~  and  to  whom 
they  look  up  as  veterans  ;  if  so  be  that  they  have  any 
reverence  in  their  souls,  which  is  not  the  case  with  all 
midshipmen. 

Then  there  is  the  After-guard,  stationed  on  the  quarter 
deck  ;  who,  under  the  quarter-masters  and  quarter- 
gunners,  attend  to  the  mainsail  and  spanker,  and  help 
haul  the  main-brace  and  other  ropes  in  the  stern  of  the 
vessel. 

The  duties  assigned  to  the  after-guard's  men  being 
comparatively  light  and  easy,  and  but  little  seamanship 
being  expected  from  them,  they  are  composed  chiefly  of 
landsmen  ;  the  least  robust,  least  hardy,  and  least  sailor- 
like  of  the  crew  ;  and  being  stationed  on  the  quarter-deck, 
they  are  generally  selected  with  some  eye  to  their  personal 
appearance.  Hence,  they  are  mostly  slender  young 
fellows,  of  a  genteel  figure  and  gentlemanly  address  ;  not 
weighing  much  on  a  rope,  but  weighing  considerably  in 
the  estimation  of  all  foreign  ladie^  who  may  chance  to 
visit  the  ship.  They  lounge  away  the  most  part  of  their 
time  in  reading  novels  and  romances  ;  talking  over  their 
lover  affairs  ashore  ;  and  comparing  notes  concerning  the 
melancholy  and  sentimental  career  which  drove  them — 
poor  young  gentlemen — into  the  hard-hearted  Navy. 
Indeed,  many  of  them  show  tokens  of  having  moved  in 


DIVISIONS  OF  A  MAN  OF-WAR'S  CREW         9 

very- respectable  society.  They  always  maintain  a  tidy 
exterior  ;  and  express  an  abhorrence  of  the  tar-bucket, 
into  which  they  are  seldom  or  never  called  to  dip  their 
digits.  And  pluming  themselves  upon  the  cut  of  their 
trowsers,  and  the  glossiness  of  their  tarpaulins,  from  the 
rest  of  the  ship's  company*  th§y  acquire  the  name  of  *  sea- 
dandies'  and  '  silk-sock-gentry' 

Then,  there  are  the  Waisters,  always  stationed  on  the 
gun-deck.  These  haul  aft  the  fore  and  main  sheets, 
besides  being  subject  to  ignoble  duties  ;  attending  to  the 
drainage  and  sewerage  below  hatches.  These  fellows  are 
all  Jimmy  Duxes — sorry  chaps,  who  never  put  foot  in 
rattlin,  or  venture  above  the  bulwarks.  Inveterate  '  sons_ 
of  farmer s>  with  the  hayseed  yet  in  their  hair,  they  are 
consigned  to  the  congenial  superintendence  of  the  chicken- 
coops,  pig-pens,  and  potato-lockers.  These  are  generally 
placed  amidships,  on  the  gun-deck  of  a  frigate,  between 
the  fore  and  main  hatches  ;  and  comprise  so  extensive 
an  area  that  it  much  resembles  the  market-place  of  a 
small  town.  The  melodious  sounds  thence  issuing,  con 
tinually  draw  tears  from  the  eyes  of  the  waisters  ;  re 
minding  them  of  their  old  paternal  pig-pens  and  potato 
patches.  They  are  the  tag-rag  and  bobtail  of  the  crew  ; 
and  he  who  is  good  for  nothing  else  is  good  enough  for  a 
waister. 

Three  decks  down — spar-deck,  gun-deck,  and  berth- 
deck — and  we  come  to  a  parcel  of  Troglodites  or  Holders, 
who  burrow,  like  rabbits  in  warrens,  among  the  water- 
tanks,  casks,  and  cables.  Like  Cornwall  miners,  wash  off 
the  soot  from  their  skins,  and  they  are  all  pale  as  ghosts. 
Unless  upon  rare  occasions,  they  seldom  come  on  deck  to 
sun  themselves.  They  may  circumnavigate  the  world 
fifty  times,  and  they  see  about  as  much  of  it  as  Jonah  did 
in  the  whale's  belly.  They  are  a  lazy,  lumpish,  torpid  set ; 
and  when  going  ashore  after  a  long  cruise  come  out  into 


10  WHITE  JACKET 

the  day  like  terrapins  from  their  caves,  or  bears  in  the 
spring,  from  tree  trunks.  No  one  ever  knows  the  names 
of  these  fellows  ;  after  a  three  years'  voyage,  they  still 
remain  strangers  to  you.  In  time  of  tempests,  when  all 
hands  are  called  to  save  ship,  they  issue  forth  into  the 
gale  like  the  mysterious  old  men  of  Paris  during  the 
massacre  of  the  Three  Days  of  September  ;  every  one 
marvels  who  they  are,  and  whence  they  come  ;  they  dis 
appear  as  mysteriously,  and  are  seen  no  more  until 
another  general  commotion. 

Such  are  the  principal  divisions  into  which  a  man-of- 
war's  crew  is  divided  ;  but  the  inferior  allotments  of  duties 
are  endless,  and  would  require  a  German  commentator 
to  chronicle. 

We  say  nothing  here  of  Boatswain's  mates,  Gunner's 
mates,  Carpenter's  mates,  Sailmaker's  mates,  Armourer's 
mates,  Master-at-Arms,  Ship's  corporals,  Cockswains, 
Quarter-masters,  Quarter-gunners,  Captains  of  the  Fore 
castle,  Captains  of  the  Fore -top,  Captains  of  the  Main 
top,  Captains  of  the  Mizen-top,  Captains  of  the  After 
guard,  Captains  of  the  Main-hold,  Captains  of  the  Fore- 
hold,  Captains  of  the  Head,  Coopers,  Painters,  Tinkers, 
Commodore's  steward,  Captain's  steward,  Ward-Room 
steward,  Steerage  steward,  Commodore's  cook,  Captain's 
cook,  Officers'  cook,  Cooks  of  the  range,  Mess-cooks, 
V  hammock-boys,  messenger-boys,  cot-boys,  loblolly-boys, 

and  numberless  others,  whose  functions  are  fixed  and 
peculiar. 

r-w It  is  from  this  endless  subdivision  of  duties  in  a  man-of- 
war  that,"  upon  first  entering  one,  a  sailor  has  need  of  a 
good  memory,  and  the  more  of  an  arithmetician  he  is. 
the  better. 

White  Jacket,  for  one,  was  a  long  time  rapt  in  calcula 
tions  concerning  the  various  '  numbers  '  allotted  him  by 
the  First  Luff,  otherwise  known  as  the  First  Lieutenant. 

v 


DIVISIONS  OF  A  MAN-OF-WAR'S  CREW      11 

In  the  first  place,  White  Jacket  was  given  the  number  of 
Ms  mess  ;  then,  his  ship's  number,  or  the  number  to  which 
he  must  answer  when  the  watch-roll  is  called  ;  then,  the 
number  of  his  hammock  ;  then,  the  number  of  the  gun 
to  which  he  was  assigned  ;  besides  a  variety  of  other 
numbers ;  all  of  which  would  have  taken  Jedediah 
Buxton  himself  some  time  to  arrange  in  battalions, 
previous  to  adding  up.  All  these  numbers,  moreover, 
must  be  well  remembered,  or  woe  betide  you. 

Consider,  now,  a  sailor  altogether  unused  to  the 
tumult  of  a  man-of-war,  for  the  first  time  stepping  on 
board,  and  given  all  these  numbers  to  recollect.  Already, 
before  hearing  them,  his  head  is  half  stunned  with  the 
unaccustomed  sounds  ringing  in  his  ears  ;  which  ears 
seem  to  him  like  belfries  full  of  tocsins.  On  the  gun-deck, 
a  thousand  scythed  chariots  seem  passing  ;  he  hears  the  /v/ 
tread  of  armed  marines  ;  the  clash  of  cutlasses  and  curses. 
The  boatswain's  mates  whistle  round  him,  like  hawks 
screaming  in  a  gale,  and  the  strange  noises  under  decks 
are  like  volcanic  rumblings  in  a  mountain.  He  dodges 
sudden  sounds  as  a  raw  recruit  falling  bombs. 

Well-nigh  useless  to  him,  now,  all  previous  circum 
navigations  of  this  terraqueous  globe  ;  of  no  account 
his  arctic,  antarctic,  or  equinoctial  experiences ;  his 
gales  off  Beachy  Head,  or  his  dismastmgs  off  Hatteras. 
He  must  begin  anew ;  he  knows  nothing ;  Greek  and 
Hebrew  could  not  help  him,  for  the  language  he  must 
learn  has  neither  grammar  nor  lexicon. 

Mark  him,  as  he  advances  along  the  files  of  old  ocean 
warriors  ;  mark  his  debased  attitude,  his  deprecating 
gestures,  his  Sawney  stare,  like  a  Scotchman  in  London ; 
his — '  cry  your  mercy,  noble  seignors  !  '  He  is  wholly 
nonplussed  and  confounded.  And  when,  to  crown  all, 
the  first  lieutenant,  whose  business  it  is  to  welcome 
all  new-comers,  and  assign  them  their  quarters  ;  when 


12  WHITE  JACKET 

this  officer — none  of  the  most  bland  or  amiable  either 
— gives  him  number  after  number  to  recollect — 246 — 
139 — 478 — 351 — the  poor  fellow  feels  like  decamping. 

Study,  then,  your  mathematics,  and  cultivate  all 
your  memories,  oh  ye  who  think  of  cruising  in  men- 
of-war  ! 


CHAPTER  IV 

JACK   CHASE 

THE  first  night  out  of  port  was  a  clear,  moonlight  one  ; 
the  frigate  gliding  through  the  water  with  all  her  batteries. 

It  was  my  quarter -watch  in  the  top,  and  there  I  reclined 
on  the  best  possible  terms  with  my  topmates.  Whatever 
the  other  seamen  might  have  been,  these  were  a  noble  set 
of  tars,  and  well  worthy  an  introduction  to  the  reader. 

First  and  foremost  was  Jack  Chase,  our  noble  first 
captain  of  the  top.  He  was  a  Briton,  and  a  true-blue  ; 
tall  and  well-knit,  with  a  clear  open  eye,  a  fine  broad  brow, 
and  an  abounding  nut-brown  beard.  Ho  man  ever  had 
a  better  heart  or  a  bolder.  He  was  loved  by  the  seamen, 
and  admired  by  the  officers  ;  and  even  when  the  captain 
spoke  to  him,  it  was  with  a  slight  air  of  respect.  Jack 
was  a  frank  and  charming  man. 

No  one  could  be  better  company  in  forecastle  or  saloon  ; 
no  man  told  such  stories,  sang  such  songs,  or  with  greater 
alacrity  sprang  to  his  duty.  Indeed,  there  was  only  one 
thing  wanting  about  him,  and  that  was  a  finger  of  his  left 
hand,  which  finger  he  had  lost  at  the  great  battle  of 
Navarino. 

He  had  a  high  conceit  of  his  profession  as  a  seaman  ; 
and  being  deeply  versed  in  all  things  pertaining  to  a  man- 
of-war,  was  universally  regarded  as  anjpracle.  The  main 
top,  over  which  he  presided,  was  a  sort  of  oracle  of  Delphi, 
to  which  many  pilgrims  ascended  to  have  their  per 
plexities  or  differences  settled. 

There  was  such  an  abounding  air  of  good  sense  and  good 

13 


14  WHITE  JACKET 

it// 

feeling  about  the  man,  that  he  who  could  not  love  him 

would  thereby  pronounce  himself  a  knave.  I  thanked 
my  sweet  stars  that  kind  fortune  had  placed  me  near  him, 
though  under  him,  in  the  frigate  ;  and  from  the  outset 
Jack  and  I  were  fast  friends* 

Wherever  you  may  be  now  rolling  over  the  blue  billows, 
dear  Jack  !  take  my  best  love  along  with  you  ;  and  God 
bless  you,  wherever  you  go  ! 

Jack  was  a  gentleman.  What  though  his  hand  was 
hard,  so  was  not  his  heart,  too  often  the  case  with  soft 
palms.  His  manners  were  easy  and  free  ;  none  of  the 
boisterousness,  so  common  to  tars  ;  and  he  had  a  polite, 
courteous  way  of  saluting  you,  if  it  were  only  to  borrow 
your  knife.  Jack  had  read  all  the  verses  of  Byron,  and 
all  the  romances  of  Scott.  He  talked  of  Rob  Roy,  Don 
Juan,  and  Pelham  ;  Macbeth  and  Ulysses  ;  but,  above 
all  things,  was  an  ardent  admirer  of  Camoens.  Parts  of 
The  Lusiad  he  could  recite  in  the  original.  Where  he  had 
obtained  his  wonderful  accomplishments  it  is  not  for  me, 
his  humble  subordinate,  to  say.  Enough,  that  those 
accomplishments  were  so  various  ;  the  languages  he 
could  converse  in  so  numerous  ;  that  he  more  than 
furnished  an  example  of  that  saying  of  Charles  the  Fifth 
—  he  who  speaks  five  languages  is  as  good  as  five  men.  But 
Jack,  he  was  better  than  a  hundred  common  mortals  ; 
Jack  was  a  whole  phalanx,  an  entire  army  ;  Jack  was  a 
thousand  strong  ;  Jack  would  have-  done  honour  to  the 
Queen  of  England's  drawing-room  ;  Jack  must  have  been 
a  by-blow  of  some  British  Admiral  of  the  Blue.  A  finer 
specimen  of  the  island  race  of  Englishmen  could  not  have 
been  picked  out  of  Westminster  Abbey  of  a  coronation 
day. 

His  whole  demeanour  was  in  strong  contrast  to  that  of 
one  of  the  captains  of  the  fore-top.  This  man,  though  a 
good  seaman,  furnished  an  example  of  those  insufferable 


JACK  CHASE  15 

Britons,  who,  while  preferring  other  countries  to  their 
own  as  places  of  residence,  still  overflow  with  all  the 
pompousness  of  national  and  individual  vanity  combined. 
'  When  I  was  on  board  the  Audacious  ' — for  a  long  time 
was  almost  the  invariable  exordium  to  the  fore-top 
captain's  most  cursory  remarks.  It  is  often  the  custom 
of  men-of-war's  men,  when  they  deem  anything  to  be 
going  on  wrong  aboard  ship,  to  refer  to  last  cruise,  when 
of  course  everything  was  done  ship-shape  and  Bristol 
fashion.  And  by  referring  to  the  Audacious — an  expres 
sive  name,  by  the  way — the  fore-top  captain  meant  a  ship 
in  the  English  Navy,  in  which  he  had  had  the  honour  of 
serving.  So  continual  were  his  allusions  to  this  craft 
with  the  amiable  name  that,  at  last,  the  Audacious  was 
voted  a  bore  by  his  shipmates.  And  one  hot  afternoon, 
during  a  calm,  when  the  fore-top  captain,  like  many 
others,  was  standing  still  and  yawning  on  the  spar-deck, 
Jack  Chase,  his  own  countryman,  came  up  to  him,  and 
pointing  at  his  open  mouth,  politely  inquired  whether 
that  was  the  way  they  caught  flies  in  Her  Britannic 
Majesty's  ship  the  Audacious  ?  After  that,  we  heard 
no  more  of  the  craft. 

Now,  the  tops  of  a  frigate  are  quite  spacious  and  cosy. 
They  are  railed  in  behind  so  as  to  form  a  kind  of  balcony, 
very  pleasant  of  a  tropical  night.  From  twenty  to  thirty 
loungers  may  agreeably  recline  there,  cushioning  them 
selves  on  old  sails  and  jackets.  We  had  rare  times  in 
that  top.  We  accounted  ourselves  the  best  seamen  in 
the  ship,  and  from  our  airy  perch  literally  looked  down 
upon  the  land-lopers  below,  sneaking  about  the  deck, 
among  the  guns.  In  a  large  degree  we  nourished  that 
feeling  of  esprit  de  corps,  always  pervading,  more  or  less, 
the  various  sections  of  a  man-of-war's  crew.  We  main 
top  men  were  brothers,  one  and  all ;  and  we  loaned  Our 
selves  to  each  othdr  with  all  the  freedom  in  the  world. 


; 


16  WHITE  JACKET 

Nevertheless,  I  had  not  long  been  a  member  of  this 
fraternity  of  fine  fellows  ere  I  discovered  that  Jack  Chase, 
our  captain,  was  —  like  all  prime  favourites  and  oracles 
among  men  —  a  little  bit  of  a  dictator  ;  not  peremptorily, 
or  annoyingly  so,  but  amusingly  intent  on  egotistically 
mending  our  manners  and  improving  our  taste,  so  that 
we  might  reflect  credit  upon  our  tutor. 

He  made  us  all  wear  our  hats  at  a  particular  angle, 
instructed  us  in  the  tie  of  our  neck  -handkerchiefs,  and  pro 
tested  against  our  wearing  vulgar  dungaree  trowsers,  besides 
giving  us  lessons  in  seamanship,  and  solemnly  conjuring 
us  forever  to  eschew  the  company  of  any  sailor  we  sus 
pected  of  having  served  in  a  whaler.  Against  all  whalers, 
indeed,  he  cherished  the  unmitigated  detestation  of  a 
true  man-of-war's  man.  Poor  Tubbs  can  testify  to  that. 

Tubbs  was  in  the  after-guard  ;  a  long,  lank  Vineyarder, 
eternally  talking  of  line-tubs,  Nantucket,  sperm-oil,  stove 
boats,  and  Japan.  Nothing  could  silence  him,  and  his 
comparisons  were  ever  invidious. 

Now,  with  all  his  soul,  Jack  abominated  this  Tubbs. 
He  said  he  was  vulgar,  an  upstart  —  Devil  take  him,  he  's 
been  in  a  whaler.  But,  like  many  men  who  have  been 
where  you  haven't  been,  or  seen  what  you  haven't  seen, 
Tubbs,  on  account  of  his  whaling  experiences,  absolutely 
affected  to  look  down  upon  Jack,  even  as  Jack  did  upon 
him  ;  and  this  it  was  that  so  enraged  our  noble  captain. 

One  night,  with  a  peculiar  meaning  in  his  eye,  he  sent 
me  down  on  deck  to  invite  Tubbs.  up  aloft  for  a  chat. 
Flattered  by  so  marked  an  honour  —  f  or  we  were  somewhat 
fastidious,  and  did  not  extend  such  invitations  to  every 
body  —  Tubbs  quickly  mounted  the  rigging,  looking  rather 
abashed  at  finding  himself  in  the  august  presence  of 
the  assembled  quarter-  watch  of  main-top  men.  Jack's 
courteous  manner,  however,  very  soon  relieved  his  em 
barrassment  ;  but  it  is  no  use  to  be  courteous  to  some 


JACK  CHASE  17 

men  in  this  world.  Tubbs  belonged  to  that  category. 
No  sooner  did  the  bumpkin  feel  himself  at  ease  than  he 
launched  out,  as  usual,  into  tremendous  laudations  of 
whalemen  ;  declaring  that  whalemen  alone  deserved  the 
name  of  sailors.  Jacf  stood  it  some  time ;  but  when 
Tubbs  came  down  upon  men-of-war,  and  particularly 
upon  main-top  men,  his  sense  of  propriety  was  so  out 
raged  that  he  launched  into  Tubbs  like  a  forty-two- 
pounder. 

1  Why,  you  limb  of  Nantucket !  you  train-oil  man  ! 
you  sea-tallow  strainer  !  you  bobber  after  carrion  !  do 
you  pretend  to  vilify  a  man-of-war  ?  Why,  you  lean 
rogue  you,  a  man-of-war  is  to  whalemen  as  a  metropolis 
to  shire  towns  and  sequestered  hamlets.  Here 's  the 
place  for  life  and  commotion  ;  here  's  the  place  to  be 
gentlemanly  and  jolly.  And  what  did  you  know,  you 
bumpkin  !  before  you  came  on  board  this  Andrew  Miller  ? 
What  knew  you  of  gun-deck,  or  orlop,  mustering  round 
the  capstan,  beating  to  quarters,  and  piping  to  dinner  ? 
Did  you  ever  roll  to  grog  on  board  your  greasy  ballyhoo 
of  blazes  ?  Did  you  ever  winter  at  Mahon  ?  Did  you 
ever  '  lash  and  carry  '  ?  Why,  what  are  even  a  merchant 
seaman's  sorry  yarns  of  voyages  to  China  after  tea- 
caddies,  and  voyages  to  the  West  Indies  after  sugar 
puncheons,  and  voyages  to  the  Shetlands  after  sealskins 
— what  are  even  these  yarns,  you  Tubbs  you  !  to  high 
life  in  a  man-of-war  ?  Why,  you  dead-eye  !  I  have 
sailed  with  lords  and  marquises  for  captains  ;  and  the 
King  of  the  Two  Sicilies  has  passed  me,  as  I  here  stood 
up  at  my  gun.  Bah  !  you  are  full  of  the  fore-peak  and 
the  forecastle  ;  you  are  only  familiar  with  Burtons  and 
Billy-tackles  ;  your  ambition  never  mounted  above  pig- 
killing  !  which,  in  my  poor  opinion,  is  the  proper  phrase 
for  whaling  !  Topmates  !  has  not  this  Tubbs  here  been 
but  a  misuser  of  good  oak  planks,  and  a  vile  desecrator 

B 


18  WHITE  JACKET 

of  the  thrice  holy  sea  ?  turning  his  ship,  my  hearties  ! 
into  a  fat-kettle,  and  the  ocean  into  a  whale-pen  ?  Be 
gone,  you  graceless,  godless  knave  !  pitch  him  over  the 
top  there,  White  Jacket !  ' 

But  there  was  no  necessity  for  my  exertions.  Poor 
Tubbs,  astounded  at  these  fulminations,  was  already 
rapidly  descending  by  the  rigging. 

This  outburst  on  the  part  of  my  noble  friend,  Jack, 
made  me  shake  all  over,  spite  of  my  padded  surtout ; 
and  caused  me  to  offer  up  devout  thanksgivings  that  in 
no  evil  hour  had  I  divulged  the  fact  of  having  myself 
served  In  a  whaler  ;  for  having  previously  marked  the 
prevailing  prejudice  of  man-of-war's  men  to  that  much- 
maligned  class  of  mariners,  I  had  wisely  held  my  peace 
concerning  stove  boats  on  the  coast  of  Japan. 


CHAPTER  V 

JACK   CHASE   ON   A   SPANISH   QUARTER-DECK 

HERE,  I  must  frankly  tell  a  story  about  Jack,  which,  as 
touching  his  honour  and  integrity,  I  am_sure,  will  not 
work  against  him  in  any  charitable  man's  estimation. 
On  this  present  cruise  of  the  frigate  Never  sink,  Jack-had- 
deserted  ;  and  after  a  certain  interval  had  been  captured. 

But  with  what  purpose  had  he  deserted  ?  To  avoid 
naval  discipline  ?  to  riot  in  some  abandoned  seaport  ? 
for  love  of  some  worthless  signorita  ?  Not  at  all.  He 
abandoned  the  frigate  from  far  higher  and  nobler,  nay, 
glorious  motives.  Though  bowing  to  naval  discipline 
afloat,  yet  ashore  he  was  a  stickler  for  the  Rights  of  Man 
and  the  liberties  of  the  world.  He  went  to  draw  a  partisan 
blade  in  the  civil  commotions  of  Peru,  and  befriend,  heart 
and  soul,  what  he  deemed  the  cause  of  the  Right. 

At  the  time,  his  disappearance  excited  the  utmost 
astonishment  among  the  officers,  who  had  little  suspected 
him  of  any  such  conduct  as  deserting. 

'  What  ?  Jack,  my  great  man  of  the  main-top,  gone  !  ' 
cried  the  captain  :  '  I  '11  not  believe  it.' 

*  Jack  Chase  cut  and  run  !  '  cried  a  sentimental  middy. 
'  It  must  have  been  all  for  love,  then  ;  the  signoritas  have 
turned  his  head.' 

'  Jack  Chase  not  to  be  found  ?  '  cried  a  growling  old 
sheet-anchor  man,  one  of  your  malicious  prophets  of  past 
events  :  *  I  thought  so  ;  I  know'd  it ;  I  could  have  sworn 
it — just  the  chap  to  make  sail  on  the  sly.  I  always 
s'pected  him.' 

19 


20  WHITE  JACKET 

Months  passed  away,  and  nothing  was  heard  of  Jack ; 
till  at  last  the  frigate  came  to  anchor  on  the  coast,  along 
side  of  a  Peruvian  sloop  of  war. 

Bravely  clad  in  the  Peruvian  uniform,  and  with  a  fine, 
mixed  martial  and  naval  step,  a  tall,  striking  figure  of 
a  long-bearded  officer  was  descried,  promenading  the 
quarter-deck  of  the  stranger,  and  superintending  the 
salutes  which  are  exchanged  between  national  vessels 
on  these  occasions. 

This  fine  officer  touched  his  laced  hat  most  courteously 
to  our  captain,  who,  after  returning  the  compliment, 
stared  at  him,  rather  impolitely,  through  his  spy 
glass. 

*  By  heaven  ! '  he  cried  at  last ;  '  it  is  he — he  can't 
disguise  his  walk — that 's  his  beard  ;  I  'd  know  him  in 
Cochin  China.  Man  the  first  cutter  there  !  Lieutenant 
Blink,  go  on  board  that  sloop  of  war,  and  fetch  me  yon 
officer.' 

All  hands  were  aghast.  What  ?  when  a  piping-hot 
peace  was  between  the  United  States  and  Peru,  to  sefid 
an  armed  body  on  board  a  Peruvian  sloop  of  war,  and 
seize  one  of  its  officers,  in  broad  daylight  ? — Monstrous 
infraction  of  the  Law  of  Nations !  What  would  Vattel 
say  ? 

But  Captain  Claret  must  be  obeyed.  So  off  went  the 
cutter,  every  man  armed  to  the  teeth,  the  lieutenant 
commanding  having  secret  instructions,  and  the  midship 
men  attending  looking  ominously  wise,  though,  in  truth, 
they  could  not  tell  what  was  coming. 

Gaining  the  sloop  of  war,  the  lieutenant  was  received 
with  the  customary  honours  ;  but  by  this  time  the  tall, 
bearded  officer  had  disappeared  from  the  quarter-deck. 
The  lieutenant  now  inquired  for  the  Peruvian  captain  ; 
and  being  shown  into  the  cabin,  made  known  to-Jiim 
that  on  board  his  vessel  was  a  person  belonging  to  the 


JACK  CHASE  ON  SPANISH  QUARTER-DECK     21 

United  States  ship  Neversink ;  and  his  orders  were  to 
have  that  person  delivered  trp  instanter. 

The  foreign  captain  curled  his  moustache  in  astonish 
ment  and  indignation  ;  he  hinted  something  about  beating 
to  quarters,  and  chastising  this  piece  of  Yankee  insolence. 

But  resting  one"  gloved  hand  upon  the  table,  and 
playing  with  his  sword-knot,  the  lieutenant,  with  a 
bland  firmness,  repeated  his  demand.  At  last,  the  whole 
case  being  so  plainly  made  out,  and  the  person  in  question 
being  so  accurately  described,  even  to  a  mole  on  his  cheek, 
there  remained  nothing  but  immediate  compliance. 

So  the  fine-looking,  bearded  officer,  who  had  so  courte 
ously  doffed  his  chapeau  to  our  captain,  but  disappeared 
upon  the  arrival  of  the  lieutenant,  was  summoned  into 
the  cabin,  before  his  superior,  who  addressed  him  thus  : — 

*  Don  John,  this  gentleman  declares,  that  of  right  you 
belong  to  the  frigate  Neversink.     Is  it  so  ?  ' 

*  It  is  even  so,  Don  Sereno/  said  Jack  Chase,  proudly 
folding  his  gold-laced  coat-sleeves  across  his  chest ;  '  and 
as  there  is  no  resisting  the  frigate,  I  comply. — Lieutenant 
Blink,  I  am  ready.     Adieu  !    Don  Sereno,  and  Madre  de 
Dios  protect  you  !     You  have  been  a  most  gentlemanly 
friend  and  captain  to  me.     I  hope  you  will  yet  thrash 
your  beggarly  foes/ 

With  that  he  turned  ;  and  entering  the  cutter,  was 
pulled  back  to  the  frigate,  and  stepped  up  to  Captain 
Claret,  where  that  gentleman  stood  on  the  quarter-deck. 

'  Your  servant,  my  fine  Don/  said  the  captain,  ironi 
cally  lifting  his  chapeau,  but  regarding  Jack  at  the  same 
time  with  a  look  of  intense  displeasure. 

'  Your  most  devoted  and  penitent  captain  of  the 
main-top,  sir  ;  and  one  who,  in  his  very  humility  of  con 
trition,  is  yetrproud  to  call  Captain  Claret  his  commander/ 
said  Jack,  making  a  glorious  bow,  and  then  tragically 
flinging  overboard  his  Peruvian  sword. 


22  WHITE  JACKET 

'  Reinstate  him  at  once,'  shouted  Captain  Claret ;  '  and 
now,  sir,  to  your  duty  ;  and  discharge  that  well  to  the 
end  5f  the  cruise,  and  you  will  hear  no  more  of  your  having 
run  away/ 

So  Jack  went  forward  among  crowds  of  admiring  tars, 
who  swore  by  his  nut-brown  beard,  which  had  amazingly 
lengthened  and  spread  during  his  absence.  They  divided 
his  laced  hat  and  coat  among  them,  and  on  their 
shoulders  carried  him  in  triumph  along  the  gun-deck. 


CHAPTER  VI 

THE  QUARTER-DECK  OFFICERS,  WARRANT  OFFICERS,  AND 
BERTH-DECK  UNDERLINGS  OF  A  MAN-OF-WAR  ;  WHERE 
THEY  LIVE  IN  THE  SHIP  ;  HOW  THEY  LIVE  ;  THEIR 
SOCIAL  STANDING  ON  SHIPBOARD  ;  AND  WHAT  SORT 
OF  GENTLEMEN  THEY  ARE 

SOME  account  has  been  given  of  the  various  divisions  into 
which  our  crew  was  divided ;  so  it  may  be  well  to  say 
something  of  the  officers;  who  they  are,  and  what  are 
their  functions. 

Our  ship,  be  it  known,  was  the  flagship  ;  that  is,  we 
sported  a  broad  pennant,  or  bougee,  at  the  main,  in  token 
that  we  carried  a  commodore — the  highest  rank  of  officers 
recognised  in  the  American  Navy.  The  bougee  is  not  to 
be  confounded  with  the  long  pennant,  or  coach-whip,  a 
tapering,  serpentine  streamer  worn  by  all  men-of-war. 

Owing  to  certain  vague,  republican  scruples  about 
creating  great  officers  of  the  Navy,  America  has  thus  far 
had  no  admirals  ;  though,  as  her  ships  of  war  increase, 
they  may  become  indispensable.  This  will  assuredly  be 
the  case  should  she  ever  have  occasion  to  employ  large 
fleets  ;  when  she  must  adopt  something  like  the  English 
plan,  and  introduce  three  or  four  grades  of  flag-officers 
above  a  commodore — admirals,  vice-admirals,  and  rear- 
admirals  of  squadrons  ;  distinguished  by  the  colours 
of  their  flags — red,  white,  and  blue,  corresponding  to 
the  centre,  van,  and  rear.  These  rank  respectively 
with  generals,  lieutenant-generals,  and  major-generals 

23 


24  WHITE  JACKET 

in  the  Army  ;  just  as  a  commodore  takes  rank  with  a 
brigadier-general.  So  that  the  same  prejudice  which 
prevents  the  American  Government  from  creating 
admirals  should  have  precluded  the  creation  of  all  Army 
officers  above  a  brigadier. 

An  American  commodore,  like  an  English  commodore, 
or  the  French  chef  d'escadre,  is  but  a  senior  captain, 
temporarily  commanding  a  small  number  of  ships,  de 
tached  for  any  special  purpose.  He  has  no  permanent 
rank,  recognised  by  Government,  above  his  captaincy  ; 
though  once  employed  as  a  commodore,  usage  and  cour 
tesy  unite  in  continuing  the  title. 

.._ ...  vQur  commodore  was  a  gallant  old  manT^who  had  seen 

service  in  his  time.  When  a  lieutenant,  he  served  in  the 
late  war  with  England  ;  and  in  the  gun-boat  actions  on 
the  Lakes  near  New  Orleans,  just  previous  to  the  grand 
land  engagements,  received  a  musket  ball  in  his  shoulder, 
which,  with  the  two  balls  in  his  eyes,  he  carries  about  with 
him  to  this  day. 

Often,  when  I  looked  at  the  venerable  old  warrior, 
doubled  up  from  the  effect  of  his  wound,  I  thought  what 
a  curious,  as  well  as  painful  sensation  it  must  be,  to  have 
one's  shoulder  a  lead-mine  ;  though,  sooth  to  say,  so  many 
of  us  civilised  mortals  convert  our  mouths  into  Golcondas. 

On  account  of  this  wound  in  his  shoulder,  our  com 
modore  had  a  body-servant's  pay  allowed  him,  in  addition 
to  his  regular  salary.  I  cannot  say  a  great  deal,  per 
sonally,  of  the  commodore  ;  he  never  sought  my  company 
at  all ;  never  extended  any  gentlemanly  courtesies. 

But  though  I  cannot  say  much  of  him  personally,  I  can 
;  v  mention  something  of  him  in  his  general  character,  as  a 
flag-officer.  In  the  first  place,  then,  I  have  serious  doubts, 
whether,  for  the  most  part,  he  was  not  dumb  ;  for,  in  my 
hearing,  he  seldom  or  never  uttered  a  word.  And  not 
only  did  he  seem  dumb  himself,  but  his  presence  possessed 


OFFICERS  OF  A  MAN-OF-WAR  25 

the  strange  power  of  making  other  people  dumb  for  the 
time.  His  appearance  on  the  quarter-deck  seemed  to 
give  every  officer  the  lockjaw. 

Another  phenomenon  about  him  was  the  strange 
manner  in  which  every  one  shunned  him.  At  the  first 
sign  of  those  epaulets  of  his  on  the  weather  side  of  the 
poop,  the  officers  there  congregated  invariably  shrunk 
over  to  leeward,  and  left  him  alone.  Perhaps  he  had 
an  evil  eye ;  maybe  he  was  the  Wandering  Jew  afloat. 
The  real  reason  probably  was  that,  like  all  high  function 
aries,  he  deemed  it  indispensable  religiously  to  sustain 
his  dignity  ;  one  of  the  most  troublesome  things  in  the 
world,  and  one  calling  for  the  greatest  self-denial.  And 
the  constant  watch,  and  many-sided  guardedness,  which 
this  sustaining  of  a  commodore's  dignity  requires,  plainly 
enough  shows  that,  apart  from  the  common  dignity  of 
manhood,  commodores,  in  general,  possess  no  real  dig 
nity  at  all.  True,  it  is  expedient  for  crowned  heads, 
generalissimos,  lord  high  admirals,  and  commodores, 
to  carry  themselves  straight,  and  beware  of  the  spinal 
complaint ;  but  it  is  not  the  less  veritable  that  it  is  a  piece 
of  assumption,  exceedingly  uncomfortable  to  themselves, 
and  ridiculous  to  an  enlightened  generation. 

Now,  how  many  rare  good  fellows  there  were  among 
us  main-top  men,  who,  invited  into  his  cabin  over  a  social 
/Bottle  or  two,  would  have  rejoiced  our  old  commodore's 
heart,  and  caused  that  ancient  wound  of  his  to  heal  up 
at  once. 

Come,  come,  commodore,  don't  look  so  sour,  old  boy  ; 
step  up  aloft  here  into  the  top,  and  we  '11  spin  you  a 
sociable  yarn. 

Truly,  I  thought  myself  much  happier  in  that  white 
jacket  of  mine  than  our  old  commodore  in  his  dignified 
epaulets.  V  5\ 

One   thing,   perhaps,   that   more   than   anything   else 


26  WHITE  JACKET 

helped  to  make  our  commodore  so  melancholy  and  forlorn 
was  the  fact  of  his  havingvso  little  to  do.  For  as  the 
frigate  had  a  captain,  of  course,  so  far  as  she  was  con 
cerned,  our  commodore  was  a  supernumerary.  What 
abundance  of  leisure)  he  must  have  had,  during  a  three 
years'  cruise  !  how  indefinitely  he  might  have  been 
improving  his  mind  ! 

But  as  everyone  knows  that  idleness  is  the  hardest 
work  in  the  world,  so  our  commodore  was  specially 
provided  with  a  gentleman  to  assist  him.  This  gentleman 
was  called  the  Commodore's  secretary.  He  was  a  remark 
ably  urbane  and  polished  man  ;  with  a  very  graceful 
exterior,  and  looked  much  like  an  ambassador  extra 
ordinary  from  Versailles.  He  messed  with  the  lieu 
tenants  in  the  ward-room,  where  he  had  a  state-room, 
elegantly  furnished  as  the  private  cabinet  of  Pelham. 
His  cot-boy  used  to  entertain  the  sailors  with  all  manner 
of  stories  about  the  silver-keyed  flutes  and  flageolets,  fine 
oil-paintings,  morocco-bound  volumes,  Chinese  chessmen, 
gold  shirt  buttons,  enamelled  pencil-cases,  extraordinary 
fine  French  boots  with  soles  no  thicker  than  a  sheet  of 
scented  nbtepaper,  embroidered  vests,  incense-burning 
sealing-wax,  alabaster  statuettes  of  Venus  and  Adonis, 
tortoise-shell  snuff-boxes,  inlaid  toilet-cases,  ivory- 
handled  hair -brushes  and  mother-of-pearl  combs,  and  a 
hundred  other  luxurious  appendages  scattered  about  this 
magnificent  secretary's  state-room. 

I  was  a  long  time  in  finding  out  what  this  secretary's 
duties  comprised.  But  it  seemed,  he  wrote  the  com 
modore's  dispatches  for  Washington,  and  also  was  his 
general  amanuensis.  Nor  was  this  a  very  light  duty,  at 
times  ;  for  some  commodores,  though  they  do  not  say 
a  great  deal  on  board  ship,  yet  they  have  a  vast  deal  to 
write.  Very  often,  the  regimental  orderly,  stationed  at 
our  commodore's  cabin  door,  would  touch  his  hat  to  the 


OFFICERS  OF  A  MAN-OF-WAR  27 

first  lieutenant,  and  with  a  mysterious  air  hand  him  a 
note.  I  always  thought  these  notes  must  contain  most 
important  matters  of  state  ;  until  one  day,  seeing  a  slip 
of  wet,  torn  paper  in  a  scupper-hole,  I  read  the  following : — 

'  Sir,  you  will  give  the  people  pickles  to-day  with  their 
fresh  meat. 

'  To  Lieutenant  Bridewell. 

1  By  command  of  the  Commodore. 

'  ADOLPHUS  DASHMAN,  Priv.  Sec/ 

This  was  a  new  revelation  ;  for,  from  his  almost  im 
mutable  reserve,  I  had  supposed  that  the  commodore 
never  meddled  immediately  with  the  concerns  of  the  ship, 
but  left  all  that  to  the  captain.  But  the  longer  we  live, 
the  more  we  learn  of  commodores. 

Turn  we  now  to  the  second  officer  in  rank,  almost 
supreme,  however,  in  the  internal  affairs  of  his  ship. 
Captain  Claret  was  a  large,  portly  man,  a  Harry  the  Eighth 
afloat,  bluff  and  hearty  ;  and  as  kingly  in  his  cabin  as 
Harry  on  his  throne.  For  a  ship  is  a  bit  of  terra-firma 
cut  off  from  the  main  ;  it  is  a  state  in  itself  ;  and  the 
captain  is  its  king. 

It  is  no  limited  monarchy,  where  the  sturdy  Commons 
have  a  right  to  petition,  and  snarl  if  they  please  ;  but 
almost  a  despotism,  like  the  Grand  Turk's.  The  captain's 
word  is  law  ;  he  never  speaks  but  in  the  imperative  mood. 
When  he  stands  on  his  quarter-deck  at  sea,  he  absolutely 
commands  as  far  as  eye  can  reach.  Only  the  moon  and 
stars  are  beyond  his  jurisdiction.  He  is  lord  and  master 
of  the  sun. 

It  is  not  twelve  o'clock  till  he  says  so.  For  when  the 
sailing-master,  whose  duty  it  is  to  take  the  regular  ob 
servation  at  noon,  touches  his  hat,  and  reports  twelve 
o'clock  to  the  officer  of  the  deck,  that  functionary  orders 
a  midshipman  to  repair  to  the  captain's  cabin,  and 


28  WHITE  JACKET 

humbly  inform  him  of  the  respectful  suggestion  of  the 
sailing-master. 

'  Twelve  o'clock  reported,  sir/  says  the  middy. 

'  Make  it  so,'  replies  the  captain. 

And  the  bell  is  struck  eight  by  the  messenger-boy,  and 
twelve  o'clock  it  is. 

As  in  the  case  of  the  commodore,  when  the  captain 
visits  the  deck,  his  subordinate  officers  generally  beat  a 
retreat  to  the  other  side  ;  and,  as  a  general  rule,  would 
no  more  think  of  addressing  him,  except  concerning  the 
ship,  than  a  lackey  would  think  of  hailing  the  Czar  of 
Russia  on  his  throne,  and  inviting  him  to  tea.  Perhaps 
no  mortal  man  has  more  reason  to  feel  such  an  intense 
sense  of  his  own  personal  consequence,  as  the  captain  of 
a  man-of-war  at  sea. 

Next  in  rank  comes  the  first  or  senior  lieutenant,  the 
chief  executive  officer.  I  have  no  reason  to  love  the 
particular  gentleman  who  filled  that  post  aboard  of  our 
frigate,  for  it  was  he  who  refused  my  petition  for  as  much 
black  paint  as  would  render  water-proof  that  white 
jacket  of  mine.  All  my  soakings  and  drenchings  lie  at 
his  state-room  door.  I  hardly  think  I  shall  ever  forgive 


him  ;  every  twinge  of  the  rheumatism,  which  I  still 
occasionally  feel,  is  directly  referable  to  him.  The  Im 
mortals  have  a  reputation  for  clemency  :  and  they  may 
pardon  him  ;  but  he  must  not  dun  me  to  be  merciful. 
But  my  personal  feelings  toward  the  man  shall  not  prevent 
me  from  here  doing  him  justice.  In  most  things  he  was 
an  excellent  seaman  ;  prompt,  loud,  and  to  the  point ; 
and  as  such  was  well  fitted  for  his  station.  The  first 
lieutenancy  of  a  frigate  demands  a  good  disciplinarian, 
and,  every  way,  an  energetic  man.  By  the  captain  he 
is  held  responsible  for  everything  ;  by  that  magnate, 
indeed,  he  is  supposed  to  be  omnipresent ;  down  in  the 
hold,  and  up  aloft,  at  one  and  the  same  time. 


OFFICERS  OF  A  MAN-OF-WAR  29 

He  presides  at  the  head  of  the  ward-room  officers' 
table,  who  are  so  called  from  their  messing  together  in  a 
part  of  the  ship  thus  designated.  In  a  frigate  it  comprises 
the  after-part  of  the  berth-deck.  Sometimes  it  goes  by 
the  name  of  the  gun-room,  but  oftener  is  called  the  ward 
room.  Within,  this  ward-room  much  resembles  a  long, 
wide  corridor  in  a  large  hotel ;  numerous  doors  opening 
on  both  hands  to  the  private  apartments  of  the  officers. 
I  never  had  a  good  interior  look  at  it  but  once,  and  then 
the  chaplain  was  seated  at  the  table  in  the  centre,  playing 
chess  with  the  lieutenant  of  marines.  It  was  mid-day, 
but  the  place  was  lighted  by  lamps. 

Besides  the  first  lieutenant,  the  ward-room  officers 
include  the  junior  lieutenants,  in  a  frigate  six  or  seven  in 
number,  the  sailing-master,  purser,  chaplain,  surgeon, 
marine  officers,  and  midshipmen's  schoolmaster,  or  '  the 
professor.'  They  generally  form  a  very  agreeable  club 
of  good  fellows  ;  from  their  diversity  of  character,  admir 
ably  calculated  to  form  an  agreeable  social  whole.  The 
lieutenants  discuss  sea-fights,  and  tell  anecdotes  of  Lord 
Nelson  and  Lady  Hamilton  ;  the  marine  officers  talk  of 
storming  fortresses,  and  the  siege  of  Gibraltar  ;  the 
purser  steadies  this  wild  conversation  by  occasional 
allusions  to  the  rule  of  three  ;  the  professor  is  always 
charged  with  a  scholarly  reflection,  or  an  apt  line  from 
the  classics,  generally  Ovid ;  the  surgeon's  stories  of  the 
amputation  table  judiciously  serve  to  suggest  the  mor 
tality  of  the  whole  party  as  men  ;  while  the  good  chaplain 
stands  ready  at  all  times  to  give  them  pious  counsel  and 
consolation. 

Of  course  these  gentlemen  all  associate  on  a  footing 
of  perfect  social  equality. 

Next  in  order  come  the  warrant  or  forward  officers, 
consisting  of  the  boatswain,  gunner,  carpenter,  and 
sailmaker.  Though  these  worthies  sport  long  coats  and 


30  WHITE  JACKET 

wear  the  anchor-button,  yet,  in  the  estimation  of  the  ward 
room  officers,  they  are  not,  technically  speaking,  rated 
gentlemen.  The  first  lieutenant,  chaplain,  or  surgeon, 
for  example,  would  never  dream  of  inviting  them  to 
dinner.  In  sea  parlance,  '  they  come  in  at  the  hawse- 
holes  '  ;  they  have  {iard  hands  ;  and  the  carpenter  and 
sailmaker  practically  understand  the  duties  which  they 
are  called  upon  to  superintend.  They  mess  by  them 
selves.  Invariably  four  in  number,  they  never  have 
need  to  play  whist  with  a  dummy. 

In  this  part  of  the  category  now  come  the  '  reefers,' 
otherwise  'middies,'  or  midshipmen.  These  boys  are 
sent  to  sea  for  the  purpose  of  making  commodores  ;  and 
in  order  to  become  commodores  many  of  them  deem  it 
indispensable  forthwith  to  commence  chewing  tobacco, 
drinking  brandy  and  water,  and  swearing  at  the  sailors. 
As  they  are  only  placed  on  board  a  sea-going  ship  to  go 
to  school  and  learn  the  duty  of  a  lieutenant ;  and  until 
qualified  to  act  as  such  have  few  or  no  special  functions 
to  attend  to  ;  they  are  little  more,  while  midshipmen, 
than  supernumeraries  on  board.  Hence,  in  a  crowded 
frigate,  they  are  so  everlastingly  crossing  the  path  of  both 
men  and  officers,  that  in  the  Navy  it  has  become  a  proverb 
that  a  useless  fellow  is  *  as  much  in  the  way  as  a  reefer' 

In  a  gale  of  wind,  when  all  hands  are  called,  and  the 
deck  swarms  with  men,  the  little  '  middies  '  running 
about  distracted,  and  having  nothing  particular  to  do, 
make  it  up  in  vociferous  swearing  ;  exploding  all  about 
under  foot  like  torpedoes.  Some  of  them  are  terrible 
little  boys,  cocking  their  caps  at  alarming  angles,  and 
looking  fierce  as  young  roosters.  They  are  generally  great 
consumers  of  Macassar  Oil  and  the  Balm  of  Columbia  ; 
they  thirst  and  rage  after  whiskers  ;  and  sometimes, 
applying  their  ointments,  lay  themselves  out  in  the  sun 
to  promote  the  fertility  of  their  chins. 


OFFICERS  OF  A  MAN-OF-WAR  31 

As  the  only  way  to  learn  to  command  is  to  learn  to 
obey,  the  usage  of  a  ship  of  war  is  such  that  the  midship 
men  are  constantly  being  ordered  about  by  the  lieu 
tenants  ;  though,  without  having  assigned  them  their 
particular  destinations,  they  are  always  going  somewhere, 
and  never  arriving.  In  some  things  they  almost  have 
a  harder  time  of  it  than  the  seamen  themselves.  They 
are  messengers  and  errand-boys  to  their  superiors. 

'  Mr.  Pert,'  cries  an  officer  of  the  deck,  hailing  a  young 
gentleman  forward.  Mr.  Pert  advances,  touches  his  hat, 
and  remains  in  an  attitude  of  deferential  suspense.  '  Go 
and  tell  the  boatswain  I  want  him.'  And  with  this  perilous 
errand  the  middy  hurries  away,  looking  proud  as  a  king. 

The  middies  live  by  themselves  in  the  steerage,  where, 
nowadays,  they  dine  off  a  table  spread  with  a  cloth. 
They  have  a  castor  at  dinner  ;  they  have  some  other 
little  boys  (selected  from  the  ship's  company)  to  wait 
upon  them  ;  they  sometimes  drink  coffee  out  of  china. 
But  for  all  these,  their  modern  refinements,  in  some 
instances  the  affairs  of  their  club  go  sadly  to  rack  and 
ruin.  The  china  is  broken ;  the  japanned  coffee-pot 
dented  like  a  pewter  mug  in  an  ale-house  ;  the  pronged 
forks  resemble  toothpicks  (for  which  they  are  sometimes 
used)  ;  the  table  knives  are  hacked  into  hand-saws,  and 
the  cloth  goes  to  the  sailmaker  to  be  patched.  Indeed, 
they  are  something  like  collegiate  freshmen  and  sopho 
mores,  living  in  the  college  buildings,  especially  so  far 
as  the  noise  they  make  in  their  quarters  is  concerned. 
The  steerage  buzzes,  hums,  and  swarms  like  a  hive  ;  or 
like  an  infant  school  of  a  hot  day,  when  the  school 
mistress  falls  asleep  with  a  fly  on  her  nose. 

In  frigates,  the  ward-room — the  retreat  of  the  lieu 
tenants — immediately  adjoining  the  steerage,  is  on  the 
same  deck  with  it.  Frequently,  when  the  middies, 
waking  early  of  a  morning,  as  most  youngsters  do,  would 


32  WHITE  JACKET 

be  kicking  up  their  heels  in  their  hammocks,  or  running 
about  in  double-reefed  nightgowns,  playing  (tag  among 
the  (  clews/  the  senior  lieutenant  would  burst  among 
them  with  a — '  Young  gentlemen,  I  am  astonished.  You 
must  stop  this  skylarking.  Mr.  Pert,  what  are  you  doing 
at  the  table  there,  without  your  pantaloons  ?  To  your 
hammock,  sir.  Let  me  see  no  more  of  this.  If  you 
disturb  the  ward-room  again,  young  gentlemen,  you  shall 
hear  of  it.'  And  so  saying,  this  hoary-headed  senior 
lieutenant  would  retire  to  his  cot  in  his  state-room,  like 
the  father  of  a  numerous  family  after  getting  up  in  his 
dressing-gown  and  slippers,  to  quiet  a  daybreak  tumult 
in  his  populous  nursery. 

Having  now  descended  from  commodore  to  middy, 
we  come  lastly  to  a  set  of  nondescripts,  forming  also  a 
'  mess  '  by  themselves,  apart  from  the  seamen.  Into  this 
mess  the  usage  of  a  man-of-war  thrusts  various  sub- 
ordinates-^-including  the  master-at-arms,  purser's  steward, 
ship's  corporals,  marine  sergeants,  and  ship's  yeoman, 
forming  the  first  aristocracy  above  the  sailors.  ' 

The  master-at-arms  is  a  sort  of  high  constable  and 
schoolmaster,  wearing  citizen's  clothes,  and  known  by 
his  official  rat  an.  He  it  is  whom  all  sailors  hate.  His 
is  the  universal  duty  of  a  universal  informer  and  hunter - 
up  of  delinquents.  On  the  berth-deck  he  reigns  supreme  ; 
sPvmg  out  all  grease-spots  made  by  the  various  cooks  of 
the  seamen's  messes,  and  driving  the  laggards  up  the 
hatches,  when  all  hands  are  called.  It  is  indispensable 
that  he  should  be  a  very  Vidocq  in  vigilance.  But  as  it 
is  a  heartless,  so  is  it  a  thankless  office.  Of  dark  nights, 
most  masters-at-arms  keep  themselves  in  readiness  to 
dodge  forty-two-pound  balls,  dropped  down  the  hatch 
ways  near  them. 

The  ship's  corporals  are  this  worthy's  deputies  and 
ushers. 


OFFICERS  OF  A  MAN-OF-WAR  33 

The  marine  sergeants  are  generally  tall  fellows  with 
unyielding  spines  and  stiff  upper  lips,  and  very  exclusive 
in  their  tastes  and  predilections. 

The  ship's  yeoman  is  a  gentleman  who  has  a  sort  of 
counting-room  in  a  tar-cellar  down  in  the  fore-hold. 
More  will  be  said  of  him  anon. 

Except  the  officers  above  enumerated,  there  are  none 
who  mess  apart  from  the  seamen.  The  '  petty  officers,' 
so  called,  that  is,  the  boatswain's,  gunner's,  carpenter's, 
and  sailmaker's  mates,  the  captains  of  the  tops,  of  the 
forecastle,  and  of  the  after-guard,  and  of  the  fore  and 
main  holds,  and  the  quarter-masters,  all  mess  in  common 
with  the  crew,  and  in  the  American  Navy  are  only  dis 
tinguished  from  the  common  seamen  by  their  slightly 
additional  pay.  But  in  the  English  Navy  they  wear 
crowns  and  anchors  worked  on  the  sleeves  of  their  jackets, 
by  way  of  badges  of  office.  In  the  French  Navy  they  are 
known  by  strips  of  worsted  worn  in  the  same  place,  like 
those  designating  the  sergeants  and  corporals  in  the  Army. 

Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  the  dinner -table  is  the  criterion 
of  rank  in  our  man-of-war  world.  The  commodore  dines 
alone,  because  he  is  the  only  man  of  his  rank  in  the  ship. 
80  too  with  the  captain  ;  and  the  ward-room  officers, 
warrant  officers,  midshipmen,  the  master-at-arms'  mess, 
and  the  common  seamen  ; — all  of  them,  respectively,  dine 
together,  because  they  are  respectively  on  a  footing  of 
equality. 


CHAPTER  VII 

BREAKFAST,   DINNER,   AND   SUPPER 

NOT  only  is  the  dinner -table  a  criterion  of  rank  on  board 
a  man-of-war,  but  also  the  dinner  hour.  He  who  dines 
latest  is  the  greatest  man ;  and  he  who  dines  earliest  is 
accounted  the  least.  In  a  flagship,  the  commodore 
generally  dines  about  four  or  five  o'clock  ;  the  captain 
about  three ;  the  lieutenants  about  two ;  while  the 
people  (by  which  phrase  the  common  seamen  are  specially 
designated  in  the  nomenclature  of  the  quarter-deck)  sit 
down  to  their  salt  beef  exactly  at  noon. 

Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  while  the  two  estates  of  sea- 
kings  and  sea-lords  dine  at  rather  patrician  hours — 
and  thereby,  in  the  long  run,  impair  their  digestive 
functions — the  sea-commoners,  or  the  people,  keep 
up  their  constitutions  by  keeping  up  the  good  old- 
fashioned,  Elizabethan,  Franklin- warranted  dinner  hour 
of  twelve. 

Twelve  o'clock !  It  is  the  natural  centre,  keystone, 
and  very  heart  of  the  day.  At  that  hour,  the  sun  has 
arrived  at  the  top  of  his  hill ;  and  as  he  seems  to  hang 
poised  there  awhile,  before  coming  down  on  the  other 
side,  it  is  but  reasonable  to  suppose  that  he  is  then 
stopping  to  dine  ;  setting  an  eminent  example  to  all 
mankind.  The  rest  of  the  day  is  called  afternoon  ;  the 
very  sound  of  which  fine  old  Saxon  word  conveys  a  feel 
ing  of  the  lee -bulwarks  and  a  nap  ;  a  summer  sea — soft 
breezes  creeping  over  it ;  dreamy  dolphins  gliding  in  the 
distance.  Afternoon  !  the  word  implies  that  it  is  an  after- 

94 


BREAKFAST,  DINNER,  AND  SUPPER        35 

piece,  coming  after  the  grand  drama  of  the  day  ;  some 
thing  to  be  taken  leisurely  and  lazily.  But  how  can  this 
be  if  you  dine  at  five  ?  For,  after  all,  though  '  Paradise 
Lost '  be  a  noble  poem,  and  we  man-of-war's  men,  no 
doubt,  largely  partake  in  the  immortality  of  the  immor 
tals  ;  yet,  let  us  candidly  confess  it,  shipmates,  that,  upon 
the  whole,  our  dinners  are  the  most  momentous  affairs 
of  these  lives  we  lead  beneath  the  moon.  What  were  a 
day  without  a  dinner  ?  a  dinnerless  day  !  such  a  day 
had  better  be  a  night. 

Again  :  twelve  o'clock  is  the  natural  hour  for  us  man- 
of-war's  men  to  dine,  because  at  that  hour  the  very  time 
pieces  we  have  invented  arrive  at  their  terminus  ;  they 
can  get  no  further  than  twelve  ;  when  straightway  they 
continue  their  old  rounds  again.  Doubtless,  Adam  and 
Eve  dined  at  twelve  ;  and  the  Patriarch  Abraham  in  the 
midst  of  his  cattle  ;  and  old  Job  with  his  noon  mowers 
and  reapers,  in  that  grand  plantation  of  Uz  ;  and  old 
Noah  himself,  in  the  Ark,  must  have  gone  to  dinner  at 
precisely  eight  bells  (noon),  with  all  his  floating  families 
and  farmyards. 

But  though  this  antediluvian  dinner  hour  is  rejected 
by  modern  commodores  and  captains,  it  still  lingers 
among  the  people  under  their  command.  Many 
sensible  things  banished  from  high  life  find  an  asylum 
among  the  mob. 

Some  commodores  are  very  particular  in  seeing  to 
it  that  no  man  on  board  the  ship  dare  to  dine  after  his 
(the  commodore's)  own  dessert  is  cleared  away. — Not 
even  the  captain.  It  is  said,  on  good  authority, 
that  a  captain  once  ventured  to  dine  at  five,  when 
the  commodore's  hour  was  four.  Next  day,  as  the 
story  goes,  that  captain  received  a  private  note,  and 
in  consequence  of  that  note  dined  for  the  future  at 
half-past  three. 


36  WHITE  JACKET 

Though,  in  respect  of  the  dinner  hour  on  board  a  man- 
of-war,  the  people  have  no  reason  to  complain ;  yet 
they  have  just  cause,  almost  for  mutiny,  in  the  outrageous 
hours  assigned  for  their  breakfast  and  supper. 

Eight  o'clock  for  breakfast ;  twelve  for  dinner  ;  four 
for  supper  ;  and  no  meals  but  these  ;  no  lunches  and  no 
cold  snacks.  Owing  to  this  arrangement  (and  partly  to 
one  watch  going  to  their  meals  before  the  other,  at  sea), 
all  the  meals  of  the  twenty -four  hours  are  crowded  into 
a  space  of  less  than  eight !  Sixteen  mortal  hours  elapse 
between  supper  and  breakfast ;  including,  to  one  watch, 
eight  hours  on  deck  !  This  is  barbarous  ;  any  physician 
will  tell  you  so.  Think  of  it !  Before  the  commodore 
has  dined  you  have  supped.  And  in  high  latitudes,  in 
summer  time,  you  have  taken  your  last  meal  for  the  day, 
and  five  hours,  or  more,  daylight  to  spare  ! 

Mr.  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  in  the  name  of  the  people, 
you  should  interpose  in  this  matter.  Many  a  time  have 
I,  a  main-top  man,  found  myself  actually  faint  of  a 
tempestuous  morning -watch,  when  all  my  energies  were 
demanded — owing  to  this  miserable,  unphilosophical 
mode  of  allotting  the  government  meals  at  sea.  We 
beg  of  you,  Mr.  Secretary,  not  to  be  swayed  in  this  matter 
by  the  Honourable  Board  of  Commodores,  who  will  no 
doubt  tell  you  that  eight,  twelve,  and  four  are  the  proper 
hours  for  the  people  to  take  their  meals  ;  inasmuch,  as 
at  these  hours  the  watches  are  relieved.  For,  though 
this  arrangement  makes  a  neater  and  cleaner  thing  of  it 
for  the  officers,  and  looks  very  nice  and  superfine  on  paper, 
yet  it  is  plainly  detrimental  to  health,  and  in  time  of  war 
is  attended  with  still  more  serious  consequences  to  the 
whole  nation  at  large.  If  the  necessary  researches  were 
made,  it  would  perhaps  be  found  that  in  those  instances 
where  men-of-war  adopting  the  above-mentioned  hours 
for  meals  have  encountered  an  enemy  at  night,  they  have 


BREAKFAST,  DINNER,  AND  SUPPER         37 

pretty  generally  been  beaten  ;  that  is,  in  those  cases 
where  the  enemies'  meal-times  were  reasonable  ;  which 
is  only  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  the  people 
of  the  beaten  vessels  were  fighting  on  an  empty  stomach 
instead  of  a  full  one. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

SELVAGEE  CONTRASTED  WITH  MAD  JACK 

HAVING  glanced  at  the  grand  divisions  of  a  man-of-war, 
let  us  now  descend  to  specialities  ;  and,  particularly,  to 
two  of  the  junior  lieutenants  ;  lords  and  noblemen  ; 
members  of  that  House  of  Peers,  the  gun-room.  JThere 
were  several  young  lieutenants  on  board  ;  but  from  these 
two — representing  the  extremes  of  character  to  be  found 
in  their  department — the  nature  of  the  other  officers  of 
their  grade  in  the  Never  sink  must  be  derived. 

One  of  these  two  quarter-deck  lords  went  among  the 
sailors  by  a  name  of  their  own  devising — Selvagee.^  Of 
course,  it  was  intended  to  be  characteristic,  and  even 
so  it  was. 

In  frigates,  and  all  large  ships  of  war,  when  getting 
under  weigh,  a  large  rope,  called  a  messenger,  is  used  to 
carry  the  strain  of  the  cable  to  the  capstan  ;  so  that  the 
anchor  may  be  weighed  without  the  muddy,  ponderous 
cable  itself  going  round  the  capstan.  As  the  cable  enters 
the  hawse-hole,  therefore,  something  must  be  constantly 
used  to  keep  this  travelling  chain  attached  to  this  travel 
ling  messenger  ;  something  that  may  be  rapidly  wound 
round  both,  so  as  to  bind  them  together.  The  article 
used  is  called  a  selvagee.  And  what  could  be  better 
adapted  to  the  purpose  ?  It  is  a  slender,  tapering,  un- 
stranded  piece  of  rope  ;  prepared  with  much  solicitude  ; 
peculiarly  flexible  ;  and  wreathes  and  serpentines  round 
the  cable  and  messenger  like  an  elegantly  modelled  garter- 
snake  round  the  twisted  stalks  of  a  vine.  Indeed,  Selvagee 

38 


SELVAGEE  CONTRASTED  WITH  MAD  JACK   39 

is  the  exact  type  and  symbol  of  a  tall,  genteel,  limber, 
spiralising  exquisite.  So  much  for  the  derivation  of  the 
name  which  the  sailors  applied  to  the  lieutenant. 

From  what  sea-alcove,  from  what  mermaid's  milliner's 
shop,  hast  thou  emerged,  Selvagee. !  with  that  dainty 
waist  and  languid  cheek  ?  What  heartless  step -dame 
drove  thee  forth  to  waste  thy  fragrance  on  the  salt  sea 
air  ? 

Was  it  you,  Selvagee  !  that,  outward  bound,  off  Cape 
Horn,  looked  at  Hermit  Island  through  an  opera-glass  ? 
Was  it  you,  who  thought  of  proposing  to  the  captain, 
that  when  the  sails  were  furled  in  a  gale,  a  few  drops  of 
lavender  should  be  dropped  in  their  '  bunts,'  so  that  when 
the  canvas  was  set  again  your  nostrils  might  not  be 
offended  by  its  musty  smell  ?  I  do  not  say  it  was  you, 
Selvagee  ;  I  but  deferentially  inquire. 

In  plain  prose,  Selvagee  was  one  of  those  officers  whom 
the  sight  of  a  trim-fitting  naval  coat  had  captivated  in 
the  days  of  his  youth.  He  fancied  that  if  a  sea-officer 
dressed  well,  and  conversed  genteelly,  he  would  abundantly 
uphold  the  honour  of  his  flag,  and  immortalise  the  tailor 
that  made  him.  On  that  rock  many  young  gentlemen 
split.  For  upon  a  frigate's  quarter-deck  it  is  not  enough 
to  sport  a  coat  fashioned  by  a  Stultz  ;  it  is  not  enough  to 
be  well  braced  with  straps  and  suspenders  ;  it  is  not 
enough  to  have  sweet  reminiscences  of  Lauras  and 
Matildas.  It  is  a  right  down  life  of  hard  wear  and  tear, 
and  the  man  who  is  not,  in  a  good  degree,  fitted  to  become 
a  common  sailor  will  never  make  an  officer.  Take  that 
to  heart,  all  ye  naval  aspirants.  Thrust  your  arms  up 
to  the  elbow  in  pitch,  and  see  how  you  like  it,  ere  you 
solicit  a  warrant.  Prepare  for  white  squalls,  living  gales 
and  typhoons  ;  read  accounts  of  shipwrecks  and  horrible 
disasters  ;  peruse  the  narratives  of  Byron  and  Bligh  ; 
familiarise  yourselves  with  the  story  of  the  English  frigate 


40  WHITE  JACKET 

Alceste,  and  the  French  frigate  Medusa.  Though  you 
may  go  ashore,  now  and  then,  at  Cadiz  and  Palermo  ; 
for  every  day  so  spent  among  oranges  and  ladies,  you  will 
have  whole  months  of  rains  and  gales. 

And  even  thus  did  Selvagee  prove  it.  But  with  all  the 
intrepid  effeminacy  of  your  true  dandy,  he  still  continued 
his  Cologne-water  baths,  and  sported  his  lace-bordered 
handkerchiefs  in  the  very  teeth  of  a  tempest.  Alas, 
Selvagee  !  there  was  no  getting  the  lavender  out  of 
you. 

But  Selvagee  was  no  fool.  Theoretically,  he  under 
stood  his  profession  ;  but  the  mere  theory  of  seamanship 
forms  but  the  thousandth  part  of  what  makes  a  seaman. 
You  cannot  save  a  ship  by  working  out  a  problem  in  the 
cabin  ;  the  deck  is  the  field  of  action. 

Well  aware  of  his  deficiency  in  some  things,  Selvagee 
never  took  the  trumpet — which  is  the  badge  of  theTclecIF 
officer  for  the  time — without  a  tremulous  movement  of 
the  lip,  and  an  earnest,  inquiring  eye  to  the  windward. 
He  encouraged  those  old  Tritons,  the  quarter-masters, 
to  discourse  with  him  concerning  the  likelihood  of  a  squall ; 
and  often  followed  their  advice  as  to  taking  in,  or  making 
sail.  The  smallest  favours  in  that  way  were  thankfully 
received.  Sometimes,  when  all  the  north  looked  un 
usually  lowering,  by  many  conversational  blandishments, 
he  would  endeavour  to  prolong  his  predecessor's  stay  on 
deck,  after  that  officer's  watch  had  expired.  But  in  fine, 
steady  weather,  when  the  captain  would  emerge  from  his 
cabin,  Selvagee  might  be  seen,  pacing  the  poop  with  long, 
bold,  indefatigable  strides,  and  casting  his  eye  up  aloft 
with  the  most  ostentatious  fidelity. 

But    vain   these    pretences ;     he    could   not    deceive. 
Selvagee  !    you  know  very  well,  that  if  it  comes  on  to 
blow  pretty  hard,  the  first  lieutenant  will  be   sure  to_ 
interfere  with  his  paternal  authority.     Every  man  and 


SELVAGEE  CONTRASTED  WITH  MAD  JACK   41 

every  boy  in  the  frigate  knows,  Selvagee,  that  you  are 
no  Neptune. 

How  unenviable  his  situation  !  His  brother  officers 
do  not  insult  him,  to  be  sure  ;  but  sometimes  their  looks 
are  as  daggers.  The  sailors  do  not  laugh  at  him  outright ; 
but  of  dark  nights  they  jeer,  when  they  hearken  to  that 
mantua-maker's  voice  ordering  a  strong  pull  at  the  main- 
brace,  or  hands  by  the  halyards  !  Sometimes,  by  way  of 
being  terrific,  and  making  the  men  jump,  Selvagee  raps 
out  an  oath  ;  but  the  soft  bomb  stuffed  with  confectioner's 
kisses  seems  to  burst  like  a  crushed  rosebud  diffusing 
its  odours.  Selvagee  !  Selvagee  1  take  a  main-top  man's 
advice  ;  and  this  cruise  over,  never  more  tempt  the  sea. 

With  this  gentleman  of  cravats  and  curling-irons,  how 
strongly  contrasts  the  man  who  was  born  in  a  gale  !  For 
in  some  time  of  tempest — off  Cape  Horn  or  Hatteras — 
Mad  Jack  must  have  entered  the  world — such  things  have 
been — not  with  a  silver  spoon,  but  with  a  speaking  trumpet 
in  his  mouth  ;  wrapped  up  in  a  caul,  as  in  a  mainsail — 
for  a  charmed  life  against  shipwrecks  he  bears — and 
crying,  Luff  I  luff,  you  may  I — steady  I — yort  !  World  ho  I 
— here  I  am  ! 

Mad  Jack  is  in  his  saddle  on  the  sea.  That  is  his  home  ; 
he  would  not  care  much,  if  another  Flood  came  and  over 
flowed  the  dry  land  ;  for  what  would  it  do  but  float  his 
good  ship  higher  and  higher7^ind  carry  his  proud  nation's 
flag  round  the  globe,  over  the  very  capitals  of  jill  hostile 
states  !  Then  would  masts  surmount  spires  ;  and  all  man 
kind,  like  the~  Chinese  boatmen  in  Canton  River,  live  in 
flotillas  and  fleets,  and  find  their  food  in  the  sea. 

Mad  Jack  was  expressly  created  and  labelled  for  a  tar. 
Five  feet  nine  is  his  mark,  in  his  socks  ;  and  not  weighing 
over  eleven  stone  before  dinner.  Like  so  many  ship's 
shrouds,  his  muscles  and  tendons  are  all  set  true,  trim, 
and  taut ;  he  is  braced  up  fore  and  aft,  like  a  ship  on  the 


42  WHITE  JACKET 

wind.  His  broad  chest  is  a  bulkhead  that  dams  off  the 
gale  ;  and  his  nose  is  an  aquiline  that  divides  it  in  two, 
like  a  keel.  His  loud,  lusty  lungs  are  two  belfries,  full  of 
all  manner  of  chimes  ;  but  you  only  hear  his  deepest 
bray  in  the  height  of  some  tempest — like  the  great  bell 
of  St.  Paul's,  which  only  sounds  when  the  King  or  the 
Devil  is  dead. 

Look  at  him  there,  where  he  stands  on  the  poop — one 
foot  on  the  rail,  and  one  hand  on  a  shroud — his  head 
thrown  back,  and  his  trumpet  like  an  elephant's  trunk 
thrown  up  in  the  air.  Is  he  going  to  shoot  dead  with 
sound  those  fellows  on  the  main-topsail-yard  ? 

Mad  Jack  was  a  bit  of  a  tyrant — they  say  all  good 
officers  are — but  the  sailors  loved  him  all  round  ;  and 
would  much  rather  stand  fifty  watches  with  him  than 
one  with  a  rose-water  sailor. 

But  Mad  Jack,  alas  !  has  one  fearful  failing.  He 
drinks.  And  so  do  we  all.  But  Mad  Jack,  he  only  drinks 
brandy.  The  vice  was  inveterate  ;  surely,  like  Ferdinand, 
Count  Fathom,  he  must  have  been  suckled  at  a  puncheon. 
Very  often  this  bad  habit  got  him  into  very  serious 
scrapes.  Twice  was  he  put  off  duty  by  the  commodore  ; 
and  once  he  came  near  being  broken  for  his  frolics.  So 
far  as  his  efficiency  as  a  sea-officer  was  concerned,  on  shore 
at  least,  Jack  might  bouse  away  as  much  as  he  pleased  ; 
but  afloat  it  will  not  do  at  all. 

Now,  if  he  only  followed  the  wise  example  set  by  those 
ships  of  the  desert,  the  camels  ;  and  while  in  port,  drank 
for  the  thirst  past,  the  thirst  present,  and  the  thirst  to 
come — so  that  he  might  cross  the  ocean  sober  ;  Mad  Jack 
would  get  along  pretty  well.  Still  better,  if  he  would 
but  eschew  brandy  altogether,  and  only  drink  of  the 
limpid  white-wine  of  the  rills  and  the  brooks. 


CHAPTER  IX 

OF  THE   POCKETS  THAT  WERE   IN  THE  JACKET 

I  MUST  make  some  further  mention  of  that  white  jacket 
of  mine. 

And  here  be  it  known — by  way  of  introduction  to  what 
is  to  follow — that  to  a  common  sailor  the  living  on  board 
a  man-of-war  is  like  living  in  a  market ;  where  you  dress 
on  the  doorsteps  and  sleep  in  the  cellar.  No  privacy 
can  you  have  ;  hardly  one  moment's  seclusion.  It  is 
almost  a  physical  impossibility  that  you  can  ever  be 
alone.  You  dine  at  a  vast  table  d'hote  ;  sleep  in  commons, 
and  make  your  toilet  where  and  when  you  can.  There 
is  no  calling  for  a  mutton  chop  and  a  pint  of  claret  by 
yourself  ;  no  selecting  of  chambers  for  the  night ;  no  hang 
ing  of  pantaloons  over  the  back  of  a  chair  ;  no  ringing 
your  bell  of  a  rainy  morning  to  take  your  coffee  in  bed. 
It  is  something  like  life  in  a  large  manufactory.  The 
bell  strikes  to  dinner,  and  hungry  or  not,  you  must  dine. 

Your  clothes  are  stowed  in  a  large  canvas  bag,  generally 
painted  black,  which  you  can  get  out  of  the  '  rack  '  only 
once  in  the  twenty -four  hours  ;  and  then,  during  a  time 
of  the  utmost  confusion  ;  among  five  hundred  other  bags, 
with  five  hundred  other  sailors  diving  into  each,  in  the 
midst  of  the  twilight  of  the  berth-deck.  In  some  measure 
to  obviate  this  inconvenience,  many  sailors  divide  their 
wardrobes  between  their  hammocks  and  their  bags ; 
stowing  a  few  frocks  and  trowsers  in  the  former  ;  so  that 
they  can  shift  at  night,  if  they  wish,  when  the  hammocks 
are  piped  down.  But  they  gain  very  little  by  this. 

43 


44  WHITE  JACKET 

You  have  no  place  whatever  but  your  bag  or  hammock 
in  which  to  put  anything  in  a  man-of-war.  If  you  lay 
anything  down,  and  turn  your  back  for  a  moment,  ten 
to  one  it  is  gone. 

Now,  in  sketching  the  preliminary  plan,  and  laying 
out  the  foundation  of  that  memorable  white  jacket  of 
mine,  I  had  had  an  earnest  eye  to  all  these  inconveniences, 
and  resolved  to  avoid  them.  I  proposed,  that  not  only 
should  my  jacket  keep  me  warm,  but  that  it  should  also 
be  so  constructed  as  to  contain  a  shirt  or  two,  a  pair  of 
trowsers,  and  divers  knick-knacks — sewing  utensils,  books, 
biscuits,  and  the  like.  With  this  object,  I  had  accordingly 
provided  it  with  a  great  variety  of  pockets,  pantries, 
clothes-presses,  and  cupboards. 

The  principal  apartments,  two  in  number,  were  placed 
in  the  skirts,  with  a  wide,  hospitable  entrance  from  the 
inside  ;  two  more,  of  smaller  capacity,  were  planted  in 
each  breast,  with  folding-doors  communicating,  so  that 
in  case  of  emergency,  to  accommodate  any  bulky  articles, 
the  two  pockets  in  each  breast  could  be  thrown  into  one. 
There  were,  also,  several  unseen  recesses  behind  the  arras  ; 
insomuch,  that  my  jacket,  like  an  old  castle,  was  full  of 
winding  stairs,  and  mysterious  closets,  crypts,  and 
cabinets  ;  and  like  a  confidential  writing-desk,  abounded 
in  snug  little  out-of-the-way  lairs  and  hiding-places,  for 
the  storage  of  valuables. 

Superadded  to  these  were  four  capacious  pockets  on 
the  outside  ;  one  pair  to  slip  books  into  when  suddenly 
started  from  my  studies  to  the  main-royal-yard  ;  and 
the  other  pair,  for  permanent  mittens,  to  thrust  my  hands 
into  of  a  cold  night-watch.  This  last  contrivance  was 
regarded  as  needless  by  one  of  my  topmates,  who  showed 
me  a  pattern  for  sea-mittens,  which  he  said  was  much 
better  than  mine. 

It  must  be  known  that  sailors,  even  in  the  bleakest 


OF  THE  POCKETS  IN  THE  JACKET          45 

weather,  only  cover  hands  when  unemployed ;  they 
never  wear  mittens  aloft ;  since  aloft  they  literally  carry_ 
their  lives  in  their  hands,  and  want  nothing  between  their 
grasp  of  the  hemp  and  the  hemp  itself. — Therefore,  it 'is 
desirable  that  whatever  things  they  cover  their  hands 
with  should  be  capable  of  being  slipped  on  and  off  in  a 
moment.  Nay,  it  is  desirable  that  they  should  be  of 
such  a  nature  that  in  a  dark  night,  when  you  are  in  a 
great  hurry — say,  going  to  the  helm — they  may  be  jumped 
into,  indiscriminately  ;  and  not  be  like  a  pair  of  right- 
and-left  kids  ;  neither  of  which  will  admit  any  hand  but 
the  particular  one  meant  for  it. 

My  topmate's  contrivance  was  this — he  ought  to  have 
got  out  a  patent  for  it — each  of  his  mittens  was  provided 
with  two  thumbs,  one  on  each  side  ;  the  convenience  of 
which  needs  no  comment.  But  though  for  clumsy  sea 
men,  whose  fingers  are  all  thumbs,  this  description  of 
mitten  might  do  very  well,  White  Jacket  did  not  so  much 
fancy  it.  For  when  your  hand  was  once  in  the  bag  of 
the  mitten,  the  empty  thumb-hole  sometimes  dangled  at 
your  palm,  confounding  your  ideas  of  where  your  real 
thumb  might  be  ;  or  else,  being  carefully  grasped  in  the 
hand,  was  continually  suggesting  the  insane  notion  that 
you  were  all  the  while  having  hold  of  someone  else's 
thumb. 

No  ;  I  told  my  good  topmate  to  go  away  with  his 
four  thumbs,  I  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  them  ;  two 
thumbs  were  enough  for  any  man. 

For  some  time  after  completing  my  jacket,  and  getting 
the  furniture  and  household  stores  in  it,  I  thought  that 
nothing  could  exceed  it  for  convenience.  Seldom  now 
did  I  have  occasion  to  go  to  my  bag,  and  be  jostled  by 
the  crowd  who  were  making  their  wardrobe  in  a  heap. 
If  I  wanted  anything  in  the  way  of  clothing,  thread, 
needles,  or  literature,  the  chances  were  that  my  invaluable 


46  WHITE  JACKET 

jacket  contained  it.  Yes  :  I  fairly  hugged  myself,  and 
revelled  in  my  jacket ;  till  alas  !  a  long  rain  put  me  out 
of  conceit  of  it.  I,  and  all  my  pockets  and  their  contents, 
were  soaked  through  and  through,  and  my  pocket  edition 
of  Shakespeare  was  reduced  to  an  omelet. 

However,  availing  myself  of  a  fine  sunny  day  that 
followed,  I  emptied  myself  out  in  the  main-top,  and 
spread  all  my  goods  and  chattels  to  dry.  But  spite  of 
the  bright  sun,  that  day  proved  a  black  one.  The 
scoundrels  on  deck  detected  me  in  the  act  of  discharging 
my  saturated  cargo  ;  they  now  knew  that  the  white  jacket 
was  used  for  a  storehouse.  The  consequence  was  that, 
my  goods  being  well  dried  and  again  stored  away  in  my 
pockets  ;  the  very  next  night,  when  it  was  my  quarter- 
watch  on  deck,  and  not  in  the  top  (where  they  were  all 
honest  men),  I  noticed  a  parcel  of  fellows  skulking  about 
after  me  wherever  I  went.  To  a  man,  they  were  pick 
pockets,  and  bent  upon  pillaging  me.  In  vain  I  kept 
clapping  my  pockets  like  nervous  old  gentlemen  in  a 
crowd  ;  that  same  night  I  found  myself  minus  several 
valuable  articles.  So,  in  the  end,  I  masoned  up  my 
lockers  and  pantries  ;  and  save  the  two  used  for  mittens, 
the  white  jacket  ever  after  was  pocketless. 


CHAPTER  X 

FROM   POCKETS   TO   PICKPOCKETS 

As  the  latter  part  of  the  preceding  chapter  may  seem 
strange  to  those  landsmen  who  have  been  habituated  to 
indulge  in  high-raised,  romantic  notions  of  the  man-of- 
war's  man's  character,  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  set  down 
here  certain  facts  on  this  head,  which  may  serve  to  place 
the  thing  in  its  true  light. 

From  the  wild  life  they  lead,  and  various  other  causes 
(needless  to  mention),  sailors,  as  a  class,  entertain  the 
most  liberal  notions  concerning  morality  and  the  Deca 
logue  ;  or,  rather,  they  take  their  own  views  of  such 
matters,  caring  little  for  the  theological  or  ethical  defini 
tions  of  others  concerning  what  may  be  criminal,  or  wrong. 

Their  ideas  are  much  swayed  by  circumstances.  They 
will  covertly  abstract  a  thing  from  one  whom  they  dislike  ; 
and  insist  upon  it  that,  in  such  a  case,  stealing  is  no 
robbing.  Or,  where  the  theft  involves  something  funny, 
as  in  the  case  of  the  white  jacket,  they  only  steal  for  the 
sake  of  the  joke  ;  but  this  much  is  to  be  observed  never 
theless,  i.e.  that  they  never  spoil  the  joke  by  returning 
the  stolea  article. 

It  is  a  good  joke,  for  instance,  and  one  often  perpe 
trated  on  board  ship,  to  stand  talking  to  a  man  in  a  dark 
night-watch,  and  all  the  while  be  cutting  the  buttons 
from  his  coat.  But  once  off,  those  buttons  never  grow 
on  again.  There  is  no  spontaneous  vegetation  in  buttons. 

Perhaps  it  is  a  thing  unavoidable,  but  the  truth  is,  that 
among  the  crew  of  a  man-of-war,  scores  of  desperadoes 

47 


48  WHITE  JACKET 

are  too  often  found,  who  stop  not  at  the  largest  enormities. 
A  species  of  highway  robbery  is  not  unknown  to  them. 
A  gang  will  be  informed  that  such  a  fellow  has  three  or 
four  gold  pieces  in  the  monkey-bag,  so  called,  or  purse, 
which  many  tars  wear  round  their  necks,  tucked  out  of 
sight.  Upon  this,  they  deliberately  lay  their  plans,  and 
in  due  time  proceed  to  carry  them  into  execution.  The 
man  they  have  marked  is  perhaps  strolling  along  the 
benighted  berth-deck  to  his  mess-chest ;  when,  of  a 
sudden,  the  footpads  dash  out  from  their  hiding-place, 
throw  him  down,  and  while  two  or  three  gag  him  and  hold 
him  fast,  another  cuts  the  bag  from  his  neck,  and  makes 
away  with  it,  followed  by  his  comrades.  This  was  more 
than  once  done  in  the  Neversink. 

At  other  times,  hearing  that  a  sailor  has  something 
valuable  secreted  in  his  hammock,  they  will  rip  it  open 
from  underneath  while  he  sleeps,  and  reduce  the  con 
jecture  to  a  certainty. 

To  enumerate  all  the  minor  pilferings  on  board  a  man- 
of-war  would  be  endless.  With  some  highly  commendable^ 
exceptions,  they  rob  from  one  another,  and  rob  back  again, 
till,  in  the  matter  of  small  things,  a  community  of  goods 
seems  almost  established  ;  and  at  last,  as  a  whole,  they 
become  relatively  honest,  by  nearly  every  man  becoming 
the  reverse.  It  is  in  vain  that  the  officers,  by  threats  of 
condign  punishment,  endeavour  to  instil  more  virtuous 
principles  into  their  crew  ;  so  thick  is  the  mob,  that  not 
one  thief  in  a  thousand  is  detected. 


CHAPTER  XI 

THE   PURSUIT   OF  POETRY   UNDER   DIFFICULTIES 

THE  feeling  of  insecurity  concerning  one's  possessions  in 
the  Never  sink,  which  the  things  just  narrated  begat  in  the 
minds  of  honest  men,  was  curiously  exemplified  in  the 
case  of  my  poor  friend  Lemsford,  a  gentlemanly  young 
member  of  the  after-guard.  I  had  very  early  made  the 
acquaintance  of  Lemsford.  It  is  curious  how  unerringly 
a  man  pitches  upon  a  spirit  any  way  akin  to  his  own, 
even  in  the  most  miscellaneous  mob. 

Lemsford  was  a  poet ;  so  thoroughly  inspired  with  the 
divine  afflatus  that  not  even  all  the  tar  and  tumult  of 
a  man-of-war  could  drive  it  out  of  him. 

As  may  readily  be  imagined,  the  business  of  writing 
verse  is  a  very  different  thing  on  the  gun-deck  of  a  frigate 
from  what  the  gentle  and  sequestered  Wordsworth  found 
it  at  placid  Rydal  Mount  in  Westmorland.  In  a  frigate, 
you  cannot  sit  down  and  meander  off  your  sonnets  when 
the  full  heart  prompts  ;  but  only  when  more  important 
duties  permit :  such  as  bracing  round  the  yards,  or 
reefing  topsails  fore  and  aft.  Nevertheless,  every  frag 
ment  of  time  at  his  command  was  religiously  devoted  by 
Lemsford  to  the  Nine.  At  the  most  unseasonable  hours 
you  would  behold  him,  seated  apart,  in  some  corner 
among  the  guns — a  shot-box  before  him,  pen  in  hand,  and 
eyes  '  in  a  fine  frenzy  rolling' 

1  What 's  that  'ere  born  nat'ral  about  ?  '— '  He  's  got 
a  fit,  hain't  he  ?  '  were  exclamations  often  made  by  the 
less  learned  of  his  shipmates.  Some  deemed  him  a 

D 


50  WHITE  JACKET 

conjurer  ;  others  a  lunatic  ;  and  the  knowing  ones  said 
that  he  must  be  a  crazy  Methodist.  But  well  knowing 
by  experience  the  truth  of  the  saying,  that  poetry  is  its 
own  exceeding  great  reward,  Lemsford  wrote  on  ;  dashing 
off  whole  epics,  sonnets,  ballads,  and  acrostics  with  a 
facility  which,  under  the  circumstances,  amazed  me. 
Often  he  read  over  his  effusions  to  me  ;  and  well  worth 
the  hearing  they  were.  He  had  wit,  imagination,  feeling, 
and  humour  in  abundance  ;  and  out  of  the  very  ridicule 
with  which  some  persons  regarded  him  he  made  rare 
metrical  sport,  which  we  two  together  enjoyed  by  our 
selves,  or  shared  with  certain  select  friends. 

Still,  the  taunts  and  jeers  so  often  levelled  at  my  fine 
friend  the  poet  would  now  and  then  rouse  him  into  rage  ; 
and  at  such  times  the  haughty  scorn  he  would  hurl  on 
his  foes  was  proof  positive  of  his  possession  of  that  one 
attribute,  irritability,  almost  universally  ascribed  to  the 
votaries  of  Parnassus  and  the  Nine. 

My  noble  captain,  Jack  Chase,  rather  patronised 
Lemsford,  and  he  would  stoutly  take  his  part  against 
scores  of  adversaries.  Frequently  inviting  him  up  aloft 
into  his  top,  he  would  beg  him  to  recite  some  of  his  verses  ; 
to  which  he  would  pay  the  most  heedful  attention,  like 
Msecenas  listening  to  Virgil,  with  a  book  of  the  MnM  in 
his  hand.  Taking  the  liberty  of  a  well-wisher,  he  would 
sometimes  gently  criticise  the  piece,  suggesting  a  few 
immaterial  alterations.  And  upon  my  word,  noble  Jack, 
with  his  native-born  good  sense,  taste,  and  humanity, 
was  not  ill  qualified  to  play  the  true  part  of  a  Quarterly 
Review  ; — which  is,  to  give  quarter  at  last,  however  severe 
the  critique. 

Now  Lemsford's  great  care,  anxiety,  and  endless  source 
of  tribulation  was  the  preservation  of  his  manuscripts. 
He  had  a  little  box,  about  the  size  of  a  small  dressing- 
case,  and  secured  with  a  lock,  in  which  he  kept  his  papers 


PURSUIT  OF  POETRY  UNDER  DIFFICULTIES  51 

and  stationery.  This  box,  of  course,  he  could  not  keep 
in  his  bag  or  hammock,  for,  in  either  case,  he  would  only 
be  able  to  get  at  it  once  in  the  twenty-four  hours.  It  was 
necessary  to  have  it  accessible  at  all  times.  So  when 
not  using  it,  he  was  obliged  to  hide  it  out  of  sight,  where 
he  could.  And  of  all  places  in  the  world,  a  ship  of  war, 
above  her  hold,  least  abounds  in  secret  nooks.  Almost 
every  inch  is  occupied  ;  almost  every  inch  is  in  plain 
sight ;  and  almost  every  inch  is  continually  being  visited 
and  explored.  Added  to  all  this,  was  the  deadly  hostility 
of  the  whole  tribe  of  ship -underlings — master-at-arms, 
ship's  corporals,  and  boatswain's  mates — both  to  the  poet 
and  his  casket.  They  hated  his  box,  as  if  it  had  been 
Pandora's,  crammed  to  the  very  lid  with  hurricanes  and 
gales.  They  hunted  out  his  hiding-places  like  pointers, 
and  gave  him  no  peace  night  or  day. 

Still,  the  long  twenty-four-pounders  on  the  main-deck 
offered  some  promise  of  a  hiding-place  to  the  box  ;  and, 
accordingly,  it  was  often  tucked  away  behind  the  car 
riages,  among  the  side  tackles  ;  its  black  colour  blending 
with  the  ebon  hue  of  the  guns. 

But  Quoin,  one  of  the  quarter-gunners,  had  eyes  like 
a  ferret.  Quoin  was  a  little  old  man-of-war's  man, 
hardly  five  feet  high,  with  a  complexion  like  a  gunshot 
wound  after  it  is  healed.  He  was  indefatigable  in  attend 
ing  to  his  duties,  which  consisted  in  taking  care  of  one 
division  of  the  guns,  embracing  ten  of  the  aforesaid 
twenty -four-pounders.  Ranged  up  against  the  ship's  side 
at  regular  intervals,  they  resembled  not  a  little  a  stud  of 
sable  chargers  in  their  stalls.  Among  this  iron  stud  little 
Quoin  was  continually  running  in  and  out,  currying  them 
down,  now  and  then,  with  an  old  rag,  or  keeping  the  flies 
off  with  a  brush.  To  Quoin,  the  honour  and  dignity  of 
the  United  States  of  America  seemed  indissolubly  linked 
with  the  keeping  his  guns  unspotted  and  glossy.  He 


52  WHITE  JACKET 

himself  was  black  as  a  chimney-sweep  with  continually 
tending  them,  and  rubbing  them  down  with  black  paint. 
He  would  sometimes  get  outside  of  the  port-holes  and 
peer  into  their  muzzles,  as  a  monkey  into  a  bottle.  Or, 
like  a  dentist,  he  seemed  intent  upon  examining  their 
teeth.  Quite  as  often,  he  would  be  brushing  out  their 
touch-holes  with  a  little  wisp  of  oakum,  like  a  Chinese 
barber  in  Canton,  cleaning  a  patient's  ear. 

Such  was  his  solicitude,  that  it  was  a  thousand  pities 
he  was  not  able  to  dwarf  himself  still  more,  so  as  to  creep 
in  at  the  touch-hole,  and,  examining  the  whole  interior 
of  the  tube,  emerge  at  last  from  the  muzzle.  Quoin  swore 
by  his  guns,  and  slept  by  their  side.  Woe  betide  the  man 
whom  he  found  leaning  against  them,  or  in  any  way 
soiling  them.  He  seemed  seized  with  the  crazy  fancy, 
that  his  darling  twenty-four-pounders  were  fragile,  and 
might  break,  like  glass  retorts. 

Now,  from  this  Quoin's  vigilance,  how  could  my  poor 
friend  the  poet  hope  to  escape  with  his  box  ?  Twenty 
times  a  week  it  was  pounced  upon,  with  a  '  here  's  that 

d d  pill-box  again  !  '  and  a  loud  threat  to  pitch  it 

overboard  the  next  time,  without  a  moment's  warning, 
or  benefit  of  clergy.  Like  many  poets,  Lemsford  was 
nervous,  and  upon  these  occasions  he  trembled  like  a  leaf. 
Once,  with  an  inconsolable  countenance,  he  came  to  me, 
saying  that  his  casket  was  nowhere  to  be  found  ;  he 
had  sought  for  it  in  his  hiding-place,  and  it  was  not 
there. 

I  asked  him  where  he  had  hidden  it  ? 

*  Among  the  guns,'  he  replied. 

'  Then  depend  upon  it,  Lemsford,  that  Quoin  has  been 
the  death  of  it.' 

Straight  to  Quoin  went  the  poet.  But  Quoin  knew 
nothing  about  it.  For  ten  mortal  days  the  poet  was  not 
to  be  comforted ;  dividing  his  leisure  time  between 


PURSUIT  OP  POETRY  UNDER  DIFFICULTIES  53 

cursing  Quoin  and  lamenting  his  loss.  The  world  is 
undone,  he  must  have  thought ;  no  such  calamity 
has  befallen  it  since  the  Deluge ; — my  verses  are 
perished. 

But  though  Quoin,  as  it  afterward  turned  out,  had 
indeed  found  the  box,  it  so  happened  that  he  had  not 
destroyed  it ;  which  no  doubt  led  Lemsford  to  infer  that 
a  superintending  Providence  had  interposed  to  preserve 
to  posterity  his  invaluable  casket.  It  was  found  at  last, 
lying  exposed  near  the  galley. 

Lemsford  was  not  the  only  literary  man  on  board  the 
Neversink.  There  were  three  or  four  persons  who  kept 
journals  of  the  cruise.  One  of  these  journalists  embel 
lished  his  work — which  was  written  in  a  large  blank 
account-book — with  various  coloured  illustrations  of  the 
harbours  and  bays  at  which  the  frigate  had  touched  ; 
and  also,  with  small  crayon  sketches  of  comical  incidents 
on  board  the  frigate  itself.  He  would  frequently  read 
passages  of  his  book  to  an  admiring  circle  of  the  more 
refined  sailors,  between  the  guns.  They  pronounced  the 
whole  performance  a  miracle  of  art.  As  the  author 
declared  to  them  that  it  was  all  to  be  printed  and  pub 
lished  so  soon  as  the  vessel  reached  home,  they  vied  with 
each  other  in  procuring  interesting  items,  to  be  incor 
porated  into  additional  chapters.  But  it  having  been 
rumoured  abroad  that  this  journal  was  to  be  ominously 
entitled  '  The  Cruise  of  the  Neversink,  or  a  Paixhan  Shot 
into  Naval  Abuses  '  ;  and  it  having  also  reached  the  ears 
of  the  ward-room  that  the  work  contained  reflections 
somewhat  derogatory  to  the  dignity  of  the  officers,  the 
volume  was  seized  by  the  master-at-arms,  armed  with  a 
warrant  from  the  captain.  A  few  days  after,  a  large  nail 
was  driven  straight  through  the  two  covers,  and  clinched 
on  the  other  side,  and,  thus  everlastingly  sealed,  the  book 
was  committed  to  the  deep.  The  ground  taken  by  the 


54  WHITE  JACKET 

authorities  on  this  occasion  was,  perhaps,  that  the  book 
was  obnoxious  to  a  certain  clause  in  the  Articles  of  War, 
forbidding  any  person  in  the  Navy  to  bring  any  other 
person  in  the  Navy  into  contempt,  which  the  suppressed 
volume  undoubtedly  did. 


CHAPTER  XII 

THE  GOOD  OR  BAD  TEMPER  OF  MAN-OF-WAR'S  MEN,  IN  A 
GREAT  DEGREE,  ATTRIBUTABLE  TO  THEIR  PARTICULAR 
STATIONS  AND  DUTIES  ABOARD  SHIP 

QUOIN,  the  quarter-gunner,  was  the  representative  of  a 
class  on  board  the  Neversink  altogether  too  remarkable 
to  be  left  astern,  without  further  notice,  in  the  rapid  wake 
of  these  chapters. 

As  has  been  seen,  Quoin  was  full  of  unaccountable 
whimsies  ;  he  was,  withal,  a  very  cross,  bitter,  ill-natured, 
inflammable  little  old  man.  So,  too,  were  all  the  members 
of  the  gunner's  gang,  including  the  two  gunner's  mates, 
and  all  the  quarter-gunners.  Every  one  of  them  had  the 
same  dark  brown  complexion  ;  all  their  faces  looked  like 
smoked  hams.  They  were  continually  grumbling  and 
growling  about  the  batteries  ;  running  in  and  out  among 
the  guns  ;  driving  the  sailors  away  from  them  ;  and 
cursing  and  swearing  as  if  all  their  consciences  had  been 
powder-singed  and  made  callous  by  their  calling.  Indeed, 
they  were  a  most  unpleasant  set  of  men,  especially 
Priming,  the  nasal-voiced  gunner's  mate,  with  the  hare 
lip  ;  and  Cylinder,  his  stuttering  coadjutor,  with  the 
clubbed  foot.  But  you  will  always  observe  that  the 
gunner's  gang  of  every  man-of-war  are  invariably  ill- 
tempered,  ugly -featured,  and  quarrelsome.  Once  when 
I  visited  an  English  line-of -battle  ship,  the  gunner's  gang 
were  at  work  fore  and  aft,  polishing  up  the  batteries, 
which,  according  to  the  admiral's  fancy,  had  been  painted 
white  as  snow.  Fidgeting  round  the  great  thirty-two - 

65 


56  WHITE  JACKET 

pounders,  and  making  stinging  remarks  at  the  sailors 
and  each  other,  they  reminded  one  of  a  swarm  of  black 
wasps,  buzzing  about  rows  of  white  headstones  in  a 
churchyard. 

Now,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  their  being  so  much 
among  the  guns  is  the  very  thing  that  makes  a  gunner's 
gang  so  cross  and  quarrelsome.  Indeed,  this  was  once 
proved  to  the  satisfaction  of  our  whole  company  of  main 
top  men.  A  fine  topmate  of  ours,  a  most  merry  and 
companionable  fellow,  chanced  to  be  promoted  to  a 
quarter-gunner's  berth.  A  few  days  afterward,  some  of 
us  main-top  men,  his  old  comrades,  went  to  pay  him  a 
visit,  while  he  was  going  his  regular  rounds  through  the 
division  of  guns  allotted  to  his  care.  But  instead  of 
greeting  us  with  his  usual  heartiness,  and  cracking  his 
pleasant  jokes,  to  our  amazement  he  did  little  else  but 
scowl ;  and  at  last,  when  we  rallied  him  upon  his  ill- 
temper,  he  seized  a  long  black  rammer  from  overhead, 
and  drove  us  on  deck,  threatening  to  report  us  if  we  ever 
dared  to  be  familiar  with  him  again. 

My  topmates  thought  that  this  remarkable  metamor 
phose  was  the  effect  produced  upon  a  weak,  vain  character, 
suddenly  elevated  from  the  level  of  a  mere  seaman  to 
the  dignified  position  of  a  petty  officer.  But  though,  in 
similar  cases,  I  had  seen  such  effects  produced  upon  some 
of  the  crew,  yet,  in  the  present  instance,  I  knew  better 
than  that ; — it  was  solely  brought  about  by  his  consort 
ing  with  those  villainous,  irritable,  ill-tempered  cannon  ; 
more  especially  from  his  being  subject  to  the  orders  of 
those  deformed  blunderbusses,  Priming  and  Cylinder. 

The  truth  seems  to  be,  indeed,  that  all  people  should 
be  very  careful  in  selecting  their  callings  and  vocations  ; 
very  careful  in  seeing  to  it  that  they  surround  themselves 
by  good-humoured,  pleasant-looking  objects,  and  agree 
able,  temper-soothing  sounds.  Many  an  angelic  disposi- 


TEMPER  OF  MAN-OF-WAR'S  MEN  57 

tion  has  had  its  even  edge  turned,  and  hacked  like  a  saw  ; 
and  many  a  sweet  draught  of  piety  has  soured  on  the 
heart  from  people's  choosing  ill-natured  employments, 
and  omitting  to  gather  round  them  good-natured  land 
scapes.  Gardeners  are  almost  always  pleasant,  affable 
people  to  converse  with  ;  but  beware  of  quarter-gunners, 
keepers  of  arsenals,  and  lonely  lighthouse  men.  And 
though  you  will  generally  observe  that  people  living  in 
arsenals  and  lighthouses  endeavour  to  cultivate  a  few 
flowers  in  pots,  and  perhaps  a  few  cabbages  in  patches, 
by  way  of  keeping  up,  if  possible,  some  gaiety  of  spirits  ; 
yet,  it  will  not  do  ;  their  going  among  great  guns  and 
muskets  everlastingly  mildews  the  blossoms  of  the  one, 
and  how  can  even  cabbages  thrive  in  a  soil  whereunto  the 
mouldering  keels  of  shipwrecked  vessels  have  imparted 
the  loam  ? 

It  would  be  advisable  for  any  man,  who  from  an  un 
lucky  choice  of  a  profession,  which  it  is  too  late  to  change 
for  another,  should  find  his  temper  souring,  to  endeavour 
to  counteract  that  misfortune  by  filling  his  private 
chamber  with  amiable,  pleasurable  sights  and  sounds. 
In  summer  time  an  ^Eolian  harp  can  be  placed  in  your 
window  at  a  very  trifling  expense  ;  a  conch-shell  might 
stand  on  your  mantel,  to  be  taken  up  and  held  to  the  ear, 
that  you  may  be  soothed  by  its  continual  lulling  sound, 
when  you  feel  the  blue  fit  stealing  over  you.  For  sights, 
a  gay-painted  punch-bowl,  or  Dutch  tankard — never 
mind  about  filling  it — might  be  recommended.  It  should 
be  placed  on  a  bracket  in  the  pier.  Nor  is  an  old-fashioned 
silver  ladle,  nor  a  chased  dinner-castor,  nor  a  fine  portly 
demijohn,  nor  anything,  indeed,  that  savours  of  eating 
and  drinking,  bad  to  drive  off  the  spleen.  But  perhaps 
the  best  of  all  is  a  shelf  of  merrily  bound  books,  containing 
comedies,  farces,  songs,  and  humorous  novels.  You  need 
never  open  them  ;  only  have  the  titles  in  plain  sight. 


58  WHITE  JACKET 

For  this  purpose,  Peregrine  Pickle  is  a  good  book  ;  so  is 
Gil  Bias  ;  so  is  Goldsmith. 

But  of  all  chamber  furniture  in  the  world,  best  calcu 
lated  to  cure  a  bad  temper,  and  breed  a  pleasant  one,  is  the 
sight  of  a  lovely  wife.  If  you  have  children,  however, 
that  are  teething,  the  nursery  should  be  a  good  way 
upstairs ;  at  sea,  it  ought  to  be  in  the  mizen-top. 
Indeed,  teething  children  play  the  very  deuce  with  a 
husband's  temper.  I  have  known  three  promising  young 
husbands  completely  spoil  on  their  wives'  hands  by 
reason  of  a  teething  child,  whose  worrisomeness  hap 
pened  to  be  aggravated  at  the  time  by  the  summer  com 
plaint.  With  a  breaking  heart,  and  my  handkerchief  to 
my  eyes,  I  followed  those  three  hapless  young  husbands, 
one  after  the  other,  to  their  premature  graves. 

Gossiping  scenes  breed  gossips.  Who  so  chatty  as 
hotel  clerks,  market-women,  auctioneers,  bar-keepers, 
apothecaries,  newspaper  reporters,  monthly  nurses,  and 
all  those  who  live  in  bustling  crowds,  or  are  present  at 
scenes  of  chatty  interest  ? 

Solitude  breeds  taciturnity  ;  that  everybody  knows  ; 
who  so  taciturn  as  authors,  taken  as  a  race  ? 

A  forced,  interior  quietude,  in  the  midst  of  great  out 
ward  commotion,  breeds  moody  people.  Who  so  moody 
as  railroad  brakemen,  steamboat  engineers,  helmsmen, 
and  tenders  of  power-looms  in  cotton  factories .?  For  all 
these  must  hold  their  peace  while  employed,  and  let  the 
machinery  do  the  chatting  ;  they  cannot  even  edge  in  a 
single  syllable. 

Now,  this  theory  about  the  wondrous  influence  of 
habitual  sights  and  sounds  upon  the  human  temper 
was  suggested  by  my  experiences  on  board  our  frigate. 
And  although  I  regard  the  example  furnished  by  our 
quarter-gunners — especially  him  who  had  once  been  our 
topmate — as  by  far  the  strongest  argument  in  favour  of 


TEMPER  OF  MAN-OF-WAR'S  MEN  59 

the  general  theory  ;  yet  the  entire  ship  abounded  with 
illustrations  of  its  truth.  Who  were  more  liberal-hearted, 
lofty-minded,  gayer,  more  jocund,  elastic,  adventurous, 
given  to  fun  and  frolic,  than  the  topmen  of  the  fore,  main, 
and  mizen  masts  ?  The  reason  of  their  liberal-hearted- 
ness  was  that  they  were  daily  called  upon  to  expatiate 
themselves  all  over  the  rigging  ;  the  reason  of  their  lofty  - 
mindedness  was  that  they  were  high  lifted  above  the 
petty  tumults,  carping  cares,  and  paltrinesses  of  the  decks 
below. 

And  I  feel  persuaded  in  my  inmost  soul  that  it  is  to 
the  fact  of  my  having  been  a  main-top  man,  and  especially 
my  particular  post  being  on  the  loftiest  yard  of  the  frigate, 
the  main-royal-yard,  that  I  am  now  enabled  to  give  such 
a  free,  broad,  off-hand,  bird's  eye,  and,  more  than  all, 
impartial  account  of  our  man-of-war  world  ;  withhold 
ing  nothing  ;  inventing  nothing  ;  nor  flattering,  nor  scan 
dalising  any  ;  but  meting  out  to  all — commodore  and 
messenger -boy  alike — their  precise  descriptions  and 
deserts. 

The  reason  of  the  mirthfulness  of  these  topmen  was, 
that  they  always  looked  out  upon  the  blue,  boundless, 
dimpled,  laughing,  sunny  sea.  Nor  do  I  hold  that  it 
militates  against  this  theory,  that  of  a  stormy  day,  when 
the  face  of  the  ocean  was  black  and  overcast,  that  some  of 
them  would  grow  moody,  and  chose  to  sit  apart.  On  the 
contrary,  it  only  proves  the  thing  which  I  maintain.  For 
even  on  shore  there  are  many  people,  naturally  gay  and 
light-hearted,  who,  whenever  the  autumnal  wind  begins 
to  bluster  round  the  corners,  and  roar  along  the  chimney- 
stacks,  straight  become  cross,  petulant,  and  irritable. 
What  is  more  mellow  than  fine  old  ale  ?  Yet  thunder 
will  sour  the  best  nut-brown  ever  brewed. 

The  Holders  of  our  frigate,  the  Troglodytes,  who  lived 
down  in  the  tarry  cellars  and  caves  below  the  berth-deck, 


60  WHITE  JACKET 

were,  nearly  all  of  them,  men  of  gloomy  dispositions, 
taking  sour  views  of  things  ;  one  of  them  was  a  blue-light 
Calvinist.  Whereas,  the  old  sheet-anchor  men,  who  spent 
their  time  in  the  bracing  sea-air  and  broad-cast  sunshine 
of  the  forecastle,  were  free,  generous-hearted,  charitable, 
and  full  of  goodwill  to  all  hands  ;  though  some  of  them, 
to  tell  the  truth,  proved  sad  exceptions  ;  but  exceptions 
only  prove  the  rule. 

The  '  steady-cooks  '  on  the  berth-deck,  the  *  steady- 
sweepers,'  and '  steady-spit-box-musterers,'  in  all  divisions 
of  the  frigate,  fore  and  aft,  were  a  narrow-minded  set ; 
with  contracted  souls  ;  imputable,  no  doubt,  to  their 
grovelling  duties.  More  especially  was  this  evinced  in 
the  case  of  those  odious  ditchers  and  night  scavengers, 
the  ignoble  '  Waisters.' 

The  members  of  the  band,  some  ten  or  twelve  in 
number,  who  had  nothing  to  do  but  keep  their  instruments 
polished,  and  play  a  lively  air  now  and  then,  to  stir  the 
stagnant  current  in  our  poor  old  commodore's  torpid 
veins,  were  the  most  gleeful  set  of  fellows  you  ever  saw. 
They  were  Portuguese,  who  had  been  shipped  at  the 
Cape  de  Verd  Islands,  on  the  passage  out.  They  messed 
by  themselves  ;  forming  a  dinner-party,  not  to  be  ex 
ceeded  in  mirthfulness  by  a  club  of  young  bridegrooms, 
three  months  after  marriage,  completely  satisfied  with 
their  bargains,  after  testing  them. 

But  what  made  them,  now,  so  full  of  fun  ?  What 
indeed  but  their  merry,  martial,  mellow  calling.  Who 
could  be  a  churl,  and  play  a  flageolet  ?  who  mean  and 
spiritless,  braying  forth  the  souls  of  thousand  heroes  from 
his  brazen  trump  ?  But  still  more  efficacious,  perhaps, 
in  ministering  to  the  light  spirits  of  the  band  was  the 
consoling  thought  that,  should  the  ship  ever  go  into  action, 
they  would  be  exempted  from  the  perils  of  battle.  In 
ships  of  war,  the  members  of  the  '  music/  as  the  band  is 


TEMPER  OF  MAN-OF-WAR'S  MEN  61 

called,  are  generally  non-combatants  ;  and  mostly  ship 
with  the  express  understanding  that,  as  soon  as  the 
vessel  comes  within  long  gunshot  of  an  enemy,  they  shall 
have  the  privilege  of  burrowing  down  in  the  cable-tiers, 
or  sea  coal-hole.  Which  shows  that  they  are  inglorious, 
but  uncommonly  sensible  fellows. 

Look  at  the  barons  of  the  gun-room — lieutenants, 
purser,  marine  officers,  sailing-master — all  of  them 
gentlemen  with  stiff  upper  lips,  and  aristocratic  cut 
noses.  Why  was  this  ?  Will  anyone  deny,  that  from 
their  living  so  long  in  high  military  life,  served  by  a  crowd 
of  menial  stewards  and  cot-boys,  and  always  accustomed 
to  command  right  and  left ;  will  anyone  deny,  I  say,  that 
by  reason  of  this,  their  very  noses  had  become  thin, 
peaked,  aquiline,  and  aristocratically  cartilaginous  ? 
Even  old  Cuticle,  the  surgeon,  had  a  Roman  nose. 

But  I  never  could  account  how  it  came  to  be  that  our 
gray-headed  first  lieutenant  was  a  little  lop-sided  ;  that 
is,  one  of  his  shoulders  disproportionately  drooped.  And 
when  I  observed,  that  nearly  all  the  first  lieutenants  I 
saw  in  other  men-of-war,  besides  many  second  and  third 
lieutenants,  were  similarly  lop-sided,  I  knew  that  there 
must  be  some  general  law  which  induced  the  phenomenon  ; 
and  I  put  myself  to  studying  it  out,  as  an  interesting 
problem.  At  last,  I  came  to  the  conclusion — to  which 
I  still  adhere — that  their  so  long  wearing  only  one  epaulet 
(for  to  only  one  does  their  rank  entitle  them)  was  the 
infallible  clue  to  this  mystery.  And  when  any  one  reflects 
upon  so  well  known  a  fact,  that  many  sea-lieutenants 
grow  decrepit  from  age,  without  attaining  a  captaincy  and 
wearing  two  epaulets,  which  would  strike  the  balance 
between  their  shoulders,  the  above  reason  assigned  will 
not  appear  unwarrantable. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

A   MAN-OF-WAR   HERMIT   IN   A   MOB 

THE  allusion  to  the  poet  Lemsford,  in  a  previous  chapter, 
leads  me  to  speak  of  our  mutual  friends,  Nord  and 
Williams,  who  with  Lemsford  himself,  Jack  Chase,  and 
my  comrades  of  the  main-top,  comprised  almost  the  only 
persons  with  whom  I  unreservedly  consorted  while  on 
board  the  frigate.  For  I  had  not  been  long  on  board  ere  I 
found  that  it  would  not  do  to  be  intimate  with  everybody. 
An  indiscriminate  intimacy  with  all  hands  leads  to  sundry 
annoyances  and  scrapes,  too  often  ending  with  a  dozen 
at  the  gangway.  Though  I  was  above  a  year  in  the 
frigate,  there  were  scores  of  men  who  to  the  last  remained 
perfect  strangers  to  me,  whose  very  names  I  did  not  know, 
and  whom  I  would  hardly  be  able  to  recognise  now  should 
I  happen  to  meet  them  in  the  streets. 

In  the  dog-watches  at  sea,  during  the  early  part  of  the 
evening,  the  main-deck  is  generally  filled  with  crowds  of 
pedestrians,  promenading  up  and  down  past  the  guns, 
like  people  taking  the  air  in  Broadway.  At  such  times, 
it  is  curious  to  see  the  men  nodding  to  each  other's  recog 
nitions  (they  might  not  have  seen  each  other  for  a  week)  ; 
exchanging  a  pleasant  word  with  a  friend  ;  making  a 
hurried  appointment  to  meet  him  somewhere  aloft  on  the 
morrow,  or  passing  group  after  group  without  deigning 
the  slightest  salutation.  Indeed,  I  was  not  at  all  singular 
in  having  but  comparatively  few  acquaintances  on  board, 
though  certainly  carrying  my  fastidiousness  to  an  unusual 
extent. 


A  MAN-OF-WAR  *  HERMIT  IN  A  MOB         63 

My  friend  Nord  was  a  somewhat  remarkable  character  ; 
and  if  mystery  includes  romance,  he  certainly  was  a  very 
romantic  one.  Before  seeking  an  introduction  to  him 
through  Lemsford,  I  had  often  marked  his  tall,  spare, 
upright  figure  stalking  like  Don  Quixote  among  the 
pigmies  of  the  after-guard,  to  which  he  belonged.  At 
first  I  found  him  exceedingly  reserved  and  taciturn  ;  his 
saturnine  brow  wore  a  scowl ;  he  was  almost  repelling  in 
his  demeanour.  In  a  word,  he  seemed  desirous  of  hinting 
that  his  list  of  man-of-war  friends  was  already  made  up, 
complete,  and  full ;  and  there  was  no  room  for  more. 
But  observing  that  the  only  man  he  ever  consorted  with 
was  Lemsford,  I  had  too  much  magnanimity,  by  going 
off  in  a  pique  at  his  coldness,  to  let  him  lose  for  ever  the 
chance  of  making  so  capital  an  acquaintance  as  myself. 
Besides,  I  saw  it  in  his  eye,  that  the  man  had  been  a  reader 
of  good  books  ;  I  would  have  staked  my  life  on  it  that 
he  seized  the  right  meaning  of  Montaigne.  I  saw  that 
he  was  an  earnest  thinker  ;  I  more  than  suspected  that 
he  had  been  bolted  in  the  mill  of  adversity.  For  all  these 
things  my  heart  yearned  toward  him  ;  I  determined  to 
know  him. 

At  last  I  succeeded  ;  it  was  during  a  profoundly  quiet 
midnight  watch,  when  I  perceived  him  walking  alone  in 
the  waist,  while  most  of  the  men  were  dozing  on  the 
carronade-slides . 

That  night  we  scoured  all  the  prairies  of  reading  ; 
dived  into  the  bosoms  of  authors,  and  tore  out  their 
hearts  ;  and  that  night  White  Jacket  learned  more  than 
he  has  ever  done  in  any  single  night  since. 

The  man  was  a  marvel.  He  amazed  me,  as  much  as 
Coleridge  did  the  troopers  among  whom  he  enlisted. 
What  could  have  induced  such  a  man  to  enter  a  man-of- 
war,  all  my  sapience  cannot  fathom.  And  how  he 
managed  to  preserve  his  dignity,  as  he  did,  among  such 


64  WHITE  JACKET 

a  rabble  rout  was  equally  a  mystery.  For  he  was  no 
sailor  ;  as  ignorant  of  a  ship,  indeed,  as  a  man  from  the 
sources  of  the  Niger.  Yet  the  officers  respected  him  ; 
and  the  men  were  afraid  of  him.  This  much  was  observ 
able,  however,  that  he  faithfully  discharged  whatever 
special  duties  devolved  upon  him  ;  and  was  so  fortunate 
as  never  to  render  himself  liable  to  a  reprimand.  Doubt 
less,  he  took  the  same  view  of  the  thing  that  another  of 
the  crew  did  ;  and  had  early  resolved  so  to  conduct 
himself  as  never  to  run  the  risk  of  the  scourge.  And  this 
it  must  have  been — added  to  whatever  incommunicable 
grief  which  might  have  been  his — that  made  this  Nord 
such  a  wandering  recluse,  even  among  our  man-of-war 
mob.  Nor  could  he  have  long  swung  his  hammock  on 
board  ere  he  must  have  found  that,  to  ensure  his  exemp 
tion  from  that  thing  which  alone  affrighted  him,  he  must 
be  content  for  the  most  part  to  turn  a  man-hater,  and 
socially  expatriate  himself  from  many  things  which  might 
have  rendered  his  situation  more  tolerable.  Still  more, 
several  events  that  took  place  must  have  horrified  him, 
at  times,  with  the  thought  that,  however  he  might  isolate 
and  entomb  himself,  yet  for  all  this,  the  improbability  of 
his  being  overtaken  by  what  he  most  dreaded  never 
advanced  to  the  infallibility  of  the  impossible. 

In  my  intercourse  with  Nord  he  never  made  allusion 
to  his  past  career — a  subject  upon  which  most  high-bred 
castaways  in  a  man-of-war  are  very  diffuse  ;  relating 
their  adventures  at  the  gaming-table  ;  the  recklessness 
with  which  they  have  run  through  the  amplest  fortunes 
in  a  single  season ;  their  alms-givings,  and  gratuities  to 
porters  and  poor  relations  ;  and  above  all,  their  youthful 
indiscretions,  and  the  broken-hearted  ladies  they  have  left 
behind.  No  such  tales  had  Nord  to  tell.  Concerning  the 
past,  he  was  barred  and  locked  up  like  the  specie  vaults 
of  the  Bank  of  England.  For  anything  that  dropped 


A  MAN-OF-WAR  HERMIT  IN  A  MOB         65 

from  him,  none  of  us  could  be  sure  that  he  had  ever 
existed  till  now.  Altogether,  he  was  a  remarkable  man. 
My  other  friend,  Williams,  was  a  thorough-going 
Yankee  from  Maine,  who  had  been  both  a  peddler  and  a 
pedagogue  in  his  day.  He  had  all  manner  of  stories  to 
tell  about  nice  little  country  frolics,  and  would  run  over 
an  endless  list  of  his  sweethearts.  He  was  honest,  acute, 
witty,  full  of  mirth  and  good-humour — a  laughing  philoso 
pher.  He  was  invaluable  as  a  pill  against  the  spleen  ; 
and,  with  the  view  of  extending  the  advantages  of  his 
society  to  the  saturnine  Nord,  I  introduced  them  to  each 
other  ;  but  Nord  cut  him  dead  the  very  same  evening, 
when  we  sallied  out  from  between  the  guns  for  a  walk 
on  the  main-deck. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

A   DRAUGHT   IN   A   MAN-OF-WAR 

WE  were  not  many  days  out  of  port  when  a  rumour  was 
set  afloat  that  dreadfully  alarmed  many  tars.  It  was 
this  :  that,  owing  to  some  unprecedented  oversight  in  the 
purser,  or  some  equally  unprecedented  remissness  in  the 
naval  storekeeper  at  Callao,  the  frigate's  supply  of 
that  delectable  beverage  called  *  grog '  was  well-nigh 
expended. 

In  the  American  Navy  the  law  allows  one  gill  of  spirits 
per  day  to  every  seaman.  In  two  portions,  it  is  served 
out  just  previous  to  breakfast  and  dinner.  At  the  roll  of 
the  drum,  the  sailors  assemble  round  a  large  tub,  or  cask, 
rilled  with  the  liquid  ;  and,  as  their  names  are  called  off 
by  a  midshipman,  they  step  up  and  regale  themselves 
from  a  little  tin  measure  called  a  '  tot.'  No  high-liver 
helping  himself  to  Tokay  off  a  well-polished  sideboard 
smacks  his  lips  with  more  mighty  satisfaction  than  the 
sailor  does  over  this  tot.  To  many  of  them,  indeed,  the 
thought  of  their  daily  tots  forms  a  perpetual  perspective 
of  ravishing  landscapes,  indefinitely  receding  in  the 
distance.  It  is  their  great  '  prospect  in  life.'  Take  away 
their  grog,  and  life  possesses  no  further  charms  for  them. 
It  is  hardly  to  be  doubted  that  the  controlling  induce 
ment  which  keeps  many  men  in  the  Navy  is  the  unbounded 
confidence  they  have  in  the  ability  of  the  United  States 
Government  to  supply  them,  regularly  and  unfailingly, 
with  their  daily  allowance  of  this  beverage.  I  have 
known  several  forlorn  individuals,  shipping  as  landsmen, 

66 


A  DRAUGHT  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR  67 

who  have  confessed  to  me  that,  having  contracted  a  love 
for  ardent  spirits,  which  they  could  not  renounce,  and 
having  by  their  foolish  courses  been  brought  into  the 
most  abject  poverty — insomuch  that  they  could  no 
longer  gratify  their  thirst  ashore — they  incontinently 
entered  the  Navy ;  regarding  it  as  the  asylum  for  all 
drunkards,  who  might  there  prolong  their  lives  by 
regular  hours  and  exercise,  and  twice  every  day  quench 
their  thirst  by  moderate  and  undeviating  doses. 

When  I  once  remonstrated  with  an  old  toper  of  a  top- 
man  about  his  daily  dram-drinking  ;  when  I  told  him  it 
was  ruining  him,  and  advised  him  to  stop  his  grog  and 
receive  the  money  for  it,  in  addition  to  his  wages,  as 
provided  by  law,  he  turned  about  on  me,  with  an  irresist 
ibly  waggish  look,  and  said,  '  Give  up  my  grog  ?  And 
why  ?  Because  it  is  ruining  me  ?  No,  no  ;  I  am  a  good 
Christian,  White  Jacket,  and  love  my  enemy  too  much  to 
drop  his  acquaintance.' 

It  may  be  readily  imagined,  therefore,  what  consterna 
tion  and  dismay  pervaded  the  gun-deck  at  the  first 
announcement  of  the  tidings  that  the  grog  was  expended. 

'  The  grog  gone  !  '  roared  an  old  sheet-anchor  man. 

'  Oh  Lord  !  what  a  pain  in  my  stomach  !  '  cried  a 
main- top  man. 

'  It 's  worse  than  the  cholera  !  '  cried  a  man  of  the 
after-guard. 

'  I  'd  sooner  the  water-casks  would  give  out !  '  said  a 
captain  of  the  hold. 

'  Are  we  ganders  and  geese,  that  we  can  live  without 
grog  ?  '  asked  a  corporal  of  marines. 

1  Ay,  we  must  now  drink  with  the  ducks  !  '  cried  a 
quarter-master. 

*  Not  a  tot  left  ?  '  groaned  a  waister. 

1  Not  a  toothful !  '  sighed  a  holder,  from  the  bottom 
of  Ms  boots, 


68  WHITE  JACKET 

Yes,  the  fatal  intelligence  proved  true.  The  drum 
was  no  longer  heard  rolling  the  men  to  the  tub,  and  deep 
gloom  and  dejection  fell  like  a  cloud.  The  ship  was  like 
a  great  city  when  some  terrible  calamity  has  overtaken 
it.  The  men  stood  apart,  in  groups,  discussing  their 
woes,  and  mutually  condoling.  No  longer,  of  still 
moonlight  nights,  was  the  song  heard  from  the  giddy 
tops  ;  and  few  and  far  between  were  the  stories  that 
were  told. 

It  was  during  this  interval,  so  dismal  to  many,  that, 
to  the  amazement  of  all  hands,  ten  men  were  reported 
by  the  master-at-arms  to  be  intoxicated.  They  were 
brought  up  to  the  mast,  and  at  their  appearance  the 
doubts  of  the  most  sceptical  were  dissipated  ;  but  whence 
they  had  obtained  their  liquor  no  one  could  tell.  It  was 
observed,  however,  at  the  time,  that  the  tarry  knaves  all 
smelled  of  lavender,  like  so  many  dandies. 

After  their  examination  they  were  ordered  into  the 
'  brig,'  a  jail-house  between  two  guns  on  the  main-deck, 
where  prisoners  are  kept.  Here  they  laid  for  some  time, 
stretched  out  stark  and  stiff,  with  their  arms  folded  over 
their  breasts,  like  so  many  effigies  of  the  Black  Prince 
on  his  monument  in  Canterbury  Cathedral. 

Their  first  slumbers  over,  the  marine  sentry  who  stood 
guard  over  them  had  as  much  as  he  could  do  to  keep 
off  the  crowd,  who  were  all  eagerness  to  find  out  how,  in 
such  a  time  of  want,  the  prisoners  had  managed  to 
drink  themselves  into  oblivion.  In  due  time  they  were 
liberated,  and  the  secret  simultaneously  leaked  out. 

It  seemed  that  an  enterprising  man  of  their  number, 
who  had  suffered  severely  from  the  common  deprivation, 
had  all  at  once  been  struck  by  a  brilliant  idea.  It  had 
come  to  his  knowledge  that  the  purser's  steward  was 
supplied  with  a  large  quantity  of  eau-de-Cologne,  clan 
destinely  brought  out  in  the  ship,  for  the  purpose  of  selling 


A  DRAUGHT  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR  69 

it,  on  his  own  account,  to  the  people  of  the  coast ;  but 
the  supply  proving  larger  than  the  demand,  and  having 
no  customers  on  board  the  frigate  but  Lieutenant  Sel- 
vagee,  he  was  now  carrying  home  more  than  a  third  of 
his  original  stock.  To  make  a  short  story  of  it,  this 
functionary,  being  called  upon  in  secret,  was  readily 
prevailed  upon  to  part  with  a  dozen  bottles,  with 
whose  contents  the  intoxicated  party  had  regaled 
themselves. 

The  news  spread  far  and  wide  among  the  men,  being 
only  kept  secret  from  the  officers  and  underlings,  and  that 
night  the  long,  crane-necked  Cologne  bottles  jingled  in 
out-of-the-way  corners  and  by -places,  and,  being  emptied, 
were  sent  flying  out  of  the  ports.  With  brown  sugar, 
taken  from  the  mess-chests,  and  hot  water  begged  from 
the  galley-cooks,  the  men  made  all  manner  of  punches, 
toddies,  and  cocktails,  letting  fall  therein  a  small  drop 
of  tar,  like  a  bit  of  brown  toast,  by  way  of  imparting  a 
flavour.  Of  course,  the  thing  was  managed  with  the 
utmost  secrecy  ;  and  as  a  whole  dark  night  elapsed  after 
their  orgies,  the  revellers  were,  in  a  good  measure,  secure 
from  detection ;  and  those  who  indulged  too  freely 
had  twelve  long  hours  to  get  sober  before  daylight 
obtruded. 

Next  day,  fore  and  aft,  the  whole  frigate  smelled  like 
a  lady's  toilet ;  the  very  tar-buckets  were  fragrant ;  and 
from  the  mouth  of  many  a  grim,  grizzled  old  quarter- 
gunner  came  the  most  fragrant  of  breaths.  The  amazed 
lieutenants  went  about  snuffing  up  the  gale  ;  and,  for 
once,  Selvagee  had  no  further  need  to  flourish  his  perfumed 
handkerchief.  It  was  as  if  we  were  sailing  by  some  odori 
ferous  shore,  in  the  vernal  season  of  violets.  Sabsean 
odours  ! 

'  For  many  a  league, 
Cheered  with  the  grateful  smell,  old  Ocean  smiled.' 


70  WHITE  JACKET 

But,  alas  !  all  this  perfume  could  not  be  wasted  for 
nothing ;  and  the  master-at-arms  and  ship's  corporals, 
putting  this  and  that  together,  very  soon  burrowed  into 
the  secret.  The  purser's  steward  was  called  to  account, 
and  no  more  lavender  punches  and  Cologne  toddies  were 
drank  on  board  the  Neversink. 


CHAPTER  XV 

A  SALT- JUNK  CLUB  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR,  WITH  A  NOTICE 
TO   QUIT 

IT  was  about  the  period  of  the  Cologne-water  excitement 
that  my  self-conceit  was  not  a  little  wounded,  and  my 
sense  of  delicacy  altogether  shocked,  by  a  polite  hint 
received  from  the  cook  of  the  mess  to  which  I  happened 
to  belong.  To  understand  the  matter,  it  is  needful  to 
enter  into  preliminaries. 

The  common  seamen  in  a  large  frigate  are  divided  into 
some  thirty  or  forty  messes,  put  down  on  the  purser's 
books  as  Mess  No.  1,  Mess  No.  2,  Mess  No.  3,  etc.  The 
members  of  each  mess  club  their  rations  of  provisions 
and  breakfast,  dine,  and  sup  together  in  allotted  intervals 
between  the  guns  on  the  main-deck.  In  undeviating 
rotation,  the  members  of  each  mess  (excepting  the  petty 
officers)  take  their  turn  in  performing  the  functions  of 
cook  and  steward.  And  for  the  time  being,  all  the 
affairs  of  the  club  are  subject  to  their  inspection  and 
control. 

It  is  the  cook's  business,  also,  to  have  an  eye  to  the 
general  interests  of  his  mess  ;  to  see  that,  when  the 
aggregated  allowances  of  beef,  bread,  etc.,  are  served  out 
by  one  of  the  master's  mates,  the  mess  over  which  he 
presides  receives  its  full  share,  without  stint  or  subtrac 
tion.  Upon  the  berth-deck  he  has  a  chest,  in  which  to 
keep  his  pots,  pans,  spoons,  and  small  stores  of  sugar, 
molasses,  tea,  and  flour. 

But  though  entitled  a  cook,  strictly  speaking,  the  head 

71 


72  WHITE  JACKET 

of  the  mess  is  no  cook  at  all ;  for  the  cooking  for  the  crew 
is  all  done  by  a  high  and  mighty  functionary,  officially 
called  the  '  ship's  cook,'  assisted  by  several  deputies.  In 
our  frigate,  this  personage  was  a  dignified  coloured 
gentleman,  whom  the  men  dubbed  '  Old  Coffee  '  ;  and 
his  assistants,  negroes  also,  went  by  the  poetical  appella 
tions  of  '  Sunshine,'  '  Rose- Water,'  and  '  May -Day.' 

Now,  the  ship's  cooking  required  very  little  science, 
though  Old  Coffee  often  assured  us  that  he  had  graduated 
at  the  New  York  Astor  House,  under  the  immediate  eye 
of  the  celebrated  Coleman  and  Stetson.  All  he  had  to 
do  was,  in  the  first  place,  to  keep  bright  and  clean  the 
three  huge  coppers,  or  cauldrons,  in  which  many  hundred 
pounds  of  beef  were  daily  boiled.  To  this  end,  Rose- 
Water,  Sunshine,  and  May -Day  every  morning  sprang  into 
their  respective  apartments,  stripped  to  the  waist,  and 
well  provided  with  bits  of  soap-stone  and  sand.  By 
exercising  these  in  a  very  vigorous  manner,  they  threw 
themselves  into  a  violent  perspiration,  and  put  a  fine 
polish  upon  the  interior  of  the  coppers. 

Sunshine  was  the  bard  of  the  trio  ;  and  while  all  three 
would  be  busily  employed  clattering  their  soap-stones 
against  the  metal,  he  would  exhilarate  them  with  some 
remarkable  St.  Domingo  melodies,  one  of  which  was  the 
following  : — 

1  Oh  !  I  los'  my  shoe  in  an  old  canoe, 

Johnio  !  come  Winum  so  ! 
Oh  !  I  los'  my  boot  in  a  pilot-boat, 

Johnio  !  come  Winum  so  ! 
Den  rub-a-dub  de  copper,  oh  ! 
Oh  !  copper  rub-a-dub- a- oh  ! ' 

When  I  listened  to  these  jolly  Africans,  thus  making 
gleeful  their  toil  by  their  cheering  songs,  I  could  not  help 
murmuring  against  that  immemorial  rule  of  men-of-war, 


A  SALT-JUNK  CLUB  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR     73 

which  forbids  the  sailors  to  sing  out,  as  in  merchant  vessels, 
when  pulling  ropes,  or  occupied  at  any  other  ship's  duty. 
Your  only  music,  at  such  times,  is  the  shrill  pipe  of  the 
boatswain's  mate,  which  is  almost  worse  than  no  music 
at  all.  And  if  the  boatswain's  mate  is  not  by,  you  must 
pull  the  ropes,  like  convicts,  in  profound  silence  ;  or  else 
endeavour  to  impart  unity  to  the  exertions  of  all  hands 
by  singing  out  mechanically,  one,  two,  three,  and  then 
pulling  all  together. 

Now,  when  Sunshine,  Rose-Water,  and  May -Day  have 
so  polished  the  ship's  coppers,  that  a  white  kid  glove 
might  be  drawn  along  the  inside  and  show  no  stain,  they 
leap  out  of  their  holes,  and  the  water  is  poured  in  for  the 
coffee.  And  the  coffee  being  boiled,  and  decanted  off 
in  bucketsful,  the  cooks  of  the  messes  march  up  with 
their  salt  beef  for  dinner,  strung  upon  strings  and  tallied 
with  labels  ;  all  of  which  are  plunged  together  into  the 
self-same  coppers,  and  there  boiled.  When,  upon  the 
beef  being  fished  out  with  a  huge  pitchfork,  the  water 
for  the  evening's  tea  is  poured  in  ;  which,  consequently, 
possesses  a  flavour  not  unlike  that  of  shank-soup. 

From  this  it  will  be  seen  that,  so  far  as  cooking  is 
concerned,  a  '  cook  of  the  mess  '  has  very  little  to  do  ; 
merely  carrying  his  provisions  to  and  from  the  grand 
democratic  cookery.  Still,  in  some  things,  his  office 
involves  many  annoyances.  Twice  a  week  butter  and 
cheese  are  served  out — so  much  to  each  man — and  the 
mess -cook  has  the  sole  charge  of  these  delicacies.  The 
great  difficulty  consists  in  so  catering  for  the  mess,  touch 
ing  these  luxuries,  as  to  satisfy  all.  Some  guzzlers  are 
for  devouring  the  butter  at  a  meal,  and  finishing  off  with 
the  cheese  the  same  day  ;  others  contend  for  saving  it 
up  against  Banyan  Day,  when  there  is  nothing  but  beef 
and  bread  ;  and  others,  again,  are  for  taking  a  very  small 
bit  of  butter  and  cheese,  by  way  of  dessert,  to  each  and 


74  WHITE  JACKET 

every  meal  through  the  week.      All  this  gives  rise  to 
endless  disputes,  debates,  and  altercations. 

Sometimes,  with  his  mess-cloth — a  square  of  painted 
canvas — set  out  on  deck  between  the  guns,  garnished 
with  pots,  and  pans,  and  kids,  you  see  the  mess-cook 
seated  on  a  match-tub  at  its  head,  his  trowser-legs  rolled 
up  and  arms  bared,  presiding  over  the  convivial  party. 

'  Now,  men,  you  can't  have  any  butter  to-day.  I  'm 
saving  it  up  for  to-morrow.  You  don't  know  the  value 
of  butter,  men.  You,  Jim,  take  your  hoof  off  the  cloth  ! 
Devil  take  me,  if  some  of  you  chaps  haven't  no  more 
manners  than  so  many  swines  !  Quick,  men,  quick  ;  bear 
a  hand,  and  scoff  (eat)  away. — I  Ve  got  my  to-morrow's 
duff  to  make  yet,  and  some  of  you  fellows  keep  scoffing  as  if 
I  had  nothing  to  do  but  sit  still  here  on  this  here  tub  here, 
and  look  on.  There,  there,  men,  you  Ve  all  had  enough  ; 
so  sail  away  out  of  this,  and  let  me  clear  up  the  wreck.' 

In  this  strain  would  one  of  the  periodical  cooks  of  Mess 
No.  15  talk  to  us.  He  was  a  tall,  resolute  fellow,  who  had 
once  been  a  brakeman  on  a  railroad,  and  he  kept  us  all 
pretty  straight ;  from  his  fiat  there  was  no  appeal. 

But  it  was  not  thus  when  the  turn  came  to  others 
among  us.  Then  it  was,  look  out  for  squalls.  The  busi 
ness  of  dining  became  a  bore,  and  digestion  was  seriously 
impaired  by  the  unamiable  discourse  we  had  over  our 
salt  horse. 

I  sometimes  thought  that  the  junks  of  lean  pork — 
which  were  boiled  in  their  own  bristles,  and  looked  gaunt 
and  grim,  like  pickled  chins  of  half -famished,  unwashed 
Cossacks — had  something  to  do  with  creating  the  bristling 
bitterness  at  times  prevailing  in  our  mess.  The  men  tore 
off  the  tough  hide  from  their  pork,  as  if  they  were  Indians 
scalping  Christians. 

Some  cursed  the  cook  for  a  rogue,  who  kept  from  us 
our  butter  and  cheese,  in  order  to  make  away  with  it  him- 


A  SALT-JUNK  CLUB  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR     75 

self  in  an  underhand  manner  ;  selling  it  at  a  premium  to 
other  messes,  and  thus  accumulating  a  princely  fortune 
at  our  expense.  Others  anathematised  him  for  his 
slovenliness,  casting  hypercritical  glances  into  their  pots 
and  pans,  and  scraping  them  with  their  knives.  Then 
he  would  be  railed  at  for  his  miserable  '  duffs,'  and  other 
short-coming  preparations. 

Marking  all  this  from  the  beginning,  I,  White  Jacket, 
was  sorely  troubled  with  the  idea  that,  in  the  course  of 
time,  my  own  turn  would  come  round  to  undergo  the  same 
objurgations.  How  to  escape,  I  knew  not.  However, 
when  the  dreaded  period  arrived,  I  received  the  keys  of 
office  (the  keys  of  the  mess-chest)  with  a  resigned  temper, 
and  offered  up  a  devout  ejaculation  for  fortitude  under 
the  trial.  I  resolved,  please  Heaven,  to  approve  myself 
an  unexceptionable  caterer,  and  the  most  impartial  of 
stewards. 

The  first  day  there  was  '  duff '  to  make — a  business 
which  devolved  upon  the  mess-cooks,  though  the  boiling 
of  it  pertained  to  Old  Coffee  and  his  deputies.  I  made 
up  my  mind  to  lay  myself  out  on  that  duff ;  to  centre  all 
my  energies  upon  it ;  to  put  the  very  soul  of  art  into  it, 
and  achieve  an  unrivalled  duff — a  duff  that  should  put 
out  of  conceit  all  other  duffs,  and  forever  make  my 
administration  memorable. 

From  the  proper  functionary  the  flour  was  obtained, 
and  the  raisins  ;  the  beef -fat,  or  '  slush,'  from  Old  Coffee  ; 
and  the  requisite  supply  of  water  from  the  scuttle-butt. 
I  then  went  among  the  various  cooks,  to  compare  their 
receipts  for  making  '  duffs '  ;  and  having  well  weighed 
them  all,  and  gathered  from  each  a  choice  item  to  make 
an  original  receipt  of  my  own,  with  due  deliberation  and 
solemnity  I  proceeded  to  business.  Placing  the  com 
ponent  parts  in  a  tin  pan,  I  kneaded  them  together  for 
an  hour,  entirely  reckless  as  to  pulmonary  considerations, 


76  WHITE  JACKET 

touching  the  ruinous  expenditure  of  breath  ;  and  having 
decanted  the  semi-liquid  dough  into  a  canvas  bag, 
secured  the  muzzle,  tied  on  the  tally,  and  delivered  it  to 
Rose-Water,  who  dropped  the  precious  bag  into  the 
coppers,  along  with  a  score  or  two  of  others. 

Eight  bells  had  struck.  The  boatswain  and  his  mates 
had  piped  the  hands  to  dinner  ;  my  mess-cloth  was  set 
out,  and  my  messmates  were  assembled,  knife  in  hand, 
all  ready  to  precipitate  themselves  upon  the  devoted  duff. 
Waiting  at  the  grand  cookery  till  my  turn  came,  I  received 
the  bag  of  pudding,  and  gallanting  it  into  the  mess, 
proceeded  to  loosen  the  string. 

It  was  an  anxious,  I  may  say,  a  fearful  moment.  My 
hands  trembled  ;  every  eye  was  upon  me  ;  my  reputation 
and  credit  were  at  stake.  Slowly  I  undressed  the  duff, 
dandling  it  upon  my  knee,  much  as  a  nurse  does  a  baby 
about  bed-time.  The  excitement  increased  as  I  curled 
down  the  bag  from  the  pudding  ;  it  became  intense, 
when  at  last  I  plumped  it  into  the  pan  held  up  to  receive 
it  by  an  eager  hand.  Bim  !  it  fell  like  a  man  shot  down 
in  a  riot.  Distraction  !  It  was  harder  than  a  sinner's 
heart ;  yea,  tough  as  the  cock  that  crowed  on  the  morn 
that  Peter  told  a  lie. 

'  Gentlemen  of  the  mess,  for  heaven's  sake  !  permit  me 
one  word.  I  have  done  my  duty  by  that  duff — I  have 

But  they  beat  down  my  excuses  with  a  storm  of  crim 
inations.  One  present  proposed  that  the  fatal  pudding 
should  be  tied  round  my  neck,  like  a  millstone,  and  myself 
pushed  overboard.  No  use,  no  use  ;  I  had  failed  ;  ever 
after,  that  duff  lay  heavy  at  my  stomach  and  my  heart. 

After  this,  I  grew  desperate  ;  despised  popularity  ; 
returned  scorn  for  scorn  ;  till  at  length  my  week  expired, 
and  in  the  duff -bag  I  transferred  the  keys  of  office  to  the 
next  man  on  the  roll. 

Somehow,  there  had  never  been  a  very  cordial  feeling 


A  SALT-JUNK  CLUB  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR     77 

between  this  mess  and  me  ;  all  along  they  had  nourished 
a  prejudice  against  my  white  jacket.  They  must  have 
harboured  the  silly  fancy  that  in  it  I  gave  myself  airs, 
and  wore  it  in  order  to  look  consequential ;  perhaps,  as 
a  cloak  to  cover  pilferings  of  tit-bits  from  the  mess.  But 
to  out  with  the  plain  truth,  they  themselves  were  not  a 
very  irreproachable  set.  Considering  the  sequel  I  am 
coming  to,  this  avowal  may  be  deemed  sheer  malice  ;  but 
for  all  that,  I  cannot  avoid  speaking  my  mind. 

After  my  week  of  office,  the  mess  gradually  changed 
their  behaviour  to  me  ;  they  cut  me  to  the  heart ;  they 
became  cold  and  reserved  ;  seldom  or  never  addressed 
me  at  meal-times  without  invidious  allusions  to  my  duff, 
and  also  to  my  jacket,  and  its  dripping  in  wet  weather 
upon  the  mess-cloth.  However,  I  had  no  idea  that  any 
thing  serious,  on  their  part,  was  brewing  ;  but  alas  !  so 
it  turned  out. 

We  were  assembled  at  supper  one  evening,  when  I 
noticed  certain  winks  and  silent  hints  tipped  to  the  cook, 
who  presided.  He  was  a  little,  oily  fellow,  who  had  once 
kept  an  oyster  cellar  ashore  ;  he  bore  me  a  grudge. 
Looking  down  on  the  mess-cloth,  he  observed  that  some 
fellows  never  knew  when  their  room  was  better  than  their 
company.  This  being  a  maxim  of  indiscriminate  applica 
tion,  of  course  I  silently  assented  to  it,  as  any  other 
reasonable  man  would  have  done.  But  this  remark  was 
followed  up  by  another,  to  the  effect  that  not  only  did 
some  fellows  never  know  when  their  room  was  better  than 
their  company,  but  they  persisted  in  staying  when  their 
company  wasn't  wanted,  and  by  so  doing  disturbed  the 
serenity  of  society  at  large.  But  this,  also,  was  a  general 
observation  that  could  not  be  gainsaid.  A  long  and 
ominous  pause  ensued  ;  during  which  I  perceived  every 
eye  upon  me,  and  my  white  jacket ;  while  the  cook  went 
on  to  enlarge  upon  the  disagreeableness  of  a  perpetually 


78  WHITE  JACKET 

damp  garment  in  the  mess,  especially  when  that  garment 
was  white.  This  was  coming  nearer  home. 

Yes,  they  were  going  to  blackball  me  ;  but  I  resolved 
to  sit  it  out  a  little  longer  ;  never  dreaming  that  my 
moralist  would  proceed  to  extremities  while  all  hands 
were  present.  But  bethinking  him  that  by  going  this 
roundabout  way  he  would  never  get  at  his  object,  he 
went  off  on  another  tack  ;  apprising  me,  in  substance, 
that  he  was  instructed  by  the  whole  mess,  then  and  there 
assembled,  to  give  me  warning  to  seek  out  another  club, 
as  they  did  not  longer  fancy  the  society  either  of  myself 
or  my  jacket. 

I  was  shocked.  Such  a  want  of  tact  and  delicacy  ! 
Common  propriety  suggested  that  a  point-blank  intima 
tion  of  that  nature  should  be  conveyed  in  a'private  inter 
view  ;  or,  still  better,  by  note.  I  immediately  rose, 
tucked  my  jacket  about  me,  bowed,  and  departed. 

And  now,  to  do  myself  justice,  I  must  add  that,  the 
next  day,  I  was  received  with  open  arms  by  a  glorious  set 
of  fellows — Mess  No.  1 ! — numbering,  among  the  rest,  my 
noble  captain,  Jack  Chase. 

This  mess  was  principally  composed  of  the  headmost 
men  of  the  gun-deck  ;  and,  out  of  a  pardonable  self- 
conceit,  they  called  themselves  the  '  Forty -two-pounder 
Club  '  ;  meaning  that  they  were,  one  and  all,  fellows  of 
large  intellectual  and  corporeal  calibre.  Their  mess- 
cloth  was  well  located.  On  their  starboard  hand  was 
Mess  No.  2,  embracing  sundry  rare  jokers  and  high  livers, 
who  waxed  gay  and  epicurean  over  their  salt  fare,  and 
were  known  as  the  *  Society  for  the  Destruction  of  Beef  and 
Pork.'  On  the  larboard  hand  was  Mess  No.  31,  made  up 
entirely  of  fore-top  men,  a  dashing,  blaze-away  set  of 
man-of-war's  men,  who  called  themselves  the  '  Cape  Horn 
Snorters  and  Never  sink  Invincibles.'  Opposite  was  one 
of  the  marine  messes,  mustering  the  aristocracy  of  the 


A  SALT-JUNK  CLUB  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR     79 

marine 'corps — the  two  corporals,  the  drummer  and  fifer, 
and  some  six  or  eight  rather  gentlemanly  privates,  native- 
born  Americans,  who  had  served  in  the  Seminole  cam 
paigns  of  Florida  ;  and  they  now  enlivened  their  salt  fare 
with  stories  of  wild  ambushes  in  the  everglades  ;  and  one 
of  them  related  a  surprising  tale  of  his  hand-to-hand 
encounter  with  Osceola,  the  Indian  chief,  whom  he  fought 
one  morning  from  daybreak  till  breakfast-time.  This 
slashing  private  also  boasted  that  he  could  take  a  chip 
from  between  your  teeth  at  twenty  paces  ;  he  offered  to 
bet  any  amount  on  it ;  and  as  he  could  get  no  one  to  hold 
the  chip,  his  boast  remained  forever  good. 

Besides  many  other  attractions  which  the  Forty-two- 
pounder  Club  furnished,  it  had  this  one  special  advantage, 
that,  owing  to  there  being  so  many  petty  officers  in  it,  all 
the  members  of  the  mess  were  exempt  from  doing  duty 
as  cooks  and  stewards.  A  fellow  called  a  steady-cook, 
attended  to  that  business  during  the  entire  cruise.  He 
was  a  long,  lank,  pallid  varlet,  going  by  the  name  of 
Shanks.  In  very  warm  weather  this  Shanks  would  sit 
at  the  foot  of  the  mess-cloth,  fanning  himself  with  the 
front  flap  of  his  frock  or  shirt,  which  he  inelegantly  wore 
over  his  trowsers.  Jack  Chase,  the  President  of  the  Club, 
frequently  remonstrated  against  this  breach  of  good 
manners  ;  but  the  steady-cook  had  somehow  contracted 
the  habit,  and  it  proved  incurable.  For  a  time,  Jack 
Chase,  out  of  a  polite  nervousness  touching  myself,  as 
a  ne.wly  elected  member  of  the  club,  would  frequently 
endeavour  to  excuse  to  me  the  vulgarity  of  Shanks.  One 
day  he  wound  up  his  remarks  by  the  philosophic  reflection 

-  But  White  Jacket,  my  dear  fellow,  what  can  you 
expect  of  him  ?  Our  real  misfortune  is,  that  our  noble 
club  should  be  obliged  to  dine  with  its  cook.' 

There  were  several  of  these  steady-cooks  on  board  :  men 
of  no  mark  or  consideration  whatever  in  the  ship  ;  lost 


80  WHITE  JACKET 

to  all  noble  promptings  ;  sighing  for  no  worlds  to  conquer, 
and  perfectly  contented  with  mixing  their  duffs,  and 
spreading  their  mess-cloths,  and  mustering  their  pots  and 
pans  together  three  times  every  day  for  a  three  years' 
cruise.  They  were  very  seldom  to  be  seen  on  the  spar- 
deck,  but  kept  below  out  of  sight.  » 


CHAPTER  XVI 

i 

GENERAL  TRAINING   IN   A  MAN-OF-WAR 

To  a  quiet,  contemplative  character,  averse  to  uproar, 
undue  exercise  of  his  bodily  members,  and  all  kind  of 
useless  confusion,  nothing  can  be  more  distressing  than 
a  proceeding  in  all  men-of-war  called  '  general  quarters* 
And  well  may  it  be  so  called,  since  it  amounts  to  a  general 
drawing  and  quartering  of  all  the  parties  concerned. 

As  the  specific  object  for  which  a  man-of-war  is  built 
and  put  into  commission  is  to  fight  and  fire  off  cannon, 
it  is,  of  course,  deemed  indispensable  that  the  crew  should 
be  duly  instructed  in  the  art  and  mystery  involved. 
Hence  these  '  general  quarters,'  which  is  a  mustering  of 
all  hands  to  their  stations  at  the  guns  on  the  several  decks, 
and  a  sort  of  sham  fight  with  an  imaginary  foe. 

The  summons  is  given  by  the  ship's  drummer,  who 
strikes  a  peculiar  beat— short,  broken,  rolling,  shuffling — 
like  the  sound  made  by  the  march  into  battle  of  iron- 
heeled  grenadiers.  It  is  a  regular  tune,  with  a  fine  song 
composed  to  it ;  the  words  of  the  chorus,  being  most 
artistically  arranged,  may  give  some  idea  of  the  air  : — 

'  Hearts  of  oak  are  our  ships,  jolly  tars  are  our  men, 
We  always  are  ready,  steady,  boys,  steady, 
To  fight  and  to  conquer,  again  and  again.' 

In  warm  weather  this  pastime  at  the  guns  is  exceed 
ingly  unpleasant,  to  say  the  least,  and  throws  a  quiet  man 
into  a  violent  passion  and  perspiration.  For  one,  I  ever 
abominated  it. 

I  have  a  heart  like  Julius  Caesar,  and  upon  occasion 

F 


82  WHITE  JACKET 

would  fight  like  Cains  Marcius  Coriolanus.  If  my  beloved 
and  forever  glorious  country  should  be  ever  in  jeopardy 
from  invaders,  let  Congress  put  me  on  a  war-horse,  in 
the  vanguard,  and  then  see  how  I  will  acquit  myself.  But 
to  toil  and  sweat  in  a  fictitious  encounter  ;  to  squander 
the  precious  breath  of  my  precious  body  in  a  ridiculous 
fight  of  shams  and  pretensions  ;  to  hurry  about  the  decks, 
pretending  to  carry  the  killed  and  wounded  below  ;  to 
be  told  that  I  must  consider  the  ship  blowing  up,  in  order 
to  exercise  myself  in  presence  of  mind,  and  prepare  for 
a  real  explosion  ;  all  this  I  despise,  as  beneath  a  true  tar 
and  man  of  valour. 

These  were  my  sentiments  at  the  time,  and  these 
remain  my  sentiments  still ;  but  as,  while  on  board  the 
frigate,  my  liberty  of  thought  did  not  extend  to  liberty 
of  expression,  I  was  obliged  to  keep  these  sentiments  to 
myself  :  though,  indeed,  I  had  some  thoughts  of  address 
ing  a  letter,  marked  Private  and  Confidential,  to  his 
Honour  the  Commodore,  on  the  subject. 

My  station  at  the  batteries  was  at  one  of  the  thirty- 
two-pound  carronades,  on  the  starboard  side  of  the 
quarter-deck.1 

1  For  the  benefit  of  a  Quaker  reader  here  and  there,  a  word  or  two  in 
explanation  of  a  carronade  may  not  be  amiss.  The  carronade  is  a  gun 
comparatively  short  and  light  for  its  calibre.  A  carronade  throwing  a 
thirty- two -pound  shot  weighs  considerably  less  than  a  long-gun  only 
throwing  a  twenty-four-pound  shot.  It  further  differs  from  a  long-gun, 
in  working  with  a  joint  and  bolt  underneath,  instead  of  the  short  arms 
or  trunnions  at  the  sides.  Its  carriage,  likewise,  is  quite  different  from 
that  of  a  long-gun,  having  a  sort  of  sliding  apparatus,  something  like  an 
extension  dining-table  ;  the  goose  on  it,  however,  is  a  tough  one,  and 
villainously  stuffed  with  most  indigestible  dumplings.  Point-blank,  the 
range  of  a  carronade  does  not  exceed  one  hundred  and  fifty  yards,  much 
less  than  the  range  of  a  long-gun.  When  of  large  calibre,  however,  it 
throws  within  that  limit,  Paixhan  shot,  all  manner  of  shells  and  com 
bustibles,  with  great  effect,  being  a  very  destructive  engine  at  close 
quarters.  This  piece  is  now  very  generally  found  mounted  in  the 
batteries  of  the  English  and  American  Navies.  The  quarter-deck  arma 
ments  of  most  modern  frigates  wholly  consist  of  carronades.  The  name 
s  derived  from  the  village  of  Carron,  in  Scotland,  at  whose  celebrated 
foundries  this  iron  Attila  was  first  cast. 


GENERAL  TRAINING  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR      83 

I  did  not  fancy  this  station  at  all ;  for  it  is  well  known 
on  shipboard  that,  in  time  of  action,  the  quarter-deck  is 
one  of  the  most  dangerous  posts  of  a  man-of-war.  The 
reason  is  that  the  officers  of  the  highest  rank  are  there 
stationed,  and  the  enemy  have  an  ungentlemanly  way 
of  target-shooting  at  their  buttons.  If  we  should  chance 
to  engage  a  ship,  then,  who  could  tell  but  some  bungling 
small-arm  marksman  in  the  enemy's  tops  might  put  a 
bullet  through  me  instead  of  the  commodore  ?  If  they 
hit  him,  no  doubt  he  would  not  feel  it  much,  for  he  was 
used  to  that  sort  of  thing,  and,  indeed,  had  a  bullet  in 
him  already.  Whereas,  /  was  altogether  unaccustomed 
to  having  blue  pills  playing  round  my  head  in  such  an 
indiscriminate  way.  Besides,  ours  was  a  flagship  ;  and 
everyone  knows  what  a  peculiarly  dangerous  predicament 
the  quarter-deck  of  Nelson's  flagship  was  in  at  the  battle 
of  Trafalgar  ;  how  the  lofty  tops  of  the  enemy  were  full 
of  soldiers,  peppering  away  at  the  English  admiral  and 
his  officers.  Many  a  poor  sailor,  at  the  guns  of  that 
quarter-deck,  must  have  received  a  bullet  intended  for 
some  wearer  of  an  epaulet. 

By  candidly  confessing  my  feelings  on  this  subject,  I 
do  by  no  means  invalidate  my  claims  to  being  held  a  man 
of  prodigious  valour.  I  merely  state  my  invincible  re 
pugnance  to  being  shot  for  somebody  else.  If  I  am  shot, 
be  it  with  the  express  understanding  in  the  shooter  that 
I  am  the  identical  person  intended  so  to  be  served.  That 
Thracian  who,  with  his  compliments,  sent  an  arrow  into 
the  king  of  Macedon,  superscribed  '  For  Philip's  right 
eye,'  set  a  fine  example  to  all  warriors.  The  hurried, 
hasty,  indiscriminate,  reckless,  abandoned  manner  in 
which  both  sailors  and  soldiers  nowadays  fight  is  really 
painful  to  any  serious-minded,  methodical  old  gentleman, 
especially  if  he  chance  to  have  systematised  his  mind  as 
an  accountant.  There  is  little  or  no  skill  and  bravery 


84  WHITE  JACKET 

about  it.  Two  parties,  armed  with  lead  and  old  iron, 
envelop  themselves  in  a  cloud  of  smoke,  and  pitch  their 
lead  and  old  iron  about  in  all  directions.  If  you  happen 
to  be  in  the  way,  you  are  hit ;  possibly  killed  ;  if  not,  you 
escape.  In  sea-actions,  if  by  good  or  bad  luck,  as  the 
case  may  be,  a  round  shot,  fired  at  random  through  the 
smoke,  happens  to  send  overboard  your  foremast,  another 
to  unship  your  rudder,  there  you  lie  crippled,  pretty  much 
at  the  mercy  of  your  foe,  who,  accordingly,  pronounces 
himself  victor,  though  that  honour  properly  belongs  to 
the  Law  of  Gravitation  operating  on  the  enemy's  balls  in 
the  smoke.  Instead  of  tossing  this  old  lead  and  iron  into 
the  air,  therefore,  it  would  be  much  better  amicably  to 
toss  up  a  copper  and  let  heads  win. 

The  carronade  at  which  I  was  stationed  was  known 
as  '  Gun  No.  5,'  on  the  first  lieutenant's  quarter-bill. 
Among  our  gun's  crew,  however,  it  was  known  as  Black 
Bet.  This  name  was  bestowed  by  the  captain  of  the  gun 
— a  fine  negro — in  honour  of  his  sweetheart,  a  coloured 
lady  of  Philadelphia.  Of  Black  Bet  I  was  rammer-and- 
sponger  ;  and  ram  and  sponge  I  did,  like  a  good  fellow. 
I  have  no  doubt  that,  had  I  and  my  gun  been  at  the  battle 
of  the  Nile,  we  would  mutually  have  immortalised  our 
selves  ;  the  ramming-pole  would  have  been  hung  up  in 
Westminster  Abbey ;  and  I,  ennobled  by  the  king, 
besides  receiving  the  illustrious  honour  of  an  autograph 
letter  from  His  Majesty  through  the  perfumed  right  hand 
of  his  private  secretary. 

But  it  was  terrible  work  to  help  run  in  and  out  of  the 
port-hole  that  amazing  mass  of  metal,  especially  as  the 
thing  must  be  done  in  a  trice.  Then,  at  the  summons 
of  a  horrid,  rasping  rattle  swayed  by  the  captain  in 
person,  we  were  made  to  rush  from  our  guns,  seize  pikes 
and  pistols,  and  repel  an  imaginary  army  of  boarders, 
who,  by  a  fiction  of  the  officers,  were  supposed  to  be 


GENERAL  TRAINING  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR      85 

assailing  all  sides  of  the  ship  at  once.  After  cutting  and 
slashing  at  them  a  while,  we  jumped  back  to  our  guns, 
and  again  went  to  jerking  our  elbows. 

Meantime,  a  loud  cry  is  heard  of  '  Fire  !  fire  !  fire  !  ' 
in  the  fore-top  ;  and  a  regular  engine,  worked  by  a  set 
of  bowery-boy  tars,  is  forthwith  set  to  playing  streams 
of  water  aloft.  And  now  it  is  '  Fire  !  fire  !  fire  !  '  on 
the  main-deck  ;  and  the  entire  ship  is  in  as  great  a 
commotion  as  if  a  whole  city  ward  were  in  a  blaze. 

Are  our  officers  of  the  Navy  utterly  unacquainted  with 
the  laws  of  good  health  ?  Do  they  not  know  that  this 
violent  exercise,  taking  place  just  after  a  hearty  dinner, 
as  it  generally  does,  is  eminently  calculated  to  breed  the 
dyspepsia  ?  There  was  no  satisfaction  in  dining  ;  the 
flavour  of  every  mouthful  was  destroyed  by  the  thought 
that  the  next  moment  the  cannonading  drum  might  be 
beating  to  quarters. 

Such  a  sea-martinet  was  our  captain  that  sometimes 
we  were  roused  from  our  hammocks  at  night ;  when  a 
scene  would  ensue  that  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  pen  and 
ink  to  describe.  Five  hundred  men  spring  to  their  feet, 
dress  themselves,  take  up  their  bedding,  and  run  to  the 
nettings  and  stow  it ;  then  hie  to  their  stations — each  man 
jostling  his  neighbour — some  alow,  some  aloft ;  some 
this  way,  some  that ;  and  in  less  than  five  minutes  the 
frigate  is  ready  for  action,  and  still  as  the  grave  ;  almost 
every  man  precisely  where  he  would  be  were  an  enemy 
actually  about  to  be  engaged.  The  gunner,  like  a  Corn 
wall  miner  in  a  cave,  is  burrowing  down  in  the  magazine 
under  the  ward-room,  which  is  lighted  by  battle -lanterns, 
placed  behind  glazed  glass  bull's-eyes  inserted  in  the 
bulkhead.  The  powder-monkeys,  or  boys,  who  fetch  and 
carry  cartridges,  are  scampering  to  and  fro  among  the 
guns  ;  and  the  first  and  second  loaders  stand  ready  to 
receive  their  supplies. 


86  WHITE  JACKET 

These  powder-monkeys,  as  they  are  called,  enact  a 
curious  part  in  time  of  action.  The  entrance  to  the 
magazine  on  the  berth-deck,  where  they  procure  their 
food  for  the  guns,  is  guarded  by  a  woollen  screen  ;  and 
a  gunner's  mate,  standing  behind  it,  thrusts  out  the 
cartridges  through  a  small  arm-hole  in  this  screen.  The 
enemy's  shot  (perhaps  red  hot)  are  flying  in  all  directions  ; 
and  to  protect  their  cartridges,  the  powder-monkeys 
hurriedly  wrap  them  up  in  their  jackets ;  and  with  all 
haste  scramble  up  the  ladders  to  their  respective  guns, 
like  eating-house  waiters  hurrying  along  with  hot  cakes 
for  breakfast. 

At  general  quarters  the  shot-boxes  are  uncovered ; 
showing  the  grape-shot — aptly  so  called,  for  they  pre 
cisely  resemble  bunches  of  the  fruit ;  though,  to  receive 
a  bunch  of  iron  grapes  in  the  abdomen  would  be  but  a 
sorry  dessert ;  and  also  showing  the  canister-shot — old 
iron  of  various  sorts,  packed  in  a  tin  case,  like  a  tea-caddy. 

Imagine  some  midnight  craft  sailing  down  on  her 
enemy  thus ;  twenty-four-pounders  levelled,  matches 
lighted,  and  each  captain  of  his  gun  at  his  post ! 

But  if  verily  going  into  action,  then  would  the  Never  sink 
have  made  still  further  preparations  ;  for  however  alike 
in  some  things,  there  is  always  a  vast  difference — if  you 
sound  them — between  a  reality  and  a  sham.  Not  to 
speak  of  the  pale  sternness  of  the  men  at  their  guns  at 
such  a  juncture,  and  the  choked  thoughts  at  their  hearts, 
the  ship  itself  would  here  and  there  present  a  far  different 
appearance.  Something  like  that  of  an  extensive  mansion 
preparing  for  a  grand  entertainment,  when  folding-doors 
are  withdrawn,  chambers  converted  into  drawing-rooms, 
and  every  inch  of  available  space  thrown  into  one  con 
tinuous  whole.  For  previous  to  an  action,  every  bulk 
head  of  a  man-of-war  is  knocked  down  ;  great  guns  are 
run  out  of  the  commodore's  parlour  windows  ;  nothing 


GENERAL  TRAINING  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR      87 

separates  the  ward-room  officers'  quarters  from  those  of 
the  men,  but  an  ensign  used  for  a  curtain.  The  sailors' 
mess-chests  are  tumbled  down  into  the  hold  ;  and  the 
hospital  cots — of  which  all  men-of-war  carry  a  large 
supply — are  dragged  forth  from  the  sail-room,  and  piled 
near  at  hand  to  receive  the  wounded  ;  amputation-tables 
are  ranged  in  the  cockpit  or  in  the  tiers,  whereon  to  carve 
the  bodies  of  the  maimed.  The  yards  are  slung  in  chains  ; 
fire-screens  distributed  here  and  there  ;  hillocks  of  cannon- 
balls  piled  between  the  guns ;  shot-plugs  suspended 
within  easy  reach  from  the  beams  ;  and  solid  masses  of 
wads,  big  as  Dutch  cheeses,  braced  to  the  cheeks  of  the 
gun-carriages. 

No  small  difference,  also,  would  be  visible  in  the  ward 
robe  of  both  officers  and  men.  The  officers  generally 
fight  as  dandies  dance,  namely,  in  silk  stockings,  inas 
much  as,  in  case  of  being  wounded  in  the  leg,  the  silk  hose 
can  be  more  easily  drawn  off  by  the  surgeon  ;  cotton 
sticks,  and  works  into  the  wound.  An  economical 
captain,  while  taking  care  to  case  his  legs  in  silk,  might 
yet  see  fit  to  save  his  best  suit,  and  fight  in  his  old  clothes. 
For,  besides  that  an  old  garment  might  much  better  be 
cut  to  pieces  than  a  new  one,  it  must  be  a  mighty  dis 
agreeable  thing  to  die  in  a  stiff,  tight-breasted  coat,  not 
yet  worked  easy  under  the  arm -pits.  At  such  times,  a 
man  should  feel  free,  unencumbered,  and  perfectly  at 
his  ease  in  point  of  straps  and  suspenders.  No  ill-will 
concerning  his  tailor  should  intrude  upon  his  thoughts 
of  eternity.  Seneca  understood  this,  when  he  chose  to 
die  naked  in  a  bath.  And  man-of-war's  men  understand 
it  also  ;  for  most  of  them,  in  battle,  strip  to  the  waist 
bands  ;  wearing  nothing  but  a  pair  of  duck  trowsers,  and 
a  handkerchief  round  their  head. 

A  captain  combining  a  heedful  patriotism  with  economy 
would  probably  e  bend  '  his  old  topsails  before  going  into 


88  WHITE  JACKET 

battle,  instead  of  exposing  his  best  canvas  to  be  riddled 
to  pieces  ;  for  it  is  generally  the  case  that  the  enemy's 
shot  flies  high.  Unless  allowance  is  made  for  it  in  pointing 
the  tube,  at  long-gun  distance,  the  slightest  roll  of  the 
ship,  at  the  time  of  firing,  would  send  a  shot,  meant  for 
the  hull,  high  over  the  top-gallant-yards. 

But  besides  these  differences  between  a  sham  fight  at 
general  quarters  and  a  real  cannonading,  the  aspect  of  the 
ship,  at  the  beating  of  the  retreat,  would,  in  the  latter 
case,  be  very  dissimilar  to  the  neatness  and  uniformity  in 
the  former. 

Then  our  bulwarks  might  look  like  the  walls  of  the 
houses  in  West  Broadway  in  New  York,  after  being 
broken  into  and  burned  out  by  the  Negro  mob.  Our 
stout  masts  and  yards  might  be  lying  about  decks,  like 
tree  boughs  after  a  tornado  in  a  piece  of  woodland  ;  our 
dangling  ropes,  cut  and  sundered  in  all  directions,  would 
be  bleeding  tar  at  every  yarn  ;  and  strewn  with  jagged 
splinters  from  our  wounded  planks,  the  gun-deck  might 
resemble  a  carpenter's  shop.  Then,  when  all  was  over, 
and  all  hands  would  be  piped  to  take  down  the  hammocks 
from  the  exposed  nettings  (where  they  play  the  part  of 
the  cotton  bales  at  New  Orleans),  we  might  find  bits  of 
broken  shot,  iron  bolts,  and  bullets  in  our  blankets.  And, 
while  smeared  with  blood  like  butchers,  the  surgeon  and 
his  mates  would  be  amputating  arms  and  legs  on  the 
berth-deck,  an  underling  of  the  carpenter's  gang  would 
be  new-legging  and  arming  the  broken  chairs  and  tables 
in  the  commodore's  cabin,  while  the  rest  of  his  squad 
would  be  splicing  and  fishing  the  shattered  masts  and 
yards.  The  scupper-holes  having  discharged  the  last 
rivulet  of  blood,  the  decks  would  be  washed  down  ;  and 
the  galley-cooks  would  be  going  fore  and  aft,  sprinkling 
them  with  hot  vinegar,  to  take  out  the  shambles'  smell 
from  the  planks  ;  which,  unless  some  such  means  are 


GENERAL  TRAINING  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR      89 

employed,  often  create  a  highly  offensive  effluvia  for 
weeks  after  a  fight. 

Then,  upon  mustering  the  men,  and  calling  the  quarter- 
bills  by  the  light  of  a  battle-lantern,  many  a  wounded 
seaman,  with  his  arm  in  a  sling,  would  answer  for  some 
poor  shipmate  who  could  never  more  make  answer  for 
himself  :— 

'  Tom  Brown  ?  ' 

'  KiUed,  sir.' 

'  Jack  Jewel  ?  ' 

1  Killed,  sir.' 

'  Joe  Hardy  ?  ' 

'  Killed,  sir.' 

And  opposite  all  these  poor  fellows'  names,  down 
would  go  on  the  quarter-bills  the  bloody  marks  of  red 
ink — a  murderer's  fluid,  fitly  used  on  these  occasions. 


CHAPTER  XVII 

AWAY  !    SECOND,    THIRD,    AND    FOURTH   CUTTERS,    AWAY  ! 

IT  was  the  morning  succeeding  one  of  these  general 
quarters  that  we  picked  up  a  lifebuoy,  descried  floating  by. 

It  was  a  circular  mass  of  cork,  about  eight  inches  thick 
and  four  feet  in  diameter,  covered  with  tarred  canvas. 
All  round  its  circumference  there  trailed  a  number  of 
knotted  rope's-ends,  terminating  in  fanciful  Turk's-heads. 
These  were  the  life-lines  for  the  drowning  to  clutch. 
Inserted  into  the  middle  of  the  cork  was  an  upright, 
carved  pole,  somewhat  shorter  than  a  pikestaff.  The 
whole  buoy  was  embossed  with  barnacles,  and  its  sides 
festooned  with  seaweed.  Dolphins  were  sporting  and 
flashing  around  it,  and  one  white  bird  was  hovering  over 
the  top  of  the  pole.  Long  ago,  this  thing  must  have  been 
thrown  overboard  to  save  some  poor  wretch,  who  must 
have  been  drowned  ;  while  even  the  lifebuoy  itself  had 
drifted  away  out  of  sight. 

The  forecastle  men  fished  it  up  from  the  bows,  and  the 
seamen  thronged  round  it. 

'  Bad  luck  !  bad  luck  !  '  cried  the  captain  of  the  head  ; 
1  we  '11  number  one  less  before  long.' 

The  ship's  cooper  strolled  by  :  he,  to  whose  department 
it  belongs  to  see  that  the  ship's  lifebuoys  are  kept  in 
good  order. 

In  men-of-war,  night  and  day,  week  in  and  week  out, 
two  lifebuoys  are  kept  depending  from  the  stern  ;  and 
two  men,  with  hatchets  in  their  hands,  pace  up  and  down, 
ready  at  the  first  cry  to  cut  the  cord  and  drop  the  buoys 

90 


AWAY  !  CUTTERS,  AWAY  !  91 

overboard.  Every  two  hours  they  are  regularly  relieved, 
like  sentinels  on  guard.  No  similar  precautions  are 
adopted  in  the  merchant  or  whaling  service. 

Thus  deeply  solicitous  to  preserve  human  life  are  the 
regulations  of  men-of-war  ;  and  seldom  has  there  been 
a  better  illustration  of  this  solicitude  than  at  the  battle 
of  Trafalgar,  when,  after  '  several  thousand '  French 
seamen  had  been  destroyed,  according  to  Lord  Colling- 
wood,  and,  by  the  official  returns,  sixteen  hundred  and 
ninety  Englishmen  were  killed  or  wounded,  the  captains 
of  the  surviving  ships  ordered  the  lifebuoy  sentries  from 
their  death-dealing  guns  to  their  vigilant  posts,  as  officers 
of  the  Humane  Society. 

'  There,  Bungs  !  '  cried  Scrimmage,  a  sheet-anchor 
man,1  '  there  's  a  good  pattern  for  you  ;  make  us  a  brace 
of  lifebuoys  like  that ;  something  that  will  save  a  man, 
and  not  fill  and  sink  under  him,  as  those  leaky  quarter- 
casks  of  yours  will  the  first  time  there  's  occasion  to  drop 
'em.  I  came  near  pitching  off  the  bowsprit  the  other  day  ; 
and,  when  I  scrambled  inboard  again,  I  went  aft  to  get 
a  squint  at  'em.  Why,  Bungs,  they  are  all  open  between 
the  staves.  Shame  on  you  !  Suppose  you  yourself  should 
fall  overboard,  and  find  yourself  going  down  with  buoys 
under  you  of  your  own  making — what  then  ?  ' 

'  I  never  go  aloft,  and  don't  intend  to  fall  overboard,' 
replied  Bungs. 

'  Don't  believe  it !  '  cried  the  sheet-anchor  man  ;  '  you 
lopers  that  live  about  the  decks  here  are  nearer  the  bottom 
of  the  sea  than  the  light  hand  that  looses  the  main-royal. 
Mind  your  eye,  Bungs — mind  your  eye  !  ' 

'  I  will,'  retorted  Bungs  ;   '  and  you  mind  yours  !  ' 

Next  day,  just  at    dawn,   I  was    startled  from    my 

1  In  addition  to  the  bower-anchors  carried  on  her  bows,  a  frigate 
carries  large  anchors  in  her  fore-chains,  called  sheet-anchors.  Hence, 
the  old  seamen  stationed  in  that  part  of  a  man-of-war  are  called  sheet- 
anchor  men. 


92  WHITE  JACKET 

hammock  by  the  cry  of  '  All  hands  about  ship  and  shorten 
sail  !  '  Springing  up  the  ladders,  I  found  that  an  unknown 
man  had  fallen  overboard  from  the  chains  ;  and  darting 
a  glance  toward  the  poop,  perceived,  from  their  gestures, 
that  the  life-sentries  there  had  cut  away  the  buoys. 

It  was  blowing  a  fresh  breeze  ;  the  frigate  was  going 
fast  through  the  water.  But  the  one  thousand  arms  of 
five  hundred  men  soon  tossed  her  about  on  the  other  tack, 
and  checked  her  further  headway. 

'  Do  you  see  him  ?  '  shouted  the  officer  of  the  watch 
through  his  trumpet,  hailing  the  mainmast-head.  '  Man 
or  buoy,  do  you  see  either  ?  ' 

'  See  nothing,  sir,'  was  the  reply. 

{ Clear  away  the  cutters !  '  was  the  next  order. 
'  Bugler  !  call  away  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  cutters' 
crews.  Hands  by  the  tackles  !  ' 

In  less  than  three  minutes  the  three  boats  were  down. 
More  hands  were  wanted  in  one  of  them,  and,  among 
others,  I  jumped  in  to  make  up  the  deficiency. 

'  Now,  men,  give  way  !  and  each  man  look  out  along 
his  oar,  and  look  sharp  !  '  cried  the  officer  of  our  boat. 
For  a  time,  in  perfect  silence,  we  slid  up  and  down  the 
great  seething  swells  of  the  sea,  but  saw  nothing. 

'  There,  it 's  no  use/  cried  the  officer  ;  '  he  's  gone, 
whoever  he  is.  Pull  away,  men — pull  away  !  they  '11  be 
recalling  us  soon.' 

*  Let   him    drown  !  '     cried   the   strokesman  ;     '  he  's 
spoiled  my  watch  below  for  me.' 

1  Who  the  devil  is  he  ?  '  cried  another. 
'  He  's  one  who  '11  never  have  a  coffin  !  '    replied  a 
third. 

*  No,  no  !  they  '11  never  sing  out,  "  All  hands  bury  the 
dead  !  "  for  him,  my  hearties  !  '  cried  a  fourth. 

1  Silence/  said  the  officer,  '  and  look  along  your  oars.' 
But  the  sixteen  oarsmen  still  continued  their  talk  ;  and, 


AWAY  !  CUTTERS,  AWAY  !  93 

after  pulling  about  for  two  or  three  hours,  we  spied  the 
recall  signal  at  the  frigate's  fore-t'-gallant  mast-head, 
and  returned  on  board,  having  seen  no  sign  even  of  the 
lifebuoys. 

The  boats  were  hoisted  up,  the  yards  braced  forward, 
and  away  we  bowled — one  man  less. 

*  Muster  all  hands  !  '  was  now  the  order  ;  when,  upon 
calling  the  roll,  the  cooper  was  the  only  man  missing. 

'  I  told  you  so,  men,'  cried  the  captain  of  the  head ; 
1 1  said  we  would  lose  a  man  before  long.' 

'  Bungs,  is  it  ?  '  cried  Scrimmage,  the  sheet-anchor 
man  ;  '  I  told  him  his  buoys  wouldn't  save  a  drowning 
man  ;  and  now  he  has  proved  it !  ' 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

A   MAN-OF-WAR   FULL   AS   A   NUT 

IT  was  necessary  to  supply  the  lost  cooper's  place ; 
accordingly,  word  was  passed  for  all  who  belonged  to 
that  calling  to  muster  at  the  mainmast,  in  order  that  one 
of  them  might  be  selected.  Thirteen  men  obeyed  the 
summons — a  circumstance  illustrative  of  the  fact  that 
many  good  handicraftsmen  are  lost  to  their  trades  and 
the  world  by  serving  in  men-of-war.  Indeed,  from  a 
frigate's  crew  might  be  culled  out  men  of  all  callings  and 
vocations,  from  a  backslidden  parson  to  a  broken-down 
comedian.  The  Navy  is  the  asylum  for  the  perverse,  the 
home  of  the  unfortunate.  Here  the  sons  of  adversity 
meet  the  children  of  calamity,  and  here  the  children  of 
calamity  meet  the  offspring  of  sin.  Bankrupt  brokers, 
boot-blacks,  blacklegs,  and  blacksmiths  here  assemble 
together  ;  and  cast-away  tinkers,  watchmakers,  quill- 
drivers,  cobblers,  doctors,  farmers,  and  lawyers  compare 
past  experiences  and  talk  of  old  times.  Wrecked  on  a 
desert  shore,  a  man-of-war's  crew  could  quickly  found 
an  Alexandria  by  themselves,  and  fill  it  with  all  the  things 
which  go  to  make  up  a  capital. 

Frequently,  at  one  and  the  same  time,  you  see  every 
trade  in  operation  on  the  gun-deck — coopering,  carpenter 
ing,  tailoring,  tinkering,  blacksmithing,  rope-making, 
preaching,  gambling,  and  fortune -telling. 

In  truth,  a  man-of-war  is  a  city  afloat,  with  long  avenues 
set  out  with  guns  instead  of  trees,  and  numerous  shady 
lanes,  courts,  and  byways.  The  quarter-deck  is  a  grand 

94 


A  MAN-OF-WAR  FULL  AS  A  NUT  95 

square,  park,  or  parade-ground,  with  a  great  Pittsfield 
elm,  in  the  shape  of  the  mainmast,  at  one  end,  and 
fronted  at  the  other  by  the  palace  of  the  commodore's 
cabin. 

Or,  rather,  a  man-of-war  is  a  lofty,  walled,  and  garri 
soned  town,  like  Quebec,  where  the  thoroughfares  are 
mostly  ramparts,  and  peaceable  citizens  meet  armed 
sentries  at  every  corner. 

Or  it  is  like  the  lodging-houses  in  Paris,  turned  upside 
down  ;  the  first  floor,  or  deck,  being  rented  by  a  lord  ; 
the  second,  by  a  select  club  of  gentlemen  ;  the  third,  by 
crowds  of  artisans  ;  and  the  fourth,  by  a  whole  rabble  of 
common  people. 

For  even  thus  is  it  in  a  frigate,  where  the  commander 
has  a  whole  cabin  to  himself  on  the  spar-deck,  the  lieu 
tenants  their  ward-room  underneath,  and  the  mass  of 
sailors  swing  their  hammocks  under  all. 

And  with  its  long  rows  of  port-hole  casements,  each 
revealing  the  muzzle  of  a  cannon,  a  man-of-war  resembles 
a  three-story  house  in  a  suspicious  part  of  the  town,  with 
a  basement  of  indefinite  depth,  and  ugly-looking  fellows 
gazing  out  at  the  windows. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

THE   JACKET  ALOFT 

AGAIN  must  I  call  attention  to  my  white  jacket,  which 
about  this  time  came  near  being  the  death  of  me. 

I  am  of  a  meditative  humour,  and  at  sea  used  often  to 
mount  aloft  at  night,  and,  seating  myself  on  one  of  the 
upper  yards,  tuck  my  jacket  about  me  and  give  loose  to 
reflection.  In  some  ships  in  which  I  have  done  this,  the 
sailors  used  to  fancy  that  I  must  be  studying  astronomy — 
which,  indeed,  to  some  extent,  was  the  case — and  that 
my  object  in  mounting  aloft  was  to  get  a  nearer  view  of 
the  stars,  supposing  me,  of  course,  to  be  short-sighted. 
A  very  silly  conceit  of  theirs,  some  may  say,  but  not  so 
silly  after  all ;  for  surely  the  advantage  of  getting  nearer 
an  object  by  two  hundred  feet  is  not  to  be  underrated. 
Then,  to  study  the  stars  upon  the  wide,  boundless  sea, 
is  divine  as  it  was  to  the  Chaldean  Magi,  who  observed 
their  revolutions  from  the  plains. 

And  it  is  a  very  fine  feeling,  and  one  that  fuses  us  into 
the  universe  of  things,  and  makes  us  a  part  of  the  All,  to 
think  that,  wherever  we  ocean  wanderers  rove,  we  have 
still  the  same  glorious  old  stars  to  keep  us  company  ; 
that  they  still  shine  onward  and  on,  forever  beautiful 
and  bright,  and  luring  us,  by  every  ray,  to  die  and  be 
glorified  with  them. 

Ay,  ay  !    we  sailors  sail  not  in  vain.     We  expatriate 

ourselves  to  nationalise  with  the  universe  ;    and  in  all 

our  voyages  round  the  world  we  are  still  accompanied 

by  those  old  circumnavigators,  the  stars,  who  are  ship- 

0* 


THE  JACKET  ALOFT  97 

mates  and  fellow-sailors  of  ours — sailing  in  heaven's  blue, 
as  we  on  the  azure  main.  Let  genteel  generations  scoff 
at  our  hardened  hands,  and  finger-nails  tipped  with  tar — 
did  they  ever  clasp  truer  palms  than  ours  ?  Let  them 
feel  of  our  sturdy  hearts,  beating  like  sledge-hammers 
in  those  hot  smithies,  our  bosoms  ;  with  their  amber- 
headed  canes,  let  them  feel  of  our  generous  pulses,  and 
swear  that  they  go  off  like  thirty -two-pounders. 

Oh,  give  me  again  the  rover's  life — the  joy,  the  thrill, 
the  whirl !  Let  me  feel  thee  again,  old  sea  !  let  me  leap 
into  thy  saddle  once  more.  I  am  sick  of  these  terra -firma 
toils  and  cares  ;  sick  of  the  dust  and  reek  of  towns.  Let 
me  hear  the  clatter  of  hailstones  on  icebergs,  and  not  the 
dull  tramp  of  these  plodders,  plodding  their  dull  way 
from  their  cradles  to  their  graves.  Let  me  snuff  thee  up, 
sea-breeze !  and  whinny  in  thy  spray.  Forbid  it,  sea- 
gods  !  intercede  for  me  with  Neptune,  0  sweet  Amphi- 
trite,  that  no  dull  clod  may  fall  on  my  coffin  !  Be  mine 
the  tomb  that  swallowed  up  Pharaoh  and  all  his  hosts  ; 
let  me  lie  down  with  Drake  where  he  sleeps  in  the  sea. 

But  when  White  Jacket  speaks  of  the  rover's  life,  he 
means  not  life  in  a  man-of-war,  which,  with  its  martial 
formalities  and  thousand  vices,  stabs  to  the  heart  the 
soul  of  all  free-and-easy  honourable  rovers. 

I  have  said  that  I  was  wont  to  mount  up  aloft  and  muse  ; 
and  thus  was  it  with  me  the  night  following  the  loss  of 
the  cooper.  Ere  my  watch  in  the  top  had  expired,  high 
up  on  the  main -royal-yard  I  reclined,  the  white  jacket 
folded  around  me  like  Sir  John  Moore  in  his  frosted  cloak. 

Eight  bells  had  struck,  and  my  watchmates  had  hied  to 
their  hammocks,  and  the  other  watch  had  gone  to  their 
stations,  and  the  top  below  me  was  full  of  strangers,  and 
still  almost  one  hundred  feet  above  even  them  I  lay  en 
tranced  ;  now  dozing,  now  dreaming  ;  now  thinking  of 
things  past,  and  anon  of  the  life  to  come.  Well-timed 

G 


98  WHITE  JACKET 

was  the  latter  thought,  for  the  life  to  come  was  much 
nearer  overtaking  me  than  I  then  could  imagine.  Perhaps 
I  was  half  conscious  at  last  of  a  tremulous  voice  hailing 
the  main-royal-yard  from  the  top.  But  if  so,  the  con 
sciousness  glided  away  from  me,  and  left  me  in  Lethe. 
But  when,  like  lightning,  the  yard  dropped  under  me,  and 
instinctively  I  clung  with  both  hands  to  the  '  tie,9  then 
I  came  to  myself  with  a  rush,  and  felt  something  like  a 
choking  hand  at  my  throat.  For  an  instant  I  thought 
the  Gulf  Stream  in  my  head  was  whirling  me  away  to 
eternity  ;  but  the  next  moment  I  found  myself  standing  ; 
the  yard  had  descended  to  the  cap  ;  and  shaking  myself 
in  my  jacket,  I  felt  that  I  was  unharmed  and  alive. 

Who  had  done  this  ?  who  had  made  this  attempt  on 
my  life  ?  thought  I,  as  I  ran  down  the  rigging. 

*  Here  it  comes  ! — Lord  !  Lord  !  here  it  comes  !  See, 
see  !  it  is  white  as  a  hammock.' 

'  Who  's  coming  ?  '  I  shouted,  springing  down  into  the 
top  ;  '  who  's  white  as  a  hammock  ?  ' 

'  Bless  my  soul,  Bill,  it 's  only  White  Jacket — that 
infernal  White  Jacket  again  !  ' 

It  seems  they  had  spied  a  moving  white  spot  there  aloft, 
and,  sailor-like,  had  taken  me  for  the  ghost  of  the  cooper  ; 
and  after  hailing  me,  and  bidding  me  descend,  to  test  my 
corporeality,  and  getting  no  answer,  they  had  lowered 
the  halyards  in  affright. 

In  a  rage  I  tore  off  the  jacket,  and  threw  it  on  the  deck. 

'  Jacket,'  cried  I,  '  you  must  change  your  complexion  ! 
you  must  hie  to  the  dyer's  and  be  dyed,  that  I  may  live. 
I  have  but  one  poor  life,  White  Jacket,  and  that  life  I 
cannot  spare.  I  cannot  consent  to  die  for  you,  but  be 
dyed  you  must  for  me.  You  can  dye  many  times  without 
injury  ;  but  I  cannot  die  without  irreparable  loss,  and 
running  the  eternal  risk.' 

So,  in  the  morning,  jacket  in  hand,  I  repaired  to  the 


THE  JACKET  ALOFT  99 

first  lieutenant,  and  related  the  narrow  escape  I  had  had 
during  the  night.  I  enlarged  upon  the  general  perils  I 
ran  in  being  taken  for  a  ghost,  and  earnestly  besought 
him  to  relax  his  commands  for  once,  and  give  me  an 
order  on  Brush,  the  captain  of  the  paint-room,  for  some 
black  paint,  that  my  jacket  might  be  painted  of  that 
colour. 

*  Just  look  at  it,  sir,'  I  added,  holding  it  up  ;  '  did  you 
ever  see  anything  whiter  ?  Consider  how  it  shines  of  a 
night,  like  a  bit  of  the  Milky  Way.  A  little  paint,  sir, 
you  cannot  refuse.' 

'  The  ship  has  no  paint  to  spare,'  he  said  ;  '  you  must 
get  along  without  it.' 

(  Sir,  every  rain  gives  me  a  soaking  ; — Cape  Horn  is  at 
hand — six  brushfuls  would  make  it  water -proof  ;  and 
no  longer  would  I  be  in  peril  of  my  life  !  ' 

'  Can't  help  it,  sir  ;  depart !  ' 

I  fear  it  will  not  be  well  with  me  in  the  end  ;  for  if  my 
own  sins  are  to  be  forgiven  only  as  I  forgive  that  hard 
hearted  and  unimpressible  first  lieutenant,  then  pardon 
there  is  none  for  me. 

What !  when  but  one  dab  of  paint  would  make  a  man 
of  a  ghost,  and  a  mackintosh  of  a  herring-net — to  refuse 
it! 

I  am  full.     I  can  say  no  more. 


CHAPTER  XX 

HOW  THEY   SLEEP  IN   A   MAN-OF-WAR 

No  more  of  my  luckless  jacket  for  a  while  ;  let  me  speak 
of  my  hammock,  and  the  tribulations  I  endured  there 
from. 

Give  me  plenty  of  room  to  swing  it  in  ;  let  me  swing  it 
between  two  date -trees  on  an  Arabian  plain  ;  or  extend 
it  diagonally  from  Moorish  pillar  to  pillar,  in  the  open 
marble  Court  of  the  Lions  in  Granada's  Alhambra  :  let 
me  swing  it  on  a  high  bluff  of  the  Mississippi — one  swing 
in  the  pure  ether  for  every  swing  over  the  green  grass  ;  or 
let  me  oscillate  in  it  beneath  the  cool  dome  of  St.  Peter's  ; 
or  drop  me  in  it,  as  in  a  balloon,  from  the  zenith,  with  the 
whole  firmament  to  rock  and  expatiate  in  ;  and  I  would 
not  exchange  my  coarse  canvas  hammock  for  the  grand 
state-bed,  like  a  stately  coach-and-four,  in  which  they 
tuck  in  a  king  when  he  passes  a  night  at  Blenheim  Castle. 

When  you  have  the  requisite  room,  you  always  have 
*  spreaders  '  in  your  hammock  ;  that  is,  two  horizontal 
sticks,  one  at  each  end,  which  serve  to  keep  the  sides 
apart,  and  create  a  wide  vacancy  between,  wherein  you 
can  turn  over  and  over — lay  on  this  side  or  that ;  on 
your  back,  if  you  please  ;  stretch  out  your  legs  ;  in  short, 
take  your  ease  in  your  hammock  ;  for  of  all  inns,  your 
bed  is  the  best. 

But  when,  with  five  hundred  other  hammocks,  yours 

is  crowded   and  jammed  in  on  all   sides,  on  a  frigate 

berth-deck ;    the  third   from   above,  when  '  spreaders  ' 

are  prohibited  by  an  express  edict  from  the  captain's 

100 


HOW  THEY  SLEEP  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR      101 

cabin  ;  and  every  man  about  you  is  jealously  watchful  of 
the  rights  and  privileges  of  his  own  proper  hammock,  as 
settled  by  law  and  usage  ;  then  your  hammock  is  your 
bastille  and  canvas  jug,  into  which,  or  out  of  which,  it 
is  very  hard  to  get ;  and  where  sleep  is  but  a  mockery 
and  a  name. 

Eighteen  inches  a  man  is  all  they  allow  you  ;  eighteen 
inches  in  width  ;  in  that  you  must  swing.  Dreadful ! 
they  give  you  more  swing  than  that  at  the  gallows. 

During  warm  nights  in  the  Tropics,  your  hammock  is 
as  a  stew-pan,  where  you  stew  and  stew  till  you  can 
almost  hear  yourself  hiss.  Vain  are  all  stratagems  to 
widen  your  accommodations.  Let  them  catch  you  in 
sinuating  your  boots  or  other  articles  in  the  head  of  your 
hammock,  by  way  of  a  *  spreader.'  Near  and  far,  the 
whole  rank  and  file  of  the  row  to  which  you  belong  feel 
the  encroachment  in  an  instant,  and  are  clamorous  till 
the  guilty  one  is  found  out,  and  his  pallet  brought  back 
to  its  bearings. 

In  platoons  and  squadrons,  they  all  lie  on  a  level ;  their 
hammock  dews  crossing  and  recrossing  in  all  directions, 
so  as  to  present  one  vast  field-bed,  midway  between  the 
ceiling  and  the  floor  ;  which  are  about  five  feet  asunder. 

One  extremely  warm  night,  during  a  calm,  when  it 
was  so  hot  that  only  a  skeleton  could  keep  cool  (from  the 
free  current  of  air  through  its  bones),  after  being  drenched 
in  my  own  perspiration,  I  managed  to  wedge  myself  out 
of  my  hammock  ;  and  with  what  little  strength  I  had  left, 
lowered  myself  gently  to  the  deck.  Let  me  see  now, 
thought  I,  whether  my  ingenuity  cannot  devise  some 
method  whereby  I  can  have  room  to  breathe  and  sleep  at 
the  same  time.  I  have  it.  I  will  lower  my  hammock 
underneath  all  these  others ;  and  then — upon  that 
separate  and  independent  level,  at  least — I  shall  have  the 
whole  berth-deck  to  myself.  Accordingly,  I  lowered  away 


102  WHITE  JACKET 

my  pallet  to  the  desired  point — about  three  inches  from 
the  floor — and  crawled  into  it  again. 

But,  alas  !  this  arrangement  made  such  a  sweeping 
semicircle  of  my  hammock,  that,  while  my  head  and  feet 
were  at  par,  the  small  of  my  back  was  settling  down  in 
definitely  ;  I  felt  as  if  some  gigantic  archer  had  hold  of 
me  for  a  bow. 

But  there  was  another  plan  left.  I  triced  up  my 
hammock  with  all  my  strength,  so  as  to  bring  it  wholly 
above  the  tiers  of  pallets  around  me.  This  done,  by  a 
last  effort  I  hoisted  myself  into  it ;  but  alas  !  it  was 
much  worse  than  before.  My  luckless  hammock  was 
stiff  and  straight  as  a  board  ;  and  there  I  was — laid  out 
in  it,  with  my  nose  against  the  ceiling,  like  a  dead  man's 
against  the  lid  of  his  coffin. 

So  at  last  I  was  fain  to  return  to  my  old  level,  and 
moralise  upon  the  folly,  in  all  arbitrary  governments,  of 
striving  to  get  either  below  or  above  those  whom  legislation 
has  placed  upon  an  equality  with  yourself. 

Speaking  of  hammocks  recalls  a  circumstance  that 
happened  one  night  in  the  Never  sink.  It  was  three  or 
four  times  repeated,  with  various  but  not  fatal  results. 

The  watch  below  was  fast  asleep  on  the  berth-deck, 
where  perfect  silence  was  reigning,  when  a  sudden  shock 
and  a  groan  roused  up  all  hands  ;  and  the  hem  of  a  pair 
of  white  trowsers  vanished  up  one  of  the  ladders  at  the 
fore-hatchway. 

We  ran  toward  the  groan,  and  found  a  man  lying  on 
the  deck  ;  one  end  of  his  hammock  having  given  way, 
pitching  his  head  close  to  three  twenty-four-pound 
cannon-shot,  which  must  have  been  purposely  placed  in 
that  position.  When  it  was  discovered  that  this  man 
had  long  been  suspected  of  being  an  informer  among  the 
crew,  little  surprise  and  less  pleasure  were  evinced  at  his 
narrow  escape. 


CHAPTER  XXI 

ONE  REASON  WHY  MAN-OF-WAR'S  MEN  ARE,   GENERALLY, 
SHORT-LIVED 

I  CANNOT  quit  this  matter  of  the  hammocks  without 
making  mention  of  a  grievance  among  the  sailors  that 
ought  to  be  redressed. 

In  a  man-of-war  at  sea,  the  sailors  have  watch  and 
watch  ;  that  is,  through  every  twenty -four  hours  they  are 
on  and  off  duty  every  four  hours.  Now,  the  hammocks 
are  piped  down  from  the  nettings  (the  open  space  for 
stowing  them,  running  round  the  top  of  the  bulwarks) 
a  little  after  sunset,  and  piped  up  again  when  the  forenoon 
watch  is  called,  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning  ;  so  that 
during  the  daytime  they  are  inaccessible  as  pallets.  This 
would  be  all  well  enough  did  the  sailors  have  a  complete 
night's  rest ;  but  every  other  night  at  sea,  one  watch 
have  only  four  hours  in  their  hammocks.  Indeed,  deduct 
ing  the  time  allowed  for  the  other  watch  to  turn  out,  for 
yourself  to  arrange  your  hammock,  get  into  it,  and  fairly 
get  asleep,  it  may  be  said  that,  every  other  night,  you  have 
but  three  hours'  sleep  in  your  hammock.  Having  then 
been  on  deck  for  twice  four  hours,  at  eight  o'clock  in  the 
morning  your  watch-below  comes  round,  and  you  are  not 
liable  to  duty  until  noon.  Under  like  circumstances,  a 
merchant  seaman  goes  to  his  bunk,  and  has  the  benefit 
of  a  good  long  sleep.  But  in  a  man-of-war  you  can  do 
no  such  thing  ;  your  hammock  is  very  neatly  stowed  in 
the  nettings,  and  there  it  must  remain  till  nightfall. 

But  perhaps  there  is  a  corner  for  you  somewhere  along 

103 


104  WHITE  JACKET 

the  batteries  on  the  gun-deck,  where  you  may  enjoy  a 
snug  nap.  But  as  no  one  is  allowed  to  recline  on  the 
larboard  side  of  the  gun-deck  (which  is  reserved  as  a 
corridor  for  the  officers  when  they  go  forward  to  their 
smoking-room  at  the  bridle-port),  the  starboard  side  only 
is  left  to  the  seamen.  But  most  of  this  side,  also,  is 
occupied  by  the  carpenters,  sailmakers,  barbers,  and 
coopers.  In  short,  so  few  are  the  corners  where  you  can 
snatch  a  nap  during  daytime  in  a  frigate,  that  not  one  in 
ten  of  the  watch  who  have  been  on  deck  eight  hours  can 
get  a  wink  of  sleep  till  the  following  night.  Repeatedly, 
after  by  good  fortune  securing  a  corner,  I  have  been 
roused  from  it  by  some  functionary  commissioned  to 
keep  it  clear. 

Off  Cape  Horn,  what  before  had  been  very  uncomfort 
able  became  a  serious  hardship.  Drenched  through  and 
through  by  the  spray  of  the  sea  at  night,  I  have  some 
times  slept  standing  on  the  spar-deck — and  shuddered 
as  I  slept — for  the  want  of  sufficient  sleep  in  my  hammock. 

During  three  days  of  the  stormiest  weather,  we  were 
given  the  privilege  of  the  berth-deck  (at  other  times 
strictly  interdicted),  where  we  were  permitted  to  spread 
our  jackets,  and  take  a  nap  in  the  morning  after  the  eight 
hours'  night  exposure.  But  this  privilege  was  but  a 
beggarly  one,  indeed.  Not  to  speak  of  our  jackets — used 
for  blankets — being  soaking  wet,  the  spray,  coming  down 
the  hatchways,  kept  the  planks  of  the  berth-deck  itself 
constantly  wet ;  whereas,  had  we  been  permitted  our 
hammocks,  we  might  have  swung  dry  over  all  this  deluge. 
But  we  endeavoured  to  make  ourselves  as  warm  and 
comfortable  as  possible,  chiefly  by  close  stowing,  so  as  to 
generate  a  little  steam,  in  the  absence  of  any  fireside 
warmth.  You  have  seen,  perhaps,  the  way  in  which  they 
box  up  subjects  intended  to  illustrate  the  winter  lectures 
of  a  professor  of  surgery.  Just  so  we  laid ;  heel  and  point, 


MAN-OF-WAR'S  MEN  SHORT-LIVED        105 

face  to  back,  dove-tailed  into  each  other  at  every  ham  and 
knee.  The  wet  of  our  jackets,  thus  densely  packed, 
would  soon  begin  to  distil.  But  it  was  like  pouring  hot 
water  on  you  to  keep  you  from  freezing.  It  was  like  being 
*  packed '  between  the  soaked  sheets  in  a  water-cure 
establishment. 

Such  a  posture  could  not  be  preserved  for  any  con 
siderable  period  without  shifting  side  for  side.  Three  or 
four  times  during  the  four  hours  I  would  be  startled  from 
a  wet  doze  by  the  hoarse  cry  of  a  fellow  who  did  the  duty 
of  a  corporal  at  the  after-end  of  my  file,  '  Sleepers  ahoy  ! 
stand  by  to  slew  round  !  '  and,  with  a  double  shuffle,  we 
all  rolled  in  concert,  and  found  ourselves  facing  the 
taffrail  instead  of  the  bowsprit.  But,  however  you 
turned,  your  nose  was  sure  to  stick  to  one  or  other  of  the 
steaming  backs  on  your  two  flanks.  There  was  some 
little  relief  in  the  change  of  odour  consequent  upon  this. 

But  what  is  the  reason  that,  after  battling  out  eight 
stormy  hours  on  deck  at  night,  man-of-war's  men  are  not 
allowed  the  poor  boon  of  a  dry  four  hours'  nap  during  the 
day  following  ?  What  is  the  reason  ?  The  commodore, 
captain,  and  first  lieutenant,  chaplain,  purser,  and 
scores  of  others,  have  all  night  in,  just  as  if  they  were 
staying  at  an  hotel  on  shore.  And  the  junior  lieutenants 
not  only  have  their  cots  to  go  to  at  any  time  ;  but  as  only 
one  of  them  is  required  to  head  the  watch,  and  there  are 
so  many  of  them  among  whom  to  divide  that  duty,  they 
are  only  on  deck  four  hours  to  twelve  hours  below.  In 
some  cases  the  proportion  is  still  greater.  Whereas,  with 
the  people  it  is  four  hours  in  and  four  hours  off 
continually. 

What  is  the  reason,  then,  that  the  common  seamen 
should  fare  so  hard  in  this  matter  ?  It  would  seem  but 
a  simple  thing  to  let  them  get  down  their  hammocks 
during  the  day  for  a  nap.  But  no  ;  such  a  proceeding 


106  WHITE  JACKET 

would  mar  the  uniformity  of  daily  events  in  a  man-of-war. 
It  seems  indispensable  to  the  picturesque  effect  of  the 
spar-deck,  that  the  hammocks  should  invariably  remain 
stowed  in  the  nettings  between  sunrise  and  sundown. 
But  the  chief  reason  is  this — a  reason  which  has  sanc 
tioned  many  an  abuse  in  this  world — precedents  are  against 
it ;  such  a  thing  as  sailors  sleeping  in  their  hammocks  in 
the  daytime,  after  being  eight  hours  exposed  to  a  night 
storm,  was  hardly  ever  heard  of  in  the  Navy.  Though,  to 
the  immortal  honour  of  some  captains  be  it  said,  the  fact 
is  upon  Navy  record  that,  off  Cape  Horn,  they  have  vouch 
safed  the  morning  hammocks  to  their  crew.  Heaven 
bless  such  tender-hearted  officers ;  and  may  they  and  their 
descendants — ashore  or  afloat — have  sweet  and  pleasant 
slumbers  while  they  live,  and  an  undreaming  siesta  when 
they  die. 

It  is  concerning  such  things  as  the  subject  of  this 
chapter  that  special  enactments  of  Congress  are  demanded. 
Health  and  comfort — so  far  as  duly  attainable  under  the 
circumstances — should  be  legally  guaranteed  to  the  man- 
of-war's  man,  and  not  left  to  the  discretion  or  caprice 
of  his  commander. 


CHAPTER  XXII 

WASH-DAY  AND  HOUSE-CLEANING  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR 

BESIDES  the  other  tribulations  connected  with  your 
hammock,  you  must  keep  it  snow-white  and  clean ; 
who  has  not  observed  the  long  rows  of  spotless  hammocks 
exposed  in  a  frigate's  nettings,  where,  through  the  day, 
their  outsides,  at  least,  are  kept  airing  ? 

Hence  it  comes  that  there  are  regular  mornings 
appointed  for  the  scrubbing  of  hammocks  ;  and  such 
mornings  are  called  scrub-hammock  mornings ;  and 
desperate  is  the  scrubbing  that  ensues. 

Before  daylight  the  operation  begins.  All  hands  are 
called,  and  at  it  they  go.  Every  deck  is  spread  with 
hammocks,  fore  and  aft ;  and  lucky  are  you  if  you  can 
get  sufficient  superficies  to  spread  your  own  hammock  in. 
Down  on  their  knees  are  five  hundred  men,  scrubbing 
away  with  brushes  and  brooms  ;  jostling,  and  crowding, 
and  quarrelling  about  using  each  other's  suds  ;  when  all 
their  purser's  soap  goes  to  create  one  indiscriminate  yeast. 

Sometimes  you  discover  that,  in  the  dark,  you  have 
been  all  the  while  scrubbing  your  next  neighbour's 
hammock  instead  of  your  own.  But  it  is  too  late  to 
begin  over  again  ;  for  now  the  word  is  passed  for  every 
man  to  advance  with  his  hammock,  that  it  may  be  tied 
to  a  net-like  framework  of  clothes-lines,  and  hoisted  aloft 
to  dry. 

That  done,  without  delay  you  get  together  your  frocks 
and  trowsers,  and  on  the  already  flooded  deck  embark  in 
the  laundry  business.  You  have  no  special  bucket  or 

107 


108  WHITE  JACKET 

basin  to  yourself — the  ship  being  one  vast  wash-tub, 
where  all  hands  wash  and  rinse  out,  and  rinse  out  and 
wash,  till  at  last  the  word  is  passed  again  to  make  fast 
your  clothes,  that  they,  also,  may  be  elevated  to  dry. 

Then  on  all  three  decks  the  operation  of  holy-stoning 
begins,  so  called  from  the  queer  name  bestowed  upon  the 
principal  instruments  employed.  These  are  ponderous 
flat  stones  with  long  ropes  at  each  end,  by  which  the 
stones  are  slidden  about,  to  and  fro,  over  the  wet  and 
sanded  decks  ;  a  most  wearisome,  dog-like,  galley-slave 
employment.  For  the  byways  and  corners  about  the 
masts  and  guns,  smaller  stones  are  used,  called  prayer- 
books  ;  inasmuch  as  the  devout  operator  has  to  down 
with  them  on  his  knees. 

Finally,  a  grand  flooding  takes  place,  and  the  decks 
are  remorselessly  thrashed  with  dry  swabs.  After  which 
an  extraordinary  implement — a  sort  of  leathern  hoe 
called  a  '  squilgee  ' — is  used  to  scrape  and  squeeze  the 
last  dribblings  of  water  from  the  planks.  Concerning 
this  '  squilgee,'  I  think  something  of  drawing  up  a  memoir, 
and  reading  it  before  the  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences. 
It  is  a  most  curious  affair. 

By  the  time  all  these  operations  are  concluded  it  is 
eight  bells,  and  all  hands  are  piped  to  breakfast  upon  the 
damp  and  every -way  disagreeable  decks. 

Now,  against  this  invariable  daily  flooding  of  the  three 
decks  of  a  frigate,  as  a  man-of-war's  man,  White  Jacket 
most  earnestly  protests.  In  sunless  weather  it  keeps  the 
sailor's  quarters  perpetually  damp  ;  so  much  so,  that  you 
can  scarce  sit  down  without  running  the  risk  of  getting 
the  lumbago.  One  rheumatic  old  sheet-anchor  man 
among  us  was  driven  to  the  extremity  of  sewing  a  piece 
of  tarred  canvas  on  the  seat  of  his  trowsers. 

Let  those  neat  and  tidy  officers  who  so  love  to  see  a 
ship  kept  spick  and  span  clean  ;  who  institute  vigorous 


WASH-DAY  AND  HOUSE -CLEANING       109 

search  after  the  man  who  chances  to  drop  the  crumb  of 
a  biscuit  on  deck,  when  the  ship  is  rolling  in  a  sea-way  ; 
let  all  such  swing  their  hammocks  with  the  sailors,  and  they 
would  soon  get  sick  of  this  daily  damping  of  the  decks. 

Is  a  ship  a  wooden  platter,  that  it  is  to  be  scrubbed  out 
every  morning  before  breakfast,  even  if  the  thermometer 
be  at  zero,  and  every  sailor  goes  barefooted  through  the 
flood  with  the  chilblains  ?  And  all  the  while  the  ship 
carries  a  doctor,  well  aware  of  Boerhaave's  great  maxim, 
'  Keep  the  feet  dry'  He  has  plenty  of  pills  to  give  you 
when  you  are  down  with  a  fever,  the  consequences  of 
these  things  ;  but  enters  no  protest  at  the  outset — as  it 
is  his  duty  to  do — against  the  cause  that  induces  the  fever. 
During  the  pleasant  night-watches,  the  promenading 
officers,  mounted  on  their  high-heeled  boots,  pass  dry- 
shod,  like  the  Israelites,  over  the  decks  ;  but  by  day 
break  the  roaring  tide  sets  back,  and  the  poor  sailors  are 
almost  overwhelmed  in  it,  like  the  Egyptians  in  the  Red 
Sea. 

Oh !  the  chills,  colds,  and  agues  that  are  caught ! 
No  snug  stove,  grate,  or  fireplace  to  go  to  ;  no,  your  only 
way  to  keep  warm  is  to  keep  in  a  blazing  passion,  and 
anathematise  the  custom  that  every  morning  makes  a 
washhouse  of  a  man-of-war. 

Look  at  it.  Say  you  go  on  board  a  line-of -battle  ship  : 
you  see  everything  scrupulously  neat ;  you  see  all  the 
decks  clear  and  unobstructed  as  the  sidewalks  of  Wall 
Street  of  a  Sunday  morning  ;  you  see  no  trace  of  a  sailor's 
dormitory  ;  you  marvel  by  what  magic  all  this  is  brought 
about.  And  well  you  may.  For  consider,  that  in  this 
unobstructed  fabric  nearly  one  thousand  mortal  men  have 
to  sleep,  eat,  wash,  dress,  cook,  and  perform  all  the 
ordinary  functions  of  humanity.  The  same  number  of 
men  ashore  would  expand  themselves  into  a  township. 
Is  it  credible,  then,  that  this  extraordinary  neatness,  and 


110  WHITE  JACKET 

especially  this  unobstructedness  of  a  man-of-war,  can  be 
brought  about  except  by  the  most  rigorous  edicts,  and 
a  very  serious  sacrifice,  with  respect  to  the  sailors,  of  the 
domestic  comforts  of  life  ?  To  be  sure,  sailors  themselves 
do  not  often  complain  of  these  things  ;  they  are  used  to 
them  ;  but  man  can  become  used  even  to  the  hardest 
usage.  And  it  is  because  he  is  used  to  it  that  sometimes 
he  does  not  complain  of  it. 

Of  all  men-of-war,  the  American  ships  are  the  most 
excessively  neat,  and  have  the  greatest  reputation  for  it. 
And  of  all  men-of-war  the  general  discipline  of  the 
American  ships  is  perhaps  the  most  severe. 

In  the  English  Navy,  the  men  liberally  mess  on  tables, 
which,  between  meals,  are  triced  up  out  of  the  way. 
The  American  sailors  mess  on  the  deck,  and  peck  up  their 
broken  biscuit,  or  midshipmen's  nuts,  like  fowls  in  a  barn 
yard. 

But  if  this  unobstructedness  in  an  American  fighting 
ship  be,  at  all  hazards,  so  desirable,  why  not  imitate  the 
Turks  ?  In  the  Turkish  Navy  they  have  no  mess-chests  ; 
the  sailors  roll  their  mess  things  up  in  a  rug,  and  thrust 
them  under  a  gun.  Nor  do  they  have  any  hammocks ; 
they  sleep  anywhere  about  the  decks  in  their  gregoes. 
Indeed,  come  to  look  at  it,  what  more  does  a  man-of- 
war's  man  absolutely  require  to  live  in  than  his  own 
skin  ?  That 's  room  enough  ;  and  room  enough  to  turn 
in,  if  he  but  knew  how  to  shift  his  spine,  end  for  end,  like 
a  ramrod,  without  disturbing  his  next  neighbour. 

Among  all  man-of-war's  men,  it  is  a  maxim  that  over- 
neat  vessels  are  Tartars  to  the  crew  ;  and  perhaps  it  may 
be  safely  laid  down  that,  when  you  see  such  a  ship,  some 
sort  of  tyranny  is  not  very  far  off. 

In  the  Never  sink,  as  in  other  national  ships,  the  business 
of  holy-stoning  the  decks  was  often  prolonged,  by  way  of 
punishment  to  the  men,  particularly  of  a  raw,  cold  morn- 


WASH-DAY  AND  HOUSE-CLEANING       111 

ing.  This  is  one  of  the  punishments  which  a  lieutenant 
of  the  watch  may  easily  inflict  upon  the  crew,  without 
infringing  the  statute  which  places  the  power  of  punish 
ment  solely  in  the  hands  of  the  captain. 

The  abhorrence  which  man-of-war's  men  have  for  this 
protracted  holy-stoning  in  cold,  comfortless  weather — 
with  their  bare  feet  exposed  to  the  splashing  inundations 
— is  shown  in  a  strange  story,  rife  among  them,  curiously 
tinctured  with  their  proverbial  superstitions. 

The  first  lieutenant  of  an  English  sloop  of  war,  a 
severe  disciplinarian,  was  uncommonly  particular  con 
cerning  the  whiteness  of  the  quarter-deck.  One  bitter 
winter  morning  at  sea,  when  the  crew  had  washed  that 
part  of  the  vessel,  as  usual,  and  put  away  their  holy 
stones,  this  officer  came  on  deck,  and  after  inspecting  it, 
ordered  the  holy -stones  and  prayer-books  up  again.  Once 
more  slipping  off  the  shoes  from  their  frosted  feet, 
and  rolling  up  their  trowsers,  the  crew  kneeled  down  to 
their  task  ;  and  in  that  suppliant  posture,  silently  invoked 
a  curse  upon  their  tyrant ;  praying,  as  he  went  below, 
that  he  might  never  more  come  out  of  the  ward-room 
alive.  The  prayer  seemed  answered  ;  for  being  shortly 
after  visited  with  a  paralytic  stroke  at  his  breakfast- 
table,  the  first  lieutenant  next  morning  was  carried  out 
of  the  ward-room  feet  foremost,  dead.  As  they  dropped 
him  over  the  side — so  goes  the  story — the  marine  sentry 
at  the  gangway  turned  his  back  upon  the  corpse. 

To  the  credit  of  the  humane  and  sensible  portion  of  the 
roll  of  American  Navy  captains,  be  it  added,  that  they 
are  not  so  particular  in  keeping  the  decks  spotless  at  all 
times,  and  in  all  weathers  ;  nor  do  they  torment  the  men 
with  scraping  bright-wood  and  polishing  ring-bolts  ;  but 
give  all  such  gingerbread  work  a  hearty  coat  of  black 
paint,  which  looks  more  warlike,  is  a  better  preservative, 
and  exempts  the  sailors  from  a  perpetual  annoyance. 


CHAPTER  XXIII 

THEATRICALS   IN   A   MAN-OF-WAR 

THE  Neversink  had  summered  out  her  last  Christmas  on  the 
Equator  ;  she  was  now  destined  to  winter  out  the  Fourth 
of  July  not  very  far  from  the  frigid  latitudes  of  Cape  Horn. 

It  is  sometimes  the  custom  in  the  American  Navy  to 
celebrate  this  national  holyday  by  doubling  the  allowance 
of  spirits  to  the  men ;  that  is,  if  the  ship  happen  to  be 
lying  in  harbour.  The  effects  of  this  patriotic  plan  may 
be  easily  imagined  :  the  whole  ship  is  converted  into  a 
dram-shop  ;  and  the  intoxicated  sailors  reel  about,  on  all 
three  decks,  singing,  howling,  and  fighting.  This  is  the 
time  that,  owing  to  the  relaxed  discipline  of  the  ship,  old 
and  almost  forgotten  quarrels  are  revived,  under  the 
stimulus  of  drink  ;  and,  fencing  themselves  up  between 
the  guns — so  as  to  be  sure  of  a  clear  space  with  at  least 
three  walls — the  combatants,  two  and  two,  fight  out  their 
hate,  cribbed  and  cabined  like  soldiers  duelling  in  a  sentry- 
box.  In  a  word,  scenes  ensue  which  would  not  for  a 
single  instant  be  tolerated  by  the  officers  upon  any  other 
occasion.  This  is  the  time  that  the  most  venerable  of 
quarter-gunners  and  quarter-masters,  together  with  the 
smallest  apprentice  boys,  and  men  never  known  to  have 
been  previously  intoxicated  during  the  cruise — this  is  the 
time  that  they  all  roll  together  in  the  same  muddy  trough 
of  drunkenness. 

In  emulation  of  the  potentates  of  the  Middle  Ages, 
some  captains  augment  the  din  by  authorising  a  grand 
jail-delivery  of  all  the  prisoners  who,  on  that  auspicious 
112 


THEATRICALS  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR         113 

Fourth  of  the  month,  may  happen  to  be  confined  in  the 
ship's  prison — '  the  brig' 

But  from  scenes  like  these  the  Neversink  was  happily 
delivered.  Besides  that  she  was  now  approaching  a  most 
perilous  part  of  the  ocean — which  would  have  made  it 
madness  to  intoxicate  the  sailors — her  complete  destitu 
tion  of  grog,  even  for  ordinary  consumption,  was  an 
obstacle  altogether  insuperable,  even  had  the  captain 
felt  disposed  to  indulge  his  man-of-war's  men  by  the 
most  copious  libations. 

For  several  days  previous  to  the  advent  of  the  holy  day, 
frequent  conferences  were  held  on  the  gun-deck  touching 
the  melancholy  prospects  before  the  ship. 

'  Too  bad — too  bad  !  '  cried  a  topman.  '  Think  of 
it,  shipmates — a  Fourth  of  July  without  grog  !  ' 

'  I  '11  hoist  the  commodore's  pennant  at  half-mast  that 
day,'  sighed  the  signal-quarter-master. 

(  And  I  '11  turn  my  best  uniform  jacket  wrong  side  out, 
to  keep  company  with  the  pennant,  old  Ensign,'  sym 
pathetically  responded  an  after -guard's  man. 

'  Ay,  do  !  '  cried  a  forecastle  man.  '  I  could  almost 
pipe  my  eye  to  think  on  't.' 

*  No  grog  on  de  day  dat  tried  men's  souls  !  '  blubbered 
Sunshine,  the  galley-cook. 

'  Who  would  be  a  Jankee  (Yankee)  now  ?  '  roared  a 
Hollander  of  the  fore-top,  more  Dutch  than  sourcrout. 

'  Is  this  the  riglar  fruits  of  liberty  ? '  touchingly  inquired 
an  Irish  waister  of  an  old  Spanish  sheet-anchor  man. 

You  will  generally  observe  that,  of  all  Americans,  your 
foreign-born  citizens  are  the  most  patriotic — especially 
toward  the  Fourth  of  July. 

But  how  could  Captain  Claret,  the  father  of  his  crew, 
behold  the  grief  of  his  ocean  children  with  indifference  ? 
He  could  not.  Three  days  before  the  anniversary — it 
still  continuing  very  pleasant  weather  for  these  latitudes 

H 


114  WHITE  JACKET 

— it  was  publicly  announced  that  free  permission  was 
given  to  the  sailors  to  get  up  any  sort  of  theatricals  they 
desired,  wherewith  to  honour  the  Fourth. 

Now,  some  weeks  prior  to  the  Neversink's  sailing  from 
home — nearly  three  years  before  the  time  here  spoken  of 
— some  of  the  seamen  had  clubbed  together,  and  made 
up  a  considerable  purse,  for  the  purpose  of  purchasing  a 
theatrical  outfit ;  having  in  view  to  diversify  the  mono 
tony  of  lying  in  foreign  harbours  for  weeks  together,  by 
an  occasional  display  on  the  boards — though  if  ever  there 
was  a  continual  theatre  in  the  world,  playing  by  night  and 
by  day,  and  without  intervals  between  the  acts,  a  man-of- 
war  is  that  theatre,  and  her  planks  are  the  boards  indeed. 

The  sailors  who  originated  this  scheme  had  served  in 
other  American  frigates,  where  the  privilege  of  having 
theatricals  was  allowed  to  the  crew.  What  was  their 
chagrin,  then,  when,  upon  making  an  application  to  the 
captain,  in  a  Peruvian  harbour,  for  permission  to  present 
the  much-admired  drama  of  '  The  Ruffian  Boy'  under 
the  captain's  personal  patronage,  that  dignitary  assured 
them  that  there  were  already  enough  ruffian  boys  on  board, 
without  conjuring  up  any  more  from  the  green-room. 

The  theatrical  outfit,  therefore,  was  stowed  down  in 
the  bottom  of  the  sailors'  bags,  who  little  anticipated  then 
that  it  would  ever  be  dragged  out  while  Captain  Claret 
had  the  sway. 

But  immediately  upon  the  announcement  that  the 
embargo  was  removed,  vigorous  preparations  were  at 
once  commenced  to  celebrate  the  Fourth  with  unwonted 
spirit.  The  half-deck  was  set  apart  for  the  theatre,  and 
the  signal-quarter-master  was  commanded  to  loan  his 
flags  to  decorate  it  in  the  most  patriotic  style. 

As  the  stage-struck  portion  of  the  crew  had  frequently 
during  the  cruise  rehearsed  portions  of  various  plays,  to 
while  away  the  tedium  of  the  night-watches,  they  needed 
no  long  time  now  to  perfect  themselves  in  their  parts. 


THEATRICALS  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR         115 

Accordingly,  on  the  very  next  morning  after  the  in 
dulgence  had  been  granted  by  the  captain,  the  following 
written  placard,  presenting  a  broadside  of  staring  capitals, 
was  found  tacked  against  the  mainmast  on  the  gun-deck. 
It  was  as  if  a  Drury  Lane  bill  had  been  posted  upon  the 
London  Monument  :— 

CAPE  HORN  THEATRE. 

Grand  Celebration  of  the  Fourth  of  July. 
DAY  PERFORMANCE. 

UNCOMMON    ATTRACTION. 

THE  OLD  WAGON  PAID  OFF! 

JACK  CHASE  ....     PERCY  ROYAL-MAST. 
STABS   OF   THE    FIRST   MAGNITUDE. 

For  this  time  only, 
THE  TEUE  YANKEE  SAILOR. 


The  managers  of  the  Cape  Horn  Theatre  beg  leave  to  inform  the  in 
habitants  of  the  Pacific  and  Southern  Oceans  that,  on  the  afternoon  of 
the  Fourth  of  July  184 — ,  they  will  have  the  honour  to  present  the 
admired  drama  of 

THE  OLD  WAGON  PAID  OFF ! 
Commodore  Bougee    .  .         .     Tom  Brown,  of  the  Fore-top. 


Captain  Spyglass 

Commodore's  Cockswain 

Old  Luff    . 

Mayor 

PERCY  ROYAL-MAST  . 

Mrs.  Lovelorn    . 

Toddy  Moll 

Gin  and  Sugar  Sail     . 


Ned  Brace,  of  the  After-guard. 
Joe  Bunk,  of  the  Launch. 
Quarter -master  Coffin. 
Seafull,  of  the  Forecastle. 
JACK  CHASE. 

Long-locks,  of  the  After-guard, 
Frank  Jones. 
Dick  Dash. 


Sailors,  Marines,  Bar-keepers,  Crimps,  Aldermen,  Police- Officers, 
Soldiers,  Landsmen  generally. 

Long  live  the  Commodore  !  Admission  Free. 

To  conclude  with  the  much-admired  song  by  Dibdin,  altered  to  suit 
all  American  Tars,  entitled 

THE  TRUE  YANKEE  SAILOR. 
True  Yankee  Sailor  (in  costume),  Patrick  Flinegan,  Captain  of  the  Head. 

Performance  to  commence  with  *Hail  Columbia,'  by  the  Brass  Band. 
Ensign  rises  at  three  bells  P.M.  No  sailor  permitted  to  enter  in  his 
shirt-sleeves.  Good  order  is  expected  to  be  maintained.  The  Master- 
at-arms  and  Ship's  Corporals  to  be  in  attendance  to  keep  the  peace. 


116  WHITE  JACKET 

At  the  earnest  entreaties  of  the  seamen,  Lemsford,  the 
gun-deck  poet,  had  been  prevailed  upon  to  draw  up  this 
bill.  And  upon  this  one  occasion  his  literary  abilities 
were  far  from  being  underrated,  even  by  the  least  in 
tellectual  person  on  board.  Nor  must  it  be  omitted  that, 
before  the  bill  was  placarded,  Captain  Claret,  enacting 
the  part  of  censor  and  grand  chamberlain,  ran  over  a 
manuscript  copy  of  '  The  Old  Wagon  Paid  Off,'  to  see 
whether  it  contained  anything  calculated  to  breed  dis 
affection  against  lawful  authority  among  the  crew.  He 
objected  to  some  parts,  but  in  the  end  let  them  all  pass. 

The  morning  of  The  Fourth — most  anxiously  awaited 
—dawned  clear  and  fair.  The  breeze  was  steady  ;  the 
air  bracing  cold  ;  and  one  and  all  the  sailors  anticipated 
a  gleeful  afternoon.  And  thus  was  falsified  the  prophecies 
of  certain  old  growlers  averse  to  theatricals,  who  had 
predicted  a  gale  of  wind  that  would  quash  all  the  arrange 
ments  of  the  green-room. 

As  the  men  whose  regular  turns,  at  the  time  of  the 
performance,  would  come  round  to  be  stationed  in  the 
tops,  and  at  the  various  halyards  and  running  ropes  about 
the  spar-deck,  could  not  be  permitted  to  partake  in  the 
celebration,  there  accordingly  ensued,  during  the  morning, 
many  amusing  scenes  of  tars  who  were  anxious  to  procure 
substitutes  at  their  posts.  Through  the  day,  many 
anxious  glances  were  cast  to  windward  ;  but  the  weather 
still  promised  fair. 

At  last  the  people  were  piped  to  dinner  ;  two  bells 
struck  ;  and  soon  after,  all  who  could  be  spared  from 
their  stations  hurried  to  the  half-deck.  The  capstan-bars 
were  placed  on  shot-boxes,  as  at  prayers  on  Sundays, 
furnishing  seats  for  the  audience  ;  while  a  low  stage, 
rigged  by  the  carpenter's  gang,  was  built  at  one  end  of 
the  open  space.  The  curtain  was  composed  of  a  large 
ensign,  and  the  bulwarks  round  about  were  draperied 


THEATRICALS  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR         117 

with  the  flags  of  all  nations.  The  ten  or  twelve  members 
of  the  brass  band  were  ranged  in  a  row  at  the  foot  of 
the  stage,  their  polished  instruments  in  their  hands, 
while  the  consequential  captain  of  the  band  himself  was 
elevated  upon  a  gun-carriage. 

At  three  bells  precisely  a  group  of  ward-room  officers 
emerged  from  the  after -hatchway,  and  seated  themselves 
upon  camp-stools,  in  a  central  position,  with  the  stars  and 
stripes  for  a  canopy.  That  was  the  royal  box.  The  sailors 
looked  round  for  the  commodore ;  but  neither  commodore 
nor  captain  honoured  the  people  with  their  presence. 

At  the  call  of  a  bugle  the  band  struck  up  Hail  Columbia, 
the  whole  audience  keeping  time,  as  at  Drury  Lane,  when 
God  Save  the  King  is  played  after  a  great  national  victory. 

At  the  discharge  of  a  marine's  musket  the  curtain  rose, 
and  four  sailors,  in  the  picturesque  garb  of  Maltese 
mariners,  staggered  on  the  stage  in  a  feigned  state  of 
intoxication.  The  truthfulness  of  the  representation  was 
much  heightened  by  the  roll  of  the  ship. 

'  The  Commodore/  '  Old  Luff,'  '  The  Mayor,'  and  c  Gin 
and  Sugar  Sail '  were  played  to  admiration,  and  received 
great  applause.  But  at  the  first  appearance  of  that 
universal  favourite,  Jack  Chase,  in  the  chivalric  character 
of  '  Percy  Royal-Mast?  the  whole  audience  simultaneously 
rose  to  their  feet,  and  greeted  him  with  three  hearty 
cheers,  that  almost  took  the  main-topsail  aback. 

Matchless  Jack,  in  full  fig,  bowed  again  and  again, 
with  true  quarter-deck  grace  and  self-possession  ;  and 
when  five  or  six  untwisted  strands  of  rope  and  bunches 
of  oakum  were  thrown  to  him,  as  substitutes  for  bouquets, 
he  took  them  one  by  one,  and  gallantly  hung  them  from 
the  buttons  of  his  jacket. 

'  Hurrah  !  hurrah  !  hurrah  ! — go  on  !  go  on  ! — stop 
hollering — hurrah  ! — go  on  ! — stop  hollering — hurrah  !  ' 
was  now  heard  on  all  sides,  till  at  last,  seeing  no  end  to 


118  WHITE  JACKET 

the  enthusiasm  of  his  ardent  admirers,  Matchless  Jack 
stepped  forward,  and,  with  his  lips  moving  in  pantomime, 
plunged  into  the  thick  of  the  part.  Silence  soon  followed, 
but  was  fifty  times  broken  by  uncontrollable  bursts  of 
applause.  At  length,  when  that  heart-thrilling  scene 
came  on,  where  Percy  Royal-Mast  rescues  fifteen  oppressed 
sailors  from  the  watch-house,  in  the  teeth  of  a  posse  of 
constables,  the  audience  leaped  to  their  feet,  overturned 
the  capstan-bars,  and  to  a  man  hurled  their  hats  on 
the  stage  in  a  delirium  of  delight.  Ah,  Jack,  that  was  a 
ten-stroke  indeed ! 

The  commotion  was  now  terrific  ;  all  discipline  seemed 
gone  forever  ;  the  lieutenants  ran  in  among  the  men, 
the  captain  darted  from  his  cabin,  and  the  commodore 
nervously  questioned  the  armed  sentry  at  his  door  as  to 
what  the  deuce  the  people  were  about.  In  the  midst 
of  all  this,  the  trumpet  of  the  officer  of  the  deck,  com 
manding  the  top-gallant-sails  to  be  taken  in,  was  almost 
completely  drowned.  A  black  squall  was  coming  down 
on  the  weather-bow,  and  the  boatswain's  mates  bellowed 
themselves  hoarse  at  the  main-hatchway.  There  is  no 
knowing  what  would  have  ensued  had  not  the  bass  drum 
suddenly  been  heard,  calling  all  hands  to  quarters,  a 
summons  not  to  be  withstood.  The  sailors  pricked  their 
ears  at  it,  as  horses  at  the  sound  of  a  cracking  whip,  and 
confusedly  stumbled  up  the  ladders  to  their  stations. 
The  next  moment  all  was  silent  but  the  wind,  howling 
like  a  thousand  devils  in  the  cordage. 

*  Stand  by  to  reef  all  three  topsails  ! — settle  away  the 
halyards  ! — haul  out — so  :  make  fast ! — aloft,  topmen  ! 
and  reef  away  !  ' 

Thus,  in  storm  and  tempest  terminated  that  day's 
theatricals.  But  the  sailors  never  recovered  from  the 
disappointment  of  not  having  the  '  True  Yankee  Sailor  ' 
sung  by  the  Irish  captain  of  the  head. 


THEATRICALS  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR         119 

And  here  White  Jacket  must  moralise  a  bit.  The 
unwonted  spectacle  of  the  row  of  gun-room  officers 
mingling  with  the  people  in  applauding  a  mere  seaman 
like  Jack  Chase  filled  me  at  the  time  with  the  most 
pleasurable  emotions.  It  is  a  sweet  thing,  thought  I,  to 
see  these  officers  confess  a  human  brotherhood  with  us, 
after  all ;  a  sweet  thing  to  mark  their  cordial  appreciation 
of  the  manly  merits  of  my  matchless  Jack.  Ah  !  they 
are  noble  fellows  all  round,  and  I  do  not  know  but  I  have 
wronged  them  sometimes  in  my  thoughts. 

Nor  was  it  without  similar  pleasurable  feelings  that  I 
witnessed  the  temporary  rupture  of  the  ship's  stern 
discipline,  consequent  upon  the  tumult  of  the  theatricals. 
I  thought  to  myself,  this  now  is  as  it  should  be.  It  is 
good  to  shake  off,  now  and  then,  this  iron  yoke  round  our 
necks.  And  after  having  once  permitted  us  sailors  to 
be  a  little  noisy,  in  a  harmless  way — somewhat  merrily 
turbulent — the  officers  cannot,  with  any  good  grace,  be 
so  excessively  stern  and  unyielding  as  before.  I  began 
to  think  a  man-of-war  a  man-of-peace-and-goodwill, 
after  all.  But,  alas  !  disappointment  came. 

Next  morning  the  same  old  scene  was  enacted  at  the 
gangway.  And  beholding  the  row  of  uncompromising- 
looking  officers  there  assembled  with  the  captain,  to 
witness  punishment — the  same  officers  who  had  been  so 
cheerfully  disposed  overnight — an  old  sailor  touched  my 
shoulder,  and  said,  '  See,  White  Jacket,  all  round  they 
have  shipped  their  quarter-deck  faces  again.  But  this  is 
the  way.' 

I  afterward  learned  that  this  was  an  old  man-of-war's 
man's  phrase,  expressive  of  the  facility  with  which  a 
sea-officer  falls  back  upon  all  the  severity  of  his  dignity, 
after  a  temporary  suspension  of  it. 


CHAPTER  XXIV 

INTRODUCTORY   TO   CAPE   HORN 

AND  now,  through  drizzling  fogs  and  vapours,  and  under 
damp,  double-reefed  topsails,  our  wet-decked  frigate 
drew  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  squally  Cape. 

Who  has  not  heard  of  it  ?  Cape  Horn,  Cape  Horn — 
a  horn  indeed,  that  has  tossed  many  a  good  ship.  Was 
the  descent  of  Orpheus,  Ulysses,  or  Dante  into  Hell,  one 
whit  more  hardy  and  sublime  than  the  first  navigator's 
weathering  of  that  terrible  Cape  ? 

Turned  on  her  heel  by  a  fierce  west  wind,  many  an 
outward-bound  ship  has  been  driven  across  the  Southern 
Ocean  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope — that  way  to  seek  a 
passage  to  the  Pacific.  And  that  stormy  Cape,  I  doubt 
not,  has  sent  many  a  fine  craft  to  the  bottom,  and  told 
no  tales.  At  those  ends  of  the  earth  are  no  chronicles. 
What  signify  the  broken  spars  and  shrouds  that,  day  after 
day,  are  driven  before  the  prows  of  more  fortunate  vessels  ? 
or  the  tall  masts,  imbedded  in  icebergs,  that  are  found 
floating  by  ?  They  but  hint  the  old  story — of  ships  that 
have  sailed  from  their  ports,  and  never  more  have  been 
heard  of. 

Impracticable  Cape  !  You  may  approach  it  from  this 
direction  or  that — in  any  way  you  please — from  the  east, 
or  from  the  west ;  with  the  wind  astern,  or  abeam,  or  on 
the  quarter  ;  and  still  Cape  Horn  is  Cape  Horn.  Cape 
Horn  it  is  that  takes  the  conceit  out  of  fresh-water  sailors, 
and  steeps  in  a  still  salter  brine  the  saltest.  Woe  betide 
the  tyro  !  the  foolhardy,  Heaven  preserve  ! 
120 


INTRODUCTORY  TO  CAPE  HORN          121 

Your  Mediterranean  captain,  who  with  a  cargo  of 
oranges  has  hitherto  made  merry  runs  across  the  Atlantic, 
without  so  much  as  furling  a  t'-gallant-sail,  oftentimes, 
off  Cape  Horn,  receives  a  lesson  which  he  carries  to  the 
grave  ;  though  the  grave — as  is  too  often  the  case — 
follows  so  hard  on  the  lesson  that  no  benefit  comes  from 
the  experience. 

Other  strangers  who  draw  nigh  to  this  Patagonia 
termination  of  our  continent,  with  their  souls  full  of  its 
shipwrecks  and  disasters — topsails  cautiously  reefed,  and 
everything  guardedly  snug — these  strangers  at  first  un 
expectedly  encountering  a  tolerably  smooth  sea,  rashly 
conclude  that  the  Cape,  after  all,  is  but  a  bugbear  ;  they 
have  been  imposed  upon  by  fables,  and  founderings  and 
sinkings  hereabouts  are  all  cock-and-bull  stories. 

'  Out  reefs,  my  hearties  ;  fore  and  aft  set  t' -gallant- 
sails  !  stand  by  to  give  her  the  fore-topmast  stun'-sail !  ' 

But,  Captain  Rash,  those  sails  of  yours  were  much  safer 
in  the  sailmaker's  loft.  For  now,  while  the  heedless 
craft  is  bounding  over  the  billows,  a  black  cloud  rises  out 
of  the  sea  ;  the  sun  drops  down  from  the  sky  ;  a  horrible 
mist  far  and  wide  spreads  over  the  water. 

'  Hands  by  the  halyards  !    Let  go  !    Clew  up  ! ' 

Too  late. 

For  ere  the  rope's-ends  can  be  cast  off  from  the  pins, 
the  tornado  is  blowing  down  to  the  bottom  of  their 
throats.  The  masts  are  willows,  the  sails  ribbons,  the 
cordage  wool ;  the  whole  ship  is  brewed  into  the  yeast 
of  the  gale. 

And  now,  if,  when  the  first  green  sea  breaks  over  him, 
Captain  Rash  is  not  swept  overboard,  he  has  his  hands 
full,  to  be  sure.  In  all  probability  his  three  masts  have 
gone  by  the  board,  and,  ravelled  into  list,  his  sails  are 
floating  in  the  air.  Or,  perhaps,  the  ship  broaches  to,  or  is 
brought  by  the  lee.  In  either  case,  Heaven  help  the  sailors, 


122  WHITE  JACKET 

their  wives,  and  their  little  ones  ;  and  Heaven  help  the 
underwriters. 

Familiarity  with  danger  makes  a  brave  man  braver, 
but  less  daring.  Thus  with  seamen  :  he  who  goes  the 
oftenest  round  Cape  Horn  goes  the  most  circumspectly. 
A  veteran  mariner  is  never  deceived  by  the  treacherous 
breezes  which  sometimes  waft  him  pleasantly  toward  the 
latitude  of  the  Cape.  No  sooner  does  he  come  within  a 
certain  distance  of  it — previously  fixed  in  his  own  mind — 
than  all  hands  are  turned  to  setting  the  ship  in  storm- 
trim  ;  and,  never  mind  how  light  the  breeze,  down  come 
his  t' -gallant-yards.  He  '  bends  '  his  strongest  storm- 
sails,  and  lashes  everything  on  deck  securely.  The  ship 
is  then  ready  for  the  worst ;  and  if,  in  reeling  round  the 
headland,  she  receives  a  broadside,  it  generally  goes  well 
with  her.  If  ill,  all  hands  go  to  the  bottom  with  quiet 
consciences. 

Among  sea-captains,  there  are  some  who  seem  to  regard 
the  genius  of  the  Cape  as  a  wilful,  capricious  jade,  that 
must  be  courted  and  coaxed  into  complaisance.  First, 
they  come  along  under  easy  sail ;  do  not  steer  boldly  for 
the  headland,  but  tack  this  way  and  that — sidling  up 
to  it.  Now  they  woo  the  Jezebel  with  a  t'-gallant- 
studding-sail ;  anon,  they  deprecate  her  wrath  with 
double-reef ed-topsails.  When,  at  length,  her  unappeas 
able  fury  is  fairly  aroused,  and  all  round  the  dismantled 
ship  the  storm  howls  and  howls  for  days  together,  they 
still  persevere  in  their  efforts.  First,  they  try  uncondi 
tional  submission  ;  furling  every  rag  and  heaving  to  ; 
laying  like  a  log,  for  the  tempest  to  toss  wheresoever  it 
pleases. 

This  failing,  they  set  a  spencer  or  try-sail,  and  shift 
on  the  other  tack.  Equally  vain  !  The  gale  sings  as 
hoarsely  as  before.  At  last,  the  wind  comes  round  fair  ; 
they  drop  the  fore-sail ;  square  the  yards,  and  scud  before 


INTRODUCTORY  TO  CAPE  HORN  123 

it :  their  implacable  foe  chasing  them  with  tornadoes,  as 
if  to  show  her  insensibility  to  the  last. 

Other  ships,  without  encountering  these  terrible  gales, 
spend  week  after  week  endeavouring  to  turn  this  boister 
ous  world-corner  against  a  continual  head-wind.  Tacking 
hither  and  thither,  in  the  language  of  sailors,  they  polish 
the  Cape  by  beating  about  its  edges  so  long. 

Le  Maire  and  Schouten,  two  Dutchmen,  were  the  first 
navigators  who  weathered  Cape  Horn.  Previous  to  this, 
passages  had  been  made  to  the  Pacific  by  the  Straits  of 
Magellan  ;  nor,  indeed,  at  that  period,  was  it  known  to 
a  certainty  that  there  was  any  other  route,  or  that  the 
land  now  called  Tierra  del  Fuego  was  an  island.  A  few 
leagues  southward  from  Tierra  del  Fuego  is  a  cluster 
of  small  islands,  the  Diegoes  ;  between  which  and  the 
former  island  are  the  Straits  of  Le  Maire,  so  called  in 
honour  of  their  discoverer,  who  first  sailed  through  them 
into  the  Pacific.  Le  Maire  and  Schouten,  in  their  small, 
clumsy  vessels,  encountered  a  series  of  tremendous  gales, 
the  prelude  to  the  long  train  of  similar  hardships  which 
most  of  their  followers  have  experienced.  It  is  a  signi 
ficant  fact,  that  Schouten's  vessel,  the  Home,  which  gave 
its  name  to  the  Cape,  was  almost  lost  in  weathering  it. 

The  next  navigator  round  the  Cape  was  Sir  Francis 
Drake,  who,  on  Raleigh's  expedition,  beholding  for  the 
first  time,  from  the  Isthmus  of  Darien,  the  '  goodlie  South 
Sea,'  like  a  true-born  Englishman,  vowed,  please  God,  to 
sail  an  English  ship  thereon  ;  which  the  gallant  sailor 
did,  to  the  sore  discomfiture  of  the  Spaniards  on  the  coasts 
of  Chili  and  Peru. 

But  perhaps  the  greatest  hardships  on  record,  in 
making  this  celebrated  passage,  were  those  experienced 
by  Lord  Anson's  squadron  in  1736.  Three  remarkable 
and  most  interesting  narratives  record  their  disasters  and 
sufferings.  The  first,  jointly  written  by  the  carpenter 


124  WHITE  JACKET 

and  gunner  of  the  Wager  ;  the  second,  by  young  Byron, 
a  midshipman  in  the  same  ship  ;  the  third,  by  the  chap 
lain  of  the  Centurion.  White  Jacket  has  them  all ;  and 
they  are  fine  reading  of  a  boisterous  March  night,  with  the 
casement  rattling  in  your  ear,  and  the  chimney  stacks 
blowing  down  upon  the  pavement,  bubbling  with  rain 
drops. 

But  if  you  want  the  best  idea  of  Cape  Horn,  get  my 
friend  Dana's  unmatchable  Two  Years  Before  the  Mast. 
But  you  can  read,  and  so  you  must  have  read  it.  His 
chapters  describing  Cape  Horn  must  have  been  written 
with  an  icicle. 

At  the  present  day  the  horrors  of  the  Cape  have  some 
what  abated.  This  is  owing  to  a  growing  familiarity 
with  it ;  but,  more  than  all,  to  the  improved  condition 
of  ships  in  all  respects,  and  the  means  now  generally  in 
use  of  preserving  the  health  of  the  crews  in  times  of  severe 
and  prolonged  exposure. 


CHAPTER  XXV 

THE   DOG-DAYS   OFF   CAPE   HORN 

COLDER  and  colder  ;  we  are  drawing  nigh  to  the  Cape. 
Now  gregoes,  pea-jackets,  monkey  -jackets,  reefing- jackets, 
storm- jackets,  oil-jackets,  paint-jackets,  round  jackets, 
short  jackets,  long  jackets,  and  all  manner  of  jackets,  are 
the  order  of  the  day,  not  excepting  the  immortal  white 
jacket,  which  begins  to  be  sturdily  buttoned  up  to  the 
throat,  and  pulled  down  vigorously  at  the  skirts,  to  bring 
them  well  over  the  loins. 

But,  alas  !  those  skirts  were  lamentably  scanty  ;  and 
though,  with  its  quiltings,  the  jacket  was  stuffed  out 
about  the  breasts  like  a  Christmas  turkey,  and  of  a  dry 
cold  day  kept  the  wearer  warm  enough  in  that  vicinity, 
yet  about  the  loins  it  was  shorter  than  a  ballet-dancer's 
skirts  ;  so  that  while  my  chest  was  in  the  temperate  zone, 
close  adjoining  the  torrid,  my  hapless  thighs  were  in  Nova 
Zembla,  hardly  an  icicle's  toss  from  the  Pole. 

Then,  again,  the  repeated  soakings  and  dryings  it  had 
undergone  had  by  this  time  made  it  shrink  woefully  all 
over,  especially  in  the  arms,  so  that  the  wristbands  had 
gradually  crawled  up  near  to  the  elbows  ;  and  it  required 
an  energetic  thrust  to  push  the  arm  through,  in  drawing 
the  jacket  on. 

I  endeavoured  to  amend  these  misfortunes  by  sewing 
a  sort  of  canvas  ruffle  round  the  skirts,  by  way  of  a 
continuation  or  supplement  to  the  original  work,  and  by 
doing  the  same  with  the  wristbands. 

This  is  the  time  for  oil-skin  suits,  dread-naughts,  tarred 

125 


126  WHITE  JACKET 

trowsers  and  overalls,  sea-boots,  comforters,  mittens, 
woollen  socks,  Guernsey  frocks,  Havre  shirts,  buffalo-robe 
shirts,  and  moose-skin  drawers.  Every  man's  jacket  is 
his  wigwam,  and  every  man's  hat  his  caboose. 

Perfect  licence  is  now  permitted  to  the  men  respecting 
their  clothing.  Whatever  they  can  rake  and  scrape 
together  they  put  on — swaddling  themselves  in  old  sails, 
and  drawing  old  socks  over  their  heads  for  night-caps. 
This  is  the  time  for  smiting  your  chest  with  your  hand, 
and  talking  loud  to  keep  up  the  circulation. 

Colder,  and  colder,  and  colder,  till  at  last  we  spoke  a 
fleet  of  icebergs  bound  north.  After  that,  it  was  one 
incessant  '  cold  snap,1  that  almost  snapped  off  our  fingers 
and  toes.  Cold  !  It  was  cold  as  Blue  Flujin,  where 
sailors  say  fire  freezes. 

And  now  coming  up  with  the  latitude  of  the  Cape,  we 
stood  southward  to  give  it  a  wide  berth,  and  while  so 
doing  were  becalmed  ;  ay,  becalmed  off  Cape  Horn,  which 
is  worse,  far  worse,  than  being  becalmed  on  the  Line. 

Here  we  lay  forty -eight  hours,  during  which  the  cold 
was  intense.  I  wondered  at  the  liquid  sea,  which  refused 
to  freeze  in  such  a  temperature.  The  clear,  cold  sky 
overhead  looked  like  a  steel-blue  cymbal,  that  might  ring, 
could  you  smite  it.  Our  breath  came  and  went  like  puffs 
of  smoke  from  pipe -bowls.  At  first  there  was  a  long, 
gawky  swell,  that  obliged  us  to  furl  most  of  the  sails,  and 
even  send  down  t' -gallant-yards,  for  fear  of  pitching  them 
overboard. 

Out  of  sight  of  land,  at  this  extremity  of  both  the  in 
habitable  and  uninhabitable  world,  our  peopled  frigate, 
echoing  with  the  voices  of  men,  the  bleating  of  lambs, 
the  cackling  of  fowls,  the  gruntings  of  pigs,  seemed  like 
Noah's  old  ark  itself,  becalmed  at  the  climax  of  the 
Deluge. 

There  was  nothing  to  be  done  but  patiently  to  await 


THE  DOG-DAYS  OFF  CAPE  HORN          127 

the  pleasure  of  the  elements,  and  *  whistle  for  a  wind,' 
the  usual  practice  of  seamen  in  a  calm.  No  fire  was 
allowed,  except  for  the  indispensable  purpose  of  cooking, 
and  heating  bottles  of  water  to  toast  Selvagee's  feet.  He 
who  possessed  the  largest  stock  of  vitality  stood  the  best 
chance  to  escape  freezing.  It  was  horrifying.  In  such 
weather  any  man  could  have  undergone  amputation  with 
great  ease,  and  helped  take  up  the  arteries  himself. 

Indeed,  this  state  of  affairs  had  not  lasted  quite  twenty- 
four  hours,  when  the  extreme  frigidity  of  the  air,  united 
to  our  increased  tendency  to  inactivity,  would  very  soon 
have  rendered  some  of  us  subjects  for  the  surgeon  and 
his  mates,  had  not  a  humane  proceeding  of  the  captain 
suddenly  impelled  us  to  vigorous  exercise. 

And  here  be  it  said,  that  the  appearance  of  the  boat 
swain,  with  his  silver  whistle  to  his  mouth,  at  the  main- 
hatchway  of  the  gun-deck,  is  always  regarded  by  the 
crew  with  the  utmost  curiosity,  for  this  betokens  that 
some  general  order  is  about  to  be  promulgated  through 
the  ship.  What  now  ?  is  the  question  that  runs  on  from 
man  to  man.  A  short  preliminary  whistle  is  then  given 
by  '  Old  Yarn/  as  they  call  him,  which  whistle  serves  to 
collect  round  him,  from  their  various  stations,  his  four 
mates.  Then  Yarn,  or  Pipes,  as  leader  of  the  orchestra, 
begins  a  peculiar  call,  in  which  his  assistants  join.  This 
over,  the  order,  whatever  it  may  be,  is  loudly  sung  out 
and  prolonged,  till  the  remotest  corner  echoes  again. 
The  boatswain  and  his  mates  are  the  town-criers  of  a 
man-of-war. 

The  calm  had  commenced  in  the  afternoon  ;  and  the 
following  morning  the  ship's  company  were  electrified  by 
a  general  order,  thus  set  forth  and  declared  :  '  D'  ye  hear 
there,  fore  and  aft  !  all  hands  skylark  !  ' 

This  mandate,  nowadays  never  used  except  upon  very 
rare  occasions,  produced  the  same  effect  upon  the  men 


128  WHITE  JACKET 

that  exhilarating  gas  would  have  done,  or  an  extra  allow 
ance  of  grog.  For  a  time,  the  wonted  discipline  of  the 
ship  was  broken  through,  and  perfect  licence  allowed. 
It  was  a  Babel  here,  a  Bedlam  there,  and  a  Pandemonium 
everywhere.  The  theatricals  were  nothing  compared 
with  it.  Then  the  faint-hearted  and  timorous  crawled 
to  their  hiding-places,  and  the  lusty  and  bold  shouted 
forth  their  glee.  Gangs  of  men,  in  all  sorts  of  outlandish 
habiliments,  wild  as  those  worn  at  some  crazy  carnival, 
rushed  to  and  fro,  seizing  upon  whomsoever  they  pleased 
— warrant  officers  and  dangerous  pugilists  excepted — 
pulling  and  hauling  the  luckless  tars  about,  till  fairly 
baited  into  a  genial  warmth.  Some  were  made  fast  to, 
and  hoisted  aloft  with  a  will ;  others,  mounted  upon  oars, 
were  ridden  fore  and  aft  on  a  rail,  to  the  boisterous  mirth 
of  the  spectators,  any  one  of  whom  might  be  the  next 
victim.  Swings  were  rigged  from  the  tops,  or  the  masts  ; 
and  the  most  reluctant  wights  being  purposely  selected, 
spite  of  all  struggles,  were  swung  from  east  to  west,  in 
vast  arcs  of  circles,  till  almost  breathless.  Hornpipes, 
fandangoes,  Donny brook-jigs,  reels,  and  quadrilles  were 
danced  under  the  very  nose  of  the  most  mighty  captain, 
and  upon  the  very  quarter-deck  and  poop.  Sparring  and 
wrestling,  too,  were  all  the  vogue  ;  Kentucky  bites  were 
given,  and  the  Indian  hug  exchanged.  The  din  frightened 
the  sea-fowl,  that  flew  by  with  accelerated  wing. 

It  is  worth  mentioning  that  several  casualties  occurred, 
of  which,  however,  I  will  relate  but  one.  While  the 
1  skylarking  '  was  at  its  height,  one  of  the  fore-top  men 
— an  ugly-tempered  devil  of  a  Portuguese,  looking  on — 
swore  that  he  would  be  the  death  of  any  man  who  laid 
violent  hands  upon  his  inviolable  person.  This  threat 
being  overheard,  a  band  of  desperadoes,  coming  up  from 
behind,  tripped  him  up  in  an  instant,  and  in  the  twinkling 
of  an  eye  the  Portuguese  was  straddling  an  oar,  borne 


THE  DOG-DAYS  OFF  CAPE  HORN          129 

aloft  by  an  uproarious  multitude,  who  rushed  him  along 
the  deck  at  a  railroad  gallop.  The  living  mass  of  arms  all 
round  and  beneath  him  was  so  dense,  that  every  time  he 
inclined  to  one  side  he  was  instantly  pushed  upright,  but 
only  to  fall  over  again,  to  receive  another  push  from  the 
contrary  direction.  Presently,  disengaging  his  hands 
from  those  who  held  them,  the  enraged  seaman  drew 
from  his  bosom  an  iron  belaying-pin,  and  recklessly  laid 
about  him  to  right  and  left.  Most  of  his  persecutors  fled  ; 
but  some  eight  or  ten  still  stood  their  ground,  and,  while 
bearing  him  aloft,  endeavoured  to  wrest  the  weapon  from 
his  hands.  In  this  attempt  one  man  was  struck  on  the 
head,  and  dropped  insensible.  He  was  taken  up  for  dead, 
and  carried  below  to  Cuticle,  the  surgeon,  while  the 
Portuguese  was  put  under  guard.  But  the  wound  did 
not  prove  very  serious  ;  and  in  a  few  days  the  man  was 
walking  about  the  deck,  with  his  head  well  bandaged. 

This  occurrence  put  an  end  to  the  '  skylarking/  further 
head-breaking  being  strictly  prohibited.  In  due  time  the 
Portuguese  paid  the  penalty  of  his  rashness  at  the  gang 
way  ;  where  once  again  the  officers  shipped  their  quarter 
deck  faces. 


CHAPTER  XXVI 

THE   PITCH   OF   THE    CAPE 

ERE  the  calm  had  yet  left  us,  a  sail  had  been  discerned 
from  the  fore-top  mast-head,  at  a  great  distance,  probably 
three  leagues  or  more.  At  first  it  was  a  mere  speck, 
altogether  out  of  sight  from  the  deck.  By  the  force  of 
attraction,  or  something  else  equally  inscrutable,  two 
ships  in  a  calm,  and  equally  affected  by  the  currents,  will 
always  approximate,  more  or  less.  Though  there  was 
not  a  breath  of  wind,  it  was  not  a  great  while  before  the 
strange  sail  was  descried  from  our  bulwarks  ;  gradually, 
it  drew  still  nearer. 

What  was  she,  and  whence  ?  There  is  no  object  which 
so  excites  interest  and  conjecture,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
baffles  both,  as  a  sail,  seen  as  a  mere  speck  on  these  remote 
seas  off  Cape  Horn. 

A  breeze  !  a  breeze  !  for  lo  !  the  stranger  is  now  per 
ceptibly  nearing  the  frigate ;  the  officer's  spyglass 
pronounces  her  a  full-rigged  ship,  with  all  sail  set,  and 
coming  right  down  to  us,  though  in  our  own  vicinity  the 
calm  still  reigns. 

She  is  bringing  the  wind  with  her.  Hurrah  !  Ay, 
there  it  is  !  Behold  how  mincingly  it  creeps  over  the 
sea,  just  ruffling  and  crisping  it. 

Our  topmen  were  at  once  sent  aloft  to  loose  the  sails, 
and  presently  they  faintly  began  to  distend.  As  yet  we 
hardly  had  steerage-way.  Toward  sunset  the  stranger 
bore  down  before  the  wind,  a  complete  pyramid  of  canvas. 
Never  before,  I  venture  to  say,  was  Cape  Horn  so  audaci- 

130 


THE  PITCH  OF  THE  CAPE  131 

ously  insulted.  Stun'-sails  alow  and  aloft ;  royals,  moon- 
sails,  and  everything  else.  She  glided  under  our  stern, 
within  hailing  distance,  and  the  signal-quarter-master  ran 
up  our  ensign  to  the  gaff. 

c  Ship  ahoy !  '  cried  the  lieutenant  of  the  watch, 
through  his  trumpet. 

'  Halloa  !  '  bawled  an  old  fellow  in  a  green  jacket, 
clapping  one  hand  to  his  mouth,  while  he  held  on  with  the 
other  to  the  mizen-shrouds. 

'  What  ship  's  that  ?  ' 

'  The  Sultan,  Indiaman,  from  New  York,  and  bound 
to  Callao  and  Canton,  sixty  days  out,  all  well.  What 
frigate  's  that  ?  ' 

'  The  United  States  ship  Neversink,  homeward  bound.' 

'  Hurrah  !  hurrah  !  hurrah  !  '  yelled  our  enthusiastic 
countryman,  transported  with  patriotism. 

By  this  time  the  Sultan  had  swept  past,  but  the 
lieutenant  of  the  watch  could  not  withhold  a  parting 
admonition. 

'  D'  ye  hear  ?  You  'd  better  take  in  some  of  your 
flying -kites  there.  Look  out  for  Cape  Horn  !  ' 

But  the  friendly  advice  was  lost  in  the  now  increasing 
wind.  With  a  suddenness  by  no  means  unusual  in  these 
latitudes,  the  light  breeze  soon  became  a  succession  of 
sharp  squalls,  and  our  sail-proud  braggadocio  of  an 
Indiaman  was  observed  to  let  everything  go  by  the  run, 
his  t' -gallant  stun' -sails  and  flying- jib  taking  quick  leave 
of  the  spars  ;  the  flying- jib  was  swept  into  the  air,  rolled 
together  for  a  few  minutes,  and  tossed  about  in  the  squalls 
like  a  football.  But  the  wind  played  no  such  pranks 
with  the  more  prudently  managed  canvas  of  the  Never 
sink,  though  before  many  hours  it  was  stirring  times 
with  us. 

About  midnight,  when  the  starboard  watch,  to  which 
I  belonged,  was  below,  the  boatswain's  whistle  was  heard, 


132  WHITE  JACKET 

followed  by  the  shrill  cry  for  '  All  hands  take  in  sail !  jump, 
men,  and  save  ship  !  ' 

Springing  from  our  hammocks,  we  found  the  frigate 
leaning  over  to  it  so  steeply,  that  it  was  with  difficulty 
we  could  climb  the  ladders  leading  to  the  upper  deck. 

Here  the  scene  was  awful.  The  vessel  seemed  to  be 
sailing  on  her  side.  The  main-deck  guns  had  several 
days  previously  been  run  in  and  housed,  and  the  port 
holes  closed,  but  the  lee  carronades  on  the  quarter-deck 
and  forecastle  were  plunging  through  the  sea,  which 
undulated  over  them  in  milk-white  billows  of  foam. 
With  every  lurch  to  leeward  the  yard-arm  ends  seemed 
to  dip  in  the  sea,  while  forward  the  spray  dashed  over 
the  bows  in  cataracts,  and  drenched  the  men  who  were 
on  the  fore-yard.  By  this  time  the  deck  was  alive  with 
the  whole  strength  of  the  ship's  company,  five  hundred 
men,  officers  and  all,  mostly  clinging  to  the  weather 
bulwarks.  The  occasional  phosphorescence  of  the  yeast- 
ing  sea  cast  a  glare  upon  their  uplifted  faces,  as  a  night 
fire  in  a  populous  city  lights  up  the  panic-stricken  crowd. 

In  a  sudden  gale,  or  when  a  large  quantity  of  sail  is 
suddenly  to  be  furled,  it  is  the  custom  for  the  first 
lieutenant  to  take  the  trumpet  from  whoever  happens 
then  to  be  officer  of  the  deck.  But  Mad  Jack  had  the 
trumpet  that  watch  ;  nor  did  the  first  lieutenant  now 
seek  to  wrest  it  from  his  hands.  Every  eye  was  upon 
him,  as  if  we  had  chosen  him  from  among  us  all,  to 
decide  this  battle  with  the  elements,  by  single  combat 
with  the  spirit  of  the  Cape  ;  for  Mad  Jack  was  the  saving 
genius  of  the  ship,  and  so  proved  himself  that  night. 
I  owe  this  right  hand,  that  is  this  moment  flying  over 
my  sheet,  and  all  my  present  being  to  Mad  Jack.  The 
ship's  bows  were  now  butting,  battering,  ramming,  and 
thundering  over  and  upon  the  head  seas,  and  with  a 
horrible  wallowing  sound  our  whole  hull  was  rolling  in 


THE  PITCH  OF  THE  CAPE  133 

the  trough  of  the  foam.     The  gale  came  athwart  the  deck, 
and  every  sail  seemed  bursting  with  its  wild  breath. 

All  the  quarter-masters,  and  several  of  the  forecastle 
men,  were  swarming  round  the  double-wheel  on  the 
quarter-deck.  Some  jumping  up  and  down,  with  their 
hands  upon  the  spokes  ;  for  the  whole  helm  and  gal 
vanised  keel  were  fiercely  feverish  with  the  life  imparted 
to  them  by  the  tempest. 

'  Hard  up  the  helm  !  '  shouted  Captain  Claret,  bursting 
from  his  cabin  like  a  ghost,  in  his  nightdress. 

'  Damn  you  !  '  raged  Mad  Jack  to  the  quarter-masters  ; 
'  hard  down — hard  down,  I  say,  and  be  damned  to  you  !  ' 

Contrary  orders  !  but  Mad  Jack's  were  obeyed.  His 
object  was  to  throw  the  ship  into  the  wind,  so  as  the 
better  to  admit  of  close-reefing  the  topsails.  But  though 
the  halyards  were  let  go,  it  was  impossible  to  clew  down 
the  yards,  owing  to  the  enormous  horizontal  strain  on 
the  canvas.  It  now  blew  a  hurricane.  The  spray  flew 
over  the  ship  in  floods.  The  gigantic  masts  seemed  about 
to  snap  under  the  world-wide  strain  of  the  three  entire 
topsails. 

'  Clew  down  !  clew  down  !  '  shouted  Mad  Jack,  husky 
with  excitement,  and  in  a  frenzy,  beating  his  trumpet 
against  one  of  the  shrouds.  But,  owing  to  the  slant  of 
the  ship,  the  thing  could  not  be  done.  It  was  obvious 
that  before  many  minutes  something  must  go — either 
sails,  rigging,  or  sticks  ;  perhaps  the  hull  itself,  and  all 
hands. 

Presently  a  voice  from  the  top  exclaimed  that  there 
was  a  rent  in  the  main-topsail.  And  instantly  we  heard 
a  report  like  two  or  three  muskets  discharged  together  ; 
the  vast  sail  was  rent  up  and  down  like  the  Veil  of  the 
Temple.  This  saved  the  mainmast ;  for  the  yard  was 
now  clewed  down  with  comparative  ease,  and  the  top- 
men  laid  out  to  stow  the  shattered  canvas.  Soon,  the 


134  WHITE  JACKET 

two  remaining  topsails  were  also  clewed  down  and  close- 
reefed. 

Above  all  the  roar  of  the  tempest  and  the  shouts  of 
the  crew  was  heard  the  dismal  tolling  of  the  ship's  bell 
— almost  as  large  as  that  of  a  village  church — which  the 
violent  rolling  of  the  ship  was  occasioning.  Imagination 
cannot  conceive  the  horror  of  such  a  sound  in  a  night 
tempest  at  sea. 

'  Stop  that  ghost !  '  roared  Mad  Jack  ;  '  away,  one  of 
you,  and  wrench  off  the  clapper  !  ' 

But  no  sooner  was  this  ghost  gagged,  than  a  still  more 
appalling  sound  was  heard,  the  rolling  to  and  fro  of  the 
heavy  shot,  which,  on  the  gun-deck,  had  broken  loose 
from  the  gun-racks,  and  converted  that  part  of  the  ship 
into  an  immense  bowling-alley.  Some  hands  were  sent 
down  to  secure  them  ;  but  it  was  as  much  as  their  lives 
were  worth.  Several  were  maimed  ;  and  the  midship 
men  who  were  ordered  to  see  the  duty  performed  reported 
it  impossible,  until  the  storm  abated. 

The  most  terrific  job  of  all  was  to  furl  the  mainsail, 
which,  at  the  commencement  of  the  squalls,  had  been 
clewed  up,  coaxed  and  quieted  as  much  as  possible  with 
the  bunt-lines  and  slab -lines.  Mad  Jack  waited  some 
time  for  a  lull,  ere  he  gave  an  order  so  perilous  to  be 
executed.  For  to  furl  this  enormous  sail,  in  such  a  gale, 
required  at  least  fifty  men  on  the  yard  ;  whose  weight, 
superadded  to  that  of  the  ponderous  stick  itself,  still 
further  jeopardised  their  lives.  But  there  was  no  pros 
pect  of  a  cessation  of  the  gale,  and  the  order  was  at  last 
given. 

At  this  time  a  hurricane  of  slanting  sleet  and  hail  was 
descending  upon  us  ;  the  rigging  was  coated  with  a  thin 
glare  of  ice,  formed  within  the  hour. 

'  Aloft,  main-yard  men  !  and  all  you  main-top  men  ! 
and  furl  the  mainsail !  '  cried  Mad  Jack. 


THE  PITCH  OF  THE  CAPE  135 

I  dashed  down  my  hat,  slipped  out  of  my  quilted 
jacket  in  an  instant,  kicked  the  shoes  from  my  feet,  and, 
with  a  crowd  of  others,  sprang  for  the  rigging.  Above 
the  bulwarks  (which  in  a  frigate  are  so  high  as  to  afford 
much  protection  to  those  on  deck)  the  gale  was  horrible. 
The  sheer  force  of  the  wind  flattened  us  to  the  rigging 
as  we  ascended,  and  every  hand  seemed  congealing  to 
the  icy  shrouds  by  which  we  held. 

'  Up — up,  my  brave  hearties  !  '  shouted  Mad  Jack  ; 
and  up  we  got,  some  way  or  other,  all  of  us,  and  groped 
our  way  out  on  the  yard-arms. 

'  Hold  on,  every  mother's  son  !  '  cried  an  old  quarter- 
gunner  at  my  side.  He  was  bawling  at  the  top  of  his 
compass  ;  but  in  the  gale,  he  seemed  to  be  whispering  ; 
and  I  only  heard  him  from  his  being  right  to  windward 
of  me. 

But  his  hint  was  unnecessary  ;  I  dug  my  nails  into 
the  jack-stays,  and  swore  that  nothing  but  death  should 
part  me  and  them  until  I  was  able  to  turn  round  and 
look  to  windward.  As  yet,  this  was  impossible  ;  I  could 
scarcely  hear  the  man  to  leeward  at  my  elbow  ;  the 
wind  seemed  to  snatch  the  words  from  his  mouth  and 
fly  away  with  them  to  the  South  Pole. 

All  this  while  the  sail  itself  was  flying  about,  some 
times  catching  over  our  head,  and  threatening  to  tear 
us  from  the  yard  in  spite  of  all  our  hugging.  For  about 
three-quarters  of  an  hour  we  thus  hung  suspended  right 
over  the  rampant  billows,  which  curled  their  very  crests 
under  the  feet  of  some  four  or  five  of  us  clinging  to  the 
lee  yard-arm,  as  if  to  float  us  from  our  place. 

Presently,  the  word  passed  along  the  yard  from  wind 
ward,  that  we  were  ordered  to  come  down  and  leave  the 
sail  to  blow,  since  it  could  not  be  furled.  A  midshipman, 
it  seemed,  had  been  sent  up  by  the  officer  of  the  deck  to 
give  the  order,  as  no  trumpet  could  be  heard  where  we  were. 


136  WHITE  JACKET 

Those  on  the  weather  yard-arm  managed  to  crawl 
upon  the  spar  and  scramble  down  the  rigging  ;  but  with 
us,  upon  the  extreme  leeward  side,  this  feat  was  out  of 
the  question  ;  it  was,  literally,  like  climbing  a  precipice 
to  get  to  windward  in  order  to  reach  the  shrouds  ;  besides, 
the  entire  yard  was  now  encased  in  ice,  and  our  hands 
and  feet  were  so  numb  that  we  dare  not  trust  our  lives 
to  them.  Nevertheless,  by  assisting  each  other,  we 
contrived  to  throw  ourselves  prostrate  along  the  yard, 
and  embrace  it  with  our  arms  and  legs.  In  this  position, 
the  stun'-sail-booms  greatly  assisted  in  securing  our  hold. 
Strange  as  it  may  appear,  I  do  not  suppose  that,  at  this 
moment,  the  slightest  sensation  of  fear  was  felt  by  one 
man  on  that  yard.  We  clung  to  it  with  might  and  main  ; 
but  this  was  instinct.  The  truth  is  that,  in  circumstances 
like  these,  the  sense  of  fear  is  annihilated  in  the  unutter 
able  sights  that  fill  all  the  eye.  and  the  sounds  that 
fill  all  the  ear.  You  become  identified  with  the  tem 
pest  ;  your  insignificance  is  lost  in  the  riot  of  the  stormy 
universe  around. 

Below  us,  our  noble  frigate  seemed  thrice  its  real 
length — a  vast  black  wedge,  opposing  its  widest  end  to 
the  combined  fury  of  the  sea  and  wind. 

At  length  the  first  fury  of  the  gale  began  to  abate, 
and  we  at  once  fell  to  pounding  our  hands,  as  a  pre 
liminary  operation  to  going  to  work  ;  for  a  gang  of  men 
had  now  ascended  to  help  secure  what  was  left  of  the 
sail ;  we  somehow  packed  it  away,  at  last,  and  came 
down. 

About  noon  the  next  day,  the  gale  so  moderated  that 
we  shook  two  reefs  out  of  the  topsails,  set  new  courses, 
and  stood  due  east,  with  the  wind  astern. 

Thus,  all  the  fine  weather  we  encountered  after  first 
weighing  anchor  on  the  pleasant  Spanish  coast  was  but 
the  prelude  to  this  one  terrific  night ;  more  especially. 


THE  PITCH  OF  THE  CAPE  137 

that  treacherous  calm  immediately  preceding  it.  But 
how  could  we  reach  our  long-promised  homes  without 
encountering  Cape  Horn  ?  by  what  possibility  avoid  it  ? 
And  though  some  ships  have  weathered  it  without 
these  perils,  yet  by  far  the  greater  part  must  encounter 
them.  Lucky  it  is  that  it  comes  about  midway  in  the 
homeward-bound  passage,  so  that  the  sailors  have  time 
to  prepare  for  it,  and  time  to  recover  from  it  after  it  is 
astern. 

But,  sailor  or  landsman,  there  is  some  sort  of  a  Cape 
Horn  for  all.  Boys  !  beware  of  it ;  prepare  for  it  in 
time.  Gray  beards  !  thank  God  it  is  passed.  And  ye 
lucky  livers,  to  whom,  by  some  rare  fatality,  your  Cape 
Horns  are  placid  as  Lake  Lemans,  flatter  not  yourselves 
that  good  luck  is  judgment  and  discretion  ;  for  all  the 
yolk  in  your  eggs,  you  might  have  foundered  and  gone 
down,  had  the  Spirit  of  the  Cape  said  the  word. 


CHAPTER  XXVII 

SOME  THOUGHTS  GROWING  OUT  OF  MAD  JACK'S 


IN  time  of  peril,  like  the  needle  to  the  loadstone,  obedi 
ence,  irrespective  of  rank,  generally  flies  to  him  who  is 
best  fitted  to  command.  The  truth  of  this  seemed 
evinced  in  the  case  of  Mad  Jack,  during  the  gale,  and 
especially  at  that  perilous  moment  when  he  counter 
manded  the  captain's  order  at  the  helm.  But  every 
seaman  knew,  at  the  time,  that  the  captain's  order  was  an 
unwise  one  in  the  extreme  ;  perhaps  worse  than  unwise. 

These  two  orders,  given  by  the  captain  and  his  lieu 
tenant,  exactly  contrasted  their  characters.  By  putting 
the  helm  hard  up,  the  captain  was  for  scudding ;  that 
is,  for  flying  away  from  the  gale.  Whereas,  Mad  Jack 
was  for  running  the  ship  into  its  teeth.  It  is  needless 
to  say  that,  in  almost  all  cases  of  similar  hard  squalls 
and  gales,  the  latter  step,  though  attended  with  more 
appalling  appearances,  is,  in  reality,  the  safer  of  the 
two,  and  the  most  generally  adopted. 

Scudding  makes  you  a  slave  to  the  blast,  which  drives 
you  headlong  before  it ;  but  running  up  into  the  wind's 
eye  enables  you,  in  a  degree,  to  hold  it  at  bay.  Scudding 
exposes  to  the  gale  your  stern,  the  weakest  part  of  your 
hull ;  the  contrary  course  presents  to  it  your  bows,  your 
strongest  part.  As  with  ships,  so  with  men  ;  he  who 
turns  his  back  to  his  foe  gives  him  an  advantage.  Where 
as,  our  ribbed  chests,  like  the  ribbed  bows  of  a  frigate, 
are  as  bulkheads  to  dam  off  an  onset. 

138 


COUNTERMANDING  A  SUPERIOR'S  ORDER    139 

That  night,  off  the  pitch  of  the  Cape,  Captain  Claret 
was  hurried  forth  from  his  disguises,  and,  at  a  manhood- 
testing  conjuncture,  appeared  in  his  true  colours.  A 
thing  which  every  man  in  the  ship  had  long  suspected 
that  night  was  proved  true.  Hitherto,  in  going  about 
the  ship,  and  casting  his  glances  among  the  men,  the 
peculiarly  lustreless  repose  of  the  captain's  eye — his 
slow,  even,  unnecessarily  methodical  step,  and  the  forced 
firmness  of  his  whole  demeanour — though,  to  a  casual 
observer,  seemingly  expressive  of  the  consciousness  of 
command  and  a  desire  to  strike  subjection  among  the 
crew — all  this,  to  some  minds,  had  only  been  deemed 
indications  of  the  fact  that  Captain  Claret,  while  care 
fully  shunning  positive  excesses,  continually  kept  him 
self  in  an  uncertain  equilibrio  between  soberness  and 
its  reverse  ;  which  equilibrio  might  be  destroyed  by  the 
first  sharp  vicissitude  of  events. 

And  though  this  is  only  a  surmise,  nevertheless,  as 
having  some  knowledge  of  brandy  and  mankind,  White 
Jacket  will  venture  to  state  that,  had  Captain  Claret 
been  an  out-and-out  temperance  man,  he  would  never 
have  given  that  most  imprudent  order  to  hard  up  the 
helm.  He  would  either  have  held  his  peace,  and  stayed 
in  his  cabin,  like  his  gracious  majesty  the  commodore, 
or  else  have  anticipated  Mad  Jack's  order,  and  thun 
dered  forth  '  Hard  down  the  helm  !  ' 

To  show  how  little  real  sway  at  times  have  the  severest 
restrictive  laws,  and  how  spontaneous  is  the  instinct  of 
discretion  in  some  minds,  it  must  here  be  added,  that 
though  Mad  Jack,  under  a  hot  impulse,  had  counter 
manded  an  order  of  his  superior  officer  before  his  very 
face,  yet  that  severe  Article  of  War,  to  which  he  thus 
rendered  himself  obnoxious,  was  never  enforced  against 
him.  Nor,  so  far  as  any  of  the  crew  ever  knew,  did  the 
captain  even  venture  to  reprimand  him  for  his  temerity. 


140  WHITE  JACKET 

It  has  been  said  that  Mad  Jack  himself  was  a  lover 
of  strong  drink.  So  he  was.  But  here  we  only  see  the 
virtue  of  being  placed  in  a  station  constantly  demanding 
a  cool  head  and  steady  nerves,  and  the  misfortune  of 
filling  a  post  that  does  not  at  all  times  demand  these 
qualities.  So  exact  and  methodical  in  most  things  was 
the  discipline  of  the  frigate,  that  to  a  certain  extent, 
Captain  Claret  was  exempted  from  personal  interposition 
in  many  of  its  current  events,  and  thereby,  perhaps, 
was  he  lulled  into  security,  under  the  enticing  lee  of  his 
decanter. 

But  as  for  Mad  Jack,  he  must  stand  his  regular  watches, 
and  pace  the  quarter-deck  at  night,  and  keep  a  sharp 
eye  to  windward.  Hence,  at  sea,  Mad  Jack  tried  to  make 
a  point  of  keeping  sober,  though  in  very  fine  weather  he 
was  sometimes  betrayed  into  a  glass  too  many.  But 
with  Cape  Horn  before  him,  he  took  the  temperance 
pledge  outright,  till  that  perilous  promontory  should  be 
far  astern. 

The  leading  incident  of  the  gale  irresistibly  invites  the 
question,  Are  there  incompetent  officers  in  the  American 
Navy  ? — that  is,  incompetent  to  the  due  performance  of 
whatever  duties  may  devolve  upon  them.  But  in  that 
gallant  marine,  which,  during  the  late  war,  gained  so 
much  of  what  is  called  glory,  can  there  possibly  be  to-day 
incompetent  officers  ? 

As  in  the  camp  ashore,  so  on  the  quarter-deck  at  sea 
— the  trumpets  of  one  victory  drown  the  muffled  drums 
of  a  thousand  defeats.  And,  in  degree,  this  holds  true 
of  those  events  of  war  which  are  neuter  in  their  character, 
neither  making  renown  nor  disgrace.  Besides,  as  a  long 
array  of  ciphers,  led  by  but  one  solitary  numeral,  swell, 
by  mere  force  of  aggregation,  into  an  immense  arith 
metical  sum  ;  even  so,  in  some  brilliant  actions,  do  a 
crowd  of  officers,  each  inefficient  in  himself,  aggregate 


COUNTERMANDING  A  SUPERIOR'S  ORDER     141 

renown  when  banded  together,  and  led  by  a  numeral 
Nelson  or  a  Wellington.  And  the  renown  of  such  heroes, 
by  outliving  themselves,  descends  as  a  heritage  to  their 
subordinate  survivors.  One  large  brain  and  one  large 
heart  have  virtue  sufficient  to  magnetise  a  whole  fleet  or 
an  army.  And  if  all  the  men  who,  since  the  beginning 
of  the  world,  have  mainly  contributed  to  the  warlike  suc 
cesses  or  reverses  of  nations,  were  now  mustered  together, 
we  should  be  amazed  to  behold  but  a  handful  of  heroes. 
For  there  is  no  heroism  in  merely  running  in  and  out  a 
gun  at  a  port-hole,  enveloped  in  smoke  or  vapour,  or 
in  firing  off  muskets  in  platoons  at  the  word  of  command. 
This  kind  of  merely  manual  valour  is  often  born  of  trepi 
dation  at  the  heart.  There  may  be  men,  individually 
craven,  who,  united,  may  display  even  temerity.  Yet  it 
would  be  false  to  deny  that,  in  some  instances,  the  lowest 
privates  have  acquitted  themselves  with  even  more 
gallantry  than  their  commodores.  True  heroism  is  not 
in  the  hand,  but  in  the  heart  and  the  head. 

But  are  there  incompetent  officers  in  the  gallant 
American  Navy  ?  For  an  American,  the  question  is  of 
no  grateful  cast.  White  Jacket  must  again  evade  it,  by 
referring  to  an  historical  fact  in  the  history  of  a  kindred 
marine,  which,  from  its  long  standing  and  magnitude, 
furnishes  many  more  examples  of  all  kinds  than  our  own. 
And  this  is  the  only  reason  why  it  is  ever  referred  to  in 
this  narrative.  I  thank  God  I  am  free  from  all  national 
invidiousness. 

It  is  indirectly  on  record  in  the  books  of  the  English 
Admiralty,  that  in  the  year  1808 — after  the  death  of 
Lord  Nelson — when  Lord  Collingwood  commanded  on 
the  Mediterranean  station,  and  his  broken  health  induced 
him  to  solicit  a  furlough,  that  out  of  a  list  of  upward  of 
one  hundred  admirals,  not  a  single  officer  was  found  who 
was  deemed  qualified  to  relieve  the  applicant  with  credit 


142  WHITE  JACKET 

to  the  country.  This  fact  Colling  wood  sealed  with  his 
life  ;  for,  hopeless  of  being  recalled,  he  shortly  after  died, 
worn  out,  at  his  post.  Now,  if  this  was  the  case  in  so 
renowned  a  marine  as  England's,  what  must  be  inferred 
with  respect  to  our  own  ?  But  herein  no  special  disgrace 
is  involved.  For  the  truth  is,  that  to  be  an  accom 
plished  and  skilful  naval  generalissimo  needs  natural 
capabilities  of  an  uncommon  order.  Still  more,  it  may 
safely  be  asserted,  that,  worthily  to  command  even  a 
frigate,  requires  a  degree  of  natural  heroism,  talent, 
judgment,  and  integrity,  that  is  denied  to  mediocrity. 
Yet  these  qualifications  are  not  only  required,  but  de 
manded  ;  and  no  one  has  a  right  to  be  a  naval  captain 
unless  he  possesses  them. 

Regarding  lieutenants,  there  are  not  a  few  Selvagees 
and  Paper  Jacks  in  the  American  Navy.  Many  com 
modores  know  that  they  have  seldom  taken  a  line-of- 
battle  ship  to  sea  without  feeling  more  or  less  nervous 
ness  when  some  of  the  lieutenants  have  the  deck  at 
night. 

According  to  the  last  Navy  Register  (1849),  there  are 
now  68  captains  in  the  American  Navy,  collectively  draw 
ing  about  300,000  dollars  annually  from  the  public  trea 
sury  ;  also,  297  commanders,  drawing  about  200,000 
dollars ;  and  377  lieutenants,  drawing  about  half  a  million ; 
and  451  midshipmen  (including  passed-midshipmen),  also 
drawing  nearly  half  a  million.  Considering  the  known 
facts,  that  some  of  these  officers  are  seldom  or  never 
sent  to  sea,  owing  to  the  Navy  Department  being  well 
aware  of  their  inefficiency  ;  that  others  are  detailed  for 
pen-and-ink  work  at  observatories,  and  solvers  of  loga 
rithms  in  the  Coast  Survey  ;  while  the  really  meritorious 
officers,  who  are  accomplished  practical  seamen,  are 
known  to  be  sent  from  ship  to  ship,  with  but  a  small 
interval  of  a  furlough  ;  considering  all  this,  it  is  not  too 


COUNTERMANDING  A  SUPERIOR'S  ORDER    143 

much  to  say  that  no  small  portion  of  the  million  and 
a  half  of  money  above  mentioned  is  annually  paid  to 
national  pensioners  in  disguise,  who  live  on  the  Navy 
without  serving  it. 

Nothing  like  this  can  be  even  insinuated  against  the 
forward  officers — boatswains,  gunners,  etc. ;  nor  against 
the  petty  officers — captains  of  the  tops,  etc.  ;  nor  against 
the  able  seamen  in  the  Navy.  For  if  any  of  these  are 
found  wanting,  they  are  forthwith  disrated  or  discharged. 

True,  all  experience  teaches,  that  whenever  there  is 
a  great  national  establishment,  employing  large  numbers 
of  officials,  the  public  must  be  reconciled  to  support  many 
incompetent  men ;  for  such  is  the  favouritism  and 
nepotism  always  prevailing  in  the  purlieus  of  these 
establishments,  that  some  incompetent  persons  are 
always  admitted,  to  the  exclusion  of  many  of  the  worthy. 

Nevertheless,  in  a  country  like  ours,  boasting  of  the 
political  equality  of  all  social  conditions,  it  is  a  great 
reproach  that  such  a  thing  as  a  common  seaman  rising 
to  the  rank  of  a  commissioned  officer  in  our  Narvy  is 
nowadays  almost  unheard  of.  Yet,  in  former  times, 
when  officers  have  so  risen  to  rank,  they  have  generally 
proved  of  signal  usefulness  in  the  service,  and  sometimes 
have  reflected  solid  honour  upon  the  country.  Instances 
in  point  might  be  mentioned. 

Is  it  not  well  to  have  our  institutions  of  a  piece  ? 
Any  American  landsman  may  hope  to  become  President 
of  the  Union — commodore  of  our  squadron  of  states. 
And  every  American  sailor  should  be  placed  in  such  a 
position,  that  he  might  freely  aspire  to  command  a 
squadron  of  frigates. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII 

EDGING   AWAY 

RIGHT  before  the  wind  !  Ay,  blow,  blow,  ye  breezes  ; 
so  long  as  ye  stay  fair,  and  we  are  homeward  bound, 
what  care  the  jolly  crew  ? 

It  is  worth  mentioning  here  that,  in  nineteen  cases 
out  of  twenty,  a  passage  from  the  Pacific  round  the 
Cape  is  almost  sure  to  be  much  shorter,  and  attended 
with  less  hardship,  than  a  passage  undertaken  from  the 
Atlantic.  The  reason  is,  that  the  gales  are  mostly  from 
the  westward,  also  the  currents. 

But,  after  all,  going  before  the  wind  in  a  frigate,  in 
such  a  tempest,  has  its  annoyances  and  drawbacks,  as 
well  as  many  other  blessings.  The  disproportionate 
weight  of  metal  upon  the  spar  and  gun  decks  induces 
a  violent  rolling,  unknown  to  merchant  ships.  We 
rolled  and  rolled  on  our  way,  like  the  world  in  its  orbit, 
shipping  green  seas  on  both  sides,  until  the  old  frigate 
dipped  and  went  into  it  like  a  diving-bell. 

The  hatchways  of  some  armed  vessels  are  but  poorly 
secured  in  bad  weather.  This  was  peculiarly  the  case 
with  those  of  the  Never  sink.  They  were  merely  spread 
over  with  an  old  tarpaulin,  cracked  and  rent  in  every 
direction. 

In  fair  weather,  the  ship's  company  messed  on  the 
gun-deck  ;  but  as  this  was  now  flooded  almost  continu 
ally,  we  were  obliged  to  take  our  meals  upon  the  berth- 
deck,  the  next  one  below.  One  day,  the  messes  of  the 
starboard  watch  were  seated  here  at  dinner  ;  forming 

144 


EDGING  AWAY  145 

little  groups,  twelve  or  fifteen  men  in  each,  reclining 
about  the  beef -kids  and  their  pots  and  pans  ;  when  all 
of  a  sudden  the  ship  was  seized  with  such  a  paroxysm 
of  rolling  that,  in  a  single  instant,  everything  on  the 
berth-deck — pots,  kids,  sailors,  pieces  of  beef,  bread- 
bags,  clothes-bags,  and  barges — were  tossed  indiscrimin 
ately  from  side  to  side.  It  was  impossible  to  stay  one's 
self  ;  there  was  nothing  but  the  bare  deck  to  cling  to, 
which  was  slippery  with  the  contents  of  the  kids,  and 
heaving  under  us  as  if  there  were  a  volcano  in  the  frigate's 
hold.  While  we  were  yet  sliding  in  uproarious  crowds — 
all  seated — the  windows  of  the  deck  opened,  and  floods 
of  brine  descended,  simultaneously  with  a  violent  lee- 
roll.  The  shower  was  hailed  by  the  reckless  tars  with  a 
hurricane  of  yells  ;  although,  for  an  instant,  I  really 
imagined  we  were  about  being  swamped  in  the  sea,  such 
volumes  of  water  came  cascading  down. 

A  day  or  two  after,  we  had  made  sufficient  easting  to 
stand  to  the  northward,  which  we  did,  with  the  wind 
astern  ;  thus  fairly  turning  the  corner  without  abating 
our  rate  of  progress.  Though  we  had  seen  no  land 
since  leaving  Callao,  Cape  Horn  was  said  to  be  some 
where  to  the  west  of  us  ;  and  though  there  was  no 
positive  evidence  of  the  fact,  the  weather  encountered 
might  be  accounted  pretty  good  presumptive  proof. 

The  land  near  Cape  Horn,  however,  is  well  worth 
seeing,  especially  Staten  Land.  Upon  one  occasion, 
the  ship  in  which  I  then  happened  to  be  sailing  drew 
near  this  place  from  the  northward,  with  a  fair,  free 
wind,  blowing  steadily,  through  a  bright  translucent 
day,  whose  air  was  almost  musical  with  the  clear,  glit 
tering  cold.  On  our  starboard  beam,  like  a  pile  of 
glaciers  in  Switzerland,  lay  this  Staten  Land,  gleaming 
in  snow-white  barrenness  and  solitude.  Unnumbered 
white  albatross  were  skimming  the  sea  near  by.  and 

K 


146  WHITE  JACKET 

clouds  of  smaller  white  wings  fell  through  the  air  like 
snowflakes.  High,  towering  in  their  own  turbaned 
snows,  the  far  inland  pinnacles  loomed  up,  like  the 
border  of  some  other  world.  Flashing  walls  and  crystal 
battlements,  like  the  diamond  watch-towers  along 
heaven's  furthest  frontier. 

After  leaving  the  latitude  of  the  Cape,  we  had  several 
storms  of  snow  ;  one  night  a  considerable  quantity  laid 
upon  the  decks,  and  some  of  the  sailors  enjoyed  the 
juvenile  diversion  of  snowballing.  Woe  unto  the 
'  middy  '  who  that  night  went  forward  of  the  booms. 
Such  a  target  for  snowballs  !  The  throwers  could  never 
be  known.  By  some  curious  sleight  in  hurling  the 
missiles,  they  seemed  to  be  thrown  on  board  by  some 
hoydenish  sea-nymphs  outside  the  frigate. 

At  daybreak  Midshipman  Pert  went  below  to  the 
surgeon  with  an  alarming  wound,  gallantly  received  in 
discharging  his  perilous  duty  on  the  forecastle.  The 
officer  of  the  deck  had  sent  him  on  an  errand,  to  tell 
the  boatswain  that  he  was  wanted  in  the  captain's  cabin. 
While  in  the  very  act  of  performing  the  exploit  of 
delivering  the  message,  Mr.  Pert  was  struck  on  the 
nose  with  a  snowball  of  wondrous  compactness.  Upon 
being  informed  of  the  disaster,  the  rogues  expressed  the 
liveliest  sympathy.  Pert  was  no  favourite. 

After  one  of  these  storms,  it  was  a  curious  sight  to 
see  the  men  relieving  the  uppermost  deck  of  its  load  of 
snow.  It  became  the  duty  of  the  captain  of  each  gun 
to  keep  his  own  station  clean  ;  accordingly,  with  an  old 
broom,  or  '  squilgee,'  he  proceeded  to  business,  often 
quarrelling  with  his  next-door  neighbours  about  their 
scraping  their  snow  on  his  premises.  It  was  like  Broad 
way  in  winter,  the  morning  after  a  storm,  when  rival 
shop -boys  are  at  work  cleaning  the  sidewalk. 

Now  and  then,  by  way  of  variety,  we  had  a  fall  of 


EDGING  AWAY  147 

hailstones,  so  big  that  sometimes  we  found  ourselves 
dodging  them. 

The  commodore  had  a  Polynesian  servant  on  board, 
whose  services  he  had  engaged  at  the  Society  Islands. 
Unlike  his  countrymen,  Wooloo  was  of  a  sedate,  earnest, 
and  philosophic  temperament.  Having  never  been  out 
side  of  the  Tropics  before,  he  found  many  phenomena 
off  Cape  Horn  which  absorbed  his  attention,  and  set 
him,  like  other  philosophers,  to  feign  theories  corre 
sponding  to  the  marvels  he  beheld.  At  the  first  snow, 
when  he  saw  the  deck  covered  all  over  with  a  white 
powder,  as  it  were,  he  expanded  his  eyes  into  stew-pans  ; 
but  upon  examining  the  strange  substance,  he  decided 
that  this  must  be  a  species  of  superfine  flour,  such  as 
was  compounded  into  his  master's  '  duffs,'  and  other 
dainties.  In  vain  did  an  experienced  natural  philosopher 
belonging  to  the  fore-top  maintain  before  his  face  that 
in  this  hypothesis  Wooloo  was  mistaken  ;  Wooloo 's 
opinion  remained  unchanged  for  some  time. 

As  for  the  hailstones,  they  transported  him  ;  he  went 
about  with  a  bucket,  making  collections,  and  receiving 
contributions,  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  them  home 
to  his  sweethearts  for  glass  beads  ;  but  having  put  his 
bucket  away,  and  returning  to  it  again,  and  finding 
nothing  but  a  little  water,  he  accused  the  bystanders 
of  stealing  his  precious  stones. 

This  suggests  another  story  concerning  him.  The 
first  time  he  was  given  a  piece  of  '  duff  '  to  eat,  he  was 
observed  to  pick  out  very  carefully  every  raisin,  and 
throw  it  away,  with  a  gesture  indicative  of  the  highest 
disgust.  It  turned  out  that  he  had  taken  the  raisins 
for  bugs. 

In  our  man-of-war,  this  semi-savage,  wandering  about 
the  gun-deck  in  his  barbaric  robe,  seemed  a  being  from 
some  other  sphere.  His  tastes  were  our  abominations  : 


148  WHITE  JACKET 

ours  his.  Our  creed  he  rejected  :  his  we.  We  thought 
him  a  loon  :  he  fancied  us  fools.  Had  the  case  been 
reversed  ;  had  we  been  Polynesians  and  he  an  American, 
our  mutual  opinion  of  each  other  would  still  have  re 
mained  the  same.  A  fact  proving  that  neither  was 
wrong,  but  both  right. 


CHAPTER  XXIX 

THE   NIGHT-WATCHES 

THOUGH  leaving  the  Cape  behind  us,  the  severe  cold  still 
continued,  and  one  of  its  worst  consequences  was  the 
almost  incurable  drowsiness  induced  thereby  during  the 
long  night-watches.  All  along  the  decks,  huddled  be 
tween  the  guns,  stretched  out  on  the  carronade-slides, 
and  in  every  accessible  nook  and  corner,  you  would  see 
the  sailors  wrapped  in  their  monkey-jackets,  in  a  state 
of  half-conscious  torpidity,  lying  still  and  freezing  alive, 
without  the  power  to  rise  and  shake  themselves. 

'  Up — up,  you  lazy  dogs ! '  our  good-natured 
third  lieutenant,  a  Virginian,  would  cry,  rapping 
them  with  his  speaking  trumpet.  *  Get  up,  and  stir 
about.' 

But  in  vain.  They  would  rise  for  an  instant,  and  as 
soon  as  his  back  was  turned,  down  they  would  drop,  as 
if  shot  through  the  heart. 

Often  I  have  lain  thus,  when  the  fact,  that  if  I  laid 
much  longer  I  would  actually  freeze  to  death,  would 
come  over  me  with  such  overpowering  force  as  to  break 
the  icy  spell,  and  starting  to  my  feet,  I  would  endeavour 
to  go  through  the  combined  manual  and  pedal  exercise 
to  restore  the  circulation.  The  first  fling  of  my  be 
numbed  arm  generally  struck  me  in  the  face,  instead  of 
smiting  my  chest,  its  true  destination.  But  in  these 
cases  one's  muscles  have  their  own  way. 

In  exercising  my  other  extremities,  I  was  obliged  to 
hold  on  to  something,  and  leap  with  both  feet ;  for  my 

149 


150  WHITE  JACKET 

limbs  seemed  as  destitute  of  joints  as  a  pair  of  canvas 
pants  spread  to  dry,  and  frozen  stiff. 

When  an  order  was  given  to  haul  the  braces — which 
required  the  strength  of  the  entire  watch,  some  two 
hundred  men — a  spectator  would  have  supposed  that  all 
hands  had  received  a  stroke  of  the  palsy.  Roused  from 
their  state  of  enchantment,  they  came  halting  and  limp 
ing  across  the  decks,  falling  against  each  other,  and,  for 
a  few  moments,  almost  unable  to  handle  the  ropes.  The 
slightest  exertion  seemed  intolerable  ;  and  frequently  a 
body  of  eighty  or  a  hundred  men,  summoned  to  brace 
the  main-yard,  would  hang  over  the  rope  for  several 
minutes,  waiting  for  some  active  fellow  to  pick  it  up  and 
put  it  into  their  hands.  Even  then,  it  was  some  time 
before  they  were  able  to  do  anything.  They  made  all 
the  motions  usual  in  hauling  a  rope,  but  it  was  a  long 
time  before  the  yard  budged  an  inch.  It  was  to  no 
purpose  that  the  officers  swore  at  them,  or  sent  the  mid 
shipmen  among  them  to  find  out  who  those  '  horse 
marines  '  and  *  sogers  '  were.  The  sailors  were  so  en 
veloped  in  monkey-jackets,  that  in  the  dark  night  there 
was  no  telling  one  from  the  other. 

*  Here,  you,  sir  !  '  cries  little  Mr.  Pert,  eagerly  catching 
hold  of  the  skirts  of  an  old  sea-dog,  and  trying  to  turn 
him  round,  so  as  to  peer  under  his  tarpaulin.     '  Who 
are  you,  sir  ?     What 's  your  name  ?  ' 

'  Find  out,  Milk-and- Water/  was  the  impertinent 
rejoinder. 

*  Blast  you  !   you  old  rascal ;   I  '11  have  you  licked  for 
that !     Tell  me  his  name,  some  of  you  !  '   turning  round 
to  the  bystanders. 

*  Gammon  !  '  cries  a  voice  at  a  distance. 

'  Hang  me,  but  I  know  you,  sir  !  and  here  's  at  you  !  ' 
and,  so  saying,  Mr.  Pert  drops  the  impenetrable  unknown, 
and  makes  into  the  crowd  after  the  bodiless  voice.  But 


THE  NIGHT-WATCHES  151 

the  attempt  to  find  an  owner  for  that  voice  is  quite  as 
idle  as  the  effort  to  discover  the  contents  of  the  monkey- 
jacket. 

And  here  sorrowful  mention  must  be  made  of  some 
thing  which,  during  this  state  of  affairs,  most  sorely 
afflicted  me.  Most  monkey-jackets  are  of  a  dark  hue  ; 
mine,  as  I  have  fifty  times  repeated,  and  say  again,  was 
white.  And  thus,  in  those  long,  dark  nights,  when  it 
was  my  quarter- watch  on  deck,  and  not  in  the  top,  and 
others  went  skulking  and  *  sogering  '  about  the  decks, 
secure  from  detection — their  identity  undiscoverable — 
my  own  hapless  jacket  forever  proclaimed  the  name  of 
its  wearer.  It  gave  me  many  a  hard  job,  which  other 
wise  I  should  have  escaped.  When  an  officer  wanted  a 
man  for  any  particular  duty — running  aloft,  say,  to  com 
municate  some  slight  order  to  the  captains  of  the  tops — 
how  easy,  in  that  mob  of  incognitoes,  to  individualise 
'  that  white  jacket'  and  dispatch  him  on  the  errand  ! 
Then,  it  would  never  do  for  me  to  hang  back  when  the 
ropes  were  being  pulled. 

Indeed,  upon  all  these  occasions,  such  alacrity  and 
cheerfulness  was  I  obliged  to  display,  that  I  was  fre 
quently  held  up  as  an  illustrious  example  of  activity, 
which  the  rest  were  called  upon  to  emulate.  '  Pull — 
pull !  you  lazy  lubbers  !  Look  at  White  Jacket,  there  ; 
pull  like  him  !  ' 

Oh  !  how  I  execrated  my  luckless  garment !  how  often 
I  scoured  the  deck  with  it  to  give  it  a  tawny  hue  !  how 
often  I  supplicated  the  inexorable  Brush,  captain  of  the 
paint-room,  for  just  one  brushful  of  his  invaluable  pig 
ment  !  Frequently,  I  meditated  giving  it  a  toss  over 
board  ;  but  I  had  not  the  resolution.  Jacketless  at  sea  ! 
Jacketless  so  near  Cape  Horn  !  The  thought  was  unen 
durable.  And,  at  least,  my  garment  was  a  jacket  in 
name,  if  not  in 


152  WHITE  JACKET 

At  length  I  essayed  a  '  swap.'  '  Here,  Bob,'  said  I, 
assuming  all  possible  suavity,  and  accosting  a  messmate 
with  a  sort  of  diplomatic  assumption  of  superiority, 
'  suppose  I  was  ready  to  part  with  this  "  grego  "  of  mine, 
and  take  yours  in  exchange — what  would  you  give  me 
to  boot  ?  ' 

*  Give  you  to  boot  ?  '  he  exclaimed,  with  horror  ;  '  I 
wouldn't  take  your  infernal  jacket  for  a  gift !  ' 

How  I  hailed  every  snow-squall ;  for  then — blessings 
on  them  ! — many  of  the  men  became  white  jackets  along 
with  myself ;  and,  powdered  with  the  flakes,  we  all 
looked  like  millers. 

We  had  six  lieutenants,  all  of  whom,  with  the  excep 
tion  of  the  first  lieutenant,  by  turns  headed  the  watches. 
Three  of  these  officers,  including  Mad  Jack,  were  strict 
disciplinarians,  and  never  permitted  us  to  lay  down  on 
deck  during  the  night.  And,  to  tell  the  truth,  though  it 
caused  much  growling,  it  was  far  better  for  our  health  to 
be  thus  kept  on  our  feet.  So  promenading  was  all  the 
vogue.  For  some  of  us,  however,  it  was  like  pacing  in  a 
dungeon  ;  for,  as  we  had  to  keep  at  our  stations — some 
at  the  halyards,  some  at  the  braces,  and  elsewhere — and 
were  not  allowed  to  stroll  about  indefinitely,  and  fairly 
take  the  measure  of  the  ship's  entire  keel,  we  were  fain 
to  confine  ourselves  to  the  space  of  a  very  few  feet.  But 
the  worst  of  this  was  soon  over.  The  suddenness  of  the 
change  in  the  temperature  consequent  on  leaving  Cape 
Horn,  and  steering  to  the  northward  with  a  ten-knot 
breeze,  is  a  noteworthy  thing.  To-day,  you  are  assailed 
by  a  blast  that  seems  to  have  edged  itself  on  icebergs  ; 
but  in  a  little  more  than  a  week  your  jacket  may  be 
superfluous. 

One  word  more  about  Cape  Horn,  and  we  have  done 
with  it. 

Years  hence,  when  a  ship  canal  shall  have  penetrated 


THE  NIGHT-WATCHES  153 

the  Isthmus  of  Darien,  and  the  traveller  be  taking  his 
seat  in  the  cars  at  Cape  Cod  for  Astoria,  it  will  be  held 
a  thing  almost  incredible  that,  for  so  long  a  period, 
vessels  bound  to  the  Nor '-West  Coast  from  New  York 
should,  by  going  round  Cape  Horn,  have  lengthened  their 
voyages  some  thousands  of  miles.  '  In  those  unen 
lightened  days  '  (I  quote,  in  advance,  the  language  of  some 
future  philosopher),  '  entire  years  were  frequently  con 
sumed  in  making  the  voyage  to  and  from  the  Spice 
Islands,  the  present  fashionable  watering-place  of  the 
beau-monde  of  Oregon.'  Such  must  be  our  national 
progress. 

Why,  sir,  that  boy  of  yours  will,  one  of  these  days, 
be  sending  your  grandson  to  the  salubrious  city  of  Jeddo 
to  spend  his  summer  vacations. 


CHAPTER  XXX 

A  PEEP  THROUGH  A  PORT-HOLE  AT  THE  SUBTERRANEAN 
PARTS   OF  A  MAN-OF-WAR 

WHILE  now  running  rapidly  away  from  the  bitter  coast 
of  Patagonia,  battling  with  the  night-watches — still  cold 
— as  best  we  may  ;  come  under  the  lee  of  my  white 
jacket,  reader,  while  I  tell  of  some  of  the  sights  to  be  seen 
in  a  frigate. 

A  hint  has  already  been  conveyed  concerning  the  sub 
terranean  depths  of  the  Neversink's  hold.  But  there  is 
no  time  here  to  speak  of  the  spirit-room,  a  cellar  down  in 
the  after-hold,  where  the  sailors'  '  grog  '  is  kept ;  nor  of 
the  cable-tiers,  where  the  great  hawsers  and  chains  are 
piled,  as  you  see  them  at  a  large  ship-chandler's  on  shore  ; 
nor  of  the  grocer's  vaults,  where  tierces  of  sugar,  molasses, 
vinegar,  rice,  and  flour  are  snugly  stowed  ;  nor  of  the 
sail-room,  full  as  a  sailmaker's  loft  ashore — piled  up  with 
great  topsails  and  top-gallant-sails,  all  ready-folded  in 
their  places,  like  so  many  white  vests  in  a  gentleman's 
wardrobe ;  nor  of  the  copper  and  copper-fastened 
magazine,  closely  packed  with  kegs  of  powder,  great-gun 
and  small-arm  cartridges ;  nor  of  the  immense  shot- 
lockers,  or  subterranean  arsenals,  full  as  a  bushel  of  apples 
with  twenty-four-pound  balls  ;  nor  of  the  bread-room, 
a  large  apartment,  tinned  all  round  within,  to  keep  out 
the  mice,  where  the  hard  biscuit  destined  for  the  con 
sumption  of  five  hundred  men  on  a  long  voyage  is  stowed 
away  by  the  cubic  yard  ;  nor  of  the  vast  iron  tanks  for 
fresh  water  in  the  hold,  like  the  reservoir  lakes  at  Fair- 
mount,  in  Philadelphia  ;  nor  of  the  paint-room,  where 

154 


SUBTERRANEAN  PARTS  OF  A  MAN-OF-WAR  155 

the  kegs  of  white  lead,  and  casks  of  linseed-oil,  and  all 
sorts  of  pots  and  brushes  are  kept ;  nor  of  the  armourer's 
smithy,  where  the  ship's  forges  and  anvils  may  be  heard 
ringing  at  times  ;  I  say  I  have  no  time  to  speak  of  these 
things,  and  many  more  places  of  note. 

But  there  is  one  very  extensive  warehouse  among  the 
rest  that  needs  special  mention — the  ship's  yeoman's 
storeroom.  In  the  Never  sink  it  was  down  in  the  ship's 
basement,  beneath  the  berth-deck,  and  you  went  to  it 
by  way  of  the  Fore-passage,  a  very  dim,  devious  corridor, 
indeed.  Entering — say  at  noonday — you  find  yourself 
in  a  gloomy  apartment,  lit  by  a  solitary  lamp.  On  one 
side  are  shelves,  filled  with  balls  of  marline,  rattlin-stuff, 
seizing-stuff,  spun-yarn,  and  numerous  twines  of  assorted 
sizes.  In  another  direction  you  see  large  cases  contain 
ing  heaps  of  articles,  reminding  one  of  a  shoemaker's 
furnishing  store — wooden  serving -mallets,  fids,  toggles,  and 
heavers  ;  iron  prickers  and  marling -spikes  ;  in  a  third 
quarter  you  see  a  sort  of  hardware  shop — shelves  piled 
with  all  manner  of  hooks,  bolts,  nails,  screws,  and  thimbles  ; 
and,  in  still  another  direction,  you  see  a  blockmaker's 
store,  heaped  up  with  lignum-vitae  sheaves  and  wheels. 

Through  low  arches  in  the  bulkhead  beyond,  you  peep 
in  upon  distant  vaults  and  catacombs,  obscurely  lighted  in 
the  far  end,  and  showing  immense  coils  of  new  ropes,  and 
other  bulky  articles,  stowed  in  tiers,  all  savouring  of  tar. 

But  by  far  the  most  curious  department  of  these 
mysterious  storerooms  is  the  armoury,  where  the  pikes, 
cutlasses,  pistols,  and  belts,  forming  the  arms  of  the 
boarders  in  time  of  action,  are  hung  against  the  walls, 
and  suspended  in  thick  rows  from  the  beams  overhead. 
Here,  too,  are  to  be  seen  scores  of  Colt's  patent  revolvers, 
which,  though  furnished  with  but  one  tube,  multiply  the 
fatal  bullets,  as  the  naval  cat-o'-nine-tails,  with  a  cannibal 
cruelty,  in  one  blow  nine  times  multiplies  a  culprit's 


156  WHITE  JACKET 

lashes  ;  so  that,  when  a  sailor  is  ordered  one  dozen  lashes, 
the  sentence  should  read  one  hundred  and  eight.  All 
these  arms  are  kept  in  the  brightest  order,  wearing  a  fine 
polish,  and  may  truly  be  said  to  reflect  credit  on  the 
yeoman  and  his  mates. 

Among  the  lower  grade  of  officers  in  a  man-of-war, 
that  of  yeoman  is  not  the  least  important.  His  responsi 
bilities  are  denoted  by  his  pay.  While  the  petty  officers, 
quarter-gunners,  captains  of  the  tops,  and  others,  receive 
but  fifteen  and  eighteen  dollars  a  month — but  little  more 
than  a  mere  able  seaman — the  yeoman  in  an  American 
line-of-battle  ship  receives  forty  dollars,  and  in  a  frigate 
thirty -five  dollars  per  month. 

He  is  accountable  for  all  the  articles  under  his  charge, 
and  on  no  account  must  deliver  a  yard  of  twine  or  a 
tenpenny  nail  to  the  boatswain  or  carpenter,  unless  shown 
a  written  requisition  and  order  from  the  senior  lieutenant. 
The  yeoman  is  to  be  found  burrowing  in  his  underground 
storerooms  all  the  day  long,  in  readiness  to  serve  licensed 
customers.  But  in  the  counter,  behind  which  he  usually 
stands,  there  is  no  place  for  a  till  to  drop  the  shillings  in, 
which  takes  away  not  a  little  from  the  most  agreeable 
part  of  a  storekeeper's  duties.  Nor,  among  the  musty, 
old  account-books  in  his  desk,  where  he  registers  all 
expenditures  of  his  stuffs,  is  there  any  cash  or  check  book. 

The  yeoman  of  the  Neversink  was  a  somewhat  odd 
specimen  of  a  Troglodite.  He  was  a  little  old  man, 
round-shouldered,  bald-headed,  with  great  goggle  eyes, 
looking  through  portentous  round  spectacles,  which  he 
called  his  barnacles.  He  was  imbued  with  a  wonderful 
zeal  for  the  naval  service,  and  seemed  to  think  that, 
in  keeping  his  pistols  and  cutlasses  free  from  rust,  he 
preserved  the  national  honour  untarnished. 

After  general  quarters,  it  was  amusing  to  watch  his 
anxious  air  as  the  various  petty  officers  restored  to  him 


SUBTERRANEAN  PARTS  OF  A  MAN-OF-WAR  157 

the  arms  used  at  the  martial  exercises  of  the  crew.  As 
successive  bundles  would  be  deposited  on  his  counter,  he 
would  count  over  the  pistols  and  cutlasses,  like  an  old 
housekeeper  telling  over  her  silver  forks  and  spoons  in  a 
pantry  before  retiring  for  the  night.  And  often,  with  a 
sort  of  dark  lantern  in  his  hand,  he  might  be  seen  poking 
into  his  furthest  vaults  and  cellars,  and  counting  over  his 
great  coils  of  ropes,  as  if  they  were  all  jolly  puncheons  of 
old  port  and  Madeira. 

By  reason  of  his  incessant  watchfulness  and  unaccount 
able  bachelor  oddities,  it  was  very  difficult  for  him  to 
retain  in  his  employment  the  various  sailors  who,  from 
time  to  time,  were  billeted  with  him  to  do  the  duty  of 
subalterns.  In  particular,  he  was  always  desirous  of 
having  at  least  one  steady,  faultless  young  man,  of  a 
literary  taste,  to  keep  an  eye  to  his  account-books,  and 
swab  out  the  armoury  every  morning.  It  was  an  odious 
business  this,  to  be  immured  all  day  in  such  a  bottomless 
hole,  among  tarry  old  ropes  and  villainous  guns  and 
pistols.  It  was  with  peculiar  dread  that  I  one  day 
noticed  the  goggle  eyes  of  Old  Revolver,  as  they  called  him, 
fastened  upon  me  with  a  fatal  glance  of  goodwill  and 
approbation.  He  had  somehow  heard  of  my  being  a 
very  learned  person,  who  could  both  read  and  write  with 
extraordinary  facility  ;  and,  moreover,  that  I  was  a 
rather  reserved  youth,  who  kept  his  modest,  unassuming 
merits  in  the  background.  But  though,  from  the  keen 
sense  of  my  situation  as  a  man-of-war's  man,  all  this 
about  my  keeping  myself  in  the  back  ground  was  true 
enough,  yet  I  had  no  idea  of  hiding  my  diffident  merits 
under  ground.  I  became  alarmed  at  the  old  yeoman's 
goggling  glances,  lest  he  should  drag  me  down  into  tarry 
perdition  in  his  hideous  storerooms.  But  this  fate  was 
providentially  averted,  owing  to  mysterious  causes  which 
I  never  could  fathom. 


CHAPTER    XXXI 

THE   GUNNER  UNDER  HATCHES 

AMONG  such  a  crowd  of  marked  characters  as  were  to  be 
met  with  on  board  our  frigate,  many  of  whom  moved  in 
mysterious  circles  beneath  the  lowermost  deck,  and  at 
long  intervals  flitted  into  sight  like  apparitions,  and  dis 
appeared  again  for  whole  weeks  together,  there  were  some 
who  inordinately  excited  my  curiosity,  and  whose  names, 
callings,  and  precise  abodes  I  industriously  sought  out, 
in  order  to  learn  something  satisfactory  concerning  them. 

While  engaged  in  these  inquiries,  often  fruitless,  or  but 
partially  gratified,  I  could  not  but  regret  that  there  was 
no  public  printed  Directory  for  the  Neversink,  such  as 
they  have  in  large  towns,  containing  an  alphabetic  list  of 
all  the  crew,  and  where  they  might  be  found.  Also,  in 
losing  myself  in  some  remote,  dark  corner  of  the  bowels 
of  the  frigate,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  various  storerooms, 
shops,  and  warehouses,  I  much  lamented  that  no  enter 
prising  tar  had  yet  thought  of  compiling  a  Handbook  of  the 
Neversink,  so  that  the  tourist  might  have  a  reliable  guide. 

Indeed,  there  were  several  parts  of  the  ship  under 
hatches  shrouded  in  mystery,  and  completely  inacces 
sible  to  the  sailor.  Wondrous  old  doors,  barred  and 
bolted  in  dingy  bulkheads,  must  have  opened  into 
regions  full  of  interest  to  a  successful  explorer. 

They  looked  like  the  gloomy  entrances  to  family  vaults 
of  buried  dead  ;  and  when  I  chanced  to  see  some  unknown 
functionary  insert  his  key,  and  enter  these  inexplicable 
apartments  with  a  battle-lantern,  as  if  on  solemn  official 
business,  I  almost  quaked  to  dive  in  with  him,  and  satisfy 

158 


THE  GUNNER  UNDER  HATCHES     159 

myself  whether  these  vaults  indeed  contained  the  moulder 
ing  relics  of  bygone  old  commodores  and  post-captains. 
But  the  habitations  of  the  living  commodore  and  captain 
— their  spacious  and  curtained  cabins — were  themselves 
almost  as  sealed  volumes,  and  I  passed  them  in  hopeless 
wonderment,  like  a  peasant  before  a  prince's  palace. 
Night  and  day  armed  sentries  guarded  their  sacred 
portals,  cutlass  in  hand  ;  and  had  I  dared  to  cross  their 
path  I  would  infallibly  have  been  cut  down,  as  if  in  battle. 
Thus,  though  for  a  period  of  more  than  a  year  I  was  an 
inmate  of  this  floating  box  of  live-oak,  yet  there  were 
numberless  things  in  it  that,  to  the  last,  remained  wrapped 
in  obscurity,  or  concerning  which  I  could  only  lose  my 
self  in  vague  speculations.  I  was  as  a  Roman  Jew  of  the 
Middle  Ages,  confined  to  the  Jews'  quarter  of  the  town, 
and  forbidden  to  stray  beyond  my  limits.  Or  I  was  as  a 
modern  traveller  in  the  same  famous  city,  forced  to  quit 
it  at  last  without  gaining  ingress  to  the  most  mysterious 
haunts — the  innermost  shrine  of  the  Pope,  and  the 
dungeons  and  cells  of  the  Inquisition. 

But  among  all  the  persons  and  things  on  board  that 
puzzled  me,  and  filled  me  most  with  strange  emotions  of 
doubt,  misgivings,  and  mystery,  was  the  gunner — a  short, 
square,  grim  man,  his  hair  and  beard  grizzled  and  singed, 
as  if  with  gunpowder.  His  skin  was  of  a  flecky  brown, 
like  the  stained  barrel  of  a  fowling-piece,  and  his  hollow 
eyes  burned  in  his  head  like  blue  lights.  He  it  was  who 
had  access  to  many  of  those  mysterious  vaults  I  have 
spoken  of.  Often  he  might  be  seen  groping  his  way  into 
them,  followed  by  his  subalterns,  the  old  quarter-gunners, 
as  if  intent  upon  laying  a  train  of  powder  to  blow  up  the 
ship.  I  remembered  Guy  Fawkes  and  the  Parliament 
House,  and  made  earnest  inquiry  whether  this  gunner  was 
a  Roman  Catholic.  I  felt  relieved  when  informed  that 
he  was  not. 


160  WHITE  JACKET 

A  little  circumstance  which  one  of  his  mates  once  told 
me  heightened  the  gloomy  interest  with  which  I  regarded 
his  chief.  He  told  me  that,  at  periodical  intervals,  his 
master  the  gunner,  accompanied  by  his  phalanx,  entered 
into  the  great  magazine  under  the  gun-room,  of  which 
he  had  sole  custody  and  kept  the  key,  nearly  as  big  as 
the  key  of  the  Bastille,  and  provided  with  lanterns,  some 
thing  like  Sir  Humphry  Davy's  safety-lamp  for  coal 
mines,  proceeded  to  turn,  end  for  end,  all  the  kegs  of 
powder  and  packages  of  cartridges  stored  in  this  inner 
most  explosive  vault,  lined  throughout  with  sheets  of 
copper.  In  the  vestibule  of  the  magazine,  against  the 
panelling,  were  several  pegs  for  slippers,  and,  before  pene 
trating  further  than  that  vestibule,  every  man  of  the 
gunner's-gang  silently  removed  his  shoes,  for  fear  that 
the  nails  in  their  heels  might  possibly  create  a  spark  by 
striking  against  the  coppered  floor  within.  Then,  with 
slippered  feet  and  with  hushed  whispers,  they  stole  into 
the  heart  of  the  place. 

This  turning  of  the  powder  was  to  preserve  its  in 
flammability.  And  surely  it  was  a  business  full  of  dire 
ful  interest,  to  be  buried  so  deep  below  the  sun,  handling 
whole  barrels  of  powder,  any  one  of  which,  touched  by 
the  smallest  spark,  was  powerful  enough  to  blow  up  a 
whole  street  of  warehouses. 

The  gunner  went  by  the  name  of  Old  Combustibles, 
though  I  thought  this  an  undignified  name  for  so  momen 
tous  a  personage,  who  had  all  our  lives  in  his  hand. 

While  we  lay  in  Callao,  we  received  from  shore  several 
barrels  of  powder.  So  soon  as  the  launch  came  alongside 
with  them,  orders  were  given  to  extinguish  all  lights  and 
all  fires  in  the  ship  ;  and  the  master-at-arms  and  his 
corporals  inspected  every  deck,  to  see  that  this  order  was 
obeyed  ;  a  very  prudent  precaution,  no  doubt,  but  not 
observed  at  all  in  the  Turkish  Navy.  The  Turkish  sailors 


THE  GUNNER  UNDER  HATCHES    161 

will  sit  on  their  gun-carriages,  tranquilly  smoking,  while 
kegs  of  powder  are  being  rolled  under  their  ignited  pipe- 
bowls.  This  shows  the  great  comfort  there  is  in  the 
doctrine  of  these  Fatalists,  and  how  such  a  doctrine,  in 
some  things  at  least,  relieves  men  from  nervous  anxieties. 
But  we  are  all  Fatalists  at  bottom.  Nor  need  we  so 
much  marvel  at  the  heroism  of  that  army  officer  who 
challenged  his  personal  foe  to  bestride  a  barrel  of  powder 
with  him — the  match  to  be  placed  between  them — and 
be  blown  up  in  good  company,  for  it  is  pretty  certain 
that  the  whole  earth  itself  is  a  vast  hogshead,  full  of  in 
flammable  materials,  and  which  we  are  always  bestriding  ; 
at  the  same  time,  that  all  good  Christians  believe  that 
at  any  minute  the  last  day  may  come,  and  the  terrible 
combustion  of  the  entire  planet  ensue. 

As  if  impressed  with  a  befitting  sense  of  the  awfulness 
of  his  calling,  our  gunner  always  wore  a  fixed  expression 
of  solemnity,  which  was  heightened  by  his  grizzled  hair 
and  beard.  But  what  imparted  such  a  sinister  look  to 
him,  and  what  wrought  so  upon  my  imagination  concern 
ing  this  man,  was  a  frightful  scar  crossing  his  left  cheek 
and  forehead.  He  had  been  almost  mortally  wounded, 
they  said,  with  a  sabre  cut,  during  a  frigate  engagement 
in  the  last  war  with  Britain. 

He  was  the  most  methodical,  exact,  and  punctual  of 
all  the  forward  officers.  Among  his  other  duties,  it  per 
tained  to  him,  while  in  harbour,  to  see  that  at  a  certain 
hour  in  the  evening  one  of  the  great  guns  was  discharged 
from  the  forecastle,  a  ceremony  only  observed  in  a  flag 
ship.  And  always  at  the  precise  moment  you  might 
behold  him  blowing  his  match,  then  applying  it ;  and 
with  that  booming  thunder  in  his  ear,  and  the  smell  of 
the  powder  in  his  hair,  he  retired  to  his  hammock  for  the 
night.  What  dreams  he  must  have  had  ! 

The  same  precision  was  observed  when  ordered  to  fire 

L 


162  WHITE  JACKET 

a  gun  to  bring  to  some  ship  at  sea  ;  for,  true  to  their  name, 
and  preserving  its  applicability,  even  in  times  of  peace, 
all  men-of-war  are  great  bullies  on  the  high  seas.  They 
domineer  over  the  poor  merchantmen,  and  with  a  hissing 
hot  ball  sent  bowling  across  the  ocean,  compel  them  to 
stop  their  headway  at  pleasure. 

It  was  enough  to  make  you  a  man  of  method  for  life 
to  see  the  gunner  superintending  his  subalterns,  when 
preparing  the  main-deck  batteries  for  a  great  national 
salute.  While  lying  in  harbour,  intelligence  reached  us 
of  the  lamentable  casualty  that  befell  certain  high  officers 
of  state,  including  the  acting  Secretary  of  the  Navy  him 
self,  some  other  member  of  the  President's  cabinet,  a 
commodore,  and  others,  all  engaged  in  experimenting 
upon  a  new-fangled  engine  of  war.  At  the  same  time 
with  the  receipt  of  this  sad  news,  orders  arrived  to  fire 
minute-guns  for  the  deceased  head  of  the  naval  depart 
ment.  Upon  this  occasion  the  gunner  was  more  than 
usually  ceremonious,  in  seeing  that  the  long  twenty-fours 
were  thoroughly  loaded  and  rammed  down,  and  then 
accurately  marked  with  chalk,  so  as  to  be  discharged  in 
undeviating  rotation,  first  from  the  larboard  side,  and 
then  from  the  starboard. 

But  as  my  ears  hummed,  and  all  my  bones  danced  in 
me  with  the  reverberating  din,  and  my  eyes  and  nostrils 
were  almost  suffocated  with  the  smoke,  and  when  I  saw 
this  grim  old  gunner  firing  away  so  solemnly,  I  thought  it 
a  strange  mode  of  honouring  a  man's  memory  who  had 
himself  been  slaughtered  by  a  cannon.  Only  the  smoke, 
that,  after  rolling  in  at  the  port-holes,  rapidly  drifted 
away  to  leeward,  and  was  lost  to  view,  seemed  truly 
emblematical  touching  the  personage  thus  honoured, 
since  that  great  non-combatant,  the  Bible,  assures  us  that 
our  life  is  but  a  vapour  that  quickly  passeth  away. 


CHAPTER   XXXII 

A   DISH  OF  DTJNDERFUNK 

IN  men-of-war,  the  space  on  the  uppermost  deck,  round 
about  the  mainmast,  is  the  police-office,  court-house, 
and  yard  of  execution,  where  all  charges  are  lodged, 
causes  tried,  and  punishment  administered.  In  frigate 
phrase,  to  be  brought  up  to  the  mast  is  equivalent  to  being 
presented  before  the  grand  jury,  to  see  whether  a  true 
bill  will  be  found  against  you. 

From  the  merciless,  inquisitorial  baiting  which  sailors, 
charged  with  offences,  too  often  experience  at  the  mast, 
that  vicinity  is  usually  known  among  them  as  the  bull-ring. 

The  mainmast,  moreover,  is  the  only  place  where  the 
sailor  can  hold  formal  communication  with  the  captain 
and  officers.  If  anyone  has  been  robbed ;  if  anyone 
has  been  evilly  entreated  ;  if  anyone's  character  has 
been  defamed  ;  if  anyone  has  a  request  to  present ;  if 
anyone  has  aught  important  for  the  executive  of  the 
ship  to  know — straight  to  the  mainmast  he  repairs  ;  and 
stands  there — generally  with  his  hat  off — waiting  the 
pleasure  of  the  officer  of  the  deck  to  advance  and  com 
municate  with  him.  Often,  the  most  ludicrous  scenes 
occur,  and  the  most  comical  complaints  are  made. 

One  clear,  cold  morning,  while  we  were  yet  running 
away  from  the  Cape,  a  raw-boned,  crack-pated  Down 
Easter,  belonging  to  the  waist,  made  his  appearance  at 
the  mast,  dolefully  exhibiting  a  blackened  tin  pan,  bear 
ing  a  few  crusty  traces  of  some  sort  of  a  sea-pie,  which 
had  been  cooked  in  it, 

163 


164  WHITE  JACKET 

'  Well,  sir,  what  now  ?  '  said  the  lieutenant  of  the 
deck,  advancing. 

*  They  stole  it,  sir  ;   all  my  nice  dunderfunk,  sir  ;   they 
did,  sir/  whined  the  Down  Easter,  ruefully  holding  up 
his  pan. 

*  Stole  your  dundlefunk  !   what 's  that  ?  ' 

*  Dunderfunk,  sir,  dunderfunk  ;  a  cruel  nice  dish  as  ever 
man  put  into  him.' 

'  Speak  out,  sir  ;  what 's  the  matter  ?  * 

*  My  dunderfunk,  sir — as  elegant  a  dish  of  dunderfunk 
as  you  ever  see,  sir — they  stole  it,  sir  !  ' 

1  Go  forward,  you  rascal !  '  cried  the  lieutenant,  in  a 
towering  rage,  '  or  else  stop  your  whining.  Tell  me, 
what 's  the  matter  ?  ' 

'  Why,  sir,  them  'ere  two  fellows,  Dobs  and  Hodnose, 
stole  my  dunderfunk.' 

'  Once  more,  sir,  I  ask  what  that  dundledunk  is  ? 
Speak  ! ' 

'  As  cruel  a  nice ' 

'  Be  off,  sir  !  sheer  !  '  and  muttering  something  about 
non  compos  mentis,  the  lieutenant  stalked  away  ;  while 
the  Down  Easter  beat  a  melancholy  retreat,  holding  up 
his  pan  like  a  tambourine,  and  making  dolorous  music 
on  it  as  he  went. 

'  Where  are  you  going  with  that  tear  in  your  eye,  like 
a  travelling  rat  ?  '  cried  a  topman. 

*  Oh  !   he  's  going  home  to  Down  East,'  said  another  ; 
*  so  far  eastward,  you  know,  shippy,  that  they  have  to 
pry  up  the  sun  with  a  handspike.' 

To  make  this  anecdote  plainer,  be  it  said  that,  at  sea, 
the  monotonous  round  of  salt  beef  and  pork  at  the 
messes  of  the  sailors — where  but  very  few  of  the  varie 
ties  of  the  season  are  to  be  found — induces  them  to 
adopt  many  contrivances  in  order  to  diversify  their 
meals.  Hence  the  various  sea-rolls,  made  dishes,  and 


A  DISH  OF  DUNDERFUNK  165 

Mediterranean  pies,  well  known  by  man-of-war's  men — 
Scouse,  Lob-scouse,  Soft-Tack,  Soft-Tommy,  Skillagalee, 
Burgoo,  Dough-boys,  Lob-Dominion,  Dog's-Body,  and  lastly, 
and  least  known,  Dunderfunk ;  all  of  which  come  under 
the  general  denomination  of  Manavalins. 

Dunderfunk  is  made  of  hard  biscuit,  hashed  and 
pounded,  mixed  with  beef  fat,  molasses,  and  water,  and 
baked  brown  in  a  pan.  And  to  those  who  are  beyond 
all  reach  of  shore  delicacies,  this  dunderfunk,  in  the 
feeling  language  of  the  Down  Easter,  is  certainly  '  a  cruel 
nice  dish' 

Now  the  only  way  that  a  sailor,  after  preparing  his 
dunderfunk,  could  get  it  cooked  on  board  the  Neversink 
was  by  slyly  going  to  Old  Coffee,  the  ship's  cook,  and  brib 
ing  him  to  put  it  into  his  oven.  And  as  some  such  dishes 
or  other  are  well  known  to  be  all  the  time  in  the  oven,  a 
set  of  unprincipled  gourmands  are  constantly  on  the 
look-out  for  the  chance  of  stealing  them.  Generally, 
two  or  three  league  together,  and  while  one  engages  Old 
Coffee  in  some  interesting  conversation  touching  his  wife 
and  family  at  home,  another  snatches  the  first  thing  he 
can  lay  hands  on  in  the  oven,  and  rapidly  passes  it  to  the 
third  man,  who  at  his  earliest  leisure  disappears  with  it. 

In  this  manner  had  the  Down  Easter  lost  his  precious 
pie,  and  afterward  found  the  empty  pan  knocking  about 
the  forecastle. 


CHAPTER   XXXIII 

A  FLOGGING 

IF  you  begin  the  day  with  a  laugh,  you  may,  nevertheless, 
end  it  with  a  sob  and  a  sigh. 

Among  the  many  who  were  exceedingly  diverted  with 
the  scene  between  the  Down  Easter  and  the  lieutenant, 
none  laughed  more  heartily  than  John,  Peter,  Mark,  and 
Antone — four  sailors  of  the  starboard  watch.  The  same 
evening  these  four  found  themselves  prisoners  in  the 
'  brig,'  with  a  sentry  standing  over  them.  They  were 
charged  with  violating  a  well-known  law  of  the  ship — 
having  been  engaged  in  one  of  those  tangled,  general  fights 
sometimes  occurring  among  sailors.  They  had  nothing 
to  anticipate  but  a  flogging,  at  the  captain's  pleasure. 

Toward  evening  of  the  next  day,  they  were  startled  by 
the  dread  summons  of  the  boatswain  and  his  mates  at 
the  principal  hatchway — a  summons  that  ever  sends  a 
shudder  through  every  manly  heart  in  a  frigate  : 

*  All  hands  witness  punishment,  ahoy  !  ' 

The  hoarseness  of  the  cry,  its  unrelenting  prolongation, 
its  being  caught  up  at  different  points,  and  sent  through 
the  lowermost  depths  of  the  ship  ;  all  this  produces  a  most 
dismal  effect  upon  every  heart  not  calloused  by  long 
habituation  to  it. 

However  much  you  may  desire  to  absent  yourself  from 
the  scene  that  ensues,  yet  behold  it  you  must ;  or,  at 
least,  stand  near  it  you  must ;  for  the  regulations  enjoin 
the  attendance  of  almost  the  entire  ship's  company,  from 
the  corpulent  captain  himself  to  the  smallest  boy  who 
strikes  the  bell. 

166 


A  FLOGGING  167 

'  All  hands  witness  punishment,  ahoy  !  ' 

To  the  sensitive  seaman  that  summons  sounds  like  a 
doom.  He  knows  that  the  same  law  which  impels  it — 
the  same  law  by  which  the  culprits  of  the  day  must 
suffer  ;  that  by  that  very  law  he  also  is  liable  at  any 
time  to  be  judged  and  condemned.  And  the  inevitable- 
ness  of  his  own  presence  at  the  scene  ;  the  strong  arm 
that  drags  him  in  view  of  the  scourge,  and  holds  him  there 
till  all  is  over  ;  forcing  upon  his  loathing  eye  and  soul 
the  sufferings  and  groans  of  men  who  have  familiarly 
consorted  with  him,  eaten  with  him,  battled  out  watches 
with  him — men  of  his  own  type  and  badge — all  this 
conveys  a  terrible  hint  of  the  omnipotent  authority 
under  which  he  lives.  Indeed,  to  such  a  man  the  naval 
summons  to  witness  punishment  carries  a  thrill,  some 
what  akin  to  what  we  may  impute  to  the  quick  and  the 
dead,  when  they  shall  hear  the  Last  Trump,  that  is  to  bid 
them  all  arise  in  their  ranks,  and  behold  the  final  penalties 
inflicted  upon  the  sinners  of  our  race. 

But  it  must  not  be  imagined  that  to  all  man-of-war's 
men  this  summons  conveys  such  poignant  emotions  ; 
but  it  is  hard  to  decide  whether  one  should  be  glad  or  sad 
that  this  is  not  the  case  ;  whether  it  is  grateful  to  know 
that  so  much  pain  is  avoided,  or  whether  it  is  far  sadder 
to  think  that,  either  from  constitutional  hard-heartedness 
or  the  multiplied  searings  of  habit,  hundreds  of  man-of- 
war's  men  have  been  made  proof  against  the  sense  of 
degradation,  pity,  and  shame. 

As  if  in  sympathy  with  the  scene  to  be  enacted,  the 
sun,  which  the  day  previous  had  merrily  flashed  upon 
the  tin  pan  of  the  disconsolate  Down  Easter,  was  now 
setting  over  the  dreary  waters,  veiling  itself  in  vapours. 
The  wind  blew  hoarsely  in  the  cordage  ;  the  seas  broke 
heavily  against  the  bows  ;  and  the  frigate,  staggering 
under  whole  topsails,  strained  as  in  agony  on  her  way. 


168  WHITE  JACKET 

'  All  hands  witness  punishment,  ahoy  !  : 

At  the  summons  the  crew  crowded  round  the  main 
mast  ;  multitudes  eager  to  obtain  a  good  place  on  the 
booms,  to  overlook  the  scene ;  many  laughing  and 
chatting,  others  canvassing  the  case  of  the  culprits  ; 
some  maintaining  sad.  anxious  countenances,  or  carrying 
a  suppressed  indignation  in  their  eyes  ;  a  few  purposely 
keeping  behind  to  avoid  looking  on  ;  in  short,  among  five 
hundred  men  there  was  every  possible  shade  of  character. 

All  the  officers — midshipmen  included — stood  together 
in  a  group  on  the  starboard  side  of  the  mainmast ;  the 
first  lieutenant  in  advance,  and  the  surgeon,  whose 
special  duty  it  is  to  be  present  at  such  times,  standing 
close  by  his  side. 

Presently  the  captain  came  forward  from  his  cabin, 
and  stood  in  the  centre  of  this  solemn  group,  with  a  small 
paper  in  his  hand.  That  paper  was  the  daily  report  of 
offences,  regularly  laid  upon  his  table  every  morning  or 
evening,  like  the  day's  journal  placed  by  a  bachelor's 
napkin  at  breakfast. 

'  Master-at-arms,  bring  up  the  prisoners,'  he  said. 

A  few  moments  elapsed,  during  which  the  captain, 
now  clothed  in  his  most  dreadful  attributes,  fixed  his 
eyes  severely  upon  the  crew,  when  suddenly  a  lane 
formed  through  the  crowd  of  seamen,  and  the  prisoners 
advanced — the  master-at-arms,  ratan  in  hand,  on  one 
side,  and  an  armed  marine  on  the  other — and  took  up 
their  stations  at  the  mast. 

'  You  John,  you  Peter,  you  Mark,  you  Antone,'  said 
the  captain,  '  were  yesterday  found  fighting  on  the  gun- 
deck.  Have  you  anything  to  say  ?  ' 

Mark  and  Antone,  two  steady,  middle-aged  men,  whom 
I  had  often  admired  for  their  sobriety,  replied  that  they 
did  not  strike  the  first  blow  ;  that  they  had  submitted 
to  much  before  they  had  yielded  to  their  passions  ;  but  as 


A  FLOGGING  169 

they  acknowledged  that  they  had  at  last  defended  them 
selves,  their  excuse  was  overruled. 

John — a  brutal  bully,  who,  it  seems,  was  the  real 
author  of  the  disturbance — was  about  entering  into  a 
long  extenuation,  when  he  was  cut  short  by  being  made 
to  confess,  irrespective  of  circumstances,  that  he  had 
been  in  the  fray. 

Peter,  a  handsome  lad  about  nineteen  years  old, 
belonging  to  the  mizen-top,  looked  pale  and  tremulous. 
He  was  a  great  favourite  in  his  part  of  the  ship,  and 
especially  in  his  own  mess,  principally  composed  of  lads 
of  his  own  age.  That  morning  two  of  his  young  mess 
mates  had  gone  to  his  bag,  taken  out  his  best  clothes, 
and,  obtaining  the  permission  of  the  marine  sentry  at 
the  '  brig,'  had  handed  them  to  him,  to  be  put  on  against 
being  summoned  to  the  mast.  This  was  done  to  pro 
pitiate  the  captain,  as  most  captains  love  to  see  a  tidy 
sailor.  But  it  would  not  do.  To  all  his  supplications 
the  captain  turned  a  deaf  ear.  Peter  declared  that  he 
had  been  struck  twice  before  he  had  returned  a  blow. 
1  No  matter,'  said  the  captain, '  you  struck  at  last,  instead 
of  reporting  the  case  to  an  officer.  I  allow  no  man  to 
fight  on  board  here  but  myself.  /  do  the  fighting.' 

'  Now,  men,'  he  added,  '  you  all  admit  the  charge  ; 
you  know  the  penalty.  Strip !  Quarter-masters,  are 
the  gratings  rigged  ?  ' 

The  gratings  are  square  frames  of  barred  woodwork, 
sometimes  placed  over  the  hatchways.  One  of  these 
squares  was  now  laid  on  the  deck,  close  to  the  ship's 
bulwarks,  and  while  the  remaining  preparations  were 
being  made  the  master-at-arms  assisted  the  prisoners  in 
removing  their  jackets  and  shirts.  This  done,  their 
shirts  were  loosely  thrown  over  their  shoulders. 

At  a  sign  from  the  captain,  John,  with  a  shameless 
leer,  advanced,  and  stood  passively  upon  the  grating, 


170  WHITE  JACKET 

while  the  bare-headed  old  quarter-master,  with  gray 
hair  streaming  in  the  wind,  bound  his  feet  to  the  cross 
bars,  and,  stretching  out  his  arms  over  his  head,  secured 
them  to  the  hammock-nettings  above.  He  then  retreated 
a  little  space,  standing  silent. 

Meanwhile,  the  boatswain  stood  solemnly  on  the  other 
side,  with  a  green  bag  in  his  hand,  from  which  taking  four 
instruments  of  punishment,  he  gave  one  to  each  of  his 
mates ;  for  a  fresh  '  cat,'  applied  by  a  fresh  hand,  is  the 
ceremonious  privilege  accorded  to  every  man-of-war 
culprit. 

At  another  sign  from  the  captain,  the  master-at-arms, 
stepping  up,  removed  the  shirt  from  the  prisoner.  At 
this  juncture  a  wave  broke  against  the  ship's  side,  and 
dashed  the  spray  over  his  exposed  back.  But  though 
the  air  was  piercing  cold,  and  the  water  drenched  him, 
John  stood  still,  without  a  shudder. 

The  captain's  finger  was  now  lifted,  and  the  first 
boatswain's  mate  advanced,  combing  out  the  nine  tails 
of  his  cat  with  his  hand,  and  then,  sweeping  them  round 
his  neck,  brought  them  with  the  whole  force  of  his  body 
upon  the  mark.  Again,  and  again,  and  again  ;  and  at 
every  blow  higher  and  higher  rose  the  long,  purple  bars 
on  the  prisoner's  back.  But  he  only  bowed  over  his  head, 
and  stood  still.  Meantime,  some  of  the  crew  whispered 
among  themselves  in  applause  of  their  shipmate's  nerve  ; 
but  the  greater  part  were  breathlessly  silent  as  the  keen 
scourge  hissed  through  the  wintry  air,  and  fell  with  a 
cutting,  wiry  sound  upon  the  mark.  One  dozen  lashes 
being  applied,  the  man  was  taken  down,  and  went  among 

the  crew  with  a  smile,  saying,  '  D n  me  !  it 's  nothing 

when  you  're  used  to  it !  Who  wants  to  fight  ?  ' 

The  next  was  Antone,  the  Portuguese.  At  every 
blow  he  surged  from  side  to  side,  pouring  out  a  torrent 
of  involuntary  blasphemies.  Never  before  had  he  been 


A  FLOGGING  171 

heard  to  curse.  When  cut  down,  he  went  among  the 
men,  swearing  to  have  the  life  of  the  captain.  Of  course, 
this  was  unheard  by  the  officers. 

Mark,  the  third  prisoner,  only  cringed  and  coughed 
under  his  punishment.  He  had  some  pulmonary  com 
plaint.  He  was  off  duty  for  several  days  after  the  flog 
ging  ;  but  this  was  partly  to  be  imputed  to  his  extreme 
mental  misery.  It  was  his  first  scourging,  and  he  felt  the 
insult  more  than  the  injury.  He  became  silent  and  sullen 
for  the  rest  of  the  cruise. 

The  fourth  and  last  was  Peter,  the  mizen-top  lad. 
He  had  often  boasted  that  he  had  never  been  degraded 
at  the  gangway.  The  day  before  his  cheek  had  worn 
its  usual  red,  but  now  no  ghost  was  whiter.  As  he  was 
being  secured  to  the  gratings,  and  the  shudderings  and 
creepings  of  his  dazzlingly  white  back  were  revealed,  he 
turned  round  his  head  imploringly  ;  but  his  weeping 
entreaties  and  vows  of  contrition  were  of  no  avail.  *  I 
would  not  forgive  God  Almighty  !  '  cried  the  captain. 
The  fourth  boatswain's  mate  advanced,  and  at  the  first 
blow  the  boy,  shouting  '  My  God  !  Oh  !  my  God  !  ' 
writhed  and  leaped  so  as  to  displace  the  gratings, 
and  scatter  the  nine  tails  of  the  scourge  all  over  his 
person.  At  the  next  blow  he  howled,  leaped,  and  raged 
in  unendurable  torture. 

'  What  are  you  stopping  for,  boatswain's  mate  ?  ' 
cried  the  captain.  '  Lay  on  !  '  and  the  whole  dozen 
was  applied. 

'  I  don't  care  what  happens  to  me  now  !  '  wept  Peter, 
going  among  the  crew,  with  blood-shot  eyes,  as  he  put  on 
his  shirt.  *  I  have  been  flogged  once,  and  they  may  do  it 
again  if  they  will.  Let  them  look  out  for  me  now  !  ' 

'  Pipe  down !  '  cried  the  captain ;  and  the  crew 
slowly  dispersed. 

Let  us  have  the  charity  to  believe  them — as  we  do — 


172  WHITE  JACKET 

when  some  captains  in  the  Navy  say,  that  the  thing  of  all 
others  most  repulsive  to  them,  in  the  routine  of  what  they 
consider  their  duty,  is  the  administration  of  corporal 
punishment  upon  the  crew ;  for,  surely,  not  to  be  scari 
fied  to  the  quick  at  these  scenes  would  argue  a  man  but 
a  beast. 

You  see  a  human  being,  stripped  like  a  slave  ;  scourged 
worse  than  a  hound.  And  for  what  ?  For  things  not 
essentially  criminal,  but  only  made  so  by  arbitrary  laws. 


CHAPTER   XXXIV 

SOME   OF  THE   EVIL   EFFECTS   OF  FLOGGING 

THERE  are  incidental  considerations  touching  this  matter 
of  flogging  which  exaggerate  the  evil  into  a  great  enor 
mity.  Many  illustrations  might  be  given,  but  let  us  be 
content  with  a  few. 

One  of  the  arguments  advanced  by  officers  of  the  Navy 
in  favour  of  corporal  punishment  is  this  :  it  can  be  in 
flicted  in  a  moment ;  it  consumes  no  valuable  time  ;  and 
when  the  prisoner's  shirt  is  put  on,  that  is  the  last  of  it. 
Whereas,  if  another  punishment  were  substituted,  it 
would  probably  occasion  a  great  waste  of  time  and  trouble, 
besides  thereby  begetting  in  the  sailor  an  undue  idea  of 
his  importance. 

Absurd,  or  worse  than  absurd,  as  it  may  appear,  all 
this  is  true  ;  and  if  you  start  from  the  same  premises 
with  these  officers,  you  must  admit  that  they  advance 
an  irresistible  argument.  But  in  accordance  with  this 
principle,  captains  in  the  Navy,  to  a  certain  extent,  inflict 
the  scourge — which  is  ever  at  hand — for  nearly  all  degrees 
of  transgression.  In  offences  not  cognisable  by  a  court- 
martial,  little,  if  any,  discrimination  is  shown.  It  is  of  a 
piece  with  the  penal  laws  that  prevailed  in  England  some 
sixty  years  ago,  when  one  hundred  and  sixty  different 
offences  were  declared  by  the  Statute  Book  to  be  capital, 
and  the  servant-maid  who  but  pilfered  a  watch  was  hung 
beside  the  murderer  of  a  family. 

It  is  one  of  the  most  common  punishments  for  very 
trivial  offences  in  the  Navy,  to  '  stop '  a  seaman's  grog 

173 


174  WHITE  JACKET 

for  a  day  or  a  week.  And  as  most  seamen  so  cling  to 
their  grog,  the  loss  of  it  is  generally  deemed  by  them  a 
very  serious  penalty.  You  will  sometimes  hear  them 
say,  '  I  would  rather  have  my  wind  stopped  than  my 
grog  ! ' 

But  there  are  some  sober  seamen  that  would  much 
rather  draw  the  money  for  it,  instead  of  the  grog  itself, 
as  provided  by  law  ;  but  they  are  too  often  deterred  from 
this  by  the  thought  of  receiving  a  scourging  for  some 
inconsiderable  offence,  as  a  substitute  for  the  stopping  of 
their  spirits.  This  is  a  most  serious  obstacle  to  the  cause 
of  temperance  in  the  Navy.  But,  in  many  cases,  even 
the  reluctant  drawing  of  his  grog  cannot  exempt  a 
prudent  seaman  from  ignominy  ;  for  besides  the  formal 
administering  of  the  '  cat '  at  the  gangway  for  petty 
offences,  he  is  liable  to  the  '  colt '  or  rope's-end,  a  bit  of 
rattlin-stuff,  indiscriminately  applied — without  stripping 
the  victim — at  any  time,  and  in  any  part  of  the  ship,  at 
the  merest  wink  from  the  captain.  By  an  express  order 
of  that  officer,  most  boatswain's  mates  carry  the  colt 
coiled  in  their  hats,  in  readiness  to  be  administered  at 
a  minute's  warning  upon  any  offender.  This  was  the 
custom  in  the  Never  sink.  And  until  so  recent  a  period 
as  the  administration  of  President  Polk,  when  the  his 
torian  Bancroft,  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  officially  inter 
posed,  it  was  an  almost  universal  thing  for  the  officers 
of  the  watch,  at  their  own  discretion,  to  inflict  chastise 
ment  upon  a  sailor,  and  this,  too,  in  the  face  of  the 
ordinance  restricting  the  power  of  flogging  solely  to 
captains  and  courts-martial.  Nor  was  it  a  thing  un 
known  for  a  lieutenant,  in  a  sudden  outburst  of  passion, 
perhaps  inflamed  by  brandy,  or  smarting  under  the  sense 
of  being  disliked  or  hated  by  the  seamen,  to  order  a  whole 
watch  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  men,  at  dead  of  night, 
to  undergo  the  indignity  of  the  colt. 


SOME  OF  THE  EVIL  EFFECTS  OF  FLOGGING    175 

It  is  believed  that,  even  at  the  present  day,  there  are 
instances  of  commanders  still  violating  the  law,  by  dele 
gating  the  power  of  the  colt  to  subordinates.  At  all 
events,  it  is  certain  that,  almost  to  a  man,  the  lieutenants 
in  the  Navy  bitterly  rail  against  the  officiousness  of 
Bancroft,  in  so  materially  abridging  their  usurped 
functions  by  snatching  the  colt  from  their  hands.  At 
the  time,  they  predicted  that  this  rash  and  most  ill- 
judged  interference  of  the  Secretary  would  end  in  the 
breaking  up  of  all  discipline  in  the  Navy.  But  it  has 
not  so  proved.  These  officers  now  predict  that,  if  the 
'  cat '  be  abolished,  the  same  unfulfilled  prediction  would 
be  verified. 

Concerning  the  licence  with  which  many  captains 
violate  the  express  laws  laid  down  by  Congress  for  the 
government  of  the  Navy,  a  glaring  instance  may  be 
quoted.  For  upward  of  forty  years  there  has  been  on 
the  American  Statute  Book  a  law  prohibiting  a  captain 
from  inflicting,  on  his  own  authority,  more  than  twelve 
lashes  at  one  time,  and  for  one  offence.  If  more  are  to 
be  given,  the  sentence  must  be  passed  by  a  court-martial. 
Yet,  for  nearly  half  a  century,  this  law  has  been  fre 
quently,  and  with  almost  perfect  impunity,  set  at  naught : 
though  of  late,  through  the  exertions  of  Bancroft  and 
others,  it  has  been  much  better  observed  than  formerly  ; 
indeed,  at  the  present  day,  it  is  generally  respected. 
Still,  while  the  Neversink  was  lying  in  a  South  American 
port,  on  the  cruise  now  written  of,  the  seamen  belonging 
to  another  American  frigate  informed  us  that  their 
captain  sometimes  inflicted,  upon  his  own  authority, 
eighteen  and  twenty  lashes.  It  is  worth  while  to  state 
that  this  frigate  was  vastly  admired  by  the  shore  ladies 
for  her  wonderfully  neat  appearance.  One  of  her  fore 
castle  men  told  me  that  he  had  used  up  three  jack- 
knives  (charged  to  him  on  the  books  of  the  purser)  in 


176  WHITE  JACKET 

scraping   the   belaying-pins   and   the   combings   of   the 
hatchways. 

It  is  singular  that  while  the  lieutenants  of  the  watch 
in  American  men-of-war  so  long  usurped  the  power  of 
inflicting  corporal  punishment  with  the  colt,  few  or  no 
similar  abuses  were  known  in  the  English  Navy.  And 
though  the  captain  of  an  English  armed  ship  is  autho 
rised  to  inflict,  at  his  own  discretion,  more  than  a  dozen 
lashes  (I  think  three  dozen),  yet  it  is  to  be  doubted 
whether,  upon  the  whole,  there  is  as  much  flogging  at 
present  in  the  English  Navy  as  in  the  American.  The 
chivalric  Virginian,  John  Randolph  of  Roanoke,  declared, 
in  his  place  in  Congress,  that  on  board  of  the  American 
man-of-war  that  carried  him  out  Ambassador  to  Russia 
he  had  witnessed  more  flogging  than  had  taken  place  on 
his  own  plantation  of  five  hundred  African  slaves  in  ten 
years.  Certain  it  is,  from  what  I  have  personally  seen, 
that  the  English  officers,  as  a  general  thing,  seem  to  be 
less  disliked  by  their  crews  than  the  American  officers  by 
theirs.  The  reason  probably  is,  that  many  of  them, 
from  their  station  in  life,  have  been  more  accustomed 
to  social  command  ;  hence,  quarter-deck  authority  sits 
more  naturally  on  them.  A  coarse,  vulgar  man,  who 
happens  to  rise  to  high  naval  rank  by  the  exhibition  of 
talents  not  incompatible  with  vulgarity,  invariably  proves 
a  tyrant  to  his  crew.  It  is  a  thing  that  American  man- 
of-war's  men  have  often  observed,  that  the  lieutenants 
from  the  Southern  States,  the  descendants  of  the  old 
Virginians,  are  much  less  severe,  and  much  more  gentle 
and  gentlemanly  in  command,  than  the  Northern  officers, 
as  a  class. 

According  to  the  present  laws  and  usages  of  the  Navy, 
a  seaman,  for  the  most  trivial  alleged  offences,  of  which 
he  may  be  entirely  innocent,  must,  without  a  trial, 
undergo  a  penalty  the  traces  whereof  he  carries  to  the 


SOME  OF  THE  EVIL  EFFECTS  OF  FLOGGING    177 

grave  ;  for  to  a  man-of-war's  man's  experienced  eye  the 
marks  of  a  naval  scourging  with  the  ;  cat '  are  through  life 
discernible.  And  with  these  marks  on  his  back,  this 
image  of  his  Creator  must  rise  at  the  Last  Day.  Yet  so 
untouchable  is  true  dignity,  that  there  are  cases  wherein 
to  be  flogged  at  the  gangway  is  no  dishonour  ;  though,  to 
abase  and  hurl  down  the  last  pride  of  some  sailor  who 
has  piqued  him,  be  sometimes  the  secret  motive,  with 
some  malicious  officer,  in  procuring  him  to  be  condemned 
to  the  lash.  But  this  feeling  of  the  innate  dignity  remain 
ing  untouched,  though  outwardly  the  body  be  scarred 
for  the  whole  term  of  the  natural  life,  is  one  of  the  hushed 
things,  buried  among  the  holiest  privacies  of  the  soul ; 
a  thing  between  a  man's  God  and  himself  ;  and  forever 
undiscernible  by  our  fellow-men,  who  account  that  a 
degradation  which  seems  so  to  the  corporal  eye.  But 
what  torments  must  that  seaman  undergo,  who,  while 
his  back  bleeds  at  the  gangway,  bleeds  agonised  drops  of 
shame  from  his  soul !  Are  we  not  justified  in  immeasur 
ably  denouncing  this  thing  ?  Join  hands  with  me,  then  ; 
and,  in  the  name  of  that  Being  in  whose  image  the  flogged 
sailor  is  made,  let  us  demand  of  legislators,  by  what 
right  they  dare  profane  what  God  Himself  accounts  sacred. 

Is  it  lawful  for  you  to  scourge  a  man  that  is  a  Roman  ? 
asks  the  intrepid  Apostle,  well  knowing,  as  a  Roman 
citizen,  that  it  was  not.  And  now,  eighteen  hundred 
years  after,  is  it  lawful  for  you,  my  countrymen,  to 
scourge  a  man  that  is  an  American  ? — to  scourge  1dm 
round  the  world  in  your  frigates  ? 

It  is  to  no  purpose  that  you  apologetically  appeal  to 
the  general  depravity  of  the  man-of-war's  man.  De 
pravity  in  the  oppressed  is  no  apology  for  the  oppressor  ; 
but  rather  an  additional  stigma  to  him,  as  being,  in  a  large 
degree,  the  effect,  and  not  the  cause  and  justification 
of  oppression. 


CHAPTER  XXXV 

FLOGGING   NOT  LAWFUL 

IT  is  next  to  idle,  at  the  present  day,  merely  to 
denounce  an  inquity.  Be  ours,  then,  a  different  task. 

If  there  are  any  three  things  opposed  to  the  genius  of 
the  American  Constitution,  they  are  these  :  irrespon 
sibility  in  a  judge,  unlimited  discretionary  authority  in 
an  executive,  and  the  union  of  an  irresponsible  judge 
and  an  unlimited  executive  in  one  person. 

Yet  by  virtue  of  an  enactment  of  Congress,  all  the 
commodores  in  the  American  Navy  are  obnoxious  to 
these  three  charges,  so  far  as  concerns  the  punishment 
of  the  sailor  for  alleged  misdemeanours  not  particularly 
set  forth  in  the  Articles  of  War. 

Here  is  the  enactment  in  question. 

XXXII.  Of  the  Articles  of  War. — 'All  crimes  com 
mitted  by  persons  belonging  to  the  Navy,  which  are  not 
specified  in  the  foregoing  articles,  shall  be  punished 
according  to  the  laws  and  customs  in  such  cases  at  sea/ 

This  is  the  article  that,  above  all  others,  puts  the 
scourge  into  the  hands  of  the  captain,  calls  him  to  no 
account  for  its  exercise,  and  furnishes  him  with  an 
ample  warrant  for  inflictions  of  cruelty  upon  the  common 
sailor  hardly  credible  to  landsmen. 

By  this  article  the  captain  is  made  a  legislator,  as 
well  as  a  judge  and  an  executive.  So  far  as  it  goes,  it 
absolutely  leaves  to  his  discretion  to  decide  what  things 
shall  be  considered  crimes,  and  what  shall  be  the  penalty  ; 
whether  an  accused  person  has  been  guilty  of  actions  by 

178 


FLOGGING  NOT  LAWFUL  179 

him  declared  to  be  crimes  ;  and  how,  when,  and  where 
the  penalty  shall  be  inflicted. 

In  the  American  Navy  there  is  an  everlasting  sus 
pension  of  the  Habeas  Corpus.  Upon  the  bare  alle 
gation  of  misconduct,  there  is  no  law  to  restrain  the 
captain  from  imprisoning  a  seaman,  and  keeping  him 
confined  at  his  pleasure.  While  I  was  in  the  Never- 
sink,  the  captain  of  an  American  sloop  of  war,  from 
undoubted  motives  of  personal  pique,  kept  a  seaman 
confined  in  the  brig  for  upward  of  a  month. 

Certainly  the  necessities  of  navies  warrant  a  code  for 
its  government  more  stringent  than  the  law  that  governs 
the  land  ;  but  that  code  should  conform  to  the  spirit  of 
the  political  institutions  of  the  country  that  ordains  it. 
It  should  not  convert  into  slaves  some  of  the  citizens 
of  a  nation  of  freemen.  Such  objections  cannot  be 
urged  against  the  laws  of  the  Russian  Navy  (not  essen 
tially  different  from  our  own),  because  the  laws  of  that 
Navy,  creating  the  absolute  one-man  power  in  the 
captain,  and  vesting  in  him  the  authority  to  scourge, 
conform  in  spirit  to  the  territorial  laws  of  Russia,  which 
is  ruled  by  an  autocrat,  and  whose  courts  inflict  the 
knout  upon  the  subjects  of  the  land.  But  with  us  it  is 
different.  Our  institutions  claim  to  be  based  upon  broad 
principles  of  political  liberty  and  equality.  Whereas,  it 
would  hardly  affect  one  iota  the  condition  on  shipboard 
of  an  American  man-of-war's  man,  were  he  transferred 
to  the  Russian  Navy  and  made  a  subject  of  the  Czar. 

As  a  sailor,  he  shares  none  of  our  civil  immunities  ; 
the  law  of  our  soil  in  no  respect  accompanies  the  national 
floating  timbers  grown  thereon,  and  to  which  he  clings 
as  his  home.  For  him  our  Revolution  was  in  vain  ;  to 
him  our  Declaration  of  Independence  is  a  lie. 

It  is  not  sufficiently  borne  in  mind,  perhaps,  that 
though  the  naval  code  comes  under  the  head  of  the 


180  WHITE  JACKET 

martial  law,  yet,  in  time  of  peace,  and  in  the  thousand 
questions  arising  between  man  and  man  on  board  ship, 
this  code,  to  a  certain  extent,  may  not  improperly  be 
deemed  municipal.  With  its  crew  of  800  or  1000  men, 
a  three-decker  is  a  city  on  the  sea.  But  in  most  of  these 
matters  between  man  and  man,  the  captain,  instead  of 
being  a  magistrate,  dispensing  what  the  law  promulgates, 
is  an  absolute  ruler,  making  and  unmaking  law  as  he 
pleases. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  XXth  of  the  Articles  of  War 
provides,  that  if  any  person  in  the  Navy  negligently 
perform  the  duties  assigned  him,  he  shall  suffer  such 
punishment  as  a  court-martial  shall  adjudge  ;  but  if  the 
offender  be  a  private  (common  sailor),  he  may,  at  the 
discretion  of  the  captain,  be  put  in  irons  or  flogged.  It 
is  needless  to  say,  that  in  cases  where  an  officer  commits 
a  trivial  violation  of  this  law,  a  court-martial  is  seldom 
or  never  called  to  sit  upon  his  trial ;  but  in  the  sailor's 
case  he  is  at  once  condemned  to  the  lash.  Thus,  one 
set  of  sea-citizens  is  exempted  from  a  law  that  is  hung 
in  terror  over  others.  What  would  landsmen  think, 
were  the  State  of  New  York  to  pass  a  law  against  some 
offence,  affixing  a  fine  as  a  penalty,  and  then  add  to 
that  law  a  section  restricting  its  penal  operation  to 
mechanics  and  day  labourers,  exempting  all  gentlemen 
with  an  income  of  one  thousand  dollars  ?  Yet  thus,  in 
the  spirit  of  its  practical  operation,  even  thus,  stands 
a  good  part  of  the  naval  laws  wherein  naval  flogging  is 
involved. 

But  a  law  should  be  '  universal,'  and  include  in  its 
possible  penal  operations  the  very  judge  himself  who 
gives  decisions  upon  it ;  nay,  the  very  judge  who  ex 
pounds  it.  Had  Sir  William  Blackstone  violated  the 
laws  of  England,  he  would  have  been  brought  before 
the  bar  over  which  he  had  presided,  and  would  there 


FLOGGING  NOT  LAWFUL  181 

have  been  tried,  with  the  counsel  for  the  Crown  reading 
to  him,  perhaps,  from  a  copy  of  his  own  Commentaries. 
And  should  he  have  been  found  guilty,  he  would  have 
suffered  like  the  meanest  subject,  '  according  to  law.' 

How  is  it  in  an  American  frigate  ?  Let  one  example 
suffice.  By  the  Articles  of  War,  and  especially  by 
Article  I.,  an  American  captain  may,  and  frequently 
does,  inflict  a  severe  and  degrading  punishment  upon 
a  sailor,  while  he  himself  is  forever  removed  from  the 
possibility  of  undergoing  the  like  disgrace  ;  and,  in  all 
probability,  from  undergoing  any  punishment  whatever, 
even  if  guilty  of  the  same  thing — contention  with  his 
equals,  for  instance — for  which  he  punishes  another. 
Yet  both  sailor  and  captain  are  American  citizens. 

Now,  in  the  language  of  Blackstone,  again,  there  is  a 
law,  '  coeval  with  mankind,  dictated  by  God  Himself, 
superior  in  obligation  to  any  other,  and  no  human  laws 
are  of  any  validity  if  contrary  to  this.'  That  law  is 
the  Law  of  Nature  ;  among  the  three  great  principles  of 
which  Justinian  includes  *  that  to  every  man  should  be 
rendered  his  due.'  But  we  have  seen  that  the  laws" in 
volving  flogging  in  the  Navy  do  not  render  to  every  man 
his  due,  since  in  some  cases  they  indirectly  exclude  the 
officers  from  any  punishment  whatever,  and  in  all  cases 
protect  them  from  the  scourge,  which  is  inflicted  upon 
the  sailor.  Therefore,  according  to  Blackstone  and 
Justinian,  those  laws  have  no  binding  force  ;  and  every 
American  man-of-war's  man  would  be  morally  justified 
in  resisting  the  scourge  to  the  uttermost ;  and,  in  so 
resisting,  would  be  religiously  justified  in  what  would  be 
judicially  styled  '  the  act  of  mutiny  '  itself. 

If,  then,  these  scourging  laws  be  for  any  reason  neces 
sary,  make  them  binding  upon  all  who  of  right  come 
under  their  sway  ;  and  let  us  see  an  honest  commodore, 
duly  authorised  by  Congress,  condemning  to  the  lash 


182  WHITE  JACKET 

a  transgressing  captain  by  the  side  of  a  transgressing 
sailor.  And  if  the  commodore  himself  prove  a  trans 
gressor,  let  us  see  one  of  his  brother  commodores  take 
up  the  lash  against  him,  even  as  the  boatswain's  mates, 
the  navy  executioners,  are  often  called  upon  to  scourge 
each  other. 

Or  will  you  say  that  a  Navy  officer  is  a  man,  but  that 
an  American-born  citizen,  whose  grandsire  may  have 
ennobled  him  by  pouring  out  his  blood  at  Bunker  Hill — 
will  you  say  that,  by  entering  the  service  of  his  country 
as  a  common  seaman,  and  standing  ready  to  fight  her 
foes,  he  thereby  loses  his  manhood  at  the  very  time  he 
most  asserts  it  ?  Will  you  say  that,  by  so  doing,  he 
degrades  himself  to  the  liability  of  the  scourge,  but 
if  he  tarries  ashore  in  time  of  danger,  he  is  safe  from 
that  indignity  ?  All  our  linked  states,  all  four  continents 
of  mankind,  unite  in  denouncing  such  a  thought. 

We  plant  the  question,  then,  on  the  topmost  argument 
of  all.  Irrespective  of  incidental  considerations,  we 
assert  that  flogging  in  the  Navy  is  opposed  to  the  essential 
dignity  of  man,  which  no  legislator  has  a  right  to  violate  ; 
that  it  is  oppressive,  and  glaringly  unequal  in  its  opera 
tions  ;  that  it  is  utterly  repugnant  to  the  spirit  of  our 
democratic  institutions ;  indeed,  that  it  involves  a 
lingering  trait  of  the  worst  times  of  a  barbarous  feudal 
aristocracy  ;  in  a  word,  we  denounce  it  as  religiously, 
morally,  and  immutably  wrong. 

No  matter,  then,  what  may  be  the  consequences  of 
its  abolition  ;  no  matter  if  we  have  to  dismantle  our 
fleets,  and  our  unprotected  commerce  should  fall  a  prey 
to  the  spoiler ;  the  awful  admonitions  of  justice  and 
humanity  demand  that  abolition  without  procrastina 
tion  ;  in  a  voice  that  is  not  to  be  mistaken,  demand 
that  abolition  to-day.  It  is  not  a  dollar-and-cent  question 
of  expediency  ;  it  is  a  matter  of  right  and  wrong.  And 


FLOGGING  NOT  LAWFUL  183 

if  any  man  can  lay  his  hand  on  his  heart,  and  solemnly 
say  that  this  scourging  is  right,  let  that  man  but  once 
feel  the  lash  on  his  own  back,  and  in  his  agony  you  will 
hear  the  apostate  call  the  seven  heavens  to  witness  that 
it  is  wrong.  And,  in  the  name  of  immortal  manhood, 
would  to  God  that  every  man  who  upholds  this  thing 
were  scourged  at  the  gangway  till  he  recanted. 


CHAPTER   XXXVI 

FLOGGING    NOT  NECESSARY 

BUT  White  Jacket  is  ready  to  come  down  from  the  lofty 
mast-head  of  an  eternal  principle,  and  fight  you — com 
modores  and  captains  of  the  Navy — on  your  own  quarter 
deck,  with  your  own  weapons,  at  your  own  paces. 

Exempt  yourselves  from  the  lash,  you  take  Bible  oaths 
to  it  that  it  is  indispensable  for  others  ;  you  swear  that, 
without  the  lash,  no  armed  ship  can  be  kept  in  suitable 
discipline.  Be  it  proved  to  you,  officers,  and  stamped 
upon  your  foreheads,  that  herein  you  are  utterly  wrong. 

'  Send  them  to  Collingwood,'  said  Lord  Nelson,  '  and 
he  will  bring  them  to  order.'  This  was  the  language  of 
that  renowned  admiral,  when  his  officers  reported  to 
him  certain  seamen  of  the  fleet  as  wholly  ungovernable. 
'  Send  them  to  Collingwood.'  And  who  was  Colling 
wood,  that,  after  these  navy  rebels  had  been  imprisoned 
and  scourged  without  being  brought  to  order,  Colling 
wood  could  convert  them  to  docility  ? 

Who  Admiral  Collingwood  was,  as  an  historical  hero, 
history  herself  will  tell  you  ;  nor,  in  whatever  triumphal 
hall  they  may  be  hanging,  will  the  captured  flags  of 
Trafalgar  fail  to  rustle  at  the  mention  of  that  name. 
But  what  Collingwood  was  as  a  disciplinarian  on  board 
the  ships  he  commanded  perhaps  needs  to  be  said.  He 
was  an  officer,  then,  who  held  in  abhorrence  all  corporal 
punishment ;  who,  though  seeing  more  active  service 
than  any  sea-officer  of  his  time,  yet,  for  years  together, 
governed  his  men  without  inflicting  the  lash. 

But  these  seamen  of  his  must  have  been  most  exemplary 


184 


FLOGGING  NOT  NECESSARY  185 

saints,  to  have  proved  docile  under  so  lenient  a  sway. 
Were  they  saints  ?  Answer,  ye  jails  and  alms-houses 
throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  Great  Britain, 
which,  in  Collingwood's  time,  were  swept  clean  of  the  last 
lingering  villain  and  pauper  to  man  His  Majesty's  fleets. 

Still  more,  that  was  a  period  when  the  uttermost 
resources  of  England  were  taxed  to  the  quick  ;  when 
the  masts  of  her  multiplied  fleets  almost  transplanted 
her  forests,  all  standing,  to  the  sea  ;  when  British  press- 
gangs  not  only  boarded  foreign  ships  on  the  high  seas, 
and  boarded  foreign  pier-heads,  but  boarded  their  own 
merchantmen  at  the  mouth  of  the  Thames,  and  boarded 
the  very  firesides  along  its  banks  ;  when  Englishmen 
were  knocked  down  and  dragged  into  the  Navy,  like 
cattle  into  the  slaughter-house,  with  every  mortal  pro 
vocation  to  a  mad  desperation  against  the  service  that 
thus  ran  their  unwilling  heads  into  the  muzzles  of  the 
enemy's  cannon.  This  was  the  time,  and  these  the  men 
that  Colling  wood  governed  without  the  lash. 

I  know  it  has  been  said  that  Lord  Collingwood  began 
by  inflicting  severe  punishments,  and  afterward  ruling 
his  sailors  by  the  mere  memory  of  a  bygone  terror,  which 
he  could  at  pleasure  revive  ;  and  that  his  sailors  knew 
this,  and  hence  their  good  behaviour  under  a  lenient  sway. 
But,  granting  the  quoted  assertion  to  be  true,  how  comes 
it  that  many  American  captains,  who,  after  inflicting  as 
severe  punishment  as  ever  Collingwood  could  have 
authorised — how  comes  it  that  they,  also,  have  not  been 
able  to  maintain  good  order  without  subsequent  floggings, 
after  once  showing  to  the  crew  with  what  terrible  attri 
butes  they  were  invested  ?  But  it  is  notorious,  and  a 
thing  that  I  myself,  in  several  instances,  know  to  have 
been  the  case,  that  in  the  American  Navy,  where  corporal 
punishment,  has  been  most  severe,  it  has  also  been  most 
frequent. 


186  WHITE  JACKET 

But  it  is  incredible  that,  with  such  crews  as  Lord 
Collingwood's — composed,  in  part,  of  the  most  desperate 
characters,  the  rakings  of  the  jails — it  is  incredible  that 
such  a  set  of  men  could  have  been  governed  by  the  mere 
memory  of  the  lash.  Some  other  influence  must  have 
been  brought  to  bear  ;  mainly,  no  doubt,  the  influence 
wrought  by  a  powerful  brain,  and  a  determined,  intrepid 
spirit  over  a  miscellaneous  rabble. 

It  is  well  known  that  Lord  Nelson  himself,  in  point 
of  policy,  was  averse  to  flogging  ;  and  that,  too,  when 
he  had  witnessed  the  mutinous  effects  of  government 
abuses  in  the  Navy — unknown  in  our  times — and  which, 
to  the  terror  of  all  England,  developed  themselves  at  the 
great  mutiny  of  the  Nore  :  an  outbreak  that  for  several 
weeks  jeopardised  the  very  existence  of  the  British  Navy. 

But  we  may  press  this  thing  nearly  two  centuries 
further  back,  for  it  is  a  matter  of  historical  doubt  whether, 
in  Robert  Blake's  time,  Cromwell's  great  admiral,  such 
a  thing  as  flogging  was  known  at  the  gangways  of  his 
victorious  fleets.  And  as  in  this  matter  we  cannot  go 
further  back  than  to  Blake,  so  we  cannot  advance  further 
than  to  our  own  time,  which  shows  Commodore  Stock 
ton,  during  the  recent  war  with  Mexico,  governing  the 
American  squadron  in  the  Pacific  without  employing  the 
scourge. 

But  if  of  three  famous  English  admirals  one  has 
abhorred  flogging,  another  almost  governed  his  ships 
without  it,  and  to  the  third  it  may  be  supposed  to  have 
been  unknown,  while  an  American  commander  has, 
within  the  present  year  almost,  been  enabled  to  sustain 
the  good  discipline  of  an  entire  squadron  in  time  of  war 
without  having  an  instrument  of  scourging  on  board, 
what  inevitable  inferences  must  be  drawn,  and  how  dis 
astrous  to  the  mental  character  of  all  advocates  of  Navy 
flogging,  who  may  happen  to  be  Navy  officers  themselves  ! 


FLOGGING  NOT  NECESSARY  187 

It  cannot  have  escaped  the  discernment  of  any  observer 
of  mankind,  that,  in  the  presence  of  its  conventional 
inferiors,  conscious  imbecility  in  power  often  seeks  to 
carry  off  that  imbecility  by  assumptions  of  lordly  severity. 
The  amount  of  flogging  on  board  an  American  man-of- 
war  is,  in  many  cases,  in  exact  proportion  to  the  pro 
fessional  and  intellectual  incapacity  of  her  officers  to 
command.  Thus,  in  these  cases,  the  law  that  authorises 
flogging  does  but  put  a  scourge  into  the  hand  of  a  fool. 
In  most  calamitous  instances  this  has  been  shown. 

It  is  a  matter  of  record,  that  some  English  ships  of 
war  have  fallen  a  prey  to  the  enemy  through  the  insub 
ordination  of  the  crew,  induced  by  the  witless  cruelty 
of  their  officers  ;  officers  so  armed  by  the  law  that  they 
could  inflict  that  cruelty  without  restraint.  Nor  have 
there  been  wanting  instances  where  the  seamen  have 
run  away  with  their  ships,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Hermione 
and  Danae,  and  forever  rid  themselves  of  the  outrageous 
inflictions  of  their  officers  by  sacrificing  their  lives  to  their 
fury. 

Events  like  these  aroused  the  attention  of  the  British 
public  at  the  time.  But  it  was  a  tender  theme,  the  public 
agitation  of  which  the  government  was  anxious  to  sup 
press.  Nevertheless,  whenever  the  thing  was  privately 
discussed,  these  terrific  mutinies,  together  with  the  then 
prevailing  insubordination  of  the  men  in  the  Navy,  were 
almost  universally  attributed  to  the  exasperating  system 
of  flogging.  And  the  necessity  for  flogging  was  generally 
believed  to  be  directly  referable  to  the  impressment  of 
such  crowds  of  dissatisfied  men.  And  in  high  quarters 
it  was  held  that  if,  by  any  mode,  the  English  fleet  could 
be  manned  without  recourse  to  coercive  measures,  then 
the  necessity  of  flogging  would  cease. 

'  If  we  abolish  either  impressment  or  flogging,  the 
abolition  of  the  other  will  follow  as  a  matter  of  course.' 


188  WHITE  JACKET 

This  was  the  language  of  the  Edinburgh  Review  at  a  still 
later  period,  1824. 

If,  then,  the  necessity  of  flogging  in  the  British  armed 
marine  was  solely  attributed  to  the  impressment  of  the 
seamen,  what  faintest  shadow  of  reason  is  there  for  the 
continuance  of  this  barbarity  in  the  American  service, 
which  is  wholly  freed  from  the  reproach  of  impressment. 

It  is  true  that,  during  a  long  period  of  non-impressment, 
and  even  down  to  the  present  day,  flogging  has  been,  and 
still  is,  the  law  of  the  English  Navy.  But  in  things  of  this 
kind  England  should  be  nothing  to  us,  except  an  example 
to  be  shunned.  Nor  should  wise  legislators  wholly 
govern  themselves  by  precedents,  and  conclude  that, 
since  scourging  has  so  long  prevailed,  some  virtue  must 
reside  in  it.  Not  so.  The  world  has  arrived  at  a  period 
which  renders  it  the  part  of  Wisdom  to  pay  homage  to 
the  prospective  precedents  of  the  Future  in  preference 
to  those  of  the  Past.  The  Past  is  dead,  and  has  no 
resurrection  ;  but  the  Future  is  endowed  with  such  a  life, 
that  it  lives  to  us  even  in  anticipation.  The  Past  is,  in 
many  things,  the  foe  of  mankind  ;  the  Future  is,  in  all 
things,  our  friend.  In  the  Past  is  no  hope  ;  the  Future 
is  both  hope  and  fruition.  The  Past  is  the  text-book  of 
tyrants  ;  the  Future  the  Bible  of  the  Free.  Those  who 
are  solely  governed  by  the  Past  stand  like  Lot's  wife, 
crystallised  in  the  act  of  looking  backward,  and  forever 
incapable  of  looking  before. 

Let  us  leave  the  Past,  then,  to  dictate  laws  to  im 
movable  China  ;  let  us  abandon  it  to  the  Chinese  Legiti 
mists  of  Europe.  But  for  us,  we  will  have  another 
captain  to  rule  over  us — that  captain  who  ever  marches 
at  the  head  of  his  troop,  and  beckons  them  forward,  not 
lingering  in  the  rear,  and  impeding  their  march  with 
lumbering  baggage-wagons  of  old  precedents.  This  is 
the  Past. 


FLOGGING  NOT  NECESSARY  189 

But  in  many  things  we  Americans  are  driven  to  a 
rejection  of  the  maxims  of  the  Past,  seeing  that,  ere 
long,  the  van  of  the  nations  must,  of  right,  belong  to  our 
selves.  There  are  occasions  when  it  is  for  America  to 
make  precedents,  and  not  to  obey  them.  We  should,  if 
possible,  prove  a  teacher  to  posterity,  instead  of  being 
the  pupil  of  bygone  generations.  More  shall  come  after  us 
than  have  gone  before  ;  the  world  is  not  yet  middle-aged. 

Escaped  from  the  house  of  bondage,  Israel  of  old  did 
not  follow  after  the  ways  of  the  Egyptians.  To  her  was 
given  an  express  dispensation  ;  to  her  were  given  new 
things  under  the  sun.  And  we  Americans  are  the 
peculiar,  chosen  people — the  Israel  of  our  time  ;  we  bear 
the  ark  of  the  liberties  of  the  world.  Seventy  years  ago 
we  escaped  from  thrall ;  and,  besides  our  first  birthright 
— embracing  one  continent  of  earth — God  has  given  to_ 
us,  for  a  future  inheritance,  the  broad  domains  of  the 
political  pagans,  that  shall  yet  come  and  lie  down  under 
the  shade  of  our  ark,  without  bloody  hands  being  lifted. 
God  has  predestinated,  mankind  expects,  great  things 
from  our  race  ;  and  great  things  we  feel  in  our  souls. 
The  rest  of  the  nations  must  soon  be  in  our  rear. 
We  are  the  pioneers  of  the  world  ;  the  advance-guard, 
sent  on  through  the  wilderness  of  untried  things,  to  break 
a  new  path  in  the  New  World  that  is  ours.  In  our  youth 
is  our  strength  ;  in  our  inexperience,  our  wisdom.  At  a 
period  when  other  nations  have  but  lisped,  our  deep 
voice  is  heard  afar.  Long  enough  have  we  been  sceptics 
with  regard  to  ourselves,  and  doubted  whether,  indeed, 
the  political  Messiah  had  come.  But  he  has  come  in  us, 
if  we  would  but  give  utterance  to  his  promptings.  And 
let  us  always  remember  that  with  ourselves,  almost  for 
the  first  time  in  the  history  of  earth,  national  selfishness 
is  unbounded  philanthropy  ;.  for  we  cannot  do  a  good  to 
America,  but  we  give  alms  to  the  world. 


CHAPTER   XXXVII 

SOME   SUPERIOR   OLD    '  LONDON   DOCK  *   FROM   THE 
WINE-COOLERS   OF  NEPTUNE 

WE  had  just  slid  into  pleasant  weather,  drawing  near  to 
the  Tropics,  when  all  hands  were  thrown  into  a  wonder 
ful  excitement  by  an  event  that  eloquently  appealed  to 
many  palates. 

A  man  at  the  fore-topsail-yard  sung  out  that  there 
were  eight  or  ten  dark  objects  floating  on  the  sea,  some 
three  points  off  our  lee-bow. 

*  Keep  her  off  three  points  !  '  cried  Captain  Claret, 
to  the  quarter-master  at  the  cun. 

And  thus,  with  all  our  batteries,  storerooms,  and  five 
hundred  men,  with  their  baggage,  and  beds,  and  pro 
visions,  at  one  move  of  a  round  bit  of  mahogany,  our 
great  embattled  ark  edged  away  for  the  strangers,  as 
easily  as  a  boy  turns  to  the  right  or  left  in  pursuit  of 
insects  in  the  field. 

Directly  the  man  on  the  topsail-yard  reported  the 
dark  objects  to  be  hogsheads.  Instantly  all  the  top- 
men  were  straining  their  eyes,  in  delirious  expectation  of 
having  their  long  grog-fast  broken  at  last,  and  that,  too, 
by  what  seemed  an  almost  miraculous  intervention.  It 
was  a  curious  circumstance  that,  without  knowing  the 
contents  of  the  hogsheads,  they  yet  seemed  certain  that 
the  staves  encompassed  the  thing  they  longed  for. 

Sail  was  now  shortened,  our  headway  was  stopped, 
and  a  cutter  was  lowered,  with  orders  to  tow  the  fleet 
of  strangers  alongside.  The  men  sprang  to  their  oars 

190 


SOME  SUPERIOR  OLD  l LONDON  DOCK'     191 

with  a  will,  and  soon  five  goodly  puncheons  lay  wallow 
ing  in  the  sea,  just  under  the  main-chains.  We  got 
overboard  the  slings,  and  hoisted  them  out  of  the  water. 

It  was  a  sight  that  Bacchus  and  his  bacchanals  would 
have  gloated  over.  Each  puncheon  was  of  a  deep-green 
colour,  so  covered  with  minute  barnacles  and  shell-fish, 
and  streaming  with  seaweed,  that  it  needed  long  search 
ing  to  find  out  their  bung-holes ;  they  looked  like  venerable 
old  loggerhead-turtles.  How  long  they  had  been  tossing 
about,  and  making  voyages  for  the  benefit  of  the  flavour 
of  their  contents,  no  one  could  tell.  In  trying  to  raft 
them  ashore,  or  on  board  of  some  merchant  ship,  they 
must  have  drifted  off  to  sea.  This  we  inferred  from  the 
ropes  that  lengthwise  united  them,  and  which,  from  one 
point  of  view,  made  them  resemble  a  long  sea-serpent. 
They  were  struck  into  the  gun-deck,  where  the  eager 
crowd  being  kept  off  by  sentries,  the  cooper  was  called 
with  his  tools. 

'  Bung  up,  and  bilge  free  !  '  he  cried,  in  an  ecstasy, 
flourishing  his  driver  and  hammer. 

Upon  clearing  away  the  barnacles  and  moss,  a  flat 
sort  of  shell-fish  was  found,  closely  adhering,  like  a 
California  shell,  right  over  one  of  the  bungs.  Doubtless 
this  shell-fish  had  there  taken  up  his  quarters,  and  thrown 
his  own  body  into  the  breach,  in  order  the  better  to  pre 
serve  the  precious  contents  of  the  cask.  The  bystanders 
were  breathless,  when  at  last  this  puncheon  was  canted 
over  and  a  tin-pot  held  to  the  orifice.  What  was  to  come 
forth  ?  salt  water  or  wine  ?  But  a  rich  purple  tide  soon 
settled  the  question,  and  the  lieutenant  assigned  to  taste 
it,  with  a  loud  and  satisfactory  smack  of  his  lips,  pro 
nounced  it  Port ! 

1  Oporto  !  '  cried  Mad  Jack,  '  and  no  mistake  !  ' 

But,  to  the  surprise,  grief,  and  consternation  of  the 
sailors,  an  order  now  came  from  the  quarter-deck  to 


192  WHITE  JACKET 

'  strike  the  strangers  down  into  the  main-hold  !  '  This 
proceeding  occasioned  all  sorts  of  censorious  observations 
upon  the  captain,  who,  of  course,  had  authorised  it. 

It  must  be  related  here  that,  on  the  passage  out  from 
home,  the  Never  sink  had  touched  at  Madeira  ;  and  there, 
as  is  often  the  case  with  men-of-war,  the  commodore 
and  captain  had  laid  in  a  goodly  stock  of  wines  for  their 
own  private  tables,  and  the  benefit  of  their  foreign 
visitors.  And  although  the  commodore  was  a  small, 
spare  man,  who  evidently  emptied  but  few  glasses,  yet 
Captain  Claret  was  a  portly  gentleman,  with  a  crimson 
face,  whose  father  had  fought  at  the  battle  of  the  Brandy- 
wine,  and  whose  brother  had  commanded  the  well-known 
frigate  named  in  honour  of  that  engagement.  And  his 
whole  appearance  evinced  that  Captain  Claret  himself 
had  fought  many  Brandywine  battles  ashore  in  honour 
of  his  sire's  memory,  and  commanded  in  many  bloodless 
Brandywine  actions  at  sea. 

It  was  therefore  with  some  savour  of  provocation  that 
the  sailors  held  forth  on  the  ungenerous  conduct  of 
Captain  Claret,  in  stepping  in  between  them  and  Provi 
dence,  as  it  were,  which  by  this  lucky  windfall,  they 
held,  seemed  bent  upon  relieving  their  necessities ; 
while  Captain  Claret  himself,  with  an  inexhaustible 
cellar,  emptied  his  Madeira  decanters  at  his  leisure. 

But  next  day  all  hands  were  electrified  by  the  old 
familiar  sound — so  long  hushed — of  the  drum  rolling 
to  grog. 

After  that  the  port  was  served  out  twice  a  day,  till  all 
was  expended. 


CHAPTER    XXXVIII 

THE   CHAPLAIN   AND   CHAPEL  IN   A   MAN-OF-WAR 

THE  next  day  was  Sunday  ;  a  fact  set  down  in  the 
almanac,  spite  of  merchant  seamen's  maxim,  that  there 
are  no  Sundays  off  soundings. 

No  Sundays  off  soundings,  indeed  !  No  Sundays  on 
shipboard  !  You  may  as  well  say  there  should  be  no 
Sundays  in  churches  ;  for  is  not  a  ship  modelled  after 
a  church  ?  has  it  not  three  spires — three  steeples  ?  yea, 
and  on  the  gun-deck,  a  bell  and  a  belfry  ?  And  does 
not  that  bell  merrily  peal  every  Sunday  morning,  to 
summon  the  crew  to  devotions  ? 

At  any  rate,  there  were  Sundays  on  board  this  par 
ticular  frigate  of  ours,  and  a  clergyman  also.  He  was  a 
slender,  middle-aged  man,  of  an  amiable  deportment 
and  irreproachable  conversation  ;  but  I  must  say  that 
his  sermons  were  but  ill-calculated  to  benefit  the  crew. 
He  had  drunk  at  the  mystic  fountain  of  Plato  ;  his  head 
had  been  turned  by  the  Germans  ;  and  this  I  will  say, 
that  White  Jacket  himself  saw  him  with  Coleridge's 
Biographia  Literaria  in  his  hand. 

Fancy,  now,  this  transcendental  divine  standing 
behind  a  gun-carriage  on  the  main-deck,  and  addressing 
five  hundred  salt-sea  sinners  upon  the  psychological 
phenomena  of  the  soul,  and  the  ontological  necessity  of 
every  sailor's  saving  it  at  all  hazards.  He  enlarged 
upon  the  follies  of  the  ancient  philosophers  ;  learnedly 
alluded  to  the  Phaedo  of  Plato  ;  exposed  the  follies  of 
Simplicius's  Commentary  on  Aristotle' *s  c  De  Coelo,9  by 


194  WHITE  JACKET 

arraying  against  that  clever  pagan  author  the  admired 
tract  of  Tertullian — De  Praescriptionibus  Haereticorum — 
and  concluded  by  a  Sanscrit  invocation.  He  was  par 
ticularly  hard  upon  the  Gnostics  and  Marcionites  of  the 
second  century  of  the  Christian  era  ;  but  he  never,  in 
the  remotest  manner,  attacked  the  everyday  vices  of 
the  nineteenth  century,  as  eminently  illustrated  in  our 
man-of-war  world.  Concerning  drunkenness,  fighting, 
flogging,  and  oppression — things  expressly  or  impliedly 
prohibited  by  Christianity — he  never  said  aught.  But 
the  most  mighty  commodore  and  captain  sat  before  him  ; 
and  in  general,  if,  in  a  monarchy,  the  state  form  the 
audience  of  the  church,  little  evangelical  piety  will  be 
preached.  Hence,  the  harmless,  non-committal  abstrusi 
ties  of  our  chaplain  were  not  to  be  wondered  at.  He  was 
no  Massillon,  to  thunder  forth  his  ecclesiastical  rhetoric, 
even  when  a  Louis  le  Grand  was  enthroned  among  his 
congregation.  Nor  did  the  chaplains  who  preached  on 
the  quarter-deck  of  Lord  Nelson  ever  allude  to  the 
guilty  Felix,  nor  to  Delilah,  nor  practically  reason  of 
righteousness,  temperance,  and  judgment  to  come,  when 
that  renowned  admiral  sat,  sword-belted,  before  them. 

During  these  Sunday  discourses,  the  officers  always 
sat  in  a  circle  round  the  chaplain,  and,  with  a  business 
like  air,  steadily  preserved  the  utmost  propriety.  In 
particular,  our  old  commodore  himself  made  a  point  of 
looking  intensely  edified  ;  and  not  a  sailor  on  board  but 
believed  that  the  commodore,  being  the  greatest  man 
present,  must  alone  comprehend  the  mystic  sentences 
that  fell  from  our  parson's  lips. 

Of  all  the  noble  lords  in  the  ward-room,  this  lord- 
spiritual,  with  the  exception  of  the  purser,  was  in  the 
highest  favour  with  the  commodore,  who  frequently 
conversed  with  him  in  a  close  and  confidential  manner. 
Nor,  upon  reflection,  was  this  to  be  marvelled  at,  seeing 


CHAPLAIN  AND  CHAPEL  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR   195 

how  efficacious,  in  all  despotic  governments,  it  is  for  the 
throne  and  altar  to  go  hand  in  hand. 

The  accommodations  of  our  chapel  were  very  poor. 
We  had  nothing  to  sit  on  but  the  great  gun-rammers 
and  capstan-bars,  placed  horizontally  upon  shot-boxes. 
These  seats  were  exceedingly  uncomfortable,  wearing 
out  our  trowsers  and  our  tempers,  and,  no  doubt,  impeded 
the  conversion  of  many  valuable  souls. 

To  say  the  truth,  man-of-war's  men,  in  general,  make 
but  poor  auditors  upon  these  occasions,  and  adopt  every 
possible  means  to  elude  them.  Often  the  boatswain's 
mates  were  obliged  to  drive  the  men  to  service,  violently 
swearing  upon  these  occasions,  as  upon  every  other. 

'  Go  to  prayers,  d n  you  !     To  prayers,  you  rascals 

— to    prayers  !  '     In    this    clerical    invitation    Captain 
Claret  would  frequently  unite. 

At  this  Jack  Chase  would  sometimes  make  merry. 
;  Come,  boys,  don't  hang  back,'  he  would  say  ;  *  come, 
let  us  go  hear  the  parson  talk  about  his  Lord  High 
Admiral  Plato,  and  Commodore  Socrates.' 

But,  in  one  instance,  grave  exception  was  taken  to 
this  summons.  A  remarkably  serious,  but  bigoted  sea 
man,  a  sheet-anchor  man — whose  private  devotions  may 
hereafter  be  alluded  to — once  touched  his  hat  to  the 
captain,  and  respectfully  said,  '  Sir,  I  am  a  Baptist ;  the 
chaplain  is  an  Episcopalian  ;  his  form  of  worship  is  not 
mine  ;  I  do  not  believe  with  him,  and  it  is  against  my 
conscience  to  be  under  his  ministry.  May  I  be  allowed, 
sir,  not  to  attend  service  on  the  half-deck  ?  ' 

'  You  will  be  allowed,  sir  !  '  said  the  captain,  haughtily, 
'  to  obey  the  laws  of  the  ship.  If  you  absent  yourself 
from  prayers  on  Sunday  mornings,  you  know  the  penalty.' 

According  to  the  Articles  of  War,  the  captain  was  per 
fectly  right  ;  but  if  any  law  requiring  an  American  to 
attend  divine  service  against  his  will  be  a  law  respecting 


196  WHITE  JACKET 

the  establishment  of  religion,  then  the  Articles  of  War  are, 
in  this  one  particular,  opposed  to  the  American  Consti 
tution,  which  expressly  says,  *  Congress  shall  make  no 
law  respecting  the  establishment  of  religion,  or  the  free 
exercise  thereof.'  But  this  is  only  one  of  several  things 
in  which  the  Articles  of  War  are  repugnant  to  that 
instrument.  They  will  be  glanced  at  in  another  part  of 
the  narrative. 

The  motive  which  prompts  the  introduction  of  chap 
lains  into  the  Navy  cannot  but  be  warmly  responded  to 
by  every  Christian.  But  it  does  not  follow,  that  because 
chaplains  are  to  be  found  in  men-of-war,  that,  under  the 
present  system,  they  achieve  much  good,  or  that,  under 
any  other,  they  ever  will. 

How  can  it  be  expected  that  the  religion  of  peace 
should  nourish  in  an  oaken  castle  of  war  ?  How  can  it 
be  expected  that  the  clergyman,  whose  pulpit  is  a  forty- 
two-pounder,  should  convert  sinners  to  a  faith  that 
enjoins  them  to  turn  the  right  cheek  when  the  left  is 
smitten  ?  How  is  it  to  be  expected  that  when,  according 
to  the  XLII.  of  the  Articles  of  War,  as  they  now  stand 
unrepealed  on  the  Statute  Book,  '  a  bounty  shall  be  paid  ' 
(to  the  officers  and  crew)  '  by  the  United  States  govern 
ment  of  twenty  dollars  for  each  person  on  board  any 
ship  of  an  enemy  which  shall  be  sunk  or  destroyed 
by  any  United  States  ship  '  ;  and  when  by  a  subse 
quent  section  (vii.),  it  is  provided,  among  other 
apportionings,  that  the  chaplain  shall  receive  '  two- 
twentieths  '  of  this  price  paid  for  sinking  and  destroying 
ships  full  of  human  beings  ?  How  is  it  to  be  expected 
that  a  clergyman,  thus  provided  for,  should  prove 
efficacious  in  enlarging  upon  the  criminality  of  Judas, 
who,  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  betrayed  his  Master  ? 

Although,  by  the  regulations  of  the  Navy,  each  seaman's 
mess  on  board  the  Neversink  was  furnished  with  a  Bible, 


CHAPLAIN  AND  CHAPEL  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR    197 

these  Bibles  were  seldom  or  never  to  be  seen,  except  on 
Sunday  mornings,  when  usage  demands  that  they  shall 
be  exhibited  by  the  cooks  of  the  messes,  when  the  master- 
at-arms  goes  his  round  on  the  berth-deck.  At  such 
times,  they  usually  surmounted  a  highly  polished  tin  pot 
placed  on  the  lid  of  the  chest. 

Yet,  for  all  this,  the  Christianity  of  man-of-war's  men, 
and  their  disposition  to  contribute  to  pious  enterprises, 
are  often  relied  upon.  Several  times  subscription  papers 
were  circulated  among  the  crew  of  the  Neversink,  while 
in  harbour,  under  the  direct  patronage  of  the  chaplain. 
One  was  for  the  purpose  of  building  a  seaman's  chapel  in 
China  ;  another  to  pay  the  salary  of  a  tract  distributor 
in  Greece  ;  a  third  to  raise  a  fund  for  the  benefit  of  an 
African  Colonisation  Society. 

Where  the  captain  himself  is  a  moral  man,  he  makes 
a  far  better  chaplain  for  his  crew  than  any  clergyman 
can  be.  This  is  sometimes  illustrated  in  the  case  of 
sloops  of  war  and  armed  brigs,  which  are  not  allowed  a 
regular  chaplain.  I  have  known  one  crew,  who  were 
warmly  attached  to  a  naval  commander  worthy  of  their 
love,  who  have  mustered  even  with  alacrity  to  the  call 
to  prayer  ;  and  when  their  captain  would  read  the 
Church  of  England  service  to  them,  would  present  a 
congregation  not  to  be  surpassed  for  earnestness  and 
devotion  by  any  Scottish  kirk.  It  seemed  like  family 
devotions,  where  the  head  of  the  house  is  foremost  in 
confessing  himself  before  his  Maker.  But  our  own 
hearts  are  our  best  prayer-rooms,  and  the  chaplains  who 
can  most  help  us  are  ourselves. 


CHAPTER   XXXIX 

THE  FRIGATE  IN  HARBOUR — THE  BOATS — GRAND  STATE 
RECEPTION   OF   THE    COMMODORE 

IN  good  time  we  were  up  with  the  parallel  of  Rio  de 
Janeiro,  and,  standing  in  for  the  land,  the  mist  soon 
cleared  ;  and  high  aloft  the  famed  Sugar  Loaf  pinnacle 
was  seen,  our  bowsprit  pointing  for  it  straight  as  a  die. 

As  we  glided  on  toward  our  anchorage,  the  bands  of 
the  various  men-of-war  in  harbour  saluted  us  with 
national  airs,  and  gallantly  lowered  their  ensigns.  Nothing 
can  exceed  the  courteous  etiquette  of  these  ships,  of  all 
nations,  in  greeting  their  brethren.  Of  all  men,  your 
accomplished  duellist  is  generally  the  most  polite. 

We  lay  in  Rio  some  weeks,  lazily  taking  in  stores  and 
otherwise  preparing  for  the  passage  home.  But  though 
Rio  is  one  of  the  most  magnificent  bays  in  the  world  ; 
though  the  city  itself  contains  many  striking  objects  ; 
and  though  much  might  be  said  of  the  Sugar  Loaf  and 
Signal  Hill  heights  ;  and  the  little  islet  of  Lucia  ;  and 
the  fortified  Ilha  dos  Cobras,  or  Isle  of  the  Snakes  (though 
the  only  anacondas  and  adders  now  found  in  the  arsenals 
there  are  great  guns  and  pistols) ;  and  Lord  Wood's 
Nose — a  lofty  eminence  said  by  seamen  to  resemble  his 
lordship's  conch-shell ;  and  the  Prays  do  Flamingo — a 
noble  tract  of  beach,  so  called  from  its  having  been  the 
resort,  in  olden  times,  of  those  gorgeous  birds  ;  and  the 
charming  Bay  of  Botofogo,  which,  spite  of  its  name,  is 
fragrant  as  the  neighbouring  Larangieros,  or  Valley  of 
the  Oranges  ;  and  the  green  Gloria  Hill,  surmounted  by 
the  belfries  of  the  queenly  Church  of  Nossa  Senora  de 

198 


THE  FRIGATE  IN  HARBOUR  199 

Gloria  ;  and  the  iron-gray  Benedictine  convent  near  by  ; 
and  the  fine  drive  and  promenade,  Passeo  Publico ; 
and  the  massive  arch-over-arch  aqueduct,  Arcos  de 
Carico  ;  and  the  Emperor's  Palace  ;  and  the  Empress's 
Gardens  ;  and  the  fine  Church  de  Candelaria  ;  and  the 
gilded  throne  on  wheels,  drawn  by  eight  silken,  silver- 
belled  mules,  in  which,  of  pleasant  evenings,  His  Imperial 
Majesty  is  driven  out  of  town  to  his  Moorish  villa  of 
St.  Christova — ay,  though  much  might  be  said  of  all  this, 
yet  must  I  forbear,  if  I  may,  and  adhere  to  my  one  proper 
object,  the  world  in  a  man-of-war. 

Behold,  now,  the  Neversink  under  a  new  aspect.  With 
all  her  batteries,  she  is  tranquilly  lying  in  harbour,  sur 
rounded  by  English,  French,  Dutch,  Portuguese,  and 
.Brazilian  seventy -fours,  moored  in  the  deep -green  water, 
close  under  the  lee  of  that  oblong,  castellated  mass  of 
rock,  Ilha  dos  Cobras,  which,  with  its  port-holes  and 
lofty  flagstaffs,  looks  like  another  man-of-war,  fast 
anchored  in  the  bay.  But  what  is  an  insular  fortress, 
indeed,  but  an  embattled  landslide  into  the  sea  from  the 
world  Gibraltars  and  Quebecs  ?  And  what  a  mainland 
fortress  but  a  few  decks  of  a  line-of-battle  ship  trans 
planted  ashore  ?  They  are  all  one — all,  as  King  David, 
men-of-war  from  their  youth. 

Ay,  behold  now  the  Neversink  at  her  anchors,  in  many 
respects  presenting  a  different  appearance  from  what 
she  presented  at  sea.  Nor  is  the  routine  of  life  on  board 
the  same. 

At  sea  there  is  more  to  employ  the  sailors,  and  less 
temptation  to  violations  of  the  law.  Whereas,  in  port, 
unless  some  particular  service  engages  them,  they  lead 
the  laziest  of  lives,  beset  by  all  the  allurements  of  the 
shore,  though  perhaps  that  shore  they  may  never  touch. 
Unless  you  happen  to  belong  to  one  of  the  numerous 
boats  which,  in  a  man-of-war  in  harbour,  are  continually 


200  WHITE  JACKET 

plying  to  and  from  the  land,  you  are  mostly  thrown  upon 
your  own  resources  to  while  away  the  time.  Whole  days 
frequently  pass  without  your  being  individually  called 
upon  to  lift  a  finger  ;  for  though,  in  the  merchant  service, 
they  make  a  point  of  keeping  the  men  always  busy  about 
something  or  other,  yet,  to  employ  five  hundred  sailors 
when  there  is  nothing  definite  to  be  done,  wholly  surpasses 
the  ingenuity  of  any  first  lieutenant  in  the  Navy. 

As  mention  has  just  been  made  of  the  numerous  boats 
employed  in  harbour,  something  more  may  as  well  be  put 
down  concerning  them.  Our  frigate  carried  a  very  large 
boat — as  big  as  a  small  sloop — called  a  launch,  which  was 
generally  used  for  getting  off  wood,  water,  and  other 
bulky  articles.  Besides  this,  she  carried  four  boats  of  an 
arithmetical  progression  in  point  of  size — the  largest 
being  known  as  the  first  cutter,  the  next  largest  the 
second  cutter,  then  the  third  and  fourth  cutters.  She 
also  carried  a  commodore's  barge,  a  captain's  gig,  and  a 
*  dinghy,'  a  small  yawl,  with  a  crew  of  apprentice  boys. 
All  these  boats,  except  the  '  dinghy,'  had  their  regular 
crews,  who  were  subordinate  to  their  cockswains — 
petty  officers,  receiving  pay  in  addition  to  their  sea 
man's  wages. 

The  launch  was  manned  by  the  old  Tritons  of  the  fore 
castle,  who  were  no  ways  particular  about  their  dress, 
while  the  other  boats — commissioned  for  genteeler  duties 
— were  rowed  by  young  fellows,  mostly,  who  had  a  dandy 
eye  to  their  personal  appearance.  Above  all,  the  officers 
see  to  it  that  the  commodore's  barge  and  the  captain's 
gig  are  manned  by  gentlemanly  youths,  who  may  do 
credit  to  their  country,  and  form  agreeable  objects  for 
the  eyes  of  the  commodore  or  captain  to  repose  upon  as 
he  tranquilly  sits  in  the  stern,  when  pulled  ashore  by  his 
barge-men  or  gig-men,  as  the  case  may  be.  Some  sailors 
are  very  fond  of  belonging  to  the  boats,  and  deem  it  a  great 


THE  FRIGATE  IN  HARBOUR  201 

honour  to  be  a  commodore's  barge-man  ;  but  others,  per 
ceiving  no  particular  distinction  in  that  office,  do  not 
court  it  so  much. 

On  the  second  day  after  arriving  at  Rio,  one  of  the 
gig-men  fell  sick,  and,  to  my  no  small  concern,  I  found 
myself  temporarily  appointed  to  his  place. 

f  Come,  White  Jacket,  rig  yourself  in  white — that 's  the 
gig's  uniform  to-day ;  you  are  a  gig-man,  my  boy — give 
ye  joy  !  '  This  was  the  first  announcement  of  the  fact 
that  I  heard  ;  but  soon  after  it  was  officially  ratified. 

I  was  about  to  seek  the  first  lieutenant,  and  plead 
the  scantiness  of  my  wardrobe,  which  wholly  disqualified 
me  to  fill  so  distinguished  a  station,  when  I  heard  the 
bugler  call  away  the  '  gig  '  ;  and,  without  more  ado,  I 
slipped  into  a  clean  frock,  which  a  messmate  doffed  for 
my  benefit,  and  soon  after  found  myself  pulling  off  his 
High  Mightiness  the  Captain  to  an  English  seventy-four. 

As  we  were  bounding  along,  the  cockswain  suddenly 
cried  '  Oars  !  '  At  the  word  every  oar  was  suspended 
in  the  air,  while  our  commodore's  barge  floated  by, 
bearing  that  dignitary  himself.  At  the  sight,  Captain 
Claret  removed  his  chapeau,  and  saluted  profoundly, 
our  boat  laying  motionless  on  the  water.  But  the  barge 
never  stopped  ;  and  the  commodore  made  but  a  slight 
return  to  the  obsequious  salute  he  had  received. 

We  then  resumed  rowing,  and  presently  I  heard 
'  Oars  !  '  again  ;  but  from  another  boat,  the  second 
cutter,  which  turned  out  to  be  carrying  a  lieutenant 
ashore.  It  was  now  Captain  Claret's  turn  to  be  honoured. 
The  cutter  lay  still,  and  the  lieutenant  off  hat ;  while 
the  captain  only  nodded,  and  we  kept  on  our  way. 

This  naval  etiquette  is  very  much  like  the  etiquette  at 
the  Grand  Porte  of  Constantinople,  where,  after  washing 
the  Sublime  Sultan's  feet,  the  Grand  Vizier  avenges 
himself  on  an  Emir,  who  does  the  same  office  for  him. 


202  WHITE  JACKET 

When  we  arrived  aboard  the  English  seventy-four, 
the  captain  was  received  with  the  usual  honours,  and 
the  gig's  crew  were  conducted  below,  and  hospitably 
regaled  with  some  spirits,  served  out  by  order  of  the 
officer  of  the  deck. 

Soon  after,  the  English  crew  went  to  quarters  ;  and 
as  they  stood  up  at  their  guns,  all  along  the  main-deck, 
a  row  of  beef -fed  Britons,  stalwart-looking  fellows,  I 
was  struck  with  the  contrast  they  afforded  to  similar 
sights  on  board  of  the  Neversink. 

For  on  board  of  us,  our  '  quarters  '  showed  an  array 
of  rather  slender,  lean-cheeked  chaps.  But  then  I  made 
no  doubt,  that,  in  a  sea-tussle,  these  lantern-jawed 
varlets  would  have  approved  themselves  as  slender 
Damascus  blades,  nimble  and  flexible  ;  whereas  these 
Britons  would  have  been,  perhaps,  as  sturdy  broad 
swords.  Yet  every  one  remembers  that  story  of  Saladin 
and  Richard  trying  their  respective  blades  ;  how  gallant 
Richard  clove  an  anvil  in  twain,  or  something  quite  as 
ponderous,  and  Saladin  elegantly  severed  a  cushion  ;  so 
that  the  two  monarchs  were  even — each  excelling  in  his 
way — though,  unfortunately  for  my  simile,  in  a  patriotic 
point  of  view,  Richard  whipped Saladin's  armies  in  the  end. 

There  happened  to  be  a  lord  on  board  of  this  ship— 
the  younger  son  of  an  earl,  they  told  me.  He  was  a 
fine-looking  fellow.  I  chanced  to  stand  by  when  he  put 
a  question  to  an  Irish  captain  of  a  gun  ;  upon  the  sea 
man's  inadvertently  saying  sir  to  him,  his  lordship  looked 
daggers  at  the  slight ;  and  the  sailor,  touching  his  hat 
a  thousand  times,  said,  '  Pardon,  your  honour  ;  I  meant 
to  say  my  lord,  sir  !  ' 

I  was  much  pleased  with  an  old  white-headed  musician, 
who  stood  at  the  main-hatchway,  with  his  enormous  bass 
drum  full  before  him,  and  thumping  it  sturdily  to  the 
tune  of  '  God  Save  the  King ! '  though  small  mercy  did 


THE  FRIGATE  IN  HARBOUR  203 

he  have  on  his  drum-heads.  Two  little  boys  were  clash 
ing  cymbals,  and  another  was  blowing  a  fife,  with  his 
cheeks  puffed  out  like  the  plumpest  of  his  country's 
plum-puddings. 

When  we  returned  from  this  trip,  there  again  took 
place  that  ceremonious  reception  of  our  captain  on 
board  the  vessel  he  commanded,  which  always  had 
struck  me  as  exceedingly  diverting. 

In  the  first  place,  while  in  port,  one  of  the  quarter 
masters  is  always  stationed  on  the  poop  with  a  spy 
glass,  to  look  out  for  all  boats  approaching,  and  report 
the  same  to  the  officer  of  the  deck  ;  also,  who  it  is  that 
may  be  coming  in  them  ;  so  that  preparations  may  be 
made  accordingly.  As  soon,  then,  as  the  gig  touched 
the  side,  a  mightily  shrill  piping  was  heard,  as  if  some 
boys  were  celebrating  the  Fourth  of  July  with  penny 
whistles.  This  proceeded  from  a  boatswain's  mate, 
who,  standing  at  the  gangway,  was  thus  honouring  the 
captain's  return  after  his  long  and  perilous  absence. 

The  captain  then  slowly  mounted  the  ladder,  and 
gravely  marching  through  a  lane  of  '  side-boys'  so  called 
— all  in  their  best  bibs  and  tuckers,  and  who  stood  making 
sly  faces  behind  his  back — was  received  by  all  the  lieu 
tenants  in  a  body,  their  hats  in  their  hands,  and  making 
a  prodigious  scraping  and  bowing,  as  if  they  had  just 
graduated  at  a  French  dancing-school.  Meanwhile, 
preserving  an  erect,  inflexible,  and  ramrod  carriage, 
and  slightly  touching  his  chapeau,  the  captain  made 
his  ceremonious  way  to  the  cabin,  disappearing  behind 
the  scenes,  like  the  pasteboard  ghost  in  Hamlet. 

But  these  ceremonies  are  nothing  to  those  in  homage 
of  the  commodore's  arrival,  even  should  he  depart  and 
arrive  twenty  times  a  day.  Upon  such  occasions,  the 
whole  marine  guard,  except  the  sentries  on  duty,  are 
marshalled  on  the  quarter-deck,  presenting  arms  as  the 


204  WHITE  JACKET 

commodore  passes  them ;  while  their  commanding 
officer  gives  the  military  salute  with  his  sword,  as  if 
making  masonic  signs.  Meanwhile,  the  boatswain  him 
self — not  a  boatswain's  mate — is  keeping  up  a  persevering 
whistling  with  his  silver  pipe  ;  for  the  commodore  is 
never  greeted  with  the  rude  whistle  of  a  boatswain's 
subaltern  ;  that  would  be  positively  insulting.  All  the 
lieutenants  and  midshipmen,  besides  the  captain  him 
self,  are  drawn  up  in  a  phalanx,  and  off  hat  together  ; 
and  the  side-boys,  whose  number  is  now  increased  to 
ten  or  twelve,  make  an  imposing  display  at  the  gang 
way  ;  while  the  whole  brass  band,  elevated  upon  the 
poop,  strike  up  '  See  !  the  Conquering  Hero  comes  !  ' 
At  least,  this  was  the  tune  that  our  captain  always 
hinted,  by  a  gesture,  to  the  captain  of  the  band,  when 
ever  the  commodore  arrived  from  shore.  It  conveyed 
a  complimentary  appreciation,  on  the  captain's  part,  of 
the  commodore's  heroism  during  the  late  war. 

To  return  to  the  gig.  As  I  did  not  relish  the  idea  of 
being  a  sort  of  body-servant  to  Captain  Claret — since 
his  gig -men  were  often  called  upon  to  scrub  his  cabin 
floor,  and  perform  other  duties  for  him — I  made  it  my 
particular  business  to  get  rid  of  my  appointment  in  his 
boat  as  soon  as  possible,  and  the  next  day  after  receiving 
it  succeeded  in  procuring  a  substitute,  who  was  glad  of 
the  chance  to  fill  the  position  I  so  much  undervalued. 

And  thus,  with  our  counterlikes  and  dislikes,  most  of 
us  man-of-war's  men  harmoniously  dovetail  into  each 
other,  and,  by  our  very  points  of  opposition,  unite  in 
a  clever  whole,  like  the  parts  of  a  Chinese  puzzle.  But 
as,  in  a  Chinese  puzzle,  many  pieces  are  hard  to  place,  so 
there  are  some  unfortunate  fellows  who  can  never  slip  into 
their  proper  angles,  and  thus  the  whole  puzzle  becomes  a 
puzzle  indeed,  which  is  the  precise  condition  of  the 
greatest  puzzle  in  the  world — this  man-of-war  world  itself. 


CHAPTER  XL 

SOME   OF  THE   CEREMONIES   IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR 

UNNECESSARY   AND   INJURIOUS 

THE  ceremonials  of  a  man-of-war,  some  of  which  have 
been  described  in  the  preceding  chapter,  may  merit  a 
reflection  or  two. 

The  general  usages  of  the  American  Navy  are  founded 
upon  the  usages  that  prevailed  in  the  Navy  of  monarchical 
England  more  than  a  century  ago  ;  nor  have  they  been 
materially  altered  since.  And  while  both  England  and 
America  have  become  greatly  liberalised  in  the  interval ; 
while  shore  pomp  in  high  places  has  come  to  be  regarded 
by  the  more  intelligent  masses  of  men  as  belonging  to 
the  absurd,  ridiculous,  and  mock-heroic  ;  while  that 
most  truly  august  of  all  the  majesties  of  earth,  the 
President  of  the  United  States,  may  be  seen  entering  his 
residence  with  his  umbrella  under  his  arm,  and  no  brass 
band  or  military  guard  at  his  heels,  and  unostentatiously 
taking  his  seat  by  the  side  of  the  meanest  citizen  in  a 
public  conveyance  ;  while  this  is  the  case,  there  still 
lingers  in  American  men-of-war  all  the  stilted  etiquette 
and  childish  parade  of  the  old-fashioned  Spanish  Court  of 
Madrid.  Indeed,  so  far  as  the  things  that  meet  the  eye 
are  concerned,  an  American  commodore  is  by  far  a  greater 
man  than  the  President  of  twenty  millions  of  freemen. 

But  we  plain  people  ashore  might  very  willingly  be 
content  to  leave  these  commodores  in  the  unmolested 
possession  of  their  gilded  penny  whistles,  rattles,  and 
gewgaws,  since  they  seem  to  take  so  much  pleasure  in 

205 


206  WHITE  JACKET 

them,  were  it  not  that  all  this  is  attended  by  consequences 
to  their  subordinates  in  the  last  degree  to  be  deplored. 

While  hardly  anyone  will  question  that  a  naval  officer 
should  be  surrounded  by  circumstances  calculated  to 
impart  a  requisite  dignity  to  his  position,  it  is  not  the 
less  certain  that,  by  the  excessive  pomp  he  at  present 
maintains,  there  is  naturally  and  unavoidably  generated 
a  feeling  of  servility  and  debasement  in  the  hearts  of 
most  of  the  seamen  who  continually  behold  a  fellow- 
mortal  flourishing  over  their  heads  like  the  archangel 
Michael  with  a  thousand  wings.  And  as,  in  degree,  this 
same  pomp  is  observed  toward  their  inferiors  by  all  the 
grades  of  commissioned  officers,  even  down  to  a  midship 
man,  the  evil  is  proportionately  multiplied. 

It  would  not  at  all  diminish  a  proper  respect  for  the 
officers,  and  subordination  to  their  authority  among  the 
seamen,  were  all  this  idle  parade — only  ministering  to 
the  arrogance  of  the  officers,  without  at  all  benefiting 
the  State — completely  done  away.  But  to  do  so,  we 
voters  and  lawgivers  ourselves  must  be  no  respecters 
of  persons. 

That  saying  about  levelling  upward,  and  not  down 
ward,  may  seem  very  fine  to  those  who  cannot  see  its 
self -involved  absurdity.  But  the  truth  is,  that,  to  gain 
the  true  level,  in  some  things,  we  must  cut  downward"; 
for  how  can  you  make  every  sailor  a  commodore  ?  or 
how  raise  the  valleys,  without  filling  them  up  with  the 
superfluous  tops  of  the  hills  ? 

Some  discreet,  but  democratic,  legislation  in  this 
matter  is  much  to  be  desired.  And  by  bringing  down 
naval  officers,  in  these  things  at  least,  without  affecting 
their  legitimate  dignity  and  authority,  we  shall  corre 
spondingly  elevate  the  common  sailor,  without  relaxing 
the  subordination,  in  which  he  should  by  all  means  be 
retained. 


CHAPTER   XL1 

A   MAN-OF-WAR  LIBRARY 

NOWHERE  does  time  pass  more  heavily  than  with  most 
man-of-war's  men  on  board  their  craft  in  harbour. 

One  of  my  principal  antidotes  against  ennui  in  Rio 
was  reading.  There  was  a  public  library  on  board,  paid 
for  by  government,  and  entrusted  to  the  custody  of  one 
of  the  marine  corporals,  a  little,  dried-up  man,  of  a  some 
what  literary  turn.  He  had  once  been  a  clerk  in  a  post 
office  ashore  ;  and,  having  been  long  accustomed  to 
hand  over  letters  when  called  for,  he  was  now  just  the 
man  to  hand  over  books.  He  kept  them  in  a  large  cask 
on  the  berth-deck,  and,  when  seeking  a  particular  volume, 
had  to  capsize  it  like  a  barrel  of  potatoes.  This  made 
him  very  cross  and  irritable,  as  most  all  librarians  are. 
Who  had  the  selection  of  these  books,  I  do  not  know,  but 
some  of  them  must  have  been  selected  by  our  chaplain, 
who  so  pranced  on  Coleridge's  High  German  horse. 

Mason  Good's  Book  of  Nature — a  very  good  book, 
to  be  sure,  but  not  precisely  adapted  to  tarry  tastes — 
was  one  of  these  volumes  ;  and  Machiavel's  Art  of 
War — which  was  very  dry  fighting  ;  and  a  folio  of 
Tillotson's  Sermons — the  best  of  reading  for  divines, 
indeed,  but  with  little  relish  for  a  main-top  man  ;  and 
Locke's  Essays — incomparable  essays,  everybody  knows, 
but  miserable  reading  at  sea  ;  and  Plutarch's  Lives — 
super-excellent  biographies,  which  pit  Greek  against 
Roman  in  beautiful  style,  but  then,  in  a  sailor's  estima 
tion,  not  to  be  mentioned  with  the  Lives  of  the  Admirals  ; 

207 


208  WHITE  JACKET 

and  Blair's  Lectures,  University  Edition — a  fine  treatise 
on  rhetoric,  but  having  nothing  to  say  about  nautical 
phrases,  such  as  'splicing  the  main-brace,'  'passing  a 
gammoning,'  '  puddinging  the  dolphin,'  and  '  making  a 
Carrick-bend  '  ;  besides  numerous  invaluable  but  unread 
able  tomes,  that  might  have  been  purchased  cheap  at 
the  auction  of  some  college  professor's  library. 

But  I  found  ample  entertainment  in  a  few  choice  old 
authors,  whom  I  stumbled  upon  in  various  parts  of  the 
ship,  among  the  inferior  officers.  One  was  Morgan's 
History  of  Algiers,  a  famous  old  quarto,  abounding  in 
picturesque  narratives  of  corsairs,  captives,  dungeons, 
and  sea-fights  ;  and  making  mention  of  a  cruel  old  Dey, 
who,  toward  the  latter  part  of  his  life,  was  so  filled  with 
remorse  for  his  cruelties  and  crimes  that  he  could  not 
stay  in  bed  after  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  but  had 
to  rise  in  great  trepidation  and  walk  off  his  bad  feelings 
till  breakfast  time.  And  another  venerable  octavo, 
containing  a  certificate  from  Sir  Christopher  Wren  to  its 
authenticity,  entitled  Knox's  Captivity  in  Ceylon,  1681 
• — abounding  in  stories  about  the  Devil,  who  was  super- 
stitiously  supposed  to  tyrannise  over  that  unfortunate 
land  :  to  mollify  him,  the  priests  offered  up  buttermilk, 
red  cocks,  and  sausages  ;  and  the  Devil  ran  roaring  about 
in  the  woods,  frightening  travellers  out  of  their  wits  ; 
insomuch  that  the  islanders  bitterly  lamented  to  Knox 
that  their  country  was  full  of  devils,  and,  consequently, 
there  was  no  hope  for  their  eventual  well-being.  Knox 
swears  that  he  himself  heard  the  Devil  roar,  though  he 
did  not  see  his  horns  ;  it  was  a  terrible  noise,  he  says, 
like  the  baying  of  a  hungry  mastiff. 

Then  there  was  Walpole's  Letters — very  witty,  pert, 
and  polite — and  some  odd  volumes  of  plays,  each  of  which 
was  a  precious  casket  of  jewels  of  good  things,  shaming 
the  trash  nowadays  passed  off  for  dramas,  containing 


A  MAN-OF-WAR  LIBRARY  209 

'  The  Jew  of  Malta,'  '  Old  Fortunatus,'  '  The  City  Madam,' 
'  Volpone/  '  The  Alchemist,'  and  other  glorious  old 
dramas  of  the  age  of  Marlowe  and  Jonson,  and  that  literary 
Damon  and  Pythias,  the  magnificent,  mellow  old  Beau 
mont  and  Fletcher,  who  have  sent  the  long  shadow  of 
their  reputation,  side  by  side  with  Shakespeare's,  far 
down  the  endless  vale  of  posterity.  And  may  that 
shadow  never  be  less  !  but  as  for  St.  Shakespeare,  may 
his  never  be  more,  lest  the  commentators  arise,  and 
settling  upon  his  sacred  text,  like  unto  locusts,  devour 
it  clean  up,  leaving  never  a  dot  over  an  I. 

I  diversified  this  reading  of  mine  by  borrowing  Moore's 
Loves  of  the  Angels  from  Rose-Water,  who  recommended 
it  as  '  de  charmingest  of  wolumes  '  ;  and  a  negro  song- 
book,  containing  Sittin'  on  a  Rail,  Gumbo  Squash,  and  Jim 
along  Josey,  from  Broadbit,  a  sheet-anchor  man.  The 
sad  taste  of  this  old  tar,  in  admiring  such  vulgar  stuff,  was 
much  denounced  by  Rose-Water,  whose  own  predilections 
were  of  a  more  elegant  nature,  as  evinced  by  his  exalted 
opinion  of  the  literary  merits  of  the  Loves  of  the  Angels. 

I  was  by  no  means  the  only  reader  of  books  on  board 
the  Neversink.  Several  other  sailors  were  diligent 
readers,  though  their  studies  did  not  lie  in  the  way  of 
belles-lettres.  Their  favourite  authors  were  such  as  you 
may  find  at  the  bookstalls  around  Fulton  Market ; 
they  were  slightly  physiological  in  their  nature.  My 
book  experiences  on  board  of  the  frigate  proved  an 
example  of  a  fact  which  every  book-lover  must  have 
experienced  before  me,  namely,  that  though  public 
libraries  have  an  imposing  air,  and  doubtless  contain 
invaluable  volumes,  yet,  somehow,  the  books  that  prove 
most  agreeable,  grateful,  and  companionable,  are  those 
we  pick  up  by  chance  here  and  there  ;  those  which  seem 
put  into  our  hands  by  Providence  ;  those  which  pretend 
to  little,  but  abound  in  much. 

o 


CHAPTER   XLII 

KILLING   TIME   IN   A   MAN-OF-WAR  IN   HARBOUR 

READING  was  by  no  means  the  only  method  adopted  by 
my  shipmates  in  whiling  away  the  long,  tedious  hours 
in  harbour.  In  truth,  many  of  them  could  not  have 
read,  had  they  wanted  to  ever  so  much  ;  in  early  youth 
their  primers  had  been  sadly  neglected.  Still,  they  had 
other  pursuits  ;  some  were  expert  at  the  needle,  and 
employed  their  time  in  making  elaborate  shirts,  stitching 
picturesque  eagles,  and  anchors,  and  all  the  stars  of  the 
federated  states  in  the  collars  thereof  ;  so  that  when  they 
at  last  completed  and  put  on  these  shirts,  they  may  be 
said  to  have  hoisted  the  American  colours. 

Others  excelled  in  tattooing,  or  pricking,  as  it  is  called 
in  a  man-of-war.  Of  these  prickers,  two  had  long  been 
celebrated,  in  their  way,  as  consummate  masters  of  the 
art.  Each  had  a  small  box  full  of  tools  and  colouring 
matter  ;  and  they  charged  so  high  for  their  services,  that 
at  the  end  of  the  cruise  they  were  supposed  to  have 
cleared  upwards  of  four  hundred  dollars.  They  would 
prick  you  to  order  a  palm-tree,  an  anchor,  a  crucifix,  a 
lady,  a  lion,  an  eagle,  or  anything  else  you  might  want. 

The  Roman  Catholic  sailors  on  board  had  at  least  the 
crucifix  pricked  on  their  arms,  and  for  this  reason  :  If 
they  chanced  to  die  in  a  Catholic  land,  they  would  be 
sure  of  a  decent  burial  in  consecrated  ground,  as  the 
priest  would  be  sure  to  observe  the  symbol  of  Mother 
Church  on  their  persons.  They  would  not  fare  as  Pro 
testant  sailors  dying  in  Callao,  who  are  shoved  under 
210 


KILLING  TIME  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR        211 

the  sands  of  St.  Lorenzo,  a  solitary,  volcanic  island  in 
the  harbour,  overrun  with  reptiles,  their  heretical  bodies 
not  being  permitted  to  repose  in  the  more  genial  loam  of 
Lima. 

And  many  sailors  not  Catholics  were  anxious  to  have 
the  crucifix  painted  on  them,  owing  to  a  curious  super 
stition  of  theirs.  They  affirm — some  of  them — that  if 
you  have  that  mark  tattooed  upon  all  four  limbs,  you 
might  fall  overboard  among  seven  hundred  and  seventy- 
five  thousand  white  sharks,  all  dinnerless,  and  not  one 
of  them  would  so  much  as  dare  to  smell  at  your  little 
finger. 

We  had  one  fore-top  man  on  board,  who,  during 
the  entire  cruise,  was  having  an  endless  cable  pricked 
round  and  round  his  waist,  so  that,  when  his  frock  was 
off,  he  looked  like  a  capstan  with  a  hawser  coiled  round 
about  it.  This  fore-top  man  paid  eighteenpence  per 
link  for  the  cable,  besides  being  on  the  smart  the  whole 
cruise,  suffering  the  effects  of  his  repeated  puncturings  ; 
so  he  paid  very  dear  for  his  cable. 

One  other  mode  of  passing  time  while  in  port  was 
cleaning  and  polishing  your  bright-work  ;  for  it  must  be 
known  that,  in  men-of-war,  every  sailor  has  some  brass 
or  steel  of  one  kind  or  other  to  keep  in  high  order — like 
housemaids,  whose  business  it  is  to  keep  well  polished 
the  knobs  on  the  front-door  railing  and  the  parlour 
grates. 

Excepting  the  ring-bolts,  eye-bolts,  and  belaying- 
pins  scattered  about  the  decks,  this  bright-work,  as  it  is 
called,  is  principally  about  the  guns,  embracing  the 
'  monkey-tails  '  of  the  carronades,  the  screws,  prickers, 
little  irons,  and  other  things. 

The  portion  that  fell  to  my  own  share  I  kept  in  superior 
order,  quite  equal  in  polish  to  Rogers's  best  cutlery.  I 
received  the  most  extravagant  encomiums  from  the 


212  WHITE  JACKET 

officers  ;  one  of  whom  offered  to  match  me  against  any 
brazier  or  brass -polisher  in  Her  British  Majesty's  Navy. 
Indeed,  I  devoted  myself  to  the  work  body  and  soul,  and 
thought  no  pains  too  painful,  and  no  labour  too  laborious, 
to  achieve  the  highest  attainable  polish  possible  for  us 
poor  lost  sons  of  Adam  to  reach. 

Upon  one  occasion,  even,  when  woollen  rags  were 
scarce,  and  no  burned-brick  was  to  be  had  from  the 
ship's  yeoman,  I  sacrificed  the  corners  of  my  woollen 
shirt,  and  used  some  dentifrice  I  had,  as  substitutes  for 
the  rags  and  burned-brick.  The  dentifrice  operated 
delightfully,  and  made  the  threading  of  my  carronade 
screw  shine  and  grin  again,  like  a  set  of  false  teeth  in 
an  eager  heiress-hunter's  mouth. 

Still  another  mode  of  passing  time,  was  arraying  your 
self  in  your  best  '  togs  '  and  promenading  up  and  down 
the  gun-deck,  admiring  the  shore  scenery  from  the  port 
holes,  which,  in  an  amphitheatrical  bay  like  Rio — belted 
about  by  the  most  varied  and  charming  scenery  of  hill, 
dale,  moss,  meadow,  court,  castle,  tower,  grove,  vine, 
vineyard,  aqueduct,  palace,  square,  island,  fort — is  very 
much  like  lounging  round  a  circular  cosmorama,  and 
ever  and  anon  lazily  peeping  through  the  glasses  here 
and  there.  Oh  !  there  is  something  worth  living  for, 
even  in  our  man-of-war  world  ;  and  one  glimpse  of  a 
bower  of  grapes,  though  a  cable's  length  off,  is  almost 
satisfaction  for  dining  off  a  shank-bone  salted  down. 

This  promenading  was  chiefly  patronised  by  the 
marines,  and  particularly  by  Colbrook,  a  remarkably 
handsome  and  very  gentlemanly  corporal  among  them. 
He  was  a  complete  lady's  man  ;  with  fine  black  eyes, 
bright  red  cheeks,  glossy  jet  whiskers,  and  a  refined 
organisation  of  the  whole  man.  He  used  to  array  him 
self  in  his  regimentals,  and  saunter  about  like  an  officer 
of  the  Coldstream  Guards,  strolling  down  to  his  club  in 


KILLING  TIME  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR        213 

St.  James's.  Every  time  he  passed  me  he  would  heave 
a  sentimental  sigh,  and  hum  to  himself  '  The  girl  I  left 
behind  me'  This  fine  corporal  afterward  became  a 
representative  in  the  Legislature  of  the  State  of  New 
Jersey  ;  for  I  saw  his  name  returned  about  a  year  after 
my  return  home. 

But,  after  all,  there  was  not  much  room,  while  in 
port,  for  promenading  at  least  on  the  gun-deck,  for  the 
whole  larboard  side  is  kept  clear  for  the  benefit  of  the 
officers,  who  appreciate  the  advantages  of  having  a  clear 
stroll  fore  and  aft ;  and  they  well  know  that  the  sailors 
had  much  better  be  crowded  together  on  the  other  side 
than  that  the  set  of  their  own  coat-tails  should  be 
impaired  by  brushing  against  their  tarry  trowsers. 

One  other  way  of  killing  time  while  in  port  is  playing 
checkers  ;  that  is,  when  it  is  permitted  ;  for  it  is  not 
every  Navy  captain  who  will  allow  such  a  scandalous 
proceeding.  But,  as  for  Captain  Claret,  though  lie  did 
like  his  glass  of  Madeira  uncommonly  well,  and  was  an 
undoubted  descendant  from  the  hero  of  the  battle  of 
the  Brandy  wine,  and  though  he  sometimes  showed  a 
suspiciously  flushed  face  when  superintending  in  person 
the  flogging  of  a  sailor  for  getting  intoxicated  against 
his"  particular  orders,  yet  I  will  say  for  Captain  Claret 
that,  upon  the  whole,  he  was  rather  indulgent  to  his  crew, 
so  long  as  they  were  perfectly  docile.  He  allowed  them 
to  play  checkers  as  much  as  they  pleased.  More  than 
once  I  have  known  him,  when  going  forward  to  the  fore 
castle,  pick  his  way  carefully  among  scores  of  canvas 
checker-cloths  spread  upon  the  deck,  so  as  not  to  tread 
upon  the  men — the  checker-men  and  man-of-war's  men 
included  ;  but,  in  a  certain  sense,  they  were  both  one  ; 
for,  as  the  sailors  used  their  checker-men,  so,  at  quarters, 
their  officers  used  these  man-of-war's  men. 

But  Captain  Claret's  leniency  in  permitting  checkers 


214  WHITE  JACKET 

on  board  his  ship  might  have  arisen  from  the  following 
little  circumstance,  confidentially  communicated  to  me. 
Soon  after  the  ship  had  sailed  from  home,  checkers 
were  prohibited  ;  whereupon  the  sailors  were  exasper 
ated  against  the  captain,  and  one  night,  when  he  was 
walking  round  the  forecastle,  bim  !  came  an  iron  belaying  - 
pin  past  his  ears  ;  and  while  he  was  dodging  that,  bim  ! 
came  another,  from  the  other  side  ;  so  that,  it  being  a 
very  dark  night,  and  nobody  to  be  seen,  and  it  being 
impossible  to  find  out  the  trespassers,  he  thought  it  best 
to  get  back  into  his  cabin  as  soon  as  possible.  Some 
time  after — just  as  if  the  belaying -pins  had  nothing  to 
do  with  it — it  was  indirectly  rumoured  that  the  checker 
boards  might  be  brought  out  again,  which — as  a  philo 
sophical  shipmate  observed — showed  that  Captain  Claret 
was  a  man  of  a  ready  understanding,  and  could  under 
stand  a  hint  as  well  as  any  other  man,  even  when 
conveyed  by  several  pounds  of  iron. 

Some  of  the  sailors  were  very  precise  about  their 
checker-cloths,  and  even  went  so  far  that  they  would 
not  let  you  play  with  them  unless  you  first  washed  your 
hands,  especially  if  so  be  you  had  just  come  from  tarring 
down  the  rigging. 

Another  way  of  beguiling  the  tedious  hours  is  to  'get 
a  cosy  seat  somewhere,  and  fall  into  as  snug  a  little 
re  very  as  you  can.  Or  if  a  seat  is  not  to  be  had — which 
is  frequently  the  case — then  get  a  tolerably  comfortable 
stand-up  against  the  bulwarks,  and  begin  to  think  about 
home  and  bread  and  butter — always  inseparably  con 
nected  to  a  wanderer — which  will  very  soon  bring  delicious 
tears  into  your  eyes  ;  for  every  one  knows  what  a  luxury 
is  grief,  when  you  can  get  a  private  closet  to  enjoy  it  in, 
and  no  Paul  Prys  intrude.  Several  of  my  shore  friends, 
indeed,  when  suddenly  overwhelmed  by  some  disaster, 
always  make  a  point  of  flying  to  the  first  oyster  cellar, 


KILLING  TIME  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR        215 

and  shutting  themselves  up  in  a  box,  with  nothing  but 
a  plate  of  stewed  oysters,  some  crackers,  the  castor,  and 
a  decanter  of  old  port. 

Still  another  way  of  killing  time  in  harbour  is  to  lean 
over  the  bulwarks,  and  speculate  upon  where,  under  the 
sun,  you  are  going  to  be  that  day  next  year,  which  is  a 
subject  full  of  interest  to  every  living  soul ;  so  much  so, 
that  there  is  a  particular  day  of  a  particular  month  of 
the  year,  which,  from  my  earliest  recollections,  I  have 
always  kept  the  run  of,  so  that  I  can  even  now  tell  just 
where  I  was  on  that  identical  day  of  every  year  past 
since  I  was  twelve  years  old.  And  when  I  am  all  alone, 
to  run  over  this  almanac  in  my  mind  is  almost  as  enter 
taining  as  to  read  my  diary,  and  far  more  interesting  than 
to  peruse  a  table  of  logarithms  on  a  rainy  afternoon.  I 
always  keep  the  anniversary  of  that  day  with  lamb  and 
peas,  and  a  pint  of  sherry,  for  it  comes  in  spring.  But 
when  it  came  round  in  the  Neversink,  I  could  get  neither 
lamb,  peas,  nor  sherry. 

But  perhaps  the  best  way  to  drive  the  hours  before 
you  four-in-hand,  is  to  select  a  soft  plank  on  the  gun- 
deck,  and  go  to  sleep.  A  fine  specific,  which  seldom  fails, 
unless,  to  be  sure,  you  have  been  sleeping  all  the  twenty- 
four  hours  beforehand. 

Whenever  employed  in  killing  time  in  harbour,  I  have 
lifted  myself  up  on  my  elbow  and  looked  around  me, 
and  seen  so  many  of  my  shipmates  all  employed  at  the 
same  common  business  ;  all  under  lock  and  key  ;  all 
hopeless  prisoners  like  myself  ;  all  under  martial  law  ; 
all  dieting  on  salt  beef  and  biscuit ;  all  in  one  uniform  ; 
all  yawning,  gaping,  and  stretching  in  concert,  it  was 
then  that  I  used  to  feel  a  certain  love  and  affection  for 
them,  grounded,  doubtless,  on  a  fellow-feeling. 

And  though,  in  a  previous  part  of  this  narrative,  I  have 
mentioned  that  I  used  to  hold  myself  somewhat  aloof 


216  WHITE  JACKET 

from  the  mass  of  seamen  on  board  the  Neversink  ;  and 
though  this  was  true,  and  my  real  acquaintances  were 
comparatively  few,  and  my  intimates  still  fewer,  yet,  to 
tell  the  truth,  it  is  quite  impossible  to  live  so  long  with 
five  hundred  of  your  fellow-beings,  even  if  not  of  the 
best  families  in  the  land,  and  with  morals  that  would 
not  be  spoiled  by  further  cultivation  ;  it  is  quite  im 
possible,  I  say,  to  live  with  five  hundred  of  your  fellow- 
beings,  be  they  who  they  may,  without  feeling  a  common 
sympathy  with  them  at  the  time,  and  ever  after  cherish 
ing  some  sort  of  interest  in  their  welfare. 

The  truth  of  this  was  curiously  corroborated  by  a 
rather  equivocal  acquaintance  of  mine,  who,  among  the 
men,  went  by  the  name  of  '  Shakings.7  He  belonged  to 
the  fore-hold,  whence,  of  a  dark  night,  he  would  some 
times  emerge  to  chat  with  the  sailors  on  deck.  I  never 
liked  the  man's  looks  ;  I  protest  it  was  a  mere  accident 
that  gave  me  the  honour  of  his  acquaintance,  and  gener 
ally  I  did  my  best  to  avoid  him,  when  he  would  come 
skulking,  like  a  jail-bird,  out  of  his  den,  into  the  liberal, 
open  air  of  the  sky.  Nevertheless,  the  anecdote  this 
holder  told  me  is  well  worth  preserving,  more  especially 
the  extraordinary  frankness  evinced  in  his  narrating  such 
a  thing  to  a  comparative  stranger. 

The  substance  of  his  story  was  as  follows  :  Shakings, 
it  seems,  had  once  been  a  convict  in  the  New  York 
State's  prison  at  Sing-Sing,  where  he  had  been  for  years 
confined  for  a  crime,  which  he  gave  me  his  solemn  word 
of  honour  he  was  wholly  innocent  of.  He  told  me  that, 
after  his  term  had  expired,  and  he  went  out  into  the 
world  again,  he  never  could  stumble  upon  any  of  his  old 
Sing-Sing  associates  without  dropping  into  a  public- 
house  and  talking  over  old  times.  And  when  fortune 
would  go  hard  with  him,  and  he  felt  out  of  sorts,  and 
incensed  at  matters  and  things  in  general,  he  told  me 


KILLING  TIME  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAE        217 

that,  at  such  time,  he  almost  wished  he  was  back  again 
in  Sing-Sing,  where  he  was  relieved  from  all  anxieties 
about  what  he  should  eat  and  drink,  and  was  supported, 
like  the  President  of  the  United  States  and  Prince  Albert, 
at  the  public  charge.  He  used  to  have  such  a  snug  little 
cell,  he  said,  all  to  himself,  and  never  felt  afraid  of  house 
breakers,  for  the  walls  were  uncommonly  thick,  and  his 
door  was  securely  bolted  for  him,  and  a  watchman  was 
all  the  time  walking  up  and  down  in  the  passage,  while 
he  himself  was  fast  asleep  and  dreaming.  To  this,  in 
substance,  the  holder  added,  that  he  narrated  this  anec 
dote  because  he  thought  it  applicable  to  a  man-of-war, 
which  he  scandalously  asserted  to  be  a  sort  of  state 
prison  afloat. 

Concerning  the  curious  disposition  to  fraternise  and 
be  sociable,  which  this  Shakings  mentioned  as  charac 
teristic  of  the  convicts  liberated  from  his  old  homestead  at 
Sing-Sing,  it  may  well  be  asked  whether  it  may  not  prove 
to  be  some  feeling,  somehow  akin  to  the  reminiscent 
impulses  which  influenced  them,  that  shall  hereafter 
fraternally  reunite  all  us  mortals,  when  we  shall  have 
exchanged  this  state's  prison  man-of-war  world  of  ours 
for  another  and  a  better. 

From  the  foregoing  account  of  the  great  difficulty  we 
had  in  killing  time  while  in  port,  it  must  not  be  inferred 
that  on  board  of  the  Neversink  in  Rio  there  was  literally 
no  work  to  be  done.  At  long  intervals  the  launch  would 
come  alongside  with  water-casks,  to  be  emptied  into 
iron  tanks  in  the  hold.  In  this  way  nearly  fifty  thousand 
gallons,  as  chronicled  in  the  books  of  the  master's  mate, 
were  decanted  into  the  ship's  bowels — a  ninety  days' 
allowance.  With  this  huge  Lake  Ontario  in  us,  the 
mighty  Neversink  might  be  said  to  resemble  the  united 
continent  of  the  Eastern  Hemisphere — floating  in  a  vast 
ocean  herself,  and  having  a  Mediterranean  floating  in  her. 


CHAPTER    XLIII 

SMUGGLING  IN   A   MAN-OF-WAR 

IT  is  in  a  good  degree  owing  to  the  idleness  just  described, 
that,  while  lying  in  harbour,  the  man-of-war's  man  is 
exposed  to  the  most  temptations,  and  gets  into  his 
saddest  scrapes.  For  though  his  vessel  be  anchored  a 
mile  from  the  shore,  and  her  sides  are  patrolled  by 
sentries  night  and  day,  yet  these  things  cannot  entirely 
prevent  the  seductions  of  the  land  from  reaching  him. 
The  prime  agent  in  working  his  calamities  in  port  is  his 
old  arch-enemy,  the  ever-devilish  god  of  grog. 

Immured  as  the  man-of-war's  man  is,  serving  out  his 
weary  three  years  in  a  sort  of  sea-Newgate,  from  which 
he  cannot  escape,  either  by  the  roof  or  burrowing  under 
ground,  he  too  often  flies  to  the  bottle  to  seek  relief  from 
the  intolerable  ennui  of  nothing  to  do,  and  nowhere  to  go. 
His  ordinary  government  allowance  of  spirits,  one  gill 
per  diem,  is  not  enough  to  give  a  sufficient  fillip  to  his 
listless  senses  ;  he  pronounces  his  grog  basely  watered  ; 
he  scouts  at  it,  as  thinner  than  muslin  ;  he  craves  a  more 
vigorous  nip  at  the  cable,  a  more  sturdy  swig  at  the  hal 
yards  ;  and  if  opium  were  to  be  had,  many  would  steep 
themselves  a  thousand  fathoms  down  in  the  densest  fumes 
of  that  oblivious  drug.  Tell  him  that  the  delirium 
tremens  and  the  mania-a-potu  lie  in  ambush  for 
drunkards,  he  will  say  to  you,  '  Let  them  bear  down  upon 
me,  then,  before  the  wind  ;  anything  that  smacks  of  life 
is  better  than  to  feel  Davy  Jones's  chest-lid  on  your  nose.' 
He  is  reckless  as  an  avalanche  ;  and  though  his  fall 

218 


SMUGGLING  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR  219 

destroy  himself  and  others,  yet  a  ruinous  commotion  is 
better  than  being  frozen  fast  in  unendurable  solitudes. 
No  wonder,  then,  that  he  goes  all  lengths  to  procure  the 
thing  he  craves  ;  no  wonder  that  he  pays  the  most  ex 
orbitant  prices,  breaks  through  all  law,  and  braves  the 
ignominious  lash  itself,  rather  than  be  deprived  of  his 
stimulus. 

Now,  concerning  no  one  thing  in  a  man-of-war  are  the 
regulations  more  severe  than  respecting  the  smuggling 
of  grog,  and  being  found  intoxicated.  For  either  offence 
there  is  but  one  penalty,  invariably  enforced  ;  and  that 
is,  the  degradation  of  the  gangway. 

All  conceivable  precautions  are  taken  by  most  frigate 
executives  to  guard  against  the  secret  admission  of 
spirits  into  the  vessel.  In  the  first  place,  no  shore  boat 
whatever  is  allowed  to  approach  a  man-of-war  in  a 
foreign  harbour  without  permission  from  the  officer  of 
the  deck.  Even  the  bum-boats,  the  small  craft  licensed 
by  the  officers  to  bring  off  fruit  for  the  sailors,  to  be 
bought  out  of  their  own  money — these  are  invariably 
inspected  before  permitted  to  hold  intercourse  with  the 
ship's  company.  And  not  only  this,  but  every  one  of 
the  numerous  ship's  boats — kept  almost  continually 
plying  to  and  from  the  shore — are  similarly  inspected, 
sometimes  each  boat  twenty  times  in  the  day. 

This  inspection  is  thus  performed  :  The  boat  being 
descried  by  the  quarter-master  from  the  poop,  she  is 
reported  to  the  deck  officer,  who  thereupon  summons 
the  master-at-arms,  the  ship's  chief  of  police.  This 
functionary  now  stations  himself  at  the  gangway,  and 
as  the  boat's  crew,  one  by  one,  come  up  the  side,  he 
personally  overhauls  them,  making  them  take  off  their 
hats,  and  then,  placing  both  hands  upon  their  heads, 
draws  his  palms  slowly  down  to  their  feet,  carefully 
feeling  all  unusual  protuberances.  If  nothing  suspicious 


220  WHITE  JACKET 

is  felt,  the  man  is  let  pass  ;  and  so  on,  till  the  whole 
boat's  crew,  averaging  about  sixteen  men,  are  examined. 
The  chief  of  police  then  descends  into  the  boat,  and 
walks  from  stem  to  stern,  eyeing  it  all  over,  and  poking 
his  long  ratan  into  every  nook  and  cranny.  This 
operation  concluded,  and  nothing  found,  he  mounts  the 
ladder,  touches  his  hat  to  the  deck  officer,  and  reports  the 
boat  dean  ;  whereupon  she  is  hauled  out  to  the  booms. 

Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  not  a  man  of  the  ship's  com 
pany  ever  enters  the  vessel  from  shore  without  it  being 
rendered  next  to  impossible,  apparently,  that  he  should 
have  succeeded  in  smuggling  anything.  Those  indi 
viduals  who  are  permitted  to  board  the  ship  without 
undergoing  this  ordeal  are  only  persons  whom  it  would 
be  preposterous  to  search — such  as  the  commodore  him 
self,  the  captain,  lieutenants,  etc.,  and  gentlemen  and 
ladies  coming  as  visitors. 

For  anything  to  be  clandestinely  thrust  through  the 
lower  port-holes  at  night  is  rendered  very  difficult,  from 
the  watchfulness  of  the  quarter-master  in  hailing  all 
boats  that  approach,  long  before  they  draw  alongside, 
and  the  vigilance  of  the  sentries,  posted  on  platforms 
overhanging  the  water,  whose  orders  are  to  fire  into  a 
strange  boat  which,  after  being  warned  to  withdraw, 
should  still  persist  in  drawing  nigh.  Moreover,  thirty  - 
two-pound  shot  are  slung  to  ropes,  and  suspended  over 
the  bows,  to  drop  a  hole  into  and  sink  any  small  craft 
which,  spite  of  all  precautions,  by  strategy  should  succeed 
in  getting  under  the  bows  with  liquor  by  night.  Indeed, 
the  whole  power  of  martial  law  is  enlisted  in  this  matter  ; 
and  every  one  of  the  numerous  officers  of  the  ship,  besides 
his  general  zeal  in  enforcing  the  regulations,  adds  to  that 
a  personal  feeling,  since  the  sobriety  of  the  men  abridges 
his  own  cares  and  anxieties. 

How  then,  it  will  be  asked,  in  the  face  of  an  argus- 


SMUGGLING  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR  221 

eyed  police,  and  in  defiance  even  of  bayonets  and  bullets, 
do  man-of-war's  men  contrive  to  smuggle  their  spirits  ? 
Not  to  enlarge  upon  minor  stratagems — every  few  days 
detected,  and  rendered  naught  (such  as  rolling  up,  in  a 
neckerchief,  a  long,  slender  '  skin  '  of  grog,  like  a  sausage, 
and  in  that  manner  ascending  to  the  deck  out  of  a  boat 
just  from  shore  ;  or  openly  bringing  on  board  cocoa-nuts 
and  melons,  procured  from  a  knavish  bum-boat,  filled 
with  spirits,  instead  of  milk  or  water) — we  will  only 
mention  here  two  or  three  other  modes,  coming  under 
my  own  observation. 

While  in  Rio,  a  fore-top  man,  belonging  to  the  second 
cutter,  paid  down  the  money,  and  made  an  arrangement 
with  a  person  encountered  at  the  Palace -landing  ashore, 
to  the  following  effect.  Of  a  certain  moonless  night, 
he  was  to  bring  off  three  gallons  of  spirits,  in  skins,  and 
moor  them  to  the  frigate's  anchor-buoy — some  distance 
from  the  vessel — attaching  something  heavy,  to  sink 
them  out  of  sight.  In  the  middle  watch  of  the  night, 
the  fore-top  man  slips  out  of  his  hammock,  and  by 
creeping  along  in  the  shadows,  eludes  the  vigilance  of 
the  master-at  arms  and  his  mates,  gains  a  port-hole,  and 
softly  lowers  himself  into  the  water,  almost  without 
creating  a  ripple — the  sentries  marching  to  and  fro  on 
their  overhanging  platform  above  him.  He  is  an  expert 
swimmer,  and  paddles  along  under  the  surface,  every 
now  and  then  rising  a  little,  and  lying  motionless  on  his 
back  to  breathe — little  but  his  nose  exposed.  The  buoy 
gained,  he  cuts  the  skins  adrift,  ties  them  round  his  body, 
and  in  the  same  adroit  manner  makes  good  his  return. 

This  feat  is  very  seldom  attempted,  for  it  needs  the 
utmost  caution,  address,  and  dexterity  ;  and  no  one 
but  a  super-expert  burglar,  and  faultless  Leander  of  a 
swimmer,  could  achieve  it. 

From   the   greater  privileges   which  they  enjoy,   the 


222  WHITE  JACKET 

'forward  officers,'  that  is,  the  gunner,  boatswain,  etc., 
have  much  greater  opportunities  for  successful  smuggling 
than  the  common  seamen.  Coming  alongside  one  night 
in  a  cutter,  Yarn,  our  boatswain,  in  some  inexplicable 
way  contrived  to  slip  several  skins  of  brandy  through 
the  air-port  of  his  own  state-room.  The  feat,  however, 
must  have  been  perceived  by  one  of  the  boat's  crew,  who 
immediately,  on  gaining  the  deck,  sprung  down  the 
ladders,  stole  into  the  boatswain's  room,  and  made  away 
with  the  prize,  not  three  minutes  before  the  rightful 
owner  entered  to  claim  it.  Though,  from  certain  circum 
stances,  the  thief  was  known  to  the  aggrieved  party,  yet 
the  latter  could  say  nothing,  since  he  himself  had  in 
fringed  the  law.  But  the  next  day,  in  the  capacity  of 
captain  of  the  ship's  executioners,  Yarn  had  the  satis 
faction  (it  was  so  to  him)  of  standing  over  the  robber  at 
the  gangway  ;  for,  being  found  intoxicated  with  the  very 
liquor  the  boatswain  himself  had  smuggled,  the  man 
had  been  condemned  to  a  flogging. 

This  recalls  another  instance,  still  more  illustrative  of 
the  knotted,  trebly  intertwisted  villainy,  accumulating 
at  a  sort  of  compound  interest  in  a  man-of-war.  The 
cockswain  of  the  commodore's  barge  takes  his  crew 
apart,  one  by  one,  and  cautiously  sounds  them  as  to 
their  fidelity — not  to  the  United  States  of  America,  but 
to  himself.  Three  individuals,  whom  he  deems  doubtful 
— that  is,  faithful  to  the  United  States  of  America — he 
procures  to  be  discharged  from  the  barge,  and  men  of 
his  own  selection  are  substituted  ;  for  he  is  always  an 
influential  character,  this  cockswain  of  the  commodore's 
barge.  Previous  to  this,  however,  he  has  seen  to  it  well, 
that  no  Temperance  men — that  is,  sailors  who  do  not 
draw  their  government  ration  of  grog,  but  take  the  money 
for  it — he  has  seen  to  it,  that  none  of  these  balkers  are 
numbered  among  his  crew.  Having  now  proved  his 


SMUGGLING  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR  223 

men,  he  divulges  his  plan  to  the  assembled  body  ;  a 
solemn  oath  of  secrecy  is  obtained,  and  he  waits  the  first 
fit  opportunity  to  carry  into  execution  his  nefarious 
designs. 

At  last  it  comes.  One  afternoon  the  barge  carries 
the  commodore  across  the  bay  to  a  fine  waterside 
settlement  of  noblemen's  seats,  called  Praya  Grande. 
The  commodore  is  visiting  a  Portuguese  marquis,  and 
the  pair  linger  long  over  their  dinner  in  an  arbour  in  the 
garden.  Meanwhile,  the  cockswain  has  liberty  to  roam 
about  where  he  pleases.  He  searches  out  a  place  where 
some  choice  red-eye  (brandy)  is  to  be  had,  purchases  six 
large  bottles,  and  conceals  them  among  the  trees.  Under 
the  pretence  of  filling  the  boat-keg  with  water,  which 
is  always  kept  in  the  barge  to  refresh  the  crew,  he  now 
carries  it  off  into  the  grove,  knocks  out  the  head,  puts 
the  bottles  inside,  reheads  the  keg,  fills  it  with  water, 
carries  it  down  to  the  boat,  and  audaciously  restores  it  to 
its  conspicuous  position  in  the  middle,  with  its  bung- 
hole  up.  When  the  commodore  comes  down  to  the 
beach,  and  they  pull  off  for  the  ship,  the  cockswain,  in 
a  loud  voice,  commands  the  nearest  man  to  take  that 
bung  out  of  the  keg — that  precious  water  will  spoil. 
Arrived  alongside  the  frigate,  the  boat's  crew  are  over 
hauled,  as  usual,  at  the  gangway  ;  and  nothing  being 
found  on  them,  are  passed.  The  master-at-arms  now 
descending  into  the  barge,  and  finding  nothing  suspicious, 
reports  it  clean,  having  put  his  finger  into  the  open  bung 
of  the  keg  and  tasted  that  the  water  was  pure.  The 
barge  is  ordered  out  to  the  booms,  and  deep  night  is 
waited  for,  ere  the  cockswain  essays  to  snatch  the  bottles 
from  the  keg. 

But,  unfortunately  for  the  success  of  this  masterly 
smuggler,  one  of  his  crew  is  a  weak-pated  fellow,  who, 
having  drunk  somewhat  freely  ashore,  goes  about  the 


224  WHITE  JACKET 

gun-deck  throwing  out  profound,  tipsy  hints  concerning 
some  unutterable  proceeding  on  the  ship's  anvil.  A 
knowing  old  sheet-anchor  man,  an  unprincipled  fellow, 
putting  this,  that,  and  the  other  together,  ferrets  out  the 
mystery  ;  and  straightway  resolves  to  reap  the  goodly 
harvest  which  the  cockswain  has  sowed.  He  seeks  him 
out,  takes  him  to  one  side,  and  addresses  him  thus  : — 

'  Cockswain,  you  have  been  smuggling  off  some  red 
eye,  which  at  this  moment  is  in  your  barge  at  the  booms. 
Now,  cockswain,  I  have  stationed  two  of  my  messmates 
at  the  port-holes,  on  that  side  of  the  ship  ;  and  if  they 
report  to  me  that  you,  or  any  of  your  barge-men,  offer  to 
enter  that  barge  before  morning,  I  will  immediately 
report  you  as  a  smuggler  to  the  officer  of  the  deck.' 

The  cockswain  is  astounded  ;  for,  to  be  reported  to 
the  deck  officer  as  a  smuggler  would  inevitably  procure 
him  a  sound  flogging,  and  be  the  disgraceful  breaking  of 
him  as  a  petty  officer,  receiving  four  dollars  a  month 
beyond  his  pay  as  an  able  seaman.  He  attempts  to  bribe 
the  other  to  secrecy,  by  promising  half  the  profits  of  the 
enterprise  ;  but  the  sheet-anchor  man's  integrity  is  like 
a  rock  ;  he  is  no  mercenary,  to  be  bought  up  for  a  song. 
The  cockswain,  therefore,  is  forced  to  swear  that  neither 
himself,  nor  any  of  his  crew,  shall  enter  the  barge  before 
morning.  This  done,  the  sheet-anchor  man  goes  to  his 
confidants,  and  arranges  his  plans.  In  a  word,  he 
succeeds  in  introducing  the  six  brandy  bottles  into  the 
ship  ;  five  of  which  he  sells  at  eight  dollars  a  bottle  ; 
and  then,  with  the  sixth,  between  two  guns,  he  secretly 
regales  himself  and  his  confederates  ;  while  the  helpless 
cockswain,  stifling  his  rage,  bitterly  eyes  them  from  afar. 

Thus,  though  they  say  that  there  is  honour  among 
thieves,  there  is  little  among  man-of-war  smugglers. 


CHAPTER   XLIV 

A  KNAVE   IN   OFFICE   IN   A   MAN-OF-WAR 

THE  last  smuggling  story  now  about  to  be  related  also 
occurred  while  we  lay  at  Rio.  It  is  the  more  particularly 
presented,  since  it  furnishes  the  most  curious  evidence 
of  the  almost  incredible  corruption  pervading  nearly  all 
ranks  in  some  men-of-war. 

For  some  days,  the  number  of  intoxicated  sailors 
collared  and  brought  up  to  the  mast  by  the  master-at- 
arms,  to  be  reported  to  the  deck  officers — previous  to  a 
flogging  at  the  gangway — had  in  the  last  degree  excited 
the  surprise  and  vexation  of  the  captain  and  senior 
officers.  So  strict  were  the  captain's  regulations  con 
cerning  the  suppression  of  grog  smuggling,  and  so  par 
ticular  had  he  been  in  charging  the  matter  upon  all  the 
lieutenants,  and  every  under-strapper  official  in  the 
frigate,  that  he  was  wholly  at  a  loss  how  so  large  a  quantity 
of  spirits  could  have  been  spirited  into  the  ship,  in  the  face 
of  all  these  checks,  guards,  and  precautions. 

Still  additional  steps  were  adopted  to  detect  the 
smugglers ;  and  Bland,  the  master-at-arms,  together 
with  his  corporals,  were  publicly  harangued  at  the  mast 
by  the  captain  in  person,  and  charged  to  exert  their 
best  powers  in  suppressing  the  traffic.  Crowds  were 
present  at  the  time,  and  saw  the  master-at-arms  touch 
his  cap  in  obsequious  homage,  as  he  solemnly  assured 
the  captain  that  he  would  still  continue  to  do  his  best ; 
as,  indeed,  he  said,  he  had  always  done.  He  concluded 
with  a  pious  ejaculation,  expressive  of  his  personal 


226  WHITE  JACKET 

abhorrence  of  smuggling  and  drunkenness,  and  his 
fixed  resolution,  so  help  him  Heaven,  to  spend  his  last 
wink  in  sitting  up  by  night,  to  spy  out  all  deeds  of 
darkness. 

*  I  do  not  doubt  you,  master-at-arms,'  returned  the 
captain  ;  '  now  go  to  your  duty.'  This  master-at-arms 
was  a  favourite  of  the  captain's. 

The  next  morning,  before  breakfast,  when  the  market- 
boat  came  off  (that  is,  one  of  the  ship's  boats  regularly 
deputed  to  bring  off  the  daily  fresh  provisions  for  the 
officers) — when  this  boat  came  off,  the  master-at-arms, 
as  usual,  after  carefully  examining  both  her  and  her  crew, 
reported  them  to  the  deck  officer  to  be  free  from  suspicion. 
The  provisions  were  then  hoisted  out,  and  among  them 

came  a  good-sized  wooden  box,  addressed  to  '  Mr. , 

Purser  of  the  United  States  ship  Never  sink.''  Of  course, 
any  private  matter  of  this  sort,  destined  for  a  gentleman 
of  the  ward-room,  was  sacred  from  examination,  and 
the  master-at-arms  commanded  one  of  his  corporals  to 
carry  it  down  into  the  purser's  state-room.  But  recent 
occurrences  had  sharpened  the  vigilance  of  the  deck 
officer  to  an  unwonted  degree,  and  seeing  the  box  going 
down  the  hatchway,  he  demanded  what  that  was,  and 
whom  it  was  for. 

'  All  right,  sir,'  said  the  master-at-arms,  touching  his 
cap  ;  '  stores  for  the  purser,  sir.' 

'  Let  it  remain  on  deck,'  said  the  lieutenant.  *  Mr. 
Montgomery  !  '  calling  a  midshipman,  '  ask  the  purser 
whether  there  is  any  box  coming  off  for  him  this  morning.' 

'  Ay,  ay,  sir,'  said  the  middy,  touching  his  cap. 

Presently  he  returned,  saying  that  the  purser  was 
ashore. 

'  Very  good,  then  ;  Mr.  Montgomery,  have  that  box 
put  into  the  brig,  with  strict  orders  to  the  sentry  not 
to  suffer  anyone  to  touch  it.' 


A  KNAVE  IN  OFFICE  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR    227 

'  Had  I  not  better  take  it  down  into  my  mess,  sir, 
till  the  purser  comes  off  ?  '  said  the  master-at-arms, 
deferentially. 

*  I  have  given  my  orders,  sir  !  '  said  the  lieutenant, 
turning  away. 

When  the  purser  came  on  board,  it  turned  out  that  he 
knew  nothing  at  all  about  the  box.  He  had  never  so 
much  as  heard  of  it  in  his  life.  So  it  was  again  brought 
up  before  the  deck  officer,  who  immediately  summoned 
the  master-at-arms. 

'  Break  open  that  box  !  ' 

'  Certairdy,  sir !  '  said  the  master-at-arms  ;  and, 
wrenching  off  the  cover,  twenty-five  brown  jugs,  like 
a  litter  of  twenty-five  brown  pigs,  were  found  snugly 
nestled  in  a  bed  of  straw. 

'  The  smugglers  are  at  work,  sir,'  said  the  master-at- 
arms,  looking  up. 

*  Uncork  and  taste  it,5  said  the  officer. 

The  master-at-arms  did  so  ;  and,  smacking  his  lips 
after  a  puzzled  fashion,  was  a  little  doubtful  whether  it 
was  American  whisky  or  Holland  gin  ;  but  he  said  he 
was  not  used  to  liquor. 

'  Brandy ;  I  know  it  by  the  smell,'  said  the  officer  ; 
'  return  the  box  to  the  brig.' 

4  Ay,  ay,  sir,'  said  the  master-at-arms,  redoubling  his 
activity. 

The  affair  was  at  once  reported  to  the  captain,  who, 
incensed  at  the  audacity  of  the  thing,  adopted  every 
plan  to  detect  the  guilty  parties.  Inquiries  were  made 
ashore  ;  but  by  whom  the  box  had  been  brought  down 
to  the  market-boat  there  was  no  finding  out.  Here  the 
matter  rested  for  a  time. 

Some  days  after,  one  of  the  boys  of  the  mizen-top 
was  flogged  for  drunkenness,  and,  while  suspended  in 
agony  at  the  gratings,  was  made  to  reveal  from  whom 


228  WHITE  JACKET 

he  had  procured  his  spirits.  The  man  was  called,  and 
turned  out  to  be  an  old  superannuated  marine,  one 
Scriggs,  who  did  the  cooking  for  the  marine  sergeants 
and  master-at-arms'  mess.  This  marine  was  one  of 
the  most  villainous-looking  fellows  in  the  ship,  with  a 
squinting,  pick-lock,  gray  eye,  and  hang-dog,  gallows 
gait.  How  such  a  most  unmartial  vagabond  had  in 
sinuated  himself  into  the  honourable  marine  corps  was 
a  perfect  mystery.  He  had  always  been  noted  for  his 
personal  uncleanliness,  and  among  all  hands,  fore  and 
aft,  had  the  reputation  of  being  a  notorious  old  miser, 
who  denied  himself  the  few  comforts  and  many  of  the 
common  necessaries  of  a  man-of-war  life. 

Seeing  110  escape,  Scriggs  fell  on  his  knees  before  the 
captain,  and  confessed  the  charge  of  the  boy.  Observ 
ing  the  fellow  to  be  in  an  agony  of  fear  at  the  sight  of 
the  boatswain's  mates  and  their  lashes,  and  all  the 
striking  parade  of  public  punishment,  the  captain  must 
have  thought  this  a  good  opportunity  for  completely 
pumping  him  of  all  his  secrets.  This  terrified  marine 
was  at  length  forced  to  reveal  his  having  been  for  some 
time  an  accomplice  in  a  complicated  system  of  under 
hand  villainy,  the  head  of  which  was  no  less  a  personage 
than  the  indefatigable  chief  of  police,  the  master-at-arms 
himself.  It  appeared  that  this  official  had  his  confidential 
agents  ashore,  who  supplied  him  with  spirits,  and  in 
various  boxes,  packages,  and  bundles — addressed  to  the 
purser  and  others — brought  them  down  to  the  frigate's 
boats  at  the  landing.  Ordinarily,  the  appearance  of 
these  things  for  the  purser  and  other  ward-room  gentle 
men  occasioned  no  surprise  ;  for  almost  every  day  some 
bundle  or  other  is  coming  off  for  them,  especially  for  the 
purser  ;  and,  as  the  master-at-arms  was  always  present 
on  these  occasions,  it  was  an  easy  matter  for  him  to  hurry 
the  smuggled  liquor  out  of  sight,  and  under  pretence  of 


A  KNAVE  IN  OFFICE  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR      229 

carrying  the  box  or  bundle  down  to  the  purser's  room, 
hide  it  away  upon  his  own  premises. 

The  miserly  marine,  Scriggs,  with  the  pick-lock  eye, 
was  the  man  who  clandestinely  sold  the  spirits  to  the 
sailors,  thus  completely  keeping  the  master-at-arms  in 
the  background.  The  liquor  sold  at  the  most  exorbitant 
prices  ;  at  one  time  reaching  twelve  dollars  the  bottle 
in  cash,  and  thirty  dollars  a  bottle  in  orders  upon  the 
purser,  to  be  honoured  upon  the  frigate's  arrival  home. 
It  may  seem  incredible  that  such  prices  should  have 
been  given  by  the  sailors  ;  but  when  some  man-of-war's 
men  crave  liquor,  and  it  is  hard  to  procure,  they  would 
almost  barter  ten  years  of  their  lifetime  for  but  one 
solitary  '  tot*  if  they  could. 

The  sailors  who  became  intoxicated  with  the  liquor 
thus  smuggled  on  board  by  the  master-at-arms  were,  in 
almost  numberless  instances,  officially  seized  by  that 
functionary,  and  scourged  at  the  gangway.  In  a  previous 
place  it  has  been  shown  how  conspicuous  a  part  the 
master-at-arms  enacts  at  this  scene. 

The  ample  profits  of  this  iniquitous  business  were 
divided  between  all  the  parties  concerned  in  it ;  Scriggs, 
the  marine,  coming  in  for  one-third.  His  cook's  mess- 
chest  being  brought  on  deck,  four  canvas  bags  of  silver 
were  found  in  it,  amounting  to  a  sum  something  short 
of  as  many  hundred  dollars. 

The  guilty  parties  were  scourged,  double-ironed,  and 
for  several  weeks  were  confined  in  the  brig,  under  a 
sentry  ;  all  but  the  master-at-arms,  who  was  merely 
cashiered,  and  imprisoned  for  a  time,  with  bracelets  at 
his  wrists.  Upon  being  liberated,  he  was  turned  adrift 
among  the  ship's  company  ;  and,  by  way  of  disgracing 
him  still  more,  was  thrust  into  the  waist,  the  most 
inglorious  division  of  the  ship. 

Upon  going  to  dinner  one  day,  I  found  him  soberly 


230  WHITE  JACKET 

seated  at  my  own  mess  ;  and  at  first  I  could  not  but 
feel  some  very  serious  scruples  about  dining  with 
him.  Nevertheless,  he  was  a  man  to  study  and  digest ; 
so,  upon  a  little  reflection,  I  was  not  displeased  at  his 
presence.  It  amazed  me,  however,  that  he  had  wormed 
himself  into  the  mess,  since  so  many  of  the  other  messes 
had  declined  the  honour  ;  until  at  last,  I  ascertained 
that  he  had  induced  a  messmate  of  ours,  a  distant  relation 
of  his,  to  prevail  upon  the  cook  to  admit  him. 

Now  it  would  not  have  answered  for  hardly  any  other 
mess  in  the  ship  to  have  received  this  man  among  them, 
for  it  would  have  torn  a  huge  rent  in  their  reputation  ; 
but  our  mess,  A.  No.   1 — the  Forty-two-pounder  Club 
— was   composed   of  so  fine   a  set  of   fellows,  so  many 
captains  of  tops  and  quarter-masters — men  of  undeniable 
mark  on  board  ship — of  long-established  standing  and 
consideration  on  the  gun-deck,  that,  with  impunity,  we 
could   do   many  equivocal  things,   utterly  inadmissible 
for  messes  of  inferior  pretension.     Besides,  though  we 
all  abhorred  the  monster  of  Sin  itself,  yet,  from  our  social 
superiority,  highly  rarefied  education  in  our  lofty  top, 
and  large  and  liberal  sweep  of  the  aggregate  of  things, 
we  were  in  a  good  degree  free  from  those  useless,  personal 
prejudices,    and    galling    hatreds    against    conspicuous 
sinners — not  Sin — which  so  widely  prevail  among  men 
of  warped  understandings,  and  unchristian  and  uncharit 
able  hearts.     No  ;    the  superstitions  and  dogmas  con 
cerning  Sin  had  not  laid  their  withering  maxims  upon 
our  hearts.     We  perceived  how  that  evil  was  but  good 
disguised,  and  a  knave  a  saint  in  his  way  ;   how  that  in 
other  planets,  perhaps,  what  we  deem  wrong  may  there 
be   deemed  right ;    even  as   some   substances,   without 
undergoing  any  mutations  in  themselves,  utterly  change 
their  colour,  according  to  the  light  thrown  upon  them. 
We  perceived  that  the  anticipated  millennium  must  have 


A  KNAVE  IN  OFFICE  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR    231 

begun  upon  the  morning  the  first  worlds  were  created  ; 
and  that,  taken  all  in  all,  our  man-of-war  world  itself  was 
as  eligible  a  round-sterned  craft  as  any  to  be  found  in 
the  Milky  Way.  And  we  fancied  that  though  some  of 
us,  of  the  gun-deck,  were  at  times  condemned  to  suffer 
ings  and  slights,  and  all  manner  of  tribulation  and 
anguish,  yet,  no  doubt,  it  was  only  our  misapprehension 
of  these  things  that  made  us  take  them  for  woeful  pains 
instead  of  the  most  agreeable  pleasures.  I  have  dreamed 
of  a  sphere,  says  Pinzella,  where  to  break  a  man  on  the 
wheel  is  Tield  the  most  exquisite  of  delights  you  can  confer 
upon  him  ;  where  for  one  gentleman  in  any  wUy  to 
vanquish  another  is  accounted  an  everlasting  dishonour ; 
where  to  tumble  one  into  a  pit  after  death,  and  then  throw 
cold  clods  upon  his  upturned  face,  is  a  species  of  con 
tumely  only  inflicted  upon  the  most  notorious  criminals. 

But  whatever  we  messmates  thought,  in  whatever 
circumstances  we  found  ourselves,  we  never  forgot  that 
our  frigate,  bad  as  it  was,  was  homeward  bound.  Such, 
at  least,  were  our  reveries  at  times,  though  sorely  jarred, 
now  and  then,  by  events  that  took  our  philosophy  aback. 
For  after  all,  philosophy — that  is,  the  best  wisdom  that 
has  ever  in  any  way~TTeen  revealed  to  our  man-of-war 
world — fs  but  a  slough  and  a  mire,  with  a  few  tufts  of 
good  footing  here  and  there. 

But  there  was  one  man  in  the  mess  who  would  have 
naught  to  do  with  our  philosophy — a  churlish,  ill-tempered, 
unphilosophical,  superstitious  old  bear  of  a  quarter- 
gunner  ;  a  believer  in  Tophet,  for  which  he  was  accord 
ingly  preparing  himself.  Priming  was  his  name  ;  but 
methinks  I  have  spoken  of  him  before. 

Besides,  this  Bland,  the  master-at-arms,  was  no  vulgar, 
dirty  knave.  In  him- — to  modify  Burke's  phrase — vice 
seemed,,  but  only  seemed,  to  lose  half  its  seeming  evil  by 
losing  all  its  apparent  grossness.  He  was  a  neat  and 


232  WHITE  JACKET 

gentlemanly  villain,  and  broke  his  biscuit  with  a  dainty 
hand.  There  was  a  fine  polish  about  his  whole  person, 
and  a  pliant,  insinuating  style  in  his  conversation,  that 
was,  socially,  quite  irresistible.  Save  my  noble  captain, 
Jack  Chase,  he  proved  himself  the  most  entertaining,  I 
had  almost  said  the  most  companionable  man  in  the 
mess.  Nothing  but  his  mouth,  that  was  somewhat  small, 
Moorish-arched,  and  wickedly  delicate,  and  his  snaky, 
black  eye,  that  at  times  shone  like  a  dark  lantern  in  a 
jeweller-shop  at  midnight,  betokened  the  accomplished 
scoundrel  within.  But  in  his  conversation  there  was 
no  trace  of  evil ;  nothing  equivocal ;  he  studiously 
shunned  an  indelicacy,  never  swore,  and  chieHy  abounded 
in  passing  puns  and  witticisms,  varied  with  humorous 
contrasts  between  ship  and  shore  life,  and  many  agreeable 
and  racy  anecdotes,  very  tastefully  narrated.  In  short — 
in  a  merely  psychological  point  of  view,  at  least — hejwas 
a  charming  blackleg.  Ashore,  such  a  man  might  have 
bee'h  an  irreproachable  mercantile  swindler,  circulating 
in  polite  society. 

But  he  was  still  more  than  this.  Indeed,  I  claim  for 
this  master-at-arms  a  lofty  and  honourable  niche  in  the 
Newgate  Calendar  of  history.  His  intrepidity,  coolness, 
and  wonderful  self-possession  in  calmly  resigning  him 
self  to  a  fate  that  thrust  him  from  an  office  in  which  he 
had  tyrannised  over  five  hundred  mortals7  many  of 
whom  hated  and  loathed  him,  passed  all  belief  ;  his 
intrepidity,  I  say,  in  now  fearlessly  gliding  among  them, 
like  a  disarmed  sword-fish  among  ferocious  white  sharks  ; 
this,  surely,  bespoke  no  ordinary  man.  While  in  office, 
even,  his  life  had  often  been  secretly  attempted  by  the 
seamen  whom  he  had  brought  to  the  gangway.  Of  dark 
nights  they  had  dropped  shot  down  the  hatchways, 
destined  *  to  damage  his  pepper-box/  as  they  phrased  it ; 
had  made  ropes  with  a  hangman's  noose  at  the  end, 


A  KNAVE  IN  OFFICE  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR    233 

and  tried  to  lasso  him  in  dark  corners.  And  now  he  was 
adrift  among  them,  under  notorious  circumstances  of 
superlative  villainy,  at  last  dragged  to  light ;  and  yet 
he  blandly  smiled,  politely  offered  his  cigar-holder  to  a 
perfect  stranger,  and  laughed  and  chatted  to  right  and 
left,  as  if  springy,  buoyant,  and  elastic,  with  an  angelic 
conscience,  and  sure  of  kind  friends  wherever  he  went, 
both  in  this  life  and  the  life  to  come. 

While  he  was  lying  ironed  in  the  brig,  gangs  of  the 
men  were  sometimes  overheard  whispering  about  the 
terrible  reception  they  would  give  him  when  he  sjiould 
be  set  at  large.  Nevertheless,  when  liberated,  they 
seemed  confounded  by  his  erect  and  cordial  assurance, 
his  gentlemanly  sociability  and  fearless  companionable- 
ness.  From  being  an  implacable  policeman,  vigilant, 
cruel,  and  remorseless  in  his  office,  however  polished  in 
his  phrases,  he  was  now  become  a  disinterested,  saunter 
ing  man  of  leisure,  winking  at  all  improprieties,  and  ready 
to  laugh  and  make  merry  with  anyone.  Still,  at  first, 
the  men  gave  him  a  wide  berth,  and  returned  scowls  for 
his  smiles  ;  but  who  can  forever  resist  the  very  Devil 
himself,  when  he  comes  in  the  guise  of  a  gentleman,  free, 
fine,  and  frank  ?  Though  Goethe's  pious  Margaret  hates 
the  Devil  in  his  horns  and  harpooneer's  tail,  yet  she  smiles 
and  nods  to  the  engaging  fiend  in  the  persuasive,  winning, 
oily,  wholly  harmless  Mephistopheles.  But,  however  it  was, 
I,  for  one,  regarded  this  master-at-arms  with  mixed  feelings 
of  detestation,  pity,  admiration,  and  something  opposed 
to  enmity.  I  could  not  but  abominate  him  when  I 
thought  of  his  conduct ;  but  I  pitied  the  continual  gnaw 
ing  which,  under  all  his  deftly  donned  disguises,  I  saw 
lying  at  the  bottom  of  his  soul.  I  admired  his  heroism 
in  sustaining  himself  so  well  under  such  reverses.  And 
when  I  thought  how  arbitrary  the  Articles  of  War  are 
in  defining  a  man-of-war  villain  ;  how  much  undetected 


234  WHITE  JACKET 

guilt  might  be  sheltered  by  the  aristocratic  awning  of 
our  quarter-deck  ;  how  many  florid  pursers,  ornaments 
of  the  ward-room,  had  been  legally  protected  in  defraud 
ing  the,  people,  I  could  not  but  say  to  myself,  Well, 
after  all,  though  this  man  is  a  most  wicked  one  indeed, 
yet  is  he  even  more  luckless  than  depraved. 

Besides,  a  studied  observation  of  Bland  convinced 
me  that  he  was  an  organic  and  irreclaimable  scoundrel, 
who  did  wicked  deeds  as  the  cattle  browse  the  herbage, 
because  wicked  deeds  seemed  the  legitimate  operation 
of  his  whole  infernal  organisation.  Phrenologically,  he 
was  without  a  soul.  Is  it  to  be  wondered  at,  that  the 
devils  are  irreligious  ?  What,  then,  thought  I,  who  is 
to  blame  in  this  matter  ?  For  one,  I  will  not  take  the 
Day  of  Judgment  upon  me  by  authoritatively  pro 
nouncing  upon  the  essential  criminality  of  any  man-of- 
war's  man ;  and  Christianity  has  taught  me  that,  at  the 
Last  Day,  man-of-war's  men  will  not  be  judged  by  the 
Articles  of  War,  nor  by  the  United  States  Statutes  at  Large, 
but  by  immutable  laws,  ineffably  beyond  the  compre 
hension  of  the  Honourable  Board  of  Commodores  and 
Navy  Commissioners. 

But  though  I  will  stand  by  even  a  man-of-war  thief, 
and  defend  him  from  being  seized  up  at  the  gangway,  if 
I  can — remembering  that  my  Saviour  once  hung  between 
two  thieves,  promising  one  life  eternal — yet  I  would  not, 
after  the  plain  conviction  of  a  villain,  again  let  him 
entirely  loose  to  prey  upon  honest  seamen,  fore  and  aft 
all  three  decks.  But  this  did  Captain  Claret ;  and 
though  the  thing  may  not  perhaps  be  credited,  never 
theless,  here  it  shall  be  recorded. 

After  the  master-at-arms  had  been  adrift  among  the 
ship's  company  for  several  weeks,  and  we  were  within 
a  few  days'  sail  of  home,  he  was  summoned  to  the  mast, 
and  publicly  reinstated  in  his  office  as  the  ship's  chief 


A  KNAVE  IN  OFFICE  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR    235 

of  police.  Perhaps  Captain  Claret  had  read  the  Memoirs 
of  Vidocq,  and  believed  in  the  old  saying,  Set  a  rogue  to 
catch  a  rogue.  Or,  perhaps,  he  was  a  man  of  very  tender 
feelings,  highly  susceptible  to  the  soft  emotions  of  grati 
tude,  and  could  not  bear  to  leave  in  disgrace  a  person 
who,  out  of  the  generosity  of  his  heart,  had,  about  a  year 
previous,  presented  him  with  a  rare  snuff-box,  fabricated 
from  a  sperm  whale's  tooth,  with  a  curious  silver  hinge, 
and  cunningly  wrought  in  the  shape  of  a  whale  ;  also  a 
splendid  gold-mounted  cane,  of  a  costly  Brazilian  wood, 
with  a  gold  plate  bearing  the  captain's  name  and  rank 
in  the  service,  the  place  and  time  of  his  birth,  and  with 
a  vacancy  underneath — no  doubt  providentially  left  for 
his  heirs  to  record  his  decease. 

Certain  it  was  that,  some  months  previous  to  the 
master-at-arms'  disgrace,  he  had  presented  these  articles 
to  the  captain,  with  his  best  love  and  compliments  ;  and 
the  captain  had  received  them,  and  seldom  went  ashore 
without  the  cane,  and  never  took  snuff  but  out  of  that 
box.  With  some  captains,  a  sense  of  propriety  might 
have  induced  them  to  return  these  presents,  when  the 
generous  donor  had  proved  himself  unworthy  of  having 
them  retained  ;  but  it  was  not  Captain  Claret  who  would 
inflict  such  a  cutting  wound  upon  any  officer's  sensi 
bilities,  though  long-established  naval  customs  had 
habituated  him  to  scourging  the  people  upon  an 
emergency. 

Now  had  Captain  Claret  deemed  himself  constitution 
ally  bound  to  decline  all  presents  from  his  subordinates, 
the  sense  of  gratitude  would  not  have  operated  to  the 
prejudice  of  justice.  And,  as  some  of  the  subordinates 
of  a  man-of-war  captain  are  apt  to  invoke  his  good  wishes 
and  mollify  his  conscience  by  making  him  friendly  gifts, 
it  would  perhaps  have  been  an  excellent  thing  for  him  to 
adopt  the  plan  pursued  by  the  President  of  the  United 


236  WHITE  JACKET 

States,  when  he  received  a  present  of  lions  and  Arabian 
chargers  from  the  Sultan  of  Muscat.  Being  forbidden 
by  his  sovereign  lords  and  masters,  the  imperial  people, 
to  accept  of  any  gifts  from  foreign  powers,  the  President 
sent  them  to  an  auctioneer,  and  the  proceeds  were  de 
posited  in  the  Treasury.  In  the  same  manner,  when 
Captain  Claret  received  his  snuff-box  and  cane,  he  might 
have  accepted  them  very  kindly,  and  then  sold  them  off 
to  the  highest  bidder,  perhaps  to  the  donor  himself,  who 
in  that  case  would  never  have  tempted  him  again. 

Upon  his  return  home,  Bland  was  paid  off  for  his  full 
term,  not  deducting  the  period  of  his  suspension.  He 
again  entered  the  service  in  his  old  capacity. 

As  no  further  allusion  will  be  made  to  this  affair,  it 
may  as  well  be  stated  now  that,  for  the  very  brief  period 
elapsing  between  his  restoration  and  being  paid  off  in 
port  by  the  purser,  the  master-at-arms  conducted  him 
self  with  infinite  discretion,  artfully  steering  between 
any  relaxation  of  discipline — which  would  have  awakened 
the  displeasure  of  the  officers — and  any  unwise  severity 
— which  would  have  revived,  in  tenfold  force,  all  the  old 
grudges  of  the  seamen  under  his  command. 

Never  did  he  show  so  much  talent  and  tact  as  when 
vibrating  in  this  his  most  delicate  predicament ;  and 
plenty  of  cause  was  there  for  the  exercise  of  iris  cunningest 
abilities  ;  for,  upon  the  discharge  of  our  man-of-war's 
men  at  home,  should  he  then  be  held  by  them  as  an 
enemy,  as  free  and  independent  citizens  they  would 
waylay  him  in  the  public  streets,  and  take  purple  ven 
geance  for  all  his  iniquities,  past,  present,  and  possible 
in  the  future.  More  than  once  a  master-at-arms  ashore 
has  been  seized  by  night  by  an  exasperated  crew,  and 
served  as  Origen  served  himself,  or  as  his  enemies  served 
Abelard. 

But  though,  under  extreme   provocation,  the   people 


A  KNAVE  IN  OFFICE  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR    237 

of  a  man-of-war  have  been  guilty  of  the  maddest  ven 
geance,  yet,  at  other  times,  they  are  very  placable  and 
milky-hearted,  even  to  those  who  may  have  outrageously 
abused  them  ;  many  things  in  point  might  be  related, 
but  I  forbear. 

This  account  of  the  master-at-arms  cannot  better  be 
concluded  than  by  denominating  him,  in  the  vivid  lan 
guage  of  the  captain  of  the  fore-top,  as  '  the  two  ends 
and  middle  of  the  thrice-laid  strand  of  a  bloody  rascal' 
which  was  intended  for  a  terse,  well-knit,  and  all-compre 
hensive  assertion,  without  omission  or  reservation.  It 
was  also  asserted  that,  had  Tophet  itself  been  raked  with 
a  fine-tooth  comb,  such  another  ineffable  villain  could 
not  by  any  possibility  have  been  caught. 


CHAPTER    XLV 

PUBLISHING   POETRY   IN   A   MAN-OF-WAR 

A  DAY  or  two  after  our  arrival  in  Rio,  a  rather  amusing 
incident  occurred  to  a  particular  acquaintance  of  mine, 
young  Lemsford,  the  gun-deck  bard. 

The  great  guns  of  an  armed  ship  have  blocks  of 
wood,  called  tampions,  painted  black,  inserted  in  their 
muzzles,  to  keep  out  the  spray  of  the  sea.  These 
tompions  slip  in  and  out  very  handily,  like  covers  to 
butter  firkins. 

By  advice  of  a  friend,  Lemsford,  alarmed  for  the  fate 
of  his  box  of  poetry,  had  latterly  made  use  of  a  particular 
gun  on  the  main-deck,  in  the  tube  of  which  he  thrust  his 
manuscripts,  by  simply  crawling  partly  out  of  the  port 
hole,  removing  the  tompion,  inserting  his  papers,  tightly 
rolled,  and  making  all  snug  again. 

Breakfast  over,  he  and  I  were  reclining  in  the  main 
top — where,  by  permission  of  my  noble  master,  Jack 
Chase,  I  had  invited  him — when,  of  a  sudden,  we  heard 
a  cannonading.  It  was  our  own  ship. 

4  Ah  !  '  said  a  topman,  '  returning  the  shore  salute 
they  gave  us  yesterday/ 

'  O  Lord  !  '  cried  Lemsford,  '  my  Songs  of  the  Sirens  !  ' 
and  he  ran  down  the  rigging  to  the  batteries  ;  but  just 
as  he  touched  the  gun-deck,  gun  No.  20 — his  literary 
strong-box — went  off  with  a  terrific  report. 

*  Well,  my  after-guard  Virgil/  said  Jack  Chase  to  him, 
as  he  slowly  returned  up  the  rigging,  '  did  you  get  it  ? 
You  need  not  answer  ;  I  see  you  were  too  late.  But 


PUBLISHING  POETRY  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR    239 

never  mind,  my  boy  ;  no  printer  could  do  the  business 
for  you  better.  That 's  the  way  to  publish,  White 
Jacket/  turning  to  me — c  fire  it  right  into  'em  ;  every 
canto  a  twenty -four-pound  shot ;  hull  the  blockheads, 
whether  they  will  or  no.  And  mind  you,  Lemsford, 
when  your  shot  does  the  most  execution,  you  hear  the 
least  from  the  foe.  A  killed  man  cannot  even  lisp.' 

1  Glorious  Jack !  '  cried  Lemsford,  running  up  and 
snatching  him  by  the  hand,  '  say  that  again,  Jack  !  look 
me  in  the  eyes.  By  all  the  Homers,  Jack,  you  have 
made  my  soul  mount  like  a  balloon  !  Jack,  I  'm  a  poor 
devil  of  a  poet.  Not  two  months  before  I  shipped 
aboard  here,  I  published  a  volume  of  poems,  very  aggres 
sive  on  the  world,  Jack.  Heaven  knows  what  it  cost  me. 
I  published  it,  Jack,  and  the  cursed  publisher  sued  me 
for  damages  ;  my  friends  looked  sheepish,  one  or  two  who 
liked  it  were  non-committal ;  and  as  for  the  addle-pated 
mob  and  rabble,  they  thought  they  had  found  out  a  fool. 
Blast  them,  Jack,  what  they  call  the  public^is^nionsjer^ 
like  the  idol  we  saw  in  Owhyhee,  with  the  head  of  a 
jackass,  the  body  of  a  baboon,  and  the  tail  of  a  scorpion  !  ' 

'  I  don't  like  that,'  said  Jack  ;  '  when  I  'm  ashore,  I 
myself  am  part  of  the  public.' 

'  Your  pardon,  Jack ;  you  are  not.  You  are  then  a 
part  of  the  people,  just  as  you  are  aboard  the  frigate  here. 
The  public  is  one  thing,  Jack,  and  the  people  another.' 

'  You  are  right,'  said  Jack  ;  '  right  as  this  leg.  Virgil, 
you  are  a  trump  ;  you  are  a  jewel,  my  boy.  The  public 
and  the  people  !  Ay,  ay,  my  lads,  let  us  hate  the  one, 
and  cleave  to  the  other.' 


CHAPTER  XLVI 

THE  COMMODORE  ON  THE  POOP,  AND  ONE  OF  '  THE  PEOPLE  ' 
UNDER  THE  HANDS  OF  THE  SURGEON 

A  DAY  or  two  after  the  publication  of  Lemsford's  '  Songs 
of  the  Sirens/  a  sad  accident  befell  a  messmate  of  mine, 
one  of  the  captains  of  the  mizen-top.  He  was  a  fine 
little  Scot,  who,  from  the  premature  loss  of  the  hair  on 
the  top  of  his  head,  always  went  by  the  name  of  Baldy. 
This  baldness  was  no  doubt,  in  great  part,  attributable 
to  the  same  cause  that  early  thins  the  locks  of  most 
man-of-war's  men — namely,  the  hard,  unyielding,  and 
ponderous  man-of-war  and  Navy  regulation  tarpaulin 
hat  which,  when  new,  is  stiff  enough  to  sit  upon,  and 
indeed,  in  lieu  of  his  thumb,  sometimes  serves  the  common 
sailor  for  a  bench. 

Now,  there  is  nothing  upon  which  the  commodore  of 
a  squadron  more  prides  himself  than  upon  the  celerity 
with  which  his  men  can  handle  the  sails,  and  go  through 
with  all  the  evolutions  pertaining  thereto.  This  is 
especially  manifested  in  harbour,  when  other  vessels  of 
his  squadron  are  near,  and  perhaps  the  armed  ships  of 
rival  nations. 

Upon  these  occasions,  surrounded  by  his  post-captain 
satraps — each  of  whom  in  his  own  floating  island  is 
king — the  commodore  domineers  over  all — emperor  of 
the  whole  oaken  archipelago ;  yea,  magisterial  and 
magnificent  as  the  Sultan  of  the  Isles  of  Sooloo. 

But,  even  as  so  potent  an  emperor  and  Caesar  to  boot 
as  the  great  Don  of  Germany,  Charles  the  Fifth,  was 

240 


THE  COMMODORE  ON  THE  POOP    241 

used  to  divert  himself  in  his  dotage  by  watching  the 
gyrations  of  the  springs  and  cogs  of  a  long  row  of  clocks, 
even  so  does  an  elderly  commodore  while  away  his  leisure 
in  harbour,  by  what  is  called  '  exercising  guns,'  and  also 
'  exercising  yards  and  sails  '  ;  causing  the  various  spars 
of  all  the  ships  under  his  command  to  be  '  braced,' 
'  topped/  and  '  cock  billed  '  in  concert,  while  the  com 
modore  himself  sits,  something  like  King  Canute,  on  an 
arm -chest  on  the  poop  of  his  flagship. 

But  far  more  regal  than  any  descendant  of  Charle 
magne,  more  haughty  than  any  Mogul  of  the  East,  and 
almost  mysterious  and  voiceless  in  his  authority  as  the 
Great  Spirit  of  the  Five  Nations,  the  commodore  deigns 
not  to  verbalise  his  commands  ;  they  are  imparted  by 
signal. 

And  as  for  old  Charles  the  Fifth,  again,  the  gay- 
pranked,  coloured  suits  of  cards  were  invented  to  while 
away  his  dotage,  even  so,  doubtless,  must  these  pretty 
little  signals  of  blue  and  red  spotted  bunting  have  been 
devised  to  cheer  the  old  age  of  all  commodores. 

By  the  commodore's  side  stands  the  signal-midship 
man,  with  a  sea-green  bag  swung  on  his  shoulder  (as  a 
sportsman  bears  his  game-bag),  the  signal-book  in  one 
hand,  and  the  signal-spyglass  in  the  other.  As  this 
signal-book  contains  the  Masonic  signs  and  tokens  of 
the  Navy,  and  would  therefore  be  invaluable  to  an 
enemy,  its  binding  is  always  bordered  with  lead,  so  as 
to  ensure  its  sinking  in  case  the  ship  should  be  captured. 
Not  the  only  book  this  that  might  appropriately  be 
bound  in  lead,  though  there  be  many  where  the  author, 
and  not  the  bookbinder,  furnishes  the  metal. 

As  White  Jacket  understands  it,  these  signals  consist 
of  variously  coloured  flags,  each  standing  for  a  certain 
number.  Say  there  are  ten  flags,  representing  the 
cardinal  numbers — the  red  flag,  No.  1  ;  the  blue  flag, 

Q 


242  WHITE  JACKET 

No.  2  ;  the  green  flag,  No.  3,  and  so  forth  ;  then,  by 
mounting  the  blue  flag  over  the  red,  that  would  stand  for 
No.  21  :  if  the  green  flag  were  set  underneath,  it  would 
then  stand  for  213.  How  easy,  then,  by  endless  trans 
positions,  to  multiply  the  various  numbers  that  may  be 
exhibited  at  the  mizen-peak,  even  by  only  three  or 
four  of  these  flags. 

To  each  number  a  particular  meaning  is  applied. 
No.  100,  for  instance,  may  mean  '  Beat  to  quarters' 
No.  150,  'All  hands  to  grog."  No.  2000,  'Strike  top 
gallant-yards.'  No.  2110,  'See  anything  to  windward?' 
No.  2800,  '  No.' 

And  as  every  man-of-war  is  furnished  with  a  signal- 
book,  where  all  these  things  are  set  down  in  order,  there 
fore,  though  two  American  frigates — almost  perfect 
strangers  to  each  other — came  from  the  opposite  Poles, 
yet  at  a  distance  of  more  than  a  mile  they  could  carry  on 
a  very  liberal  conversation  in  the  air. 

When  several  men-of-war  of  one  nation  lie  at  anchor 
in  one  port,  forming  a  wide  circle  round  their  lord  and 
master,  the  flagship,  it  is  a  very  interesting  sight  to  see 
them  all  obeying  the  commodore's  orders,  who  mean 
while  never  opens  his  lips. 

Thus  it  was  with  us  in  Rio,  and  hereby  hangs  the  story 
of  my  poor  messmate  Baldy. 

One  morning,  in  obedience  to  a  signal  from  our  flag 
ship,  the  various  vessels  belonging  to  the  American 
squadron  then  in  harbour  simultaneously  loosened  their 
sails  to  dry.  In  the  evening,  the  signal  was  set  to  furl 
them.  Upon  such  occasions  great  rivalry  exists  between 
the  first  lieutenants  of  the  different  ships  ;  they  vie 
with  each  other  who  shall  first  have  his  sails  stowed  on 
the  yards.  And  this  rivalry  is  shared  between  all  the 
officers  of  each  vessel,  who  are  respectively  placed  over 
the  different  topmen ;  so  that  the  mainmast  is  all 


THE  COMMODORE  ON  THE  POOP    243 

eagerness  to  vanquish  the  foremast,  and  the  mizen- 
mast  to  vanquish  them  both.  Stimulated  by  the  shouts 
of  their  officers,  the  sailors  throughout  the  squadron 
exert  themselves  to  the  utmost. 

'  Aloft,  topmen  !  lay  out !  furl !  '  cried  the  first 
lieutenant  of  the  Neversink. 

At  the  word  the  men  sprang  into  the  rigging,  and  on 
all  three  masts  were  soon  climbing  about  the  yards,  in 
reckless  haste  to  execute  their  orders. 

Now,  in  furling  topsails  or  courses,  the  point  of  honour, 
and  the  hardest  work,  is  in  the  bunt,  or  middle  of  the 
yard  ;  this  post  belongs  to  the  first  captain  of  the  top. 

1  What  are  you  'bout  there,  mizen-top  men  ?  '  roared 

the  first  lieutenant,  through  his  trumpet.  '  D n 

you,  you  are  clumsy  as  Russian  bears  !  don't  you  see  the 
main-top  men  are  nearly  off  the  yard  ?  Bear  a  hand, 
bear  a  hand,  or  I  '11  stop  your  grog  all  round  !  You, 
Baldy  !  are  you  going  to  sleep  there  in  the  bunt  ?  ' 

While  this  was  being  said,  poor  Baldy — his  hat  off, 
his  face  streaming  with  perspiration — was  frantically 
exerting  himself,  piling  up  the  ponderous  folds  of  canvas 
in  the  middle  of  the  yard  ;  ever  and  anon  glancing  at 
victorious  Jack  Chase,  hard  at  work  at  the  main-top 
sail-yard  before  him. 

At  last,  the  sail  being  well  piled  up,  Baldy  jumped 
with  both  feet  into  the  bunt,  holding  on  with  one  hand 
to  the  chain  '  tie,9  and  in  that  manner  was  violently 
treading  down  the  canvas,  to  pack  it  close. 

'  D n  you,  Baldy,  why  don't  you  move,  you  crawl 
ing  caterpillar  ?  '  roared  the  first  lieutenant. 

Baldy  brought  his  whole  weight  to  bear  on  the  rebelli 
ous  sail,  and  in  his  frenzied  heedlessness  let  go  his  hold 
on  the  tie. 

'  You,  Baldy  !  are  you  afraid  of  falling  ?  '  cried  the 
first  lieutenant. 


244  WHITE  JACKET 

At  that  moment,  with  all  his  force,  Baldy  jumped 
down  upon  the  sail ;  the  bunt-gasket  parted  ;  and  a  dark 
form  dropped  through  the  air.  Lighting  upon  the  top- 
rim,  it  rolled  off ;  and  the  next  instant,  with  a  horrid 
crash  of  all  his  bones,  Baldy  came,  like  a  thunderbolt, 
upon  the  deck. 

Aboard  of  most  large  men-of-war  there  is  a  stout  oaken 
platform,  about  four  feet  square,  on  each  side  of  the 
quarter-deck.  You  ascend  to  it  by  three  or  four  steps  ; 
on  top,  it  is  railed  in  at  the  sides,  with  horizontal  brass 
bars.  It  is  called  the,  Horse  Block  ;  and  there  the  officer 
of  the  deck  usually  stands,  in  giving  his  orders  at  sea. 

It  was  one  of  these  horse  blocks,  now  unoccupied,  that 
broke  poor  Baldy's  fall.  He  fell  lengthwise  across  the 
brass  bars,  bending  them  into  elbows,  and  crushing  the 
whole  oaken  platform,  steps  and  all,  right  down  to  the 
deck  in  a  thousand  splinters. 

He  was  picked  up  for  dead,  and  carried  below  to  the 
surgeon.  His  bones  seemed  like  those  of  a  man  broken 
on  the  wheel,  and  no  one  thought  he  would  survive  the 
night.  But  with  the  surgeon's  skilful  treatment  he 
soon  promised  recovery.  Surgeon  Cuticle  devoted  all 
his  science  to  this  case. 

A  curious  framework  of  wood  was  made  for  the 
maimed  man  ;  and  placed  in  this,  with  all  his  limbs 
stretched  out,  Baldy  lay  flat  on  the  floor  of  the  sick-bay 
for  many  weeks.  Upon  our  arrival  home  he  was  able  to 
hobble  ashore  on  crutches  ;  but  from  a  hale,  hearty 
man,  with  bronzed  cheeks,  he  was  become  a  mere  dis 
located  skeleton,  white  as  foam  ;  but  ere  this,  perhaps, 
his  broken  bones  are  healed  and  whole  in  the  last  repose 
of  the  man-of-war's  man. 

Not  many  days  after  Baldy's  accident  in  furling  sails 
— in  this  same  frenzied  manner,  under  the  stimulus  of  a 
shouting  officer — a  seaman  fell  from  the  main-royal-yard 


THE  COMMODORE  ON  THE  POOP    245 

of  an  English  line-of-battle  ship  near  us,  and  buried  his 
ankle-bones  in  the  deck,  leaving  two  indentations  there, 
as  if  scooped  out  by  a  carpenter's  gouge. 

The  royal-yard  forms  a  cross  with  the  mast,  and 
falling  from  that  lofty  cross  in  a  line-of-battle  ship  is 
almost  like  falling  from  the  cross  of  St.  Paul's  ;  almost 
like  falling  as  Lucifer  from  the  well-spring  of  morning 
down  to  the  Phlegethon  of  night. 

In  some  cases,  a  man,  hurled  thus  from  a  yard,  has 
fallen  upon  his  own  shipmates  in  the  tops,  and  dragged 
them  down  with  him  to  the  same  destruction  with 
himself. 

Hardly  ever  will  you  hear  of  a  man-of-war  returning 
home  after  a  cruise  without  the  loss  of  some  of  her  crew 
from  aloft,  whereas  similar  accidents  in  the  merchant 
service — considering  the  much  greater  number  of  men 
employed  in  it — are  comparatively  few. 

Why  mince  the  matter  ?  The  death  of  most  of  these 
man-of-war's  men  lies  at  the  door  of  the  souls  of  those 
officers,  who,  while  safely  standing  on  deck  themselves, 
scruple  not  to  sacrifice  an  immortal  man  or  two,  in 
order  to  show  off  the  excelling  discipline  of  the  ship. 
And  thus  do  the  people  of  the  gun-deck  suffer,  that 
the  commodore  on  the  poop  may  be  glorified. 


CHAPTER   XLVII 

AN   AUCTION   IN   A   MAN-OF-WAR 

SOME  allusion  has  been  made  to  the  weariness  experienced 
by  the  man-of-war's  man  while  lying  at  anchor  ;  but 
there  are  scenes  now  and  then  that  serve  to  relieve  it. 
Chief  among  these  are  the  purser's  auctions,  taking  place 
while  in  harbour.  Some  weeks,  or  perhaps  months,  after 
a  sailor  dies  in  an  armed  vessel,  his  bag  of  clothes  is  in 
this  manner  sold,  and  the  proceeds  transferred  to  the 
account  of  his  heirs  or  executors. 

One  of  these  auctions  came  off  in  Rio,  shortly  after 
the  sad  accident  of  Baldy. 

It  was  a  dreamy,  quiet  afternoon,  and  the  crew  were 
listlessly  lying  around,  when  suddenly  the  boatswain's 
whistle  was  heard,  followed  by  the  announcement, 
'  D'  ye  hear  there,  fore  and  aft !  Purser's  auction  on 
the  spar-deck  !  ' 

At  the  sound,  the  sailors  sprang  to  their  feet  and 
mustered  round  the  mainmast.  Presently  up  came  the 
purser's  steward,  marshalling  before  him  three  or  four 
of  his  subordinates,  carrying  several  clothes-bags,  which 
were  deposited  at  the  base  of  the  mast. 

Our  purser's  steward  was  a  rather  gentlemanly  man 
in  his  way.  Like  many  young  Americans  of  his  class, 
he  had  at  various  times  assumed  the  most  opposite 
functions  for  a  livelihood,  turning  from  one  to  the  other 
with  all  the  facility  of  a  light-hearted,  clever  adventurer. 
He  had  been  a  clerk  in  a  steamer  on  the  Mississippi  River  ; 
an  auctioneer  in  Ohio  ;  a  stock  actor  at  the  Olympic 

246 


AN  AUCTION  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR          247 

Theatre  in  New  York  ;  and  now  he  was  purser's  steward 
in  the  Navy.  In  the  course  of  this  diversified  career  his 
natural  wit  and  waggery  had  been  highly  spiced,  and 
every  way  improved  ;  and  he  had  acquired  the  last  and 
most  difficult  art  of  the  joker,  the  art  of  lengthening  his 
own  face  while  widening  those  of  his  hearers,  preserving 
the  utmost  solemnity  while  setting  them  all  in  a  roar. 
He  was  quite  a  favourite  with  the  sailors,  which,  in  a  good 
degree,  was  owing  to  his  humour  ;  but  likewise  to  his 
off-hand,  irresistible,  romantic,  theatrical  manner  of 
addressing  them. 

With  a  dignified  air,  he  now  mounted  the  pedestal  of 
the  main-topsail  sheet-bitts,  imposing  silence  by  a 
theatrical  wave  of  his  hand  ;  meantime,  his  subordinates 
were  rummaging  the  bags,  and  assorting  their  contents 
before  him. 

f  Now,  my  noble  hearties,'  he  began,  '  we  will  open 
this  auction  by  offering  to  your  impartial  competition  a 
very  superior  pair  of  old  boots  '  ;  and  so  saying,  he 
dangled  aloft  one  clumsy  cowhide  cylinder,  almost  as 
large  as  a  fire-bucket,  as  a  specimen  of  the  complete  pair. 

1  What  shall  I  have  now,  my  noble  tars,  for  this  superior 
pair  of  sea-boots  ?  ' 

*  Where  's  t'  other  boot  ?  '  cried  a  suspicious-eyed 
waister.  '  I  remember  them  'ere  boots.  They  were  old 
Bob's,  the  quarter-gunner's  ;  there  was  two  on  'em,  too. 
I  want  to  see  t'  other  boot.' 

'  My  sweet  and  pleasant  fellow,'  said  the  auctioneer, 
with  his  blandest  accents,  '  the  other  boot  is  not  just  at 
hand,  but  I  give  you  my  word  of  honour  that  it  in  all 
respects  corresponds  to  the  one  you  here  see — it  does, 
I  assure  you.  And  I  solemnly  guarantee,  my  noble 
sea-fencibles,'  he  added,  turning  round  upon  all,  '  that 
the  other  boot  is  the  exact  counterpart  of  this.  Now, 
then,  say  the  word,  my  fine  fellows.  What  shall  I  have  ? 


248  WHITE  JACKET 

Ten  dollars,  did  you  say  ?  '  politely  bowing  toward  some 
indefinite  person  in  the  background. 

*  No  ;  ten  cents/  responded  a  voice. 

f  Ten  cents  !  ten  cents  !  gallant  sailors,  for  this  noble 
pair  of  boots,5  exclaimed  the  auctioneer,  with  affected 
horror  ;  *  I  must  close  the  auction,  my  tars  of  Columbia  ; 
this  will  never  do.  But  let 's  have  another  bid  ;  now, 
come,'  he  added,  coaxingly  and  soothingly.  '  What  is 
it  ?  One  dollar  ?  One  dollar,  then — one  dollar  ;  going 
at  one  dollar  ;  going,  going — going.  Just  see  how  it 
vibrates  ' — swinging  the  boot  to  and  fro — *  this  superior 
pair  of  sea-boots  vibrating  at  one  dollar  ;  wouldn't  pay 
for  the  nails  in  their  heels  ;  going,  going — gone  !  '  And 
down  went  the  boots. 

*  Ah,  what  a  sacrifice  !    what  a  sacrifice  !  '  he  sighed, 
tearfully  eyeing  the  solitary  fire -bucket,  and  then  glancing 
round  the  company  for  sympathy. 

4  A  sacrifice,  indeed  !  '  exclaimed  Jack  Chase,  who 
stood  by  ;  '  purser's  steward,  you  are  Mark  Antony 
over  the  body  of  Julius  Csesar.' 

'  So  I  am,  so  I  am/  said  the  auctioneer,  without 
moving  a  muscle.  *  And  look  ! '  he  exclaimed,  suddenly 
seizing  the  boot,  and  exhibiting  it  on  high,  '  look, 
my  noble  tars,  if  you  have  tears,  prepare  to  shed 
them  now.  You  all  do  know  this  boot.  I  remember 
the  first  time  ever  old  Bob  put  it  on.  'Twas  on  a 
winter  evening,  off  Cape  Horn,  between  the  starboard 
carronades — that  day  his  precious  grog  was  stopped. 
Look  !  in  this  place  a  mouse  has  nibbled  through  ;  see 
what  a  rent  some  envious  rat  has  made  ;  through  this 
another  filed,  and,  as  he  plucked  his  cursed  rasp  away, 
mark  how  the  boot-leg  gaped.  This  was  the  unkindest 
cut  of  all. — But  whose  are  the  boots  ?  '  suddenly  assum 
ing  a  business-like  air  ;  '  yours  ?  yours  ?  yours  ?  ' 

But  not  a  friend  of  the  lamented  Bob  stood  by. 


AN  AUCTION  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR          249 

*  Tars  of  Columbia,'  said  the  auctioneer,  imperatively, 
*  these  boots  must  be  sold ;  and  if  I  can't  sell  them 
one  way,  I  must  sell  them  another.  How  much  a  pound, 
now,  for  this  superior  pair  of  old  boots  ?  going  by  the 
pound  now,  remember,  my  gallant  sailors  !  what  shall 
I  have  ?  one  cent,  do  I  hear  ?  going  now  at  one  cent  a 
pound — going — going — going — gone  !  ' 

1  Whose  are  they  ?  Yours,  captain  of  the  waist  ? 
Well,  my  sweet  and  pleasant  friend,  I  will  have  them 
weighed  out  to  you  when  the  auction  is  over.' 

In  like  manner  all  the  contents  of  the  bags  were  dis 
posed  of,  embracing  old  frocks,  trowsers,  and  jackets, 
the  various  sums  for  which  they  went  being  charged  to 
the  bidders  on  the  books  of  the  purser. 

Having  been  present  at  this  auction,  though  not  a 
purchaser,  and  seeing  with  what  facility  the  most  dis 
mantled  old  garments  went  off,  through  the  magical 
cleverness  of  the  accomplished  auctioneer,  the  thought 
occurred  to  me,  that  if  ever  I  calmly  and  positively  de 
cided  to  dispose  of  my  famous  white  jacket,  this  would 
be  the  very  way  to  do  it.  I  turned  the  matter  over  in 
my  mind  a  long  time. 

The  weather  in  Rio  was  genial  and  warm,  and  that 
I  would  ever  again  need  such  a  thing  as  a  heavy  quilted 
jacket — and  such  a  jacket  as  the  white  one,  too — seemed 
almost  impossible.  Yet  I  remembered  the  American 
coast,  and  that  it  would  probably  be  autumn  when  we 
should  arrive  there.  Yes,  I  thought  of  all  that,  to  be 
sure  ;  nevertheless,  the  ungovernable  whim  seized  me 
to  sacrifice  my  jacket  and  recklessly  abide  the  conse 
quences.  Besides,  was  it  not  a  horrible  jacket  ?  To 
how  many  annoyances  had  it  subjected  me  ?  How 
many  scrapes  had  it  dragged  me  into  ?  Nay,  had  it  not 
once  jeopardised  my  very  existence  ?  And  I  had  a 
dreadful  presentiment  that,  if  I  persisted  in  retaining  it, 


250  WHITE  JACKET 

it  would  do  so  again.  Enough  !  I  will  sell  it,  I  muttered  ; 
and,  so  muttering,  I  thrust  my  hands  further  down  in  my 
waistband,  and  walked  the  main-top  in  the  stern  concen 
tration  of  an  inflexible  purpose.  Next  day,  hearing  that 
another  auction  was  shortly  to  take  place,  I  repaired  to 
the  office  of  the  purser's  steward,  with  whom  I  was  upon 
rather  friendly  terms.  After  vaguely  and  delicately 
hinting  at  the  object  of  my  visit,  I  came  roundly  to  the 
point,  and  asked  him  whether  he  could  slip  my  jacket 
into  one  of  the  bags  of  clothes  next  to  be  sold,  and  so 
dispose  of  it  by  public  auction.  He  kindly  acquiesced, 
and  the  thing  was  done. 

In  due  time  all  hands  were  again  summoned  round  the 
mainmast ;  the  purser's  steward  mounted  his  post,  and 
the  ceremony  began.  Meantime,  I  lingered  out  of  sight, 
but  still  within  hearing,  on  the  gun-deck  below,  gazing 
up  unperceived  at  the  scene. 

As  it  is  now  so  long  ago,  I  will  here  frankly  make  con 
fession  that  I  had  privately  retained  the  services  of  a 
friend — Williams,  the  Yankee  pedagogue  and  peddler — 
whose  business  it  would  be  to  linger  near  the  scene 
of  the  auction,  and,  if  the  bids  on  the  jacket  loitered,  to 
start  it  roundly  himself  ;  and  if  the  bidding  then  became 
brisk,  he  was  continually  to  strike  in  with  the  most  pertin 
acious  and  infatuated  bids,  and  so  exasperate  competition 
into  the  maddest  and  most  extravagant  overtures. 

A  variety  of  other  articles  having  been  put  up,  the 
white  jacket  was  slowly  produced,  and,  held  high  aloft 
between  the  auctioneer's  thumb  and  forefinger,  was 
submitted  to  the  inspection  of  the  discriminating 
public. 

Here  it  behoves  me  once  again  to  describe  my  jacket ; 
for,  as  a  portrait  taken  at  one  period  of  life  will  not 
answer  for  a  later  stage  ;  much  more  this  jacket  of  mine, 
undergoing  so  many  changes,  needs  to  be  painted  again 


AN  AUCTION  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR          251 

and  again,  in  order  truly  to  present  its  actual  appearance 
at  any  given  period. 

A  premature  old  age  had  now  settled  upon  it ;  all  over 
it  bore  melancholy  scars  of  the  masoned-up  pockets  that 
had  once  trenched  it  in  various  directions.  Some  parts 
of  it  were  slightly  mildewed  from  dampness  ;  on  one 
side  several  of  the  buttons  were  gone,  and  others  were 
broken  or  cracked ;  while,  alas !  my  many  mad  endeavours 
to  rub  it  black  on  the  decks  had  now  imparted  to  the 
whole  garment  an  exceedingly  untidy  appearance.  Such 
as  it  was,  with  all  its  faults,  the  auctioneer  dis 
played  it. 

4  You  venerable  sheet-anchor  men  !  and  you,  gallant 
fore-top  men !  and  you,  my  fine  waisters !  what  do 
you  say  now  for  this  superior  old  jacket  ?  Buttons  and 
sleeves,  lining  and  skirts,  it  must  this  day  be  sold  with 
out  reservation.  How  much  for  it,  my  gallant  tars  of 
Columbia  ?  say  the  word,  and  how  much  ?  ' 

'  My  eyes  !  '  exclaimed  a  fore-top  man,  '  don't  that 
'ere  bunch  of  old  swabs  belong  to  Jack  Chase's  pet  ? 
Arn't  that  the  white  jacket  ?  ' 

*  The  white  jacket !  '   cried  fifty  voices  in  response  ; 
'  the  white  jacket !  '     The  cry  ran  fore  and  aft  the  ship 
like    a    slogan,   completely   overwhelming    the    solitary 
voice  of  my  private  friend  Williams,  while  all  hands 
gazed  at  it  with  straining  eyes,  wondering  how  it  came 
among  the  bags  of  deceased  mariners. 

*  Ay,  noble  tars,'  said  the  auctioneer,  '  you  may  well 
stare  at  it ;   you  will  not  find  another  jacket  like  this  on 
either  side  of  Cape  Horn,  I  assure  you.     Why,  just  look 
at  it !     How  much,  now  ?     Give  me  a  bid — but  don't 
be  rash  ;   be  prudent,  be  prudent,  men  ;   remember  your 
purser's  accounts,  and  don't  be  betrayed  into  extra 
vagant  bids.' 

1  Purser's    steward !  '    cried    Grummet,    one    of    the 


252  WHITE  JACKET 

quarter-gunners,  slowly  shifting  his  quid  from  one  cheek 
to  the  other,  like  a  ballast-stone,  '  I  won't  bid  on  that 
'ere  bunch  of  old  swabs,  unless  you  put  up  ten  pounds 
of  soap  with  it.' 

'  Don't  mind  that  old  fellow,'  said  the  auctioneer. 
*  How  much  for  the  jacket,  my  noble  tars  ?  ' 

'  Jacket !  '  cried  a  dandy  bone-polisher  of  the  gun 
room.  '  The  sailmaker  was  the  tailor,  then.  How 
many  fathoms  of  canvas  in  it,  purser's  steward  ?  ' 

'  How  much  for  this  jacket  ?  '  reiterated  the  auctioneer, 
emphatically. 

'  Jacket,  do  you  call  it !  '  cried  a  captain  of  the  hold. 
'  Why  not  call  it  a  white-washed  man-of-war  schooner  ? 
Look  at  the  port-holes,  to  let  in  the  air  of  cold  nights.' 

'  A  reg'lar  herring-net,'  chimed  in  Grummet. 

'  Gives  me  the  fever-nagur  to  look  at  it,'  echoed  a 
mizen-top  man. 

*  Silence  !  '    cried    the    auctioneer.     '  Start    it    now — 
start  it,  boys  ;    anything  you  please,  my  fine  fellows  ! 
it  must  be  sold.     Come,  what  ought  I  to  have  on  it, 
now  ?  ' 

*  Why,  purser's  steward,'  cried  a  waister,  '  you  ought 
to  have  new  sleeves,  a  new  lining,  and  a  new  body  on  it, 
afore  you  try  to  shove  it  off  on  a  greenhorn.' 

'  What  are  you  busin'  that  'ere  garment  for  ?  '  cried  an 
old  sheet-anchor  man.  '  Don't  you  see  it 's  a  "  uniform 
mustering  jacket  " — three  buttons  on  one  side  and  none 
on  t'  other  ?  ' 

'  Silence  !  '  again  cried  the  auctioneer.  '  How  much, 
my  sea-fencibles,  for  this  superior  old  jacket  ?  ' 

'  Well,'  said  Grummet,  '  I  '11  take  it  for  cleaning-rags 
at  one  cent.' 

*  Oh,  come,  give  us  a  bid  !  say  something,  Columbians.' 
'  Well,  then,'  said  Grummet,  all  at  once  bursting  into 

genuine  indignation,  '  if  you  want  us  to  say  something, 


AN  AUCTION  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR          253 

then  heave  that  bunch  of  old  swabs  overboard,  say  /, 
and  show  us  something  worth  looking  at.' 

*  No  one  will  give  me  a  bid,  then  ?     Very  good  ;  here, 
shove  it  aside.     Let 's  have  something  else  there.' 

While  this  scene  was  going  forward,  and  my  white 
jacket  was  thus  being  abused,  how  my  heart  swelled 
within  me  !  Thrice  was  I  on  the  point  of  rushing  out 
of  my  hiding-place,  and  bearing  it  off  from  derision  ; 
but  I  lingered,  still  flattering  myself  that  all  would  be 
well,  and  the  jacket  find  a  purchaser  at  last.  But  no, 
alas  !  there  was  no  getting  rid  of  it,  except  by  rolling 
a  forty-two -pound  shot  in  it,  and  committing  it  to  the 
deep.  But  though,  in  my  desperation,  I  had  once  con 
templated  something  of  that  sort,  yet  I  had  now  become 
unaccountably  averse  to  it,  from  certain  involuntary 
superstitious  considerations.  If  I  sink  my  jacket, 
thought  I,  it  will  be  sure  to  spread  itself  into  a  bed  at 
the  bottom  of  the  sea,  upon  which  I  shall  sooner  or  later 
recline,  a  dead  man.  So,  unable  to  conjure  it  into  the 
possession  of  another,  and  withheld  from  burying  it  out 
of  sight  forever,  my  jacket  stuck  to  me  like  the  fatal 
shirt  on  Nessus. 


CHAPTER    XLVIII 

PURSER,  PURSER'S  STEWARD,  AND  POSTMASTER  IN  A 
MAN-OF-WAR 

As  the  purser's  steward  so  conspicuously  figured  at  the 
unsuccessful  auction  of  my  jacket,  it  reminds  me  of  how 
important  a  personage  that  official  is  on  board  of  all 
men-of-war.  He  is  the  right-hand  man  and  confidential 
deputy  and  clerk  of  the  purser,  who  entrusts  to  him  all 
his  accounts  with  the  crew,  while,  in  most  cases,  he  him 
self,  snug  and  comfortable  in  his  state-room,  glances  over 
a  file  of  newspapers  instead  of  overhauling  his  ledgers. 

Of  all  the  non-combatants  of  a  man-of-war,  the  purser, 
perhaps,  stands  foremost  in  importance.  Though  he  is 
but  a  member  of  the  gun-room  mess,  yet  usage  seems  to 
assign  him  a  conventional  station  somewhat  above  that 
of  his  equals  in  Navy  rank — the  chaplain,  surgeon,  and 
professor.  Moreover,  he  is  frequently  to  be  seen  in  close 
conversation  with  the  commodore,  who,  in  the  Neversink, 
was  more  than  once  known  to  be  slightly  jocular  with 
our  purser.  Upon  several  occasions,  also,  he  was  called 
into  the  commodore's  cabin,  and  remained  closeted 
there  for  several  minutes  together.  Nor  do  I  remember 
that  there  ever  happened  a  cabinet  meeting  of  the  ward 
room  barons,  the  lieutenants,  in  the  commodore's  cabin, 
but  the  purser  made  one  of  the  party.  Doubtless  the 
important  fact  of  the  purser  having  under  his  charge  all 
the  financial  affairs  of  a  man-of-war,  imparts  to  him  the 
great  importance  he  enjoys.  Indeed,  we  find  in  every 
government — monarchies  and  republics  alike — that  the 

254 


PURSER  AND  PURSER'S  STEWARD          255 

personage  at  the  head  of  the  finances  invariably  occupies 
a  commanding  position.  Thus,  in  point  of  station,  the 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury  of  the  United  States  is  deemed 
superior  to  the  other  heads  of  departments.  Also,  in 
England,  the  real  office  held  by  the  great  Premier  him 
self  is — as  everyone  knows — that  of  First  Lord  of  the 
Treasury. 

Now,  under  this  high  functionary  of  state,  the  official 
known  as  the  purser's  steward  was  head  clerk  of  the 
frigate's  fiscal  affairs.  Upon  the  berth-deck  he  had  a 
regular  counting-room,  full  of  ledgers,  journals,  and  day 
books.  His  desk  was  as  much  littered  with  papers  as 
any  Pearl  Street  merchant's,  and  much  time  was  devoted 
to  his  accounts.  For  hours  together  you  would  see  him, 
through  the  window  of  his  subterranean  office,  writing 
by  the  light  of  his  perpetual  lamp. 

Ex-officio,  the  purser's  steward  of  most  ships  is  a  sort 
of  postmaster,  and  his  office  the  post-office.  When  the 
letter  bags  for  the  squadron — almost  as  large  as  those  of 
the  United  States  mail — arrived  on  board  the  Neversink, 
it  was  the  purser's  steward  that  sat  at  his  little  window 
on  the  berth-deck,  and  handed  you  your  letter  or  paper 
— if  any  there  were  to  your  address.  Some  disappointed 
applicants  among  the  sailors  would  offer  to  buy  the 
epistles  of  their  more  fortunate  shipmates,  while  yet  the 
seal  was  unbroken — maintaining  that  the  sole  and  con 
fidential  reading  of  a  fond,  long,  domestic  letter  from  any 
man's  home,  was  far  better  than  no  letter  at  all. 

In  the  vicinity  of  the  office  of  the  purser's  steward 
are  the  principal  storerooms  of  the  purser,  where  large 
quantities  of  goods  of  every  description  are  to  be  found. 
On  board  of  those  ships  where  goods  are  permitted  to 
be  served  out  to  the  crew  for  the  purpose  of  selling  them 
ashore,  to  raise  money,  more  business  is  transacted  at  the 
office  of  a  purser's  steward  in  one  Liberty  Day  morning 


256  WHITE  JACKET 

than  all  the  dry-goods  shops  in  a  considerable  village 
would  transact  in  a  week. 

Once  a  month,  with  undeviating  regularity,  this  official 
has  his  hands  more  than  usually  full.  For  once  a  month, 
certain  printed  bills,  called  mess-bills,  are  circulated 
among  the  crew,  and  whatever  you  may  want  from  the 
purser — be  it  tobacco,  soap,  duck,  dungaree,  needles, 
thread,  knives,  belts,  calico,  ribbon,  pipes,  paper,  pens, 
hats,  ink,  shoes,  socks,  or  whatever  it  may  be — down  it 
goes  on  the  mess-bill,  which  being  the  next  day  returned 
to  the  office  of  the  steward,  the  '  slops,'  as  they  are  called, 
are  served  out  to  the  men  and  charged  to  their  accounts. 

Lucky  is  it  for  man-of-war's  men  that  the  outrageous 
impositions  to  which,  but  a  very  few  years  ago,  they 
were  subjected  from  the  abuses  in  this  department  of 
the  service,  and  the  unscrupulous  cupidity  of  many  of 
the  pursers — lucky  is  it  for  them  that  now  these  things 
are  in  a  great  degree  done  away.  The  pursers,  instead 
of  being  at  liberty  to  make  almost  what  they  pleased 
from  the  sale  of  their  wares,  are  now  paid  by  regular 
stipends  laid  down  by  law. 

Under  the  exploded  system,  the  profits  of  some  of  these 
officers  were  almost  incredible.  In  one  cruise  up  the 
Mediterranean,  the  purser  of  an  American  line-of-battle 
ship  was,  on  good  authority,  said  to  have  cleared  the  sum 
of  fifty  thousand  dollars.  Upon  that  he  quitted  the  ser 
vice,  and  retired  into  the  country.  Shortly  after,  his  three 
daughters — not  very  lovely — married  extremely  well. 

The  ideas  that  sailors  entertain  of  pursers  is  expressed 
in  a  rather  inelegant  but  expressive  saying  of  theirs  : 
'  The  purser  is  a  conjurer  ;  he  can  make  a  dead  man  chew 
tobacco  ' — insinuating  that  the  accounts  of  a  dead  man 
are  sometimes  subjected  to  post-mortem  charges.  Among 
sailors,  also,  pursers  commonly  go  by  the  name  of  nip- 
cheeses. 


PURSER  AND  PURSER'S  STEWARD          257 

No  wonder  that  on  board  of  the  old  frigate  Java,  upon 
her  return  from  a  cruise  extending  over  a  period  of  more 
than  four  years,  one  thousand  dollars  paid  off  eighty  of 
her  crew,  though  the  aggregate  wages  of  the  eighty 
for  the  voyage  must  have  amounted  to  about  sixty 
thousand  dollars.  Even  under  the  present  system,  the 
purser  of  a  line-of-battle  ship,  for  instance,  is  far  better 
paid  than  any  other  officer,  short  of  captain  or  commo 
dore.  While  the  lieutenant  commonly  receives  but 
eighteen  hundred  dollars,  the  surgeon  of  the  fleet  but 
fifteen  hundred,  the  chaplain  twelve  hundred,  the  purser 
of  a  line-of-battle  ship  receives  thirty-five  hundred 
dollars.  In  considering  his  salary,  however,  his  re 
sponsibilities  are  not  to  be  overlooked ;  they  are  by  no 
means  insignificant. 

There  are  pursers  in  the  Navy  whom  the  sailors  exempt 
from  the  insinuations  above  mentioned,  nor,  as  a  class, 
are  they  so  obnoxious  to  them  now  as  formerly  ;  for  one, 
the  florid  old  purser  of  the  Neversink — never  coming  into 
disciplinary  contact  with  the  seamen,  and  being  withal 
a  jovial  and  apparently  good-hearted  gentleman — was 
something  of  a  favourite  with  many  of  the  crew. 


CHAPTER    XLIX 

RUMOURS    OF   A   WAR,    AND    HOW   THEY   WERE   RECEIVED 
BY  THE   POPULATION   OF  THE   NEVERSINK 

WHILE  lying  in  the  harbour  of  Callao,  in  Peru,  certain 
rumours  had  come  to  us  touching  a  war  with  England, 
growing  out  of  the  long-vexed  North-Eastern  Boundary 
Question.  In  Rio  these  rumours  were  increased  ;  and 
the  probability  of  hostilities  induced  our  commodore  to 
authorise  proceedings  that  closely  brought  home  to 
every  man  on  board  the  Neversink  his  liability  at  any 
time  to  be  killed  at  his  gun. 

Among  other  things,  a  number  of  men  were  detailed 
to  pass  up  the  rusty  cannon-balls  from  the  shot-lockers 
in  the  hold,  and  scrape  them  clean  for  service.  The 
commodore  was  a  very  neat  gentleman,  and  would  not 
fire  a  dirty  shot  into  his  foe. 

It  was  an  interesting  occasion  for  a  tranquil  observer ; 
nor  was  it  altogether  neglected.  Not  to  recite  the  precise 
remarks  made  by  the  seamen  while  pitching  the  shot  up 
the  hatchway  from  hand  to  hand,  like  schoolboys  playing 
ball  ashore,  it  will  be  enough  to  say  that,  from  the  general 
drift  of  their  discourse — jocular  as  it  was — it  was  manifest 
that,  almost  to  a  man,  they  abhorred  the  idea  of  going 
into  action. 

And  why  should  they  desire  a  war  ?  Would  their 
wages  be  raised  ?  Not  a  cent.  The  prize-money, 
though,  ought  to  have  been  an  inducement.  But  of  all 
the  '  rewards  of  virtue/  prize-money  is  the  most  un 
certain  ;  and  this  the  man-of-war's  man  knows.  What, 
then,  has  he  to  expect  from  war  ?  What  but  harder 

258 


RUMOURS  OF  A  WAR  259 

work,  and  harder  usage  than  in  peace  ;  a  wooden  leg  or 
arm  ;  mortal  wounds,  and  death  ?  Enough,  however, 
that  by  far  the  majority  of  the  common  sailors  of  the 
Never  sink  were  plainly  concerned  at  the  prospect  of  war, 
and  were  plainly  averse  to  it. 

But  with  the  officers  of  the  quarter-deck  it  was  just 
the  reverse.  None  of  them,  to  be  sure,  in  my  hearing 
at  least,  verbally  expressed  their  gratification  ;  but  it 
was  unavoidably  betrayed  by  the  increased  cheerfulness 
of  their  demeanour  toward  each  other,  their  frequent 
fraternal  conferences,  and  their  unwonted  animation 
for  several  days  in  issuing  their  orders.  The  voice  of 
Mad  Jack — always  a  belfry  to  hear — now  resounded 
like  that  famous  bell  of  England,  Great  Tom  of  Oxford. 
As  for  Selvagee,  he  wore  his  sword  with  a  jaunty  air, 
and  his  servant  daily  polished  the  blade. 

But  why  this  contrast  between  the  forecastle  and  the 
quarter-deck,  between  the  man-of-war's  man  and  .his 
officer  ?  Because,  though  war  would  equally  jeopardise 
the  lives  of  both,  yet,  while  it^held  out  to  the  sailor  no 
promise  of  promotion,  and  what  is  called  glory,  these 
things  fired  the  breast  of  his  officers. 

It  is  no  pleasing  task,  nor  a"  thankful  one,  to  dive  into 
the  souls  of  some  men  ;  but  there  are  occasions  when, 
to  bring  up  the  mud  from  the  bottom,  reveals  to  us  on 
what  soundings  we  are,  on  what  coast  we  adjoin. 

How  were  these  officers  to  gain  glory  ?  How  but  by 
a  distinguished  slaughtering  of  their  fellow-men  ?  How 
were  they  to  be  promoted  ?  How  but  over  the  buried 
heads  of  killed  comrades  and  messmates  ? 

This  hostile  contrast  between  the  feelings  with  which 
the  common  seamen  and  the  officers  of  the  Neversink 
looked  forward  to  this  more  than  possible  war,  is  one 
of  many  instances  that  might  be  quoted  to  show  the 
antagonism  of  their  interests,  the  incurable  antagonism 


260  WHITE  JACKET 

in  which  they  dwell.  But  can  men,  whose  interests  are 
diverse,  ever  hope  to  live  together  in  a  harmony  un- 
coerced  ?  Can  the  brotherhood  of  the  race  of  mankind 
ever  hope  to  prevail  in  a  man-of-war,  where  one  man's 
bane  is  almost  another's  blessing  ?  By  abolishing  the 
scourge,  shall  we  do  away  tyranny  ;  that  tyranny  which 
must  ever  prevail,  where  of  two  essentially  antagonist 
classes  in  perpetual  contact,  one  is  immeasurably  the 
stronger  ?  Surely  it  seems  all  but  impossible.  And  as  the 
very  object  of  a  man-of-war,  as  its  name  implies,  is  to  fight 
the  very  battles  so  naturally  averse  to  the  seamen  ;  so 
long  as  a  man-of-war  exists,  it  must  ever  remain  a  picture 
of  much  that  is  tyrannical  and  repelling  in  human  nature. 

Being  an  establishment  much  more  extensive  than 
the  American  Navy,  the  English  armed  marine  furnishes 
a  yet  more  striking  example  of  this  thing,  especially  as 
the  existence  of  war  produces  so  vast  an  augmentation 
of  her  naval  force  compared  with  what  it  is  in  time  of 
peace.  It  is  well  known  what  joy  the  news  of  Bona 
parte's  sudden  return  from  Elba  created  among  crowds  of 
British  naval  officers,  who  had  previously  been  expecting 
to  be  sent  ashore  on  half -pay.  Thus,  when  all  the  world 
wailed,  these  officers  found  occasion  for  thanksgiving.  I 
urge  it  not  against  them  as  men — their  feelings  belonged 
to  their  profession.  Had  they  not  been  naval  officers, 
they  had  not  been  rejoicers  in  the  midst  of  despair. 

When  shall  the  time  come,  how  much  longer  will  God 
postpone  it,  when  the  clouds,  which  at  times  gather  over 
the  horizons  of  nations,  shall  not  be  hailed  by_jany  class 
of  humanity,  and  invoked  to  burst  as  a  bomb  ?  Stand 
ing  navies,  as  well  as  standing  armies,  serve  to  keepjilive 
the  spirit  of  war  even  in  the  meek  heart  of  peace.  In  its 
very  embers  and  smoulderings  they  nourish  that  fatal 
fire,  and  half -pay  officers,  as  the  priests  of  Mars,  yet 
guard  the  temple,  though  no  god  be  there. 


CHAPTER   L 

THE    BAY   OF   ALL   BEAUTIES 

I  HAVE  said  that  I  must  pass  over  Rio  without  a  descrip 
tion  ;  but  just  now  such  a  flood  of  scented  reminiscences 
steals  over  me,  that  I  must  needs  yield  and  recant,  as  I 
inhale  that  musky  air. 

More  than  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles'  circuit  of  living 
green  hills  embosoms  a  translucent  expanse,  so  gemmed 
in  by  sierras  of  grass,  that  among  the  Indian  tribes  the 
place  was  known  as  '  The  Hidden  Water.'  On  all  sides, 
in  the  distance,  rise  high  conicarpeaks,  which  "at  sunrise 
and  sunset  burn  like  vast  tapers  ;  and  down  from  the 
interior,  through  vineyards  and  forests,  flow  radiating 
streams,  all  emptying  into  the  harbour. 

Talk  not  of  Bahia  de  Todos  os  Santos — the  Bay  of 
All  Saints  ;  for  though  that  be  a  glorious  haven,  yet  Rio 
is  the  Bay  of  all  Rivers — the  Bay  of  all  Delights — the 
Bay  of  all  Beauties.  From  circumjacent  hillsides,  un 
tiring  summer  hangs  perpetually  in  terraces  of  vivid 
verdure  ;  and,  embossed  with  old  mosses,  convent  and 
castle  nestle  in  valley  and  glen. 

All  round,  deep  inlets  run  into  the  green  mountain 
land,  and,  overhung  with  wild  Highlands,  more  resemble 
Loch  Katrines  than  Lake  Lemans.  And  though  Loch 
Katrine  has  been  sung  by  the  bonneted  Scott,  and  Lake 
Leman  by  the  coroneted  Byron  ;  yet  here,  in  Rio,  both 
the  loch  and  the  lake  are  but  two  wildflowers  in  a  pros 
pect  that  is  almost  unlimited.  For,  behold  !  far  away, 
and  away,  stretches  the  broad  blue  of  the  water,  to  yonder 

261 


262  WHITE  JACKET 

soft-swelling  hills  of  light  green,  backed  by  the  purple 
pinnacles  and  pipes  of  the  grand  Organ  Mountains  ;  fitly 
so  called,  for  in  thunder- time  they  roll  cannonades  down 
the  bay,  drowning  the  blended  bass  of  all  the  cathedrals 
in  Rio.  Shout  amain,  exalt  your  voices,  stamp  your 
feet,  jubilate,  Organ  Mountains  !  and  roll  your  Te  Deums 
round  the  world  ! 

What  though,  for  more  than  five  thousand  five  hundred 
years,  this  grand  harbour  of  Rio  lay  hid  in  the  hills,  un 
known  by  the  Catholic  Portuguese  ?  Centuries  ere 
Haydn  performed  before  emperors  and  kings,  these 
Organ  Mountains  played  his  oratorio  of  '  The  Creation  ' 
before  the  Creator  himself.  But  nervous  Haydn  could 
not  have  endured  that  cannonading  choir,  since  this 
composer  of  thunderbolts  himself  died  at  last  through 
the  crashing  commotion  of  Napoleon's  bombardment  of 
Vienna. 

But  all  mountains  are  Organ  Mountains  :  the  Alps  and 
the  Himalayas  ;  the  Appalachian  Chain,  the  Ural,  the 
Andes,  the  Green  Hills  and  the  White.  All  of  them  play 
anthems  for  ever  :  *  The  Messiah,'  and  '  Samson,'  and 
'  Israel  in  Egypt,'  and  '  Saul,'  and  '  Judas  Maccabeus,'  and 
'  Solomon.' 

Archipelago  Rio  !  ere  Noah  on  old  Ararat  anchored 
his  ark,  there  lay  anchored  in  you  all  these  green,  rocky 
isles  I  now  see.  But  God  did  not  build  on  you,  isles  ! 
those  long  lines  of  batteries  ;  nor  did  our  blessed  Saviour 
stand  godfather  at  the  christening  of  yon  frowning  fortress 
of  Santa  Cruz,  though  named  in  honour  of  himself,  the 
divine  Prince  of  Peace  ! 

Amphitheatrical  Rio  !  in  your  broad  expanse  might 
be  held  the  Resurrection  and  the  Judgment  Day  of  the 
whole  world's  men-of-war,  represented  by  the  flagships 
of  fleets — the  flagships  of  the  Phoenician  armed  galleys 
of  Tyre  and  Sidon  ;  of  King  Solomon's  annual  squadrons 


THE  BAY  OF  ALL  BEAUTIES  263 

that  sailed  to  Ophir  ;  whence  in  after  times,  perhaps, 
sailed  the  Acapulco  fleets  of  the  Spaniards,  with  golden 
ingots  for  ballasting  ;  the  flagships  of  all  the  Greek  and 
Persian  craft  that  exchanged  the  war-hug  at  Salamis  ; 
of  all  the  Roman  and  Egyptian  galleys  that,  eagle-like, 
with  blood-dripping  prows,  beaked  each  other  at  Actium  ; 
of  all  the  Danish  keels  of  the  Vikings  ;  of  all  the  mos 
quito  craft  of  Abba  Thule,  king  of  the  Pelews,  when  he 
went  to  vanquish  Artingall ;  of  all  the  Venetian,  Genoese, 
and  Papal  fleets  that  came  to  the  shock  at  Lepanto  ;  of 
both  horns  of  the  crescent  of  the  Spanish  Armada ;  of 
the  Portuguese  squadron  that,  under  the  gallant  Gama, 
chastised  the  Moors,  and  discovered  the  Moluccas  ;  of 
all  the  Dutch  navies  led  by  Van  Tromp,  and  sunk  by 
Admiral  Hawke  ;  of  the  forty-seven  French  and  Spanish 
sail-of-the-line  that,  for  three  months,  essayed  to  batter 
down  Gibraltar ;  of  all  Nelson's  seventy -fours  that 
thunder-bolted  off  St.  Vincent's,  at  the  Nile,  Copenhagen, 
and  Trafalgar  ;  of  all  the  frigate  merchantmen  of  the 
East  India  Company ;  of  Perry's  war-brigs,  sloops, 
and  schooners  that  scattered  the  British  armament  on 
Lake  Erie  ;  of  all  the  Barbary  Corsairs  captured  by 
Bainbridge ;  of  the  war-canoes  of  the  Polynesian  kings, 
Tammahammaha  and  Pomaree — ay  !  one  and  all,  with 
Commodore  Noah  for  their  Lord  High  Admiral — in  this 
abounding  Bay  of  Rio  these  flagships  might  all  come  to 
anchor,  and  swing  round  in  concert  to  the  first  of  the  flood. 
Rio  is  a  small  Mediterranean  ;  and  what  was  fabled 
of  the  entrance  to  that  sea,  in  Rio  is  partly  made  true  ; 
for  here,  at  the  mouth,  stands  one  of  Hercules'  Pillars, 
the  Sugar  Loaf  Mountain,  one  thousand  feet  high,  inclin 
ing  over  a  little,  like  the  Leaning  Tower  of  Pisa.  At  its 
base  crouch,  like  mastiffs,  the  batteries  of  Jose  and 
Theodosia,  while  opposite,  you  are  menaced  by  a  rock- 
founded  fort. 


264  WHITE  JACKET 

The  channel  between — the  sole  inlet  to  the  bay — 
seems  but  a  biscuit's  toss  over  ;  you  see  naught  of  the 
landlocked  sea  within  till  fairly  in  the  strait.  But,  then, 
what  a  sight  is  beheld !  Diversified  as  the  harbour  of 
Constantinople,  but  a  thousand-fold  grander.  When  the 
Neversink  swept  in,  word  was  passed,  *  Aloft,  topmen  ! 
and  furl  the  t'-gallant-sails  and  royals  !  ' 

At  the  sound  I  sprang  into  the  rigging,  and  was  soon 
at  my  perch.  How  I  hung  over  that  main-royal-yard 
in  a  rapture  !  High  in  air,  poised  over  that  magnificent 
bay,  a  new  world  to  my  ravished  eyes,  I  felt  like  the 
foremost  of  a  flight  of  angels,  new-lighted  upon  earth, 
from  some  star  in  the  Milky  Way. 


CHAPTER   LI 

ONE  OF  '  THE  PEOPLE  '  HAS  AN  AUDIENCE  WITH  THE  COM 
MODORE  AND   THE  CAPTAIN  ON  THE  QUARTER-DECK 

WE  had  not  lain  in  Rio  long,  when  in  the  innermost 
recesses  of  the  mighty  soul  of  my  noble  captain  of  the 
top — incomparable  Jack  Chase — the  deliberate  opinion 
was  formed,  and  rock-founded,  that  our  ship's  company 
must  have  at  least  one  day's  *  liberty  '  to  go  ashore  ere  we 
weighed  anchor  for  home. 

Here  it  must  be  mentioned  that,  concerning  anything 
of  this  kind,  no  sailor  in  a  man-of-war  ever  presumes 
to  be  an  agitator,  unless  he  is  of  a  rank  superior  to  a 
mere  able  seaman ;  and  no  one  short  of  a  petty  officer 
— that  is,  a  captain  of  the  top,  a  quarter-gunner,  or 
boatswain's  mate — ever  dreams  of  being  a  spokesman 
to  the  supreme  authority  of  the  vessel  in  soliciting  any 
kind  of  favour  for  himself  and  shipmates. 

After  canvassing  the  matter  thoroughly  with  several  old 
quarter-masters  and  other  dignified  sea-fencibles,  Jack, 
hat  in  hand,  made  his  appearance,  one  fine  evening, 
at  the  mast,  and,  waiting  till  Captain  Claret  drew  nigh, 
bowed,  and  addressed  him  in  his  own  off-hand,  polished, 
and  poetical  style.  In  his  intercourse  with  the  quarter 
deck,  he  always  presumed  upon  his  being  such  a  universal 
favourite. 

'  Sir,  this  Rio  is  a  charming  harbour,  and  we  poor 
mariners — your  trusty  sea- warriors,  valiant  captain  ! 
who,  with  you  at  their  head,  would  board  the  Rock  of 
Gibraltar  itself,  and  carry  it  by  storm — we  poor  fellows, 

265 


266  WHITE  JACKET 

valiant  captain  !  have  gazed  round  upon  this  ravishing 
landscape  till  we  can  gaze  no  more.  Will  Captain  Claret 
vouchsafe  one  day's  liberty,  and  so  assure  himself  of 
eternal  felicity,  since,  in  our  flowing  cups,  he  will  be  ever 
after  freshly  remembered  ?  ' 

As  Jack  thus  rounded  off  with  a  snatch  from  Shake 
speare,  he  saluted  the  captain  with  a  gallant  flourish  of 
his  tarpaulin,  and  then,  bringing  the  rim  to  his  mouth, 
with  his  head  bowed,  and  his  body  thrown  into  a  fine 
negligent  attitude,  stood  a  picture  of  eloquent  but 
passive  appeal.  He  seemed  to  say,  Magnanimous 
Captain  Claret,  we  fine  fellows,  and  hearts  of  oak,  throw 
ourselves  upon  your  unparalleled  goodness. 

'  And  what  do  you  want  to  go  ashore  for  ?  '  asked  the 
captain,  evasively,  and  trying  to  conceal  his  admiration 
of  Jack  by  affecting  some  haughtiness. 

4  Ah  !  sir/  sighed  Jack,  '  why  do  the  thirsty  camels  of 
the  desert  desire  to  lap  the  waters  of  the  fountain  and 
roll  in  the  green  grass  of  the  oasis  ?  Are  we  not  but  just 
from  the  ocean  Sahara  ?  and  is  not  this  Rio  a  verdant 
spot,  noble  captain  ?  Surely  you  will  not  keep  us  always 
tethered  at  anchor,  when  a  little  more  cable  would  admit 
of  our  cropping  the  herbage  !  And  it  is  a  weary  thing, 
Captain  Claret,  to  be  imprisoned  month  after  month  on 
the  gun-deck,  without  so  much  as  smelling  a  citron.  Ah  ! 
Captain  Claret,  what  sings  sweet  Waller  : — 

"  But  who  can  always  on  the  billows  lie  ? 
The  watery  wilderness  yields  no  supply." 

Compared  with  such  a  prisoner,  noble  captain, 

"  Happy,  thrice  happy,  who,  in  battle  slain, 
Press'd  in  Atrides'  cause  the  Trojan  plain  !  " 

Pope's  version,  sir,  not  the  original  Greek.' 

And  so  saying,  Jack  once  more  brought  his  hat-rim 
to  his  mouth,  and  slightly  bending  forward,  stood  mute. 


AUDIENCE  WITH  COMMODORE  AND  CAPTAIN  267 

At  this  juncture  the  Most  Serene  Commodore  himself 
happened  to  emerge  from  the  after-gangway,  his  gilded 
buttons,  epaulets,  and  the  gold  lace  on  his  chapeau 
glittering  in  the  flooding  sunset.  Attracted  by  the  scene 
between  Captain  Claret  and  so  well  known  and  admired 
a  commoner  as  Jack  Chase,  he  approached,  and  assum 
ing  for  the  moment  an  air  of  pleasant  condescension — 
never  shown  to  his  noble  barons  the  officers  of  the  ward 
room — he  said,  with  a  smile,  '  Well,  Jack,  you  and  your 
shipmates  are  after  some  favour,  I  suppose — a  day's 
liberty,  is  it  not  ?  ' 

Whether  it  was  the  horizontal  setting  sun,  streaming 
along  the  deck,  that  blinded  Jack,  or  whether  it  was  in 
sun-worshipping  homage  of  the  mighty  commodore, 
there  is  no  telling  ;  but  just  at  this  juncture  noble  Jack 
was  standing  reverentially  holding  his  hat  to  his  brow, 
like  a  man  with  weak  eyes. 

'  Valiant  commodore,'  said  he,  at  last,  '  this  audience 
is  indeed  an  honour  undeserved.  I  almost  sink  beneath 
it.  Yes,  valiant  commodore,  your  sagacious  mind  has 
truly  divined  our  object.  Liberty,  sir  ;  liberty  is,  indeed, 
our  humble  prayer.  I  trust  your  honourable  wound, 
received  in  glorious  battle,  valiant  commodore,  pains 
you  less  to-day  than  common.' 

'  Ah  !  cunning  Jack  !  '  cried  the  commodore,  by  no 
means  blind  to  the  bold  sortie  of  his  flattery,  but  not  at 
all  displeased  with  it.  In  more  respects  than  one,  our 
commodore's  wound  was  his  weak  side. 

'  I  think  we  must  give  them  liberty,'  he  added,  turning 
to  Captain  Claret ;  who  thereupon,  waving  Jack  further 
off,  fell  into  confidential  discourse  with  his  superior. 

'  Well,  Jack,  we  will  see  about  it,'  at  last  cried 
the  commodore,  advancing.  '  I  think  we  must  let 
you  go.' 

'  To  your  duty,  captain  of  the  main-top  !  '  said  the 


268  WHITE  JACKET 

captain  rather  stiffly.  He  wished  to  neutralise  some 
what  the  effect  of  the  commodore's  condescension. 
Besides,  he  had  much  rather  the  commodore  had  been 
in  his  cabin.  His  presence,  for  the  time,  affected  his 
own  supremacy  in  his  ship.  But  Jack  was  no  ways  cast 
down  by  the  captain's  coldness  ;  he  felt  safe  enough  ; 
so  he  proceeded  to  offer  his  acknowledgments. 

"  Kind  gentlemen,"  he  sighed,  '  "  your  pains  are 
registered  where  every  day  I  turn  the  leaf  to  read," — 
Macbeth,  valiant  commodore  and  captain  ! — what  the 
Thane  says  to  the  noble  lords,  Rosse  and  Angus.' 

And  long  and  lingeringly  bowing  to  the  two  noble 
officers,  Jack  backed  away  from  their  presence,  still 
shading  his  eyes  with  the  broad  rim  of  his  hat. 

*  Jack  Chase  forever  ! '  cried  his  shipmates,  as  he 
carried  the  grateful  news  of  liberty  to  them  on  the  fore 
castle.  *  Who  can  talk  to  commodores  like  our  matchless 
Jack  ! ' 


CHAPTER   LII 

SOMETHING   CONCERNING  MIDSHIPMEN 

IT  was  the  next  morning  after  matchless  Jack's  inter 
view  with  the  commodore  and  captain,  that  a  little  in 
cident  occurred,  soon  forgotten  by  the  crew  at  large,  but 
long  remembered  by  the  few  seamen  who  were  in  the 
habit  of  closely  scrutinising  everyday  proceedings.  Upon 
the  face  of  it,  it  was  but  a  common  event — at  least  in  a 
man-of-war — the  flogging  of  a  man  at  the  gangway. 
But  the  under-current  of  circumstances  in  the  case  were 
of  a  nature  that  magnified  this  particular  flogging  into 
a  matter  of  no  small  importance.  The  story  itself  cannot 
here  be  related  ;  it  would  not  well  bear  recital :  enough 
that  the  person  flogged  was  a  middle-aged  man  of  the 
waist — a  forlorn,  broken-down,  miserable  object,  truly  ; 
one  of  those  wretched  landsmen  sometimes  driven  into 
the  Navy  by  their  unfitness  for  all  things  else,  even  as 
others  are  driven  into  the  workhouse.  He  was  flogged 
at  the  complaint  of  a  midshipman  ;  and  hereby  hangs 
the  drift  of  the  thing.  For  though  this  waister  was  so 
ignoble  a  mortal,  yet  his  being  scourged  on  this  one 
occasion  indirectly  proceeded  from  the  mere  wanton  spite 
and  unscrupulousness  of  the  midshipman  in  question — 
a  youth  who  was  apt  to  indulge  at  times  in  undignified 
familiarities  with  some  of  the  men,  who,  sooner  or  later, 
almost  always  suffered  from  his  capricious  preferences. 

But  the  leading  principle  that  was  involved  in  this 
affair  is  far  too  mischievous  to  be  lightly  dismissed. 

In  most  cases,  it  would  seem  to  be  a  cardinal  prin 
ciple  with  a  Navy  captain  that  his  subordinates  are 


270  WHITE  JACKET 

disintegrated  parts  of  himself,  detached  from  the  main 
body  on  special  service,  and  that  the  order  of  the  minutest 
midshipman  must  be  as  deferentially  obeyed  by  the  sea 
men  as  if  proceeding  from  the  commodore  on  the  poop. 
This  principle  was  once  emphasised  in  a  remarkable 
manner  by  the  valiant  and  handsome  Sir  Peter  Parker, 
upon  whose  death,  on  a  national  arson  expedition  on  the 
shores  of  Chesapeake  Bay,  in  1812  or  1813,  Lord  Byron 
wrote  his  well-known  stanzas.  '  By  the  God  of  war  !  ' 
said  Sir  Peter  to  his  sailors,  £  I  '11  make  you  touch  your 
hat  to  a  midshipman's  coat,  if  it 's  only  hung  on  a  broom 
stick  to  dry.' 

That  the  king,  in  the  eye  of  the  law,  can  do  no  wrong, 
is  the  well-known  fiction  of  despotic  states  ;  but  it  has 
remained  for  the  navies  of  constitutional  monarchies 
and  republics  to  magnify  this  fiction,  by  indirectly 
extending  it  to  all  the  quarter-deck  subordinates  of  an 
armed  ship's  chief  magistrate.  And  though  judicially 
unrecognised,  and  unacknowledged  by  the  officers  them 
selves,  yet  this  is  the  principle  that  pervades  the  fleet ; 
this  is  the  principle  that  is  every  hour  acted  upon,  and 
to  sustain  which,  thousands  of  seamen  have  been  flogged 
at  the  gangway. 

However  childish,  ignorant,  stupid,  or  idiotic  a  midship 
man,  if  he  but  orders  a  sailor  to  perform  even  the  most 
absurd  action,  that  man  is  not  only  bound  to  render 
instant  and  unanswering  obedience,  but  he  would  refuse 
at  his  peril.  And  if,  having  obeyed,  he  should  then  com 
plain  to  the  captain,  and  the  captain,  in  his  own  mind, 
should  be  thoroughly  convinced  of  the  impropriety, 
perhaps  of  the  illegality  of  the  order,  yet,  in  nine  cases 
out  of  ten,  he  would  not  publicly  reprimand  the  midship 
man,  nor  by  the  slightest  token  admit  before  the  com 
plainant  that,  in  this  particular  thing,  the  midshipman 
had  done  otherwise  than  perfectly  right. 


SOMETHING  CONCERNING  MIDSHIPMEN    271 

Upon  a  midshipman's  complaining  of  a  seaman  to 
Lord  Collingwood,  when  captain  of  a  line -of -battle  ship, 
he  ordered  the  man  for  punishment ;  and,  in  the  interval, 
calling  the  midshipman  aside,  said  to  him,  '  In  all  pro 
bability,  now,  the  fault  is  yours — you  know  ;  therefore, 
when  the  man  is  brought  to  the  mast,  you  had  better 
ask  for  his  pardon/ 

Accordingly,  upon  the  lad's  public  intercession, 
Collingwood,  turning  to  the  culprit,  said,  '  This  young 
gentleman  has  pleaded  so  humanely  for  you,  that,  in  the 
hope  you  feel  a  due  gratitude  to  him  for  his  benevolence, 
I  will,  for  this  time,  overlook  your  offence.'  This  story 
is  related  by  the  editor  of  the  admiral's  Correspond 
ence,  to  show  the  admiral's  kind-heartedness. 

Now  Collingwood  was,  in  reality,  one  of  the  most  just, 
humane,  and  benevolent  admirals  that  ever  hoisted  a 
flag.  For  a  sea-officer,  Collingwood  was  a  man  in  a 
million.  But  if  a  man  like  him,  swayed  by  old  usages, 
could  thus  violate  the  commonest  principle  of  justice — 
with  however  good  motives  at  bottom — what  must  be 
expected  from  other  captains  not  so  eminently  gifted 
with  noble  traits  as  Collingwood  ? 

And  if  the  corps  of  American  midshipmen  is  mostly 
replenished  from  the  nursery,  the  counter,  and  the  lap  of 
unrestrained  indulgence  at  home  ;  and  if  most  of  them 
at  least,  by  their  impotency  as  officers,  in  all  important 
functions  at  sea,  by  their  boyish  and  overweening  conceit 
of  their  gold  lace,  by  their  overbearing  manner  toward 
the  seamen,  and  by  their  peculiar  aptitude  to  construe 
the  merest  trivialities  of  manner  into  set  affronts  against 
their  dignity  ;  if  by  all  this  they  sometimes  contract  the 
ill-will  of  the  seamen  ;  and  if,  in  a  thousand  ways,  the 
seamen  cannot  but  betray  it — how  easy  for  any  of  these 
midshipmen,  who  may  happen  to  be  unrestrained  by 
moral  principle,  to  resort  to  spiteful  practices  in  procuring 


272  WHITE  JACKET 

vengeance  upon  the  offenders,  in  many  instances  to 
the  extremity  of  the  lash  ;  since,  as  we  have  seen,  the 
tacit  principle  in  the  Navy  seems  to  be  that,  in  his 
ordinary  intercourse  with  the  sailors,  a  midshipman  can 
do  nothing  obnoxious  to  the  public  censure  of  his  superiors. 

'  You  fellow,  I  '11  get  you  licked  before  long,'  is  often 
heard  from  a  midshipman  to  a  sailor  who,  in  some  way 
not  open  to  the  judicial  action  of  the  captain,  has  chanced 
to  offend  him. 

At  times  you  will  see  one  of  these  lads,  not  five  feet 
high,  gazing  up  with  inflamed  eye  at  some  venerable 
six-footer  of  a  forecastle  man,  cursing  and  insulting  him 
by  every  epithet  deemed  most  scandalous  and  unendur 
able  among  men.  Yet  that  man's  indignant  tongue  is 
treble-knotted  by  the  law  that  suspends  death  itself 
over  his  head  should  his  passion  discharge  the  slightest 
blow  at  the  boy-worm  that  spits  at  his  feet. 

But  since  what  human  nature  is,  and  what  it  must  for 
ever  continue  to  be,  is  well  enough  understood  for  most 
practical  purposes,  it  needs  no  special  example  to  prove 
that,  where  the  merest  boys,  indiscriminately  snatched 
from  the  human  family,  are  given  such  authority  over 
mature  men,  the  results  must  be  proportionable  in 
monstrousness  to  the  custom  that  authorises  this  worse 
than  cruel  absurdity. 

Nor  is  it  unworthy  of  remark  that,  while  the  noblest 
minded,  and  most  heroic  sea-officers — men  of  the  top 
most  stature,  including  Lord  Nelson  himself — have  re 
garded  flogging  in  the  Navy  with  the  deepest  concern, 
and  not  without  weighty  scruples  touching  its  general 
necessity,  still,  one  who  has  seen  much  of  midshipmen 
can  truly  say  that  he  has  seen  but  few  midshipmen  who 
were  not  enthusiastic  advocates  and  admirers  of  scourg 
ing.  It  would  almost  seem  that  they  themselves,  having 
so  recently  escaped  the  posterior  discipline  of  the  nursery 


SOMETHING  CONCERNING  MIDSHIPMEN    273 

and  the  infant  school,  are  impatient  to  recover  from  those 
smarting  reminiscences  by  mincing  the  backs  of  full- 
grown  American  freemen. 

It  should  not  be  omitted  here  that  the  midshipmen 
in  the  English  Navy  are  not  permitted  to  be  quite  so 
imperious  as  in  the  American  ships.  They  are  divided 
into  three  (I  think)  probationary  classes  of  '  volunteers/ 
instead  of  being  at  once  advanced  to  a  warrant.  Nor 
will  you  fail  to  remark,  when  you  see  an  English  cutter 
officered  by  one  of  these  volunteers,  that  the  boy  does 
not  so  strut  and  slap  his  dirk-hilt  with  a  Bobadil  air, 
and  anticipatingly  feel  of  the  place  where  his  warlike 
whiskers  are  going  to  be,  and  sputter  out  oaths  so  at  the 
men,  as  is  too  often  the  case  with  the  little  boys  wearing 
best-bower  anchors  on  their  lapels  in  the  American  Navy. 

Yet  it  must  be  confessed  that  at  times  you  see  midship 
men  who  are  noble  little  fellows,  and  not  at  all  disliked 
by  the  crew.  Besides  three  gallant  youths,  one  black- 
eyed  little  lad,  in  particular,  in  the  Never 'sink ,  was  such 
a  one.  From  his  diminutiveness  he  went  by  the  name 
of  Boat  Plug  among  the  seamen.  Without  being  exactly 
familiar  with  them,  he  had  yet  become  a  general  favourite, 
by  reason  of  his  kindness  of  manner,  and  never  cursing 
them.  It  was  amusing  to  hear  some  of  the  older  Tritons 
invoke  blessings  upon  the  youngster,  when  his  kind  tones 
fell  on  their  weather-beaten  ears.  '  Ah,  good  luck  to 
you,  sir  !  '  touching  their  hats  to  the  little  man  ;  '  you 
have  a  soul  to  be  saved,  sir  !  '  There  was  a  wonderful 
deal  of  meaning  involved  in  the  latter  sentence.  You 
have  a  soul  to  be  saved,  is  the  phrase  which  a  man-of-war's 
man  peculiarly  applies  to  a  humane  and  kind-hearted 
officer.  It  also  implies  that  the  majority  of  quarter-deck 
officers  are  regarded  by  them  in  such  a  light  that  they 
deny  to  them  the  possession  of  souls.  Ah  !  but  these 
plebeians  sometimes  have  a  sublime  vengeance  upon 

s 


274  WHITE  JACKET 

patricians.  Imagine  an  outcast  old  sailor  seriously 
cherishing  the  purely  speculative  conceit  that  some  bully 
in  epaulets,  who  orders  him  to  and  fro  like  a  slave,  is  of 
an  organisation  immeasurably  inferior  to  himself  ;  must 
at  last  perish  with  the  brutes,  while  he  goes  to  his 
immortality  in  heaven  ! 

But  from  what  has  been  said  in  this  chapter,  it  must 
not  be  inferred  that  a  midshipman  leads  a  lord's  life  in 
a  man-of-war.  Far  from  it.  He  lords  it  over  those 
below  him,  while  lorded  over  himself  by  his  superiors. 
It  is  as  if  with  one  hand  a  schoolboy  snapped  his  fingers 
at  a  dog,  and  at  the  same  time  received  upon  the  other 
the  discipline  of  the  usher's  ferule.  And  though,  by 
the  American  Articles  of  War,  a  Navy  captain  cannot, 
of  his  own  authority,  legally  punish  a  midshipman, 
otherwise  than  by  suspension  from  duty  (the  same  as 
with  respect  to  the  ward-room  officers),  yet  this  is  one 
of  those  sea-statutes  which  the  captain,  to  a  certain 
extent,  observes  or  disregards  at  his  pleasure.  Many 
instances  might  be  related  of  the  petty  mortifications 
and  official  insults  inflicted  by  some  captains  upon  their 
midshipmen  ;  far  more  severe,  in  one  sense,  than  the 
old-fashioned  punishment  of  sending  them  to  the  mast 
head,  though  not  so  arbitrary  as  sending  them  before 
the  mast,  to  do  duty  with  the  common  sailors — a  custom, 
in  former  times,  pursued  by  captains  in  the  English 
Navy. 

Captain  Claret  himself  had  no  special  fondness  for 
midshipmen.  A  tall,  overgrown  young  midshipman, 
about  sixteen  years  old,  having  fallen  under  his  dis 
pleasure,  he  interrupted  the  humble  apologies  he  was 
making,  by  saying,  '  Not  a  word,  sir  !  I  '11  not  hear  a 
word !  Mount  the  netting,  sir,  and  stand  there  till  you 
are  ordered  to  come  down  !  ' 

The  midshipman  obeyed  ;    and,  in  full  sight  of  the 


SOMETHING  CONCERNING  MIDSHIPMEN    275 

entire  ship's  company,  Captain  Claret  promenaded  to 
and  fro  below  his  lofty  perch,  reading  him  a  most  aggra 
vating  lecture  upon  his  alleged  misconduct.  To  a  lad  of 
sensibility,  such  treatment  must  have  been  almost  as 
stinging  as  the  lash  itself  would  have  been. 

In  another  case  a  midshipman  attempted  to  carry  the 
day  by  speaking  up  to  his  superior  ;  but  in  a  most  un 
expected  manner  he  paid  the  penalty  of  his  indiscretion. 

Seeing  a  reefer's  hammock  in  the  quarter-netting,  and 
observing  it  to  be  rather  equivocally  discoloured,  the 
captain  demanded  to  know  what  particular  midshipman 
was  the  proprietor  of  that  hammock.  When  the  lad 
appeared,  he  said  to  him,  '  What  do  you  call  that,  sir  ?  ' 
pointing  at  the  discoloration. 

'  Captain  Claret/  said  the  unabashed  reefer,  looking 
him  full  in  the  eye,  '  you  know  what  that  is,  sir,  as  well 
as  I  do.' 

'  So  I  do,  sir.  Quarter-master  !  pitch  that  hammock 
overboard.' 

The  midshipman  started,  and,  hurrying  up  to  it,  turned 
round,  and  said,  '  Captain  Claret,  I  have  a  purse  lashed 
up  here  ;  it 's  the  only  safe  way  I  can  keep  it.' 

'  Did  you  hear  me,  quarter-master  ?  '  said  the  captain  ; 
and  overboard  went  the  hammock  and  purse. 

The  same  afternoon,  this  midshipman  reported  his 
cot-boy  as  having  neglected  to  scrub  this  identical  ham 
mock,  though  repeatedly  ordered  to  do  so  by  his  master. 
Though  called  a  cot-boy,  the  person  thus  designated 
happened  to  be,  in  fact,  a  full-grown  man.  The  case 
being  fully  laid  before  the  captain  at  the  mast,  and  the 
midshipman's  charge  having  been  heard,  this  cot-boy, 
spite  of  his  protestations,  and  altogether  through  the 
midshipman's  instrumentality,  was  condemned  to  a 
flogging. 

Thus  it  will  be  seen  that,  though  the  captain  permits 


276  WHITE  JACKET 

himself  to  domineer  over  a  midshipman,  and,  in  cases  of 
personal  contact  with  him,  does  not  scruple  to  pronounce 
him  an  egregious  wrongdoer,  and  treats  him  accordingly  ; 
yet,  in  other  cases,  involving  the  immediate  relationship 
between  the  midshipman  and  the  sailor,  he  still  sustains 
the  principle  that  a  midshipman  can  neither  say  nor  do 
any  wrong. 

It  is  to  be  remembered  that,  wherever  these  chapters 
treat  of  midshipmen,  the  officers  known  as  passed- 
midshipmen  are  not  at  all  referred  to.  In  the  American 
Navy  these  officers  form  a  class  of  young  men  who, 
having  seen  sufficient  service  at  sea  as  midshipmen  to 
pass  an  examination  before  a  Board  of  Commodores, 
are  promoted  to  the  rank  of  passed-midshipmen,  intro 
ductory  to  that  of  lieutenant.  They  are  supposed  to  be 
qualified  to  do  duty  as  lieutenants,  and  in  some  cases 
temporarily  serve  as  such.  The  difference  between  a 
passed-midshipman  and  a  midshipman  may  be  also 
inferred  from  their  respective  rates  of  pay.  The  former, 
upon  sea  service,  receives  750  dollars  a  year ;  the  latter, 
400  dollars.  There  were  no  passed-midshipmen  in  the 
Never  sink. 


CHAPTER    LIII 

SEAFARING  PERSONS  PECULIARLY  SUBJECT  TO  BEING 
UNDER  THE  WEATHER — THE  EFFECTS  OF  THIS  UPON 
A  MAN-OF-WAR  CAPTAIN 

IT  has  been  said  that  some  midshipmen,  in  certain  cases, 
are  guilty  of  spiteful  practices  against  the  man-of-war's 
man.  But  as  these  midshipmen  are  presumed  to  have 
received  the  liberal  and  lofty  breeding  of  gentlemen,  it 
would  seem  all  but  incredible  that  any  of  their  corps 
could  descend  to  the  paltriness  of  cherishing  personal 
malice  against  so  conventionally  degraded  a  being  as  a 
sailor.  So,  indeed,  it  would  seem.  But  when  all  the 
circumstances  are  considered,  it  will  not  appear  extra 
ordinary  that  some  of  them  should  thus  cast  discredit 
upon  the  warrants  they  wear.  Title,  and  rank,  and 
wealth,  and  education  cannot  unmake  human  nature  ; 
the  same  in  cabin-boy  and  commodore,  its  only  differ 
ences  lie  in  the  different  modes  of  development. 

At  sea,  a  frigate  houses  and  homes  five  hundred  mortals 
in  a  space  so  contracted  that  they  can  hardly  so  much 
as  move  but  they  touch.  Cut  off  from  all  those  outward 
passing  things  which  ashore  employ  the  eyes,  tongues, 
and  thoughts  of  landsmen,  the  inmates  of  a  frigate  are 
thrown  upon  themselves  and  each  other,  and  all  their 
ponderings  are  introspective.  A  morbidness  of  mind  is 
often  the  consequence,  especially  upon  long  voyages, 
accompanied  by  foul  weather,  calms,  or  head- winds. 
Nor  does  this  exempt  from  its  evil  influence  any  rank  on 
board.  Indeed,  high  station  only  ministers  to  it  the 

277 


278  WHITE  JACKET 

more,  since  the  higher  the  rank  in  a  man-of-war  the  less 
companionship. 

It  is  an  odious,  unthankful,  repugnant  thing  to  dwell 
upon  a  subject  like  this  ;  nevertheless,  be  it  said,  that, 
through  these  jaundiced  influences  even  the  captain  of 
a  frigate  is,  in  some  cases,  indirectly  induced  to  the  in 
fliction  of  corporal  punishment  upon  a  seaman.  Never 
sail  under  a  Navy  captain  whom  you  suspect  of  being 
dyspeptic,  or  constitutionally  prone  to  hypochondria. 

The  manifestation  of  these  things  is  sometimes  remark 
able.  In  the  earlier  part  of  the  cruise,  while  making  a 
long,  tedious  run  from  Mazatlan  to  Callao  on  the  Main, 
baffled  by  light  head-winds  and  frequent  intermitting 
calms,  when  all  hands  were  heartily  wearied  by  the  torrid, 
monotonous  sea,  a  good-natured  fore-top  man  by  the 
name  of  Candy — quite  a  character  in  his  way — standing 
in  the  waist  among  a  crowd  of  seamen,  touched  me,  and 
said,  '  D'  ye  see  the  old  man  there,  White  Jacket,  walk 
ing  the  poop  ?  Well,  don't  he  look  as  if  he  wanted  to 
flog  some  one  ?  Look  at  him  once.' 

But  to  me,  at  least,  no  such  indications  were  visible 
in  the  deportment  of  the  captain,  though  his  thrashing 
the  arm-chest  with  the  slack  of  the  spanker-out-haul 
looked  a  little  suspicious.  But  anyone  might  have  been 
doing  that  to  pass  away  a  calm. 

'  Depend  on  it,'  said  the  topman,  '  he  must  somehow 
have  thought  I  was  making  sport  of  him  a  while  ago, 
when  I  was  only  taking  off  old  Priming,  the  gunner's 
mate.  Just  look  at  him  once,  White  Jacket,  while  I 
make  believe  coil  this  here  rope  ;  if  there  arn't  a  dozen 
in  that  'ere  captain's  top-lights,  my  name  is  horse-marine. 
If  I  could  only  touch  my  tile  to  him  now,  and  take  my 
Bible  oath  on  it,  that  I  was  only  taking  off  Priming,  and 
not  him,  he  wouldn't  have  such  hard  thoughts  of  me. 
But  that  can't  be  done  ;  he  'd  think  I  meant  to  insult 


SEAFARING  PERSONS  UNDER  THE  WEATHER  279 

him.  Well,  it  can't  be  helped  ;  I  suppose  I  must  look 
out  for  a  baker's  dozen  afore  long.' 

I  had  an  incredulous  laugh  at  this.  But  two  days 
afterward,  when  we  were  hoisting  the  main-topmast 
stun'-sail,  and  the  lieutenant  of  the  watch  was  repri 
manding  the  crowd  of  seamen  at  the  halyards  for  their 
laziness — for  the  sail  was  but  just  crawling  up  to  its 
place,  owing  to  the  languor  of  the  men,  induced  by  the 
heat — the  captain,  who  had  been  impatiently  walking 
the  deck,  suddenly  stopped  short,  and  darting  his  eyes 
among  the  seamen,  suddenly  fixed  them,  crying  out, 
'  You,  Candy,  and  be  damned  to  you,  you  don't  pull  an 
ounce,  you  blackguard  !  Stand  up  to  that  gun,  sir  ; 
I  '11  teach  you  to  be  grinning  over  a  rope  that  way,  with 
out  lending  your  pound  of  beef  to  it.  Boatswain's  mate, 
where  's  your  colt  ?  Give  that  man  a  dozen.' 

Removing  his  hat,  the  boatswain's  mate  looked  into 
the  crown  aghast ;  the  coiled  rope,  usually  worn  there, 
was  not  to  be  found  ;  but  the  next  instant  it  slid  from 
the  top  of  his  head  to  the  deck.  Picking  it  up,  and 
straightening  it  out,  he  advanced  toward  the  sailor. 

'  Sir,'  said  Candy,  touching  and  retouching  his  cap  to 
the  captain,  '  I  was  pulling,  sir,  as  much  as  the  rest,  sir  ; 
I  was,  indeed,  sir.' 

'  Stand  up  to  that  gun,'  cried  the  captain.  '  Boat 
swain's  mate,  do  your  duty.' 

Three  stripes  were  given,  when  the  captain  raised  his 

finger.  '  You ,x  do  you  dare  stand  up  to  be  flogged 

with  your  hat  on  !  Take  it  off,  sir,  instantly.' 

Candy  dropped  it  on  deck. 

'  Now  go  on,  boatswain's  mate.'  And  the  sailor 
received  his  dozen. 

With  his  hand  to  his  back  he  came  up  to  me,  where 

1  The  phrase  here  used  I  have  never  seen  either  written  or  printed 
and  should  not  like  to  be  the  first  person  to  introduce  it  to  the  public. 


280  WHITE  JACKET 

I  stood  among  the  bystanders,  saying,  '  O  Lord,  O  Lord  ! 
that  boatswain's  mate,  too,  had  a  spite  agin  me  ;  he 
always  thought  it  was  me  that  set  afloat  that  yarn  about 
his  wife  in  Norfolk.  0  Lord  !  just  run  your  hand  under 
my  shirt,  will  you,  White  Jacket  ?  There  !  didn't  he 
have  a  spite  agin  me,  to  raise  such  bars  as  them  ?  And 
my  shirt  all  cut  to  pieces,  too — arn't  it,  White  Jacket  ? 
Damn  me,  but  these  coltings  puts  the  tin  in  the  purser's 
pocket.  0  Lord  !  my  back  feels  as  if  there  was  a  red- 
hot  gridiron  lashed  to  it.  But  I  told  you  so — a  widow's 
curse  on  him,  say  I — he  thought  I  meant  him,  and  not 
Priming.' 


CHAPTER   LIV 

'  THE    PEOPLE  '    ABE   GIVEN    '  LIBERTY  ' 

WHENEVEB,  in  intervals  of  mild  benevolence,  or  yielding 
to  mere  politic  dictates,  kings  and  commodores  relax 
the  yoke  of  servitude,  they  should  see  to  it  well  that  the 
concession  seem  not  too  sudden  or  unqualified  ;  for,  in 
the  commoner's  estimation,  that  might  argue  feebleness  or 
fear. 

Hence  it  was,  perhaps,  that,  though  noble  Jack  had 
carried  the  day  captive  in  his  audience  at  the  mast,  yet 
more  than  thirty-six  hours  elapsed  ere  anything  official 
was  heard  of  the  '  liberty  '  his  shipmates  so  earnestly 
coveted.  Some  of  the  people  began  to  growl  and  grumble. 

'  It 's  turned  out  all  gammon,  Jack,'  said  one. 

'  Blast  the  commodore  !  '  cried  another,  '  he  bam 
boozled  you,  Jack.' 

'  Lay  on  your  oars  awhile,'  answered  Jack,  *  and  we 
shall  see  ;  we  Ve  struck  for  liberty,  and  liberty  we  '11 
have !  I  'm  your  tribune,  boys ;  I  'm  your  Rienzi. 
The  commodore  must  keep  his  word.' 

Next  day,  about  breakfast-time,  a  mighty  whistling 
and  piping  was  heard  at  the  main-hatchway,  and  pre 
sently  the  boatswain's  voice  was  heard  :  '  D'  ye  hear 
there,  fore  and  aft !  all  you  starboard  quarter-watch  ! 
get  ready  to  go  ashore  on  liberty  !  ' 

In  a  paroxysm  of  delight,  a  young  mizen-top  man, 
standing  by  at  the  time,  whipped  the  tarpaulin  from 
his  head,  and  smashed  it  like  a  pancake  on  the  deck. 
*  Liberty  !  '  he  shouted,  leaping  down  into  the  berth-deck 
after  his  bag. 

281 


282  WHITE  JACKET 

At  the  appointed  hour,  the  quarter-watch  mustered 
round  the  capstan,  at  which  stood  our  old  First  Lord 
of  the  Treasury  and  Paymaster-General,  the  purser, 
with  several  goodly  buckskin  bags  of  dollars,  piled  up 
on  the  capstan.  He  helped  us  all  round  to  half  a  hand 
ful  or  so,  and  then  the  boats  were  manned,  and,  like  so 
many  Esterhazys,  we  were  pulled  ashore  by  our  ship 
mates.  All  their  lives  lords  may  live  in  listless  state  ; 
but  give  the  commoners  a  holyday,  and  they  outlord  the 
commodore  himself. 

The  ship's  company  were  divided  into  four  sections  or 
quarter- watches,  only  one  of  which  were  on  shore  at  a 
time,  the  rest  remaining  to  garrison  the  frigate — the 
term  of  liberty  for  each  being  twenty-four  hours. 

With  Jack  Chase  and  a  few  other  discreet  and  gentle 
manly  topmen,  I  went  ashore  on  the  first  day,  with  the 
first  quarter- watch.  Our  own  little  party  had  a  charm 
ing  time  ;  we  saw  many  fine  sights  ;  fell  in — as  all  sailors 
must — with  dashing  adventures.  But,  though  not  a  few 
good  chapters  might  be  written  on  this  head,  I  must  again 
forbear  ;  for  in  this  book  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  the 
shore  further  than  to  glance  at  it,  now  and  then,  from 
the  water  ;  my  man-of-war  world  alone  must  supply 
me  with  the  staple  of  my  matter  ;  I  have  taken  an  oath 
to  keep  afloat  to  the  last  letter  of  my  narrative. 

Had  they  all  been  as  punctual  as  Jack  Chase's  party, 
the  whole  quarter-watch  of  liberty  men  had  been  safe 
on  board  the  frigate  at  the  expiration  of  the  twenty- 
four  hours.  But  this  was  not  the  case  ;  and  during  the 
entire  day  succeeding,  the  midshipmen  and  others  were 
engaged  in  ferreting  them  out  of  their  hiding-places  on 
shore,  and  bringing  them  off  in  scattered  detachments 
to  the  ship. 

They  came  in  all  imaginable  stages  of  intoxication  ; 
some  with  blackened  eyes  and  broken  heads  ;  some  still 


'  THE  PEOPLE  '  ARE  GIVEN  '  LIBERTY  '     283 

more  severely  injured,  having  been  stabbed  in  frays  with 
the  Portuguese  soldiers.  Others,  unharmed,  were  im 
mediately  dropped  on  the  gun-deck,  between  the  guns, 
where  they  lay  snoring  for  the  rest  of  the  day.  As  a 
considerable  degree  of  licence  is  invariably  permitted  to 
man-of-war's  men  just  '  off  liberty,'  and  as  man-of-war's 
men  well  know  this  to  be  the  case,  they  occasionally 
avail  themselves  of  the  privilege  to  talk  very  frankly  to 
the  officers  when  they  first  cross  the  gangway,  taking  care 
meanwhile  to  reel  about  very  industriously,  so  that  there 
shall  be  no  doubt  about  their  being  seriously  intoxicated, 
and  altogether  non  compos  for  the  time.  And  though 
but  few  of  them  have  cause  to  feign  intoxication,  yet 
some  individuals  may  be  suspected  of  enacting  a  studied 
part  upon  these  occasions.  Indeed — judging  by  certain 
symptoms — even  when  really  inebriated,  some  of  the 
sailors  must  have  previously  determined  upon  their 
conduct ;  just  as  some  persons  who,  before  taking  the 
exhilarating  gas,  secretly  make  up  their  minds  to  per 
form  certain  mad  feats  while  under  its  influence,  which 
feats  consequently  come  to  pass  precisely  as  if  the  actors 
were  not  accountable  for  them. 

For  several  days,  while  the  other  quarter- watches  were 
given  liberty,  the  Neversink  presented  a  sad  scene.  She 
was  more  like  a  madhouse  than  a  frigate  ;  the  gun- 
deck  resounded  with  frantic  fights,  shouts,  and  songs. 
All  visitors  from  shore  were  kept  at  a  cable's  length. 

These  scenes,  however,  are  nothing  to  those  which  have 
repeatedly  been  enacted  in  American  men-of-war  upon 
other  stations.  But  the  custom  of  introducing  women 
on  board,  in  harbour,  is  now  pretty  much  discontinued, 
both  in  the  English  and  American  Navy,  unless  a  ship, 
commanded  by  some  dissolute  captain,  happens  to  lie  in 
some  far-away,  outlandish  port,  in  the  Pacific  or  Indian 
Ocean. 


284  WHITE  JACKET 

The  British  line-of -battle  ship,  Royal  George,  which 
in  1782  sunk  at  her  anchors  at  Spithead,  carried  down 
three  hundred  English  women  among  the  one  thousand 
souls  that  were  drowned  on  that  memorable  morning. 

When,  at  last,  after  all  the  mad  tumult  and  contention 
of  '  Liberty,'  the  reaction  came,  our  frigate  presented  a 
very  different  scene.  The  men  looked  jaded  and  wan, 
lethargic  and  lazy  ;  and  many  an  old  mariner,  with  hand 
upon  abdomen,  called  upon  the  flagstaff  to  witness  that 
there  were  more  hot  coppers  in  the  Neversink  than  those 
in  the  ship's  galley. 

Such  are  the  lamentable  effects  of  suddenly  and  com 
pletely  releasing  the  people  of  a  man-of-war  from 
arbitrary  discipline.  It  shows  that,  to  such,  '  liberty,' 
at  first,  must  be  administered  in  small  and  moderate 
quantities,  increasing  with  the  patient's  capacity  to 
make  a  good  use  of  it. 

Of  course,  while  we  lay  in  Rio,  our  officers  frequently 
went  ashore  for  pleasure,  and,  as  a  general  thing,  con 
ducted  themselves  with  propriety.  But  it  is  a  sad  thing 
to  say,  that,  as  for  Lieutenant  Mad  Jack,  he  enjoyed 
himself  so  delightfully  for  three  consecutive  days  in  the 
town  that,  upon  returning  to  the  ship,  he  sent  his  card 
to  the  surgeon,  with  his  compliments,  begging  him  to 
drop  into  his  state-room  the  first  time  he  happened  to 
pass  that  way  in  the  ward-room. 

But  one  of  our  surgeon's  mates,  a  young  medico  of 
fine  family  but  slender  fortune,  must  have  created  by 
far  the  strongest  impression  among  the  hidalgoes  of  Rio. 
He  had  read  Don  Quixote,  and,  instead  of  curing  him  of 
his  Quixotism,  as  it  ought  to  have  done,  it  only  made 
him  still  more  Quixotic.  Indeed,  there  are  some  natures 
concerning  whose  moral  maladies  the  grand  maxim  of 
Mr.  Similia  Similibus  Curantur  Hahneman  does  not  hold 
true,  since,  with  them,  like  cures  not  like,  but  only 


1  THE  PEOPLE  '  ARE  GIVEN  '  LIBERTY  '     285 

aggravates  like.  Though,  on  the  other  hand;  so  incurable 
are  the  moral  maladies  of  such  persons,  that  the  antagonist 
maxim,  contraria  contrariis  curantur,  often  proves  equally 
false. 

Of  a  warm  tropical  day,  this  surgeon's  mate  must  needs 
go  ashore  in  his  blue  boat-cloak,  wearing  it,  with  a  gallant 
Spanish  toss,  over  his  cavalier  shoulder.  By  noon,  he 
perspired  very  freely  ;  but  then  his  cloak  attracted  all 
eyes,  and  that  was  huge  satisfaction.  Nevertheless,  his 
being  knock-kneed,  and  spavined  of  one  leg,  sorely  im 
paired  the  effect  of  this  hidalgo  cloak,  which,  by  the  way, 
was  somewhat  rusty  in  front,  where  his  chin  rubbed 
against  it,  and  a  good  deal  bedraggled  all  over,  from 
his  having  used  it  as  a  counterpane  off  Cape  Horn. 

As  for  the  midshipmen,  there  is  no  knowing  what  their 
mammas  would  have  said  to  their  conduct  in  Rio.  Three 
of  them  drank  a  good  deal  too  much  ;  and  when  they 
came  on  board  the  captain  ordered  them  to  be  sewed 
up  in  their  hammocks,  to  cut  short  their  obstreperous 
capers  till  sober. 

This  shows  how  unwise  it  is  to  allow  children  yet  in 
their  teens  to  wander  so  far  from  home.  It  more  especi 
ally  illustrates  the  folly  of  giving  them  long  holydays  in 
a  foreign  land,  full  of  seductive  dissipation.  Port  for 
men,  claret  for  boys,  cried  Dr.  Johnson.  Even  so,  men 
only  should  drink  the  strong  drink  of  travel ;  boys 
should  still  be  kept  on  milk  and' water  at  home.  Middies  ! 
you  may  despise  your  mother's  leading-strings,  but  they 
are  the  man-ropes,  my  lads,  by  which  many  youngsters 
have  steadied  the  giddiness  of  youth,  and  saved  them 
selves  from  lamentable  falls.  And  middies  !  know  this, 
that  as  infants,  being  too  early  put  on  their  feet,  grow 
up  bandy-legged,  and  curtailed  of  their  fair  proportions, 
even  so,  my  dear  middies,  does  it  morally  prove  with  some 
of  you,  who  prematurely  are  sent  off  to  sea. 


286  WHITE  JACKET 

These  admonitions  are  solely  addressed  to  the  more 
diminutive  class  of  midshipmen — those  under  five  feet 
high,  and  under  seven  stone  in  weight. 

Truly,  the  records  of  the  steerages  of  men-of-war  are 
full  of  most  melancholy  examples  of  early  dissipation, 
disease,  disgrace,  and  death.  Answer,  ye  shades  of  fine 
boys,  who  in  the  soils  of  all  climes,  the  round  world  over, 
far  away  sleep  from  your  homes. 

Mothers  of  men  !  If  your  hearts  have  been  cast  down 
when  your  boys  have  fallen  in  the  way  of  temptations 
ashore,  how  much  more  bursting  your  grief,  did  you 
know  that  those  boys  were,  far  from  your  arms,  cabined 
and  cribbed  in  by  all  manner  of  iniquities.  But  this 
some  of  you  cannot  believe.  It  is,  perhaps,  well  that 
it  is  so. 

But,  hold  them  fast — all  those  who  have  not  yet 
weighed  their  anchors  for  the  Navy — round  and  round, 
hitch  over  hitch,  bind  your  leading-strings  on  them, 
and,  clinching  a  ring-bolt  into  your  chimney-jam,  moor 
your  boys  fast  to  that  best  of  harbours,  the  hearthstone. 

But  if  youth  be  giddy,  old  age  is  staid  ;  even  as  young 
saplings,  in  the  litheness  of  their  limbs,  toss  to  their 
roots  in  the  fresh  morning  air  ;  but,  stiff  and  unyielding 
with  age,  mossy  trunks  never  bend.  With  pride  and 
pleasure  be  it  said,  that,  as  for  our  old  commodore, 
though  he  might  treat  himself  to  as  many  '  liberty  days  ' 
as  he  pleased,  yet  throughout  our  stay  in  Rio  he  con 
ducted  himself  with  the  utmost  discretion. 

But  he  was  an  old,  old  man  ;  physically,  a  very  small 
man  ;  his  spine  was  as  an  unloaded  musket-barrel — not 
only  attenuated,  but  destitute  of  a  solitary  cartridge, 
and  his  ribs  were  as  the  ribs  of  a  weasel. 

Besides,  he  was  commodore  of  the  fleet,  supreme  lord 
of  the  Commons  in  Blue.  It  beseemed  him,  therefore, 
to  erect  himself  into  an  ensample  of  virtue,  and  show  the 


'  THE  PEOPLE  '  ARE  GIVEN  '  LIBERTY  '     287 

gun-deck  what  virtue  was.  But,  alas  !  when  Virtue  sits 
high  aloft  on  a  frigate's  poop,  when  Virtue  is  crowned 
in  the  cabin  a  commodore,  when  Virtue  rules  by  com 
pulsion,  and  domineers  over  Vice  as  a  slave,  then  Virtue, 
though  her  mandates  be  outwardly  observed,  bears  little 
interior  sway.  To  be  efficacious,  Virtue  must  come 
down  from  aloft,  even  as  our  blessed  Redeemer  came 
down  to  redeem  our  whole  man-of-war  world  ;  to  that 
end,  mixing  with  its  sailors  and  sinners  as  equals. 


CHAPTER   LV 

MIDSHIPMEN   ENTERING  THE  NAVY   EARLY 

THE  allusion  in  the  preceding  chapter  to  the  early  age 
at  which  some  of  the  midshipmen  enter  the  Navy  suggests 
some  thoughts  relative  to  more  important  considerations. 

A  very  general  modern  impression  seems  to  be,  that, 
in  order  to  learn  the  profession  of  a  sea-officer,  a  boy  can 
hardly  be  sent  to  sea  too  early.  To  a  certain  extent,  this 
may  be  a  mistake.  Other  professions,  involving  a  know 
ledge  of  technicalities,  and  things  restricted  to  one 
particular  field  of  action,  are  frequently  mastered  by 
men  who  begin  after  the  age  of  twenty-one,  or  even  at 
a  later  period  of  life.  It  was  only  about  the  middle  of 
the  seventeenth  century  that  the  British  military  and 
naval  services  were  kept  distinct.  Previous  to  that 
epoch  the  king's  officers  commanded  indifferently  either 
by  sea  or  by  land. 

Robert  Blake,  perhaps  one  of  the  most  accomplished, 
and  certainly  one  of  the  most  successful  admirals  that 
ever  hoisted  a  flag,  was  more  than  half  a  century  old 
(fifty-one  years)  before  he  entered  the  naval  service,  or 
had  aught  to  do,  professionally,  with  a  ship.  He  was  of 
a  studious  turn,  and,  after  leaving  Oxford,  resided  quietly 
on  his  estate,  a  country  gentleman,  till  his  forty-second 
year,  soon  after  which  he  became  connected  with  the 
Parliamentary  army. 

The  historian  Clarendon  says  of  him,  '  He  was  the 
first  man  that  made  it  manifest  that  the  science  (seaman 
ship)  might  be  attained  in  less  time  than  was  imagined/ 

288 


MIDSHIPMEN  ENTERING  NAVY  EARLY    289 

And  doubtless  it  was  to  his  shore  sympathies  that  the 
well-known  humanity  and  kindness  which  Blake  evinced 
in  his  intercourse  with  the  sailors  is  in  a  large  degree  to 
be  imputed. 

Midshipmen  sent  into  the  Navy  at  a  very  early  age 
are  exposed  to  the  passive  reception  of  all  the  prejudices 
of  the  quarter-deck  in  favour  of  ancient  usages,  how 
ever  useless  or  pernicious  ;  those  prejudices  grow  up 
with  them,  and  solidify  with  their  very  bones.  As  they 
rise  in  rank,  they  naturally  carry  them  up  ;  whence  the 
inveterate  repugnance  of  many  commodores  and  cap 
tains  to  the  slightest  innovations  in  the  service,  however 
salutary  they  may  appear  to  landsmen. 

It  is  hardly  to  be  doubted  that,  in  matters  connected 
with  the  general  welfare  of  the  Navy,  government  has 
paid  rather  too  much  deference  to  the  opinions  of  the 
officers  of  the  Navy,  considering  them  as  men  almost 
born  to  the  service,  and  therefore  far  better  qualified  to 
judge  concerning  any  and  all  questions  touching  it  than 
people  on  shore.  But  in  a  nation  under  a  liberal  con 
stitution,  it  must  ever  be  unwise  to  make  too  distinct 
and  peculiar  the  profession  of  either  branch  of  its  military 
men.  True,  in  a  country  like  ours,  nothing  is  at  present 
to  be  apprehended  of  their  gaining  political  rule  ;  but 
not  a  little  is  to  be  apprehended  concerning  their  per 
petuating  or  creating  abuses  among  their  subordinates, 
unless  civilians  have  full  cognisance  of  their  adminis 
trative  affairs,  and  account  themselves  competent  to 
the  complete  overlooking  and  ordering  them. 

We  do  wrong  when  we  in  any  way  contribute  to  the 
prevailing  mystification  that  has  been  thrown  about  the 
internal  affairs  of  the  national  sea-service.  Hitherto 
those  affairs  have  been  regarded  even  by  some  high 
state  functionaries  as  things  beyond  their  insight — 
altogether  too  technical  and  mysterious  to  be  fully 

T 


290  WHITE  JACKET 

comprehended  by  landsmen.  And  this  it  is  that  has 
perpetuated  in  the  Navy  many  evils  that  otherwise 
would  have  been  abolished  in  the  general  amelioration 
of  other  things.  The  Army  is  sometimes  remodelled, 
but  the  Navy  goes  down  from  generation  to  generation 
almost  untouched  and  unquestioned,  as  if  its  code  were 
infallible,  and  itself  a  piece  of  perfection  that  no  states 
man  could  improve.  When  a  Secretary  of  the  Navy 
ventures  to  innovate  upon  its  established  customs,  you 
hear  some  of  the  Navy  officers  say,  '  What  does  this 
landsman  know  about  our  affairs  ?  Did  he  ever  head 
a  watch  ?  He  does  not  know  starboard  from  larboard, 
girt-line  from  back-stay.' 

While  we  deferentially  and  cheerfully  leave  to  Navy 
officers  the  sole  conduct  of  making  and  shortening  sail, 
tacking  ship,  and  performing  other  nautical  manoeuvres, 
as  may  seem  to  them  best ;  let  us  beware  of  abandoning 
to  their  discretion  those  general  municipal  regulations 
touching  the  well-being  of  the  great  body  of  men  before 
the  mast ;  let  us  beware  of  being  too  much  influenced 
by  their  opinions  in  matters  where  it  is  but  natural  to 
suppose  that  their  long-established  prejudices  are  enlisted. 


CHAPTER    LVI 

A  SHORE  EMPEROR  ON  BOARD   A  MAN-OF-WAR 

WHILE  we  lay  in  Rio,  we  sometimes  had  company  from 
shore  ;  but  an  unforeseen  honour  awaited  us.  One  day, 
the  young  Emperor,  Don  Pedro  n.,  and  suite — making 
a  circuit  of  the  harbour,  and  visiting  all  the  men-of-war 
in  rotation — at  last  condescendingly  visited  the  Neversink. 

He  came  in  a  splendid  barge,  rowed  by  thirty  African 
slaves,  who,  after  the  Brazilian  manner,  in  concert  rose 
upright  to  their  oars  at  every  stroke  ;  then  sank  back 
ward  again  to  their  seats  with  a  simultaneous  groan. 

He  reclined  under  a  canopy  of  yellow  silk,  looped 
with  tassels  of  green,  the  national  colours.  At  the 
stern  waved  the  Brazilian  flag,  bearing  a  large  diamond 
figure  in  the  centre,  emblematical,  perhaps,  of  the  mines 
of  precious  stones  in  the  interior  ;  or,  it  may  be,  a  magni 
fied  portrait  of  the  famous  '  Portuguese  diamond  '  itself, 
which  was  found  in  Brazil,  in  the  district  of  Tejuco, 
on  the  banks  of  the  Rio  Belmonte. 

We  gave  them  a  grand  salute,  which  almost  made  the 
ship's  live-oak  knees  knock  together  with  the  tremendous 
concussions.  We  manned  the  yards,  and  went  through 
a  long  ceremonial  of  paying  the  Emperor  homage.  Re 
publicans  are  often  more  courteous  to  royalty  than 
royalists  themselves.  But  doubtless  this  springs  from 
a  noble  magnanimity. 

At  the  gangway,  the  Emperor  was  received  by  our 
commodore  in  person,  arrayed  in  his  most  resplen 
dent  coat  and  finest  French  epaulets.  His  servant  had 

291 


292  WHITE  JACKET 

devoted  himself  to  polishing  every  button  that  morning 
with  rotten-stone  and  rags — your  sea  air  is  a  sworn  foe 
to  metallic  glosses  ;  whence  it  comes  that  the  swords  of 
sea-officers  have,  of  late,  so  rusted  in  their  scabbards 
that  they  are  with  difficulty  drawn. 

It  was  a  fine  sight  to  see  this  Emperor  and  commodore 
complimenting  each  other.  Both  wore  chapeaux-de-bras, 
and  both  continually  waved  them.  By  instinct,  the 
Emperor  knew  that  the  venerable  personage  before  him 
was  as  much  a  monarch  afloat  as  he  himself  was  ashore. 
Did  not  our  commodore  carry  the  sword  of  state  by  his 
side  ?  For  though  not  borne  before  him,  it  must  have 
been  a  sword  of  state,  since  it  looked  far  too  lustrous 
to  have  been  his  fighting  sword.  That  was  naught  but 
a  limber  steel  blade,  with  a  plain,  serviceable  handle,  like 
the  handle  of  a  slaughter-house  knife. 

Who  ever  saw  a  star  when  the  noon  sun  was  in  sight  ? 
But  you  seldom  see  a  king  without  satellites.  In  the 
suite  of  the  youthful  Emperor  came  a  princely  train  ; 
so  brilliant  with  gems  that  they  seemed  just  emerged 
from  the  mines  of  the  Rio  Belmonte. 

You  have  seen  cones  of  crystallised  salt  ?  Just  so 
flashed  these  Portuguese  Barons,  Marquises,  Viscounts, 
and  Counts.  Were  it  not  for  their  titles,  and  being  seen 
in  the  train  of  their  lord,  you  would  have  sworn  they 
were  eldest  sons  of  jewellers  all,  who  had  run  away  with 
their  father's  cases  on  their  backs. 

Contrasted  with  these  lamp-lustres  of  barons  of 
Brazil,  how  waned  the  gold  lace  of  our  barons  of  the 
frigate,  the  officers  of  the  gun-room  !  and  compared  with 
the  long,  jewel-hilted  rapiers  of  the  Marquises,  the  little 
dirks  of  our  cadets  of  noble  houses — the  middies — 
looked  like  gilded  tenpenny  nails  in  their  girdles. 

But  there  they  stood !  Commodore  and  Emperor, 
Lieutenants  and  Marquises,  middies  and  pages  !  The 


A  SHORE  EMPEROR  ON  A  MAN-OF-WAR    293 

brazen  band  on  the  poop  struck  up  ;  the  marine  guard 
presented  arms  ;  and  high  aloft,  looking  down  on  this 
scene,  all  the  people  vigorously  hurrahed.  A  top- 
man  next  me  on  the  main-royal-yard  removed  his  hat, 
and  diligently  manipulated  his  head  in  honour  of  the 
event ;  but  he  was  so  far  out  of  sight  in  the  clouds  that 
this  ceremony  went  for  nothing. 

A  great  pity  it  was,  that  in  addition  to  all  these  honours, 
that  admirer  of  Portuguese  literature,  Viscount  Strang- 
ford,  of  Great  Britain — who,  I  believe,  once  went  out 
Ambassador  Extraordinary  to  the  Brazils — it  was  a  pity 
that  he  was  not  present  on  this  occasion,  to  yield  his 
tribute  of  '  A  Stanza  to  Braganza !  '  For  our  royal 
visitor  was  an  undoubted  Braganza,  allied  to  nearly  all 
the  great  families  of  Europe.  His  grandfather,  John  vi., 
had  been  King  of  Portugal ;  his  own  sister,  Maria,  was 
now  its  queen.  He  was,  indeed,  a  distinguished  young 
gentleman,  entitled  to  high  consideration,  and  that  con 
sideration  was  most  cheerfully  accorded  him. 

He  wore  a  green  dress-coat,  with  one  regal  morning- 
star  at  the  breast,  and  white  pantaloons.  In  his  chapeau 
was  a  single,  bright,  golden-hued  feather  of  the  Imperial 
toucan  fowl,  a  magnificent,  omnivorous,  broad-billed 
bandit  bird  of  prey,  a  native  of  Brazil.  Its  perch  is  on 
the  loftiest  trees,  whence  it  looks  down  upon  all  humbler 
fowls,  and,  hawk-like,  flies  at  their  throats.  The  toucan 
once  formed  part  of  the  savage  regalia  of  the  Indian 
caciques  of  the  country,  and,  upon  the  establishment  of 
the  empire,  was  symbolically  retained  by  the  Portuguese 
sovereigns. 

His  Imperial  Majesty  was  yet  in  his  youth  ;  rather 
corpulent,  if  anything  ;  with  a  care-free,  pleasant  face, 
and  a  polite,  indifferent,  and  easy  address.  His  manners, 
indeed,  were  entirely  unexceptionable. 

Now  here,  thought  I,  is  a  very  fine  lad,  with  very 


294  WHITE  JACKET 

fine  prospects  before  him.  He  is  supreme  Emperor  of 
all  these  Brazils  ;  he  has  no  stormy  night-watches  to 
stand  ;  he  can  lay  abed  of  mornings  just  as  long  as  he 
pleases.  Any  gentleman  in  Rio  would  be  proud  of  his 
personal  acquaintance,  and  the  prettiest  girl  in  all  South 
America  would  deem  herself  honoured  with  the  least 
glance  from  the  acutest  angle  of  his  eye. 

Yes  :  this  young  Emperor  will  have  a  fine  time  of  this 
life,  even  so  long  as  he  condescends  to  exist.  Every  one 
jumps  to  obey  him  ;  and  see,  as  I  live,  there  is  an  old 
nobleman  in  his  suite— the  Marquis  d'Acarty  they  call 
him,  old  enough  to  be  his  grandfather — who,  in  the  hot 
sun,  is  standing  bareheaded  before  him,  while  the  Emperor 
carries  his  hat  on  his  head. 

*  I  suppose  that  old  gentleman,  now,'  said  a  young 
New  England  tar  beside  me,  '  would  consider  it  a  great 
honour  to  put  on  his  Royal  Majesty's  boots  ;    and  yet, 
White  Jacket,  if  yonder  Emperor  and  I  were  to  strip  and 
jump  overboard  for  a  bath,  it  would  be  hard  telling 
which  was  of  the  blood  royal  when  we  should  once  be 
in  the  water.     Look  you,  Don  Pedro  n.,'  he  added,  '  how 
do   you   come   to   be   Emperor  ?     Tell  me   that.     You 
cannot  pull  as  many  pounds  as  I   on  the  main-topsail- 
halyards  ;   you  are  not  as  tall  as  I ;   your  nose  is  a  pug, 
and  mine  is  a  cut-water ;   and  how  do  you  come  to  be 
a  brigand,  with  that  thin  pair  of  spars  ?     A  brigand, 
indeed  !  ' 

'  Braganza,  you  mean,'  said  I,  willing  to  correct  the 
rhetoric  of  so  fierce  a  republican,  and,  by  so  doing, 
chastise  his  censoriousness. 

*  Braganza  !  br agger  it  is,'  he  replied  ;   '  and  a  bragger, 
indeed.     See  that  feather  in  his  cap.     See  how  he  struts 
in  that  coat !     He  may  well  wear  a  green  one,  topmates 
— he  's  a  green-looking  swab  at  the  best.' 

*  Hush,   Jonathan,'    said   I ;    '  there 's    the  first    luff 


A  SHORE  EMPEROR  ON  A  MAN-OF-WAR    295 

looking  up.  Be  still !  the  Emperor  will  hear  you  ' ;  and 
I  put  my  hand  on  his  mouth. 

'  Take  your  hand  away,  White  Jacket,'  he  cried ; 
*  there  's  no  law  up  aloft  here.  I  say,  you  Emperor — 
you  greenhorn  in  the  green  coat,  there — look  you,  you 
can't  raise  a  pair  of  whiskers  yet ;  and  see  what  a  pair 
of  homeward-bounders  I  have  on  my  jowls  !  Don  Pedro, 
eh  ?  What 's  that,  after  all,  but  plain  Peter — reckoned 
a  shabby  name  in  my  country.  Damn  me,  White  Jacket, 
I  wouldn't  call  my  dog  Peter  !  ' 

'  Clap  a  stopper  on  your  jaw-tackle,  will  you  ?  '  cried 
Ringbolt,  the  sailor  on  the  other  side  of  him.  '  You  11 
be  getting  us  all  into  darbies  for  this.' 

' 1  won't  trice  up  my  red  rag  for  nobody,'  retorted 
Jonathan.  '  So  you  had  better  take  a  round  turn  with 
yours,  Ringbolt,  and  let  me  alone,  or  I  '11  fetch  you  such 
a  swat  over  your  figurehead,  you  '11  think  a  Long  Wharf 
truck-horse  kicked  you  with  all  four  shoes  on  one  hoof  ! 
You  Emperor — you  counter-jumping  son  of  a  gun — cock 
your  weather  eye  up  aloft  here,  and  see  your  betters  ! 
I  say,  topmates,  he  ain't  any  Emperor  at  all — /  'm  the 
rightful  Emperor.  Yes,  by  the  commodore's  boots ! 
they  stole  me  out  of  my  cradle  here  in  the  palace  at  Rio, 
and  put  that  greenhorn  in  my  place.  Ay,  you  timber- 
head,  you,  I  'm  Don  Pedro  n.,  and  by  good  rights  you 
ought  to  be  a  main-top  man  here,  with  your  fist  in  a  tar- 
bucket  !  Look  you,  I  say,  that  crown  of  yours  ought 
to  be  on  my  head  ;  or,  if  you  don't  believe  that,  just 
heave  it  into  the  ring  once,  and  see  who 's  the  best 
man.' 

'  What 's  this  hurrah's  nest  here  aloft  ? '  cried  Jack 
Chase,  coming  up  the  t' -gallant  rigging  from  the  top 
sail-yard.  '  Can't  you  behave  yourself,  royal-yard  men, 
when  an  Emperor  's  on  board  ?  ' 

'  It 's  this  here  Jonathan/  answered  Ringbolt :    *  he  's 


296  WHITE  JACKET 

been  blackguarding  the  young  nob  in  the  green  coat, 
there.     He  says  Don  Pedro  stole  his  hat/ 

'  How  ?  ' 

'  Crown,  he  means,  noble  Jack,'  said  a  topman. 

'  Jonathan  don't  call  himself  an  Emperor,  does  he  ?  ' 
asked  Jack. 

'  Yes,'  cried  Jonathan ;  '  that  greenhorn  standing 
there  by  the  commodore  is  sailing  under  false  colours  ; 
he  's  an  impostor,  I  say  ;  he  wears  my  crown.' 

'  Ha  !  ha  !  '  laughed  Jack,  now  seeing  into  the  joke, 
and  willing  to  humour  it ;  *  though  I  'm  born  a  Briton, 
boys,  yet,  by  the  mast !  these  Don  Pedros  are  all  Perkin 
Warbecks.  But  I  say,  Jonathan,  my  lad,  don't  pipe 
your  eye  now  about  the  loss  of  your  crown  ;  for,  look 
you,  we  all  wear  crowns,  from  our  cradles  to  our  graves, 
and  though  in  double-darbies  in  the  brig,  the  commodore 
himself  can't  unking  us.' 

'  A  riddle,  noble  Jack.' 

*  Not  a  bit ;  every  man  who  has  a  sole  to  his  foot  has 
a  crown  to  his  head.  Here  's  mine  ' ;  and  so  saying, 
Jack,  removing  his  tarpaulin,  exhibited  a  bald  spot,  just 
about  the  bigness  of  a  crown  piece,  on  the  summit  of  his 
curly  and  classical  head. 


CHAPTER    LVII 

THE   EMPEROR  REVIEWS   '  THE   PEOPLE  '   AT   QUARTERS 

I  BEG  their  Royal  Highnesses'  pardons  all  round,  but  I 
had  almost  forgotten  to  chronicle  the  fact,  that  with 
the  Emperor  came  several  other  royal  princes — kings, 
for  aught  we  knew — since  it  was  just  after  the  cele 
bration  of  the  nuptials  of  a  younger  sister  of  the  Brazilian 
monarch  to  some  European  royalty.  Indeed,  the  Em 
peror  and  his  suite  formed  a  sort  of  bridal  party,  only 
the  bride  herself  was  absent. 

The  first  reception  over,  the  smoke  of  the  cannonading 
salute  having  cleared  away,  and  the  martial  outburst  of 
the  brass  band  having  also  rolled  off  to  leeward,  the 
people  were  called  down  from  the  yards,  and  the  drum 
beat  to  quarters. 

To  quarters  we  went ;  and  there  we  stood  up  by  our 
iron  bull-dogs,  while  our  royal  and  noble  visitors  pro 
menaded  along  the  batteries,  breaking  out  into  frequent 
exclamations  at  our  warlike  array,  the  extreme  neat 
ness  of  our  garments,  and,  above  all,  the  extraordinary 
polish  of  the  bright-work  about  the  great  guns,  and  the 
marvellous  whiteness  of  the  decks. 

4  Que  gosto  !  '  cried  a  Marquis,  with  several  dry  goods 
samples  of  ribbon,  tallied  with  bright  buttons,  hanging 
from  his  breast. 

'  Que  gloria  !  '  cried  a  crooked,  coffee-coloured  Viscount, 
spreading  both  palms. 

'  Que  alegria  ! '  cried  a  little  Count,  mincingly  circum 
navigating  a  shot-box. 

297 


298  WHITE  JACKET 

'  Que  contentamento  he  o  meu  !  '  cried  the  Emperor 
himself,  complacently  folding  his  royal  arms,  and  serenely 
gazing  along  our  ranks. 

Pleasure,  Glory,  and  Joy — this  was  the  burden  of  the 
three  noble  courtiers.  And  very  pleasing  indeed — was 
the  simple  rendering  of  Don  Pedro's  imperial  remark. 

'  Ay,  ay/  growled  a  grim  rammer-and-sponger  behind 
me  ;  '  it 's  all  devilish  fine  for  you  nobs  to  look  at ;  but 
what  would  you  say  if  you  had  to  holy-stone  the  deck 
yourselves,  and  wear  out  your  elbows  in  polishing  this 
cursed  old  iron,  besides  getting  a  dozen  at  the  gangway 
if  you  dropped  a  grease-spot  on  deck  in  your  mess  ?  Ay, 
ay,  devilish  fine  for  you,  but  devilish  dull  for  us  !  ' 

In  due  time  the  drums  beat  the  retreat,  and  the  ship's 
company  scattered  over  the  decks. 

Some  of  the  officers  now  assumed  the  part  of  cicerones, 
to  show  the  distinguished  strangers  the  bowels  of  the 
frigate,  concerning  which  several  of  them  showed  a  good 
deal  of  intelligent  curiosity.  A  guard  of  honour,  de 
tached  from  the  marine  corps,  accompanied  them,  and 
they  made  the  circuit  of  the  berth-deck,  where,  at  a 
judicious  distance,  the  Emperor  peeped  down  into  the 
cable-tier,  a  very  subterranean  vault. 

The  captain  of  the  main-hold,  who  there  presided, 
made  a  polite  bow  in  the  twilight,  and  respectfully  ex 
pressed  a  desire  for  His  Royal  Majesty  to  step  down 
and  honour  him  with  a  call ;  but,  with  his  handkerchief 
to  his  Imperial  nose,  His  Majesty  declined.  The  party 
then  commenced  the  ascent  to  the  spar-deck  ;  which, 
from  so  great  a  depth  in  a  frigate,  is  something  like 
getting  up  to  the  top  of  Bunker  Hill  Monument  from 
the  basement. 

While  a  crowd  of  the  people  was  gathered  about  the 
forward  part  of  the  booms,  a  sudden  cry  was  heard  from 
below  ;  a  lieutenant  came  running  forward  to  learn  the 


THE  EMPEROR  REVIEWS  '  THE  PEOPLE '  299 

cause,  when  an  old  sheet-anchor  man  standing  by,  after 
touching  his  hat,  hitched  up  his  waistbands,  and  replied, 
*  I  don't  know,  sir,  but  I  'm  thinking  as  how  one  o'  them 
'ere  kings  has  been  tumblin'  down  the  hatchway.' 

And  something  like  this  it  turned  out.  In  ascending 
one  of  the  narrow  ladders  leading  from  the  berth-deck 
to  the  gun-deck,  the  Most  Noble  Marquis  of  Silva,  in 
the  act  of  elevating  the  Imperial  coat-tails,  so  as  to 
protect  them  from  rubbing  against  the  newly  painted 
combings  of  the  hatchway,  this  Noble  Marquis's  sword, 
being  an  uncommonly  long  one,  had  caught  between 
his  legs,  and  tripped  him  head  over  heels  down  into  the 
fore-passage. 

1  Onde  ides  ?  '  (where  are  you  going  ?)  said  his  royal 
master,  tranquilly  peeping  down  toward  the  falling 
Marquis  ;  '  and  what  did  you  let  go  of  my  coat-tails 
for  ?  '  he  suddenly  added,  in  a  passion,  glancing  round 
at  the  same  time,  to  see  if  they  had  suffered  from  the 
unfaithfulness  of  his  train-bearer. 

'  Oh,  Lord !  '  sighed  the  captain  of  the  fore-top, 
'  who  would  be  a  Marquis  of  Silva  1  ' 

Upon  being  assisted  to  the  spar-deck,  the  unfortunate 
Marquis  was  found  to  have  escaped  without  serious  harm  ; 
but,  from  the  marked  coolness  of  his  royal  master,  when 
the  Marquis  drew  near  to  apologise  for  his  awkwardness, 
it  was  plain  that  he  was  condemned  to  languish  for  a  time 
under  the  royal  displeasure. 

Shortly  after,  the  Imperial  party  withdrew,  under 
another  grand  national  salute. 


CHAPTER   LVIII 

A   QUARTER-DECK   OFFICER   BEFORE   THE   MAST 

As  we  were  somewhat  short-handed  while  we  lay  in  Rio, 
we  received  a  small  draft  of  men  from  a  United  States 
sloop  of  war,  whose  three  years'  term  of  service  would 
expire  about  the  time  of  our  arrival  in  America. 

Under  guard  of  an  armed  lieutenant  and  four  midship 
men,  they  came  on  board  in  the  afternoon.  They  were 
immediately  mustered  in  the  starboard  gangway,  that 
Mr.  Bridewell,  our  first  lieutenant,  might  take  down 
their  names,  and  assign  them  their  stations. 

They  stood  in  a  mute  and  solemn  row  ;  the  officer 
advanced,  with  his  memorandum  book  and  pencil. 

My  casual  friend,  Shakings,  the  holder,  happened 
to  be  by  at  the  time.  Touching  my  arm,  he  said, 
'  White  Jacket,  this  here  reminds  me  of  Sing-Sing, 
when  a  draft  of  fellows,  in  darbies,  came  on  from  the 
State  Prison  at  Auburn  for  a  change  of  scene  like,  you 
know  I ' 

After  taking  down  four  or  five  names,  Mr.  Bridewell 
accosted  the  next  man,  a  rather  good-looking  person, 
but,  from  his  haggard  cheek  and  sunken  eye,  he  seemed 
to  have  been  in  the  sad  habit,  all  his  life,  of  sitting  up 
rather  late  at  night ;  and  though  all  sailors  do  certainly 
keep  late  hours  enough — standing  watches  at  midnight 
— yet  there  is  no  small  difference  between  keeping  late 
hours  at  sea  and  keeping  late  hours  ashore. 

'  What 's  your  name  ?  '  asked  the  officer,  of  this  rather 
rakish-looking  recruit. 

300 


AN  OFFICER  BEFORE  THE  MAST          301 

*  Mandeville,  sir,'  said  the  man,  courteously  touch 
ing  his  cap.  '  You  must  remember  me,  sir,'  he  added, 
in  a  low,  confidential  tone,  strangely  dashed  with  ser 
vility  ;  *  we  sailed  together  once  in  the  old  Macedonian, 
sir.  I  wore  an  epaulet  then ;  we  had  the  same  state 
room,  you  know,  sir.  I  'm  your  old  chum,  Mandeville, 
sir/  and  he  again  touched  his  cap. 

'  I  remember  an  officer  by  that  name,'  said  the  first 
lieutenant,  emphatically,  *  and  I  know  you,  fellow. 
But  I  know  you  henceforth  for  a  common  sailor.  I  can 
show  no  favouritism  here.  If  you  ever  violate  the  ship's 
rules,  you  shall  be  flogged  like  any  other  seaman.  I  place 
you  in  the  fore-top  ;  go  forward  to  your  duty.' 

It  seemed  this  Mandeville  had  entered  the  Navy  when 
very  young,  and  had  risen  to  be  a  lieutenant,  as  he 
said.  But  brandy  had  been  his  bane.  One  night, 
when  he  had  the  deck  of  a  line-of -battle  ship,  in  the 
Mediterranean,  he  was  seized  with  a  fit  of  mania-a- 
potu,  and,  being  out  of  his  senses  for  the  time,  went 
below  and  turned  into  his  berth,  leaving  the  deck  without 
a  commanding  officer.  For  this  unpardonable  offence 
he  was  broken. 

Having  no  fortune,  and  no  other  profession  than  the 
sea,  upon  his  disgrace  he  entered  the  merchant  service 
as  a  chief  mate  ;  but  his  love  of  strong  drink  still  pur 
suing  him,  he  was  again  cashiered  at  sea,  and  degraded 
before  the  mast  by  the  captain.  After  this,  in  a  state 
of  intoxication,  he  re-entered  the  Navy  at  Pensacola  as 
a  common  sailor.  But  all  these  lessons,  so  biting-bitter 
to  learn,  could  not  cure  him  of  his  sin.  He  had  hardly 
been  a  week  on  board  the  Neversink,  when  he  was 
found  intoxicated  with  smuggled  spirits.  They  lashed 
him  to  the  gratings,  and  ignominiously  scourged  him 
under  the  eye  of  his  old  friend  and  comrade,  the  first 
lieutenant. 


302  WHITE  JACKET 

This  took  place  while  we  lay  in  port,  which  reminds 
me  of  the  circumstance,  that  when  punishment  is  about 
to  be  inflicted  in  harbour,  all  strangers  are  ordered  ashore  ; 
and  the  sentries  at  the  side  have  it  in  strict  charge  to 
waive  off  all  boats  drawing  near. 


CHAPTER   LIX 

A   MAN-OF-WAR  BUTTON   DIVIDES   TWO   BROTHERS 

THE  conduct  of  Mandeville,  in  claiming  the  acquaint 
ance  of  the  first  lieutenant  under  such  disreputable 
circumstances,  was  strongly  contrasted  by  the  behaviour 
of  another  person  on  board,  placed  for  a  time  in  a  some 
what  similar  situation. 

Among  the  genteel  youths  of  the  after-guard  was  a  lad 
of  about  sixteen,  a  very  handsome  young  fellow,  with 
starry  eyes,  curly  hair  of  a  golden  colour,  and  a  bright, 
sunshiny  complexion  :  he  must  have  been  the  son  of 
some  goldsmith.  He  was  one  of  the  few  sailors — not 
in  the  main-top — whom  I  used  to  single  out  for  occasional 
conversation.  After  several  friendly  interviews  he  be 
came  quite  frank,  and  communicated  certain  portions 
of  his  history.  There  is  some  charm  in  the  sea,  which  in 
duces  most  persons  to  be  very  communicative  concerning 
themselves. 

We  had  lain  in  Rio  but  a  day,  when  I  observed  that 
this  lad — whom  I  shall  here  call  Frank — wore  an  un 
wonted  expression  of  sadness,  mixed  with  apprehension. 
I  questioned  him  as  to  the  cause,  but  he  chose  to  conceal  it. 
Not  three  days  after,  he  abruptly  accosted  me  on  the 
gun-deck,  where  I  happened  to  be  taking  a  promenade. 

*  I  can't  keep  it  to  myself  any  more,'  he  said  ;  *  I  must 
have  a  confidant,  or  I  shall  go  mad  ! ' 

'  What  is  the  matter  ?  '  said  I,  in  alarm. 

*  Matter  enough — look  at  this  !  '  and  he  handed  me 
a  torn  half -sheet  of  an  old  New  York  Herald,  putting  his 

303 


304  WHITE  JACKET 

finger  upon  a  particular  word  in  a  particular  paragraph. 
It  was  the  announcement  of  the  sailing  from  the  Brooklyn 
Navy  yard  of  a  United  States  store-ship,  with  provisions 
for  the  squadron  in  Rio.  It  was  upon  a  particular  name, 
in  the  list  of  officers  and  midshipmen,  that  Frank's  finger 
was  placed. 

'  That  is  my  own  brother/  said  he  ;  *  he  must  have 
got  a  reefer's  warrant  since  I  left  home.  Now,  White 
Jacket,  what 's  to  be  done  ?  I  have  calculated  that  the 
store-ship  may  be  expected  here  every  day  ;  my  brother 
will  then  see  me — he  an  officer,  and  I  a  miserable  sailor 
that  any  moment  may  be  flogged  at  the  gangway,  before 
his  very  eyes.  Heavens  !  White  Jacket,  what  shall  I  do  ? 
Would  you  run  ?  Do  you  think  there  is  any  chance  to 
desert  ?  I  won't  see  him,  by  Heaven,  with  this  sailor's 
frock  on,  and  he  with  the  anchor  button  !  ' 

'  Why,  Frank,'  said  I,  '  I  do  not  really  see  sufficient 
cause  for  this  fit  you  are  in.  Your  brother  is  an  officer 
— very  good  ;  and  you  are  nothing  but  a  sailor — but 
that  is  no  disgrace.  If  he  comes  on  board  here,  go  up 
to  him,  and  take  him  by  the  hand ;  believe  me,  he  will 
be  glad  enough  to  see  you  ! ' 

Frank  started  from  his  desponding  attitude,  and  fixing 
his  eyes  full  upon  mine,  with  clasped  hands  exclaimed, 
'  White  Jacket,  I  have  been  from  home  nearly  three 
years  ;  in  that  time  I  have  never  heard  one  word  from 
my  family,  and,  though  God  knows  how  I  love  them, 
yet  I  swear  to  you,  that  though  my  brother  can  tell  me 
whether  my  sisters  are  still  alive,  yet,  rather  than  accost 
him  in  this  lined-frock,  I  would  go  ten  centuries  without 
hearing  one  syllable  from  home  !  ' 

Amazed  at  his  earnestness,  and  hardly  able  to  account 
for  it  altogether,  I  stood  silent  a  moment ;  then  said, 
'  Why,  Frank,  this  midshipman  is  your  own  brother, 
you  say  ;  now,  do  you  really  think  that  your  own  flesh 


A  BUTTON  DIVIDES  TWO  BROTHERS      305 

and  blood  is  going  to  give  himself  airs  over  you,  simply 
because  he  sports  large  brass  buttons  on  his  coat  ? 
Never  believe  it.  If  he  does,  he  can  be  no  brother,  and 
aught  to  be  hanged — that 's  all !  ' 

*  Don't  say  that  again/  said  Frank,  resentfully  ;  '  my 
brother  is  a  noble-hearted  fellow  ;  I  love  him  as  I  do 
myself.  You  don't  understand  me,  White  Jacket ; 
don't  you  see,  that  when  my  brother  arrives,  he  must 
consort  more  or  less  with  our  chuckle-headed  reefers  on 
board  here  ?  There  's  that  namby-pamby  Miss  Nancy 
of  a  white-face,  Stribbles,  who,  the  other  day,  when 
Mad  Jack's  back  was  turned,  ordered  me  to  hand  him 
the  spyglass,  as  if  he  were  a  commodore.  Do  you 
suppose,  now,  I  want  my  brother  to  see  me  a  lackey 
aboard  here  ?  By  Heaven,  it  is  enough  to  drive  one 
distracted  !  What 's  to  be  done  ?  '  he  cried,  fiercely. 

Much  more  passed  between  us,  but  all  my  philosophy 
was  in  vain,  and  at  last  Frank  departed,  his  head  hanging 
down  in  despondency. 

For  several  days  after,  whenever  the  quarter-master 
reported  a  sail  entering  the  harbour,  Frank  was  fore 
most  in  the  rigging  to  observe  it.  At  length,  one  after 
noon,  a  vessel  drawing  near  was  reported  to  be  the  long- 
expected  store-ship.  I  looked  round  for  Frank  on  the 
spar-deck,  but  he  was  nowhere  to  be  seen.  He  must 
have  been  below,  gazing  out  of  a  port-hole.  The  vessel 
was  hailed  from  our  poop,  and  came  to  anchor  within  a 
biscuit's  toss  of  our  batteries. 

That  evening  I  heard  that  Frank  had  ineffectually 
endeavoured  to  get  removed  from  his  place  as  an  oars 
man  in  the  first  cutter — a  boat  which,  from  its  size, 
is  generally  employed  with  the  launch  in  carrying  ship 
stores.  When  I  thought  that,  the  very  next  day,  per 
haps,  this  boat  would  be  plying  between  the  store-ship 
and  our  frigate,  I  was  at  no  loss  to  account  for  Frank's 

u 


306  WHITE  JACKET 

attempts  to  get  rid  of  his  oar,  and  felt  heartily  grieved  at 
their  failure. 

Next  morning  the  bugler  called  away  the  first  cutter's 
crew,  and  Frank  entered  the  boat  with  his  hat  slouched 
over  his  eyes.  Upon  his  return,  I  was  all  eagerness  to 
learn  what  had  happened,  and  as  the  communication 
of  his  feelings  was  a  grateful  relief,  he  poured  his  whole 
story  into  my  ear. 

It  seemed  that,  with  his  comrades,  he  mounted  the 
store-ship's  side,  and  hurried  forward  to  the  forecastle. 
Then,  turning  anxiously  toward  the  quarter-deck,  he 
spied  two  midshipmen  leaning  against  the  bulwarks, 
conversing.  One  was  the  officer  of  his  boat — was  the 
other  his  brother  ?  No  ;  he  was  too  tall — too  large. 
Thank  Heaven  !  it  was  not  him.  And  perhaps  his  brother 
had  not  sailed  from  home,  after  all ;  there  might  have 
been  some  mistake.  But  suddenly  the  strange  midship 
man  laughed  aloud,  and  that  laugh  Frank  had  heard 
a  thousand  times  before.  It  was  a  free,  hearty  laugh — 
a  brother's  laugh  ;  but  it  carried  a  pang  to  the  heart  of 
poor  Frank. 

He  was  now  ordered  down  to  the  main-deck  to  assist 
in  removing  the  stores.  The  boat  being  loaded,  he  was 
ordered  into  her,  when,  looking  toward  the  gangway, 
he  perceived  the  two  midshipmen  lounging  upon  each 
side  of  it,  so  that  no  one  could  pass  them  without  brush 
ing  their  persons.  But  again  pulling  his  hat  over  his 
eyes,  Frank,  darting  between  them,  gained  his  oar. 
*  How  my  heart  thumped,'  he  said,  *  when  I  actually 
felt  him  so  near  me  ;  but  I  wouldn't  look  at  him — no  ! 
I  'd  have  died  first !  ' 

To  Frank's  great  relief,  the  store-ship  at  last  moved 
further  up  the  bay,  and  it  fortunately  happened  that  he 
saw  no  more  of  his  brother  while  in  Rio  ;  and  while  there, 
he  never  in  any  way  made  himself  known  to  him. 


CHAPTER    LX 

A  MAN-OF-WAR'S  MAN  SHOT  AT 

THERE  was  a  seaman  belonging  to  the  fore-top — a  mess 
mate,  though  not  a  topmate  of  mine,  and  no  favourite 
of  the  captain's — who,  for  certain  venial  transgressions, 
had  been  prohibited  from  going  ashore  on  liberty  when 
the  ship's  company  went.  Enraged  at  the  deprivation 
— for  he  had  not  touched  earth  in  upward  of  a  year — 
he,  some  nights  after,  lowered  himself  overboard,  with 
the  view  of  gaining  a  canoe,  attached  by  a  rope  to 
a  Dutch  galliot  some  cables' -length  distant.  In  this 
canoe  he  proposed  paddling  himself  ashore.  Not 
being  a  very  expert  swimmer,  the  commotion  he  made 
in  the  water  attracted  the  ear  of  the  sentry  on  that 
side  of  the  ship,  who,  turning  about  in  his  walk,  per 
ceived  the  faint  white  spot  where  the  fugitive  was 
swimming  in  the  frigate's  shadow.  He  hailed  it ;  but 
no  reply. 

'  Give  the  word,  or  I  fire  !  ' 

Not  a  word  was  heard. 

The  next  instant  there  was  a  red  flash,  and,  before  it 
had  completely  ceased  illuminating  the  night,  the  white 
spot  was  changed  into  crimson.  Some  of  the  officers, 
returning  from  a  party  at  the  Beach  of  the  Flamingoes, 
happened  to  be  drawing  near  the  ship  in  one  of  her 
cutters.  They  saw  the  flash,  and  the 'bounding  body  it 
revealed.  In  a  moment  the  topman  was  dragged  into 
the  boat,  a  handkerchief  was  used  for  a  tourniquet,  and 
the  wounded  fugitive  was  soon  on  board  the  frigate, 

307 


308  WHITE  JACKET 

when,  the  surgeon  being  called,  the  necessary  attentions 
were  rendered. 

Now,  it  appeared,  that  at  the  moment  the  sentry 
fired,  the  topman — in  order  to  elude  discovery,  by 
manifesting  the  completest  quietude — was  floating  on 
the  water,  straight  and  horizontal,  as  if  reposing  on  a 
bed.  As  he  was  not  far  from  the  ship  at  the  time,  and 
the  sentry  was  considerably  elevated  above  him — pacing 
his  platform,  on  a  level  with  the  upper  part  of  the  ham 
mock-nettings — the  ball  struck  with  great  force,  with  a 
downward  obliquity,  entering  the  right  thigh  just  above 
the  knee,  and,  penetrating  some  inches,  glanced  upward 
along  the  bone,  burying  itself  somewhere,  so  that  it  could 
not  be  felt  by  outward  manipulation.  There  was  no 
dusky  discoloration  to  mark  its  internal  track,  as  in  the 
case  when  a  partly  spent  ball — obliquely  hitting — after 
entering  the  skin,  courses  on,  just  beneath  the  surface, 
without  penetrating  further.  Nor  was  there  any  mark 
on  the  opposite  part  of  the  thigh  to  denote  its  place,  as 
when  a  ball  forces  itself  straight  through  a  limb,  and 
lodges,  perhaps,  close  to  the  skin  on  the  other  side. 
Nothing  was  visible  but  a  small,  ragged  puncture, 
bluish  about  the  edges,  as  if  the  rough  point  of  a 
tenpenny  nail  had  been  forced  into  the  flesh,  and  with 
drawn.  It  seemed  almost  impossible,  that  through 
so  small  an  aperture,  a  musket  bullet  could  have 
penetrated. 

The  extreme  misery  and  general  prostration  of  the 
man,  caused  by  the  great  effusion  of  blood — though, 
strange  to  say,  at  first  he  said  he  felt  no  pain  from  the 
wound  itself — induced  the  surgeon,  very  reluctantly,  to 
forgo  an  immediate  search  for  the  ball,  to  extract  it, 
as  that  would  have  involved  the  dilating  of  the  wound 
by  the  knife  ;  an  operation  which,  at  that  juncture, 
would  have  been  almost  certainly  attended  with  fatal 


A  MAN-OF-WAR'S  MAN  SHOT  AT  309 

results.     A  day  or  two,  therefore,  was  permitted  to  pass, 
while  simple  dressings  were  applied. 

The  surgeons  of  the  other  American  ships  of  war  in 
harbour  occasionally  visited  the  Neversink,  to  examine 
the  patient,  and  incidentally  to  listen  to  the  expositions 
of  our  own  surgeon,  their  senior  in  rank.  But  Cad- 
wallader  Cuticle,  who,  as  yet,  has  been  but  incidentally 
alluded  to,  now  deserves  a  chapter  by  himself. 


CHAPTER    LXI 

THE   STJKGEON   OF  THE   FLEET 

CADWALLADER  CUTICLE,  M.D.,  and  Honorary  Member 
of  the  most  distinguished  Colleges  of  Surgeons  both  in 
Europe  and  America,  was  our  Surgeon  of  the  Fleet. 
Nor  was  he  at  all  blind  to  the  dignity  of  his  position  ;  to 
which,  indeed,  he  was  rendered  peculiarly  competent,  if 
the  reputation  he  enjoyed  was  deserved.  He  had  the 
name  of  being  the  foremost  surgeon  in  the  Navy,  a  gentle 
man  of  remarkable  science  and  a  veteran  practitioner. 

He  was  a  small,  withered  man,  nearly,  perhaps  quite, 
sixty  years  of  age.  His  chest  was  shallow,  his  shoulders 
bent,  his  pantaloons  hung  round  skeleton  legs,  and  his 
face  was  singularly  attenuated.  In  truth,  the  corporeal 
vitality  of  this  man  seemed,  in  a  good  degree,  to  have 
died  out  of  him.  He  walked  abroad,  a  curious  patch 
work  of  life  and  death,  with  a  wig,  one  glass  eye,  and  a 
set  of  false  teeth,  while  his  voice  was  husky  and  thick  ; 
but  his  mind  seemed  undebilitated  as  in  youth  ;  it  shone 
out  of  his  remaining  eye  with  basilisk  brilliancy. 

Like  most  old  physicians  and  surgeons  who  have  seen 
much  service,  and  have  been  promoted  to  high  profes 
sional  place  for  their  scientific  attainments,  this  Cuticle 
was  an  enthusiast  in  his  calling.  In  private,  he  had 
once  been  heard  to  say,  confidentially,  that  he  would 
rather  cut  off  a  man's  arm  than  dismember  the  wing  of 
the  most  delicate  pheasant.  In  particular,  the  depart 
ment  of  morbid  anatomy  was  his  peculiar  love  ;  and  in 
his  state-room  below  he  had  a  most  unsightly  collection 

310 


THE  SURGEON  OF  THE  FLEET  311 

of  Parisian  casts,  in  plaster  and  wax,  representing  all 
imaginable  malformations  of  the  human  members,  both 
organic  and  induced  by  disease.  Chief  among  these 
was  a  cast,  often  to  be  met  with  in  the  Anatomical 
Museums  of  Europe,  and  no  doubt  an  unexaggerated 
copy  of  a  genuine  original ;  it  was  the  head  of  an  elderly 
woman,  with  an  aspect  singularly  gentle  and  meek,  but 
at  the  same  time  wonderfully  expressive  of  a  gnawing 
sorrow,  never  to  be  relieved.  You  would  almost  have 
thought  it  the  face  of  some  abbess,  for  some  unspeakable 
crime  voluntarily  sequestered  from  human  society,  and 
leading  a  life  of  agonised  penitence  without  hope,  so 
marvellously  sad  and  tearfully  pitiable  was  this  head. 
But  when  you  first  beheld  it,  no  such  emotions  ever 
crossed  your  mind.  All  your  eyes  and  all  your  horri 
fied  soul  were  fast  fascinated  and  frozen  by  the  sight 
of  a  hideous,  crumpled  horn,  like  that  of  a  ram, 
downward  growing  out  from  the  forehead,  and  partly 
shadowing  the  face  ;  but  as  you  gazed,  the  freezing 
fascination  of  its  horribleness  gradually  waned,  and  then 
your  whole  heart  burst  with  sorrow,  as  you  contemplated 
those  aged  features,  ashy  pale  and  wan.  The  horn 
seemed  the  mark  of  a  curse  for  some  mysterious  sin, 
conceived  and  committed  before  the  spirit  had  entered 
the  flesh.  Yet  that  sin  seemed  something  imposed, 
and  not  voluntarily  sought ;  some  sin  growing  out  of 
the  heartless  necessities  of  the  predestination  of  things  ; 
some  sin  under  which  the  sinner  sank  in  sinless  woe. 

But  no  pang  of  pain,  not  the  slightest  touch  of  con 
cern,  ever  crossed  the  bosom  of  Cuticle  when  he  looked 
on  this  cast.  It  was  immovably  fixed  to  a  bracket, 
against  the  partition  of  his  state-room,  so  that  it  was 
the  first  object  that  greeted  his  eyes  when  he  opened 
them  from  his  nightly  sleep.  Nor  was  it  to  hide  the 
face,  that  upon  retiring  he  always  hung  his  Navy  cap 


312  WHITE  JACKET 

upon  the  upward  curling  extremity  of  the  horn,  for  that 
obscured  it  but  little. 

The  surgeon's  cot-boy,  the  lad  who  made  up  his  swing 
ing  bed  and  took  care  of  his  room,  often  told  us  of  the 
horror  he  sometimes  felt  when  he  would  find  himself  alone 
in  his  master's  retreat.  At  times  he  was  seized  with  the 
idea  that  Cuticle  was  a  preternatural  being  ;  and  once 
entering  his  room  in  the  middle  watch  of  the  night,  he 
started  at  finding  it  enveloped  in  a  thick,  bluish  vapour, 
and  stifling  with  the  odours  of  brimstone.  Upon  hearing 
a  low  groan  from  the  smoke,  with  a  wild  cry  he  darted 
from  the  place,  and,  rousing  the  occupants  of  the  neigh 
bouring  state-rooms,  it  was  found  that  the  vapour  pro 
ceeded  from  smouldering  bunches  of  Lucifer  matches, 
which  had  become  ignited  through  the  carelessness  of 
the  surgeon.  Cuticle,  almost  dead,  was  dragged  from 
the  suffocating  atmosphere,  and  it  was  several  days  ere 
he  completely  recovered  from  its  effects.  This  accident 
took  place  immediately  over  the  powder  magazine  ;  but 
as  Cuticle,  during  his  sickness,  paid  dearly  enough  for 
transgressing  the  laws  prohibiting  combustibles  in  the 
gun-room,  the  captain  contented  himself  with  privately 
remonstrating  with  him. 

Well  knowing  the  enthusiasm  of  the  surgeon  for  all 
specimens  of  morbid  anatomy,  some  of  the  ward-room 
officers  used  to  play  upon  his  credulity,  though,  in  every 
case,  Cuticle  was  not  long  in  discovering  their  decep 
tions.  Once,  when  they  had  some  sago  pudding  for  dinner, 
and  Cuticle  chanced  to  be  ashore,  they  made  up  a  neat 
parcel  of  this  bluish-white,  firm,  jelly-like  preparation,  and 
placing  it  in  a  tin  box,  carefully  sealed  with  wax,  they 
deposited  it  on  the  gun-room  table,  with  a  note,  purport 
ing  to  come  from  an  eminent  physician  in  Rio,  connected 
with  the  Grand  National  Museum  on  the  Praca  d'Accla- 
macao,  begging  leave  to  present  to  the  scientific  Senhor 


THE  SURGEON  OF  THE  FLEET  313 

Cuticle — with  the  donor's  compliments — an  uncommonly 
fine  specimen  of  a  cancer. 

Descending  to  the  ward-room,  Cuticle  spied  the  note, 
and  no  sooner  read  it,  than,  clutching  the  case,  he  opened 
it,  and  exclaimed,  '  Beautiful !  splendid  !  I  have  never 
seen  a  finer  specimen  of  this  most  interesting  disease.' 

'  What  have  you  there,  Surgeon  Cuticle  ?  '  said  a 
lieutenant,  advancing. 

*  Why,  sir,  look  at  it ;  did  you  ever  see  anything  more 
exquisite  ?  ' 

'  Very  exquisite,  indeed  ;  let  me  have  a  bit  of  it,  will 
you,  Cuticle  ?  ' 

'  Let  you  have  a  bit  of  it ! '  shrieked  the  surgeon, 
starting  back.  '  Let  you  have  one  of  my  limbs  !  I 
wouldn't  mar  so  large  a  specimen  for  a  hundred  dollars  ; 
but  what  can  you  want  of  it  ?  You  are  not  making 
collections  !  ' 

*  I  'm  fond  of  the  article,'  said  the  lieutenant ;  '  it 's  a 
fine  cold  relish  to  bacon  or  ham.     You  know,  I  was  in 
New  Zealand  last  cruise,  Cuticle,  and  got  into  sad  dissi 
pation  there  among  the  cannibals ;   come,  let 's  have  a 
bit,  if  it 's  only  a  mouthful.' 

'  Why,  you  infernal  Feejee  !  '  shouted  Cuticle,  eyeing 
the  other  with  a  confounded  expression  ;  '  you  don't 
really  mean  to  eat  a  piece  of  this  cancer  ?  ' 

'  Hand  it  to  me,  and  see  whether  I  will  not,'  was  the 
reply. 

'  In  God's  name,  take  it !  '  cried  the  surgeon,  putting 
the  case  into  his  hands,  and  then  standing  with  his  own 
uplifted. 

'  Steward  !  '  cried  the  lieutenant,  '  the  castor — quick  ! 
I  always  use  plenty  of  pepper  with  this  dish,  sur 
geon  ;  it 's  oystery.  Ah !  this  is  really  delicious,'  he 
added,  smacking  his  lips  over  a  mouthful.  *  Try  it  now, 
surgeon,  and  you  '11  never  keep  such  a  fine  dish  as 


314  WHITE  JACKET 

this,  lying  uneaten  on  your  hands,  as  a  mere  scientific 
curiosity/ 

Cuticle's  whole  countenance  changed ;  and,  slowly 
walking  up  to  the  table,  he  put  his  nose  close  to  the  tin 
case,  then  touched  its  contents  with  his  finger  and  tasted 
it.  Enough.  Buttoning  up  his  coat,  in  all  the  trem 
blings  of  an  old  man's  rage,  he  burst  from  the  ward-room, 
and,  calling  for  a  boat,  was  not  seen  again  for  twenty- 
four  hours. 

But  though,  like  all  other  mortals,  Cuticle  was  subject 
at  times  to  these  fits  of  passion — at  least  under  out 
rageous  provocation — nothing  could  exceed  his  coolness 
when  actually  employed  in  his  imminent  vocation. 
Surrounded  by  moans  and  shrieks,  by  features  distorted 
with  anguish  inflicted  by  himself,  he  yet  maintained  a 
countenance  almost  supernaturally  calm  ;  and  unless 
the  intense  interest  of  the  operation  flushed  his  wan  face 
with  a  momentary  tinge  of  professional  enthusiasm,  he 
toiled  away,  untouched  by  the  keenest  misery  coming 
under  a  fleet-surgeon's  eye.  Indeed,  long  habituation 
to  the  dissecting-room  and  the  amputation-table  had 
made  him  seemingly  impervious  to  the  ordinary  emotions 
of  humanity.  Yet  you  could  not  say  that  Cuticle  was 
essentially  a  cruel-hearted  man.  His  apparent  heartless- 
ness  must  have  been  of  a  purely  scientific  origin.  It  is 
not  to  be  imagined  even  that  Cuticle  would  have  harmed 
a  fly,  unless  he  could  procure  a  microscope  powerful 
enough  to  assist  him  in  experimenting  on  the  minute 
vitals  of  the  creature. 

But  notwithstanding  his  marvellous  indifference  to  the 
sufferings  of  his  patients,  and  spite  even  of  his  enthusiasm 
in  his  vocation — not  cooled  by  frosting  old  age  itself — 
Cuticle,  on  some  occasions,  would  affect  a  certain  dis 
relish  of  his  profession,  and  declaim  against  the  necessity 
that  forced  a  man  of  his  humanity  to  perform  a  surgical 


THE  SURGEON  OF  THE  FLEET  315 

operation.  Especially  was  it  apt  to  be  thus  with  him, 
when  the  case  was  one  of  more  than  ordinary  interest. 
In  discussing  it,  previous  to  setting  about  it,  he  would 
veil  his  eagerness  under  an  aspect  of  great  circumspection, 
curiously  marred,  however,  by  continual  sallies  of  un- 
suppressible  impatience.  But  the  knife  once  in  his  hand, 
the  compassionless  surgeon  himself,  undisguised,  stood 
before  you.  Such  was  Cadwallader  Cuticle,  our  Surgeon 
of  the  Fleet. 


CHAPTER    LXII 

A   CONSULTATION   OF  MAN-OF-WAR  SURGEONS 

IT  seems  customary  for  the  Surgeon  of  the  Fleet,  when 
any  important  operation  in  his  department  is  on  the 
anvil,  and  there  is  nothing  to  absorb  professional  atten 
tion  from  it,  to  invite  his  brother  surgeons,  if  at  hand  at 
the  time,  to  a  ceremonious  consultation  upon  it.  And 
this,  in  courtesy,  his  brother  surgeons  expect. 

In  pursuance  of  this  custom,  then,  the  surgeons  of 
the  neighbouring  American  ships  of  war  were  requested 
to  visit  the  Neversink  in  a  body,  to  advise  concerning 
the  case  of  the  topman,  whose  situation  had  now  become 
critical.  They  assembled  on  the  half-deck,  and  were 
soon  joined  by  their  respected  senior,  Cuticle.  In  a  body 
they  bowed  as  he  approached,  and  accosted  him  with 
deferential  regard. 

1  Gentlemen,'  said  Cuticle,  unostentatiously  seating 
himself  on  a  camp-stool,  handed  him  by  his  cot-boy, 
'  we  have  here  an  extremely  interesting  case.  You  have 
all  seen  the  patient,  I  believe.  At  first  I  had  hopes  that 
I  should  have  been  able  to  cut  down  to  the  ball,  and 
remove  it ;  but  the  state  of  the  patient  forbade.  Since 
then,  the  inflammation  and  sloughing  of  the  part  has 
been  attended  with  a  copious  suppuration,  great  loss  of 
substance,  extreme  debility  and  emaciation.  From  this, 
I  am  convinced  that  the  ball  has  shattered  and  deadened 
the  bone,  and  now  lies  impacted  in  the  medullary  canal. 
In  fact,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  wound  is  incurable, 
and  that  amputation  is  the  only  resource.  But,  gentle- 

316 


A  CONSULTATION  OF  SURGEONS         317 

men,  I  find  myself  placed  in  a  very  delicate  predicament. 
I  assure  you  I  feel  no  professional  anxiety  to  perform 
the  operation.  I  desire  your  advice,  and  if  you  will  now 
again  visit  the  patient  with  me,  we  can  then  return  here, 
and  decide  what  is  best  to  be  done.  Once  more  let  me  say, 
that  I  feel  no  personal  anxiety  whatever  to  use  the  knife.' 

The  assembled  surgeons  listened  to  this  address  with 
the  most  serious  attention,  and,  in  accordance  with  their 
superior's  desire,  now  descended  to  the  sick-bay,  where  the 
patient  was  languishing.  The  examination  concluded, 
they  returned  to  the  half-deck,  and  the  consultation 
was  renewed. 

*  Gentlemen,'  began  Cuticle,  again  seating  himself, 
*  you  have  now  just  inspected  the  limb  ;  you  have  seen 
that  there  is  no  resource  but  amputation  ;  and  now, 
gentlemen,  what  do  you  say  ?  Surgeon  Bandage,  of  the 
Mohawk,  will  you  express  your  opinion  ?  ' 

'  The  wound  is  a  very  serious  one,'  said  Bandage — 
a  corpulent  man,  with  a  high  German  forehead — shaking 
his  head  solemnly. 

'  Can  anything  save  him  but  amputation  ?  '  demanded 
Cuticle. 

'  His  constitutional  debility  is  extreme,'  observed 
Bandage,  *  but  I  have  seen  more  dangerous  cases.1 

'  Surgeon  Wedge,  of  the  Malay,'  said  Cuticle,  in  a  pet, 
'  be  pleased  to  give  your  opinion  ;  and  let  it  be  definitive, 
I  entreat '  :  this  was  said  with  a  severe  glance  toward 
Bandage. 

'  If  I  thought,'  began  Wedge,  a  very  spare,  tall  man, 
elevating  himself  still  higher  on  his  toes,  *  that  the  ball 
had  shattered  and  divided  the  whole  femur,  including  the 
Greater  and  Lesser  Trochanter,  the  Linear  aspera,  the 
Digital  fossa,  and  the  Intertrochanteric,  I  should  certainly 
be  in  favour  of  amputation  ;  but  that,  sir,  permit  me  to 
observe,  is  not  my  opinion.' 


318  WHITE  JACKET 

'  Surgeon  Sawyer,  of  the  Buccaneer'  said  Cuticle, 
drawing  in  his  thin  lower  lip  with  vexation,  and  turning 
to  a  round-faced,  florid,  frank,  sensible-looking  man, 
whose  uniform  coat  very  handsomely  fitted  him,  and 
was  adorned  with  an  unusual  quantity  of  gold  lace  ; 
'  Surgeon  Sawyer,  of  the  Buccaneer,  let  us  now  hear  your 
opinion,  if  you  please.  Is  not  amputation  the  only 
resource,  sir  ?  ' 

6  Excuse  me,'  said  Sawyer,  '  I  am  decidedly  opposed 
to  it ;  for  if  hitherto  the  patient  has  not  been  strong 
enough  to  undergo  the  extraction  of  the  ball,  I  do  not 
see  how  he  can  be  expected  to  endure  a  far  more 
severe  operation.  As  there  is  no  immediate  danger  of 
mortification,  and  you  say  the  ball  cannot  be  reached 
without  making  large  incisions,  I  should  support  him, 
I  think,  for  the  present,  with  tonics,  and  gentle  anti- 
phlogistics,  locally  applied.  On  no  account  would  I 
proceed  to  amputation  until  further  symptoms  are 
exhibited.' 

'  Surgeon  Patella,  of  the  Algerine*  said  Cuticle,  in  an 
ill-suppressed  passion,  abruptly  turning  round  on  the 
person  addressed,  *  will  you  have  the  kindness  to  say 
whether  you  do  not  think  that  amputation  is  the  only 
resource  ?  ' 

Now  Patella  was  the  youngest  of  the  company,  a 
modest  man,  filled  with  a  profound  reverence  for  the 
science  of  Cuticle,  and  desirous  of  gaining  his  good 
opinion,  yet  not  wishing  to  commit  himself  altogether 
by  a  decided  reply,  though,  like  Surgeon  Sawyer,  in 
his  own  mind  he  might  have  been  clearly  against  the 
operation. 

*  What  you  have  remarked,  Mr.  Surgeon  of  the  Fleet,' 
said  Patella,  respectfully  hemming,  c  concerning  the 
dangerous  condition  of  the  limb,  seems  obvious  enough  ; 
amputation  would  certainly  be  a  cure  to  the  wound  ; 


A  CONSULTATION  OF  SURGEONS         319 

but  then,  as,  notwithstanding  his  present  debility,  the 
patient  seems  to  have  a  strong  constitution,  he  might 
rally  as  it  is,  and  by  your  scientific  treatment,  Mr.  Sur 
geon  of  the  Fleet ' — bowing — '  be  entirely  made  whole, 
without  risking  an  amputation.  Still,  it  is  a  very  critical 
case,  and  amputation  may  be  indispensable  ;  and,  if  it 
is  to  be  performed,  there  ought  to  be  no  delay  what 
ever.  That  is  my  view  of  the  case,  Mr.  Surgeon  of  the 
Fleet.' 

'  Surgeon  Patella,  then,  gentlemen,'  said  Cuticle,  turn 
ing  round  triumphantly,  '  is  clearly  of  opinion  that  am 
putation  should  be  immediately  performed.  For  my 
own  part — individually,  I  mean,  and  without  respect  to 
the  patient — I  am  sorry  to  have  it  so  decided.  But  this 
settles  the  question,  gentlemen — in  my  own  mind,  how 
ever,  it  was  settled  before.  At  ten  o'clock  to-morrow 
morning  the  operation  will  be  performed.  I  shall  be 
happy  to  see  you  all  on  the  occasion,  and  also  your 
juniors '  (alluding  to  the  absent  Assistant  Surgeons). 
'  Good  morning,  gentlemen  ;  at  ten  o'clock,  remember.' 

And  Cuticle  retreated  to  the  ward-room. 


CHAPTER   LXIII 

THE   OPERATION 

NEXT  morning,  at  the  appointed  hour,  the  surgeons 
arrived  in  a  body.  They  were  accompanied  by  their 
juniors,  young  men  ranging  in  age  from  nineteen  years 
to  thirty.  Like  the  senior  surgeons,  these  young  gentle 
men  were  arrayed  in  their  blue  navy  uniforms,  displaying 
a  profusion  of  bright  buttons,  and  several  broad  bars  of 
gold  lace  about  the  wristbands.  As  in  honour  of  the 
occasion,  they  had  put  on  their  best  coats  ;  they  looked 
exceedingly  brilliant. 

The  whole  party  immediately  descended  to  the  half- 
deck,  where  preparations  had  been  made  for  the  opera 
tion.  A  large  garrison-ensign  was  stretched  across  the 
ship  by  the  mainmast,  so  as  completely  to  screen  the 
space  behind.  This  space  included  the  whole  extent  aft 
to  the  bulkhead  of  the  commodore's  cabin,  at  the  door 
of  which  the  marine  orderly  paced,  in  plain  sight,  cutlass 
in  hand. 

Upon  two  gun-carriages,  dragged  amidships,  the 
death-board  (use  for  burials  at  sea)  was  horizontally 
placed,  covered  with  an  old  royal-stun'-sail.  Upon  this 
occasion,  to  do  duty  as  an  amputation-table,  it  was 
widened  by  an  additional  plank.  Two  match-tubs,  near 
by,  placed  one  upon  another,  at  either  end  supported 
another  plank,  distinct  from  the  table,  whereon  was 
exhibited  an  array  of  saws  and  knives  of  various  and 
peculiar  shapes  and  sizes  ;  also,  a  sort  of  steel,  something 
like  the  dinner-table  implement,  together  with  long 

320 


THE  OPERATION  321 

needles,  crooked  at  the  end  for  taking  up  the  arteries, 
and  large  darning  needles,  thread,  and  bees-wax,  for 
sewing  up  a  wound. 

At  the  end  nearest  the  larger  table  was  a  tin  basin  of 
water,  surrounded  by  small  sponges,  placed  at  mathe 
matical  intervals.  From  the  long  horizontal  pole  of  a 
great-gun  rammer — fixed  in  its  usual  place  overhead — 
hung  a  number  of  towels,  with  '  U.  S.'  marked  in  the 
corners. 

All  these  arrangements  had  been  made  by  the  '  sur 
geon's  steward,5  a  person  whose  important  functions  in 
a  man-of-war  will,  in  a  future  chapter,  be>  entered  upon 
at  large.  Upon  the  present  occasion,  he  was  bustling 
about,  adjusting  and  readjusting  the  knives,  needles, 
and  carver,  like  an  over-conscientious  butler  fidgeting 
over  a  dinner-table  just  before  the  convivialists  enter. 

But  by  far  the  most  striking  object  to  be  seen  behind 
the  ensign  was  a  human  skeleton,  whose  every  joint 
articulated  with  wires.  By  a  rivet  at  the  apex  of  the 
skull,  it  hung  dangling  from  a  hammock  hook  fixed  in 
a  beam  above.  Why  this  object  was  here  will  presently 
be  seen  ;  but  why  it  was  placed  immediately  at  the  foot 
of  the  amputation-table  only  Surgeon  Cuticle  can  tell. 

While  the  final  preparations  were  being  made,  Cuticle 
stood  conversing  with  the  assembled  surgeons  and 
assistant  surgeons,  his  invited  guests. 

t  Gentlemen,'  said  he,  taking  up  one  of  the  glittering 
knives,  and  artistically  drawing  the  steel  across  it ; 
'  Gentlemen,  though  these  scenes  are  very  unpleasant, 
and  in  some  moods,  I  may  say,  repulsive  to  me — yet 
how  much  better  for  our  patient  to  have  the  contusions 
and  lacerations  of  his  present  wound — with  all  its  dan 
gerous  symptoms — converted  into  a  clean  incision,  free 
from  these  objections,  and  occasioning  so  much  less 
subsequent  anxiety  to  himself  and  the  surgeon  !  Yes/ 

x 


322  WHITE  JACKET 

he  added,  tenderly  feeling  the  edge  of  his  knife,  '  am 
putation  is  our  only  resource.  Is  it  not  so,  Surgeon 
Patella  ?  '  turning  toward  that  gentleman,  as  if  relying 
upon  some  sort  of  an  assent,  however  clogged  with 
conditions. 

'  Certainly/  said  Patella,  '  amputation  is  your  only 
resource,  Mr.  Surgeon  of  the  Fleet ;  that  is,  I  mean,  if 
you  are  fully  persuaded  of  its  necessity.' 

The  other  surgeons  said  nothing,  maintaining  a  some 
what  reserved  air,  as  if  conscious  that  they  had  no 
positive  authority  in  the  case,  whatever  might  be  their 
own  private  opinions  ;  but  they  seemed  willing  to  behold, 
and,  if  called  upon,  to  assist  at  the  operation,  since  it 
could  not  now  be  averted. 

The  young  men,  their  assistants,  looked  very  eager, 
and  cast  frequent  glances  of  awe  upon  so  distinguished 
a  practitioner  as  the  venerable  Cuticle. 

'  They  say  he  can  drop  a  leg  in  one  minute  and  ten 
seconds  from  the  moment  the  knife  touches  it,'  whispered 
one  of  them  to  another. 

*  We  shall  see,'  was  the  reply  ;  and  the  speaker  clapped 
his  hand  to  his  fob,  to  see  if  his  watch  would  be  forth 
coming  when  wanted. 

'  Are  you  all  ready  here  ?  '  demanded  Cuticle,  now 
advancing  to  his  steward  ;  *  have  not  those  fellows  got 
through  yet  ?  '  pointing  to  three  men  of  the  carpenter's 
gang,  who  were  placing  bits  of  wood  under  the  gun- 
carriages  supporting  the  central  table. 

4  They  are  just  through,  sir,'  respectfully  answered 
the  steward,  touching  his  hand  to  his  forehead,  as  if 
there  were  a  cap-front  there. 

*  Bring  up  the  patient,  then,'  said  Cuticle. 

*  Young  gentlemen,'  he  added,  turning  to  the  row  of 
assistant   surgeons,    '  seeing    you    here   reminds   me   of 
the  classes  of  students  once  under  my  instruction  at 


THE  OPERATION  323 

the  Philadelphia  College  of  Physicians  and  Surgeons. 
Ah,  those  were  happy  days  !  '  he  sighed,  applying  the 
extreme  corner  of  his  handkerchief  to  his  glass  eye. 
*  Excuse  an  old  man's  emotions,  young  gentlemen  ;  but 
when  I  think  of  the  numerous  rare  cases  that  then  came 
under  my  treatment,  I  cannot  but  give  way  to  my 
feelings.  The  town,  the  city,  the  metropolis,  young 
gentlemen,  is  the  place  for  you  students  ;  at  least  in 
these  dull  times  of  peace,  when  the  Army  and  Navy  fur 
nish  no  inducements  for  a  youth  ambitious  of  rising  in 
our  honourable  profession.  Take  an  old  man's  advice, 
and  if  the  war  now  threatening  between  the  States  and 
Mexico  should  break  out,  exchange  your  Navy  com 
missions  for  commissions  in  the  Army.  From  having 
no  military  marine  herself,  Mexico  has  always  been 
backward  in  furnishing  subjects  for  the  amputation- 
tables  of  foreign  navies.  The  cause  of  science  has  lan 
guished  in  her  hands.  The  Army,  young  gentlemen,  is 
your  best  school ;  depend  upon  it.  You  will  hardly 
believe  it,  Surgeon  Bandage,'  turning  to  that  gentleman, 
'  but  this  is  my  first  important  case  of  surgery  in  a 
nearly  three  years'  cruise.  I  have  been  almost  wholly 
confined  in  this  ship  to  doctor's  practice — prescribing 
for  fevers  and  fluxes.  True,  the  other  day  a  man  fell 
from  the  mizen-topsail-yard ;  but  that  was  merely  an 
aggravated  case  of  dislocations,  and  bones  splintered 
and  broken.  No  one,  sir,  could  have  made  an  amputa 
tion  of  it,  without  severely  contusing  his  conscience. 
And  mine — I  may  say  it,  gentlemen,  without  ostentation 
— is  peculiarly  susceptible.' 

And  so  saying,  the  knife  and  carver  touchingly  dropped 
to  his  sides,  and  he  stood  for  a  moment  fixed  in  a  tender 
re  very.  But  a  commotion  being  heard  beyond  the 
curtain,  he  started,  and,  briskly  crossing  and  recrossing 
the  knife  and  carver,  exclaimed,  '  Ah,  here  comes  our 


324  WHITE  JACKET 

patient ;  surgeons,  this  side  of  the  table,  if  you  please  ; 
young  gentlemen,  a  little  further  off,  I  beg.  Steward, 
take  off  my  coat — so  ;  my  neckerchief  now  ;  I  must  be 
perfectly  unencumbered,  Surgeon  Patella,  or  I  can  do 
nothing  whatever/ 

These  articles  being  removed,  he  snatched  off  his  wig, 
placing  it  on  the  gun-deck  capstan  ;  then  took  out  his 
set  of  false  teeth,  and  placed  it  by  the  side  of  the  wig  ; 
and,  lastly,  putting  his  forefinger  to  the  inner  angle  of 
his  blind  eye,  spirted  out  the  glass  optic  with  professional 
dexterity,  and  deposited  that,  also,  next  to  the  wig  and 
false  teeth. 

Thus  divested  of  nearly  all  inorganic  appurtenances, 
what  was  left  of  the  surgeon  slightly  shook  itself,  to  see 
whether  anything  more  could  be  spared  to  advantage. 

'  Carpenter's  mates,'  he  now  cried,  '  will  you  never 
get  through  with  that  job  ?  ' 

*  Almost  through,  sir — just  through,'  they  replied, 
staring  round  in  search  of  the  strange,  unearthly  voice 
that  addressed  them  ;  for  the  absence  of  his  teeth  had 
not  at  all  improved  the  conversational  tones  of  the 
Surgeon  of  the  Fleet. 

With  natural  curiosity  these  men  had  purposely  been 
lingering,  to  see  all  they  could  ;  but  now,  having  no 
further  excuse,  they  snatched  up  their  hammers  and 
chisels,  and — like  the  stage-builders  decamping  from 
a  public  meeting  at  the  eleventh  hour,  after  just  com 
pleting  the  rostrum  in  time  for  the  first  speaker — the 
carpenter's  gang  withdrew. 

The  broad  ensign  now  lifted,  revealing  a  glimpse  of 
the  crowd  of  man-of-war's  men  outside,  and  the  patient, 
borne  in  the  arms  of  two  of  his  messmates,  entered  the 
place.  He  was  much  emaciated,  weak  as  an  infant,  and 
every  limb  visibly  trembled,  or  rather  jarred,  like  the 
head  of  a  man  with  the  palsy.  As  if  an  organic  and  in- 


THE  OPERATION  325 

voluntary  apprehension  of  death  had  seized  the  wounded 
leg,  its  nervous  motions  were  so  violent  that  one  of  the 
messmates  was  obliged  to  keep  his  hand  upon  it. 

The  topman  was  immediately  stretched  upon  the 
table,  the  attendants  steadying  his  limbs,  when,  slowly 
opening  his  eyes,  he  glanced  about  at  the  glittering 
knives  and  saws,  the  towels  and  sponges,  the  armed 
sentry  at  the  commodore's  cabin-door,  the  row  of  eager- 
eyed  students,  the  meagre  death's-head  of  a  Cuticle, 
now  with  his  shirt-sleeves  rolled  up  upon  his  withered 
arms  and  knife  in  hand,  and,  finally,  his  eye  settled  in 
horror  upon  the  skeleton,  slowly  vibrating  and  jingling 
before  him,  with  the  slow,  slight  roll  of  the  frigate  in  the 
water. 

'  I  would  advise  perfect  repose  of  your  every  limb, 
my  man/  said  Cuticle,  addressing  him  ;  *  the  precision 
of  an  operation  is  often  impaired  by  the  inconsiderate 
restlessness  of  the  patient.  But  if  you  consider,  my 
good  fellow,'  he  added,  in  a  patronising  and  almost 
sympathetic  tone,  and  slightly  pressing  his  hand  on 
the  limb,  '  if  you  consider  how  much  better  it  is  to  live 
with  three  limbs  than  to  die  with  four,  and  especially  if 
you  but  knew  to  what  torments  both  sailors  and  soldiers 
were  subjected  before  the  time  of  Celsus,  owing  to  the 
lamentable  ignorance  of  surgery  then  prevailing,  you 
would  certainly  thank  God  from  the  bottom  of  your 
heart  that  your  operation  has  been  postponed  to  the 
period  of  this  enlightened  age,  blessed  with  a  Bell,  a 
Brodie,  and  a  Lally.  My  man,  before  Celsus's  time, 
such  was  the  general  ignorance  of  our  noble  science, 
that,  in  order  to  prevent  the  excessive  effusion  of  blood, 
it  was  deemed  indispensable  to  operate  with  a  red-hot 
knife  ' — making  a  professional  movement  toward  the 
thigh — '  and  pour  scalding  oil  upon  the  parts  ' — elevat 
ing  his  elbow,  as  if  with  a  teapot  in  his  hand — '  still 


326  WHITE  JACKET 

further  to  sear  them,  after  amputation  had  been  per 
formed.5 

'  He  is  fainting  !  '  said  one  of  his  messmates  ;  '  quick  ! 
some  water !  '  The  steward  immediately  hurried  to 
the  topman  with  the  basin. 

Cuticle  took  the  topman  by  the  wrist,  and  feeling  it 
awhile,  observed,  '  Don't  be  alarmed,  men,'  addressing 
the  two  messmates  ;  '  he  '11  recover  presently  ;  this 
fainting  very  generally  takes  place.'  And  he  stood  for 
a  moment,  tranquilly  eyeing  the  patient. 

Now  the  Surgeon  of  the  Fleet  and  the  topman  pre 
sented  a  spectacle  which,  to  a  reflecting  mind,  was  better 
than  a  churchyard  sermon  on  the  mortality  of  man. 

Here  was  a  sailor,  who,  four  days  previous,  had  stood 
erect — a  pillar  of  life — with  an  arm  like  a  royal-mast, 
and  a  thigh  like  a  windlass.  But  the  slightest  conceiv 
able  finger-touch  of  a  bit  of  crooked  trigger  had  eventu 
ated  in  stretching  him  out,  more  helpless  than  an  hour- 
old  babe,  with  a  blasted  thigh,  utterly  drained  of  its 
brawn.  And  who  was  it  that  now  stood  over  him  like 
a  superior  being,  and,  as  if  clothed  himself  with  the 
attributes  of  immortality,  indifferently  discoursed  of 
carving  up  his  broken  flesh,  and  thus  piecing  out  his 
abbreviated  days  ?  Who  was  it,  that,  in  capacity  of 
surgeon,  seemed  enacting  the  part  of  a  Regenerator  of 
life  ?  The  withered,  shrunken,  one-eyed,  toothless,  hair 
less  Cuticle  ;  with  a  trunk  half  dead — a  memento  mori 
to  behold  ! 

And  while,  in  those  soul-sinking  and  panic -striking 
premonitions  of  speedy  death  which  almost  invariably 
accompany  a  severe  gun-shot  wound,  even  with  the 
most  intrepid  spirits  ;  while  thus  drooping  and  dying, 
this  once  robust  topman's  eye  was  now  waning  in  his 
head  like  a  Lapland  moon  being  eclipsed  in  clouds — 
Cuticle,  who  for  years  had  still  lived  in  his  withered 


THE  OPERATION  327 

tabernacle  of  a  body — Cuticle,  no  doubt  sharing  in  the 
common  self-delusion  of  old  age — Cuticle  must  have 
felt  his  hold  of  life  as  secure  as  the  grim  hug  of  a  grizzly 
bear.  Verily,  life  is  more  awful  than  death  ;  and  let  no 
man,  though  his  live  heart  beat  in  him  like  a  cannon — let 
him  not  hug  his  life  to  himself  ;  for,  in  the  predestinated 
necessities  of  things,  that  bounding  life  of  his  is  not  a 
whit  more  secure  than  the  life  of  a  man  on  his  death-bed. 
To-day  we  inhale  the  air  with  expanding  lungs,  and  life 
runs  through  us  like  a  thousand  Niles  ;  but  to-morrow 
we  may  collapse  in  death,  and  all  our  veins  be  dry  as 
the  brook  Kedron  in  a  drought. 

*  And  now,  young  gentlemen,'   said  Cuticle,   turning 
to  the  assistant  surgeons,  '  while  the  patient  is  coming 
to,  permit  me  to  describe  to  you  the  highly  interesting 
operation  I  am  about  to  perform.' 

'  Mr.  Surgeon  of  the  Fleet,'  said  Surgeon  Bandage, 
'  if  you  are  about  to  lecture,  permit  me  to  present  you 
with  your  teeth  ;  they  will  make  your  discourse  more 
readily  understood.'  And  so  saying,  Bandage,  with  a 
bow,  placed  the  two  semicircles  of  ivory  into  Cuticle's 
hands. 

*  Thank    you,    Surgeon    Bandage,'   said    Cuticle,   and 
slipped  the  ivory  into  its  place. 

1  In  the  first  place,  now,  young  gentlemen,  let  me 
direct  your  attention  to  the  excellent  preparation  before 
you.  I  have  had  it  unpacked  from  its  case,  and  set 
up  here  from  my  state-room,  where  it  occupies  the  spare 
berth ;  and  all  this  for  your  express  benefit,  young 
gentlemen.  This  skeleton  I  procured  in  person  from 
the  Hunterian  Department  of  the  Royal  College  of 
Surgeons  in  London.  It  is  a  masterpiece  of  art.  But 
we  have  no  time  to  examine  it  now.  Delicacy  forbids 
that  I  should  amplify  at  a  juncture  like  this  ' — casting 
an  almost  benignant  glance  toward  the  patient,  now 


328  WHITE  JACKET 

beginning  to  open  his  eyes  ;  '  but  let  me  point  out  to  you 
upon  this  thigh-bone  ' — disengaging  it  from  the  skeleton, 
with  a  gentle  twist — '  the  precise  place  where  I  propose 
to  perform  the  operation.  Here,  young  gentlemen,  here 
is  the  place.  You  perceive  it  is  very  near  the  point  of 
articulation  with  the  trunk.' 

'  Yes,'  interposed  Surgeon  Wedge,  rising  on  his  toes, 
£  yes>  y°ung  gentlemen,  the  point  of  articulation  with 
the  acetabulum  of  the  os  innominatum.' 

'  Where  's  your  "  Bell  on  Bones,"  Dick  ?  '  whispered  one 
of  the  assistants  to  the  student  next  him.  '  Wedge  has 
been  spending  the  whole  morning  over  it,  getting  out  the 
hard  names.' 

1  Surgeon  Wedge,'  said  Cuticle,  looking  round  severely, 
'  we  will  dispense  with  your  commentaries,  if  you  please, 
at  present.  Now.  young  gentlemen,  you  cannot  but 
perceive,  that  the  point  of  operation  being  so  near  the 
trunk  and  the  vitals,  it  becomes  an  unusually  beautiful 
one,  demanding  a  steady  hand  and  a  true  eye  ;  and,  after 
all,  the  patient  may  die  under  my  hands.' 

'  Quick,  steward  !  water,  water  ;  he  's  fainting  again  !  ' 
cried  the  two  messmates. 

1  Don't  be  alarmed  for  your  comrade,  men,'  said 
Cuticle,  turning  round.  '  I  tell  you  it  is  not  an  un 
common  thing  for  the  patient  to  betray  some  emotion 
upon  these  occasions — most  usually  manifested  by 
swooning  ;  it  is  quite  natural  it  should  be  so.  But  we 
must  not  delay  the  operation.  Steward,  that  knife — 
no,  the  next  one — there,  that 's  it.  He  is  coming  to, 
I  think  ' — feeling  the  topman's  wrist.  '  Are  you  all 
ready,  sir  ?  ' 

This  last  observation  was  addressed  to  one  of  the 
Neversink's  assistant  surgeons,  a  tall,  lank,  cadaverous 
young  man,  arrayed  in  a  sort  of  shroud  of  white  canvas, 
pinned  about  his  throat,  and  completely  enveloping  his 


THE  OPERATION  329 

person.  He  was  seated  on  a  match-tub — the  skeleton 
swinging  near  his  head — at  the  foot  of  the  table,  in 
readiness  to  grasp  the  limb,  as  when  a  plank  is  being 
severed  by  a  carpenter  and  his  apprentice. 

'  The  sponges,  steward,'  said  Cuticle,  for  the  last  time 
taking  out  his  teeth,  and  drawing  up  his  shirt-sleeve  still 
further.  Then,  taking  the  patient  by  the  wrist,  '  Stand 
by,  now,  you  messmates  ;  keep  hold  of  his  arms  ;  pin 
him  down.  Steward,  put  your  hand  on  the  artery  ;  I 
shall  commence  as  soon  as  his  pulse  begins  to — now, 
now  !  '  Letting  fall  the  wrist,  feeling  the  thigh  carefully, 
and  bowing  over  it  an  instant,  he  drew  the  fatal  knife 
unerringly  across  the  flesh.  As  it  first  touched  the  part, 
the  row  of  surgeons  simultaneously  dropped  their  eyes 
to  the  watches  in  their  hands,  while  the  patient  lay,  with 
eyes  horribly  distended,  in  a  kind  of  waking  trance. 
Not  a  breath  was  heard  ;  but  as  the  quivering  flesh 
parted  in  a  long,  lingering  gash,  a  spring  of  blood  welled 
up  between  the  living  walls  of  the  wound,  and  two  thick 
streams,  in  opposite  directions,  coursed  down  the  thigh. 
The  sponges  were  instantly  dipped  in  the  purple  pool ; 
every  face  present  was  pinched  to  a  point  with  suspense  ; 
the  limb  writhed  ;  the  man  shrieked  ;  his  messmates 
pinioned  him  ;  while  round  and  round  the  leg  went  the 
unpitying  cut. 

c  The  saw  !  '  said  Cuticle. 

Instantly  it  was  in  his  hand. 

Full  of  the  operation,  he  was  about  to  apply  it,  when, 
looking  up,  and  turning  to  the  assistant  surgeons,  he 
said,  '  Would  any  of  you  young  gentlemen  like  to  apply 
the  saw  ?  A  splendid  subject !  ' 

Several  volunteered ;  when,  selecting  one,  Cuticle 
surrendered  the  instrument  to  him,  saying,  '  Don't  be 
hurried,  now  ;  be  steady.' 

While  the  rest  of  the  assistants  looked  upon  their 


330  WHITE  JACKET 

comrade  with  glances  of  envy,  he  went  rather  timidly 
to  work  ;  and  Cuticle,  who  was  earnestly  regarding  him, 
suddenly  snatched  the  saw  from  his  hand.  '  Away, 
butcher  !  you  disgrace  the  profession.  Look  at  me  \ ' 

For  a  few  moments  the  thrilling  rasping  sound  was 
heard  ;  and  then  the  topman  seemed  parted  in  twain 
at  the  hip,  as  the  leg  slowly  slid  into  the  arms  of  the  pale, 
gaunt  man  in  the  shroud,  who  at  once  made  away  with 
it,  and  tucked  it  out  of  sight  under  one  of  the  guns. 

'  Surgeon  Sawyer,'  now  said  Cuticle,  courteously 
turning  to  the  surgeon  of  the  Buccaneer,  '  would  you  like 
to  take  up  the  arteries  ?  They  are  quite  at  your  service, 
sir.' 

'  Do,  Sawyer ;  be  prevailed  upon/  said  Surgeon 
Bandage. 

Sawyer  complied  ;  and  while,  with  some  modesty, 
he  was  conducting  the  operation,  Cuticle,  turning  to  the 
row  of  assistants,  said,  '  Young  gentlemen,  we  will  now 
proceed  with  our  illustration.  Hand  me  that  bone, 
steward/  And  taking  the  thigh-bone  in  his  still  bloody 
hands,  and  holding  it  conspicuously  before  his  auditors, 
the  Surgeon  of  the  Fleet  began  : — 

'  Young  gentlemen,  you  will  perceive  that  precisely 
at  this  spot — here — to  which  I  previously  directed  your 
attention — at  the  corresponding  spot  precisely — the 
operation  has  been  performed.  About  here,  young 
gentlemen,  here  ' — lifting  his  hand  some  inches  from  the 
bone — '  about  here  the  great  artery  was.  But  you 
noticed  that  I  did  not  use  the  tourniquet ;  I  never  do. 
The  forefinger  of  my  steward  is  far  better  than  a  tourni 
quet,  being  so  much  more  manageable,  and  leaving  the 
smaller  veins  uncompressed.  But  I  have  been  told, 
young  gentlemen,  that  a  certain  Seignior  Seignioroni,  a 
surgeon  of  Seville,  has  recently  invented  an  admirable 
substitute  for  the  clumsy,  old-fashioned  tourniquet.  As 


THE  OPERATION  331 

I  understand  it,  it  is  something  like  a  pair  of  callipers, 
working  with  a  small  Archimedes  screw — a  very  clever 
invention,  according  to  all  accounts.  For  the  padded 
points  at  the  end  of  the  arches  ' — arching  his  forefinger 
and  thumb — '  can  be  so  worked  as  to  approximate  in 
such  a  way,  as  to — but  you  don't  attend  to  me,  young 
gentlemen,'  he  added,  all  at  once  starting. 

Being  more  interested  in  the  active  proceedings  of 
Surgeon  Sawyer,  who  was  now  threading  a  needle  to  sew 
up  the  overlapping  of  the  stump,  the  young  gentle 
men  had  not  scrupled  to  turn  away  their  attention 
altogether  from  the  lecturer. 

A  few  moments  more,  and  the  topman,  in  a  swoon, 
was  removed  below  into  the  sick-bay.  As  the  curtain 
settled  again  after  the  patient  had  disappeared,  Cuticle, 
still  holding  the  thigh-bone  of  the  skeleton  in  his  en 
sanguined  hands,  proceeded  with  his  remarks  upon  it ; 
and  having  concluded  them,  added,  '  Now,  young  gentle 
men,  not  the  least  interesting  consequence  of  this  opera 
tion  will  be  the  finding  of  the  ball,  which,  in  case  of  non- 
amputation,  might  have  long  eluded  the  most  careful 
search.  That  ball,  young  gentlemen,  must  have  taken  a 
most  circuitous  route.  Nor,  in  cases  where  the  direction 
is  oblique,  is  this  at  all  unusual.  Indeed,  the  learned 
Henner  gives  us  a  most  remarkable — I  had  almost  said  an 
incredible — case  of  a  soldier's  neck,  where  the  bullet 
entering  at  the  part  called  Adam's  Apple — 

'  Yes,'  said  Surgeon  Wedge,  elevating  himself,  *  the 
pomum  Adami.' 

1  Entering  the  point  called  Adam's  Apple'  continued 
Cuticle,  severely  emphasising  the  last  two  words,  '  ran 
completely  round  the  neck,  and,  emerging  at  the  same 
hole  it  had  entered,  shot  the  next  man  in  the  ranks.  It 
was  afterward  extracted,  says  Henner,  from  the  second 
man,  and  pieces  of  the  other's  skin  were  found  adhering 


332  WHITE  JACKET 

to  it.  But  examples  of  foreign  substances  being  received 
into  the  body  with  a  ball,  young  gentlemen,  are  fre 
quently  observed.  Being  attached  to  a  United  States 
ship  at  the  time,  I  happened  to  be  near  the  spot  of  the 
battle  of  Ayacucho,  in  Peru.  The  day  after  the  action, 
I  saw  in  the  barracks  of  the  wounded  a  trooper,  who 
having  been  severely  injured  in  the  brain,  went  crazy, 
and,  with  his  own  holster-pistol,  committed  suicide  in 
the  hospital.  The  ball  drove  inward  a  portion  of  his 
woollen  nightcap ' 

'  In  the  form  of  a  cul-de-sac,  doubtless,'  said  the  un 
daunted  Wedge. 

'  For  once,  Surgeon  Wedge,  you  use  the  only  term 
that  can  be  employed ;  and  let  me  avail  myself  of  this 
opportunity  to  say  to  you,  young  gentlemen,  that  a  man 
of  true  science  ' — expanding  his  shallow  chest  a  little — 
'  uses  but  few  hard  words,  and  those  only  when  none 
other  will  answer  his  purpose  ;  whereas  the  smatterer  in 
science  ' — slightly  glancing  toward  Wedge — '  thinks  that 
by  mouthing  hard  words  he  proves  that  he  understands 
hard  things.  Let  this  sink  deep  in  your  minds,  young 
gentlemen ;  and,  Surgeon  Wedge ' — with  a  stiff  bow — 
'  permit  me  to  submit  the  reflection  to  yourself.  Well, 
young  gentlemen,  the  bullet  was  afterward  extracted 
by  pulling  upon  the  external  parts  of  the  cul-de-sac — 
a  simple,  but  exceedingly  beautiful  operation.  There  is 
a  fine  example,  somewhat  similar,  related  in  Guthrie ; 
but,  of  course,  you  must  have  met  with  it,  in  so  well 
known  a  work  as  his  Treatise  on  Gun-shot  Wounds. 
When,  upward  of  twenty  years  ago,  I  was  with  Lord 
Cochrane,  then  admiral  of  the  fleets  of  this  very  country  ' 
— pointing  shoreward,  out  of  a  port-hole — £  a  sailor  of  the 
vessel  to  which  I  was  attached,  during  the  blockade  of 

Bahia,  had  his  leg '  But  by  this  time  the  fidgets  had 

completely  taken  possession  of  his  auditors,  especially  of 


THE  OPERATION  333 

the  senior  surgeons  ;  and  turning  upon  them  abruptly 
he  added,  '  But  I  will  not  detain  you  longer,  gentlemen  ' 
— turning  round  upon  all  the  surgeons — '  your  dinners 
must  be  waiting  you  on  board  your  respective  ships. 
But,  Surgeon  Sawyer,  perhaps  you  may  desire  to  wash 
your  hands  before  you  go.  There  is  the  basin,  sir  ;  you 
will  find  a  clean  towel  on  the  rammer.  For  myself,  I 
seldom  use  them  ' — taking  out  his  handkerchief.  '  I 
must  leave  you  now,  gentlemen,' — bowing.  '  To-morrow, 
at  ten,  the  limb  will  be  upon  the  table,  and  I  shall  be 
happy  to  see  you  all  upon  the  occasion.  Who  's  there  ? ' 
turning  to  the  curtain,  which  then  rustled. 

'  Please,  sir,'  said  the  steward,  entering,  '  the  patient 
is  dead.' 

'  The  body,  also,  gentlemen,  at  ten  precisely,'  said 
Cuticle,  once  more  turning  round  upon  his  guests.  '  I 
predicted  that  the  operation  might  prove  fatal ;  he  was 
very  much  run  down.  Good  morning ' ;  and  Cuticle 
departed. 

'  He  does  not,  surely,  mean  to  touch  the  body  ?  '  ex 
claimed  Surgeon  Sawyer,  with  much  excitement. 

'  Oh,  no  !  '  said  Patella,  *  that 's  only  his  way  ;  he 
means,  doubtless,  that  it  may  be  inspected  previous  to 
being  taken  ashore  for  burial.' 

The  assemblage  of  gold-laced  surgeons  now  ascended 
to  the  quarter-deck  ;  the  second  cutter  was  called  away 
by  the  bugler,  and,  one  by  one,  they  were  dropped  aboard 
of  their  respective  ships. 

The  following  evening  the  messmates  of  the  topman 
rowed  his  remains  ashore,  and  buried  them  in  the  ever- 
vernal  Protestant  cemetery,  hard  by  the  Beach  of  the 
Flamingoes,  in  plain  sight  from  the  bay. 


CHAPTER    LXIV 

MAN-OF-WAR  TROPHIES 

WHEN  the  second  cutter  pulled  about  among  the  ships, 
dropping  the  surgeons  aboard  the  American  men-of-war 
here  and  there — as  a  pilot-boat  distributes  her  pilots  at 
the  mouth  of  a  harbour — she  passed  several  foreign 
frigates,  two  of  which,  an  Englishman  and  a  French 
man,  had  excited  not  a  little  remark  on  board  the  Never- 
sink.  These  vessels  often  loosed  their  sails  and  exercised 
yards  simultaneously  with  ourselves,  as  if  desirous  of 
comparing  the  respective  efficiency  of  the  crews. 

When  we  were  nearly  ready  for  sea,  the  English 
frigate,  weighing  her  anchor,  made  all  sail  with  the  sea 
breeze,  and  began  showing  off  her  paces  by  gliding  about 
among  all  the  men-of-war  in  harbour,  and  particularly 
by  running  down  under  the  Never  sink's  stern.  Every 
time  she  drew  near,  we  complimented  her  by  lowering  our 
ensign  a  little,  and  invariably  she  courteously  returned 
the  salute.  She  was  inviting  us  to  a  sailing  match  ;  and 
it  was  rumoured  that,  when  we  should  leave  the  bay,  our 
captain  would  have  no  objections  to  gratify  her  ;  for,  be 
it  known,  the  Never  sink  was  accounted  the  fleetest  keeled 
craft  sailing  under  the  American  long-pennant.  Perhaps 
this  WP°  the  reason  why  the  stranger  challenged  us. 

It  nay  have  been  that  a  portion  of  our  crew  were  the 
more  anxious  to  race  with  this  frigate,  from  a  little 
circumstance  which  a  few  of  them  deemed  rather  galling. 
Not  many  cables' -length  distant  from  our  commodore's 
cabin  lay  the  frigate  President,  with  the  red  cross  of 

334 


MAN-OF-WAR  TROPHIES  335 

St.  George  flying  from  her  peak.  As  its  name  imported, 
this  fine  craft  was  an  American  born ;  but  having  been 
captured  during  the  last  war  with  Britain,  she  now  sailed 
the  salt  seas  as  a  trophy. 

Think  of  it,  my  gallant  countrymen,  one  and  all,  down 
the  sea-coast  and  along  the  endless  banks  of  the  Ohio 
and  Columbia — think  of  the  twinges  we  sea-patriots  must 
have  felt,  to  behold  the  live  oak  of  the  Floridas  and  the 
pines  of  green  Maine  built  into  the  oaken  walls  of  Old 
England !  But,  to  some  of  the  sailors,  there  was  a 
counterbalancing  thought,  as  grateful  as  the  other  was 
galling  ;  and  that  was,  that  somewhere,  sailing  under 
the  Stars  and  Stripes,  was  the  frigate  Macedonian,  a 
British-born  craft  which  had  once  sported  the  battle- 
banner  of  Britain. 

It  has  ever  been  the  custom  to  spend  almost  any 
amount  of  money  in  repairing  a  captured  vessel,  in  order 
that  she  may  long  survive  to  commemorate  the  heroism 
of  the  conqueror.  Thus,  in  the  English  Navy,  there  are 
many  Monsieurs  of  seventy-fours  won  from  the  Gaul. 
But  we  Americans  can  show  but  few  similar  trophies, 
though,  no  doubt,  we  would  much  like  to  be  able  so  to  do. 

But  I  never  have  beheld  any  of  these  floating  trophies 
without  being  reminded  of  a  scene  once  witnessed  in  a 
pioneer  village  on  the  western  bank  of  the  Mississippi. 
Not  far  from  this  village,  where  the  stumps  of  aboriginal 
trees  yet  stand  in  the  market-place,  some  years  ago  lived 
a  portion  of  the  remnant  tribes  of  the  Sioux  Indians,  who 
frequently  visited  the  white  settlements  to  purchase 
trinkets  and  cloths. 

One  florid  crimson  evening  in  July,  when  the  red-hot 
sun  was  going  down  in  a  blaze,  and  I  was  leaning  against 
a  corner  in  my  huntsman's  frock,  lo  !  there  came  stalking 
out  of  the  crimson  west  a  gigantic  red-man,  erect  as  a  pine, 
with  his  glittering  tomahawk,  big  as  a  broad-axe,  folded 


336  WHITE  JACKET 

in  martial  repose  across  his  chest.  Moodily  wrapped  in 
his  blanket,  and  striding  like  a  king  on  the  stage,  he 
promenaded  up  and  down  the  rustic  streets,  exhibiting 
on  the  back  of  his  blanket  a  crowd  of  human  hands,  rudely 
delineated  in  red  ;  one  of  them  seemed  recently  drawn. 

'  Who  is  this  warrior  ?  '  asked  I ;  '  and  why  marches 
he  here  ?  and  for  what  are  these  bloody  hands  ?  ' 

'  That  warrior  is  the  Red-Hot  Coal,'  said  a  pioneer  in 
moccasins  by  my  side.  '  He  marches  here  to  show  off 
his  last  trophy  ;  every  one  of  those  hands  attests  a  foe 
scalped  by  his  tomahawk  ;  and  he  has  just  emerged  from 
Ben  Brown's,  the  painter,  who  has  sketched  the  last  red 
hand  that  you  see  ;  for  last  night  this  Red-Hot  Coal 
outburned  the  Yellow  Torch,  the  chief  of  a  band  of  the 
Foxes.' 

Poor  savage  !  thought  I ;  and  is  this  the  cause  of  your 
lofty  gait  ?  Do  you  straighten  yourself  to  think  that 
you  have  committed  a  murder,  when  a  chance  falling 
stone  has  often  done  the  same  ?  Is  it  a  proud  thing  to 
topple  down  six  feet  perpendicular  of  immortal  man 
hood,  though  that  lofty  living  tower  needed  perhaps 
thirty  good  growing  summers  to  bring  it  to  maturity  ? 
Poor  savage  !  And  you  account  it  so  glorious,  do  you, 
to  mutilate  and  destroy  what  God  himself  was  more 
than  a  quarter  of  a  century  in  building  ? 

And  yet,  fellow-Christians,  what  is  the  American 
frigate  Macedonian,  or  the  English  frigate  President,  but 
as  two  bloody  red  hands  painted  on  this  poor  savage's 
blanket  ? 

Are  there  no  Moravians  in  the  Moon,  that  not  a  mis 
sionary  has  yet  visited  this  poor  pagan  planet  of  ours,  to 
civilise  civilisation  and  christianise  Christendom  ? 


CHAPTER    LXV 

A  MAN-OF-WAR  RACE 

WE  lay  in  Rio  so  long — for  what  reason  the  commodore 
only  knows — that  a  saying  went  abroad  among  the  im 
patient  sailors  that  our  frigate  would  at  last  ground  on 
the  beef -bones  daily  thrown  overboard  by  the  cooks. 

But  at  last  the  good  tidings  came.  c  All  hands  up 
anchor,  ahoy  !  '  And  bright  and  early  in  the  morning 
up  came  our  old  iron,  as  the  sun  rose  in  the  east. 

The  land  breeze  at  Rio — by  which  alone  vessels  may 
emerge  from  the  bay — is  ever  languid  and  faint.  It 
comes  from  gardens  of  citrons  and  cloves,  spiced  with 
all  the  spices  of  the  Tropic  of  Capricorn.  And,  like  that 
old  exquisite,  Mohammed,  who  so  much  loved  to  snuff 
perfumes  and  essences,  and  used  to  lounge  out  of  the 
conservatories  of  Khadija,  his  wife,  to  give  battle  to  the 
robust  sons  of  Koriesh  ;  even  so  this  Rio  land  breeze 
comes  jaded  with  sweet-smelling  savours,  to  wrestle  with 
the  wild  Tartar  breezes  of  the  sea. 

Slowly  we  dropped  and  dropped  down  the  bay,  glided 
like  a  stately  swan  through  the  outlet,  and  were  gradually 
rolled  by  the  smooth,  sliding  billows,  broad  out  upon  the 
deep.  Straight  in  our  wake  came  the  tall  mainmast 
of  the  English  fighting  frigate,  terminating,  like  a  steepled 
cathedral,  in  the  bannered  cross  of  the  religion  of  peace  ; 
and  straight  after  her  came  the  rainbow  banner  of  France, 
sporting  God's  token  that  no  more  would  he  make  war 
on  the  earth. 

Both  Englishman  and  Frenchman  were  resolved  on 

Y 


338  WHITE  JACKET 

a  race  ;  and  we  Yankees  swore  by  our  topsails  and 
royals  to  sink  their  blazing  banners  that  night  among  the 
southern  constellations  we  should  daily  be  extinguishing 
behind  us  in  our  run  to  the  north. 

4  Ay,'  said  Mad  Jack,  '  St.  George's  banner  shall  be  as 
the  Southern  Cross,  out  of  sight,  leagues  down  the  horizon, 
while  our  gallant  stars,  my  brave  boys,  shall  burn  all 
alone  in  the  north,  like  the  Great  Bear  at  the  Pole  ! 
Come  on,  Kainbow  and  Cross  !  ' 

But  the  wind  was  long  languid  and  faint,  not  yet 
recovered  from  its  night's  dissipation  ashore,  and  noon 
advanced,  with  the  Sugar  Loaf  pinnacle  in  sight. 

Now  it  is  not  with  ships  as  with  horses  ;  for  though, 
if  a  horse  walk  well  and  fast,  it  generally  furnishes  good 
token  that  he  is  not  bad  at  a  gallop,  yet  the  ship  that  in 
a  light  breeze  is  outstripped,  may  sweep  the  stakes,  so 
soon  as  a  t' -gallant  breeze  enables  her  to  strike  into  a 
canter.  Thus  fared  it  with  us.  First,  the  Englishman 
glided  ahead,  and  bluffly  passed  on  ;  then  the  French 
man  politely  bade  us  adieu,  while  the  old  Never  sink 
lingered  behind,  railing  at  the  effeminate  breeze.  At  one 
time,  all  three  frigates  were  irregularly  abreast,  forming 
a  diagonal  line  ;  and  so  near  were  all  three  that  the 
stately  officers  on  the  poops  stiffly  saluted  by  touching 
their  caps,  though  refraining  from  any  further  civilities. 
At  this  juncture,  it  was  a  noble  sight  to  behold  those 
fine  frigates,  with  dripping  breast-hooks,  all  rearing  and 
nodding  in  concert,  and  to  look  through  their  tall  spars 
and  wilderness  of  rigging,  that  seemed  like  inextricably 
entangled,  gigantic  cobwebs  against  the  sky. 

Toward  sundown  the  ocean  pawed  its  white  hoofs  to 
the  spur  of  its  helter-skelter  rider,  a  strong  blast  from 
the  eastward,  and,  giving  three  cheers  from  decks,  yards, 
and  tops,  we  crowded  all  sail  on  St.  George  and  St.  Denis. 

But  it  is  harder  to  overtake  than  outstrip  ;   night  fell 


A  MAN-OF-WAR  RACE  339 

upon  us,  still  in  the  rear — still  where  the  little  boat  was, 
which,  at  the  eleventh  hour,  according  to  a  Rabbinical 
tradition,  pushed  after  the  ark  of  old  Noah. 

It  was  a  misty,  cloudy  night ;  and  though  at  first  our 
look-outs  kept  the  chase  in  dim  sight,  yet  at  last  so  thick 
became  the  atmosphere,  that  no  sign  of  a  strange  spar 
was  to  be  seen.  But  the  worst  of  it  was  that,  when  last 
discerned,  the  Frenchman  was  broad  on  our  weather- 
bow,  and  the  Englishman  gallantly  leading  his  van. 

The  breeze  blew  fresher  and  fresher  ;  but,  with  even 
our  main-royal  set,  we  dashed  along  through  a  cream- 
coloured  ocean  of  illuminated  foam.  White  Jacket  was 
then  in  the  top,  and  it  was  glorious  to  look  down  and 
see  our  black  hull  butting  the  white  sea  with  its  broad 
bows  like  a  ram. 

'  We  must  beat  them  with  such  a  breeze,  dear  Jack,' 
said  I  to  our  noble  captain  of  the  top. 

*  But  the  same  breeze  blows  for  John  Bull,  remember,' 
replied  Jack,  who,  being  a  Briton,  perhaps  favoured  the 
Englishman  more  than  the  Neversink. 

'  But  how  we  boom  through  the  billows  !  '  cried  Jack, 
gazing  over  the  top-rail ;  then,  flinging  forth  his  arm, 
recited : 

*  "  Aslope,  and  gliding  on  the  leeward  side, 
The  bounding  vessel  cuts  the  roaring  tide." 

Camoens  !  White  Jacket,  Camoens  !  Did  you  ever 
read  him  ?  The  Lusiad,  I  mean  ?  It 's  the  man-of-war 
epic  of  the  world,  my  lad.  Give  me  Gama  for  a  com 
modore,  say  I — noble  Gama !  And  Mickle,  White 
Jacket,  did  you  ever  read  of  him  ?  William  Julius 
Mickle  ?  Camoens's  translator  ?  A  disappointed  man, 
though,  White  Jacket.  Besides  his  version  of  The 
Lusiad,  he  wrote  many  forgotten  things.  Did  you  ever 
see  his  ballad  of  "  Cumnor  Hall  "  ?— No  ?— Why,  it  gave 


340  WHITE  JACKET 

Sir  Walter  Scott  the  hint  of  Kenihvorth.  My  father 
knew  Mickle  when  he  went  to  sea  on  board  the  old 
Eomney  man-of-war.  How  many  great  men  have  been 
sailors.  White  Jacket !  They  say  Homer  himself  was 
once  a  tar,  even  as  his  hero,  Ulysses,  was  both  a  sailor 
and  a  shipwright.  I  '11  swear  Shakespeare  was  once  a 
captain  of  the  forecastle.  Do  you  mind  the  first  scene 
in  The  Tempest,  White  Jacket  ?  And  the  world-finder, 
Christopher  Columbus,  was  a  sailor  !  and  so  was  Camoens, 
who  went  to  sea  with  Gama,  else  we  had  never  had  the 
The  Lusiad,  White  Jacket.  Yes,  I  've  sailed  over  the 
very  track  that  Camoens  sailed — round  the  East  Cape 
into  the  Indian  Ocean.  I  Ve  been  in  Don  Jose's  garden, 
too,  in  Macao,  and  bathed  my  feet  in  the  blessed  dew  of 
the  walks  where  Camoens  wandered  before  me.  Yes, 
White  Jacket,  and  I  have  seen  and  sat  in  the  cave  at 
the  end  of  the  flowery,  winding  way  where  Camoens, 
according  to  tradition,  composed  certain  parts  of  his 
Lusiad.  Ay,  Camoens  was  a  sailor  once  !  Then,  there  's 
Falconer,  whose  "Shipwreck"  will  never  founder,  though 
he  himself,  poor  fellow,  was  lost  at  sea  in  the  Aurora 
frigate.  Old  Noah  was  the  first  sailor.  And  St.  Paul, 
too,  knew  how  to  box  the  compass,  my  lad  !  mind  you 
that  chapter  in  Acts  ?  I  couldn't  spin  the  yarn  better 
myself.  Were  you  ever  in  Malta  ?  They  called  it 
Melita  in  the  Apostle's  day.  I  have  been  in  Paul's  cave 
there,  White  Jacket.  They  say  a  piece  of  it  is  good  for 
a  charm  against  shipwreck  ;  but  I  never  tried  it.  There  's 
Shelley,  he  was  quite  a  sailor.  Shelley — poor  lad  !  a 
Percy,  too — but  they  ought  to  have  let  him  sleep  in  his 
sailor's  grave — he  was  drowned  in  the  Mediterranean, 
you  know,  near  Leghorn — and  not  burn  his  body,  as 
they  did,  as  if  he  had  been  a  bloody  Turk.  But  many 
people  thought  him  so,  White  Jacket,  because  he  didn't 
go  to  mass,  and  because  he  wrote  Queen  Mab.  Trelawney 


A  MAN-OF-WAR  RACE  341 

was  by  at  the  burning  ;  and  he  was  an  ocean-rover,  too  ! 
Ay,  and  Byron  helped  put  a  piece  of  a  keel  on  the 
fire  ;  for  it  was  made  of  bits  of  a  wreck,  they  say  ;  one 
wreck  burning  another  !  And  was  not  Byron  a  sailor  ? 
an  amateur  forecastle  man,  White  Jacket !  so  he  was  ; 
else  how  bid  the  ocean  heave  and  fall  in  that  grand, 
majestic  way  1  I  say,  White  Jacket,  d'  ye  mind  me  ? 
there  never  was  a  very  great  man  yet  who  spent  all  his 
life  inland.  A  snuff  of  the  sea,  my  boy,  is  inspiration  ; 
and  having  been  once  out  of  sight  of  land,  has  been  the 
making  of  many  a  true  poet  and  the  blasting  of  many 
pretenders  ;  for,  d'  ye  see,  there  's  no  gammon  about 
the  ocean  ;  it  knocks  the  false  keel  right  off  a  pretender's 
bows  ;  it  tells  him  just  what  he  is,  and  makes  him  feel  it, 
too.  A  sailor's  life,  I  say,  is  the  thing  to  bring  us  mortals 
out.  What  does  the  blessed  Bible  say  ?  Don't  it  say 
that  we  main-top  men  alone  see  the  marvellous  sights 
and  wonders  ?  Don't  deny  the  blessed  Bible,  now  !  don't 
do  it !  How  it  rocks  up  here,  my  boy  !  '  holding  on  to  a 
shroud  ;  '  but  it  only  proves  what  I  've  been  saying — the 
sea  is  the  place  to  cradle  genius !  Heave  and  fall,  old  sea ! ' 

*  And  you,  also,  noble  Jack,'  said  I,  '  what  are  you  but 
a  sailor  ?  ' 

'  You  're  merry,  my  boy,'  said  Jack,  looking  up  with 
a  glance  like  that  of  a  sentimental  archangel  doomed 
to  drag  out  his  eternity  in  disgrace.  '  But  mind  you, 
White  Jacket,  there  are  many  great  men  in  the  world 
besides  commodores  and  captains.  I  've  that  here, 
White  Jacket ' — touching  his  forehead — '  which,  under 
happier  skies — perhaps  in  yon  solitary  star  there,  peep 
ing  down  from  those  clouds — might  have  made  a  Homer 
of  me.  But  Fate  is  Fate,  White  Jacket ;  and  we  Homers 
who  happen  to  be  captains  of  tops  must  write  our  odes 
in  our  hearts,  and  publish  them  in  our  heads.  But  look  ! 
the  captain  's  on  the  poop.' 


342  WHITE  JACKET 

It  was  now  midnight ;  but  all  the  officers  were  on  deck. 

'  Jib-boom,  there  !  '  cried  the  lieutenant  of  the  watch, 
going  forward  and  hailing  the  headmost  look-out.  '  D'  ye 
see  anything  of  those  fellows  now  ?  ' 

*  See  nothing,  sir.' 

'  See  nothing,  sir,'  said  the  lieutenant,  approaching 
the  captain,  and  touching  his  cap. 

*  Call    all   hands  !  '   roared    the   captain.     '  This   keel 
shan't  be  beat  while  I  stride  it.' 

All  hands  were  called,  and  the  hammocks  stowed  in 
the  nettings  for  the  rest  of  the  night,  so  that  no  one 
could  lie  between  blankets. 

Now,  in  order  to  explain  the  means  adopted  by  the 
captain  to  ensure  us  the  race,  it  needs  to  be  said  of  the 
NeversinJc  that,  for  some  years  after  being  launched, 
she  was  accounted  one  of  the  slowest  vessels  in  the 
American  Navy.  But  it  chanced  upon  a  time  that, 
being  on  a  cruise  in  the  Mediterranean,  she  happened 
to  sail  out  of  Port  Mahon  in  what  was  then  supposed 
to  be  very  bad  trim  for  the  sea.  Her  bows  were  rooting 
in  the  water,  and  her  stern  kicking  up  its  heels  in  the 
air.  But,  wonderful  to  tell,  it  was  soon  discovered  that 
in  this  comical  posture  she  sailed  like  a  shooting-star  ; 
she  outstripped  every  vessel  on  the  station.  Thence 
forward  all  her  captains,  on  all  cruises,  trimmed  her  by 
the  head  ;  and  the  NeversinJc  gained  the  name  of  a  clipper. 

To  return.  All  hands  being  called,  they  were  now 
made  use  of  by  Captain  Claret  as  make-weights,  to  trim 
the  ship,  scientifically,  to  her  most  approved  bearings. 
Some  were  sent  forward  on  the  spar-deck,  with  twenty- 
four-pound  shot  in  their  hands,  and  were  judiciously 
scattered  about  here  and  there,  with  strict  orders  not 
to  budge  an  inch  from  their  stations,  for  fear  of  marring 
the  captain's  plans.  Others  were  distributed  along  the 
gun  and  berth  decks,  with  similar  orders  ;  and,  to  crown 


A  MAN-OF-WAR  RACE  343 

all,  several  carronade  guns  were  unshipped  from  their 
carriages,  and  swung  in  their  breechings  from  the  beams 
of  the  main-deck,  so  as  to  impart  a  sort  of  vibratory 
briskness  and  oscillating  buoyancy  to  the  frigate. 

And  thus  we  five  hundred  make-weights  stood  out 
that  whole  night,  some  of  us  exposed  to  a  drenching 
rain,  in  order  that  the  NeversinJc  might  not  be  beaten. 
But  the  comfort  and  consolation  of  all  make-weights 
is  as  dust  in  the  balance  in  the  estimation  of  the  rulers 
of  our  man-of-war  world. 

The  long,  anxious  night  at  last  came  to  an  end,  and, 
with  the  first  peep  of  day,  the  look-out  on  the  jib-boom 
was  hailed  ;  but  nothing  was  in  sight.  At  last  it  was 
broad  day  ;  yet  still  not  a  bow  was  to  be  seen  in  our  rear, 
nor  a  stern  in  our  van. 

'  Where  are  they  ?  '  cried  the  captain. 

'  Out  of  sight,  astern,  to  be  sure,  sir,'  said  the  officer 
of  the  deck. 

*  Out  of  sight,  ahead,  to  be  sure,  sir,'  muttered  Jack 
Chase,  in  the  top. 

Precisely  thus  stood  the  question  :  whether  we  beat 
them,  or  whether  they  beat  us,  no  mortal  can  tell  to  this 
hour,  since  we  never  saw  them  again  ;  but  for  one,  White 
Jacket  will  lay  his  two  hands  on  the  bow-chasers  of  the 
NeversinJc,  and  take  his  ship's  oath  that  we  Yankees 
carried  the  day. 


CHAPTER    LXVI 

FUN  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR 

AFTER  the  race  (our  man-of-war  Derby)  we  had  many 
days  fine  weather,  during  which  we  continued  running 
before  the  Trades  toward  the  north.  Exhilarated  by 
the  thought  of  being  homeward  bound,  many  of  the 
seamen  became  joyous,  and  the  discipline  of  the  ship, 
if  anything,  became  a  little  relaxed.  Many  pastimes 
served  to  while  away  the  dog-watches  in  particular. 
These  dog-watches  (embracing  two  hours  in  the  early 
part  of  the  evening)  form  the  only  authorised  playtime 
for  the  crews  of  most  ships  at  sea. 

Among  other  diversions  at  present  licensed  by  authority 
in  the  Neversink,  were  those  of  single-stick,  sparring, 
hammer-and-anvil,  and  head-bumping.  All  these  were 
under  the  direct  patronage  of  the  captain,  otherwise — 
seeing  the  consequences  they  sometimes  led  to — they 
would  undoubtedly  have  been  strictly  prohibited.  It 
is  a  curious  coincidence,  that  when  a  Navy  captain  does 
not  happen  to  be  an  admirer  of  the  Fistiana,  his  crew 
seldom  amuse  themselves  in  that  way. 

Single-stick,  as  everyone  knows,  is  a  delightful  pas 
time,  which  consists  in  two  men  standing  a  few  feet  apart, 
and  rapping  each  other  over  the  head  with  long  poles. 
There  is  a  good  deal  of  fun  in  it,  so  long  as  you  are  not 
hit ;  but  a  hit — in  the  judgment  of  discreet  persons — 
spoils  the  sport  completely.  When  this  pastime  is 
practised  by  connoisseurs  ashore,  they  wear  heavy, 
wired  helmets,  to  break  the  force  of  the  blows.  But 

344 


FUN  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR  345 

the  only  helmets  of  our  tars  were  those  with  which  nature 
had  furnished  them.  They  played  with  great  gun- 
rammers. 

Sparring  consists  in  playing  single-stick  with  bone 
poles  instead  of  wooden  ones.  Two  men  stand  apart, 
and  pommel  each  other  with  their  fists  (a  hard  bunch  of 
knuckles  permanently  attached  to  the  arms,  and  made 
globular,  or  extended  into  a  palm,  at  the  pleasure  of  the 
proprietor),  till  one  of  them,  finding  himself  sufficiently 
thrashed,  cries  enough. 

Hammer-and-anvil  is  thus  practised  by  amateurs  : 
Patient  No.  1  gets  on  all-fours,  and  stays  so  ;  while 
patient  No.  2  is  taken  up  by  his  arms  and  legs,  and  his 
base  is  swung  against  the  base  of  patient  No.  1,  till 
patient  No.  1,  with  the  force  of  the  final  blow,  is  sent 
flying  along  the  deck. 

Head-bumping,  as  patronised  by  Captain  Claret,  con 
sists  in  two  negroes  (whites  will  not  answer)  butting  at 
each  other  like  rams.  This  pastime  was  an  especial 
favourite  with  the  captain.  In  the  dog-watches,  Rose- 
Water  and  May-Day  were  repeatedly  summoned  into 
the  lee  waist  to  tilt  at  each  other,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
captain's  health. 

May -Day  was  a  full-blooded  '  bull-negro ' — so  the 
sailors  called  him — with  a  skull  like  an  iron  tea-kettle  ; 
wherefore  May-Day  much  fancied  the  sport.  But  Rose- 
Water,  he  was  a  slender  and  rather  handsome  mulatto, 
and  abhorred  the  pastime.  Nevertheless,  the  captain 
must  be  obeyed  ;  so  at  the  word  poor  Rose -Water  was 
fain  to  put  himself  in  a  posture  of  defence,  else  May-Day 
would  incontinently  have  bumped  him  out  of  a  port-hole 
into  the  sea.  I  used  to  pity  poor  Rose-Water  from  the 
bottom  of  my  heart.  But  my  pity  was  almost  aroused 
into  indignation  at  a  sad  sequel  to  one  of  these  gladiatorial 
scenes. 


346  WHITE  JACKET 

It  seems  that,  lifted  up  by  the  unaffected,  though 
verbally  unexpressed  applause  of  the  captain,  May-Day 
had  begun  to  despise  Rose-Water  as  a  poltroon — a  fellow 
all  brains  and  no  skull ;  whereas  he  himself  was  a  great 
warrior,  all  skull  and  no  brains. 

Accordingly,  after  they  had  been  bumping  one  evening 
to  the  captain's  content,  May -Day  confidentially  told 
Rose-Water  that  he  considered  him  a  *  nigger ,'  which, 
among  some  blacks,  is  held  a  great  term  of  reproach. 
Fired  at  the  insult,  Rose-Water  gave  May-Day  to  under 
stand  that  he  utterly  erred  ;  for  his  mother,  a  black  slave, 
had  been  one  of  the  mistresses  of  a  Virginia  planter, 
belonging  to  one  of  the  oldest  families  in  that  state. 
Another  insulting  remark  followed  this  innocent  dis 
closure  ;  retort  followed  retort ;  in  a  word,  at  last  they 
came  together  in  mortal  combat. 

The  master-at-arms  caught  them  in  the  act,  and 
brought  them  up  to  the  mast.  The  captain  advanced. 

'  Please,  sir/  said  poor  Rose-Water,  '  it  all  came  of  dat 
'ar  bumping  ;  May -Day,  here,  aggrawated  me  'bout  it.' 

'  Master-at-arms,'  said  the  captain,  '  did  you  see  them 
fighting  ?  ' 

'  Ay,  sir,'  said  the  master-at-arms,  touching  his  cap. 
'  Rig  the  gratings,'  said  the  captain.     c  I  '11  teach  you 
two  men  that,  though  I  now  and  then  permit  you  to  play, 
I  will  have  no  fighting.    Do  your  duty,  boatswain's  mate  ! ' 
And  the  negroes  were  flogged. 

Justice  commands  that  the  fact  of  the  captain's  not 
showing  any  leniency  to  May-Day — a  decided  favourite 
of  his,  at  least  while  in  the  ring — should  not  be  passed 
over.  He  flogged  both  culprits  in  the  most  impartial 
manner. 

As  in  the  matter  of  the  scene  at  the  gangway,  shortly 
after  the  Cape  Horn  theatricals,  when  my  attention  had 
been  directed  to  the  fact  that  the  officers  had  shipped 


FUN  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR  347 

their  quarter-deck  faces — upon  that  occasion,  I  say,  it  was 
seen  with  what  facility  a  sea-officer  assumes  his  wonted 
severity  of  demeanour  after  a  casual  relaxation  of  it. 
This  was  especially  the  case  with  Captain  Claret  upon 
the  present  occasion.  For  any  landsman  to  have  beheld 
him  in  the  lee  waist,  of  a  pleasant  dog-watch,  with 
a  genial,  good-humoured  countenance,  observing  the 
gladiators  in  the  ring,  and  now  and  then  indulging  in 
a  playful  remark — that  landsman  would  have  deemed 
Captain  Claret  the  indulgent  father  of  his  crew,  perhaps 
permitting  the  excess  of  his  kind-heartedness  to  encroach 
upon  the  appropriate  dignity  of  his  station.  He  would 
have  deemed  Captain  Claret  a  fine  illustration  of  those 
two  well-known  poetical  comparisons  between  a  sea- 
captain  and  a  father,  and  between  a  sea-captain  and 
the  master  of  apprentices,  instituted  by  those  eminent 
maritime  jurists,  the  noble  Lords  Tenterden  and  Stowell. 
But  surely,  if  there  is  anything  hateful,  it  is  this 
shipping  of  the  quarter-deck  face  after  wearing  a  merry 
and  good-natured  one.  How  can  they  have  the  heart  ? 
Methinks,  if  but  once  I  smiled  upon  a  man — never  mind 
how  much  beneath  me — I  could  not  bring  myself  to  con 
demn  him  to  the  shocking  misery  of  the  lash.  Oh 
officers  !  all  round  the  world,  if  this  quarter-deck  face 
you  wear  at  all,  then  never  unship  it  for  another,  to  be 
merely  sported  for  a  moment.  Of  all  insults,  the  tem 
porary  condescension  of  a  master  to  a  slave  is  the  most 
outrageous  and  galling.  That  potentate  who  most 
condescends,  mark  him  well ;  for  that  potentate,  i£ 
occasion  come,  will  prove  your  uttermost  tyrant. 


CHAPTER   LXVII 

WHITE  JACKET  ARRAIGNED   AT  THE   MAST 

WHEN  with  five  hundred  others  I  made  one  of  the  com 
pelled  spectators  at  the  scourging  of  poor  Rose-Water,  I 
little  thought  what  Fate  had  ordained  for  myself  the  next 
day. 

Poor  mulatto  !  thought  I,  one  of  an  oppressed  race, 
they  degrade  you  like  a  hound.  Thank  God  !  I  am  a 
white.  Yet  I  had  seen  whites  also  scourged  ;  for,  black 
or  white,  all  my  shipmates  were  liable  to  that.  Still, 
there  is  something  in  us,  somehow,  that,  in  the  most 
degraded  condition,  we  snatch  at  a  chance  to  deceive 
ourselves  into  a  fancied  superiority  to  others,  whom  we 
suppose  lower  in  the  scale  than  ourselves. 

Poor  Rose-Water  !  thought  I ;  poor  mulatto  !  Heaven 
send  you  a  release  from  your  humiliation  ! 

To  make  plain  the  thing  about  to  be  related,  it  needs 
to  repeat  what  has  somewhere  been  previously  men 
tioned,  that  in  tacking  ship  every  seaman  in  a  man-of-war 
has  a  particular  station  assigned  him.  What  that 
station  is,  should  be  made  known  to  him  by  the  first 
lieutenant ;  and  when  the  word  is  passed  to  tack  or 
wear,  it  is  every  seaman's  duty  to  be  found  at  his  post. 
But  among  the  various  numbers  and  stations  given  to 
me  by  the  senior  lieutenant,  when  I  first  came  on  board 
the  frigate,  he  had  altogether  omitted  informing  me  of 
my  particular  place  at  those  times,  and,  up  to  the  precise 
period  now  written  of,  I  had  hardly  known  that  I  should 
have  had  any  special  place  then  at  all.  For  the  rest  of 

348 


WHITE  JACKET  ARRAIGNED  AT  THE  MAST  349 

the  men,  they  seemed  to  me  to  catch  hold  of  the  first 
rope  that  offered,  as  in  a  merchantman  upon  similar 
occasions.  Indeed,  I  subsequently  discovered,  that 
such  was  the  state  of  discipline — in  this  one  particular, 
at  least — that  very  few  of  the  seamen  could  tell  where 
their  proper  stations  were,  at  tacking  or  wearing. 

'  All  hands  tack  ship,  ahoy  !  '  such  was  the  announce 
ment  made  by  the  boatswain's  mates  at  the  hatchways 
the  morning  after  the  hard  fate  of  Rose-Water.  It  was 
just  eight  bells — noon,  and  springing  from  my  white 
jacket,  which  I  had  spread  between  the  guns  for  a  bed 
on  the  main-deck,  I  ran  up  the  ladders,  and,  as  usual, 
seized  hold  of  the  main-brace,  which  fifty  hands  were 
streaming  along  forward.  When  main-topsail  haul ! 
was  given  through  the  trumpet,  I  pulled  at  this  brace 
with  such  heartiness  and  goodwill,  that  I  almost  flattered 
myself  that  my  instrumentality  in  getting  the  frigate 
round  on  the  other  tack  deserved  a  public  vote  of  thanks, 
and  a  silver  tankard  from  Congress. 

But  something  happened  to  be  in  the  way  aloft  when 
the  yards  swung  round  ;  a  little  confusion  ensued  ;  and, 
with  anger  on  his  brow,  Captain  Claret  came  forward  to 
see  what  occasioned  it. — No  one  to  let  go  the  weather- 
lift  of  the  main-yard  !  The  rope  was  cast  off,  however, 
by  a  hand,  and  the  yards,  unobstructed,  came  round. 

When  the  last  rope  was  coiled  away,  the  captain 
desired  to  know  of  the  first  lieutenant  who  it  might 
be  that  was  stationed  at  the  weather  (then  the  star 
board)  main-lift.  With  a  vexed  expression  of  counten 
ance  the  first  lieutenant  sent  a  midshipman  for  the 
station-bill ;  when,  upon  glancing  it  over,  my  own  name 
was  found  put  down  at  the  post  in  question. 

At  the  time  I  was  on  the  gun-deck  below,  and  did 
not  know  of  these  proceedings  ;  but  a  moment  after,  I 
heard  the  boatswain's  mates  bawling  my  name  at  all  the 


350  WHITE  JACKET 

hatchways,  and  along  all  three  decks.  It  was  the  first 
time  I  had  ever  heard  it  so  sent  through  the  furthest 
recesses  of  the  ship,  and  well  knowing  what  this  generally 
betokened  to  other  seamen,  my  heart  jumped  to  my 
throat,  and  I  hurriedly  asked  Flute,  the  boatswain's 
mate  at  the  fore-hatchway,  what  was  wanted  of  me. 

'  Captain  wants  ye  at  the  mast,'  he  replied.  *  Going 
to  flog  ye,  I  guess.' 
1  What  for  ?  ' 

'  My  eyes  !  you  've  been  chalking  your  face,  hain't  ye  ? ' 
'  What  am  I  wanted  f or  ?  '  I  repeated. 
But  at  that  instant  my  name  was  again  thundered 
forth  by  the  other  boatswain's  mate,  and  Flute  hurried 
me  away,  hinting  that  I  would  soon  find  out  what  the 
captain  desired  of  me. 

I  swallowed  down  my  heart  in  me  as  I  touched  the 
spar-deck,  for  a  single  instant  balanced  myself  on  my 
best  centre,  and  then,  wholly  ignorant  of  what  was 
going  to  be  alleged  against  me,  advanced  to  the  dread 
tribunal  of  the  frigate. 

As  I  passed  through  the  gangway,  I  saw  the  quarter 
master  rigging  the  gratings  ;  the  boatswain  with  his 
green  bag  of  scourges  ;  the  master-at-arms  ready  to 
help  off  some  one's  shirt. 

Again  I  made  a  desperate  swallow  of  my  whole  soul 
in  me,  and  found  myself  standing  before  Captain  Claret. 
His  flushed  face  obviously  showed  him  in  ill-humour. 
Among  the  group  of  officers  by  his  side  was  the  first 
lieutenant,  who,  as  I  came  aft,  eyed  me  in  such  a 
manner  that  I  plainly  perceived  him  to  be  extremely 
vexed  at  me  for  having  been  the  innocent  means  of 
reflecting  upon  the  manner  in  which  he  kept  up  the 
discipline  of  the  ship. 

*  Why  were  you  not  at  your  station,  sir  ?  '  asked  the 
captain. 


WHITE  JACKET  ARRAIGNED  AT  THE  MAST  351 

'  What  station  do  you  mean,  sir  ?  '  said  I. 
It  is  generally  the  custom  with  man-of-war's  men  to 
stand  obsequiously  touching  their  hat  at  every  sentence 
they  address  to  the  captain.  But  as  this  was  not  obli 
gatory  upon  me  by  the  Articles  of  War,  I  did  not  do  so 
upon  the  present  occasion,  and  previously,  I  had  never 
had  the  dangerous  honour  of  a  personal  interview  with 
Captain  Claret. 

He  quickly  noticed  my  omission  of  the  homage  usually 
rendered  him,  and  instinct  told  me  that,  to  a  certain 
extent,  it  set  his  heart  against  me. 

*  What  station,  sir,  do  you  mean  ?  '  said  I. 
'  You  pretend  ignorance/   he   replied ;     '  it   will   not 
help  you,  sir.' 

Glancing  at  the  captain,  the  first  lieutenant  now 
produced  the  station-bill,  and  read  my  name  in  con 
nection  with  that  of  the  starboard  main-lift. 

1  Captain  Claret/  said  I,  '  it  is  the  first  time  I  ever 
heard  of  my  being  assigned  to  that  post/ 

'  How  is  this,  Mr.  Bridewell  ?  '  he  said,  turning  to  the 
first  lieutenant,  with  a  fault-finding  expression. 

'  It  is  impossible,  sir/  said  that  officer,  striving  to 
hide  his  vexation,  '  but  this  man  must  have  known  his 
station.' 

( I  have  never  known  it  before  this  moment,  Captain 
Claret/  said  I. 

1  Do  you  contradict  my  officer  ? '  he  returned.  *  I  shall 
flog  you ! ' 

I  had  now  been  on  board  the  frigate  upward  of  a  year, 
and  remained  unscourged ;  the  ship  was  homeward 
bound,  and  in  a  few  weeks,  at  most,  I  would  be  a  free 
man.  And  now,  after  making  a  hermit  of  myself  in  some 
things,  in  order  to  avoid  the  possibility  of  the  scourge, 
here  it  was  hanging  over  me  for  a  thing  utterly  unforeseen, 
for  a  crime  of  which  I  was  as  utterly  innocent.  But  all 


352  WHITE  JACKET 

that  was  as  naught.  I  saw  that  my  case  was  hopeless  ; 
my  solemn  disclaimer  was  thrown  in  my  teeth,  and  the 
boatswain's  mate  stood  curling  his  fingers  through  the 
cat. 

There  are  times  when  wild  thoughts  enter  a  man's 
heart,  when  he  seems  almost  irresponsible  for  his  act 
and  his  deed.  The  captain  stood  on  the  weather-side 
of  the  deck.  Sideways,  on  an  unobstructed  line  with 
him,  was  the  opening  of  the  lee-gangway,  where  the  side- 
ladders  are  suspended  in  port.  Nothing  but  a  slight 
bit  of  sinnate-stuff  served  to  rail  in  this  opening,  which 
was  cut  right  down  to  the  level  of  the  captain's  feet, 
showing  the  far  sea  beyond.  I  stood  a  little  to  wind 
ward  of  him,  and,  though  he  was  a  large,  powerful  man, 
it  was  certain  that  a  sudden  rush  against  him,  along  the 
slanting  deck,  would  infallibly  pitch  him  head-foremost 
into  the  ocean,  though  he  who  so  rushed  must  needs  go 
over  with  him.  My  blood  seemed  clotting  in  my  veins  ; 
I  felt  icy  cold  at  the  tips  of  my  fingers,  and  a  dimness 
was  before  my  eyes.  But  through  that  dimness  the 
boatswain's  mate,  scourge  in  hand,  loomed  like  a  giant, 
and  Captain  Claret,  and  the  blue  sea  seen  through  the 
opening  at  the  gangway,  showed  with  an  awful  vivid 
ness.  I  cannot  analyse  my  heart,  though  it  then  stood 
still  within  me.  But  the  thing  that  swayed  me  to  my 
purpose  was  not  altogether  the  thought  that  Captain 
Claret  was  about  to  degrade  me,  and  that  I  had  taken 
an  oath  with  my  soul  that  he  should  not.  No,  I  felt 
my  man's  manhood  so  bottomless  within  me,  that  no 
word,  no  blow,  no  scourge  of  Captain  Claret  could  cut 
me  deep  enough  for  that.  I  but  swung  to  an  instinct 
in  me — the  instinct  diffused  through  all  animated  nature, 
the  same  that  prompts  even  a  worm  to  turn  under  the 
heel.  Locking  souls  with  him,  I  meant  to  drag  Captain 
Claret  from  this  earthly  tribunal  of  his  to  that  of  Jehovah, 


WHITE  JACKET  ARRAIGNED  AT  THE  MAST  353 

and  let  Him  decide  between  us.     No  other  way  could  I 
escape  the  scourge. 

Nature  has  not  implanted  any  power  in  man  that  was 
not  meant  to  be  exercised  at  times,  though  too  often 
our  powers  have  been  abused.  The  privilege,  inborn 
and  inalienable,  that  every  man  has,  of  dying  himself, 
and  inflicting  death  upon  another,  was  not  given  to  us 
without  a  purpose.  These  are  the  last  resources  of  an 
insulted  and  unendurable  existence. 

'  To  the  gratings,  sir  !  '  said  Captain  Claret ;  '  do  you 
hear  ?  ' 

My  eye  was  measuring  the  distance  between  him  and 
the  sea. 

'  Captain  Claret,'  said  a  voice  advancing  from  the 
crowd.  I  turned  to  see  who  this  might  be,  that  auda 
ciously  interposed  at  a  juncture  like  this.  It  was 
the  same  remarkably  handsome  and  gentlemanly  cor 
poral  of  marines,  Colbrook,  who  has  been  previously 
alluded  to,  in  the  chapter  describing  killing  time  in  a 
man-of-war. 

' 1  know  that  man,'  said  Colbrook,  touching  his  cap, 
and  speaking  in  a  mild,  firm,  but  extremely  deferential 
manner  ;  '  and  I  know  that  he  would  not  be  found 
absent  from  his  station,  if  he  knew  where  it  was.' 

This  speech  was  almost  unprecedented.  Seldom  or 
never  before  had  a  marine  dared  to  speak  to  the  captain 
of  a  frigate  in  behalf  of  a  seaman  at  the  mast.  But 
there  was  something  so  unostentatiously  commanding 
in  the  calm  manner  of  the  man,  that  the  captain,  though 
astounded,  did  not  in  any  way  reprimand  him.  The 
very  unusualness  of  his  interference  seemed  Colbrook 's 
protection. 

Taking  heart,  perhaps,  from  Colbrook's  example, 
Jack  Chase  interposed,  and  in  a  manly  but  carefully 
respectful  manner,  in  substance  repeated  the  corporal's 


354  WHITE  JACKET 

remark,  adding  that  he  had  never  found  me  wanting  in 
the  top. 

Captain  Claret  looked  from  Chase  to  Colbrook,  and 
from  Colbrook  to  Chase — one  the  foremost  man  among 
the  seamen,  the  other  the  foremost  man  among  the 
soldiers — then  all  round  upon  the  packed  and  silent  crew, 
and,  as  if  a  slave  to  Fate,  though  supreme  captain  of  a 
frigate,  he  turned  to  the  first  lieutenant,  made  some 
indifferent  remark,  and  saying  to  me,  You  may  go, 
sauntered  aft  into  his  cabin  ;  while  I,  who,  in  the  des 
peration  of  my  soul,  had  but  just  escaped  being  a  murderer 
and  a  suicide,  almost  burst  into  tears  of  thanksgiving 
where  I  stood. 


CHAPTER    LXVIII 

A  MAN-OF-WAR  FOUNTAIN,   AND    OTHER  THINGS 

LET  us  forget  the  scourge  and  the  gangway  awhile,  and 
jot  down  in  our  memories  a  few  little  things  pertaining 
to  our  man-of-war  world.  I  let  nothing  slip,  however 
small ;  and  feel  myself  actuated  by  the  same  motive 
which  has  prompted  many  worthy  old  chroniclers,  to  set 
down  the  merest  trifles  concerning  things  that  are  des 
tined  to  pass  away  entirely  from  the  earth,  and  which, 
if  not  preserved  in  the  nick  of  time,  must  infallibly  perish 
from  the  memories  of  man.  Who  knows  that  this 
humble  narrative  may  not  hereafter  prove  the  history  of 
an  obsolete  barbarism  ?  Who  knows  that,  when  men- 
of-war  shall  be  no  more,  White  Jacket  may  not  be 
quoted  to  show  to  the  people  in  the  Millennium  what  a 
man-of-war  was  ?  God  hasten  the  time  !  Lo  !  ye  years, 
escort  it  hither,  and  bless  our  eyes  ere  we  die. 

There  is  no  part  of  a  frigate  where  you  will  see  more 
going  and  coming  of  strangers,  and  overhear  more  greet 
ings  and  gossipings  of  acquaintances,  than  in  the  im 
mediate  vicinity  of  the  scuttle-butt,  just  forward  of  the 
main-hatchway,  on  the  gun-deck. 

The  scuttle-butt  is  a  goodly,  round,  painted  cask, 
standing  on  end,  and  with  its  upper  head  removed,  show 
ing  a  narrow  circular  shelf  within,  where  rest  a  number 
of  tin  cups  for  the  accommodation  of  drinkers.  Central, 
within  the  scuttle-butt  itself,  stands  an  iron  pump, 
which,  connecting  with  the  immense  water-tanks  in  the 
hold,  furnishes  an  unfailing  supply  of  the  much  admired 

355 


356  WHITE  JACKET 

pale  ale,  first  brewed  in  the  brooks  of  the  Garden  of 
Eden,  and  stamped  with  the  brand  of  our  old  father 
Adam,  who  never  knew  what  wine  was.  We  are  in 
debted  to  the  old  vintner  Noah  for  that.  The  scuttle 
butt  is  the  only  fountain  in  the  ship  ;  and  here  alone  can 
you  drink,  unless  at  your  meals.  Night  and  day  an 
armed  sentry  paces  before  it,  bayonet  in  hand,  to  see  that 
no  water  is  taken  away,  except  according  to  law.  I 
wonder  that  they  station  no  sentries  at  the  port-holes, 
to  see  that  no  air  is  breathed,  except  according  to  Navy 
regulations. 

As  five  hundred  men  come  to  drink  at  this  scuttle 
butt  ;  as  it  is  often  surrounded  by  officers'  servants 
drawing  water  for  their  masters  to  wash  ;  by  the  cooks 
of  the  range,  who  hither  come  to  fill  their  coffee-pots  ; 
and  by  the  cooks  of  the  ship's  messes  to  procure  water 
for  their  duffs  ;  the  scuttle-butt  may  be  denominated 
the  town-pump  of  the  ship.  And  would  that  my  fine 
countryman,  Hawthorne  of  Salem,  had  but  served  on 
board  a  man-of-war  in  his  time,  that  he  might  give  us 

the  reading  of  a  '  rill '  from  the  scuttle-butt. 

******* 

As  in  all  extensive  establishments — abbeys,  arsenals, 
colleges,  treasuries,  metropolitan  post-offices,  and  monas 
teries — there  are  many  snug  little  niches,  wherein  are 
ensconced  certain  superannuated  old  pensioner  officials  ; 
and,  more  especially,  as  in  most  ecclesiastical  establish 
ments,  a  few  choice  prebendary  stalls  are  to  be  found, 
furnished  with  well-filled  mangers  and  racks  ;  so,  in  a 
man-of-war,  there  are  a  variety  of  similar  snuggeries 
for  the  benefit  of  decrepit  or  rheumatic  old  tars.  Chief 
among  these  is  the  office  of  mast-man. 

There  is  a  stout  rail  on  deck,  at  the  base  of  each  mast, 
where  a  number  of  braces,  lifts,  and  buntlines  are  belayed 
to  the  pins.  It  is  the  sole  duty  of  the  mast-man  to  see 


A  MAN-OF-WAR  SNUGGERY  357 

that  these  ropes  are  always  kept  clear,  to  preserve  his 
premises  in  a  state  of  the  greatest  attainable  neatness, 
and  every  Sunday  morning  to  dispose  his  ropes  in  neat 
Flemish  coils. 

The  mainmast-man  of  the  Neversink  was  a  very  aged 
seaman,  who  well  deserved  his  comfortable  berth.  He 
had  seen  more  than  half  a  century  of  the  most  active 
service,  and,  through  all,  had  proved  himself  a  good  and 
faithful  man.  He  furnished  one  of  the  very  rare  examples 
of  a  sailor  in  a  green  old  age  ;  for,  with  most  sailors,  old 
age  comes  in  youth,  and  Hardship  and  Vice  carry  them 
on  an  early  bier  to  the  grave. 

As  in  the  evening  of  life,  and  at  the  close  of  the  day, 
old  Abraham  sat  at  the  door  of  his  tent,  biding  his  time 
to  die,  so  sits  our  old  mast-man,  on  the  coat  of  the  mast, 
glancing  round  him  with  patriarchal  benignity.  And 
that  mild  expression  of  his  sets  off  very  strangely  a  face 
that  has  been  burned  almost  black  by  the  torrid  suns 
that  shone  fifty  years  ago — a  face  that  is  seamed  with 
three  sabre  cuts.  You  would  almost  think  this  old 
mast-man  had  been  blown  out  of  Vesuvius,  to  look  alone 
at  his  scarred,  blackened  forehead,  chin,  and  cheeks. 
But  gaze  down  into  his  eye,  and  though  all  the  snows  of 
Time  have  drifted  higher  and  higher  upon  his  brow,  yet 
deep  down  in  that  eye  you  behold  an  infantile,  sin 
less  look,  the  same  that  answered  the  glance  of  this  old 
man's  mother  when  first  she  cried  for  the  babe  to  be  laid 
by  her  side.  That  look  is  the  fadeless,  ever  infantile 
immortality  within. 

******* 

The  Lord  Nelsons  of  the  sea,  though  but  barons  in 
the  state,  yet  oftentimes  prove  more  potent  than  their 
royal  masters  ;  and  at  such  scenes  as  Trafalgar — dethron 
ing  this  emperor  and  reinstating  that — enact  on  the 
ocean  the  proud  part  of  mighty  Richard  Nevil,  the 


358  WHITE  JACKET 

king-making  Earl  of  the  land.  And  as  Richard  Nevil 
entrenched  himself  in  his  moated  old  man-of-war  castle 
of  Warwick,  which,  underground,  was  traversed  with 
vaults,  hewn  out  of  the  solid  rock,  and  intricate  as  the 
wards  of  the  old  keys  of  Calais,  surrendered  to  Edward  in.; 
even  so  do  these  king-commodores  house  themselves  in 
their  water-rimmed,  cannon-sentried  frigates,  oaken  dug, 
deck  under  deck,  as  cell  under  cell.  And  as  the  old 
Middle  Age  warders  of  Warwick,  every  night  at  curfew, 
patrolled  the  battlements,  and  dove  down  into  the 
vaults  to  see  that  all  lights  were  extinguished,  even  so 
do  the  master-at-arms  and  ship's  corporals  of  a  frigate 
perambulate  all  the  decks  of  a  man-of-war,  blowing  out 
all  tapers  but  those  burning  in  the  legalised  battle- 
lanterns.  Yea,  in  these  things,  so  potent  is  the  authority 
of  these  sea-wardens,  that,  though  almost  the  lowest 
subalterns  in  the  ship,  yet  should  they  find  the  senior 
lieutenant  himself  sitting  up  late  in  his  state-room, 
reading  Bowditch's  Navigator,  or  D' Anton  On  Gun 
powder  and  Fire-arms,  they  would  infallibly  blow  the 
light  out  under  his  very  nose  ;  nor  durst  that  Grand- 
Vizier  resent  the  indignity. 

But,  unwittingly,  I  have  ennobled,  by  grand  his 
torical  comparisons,  this  prying,  pettifogging,  Irish 
informer  of  a  master-at-arms. 

You  have  seen  some  slim,  slip-shod  housekeeper,  at 
midnight,  ferreting  over  a  rambling  old  house  in  the 
country,  starting  at  fancied  witches  and  ghosts,  yet 
intent  on  seeing  every  door  bolted,  every  smoulder 
ing  ember  in  the  fireplaces  smothered,  every  loitering 
domestic  abed,  and  every  light  made  dark.  This  is  the 

master-at-arms  taking  his  night  rounds  in  a  frigate. 
******* 

It  may  be  thought  that  but  little  is  seen  of  the  com 
modore  in  these  chapters,  and  that,  since  he  so  seldom 


THE  MAJESTY  OF  A  COMMODORE        359 

appears  on  the  stage,  he  cannot  be  so  august  a  personage 
after  all.  But  the  mightiest  potentates  keep  the  most 
behind  the  veil.  You  might  tarry  in  Constantinople  a 
month,  and  never  catch  a  glimpse  of  the  Sultan.  The 
Grand  Lama  of  Thibet,  according  to  some  accounts,  is 
never  beheld  by  the  people.  But  if  anyone  doubts  the 
majesty  of  a  commodore,  let  him  know  that,  according 
to  XLIL  of  the  Articles  of  War,  he  is  invested  with  a 
prerogative  which,  according  to  monarchical  jurists,  is 
inseparable  from  the  throne — the  plenary  pardoning 
power.  He  may  pardon  all  offences  committed  in  the 
squadron  under  his  command. 

But  this  prerogative  is  only  his  while  at  sea,  or  on  a 
foreign  station.  A  circumstance  peculiarly  significant 
of  the  great  difference  between  the  stately  absolutism 
of  a  commodore  enthroned  on  his  poop  in  a  foreign 
harbour,  and  an  unlaced  commodore  negligently  reclin 
ing  in  an  easy-chair  in  the  bosom  of  his  family  at  home. 


CHAPTER   LXIX 

PRAYERS   AT  THE   GUNS 

THE  training  days,  or  general  quarters,  now  and  then 
taking  place  in  our  frigate,  have  already  been  described, 
also  the  Sunday  devotions  on  the  half -deck  ;  but  nothing 
has  yet  been  said  concerning  the  daily  morning  and 
evening  quarters,  when  the  men  silently  stand  at  their 
guns,  and  the  chaplain  simply  offers  up  a  prayer. 

Let  us  now  enlarge  upon  this  matter.  We  have 
plenty  of  time  ;  the  occasion  invites  ;  for  behold  !  the 
homeward-bound  Never  sink  bowls  along  over  a  jubilant 
sea. 

Shortly  after  breakfast  the  drum  beats  to  quarters  ; 
and  among  five  hundred  men,  scattered  over  all  three 
decks,  and  engaged  in  all  manner  of  ways,  that  sudden 
rolling  march  is  magical  as  the  monitory  sound  to  which 
every  good  Mussulman  at  sunset  drops  to  the  ground 
whatsoever  his  hands  might  have  found  to  do,  and, 
throughout  all  Turkey,  the  people  in  concert  kneel 
toward  their  holy  Mecca. 

The  sailors  run  to  and  fro — some  up  the  deck-ladders, 
some  down — to  gain  their  respective  stations  in  the 
shortest  possible  time.  In  three  minutes  all  is  composed. 
One  by  one,  the  various  officers  stationed  over  the 
separate  divisions  of  the  ship  then  approach  the  first 
lieutenant  on  the  quarter-deck,  and  report  their  re 
spective  men  at  their  quarters.  It  is  curious  to  watch 
their  countenances  at  this  time.  A  profound  silence 
prevails  ;  and,  emerging  through  the  hatchway,  from 

360 


PRAYERS  AT  THE  GUNS  361 

one  of  the  lower  decks,  a  slender  young  officer  appears, 
hugging  his  sword  to  his  thigh,  and  advances  through 
the  long  lanes  of  sailors  at  their  guns,  his  serious  eye  all 
the  time  fixed  upon  the  first  lieutenant's — his  polar 
star.  Sometimes  he  essays  a  stately  and  graduated 
step,  an  erect  and  martial  bearing,  and  seems  full  of 
the  vast  national  importance  of  what  he  is  about  to 
communicate. 

But  when  at  last  he  gains  his  destination,  you  are 
amazed  to  perceive  that  all  he  has  to  say  is  imparted  by 
a  Freemason  touch  of  his  cap,  and  a  bow.  He  then 
turns  and  makes  off  to  his  division,  perhaps  passing 
several  brother  lieutenants,  all  bound  on  the  same 
errand  he  himself  has  just  achieved.  For  about  five 
minutes  these  officers  are  coming  and  going,  bringing  in 
thrilling  intelligence  from  all  quarters  of  the  frigate  ; 
most  stoically  received,  however,  by  the  first  lieutenant. 
With  his  legs  apart,  so  as  to  give  a  broad  foundation  for 
the  superstructure  of  his  dignity,  this  gentleman  stands 
stiff  as  a  pikestaff  on  the  quarter-deck.  One  hand 
holds  his  sabre — an  appurtenance  altogether  unnecessary 
at  the  time  ;  and  which  he  accordingly  tucks,  point 
backward,  under  his  arm,  like  an  umbrella  on  a  sunshiny 
day.  The  other  hand  is  continually  bobbing  up  and 
down  to  the  leather  front  of  his  cap,  in  response  to  the 
reports  and  salutes  of  his  subordinates,  to  whom  he  never 
deigns  to  vouchsafe  a  syllable  ;  merely  going  through 
the  motions  of  accepting  their  news,  without  bestowing 
thanks  for  their  pains. 

This  continual  touching  of  caps  between  officers  on 
board  a  man-of-war  is  the  reason  why  you  often  notice 
that  the  glazed  fronts  of  their  caps  look  jaded,  lack 
lustre,  and  worn ;  sometimes  slightly  oleaginous — 
though,  in  other  respects,  the  cap  may  appear  glossy 
and  fresh.  But  as  for  the  first  lieutenant,  he  ought 


362  WHITE  JACKET 

to  have  extra  pay  allowed  to  him,  on  account  of  his  extra 
ordinary  outlays  in  cap  fronts  ;  for  he  it  is  to  whom,  all 
day  long,  reports  of  various  kinds  are  incessantly  being 
made  by  the  junior  lieutenants  ;  and  no  report  is  made 
by  them,  however  trivial,  but  caps  are  touched  on  the 
occasion.  It  is  obvious  that  these  individual  salutes 
must  be  greatly  multiplied  and  aggregated  upon  the 
senior  lieutenant,  who  must  return  them  all.  Indeed, 
when  a  subordinate  officer  is  first  promoted  to  that  rank, 
he  generally  complains  of  the  same  exhaustion  about 
the  shoulder  and  elbow  that  La  Fayette  mourned  over, 
when,  in  visiting  America,  he  did  little  else  but  shake 
the  sturdy  hands  of  patriotic  farmers  from  sunrise  to 
sunset. 

The  various  officers  of  divisions  having  presented  their 
respects,  and  made  good  their  return  to  their  stations, 
the  first  lieutenant  turns  round,  and,  marching  aft, 
endeavours  to  catch  the  eye  of  the  captain,  in  order  to 
touch  his  own  cap  to  that  personage,  and  thereby,  with 
out  adding  a  word  of  explanation,  communicate  the  fact 
of  all  hands  being  at  their  guns.  He  is  a  sort  of  retort, 
or  receiver-general,  to  concentrate  the  whole  sum  of  the 
information  imparted  to  him,  and  discharge  it  upon  his 
superior  at  one  touch  of  his  cap  front. 

But  sometimes  the  captain  feels  out  of  sorts,  or  in 
ill-humour,  or  is  pleased  to  be  somewhat  capricious,  or 
has  a  fancy  to  show  a  touch  of  his  omnipotent  supremacy  ; 
or,  perad venture,  it  has  so  happened  that  the  first  lieu 
tenant  has,  in  some  way,  piqued  or  offended  him,  and  he 
is  not  unwilling  to  show  a  slight  specimen  of  his  dominion 
over  him,  even  before  the  eyes  of  all  hands  ;  at  all  events, 
only  by  some  one  of  these  suppositions  can  the  singular 
circumstance  be  accounted  for,  that  frequently  Captain 
Claret  would  pertinaciously  promenade  up  and  down 
the  poop,  purposely  averting  his  eye  from  the  first 


PRAYERS  AT  THE  GUNS  363 

lieutenant,  who  would  stand  below  in  the  most  awkward 
suspense,  waiting  the  first  wink  from  his  superior's  eye. 

*  Now  I  have  him  !  '  he  must  have  said  to  himself,  as 
the  captain  would  turn  toward  him  in  his  walk  ;  '  now  's 
my  time  !  '  and  up  would  go  his  hand  to  his  cap  ;  but, 
alas  !  the  captain  was  off  again  ;  and  the  men  at  the 
guns  would  cast  sly  winks  at  each  other  as  the  embarrassed 
lieutenant  would  bite  his  lips  with  suppressed  vexation. 

Upon  some  occasions  this  scene  would  be  repeated 
several  times,  till  at  last  Captain  Claret,  thinking  that 
in  the  eyes  of  all  hands  his  dignity  must  by  this  time  be 
pretty  well  bolstered,  would  stalk  toward  his  subordinate, 
looking  him  full  in  the  eyes  ;  whereupon  up  goes  his 
hand  to  the  cap  front,  and  the  captain,  nodding  his 
acceptance  of  the  report,  descends  from  his  perch  to  the 
quarter-deck. 

By  this  time  the  stately  commodore  slowly  emerges 
from  his  cabin,  and  soon  stands  leaning  alone  against 
the  brass  rails  of  the  after-hatchway.  In  passing  him, 
the  captain  makes  a  profound  salutation,  which  his 
superior  returns,  in  token  that  the  captain  is  at  perfect 
liberty  to  proceed  with  the  ceremonies  of  the  hour. 

Marching  on,  Captain  Claret  at  last  halts  near  the 
mainmast,  at  the  head  of  a  group  of  the  ward-room 
officers,  and  by  the  side  of  the  chaplain.  At  a  sign  from 
his  finger,  the  brass  band  strikes  up  the  Portuguese 
hymn.  This  over,  from  commodore  to  hammock-boy, 
all  hands  uncover,  and  the  chaplain  reads  a  prayer. 
Upon  its  conclusion,  the  drum  beats  the  retreat,  and  the 
ship's  company  disappear  from  the  guns.  At  sea  or  in 
harbour,  this  ceremony  is  repeated  every  morning  and 
evening. 

By  those  stationed  on  the  quarter-deck  the  chaplain 
is  distinctly  heard  ;  but  the  quarter-deck  gun  division 
embraces  but  a  tenth  part  of  the  ship's  company,  many 


364  WHITE  JACKET 

of  whom  are  below,  on  the  main-deck,  where  not  one 
syllable  of  the  prayer  can  be  heard.  This  seemed  a 
great  misfortune  ;  for  I  well  knew  myself  how  blessed 
and  soothing  it  was  to  mingle  twice  every  day  in  these 
peaceful  devotions,  and,  with  the  commodore,  and 
captain,  and  smallest  boy,  unite  in  acknowledging 
Almighty  God.  There  was  also  a  touch  of  the  tem 
porary  equality  of  the  Church  about  it,  exceedingly 
grateful  to  a  man-of-war's  man  like  me. 

My  carronade  gun  happened  to  be  directly  opposite 
the  brass  railing  against  which  the  commodore  invari 
ably  leaned  at  prayers.  Brought  so  close  together, 
twice  every  day,  for  more  than  a  year,  we  could  not  but 
become  intimately  acquainted  with  each  other's  faces. 
To  this  fortunate  circumstance  it  is  to  be  ascribed,  that 
some  time  after  reaching  home,  we  were  able  to  recog 
nise  each  other  when  we  chanced  to  meet  in  Washington, 
at  a  ball  given  by  the  Russian  Minister,  the  Baron  de 
Bodisco.  And  though,  while  on  board  the  frigate,  the 
commodore  never  in  any  manner  personally  addressed 
me — nor  did  I  him — yet,  at  the  Minister's  social  enter 
tainment,  we  there  became  exceedingly  chatty  ;  nor  did 
I  fail  to  observe,  among  that  crowd  of  foreign  dignitaries 
and  magnates  from  all  parts  of  America,  that  my  worthy 
friend  did  not  appear  so  exalted  as  when  leaning,  in 
solitary  state,  against  the  brass  railing  of  the  Never  sink's 
quarter-deck.  Like  many  other  gentlemen,  he  appeared 
to  the  best  advantage,  and  was  treated  with  the  most 
deference  in  the  bosom  of  his  home,  the  frigate. 

Our  morning  and  evening  quarters  were  agreeably 
diversified  for  some  weeks  by  a  little  circumstance,  which, 
to  some  of  us  at  least,  always  seemed  very  pleasing. 

At  Callao,  half  of  the  commodore's  cabin  had  been 
hospitably  yielded  to  the  family  of  a  certain  aristocratic - 
looking  magnate,  who  was  going  ambassador  from  Peru 


PRAYERS  AT  THE  GUNS  365 

to  the  Court  of  the  Brazils,  at  Rio.  This  dignified 
diplomatist  sported  a  long,  twirling  moustache,  that 
almost  enveloped  his  mouth.  The  sailors  said,  he  looked 
like  a  rat  with  his  teeth  through  a  bunch  of  oakum,  or 
a  St.  Jago  monkey  peeping  through  a  prickly -pear  bush. 

He  was  accompanied  by  a  very  beautiful  wife,  and  a 
still  more  beautiful  little  daughter,  about  six  years  old. 
Between  this  dark-eyed  little  gypsy  and  our  chaplain 
there  soon  sprung  up  a  cordial  love  and  good  feeling,  so 
much  so,  that  they  were  seldom  apart.  And  whenever 
the  drum  beat  to  quarters,  and  the  sailors  were  hurrying 
to  their  stations,  this  little  signorita  would  outrun  them 
all  to  gain  her  own  quarters  at  the  capstan,  where  she 
would  stand  by  the  chaplain's  side,  grasping  his  hand, 
and  looking  up  archly  in  his  face. 

It  was  a  sweet  relief  from  the  domineering  sternness 
of  our  martial  discipline — a  sternness  not  relaxed  even 
at  our  devotions  before  the  altar  of  the  common  God  of 
commodore  and  cabin-boy — to  see  that  lovely  little  girl 
standing  among  the  thirty-two-pounders,  and  now  and 
then  casting  a  wondering,  commiserating  glance  at  the 
array  of  grim  seamen  around  her. 


CHAPTER    LXX 

MONTHLY   MUSTER  BOUND   THE   CAPSTAN 

BESIDES  general  quarters,  and  the  regular  morning  and 
evening  quarters  for  prayers  on  board  the  Neversink, 
on  the  first  Sunday  of  every  month  we  had  a  grand 
'  muster  round  the  capstan,1  when  we  passed  in  solemn 
review  before  the  captain  and  officers,  who  closely 
scanned  our  frocks  and  trowsers,  to  see  whether  they 
were  according  to  the  Navy  cut.  In  some  ships,  every 
man  is  required  to  bring  his  bag  and  hammock  along  for 
inspection. 

This  ceremony  acquires  its  chief  solemnity,  and,  to  a 
novice,  is  rendered  even  terrible,  by  the  reading  of  the 
Articles  of  War  by  the  captain's  clerk  before  the  as 
sembled  ship's  company,  who,  in  testimony  of  their 
enforced  reverence  for  the  code,  stand  bareheaded  till 
the  last  sentence  is  pronounced. 

To  a  mere  amateur  reader  the  quiet  perusal  of  these 
Articles  of  War  would  be  attended  with  some  nervous 
emotions.  Imagine,  then,  what  my  feelings  must  have 
been,  when,  with  my  hat  deferentially  in  my  hand,  I 
stood  before  my  lord  and  master,  Captain  Claret,  and 
heard  these  Articles  read  as  the  law  and  gospel,  the  in 
fallible,  unappealable  dispensation  and  code,  whereby 
I  lived,  and  moved,  and  had  my  being  on  board  of  the 
United  States  ship  Neversink. 

Of  some  twenty  offences — made  penal — that  a  sea 
man  may  commit,  and  which  are  specified  in  this  code, 
thirteen  are  punishable  by  death, 

366 


MONTHLY  MUSTER  ROUND  THE  CAPSTAN    367 

'  Shall  suffer  death  !  '  This  was  the  burden  of  nearly 
every  Article  read  by  the  captain's  clerk  ;  for  he  seemed 
to  have  been  instructed  to  omit  the  longer  Articles,  and 
only  present  those  which  were  brief  and  to  the  point. 

'  Shall  suffer  death ! '  The  repeated  announcement 
falls  on  your  ear  like  the  intermitting  discharge  of  artillery. 
After  it  has  been  repeated  again  and  again,  you  listen  to 
the  reader  as  he  deliberately  begins  a  new  paragraph  ; 
you  hear  him  reciting  the  involved,  but  comprehensive 
and  clear  arrangement  of  the  sentence,  detailing  all 
possible  particulars  of  the  offence  described,  and  you 
breathlessly  await,  whether  that  clause  also  is  going  to 
be  concluded  by  the  discharge  of  the  terrible  minute-gun. 
When,  lo  !  it  again  booms  on  your  ear — shall  suffer  death  ! 
No  reservations,  no  contingencies  ;  not  the  remotest 
promise  of  pardon  or  reprieve  ;  not  a  glimpse  of  com 
mutation  of  the  sentence  ;  all  hope  and  consolation  is 
shut  out — shall  suffer  death  !  that  is  the  simple  fact  for 
you  to  digest ;  and  it  is  a  tougher  morsel,  believe  White 
Jacket  when  he  says  it,  than  a  forty-two-pound  cannon- 
ball. 

But  there  is  a  glimmering  of  an  alternative  to  the 
sailor  who  infringes  these  Articles.  Some  of  them  thus 
terminate  :  *  Shall  suffer  death,  or  such  punishment  as  a 
court-martial  shall  adjudge*  But  hints  this  at  a  penalty 
still  more  serious  ?  Perhaps  it  means  '  death,  or  worse 
punishment* 

Your  honours  of  the  Spanish  Inquisition,  Loyola  and 
Torquemada  !  produce,  reverend  gentlemen,  your  most 
secret  code,  and  match  these  Articles  of  War,  if  you  can. 
Jack  Ketch,  you  also  are  experienced  in  these  things  ! 
Thou  most  benevolent  of  mortals,  who  standest  by  us, 
and  hangest  round  our  necks,  when  all  the  rest  of  this 
world  are  against  us — tell  us,  hangman,  what  punish 
ment  is  this,  horribly  hinted  at  as  being  worse  than 


368  WHITE  JACKET 

death  ?  Is  it,  upon  an  empty  stomach,  to  read  the 
Articles  of  War  every  morning,  for  the  term  of  one's 
natural  life  ?  Or  is  it  to  be  imprisoned  in  a  cell,  with  its 
walls  papered  from  floor  to  ceiling  with  printed  copies,  in 
italics,  of  these  Articles  of  War  ? 

But  it  needs  not  to  dilate  upon  the  pure,  bubbling  milk 
of  human  kindness,  and  Christian  charity,  and  forgive 
ness  of  injuries  which  pervade  this  charming  document, 
so  thoroughly  imbued,  as  a  Christian  code,  with  the 
benignant  spirit  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  But  as  it 
is  very  nearly  alike  in  the  foremost  states  of  Christendom, 
and  as  it  is  nationally  set  forth  by  those  states,  it  in 
directly  becomes  an  index  to  the  true  condition  of  the 
present  civilisation  of  the  world. 

As,  month  after  month,  I  would  stand  bareheaded 
among  my  shipmates,  and  hear  this  document  read,  I 
have  thought  to  myself,  Well,  well,  White  Jacket,  you 
are  in  a  sad  box,  indeed.  But  prick  your  ears,  there 
goes  another  minute -gun.  It  admonishes  you  to  take 
all  bad  usage  in  good  part,  and  never  to  join  in  any  public 
meeting  that  may  be  held  on  the  gun-deck  for  a  redress 
of  grievances.  Listen  : — 

Art.  XIII.  '  //  any  person  in  the  Navy  shall  make,  or 
attempt  to  make,  any  mutinous  assembly,  he  shall,  on  con 
viction  thereof  by  a  court-martial,  suffer  death' 

Bless  me,  White  Jacket,  are  you  a  great  gun  yourself, 
that  you  so  recoil,  to  the  extremity  of  your  breechings, 
at  that  discharge  ? 

But  give  ear  again.  Here  goes  another  minute-gun. 
It  indirectly  admonishes  you  to  receive  the  grossest 
insult,  and  stand  still  under  it : — 

Art.  XIV.  '  No  private  in  the  Navy  shall  disobey  the 
lawful  orders  of  his  superior  officer,  or  strike  him,  or  draw, 
or  offer  to  draw,  or  raise  any  weapon  against  him,  while  in 
the  execution  of  the  duties  of  his  office,  on  pain  of  death.9 


MONTHLY  MUSTER  ROUND  THE  CAPSTAN    369 

Do  not  hang  back  there  by  the  bulwarks,  White  Jacket ; 
come  up  to  the  mark  once  more ;  for  here  goes  still 
another  minute-gun,  which  admonishes  you  never  to  be 
caught  napping  : — 

Part  of  Art.  XX.  *  //  any  person  in  the  Navy  shall  sleep 
upon  his  watch,  he  sJwll  suffer  death.9 

Murderous  !  But  then,  in  time  of  peace,  they  do  not 
enforce  these  bloodthirsty  laws  ?  Do  they  not,  indeed  ? 
What  happened  to  those  three  sailors  on  board  an  American 
armed  vessel  a  few  years  ago,  quite  within  your  memory, 
White  Jacket ;  yea,  while  you  yourself  were  yet  serving 
on  board  this  very  frigate,  the  Neversink  ?  What 
happened  to  those  three  Americans,  White  Jacket — those 
three  sailors,  even  as  you,  who  once  were  alive,  but  now 
are  dead  ?  '  Shall  suffer  death  !  '  those  were  the  three 
words  that  hung  those  three  sailors. 

Have  a  care,  then,  have  a  care,  lest  you  come  to  a  sad 
end,  even  the  end  of  a  rope  ;  lest,  with  a  black-and-blue 
throat,  you  turn  a  dumb  diver  after  pearl  shells  ;  put  to 
bed  forever,  and  tucked  in,  in  your  own  hammocjk,  at  the 
bottom  of  the  sea.  And  there  you  will  lie,  White  Jacket, 
while  hostile  navies  are  playing  cannon-ball  billiards 
over  your  grave. 

By  the  mainmast !  then,  in  a  time  of  profound  peace, 
I  am  subject  to  the  cut-throat  martial  law  !  And  when 
my  own  brother,  who  happens  to  be  dwelling  ashore,  and 
does  not  serve  his  country  as  I  am  now  doing — when  he 
is  at  liberty  to  call  personally  upon  the  President  of  the 
United  States,  and  express  his  disapprobation  of  the 
whole  national  administration,  here  am  /,  liable  at  any 
time  to  be  run  up  at  the  yard-arm,  with  a  necklace,  made 
by  no  jeweller,  round  my  neck  ! 

A  hard  case,  truly,  White  Jacket ;  but  it  cannot  be 
helped.  Yes  ;  you  live  under  this  same  martial  law. 
Does  not  everything  around  you  din  the  fact  in  your 

2A 


370  WHITE  JACKET 

ears  ?  Twice  every  day  do  you  not  jump  to  your  quarters 
at  the  sound  of  a  drum  ?  Every  morning,  in  port,  are 
you  not  roused  from  your  hammock  by  the  reveille,  and 
sent  to  it  again  at  nightfall  by  the  tattoo  ?  Every  Sunday 
are  you  not  commanded  in  the  mere  matter  of  the  very 
dress  you  shall  wear  through  that  blessed  day  ?  Can 
your  shipmates  so  much  as  drink  their  '  tot  of  grog  '  ? 
nay,  can  they  even  drink  but  a  cup  of  water  at  the  scuttle 
butt,  without  an  armed  sentry  standing  over  them  ? 
Does  not  every  officer  wear  a  sword  instead  of  a  cane  ? 
You  live  and  move  among  twenty -four-pounders,  White 
Jacket ;  the  very  cannon-balls  are  deemed  an  ornament 
around  you,  serving  to  embellish  the  hatchways  ;  and 
should  you  come  to  die  at  sea,  White  Jacket,  still  two 
cannon-balls  would  bear  you  company  when  you  would 
be  committed  to  the  deep.  Yea,  by  all  methods,  and 
devices,  and  inventions,  you  are  momentarily  ad 
monished  of  the  fact  that  you  live  under  the  Articles 
of  War.  And  by  virtue  of  them  it  is,  White  Jacket, 
that,  without  a  hearing  and  without  a  trial,  you  may, 
at  a  wink  from  the  captain,  be  condemned  to  the 
scourge. 

Speak  you  true  ?     Then  let  me  fly  ! 

Nay,  White  Jacket,  the  landless  horizon  hoops  you  in. 

Some  tempest,  then,  surge  all  the  sea  against  us  ! 
hidden  reefs  and  rocks,  arise  and  dash  the  ship  to 
chips  !  I  was  not  born  a  serf,  and  will  not  live  a  slave  ! 
Quick !  corkscrew  whirlpools,  suck  us  down !  world's 
end  whelm  us  ! 

Nay,  White  Jacket,  though  this  frigate  laid  her  broken 
bones  upon  the  Antarctic  shores  of  Palmer's  Land ; 
though  not  two  planks  adhered  ;  though  all  her  guns 
were  spiked  by  sword-fish  blades,  and  at  her  yawning 
hatchways  mouth-yawning  sharks  swam  in  and  out ; 
yet,  should  you  escape  the  wreck  and  scramble  to  the 


MONTHLY  MUSTER  ROUND  THE  CAPSTAN    371 

beach,  this  Martial  Law  would  meet  you  still,  and  snatch 
you  by  the  throat.  Hark  ! 

Art.  XLII.  Part  of  Sec.  3.  '  In  all  cases  where,  the 
crews  of  the  ships  or  vessels  of  the  United  States  shall  be 
separated  from  their  vessels  by  the  latter  being  wrecked,  lost, 
or  destroyed,  all  the  command,  power,  and  authority  given 
to  the  officers  of  such  ships  or  vessels  shall  remain,  and  be  in 
full  force,  as  effectually  as  if  such  ship  or  vessel  were  not  so 
wrecked,  lost,  or  destroyed.'' 

Hear  you  that,  White  Jacket !  I  tell  you  there  is  no 
escape.  Afloat  or  wrecked,  the  Martial  Law  relaxes  not 
its  gripe.  And  though,  by  that  self -same  warrant,  for 
some  offence  therein  set  down,  you  were  indeed  to 
1  suffer  death/  even  then  the  Martial  Law  might  hunt 
you  straight  through  the  other  world,  and  out  again 
at  its  other  end,  following  you  through  all  eternity,  like 
an  endless  thread  on  the  inevitable  track  of  its  own  point, 
passing  unnumbered  needles  through. 


CHAPTER   LXXI 

THE   GENEALOGY   OF  THE   ARTICLES   OF  WAR 

As  the  Articles  of  War  form  the  ark  and  constitution  of 
the  penal  laws  of  the  American  Navy,  in  all  sobriety 
and  earnestness  it  may  be  well  to  glance  at  their  origin. 
Whence  came  they  ?  And  how  is  it  that  one  arm  of 
the  national  defences  of  a  Republic  comes  to  be  ruled 
by  a  Turkish  code,  whose  every  section  almost,  like 
each  of  the  tubes  of  a  revolving  pistol,  fires  nothing 
short  of  death  into  the  heart  of  an  offender  ?  How 
comes  it  that,  by  virtue  of  a  law  solemnly  ratified  by  a 
Congress  of  freemen,  the  representatives  of  freemen, 
thousands  of  Americans  are  subjected  to  the  most  des 
potic  usages,  and,  from  the  dockyards  of  a  Republic, 
absolute  monarchies  are  launched,  with  the  '  glorious 
Stars  and  Stripes  '  for  an  ensign  ?  By  what  unparalleled 
anomaly,  by  what  monstrous  grafting  of  tyranny  upon 
freedom,  did  these  Articles  of  War  ever  come  to  be  so 
much  as  heard  of  in  the  American  Navy  ? 

Whence  came  they  ?  They  cannot  be  the  indigenous 
growth  of  those  political  institutions,  which  are  based 
upon  that  arch-democrat  Thomas  Jefferson's  Declaration 
of  Independence  ?  No  ;  they  are  an  importation  from 
abroad,  even  from  Britain,  whose  laws  we  Americans 
hurled  off  as  tyrannical,  and  yet  retained  the  most 
tyrannical  of  all. 

But  we  stop  not  here  ;  for  these  Articles  of  War  had 
their  congenial  origin  in  a  period  of  the  history  of  Britain 
when  the  Puritan  Republic  had  yielded  to  a  monarchy 

372 


THE  GENEALOGY  OF  THE  ARTICLES  OF  WAR  373 

restored  ;  when  a  hangman  Judge  Jeffreys  sentenced  a 
world's  champion  like  Algernon  Sidney  to  the  block ; 
when  one  of  a  race — by  some  deemed  accursed  of  God — 
even  a  Stuart,  was  on  the  throne  ;  and  a  Stuart,  also, 
was  at  the  head  of  the  Navy,  as  Lord  High  Admiral. 
One,  the  son  of  a  king  beheaded  for  encroachments  upon 
the  rights  of  his  people,  and  the  other,  his  own  brother, 
afterward  a  king,  James  n.,  who  was  hurled  from  the 
throne  for  his  tyranny.  This  is  the  origin  of  the  Articles 
of  War  ;  and  it  carries  with  it  an  unmistakable  clew  to 
their  despotism.1 

Nor  is  it  a  dumb  thing  that  the  men  who,  in  demo 
cratic  Cromwell's  time,  first  proved  to  the  nations  the 
toughness  of  the  British  oak  and  the  hardihood  of  the 
British  sailor — that  in  Cromwell's  time,  whose  fleets 

1  The  first  Naval  Articles  of  War  in  the  English  language  were  passed 
in  the  thirteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  Charles  the  Second,  under  the  title 
of  *  An  Act  for  establishing  Articles  and  Orders  for  (he  regulating  and 
better  Government  of  his  Majesty's  Navies,  Ships-of-  War,  and  Forces  by 
Sea.'  This  act  was  repealed,  and,  so  far  as  concerned  the  officers,  a 
modification  of  it  substituted,  in  the  twenty-second  year  of  the  reign 
of  George  the  Second,  shortly  after  the  Peace  of  Aix-la-Chapelle,  just 
one  century  ago.  This  last  act,  it  is  believed,  comprises,  in  substance, 
the  Articles  of  War  at  this  day  in  force  in  the  British  Navy.  It  is  not 
a  little  curious,  nor  without  meaning,  that  neither  of  these  acts  ex 
plicitly  empowers  an  officer  to  inflict  the  lash.  It  would  almost  seem  as 
if,  in  this  case,  the  British  lawgivers  were  willing  to  leave  such  a  stigma 
out  of  an  organic  statute,  and  bestow  the  power  of  the  lash  in  some  less 
solemn,  and  perhaps  less  public  manner.  Indeed,  the  only  broad  enact 
ments  directly  sanctioning  naval  scourging  at  sea  are  to  be  found  in  the 
United  States  Statute  Book  and  in  the  '  Sea  Laws '  of  the  absolute 
monarch,  Louis  le  Grand,  of  France.* 

Taking  for  their  basis  the  above-mentioned  British  Naval  Code,  and 
engrafting  upon  it  the  positive  scourging  laws,  which  Britain  was  loth 
to  recognise  as  organic  statutes,  our  American  lawgivers,  in  the  year 
1800,  framed  the  Articles  of  War  now  governing  the  American  Navy. 
They  may  be  found  in  the  second  volume  of  the  United  States  Statutes 
at  Large,  under  chapter  xxxiii. — 'An  act  for  the  better  government  of 
the  Navy  of  the  United  States.' 


*  For  reference  to  the  latter  (L'Ord.  de  la  Marine),  vide  Curtis's  Treatise  on 
the  Rights  and  Duties  of  Merchant  Seamen,  according  to  the  General  Maritime 
Law,  part  ii.  c.  1. 


374  WHITE  JACKET 

struck  terror  into  the  cruisers  of  France,  Spain,  Portugal, 
and  Holland,  and  the  corsairs  of  Algiers  and  the  Levant ; 
in  Cromwell's  time,  when  Robert  Blake  swept  the  Narrow 
Seas  of  all  the  keels  of  a  Dutch  admiral  who  insultingly 
carried  a  broom  at  his  foremast ;  it  is  not  a  dumb  thing 
that,  at  a  period  deemed  so  glorious  to  the  British  Navy, 
these  Articles  of  War  were  unknown. 

Nevertheless,  it  is  granted  that  some  laws  or  other 
must  have  governed  Blake's  sailors  at  that  period  ;  but 
they  must  have  been  far  less  severe  than  those  laid  down 
in  the  written  code  which  superseded  them ;  since, 
according  to  the  father-in-law  of  James  n.,  the  historian 
of  the  Rebellion,  the  English  Navy,  prior  to  the  enforce 
ment  of  the  new  code,  was  full  of  officers  and  sailors  who, 
of  all  men,  were  the  most  republican.  Moreover,  the 
same  author  informs  us  that  the  first  work  undertaken 
by  his  respected  son-in-law,  then  Duke  of  York,  upon 
entering  on  the  duties  of  Lord  High  Admiral,  was  to 
have  a  grand  re-christening  of  the  men-of-war,  which 
still  carried  on  their  sterns  names  too  democratic  to  suit 
his  high-tory  ears. 

But  if  these  Articles  of  War  were  unknown  in  Blake's 
time,  and  also  during  the  most  brilliant  period  of  Admiral 
Benbow's  career,  what  inference  must  follow  ?  That  such 
tyrannical  ordinances  are  not  indispensable — even  during 
war — to  the  highest  possible  efficiency  of  a  military 
marine. 


CHAPTER   LXXII 

'  HEREIN  ARE  THE  GOOD  ORDINANCES  OF  THE  SEA,  WHICH 
WISE  MEN,  WHO  VOYAGED  ROUND  THE  WORLD,  GAVE 
TO  OUR  ANCESTORS,  AND  WHICH  CONSTITUTE  THE 
BOOKS  OF  THE  SCIENCE  OF  GOOD  CUSTOMS.' — The 

Consulate  of  the  Sea. 

THE  present  usages  of  the  American  Navy  are  such  that, 
though  there  is  no  government  enactment  to  that  effect, 
yet,  in  many  respects,  its  commanders  seem  virtually 
invested  with  the  power  to  observe  or  violate,  as  seems 
to  them  fit,  several  of  the  Articles  of  War. 

According  to  Article  XV.,  '  No  person  in  the  Navy 
shall  quarrel  with  any  other  person  in  the  Navy,  nor 
use  provoking  or  reproachful  words,  gestures,  or  menaces, 
on  pain  of  such  punishment  as  a  court-martial  shall 
adjudge.' 

'  Provoking  or  reproachful  words ! '  Officers  of  the 
Navy,  answer  me !  Have  you  not,  many  of  you,  a 
thousand  times  violated  this  law,  and  addressed  to  men, 
whose  tongues  were  tied  by  this  very  Article,  language 
which  no  landsman  would  ever  hearken  to,  without  fly 
ing  at  the  throat  of  his  insulter  ?  I  know  that  worse 
words  than  you  ever  used  are  to  be  heard  addressed 
by  a  merchant  captain  to  his  crew ;  but  the  mer 
chant  captain  does  not  live  under  the  XVth  Article 
of  War. 

Not  to  make  an  example  of  him,  nor  to  gratify  any 
personal  feeling,  but  to  furnish  one  certain  illustration  of 
what  is  here  asserted,  I  honestly  declare  that  Captain 

375 


376  WHITE  JACKET 

Claret  of  the  Neversink  repeatedly  violated  this  law  in 
his  own  proper  person. 

According  to  Article  III.,  no  officer,  or  other  person 
in  the  Navy,  shall  be  guilty  of  '  oppression,  fraud,  pro 
fane  swearing,  drunkenness,  or  any  other  scandalous 
conduct/ 

Again  let  me  ask  you,  officers  of  the  Navy,  whether 
many  of  you  have  not  repeatedly,  and  in  more  than 
one  particular,  violated  this  law  ?  And  here,  again, 
as  a  certain  illustration,  I  must  once  more  cite  Cap 
tain  Claret  as  an  offender,  especially  in  the  matter  of 
profane  swearing.  I  must  also  cite  four  of  the  lieu 
tenants,  some  eight  of  the  midshipmen,  and  nearly  all 
the  seamen. 

Additional  Articles  might  be  quoted  that  are  habitu 
ally  violated  by  the  officers,  while  nearly  all  those  ex 
clusively  referring  to  the  sailors  are  unscrupulously 
enforced.  Yet  those  Articles,  by  which  the  sailor  is 
scourged  at  the  gangway,  are  not  one  whit  more  laws 
than  those  other  Articles,  binding  upon  the  officers, 
that  have  become  obsolete  from  immemorial  disuse ; 
while  still  other  Articles,  to  which  the  sailors  alone 
are  obnoxious,  are  observed  or  violated  at  the  caprice  of 
the  captain.  Now,  if  it  be  not  so  much  the  severity 
as  the  certainty  of  punishment  that  deters  from  trans 
gression,  how  fatal  to  all  proper  reverence  for  the 
enactments  of  Congress  must  be  this  disregard  of  its 
statutes. 

Still  more.  This  violation  of  the  law,  on  the  part  of 
the  officers,  in  many  cases  involves  oppression  to  the 
sailor.  But  throughout  the  whole  naval  code,  which 
so  hems  in  the  mariner  by  law  upon  law,  and  which 
invests  the  captain  with  so  much  judicial  and  adminis 
trative  authority  over  him — in  most  cases  entirely  dis 
cretionary — not  one  solitary  clause  is  to  be  found  which 


THE  GOOD  ORDINANCES  OF  THE  SEA     377 

in  any  way  provides  means  for  a  seaman  deeming  him 
self  aggrieved  to  obtain  redress.  Indeed,  both  the 
written  and  unwritten  laws  of  the  American  Navy  are 
as  destitute  of  individual  guarantees  to  the  mass 
of  seamen  as  the  Statute  Book  of  the  despotic  Empire 
of  Russia. 

Who  put  this  great  gulf  between  the  American  captain 
and  the  American  sailor  ?  Or  is  the  captain  a  creature 
of  like  passions  with  ourselves  ?  Or  is  he  an  infallible 
archangel,  incapable  of  the  shadow  of  error  ?  Or  has  a 
sailor  no  mark  of  humanity,  no  attribute  of  manhood, 
that,  bound  hand  and  foot,  he  is  cast  into  an  American 
frigate  shorn  of  all  rights  and  defences,  while  the  notorious 
lawlessness  of  the  commander  has  passed  into  a  proverb, 
familiar  to  man-of-war's  men,  The  law  was  not  made 
for  the  captain !  Indeed,  he  may  almost  be  said  to 
put  off  the  citizen  when  he  touches  his  quarter 
deck  ;  and,  almost  exempt  from  the  law  of  the  land 
himself,  he  comes  down  upon  others  with  a  judicial 
severity  unknown  on  the  national  soil.  With  the 
Articles  of  War  in  one  hand,  and  the  cat-o'-nine-tails 
in  the  other,  he  stands  an  undignified  parody  upon 
Mohammed  enforcing  Moslemism  with  the  sword  and 
the  Koran. 

The  concluding  sections  of  the  Articles  of  War  treat 
of  the  naval  courts-martial  before  which  officers  are  tried 
for  serious  offences  as  well  as  the  seamen.  The  oath 
administered  to  members  of  these  courts — which  some 
times  sit  upon  matters  of  life  and  death — explicitly  en 
joins  that  the  members  shall  not  'at  any  time  divulge 
the  vote  or  opinion  of  any  particular  member  of  the  court, 
unless  required  so  to  do  before  a  court  of  justice  in  due 
course  of  law.1 

Here,  then,  is  a  Council  of  Ten  and  a  Star  Chamber 
indeed !  Remember,  also,  that  though  the  sailor  is 


378  WHITE  JACKET 

sometimes  tried  for  his  life  before  a  tribunal  like  this, 
in  no  case  do  his  fellow-sailors,  his  peers,  form  part 
of  the  court.  Yet  that  a  man  should  be  tried  by 
his  peers  is  the  fundamental  principle  of  all  civilised 
jurisprudence.  And  not  only  tried  by  his  peers,  but 
his  peers  must  be  unanimous  to  render  a  verdict ; 
whereas,  in  a  court-martial,  the  concurrence  of  a 
majority  of  conventional  and  social  superiors  is  all 
that  is  requisite. 

In  the  English  Navy,  it  is  said,  they  had  a  law  which 
authorised  the  sailor  to  appeal,  if  he  chose,  from  the 
decision  of  the  captain — even  in  a  comparatively  trivial 
case — to  the  higher  tribunal  of  a  court-martial.  It  was 
an  English  seaman  who  related  this  to  me.  When  I  said 
that  such  a  law  must  be  a  fatal  clog  to  the  exercise  of  the 
penal  power  in  the  captain,  he,  in  substance,  told  me  the 
following  story. 

A  topman  guilty  of  drunkenness  being  sent  to  the 
gratings,  and  the  scourge  about  to  be  inflicted,  he  turned 
round  and  demanded  a  court-martial.  The  captain 
smiled,  and  ordered  him  to  be  taken  down  and  put  into 
the  '  brig.'  There  he  was  kept  in  irons  some  weeks, 
when,  despairing  of  being  liberated,  he  offered  to  com 
promise  at  two  dozen  lashes.  '  Sick  of  your  bargain, 
then,  are  you  ?  '  said  the  captain.  '  No,  no  !  a  court- 
martial  you  demanded,  and  a  court-martial  you  shall 
have  !  '  Being  at  last  tried  before  the  bar  of  quarter 
deck  officers,  he  was  condemned  to  two  hundred  lashes. 
What  for  ?  for  his  having  been  drunk  ?  No  !  for  his 
having  had  the  insolence  to  appeal  from  an  authority,  in 
maintaining  which  the  men  who  tried  and  condemned 
him  had  so  strong  a  sympathetic  interest. 

Whether  this  story  be  wholly  true  or  not,  or  whether 
the  particular  law  involved  prevails,  or  ever  did  prevail, 
in  the  English  Navy,  the  thing,  nevertheless,  illustrates  the 


THE  GOOD  ORDINANCES  OF  THE  SEA     379 

ideas  that  man-of-war's  men  themselves  have  touching 
the  tribunals  in  question. 

What  can  be  expected  from  a  court  whose  deeds  are 
done  in  the  darkness  of  the  recluse  courts  of  the  Spanish 
Inquisition  ?  when  that  darkness  is  solemnised  by  an 
oath  on  the  Bible  ?  when  an  oligarchy  of  epaulets  sits 
upon  the  bench,  and  a  plebeian  topman,  without  a  jury, 
stands  judicially  naked  at  the  bar  ? 

In  view  of  these  things,  and  especially  in  view  of  the 
fact  that,  in  several  cases,  the  degree  of  punishment  in 
flicted  upon  a  man-of-war's  man  is  absolutely  left  to 
the  discretion  of  the  court,  what  shame  should  American 
legislators  take  to  themselves,  that  with  perfect  truth 
we  may  apply  to  the  entire  body  of  American  man-of- 
war's  men  that  infallible  principle  of  Sir  Edward  Coke  : 
'  It  is  one  of  the  genuine  marks  of  servitude  to  have  the  law 
either  concealed  or  precarious.''  But  still  better  may  we 
subscribe  to  the  saying  of  Sir  Matthew  Hale  in  his 
History  of  the  Common  Law,  that c  the  Martial  Law,  being 
based  upon  no  settled  principles,  is,  in  truth  and  reality, 
no  law,  but  something  indulged  rather  than  allowed  as  a 
law.' 

I  know  it  may  be  said  that  the  whole  nature  of  this 
naval  code  is  purposely  adapted  to  the  war  exigencies  of 
the  Navy.  But  waiving  the  grave  question  that  might 
be  raised  concerning  the  moral,  not  judicial,  lawfulness 
of  this  arbitrary  code,  even  in  time  of  war  ;  be  it  asked, 
why  is  it  in  force  during  a  time  of  peace  ?  The  United 
States  has  now  existed  as  a  nation  upward  of  seventy 
years,  and  in  all  that  time  the  alleged  necessity  for  the 
operation  of  the  naval  code — in  cases  deemed  capital — 
has  only  existed  during  a  period  of  two  or  three  years  at 
most. 

Some  may  urge  that  the  severest  operations  of  the 
code  are  tacitly  made  null  in  time  of  peace.  But  though 


380  WHITE  JACKET 

with  respect  to  several  of  the  Articles  this  holds  true, 
yet  at  any  time  any  and  all  of  them  may  be  legally  en 
forced.  Nor  have  there  been  wanting  recent  instances 
illustrating  the  spirit  of  this  code,  even  in  cases  where 
the  letter  of  the  code  was  not  altogether  observed.  The 
well-known  case  of  a  United  States  brig  furnishes  a 
memorable  example,  which  at  any  moment  may  be  re 
peated.  Three  men,  in  a  time  of  peace,  were  then  hung 
at  the  yard-arm,  merely  because,  in  the  captain's  judg 
ment,  it  became  necessary  to  hang  them.  To  this  day 
the  question  of  their  complete  guilt  is  socially  dis 
cussed. 

How  shall  we  characterise  such  a  deed  ?  Says  Black- 
stone,  *  If  anyone  that  hath  commission  of  martial 
authority  doth,  in  time  of  peace,  hang,  or  otherwise 
execute  any  man  by  colour  of  martial  law,  this  is 
murder  ;  for  it  is  against  Magna  Charta.' l 

Magna  Charta  !  We  moderns,  who  may  be  landsmen, 
may  justly  boast  of  civil  immunities  not  possessed  by 
our  forefathers  ;  but  our  remoter  forefathers  who  hap 
pened  to  be  mariners  may  straighten  themselves  even  in 
their  ashes  to  think  that  their  lawgivers  were  wiser  and 
more  humane  in  their  generation  than  our  lawgivers 
in  ours.  Compare  the  sea -laws  of  our  Navy  with  the 
Roman  and  Rhodian  ocean  ordinances  ;  compare  them 
with  The  Consulate  of  the  Sea  ;  compare  them  with  the 
laws  of  the  Hanse  Towns  ;  compare  them  with  the 
ancient  Wisbury  laws.  In  the  last  we  find  that  they 
were  ocean  democrats  in  those  days.  *  If  he  strikes, 
he  ought  to  receive  blow  for  blow.'  Thus  speak 
out  the  Wisbury  laws  concerning  a  Gothland  sea- 
captain. 

In  final  reference  to  all  that  has  been  said  in  previous 
chapters  touching  the  severity  and  unusualness  of  the 

1  Commentaries,  b.  i.  c.  xiii. 


THE  GOOD  ORDINANCES  OF  THE  SEA     381 

laws  of  the  American  Navy,  and  the  large  authority 
vested  in  its  commanding  officers,  be  it  here  observed 
that  White  Jacket  is  not  unaware  of  the  fact  that  the 
responsibility  of  an  officer  commanding  at  sea — whether 
in  the  merchant  service  or  the  national  marine — is  un 
paralleled  by  that  of  any  other  relation  in  which  man 
may  stand  to  man.  Nor  is  he  unmindful  that  both 
wisdom  and  humanity  dictate  that,  from  the  peculiarity 
of  his  position,  a  sea -officer  in  command  should  be  clothed 
with  a  degree  of  authority  and  discretion  inadmissible 
in  any  master  ashore.  But,  at  the  same  time,  these 
principles — recognised  by  all  writers  on  maritime  law — 
have  undoubtedly  furnished  warrant  for  clothing  modern 
sea-commanders  and  naval  courts-martial  with  powers 
which  exceed  the  due  limits  of  reason  and  necessity. 
Nor  is  this  the  only  instance  where  right  and  salutary 
principles,  in  themselves  almost  self-evident  and  in 
fallible,  have  been  advanced  in  justification  of  things 
which  in  themselves  are  just  as  self -evidently  wrong 
and  pernicious. 

Be  it  here,  once  and  for  all,  understood,  that  no  senti 
mental  and  theoretic  love  for  the  common  sailor  ;  no 
romantic  belief  in  that  peculiar  noble-heartedness  and 
exaggerated  generosity  of  disposition  fictitiously  im 
puted  to  him  in  novels ;  and  no  prevailing  desire 
to  gain  the  reputation  of  being  his  friend,  have 
actuated  me  in  anything  I  have  said,  in  any  part 
of  this  work,  touching  the  gross  oppression  under 
which  I  know  that  the  sailor  suffers.  Indifferent  as 
to  who  may  be  the  parties  concerned,  I  but  desire 
to  see  wrong  things  righted,  and  equal  justice  adminis 
tered  to  all. 

Nor,  as  has  been  elsewhere  hinted,  is  the  general 
ignorance  or  depravity  of  any  race  of  men  to  be  alleged 
as  an  apology  for  tyranny  over  them.  On  the  contrary, 


382  WHITE  JACKET 

it  cannot  admit  of  a  reasonable  doubt,  in  any  unbiased 
mind  conversant  with  the  interior  life  of  a  man-of-war, 
that  most  of  the  sailor  iniquities  practised  therein  are 
indirectly  to  be  ascribed  to  the  morally  debasing  effects 
of  the  unjust,  despotic,  and  degrading  laws  under  which 
the  man-of-war's  man  lives. 


CHAPTER   LXXIII 

NIGHT  AND   DAY   GAMBLING  IN   A  MAN-OF-WAR 

MENTION  has  already  been  made  that  the  game  of 
draughts,  or  checkers,  was  permitted  to  be  played  on 
board  the  Neversink.  At  the  present  time,  while  there 
was  little  or  no  ship  work  to  be  done,  and  all  hands,  in 
high  spirits,  were  sailing  homeward  over  the  warm, 
smooth  sea  of  the  Tropics  ;  so  numerous  became  the 
players,  scattered  about  the  decks,  that  our  first  lieu 
tenant  used  ironically  to  say  that  it  was  a  pity  they 
were  not  tessellated  with  squares  of  white  and  black 
marble,  for  the  express  benefit  and  convenience  of  the 
players.  Had  this  gentleman  had  his  way,  our  checker 
boards  would  very  soon  have  been  pitched  out  of  the 
ports.  But  the  captain — unusually  lenient  in  some 
things — permitted  them,  and  so  Mr.  Bridewell  was  fain 
to  hold  his  peace. 

But,  although  this  one  game  was  allowable  in  the 
frigate,  all  kinds  of  gambling  were  strictly  interdicted, 
under  the  penalty  of  the  gangway  ;  nor  were  cards  or 
dice  tolerated  in  any  way  whatever.  This  regulation 
was  indispensable,  for,  of  all  human  beings,  man-of-war's 
men  are  perhaps  the  most  inclined  to  gambling.  The 
reason  must  be  obvious  to  anyone  who  reflects  upon 
their  condition  on  shipboard.  And  gambling — the  most 
mischievous  of  vices  anywhere — in  a  man-of-war  oper 
ates  still  more  perniciously  than  on  shore.  But  quite  as 
often  as  the  law  against  smuggling  spirits  is  transgressed 

383 


384  WHITE  JACKET 

by  the  unscrupulous  sailors,  the  statutes  against  cards 
and  dice  are  evaded. 

Sable  night,  which,  since  the  beginning  of  the  world, 
has  winked  and  looked  on  at  so  many  deeds  of  iniquity 
— night  is  the  time  usually  selected  for  their  operations 
by  man-of-war  gamblers.  The  place  pitched  upon  is 
generally  the  berth-deck,  where  the  hammocks  are 
swung,  and  which  is  lighted  so  stintedly  as  not  to  dis 
turb  the  sleeping  seamen  with  any  obtruding  glare.  In 
so  spacious  an  area  the  two  lanterns  swinging  from  the 
stanchions  diffuse  a  subdued  illumination,  like  a  night 
taper  in  the  apartment  of  some  invalid.  Owing  to  their 
position,  also,  these  lanterns  are  far  from  shedding  an 
impartial  light,  however  dim,  but  fling  long  angular  rays 
here  and  there,  like  burglars'  dark-lanterns  in  the  fifty- 
acre  vaults  of  the  West  India  Docks  on  the  Thames. 

It  may  well  be  imagined,  therefore,  how  well  adapted 
is  this  mysterious  and  subterranean  Hall  of  Eblis  to  the 
clandestine  proceedings  of  gamblers,  especially  as  the 
hammocks  not  only  hang  thickly,  but  many  of  them 
swing  very  low,  within  two  feet  of  the  floor,  thus  form 
ing  innumerable  little  canvas  glens,  grottoes,  nooks, 
corners,  and  crannies,  where  a  good  deal  of  wickedness 
may  be  practised  by  the  wary  with  considerable  impunity. 

Now  the  master-at-arms,  assisted  by  his  mates,  the 
ship's  corporals,  reigns  supreme  in  these  bowels  of  the 
ship.  Throughout  the  night  these  policemen  relieve 
each  other  at  standing  guard  over  the  premises  ;  and, 
except  when  the  watches  are  called,  they  sit  in  the  midst 
of  a  profound  silence,  only  invaded  by  trumpeter's 
snores,  or  the  ramblings  of  some  old  sheet-anchor  man 
in  his  sleep. 

The  two  ship's  corporals  went  among  the  sailors  by 
the  names  of  Leggs  and  Pounce  ;  Pounce  had  been  a 
policeman,  it  was  said,  in  Liverpool ;  Leggs,  a  turnkey 


GAMBLING  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR  385 

attached  to  '  The  Tombs/  in  New  York.  Hence  their 
education  eminently  fitted  them  for  their  stations  ;  and 
Bland,  the  master-at-arms,  ravished  with  their  dexterity 
in  prying  out  offenders,  used  to  call  them  his  two  right 
hands. 

When  man-of-war's  men  desire  to  gamble,  they  ap 
point  the  hour,  and  select  some  certain  corner,  in  some 
certain  shadow,  behind  some  certain  hammock.  They 
then  contribute  a  small  sum  toward  a  joint  fund  to  be 
invested  in  a  bribe  for  some  argus-eyed  shipmate,  who 
shall  play  the  part  of  a  spy  upon  the  master-at-arms 
and  corporals  while  the  gaming  is  in  progress.  In  nine 
cases  out  of  ten  these  arrangements  are  so  cunning  and 
comprehensive,  that  the  gamblers,  eluding  all  vigilance, 
conclude  their  game  unmolested.  But  now  and  then, 
seduced  into  unwariness,  or  perhaps,  from  parsimony, 
being  unwilling  to  employ  the  services  of  a  spy,  they 
are  suddenly  lighted  upon  by  the  constables,  remorse 
lessly  collared,  and  dragged  into  the  brig,  there  to  await 
a  dozen  lashes  in  the  morning. 

Several  times  at  midnight  I  have  been  startled  out  of 
a  sound  sleep  by  a  sudden,  violent  rush  under  my  ham 
mock,  caused  by  the  abrupt  breaking  up  of  some  nest  of 
gamblers,  who  have  scattered  in  all  directions,  brushing 
under  the  tiers  of  swinging  pallets,  and  setting  them  all 
in  a  rocking  commotion. 

It  is,  however,  while  laying  in  port  that  gambling 
most  thrives  in  a  man-of-war.  Then  the  men  frequently 
practise  their  dark  deeds  in  the  light  of  the  day,  and 
the  additional  guards  which,  at  such  times,  they  deem 
indispensable,  are  not  unworthy  of  note.  More  especially, 
their  extra  precautions  in  engaging  the  services  of  several 
spies,  necessitate  a  considerable  expenditure,  so  that,  in 
port,  the  diversion  of  gambling  rises  to  the  dignity  of  a 
nabob  luxury. 

2s 


386  WHITE  JACKET 

During  the  day  the  master-at-arms  and  his  corporals 
are  continually  prowling  about  on  all  three  decks,  eager 
to  spy  out  iniquities.  At  one  time,  for  example,  you 
see  Leggs  switching  his  magisterial  ratan,  and  lurking 
round  the  foremast  on  the  spar-deck  ;  the  next  moment, 
perhaps,  he  is  three  decks  down,  out  of  sight,  prowling 
among  the  cable-tiers.  Just  so  with  his  master,  and 
Pounce  his  coadjutor  ;  they  are  here,  there,  and  every 
where,  seemingly  gifted  with  ubiquity. 

In  order  successfully  to  carry  on  their  proceedings  by 
day,  the  gamblers  must  see  to  it  that  each  of  these  con 
stables  is  relentlessly  dogged  wherever  he  goes  ;  so  that, 
in  case  of  his  approach  toward  the  spot  where  themselves 
are  engaged,  they  may  be  warned  of  the  fact  in  time  to 
make  good  their  escape.  Accordingly,  light  and  active 
scouts  are  selected  to  follow  the  constable  about.  From 
their  youthful  alertness  and  activity,  the  boys  of  the 
mizen-top  are  generally  chosen  for  this  purpose. 

But  this  is  not  all.  On  board  of  most  men-of-war 
there  is  a  set  of  sly,  knavish  foxes  among  the  crew, 
destitute  of  every  principle  of  honour,  and  on  a  par  with 
Irish  informers.  In  man-of-war  parlance,  they  come 
under  the  denomination  of  fancy  men  and  white  mice. 
They  are  called  fancy  men  because,  from  their  zeal  in 
craftily  reporting  offenders,  they  are  presumed  to  be  re 
garded  with  high  favour  by  some  of  the  officers.  Though 
it  is  seldom  that  these  informers  can  be  certainly 
individualised,  so  secret  and  subtle  are  they  in  laying 
their  information,  yet  certain  of  the  crew,  and  especially 
certain  of  the  marines,  are  invariably  suspected  to  be 
fancy  men  and  white  mice,  and  are  accordingly  more  or 
less  hated  by  their  comrades. 

Now,  in  addition  to  having  an  eye  on  the  master-at- 
arms  and  his  aids,  the  day -gamblers  must  see  to  it  that 
every  person  suspected  of  being  a  white  mouse  or  fancy 


GAMBLING  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR  387 

man  is  likewise  dogged  wherever  he  goes.  Additional 
scouts  are  retained  constantly  to  snuff  at  their  trail. 
But  the  mysteries  of  man-of-war  vice  are  wonderful ; 
and  it  is  now  to  be  recorded  that,  from  long  habit  and 
observation,  and  familiarity  with  the  guardo  moves  and 
manoeuvres  of  a  frigate,  the  master-at-arms  and  his  aids 
can  almost  invariably  tell  when  any  gambling  is  going 
on  by  day  ;  though,  in  the  crowded  vessel,  abounding 
in  decks,  tops,  dark  places,  and  outlandish  corners  of  all 
sorts,  they  may  not  be  able  to  pounce  upon  the  identical 
spot  where  the  gamblers  are  hidden. 

During  the  period  that  Bland  was  suspended  from  his 
office  as  master-at-arms,  a  person  who,  among  the  sailors, 
went  by  the  name  of  Sneak,  having  been  long  suspected 
to  have  been  a  white  mouse,  was  put  in  Bland's  place. 
He  proved  a  hang-dog,  sidelong  catch-thief,  but  gifted 
with  a  marvellous  perseverance  in  ferreting  out  culprits  ; 
following  in  their  track  like  an  inevitable  Cuba  blood 
hound,  with  his  noiseless  nose.  When  disconcerted, 
however,  you  sometimes  heard  his  bay. 

'  The  muffled  dice  are  somewhere  around,'  Sneak 
would  say  to  his  aids  ;  '  there  are  them  three  chaps, 
there,  been  dogging  me  about  for  the  last  half -hour. 
I  say,  Pounce,  has  anyone  been  scouting  around  you 
this  morning  ?  ' 

'  Four  on  'em/  says  Pounce.  '  I  know'd  it ;  I  know'd 
the  muffled  dice  was  rattlin'  !  ' 

'  Leggs  !  '  says  the  master-at-arms  to  his  other  aid, 
*  Leggs,  how  is  it  with  you — any  spies  ?  ' 

'  Ten  on  'em,'  says  Leggs.  *  There  's  one  on  'em  now 
— that  fellow  stitching  a  hat/ 

*  Halloo,  you,  sir  !  '  cried  the  master-at-arms,  '  top 
your  boom  and  sail  large,  now.  If  I  see  you  about  me 
again,  I  '11  have  you  up  to  the  mast.' 

4  What  am  I  a-doin'   now  ?  '    says  the   hat-stitcher, 


388  WHITE  JACKET 

with  a  face  as  long  as  a  rope-walk.  '  Can't  a  feller  be 
workin'  here,  without  being  'spected  of  Tom  Coxe's 
traverse,  up  one  ladder  and  down  t'  other  ?  ' 

'  Oh,  I  know  the  moves,  sir  ;  I  have  been  on  board  a 
guardo.  Top  your  boom,  I  say,  and  be  off,  or  I  '11  have 
you  hauled  up  and  riveted  in  a  clinch — both  fore-tacks 
over  the  main-yard,  and  no  bloody  knife  to  cut  the  seiz 
ing.  Sheer  !  or  I  '11  pitch  into  you  like  a  shin  of  beef 
into  a  beggar's  wallet.' 

It  is  often  observable  that,  in  vessels  of  all  kinds,  the 
men  who  talk  the  most  sailor  lingo  are  the  least  sailor- 
like  in  reality.  You  may  sometimes  hear  even  marines 
jerk  out  more  salt  phrases  than  the  captain  of  the  fore 
castle  himself.  On  the  other  hand,  when  not  actively 
engaged  in  his  vocation,  you  would  take  the  best  speci 
men  of  a  seaman  for  a  landsman.  When  you  see  a  fellow 
yawing  about  the  docks  like  a  homeward-bound  India- 
man,  a  long  commodore's  pennant  of  black  ribbon  flying 
from  his  mast-head,  and  fetching  up  at  a  grog-shop  with 
a  slew  of  his  hull,  as  if  an  admiral  were  coming  alongside 
a  three-decker  in  his  barge,  you  may  put  that  man  down 
for  what  man-of-war's  men  call  a  damn-my-eyes  tar, 
that  is,  a  humbug.  And  many  damn-my-eyes  humbugs 
there  are  in  this  man-of-war  world  of  ours. 


CHAPTER   LXXIV 

THE   MAIN-TOP  AT  NIGHT 

THE  whole  of  our  run  from  Rio  to  the  Line  was  one 
delightful  yachting,  so  far  as  fine  weather  and  the  ship's 
sailing  were  concerned.  It  was  especially  pleasant  when 
our  quarter- watch  lounged  in  the  main-top,  diverting 
ourselves  in  many  agreeable  ways.  Removed  from  the 
immediate  presence  of  the  officers,  we  there  harmlessly 
enjoyed  ourselves,  more  than  in  any  other  part  of  the 
ship.  By  day,  many  of  us  were  very  industrious,  making 
hats  or  mending  our  clothes.  But  by  night  we  became 
more  romantically  inclined. 

Often  Jack  Chase,  an  enthusiastic  admirer  of  sea- 
scenery,  would  direct  our  attention  to  the  moonlight 
on  the  waves,  by  fine  snatches  from  his  catalogue  of 
poets.  I  shall  never  forget  the  lyric  air  with  which,  one 
morning,  at  dawn  of  day,  when  all  the  east  was  flushed 
with  red  and  gold,  he  stood  leaning  against  the  topmast 
shrouds,  and,  stretching  his  bold  hand  over  the  sea, 
exclaimed,  *  Here  comes  Aurora  :  topmates,  see  !  '  And, 
in  a  liquid,  long-lingering  tone,  he  recited  the  lines  : — 

1  With  gentle  hand,  as  seeming  oft  to  pause, 
The  purple  curtains  of  the  morn  she  draws.' 

'  Commodore  Camoens,  White  Jacket. — But  bear  a 
hand  there  ;  we  must  rig  out  that  stun' -sail  boom — 
the  wind  is  shifting.' 

From  our  lofty  perch,  of  a  moonlight  night,  the  frigate 
itself  was  a  glorious  sight.  She  was  going  large  before 

389 


390  WHITE  JACKET 

the  wind,  her  stun'-sails  set  on  both  sides,  so  that  the 
canvas  on  the  mainmast  and  foremast  presented  the 
appearance  of  two  majestic,  tapering  pyramids,  more 
than  a  hundred  feet  broad  at  the  base,  and  terminating 
in  the  clouds  with  the  light  copestone  of  the  royals. 
That  immense  area  of  snow-white  canvas  sliding  along 
the  sea  was  indeed  a  magnificent  spectacle.  The  three 
shrouded  masts  looked  like  the  apparitions  of  three 
gigantic  Turkish  Emirs  striding  over  the  ocean. 

Nor,  at  times,  was  the  sound  of  music  wanting,  to  aug 
ment  the  poetry  of  the  scene.  The  whole  band  would 
be  assembled  on  the  poop,  regaling  the  officers,  and  in 
cidentally  ourselves,  with  their  fine  old  airs.  To  these, 
some  of  us  would  occasionally  dance  in  the  top,  which 
was  almost  as  large  as  an  ordinary-sized  parlour.  When 
the  instrumental  melody  of  the  band  was  not  to  be  had, 
our  nightingales  mustered  their  voices  and  gave  us  a 
song. 

Upon  these  occasions  Jack  Chase  was  often  called  out, 
and  regaled  us,  in  his  own  free  and  noble  style,  with  the 
'  Spanish  Ladies  ' — a  favourite  thing  with  British  man- 
of-war's  men — and  many  other  salt-sea  ballads  and 
ditties,  including 


'  Sir  Patrick  Spens  was  the  best  sailor 
That  ever  sailed  the  sea.' 


Also, 


'  And  three  times  around  spun  our  gallant  ship ; 

Three  times  around  spun  she  ; 
Three  times  around  spun  our  gallant  ship, 
And  she  went  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea — 

The  sea,  the  sea,  the  sea, 
And  she  went  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea ! ' 

These  songs  would  be  varied  by  sundry  yarns  and 
twisters  of  the  topmen.     And  it  was  at  these  times  that 


THE  MAIN-TOP  AT  NIGHT  391 

I  always  endeavoured  to  draw  out  the  oldest  Tritons 
into  narratives  of  the  war-service  they  had  seen.  There 
were  but  few  of  them,  it  is  true,  who  had  been  in  action  ; 
but  that  only  made  their  narratives  the  more  valuable. 

There  was  an  old  negro  who  went  by  the  name  of 
Tawney,  a  sheet-anchor  man,  whom  we  often  invited 
into  our  top  of  tranquil  nights,  to  hear  him  discourse. 
He  was  a  staid  and  sober  seaman,  very  intelligent,  with 
a  fine  frank  bearing,  one  of  the  best  men  in  the  ship, 
and  held  in  high  estimation  by  everyone. 

It  seems  that  during  the  last  war  between  England 
and  America  he  had,  with  several  others,  been  '  im 
pressed  '  upon  the  high  seas  out  of  a  New  England 
merchantman.  The  ship  that  impressed  him  was  an 
English  frigate,  the  Macedonian,  afterward  taken  by 
the  Neversink,  the  ship  in  which  we  were  sailing. 

It  was  the  holy  Sabbath,  according  to  Tawney,  and, 
as  the  Briton  bore  down  on  the  American — her  men  at 
their  quarters — Tawney  and  his  countrymen,  who  hap 
pened  to  be  stationed  at  the  quarter-deck  battery,  re 
spectfully  accosted  the  captain — an  old  man  by  the  name 
of  Cardan — as  he  passed  them,  in  his  rapid  promenade, 
his  spyglass  under  his  arm.  Again  they  assured  him 
that  they  were  not  Englishmen,  and  that  it  was  a 
most  bitter  thing  to  lift  their  hands  against  the  flag  of 
that  country  which  harboured  the  mothers  that  bore 
them.  They  conjured  him  to  release  them  from  their 
guns,  and  allow  them  to  remain  neutral  during  the  con 
flict.  But  when  a  ship  of  any  nation  is  running  into 
action,  it  is  no  time  for  argument,  small  time  for  justice, 
and  not  much  time  for  humanity.  Snatching  a  pistol 
from  the  belt  of  a  boarder  standing  by,  the  captain 
levelled  it  at  the  heads  of  the  three  sailors,  and  com 
manded  them  instantly  to  their  quarters,  under  penalty 
of  being  shot  on  the  spot.  So,  side  by  side  with  his 


392  WHITE  JACKET 

country's  foes,  Tawney  and  his  companions  toiled  at 
the  guns,  and  fought  out  the  fight  to  the  last ;  with  the 
exception  of  one  of  them,  who  was  killed  at  his  post  by 
one  of  his  own  country's  balls. 

At  length,  having  lost  her  fore  and  main  topmasts, 
and  her  mizen-mast  having  been  shot  away  to  the 
deck,  and  her  fore-yard  lying  in  two  pieces  on  her  shat 
tered  forecastle,  and  in  a  hundred  places  having  been 
hulled  with  round  shot,  the  English  frigate  was  reduced 
to  the  last  extremity.  Captain  Cardan  ordered  his  signal- 
quarter-master  to  strike  the  flag. 

Tawney  was  one  of  those  who,  at  last,  helped  pull 
him  on  board  the  Neversink.  As  he  touched  the  deck, 
Cardan  saluted  Decatur,  the  hostile  commander,  and 
offered  his  sword ;  but  it  was  courteously  declined. 
Perhaps  the  victor  remembered  the  dinner-parties  that 
he  and  the  Englishman  had  enjoyed  together  in  Norfolk, 
just  previous  to  the  breaking  out  of  hostilities — and 
while  both  were  in  command  of  the  very  frigates  now 
crippled  on  the  sea.  The  Macedonian,  it  seems,  had  gone 
into  Norfolk  with  dispatches.  Then  they  had  laughed 
and  joked  over  their  wine,  and  a  wager  of  a  beaver  hat 
was  said  to  have  been  made  between  them  upon  the 
event  of  the  hostile  meeting  of  their  ships. 

Gazing  upon  the  heavy  batteries  before  him,  Cardan 
said  to  Decatur,  '  This  is  a  seventy-four,  not  a  frigate  ; 
no  wonder  the  day  is  yours  !  ' 

This  remark  was  founded  upon  the  Neversink's  superi 
ority  in  guns.  The  Never  sink's  main-deck  batteries  then 
consisted,  as  now,  of  twenty-four-pounders  ;  the  Mace 
donian's  of  only  eighteens.  In  all,  the  Neversink  num 
bered  fifty -four  guns  and  four  hundred  and  fifty  men  ; 
the  Macedonian,  forty -nine  guns  and  three  hundred  men  ; 
a  very  great  disparity,  which,  united  to  the  other  circum 
stances  of  this  action,  deprives  the  victory  of  all  claims 


THE  MAIN-TOP  AT  NIGHT  393 

to  glory  beyond  those  that  might  be  set  up  by  a  river- 
horse  getting  the  better  of  a  seal. 

But  if  Tawney  spoke  truth — and  he  was  a  truth-telling 
man  —  this  fact  seemed  counterbalanced  by  a  circum 
stance  he  related.  When  the  guns  of  the  Englishman 
were  examined,  after  the  engagement,  in  more  than  one 
instance  the  wad  was  found  rammed  against  the  cartridge, 
without  intercepting  the  ball.  And  though,  in  a  frantic 
sea-fight,  such  a  thing  might  be  imputed  to  hurry  and 
remissness,  yet  Tawney,  a  stickler  for  his  tribe,  always 
ascribed  it  to  quite  a  different  and  less  honourable  cause. 
But,  even  granting  the  cause  he  assigned  to  have  been 
the  true  one,  it  does  not  involve  anything  inimical  to  the 
general  valour  displayed  by  the  British  crew.  Yet,  from 
all  that  may  be  learned  from  candid  persons  who  have 
been  in  sea-fights,  there  can  be  but  little  doubt  that  on 
board  of  all  ships,  of  whatever  nation,  in  time  of  action, 
no  very  small  number  of  the  men  are  exceedingly  nervous, 
to  say  the  least,  at  the  guns  ;  ramming  and  sponging  at 
a  venture.  And  what  special  patriotic  interest  could 
an  impressed  man,  for  instance,  take  in  a  fight,  into 
which  he  had  been  dragged  from  the  arms  of  his  wife  ? 
Or  is  it  to  be  wondered  at  that  impressed  English  seamen 
have  not  scrupled,  in  time  of  war,  to  cripple  the  arm  that 
has  enslaved  them  ? 

During  the  same  general  war  which  prevailed  at  and 
previous  to  the  period  of  the  frigate  action  here  spoken 
of,  a  British  flag-officer,  in  writing  to  the  Admiralty, 
said,  '  Everything  appears  to  be  quiet  in  the  fleet ;  but, 
in  preparing  for  battle  last  week,  several  of  the  guns  in 
the  after  part  of  the  ship  were  found  to  be  spiked  '  ; 
that  is  to  say,  rendered  useless.  Who  had  spiked  them  ? 
The  dissatisfied  seamen.  Is  it  altogether  improbable, 
then,  that  the  guns  to  which  Tawney  referred  were 
manned  by  men  who  purposely  refrained  from  making 


394  WHITE  JACKET 

them  tell  on  the  foe  ;  that,  in  this  one  action,  the  victory 
America  gained  was  partly  won  for  her  by  the  sulky 
insubordination  of  the  enemy  himself  ? 

During  this  same  period  of  general  war,  it  was  fre 
quently  the  case  that  the  guns  of  English  armed  ships 
were  found  in  the  mornings  with  their  breechings  cut 
overnight.  This  maiming  of  the  guns,  and  for  the 
time  incapacitating  them,  was  only  to  be  imputed  to 
that  secret  spirit  of  hatred  to  the  service  which  induced 
the  spiking  above  referred  to.  But  even  in  cases  where 
no  deep-seated  dissatisfaction  was  presumed  to  prevail 
among  the  crew,  and  where  a  seaman,  in  time  of  action, 
impelled  by  pure  fear,  '  shirked  from  his  gun  '  ;  it  seems 
but  flying  in  the  face  of  Him  who  made  such  a  seaman 
what  he  constitutionally  was,  to  sew  coward  upon  his 
back,  and  degrade  and  agonise  the  already  trembling 
wretch  in  numberless  other  ways.  Nor  seems  it  a 
practice  warranted  by  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  for  the 
officer  of  a  battery,  in  time  of  battle,  to  stand  over  the 
men  with  his  drawn  sword  (as  was  done  in  the  Macedonian), 
and  run  through  on  the  spot  the  first  seaman  who  showed 
a  semblance  of  fear.  Tawney  told  me  that  he  distinctly 
heard  this  order  given  by  the  English  captain  to  his 
officers  of  divisions.  Were  the  secret  history  of  all  sea- 
fights  written,  the  laurels  of  sea-heroes  would  turn  to 
ashes  on  their  brows. 

And  how  nationally  disgraceful,  in  every  conceivable 
point  of  view,  is  the  IVth  of  our  American  Articles  of 
War  :  '  If  any  person  in  the  Navy  shall  pusillanimously 
cry  for  quarter,  he  shall  suffer  death.'  Thus,  with  death 
before  his  face  from  the  foe,  and  death  behind  his  back 
from  his  countrymen,  the  best  valour  of  a  man-of-war's 
man  can  never  assume  the  merit  of  a  noble  spontaneous- 
ness.  In  this,  as  in  every  other  case,  the  Articles  of  War 
hold  out  no  reward  for  good  conduct,  but  only  compel 


THE  MAIN-TOP  AT  NIGHT  395 

the  sailor  to  fight,  like  a  hired  murderer,  for  his  pay,  by 
digging  his  grave  before  his  eyes  if  he  hesitates. 

But  this  Article  IV.  is  open  to  still  graver  objections. 
Courage  is  the  most  common  and  vulgar  of  the  virtues  ; 
the  only  one  shared  with  us  by  the  beasts  of  the  field  ; 
the  one  most  apt,  by  excess,  to  run  into  viciousness. 
And  since  Nature  generally  takes  away  with  one  hand 
to  counterbalance  her  gifts  with  the  other,  excessive 
animal  courage,  in  many  cases,  only  finds  room  in  a 
character  vacated  of  loftier  things.  But  in  a  naval 
officer,  animal  courage  is  exalted  to  the  loftiest  merit, 
and  often  procures  him  a  distinguished  command. 

Hence,  if  some  brainless  bravo  be  captain  of  a  frigate 
in  action,  he  may  fight  her  against  invincible  odds,  and 
seek  to  crown  himself  with  the  glory  of  the  shambles, 
by  permitting  his  hopeless  crew  to  be  butchered  before 
his  eyes,  while  at  the  same  time  that  crew  must  consent 
to  be  slaughtered  by  the  foe,  under  penalty  of  being 
murdered  by  the  law.  Look  at  the  engagement  between 
the  American  frigate  Essex  with  the  two  English  cruisers, 
the  Phoebe  and  Cherub,  off  the  Bay  of  Valparaiso,  during 
the  late  war.  It  is  admitted  on  all  hands  that  the 
American  captain  continued  to  fight  his  crippled  ship 
against  a  greatly  superior  force  ;  and  when,  at  last,  it 
became  physically  impossible  that  he  could  ever  be  other 
wise  than  vanquished  in  the  end ;  and  when,  from 
peculiarly  unfortunate  circumstances,  his  men  merely 
stood  up  to  their  nearly  useless  batteries  to  be  dis 
membered  and  blown  to  pieces  by  the  incessant  fire  of 
the  enemy's  long  guns.  Nor,  by  thus  continuing  to  fight, 
did  this  American  frigate  one  iota  promote  the  true 
interests  of  her  country.  I  seek  not  to  underrate  any 
reputation  which  the  American  captain  may  have  gained 
by  this  battle.  He  was  a  brave  man  ;  that  no  sailor  will 
deny.  But  the  whole  world  is  made  up  of  brave  men. 


396  WHITE  JACKET 

Yet  I  would  not  be  at  all  understood  as  impugning  his 
special  good  name.  Nevertheless,  it  is  not  to  be  doubted, 
that  if  there  were  any  common-sense  sailors  at  the  guns 
of  the  Essex,  however  valiant  they  may  have  been,  those 
common-sense  sailors  must  have  greatly  preferred  to  strike 
their  flag,  when  they  saw  the  day  was  fairly  lost,  than 
postpone  that  inevitable  act  till  there  were  few  American 
arms  left  to  assist  in  hauling  it  down.  Yet,  had  these 
men,  under  these  circumstances,  '  pusillanimously  cried 
for  quarter,'  by  the  IVth  Article  of  War  they  might  have 
been  legally  hung. 

According  to  the  negro,  Tawney,  when  the  captain 
of  the  Macedonian — seeing  that  the  Neversink  had  his 
vessel  completely  in  her  power — gave  the  word  to  strike 
the  flag,  one  of  his  officers,  a  man  hated  by  the  seamen 
for  his  tyranny,  howled  out  the  most  terrific  remon 
strances,  swearing  that,  for  his  part,  he  would  not  give 
up,  but  was  for  sinking  the  Macedonian  alongside  the 
enemy.  Had  he  been  captain,  doubtless  he  would  have 
done  so  ;  thereby  gaining  the  name  of  a  hero  in  this 
world  ; — but  what  would  they  have  called  him  in  the 
next  ? 

But  as  the  whole  matter  of  war  is  a  thing  that  smites 
common  sense  and  Christianity  in  the  face  ;  so  every 
thing  connected  with  it  is  utterly  foolish,  unchristian, 
barbarous,  brutal,  and  savouring  of  the  Feejee  Islands, 
cannibalism,  saltpetre,  and  the  devil. 

It  is  generally  the  case  in  a  man-of-war  when  she 
strikes  her  flag  that  all  discipline  is  at  an  end,  and  the 
men  for  a  time  are  ungovernable.  This  was  so  on  board 
of  the  English  frigate.  The  spirit-room  was  broken 
open,  and  buckets  of  grog  were  passed  along  the  decks, 
where  many  of  the  wounded  were  lying  between  the 
guns.  These  mariners  seized  the  buckets,  and,  spite  of 
all  remonstrances,  gulped  down  the  burning  spirits,  till, 


THE  MAIN-TOP  AT  NIGHT  397 

as  Tawney  said,  the  blood  suddenly  spirted  out  of  their 
wounds,  and  they  fell  dead  to  the  deck. 

The  negro  had  many  more  stories  to  tell  of  this  fight ; 
and  frequently  he  would  escort  me  along  our  main-deck 
batteries — still  mounting  the  same  guns  used  in  the 
battle — pointing  out  their  ineffaceable  indentations  and 
scars.  Coated  over  with  the  accumulated  paint  of  more 
than  thirty  years,  they  were  almost  invisible  to  a  casual 
eye  ;  but  Tawney  knew  them  all  by  heart ;  for  he  had 
returned  home  in  the  Neversink,  and  had  beheld  these 
scars  shortly  after  the  engagement. 

One  afternoon,  I  was  walking  with  him  along  the 
gun-deck,  when  he  paused  abreast  of  the  mainmast. 
'  This  part  of  the  ship/  said  he,  '  we  called  the  slaughter 
house  on  board  the  Macedonian.  Here  the  men  fell,  five 
and  six  at  a  time.  An  enemy  always  directs  its  shot  here, 
in  order  to  hurl  over  the  mast,  if  possible.  The  beams 
and  carlines  overhead  in  the  Macedonian  slaughter 
house  were  spattered  with  blood  and  brains.  About 
the  hatchways  it  looked  like  a  butcher's  stall ;  bits  of 
human  flesh  sticking  in  the  ring-bolts.  A  pig  that  ran 
about  the  decks  escaped  unharmed,  but  his  hide  was  so 
clotted  with  blood,  from  rooting  among  the  pools  of  gore, 
that  when  the  ship  struck  the  sailors  hove  the  animal 
overboard,  swearing  that  it  would  be  rank  cannibalism 
to  eat  him.' 

Another  quadruped,  a  goat,  lost  its  forelegs  in  this 
fight. 

The  sailors  who  were  killed — according  to  the  usual 
custom — were  ordered  to  be  thrown  overboard  as  soon 
as  they  fell ;  no  doubt,  as  the  negro  said,  that  the  sight 
of  so  many  corpses  lying  around  might  not  appal  the 
survivors  at  the  guns.  Among  other  instances,  he  re 
lated  the  following.  A  shot  entering  one  of  the  port 
holes,  dashed  dead  two-thirds  of  a  gun's  crew.  The 


398  WHITE  JACKET 

captain  of  the  next  gun,  dropping  his  lockstring,  which 
he  had  just  pulled,  turned  over  the  heap  of  bodies  to 
see  who  they  were  ;  when,  perceiving  an  old  messmate 
who  had  sailed  with  him  in  many  cruises,  he  burst  into 
tears,  and,  taking  the  corpse  up  in  his  arms,  and  going 
with  it  to  the  side,  held  it  over  the  water  a  moment,  and 

eyeing  it,  cried,  '  Oh  God !  Tom ! ' — '  D n  your  prayers 

over  that  thing  !  overboard  with  it,  and  down  to  your 
gun  !  '  roared  a  wounded  lieutenant.  The  order  was 
obeyed,  and  the  heart-stricken  sailor  returned  to  his 
post. 

Tawney's  recitals  were  enough  to  snap  this  man-of- 
war  world's  sword  in  its  scabbard.  And  thinking  of  all 
the  cruel  carnal  glory  wrought  out  by  naval  heroes  in 
scenes  like  these,  I  asked  myself  whether,  indeed,  that 
was  a  glorious  coffin  in  which  Lord  Nelson  was  entombed 
— a  coffin  presented  to  him,  during  life,  by  Captain  Hallo- 
well  ;  it  had  been  dug  out  of  the  mainmast  of  the  French 
line-of -battle  ship  L 'Orient,  which,  burning  up  with 
British  fire,  destroyed  hundreds  of  Frenchmen  at  the 
battle  of  the  Nile. 

Peace  to  Lord  Nelson  where  he  sleeps  in  his  moulder 
ing  mast !  but  rather  would  I  be  urned  in  the  trunk  of 
some  green  tree,  and  even  in  death  have  the  vital  sap 
circulating  round  me,  giving  of  my  dead  body  to  the 
living  foliage  that  shaded  my  peaceful  tomb. 


CHAPTER   LXXV 

'  SINK,   BURN,   AND   DESTROY  ' 

Printed  Admiralty  orders  in  time  of  war. 

AMONG  innumerable  '  yarns  and  twisters,'  reeled  off  in 
our  main-top  during  our  pleasant  run  to  the  north,  none 
could  match  those  of  Jack  Chase,  our  captain. 

Never  was  there  better  company  than  ever-glorious 
Jack.  The  things  which  most  men  only  read  of,  or 
dream  about,  he  had  seen  and  experienced.  He  had 
been  a  dashing  smuggler  in  his  day,  and  could  tell  of  a 
long  nine-pounder  rammed  home  with  wads  of  French 
silks  ;  of  cartridges  stuffed  with  the  finest  gunpowder 
tea  ;  of  canister-shot  full  of  West  India  sweetmeats  ; 
of  sailor  frocks  and  trowsers,  quilted  inside  with  costly 
laces  ;  and  table-legs,  hollow  as  musket  barrels,  com 
pactly  stowed  with  rare  drugs  and  spices.  He  could 
tell  of  a  wicked  widow,  too — a  beautiful  receiver  of 
smuggled  goods  upon  the  English  coast — who  smiled  so 
sweetly  upon  the  smugglers  when  they  sold  her  silks  and 
laces,  cheap  as  tape  and  ginghams.  She  called  them 
gallant  fellows,  hearts  of  game  ;  and  bade  them  bring 
her  more. 

He  could  tell  of  desperate  fights  with  His  British 
Majesty's  cutters,  in  midnight  coves  upon  a  stormy 
coast ;  of  the  capture  of  a  reckless  band,  and  their  being 
drafted  on  board  a  man-of-war  ;  of  their  swearing  that 
their  chief  was  slain  ;  of  a  writ  of  habeas  corpus  sent  on 
board  for  one  of  them  for  a  debt — a  reserved  and  hand 
some  man — and  his  going  ashore,  strongly  suspected 

399 


400  WHITE  JACKET 

of  being  the  slaughtered  captain,  and  this  a  successful 
scheme  for  his  escape. 

But  more  than  all,  Jack  could  tell  of  the  battle  of 
Navarino,  for  he  had  been  a  captain  of  one  of  the  main- 
deck  guns  on  board  Admiral  Codrington's  flagship,  the 
Asia.  Were  mine  the  style  of  stout  old  Chapman's 
Homer,  even  then  I  would  scarce  venture  to  give  noble 
Jack's  own  version  of  this  fight,  wherein,  on  the  20th  of 
October,  A.D.  1827,  thirty-two  sail  of  Englishmen,  French 
men,  and  Russians,  attacked  and  vanquished  in  the 
Levant,  an  Ottoman  fleet  of  three  ships-of-the-line, 
twenty-five  frigates,  and  a  swarm  of  fire  -  ships  and 
hornet  craft. 

4  We  bayed  to  be  at  them,'  said  Jack  ;  f  and  when  we 
did  open  fire,  we  were  like  dolphin  among  the  flying-fish. 
"  Every  man  take  his  bird  "  was  the  cry  when  we  trained 
our  guns.  And  those  guns  all  smoked  like  rows  of  Dutch 
pipe-bowls,  my  hearties  !  My  gun's  crew  carried  small 
flags  in  their  bosoms,  to  nail  to  the  mast  in  case  the  ship's 
colours  were  shot  away.  Stripped  to  the  waistbands, 
we  fought  like  skinned  tigers,  and  bowled  down  the 
Turkish  frigates  like  ninepins.  Among  their  shrouds 
— swarming  thick  with  small-arm  men,  like  flights  of 
pigeons  lighted  on  pine-trees — our  marines  sent  their 
leaden  peas  and  gooseberries,  like  a  shower  of  hailstones 
in  Labrador.  It  was  a  stormy  time,  my  hearties  !  The 
blasted  Turks  pitched  into  the  old  Asia's  hull  a  whole 
quarry  of  marble  shot,  each  ball  one  hundred  and  fifty 
pounds.  They  knocked  three  port-holes  into  one.  But 
we  gave  them  better  than  they  sent.  *  Up  and  at  them, 
my  bull-dog  !  '  said  I,  patting  my  gun  on  the  breech  ; 
'  tear  open  hatchways  in  their  Moslem  sides  !  '  White 
Jacket,  my  lad,  you  ought  to  have  been  there.  The  bay 
was  covered  with  masts  and  yards,  as  I  have  seen  a 
raft  of  snags  in  the  Arkansas  River.  Showers  of  burned 


'  SINK,  BURN,  AND  DESTROY  '  401 

rice  and  olives  from  the  exploding  foe  fell  upon  us  like 
manna  in  the  wilderness.  "  Allah  !  Allah  !  Mohammed  ! 
Mohammed  !  "  split  the  air  ;  some  cried  it  out  from  the 
Turkish  port-holes  ;  others  shrieked  it  forth  from  the 
drowning  waters,  their  top -knots  floating  on  their  shaven 
skulls  like  black  snakes  on  half -tide  rocks.  By  those 
top -knots  they  believed  that  their  Prophet  would  drag 
them  up  to  Paradise,  but  they  sank  fifty  fathoms,  my 
hearties,  to  the  bottom  of  the  bay.  "  Ain't  the  bloody 
'Hometons  going  to  strike  yet  ?  "  cried  my  first  loader,  a 
Guernsey  man,  thrusting  his  neck  out  of  the  port-hole,  and 
looking  at  the  Turkish  line-of -battle  ship  near  by.  That 
instant  his  head  blew  by  me  like  a  bursting  Paixhan  shot, 
and  the  flag  of  Ned  Knowles  himself  was  hauled  down 
forever.  We  dragged  his  hull  to  one  side,  and  avenged 
him  with  the  cooper's  anvil,  which,  endways,  we  rammed 
home — a  messmate  shoved  in  the  dead  man's  bloody 
Scotch  cap  for  the  wad,  and  sent  it  flying  into  the  line- 
of -battle  ship.  By  the  god  of  war  !  boys,  we  hardly  left 
enough  of  that  craft  to  boil  a  pot  of  water  with.  It  was 
a  hard  day's  work — a  sad  day's  work,  my  hearties.  That 
night,  when  all  was  over,  I  slept  sound  enough,  with  a 
box  of  canister  shot  for  my  pillow  !  But  you  ought  to 
have  seen  the  boat-load  of  Turkish  flags  one  of  our 
captains  carried  home  ;  he  swore  to  dress  his  father's 
orchard  in  colours  with  them,  just  as  our  spars  are 
dressed  for  a  gala  day.' 

4  Though  you  tormented  the  Turks  at  Navarino,  noble 
Jack,  yet  you  came  off  yourself  with  only  the  loss  of  a 
splinter,  it  seems/  said  a  topman,  glancing  at  our 
captain's  maimed  hand. 

'  Yes  ;  but  I  and  one  of  the  lieutenants  had  a  narrower 
escape  than  that.  A  shot  struck  the  side  of  my  port 
hole,  and  sent  the  splinters  right  and  left.  One  took 
off  my  hat  rim  clean  to  my  brow  ;  another  razeed  the 

2c 


402  WHITE  JACKET 

lieutenant's  left  boot,  by  slicing  off  the  heel ;  a  third 
shot  killed  my  powder-monkey,  without  touching  him.' 

1  How,  Jack  «  ' 

'  It  whizzed  the  poor  babe  dead.  He  was  seated  on 
a  cheese  of  wads  at  the  time,  and  after  the  dust  of  the 
powdered  bulwarks  had  blown  away,  I  noticed  he  yet 
sat  still,  his  eyes  wide  open.  "  My  little  hero  !  "  cried  I, 
and  I  clapped  him  on  the  back  ;  but  he  fell  on  his  face 
at  my  feet.  I  touched  his  heart,  and  found  he  was  dead. 
There  was  not  a  little-finger  mark  on  him.' 

Silence  now  fell  upon  the  listeners  for  a  time,  broken 
at  last  by  the  second  captain  of  the  top. 

'  Noble  Jack,  I  know  you  never  brag,  but  tell  us  what 
you  did  yourself  that  day  ?  ' 

'  Why,  my  hearties,  I  did  not  do  quite  as  much  as 
my  gun.  But  I  flatter  myself  it  was  that  gun  that 
brought  down  the  Turkish  admiral's  mainmast ;  and 
the  stump  left  wasn't  long  enough  to  make  a  wooden 
leg  for  Lord  Nelson.' 

'  How  ?  but  I  thought,  by  the  way  you  pull  a  lock- 
string  on  board  here,  and  look  along  the  sight,  that  you 
can  steer  a  shot  about  right — hey,  Jack  ?  ' 

1  It  was  the  Admiral  of  the  Fleet — God  Almighty 
— who  directed  the  shot  that  dismasted  the  Turkish 
admiral,'  said  Jack  ;  '  I  only  pointed  the  gun.' 

'  But  how  did  you  feel,  Jack,  when  the  musket-ball 
carried  away  one  of  your  hooks  there  ?  ' 

'  Feel !  only  a  finger  the  lighter.  I  have  seven  more 
left,  besides  thumbs  ;  and  they  did  good  service,  too,  in 
the  torn  rigging  the  day  after  the  fight ;  for  you  must 
know,  my  hearties,  that  the  hardest  work  comes  after 
the  guns  are  run  in.  Three  days  I  helped  work,  with 
one  hand,  in  the  rigging,  in  the  same  trowsers  that  I 
wore  in  the  action  ;  the  blood  had  dried  and  stiffened  ; 
they  looked  like  glazed  red  morocco.' 


c  SINK,  BURN,  AND  DESTROY  *  403 

Now,  this  Jack  Chase  had  a  heart  in  him  like  a  mas 
todon's.  I  have  seen  him  weep  when  a  man  has  been 
flogged  at  the  gangway  ;  yet,  in  relating  the  story  of  the 
battle  of  Navarino,  he  plainly  showed  that  he  held  the 
God  of  the  blessed  Bible  to  have  been  the  British  Com 
modore  in  the  Levant,  on  the  bloody  20th  of  October,  A.D. 
1827.  And  thus  it  would  seem  that  war  almost  makes 
blasphemers  of  the  best  of  men,  and  brings  them  all 
down  to  the  Feejee  standard  of  humanity.  Some  mari- 
of-war's  men  have  confessed  to  me  that,  as  a  battle  has 
raged  more  and  more,  their  hearts  have  hardened  in  in 
fernal  harmony  ;  and,  like  their  own  guns,  they  have 
fought  without  a  thought. 

Soldier  or  sailor,  the  fighting  man  is  but  a  fiend  ;  and 
the  staff  and  bodyguard  of  the  Devil  musters  many  a 
baton.  But  war  at  times  is  inevitable.  Must  the 
national  honour  be  trampled  under  foot  by  an  insolent 
foe? 

Say  on,  say  on  ;  but  know  you  this,  and  lay  it  to 
heart,  war-voting  Bench  of  Bishops,  that  He  on  whom 
we  believe  himself  has  enjoined  us  to  turn  the  left  cheek 
if  the  right  be  smitten.  Never  mind  what  follows. 
That  passage  you  cannot  expunge  from  the  Bible  ;  that 
passage  is  as  binding  upon  us  as  any  other  ;  that  passage 
embodies  the  soul  and  substance  of  the  Christian  faith  ; 
without  it,  Christianity  were  like  any  other  faith.  And 
that  passage  will  yet,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  turn  the 
world.  But  in  some  things  we  must  turn  Quakers  first. 

But  though  unlike  most  scenes  of  carnage,  which  have 
proved  useless  murders  of  men,  Admiral  Codrington's 
victory  undoubtedly  achieved  the  emancipation  of 
Greece,  and  terminated  the  Turkish  atrocities  in  that 
tomahawked  state,  yet  who  shall  lift  his  hand  and  swear 
that  a  Divine  Providence  led  the  van  of  the  combined 
fleets  of  England,  France,  and  Russia  at  the  battle  of 


404  WHITE  JACKET 

Navarino  ?  For  if  this  be  so,  then  it  led  the  van  against 
the  Church's  own  elect — the  persecuted  Waldenses  in 
Switzerland — and  kindled  the  Smithfield  fires  in  Bloody 
Mary's  time. 

But  all  events  are  mixed  in  a  fusion  indistinguishable. 
What  we  call  Fate  is  even,  heartless,  and  impartial ;  not 
a  fiend  to  kindle  bigot  flames,  nor  a  philanthropist  to 
espouse  the  cause  of  Greece.  We  may  fret,  fume,  and 
fight ;  but  the  thing  called  Fate  everlastingly  sustains 
an  armed  neutrality. 

Yet  though  all  this  be  so,  nevertheless,  in  our  own 
hearts,  we  mould  the  whole  world's  hereafters  ;  and  in 
our  own  hearts  we  fashion  our  own  gods.  Each  mortal 
casts  his  vote  for  whom  he  will  to  rule  the  worlds  ;  I 
have  a  voice  that  helps  to  shape  eternity  ;  and  my 
volitions  stir  the  orbits  of  the  furthest  suns.  In  two 
senses,  we  a,re  precisely  what  we  worship.  Ourselves 
are  Fate. 


CHAPTER    LXXVI 

THE   CHAINS 

WHEN  wearied  with  the  tumult  and  occasional  con 
tention  of  the  gun-deck  of  our  frigate.  I  have  often  re 
treated  to  a  port -hole,  and  calmed  myself  down  by 
gazing  broad  off  upon  a  placid  sea.  After  the  battle- 
din  of  the  last  two  chapters,  let  us  now  do  the  like, 
and,  in  the  sequestered  fore-chains  of  the  Never  sink 
tranquillise  ourselves,  if  we  may. 

Notwithstanding  the  domestic  communism  to  which 
the  seamen  in  a  man-of-war  are  condemned,  and  the 
publicity  in  which  actions  the  most  diffident  and  retiring 
in  their  nature  must  be  performed,  there  is  yet  an  odd 
corner  or  two  where  you  may  sometimes  steal  away,  and, 
for  a  few  moments,  almost  be  private. 

Chief  among  these  places  is  the  chains,  to  which  I  would 
sometimes  hie  during  our  pleasant  homeward-bound 
glide  over  those  pensive  tropical  latitudes.  After  hear 
ing  my  fill  of  the  wild  yarns  of  our  top,  here  would 
I  recline — if  not  disturbed — serenely  concocting  infor 
mation  into  wisdom. 

The  chains  designates  the  small  platform  outside  of 
the  hull,  at  the  base  of  the  large  shrouds  leading  down 
from  the  three  mast-heads  to  the  bulwarks.  At  present 
they  seem  to  be  getting  out  of  vogue  among  merchant 
vessels,  along  with  the  fine,  old-fashioned  quarter-gal 
leries,  little  turret-like  appurtenances,  which,  in  the 
days  of  the  old  admirals,  set  off  the  angles  of  an  armed 
ship's  stern.  Here  a  naval  officer  might  lounge  away 

405 


406  WHITE  JACKET 

an  hour  after  action,  smoking  a  cigar  to  drive  out  of  his 
whiskers  the  villainous  smoke  of  the  gunpowder.  The 
picturesque,  delightful  stern-gallery,  also,  a  broad  bal 
cony  overhanging  the  sea,  and  entered  from  the  captain's 
cabin,  much  as  you  might  enter  a  bower  from  a  lady's 
chamber  ;  this  charming  balcony,  where,  sailing  over 
summer  seas  in  the  days  of  the  old  Peruvian  viceroys, 
the  Spanish  cavalier,  Mendanna,  of  Lima,  made  love  to 
the  Lady  Isabella,  as  they  voyaged  in  quest  of  the 
Solomon  Islands,  the  fabulous  Ophir,  the  Grand  Cyclades  ; 
and  the  Lady  Isabella,  at  sunset,  blushed  like  the  Orient, 
and  gazed  down  to  the  gold-fish  and  silver-hued  flying- 
fish,  that  wove  the  woof  and  warp  of  their  wakes  in 
bright,  scaly  tartans  and  plaids  underneath  where  the 
lady  reclined  ;  this  charming  balcony — exquisite  retreat 
—has  been  cut  away  by  vandalic  innovations.  Ay,  that 
claw-footed  old  gallery  is  no  longer  in  fashion  ;  in  com 
modore's  eyes,  is  no  longer  genteel. 

Out  on  all  furniture  fashions  but  those  that  are  past ! 
Give  me  my  grandfather's  old  armchair,  planted  upon 
four  carved  frogs,  as  the  Hindus  fabled  the  world  to 
be  supported  upon  four  tortoises  ;  give  me  his  cane,  with 
the  gold-loaded  top — a  cane  that,  like  the  musket  of 
General  Washington's  father  and  the  broadsword  of 
William  Wallace,  would  break  down  the  back  of  the 
switch-carrying  dandies  of  these  spindle-shank  days ; 
give  me  his  broad-breasted  vest,  coming  bravely  down 
over  the  hips,  and  furnished  with  two  strong-boxes  of 
pockets  to  keep  guineas  in  ;  toss  this  toppling  cylinder 
of  a  beaver  overboard,  and  give  me  my  grandfather's 
gallant,  gable-ended,  cocked  hat. 

But  though  the  quarter-galleries  and  the  stern-gallery 
of  a  man-of-war  are  departed,  yet  the  chains  still  linger  ; 
nor  can  there  be  imagined  a  more  agreeable  retreat. 
The  huge  blocks  and  lanyards  forming  the  pedestals  of 


THE  CHAINS  407 

the  shrouds  divide  the  chains  into  numerous  little  chapels, 
alcoves,  niches,  and  altars,  where  you  lazily  lounge — 
outside  of  the  ship,  though  on  board.  But  there  are 
plenty  to  divide  a  good  thing  with  you  in  this  man-of- 
war  world.  Often,  when  snugly  seated  in  one  of  these 
little  alcoves,  gazing  off  to  the  horizon,  and  thinking  of 
Cathay,  I  have  been  startled  from  my  repose  by  some 
old  quarter-gunner,  who,  having  newly  painted  a  parcel 
of  match-tubs,  wanted  to  set  them  to  dry. 

At  other  times,  one  of  the  tattooing  artists  would  crawl 
over  the  bulwarks,  followed  by  his  sitter  ;  and  then  a 
bare  arm  or  leg  would  be  extended,  and  the  disagreeable 
business  of  '  pricking  '  commence,  right  under  my  eyes  ; 
or  an  irruption  of  tars,  with  ditty-bags  or  sea-reticules, 
and  piles  of  old  trowscrs  to  mend,  would  break  in  upon 
my  seclusion,  and,  forming  a  sewing  circle,  drive  me  off 
with  their  chatter. 

But  once — it  was  a  Sunday  afternoon — I  was  pleasantly 
reclining  in  a  particularly  shady  and  secluded  little  niche 
between  two  lanyards,  when  I  heard  a  low,  supplicating 
voice.  Peeping  through  the  narrow  space  between  the 
ropes,  I  perceived  an  aged  seaman  on  his  knees,  his  face 
turned  seaward,  with  closed  eyes,  buried  in  prayer. 
Softly  rising,  I  stole  through  a  port-hole,  and  left  the 
venerable  worshipper  alone. 

He  was  a  sheet-anchor  man,  an  earnest  Baptist,  and 
was  well  known  in  his  own  part  of  the  ship  to  be  constant 
in  his  solitary  devotions  in  the  chains.  He  reminded 
me  of  St.  Anthony  going  out  into  the  wilderness  to  pray. 

This  man  was  captain  of  the  starboard  bow-chaser, 
one  of  the  two  long  twenty-four-pounders  on  the  fore 
castle.  In  time  of  action,  the  command  of  that  iron 
Thalaba  the  Destroyer  would  devolve  upon  him.  It 
would  be  his  business  to  c  train  '  it  properly  ;  to  see  it 
well  loaded  ;  the  grape  and  canister  rammed  home  ; 


408  WHITE  JACKET 

also,  to  'prick  the  cartridge,'  'take  the  sight,'  and  give  the 
word  for  the  match-man  to  apply  his  wand  ;  bidding 
a  sudden  hell  to  flash  forth  from  the  muzzle  in  wide 
combustion  and  death. 

Now,  this  captain  of  the  bow-chaser  was  an  upright 
old  man,  a  sincere,  humble  believer,  and  he  but  earned 
his  bread  in  being  captain  of  that  gun  ;  but  how,  with 
those  hands  of  his  begrimed  with  powder,  could  he  break 
that  other  and  most  peaceful  and  penitent  bread  of  the 
Supper  ?  though  in  that  hallowed  sacrament  it  seemed 
he  had  often  partaken  ashore.  The  omission  of  this  rite 
in  a  man-of-war — though  there  is  a  chaplain  to  preside 
over  it,  and  at  least  a  few  communicants  to  partake — 
must  be  ascribed  to  a  sense  of  religious  propriety,  in  the 
last  degree  to  be  commended. 

Ah  !  the  best  righteousness  of  our  man-of-war  world 
seems  but  an  unrealised  ideal,  after  all ;  and  those  maxims 
which,  in  the  hope  of  bringing  about  a  millennium,  we 
busily  teach  to  the  heathen,  we  Christians  ourselves  dis 
regard.  In  view  of  the  whole  present  social  framework 
of  our  world,  so  ill-adapted  to  the  practical  adoption  of 
the  meekness  of  Christianity,  there  seems  almost  some 
ground  for  the  thought,  that  although  our  blessed  Saviour 
was  full  of  the  wisdom  of  heaven,  yet  His  gospel  seems 
lacking  in  the  practical  wisdom  of  earth — in  a  due  ap 
preciation  of  the  necessities  of  nations  at  times  demand 
ing  bloody  massacres  and  wars  ;  in  a  proper  estimation 
of  the  value  of  rank,  title,  and  money.  But  all  this  only 
the  more  crowns  the  divine  consistency  of  Jesus  ;  since 
Burnet  and  the  best  theologians  demonstrate  that  his 
nature  was  not  merely  human — was  not  that  of  a  mere 
man  of  the  world. 


CHAPTER   LXXVII 

THE   HOSPITAL   IN   A   MAN-OF-WAR 

AFTER  running  with  a  fine  steady  breeze  up  to  the  Line, 
it  fell  calm,  and  there  we  lay.  three  days  enchanted  on 
the  sea.  We  were  a  most  puissant  man-of-war,  no 
doubt,  with  our  five  hundred  men,  commodore,  and 
captain,  backed  by  our  long  batteries  of  thirty-two  and 
twenty-four-pounders  ;  yet,  for  all  that,  there  we  lay 
rocking,  helpless  as  an  infant  in  the  cradle.  Had  it  only 
been  a  gale  instead  of  a  calm,  gladly  would  we  have 
charged  upon  it  with  our  gallant  bowsprit,  as  with  a 
stout  lance  in  rest ;  but,  as  with  mankind,  this  serene, 
passive  foe — unresisting  and  irresistible — lived  it  out, 
unconquered  to  the  last. 

All  these  three  days  the  heat  was  excessive  ;  the  sun 
drew  the  tar  from  the  seams  of  the  ship  ;  the  awnings 
were  spread  fore  and  aft ;  the  decks  were  kept  constantly 
sprinkled  with  water.  It  was  during  this  period  that  a 
sad  event  occurred,  though  not  an  unusual  one  on  ship 
board.  But  in  order  to  prepare  for  its  narration,  some 
account  of  a  part  of  the  ship  called  the  '  sick-bay  '  must 
needs  be  presented. 

The  sick-bay  is  that  part  of  a  man-of-war  where  the 
invalid  seamen  are  placed  ;  in  many  respects  it  answers 
to  a  public  hospital  ashore.  As  with  most  frigates,  the 
sick-bay  of  the  Neversink  was  on  the  berth-deck — the 
third  deck  from  above.  It  was  in  the  extreme  forward 
part  of  that  deck,  embracing  the  triangular  area  in  the 
bows  of  the  ship.  It  was,  therefore,  a  subterranean 

409 


410  WHITE  JACKET 

vault,  into  which  scarce  a  ray  of  heaven's  glad  light  ever 
penetrated,  even  at  noon. 

In  a  sea-going  frigate  that  has  all  her  armament  and 
stores  on  board,  the  floor  of  the  berth-deck  is  partly 
below  the  surface  of  the  water.  But  in  a  smooth  harbour, 
some  circulation  of  air  is  maintained  by  opening  large 
auger-holes  in  the  upper  portion  of  the  sides,  called  '  air 
ports/  not  much  above  the  water  level.  Before  going 
to  sea,  however,  these  air-ports  must  be  closed,  caulked, 
and  the  seams  hermetically  sealed  with  pitch.  These 
places  for  ventilation  being  shut,  the  sick-bay  is  entirely 
barred  against  the  free,  natural  admission  of  fresh  air. 
In  the  Neversink,  a  few  lungsful  were  forced  down  by 
artificial  means.  But  as  the  ordinary  wind-sail  was  the 
only  method  adopted,  the  quantity  of  fresh  air  sent 
down  was  regulated  by  the  force  of  the  wind.  In  a  calm 
there  was  none  to  be  had,  while  in  a  severe  gale  the  wind- 
sail  had  to  be  hauled  up,  on  account  of  the  violent  draught 
blowing  full  upon  the  cots  of  the  sick.  An  open-work 
partition  divided  our  sick-bay  from  the  rest  of  the  deck, 
where  the  hammocks  of  the  watch  were  slung  ;  it  there 
fore  was  exposed  to  all  the  uproar  that  ensued  upon  the 
watches  being  relieved. 

An  official,  called  the  surgeon's  steward,  assisted  by 
subordinates,  presided  over  the  place.  He  was  the 
same  individual  alluded  to  as  officiating  at  the  am 
putation  of  the  topman.  He  was  always  to  be  found  at 
his  post,  by  night  and  by  day. 

This  surgeon's  steward  deserves  a  description.  He 
was  a  small,  pale,  hollow-eyed  young  man,  with  that 
peculiar  Lazarus-like  expression  so  often  noticed  in 
hospital  attendants.  Seldom  or  never  did  you  see  him 
on  deck,  and  when  he  did  emerge  into  the  light  of  the 
sun,  it  was  with  an  abashed  look,  and  an  uneasy,  wink 
ing  eye.  The  sun  was  not  made  for  him.  His  nervous 


THE  HOSPITAL  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR        411 

organisation  was  confounded  by  the  sight  of  the  robust 
old  sea-dogs  on  the  forecastle,  and  the  general  tumult 
of  the  spar-deck,  and  he  mostly  buried  himself  below 
in  an  atmosphere  which  long  habit  had  made  congenial. 

This  young  man  never  indulged  in  frivolous  conver 
sation  ;  he  only  talked  of  the  surgeon's  prescriptions  ; 
his  every  word  was  a  bolus.  He  never  was  known  to 
smile  ;  nor  did  he  even  look  sober  in  the  ordinary  way  ; 
but  his  countenance  ever  wore  an  aspect  of  cadaverous 
resignation  to  his  fate.  Strange  !  that  so  many  of  those 
who  would  fain  minister  to  our  own  health  should  look 
so  much  like  invalids  themselves. 

Connected  with  the  sick-bay,  over  which  the  surgeon's 
steward  presided — but  removed  from  it  in  place,  being 
next  door  to  the  counting-room  of  the  purser's  steward 
— was  a  regular  apothecary's  shop,  of  which  he  kept 
the  key.  It  was  fitted  up  precisely  like  an  apothecary's 
on  shore,  displaying  tiers  of  shelves  on  all  four  sides, 
filled  with  green  bottles  and  gallipots  ;  beneath  were 
multitudinous  drawers,  bearing  incomprehensible  gilded 
inscriptions  in  abbreviated  Latin. 

He  generally  opened  his  shop  for  an  hour  or  two  every 
morning  and  evening.  There  was  a  Venetian  blind  in 
the  upper  part  of  the  door,  which  he  threw  up  when  inside, 
so  as  to  admit  a  little  air.  And  there  you  would  see  him, 
with  a  green  shade  over  his  eyes,  seated  on  a  stool,  and 
pounding  his  pestle  in  a  great  iron  mortar  that  looked  like 
a  howitzer,  mixing  some  jalapy  compound.  A  smoky 
lamp  shed  a  flickering,  yellow-fever  tinge  upon  his  pallid 
face  and  the  closely  packed  regiments  of  gallipots. 

Several  times  when  I  felt  in  need  of  a  little  medicine, 
but  was  not  ill  enough  to  report  myself  to  the  surgeon 
at  his  levees,  I  would  call  of  a  morning  upon  his  steward 
at  the  sign  of  the  Mortar,  and  beg  him  to  give  me  what  I 
wanted  ;  when,  without  speaking  a  word,  this  cadaverous 


412  WHITE  JACKET 

young  man  would  mix  me  my  potion  in  a  tin  cup. 
and  hand  it  out  through  the  little  opening  in  his  door, 
like  the  boxed-up  treasurer  giving  you  your  change  at 
the  ticket-office  of  a  theatre. 

But  there  was  a  little  shelf  against  the  wall  of  the 
door,  and  upon  this  I  would  set  the  tin  cup  for  a  while, 
and  survey  it ;  for  I  never  was  a  Julius  Csesar  at  taking 
medicine  ;  and  to  take  it  in  this  way,  without  a  single 
attempt  at  disguising  it ;  with  no  counteracting  little 
morsel  to  hurry  down  after  it ;  in  short,  to  go  to  the 
very  apothecary's  in  person,  and  there,  at  the  counter, 
swallow  down  your  dose,  as  if  it  were  a  nice  mint- julep 
taken  at  the  bar  of  a  hotel — this  was  a  bitter  bolus 
indeed.  But,  then,  this  pallid  young  apothecary  charged 
nothing  for  it,  and  that  was  no  small  satisfaction  ;  for 
is  it  not  remarkable,  to  say  the  least,  that  a  shore  apothe 
cary  should  actually  charge  you  money — round  dollars 
and  cents — for  giving  you  a  horrible  nausea  ? 

My  tin  cup  would  wait  a  long  time  on  that  little  shelf  ; 
yet  '  Pills,'  as  the  sailors  called  him,  never  heeded  my 
lingering,  but  in  sober,  silent  sadness  continued  pound 
ing  his  mortar  or  folding  up  his  powders  ;  until  at  last 
some  other  customer  would  appear,  and  then,  in  a  sudden 
frenzy  of  resolution,  I  would  gulp  down  my  sherry- 
cobbler,  and  carry  its  unspeakable  flavour  with  me  far 
up  into  the  frigate's  main-top.  I  do  not  know  whether 
it  was  the  wide  roll  of  the  ship,  as  felt  in  that  giddy  perch, 
that  occasioned  it.  but  I  always  got  seasick  after  taking 
medicine  and  going  aloft  with  it.  Seldom  or  never  did 
it  do  me  any  lasting  good. 

Now  the  surgeon's  steward  was  only  a  subordinate  of 
Surgeon  Cuticle  himself,  who  lived  in  the  ward-room 
among  the  lieutenants,  sailing-master,  chaplain,  and 
purser. 

The  surgeon  is,  by  law,  charged  with  the  business  of 


THE  HOSPITAL  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR        413 

overlooking  the  general  sanitary  affairs  of  the  ship.  If 
anything  is  going  on  in  any  of  its  departments  which 
he  judges  to  be  detrimental  to  the  healthfulness  of  the 
crew,  he  has  a  right  to  protest  against  it  formally  to  the 
captain.  When  a  man  is  being  scourged  at  the  gang 
way,  the  surgeon  stands  by  ;  and  if  he  thinks  that  the 
punishment  is  becoming  more  than  the  culprit's  consti 
tution  can  well  bear,  he  has  a  right  to  interfere  and 
demand  its  cessation  for  the  time. 

But  though  the  Navy  regulations  nominally  vest  him 
with  this  high  discretionary  authority  over  the  very 
commodore  himself,  how  seldom  does  he  exercise  it  in 
cases  where  humanity  demands  it  ?  Three  years  is  a 
long  time  to  spend  in  one  ship,  and  to  be  at  swords' 
points  with  its  captain  and  lieutenants  during  such 
a  period,  must  be  very  unsocial  and  every  way  irksome. 
No  otherwise  than  thus,  at  least,  can  the  remissness  of 
some  surgeons  in  remonstrating  against  cruelty  be 
accounted  for. 

Not  to  speak,  again,  of  the  continual  dampness  of  the 
decks  consequent  upon  flooding  them  with  salt  water, 
when  we  were  driving  near  to  Cape  Horn,  it  needs  only 
to  be  mentioned  that,  on  board  of  the  Neversink,  men 
known  to  be  in  consumptions  gasped  under  the  scourge 
of  the  boatswain's  mate,  when  the  surgeon  and  his  two 
attendants  stood  by  and  never  interposed.  But  where 
the  unscrupulousness  of  martial  discipline  is  maintained, 
it  is  in  vain  to  attempt  softening  its  rigour  by  the  or 
daining  of  humanitarian  laws.  Sooner  might  you  tame 
the  grizzly  bear  of  Missouri  than  humanise  a  thing  so 
essentially  cruel  and  heartless. 

But  the  surgeon  has  yet  other  duties  to  perform. 
Not  a  seaman  enters  the  Navy  without  undergoing  a  cor 
poral  examination,  to  test  his  soundness  in  wind  and  limb. 

One  of  the  first  places  into  which  I  was  introduced 


414  WHITE  JACKET 

when  I  first  entered  on  board  the  Neversink  was  the 
sick-bay,  where  I  found  one  of  the  assistant  surgeons 
seated  at  a  green-baize  table.  It  was  his  turn  for  visiting 
the  apartment.  Having  been  commanded  by  the  deck 
officer  to  report  my  business  to  the  functionary  before 
me,  I  accordingly  hemmed,  to  attract  his  attention,  and 
then  catching  his  eye,  politely  intimated  that  I  called 
upon  him  for  the  purpose  of  being  accurately  laid  out 
and  surveyed. 

'  Strip  !  '  was  the  answer,  and,  rolling  up  his  gold-laced 
cuff,  he  proceeded  to  manipulate  me.  He  punched  me 
in  the  ribs,  smote  me  across  the  chest,  commanded  me 
to  stand  on  one  leg  and  hold  out  the  other  horizontally. 
He  asked  me  whether  any  of  my  family  were  consump 
tive  ;  whether  I  ever  felt  a  tendency  to  a  rush  of  blood 
to  the  head  ;  whether  I  was  gouty  ;  how  often  I  had 
been  bled  during  my  life  ;  how  long  I  had  been  ashore  ; 
how  long  I  had  been  afloat ;  with  several  other  questions 
which  have  altogether  slipped  my  memory.  He  con 
cluded  his  interrogatories  with  this  extraordinary  and 
unwarranted  one — '  Are  you  pious  ?  ' 

It  was  a  leading  question  which  somewhat  staggered 
me,  but  I  said  not  a  word  ;  when,  feeling  of  my  calves, 
he  looked  up  and  incomprehensibly  said,  '  I  am  afraid 
you  are  not.' 

At  length  he  declared  me  a  sound  animal,  and  wrote 
a  certificate  to  that  effect,  with  which  I  returned  to  the 
deck. 

This  assistant  surgeon  turned  out  to  be  a  very  singular 
character,  and  when  I  became  more  acquainted  with  him 
I  ceased  to  marvel  at  the  curious  question  with  which  he 
had  concluded  his  examination  of  my  person. 

He  was  a  thin,  knock-kneed  man,  with  a  sour,  satur 
nine  expression,  rendered  the  more  peculiar  from  his 
shaving  his  beard  so  remorselessly  that  his  chin  and  cheeks 


THE  HOSPITAL  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR        415 

always  looked  blue,  as  if  pinched  with  cold.  His  long 
familiarity  with  nautical  invalids  seemed  to  have  filled  him 
full  of  theological  hypoes  concerning  the  state  of  their 
souls.  He  was  at  once  the  physician  and  priest  of  the 
sick,  washing  down  his  boluses  with  ghostly  consola 
tion,  and  among  the  sailors  he  went  by  the  name  of  The 
Pelican,  a  fowl  whose  hanging  pouch  imparts  to  it  a 
most  chop-fallen,  lugubrious  expression. 

The  privilege  of  going  off  duty  and  lying  by  when  you 
are  sick  is  one  of  the  few  points  in  which  a  man-of-war  is 
far  better  for  the  sailor  than  a  merchantman.  But,  as 
with  every  other  matter  in  the  Navy,  the  whole  thing  is 
subject  to  the  general  discipline  of  the  vessel,  and  is  con 
ducted  with  a  severe,  unyielding  method  and  regularity, 
making  no  allowances  for  exceptions  to  rules. 

During  the  half-hour  preceding  morning  quarters, 
the  surgeon  of  a  frigate  is  to  be  found  in  the  sick-bay, 
where,  after  going  his  rounds  among  the  invalids,  he 
holds  a  levee  for  the  benefit  of  all  new  candidates  for 
the  sick-list.  If,  after  looking  at  your  tongue,  and 
feeling  of  your  pulse,  he  pronounces  you  a  proper  candi 
date,  his  secretary  puts  you  down  on  his  books,  and  you 
are  thenceforth  relieved  from  all  duty,  and  have  abundant 
leisure  in  which  to  recover  your  health.  Let  the  boat 
swain  blow  ;  let  the  deck  officer  bellow  ;  let  the  captain 
of  your  gun  hunt  you  up  ;  yet,  if  it  can  be  answered 
by  your  messmates  that  you  are  c  down  on  the  list,'  you 
ride  it  all  out  with  impunity.  The  commodore  himself 
has  then  no  authority  over  you.  But  you  must  not  be 
too  much  elated,  for  your  immunities  are  only  secure 
while  you  are  immured  in  the  dark  hospital  below. 
Should  you  venture  to  get  a  mouthful  of  fresh  air  on  the 
spar-deck,  and  be  there  discovered  by  an  officer,  you 
will  in  vain  plead  your  illness  ;  for  it  is  quite  impossible, 
it  seems,  that  any  true  man-of-war  invalid  can  be  hearty 


416  WHITE  JACKET 

enough  to  crawl  up  the  ladders.     Besides,  the  raw  sea 
air,  as  they  will  tell  you,  is  not  good  for  the  sick. 

But,  notwithstanding  all  this,  notwithstanding  the 
darkness  and  closeness  of  the  sick-bay,  in  which  an 
alleged  invalid  must  be  content  to  shut  himself  up  till  the 
surgeon  pronounces  him  cured,  many  instances  occur, 
especially  in  protracted  bad  weather,  where  pretended 
invalids  will  submit  to  this  dismal  hospital  durance  in 
order  to  escape  hard  work  and  wet  jackets. 

There  is  a  story  told  somewhere  of  the  Devil  taking 
down  the  confessions  of  a  woman  on  a  strip  of  parch 
ment,  and  being  obliged  to  stretch  it  longer  and  longer 
with  his  teeth,  in  order  to  find  room  for  all  the  lady  had 
to  say.  Much  thus  was  it  with  our  surgeon's  steward, 
who  had  to  lengthen  out  his  manuscript  sick-list,  in  order 
to  accommodate  all  the  names  which  were  presented  to 
him  while  we  were  off  the  pitch  of  Cape  Horn.  What 
sailors  call  the  *  Cape  Horn  Fever  '  alarmingly  prevailed  ; 
though  it  disappeared  altogether  when  we  got  into  fine 
weather,  which,  as  with  many  other  invalids,  was  solely 
to  be  imputed  to  the  wonder-working  effects  of  an  entire 
change  of  climate. 

It  seems  very  strange,  but  it  is  really  true,  that  off 
Cape  Horn  some  '  sogers  '  of  sailors  will  stand  cupping, 
and  bleeding,  and  blistering,  before  they  will  budge.  On 
the  other  hand,  there  are  cases  where  a  man  actually  sick 
and  in  need  of  medicine  will  refuse  to  go  on  the  sick-list, 
because  in  that  case  his  allowance  of  grog  must  be  stopped. 

On  board  of  every  American  man-of-war,  bound  for 
sea,  there  is  a  goodly  supply  of  wines  and  various  deli 
cacies  put  on  board — according  to  law — for  the  benefit 
of  the  sick,  whether  officers  or  sailors.  And  one  of  the 
chicken-coops  is  always  reserved  for  the  government 
chickens  destined  for  a  similar  purpose.  But,  on  board 
of  the  Never  sink,  the  only  delicacies  given  to  invalid 


THE  HOSPITAL  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR        417 

sailors  was  a  little  sago  or  arrowroot,  and  they  did  not 
get  that  unless  severely  ill ;  but,  so  far  as  I  could  learn, 
no  wine,  in  any  quantity,  was  ever  prescribed  for  them, 
though  the  government  bottles  often  went  into  the 
ward-room  for  the  benefit  of  indisposed  officers. 

And  though  the  government  chicken-coop  was  re 
plenished  at  every  port,  yet  not  four  pair  of  drum-sticks 
were  ever  boiled  into  broth  for  sick  sailors.  Where  the 
chickens  went  someone  must  have  known  ;  but,  as  I 
cannot  vouch  for  it  myself,  I  will  not  here  back  the 
hardy  assertion  of  the  men,  which  was  that  the  pious 
Pelican — true  to  his  name — was  extremely  fond  of 
poultry.  I  am  the  still  less  disposed  to  believe  this 
scandal,  from  the  continued  leanness  of  the  Pelican, 
which  could  hardly  have  been  the  case  did  he  nourish 
himself  by  so  nutritious  a  dish  as  the  drum-sticks  of 
fowls,  a  diet  prescribed  to  pugilists  in  training.  But 
who  can  avoid  being  suspicious  of  a  very  suspicious 
person  ?  Pelican  !  I  rather  suspect  you  still. 


CHAPTER   LXXVIII 

DISMAL  TIMES   IN  THE   MESS 

IT  was  on  the  first  day  of  the  long,  hot  calm  which  we 
had  on  the  Equator,  that  a  messmate  of  mine,  by  the 
name  of  Shenly,  who  had  been  for  some  weeks  complain 
ing,  at  length  went  on  the  sick-list. 

An  old  gunner's  mate  of  the  mess — Priming,  the  man 
with  the  hare-lip,  who,  true  to  his  tribe,  was  charged 
to  the  muzzle  with  bile,  and,  moreover,  rammed  home 
on  top  of  it  a  wad  of  sailor  superstition — this  gunner's 
mate  indulged  in  some  gloomy  and  savage  remarks — 
strangely  tinged  with  genuine  feeling  and  grief — at  the 
announcement  of  the  sickness  of  Shenly,  coming  as  it  did 
not  long  after  the  almost  fatal  accident  befalling  poor 
Baldy,  captain  of  the  mizen-top,  another  messmate  of 
ours,  and  the  dreadful  fate  of  the  amputated  fore-top  man 
whom  we  buried  in  Rio,  also  our  messmate. 

We  were  cross-legged  seated  at  dinner,  between  the 
guns,  when  the  sad  news  concerning  Shenly  was  first 
communicated. 

*  I  know'd  it,  I  know'd  it,'  said  Priming,  through  his 
nose.  '  Blast  ye,  I  told  ye  so  ; — poor  fellow  !  But 
dam'me,  I  know'd  it.  This  comes  of  having  thirteen 
in  the  mess.  I  hope  he  arn't  dangerous,  men  ?  Poor 
Shenly  !  But,  blast  it,  it  warn't  till  White  Jacket  there 
corned  into  the  mess  that  these  here  things  began.  I 
don't  believe  there  '11  be  more  nor  three  of  us  left  by  the 
time  we  strike  soundings,  men.  But  how  is  he  now  ? 
Have  you  been  down  to  see  him,  any  on  ye  ?  Damn 

418 


DISMAL  TIMES  IN  THE  MESS  419 

you,  you  Jonah  !  I  don't  see  how  you  can  sleep  in  your 
hammock,  knowing  as  you  do  that  by  making  an  odd 
number  in  the  mess  you  have  been  the  death  of  one 
poor  fellow,  and  ruined  Baldy  for  life,  and  here  's  poor 
Shenly  keeled  up.  Blast  you,  and  your  jacket,  say  I.' 

'  My  dear  messmate,'  I  cried,  '  don't  blast  me  any 
more,  for  Heaven's  sake.  Blast  my  jacket  you  may, 
and  I  '11  join  you  in  that,  but  don't  blast  me  ;  for  if  you 
do,  I  shouldn't  wonder  if  I  myself  was  the  next  man  to 
keel  up.' 

'  Gunner's  mate  !  '  said  Jack  Chase,  helping  himself 
to  a  slice  of  beef,  and  sandwiching  it  between  two  large 
biscuits — '  Gunner's  mate  !  White  Jacket  there  is  my 
particular  friend,  and  I  would  take  it  as  a  particular 
favour  if  you  would  knock  off  blasting  him.  It 's  in  bad 
taste,  rude,  and  unworthy  a  gentleman.' 

'  Take  your  back  away  from  that  'ere  gun-carriage, 
will  ye  now,  Jack  Chase  ?  '  cried  Priming,  in  reply,  just 
then  Jack  happening  to  lean  up  against  it.  '  Must  I 
be  all  the  time  cleaning  after  you  fellows  ?  Blast  ye  ! 
I  spent  an  hour  on  that  'ere  gun-carriage  this  very 
mornin'.  But  it  all  comes  of  White  Jacket  there.  If 
it  warn't  for  having  one  too  many,  there  wouldn't  be 
any  crowding  and  jamming  in  the  mess.  I  'm  blessed  if 
we  ar'n't  about  chock-a-block  here  !  Move  further  up 
there,  I  'm  sitting  on  my  leg  !  ' 

'  For  God's  sake,  gunner's  mate,'  cried  I,  '  if  it  will 
content  you,  I  and  my  jacket  will  leave  the  mess.' 

'  I  wish  you  would,  and  be to  you  !  '  he  replied. 

'  And  if  he  does,  you  will  mess  alone,  gunner's  mate,' 
said  Jack  Chase. 

'  That  you  will,'  cried  all. 

'  And  I  wish  to  the  Lord  you  'd  let  me  !  '  growled 
Priming,  irritably  rubbing  his  head  with  the  handle  of 
his  sheath-knife. 


420  WHITE  JACKET 

f  You  are  an  old  bear,  gunner's  mate.'  said  Jack  Chase. 

'  I  am  an  old  Turk,'  he  replied,  drawing  the  flat  blade 
of  his  knife  between  his  teeth,  thereby  producing  a 
whetting,  grating  sound. 

e  Let  him  alone,  let  him  alone,  men,'  said  Jack  Chase. 
'  Only  keep  off  the  tail  of  a  rattlesnake,  and  he  '11  not 
rattle.' 

'  Look  out  he  don't  bite,  though,'  said  Priming,  snap 
ping  his  teeth  ;  and  with  that  he  rolled  off,  growling  as 
he  went. 

Though  I  did  my  best  to  carry  off  my  vexation  with 
an  air  of  indifference,  need  I  say  how  I  cursed  my  jacket, 
that  it  thus  seemed  the  means  of  fastening  on  me  the 
murder  of  one  of  my  shipmates,  and  the  probable  murder 
of  two  more.  For,  had  it  not  been  for  my  jacket,  doubt 
less,  I  had  yet  been  a  member  of  my  old  mess,  and  so 
have  escaped  making  the  luckless  odd  number  among 
my  present  companions. 

All  I  could  say  in  private  to  Priming  had  no  effect ; 
though  I  often  took  him  aside,  to  convince  him  of  the 
philosophical  impossibility  of  my  having  been  accessory 
to  the  misfortunes  of  Baldy,  the  buried  sailor  in  Rio, 
and  Shenly.  But  Priming  knew  better  ;  nothing  could 
move  him  ;  and  he  ever  afterward  eyed  me  as  virtu 
ous  citizens  do  some  notorious  underhand  villain  going 
unhung  of  justice. 

Jacket !  jacket !  thou  hast  much  to  answer  for, 
jacket ! 


CHAPTER    LXXIX 

HOW  MAN-OF-WAR'S  MEN  DIE  AT  SEA 

SHENLY,  my  sick  messmate,  was  a  middle-aged,  hand 
some,  intelligent  seaman,  whom  some  hard  calamity, 
or  perhaps  some  unfortunate  excess,  must  have  driven 
into  the  Navy.  He  told  me  he  had  a  wife  and  two 
children  in  Portsmouth,  in  the  state  of  New  Hampshire. 
Upon  being  examined  by  Cuticle,  the  surgeon,  he  was, 
on  purely  scientific  grounds,  reprimanded  by  that  func 
tionary  for  not  having  previously  appeared  before  him. 
He  was  immediately  consigned  to  one  of  the  invalid  cots 
as  a  serious  case.  His  complaint  was  of  long  standing  ; 
a  pulmonary  one,  now  attended  with  general  prostration. 

The  same  evening  he  grew  so  much  worse,  that,  accord 
ing  to  man-of-war  usage,  we,  his  messmates,  were  officially 
notified  that  we  must  take  turns  at  sitting  up  with  him 
through  the  night.  We  at  once  made  our  arrangements, 
allotting  two  hours  for  a  watch.  Not  till  the  third  night 
did  my  own  turn  come  round.  During  the  day  preced 
ing,  it  was  stated  at  the  mess  that  our  poor  messmate 
was  run  down  completely  ;  the  surgeon  had  given  him  up. 

At  four  bells  (two  o'clock  in  the  morning),  I  went  down 
to  relieve  one  of  my  messmates  at  the  sick  man's  cot. 
The  profound  quietude  of  the  calm  pervaded  the  entire 
frigate  through  all  her  decks.  The  watch  on  duty  were 
dozing  on  the  carronade-slides,  far  above  the  sick-bay  ; 
and  the  watch  below  were  fast  asleep  in  their  hammocks, 
on  the  same  deck  with  the  invalid. 

Groping  my  way  under  these  two  hundred  sleepers, 

421 


422  WHITE  JACKET 

I  entered  the  hospital.  A  dim  lamp  was  burning  on 
the  table,  which  was  screwed  down  to  the  floor.  This 
light  shed  dreary  shadows  over  the  whitewashed  walls 
of  the  place,  making  it  look  like  a  whited  sepulchre 
under  ground.  The  wind-sail  had  collapsed,  and  lay 
motionless  on  the  deck.  The  low  groans  of  the  sick 
were  the  only  sounds  to  be  heard  ;  and,  as  I  advanced, 
some  of  them  rolled  upon  me  their  sleepless,  silent, 
tormented  eyes. 

'  Fan  him,  and  keep  his  forehead  wet  with  this  sponge,' 
whispered  my  messmate,  whom  I  came  to  relieve,  as  I 
drew  near  to  Shenly's  cot,  '  and  wash  the  foam  from  his 
mouth  ;  nothing  more  can  be  done  for  him.  If  he  dies 
before  your  watch  is  out,  call  the  surgeon's  steward  ;  he 
sleeps  in  that  hammock,'  pointing  it  out.  '  Good-bye, 
good-bye,  messmate,'  he  then  whispered,  stooping  over 
the  sick  man  ;  and  so  saying,  he  left  the  place. 

Shenly  was  lying  on  his  back.  His  eyes  were  closed, 
forming  two  dark-blue  pits  in  his  face  ;  his  breath  was 
coming  and  going  with  a  slow,  long-drawn,  mechanical 
precision.  It  was  the  mere  foundering  hull  of  a  man 
that  was  before  me  ;  and  though  it  presented  the  well- 
known  features  of  my  messmate,  yet  I  knew  that  the 
living  soul  of  Shenly  never  more  would  look  out  of  those 
eyes. 

So  warm  had  it  been  during  the  day  that  the  surgeon 
himself,  when  visiting  the  sick-bay,  had  entered  it  in 
his  shirt-sleeves  ;  and  so  warm  was  now  the  night,  that 
even  in  the  lofty  top  I  had  worn  but  a  loose  linen  frock 
and  trowsers.  But  in  this  subterranean  sick-bay,  buried 
in  the  very  bowels  of  the  ship,  and  at  sea  cut  off  from  all 
ventilation,  the  heat  of  the  night  calm  was  intense.  The 
sweat  dripped  from  me  as  if  I  had  just  emerged  from  a 
bath  ;  and  stripping  myself  naked  to  the  waist,  I  sat  by 
the  side  of  the  cot,  and  with  a  bit  of  crumpled  paper — 


HOW  MAN-OF-WAR'S  MEN  DIE  AT  SEA      423 

put  into  my  hand  by  the  sailor  I  had  relieved — kept 
fanning  the  motionless  white  face  before  me. 

I  could  not  help  thinking,  as  I  gazed,  whether  this 
man's  fate  had  not  been  accelerated  by  his  confinement 
in  this  heated  furnace  below  ;  and  whether  many  a  sick 
man  round  me  might  not  soon  improve,  if  but  permitted 
to  swing  his  hammock  in  the  airy  vacancies  of  the  half- 
deck  above,  open  to  the  port-holes,  but  reserved  for  the 
promenade  of  the  officers. 

At  last  the  heavy  breathing  grew  more  and  more 
irregular,  and  gradually  dying  away,  left  forever  the 
unstirring  form  of  Shenly. 

Calling  the  surgeon's  steward,  he  at  once  told  me  to 
rouse  the  master-at-arms,  and  four  or  five  of  my  mess 
mates.  The  master-at-arms  approached,  and  immedi 
ately  demanded  the  dead  man's  bag,  which  was  accord 
ingly  dragged  into  the  bay.  Having  been  laid  on  the 
floor,  and  washed  with  a  bucket  of  water  which  I  drew 
from  the  ocean,  the  body  was  then  dressed  in  a  white 
frock,  trowsers,  and  neckerchief,  taken  out  of  the  bag. 
While  this  was  going  on,  the  master-at-arms — standing 
over  the  operation  with  his  ratan,  and  directing  myself 
and  messmates — indulged  in  much  discursive  levity, 
intended  to  manifest  his  fearlessness  of  death. 

Pierre,  who  had  been  a  '  chummy '  of  Shenly's,  spent 
much  time  in  tying  the  neckerchief  in  an  elaborate  bow, 
and  affectionately  adjusting  the  white  frock  and  trowsers  ; 
but  the  master-at-arms  put  an  end  to  this  by  ordering  us 
to  carry  the  body  up  to  the  gun-deck.  It  was  placed  on 
the  death-board  (used  for  that  purpose),  and  we  pro 
ceeded  with  it  toward  the  main-hatchway,  awkwardly 
crawling  under  the  tiers  of  hammocks,  where  the  entire 
watch  below  was  sleeping.  As,  unavoidably,  we  rocked 
their  pallets,  the  man-of-war's  men  would  cry  out  against 
us  ;  through  the  mutterings  of  curses,  the  corpse  reached 


424  WHITE  JACKET 

the  hatchway.  Here  the  board  slipped,  and  some  time 
was  spent  in  readjusting  the  body.  At  length  we  de 
posited  it  on  the  gun-deck,  between  two  guns,  and  a 
union  jack  being  thrown  over  it  for  a  pall,  I  was  left  again 
to  watch  by  its  side. 

I  had  not  been  seated  on  my  shot-box  three  minutes, 
when  the  messenger-boy  passed  me  on  his  way  forward  ; 
presently  the  slow,  regular  stroke  of  the  ship's  great 
bell  was  heard,  proclaiming  through  the  calm  the  ex 
piration  of  the  watch  ;  it  was  four  o'clock  in  the  morning. 

Poor  Shenly  !  thought  I,  that  sounds  like  your  knell ! 
and  here  you  lie  becalmed,  in  the  last  calm  of  all ! 

Hardly  had  the  brazen  din  died  away,  when  the  boat 
swain  and  his  mates  mustered  round  the  hatchway, 
within  a  yard  or  two  of  the  corpse,  and  the  usual  thunder 
ing  call  was  given  for  the  watch  below  to  turn  out. 

%  All  the  starboard  watch,  ahoy !  On  deck  there, 
below  !  Wide  awake  there,  sleepers  !  ' 

But  the  dreamless  sleeper  by  my  side,  who  had  so  often 
sprung  from  his  hammock  at  that  summons,  moved  not 
a  limb  ;  the  blue  sheet  over  him  lay  unwrinkled. 

A  messmate  of  the  other  watch  now  came  to  relieve 
me ;  but  I  told  him  I  chose  to  remain  where  I  was  till 
daylight  came. 


CHAPTER   LXXX 

THE  LAST   STITCH 

JUST  before  daybreak  two  of  the  sailmaker's  gang  drew 
near,  each  with  a  lantern,  carrying  some  canvas,  two 
large  shot,  needles,  and  twine.  I  knew  their  errand  ; 
for  in  men-of-war  the  sailmaker  is  the  undertaker. 

They  laid  the  body  on  deck,  and,  after  fitting  the 
canvas  to  it,  seated  themselves,  cross-legged  like  tailors, 
one  on  each  side,  and,  with  their  lanterns  before  them, 
went  to  stitching  away,  as  if  mending  an  old  sail.  Both 
were  old  men,  with  grizzled  hair  and  beard,  and  shrunken 
faces.  They  belonged  to  that  small  class  of  aged  sea 
men  who,  for  their  previous  long  and  faithful  services, 
are  retained  in  the  Navy  more  as  pensioners  upon  its 
merited  bounty  than  anything  else.  They  are  set  to 
light  and  easy  duties. 

'  Ar'n't  this  the  fore-top  man,  Shenly  ?  '  asked  the 
foremost,  looking  full  at  the  frozen  face  before  him. 

'  Ay,  ay,  old  Ringrope,'  said  the  other,  drawing  his 
hand  far  back  with  a  long  thread,  '  I  thinks  it 's  him  ; 
and  he  's  further  aloft  now,  I  hope,  than  ever  he  was  at 
the  fore-truck.  But  I  only  hopes  ;  I  'm  afeard  this 
ar'n't  the  last  on  him  !  ' 

'  His  hull  here  will  soon  be  going  out  of  sight  below 
hatches,  though,  old  Thrummings,'  replied  Ringrope, 
placing  two  heavy  cannon-balls  in  the  foot  of  the  canvas 
shroud. 

*  I  don't  know  that,  old  man  ;  I  never  yet  sewed  up 
a  shipmate  but  he  spooked  me  arterward.  I  tell  ye, 

425 


426  WHITE  JACKET 

Ringrope,  these  'ere  corpses  is  cunning.  You  think  they 
sinks  deep,  but  they  comes  up  agin  as  soon  as  you  sails 
over  'em.  They  lose  the  number  of  their  mess,  and  their 
messmates  sticks  their  spoons  in  the  rack  ;  but  no  good 
— no  good,  old  Ringrope  ;  they  ar'n't  dead  yet.  I  tell 
ye,  now,  ten  best-bower  anchors  wouldn't  sink  this  'ere 
topman.  He  '11  be  soon  coming  in  the  wake  of  the  thirty- 
nine  spooks  what  spooks  me  every  night  in  my  hammock 
— jist  afore  the  mid- watch  is  called.  Small  thanks  I  gets 
for  my  pains  ;  and  every  one  on  'em  looks  so  'proachf ul- 
like,  with  a  sailmaker's  needle  through  his  nose.  I  've 
been  thinkin',  old  Ringrope,  it 's  all  wrong  that  'ere  last 
stitch  we  takes.  Depend  on  't,  they  don't  like  it — none 
on  'em.' 

I  was  standing  leaning  over  a  gun,  gazing  at  the  two 
old  men.  The  last  remark  reminded  me  of  a  super 
stitious  custom  generally  practised  by  most  sea-under 
takers  upon  these  occasions.  I  resolved  that,  if  I  could 
help  it,  it  should  not  take  place  upon  the  remains  of 
Shenly. 

'  Thrummings,'  said  I,  advancing  to  the  last  speaker, 
'  you  are  right.  That  last  thing  you  do  to  the  canvas 
is  the  very  reason,  be  sure  of  it,  that  brings  the  ghosts 
after  you,  as  you  say.  So  don't  do  it  to  this  poor  fellow, 
I  entreat.  Try  once,  now,  how  it  goes  not  to  do  it.' 

'  What  do  you  say  to  the  youngster,  old  man  ?  '  said 
Thrummings,  holding  up  his  lantern  into  his  comrade's 
wrinkled  face,  as  if  deciphering  some  ancient  parchment. 

'  I  'm  agin  all  innowations,'  said  Ringrope  ;  '  it 's  a 
good  old  fashion,  that  last  stitch  ;  it  keeps  'em  snug, 
d'  ye  see,  youngster.  I  'm  blest  if  they  could  sleep  sound, 
if  it  wa'n't  for  that.  No,  no,  Thrummings  !  no  inno 
wations  ;  I  won't  hear  on  't.  I  goes  for  the  last  stitch  !  ' 

1  S'pose  you  was  going  to  be  sewed  up  yourself,  old 
Ringrope,  would  you  like  the  last  stitch  then  ?  You  are 


THE  LAST  STITCH  427 

an  old  gun,  Ringrope  ;  you  can't  stand  looking  out  at 
your  port-hole  much  longer,'  said  Thrummings,  as  his 
own  palsied  hands  were  quivering  over  the  canvas. 

'  Better  say  that  to  yourself,  old  man,'  replied  Ring- 
rope,  stooping  close  to  the  light  to  thread  his  coarse 
needle,  which  trembled  in  his  withered  hands  like  the 
needle  in  a  compass  of  a  Greenland  ship  near  the  Pole. 
4  You  ain't  long  for  the  sarvice.  I  wish  I  could  give 
you  some  o'  the  blood  in  my  veins,  old  man  !  ' 

'  Ye  ain't  got  ne'er  a  teaspoonful  to  spare/  said  Thrum 
mings.  '  It  will  go  hard,  and  I  wouldn't  want  to  do  it ; 
but  I  'm  afear'd  I  '11  have  the  sewing  on  ye  up  afore 
long  !  ' 

1  Sew  me  up  ?  Me  dead  and  you  alive,  old  man  ?  ' 
shrieked  Ringrope.  '  Well,  I  've  he'rd  the  parson  of  the 
old  Independence  say  as  how  old  age  was  deceitful ;  but 
I  never  seed  it  so  true  afore  this  blessed  night.  I  'm 
sorry  for  ye,  old  man — to  see  you  so  innocent-like,  and 
Death  all  the  while  turning  in  and  out  with  you  in  your 
hammock,  for  all  the  world  like  a  hammock-mate.' 

'  You  lie  !  old  man/  cried  Thrummings,  shaking  with 
rage.  '  It 's  you  that  have  Death  for  a  hammock-mate  ; 
it 's  you  that  will  make  a  hole  in  the  shot-locker  soon.' 

'  Take  that  back  !  '  cried  Ringrope,  huskily,  leaning  far 
over  the  corpse,  and,  needle  in  hand,  menacing  his  com 
panion  with  his  aguish  fist.  *  Take  that  back,  or  I  '11 
throttle  your  lean  bag  of  wind  for  ye  !  ' 

'  Blast  ye  !  old  chaps,  ain't  ye  any  more  manners  than 
to  be  fighting  over  a  dead  man  ?  '  cried  one  of  the  sail- 
maker's  mates,  coming  down  from  the  spar-deck.  '  Bear 
a  hand  ! — bear  a  hand  !  and  get  through  with  that  job  !  ' 

'  Only  one  more  stitch  to  take/  muttered  Ringrope, 
creeping  near  the  face. 

'  Drop  your  palm  then,  and  let  Thrummings  take 
it ;  follow  me — the  foot  of  the  mainsail  wants  mending 


428  WHITE  JACKET 

—must  do  it  afore  a  breeze  springs  up.  D'  ye  hear,  old 
chap  !  I  say,  drop  your  palm,  and  follow  me.' 

At  the  reiterated  command  of  his  superior,  Ringrope 
rose,  and,  turning  to  his  comrade,  said,  *  I  take  it  all 
back,  Thrummings,  and  I  'm  sorry  for  it,  too.  But 
mind  ye,  take  that  'ere  last  stitch,  now  ;  if  ye  don't, 
there  's  no  tellin'  the  consekenses.' 

As  the  mate  and  his  man  departed,  I  stole  up  to 
Thrummings,  '  Don't  do  it — don't  do  it,  now,  Thrum 
mings — depend  on  it,  it 's  wrong  !  ' 

'  Well,  youngster,  I  '11  try  this  here  one  without  it  for 
jist  this  here  once  ;  and  if,  arter  that,  he  don't  spook  me, 
I  '11  be  dead  agin  the  last  stitch  as  long  as  my  name  is 
Thrummings.' 

So,  without  mutilation,  the  remains  were  replaced 
between  the  guns,  the  union  jack  again  thrown  over 
them,  and  I  reseated  myself  on  the  shot-box. 


CHAPTER    LXXXI 


QUARTERS  over  in  the  morning,  the  boatswain  and  his 
four  mates  stood  round  the  main-hatchway,  and  after 
giving  the  usual  whistle,  made  the  customary  announce 
ment — '  All  hands,  bury  the  dead,  ahoy  !  ' 

In  a  man-of-war,  everything,  even  to  a  man's  funeral 
and  burial,  proceeds  with  the  unrelenting  promptitude 
of  the  martial  code.  And  whether  it  is,  All  hands,  bury 
the  dead  !  or,  All  hands,  splice  the  main-brace,  the  order 
is  given  in  the  same  hoarse  tones. 

Both  officers  and  men  assembled  in  the  lee  waist, 
and  through  that  bareheaded  crowd  the  messmates 
of  Shenly  brought  his  body  to  the  same  gangway 
where  it  had  thrice  winced  under  the  scourge.  But 
there  is  something  in  death  that  ennobles  even  a 
pauper's  corpse  ;  and  the  captain  himself  stood  bare 
headed  before  the  remains  of  a  man  whom,  with  his  hat 
on,  he  had  sentenced  to  the  ignominious  gratings  when 
alive. 

'  /  am  the  resurrection  and  the  life !  '  solemnly  began 
the  chaplain,  in  full  canonicals,  the  prayer-book  in  his 
hand. 

'  Damn  you  !  off  those  booms  !  '  roared  a  boatswain's 
mate  to  a  crowd  of  topmen,  who  had  elevated  themselves 
to  gain  a  better  view  of  the  scene. 

*  We  commit  this  body  to  the  deep ! '  At  the  word, 
Shenly's  messmates  tilted  the  board,  and  the  dead  sailor 
sank  in  the  sea. 

429 


430  WHITE  JACKET 

'  Look  aloft/  whispered  Jack  Chase.  '  See  that  bird  ! 
it  is  the  spirit  of  Shenly.' 

Gazing  upward,  all  beheld  a  snow-white,  solitary  fowl, 
which — whence  coming  no  one  could  tell — had  been 
hovering  over  the  mainmast  during  the  service,  and 
was  now  sailing  far  up  into  the  depths  of  the  sky. 


CHAPTER   LXXXII 

WHAT   REMAINS    OF   A   MAN-OF-WAR'S    MAN    AFTER   HIS 
BURIAL  AT  SEA 

UPON  examining  Shenly's  bag,  a  will  was  found,  scratched 
in  pencil,  upon  a  blank  leaf  in  the  middle  of  his  Bible  ; 
or,  to  use  the  phrase  of  one  of  the  seamen,  in  the  midships, 
atween  the  Bible  and  Testament,  where  the  Pothecary 
(Apocrypha)  uses  to  be. 

The  will  was  comprised  in  one  solitary  sentence,  ex 
clusive  of  the  dates  and  signatures  :  *  In  case  I  die  on 
the  voyage,  the  purser  will  please  pay  over  my  wages  to  my 
wife,  who  lives  in  Portsmouth,  New  Hampshire.1 

Besides  the  testator's,  there  were  two  signatures  of 
witnesses. 

This  last  will  and  testament  being  shown  to  the  purser, 
who,  it  seems,  had  been  a  notary,  or  surrogate,  or  some 
sort  of  cosy  chamber  practitioner  in  his  time,  he  declared 
that  it  must  be  '  proved.'  So  the  witnesses  were  called, 
and  after  recognising  their  hands  to  the  paper,  for  the 
purpose  of  additionally  testing  their  honesty,  they  were 
interrogated  concerning  the  day  on  which  they  had 
signed — whether  it  was  Banyan  Day,  or  Duff  Day,  or 
Swamp-seed  Day  ;  for  among  the  sailors  on  board  a 
man-of-war  the  land  terms,  Monday,  Tuesday,  Wednes 
day,  are  almost  unknown.  In  place  of  these  they  substi 
tute  nautical  names,  some  of  which  are  significant  of  the 
daily  bill  of  fare  at  dinner  for  the  week. 

The  two  witnesses  were  somewhat  puzzled  by  the 
attorney-like  questions  of  the  purser,  till  a  third  party 

431 


432  WHITE  JACKET 

came  along,  one  of  the  ship's  barbers,  and  declared,  of 
his  own  knowledge,  that  Shenly  executed  the  instrument 
on  a  Shaving  Day  ;  for  the  deceased  seaman  had  in 
formed  him  of  the  circumstance  when  he  came  to  have 
his  beard  reaped  on  the  morning  of  the  event. 

In  the  purser's  opinion,  this  settled  the  question  ;  and 
it  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  widow  duly  received  her 
husband's  death-earned  wages. 

Shenly  was  dead  and  gone  ;  and  what  was  Shenly's 
epitaph  ? 

— '  D.  D.'- 

opposite  his  name  in  the  purser's  books,  in  '  Black's  best 
Writing  Fluid ' — funereal  name  and  funereal  hue — 
meaning  '  Discharged,  Dead.' 


CHAPTER   LXXXIII 

A   MAN-OF-WAR   COLLEGE 

IN  our  man-of-war  world,  Life  comes  in  at  one  gangway 
and  Death  goes  overboard  at  the  other.  Under  the 
man-of-war  scourge,  curses  mix  with  tears  ;  and  the  sigh 
and  the  sob  furnish  the  bass  to  the  shrill  octave  of  those 
who  laugh  to  drown  buried  griefs  of  their  own.  Checkers 
were  played  in  the  waist  at  the  time  of  Shenly's  burial ; 
and  as  the  body  plunged,  a  player  swept  the  board.  The 
bubbles  had  hardly  burst,  when  all  hands  were  piped  down 
by  the  boatswain,  and  the  old  jests  were  heard  again,  as 
if  Shenly  himself  were  there  to  hear. 

This  man-of-war  life  has  not  left  me  unhardened. 
I  cannot  stop  to  weep  over  Shenly  now  ;  that  would  be 
false  to  the  life  I  depict ;  wearing  no  mourning  weeds, 
I  resume  the  task  of  portraying  our  man-of-war  world. 

Among  the  various  other  vocations,  all  driven  abreast 
on  board  of  the  Neversink,  was  that  of  the  schoolmaster. 
There  were  two  academies  in  the  frigate.  One  com 
prised  the  apprentice  boys,  who,  upon  certain  days  of 
the  week,  were  indoctrinated  in  the  mysteries  of  the 
primer  by  an  invalid  corporal  of  marines,  a  slender, 
wizen-cheeked  man,  who  had  received  a  liberal  infant- 
school  education. 

The  other  school  was  a  far  more  pretentious  affair — 
a  sort  of  army  and  navy  seminary  combined,  where 
mystical  mathematical  problems  were  solved  by  the 
midshipmen,  and  great  ships-of-the-line  were  navigated 
over  imaginary  shoals  by  unimaginable  observations  of 

2E 


434  WHITE  JACKET 

the  moon  and  the  stars,  and  learned  lectures  were  de 
livered  upon  great  guns,  small  arms,  and  the  curvilinear 
lines  described  by  bombs  in  the  air. 

'  The  Professor '  was  the  title  bestowed  upon  the 
erudite  gentleman  who  conducted  this  seminary,  and 
by  that  title  alone  was  he  known  throughout  the  ship. 
He  was  domiciled  in  the  ward-room,  and  circulated 
there  on  a  social  par  with  the  purser,  surgeon,  and  other 
non-combatants  and  Quakers.  By  being  advanced  to  the 
dignity  of  a  peerage  in  the  ward-room,  Science  and 
Learning  were  ennobled  in  the  person  of  this  professor, 
even  as  Divinity  was  honoured  in  the  chaplain  enjoying 
the  rank  of  a  spiritual  peer. 

Every  other  afternoon,  while  at  sea,  the  professor 
assembled  his  pupils  on  the  half -deck,  near  the  long 
twenty-four-pounders.  A  bass  drum-head  was  his  desk, 
his  pupils  forming  a  semicircle  around  him,  seated  on 
shot-boxes  and  match-tubs. 

They  were  in  the  jelly  of  youth,  and  this  learned 
professor  poured  into  their  susceptible  hearts  all  the 
gentle,  gunpowder  maxims  of  war.  Presidents  of  Peace 
Societies  and  Superintendents  of  Sabbath  Schools,  must 
it  not  have  been  a  most  interesting  sight  ? 

But  the  professor  himself  was  a  noteworthy  person. 
A  tall,  thin,  spectacled  man,  about  forty  years  old,  with 
a  student's  stoop  in  his  shoulders,  and  wearing  uncom 
monly  scanty  pantaloons,  exhibiting  an  undue  proportion 
of  his  boots.  In  early  life  he  had  been  a  cadet  in  the 
military  academy  of  West  Point ;  but,  becoming  very 
weak-sighted,  and  thereby  in  a  good  manner  disqualified 
for  active  service  in  the  field,  he  had  declined  entering 
the  Army,  and  accepted  the  office  of  professor  in  the  Navy. 

His  studies  at  West  Point  had  thoroughly  grounded 
him  in  a  knowledge  of  gunnery  ;  and,  as  he  was  not  a 
little  of  a  pedant,  it  was  sometimes  amusing,  when  the 


A  MAN-OF-WAR  COLLEGE  435 

sailors  were  at  quarters,  to  hear  him  criticise  their  evolu 
tions  at  the  batteries.  He  would  quote  Dr.  Button's 
Tracts  on  the  subject,  also,  in  the  original,  The  French 
Bombardier,  and  wind  up  by  Italian  passages  from  the 
Prattica  Manuale  deW  Artiglieria. 

Though  not  required  by  the  Navy  regulations  to 
instruct  his  scholars  in  aught  but  the  application  of 
mathematics  to  navigation,  yet  besides  this,  and  besides 
instructing  them  in  the  theory  of  gunnery,  he  also  sought 
to  root  them  in  the  theory  of  frigate  and  fleet  tactics. 
To  be  sure,  he  himself  did  not  know  how  to  splice  a  rope 
or  furl  a  sail ;  and,  owing  to  his  partiality  for  strong 
coffee,  he  was  apt  to  be  nervous  when  we  fired  salutes  ; 
yet  all  this  did  not  prevent  him  from  delivering  lectures 
on  cannonading  and  '  breaking  the  enemy's  line.' 

He  had  arrived  at  his  knowledge  of  tactics  by  silent, 
solitary  study,  and  earnest  meditation  in  the  sequestered 
retreat  of  his  state-room.  His  case  was  somewhat 
parallel  to  the  Scotchman's — John  Clerk,  Esq.,  of  Eldin 
• — who,  though  he  had  never  been  to  sea,  composed  a 
quarto  treatise  on  fleet-fighting,  which  to  this  day  re 
mains  a  text-book  ;  and  he  also  originated  a  nautical 
manoeuvre,  which  has  given  to  England  many  a  victory 
over  her  foes. 

Now  there  was  a  large  blackboard,  something  like 
a  great-gun  target — only  it  was  square — which  during 
the  professor's  lectures  was  placed  upright  on  the  gun- 
deck,  supported  behind  by  three  boarding-pikes.  And 
here  he  would  chalk  out  diagrams  of  great  fleet  engage 
ments  ;  making  marks,  like  the  soles  of  shoes,  for  the 
ships,  and  drawing  a  dog-vane  in  one  corner  to  denote 
the  assumed  direction  of  the  wind.  This  done,  with 
a  cutlass  he  would  point  out  every  spot  of  interest. 

4  Now,  young  gentlemen,  the  board  before  you  ex 
hibits  the  disposition  of  the  British  West  Indian  squadron 


436  WHITE  JACKET 

under  Rodney,  when,  early  on  the  morning  of  the  9th  of 
April,  in  the  year  of  our  blessed  Lord  1782,  he  discovered 
part  of  the  French  fleet,  commanded  by  the  Count  de 
Grasse,  lying  under  the  north  end  of  the  Island  of 
Dominica.  It  was  at  this  juncture  that  the  admiral 
gave  the  signal  for  the  British  line  to  prepare  for  battle, 
and  stand  on.  D'  ye  understand,  young  gentlemen  ? 
Well,  the  British  van  having  nearly  fetched  up  with 
the  centre  of  the  enemy — who,  be  it  remembered,  were 
then  on  the  starboard  tack — and  Rodney's  centre  and 
rear  being  yet  becalmed  under  the  lee  of  the  land — the 
question  I  ask  you  is,  What  should  Rodney  now  do  ?  ' 

'  Blaze  away,  by  all  means !  '  responded  a  rather 
confident  reefer  who  had  zealously  been  observing  the 
diagram. 

'  But,  sir,  his  centre  and  rear  are  still  becalmed,  and 
his  van  has  not  yet  closed  with  the  enemy.' 

'  Wait  till  he  does  come  in  range,  and  then  blaze  away,' 
said  the  reefer. 

'  Permit  me  to  remark,  Mr.  Pert,  that  "  blaze  away  " 
is  not  a  strictly  technical  term  ;  and  also  permit  me  to 
hint,  Mr.  Pert,  that  you  should  consider  the  subject 
rather  more  deeply  before  you  hurry  forward  your 
opinion.' 

This  rebuke  not  only  abashed  Mr.  Pert,  but  for  a  time 
intimidated  the  rest ;  and  the  professor  was  obliged  to 
proceed,  and  extricate  the  British  fleet  by  himself.  He 
concluded  by  awarding  Admiral  Rodney  the  victory, 
which  must  have  been  exceedingly  gratifying  to  the 
family  pride  of  the  surviving  relatives  and  connections 
of  that  distinguished  hero. 

'  Shall  I  clean  the  board,  sir  ?  '  now  asked  Mr.  Pert, 
brightening  up. 

'No,  sir  ;  not  till  you  have  saved  that  crippled  French 
ship  in  the  corner.  That  ship,  young  gentlemen,  is  the 


A  MAN-OF-WAR  COLLEGE  437 

Glorieuse  ;  you  perceive  she  is  cut  off  from  her  consorts, 
and  the  whole  British  fleet  is  giving  chase  to  her.  Her 
bowsprit  is  gone  ;  her  rudder  is  torn  away  ;  she  has  one 
hundred  round  shot  in  her  hull,  and  two-thirds  of  her 
men  are  dead  or  dying.  What 's  to  be  done  ?  the  wind 
being  at  north-east  by  north  ?  ' 

'  Well,  sir,'  said  Mr.  Dash,  a  chivalric  young  gentle 
man  from  Virginia,  '  I  wouldn't  strike  yet ;  I  'd  nail  my 
colours  to  the  main-royal-mast !  I  would,  by  Jove  !  ' 

'  That  would  not  save  your  ship,  sir  ;  besides,  your 
mainmast  has  gone  by  the  board.' 

'  I  think,  sir,'  said  Mr.  Slim,  a  diffident  youth,  *  I  think, 
sir,  I  would  haul  back  the  fore-topsail.' 

*  And  why  so  ?  of  what  service  would  that  be,  I  should 
like  to  know,  Mr.  Slim  ?  ' 

'  I  can't  tell  exactly  ;  but  I  think  it  would  help  her  a 
little,'  was  the  timid  reply. 

'  Not  a  whit,  sir — not  one  particle  ;  besides,  you  can't 
haul  back  your  fore-topsail  —  your  foremast  is  lying 
across  your  forecastle.' 

*  Haul  back  the  main-topsail,  then,'  suggested  another. 
'  Can't  be  done  ;    your  mainmast,  also,  has  gone  by 

the  board  !  ' 

'  Mizen -topsail  ?  '  meekly  suggested  little  Boat-Plug. 

'  Your  mizen-topmast,  let  me  inform  you,  sir,  was 
shot  down  in  the  first  of  the  fight !  ' 

'  Well,  sir,'  cried  Mr.  Dash,  '  I  'd  tack  ship,  anyway  ; 
bid  'em  good-bye  with  a  broadside  ;  nail  my  flag  to  the 
keel,  if  there  was  no  other  place  ;  and  blow  my  brains 
out  on  the  poop  !  ' 

'  Idle,  idle,  sir  !  worse  than  idle  !  you  are  carried 
away,  Mr.  Dash,  by  your  ardent  Southern  temperament ! 
Let  me  inform  you,  young  gentleman,  that  this  ship/ 
touching  it  with  his  cutlass,  '  can  not  be  saved.' 

Then,  throwing  down  his  cutlass,  '  Mr.  Pert,  have  the 


438  WHITE  JACKET 

goodness  to  hand  me  one  of  those  cannon-balls  from  the 
rack.' 

Balancing  the  iron  sphere  in  one  hand,  the  learned 
professor  began  fingering  it  with  the  other,  like  Columbus 
illustrating  the  rotundity  of  the  globe  before  the  Royal 
Commission  of  Castilian  Ecclesiastics. 

'  Young  gentlemen,  I  resume  my  remarks  on  the 
passage  of  a  shot  in  vacuo,  which  remarks  were  inter 
rupted  yesterday  by  general  quarters.  After  quoting 
that  admirable  passage  in  Spearman's  British  Gunner, 
I  then  laid  it  down,  you  remember,  that  the  path  of  a 
shot  in  vacuo  describes  a  parabolic  curve.  I  now  add 
that,  agreeably  to  the  method  pursued  by  the  illustrious 
Newton  in  treating  the  subject  of  curvilinear  motion, 
I  consider  the  trajectory  or  curve  described  by  a  moving 
body  in  space  as  consisting  of  a  series  of  right  lines, 
described  in  successive  intervals  of  time,  and  consti 
tuting  the  diagonals  of  parallelograms  formed  in  a  ver 
tical  plane  between  the  vertical  deflections  caused  by 
gravity  and  the  production  of  the  line  of  motion  which 
has  been  described  in  each  preceding  interval  of  time. 
This  must  be  obvious  ;  for,  if  you  say  that  the  passage 
in  vacuo  of  this  cannon-ball,  now  held  in  my  hand,  would 
describe  otherwise  than  a  series  of  right  lines,  etc.,  then 
you  are  brought  to  the  reductio  ad  absurdum,  that  the 
diagonals  of  parallelograms  are ' 

'  All  hands  reef  topsail !  '  was  now  thundered  forth 
by  the  boatswain's  mates.  The  shot  fell  from  the  pro 
fessor's  palm  ;  his  spectacles  dropped  on  his  nose,  and 
the  school  tumultuously  broke  up,  the  pupils  scrambling 
up  the  ladders  with  the  sailors  who  had  been  overhearing 
the  lecture. 


CHAPTER    LXXXIV 

MAN-OF-WAR  BARBERS 

THE  allusion  to  one  of  the  ship's  barbers  in  a  previous 
chapter,  together  with  the  recollection  of  how  conspicuous 
a  part  they  enacted  in  a  tragical  drama  soon  to  be  related, 
leads  me  now  to  introduce  them  to  the  reader. 

Among  the  numerous  artists  and  professors  of  polite 
trades  in  the  Navy,  none  are  held  in  higher  estimation 
or  drive  a  more  profitable  business  than  these  barbers. 
And  it  may  well  be  imagined  that  the  five  hundred  heads 
of  hair  and  five  hundred  beards  of  a  frigate  should  furnish 
no  small  employment  for  those  to  whose  faithful  care 
they  may  be  entrusted.  As  everything  connected  with 
the  domestic  affairs  of  a  man-of-war  comes  under  the 
supervision  of  the  martial  executive,  so  certain  barbers 
are  formally  licensed  by  the  first  lieutenant.  The 
better  to  attend  to  the  profitable  duties  of  their  calling, 
they  are  exempted  from  all  ship's  duty,  except  that  of 
standing  night-watches  at  sea,  mustering  at  quarters, 
and  coming  on  deck  when  all  hands  are  called.  They 
are  rated  as  able  seamen,  or  ordinary  seamen,  and  receive 
their  wages  as  such ;  but,  in  addition  to  this,  they  are 
liberally  recompensed  for  their  professional  services. 
Herein  their  rate  of  pay  is  fixed  for  every  sailor  mani 
pulated — so  much  per  quarter,  which  is  charged  to  the 
sailor,  and  credited  to  his  barber  on  the  books  of  the 
purser. 

It  has  been  seen  that  while  a  man-of-war  barber  is 
shaving  his  customers  at  so  much  per  chin,  his  wages  as  a 

439 


440  WHITE  JACKET 

seaman  are  still  running  on,  which  makes  him  a  sort  of 
sleeping  partner  of  a  sailor  ;  nor  are  the  sailor  wages  he 
receives  altogether  to  be  reckoned  as  earnings.  Consider 
ing  the  circumstances,  however,  not  much  objection  can 
be  made  to  the  barbers  on  this  score.  But  there  were 
instances  of  men  in  the  Neversink  receiving  government 
money  in  part  pay  for  work  done  for  private  individuals. 
Among  these  were  several  accomplished  tailors,  who 
nearly  the  whole  cruise  sat  cross-legged  on  the  half-deck, 
making  coats,  pantaloons,  and  vests  for  the  quarter-deck 
officers.  Some  of  these  men,  though  knowing  little  or 
nothing  about  sailor  duties,  and  seldom  or  never  perform 
ing  them,  stood  upon  the  ship's  books  as  ordinary  sea 
men,  entitled  to  ten  dollars  a  month.  Why  was  this  ? 
Previous  to  shipping  they  had  divulged  the  fact  of  their 
being  tailors.  True,  the  officers  who  employed  them 
upon  their  wardrobes  paid  them  for  their  work,  but 
some  of  them  in  such  a  way  as  to  elicit  much  grumbling 
from  the  tailors.  At  any  rate,  these  makers  and  menders 
of  clothes  did  not  receive  from  some  of  these  officers  an 
amount  equal  to  what  they  could  have  fairly  earned 
ashore  by  doing  the  same  work.  It  was  a  consider 
able  saving  to  the  officers  to  have  their  clothes  made  on 
board. 

The  men  belonging  to  the  carpenter's  gang  furnished 
another  case  in  point.  There  were  some  six  or  eight 
allotted  to  this  department.  All  the  cruise  they  were 
hard  at  work.  At  what  ?  Mostly  making  chests  of 
drawers,  canes,  little  ships  and  schooners,  swifts,  and 
other  elaborated  trifles,  chiefly  for  the  captain.  What 
did  the  captain  pay  them  for  their  trouble  ?  Nothing. 
But  the  United  States  government  paid  them  ;  two  of 
them  (the  mates)  at  nineteen  dollars  a  month,  and  the 
rest  receiving  the  pay  of  able  seamen,  twelve  dollars. 

To  return. 


MAN-OF-WAR  BARBERS  441 

The  regular  days  upon  which  the  barbers  shall  exercise 
their  vocation  are  set  down  on  the  ship's  calendar,  and 
known  as  shaving  days.  On  board  of  the  Neversink 
these  days  are  Wednesdays  and  Saturdays  ;  when,  im 
mediately  after  breakfast,  the  barbers'  shops  were  opened 
to  customers.  They  were  in  different  parts  of  the  gun- 
deck,  between  the  long  twenty-four-pounders.  Their 
furniture,  however,  was  not  very  elaborate,  hardly  equal 
to  the  sumptuous  appointments  of  metropolitan  barbers. 
Indeed,  it  merely  consisted  of  a  match-tub,  elevated  upon 
a  shot-box,  as  a  barber's  chair  for  the  patient.  No 
Psyche  glasses  ;  no  hand-mirror  ;  no  ewer  and  basin  ; 
no  comfortable  padded  footstool ;  nothing,  in  short, 
that  makes  a  shore  '  shave  '  such  a  luxury. 

Nor  are  the  implements  of  these  man-of-war  barbers 
out  of  keeping  with  the  rude  appearance  of  their  shops. 
Their  razors  are  of  the  simplest  patterns,  and,  from 
their  jaggedness,  would  seem  better  fitted  for  the  prepar 
ing  and  harrowing  of  the  soil  than  for  the  ultimate  reap 
ing  of  the  crop.  But  this  is  no  matter  for  wonder,  since 
so  many  chins  are  to  be  shaven,  and  a  razor-case  holds 
but  two  razors.  For  only  two  razors  does  a  man-of-war 
barber  have,  and,  like  the  marine  sentries  at  the  gang 
ways  in  port,  these  razors  go  off  and  on  duty  in  rota 
tion.  One  brush,  too,  brushes  every  chin,  and  one  lather 
lathers  them  all.  No  private  brushes  and  boxes  ;  no 
reservations  whatever. 

As  it  would  be  altogether  too  much  trouble  for  a  man- 
of-war's  man  to  keep  his  own  shaving  tools  and  shave 
himself  at  sea,  and  since,  therefore,  nearly  the  whole 
ship's  company  patronise  the  ship's  barbers,  and  as  the 
seamen  must  be  shaven  by  evening  quarters  of  the  days 
appointed  for  the  business,  it  may  be  readily  imagined 
what  a  scene  of  bustle  and  confusion  there  is  when  the 
razors  are  being  applied.  First  come,  first  served,  is  the 


442  WHITE  JACKET 

motto  ;  and  often  you  have  to  wait  for  hours  together, 
sticking  to  your  position  (like  one  of  an  Indian  file  of 
merchants'  clerks  getting  letters  out  of  the  post-office), 
ere  you  have  a  chance  to  occupy  the  pedestal  of  the 
match-tub.  Often  the  crowd  of  quarrelsome  candidates 
wrangle  and  fight  for  precedency,  while  at  all  times  the 
interval  is  employed  by  the  garrulous  in  every  variety 
of  ship  gossip. 

As  the  shaving  days  are  unalterable,  they  often  fall 
upon  days  of  high  seas  and  tempestuous  winds,  when 
the  vessel  pitches  and  rolls  in  a  frightful  manner.  In 
consequence,  many  valuable  lives  are  jeopardised  from 
the  razor  being  plied  under  such  untoward  circum 
stances.  But  these  sea-barbers  pride  themselves  upon 
their  sea-legs,  and  often  you  will  see  them  standing  over 
their  patients,  with  their  feet  wide  apart,  and  scientifically 
swaying  their  bodies  to  the  motion  of  the  ship,  as  they 
flourish  their  edge-tools  about  the  lips,  nostrils,  and 
jugular. 

As  I  looked  upon  the  practitioner  and  patient  at  such 
times,  I  could  not  help  thinking  that,  if  the  sailor  had 
any  insurance  on  his  life,  it  would  certainly  be  deemed 
forfeited  should  the  president  of  the  company  chance 
to  lounge  by  and  behold  him  in  that  imminent  peril. 
For  myself,  I  accounted  it  an  excellent  preparation  for 
going  into  a  sea-fight,  where  fortitude  in  standing  up  to 
your  gun  and  running  the  risk  of  all  splinters,  comprise 
part  of  the  practical  qualities  that  make  up  an  efficient 
man-of-war's  man. 

It  remains  to  be  related,  that  these  barbers  of  ours 
had  their  labours  considerably  abridged  by  a  fashion 
prevailing  among  many  of  the  crew,  of  wearing  very 
large  whiskers  ;  so  that,  in  most  cases,  the  only  parts 
needing  a  shave  were  the  upper  lip  and  suburbs  of  the 
chin.  This  had  been  more  or  less  the  custom  during 


MAN-OF-WAR  BARBERS  443 

the  whole  three  years'  cruise  ;  but  for  some  time  previous 
to  our  weathering  Cape  Horn,  very  many  of  the  seamen 
had  redoubled  their  assiduity  in  cultivating  their  beards, 
preparatory  to  their  return  to  America.  There  they 
anticipated  creating  no  small  impression  by  their  im 
mense  and  magnificent  homeward-bounders — so  they 
called  the  long  fly-brushes  at  their  chins.  In  particular, 
the  more  aged  sailors,  embracing  the  Old  Guard  of  sea- 
grenadiers  on  the  forecastle,  and  the  begrimed  gunner's 
mates  and  quarter-gunners,  sported  most  venerable 
beards  of  an  exceeding  length  and  hoariness,  like  long, 
trailing  moss  hanging  from  the  bough  of  some  aged  oak. 
Above  all,  the  captain  of  the  forecastle,  old  Ushant 
— a  fine  specimen  of  a  sea-sexagenarian — wore  a  wide, 
spreading  beard,  grizzled  and  gray,  that  flowed  over 
his  breast,  and  often  became  tangled  and  knotted  with 
tar.  This  Ushant,  in  all  weathers,  was  ever  alert  at 
his  duty  ;  intrepidly  mounting  the  fore-yard  in  a  gale, 
his  long  beard  streaming  like  Neptune's.  Off  Cape 
Horn  it  looked  like  a  miller's,  being  all  over  powdered 
with  frost :  sometimes  it  glittered  with  minute  icicles 
in  the  pale,  cold,  moonlit  Patagonian  nights.  But  though 
he  was  so  active  in  time  of  tempest,  yet  when  his  duty 
did  not  call  for  exertion,  he  was  a  remarkably  staid, 
reserved,  silent,  and  majestic  old  man,  holding  himself 
aloof  from  noisy  revelry,  and  never  participating  in  the 
boisterous  sports  of  the  crew.  He  resolutely  set  his  beard 
against  their  boyish  frolickings,  and  often  held  forth  like 
an  oracle  concerning  the  vanity  thereof.  Indeed,  at 
times  he  was  wont  to  talk  philosophy  to  his  ancient 
companions — the  old  sheet-anchor  men  around  him — 
as  well  as  to  the  hare-brained  tenants  of  the  fore-top,  and 
the  giddy  lads  in  the  mizen. 

Nor  was  his  philosophy  to  be  despised  ;    it  abounded 
in  wisdom.     For  this  Ushant  was  an  old  man,  of  strong 


444  WHITE  JACKET 

natural  sense,  who  had  seen  nearly  the  whole  terra 
queous  globe,  and  could  reason  of  civilised  and  savage, 
of  Gentile  and  Jew,  of  Christian  and  Moslem.  The  long 
night-watches  of  the  sailor  are  eminently  adapted  to 
draw  out  the  reflective  faculties  of  any  serious-minded 
man,  however  humble  or  uneducated.  Judge,  then, 
what  half  a  century  of  battling  out  watches  on  the  ocean 
must  have  done  for  this  fine  old  tar.  He  was  a  sort  of 
sea-Socrates,  in  his  old  age  '  pouring  out  his  last  philo 
sophy  and  life,'  as  sweet  Spenser  has  it ;  and  I  never 
could  look  at  him,  and  survey  his  right  reverend  beard, 
without  bestowing  upon  him  that  title  which,  in  one 
of  his  satires,  Persius  gives  to  the  immortal  quaffer 
of  the  hemlock  —  Magister  Barbatus  —  the  bearded 
master. 

Not  a  few  of  the  ship's  company  had  also  bestowed 
great  pains  upon  their  hair,  which  some  of  them — 
especially  the  genteel  young  sailor  bucks  of  the  after 
guard — wore  over  their  shoulders  like  the  ringleted 
Cavaliers.  Many  sailors,  with  naturally  tendril  locks, 
prided  themselves  upon  what  they  call  love-curls,  worn 
at  the  side  of  the  head,  just  before  the  ear — a  custom 
peculiar  to  tars,  and  which  seems  to  have  filled  the 
vacated  place  of  the  old-fashioned  Lord  Rodney  cue, 
which  they  used  to  wear  some  fifty  years  ago. 

But  there  were  others  of  the  crew  labouring  under 
the  misfortune  of  long,  lank,  Winnebago  locks,  or  carroty 
bunches  of  hair,  or  rebellious  bristles  of  a  sandy  hue. 
Ambitious  of  redundant  mops,  these  still  suffered  their 
carrots  to  grow,  spite  of  all  ridicule.  They  looked  like 
Huns  and  Scandinavians  ;  and  one  of  them,  a  young 
Down  Easter,  the  unenvied  proprietor  of  a  thick  crop  of 
inflexible  yellow  bamboos,  went  by  the  name  of  Peter 
the  Wild  Boy  ;  for,  like  Peter  the  Wild  Boy  in  France, 
it  was  supposed  that  he  must  have  been  caught  like  a 


MAN-OF-WAR  BARBERS  445 

catamount  in  the  pine  woods  of  Maine.  But  there  were 
many  fine,  flowing  heads  of  hair  to  counterbalance  such 
sorry  exhibitions  as  Peter's. 

What  with  long  whiskers  and  venerable  beards,  then, 
of  every  variety  of  cut — Charles  the  Fifth's  and  Aure- 
lian's — and  endless  goatees  and  imperials ;  and  what 
with  abounding  locks,  our  crew  seemed  a  company  of 
Merovingians  or  Long-haired  Kings,  mixed  with  savage 
Lombards  or  Longobardi,  so  called  from  their  lengthy 
beards. 


CHAPTER  LXXXV 

THE  GREAT  MASSACRE  OF  THE  BEARDS 

THE  preceding  chapter  fitly  paves  the  way  for  the  present, 
wherein  it  sadly  befalls  White  Jacket  to  chronicle  a 
calamitous  event,  which  filled  the  Neversink  with  long 
lamentations,  that  echoed  through  all  her  decks  and  tops. 
After  dwelling  upon  our  redundant  locks  and  thrice- 
noble  beards,  fain  would  I  cease,  and  let  the  sequel 
remain  undisclosed,  but  truth  and  fidelity  forbid. 

As  I  now  deviously  hover  and  lingeringly  skirmish 
about  the  frontiers  of  this  melancholy  recital,  a  feeling 
of  sadness  comes  over  me  that  I  cannot  withstand. 
Such  a  heartless  massacre  of  hair  !  Such  a  Bartholo 
mew's  Day  and  Sicilian  Vespers  of  assassinated  beards  ! 
Ah  !  who  would  believe  it !  With  intuitive  sympathy 
I  feel  of  my  own  brown  beard  while  I  write,  and  thank 
my  kind  stars  that  each  precious  hair  is  forever  beyond 
the  reach  of  the  ruthless  barbers  of  a  man-of-war  ! 

It  needs  that  this  sad  and  most  serious  matter  should 
be  faithfully  detailed.  Throughout  the  cruise,  many  of 
the  officers  had  expressed  their  abhorrence  of  the  im 
punity  with  which  the  most  extensive  plantations  of  hair 
were  cultivated  under  their  very  noses  ;  and  they  frowned 
upon  every  beard  with  even  greater  dislike.  They  said 
it  was  unseamanlike  ;  not  ship-shape  ;  in  short,  it  was 
disgraceful  to  the  Navy.  But  as  Captain  Claret  said 
nothing,  and  as  the  officers,  of  themselves,  had  no  au 
thority  to  preach  a  crusade  against  whiskerandoes,  the 
Old  Guard  on  the  forecastle  still  complacently  stroked 

446 


THE  GREAT  MASSACRE  OF  THE  BEARDS    447 

their  beards,  and  the  sweet  youths  of  the  after-guard 
still  lovingly  threaded  their  fingers  through  their  curls. 

Perhaps  the  captain's  generosity  in  thus  far  permitting 
our  beards  sprung  from  the  fact  that  he  himself  wore  a 
small  speck  of  a  beard  upon  his  own  imperial  cheek  ; 
which,  if  rumour  said  true,  was  to  hide  something,  as 
Plutarch  relates  of  the  Emperor  Adrian.  But,  to  do 
him  justice — as  I  always  have  done — the  captain's 
beard  did  not  exceed  the  limits  prescribed  by  the  Navy 
Department. 

According  to  a  then  recent  ordinance  at  Washington, 
the  beards  of  both  officers  and  seamen  were  to  be  accur 
ately  laid  out  and  surveyed,  and  on  no  account  must  come 
lower  than  the  mouth,  so  as  to  correspond  with  the 
Army  standard — a  regulation  directly  opposed  to  the 
theocratical  law  laid  down  in  the  nineteenth  chapter 
and  twenty-seventh  verse  of  Leviticus,  where  it  is  ex 
pressly  ordained,  '  Thou  slialt  not  mar  the  corners  of  thy 
beard'  But  legislators  do  not  always  square  their 
statutes  by  those  of  the  Bible. 

At  last,  when  we  had  crossed  the  Northern  Tropic, 
and  were  standing  up  to  our  guns  at  evening  quarters, 
and  when  the  setting  sun,  streaming  in  at  the  port-holes, 
lit  up  every  hair,  till,  to  an  observer  on  the  quarter-deck, 
the  two  long,  even  lines  of  beards  seemed  one  dense 
grove  ;  in  that  evil  hour  it  must  have  been,  that  a  cruel 
thought  entered  into  the  heart  of  our  captain. 

A  pretty  set  of  savages,  thought  he,  am  I  taking  home 
to  America ;  people  will  think  them  all  catamounts 
and  Turks.  Besides,  now  that  I  think  of  it,  it 's  against 
the  law.  It  will  never  do.  They  must  be  shaven  and 
shorn — that 's  flat. 

There  is  no  knowing,  indeed,  whether  these  were  the 
very  words  in  which  the  captain  meditated  that  night ; 
for  it  is  yet  a  mooted  point  among  metaphysicians, 


448  WHITE  JACKET 

whether  we  think  in  words,  or  whether  we  think  in 
thoughts.  But  something  like  the  above  must  have 
been  the  captain's  cogitations.  At  any  rate,  that  very 
evening  the  ship's  company  were  astounded  by  an  ex 
traordinary  announcement  made  at  the  main-hatchway 
of  the  gun-deck,  by  the  boatswain's  mate  there  stationed. 
He  was  afterward  discovered  to  have  been  tipsy  at  the 
time. 

'  D'  ye  hear  there,  fore  and  aft  ?  All  you  that  have 
hair  on  your  heads,  shave  them  off  ;  and  all  you  that 
have  beards,  trim  'em  small !  ' 

Shave  off  our  Christian  heads  !  And  then,  placing 
them  between  our  knees,  trim  small  our  worshipped 
beards  !  The  captain  was  mad. 

But  directly  the  boatswain  came  rushing  to  the  hatch 
way,  and,  after  soundly  rating  his  tipsy  mate,  thundered 
forth  a  true  version  of  the  order  that  had  issued  from  the 
quarter-deck.  As  amended,  it  ran  thus  : — 

'  D'  ye  hear  there,  fore  and  aft  ?  All  you  that  have 
long  hair,  cut  it  short ;  and  all  you  that  have  large 
whiskers,  trim  them  down,  according  to  the  Navy 
regulations.' 

This  was  an  amendment,  to  be  sure  ;  but  what  bar 
barity,  after  all !  What !  not  thirty  days'  run  from 
home,  and  lose  our  magnificent  homeward-bounders  ! 
The  homeward-bounders  we  had  been  cultivating  so 
long  !  Lose  them  at  one  fell  swoop  ?  Were  the  vile 
barbers  of  the  gun-deck  to  reap  our  long,  nodding  har 
vests,  and  expose  our  innocent  chins  to  the  chill  air 
of  the  Yankee  coast !  And  our  viny  locks  !  were  they 
also  to  be  shorn  ?  Was  a  grand  sheep-shearing,  such 
as  they  annually  have  at  Nantucket,  to  take  place  ;  and 
our  ignoble  barbers  to  carry  off  the  fleece  ? 

Captain  Claret !  in  cutting  our  beards  and  our  hair, 
you  cut  us  the  unkindest  cut  of  all !  Were  we  going  into 


THE  GREAT  MASSACRE  OF  THE  BEARDS  449 

action,  Captain  Claret — going  to  fight  the  foe  with  our 
hearts  of  flame  and  our  arms  of  steel,  then  would  we 
gladly  offer  up  our  beards  to  the  terrific  God  of  War, 
and  that  we  would  account  but  a  wise  precaution  against 
having  them  tweaked  by  the  foe.  Then,  Captain  Claret, 
you  would  but  be  imitating  the  example  of  Alexander, 
who  had  his  Macedonians  all  shaven,  that  in  the  hour 
of  battle  their  beards  might  not  be  handles  to  the  Persians. 
But  now,  Captain  Claret !  when  after  our  long,  long 
cruise,  we  are  returning  to  our  homes,  tenderly  stroking 
the  fine  tassels  on  our  chins,  and  thinking  of  father  or 
mother,  or  sister  or  brother,  or  daughter  or  son  ;  to  cut 
off  our  beards  now — the  very  beards  that  were  frosted 
white  off  the  pitch  of  Patagonia — this  is  too  bitterly  bad, 
Captain  Claret !  and,  by  Heaven,  we  will  not  submit. 
Train  your  guns  inboard,  let  the  marines  fix  their  bayonets, 
let  the  officers  draw  their  swords  ;  we  will  not  let  our 
beards  be  reaped — the  last  insult  inflicted  upon  a  van 
quished  foe  in  the  East ! 

Where  are  you,  sheet-anchor  men  !  Captains  of  the 
tops !  gunner's  mates !  mariners,  all !  Muster  round 
the  capstan  your  venerable  beards,  and  while  you  braid 
them  together  in  token  of  brotherhood,  cross  hands  and 
swear  that  we  will  enact  over  again  the  mutiny  of  the 
Nore,  and  sooner  perish  than  yield  up  a  hair  ! 

The  excitement  was  intense  throughout  that  whole 
evening.  Groups  of  tens  and  twenties  were  scattered 
about  all  the  decks,  discussing  the  mandate,  and  in 
veighing  against  its  barbarous  author.  The  long  area 
of  the  gun-deck  was  something  like  a  populous  street 
of  brokers,  when  some  terrible  commercial  tidings  have 
newly  arrived.  One  and  all,  they  resolved  not  to  suc 
cumb,  and  every  man  swore  to  stand  by  his  beard  and  his 
neighbour. 

Twenty -four  hours  after,  at  the  next  evening  quarters, 

2F 


450  WHITE  JACKET 

the  captain's  eye  was  observed  to  wander  along  tiie  men 
at  their  guns — not  a  beard  was  shaven  ! 

When  the  drum  beat  the  retreat,  the  boatswain — now 
attended  by  all  four  of  his  mates,  to  give  additional 
solemnity  to  the  announcement — repeated  the  previous 
day's  order,  and  concluded  by  saying,  that  twenty-four 
hours  would  be  given  for  all  to  acquiesce. 

But  the  second  day  passed,  and  at  quarters,  untouched, 
every  beard  bristled  on  its  chin.  Forthwith  Captain 
Claret  summoned  the  midshipmen,  who,  receiving  his 
orders,  hurried  to  the  various  divisions  of  the  guns, 
and  communicated  them  to  the  lieutenants  respectively 
stationed  over  divisions. 

The  officer  commanding  mine  turned  upon  us,  and 
said,  '  Men,  if  to-morrow  night  I  find  any  of  you  with 
long  hair,  or  whiskers  of  a  standard  violating  the  Navy 
regulations,  the  names  of  such  offenders  shall  be  put 
down  on  the  report.' 

The  affair  had  now  assumed  a  most  serious  aspect. 
The  captain  was  in  earnest.  The  excitement  increased 
tenfold  ;  and  a  great  many  of  the  older  seamen,  exas 
perated  to  the  uttermost,  talked  about  knocking  off  duty 
till  the  obnoxious  mandate  was  revoked.  I  thought  it 
impossible  that  they  would  seriously  think  of  such  a 
folly  ;  but  there  is  no  knowing  what  man-of-war's  men 
will  sometimes  do,  under  provocation — witness  Parker 
and  the  Nore. 

That  same  night,  when  the  first  watch  was  set,  the 
men  in  a  body  drove  the  two  boatswain's  mates  from 
their  stations  at  the  fore  and  main  hatchways,  and  un 
shipped  the  ladders ;  thus  cutting  off  all  communi 
cation  between  the  gun  and  spar  decks,  forward  of  the 
mainmast. 

Mad  Jack  had  the  trumpet ;  and  no  sooner  was  this 
incipient  mutiny  reported  to  him  than  he  jumped  right 


THE  GREAT  MASSACRE  OF  THE  BEARDS  451 

down  among  the  mob,  and  fearlessly  mingling  with  them, 
exclaimed,  '  What  do  you  mean,  men  ?  don't  be  fools  ! 
This  is  no  way  to  get  what  you  want.  Turn  to,  my  lads, 
turn  to  !  Boatswain's  mate,  ship  that  ladder  !  So  !  up 
you  tumble,  now,  my  hearties  !  away  you  go  !  ' 

His  gallant,  off-handed,  confident  manner,  recognising 
no  attempt  at  mutiny,  operated  upon  the  sailors  like 
magic.  They  tumbled  up,  as  commanded  ;  and  for  the 
rest  of  that  night  contented  themselves  with  privately 
fulminating  their  displeasure  against  the  captain,  and 
publicly  emblazoning  every  anchor-button  on  the  coat 
of  admired  Mad  Jack. 

Captain  Claret  happened  to  be  taking  a  nap  in  his 
cabin  at  the  moment  of  the  disturbance  ;  and  it  was 
quelled  so  soon,  that  he  knew  nothing  of  it  till  it  was 
officially  reported  to  him.  It  was  afterward  rumoured 
through  the  ship  that  he  reprimanded  Mad  Jack  for 
acting  as  he  did.  He  maintained  that  he  should  at 
once  have  summoned  the  marines,  and  charged  upon  the 
'  mutineers.'  But  if  the  sayings  imputed  to  the  captain 
were  true,  he  nevertheless  refrained  from  subsequently 
noticing  the  disturbance,  or  attempting  to  seek  out  and 
punish  the  ringleaders.  This  was  but  wise  ;  for  there 
are  times  when  even  the  most  potent  governor  must  wink 
at  trangression,  in  order  to  preserve  the  laws  inviolate 
for  the  future.  And  great  care  is  to  be  taken,  by  timely 
management,  to  avert  an  incontestable  act  of  mutiny, 
and  so  prevent  men  from  being  roused,  by  their  own 
consciousness  of  transgression,  into  all  the  fury  of  an 
unbounded  insurrection.  Then,  for  the  time,  both 
soldiers  and  sailors  are  irresistible  ;  as  even  the  valour 
of  Csesar  was  made  to  know,  and  the  prudence  of  Ger- 
manicus,  when  their  legions  rebelled.  And  not  all  the 
concessions  of  Earl  Spencer,  as  First  Lord  of  the  Ad 
miralty,  nor  the  threats  and  entreaties  of  Lord  Bridport, 


452  WHITE  JACKET 

the  Admiral  of  the  Fleet — no,  nor  His  Gracious  Majesty's 
plenary  pardon  in  prospective,  could  prevail  upon  the 
Spithead  mutineers  (when  at  last  fairly  lashed  up  to  the 
mark)  to  succumb,  until  deserted  by  their  own  messmates, 
and  a  handful  was  left  in  the  breach. 

Therefore,  Mad  Jack  !  you  did  right,  and  no  one  else 
could  have  acquitted  himself  better.  By  your  crafty 
simplicity,  good-natured  daring,  and  off-handed  air  (as 
if  nothing  was  happening)  you  perhaps  quelled  a  very 
serious  affair  in  the  bud,  and  prevented  the  disgrace  to 
the  American  Navy  of  a  tragical  mutiny,  growing  out  of 
whiskers,  soap-suds,  and  razors.  Think  of  it,  if  future 
historians  should  devote  a  long  chapter  to  the  great 
Rebellion  of  the  Beards  on  board  the  United  States  ship 
Neversink.  Why,  through  all  time  thereafter,  barbers 
would  cut  down  their  spiralised  poles,  and  substitute 
miniature  mainmasts  for  the  emblems  of  their  calling. 

And  here  is  ample  scope  for  some  pregnant  instruction, 
how  that  events  of  vast  magnitude  in  our  man-of-war 
world  may  originate  in  the  pettiest  of  trifles.  But  that 
is  an  old  theme  ;  we  waive  it,  and  proceed. 

On  the  morning  following,  though  it  was  not  a  regular 
shaving  day,  the  gun-deck  barbers  were  observed  to 
have  their  shops  open,  their  match-tub  accommodations 
in  readiness,  and  their  razors  displayed.  With  their 
brushes,  raising  a  mighty  lather  in  their  tin  pots,  they 
stood  eyeing  the  passing  throng  of  seamen,  silently  in 
viting  them  to  walk  in  and  be  served.  In  addition  to 
their  usual  implements,  they  now  flourished  at  intervals 
a  huge  pair  of  sheep -shears,  by  way  of  more  forcibly 
reminding  the  men  of  the  edict  which  that  day  must  be 
obeyed,  or  woe  betide  them. 

For  some  hours  the  seamen  paced  to  and  fro  in  no 
very  good  humour,  vowing  not  to  sacrifice  a  hair.  Before 
hand,  they  denounced  that  man  who  should  abase  him- 


THE  GREAT  MASSACRE  OF  THE  BEARDS  453 

self  by  compliance.  But  habituation  to  discipline  is 
magical ;  and  ere  long  an  old  forecastle  man  was  dis 
covered  elevated  upon  a  match-tub,  while,  with  a  malicious 
grin,  his  barber — a  fellow  who,  from  his  merciless  rasping, 
was  called  Blue-Skin — seized  him  by  his  long  beard,  and 
at  one  fell  stroke  cut  it  off  and  tossed  it  out  of  the  port 
hole  behind  him.  This  forecastle  man  was  ever  afterward 
known  by  a  significant  title — in  the  main  equivalent  to 
that  name  of  reproach  fastened  upon  that  Athenian  who, 
in  Alexander's  time,  previous  to  which  all  the  Greeks 
sported  beards,  first  submitted  to  the  deprivation  of  his 
own.  But,  spite  of  all  the  contempt  hurled  on  our  fore 
castle  man,  so  prudent  an  example  was  soon  followed  ; 
presently  all  the  barbers  were  busy. 

Sad  sight !  at  which  anyone  but  a  barber  or  a  Tartar 
would  have  wept !  Beards  three  years  old  ;  goatees  that 
would  have  graced  a  chamois  of  the  Alps  ;  imperials 
that  Count  D'Orsay  would  have  envied  ;  and  love-curls 
and  man-of-war  ringlets  that  would  have  measured, 
inch  for  inch,  with  the  longest  tresses  of  the  Fair  One 
with  the  Golden  Locks — all  went  by  the  board  !  Captain 
Claret !  how  can  you  rest  in  your  hammock  !  By  this 
brown  beard  which  now  waves  from  my  chin — the  illus 
trious  successor  to  that  first,  young,  vigorous  beard  I 
yielded  to  your  tyranny — by  this  manly  beard,  I  swear 
it  was  barbarous  ! 

My  noble  captain,  Jack  Chase,  was  indignant.  Not 
even  all  the  special  favours  he  had  received  from  Captain 
Claret,  and  the  plenary  pardon  extended  to  him  for  his 
desertion  into  the  Peruvian  service,  could  restrain  the 
expression  of  his  feelings.  But  in  his  cooler  moments, 
Jack  was  a  wise  man  ;  he  at  last  deemed  it  but  wisdom 
to  succumb. 

When  he  went  to  the  barber  he  almost  drew  tears  from 
his  eyes.  Seating  himself  mournfully  on  the  match-tub, 


454  WHITE  JACKET 

he  looked  sideways,  and  said  to  the  barber,  who  was 
slithering  his  sheep -shears  in  readiness  to  begin  :  *  My 
friend,  I  trust  your  scissors  are  consecrated.  Let  them 
not  touch  this  beard  if  they  have  yet  to  be  dipped  in 
holy  water  ;  beards  are  sacred  things,  barber.  Have 
you  no  feeling  for  beards,  my  friend  ?  think  of  it '  ;  and 
mournfully  he  laid  his  deep-dyed,  russet  cheek  upon  his 
hand.  '  Two  summers  have  gone  by  since  my  chin  has 
been  reaped.  I  was  in  Coquimbo  then,  on  the  Spanish 
Main ;  and  when  the  husbandman  was  sowing  his 
autumnal  grain  on  the  Vega,  I  started  this  blessed  beard  ; 
and  when  the  vine-dressers  were  trimming  their  vines 
in  the  vineyards,  I  first  trimmed  it  to  the  sound  of  a  flute. 
Ah  !  barber,  have  you  no  heart  ?  This  beard  has  been 
caressed  by  the  snow-white  hand  of  the  lovely  Tomasita 
of  Tombez — the  Castilian  belle  of  all  Lower  Peru.  Think 
of  that,  barber  !  I  have  worn  it  as  an  officer  on  the 
quarter-deck  of  a  Peruvian  man-of-war.  I  have  sported 
it  at  brilliant  fandangoes  in  Lima.  I  have  been  alow  and 
aloft  with  it  at  sea.  Yea,  barber  !  it  has  streamed  like 
an  admiral's  pennant  at  the  mast-head  of  this  same 
gallant  frigate,  the  Neversink  !  Oh  !  barber,  barber  ! 
it  stabs  me  to  the  heart !  Talk  not  of  hauling  down  your 
ensigns  and  standards  when  vanquished — what  is  that, 
barber  !  to  striking  the  flag  that  Nature  herself  has  nailed 
to  the  mast !  ' 

Here  noble  Jack's  feelings  overcame  him  ;  he  drooped 
from  the  animated  attitude  into  which  his  enthusiasm 
had  momentarily  transported  him  ;  his  proud  head  sunk 
upon  his  chest,  and  his  long,  sad  beard  almost  grazed 
the  deck. 

'  Ay  !  trail  your  beards  in  grief  and  dishonour,  oh 
crew  of  the  Neversink  \  '  sighed  Jack.  '  Barber,  come 
closer — now,  tell  me,  my  friend,  have  you  obtained  abso 
lution  for  this  deed  you  are  about  to  commit  ?  You  have 


THE  GREAT  MASSACRE  OF  THE  BEARDS  455 

not  ?  Then,  barber,  /  will  absolve  you ;  your  hands 
shall  be  washed  of  this  sin  ;  it  is  not  you,  but  another  ; 
and  though  you  are  about  to  shear  off  my  manhood,  yet, 
barber,  I  freely  forgive  you  ;  kneel,  kneel,  barber  !  that 
I  may  bless  you,  in  token  that  I  cherish  no  malice  ! ' 

So  when  this  barber,  who  was  the  only  tender-hearted 
one  of  his  tribe,  had  kneeled,  been  absolved,  and  then 
blessed,  Jack  gave  up  his  beard  into  his  hands,  and  the 
barber,  clipping  it  off  with  a  sigh,  held  it  high  aloft,  and, 
parodying  the  style  of  the  boatswain's  mates,  cried 
aloud,  *  D'  ye  hear,  fore  and  aft  ?  This  is  the  beard  of 
our  matchless  Jack  Chase,  the  noble  captain  of  this 
frigate's  main-top  ! ' 


CHAPTER    LXXXVI 

THE  REBELS  BROUGHT  TO  THE  MAST 

THOUGH  many  heads  of  hair  were  shorn,  and  many  fine 
beards  reaped  that  day,  yet  several  still  held  out,  and 
vowed  to  defend  their  sacred  hair  to  the  last  gasp  of  their 
breath.  These  were  chiefly  old  sailors — some  of  them 
petty  officers — who,  presuming  upon  their  age  or  rank, 
doubtless  thought  that,  after  so  many  had  complied 
with  the  captain's  commands,  they,  being  but  a  handful, 
would  be  exempted  from  compliance,  and  remain  a 
monument  of  our  master's  clemency. 

That  same  evening,  when  the  drum  beat  to  quarters, 
the  sailors  went  sullenly  to  their  guns,  and  the  old  tars 
who  still  sported  their  beards  stood  up,  grim,  defying, 
and  motionless,  as  the  rows  of  sculptured  Assyrian  kings, 
who,  with  their  magnificent  beards,  have  recently  been 
exhumed  by  Layard. 

When  the  proper  time  arrived,  their  names  were  taken 
down  by  the  officers  of  divisions,  and  they  were  after 
ward  summoned  in  a  body  to  the  mast,  where  the 
captain  stood  ready  to  receive  them.  The  whole  ship's 
company  crowded  to  the  spot,  and,  amid  the  breath 
less  multitude,  the  venerable  rebels  advanced  and 
unhatted. 

It  was  an  imposing  display.  They  were  old  and  vener 
able  mariners  ;  their  cheeks  had  been  burned  brown  in 
all  latitudes,  wherever  the  sun  sends  a  tropical  ray. 
Reverend  old  tars,  one  and  all ;  some  of  them  might 
have  been  grandsires,  with  grandchildren  in  every  port 

456 


THE  REBELS  BROUGHT  TO  THE  MAST       457 

round  the  world.  They  ought  to  have  commanded  the 
veneration  of  the  most  frivolous  or  magisterial  beholder. 
Even  Captain  Claret  they  ought  to  have  humiliated  into 
deference.  But  a  Scythian  is  touched  with  no  reverential 
promptings  ;  and,  as  the  Roman  student  well  knows, 
the  august  Senators  themselves  seated  in  the  Senate- 
house,  on  the  majestic  hill  of  the  Capitol,  had  their 
holy  beards  tweaked  by  the  insolent  chief  of  the 
Goths. 

Such  an  array  of  beards  !  spade-shaped,  hammer- 
shaped,  dagger-shaped,  triangular,  square,  peaked,  round, 
hemispherical,  and  forked.  But  chief  among  them  all 
was  old  Ushant's,  the  ancient  captain  of  the  forecastle. 
Of  a  Gothic  venerableness,  it  fell  upon  his  breast  like  a 
continual  iron-gray  storm. 

Ah  !  old  Ushant,  Nestor  of  the  crew  !  it  promoted  my 
longevity  to  behold  you. 

He  was  a  man-of-war's  man  of  the  old  Benbow  school. 
He  wore  a  short  cue,  which  the  wags  of  the  mizen-top 
called  his  '  plug  of  pigtail*  About  his  waist  was  a  broad 
boarder's  belt,  which  he  wore,  he  said,  to  brace  his  main 
mast,  meaning  his  backbone  ;  for  at  times  he  complained 
of  rheumatic  twinges  in  the  spine,  consequent  upon 
sleeping  on  deck,  now  and  then,  during  the  night-watches 
of  upward  of  half  a  century.  His  sheath-knife  was 
an  antique — a  sort  of  old-fashioned  pruning -hook  ;  its 
handle — a  sperm  whale's  tooth — was  carved  all  over 
with  ships,  cannon,  and  anchors.  It  was  attached  to 
his  neck  by  a  lanyard,  elaborately  worked  into  '  rose- 
knots  '  and  '  Turk's -heads '  by  his  own  venerable 
fingers. 

Of  all  the  crew,  this  Ushant  was  most  beloved  by  my 
glorious  captain,  Jack  Chase,  who  one  day  pointed  him 
out  to  me  as  the  old  man  was  slowly  coming  down  the 
rigging  from  the  fore-top. 


458  WHITE  JACKET 

'  There,  White  Jacket !   isn't  that  old  Chaucer's  ship- 
man  ? 

"  A  dagger  hanging  by  a  las  hadde  he, 

About  his  nekke,  under  his  arm  adown  ; 
The  hote  sommer  hadde  made  his  beard  all  brown. 
Hardy  he  is,  and  wise  ;  I  undertake 
With  many  a  tempest  has  his  beard  be  shake." 

From  the  Canterbury  Tales,  White  Jacket !  and  must 
not  old  Ushant  have  been  living  in  Chaucer's  time,  that 
Chaucer  could  draw  his  portrait  so  well  ?  ' 


CHAPTER    LXXXVII 

OLD   USHANT  AT  THE   GANGWAY 

THE  rebel  beards,  headed  by  old  Ushant's,  streaming 
like  a  commodore's  bougee,  now  stood  in  silence  at  the 
mast. 

'  You  knew  the  order  !  '  said  the  captain,  eyeing  them 
severely  ;  *  what  does  that  hair  on  your  chins  ?  ' 

*  Sir,'  said  the  captain  of    the   forecastle,   '  did    old 
Ushant  ever  refuse  doing  his  duty  ?  did  he  ever  yet  miss 
his  muster  ?     But,  sir,  old  Ushant's  beard  is  his  own  ! ' 

*  What 's  that,  sir  ?     Master-at-arms,  put  that  man 
into  the  brig.' 

'  Sir,'  said  the  old  man,  respectfully,  '  the  three  years 
for  which  I  shipped  are  expired  ;  and  though  I  am  perhaps 
bound  to  work  the  ship  home,  yet,  as  matters  are,  I  think 
my  beard  might  be  allowed  me.  It  is  but  a  few  days, 
Captain  Claret.' 

'  Put  him  into  the  brig  !  '  cried  the  captain  ;  '  and 
now,  you  old  rascals  !  '  he  added,  turning  round  upon  the 
rest,  c  I  give  you  fifteen  minutes  to  have  those  beards 
taken  off  ;  if  they  then  remain  on  your  chins,  I  '11  flog 
you — every  mother's  son  of  you — though  you  were  all 
my  own  godfathers  ! ' 

The  band  of  beards  went  forward,  summoned  their 
barbers,  and  their  glorious  pennants  were  no  more.  In 
obedience  to  orders,  they  then  paraded  themselves  at 
the  mast,  and  addressing  the  captain,  said,  '  Sir,  our 
muzzle-lashings  are  cast  off  !  ' 

Nor  is  it  unworthy  of  being  chronicled,  that  not  a  single 

459 


460  WHITE  JACKET 

sailor  who  complied  with  the  general  order  but  refused 
to  sport  the  vile  regulation  whiskers  prescribed  by  the 
Navy  Department.  No !  like  heroes  they  cried,  '  Shave  me 
clean  !  I  will  not  wear  a  hair,  since  I  cannot  wear  all !  ' 

On  the  morrow,  after  breakfast,  Ushant  was  taken  out 
of  irons,  and,  with  the  master-at-arms  on  one  side  and 
an  armed  sentry  on  the  other,  was  escorted  along  the 
gun-deck  and  up  the  ladder  to  the  mainmast.  There 
the  captain  stood,  firm  as  before.  They  must  have 
guarded  the  old  man  thus  to  prevent  his  escape  to  the 
shore,  something  less  than  a  thousand  miles  distant  at 
the  time. 

'  Well,  sir,  will  you  have  that  beard  taken  off  ?  you 
have  slept  over  it  a  whole  night  now  ;  what  do  you  say  ? 
I  don't  want  to  flog  an  old  man  like  you,  Ushant !  ' 

'  My  beard  is  my  own,  sir  !  '  said  the  old  man,  lowly. 

'  Will  you  take  it  off  ?  ' 

'  It  is  mine,  sir  !  '  said  the  old  man,  tremulously. 

*  Rig  the  gratings  !  '  roared  the  captain.  '  Master- 
at-arms,  strip  him !  quarter-masters,  seize  him  up ! 
boatswain's  mates,  do  your  duty  !  ' 

While  these  executioners  were  employed,  the  captain's 
excitement  had  a  little  time  to  abate  ;  and  when,  at 
last,  old  Ushant  was  tied  up  by  the  arms  and  legs,  and 
his  venerable  back  was  exposed — that  back  which  had 
bowed  at  the  guns  of  the  frigate  Constitution  when  she 
captured  the  Guerriere — the  captain  seemed  to  relent. 

'  You  are  a  very  old  man,'  he  said,  *  and  I  am  sorry  to 
flog  you  ;  but  my  orders  must  be  obeyed.  I  will  give  you 
one  more  chance  ;  will  you  have  that  beard  taken  off  ?  ' 

'  Captain  Claret,'  said  the  old  man,  turning  round 
painfully  in  his  bonds,  '  you  may  flog  me,  if  you  will ; 
but,  sir,  in  this  one  thing  I  can  not  obey  you.' 

'  Lay  on  !  I  '11  see  his  backbone  !  '  roared  the  captain, 
in  a  sudden  fury. 


OLD  USHANT  AT  THE  GANGWAY         461 

'  By  Heaven  !  '  thrillingly  whispered  Jack  Chase,  who 
stood  by,  '  it 's  only  a  halter  ;  I  '11  strike  him  !  ' 

'  Better  not,'  said  a  topmate  ;  { it 's  death,  or  worse 
punishment,  remember.' 

*  There  goes  the  lash  !  '  cried  Jack.  '  Look  at  the 
old  man  !  By  G — d,  I  can't  stand  it !  Let  me  go, 
men  !  '  and  with  moist  eyes  Jack  forced  his  way  to  one 
side. 

'  You,  boatswain's  mate,'  cried  the  captain,  '  you  are 
favouring  that  man  !  Lay  on  soundly,  sir,  or  I  '11  have 
your  own  cat  laid  soundly  on  you.' 

One,  two,  three,  four,  five,  six,  seven,  eight,  nine,  ten, 
eleven,  twelve  lashes  were  laid  on  the  back  of  that  heroic 
old  man.  He  only  bowed  over  his  head,  and  stood  as 
the  Dying  Gladiator  lies. 

£  Cut  him  down,'  said  the  captain. 

'  And  now  go  and  cut  your  own  throat/  hoarsely 
whispered  an  old  sheet-anchor  man,  a  messmate  of 
Ushant's. 

When  the  master-at-arms  advanced  with  the  prisoner's 
shirt,  Ushant  waved  him  off  with  the  dignified  air  of  a 
Brahim,  saying,  *  Do  you  think,  master-at-arms,  that  I 
am  hurt  ?  I  will  put  on  my  own  garment.  I  am  never 
the  worse  for  it,  man  ;  and  'tis  no  dishonour  when  he 
who  would  dishonour  you  only  dishonours  himself.' 

'  What  says  he  ?  '  cried  the  captain  ;  '  what  says  that 
tarry  old  philosopher  with  the  smoking  back  ?  Tell  it 
to  me,  sir,  if  you  dare  !  Sentry,  take  that  man  back 
to  the  brig.  Stop  !  John  Ushant,  you  have  been 
captain  of  the  forecastle  ;  I  break  you.  And  now  you 
go  into  the  brig,  there  to  remain  till  you  consent  to  have 
that  beard  taken  off.' 

'  My  beard  is  my  own,'  said  the  old  man,  quietly. 
'  Sentry,  I  am  ready.' 

And  back  he  went  into  durance  between  the  guns  ; 


462  WHITE  JACKET 

but  after  lying  some  four  or  five  days  in  irons,  an  order 
came  to  remove  them  ;  but  he  was  still  kept  confined. 

Books  were  allowed  him,  and  he  spent  much  time  in 
reading.  But  he  also  spent  many  hours  in  braiding  his 
beard,  and  interweaving  with  it  strips  of  red  bunting, 
as  if  he  desired  to  dress  out  and  adorn  the  thing  which 
had  triumphed  over  all  opposition. 

He  remained  a  prisoner  till  we  arrived  in  America  ; 
but  the  very  moment  he  heard  the  chain  rattle  out  of 
the  hawse-hole,  and  the  ship  swing  to  her  anchor,  he 
started  to  his  feet,  dashed  the  sentry  aside,  and  gaining 
the  deck,  exclaimed,  *  At  home,  with  my  beard  !  ' 

His  term  of  service  having  some  months  previous 
expired,  and  the  ship  being  now  in  harbour,  he  was 
beyond  the  reach  of  naval  law,  and  the  officers  durst  not 
molest  him.  But  without  unduly  availing  himself  of 
these  circumstances,  the  old  man  merely  got  his  bag 
and  hammock  together,  hired  a  boat,  and  throwing  him 
self  into  the  stern,  was  rowed  ashore,  amid  the  un- 
suppressible  cheers  of  all  hands.  It  was  a  glorious  con 
quest  over  the  Conqueror  himself,  as  well  worthy  to  be 
celebrated  as  the  battle  of  the  Nile. 

Though,  as  I  afterward  learned,  Ushant  was  earnestly 
entreated  to  put  the  case  into  some  lawyer's  hands,  he 
firmly  declined,  saying,  '  I  have  won  the  battle,  my 
friends,  and  I  do  not  care  for  the  prize-money.'  But  even 
had  he  complied  with  these  entreaties,  from  precedents  in 
similar  cases,  it  is  almost  certain  that  not  a  sou's  worth 
of  satisfaction  would  have  been  received. 

I  know  not  in  what  frigate  you  sail  now,  old  Ushant ; 
but  Heaven  protect  your  storied  old  beard,  in  whatever 
typhoon  it  may  blow.  And  if  ever  it  must  be  shorn, 
old  man,  may  it  fare  like  the  royal  beard  of  Henry  i.  of 
England,  and  be  clipped  by  the  right  reverend  hand  of 
some  Archbishop  of  Sees. 


OLD  USHANT  AT  THE  GANGWAY         463 

As  for  Captain  Claret,  let  it  not  be  supposed  that  it  is 
here  sought  to  impale  him  before  the  world  as  a  cruel, 
black-hearted  man.  Such  he  was  not.  Nor  was  he, 
upon  the  whole,  regarded  by  his  crew  with  anything  like 
the  feelings  which  man-of-war's  men  sometimes  cherish 
toward  signally  tyrannical  commanders.  In  truth, 
the  majority  of  the  Neversink's  crew — in  previous  cruises 
habituated  to  flagrant  misusage — deemed  Captain  Claret 
a  lenient  officer.  In  many  things  he  certainly  refrained 
from  oppressing  them.  It  has  been  related  what  privi 
leges  he  accorded  to  the  seamen  respecting  the  free  play 
ing  of  checkers — a  thing  almost  unheard  of  in  most 
American  men-of-war.  In  the  matter  of  overseeing  the 
men's  clothing,  also,  he  was  remarkably  indulgent,  com 
pared  with  the  conduct  of  other  Navy  captains,  who, 
by  sumptuary  regulations,  oblige  their  sailors  to  run  up 
large  bills  with  the  purser  for  clothes.  In  a  word,  of 
whatever  acts  Captain  Claret  might  have  been  guilty  in 
the  Neversink,  perhaps  none  of  them  proceeded  from  any 
personal,  organic  hard-heartedness.  What  he  was,  the 
usages  of  the  Navy  had  made  him.  Had  he  been  a  mere 
landsman — a  merchant,  say — he  would  no  doubt  have 
been  considered  a  kind-hearted  man. 

There  may  be  some  who  shall  read  of  this  Bartholomew 
Massacre  of  beards  who  will  yet  marvel,  perhaps,  that 
the  loss  of  a  few  hairs,  more  or  less,  should  provoke  such 
hostility  from  the  sailors,  lash  them  into  so  frothing  a 
rage  ;  indeed,  come  near  breeding  a  mutiny. 

But  these  circumstances  are  not  without  precedent. 
Not  to  speak  of  the  riots,  attended  with  the  loss  of  life, 
which  once  occurred  in  Madrid,  in  resistance  to  an  arbi 
trary  edict  of  the  king's,  seeking  to  suppress  the  cloaks 
of  the  Cavaliers  ;  and  not  to  make  mention  of  other 
instances  that  might  be  quoted,  it  needs  only  to  point 
out  the  rage  of  the  Saxons  in  the  time  of  William  the 


464  WHITE  JACKET 

Conqueror,  when  that  despot  commanded  the  hair  on 
their  upper  lips  to  be  shaven  off — the  hereditary  mous 
taches  which  old  generations  had  sported.  The  multi 
tude  of  the  dispirited  vanquished  were  obliged  to  ac 
quiesce  ;  but  many  Saxon  Franklins  and  gentlemen  of 
spirit,  choosing  rather  to  lose  their  castles  than  their 
moustaches,  voluntarily  deserted  their  firesides,  and 
went  into  exile.  All  this  is  indignantly  related  by  the 
stout  Saxon  friar,  Matthew  Paris,  in  his  Historia  Major, 
beginning  with  the  Norman  Conquest. 

And  that  our  man-of-war's  men  were  right  in  desiring 
to  perpetuate  their  beards,  as  martial  appurtenances, 
must  seem  very  plain,  when  it  is  considered  that,  as  the 
beard  is  the  token  of  manhood,  so,  in  some  shape  or  other, 
has  it  ever  been  held  the  true  badge  of  a  warrior.  Bona 
parte's  grenadiers  were  stout  whiskerandoes  ;  and  per 
haps,  in  a  charge,  those  fierce  whiskers  of  theirs  did  as 
much  to  appal  the  foe  as  the  sheen  of  their  bayonets. 
Most  all  fighting  creatures  sport  either  whiskers  or  beards  ; 
it  seems  a  law  of  Dame  Nature.  Witness  the  boar,  the 
tiger,  the  cougar,  man,  the  leopard,  the  ram,  the  cat — 
all  warriors,  and  all  whiskerandoes.  Whereas,  the  peace- 
loving  tribes  have  mostly  enamelled  chins. 


CHAPTER   LXXXVIII 

FLOGGING   THROUGH  THE   FLEET 

THE  flogging  of  an  old  man  like  Ushant,  most  landsmen 
will  probably  regard  with  abhorrence.  But  though,  from 
peculiar  circumstances,  his  case  occasioned  a  good  deal 
of  indignation  among  the  people  of  the  Neversink,  yet, 
upon  its  own  proper  grounds,  they  did  not  denounce  it. 
Man-of-war's  men  are  so  habituated  to  what  landsmen 
would  deem  excessive  cruelties,  that  they  are  almost 
reconciled  to  inferior  severities. 

And  here,  though  the  subject  of  punishment  in  the 
Navy  has  been  canvassed  in  previous  chapters,  and 
though  the  thing  is  every  way  a  most  unpleasant  and 
grievous  one  to  enlarge  upon,  and  though  I  painfully 
nerve  myself  to  it  while  I  write,  a  feeling  of  duty  compels 
me  to  enter  upon  a  branch  of  the  subject  till  now  un- 
discussed.  I  would  not  be  like  the  man,  who,  seeing  an 
outcast  perishing  by  the  roadside,  turned  about  to  his 
friend,  saying,  '  Let  us  cross  the  way ;  my  soul  so  sickens 
at  this  sight  that  I  cannot  endure  it.' 

There  are  certain  enormities  in  this  man-of-war  world 
that  often  secure  impunity  by  their  very  excessiveness. 
Some  ignorant  people  will  refrain  from  permanently  re 
moving  the  cause  of  a  deadly  malaria,  for  fear  of  the 
temporary  spread  of  its  offensiveness.  Let  us  not  be  of 
such.  The  more  repugnant  and  repelling,  the  greater 
the  evil.  Leaving  our  women  and  children  behind,  let 
us  freely  enter  this  Golgotha. 

Years  ago  there  was  a  punishment  inflicted  in  the 

2G 


466  WHITE  JACKET 

English,  and  I  believe  in  the  American  Navy,  called  keel 
hauling — a  phrase  still  employed  by  man-of-war's  men 
when  they  would  express  some  signal  vengeance  upon  a 
personal  foe.  The  practice  still  remains  in  the  French 
national  marine,  though  it  is  by  no  means  resorted  to  so 
frequently  as  in  times  past.  It  consists  of  attaching 
tackles  to  the  two  extremities  of  the  main-yard,  and 
passing  the  rope  under  the  ship's  bottom.  To  one  end 
of  this  rope  the  culprit  is  secured  ;  his  own  shipmates 
are  then  made  to  run  him  up  and  down,  first  on  this  side, 
then  on  that — now  scraping  the  ship's  hull  under  water 
• — anon,  hoisted,  stunned  and  breathless,  into  the  air. 

But  though  this  barbarity  is  now  abolished  from  the 
English  and  American  navies,  there  still  remains  another 
practice  which,  if  anything,  is  even  worse  than  keel 
hauling.  This  remnant  of  the  Middle  Ages  is  known  in 
the  Navy  as  'flogging  through  the  fleet.'  It  is  never  in 
flicted  except  by  authority  of  a  court-martial  upon  some 
trespasser  deemed  guilty  of  a  flagrant  offence.  Never, 
that  I  know  of,  has  it  been  inflicted  by  an  American  man- 
of-war  on  the  home  station.  The  reason,  probably,  is, 
that  the  officers  well  know  that  such  a  spectacle  would 
raise  a  mob  in  any  American  seaport. 

By  XLI.  of  the  Articles  of  War,  a  court-martial  shall 
not,  *  for  any  one  offence  not  capital,'  inflict  a  punish 
ment  beyond  one  hundred  lashes.  In  cases  '  not  capital  * 
this  law  may  be,  and  has  been,  quoted  in  judicial  justi 
fication  of  the  infliction  of  more  than  one  hundred  lashes. 
Indeed,  it  would  cover  a  thousand.  Thus  :  one  act  of 
a  sailor  may  be  construed  into  the  commission  of  ten 
different  transgressions,  for  each  of  which  he  may  be 
legally  condemned  to  a  hundred  lashes,  to  be  inflicted 
without  intermission.  It  will  be  perceived,  that  in  any 
case  deemed  *  capital,'  a  sailor,  under  the  above  Article, 
may  legally  be  flogged  to  the  death. 


FLOGGING  THROUGH  THE  FLEET         467 

But  neither  by  the  Articles  of  War,  nor  by  any  other 
enactment  of  Congress,  is  there  any  direct  warrant  for 
the  extraordinary  cruelty  of  the  mode  in  which  punish 
ment  is  inflicted,  in  cases  of  flogging  through  the  fleet. 
But  as  in  numerous  other  instances,  the  incidental 
aggravations  of  this  penalty  are  indirectly  covered  by 
other  clauses  in  the  Articles  of  War ;  one  of  which 
authorises  the  authorities  of  a  ship — in  certain  indefinite 
cases — to  correct  the  guilty  '  according  to  the  usages  of 
the  sea-service.1 

One  of  these  *  usages  '  is  the  following  : — 

All  hands  being  called  '  to  witness  punishment '  in  the 
ship  to  which  the  culprit  belongs,  the  sentence  of  the 
court-martial  condemning  him  is  read,  when,  with  the 
usual  solemnities,  a  portion  of  the  punishment  is  inflicted. 
In  order  that  it  shall  not  lose  in  severity  by  the  slightest 
exhaustion  in  the  arm  of  the  executioner,  a  fresh  boat 
swain's  mate  is  called  out  at  every  dozen. 

As  the  leading  idea  is  to  strike  terror  into  the  beholders, 
the  greatest  number  of  lashes  is  inflicted  on  board  the 
culprit's  own  ship,  in  order  to  render  him  the  more 
shocking  spectacle  to  the  crews  of  the  other  vessels. 

The  first  infliction  being  concluded,  the  culprit's  shirt 
is  thrown  over  him  ;  he  is  put  into  a  boat — the  Rogue's 
March  being  played  meanwhile — and  rowed  to  the  next 
ship  of  the  squadron.  All  hands  of  that  ship  are  then 
called  to  man  the  rigging,  and  another  portion  of  the 
punishment  is  inflicted  by  the  boatswain's  mates  of  that 
ship.  The  bloody  shirt  is  again  thrown  over  the  seaman  ; 
and  thus  he  is  carried  through  the  fleet  or  squadron  till 
the  whole  sentence  is  inflicted. 

In  other  cases,  the  launch — the  largest  of  the  boats — 
is  rigged  with  a  platform  (like  a  headsman's  scaffold), 
upon  which  halberds,  something  like  those  used  in  the 
English  army,  are  erected.  They  consist  of  two  stout 


468  WHITE  JACKET 

poles,  planted  upright.  Upon  the  platform  stand  a 
lieutenant,  a  surgeon,  a  master-at-arms,  and  the  execu 
tioners  with  their  '  cats/  They  are  rowed  through  the 
fleet,  stopping  at  each  ship,  till  the  whole  sentence  is 
inflicted,  as  before. 

In  some  cases  the  attending  surgeon  has  professionally 
interfered  before  the  last  lash  has  been  given,  alleging 
that  immediate  death  must  ensue  if  the  remainder 
should  be  administered  without  a  respite.  But  instead  of 
humanely  remitting  the  remaining  lashes,  in  a  case  like 
this,  the  man  is  generally  consigned  to  his  cot  for  ten  or 
twelve  days  ;  and  when  the  surgeon  officially  reports 
him  capable  of  undergoing  the  rest  of  the  sentence,  it  is 
forthwith  inflicted.  Shylock  must  have  his  pound  of 
flesh. 

To  say,  that  after  being  flogged  through  the  fleet  the 
prisoner's  back  is  sometimes  puffed  up  like  a  pillow  ;  or 
to  say  that  in  other  cases  it  looks  as  if  burned  black  before 
a  roasting  fire  ;  or  to  say  that  you  may  track  him  through 
the  squadron  by  the  blood  on  the  bulwarks  of  every  ship, 
would  only  be  saying  what  many  seamen  have  seen. 

Several  weeks,  sometimes  whole  months,  elapse  before 
the  sailor  is  sufficiently  recovered  to  resume  his  duties. 
During  the  greater  part  of  that  interval  he  lies  in  the  sick 
bay,  groaning  out  his  days  and  nights  ;  and  unless  he 
has  the  hide  and  constitution  of  a  rhinoceros,  he  never  is 
the  man  he  was  before,  but,  broken  and  shattered  to  the 
marrow  of  his  bones,  sinks  into  death  before  his  time. 
Instances  have  occurred  where  he  has  expired  the  day 
after  the  punishment.  No  wonder  that  the  English 
man,  Dr.  Granville — himself  once  a  surgeon  in  the  Navy 
— declares,  in  his  work  on  Russia,  that  the  barbarian 
'  knout '  itself  is  not  a  greater  torture  to  undergo  than 
the  Navy  cat-o'-nine-tails. 

Some  years  ago  a  fire  broke  out  near  the  powder  maga- 


FLOGGING  THROUGH  THE  FLEET        469 

zine  in  an  American  national  ship,  one  of  a  squadron  at 
anchor  in  the  Bay  of  Naples.  The  utmost  alarm  pre 
vailed.  A  cry  went  fore  and  aft  that  the  ship  was  about 
to  blow  up.  One  of  the  seamen  sprang  overboard  in 
affright.  At  length  the  fire  was  got  under,  and  the  man 
was  picked  up.  He  was  tried  before  a  court-martial, 
found  guilty  of  cowardice,  and  condemned  to  be  flogged 
through  the  fleet.  In  due  time  the  squadron  made  sail 
for  Algiers,  and  in  that  harbour,  once  haunted  by  pirates, 
the  punishment  was  inflicted — the  Bay  of  Naples,  though 
washing  the  shores  of  an  absolute  king,  not  being  deemed 
a  fit  place  for  such  an  exhibition  of  American  naval  law. 
While  the  Never  sink  was  in  the  Pacific,  an  American 
sailor,  who  had  deposited  a  vote  for  General  Harrison 
for  President  of  the  United  States,  was  flogged  through 
the  fleet. 


CHAPTER   LXXXIX 

THE   SOCIAL  STATE  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR 

BUT  the  floggings  at  the  gangway  and  the  floggings 
through  the  fleet,  the  stealings,  highway  robberies, 
swearings,  gamblings,  blasphemings,  thimble-riggings, 
smugglings,  and  tipplings  of  a  man-of-war,  which  through 
out  this  narrative  have  been  here  and  there  sketched 
from  the  life,  by  no  means  comprise  the  whole  catalogue 
of  evil.  One  single  feature  is  full  of  significance. 

All  large  ships  of  war  carry  soldiers,  called  marines. 
In  the  Neversink  there  were  something  less  than  fifty, 
two-thirds  of  whom  were  Irishmen.  They  were  officered 
by  a  lieutenant,  an  orderly  sergeant,  two  sergeants, 
and  two  corporals,  with  a  drummer  and  fifer.  The 
custom,  generally,  is  to  have  a  marine  to  each  gun  ; 
which  rule  usually  furnishes  the  scale  for  distributing  the 
soldiers  in  vessels  of  different  force. 

Our  marines  had  no  other  than  martial  duty  to  per 
form  ;  excepting  that,  at  sea,  they  stood  watches  like 
the  sailors,  and  now  and  then  lazily  assisted  in  pulling 
the  ropes.  But  they  never  put  foot  in  rigging  or  hand  in 
tar-bucket. 

On  the  quarter-bills,  these  men  were  stationed  at  none 
of  the  great  guns  ;  on  the  station-bills,  they  had  no  posts 
at  the  ropes.  What,  then,  were  they  for  ?  To  serve  their 
country  in  time  of  battle  ?  Let  us  see.  When  a  ship 
is  running  into  action,  her  marines  generally  lie  flat  on 
their  faces  behind  the  bulwarks  (the  sailors  are  sometimes 
ordered  to  do  the  same),  and  when  the  vessel  is  fairly 

470 


THE  SOCIAL  STATE  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR       471 

engaged,  they  are  usually  drawn  up  in  the  ship's  waist 
— like  a  company  reviewing  in  the  Park.  At  close 
quarters,  their  muskets  may  pick  off  a  seaman  or  two  in 
the  rigging,  but  at  long-gun  distance  they  must  passively 
stand  in  their  ranks  and  be  decimated  at  the  enemy's 
leisure.  Only  in  one  case  in  ten — that  is,  when  their  vessel 
is  attempted  to  be  boarded  by  a  large  party,  are  these 
marines  of  any  essential  service  as  fighting  men ;  with 
their  bayonets  they  are  then  called  upon  to  '  repel !  J 

If  comparatively  so  useless  as  soldiers,  why  have 
marines  at  all  in  the  Navy  ?  Know,  then,  that  what 
standing  armies  are  to  nations,  what  turnkeys  are  to 
jails,  these  marines  are  to  the  seamen  in  all  large  men-of- 
war.  Their  muskets  are  their  keys.  With  those  muskets 
they  stand  guard  over  the  fresh  water  ;  over  the  grog, 
when  doled  ;  over  the  provisions,  when  being  served  out 
by  the  master's  mate  ;  over  the  '  brig,'  or  jail ;  at  the 
commodore's  and  captain's  cabin  doors  ;  and,  in  port, 
at  both  gangways  and  forecastle. 

Surely,  the  crowd  of  sailors,  who  besides  having  so 
many  sea-officers  over  them,  are  thus  additionally  guarded 
by  soldiers,  even  when  they  quench  their  thirst — surely 
these  man-of-war's  men  must  be  desperadoes  indeed  ; 
or  else  the  naval  service  must  be  so  tyrannical  that  the 
worst  is  feared  from  their  possible  insubordination. 
Either  reason  holds  good,  or  both,  according  to  the 
character  of  the  officers  and  crew. 

It  must  be  evident  that  the  man-of-war's  man  casts 
but  an  evil  eye  on  a  marine.  To  call  a  man  a  *  horse 
marine '  is,  among  seamen,  one  of  the  greatest  terms  of 
contempt. 

But  the  mutual  contempt,  and  even  hatred,  subsisting 
between  these  two  bodies  of  men — both  clinging  to  one 
keel,  both  lodged  in  one  household — is  held  by  most 
Navy  officers  as  the  height  of  the  perfection  of  Navy 


472  WHITE  JACKET 

discipline.  It  is  regarded  as  the  button  that  caps  the 
uttermost  point  on  their  mainmast. 

Thus  they  reason  :  Secure  of  this  antagonism  between 
the  marine  and  the  sailor,  we  can  always  rely  upon  it, 
that  if  the  sailor  mutinies,  it  needs  no  great  incitement 
for  the  marine  to  thrust  his  bayonet  through  his  heart ; 
if  the  marine  revolts,  the  pike  of  the  sailor  is  impatient 
to  charge.  Checks  and  balances,  blood  against  blood, 
that  is  the  cry  and  the  argument. 

What  applies  to  the  relation  in  which  the  marine  and 
sailor  stand  toward  each  other — the  mutual  repulsion 
implied  by  a  system  of  checks — will,  in  degree,  apply 
to  nearly  the  entire  interior  of  a  man-of-war's  discipline. 
The  whole  body  of  this  discipline  is  emphatically  a  sys 
tem  of  cruel  cogs  and  wheels,  systematically  grinding 
up  in  one  common  hopper  all  that  might  minister  to  the 
moral  well-being  of  the  crew. 

It  is  the  same  with  both  officers  and  men.  If  a  captain 
have  a  grudge  against  a  lieutenant,  or  a  lieutenant  against 
a  midshipman,  how  easy  to  torture  him  by  official  treat 
ment,  which  shall  not  lay  open  the  superior  officer  to 
legal  rebuke.  And  if  a  midshipman  bears  a  grudge 
against  a  sailor,  how  easy  for  him,  by  cunning  practices, 
born  of  a  boyish  spite,  to  have  him  degraded  at  the  gang 
way.  Through  all  the  endless  ramifications  of  rank  and 
station,  in  most  men-of-war  there  runs  a  sinister  vein  of 
bitterness,  not  exceeded  by  the  fireside  hatreds  in  a 
family  of  step -sons  ashore.  It  were  sickening  to  detail 
all  the  paltry  irritabilities,  jealousies,  and  cabals,  the 
spiteful  detractions  and  animosities,  that  lurk  far  down, 
and  cling  to  the  very  kelson  of  the  ship.  It  is  unmanning 
to  think  of.  The  immutable  ceremonies  and  iron  eti 
quette  of  a  man-of-war  ;  the  spiked  barriers  separating 
the  various  grades  of  rank  ;  the  delegated  absolutism 
of  authority  on  all  hands  ;  the  impossibility,  on  the  part 


THE  SOCIAL  STATE  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR       473 

of  the  common  seaman,  of  appeal  from  incidental  abuses, 
and  many  more  things  that  might  be  enumerated,  all 
tend  to  beget  in  most  armed  ships  a  general  social  con 
dition  which  is  the  precise  reverse  of  what  any  Christian 
could  desire.  And  though  there  are  vessels  that  in  some 
measure  furnish  exceptions  to  this  ;  and  though,  in  other 
ships,  the  thing  may  be  glazed  over  by  a  guarded, 
punctilious  exterior,  almost  completely  hiding  the  truth 
from  casual  visitors,  while  the  worst  facts  touching  the 
common  sailor  are  systematically  kept  in  the  back 
ground,  yet  it  is  certain  that  what  has  here  been  said  of 
the  domestic  interior  of  a  man-of-war  will,  in  a  greater 
or  less  degree,  apply  to  most  vessels  in  the  Navy.  It 
is  not  that  the  officers  are  so  malevolent,  nor,  altogether, 
that  the  man-of-war's  man  is  so. vicious.  Some  of  these 
evils  are  unavoidably  generated  through  the  operation 
of  the  naval  code  ;  others  are  absolutely  organic  to  a 
Navy  establishment,  and,  like  other  organic  evils,  are 
incurable,  except  when  they  dissolve  with  the  body  they 
live  in. 

These  things  are  undoubtedly  heightened  by  the  close 
cribbing  and  confinement  of  so  many  mortals  in  one 
oaken  box  on  the  sea.  Like  pears  closely  packed,  the 
crowded  crew  mutually  decay  through  close  contact, 
and  every  plague-spot  is  contagious.  Still  more,  from 
this  same  close  confinement — so  far  as  it  affects  the 
common  sailors — arise  other  evils,  so  direful  that  they 
will  hardly  bear  even  so  much  as  an  allusion.  What 
too  many  seamen  are  when  ashore  is  very  well  known  ; 
but  what  some  of  them  become  when  completely  cut 
off  from  shore  indulgences  can  hardly  be  imagined  by 
landsmen.  The  sins  for  which  the  cities  of  the  plain 
were  overthrown  still  linger  in  some  of  these  wooden- 
walled  Gomorrahs  of  the  deep.  More  than  once  com 
plaints  were  made  at  the  mast  in  the  Neversink,  from 


474  WHITE  JACKET 

which  the  deck  officer  would  turn  away  with  loathing, 
refuse  to  hear  them,  and  command  the  complainant 
out  of  his  sight.  There  are  evils  in  men-of-war,  which, 
like  the  suppressed  domestic  drama  of  Horace  Walpole, 
will  neither  bear  representing,  nor  reading,  and  will 
hardly  bear  thinking  of.  The  landsman  who  has  neither 
read  Walpole's  Mysterious  Mother,  nor  Sophocles's 
(Edipus  Tyrannus,  nor  the  Roman  story  of  Count  Cenci, 
dramatised  by  Shelley,  let  that  landsman  guardedly 
remain  in  his  ignorance  of  even  worse  horrors  than  these, 
and  forever  abstain  from  seeking  to  draw  aside  this  veil. 


CHAPTER   XC 

THE   MANNING   OF  NAVIES 

1  THE  gallows  and  the  sea  refuse  nothing,'  is  a  very  old 
sea  saying ;  and,  among  all  the  wondrous  prints  of 
Hogarth,  there  is  none  remaining  more  true  at  the 
present  day  than  that  dramatic  boat  scene,  where,  after 
consorting  with  harlots,  and  gambling  on  tombstones, 
the  Idle  Apprentice,  with  the  villainous  low  forehead,  is 
at  last  represented  as  being  pushed  off  to  sea,  with  a 
ship  and  a  gallows  in  the  distance.  But  Hogarth  should 
have  converted  the  ship's  masts  themselves  into  Tyburn 
trees,  and  thus,  with  the  ocean  for  a  background,  closed 
the  career  of  his  hero.  It  would  then  have  had  all  the 
dramatic  force  of  the  opera  of  Don  Juan,  who,  after 
running  his  impious  courses,  is  swept  from  our  sight  in  a 
tornado  of  devils. 

For  the  sea  is  the  true  Tophet  and  bottomless  pit  of 
many  workers  of  iniquity  ;  and,  as  the  German  mystics 
feign  Gehennas  within  Gehennas,  even  so  are  men-of- 
war  familiarly  known  among  sailors  as  *  Floating  Hells/ 
And  as  the  sea,  according  to  old  Fuller,  is  the  stable  of 
brute  monsters,  gliding  hither  and  thither  in  unspeak 
able  swarms,  even  so  is  it  the  home  of  many  moral 
monsters,  who  fitly  divide  its  empire  with  the  snake,  the 
shark,  and  the  worm. 

Nor  are  sailors,  and  man-of-war's  men  especially,  at 
all  blind  to  a  true  sense  of  these  things.  '  Purser  rigged 
and  parish  damned  '  is  the  sailor  saying  in  the  American 
Navy,  when  the  tyro  first  mounts  the  lined  frock  and 

475 


476  WHITE  JACKET 

blue  jacket,  aptly  manufactured  for  him  in  a  state 
prison  ashore. 

No  wonder,  that  lured  by  some  crimp  into  a  service 
so  galling,  and,  perhaps,  persecuted  by  a  vindictive 
lieutenant,  some  repentant  sailors  have  actually  jumped 
into  the  sea  to  escape  from  their  fate,  or  set  themselves 
adrift  on  the  wide  ocean  on  the  gratings,  without  com 
pass  or  rudder. 

In  one  case,  a  young  man,  after  being  nearly  cut  into 
dog's  meat  at  the  gangway,  loaded  his  pockets  with  shot 
and  walked  overboard. 

Some  years  ago  I  was  in  a  whaling  ship  lying  in  a 
harbour  of  the  Pacific,  with  three  French  men-of-war 
alongside.  One  dark,  moody  night,  a  suppressed  cry 
was  heard  from  the  face  of  the  waters,  and,  thinking  it 
was  some  one  drowning,  a  boat  was  lowered,  when  two 
French  sailors  were  picked  up,  half  dead  from  exhaus 
tion,  and  nearly  throttled  by  a  bundle  of  their  clothes 
tied  fast  to  their  shoulders.  In  this  manner  they  had 
attempted  their  escape  from  their  vessel.  When  the 
French  officers  came  in  pursuit,  these  sailors,  rallying 
from  their  exhaustion,  fought  like  tigers  to  resist  being 
captured.  Though  this  story  concerns  a  French  armed 
ship,  it  is  not  the  less  applicable,  in  degree,  to  those  of 
other  nations. 

Mix  with  the  men  in  an  American  armed  ship  ;  mark 
how  many  foreigners  there  are,  though  it  is  against  the 
law  to  enlist  them.  Nearly  one -third  of  the  petty 
officers  of  the  Never  sink  were  born  east  of  the  Atlantic. 
Why  is  this  ?  Because  the  same  principle  that  operates 
in  hindering  Americans  from  hiring  themselves  out  as 
menial  domestics  also  restrains  them,  in  a  great  measure, 
from  voluntarily  assuming  a  far  worse  servitude  in  the 
Navy.  '  Sailors  wanted  for  the  Navy '  is  a  common 
announcement  along  the  wharves  of  our  seaports.  They 


THE  MANNING  OF  NAVIES  477 

are  always  '  wanted'  It  may  have  been,  in  part,  owing 
to  this  scarcity  of  man-of-war's  men,  that  not  many 
years  ago  black  slaves  were  frequently  to  be  found 
regularly  enlisted  with  the  crew  of  an  American  frigate, 
their  masters  receiving  their  pay.  This  was  in  the  teeth 
of  a  law  of  Congress  expressly  prohibiting  slaves  in  the 
Navy.  This  law,  indirectly,  means  black  slaves,  nothing 
being  said  concerning  white  ones.  But  in  view  of  what 
John  Randolph  of  Roanoke  said  about  the  frigate  that 
carried  him  to  Russia,  and  in  view  of  what  most  armed 
vessels  actually  are  at  present,  the  American  Navy  is 
not  altogether  an  inappropriate  place  for  hereditary 
bondmen.  Still,  the  circumstance  of  their  being  found 
in  it  is  of  such  a  nature,  that  to  some  it  may  hardly 
appear  credible.  The  incredulity  of  such  persons, 
nevertheless,  must  yield  to  the  fact  that,  on  board  of  the 
United  States  ship  Never  sink,  during  the  present  cruise, 
there  was  a  Virginian  slave  regularly  shipped  as  a  sea 
man,  his  owner  receiving  his  wages.  Guinea — such  was 
his  name  among  the  crew — belonged  to  the  purser,  who 
was  a  southern  gentleman  ;  he  was  employed  as  his 
body-servant.  Never  did  I  feel  my  condition  as  a  man- 
of-war's  man  so  keenly  as  when  seeing  this  Guinea 
freely  circulating  about  the  decks  in  citizen's  clothes, 
and,  through  the  influence  of  his  master,  almost  entirely 
exempted  from  the  disciplinary  degradation  of  the  Cau 
casian  crew.  Faring  sumptuously  in  the  ward-room  ; 
sleek  and  round,  his  ebon  face  fairly  polished  with  con 
tent  ;  ever  gay  and  hilarious  ;  ever  ready  to  laugh  and 
joke,  that  African  slave  was  actually  envied  by  many 
of  the  seamen.  There  were  times  when  I  almost  envied 
him  myself.  Lemsford  once  envied  him  outright.  '  Ah, 
Guinea  !  '  he  sighed,  '  you  have  peaceful  times  ;  you 
never  opened  the  book  I  read  in.' 

One  morning,  when  all  hands  were  called  to  witness 


478  WHITE  JACKET 

punishment,  the  purser's  slave,  as  usual,  was  observed 
to  be  hurrying  down  the  ladders  toward  the  ward-room, 
his  face  wearing  that  peculiar  pinched  blueness,  which, 
in  the  negro,  answers  to  the  paleness  caused  by  nervous 
agitation  in  the  white.  '  Where  are  you  going,  Guinea  ?  ' 
cried  the  deck  officer,  a  humorous  gentleman,  who  some 
times  diverted  himself  with  the  purser's  slave,  and  well 
knew  what  answer  he  would  now  receive  from  him. 
'  Where  are  you  going,  Guinea  ?  '  said  this  officer  ;  *  turn 
about ;  don't  you  hear  the  call,  sir  ?  '  *  'Sense  me, 
massa  !  '  said  the  slave,  with  a  low  salutation  ;  '  I  can't 
'tand  it ;  I  can't,  indeed,  massa  !  '  and  so  saying,  he 
disappeared  beyond  the  hatchway.  He  was  the  only 
person  on  board,  except  the  hospital  steward  and  the 
invalids  of  the  sick-bay,  who  was  exempted  from  being 
present  at  the  administering  of  the  scourge.  Accustomed 
to  light  and  easy  duties  from  his  birth,  and  so  fortunate 
as  to  meet  with  none  but  gentle  masters,  Guinea,  though 
a  bondman,  liable  to  be  saddled  with  a  mortgage,  like  a 
horse — Guinea,  in  india-rubber  manacles,  enjoyed  the 
liberties  of  the  world. 

Though  his  body-and-soul  proprietor,  the  purser 
never  in  any  way  individualised  me  while  I  served  on 
board  the  frigate,  and  never  did  me  a  good  office  of  any 
kind  (it  was  hardly  in  his  power),  yet,  from  his  pleasant, 
kind,  indulgent  manner  toward  his  slave,  I  always  im 
puted  to  him  a  generous  heart,  and  cherished  an  involun 
tary  friendliness  toward  him.  Upon  our  arrival  home, 
his  treatment  of  Guinea,  under  circumstances  peculiarly 
calculated  to  stir  up  the  resentment  of  a  slave-owner, 
still  more  augmented  my  estimation  of  the  purser's  good 
heart. 

Mention  has  been  made  of  the  number  of  foreigners  in 
the  American  Navy  ;  but  it  is  not  in  the  American  Navy 
alone  that  foreigners  bear  so  large  a  proportion  to  the 


THE  MANNING  OF  NAVIES  479 

rest  of  the  crew,  though  in  no  navy,  perhaps,  have  they 
ever  borne  so  large  a  proportion  as  in  our  own.  Accord 
ing  to  an  English  estimate,  the  foreigners  serving  in  the 
King's  ships  at  one  time  amounted  to  one-eighth  of  the 
entire  body  of  seamen.  How  it  is  in  the  French  Navy, 
I  cannot  with  certainty  say  ;  but  I  have  repeatedly  sailed 
with  English  seamen  who  have  served  in  it. 

One  of  the  effects  of  the  free  introduction  of  foreigners 
into  any  navy  cannot  be  sufficiently  deplored.  During 
the  period  I  lived  in  the  Neversink,  I  was  repeatedly 
struck  by  the  lack  of  patriotism  in  many  of  my  shipmates. 
True,  they  were  mostly  foreigners,  who  unblushingly 
avowed  that,  were  it  not  for  the  difference  of  pay,  they 
would  as  lief  man  the  guns  of  an  English  ship  as  those 
of  an  American  or  Frenchman.  Nevertheless,  it  was 
evident,  that  as  for  any  high-toned  patriotic  feeling, 
there  was  comparatively  very  little — hardly  any  of  it — 
evinced  by  our  sailors  as  a  body.  Upon  reflection,  this 
was  not  to  be  wondered  at.  From  their  roving  career, 
and  the  sundering  of  all  domestic  ties,  many  sailors,  all 
the  world  over,  are  like  the  '  Free  Companions,'  who 
some  centuries  ago  wandered  over  Europe,  ready  to  fight 
the  battles  of  any  prince  who  could  purchase  their  swords. 
The  only  patriotism  is  born  and  nurtured  in  a  stationary 
home,  and  upon  an  immovable  hearthstone ;  but 
the  man-of-war's  man,  though  in  his  voyagings  he 
weds  the  two  Poles,  and  brings  both  Indies  together, 
yet,  let  him  wander  where  he  will,  he  carries  his  one 
only  home  along  with  him  :  that  home  is  his  hammock. 
*  Born  under  a  gun,  and  educated  on  the  bowsprit'  accord 
ing  to  a  phrase  of  his  own,  the  man-of-war's  man  rolls 
round  the  world  like  a  billow,  ready  to  mix  with  any 
sea,  or  be  sucked  down  to  death  in  the  maelstrom  of 
any  war. 

Yet  more.     The  dread  of  the  general  discipline  of  a 


480  WHITE  JACKET 

man-of-war  ;  the  special  obnoxiousness  of  the  gangway  ; 
the  protracted  confinement  on  board  ship,  with  so  few 
4  liberty  days  '  ;  and  the  pittance  of  pay  (much  less  than 
what  can  always  be  had  in  the  merchant  service),  these 
things  contrive  to  deter  from  the  navies  of  all  countries 
by  far  the  majority  of  their  best  seamen.  This  will  be 
obvious,  when  the  following  statistical  facts,  taken  from 
Macpherson's  Annals  of  Commerce,  are  considered.  At 
one  period,  upon  the  peace  establishment,  the  number 
of  men  employed  in  the  English  Navy  was  25,000  ;  at 
the  same  time,  the  English  merchant  service  was  employ 
ing  118,952.  But  while  the  necessities  of  a  merchant 
man  render  it  indispensable  that  the  greater  part  of  her 
crew  be  able  seamen,  the  circumstances  of  a  man-of-war 
admit  of  her  mustering  a  crowd  of  landsmen,  soldiers,  and 
boys  in  her  service.  By  a  statement  of  Captain  Marryat's, 
in  his  pamphlet  (A.D.  1822)  On  the  Abolition  of  Impress 
ment,  it  appears  that,  at  the  close  of  the  Bonaparte  wars, 
a  full  third  of  all  the  crews  of  His  Majesty's  fleets 
consisted  of  landsmen  and  boys. 

Far  from  entering  with  enthusiasm  into  the  King's 
ships  when  their  country  was  menaced,  the  great  body  of 
English  seamen,  appalled  at  the  discipline  of  the  Navy, 
adopted  unheard-of  devices  to  escape  its  pressgangs. 
Some  even  hid  themselves  in  caves,  and  lonely  places 
inland,  fearing  to  run  the  risk  of  seeking  a  berth  in  an 
outward-bound  merchantman,  that  might  have  carried 
them  beyond  sea.  In  the  true  narrative  of  John  Nichol, 
Mariner,  published  in  1822  by  Blackwood  in  Edinburgh, 
and  Cadell  in  London,  and  which  everywhere  bears  the 
spontaneous  impress  of  truth,  the  old  sailor,  in  the  most 
artless,  touching,  and  almost  uncomplaining  manner, 
tells  of  his  '  skulking  like  a  thief  '  for  whole  years  in  the 
country  round  about  Edinburgh,  to  avoid  the  pressgangs, 
prowling  through  the  land  like  bandits  and  Burkers.  At 


THE  MANNING  OF  NAVIES  481 

this  time  (Bonaparte's  wars),  according  to  Steel's  List, 
there  were  forty-five  regular  pressgang  stations  in 
Great  Britain.1 

In  a  later  instance,  a  large  body  of  British 
seamen  solemnly  assembled  upon  the  eve  of  an  antici 
pated  war,  and  together  determined,  that  in  case  of 
its  breaking  out,  they  would  at  once  flee  to  America, 
to  avoid  being  pressed  into  the  service  of  their  country 
— a  service  which  degraded  her  own  guardians  at  the 
gangway. 

At  another  time,  long  previous  to  this,  according  to 
an  English  Navy  officer,  Lieutenant  Tomlinson,  three 
thousand  seamen,  impelled  by  the  same  motive,  fled 
ashore  in  a  panic  from  the  colliers  between  Yarmouth 
Roads  and  the  Nore.  Elsewhere,  he  says,  in  speaking 
of  some  of  the  men  on  board  the  King's  ships,  that 
'  they  were  most  miserable  objects.'  This  remark  is 
perfectly  corroborated  by  other  testimony  referring  to 
another  period.  In  alluding  to  the  lamented  scarcity 
of  good  English  seamen  during  the  wars  of  1808,  etc., 
the  author  of  a  pamphlet  on  Naval  Subjects  says,  that 
all  the  best  seamen,  the  steadiest  and  best-behaved 
men,  generally  succeeded  in  avoiding  the  impress. 
This  writer  was,  or  had  been,  himself  a  captain  in  the 
British  fleet. 


1  Besides  this  domestic  kidnapping,  British  frigates,  in  friendly  or 
neutral  harbours,  in  some  instances  pressed  into  their  service  foreign 
sailors  of  all  nations  from  the  public  wharves.  In  certain  cases,  where 
Americans  were  concerned,  when  'protections'  were  found  upon  their 
persons,  these  were  destroyed  ;  and  to  prevent  the  American  consul 
from  claiming  his  sailor  countrymen,  the  pressgang  generally  went  on 
shore  the  night  previous  to  the  sailing  of  the  frigate,  so  that  the  kid 
napped  seamen  were  far  out  to  sea  before  they  could  be  missed  by  their 
friends.  These  things  should  be  known ;  for  in  case  the  English 
government  again  goes  to  war  with  its  fleets,  and  should  again  resort 
to  indiscriminate  impressment  to  man  them,  it  is  well  that  both 
Englishmen  and  Americans,  that  all  the  world  be  prepared  to  put  down 
an  iniquity  outrageous  and  insulting  to  God  and  man. 

2H 


482  WHITE  JACKET 

Now  it  may  be  easily  imagined  who  are  the  men,  and 
of  what  moral  character  they  are,  who,  even  at  the 
present  day,  are  willing  to  enlist  as  full-grown  adults  in 
a  service  so  galling  to  all  shore-manhood  as  the  Navy. 
Hence  it  comes  that  the  skulkers  and  scoundrels  of  all 
sorts  in  a  man-of-war  are  chiefly  composed  not  of  regular 
seamen,  but  of  these  '  dock-lopers  '  of  landsmen,  men 
who  enter  the  Navy  to  draw  their  grog  and  murder  their 
time  in  the  notorious  idleness  of  a  frigate.  But  if  so  idle, 
why  not  reduce  the  number  of  a  man-of-war's  crew,  and 
reasonably  keep  employed  the  rest  ?  It  cannot  be  done. 
In  the  first  place,  the  magnitude  of  most  of  these  ships 
requires  a  large  number  of  hands  to  brace  the  heavy 
yards,  hoist  the  enormous  topsails,  and  weigh  the 
ponderous  anchor.  And  though  the  occasion  for  the 
employment  of  so  many  men  comes  but  seldom,  it 
is  true,  yet  when  that  occasion  does  come — and  come 
it  may  at  any  moment — this  multitude  of  men  are 
indispensable. 

But  besides  this,  and  to  crown  all,  the  batteries 
must  be  manned.  There  must  be  enough  men  to  work 
all  the  guns  at  one  time.  And  thus,  in  order  to  have 
a  sufficiency  of  mortals  at  hand  to  '  sink,  burn,  and 
destroy,'  a  man-of-war — besides,  through  her  vices, 
hopelessly  depraving  the  volunteer  landsmen  and 
ordinary  seamen  of  good  habits,  who  occasionally 
enlist — must  feed  at  the  public  cost  a  multitude  of 
persons,  who,  if  they  did  not  find  a  home  in  the  Navy, 
would  probably  fall  on  the  parish,  or  linger  out  their 
days  in  a  prison. 

Among  others,  these  are  the  men  into  whose  mouths 
Dibdin  puts  his  patriotic  verses,  full  of  sea  chivalry  and 
romance.  With  an  exception  in  the  last  line,  they  might 
be  sung  with  equal  propriety  by  both  English  and 
American  man-of-war's  men. 


THE  MANNING  OF  NAVIES  483 

1  As  for  me,  in  all  weathers,  all  times,  tides,  and  ends, 

Naught 's  a  trouble  from  duty  that  springs  ; 
For  my  heart  is  my  Poll's,  and  my  rhino 's  my  friends, 
And  as  for  my  life,  it 's  the  king's. 

To  rancour  unknown,  to  no  passion  a  slave, 
Nor  unmanly,  nor  mean,  nor  a  railer,'  etc. 

I  do  not  unite  with  a  high  critical  authority  in  con 
sidering  Dibdin's  ditties  as  '  slang  songs/  for  most  of 
them  breathe  the  very  poetry  of  the  ocean.  But  it  is 
remarkable  that  those  songs — which  would  lead  one  to 
think  that  man-of-war's  men  are  the  most  care-free, 
contented,  virtuous,  and  patriotic  of  mankind — were 
composed  at  a  time  when  the  English  Navy  was  prin 
cipally  manned  by  felons  and  paupers,  as  mentioned  in 
a  former  chapter.  Still  more,  these  songs  are  pervaded 
by  a  true  Mohammedan  sensualism  ;  a  reckless  acquies 
cence  in  fate,  and  an  implicit,  unquestioning,  dog-like 
devotion  to  whoever  may  be  lord  and  master.  Dibdin 
was  a  man  of  genius  ;  but  no  wonder,  Dibdin  was  a 
government  pensioner  at  £200  per  annum. 

But  notwithstanding  the  iniquities  of  a  man-of-war, 
men  are  to  be  found  in  them,  at  times,  so  used  to  a 
hard  life,  so  drilled  and  disciplined  to  servitude,  that, 
with  an  incomprehensible  philosophy,  they  seem  cheer 
fully  to  resign  themselves  to  their  fate.  They  have 
plenty  to  eat ;  spirits  to  drink  ;  clothing  to  keep  them 
warm  ;  a  hammock  to  sleep  in  ;  tobacco  to  chew  ;  a 
doctor  to  medicine  them  ;  a  parson  to  pray  for  them  ; 
and,  to  a  penniless  castaway,  must  not  all  this  seem  as 
a  luxurious  Bill  of  Fare  ? 

There  was  on  board  of  the  Neversink  a  fore-top  man 
by  the  name  of  Landless,  who,  though  his  back  was 
cross -barred,  and  plaided  with  the  ineffaceable  scars  of 
all  the  floggings  accumulated  by  a  reckless  tar  during 


484  WHITE  JACKET 

a  ten  years'  service  in  the  Navy,  yet  he  perpetually  wore 
a  hilarious  face,  and  at  joke  and  repartee  was  a  very 
Joe  Miller. 

That  man,  though  a  sea  vagabond,  was  not  created  in 
vain.  He  enjoyed  life  with  the  zest  of  everlasting  ado 
lescence  ;  and,  though  cribbed  in  an  oaken  prison,  with 
the  turnkey  sentries  all  round  him,  yet  he  paced  the 
gun-deck  as  if  it  were  broad  as  a  prairie,  and  diversi 
fied  in  landscape  as  the  hills  and  valleys  of  the  Tyrol. 
Nothing  ever  disconcerted  him  ;  nothing  could  transmute 
his  laugh  into  anything  like  a  sigh.  Those  glandular 
secretions,  which  in  other  captives  sometimes  go  to  the 
formation  of  tears,  in  him  were  expectorated  from  the 
mouth,  tinged  with  the  golden  juice  of  a  weed,  where 
with  he  solaced  and  comforted  his  ignominious  days. 

'  Rum  and  tobacco  !  '  said  Landless,  '  what  more  does 
a  sailor  want  ?  ' 

His  favourite  song  was  Dibdin's  *  True  English  Sailor,1 
beginning  : — 

'  Jack  dances  and  sings,  and  is  always  content, 
In  his  vows  to  his  lass  he  '11  ne'er  fail  her ; 
His  anchor 's  atrip  when  his  money  5s  all  spent, 
And  this  is  the  life  of  a  sailor.' 

But  poor  Landless  danced  quite  as  often  at  the  gang 
way,  under  the  lash,  as  in  the  sailor  dance-houses  ashore. 

Another  of  his  songs,  also  set  to  the  significant  tune 
of  The  King,  God  bless  him  !  mustered  the  following  lines 
among  many  similar  ones  : — 

'  Oh,  when  safely  landed  in  Boston  or  'York, 

Oh  how  I  will  tipple  and  jig  it ; 
And  toss  off  my  glass  while  my  rhino  holds  out, 
In  drinking  success  to  our  frigate  ! ' 

During  the  many  idle  hours  when  our  frigate  was  lying 
in  harbour,  this  man  was  either  merrily  playing  at 


THE  MANNING  OF  NAVIES  485 

checkers,  or  mending  his  clothes,  or  snoring  like  a  trum 
peter  under  the  lee  of  the  booms.  When  fast  asleep, 
a  national  salute  from  our  batteries  could  hardly  move 
him.  Whether  ordered  to  the  main-truck  in  a  gale  ;  or 
rolled  by  the  drum  to  the  grog-tub  ;  or  commanded  to 
walk  up  to  the  gratings  and  be  lashed,  Landless  always 
obeyed  with  the  same  invincible  indifference. 

His  advice  to  a  young  lad,  who  shipped  with  us  at 
Valparaiso,  embodies  the  pith  and  marrow  of  that  philo 
sophy  which  enables  some  man-of-war's  men  to  wax  jolly 
in  the  service. 

'  Shippy  !  '  said  Landless,  taking  the  pale  lad  by  his 
neckerchief,  as  if  he  had  him  by  the  halter  ;  '  Shippy, 
I  've  seen  sarvice  with  Uncle  Sam — I  've  sailed  in  many 
Andrew  Millers.  Now  take  my  advice,  and  steer  clear 
of  all  trouble.  D'  ye  see,  touch  your  tile  whenever 
a  swob  (officer)  speaks  to  you.  And  never  mind  how 
much  they  rope's-end  you,  keep  your  red-rag  belayed  ; 
for  you  must  know  as  how  they  don't  fancy  sea -lawyers  ; 
and  when  the  sarving  out  of  slops  comes  round,  stand 
up  to  it  stiffly  ;  it 's  only  an  Oh  Lord  !  or  two,  and  a  few 
Oh  my  Gods  ! — that 's  all.  And  what  then  ?  Why,  you 
sleeps  it  off  in  a  few  nights,  and  turns  out  at  last  all 
ready  for  your  grog.' 

This  Landless  was  a  favourite  with  the  officers,  among 
whom  he  went  by  the  name  of  '  Happy  Jack.1  And  it 
is  just  such  Happy  Jacks  as  Landless  that  most  sea- 
officers  profess  to  admire  ;  a  fellow  without  shame,  with 
out  a  soul,  so  dead  to  the  least  dignity  of  manhood  that 
he  could  hardly  be  called  a  man.  Whereas,  a  seaman 
who  exhibits  traits  of  moral  sensitiveness,  whose  de 
meanour  shows  some  dignity  within  ;  this  is  the  man 
they,  in  many  cases,  instinctively  dislike.  The  reason 
is,  they  feel  such  a  man  to  be  a  continual  reproach  to 
them,  as  being  mentally  superior  to  their  power.  He 


486  WHITE  JACKET 

has  no  business  in  a  man-of-war  ;  they  do  not  want 
such  men.  To  them  there  is  an  insolence  in  his  manly 
freedom,  contempt  in  his  very  carriage.  He  is  unen 
durable,  as  an  erect,  lofty-minded  African  would  be  to 
some  slave-driving  planter. 

Let  it  not  be  supposed,  however,  that  the  remarks  in 
this  and  the  preceding  chapter  apply  to  all  men-of-war. 
There  are  some  vessels  blessed  with  patriarchal,  intel 
lectual  captains,  gentlemanly  and  brotherly  officers, 
and  docile  and  Christianised  crews.  The  peculiar  usages 
of  such  vessels  insensibly  soften  the  tyrannical  rigour 
of  the  Articles  of  War  ;  in  them,  scourging  is  unknown. 
To  sail  in  such  ships  is  hardly  to  realise  that  you  live 
under  the  martial  law,  or  that  the  evils  above  mentioned 
can  anywhere  exist. 

And  Jack  Chase,  old  Ushant,  and  several  more  fine 
tars  that  might  be  added,  sufficiently  attest,  that  in  the 
Neversink,  at  least,  there  was  more  than  one  noble  man- 
of-war's  man  who  almost  redeemed  all  the  rest. 

Wherever,  throughout  this  narrative,  the  American 
Navy,  in  any  of  its  bearings,  has  formed  the  theme  of 
a  general  discussion,  hardly  one  syllable  of  admiration 
for  what  is  accounted  illustrious  in  its  achievements 
has  been  permitted  to  escape  me.  The  reason  is  this  : 
I  consider,  that  so  far  as  what  is  called  military  renown 
is  concerned,  the  American  Navy  needs  no  eulogist  but 
History.  It  were  superfluous  for  White  Jacket  to  tell 
the  world  what  it  knows  already.  The  office  imposed 
upon  me  is  of  another  cast ;  and,  though  I  foresee  and 
feel  that  it  may  subject  me  to  the  pillory  in  the  hard 
thoughts  of  some  men,  yet,  supported  by  what  God  has 
given  me,  I  tranquilly  abide  the  event,  whatever  it  may 
prove. 


CHAPTER    XCI 

SMOKING    CLUB   IN   A   MAN-OF-WAE,   WITH  SCENES   ON 
THE   GUN-DECK   DRAWING   NEAR  HOME 

THERE  is  a  fable  about  a  painter  moved  by  Jove  to  the 
painting  of  the  head  of  Medusa.  Though  the  picture 
was  true  to  the  life,  yet  the  poor  artist  sickened  at  the 
sight  of  what  his  forced  pencil  had  drawn.  Thus, 
borne  through  my  task  toward  the  end,  my  own  soul 
now  sinks  at  what  I  myself  have  portrayed.  But  let 
us  forget  past  chapters,  if  we  may,  while  we  paint  less 
repugnant  things. 

Metropolitan  gentlemen  have  their  club  ;  provincial 
gossipers  their  news-room ;  village  quidnuncs  their 
barber's  shop  ;  the  Chinese  their  opium-houses  ;  Ameri 
can  Indians  their  council-fire  ;  and  even  cannibals  their 
Noojona,  or  Talk-stone,  where  they  assemble  at  times  to 
discuss  the  affairs  of  the  day.  Nor  is  there  any  govern 
ment,  however  despotic,  that  ventures  to  deny  to  the 
least  of  its  subjects  the  privilege  of  a  sociable  chat.  Not 
the  Thirty  Tyrants  even — the  clubbed  post-captains  of 
old  Athens — could  stop  the  wagging  tongues  at  the 
street  corners.  For  chat  man  must ;  and  by  our  im 
mortal  Bill  of  Rights,  that  guarantees  to  us  liberty  of 
speech,  chat  we  Yankees  will,  whether  on  board  a  frigate, 
or  on  board  our  own  terra-firma  plantations. 

In  men-of-war,  the  galley,  or  cookery,  on  the  gun- 
deck  is  the  grand  centre  of  gossip  and  news  among  the 
sailors.  Here  crowds  assemble  to  chat  away  the  half- 
hour  elapsing  after  every  meal.  The  reason  why  this 

487 


488  WHITE  JACKET 

place  and  these  hours  are  selected  rather  than  others  is 
this  :  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  galley  alone,  and 
only  after  meals,  is  the  man-of-war's  man  permitted  to 
regale  himself  with  a  smoke. 

A  sumptuary  edict,  truly,  that  deprived  White  Jacket, 
for  one,  of  a  luxury  to  which  he  had  long  been  attached. 
For  how  can  the  mystical  motives,  the  capricious  im 
pulses  of  a  luxurious  smoker  go  and  come  at  the  beck 
of  a  commodore's  command  ?  No  !  when  I  smoke,  be 
it  because  of  my  sovereign  good  pleasure  I  choose  so  to 
do,  though  at  so  unseasonable  an  hour  that  I  send 
round  the  town  for  a  brazier  of  coals.  What !  smoke 
by  a  sun-dial  ?  Smoke  on  compulsion  ?  Make  a  trade, 
a  business,  a  vile  recurring  calling  of  smoking  ?  And, 
perhaps,  when  those  sedative  fumes  have  steeped  you  in 
the  grandest  of  reveries,  and,  circle  over  circle,  solemnly 
rises  some  immeasurable  dome  in  your  soul — far  away, 
swelling  and  heaving  into  the  vapour  you  raise — as  if 
from  one  of  Mozart's  grandest  marches  a  temple  were 
rising,  like  Venus  from  the  sea — at  such  a  time,  to  have 
your  whole  Parthenon  tumbled  about  your  ears  by  the 
knell  of  the  ship's  bell  announcing  the  expiration  of  the 
half -hour  for  smoking  !  Whip  me,  ye  Furies  !  toast  me 
in  saltpetre  !  smite  me,  some  thunderbolt !  charge  upon 
me,  endless  squadrons  of  Mamelukes  !  devour  me, 
Feejees  !  but  preserve  me  from  a  tyranny  like  this. 

No  !  though  I  smoked  like  an  Indian  summer  ere  I 
entered  the  Neversink,  so  abhorrent  was  this  sumptuary 
law,  that  I  altogether  abandoned  the  luxury  rather  than 
enslave  it  to  a  time  and  a  place.  Herein  did  I  not  right, 
Ancient  and  Honourable  Old  Guard  of  Smokers  all  round 
the  world  ? 

But  there  were  others  of  the  crew  not  so  fastidious 
as  myself.  After  every  meal,  they  hied  to  the  galley 
and  solaced  their  souls  with  a  whiff. 


SMOKING  CLUB  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR       489 

Now,  a  bunch  of  cigars,  all  banded  together,  is  a  type 
and  a  symbol  of  the  brotherly  love  between  smokers. 
Likewise,  for  the  time,  in  a  community  of  pipes  is  a 
community  of  hearts.  Nor  was  it  an  ill  thing  for  the 
Indian  sachems  to  circulate  their  calumet  tobacco -bowl 
— even  as  our  own  forefathers  circulated  their  punch 
bowl — in  token  of  peace,  eharity,  and  goodwill,  friendly 
feelings,  and  sympathising  souls.  And  this  it  was  that 
made  the  gossipers  of  the  galley  so  loving  a  club,  so  long 
as  the  vapoury  bond  united  them. 

It  was  a  pleasant  sight  to  behold  them.  Grouped 
in  the  recesses  between  the  guns,  they  chatted  and 
laughed  like  rows  of  convivialists  in  the  boxes  of  some 
vast  dining  saloon.  Take  a  Flemish  kitchen  full  of  good 
fellows  from  Teniers  ;  add  a  fireside  group  from  Wilkie  ; 
throw  in  a  naval  sketch  from  Cruikshank  ;  and  then  stick 
a  short  pipe  into  every  mother's  son's  mouth,  and  you 
have  the  smoking  scene  at  the  galley  of  the  Neversink. 

Not  a  few  were  politicians  ;  and,  as  there  were  some 
thoughts  of  a  war  with  England  at  the  time,  their  dis 
cussions  waxed  warm. 

'  I  tell  you  what  it  is,  shippies  !  '  cried  the  old  captain 
of  gun  No.  1  on  the  forecastle,  '  if  that  'ere  President  of 
ourn  don't  luff  up  into  the  wind,  by  the  battle  of  the 
Nile  !  he  '11  be  getting  us  into  a  grand  fleet  engagement 
afore  the  Yankee  nation  has  rammed  home  her  cartridges 
— let  alone  blowing  the  match  !  ' 

'  Who  talks  of  luffing  ?  '  roared  a  roystering  fore-top 
man.  '  Keep  our  Yankee  nation  large  before  the  wind, 
say  I,  till  you  come  plump  on  the  enemy's  bows,  and 
then  board  him  in  the  smoke,'  and  with  that  there  came 
forth  a  mighty  blast  from  his  pipe. 

4  Who  says  the  old  man  at  the  helm  of  the  Yankee 
nation  can't  steer  his  trick  as  well  as  George  Washington 
himself  ?  '  cried  a  sheet-anchor  man. 


490  WHITE  JACKET 

;  But  they  say  he  's  a  cold  water  customer,  Bill,'  cried 
another  ;  '  and  sometimes  o'  nights  I  somehow  has  a 
presentation  that  he  's  goin'  to  stop  our  grog.' 

*  D'  ye  hear  there,  fore  and  aft  !  '  roared  the  boat 
swain's  mates  at  the  gangway,  '  all   hands   tumble  up, 
and  'bout  ship  !  ' 

'  That 's  the  talk  !  '  cried  the  captain  of  gun  No.  1, 
as,  in  obedience  to  the  summons,  all  hands  dropped 
their  pipes  and  crowded  toward  the  ladders,  '  and  that 's 
what  the  President  must  do — go  in  stays,  my  lads,  and 
put  the  Yankee  nation  on  the  other  tack.' 

But  these  political  discussions  by  no  means  supplied 
the  staple  of  conversation  for  the  gossiping  smokers  of 
the  galley.  The  interior  affairs  of  the  frigate  itself 
formed  their  principal  theme.  Rumours  about  the 
private  life  of  the  commodore  in  his  cabin ;  about 
the  captain,  in  his ;  about  the  various  officers  in 
the  ward-room ;  about  the  reefers  in  the  steerage, 
and  their  madcap  frolickings,  and  about  a  thousand 
other  matters  touching  the  crew  themselves  ;  all  these 
— forming  the  eternally  shifting,  domestic  by-play 
of  a  man-of-war — proved  inexhaustible  topics  for  our 
quidnuncs. 

The  animation  of  these  scenes  was  very  much  height 
ened  as  we  drew  nearer  and  nearer  our  port ;  it  rose  to 
a  climax  when  the  frigate  was  reported  to  be  only  twenty - 
four  hours'  sail  from  the  land.  What  they  should  do 
when  they  landed  ;  how  they  should  invest  their  wages  ; 
what  they  should  eat ;  what  they  should  drink  ;  and 
what  lass  they  should  marry — these  were  the  topics 
which  absorbed  them. 

*  Sink  the  sea  !  '  cried  a  forecastle  man.     '  Once  more 
ashore,  and  you  '11  never  again  catch  old  Boombolt  afloat. 
I  mean  to  settle  down  in  a  sail-loft.' 

4  Cable-tier  pinches  blister  all  tarpaulin  hats  ! '  cried  a 


SMOKING  CLUB  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR        491 

young  after-guard's  man ;  '  I  mean  to  go  back  to 
the  counter.' 

'  Shipmates  !  take  me  by  the  arms,  and  swab  up  the 
lee-scuppers  with  me,  but  I  mean  to  steer  a  clam-cart 
before  I  go  again  to  a  ship's  wheel.  Let  the  Navy  go 
by  the  board — to  sea  again,  I  won't.' 

'  Start  my  soul-bolts,  maties,  if  any  more  Blue  Peters 
and  sailing  signals  fly  at  my  fore  ! '  cried  the  captain 
of  the  head.  *  My  wages  will  buy  a  wheelbarrow,  if 
nothing  more.' 

*  I  have  taken  my  last  dose  of  salts,'  said  the  captain 
of  the  waist,  *  and  after  this  mean  to  stick  to  fresh  water. 
Ay,  maties,  ten  of  us  waisters  mean  to  club  together, 
and  buy  a  serving-mallet  boat,  d'  ye  see  ;  and  if  ever  we 
drown,  it  will  be  in  the  "  raging  canal !  "     Blast  the  sea, 
shipmates  !   say  I.' 

*  Profane  not  the  holy  element !  '  said  Lemsford,  the 
poet  of  the  gun-deck,  leaning  over  a  cannon.      '  Know 
ye  not,  man-of-war's  men  !    that  by  the  Parthian  magi 
the   ocean   was   held   sacred  ?     Did   not  Tiridates,   the 
Eastern    monarch,    take    an   immense    land    circuit   to 
avoid  desecrating  the  Mediterranean,  in  order  to  reach 
his    imperial    master,  Nero,   and    do    homage    for    his 
crown  ?  ' 

*  What  lingo  is  that  ?  '  cried  the  captain  of  the  waist. 

'  Who  's  Commodore  Tiddery-eye  ?  '  cried  the  fore 
castle  man. 

'  Hear  me  out,'  resumed  Lemsford.  '  Like  Tiridates, 
I  venerate  the  sea,  and  venerate  it  so  highly,  shipmates, 
that  evermore  I  shall  abstain  from  crossing  it.  In  that 
sense,  captain  of  the  waist,  I  echo  your  cry.' 

It  was,  indeed,  a  remarkable  fact,  that  nine  men  out 
of  every  ten  of  the  Neversink's  crew  had  formed  some 
plan  or  other  to  keep  themselves  ashore  for  life,  or,  at 
least,  on  fresh  water,  after  the  expiration  of  the  present 


492  WHITE  JACKET 

cruise.  With  all  the  experiences  of  that  cruise  accumu 
lated  in  one  intense  recollection  of  a  moment ;  with 
the  smell  of  tar  in  their  nostrils  ;  out  of  sight  of  land  ; 
with  a  stout  ship  under  foot,  and  snuffing  the  ocean  air  ; 
with  all  the  things  of  the  sea  surrounding  them  ;  in 
their  cool,  sober  moments  of  reflection  ;  in  the  silence 
and  solitude  of  the  deep,  during  the  long  night-watches, 
when  all  their  holy  home  associations  were  thronging 
round  their  hearts  ;  in  the  spontaneous  piety  and  devo 
tion  of  the  last  hours  of  so  long  a  voyage  ;  in  the  fulness 
and  the  frankness  of  their  souls  ;  when  there  was  naught 
to  jar  the  well-poised  equilibrium  of  their  judgment — 
under  all  these  circumstances,  at  least  nine-tenths  of  a 
crew  of  five  hundred  man-of-war's  men  resolved  forever 
to  turn  their  backs  on  the  sea.  But  do  men  ever  hate 
the  thing  they  love  ?  Do  men  forswear  the  hearth  and 
the  homestead  ?  What,  then,  must  the  Navy  be  ? 

But,  alas  for  the  man-of-war's  man,  who,  though  he 
may  take  a  Hannibal  oath  against  the  service  ;  yet, 
cruise  after  cruise,  and  after  forswearing  it  again  and 
again,  he  is  driven  back  to  the  spirit-tub  and  the  gun- 
deck  of  his  old  hereditary  foe,  the  ever-devilish  god  of 
grog. 

On  this  point,  let  some  of  the  crew  of  the  Neversink  be 
called  to  the  stand. 

You,  captain  of  the  waist !  and  you,  seamen  of  the 
fore-top  !  and  you,  after-guard's  men  and  others  !  how 
came  you  here  at  the  guns  of  the  North  Carolina,  after 
registering  your  solemn  vows  at  the  galley  of  the  Never 
sink  « 

They  all  hang  their  heads.  I  know  the  cause  ;  poor 
fellows  !  perjure  yourselves  not  again  ;  swear  not  at  all 
hereafter. 

Ay,  these  very  tars — the  foremost  in  denouncing  the 
Navy  ;  who  had  bound  themselves  by  the  most  tremen- 


SMOKING  CLUB  IN  A  MAN-OF-WAR        493 

dous  oaths — these  very  men,  not  three  days  after  getting 
ashore,  were  rolling  round  the  streets  in  penniless  drunken 
ness  ;  and  next  day  many  of  them  were  to  be  found  on 
board  of  the  guardo  or  receiving  ship.  Thus,  in  part,  is 
the  Navy  manned. 

But  what  was  still  more  surprising,  and  tended  to 
impart  a  new  and  strange  insight  into  the  character  of 
sailors,  and  overthrow  some  long-established  ideas  con 
cerning  them  as  a  class,  was  this  :  numbers  of  men  who, 
during  the  cruise,  had  passed  for  exceedingly  prudent, 
nay,  parsimonious  persons,  who  would  even  refuse  you 
a  patch,  or  a  needleful  of  thread,  and,  from  their  stingi 
ness,  procured  the  name  of  Ravelings — no  sooner  were 
these  men  fairly  adrift  in  harbour,  and  under  the  influence 
of  frequent  quaffings,  than  their  three-years-earned  wages 
flew  right  and  left ;  they  summoned  whole  boarding- 
houses  of  sailors  to  the  bar,  and  treated  them  over  and 
over  again.  Fine  fellows  !  generous-hearted  tars  !  See 
ing  this  sight>  I  thought  to  myself,  Well,  these  generous- 
hearted  tars  on  shore  were  the  greatest  curmudgeons 
afloat !  it 's  the  bottle  that 's  generous,  not  they  !  Yet 
the  popular  conceit  concerning  a  sailor  is  derived  from 
his  behaviour  ashore  ;  whereas,  ashore  he  is  no  longer  a 
sailor,  but  a  landsman  for  the  time.  A  man-of-war!s 
man  is  only  a  man-of-war's  man  at  sea  ;  aifd  the  sea  is 
the  place  to  learn  what  he  is.  But  we  have  seen  thaFa 
man-of-war  is  but  this  old-fashioned  world  of  ours  afloat, 
full  of  all  manner  of  characters — full  of  strange  contra 
dictions  ;  and  though  boasting  some  fine  fellows  here 
and  there,  yet,  upon  the  whole,  charged  to  the  combings 
of  her  hatchways  with  the  spirit  of  Belial  and  all 
unrighteousness. 


CHAPTER   XCII 

THE   LAST  OF  THE  JACKET 

ALREADY  has  White  Jacket  chronicled  the  mishaps  and 
inconveniences,  troubles  and  tribulations  of  all  sorts 
brought  upon  him  by  that  unfortunate  but  indispensable 
garment  of  his.  But  now  it  befalls  him  to  record  how 
this  jacket,  for  the  second  and  last  time,  came  near 
proving  his  shroud. 

Of  a  pleasant  midnight,  our  good  frigate,  now  some 
where  off  the  Capes  of  Virginia,  was  running  on  bravely, 
when  the  breeze,  gradually  dying,  left  us  slowly  gliding 
toward  our  still  invisible  port. 

Headed  by  Jack  Chase,  the  quarter- watch  were  reclin 
ing  in  the  top,  talking  about  the  shore  delights  into 
which  they  intended  to  plunge,  while  our  captain  often 
broke  in  with  allusions  to  similar  conversations  when  he 
was  on  board  the  English  line-of-battle  ship,  the  Asia, 
drawing  nigh  to  Portsmouth,  in  England,  after  the  battle 
of  Navarino. 

Suddenly  an  order  was  given  to  set  the  main-top 
gallant  stun' -sail,  and  the  halyards  not  being  rove,  Jack 
Chase  assigned  to  me  that  duty.  Now  this  reeving  of  the 
halyards  of  a  main-top-gallant  stun' -sail  is  a  business 
that  eminently  demands  sharp -sightedness,  skill,  and 
celerity. 

Consider  that  the  end  of  a  line,  some  two  hundred  feet 
long,  is  to  be  carried  aloft,  in  your  teeth,  if  you  please, 
and  dragged  far  out  on  the  giddiest  of  yards,  and  after 
being  wormed  and  twisted  about  through  all  sorts  of 

494 


THE  LAST  OF  THE  JACKET  495 

intricacies — turning  abrupt  corners  at  the  abruptest  of 
angles — is  to  be  dropped,  clear  of  all  obstructions,  in  a 
straight  plumb-line  right  down  to  the  deck.  In  the  course 
of  this  business,  there  is  a  multitude  of  sheave-holes  and 
blocks,  through  which  you  must  pass  it ;  often  the  rope 
is  a  very  tight  fit,  so  as  to  make  it  like  threading  a  fine 
cambric  needle  with  rather  coarse  thread.  Indeed,  it  is  a 
thing  only  deftly  to  be  done,  even  by  day.  Judge,  then, 
what  it  must  be  to  be  threading  cambric  needles  by  night, 
and  at  sea,  upward  of  a  hundred  feet  aloft  in  the  air. 

With  the  end  of  the  line  in  one  hand,  I  was  mounting 
the  topmast  shrouds,  when  our  captain  of  the  top  told 
me  that  I  had  better  off  jacket ;  but  though  it  was  not 
a  very  cold  night,  I  had  been  reclining  so  long  in  the  top, 
that  I  had  become  somewhat  chilly,  so  I  thought  best  not 
to  comply  with  the  hint. 

Having  reeved  the  line  through  all  the  inferior  blocks, 
I  went  out  with  it  to  the  end  of  the  weather-top-gallant 
yard-arm,  and  was  in  the  act  of  leaning  over  and  passing 
it  through  the  suspended  jewel-block  there,  when  the 
ship  gave  a  plunge  in  the  sudden  swells  of  the  calm  sea, 
and  pitching  me  still  further  over  the  yard,  threw  the 
heavy  skirts  of  my  jacket  right  over  my  head,  completely 
muffling  me.  Somehow  I  thought  it  was  the  sail  that  had 
flapped,  and,  under  that  impression,  threw  up  my  hands 
to  drag  it  from  my  head,  relying  upon  the  sail  itself  to 
support  me  meanwhile.  Just  then  the  ship  gave  another 
sudden  jerk,  and,  head  foremost,  I  pitched  from  the  yard. 
I  knew  where  I  was,  from  the  rush  of  the  air  by  my  ears, 
but  all  else  was  a  nightmare.  A  bloody  film  was  before 
my  eyes,  through  which,  ghost-like,  passed  and  repassed 
my  father,  mother,  and  sisters.  An  unutterable  nausea 
oppressed  me  ;  I  was  conscious  of  gasping  ;  there  seemed 
no  breath  in  my  body.  It  was  over  one  hundred  feet  that 
I  fell — down,  down,  with  lungs  collapsed  as  in  death. 


496  WHITE  JACKET 

Ten  thousand  pounds  of  shot  seemed  tied  to  my  head, 
as  the  irresistible  law  of  gravitation  dragged  me,  head 
foremost  and  straight  as  a  die,  toward  the  infallible  centre 
of  this  terraqueous  globe.  All  I  had  seen,  and  read,  and 
heard,  and  all  I  had  thought  and  felt  in  my  life,  seemed 
intensified  in  one  fixed  idea  in  my  soul.  But  dense  as 
this  idea  was,  it  was  made  up  of  atoms.  Having  fallen 
from  the  projecting  yard-arm  end,  I  was  conscious  of  a 
collected  satisfaction  in  feeling,  that  I  should  not  be 
dashed  on  the  deck,  but  would  sink  into  the  speechless 
profound  of  the  sea. 

With  the  bloody,  blind  film  before  my  eyes,  there  was 
a  still  stranger  hum  in  my  head,  as  if  a  hornet  were  there  ; 
and  I  thought  to  myself,  Great  God  !  this  is  Death  !  Yet 
these  thoughts  were  unmixed  with  alarm.  Like  frost 
work  that  flashes  and  shifts  its  scared  hues  in  the  sun, 
all  my  braided,  blended  emotions  were  in  themselves  icy 
cold  and  calm. 

So  protracted  did  my  fall  seem,  that  I  can  even  now 
recall  the  feeling  of  wondering  how  much  longer  it  would 
be,  ere  all  was  over  and  I  struck.  Time  seemed  to  stand 
still,  and  all  the  worlds  seemed  poised  on  their  poles,  as 
I  fell,  soul-becalmed,  through  the  eddying  whirl  and 
swirl  of  the  maelstrom  air. 

At  first,  as  I  have  said,  I  must  have  been  precipitated 
head  foremost ;  but  I  was  conscious,  at  length,  of  a  swift, 
flinging  motion  of  my  limbs,  which  involuntarily  threw 
themselves  out,  so  that  at  last  I  must  have  fallen  in  a  heap. 
This  is  more  likely,  from  the  circumstance,  that  when  I 
struck  the  sea,  I  felt  as  if  some  one  had  smote  me  slant 
ingly  across  the  shoulder  and  along  part  of  my  right  side. 

As  I  gushed  into  the  sea,  a  thunder-boom  sounded  in 
my  ear  ;  my  soul  seemed  flying  from  my  mouth.  The 
feeling  of  death  flooded  over  me  with  the  billows.  The 
blow  from  the  sea  must  have  turned  me,  so  that  I  sank 


THE  LAST  OF  THE  JACKET  497 

almost  feet  foremost  through  a  soft,  seething,  foamy  lull. 
Some  current  seemed  hurrying  me  away  ;  in  a  trance  I 
yielded,  and  sank  deeper  down  with  a  glide.  Purple 
and  pathless  was  the  deep  calm  now  around  me,  flecked 
by  summer  lightnings  in  an  azure  afar.  The  horrible 
nausea  was  gone  ;  the  bloody,  blind  film  turned  a  pale 
green  ;  I  wondered  whether  I  was  yet  dead,  or  still  dying. 
But  of  a  sudden  some  fashionless  form  brushed  my  side 
— some  inert,  soiled  fish  of  the  sea  ;  the  thrill  of  being 
alive  again  tingled  in  my  nerves,  and  the  strong  shunning 
of  death  shocked  me  through. 

For  one  instant  an  agonising  revulsion  came  over  me  as 
I  found  myself  utterly  sinking.  Next  moment  the  force 
of  my  fall  was  expended  ;  and  there  I  hung,  vibrating  in 
the  mid-deep.  What  wild  sounds  then  rang  in  my  ear  ! 
One  was  a  soft  moaning,  as  of  low  waves  on  the  beach  ; 
the  other  wild  and  heartlessly  jubilant,  as  of  the  sea  in 
the  height  of  a  tempest.  Oh  soul !  thou  then  heardest 
life  and  death  :  as  he  who  stands  upon  the  Corinthian 
shore  hears  both  the  Ionian  and  the  ^Egean  waves.  The 
life-and-death  poise  soon  passed  ;  and  then  I  found  my 
self  slowly  ascending,  and  caught  a  dim  glimmering  of 
light. 

Quicker  and  quicker  I  mounted  ;  till  at  last  I  bounded 
up  like  a  buoy,  and  my  whole  head  was  bathed  in  the 
blessed  air. 

I  had  fallen  in  a  line  with  the  main-mast ;  I  now 
found  myself  nearly  abreast  of  the  mizen-mast,  the 
frigate  slowly  gliding  by  like  a  black  world  in  the  water. 
Her  vast  hull  loomed  out  of  the  night,  showing  hundreds 
of  seamen  in  the  hammock  nettings,  some  tossing  over 
ropes,  others  madly  flinging  overboard  the  hammocks  ; 
but  I  was  too  far  out  from  them  immediately  to  reach 
what  they  threw.  I  essayed  to  swim  toward  the  ship  ; 
but  instantly  I  was  conscious  of  a  feeling  like  being 

2i 


498  WHITE  JACKET 

pinioned  in  a  feather  bed,  and,  moving  my  hands,  felt 
my  jacket  puffed  out  above  my  tight  girdle  with  water. 
I  strove  to  tear  it  off  ;  but  it  was  looped  together  here 
and  there,  and  the  strings  were  not  then  to  be  sundered 
by  hand.  I  whipped  out  my  knife,  that  was  tucked  at 
my  belt,  and  ripped  my  jacket  straight  up  and  down,  as 
if  I  were  ripping  open  myself.  With  a  violent  struggle 
I  then  burst  out  of  it,  and  was  free.  Heavily  soaked,  it 
slowly  sank  before  my  eyes. 

Sink  !  sink  !  oh  shroud  !  thought  I ;  sink  forever  ! 
accursed  jacket  that  thou  art ! 

'  See  that  white  shark  !  '  cried  a  horrified  voice  from 
the  taffrail ;  '  he  '11  have  that  man  down  his  hatchway  ! 
Quick  !  the  grains  \  the  grains  \ ' 

The  next  instant  that  barbed  bunch  of  harpoons 
pierced  through  and  through  the  unfortunate  jacket, 
and  swiftly  sped  down  with  it  out  of  sight. 

Being  now  astern  of  the  frigate,  I  struck  out  boldly 
toward  the  elevated  pole  of  one  of  the  lifebuoys  which 
had  been  cut  away.  Soon  after,  one  of  the  cutters  picked 
me  up.  As  they  dragged  me  out  of  the  water  into  the  air, 
the  sudden  transition  of  elements  made  my  every  limb 
feel  like  lead,  and  I  helplessly  sunk  into  the  bottom  of 
the  boat. 

Ten  minutes  after,  I  was  safe  on  board,  and,  springing 
aloft,  was  ordered  to  reeve  anew  the  stun'-sail  halyards, 
which,  slipping  through  the  blocks  when  I  had  let  go  the 
end,  had  unrove  and  fallen  to  the  deck. 

The  sail  was  soon  set ;  and,  as  if  purposely  to  salute  it, 
a  gentle  breeze  soon  came,  and  the  Never  sink  once  more 
glided  over  the  water,  a  soft  ripple  at  her  bows,  and 
leaving  a  tranquil  wake  behind. 


CHAPTER   XCIII 

CABLE  AND  ANCHOR  ALL  CLEAR 

AND  now  that  the  white  jacket  has  sunk  to  the  bottom 
of  the  sea,  and  the  blessed  Capes  of  Virginia  are  believed 
to  be  broad  on  our  bow — though  still  out  of  sight — our 
five  hundred  souls  are  fondly  dreaming  of  home,  and  the 
iron  throats  of  the  guns  round  the  galley  re-echo  with 
their  songs  and  hurrahs — what  more  remains  ? 

Shall  I  tell  what  conflicting  and  almost  crazy  surmisings 
prevailed  concerning  the  precise  harbour  for  which  we 
were  bound  ?  For,  according  to  rumour,  our  commo 
dore  had  received  sealed  orders  touching  that  matter, 
which  were  not  to  be  broken  open  till  we  gained  a  precise 
latitude  of  the  coast.  Shall  I  tell  how,  at  last,  all  this 
uncertainty  departed,  and  many  a  foolish  prophecy  was 
proved  false,  when  our  noble  frigate — her  longest  pen 
nant  at  her  main — wound  her  stately  way  into  the  inner 
most  harbour  of  Norfolk,  like  a  plumed  Spanish  grandee 
threading  the  corridors  of  the  Escurial  toward  the  throne- 
room  within  ?  Shall  I  tell  how  we  kneeled  upon  the  holy 
soil  ?  How  I  begged  a  blessing  of  old  Ushant,  and  one 
precious  hair  of  his  beard  for  a  keepsake  ?  How  Lems- 
ford,  the  gun-deck  bard,  offered  up  a  devout  ode  as  a 
prayer  of  thanksgiving  1  How  saturnine  Nord,  the 
magnifico  in  disguise,  refusing  all  companionship,  stalked 
off  into  the  woods,  like  the  ghost  of  an  old  Calif  of 
Bagdad  ?  How  I  swayed  and  swung  the  hearty  hand 
of  Jack  Chase,  and  nipped  it  to  mine  with  a  carrick-bend  ; 
yea,  and  kissed  that  noble  hand  of  my  liege  lord  and 
captain  of  my  top,  my  sea-tutor  and  sire  ? 

499 


500  WHITE  JACKET 

Shall  I  tell  how  the  grand  commodore  and  captain 
drove  off  from  the  pier-head  ?  How  the  lieutenants, 
in  undress,  sat  down  to  their  last  dinner  in  the  ward 
room,  and  the  champagne,  packed  in  ice,  spirted  and 
sparkled  like  the  hot  springs  out  of  a  snowdrift  in 
Iceland  ?  How  the  chaplain  went  off  in  his  cassock, 
without  bidding  the  people  adieu  1  How  shrunken 
Cuticle,  the  surgeon,  stalked  over  the  side,  the  wired 
skeleton  carried  in  his  wake  by  his  cot-boy  ?  How  the 
lieutenant  of  marines  sheathed  his  sword  on  the  poop, 
and,  calling  for  wax  and  a  taper,  sealed  the  end  of  the 
scabbard  with  his  family  crest  and  motto — Denique 
Codum  ?  How  the  purser  in  due  time  mustered  his  money 
bags,  and  paid  us  all  off  on  the  quarter-deck — good  and 
bad,  sick  and  well,  all  receiving  their  wages  ;  though, 
truth  to  tell,  some  reckless,  improvident  seamen,  who  had 
lived  too  fast  during  the  cruise,  had  little  or  nothing  now 
standing  on  the  credit  side  of  their  purser's  accounts  ? 

Shall  I  tell  of  the  Retreat  of  the  Five  Hundred  inland  ; 
not,  alas  !  in  battle  array,  as  at  quarters,  but  scattered 
broadcast  over  the  land  ? 

Shall  I  tell  how  the  Neversink  was  at  last  stripped 
of  spars,  shrouds,  and  sails — had  her  guns  hoisted  out 
— her  powder  magazine,  shot-lockers,  and  armouries 
discharged — till  not  one  vestige  of  a  fighting  thing  was 
left  in  her,  from  furthest  stem  to  uttermost  stern  ? 

No  !  let  all  this  go  by  ;  for  our  anchor  still  hangs  from 
our  bows,  though  its  eager  flukes  dip  their  points  in  the 
impatient  waves.  Let  us  leave  the  ship  on  the  sea — 
still  with  the  land  out  of  sight — still  with  brooding  dark 
ness  on  the  face  of  the  deep.  I  love  an  indefinite,  infinite 
background — a  vast,  heaving,  rolling,  mysterious  rear  ! 

It  is  night.  The  meagre  moon  is  in  her  last  quarter 
— that  betokens  the  end  of  a  cruise  that  is  passing.  But 
the  stars  look  forth  in  their  everlasting  brightness — and 
that  is  the  everlasting,  glorious  Future,  forever  beyond  us. 


CABLE  AND  ANCHOR  ALL  CLEAR    501 

We  main-top  men  are  all  aloft  in  the  top  ;  and  round 
our  mast  we  circle,  a  brother-band,  hand  in  hand,  all 
spliced  together.  We  have  reefed  the  last  topsail ; 
trained  the  last  gun  ;  blown  the  last  match  ;  bowed  to  the 
last  blast ;  been  tranced  in  the  last  calm.  We  have 
mustered  our  last  round  the  capstan ;  been  rolled  to 
grog  the  last  time  ;  for  the  last  time  swung  in  our  ham 
mocks  ;  for  the  last  time  turned  out  at  the  seagull  call 
of  the  watch.  We  have  seen  our  last  man  scourged  at 
the  gangway  ;  our  last  man  gasp  out  the  ghost  in  the 
stifling  sick-bay  ;  our  last  man  tossed  to  the  sharks.  Our 
last  death-denouncing  Article  of  War  has  been  read  ;  and 
far  inland,  in  that  blessed  clime  whitherward  our  frigate 
now  glides,  the  last  wrong  in  our  frigate  will  be  remem 
bered  no  more  ;  when  down  from  our  mainmast  comes 
our  commodore's  pennant,  when  down  sinks  its  shooting 
stars  from  the  sky. 

*  By  the  mark,  nine  !  '  sings  the  hoary  old  leadsman, 
in  the  chains.  And  thus,  the  mid- world  Equator  passed, 
our  frigate  strikes  soundings  at  last. 

Hand  in  hand  we  topmates  stand,  rocked  in  our  Pisgah 
top.  And  over  the  starry  waves,  and  broad  out  into  the 
blandly  blue  and  boundless  night,  spiced  with  strange 
sweets  from  the  long-sought  land — the  whole  long  cruise 
predestinated  ours,  though  often  in  tempest-time  we 
almost  refused  to  believe  in  that  far-distant  shore — 
straight  out  into  that  fragrant  night,  ever-noble  Jack 
Chase,  matchless  and  unmatchable  Jack  Chase  stretches 
forth  his  bannered  hand,  and,  pointing  shoreward,  cries  : 
'  For  the  last  time,  hear  Camoens,  boys  ! 

'  "  How  calm  the  waves,  how  mild  the  balmy  gale  ! 
The  Halcyons  call,  ye  Lusians  spread  the  sail ! 
Appeased,  old  Ocean  now  shall  rage  no  more ; 
Haste,  point  our  bowsprit  for  yon  shadowy  shore. 
Soon  shall  the  transports  of  your  natal  soil 
O'erwhelm  in  bounding  joy  the  thoughts  of  every  toil."  ' 


THE  END 

As  a  man-of-war  that  sails  through  the  sea,  so  this  earth 
that  sails  through  the  air.  We  mortals  are  all  on  board 
a  fast-sailing,  never-sinking  world-frigate,  of  which  God 
was  the  shipwright  ;  and  she  is  but  one  craft  in  a  Milky- 
Way  fleet,  of  which  God  is  the  Lord  High  Admiral.  The 
port  we  sail  from  is  forever  astern.  And  though  far 
out  of  sight  of  land,  for  ages  and  ages  we  continue  to 
sail  with  sealed  orders,  and  our  last  destination  remains 
a  secret  to  ourselves  and  our  officers  ;  yet  our  final 
haven  was  predestinated  ere  we  slipped  from  the  stocks 
at  Creation. 

Thus  sailing  with  sealed  orders,  we  ourselves  are  the 
repositories  of  the  secret  packet,  whose  mysterious  con 
tents  we  long  to  learn.  There  are  no  mysteries  out  of 
ourselves.  But  let  us  not  give  ear  to  the  superstitious, 
gun-deck  gossip  about  whither  we  may  be  gliding,  for,  as 
yet,  not  a  soul  on  board  of  us  knows — not  even  the 
commodore  himself  ;  assuredly  not  the  chaplain ;  even 
our  professor's  scientific  surmisings  are  vain.  On  that 
point,  the  smallest  cabin-boy  is  as  wise  as  the  captain. 
And  believe  not  the  hypochondriac  dwellers  below  hatches, 
who  will  tell  you,  with  a  sneer,  that  our  world-frigate  is 
bound  to  no  final  harbour  whatever  ;  that  our  voyage 
will  prove  an  endless  circumnavigation  of  space.  Not  so. 
For  how  can  this  world-frigate  prove  our  eventual  abiding 
place,  when,  upon  our  first  embarkation,  as  infants  in 
arms,  her  violent  rolling — in  after  life  unperceived — 
makes  every  soul  of  us  seasick  ?  Does  not  this  show, 
too,  that  the  very  air  we  here  inhale  is  uncongenial,  and 

502 


THE  END  503 

only  becomes  endurable  at  last  through  gradual  habitua- 
tion,  and  that  some  blessed  placid  haven,  however  remote 
at  present,  must  be  in  store  for  us  all  ? 

Glance  fore  and  aft  our  flush  decks.  What  a  swarm 
ing  crew  !  All  told,  they  muster  hard  upon  eight  hundred 
millions  of  souls.  Over  these  we  have  authoritative 
Lieutenants,  a  sword-belted  Officer  of  Marines,  a  Chaplain, 
a  Professor,  a  Purser,  a  Doctor,  a  Cook,  a  Master-at-arms. 

Oppressed  by  illiberal  laws,  and  partly  oppressed  by 
themselves,  many  of  our  people  are  wicked,  unhappy, 
inefficient.  We  have  skulkers  and  idlers  all  round,  and 
brow-beaten  waisters,  who,  for  a  pittance,  do  our  craft's 
shabby  work.  Nevertheless,  among  our  people  we  have 
gallant  fore,  main,  and  mizen-top  men  aloft,  who,  well 
treated  or  ill,  still_trim  our  craft  to  the  blast. 

We  have  a  brig  for  trespassers  ;  a  bar  by  our  main 
mast,  at  which  they  are  arraigned  ;  a  cat-o' -nine-tails 
and  a  gangway,  to  degrade  them  in  their  own  eyes  and 
in  ours.  These  are  not  always  employed  to  convert  Sin 
to  Virtue,  but  to  divide  them,  and  protect  Virtue  and 
legalised  Sin  from  unlegalised  Vice. 

We  have  a  J3ick-bay  for  the  smitten  and  helpless, 
whither  We  hurry  them  out  of  sight,  and,  however  they 
may  groan  beneath  hatches,  we  hear  little  of  their  tribu 
lations  on  deck  ;  we  still  sport  our  gay  streamer  aloft. 
Outwardly  regarded,  our  craft  is  a  lie  ;  for  all  that  is  out 
wardly  seen  of  it  is  the  clean-swept  deck,  and  oft-painted 
planks  comprised  above  the  water-line  ;  whereas,  the 
vast  mass  of  our  fabric,  with  all  its  storerooms  of  secrets, 
forever  slides  along  far  under  the  surface. 

When  a  shipmate  dies,  straightway  we  sew  him  up, 
and  overboard  he  goes  ;  our  world-frigate  rushes  by, 
and  never  more  do  we  behold  him  again  ;  though,  sooner 
or  later,  the  everlasting  under-tow  sweeps  him  toward 
our  own  destination. 


504  WHITE  JACKET 

i 

We  have  both  a  quarter-deck  to  our  craft  and  a  gun- 
deck  ;  subterranean  shot-lockers  and  gunpowder  maga 
zines  ;  and  the  Articles  of  War  form  our  domineering 
code. 

Oh,  shipmates  and  world-mates,  all  round  !  we  the 
people  suffer  many  abuses.  Our  gun-deck  is  full  of  com 
plaints.  In  vain  from  Lieutenants  do  we  appeal  to  the 
Captain  ;  in  vain — while  on  board  our  world-frigate — 
to  the  indefinite  Navy  Commissioners,  so  far  out  of  sight 
aloft.  Yet  the  worst  of  our  evils  we  blindly  inflict  upon 
ourselves  ;  our  officers  cannot  remove  them,  even  if  they 
would.  From  the  last  ills  no  being  can  save  another  ; 
therein  each  man  must  be  his  own  saviour.  For  the  rest, 
whatever  befall  us,  let  us  never  train  our  murderous  guns 
inboard ;  let  us  not  mutiny  with  bloody  pikes  in  our 
hands.  Our  Lord  High  Admiral  will  yet  interpose  ;  and 
though  long  ages  should  elapse,  and  leave  our  wrongs  un- 
redressed,  yet,  shipmates  and  world-mates  !  let  us  never 
forget,  that 

*  Whoever  afflict  us,  whatever  surround, 
Life  is  a  voyage  that 's  homeward  bound  ! ' 


THE    END 


