Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/| 




BOUGHT WITH 

MONEY RECEIVED FROM 

LIBRARY FINES 



Lord Arthur savile's 

CRIME &* OTHER STORIES 



By 

OSCAR 
WILDE 



London 

JAMES R. OSGOOD, 
M<=ILVAINE and CO., 

45 
Albemarle Street 



i8gi 







^. 






i^ 






Contents 

PAGE 

Lord Arthur Savil^s Crime . . i 

The Sphinx without a Secret . -75 

The Canterville Ghost . .89 

The Model Millionaire . • ^55 



Lord Arthur savile's 

CRIME 



A study of 
duty 



6 




I 



T was Lady Windermere's last 
reception before Easter, and 
Bentinck House was even 
more crowded than usual. 
Six Cabinet Ministers had 
come on from the Speaker's Lev^e in their 
stars and ribands, all the pretty women 
wore their smartest dresses, and at the end 
of the picture-gallery stood the. Princess 
Sophia of Carlsriihe, a heavy Tartar-looking 
lady, with tiny black eyes and wonderful 
emeralds, talking bad French at the top of 
her voice, and laughing immoderately at 
everything that was said to her. It was 
certainly a wonderful medley of people. 
Gorgeous peeresses chatted affably to 
violent Radicals, popular preachers brushed 
coat-tails with .eminent sceptics, a perfect 



4 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 

bevy of bishops kept following a stout 
prima -donna from room to room, on the 
staircase stood several Royal Academicians, 
disguised as artists, and it was said that at 
one time the supper- room was absolutely 
crammed with geniuses. In fact, it was 
one of Lady Windermere's best nights, and 
the Princess stayed till nearly half- past 
eleven. 

As soon as she had gone, Lady Winder- 
mere returned to the picture-gallery, where a 
celebrated political economist was solemnly 
explaining the scientific theory of music to 
an indignant virtuoso from Hungary, and 
began to talk to the Duchess of Paisley. 
She looked wonderfully beautiful with her 
grand ivory throat, her large blue forget- 
me-not eyes, and her heavy coils of golden 
hair. Or pur they were — not that pale 
straw colour that nowadays usurps the gra- 
cious name of gold, but such gold as is 
woven into sunbeams or hidden in strange 
amber; and they gave to her face some- 
thing of the frame of a saint, with not a 
little of the fascination of a sinner. She 
was a curious psychological study. Early in 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 5 

life she had discovered the important truth 
that nothing looks so like innocence as an 
indiscretion ; and by a series of reckless 
escapades, half of them quite harmless, she 
had acquired all the privileges of a personality. 
She had more than once changed her hus- 
band ; indeed, Debrett credits her with three 
marriages; but as she had never changed 
her lover, the world had long ago ceased to 
talk scandal about her. She was now forty 
years of age, childless, and with that inordi- 
nate passion for pleasure which is the secret 
of remaining young. 

Suddenly she looked eagerly round the 
room, and said, in her clear contralto voice, 
* Where is my cheiromantist ? ' 

* Your what, Gladys ? ' exclaimed the 
Duchess, giving an involuntary start. 

* My cheiromantist, Duchess ; I can't live 
without him at present.' 

* Dear Gladys ! you are always so original,' 
murmured the Duchess, trying to remem- 
ber what a cheiromantist really was, and 
hoping it was not the same as a cheiro- 
podist. 

* He comes to see my hand twice a week 



6 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 

regularly/ continued Lady Windermere, * and 
is most interesting about it/ 

* Good heavens ! ' said the Duchess to 
herself, * he is a sort of cheiropodist after all. 
How very dreadful. I hope he is a foreigner 
at any rate. It wouldn't be quite so bad 
then.' 

* I must certainly introduce him to you.' 

* Introduce him ! ' cried the Duchess ; 
*you don't mean to say he is here?' and 
she began looking about for a small tortoise- 
shell fan and a very tattered lace shawl, so 
as to be ready to go at a moment's notice. 

* Of course he is here, I would not dream 
of giving a party without him. He tells me 
I have a pure psychic hand, and that if my 
thumb had been the least little bit shorter, I 
should have been a confirmed pessimist, and 
gone into a convent.' 

* Oh, I see ! ' said the Duchess, feeling 
very much reheved; *he tells fortunes, I 
suppose ? ' 

*And misfortunes, too,' answered Lady 
Windermere, *any amount of them. Next 
year, for instance, I am in great danger, both 
by land and sea, so I am going to live in a 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 7 

bairoon, and draw up my dinner in a basket 
every evening. It is all written down on my 
little finger, or on the palm of my hand, I 
forget which/ 

*But surely that is tempting Providence, 
Gladys/ 

*My dear Duchess, surely Providence 
can resist temptation by this time. I think 
every one should have their hands told once 
a month, so as to know what not to do. Of 
course, one does it all the same, but it is so 
pleasant to be warned. Now, if some one 
doesn't go and fetch Mr. Podgers at once, I 
shall have to go myself.' 

* Let me go. Lady Windermere,' said a tall 
handsome young man, who was standing by, 
listening to the conversation with an amused 
smile. 

* Thanks so much. Lord Arthur ; but I am 
afraid you wouldn't recognise him.' 

' If he is as wonderful as you say. Lady 
Windermere, I couldn't well miss him. Tell 
me what he is like, and I'll bring him to you 
at once.' 

* Well, he is not a bit like a cheiromantist. 
I mean he is not mysterious, or esoteric, or 



8 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE^S CRIME 

romantic-looking. He is a little, stout man, 
with a funny, bald head, and great gold- 
rimmed spectacles ; something between a 
family doctor and a country attorney. I'm 
really very sorry, but it is not my fault. 
People are so annoying. All my pianists 
look exactly like poets, and all my poets look 
exactly like pianists ; and I remember last 
season asking a most dreadful conspirator to 
dinner, a man who had blown up ever so 
many people, and always wore a coat of mail, 
and carried a dagger up his shirt-sleeve ; and 
do you know that when he came he looked 
just like a nice old clergyman, and cracked 
jokes all the evening? Of course, he was 
very amusing, and all that, but I was awfully 
disappointed } and when I asked him about 
the coat of mail, he only laughed, and said 
it was far too cold to wear in England. Ah, 
here is Mr. Podgers ! Now, Mr. Podgers, I 
want you to tell the Duchess of Paisley's 
hand. Duchess, you must take your glove 
off. No, not the left hand, the other.' 

*Dear Gladys, I really don't think it is 
quite right,' said the Duchess, feebly un- 
buttoning a rather soiled kid glove. 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE^S CRIME Q 

* Nothing interesting ever is,' said Lady 
Windermere : * on a fait le monde ainsu But 
I must introduce you. Duchess, this is Mr. 
Podgers, my pet cheiromantist. Mr. Podgers, 
this is the Duchess of Paisley, and if you say 
that she has a larger mountain of the moon 
than I have, I will never believe in you 
again.' 

*I am sure, Gladys, there is nothing of 
the kind in my hand,' said the Duchess 
gravely. 

*Your Grace is quite right,' said Mr. 
Podgers, glancing at the little fat hand with 
its short square fingers, * the mountain of the 
moon is not developed. The line of life, 
however, is excellent. Kindly bend the 
wrist. Thank you. Three distinct lines on 
the rascette \ You will live to a great age. 
Duchess, and be extremely happy. Ambition 
— very moderate, line of intellect not exag- 
gerated, line of heart ' ^ 

* Now, do be indiscreet, Mr. Podgers,' 
cried Lady Windermere. 

* Nothing would give me greater pleasure,' 
said Mr. Podgers, bowing, *if the Duchess 
ever had been, but I am sorry to say that I- 



lO LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 



see great permanence of affection, combined 
with a strong sense of duty.' 

*Pray go on, Mr. Podgers,' said the 
Duchess, looking quite pleased. 

* Economy is not the least of your Grace's 
virtues,' continued Mr. Podgers, and Lady 
Windermere went off into fits of laughter. 

* Economy is a very good thing,' remarked 
the Duchess complacently ; * when I married 
Paisley he had eleven castles, and not a 
single house fit to live in.' 

* And now he has twelve houses, and not 
a single castle,' cried Lady Windermere. 

'Well, my dear,' said the Duchess, *I 
like ' 

* Comfort,' said Mr. Podgers, * and modern 
improvements, and hot water laid on in every 
bedroom. Your Grace is quite right. Com- 
fort is the only thing our civilisation can 
give us.' 

*You have told the Duchess's character 
admirably, Mr. Podgers, and now you must 
tell Lady Flora's ; ' and in answer to a nod 
from the smiling hostess, a tall girl, with 
sandy Scotch hair, and high shoulder-blades, 
stepped awkwardly from behind the sofa, 



V 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILe's CRIME II 

and held out a long, bony hand with spatulate 
fingers. 

* Ah, a pianist ! I see,' said Mr. Podgers, 
*an excellent pianist, but perhaps hardly a 
musician. Very reserved, very honest, and 
with a great love of animals.' 

* Quite true ! ' exclaimed the Duchess, 
turning to Lady Windermere, * absolutely 
true ! Flora keeps two dozen collie dogs at 
Macloskie, and would turn our town house 
into a menagerie if her father would let her.' 

*Well, that is just what I do with my 
house every Thursday evening,' cried Lady 
Windermere, laughing, *only I like lions 
better than collie dogs.' 

* Your one mistake. Lady Windermere,' 
said Mr. Podgers, with a pompous bow. 

* If a woman can't make her mistakes 
charming, she is only a female,' was the answer. 
* But you must read some more hands for us. 
Come, Sir Thomas, show Mr. Podgers yours ; ' 
and a genial -looking old gentleman, in a 
white waistcoat, came forward, and held out 
a thick rugged hand, with a very long third 
finger. 

* An adventurous nature; four long voyages 



12 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 

in the past, and one to come. Been ship- 
wrecked three times. No, only twice, but 
in danger of a shipwreck your next journey. 
A strong Conservative, very punctual, and 
with a passion for collecting curiosities. 
Had a severe illness between the ages of 
sixteen and eighteen. Was left a fortune 
when about thirty. Great aversion to cats ^ 
and Radicals.' 

* Extraordinary ! ' exclaimed Sir Thomas ; 
* you must really tell my wife's hand, too.' 

*Your second wife's,' said Mr. Podgers 
quietly, still keeping Sir Thomas's hand in 
his. *Your second wife's. I shall be 
charmed ; ' but Lady Marvel, a melancholy- 
looking woman, with brown hair and senti- 
mental eyelashes, entirely declined to have 
her past or her future exposed ; and nothing 
that Lady Windermere could do would 
induce Monsieur de Koloff, the Russian 
Ambassador, even to take his gloves off. In 
fact, many people seemed afraid to face the 
odd little man with his stereotyped smile, his 
gold spectacles, and his bright, beady eyes ; 
and when he told poor Lady Fermor, right 
out before every one, that she did not care 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 1 3 

a bit for music, but was extremely fond of 
musicians, it was generally felt that cheiro- 
mancy was a most dangerous science, and 
one that ought not to be encouraged, except 
in a tite-a-tite. 

Lord Arthur Savile, however, who did 
not know anything about Lady Fermor's 
unfortunate story, and who had been watch- 
ing Mr. Podgers with a great deal of interest, 
was filled with an immense curiosity to have 
his own hand read, and feeling somewhat shy 
about putting himself forward, crossed over 
the room to where Lady Windermere was 
sitting, and, with a charming blush, asked her 
if she thought Mr. Podgers would mind. 

* Of course, he won't mind,' said Lady 
Windermere, 'that is what he is here for. 
All my lions, Lord Arthur, are performing 
lions, and jump through hoops whenever I 
ask them. But I must warn you beforehand 
that I shall tell Sybil everything. She is 
coming to lunch with me to-morrow, to talk 
about bonnets, and if Mr. Podgers finds out 
that you have a bad temper, or a tendency 
to gout, or a wife living in Bayswater, I shall 
certainly let her know all about it.' 



14 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 

Lord Arthur smiled, and shook his head. 
* I am not afraid/ he answered. * Sybil 
knows me as well as I know her.' 

* Ah ! I am a little sorry to hear you say 
that. The proper basis for marriage is a ^ 
mutual misunderstanding. No, I am not at 
all cynical, I have merely got experience, 
which, however, is very much the same 
thing. Mr. Podgers, Lord Arthur Savile is 
dying to have his hand read. Don't tell 
him that he is engaged to one of the most 
beautiful girls in London, because that 
appeared in the Morning Fost a month 
ago.' 

'Dear Lady Windermere,' cried the 
Marchioness of Jedburgh, * do let Mr. 
Podgers stay here a little longer. He has 
just told me I should go on the stage, and 
I am so interested.' 

« If he has told you that. Lady Jedburgh, 
I shall certainly take him away. Come over 
at once, Mr. Podgers, and read Lord Arthur's 
hand.' 

'Well,' said Lady Jedburgh, making a 
little moue as she rose from the sofa, * if I 
am not to be allowed to go on the stage, I 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 1 5 

must be allowed to be part of the audience 
at any rate.' 

* Of course ; we are all going to be part 
of the audience/ said Lady Windermere; 
* and now, Mr. Podgers, be sure and tell us 
something nice. Lord Arthur is one of my 
special favourites.' 

But when Mr. Podgers saw Lord Arthur's 
hand he grew curiously pale, and said nothing. 
A shudder seemed to pass through him, 
and his great bushy eyebrows twitched con- 
vulsively, in an odd, irritating way they 
had when he was puzzled. Then some 
huge beads of perspiration broke out on 
his yellow forehead, like a poisonous dew, 
and his fat fingers grew cold and 
clammy. 

Lord Arthur did not fail to notice these 
strange signs of agitation, and, for the first 
time in his life, he himself felt fear. His 
impulse was to rush from the room, but he 
restrained himself. It was better to know 
the worst, whatever it was, than to be left in 
this hideous uncertainty. 

* I am waiting, Mr. Podgers,' he said. 

* We are all waiting,' cried Lady Winder- 



1 6 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 

mere, in her quick, impatient manner, but 
the cheiromantist made no reply. 

' I believe Arthur is going on the stage,' 
said Lady Jedburgh, 'and that, after your 
scolding, Mr. Podgers is afraid to tell him so. 

Suddenly Mr. Podgers dropped Lord 
Arthur s right hand, and seized hold of his 
left, bending down so low to examine it that 
the gold rims of his spectacles seemed almost 
to touch the palm. For a moment his face 
became a white mask of horror, but he soon 
recovered his sang-froid^ and looking up 
at Lady Windermere, said with a forced 
smile, * It is the hand of a charming young 
man.' 

* Of course it is 1 ' answered Lady Winder- 
mere, * but will he be a charming husband ? 
That is what I want to know.' 

* All charming young njen are,' said Mr. 
Podgers. 

* I don't think a husband should be too 
fascinating,' murmured Lady Jedburgh pen- 
sively, *it is so dangerous.' 

* My dear child, they never are too fascin- 
ating,' cried Lady Windermere. * But what 
I want are details. Details are the only 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 1 7 

things that interest. What is going to 
happen to Lord Arthur ? ' 

*Well, within the next few months Lord 
Arthur will go a voyage ' 

* Oh yes, his honeymoon, of course ! ' 

* And lose a relative/ 

* Not his sister, I hope ? ' said Lady Jed- 
burgh, in a piteous tone of voice. 

* Certainly not his sister,' answered Mr. 
Podgers, with a deprecating wave of the 
hand, * a distant relative merely.' 

* Well, I am dreadfully disappointed,' said 
Lady Windermere. *I have absolutely 
nothing to tell Sybil to-morrow. No one 
cares about distant relatives nowadays. They 
went out of fashion years ago. However, I 
suppose she had better have a black silk by 
her; it always does for church, you know. 
And now let us go to supper. They are 
sure to have eaten everything up, but we 
may find some hot soup. Frangois used to 
make excellent soup once, but he is so 
agitated about politics at present, that I 
never feel quite certain about him. I do 
wish General Boulanger would keep quiet. 
Duchess, I am sure you are tired ? ' 

c 



1 8 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE^S CRIME 

*Not at all, dear Gladys,' answered the 
Duchess, waddling towards the door. * I have 
enjoyed myself immensely, and the cheiro- 
podist, I mean the cheiromantist, is most 
interesting. Flora, where can my tortoise- 
shell fan be ? Oh, thank you. Sir Thomas, 
so much. And my lace shawl. Flora ? Oh, 
thank you. Sir Thomas, very kind, I'm sure;' 
and the worthy creature finally managed to 
get downstairs without dropping her scent- 
bottle more than twice. 

All this time Lord Arthur Savile had 
remained standing by the fireplace, with the 
same feeling of dread over him, the same 
sickening sense of coming evil. He smiled 
sadly at his sister, as she swept past him on 
Lord Plymdale's arm, looking lovely in her 
pink brocade and pearls, and he hardly heard 
Lady Windermere when she called to him to 
follow her. He thought of Sybil Merton, 
and the idea that anything could come be- 
tween them made his eyes dim with tears. 

Looking at him, one would have said that 
Nemesis had stolen the shield of Pallas, and 
shown him the Gorgon's head. He seemed 
turned to stone, and his face was like marble 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE S CRIME 1 9 

in its melancholy. He had lived the deli- 
cate and luxurious life of a young man of 
birth and fortune, a life exquisite in its 
freedom from sordid care, its beautiful boyish 
insouciance ; and now for the first time he 
became conscious of the terrible mystery of 
Destiny, of the awful meaning of Doom. 

How mad and monstrous it all seemed ! 
Could it be that written on his hand, in 
characters that he could not read himself, 
but that another could decipher, was some 
fearful secret of sin, some blood-red sign of 
crime? Was there no escape possible? 
Were we no better than chessmen, moved 
by an unseen power, vessels the potter 
fashions at his fancy, for honour or for 
shame ? His reason revolted against it, and 
yet he felt that some tragedy was hanging 
over him, and that he had been suddenly 
called upon to bear an intolerable burden. 
Actors are so fortunate. They can choose 
whether they will appear in tragedy or in 
comedy, whether they will suffer or make 
. merry, laugh or shed tears. But in real life 
it is different. Most men and women are 
forced to perform parts for which they have 



20 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 



no qualifications. Our Guildensterns play 
Hamlet for us, and our Hamlets have to jest 
like Prince Hal. The world is a stage, but 
the play is badly cast. 

Suddenly Mr. Podgers entered the room. 
When he saw Lord Arthur he started, and 
his coarse, fat face became a sort of greenish- 
yellow colour. The two men's eyes met, and 
for a moment there was silence. 

* The Duchess has left one of her gloves 
here, Lord Arthur, and has asked me to 
bring it to her,' said Mr. Podgers finally. 
* Ah, I see it on the sofa ! Good evening.' 

* Mr. Podgers, I must insist on your giving 
me a straightforward answer to a question I 
am going to put to you.' 

* Another time, Lord Arthur, but the 
Duchess is anxious. I am afraid I must go.' 

* You shall not go. The Duchess is in no 
hurry.' 

* Ladies should not be kept waiting. Lord 
Arthur,' said Mr. Podgers, with his sickly 
smile. * The fair sex is apt to be impatient.' 

Lord Arthur's finely-chiselled lips curled 
in petulant disdain. The poor Duchess 
seemed to him of very little importance at 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 21 

that moment. He walked across the room 
to where Mr. Podgers was standing, and 
held his hand out. 

*Tell me what you saw there,' he said. 
* Tell me the truth. I must know it. I am 
not a child.' 

Mr. Podgers's eyes blinked behind his gold- 
rimmed spectacles, and he moved uneasily 
from one foot to the other, while his fingers 
played nervously with a flash watch-chain. 

*What makes you think that I saw any- 
thing in your hand, Lord Arthur, more than 
I told you ? ' 

*I know you did, and I insist on your 
telling me what it was. I will pay you. I 
will give you a cheque for a hundred pounds.' 

The green eyes flashed for a moment, and 
then became dull again. 

* Guineas?' said Mr. Podgers at last, in 
a low voice. 

* Certainly. I will send you a cheque to- 
morrow. What is your club ? ' 

* I have no club. That is to say, not just 

at present. My address is , but allow 

me to give you my card ; ' and producing a 
bit of gilt-edged pasteboard from his waist- 



2 2 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 

coat pocket, Mr. Podgers handed it, with a 
low bow, to Lord Arthur, who read on it, 



MR. SEPTIMUS K. PODGERS 

Professional Cheiromantist 
io3fl West Moon Street 



* My hours are from ten to four,' murmured 
Mr. Podgers mechanically, *and I make a 
reduction for families.' 

*Be quick,' cried Lord Arthur, looking 
very pale, and holding his hand out. 

Mr. Podgers glanced nervously round, and 
drew the heavy portiere across the door. 

*It will take a little time. Lord Arthur, 
you had better sit down.' 

* Be quick, sir,' cried Lord Arthur again, 
stamping his foot angrily on the polished 
floor. 

Mr. Podgers smiled, drew from his breast- 
pocket a small magnifying glass, and wiped 
it carefully with his handkerchief. 

* I am quite ready,' he said. 



II 



Ten minutes later, with face blanched by 
terror, and eyes wild with grief, Lord Arthur 
Savile rushed from Bentinck House, crushing 
his way through the crowd of fur-coated foot- 
men that stood round the large striped awn- 
ing, and seeming not to see or hear anything. 
The night was bitter cold, and the gas-lamps 
round the square flared and flickered in the 
keen wind; but his hands were hot with 
fever, and his forehead burned like fire. On 
and on he went, alinost with the gait of a 
drunken man. A policeman looked curi- 
ously at him as he passed, and a beggar, who 
slouched from an archway to ask for alms, 
grew frightened, seeing misery greater than 
his own. Once he stopped under a lamp, 
and looked at his hands. He thought he 
could detect the stain of blood, already upon 



24 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 

them, and a faint cry broke from his trem- 
bling Hps. 

Murder ! that is what the cheiromantist had 
seen there. Murder ! The very night seemed 
to know it, and the desolate wind to howl it 
in his ear. The dark corners of the streets 
were full of it. It grinned at him from the 
roofs of the houses. 

First he came to the Park, whose sombre 
woodland seemed to fascinate him. He 
leaned wearily up against the railings, cool- 
ing his brow against the wet metal, and 
listening to the tremulous silence of the 
trees. * Murder! murder!' he kept repeat- 
ing, as though iteration could dim the horror 
of the word. The sound of his own voice 
made him shudder, yet he almost hoped that 
Echo might hear him, and wake the slumber- 
ing city from its dreams. He felt a mad 
desire to stop the casual passer-by, and tell 
him everything. 

Then he wandered across Oxford Street 
into narrow, shameful alleys. Two women 
with painted faces mocked at him as he 
went by. From a dark courtyard came a 
sound of oaths and blows, followed by shrill 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 25 

screams, and, huddled upon a damp door- 
step, he saw the crook-backed forms of 
poverty and eld. A strange pity came over 
him. Were these children of sin and misery 
predestined to their end, as he to his ? Were 
they, like him, merely the puppets of a mon- 
strous show ? 

And yet it was not the mystery, but the 
comedy of suffering that struck him ; its abso- 
lute uselessness, its grotesque want of mean- 
ing. How incoherent everything seemed ! 
How lacking in all harmony ! He was 
amazed at the discord between the shallow 
optimism of the day, and the real facts of 
existence. He was still very young. 

After a time he found himself in front of 
Marylebone Church. The silent roadway 
looked like a long riband of polished silver, 
flecked here and there by the dark arabesques 
of waving shadows. Far into the distance 
curved the line of flickering gas-lamps, and 
outside a little walled-in house stood a solitary 
hansom, the driver asleep inside. He walked 
hastily in the direction of Portland Place, 
now and then looking round, as though he 
feared that he was being followed. At the 



26 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 

corner of Rich Street stood two men, reading 
a small bill upon a hoarding. An odd feel- 
ing of curiosity stirred him, and he crossed 
over. As he came near, the word * Murder,' 
printed in black letters, met his eye. He 
started, and a deep flush came into his cheek. 
It was an advertisement offering a reward for 
any information leading to the arrest of a 
man of medium height, between thirty and 
forty years of age, wearing a billy-cock hat, 
a black coat, and check trousers, and with a 
scar upon his right cheek. He read it over 
and over again, and wondered if the wretched 
man would be caught, and how he had been 
scarred. Perhaps, some day, his own name 
might be placarded on the walls of London. 
Some day, perhaps, a price would be set on 
his head also. 

The thought made him sick with horror. 
He turned on his heel, and hurried on into 
the night 

Where he went he hardly knew. He had 
a dim memory of wandering through a laby- 
rinth of sordid houses, of being lost in a 
giant web of sombre streets, and it was bright 
dawn when he found himself at last in Picca- 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 27 

dilly Circus. As he strolled home towards 
Belgrave Square, he met the great waggons 
on their way to Covent Garden. The white- 
smocked carters, with their pleasant sun- 
burnt faces and coarse curly hair, strode 
sturdily on, cracking their whips, and calling 
out now and then to each other; on the 
back of a huge grey horse, the leader of a 
jangling team, sat a chubby boy, with a 
bunch of primroses in his battered hat, 
keeping tight hold of the mane with his 
little hands, and laughing; and the great 
piles of vegetables looked like masses of jade 
against the morning sky, like masses of green 
jade against the pink petals of some mar- 
vellous rose. Lord Arthur felt curiously 
affected, he could not tell why. There was 
something in the dawn's delicate loveliness 
that seemed to him inexpressibly pathetic, 
and he thought of all the days that break in 
beauty, and that set in storm. These rustics, 
too, with their rough, good-humoured voices, 
and their nonchalant ways, what a strange 
London they saw ! A London free from the 
sin of night and the smoke of day, a pallid, 
ghost -like city, a desolate town of tombs ! 



28 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 

He wondered what they thought of it, and 
whether they knew anything of its splendour 
and its shame, of its fierce, fiery -coloured 
joys, and its horrible hunger, of all it makes 
and mars from morn to eve. Probably it 
was to them merely a mart where they 
brought their fruits to sell, and where they 
tarried for a few hours at most, leaving the 
streets still silent, the houses still asleep. 
It gave him pleasure to watch them as they 
went by. Rude as they were, with their 
heavy, hobnailed shoes, and their awkward 
gait, they brought a little of Arcady with 
them. He felt that they had lived with 
Nature, and that she had taught them peace. 
He envied them all that they did not know. 
By the time he had reached Belgrave 
Square the sky was a faint blue, and the birds 
were beginning to twitter in the gardens. 



Ill 



When Lord Arthur woke it was twelve 
o'clock, and the mid-day sun was streaming 
through the ivory-silk curtains of his room. 
He got up and looked out of the window. 
A dim haze of heat was hanging over the 
great city, and the roofs of the houses were 
like dull silver. In the flickering green of 
the square below some children were flitting 
about like white butterflies, and the pave- 
ment was crowded with people on their way 
to the Park. Never had life seemed lovelier 
to him, never had the things of evil seemed 
more remote. 

Then his valet brought him a cup of 
chocolate on a tray. After he had drunk it, 
he drew aside a heavy portthre of peach- 
coloured plush, and passed into the bath- 
room. The light stole softly from above, 



30 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 

through thin slabs of transparent onyx, and 
the water in the marble tank glimmered like 
a moonstone. He plunged hastily in, till 
the cool ripples touched throat and hair, and 
then dipped his head right under, as though 
he would have wiped away the stain of some 
shameful memory. When he stepped out he 
felt almost at peace. The exquisite physical 
conditions of the moment had dominated 
him, as indeed often happens in the case of 
very finely-wrought natures, for the senses, 
like fire, can purify as well as destroy. 

After breakfast, he flung himself down on 
a divan, and lit a cigarette. On the mantel- 
shelf, framed in dainty old brocade, stood a 
large photograph of Sybil Merton, as he had 
seen her first at Lady Noel's ball The 
small, exquisitely-shaped head drooped slightly 
to one side, as though the thin, reed -like 
throat could hardly bear the burden of so 
much beauty ; the lips were slightly parted, 
and seemed made for sweet music ; and all 
the tender purity of girlhood looked out in 
wonder from the dreaming eyes. With her 
soft, clinging dress of cripe-de-chine, and her 
large leaf-shaped fan, she looked like one of 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 3 1 

those delicate little figures men find in the 
olive-woods near Tanagra ; and there was a 
touch of Greek grace in her pose and atti- 
tude. Yet she was not petite. She was 
simply perfectly proportioned — a rare thing 
in an age when so many women are either 
over life-size or insignificant. 

Now as Lord Arthur looked at her, he was 
filled with the terrible pity that is born of 
love. He felt that to marry her, with the 
doom of. murder hanging over his head, 
would be a betrayal like that of Judas, a sin 
worse than any the Borgia had ever dreamed 
of. What happiness could there be for 
them, when at any moment he might be 
called upon to carry out the awful prophecy 
written in his hand ? What manner of life 
would be theirs while Fate still held this 
fearful fortune in the scales ? The marriage 
must be postponed, at all costs. Of this he 
was quite resolved. Ardently though he 
loved the girl, and the mere touch of her 
fingers, when they sat together, made each 
nerve, of his body thrill with exquisite joy, he 
recognised none the less clearly where his 
duty lay, and was fully conscious of the fact 



32 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 

that he had no right to marry until he had 
committed the murder. This done, he could 
stand before the altar with Sybil Merton, 
and give his life into her hands without 
terror of wrongdoing. This done, he could 
take her to his arms, knowing that she would 
never have to blush for him, never have to 
hang her head in shame. But done it must 
be first ; and the sooner the better for both. 
Many men in his position would have 
preferred the primrose path of dalliance to 
the steep heights of duty ; but Lord Arthur 
was too conscientious to set pleasure above 
principle. . There was more than mere passion 
in his love ; and Sybil was to him a symbol 
of all that is good and noble. For a moment 
he had a natural repugnance against what he 
was asked to do, but it soon passed away. 
His heart told him that it was not a sin, but 
a sacrifice; his reason reminded him that 
there was no other course open. He had to 
choose between living for himself and living 
for others, and terrible though the task laid 
upon him undoubtedly was, yet he knew 
that he must not suffer selfishness to triumph 
over love. Sooner or later we are all called 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 33 

upon to decide on the same issue — of us all, 
the same question is asked. To Lord Arthur 
it came early in life — ^before his nature had 
been spoiled by the calculating cynicism of 
middle- age, or his heart corroded by the 
shallow, fashionable egotism of our day, and 
he felt no hesitation about doing his duty. 
Fortunately also, for him, he was no mere 
dreamer, or idle dilettante. Had he been 
so, he would have hesitated, like Hamlet, 
and let irresolution mar his purpose. But 
he was essentially practical Life to him 
meant action, rather than thought. He 
had that rarest of all things, common 
sense. 

The wild, turbid feelings of the previous 
night had by this time completely passed 
away, and it was almost with a sense of 
shame that he looked back upon his mad 
wanderings from street to street, his fierce 
emotional agony. The very sincerity of his 
sufferings made them seem unreal to him now. 
He wondered how he could have been so 
foolish as to rant and rave about the inevit- 
able. The only question that seemed to 
trouble him was, whom to make away with ; 

D 



34 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 

for he was not blind to the fact that murder, 
like the religions of the Pagan world, requires 
a victim as well as a priest. Not being a 
jf genius, he had no enemies, and indeed he 
felt that this was not the time for the gratifica- 
tion of any personal pique or dislike, the 
mission in which he was engaged being one 
of great and grave solemnity. He accord- 
ingly made out a list of his friends and rela- 
tives on a sheet of notepaper, and after 
careful consideration, decided in favour of 
Lady Clementina Beauchamp, a dear old 
lady who lived in Curzon Street, and was his 
own second cousin by his mother's side. 
He had always been very fond of Lady Clem, 
as every one called her, and as he was very 
wealthy himself, having come into all Lord 
Rugby's property when he came of age, there 
was no possibility of his deriving any vulgar 
monetary advantage by her death. In fact, 
the more he thought over the matter, the 
more she seemed to him to be just the right 
person, and, feeling that any delay would be 
unfair to Sybil, he determined to make his 
arrangements at once. 

The first thing to be done was, of course, 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 35 

to settle with the cheiromantist ; so he sat 
down at a small Sheraton writing-table that 
stood near the window, drew a cheque for 
;£io5, payable to the order of Mr. Septimus 
Podgers, and, enclosing it in an envelope, 
told his valet to take it to West Moon Street. 
He then telephoned to the stables for his han- 
som, and dressed to go out. As he was leaving 
the room, he looked back at Sybil Merton's 
photograph, and swore that, come what may, 
he would never let her know what he was doing 
for her sake, but would keep the secret of 
his self-sacrifice hidden always in his heart 

On his way to the Buckingham, he stopped 
at a florist^s, and sent Sybil a beautiful basket 
of narcissi, with lovely white petals and 
staring pheasants' eyes, and on arriving at 
the club, went straight to the library, rang 
che bell, and ordered the waiter to bring him 
a lemon-and-soda, and a book on Toxicology. 
He had fully decided that poison was the 
best means to adopt in this troublesome 
business. An5rthing like personal violence 
was extremely distasteful to him, and besides, 
he was very anxious not to murder Lady 
Clementina in any way that might attract 



36 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 

public attention, as he hated the idea of 
being lionised at Lady Windermere's, or 
seeing his name figuring in the paragraphs 
of vulgar society-newspapers. He had also 
to think of Sybil's father and mother, who 
were rather old-fashioned people, and might 
possibly object to the marriage if there was 
anything like a scandal, though he felt certain 
that if he told them the whole facts of the 
case they would be the very first to appreci- 
ate the motives that had actuated him. He 
had every reason, then, to decide in favour 
of poison. It was safe, sure, and quiet, and 
did away with any necessity for painful 
scenes, to which, like most Englishmen, he 
had a rooted objection. 

Of the science of poisons, however, he 
knew absolutely nothing, and as the waiter 
seemed quite unable to find anything in the 
library but Ruffs Guide and Bailey's Maga- 
zine, he examined the book-shelves himself, 
and finally came across a handsomely-bound 
edition of the Pharmacopoeia, and a copy of 
Erskine's Toxicology, edited by Sir Mathew 
Reid, the President of the Royal College of 
Physicians, and one of the oldest members 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 37 

of the Buckingham, having been elected in 
mistake for somebody else; a contretemps 
that so enraged the Committee, that when 
the real man came up they black-balled him 
unanimously. Lord Arthur was a good deal 
puzzled at the technical terms used in both 
books, and had begun to regret that he had 
not paid more attention to his classics at 
Oxford, when in the second volume of 
Erskine,. he found a very interesting and 
complete account of the properties of aconi- 
line, written in fairly clear English. It 
seemed to him to be exactly the poison he 
wanted. It was swift — indeed, almost im- 
mediate, in its effect — perfectly painless, and 
when taken in the form of a gelatine capsule, 
the mode recommended by Sir Mathew, not 
by any means unpalatable. He accordingly 
made a note, upon his shirt -cuff, of the 
amount necessary for a fatal dose, put the 
books back in their places, and strolled up 
St. James's Street, to Pestle and Humbey's, 
the great chemists. Mr. Pestle, who always 
attended personally . on the aristocracy, was 
a good deal surprised at the order, and in 
a very deferential manner murmured some- 



38 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE*S CRIME 

thing about a medical certificate being neces- 
sary. However, as soon as Lord Arthur 
explained to him that it was for a large 
Norwegian mastiff that he was obliged to get 
rid of, as it showed signs of incipient rabies, 
and had already bitten the coachman twice 
in the calf of the leg, he expressed himself as 
being perfectly satisfied, complimented Lord 
Arthur on his wonderful knowledge of Toxi- 
cology, and had the prescription made up 
immediately. 

Lord Arthur put the capsule into a pretty 
little silver bonbonmhre that he saw in a shop- 
window in Bond Street, threw away Pestle 
and Humbey's ugly pill-box, and drove off at 
once to Lady Clementina's. 

* Well, monsieur le tnauvais sujet^ cried the 
old lady, as he entered the room, *why 
haven't you been to see me all this time ? * 

*My dear Lady Clem, I never have a 
moment to myself,' said Lord Arthur, smiling. 

* I suppose you mean that you go about 
all day long with Miss Sybil Merton, buying 
chiffons and talking nonsense? I cannot 
understand why people make such a fuss 
about being married. In my day we never 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 39 

dreamed of billing and cooing in public, or 
in private for that matter.' 

*I assure you I have not seen Sybil for 
twenty -four hours, Lady Clem. As far as I 
can make out, she belongs entirely to her 
milliners.' 

* Of course ; that is the only reason you 
come to see an ugly old woman like myself. 
I wonder you men don't take warning. On 
a fait des folies pour moi^ and here I am, a 
poor, rheumatic creature, with a false front 
and a bad temper. Why, if it were not for 
dear Lady Jansen, who sends me all the 
worst French novels she can find, I don't 
think I could get through the day. Doctors 
are no use at all, except to get fees out of 
one. They can't even cure my heart- 
burn.' 

* I have brought you a cure for that, Lady 
Clem,' said Lord Arthur gravely. * It is a 
wonderful thing, invented by an American.' 

* I don't think I like American inventions, 
Arthur. I am quite sure I don't. I read 
some . American novels lately, and they were 
quite nonsensical.' 

* Oh, but there is no nonsense at all about 



40 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's C^IME 

this, Lady Clem! I assure you it is a perfect 
cure. You must promise to try it;* and 
Lord Arthur brought the little box out of 
his pocket, and handed it to her. 

*Well, the box is charming, Arthur. Is 
it really a present ? That is very sweet of 
you. And is this the wonderful medicine ? 
It looks like a bonbon. 111 take it at 
once.* 

* Good heavens ! Lady Clem,* cried Lord 
Arthur, catching hold of her hand, *you 
mustn't do anything of the kind. It is a 
homoeopathic medicine, and if you take it 
without having heartburn, it might do you 
no end of harm. Wait till you have an 
attack, and take it then. You will be aston- 
ished at the result.* 

* I should like to take it now,* said Lady 
Clementina, holding up to the light the little 
transparent capsule, with its floating bubble 
of liquid aconitine. *I am sure it is deli- 
cious. The fact is that, though I hate 
doctors, I love medicines. However, 1*11 
keep it till my next attack.* 

*And when will that be?* asked Lord 
Arthur eagerly. * Will it be soon ? * 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 4 1 

* I hope not for a week. I had a very 
bad time yesterday morning with it. But 
one never knows.' 

* You are sure to have one before the end 
of the month then, Lady Clem ? ' 

*I am afraid so. But how sympathetic 
you are to-day, Arthur ! Really, Sybil l^s 
done you a great deal of good. And now 
70U must run away, for I am dining with 
some very dull people, who won't talk 
scandal, and I know that if I don't get my 
sleep now I shall never be able to keep 
awake during dinner. Good-bye, Arthur, 
give my love to Sybil, and thank you so 
much for the American medicine.' 

* You won't forget to take it. Lady Clem, 
will you ? ' said Lord Arthur, rising from his 
seat 

* Of course I won't, you silly boy. I think 
it is most kind of you to think of me, and I 
shall write and tell you if I want any more.' 

Lord Arthur left the house in high spirits, 
and with a feeling of immense relief. 

That night he had an interview with Sybil 
Merton. He told her how he had been 
suddenly placed in a position of terrible 



42 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 

difficulty, from which neither honour nor 
duty would allow him to recede. He told 
her that the marriage must be put off for the 
present, as until he had got rid of his fearful 
entanglements, he was not a free maa He 
implored her to trust him, and not to have 
any doubts about the future. Everything 
would come right, but patience was neces- 
sary. 

The scene took place in the conservatory 
of Mr. Merton's house, in Park Lane, where 
Lord Arthur had dined as usual. Sybil had 
never seemed more happy, and for a moment 
Lord Arthur had been tempted to play the 
coward's part, to write to Lady Clementina 
for the pill, and to let the marriage go on as 
if there was no such person as Mr. Podgers 
in the world. His better nature, however, 
soon asserted itself, and even when Sybil 
flung herself weeping into his arms, he did 
not falter. The beauty that stirred his senses 
had touched his conscience also. He felt 
that to wreck so fair a life for the sake of a 
few months' pleasure would be a wrong thing 
to do. 

He stayed with Sybil till nearly midnight. 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE*S CRIME 43 

comforting her and being comforted in turn, 
and early the next morning he left for Venice, 
after writing a manly, firm letter to Mr. 
Merton about the necessary postponement 
of the marriage. 



IV 



In Venice he met his brother, Lord Surbiton, 
who happened to have come over from Corfu 
in his yacht. The two young men spent a 
delightful fortnight together. In the morning 
they rode on the Lido, or glided up and down 
the green canals in their long black gondola ; 
in the afternoon they usually entertained 
visitors on the yacht; and in the evening they 
dined at Florian's, and smoked innumerable 
cigarettes on the Piazza. Yet somehow Lord 
Arthur was not happy. Every day he studied 
the obituary column in the Times, expecting 
to see a notice of Lady Clementina's death, 
but every day he was disappointed. He 
began to be afraid that some accident had 
happened to her, and often regretted that he 
had prevented her taking the aconitine when 
she had been so anxious to try its effect. 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 45 

Sybil's letters, too, though full of love, and 
trust, and tenderness, were often very sad in 
their tone, and sometimes he used to think 
that he was parted from her for ever. 

After a fortnight Lord Surbiton got bored 
with Venice, and determined to run down 
the coast to Ravenna, as he heard that there 
was some capital cock-shooting in the Pin- 
etum. Lord Arthur, at first, refused abso- 
lutely to come, but Surbiton, of whom he 
was extremely fond, finally persuaded him 
that if he stayed at Danielli's by himself he 
would be moped to death, and on the morn- 
ing of the 15th they started, with a strong 
nor'-east wind blowing, and a rather sloppy 
sea. The sport was excellent, and the free, 
open-air life brought the colour back to 
Lord Arthur's cheeks, but abput the 2 2d he 
became anxious about Lady Clementina, 
and, in spite of Surbiton's remonstrances, 
came back to Venice by train. 

As he stepped out of his gondola on to 
the hotel steps, the proprietor came forward 
to meet him with a sheaf of telegrams. Lord 
Arthur snatched them out of his hand, and 
tore them open. Everything had been sue- 



46 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 

cessful. Lady Clementina had died quite 
suddenly on the night of the 1 7 th ! 

His first thought was for Sybil, and he 
sent her off a telegram announcing his 
immediate return to London. He then 
ordered his valet to pack his things for the 
night mail, sent his gondoliers about five 
times their proper fare, and ran up to his 
sitting-room with a light step and a buoyant 
heart. There he found three letters waiting 
for him. One was from Sybil herself, full 
of sympathy and condolence. The others 
were from his mother, and from Lady 
Clementina's solicitor. It seemed that the 
old lady had dined with the Duchess that 
very night, had delighted every one by her 
wit and esprit^ but had gone home somewhat 
early, complaining of heartburn. In the 
morning she was found dead in her bed, 
having apparently suffered no pain. Sir 
Mathew Reid had been sent for at once, 
but, of course, there was nothing to be done, 
and she was to be buried on the 2 2d at 
Beauchamp Chalcote. A few days before 
she died she had made her will, and left 
Lord Arthur her little house in Curzon 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 47 

Street, and all her furniture, personal effects, 
and pictures, with the exception of her col- 
lection of miniatures, which was to go to 
her sister, Lady Margaret Rufford, and her 
amethyst necklace, which Sybil Merton was 
to have. The property was not of much 
value; but Mr. Mansfield the solicitor was 
extremely anxious for Lord Arthur to return 
at once, if possible, as there were a great 
many bills to be paid, and Lady Clem- 
entina had never kept any regular accounts. 

Lord Arthur was very much touched by 
Lady Clementina's kind remembrance of 
him, and felt that Mr. Podgers had a great 
deal to answer for. His love of Sybil, how- 
ever, dominated every other emotion, and the 
consciousness that he had done his duty gave 
him peace and comfort. When he arrived 
at Charing Cross, he felt perfectly happy. 

The Mertons received him very kindly, 
Sybil made him promise that he would never 
again allow anything to come between them, 
and the marriage was fixed for the 7 th June. 
Life seemed to him once more bright and 
beautiful, and all his old gladness came back 
to him again. 



48 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 

One day, however, as he was going over 
the house in Curzon Street, in company 
with Lady Clementina's soUcitor and Sybil 
herself, burning packages of faded letters, 
and turning out drawers of odd rubbish, the 
young girl suddenly gave a little cry of 
delight. 

* What have you found, Sybil ? * said Lord 
Arthur, looking up from his work, and 
smiling. 

*This lovely little silver bonbonniire^ 
Arthur. Isn't it quaint and Dutch? Do 
give it to me ! I know amethysts won't 
become me till I am over eighty.' 

It was the box that had held the aconitine. 

Lord Arthur started, and a faint blusb 
came into his cheek. He had almost 
entirely forgotten what he had done, and it 
seemed to him a curious coincidence that 
Sybil, for whose sake he had gone through 
all that terrible anxiety, should have been 
the first to remind him of it. 

* Of course you can have it, Sybil. I gave 
it to poor Lady Clem myself.' 

* Oh ! thank you, Arthur ; and may I have 
the bonbon too ? I had no notion that Lady 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE*S CRIME 49 

Clementina liked sweets. I thought she 
was far too intellectual.' 

Lord Arthur grew deadly pale, and a 
horrible idea crossed his mind. 

^Bonbon, Sybil? What do you mean?' 
he said, in a slow, hoarse voice. 

* There is one in it, that is all. It looks 
quite old and dusty, and I have not the 
slightest intention of eating it What is the 
matter, Arthur ? How white you look ! ' 

Lord Arthur rushed across the room, and 
seized the box. Inside it was the amber- 
coloured capsule, with its poison -bubble. 
Lady Clementina had died a natural death 
after all ! 

The shock of the discovery was almost 
too much for him. He flung the capsule 
into the fire, and sank on the sofa with a cry 
of despair. 



E 



V 



Mr. Merton was a good deal distressed at 
the second postponement of the marriage, 
and Lady Julia, who had already ordered 
her dress for the wedding, did all in her 
power to make Sybil break off the match. 
Dearly, however, as Sybil loved her mother, 
she had given her whole life into Lord 
Arthur's hands, and nothing that Lady Julia 
could say could make her waver in her faith. 
As for Lord Arthur himself, it took him days 
to get over his terrible disappointment, and for 
a time his nerves were completely unstrung. 
His excellent common sense, however, soon 
asserted itself, and his sound, practical mind 
did not leave him long in doubt about what 
to do. Poison having proved a complete 
failure, dynamite, or some other form of ex- 
plosive, was obviously the proper thing to try. 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE*S CRIME 5 1 

He accordingly looked again over the list 
of his friends and relatives, and, after careful 
consideration, determined to blow up his 
uncle, the Dean of Chichester. The Dean, 
who was a man of great culture and learning, 
was extremely fond of clocks, and had a 
wonderful collection of timepieces, ranging 
from the fifteenth century to the present 
day, and it seemed to Lord Arthur that this 
hobby of the good Dean's offered him an 
excellent opportunity for carrying out his 
scheme. Where to procure an explosive 
machine was, of course, quite another matter. 
The London Directory gave him no in- 
formation on the point, and he felt that 
there was very little use in going to Scotr 
land Yard about it, as they never seemed 
to know anything about the movements 
of the dynamite faction till after an ex- 
plosion had taken place, and not much 
even then. 

Suddenly he thought of his friend Rouva- 
loff, a young Russian of very revolutionary 
tendencies, whom he had met at Lady 
Windermere's in the winter. Count Rouva- 
lofF was supposed to be writing a life of 



52 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 

Peter the Great, and to have come over to 
England for the purpose of studying the 
documents relating to that Tsar's residence 
in this country as a ship carpenter; but it 
was generally suspected that he was a 
Nihilist agent, and there was no doubt that 
the Russian Embassy did not look with any 
favour upon his presence in London. Lord 
Arthur felt that he was just the man for his 
purpose, and drove down one morning to his 
lodgings in Bloomsbury, to ask his advice 
and assistance. 

* So you are taking up politics seriously ? ' 
said Count Rouvaloff, when Lord Arthur 
had told him the object of his mission ; but 
Lord Arthur, who hated swagger of any kind, 
felt bound to admit to him that he had not 
the slightest interest in social questions, and 
simply wanted the explosive machine for a 
purely family matter, in which no one was 
concerned but himself. 

Count Rouvaloff looked at him for some 
moments in amazement, and then seeing 
that he was quite serious, wrote an address 
on a piece of paper, initialled it, and handed 
it to him across the table. 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 53 

' Scotland Yard would give a good deal to 
know this address, my dear fellow.' 

*They shan't have it,' cried Lord Arthur, 
laughing ; and after shaking the young 
Russian warmly by the hand he ran down- 
stairs, examined the paper, and told the 
coachman to drive to Soho Square. 

There he dismissed him, and strolled down 
Greek Street, till he came to a place called 
Bayle's Court. He passed under the arch- 
way, and found himself in a curious cul-de- 
sac^ that was apparently occupied by a 
French Laundry, as a perfect network of 
clothes-lines was stretched across from house 
to house, and there was a flutter of white 
linen in the morning air. He walked right 
to the end, and knocked at a little green 
house. After some delay, during which 
every window in the court became a blurred 
mass of peering faces, the door was opened 
by a rather rough -looking foreigner, who 
asked him in very bad English what his 
business was. Lord Arthur handed him the 
paper Count Rouvaloff had given him. 
When the man saw it he bowed, and invited 
Lord Arthur into a very shabby front parlour 



54 JLORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 

on the ground -floor, and in a few moments 
Herr Winckelkopf, as he was called in 
England, bustled into the room, with a very 
wine-stained napkin round his neck, and a 
fork in his left hand. 

* Count Rouvaloff has given me an intro- 
duction to you,* said Lord Arthur, bowing, 
* and I am anxious to have a short interview 
with you on a matter of business. My 
name is Smith, Mr. Robert Smith, and I 
want you to supply me with an explosive 
clock.' 

' Charmed to meet you. Lord Arthur,' said 
the genial little German laughing. * Don't 
look so alarmed, it is my duty to know 
everybody, and I remember seeing you one 
evening at Lady Windermere's. I hope her 
ladyship is quite well. Do you mind sitting 
with me while I finish my breakfast ? There 
is an excellent p&tk^ and my friends are kind 
enough to say that my Rhine wine is better 
than any they get at the German Embassy,' 
and before Lord Arthur had got over his 
surprise at being recognised, he found him- 
self seated in the back-room, sipping the 
most delicious Marcobriinner out of a pale 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 55 

yellow hock-glass marked with the Imperial 
monogram, and chatting in the friendliest 
manner possible to the famous con- 
spirator. 

* Explosive clocks/ said Herr Winckelkopf, 
* are not very good things for foreign export- 
ation, as, even if they succeed in passing 
the Custom House, the train service is so 
irregular, that they usually go off before they 
have reached their proper destination. If, 
however, you want one for home use, 1 can 
supply you with an excellent article, and 
guarantee that you will be satisfied with the 
result. May I ask for whom it is intended ? 
If it is for the police, or for any one connected 
with Scotland Yard, I am afraid I cannot do 
anything for you. The English detectives 
are really our best friends, and I have always 
found that by relying on their stupidity, we 
can do exactly what we like. I could not 
spare one of them.' 

' I assure you,' said Lord Arthur, ' that it 
has nothing to do with the police at all. In 
fact, the clock is intended for the Dean of 
Chichester.' 

*Dear me 1 I had no idea that you felt so 



56 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 

Strongly about religion, Lord Arthur. Few 
young men do nowadays.' 

'I am afraid you overrate me, Herr 
Winckelkopf,' said Lord Arthur, blushing. 
*The fact is, I really know nothing about 
theology.' 

* It is a purely private matter then ? ' 
' Purely private.' 

Herr Winckelkopf shrugged his shoulders, 
and left the room, returning in a few minutes 
with a round cake of dynamite about the 
size of a penny, and a pretty little French 
clock, surmounted by an ormolu figure of 
Liberty trampling on the hydra of Despotism. 

Lord Arthur's face brightened up when he 
saw it. * That is just what I want,' he cried, 
* and now tell me how it goes off.' 

* Ah ! there is my secret,' answered Herr 
Winckelkopf, contemplating his invention 
with a justifiable look of pride; *let me 
know when you wish it to explode, and I 
will set the machine to the moment.' 

* Well, to-day is Tuesday, and if you could 
send it off at once ' 

* That is impossible ; I have a great deal 
of important work on hand for some friends 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 57 

of mine in Moscow. Still, I might send it 
off" to-morrow.' 

* Oh, it will be quite time enough ! * said 
Lord Arthur politely, *if it is delivered to- 
morrow night or Thursday morning. For 
the moment of the explosion, say Friday at 
noon exactly. The Dean is always at home 
at that hour.' 

* Friday, at noon,' repeated Herr Winckel- 
kopf, and he made a note to that effect in a 
large ledger that was lying on a bureau near 
the fireplace. 

* And now,' said Lord Arthur, rising from 
his seat, * pray let me know how much I am 
in your debt.' 

*It is such a small matter, Lord Arthur, 
that I do not care to make any charge. The 
dynamite comes to seven and sixpence, the 
clock will be three pounds ten, and the 
carriage about five shiUings. I am only too 
pleased to oblige any friend of Count 
Rouvaloffs.' 

* But your trouble, Herr Winckelkopf ? ' 

' Oh, that is nothing ! It is a pleasure to 
me. I do not work for money; I live 
entirely for my art.' 



58 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 

Lord Arthur laid down ^£4 : 2 : 6 on the 
table, thanked the little German for his 
kindness, and, having succeeded in declining 
an invitation to meet some Anarchists at a 
meat -tea on the following Saturday, left the 
house and went off to the Park. 

For the next two days he was in a state of 
the greatest excitement, and on Friday at 
twelve o'clock he drove down to the Buck- 
ingham to wait for news. All the afternoon 
the stolid hall-porter kept posting up telegrams 
from various parts of the country giving the 
results of horse-races, the verdicts in divorce 
suits, the state of the weather, and the Jike, 
while the tape ticked out wearisome details 
about an all-night sitting in the House of 
Commons, and a small panic on the Stock 
Exchange. At four o'clock the evening papers 
came in, and Lord Arthur disappeared into 
the library with the Pa// Ma//, the St James* s^ 
the G/obe, and the Echo, to the immense 
indignation of Colonel Goodchild, who 
wanted to read the reports of a speech he 
had delivered that morning at the Mansion 
House, on the subject of South African 
Missions, and the advisability of having black 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 59 

Bishops in every province, and for some 
reason or other had a strong prejudice 
against the Evening News. None of the 
papers, however, contained even the slightest 
allusion to Chichester, and Lord Arthur felt 
that the attempt must have failed. It was a 
terrible blow to him, and for a time he was 
quite unnerved. Herr Winckelkopf, whom 
he went to see the next day, was full of 
elaborate apologies, and offered to supply 
him with another clock free of charge, or 
with a case of nitro-glycerine bombs at cost 
price. But he had lost all faith in explosives, 
and Herr Winckelkopf himself acknowledged 
that everything is so adulterated nowadays, 
that even dynamite can hardly be got in a 
pure condition. The little (jerman, however, 
while admitting that something must have 
gone wrong with the machinery, was not 
without hope that the clock might still go off, 
and instanced the case of a barometer that 
he had once sent to the military Governor at 
Odessa, which, though timed to explode in 
ten days, had not done so for something 
like three months. It was quite true that 
when it did go off, it merely succeeded in 



6o LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 

blowing a housemaid to atoms, the Governor 
having gone out of town six weeks' before, 
but at least it showed that dynamite, as a 
destructive force, was, when under the control 
of machinery, a powerful, though a some- 
what unpunctual agent. Lord Arthur was a 
little consoled by this reflection, but even 
here he was destined to disappointment, for 
two days afterwards, as he was going upstairs, 
the Duchess called him into her boudoir, and 
showed him a letter she had just received 
from the Deanery. 

*Jane writes charming letters,' said the 
Duchess ; ' you must really read her last. It 
is quite as good as the novels Mudie sends us.' 

Lord Arthur seized the letter from her 
hand. It ran as follows : — 

* The Deanery, Chichester, 
* 27/1^ May, 
* My Dearest Aunt, 

' Thank you so much for the flannel for 
the Dorcas Society, and also for the gingham. 
I quite agree with you that it is nonsense 
their wanting to wear pretty things, but 
everybody is so Radical and irreligious 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE*S CRIME 6 1 

nowadays, that it is difficult to make them 
see that they should not try and dress like 
the upper classes. I am sure I don't know 
what we are coming to. As papa has often 
said in his sermons, we live in an age of 
unbelief. 

* We have had great fun over a clock that 
an unknown admirer sent papa last Thursday. 
It arrived in a wooden box from London, 
carriage paid ; and papa feels it must have 
been sent by some one who had read his 
remarkable sermon, " Is License Liberty ? " 
for on the top of the clock was a figure of a 
woman, with what papa said was the cap 
of Liberty on her head. I didn't think it 
very becoming myself, but papa said it was 
historical, so I suppose it is all right. 
Parker unpacked it, and papa put it on the 
mantelpiece in the library, and we were all 
sitting there on Friday morning, when just 
as the clock struck twelve, we heard a 
whirring noise, a little puff of smoke came 
from the pedestal of the figure, and the 
goddess of Liberty fell off, and broke her 
nose on the fender! Maria was quite 
alarmed, but it looked so ridiculous, that 



62 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 

James and I went off into fits of laughter, 
and even papa was amused. When we 
examined it, we found it was a sort of alarum 
clock, and that, if you set it to a particular 
hour, and put some gunpowder and a cap 
under a- little hammer, it went off whenever 
you wanted. Papa said it must not remain 
in the library, as it made a noise, so Reggie 
carried it away to the schoolroom, and does 
nothing but have small explosions all day 
long. Do you think Arthur would like one 
for a wedding present ? I suppose they are 
quite fashionable in London. Papa says 
they should do a great deal of good, as they 
show that Liberty can*t last, but must fall 
down. Papa says Liberty was invented at 
the time of the French Revolution. How 
awful it seems ! 

* I have now to go to the Dorcas, where I 
will read them your most instructive letter. 
How true, dear aunt, your idea is, that in 
their rank of life they should wear what is 
unbecoming. I must say it is absurd, their 
anxiety about dress, when there are so many 
more important things in this world, and in 
the next. I am so glad your flowered poplin 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 63 

turned out so well, and that your lace was 
not torn. I am wearing my yellow satin, 
that you so kindly gave me, at the Bishop's 
on Wednesday, and think it will look aU 
right Would you have bows or not? 
Jennings says that every one wears bows now, 
and that the underskirt should be frilled. 
Reggie has just had another explosion, and 
papa has ordered the clock to be sent to the 
stables. I don't think papa likes it so much 
as he did at first, though he is very flattered 
at being sent such a pretty and ingenious 
toy. It shows that people read his sermons, 
and profit by them. 

*Papa sends his love, in which James, 
and Reggie, and Maria all unite, and, hoping 
that Uncle Cecil's gout is better, believe 
me, dear aunt, ever your affectionate 
niece, Jane Percy. 

^P,S, — Do tell me about the bows. 
Jennings insists they are the fashion.' 

Lord Arthur looked so serious and unhappy 
over the letter, that the Duchess went into 
fits of laughter. 

* My dear Arthur,' she cried, * I shall 



/ 

/ 



64 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE*S CRIME 



never show you a young lady's letter again ! 
/ But what shall I say about the clock? I 

/ think it is a capital invention, and I should 

like to have one myself.' 

' I don't think much of them,' said Lord 
Arthur, with a sad smile, and, after kissing 
his mother, he left the room. 

When he got upstairs, he flung himself on 
a sofa, and his eyes filled with tears. He had 
done his best to commit this murder, but on 
both occasions he had failed, and through 
no fault of his own. He had tried to do 
his duty, but it seemed as if Destiny herself 
had turned traitor. He was oppressed with 
the sense of the barrenness of good intentions, 
of the futility of trying to be fine. Perhaps, 
it would be better to break off the marriage 
altogether. Sybil would suffer, it is true, 
but suffering could not really mar a nature 
so noble as hers. As for himself, what did 
it matter? There is always some war in 
which a man can die, some cause to which a 
man can give his life, and as life had no 
pleasure for him, so death had no terror. 
Let Destiny work out his doom. He would 
not stir to help her. 



•LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 65 

At half-past seven he dressed, and went 
down to the club. Surbiton was there with 
a party of young men, and he was obliged to 
dine with them. Their trivial conversation 
and idle jests did not interest him, and as 
soon as coffee was brought he left them, in- 
venting some engagement in order to get away. 
As he was going out of the club, the hall- 
porter handed him a letter. It was from 
Herr Winckelkopf, asking him to call down 
the next evening, and look at an explosive 
umbrella, that went off as soon as it was 
opened. It was the very latest invention, 
and had just arrived from Geneva. He tore 
the letter up into fragments. He had made 
up his mind not to try any more experiments. 
Then he wandered down to the Thames 
Embankment, and sat for hours by the river. 
The moon peered through a mane of tawny 
clouds, as if it were a lion's eye, and in- 
numerable stars spangled the hollow vault, 
like gold dust powdered on a puiple dome. 
Now and then a barge swung out into the 
turbid stream, and floated away with the 
tide, and the railway signals changed from 
green to scarlet as the trains ran shrieking 

F 



66 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 

across the bridge. After some time, twelve 
o'clock boomed from the tall tower at West- 
minster, and at each stroke of the sonorous 
bell the night seemed to tremble. Then the 
railway lights went out, one solitary lamp 
left gleaming like a large ruby on a giant 
mast, and the roar of the city became fainter. 

At two o'clock he got up, and strolled 
towards Blackfriars. How unreal everjrthing 
looked ! How like a strange dream ! The 
houses on the other side of the river seemed 
built out of darkness. One would have said 
that silver and shadow had fashioned the 
world anew. The huge dome of St Paul's 
loomed like a bubble through the dusky 
air. 

As he approached Cleopatra's Needle he 
saw a man leaning over the parapet, and as 
he came nearer the man looked up, the 
gas-light falling full upon his face. 

It was Mr. Podgers, the cheiromantist ! 
No one could mistake the fat, flabby fece, 
the gold-rimmed spectacles, the sickly feeble 
smile, the sensual mouth. 

Lord Arthur stopped. A brilliant idea 
flashed across him, and he stole softly up 



' LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 67 

behind. In a moment he had seized Mr. 
Podgers by the legs, and flung him into the 
Thames. There was a coarse oath, a heavy 
splash, and all was still. Lord Arthur looked 
anxiously over, but could see nothing of the 
cheiromantist but a tall hat, pirouetting in 
an eddy of moonlit water. After a time it 
also sank, and no trace of Mr. Podgers was 
visible. Once he thought that he caught 
sight of the bulky misshapen figure striking 
out for the staircase by the bridge, and 
a horrible feeling of failure came over him, 
but it turned out to be merely a reflection, 
and when the moon shone out from behind 
a cloud it passed away. At last he seemed 
to have realised the decree of destiny. He 
heaved a deep sigh of relief, and Sybil's name 
came to his lips. 

* Have you dropped anything, sir ? * said a 
voice behind him suddenly. 

He turned round, and saw a policeman 
with a buirs-eye lantern. 

'Nothing of importance, sergeant,' he 
answered, smiling, and hailing a passing 
hansom, he jumped in, and told the man to 
drive to Belgrave Square. 



68 LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 

For the next few days he alternated be- 
tween hope and fear. There were moments 
when he almost expected Mr. Podgers to 
walk into the room, and yet at other times 
he felt that Fate could not be so unjust to 
him. Twice he went to the cheiromantist's 
address in West Moon Street, but he could 
not bring himself to ring the bell. He 
longed for certainty, and was afraid of it. 

Finally it came. He was sitting in the 
smoking-room of the club having tea, and 
listening rather wearily to Surbiton's account 
of the last comic song at the Gaiety, when 
the waiter came in with the evening papers. 
He took up the St Jiames\ and was listlessly 
turning over its pages, when this strange 
heading caught his eye : 

Suicide of a Cheiromantist. ' 

He turned pale with excitement, and 
began to read. The paragraph ran as 
follows : — 

Yesterday morning, at seven o'clock, the body of 
Mr. Septimus R. Podgers, the eminent cheiromantist, 
was washed on shore at Greenwich, just in front of 
the Ship Hotel. The unfortunate gentleman had 
been missing for some days, and considerable anxiety 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE's CRIME 69 

for his safety had been felt in cheiromantic circles. 
It is supposed that he committed suicide under the 
influence of a temporary mental derangement, caused 
by overwork, and a verdict to that effect was returned 
this afternoon by the coroner's jury. Mr. Podgers 
had just completed an elaborate treatise on the subject 
of the Human Hand, that will shortly be published, 
when it will no doubt attract much attention. The 
deceased was sixty-five years of age, and does not 
seem to have left any relations. 

Lord Arthur rushed out of the club with 
the paper still in his hand, to the immense 
amazement of the hall-porter, who tried in 
vain to stop him, and drove at once to Park 
Lane. Sybil saw him from the window, and 
something told her that he was the bearer of 
good news. She ran down to meet him, 
and, when she saw his face, she knew that 
all was well 

* My dear Sybil,' cried Lord Arthur, ' let 
us be married to-morrow ! ' 

* You foolish boy ! Why the cake is not 
even ordered ! ' said Sybil, laughing through 
her tears. 



VI 



When the wedding took place, some three 
weeks later, St. Peter's was crowded with a 
perfect mob of smart people. The service 
was read in a most impressive manner by the 
Dean of Chichester, and everybody agreed 
that they had never seen a handsomer couple 
than the bride and bridegroom. They were 
more than handsome, however — they were 
happy. Never for a single moment did Lord 
Arthur regret all that he had suffered for 
Sybil's sake, while she, on her side, gave him 
the best things a woman can give to any man 
— worship, tenderness, and love. For them 
romance was not killed by reality. They 
always felt young. 

Some years afterwards, when two beautiful 
children had been born to them. Lady 
Windermere came down on a visit to Alton 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILe's CRIME 7 1 

Priory, a lovely old place, that had been 
the Duke's wedding present to his son ; and 
one afternoon as she was sitting with Lady 
Arthur under a lime-tree in the garden, 
watching the little boy and girl as they 
played up and down the rose-walk, like 
fitful sunbeams, she suddenly took her 
hostess's hand in hers, and said, 'Are you 
happy, Sybil?' 

* Dear Lady Windermere, of course I am 
happy. Aren't you ? ' 

*I have no time to be happy, Sybil. I 
always like the last person who is introduced 
to me; but, as a rule, as soon as I know 
people I get tired of them.' 

* Don't your lions satisfy you. Lady Win- 
dermere ? ' 

* Oh dear, no ! lions are only good for one 
season. As soon as their manes are cut, 
they are the dullest creatures going. Besides, 
they behave very badly, if you are really nice 
to them. Do you remember that horrid 
Mr. Podgers? He was a dreadful im- 
postor. Of course, I didn't mind that at 
all, and even when he wanted to borrow 
money I forgave him, but I could not 



72 LORD ARTHUR SAVILe's CRIME 

Stand his making love to me. He has 
really made me hate cheiromancy. I go 
in for telepathy now. It is much more 
amusing.' 

* You mustn't say anything against cheiro- 
mancy here, Lady Windermere; it is the 
only subject that Arthur does not like people 
to chaff about. I assure you he is quite 
serious over it.' 

* You don't mean to say that he believes 
in it, Sybil ? ' 

*Ask him. Lady Windermere, here he 
is;' and Lord Arthur came up the garden 
with a large bunch of yellow roses in his 
hand, and his two children dancing round 
him. 

* Lord Arthur ? ' 

* Yes, Lady Windermere.' 

* You don't mean to say that you believe 
in cheiromancy ? ' 

*0f course I do,' said the young man, 
smiling. 

* But why ? ' 

* Because I owe to it all the happiness of 
my life,' he murmured, throwing himself into 
a wicker chair. 



LORD ARTHUR SAVILE'S CRIME 73 

* My dear Lord Arthur, what do you owe 
to it?' 

'Sybil,' he answered, handing his wife 
the roses, and looking into her violet 
eyes. 

* What nonsense ! ' cried Lady Windermere. 
* I never heard such nonsense in all my life.' 



The sphinx without a 

SECRET 



An etching 




NE afternoon I was sitting out- 
side the Cafd de la Paix, 
watching the splendour and 
shabbiness of Parisian life, 
and wondering over my ver- 
mouth at the strange panorama of pride and 
poverty that was passing before me, when 1 
heard some one call my name. I turned 
round, and saw Lord Murchison. We had 
not met since we had been at college to- 
gether, nearly ten years before, so I was 
delighted to come across him again, and we 
shook hands warmly. At Oxford we had been 
great friends. I had liked him immensely, 
he was so handsome, so high-spirited, and so 
honourable. We used to say of him that he 
would be the best of fellows, if he did not 
always speak the truth, but I think we really 



78 THE SPHINX WITHOUT A SECRET 

admired him all the more for his frankness. 
I found him a good deal changed. He looked 
anxious and puzzled, and seemed to be in 
doubt about something. I felt it could not be 
modern scepticism, for Murchison was the 
stoutest of Tories, and believed in the Penta- 
teuch as firmly as he believed in the House 
of Peers ; so I concluded that it was a 
woman, and asked him if he was married 
yet. 

* I don't understand women well enough,' 
he answered. 

'My dear Gerald,' I said, * women are 
meant to be loved, not to be understood.' 

* I cannot love where I cannot trust,' he 
replied. 

* I believe you have a mystery in your life, 
Gerald,' I exclaimed ; * tell me about it.' 

' Let us go for a drive,' he answered, ' it is 
too crowded here. No, not a yellow carriage, 
any other colour — there, that dark-green one 
will do;' and in a few moments we were 
trotting down the boulevard in the direction 
of the Madeleine. 

* Where shall we go to ?' 1 said. 

' Oh, anywhere you like ! ' he answered — 



THE SPHINX WITHOUT A SECRET 79 

* to the restaurant in the Bois ; we will dine 
there, and you shall tell me all about your- 
self.' 

* I want to hear about you first/ I said. 

* Tell me your mystery.' 

He took fi-om his pocket a little silver- 
clasped morocco case, and handed it to me. 
I opened it Inside there was the photograph 
of a woman. She was tall and slight, and 
strangely picturesque with her large vague 
eyes and loosened hair. She looked like a 
dairoayante, and was wrapped in rich furs. 

'What do you think of that face?' he 
said ; ' is it truthful ? ' 

I examined it carefully. It seemed to me 
the £u£ of some one who had a secret, but 
whether that secret was good or evil I could 
not say. Its beaut)- was a beauty moulded 
Ofut of many mysteries — the beauty, in fact, 
wfaidi 13 psydu^ogical, not plastic — and the 
iaanx smile that just played across the lips 
was hn too ssbde to be really sweec 

* WcE," he cried imxanenrhr, * what do jrfi 



*5ie5i the GKcooda in ttb«/ 1 agjwered 

'LetmekaovaHaxjoot aez.' 



8o THE SPHINX WITHOUT A SECRET 

* Not now/ he said ; ' after dinner ; ' and 
began to talk of other things. 

When the waiter brought us our coffee 
and cigarettes I reminded Gerald of his 
promise. He rose from his seat, walked 
two or three times up and down the room, 
and, sinking into an armchair, told me the 
following story : — 

*One evening,* he said, *I was walking 
down Bond Street about five o'clock. There 
was a terrific crush of carriages, and the 
traffic was almost stopped. Close to the 
pavement was standing a little yellow 
brougham, which, for some reason or other, 
attracted my attention. As I passed by 
there looked out from it the face I showed 
you this afternoon. It fascinated me im- 
mediately. All that night I kept thinking 
of it, and all the next day. I wandered up 
and down that wretched Row, peering into 
every carriage, and waiting for the yellow 
brougham; but I could not find pta belle 
inconnue, and at last I began to think she 
was merely a dream. About a week after- 
wards I was dining with Madame de Rastail. 
Dinner was for eight o'clock; but at half- 



THE SPHINX WITHOUT A SECRET 8 1 

• 

past eight we were still waiting in the 
drawing-room. Finally the servant threw 
open the door, and announced Lady Alroy. 
It was the woman I had been looking for. 
She came in very slowly, looking like a moon- 
beam in grey lace, and, to my intense delight, 
I was asked to take her in to dinner. After 
we had sat down I remarked quite innocently, 
* I think I caught sight of you in Bond Street 
some time ago. Lady Alroy.' She grew very 
pale, and said to me in a low voice, * Pray 
do not talk so loud ; you may be overheard.' 
I felt miserable at having made such a bad 
beginning, and plunged recklessly into the 
subject of the French plays. She spoke 
very little, always in the same low musical 
voice, and seemed as if she was afraid of 
some one listening. I fell passionately, 
stupidly in love, and the indefinable atmo- 
sphere of mystery that surrounded her excited 
my most ardent curiosity. When she was 
going away, which she did very soon after 
dinner, I asked her if I might call and see 
her. She hesitated for a moment, glanced 
round to see if any one was near us, and 
then said, " Yes ; to-morrow at a quarter to 

G 



82 THE SPHINX WITHOUT A SECRET 

five." I begged Madame de Rastail to tell 
me about her; but all that I could learn 
was that she was a widow with a beautiful 
house in Park Lane, and as some scientific 
bore began a dissertation on widows, as ex- 
emplifying the survival of the matrimonially 
fittest, I left and went home. 

*The next day I arrived at Park Lane 
punctual to the moment, but was told by the 
butler that Lady Alroy had just gone out 
I went down to the club quite imhappy and 
very much puzzled, and after long considera- 
tion wrote her a letter, asking if I might be 
allowed to try my chance some other after- 
noon. I had no answer for several days, 
but at last I got a little note saying she 
would be at home on Sunday at four, and 
with this extraordinary postscript: "Please 
do not write to me here again ; I will 
explain when I see you." On Sunday 
she received me, and was perfectly charm- 
ing ; but when I was going away she 
begged of me, if I ever had occasion to 
write to her again, to address my letter 
to " Mrs. Knox, care of Whittaker's Library, 
Green Street." "There are reasons," she 



THE SPHINX WITHOUT A SECRET B3 

said, "why I cannot receive letters in my 
own house." 

* All through the season I saw a great deal 
of her, and the atmosphere of mystery never 
left her. Sometimes I thought that she was 
in the power of some man, but she looked so 
unapproachable that I could not believe it. 
It was really very difficult for me to come to 
any conclusion, for she was like one of those 
strange crystals that one sees in museums, 
which are at one moment clear, and at another 
clouded. At last I determined to ask her to 
be my wife : I was sick and tired of the 
incessant secrecy that she imposed on all my 
visits, and on the few letters I sent her. I 
wrote to her at the library to ask her if 
she could see me the following Monday 
at six. She answered yes, and I was 
in the seventh heaven of delight. I 
was infatuated with her: in spite of the 
mystery, I thought then — in consequence 
of it, I see now. No; it was the woman 
herself I loved. The mystery troubled me, 
maddened me. Why did chance put me 
in its track ? ' 

* You discovered it, then ? ' I cried. 



84 THE SPHINX WITHOUT A SECRET 

* I fear so/ he answered. * You can judge 
for yourself.' 

*When Monday came round I went to 
lunch with my uncle, and about four o'clock 
found myself in the Marylebone Road. My 
uncle, you know, lives in Regent's Park. I 
wanted to get to Piccadilly, and took a short 
cut through a lot of shabby little streets. 
Suddenly I saw in front of me Lady Alroy, 
deeply veiled and walking very fast On 
coming to the last house in the street, she 
went up the steps; took oiit a latch-key, and 
let herself in. " Here is the mystery," I said 
to myself; and I hurried on and examined the 
house. It seemed a sort of place for letting 
lodgings. On the doorstep lay her handker- 
chiefj which she had dropped. I picked it 
up and put it in my pocket. Then I began 
to consider what I should do. I came to 
the conclusion that I had no right to spy 
on her, and I drove down to the club. At 
six I called to see her. She was lying on a 
sofa, in a tea-gown of silver tissue looped up 
by some strange moonstones that she always 
wore. She was looking quite lovely. " I am 
so glad to see you," she said ; " I have not 



THE SPHINX WITHOUT A SECRET 85 

been out all day." I stared at her in amaze- 
ment, and pulling the handkerchief out of my 
pocket, handed it to her. "You dropped 
this in Cumnor Street this afternoon, Lady 
Alroy," I said very calmly. She looked at 
me in terror, but made no attempt to take 
the handkerchief. "What were you doing 
there ? " I asked. " What right have you to 
question me ? " she answered. " The right of 
a man who loves you," I replied ; " I came 
here to ask you to be my wife." She hid 
her face in her hands, and burst into floods 
of tears. " You must tell me," I continued. 
She stood up, and, looking me straigTit in 
the face, said, " Lord Murchison, there is 
nothing to tell you." — "You went to meet 
some one," I cried; "this is your mystery." 
She grew dreadfully white, and said, " I went 
to meet no one." — " Can't you tell the truth?" 
I exclaimed. " I have told it," she replied. 
I was mad, frantic; I don't know what I 
said, but I said terrible things to her. Finally 
I rushed out of the house. She wrote 
me a letter the next day ; I sent it back un- 
opened, and started for Norway with Alan 
Colville. After a month I came back, and 



86 THE SPHINX WITHOUT A SECRET 

the first thing I saw in the Morning Post 
was the death of Lady Aboy. She had 
caught a chill at the Opera, and had died 
in five days of congestion of the lungs. I 
shut myself up and saw no one. I had loved 
her so much, I had loved her so madly. 
Good God ! how I had loved that woman ! ' 

* You went to the street, to the house in 
it ? ' I said. 

* Yes,' he answered. 

*One day I went to Cumnor Street. I 
could not help it ; I was tortured with doubt. 
I knocked at the door, and a respectable- 
looking woman opened it to me. I asked 
her if she had any rooms to let. " Well, sir," 
she replied, " the drawing-rooms are supposed 
to be let ; but I have not seen the lady for 
three months, and as rent is owing on them, 
you can have them." — " Is this the lady ? " I 
said, showing the photograph. " That's her, 
sure enough," she exclaimed; "and when is 
she coming back, sir ? " — " The lady is dead," 
I replied. " Oh, sir, I hope not ! " said the 
woman ; " she was my best lodger. She paid 
me three guineas a week merely to sit in my 
drawing-rooms now and then." — "She met 



THE SPHINX WITHOUT A SECRET 87 

some one here?" I said; but the woman 
assured me that it was not so, that she always 
came alone, and saw no one. "What on 
earth did she do here?*' I cried. "She 
simply sat in the drawing-room, sir, reading 
books, and sometimes had tea," the woman 
answered. I did not know what to say, so I 
gave her a sovereign and went away. Now, 
what do you think it all meant ? You don't 
believe the woman was telling the truth ? ' 

* I do.' 

' Then why did Lady Alroy go there ? ' 
*My dear Gerald,' I answered, *Lady 
Alroy was simply a woman with a mania for 
mystery. She took these rooms for the 
pleasure of going there with her veil down, 
and imagining she was a heroine. She had 
a passion for secrecy, but she herself was 
merely a Sphinx without a secret.' 

* Do you really think so ? ' 

* I am sure of it,' I repHed. 

He took out the morocco case, opened it, 
and looked at the photograph. * I wonder ? ' 
he said at last. 



The canterville ghost 



A Hylo-Idealistic 
Romance 



I 




HEN Mr. Hiram B. Otis, the 

American Minister, bought 

h^\rJ\/ Canterville Chase, every one 

I^P^ V told him he was doing a very 

fooHsh thing, as there was no 
doubt at all that the place was haunted. 
Indeed, Lord Canterville himself, who was a 
man of the most punctilious honour, had felt 
it his duty to mention the fact to Mr. Otis 
when they came to discuss terms. 

* We have not cared to live in the place 
ourselves,' said Lord Canterville, * since my 
grand-aunt, the Dowager Duchess of Bolton, 
was frightened into a fit, from which she 
never really recovered, by two skeleton hands 
being placed on her shoulders as she was 
dressing for dinner, and I feel bound to tell 
you, Mr. Otis, that the ghost has been seen 



92 THE CANTERVILLE GHOgT 

by several living members of my family, as 
well as by the rector of the parish, the Rev. 
Augustus Dampier, who is a Fellow of King's 
College, Cambridge. After the unfortunate 
accident to the Duchess, none of our younger 
servants would stay with us, and Lady Canter- 
ville often got very little sleep at night, in 
consequence of the mysterious noises 
that came from the corridor and the 
library.' 

*My Lord,' answered the Minister, *I 
will take the furniture and the ghost at a 
valuation. I come from a modern country, 
where we have everything that money can 
buy; and with all our spry young fellows 
painting the Old World red, and carrying off 
your best actors and prima-donnas, I reckon 
that if there were such a thing as a ghost in 
Europe, we'd have it at home in a very short 
time in one of our public museums, or on 
the road as a show.' 

*I fear that the ghost exists,' said Lord 
Canterville, smiling, 'though it may have 
resisted the overtures of your enterprising 
impresarios. It has been well known for 
three centuries, since 1584 in fact, and 



THE CANTER VI LLE GHOST 93 

always makes its appearance before the death 
of any member of our family.' 

* Well, so does the family doctor for that 
matter, Lord Canterville. But there is no 
such thing, sir, as a ghost, and I guess the 
laws of Nature are not going to be suspended 
for the British aristocracy.' 

* You are certainly very natural in America,' 
answered Lord Canterville, who did not quite 
understand Mr. Otis's last observation, * and 
if you don't mind a ghost in the house, it is 
all right Only you must remember I warned 
you.' 

A few weeks after this, the purchase was 
concluded, and at the close of the season the 
Minister and his family went down to Canter- 
ville Chase. Mrs. Otis, who, as Miss Lucretia 
R. Tappan, of West 53d Street, had been a 
celebrated New York belle, was now a very 
handsome, middle-aged woman, with fine 
eyes, and a superb profile. Many American 
ladies on leaving their native land adopt an 
appearance of chronic ill -health, under the 
impression, that it is a form of European re- 
finement, but Mrs. Otis had never fallen into 
this error. She had a magnificent constitu- 



94 THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 

tion, and a really wonderful amount of animal 
spirits. Indeed, in many respects, she was 
quite English, and was an excellent example 
of the fact that we have really everything in 
common with America nowadays, except, of 
course, language. Her eldest son, christened 
Washington by his parents in a moment of 
patriotism, which he never ceased to regret, 
was a fair-haired, rather good-looking young 
man, who had qualified himself for American 
diplomacy by leading the German at the 
Newport Casino for three successive seasons, 
and even in London was well known as an 
excellent dancer. Gardenias and the peerage 
were his only weaknesses. • Otherwise he was 
extremely sensible. Miss Virginia E. Otis 
was a little girl of fifteen, lithe and lovely as 
a fawn, and with a fine freedom in her large 
blue eyes. She was a wonderful amazon, 
and had once raced old Lord Bilton on her 
pony twice round the park, winning by a 
length and a half, just in front of the Achilles 
statue, to the huge delight of the young 
Duke of Cheshire, who proposed for her on 
the spot, and was sent back to Eton that 
very night by his guardians, in floods of tears. 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 95 

After Virginia came the twins, who were 
usually called *The Stars and Stripes/ as 
they were always getting swished. They 
were delightful boys, and with the exception 
of the worthy Minister the only true republi- 
cans of the family. 

As Canterville Chase is seven miles from 
Ascot, the nearest railway station, Mr. Otis 
had telegraphed for a waggonette to meet 
them, and they started on their drive in high 
spirits. It was a lovely July evening, and 
the air was delicate with the scent of the 
pinewoods. Now and then they heard a 
wood pigeon brooding over its own sweet 
voice, or saw, deep in the rustling fern, the 
burnished breast of the pheasant. Little 
squirrels peered at them from the beech- 
trees as they went by, and the rabbits scudded 
away through the brushwood and over the 
mossy knolls, with their white tails in the 
air. As they entered the avenue of 
•Canterville Chase, however, the sky be- 
came suddenly overcast with clouds, a 
curious stillness seemed to hold the atmo- 
sphere, a great flight of rooks passed 
silently over their heads, and, before they 



96 THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 

reached the house, some big drops of rain 
had fallen. 

Standing on the steps to receive them was 
an old woman, neatly dressed in black silk, 
with a white cap and apron. This was Mrs. 
Umney, the housekeeper, whom Mrs. Otis, 
at Lady Canterville's earnest request, had 
consented to keep on in her former position. 
She made them each a low curtsey as they 
alighted, and said in a quaint, old-fashioned 
manner, ' I bid you welcome to Canterville 
Chase.' Following her, they passed through 
the fine Tudor hall into the library, a long, 
low room, panelled in black oak, at the end 
of which was a large stained-glass window. 
Here they found tea laid out for them, and, 
after taking off their wraps, they sat down 
and began to look round, while Mrs. Umney 
waited on them. 

Suddenly Mrs. Otis caught sight of a dull 
red stain on the floor just by the fireplace 
and, quite unconscious of what it really 
signified, said to Mrs. Umney, * I am afraid 
something has been spilt there.' 

* Yes, madam,' replied the old housekeeper 
inalowvoice, * blood has been spilt on that spot.' 



THE CANTER VILLE GHOST 97 

* How horrid,' cried Mrs. Otis; * I don't at 
all care for blood -stains in a sitting-room. 
It must be removed at once.' 

The old woman smiled, and answered in 
the same low, mysterious voice, *It is the 
blood of Lady Eleanore de Canterville, who 
was murdered on that very spot by her own 
husband, Sir Simon de Canterville, in 1575. 
Sir Simon survived her nine years, and dis- 
appeared suddenly under very mysterious 
circumstances. His body has never been 
discovered, but his guilty spirit still haunts 
the Chase. The blood -stain has been 
much admired by tourists and others, and 
cannot be removed.' 

* That is all nonsense,' cried Washington 
Otis ; * Pinkerton's Champion Stain Remover 
and Paragon Detergent will clean it up in no 
time,' and before the terrified housekeeper 
could interfere he had fallen upon his knees, 
and was rapidly scouring the floor with a 
small stick of what looked like a black 
cosmetic. In a few moments no trace of 
the blood-stain could be seen. 

*I knew Pinkerton would do it,' he 
exclaimed triumphantly, as he looked round 

H 



98 THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 

at his admiring family; but no sooner had he 
said these words than a terrible flash of 
lightning lit up the sombre room, a fearful 
peal of thunder made them all start to their 
feet, and Mrs. Umney fainted. 

* What a monstrous climate \ ' said the 
American Minister calmly, as he lit a long 
cheroot. * I guess the old country is so over- 
populated that they have not enough decent 
weather for everybody. I have always been 
of opinion that emigration is the only thing 
for England.' 

* My dear Hiram,' cried Mrs. Otis, * what 
can we do with a woman who faints ? ' 

* Charge it to her like breakages,' answered 
the Minister ; * she won't faint after that ; ' 
and in a few moments Mrs. Umney certainly 
came to. There was no doubt, however, 
that she was extremely upset, and she sternly 
warned Mr. Otis to beware of some trouble 
coming to the house. 

* I have seen things with my own eyes, sir,' 
she said, *that would make any Christian's 
hair stand on end, and many and many a 
night I have not closed my eyes in sleep for 
the awful things that are done here.' Mr. 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 99 

Otis, however, and his wife warmly assured 
the honest soul that they were not afraid of 
ghosts, and, after invoking the blessings of 
Providence on her new master and mistress, 
and making arrangements for an increase of 
salary, the old housekeeper tottered off to 
her own room. 



II 



The storm raged fiercely all that night, but 
nothing of particular note occurred. The 
next morning, however, when they came down 
to breakfast, they fpund the terrible stain of 
blood once again on the floor. * I don't think 
it can be the fault of the Paragon Detergent,' 
said Washington, *for I have tried it with 
everything. It must be the ghost.' He ac- 
cordingly rubbed out the stain a second time, 
but the second morning it appeared again. 
The third morning also it was there, though 
the library had been locked up at night by 
Mr. Otis himself, and the key carried upstairs. 
The whole family were now quite interested ; 
Mr. Otis began to suspect that he had been 
too dogmatic in his denial of the existence 
of ghosts, Mrs. Otis expressed her intention of 
joining the Psychical Society, and Washington 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST lOI 

prepared a long letter to Messrs. Myers and 
Podmore on the subject of the Permanence of 
Sanguineous Stains when connected with 
Crime. That night all doubts about the 
objective existence of phantasmata were 
removed for ever. 

The day had been warm and sunny ; and, 
in the cool of the evening, the whole family 
went out to drive. They did not return 
home till nine o'clock, when they had a light 
supper. The conversation in no way turned 
upon ghosts, so there were not even those 
primary conditions of receptive expectation 
which so often precede the presentation of 
psychical phenomena. The subjects dis- 
cussed, as I have since learned from Mr. 
Otis, were merely such as form the ordinary 
conversation of cultured Americans of the 
better class, such as the immense superiority 
of Miss Fanny Davenport over Sara Bernhardt 
as an actress; the difficulty of obtaining 
green corn, buckwheat cakes, and hominy, 
even in the best English houses ; the import- 
ance of Boston in the development of the 
world-soul; the advantages of the baggage 
check system in railway travelling ; and the 



102 THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 

sweetness of the New York accent as com- 
pared to the London drawL No mention 
at all was made of the supernatural, nor was 
Sir Simon de Canterville alluded to in any 
way. At eleven o'clock the family retired, 
and by half- past all the lights were out. 
Some time after, Mr. Otis was awakened by 
a curious noise in the corridor, outside his 
room. It sounded like the clank of metal, 
and seemed to be coming nearer every 
moment. He got up at once, struck a 
match, and looked at the time. It was 
exactly one o'clock. He was quite calm, 
and felt his pulse, which was not at all 
feverish. The strange noise still continued, 
and with it he heard distinctly the sound of 
footsteps. He put on his slippers, took a 
small oblong phial out of his dressing-case, 
and opened the door. Right in front of him 
he saw, in the wan moonlight, an old man of 
terrible aspect. His eyes were as red burn- 
ing coals ; long grey hair fell over his 
shoulders in matted coils; his garments, 
which were of antique cut, were soiled and 
ragged, and from his wrists and ankles hung 
heavy manacles and rusty gyves. 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST I03 

' My dear sir,' said Mr. Otis, ' I really 
must insist on your oiling those chains, and 
have brought you for that purpose a small 
bottle of the Tammany Rising Sun Lubricator. 
It is said to be completely efficacious upon 
one application, and there are several testi- 
monials to that effect on the wrapper from 
some of our most eminent native divines. 
I shall leave it here for you by the bedroom 
candles, and will be happy to supply you 
with more should you require it.' With 
these words the United States Minister laid 
the bottle down on a marble table, and, 
closing his door, retired to rest. 

For a moment the Canterville ghost stood 
quite motionless in natural indignation ; then, 
dashing the bottle violently upon the polished 
floor, he fled down the corridor, uttering 
hollow groans, and emitting a ghastly green 
light. Just, however, as he reached the top 
of the great oak staircase, a door was flung 
open, two little white-robed figures appeared, 
and a large pillow whizzed past his head ! 
There was evidently no time to be lost, so, 
hastily adopting the Fourth Dimension of 
Space as a means of escape, he vanished 



104 THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 

through the wainscoting, and the house 
became quite quiet. 

On reaching a small secret chamber in 
the left wing, he leaned up against a moon- 
beam to recover his breath, and began to try 
and realise his position. Never, in a brilliant 
and uninterrupted career of three hundred 
years, had he been so grossly insulted. He 
thought of the Dowager Duchess, whom he 
had frightened into a fit as she stood before 
the glass in her lace and diamonds ; of the 
four housemaids, who had gone off into 
hysterics when he merely grinned at them 
through the curtains of one of the spare 
bedrooms ; of the rector of the parish, whose 
candle he had blown out as he was coming 
late one night from the library, and who had 
been under the care of Sir William Gull ever 
since, a perfect martyr to nervous disorders ; 
and of old Madame de Tremouillac, who, 
having wakened up one morning early and 
seen a skeleton seated in an armchair by 
the fire reading her diary, had been confined 
to her bed . for six weeks with an attack of 
brain fever, and, on her recovery, had become 
reconciled to the Church, and broken off her 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST I05 

connection with that notorious sceptic Mon- 
sieur de Voltaire. He remembered the 
terrible night when the wicked Lord Canter- 
ville was found choking in his dressing-room, 
with the knave of diamonds half-way down 
his throat, and confessed, just before he died, 
that he had cheated Charles 'James Fox out 
of ;^5 0,000 at Crockford's by means of that 
very card, and swore that the ghost had 
made him swallow it. All his great achieve- 
ments came back to him again, from the 
butler who had shot himself in the pantry 
because he had seen a green hand tapping 
at the window pane, to the beautiful Lady 
Stutfield, who was always obliged to wear a 
black velvet band round her throat to hide 
the mark of five fingers burnt upon her white 
skin, and who drowned herself at last in the 
carp-pond at the end of the King's Walk. 
With the enthusiastic egotism of the true 
artist he went over his most celebrated 
performances, and smiled bitterly to himself 
as he recalled to mind his last appearance as 
'Red Reuben, or the Strangled Babe,' his 
debut as * Gaunt Gibeon, the Blood-sucker of 
Bexley Moor,' and the furore he had excited. 



I06 THE CANTER VILLE GHOST 

one lovely June evening by merely playing 
ninepins with his own bones upon the lawn- 
tennis ground. And after all this, some 
wretched modern Americans were to come 
and offer him the Rising Sun Lubricator, 
and throw pillows at his head ! It was 
quite unbearable. Besides, no ghost in 
history had ever been treated in this manner. 
Accordingly, he determined to have venge- 
ance, and remained till daylight in an atti- 
tude of deep thought. 



Ill 



The next morning, when the Otis family met 
at breakfast, they discussed the ghost at some 
length. The United States Minister was 
naturally a little annoyed to find that his 
present had not been accepted. * I have no 
wish,' he said, * to do the ghost any personal 
injury, and I must say that, considering the 
length of time he has been in the house, I 
don't think it is at all polite to throw pillows 
at him ' — a very just remark, at which, I am 
sorry to say, the twins burst into shouts of 
laughter. *Upon the other hand,* he con- 
tinued, *if he really declines to use the 
Rising Sun Lubricator, we shall have to take 
his chains from him. It would be quite 
impossible to sleep, with such a noise going 
on outside the bedrooms.' 

For the rest of the week, however, they 



I08 THE CANTER VILLE GHOST 

were undisturbed, the only thing that excited 
any attention being the continual renewal of 
the blood -stain on the library floor. This 
certainly was very strange, as the door was 
always locked at night by Mr. Otis, and the 
windows kept closely barred. The chameleon- 
like colour, also, of the stain excited a good 
deal of comment. Some mornings it was a 
dull (almost Indian) red, then it would be ver- 
milion, then a rich purple, and once when they 
came down for family prayers, according to the 
simple rites of the Free American Reformed 
Episcopalian Church, they found it a bright 
emerald-green. These kaleidoscopic changes 
naturally amused the party very much, and 
bets on the subject were freely made . every 
evening. The only person who did not 
enter into the joke was little Virginia, who, for 
some unexplained reason, was always a good 
deal distressed at the sight of the blood-stain, 
and very nearly cried the morning it was 
emerald-green. 

The second appearance of the ghost was 
on Sunday night. Shortly after they had 
gone to bed they were suddenly alarmed by 
a fearful crash in the hall. Rushing down- 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST IO9 

Stairs, they found that a large suit of old 
armour had become detached from its stand, 
and had fallen on the stone floor, while, 
seated in a high -backed chair, was the 
Canterville ghost, rubbing his knees with an 
expression of acute agony on his face. The 
twins, having brought their pea-shooters with 
them, at once discharged two pellets on him, 
with that accuracy of aim which can only be 
attained by long and careful practice on a 
writing-master, while the United States 
Minister covered him with his revolver, and 
called upon him, in accordance with Cali- 
fornian etiquette, to hold up his hands ! 
The ghost started up with a wild shriek of 
rage, and swept through them like a mist, 
extinguishing Washington Otis's candle as he 
passed, and so leaving them all in total 
darkness. On reaching the top of the stair- 
case he recovered himself, and determined 
to give his celebrated peal of demoniac 
laughter. This he had on more than one 
occasion found extremely useful. It was 
said to have turned Lord Raker's wig grey in 
a single night, and had certainly made three 
of Lady Canterville's French governesses 



no THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 

give warning before their month was up. 
He accordingly laughed his most horrible 
laugh, till the old vaulted roof rang and rang 
again, but hardly had the fearful echo died 
away when a door opened, and Mrs. Otis 
came out in a light blue dressing-gown. * I 
am afraid you are far from well,' she said, 
*and have brought you a bottle of Dr. 
Dobeirs tincture. If it is indigestion, you 
will find it a most excellent remedy.' The 
ghost glared at her in fury, and began at 
once to make preparations for turning himself 
into a large black dog, an accomplishment 
for which he was justly renowned, and to 
which the family doctor always attributed 
the permanent idiocy of Lord Canterville's 
uncle, the Hon. Thomas Horton. The 
sound of approaching footsteps, however, 
made him hesitate in his fell purpose, so he 
contented himself with becoming faintly 
phosphorescent, and vanished with a deep 
churchyard groan, just as the twins had come 
up to him. 

On reaching his room he entirely broke 
down, and became a prey to the most violent 
agitation. The vulgarity of the twins, and 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST III 

the gross materialism of Mrs. Otis, were 
naturally extremely annoying, but what really 
distressed him most was, that he had been 
unable to wear the suit of mail. He had 
hoped that even modem Americans would be 
thrilled by the sight of a Spectre In Armour, 
if for no more sensible reason, at least out of 
respect for their national poet Longfellow, 
over whose graceful and attractive poetry he 
himself had whiled away many a weary hour 
when the Cantervilles were up in town. 
Besides, it was his own suit. He had worn it 
with great success at the Kenilworth tourna- 
ment, and had been highly complimented on 
it by no less a person than the Virgin Queen 
herself. Yet when he had put it on, he had 
been completely overpowered by the weight of 
the huge breastplate and steel casque, and had 
fallen heavily on the stone pavement, barking 
both his knees severely, and bruising the 
knuckles of his right hand. 

For some days after this he was extremely 
ill, and hardly stirred out of his room at all, 
except to keep the blood- stain in proper 
repair. However, by taking great care of 
himself, he recovered, and resolved to make 



112 THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 

a third attempt to frighten the United States 
Minister and his family. He selected Friday, 
the 1 7 th of August, for his appearance, and 
spent most of that day in looking over his 
wardrobe, ultimately deciding in favour of a 
large slouched hat with a red feather, a 
winding-sheet frilled at the wrists and neck, 
and a rusty dagger. Towards evening a 
violent storm of rain came on, and the wind 
was so high that all the windows and doors in 
the old house shook and rattled. In fact, it 
was just such weather as he loved. His plan 
of action was this. He was to make his way 
quietly to Washington Otis's room, gibber at 
him from the foot of the bed, and stab 
himself three times in the throat to the 
sound of low music. He bore Washington 
a special grudge, being quite aware that it 
was he who was in the habit of removing the 
famous Canterville blood-stain, by means of 
Pinkerton's Paragon Detergent Having re- 
duced the reckless and foolhardy youth to a 
condition of abject terror, he was then to 
proceed to the room occupied by the United 
States Minister and his wife, and there to 
place a clammy hand on Mrs. Otis's forehead, 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST II3 

while he hissed into her trembling husband's 
ear the awful secrets of the charnel-house. 
With regard to little Virginia, he had not 
quite made up his mind. She had never 
insulted him in any way, and was pretty and 
gentle. A few hollow groans from the 
wardrobe, he thought, would be more than 
sufficient, or, if that failed to wake her, he 
might grabble at the counterpane with palsy- 
twitching fingers. As for the twins, he was 
quite determined to teach them a lesson. 
The first thing to be done was, of course, to 
sit upon their chests, so as to produce the 
stifling sensation of nightmare. Then, as 
their beds were quite close to each other, to 
stand between them in the form of a green, 
icy-cold corpse, till they became paralysed with 
fear, and finally, to throw off the winding- 
sheet, and crawl round the room, with white, 
bleached bones and one rolling eyeball, in the 
character of *Dumb Daniel, or the Suicide's 
Skeleton,' a rdle in which he had on more 
than one occasion produced a great effect, 
and which he considered quite equal to his 
famous part of * Martin the Maniac, or the 
Masked Mystery.' 



114 THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 

At half-past ten he heard the family going 
to bed. For some time he was disturbed 
by wild shrieks of laughter from the twins, 
who, with the light-hearted gaiety of school- 
boys, were evidently amusing themselves 
before they retired to rest, but at a quarter 
past eleven all was still, and, as midnight 
sounded, he sallied forth. The owl beat 
against the window panes, the raven croaked 
from the old yew-tree, and the wind wandered 
moaning round the house like a lost soul ; 
but the Otis family slept unconscious of their 
doom, and high above the rain and storm 
he could hear the steady snoring of the 
Minister for the United States. He stepped 
stealthily out of the wainscoting, with an evil 
smile on his cruel, wrinkled mouth, and the 
moon hid her face in a cloud as he stole past 
the great oriel window, where his own arms 
and those of his murdered wife were blazoned 
in azure and gold. On and on he glided, 
like an evil shadow, the very darkness seem- 
ing to loathe him as he passed. Once 
he thought he heard something call, and 
stopped; but it was only the baying of a 
dog from the Red Farm, and he went on, 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST II5 

muttering strange sixteenth -century curses, 
and ever and anon brandishing the rusty 
dagger in the midnight air. Finally he 
reached the corner of the passage that led to 
luckless Washington's room. For a moment 
he paused there, the wind blowing his long 
grey locks about his head, and twisting into 
grotesque and fantastic folds the nameless 
horror of the dead man's shroud. Then the 
clock struck the quarter, and he felt the time 
was come. He chuckled to himself, and 
turned the corner; but no sooner had he 
done so, than, with a piteous wail of terror, 
he fell back, and hid his blanched face in 
his long, bony hands. Right in front of him 
was standing a horrible spectre, motionless 
as a carven image, and monstrous as a 
madman's dream ! Its head was bald and 
burnished; its face round, and fat, and 
white ; and hideous laughter seemed* to have 
writhed its features into an eternal grin. 
From the eyes streamed rays of scarlet light, 
the mouth was a wide well of fire, and a 
hideous garment, like to his own, swathed 
with its silent snows the Titan form. On its 
breast was a placard with strange writing in 



Il6 THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 

antique characters, some scroll of shame it 
seemed, some record of wild sins, some 
awful calendar of crime, and, with its right 
hand, it bore aloft a falchion of gleaming 
steel. 

Never having seen a ghost before, he 
naturally was terribly frightened, and, after a 
second hasty glance at the awful phantom, 
he fled back to his room, tripping up in his 
long winding sheet as he sped down the 
corridor, and finally dropping the rusty 
dagger into the Minister's jack-boots, where 
it was found in the morning by the butler. 
Once in the privacy of his own apartment, 
he flung himself down on a small pallet-bed, 
and hid his face under the clothes. After a 
time, however, the brave old Canterville spirit 
asserted itself, and he determined to go and 
speak to the other ghost as soon as it was 
daylight. Accordingly, just as the dawn 
was touching the hills with silver, he re- 
turned towards the spot where he had first 
laid eyes on the grisly phantom, feeling that, 
after all, two ghosts were better than one, 
and that, by the aid of his new friend, he 
might safely grapple with the twins. On 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST II7 

reaching the spot, however, a terrible sight 
met his gaze. Something had evidently 
happened to the spectre, for the light had 
entirely faded from its hollow eyes, the 
gleaming falchion had fallen from its hand, 
and it was leaning up against the wall in a 
strained and uncomfortable attitude. He 
rushed forward and seized it in his arms, 
when, to his horror, the head slipped off and 
rolled on the floor, the body assumed a 
recumbent posture, and he found himself 
clasping a white dimity bedcurtain, with a 
sweeping -brush, a kitchen cleaver, and a 
hollow turnip lying at his feet ! Unable to 
understand this curious transformation, he 
clutched the placard with feverish haste, and 
there, in the grey morning light, he read 
these fearful words : — 



$e SDnTie €nte anti SDrigtnale ^poolt. 
IBetDare of $e 3[mitationeis. 
Ztl ot1)ttfi are Counterfeite. 



Il8 THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 

The whole thing flashed across him. He 
had been tricked, foiled, and outwitted ! 
The old Canterville look came into his eyes ; 
he ground his toothless gums together ; and, 
raising his withered hands high above his 
head, swore, according to the picturesque 
phraseology of the antique school, that when 
Chanticleer had sounded twice his merry 
horn, deeds of blood would be wrought, and 
Murder walk abroad with silent feet 

Hardly had he finished this awful oath 
when, from the red-tiled roof of a distant 
homestead, a cock crew. He laughed a 
long, low, bitter laugh, and waited. Hour 
after hour he waited, but the cock, for some 
strange reason, did not crow again. Finally, 
at half-past seven, the arrival of the house- 
maids made him give up his fearful vigil, and 
he stalked back to his room, thinking of his 
vain oath and baffled purpose. There he 
consulted several books of ancient chivalry, 
of which he was exceedingly fond, and found 
that, on every occasion on which this oath 
had been used. Chanticleer had always 
crowed a second time. * Perdition seize the 
naughty fowl,' he muttered, * I have seen the 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 1 19 

day when, with my stout spear, I would have 
run him through the gorge, and made him 
crow for me an 'twere in death ! ' He then 
retired to a comfortable lead coffin, and 
stayed there till evening. 



IV 



The next day the ghost was very weak and 
tired. The terrible excitement of the last 
four weeks was beginning to have its effect. 
His nerves were completely shattered, and 
he started at the slightest noise. For five 
days he kept his room, and at last made up 
his mind to give up the point of the blood- 
stain on the library floor. If the Otis family 
did not want it, they clearly did not deserve 
it. They were evidently people on a. low, 
material plane of existence, and quite incap- 
able of appreciating the symbolic value of 
sensuous phenomena. The question of 
phantasmic apparitions, and the development 
of astral bodies, was of course quite a different 
matter, and really not under his control. It 
was his solemn duty to appear in the corridor 
once a week, and to gibber from the large 



THE CANTERVlLLE GHOST 121 

oriel window on the first and third Wednes- 
days in every month, and he did not see 
how he could honourably escape from his 
obligations. It is quite true that his life 
had been very evil, but, upon the other 
hand, he was most conscientious in all things 
connected with the supernatural. For the 
next three Saturdays, accordingly, he tra- 
versed the corridor as usual between mid- 
night and three o'clock, taking every possible 
precaution against being either heard or seen. 
He removed his boots, trod as lightly as 
possible on the old worm-eaten boards, wore 
a large black velvet cloak, and was careful 
to use the Rising Sun Lubricator for oiling 
his chains. I am bound to acknowledge 
that it was with a good deal of difficulty 
that Jie brought himself to adopt this last 
mode of protection. However, one night, 
while the family were at dinner, he slipped 
into Mr. Otis's bedroom and carried off the 
bottle. He felt a little humiliated at first, 
but afterwards was sensible enough to see 
that there was a great deal to be said for the 
invention, and, to a certain degree, it served 
his purpose. Still, in spite of everything, 



122 THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 

he was not left unmolested. Strings were 
continually being stretched across the cor- 
ridor, over which he tripped in the dark, and 
on one occasion, while dressed for the part 
of * Black Isaac, or the Huntsman of Hogley 
Woods,' he met with a severe fall, through 
treading on a butter -slide, which the twins 
had constructed from the entrance of the 
Tapestry Chamber to the top of the oak 
staircase. This last insult so enraged him, 
that he resolved to make one final effort to 
assert his dignity and social position, and 
determined to visit the insolent young 
Etonians the next night in his celebrated 
character of 'Reckless Rupert, or the 
Headless Earl.' 

He had not appeared in this disguise for 
more than seventy years : in fact, no^ since 
he had so frightened pretty Lady Barbara 
Modish by means of it, that she suddenly 
broke off her engagement with the present 
Lord Canterville's grandfather, and ran away 
to Gretna Green with handsome Jack Castle- 
town, declaring that nothing in the world 
would induce her to marry into a family 
that allowed such a horrible phantom to 



THE CANTER VILLE GHOST 1 23 

walk Up and down the terrace at twilight. 
Poor Jack was afterwards shot in a duel by 
Lord Canterville on Wandsworth Common, 
and Lady Barbara died of a broken heart at 
Tunbridge Wells before the year was out, so, 
in every way, it had been a great success. 
It was, however, an extremely difficult 
* make-up,' if I may use such a theatrical 
expression in connection with one of the 
greatest mysteries of the supernatural, or, to 
employ a more scientific term, the higher- 
natural world, and it took him fully three 
hours to make his preparations. At last 
everything was ready, and he was very 
pleased with his appearance. The big 
leather riding-boots that went with the dress 
were just a little too large for him, and he 
could only find one of the two horse-pistols, 
but, on the whole, he was quite satisfied, 
and at a quarter past one he glided out of 
the wainscoting and crept down the corridor. 
On reaching the room occupied by the twins, 
which I should mention was called the Blue 
Bed Chamber, on account of the colour of 
its hangings, he found the door just ajar. 
Wishing to make an effective entrance, he 



124 THE CANTER VILLE GHOST 

flung it wide open, when a heavy jug of 
water fell right down on him, wetting him to 
the skin, and just missing his left shoulder 
by a couple of inches. At the same moment 
he heard stifled shrieks of laughter proceed- 
ing from the four-post bed. The shock to 
his nervous system was so great that he fled 
back to his room as hard as he could go, 
and the next day he was laid up with a 
severe cold. The only thing that at all 
consoled him in the whole aflair was the 
fact that he had not brought his head with 
him, for, had he done so, the consequences 
might have been very serious. 

He now gave up all hope of ever frighten- 
ing this rude American family, and contented 
himself, as a rule, with creeping about the 
passages in list slippers, with a thick red 
muffler round his throat for fear of draughts, 
and a small arquebuse, in case he should be 
attacked by the twins. The final blow he 
received occurred on the 1 9th of September. 
He had gone downstairs to the great entrance- 
hall, feeling sure that there, at any rate, he 
would be quite unmolested, and was amusing 
himself by making satirical remarks on the 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 1 25 

large Saroni photographs of the United 
States minister and his wife, which had now 
taken the place of the Canterville family 
pictures. He was simply but neatly clad in 
a long shroud, spotted with churchyard 
mould, had tied up his jaw with a strip of 
yellow linen, and carried a small lantern and 
a sexton's spade. In fact, he was dressed 
for the character of * Jonas the Graveless, 
or the Corpse-Snatcher of Chertsey Barn,' 
one of his most remarkable impersonations, 
and one which the Cantervilles had every 
reason to remember, as it was the real origin 
of their quarrel with their neighbour, Lord 
Rufford. It was about a quarter past two 
o'clock in the morning, and, as far as he 
could ascertain, no one was stirring. As he 
was strolling towards the library, however, 
to see if there were any traces left of the 
blood-stain, suddenly there leaped out on 
him from a dark corner two figures, who 
waved their arms wildly above their heads, 
and shrieked out * BOO 1 ' in his ear. 

Seized with a panic, which, under the 
circumstances, was only natural, he rushed 
for the staircase, but found Washington Otis 



126 THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 

waiting for him there with the big garden- 
syringe ; and being thus hemmed in by his 
enemies on every side, and driven almost to 
bay, he vanished into the great iron stove, 
which, fortunately for him, was not lit, and 
had to make his way home through the flues 
and chimneys, arriving at his own room in a . 
terrible state of dirt, disorder, and despair. 

After this he was not seen again on any 
nocturnal expedition. The twins lay in wait 
for him on several occasions, and strewed 
the passages with nutshells every night to 
the great annoyance of their parents and the 
servants, but it was of no avail. It was 
quite evident that his feelings were so 
wounded that he would not appear. Mr. 
Otis consequently resumed his great work 
on the history of the Democratic Party, on 
which he had been engaged for some years ; 
Mrs. Otis organised a wonderful clam-bake, 
which amazed the whole county; the boys 
took to lacrosse, euchre, poker, and other 
American national games ; and Virginia rode 
about the lanes on her* pony, accompanied 
by the young Duke of Cheshire, who had 
come to spend the last week of his holidays 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 1 27 

at Canterville Chase. It was generally 
assumed that the ghost had gone away, and, 
in fact, Mr. Otis wrote a letter to that effect 
to Lord Canterville, who, in reply, expressed 
his great pleasure at the news,' and sent his 
best congratulations to the Minister's worthy 
wife. 

The Otises, however, were deceived, for 
the ghost was still in the house, and though 
now almost an invalid, was by no means 
ready to let matters rest, particularly as he 
heard that among the guests was the young 
Duke of Cheshire, whose grand-uncle, Lord 
Francis Stilton, had once bet a hundred 
guineas with Colonel Carbury that he would 
play dice with the Canterville ghost, and was 
found the next morning lying on the floor of 
the card -room in such a helpless paralytic 
state, that though he lived on to a great age, 
he was never able to say anything again but 
* Double Sixes.' The story was well known 
at the time, though, of course, out of respect 
to the feelings of the two noble families, 
every attempt was made to hush it up ; and 
a full account of all the circumstances con- 
nected with it will be found in the third 



128 THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 

volume of Lord Tattle's Recollections of the 
Prince Regent and his Friends, The ghost, 
then, was naturally very anxious to show 
that he had not lost his influence over the 
Stiltons, with whom, indeed, he was distantly 
connected, his own first cousin having been 
married en secondes noces to the Sieur de 
Bulkeley, from whom, as every one knows, 
the Dukes of Cheshire are lineally descended. 
Accordingly, he made arrangements for ap- 
pearing to Virginia's little lover in his cele- 
brated impersonation of * The Vampire Monk, 
or, the Bloodless Benedictine,' a performance 
so horrible that when old Lady Startup saw 
it, which she did on one fatal New Year's 
Eve, in the year 1764, she went off into the 
most piercing shrieks, which culminated in 
violent apoplexy, and died in three days, 
after disinheriting the Cantervilles, who were 
her nearest relations, and leaving all her 
money to her London apothecary. At the 
last moment, however, his terror of the twins 
prevented his leaving his room, and the little 
Duke slept in peace under the great feathered 
canopy in the Royal Bedchamber, and 
dreamed of Virginia. 



A FEW days after this, Virginia and her 
curly -haired cavalier went out riding on 
Brockley meadows, where she tore her habit 
so badly in getting through a hedge, that, 
on their return home, she made up her mind 
to go up by the back staircase so as not to 
be seen. As she was running past the 
Tapestry Chamber, the door of which hap- 
pened to be open, she fancied she saw some 
one inside, and thinking it was her mother's 
maid, who sometimes used to bring her work 
there, looked in to ask her to mend her habit. 
To her immense surprise, however, it was 
the Canterville Ghost himself! He was 
sitting by the window, watching the ruined 
gold of the yellowing trees fly through the 
air, and the red leaves dancing madly down 
the long avenue. His head was leaning on 



130 THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 

his hand, and his whole attitude was one of 
extreme depression. Indeed, so forlorn, and 
so much out of repair did he look, that little 
Virginia, whose first idea had been to run 
away and lock herself in her room, was filled 
with pity, and determined to try and comfort 
him. So light was her footfall, and so deep 
his melancholy, that he was not aware of her 
presence till she spoke to him. 

* I am so sorry for you,' she said, * but my 
brothers are going back to Eton to-morrow, 
and then, if you behave yourself, no one will 
annoy you.* 

* It is absurd asking me to behave myself,' 
he answered, looking round in astonishment 
at the pretty little girl who had ventured to 
address him, * quite absurd. I must rattle 
my chains, and groan through keyholes, 
and walk about at night, if that is what 
you mean. It is my only reason for exist- 
ing.' 

*It is no reason at all for existing, and 
you know you have been very wicked. Mrs. 
Umney told us, the first day we arrived here, 
that you had killed your wife.' 

*Well, I quite admit it,' said the Ghost 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST I31 

petulantly, ' but it was a purely family matter, 
and concerned no one else/ 

*It is very wrong to kill any one,' said 
Virginia, who at times had a sweet Puritan 
gravity, caught from some old New England 
ancestor. 

* Oh, I hate the cheap severity of abstract 
ethics ! My wife was very plain, never had 
my ruffs properly starched, and knew nothing 
about cookery. Why, there was a buck I 
had shot in Hogley Woods, a magnificent 
pricket, and do you know how she had it 
sent up to table ? However, it is no matter 
now, for it is all over, and I don't think it 
was very nice of her brothers to starve me 
to death, though I did kill her.' 

'Starve you to death? Oh, Mr. Ghost, 
I mean Sir Simon, are you hungry ? I have 
a sandwich in my case. Would you like it ? ' 

* No, thank you, I never eat anything now ; 
but it is very kind of you, all the same, and 
you are much nicer than the rest of your 
horrid, rude, vulgar, dishonest family.' 

* Stop ! ' cried Virginia stamping her foot, 
*it is you who are rude, and horrid, and 
vulgar, and as for dishonesty, you know you 



132 THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 

Stole the paints out of my box to try and 
furbish up that ridiculous blood-stain in the 
library. First you took all my reds, includ- 
ing the vermilion, and I couldn't do any 
more sunsets, then you took the emerald- 
green and the chrome-yellow, and finally I 
had nothing left but indigo and Chinese 
white, and could only do moonlight scenes, 
which are always depressing to look at, and 
not at all easy to paint I never told on 
you, though I was very much annoyed, and 
it was most ridiculous, the whole thing ; for 
who ever heard of emerald-green blood ? ' 

* Well, really,' said the Ghost, rather meekly, 
*what was I to do? It is a very difficult 
thing to get real blood nowadays, and, as 
your brother began it all with his Paragon 
Detergent, I certainly saw no reason why I 
should not have your paints. As for colour, 
that is always a matter of taste : the Canter- 
villes have blue blood, for instance, the very 
bluest in England ; but I know you Ameri- 
cans don't care for things of this kind.' 

* You know nothing about it, and the best 
thing you can do is to emigrate and improve 
your mind. My father will be only too happy 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 1 33 

to give you a free passage, and though there 
is a heavy duty on spirits of every kind, there 
will be no difficulty about the Custom House, 
as the officers are all Democrats. Once in 
New York, you are sure to be a great success. 
I know lots of people there who would give 
a hundred thousand dollars to have a grand- 
father, and much more than that to have a 
family ghost.' 

* I don't think I should like America.' 

* I suppose because we have no ruins and 
no curiosities,' said Virginia satirically. 

* No ruins ! no curiosities ! ' answered the 
Ghost ; * you have your navy and your 
manners.' 

*Good evening; I will go and ask papa 
to get the twins an extra week's holiday.' 

* Please don't go, Miss Virginia,' he cried ; 
* I am so lonely and so unhappy, and I really 
don't know what to do. I want to go to 
sleep and I cannot' 

* That's quite absurd ! You have merely 
to go to bed and blow out the candle. It 
is very difficult sometimes to keep awake, 
especially at church, but there is no difficulty 
at all about sleeping. Why, even babies 



134 THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 

know how to do that, and they are not very 
clever.' 

* I have not slept for three hundred years/ 
he said sadly, and Virginia's beautiful blue 
eyes opened in wonder ; * for three hundred 
years I have not slept, and I am so tired.' 

Virginia grew quite grave, and her little 
lips trembled like rose-leaves. She came 
towards him, and kneeling down at his side, 
looked up into his old withered face. 

' Poor, poor Ghost,' she murmured ; * have 
you no place where you can sleep ? ' 

'Far away beyond the pinewoods,' he 
answered, in a low dreamy voice, * there is a 
little garden. There the grass grows long 
and deep, there are the great white stars of 
the hemlock flower, there the nightingale 
sings all night long. All night Jpng he sings, 
and the cold, crystal moon looks down, and 
the yew-tree spreads out its giant arms over 
the sleepers.' 

Virginia's eyes grew dim with tears, and 
she hid her face in her hands. 

*You mean the Garden of Death,' she 
whispered. 

* Yes, Death. Death must be so beautiful 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 1 35 

To lie in the soft brown earth, with the grasses 
waving above one's head, and Usten to silence. 
To have no yesterday, and no to-morrow. To 
forget time, to forgive life, to be at peace. 
You can help me. You can open for me the 
portals of Death's house, for Love is always 
with you, and Love is stronger than Death is.' 

Virginia trembled, a cold shudder ran 
through her, and for a few moments there 
was silence! She felt as if she was in a 
terrible dream. 

Then the Ghost spoke again, and his voice 
sounded like the sighing of the wind. 

* Have you ever read the old prophecy on 
the library window ? ' 

*0h, often,' cried the little girl, looking 
up ; * I know it quite well. It is painted in 
curious black letters, and is difficult to read. 
Th^e are only six lines : 

< ^l^ett a goloen gtrl can tutn 
Prater from out t^e lips of ain, 
Wi^tn tf)e iiarren almotiti liearis, 
atiQ a UttU c^iVQ giteis atua? its teats, 
Sfjen sl^all all tl^e l^ouse tt still 
9inti peace come to Catitettille. 

But I don't know what they mean.' 



136 THE CANTER VILLE GHOST 

*They mean,' he said sadly, *that you 
must weep with me for my sins, because I 
have no tears, and pray with me for my soul, 
because I have no faith, and then, if you 
have always been sweet, and good, and 
gentle, the Angel of Death will have mercy 
on me. You will see fearful shapes in dark- 
ness, and wicked voices will whisper in your 
ear, but they will not harm you, for against 
the purity of a little child the powers of Hell 
cannot prevail.' 

Virginia made no answer, and the Ghost 
wrung his hands in wild despair as he looked 
down at her bowed golden head. Suddenly 
she stood up, very pale, and with a strange 
light in her eyes. * I am not afraid,' she said 
firmly, *and I will ask the Angel to have 
mercy on you.' 

He rose from his seat with a faint cry of 
joy, and taking her hand bent over it with 
old-fashioned grace and kissed it His 
fingers were as cold as ice, and his lips 
burned like fire, but Virginia did not falter, 
as he led her across the dusky room. On 
the faded green tapestry were broidered little 
huntsmen. They blew their tasselled horns 



THE CANTER VILLE GHOST 1 37 

and with their tiny hands waved to her to 
go back. * Go back ! little Virginia/ they 
cried, * go back ! ' but the Ghost clutched 
her hand more tightly, and she shut her eyes 
against them. Horrible animals with lizard 
tails, and goggle eyes, blinked at her from 
the carven chimney-piece, and murmured 
* Beware ! little Virginia, beware ! we may 
never see you again,' but the Ghost glided 
on more swiftly, and Virginia did not listen. 
When they reached the end of the room he 
stopped, and muttered some words she could 
not understand. She opened her eyes, and 
saw the wall slowly fading away like a mist, 
and a great black cavern in front of her. 
A bitter cold wind swept round them, and 
she felt something pulling at her dress. 
' Quick, quick,' cried the Ghost, * or it will 
be too late,' and, in a moment, the wainscot- 
ing had closed behind them, and the Tapestry 
Chamber was empty. 



VI 



About ten minutes later, the bell rang for 
tea, and, as Virginia did not come down, 
Mrs. Otis sent up one of the footmen to tell 
her. After a little time he returned and said 
that he could not find Miss Virginia anywhere. 
As she was in the habit of going out to the 
garden every evening to get flowers for the 
dinner - table, Mrs. Otis was not at all 
alarmed at first, but when six o'clock struck, 
and Virginia did not appear, she became 
really agitated, and sent the boys out to look 
for her, while she herself and Mr. Otis 
searched every room in the house. At half- 
past six the boys came back and said that they 
could find no trace of their sister anywhere. 
They were all now in the greatest state of 
excitement, and did not know what to do, 
when Mr. Otis suddenly remembered that, 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 1 39 

some few days before, he had given a band 
of gipsies permission to camp in the park. 
He accordingly at once set off for Blackfell 
Hollow, where he knew they were, accom- 
panied by his eldest son and two of the 
farm-servants. The little Duke of Cheshire, 
who was perfectly frantic with anxiety, begged 
hard to be allowed to go too, but Mr. Otis 
would not allow him, as he was afraid there 
might be a scuffle. On arriving at the spot, 
however, he found that the gipsies had gone, 
and it was evident that their departure had 
been rather sudden, as the fire was still 
burning, and some plates were lying on the 
grass. Having sent off Washington and the 
two men to scour the district, he ran home, 
and despatched telegrams to all the police 
inspectors in the county, telling them to look 
out for a little girl who had been kidnapped 
by tramps or gipsies. He then ordered his 
horse to be brought round, and, after insist- 
ing on his wife and the three boys sitting 
down to dinner, rode off down the Ascot 
road with a groom. He had hardly, however, 
gone a couple of miles, when he heard 
somebody galloping after him, and, looking 



I40 THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 

round, saw the little Duke coming up on his 
pony, with his face very flushed and no hat 
* I'm awfully sorry, Mr. Otis,' gasped out the 
boy, ' but I can't eat any dinner as long as 
Virginia is lost. Please, don't be angry with 
me ; if you had let us be engaged last year, 
there would never have been all this trouble. 
You won't send me back, will you ? I can't 
go ! I won't go ! ' 

The Minister could not help smiling at 
the handsome young scapegrace, and was a 
good deal touched at his devotion to Virginia, 
so leaning down from his horse, he patted 
him kindly on the shoulders, and said, ' Well, 
Cecil, if you won't go back I suppose you 
must come with me, but I must get you a 
hat at Ascot.' 

* Oh, bother my hat ! I want Virginia ! ' 
cried the little Duke, laughing, and they 
galloped on to the railway station. There 
Mr. Otis inquired of the station-master if 
any one answering to the description of 
Virginia had been seen on the platform, but 
could get no news of her. The station- 
master, however, wired up and down the 
line, and assured him that a strict watch 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 14I 

would be kept for her, and, after having 
bought a hat for the little Duke from a 
linen-draper, who was just putting up his 
shutters, Mr. Otis rode off to Bexley, a 
village about four miles away, which he was 
told was a well-known haunt of the gipsies, 
as there was a large common next to it. 
Here they roused up the rural policeman, 
but could get no information from him, and, 
after riding all over the common, they turned 
their horses' heads homewards, and reached 
the Chase about eleven o'clock, dead -tired 
and almost heart-broken. They found 
Washington and the twins waiting for them 
at the gate -house with lanterns, as the 
avenue was very dark. Not the slightest 
trace of Virginia had been discovered. The 
gipsies had been caught on Brockley 
meadows, but she was not with them, and 
they had explained their sudden departure 
by saying that they had mistaken the date of 
Chorton Fair, and had gone off in a hurry 
for fear they might be late. Indeed, they 
had been quite distressed at hearing of 
Virginia's disappearance, as they were very 
grateful to Mr. Otis for having allowed them 



142 THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 

to camp in his park, and four of their 
number had stayed behind to help in the 
search. The carp-pond had been dragged, 
and the whole Chase thoroughly gone over, 
but without any result. It was evident that, 
for that night at any rate, Virginia was lost 
to them ; and it was in a state of the deepest 
depression that Mr. Otis and the boys walked 
up to the house, the groom following behind 
with the two horses and the pony. In the 
hall they found a group of frightened servants, 
and lying on a sofa in the library was poor 
Mrs. Otis, almost out of her mind with 
terror and anxiety, and having her forehead 
bathed with eau -de -cologne by the old 
housekeeper. Mr. Otis at once insisted on 
her having something to eat, and ordered 
up supper for the whole party. It was a 
melancholy meal, as hardly any one spoke, 
and even the twins were awestruck and 
subdued, as they were very fond of their 
sister. When they had finished, Mr. Otis, 
in spite of the entreaties of the little Duke, 
ordered them all to bed, saying that nothing 
more could be done that night, and that he 
would telegraph in the morning to Scotland 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 1 43 

Yard for some detectives to be sent down 
immediately. Just as they were passing 
out of the dining-room, midnight began to 
boom from the clock tower, and when the 
last stroke sounded they heard a crash and 
a sudden shrill cry; a dreadful peal of 
thunder shook the house, a strain of un- 
earthly music floated through the air, a 
panel at the top of the staircase flew back 
with a loud noise, and out on the landing, 
looking very pale and white, with a little 
casket in her hand, stepped Virginia. In a 
moment they had all rushed up to her. 
Mrs. Otis clasped her passionately in her 
arms, the Duke smothered her with violent 
kisses, and the twins executed a wild war- 
dance round the group. 

* Good heavens ! child, where have you 
been?' said Mr. Otis, rather angrily, think- 
ing that she had been playing some foolish 
trick on them. * Cecil and I have been 
riding all over the country looking for you, 
and your mother has been frightened to 
death. You must never play these practical 
jokes any more.' 

* Except on the Ghost ! except on the 



144 THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 

Ghost ! ' shrieked the twins, as they capered 
about. 

*My own darling, thank God you are 
found ; you must never leave my side again,' 
murmured Mrs. Otis, as she kissed the 
trembling child, and smoothed the tangled 
gold of her hair. 

*Papa,' said Virginia quietly, *I have 
been with the Ghost. He is dead, and you 
must come and see him. He had been 
very wicked, but he was really sorry for all 
that he had done, and he gave me this box 
of beautiful jewels before he died.' 

The whole family gazed at her in mute 
amazement, but she was quite grave and 
serious; and, turning round, she led them 
through the opening in the wainscoting 
down a narrow secret corridor, Washington 
following with a lighted candle, which he 
had caught up from the table. Finally, 
they came to a great oak door, studded with 
rusty nails. When Virginia touched it, it 
swung back on its heavy hinges, and they 
found themselves in a little low room, with a 
vaulted ceiling, and one tiny grated window. 
Imbedded in the wall was a huge iron ring. 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 1 45 

and chained to it was a gaunt skeleton, that 
was stretched out at full length on the stone 
floor, and seemed to be trying to grasp with 
its long fleshless fingers an old-fashioned 
trencher and ewer, that were placed just out 
of its reach. The jug had evidently been 
once filled with water, as it was covered 
inside with green mould. There was 
nothing on the trencher but a pile of dust. 
Virginia knelt down beside the skeleton, 
and, folding her little hands together, began 
to pray silently, while the rest of the party 
looked on in wonder at the terrible tragedy 
whose secret was now disclosed to them. 

* Hallo ! ' suddenly exclaimed one of the 
twins, who had been looking out of the win- 
dow to try and discover in what wing of the 
house the room was situated. * Hallo ! the old 
withered almond-tree has blossomed. I can 
see the flowers quite plainly in the moonlight.' 

*God has forgiven him,' said Virginia 
gravely, as she rose to her feet, and a 
beautiful light seemed to illumine her face. 

* What an angel you are ! ' cried the young 
Duke, and he put his arm round her neck, 
and kissed her. 



VII 

Four days after these curious incidents a 
funeral started from Canterville Chase at 
about eleven o'clock at night. The hearse 
was drawn by eight black horses, each of 
which carried on its head a great tuft of 
nodding ostrich-plumes, and the leaden 
coffin was covered by a rich purple pall, on 
which was embroidered in gold the Canter- 
ville coat-of-arms. By the side of the hearse 
and the coaches walked the servants with 
lighted, torches, and the whole procession 
was wonderfully impressive. Lord Canter- 
ville was the chief mourner, having come up 
specially from Wales to attend the funeral, 
and sat in the first carriage along with little 
Virginia. Then came the United States 
Minister and his wife, then Washington and 
the three boys, and in the last carriage was 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 1 47 

Mrs. Umney. It was generally felt that, as 
she had been frightened by the ghost for 
more than fifty years of her life, she had a 
right to see the last of him. A deep grave 
had been dug in the corner of the church- 
yard, just under the old yew-tree, and the 
service was read in the most impressive 
manner by the Rev. Augustus Dampier. 
When the ceremony was over, the servants, 
according to an old custom observed in the 
Canterville family, extinguished their torches, 
and, as the coffin was being lowered into the 
grave, Virginia stepped forward, and laid on 
it a large cross made of white and pink 
almond-blossoms. As she did so, the moon 
came out from behind a cloud, and flooded 
with its silent silver the little churchyard, 
and from a distant copse a nightingale began 
to sing. She thought of the ghost's^escrip- 
tion of the Garden of Death, her eyes 
became dim with tears, and she hardly 
spoke a word during the drive home. 

The next morning, before Lord Canterville 
went up to town, Mr. Otis had an inter- 
view with him on the subject of the jewels 
the ghost had given to Virginia. They were 



r^S THE CANTERVIIXE GHOST 

pertectly magmficent, especially a certain 
mby necklace with old Venetian setting, 
which was really a superb specimen of 
sixteenth -century work, and their value was 
so great that Mr. Otis felt considerable 
scruples about allowing his daughter to 
accept them. 

* My lewd,' he said, ' I know that in this 
country mortmain is held to apply to trinkets 
as well as to land, and it is quite clear to me 
that these jewels are, or should be, heirlooms 
in your hmHy. I must beg you, accordingly, 
to take them to London with you, and to 
r^ard them simply as a portion of your 
property which has been restored to you 
imder certain strange conditions. As for 
my daughter, she is merely a child, and has 
as yet, I am glad to say, but Httle interest in 
such appurtenances of idle luxury. I am 
also informed by Mrs. Otis, who, I may say, 
is no mean authority upon Art — having had 
the privilege of spending several winters in 
Boston when she was a girl — ^that these gems 
are of great monetary worth, and if offered 
for sale would fetch a tall price. Under 
these circumstances, Lord Canterville, I feel 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 1 49 

sure that you will recognise how impossible 
it would be for me to allow them to remain 
in the possession of any member of my 
family ; and, indeed, all such vain gauds and 
toys, however suitable or necessary to the 
dignity of the British aristocracy, would be 
completely out of place among those who 
have been brought up on the severe, and I 
believe immortal, principles of Republican 
simplicity. Perhaps I should mention that 
Virginia is very anxious that you should 
allow her to retain the box, as a memento of 
your unfortunate but misguided ancestor. 
As it is extremely old, and consequently a 
good deal out of repair, you may perhaps 
think fit to comply with her request. For 
my own part, I confess I am a good deal 
surprised to find a child of mine expressing 
sympathy with mediaevalism in any form, and 
can only account for it by the fact that 
Virginia was born in one of your London 
suburbs shortly after Mrs. Otis had returned 
from a trip to Athens.' 

Lord Canterville listened very gravely to 
the worthy Minister's speech, pulling his 
grey moustache now and then to hide an 



150 THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 

involuntar}^ smile, and when Mr. Otis had 
ended, he shook him cordially by the hand, 
and said, * My dear sir, your charming little 
daughter rendered my unlucky ancestor. Sir 
Simon, a very important service, and I and 
my family are much indebted to her for her 
marvellous courage and pluck. The jewels 
are clearly hers, and, egad, I believe that 
if I were heartless enough to take them from 
her, the wicked old fellow would be out of 
his grave in a fortnight, leading me the devil 
of a life. As for their being heirlooms, 
nothing is an heirloom that is not so men- 
tioned in a will or legal document, and the 
existence of these jewels has been quite 
unknown. I assure you I have no more 
claim on them than your butler, and when 
Miss Virginia grows up I daresay she will 
be pleased to have pretty things to wear. 
Besides, you forget, Mr. Otis, that you took 
the furniture and the ghost at a valuation, and 
anything that belonged to the ghost passed at 
once into your possession, as, whatever activity 
Sir Simon may have shown in the corridor at 
night, in point of law he was really dead, and 
you acquired his property by purchase.' 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 151 

Mr. Otis was a good deal distressed at 
Lord Canterville's refusal, and begged him to 
reconsider his decision, but the good-natured 
peer was quite firm, and finally induced the 
Minister to allow his daughter to retain the 
present the ghost had given her, and when, 
in the spring of 1890, the young Duchess of 
Cheshire was presented at the Queen's first 
drawing-room on the occasion of her marriage, 
her jewels were the universal theme of admira- 
tion. For Virginia received the coronet, 
which is the reward of all good little American 
girls, and was married to her boy -lover as 
soon as he came of age. They were both 
so charming, and they loved each other 
so much, that every one was delighted at 
the match, except the old Marchioness of 
Dumbleton, who had tried to catch the Duke 
for one of her seven unmarried daughters, 
and had given no less than three expensive 
dinner-parties for that purpose, and, strange 
to say, Mr. Otis himself. Mr. Otis was 
extremely fond of the young Duke personally, 
but, theoretically, he objected to titles, and, 
to use his own words, 'was not without 
apprehension lest, amid the enervating in- 



152 THE CAXTERVILLE GHOST 

fluences of a pleasure-loving aristocracy, the 
true principles of Republican simplicity 
should be forgotten.' His objections, how- 
ever, were completely overruled, and I believe 
that when he walked up the aisle of St 
George's, Hanover Square, ^ith his daughter 
leaning on his arm, there was not a prouder 
man in the whole length and breadth of 
England 

The Duke and Duchess, after the honey- 
moon was over, went down to CanterviUe 
Chase, and on the day after their arrival they 
walked over in the afternoon to the lonely 
churchyard by the pine-woods. There had 
been a great deal of difficulty at first about 
the inscription on Sir Simon's tombstone, 
but finally it had been decided to engrave 
on it simply the initials of the old gentle- 
man's name, and the verse from the librar}' 
window. The Duchess had brought with 
her some lovely roses, which she strewed 
upon the grave, and after they had stood by 
it for some time they strolled into the ruined 
chancel of the old abbey. There the 
Duchess sat down on a fallen pillar, while 
her husband lay at her feet smoking a cigar- 



THE CANTERVILLE GHOST 153 

ette and looking up at her beautiful eyes. 
Suddenly he threw his cigarette away, took 
hold of her hand, and said to her, * Virginia, 
a wife should have no secrets from her 
husband.' 

* Dear Cecil ! I have no secrets from you.' 
*Yes, you have,' he answered, smiling, 

* you have never told me what happened to 
you when you were locked up with the ghost.' 
*I have never told any one, Cecil,' said 
Virginia gravely. 

* I know that, but you might tell me.' 

* Please don't ask me, Cecil, I cannot tell 
you. Poor Sir Simon ! I owe him a great 
deal. Yes, don't laugh, Cecil, I really do. 
He made me see what Life is, and what 
Death signifies, and why Love is stronger 
than both.' 

The Duke rose and kissed his wife lov- 
ingly. 

* You can have your secret as long as I 
have your heart,' he murmured. 

* You have always had that, Cecil.' 

* And you will tell our children some day, 
won't you ? ' 

Virginia blushed. 



The model millionaire 



A note of admiration 




NLESS one is wealthy there i$ 
no use in being a charming 
fellow. Romance is the privi- 
lege of the rich, not the pro- 
fession of the unemployed. 
The poor should be practical and prosaic. 
It is better to have a permanent income than 
to be fascinating. These are the great truths 
of modern life which Hughie Erskine never 
realised. Poor Hughie ! Intellectually, we 
must admit, he was not of much importance. 
He never said a brilliant or even an ill- 
natured thing in his life. But then he was 
wonderfully good-looking, with his crisp 
brown hair, his clear-cut profile, and his 
grey eyes. He was as popular with men as 
he was with women, and he had every ac- 
complishment except that of making money. 



158 THE MODEL MILLIONAIRE 

His father had bequeathed him his cavalry 
sword, and a History of the Peninsular War 
in fifteen volumes. Hughie hung the first 
over his looking-glass, put the second on a 
shelf between RufFs Guide and Bailey's 
Magazine^ and lived on two hundred a year 
that an old aunt allowed him. He had tried 
everything. He had gone on the Stock 
Exchange for six months ; but what was a 
butterfly to do among bulls and bears ? He 
had been a tea-merchant for a little longer, 
but had soon tired of pekoe and souchong. 
Then he Ijad tried selling dry sherry. That 
did not answer \ the sherry was a little too 
dry. Ultimately he became nothing, a de- 
lightful, ineffectual young man with a perfect 
profile and no profession. 

To make matters worse, he was in love. 
The girl he loved was Laura Merton, the 
daughter of a retired Colonel who had lost 
his temper and his digestion in India, and 
had never found either of them again. 
Laura adored him, and he was ready to 
kiss her shoe-strings. They were the hand- 
somest couple in London, and had not a 
penny -piece between them. The Colonel 



THE MODEL MILLIONAIRE 1 59 

was very fond of Hughie, but would not hear 
of any engagement. 

* Come to me, my boy, when you have got 
ten thousand pounds of your own, and we 
will see about it,' he used to say; and 
Hughie looked very glum on those days, 
and had to go to Laura for consolation. 

One morning, as he was on his way to 
Holland Park, where the Mertons lived, he 
dropped in to see a great friend of his, Alan 
Trevor. Trevor was a painter. Indeed, few 
people escape that nowadays. But he was 
also an artist, and artists are rather rare. 
Personally he was a strange rough fellow, 
with a freckled face and a red ragged beard. 
However, when he took up the brush he 
was a real master, and his pictures were 
eagerly sought after. He had been very 
much attracted by Hughie at first, it must 
be acknowledged, entirely on account of his 
personal charm. * The only people a painter 
should know,' he used to say, *are people 
who are bHe and beautiful, people who are 
an artistic pleasure to look at and an intel- 
lectual repose to talk to. Men who are 
dandies and women who are darlings rule 



l6o THE MODEL MILLIONAIRE 

the world, at least they should do so.' How- 
ever, after he got to know Hughie better, he 
liked him quite as much for his bright buoyant 
spirits and his generous reckless nature, and 
had given him the permanent entree to his 
studio. 

When Hughie came in he found Trevor 
putting the finishing touches to a wonderful 
life-size picture of a beggar-man. The beggar 
himself was standing on a raised platform in 
a corner of the studio. He was a wizened 
old man, with a face like wrinkled parchment, 
and a most piteous expression. Over his 
shoulders was flung a coarse brown cloak, all 
tears and tatters ; his thick boots were patched 
and cobbled, and with one hand he leant on 
a rough stick, while with the other he held 
out his battered hat for alms. 

* What an amazing model ! ' whispered 
Hughie, as he shook hands with his friend. 

* An amazing model ? ' shouted Trevor at 
the top of his voice ; * I should think so ! 
Such beggars as he are not to be met with 
every day. A trouvaille^ mon cher ; a living 
Velasquez ! My stars ! what an etching 
Rembrandt would have made of him ! ' 



THE MODEL MILLIONAIRE l6l 

* Poor old chap ! * said ^Hughie, * how 
miserable he looks ! But I suppose, to you 
painters, his face is his fortune ? ' 

'Certainly,' replied Trevor, 'you don't 
want a beggar to look happy, do you ? ' 

* How much does a model get for sitting ? ' 
asked Hughie, as he found himself a com- 
fortable seat on a divan. 

* A shilling an hour.' 

*And how much do you get for your 
picture, Alan?' 

* Oh, for this I get two thousand ! ' 

* Pounds ? ' 

* Guineas. Painters, poets, and physicians 
always get guineas.' 

* Well, I think the model should have a 
percentage,' cried Hughie, laughing; *they 
work quite as hard as you do.' 

* Nonsense, nonsense ! Why, look at the 
trouble of laying on the paint alone, and 
standing all day long at one's easel ! It's 
all very well, Hughie, for you to talk, but I 
assure you that there are moments when Art 
almost attains to the dignity of manual 
labour. But you mustn't chatter ; I'm very 
busy. Smoke a cigarette, and keep quiet.' 

M 



1 62 THE MODEL MILLIONAIRE 

After some time the servant came in, and 
told Trevor that the frame-maker wanted to 
speak to him. 

* Don't run away, Hughie/ he said, as he 
went out, * I will be back in a moment* 

The old beggar- man took advantage of 
Trevor's absence to rest for a moment on a 
wooden bench that was behind him. He 
looked so forlorn and wretched that Hughie 
could not help pitying him, and felt in his 
pockets to see what money he had. All 
he could find was a sovereign and some 
coppers. *Poor old fellow,' he thought 
to himself, * he wants it more than I do, but 
it means no hansoms for a fortnight ; ' and 
he walked across the studio and slipped 
the sovereign into the beggar's hand. 

The old man started, and a faint smile 
flitted across his withered lips. * Thank you, 
sir,' he said, * thank you.' 

Then Trevor arrived, and Hughie took his 
leave, blushing a little at what he had done. 
He spent the day with Laura, got a charming 
scolding for his extravagance, and had to 
walk home. 

That night he strolled into the Palette 



THE MODEL MILLIONAIRE 1 63 

Club about eleven o'clock, and found Trevor 
sitting by himself in the smoking-room drink- 
ing hock and seltzer. 

* Well, Alan, did you get the picture finished 
all right ? ' he said, as he lit his cigarette. 

* Finished and framed, my boy ! ' answered 
Trevor ; * and, by-the-bye, you have made a 
conquest. That old model you saw is quite 
devoted to you. I had to tell him all about 
you — who you are, where you live, what your 
income is, what prospects you have ' 

*My dear Alan,' cried Hughie, *I shall 
probably find him waiting for me when I go 
home. But of course you are only joking. 
Poor old wretch ! I wish I could do some- 
thing for him. I think it is dreadful that 
any one should be so miserable. I have got 
heaps of old clothes at home — do you think 
he would care for any of them ? Why, his 
rags were falling to bits.' 

*But he. looks splendid in them,' said 
Trevor. ' I wouldn't paint him in a frock- 
coat for anything. What you call rags I call 
romance. What seems poverty to you is 
picturesqueness to me. However, I'll, tell 
him of your offer.' 



164 THE MODEL MILLIONAIRE 

'Alan/ said Hughie seriously, *you 
painters are a heartless lot' 

*An artist's heart is his head,' replied 
Trevor; *and besides, our business is to 
realise the world as we see it, not to reform 
it as we know it . A chacun son mktier. And 
now tell me how Laura is. The old model 
was quite interested in her.' 

*You don't mean to say you talked to 
him about her ? ' said Hughie. 

* Certainly I did He knows all about the 
relentless colonel, the lovely Laura, and the 
;£^i 0,000.' 

* You told that old beggar all my private 
affairs ? ' cried Hughie, looking very red and 
angry. 

* My dear boy,' said Trevor, smiling, * that 
old beggar, as you call him, is one of the 
richest men in Europe. He could buy all 
London to-morrow without overdrawing his 
account. He has a house in every capital, 
dines off gold plate, and can prevent Russia 
going to war when he chooses.' 

* What on earth do you mean ? ' exclaimed 
Hughie. 

* What I say,' said Trevor. * The old man 



THE MODEL MILLIONAIRE 1 65 

you saw to-day in the studio was Baron 
Hausberg. He is a great friend of mine, 
buys all my pictures and that sort of thing, 
and gave me a commission a month ago to 
paint him as a beggar. Que voulez-vousf 
Lafantatsie (Pun millionnairel And I must 
say he made a magnificent figure in his rags, 
or perhaps I should say in my rags ; they are 
an old suit I got in Spain.' 

* Baron Hausberg ! ' cried Hughie. * Good 
heavens ! I gave him a sovereign ! ' and he 
sank into an armchair the picture of dis- 
may. 

* Gave him a sovereign ! ' shouted Trevor, 
and he burst into a roar of laughter. * My 
dear boy, you'll never see it again. Son 
affaire ^est V argent des autres! 

* I think you might have told me, Alan,* 
said Hughie sulkily, 'and not have let me 
make such a fool of myself.' 

* Well, to begin with, Hughie,' said Trevor, 
*it never entered my mind that you went 
about distributing alms in that reckless way. 
I can understand your kissing a pretty model, 
but your giving a sovereign to an ugly one — 
by Jove, no ! Besides, the fact is that I 



1 66 THE MODEL MILLIONAIRE 

really was not at home to-day to any one; 
and when you came in I didn't know whether 
Hausberg would like his name mentioned. 
You know he wasn't in full dress.' 

*What a duifer he must think me!' said 
Hughie. 

* Not at all. He was in the highest spirits 
after you left ; kept chuckling to himself and 
rubbing his old wrinkled hands together. I 
couldn't make out why he was so interested 
to know all about you: but I see it all 
now. He'll invest your sovereign for you, 
Hughie, pay you the interest every six 
months, and have a capital story to tell 
after dinner.' 

* I am an unlucky devil,' growled Hughie. 
* The best thing I can do is to go to bed ; 
and, my dear Alan, you mustn't tell any one. 
I shouldn't dare show my face in the 
Row.' 

* Nonsense ! It reflects the highest credit 
on your philanthropic spirit, Hughie. And 
don't run away. Have another cigarette, 
and you can talk about Laura as much as 
you like.' 

However, Hughie wouldn't stop, but walked 



THE MODEL MILLIONAIRE 1 67 

home, feeling very unhappy, and leaving Alan 
Trevor in fits of laughter. 

The next morning, as he was at breakfast, 
the servant brought him up a card on which 
was written, * Monsieur Gustave Naudin, de 
la part de M. le Baron Hausberg.* *I sup- 
pose he has come for an apology,' said Hughie 
to himself; and he told the servant to show 
the visitor up. 

An old gentleman with gold spectacles and 
grey hair came into the room, and said, in a 
slight French accent, * Have I the honour of 
addressing Monsieur Erskine ? ' 

Hughie bowed. 

*I have come from Baron Hausberg,' he 
continued. * The Baron ' 

*I beg, sir, that you will offer him my 
sincerest apologies,' stammered Hughie. 

*The Baron,' said the old gentleman, 
with a smile, * has commissioned me to bring 
you this letter;' and he extended a sealed 
envelope. 

On the outside was written, *A wedding 
present to Hugh Erskine and Laura Merton, 
from an old beggar,' and inside was a cheque 
for ;£ 1 0,000. 



1 68 THE MODEL MILLIONAIRE 

When they were married Alan Trevor was 
the best -man, and the Baron made a speech 
at the wedding-breakfast 

* Millionaire models,' remarked Alan, * are 
rare enough ; but, by Jove, model millionaires 
are rarer still ! ' 



THE END 



Printed by R. & R. Clakk, Kdinhurgh, 



'tt 




This book sboi 
Library on or betor 
below. 3 2044o'i'[!; 

Afineotfiv 
•^rainme it br 



m 



THE BORHOWER WILL BE CHARGED 
AN OVERDUE FEE IF THIS BOOK IS 
NOT RETURNED TO THE LIBRARY 
ON OR BEFORE THE LAST DATE 
STAMPED BELOW. NON-RECEIPT OF 
OVERDUE NOTICES DOES NOT 
EXEMPT THE BORROWER FROM 
OVERDUE FEES. 




